P3439 E466_1 99863301 115493
AN Easy and Compendious INTRODVCTION For Reading all sorts of HISTORIES: CONTRIVED, In a more facile way then heretofore hath been published, out of the Papers of MATHIAS PRIDEAVX Mr of Arts and sometime Fellow of Exeter Colledge in OXFORD. Cicero de Oratore. Nescire quid ante a quam natus sis acciderit, Id semper est esse Puerum. OXFORD, Printed for LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Ʋniversity, M.DC.XLVIII.
D. D. TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULL Sr THOMAS REYNELL And the Virtuous Lady KATHARINE His Wife: FOR THE VSE OF Their Towardly young Sonnes Mr THOMAS AND Mr HENRY REYNELL.
TO THE READER. EXpect no more here (good Rea∣der) then the Title promiseth, that is, an Introduction, not to rest on as satisfied, but to lead thee on to larger Volumnes. The number of seaven is here used, not out of affectation, but experience, as most easy for Memory, which is the prime scope of this Compendi∣um, to touch at that which may seeme most remarkable, and so to dispose it, that it may be best remembred. The whole consisteth
of three Tracts, The first of History Ecclesia∣sticall, Deduced from the Creation of the World to these our times. The Second that is Politicall, ascends no higher then Nimrod (for those Anti-Diluvian Dynasties mentio∣ned by some, must be held only Imaginary) and is continued in the like line downe∣ward. Whence the History of Successions begins: with an Instance given in the Successive Governments of our own Country. Whereunto a short appendix is added, con∣cerning the History of Professions, as also Na∣turall, Ʋarious, and Ʋaine stories, poynting only at the heads they may be drawn unto: and in Generall, what is to be thought of them, and so an end. Some are of the mind, that such an Indu∣ction may not only prove a Directory to a be∣ginner, but a Remembrancer to those that have forgotten much they have read, and will take it well to be Prompted at the chea∣pest rate. Malmsbur. de Gestis Reg. Angl. l. 5. In the like case it was the resoluti∣on of a Writer of our own, Mihi debetur col∣lectionis gratia, tibi habeas electionis materiam, Of what I have collected you may take your
choyce, passe by some or leave all. My con∣clusion is that of the Poet, —si quid novisti rectius istis Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum. Horat If you have found a righter way Impart it if you please, If not take this then for a stay, And use it at your ease.
The Heads here especially Treated of Are, 1. A Summe of tenne Long-liv'd Antediluvian Patriarches. 2. A Briefe of the Historicall part of the old Te∣stament, as farre as the Apocrypha. 3. A continuation of it by the line of the Macca∣bees, and their successors, to the Birth of our Savi∣our. 4. The Life of our Saviour and his Apostles, with a touch of the seventy Disciples, and seven first Deacons. 5. An Epitome of the Popes Lives, from the first to this that now Possesseth the Chaire. 6. Politicall History deduced from Nimrod, by the Foure Monarchies, to this present Emperour Ferdinand the third. And the History of Successi∣ons. With an instance in the History of Britaine. 7. Directions for Orderly Reading of the Histo∣ries of Professions, Naturall History, Various Colle∣ctions, and Vaine Romances, to which all sorts of I∣maginable Narrations may be reduced.
CAP. I. Of the Antediluvian Patriarches, or long∣liv'd Fathers, before the Flood. 1. HISTORY is a Commemoration of things past, with the Circumstances of Time and Place, in distinct Distances, Intervals, or Dynastyes, by Lineall discents, for the readier help of memory, and application. 2. This may ei∣ther be 1. ECCLESIASTICALL. 2. POLITICALL. 3. Of SUCCESSIONS in States, Countries, or Families. 4. Of PROFESSIONS, as the lives of Famous men, in any Faculty. 5. NATURALL, as that of Pliny, &c. 6. VARIOUS, such as we have from Valerius Maximus, Plutarch, Aelian. 7. VAINE, LEGENDARY, or FABULOUS, passed by the name of Romances. 3. Ecclesiasticall, insisteth especially upon Church-matters; and hath precedency before other, in regard of its Antiquity, Dignity, and directive Certainty.
4. It falleth with∣in the limits of these Intervals, From the 1. Creation to the end of the Flood. 1657. 2. Flood to the calling of Abraham. 367. 3. Calling of Abraham to the departing of the Israelites out of Aegypt. 430. 4. Aegyptian Exodus to the building of Solomons Temple. 480. 5. First Temple to the second, erected by Zorobabel. 497. 6. Second Temple to the Nativity of our Saviour. 529. 7. Nativity of our Saviour to this pre∣sent time. 1647. 5. vid. Grafton Chron. pag. 72. Alsted. Ency∣clop l. 33. Chronol. c. 3. The first Intervall or Distance, from the Creation to the end of the Flood, conteynes the Passages of 1657 yeares, easily collected out of the fift of Genesis, in which we have the tenne long-liv'd Fathers in this Order. 1. Anno Mun∣di 1. ADAM, happy in his innocency, whiles he so continued in Paradice with his beloved Evah. But that was not long, for 'tis commonly held that  he lodged not one night there, Gen. 3. so suddaine was the Serpents seducing, his Wifes consenting, his yeilding, Gods execution. 2. After his expulsion from Paradice he had small comfort of his issue: Gen. 4. Cain slew his Brother Abel, and was doomed thereupon to be a Va∣grant. 3. A lying book called Lepto genesis names Calmana and Delbora Adams two eldest Daughters, Comestor. Schedel. that became Wives to Cain and Abel their Brethren. But this seems as likely as those Revelations of Adam, set forth by the Gnosticks, and the Genealogies of his Sonns and Daughters, (which are accounted 30. of either Sexe by Comestor,) venred by the Manichees, but condemned by Gelasius. D. 15. C. San∣cta Romana. 4. Lesse hurtfull is that Dibre-A∣dam, contrived in a Boxe by Simon Sturtevant. Some conceit that Abel slew the very same Serpent the Divell had formerly possessed, M. S. Hele on the 3. first chap. of Gen. to seduce his Mother; but not without a wound in the Heele, before he could bruise his Head. This is manifest, that good Abel failing without issue, there was set in his place his Brother. Gen. 4.25. 2. SETH, whom the forenamed Gnosticks make also a
Writer, entitling him to seven Bookes, to which they added seven more of their owne. 2. Josephus relates that his Sonnes erected two Pillars, the one of Brick, Antiquit. L. 1. C, 4. the other of Stone, to preserve their Mathematicall Speculations to Poste∣rity; upon a Prophecy from Adam, that the world should be first Drowned, then Burned. 3. C. 2. Anonymus upon Mathew, mentions another Propheticall writing of his, con∣cerning the Starre, that was the Cynosure to bring the East∣erne Kings to Christ. But such Relations want warrant. His Successour in the holy line was his Sonne. 3. ENOSH, in whose time men began to call upon the name of the Lord, or to call themselves by the name of the Lord, or as others render the place, Broughton. Tremelius. The Name of the Lord began to be Prophaed. 2. Hence some gather the be∣ginning of Idolatry, which other deferre till after the flood. A separation is apparent in this mans daies, betweene the prophane Caynites, and those Godly Setheans. And likely it is, that then began the Assemblies, perchance on the Seventh day, blessed and hallowed of God for publique Worship. De Monach, C. 5. Gen. 5.10. 3. Bellarmine will needs fetch from hence the Originall of Monkery, but this Enosh was married, gat Sonnes and Daughters, and amongst them to succeed him. 4. CAINAN, of whom we finde nothing Registred, but how long he lived, and that he begat, 5. MAHALALEEL, as he did, 6. IARED, and he, 7. ENOCH, whose Prophesies we have mentioned in the Epistle of S. Jude. Vers. 14. Origen and the Author of the Testament of the twelve Patriarkes, cite divers passages out of them. As, 1. of the number and names of Starres. 2. Of the wooing of Mortall Beauties, by the wanton descending Angells. 3. Of the Gyants, from that brood. 4. Of the death of Christ by the Jewes, and their ruine by it. 5. Of the Drowning and Burning of the World, and more to that purpose. 2. These were not only in the hands of Origen and Tertullian, but of S. Hierom, Augustin, Bede and o∣thers; notwithstanding S. Augustin brands them for coun∣terfeit,
and none warrant them. 3. This Enoch, the se∣venth from Adam, died not as other men, but after he had spent so many yeares upon earth, as there be daies in a yeare, he was transsated hence by God, A. M. 987. The most part of them, For herein they cannot a∣gree. with whom he had walked though he lived in the state of Marriage. 4. The Pa∣pists say, he is reserved alive in Paradice, (whence Adam was expelled) with his companion Elias, who shall both come in person to oppose Antichrist, and then be slaine of him, then revive, and so at length be taken up into Heaven. This is to quit the Pope, Bellarm. de Pontif. Rom. L. 3. Aetat. 5. from suspicion of being Antichrist, seeing Enoch and Elias, have not yet come in person, to testi∣fie against him. Gobeline Parson relates, that such a man was found by Alexander the Great in the East-Indies, lying in a Golden bed, in the Mountaine of the Sunne, who well might be thought to be this Henoch. but let them feed on their fan∣cies. The shortnesse of this mans time upon earth, was re∣compensed by the age of his Sonne, 8. METHUSALAH, , the longest liver we read of. for Adam, and He, take up all the space be∣tweene the Creation and the Flood. 2. His age was 969 yeares; of which he might spend 346 with Adam, to in∣forme himselfe, and almost 100 with Sem, to teach Posteri∣ty. But his longest life had a period before the Flood, and a Successour his Sonne. 9. LAMECH, different from that Lamech of Caines race, who being a blind Archer, slew his Grandsire Caine. and the Boy that led him, for directing him to do it, if we beleive Torniellus, who cites divers Fathers to justifie this groundlesse Fancy. 2. Of this holy Lamech is registred, the notable Propheticall speech at the birth of his Sonne. Gen. 5.29. 10. NOAH, who was to be a Comforter to the world by Rest, in the greatest extremities, as the name importeh, being derived either from Nacham, to Comfort, or Nuach, to Rest. the last of the ten Antediluvian Patriarches. Out of whose names a great Hebritian hath left this observation. Adam, Earthy; Cain, Possession; Abel, Vanity: sheweth that all Earthy Possession is Ʋanity. Seth, may be set in Abels
place, yet not so fixed, but that reason will be, for naming of his Sonne Enosh, Sad. man, or Sorrowfull. He begets Cainan, Lamentation, from him succeeds Mahalalcel, a praiser of God. This holds not among all, but Jared notes a descend∣ing. Enoch, that followes in the seventh place, signifies one dedicated to God among so many wicked. He of the short∣est abode here upon earth of all his ranke, leaves the longest liver Methusalah, whose name speakes thus much, He dying God sendeth, whom? Lamech, what to do? his name tells us, to strike, not to destroy all; but as Noahs name Comfort∣eth, to preserve God's chosen in rest. This Noah by the He∣athens was termed in scorne Prometheus, and fained to be chained to Caucasus with a Ʋulture feeding on his Intrals, in regard of his foretelling the worlds destruction, and pro∣viding an Arke to escape it, neare the mountain Caucasus, 120 yeares before it came. Likewise he is called Ogyges, for opening a gate for the preservation of Mankind. Sa∣turne, as being the worlds Seed, or Seminarie. Hercules, the publique Breeder. Deucalion, in whose time fell the great Inundation, described by Ovid. Janus Bifrons, that found Wine, and look'd into both Worlds, both before and after the Flood. For to this Flood have reference, all the Heathenish great Inundations. To this purpose runnes the verse in Eu∣sebius, Sol & Osyris idem, Dionysius, Oriu, Apollo. All those in truth were but the same, And differ only in the name. Which may be gathered from Plutarch, who affirmes that Deucalion sent a Dove to try whether the waters were dry∣ed. This Flood lasted a whole yeare, which confirmes, that in the long-lived Fathers, their yeares were Solar, not Lunar, or Months, as some have imagined. 2. COntemporary in this Intervall, were the line of Cain, amongst whom we have 1. the first City Enoch. 2. Poligamie brought in by Lamech, who being a blind Ar∣cher
is said to have slaine his great Grandsire Cain, Gen. 4. and the Lad that led him for misdirecting him. 3. Jabal, the Father of Tent-making, and Hearding Catell. 4. Jubal, for instru∣mentall Musicke 5. Tubal-Cain, the first forger of Brasse & Iron. Hartman. Schedel. 6. And some say his Sister Naamah began Carding and Spinning to cover nakednesse, rather then with Figge leaves, or with Beastes Skinnes. 7. Likely it is, that amongst the Poets, the Garden of Adonis, might have relation to this in Eden; Nectar and Ambrosium to the Tree of Life. Euridi∣ces wounding by a Serpent, to the Serpent poysoning our Mother Eve. Mercury, Apollo and Ʋulcan, to Jabal, Jubal and Tubal-cain. Venus, to Naamah. Their , or God-making, to the translation of Enoch. Their God-wench∣ing, Gen. 6.2. to the dissolute doings between the Sonnes of God, and the Daughters of Men. Which things they might have by hear-say, and worke on at their pleasure, to be noted by the way, not insisted upon. Matters of Enquiry, and Discourse. 3. WHE∣THER 1. The World began in Spring, or Autumne? 2. The Seat of Paradice may be punctually as∣signed? 3. Abel slew the same Serpent, the Divell had abused to seduce his Mother? 4. Enoch with Elias be reserved in Paradice, to come against Anti-christ and to be slaine by him? 5. The Book of his Prophecies extant among the Fathers, might passe for authenticall? 6. Cain were slain by Lamech, his Grand∣child a blind Archer? 7. Methusalah dyed before the Flood?
CAP. II. The Intervall of the Noachians. 1. An. Mund. 1657.THE second Distance takes its rise from the end of the Flood, to the calling of Abra∣ham for the space of 367 yeares; gathered out of Gen, 11.26. 2. In which succeed, 1. SEM, the middle Sonne of Noah, Junius. as some contend, but preferd before the elder Japhet, and the youngest Cham. 2. He is thought by the Jewes, Gen. 14. Broughton. to be Mel∣chizedek that brought provision to Abraham and his compa∣ny, at their return from their victory against the four Eastern Kings: which is strongly opposed by some latter writers. Cuneus Mouli. 3. In the distribution of the world after the Flood, Asia fell to his share, and his Posterities; from whence tis likely that they spread themselves East-ward, and so rounded the earth, that way to people America; as on the West, they left Palestina, and those Coasts, to Chams issue, the Cananites, whose proper portion was Africke; as Iaphets was Europe, and the Isles. Sems Successour was, 2. ARPHAXAD, younger Brother (as it should seem) to Elam, and Ashur, from whom descended the Persians, and Assyrians. Abulensis out of Comestor and Methodius, men∣tions one Ionithus or Ionichus, begotten of Noah 100 yeares after the Flood, who informed the Easterlings in Astronomy. Prophesied of the four Monarchies, and put Nimrod his for∣ward Scholer, first to take state upon him. His picture you have in Chronica Chronicorum, as also of Persla, Cathastua, and Funda, Sem, Ham, and Iaphets Wives. But these Mon∣kish Figments, have lesse show of truth, then the foysting in
here of Cainan by the Greeks, to be Arphaxads Son, whom all the Hebrews omitt, and ranck in the next place, 3. SALAH, He is said to have built Salem, by Come∣stor, and by others, (upon the passage of his Father Arphax∣ad over the River Tygris, to seat himselfe with his Family in Chaldea) to have named his Sonne, 4. HEBER; From this man, his posterity were enti∣tuled Hebrewes. In his time fell out a double division, first of Tongues, then of Nations, according to their severall tongues. He sticks to the Originall Hebrew, and upon fore∣sight of these divisions amongst others nameth his Sonne, 5. Gen. 10.15. PELEG, in whose time these Divisions fell out. He begets, 6. REU, of whom we read nothing else, but that he begate, 7. Luk. 3. SARUG, whom St Luke termeth Saruch, follow∣ing therein the Septuagint. His Successour was, 8. C. 24.2. Judith 5.7. NAHOR, tainted with Idolatrous Leaven, as ap∣peares by Josuah's confession, and Achiors Declaration. Leaves behind him at Ʋr of the Chaldeans, 9. TERAH. He had three Sonns, Haran, Nahor, and Abram, but upon Harams death in Ʋr of the Chaldeans, whether burnt by the Fire, which faithfull Abram esca∣ped (as the Jewsh tradition delivers it) or caused by some other meanes, he removes from Ʋr to Charran, in Mesopo∣tamia with all his Family, (it should seeme upon his Sonne Abrams motion, Gen. 12.1. A.M. 2020. who had his call from God) and dyes there. His Family at his death stood thus disposed. Haran (that dyed before him) left behind him one Sonne named Lot, and two Daughters, Milcah and Iscah. Milcah was taken to Wife by her Ʋncle Nahor, who setled in that place. But Iscah (who should seeme to be termed Sarai for her Beauty and Houswivery) was marryed to the great Father. 10. ABRAM, of whose travels from Charran to Ca∣naan, and from thence to Aegypt and Gerar. 2. of his Victories against the foure Easterne Kings. 3. his dome∣stique troubles, by meanes of the dissention between his
Wife Sarah, and her Maid Hagar, (4.) his Circumcision by Gods appointment, (5.) his entertaining of Angels, (6.) receiving a Sonne from his Sarah past teeming, his readines to Sacrifice him when God commanded, (7.) his second marryage and issue by Keturah, and other passages of note, From Gen. 12. to the eight v. cap. 25. the Scripture sufficiently sets downe, from whence other Authors have it. He is thought to be the first instructer of the Aegyptians in good Learning, who before were igno∣rant. He ever relyed on this sure ground; that there was one God the Creator of all things, and that all happinesse came from his good pleasure, not from any strength or worth of our owne. A Booke called Ietzira is Fathered upon him, but the imposture is manifest, and the peece thought to be R. Akibah's. The rest of his Children otherwise provided for; his Sonne Isaac is left to continue the holy Line, the fore∣man of the next Intervall. 2. COntemporary with this Period, are reckoned (1.) the building of the Tower of Babel, (2.) the intro∣ducing of diverse Languages, (3.) the Peopling of the World by Noah's Posterity, (4.) the Foundation of the As∣syrian Monarchy in Nimrod, Ninus and Semiramis, (5.) the Overthrow of the foure Easterne Kings, by Abram and his 318 Household Servants, (6.) the Destruction from Hea∣ven of Sodome and Gomorrah, Gen. 18. & 19. withother Cities of the Plain by Fire and Brimstone, (7.) the Incestuous Originall of the Moabites and Ammonites, and Bastard-brood of the Ismae∣lites. Also the Poets Ship, Argos, and Gigantomachia the Gyants Warre with their Gods, may have reference to Noahs Arke, and the Builders of Babel.
Discourse herevpon may be, 3. WHE∣THER 1. The Flood drowned Paradice? 2. The Arke could containe all sorts of Beasts, and Fowle, with sufficient provision for them for a yeare, besides Noah and his Fa∣mily? 3. Sem were Noahs Eldest Sonne; and the same with Melchizedec? 4. His Posterity by an Easterne passage Peo∣pled America? 5. Hebrew were the only Tongue spoken be∣fore the Confusion at Babel? 6. Abram were the first that had his name changed, the first Victorious Leader in the Warres, the first Professour of Liberall Sci∣ences, the first Circumcised, and the first Purchaser of Land we read of? 7. His Revelations mentioned by Epiphanius, and his Assumption cited by Origen, and the Booke Jetzirah put upon him, be frivolous and fabulous?
CAP. III. Of the Israelites. 1. THE third Distance is from Abram; to the departing of Israel from Egypt; and containeth the space of 430. years, Gal. 3.17. 2. In which succeed, 1. ISAAC, A. M. 2120. the promised seed given to Abraham and Sarah in their old Age. (2.) He was for∣ced by Famine to forsake Canaan, and releive himselfe with King Abimelech in Gerar, as his Father had formerly done; where God gave increase of Seed, 100 for one. (3.) Gen. 26.1. By distrusting God's protection, he denyed Rebecca to be his Wife, (as Abraham had formerly done Sarah.) But the plot was discovered by Abimelech, and he reprooved for it, and sent away safely. (4.) Notorious is his strange deliverance from being Sacrificed by his Father, Gen. 22. and the birth of his twins Esau and Jacob, of which 2. IACOB, the yonger got the Birth right from Esau by purchase for a trifle, and the Blessing by a stratagem. Gen. 17. &  (2.) Thereupon to avoyd his Brothers revenge, he fled into Mesopotamia to his Vncle Laban, and marryed both his Daughters, blear-eyed Leah, and faire Rachel. (3.) Thence after ad service, having gotten many Children and Goods, he returnes unto Canaan; and is reconciled by God's mer∣cy in the way to his Brother Esau; who came out with 400 men to doe him a Mischeife. (4.) After many Afflictions in Canaan by the deflowring his only Daughter Dinah, by the murthering thereupon of the Sichemites, by his rash Sonnes Simeon and Levi; by the untowardly matching of his Sonne
Judah, his Rachel's death in Child-birth, and the like which the Scripture hath at large; Through envy of his Brethren, Joseph was sold into Egypt. 5. where after much sorrow, he was at length advanced to be cheife Governour, and by that meanes preserved his Father; and Brethren, in a most dangerous time of Famine. Gen. 46.27. 6. Jacob and his Family of 70. persons, repaire to Ioseph in Egypt, where he provided plente∣ously for them in Goshen. 7. Iacob broken with age, (after he had bestowed upon his Sonnes a Propheticall Blessing) dyes in Egypt, but was honourably translated thence by Io∣seph, and his retinue, to be buried with his Fathers at Mack∣pelah, in Canaan. His third Sonne, 3. LEVI Succeeds, for the Preistly Dignity. Of him besides, Gen. 46. 1. Chron. 6. we have nothing singular; As also of his Sonne. 4. COHATH, who descended with his Grand-father and Father into Egypt, where he begat, 5. AMRAM, in whose time the persecution was hot, through the cruell Law of Pharaoh Amenophis, for slaying all the Male-Children, Exod. 1.16. as soone as they were borne. He marryed Jacobed, Exod. 2.1. a Daughter of Levi, and had by her first a Daughter, whom he called Miriam, from the bitter Affli∣ction which they suffered; then a Sonue, Aaron, who after∣ward was the first solemnely consecrated High-Preist of the Israelites. Then, 6. MOSES, of whose miraculous preservation, and Education in Pharaoh Chenchres Court. 2. flying from thence, and soiourning with Jethro in Midian, and marrying Zipporah, Iethros Daughter. 3. Returning thence by God's Especiall Commission, and negotiating with Pharaoh, for the Deliverance of his Brethren, which at last was accomplished after Tenne Plagues upon Egypt; and Pharaohs drowning. 4. Troubles in the Wildernesse. 5. receiving the Law in Horeb. Aprilis. 15. 6. setling Church Discipline. 7. Victories over Arad, Amaleck, Sehon, and Og, in his passage toward Ca∣naan, Death in Mount Nebo, with all circumstances, the Scri∣pture is most copious. By the Bye, we read of him in other
Authors, that his foster Mother was the Princesse Ther∣mutis, Bitia o Zerris Pharaohs daughter. 2. Iacobus Iustus in the notes to his Map of the Holy Land. That Bala∣am, Iob, and Iethro were at that time Pharaohs Counsellors, who when the child trampled Pharaohs Crowne under his feete, Balaam said it presaged destruction to the State. Iob, would have nothing determined against him, but Iethro said it was but a childish trick, and therefore not to be regarded. Whence those 3. sped afterward accordingly, Balaam was slaine, Job afflicted, and Iethro made happy by Moses affini∣ty. 4. The Iewes say, he begd done playday in the weeke, for his Countreymen; and that fell out by miracle to be the Iewish Sabbaoth. 5. Iosephus shewes how he overthrew the King of Aethiopia, and married his daughter Tharbis, Antiqui l. 3. c. 9. that fell in love with him. 6. Lyra hath from a Rabbyn the com∣bate he had with Og the Gyant of Basan, but these things are Apocrypha. 7. The Pentateuch we have of his, which may claime the Title de Originibus, above all other writings, being the first extant of uncontrouleable certainty, some say Ioseph, other that Moses was the same with Mer∣curius Trismegistus, of the Aegyptians, he is termed  in the fragment we have of Orpheus, In Hymno. which agrees well with his name drawne out of the waters. Scalig. 2. COntemporary with this period (besides the obscure Kings of the Assyrian Monarchy mentioned by A∣fricanus, Eusebius, the forger Annius Viterbiensis, and o∣thers) fall in 1. the foundation of the Druides, repaired unto for determining of all controversies amongst the Celts. 2. The great floods of Ogyges. Aventine Picardus de Celtopaedia. And (248 years after) that other in the time of Deucaleon, which almost drowned Greece. 3. Prometheus and Atlas his brother the ancient starre-gazers. 4. Iannes and Iambres, with Balaam the great Magicians. 5. Cecrops of Athens, Plinius Nar. Hist. l. 7. c. 5. 6. from whom we have Phaeton, that set the world on fire. 6. Bacchus and Apis or Serapis, the Idoll of the Aegyptians. 7. The story of Iob, whom some think to have been the same with Iobab, Gen. 36.33. of the line of Esau. vid. Torneel. Bellarm.
Inquiries. 3. Whether 1. The sale of Esau's Birth-right were le∣gall, he having it not in possession? 2. A blessing gotten by circumvention, and lying, be fit for imitation? 3. Iacobs marrying of two sisters, and using their Maidens for Concubines, may be ex∣cused? 4. There be any certainty in the art of Oue∣rocritiques or divination by Dreams? 5. Pharaohs Magitians did true miracles? 6. Moses Aethiopian expedition may passe for trueth? 7. Balaam had his Prophesies from God, or his Asse understood what he spake?
CAP. IV. Of Judges. 1. THe 4th distance is extended, from the depart∣ing of the Israelites from Aegypt, to the building of Solomons Temple, for the space of 480 yeares. 1. Kings 6.1. 2. In it are two Dynasties 1. Iudges 2. Kings. That of Judges followeth in this Line, 1. IOSUA the Conquerour, who by the overthrow of one and thirty Kings, setled the Israelites in the promised Land, and divided it amongst them according to their Tribes, with Eleazar the high Priest Araons successor. 2. He is thought to have written the last chapter of Deuteronomy, and his own acts, containing the space of fourteene years. Seaven spent in the conquest, wherein diverse of the Canaa∣nites fled for feare and setled themselves in Africke, which is gathered by a Pillar mentioned by Procopius that expres∣sed so much; as also by the Harmony of the punick dialect with the Hebrew, as appears by the fragment of Gibberish by Plautus in Paenulo, and diverse words in S. Augustine: And the other seaven in the division of the Land. 3. Iosh. 2 With Eleazarus the high Priest, he held the first Councell in Si∣chem, for abolishing strange worship, and burying Iosephs bones. 4. He setled the Tabernacle in Shiloh; where it re∣sted 369. years, till Eli's time; dyes honourably, being a type of Christ, whose name Iesus he carried, to him suc∣ceeds 2. OTHONIEL, who (after they of Iudah and the
Simeonites had cut off Adonibezeks thumbes, Judges 1. and great toes, as he had served 70. other Kings) led the Israelites against Cushanrishathaim King of Mesopotamia, Ib. 3. whom he over∣threw, and setled peace amongst his Countreymen, till his dying day. His successor was 3. EHUD, Ib. that slew Eglon with his Left-hand dagger, by a stratagem, and so delivered his Countrey from the thral∣dome of the Moabites, who oppressed them by reason of their Idolatry. After him was 4. SHAMGAR, the sonne of Anath, who slew of the Phili∣stims 600 men with an Oxe goade; and he also delivered Israel. but they relapsing againe, quickly fell into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan: notwithstanding upon their repentance were delivered by the Counsell and Valour of 5. BARAK and Deborah. This Iabin was a redoubted Prince, the rather by the successefull exploits of his Generall Sisera, Ib. 4. and the terriblenesse of his 900. Iron Chariots. 2. But all this availes not, when God ariseth to defend his own cause. The host is discomfited, Sisera slaine, by Iael a weake woman, to whose tent he fled for shelter. Israel sinnes againe, and thereby draw the Midianites upon them. 6. GIDEON then is raised, Ib. 6. who miraculously discomfites them, with the slaughter of foure of their Princes; and pu∣nishing of these faithlesse Israelites that refused to aide him. 2. He refused the government offered him for himselfe, and his posterity, stayned his former acts by the Idolatry of the Ephod made by him, Ib. 8. which became the destruction of his house, notwithstanding he had seventy Sonnes lawfully be∣gotten. For 7. ABIMELECH his Bastard, slew them all save one, up∣on one stone, Ib. 9. then took the government upon himselfe, was the destruction of the sichemites, that were his advancers, but at the Siege of Thebez, had his skull crackt by the hand of a woman, who threw a piece of milstone upon him, but to prevent the disgrace of being slaine by a Woman, his
Squire thrust him through by his own command. 8. TOLA of Isachar takes the government, his residence was in Shamir in mount Ephraim; nothing is Chronicled of him, but that after 23. years managing the State, he left it to 9. IAIR the Gileadite, Ib. 10. he supported it the better by reason of his thirty sonnes, who were Lords of so many se∣verall Citties, bearing the names of Havoth-Iair in Gilead, 2. But when Idolatry crept in again amongst them, their eni∣mies got quickly a hand over them; of these the Ammonites most pinched the Gileadites; who after acknowledgement of their faults, sent for 10. Ib. 11. IEPHTHAH their banished countryman to be their Leader. 2. He after some expostulations of unkind∣nesse, undertakes the charge, sends two noble Embassages to the Ammonites, to justify the right of his cause, & declare the wrong they did him. 3. Vpon the refusall of his de∣mands, he joynes Battle with them: 4. Makes a rash vow that if he proved victorious, for sacrificing the first thing, that at his safe returne to his own house, should meet him, this pro∣ved to be his only child and daughter. 5. He overcome, performs his vow, and afterward being quarelled with by the Ephramites, cut off of them 42000. Ib. 12. which were discern∣ed by pronouncing Sibboleth for Shibboleth. His successor was 11. Ibzan of Bethleem, much strengthned by his thirty sonnes, and thirty daughters, Ib. who linked him in a large Affi∣nity, Then 12. ELON of Zabulon took the government who after ten years left it to 13. AEDON, noted for his forty Sonnes and thirty Ne∣phews, that rod on threescore and tenne Asse colts. which ar∣gued him to be a man of great Estate and Honour, yet in strength much inferior to 14. SAMPSON, Manoah's Son of Dan, by a wife that had been formerly barren. 2. In setting forth his strange birth foretold his parents by an Angell, his incredible
strength, his love, with the successe thereof, his wonderfull plaguing the Philistims; his betraying, death, drawne upon himselfe, Ib. from chap. 23. to 17. to be revenged of his enemies that had put out his eyes, and used him with all extremity and disgrace, the text of Scripture is copious; After him we read of no Iudge untill 15. ELI's time, but in the Interim have three notable stories, the first of the Danites, surprizing the loose inhabi∣tants of Laish: and the taking away Michae's Image, and Levite. which was the Originall of the Idolatry that long after plagued Israell. 2. Of the odious abuse of the Levites. Cancubine, and his horrible rovenge, which was like to be the utter ruine of the Benjamites, that maintained the villa∣nie. The 3. of the travells of Naomi and Ruth, with the happy issue at length, after so great distresses. 2. This Ely was the High-priest, a good man, but had debosht Sonnes, to whom being too much indulgent, . Sam. 2. they were their own ruine, and their Fathers Breakneck, To him succeeded his servant 16. SAMUEL, obtained of God by his Mother Han∣nah after many years barrennesse. 2. He setled the Church and Common-wealth, much shattered by the loosenesse of Ely's time. Kept his yearly Assises in Bethel, Gilgall, and Mispah, beside his more particular deciding causes at home in Ramah. 3. His Sonnes Joel and Abiah degenerate from their Fathers Piety and Integrity, Thereupon the people re∣quire a King. Saul of Benjamin is annoynted, and so the State is altered. 4. The Priests that concurred with these were 1. Aaron, 2. Eleazar, 3. Phineas; 4. Abisua, 5. Boc∣chi, 6. Ozis, 7. Ely. Samuel was only a Prophet of the Tribe of Levi. He is supposed to have written the bookes of Judges, Ruth, and a great part of the first of Samuel. 2. WIth this distance concur 1. The civill Wars with the Benjamites, in which there fell on both sides 65100 in the field, with the utter destruction of Men, Women and Children, in all the Cities of the Benjamites, And of Ja∣besh-gilead except 400 Ʋirgins. 2. The beginning of the
Jubiles of the Jewes, and Olympiads of the Greeks. 3. Iub. 2500. The six servitudes of the Israelites by reason of their Jdolatry and their deliverance, upon their repentance. 4. Olymp. 3174 The Charta Magna of Amphiction for preserving the Graecian Liber∣ties. 5. V.C. 3198. The drunken braule between the Lapithes and Cen∣taurs, with the Expedition of the Argonautes to Cholcos for the golden fleece under Jason. 6. The warres of Thebes and Troy set forth so largely by Poets. 7. Together with the acts of Hercules. Thesem, Cadmus, Bellerophon. Perseus. Troy sacked. 2767. Cadmus in∣creaseth greek letters 2520. The rapes of Proserpina, Enropa, Helena. Dedalus flight from Creet, with his sonne Icarus, that by mounting too high was drowned. Where note that most of the Antiquities of the Heathen come not so high as Sampson. 3. Whether 1. Divers of the Cananites, fled from Iosua, and seated themselves in Africk? 2. Oathes binde, which are procured by cir∣cumvention as that to the Gibeonites? 3. The whole frame of Heaven, staid at the Standing of the Sunne in Iosuahs time? 4. Iephtha sacrificed his Daughter, by putting her to death? 5. Sampsons killing himselfe be imitable or excusable? 6. Ely or his Sonnes, were more to be bla∣med, they for their dissolutenesse, or he for suffering it? 7. The Practice, or Prerogatives of Kings, are set downe? 1. Sam. 8. The second Dynasty intercepts those Kings who had Israel intire under their government. In this manner, 1. SAUL the Sonne of Kish, of an eminent house in Ben∣jamin. 2. He sent to seek his fathers Asses stumbled upon a Kingdome. 3. He was a goodly man, 1. Sam. 10.23 higher then
any of the People from the shoulders upward, Annoynted by Samuel, and applauded by all the States in a Solemne Parliament at Mispah. Ib. 4. At his first entry he quitted him∣selfe nobly, in raising the siege at Jabesh Gilead, with the overthrow of the Ammonites. Ib. But his incroaching upon the Priests Office to Sacrifice, Ib. 13. and sparing of Agag with the A∣malakites, Ib. 15. contrary to Gods expresse command; outed him of Gods favour, and gave way for an evill Spirit to vex him. 5. 1. Sam. 36.14 The valour of brave Prince Jonathan, and his faithfull friendship to his Brother-law David, cover in a manner the Fathers exorbitances. 6. Being left to himselfe in his latter time, nothing thrives with him. He grew jealous of his own Sonne Jonathan, persecutes his most loyall and deserving Sonne in Law and Subject David, most barbarously murde∣red Abimelech the High-priest with 85. Ib. 22.18. persons that did weare a Linnen Ephod, and destroyed Nob, the Priests Citty with all that belonged to it. Consults with a Witch at En∣dor, Ib. 28. Ib. 31.4. and last of all Kills himselfe in Mount Gilboa, leaving his carcasse to the Philistims, and his Kingdome to 2.  DAVID the Sonne of Iesse, of the tribe of Iudah, a man after Gods own heart, designed before, and Annoynted to that purpose. 2. He first grew famous by the overthrow of Goliahs, Ib. 17. in single combate. and thereupon after the bringing in for a vantage, three hundred fore-skins of the Philistims, he marrieth Michall, Ib. 18.19. Sauls daughter; who convayed him with her brother Ionathan, from her Fathers fury. 3. His entrance into the Kingdome was strongly withstood by Ish∣bosheths hereditary title, and valiant Abner; but those cut off, all willingly fell to him without farther questioning. 4. After his once setling, his first care was for Religion, to bring the Arke of God from Kiriath-jearim, . Sam. 6. Obed Edoms house, to place it in Sion, a more publike and consecrated place. And not therewith satisfied, he plots to build a Tem∣ple for it, But forbidden by Nathan, notwithstanding makes plentifull provision for his successor to performe it, Ib. 7. with the lesse trouble and charge. He held the second Councell for ordering Divine Service. 5. His thankfull kindnesse to Me∣phibosheth,
Ionathans lame sonne, Ib. 9. Ib. 16. is an excellent patterne for men advanced to imitate, but cheating Zibahs that bearay their trust, should be nearer sifted, and more severely puni∣shed. 6. God gave him noted victories, against the Phili∣stims, Moabites, Sobeans, Damascens, Edomites, Ammo∣nites, and all other that opposed him. 7. But his taking of Ʋriahs wife, and hard usage of the Husband, Ib. 11. Ib. 24. with his num∣bring the People are evident tokens of humane infirmity. 8. Vpon these fell the disasters of the deflowring his daugh∣ter Tamar, the murder of his sonne Ammon, the Rebellion of Absolon, and of Sheba the sonne of Bichri. Ib. 13.15.20. and in his drooping old age the combination of Ioab, with his much tendred sonne Adoniah, to bury him as it were alive. 9. We have the Booke of Psalmes for the most part his, 1. King. 1. though per∣chance not written, yet made by him; the greatest help to devotion, left of the Iewish Church. 10. His end was most pious and glorious, leaving the wisest Statesmen, the worthi∣est Warriors, and inestimable treasure of wealth, with his heavenly Councell and Blessing to his sonne 3. SOLOMON 1. His piety, wisdome, and executi∣on of his Fathers directions, at the first were admired of all, and set him in a pitch, beyond any of his ancestors. 2. That Temple which his Father intended he began, in the fourth of his Raigne, and most gloriously finished it, and setled the Arke in it, in the Holyest of Holies, which had formerly been tossed about; from the Desart to Gilgal, from Gilgal to Shilo, from Shilo, to the Philistims, from thence, to Beth∣shemesh, from Bethshemesh; to Kiriathjearim, from thence to the house of O bed Edom, from thence to the City of David. So that his wisdom brought him in admiration both at home, and abroad with strangers, who repaired unto him, as to an Oracle. witnesse the Queene of Sheba, 1. King. 4.29. Ib. 10. that came in person from her own Countrey, to conferre with him; And Hiram of Tyre, that joyned with him to fetch gold from Ophir. His daily provision for his houshold, stables, 2. King 4.22. and other expences would be thought incredible, in any other History, but Ca∣nonicall. 3. But in the midst of prosperity, wealth, and
ease, the multitude of strange women, wrought him to fa∣vour and further Idolatry, which he freed himselfe from (as it is thought) afterward, and left his Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Canticum, By De la Cer∣da, a Iesuit. a testimony thereof, and directions for all po∣sterity. 4. Those other writings which are attributed to him, whether pious, as the booke of Wisdome, and Ecclesia∣sticus; or of late, his 18 Psalme set forth in Greeke and Latine: or Impious, and frivolous, as 1. Incantationes Solomonis. 2. Vid. Pinedam de Rebus ge∣stis Solomo∣nis. Clavicula. 3. Amulus. 4. Contradictio. 5. Hydromantia to his sonne Rehoboam. 6. de Geniis. 7. Liber verborum Solomonis. 8. De umbris Idearum. 9. his Calender. 10. Chi∣micks. 11. Epistles between him and Hyram of Tyre, and Ʋaphres King of Egypt. 12. the Ars memoriae that goes un∣der his name, are rejected all as forged pieces. 5. His latter daies, after so much magnificence, and pleasure, were peste∣red with insurrectious, of Hadad, Rezin, and Jeroboam, whom he lived not fully to quell, but left them to vexe his Sonue that succeeded. 2. COncurrent, with these times are made the obscure po∣sterity of Aeneas in Italy, and our Brute here amongst us. Plutarch. Euseb. Iustin. 2. Codrus the last King of Athens, who purchased by his own death, the victory for his Countrey. 3. The birth of Homer. 4. The famous combate between Abners men, and Ioabs wherein twelve of a side, 2. Sam. 2.16. slew each man his opposite up∣on the place. 5. The Giants of the Philistims cut off at times by David and his 37 Worthies. 2. Sam. 23. 6. The hight of Poe∣try, Musicke, and all kind of Philosophy eminent in Davids Psalmes, Kings, 4.32 and Solomons 3000 Proverbs, and 1005 songs, with his books of Naturall Philosophy, mentioned in Scri∣pture. 7. His perfection in the Art of Navigation, in trading with the Tyrians to Ophir for Gold.
Whether 1. Musick have any virtue to drive away Di∣vells? 2. The Dead may be raised by a Witch? 3. Joab might justifie Absoloms killing, ha∣ving a command from his Soveraigne to the contrary? 4. A Warrior may not build God a House as well as another man? 5. Solomon repented before his death and was forgiven? 6. Ophir may be thought to be Pern in the West Indies? 7. The Queeue of Sheba (named by some Makedah or Nicaules) had Meleck a Sonne by Solomon from whom descended Candace, whose Eunuch propagated Christianity amongst the Abissines now under Prester Iohn?
CAP. V. Kings of Iudah. 1 THE fifth Distance is from the erecting of the First Temple, to the Second, the space of 497 yeares. 2. Alst. Ency∣clop. p. 32. c. 17. § 5. And comprehends two Dynasties, The 1. Succession of the Kings of Judah unto the Captivity. 427 yeares. 2. Continuance in the Captivi∣ty untill their returne, and Building the Second Temple. 70 yeares. In the Succession of the Kings of Iudah are reckoned, 1.  REHOBOHAM, who in the Parliament at Sechem, rejecting the advice of his Fathers experienced Councellours, 1. Kings 12. 2. Chron. 10. and following the devices of his owne Green-headed com∣panions, gave occasion to the Rent of ten Tribes from him, who sided with Ieroboam the Sonne of Nebat, and could never afterward be united. (2.) When he sent his Trea∣surer Adoram to demaund Tribute of the Rebels; Ib. v. 18. they Stoned him, and put the King to shift for himselfe, and there∣upon when he had provided an Army from Iudah, 1. Kings 10. 2. Chr. 11.1. and Ben∣jamin to recover his Right of 180000 valiant men; he was forbidden to proceed by Shemaiah, the man of God, which he obeyed. (3.) Vpon his falling off into Idolatry, and tolerating Sodomites; 1. Reg. 14. 2. Chron. 12. Shishak King of Aegypt came and ri∣fled the Temple with the Kings Treasure. so that he was forced to supply Solomons golden Shieldes, (which were then carried away) with the like of Brasse. Thus he
left the State much deminished, and impoverished to his Sonne. 2. ABIAH, little better then his Father. (2.) Not∣withstanding in a set Battle against Ieroboam, who brought no lesse then 800000 into the field; with 400000 only of his side, he slew 500000 of the Enemies, and routed the rest, because he relyed upon the God of his Fathers. 2. Chron. 3. v. 3. Ib. v. 17. Ib. (3.) Vp∣on this notable victory he recovered diverse Townes from Ieroboam, and kept him under, untill his dying day. Iddo the Prophet wrote his life, which we have not. To him succeeded his sonne 3. ASA, He reformed Religion, by taking away the Sodomites, and demolishing the Groves, and Images of his Fathers erecting, wherein he granted not a dispensation to his mother Maacha's superstition. 1. Kings 15. 2. Chron. 16. Yet neglected the remo∣vall of the high places, which had stood since the Raigne of his great Grand-father Solomon. 2. He had an Army as hand, of Iudah, and Benjamin, 2. Chron. 14. Ib. v. 9. confisting of 580000 valiant men; wherewith he overthrew Zera the Aethiopian, that brought 1000000 against him. 3. In his Bickerings with his neighbour Baasha of Israel, 2. Chron. 16. 1. Kings 15. Ib. he hired Benhadad of Damas∣cus, with the consecrated treasure of the Temple, and supply of his owne, to divert Baasha, from fortifying Raamah, which was done, but Hanani the Seer checks him for it, for which he was imprisoned insteed of amends. 4. A disease toward his latter end takes him in his feet (it may be a sharpe goute) which increasing upon him; he depends more upon Physitians, then seeking to God, so dyes, and was magnifi∣cently buried, leaving his good Sonne 4. IEHOSOPHAT his successour. He was exceed∣ing circumspect, for the fortifying of his Territories, and had an Army in the field that waited on him (besides those he had in Garrison) under five able leaders, 2. Chron. 17. of 1160000 mighty men of valour. 2. In reforming Religion, he took away the High places, and groves out of Iudah, Ib. 17. and sent a∣broad Preachers to instruct the People. 3. His joyning with Idolatrous Ahab, was like to have cost him his life, in the
Battle at Ramoth-Gilead, for which he was boldly reproved by Jehu the sonne of Hanani the Seer, 1. Reg. 22. 2. Chron. 19. which he took well at his hand. And 4. thereupon took order for the better setl∣ing of affaires, both of Church and State. 5. A mixt com∣pany of Moab, Ib. 29. Ammon, and Seir, that had combined a∣gainst him, were miraculously defeated upon his fasting and prayer: by the mutuall massacring of one another in Hazza∣zon-Tamar, as Iahaziel the Levite foretold him, for which he had a solemne thanks-giving, in the valley of Berachah. 6. Ib. All this could not keepe his easy disposition from con∣federating with Ahaziah, Idolatrous Ahabs sonne, but their Navies must needs joyne in a voyage to Tarshish; what the issue should prove it was foretold him by Eliezer the Prophet. The Navy was cast away. He soon dyes and leaves the Crowne to 5. IEHORAM: a degenerate sonne from so Religious a Father: made farre the worse by his match with Athalia, Idolatrous Omri's daughter, and wicked Ahab's sister of Israel. 2. His entrance to the Kingdome was (according to the moderne Turkish manner) with the slaughter of his brethren, Ib. 21.4. and diverse of the Nobles. 3. He had a victory a∣gainst the Edomites, Ib. but not to keepe them in their wonted subjection, but to rout them for the present, when Libnah, one of his own Citties revolted from him, because he had forsaken the God of his Fathers. 4. Wicked courses can ne∣ver prosper long. Astinging letter left by Elias before his translation, came to his hands, to forewarne him, whereto he should trust. 5. The Philistims and ragged Arabians surprize Ierusalem, and bereave him of all his Wives and Sonnes except the youngest. 6. A horrible disease at last seis∣eth upon him, Ib. so that his bowells fell out, and he dyes loath∣somely, not desired, nor buried in the Sepulchers of his Fa∣thers, leaving only to succeed him 6. AHAZIAH his youngest sonne; a sprig of Athali∣ahs, Ib. 22. altogether ruled by his wicked mothers suggestions. 2. He would needs assist his cozen Jehoram of Israel, at the siege of Ramoth Gilead, and afterward in a complement visit
him, when he returned to be cured of his wounds in that bickering received. 3. But that cost him his life, by the hand of furious Johu, raised up by God to be the ruine of Ahabs house. Notwithstanding for his good Grandfathers sake Je∣hosophat, he had a Kingly buriall. upon which his violent Mother 7. ATHALIAH usurps the Kingdome. 1. Her first designe was to destroy all the Seed Royall of the House of Iudah, Ib. v 10. to free her selfe from competitors. But the pittifull Princesse Iehoshabeah, Ichoiadah the High-Priests wife, conveyed her young Nephew Ioash Ahaziah's sonne, from her cruelty, and brought him up in the Temple secretly. 2. Athaliah Re∣vells it out, for a seaven yeere, supposing all safe, promotes the Idolatry of the house of Omri. 3. 2. Chron. 23. But after by Iehoia∣dah's provident contriving, she had that she deserved, and the right Heire 8. Ioash tooke place, when he was but seaven years, old, Ib. 1. He did excellent well under the tutorage, and advice of his grave and Religious Vnkle Ichoiadah, took order for the repairing of the Temple, and reforming of all things amisse, both in Church and State. 2. But the good old man once gone, Ib. c. 24. Sychophants insinuated themselves to debosh the young King, that all kind of goodnesse was left off, and Ido∣latry againe imbraced. 4. Against which when Zachariah, Ichoiadahs sonne shewed himselfe (as it became him) free and resolute, he was Tyrannically stoned to death, V. 12. by the Kings Commandement, in the Court of the house of the Lord, Ib. v. 2. without respect of Place, Cause, or Person. 5. This pro∣ved not well; for the King was thereupon overthrown shamefully, by a small company of the Syrians; plagued with diseases, and at last treacherously made away by his own Servants, leaving his Kingdome to his sonne 9. AMAZIAH, who did worthily in executing those Traytors that slew his Father, Ib. c. 25. yet sparing their harmelesse children. 2. He Mustered 300000 of his own, and hired 100000 of Israel, to goe against Edom; but was forbidden by a Prophet, to take the Israelites with him. Thus he obey∣ed
with the losse of his pay of a 100 talents. 3. These dis∣banded and disordered Israelites, rifled Iudah in their re∣turne. The King proceeds with his owne, and is victorious over Edom. Ib. 4. He takes the Idoles of the vanquished Edo∣mites, and foolishly serves them, for which he is freely checked by a Prophet, which he took not well, nor obeyed. 5. Vpon presumption on this successe, and strength, he cha∣lengeth Ioash King of Israel, Ib. v. 18. who minds him of his vanity, in a pretty Apology of the Cedar and Thistle. This diverts him not, but joyning Battle with him, hath the worst; and is taken Prisoner, Ierusalem is ransackt. 6. These disasters worke no amendment or repentance in him, for in his Idola∣try he is slaine, by a conspiracy, that overtooke him, flying at Lachish. 7. Is brought back to Ierusalem and buried with his Fathers. his sonne 10. Ib. c. 26. 2. Kings 14. VZZIAH or Azariah is setled in his throne by all the People. 2. He proved a very valiant man, and victorious against the Philistims, V. 3. and Arabians. 3. Had by the least 300700 Souldiers, in a readinesse well appoynted at all as∣sayes, V. 14. fortified Jerusalem with Mathematicall Engines, and other places with all munition requisite. 4 Was a great sheep-master, Ib. a planter of Vines, and a lover of Husbandry. 5. But prosperity and pride at last spoyled all. In a prophane humor he invades the Priests Office, to burne Incense against Gods Commandement, then was strucken with a Leprosie, and hasted out of the Temple, being afraid of a greater judgement. 2. Chron. 26. whereupon he was shut up in a severall house, being not fit to converse with others, any longer for mana∣ging the State, And so 11. IOTHAM his sonne took the government upon him. 1. 2. Chron. 27. 2. Kings 15. He was a great builder, and victorious against the Ammo∣nites. 2. Abstained from incroaching upon the Priest-hood, as his Father had done, is commended for his good endea∣vours in reformation. 3. Howbeit the high places were not taken downe, whereby the people continued in their Ido∣latry. His Sonne 12. AHAZ that succeeded him, much degenerated
from him. 1. He brought in, Ib. 28. 2. Kings 16. the Idolatry of the Kings of Israell, and after the abominations of the Heathen, Sacrificed his children by fire in the vally of Hinnon. All high places, and hills, and greene trees were witnesses of his Abomina∣tions; so that the text saies This is that King Ahaz, Ib. v. 22. that car∣ried the brand of infamy with him to his grave. 2. But be∣fore he came thither; the Syrians smote him, Ib. and carried a∣way a great multitude of his Subjects to Damascus, where he went to meet Tiglath Peleser of Assyria, and sent home a modell of an Heathenish Altar, 2. Kings . which Ʋriah the High-Priest set up in the Temple, and sacrificed upon, at such time as Gods Altar, and the Lavar, were moved from their pla∣ces, and the Brazen Sea, took off the stately Oxen of Brasse, and set on a pavement of stone. Besides the Kings entry was turned from the the house of the Lord, to gratify the King of Assyria. 3. Afterward Pekah of Israel, broke him; whose Champion Zichri of Ephraim, 2. Chron. 2. slew Prince Maassiah his Sonne, with other chiefe men about him. At which time Is∣raell carried away 200000 Captives, that by Oded the Pro∣phets means, were in pity returned againe without hurt, Ib. or ransome. 4. All this wrought not the King to goodnesse, but he sends for the Assyrian to help him against the Edo∣mites and Philistims, and fees him, with the confecrated treasures of Gods house. But this did him no good. 5. For after so unworthy a race expired, Ib. he sleeps with his Fa∣thers, but is not thought fit to be brought into the Kings Se∣pulchers. 13. HEZECHIAH his sonne succeeds him, who pro∣ved the better man (out of doubt) through the good instru∣ctions of his mother Abiah, the daughter of Zachariah, 2. Chron. 28 v. 5. who had understanding in the visions of God, and was so faithfull an adviser to his great Grandsire Vzziah. 2. His first care was to rectify Religion, which had so much suffered by his Father: wherefore he breaks downe the brazen Serpent, and calls it Nehushtan, when it was burnt. 2. Kings 18.4 Then invites all Is∣rael to the celebrating of the Passeover, but they laught him to scorne for it. not without a perpetuall captivity shortly
falling upon them, 2. Chr. 30.10 who proved ungratefull in the acknow∣ledgement of their deliverance from Aegypts bondage. 3. 2. Kings 17. Senacharib the great Assyrian (whose father Salmannaz∣zer had not long before captivated the ten Tribes) beleagred Jerusalem, but with the miraculous losie of an 185000 of his bravest Leaders and Souldiers. Ib. c. 20. 4. He falls sicke, and through Prayer purchased fifteen years prorogation of his life, which was confirmed to him by a signe, of the shadowes retrogradation in Ahaz dyall. 5. Whereupon Merodach Baladan of Babylon, Ib. congratulates him with an Ambassage and Presents. Whom he acquaints with the great treasures of the Kingdome, for which Isaiah the Prophet reprooves him, and foretells they shall be transfer'd to Babel. As he lived so he dies honourably, is inter'd accordingly, leaves his Kingdome to his sonne 14. MANASSES, who cancells his Fathers goodnesse: and erected againe the Idolatry of his Grand father Ahaz. Expiates his Children in the fire of Benhinnon, 2. Chron. 33. 2. Kings 21. useth all kinds of Witchcraft, and working by familiar spirits, sets up a car∣ved Image in Gods Temple, causing Judah to doe worse then the heathen. Ib. 2. For this he is carried away captive to Ba∣bylon, then expresseth his syncere repentance by hearty pray∣er, not in the words perhaps, but in the sence, of that Apo∣cryphall prayer, which goes under his name. 3. Returnes again to his Kingdome, Reformes effectually, dyes religi∣ously and leaves 15. Ib. AMON his sonne to succeed. 1. This man being of sufficient age, could not be warned by his Fathers exam∣ple, but restores Idolatry at the highest, and humbled not himselfe but persists in his folly. 2. Till his servants con∣spir'd, and slew him in his own house, which the people took so indignly, that the Traitors had quickly what they deser∣ved. And 16. 2. Kings 22. 2. Chron. 34. IOSIAH his sonne was made King in his steed, of whom too much good cannot be spoken. He began betimes to reforme Religion, and repaire the Temple, brings the book of the Law againe to light, which was formerly lost; cele∣brates
a solemn Passeover beyond all the Kings that were be∣fore him. 2. In an unadvised expedition against Necho of Aegypt, he got his deaths wound, by an arrow in the valley of Megiddo, returnes, and dyes at Ierusalem, and 3. Ib. 35. 2. Chr. 35.25. was buryed with the great Lamentation of the Prophet Ieremiah, and all his Subjects, who setled his sonne 17. JEHOAHAZ in his place, but long he could not hold it. Ib. 36. For after three monthes Pharao Necho comes upon him, broken by his Fathers Disasters, and carries him Captive into Aegypt. Sets Eliachim his brother in his place, whom he calleth 18. IEHOIAKIM: This man (farre degenerating from his Fathers vertues) is within a dozen yeares carryed prisoner to Babylon, by Nebuchad-nezzar, 2. Chr. 3. with all the Rich∣es of the Temple. His sonne Jechoniah, or Choniah, or 19. IEHOIACHIN is left in his place, which he received young, managed ill, and kept not long. For within a yeare, Nebuchad-nezzar was also upon him, Ib. and carryed him away to Babylon prisoner, with his Mother, and all his Princes, and Officers, even to the very Smiths, and Artizans, where ('tis thought) he dyed upon the way, and had no bet∣ter buriall then an Asse, as Jeremiah had foretold. Jer. 22.19. His Vn∣cle Mataniah is put King in his place, and called 20. ZEDEKIAH. He Rebels against his advancer Nebuchadnezzar, contrary to the advice of Jeremiah the pro∣phet, and his Oath of Allegiance he had taken; Jerusalem (after two yeares seige) ransackt, the King laid hold on, 2. Chr. 36.13. the Temple, City, and all Defaced. 2. He was brought to Ne∣buchad-nezzar at Riblah, had his sonnes slaine before him, that he might not only feele, but see his Woe. Afterward his Eyes were put out, and he carryed Captive to Babylon, where he ended his Woefull daies. 3. Ib. One Gedaliah was left behinde to governe the scattered people, who were too many, and worthlesse to be carryed so farre; but he was tray∣terously slaine by the Treason of Ismael, the sonne of Netha∣niah, and his Confederates. They hurryed the people with Je∣remiah the Prophet into Egypt. 4. Evilmerodach, Nebuchad-nezzars
sonne and successour, dealt kindly with Jehoja∣chim, in Babylon, but releaseth not the Captivity. 2. COntemporary with these, were (as it appeareth out of the second of Kings, and Chronicles) 1. The Kings of Israel. 1. Politique Ieroboam, who got little by Treason and Idolatry; for 2. Debosht Nadab his sonne, was rooted out with all his House; by 3. Boysterous Baasha. His son, 4. Drunken Elah, with all that Familie were on the suddain made away by 5. Rash Zimri. He raigned but seven daies, before 6. Stout Omri forced him to burne himselfe, with the Palace in Tirzah; Omri stood longer, bought Samaria, set∣led himselfe there in his Idolatrous courses, and left 7. Vx∣orious Ahab his sonne to succeed him. He with his Zidonian virago Iezabell, . Kings 21. proves worse then his Ancestors. Extorts Naboths Vineyard from him, where afterward dogges lickt his blood. Yet left his sonne 8. Mopish Ahaziah his succes∣sour, 2. King. 1. who dyes by a fall, of which Beelzebub of Ekron could not cure him, And leaves the Kingdom to his stirring bro∣ther 9. Iehoram; This man was taken off by 10. Furious Jehu, who makes also an end of the Masculine Iezabell, with all the breed of that Line. He did well in executing the Baalites, but the touch of Ieroboams politique Idolatry, taint∣ed all his other good parts. His sonne 11. vexed Jehoahaz followes, who (notwithstanding Gods favour in easing him) could not be staved of from Ieroboams Policy. 12. Ioash his sonne follows in the same rode. Rifled Ierusalem, when he had overthrowne Amaziah. Leaves the 13. Valiant Iero∣boam his successour, who somewhat refreshed the State, and so leaves it to the 14. Vnfortunate Zachariah; he was trai∣terously slaine by 15. Shallum, who made an end of Iehu's race, but held the Throne but a month, before 16. Mena∣hem tooke him off. He left the Kingdome to 17. Pekaiah his sonne. But 18. Pekah, the sonne of Remaliah, soone outed him, and held it. He was traiterously slaine by 19. Hoshea the sonne of Elah, & he with the ten Tribes carried captives by Shalmaneser of Assyria. 2. Kings 17.
2. Also Prophets; 1. That Man of God who came from Iudah, 1. Kings 13. and startled Ierobeam in his Calvish sacrificing at Be∣thel, by the renting of the Altar, and withering of the hand stretched out to apprehend him. 2. Elijah, and Elisha, emi∣nent for Miracles. 3. Besides those Greater, and lesser Pro∣phets, whose Writings we have. 3. With whom fell in 1. the Division of the Assyrian Monarchy, (through Sardanapalus effeminate Luxury) be∣tween Phul-Bellock and Arbaces. 2. The Founding of Rome by Romulus, with the successe of the six Kings following. 3. Lycurgus and his Lawes for the Lacedemonians. 4. Midas of Phrigia with Asses cares. 5. The seven Wise-men of Greece. 6. Pharao-Necho's vaine attempt, to joyne Nilus, with the Red-Sea. 7. The building of Carthage by Dido, a∣bove 200 years after Aeneas death. Which discredits Ʋir∣gils Poem, of the hot Affection between them. Jnquiries. 3. WHE∣THER 1. Zachariah, Jehojadahs sonne, were the same our Saviour speaks of in the Gospell, Mat. 23.35. 2. Ʋzziahs Mathemeticall Instruments, were of the same kinde with those of Archimedes in Plutarch? 3. The shadow went back only in Ahaz dyall, not the Sunne in the Heavens? 4. The captivity of the Tenne Tribes, peopled Tartary and the West-Indies? 5. Iehojachim had any markes of Inchantment upon him? 6. Elisha Prophesied the better, by hearing of a Musicall instrument? 7. He gave a Toleration to Naaman, to be pre¦sent at Idolatrous Worship?
SECT. II. The time of the Captivity of Babylon. 1. THe Captivity of the tenne Tribes by Salmana∣sar, and of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar, hath put a period to the first Dynasty in the succession of Kings. The second Dynasty here runs along in the con∣tinuance of the Captivity for the space of 70 years, wherein it is sufficient to note these eminent men. 1.  DANIEL, of the Bloud Royall, who was carried away but young with King Ioakim. 2. His sober Dyet, and education in the learning of those times, fitted him for grea∣ter imployments. 3. The expounding of Nebuchadnezzars two dreams, when all the Chaldean Wisards were at a non plus; gave the first rise, to his succeeding advancement, and credit. To Balthazar he interpreted the condemnatory hand∣writing against him. Vnder Darius for his Religion, he was cast into the Lyons don; but there was miraculously freed, to the ruine of his accusers. 4. His Prophesy (which we have) is partly in the Chalday, partly in the Hebrew tongue; and containes the History from the third year of Ioakim, to the end of the Captivity: in which he was a spectator, or actor. As also a foretelling from thence, the troubles that should befall the Church, under the Graecians and Romans; The comming of the Messias after 70 Propheticall weekes. The Passages from thence in generall to the end of the World. 5. The deliverance of Susanna, is put upon him, and the ab∣breviating of Nebuchadnezzars transformation from seaven years to so many weekes by his prayers. 6. He is said to have refused to be coheire with Baltasar in that Monarchy, when it was offered him by Nebuchadnezzar. 7. He lived 138
years (by Pererius calculation) which A Lapide his fellow Iesuit findes fault with; who hath afforded us his picture in his Chaldean trowzes, out of the Emperour Basilius Porphy∣genitus booke, now in the Vatican. where he is also re∣ported with his three fellowes, Sydrach, Mesach, and A∣bednego, to have suffered Martyrdome, which other Histo∣rians have not observed. 2. ZEROBABEL who with Iosua the high Priest, and others brought the People again from Babylon, by the grant of Cyrus after the 70 years Captivity. 2. He set up first the Altar, sacrificed upon it, and layd the foundations of the second Temple, whereat the old men wept, to see how farre it came short of the former. 3. The worke is hindered by Cyrus successors, Haggai and Zachary the Prophets, incite the builders to goe onward. The Persian gives way, and the worke is finished, dedicated, and the Passcover solem∣nized. 3. EZRA the Priest a ready Scribe in the Law, comes with a new supply, having commission from Artaxerxes. 2. He orders all matters concerning Gods worship in a Councell, by the encouragement of Shecaniah, separates the Israelites, that had taken outlandish wives, digests the Ca∣non of the Scripture as we now have it; adding the divisi∣ons to it, whereas before, it was one intire masse. Begins the Masoriticall notes for the truer reading, and distincter pro∣nuntiation of the tongue; which had much suffered in the 70 years Captivity. 3. There joyned with him in this great worke (as the Iewes would have it) 1. Danicl. 2. Ana∣nias. 3. Azarias. 4. Misael. 5. Iosua. 6. Zorobabel. 7. Hag∣geas. 8. Zacharias. 9. Malachias. 10 Nehemias. 11. Mar∣dochaeus, that makes out a whole dozen. The third and fourth of Esdras are casheir'd for none of his. 4. NEHEMIAH the Tirshasha or Governour comes af∣ter him, and builds up the walles by Artaxerxes commissi∣on, maugre the pestilent opposition of Sanballet, Tobiah, and Geshem with their confederates. 2. He orders all things prudently, and with vigilant resolution. Restraines Ʋsu∣rers,
keeps hospitality, causeth the Law to be read, and ex∣pounded to the People, takes a Catalogue of those, that re∣turned from the Captivity, and made a Covenant to serve the Lord. 3. Reformes the violation of the Sabbaoth, and taking strange wives, is thought to be the Register of his own Acts. About which time, 5.  MORDECAI the Benjamite captivated with Iechoni∣ah, proved a worthy upholder of his Nation under Ahashu∣erosh, in Shushan. 2. By his provident Councell, Esther his orphane Kinswoman, came to be Queene in Ʋasti's place, who was divorced for her sullennesse. 3. He discovered a treason against the King, and afterward by Gods providence, contrived the matter so happily, that Hamon, the Iewes deadly enemy, who had plotted their utter ruine, was han∣ged on a tree, the fame gallowes, he had erected for Morde∣cais execution. 4. The King takes a liking to him, and makes him the chiefe man under him. 5. In which place he behaved himselfe most religiously and prudently, and is thought also to have written the booke of Esther. His Acts are registred in the Chronicles of Media, and Persia. 3. COncurrent with these times are, 1. The stories of Tobit and Judeth. 2. The fragments annexed to Daniel, of Susanna, Bel and the Dragon. 3. The Hiding of the holy Fire in a pitt by the Priests, 2. Macc. 1, & 2. and of the Arke, with the Altar of Incense, in a Cave, by Jeremy in Mount Horeb. 4. The Prophesy of Baruch, with the Epistle of Jeremy. 5. Ezechiels, Haggies, and Zacharies predications, and pre∣dictions, to their captive Countreymen. 6. The translation of the Assyrian Monarchy to the Medes, and Persians. 7 The growing up of the Greekes and Romanes.
INQVIRIES. Whether 1. The Representation of Nebuchadnezzars Image extend no farther then the com∣ming of the Messias? 2. Those additions to Daniel, of Susanna, Bell, and the Dragon, may passe for Hi∣story? 3. The Bookes of Tobit, and Iudeth, be only sacred Poems? 4. Ezra left the old Hebrew letters, to the Samaritans, and brought in those we now have, from the Chaldeans? 5. He ordered the bookes of the old Testa∣ment as now we have them? 6. With the grand Synagogue he added the Hebrew poynts, and began the Masorah? 7. Xerxes were Hesters husband?
CAP. VI. Chiefetaines. 1. Confer. Al∣sted. Ency∣clop. l. 33. c. 3. Graston Chron. THe sixth Distance from the second Temple to the birth of Christ, containing the space of 529 years, hath three Dynaesties 1. Chiefetaines from the house of David. 2. Asmonaei or Maccabes. 3. Kings. These Chiefetaines we have from Saint Luke in this Or∣der. 1. RHESA MESULLAM, of whom nothing is recor∣ded but that he left 2.  IOANNA BEN RHESA, to succeed him, in whose time Ezra came to Ierusalem, with 1500 men. His suc∣cessor was 3. IUDAS HIRCANUS, when Iohn the High Priest, being provoked by his brother Iosua, slew him in the Tem∣ple. whereupon Bagoses Artaxerxes a powerfull Eunuch in revenge of his friend Iosua, enters the Temple and pol∣lutes it. 4. IOSEPH followes him, The schisme between Iad∣dus the High Priest, and Manasses his brother falls out a∣bout this time. wherein the Antitemple of Mount Garesim, was built by rich Sanballat, Manasses Father in Law, to put down the Temple at Ierusalem. Him 5. SEMEI-ABNER succeeded, who saw the fraudu∣lent surprisall of the Citty of Ierusalem, with the Temple, by
Ptolomaeus Lagi, and captivating of his Countrymen, in ano∣ther Aegyptian servitude. After him 6 MATTHIAS ELI found small comfort in all those af∣flictions, Nor 7. MATH ASERMAH alias Asar Masat that succee∣ded him, nor 8. NAGGE, alias Artaxad Nagid, that followed him. About which times, seem to have grown those horrible projects against the Jewes in Aegypt, and their strange deli∣verance, related in the third of Maccabees: But 9. ESLA alias Haggi Eli, received more kindnesse in Ptolomeus Philadelphus daies, who procured that translati∣on we have of the Septuagint in Greeke, and set free 120000 Iewes from slavery, at his own cost. 10. NAHUM MASHETH, was sharer in the same hap∣pinesse; whose successor was 11. AMOS SYRACH, 'Tis said the fosse or Cut, be∣tween Nilus, and the Red sea, which Pharao Necho, and Darius had attempted in vaine; was then finished by Pto∣lomeus Philadelphus, after Amos 12. MATHATHIAS SILOAH, is only named, his sonne 13. IOSEPH IUNIOR, alias Arses, is in great esteeme with Ptolomeus Euergetes, as also were Ioseph and Hirc a∣nus (of the Priests stock) great Courteors then in Aegypt; about which time Ecclesiasticus was written by Iesus the sonne of Syrach. In this line of David 14. IANNES HIRCANUS primus is accounted the last. He defeateth the Arabians in some Battles, and so wearied with the extremity of the times, is gathered to his Ance∣stors. COntemporary with these were, 1. High-Priests, emi∣nent to be taken notice of above the rest. 1. Ioshua as∣sistant to Zorobabel. 2. Ioachim, who is said to have written the booke of Iudith, and Iaddus that met in his Priestly vestments Alexander the great, comming with an intent
to plunder Ierusalem, but he so pacified him, that he offered Sacrifices to God according to the High Priests direction; was much taken with the Prophesy of Daniel, then shewed unto him, concerning the Greeke Goat, that should break the Persian Ramme. Dan. 8. whereupon he granted to the Jewes, whatsoever they demanded of him. Ioseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 8. 2. Externall accidents. 1. The Battles of, 1. Marath∣ron, 2. Thermopylae. 3. Salamina, and 4. Platea, wherein the Greekes had notable victories over the Persians, and thereupon instituted Cock-fighting. 5. Coriolanus and Alci∣bindes, flying off, and vexing their Countreys. 6. The Warre between the Persian brethren Artaxerxes, and Cyrus, and the honourable retreat of Xenophon with his 10000 Greeks, with all the businesse that happened from Cyrus, and his Persian successors; those of Alexander the Great and his suc∣cessors unto Antiochus Epiphanes. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The forenamed Chieftaines of the line of David, had any authority of Magistrates amongst their Countrymen? 2. Ioseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 7. The killing of Iosuah in the Temple, by Iohn his brother, the High Priest, pollu∣ted the Temple and made Iohn irregular? 3. Ib. Ib. l. 13. c. 6. The Temple in mount Garesim erected by Sanballet, for Manasses his Sonne in Law, or that of Onias in Aegypt, were any way tollerable? 4. Simeon the High-Priest, were author of the Book called the third of Maceabes, which in order should be the first? 5. The Greeke translation we have under the name of the Septuagint, be undoubtedly theirs?
6. There were ever a ditch or Cutt perfected to make the Mediterranean, and the Red Sea meet? 7. Iesus the sonne of Sirach that wrote Eccle∣siasticus, were one of the seaventy Inter∣preters?
SECT. II. Maccabees. 1. THe second Dynasty, Incidit inter∣regnum Iu∣daicum per Annos 62. Alst. is of the Asmonei, or Mac∣cabees, extraordinarily raised up by God, to de∣fend true Religion. In this are reckoned. 1.  MATHATHIAS of Modin, who 1. killed an Apo∣state Iew, by the Altar, together with the Kings commissi∣oner. 2. Afterwards destroyed the Heathenish Altars: and circumcised the Iewish Children by force. 3. Giveth di∣rections to his sonnes to be resolute in their profession, and defence of their Countrey; and so dies honourably, leaving to succeed him in the quarrell, his sonne 2.  IUDAS MACCABEUS, so termed of foure Letters which he carried in his Standard, M. C. B. I. which inti∣mate by the Iewes Rashitiboth  who is like among the Gods unto thee Ichovah? Exod. 15.11. though others think otherwise. He 1. overthrew Apollo∣nius with his great host comming against him out of Sama∣ria, and took his Sword from him, which he after used. And 2. 1. Mac. 4.57. Seron a Prince of the Army of Syria. 3. Then Gorgias, and Lysias with their Armies, purifieth the Temple polluted by Antiochus, and (in memory thereof) appoynted the Feast of the Dedication, honoured by our Saviours presence Ioh. 10.22. 4. Overcame the Idumeans, Ammonites, and o∣thers, 1. Mac. 6.46. with their great Leader Timotheus. 5. Encounters Eupators huge Host, where valiant Eleazar slew the Ele∣phant, that crushed him with his fall; makes a league with the Romanes. 6. Defeats and kills Nicanor (Demetrius Generall) with all his host. Ib. 9.18. 7. At length venturing with 800 men, upon Bacchides that had 20000 foote, and 2000 horse, after a most resolute rowting of the right wing, he was enclosed by the left wing, and so slaine.
3. JONATHAN his brother succeeeds him. Who 1. ha∣ving revenged the death of his brother Iohn, Ib. . 37. at the great marriage of Ambri: with a few breaks through Bacchides great Army, endangereth the Generall himselfe in his pas∣sage, slayes a 1000 men, swims over Jordan with his com∣pany and so quits himselfe. 2. By the hand of God stopping the mouth of Alcimus. with a deadly palsey, he is delivered from that treacherous High-Priest, who had mastered the Hasideans, and was pulling downe the Monuments of the Prophets. 3. Discomfited Bacchides before Beth Basim, and forced him to a Peace. 4. Sticks to Alexander, the sonne of Epiphanes, who named him High-Priest, and defeats A∣pollonius the Generall of Demetrius, and an host of stran∣gers, when his own men had left him. 5. Reneweth the league with the Romanes and Spartanes. 6. Is betrayed and slaine by the Vsurper Tryphon, leaving his brother 4. SIMON, who was chosen in his place. 1. He was de∣ceived by Tryphon of an 100 talents, which he sent with Jonathans two sonnes, to redeeme their Father, but lost all. 1. Mac. c. 13, & 14. 2. He wan Gaza, and the Castle of Ierusalem, continues the League with the Romanes, and Lacedemonians. 3. Over∣throwes by his sonnes, Cendebeus, Antiochus Captaine. 4. So governes that he is stiled the High, and chiefe Priest, Governour and Prince of the Iewes. 5. Ib. c. 6. Is betrayed by his Sonne in Law Ptolomey, and slayne with his two Sonnes Mathathias, and Iudas, at a Banquet in Hiericho, but 5. IOHANNES HIRCANUS, the third brother escaped, to succeed the Father, and revenge the parricide. 1. He be∣sieged treacherous Ptolomy in the Castle of Dagon, but left the Siege, at the woefull sight of the tortures of his mother, who notwithstanding, animated him to persist in his pur∣pose. 2. Ioseph. Antiy. l. 13 c. 14. & 15. He bravely defended Jerusalem against the siege of Antiochus Sedites, of whom he purchaseth his peace with a great summe of Mony, supplyed, with an advantage, out of the Sepulcher of David. 3. Ib. c. 16. He recovereth many places in Syria, and demolisheth the Temple, on Mount Garisim, which had stood 200 years: causeth the Idumeans, to be cir∣cumcised,
that resolved to stay among the Iewes, reneweth the League with the Romanes. 4. Vtterly razeth Samaria. falls off from the Pharisees to the Sadduces. 5. Being in a manner, Prince, Priest, and Prophet, after 31. years rule, dyes, leaving his government to his Sonnes. 1. COncurrent are here. 1. Iewish Priests. 1. Nason that bought the place. 2. Menelaus, that out bid him, but had little comfort of his bargaine. 3. Alcimus the be∣trayer of his Countrey: the last of the race of Aaron. 4. Then Jonathan. 5. Simeon. 6. Iohannes Hircanus, of Mathathi∣as stock injoy it. 2. Onias, building a Mock-Temple, at Heliopolis in Ae∣gypt, 2. Macc. 7. for the Iewes of those parts. 2. Heliodorus whipping by an Angell, for offering to trake the Temples Treasure. 3. The horrible persecution of Epiphanes, specified in old E∣leazarus, in the Mother and her Seaven Sonnes. 4. In the death of Razis, who to escape Nicanors hands, strangely slew himselfe. 5. The rising of the Sects of Pharisees Saddu∣cees and 3. 2. Macc. 14.41. The quarrels with various successe between the Se∣leucidae, and the Lagidae, untill the end of the brethren An∣tiochus, Grypns, and Cycicenus.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The second booke of Maccabees be the same Authors with the former, and may be reconciled with it? 2. Mattathias might lawfully slay an offen∣dor, being no Magistrate? 3. Forced circumcision, practised by Matta∣thias, and John Hircanus, may be appro∣ved? 4. Hircanus taking 3000 Talents out of Da∣vids sepulcher for secular uses, were not a kind of Sacriledge? 5. He might not more providently have al∣tered the property of the Temple on Mount Garesin, then have utterly razed it? 6. The Pharisees, Saducees, and Essenes were unknown to ancient times, before the Jewes commerce with the Grecians? 7. Rasis resolute killing of himselfe, may be rather pittied, then defended?
SECT. III. Kings. 1. THe Asmonei thus farre contented themselves with the title of Governours or High-Priests, now they aspire to be Kings, In which descent followes. 1.  ARISTOBULUS the eldest sonne of Iohannes Hircanus. 1. He associates to him in the government his brother Antigonus, but quickly (by his wifes Salomes per∣swasion) makes him away. 2. He imprisoneth his three younger brethren, and starved his own Mother, upon suspci∣tion she affected the Kingdome. 3. For which his consci∣ence torturing him, after a years Reigne he dyes miserably. 2. ALEXANDER IANNaeus, his brother, (released by Salome out of prison) succeeds him, for which kindnesse he marries the widdow. 2. With much adoe he getteth Ptole∣enais, receives two overthrowes by Lathurus, who was ba∣nished Aegypt, by his Mother Cleopatra. 3. The Pharisees are hard against him, of whom he dispatched at once 50000. 4. Notwithstanding (finding by experience how they led the vulgar) he exhorteth his Wife to close in with them, and to be ruled altogether by them. This counsell 3. ALEXANDRA alias Salome his wife wisely followes, and so gets the government. 2. The Pharisees doe what they list: and tyrannize over the contrary faction; The Queen growes to be of 73 years of age, and much broken, after nine years Raigne dyes. his eldest Sonne 4. HIRCANUS (whom she before had made High-Priest) succeeded by right. This (he being but a soft man) hardly maintained by the helpe of Antipater the Idumean, and Aretas King of Arabia, who drove Aristobulus his bro∣ther, (that withstood him) out of Jerusalem. 2. The mat∣ter
came to be disputed (who should be King) between the brethren Hircanus, and Aristobulus, before Pompey the Great. He takes with Hircanus, makes a breach on the Tem∣ple, laies open the Holiest of Holies. 3. And having done what he list, hasteneth to Rome, carrying with him Aristo∣bulus prisoner, with his two Sonnes and two Daughters, but his sonne Alexander escaped by the way. Antigonus was led on, and there kept for a while. 4. Hircanus held up by Antipater, and the Pompeian faction, at length falls into the hands of Antigonus (his brother Aristobulus sonne) who cutts off his eares, and sends him Prisoner with Paco∣rus and Barzaphanes the Parthians, where he was well u∣sed by their King Phraates, and returned back againe to his Countrey. There at the age of 80 years, he was put to death by Herod, who with his Father and Brethren, formerly had stood so for him. Competitour with this Hircanus was his Brother 5. ARISTOBULUS the second, he was the more Active man, and by composition had the Kingdome left to him by his brother Hircanus: but that Antipater with his sonnes (backed by Pompey) revived Hircanus title. 2. He being freed from his imprisonment at Rome by Julius Caesar, to returne into his Country, was poysoned by the way, by some of Pompey's Faction. His sonne Alexander having stirred in Iewry as much as he could, to make way for him. 3. This Alexander had to wife Alexandra, his unkle Hircanus daughter, which bare him the two paragons of that time, for beauty, Aristobulus and Mariamne. At length, himselfe at Pompeys direction is beheaded at Antioch by Scipio. In whose right and revenge, his Brother 6. ANTIGONUS shewes himselfe; Backed by the Tyri∣ans, Parthians, and other friends. Invades Galily, takes Je∣rusalem, held it for a while, but at length is taken by Socius the Romane leader, after sixe months Seige. Thence was he sent to Antony who dispatched him at Antioch. In all this 7. HEROD, had the chiefest stroke, who then had none to withstand his usurpation. He was the sonne of An∣tipater
the Idumean, a Rich, Wife, and expert man, a great friend to Hircanus, and upholder of him against his brother Aristobulus. 2. In all which excellent parts this second sonne of his Herod, came nothing behind him. 3. For exe∣cuting Ezechias the Thiefe with his associates, he is questi∣oned before the Sanedrim, where downright Sanreas tells him his owne, but he was grown too stiffenecked for such a curbe. 4. Vpon the death of Caesar, (touching with amo∣rous Cleopatra of Aegypt by the bye) he gets to Rome: There by Antony's means (whom he had well bribed, and still observed) he is proclaimed King of Iudea. 5. Returnes and by great industry, valour and Policie, settles himselfe in it, makes away with all the Bloud-Royall that might questi∣on his title. Amongst which the sweet Aristobulus in sport, is duckt to death by his fellow Swimmers, And the beauti∣full Mariamne his sister, (through Herods deerest wife) is executed; (as also her Mother Alexandra afterwards) for pretended Treason. 6. This barbarous cruelty is extended farther to his own Children, so that Augustus said, he had ra∣ther be Herods swine then his Sonne. 7. He was magnificent in buildings, expressed in Samaria (called by him Sebastia) Caesarea: his own pallace at Ierusalem; but especially in the third Temple by him erected. 8. He escapeth many conspi∣racies, but at length, after the mercilesse butchery of the In∣fants of Bethlem, and other villanous massacres, the hand of God seazeth upon him, so that he dies of a most horrible, and loathsome disease. In his time 3959. from the Creation our Saviour Christ Iesus was borne. The beginner of the last period. COncurrent with these times, were the 1. High-Priests. 1. Alexander Ianneus. 2. Hircanus, first put in by his Mother Alexandra. 3. Aristobulus his brother. 4. Ananelus a base fellow, foysted in by Herode, and outed againe by him, to make way for 5. Aristobulus, Mariam∣ne's brother, who was treacherously drowned. 6. Jesus sone of Phebes, who is deprived, to give place to. 7. Simon
Boethus, whose faire daughter, Herod took to wife, after he had executed Mariamne. Him succeeded 8. Mathias, who was deposed for a sedition. And 9. Joazar placed in his roome, but deposed afterward by Cyrenius, to make way for. 10. Ananus. 11. Ismael, Eleazar, Symon, and Jo∣seph aliàs Caiaphas, execute the office by turnes, with An∣nas, all our Saviours time upon earth. 2. Warres between Cleopatra, and her sonne Lathurus of Aegypt. 2. Those of the Romanes, with Mithridates and Tigranes, the Easterne Potentates. 3. Crassus defear af∣ter he had robbed the Temple of Ierusalem by the Parthi∣ans, at Charras. 4. The rifling of Ierusalem, and the Temple, by Pompey. The civill Warres, between him, and Iulius Cae∣sar, Augustus, and Antonye. 3. Proscriptions of Cicero, and other eminent men of Rome, till Augustus, got all into his hands, shut up the Tem∣ple of Ianus, in token of a generall Peace; and taxed all the subdued Provinces. INQVIRIES. Whether 1. Aristobulus did wisely as the times stood to assume the Title of King, which his pre∣decessors had so long forborne? 2. The office of High-Priest and King a∣mongst the Iewes were compatible? 3. The Biting off of Hircanus Eares by vil∣lany, might make him irregular for the High-Priests office? 4. Iacobs Prophesy of the departing of the Scepter from Iudah, were fulfilled by He∣rods usurpation? 5. Herod were an Indumean of a base stock as Iosephus represents him? 6. Mariamne his faire wife, might be justly charged of conspiracy against him? 7. The Temple he built, were more magni∣ficent, then that he pluckt downe?
CAP. VII. The Life of our Saviour. 1. THE seaventh and last Distance is, from the Birth of Christ, to this present yeare 1647. 2. This (for order sake) may be referred to a tri∣ple Hierarchy. 1. Evangelicall. 2. Apostolicall. 3. Ecclesiasticall. 3. The Evangelicall, Historically only toucheth upon the Sayings and Doings of our Saviour, Registred by the foure Evangelists, from his Birth untill the descending of the Ho∣ly Ghost. 4. According to these heads, or the like, of His 1. Private Life. 2. Preparation for exeqution of his Me∣diatorship. 3. Sermons. 4. Miracles. 5. Conferences. 6. Sufferings. 7. Triumphs. 5. Private Life. Math. 3. His Private life before his Baptisme, for the space of about thirty years, holdeth forth unto us. 1. The Prophe∣cied preparation of Iohn Baptist to be his fore-runner; of the
Blessed Virgin Mary to be his Mother; of Ioseph, Mar. 1. Luk. 3. Luk. 2. to be the faithfull Guardian of his Infancy, and Pupilage. 2. His Na∣tivity at Bethlem Ephratah, in a Stable, welcomed in, and Preached by a quire of Angells, That sent the Sheepheards to see it, who found it as 'twas told them from heaven. In which meane place, Math. 2. (it may be well thought) he was the eight day Circumcized. 3. His visiting by the wise Easter∣lings, who schooled by Herod, to bring information where they found him, followed the directions of a better Master, and returned home another way. 4. Luk. 2. His Mothers Purifi∣cation, with Simeons and Hannahs open Testimonies of him in the Temple, as it were under Herods Nose, whiles he ex∣pected to heare from the Wise men, or was taken up (per∣haps) by more Courtly imployments. 5. His Flight into Aegypt, by an Angells direction, whereupon followed the Massacre of the Bethlem Infants, of two years old, Math. 9. and un∣der, wherein (some affirme) that 14000, or thereabout, were Butchered. 6. His returne, and setling with his Pa∣rents in Nazareth. 7. Luke 2. His going with them to Ierusalem at the Passeover, where by his Conference, and Questioning with the Doctors, he astonished all the hearers at his under∣standing, and answeres, whence returning with his Parents to Nazareth, he subjected himselfe unto them, and exercised as some think the Trade of a Carpenter. (Baronius thinkes he made yoaks, alluding thereto, in that he professeth, My yoake is easy. Mat. 11.30.) Vntill 6. His Preparation for the worke of his Mediatorship. Preparati∣ons. In which these particulars are most remarkable. 1. His pub∣lique Baptizing by Iohn in the River Jordan. 2. The Te∣stimony of his Father from Heaven, This is my beloved sonne in whom I am well pleased, reiterated with that addition to the three Apostles, in the Mount, Heare him, and confirmed more publiquely in a voyce from Heaven. Io. 12.28. Mar. 1. Math. 3. Luk. 3. Ioh. 1. I have glorified it, and will glorify it againe. 3. The descending of the Holy Ghost, in a bodily shape like a Dove, and abiding upon him; who thereupon led him into the Wildernesse. 4. His fasting there forty daies, and forty nights. 5. His tempting by the
Devill, Luk. 10.18. Io. 14.30. whom he vanquished, and beheld afterward falling from Heaven, as lightning, and returning at last as a Prince of this World, could find nothing in him to except against. 6. His returning into Galilee, and gathering Disciples, where we have the distinct callings of Andrew, Mat. 9. and Peter, Iames, and Iohn, and afterwards of Mathew from the receit of Custome, to be his followers. 7. His sorting of them, Twelve he ordained by name, Mar. 3.14. that they should be with him, to be sent forth to Preach, and seventy others, he appointed, to goe two and two before him, Luk. 10.5. to such places as he himselfe would come. 7. Sermons. Math. c. 5, 6, . Of his Sermons upon these preparations (to omit o∣ther) we have in Saint Mathew. 1. His Catecheticall Cap. 5, 6, 7, declaring the qualifications of those that aime at bles∣sednesse, Ib. c. 10. and the meanes that lead unto it. 2. His Concio ad Clerum c. 10. or Sermon to the Clergy, instructing them, what to doe, Ib. c. 11. how to teach, and what to expect. 3. Concio pro Clero, his Sermon in the behalfe of the Clergy, wherein he justifyeth Iohn Baptist, and his Doctrine, taxeth perverse, and censorious hearers, and inviteth the meeke and lowly in heart, Ib. v. 30. Ib. 13. to come unto him, and undergoe his yoake. 4. His po∣pular Sermon, to the promiscuous Multitude c. 13. concern∣ing the diverse effects of the Word Preached, the pretious∣nesse of it being imbraced, and the strickt account that is to be given of it. Ib. c. 18. 5. His Irenicon, or Sermon for composing dif∣ferences, wherein the authority of the Church is asserted, and a heavy doome denounced against such as slight it, and will not be drawn by Gods forgiving us to forgive their Bre∣thren. Ib. c. 23. 6. His Elenchicall or Sermon of Reproofe against the Hypocriticall Scribes and Pharises c. 23. Whose true Do∣ctrine notwithstanding he will not have rejected, through hatred or prejudice to their Persons, but their Arrogancy to be avoided, Ib. c. 24.25. and their pretences of Religion, for their own wick∣ed ends, to be detested. 7. His Propheticall of the destructi∣on of Ierusalem, the end of the World, and the Day of judge∣ment, with the manner of it. 8. Miracles. His Miracles followe to back his Sermons. Of which
some have pitcht upon 34. others have reckoned 57. Simon de Cas∣sia. Salmeron. A Lapide. Io. 2. Math. 15. Math. 7. all may be disposed according to the places in which they were performed. As 1. In Galilee. The turning of water into Wine, dispossessing the Woman of Canaans daughter. The curing of one Deafe, that had an impediment in his speech, by put∣ing his fingers into his eares, and touching his tongue with his spittle. 2. In Capernaum, The curing of a Noble mans sonne, Io. 4. Mar. 2. Math. 9. at a great distance, Of the Paralitique that was brought in a bed, and let downe through the roofe of the house before him, Of the raising of Iairus daughter, &c. 3. Beyond Ior∣dane, the dispossession of a Legion of Divells, Mar. 5. and sending them into the heard of Swine. 4. On the Sea, in command∣ing the wind and waters, walking on the waters, assembling the Fishes at his pleasure to be taken, whereof one brought mony in his mouth to pay tribute. 5. Math. 57. Io. 6. Math. 14. & 15. Luk. 7. In the Wildernesse by feeding 5000 with five Barlie loaves, and two fishes, and 4000 at another time, in the like miraculous manner. 6. In Iudea, The raising of the Widowes sonne of Naim, and of Lazarus, when he stunke in his grave, are Wonders never elsewhere heard of. 7. And lastly in Ierusalem, Jo. 11. Io. 5. Io. 9. The quit∣ing of the impotent man at Bethesda, of his eight and thirty years languishing: The opening of the eyes of him that was borne blind, with like, which to these places may be re∣ferred. 9. These were intermixed with his Conferences, Conferen∣ces. distin∣guishable by the parties conferred with, So we have his discourse with 1. Nicodemus of Regeneration, and Salvati∣on, by his lifting up, from the biting of the old Serpent, Jo. 2. as the Israelites were cured by Moses Serpent in the Wilder∣nesse. 2. With the Woman of Samaria at Iacobs well: Ib. 4. con∣cerning the comming of Messias, and Gods spirituall Wor∣ship. 3. With the Pharisees, of Traditions, Sabboth, math. 15. and the Author of his Doctrine, and Miracles. 4. Ib. c. 22, Luke 10. With the Sad∣duces, concerning the Resurrection. 5. With the Lawyers about the First and Greatest Commandement, and who may be tearmed our Neighbour. 6. With the People, Jo. 6. touching the Bread of Life, and spirituall Manna, and their senseles∣nesse,
in not acknowledging the Messias. 7. With his Dis∣ciples and followers, Math. 20. Mar. 10. affecting supremacy, and being dis∣heartned at his low condition, and foretelling them of grea∣ter sufferings that should fall upon him. 10. Sufferings. Math. 26. Mar. 14. Luk. 22. v. 52. These sufferings he endured. 1. In Gethsemane, when he was in his greatest Agony, exceeding sorrowfull, very Heavy to the death, prayed, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood. 2. In his apprehending, by the Chiefe Priests, Captaines of the Temple, Iudas, and the rascall multitude. Luk. 23. 3. In the Ecclesiastique Consistories of Annas, and Caiphas. 4. In Herods Court by Jeerings and Mockings, and returning him to Pilate in a robe of Scorne. 5. Vnder Pilates hands, where he was tumultuously voted to be cru∣cified, against the Iudges acquitting of him, and a seditious Murtherer accepted before him. Io. 19. 6. In his Crowning with thornes, spitting upon, scourging, and burthened with his own crosse, by the executioners, after his condemnation. 7. In his torments on the Crosse, by mockings, revylings, re∣lieving only with Gall and Ʋineger piercing his side after he was dead. When the Heavens put on their blacks, the earth staggered, the Rocks rent, the graves opened, the Temples vayle was torne from the top to the bottome, at such tran∣scendent Impieties, for continuall remembrance of which we have the Sacrament, Instituted solemnly by himselfe at his last Supper. 11. Triumphs. Colloss. 2.15. And upon this Consummatum est, or Finishing, suc∣ceeded his Triumphs. 1. Over Principalities and Powers of darknesse, by spoyling them and shewing them openly. 2. O∣ver the Grave and Death by his Resurrection. 3. O∣ver all oppositions and Impediments, Act 1. by his forty daies con∣versing with his Apostles, in tenne infallible apparitions, in∣structing them in those things that pertaine to the Kingdome of God. Io. 20. Math. 28. 4. In giving them full Commission to teach, and list all Nations by Baptisme, In the name of the most Sacred Trinity, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, and to remit and re∣taine sinnes, by virtue of the Holy Ghost, which he breathed upon them. 5. In trampling the World under foot, by his
Glorious Ascension. 6. Ruling in the midst of his, Psal. 110. and his Churches enemies. by the rod of his strength, as he sits at the right hand of the Father. 7. And last of all by sending of the Holy Ghost, to furnish his Apostles and their Successors, for the propagating of the Gospell, to the utter dissolving of all the depths of Saetan, and his incessant Machinations. The ri∣diculous paralell of Apollonius Tyaneus with our Saviour, by Hierocles, and the malitious exceptions of R. Nizachon, against his doings and Miracles, are fully answered, by Eu∣sebius, and Munster, in Math. Hebraice. 12. About this fulnesse of Time, Gal. 4. in our Saviours being up∣on earth, appeared. 1. The great Witts for Poetry, Ʋirgil, Ovid, Horace, &c. for Oratory Cicero, for History Salust, Livy, Trogus, Pompeius, Strabo the Geographer. 2. Trium∣phant Warriors, Pompey, Julius Caesar, Augustus. 3. No∣torious Impostors, Simon Magus who proclaimed himselfe to appeare, as God the Father to the Samaritanes, Ireneus l. 2. God the Sonne to the Jewes, and God the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles. Theudas a Magitian, that missed a multitude, to passe over Iordan, which he bore them in hand, should divide it selfe, but himselfe and those with him, were all slaine or scattered. Act. 5.36. Judas of Galilee, who would not indure to pay Tribute, or acknowledge any Lord: which some make the reason that our Saviour and his Apostles, were so punctuall against this madnes, least they should be thought such Galileans, Euseb. E. H. l. 4. c. 6. Dion Cassius in Hadriano. as favou∣red Rebellion. such a one was Barcochebas, afterward a fa∣tall Comet, who with his new light was the destruction of 50000 of his followers. 4. Silencing of Oracles, as that of Delphos, where Augustus Caesar urging the Divell for an answere, was told that an Hebrew child, had stop'd his mouth, and sent him with a Mittimus to Hell, and there∣fore, he might spare labour or cost, Peucer. de Oraculis. to consult with him any more. The like was the Lamentation for the death of the great God Pan in Plutarch. 5. The discovery of the Abomi∣nation of the Idoll Priests in Rome, upon the abusing of the noble Matrone Paulina, by Decius Mundus, whom he could not bring to his Lure by mony, but had his will of, un∣der
the maske of Anubis to which Doggs head she was de∣voted, Ioseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 4. which was the destruction both of those bawdy Priests and Temple. 6. The expelling of Players from Rome for the like villanies. And 7. the fall of Sejanus, Tyberius great favorite, with the disgracefull and horrible executions of his Sonne and Daughter. Inquiries. Whether 1. Protoevangelium Iacobi, and the Book of our Saviours Infancy be altogether fabu∣lous? 2. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 2. The Epistle of Lentulus, describing our Saviours feature of body, or that of Pilate to Tiberius concerning his miraculous Acts, may passe for currant? 3. Suidas in ver∣be Jesus. The story of Jesus registring amongst the Priests, under the title of the Sonne of God, and Mary the Ʋirgin in Suidas, be of any credit? 4. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 14. Agbarus letter to him, and his answere to Agbarus, in Eusebius, may be taken for truth? 5. Antiq. l. 18. c. 4. Euseb. Eccle∣siast. Hist. l. 1. c. 12. Ib. c. 7. Iosephus Testimony concerning the Di∣vine carriage of our Saviour, and pious conversation of Iohn Baptist, may be su∣spected for an Addition of the Christians? 6. The Eternall Gospell invented by Cyrillus a Monke, to uphold the Papall tyranny, heresies, and Idolatry, tended to the ex∣tinguishing of Christianity? 7. See forth by Ludovicus de Dieu in the Persiā tongue and Latine, with Animad∣versions. The mixt Gospell of truth and trash, tendred to Acbar the great Mogul, by Xa∣verius the Iesuite to informe him in Chri∣stianity, be not Impudent and abominable?
SECT. II. Hierarch. Apostolicall. 1. THE Evangelicall Hierarchy, was seconded by the Apostolicall, That containes the Acts of the Apostles, and their fellow-labourers, for the first Planting and setling of the Christian Church, composed of Jewes and Gentiles. 2. These Acts were performed by them either At their being together at Ierusalem, im∣mediatly upon the Holy Ghost's de∣scention. After their scattering by reason of the persecution, and their mission or de∣signment to their severall places. 3. Being yet toge∣ther, 1. Act. 1 They solemnly chose Mathias into the place of Iudas the Traitor. 2. Ib. 2. They are inspired by the visible descent of the Holy Ghost, whereupon Peter made that first Sermon, whereby he gained to the Church about 3000. 3. Peter and John cure a Cripple, Ib. v. 14. at the Tem∣ples Beautifull gate, whereby at a second Sermon, the number is made 5000. 4. They are thereupon imprisoned, Ib. 4. and af∣ter convented before Annas and Caia∣phas, Iohn and ALexander, but passe un∣punished by reason of the People. A pub∣lique Thanks-giving is made for it, and contribution, that no want might be a∣mongst the Poore beginners, which might make them shrinke from their profession. 5. Ananias and Saphira, Ib. 5. are miraculoussy
strucken dead, for their lying dissimula∣tion. 6. The Apostles continue to doe Miracles, whereupon they are imprisoned, but are delivered by an Angell, had before a Councell, but escape with an ordinary beating and threatning, by the wise advice of Gamaliell. 7. Ib. 6. A murmuring ariseth of the Graecians, a∣gainst the Hebrews, for neglect of their Widdowes: seaven Deacons are chosen to pacify it, amongst whom Steven proves eminent, Ib. 7. for his zeale and abilities, which cost him a stoning, but gained him the Primacy of Martyrdome. 4. After their separation, or scattering; are especial∣ly remarkable, the Lives and doings of the 1. 12. Apostles. 2. 70. Disciples. 3. 7. Deacone. These Apostles were, 1 SIMON PETER termed also Cephas, Act. c. 3. Ib. who was sent by the rest of the Apostles with Iohn, from Ierusalem, to Samaria; to second Philip, who had there Preached Christ. 2. There he discovered, and confounded Simon Magus, and thence returnes to Jerusalem. 3. Their go∣ing again abroad, to visit and confirme the Churches, he arrives at Lidda, Ib. 9. where he cures Aeneas of the Palsey, and at Ioppa, raiseth Tabitha from the dead, and after∣wards staied many daies with Simon a Tanner. Ib. 10. 4. In that Tanners house, he had the vision of the sheet, of cleane, and uncleane creatures, clapt togither. 5. From thence was directed by the spirit to goe to Cornelius, whom he Baptizeth with his Family, and Friends; and so returnes the second time to Jerusalem. 6. Then being questioned
for his going to the Gentiles, gives a satisfying answere, Ib. 11. and is taken afterward, and imprisoned by Herod Agrip∣pa, but is freed by an Angell. 7. Ib. 12. Act. 15. After that we find no more of him, till he gave his suffrage, in the Councell at Ierusalem. 8. From thence going unto Antioch, is repro∣ved by Saint Paul to his face, for dissimulation. 9. Gal. 2.11. After∣ward what course he tooke the Scripture mentioneth not. only we have two Epistles of his, the first (as tis thought) from Babylon, the second mentioning Saint Paules Epi∣stles, and the abuse of them, by diverse. 10. 2. Pet. 3.16. His being at Rome cannot be proved, or that he left any more wri∣tings behind him, besides those two Epistles which make rather against Popery then any way countenance it. His life written by Xaverius in the Persian Language, and translated by Ludovicus de Dieu; is fraught with impu∣dent fables, as his soliciting the blessed Virgin, to inter∣cede to Christ for pardon, of his thrice denying of him, and our Saviours making him and his successors his Vicars here on earth, and the like) as appeareth in the Animadversi∣ons upon it. St Marke is reported to be with him at Rome where he wrote his Gospel, (some say) in Lattine, the Originall yet remaining in Ʋenice, afterward transla∣ted into Greeke by himselfe, but this is only Iesuiticall Tradition, who make Marke the Evangelist, S. Peters convert, differing from Iohn Marke, that accompani∣ed S. Paul, which the Scripture mentioneth. 2. ANDREW, was first a Disciple of John Baptist, Jo. 40. then (upon his testimony) a follower of our Saviours; to whom he brought his brother Peter. 2. He is said to be the A∣postle of the Scythians, Sogdians, and Dacians, to be Cru∣cified by Aegeas, King of Edessa, and buried at Patras in Achaia. 3. IAMES of Zebedee was the first of the Apostles, Act. 12. that suffered Martyrdome, under Herod in Jerusalem, and there buried. his bones were said to be translated after∣wards to Compostella in Spaine, where Pilgrims make su∣perstitious journies to visit them.
4. IOHN his Brother, was the Disciple whom Iesus lo∣ved; and joyned in Commission with Peter, to confirme the convicted Samaritans, by Philip. 2. 'Tis said that he was put into a vessell of boyling Oyle at Rome, in Domiti∣ans time, which did him no hurt. 3. It is certaine, he was banished into Patmos, where he wrote his Revelation; and after his returne to Ephesus, his three Epistles, and Gospel; which was published by Gaius his Host, and Dea∣con. 4. Some thinke he slumbereth yet under the earth at Ephesus; where he made his own Grave, and in a man∣ner interred himselfe; out of which he Preached. More probable is that of his recovering of a publique Thiefe, who after was made Bishop. 5. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 20. PHILIP of Bethsaida, Preached (as 'tis thought) the Gospell in Phrygia, and lyeth buried at Hieropolis. 6. BARTHOLOMEW, is said to have gone as farre as In∣dia, and to have Preached, where some say he was cudgel∣led to death, some, Crucified, some, that he was flayne a live: some, that he was Beheaded: But Peter de Natalibus affirmes that all these tortures were inflicted on him, suc∣cessively. Ʋisars in Ps. 22. Father Ambrose Chircher, (a great travailer of late in the Easterne parts) tells us of a Tradition they have in China, that one Olo Puen was brought thither from Iudaea in the Cloudes, and Preached Christianity a∣mongst them, whereof he left 27. Tomes behind him, more ('tis to be thought) then can be shewen of S. Bar∣tholomews. 7. THOMAS is reckoned the Apostle of the Parthians, Medes, and Persians, where he was slaine with a dart and lyes buried. 8. MATHEW wrote the first Gospell, (some think in He∣brew) It is not known who translated it. 2. He is said to have been entertained, Act. 8. by the Eunuch of Queene Candace in Aethiopia; where he Preached the Gospell, converted the People, and was Married. 9. IAMES of Alpheus otherwise called Oblias, or Iu∣stus, succeeded Iames of Zebedee in the Bishoprick of Ie∣rusalem.
2. Concludes the Councell there as President, notwithstanding the presence of Peter. 3. Leaves a Ca∣tholique Epistle for the animating of Faith by Workes. 4. Was Martyred at Ierusalem, after he was thrown downe from a Pinnacle of the Temple, by a fullers club. 10. LEBBEUS aliàs Thaddeus, Math. 10. Act. 1. Act. 15.22. or Iudas surnamed Bar∣sabas, the Brother of Iames, from him we have an Epi∣stle to the same purpose with the 2d of S. Peter. 2. He was made commissioner with Silas, to carry the Coun∣cells of Ierusalems decrees to them of Antioch. He is said to have gone to King Agbarus, of Edessa, and to have cu∣red, and converted him, and his, according to the Letter of our Saviour, Euseb. Eccles Hist. returning an answere to a Letter of Ag∣barus first sent unto him. And there he lyes buried. 11. SIMON the Canaanite, or Zelotes, is said to have done somewhat in Africke, to be crucified in Brettannia, (saith Dorotheus) Ʋolaterane calls it Betani, Peter de Natalibus, Bethania, which is most like, that (if he were Bishop as some say of Ierusalem) he might there suffer. 12. MATHIAS came to be an Apostle by election, in∣to the place of Iudas Iscariot, who is reported to have slain his Father, married his Mother, and betrayed his Master. 2. His Diocesse fell out to be Aethiopia, about the Haven Hissus, and the river Phasis amongst Men-ea∣ters where he dyed. All which Relations may be noted for Monkish evaporations. To which these Twelve may be added. 6. St PAUL, first Saul, a persecutor, Act. 9. then taken off in a miraculous manner by Christs call from heaven (2.) where∣upon he lyes three dayes at Damascus in an extasie, at what time ('tis thought) he was rapt into the third Heaven, and made  taught by Christ himselfe; then restored to his sight, and Baptized by Ananias. (3.) From thence he goes into Arabia, Act. 9. 2 Cor. 11. Gall. 1 18. and having spent there three yeares in Preaching, returnes to Damascus, but hardly thence escapes, in a Basket: and comes to  to see Peter, or con∣ferre
with him in Jerusale, after Iames of Zebedees Mar∣tyrdome, and a little before the imprisoning of S. Peter. (4.) But having notice in a vision that it would be bootlesse, and dangerous for him to stay there longer, he betakes him∣selfe to Tarsus his owne Country, the Metropolitane City in Cilicia, but staid not long there, before Barnabas came to fetch him away to Antioch, the chiefe City of Syria, to help him in his charge, which the Church of Jerusalem had there designed him, for confirming of those Gentiles which some of the dispersion of the Jewes had formerly instructed. (5.) This they performed with that Alacrity and successe, Act. 11. that from Antioch, we had first the name of Christians. Thither when Agabus had repaired to them, and Prophecied of a Dearth at hand; they were sent with a Collection, by the Church of Antioch, to help the poore Brethren in Ierusalem. Thence returning they brought Iohn Marke with them. (6.) Not long after, both of them by expresse command of the holy Ghost, (after Prayers and Imposition of hands) are dispatched (taking Marke with them) to that Bienniall Cir∣cuit, wherein Sergius Paulus Proconsul of Paphus was con∣verted, Elymas Bar-Iesu confounded, many Cities and Countries blessed by the light of the Gospel, Paul at Listra stoned, where a little before he had bin (with Barnabas) deified. Notwithstanding under Gods protection (having gotten Titus with them instead of Marke, (which went to Jerusalem) they returned againe to Antioch. (7.) There a quarrell then being set a foote, by some  false Brethren, Gal. 2.4. Act. 15. concerning the Abrogation of Iewish Ceremonies, he passed to the Councell of Ierusalem, where the businesse was decided; And then returnes to Antioch, where he made bold to reprove Peter. (8.) Then makes a journey with Silas into Asia to confirme the Churches, a little before there by him planted. (9.) That being done he comes from Troas over into Europe, visits Macedon, Thessalonica, Corinth, Athens, Achaia. (10.) At length returnes to Ie∣rusalem, Act. 25, 26 27, 28. is there Apprehended. Thence sent to Caesaria, an∣swers before Felix, Festus, and Agrippa, appeales to Caesar,
is sent thence to Rome, escapes in the journey Shipwrack, and the Ʋiper in Malta. (11.) Gets from thence oppor∣tunity to make an excursion to Plant, and confirme Churches: Returnes againe to Rome. and is Martyred, (as 'tis thought) under Nero. (12.) Companions he had of his Travels and Preaching: Barnabas, Luke the Physitian of Antioch, from whom we have this excellent Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, dedicated to Theophilus, who converted to Chri∣stianity converted his house to be a Church. Marke the E∣vangelist, Silas, Timotheus, Titus, Aquila, and Priscilla: And in his European journey, Sopater, Aristarchus, Secun∣dus, Gaius, Tychicus, and Trophimus. (13.) We have foureteene Epistles of his; some written to whole Churches, some to particular Men: some before his Bonds, some in them: in this order. Before his Imprisonment; two, to the Thessalonians, one to Titus, one to the Galathians, two to the Corinthians, one to Timothy, one to the Romans. In his Imprisonment, one to the Philippians, one to the Colossians, one to Philemon, one to the Ephesians, one to the Hebrewes, and last of all, a second Epistle to Timothy. (14.) That E∣pistle of his to the Ladiceans, is meerely Imaginary, and those between him and Seneca forged. The subscriptions for Timothy and Titus being Bishops of Ephesus and Crte, are carped at only by Wranglers. 7. For the seaventy Disciples, we have their Commission from our Saviour, Luke 10. but not their names, Peter de Natali∣libus tels us of two old Catalogues of their names, which he found in Rome, under the Name of Drtheus Bishop of Tyre, the one in Greeke, the other in Latine: But just excep∣tions lye against both. 1. They disagree one from the other. 2. Instead of 70, the Greeke hath 72. 3. In both Caesar (perchance Nero) is made a Disciple, and Bishop of Dyra∣chium, as Philip and Alexander the Great, are made by some, our Saviours Ancestours. 4. James, and Cephas (the same with Peter) are degraded from Apostles to be Disciples. 5. Tarrick Schi∣kardi. &c. Lazarus is the last of the ranke, Bishop of Marsilia, but whe∣ther the Begger, or the Gontleman of Bethania, it appeares
not. Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 1. c. 13. 6. Eusius plainly saies that the Catalogue of the 70 Disciples is no where to be found. Petrus de Natalibus, Ʋo∣lateran, and Democharis, who would take upon them to per∣sect the Catalogue of Dorotheus, dissent from him, and agree not amongst themselves, See Eusebius in English. as it appeares in Meredith Hanmer's Collation in his Preface to Dorotheus. 8. More certainty is of the seven Deaons, Act. 6. who were Ordained by prayer and laying on of Hands, to make e∣speciall provision for the poore. These are named to be, 1. STEPHEN, whose disputations with the Libertines, we have, 2. Cyrenians, 3. Alexandrians, and 4. Cilicians. 2. His Apologetique Sermon before the High Priest, and peo∣ple. 3. His patient and comfortable undergoing the first Mar∣yredome, Act. 6.7. with him 'tis said that 2. NICANOR suffered, besides other 2000 Christians (saith the Greek Dorotheus) but two only are found in the Lattaine. PARMENAS perchance might be one of them; who is said to have dyed in the presence of the Apostles. 4. TIMON, hath not so much mentioned of him, but is left out of the Catalogues. 5. PROCHORVS hath more put upon him then belongs unto him; that Foolish-Booke of the life of S. John. Biblioth. Pat. Hirat. Tom. 1. 6. Revel. 2.6. NICHOLAS is censured for prostituting his hand∣some Wife, to quitt himselfe from suspition of ealousie, and thence to have given ground to the Sect of the Nicholaitans. 7. PHILIP called also the Evangelist frighted (with the rest) by Stephens cruell usage, falls upon Samaria, and there converts them to the Faith; which Peter afterwards seconded 2. Converts, and Baptiseth the Eunuch of Aethio∣pia. 3. Was rapt thence by the Spirit (as Elias was wont to be) and found afterward at Azotus. 4. Thence went Preaching to Caesarea, where e spent (as it should seeme) the remainder of his Life, Act. 21. having foure Virgin Prophetesses
to his Daughters; where he entertained S. Paul in his pas∣sage towards Ierusalem. COncurrent with these, are 1. Prodigies, forerunning the destruction of Jerusalem. 1. Charets, and Armies seen in the Ayre. 2. A Comet like a flaming sword, perpen∣dicular over the Citty. 3. At the Passeover sacrifice an Oxe brought forth a Lambe. 4. The Brasse gates of the Temple flew open of their own accord. 5. And a voyce was heard, to say Migremus hìnc. 6. The Horrible Factions, famine and Sacking of the City by Titus, and the infinite slaughter, of more then a Million of men. Of the often taking of Ie∣rusalem. vid. Isaacson pag. 31. 2. Ill times in Rome by reason of the wickednesse, fol∣ly, and Pride of their Emperours, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, &c.
INQVIRIES. Whether 1. The twelve Apostles in an Assembly at Ierusalem, before their dispersing, contri∣ved that Symboll which we call the Apo∣stles Creed? 2. It be likely that if our Saviour had desig∣ned Saint Peter and his uccessors to be Heads of the Catholique Church, as his Vi∣cars; that himselfe when he breathed up∣on all the Apostles alike. or S. Peter in his Epistles, or Saint Paul to the Romanes, would have given no notice of it? 3. Act. 11. Antioch having the first Title of Christi∣ans, should not be accounted the Mother Church, rather then Rome? 4. It may be Historically convinced that S. Peter was either at Rome, or Corinth? 5. Saint Mathews Gospell were first writ∣ten in Hebrew, and Saint Markes in Lattine? 6. The Epistle to the Hebrews be S. Paul and Originally written in Greeke? 7. Nicholas the Deacon, were the beginner of the Nicholaitans which our Saviour professeth to hate. Revel. 2.6.
SECT. III. Good Bishops. 1. THE Apostolicall Hierarchy, being thus briefly represented. The Ecclesiasticall takes its turne. 2. This we deduce by the descent of Popes. as being in the Westerne Church, not more certaine or syn∣cere then others, but notorious. 3. Of these Popes are noted in Peter Crab, Severinus, Binius and others, 1. Their Lives. 2. Decretall Epistles. 3. Severall Decrees. 4. Councells any way held in their times. To which may be added 5ly Bulls occasionally sent forth by them. 4. Here it shall be sufficient, to touch their Lives and peculiar writings, that are known to be theirs, or are usual∣ly put upon them, in their distinct Classes or rankes. 5. These rankes may be 7. of 1. Good Bishops 32. 2. Tollerable Arch-Bishops or Patriarks 33. 3. Ʋsurping Nimrods 38. 4. Luxurious Sodomites 40. 5. Aegyptian Magitians 40. 6. Devouring Abaddons 41. 7. Incurable Babylonians 19. 6. The good Bishops succeed in this order, for about the space of the first 300 years after the Hierarchy of the Apo∣stles. 1. LINUS, a Tuscan, mentioned by S. Paul in the end of his second Epistle to Timothy, Clement (they say) was de∣puted by Peter to his Chayre, but he in modesty puts it off, to Linus (saith Ciaconius) and that not without Gods espe∣ciall disposing, that an ill example might not thence be ta∣ken, for any Pope afterward to shuse his own successor. 2. He
needed not have decreed that Women should not come into the Temple without a covering, 1. Cor. 11. S. Paul had taken order for that long before; and few Temples for the Christians could be shewed in Nero's time, under whose first persecu∣tion it was likely this good man suffered. Biblioth Pat. Tom. 1. H∣erat. Collon. The two bookes put upon him of S. Peters, and Pauls sufferings, are disallow∣ed by Bellarmine, and the most of that side, who agree not also upon his successour 2.  ANACLETUS, an Athenian, into whose place some foist Cletus a Romane, and turne off this Anacletus, to fol∣low Clemens, Ciacon. Plat. some make them to be all one, and thus take up the matter, that the same whom the Romane Christians call Cletus, the Greeks call Anacletus, no certainty is here to be had. 2. In his time fell out the second persecution un∣der Domitian, who caused S. John to be cast into a vessell of boyling oyle, out of which delivered untouched, he is bani∣shed into the Isle of Pathmos. This Anacletus with his Pri∣macy could not helpe, neither 3.  CLEMENT the Romane, who should have been first after S. Peter, if his vote would have carried it, but now fol∣lowes in the third place. Of him they forge that he divided Rome into Parish Churches, but got not thereby a poore Ʋi∣carage hovell to shelter himselfe, from the Banishment of the Emperour Hadrian. 2. S. Paul acknowledgeth him (as most let it passe) for his  fellow Labourer Phil. 4.3. doubtlesse he busied himselfe in better imployments, then the setting forth of Masses, Ʋestures, and such other Cere∣monies. olon. 1569. 3. Lambertus Gruterus, hath cobled together such Workes as are fathered upon him, by the name of Clemen∣tines. which are tenne Bookes of his Recognitions, with an Epitome of them; containing the Pilgrimages, and Acts of S. Peter; eight more of the Constitutions of the Apostles, be∣sides 90. Canons, ascribed also to them, and five decretall Epistles of the same stampe. 4. Since which time his Epistle to the Corinthians (so much talked of by the Ancients) hath come to light, and is newly set forth in Greeke and Lat∣tine, with very Learned observations, of Mr Patrick Young,
Oxon. 1633. 5. Notwithstanding the worth of this man, he was condemned to hew Marble in the Quarries about the Euxine Sea, and at length with an Anchor about his neck therein drowned. 4. EVARISTUS, a Bethlemite (as Ciaconius would have it) for all this, was not terrified, from taking the place, whom we may think to have spent his time better, then in such beggerly constitutions, which are commonly put upon him, he is said to have been beheaded: And no better sped 5. ALEXANDER, a Romane under Aurelian, though he be said to have brought in the Confecton, and use of Holy Water, for the purging of mens soules, and the driving a∣way of Divells, upon which we have a merry Lecture of father Busdrakes. 6. SIXTUS then comes by our account in the sixt place, whom the Greekes terme Xystus, though he were a Ro∣mane. 2. He sent (they say) one Peregrine a Priest, to be Bishop amongst the Gaules, who desired it. 3. Aquila and Priscilla banished from Rome, by Claudius Acts 18. are said to have continued to this mans time: And that Aquila to have translated the Old Testament, next after the 72, which will scarce hold. This man dying also a Martyr left the chayre to 7. TELESPHORUS, the sonne of an Anahorite, ('tis hop'd begotten in Matrimony) who instituted Lent from a former tradition of the Apostles, but unwritten. 8. HYGINUS, the Athenian, a Philosophers sonne, his successor, brought in Gossips to Baptisme, and set Iustine Mar∣tyr, to make his Apologies for the Christians, whiles he made Cardinalls, (as Ciaconius bears us in hand) and leaves 9.  PIUS of Aquilea to settle the keeping of Easter upon the Lords day, which Hermas his brother, (that is said to be the Author of the Booke intituled Pastor) had recei∣ved from an Angell, that he should perswade all men to doe. 10. ANICETUS the Syrian that tooke his place brought in the shaving of Priests Crownes. In his time Polycarpus
mett Marcion in Rome and told him to his face, that he was the first begotten of the Devill. 11.  SOTER a Campanian that followes, is reported to have been a very honest man, and to have ordayned that Marriages should be Celebrated in publique, and solemnely with the consent of Parents. 12.  ELUTHERIUS that Succeeded, was a Grecian. To him were sent by our King Lucius, Helvanus and Me∣duanus, to request him to supply him, with some faithfull Pastors, for the further instruction of his Subjects in Christi∣anity. Fugacius, and Damianus, were the men that this Pope dispatched to him with his owne Letters, in which he telleth the King that as Christs Ʋicar, he might settle mat∣ters for Religion within his owne Dominions. 2. To this Pope also Iraeneus is said to be sent from the Churches of France, to be resolved in some doubts, which Heretiques (then blustering every where) had cast in amongst them. But 13.  VICTOR, a hott African his Successour, tooke more state upon him (by reason the stormes of Persecution in his time, were well blowne over) and Excommunicated the Easterne Bishops, for not keeping Easter upon the same day with him. 2. This was resisted by Polycrates of Ephesus, and Iraeneus of Lions, and all the Easterne Bishops, in a full Councell of Palestine, who stood for the Tradition of S. Iohn, and Philip the Apostles; as they of the West did, on that they had, from S. Peter and S. Paul. This brabble was after agreed at the first Councell of Nice, where the West Church had the hand, and those that would not celebrate Easter on Sunday, were termed Quartadecimani: Ʋictor being thus Ʋictorious leaves the Chayre, to 14.  ZEPHERINUS a Romane. This man turned wooden Chaelices into Glasses because (as some fondly imagined) the pretious Bloud of Christ, should not soake into them, as it might into the wood, went bare-footed in imitation of our Saviour, and Gelded himselfe for the kingdome of God. 2. He Moderated in a Disputation between Proclus, the
chiefe of the Cataphrygians, and Caius that defended the right, Anathematizing Tertullian, and all others that stood out against him. 15. CALIXTUS of Ravenna that tooke his place, might not be so bold, by reason of the heavy Persecution under Se∣verus, 2. yet he appointed (some say) the foure Fasts, continued amongst us to this day, but apprehended at length, suffered cruell Martyrdome, and made way, to 16. VRBANUS a Romane, of whom the Pontificall saies that he turn'd the holy Ʋessels into Silver, which might seeme a matter of great difficulty in those Savage times under the Beast Heliogabalus. 2. Origines had the hard hap with this, Binius Ciacon mans consent to be Excommunicated by Demetrius of Alexandria, but himselfe escaped not Martyrdome, nor 17. PONTIANUS his Countryman, and Successour, who tasted of the same Cup, in the Isle of Sardinia, where he was banished, leaving his place to, 18. ANTERUS a Grecian, that tooke care to have the Acts and Monuments of Martyrs to be Registred, by appro∣ved Notaries; Hunselfe being added to their number by the Tyrany of the great Cyclops, Maximinus. 19. FABIAN a Romane takes the place, by an unex∣pected Election, caused by the standing of a Pigeon on his head. 2. He is said to have Baptised the two Philips, that were Emperours, and to have addmitted Origene to his Pur∣gation; He suffered under Decius, Ciacon. in the seaventh Perse∣cution. 20. CORNELIUS a Romane takes his place, but not without opposition of Novatianus a Priest of Rome, who accused Cornelius of Heresie, for receiving those that had fallen into Idolatry upon their repentance, which the No∣vatians would not indure. 2. This side of Novation conti∣nued long, in chusing Successivey a Pope of their owne, un∣till in Celestinus time, they were broken off. 3. Betweene this Cornelius and S. Cyprian passed many friendly Epistles, in which Cyprian stileth him familiarly his Brother. At last through the Tyrany of Decius
Incidit in rigidos Praesul Cornelius enses, Saith Mantuan. Cornelius was none of those Who Kings and Emperours depose. 21.  LUCIUS a Romane in that heat of persecution, ven∣tured upon the place, from which be was Banished, but re∣turnes soon againe. Cyprian in a loving Epistle gratulates his returne. The same Commerce held between Cyprian and his successor 22.  STEPHANUS, also a Romane, as it appears in their mutuall Epistles, notwithstanding a difference grew be∣tween them, Cor. Cyprian. Ep. ad Cor∣nei. Lucium & Stephan. concerning the rebaptizing, of the Baptized by Heretiques; which Cyprian would not indure, but Stepha∣nus thought fit: in the carriage of which businesse, Stephen bearing himselfe somewhat too high, is shrewdly taxed by Firmilian. Apud Cypr. Ep. 75. He was Martyred by Ʋalerian, and left his Sea to, 23.  SIXTUS the second, an Athenian, whom S. Laus rence to his power stifly backed, till he was rosted on a Gridiron for his resolution. 2. From the grievousnesse of that times persecution, one Paul fled from Alexandria, and became the first Hermit, whose life we have in S. Hierome, with his Schollers Hilarions. 3. A booke of 430 sentences, in the third volumne of Bibliotheca Patrum, is ascribed by some to this man, but it falls out to be the worke of Sixtus the Pythagorean. His Countryman 24.  DIONYSIUS succeeds him, in whose time Cyprian suffered Martyrdome, and Paulus Samosatenus, vexed the Church with his Pride and Heresy; which was to his power withstood by this Pope. 2. Who is also said to have con∣verted Triphonia, the Empresse of Decius, and Cyrilla her daughter with 46000 more to Christianity. 25.  FOELIX the Romane that followed him, met with no happier times: in which notwithstanding, some are so for∣ward to say, that he built Churches, and appointed Sacrifices for the Martyrs Altars. A Martyr he proved himselfe and so was his follower.
26. EUTICHIANUS the Tuscan, who is reported to have buried 342 Martyrs with his own hands. 2. He is said to have first blessed Grapes, and Beanes, and such like commodities, upon the Altar, and to have buried the Mar∣tyrs in purple vestments. 27. GAIUS of Dalmatia might have better done it, in re∣gard he was the Emperour Dioclesians kinsman: but for that he sped never the better, neither Gabinius his brother, whose daughter Sufanna, should have marryed Galerius the Empe∣rour by the Appointment of Dioclesian, but she utterly re∣fused it, though it cost her her life. 28.  MARCELLINUS the Romane that followed this Gaius, was not so resolute as this Ʋirgin, but through feare, offered Frankincence to Mars, some say to Isis, and Ʋesta, according to that of Mantuan — victus formidine Christum Prodidit, & plena Mart is libavit acerra. Daunted with feare, his Christ he did betray, And sacrific'd to Mars as most men say. For which he was question'd by the Councell of Suessane, as the Traditors were at Cyrrha in Numidia, for delivering the Bibles to be burnt; but of this he soon repented, repro∣ved the Tyrant to his face, and dyed a Martyr. His Country∣man neere of his name, 29. MARCELLUS followes, and stood out constantly against Maximinianus the Tyrant; for which he was doo∣med to keep Beasts in a stable, made of the house of Lucina a Widdow; who in pitty had entertained him, thence he de∣sisted not, to instruct those by writing, whom he could not by Preaching, untill he ended his daies in that loathsome place, whom a Grecian 30. EUSEBIUS succeeded, in the time of Maxenti∣us, as fierce as any of the rest. This Eusebius, Theodoret ac∣knowledgeth not to be Pope, neither Marcellus, but Opta∣tus, Augustine, Eusebius, and others doe. 2. Some say the Crosse of Christ was found in his time at Hierusalem, by one
Judas a Iew, who thereupon became a Christian, but this bereaves Queene Helene Constantines. Mother of that ho∣nour. 3. After much sorrow, and hardnesse indured by him, he left his place to 31.  MILTIADES an African, otherwise called Mel∣chiades. In this mans time, Canstantine the great, is said to have had that great victory against Maxentius, who was drowned in Tybur, by the fall of the Bridge Milvius. To this Pope Constantine gave the house of Plantius Latera∣nus, Ciacon. proscribed by Nero, which hath continued to this day, by the name of the Laterane Palace, and made him judge of the notable African controversy, between Cecilianus the Bishop of Carthage, and Maiorinus the Donatist, concern∣ing the giving up the Bibles to be burnt. Baleue. But others say, he dyed a Martyr, as all his predecessors did, from the time of S. Peter. For his successour, 32.  SYLVESTER a Romane, was fetcht out from the Mountaine of Soracte (where he had hid himselfe from per∣secution) to be Pope. 2. This man is said to have Baptized Constantine the Emperour, (though Eusebius relate that it was done by Eusebius of Nicomedia) who thereupon was cured of a Leprosy; and erected S. Peters Church in Rome, himselfe digging the foundation, and carrying away twelve baskets full of Earth in honour of the twelve Apostles, up∣on his Imperiall shoulders. And afterward at the instance of this good Pope, built many other Churches, consecrated to the honour of Saints and Martyrs, made a decree for cele∣brating the Lords Day in steed of the Iewish Sabbaoth. Cod. l. Imp. Tit. de Feriis. 3. His donation with the rest of his profuse liberality, summ'd up by Ciasonius, is incredible. he appoynted Sylvester to weare a Crowne of Gold, but he contented himselfe with a Phrygi∣an Miter. Now a Triple Diadem, is thought scarce stately enough for his successors. 4. To his time is referred the first famous generall Councell of Nice, against Arius: he dyed peaceably in a good age. And shut up the first order of good Bishops.
2. WIthin the compasse of this Intervall, we meet with especiall Writers. 1. Ignatius, accurately set forth of late, by the most learned Primate of Armagh. 2. Justine Martyr. 3. Clemens Alexandrinus. 4. Ireneus. 5. O∣rigen. 6. Tertullian. 7. Lactantius, with Arnobius, Cy∣prian and others, who encountred the damned Heresies of the 1. Basilidians. 2. Ʋalentinians. 3. Marcionites. 4. Mon∣tanists. 5. Encratites. 6. Gnostiques. 7. Novatians. The Sy∣nods of Ancyra for purging the Church from such drosse. Of Sinvuessa, against Pope Marcellinus, that had through feare sacrificed to Idolls: diverse for the setling of Easter to be kept uniformally, and the repressing of Novatians. The most eminent was that of Nice, against Arius and his faction wherein 318. Bishops condemned his Blasphemy against the Deity of our Saviour, and laid the ground of that Creed that bears the name of that famous Councell. These troubles were ushered in by the tenne noted persecutions by the Heathen Emperours, which yeelded throughout all the Romane Em∣pyre an innumerable company of Martyrs, too many to be Canonized for any Calender.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. That succession may conduce to the Popes Supremacy, which faultreth and faileth in the first foundation? 2. The Decretall Epistles fathered on the first Popes, may be suspected to be the false ware of Isodorus Mercator. 3. It be likely that those Religious Popes, in such extreme persecutions, had liberty or list, to think on making Cardinalls or Gossips, and introduce a rabble of beggerly Ceremonies? 4. Damasus and Anastathius, and such o∣ther Registers of the Popes Lives, be not supposititious Writers, or shamelesly fal∣sified? 5. Those workes fathered on Clemens Ro∣manus, set forth by Lambert Gruter, be not for the most part of a latter stampe? 6. The Mistery of Iniquitie, began not to worke in Pope Ʋictor, when he excom∣municated the Churches of the East, for dissenting about the time of keeping Ea∣ster? 7. The madnesse of the Gnostiques, Valenti∣nians, Arians, Novaeeinns, and the like, be not revived and set on foot againe by our Moderne Fanatiques?
SECT. IV. Tollerable Arch-Bishops. 1. THe good Bishops, having thus sealed their pro∣fession with their blood, in the front of Christs Ar∣my. The second file comes on, Of 1. Tollerable Arch. bishops. 2. Patriarches. The Arch Bishops are 19. for the time of almost two hundred years, in the ensuing order. 1. MARCUS a Romane, who for the small time he held the place, brought in the singing of the Nicene Creed, and the giving of the Pall to the Bishop of Hostia; which af∣terward when other Bishops procured in like manner, they sweetly paid for. This Pall was to be of Wooll, not of silke, Luke 15. or any other stuffe, to signify the skinne of that lost sheepe, which our Saviour (by his example) taught to be fetched home, upon the good sheapheards shoulders from the wil∣dernesse. His Countryman 2. IULIUS had a longer time to doe more, In which A∣thanasius came to Rome, and was friendly entertained by him; where to give satisfaction of his doctrine, concerning the Trinity, he made that Creed which we have in our Lit∣turgy, approved then by Julius, and his Clergy, Ciacon. and put a∣mongst their Records; from whence it was after taken out, and published, to be generally received of the Church. 2. By his care also, it was ordained, that Protonotaries should be appoynted to Register the passages in the Church. But Pla∣tina complaines that in his time, they were become so illi∣terate, that some of them could scarce write their own names in Lattaine, being foysted into that place from the occupations, of Bawdes, and Parasites.
3.  LIBERIUS a Romane that succeeds him, was not so constant. but either through feare, or ambition, subscribed to Arianisme, and Athanasius condemnation. 2. Foelix was clapt into his place, who proved a stouter man, but Li∣berius recollecteth himselfe againe, and recovers his seate, in which he dies a Confessor, and leaves it to this 4.  FOELIX 2d his fellow Citizen, who condescended to communicate with the Arians, though he were none himselfe; but afterward in a tumult, was made away by them. He made the second Schisme with Liberius, & there∣fore by some is left out of the Catalogue of Popes. 5.  DAMASUS a Spaniard hardly got his place, being mainly opposed also by Ʋrcicinus, who was elected by the adverse faction; After many bickerings, and much bloud shed, Damasus carried it. 2. He was a great friend to St Hierome, who (as Ciaconius stifly maintaines) was made Cardinall by him. first, by the title of St Anastasius, and then of St Lau∣rence. It appears by his procurement, Hierome much refor∣med the vulgar Lattaine Edition. 3. He ordered those should be accursed, that put their mony to Ʋse, would pay no Tithes; and appointed Gloria Patri &c. to close up every Psalme. 4. Some make him the author of the Pontificall con∣taining the Popes Lives, this is certain, that the Luxury of the Clergy was at a great height in his time; which gave oc∣casion to the jest of an Heathen Consul, Make me Pope, and I will straight turne Christian. 6.  SIRICIUS a Romane that followed did lesse good. He excluded those that were twice Married, and admitted Monkes into Holy Orders. 2. The concei he entertained of the merit of Virginity, made him fierce in prosequuting Io∣vinian. 3. In his time, (but not by his meanes but by the good Emperour Theodosian's,) the Temple of Serapis in Ae∣gypt, was demolished and the Idoll broken. 7.  ANASTASIUS of his own Tribe held on the same course. 2. He was carefull to represse the errors of Origene; the first that brought up the standing up at the reading of the Gospell. The doings of
8.  INNOCENTIUS the Albane are not of much greater note, notwithstanding he was a great stickler against the Pe∣lagians. 2. In his time Alaricus plundered Rome, but In∣nocentius was then at Ravenna, 3. some hand he seemed to have, in the great conference then held in Carthage, be∣tween the Orthodoxe, and Donatists; set downe by Papirius Massonius in Binius. The Grecian. 9. ZOSIMUS did somewhat also that way, brought in Tapers into the Church, 2. forbid Cleark to haunt Ale∣houses, or Taverns, gave way to 10. BONIFACIUS a Romane, the Sonne of Jocundus a Friest. He was chosen in a Hubbub, being shrewdly oppo∣sed by Eulalius the Deacon, which made the fifth Schisme, saith Onephrius. Beda in Collecta in fine, cites a Booke of his Miracles, but none of them are now found Registred. 11.  COELESTINUS a Campanian takes the turne after him. He is much to be commended, for sending Germanus and Lupus hither into England, Palladius into Scotland, and Patrick into Ireland, for the rooting out of the Pelagian Heresie. 12. SIXTUS 3d, a Romane that followes, was not so well imployed; he was accused by one Bassus, for getting a Nunne with Child; but the matter was decided by a Synod, to Bassus his disgrace. 2. Much he was for building; and here∣by gott the title of the Enricher of the Church. 3. At the Emperesse Eudoxias instance, he made a Holyday, for St Pe∣ters Chaire: But all this could not keep out Gensericus from Plundering Rome. But 13. LEO the Tuscan, prevayled better, not only with the same Genserick, but also with Atylas, whom he disswa∣ded from the sacking of Rome, which then lay at his mercy, This is attributed to the miraculous assistance of S. Peter, and S. Paul, who terrified the Hunnes whiles Leo speak unto him. 2. In his time, the horrible Earth-quakes were as∣swaged, that ruin'd many Cities, at the singing of a new Tri∣sagium, which a Boy rapt up into the Ayre, learned of Angels, being this Sancte Deus, Sancte fortis, Sancte & immortalis.
Vpon the overthrow of Aquileia by Atylas, the Venetians setled themselves in the Gulfe, which now they have made so famous. 3. Some Miracles are attributed to this man. His works are set forth in one Ʋolumne by the Cannons re∣gular of S. Martyn in Lovayne, being 20, Homilyes, and 110 Epistles, to be found in Bibl. Pat. part. 5. p. 789. 14.  HILARIUS, (or Hilarus according to Onuphrius) of Sardinia, could not prevaile so much with Odoacer, and his Heruli, as Leo had done with Atylas and his Hunnes, but that Rome was sacked by their incursion. 2. Two things were notable in this mans time, the rectifying of the Cyclus Paschatis, or Golden Number, by Ʋictorinus of Aquitany; and the bringing in of the Letany, (which is yet retained a∣mongst us) by Mamertus Claudius of Ʋienna, for the aver∣ting of Gods heavy Judgments, and imploring his mercy. Whence we have the Rogation Weeke, about the Ascention. 3. Hilarus is said also to have decreed, that no Minister should Marry any other Woman but a Mayd, by which it appeareth that Ministers, might then Marry. But 15.  SIMPLICIUS the Tiburtine busied himselfe in no such simple matters. He built Pallaces, took upon him the Jurisdiction of the Church of Ravenna; decreed that none of the Clergy should hold a Benefice of any Lay man: upon his adorning St Andrewes Church in Rome amongst other, he hath these invitatory verses. Plebs devota veni, per{que} haec commercia disce, Terreno censu, regna supernapeti. Come heare and learne you rowt devour, To purchase Heaven, out of doubt. 16.  FAELIX the 3d, the sonne of a Romane Priest, was not so stirring at home, notwthstanding he opposed the Eno∣ticon, or proposall of Vnion, by the Greeke Emperonr Zeno, to the great consusion of both Eusterne and Westerne Church∣e. 17.  GELASIUS (an African Bishops sonne) did more good, in ordering the Canon of Scripture, and branding coun∣terfeit Books, which passed before for Authenticall. 2. Bel∣larmine
and Baronius be of the opinion, that the Tract under his name De duabus Christi naturis contra Eutychetem, Biblioth. Pat. Colon. 1618. Tom. 5. be∣longeth to Gelasins Cycizenus, not to a Pope, who would never have justified Eusebius, whom he had otherwise censu∣red for an Arian, nor speak against Transubstantiation. 3. A large Catalogue of Cardinals made by him, is Registred by Ciaconius, and the Dedication of S. Michaels Church, the Popes Patrone, and the French Kings. Farre short of this man, came, 18. ANASTASIUS the second, a Romane, that had his place; he notwithstanding presumed to Excommunicate A∣nastasius the Greeke Emperour, (as Platina reports) for fa∣vouring the Heretique Acatius, whose Heresy afterward himselfe favoured, and communicated with Photinus, till at length with Arius he purged out his bowels into a Privy. 19. SYMMACHUS the Sardinian then is chosen, but not without great opposition of one Lawrence, which continued some years after. This Onuphrius makes the fourth, but Cia∣conius the fifth Schisme. 2. No extraordinary matters were done by him, but that he took order with the stubborne soule of one Paschatius, to be well chastized in Purgatory after his death, as Gregory toucheth in his Moralls, Lib. 4. c. 40. COntemporary with these were 1. The eminent Fa∣thers of the Lattaine Church, Ambrose, Hierome, Au∣gustine, and Gregory the great. and those of no lesse esteeme in the Greeke, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, with Chry∣sostome, which opposed themselves against the 2. Here∣sies of the Arians, under whom the whole World groaned. That denyed our Saviours God-head, & Manicheans that re∣jected his word, together with the Pelagians who with∣stood his Grace, and Donatists who rent in peeces his Church. In which conflict they were backed, as before with the famous Councell of Nice to quell Arius: so suc∣cessively, with the Generall Councell of Constantinople, a∣gainst Macedonius denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost: and that of Ephesus which condemned Nestorius for his Blas∣phemy
against our Saviour, and his blessed Mother, upon which followed the Councell of Chalcedon against Euty∣hes, confounding our Saviours Natures, to be handled with the rest distinctly in the History of Councells. 3. As al∣so, of the Irruptions of the Goths, Ʋandalls, Huns, and He∣rul, which heaped on massaeres of Martyrs. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The giving of the Pall were first brought in by Pope Marcus, and belong only to Arch Bishops? 2. Athanasius Creed depend on the records of Rome, from whence it was set forth long after the framing of it in the time of Pope Julius? 3. S. Hierome were ever Cardinall, or wore such a Hat, as the Painters bestow upon him? 4. Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, forged a Canon of the Councell of Nice, to justi∣fy their unjust claime of Appeales to the Sea of Rome? 5. S. Augustine with the rest of the African Bishops assembled in the Councell of Car∣thage, that withstood them in it, dyed ex∣communicated by them for it? 6. The Rogation weeke and the Letany, had its originall from Claudius Mamercus, of Ʋienna? 7. Pope Anastasius might legally excommu∣nicate Anastasius the Greek Emperour?
SECT. V. Patriarchs. MVch adoe hath been to passe those nineteen fore∣mentioned Popes, for Tollerable Arch-Bishops, more will be required to justify the fourteene fol∣lowing for good Patriarchs, of which, 1. HORMISDA of Campania, first had the title from Iustine the Emperour. He was so pert upon it, as to Ex∣communicate Anastasius the Emperour, because he stood up∣on, that it was the Emperours part to command, and not to veyle bonnet to Bishops. 2. IOHN the first, a Tuscane, that succeeds, was a man of more excellent parts, and piety. As Theodoricus King of Italy had been the death of learned Boethius, and prudent Symmachus, so after he had sent this Iohn, to Justine the Ea∣sterne Emperour, to intercede for the Arians, (which he did not according to his instructions, but wrote to the Bishops of Italy to stand out for the truth) upon his returne he was sent to Ravenna, and there died of Famine, in a stinking and noysome Prison. Some strange things are related of this man, as that when he had once backt a Gentlewomans horse of Corinth, the Nagge (before gentle) would never permit any after to ride him. That he restored to a blind man his sight in the gate of Constantinople, and that after his death he was seen by an Hermit, with Symmachus hi Companion, to throw the soule of the Trnt Theodoricke the Arian into Lapari to be tormented. This mans hard hap deterres not 3. FOELIX the fourth, a Samnite, to venture on his place, but his zeale was not so forward, to indanger much himselfe, He Excommunicated the Patriarch of Constantinople, farre enough from him, and at home divided the Charcell from
the Church, commanded extreme unction to be ministred to men a dying. Benedict the father of Monkery, Priscian the Grammarian, and litle Denise the maker of the Cicle for Easter, ard said to be of this mans time, as 4.  BONIFACE the second of Rome was his successour, but with much adoe, being strongly opposed by Dioscours, who dyed shortly in the quarrell, and so this sixth Schisme was appeased. 2. He end eavoured to establish a decree, that every Pope should chuse his successor, but it was so with∣stood by the Clergy, that he was faine to disanull it himselfe, And 5.  IOHN the second his Countryman, came not in by his chusing. 2. This man was surnamed Mercury for his elo∣quence; had an Embassage sent unto him, with guists from Iustinian the Emperour, for condemning the Patriarch of Constantinople Anthemius the Arian. An Epistle of his concerning the Fathers and Sonnes equality, is much com∣mended. His successour and Countryman 6.  AGAPHETUS a Cardinalls sonne, was sent by Theodo∣tus the Gothish King, to pacify Iustinian the Emperour, who was highly offended, for the death of the Noble and Lear∣ned Queene Amalasunta; upon his comming Anthemius the Eutychian Patriarch was removed, and Menna set in his place. There is a Confession of Faith directed by this Aga∣petus to Justinian: And a tract of his againe to the Emperour, containing good Precepts of Government. He dyed at Constantinople, but was thence conveyed to Rome to be bu∣ried, where 7.  SYLVERIUS a Campanian had his Chayre, Pope Hor∣misdah's sonne, who was somewhat more then a Cardinall. This man was used hardly by Theodora the Empresse, and Antonia, Belisarita wife, because he would not consent to the putting out of Menna; and restoring of Anthemius the Eutichean, the Empresse favourite. For this refusall, he was depos'd himselfe, upon pretences that he dealt under hand with the Gathes, who then besieged the City. And 8.  VIGILIUS his underminer, was set in his place, and
made the seaventh Schisme. But he had litle comfort of his unjust advancement, for being charged with breach of promise by the violent Theodora, he was fetcht to Constan∣tinople, and there with a halter about his neck, drawn about the streets, and thence banished. In returne from which he dyed, which made way for 9. PELAGIUS a Romane to take his place; in whose time Tottylas besieged Rome, and wonne it. Notwithstan∣ding this disaster, this Pope was tampering to clayme a Su∣premacy, not from Canons of Councells, or Apostolicall Or∣dinance, but from Christ himselfe. It is said that by his In∣tercession, he somewhat mitigated Tottylas, But 10. IOHN the 3d his fellow Citizen, had better quarter from Narsete the Eunuch, who turned out the Gothes, and established Iohn in his Chaire. There is a decree of his in Gra∣tian dist. 99. c. Nullus, that cutts off any of the Clergy from the Title of Chiefe Priest, or vniversall Bishop. 11. BENEDICT a Romane also, that succeeded, fell in the time when the Lombards forraged all Italy, the griefe whereof brought him quickly to his end, That 12. PELAGIUS the 2d might take his place, who being a Romane, in the Besieging of the City by the Lombards, was made Pope, without Tiberius the Emperours consent, which Election he sent Gregory to Constantinople for to ex∣cuse. The same 13. GREGORY a Romane Succeeded next, He was ter∣med Magnus, both for the Extraordinary matters performed by him, as also for his Learning, though he took the Popedome upon him unwillingly, and first called himselfe Servus serve∣rum Dei. 2. He sent Augustine into England, who spread Christianity amongst the Easterne Saxons, (The most part of them before being Pagans,) whereas the Brittaines had at that time of his comming, seaven Bishops and an Arch-Bishop. 3. He translated the Arch-Bishops Seat from Lon∣don to Canterbury. 4. Earnestly withstood the clayme of vniversall Bishop, against Iohn of Constantinople. Playes the Polititian with Mauritius his Preferrer, and graced too
much the Traytor Phocas that slew him. 5. He is said to have staid a Plague, by carrying in Procession the Image of the Blessed Ʋirgine, and causing the punishing Angel to put up his Sword. Also to have delivered Traianes soule out of Hell by his prayers, & to have brought in Candles for Candle. masse, and added foure dayes to Lent. Besides to have Can∣celled his decree against Priests Marriages, upon the finding of 6000 Infant's Sculls in a Fish pond. 6. He is censured by some, to be the last of the good, but first, of the bad Popes, To be signified by the Angel, flying between Heaven and Earth. For one that made many Superstitious orders, which yet take place; but the good he appointed, was never well observed. For of the Priests he complaines, the World is full of them, and yet in the Lords Harvest there are few Labourers. We take upon us the Office, but discharge it who list, and I thinke no dishonour to God can be shewed so great, as that which it tollerateth in Priests, for they are come now to that passe, that they they Jerre at him that lives humbly, and Continently, and takes better courses then them∣selves, with which fall in those Verses of Mantuan, Sordida Gregorij leges observat Egestas, Quae teuues scrutatur aquas & flumina summa: Grande & pinque pecus fundo versatur in Imo. At sacri proceres qui lina capacia Petri, Altius immergunt, laqueant genus omne natantum. Poore Curats only keep Pope Gregory's lawes, And fish in Rills, or Rivers su face sweepe; But fatter Jacks and Carpes escape their pawes Mdding themselves in Coverts of the deepe. Now our Peers sinck St Peters larger Nett, And in the bottome what they find, they gett. 7. His workes are set forth in one Volumne in diverse Editions. Containing upon Job. 35 Bookes, expositions up∣on the 7 Penitentiall Psalmes, upon the Canticles, 22 Homi∣lies upon Ezechiel, 40 upon diverse Gospels. Of a Pastorall charge, upon the first of Kings. Answere to 12 Questions
proposed by Augustine of Canterbury, twelve bookes of E∣pistles, and foure bookes of Dialogues to Queene Theodolin∣da, to confirme her, and terrify her Husband with the Hor∣rours of another World. All which workes of his, 14. SABINIANUS a Tuscane, his successor would have had burnt, if he might have had his will: But Petrus Diaco∣nus affiemed upon his oath, that he often saw a Dove whi∣spering at his eare when he wrote, which Dove is common∣ly painted with him. This Quarrell grew betweene Gre∣gory and Sabinian; for that Gregory freely bestowed Corne amongst the Poore, which Sabinian made them pay for, whereupon Clamours arose against him, and he to justify himselfe, said that Gregory wasted improvidently the Reve∣nues of the Church, to get himselfe applause, and persisted in such calumniations to wrong the dead, untill Gregory (be∣lieve it who will) appeared unto him, and knockt him on the head, whereof he dyed, and so put a period to the Tol∣lerable Arch-Bishops and Patriarches. 2. IN these times may be notice taken of 1. Hillary B. of Poiters, a great stickler in twelve Bookes against the Arians: Prosper and Fulgentius, S. Augustines followers: Orosius the Historian: Priscian the notable Grammarian: Dionysius Exiguus the setler of the Calendar. 2. The be∣ginning of Regular Monkes by Benedict an Italian Abbot, with his sister Scholastica. 3. The damnable vexations of Athanasius in the Councell of Tyre, and otherwise, with the impostures of Idolaters, Socr. l. 5. c. 16. discovered in the demolishing of the Images of Cithra and Serapis, and the stirres upon it in Alexandria, of all which it is sufficient to have given a touch by the way.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The Pope may justly chalenge a Suprema∣cy over all Bishops, which so earnestly was opposed in John of Constantinople? 2. Math. 16. Io. 21. It were not a grosse oversight, to have neg∣lected the urging of Thou art Peter,] and feed my sheepe] If in these Texts, it had been conceived that the Supremacy was granted by our Saviour to S. Peter, and the Popes his Successors? 3. The Clergyes withstanding Boniface the second's endeavour to name his Successour, were not prejudiciall to the Popes Infal∣libility? 4. Gregory the great, were the author of the foute bookes of Dialogues, ascribed to him? 5. He Gott, Trajanus soule out of Hell, by his Intercession? 6. Sabinian brought in the first use of Bells into Churches? 7. He were knockt in the head by Gregories Ghost, for abusing and defaming him when he had gotten his place?
SECT. VI. Ʋsurping Nimrods. VVEE have seen the best of the Tolerable Arch-Bishops, and Patriarchs, 38 Ʋsurp∣ing Nimrods, become their Successors, for about 250. yeares, in this order. 1. BONIFACE the third, a Romane. This man obtained of Phocas an adulterous Assassine, (who had most brutishly slaine his Master the Emperour Mauritius) that Popish su∣premacy, which to this day, is so much stood upon. 2. Platina. Then came the name of Pope, to be appropriated to the Romane, which formerly was usuall to other Bishops; and Ʋolumus, & Jubemus, We Will and Command, Rom. 13. not I beseech you Bre∣thren, to be the stile of a Priest. This brought in the Quaere, that Platina scarce replyeth unto, Quantum reddat Episco∣patus? non quot oves pascuae, in co sunt? What is the Bishop∣ricke worth, not what opportunity is in it, to get soules. 3. Many strange Prodigies, ushered in this supreame head of the Church. A Commet of a stupendious magnitude, P. Dlaconus L. 18. Sea∣monsters, shewing themselves to the terror of many, and Mahomets publishing of his Alcharon, to make worke on both sides, for the faithfull to defend themselves. Here then is began the Kingdome of the Beast. Revel. 13. But this usur∣per continued not a yeare, before he was forced by death to part with all his pompe to 2. BONIFACE the fourth, an other Italian, who set as good a face upon the matter, as his predecessor. He changed the Pantheon of mother Cybele, and the heathenish Pagods to be a Fane for the blessed Virgin and Martyrs, and there∣upon instituted Allhallan-day. 2. Turned his Fathers house into a Monastery, and endowed it with revenues', to farten some Monkes he might make use of. But amidst his many
endeavours, he leaveth his seate and businesse to his Succes∣sour. 3.  DEUS-DEDIT or Theodorus another Romane. This man ordred that Gossips should not marry. 2. Some say he was Car∣dinall of S Iohns, Aera Chri∣stiana, or year of the Lord. and S. Pauls being so stiled by Gregory the first, who first brought in the account from the Birth of Christ. He is reported to have cured a Leeper with a kisse, yet in his time such a Leprosy raigned, so disfiguring men, that they could not be knowne. And then, Impious Cosroes of Persia, having gotten (as he thought) the Crosse of Christ, placed himselfe in the midst, Ciacon. that on the Right-hand, and a Cocke on the left, in contempt of the Trinity, which he paid for afterwards. 4.  BONIFACE the fifth comes in this mans roome, of the fame Country. Asyla. He did little worth the noting, but only priviledged Murtherers, and Theeves, that tooke sanctua∣ry, should not be thence plucked out, to suffer by the hand of Justice. His Countryman 5.  HONORIUS the first succeeds him. This Pope was censured by the third Councell of Constentinople, to be a Mo∣nothelite. but Onuphrius, Ciaconius, Bellarmine, and Baro∣nius with diverse others of that side, labour to quitt him. 2. He clothed S. Peters Church with Iupiter Capitolinue coate, and instituted the feast of Exaltation of the Crosse, leaving 6.  SEVERINUS a Romane to doe lesse; from whom Isa∣cius the Exarch of Italy, tooke away the Laterane treasury to pay his Souldiers, for which Severinus severity dared not to Anathematize him, for Popes as yet were the Ex∣archs creatures, so was 7.  IOHN the fourth, a Dalmatian, who with the remain∣der of the Treasury of the Church, redeemed some exiles of his Countrymen, 2. He busied himselfe more then need a∣bout the celebration of Easter, and the translating of Mar∣tyrs bones. Yet wrote into England against the Pelagian Heresy. 3. Vnder this Popes nose, Rhotharis of Lombardy placed two Bishops in one Sea, the one a Catholique and the other an Arrian.
8. THEODORUS a Graecian that followes him, was the Bishop of Jerusalem's sonne. He makes bold to deprive Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople, for the Heresy of the Acephalies, who differed not much from the Monotholites. 9.  MARTIN the first an Italian that comes after him bestirres himselfe in decking of Churches, and appoynting of Holy-dayes, and commanding Priests to shave their Polls, and to keep themselves single. 2. For being too forward in deposing Paul the Patriarch of Constantinople, he was fetcht to Constantinople by Constantius the Emperour, De Rom. l. 4. c. 12. and banished into Pontus, where he dyed. Bellarmine straines himselfe to justify this Pope against some imputations of the Magdeburgenses. but 10. EUGENIUS I. the Romane that succeeds him, was lesse active, and sped better. Yet he would have Bishops to have prisons for their Priests, who were so bold with the Pope himselfe, that when his Holinesse had received hereti∣call Letters, from the Patriarch of Constantinople, they threatned that they would interdict him, from saying Masse before he had burnt them. 11.  VITALIANUS his Countryman followes in a more troublesome time. Wherein Constans the Greek Em∣perour came to Rome, and after some complements of kind∣nesse, rifles it, especially of the gay Pictures, and rich Sta∣tue's. 2. Maurus Arch-bishop of Ravenna is excommuni∣cated by this Pope, but retorts the same kindnesse upon him againe. 3. Theodorus a Greeke, and one Hadrian an African, are sent hither into England by him, to bring in the Lattaine service, being the yeare 666. just the number of the Beast; of which the word , and , (by Ba∣leus Reckoning) give a shrewd account. Monkery was much in request in this mans dayes. Which having a period, way is given to 12. A DEO DATUS or Theodatus his Countryman, who formerly was a Monke, and in the Popedome did little, besides the repairing of Erasmus Monastery in Mount Caeli∣us, of which he ahd been. 2. Ciacon. He decreed that Maurus
Arch bishop of Ravenna, should not have Christian buriall, in regard he denyed to stoop to the Sea of Rome, as Reparatus his successor did. 3. Earth-quakes, Comets, and Tempests much amazed men in this mans time. Amidst which 13.  DONUS the first, a Roman succeeds him, he so layes about him, iacon. that Theodorus Arch bishop of Ravenna submits his Church unto him, upon a pett taken against his Clergy, for not affording him due attendance. (Which Church be∣fore for standing out against Rome, was nicknamed by the Romanes Allo, Plat. or Autocephelus.) 2. He made a Paradise of S. Peters Church Porch. 3. In this mans daies, King Da∣goberts soule of France, being at the brim of Lippari, to be thrown in by the Divell, was manfully rescued by S. Denis. S. Martin, and S. Maurice, whom in his life time he had ho∣noured. And Idelfonsus the Spaniard for defending the bles∣sed Virgins immaculatenesse, against some Heretiques of those times, was rewarded by that Patronesse with a new Coate for his labour. A Monke of Scicily. 14.  AGATHO the first took his Chayre, and 1. Com∣mands that the Popes sanctions, should be as firmely kept, as the Apostles. 2. He dispatcheth one John Abbot of S. Mar∣tins into England, Gras. dist. 19. Bed. lib. 4. c. 18. Platina. to have our Church Service in tune; and other Romish injunctions. 3. Two Johns, John Bishop of Portua, and John the Deacon of Rome, are sent to the sixth Councell of Constantinople against the Monothelites, where John of Portua said Masse in Latine, which took very well amongst the giddy Greekes, he dyes of the Plague, and leaves in his place 15.  LEO the second, a Scicilian, a man skilfull in Greeke, as well as Lataine, and an excellent Musitian. 2. He ratified the sixth Synod to confirme the Masse, and restraine the Westerne Priests Marriages, brought in the kissing of the Paxe. 3. By the Emperour Iustinians meanes, he subjected the Sea of Revenna to the Romane Chayre, and put out the eyes of Foelix the Arch-bishop that stood against it. All this was done in tenne Months. Then 16.  BENEDICT the second a Romane, seconds him, a
Pope also but of Tenne Months sitting, in which he got to be first stiled the Vicar of Christ; and of Constantine the fifth, that the Pope should be freely elected by the Clergy, with∣out consent of the Exarches, or Emperours. This was more then was performed by his Successour 17. IOHN the fifth a Syrian, of whom we only have, that he was consecrated by the three Bishops of Asia, Por∣tua, and Ʋalaterne, which Ceremony was continued to after ages. 2. He is said to have written a booke of the Arch-bi∣shops Pall. 18. CONON the first, a Thracian, comes next, chosen in a great distraction; the Citizens, being for one Peter an Arch∣bishop, and the Souldiers for Theodorus a Priest. 2. He sick∣ned presently upon his Election, perchance (as Ball saith) through some unwholsome draught. 3. It is agreed upon, that one Paschalis, an Arch-deacon, gave a great summe of Mony to Iohn Platina, Exarch of Ravenna, (one of the six Princes of Italy) to be Pope after him, but the plott took not, and so all was lost. 4. St Killian the Scotte, with some others were sent by this man, to convert some places of Germany, where they were Martyred. He was not Pope a Yeare, but after Eleaven Months, left the place to 19. SERGIUS the first, a Syrian, who got it, notwith∣standing the great opposition of Paschalis and Theodorus, competitors before with Conon, who possessing (with their severall partizans) the pallace of Laterane, by the choyce of this Sergius they were driven out. 2. For refu∣sing to receive the Canons of Trullo; he was sent for to Con∣stantinople by the Emperour Iustinian, but the Italians rescu∣ed him, and forced Zacharias Protospatarius (who had com∣mission to bring him) to protect himselfe, by creeping under the Popes Bed. So small a matter was it then held, upon pre∣text of Religion to oppose Authority. 3. This Pope, was shrewdly suspected for Adultery, and was taxed of our Arch-bishop Anselme for it. 20. IOHN the sixth a Grecian was put in his place, and soon outed againe, (as Premonstratensis saith) and Sergius re∣invested.
But others goe on here with an orderly succession, making this Iohn famous for feeding the Poore in a great fa∣mine, and ransoming Captives, with the Church Treasure. Some say he dyed a Martyr, but none tells why, or by whom. His Countryman of the same name, 21.  IOHN the Seaventh followes, Noted for nothing but for building some Churches, and erecting, and varnishing Images. His Sonne (as Ciaconius seemes to make him) 22.  SISINNIUS succeeds him, but with great oppositi∣on of one Dioscorus. 2. This man by reason of the goute, both in his hands and feet, could not doe much: yet left pro∣vision for repairing the City Walls, Baleus. Nauclerus. and Temples. 'Tis thought by some, that Dioscorus set him packing within three weeks by a Potion. 23.  CONSTANTINE the first a Syrian also succeeds him. This stirring man was the first that permitted Justinian the second to kisse his Feet. 2. He peremptorily resisted Phi∣lippicus Bardanes, with Iohn the Patriarch of Constantino∣ple, for their defacing of Images, and thereupon would not snffer the Emperours Picture in his Coyne. 3. 'Tis thought Anthemius was incited to Rebell by his means, and put out Philippicus eyes with a burning Bason, (which Platina de∣scribes.) 4. By a sleight he subjected the Church of Ticene, (that before belonged to Millaine,) to his Sea. 5. In this mans time Kinred and Offa, two of our petty Sax∣on Kings, were perswaded to forsake their callings, and be∣come Monks. 24.  GREGORY the second a Romane seconds him, and outvyed him in the defence of Images. 2. Excommunicates Leo Isaurus the Greeke Emperour, for standing against them, and banisheth Germane Patriarch, of Constantinople, and Da∣mascene, who pleaded for them. 3. From this man, our Countryman Boniface went, that converted the Germans, and at length suffered amongst them. 4. He forced Luitpran∣dus King of Italy to confirme some Donations of his Prede∣cessor Arithpert, and most of the States of Italy, and Spaine, to Revolt from their Emperour, and bind themselves by
Oath to his obedience. And so the Emperours of the East, for their standing against Images, lost their interest in the West, by this holy Fathers contriving, Of his Writings see Baron. Tom. 9. ad Annum 13. 25. GREGORY the third, a Syrian, in this bloudy quar∣rell of Images, (if it may be so said) thirds his Predecessor, 2. Excommunicates againe the Emperour Leo Isaurus, drives the Greeks out of Italy by the Lombards, and over∣tops the Lombards afterward by the French, under the Con∣duct of Charles Martell, who had a great hand at that time against the Saracens. 3. He forbids men to eate Horse-flesh, and wrote to Boniface of Germany, that his Priests should have shaven Crownes, and pray, and sacrifice for the dead, in their Masses. But 26. ZACHARY the first a Grecian, not Excommunicates only, but de facto deposeth Childerick King of France, (God knowes by what right) and with the same high hand turnes off Lachis, or Rachis King of Lombardy, Plat. Ciacon. and Carloman of France, from there Thrones, to be Monks. The Papists say it was their owne seeking; but their Prelates should have in∣structed them better. 2. This Zachary is said to have tran∣slated Gregories Dialogues into Greeke. 3. Ʋirgilius a Bi∣shop is condemned by this man, See Ramus in Praef. Mathe∣mat. for holding there be Antipo∣des. One Stephen is reported to have been Elected in his Roome, but dying presently Ʋnconsecrated by reason where∣of, 27. STEPHEN the second a Romane neere at hand, steps into his Place. He wrought so with Pipin of France, that he came into Italy and outed Aistulphus of Lombardy, which he bestowed upon the Pope, for freeing him of his Oath to his Soveraigne Childerick, and shaving Childerick againe to make sure work, and thrusting him into a Monastery. 3. Vp∣on this successe, he was the first that was carryed upon mens shoulders, him succeeded his Brother, 28. PAUL the first a Romane, but not without some op∣position of one Theophylact. He Excommunicates Constan∣tine Copronimus the Greeke Emperour, upon the old quarrell
of Images. 2. An Image of Christ pricked in hatred by the Jewes, yeelded bloud, out of its side that cured all Diseases, (except stupid credulity) and thereby converted many of them, 3. he honoured much St Petrouell, who was St Peters Daughter. 29.  STEPHEN the third a Sicilian, with much adoe gets his place. For Constantine (Brother to King Desiderius of Lombardy was in for a whole yeare) but was outed againe, Baleus Plat. because he was but a Lay-man, and one Philip, that was cho∣sen, lost it for want of meanes to defend it. 2. he brought in the worship and censing of Images, and subjected Millaine to his Sea which fell to 30.  HADRIAN the first a Romane, a great patrone of Images, for which he wrote a Booke. 2. Notwithstanding he could captivate the poore Orphans of Bertha, the Widow of Caroloman, who were the right Heyres of France, 3. for this he went not unrewarded by Charles the Great, who confirmed his Fathers guifts to the Romane Sea, by adding the Dukedomes of Spoleto and Benevent unto it. And when all is reckoned, this is that which they call Constantines do∣nation. 31.  LEO the third a Romane succeeds, who as his Prede∣cessor Hadrian by closing in with Charles the Great, had ruined Desiderius of Lumbardy, and extinguished that State, which had stood in Italy 200 yeares. Also this man at his first entrance, (to curry favour with the same victorious King) prostitutes his Keyes, and Romane Liberties at his feet, which the Romans took so ill, that having gotten the Sycophant a∣broad, they pluckt him from his Horse, and whipt him like a Rogue. Ʋictorellus upon Ciacon strongly maintaines, that in that hurry his eyes were pluckt out, and tongue cutt off, but soone after restored by miracles. 2. Charles with the soonest hath word of this abuse; comes to Rome for righting of it, the Pope cleares himselfe from all imputations laid against him, by his owne Oath; the People cry that the Apostolicall Sea is to be Judged by none. Thus the Pope is freed, Charles for his paynes, pronounced Emperour, because they of the East,
were too farre out of the way, to serve the Popes turne. The new made Emperour takes Oath to defend and protect the Romane Church, and obey it. 3. Certaine Miracles, voyced to be wrought by the blood of a Rood at Mantua, are confir∣med by this Pope. 32. STEPHEN the fourth a Romane gets his place, but not by the Emperours Election, as it was promised to Charles, by his Predecessors, Adrian and Leo, but by choyce of their owne Clergy. 2. This in Person he goes to excuse to Lew∣is the Emperour in France, and with some Complements in crowning the Emperour and his Wife, by the titles of Augu∣stus, and Augusta, salves all the businesse, 3. Returnes to Rome, and makes a decree, that it shall be in the Clergies Power to chuse the Pope, but not to consecrate him, but in presence of the Emperours Embassadour. So prettily could these men juggle to delude their best Friends, and worke their own ends. In the same manner, without the Empe∣rours suffrage, his Countryman 33. PASCHALIS the first was chosen, who excused the matter so cunningly, to Lewis the Emperour, that he not only obtained a relaxation of his Right in chusing of Popes, but a larger donation to the Church of Rome, of territories, and revenues then formerly by his predecessors had been granted. 2. He was shrewdly suspected for making away in a tumult, some great men, that withstood his projects in the Emperours behalfe, but his own Oath was sufficient to cleare him, whereof he might be absolved at pleasure. With more adoe another Romane, 34. EUGENIUS the second got the Chayre, by reason of the opposition of Zinzimus, he is much commended for his bonty to the Poore. 2. In this mans time, Michael the Ea∣sterne Emperour, sent to Lewis the Westerne, to know what he thought concerning Images. Lewis referres the matter to Eugenius, what his decision was, none mention. Some say there was a Conference about it, at or about Paris, Baron. Ciacon. Stella. and that Eugenius was slaine by the Romanes: others acknowledge no such matter, but that he dyed peaceably, leaving
35.  VALENTINE the first, his fellow Citizen his suc∣cessour, A man of too good hopes to keep the place long. Hune tantum terris ostendunt fata, nec ultra Esse sinunt. — This man was shewn, but must not stay, The Fates doe snatch him straight away. As Ciaconius saies of him. After forty daies therefore he left his keyes to 36.  GREGORY the fourth his fellow Citizen, who would not accept of them, without the Emperours approba∣tion. 2. Between whom and his Rebellious sonnes he went into France, to make Peace, but could not effect it. 3. Intol∣lerable was the luxury of the Clergy in those daies, against which a Synod was held at Aquisgrave, and Platina men∣tioning it, adds Vtinam nostris temporibus Ludovice viveres. would God ô Lewes thou hadst liv'd in our times. 37.  SERGIUS the second another Romane comes next. 1. He was formerly called Os porci Hogs-snout, but that was when he was Baptized, the Popedome proved a grea∣ter matter unto him for to change his name. 2. By his ex∣ample other Popes have done the like, in changing their Christian names, 3. His Election was confirmed, by the Emperour Lotharius, whose sonne Lewis he afterwards Crowned at Rome. 38.  LEO the fourth a Romish Monke, shuts up this third vanke of Popes. 1. He is commended for a great buil∣der that compassed the Vaticane with a Wall, reedified the Castle of S. Augelo, and did many such other matters. 2. The Saracens were scared from Italy, by his Crossing, Blessing, Cursing, and Animating his Souldiers, 3. He was questio∣ned for plotting to transferre the Empire, from France to the Greeks againe, but from that he cleared himselfe by his Oath. 4. By his Prayers 'tis said, he drove away a Basi∣liske from S. Lucies Chappell, dispensed with Ethelwolfe to leave his Monastery and raigne in England, for which courtesy the Monkish King, gratified his Holinesse with
yearly Peter pence. And these were the chiefe imploy∣ments of these jolly Prelaetes, when once they grew to be puffed up with Supremacies and Donations. 2. IN this Distance are met with. 1. The Popes excom∣municating, and Deposing, of their fellow Bishops, and Patriarchs, Dethroning, and Monkifying Kings, Constitut∣ing and deluding Emperours, and maintaining Idolls against them. 2. Here about the yeare 666 (the number of the Apocalypticall Beast) Phocas the Parricide, that slew his Master Mauritius, Boniface the purchaser of Supremacy, of that villanie by Symony, And Mahomet the Grand Im∣postor, brake forth together, whom the Saracens soon fol∣lowed, to the devastation, and hazarding of all Christen∣dome. 3. Which the Learned of those times, Isodorus Hispa∣censis, Venerable Bede, Haimo, Strabus, Rabanus, to which may be added, Damascene, whom (some write turned afterward Mahumetan) and Paulus Warenfre∣dus the first Postillator, might Lament rather, then with∣stand.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Maurus Arch-Bishop of Ravenna served the Pope in his kinde, to Excommunicate him, for Excommunicating him first? 2. It smel't not of Antichristian Pride in Pope Constantine, to permit the Empe∣rour Justinian to kisse his feete? 3. The Eastern Emperours were in the right, in withstanding the having of Images in the Church? 4. It be lawfull for Kings to forsake their Callings, to become Monkes? 5. Popes may dispence with the Oath of Al∣leageance to Princes? 6. They may Depose Kings, and translate Empires? 7. It be lawfull to eate Horse-flesh, notwith∣standing the Popes Inhibition?
SECT. VII. The Fourth ranke of Luxurious Sodomites. AMbition having attained the top of desire, melteth quickly into Luxury. No marvell then if after Ʋ∣surping Nimrods, Luxurious Sodomites come to take their turnes, for the space well neere of two hundred years in this order. 1. IOHN the eight, otherwise tearmed Pope IOHANE, a Lasse of Mentz in Germany, that ranne away with an English Monke of Fulda in Mans apparell, and studied with him at Athens, till there he dyed. 2. Thence this Virago came to Rome, and so learnedly trussed her poynts, that after Leo's death, she was advanced to Saint Peters Chayre. 3. Where for two years and a halfe, she celebrated Masse, gave Orders, freed the Emperour Lewis from his Oath to Aldegisus, Crownes Charles the Bald, Thomas Har∣ding. takes up the Con∣troversy between the two Hinomares, established the lear∣ned Photius in the Patriarchship of Constantinople, wrote a learned Letter to the Prince of Moravia, wanted nothing requisite to an excellent Pope, but the right Gender. 4. The defect of which discovered it selfe, in her going to the La∣terane, between Colosses, and S. Clements, where without a Midwife, she was delivered of somewhat, and her life to∣gether, for which her successors have since, baulk't that un∣lucky way, and provided a hollow seate of Porphyry, to pre∣vent such after-claps. 5. This story of Dame Johane, Onu∣phrius, Bellarmine, Baronius, Vid. Io. Wol∣fium in Me∣morabilib. and their followers would de∣cry by all meanes possible, but we have fifty (at least) of their own suffrages against them. 2. BENEDICT the third, a Romane, was chosen in her
roome, but not without putting in security into the Dea∣cons hand, that he was of the masculine Gender: he was with∣stood (saith Ciaconius) by one Anastasius, but to no pur∣pose. 2. He made shew of great humility, and therefore would be buried not in, but without the Threshold of Saint Peters Church. 3.  NICHOLAS the first, named the Great, (a Romane) kept a greater stirre, deprives Iohn of Ravenna, for not stoo∣ping unto him. 2. Swaggers with Michaell the Emperour of Constantinople, about Photius the Patriarch, and writes him an Epistle, which is much stood upon. 3. Vntill this mans time Anastasius the Librariaen wrote the lives of the Popes, but after untill Clement the second, one William ano∣ther Librarian, who passeth under the name of Damasus. 4. Onuphrius, Platina, and Ciaconius complaine much of the negligent registring, and confusion of their Popes Lives, not∣withstanding their succession is made such a convincing ar∣gument. 5. He was stiffe against Priests Marriage, but ta∣ken downe, by a resolute Epistle of Huldrick a Germane Bishop. 4.  HADRIAN the second a Romane also comes next. The Emperours Embassador excepted against his Election, without their Masters consent, but were deluded by an an∣swere, that a worthy man was chosen; and so must put up their pipes. 2. He kept a great stirre to bring the Bul∣garians under his virge, which was first yeelded unto, but it held not to purpose. 3. By his violence he outed the Lear∣ned Photius of Constantinople, and gott Ignatius againe into his roome, by the eight Synode of Constantinople. 4. The Emperour Lotharius, came to Rome to receive Absolution of him, which is much stood upon; as also the platforme he gave of Lawes, for the Kingdome of Aragon. After this mn is named by Onuphrius, Ciacon, Bellarmine and others, John the 8th (counting Pope Johane for no body) but Platina their senior, reckoneth 5.  IOHN the ninth a Romane also. He Crowned three Emperous, Charles the bald, Charles the grosse, and Lewis
the Sutterer, for holding too much with whom he was Im∣prisoned by the Romanes, but escaping, gott into France, where he did somewhat in a Councell at Trecas. 2. After returning to Rome, he beat the Saracens out of Italy, and Si∣cily, and wrote (as some thinke) foure Books of the Life of Gregory the Great, 6. MARTINE the second, a French man takes his place, whom Ciacon, and others (against Platina) call Marinus the first, so well they agree in their names, and reckonings, 2. Platina saith he gott the Popedome by ill meanes. Bale adds that his Father Palumbus was a Conjurer, Fasciculus temporum cryes our, Heu heu Domine Deus, &c. and bitter∣ly laments the iniquities of those times. 7.  HADRIAN the third a Romane that followed made them worse. He decrees the Emperour should have nothing to doe in the Popes Election. 2. The Romanes conceived great hopes of him for his resolution; but Death abridged it. And 8. STEPHEN the fifth a Romane takes his place. Onu∣phrius, Ciacon, and Bellarmine, call him Stephen the sixth, mis∣liking Platina's reckoning. 2. No Act of his is left worth the noting, but that he abrogated the purging of Adultery, and Witchcraft; by going over burning Coulters, and casting the suspected into the Water. 9.  FORMOSUS Bishop of Portua then recovers the Chayre, but not without great opposition of Sergius the Deacon. 2. This man was held guilty of his predecessor Iohn's imprisonment, thereupon fled and forsooke Rome, and turned Layicke, but Pope Martino absolves him for mo∣ney, & sets him right againe: so that by the same Bursae gra∣tia, he gat to be Pope. 3. Wherein he did nothing of note, besides the varnishing of Saint Peters Church. 10. BONIFACE the sixth, a Tuscane, must needs doe lesse in the three weekes he had the place. 11. STEPHEN the sixth, a Romane, in the one yeare he possessed the seate, bestirred himselfe more, for he took up the carcase of Formosus his predecessor, (to whom he had
been beholding) devested him of his pontificalls, and clo∣thed him in a Lay habit, cut off the two consecrating fingers of his right hand, and threw him into Tyber. But his decrees were voyded, and doings censured by 12.  ROMANUS the first his successor, which was all that he did, and was also all the worke that his successour, and Countryman 13.  THEODORUS the second performed, in his Twenty daies keeping the Chayre, which Platina cries out upon. Bel∣larmine leaves out these two for wranglers, and claps in next to Stephen, 14.  IOHN the tenth, also a Romane, who was fiercer for Formosus, then the former two; but was withstood of the people, whereupon he got to Ravenna, and there cancelled Stephens Acts, and established those of Formosus, nothing better was 15.  BENEDICT the fourth, a Romane that followed, Platina here also cryes out, that Riches had made the Church Wanton, and Ʋice had no restraint. 16.  LEO the fifth his Countryman found it too true, for before he was scarce warme in his place, he was outed by 17.  CHRISTOPHER the first, also a Romane, though Platina say, he was so base that his Country was not known. This Lucifer rather then Christopher (saith Ciaconius) thrust his predecessor into a Monastery where he dyed of discon∣tent. But 18.  SERGIUS the third, also a Romane. (Marozias (a famous strumpet) sweetheart) paid him in his owne coyne, for within seven Months, she styed him up likewise in a Mo∣nastery, and a little after, into a stricter Prison, where he mi∣serably ended his daies. 2. Then this mans holinesse turnes his spleen againe, against dead Formosus: once more he must be had up, and then be beheaded, and the three fingers left on his right hand be chopt off, and so be cast into Tyber, and all the Priests made by him new ordered. 3. Platina saith, that it was reported, that some Fisher-men finding his carcase, interred it in Saint Peters Church, at which time the Ima∣ges
of the Saints there, did it reverence. King Images, that would as well worship, as be worshiped! After this 19. ANASTASIUS the third, a Romane, is commended for that in his short time, he did neither good nor harme. As neither did 20. LANDO his Countryman, who changed not his name. Peter Praemonstratensis saith he was Father to 21. IOHN the Eleaventh his successoer; but Platina tells us, that he was Pope Sergin's bastard, either way he had a title that he might pretend to the Popedome. 2. He carryed a military spirit, and was Ʋictorious against the Saracens, but this could not free him from domestique plots. 3. For by Madame Marozias meanes he was taken, Luitprand. l 2. c. 13. Ciacon. and stifled with a pillow, from which soft death Saint Peter, and Saint Paule (who were said to have fought for him against the Sarasins) did not free him. 4. Iohn Marozias Heire apparent by Pope Sergius, for the time is foysted in, but could not then keep the place, being outed by 22. LEO the sixth, a Romane, who in his seaven months Raigne, did nothing notable, such another was his Coun∣tryman. 23. STEPHEN the seaventh, that appeared only, and af∣ter two years space, left the place to him that gaped for it againe: 24. IOHN the 12. the famous Cock of the game, of the breed of Pope Sergius, and Marozia, who had, given a pill to Leo and Stephen, that stood in his way. 2. This gallant with his mother Marozia roled all the roste. But Marozia could not so rest, but after the death of her Husband Guido she must needs take in Hugo King of Italy (her Husbands own brother for her Husband, a Burgundian without dispen∣sation) to her bed. 3. A quarrell upon this arose, betwixt her new Husband, and her sonne Albericus, for not neatly holding of the bason to his Ʋnkle Father in Law, when he washed his hands. This grew to that height, that King Hugh was faine to forsake Queene Marozia, and Rome, and leave the good people as he found them. Iohn with his mo∣ther,
flaunts it a while. But at length gives way to his Countryman 25.  LEO the seaventh, who was altogether for his ease, and did nothing worth Commendations. 2. In his time (saith Luitprandus) Bozon Bishop of Placentia, Theobald of Millaine, and another great Prelate, were all the bastards of King Hugh before mentioned, Baleus. by his three Queanes Bezola, Rosa, and Stephana, which he tearmed Ʋenus, Iuno, and Semile. Was not this a hopefull breed of Bishops, to doe good in the Church in these dissolute times? Notwith∣standing 26.  STEPHEN the eight a Germane ventures upon the Papacy, but to his little comfort, for the faction (as 'tis thought) of Albricus Madame Marozia's sonne, so abused him, that he dared not to shew his face abroad, by reason of the wounds they had deformed him with. This took him off from doing any thing of note. And as little was performed by the Romane that succeeded him, 27.  MARTINE the third, whom Bellarmine and Cia∣conius call Marin the second, but we follow Platina their ancient. Yet somewhat he did in repairing Churches, and feeding the poore. 2. About this time an ill favoured Chap∣laine of Madam Guilla's, Marquesse Berengarius wife, was descryed by the barking of a dogge, resorting to his Ladies bed, and thereupon was taken, and dismembred of the exces∣sive weapons he carried with him. Luitpraudus Lib. 5. c. 15. such was the fruit of forced chastity. This netled Berengarius to be rough with the Monks, and Clergy, which caused 28.  AGAPETUS the second, a Romane, to call in Otho of Germany to overtop him, and by that meanes, an over∣ture was made to the Germane Dynastye. But 29.  IOHN the thirteenth (Albericus sonne) was more stirring. By the threatning and Bribery of his Father, and Marozia his mother, he recovered the place that he for∣merly had, but could not keepe it. 2. Baleus out of Luit∣praudus sets him forth in his colours, that he was given to all deboshtnesse, Perjury and Sacriledge; that for inclining to
Otho the great, he dismembred diverse of his Cardiualls, by plucking out their eyes, cutting off their hands, and gelding them, that he made Deacons in his Stable amongst his hor∣ses. that for money, he made boyes Bishops, defloured Ray∣nora a Widdow his Fathers Concubine, and Anna another, with her neece, put out the eyes of his Ghostly father Bene∣dict, brake windowes in the night, set houses on fire, dranke a health to the Divell, would say Masse, and not communicate. 3. for which and other intollerable pranks, he was deposed by Otho in a Councell, and Leo the eight put into his place. But his Wenches and Friends (when Otho had turned his back) soon got him in againe. 4. From this gallane our Saint Dunstane purchased with a round summe of Mony, an Inhi∣bition against Priests Marriages, which caused here at that time no small stirre. 5. At length taken in the Act with a resolute mans wife, this Pope met with a gash, that within eight daies set him packing to another world. His friends thrust into his place 30. BENEDICT the fifth a Citizen of Rome. But Otho the Emperour returning, disanulled the Election, and took Benedict with him into Germany, where he dyed in banish∣ment, setling 31. LEO the eight his fellow Citizen in his place. To gratifie which kindnes, 2. he crownes Otho Emperour, re∣mitts unto him the right of Chusing Popes; for which was ratified unto the Papacy, Constuntines, or rather Pipins, and Charles the Great's Donations. 3. Ciaconi therefore cals him an Anti-Pope. It should seeme he was too honest, to be well liked of, or to governe long. 32. IOHN the 14 Bishop of Narvia, (some say the Sonne of Iohn the twelfth) steps into his roome. 2. Against whom the Romans make head, and Imprison him. Bal. Otho the Empe∣rour frees him, and delivers Peter the Ringleader of them, Governour of the City, into his hands, whom he most igno∣miniously put to Death. 3. In his time Bells began to be Baptized, and to have names given them. Harder was the hap of his Countryman and Successor.
33.  BENEDICT the sixth. For Cynthius a potent City∣zen of Rome Imprisoned him, in the Castle of St Angelo, for some prancks he had played, where he was soone made away, least he should complain, and bring in Caesar upon them, as others had done. 2. It should seem (saith Platina) he de∣served to be so used, for that they that did it, were not called to a reckoning for it. This made 34.  DONUS the second that followed (a Romane also) the waryer of him. 2. The Polonians desired to have their King Crowned, aleus. Plat. Ciac. Chronol. but sped not, because (as it is like) they came empty handed. 3. Writers much complaine of the obscurity of these times. Vide Soeculum infoelix (saith Bellarmine) Take notice of an unhappy age, in which were not to be found any famous Writers, or Councels. The Popes little cared for the Common good; but yet he adds it fell out well by Gods Providence, that there sprang up then no new Heresies. Nei∣ther could there well, because little Religion was then on foot, besides Superstition, and Heresies. In these times by in∣direct meanes crept in 35 BONIFACE the seaventh, surnamed France, but the Citizens made head against him; & he stole away the Church Implements, and Treasure, and fled to Constantinople. John the 15th is put into his place, but he returns, and buyes him out, recovers the place againe, but soone dyes of an Apoplexy-Baronius saith, he was rather a Theife, a Murderer, and a Traytor to his Country, then a Pope. His usage shewed him to be such to 36.  IOHN the fifteenth a Lombard, who being made Pope upon Boniface's flying to Constantinople, at his returne was Imprisoned by him, and there made away, some say by Famine, and stench of the place; others that Ferrareus (Boni∣face's Father) did the deed. Next after comes 37.  BENEDICT the seaventh according to Bale and Bellarmine, but is put before by Platina, and Ciaconius. 2. He Crowned Otho, with his Wife Theophania, in the Church of Laterane, and turn'd out Gilbert the Conjurer from the Arch∣bishoprick of Rhemes.
38.  IOHN the sixteenth a Remane (the sonne of Leo a Preist) begotten in Matrimony, then followes, a man alto∣gether for the enriching of his kindred, Plat: whereby the Clergy hated him; but that was after, taken up for a Custome. To him succeeds another Romane, 39. IOHN the seaventeenth, commended for a great Scho∣lar, he found such opposition, of Crescentius the Romane Con∣sul, that he was faine to quitt Rome, and shelter himselfe in in Hetruria. 2. But Crescentius fearing he would bring in Otho the Emperour upon him, went and so submitted him∣selfe, that John returned, and all was well. Next a Kinsman of the Emperours, one Bruno a Germane takes the plate, by the name of 40. GREGORY the fifth. Against this man, Crescentius the Consull also makes head, drives him from Rome, and pla∣ces John a Grecian in his Seat. But Gregory returnes, and by the Emperours Forces, subdues his Enemies, and puts them to death ignominioussy. 2. After wards appoints the seaven Electors, for chusing the Germane Emperours, which con∣stitution was then ratifyed, by the then Emperour Otho. 3. Bale with Platina, reckoneth this Anti-pope John amongst the number of Popes, by the name of Iohn the 18, but Ciaco∣nius and Bellarmine, with greater reason omit him, and such were the pollicies and pollutions, under the Regiment of the great Whore and her Minions. 2. IN this dissolute and sharking period, little good could be expected, notwithstanding in it may be notice taken of 1. Translating the Empire from the French (by Pope Agape∣tus plotting) to Otho Magnus the Germane where it yet continues. 2. The controversy betweene Photius and Igna∣tius for the Patriarchship of Constantinople. 3. Theophylact Luitprandus, and Erigina Scotus may passe here for Schollers. 4. The miserable death of Hatto Arch-bishop of Mentz by Mice which a Tower, built in the River Rhene, could not guard him from, nor any other forces he had about him: see the story and picture in Munsters Geography.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The story of Pope Johan may passe for a true History? 2. Maroziahs and her Daughters Pope-ma∣king, discovered not the skirts of the Whore of Babylon? 3. Bastards, Bribers, and Atheists, may be ac∣knowledged for Christs Ʋicars, or Saint Peters successors? 4. Priests marriages, be not more tollerable, then Popes insatiable Beastlinesse? 5. Boniface the seaventh, robbing the Church treasury, and purchasing with it after∣wards the Popedome which he had forfei∣ted, include not in it Sacriledge, and Sy∣mony? 6. The quarrelling concerning Formosus and his doings, represent not the snarling of doggs about a carcasse? 7. It were not  in the Popes, to take upon them the deciding of the businesse of Photius in the Patriarch∣ship of Constantinople?
SECT. VIII. The fifth Ranke of Aegyptian Magitians. THE body of the two Witnesses were to lye in the streets of the great Citty: which spiritually is call∣ed Sodome, and Aegypt. Of the Luxurious Sodo∣mites we have taken a view, Rev. 11. Glutted Luxury soon degene∣rates into divellish Sorcery. These Aegyptian Magitians for the next 240 years, take place in this order. 1. SYLVESTER the second, a French man, brought up in the Abby of Floriack where Necromancy at that time, was held an eminent piece of learning. 2. To perfect his skill that way, he gets to a Saracen in Sivill, and cozens him of his chiefe Conjuring Booke, by being inward with the Ma∣gicians daughter. 3. Then he contracts with the Divell, to be his wholly, upon condition he would conduct him back to France, and fit him with promotions. 4. Vpon his returne into France, he became admirable for his deepe learning, and (amongst others of great State) had these Chiefetaines his Schollers in the Black-art, Theophilact. Laurence, Mal∣fitane, Brazutus, and Iohn Gratian. 5. By help of these, and of his other Arts, he became first Bishop of Rhemes, then Arch-Bishop of Ravenna, and thence to be Pope, in which seate he concealed (but ever practised) his divelish mystery, having in secret, a Brazen head in stead of a Del∣phique Oracle. 6. Consulting with this on a time, how long he should live, answere was given, untill he said Masse in Jerusalem. This made him confident of a long continuance, but he was cozened by the Divells Aequivocation, who sei∣zed upon him saying Masse in the Church of S. Crosse, in one of Lent stations, which was otherwise called Jerusalem.
that he little thought on. 7. He is said to have then repen∣ted, and in token thereof, to have requested, that his hands, tongue, and secret members might be cut off, where with he had offended God, and so to be put into a Cart, which was done, and the beasts of their ownaccord, drew him to Late∣rane Church, where he lyeth buried. By the ratling of his bones in the sepulcher, prognosticating the death of his Suc∣cessors. 8. But all this, Onuphrius, Ciaconius, Bellarmine, and other moderne Papists reject, Benno. Martinus Po∣onus. Platina, Stessa. Fasci∣culus temper. Mesteus. Vicelius. as a fable. For which they can blame none but their own ancestors. Ciaconius gives a Catalogue of his writings. A booke of Geometry. MS. in Cardinall Farnesies Library. of Arithmetique, of the Spheare, the Composition of the Astrolabe, with a volumne of Epistles, which few should seem have met with. He was held a Ma∣gician (say his Advocates) because he was a notable Mathe∣matician, which was rare in those obscure times. After a lit∣tle more then foure years 2.  IOHN called Siccus (saith Blondus) whom those that leave out Pope Iohane, and Iohn the Greeke, (Gre∣gory the fifth his competitor:) reckon but the 17. Those that take in both, say he was the 19. We keeping in Dame Ioan, and not counting that Iohn, may best take him for the 18th 2. Benno makes him to be given to Magick, as his predeces∣sor was, He took off the choyce of Popes from the People, upon this plausible ground, Docendus est populus non se∣quendus, the people are to be taught not followed. 3. He ap∣poynted the feast of All-soules upon Odoloh's dreams, and Gregories Dialogues. It is thought he was poysoned, that one as good as himselfe, 3.  IOHN the 19 (called Fasanus) might take his turne. For from Sylvesters the seconds time, to Hildebrand, or Gregory the seaventh inclusively, amongst Popes (saith Benno) you shall find them all Necromancers. 2. Little was acted in this Popes daies, besides raising (as they pretended) of soules to make people believe Purgatory, and the need of their suffrages. 4.  SERGIUS the fourth a Romane that succeeded,
passeth by with the title of a harmlesse and merry man. 2. Ci∣acon puts upon him, that this man was called Bucca Porci, and changed his name, and that he also instituted the seaven Electors of Gormany, which is not likely, He seemed to be of the same institution with 5. BENEDICT the eight a Tuscane, his successor, who was seen after his death, upon a Black horse, and confessed, he was greatly tormented, and desired (the Bishop that thus saw him) to procure Odilo of Cluniacke to pray for him, and to tell 6. IOHN the 20th his brother, that he should take a trea∣sure, which he discovered where it was hidden, and distri∣bute to the Poore for his Soule. 2. He crowned the Empe∣rour Conrade, and was alwaies protected by him. This Iohn (with Benedict before him) was the Bishop of Portuas sonne, ('tis hoped well begotten.) Their Nephew 7.  BENEDICT the ninth keeps the Chayre to the Fa∣mily, he was formerly named Theophylact, fellow pupill with Laurence, and Iohn Gratian the Consurers, whom he made Cardinalls. 2. They were wont to wander the Woods, invocate Devills, and to bewitch Women to runne after them. Laurence (one of the crew) could tell the standers by, that a sparrow brought newes to his fellowes of a booty ready for them, by the overthrow of a Cart. 3. Peter of Hungary, was suborned by this Pope to put by Henry the third, from his succession to his Father in the Empire: to which purpose a Crowne was sent him with this Inscription Petra dedit Romam Petro, Tibi Papa Coronam. The Rock gave Peter Rome, The Pope to thee this Crowne doth doome. But Peter was quickly quelled by Henries valour, and Bene∣dict therewith terrified, sold the Popedome, to Iohn Gratian his Companion for 1500l. 4. After his death, an Heremite is said to have seen him, by a Mill, having the body of a Beare, and Head and Taile of an Asse: But between Iohn Gratians bargaine, and the Popedome, steps in
8.  SYLVESTER the third a Romane, and Bishop of Sa∣bine, Laurence the Conjurers sonne. This was done while Benedict was living, who quickly recovers his seat againe, outs Sylvester, and gives the Polonians one Cashimire, a Monke for their King. In regard whereof, diverse omit this Pope, from him, John Gratian an Italian, by the name of 9.  GREGORY the sixth, receives the Keyes, so that three Popes were extant here at one time, (which Ciacon calls the 20th schisme. Bellarmine makes it but the 14th) Bene∣dict in the Laterane, Sylvester in S. Peters, and Gregory, in S. Maries. 2. But the Emperour coming to keep the Peace amongst them, put to flight Benedict, sent Sylvester home to his Bishopricke, and banisht Gregory into Germany, with his scholler Hildebrand, then placeth in the Chayre 10.  CLEMENT the second Bishop of Bamberge. By the authority of a Synode, he caused the Romanes to renounce (by oath) the right they claimed, in chusing Popes. 2. But this netled them so deepely, that as soone as the Emperour was gone, they set his Pope going with poyson, Bracutus was the Competitor, but 11.  DAMASUS the second, a Bavarian put him off, that he might possesse the place, which he kept but three weeks and two daies, and then Brazutus did as much for him. Whereupon the Emperour sent Bruno a Germane Bishop to supply the place. He possesseth it by the name of 12.  LEO the ninth. As this man was going to Rome from Germany in his Pontificalibus, Hildebrand falls into his Company, and perswades the simple man, to put off his Robes, wave the Emperour, and have a new Election from the Ro∣mane Clergy. 2. This he did and then made Hildebrand Cardinall, who managed all then at his pleasure. At Ver∣cellis he held a Councell against Beringarius, but soon after he had a passe from Brazutus, leaving his seate to his Country∣man 13.  VICTOR the second, who was received by the Romanes, rather for feare of the Emperour, then any liking
to the man. 2. Cardinall Hildebrand is dispatched into Germany, to designe young Henry heire apparent, to the Empire, upon whose returne, Ʋictor was soon vanquished, by one of Brazutus pills, and so was the Lorayner 14.  STEPHEN the ninth, who was thrust in without Caesars consent, he brought Millayne to vaile bonnet, and crouch to Rome, held a Councell at Florence against married Priests, and chose that took Benefices of Lay-men. 2. To re∣forme some such matters, Hildebrand was Legat a Late∣re, into Burgundy and other places. But Brazutus neere home, sent him the way of his Fathers. One Mincius a Cam∣panian then steps in, by the name of 15. BENFDICT the 10th, But because this was done without Hildebrands privity, and in his absence, a Councell was held at Sutrinum, in which Benedict was deposed, and Gerardus Bishop of Florence, Hildebrands Companion, pla∣ced by the title of 16. NICHOLAS the second. Benedict thus deprived, dyes in banishment, and by diverse is not reckoned among the Popes. 2. Nicholas bestirres himselfe, to bring the election of the Popes to the Cardinalls, and to bring Beringarius to a recantation of his opinion against Transubstantiation. 3. In the mean while, Hildebrand extorts from the Pope, to be Arch-deacon of Rome, and then Brazutus comes with his Cup, and sets Nicholas also packing. A man would have thought that then Hildebrand should have sped, but 17. ALEXANDER the second, a Millanois happens to be chosen. Cadolus (Bishop of Parma) is set up against him, and twice coming to Rome with an Army, is twice repul∣sed. 2. The Emperour complaines, that Alexander was elected without his leave. Hildebrand stoutly maintaines that the Emperour hath no right in the election of Popes. A∣lexander inclining to yeeld the Emperour his due, is sound∣ly boxed by Hildebrand, then imprisoned, and at length poy∣soned. Now comes Hildebrand the Hetrurian under the name of 18. GREGORY the seaventh, without any election of
Emperour or Clergy, but only by his own intrusion. 2. He had poysoned some sixe or seaven Popes by Brazutus before he could get the Popedome himselfe. 2. In it he had a trick to shake out sparkes of fire, out of his sleeves, by ano∣ther such, he had brought it about, that the voyce of the peo∣ple was, Peter the Apostle hath made choyce of Hildebrand to be Pope. 3. He mainly set himselfe against the Emperour, and had plotted, that when he went to Prayers at S. Maries in Aventine hill, a villaine was set with a stone, to roll down from the roofe to brayne the Emperour, but it fell out to the fall and quashing of the Executioner. 4. He threw the Sa∣crament into the fire, because it answered not his demands (as the Heathen Gods did) concerning his successe against the Emperour, whom he Excommunicated, and sent a Crowne unto Rodelphus Duke of suevia, with this verse upon it, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho. That Crowne the Rock did give to Peter, Peter on Ralph bestowes in meeter. To cause him to Rebell against his Master, wherein he had the foyle, and dyed miserably, (as Herman Count of Lucel∣burg, that was next set up against the Emperour also did) by the hand of a Woman, tumbling downe a stone upon him, as he was besiedging a certain Castle in Germany. 5. At last he got the Emperour to such an advantage, that he was faine to come to his Castle at Canusium, Plat: with his Empresse, and Sonne, barefooted in the cold of Winter, and there to wait three daies fasting, untill he might have audience, which at length was obtained, by the mediation of Madame Matilda (the Popes minion) or (as they called her) S. Pe∣ters daughter, that left her Husband, to live with this holy Father, the Abbot of Cluny, Earle of Savoy and others. 6. When he pronounced the sentence of Excommunication against the Emperour, Ben. the new seate whereon he sate, unex∣pectedly rent in peeces. He condemned Berengarius opini∣on against the Corporall presence, together with Preists Mar∣riages, Sainted Liberius the Arian, exercised what cruelty
pleased, especially against a Widdowes Sonne, whose Foot he cutt off. 7. But at last vengeance over tooke him; for in a Sy∣node at Brixia he was Deposed, and dyed miserably in exile. The Papists notwithstanding commend this man. One Cle∣ment was set up against him, in his life time, But 19. VICTOR the third an Italian succeeds him, thrust in by Matilda; and therefore defended all Gregories doings. 2. T is was not long, for his Sub-Deacon poysoned him in the Chalice, Christ's Blood in that case, Platina. being no preservae∣tive. A Monke of Cluney, 20. VRBANE the second, an Hetrurian takes the place, a true Diciple of Hildebrands, and Crony of Matildahs. 2. He opposes the Emperour, and Excommunicates him, and Cloment the third whom he had chosen Pope. So that instead of Ʋrbanus, he was called Turbanus, because he set all Chri∣stendome in a Combustion, quarrelling which Popes side to take. 3. But Ʋrbane out stript Clement, by holding diverse Synods, and upon the information of Peter the Hermite, sending 300000, signed with the Crosse to recover the Ho¦ly-land, under the Conduct of Godfrey of Bulloigne. 4. Not∣withstanding Iohn a Romane Citizen, at last made him hide his head, in the house of Peter Leo, where he yeelded up his trou Iesome spirit, though St Benedict formerly as it was voy∣ced, had cured him of the Stone by Miracle. 21.  PASCHALIS the second another of Hildebrands brood seconds him. This man would not (forsooth in modesty) take the place before the hyred shout of the multitude, Petrus Raynerum virum optimum elegit, Peter hath chosen Rayner∣us an excellent man, had heartned him to it. 2. Then he shewes himselfe in excommunicating the Emperour Henry the fourth, and setting his only sonne Henry the fifth, against him, to persecute him to the death. And being dead caused him to lye unburied five yeares together. 3. Neither agrecd he better with Henry the fifth. He denyed the right of In∣vestiture of Bishops, and other Imperiall priviledgor, where∣upon he was laid in hold by the Emperour; frees himselfe by a solemne Oath, not to withstand any more the Imperiall
right, but as soone as the Emperour had turned his back, and left Italy, his holynesse could dispence for Perjury, and Excom∣municate the sonne, as devoutly as he had done the Father. 4. He gave entertainment to Anselme, our Rebellious Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and upheld him against his Soveraigne, Henry the first, but that understanding King, kept them well enough at his staves end. 5. Preists Marriages were rein∣terdicted, by this Scholer of Hildebrand. He made a great company of Carnall Cardinals, had Albert, and Theodorick (with others, noted by Ciacon) set up Anti-Popes against him, But 22.  GELASIUS the second a Campanian had the luck to carry the place, but not without great opposition of Cincius Fregepanius who set upon the Conclave, bang'd the Cardi∣nalls, unhors'd the new Pope, untill the people rescued him, and made Fregepane submitt. 2. Then the Emperour Hen∣ry came upon him, and set up one Maurice Burdine by the name of Gregory the eight against him, so that he was con∣strayned to fly into France, where he shortly dyed of a Plure∣sie, haveing first Excommunicated the Emperour freed the Templers from the subjection to the Patriarch of Ierusalem. Burdine the Emperours man could not hold the place. But, 23.  CALIXTUS the second a Burgundian gott it, 2. He continues the Excommunication against the Emperour in a Councell of Germany, makes the Emperour yeeld unto him, and so absolves him, but abuses his Pope Gregory, whom he had made; by setting of him upon a Camell with his face towards the tayle, and then thrusting him shauen into a Mo∣nasty. 3. He appointed the foure Fasts, decreed it Adul∣tery for a Bishop to forsake his Sea, was much against Preists Marryages, whereupon our Simon of Durham made the verses. O bone calixte nunc omnis clerus odit te, Quondam Presbyteri potrant uxoribus uti, Hoc destruxisti postquam tu Papa fuisti; Ergo tuum merito, nomen habent odio.
The Clergy the now good Calixtus hate, The heretofore each one might have his Mate, But since thou gotten hast the Papall throne, They must keep Puncks, or learn to Lig alone. 24. HONORUS the second an Italian comes next, but with great opposition of two others, that were set up against him. 2. From this man, John Cremensis was sent hither in∣to England, to dash Preists Marriages. But in his greatest heat of urging his Commission, he was found a Bed with a Whore. 3. Platina tels us, that one Arnulphus, (Bale adds, an Englishman) was Martyred in Rome, for Preaching against the Clergies pompe and luxury. His Countryman, 25. INNOCENT the second enters upon the place, he was opposed by an Antipope ealled Anacletus backt by Roger King of Sicily, who forced this Pope to fly into Germany, and France to be righted. 2. The Emperour Lotharius with an Army, setled him in his seat. 3. But Roger King of Sicily hath another bout with him, Imprisoneth him, and his Cardinalls, till he had gotten of him, to be pronounced King of both Scicilies, which was done; and then Scicily, was reckoned St Peters Patrimony. So easie it was then for Popes to bestow Kingdoms, in which neither by Divine, nor humane Law, could they clayme any interest. His successor a Tuscan. 26.  CaeLESTINUS the second put in by Conradus the Emperour, sate so short a time, that nothing is noted of him, not much longer remained. 17. LUCIUS the second a Bononian, for when he went about to abrogate the Office of Patricians, and with Souldi∣ers, beset the Capitoll, he was so pelted with stones, by the Citizens, that he soone resigned his life, and place to. 28. EUGENIUS the third, a Pisan, St Barnards Scholer, to whom he wrote his Books of Confideration. 2. But Eu∣genius more considered the enlarging of his place, and power, and therefore would not permitt the Romanes, to chuse their owne Senatours, nor their Patricians to beare any sway. 3. This grew to such a quarrell that the Pope, was faine to leave Rome, and fly into France, whence after some time
and matters accommodated, he returned and dyed at Tyber. 29.  ANASTASIUS the fourth took his place, a Romane, but did nothing in it worth the noting, only he gave a great Chalice to the Church of Laterane; whilst William our Arch-bishop of Yorke, was poysoned in the Chalice. 30.  ADRIAN the fourth an Englishman succeeds, before called Nicholas Brack-speare. 2. This man would not suf∣fer the Consuls in Rome to have any power, and condemned Arnold of Brixia for an Heretique in holding with them. 3. He quarrelled with Frederick the Emperour, for not hold∣ing Hostler like his stirrop, and afterwards Excommunicates him, for clayming his rights, and writing his name before the Popes, for which the Emperour defends himselfe by a Letter. 4. Great stirres there were also between him, and William of Scicily concerning Apulia, wherein William had the bet∣ter, and at length gott to be stiled King of both Sciciles. 5. When with his Cardinals, he had conspired to ruine the Emperour, and had sent a Counterfeit to stabb him, and an A∣rabian to poyson him, he was choackt with a fly, that gott into his Throat, which verified, that he was wont to repeat often. There is no kind of life upon earth more wretched, then to be a Pope. Yet this lessened not. 31.  ALEXANDER the third an Hetrurian, but that he opposed his Soveraigne in a more treacherous manner. 2. He was chosen indeed in a strong Faction of Victor, Paschalis, Calixtim, Innocentius, all clayming the place. 3. The Emperour comes to Papia for to appease the stirrs, sends for Alexander, who insteed of obeying, Excommunicates the Emperour, and his Oposites, and by the French Kings favour, and his owne Purse, settles himselfe in Rome. 4. The Emperour comes with an Army to correct his insolency, but Hartman Bishop of Brixia, by effectuall perswasions, turnes him from the Pope, against the Saracens. 5. There being Victorious, and return∣ing, he was surprised by the Popes Treason, who had sent his exact Counterfeit to the Souldan, that he might not misse in laying wait for the man. 6. Being apprehended therefore with his Chaplaine, as they went to Bath themselves in a
River of Armenia, & brought before the Souldan; the Pict∣ure discovered him. The Souldan uses him nobly, appoints his Ransom, then guards him home as farre as Brixia. 7. The Princes of the Empire unite, to revenge the prodigious Trea∣son, the Pope betakes himselfe to Ʋenice, where Duke Seba∣stian protects him. Otho the Emperours Sonne, is sent with an Army to hemme him in; and not to fight untill his Fathers comming. This charge he neglecting, is overthrowne, and taken Prisoner. 8. The good Father, to preserve his Soune, is forced to submit, in St Marks Church in Ʋenice. He pro∣strates himselfe before the Pope, who setting his foot on his Neck, with that of the Psalmist in his mouth: Super Aspidem & Basiliscum, Thou shalt walk upon the Serpent, and Adder, and the Emperour replying, non tibi, sed Petro; the Beast goes on, & mihi, & Petro to me, as well as to Poter. 9. This end, after much trouble, had that remar kable businesse. The Pope gratified the Venetians, (as he had reason) made his condi∣tions with the Emperour at his pleasure, and so returnes to Rome. 10. Henry the second our King, was much vexed by this Pope, for the death of Thomas Becket of Canterbury, whom the Pope made St Thomas, for withstanding his King & Soveraigne. And upon the Kings submission to the lash, granted to Him, and his Heyres, the Title of the Kings of England. Hinc autem observatum est (saith Flatina) ut om∣nes Anglici à Romano Pontifice. Regni jura recognoscant. Hence it is observed, that all Kings of England, must acknow∣ledge the Pope for their Land-Lord. In this proud Popes time, the poore Waldenses stood up for the truth, and increa∣sed amongst all persecutions. To this Pope, Nicholas Mania∣cutius wrote mad verses, extant in Onuphrius, where he con∣cludes: Scimus Alexandrum per soecula commemorandum. As long's there is a Goose or Gander, We must remember Alexander. He kept the place 21 yeares, and more. 32. LUCIUS the third his Countryman sooner quirted it.
1. At his Election by the Cardinals, the Romanes were so much exasperated, that they abused all his Partizans, setting them upon Asses, with their faces backwards, and disgrace∣ing them, with the like Contumelies, for offering to abolish their Consuls. 2. The Pope gets to Verona, and condemnes their doings, exhorts the Christians to resist Sultan Saladine in the East, but to no purpose, somewhat he did for Luca, where he was borne, gives over to 33. VRBANE the third a Millenois. He animates the Christians against Victorious Saladine, and would have Ex∣communicated the Emperour, Crantzius. because he honoured not his Holinesse, in all his projects (whence some termed him Tur∣banus) but he was prevented by death. As also was 34.  GREGORY the eight an Apulian his Successour, who was very earnest the same way, to set the Christians upon the Saracens, that the Popes might rule all in their absence. 2. Endeavouring to agree the Pisans, and Genuans, he was poysoned (as tis thought) amongst them. 35.  CLEMENT the third a Romane that Succeeded him, prevailed more in setting forth the expedition against the Saracens. 2. For upon his instigation, Frederick the Empe∣rour, Philip of France, and our Richard Cordelion (with o∣ther Worthies) undertook the businesse, but performed little. 3. Vpon the death of William of Scicily, this Pope puts in to make that Country Tributary to Rome, but the Scicilians found an Heyre, Tancred Williams base Sonne to hold it. 4. He Excommunicated the Danes, for maintaining the Marriage of their Clergy; but composed the dissention about superiority, between the Citizens of Rome, and the Clergy, by granting the Senators, and Patricians their right. Which controversie had continued, from Innocent the second, to this Clement the third, fifty yeares together. 36.  CELESTINE the third a Romane that succeeds, be∣ing an old man, yet is for this holy Warre as his Predecessors had bin, for having a sting at Tancred of Sicily he gets Con∣stance King Rogers lawfull Daughter, out of a Nunnery, and Marries her to the Emperour, Henry the sixth, with con∣dition,
that he should out Tancred, and admitt the Pope a sharer, in the conquered Kingdome. 2. When Henry came with his Empresse Constance, to be Crowned by him in Rome, he did it not with his hands, but feet; setting it on and spur∣ning it off againe, with this saying, per me Reges regnant, I have power to make and unmake Emperours. 3. He sets all Princes almost together by the Eares, that Rome might gain, by making them friends. Whereupon Vspergensis cries out, rejoyce ô Mother Rome, because all rivers of Treasures flow into thy Ocean &c. Hellish was this Celestine, but 37. INNOCENT the third a Campanian that follows, more contraried his name. 2. He held the great Councell of Late∣rane, under pretence of recovering Jerusalem, but it was for deposing the Emperour; for witholding (as it was pretend∣ed) some Church-rights. At which time, Anricular Con∣fession was established, and the Cup taken from the Layty in the Communion. 3. It was this Popet resolution against Phi∣lip the Emperour, (only because he was chosen without his liking) Either I will Vn-crowne him, or he shall Vn-throne me. Whereupon he raysed, the Otho's against him, who at length slew him. And yet this Champian could not so please the Pope, but upon clayme of the Imperiall rights, he must needs be Excommunicated. 4. He bore a heavy hand over our King Iohn, deposed him, interdicts the Kingdome for six years together; upon his restoring by his Legate Pandulph, tynes it at the yearely rent of 1000 Marks, to be held of the Pope in Fee-farme. 5. He was terrible against Preists Marriages, whereupon we have these Verses by an Oxford man. Prisciani regula penitus cassatur, Sacerdos per Hic & Haec olim declinatur, Nune per Hic solum articulatur, Cùm per nostrum Praesulem Haec amoveatur. Old Priscians rule hence forth must hold no more, 'Twas Hic & Haec Sacerdos heretofore. But now poore Hic must lye alone perforce, For his deare Haec our Prelate doth diverce.
And an 100 were burnt in one day in Alsatia, for holding the free use of meates, and Matrimony. Almericus Bones were burnt after his death, because living, he had spoken a∣gainst Images in Churches. This man must have all differen∣ces between Princes, devolved to his Decision. After him 38.  HONORIUS the third a Romane, continues to be a Stickler for the holy Land. 2. He Crownes Frederick (the Nunne, Constanc's Sonne) against Otho the 4th, and not∣withstanding for clayming his rights, afterwards Excommu∣nicates him. 3. Confirmes the Orders of Dominick, and Francis, and sets them against the Waldenses; grounded upon certaine Dreames, which Innocent his Predecessor had, fore∣boading these mens service in that behalfe. 4. He caused 400 Scotts to be hanged, and their Children Gelded, for burn∣ing their Bishop (who had Excommunicated them) in his owne Kitching, and exacted by Otho his Legate, of every Cathedral amongst us Two Prebends, to help to pay scores of Mother Laterane, which gave occasion to this Rime. O Pater Honori, multorum nate dolori Est tibi decors, vivere? vade mori. O Father Honori, borne for a sad story, To live is it glory? Death is to good for ye. So he died and left a worse in his place. 39.  GREGORY the ninth a Campanian. This man thrice Excommunicated Frederick the Emperour, whom he had sent to recover the Holy Land, that he (at the more case) might get Apulia, and Lombardy from him in his ab∣sence. 2. With much adoe, and at a deare rate, the Empe∣rour gets his absolution, but his Holinesse raiseth new stirres against him, that so exasperate him, that Satynicall verses (as it were of defyance) past between them. Many of the Clergy suffered in the broyles; amongst which the Popes brother was hanged for his Treasons. 3. Dominick, Fran∣cis, and Anthony of Padua are Canonized, a deadly feud fell, between the Papaline Guelphes, and Imperiall Gibelines, which in a manner, to this day continues. 4. To affront the
opinion that the Pope was Antichrist, (strongly urged by the Waldenses, and the Emperours Preachers, out of the Re∣velation of S. Iohn) Cyrill a Grecian, the third president of the White Fryars, or Carmelites, obtrudes certain tables of silver, written (as he said) by Gods own finger, and delive∣red him to publish. which shew an other gats progresse of the Church then the Apocalips foretell; and are illustrated, by the Comments of Abbat Ioachim, Gulielmus Cisterciencis and Iohn de Rupe-Scissâ. 5. Raymund of Pinnasort, a Spani∣ard of Bercinona, composeth the booke of Decretalls, Plat. Ciacon. whi this Pope alloweth. In these courses especially against the Emperour, old 40. CELESTINE the fourth a Lumbard, would have persisted, but that almost at his first entrance, he tooke a poti∣on, that marred his stomack, and sent him to his predecessors? One Robert Sommerton, or Sommerlet an English man, be∣cause he was upon election to be Pope, by the like means was set going the same way. 21. weeks the place lies voyd, till the Emperour (at the request of Baldwine the Easterne Emperour, and Raymund of Tholose) freed the Cardinalls he had in Prison, to goe to an Election. Revel. 13. This pack of Sorce∣rers by some is tearmed the Kingdome of the Dragon. 2. IN the compasse of this Period are found, 1. Besides a knot of Conjurers, and Poysoners. 2. A Crew of Di∣velish Rebells, abusing Religion to varnish their damnable de∣signes. 3. A rable of Orders of Munks, that disorder all things. 4. Wrangling Sophistry set on foot, by Lanfranch, Lom∣bard, Albertus Magnus, with otheir Sects and Factions. 5. Canonists, glosing and descanting upon their Master Gra∣tian the Collector of the Decrees. 6. Comestor with lying Legendaries. 7 Hildegardis, Katherine of Seene, and some other such Shee-Prophetesses; notwithstanding, Anselme, and Bernard, and the Hugoes de Sancto Victore, and de Sancte-Claro, are of better account. The vexations of the poore Waldenses, and barbarous usage of Learned Beringarius, were wonderfull, and of long Continuance, as their Histo∣ries set out at large doe manifest.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Necromancy may be a tollerable way to Ecclesiasticall preferment? 2. Pope Sylvesters Brazen head, were the same with our Roger Bacons, or of any o∣ther temper? 3. Iohn Gratian the Conjurer, had the Pope∣dome at an easy rate, for 1500l of Bene∣dict the 9th? 4. The Sub-Deacon that poysoned Pope Ʋi∣ctor the third in the Chalice, and Hilde∣brand that threw the consecrated host in to the fire, believed Transubstantiation? 5. Hildebrand aliàs Gregory the 7. poysoned sixe or seaven Popes, before he could get the place for himselfe? 6. Saladine with the Saracens, did lesse hurt to Christianity in the East, then the Popes with their Complices in the West? 7. The Waldenses in the maine, held the same opinions with the Protestants of latter times?
SECT. IX. The sixth Ranke of Devouring Abaddons. FRom Aegyptian Magitians, we fall upon Devouring Abaddons, who strengthned their side by multitudes of Monkish Ianizaries; that wasted (for about 250. years following) all that lay before them, the leader of these was 1. INNOCENT the fourth of Genua, he denounced the fourth Excommunication against the Emperour Frederick, who had been his greatest friend, held a Councell at Lions, and deposed him, set Henry of Thuring in his place, and af∣ter him William of Holland, and a great company of Crusia∣dos (that the Pope had marked for his own beasts) but the Emperour crossed their Crownes as he met with them, and Nobly defended himselfe, untill he was poysoned at length by the Popes meanes, and finally smothered by his bastard Manfred. 2. This Pope was the only Patron of the foure orders of begging Locusts, Dominicans, Franciscans, Car∣melites, and Augustines, who hatched under him those ad∣dle eggs of Summaries, Sophismes, Repertories, Reductories, Quodlibets, Exorcismes, Breviaries, Ritualls and the like, 3. He offered to sell the Kingdome of Sicily to Henry the third at a reasonable rate, being none of his own, and quar∣relled with our Robert Grostead Bishop of Lincolne who withstood him stoutly, and contemned his Excommunication. 4. And after his death (is said) to have minded the Pope by a thumpe on his side, with his Crosyers staffe, and this Item, Ʋeni miser in judicium Dei, come wretch to Gods judgement, and so eased the world of this Tyrant: He left behind him Apparatum ad decretales, an Apology against Pe∣ter de Ʋineis, with other tracts mentioned by Ciacon, and his successor a Campanian,
2. ALEXANDER the fourth. This man is all for Apu∣lia, Excommunicated Munfred, diverted the money gathe∣red to recover the Holy Land, to work his own ends at home, pilled England so farre, that Fulke Bishop of London, exclaimed against him, one Leonard told his Legate that Churches were under the Popes tuition not fruition, to de∣fend, not to expend; and a Clearke he sent to be Prebend of Paules, against the Kings Chaplaine, was slaine in a tumult. 2. He made for money, Richard Earle of Cornwall (Henry the thirds brother) King of Germany, whereupon a rime was made, Nummus ait pro me, nubet Cornubia Romae, My purse tells me a quick dispatch, 'Twixt Rome and Cornwall for a match. Condemnes the bookes of William de Sancto Amore, leaves, 3.  VRBANE the fourth his successor, being formerly a Patriarch of Ierusalem. He continued his sting against Man∣fred of Sicily, and wrought Charles the King of France (his Brother) to be his death. 2. Withstood the Romanes as much as he could, who had set up a new Magistrate amongst them, called Bandenses, having power of life and death. 3. Vpon solicitation by Eva an Anchoresse, but (as Onuphri∣us will have it) by a drop of bloud, distilling from the host in a Priests hand, he instituted the feast of Corpus Christi day. 4. Albertus Magnus, and Aquinas are referred to this mans time. 4.  CLEMENT the fourth, a French man is next; who had before a Wife and three children. 2. He brings in the French to get Naples, sent Octobonus into England, to take the value of all Church Revenues. But (he summoned by Death to a reckoning) in a great Hubbub of the Cardinalls, 5.  GREGORY the tenth, a Lombard was thrust into his place: whereupon came the verses, Papatus munus tulit Archi diaconus unus, Quem Patrem Patrum, fecit discordia fratrum.
An Arch-deacon, the Papall Incomes gathers, Whom Brethrens discord, Father made of Fathers. 2. He held a Councell at Lions, at which was present My∣chael Paleologus the Greeke Emperour, and acknowledged the Laterane tenent, of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, from the Father, and the Sonne, which twelve times before, they had withstood. 3. Bonaveuture was by him made Car∣dinall, and Peter de Turantesia Cardinall of Hostia, Radul∣phus of Auspurge Crowned Emperour, but would not goe to Rome to have it. Quia vestigia (as he said) ipsum terre∣bant, because the Foxe saw no safe returne. Peter de Tarau∣tasia succeeds him by the title of 6. INNOCENT the fifth, a Burgundian, the first Pope of the begging Fryars, being the same Peter Tartaret that wrote upon the Sentences and other workes. 2. He endea∣voured to set Peace amongst all, but dyed before he could effect any thing. 7. HADRIAN the fifth a Genoway followes, named be∣fore Octobonus, the same that kept so great a stirre here in England, in the Raigne of Henry the third. 2. Platina. Vide Pitgah Evang. p. 182 He dyes be∣fore he was consecrated, some say by the fall of a new house. But others say this was the end of 8. IOHN the 21. a Portugall Physition. Platina passes him for a vaine man, and thereupon inferres Nescio quo pa∣cto compertum est, ut viri quidam admodum literati, ad res agendas parum idonei videantur. We see for action Learning availes not when, The greatest Clearkes proves not the wisest men. 2. He was a Writer notwithstanding, and favourer of Schollers, which was the least care of 9. NICHOLAS the third a Romane. He inclosed a Warren of Hares for his holinesse recreation. 2. Was raven∣nous for his kindred, raised the quarrell between Peter of Aragon, and Charles of France, for Sycily, whence grew the Massacre of the French, called Sycilian vespers, wherein all sorts of French upon the Toll of a Bell, were cruelly But∣chered.
10.  MARTINE the fourth, a French-man that succeeded, thereupon Excommunicated Peter of Aragon, but he con∣temned it, and strengthned himselfe by Paleologus. 2. He kept the Concubine of his predecessor Nicholas, and remo∣ved all Pictures of Bears from his pallace, least the behol∣ding of them should cause his sweet heart to bring forth a Beare. His Excommunication of Peter of Aragon, is conti∣nued by 11.  HONORIUS the fourth a Romane, who did little else, but confirme the Augustine Friars, and cause the white Carmelites, to be called our Ladies Brethren, so much was not performed by 12.  NICHOLAS the fourth, a Franciscan Italian, who dyed (some say) of griefe, to see both Church and State in such remedilesse Combustions. After two years scolding of the Cardinalls, 13.  CELESTINE the fifth an Italian (formerly an An∣chorite) was chosen, He resolving to be strict in reforming the Church, was guild by one that fained himselfe to be an Angell, and spake through a Trunke in a wall, Celestine, Ce∣lestine, give over thy Chayre, for it is above thy ability. 2. The French King perswaded him to hold it, but he decreed, that a Pope might quit his place, as he did, to turne Hermite a∣gaine. But that preserved not his life from the jealousy of 14.  BONIFACE the eight, a Campanian that thus chea∣ted him: for he caused him to be imprisoned, and made a∣way. 2. Of this Boniface it is said that he entred like a Foxe, raigned like a Lyon, and dyed like a Dogge. 3. He threw ashes into the Arch-bishop Porchets eyes on Ash-wednes∣day, because he was a Gibelline; brought in the Iewish Jube∣ly, carryed two swords before him, and shewed himselfe as well in Imperiall Robes as in Papall habilliments, to ex∣presse that he had power of both swords, in that Church, out of which there is no salvation. 4. For his Excommunicating Phillip the Fayre of France, and his cruelty against others, he drew upon himselfe an infamous death, by the hands of those, he had formerly banished. 5. John Cassiodores Epistle
in Bale, shewes how lamentably England suffered by him. A much better Pope was little 15. BENEDICT a Lombard, a Sheapheards sonne, who would not acknowledge his poore mother when she came to him Lady like, but caused her to put on her Shepheardesse ap∣parell. He absolved the King of France, Excommunicated the murtherers of his predecessor Boniface, desired to com∣pose all brawles, but was poysoned at length in a figge. 16. CLEMENT the fifth a French man that succeeds, transferred the Court to Avignion, where it continued 70. years, governing Rome the while, by deputy Cardinalls. 2. At the pompe of his Coronation much hurt was done, by the fall of a Wall, and the Pope lost a Carbuncle out of his Mytre, valued at 6000. Florens. 3. He rooted out the Tem∣plers, favoured the Knights of Rhodes, Excommunicated the Florentines, Lucians, and Ʋenetians, whose Ambassador Francis Dandalus, sent to pacify him, he chayned under his table to feed with the doggs. 4. From the Councell held by him in Ʋienna, we have the Clementines of the Canon Law. Henry of Lutzenburg the Emperour, a little after was poysoned in the host by one Bernard a Monke, whom pre∣sently he forgave, and wished him to shift away to save his life. The Pope dyes of the fluxe, after two years. His Countryman 17. IOHN the 22. succeeds him. He Sainted Thomas of Aquine, and Thomas of Hereford, flead a Bishop and after∣wards burned him, because he had offended him. 2. Chal∣lenged a Supremacy over the Greeke Church, but they wished the Divell to be with him, as God was with them: would by no means Crowne the Emperour Lewis of Bava∣ria, who contemned it, and was otherwise Crowned King of the Romanes: Whereupon he deprives him but not with∣out stout opposition. Occam Marsilius, and Iandunus taking the Emperours part. 3. He held the soules to dye with the body, but was condemned for it, by the Parisians, the Coun∣cell of Constance, Durandus, Thomas Wallis an English man and others. He lived longest of any Pope, and dyed richest.
18.  BENEDICT the 12. also a French man succeeds him, opposes at first Lewis the Emperour, but afterward falling out with the French King, takes the Emperours part, who notably had defended his Royalty, in an assembly of the Peeres of Germany. 2. He reformed some Orders, or rather disorders of the Monkes, bought Francis Petraches beau∣tifull sister, with a great summe of Money, of her brother Gerard, to make some use of her. Had these Rimes made on: him when he was gone, Hic situs est Nero, laicis mors, vipera olero, Devius à vero, cuppa repleta mero. Laicks bane, Clerks viper, here lyes Nero's trunke, Fardle of Lyes, a Butt of Wine stark drunke. 19.  CLEMENT the sixth his Country man proves more violent then his predecessor. 2. To diminish the Emperours authority, he creates Vicount Ʋicars to rule the Empire, which caused the Emperour to institute such other Ʋicars to governe the Church. 3. This and other things so netled his Clemency, that upon no Termes he would be reconciled with the Emperour, except he put himselfe and all his into his Holinesse disposition. 4. For quietnesse sake, and to pre∣vent the shedding of Christian blood, the Emperour doth it; The Princes of the Empire, exclaime against the Popes ty∣rannicall conditions. The Arch-bishop of Mentz is deposed, for but speaking on the Emperours behalfe. The other Ele∣ctors bribed: set up his sonne Charles, to be King of the Romanes, he to settle himselfe, morgaged speciall portions of the Emperiall Revenues, never againe recovered, where∣by the weakned Empire, was exposed to the Turkes inva∣sion. 6. In England also this Pope made so bold, as to bestow Bishopricks and Benefices at his pleasure. But our Edward the third, would admit of no such intrusion. 7. Tis thought by his meanes, the hated Emperour was poysoned, and his Holinesse breathed his last, Bale. by an Impostume, after he had tyrannized so long, and cozoned the World by his yeare of Inbilee and blasphemous Indulgences. His Countryman
20.  INNOCENT the sixth a Lawyer, by pinching and de∣minishing his House-keeping, cast about to keep up money. 2. It was well that he commanded Priests to be resident, and to give good Example unto their Charge by their tem∣perare lives. 3. Richard Arch bishop of Armaught, urged before this Pope Nine Articles against the begging Fryars, that were never answered. 4. And John de Rupe Scissa, foretold such shrewd things of Anti-christ, that proved af∣terward too true. For which he was burnt at Avignion. 5. Whilst the Lance, and Nayles that tormented our Savi∣our, were graced withan Holiday and this Elogy. Ave ferrum triumphale, Intrans pectus tu vitale, Coeli pandis ostia, Haile Iron triumphall, Piercing a breast vitall, That opens Heavens gate, Faecundata in cruore, Faelix hasta, nos amore, Per te fixos saucia. Bles'd spear steeped in blood With love make al us wood The Heretiques to hate. An Englishmans Sonne (though borne in France.) 21 VRBAN the fifth comes next, a great stickler, to up∣hold Popish priveledges, and set forth the State, and Autho∣rity of the Papacy. 2. John Huncash an Englishman was his Champian, for Warrs. Briget of Sweveland, was entertained, Platina. and had the order of St Briget conformed by him. 3. About the same time; Vide Crisp. Sabellinus vo∣later. Baleum. an order of the Iesuits with the Scopetines ap∣peared, which differs from our moderne Pragmatists, as Ly∣dius notes. 4. Determining to returne againe into Italy, he was poysoned (as it is thought) at Marsils, GREGORY the cleaventh that succeeded, was Nephew to Pope Clement the sixth, made Cardinall by him, before he was 17 yeares old, and then sent to Schoole to Baldus the greet Lawyer of Peruse. 2. By the perswasion of whom, and St Katherine, St Dominicks Sister, of Sceane, most of the Cities of Italy revolted from him. 3. Vpon which occasi∣on, as also by the admonition of Briget, returned from Jeru∣salem, and the reproofe of a bold Bishop, (who told him he could not blame him for Non-residency, that had left Rome
to reside in Avignion.) He left Avignion, and with 12 Gal∣lyes returned againe to Rome, Anno 1376, after the Court had bin at Avignion 70 yeares together. 4. Vpon his re∣turne, he Excommunicated the Florentines, and regayned by the sword, what before was lost, repayred Romes Dilapidati∣ons, by the absence of former Incumbents. 5. A sect of Bed∣lam. Dancers, of men and women Enthusiasts to se in those dayes, which the world thought not well Christned, by these bawdy Priests. 6. At this Popes death the Pallace of Avig∣nion was fired by chance, that unclean Birds might no more roust in that Cage. for 23.  VRBANE the sixth a poore Neopolitane that succee∣ded expressed himselfe against returning into France. Whereupon a company of French Cardinals, chose Clement the seaventh against him, beginning a Schisme that lasted al∣most 40 yeares. 2. At this mans first Election, he was much graced by Iane Queene of Naples, and Otto of Brunswick her Husband, but the rude beast soon forgot it, and afterward was the cause of both their deaths, to make good that saying, Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum, Corde stat inflato, pauper honore dato. None looks to be accounted, More then a Begger mounted, He struts with heart full blowne. when honor's on him throwne. 3. He was much in the beginning for Charles King of Na∣ples, with an eye to the Princifying of his Roguish Nephew Francis Batillus; But this friendship was soone turned to spight. And Batillus after his Vncles death, was stript of all that he had heaped together, according to the saying, Cum moritur praesul cognatio tota fit exul. When once the Prelate failes, His Kin may pare their nayles. 4. The brutish Tyranny of this Pope, against some of his Car∣dinals, (whom he suspected to be underhand for Clement)
is described by Theodoricus à Niem, who was his Secretary, and present at their usage. Berthold Swarts a Chymick, then invented Gunpowder. 5. He held a Iubilee to gather money, made 54. Cardinalls, to back him against his opposite. 24. CLEMENT the seaventh, a French man of a Noble house, with whom sided the French and Spanish, as our Eng∣lish Dutch, Italians and others, did with Ʋrbane. 2. This quarrell grew so high, that Rome it selfe was miserably plundred by Clement, and his adherents. 3. One Popes Bulls roared against the others, Christendome was divided, Io∣hannes de Ligniaco writes in defence of Clement, and a Councell at Paris made good his title. The Abbat of St Ʋe∣dast apologizeth for Ʋrban. Platina omits Clement, as an Intruder, and after Ʋrbane puts 25. BONIFACE the ninth another Naples man, made Cardinall before by Ʋrban. 2. He was scarce thirty years old, when he was made Pope, so ignorant, that he could neither sing nor say, nor understand the supplications put up to him, or matters discussed before him. 3. Yet was he the notablest Huckster for selling Church livings, that ever came in that Sea. Any dolt might be then preferred for mo∣ny, and be sooner traded with, then a more deserving man. 3. His Mother and two Brethren in the Court, helpe to make his markets for him. He married his Sister to the Duke of Adria, who quickly slew her, and forfeited his own life for it. 4. In this mans time Chrysolaras brought from the East the Greeke Letters, which had been neglected in the West for 500. years, in propagation of which learning Guarinus, Victorinus; Philelphus, Leonard Aretine, with o∣thers, joyned with him. 26.  BENEDICT the 13. a Spaniard (called Peter de Luna) is not numbred by the Romanists, amongst their Popes, because he succeeded Clement the seaventh in the schisme. 2. At his Election he took an Oath, to give over the place, if the Cardinalls should think it meet; but being put to it, he easily dispensed with that Oath, complies with the King of France, to hold him in, whiles
27.  INNOCENT the seaventh an Italian, Elected in Bo∣niface the 9th place, Poped it in Italy, but falling out with the Cittizens of Rome, by reason that his Nephew Lewis hath treacherously butchered some of them, he was faine to fly from Rome, to Ʋiterbium, with great difficulty. 2. But matters composed he returned at last againe, made diverse Cardinalls, demanded the moyty of Ecclesiasticall Revenues, but was stoutly denyed, both in France and England. In this mans place, was chosen by the Cardinalls, 28.  GREGORY the 12th a Venetian, but on this condi∣tion, that for the Peace of the Church, he should be bound to resigne. 2. Many delusions past betwixt Peter Moon, and him, which the Cardinalls perceiving, called a Councell at Pisa, and outed them both, and put into the place, 29.  ALEXANDER the fifth, a Cretane. 2. He deposed Ladislaus King of Naples, and Apulia: by a Bull confirmed St Francis five wounds, to be accounted an Article of Faith. The Cardinall of St Eustace that poysoned him, took his place, rather then was chosen, by the name of 30.  IOHN the 23. a Neopolitane, At a Councell summoned by him at Rome, to Crowne the Emperour Sigismund. A great Owle twice so affronted him, that he could not goe onward, but Madge howlet lost her life for her undacity. 2. By his consent, a Councell was then assembled at Con∣stance 1414. in which this Pope for diverse intollerable villanies was deposed, as was Peter de Luna, and Gregory the 12. who upheld the schisme stubbornly till that time. Whereupon these verses begin his Epitaph. Baltasar imprimis vocitabar, & inde Johannes. Deposicus, rursus Baltasar ipse vocor. First Baltasar, and then Pope Iohn I was, But now depos'd, for Baltasar must passe. 31.  MARTIN the fifth a Romane, was by the Councell put into his place, which decreed a Councell to be above the Pope, and condemned Iohn Wickliffe and burned John Husse, and Hierome of Prague his followers. 2. He knew
very well to Complement, which gain'd him more respect then the harshnesse of others. Hired our Thomas Waldensis to write against Wickliffe and left to succeed him 32. EUGENIUS the fourth a Venetian, who fell out with the Romanes upon his first entrance, and was faine to fly thence, to Pisa disguised. 3. He was cited to appeare, to come at the Councell of Basill, but was terrified by the Cen∣sure of Iohn at Constance. To prevent that therefore, he re∣fuseth utterly to appeare. But summons the Councell of Flo∣rence, to divert it. 3. They of Basil depose him, and chuse in his place Amadeus Duke of Savoy, that had turned Here∣mite calling him 33. FoeLIX the fifth, a better disposed man, then many of his predecessors. Hee accounted the Poore his Hounds, with which he hunted for the glory of Heaven, which the Cardinall Aquilegia (of the same time) little thought upon, when he maintained hounds and horses instead of the poore, for the Peace of the Church. After tenne years, he un-Poped himselfe, and contented himselfe with a Cardinallship, left his place to 34. NICHOLAS the fifth of Genua. In the Iubilee this man celebrated, there were 136. slayne in the crowde in the streets of Rome. 2. Constantinople was then taken by the Turke, to the great losse and shame of all Cristendome. 3. He built the Ʋatican, he was a favourer of Learning. An old decrepit Spaniard, 35. CALIXTUS the third gets the place, and sends out (amongst diverse others) John Capistranus, and Robert Li∣cius, Minorites notable hypocrites, by their devices, and Mountebankismes, to incense the Christians against the Turkes. He should seem to be a man of no great reach, of whom a Cardinall said at his Election. Quam fatuè, fatui, fatuum, creavere Calixtum. Pantanus de Magnif. c. 12. How foolishly were those Electors mixt, That have been fool'd to chuse the foole Calixt. 36. PIUS the second an Hetrurian succeeds him, called
before Aencas Sylvius, he was a great man in the Councell of Basill, against Pope Eugenius, but after he came to be Pope, all was forgotten. 3. His saying was, that marriage was better for the Clergy then single life, and turned out diverse Cloystered Nuns, to take their Liberty 3. Great discord grew in Germany for his turning out of the Arch bishop of Collayne, his Workes are bound together in one volumne, which shew him to have been a farre better Scholler then his Successor, 37.  PAUL the second, a Venetian, for he was altogether for getting Iewells, to adorne his Diademe, could not endure the name of an Vniversity, made scarlet to be peculiar to his Cardinalls, repined (for his contemned daughters sake) that the Clergy might not Marry. If worse might be, 38.  SIXTUS the fourth a Ligurian, his successor was, who provided for his Concubine Tyresia shooes covered with pearle, builded stewes at Rome, which brought incomes to his Holinesse yearly 2000. duckets, granted to the Car∣dinall of St Lucia the use of unnaturall lusts, for three months in the yeare, Iune, Iuly, and August, cursed Lauren∣tius de Medicis, for justly executing his Nephew Raphaell; hath this passe (with diverse others as tart) put upon him, Non potuit savum vis ulla extinguere Sixtum, Audito tantum Nomine pacis obit. No humane force could raging Sixtus sway, Yet at the name of Peace he dropt away. This man was wont to call all Ʋniversity Schollers here∣tiques: plagued and racked poor Platina, who in him ends his History, Onuphrius continues it and goes on with 39.  INNOCENT the eight, a Genoway, a dull ignorant block, that would take a Cup too much in the middest of the greatest affaires. 2. He was all for his base Children, gave a great dowry to his daughter Theodorina: Mantuan lived in his time, and with this passe he is dispatched. Octo Nocens pueros genuit, totidem{que} puellas, Hunc merito poteris, dicere Roma patrem.
Eight Ladds and twice foure girles Nocens got, And might not Rome him Father terme? Why not? The height of Villany came after him Roderique Borgia, called 40. ALEXANDER the sixth a Spaniard, who plagued them that chose him, heaped all upon his Bastards, took mo∣ny of Bajazet the Turke, to make away his brother Gemes, that had committed himselfe to the Popes protection, car∣nally used his own Daughter Lucretia, the Wife to three Princes. upon whom these verses are extant. Hic jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sedre Thais, Alexandri, filia, sponsa, nurus. Ergone te semper rapiet Lucretia Sextus? Heu fatum dici nominis hic! Pater est. Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus & iste, Semper sub Sextis, perdita Roma fuit. Lucrece by name here lyes, but Thais in life, Pope Alexanders child, spouse, and Sonnes Wife. And must a Sextus Lucrece alwaies Ravish, Curst name! but here's his Father that's most Knavish. Tarquinius, Nero, this a Sextus too? Sextus was ever borne Rome to undoe. He gave himselfe to the Divell, who at length fetcht him, being poysoned with the same Cup, he had provided for his invited Cardinalls. 41. PIUS the third an Hetrurian, with much adoe, and great opposition of Valentine Borgia was chosen; whose purpose was to hunt the French men out of Italy, but dyed in the interim with an ulcer in his legge.
2. COntemporary of chiefest note are here. The Famous 1. Schoolemen, Albertus M. Halensis, Aquinas, and Scotus, the Patrons of the Dominicans, and Minorites. Occam and Durand, that make bold some times to dissent from them. 2. Notorious Lawyers, Accursius, Bartho∣lus, Baldus, Parnormitan. 2. Writers of Account, Lyra, Gerson, Mirandula, Regiomontanus, Agricola. 3. Made known by the Art of Printing, which (with the invention of Gunpowder) was found out in this Period. 4. In which also the Popes removing from Rome to Avignion: the Sici∣lian Vespers: the taking of Constantinople by the Turke are exceeding remarkable. Together with the deposing of Popes in the Councells of Pisa, Constance, and Basill, which they are loath to heare of. 5. In the mean while Wicklevists, Hussites, and their followers goe to wrack, untill God rai∣sed up the valiant John Ziska to yeeld them some com∣fort. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The Schoolemen with their Niceties, of the Canonists by their Extravagancies, more corrupted the Simplicity of the Go∣spell? 2. The malitious throwing of Ashes by Bo∣niface the eight into Arch-Bishop Por∣chets eyes, were a way to cure his blind∣nesse? 3. Rome could be counted the Mother Church, as long as the Popes kept their residence in Avignion? 4. The chayning of Francis Dandalus under the Popes table, with the doggs, were a
fit entertainment for an Embassadour of State? 5. It savoured of Divinity or Humanity, in Paul the second, and Sixtus the fourth, to pronounce all Ʋniversity men, to be He∣retiques? 6. The Inventions of Printing and Gunpow∣der, have done more harme then good? 7. Alexander the sixt, had a pattent from the Divell, to bestow the West Indies upon the King of Spaine?
SECT. X. The seaventh Ranke of Incurable Babilonians. AFter Devouring Abaddons, to fill up the mystery, and measure of Iniquity, succeeded for the space, to this time, almost of an 150 yeares Incurable Babi∣lonians, Curavimus Babylona & non est sanata, for the rest of the men that were not killed by those Plagues, repented not of their 1. Rev. 21.9. Murthers, 2. Sorceries. 3. Fornications. 4. Thefts, as it appeareth in the particulars of, 1.  IULIUS the second a Genoway, Sixtim the fourth his Nephew, (perchance his Sonne) he was more addicted to Warre, then Writing, or teaching his flock. 2. Whereupon he is said to have throwne Peters Keyes into Tyber, with words to this purpose. Hic gladius Pauli nunc nos defendat ab hoste, Quandoquidem clavis, nil juvat ista Petri. This sword of Pauls. must us defend from foes, Sith Peters keyes, serve not to beare off blowes. 3. He breaking his Oath, in not celebrating a Councell, (as he had sworne to do) moved some Cardinals to assemble at Pisa and Depose Him, but he easily avoyded that, by a Counter-Councell, at Laterane. 4. Lewis of France was Excommu∣nicated by him, but he reckoned little of it, and coyned Mo∣ney with his inscription, Perdam Babilonem. I will destroy Ba∣bylon. 5. He dispensed with our Henry the eight, to Mr∣ry his Brother Arthurs Wife. Abused two ingenuous Youths, sent by Queen Anne of France, to be bred in Italy, of which one wrote, Ʋenit in Italiam spectabilis indole rara, Germanus, redijt de puero mulier.
To Rome a German came of faire aspect, But he return'd a woman in effect. And the Pope himselfe is passed with this Tetrastick. Genua cui Patrem, genetricem Graecia, Partum Pontus & unda dedit, num bonus esse potest? Fallaces Ligures, mendax est Graecia, Ponto Nulla fides, in te haec, singula IVLE tenes. He that from Greece and Genua had his blood, And on the Waves his Birth, can he prove good. The Genoway, cheat, the Greeks, men lyars call, The Sea perfidious, Julius hath these all. He sainted one Mother Frances, a Romane Matron, for pre∣serving her chastity by melted Lard, &c. At Mantua was then Preached by Ptolomy Lucensis a Cistertian, that our Saviour was not conceaved in the Virgins Wombe, but in a place neere her heart, of three drops of blood; Of these times Maximilian the Emperour was wont to say, Deus aterne nisi vigilares, quam male esset mundo, quem regimus nos; ego, mi∣ser venator, & ebriosus ille, & Sceleratus Julius. O eternall God if thou should not watch over us, how ill would it goe with the world which we governe? I a miserable Hunter, and that Drunkerd, and wicked Julius. After this martiall Pastor, came joviall 2. LEO the tenth, the Duke of Florenc's Sonne, made Cardinall at thirteene yeares old; and Pope at 38. 2. He fa∣voured Scholers because they should claw him, as Erasmus and others did; not that he set more by Learning, then the profession of Christianity, which he told Cardinall Bembus, he esteemed to be but a profitable fable. 3. In the making 30 Cardinals, to strengthen his own designes; a tempest arose that shooke the Statua of Christ, out of his Mothers armes, and Peters Keyes out of his hands. (As in his predecessors dayes, Alexander the sixth, the like tempest had beat downe the Angel, from the topp of St Angelo, and the Owle that appeared to the Councell of Laterane, pretended no good.
4. At the Councell of Laterane, held by this Leo, (to voyd that of Pisa) he was termed by Sycophants, the Lyon of the tribe of Iudah, to whom all power was given, both in Heaven, and in Earth, whom all Kings must adore. Ps. 72. But as Mancimellus, Machiavell, Guiccardine, Mantuan, Sanavaro∣la, had partly discovered, the Popish Impostures before in A∣lexander the sixth, so Philippus Decius, Stapulensis, Budeus, Mirandula, Erasmus, make way for Luthers reformation in these times, which began on this occasion. 5. Leo's luxury wanted money, of his own store, to bestow on his Sister Mag∣dalon for a Dowry. This must be raised by Indulgences sent into Germany. The Fryers quarrell who should have the ho∣nour, and profit of the sale. The Dominicans carry it from the Augustines. Luther stomackes at it, and writes against the Huckster Tercelius. The Pope is interessed in the businesse, Luther stands out, is backt by Princes, and learned men, who were weary of the Popes tyranny. 6. The French urge the pragmaticall sanction, and the Councell of Constance for their liberty; who having an overthrow in Italy, so overjoy∣ed his Holinesse, that immediatly thereupon he dyed: of which Sannazarius, Sacra sub extrema si forte requiritis hora, Cur Leo non poterat sumere? vendiderat. Why Leo dyed unhousled then 'twas told him, He could not have such rites, for he had sold them. His successor was, 3.  HADRIAN the fixth, a Low-Country man, He makes a great shew in his first entrance, to urge a Reformation, for which purpose he instructs his Legate Cheregate, to the Princes of Germany. They are much animated by this over∣ture, and furnish the Legate, with an hundred grievances of their Nation, Centum Gra∣vamina. vid. Fascical. Re∣rum Expeten∣darum. which they desire might be redressed. 2. But greater matters diverted his Holinesse. Then Lutherans be∣gan to spread, the Turkes to approach. These and the like Corrosiues, (and perchance a dramme to help it onward) so broake him, that in the second year of his Papality, he left
this Inscription on his Tombe, Hadrianus Sextus hìc situs est, qui nihil sibi infaelicius in hac vita, quàm quod imperaret, dux∣it. Here lies Hadrian the fixt, who held it his greatest un∣happinesse that in this life he had been Pope. He wrote upon the fourth of the sentences, and a Large Epistle to the Duke of Saxony. A farre worse man came after him, 4. CLEMENT the seaventh a Florentine, and Nephew (or sonne) to Leo the tenth, he matcheth his Neice Cathe∣rine, with the House of France, whereby she came after∣wards to be the Famous Queene Mother. 2. For falling off from the Emperour to France, Rome came to be sacked by the Duke of Burbon, and the Pope himselfe (with his Car∣dinalls) to be taken Prisoners. 4. For crossing our King Henry the eight, and deluding him in the Divorce from his brothers wife Queene Katharine, he lost his Supremacy here in England, and for his lewd life otherwise, made his See infamous. Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse, revertar, Cum leuo, aut Meretrix, Scurra, Cinaedus ero. Vile Rome adiew, I did thee view, but hence no more will see, Till Pimpe, or Punke, or Iade or Spade, I doe resolve to be. 4. Palengenius that lived in his time, sets out the corruptions of these daies in his Capricorne; some say he died of the low∣sy disease, others by the poysonous smell of a Torch. This Pope might passe for a Clement, and mercifull man indeed, in regard of his successor a Romane, 5. PAUL the third, who prostituted his sister Julia Far∣nesia to Alexander the sixth, that he might be made Cardi∣nall, committed incest with his own daughter Constantia, and poysoned her husband Bosius Sforfia, to enjoy her the more freely: so (in a jealous humor) he used his own sister, upon suspition she played false with him, but for pressing on his Neice Laura Farnesia in the like matter; Nicholas Quer∣cen her husband (taking him in the Act) gave him a marke
that he carried with him to his grave. 2. Being Legate at Ancona, (under Pope Iulius the second) he cozened a La∣dy, under pretence of marriage to yeeld to his Lust, who upon discovery of the delusion, fell almost distracted: yet brought him that Peter Aloysius, afterward Duke of Placen∣ia, where he was slaine for his horrible villanies, especially that, upon Cosmus Cherea not to be named. 3. To this In∣cest (and maintaining 45000. Courtezans) his Necromancy comes as a Complement. He conferred with Gauricus Ser∣vita, and other of the damned Crew, who were alwaies at his Elbow. 4. Fom this Popes piety, we had the Councell of Trent, and Order of the Jesuits, and King Henry the eight Excommunicated, and our England given Primo occu∣paturo, some will say a worse there could not be. But let them consider his successor, and Countryman, and Legate in the Councell of Trent, 6.  IULIUS the third. Who as soone as he was chosen (not without great stirres) gave his Cardinalls hat to a Sodo∣miticall boy (whom he had abused) called Innocentius: to the repining Cardinalls who asked a reason of it, What rea∣son had you (saies he) to chuse me Pope? Fortune favours whom she pleaseth. 2. Iohn Casa Arch-bishop of Benevent, & Deane of the Apostolicall Chamber, in this mans time, Prin∣ted a Book at Ʋenice in defence of Sodomy: By whom Fran∣cis Spira was seduced to revolt, and dyed desperately. 3. This Pope was the man, that would have his Porke (for∣bidden by his Physitian) Al despetto de dio, in despight of God: and maintained that he had more cause, to be angry for the keeping back of his cold Peacock Pye, then God had to cast Adam out of Paradice for eating of an Apple. 4. From the same man we had, the Reconciliation, and blessing of the Mother Church, so submissively taken, from the hands of Cardinall Poole in Queen Maries daies, that cost the lives of so many Innocents, by various Executions. 5. Whereup∣on one Ʋvalterius describes the Sea of Rome under him in this Tetrastichon.
Roma quid est? quod te docuit praeposterus ordo. Quid docuit? jungas versa elementa seies, Roma Amor est, Amor est? qualis? praeposterus. unde haec? Roma Mares. noli dicere plura scio. What's Rome? even that preposterousnesse doth show, What's that? spel't backward, then thou soon maist know, Backward 'tis Amor love, what love? nay hold, It is a male loue, odious to be told. And Beza plaies upon three evacuating Basons which this Pope was wont to have at hand in his beastly surquedry, I nunc Pontifices Germania dira negato, Omnia Clausa suo jura tenere sinu. And now will cursed Germany deny, The Pope hath * Alluding to the word that signifies Laws and Broth. Iura that he thus let fly. No sure this Pope let it fly at both ends, and his life went af∣ter. Another of the Tridentine Legats, 7 MARCELLUS the second an Hetruscan, was quickly foysted into the place. The rather, because he was sickly, and in likely-hood could not keep it long. 2. He had been Schoole Master to Peter Aloysius esteemed the Lutherane worse then Turks, & perswadeed Charles the fifth, and Fer∣dinand, rather to turne their forces against them, then the Mahometanes. 3. Paulus Vergerius must not stay in the Councell of Trent, but why forsooth? He believed not the Legend of St George, and S. Christopher, whom Paul the third before had left out of the Breviary. The Bishop of Claudia Fossa Iames Nanclant, must be likewise discharged, for holding the Scripture to be above Traditions, and Wil∣liam of Venice, for saying the Councell was above the Pope. But the short time he Poped it, abridged his farther pro∣ceedings, which being but 23. daies, a Neopolitne 8. PAUL the fouth continues the Line, who wrote a book for reforming the Church, to Paul the third, when he was Cardinall, wherein he taxed most of the same abuses, that Luther did; but the case was altered, when he came to
have power in his own hand. 2. He was a great Patron of the Jesuits, and Inquisition, which had made away (by Ver∣gerius reckoning in his time) 150000. persons under pre∣text of Religion. England had her share by Queen Maries Clergy. It was this Popes Legate, Cardinall Caraffa, that gave this blessing to the devout Parisians. Quandoquidem Populus decipivult, decipiatur, In as much as this people will be deceived, let them be deceived. He was so hated for his cruelty, that immediatly upon his death, the people burnt the Prison or rather slaughter-house of the Inquisition, beheaded the Popes Statua, and threw it into Tyber, and ra∣zed all the Armes of the Caraffa's they could fall upon. One of the house of the Medices, by the Spanish faction, is after foure months, thrust into his place, 9.  PIUS the fourth, who abrogates the Acts of his predecessors, and persecutes his kindred, makes Charles Bor∣romeus Cardinall, who after proved a Saint. 2. The Natio∣nall Councell the King of France held at Poyters, he hand∣somely defeats, by setting on foot again the Councell of Trent. 3. Thither he cites the Protestant Germanes, and French Hugonotes, with Calvin among the rest, by the Bi∣shop of Cumane; But their answer was, that the Pope had no Authority to call Councells, much lesse to carry things at his pleasure. A free Councell they were willing for, where Gods Word might take place, and not be overswayed with politique Projects. 4. Queen ELIZABETH took order that none of his Legats should set footing here in England, which hath sped the better for it ever since. 5. She was de∣signed to be Excommunicated for it, but that was hindred by some by respects: much moving there was for Reformation by the Legats of France and Germany, at least for the Com∣munion in both kinds, hopes thereof were given, but the Councell was broken off, and nothing performed. 6. Ʋenery, and Luxury (as 'twas thought by this Popes best friends) shortned his daies. More pious his successor was esteemed 10.  PIUS the fifth a Lombard, especially for Curbing the Whoores about Rome, whom he commanded to be marryed
or whipt, and if they died in that Course to be buried in a Dunghill. 2. He shewed himselfe resolute also against the Turke, and was of confederacy with the Spanyard, and other Christian States, in the Victory at Lepanto. 3. But otherwise amongst Christian Princes, that were not wholy at his beck, played the Turke himselfe. Had a hand in the Death of Prince Charles of Spaine; in the making away of our King James his Father, in most of the Treasons against Queene Elizabeth, whom he solemnely Excommunicated by a Bull, which one Felton set up, upon the Bishop of Londons Gate, for which he was Executed. This Bull our Bishop Jewell so bayted, that his Piety dar'd not to reply. His instruction was to Caesar by his Legat Commendinus, Nec fidem, aut Sacramen∣tum infideli esse servandum. Neither Faith, nor Oaths, is to be kept with Infidells, an excellent position to convert Infi∣dells, and credit Christian Religion. The Bononian 11. GREGORY the 13th followes, by whose procure∣ment, (after the Queene of Navarre had bin poysoned by a payre of Gloves,) was that Butcherly Massacre in Paris, which was celebrated at Rome with publique Triumphs. 2. He interposeth for the disposing of the Kingdom of Portu∣gall, voyd by the Death of Sebastian in Africk, But Philip of Spaine laying hold of it, he congratulates the Conquerours. 3. He alters the Kalender, but could not effect with Caesar, and divers other Princes, his new stile (which anticipates 10 dayes in the old accompt) should be followed, which is done notwithstanding amongst some States, for politique re∣spects. 4. The Archbishop of Cullayne, Gilbert Truchchesius, is outed of his Archbishoprick by his Excommunication, be∣cause he Married, and the doting Governour of Malia, sang a Nunc dimittis to him, adding postquam oculi mei viderunt salutare tuum, For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which his Holinesse took in very good part, as belonging to him. Next comes blustering in from Marca Ancona, 12. SIXTUS the fifth, who first falls upon Henry the third of France, for killing the Guises, and not plaguing the Pro∣testants, as he would have him to have done, then he Excom∣municates
him, and when he was Butchered by a desperate Monke James Clement with a poysoned knife; his Holinesse praiseth the fact, in a set Panegerick amidst his Cardinals; comparing it with the works of Creation, and Incarnation. 2. He blesieth the Banner of Spaine against England, in the famous expedition of 88; but to no great purpose. After∣wards commends Queene Elizabeth for a very excellent Governesse. 3. Quarrells with Spaine for Naples, and car∣ryed such a heavy hand over the Iesuits, that he wiped them of a great masse of money, so that they forged, that the Devill carryed him away in the habit of a Coachman, two yeares before he should have done it by Compact. But the Pope had bestowed those two yeares of his own age to make a Youth, (otherwise under age) ripe for the Gallowes. Whereupon Bellarmine being questioned what he thought of this Popes ending, sagely gave his censure, Quantum sapio, quantum capo quantum intelligo, Dominus noster Papa descendit ad in∣fernum, and yet to this Pope he dedicates his Controversies. Lesse adoe there was with the Gennoway that ascended the Chayre. 13.  VREANE the seaventh who kept it but a fortnight, and then left it to, 14.  GREGORY the 14th of Millaine, one of the Tri∣dentine Grandees as his predecessors were, but there he held a shrewd position, that Bishops by Gods Law, are tyed to re∣fidency. 2 He held also a Iubilee, and exhausted the Treasury of the Church, in the Warres of France, which Sixtus before had sealed by an Oath to be imployed for the recovery of the Holy land. 3. He Curses Henry of Navarre, as a relapsed Heretique, but the Parliament of France laught at his Bulls, and adjudged them to the fire by the hand of the Hangman. 4. The King wished the Prelates to cramme the Papacy with no more Annales from France, but to create a Patri∣arch of their own. 5. The Pope sends hi Nephew Francis, Generall to the French Warres, but could nor resist the Fe∣ver and Stone at home, which ended him, before he could end one yeare in his Papacy, a Bononian
15. INNOCENT the ninth could not hold in so long. Yet for the two moneths he was in, he expressed an hatred against the King of Navarre, and a good liking of the Jesuits. 2. It may be observed here, (to shew the frailty of humane Con∣dition, and poore assurance of great places) that one yeare, foure moneths, and three dayes made an End of foure Popes. The Florentine, 16. CLEMENT the eight kept the place longer, to do more mischeife. He begins with Henry of Navarre, and presses him so close, that at the last he made him to turne Papist before he could be quiett in his Kingdome. 2. Neither then was, for first a woman, then Botrerius his own Cup-bearer, through the instigation of the Iesuits, afterward John Chastell (a stu∣dent of theirs attempted his death. Which Ravilliac their Villaine at last effected,) and all for sooth because he had en∣tred upon the Kingdome, being absolved only by the Bishop of Biberico, and not by the Popes Clemency. 3. To get a playster therefore for this Sore, Perron the Apostata must be sent Embassadour to Rome, where  the Pope gives absolution, reciting the 11 Psalme, and at every verse gently striking with his rodd, the prostrated suppliants, which he should have lashed more roundly. 4. As he did in∣deed Caesar Estensis, whom he Excommunicated, and got from him, the Dukedome of Ferrara, and added it to St Peters Pa∣trimony, which was more then the poore Fisherman's owne Father could ever get him. 5. He dispensed with Cardi∣nall Albert of Austria, to marry Isabella, Infanta of Spaine, but afforded not the title of King to the great Duke of Moseo∣via, desiring it of him, because he inclined too much to the Greeke Church 6. The Alexandrians (some say) submit∣ted unto him. He dispensed with Henry of France, to put a∣way Queene Margaret, and marry with Maria de Medices, laboured what he could, that King Iames should not succeed Queene Elizabeth here in England, was much troubled with the Gowte, (but eased as he saith) when Arch-duke Maxi∣milian kissed his gowty Golls. Hi Countryman, 16. LEO the eleventh that took his place, came in with
this Motto over his Arch-triumphall Pageant. Diguus est Leo, in virtute Agni accipere librum, & solvere septem signa∣cula ejus. But foure times seaven dayes had not past, before a burning Feaver, (or somewhat else) put the Lord Cardi∣nals upon a new Election of 17.  PAUL the fifth an Italian, Bellarmine and Baronius were named with him, but the place needed not so much learning, whatsoever learning this Pope had, such Inscriptions were afforded him and well taken. PaV Lo QV Into VICe Deo. Christianae Reipublicae Monarchae invictissimo, & Ponti∣ficiae omnipotentiae conservatori acerrimo, Morneus in praef. Myster. Iniquit. out of which inscri∣ptions in the three first words, we have the number of the Beast 666. 2. Of no lesse importance are those other Attri∣butes, Gens & Regnum quod non servierit illi, in gladio, & in fame, & in peste, visitabo super gentem illam, ait Dominus, Ier. 27. And, Dedit dominus potestatem, ut omnes populi ipsi servi∣aut, potestas ejus potestas aeterna, & regnum ejus, quod non cor∣rumpetur, & crunt Reges Nutritij tui, &c. Vultu in terram demisso, pulverem tuorum pedum lingent, Isa. 49.3. For not stooping therefore to his power, and titles, a powder-plote was set on foot by Garnett the Iesuite, and others his Com∣plices here in England, to blow up the King and the whole State. 4. The state of Ʋenice was interdicted notwithstan∣ding this Popes vsurpatious, whereupon the Jesuits (that si∣ded with him) were banished, diverse of other Orders stuck close to the state against the Pope, and his learned Cardinals, Bellarmine and Baronius; where Baroniu's exhortation to his Holinesse, Surge and Manduca arise and eate the Venetians, would not well goe downe, till Cardinall Joyous of France, was faine to patch up the matter, without the least disparage∣ment to the Venetians. 5. The Oath of Alleageance which our King Iames, (most justly required of his Subjects) was forbidden by Breves from this Pope; but that learned King with His owne Penne, so justified his own right, that his Ho∣linesse declined the encounter. 6. Suarez, Bellarmine, Becan, and others that interposed against the Supremacy of Kings, within their own Territories, were censured by the Sorbon
of Paris, and other Papists. At length in France, Cardinall Peron Cowed them, to allow in some sort, of the Councell of Trent. 7. In the breach between Cesar and the County Pa∣latine, a great taxe was laid upon all the Clergy of Italy, to∣wards the upholding of the Catholique cause, and a new Order of Knighthood erected at Vienna, under the patronage of the Blessed Virgin, St Michael, and St Francis, to root out all Heretiques. Saxon joynes with Cesar against the Prote∣stants, contrary to the determination of his Divines of Jene, and Wittemberg. 8. The great Controversies between the Iesuits, and Dominicans, concerning the immaculate Concep∣tion of the Blessed Virgin, is smthered, rather then decided, a Jubile held to bring in money, and so Mort ƲƲs est VICe∣DeƲs. 18. GREGORY the 15th of Bononia succeeds him, e∣lected by way of Adoration. 1. He instigates the French against the Protestants, Saints Ignatius Loiola, with Teresa, Isodorus, Gonzaga, and Koska of the same Society, quarrells with the Venetians for entertaining Greeks, when they warred not with Infidells, to whom the Ʋenetians re∣plyed, that they held all Infidells, that opposed their Com∣mon-wealth. 2. The Illuminati in this mans time, keep a great quarter in Spaine, which some hold a kind of Prote∣stant Round-heads, and multiplied to that height that the Inquisitors were faine to winke at them. After two years blustering with much adoe among the Cardinalls. 19. VRBANE the eight, a Florentine (that now holds it) was chosen in his place: 24. Cardinalls grew sicke, in this hot businesse, whereof tenne lost their lives, with diverse others. 2. He first casts about to advance his kindred, among whom Cardinall Barbarino is now the man. 3. The jarres between the French and Spanish for the Ʋaltoline could not be composed by him: the French were first blamed for fa∣vouring the rotestants cause in Germany, and entring into League with them, But now the Spaniard is disliked, and upon the King of Sweeds victorious proceedings, the Spanish Legas was told by his Holinesse, that the tyranny of his Ma∣ster,
gave just cause of rejoycing at the Heretiques prosperous successe. 4. The Jesuits found no friend in him, for he hath quite cashiered the shee Iesuitesses, which under hand grew to an Order very advantagious to that society. Garassius one of their Company, wrote a summe of Divinity, which their Generall had approved, but the Sorbon utterly condemned: And upon a Pett taken for being stopped from a Bishopricke (which the King of Spaine through Count Olivares pro∣curing) had bestowed upon a Jesuit, That Iesuit writes di∣rectly against the Popes power, and Contends, that he can doe no more out of his Diocesse, then another Bishop, and that his Bulla Coenae, thundred (for formality against his Ma∣ster every yeare) is but a Bable. 5. The Arch-bishop of Spalata playing Iack of both sides, and passing from hence to Rome, met with worse entertainment there, then he found here. Father Paul was wounded for standing for his Venetians, and one Barnes an Englishman led Captive to Rome, for ex∣pressing himselfe too much against the Iesuits in the behalfe of Kings. This Pope seems to be a more polite Scholler, then many of his predecessors by the bookes he hath written, and not so Barbarous as many of them have been. The Lord o∣pen the eyes of all those that sit in darknesse, whom the God of this world hath blinded, that they may see the truth and em∣race it. AMEN. 2. INto this Period fall so many varieties of high concern∣ment, that they can hardly be glanced at. 1. The ere∣cting of new Vniversities, Wittemberg, Frankeford, Mar∣purg. &c. Especially in Germany. 2. Famous writers of the Reformation, Luther, and Melanctho in Saxony; Zuinglius and Oecolampadius in Helvetia; Calvin, and Beza in France; Peter Martyr, and Zanchius from Italy; with others in o∣ther places of no lesse eminency, which with admired Learning, and Industry, have maintained Gods truth against the Tridentine Engineers of the Romanists, and the volumi∣nous Iesuits their Emissaries: As also against the domestique underminings of Socinus, Armiians, and their partizans.
3. The wasting combustians, between the Imperialists and Sweadish, France and Spaine, Polonians and the Turke, each requiring a particular History. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Luthers Reformation were not at first undertaken out of Emulation rather then conscience? 2. The Difference between Lutherans and Calvinists stands in such termes of oppo∣sition as may admit of no Reconcilement? 3. The conventing of the Councell of Trent, were not rather for politique ends, then Reforming of any thing amisse in Religion 4. The voluminous Disputes and Comments of the Iesuits be not more for ostentation in Divinity, then Edification? 5. The Madnesse of the Auabaptists, and their Enthysiasts be not as dangerous to States, as the projects of the Iesuits? 6. The Dissentions of Christian Princes, be as advantagious to the Pope, as to the Turke? 7. Socinianisme, and slighting of all Antiqui∣ty, be not an Introduction to Paganisme, and Atheisme? So much for Ecclesiasticalll History in Generall.
OF POLITICALL HISTORY IN GENERALL, Deduced From NIMROD ACCORDING TO THE foure Monarchies, by a conti∣nued Line of Succession to these times. With a touch in every Period of some Principall Concurrent Matters to be Taken notice of. TOGETHER WITH Inquiries for Discourse. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula Cautum. Foelix quem faciunt aliorum praemia promptum. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniersity, 1648.
FIRST MONARCHY. CAP. I. Of Politicall History. PERIOD. I. 1. TO Ecclosiasticall History thus briefly com∣prehended, Politieall in the same method succeeds, that toucheth especially on Civi matters, in Kingdomes, States, or Common-Weales. 2. And is carri∣ed along in these Periods, From 1. NIMROD, to Cyrus. 2. CYRUS to Alexander the Great. 3. ALEXANDER, to Iulius Caesar. 4. CaeSAR, to Constantine the great. 5. CONSTNTINE, to Charles the Great. 6. CHARLES to Ralph of Auspurg. 7. RADULPHUS Auspurgensis, to Ferdinand the third, of these times. 3. The first Period, sets up the Assyrian Monarchy for
the space of 1903. years. In this line of succession we find in Moses. 1. NIMROD characterized to be a mighty one in the earth. So mighty a Hunter before the Lord, that it grew to be a Proverbe, Gen. 10.8.9. Aben Ezra. as great a hunter as Nimrod. 2. This some take, as spoken to his praise, that he destroyed Wild Beasts, to make room for better inhabitants, which he builded Cit∣ties to defend, and keep together; and ordered by strict Laws, to civilize their rudenesse: but others carry it by suffrages to his disgrace; that he dealt with Men as with Beasts, by al∣tering Paternall Government (continued from the Creation to these times) into forcing Tyranny. 3. In this humor asso∣ciating to himselfe Ioktan of the house of Shem, and Suphena of Japhets family (if some may be credited) He undertook the building of a Citty and Tower, Methodius Chron. Chro∣nicor. S. W. Rawleigh. Gen. 11.4. whose top might reach up unto Heaven, but that plot was dashed by the confusion of Languages from heaven, and the place had the name of Ba∣bel that signifies confusion. 4. His departing thence into As∣syria, and building Nineveth there, with three Citties more, as he had done foure before in Babel (all named in the Scri∣pture) stands upon a nicity of transsating the 11. verse of the 10. chap. of Genesis, which Junius would have runne thus, Out of that Land he went into Assyria, But we read without straining the originall, Out of that Land went forth Ashur of Shems race, who builded Ninineh, and gave the Name to Assyria, He (perchance) had been with Nim∣rod at Babel, and observing his courses, would get himselfe also a name by building, which might thrive better in ano∣ther place, then his did. 5. This eminent Gyant (as S. Augu∣stine termes him) is said to have raigned 114. DeCivit. Dei l. 16. c. 3. and then leaves his Dominions to his Sonne 2.  BELUS: Him diverse make to be the same with Nimrod but on uncertain grounds. 2. He should seem to be of a more contenting disposition then his Father, some think he imployed himselfe most in drayning the Fennes a∣bout Babylon, awleigh. and carrying off the Water, to make the Coun∣try
the more usefull. 3. His pleasing government deified him with his Subjects; and made him the sire of many petty gods, as Bel, Baal, Baalberth, Baalzephon, and the like. The Chaldeans prefixed Bel, or Bal, as an ensigne of honour to their names as Baladan, Balihasar, the Carthagineans added it to theirs, as to Asdrubal, Hannibal. 4. This Babylonian Belus was long before that Phenicun of Tyre, Ʋirgil Ae∣nead. 1. whose great Bowle Dido fill'd with Wine for the entertainment of Ae∣neas: Him followeth of a more stirring spirit, his sonne, 3. NINUS, It is observed by one, that the Ancients used to terme the Founders of Kingdoms Saturnes, the Setlers, Xenophon in Aequivocis. Jupiters, and the Inlargers Hercules. Whence we having Saturnus Nimrod, and Iupiter Belus, must needs take this third to be Hercules Ninus. 2. This man inlargeth Nineveh, founded before by Asshur, and imparts unto it his owne Name, Ionas 3.3. continuing to be an exceeding great City in Jonas time, of three dayes Iourney about. 3. The incredible num∣ber of almost two Millions in his Army, which he brought against Zoroastres the Magician of Bactria, Diod. Sculus, (who mett him with few lesse, and was overthrowne by him,) discredits the whole narration. 4. That is more probable, the setting up of his Father Belus statua to be worshipped, he gave the first hint to Idolatry in Image worship, which Image of his (some say) continued untill Daniels time, when it was de∣stroy'd by Darius Medus or Cyrus, upon the discovery of the Imposture of Bells Preists, shewen in that Apocryphall frag∣ment of Bell, and the Dragon. 5. His death is said to be procured by a trick of his Wife, 4. SEMIRAMIS, who obtaining of him to have all the power of Royalty put into her hands, for the space of 5 dayes or some such matter, to try how she could King it; In that space she made him away, Pezelius. and then under the habit a while of her carelesse Sonne Ninias first governs, and afterwards by her selfe. 2. Phtarc. Her originall is made to be from Ascalon of Palestina, where Derceta a beautifull Reeluse, gotten with Child by some Triton or Dagon, exposed her, to take her for∣tune amongst the Reedes of the Lake, where she was fed by
Birds, and thence had her name, which in that Country speech signifieth a Bird. 3. Growne up, she was Married to one Menon, who accompanied Ninus in his expedition a∣gainst Zoroaster. There being noted for her Witt, Resoluti∣on, Diodor. sicul. Valer Maxi∣mue. and Beauty; was taken by Nintu to be his Queene, whom she fitted as is mentioned. 4. All agree that she inlarged the City of Babilon to admiration, which once being like to be surprised, upon hearing of it, she rescued with her hayre halfe hanging about her Eares, not staying to dresse it wholy, and therefore is so Pictured. 5. For her Lusts she is branded to be insatiable, killing those she had accompanied with, and at length soliciting her owne Sonne, was slaine by him. 6. O∣thers allow her a more honourable death, that marching a∣gainst the Indians with an Army of three Millions, Ravvleigh. of foot, besides fifty thousand Horse and an hundred thousand Chari∣ots, she was overthrowne by Staurobates upon the banck of Indus, C. 25. v. last. a facie irae columbae. See a Lapide, and Tirin. Stephanus. and so turned into Ʋenus Bird, a Dove. Whence it came that the Babilonians carryed a Dove in their Banners alluded unto, by Jeremy clear in the vulgar Latine, which the originall will beare, though our Translation with others, have it otherwise. Vpon his Mothers death, 5.  NINIAS or Zameis creeps out from amongst his Wenches. Diod. sicul. l. 2 Pezelius. Athenaus passes him with this Character, . To eate and drinke he proved flush, For better things, car'd not a rush. 6. Of little better mettle were those that followed him, though Arius be said to have done somewhat, Berosus. Africanus. Eusebius. against the Bractians and Caspians, others about 20 are named only un∣till we come to, 7.  SARDANAPALUS. Here a stand is made (as it were) to view a Monster, a man womanuified, having a terrible name. Pezelius. For Sar notes a Prince, Dan a Judge, Niphal an over∣thrower, or Conquerour, no otherwise applyable to him, but that his Luxurious carriage overthrew both Soveraignty, and Indgment. Hrt. Schedel. 2. He is voted by one to be the first inventor of
Cushions. His retirednesse from his Nobles to spin and dally with his Curtizans, drew upon him, Herodot. Iustin. his Stomachfull Lea∣ders, Arbaces, and Beloch, who after some Bickerings, drave him to sacrifice himselfe with his Wealth and Wenches, to Vulcan in a Wood pile. 3. His Ethicks were, Ede, Bibe & lude post Mortem Nulla voluptat. Eate drinke and play whiles thou arthere, For Death invites to no good cheare. His Epitaph Haec habui qui edi, quae{que} exsaturata libide Hausit, at illa jacent multa & praeclara relicta, That which I eate, and took I did enjoy, All that I left behind proves but a toy. What Epitath (saies Aristotle) could fit an Oxe better? It were good therefore for great ones so to live, that they meet not in the end, with the Death of a Dogge, the Buriall of an Asse, and the Epitath of an Oxe. 4. Arbaces and Beloch having thus dispatched their Master, share his Dominions between them. 5. Arbaces settles himselfe Eastward a∣mongst the Medes and Persians. But the Royall Seat (though then of lesse Command) is continued by, 8. BELOCH, Beleser, or Belosis, the same with Pul, or Phul of the Hebrewes. 1. Diodor. sicul. 2. Kings 15. 1. Chron. 5. Iose. Antiq. l. 9. c. 11. 2. Kings 15, 16. This is said to be that King of Niniveh, that humbled himselfe and all his, so notoriously at the preaching of Ionah. 2. He afterwards invaded Israell in the time of the Tyrant Menahem, (that ript the Infants of Tiphsah out of their Mothers Bellies, because their Fa∣thers opened not the Gates unto him) but was contented to take a vast contribution which was levyed on the people, and so returned home againe. This contented not his successour. 9. TIGLATH Pilesar, but he returneth in the dayes of Pekah the sonne of Remaliah, (who had rooted out bloody Menahems brood) and carryed away Captives most of the Inhabitants on the East side of Iordan. 2. Chron. 5. Who had growen to a high pitch, as long as they served the Lord by their Victories over the Hagarites, but afterwards turning Idolaters, were
so transported into the East, that they never returned. 2. 2. Kings 16. With this Tiglath-Pilesar, Ahaz of Iudah also comple∣mented, and hyred him with the sacred treasure of the Tem∣ple, Ib. v. 21. to protect him against Rezin of Syria, and Pekah of Isra∣cl, goes to meet him at Damascus, and fancying there an Altar, must needs have the like to be made for Gods house, which Ʋriah the high Preist, did according tothe Patterne sent him, yet all this would not stave off. 10.  SHALMANESER that followes. But as his prede∣cessour had captivated Galile, . Kings 17. and those beyond Iordan: so this man sets on Samaria, and after three yeares Seige ruinates it, with their King Hoshea who had not kept touch with him. v. 6. The Inhabitants he transplanteth to Halah, and Habor by the River Gozan, Tob. 1.2. Iosep. Antiq. l. 9. c. 13.14. the Cities of the Medes. 2. Tobit was led away in this Captivity to Niniveh. In assisting wicked Ahaz, he sacked Damascus, sharply assaulted Tyre, but fayling to take it, Plundred the Country about it. 3. His cruelty is taxed in the taking of Betharbel, Hoseah, 10.14. where the Mothers were dashed in peeces upon their Children. This uncontroled suc∣cesse of his, animated his successour, 11.  SENNACHERIE to set upon Iudah, and Ierusalem, 1. 2. Kings 18. From whence being diverted a while by a great summe of Money, pay'd him by good King Ezechiah; he promiseth to withdraw his Forces, but performes nothing. 2. Rabsha∣keh and others are sent to summon Ierusalem. In the meane while, Iosep. Antiq. Herodot. he besets Pelusium in Aegypt, but thence is put off by the huge Army of Taracha King of Aethipia, some talk of an Army of Mice that shapt his Souldiers Bow-strings, making them unfit for service. 3. Beleeve that who list, but this is Canonicall, that returning and Beleaguering Ieru∣salem, 2. Kings 19. by Ezechias prayers, and Isaiahs concurrence, 185000 of his formidable Host in one night were slaine by an Ange, which startled him into an abrupt returne into his Country, where he ended his dayes (as some say) in this manner. Demanding on a time of some about him, Biblia. Cast∣ali. ni Tabu. c. 1. what might be the reason, that the unresistable God of heaven, so favoured the Iewish Nation, as he had found by sad experience? Answere
was given, that Abraham fromwhomthey descended, sa∣crificed unto him his only sonne, which purchased this prote∣ction to his progeny. If that will winne him (saith he) I will spare him two of my sonnes, to procure him to be on my side: which Sharezar and Adramelech his sonnes hearing of, they prevented their own deaths, by his, 2. Kings c. 19. as he was wor∣shipping in the house of Nisroch his god, and flying there∣upon into Armenia, left their brother 12. ESARHADDON to Raigne in his steed. This man disheartned by the hard hap of his Father, and broken by the Rebellious opposition of his bloudy Brethren; was set upon by 14. MERODACH BALADAN, Governour of Babylon, who being a stirring man, had shaken off the yoake of the Medes in Artices time, and denied all subjection to Senna∣cherib of Assyria. 2. 2. Kings. 20, Isai. 39. Some such matter may be gathered by his Complementing with Hezekiah, in sending him Letters, and a present, to congratulate the recovery from his sicknesse: In which there was some Aime, to make him his friend, for his strengthning, to cut off Sennacheribs issue, and to transferre the Monarchy from Niniveh to Babylon, which he performed. 2 He is guessed to be the same with Nabonas∣sar of Ptolomy, from whom the famous Epocha is taken that diverse follow, but concerning him and his successours in this Babylonian line there is such confusion, and variety, De 4. Summis Imperiis. Ierem. 50. Rawleigh. that judicious Sleidan waves it all, to stick to the certainty of Scripture, where Merodach is put either for the Idoll or state of the destinated to be destroyed, and 15. NABUCHODONOSOR the Great for his successour. This man brought the first Monarchy to its highest pitch. 1. Rawleigh Hist l. 3. Ezech. 26.2. By his victories over the Iewes and all the bordering Na∣tions. 2. Tyre rejoyced at the tuine of jerusalem: but her turne came speedily after; her situation in the Sea, and the strength of her Navie could not save her. This was the great secvice sooken of by the Prophet, Ezechiel. 29.18. Herodtus. Dioder. Siculus. wherein every head was made bald and every shoulder made bare, in filling up that straight of the Sea which separated it from the Continent be∣fore it could be taken. 3. For this the Conquest of Aegypt
was allotted him by God for wages, which he victoriously atchieved, Isay 19. Ezech. 29. cap. 3. as it was fore-prophesyed. 4. Then Nineveh, for Rebellion was ruinated by him, as Nahum foretold it should. 5. Puffed up with this successe, He sets up a mon∣strous Statua of his own fancying, to be under paine of burning adored. 6. Was not Schooled sufficiently by the miraculous deliverance of Sydrach, Mesach, and Abednego, and the divine Informations of Daniel, to acknowledge the true God's supremacy, untill at length in the midst of his vaunting humors, he was strooken stark mad, and doomed for seaven years to converse with Wild-beasts: but then was, 7. restored, acknowledged Gods Infinitenesse, and mans Impotency, Theodoret. Lyra. Carthusian. repented, and according to S. Augustines charita∣ble censure (whom some others follow) was saved, leaving his large Dominions to 16.  EVILMERODACH his sonne, who had managed the Kingdome (as some think) in the time of his Fathers Madnesse. Rawleigh. 2. Afterward having it in his own right, he dealt kindly with Jehojachin his Captive, 2. Kings 25.27. whom he advanced from Prison to feed at his own table, perchance the rather, because his father Nabuchodonoser had not kept the condi∣tions agreed upon, when he surrendred himselfe unto him and Ierusalem. 3. Nitocris (some say his sister, some his wife) was a notable stirring virago in those dases, that passed Semiramis. 4. But all this could not hold up Babylon, which was destinated to fall. Rawleigh. 5. The Medes and Persians prove victorious against him, thereupon Aegypt takes occasion to Rebell, where he lost all that his father had gotten. 6. Hee was slain in a Battle, wherein his multitude of deboshe Soul∣diers were defeated, by the well armed sturdy Medes, and leaves his vast dishartered Empire to his degenerate Sonne 17.  BALTASAR, a slave to his Lust, and a fit object for a Conquerour to work upon, which was well known to his enemies, and drew them the sooner upon him. 2. Diverse presages there were of thi mans mischievous disposition, ten∣ding to ruine. For in his fathers time, he slew a young No∣ble
man, that should have married his sister, only for that he saw him gore two wild beasts with his Iaveling, that he him∣selfe had missed to doe: And an other Lord he gelded, be∣cause a Lady said in his commendation, that that woman should be happy, who should have him for her Husband. Cap. 27.7. 3. In this man was fulfilled the Prophesy of Ieremy, All Na∣tions shall serve Nebuchadnezzar and his Sonne, and his Sonnes sonne, untill the very time of his land come: and then many Nations and great Kings shaell serve themselves of him. 4. The unparalleld upshot of which, C. 5 is described by Daniell in the midst of his surquedry, and prostituting of the conse∣crated vessells to his Wives and Concubines, which had been taken out of the Temple of Ierusalem by his Grandfather, and till that time laid up untouched, with addition of the magni∣fying of his Idoll Gods, and sleighting the God of Israel: A hand writing for his execution from Heaven, Dan. 5.30. was signed on a wall over against him, which as soone as it was denounced, was dispatched, For in that night (saith the Text) was Bel∣shazzar King of the Chaldeans slaine, (the neglected Be∣siegers dividing Euphrates, and surprizing the Citty and Court) and Darius the Median took the Kingdome, Xenophon Cy∣roped. l. 7. together with Cyrus the Perfian, as it is gathered by conferring of Dan. 5.31. with 2. Chron. 36.20. 2. COncurrents in this Period to be taken notice of, may be, 1. The Originalls of Monarchicall Government, amongst all the dispersed Nations. 2. The building of Cit∣ties and Fortresses, for their Honour, Safety, and civilizing their subjects. 3. The Seminaries for learning and spreaders of it, whence we meet with, Cockmah Misraim, Sixtus Senen∣sis. the wis∣dome of the Priests of Aegypt, derived from Abraham, Jo∣seph, and the Trismegisti, wherein Moses was perfectly in∣structed. The Magick of Balaam, Acts 7. Mat. 2. Numb. 24, 17. Sixtus Senems. which took with the Easterne nations, and directed the Magi to Christ by the starre foretold by him. Cockmah Chasdim, the wisdome of the Chaldeans, which Daniel was versed in, and surmoun∣ted, Besides Kiriah Sepher of the Cananites, Najoth and
Ramah, and Jericho, Schooles (and as it were Vniversities) of Students and Prophets amongst the Iewes. 4. The cala∣mities and deliverances of the Church, Pezelius in Mellificio. Alsted in Hi∣storiis. in hir oppressions, captivites, and wonderfull preservations. 5. The clashing of Nations for supremacy, in the Assyrian, Aegyptian, Theban, Trojane warres. 6. The depopulations, ruines, or translations of States, and People, (too vast to be piled up in a Com∣pendium.) 7. Yet the concurrence of the line of Arbaces, sharer with Beloch, (in the mentioned division of Sarda∣napalus Empire) must not be omitted: Apud Photiū in Biblioth. Iustin. Herodot. Ctesias Gnidius here gives us the names of nine successors, some of which others touch upon, but Iustine passing them as nominall, insisteth only on Astiages, whose daughter Mandana, married to a meane Persian Gentleman Cambyses, brought forth Cyrus, whom Astiages, plotted in vaine to make away: but drew him on rather to out him of his Kingdome, and with Darius Medus his Vokle, to extinguish the first, and set up the se∣cond Monarchy. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Any certainty may be had of story (be∣sides that of Scripture:) concerning the Assyrian Monarchy? 2. Ier. 29.22. Bel destroyed by Daniel were Belus statua, the first Idoll, and Zedekiah, and Ahas the two Elders that assaulted Su∣sanna? 3. Semiramis were slaine in the Indian Warre, or at home by her sonne Ninias? 4. Hos. 5.13. & 10.6. Isajah 20. Iareb and Sargon mentioned in Scripture, were distinct Kings of Assyria? 5. Nebuchadnezzar were really transformed into a Beast? 6. Vpon his recovery, he acknowledged the true God, repented, and was saved? 7. The Handwriting against Baltasar, were in strang Characters, or a known Alphahet?
SECOND MONARCHY of the Persians. PERIOD II. 1. THE second Period includeth the Persian Mo∣narchy, continued for about 200. years, and hath in it these Kings. 1. CYRUS, named about 200 years before he was borne, (as Josias was 300. to destroy the Idolatry of Bethel before it was performed) He was Grand-child to Astiages, the great King of Media, by his daughter Mandana, whom he married to Cambises a mean gentleman of Persia, to fru∣strate a deposing, Herodtus Iustin. which he had dreamed should grow upon him, out of his daughters Loynes: but mens purposes rather stoop to, then stop Gods purposes. 2. Of his strang preserva∣tion from his Grand-fathers cruelty, Education among Ru∣stiques, Acting the King amongst his play-fellowes, in chasti∣zing a Noble mans sonne, that resisted his authority, His bringing thereupon before his Grand-father, and his un∣daunted behaviour, with the discovery who he was, and the barbarous revenge taken upon Harpagus for not making him away, as he was commanded, we have in Herodotus and Iustin at Large. 3. His first expedition was a gainst his Grand∣father Astiages, whom having overcome, he granted him his life, and being unwilling to returne againe to rule among the Medes, he placed him in a Government among the
Hircaneans. 4. From thence he Marches against Craesus of Eydia, whom he vanquished, saves from the fire, and takes to be his chiefe Counfellor, who proved faithfull unto him. 5. Then he falls upon the Greekes of Ionia, and by Harpagus subdues them. 6. Afterward he sets on Babylon with his unkle Darius Medus, (whose daughter he had married) and takes it with the death of Baltasar, after which exploit, his Vnkle (as it should seeme) quickly dyed, so the whole Monarchy came unto him. 7. His last expedition was against the Scy∣thians, where after his defeature of the young Prince Spar∣gapises by a stratageme, his Mother Tamoris in a second con∣flict overthrew him, and cutting off his head, threw it into a vessell full of blood, with this bitter taunt satia te sanguine, now glut thy selfe with blood, which in all thy life thou hast thirsted after. In this most Histories agree, yet Xenophon leaves him a peaceable departure in his bed, Institut. Cyr. l. 8. with an excel∣lent farewell to those that were about him. Asia (saith he) never saw the like Governor. A worse ('tis plaine) his Sonne 2.  CAMBISES came after him. He 1. overthrew the Aegyptians, Herodotus l. 3. with their King Psammenitus, the sonne of A∣masis, whose patience and prudence in misery, melted the fierce vanquisher into mercy. 2. Then intending to fall upon the Carthagineans, could not get the Phenicians his Seamen to undertake the businesse, in regard of a league between them and the Carthagineans. 3. Whereupon he sends part of his Army against those borderers on the Mediterranean Sea, called Hammones, from the Oracle of Iupiter Hammon, a∣mongst them, but they were all overwhelmed with the sandes and never seen after. Notwithstanding all this, he would needs have a bout with the Aethiopians, to whom he dispatched Ambassadors, to know in what estate they stood, which being slighted by their King, he furiously marcheth against them, so farre, that he hardly escaped an overthrowing in the Libian Dosarts, with his whole Army. This forced him to a shamefull retreat. 5. It is a passage worth the noting of, his deriding and wounding Apis the
God-calfe of the Aegyptians, and the fleaing of Sisamnis a corrupt Judge, and hanging his skinne over the Tribunall, to be a warning to his sonne Othanes (whom he put into his place) to doe better. 6. But the killing of his owne Brother Smerdis, with his sister (his own wife) for pittying him; as also, the shooting of an arrow through the heart of Prexa∣spe's sonne, and seeking to doe the like by Craesus, who ad∣monished him of his furiousnesse, are transcendent markes of Cyclopicall Tyranny. 7. His end was by a wound in the thigh of his own sword, falling out of the Scabbard, as he was taking horse to goe against the Magi, who had Rebelled a∣gainst him. Their pretence was that Smerdis the Kings bro∣ther was not slaine (as he commanded) and thereupon they set up a Pseudo-Smerdis of their owne to raigne, which was soon discovered by his cropt ears, made away by the Nobles. And one of the seven in the Action. 3.  DARIUS Histaspis got the Scepter by the timely Neighing of his Horse at the Sunne rising. 1. Herodot. Iustin. He marries A∣tossa Cyrus daughter for the strengthning of his title. 2. Re∣covers Rebellious Babylon by a stratagem of Zopyrus, one of his Nobles, who cutting off his own Lipps and Nose, and pittifully disfiguring himselfe, got in with the Babylonians to be their leader against the Tyrant; whom he pretended had so martyred him, which done, he found the oppor∣tunity to subject it againe to his Master. From this he Marcheth against the Scythians, but had but a cold bout of it, they jeering him with the presents of a Bird, a Frogge, a Mouse, and five Arrowes, which by Hieroglyphicall inter∣pretation meant nothing else but, That if the Persians got them not quickly gone from them, as Birds in the Ayre, or duckt as Froggs into a marsh, or erept not into Mouse holes, they should have their Arrowes in their sides to set them packing, which was soon done with shame. 4. Better was the successe he had a while against the Greeks, that upon his defeat by the Scythians rebelled against him. 5. But when he came with 600000 to make a full conquest of it, Herodot. l. 6. Iustin. l.  he was shamefully overthrown by Miltiades the Athenian, bringing
against him but 10000, in the Feild of Marathron, registred (as Plutarch saith) by almost 300 Historians. In this fight Themistocles the Athenian gave proofes of his Valour, and one Cynegeris a Souldier was so feirce, Sustin. l. 2. that when both his hands were cut off he set his teeth to stay a Ship of the flying Persians. 6. This ignominious losse, when he cast about to repaire the Robellion of the Aegyptians, and 7. The quar∣rell between his Sonnes, who should sncceed him quite en∣ded him, Artabasanes the eldest, claymes it as Heire, but in regard he was borne, (his Father being but a Subject) the Younger, 4.  XERXES carries it being Cyrus Grand-child by A∣tossa. His 1. Expedition was against the Rebellious Aegyp∣tians, wherein proving successefull, he returnes and makes that great Feast mentioned in the book of Hester, who be∣comes his Queene in place of Vasthi: 2. Then is wholly for the revenging of his Fathers quarrell upon Greece, Herodoru. Iustin. against which (he is said by some) to have led five Millions of men, by others a Million and seven hundred thousand, all which notwithstanding were entertained, by one Pythius at Sardis, who presented the King besides, with 2000 Talents in Sil∣ver, awleigh. and in Gold foure Millions. 3. Thence passeth forth by making Mount Athos an Iland, and Hellespont to give way unto him by a Bridg of Boates. 4. But at Thermopilae, he lost neere 20000 of his Army, by the opposition of Leonidas, and 300 Lacedaemonians, upon which followed a defeat of his Navie at Artemisium in the straits of Eubaea. 5. This was seconded by an other overthrow by Themistocles, at Sala∣minis, increased by the Land-Victory, which Pausanias had against his Generall Mardonius at Plateae, and Leutychidas the Athenian, with Xantippus the Lacedemonian Admirall, got the same day neere Mycae a Promontory in Asia by Sea. 6. Which laid together so terrified this Burdener of the Sea and Land, that he was perswaded to returne towards his Country, over Hellespont in a Cock-boate. 7. Where after his Sacrilegious assaulting of the Temple of Delphos, Barba∣rous dealing with his Brother, and his chast Wife, prostitu∣ting
himself to all base villanies, he was Treacherously slaine in his Bed at last by Artabanus his Ʋncle, leaving his Sonne he had by Hester. 5 ARTAXERXES to succeed him, some make this Long∣hand to be Hesters Husband, Rawleigh. but Cronology will hardly beare it. 1. His entrance was good in doing sustice on his Trea∣cherous Ʋncle, for the death of his Father and Brother. 2. His Courtesie likewise is much commended to the brave Themistocles, that was forced by his ungratefull Citizens to cast himselfe upon such an Enemie. 3. He could not chuse but be more favourable to the Jewes then others had beene, for his Mothers sake, Ezra. 4.9. Stephan. in Artaxer. yet such strong oppesition was made by the faction against them, that the building of the Temple (that was in a good forwardnesse) was by this mans Decree prohibited. 4. To him succeeded, 6. DARIUS Nothus, some say so termed, for that he was Longimanu's Sonne by a Concubine, more received is that, that he was his Sonne in Law by Marrying of his Daughter Parysitades. 2. Two Brethren he had, Xerxes and Sogdia∣nus that raigned before him, but their behaviour was so un∣worthy, and their raigne so short (ending within compasse of a yeare) that there is no reckoning made of them. 2. A∣gainst Nothus (at his first setling) Amyrteus the Aegyptian rebelled, and delivered his Country from the Persian ser∣vitude. 3. Amerges likewise a Subject of his owne, of the bloud Royall, Lieutenant of Caria ioyned with the Athe∣nians against him, but these were soon broken. 4. One po∣licy he had beyond his Ancestors, that seeing his multitudes of Souldiers had bin so often rowted; to use the Purse, rather then the Pike. 5. By this project he closed with the stout Lacedemonians, and recovered most of the losses of his Pre∣decessors in Asia. 6. Ezra. 6. He is credited in Scripture for setting forward the building of the Temple, which by his Father had bin interrupted. 7. By his Wife Parysitades he had two Sonnes of which the Elder, 7. ARTAXERXES Mnemon succeeds him. 1. This his Younger Brother Cyrus stomakes at, and being backed by
the Queene Mother, and freed from his Fathers displeasure, was sent to his charge in Lidia. 2. But that contents him not, his high thoughts undervalued his elder Brothers softer tem∣per, and nothing but Monarchy must content him. 3. Ha∣ving hyred therefore a Company of resolute Greeks, to en∣hearten his own Forces, he Marches hastily towards his Bro∣ther that had farre the greater preparations. They meet, the vantage is the Invaders, which puts him upon a needlesse Gallantry, wherein he lost his Victory, and life. 4. The no∣table Retreat afterward of the Grecians (mauger all the huge Forces of the Persian) is notably set downe by Zeno∣phon, Lib 7. de ex∣pedit. Cyru∣stn l. 10. which was their Leader. 5. This Mnemon is said to have had 115 Sonnes by Concubines, Plutarch affirmeth 160. Only three in Matrimony, of which Darius was Exe∣quted for Rebellion, with 50 more of his Brethren, whom he had drawne into the Conspiracy. This breaks the Fathers heart, his youngest sonne. 8.  OCHUS takes his place. 1. In his entrance he (as the Turkes continue it) made away his Brethren, that he might Tyrannize securely without Competitors. 2. Forty thousand Sydonians, that as peaceable Supplicants sued to him for his favour, were barbarously Butchered by his command. 3. Not∣withstanding he recover'd Aegypt (that had fallen off frō the Persian in his Grandfathers time) by his Generalls, Mentor and Bagoas, whom he seemed to value, whiles they served his turne. But his Tyranny proving unsufferable, Bageas sets him packing with a Potion. And murthering the rest of his Brethren, places, 9.  ARSES otherwise Arsames in his Throne. It was not long before this young King had resented; and detested Bagoas villanies, which he perceiving, and fearing due puni∣shment, prevented by sending also this man the way of his Fathers. This extinguishing (as it were) of all the bloud Royall, put the Nobles to a stand who should succeed. But Bagoas had fitted them with a friend of his, who was recei∣ved by the Title of, 10.  DARIUS Codomannus. Cosen Germane he was to Arses, Diod. siculus. and of high esteeme in the Court, by reason of a Duell
he undertook against a Chalenger of the Persian Army, and performed it to the honour of his Country. 2. Bagoas not∣withstanding soone distasts him, and prepares to dispatch him with the Potion of his Predecessors. Of this the King having notice, Forces Bagaos that brought him the draught, to drinke it up himselfe, whereby he was presently freed from such a dangerous Cup-bearer. 3. Hence wallowing in all Luxury and riot securely. Alexander the Macedonian comes upon him & gives him three fatall overthrowes, 1. at Granvick, where his Forces (having all advantages of their Enemies) shamefully fled. 2. At Issus; where Darius (with the losse of his Brother, Captivating of his Mother, Wife, and all the traine of Court Ladies, besides the utter defear of his huge Army, casting his Crowne away from him, hardly escaped. 3. To venture the stock upon it, he recrewted at Arbela, and there having a finall overthrow, was betrayed in his flight by Nabarzanes and Bessus, two of his owne Com∣manders, and so, miserably murthered. Nabarzanes was after∣ward by intercession, spared by Alexander; But Bessus pro∣sequted and taken, was delivered to Tortures, to receive the extreamest vengeance of Treason, which in the highest mea∣sure he had deserved. And so we have the Period of the se∣cond Monarchy of the Persians. 2. COncurrent with this Period, may be notice taken of 1. The state of the Church (perchance upon the Prophecy of Isaiah shewed unto Cyrus by Daniel.) A relax∣ation of the Babylonian Captivity, was from him obtained, Ezra. 19. for those of the Jewes that would returne to Jerusalem, and build the House of God, with restitution of the sacred Vessels carryed away by Nebuchadnezar, which Building although it were hindered by spitefull opposition, under Cambises, Ezra. . Hi∣staspis, Xerxes, Artaxerxes, and put at a stand; yet Darius Nothus at length gave way to the Finishing of it, which was performed by Zorobabel. Ezra then comes with a new sup∣ply to settle Gods Worship in Doctrine, and Discipline, and Nebemiah, (notwithstanding all Projects, Threats, and Dif∣ficulties)
raiseth up the walls of the City. 2. The progresse of Learning from the Chaldeans, is here continued in the Colle∣ges of the Magi, which spread it self far to the Indians East∣ward, & Westward to the Greekes. 3. Whence sprang up (as it were) the Fathers of Faculties. for not to mention the seaven Wise men of Greece, (all within this compasse) Hy∣pocrates, Herodotus, Papirius, Euclide, Democritus Abde∣rita, so eminent for Physick, History, Law, Mathematiques, and anatomizing the bowels of nature, are all in this standing. 4. In which besides the mentioned persian Invasions and o∣verthrowes, the Peloponesian, Messenian, and Theban Warres are notorious, amongst the Greeks, and the Cartha∣ginian, between them and the Romanes. 5. Whence we have the Catalogue of the famous leaders, Miltiades, Cy∣mon, Themistocles. Leonidas, Agesilaus, Epaminondas, Alci∣biades of the Greekes, Coriolanus, the Scipios, and diverse others of the Latines, with Asdrubal and Hannibal amongst the Carthaginians. 6. Peculiar notice may be taken of 1. Queene Artemisia of Caria, that gave Xerxes the best Councell, and help that he had against the Greekes, and quitted her selfe with most honour, from their eager prosequution of her. 2. Thrasybulus delivering his Citizens or Athens, from the thirty Tyrants. 3. And that excellent bringing off of about tenne thousand Greekes by Xenophon from all the forces of Artaxerxes Mnemon, as he hath himselfe most excellently in seaven bookes described. 7. Lastly the Ac∣complishment of the Prophesies, concerning the ruine of Ba∣bylon, Isaiah. 45. Dan. 5. Cyrus named for the restoring the Jewes to their Country. The breaking off the two Hornes of the Persian Ramme, by the great horne of the Hee Goate of Greece may here be especially thought upon, too ample in a summary to be farther enlarged.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Xenophons Cyropedia, be a better patterne of a good Prince, then a Relation of that which was performed? 2. Cyrus were more enriched by the good counsell of Craesus, then benefited by all his wealth he had from him? 3. Cambyses were that Nabuchodonosor, whose Generall Holophernes, Judith slew, as Beda and the Iewes would have it? Vid. Anno Iuni in Iud∣tia 4. He destroyed the Aegyptian Idolls, rather in scorne of all Religion, then hatred of I∣dolatry? 5. Zopyrus stratagem for recovering Babylon to Darius Hystaspis, by cutting off his own nose and lipps be fit for imitation? Herod. l. 3 6. It be credible that Pythius a Subject of Sardis, should feast Xerxes Army of a million and halfe of men, and present the King besides with above foure millions of coyne? Herodt. l. 7. Prudence rather, and good Leaders, then personall valour, wanted in Darius Codo∣mannus to withstand Alexander that so soon overthrew him?
THIRD MONARCHY of the Greekes. PERIOD III. 1. THE Third Intervall or Period, is from Alex∣ander the Great, to Julius Caesar, and includes the Third Monarchy of the Greeks for the space of 280 years. In this therefore we have 1.  ALEXANDER the Great, sonne of Philip King of Macedon, who being brought up under the famous Theban Epaminondas, laid by his Policy, and Prowesse, the founda∣tion of his sonnes Greatnesse; for the finishing of the Pho∣tensian or sacred warre, in maintenance of Religion and Ju∣stice (as it was pretended) wan him no small repute, and his old Souldiers, were the setters up and upholders of young Alexander. 1. He having a designe on Persia, thought it wisdome so to settle Gracia, that domestique di∣stractions recalled him not from forraine proceedings. In performing which, as stubborne Thebes tasted off his In∣dignation by ruine, so the race of Pindarus therein preserved, and the Lady Timoclea pardoned, expressed his generous re∣spects to Virtue and Learning. 2. Passing thence into Asia with an Army of about 30000 Foot and 5000 Horse, the greater forces of Darius (having besides all advantages of the river Granvick) could not stop him, but he breaks through & routs them, and so forrageth Phrygia, & all those
coasts at his pleasure. Iustia. Curtius. Diodor. Arion. Where the cutting of Gordius knot a sunder with his sword, (otherwise untiable) was a sufficient fulfilling (as he thought) of the Prophesy depending on it, and his reckoning of Achilles happy (when he viewed his Tombe) that had a Homer to register his Actions; expressed an heroicall emulation loath to be outvyed by any. 3. In Sy∣ria his advancing of Abdolominus from a poor Gardiner to be King in Sidon, his taking of Tyre (after seaven months siege) with incredible charge and resolution: Ioseph His Reverend and admired carriage toward Iaddus the High-priest of the Iewes, not sparing only but gracing with immunities Ierusa∣lem, and the Temple; farther set forth his High spirit, and Noble disposition. 4. This fame attended by perpetuall successe, surrendred him Aegypt, as soon as he set foot in it. From whence his journey through the Lybian Sands on pil∣grimage to Iupiter Hammon (whose sonne he would needs be thought to be) might for his honour, and profit have been well spared. 5. But his victories at Issus, and Arbela over Darius, are the more graced, by his Heroicke carriage to the captive Ladies of Persia, and the vengeance taken upon Bes∣sus that betrayed his Master. 6. After which India tasted of his Greatnesse and Goodnesse, expressed in conquering Porus, and others which there withstood him: All which could not excuse his hard usage of old Parmenio, and his sonne Philotas, exequted for Traytors upon slight grounds: His killing of his Foster brother Clitus, in the height of Distem∣per, and Burning the faire City Persepolis, at the motion of a strumpet. 7. Not long after which he met with (as 'tis thought) his death in Babylon by poyson, Antipaters sonnes were suspected for it, some say Aristotle and Calisthenes were accessary, but upon no proofes. His Ring he left to Perdiccas, but his Dominions  to the worthiest. this set up competitors, every one in his selfe-esteeme claim∣ing a share: but after some sharp bickerings between them, who should have most, According to Daniels Prophesy, Cap. 8.. of a bout a dozen that are named, only foure stood up that quel∣led the rest, and continued. Of which we take for deducing
the line in this shattered Monarchy, next to Alexander, 2. A.M. 3629. tust. l. 84. ANTIGONUS, taken for the sonne of Philip by a Con∣Cubine. 2. He setling himselfe in the lesser Asia, first assu∣med the title of a King, whom in emulation the rest follow∣ed. 3. His greatest conflicts were with the valiant Eume∣nes, who held him hardly to it, untill he was shamefully be∣trayed by the stubborne Agyraspides, termed Silver-shields, proud of their services under Alexander: but Teutamus their leader paid deare for it. 4. Perdiceas that with his complices strugled against him, lost himselfe in Aegypt. 5. Af∣ter diverse other changes of victories, and defeats neare E∣phesus at Ipsus, he met with the fatall blow that ended him, from Seleucus, Ibid. Lysimachus, and Ptolomy's united forces. At which time also was rowted his hauty sonne 3.  DEMETRIUS Poliorcetes, so called for his skill and successe in subduing Citties. 2. He was a great help to his Father in most of his atchievements. 3. Coming himselfe to raigne he passed Euphrates in the East, and subdued Baby∣lon; Perel. part. 1. p. 437 Athons also in the West, was so hardly put to it by him, that a quarrell arose between a Father and his Sonne, who should have a dead mouse, that by chance in the famine, fell from a roofe betwixt them. 4. He supposed that he had ve∣ry politiquely married his daughter Stratonice to Celeucus of Babylon, but it proved otherwise; for this Sonne in Law of his, soon after, sides with Ptolomy of Aegypt, and outs him of his Kingdome. 5. More we shall find of him after∣ward, in the line of Macedon. In the mean while, 4. CELEUCUS Nicanor would not leave him without an heire, but annexeth all his Asian Dominions to his, whose line we follow here as the most illustrious. 2. From this man we have the Aera or Account used in the Books of Mac∣cabees. Appl in Gy∣iaci. 3. Besides his continuall warres to inlarge his Ter∣ritories, he was a great builder, and erected nine Citties calling them all by his name Selenciah. 4. He was conten∣ted to bestow his faire wife Stratocias, upon his sonne 5.  ANTIOCHUS Soter, who so desperately doted on her, that without that salve his wound was incurable. 2. It
was not for any great good he did, the name of Saviour was afforded him, but because he did not much hurt. Notwith∣standing he is said to have carryed a hard hand over the Jewes. 3. Not much better proved his sonne by his Mother, wife Stratonica. 6. ANTIOCHUS, howsoever termed Theos, and made as it were a god by the Milesians for freeing them from the tyranny of Timarchus. 2. Great quarrells fell between him and Ptolomy Philadelphus of Aegypt, which were partly skinned over, by his putting away his wife Laodice (by whom he had two sonnes Seleucus Callinicus, and Antio∣chus Hierax) and marrying Berenice the daughter of Ptolo∣my. But this held not, Dan. 1.6. (as it was foretold by Daniel) For upon Theo's death, enraged Laodice falls on disconsolate Be∣renice, and caused her to be put to death, with her young sonne she had by Theos, which was basely performed against the solemne oath of. 7. SELEUCUS Callinicus, who made into his succession such a bloudy entrance. This Berenices Haire, is continued an Asterisme in the celestiall Globes. 2. Ptolomy Euerge∣tes of Aegypt sets upon him, to revenge the murther of his sister Berenice, takes part of Syria from him; Callinicus (by the help of his brother Hierax) recovers it againe, makes peace with Ptolomy without his brothers consent. 3. Hierax thereupon exasperated, warres on him, and expells him out of Syria. 4. Vpon these dissentions. Eumenes in Bithynia, Arsaces in Parthia, and the Gaulls plundering every where, make more work. 5. Hierax is slaine by Ptolomies Souldi∣ers Gallinicus dies by the fall from a horse. He left two sonnes behind him Seleucus and Antiochus, of which 8. SELEUCUS raigned next after him, by the name of Ceraunus which signifies Lightning. 2. But as Lightning, soon flasheth, pierceth, and fadeth: so this sparke passing ∣ver the Mountain Taurus, was by his own Souldiers extin∣guished, leaving his Dominions to his brother 9. ANTIOCHUS afterward called Magnus, perchance for undertaking much, and performing little. 2. He set up∣on
on Philopater of Aegypt, but was faine to make his Peace with him: opposed the Romanes, who had taken upon them the Wardship of young Ptolomy Epiphanes of Aegypt, by whom being often Beaten, he was forced to retyre himselfe beyond Taurus, and leave the Territories on this side of it to the Conquerours. 3. To him Haenniball fled, being defeated in the second Punick Warres, but could not be protected by him, and therefore made himselfe away to prevent his deli∣vering to the Romanes. 4. His end was by an enraged mul∣titude, in defence of their God Belus, whose Temples & Trea∣sures in Syria, he went about to rifle. 5. Of his three sonnes surviving him, Seleucus Philopater, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Demetrius, 10.  SELEUCUS Philopater the fourth of that name suc∣ceeds him. 2. He is foretold by Daniel to be a raiser of Tax∣es, Dan. 11.22. . Macch. 3. v. 38. having heard of the Treasure in the Temple of Ierusalem, he sends Heliodorus his Treasurer to seaze upon it for his use, but Heliodorus met with such a Lashing from Heaven, that he told his Master at his returne, If he had any Enemy or Tray∣tour, he should send him thither upon the like imployment. 3. whiles his two Brothers Epiphanes and Demetrius, were Hostages at Rome, this man addicts himselfs securely to all Licentiousnesse, but Epiphanes breaking from thence, and ta∣king his opportunity, was quickly found to ease him of his Government, This 11.  ANTIOCHUS Epiphanus tooke upon him. 1. Of his en∣trance 'tis said as of Boniface the eight, that he entred as a Fox, raigned as a Lyon, and dyed like a Dogg. 2. He tooke upon him at the first only to be a Guardian to Demetrius his Brothers Sonne; but once setled, quickly dispatched him, and takes all to himselfe. 3. Sets upon Aegypt, but staved off by the Romanes from that enterprize. 4. Returnes furiously upon the Iewes, whose Temple and Religion he would needs extinguish. 5. Old Eleazarus, and a Widdow with her se∣ven Sonnes are Martyred by him. 6. Iupiter Olympiu's I∣mage, must be erected upon Gods Altar, and Incense and Sa∣crifices offered unto it. 7. This made the seven Asmonei or
Maccabees, succesfully to stand up against him, for the vindi∣cation of Gods honour, to the defeating of diverse of his Ge∣nerals, and Forces. 8. Polybius termes him Epimanes, a mad man, and Christian Divines a Type of Anti-christ, a vile man (saith Daniel) that had not one commendable quality to speake for him. Having at last spit his Venom & wasted him∣selfe, he would needs into Persia to rifle the Treasures of the Temple of Nannea, to whom he pretended to be a Suiter in Marriage, and to take that wealth for a Dowry; but the Priests there so Polted him, that the Match was broken, and the Dow∣ry left behind, whence returning with disgrace, Gods ven∣geance ended him on the way, leaving Inheritour of his In∣famy, and Kingdoms his Sonne, 12. ANTIOCHUS Eupater, who made Peace with the Jewes, in regard he perceived that it was in vaine to oppresse them. 2. But within two yeares his Vncle Demetrius, the third sonne of Antiochus Magnus gets loose from Rome, (where he had bin a pledg with his Brother Epiphanes,) kills him, and succeeds under the title of, 13. DEMETRIUS Soter a preserver, but neither preser∣ved he others, neither long preserved himselfe. 2. Vpon a complaint of Treacherous Alcimus, 1. Macch. 7. 2. Macch. 14. he sent his Generall Nicanor to subdue Judas Maccabeus; but he with 3000 men, defeated the Hoast of Syria, and slew their Generall. For which a Feast was set a part, to be celebrated. By an other Generall of his Bacchides, Judas (deserted by his own men) nobly sold his Life. 3. 1. Macch. 10. But Soter had small time to Triumph in it, for in a set Battle he was overthrowne and slaine by, 14. ALEXANDER his Nephew, who pretended he was the Sonne of Epiphanes. He is termed otherwise, Alexander Bala, or Ʋeles. 2. Philometor of Aegypt gives him his Daughter, but afterwards taking his advantage, deprives him of his Wife, and Kingdome. 3. The poore man flies into A∣rabia, where he was slaine, and his head presented to Philo∣metor. Soter that was before this mans intrusion, had two sonnes, the younger Antiochus Sedetes, and the elder, 15. DEMETRIUS Nicanor who succeeded, but little
content he had in it, for Sedetes joyning with Tryphou (a great Commander in those dayes) with the concurrence of the Valiant Asmonean Jonathan, oseph. Anti. 13. c. 9. quickly outed him. 2. Try∣phan had a plot to King himselfe, but businesses were not ripe, he goes therefore into Arabia, and thence procures from one Malchu's tutorage, young Antiochus the son of Ba∣la, or Veles forementioned, to have a plausibletitle, this Child, 16.  ANTIOCHUS Entheus therefore is invested for a state, oseph. Ib. but after a defeat given to Nicanor by Arsaces of Par∣thia, who took him Prisoner, and the Coast (at it were clea∣red,) young Antiochus must sleepe with Fathers, and Tri∣umphing, 17.  TRYPHON the Apamean ascends the Throne with∣out pretence of Title. 2. He overcometh Nicanor. 3. Trea∣cherously, inveigheth Jonathan, and put him to Death. 4. Simon Ionathans Brother (chosen the Jewes Generall) Beseigeth this Trifler (as Ioseph termes him) in Dora from whence escaping to Apamea, Antiq. l. 13. c. 12. he was there taken and slaine by, 18.  ANTIOCHUS Sedetes termed Soter, and Pius sonne of the former Soter, and Brother to Nicanor. 2. He dealt not well with Simon the Father, and Hircanus his Sonne. 3. Who purchased a Peace of him for mony. 4. Invading Arsaces, he was slaine by him. 5. By meanes whereof, his Brother Nicanor returnes out of Captivity, and raignes thre yeares. Vpon his death, 19.  ALEXANDER Sebenna is foysted in by Physcon of Aegypt, Ioseph. Antiq. . 13. c. 17. but is quickly outed againe by 20. ANTIOCHUS Gryphus who slew him in battle, this Gryphus was sonne of Nicanor, and had a younger Brother Cyzicenus, that perpetually Warred upon him with variable successe. 2. This ennity of the Fathers was continued by, 21. CYZIZENUS, Seleucus, Philippus, and Demetrius, the Sonnes of Gryphus, and Antiochus, the Sonne of Cyzize∣nus their Vncle; untill (that wasted by such irreconcilable dissentions.) They were surprized by Tygranes of Parthia; who put a Period to the Line of the Seleucidae, but himselfe
was soone after subdued by the Romanes, and Syria made a Province. 2. Cnotemporary with this Period must be paralleled, the Line of the Ptolomies or Lagidae of Aegypt, taking their rise from. 1. Ptolomeus Lagus a By-blow of Philips of Macedon, the third sharer in Great Alexanders Dominions. Ioseph. An∣tiq. l. 12. c. . He surprized Ierusalem by a Stratageme, taking the vantage of the strict celebration of their Sabboth; and carried mul∣titudes of them Captives into Aegypt, which 2. Philadel∣phus his sonne redeemed with his owne Treasury, and set at Liberty, who was famous besides for his exquisit Library, and procuring the Translation of the Septuagint. Farre short of him came. 3. Evergetes his sonne, commended notwith∣standing, for revenging of his Sisters Beronices death, upon the bloudy Callinicus of Syria. But devillish proved his sonne Nick-named. 4. Philopater for Butchering his own Parents, from whose tyranny the Iewes in Aegypt were miraculously delivered, by Gods frustrating his projects, and turning his Elephants prepared for to destroy the Iewes, to the destructi∣on of their Leaders. See the Booke of Symion the high Preist, commonly called the 3. of Maccabees. 5. Epiphanes was too young to be so Villanous, upheld by the Romans his Gar∣dians, against Philip of Macedon, and the great Antiochus. 6. Philometor comes next in the Line, so called from the deadly hate his Mother bore him. 7. Phiscons great Panche wallowes in next, that sent his sonne to be eaten of his own Mother, as bad or worse proved. 8. Lathurus that vexed the Iewes, and forced his Prisoners to feed on dead Carcases, whereupon outed by his Brother. 9. Alexander, Alexander kept the place, untill his Mother Cleopatra plotted to kill him, which he prevented by Matricide; Deposes himselfe & gives way for Lathurus his returne to Raigne againe. 10. Then Auletes the Fidler comes on, but by Pompeyes perswa∣sion, was banished by the Romans, to give way to 11. Dyoni∣sius his sonne, that proved Pompey's executioner, when he fled to Aegypt from his overthrow in Thessalia. Only 12. Cle∣opatra his Sister remained to succeed, Minion first to Julius
Caesar, then to Mark-Anthony, whose overthrow at Actum brake her heart. Antony made himselfe away by poyson, she by Aspes, applyed to her Breasts. And the date of the Lagedae exspired, Aegypt falls also to be a Romane Province. 3. The next paralell is the line of Macedon. In which the 1. Arideus, Alexanders halfe brother, did nothing but by dire∣ction of stirring Perdiccas, to whose tutorage he was commit∣ted, but both of them quickly cut off. 2. Cassander, Antipaters sonne did more then he should, in barbarously making away Olympias Alexanders mother, ustin. l. 14. Cleopatra his sister, with his two Wives Roxane and Barsena, and their Children Alex∣ander and Hercules: the cry of whose blood found revenge in his. 3. Antipater that succeeded, and Alexander his bro∣ther, who were the ruine one of another, and the whole bloudy family. This was especially performed by 4. De∣metrius Poliorcetes who outed from Syria, by overthrow∣ing the wrangling brethren, setles himselfe here. But 5. Pyr∣rhus of Epyre soon got the Kingdome from him, and as quickly left it to 6. Lysimachus of Thrace, that stout com∣mander of Alexanders, who strangled the Lyon he was ex∣posed unto, without weapon, to be torne in pieces. But this valour defended him not against the undermining and for∣ces of the Aegyptian, 7. Ceraunus who outs him, growes in with his Wife, cheats them, and abuses them all. But be∣fore a whole year past 8. Meliager another of Alexanders leaders dispatches him, he Raignes but two Months, before 9. Antipater the second had gotten the Scepter from him, and about 45 daies after, left it to 10. Sosthenes, who freed the Kingdome from the plundering Galls, but could not free himself from 11. Antigonus Gonatus Poliorcetes sonne, who recovered the Kingdom after five intervenient intruders. To him succeeds 12. Antigonus the second, his Sonne. He leaves Antigonus the third, tearmed Doson, for promising much and performing nothing, but his government ended, with the nonage of 13. Philip, Gonates sonne, to whom Doson was only Protector. Philip hath great overthrowes by the Romanes, who captivated at length his sonne. 14. Por∣seus
by Paulus Aemilius, And so Macedon also fell to be a Romane Province. 4. With these fall in the beginnings and growth of the Romanes Greatnesse under their Kings, Consulls, Tribunes, and Dictators upon occasion 2. Whence we have their Vi∣ctories in Europe, in the Italian, Scicilian, Spanish, Macedo∣nian, German, Illyrian, and warres with Pyrrhus in their own Territories. In Asia the Syrian, Parthian, and strong opposition of Methridates and his adherents. In Africa, the three famous Punick Warres, untill Carthage was razed by them. And the stubborne resistance of Jugurtha, at larg re∣corded in particular Histories, as Insurrections amongst themselves of their discontented slaves, of Catiline and Ser∣torius, the bloudy ruptures between Marius and Scylla, Pompey and Caesar, Tantae molis erat, so waighty a matter i was to lay the foundation and erect the Trophies of the Fourth Monarchy of the Romanes. 5. As for matters of the Church, and progresse of Learn∣ing, in this Period between Alexander and Caesar, We find the Temple of Jerusalem surprised by Crassus and Pom∣pey, with their disasterous ends upon it, and the Iewes brought under the yoake of Herod the Idumean. But humane Learning never attained that splendor, as then it did a∣mongst the Graecian Philosophers, especially severed by their distinct Schooles, of Academicks, Peripatetiques, Sto∣icks, Cynicks, Epicures, Pythagoreans, and Sceptiques, too nu∣merous to be rehearsed.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Alexanders expedition against the Persi∣an, were rather of ambitious venturing, then of just cause given? 2. v. Hist. l. 9. c. 17. If he had turned his Forces Westward, he had met with his match in Papyrius Cur∣sor amongst the Romanes? 3. His entitling himselfe Jupiter Hammons sonne, distasted him more with his owne, then advantaged him with strangers? 4. His proceeding against his old valiant Ge∣nerall Parmenio, and his brave sonne Phi∣lotas, had sufficient ground to exequte them for Traytors? 5. Antiochus Epiphanes may passe for a fit type of Antichrist? 6. The first Library of note, were that of Ptolomeus Philadelphus in Aegypt? 7. The change of Kings of diverse families, in the Macedonian line, were the chiefe cause of subduing them by the Romane Conquest?
FOVRTH MONARCHY of the Romanes. PERIOD IIII. 1. THe Fourth Period, from Iulius Caesar to Con∣stantine the Great, begins the Fourth Monarchy of the Romanes, and takes up the space of about 355 years, under forty Pagan Emperours, whereof the first was, 1. IULIUS CaeSAR. His exploits are famous in the 1. Gallish, 2. Germane, 3. British, 4. Civill warres a∣gainst Pompey, and his adherents. 5. Alexandrian, for set∣ling Cleopatra, with whom he was too intimate. 6. African, against Cato, who slew himselfe at Ʋtica. And 7. Spanish Warres against Sextus Pompeius. In all which he is recko∣ned by some to have been victorious in fifty set Battles. 2. Having gotten the perpetuall Dictatorship, Plutarch. He reformed the Calender, as now we retaine it in the Iulian years ac∣count, and left the Month Iulius for continuance of his name. 3. To this valour he wanted not Learning or Language, for the Registring his own Acts, a touch whereof is extant in his seaven Bookes de Bello Gallico, and three other de Bello Ci∣vili. 4. Cicero cries him up also for a most pertinent and ac∣complished Orator. 5. In Martiall affaires Plutarch so pa∣ralells him with Alexander, that he carries the Bucklers from him, though from spotts (which are usually noted in Heroicall dispositions) Alexander may be observed more
Free. 6. This honour he gained to leave the name of Caesar to all his successours, whereof his Parallell came short. His quick dispatch is noted in Veni, Vidi, Vici, I came, saw, o∣vercame, the great forces that Pharnaces Mithridates sonne of Pontus had levied against him. 7. His Motto was SE∣MEL QƲAM SEMPER. Ibid. Better it is once to dye, then to live alwaies languishing. It fell out with him ac∣cordingly. For sitting in the Senate-house, he was bru∣tishly murthered with 23. wounds, the most part given by them whose lives he had preserved, which (it should seem) he intimated to Brutus in his last words ; What? and thou my sonne? His successor was his sister Julias, naturall, and his adopted sonne, 2.  AUGUSTUS Caesar, borne in Cicero's Consulship, who exhorts his brother Quintus in his Government, to immitate the prudence of Octavius, who was Augustu's fa∣ther. 2. Before he could secure himselfe, Anthony, and Le∣pidus were wisely to be dealt with. A Triumvirate was patched up between them, for signing of which Lucius Cae∣sar, Augustus own Vnkle, old Cicero his faithfull Advo∣cate, and Paulus the brother of the High Priest Lepidus, must be proscribed to be executed; so little reckoning is made of other obligations, where the condition runnes for Soveraignty. But this knot was quickly dissolved, the three sonnes growing into one. Lepidus dyes, Anthony over∣thrown at Mutina, and Actium made himselfe away. 3. Au∣gustus having vanquished all his opposites at home, and Ene∣mies abroad, with incredible successe and Celerity (except in that one shamefull defeat of Q. Ʋarus against Arminius) shuts up the Temple of Ianus, in token of an universall peace. Vid. Alsted. Hist. c. 21. 4. Then was the Prince of Peace our Saviour borne the 42. of this Emperours Raigne, and in the year of the world (as amongst 28 differences, we pitch upon with Lu∣ther and Lucidus) 3960. some think this variety of account (especially between the Greeks and Latines) happened, by reason it was usuall amongst the Ancients by these figures 1.2.3.6, mystically to insinuate the Sacred Trinity, in 1.2.3.
and unity in 6. which mixed with the years of the World (by those who knew not what it meant) brought the ac∣count so much out of square, that by subduction of that addi∣tament may be thus rectified. Eusebius counts from the Cre∣ation to the Nativity 5199 years, from which subduct 1236 (the forementioned mysticall summe) and the re∣mainder will be 3963. but three years exceeding Luthers reckoning, which we follow. 5. But those matters were least thought on by those, whom Gods providence made chiefe actors in it. Psal. 49. Man in honour may be compared to Beasts that Perish. Augustus thus advanced in the eye of the world finds his discontents at home, in his Children. His daughter Iulia, by his wife Scribonia, and her issue, had not the best report. It is doubted whether Ovid were too familiar with hir, somewhat there was more then his bookes de Arte A∣mandi, that caused him to be banished. He was wont to wish that he had never been Married, or been a Father, Sueton. and to terme his daughter the Impostumes of the World. 6. Vomicas & Carcinomat. Yet this rigid Father could take Livia Drusilla, from her Hus∣band Taberius Nero, when she was great with child with Drusus, and she humour'd him so pleasingly all his life, (though he had no issue by her) that his last words were, O Livia, remember our marriage, and Adieu: so shee did, Tocim. and 'tis thought, had a finger in setting him going. 7. He affected Maecenas for his secrecy, Agrippa for his patience, and Virgill for his rare gift in sublime Poetry, was wont to say that he received Rome of Bricke, but had left it Marble. His Mot∣to was FESTINA LENTE. . Eucipid. in Phaenissis. SAT CITOSI SAT BENE: , which hinders not a speedy execution of that which is deliberately resolved upon. His successor was 3.  TIBERIUS the Sonne in Law only of Augustus, which his wife Livia brought him, begotten of her former husband Tiberius Nero, and his brother Drusus in her bel∣ly to boote. 2. In his first imployments he proved victorious against the Germanes and others, with his brother Drusus, which caused Augustus to adopt him, and marry his daughter
Iulia to him, from whom he was quickly divorced by her Fathers consent. 3. He made himself shye in undertaking the charge of the Empire, but entring like a Fox (as it is said of Boniface the eight) raigned like a Lyon, and dyed like a Dogg. 4. In the 15, some say the 18th yeare of his Tyran∣ny our Saviour suffered, whom he would have deified, but the Senate withstood it. 5. Seianus his great Favorite was wor∣ryed by him, and his daughter deflowred by the Hangman, to make her lyable to accompany her father. 6. His latter time was most unnaturally spent in prodigious cruelty, and bestia∣lity, Sueton. so that he was rightly Characterized by Theodorus Gada∣reus his Tutor, , Durt kned with bloud, and by others, instead of Claudius Tyberius Nero, Caldius Biberius Mero. 7. Lastly as he and his Mother Li∣via, had a hand in making away Marcus Agrippa the right Heire to Augustus: so ('tis thought) his successour took a course to hasten his passage to his Ancestors. Then after he had contrary to his Motto, (which was MELIVS EST TONDERE, QVAM DEGLVBERE) a long time not only fleeced, but devoured the sheepe, a worse (if worse might be) follows him. 4.  CAIUS Caligula. It must be remembred, that Livia brought with her to Augustus two sonnes by her former Husband, Tiberius, and Drusus; Tiberius raigned next after him, Drusus died in the Germane Warres, leaving two sonnes behind him, Germanicus, and Claudius. This Caligula was the sonne of Germanicus by Agrippina, Daughter of Julia, and Grandchild to Augustus, who after many rare Atchive∣ments died in Germany. 2. In the beginning of his Govern∣ment he vented his spite to the Iewes, for denying him reli∣gious worship, sets up his Statue in the Temple of Ierusalem by the title of Iupiter Caius, Enseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 6. Ioseph. Antiq. l. 18. gave favourable Audience to Appion declaiming against them, but would not heare Philo, in their defence. 3. His Lust was Monstrous in erecting Stewes in his Palace, Deflowring his own Sisters, sparing nei∣ther Matrones, nor Maydes that he had a mind unto. 4. His cruelties Devillish exercised (as it were) in hatred of maen∣kind,
and fretted that no heavier calamities fell upon the world in his dayes. 5. His courting of the Moone to be his Paramour, bringing Cockleshels to Rome from Germany, as spoyles of the Conquered Ocean; Inviting his Horse Jncita∣tus, and entertaining him with a Golden Manger full of Pro∣vender, and vessels of the best Wine to drinke, Sueton. promising to make him Consull, with the like freaks of frenzy, need not to be insisted upon. 6. His Tragicall Motto was ODERƲNT DƲM METƲƲNT, he passed not for the hatred so he might be a Bugbeare to all men. To which purpose, he must be Iupiter Hercules, & what not? Yet any Crack of Thunder drave him to shelter himself under his Bed. 7. A good end for such a Monster could not be expected, which befell him from Cassius Charea, and Cornelius Sabinus, his officers neare about him, His Wife Caesonia and Daughter were slaine together with him, into his place was hoysted his Ʋncle, 4. CLAUDIUS in a strange manner, for certaine Souldiers in a hurry, going to Plunder the Pallace, one perceiving the feet of a man hidden in a hole, plucks him out by the heeles. This proves to be Claudius, who falling on his knees, and de∣siring his life might be spared, the Souldiers lift him up on their shoulders and proclaime him Emperour. This tooke so with the multitude, that the Senate, for their own safety were faine to give way unto it. 2. At his first entrance, he shewed more discretion then was expected from him. He would not be honoured with Sacrifices. Banished the Iewes out of Rome for their tumults, provided for the Poore in a great Famine, Act. 18.. Act. 11.28. foretold by Agabus. 3. Neither were his Atcheivements abroad of lesse consequence, in Germany and Africa by his Commanders. In our Brittany he was in Person, and so setled affaires, that he returned with the title of Britannicus. A Phoe∣nix in his time was seene and seldom before, or since. 4. Sextus Aure. Victor. His Mother was wont to terme him a Monster begun not perfect∣ed by nature, so that it past for a Proverbiall disgrace stultior Claudio, a veryer foole then Claudius. But he lost himselfe not so much by doing as suffering indignities. His Wife Mes∣sallina was not satisfied to outvy all Strumpets in the Stewes
but needs she must Marry publiquely a young Gallant C. Sylius in her Husbands absence: but this impudence cost her her life. 5. Pallas, Narcissus, and other ministers about him, took the vantage of his easie disposition egregiously to cheate him, and deride him. Of this crue Faelix was preferred to be Go∣vernour in Iudea, Act. 23. whom St Pauls Sermon of Temperance, and Iudgement to come in the presence of his Minion Drusilla, made to tremble. 6. In his time Simon Magus plaied his pranks in Rome, & got to be honored as a God, but that St Peter encountred him there to his neck-breaking, we find not. It would do well that this Emperours Law against freed men in∣gratefull to their Patrons, (should be retracted to their former slavery,) were severely exequted in these Rebellious times. 7. Sparkes of a generous minde, (howsoever damped by a crazy body) appeare in his Motto, GENERIS ƲIRTƲS NOBILITAS. It is virtue, not Scutchions, or Images of An∣cestours makes men Noble. 8. His Wife Agrippina (worse, if it might be then his former Messalina) poysoned him at length in a Mushrome (of which Seneca makes good sport, In Apocolo∣cyntosi de Morte Cloudii. and of his deifying) to assure the succession of her sonne, 6.  NERO which she had by her former Husband Domi∣tius Aenobardus, who was wont to say that from him, and Agrippina, nothing could proceed but for publique mischeife. 1. The first five yeares of his Government were such, that Traiane was wont to say, none ever had attained to the per∣fection of them. 2. But afterward he brake out into all Vil∣lanies of Lusts, with Catamites and Strumpets of all sorts, wherein he spared not his owne Mother, and slew her after∣ward, with the most unnaturall abusing of her dead Corps; Of Butchery in making away his Wife Octavia, and kicking to death (being great with Child) his beloved Poppaed, not sparing Seneca, and Burrhus his faithfull Councellours, sending Lucan the Poet to accompany them. 3. He set Rome on fire, and for excuse thereof, laid it upon the Christians. 4. Was Author of the first grand Persequntion, wherein St Peter (as it is said) and St Paule were Martyred at Rome, with others innumetable, and Jacobus Justus at Jerusalem.
Whereupon Tertullian inferr'd that the Gospel must needs be a pretious thing, because Nero hated it. 5. The Company he most affected, were Witches, Bauds, Sycophants, Fidler, Coachmen, Stageplayers, guelded Ganimeds, of whō he would have turned Sporus into a woman and Married. Whereupon one wished that his Father had had no other Wife, whence past these Pasquils upon him.  Nero, Orestes, Almaeon, registred for Kill-mothers. 6. Al∣though he used for a Motto QVAEVISTERRA ARTEM ALIT, All Countries yeeld a being to aman of Parts and Arts, in reference to his own skill, which he cheifly stood upon, yet that was more genuine unto him, , not only whem I am dead, but while I live, let Heaven and Earth be turned into a Chaos. 7. Con∣tinuing to be so intolerable, his Souldiers fell off from, and the Senate adjudged him to be whipt to death like a Rogue, which exeqution he prevented by killing himselfe, having no friend, or foe left that would do so much for him. His suc∣cessour was old, 7. GALBA a sowre Souldier, and strict in Discipline, so that when he came to the Army, the buzz went amongst the vulgar. Disce Militare miles, Galba est non Getulicus. Stand to your tackling, Galba comes amongst you, not remisse Ge∣tulicus. 2. As the Army advanced him for hope of promi∣sed gaine, so for non-payment, they quickly Rebelled against him. 3. His Motto could not stop their mouthes, LEGEN∣DVS EST MILES NON EMENDVS. A Souldier must be chosen, not bought. Whereupon they basely slew him, and set up in his place, 8. OTHO a Complementing Courteour, well beloved of the most of his Souldiers, but unhappy in his advancement. 2. He was overthrown in three Skirmishes rather then Bat∣tles, despaires of his condition. 3. His Motto VNVS PRO MVLTIS, he would rather dye himselfe, then draw on the death of a multitude. This he wrought by his owne hands. whereupon Ausnius passes him with this Epitaph,
Fine tamen laudandus erat qui morte decora, Hoc solum fecit obile, quòd perijt. Whatsoere his life was, sure his death was faire, Noble in this for being his owne slayer. His Competitor that forced him to it, 9.  VITELLIUS had lesse credit and comfort in his place, a debaucht wretch, and bloudy beast, whose word was BO∣NVS EST ODOR HOSTIS, MELIOR CIVIS OCCI∣SI. The smell of a dead enemy is good, but better of a dead Citizen. 2. But such divillish dispositions are most common∣ly paid in their owne Coyne. 3. He was quickly forsaken of his Partizans, drag'd through the street, pelted with myre and filth, hackt and tormented with Weapons, and so per sca∣las Gemonias, by the growning stayres throwne into Tybur, as he had barbarously used the Brother of 10.  VESPAEIAN that succeeded him, who was of a mea∣ner house then those that went before, but by his Virtue, Va∣lour, and moderation overtopped them. 2. He was designed to quell the Iewes that rebelled, wherein he prospering with the best approbation, Vpon the Souldiers setting up else∣where other Emperours after the death of Nero, his follow∣ers took upon them to doe the like, and Galba, Otho, and Vi∣tellius in a trice cutt off, their Choyce stood by the applause of all. 3. At his entrance he repaired the Cities ruines, shewed himselfe averse from Flatterers, base lusts and revellings, by which his Predecessors became infamous. ueton. 4. It is said that he miraculously cured a blind man, and one that was lame, but this might be but a device to gaine popular reputation. 5. His easinesse to passe by injuryes appeared, in the bestowing no∣bly of Vittelliu's his Competitors Daughter, and giving a large Portion with her. 6. He much relyed on Predictions. Iose∣phus the Historian foretold him he should be Emperour, and then should free him from Imprisonment. 7. His Covetu∣ousnesse is taxed by most, which his Motto importeth, LV∣CRI BONVS ODOR EX RE QVALIBET. But this is capable of a good meaning, which his practice verified.
Of gaine contenting is the smell, If gotten, and disposed well. His end was manly in this parting resolution, Oportet Impe∣ratorem stantem mori, an Emperour should dye standing as he did, leaving his place to his sonne, 11. TITUS, before his comming to raigne, he gave shrewd suspition of Luxury (in entertaining of Beronice, and her trayne, from whom afterward he was unwillingly severed;) Of crueliy, in murdering Aulus Caecinna through a jealous humour, when he friendly invted him to supper; of Avarice, in extorting from others, that belonged not to him; so that diverse misdoubted he would prove another Nero. But his sweet and prudent Government quickly wiped off all those aspersions. In so much that he was termed Delitiae humani generis, the delight of mankind. 2. It was a principle he held, that the courtisie of a Prince, should dismisse no Suiter with a sad Countenance. And sitting on a time in company, O my friends (saith he) I have lost a day, in regard he had spent it without doing some good. 3. His Conquest of Ierusalem made him famous, not only for the difficulty of the thing, as for his moderate carriage in it, bearing with the desperate stubbernesse of the Beseiged, and shedding Teares at the bur∣ning of the Temple, when he could not help it. 4. The im∣precation of the Jewes at our Saviours voting to Death, His bloud be upon us and our children. There took place in full measure, and in the same, mett to their Mssias. For so many of them were then Crucified, De Bell Iud. l. 6. c. 32. that by relation of their owne Iosephus, there remained no more space to set Crosses in, nor any more Crosses to crucifie bodies upon. Thus was accomplished the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel, and re∣peated by our Saviour, being 490 weeks of yeares, as the more passable opinion is, from the second yeare of Darius Nothus, who gave way to the reedifying & finishing of the se∣cond Temple. 5. Vpon this successe a suspition grew, that he affected the Deposing of his Father, but his hasting to him, and continued observance of him, soone cleared him from a∣ny such intention. 6. His brother Domitian, could not be so
excused for plotting against him, whom notwithstanding convicted he freely pardoned 7. His Symbole was PRIN∣CEPS BONVS ORBIS AMOR. All the world falls in love with a good Prince. He seemed the better through the wickednesse of his Brother, 12. DOMITIAN that followed him. 1. Never toward∣ly from his childhood. 2. Being Emperour he would retyre himselfe frequently to stab flies, whence one asking who was with his Majesty, Belzebub. Muscicapita∣veus. it was aptly applyed, truly not a Fly. 3. He set on foot the second grand persecution against the Christians, wherein St Iohn was banished into Pathmos, and wrote his Revelation; Arrogated to himselfe Divine Ho∣nours, and would be stiled Dominus & Deus noster, our Lord and God, to which afterward the Canonists entitled the Pope. 4. The Months December and October are de∣signed to bear his name, as Iuly and August, doe of Julius Caesar, and Augustus, but this change of the Calender took not. 5. When men were weary of him, a Chough is said to have spoke Greeke from the Tarpeian rock , All shall be well. 6. Which could not be untill the Tyrant was slaine outright, by his own servants, which the Divell might informe Apollonius Tyaneus of, when he cryed out at Ephesus the same time, To him Stephen, strike him, kill him. 7. His word was FALLAX BONVM REGNVM, A Kingdome is a deceiptfull good. He found it too true, and a better successor then himselfe Cocceius 13.  NERVA a Father, rather then a Prince of the Com∣monwealth, he set things right, that his predecessor had dis∣ordered, revoked St John out of Banishment, provided for poore, forbad incestuous marriages. 2. His Motto summes up his excellencies, Seneca in Thyeste. MENS BONA REGNVM POSSIDET, my mind to me a Kingdome is. 3. The shortnesse of his good government, was continued by his adopted sonne and successour Ʋlpius 14.  TRAANUS, a Spaniard, the first stranger that rai∣gned among the Italians, his justice, moderation, and va∣lour, got him the title of Pater Patriae father of his Coun∣try.
2. Notwithstanding the third persecution against the Christians was raised by him. This was so me what mittiga∣ted afterward by the Testimony of Plinius Secundus, con∣cerning their harmlesse conversation. 3. Plutarch was his Instructer, and Lucian that scorner of all Religion, lived in his time, who thought it a disparagement to their great witts, to stoop so low as Christianity. Notwithstanding Oracles ceased (especially at that time) amongst the Hea∣then, And frequent miracles were amongst Christians. 4. The Iewes (not lessoned by the late ruine of Jerusalem) raise insurrections against him, in which 200000 of them perished. 5. His word was QVALIS REX TALIS GREX, Subjects prove good by a good Kings example. His cousen Aelius 15. ADRIANUS takes his place, much commended for his personall endowments, of Memory, Wit, and other abi∣lities. 2. By the Apologies of Aristides and Quadratus, the fourth persecution begun in his time was much staied a gainst the Christians, who at length had so gained his good opinion, that he would have builded a Church for them without Images, if some about him had not told him, that it would be dishonourable to all the rest of the Gods. 3. The Iewes possessed with a fatall frenzy, are up in Armes againe, under an Impostor Barchocab, a sonne of the starre, that should rise in Iacob, but he proved but Barchosbah, a sonne of a lying cheater, this drew upon them their grubbing up, root and Branch, the Plough upon the Citty, the erecting of ano∣ther out of its ruines, by the name of Aelia from the Em∣perour, with the statua of a sow set over the Gate in detesta∣tion of Judaisme. 4. After many Journeys, and setling af∣faires abroad, and here in Brittany, by building a wall of 80 miles, to sever the Romanes from the Natives, he returnes to right matters at home. 5. His word was NON MI∣HI SED POPVLO, consonant to that of the twelve Tables, Salus Populi suprema lex esto, the Peoples good must be the chiefe scope of the Ruler, to be promoted by him as a Protector, and Gardian, not as a Servant, or Officer,
to be accountable to his Subjects (if he doe not his duty) but to God only who is his only Superiour. He dyes Poetically desperate, with this farewell to the world. Animula vagula blandula, Hospes comes{que} corporis, Quae nunc abibis in loca? Pallidula rigida, nudula, Nec utsoles, dabis jocos. having adop∣ted to succeed him 16. ANTONINUS Pius, who erected a Temple for clemen∣cy: he better affected the Christians, after he had read the Apologies of Iustine Martyr, and others. 2. He had learned men in great esteeme, as Galen, (who was his Physitian) but detested Jdlelers, as the bane of the Common-wealth. 3. His Motto shewes his gentle disposition. SATIVS EST SERVARE VNVM CIVEM, QVAM MVLTOS HOSTES PERDERE. one Cittizen is preserved with greater credit, then a thousand enemies destroy∣ed. His sonne 17. ANTONINUS Philosophus followes, who associates to him his brother Lucius Ʋerus, of a contrary disposition. The Philosopher furnished with all virtues, his brother with vices, but Verus continues not long, so that the whole govern∣ment returned to him. Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 5. 2. He raised in a blind zeale, the fifth persecution against the Christians wherein Polycarpus and Iustine Martyr suffered. But his distressed Army in Germa∣ny, being miraculously preserved, by the prayers of the Chri∣stians, calmed him into a more favourable conceit of them. The Legion that obtained this help from heaven, was there∣upon termed , for not only procuring raine to the thirsty Souldier, but Thunder and Lightning to route the E∣nemy. His word was REGNI CLEMENTIA CVS∣TOS, Clemency is a Kingdomes best preserver His sonne. 18.  COMMODUS thought not so. A degenerate wresch and shame to his family. 2. He kept 300 Curtizans, and so many Boyes: would needs be accounted Hercules the sonne of Jupiter, and so encounter Wild Beasts with his club and
Lions skinne, had an ambition to have some months beare his name, as Iulius Caesar and Augustus had; but met at length with a draught of Poyson from his Sweet-heart Martia & a strangling upon that, to dispatch him quickly. 3. This for∣ted not with his Embleme PEDETENTIM though it ranne with all his Subjects desires, who in a manner thrust into his place Helvius 19. PERTINAX an experienced souldier, and a worthy man, too good to keep it long. 2. But indeavouring reso∣lutely to right things amisse, he was basely without provoca∣tion murthered by the Praetorian bands. 3. His motto is said to be MILITEMVS, Let us March on. His march was soon cut off by 20. DIDIUS Iulianus, who bought the Empire for mony, and had his Symbole, IN PRETIO PRE∣TIVM, Mony gets any thing, but he had small incoms by his purchase. Niger in Syria, and Albinus in Britany lay claime to it, and he being slaine in his Pallace by those he traded with, 21. SEPTIMIUS Severus fucceeds, commended for a great Souldier, and otherwise a worthy man. 2. He set on foot the sixt Persecution, it being the Divells policy to im∣ploy especially men noted for morall honesty and abilities, to massaker Gods Saints, that the world might believe, that those could not chuse but be most abominable, whom such wise & pious men were so earnest to extinguish. 3. After some Victories in the East, and building a wall here between England and Scotland, he dyed at Yorke, his word was LA∣BOREMVS, Let's be doing, which was ill applied by his sonne that succeeded. 22. BASSIANUS Caracalla, so called from a new fashio∣ned cassock that he wore, reaching down to his ancles. 2. He professed that in all his life, he never learned to doe good. He slew his brother Geta in his step-mother Julias armes, whom afterward he took to wife, and slew Papinianu the famous Lawyer, because solicited by him to defend his fratricide, his answer was, that it was a crime sooner committed then
defended. 3. In a frantick humor he would be accounted Alexander the Great, and Achilles, conforming the posture of his body to their statues. His Motto was, OMNIS IN FERRO SALƲS, All safety lies in the sword: but the sword could not protect him, for going to untrusse a poynt, in his expedition against the Parthians, he was slain by one Martiall a Centurion, by the setting on of Opilius. 23. Macrinus an unworthy wight, who took the go∣vernment upon him, which Audentius an able man waved, when it was offered unto him. 2. He made a dishonoura∣ble peace with the Parthians, associates his sonne Diadume∣nus to be Coemperour with him. 3. His word is said to be, FERENDƲM ET SPERANDƲM: Beare he might, but no good he could hope, from such detestable beginnings. His Sonne with himselfe were saine together by their own Souldiers, to make way for Antoninus 24.  HELIOGABALUS a monster, the bastard of Caracal∣la by Simiamira a strumpet, whom he is said incestuously to have used. 2. He erected a Temple to the Sunne, whose Priest he was, and would constraine the Christians to wor∣ship in it; Married a Vestall, and defended the fact to the Senate, that he might doe it being a Priest. 3. His setting up a Senate of Women, was a new fetch of Policy, and their Ordinances were correspondent, as what attyre each Woman should use, Pezelus ex Aurel. Herod. an. Capitolin. how they should take place, when salute &c. set down by Authors. His word was SVVS SIBI QVISQVE HERAES OPTIMVS, Every man should be his own Heire, no matter for posterity. Those soul∣diers that chose him exequted him in a Privy, and sent him to clense himselfe in Tybur. His cousen Alexianus succee∣ded him by the name of 25,  ALEXANDER Severus: He was somewhat harsh to the Christians in the beginning, but afterward favoured them so farre, that he had the picture of Abraham, and Christ in private, and would have built a Temple for Christians, if Vlpian the Lawyer (whose advice he much used) and some others, had not diverted him from it. 2. His Mother Mam∣mea
sent for Origen, and was instructed by him in grounds of Christianity. 3. He was a strict exactor of Discipline, an utter enemy to Idlenesse, buying and selling of offices, cheatings in matter of trust: whereupon he adjudged one to be stifled with smoake, that had vented smoake in stead of substance. His Motto was that of our Saviours, QƲOD TIBI HOC ALTERI, Doe as thou wilt be done unto. Yet all these ex∣cellencies, could not shield him from his barbarous Souldi∣ers, who slew him together with his good Mother, neare Mentz in Germany. Of whom the Cyclopean ringleader was 26. MAXIMINUS Thrax, in a hurry made his successor. A man of a vast stature, two foot and a halfe higher, then a∣ny in the Army, devouring forty pound of flesh daily, with about sixe gallons of wine to digest it. 2. Advanced by Se∣verus, he furthered the conspiracy against him, and persecu∣ted the Christians more spitefully, because he favoured them. 3. As this seaventh persecution was the shortest, so it was most violent, not of the common sort so much, as of their especiall Leaders, who were either cut off from them, Chrys. in Heb. 13. v. 17. or hireling intruded for them, or their flock set up against them. 4. His boysterous tyranny so exasperated his Souldiers, that they set up one Quercianus against him, but he quickly made away, the Gordiani with the like successe appear in Africk, of whom the younger was slaine by Capellanus, Maximinu's friend, and the elder, strangled himselfe. 5. For the Senates favouring those Competitors, he hastned with his Army to Rome, to be revenged of them, but was slaine in besieging Aquileia, where the women cut off their haire to make bow∣strings, to shoot against him. 6. At which siege his Souldiers mutiny, slay him and his sonne, professing that of an ill breed, not a Whalpe must be left. 7. His word was, QƲO MA∣JOR HOC LABORIOSIOR, Greatest pains taking, should attend the greatest abilities, but not to doe mischiefe, but good. As this mans competitors Balbinus and Puppianus were like to have done, but they were cut off before they were setled, and therefore not reckoned in the line of Empe∣rours.
27.  GORDIANUS succeeds, a young Nephew of Gor∣dianus the elder, He had good successe against Sapor of Persia. 2. The Symbole ascribed unto him is PRINCEPS MI∣SER QVEM LATET VERITAS, Vnhappy is that Prince from whom truth is concealed. This was this young mans cause, who was basely made away by 28.  PHILIPPUS Arabs his Generall. 1. It is said that he was Baptized with his Mother, and Family, but Scali∣ger denyes it, he was never observed to laugh, was a deep dissembler, according to his Motto, MALITIA REGNO JDONEA, Pomponiua Latus. wickednesse fits to Governe. He found the fruit of it, being with his sonne slaine by the Souldiers, to make way for 29.  DECIUS approved by the Senate and Souldiers, a man beyond exception both for Ʋalour and conversation. 2. But whether it were for hatred to Philip, that seemed to favour Christianity, or to get a masse of money which Philip had left in Pope Fabians hands, or some other secret ayme: He became the author of the 8th terrible Persecution, wherein Orignae faultered, Niceph. l. 5. c. 27. Apollonia had her teeth beaten out, and the seven that slept 129 yeares in a Cave, from that time to Theodosius, with diverse other are Registred. 3. In his time Paul an Aegyptian betaking himselfe into the Wil∣dernesse to avoyd persecution, became the first Hermite. 4. His word was, APEX MAGISTRATVS AVTHORI∣TAS, and his sonnes, Fugitivo nulla Corona, authority he had sufficient but that freed him not from the Treason of 30.  TREBONIANUS Gallus, who basely betrayed him to the Gothes, by whom he and his sonne young Decius, peri∣shed. 2. But the same Lot quickly befell Gallus with his sonne Volusian, from Aemilianus. 3. Good Symboles are at∣tributed to these, as to Gallus, NEMO AMICVS IDEM ET ADVLATOR, No Flatterer can be a true friend; to Volucian PVBLICA FAMA NON EST VANA, That all report, is likely to have some truth in it; To Aemilian, NON GENS SED MENS, NON GENVS SED GE∣NIVS. Not Race or Place, but Grace truely sets forth a man.
These had only the title of Emperours, but soone fell before 31. VALERIAN, A man received at first with great ap∣plause; but afterward perverted, (as 'tis said) by an Aegypti∣an Magician. He raised the 9th persecution against the Chri∣stians. 2. In this (besides infinite others by unusuall tor∣ments) Cyprian the famous African-Father suffered, and Laurence that resolute Champian was Roasted on a Gridyron. 3. But the cry of bloud is prevalent, soone after, (it is thought by Treason of some about him) he fell into the hands of Sa∣por King of Persia, who used him for a foot-stoole as oft as he took Horse, to the utmost vilifying of Majesty, & regret of di∣verse Princes that were intercessours for him. His word was NON ACERBA SED BLANDA, not bitter but flattering words doe all the mischeife. He associated unto him in the Government his sonne 33. GALIENUS, an unnaturall Lumpe of flesh that never stirred to releive his Father, but was all for his panch, and playes. 2. Thirty Competitors were then on foote, Pezelius in Sleidan. under the ti∣tle of Emperours, who confounded one another. 3. His Motto was PROPE AD SVMMVM, PROPE AD EXI∣TVM, neere the top, neere the end. In which the Goths grew upon him, the Christians eased from their perseqution, and he slaine by 34. CLAUDIUS, who setled all right in two yeares, by two notable overthrowes of the Gothes of 300000 by land, and their Navy by sea. 2. when these Gothes had gotten an infinite number of bookes, ready for the Fire; Nay, burne them not (saith one) but leave them to take off the bookish Greeks from Martiall affaires, that we may the sooner overcome them. 3. He is said to have the moderation of Augustus, the virtue of Trajane, and the Piety of Antoninus. 4. His speech was REX, VIVA LEX, a King is a living Law, which was made good in him. 5. Vpon his death by sicknesse, his Brother Quintilius, stirred to have succeeded, but finding him∣selfe too Weake to oppose, made himselfe away by opening of a Ʋeyne, and left it to 35. AURELIANUS, famous for many Ʋictories, especially
those over Tetricus his opposite, and the brave Queene Zeno∣bia of Palmerina, whom he brought in Tyiumph to Rome in golden chaynes. 2. Incensed against Tyana, he vowed he would not leave a Dog in it but having taken it, upon a fright∣ing by the Ghost of Apollonius Tyaneus the Magician dead long before, he commanded his Souldiers to kill all the Dogs, but spare the Citizens. 3. QVO MAIOR EO PLACA∣BILIOR was his Motto, the greater the gentler, which he forgot in his latter time. Porphyzius that furly Antichristian Praedicabilist grumbled against Christians in his time. Against whom the Emperour being about to figne a Perseqution, was terrified by a Thunderbolt which stopped it, when his cruelty grew intollerable, he was betrayed by his Secretary and so slaine. 36.  TACITUS succeeds him, a worthy man, concerning whose Choyce, there was much complementing between the Army and Senate, but the Senate carryed it. 2. His word was SIBI BONƲS ALIJS MALVS, he that is too much for himselfe, failes to be good to others. 3. He kept not the place a yeare, but dyed of a Feaver. His Brother Florianus put in to succeed, but finding his weaknesse, quitts the pursuit by opening a veyne, and leaves it to 37.  PROBUS a valiant man, no way dissenting from his name. 2. He subdued the Germanes in the West, & Persians in the East, with diverse other of the Romanes enemies. 3. His Motto was PRO STIPE LABOR, no fight, no pay, Freequarter was not then in use, the unruly Souldiers that chose him, made him away to have a worse in his place. 38.  CARUS, slaine by a Thunderbolt. His sonne Cari∣nus for his lewdnesse, was as soon dispatched, but his other sonne Numerianus of better temper, was basely made away by his Father in Law Arrius Aper. 2. Carus saying was BONVS DVX BONVS COMES, A good Lea∣der makes a good follower. Numerianus was wont to re∣peat. Esto quod audis, be thou as good as thou art reported to be, and Carinus comes in with his Cedendum multitudi∣ni, most voyces must carry it. 3. Aper thought to have car∣ried
the Empire by the murder of Numerianus, but he was flaine by 39. DBOCLESIAN, who was told he should be Empe∣rour after he had slaine a Wild Boare, which he took to be this Aper. 2. Being puffed up by diverse victories against the Persians and others, he would needs be adored as a God, and whereas the meaner sort used formerly to kisse the Em∣perours knee, the better his hand, Euseb Eccles. Hist. l 8. c. 2. Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 2. all must kisse this mans foot. 3. He raised the tenth, and extreamest Persecution, wherein Churches were overthrowne, Bibles burnt, whole Citties razed, Women hanged upon trees naked with their heads downeward: the bones of Princes and Nobles digg'd out of their Sepulchers and cast into the sea: a whole Legion of Souldiers with their Commander Maurice cut off, for re∣fusing to sacrifice to Jdolls, by which unheard of Tyranny, he presumed to performe that which he openly professed, that he would root out the profession of Christianity. 4. Isai. 32. But God hath a hook for such Wild Beasts noses. In his govern∣ment he makes Maximianus, Augustus with him, to whom five Caesars more are assumed, who agreed not well amongst themselves. 5. Growing old, and weary in seeing that his mischievous plots took not wished effect, he perswaded his partner Maximianus to depose with him all government, and to live as private men, which was done according to his Motto, NIL DIFFICILIVS EST QVAM BENE IMPERARE, Nothing is more difficult then to rule well. 6. When the government fell amongst the Cae∣sars, they justled one the other, some for, some against the Christians. 7. He that favoured most the Christians sped best, who was 40. CONSTANTIUS Chlorus, A man of a gentle and free disposition, being a Christian, wherefore in a tryall, he proposed to his Souldiers, who would sacrifice to Jdolls, or stand to the grounds of Christianity: he discarded the Jdola∣ters, and retained the Christians, whose fidelity he might de∣pend upon. 2. After diverse victories against his opposites, he dyed peaceably here at Yorke. His saying was VIR∣TVS
QVAE PATITVR VINCIT, Jnsuffering virtue overcomes. His associates sped much worse, as it will appeare in the Empire of his sonne, who begins the next Period. 2. IN this Period (besides the Birth, and Life, and Suf∣ferings of our Saviour, with his Resurrection, and As∣cention, the descending of the Holy Ghost, and spreading of the Gospell by the Apostles before touched upon) 1. The storm∣ing of the Christian Church, at her first appearance under the tenne notorious Persecutions, is especially remarkable; Wherein not Rebellious opposition, or deluding projects, or hypocriticall tergiversations, but prayers, and teares, and re∣solute profession, and martyrdome, proved at length victori∣ous. 2. Here comes in the ruine of Jerusalem, foretold with tears by our Saviour, of which one saith Lege & Luge. S• Paul gives a hint to the Romanes, Rom. 11.21. If God spared not the na∣turall branches, take heed least he also spare not thee. Their City and Temple were ransackt by Titus, but put under the Plough, and the whole nation scattered (as at this day) by Adrian, for their obdurate perversenesse. 3. Here appears the greatest opposition that Philosophers, Oratours, Politici∣ans, and Magicians could make against the Gospel, but ever in the end were worsted. Celsus, Porphyry, Hierocles, with his Apollonius Tyaneus, and the like Mountebankes, how palpably were they convinced, and made ridiculous, by Iu∣stine Martyr, Tertullian, Origen, Eusebius, &c. in their A∣pologies remaining at this day? 4. Neither was Satan per∣mitted as formerly to hold up his party by his Oracles, En∣thysiasts, and other delusions, which were silenced and dis∣covered to be cheats, and as Dagon broken before the Arke, to the wonder of their wisest votaries. 5. Notice may be taken of the reiterated breaches in this Monarchy, under the bruitish Lusts, and Tyrannizing of diverse of their Empe∣rours, which those of better temper were not able to repaire. 6. Insolency of Souldiers, who made and unmade whom they pleased, and often so many at one time, that one devoured
an other. 7. And lastly, by the irruptions of the Goths and Persians, who took the hint to overthrow that, which they found so tottering, may perswade domestique unity, to pre∣vent forraine enmity. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Tiberius or Nere were the more insuffe∣rable Tyrant? 2. Caligula or Caracalla were the veriest Monsters? 3. Massilina or Agrippina proved the worst wife to Claudius? 4. Domitian or Commodus more degenerated from their Ancestours? 5. Antoninus Pius or Philosophus were the greater Schollers? 6. Trajan or Adrian were the better Gover∣nours? 7. Decius or Dioclesian were the heavier persecutors?
FIFTH MONARCHY of Easterne Greekes. PERIOD V. 1. THe Fifth Period, is from Constantine the great, to Charles the great, and containeth the Dyna∣sty of the Easterne Greekes for the space of 455 years, in a line of thirty three Emperours, Wherein wee have, 1.  CONSTANTINE the Great, the sonne of Constanti∣us Chlorus, not by his second Wife Theodosia, (which Dio∣clesian put upon him) but by the virtuous Helena, his first Wife, crat. l. 1. a Brittish Lady, who found the Crosse of our Saviour in Iernsalem, for which the Pope set up an Holy-day. 2. He translated the Emperiall seat from Rome to Bizantium, which he builded (as it were a new) and called after his own name Constantinople; built Churches, encouraged Schollers, and was so respective of the Clergy, that he pro∣fessed, If he found any blemishes in Bishops, he would rather cover them with his own parple robe, then they should be divulged, to the disgrace of the calling. 3. The Famous Councell of Nice was assembled by him, and graced by his presence: wherein receiving diverse papers of dissenting Bi∣shops, accusing each other, he burnt them without farther a∣doe, to perswade them to unity. 4. The hard dealing with his worthy sonne Crispus (whom he had by a Concubine) through the wrong suggestions of his lustfull wife Fausta, is
excused by none, and the truth afterwards appearing, the Empresse deservedly suffered for it. 5. The Donation of the Church of Rome put upon him, is found to be a forgery. In his time Iberia and India received the Gospell, his Subjects were freed from taxes, and protected against the incursions of Forraigne enemies. 6. In his latter time he was wrought by his sister Constantia, to favour the Arians, whom the Councell of Nice had condemned. Eusebius Bishop of Ni∣comedia (the chiefest prop of that Heresy) is said to have Baptized him a little before his death, not Pope Sylvester the first, as the Romanists have fained. 7. His Symbole was IM∣MEDICABILE VƲLNƲS ENSE RESCINDEN∣DVM EST, When there is no hope of curing, men must fall to cutting. Of his three sonnes, (amongst whom he divided his large Empire) the youngest, 2.  CONSTANTIVS succeeded in the East, whose line we take as most eminent, and lesse interrupted touching on the other Brethren, as Contemporaries, Of which Constan∣tine the eldest (not content with his share of France, Spaine, and Britaine) would needs encroach upon his brother Con∣stance, who had Jtaly and Africke, but was quickly slaine in the prosecution. 2. Constance thus having gotten all the West, proves a great upholder of Paulus Patriarch of Constantino∣ple, and Athanasius of Alexandria, the most eminent stick∣lers against the Arians, whom Constantius of Constantinople stood for. But Magnentius (whose life he had formerly sa∣ved from the Souldiers fury) treacherously Rebelled against him, and slew him, but received the same measure from Con∣stantius his brother, who remained then sole Emperour, all competitors being so happily extinguished. 3. He admitted his Aunt Constantia, (Lucinius relict) to live with him in the Court, Her an insinuating Arian Priest had perverted to be of his sect; she infects the Emperour, who becomes so eager in furthering it, Hierom. that Jngemuit totus Mundus the whole world (saith a Father) groaned under the pressure of that Heresy. 4. Paul of Constantinople is banished, Athana∣sius tossed up and downe the World to save his life, from
his persecutors, one George usurps his Sea of Alexandria, who afterward for his cruelty being slaine by the Pagans, was Sainted by his Partizans, & some would have him to be our Saint George a Horse back, which is not likely. 5. Ma∣nifest it is that this persecution of the Arians, was no lesse bloudy, and barbarous, then the worst of the former tenne, amongst the Pagans. 6. His Motto was PATIENS SIT PRINCIPIS AVRIS, A Prince must have a patient care, but to faithfull Councellors, not fawning flatterers. 7. He associats to himselfe his Nephew Gallus, who growing (u∣pon some performed service) too Insolent, was soon rid out of the way, and 3.  IULIAN his brother takes his place, whom Constanti∣us (by reason of his death intervenient) could not hinder from being his successour. Socrat. l. 3. c. 1. His successe against the Galls, and Germanes cry'd him up amongst the Souldiers. 2. Constanti∣us suspecting his pronenesse to Paganisme, sent him to be carefully grounded in Christianity, to Nicomedia, where he caused himselfe to be shaven, and became a Lecturer in pub∣lique: but he frequented by stealth, the company of Libani∣us the Sophist, and Maximus the Philosophicall Magician, with Jamblicus the Pythagorean, who warped him wholly to their bent, which brake out afterward. 3. In the begin∣ing of his Government, he recalls the Orthodox Bishops, ba∣nished by Constantius, for hatred to his predecessour, not for any respect to Religion, as also he endeavoured to reedi∣fy the Temple of Jerusalem, not in favour of the Jewish pro∣fession, but to spite the Christians, to whom he forbad the use of Heathen Writers, telling them in scorne, that their own more sublime Learning might suffice. And when they complained of injuries done them by Heathen, your God (saith he) hath taught you to swallow all such things with pa∣tience. 4. He learned Rhetorique of Ecebolius the weather∣cock for any Religion. In which he so much prided himselfe, that all night he would spend to contrive Orations, to vent the next day before the Senate for applause. 5. All his prede∣cessors are Satyrically taxed by him, especially Constantine
the Great, in his scoffing Pageant, See his works set forth at Paris in Greek and Latine. 1630. which he intituled Caesa∣res. His Misopogon and other tracts, are of the same leaven, except those bookes which he wrote against Christianity, mentioned by Saint Hierome, and answered by Cyrill of A∣lexandria, wherein he is more openly vitulent. 6. His Mot∣to was, PENNIS PROPRIIS PERIRE GRAVE, It is a heavy case, to be slaine with a mans own weapons, as the great leader C. Marius is said to be slaine, with the same sword he made when he was a Cutler. 7. Leading a well provided Army, with great confidence, against the Persian, he was betrayed by a fugitive into a streight, to fight with disadvantage, where having an arrow, or stab (not known from whence) fastned on him, he is said to have desperately ended his daies, with these last words vicisti Galilee, Now thou Galilean (meaning our Saviour Christ) hast overcome mee. 4.  JOVINIAN, a man of comely stature, valiant, and a lover of Learning, Being put to his choyce in Iulians time, to sacrifice to Idolls, or to be cashired, Socrat. l. 3. c. 19. he resolutely threw a∣way his Souldiers belt, which the Emperour took not notice of, standing in need of his service. 2. When he was voted Emperour by the Army, he told them in expresse termes, he was a Christian, and would not be a Leader of Pagans, whereupon they replied, that they were all of his profession, which not wartanted them to take up Armes against Iulian, who went about to extinguish it. 3. Necessity (drawn on by his predecessors rashnesse) forced him to a dishonourable league with the Persian, which some too tartly censured. Socrat. ib. c. 21. 4. To the Bishops, severall complaints presented to him, I tell you (saith he) J love not contentious persons, but such as stand for unity. he was much for liberty of Conscience, and had a high esteeme of Athanasius, whom he recalled from banish∣ment. 5. His Motto was SCOPVS VITAE CHRISTVS, that expressed his syncere affection to Christianity. 6. As he returned from the East, he was found dead in his chamber, some suspect by treason, others say that he was casually smo∣thered with wet coales in a new plaistered roome. 7. Vpon
notice of his death, the Souldiers chuse into his place, 5.  VALENTINIAN (some say) the sonne of a Rope-ma∣ker, virtue exalteth the meanest, when villany tumbleth downe the noblest. This man was known to suffer for Chri∣stianity, which made for his advancement, being banished by Iulian, for boxing of a Pagan Priest, that besprinkled him with his holy Water. 2. His Symbole was PRINCEPS SERVATOR IVSTVS, A Prince by Justice must preserve his People. 3. Being himselfe Orthodox according to the Ni∣cene Creed, he settles himselfe to governe in the West, and leaves to rule in the East, his brother 6.  VALENS a furious Arian, and a bitter persecutor of those that dissented from him. 2. He was somewhat stop∣ped by Procopiu's Rebellion against him, whom having sub∣dued, he cruelly rent in sunder, between two trees, artifici∣ally forced to that purpose. 3. In stead of righting the wron∣ged Orthodox, he caused to be murthered 80 supplicants, that were sent unto him. 4. His saying ALIENVS AB IRA, ALIENVS A IVSTITIA, He will be slack in justice, whom anger sometimes pricks not forward, discover∣eth, that his anger brake forth to the prejudice of Iustice. 5. In an expedition against the Gothes, that brake in upon him, he was rowted by them, and being wounded in his flight, was burnt in an obscure cottage. His brother Valenti∣nian (that disliked his courses) dying in the west, his sonne 7.  GRATIAN proved heire, both to him and his Ʋnkle Valens. 1. His Education was by Ausonius whose Poems are extant, St Ambrose was known unto him, and much estee∣med by him. 2. He associats unto him in the government Valentinian his brother, but too young to yeeld him much help, and the lesse by reason that Iustina (mother to Ʋalenti∣nian the second) was a great patronesse of the Arians, and persecutrix of Saint Ambrose, that stood against hem. 3. The issue was, that Gratian being treacherosly slaine by Andra∣gathius, and Ʋalentinian, strangled in his bed by Arboga∣stus, Justina was left together with the Empire, in a woe∣full plight, which soon ended her. 4. Gratians Motto is said
to be, NON QVAM DIV, SED QVAM BENE, It is not to be look'd after how long, but how well we runne our race. Ʋalentinians was, AMICVS VETERRIMVS OPTI∣MVS, An old friend is the best. Such a one God raised to these two unfortunate Princes. 8  THEODOSIUS Magnus a Spaniard, who was assu∣med for his experienced valour, and virtue, to joyne with him and his brother Ʋalentinian, to make head against their potent enimy. 2. Which he performed, not only by reveng∣ing their untimely deaths upon Andragathius, and Arboga∣stus, but also upon Maximus, and Eugenius, their Gene∣ralls, whom he utterly defeated. 3. Remarkable are the Verses of Claudian, De 3. Consul. Honorii. concerning the miraculous support of God, fighting for him, against those combined Rebells. O nimiùm dilecte Deo! cui fundit ab antris Aeolus armatas hyemes, cui militat aether, Et Conjurati veniunt ad Classica venti. O much belov'd of God, from Heaven who sends, Arm'd Tempests for thine ayd: sor whom the ayre Couragiously doth fight, its Force thee lends Confederate winds, which at that call repayre. 4. He carryed the name of Christ in his Victorious Ban∣ners, being reproved by St Ambrose, Ruff. l. 2. c. 2. Theod. l. 5. c. 17. for the rash Massacring of the Citizens of Thessalonica, and denied entrance into the Church at Millayne, he was so farre from taking it as an af∣front, that he humbled himselfe by Pennance, & Teares, Theodoret. lib. 5. Hist. Ib. c. 26. till he received Ecclesiasticall Absolution. To which may be ad∣ded the taking in good part of the bold reprofe of Amphy∣lochius, Bishop of Iconium, for being more tender of his sonnes neglect, then he was of the honour of the sonne of God, which he suffered the Arians to diminish. 5. His saying was ERIPERE TELVM, NON DARE IRATO DECET. An angry man should be disarmed rather, then furnished with a Weapon. 6. His death was as his life, full of honour. 7. Of the two sonnes left behind him, Honorius the younger succeded in the West, as
9.  ARCADIUS had the East, whose line we follow. But as Sitllico appointed Gardyan to his brother Honorius, proved false to him in the West: Ruffinus his Tutor in the East, tooke the same course to betray him to the Gothes, which discovered in time, deservedly cut him off. 2. Freed from this hazard, Eudoxia his Wife, and Gaina his Generall, led him at their pleasure, whereby the famous Chrysostome, (reproving freely their plotts for Arianisme) was twice ba∣nished, and from the last never returned. 3. His Symbole was, SVMMA CADVNT SVBITO. The higher the as∣cent the more subject to ruine, and danger in the fall. After his death his sonne, 10.  THEODOSIUS the second succeeds him. He was commended by his Father to the Tuition of Isdegird King of Persia, but Anthonius at home, and his Sister Pulcheria, were his best instructers. 2. His sweet disposition and love to Learning, appeared in his readinesse to pardon offences, and erecting a Library little short of Ptolomeus Philadel∣phus in Aegypt. 3. By procurement of his Sister Puleheria, he tooke to Wife Eudocia the Daughter of one Leontius a Philosopher, for her rare parts of behaviour, Learning and Beauty, of whom he became afterwards causelessly Jealous, which put her upon a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where the Priests had got a Text, Domine in Eudocia tua, to put her to great expences to Build for their conveniency. *  Ps. 51.18. 4. Gothes and Vandalls under their Leaders Attyla and Gensevick much infested the Empire. For withstanding of whom, he as∣sociates unto him his Cozen, passed by the name of Ʋalenti∣nian the third. His Generall Aetius, gave the great over∣throw to Attila, in the Feilds of Catalaunia, whom his un∣gratefull Master requited with death for his service. Bet∣ter sped Ardaburius, for his rooting out Iohn he Ʋsurper, having his deliverance (as it is conceived) wrought by Mi∣racle. 4. It may not be omitted, what course Pulcheria took with this Prince, to make him the more wary for signing Bills which were brought unto him, without reading them, or considering what they contained. Among a bundle brought
unto him, she puts in one, wherein was contained, that he sold his Empresse for a Slave. This passed under his hand a∣mongst the rest, which when he saw he was sufficiently lessoned to consider what he granted. 6. A care was taken by him, to gather out of a heape of unordered Lawes, such as were of speciall use for his Government, and so to be sett downe, that those which were to observe them, might know them. 7. His Motto was TEMPORI PARENDVM, we must fit us (as farre as it may be done with a good Consci∣ence) to the time wherein we live, with Christian prudence. He dyed with a fall from his Horse, and left to succeed him 11.  MARTIANUS an ancient man, and an experienced Souldier. Pulcheria (that had the cheife hand in her Brother Theodosius dayes for most matters of Government) was con∣tent to take him for her Husband, to rule as she had done in a manner before. 2. He aymed at Peace above all things, being superannuated for action. 3. Wherefore his saying was PAX BELLO POTIOR. Give me peace, and let o∣thers quarrell. In which he dies, and 12.  LEO THRAX takes his place, a worthy man, and so propense unto mercy, that his Embleme was, REGIS CLE∣MENTIA VIRTƲS, No virtue sets forth a Prince more, then Clemency. 2. He had much adoe with Asper, a potent Gothe, who forced him to designe his sonne Ardabarius to be his successor, but it was done with such dislike of the Se∣nate and People, that the Heads both of father and sonne paid for it. 3. He professed that he rather would have Philoso∣phers then Souldiers in his pay, designes his Grand child to succeed him by the title of Leo the second, but he waved it by a rare example, and confer'd it upon his Father 13.  ZENO, whom he Crownes with his owne hands, and dyes soone after. This man was as mishapen in bodie, as unto∣ward in manners. 2. Whereupon his Wife Berrina thrust in Basiliscus her brother into his Throne, who held it for a while with little content to the Subjects, which made him to be soone discarded, and Zeno returnes to governe againe. 3. Where continuing his habituall disordinarilesse, it brought
him to a kind of Apoplexy. In a fitt of which, he was buryed alive, but recovering in his Sepulcher, and crying for help, his Wife Ariadne was so kind to denye it him. His word was MALO NODO MALVS CVNENS, an ill wedge to an ill block, must be fitted accordingly. No sooner was he so dis∣parched, but 14.  ANASTATIUS Dicorus had his place and wife toge∣ther, so called for having the pupills of his eyes of diverse colours, one black, the other gray. 2. He proved a great pa∣trone of the Eutychians, which procured great stirres in the Church, and hard measure to the right beleevers. In his time Bizantium was delivered, by the burning glasses of Proclus, which set the Beseigning Navy on fire, and Cabades of Persia escaped out of prison, by prostituting his faire Queene to the Goalor. 3. His word was MELLITVM VEN E∣NVM, BLANDA ORATIO. Smooth talke proves often sweet poyson. He is said to have bin warned in his sleepe to do no hurt to Justine, and Justinian, whom he had designed to be made away for plotting against him. Himselfe was slaine with a Thunderbolt, and 15.  IUSTINUS succeeds him, who was first a Swineherd, then a Herdsman, then a Carpenter, from thence a Souldier and so Emperour. 2. He proved a great upholder of the Ni∣cene Faith, though himselfe had no Learning at all. 3. It it worth the noting how so low a Swaine, should come to that top of honour. Vpon Anastasius death, Amantius a stirring, and a rich Courteour, put a great summe of money into his hand, to purchase the Empire for his friend Theocritianus, which plott, if it took, would easily make both them gayners by the bargaine. But Justin wisely employed the money for himselfe, got the thing, and soone took order with the Huck∣sters to have a Quietus est from restitution of the mony. 4. Much adoe he had with Theodorick that perfidious Ari∣an Gothe, who put to death the worthy Symmachus and lear∣ned Boethius. 5. The ruine of Antioche by an Earthquake, almost brake his heart. His word was QVOD PVDET HOC PIGEAT, That should greive most which is shame∣full
in it selfe, and done against Conscience. He took order that his Sisters sonne 16.  IUSTINIAN should have his place. This man is sti∣led the Father of the Civill Law, which by the Iudgement and industry of Trebonian and other Coadjutors, was digested in that forme we now have it. 2. The stubborne Gothes, and Ʋandalls were never so shattered, as they were by his Valiant Leaders. Of which Belisarius may be paralleld with any of former times, he brought Ʋitiges, and Gillimer their Kings Captives to his Master, and cleared him from the rest of all his Enemies. And yet Theodora the Empresse in fa∣vour of the Euticheans, so persecuted him, that in his old age his eyes were put out, and at the Temple of St Sophy (built newly by the Emperour) forced to beg Date panem Belisa∣rio, quem virtus extulit, invidia depressit. Give a Crust to old, Procoplut. blind Belisarius, whom virtue advanced, but envy hath brought to this misery. 3. All the rest of his actions, as the sending the holy Ʋessels, taken by Titus out of the Iewish Temple, to Ierusalem to be disposed of, by the Christian Bi∣shops; The revenging of the death of Queene Amalasunta, upon the Barbarous contrivers of it; can no way wipe of his savage ingratitude to so worthy a man. 4. In his latter time (it should seeme) he began to forget himselfe, and he that had prescribed Lawet to the world, was faine to submit at home to Gynaecocracy. His word was SƲMMƲM IVS, SƲMMA INIVRIA. The rigour of the Law may prove injurious to conscience. He forgott not to leave his Daugh∣ters (some say his Sisters sonne) 17.  IUSTINUS the second to succeed him, a man that had nothing commendable in him, a coveteous wretch, a Pe∣lagian, and altogether ruled by his wife Sophia. 2. Shee en∣vying the prosperous successe of the Valiant Narses, against the Gothes, sent him word that she would have him come home from Italy and spinne, but he returned such a message, that he would spinne such a Thred, that neither she nor hers should be able to untwist. And so he did, thereupon by bring∣ing in the Lombards, which the Emperours (Exarches then
first set up) were not able to expell. 3. His Motto was LI∣BERTAS RES INESTIMABILIS, Liberty is unvaluable. He associates to himselfe, 18.  TIBERIUS who succeeds him by the name of Ti∣berius the second, but this was a Christian, and a worthy man, Tiberius Nero was neither. His religious care of the poore was rewarded (as it were) by miracle. For walking on a time and observing a crosse in the Pavement under his feet, He commanded it should be removed to a place of more reverent esteeme. Which being performed, such a masse of Treasure was discovered under it, that furnished afterward his liberality, and employments. 2. The proud Cosroes of Persia, (who at first rejected his Embassadours) at last was made stoope by a potent Army, which he durst not grapple with, the conceipt whereof so brake his heart, that he will'd his Successour not to oppose the Romane Empire. 3. By rea∣son of his employment in the East, the Gothes strengthned themselves in the West. Amongst which, Lemugildus a King in Spaine proved so feirce an Arian, that he executed his own sonne Elmingildus, for being a Catholique. 4. His saying was STIPS PAVPERVM, THESAVRVS DIVITVM, The truest Treasure of the Rich, is the Almes given to the Poore. 5. The best Epitaph for a Prince (in his opinion) was to leave a good Successour behind him. Whereupon growing old, and weake he chose 19.  MAURITIUS to be his successor, to whom he gives Constantina his daughter, together with the Empire, in Mar∣riage, and so dyes in Peace. 2. The Abilities of this man, were found by the Persians, to their losse; and Caganus with his hardy Scythians, which he suppressed, and drave the Hunnes out of Pannonia. 3. His Symbole was, QVOD TIMIDVM, IDEM ET CRVDELE, None so cruell as a Coward, He found it so by his Tragicall experience. For upon deniall of redeeming some of his captive Souldiers from Caganus at an easy rate, whether it were out of covetous∣nesse (for which he was branded) or dislike, of their rashnesse, that had inthralled themselves, vantage was taken by
20. PHOCAS, a barbarous saucy Centurion of his Army, to affront, depose him, and make him most brutishly away, with his Empresse, and all their Children, and kindred. 2. This is the right craggy Rock upon which the Popish Supremacy is built: so that Boniface the third, Act. 22.28. might well use the text of Claudius Lycius to St Paul, with a great summe obtained I this freedome. 3. Some feare of vengeance discovered it selfe in his Motto, FORTVNAM CITIVS REPERIAS, QVAM RETINEAS, It is easyer to get, then to hold an un∣lawfull booty. When his basenesse, lust, cruelty, and ignomi∣nious ruining of the Empire, had incensed all men against him: He, with all his, were served as he had used his master Mauritius, and in some measure more shamefully, his Privy parts were cut off, and his mangled body boyled in a great brasen Furnace, called the Oxe by 21. HERACLIUS that succeeded him, Lieutenant of Africk, He recovered to the Empire Syria, Aegypt, and Jerusalem, together with the Crosse of Christ, which the Pagans had gotten. This thence was carryed to Constantino∣ple, and afterward to Rome. 2. Cosroes of Persia, that inso∣lently incroached upon the Empires, was so rowted by him, that upon his discomfiture, he was slaine of his own sonne, who succeeding, a peace was straight concluded. 3. His Motto, A DEO VICTORIA. It is God that gives victo∣ries, forted well with his former Actions, but the sequell was not correspondent. 3. He turnes Monothelite, Incestu∣ously Marries with Martina his own brothers daughter, and makes a Law, that others might doe the like. This drove on the Saracens, who for want of pay, revolted from him, & fol∣lowed the Impostor Mahomet, who about that time set forth his nonsence poysoning Alcoran. 4. The Emperour struggles to make head against thē, but Gods hand was not with him: the Saracens give him a great overthrow, and another time (like the losse of Zanacherib) 52000 men of his Army, were found dead in one night, without any apparent execu∣tioners. 5. His incest was followed by a strange priapisme, which togither with a dropsy ended his daies. His sonne
22.  CONSTANTINE (by a former Wife) enjoyed his place for foure Months, but then was poysoned by Martina his step-mother, to make way, for her sonne Heraclionas. 2. But the plot held not, Her tongue was cut out, and her sonnes nose cut off, both were banished by the Senate of Con∣stantinople. 3. His word is said to be, INSANIA LAE∣TA VOLVPT AS EXCESSIVE, Pleasure is but a kind of Madnesse. His sonne 23.  CONSTANS was set in his place, a Monothclite, for withstanding which Heresy, he dealt barbarously with Martine Bishop of Rome, whose hands and tongue he cut off, and then banished him, shamefully plundered Rome, which he said he would make glorious. 2. The Saracens overthrew him, and prevailed mightily every where, with their new Alcaron dotages. 3. His word was PARENDVM NE∣CESSITATI, Necessity must be obeyed. He was slaine in Scicilia by his Souldiers, and 24.  CONSTANTINE his sonne obtaines his place: He was tearmed Pogonatus for his bringing home a beard with him from the Warres, whereas he went forth without it. He slew Mezentius his competitor, who was cause of his Fa∣thers death: overthrew the Saracens, and made them tribu∣taries: made Peace with the Bulgarians, by leaving them Misia to inhabit. 2. He held the great Counceli in Trullo a∣gainst the Monothelites, in which Pope Honorius was con∣demned for maintaining that Heresy. 3. His word was QƲOD CITO FIT, CITO PERIT, Quickly come, quickly gone, Hast makes wast. About this time the Bishop of Rome assumed the title  to be uncontroleable, which Luther takes notice to be about the yeare 666 the number of the Beast. Apoc. 13. To Pogonatia succeeds his sonne 25.  IUSTINIAN 2d. He brake the League with the Saracens and Bulgarians, to the dishonour of Christianity, and their great advantage, was led to all mischiefe by two Favorites, Stephanus and Theodorus, who paid for it at last in the Belly of a glowing Brasen Bull. 2. For his intollera∣ble tyranny Leontius a Noble man about him, apprehends
him, slits his nose, and banisheth him, and supplies his place. But Absimarus set up by the Souldiers and People, soon serves him in the same kind, and thrusts him into a Monaste∣ry. This holds not long, but Justinian is restored, by the kindnesse of Terbellis Prince of Bulgary, tramples Leontius, and Absimarus (brought to him) under his feet, and so caused them to be beheaded 3. His Motto was, MVLTI NIMIVM, NEMO SATIS, Many have too much, none is content. His carriage (nothing mended by his sufferings) discontented all men, so that he was slaine by one of his own Servants, set on by 26. PHILIPPICUS Bardanes, who by the Votes of the Army and People takes his place. This man shewed himselfe to be a Monothelite, in that he was so fierce against the sixth Synode that condemned them, that the Images and Statuas of the Bishops must be demolished, that had a hand in it. 2. Here began the bloudy controversy between the East and West Church, concerning Images: Constautine the Pope (whose feet Justinian the second had lately honoured with a kisse) in pitty stood for those harmlesse things, that could not speake for themselves, Bardanes was valiant against them. The Pope takes upon him to Excommunicate him, and de∣prive him of his Soveraignty for Heresy, but upon what sure grounds it remaines yet to be shewed. 3. His Motto well fitted his condition, FORTVNA CITO REPOSCIT, QVAE DEDIT, That which fortune gave, she will againe soon have. For he was deprived of sight and life by his own Secretary. 27. ANASTATHIUS succeeds him, a man of good parts, and was likely to have made good use of them. 2. His word was, SI NON DES, ACCIPIT ƲLTRO, If thou give not to some, they will make bold to take it, This fell to his lot, for before he was setled in his Throne 28. THEODOSIUS 3d an obscure man, was set up by the Souldiers to Rebell against him, and having the better of him, only shaved his crowne, and thrust him into a Monaste∣ry. 2. He was for restoring Images in Churches, to strengthen
himselfe by the Popish faction. His saying was, PATIEN∣TIA REMEDIVM MALORVM: He was soon put to practice of it, for as he had dealt with his predecessour, so 28.  LEO Isaurus used him, overcomes him, shaves him, and claps him into a Monastery, which kind of life (some say) he voluntarily imbraced. 2. The quarrell against Images is with greater vigor by this man revived, whence the Monkes terme him Jconomachus, Theomachus, Cononsceleratus, and what hot? He holds a Councell in the East, to justify the de∣molishing of them. Pope Gregory the second, in the West assembles a great company for their upholding: This was that Gregory who is thought (by some) to be the Author of those fabulous Dialogues, which he wrote to terrify Queene Theelindahs husband into Christianity. 3. The Saracens for more then two years togither, besiege Constantinople, but were forced to leave it, through famine and other disasters. 4. While the Emperour is taken up for defence of the East, against these subverters of Christianity, He is Excommuni∣cated by the Pope in the West: who takes in the barbarous Lombards to make good his party, and workes the Subjects in the West, to fall off from the Easterne Empire, who never returned afterward to their due obedience. 5. His common saying was, OCCVLTI INIMICI PESSIMI, A close Enimy, is farre worse then an open; yet nether prevailed so a∣gainst him, nor the anger of the Saints, for burning or break∣ing their Images, but he raigned long, and dyed honourably, leaving his place to 29.  CONSTANTINE the fifth his sonne. This man was Nicknamed Copronimus, because (say the Image-patrons) at his Baptizing, he polluted the Fount: others terme him Antichrist, the seed of the Serpent, an instrument of the Di∣vell, an Inchanter, and all this, for persisting in his Fathers zeale, for exterminating Idolatrous Images. 2. Artabastus the Governour of Armenia set up against him, was quickly quelled by him, and the Saracens and Bulgarians, tasted deeply of his undaunted Valour. 3. As in his Fathers time, so in his, Councells and Anathema's must be thundered against
him from the West, in the behalfe of Images: this might have been left to the Saints righting themselves, whose Images were broken, as Joas told the men that would plead for Ba∣al; but the Pope had a farther plot in it, to make his market, which was manifested shortly after. 5. His saying was QVID SINE PECTORE CORPVS? What is a body without a spirit? This in him was not daunted to the last, he dyes and leaves his Dominions to 30. LED the fourth his sonne. of the same mind with his Father, and Grand-father against Images, which drew on all the reproaches the Monkish Historians could lay upon him. 2. In an expedition against Syria, he returned with losse, which disheartned him (perchance) to the shortning of his daies. 3. He had to wife Irene a wilye Athenian, who practised to shuffle and cut for her own advantage. His word was QVO FORTVNA, SI NON VTERIS? To what purpose is a fortune, that use is not made of. His Em∣presse Irene, shewed her selfe somewhat too forward in that behalfe, for upon her Husbands death, she took upon her, the protection of her sonne, 31. CONSTANTINE the sixth, that succeeded, (being but a child) and the managing of the whole estate. In which she had such projects and windings, that here doings were not well liked of by the wisest. 2. She was all for Images, not (as it should seeme) out of Conscience, but to ingratiate her selfe to the West, which grew to appeare the stronger side. For this purpose was assembled the second Conucell of Nice, that brings such proofes for Idolatry, that the Images them∣selves (if they were sensible) would blush to heare repea∣ted. 3. Her Government so disliked her sonne, that grown to discretion he set her aside, & took it wholly unto himselfe: Which she stomaking, as the greatest indignity, circumvents him, puts out his eyes, and imprisons him, where with hearts griefe he ended his daies. 4. His word is said to be, MV∣LIERI IMPERARE, RES DESPERATA, It is a de∣sperate thing for a Woman to rule: which though it be not generall, yet he found it so by woefull experience. 5. But the
Mother had little content in her sole government after her sonnes death, although her Motto was, VIVE VT VI∣VAS, Live that thou maist live: being quickly deposed and banished by Nicephorus in the East, when Charles in the West laies the ground for the Government of the Westerne Frankes that follow. 2. COntemporary with this Period fall in to be noted, e∣specially. 1. The divisions of the Empire, First be∣tween the sonnes of Constantine the great, Constantius, Con∣stantine, and Constans, but the two latter passing away without Issue, the whole returned to Constantius, In whose successours, the second Division was between Arcadius and Honorius, the sonnes of Theodosius the great, Wherein, (with the line of Arcadius which is taken as most eminent) the successors of Honorius, are usually ranked, as contempora∣ry in this descent. 1. Honorius much vexed by Alaricus the Gothe, drawn upon him by his perfidious leader Stilico. 2. Ʋalentinian his Nephew, by Ataulphus, and his sister Placidia; who ill rewarded with death his noble leader Ae∣tius, that gave the great overthrow to the Hunne Atila. 3. Maximus an usurper, soon in, soon out. 4. Avitus. 5. Ma∣joranus. 6. Severus, with 7. Anthemius, by mutuall plots consuming one another. 8. Olibrius, and 9. Glycerius of no better note. 10. Julius Nepos, who depoieth Glycerius. 11. Orestes that outed Nepos. 12. Augustulus Orestes sonne, leaves all to Odoacer King of the Heruli, and so, as this We∣sterne line of Emperours, began in Augustus, it had its Peri∣od in Augustulus. With these fall in 3ly the irruptions of the Barbarians, to the renting and plundering of the Empire, 1. by Alaricus. 2. Genserick, 3. Atila, 4. Totilas, 5. Radigi∣sus, 6. Ricimer, 7. Odoacer who sacked the City of Rome it selfe. And the Heruli brought in by Odoacer, the Gothes under Theodoricus, and the Lombards conducted by Alboi∣nus, erected Kingdomes in Italy it selfe, which the Ex∣arches of the Emperours were faine to comply with. 4. A∣gainst these, Belesarius, Narses, Aetius and others, appea∣red
in the defence of the Church and State, not inferior to any famous Chieftains that had gone before them, or succee∣ded, though they were requited (as diverse others have been) with most barbarous ingratitude. 5. In this Period also are conspicuous, three monsters (as three heads of Cer∣berus) thrust out about the same time, Phocas, the Arch tray∣tor, that butchered his Soveraigne and all his Family. 2. Bo∣niface the third, that purchased by the basest Symony, the An∣tichristian Supremacy from that Arch-traytor. 3. And Ma∣homet the Arch-impostor, appoynted by God to be a scourge to all Christendume, for the Ambition, Luxury, and Idola∣try that then so raigned in it.  Notice may be taken of the virulent persecution by the Arians, and fraudulent plots of Julian the Apostate for Paganisme, and Popes for Images, proving farre more dangerous and divellish to right belie∣vers, then the violent persecution of the Heathen Empe∣rours. 7ly To stand in the gappe against all which, Fathers to confute, Councells to convince, Princes to uphold and protect them, Martyrs to seale the truth with their blood, never appeared more, or more resolute, then within the compasse of this Period, which may well be held the  or chiefe vigour of the Church.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Constantine the Great before his death be∣came an Arrian? 2. The Donation to the Church of Rome fa∣thered upon him be forged? 3. Christianity received any prejudice by Ju∣lians prohibiting the reading of Heathen Writers? 4. St Ambrose austeere carriage to his Sove∣raigne Theodosius, in poynt of discipline, may be warrantably imitated? 5. More Law were lost in Iustinians digesting of it, as it is, then preserved? 6. The Graecians were in the right, in with∣standing the Popish patronizing of Images in Churches? 7. The Turkish Alcoran or Popish Legends be more fabulous, foolish, and pernitious?
SIXT MONARCHY of Westerne Frankes. PERIOD VI. THe Sixt Period from Charles the Great to Ro∣dulph of Auspurge, sets forth the Government of the Westerne Frankes, for the space of 472 yeares, and had in it 25 Emperours. 1. CHARLES the Great Sonne of Pipine, and Grand-Child to Charles Martell of France, whose great service for Christendome against the Saracens, trod a path for this man to goe further. 2. He setled the French distractions, queld the Saxons often Rebellion, subdued the Danes, pacy∣fied Bobemia, overthrow the Saracens, and Hunnes, expel∣led the Lomberds with their King Desiderius, after their long tyrannizing in Italy. 3. Proceeding afterwards to Rome, and composing the differences there between the Pope and People, to the seeming content of all parties. Pope Leo the third (seriously and solemnely, as though it had bin in his gift.) bestowes upon him the title of Emperour, with the applause of all, and his modest acceptation. 4. Notwithstand∣ing to strengthen his interest, he transacts both with Ireno the Empresse then of the East (between whom and himselfe, and their sonne and daughter was a treaty of Marriage, which took not,) and also with Nicephorus, Irenes successour, which quitted him from usurping that, he had by composition.
5. His aversnesse from allowing the Popish upholding Ima∣ges, appeares in a Councell he held at Frankford, and his wri∣tiag against the 2. Councell of Nice. He Erected three Ʋni∣versities, Bononia. Papia. Paris. of which Paris the cheifest, had its especiall rules and ordering from Alcuinus our Oxford man, who was the Emperours Tutor. 6. Whatsoever is pretended of Constan∣tines, it was Pipines, and Charles Donations that set Rome on floate, and the rather, for the good service Pope Zachary did in the Deposing Childerick, the lawfull King of France, which was the advancing of Pipine to be a King, and his sonne an Emperour. 7. His Motto was, CHRISTVS RE∣GNAT, VINCIT TRIVMPHAT. Christ raignes, Con∣quers and Triumphes, expresses his Christian humility in all his greatnesse. After so many Battles and hazards, He dyes peaceably in a good age, leaving his sonne 2.  LUDOVICUS Pius to succeed him. This man is said to have confirmed all the Donations of his Father and Grand∣father to Rome, with remitting unto them the choyce of their Popes amongst themselves, Distinct. 63. but that Canon, Ego Ludovicus, where the Grants are contained, is suspected to be forged. 2. Pezelius. He renewed the League with the Greeks, repressed the Tu∣mults amongst the Britons and Bulgarians, cut of his Cosen Bernards head King of Italy, for affecting the Empire. 3. For adhering constantly to his second wife Iudith, which the Clergy pretended was too neare of Kin to him by their Ca∣nons, the sonnes of his former wife Rebell against him, and imprison him, and his Clergy makes bold to Excommuni∣cate him, but he was soone restored again upon better consi∣deration, & all matters well composed. 4. He caused the Bi∣ble to be translated into the Saxon Tongue, without contra∣diction for ought we find of the Popes then being. 5. His saying was OMNIVM RERVM VICISSITVDO. Eve∣ry thing takes its turne, and seldome comes a better. It proves here in his sonne, 3.  LOTHARIUS who quarrelling at his first entrance, with his brother Lewes, and Charles, was twice overthrown by them. Charles getting from him for his share, France; and
Lewes, Germany; leaving only to him Italy, with Gallia Nar∣bonensis, and Austrasia which he termed by his owne name Lotharingia, to uphold the title of the Emperour, which they sought not after. 2 In his time the Saracens Plundered Italy, which he could not help, and Pope Iohan had gotten St Peters Chayre, whose sexe could not be so well discerned, saith Chalcondilas, because the Popes usually shave their Beards. 3. He is passed with this Symbole ƲBI MEL, JBI FEL. Gall commonly accompanies hony, which broke him so much that he quted his Empire, and betooke himselfe to a Mo∣nastery, where he ended his dayes, leaving his charge to 4. LUDOVICUS the second his sonne. 1. He repressed the Saracens in Italy, subdued the Slavonians, and brought them to Christianity. Wanted not will, but power to doe more good. 2. At the Election of Adrian the second, without no∣tice given to his Embassadours then being in Rome, he was sleighted with this excuse, that no contempt was meant therein, but a prevention of an ill conceipt, that a Pope could not be chosen, if such a presence were wanting. 3. His say∣ing was PAR SIT FORTVNA LABORI, I aske but successe according to my paines taking. He dyes without Issue, and left the King of France his Vncle 5. CHARLES the Bald to succeed him in the Empire. He was first withstood by his elder Brother Lewes of Germany, but his death ended the quarrell. 2. He expells the Sara∣cens out of Rome and raigned not so long to doe any great matters. Bertram was set on worke by him concerning the Corporall Presence, which then began to be grosly maintain'd in the Sacrament. 3. His saying was QVOD PASTORI HOC OVIBVS, The flock never thrives in the Pastors mi∣series. He is thought to be poysoned by a Iew his Physition in Italy, leaves his sonne 6. LEWES the Stammerer, Crown'd by Pope John in France, but not acknowledged in Rome. 2. He meant well, but wan∣ting health & time performed little. 3. His Motto was that of Galba's, MILES LEGENDVS NON EMENDVS, he dyed quickly & left his Cosen of the elder house his successour,
7.  CHARLES the Fat. He had France, Germany, and Italy, togither with the title of the Empire. 2. And not∣withstanding his unwildinesse of body, did much against the Saracens, and drove them from Italy. The Normans and Belgians, put him to more trouble, to whom he was con∣strained to grant those Territories they ever since have kept. 3. Those sad times set on some to write, Threnos Germaniae, the Lamentations of Germany. according to his Motto OS GARRVLVM INTRICATOMNIA, A pra∣ting tongue puzzells all businesse of consequence. He proving unfit for Action, some say was deposed, others, that he dyed with griefe and want. All agree that 8.  ARNULPHUS his Nephew followed him, he quelles the tumultuous Normans, and in managing other affaires of the Empire shewed himselfe an able man. 2. But falling u∣pon Rifling of Churches, Gods vengeance overtook his Sa∣criledge, most say he died of the lowsy disease, others, that he was poysoned by Guido's wife, whose Husband he had caused to be ignominiously hanged. 3. His word was FA∣CILE VOCABIS CACODEMONEM, SED NON FACILE REPVLERIS, It is easy to raise a Divell, but not so easy to be rid of him. His sonne 9.  LEWIS the fourth is advanced to his place. 1. Ne∣ver were the times, more dissolute and dangerous, then in this mans daies. Beringarius and Lewis the sonne of Boson in Italy, the Hungarians, Germans, and Saracens on all sides come upon him. In Rome all things were carried by Ma∣roziah the strumpet, and her breed, with whō the Lombards were associated. 2. His word was MƲLTOKƲM MA∣NƲS. PAƲCORƲM CONCILIƲM, Few directors will guide many hands. 3. In him (some say) ended the line of Charles the Great. The Imperiall dignity being confer∣red upon 10.  CONRADUS Duke of Franconia. It was offered by the Nobles to Otho Duke of Saxony, but he excused him∣selfe through his age, and commended Courade unto them, which some make to be of the kindred of Great Charles
2. He grew Jealous of Henry old Otho's sonne, and carried a hard hand over him, but at length commended him to his suc∣cessor. 3. His word was, FORTVNA CVM BLANDI∣TVR FALLIT, Fortune failes when she fawnes. This 11. HENRY the first that succeeds, in the unquestion'd Germane line, was termed Auceps the Faulkoner, because he used much that kind of recreation. 2. Chron. Chro∣nicer. He was so farre from sueing to the Pope to be Crowned, that he refused that com∣plement offered unto him. 3, Purchased (as one saith) the holy Lance wherewith our Saviours side was pierced, Hedio. with some of the nailes to the bargaine of Radulphu King of Burgundy, giving him great guifts, and part of Suevia for it, which shewes that he was religious in his way. 3. He over∣came Arnold of Bavaria his competitor by perswasion, the Hungarians, Bohemians, and Dalmatians by force, Sleidan. pacified all Germany, and divided it into Marquisates. 4. He foun∣ded Bishopricks, brought in the martiall exercise of Tilting. 5. His word was TARDVS AD VINDICTAM, AD BENEFICENTIAM VELOX, It is a Princely mind to be readier to gratify then to take revenge. Vpon his peaceable death. 12. OTHO the first, his sonne, takes his place, whose Symbole shewed his generous disposition, AƲT MORS AVT VITA DECORA, Better it is to dye bravely, then to live ignominiosly. 2. In France he freed King Lewis im∣prisoned by his Rebellious Subjects. In Bohemia he expelled Bolislaus for murthering his own Brother. From Italy he drove Beringarius King of the Lombards. in Rome deposed that monster John the 12. & setled Leo the 8. in his Chaire. 3. For marrying a second Wife, his sonne Laitholdus (which he had by Editha his first wife our King Edmunds daughter) rebelled against him, but being overcome, and submitting, out of a fatherly affection was received againe into favour. 4 Howsoever he was contented (being in Rome) to be Crowned by the Pope, yet he left a decree that no Pope should be elected without the Emperours consent. 5. After manifold Heroicall exploits atchieved by him in
all parts of his Dominion, he attained the Epethite of Mag∣nus with Constantine and Charles, dyed in the bed of Ho∣nour, and left 13.  OTHO the second, his sonne, to inherit his royalties and virtues. 1. His opposite, the quarrelling Henry Duke of Bavaria was quickly quelled by him. 2. He was termed, the pale death of the Saracens, for the often overthrowes, (e∣specially in Apulia) given them. 3. The Greeks notwith∣standing, under the conduct of Basilius their Emperour, and Constantine his sonne, had the hand over him (in a set Bat∣tell) in such sort, that he was faine to swimme for his life, and escape in a Fishers boate, whence falling amongst Pyrats, he hardly freed himselfe. 4. His word was, PACEM CVM HOMINIBVS CVM VITIIS BELLVM, Let's quarrell with our faults, not with our friends. 5. His Wife was Theophania, the Easterne Emperours daughter, by whom he had 14.  OTHO the third, that succeeded him, in verifying the prophetique verse, Otho, post Otho, regnabit tertius Otho. 1. Being but tenne years old at his Enthronizing, his toward∣linesse was such, that he attained the title of Otho the kind, and (as the phrase went then) Mirabilia Mundi, the Mira∣le of the World. 2. Some put the Institution of the seaven E∣lectors upon him. A more difficult businesse he found to re∣ctify the unruly Popes, whose damnable ambition, brawles, and Schismes, took off the best Emperours, from better em∣ployments abroad. 3. His word was, ƲNITA VIRTƲS VALET, Vnited valour performes. 'Tis thought he was poysoned in Rome by Crescentius widdow, in a paire of gloves. 15.  HENRY the second, is chosen by the seaven Electors to succeed him, he had the title of Henry the holy, and Lame, before, Duke of Bavaria, being of the blood of Otho the great, some say his sonne, others his Nephew. 2. Having subdued all the enimies of the Empire, he dealt so effectual∣ly with Stephen of Hungary, that the most of them were
brought to embrace Christianity. 3. His word was NE QVID NIMIS, Least overdoing, prove undoing. Kune∣gundis his Empresse, is said to have lived (by mutuall con∣sent) untouched with him. This accompanied with other virtues, was made meritorious to Saint him. Some diffe∣rence arose amongst the Electors concerning his successor, but 16. CONRADUS the 2d, called Salicus as much as to say, as Aulicus a Courteour ended it. Alsted. Pezelius fetcheth the name from the river Sala in Franconia. The great commotion in Ita∣ly, he appeased with singular valour & dexterity, where be∣sieging Millaine, he was deterred by a vision, (the Monkes would have it of frowning St Ambrose) which caused him to leave the enterprize. 2. The deadly Feud betwixt the Guelphes and Gibellines, brake out a fresh in this mans daies, in regard he was a Gibbelline as all the Franconians, where∣as their neighbours of Suevia were entirely for the Guelphs. 3. His Motto was a notable rule, OMNIVM MORES TVOS IMPRIMIS OBSERVATO, Observe all mens carriages, but especially thine owne. He was buried at Spire with his Empresse, in the Cathedrall of his own erecting, a∣mongst the rest of his Linage, as the inscription shewes, Filius hic, Pater hic, Avus hic, Proavus jacet istic, Hic Proavi Conjux, hic Henrici senioris. his sonne 17. HENRY the third, surnamed Niger, Black Henry, was elected to succeed him. He married the daughter of Canutus the Dane, then Raigning here in England. Subdu∣ed the Hungarians and Bohemians, who were alwaies mu∣tining. But thence was called away to Italy, to keep the peace amongst the Popes, who were like to pull St Peters chayre in peeces between them. Three of them he deposed, Benedict the 9. Gregory the 6. & Sylvester the 3. And chose successively Clement the 2. Damasus the 2. Leo the 9. and Victor the 2. Taking an oath of the Citizens, that they should not any more chuse a Pope without the Emperours consent. In him decayed the glory of the Romane Empire. 3. His saying was, QVI LITEM AVFERT EXE∣CRATIONEM
IN BENEDICTIONEM MVTAT. He that stinteth strife, changeth a curse into a blessing. The remedilesse ruine of Church and State, hastned (as it should seeme) his death. His sonne very young, 18.  HENRY the fourth, succeeds him, who growing up under the carefull education of his Mother, proved a va∣liant, and wise, though an unfortunate Prince. 2. In 62. Bat∣tailes which he waged in person (for the most part) he be∣came victorious. 3. For standing for his right in Election of Popes, he was crossed, especially by Gregory the seaventh, known by the name of Hildebrand, and his complices: who twice Excommunicates him, then sets up Rodolph Duke of Saxony his sworne Subject, to rebell against and depose him, bestowing on him as freely a Crowne and Empire, as ever the Divell offered all the Kingdomes of the World to our Sa∣viour: Math. 4. but this project failing, with the desperate and deplo∣rable ruine of Rodulph. 4. Notwithstanding his unimperiall submission in an unparallel'd manner, at the Castle of Canu∣sium, and receiving there Absolution: His own sonnes Hen∣ry and Conrade, must afterward be set up against him. 5. Whereby at length wearied and broken, after tenne years Raigne, he was deposed, and driven to that exigent, that he desired only a Clerkship, in a house at Spire of his own foun∣dation, which was Barbarously (by the Bishop of that place) denyed him. 6. Whereupon he brake out into that speech of Job. Miseremini mei amici quia manus dei tetegit me. 7. His usuall speech was, MVLTI MVLTA SCIVNT SE AƲ∣TEM NEMO. Many know much, but few (as they should) know themselves. Greife killed him, and made way for his sonne, 19.  HENRY the fifth to succeed him. 1. He urged by Pope Paschall to renounce his right in chusing Popes and Bi∣shops Investiures by Staffe and Ring; utter refuses it. The Pope thereupon makes no more adoe but Excommunicates him. 2. The Emperour rights himselfe, by casting the Pope into Prison, which brings him to covenant with the Empe∣rour, that he would lay no farther clay me to those Imperiall
rights. 3. For confirmation of which agreement and privi∣ledges, the Pope takes the Consecrated Host, and deviding it in∣to two parts, gives the one to the Emperour, and reserves the other to himselfe, with an Excoration in these words. Magdeburg. Hist. Cent. 12. c. 8. Let him be devided from the Kingdom of Christ, who shall presume to vio∣late this Covenant Bound up between you and me. 4. Yet this held not, no sooner had the Emperor turn'd his back, & the Pope had liberty of breathing, but this knott is easily loosed by him that tyed it so solemnly, and Calixtus his Successour, so haunted the Emperour with furies, that he was forced to quirt all his rights in that behalfe. His word was MORTEM OPTARE, MALVM, TIMERE, PEIVS. It is not good to wish for death, but worse to feare it. He Marryed Maud the Daughter of our King Henry the First, but dyed Childlesse. His successor was, 20.  LOTHARIUS the second Duke of Saxony chosen by the Nobles. 1. He was much opposed in the beginning by Conrade, and Frederick his predecessors Sisters sounes, but by mediation of St Bernard of great esteem in those dayes, a re∣conciliation was made between them. 2. For the setling of Pope Innocent the 2d, whom the Romans had violently un∣chayred, he marches to Rome, soone right's all that was amisse, is Crowned by the reestablished Pope, which (as a transcendent accident is pictured on a wall with these subscribed verses. Rex venit ante fores, jurans prius urbis honores, Post homo fit Papae jurans quo dante Coronam. The King came to the gate and sware, he would uphold the City, Crown'd by the Pope became his flave, alasse the more's the pitty. 3. He reformed the Civill Law by Vernerius directions, and commanded it to be read in Schooles, and executed in places of Judicature, which the French took from him. 4. He drove Roger King of Scicily out of Apulia, and Campania which he had long forraged, is equalized with Charles the great. 5. His Embleme was most usuall, AVDI ALTERAM PAR∣TEM. A good Judge must have an eare as well for the Defend∣ant
as the Plaintife. He also (as his predecessor) left no Issue, but by consent of the Electors. 21  CONRADE the third of Suevia had his place. At first he was opposed by Henry the proud of Bavaria, and his Bro∣ther Guelpho, but that storme was quickly blowne over. 2. From this Guelpho, some derive the Guelphes of the Popes factions who Mortally hated the Gibellines that stood for the Emperours. 3. This hatred is said to have growne first, at the Seige of Winsperg in Germany by Henry of Gibelline the Em∣perours sonne. They of Guelpho's held the place, but their cry∣ing a Guelpho a Guelpho, could not free them from the Gibel∣lines Forces. 4. Wherein the condition of the surrender being, that the men should expect the sword, but the women (upon their Petition) should passe away, with as much as they could carry upon their backs: They abandoning all other necessaries, came forth Loaden only with their Husbands, which the roy∣all Gibbelline applauding, dismissed them all with pardon. 5. He made three Voyages into the Holy Land without suc∣cesse, was treacherously dealt with by Emmanuel Emperour of Constantinople, who promising to supply him with Victu∣alls (which he depended upon) basely sent him Meale, ming∣led with Lyme, whereby his Army was poysoned, and he dis∣abled to performe that which he intended. His saying is re∣gistred to be, PAVCA CVM ALIIS TECVM MVLTA, Say little to others, but more to thy selfe. Death surprised him before he was formally Crowned, his successor was 22.  FREDERICKE, first named of his Red Beard Bar∣barossa, a Nephew of Conrades. He subdued the Rebellious Italians, sowed Millayne with Salt, made the Rebellious Count Palatine carry a Dogg for Pennance, exalted Bohemia to be a Kingdome, and Austria from a Marquisate to be a Dukedome. 2. With this man Pope Adrian, (he that was afterward Choakt with a flye) was displeased because he held not his stirrop Hostler-like on the right side. But his successour Alexander quitted that injury, when he trode on his Emperours neck, with his super Aspidem & Basiliscum, in Ʋenice as hath bin fore-mentioned. 3. He was of such a
ready memory, that whomsoever he had once knowne, though never so long absent, he could readily discerne and call by his name, as though he had bin alwayes conversant with him. 4. Many meanes were used to make him away, especially by the Popes whom he withstood, and stopt Appeales from them. 5. In his time the Fathers of the Schoolemen, Canonists, and Legendarians were hatched by Lombard, Gracian, and Co∣mestor. His saying was, QVI NESCIT DISSIMVLARE, NESCIT IMPERARE. He that cannot dissemble, knowes noe how to rule. Amongst his many Heroick Acts, he was forced to swallow many indignities, by reason of the iniquity of the times. Being drowned in a River of Palestina, his sonne 23. HENRY the 6th was declared Emperour, sirnamed Asper for his rigidnesse. No Wife could be found fit for him but Constantia the Daughter of Rogerius King of Scicily, must by the Popes dispensation, be taken out of a Nunnery, (where she was a votresse) and Marryed unto him, on condition that he must out Tancred King of Scicily, that the Pope might have the greatest benefit of that Kingdome, which was done accordingly. 2. Francis and Dominick the ring-leaders of the Dominicans, & Minorites peepe up in his dayes to be supporters of the Popes Armes. Some tumults in Italy were suppressed by him, and some Forces (but to no purpose) sent into the Holy Land. 3. His saying was QVI NESCIT TACERE, NESCIT LOQVI. He that know∣eth not how to be silent, is ignorant how to speake. His sonne Frederick being a Child when he dyed, 24.  PHILIP his brother by the Electors was put into his place. This was done to the dislike of Innocent the Pope, who thereupon Excommunicated him, but he quickly made his peace, and then Otho the Duke of Saxony was by an other faction set up against him, at first favoured by the Pope, but afterward also Excommunicated. 2. An agreement at length was made, Otho Marries Philips Daughter, and is assured to succeed, and Richard the Popes Nephew, takes to Wife the other Sister, and so his Holinesse resteth contented. 3. This agreed with his Motto, SATIVS EST RECVRRERE
QVAM MALE CVRRERE. The nayle must driven that will goe. Better it is to retyre, then to runne upon the Pikes. But humane plotts often faile, Philip is treacherously slaine by the Count Palatine, and Otho had little ioy of his succession, for he was Excommunicated by the Pope, quickly overthrown, and never acknowledged to be Emperour. 25.  FREDERICK 2d the sonne of Henry the 6th, and Constantia the forementioned discloystered Nunne is chosen by the Peeres. 1. He was Crown'd at Rome, bestowed on the Church the Dukedome of Fundanus, confirmed what Privi∣ledges they desired, makes a voyage into Palestina, frights the Enemies into an advantagious composition for the Christians, returnes with honour. 2. Yet all this could not content Honorius, Gregoriy the 9th, Innocent the 3d, and Celestine, in those dayes the Romane Chayre-men, but needs he must be about five times Excommunicated, then proscribed or sequestred from all his Royalties and meanes, which must be ratified by a Bull, Apoc. 13. commanded (in steed of a Sermon) to be read in every Church, and begins thus, Ascenditè Mari Bellica Bestias so well his Holinesse can poynt out the accomplishment of Pro∣phecyes. 3. But this not daunting his Heroick magnanimity, Henry Lantgrave of Thuring, William Earle of Holland, nay his owne sonnes Henry Caesar, and Frederick of Austria, are wrought (to their owne ruine) to Rebell against him, so ope∣rative were the Enchantments of the Whore of Babylon. Last∣ly to make sure worke, in a Councell of France at Lyons by Innocent the 4th, he is Deposed. 4. Notwithstanding: the Germane Bishops forsake him not, but devoted the Popes Le∣gate Behavus to the Devill, for urging such treacherous Pro∣scriptions, the ground of which were the Emperours doing Justice, upon some of the Popes Cronyes that had Rebelled a∣gainst him, and for writing his Name in publique Instru∣ments before the Popes. 5. The deadly fewd between the Gibellines and Guelphes, at that time was in the height. In which also fell the Scicilian Ʋespers, wherein the French for their Insolencies had their Throats cut in Scicily, and the In∣quifition, and Cardinals Hatts had their first Blockings. 6. His
usuall word was in the greatest threatning of his adversaries, MINARVM STREPITVS, ASINORVM CREPITVS, He that dyes with threats, deserves the funerall of an Asse. Of this Emperour runnes the distichon. Principe in hoc patuit Romanae injuria Papae, Et quantum sceleris Curia tota tegat. 7. His last wife was Matilda our King Iohns daughter, he had married before Iolam the Kings daughter of Ierusalem, by whom he was entitled to that Kingdome, some say he dyed a naturall death, others, that he was strangled by his Ba∣stard Manfred. His sonne Conrade, and our Richard Duke of Cornewall, with others were named to succeed him, but none enjoyed the place for the space of 22 years, untill Ra∣dulphus the beginner of the next and last Period. 2. WIth this Period concurre. 1. The Emperours of the East. 1. Nicephorus who expelled Irene, and agreed with Charles the Great, that he should have the Empire of the West to him and his successors. 2. Michael Curopolites his Sonne in Law, who ratified the same com∣position. 3. Leo Armenius an intruder, who banished his predecessor, and was slaine himselfe by 4. Michael Thrau∣lus an unworthy Amorite. 5. Theophilus his sonne was bet∣ter, but the Saracens brake his heart. 6. Michael his sonne comes in with his mother Theodora protectrix, but he mued her quickly in a Monastery, and was slaine himselfe by. 7. Basilius Macedo, a man of a better temper, he left his sonne to succeed. 8. Lee more addicted to Astrology then carefull in his calling. 9. His brother Alexander fol∣lowes, that kill'd himselfe with gurmundizing. 10. Then Constantine Leo's sonne, who is said to have converted some Turkes to Christianity. 11. Romanus his sonne, on the con∣trary, caused his Mother and Sisters to turne strumpets, and himselfe was poysoned. 12. Nicephorus Phocas that usur∣ped the place, pretended to doe somewhat against the Sara∣cens, but oppressd only the Subjects with taxes. 13. John Zimisces out off all his race, did somewhat against the Bul∣garians,
and was poysoned. 14. Basilius, and 15. Constan∣tine being brethren, passe on without performing any thing worth the notice. 16. Romanus Argyropilus did somewhat in the beginning, but was quickly choakt in a bath by the means of Zoe his adulterous Wife, and 17. Michael Paph∣lago a driveling slave, after him by the same Zoe is thrust in. 18. Michael Galaphates a base dissembler, who soon outed his patronesse, but proved so intollerable himselfe, that she was recalled from banishment and made Empresse: shee marries. 19. Constantine Monomachus a slugge, they drop away togither. And 20. Theodora Porphyrogenita Zoes sister takes the reines in her hand. This holds not, but 21. Mi∣chael Strato an old man, is thrust in by the Courteours, and soon outed by 22. Isaacus Comnenus, who proved some∣what better, yet could not give content. but 23. Con∣stantine Ducas must have his place. This he soon left to his wife Eudochia and her Children, who married that she might the better hold it. 24. Romanus Diogenes, victorious against the Turkes, but ungratefully deprived of his sight, and banished, by those whom he had preserved. 25. Nicephorus Botoniatos succeeds, by thrusting the right heire into a Mo∣nastery. 26. Alexius Comnenus does as much for him, and treacherously used the Lattaines in their passage by him to recover the Holy Land. 27. Much better was his sonne Ca∣lo Johannes, who prevailed against the Turkes, and dyed by the prick of a Dart himselfe had envenomed. 28. Emanuel his sonne was he that mixed chalke with the flower he sent the French, for provision for the Army, and put out the eyes of Dandalus the Ʋenice Embassadour, contrary to the Law of Nations. 29 Alexius his young sonne, was villanously made away by his Tutor. 30. Andronicus, who had soon his deserved punishment. by 31. Jaacius Angelus, who roy∣ally entertained Frederick Barbarossa passing to Palestina, but was most barbarously deprived of his sight, and impri∣soned by his own brother, whom he had redeemed from Turkish slavery. 32. Alexius Comnenus the fratricide, he was soon outed by his Nephew. 33. Alexius the third, who
restored his blind father Isaacius, he soon dying, left the place to him, which Myrtillus or Murziphlus, a base fellow treacherously extorted from him. He was cut off by the French and Ʋenetians, that setled the first Lattaine in the Greeking Empire. 34. Baldwin Earle of Flanders. He left for his successour 35. Henry his Brother. 36. Peter Altisi∣dorensis followes him, betrayed and slaine by Lascaris. 37. Robert his sonne succeeds, and leaves the place to his sonne Balwin the second: In him ended in Con∣stantinople the Government of the Lattines, who had held it about 60. years, under five Emperours, although Theodorus Lascarus, Iohn Ducas, John Theodore, stiled themselves Emperours of Greece the same time in Adrinople, untill 38. Michael Paleologus recovered Constantinople againe, about the yeare 1270. which falls in with the time of Rodulphus Haspurgensis. 2ly In the compasse of this Pe∣riod, sprang up the seaven bloudy controversies, that set all Christendome in combustians. Concerning 1. The Popes Supremacy over, Bishops, Councells, Princes. 2. Their Ele∣ctions without and against the Emperours consent. 3. The Investiture of Bishops by Staffe and Ring. 4. Priests Mar∣riages. 5. Images. 6. Transubstantiation. 7. And Indulgen∣ces. 3ly In the same compasse Postillators, Schoolemen, and Canonists, In Warenfride, Lombard, and Gratian, had their first beginnings and countenancing. 4ly The diverse expedi∣tions for recovering the Holy Land. 5ly The persecutions of the poore Waldenses. 6ly The multiplying of Monaste∣ries and Orders of Fryars. And 7ly decay of Polite Learning, may be within this circle evidently taken notice of, as mat∣ters of no small concernment.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The agreement of Charles M. with the Greeke Emperours, imply not, that he held Pope Leo's pronouncing him Empe∣rour of the West, and Crowning him, to be no sure title? 2. That Crowning de facto were a sufficient ground for the succeeding Popes to claim the same priviledge de Jure, as essentiall to the being of an Emperour? 3. In vite Care∣li. Those stories and wonders of Oliver and Roland, and the foure sonnes of Ammon, related by Arch-Bishop Turpin, and o∣thers, are for the most part fabulous? 4. The Westerne Emperours had more trou∣ble to keep correspondence with the in∣croaching Popes, then to quit themselves from the invasions of other Enemies? 5. Christianity were more abused and cor∣rupted, by the Schoolemens affected nici∣ties, then by the grosse figments of the Le∣gendaries? 6. The recovering of the Holy Land were of more importance, then the maintenance of unity amongst Christian Princes, to stop the Infidells from coming any farther? 7. Pious and prudent Preachers, might not have prevailed more for the Enemies con∣version, then the Sword-men performed for their subversion?
SEAVENTH PERIOD of Austrians. PERIOD VII. THE Seaventh and Iast Period yet current, hath continued for the space of 360. years and more, From Radolph of Ausperg, to Ferdinand the se∣cond, and numbers in it 18. Emperours. 1.  RADULPHUS AUSPURGENSIS chosen with much adoe by the seaven Electors, after 22 years vacancy of the Empire. 2. He overthrew Ottacar King of Bohemia, and pa∣cified the tumults in Germany, was free to the Church of Rome, by bestowing on it the power of the Exarches, and Romandiola, to stop (as some say) Cerberus chapps with such bits, least they should worry him, as they had his prede∣cessors. Notwithstanding he had no mind to travell to Rome for his Coronation. Quia me vestigia terrent (faith he) as the foxe observed concerning repairing to the Lions denne, many paths lead thither, but few tracts appeare of retur∣ners. 3. He had many children and matched sixe of his daughters to so many Princes, the seaventh remaining a vir∣gin. His usuall Motto was, MELIVS EST BENE IM∣PERARE, QVAM IMPERIVM AMPLIARE, Better it is to governe well that a man hath, then to inlarge his Do∣minions, many Cities in Italy purchased their freedome of him before his death, he endeavoured to settle the Empire upon his sonne Albert, but it was carried against him, espe∣cially by the Elector of Mentz. and
2.  ADOLPH Earle of Nassau had the place, a man of too mean a fortune, to uphold the Majesty of it. Our Ed∣ward of England, sent him a round snmme of mony, to up∣hold his rights, but he was forced to use it to supply his want. 2. His saying was, ANIMVS EST QVI DIVI∣TES FACIT, It is the mind not the Purse, which makes man rich, but he found by experience, they would doe well togither. 3. In a quarrell between him and Albert of Au∣stria, who had the better purse, he was forsaken of his friends, and slaine by his Enimies, of whom 3.  ALBERT the chiefe succeeds him. This man was the Sonne and Heire of Radulphus the first, surnamed Austria∣cus, in regard of his wife Elizabeth, he got Tyrol and Carin∣thia to be annexed to it. 2. Victorious he is said to be, in twelve severall Battles, the most of which might be rather termed Skirmishes. Of 21. children which he fathered, e∣leaven came to age, and were honourably disposed of. 3. In this mans time, seaven things happened very remarkable. 1. The removing of the Papall seat from Rome to Avignion in France. 2. The subversion of the Knights Templass. 3. The setling of the Knights of St Iohns in Rhodes. 4. The Scali∣gers in Ʋerona, and the 5. Estei in Ferrara. 6. The firsti Iu∣bilee at Rome in the West. And 7. the beginnings of the Ot∣tomans in the East. 5ly His Motto is said to be, QVOD O∣PTIMVM, ILLVD ET IVCVNDISSIMVM, That which is best, should most take us as in it selfe most pleasant. He was treacheroufly slaine by his Nephew and his compli∣ces, in which place his sonnes afterward built a Monastery. His successor was 4.  HENRY the seaventh of Lutzeburg, a pious, pru∣dent, and valarous Prince. 2. Having composed matters in Germany, he hastneth to doe the like in Italy, where all dis∣cipline was out of frame. Was Crowned in Rome in the Popes absence, by three Cardinalls, omitted no opportuni∣ty to give all content: notwithstanding he was tumultuously droven out of Rome, by the faction of the Ʋrcini, and through hatred of the Florentines poysoned in the Eucharist
by one Bernard an hired Monke. 3. That passeth for his Mot∣to, which he uttered upon the first feeling of the operation of the Poyson, CALX VITAE, CALIX MORTIS, The Cup of life is made my death. Which made way for the suc∣cession of 5. LEWIS of Bavaria, an able and resolute man, Against whom by the Popes faction, and some Electors was set up. Frederick of Austria Alberts soune, and Lewis was twice excommunicated, which he little regarded, and was told by our Occam, who stood up in his defence, with this resolute saying, Defendas me ô Imperator gladio, & ego defendam te verbo, protect me with the sword, and I will justify that thou doest by the word. 2. In this siding on all sides, Lewis having the better of Frederick, they come to an agreement, both keep the title of Emperours, but Lewis hath the Power and right. In his time the Countesse of Holland is said to have had as many Children at a Birth, as there be daies in a yeare. He deposed Pope Iohn the 22. and put Nicholas the fifth into his place. Lyra then flourished, whose Comment upon the whole Scripture, is Worthily esteemed at this day. 3, His Motto was, SOLA BONA QVAE HONESTA, Those things are only good which may stand with honesty, o∣thers attribute to him this, HVIVSMODI COMPARAN∣DAE SVNT OPES QVAE CVM NAVFRAGIO SI∣MVL ENATENT, Englished by our Queen Mary, which we have in a Breviary of hers, under her own hand, to a certain Lady, when she was Princesse, to be seen in the Ar∣chives of our Oxford Library, Get you such goods which may in a Shipwrack be carried away with you. Some say he dyed of an Apoplexy, others, that he was poysoned by the Austri∣an faction of his competor, at a Banquet in a Burgraves house in Norimberg. This is agreed upon, that 6.  CHARLES the fourth the Kings sonne of Bohemia succeeded him. Against him were set up our Edward the 3d of England; Frederick of Misnia, and Gunter of Swartzburg, but Edward waved the dignity with such trouble, Frederick was satisfied with money, and Gunter poysoned. 1. In his
journy into Jtaly to be Crowned, all was fish with him that came to nett, so that for his capacity he was termed the Step∣father of the Church, and this put upon him, that he would sell the Empire, if he might find a Chapman to gaine by the bargaine. 3. But with these enormities he had joyned ma∣ny excellencies. As himself was Lerned, so he much favou∣red Scholers, Founded the Ʋniversity of Prague, set forth that Golden Bull called Lex Carolina, wherein he requires that Emperours should be good Linguists to conferre them∣selves with Embassadours, and prescribes what solemnity should be used in electing, and authorizing Emperours ac∣cording to the Eminency of their place. 4. In this time flo∣rished Wicliffe, and Richard Armacanus for Divinity, Bar∣tholus and Baldus for Law renowned ever since. A Ratt∣catcher led forth with Taber and Pipe, most of the Children of the Towne of Hamel in Germany, who followed him into the side of a Mountaine opening, and were never more after heard of. The number also that dyed of the Plague in those dayes is incredible. 5. His Motto was, OPTIMVM EST ALIENA FRVI INSANIA. It is a wise way to make use of other mens Madnesse, which his sonne 7.  WENCESLANUS for whom he purchased the Em∣pire, had scarce the witt to doe. 1. He granted diverse Pri∣viledges to the Noringbergers for a Load of Wine, executed Barthold Swartz for inventing Gunpouder. 2. Bajaz the furious Turke, this time was like to have overrunne Europe, but was recalled, and overthrowne by the unresistable Tam∣berlane, and carryed about within a Golden Cage, to be trod upon as a foot-stoole when he mounted on Horseback. 3. The Motto put upon him was, MOROSOPHI MORI∣ONES PESSIMI. None are more pernicious Fooles, then those that are between Hauke & Buzzard, sots in serious mat∣ters, but wise enough to doe mischeife. He was Deposed for his untowardlinesse, and 8.  RUPERT Dake of Bavaria is Elected into his place. He was also Count Palatine, and from him came the foure Palatine Families, Heidleberg, Neuberg, Simmeren, and Swi∣brooke.
2. He endeavoured to reforme much, but could per∣forme litle. In his time two Popes were Deposed by the Councell of Pisa. 3. His mercifull Motto was, MISERIA RES DIGNA MISERICORDIA. Misery is to be pittied from what fountaine soever it floweth. To him succeeds. 9. SIGISMUND the brother of Wenceslaus, sonne of Charles the fourth. He tooke great paines and travels to set∣tle Peace amongst Christian Princes, yet new troubles still grew on him. 2. The Councell of Constance then held, De∣posed three Ropes, and chose Martin the first, which without the leave of the Electing Cardinals stood for good. So the Councell of Basill afterwards deposed Eugenius the fourth, and put into his place Amadeus, Duke of Savoy, but he soon resigned it againe: hence notwithstanding it may be conclu∣ded, That the Papists in those daies, held not the Pope, to be above a Councell. 3. Vpon the perfidious and shamefull Martyring of Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prague, the Bohe∣mians united themselves under John Zica to vindicate their rights and liberty of conscience. 4. This Zizea (though at the beginning having but one, and afterwards never an eye, was Victorious in 11 Battles. At his Death he defired his Skinne might make a Drumme, the sound of which would put a panick feare upon the persecuters of Gods Truth, and in truth a panick feare Rowted once the Emperours Army, Pezel. when the Hussites or Taborites were in a poore case to resist them. 5. This Emperours Motto was, CEDVNT MVNERA FATIS, Rewards alwayes attend not deserts, but fortune. He is reported nine times to have assayled the Turke, but never with successe, he dyes Childlesse, and 10.  ALBERT of Anstria the second his sonne in Law suc∣ceeds him, who held not the place so long as to doe any mat∣ter of consequence. 2. He carryed a heavy hand over the Jewes, withstood the Hussites, subdued Silesia, but could not preserve the Christians from that ruinous blow given by the Turkes to the Hungarians in the fields of Varna. 3. His Motto was, AMICVS OPTIMA ƲITAE POSSES∣SIO. Aright friend is this lifes best inheritance. Tis thought
he dyed of a surfet upon Pumpions. His successor was, 11.  FREDERICK the third, Arch Duke of Austria, his kinsman: a man accomplished with all parts fit for so high a calling. 2. Some place in his time, the overthrow of the Hungarians in Varna, but a greater blow then that, was the taking of Constantinople by Mahomet. A.C. 1553. to the shame and confusion of all Christendome. 3. Printing was thē invented by Iohn Guttenberg at Mentz, thence increased at Strausberge, and so communicated to Rome. 4. Vpon the Turkes possessing Constantinople, the Greekes flying for shel∣ter into the West, brought the riches of their tongue with them, which before was not so much respected. 5. His Mot∣to was, RERVM IRRECVPERABILIVM FAELIX OBLIVIO. It is happinesse to forget that which may not be recovered. After his long Raigne, his sonne 12.  MAXIMILIAN the first ascends the Throne. So great a Scholler, that he elegantly spake Latine, and other tongues: and in imitation of Iulius Caesar, wrote his own Acts. 2. Great stirres he had with the Venetians, whom he brought at length to submit. Having an interest in the Low Countries, by his marriage with Mary of Burgundy, he was coursly used amongst them, by a company of rude Mecha∣niques, detained in Prison, which he endured with pati∣ence, and freed himselfe from, after nine months with admi∣rable prudence. 3. His Motto was, TENE MENSVRAM, ET RESPICE FINEM, keep thy selfe within compasse, and have an eye alwaies to the end of thy life and actions. Sca∣ligers testimony of him was, If I should say that this Prince excelled all his predecessors, I should say lesse then the truth. His Grand-child, sonne of Philip, Arck-Duke of Austria 13.  CHARLES the fifth followes, This man was the glory of the house of Austria. At his Baptizing the Abbots offered a Bible with this inscription, Scrutamini Scripturas. Joh. 5. which was Luthers rule, whereby he set on foot the Refor∣mation. and the Protestants in Spira, whereby they with∣stood the Tyranny, Idolatry, and Hereticall Doctrine of the Pope and his Clergy. Adding a hundred grievances, which
they petitioned might be reformed, according to this rule. But the deafe Adders stopped their Eares. 2. He liked to read three bookes especially, Polybius History, Machiavel Prince, and Castalions Courteour. 3. In fifteen warres which he waged (for the most part) he was successefull. The lust of which was by Cortez and Pizarre, in the newly discove∣red parts of America, where in 28 Battailes, he became Master of so many Kingdomes. 4. Neere home, he took Rome by the Duke of Burbon. Captivated the French King Francis in the Battle of Pavia. Frighted Solyman the Turke from Vienna. Setled Mully Hassen in his Kingdome in Africk. Defeats Barbarossa the Sea Bugbeare, and takes Tunys. 5. By the Popes continuall instigations, he carryed a hard hand against the Protestants, whose patience and perseve∣rance, with other intervenient crosses, at length abated his edge. 6. So wearied with the worlds incessant troubles, he divests himselfe of all Emperiall authority, and betakes him to the repose of a Monastery. 7. His Motto was PLVS VLTRA, opposite to that of Hercules, For in the world a pious contemplation must not be bounded, but seek farther for a safer Haven: Spaine and the Low Countreys he left to his sonne Philip, but the Empire, by the consent of the Ele∣ctors, to 14. FERDINAND the first, his brother, a compleat and a judicious Prince. Vnder him in the Treaty of Passaw, was granted liberty of Conscience, to the professors of the Augu∣stane confession, which much startled the Fathers of the Trent Councell, As the grant also did to the Bohemians, for recei∣ving the supper in both kinds. 2. He subdued Iohn Sepusi∣us of Transilvania, entrenching upon the Crowne of Hunga∣ry, and strongly kept back the Turke from farther encroach∣ing upon his dominions. 3. His Motto was, FIAT IƲ∣ST ITIA ET PEREAT MVNDVS, Let right be done and come what may of it. His sonne 15. MAXIMILIAN the second, without any oppositi∣on, became his successour, Who was constant to the Tenent, that mens consciences are not to be forced in matters of Reli∣gion.
2. In his time began the Warres in the Low Countries, chiefly through the Spanish Tyranny, executedby the Duke of Alva, on the grieved people, and otherwise on the Earles of Horne and Egmond which yet endureth: The five Civill Warres in France, the barbarous Massacre of the Protestants began at Paris, The famous defeat of the Turkes, in the Sea∣fight at Lepanto. His pious Motto was, DOMINƲS PROVIDEBIT, The Lord will provide for such as depend upon him: under whose protection he breathing out his last, his sonne 16.  RODOLPHUS the second succeeds him, a Prince much addicted to Chimistry. 2. He granted liberty of Re∣ligion to the Protestants, obtained diverse victories against the Turke, with whom afterward he made a Peace, but ac∣cording to the Turkish manner, it was kept no otherwise then it might advantage them. 3. But a closer advantage was taken upon him by his own brother Mathias; who ex∣torted from him Hungary and Austria, with some other of his Dominions, to bury him as it were alive, and take his place before he had fairely left it. 4. Arch-Duke Leopold shewed himselfe somewhat in the Emperours behalfe, but to no purpose. 5. His Symbole was, OMNIA EX VO∣LVNTATE DEI, All must be as God will have it. And God would have his brother 17.  MATHIAS to succeed, with whom Gabriell Batte∣ry playing false, and tyrannizing over the Pregeny of the Saxons, in Transilvania, was slaine of his own Souldiers be∣fore Verradine. 2. The Protestants standing for their pri∣viledges in Bohemia, were withstood by some of the Empe∣rours Councell, of whom they threw Slabata and Fabritius Smesantius, with a Secretary out of a window at Prague. 3. Bethlem Gabor is chosen Prince of Transilvania by the States. The Iesuits expelled Bohemia, Cleselius the Cardi∣nall is violently taken from the Court, Bucquoy and Tampi∣er, are sent to pacify the Bohemians: Over whom the Em∣perour assignes his Cosen to be King. 4. The Moravians banish the Iesuits: consine the Cardinall Dithrighstin, and
Zerotine. The Earle of Thurne ènters Moravia, and Beth∣lem Gaber Hungary, to force those places from the Empe∣rour. 5. Whose Motto was, CONCORDIA LVMINE MAIOR, Con̄cord is more then light, To set things right. Which prevented by death, he could not doe, but leaves to be performed by his kinsman, 18. FERDINAND the second, made not long before King of Bohemia: The Bohemians except against his electi∣on, and chuse Frederick Count Palatine of Rhene King of Bohemia, He accepts of it, enters with the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and is Crowned in Prague. 2. Bucquoy the Em∣perours Generall enters Bohemia, Bethlem Gabor stirres on the other side in Hungary, to make a diversion, The Prote∣stants assemble at Nurinburg, and the Papists at Wortzburg, to make their parties good. The Emperour sets out an Edict against the King of Bohemia, and sends him monitory let∣ters to desist, to which he replies and stands to justify his right. 3. Spinola is brought to invade the Palatinate, and takes diverse Townes in it: Sir Horatio Vere with the Eng∣lish would have encountred him, but the Marquesse of An∣spacke Generall of the Protestant Army stopps it. 4. The King of Bohemia with his Queene, for saken of the States of that Kingdome, are forced to save themselves by flight. He is proscribed and put out of his Electorship, which is confer∣red upon the Duke of Bavaria. Tampier and Bucquoy the Emperours eaders are both slaine. 5. Duke Christian of Brunswick, and Count Mansfield, stirre for the King of Bo∣hemia. Heidelberg is taken by Tilly, the Emperours Gene∣rall, and Frankendale delivered to the Spaniard. The King of Bohemia settles himselfe with his Queene and Children at the Hague. Tilly drives Maurice Lantgrave of Hassia out of his Countrey. The King of Denmarke makes head against him, but to his great losse. Mansfield having left his forces with the Duke of Saxonweymer, dyes neere Venice, who with the Husbandmen men of Austria, & otherwise makes
head against the Imperialists, but with no successe. 6 Gusta∣vus Adolphus King of Swedia, like a Tempest falls on Ger∣many: Frees the oppressed Princes of Pomerania and Bran∣deburg: restores the Dukes of Meckelburg, Takes Wrutz∣burg, Mentz, and all that lies in his way: Overthrowes Til∣ly in two great Battailes, at Leippseike, and Leick: Overruns a great part of Bavaria. In a third Battle at Lutzen, puts Walsteene Duke of Freedland to the worst, slew the valiant Pappenheim, with diverse other of note of the Imperialists, But was there slaine himselfe, whether by the Enemy, or Treason of his own it is controverted by many: with whom we also end. 7. This Emperours Motto is said to be, LE∣GITIME CERT ANTIBƲS, It is the better for them that doe so, and undertake no Warre but upon just grounds. 2. MAtters of Consequence may be noted with this Pe∣riod. 1. The Contemporary Emperours of the East, 1. Andronicus Paleologus, sonne of Michael Paleologus (mentioned in the former Period) that recovered Constan∣tinople, this man would not stoop to the Lattaines, Neither his Nephew. 2. Andronicus Paleologus junior. Him fol∣lowes John Paleologus, under the protectorship of John Catachucenus, with whom Calo Johannes Catachnzenus sonne in Law, for some tenne years pertakes in the govern∣ment. 4. Then two Calo Johannes 5th 6th 7ly Andronicus, with a 8th Iunior Manuell, follow in a confus'd and shufling manner, untill 9. Constantine the 11. In whose time Con∣stantinople the famous seat of the Easterne Emperours, was made the Imperiall Citty of the Turkes, by Mahomet the Great, who thereupon was stiled their first Emperour, so that as the Westerne Empire began in Augustus, and ended in Augustulus: so the Easterne had Constantine the Great that erected it, and Constantine the unhappy that lost his life together with it, and was buried in the Empites ruines. 2ly Within this Period may be also observed seven Expedi∣tions for the recovery of the Holy Land, with infinite charge and losse, and no answerable successe. 3. The discoveries of
the West Indies by Columbus, and Americus Vespucius, and the conquest in them by Cortez, and Pizarro. 4. The sayling about the whole world by Sir Francis Drake, Sir Thomas Candish, and Oliver Van-North: to whom Ferdinando Ma∣gellane had shewed the way, but died before he came to his journeys end. 5. Within this compasse besides, fell the fa∣mous inventions of Gunpowder and Printing. They of Chi∣na boast, they had Printing long before, but their untowardly characters shew the vanity of that vaunt, and what may be expected from them, that never attained to the perfection of an Alphabet. 6. Hereupon followes the Reformation of Religion, by Luther, Zuinglius, and other pious and Learned Doctors beyond the Sea, which was perfected here with us, by our domestique Bishops, Martyrs, and Professor, to the admiration and envy of friends and opposers. So that our Constantine hath been reckoned the first Christian Empe∣rour, our Lucius the first King Christened, and our Henry the eight the first that broke the neck of the Popes usurped authority, which are blessings never to be recounted, with∣out continuall thankes to God, that hath so graced this Isle above so many famous Kingdomes round about us. Tamber∣lane, Zisa, Huniades, Scanderbeg, and Gustavus King of Sweden of this Period, may be justly paralel'd with the most famous Leaders, that we read of amongst the Ancients.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Iewish Iubilies may be turned into Chri∣stian Marts, to make sale of Pardons, and to get mony? 2. To be Crown'd or approved by the Pope, conferre any Title or Power to the Ro∣mane Emperour? 3. Wenceslaus the Emperour did well in put∣ing to death Barthold Swartz, for invent∣ing Gunpowder? 4. The invention and practice of Printing, have done more hurt then good? 5. Machavills Princeps, were a Book wor∣thy of the esteeme it had from Charles the fifth? 6. Anabaptisticall Anarchy, be not more in∣tollerable in Church or State then Popish Supremacy? 7. Supremacy, Ʋbiquity, and the new found Discipline, may not proceed from the A∣pocalypticall froggs, that set most Chur∣ches and States at variance one with ano∣ther? So much for the Politicall History in Generall.
OF THE HISTORY OF SVCCESSIONS In States, Countries, Or Families. WITH A Particular Instance in the Succession of Governments, and Governours, in this our own Country, which may serve for a Directory of Contrivance for other States. According to the Method observed in the two former Tracts. Ne te quaesiveris extra, Domi Talpa, foris Linceus. Abroad let not thy Fancy roame, Vntill thou know what's done at home. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniversity, 1648.
The Dynasty of the BRITANES. 1. TO Ecclesiasticall, and Politicall History in Ge∣nerall, succeeds in particular, The History of Successions, which may be in Kingdomes, States, or Families: the latter we leave to their peculiar Registers, Heralds, or Genea∣logists: and amongst the diversities in the first, pitch only u∣pon a Briefe of the Chronicles, of this Kingdome of Eng∣land. 2. In which may be observed, the severall Dynasties or Governments Of 1. BRITANES. 2. SAXONS. 3. DANES. 4. NORMANS. 5. PLANTAGENETS. 6. TUDORS. 7. STUARTS. 3. The Dynasty of the Britans, is so interlarded with Fa∣bles, and perplexed through Confusion; that Authors herein consent not, where to begin, how to goe onward, or when to end, that the parts of it may tollerably hang togither. To touch on all therefore that is usually said, as well upon obscu∣rer,
or surer grounds, These Distances (for memory) may be taken notice of, 4. From. 1. SAMOTHES to Albion. 2. ALBION to Brute. 3. BRUTE to Dunwallo. 4. DUNWALLO to Cassibilan. 5. CASSIBILAN to Lucius. 6. LUCIUS to Vortigerne. 7. VORTIGERNE to the Saxons. 5. THE first Distance in the British Dinasty, from Samothes to Albion, (for distinctions sake) may passe under the title of Samotheans from the first Governour in it. 1. SAMOTHES. This man is said to have beene the same with Mesech the sixt sonne of Iaphet, Gen. 10. but if Berosus (brought to light by Annius Viterbiensis) had not said so, Bale. Caius. Hollinshed. those that take it upon his trust, would hardly have gathered it from any Records of credit. 2. He is passed for a great Scholer in Philosophy and Mathematiques, neither was he negligent in Religion and Church-Discipline, Baleus de scri∣ptorb. Archilochus. Xenophon. Iosephus. but wrote a booke of rituall Canons, for the more orderly preservation of it, and that in Phaenician Letters, to whom the Greeks have been behold∣ing for their Alphabet, which diverse of our latter Antiqua∣ries are loath to grant. 3. From him (they say) this Iland was first called Samothea, in wich flourished Samothei a Sect of excellent Philosophers. But when this is asserted by some out of Aristotle, and Socion, mentioned by Diogenes Laertius; an exquisite Philologist of ours, M. Selden. will convince them of their mistake. For Samothei may rather be deduced from , Semidei Heroes, a kind of reverend Gods, then from this Samothes to whom his sonne, 2. MAGUS is brought to succeed as the right Heire. The name should not be offensive to Christians, Math. 2. by reason of the comming of the Magi to Christ. When we may distin∣guish
between naturall Magick, and Diabolicall, and wise Magi, and Witches. The word fetcheth his roote from Per∣sia, where the Magi were the Kings cheife Councellours, Iustine, others. and upon occasion once usurped the Throne. 2. From this Fairy King, some deduce the Pedigree of those Persians, but it is a large leape, and unknowne, how they gott over the Water. What manner of Professors they were amongst the Persians the Poet shewes, Ille penes Persas Magus est qui sidera norit, Qui scit herbarum vires cultum{que} deorum, Persepoli facit ista Magos prudentia triplex. The Persians him Magus terme that course of Sarres doth know, The power of Herbes, and worship due to God that man doth owe, By threefold knowledge, thus the name of Magus then did grow. 3. Some are of a mind, Sir Thomas Eliot. George Lilly. that the names that end in Magus here amongst us, as Neomagus our Chester, Niomagus our Buckingham with other, had their appellation from this King of Samothea, whose virtues were continued in his sonne 3. SARRON. For this man founded Schooles and publique places for Learning to Civillize his wild Subjects, with whō nothing else would worke. 2. From hence grew that Sect of Philosophers, mentioned by the name of Saronides in Dio∣dorus Siculus, without whose presence, no act of Religion was thought to be well performed. 3. A better Prince could hardly be wished for, yet he was much outstript by his sonne 4. DRUIS, who is set forth to be the Master of Pythago∣ras, for his immortality and transmigration of soules from one body into another. And the founder of the Druides, Lazius de Gent. migrat. l. 2. ex Mar∣cellino. from whom Timagines is said to have brought the Greek Letters first to Atheus. 2. Their cheife seat was the Ile of Man or Anglisey, and most sacred and of highest esteeme, were Oakes and Misselto. That which they taught must be committed to memory, not writing. They tooke upon them the determining
of all causes Ecclesiasticall and Civill. Excommunicated those that obeyed them not, were so expert in telling For∣tunes, that the Saxons afterwards termed every Wysard a Dry. Caesar. Picardus in Celtopae did. M. Selden. Their Opinions are collected by diverse, some passe∣able, other frivolous and superstitious. 3. For their barba∣rous sacrificing of men, to devine thereby what was to come, and others abominations, they were scattered by the Ro∣manes in Gallia, in Tiberius, and Claudiu's times, and after∣wards here extinguished by the Preaching of the Gospel, long before which time 5. BARDUS possessed his Father Drui's place, To his Ancestours Philosophy, Magick Politiques, Rites, and Cere∣monies, this man added Poetry, and set all their Excell encies at a higher key. 2. From him we have the ancient Bardi, the Chroniclers of all Heroick Actions, and Commenders of their Performers to the Imitation of Posterity, Avent. Hist. Brior. l. 22. whom an ancient Poet thus bespeaketh Vos quoque qui fortes animas bello{que} peremptas, Laudibus in longum vates deducitis aevum, Plurima securi fudistis Carmina Bardi. Then you brave Bards securely song, the pray ses of dead Peares, In lofty straines for to prolong, their fame for many yeares. 3. Their esteem was such amongst the greatest Commanders, that if two Armies were even at the push of pike, and a Bard had step'd in between them, they would have held their hands, hearkned to his advice, and not have offered to strike untill he were out of danger. 4. Famous amongst those Bardes (before the comming of our Saviour) were held Plenidius and Glaskirion, Leland. Price. LLoyd. and of late yeares Davye dye, David ap Williams and others. They say the Iland Bardsey, had In∣sula Bardorum its name from them, and Aquila, Perdix, Pa∣trick, Maddoch, and both the Merlyns the Wysards, were from this Institution. Successors to him are numbred by some to be
6. LONGHO-BARDUS his sonne who gave the name to the Lingones in France, but 7. CELTES that came after him, gayned the repute to have France, and most of the Westerne parts to beare his name. In regard whereof John Picardus, called his five books of the Learning of those times Celtopaediae. But these are named only, and may be well left to those fancyes that be∣gat them. 2. COntemporaries here are not to be expected, except Jonithus Noahs fourth sonne, & Nimrods Tutor, Her∣cules of France which he had with his Galathe, Grafton. the Daugh∣ter of Jupiter Celtes, and the Battell between him and the Giants, the sonnes of Titan in Italy, may be ranked with these Samotheans, all of a like being and credit. INQVIRES. 3. Whether. 1. Those Peices of Berosus, and other Anci∣ents set forth by Annius Viterbiensis, may be rejected as Fictions? 2. This Iland ever were known by the name of Somothea in any ancient approved Re∣cords? 3. A Phaenician Alphabet were extant in Sa∣mothes time, more ancient then the He∣brew, frō which the Greeks deriv'd their? 4. The Magi of the Persians had their name and Learning, from our King Magus? 5. The Sarronides in Diodorus Siculus, and the Druides in Caesar, had their Titles ra∣ther from hollow Trees of Oakes, then from the Kings before mentioned? 6. Pythagoras had his Metempsychosis from the Druides, or they from him? 7. Merlins Prophesies may be well passed under the title of Old Wives Tales?
Albionists. DISTANCE II. THE second Distance of change in this British Dy∣nasty, is from Albion to Brute. In this appeares in the fore-front, the terrible Gyant. 1. ALBION, He is set forth to be the sonne of Neptune the Sea-god, Gen. 10.13. the same with Naphtuhim in Moses, of the house of Cham. These Chamites had conspired and slaine Osyris the father of Hercules Libicus, Ib. called by Moses Leha∣bim. To revenge whose death Hercules (like a good sonne) bestirred himselfe, and having made short work with Try∣phon and Busyris in Aegypt, Anteus in Mauritania, and Ge∣rion in Spaine, Lestrigo in Italy must not escape him. Against whom hastning to execute his Club-law; In Gallia he was encountred by this our Albion, and his brother Bergion. 2. Al∣bion had easily brought under the Samotheans of Iaphets line, who were given only to idle speculations, for to assist him. And Bergion had no lesse power amongst the Gaules. The Battles joyne, Hercule's part gives ground, store of Stones being at hand, by command (being no better furnished) they use them, and that with such successe, that Albion and Bergi∣on are both slaine, & their Forces utterly defeated. Where∣upon Poets tooke the hynt, that Jupiter threw downe those stones from heaven to make his sonne Hercules victorious. 3. Notwithstanding this disaster, this Impe of Cham is said to have left the name of Albion to this Iland, which others deduce From Albina one of Dioclesians daughters King of Syria; or of Danaus, who caused them to cut their Husbands
throats, for which their punishment in Hell is to carry water in Sives, pretty Poetry, but peevish History: These Lasses are said to have companied with Hob-goblings, or men as mon∣strous as them, and so to have peopled this Country, but Hol∣lenshed (otherwise credulous enough) confutes this mainly by naming the 50 daughters of Danaus, whereof none was called Albina 4. Others therefore more judiciously, think it called Albion, either from the white Clifts by the Lattins, or from , happy (by reason of the plenty of all things in it) by the Greeks, which conjectures are farre more passe∣able. 5. Lastly this Gyant of ours is made to be the same with Albion, mentioned by Pomponius Mela, and the Au∣thor of some Geometricall Demonstrations, touched by Bale and Gesner in his Bibliotheca. 6. A Rable of Elves are na∣med to be his Successours, as Galates, 2 Allobrox, 3 Ramuis, 4, Paris, 5 Lugdus, 6 Francus, 7 Pictus, &c. Invented by Idle Monkes, to give a reason of the Originalls of some people or Cities they undertook to write of. 7. Yet David Pencair a British writer, and Nennius are brought to give Evidence for Danaus daughters floating hither, and naming the place, which is more unlikely, and dishonourable then the Legend of the Giganticall Mathematician Albion. 2. COontempories here need not to be looked after, in as much as it is questioned, whether their have bin such men as Albion & his successors or no, except we would fitt him with the company of Poliphemus of Scicily, Finmacoel the great hunter of Scotland, Holingshed. Saxo Gram∣maticus. of no lesse then seaven Cubites height, Starkater the huge Ki-lcow of Sweden, and Fian-Ma∣chon of Ireland, who slew Glas King Logers Swin-heard of that Country, of a hundred foot in length, as it was made ap∣peare to St Patrick and his twelve Disciples, that at their request, by the signe of the Crosse made upon his Tombe, called him forth to shew himselfe, and then baptized him after he had been dead, and in Holl, 'tis not known how long, and so remitted him againe to rest in his Grave, according to the relation of Iohn Capgrave in the life of St Patrick.
INQVIRIES. 4. Whether. 1. Albion in Pomponius Mela, be the same Gyant that subdued the Samotheans, and raigned thereupon in this Iland? 2. See Hollin∣sheds descrip∣tion of Bri∣taine. It be likely that any Gyants were hereto∣fore of vaster Stature, then extraordinarily have been since found in latter ages, or may be now in diverse Countries? 3. Albion had its name from the forementi∣oned Gyant, or from the Lady Albina, or some other occasion? 4. The Geometricall Demonstrations mentio∣ned by Gesner, be Richard's of Walling∣fords, framed for the Clock of St Albons, without relation to the Gyant Albion? 5. It be not a bold wresting of the Text of Scripture to derive Hercules and Neptune, from Lehabim & Napthuhim Gen. 10.13? 6. There be any likelyhood in the Tale of the floating hither from Greece of the thirty two Daughters of Danaus, or Dioclesian? 7. It be not detestable & scandalous to deduce the ancient Inhabitants of this Iland from incarnate Hobgoblius?
Trojanes. DISTANCE III. 1. THe third Distance may be termed of the Trojanes, which ends at Dunwallo, and begins with, 1. BRUTUS ap Sylvius, ap Ascanius, ap Aeneas, who having by chance slaine his Father, by shooting at a Deere, leaves Italy, and betakes himselfe to Greece. 2. With the help of diverse of his Countrymen Trojanes, there repairing unto him, he forceth King Pandrasus, to give him his Daughter Immogen to wife, and furnish him with a Navy to seeke his fortune. 3. This Navy upon a two daies sayling, brought him to an Iland (that few Geographers have met with) named Leogitia or Lergetia. There he stumbled u∣pon an Oracle (which in great devotion he consulted with) in this Poeticall rapture. Diva potens nemorum, terror Sylvestribus apris, Cui licet aufractus ire per aethereos. Infernas{que} Domos; Terrestria jura resolve, Et dic quas terras nos habitare velis. Dic certam sedem, quâ te venerabor in avum, Quae tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris. Thou Goddesse that dost rule The Woods, and Forrests greene, And chasest foaming bores, That flee thy awfull sight; Thou that maist passe aloft, In any skies so sheene, And walke in dismall cells, Through places voyd of light;
Discover fates behest, Direct our cause aright, And shew where we shall dwell, According to thy will, In seats of sure abode, Where Temples we may dight, For Virgins that shall sound, Thy praise with voyces shrill. It is to be supposed he was told, that it was a shee Oracle of Diana, with whom he complements accordingly, and from whom, in his sleepe, he receives this gentle answere, in the same straine he had courted her, Brute, sub occasum solis trans Gallica Rogna, Insula in Oceano est, undi{que} clausa mari: Insula in Oceano est, habitata Gigantibus olim, Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuis; Hanc pete, nam{que} tibi sedes erit illa perennis, Hìc fiet natis altera Troia tuis. Hìc de prole tua reges nascentur, & ipsis Totius terrae subditus orbis erit. Brute farre by West beyond the Gallish land is found, An Isle, which with the Ocean sea, inclosed is about: Where Giants whilom dwelt, but now is desart ground, Most meet, where thou maist plant thy selfe, with all thy route: Make thither ward with speed, for there thou shalt find out, An everlasting seat, and Troy shall rise anew, Vnto thy race, of whom shall Kings triumphant sprout, That with their mighty power, shall all the World subdue. 4. More here is said then verified, and promised then per∣formed: upon this he goes on, and meets with the valiant Coroneus, and other Trojans in his way, whom he associate to them he had. 5. They arrive in France, overcome Gof∣farius the Pictish King of Brittaine, who quarrelled with
them to his cost. 6. From thence hoysting sailes, he arrives at Totnesse in Devon. Coroneus in wrestling breaks the neck of Gogmagog the Giant, some say over Dover Rocks, others over the Clifs of Plymmouth Howe, For which, and other services, he is made Duke of Cornwall, so called after his name. 7. Brute settles the government in the rest of Albi∣on, and changeth its name into Brutaine and builds Troyno∣vant now London: leaves to his second Sonne Camber, that portion then named from him Cambria, now Wales: to his youngest Albanack, the nor therne parts, termed from him ALbania: But Loegria now. England, designed was for the inheritance of his eldest sonne 2. LOCRINE. This man upon notice of his brother Al∣banact's death, that was invaded and slaine by Humber King of Hunnes, together with his brother Camber, sets upon the Invader, slaies him, and throwes his body into the river neere the overthrow, which thence at this day, retaines the name of Humber. 2. In this Battaile was taken the faire La∣dy Elstrild, whom he kept for his Paramore, untill his jea∣lous wise Guendolen, Coreneus of Cornewalls daughter slew him in Battle, captivated the distressed Elstrild, with the young Sabrina her danghter, which she had by Locrine: both were thrown into the River, which of the daughters name is termed Sabrina, or Severne. 3. Afterward for a while she took the government into her own hands, and mannaged it in the non-age of her sonne 3. MADAN, whom she had by Locrine, before the breach between them. He seemed to be inheritor only of his Fathers Lusts, and Mothers fiercenesse: and is noted to be monstrous in the one, and tyrannicall in the other. 2. Ranulph. Cicestren. His death is reported to be correspondent to his beastly life, be∣ing devoured by Wild beasts, amongst which he fell in hunt∣ing, leaving behind him his sonne 4. MEMPRICIUS to succeed him. With him his bro∣ther Manlius callengeth an interest in the Kingdome, but under colour of a Treaty, he was soon dispatched out of the way. 2. Scured then from Competition and opposition,
he plungeth himselfe into all kinds of unnaturall Lust, which made him odious to his Subjects, and rendred him as a prey, to be intombed (as his father was) in the Paunches of wild beasts, to make way for a better successor, his sonne 5.  EBRANK, commended for a great builder, from whom we have the Cities of Yorke, & Edenburgh in Scotland. 2. He is farther noted to have subdued some parts of France & Ger∣many, by his 20 Sonnes, which he had by 21 Wives, whereof the forwardest was Assaracus that led on the rest. 3. His thirty daughters, sisters to those Sonnes, were sent into Italy, to Alba Sylvius, to be married to Trojane Nobility, to whom the Sabines refused to joyne their Daughters. Thus having plotted the propagation of the breed of Troy, he leaves the prosecution, to his sonne 6.  BRUTE Greene-shield, but he did lesse then the Green Knight is said to have done, in the tale of Valentine and Or∣son. Some say he attempted somewhat upon France, and built somewhat in Britaine, all as much as nothing. His Sonne 7.  LEILL that followed, is remembred only in the name of Caerleill continued amongst us: where he built a Temple, and placed a Flamen; Acts of devotion neglected by his predecessors: In this Temple he was intombed. 8.  LUD Hurdibras his sonne that succeeded, is more commended, he appeased the stirres raised in his Fathers time. 2. Builded Canterbury, and Winchester, and Mount Palladoure (now Shaftbury) where Aquila, nor a bird (as Geffery of Monmouth tells us) but a Wisard so called, was held an Oraclist. 3. Some what he was also for Temples and Flamins. But his sonne 9.  BLADUD went beyond him, He was bred in Athens, and thence returned a great Mathematitian, and Magitan, brought foure Philosophers with him, which he placed in Stamford, Professors having made that place a kind of an Ʋ∣niversity. 2. Builded Bath, and by art produced those Hot Waters, which yet there continue, committing the conser∣vation of them to Minerva. 3. But presuming to flye with
artificiall Wings and Spells, he fell from Apollo's Temple (now Poules) in Troynovant, and so ended his daies: 10. LEAR his sonne took the Government, and built Leicester. Famous for his three daughters, Gonorilla, Ragan, and Cordeilla. The two eldest professed great love unto him, till they had gotten all that he had, and his Kingdome be∣tween them: then their Husbands Hunnius Duke of Corne∣wall, and Maglanus of Albany, took the advantage of the forlorne old man, to dethrone him. 3. He repaires to the misunderstood Cordeilla, who had married Aganippus a Prince of France, she dutifully receives him, and her Hus∣band with the help of confederates, restores him to his for∣mer dignity, in which he dying leaves the place to his thank∣full daughter 11. CORDEILLA, But shee being invaded by her two Nephews Morgan, and Cunedag (sonnes to her mentioned sisters) and by them subdued and imprisoned, pittifully made her selfe away, and leaves to them the Kingdome, 12. Morgan and Cunedag, who peaceably ruled for a while, in their severall divisions. But Morgan of the elder sister, contending that the whole belonged unto him, ventu∣red upon his Cosens part, and so lost all with his life: leaving his name to the place in which he was vanquished, of Glan-Morgan, continued ever since; and the whole Kingdome to Cunedag, who had it not long, before his death transferr'd it to his sonne 13. RIVALLO, In whose time it raigned blood, for three daies together, that bred flies: which a contagion fol∣lewed that consumed multitudes. This Perdix the Wisard of those daies, might foretell, but not withstand. This cala∣mity wrought not his sonne that succeeded, 14. GURGUSTUS, to forsake his beastly surquedry, but left it to his brother 15. SYSILLIUS his successour to augment it, rather then reforme it, and his kinsman 16.  IAGO (for ought is said of him) runnes onward in the same straine, and dyes without Issue.
17.  KINNIMACUS or Kinmartu (some say) his brother is named only to bring in 18.  GORBODUG his sonne, and he to fill up a roome, and then transferre it to his sonnes, 19.  FERREX and Porrex, They quarrelling with one the other (as the manner is in such cases) met in Battle: wherein whether Ferrex slew Porrex, or he his brother, it is uncertaine: all agree, that the Mother with her own hands flew the snrviver in his bed, when he least thought of it, and so put a Brutish Period to the line of Brute, after it had con∣tinued about 700 years. Then upon much bickering for a∣bout 50 years space, the Monarchy degenerated into a Pen∣tarchy, wherein first Staterus became King of Albania. 2. Yevan of Northumberland. 3. Pinnor of Loegria. 4. Ru∣dac of Wales, and Cloten of Cornwall, whose sonne Mulmu∣cius Dunwallo, brought it back to a Monarchy as before, the leader in the next Distance or Ranke. 2. VVIth these fall in the times of David, and his suc∣cessors, untill the returne from the Captivity of Babylon. Grafton. 2. The building of Rome, and diverse other Cit∣ties here amongst us. 3. The originalls of the names, of some Places and Rivers, which carry small credit with them.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The story of Brute and his Line, be as un∣certaine as that of Samothes and Albion? 2. Britaine had its name from Brit painted, and Tania a Region, and Cornewall from Kern a horne, which it resembleth, and Wallia to which it relateth, and not from Brutus and Coroneus? 3. Greeke Oracles ever used to give answers in Lattaine Hexameter and Fentameter? 4. Coroneus worsting Gogmagog in wrestling, left a patterne to the Cornish to prove such skilfull Wrestlers? 5. Stamford were made an Vniversity by King Bladud? 6. The hot Baths in the Citty of Bath, were ever so naturally, before King Bladud built there a Temple, and committed them to Minerva's trust? 7. Aquila's and Perdix' Prophecies, be meere forged delusions?
Brittish Monarchs. DISTANCE IV. 1. THe fourth Distance of Brittish free Monarchs ends at Cassibellane, and takes his rise from Mulmuci 1.  DUNWALLO, Duke Clotons sonne of Cornewall, he subdued the other Rulers in the Pentarchy, and was the first Crowned King of Britany, whereas others before were but termed Rulers, Dukes, or Governours. 2. He constituted good Lawes, translated out of British into Latine by Gildas Priscus, and afterward by King Alfred, into English, and mingled amongst his Statutes. Notable was the priviledge he granted to Heathen Temples: that those that fled unto them, should be there protected, and thence passe untouched to shift for themselves. 3. Blackwell Hall, Malmsbury, and the Vies, are said to be built by him, and the foure crosse waies began, which were finished by his sonne Beline. 3. Most affirme that he brought in Weights and Measures, and or∣dained strict Lawes for the punishment of theft: being a great favourer of Learning and Chivalry, dyes honourably, and leaves his two sonnes to Raigne after him joyntly, 2.  BELINUS and Brennus, Brennus by north Humber, and Beline in the Southerne parts remaining, with Corne∣wall. 2. Brennus not contented with his dividend, for strengthning of himselfe to get more, sayles into Norway, there marries King Elsings daughter, but lost her in the car∣riage homeward, to Guiltdake her former sweetheart King
of Denmarke: This King by storme is driven with her, u∣pon the coast of Northumberland, and entertained by Beline, Brennus followes, and requires of his Brother his Wife and Patrimony: both are denied him, they joyne Battle, Bren∣nus with his Norwaies is routed, flyes into Gallia, marries Se∣ginus daughter Duke of Allabrog, returnes with his Father in Lawe's forces upon his brother Beline. Being upon an un∣naturall encounter, the Mother steps between, and fully ac∣cords them. 3. Brennus returnes, (some say, accompanied with his brother Beline, 'tis well he had his best furtherance) and conquereth a great part of Gallia, whence furnished with forces, he passes into Italy, and after a great overthrow given, surprizeth Rome. Livius. The chiefe leaders in which find∣ing their weaknesse, fortify themselves in the Capitoll: to which the Galls having found a secret passage, and thinking to have taken them napping, were discovered by some geese, and so disappoynted, whence afterward the Romanes had a Goose feast, in the honour of Iuno. 4. In the mean whiles, the ancient Senaters sitting with great gravity in Chaires at their Doores, and thereby at first awing the pillaging Souldi∣ers into reverence: upon a boxe given by Marcus Papirius, to one that plaid with his beard, he inraged thereby, cut his throat, and emboldned his fellowes to doe the like to the rest. 4. A composition is made for surrendring the Capitoll, the mony to be paid from the Romans is weighing, the Galls throw in their swords to the ballance, to augment the summe agreed upon. A quarrell thence ariseth, in the heat of which Furius Camillus (recalled from Banishment and made Di∣ctator by the Senate) comes with forces, expells the Galls out of Rome and Italy. 5. Thence falling upon Greece, they are said to have subdued Sosteme Duke of Macedon, where plundering all Temples they met with, and attempting to doe the like at Delphos, Apollo (as it should seem in anger) so pelted them with haile-stones, and with an Earth-quake, and a fall of a peece of Pernassus, that he slew most of them, and so wounded our Brennus, that in despaire he fell upon his own Sword. 6. All this while Beline at home spent his
time, Graston. Leland. 1. in setling Archflamines in London, Yorke, and Carleon: Built Billings gate and the Tower of London. 7. and so died honourably, and was buried with great pompe, leaving his sonne 3.  GURGUINTUS to succeed him. Vpon denyall of the Tribute granted to his Father Beline by Guiltdake King of Denmarke, he passed thither with an Army, and by Force recovered the continuance of the Payment of it. 2. In his returne he mett with Captaine Partholine with a company of vagrant Spaniards that sought a place to dwell in, whom he fixed in Ireland. 3. This Partholines brother Cataber is said in earnest by some, to have Founded the Ʋniversity of Cambridge. Gaius. 4.  GUINTHOLINUS his sonne followes him the more famous for his learned and prudent Wife Martia, from whom the Saxons had their Lawes Marthehelog translated unto them by King Alfred, 2. He is said to have built War∣wick about the time that Alexander the Great was borne, leaves to succeed his sonne. 5.  SICILIUS guided by his mother in his nonage. In his time the Picts got footing in the Marches of England and Scotland, whom his sonne 6.  KIMARUS a dissolute and carelesse young Prince, ne∣ver endeavoured to remove, he was treacherously slaine in Hunting, and 7.  ELANIUS his sonne or brother that took his place in only named, whose Bastard 8.  MORINDUS had more mettell in him, and was much magnified for his comely personage and courage, but rashly encountring alone a Sea-monster that devoured all before him, after a furious conflict, he was also devoured by it, lea∣ving five sonnes, of which 9.  GORBOMAN proved a good Prince. He repaired Temples, Grafton. ellinsh. promoted Sacrifices according to the blind devotion of those dayes. Built Cambridge and Grantham, which others deny, and say it was Canta another Towne inclosed with walls wherein some Philosophers were placed, destroyed af∣terwards
by the Saxons. He dying without Issue, 10. ARCHIGALLUS his brother takes the place, but Deposed by the Nobles for his oppression, untill the third brother 11. ELIDURUS, finding him discontented in a Wood, as he rode on Hunting, lovingly restored him to his Royalties, and then upon his death Raigned after him, which was not long before 12.  VIGENIUS and Peridurus the two youngest bre∣thren bandied against him, and shared his meanes betwixt them. Vigenius dies, and Peridurus for his cruelty was slaine by his Nobles, so that Elidurus was freed out of Prison to Raigne the third time, between whom and Helie, there pas∣sing about 180 yeares, Monometensis and others have made bold to name 33 Kings to take up that time. But herein there is no agreement in names, number, or whether they were before Dunwallo, or succeeded Elidurus, Graston. Hollinsh. Polltdor Virgil. whereof Hollinshed hath a digression in the History of England, lib. 3. c. 8. The names therefore of these Fayrie Kings may be well omit∣ted, (of whom nothing is noted but the name) to pitch upon 13. HELIE. From him some think, the Ile of Elie took his name, others say noe, but from a multitude of Eales, into which the Married Preists with their Wives and Children were transformed, that refused to obey St Dunstanes Ordi∣dinance, that Preists should live single, but that derivation is more probable that is deduced from Helig, LLoyd. which signifies in Brittish a Willow, by reason of the plenty of Willowes which there grew. 2. This Holye had three sonnes, Lud, Cassibilane; and Nennius; Nennius came not to raigne, but 14. LUD succeeded his Father, and reformed Lawes, augmented Troynovant, and thereupon called it Ludstowne, now London. His brother Nennius was offended with it, conceiving thereby that the name of Troy should be forgot∣ten, Ludgate more plainly beares his name without of∣fence. 2. Some say Baynards Castle, others that the Bishop, of Londons Pallace was built by him for his Court. 3. He left two sonnes behind him, Androgeus and Theomantius,
who in their Nonnage fell under the protection of their Vn∣cle Cassibellane the foreman in the next Distance. 2. VVIth those times concurre, 1. The latter Kings of the Persian Monarchy, and former of the Greeks. 2. The beginning of the Scotish Monarchy by Fer∣usius, crowned upon the fatallstone brought by Gathelus out of Spaine that hath this Inscription. Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocun{que} locatum, Invenient Lapidem, regnare tenentur Ibidem. Except old sawes do faine, and Wissards witts be blind, The Scotts in place shall raigne, where they this stone shall find. 3. Aspiring of the Romanes to overtop all those that had gone before them. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Any of Mulmutius Dunwallo's, or Marci∣an's lawes may be now distinctly shewen. 2. Brennus that sacked Rome were a Britan, or a Gaule? 3. Irelands first Inhabitants were Spanish ex∣iles, under the conduct of Captaine Par∣theline? 4. The Ʋniversity of Cambridge were Foun∣ded by Cantaber Captaine Parthelin's Brother? 5. Morindus encountring alone the Seamon∣ster express'd not more vanity, then va∣lour? 6. The Transforming of Marryed Preists in∣to Eales, be not as hansome a Metamor∣phosis as any in Ovid? 7. It were not surly vnadvisednesse in a Se∣nator of Rome, to hassard his owne head, and of many others, for some incivility of∣fered to the gravity of his Beard?
Romane Tributaries. DISTANCE V. THE fifth Distance is extended to King Lucius, the first Christian that Raigned among the Britaines, and begins with, 1.  CASSIBILLANE in whose time the Britaines were first Conquered, and made Tributaries to the Romanes. 2. He was brother to Lud, and had the Kingdome cast upon him, by reason of the nonage of Luds sonnes, Androgeus and Theomantius. 3. Iulius Caesar at that time imployed in the subduing Gallia, being informed they had underhand sup∣plies from Britaine, takes vantage thereupon to invade the Ile, where partly by Stormes at Sea, that wracked his Navy, partly by Valour of the Inhabitants, under this Kings con∣duct. Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. He Britanes sought, but Force to quell did lack, And like a Coward shew'd his fearefull back. As Pompey in the Poet object's to his disgrace. 4. Lucan. Our wri∣ters say farther, that Nennius the Kings brother meeting with Caesar hand to hand, got his sword from him, but with it a knock on the pate, Monomelens. that cost him his life within fifteene dayes after. 5. At length upon a quarrell between the King and his Nephew Aadrogeus, concerning one Evelin who had slaine the Kings kinsman, and was countenanced therein by the young Prince, matters came to that height, that An∣drogeus revolts, and calls back Caesar from France, and assist∣eth him to the overthrow of his Country. This rendred him so hatefull, that Cassibellane dying without Issue, the younger sonne of Lud
2.  THEOMANTIUS was preferr'd to the place. He qui∣etly paid the Tribute to the Romanes, which his vnkle had promised to Caesar: administred Iustice at home, and prote∣cted his Subjects from Forreigners, which made a faire way for his sonne 3.  KIMBELLINE to succeed him. In the 23. yeare of whose Raigne our Saviour Christ was borne. 2. Some say that upon deniall of the Romane Tribute, Augustus Caesar was thrice upon the way to invade Britaine, but was by o∣ther businesses diverted. The contrary relation is more like∣ly, that Kimbelline being bred in Rome, and graced much by Augustus, never gave afterward occasion of distast. whose good example his sonne and successor 4.  GUIDERIUS, had not the wisdome to follow. He therefore being valorous, and of a haughty spirit, held it a di∣sparagement for a King, to be Tributary unto any. No Tri∣bute therefore may be had from him. 2. Caligula the Ro∣mane Emperour stormes at it, goes in Person against him, brings his company as farre as the Belgique shore, causes his Army thence to gather Coccle shels, and so ridiculously re∣turnes triumphantly to Rome with the spoyles (as he ac∣counted it) of the Ocean. 3. Claudius (as 'twas thought) a simpler man, took a better grounded course. for by his Leaders, Plautius and Ʋespasian, he brought the Britaines to more submissive termes, Grafton. Hollinsh. and conquered Guiderius, our stories relate it in this manner, One Hamo (siding with the Romanes) put on British formalities, by that means came neare to the King, and slew him, to repaire which losse 5.  ARVIRAGUS the Kings brother, shifteth himselfe into the Kings Ornaments (to prevent discouragement of the Souldiers who knew not what was done) and so conti∣nues the fight, in which they were, and had the better: pur∣sues Hamo to the Sea side, where he slew himselfe; whence the place took the name of Hamo's Haven, & now with a lit∣tle change is called South-Hampton. 2. Arviragus holds up stoutly, after diverse conflicts, keepeth his owne and is at length reconciled to the Emperour, by marrying his daugh∣ter
Genissa. 3. Hence swelling and esteeming it an indignity, to be perpetually jaded with taxes, withstands the payment, is invaded by Vespasian, who lands at Totnesse, the King en∣counters him, in a doubtfull Battle nere Exceter. The Queene interposes and makes them friends, for quietnesse sake, the Tribute is continued. 4. How redoubted this King seemed to be to the Romanes, may be gathered from that peece of the Satyrist, Regem aliquem capies aut de Temone Britanno Invenal at. 4. Excidet Arviragus. — It boads great honour to thy selfe, some King thou shalt restraine, Or shake the fierce Arviragus out of his British wayne. Saies the Parasite to the Emperour, making it no small tri∣umph to unhorse Arviragus: who by some is stiled the He∣ctor of Britaine. 5. After such brave atchievements he dies peaceably, and leaves his virtues and Kingdome to his sonne 6. MARIUS. The Picts invading this Countrey, had a notable overthrow by him, with their leader Roderick, at Stanes More in the North, so called from a stone crected in that place, as a memoriall of that Victory. 2. Some call this man Westmer, to deduce from thence, with more probabili∣ty the name of Westmerland, others make him the same with Arviragus, whose heroick wife Voadicia, for an unsufferable abuse offered unto her, and her two daughters, gave notable overthrowes to the Romanes, untill at length she was defea∣ted by Palinus Suetonius, which she took so indignely, that she made her selfe away. In these heavy and desperate times 7.  COILUS the sonne of Marius undertakes the go∣vernment, which he might mannage with lesse danger, in regard he was brought up amongst the Romanes, and could humour them best for his own quiet. 2. He constantly pay∣ed the tribute unto them, which prevented the greatest quarrell. 3. Colchester is thought to beare his name, and commend him to posterity: but that was more really done
by his sonne Lucius, the chiefe in the ne Distance. 2. WIthin compasse of this Distance, especially notice may be taken of. 1. The eminent Invaders and oppreors of this Iland, which are storied to be. 1. Iulius Cae∣sar. Holinsh. 2. Vespasian under Claudius, who gave thirty over∣throwes to the Inhabitants. 3. Aulus Plautius a Romane Senator called out of France, and preferred before Narcis∣sus the Emperours minion, by the Souldiers crying out O Sa∣turnalia. 4. Osterius Scapula. 5. Paulinus Sutonius. 6. Julius Frontinus, & 7. Julius Agricola, Father in Law to Cornelius Tacitus, who with advantage sets forth his History. 2ly Those that worthily resisted them, deservedly should be remem∣bred, who were 1. Cassibellane that confronted Caesar. 2. Nennius his brother, who got his sword from him. 3. Gui∣derius, who manfully stood up for the liberty of his Coun∣trey, untill he was treacherously slaine by Hamo. 4. Arvi∣ragus, the Hector of Britaine, who stroke a terror to the Ro∣manes. 5. Voadicia that resolute Queene, that made them smart for the abusing her, and her two daughters. 6. Cara∣tack that incomparable Welch man, that was so basely be∣trayed, by that strumpet Catismandua of North Wales, who had turn'd off her Husband, to marry with her ignoble Pa∣ramour: but Caratacks refolution and behaviour, so took the Emperour Claudius, and the Romanes, that her betraying, and carrying to Rome with his Wife and Children, heightned him to a greater esteeme. 7. Lastly, the two Noble Scots, Corbrid and Galgalus, supporters in these extremities, leave them in fames Register never to be forgotten.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether. 1. In relating these former passages, the Ro∣manes or our own Records, are rather to be credited? 2. Caesar conquered Britaine by valour, ra∣ther then domestique dissentions and Trea∣son? 3. It be likely that Kimbaline were Knighte by Augustus? 4. Arviragus marriage with Genissa the Emperour Claudius daughter, were not worthy mentioning in Roman Histories if it were true? Bale. Ponticus. Viramnus. 5. There were ever such a virago as Brun∣duca, that terrified Rome more then Han∣niball, and dyed in going to subdue it? 6. She were not the same with Voadicia? 7. South-Hampton had its name from Ham slaine thereby Arviragus?
British Christians. DISTANCE VI. 1. THe sixt Classi or Distance amongst the Britaines, is bounded with Vortiger, and begins with 1.  LUCIUS, the sonne of Coilus forementioned. This is the first King we read of that imbraced Christianity. 2. He sent to Elutherius then Bishop of Rome, Elvanus and Med∣vinus learned men of his owne, to receive farther instructi∣ons from him: an answere is returned him from thence by Faganus and Danianus in these words, You have received in the Kingdome of Britaine by God mercy, both the Law and faith of Christ; Ye have both the New and Old Testament, out of the same, through Gods grace, by the advice of your Realme take a Law, and by the same through Gods sufferance, rule you your Kingdome of Britaine, for in that Kingdome you are Gods Ʋicar. What could be more solid and punctuall? but how the stile was altered afterward in that Sea, the World felt and lamented. 3. Vpon this the King altered the three Pagan Arch-Flamins, and twenty eight Flamins, into so many Arch-Bishopricks and Bishopricks. The Arch-Bishops were of London, Yorke, and Gloster: the Bishops of other places: Idoll Temples were destroyed: Westminster built in the Isle of Thorny, the place where it now stands, being then so called. 4. Priviledges and meanes were granted for the honouring such sacred places. 5. The King dies without Is∣sue: wherefore to continue the line of Government, wee are forced to take in the Emperour 2.  SEVERUS: for he comes hither in Person, to appease
the tumults amongst the headlesse and heedlesse multitude, or∣ders that the Country should have no more Kings of her own. 2. Built a Wall between England and Scotland, of 112 miles in length, to stop the suddaine incursions of the Scots and Picts: at least repaired that wall, which Adrian had erected before. 3. He dyes here in Yorke, and left his sonne the Monster, 3. BASSIANUS to succeed him, of whose killing his brother Geta, and other villanies, mention is made before in his life. Of him 4.  CARAUSIUS an obscure Britaine purchaseth the Go∣vernment of the shattered State, Eutropius. wherein when he presu∣med to King it, 5.  ALECTUS is sent from Rome by the Senate to out him, which he quickly did. And was as soon dealt with in the like kind, by 6. ASCLEPIODOTUS Duke of Cornewall. This man re∣solutely bestirres himselfe for the freedome of his Country: disgarrisons the Romane holds, besieges London, carries it, kills the Romane Governour thereof Livius, and throwes him into a Rivellet thence called Wall-brook. But differen∣ces falling out between him and Coill Earle of Colchester, it grew to a set Battle, wherein Asclepiodotus was slaine, and 7. COILL takes his place. Constantius Clhorus is sent by the Romane Senate to subdue the tumultuous: but matters were so politiquely contrived between them, that in steed of outing Coill, Clhorus takes his faire, and peerclesse Daughter Helena to wife, and with her, the Kingdome after her Father: He is highly commended, for his morall virtues, valour, moderation, and in those sad times, for favouring the Christians. After an excellent exhortation on his death-bed to those that were about him, he quietly breathed his last, and lyes buried at Yorke, leaving 8.  CONSTANTINE the Heire and Augmenter of his worth, whom he had by the British Helen. As Lucius had the honour before to be Registred for the first Christian King, so this Great Constantine, is famous to all ages, for the first
Christian Emperour: of whom more is said in his life a∣mongst the Emperours. After him expired the Romane vas∣salage, which had endured 483 years by the intrusion of 9.  OCTAVIUS Duke of Cornewall. Against him Con∣stantine sends Traherne his Vnkle by the Mothers side, but he was quickly encounterd by Octavius (that had great means and friends) and overthrowne neere Winchester, but Traherne recruting his forces, at an other Battle in the North, had the better of Octavius, who thereupon fled into Norway. 2. Thence understanding that Traherne was slaine, by an Earle that was his friend: he returnes againe to his E∣state, and governs peaceably. 3. And for the strengthning of his Title, to make it good to posterity, he sends for from Rome 10.  MAXIMIANUS, or Maximus, a kinsman of the Great Constantines. For this mans harsh dealing with the Ghristi∣ans, he is set forth by most writers as a Tyrant. 2. Quarrells fell out between him and Conan Meridoc Duke of Corne∣wall, and some conflicts, with various successe, but they a∣greed at last, Maximianus bestowing Armorica, which he had conquered upon Conan, who called it Little Britaine, and having made away the ancient Inhabitants, sent into Cornewall for Wives, to people it with Brittish blood, 11000 Virgins were shipped thither by Diothen, then Duke, whereof Ʋrsnla his faire daughter was one, but they were barbarously slaine in the passage, by Guanus Captain of the Hunnes, and Melga King of Ficts, who afterward were forced into Ireland by Gracian, a Leader sent from our Maximinian. 3. Who puffed up with wealth and successe, Rebelled against his Master Gratian the Emperour, whom he slew in France, and proclaimed himselfe Emperour, but quickly lost that dignity with his life, by Theodosius the great, In Orat. fu∣neb. de exitu Theodofii. neere Aquilea, concerning whom St Ambrose hath this passage, Maximus occisus est, nunc in inferno docen ex∣emplo miserabili, quam durum sit, Arma suis Principibus ir∣rogare. Maximus is slaine, and now in Hell by his miserable example, teacheth what a hard matter it is for Subjects to take up Armes against their Princes.
11.  GRACIAN then his Generall makes bold to supply the vacant place, he was a Britaine by birth and education, yet so Tyrannized over his Countrymen, that in a short space he was slaine amongst them. 2. Whereupon Guanus and Melga, finding them destitute of a Leader, come upon them out of Ireland. The Scots and Picts breake in upon them from the North, and Civill dissentions plague them as much in the middest, so that nothing but Famine, Bloud and desola∣tion was before their eyes. 3. In this extremity they repayre to Aetius the Romane Leiftenant in Gallia, with this pitty∣full complaint. The Barbarous people drive us to the Sea, and the Sea driveth us back unto them againe. Hereof arise two kinds of death, for either we are slaine, or drowned, and a∣gainst such evils, have we no remedy, or help at all. Therefore in respect of your Clemency, succour your owne we most instant∣ly desire you. 4. But finding cold comfort, either for that the Romane regarded them not, or had his hands full otherwise, they dispatch Embassadours to Aldroenus then King of lit∣tle Britaine, who consented to ayd them, if they would accept his brother to be their King. 5. Necessity enforceth them to imbrace the Condition, and so 12. CONSTANTINE is made their King. He Lands with Forces at Totnesse, slayes Guanus the Hunnish King in the Feild, and defeateth the rest of the oppressours, but soone af∣ter was treacherously slaine himselfe by a perfidious Pict. 2. He left three sonnes surviving Constantius, Aurclius Ambrose, and Ʋter Pendragon. Constantius that for his blockishnesse was Cloystered in a Monastery, was thence ta∣ken to Raigne after him, but was wholy guided as a Ward by Vortiger Duke of Cornewall, who caused him to be made a∣way that he might enjoy the Place, and appeares the fore∣man of the next, and last Classis or Distance in the Brittish Dynasty. 3. WIth this Distance falleth in, 1. The great Que∣stion concerning the first Planter of Christianity in Britany. Whether it were 1. St James the sonne of Zebe∣dee,
or 2, Simon Zelotes, or 3, St Peter, or 4, St Paul, or 5, Jo∣seph of Aramathea, or 6, Aristobulus, or 7, Timothy, or all these, or any other at diverse times, and on diverse occasions, may be said to have put their hand to the worke. 2, The damnable Heresie of Pelagius, first hence taking his rise with its progresse, and cheife abettours and opposers of it. 3. The wofull estate of the Brittish Christians under the Romane servitude, and persecutions, wherein St Albon had the honour to be the first Martyr, and the shamefull desertion of them and leaving them to the mercylesse Irruptions of the Hunnet and Picts. All which and much more you have most accurate∣ly, and judiciously discussed by the most Reverend Father in God Arch-Bishop Ʋsher Lord Primate of Ireland, in sifting (as one saies of B. Bradwarden) to the Branne the Brittish Churches Antiquitice. INQVIRES. 3. Whether. 1. It can positively be set down who brought Christianity first into this Iland? 2. Lucius was the first King read of, that ever imbraced it? 3. The passages betwixt him and Pope Elu∣therius, especially the answer of Eluthe∣rius terming him Gods Vicar in his owne Kingdome, be forged? 4. He disposed Arch-Bishopricks or Bishop∣ricks as 'tis related? 5. Helena the mother of Constantine the great were King Coills daughter, or as others say a Wench of an Inne? 6. The story of Ʋrsula and the 11000 Vir∣gins Massacred in their passage to little Brittaine, be of any credit? 7. A Monkish Cell could render Constantius fit for a Kingly Throne?
Brittish strugling with Saxons &c. DISTANCE VII. 1. THe Seaventh and last Classis or Distance, pro∣poseth the Britaines intangled and strugling with the Saxons to hold their owne, notwith∣standing they had entertained them for their assistance. This reacheth as farre as the dynasty of the Saxons, and begins with 1. VORTIGER or Vortigerne, who had treacherously made away his predecessor Constantius, though to set a co∣lour of his innocency, he caused the Actors to be executed, whom himselfe had set on worke. Anrelius Ambrose, and Ʋter Pendragon, the younger brethren of Constantius, are conveyed away from his tyranny by their friends, into little Britaine. 2. Whereupon being streigthned extreamely by the Picts and Scots, and fearing the returne of these bre∣thren to require their right to the Crowne, he invites the Saxons to come and strengthen his party: some say they casually landed here, and were only entertained by him. Their Leaders were Hengistus and Horsus, two brethren descended (as they vaunted from Wooden and Fria, the Sax∣on dieties. By the help of these and their followers, he re∣pelleth his forraigne, and appeaseth his domestique enimies. 3. Heugist thus growing in high esteeme, obtaines a favour of the King, but to grant him so much land as an Oxe hide might compasse. This petty suit was soon had, but the hide cut into small thongs, incircled so much ground, that a Fort thereon was builded, by the name of Thong Castle, where
Hengist setled himselfe. 4. Then Ocea and Ebusa more of Hengists breed, are sent for out of Germany, who bring his faire daughter Rowan with them: the King is invited to Thong Castle, Rowan set forth to the utmost, presents him with a Wassayle, or Dutch health: he falls in love with her, puts away his lawfull Christian Wife, to take this Pagan stranger. 5. The Nobility except against it, and to prevent the overgrowing of the Saxons to their destruction, they for∣sake him, and put his eldest sonne 2.  VORTIMER into his place. He was victorious a∣gainst the Saxons, in foure maine Battles, in the second of which, his brother Catigerne and Horsus the Saxon, hand to hand slew each other. 1. They in these, and diverse other conflicts being thus defeated and broken, shelter themselves in the Iles of Wight, and Thenet, thence Petition for leave to returne into their Country: which they did, leaving their Families and Possessions behind. But Queen Rowan finds the means to have Vortimer poysoned, by reason whereof Vor∣tiger recovers the Kingdome, Hengist returnes from Germa∣ny with fresh supplies: Vortiger with his British Nobles makes head against him. 2. A Treaty is agreed upon, the place appoynted for it, is now known by the name of Stone∣henge, where the Brittish coming unarmed, according to a∣greement, At the word given by Hengist, Nempt your sexes, had their throats cut most treacherously, with the knives the Saxons brought covertly thither for that purpose. 3. Only Earle Edole of Glocester (some say Chester) got a stake by good hap, wherewith he defended himselfe, and dispatched 17, some say 70 of the miscreants, and so escaped with his life to Salisbury. Hengist seizeth upon Ʋortiger, as his Pri∣soner, mue's him up with his Wife in a Castle in Wales. Where we leave him to speake of the right heire and suc∣cessour 3.  AURELIUS Ambrose, who made acquainted with the mentioned stirres, comes with his brother Ʋter out of Lit∣tle Britaine, and first falls upon Ʋortigers Castle, where he was immured, and burnes it with the King and all in it. 2. O∣thers
report it was fired from Heaven, by reason of the Incest that Vortiger committed with his own daughter, Rowans brat, by whom he had a sonne named Faustus, who wept himselfe blind, for the Abominations of his Parents. 3. Au∣relius warreth successively against the Saxon, takes Hengist (by Earle Edolls meanes, that escaped from the Treason at Stone-henge) and beheads him. Erects a monument of huge stones, transported (some say by Merlins enchantment) from Ireland, in memory of the slaine Nobility by the Sax∣ons, and named the adjacent Towne Ambrose Bury, now Amesbury. Overthrowes Pascentius the youngest sonne of Vortiger, that came with Guillamore King of Ireland, to claime the Kingdome of his Father: was poysoned at last, by a counterfeit Physitian, that pretended to cure him being sick, and so leaves the Government to his brother 4. VTER-PENDRAGON, so called (it should seeme) from his fierce countenance, and sparkling eyes: others say from a Dragons head carried in his Banner. He made short worke in cutting off Ebusa and Occa, Hengists sonnes. 2. Fell inamoured with Igerne, Gorolois wife Duke of Cornewall, whom he flew in prosecution of his dishonourable affection, and afterward by Merlins jugling, had his will of her, in Tintagill Castle in Cornewall, who bore unto him the re∣nowned 5. ARTHUR to succeed him: For he is said to be poyso∣ned, and buried at Stone-heng, as his brother Ambrose was, and had none to take his place, but this stripling of fifteen years old, who expressed beyond his age, a manly courage. 2. Such incredible things are put upon him by Monkish Le∣gendaries, that make his true Atchievements questionable, Grafton out of Nennius. twelve Battles are recorded wherein he defeated the Sax∣ons. In the last at Baden hill, some say he slew 140 Saxons with his own hands, others bring the number to 800: it is sufficient to think he wanted not ability of body, or corre∣spondent courage. 3. Cerdicus, Ella, Porth, (who gave the name to Portsmouth) and other adversaries put him hard to it: he is said also to have quarrelled with the Romanes, and
Marching thitherward, to have flaine a Gyant in Spaine, which might have had some shew of truth, if good Authors had related it. 4. Reliques are shewn of his Round Table at Winchester, and of the 24 seats thereof amongst the Welsh. Lancelot du Lake, Tristram, and Gawen, are named for his chiefest Knights, and these names at this day, are commonly given in Baptisme amongst us. whereupon most conclude with Ieffry of Monmoth, and Leland, that there was such a valiant man, against Newbrigensis and Pollidore that questi∣on it. but all except against the Monkish fictions, that are put upon him. 2. King Henry the second, upon bearing of a Welsh Bard, chanting his Acts and death, with his interring at Glassenbury, sent to search the place: where his corps were found, with his faire Queene Guenevers, the Brittish Helena's, as her name imports. In a Battle with his Cosen Mordred (who laid a claime to the Kingdome) at Commel∣ford in Cornewall, he received his deaths wound, but slew outright the Rebell. Duke Cadors sonne of Cornewall 6.  CONSTANTINE the third, succeeds him, who after diverse bickerings with Mordreds sonnes that stood for their right, at length flew them both (having taken sanctuary) whereof Gyldas pittifully complaineth. But himselfe soon found the like measure, by a Nephew of Arthur's, 7.  AUREZIUS Conanus, a man sufficiently valiant and liberall, but hearkning too much to Sycophants, and em∣brewing his hands in the blood of his kindred, he became soon odious, and left his place to his sonne 8.  VORTIPORUS. He valiantly withstood the intrusi∣ons of the Saxons, yet Gildas declaimes against him also as a Tyrant, and a dissolute libertine, which made way the ea∣sier for the Nephew of Aurelius Conanus. 9.  MALGO a Duke of Britaine: He was a most persona∣ble man, and therewithall a hardy King. Yet his Imperfe∣ctions, were so notorious, that he could not escape Gilda's lash, who termes him a Tawny Butcher, a Beare, a contem∣ner of Religion, and an oppressor of the Clergy, words unfit for a Clergy man to give, or a King to beare: some say that
thereupon, out of remorse of Conscience, he betook himselfe to a Monastery, but quickly threw off his cowle againe, and ended his life in such desperate courses. One worse then him∣selfe 10. CARETICUS is put into his place. This the Saxous soon espied, and finding the dislike between him and his Subjects, (which he delighted in rather then appeased) They aime at a Conquest of the whole Land, and get Gurmundus an Arch Pyrate of Norway, others say a King of the Afri∣cans then being in Ireland to assist them in it. 2. He comes with all his Forces, The King flies to Chichester: the be∣fiedgers by a stratagem of tying fire to Sparrowes, ang so let∣ing them flye into the Towne amongst Thatched houses, and dry straw, quickly fired it, Careticus escapes into Wales, which was (with Cornewall) the chiefe hold left for the poore Britaines. Saxons then roame up and downe at plea∣sure, and (as some say) called the whole Country Hengist∣land, which now we call England. 3. After 24 years of this streightning of the Britaines. 11.  CADWAN Duke of North-wales becomes Gover∣nour of his Country. Austine the Monke, had before arri∣ved amongst the Saxons, sent by Pope Gregory, and conver∣ted many of them to Christianity, but carrying himselfe too high, at a meeting with the British Bishops, at a place there∣upon called Austines Oake in Worcester shire, no agreement was made between them: not long after, a Massacre was executed upon the harmelesse Monkes of Bangor, wherein 2000 were slaine, (som say not without Austins instigation) by wild Ethelfrid, the Pagan King of Northumberland. 2. This barbarous cruelty, Gadwan leads his Forces to re∣venge, but the matter by mediation was so composed be∣twixt them, that they ever after continued friends, untill his dying day, to whom succeeded his sonne 12. CADWALLO, He joyning with Penda King of Mercia, killed Edwin King of Northumberland, with his sonne Osfride, in the Battle at Hethfeild, for which he it bit∣terly taxed by Beda: but Beda being a Saxon, is observed
not to speake the best of the Britaines, and soothed by the Romane Faction of Austins breed, accounted the dissenting Britaines (though better Christians then themselves) little better then Pagans. 2. Others acquit Cadwallo for a Noble Prince, and a great defendor of his Country, and scourge of their adversaries. His sonne 13.  CADWALLADER proved not so successefull. Not∣withstanding at the beginning, he had the better of those Saxons that opposed. 1. In a great famine, that fell upon all his territories, he was forced with his Nobles to forsake his Country, and sojourne with his Cosen Alan, King of Little Britaine. 2. In the interim, his Pined Subjects were oppres∣sed by the Saxons. He about by his returne to relieve them, is diverted by a Dreame, some make it the appearance of an Angell, and so goes to Rome on Pilgrimage, there turnes Monke, dyes, and is there buried. Where interred was with him, the last of the Brittish Monarches. Such an influence had Dreams, and fancied apparitions, and forged Sawes, and the like delusions, upon suspicious dispositions. 2. WIth this last Distance or Ranke in the British Dy∣nasty Contemporize. 1. The Sourse of Mahuma∣tisme, by the Alcaron in the East. 2. The Propagation of Papall Pompe and Superstition in the West: betwixt which, it was no marvaile if 3. Paganisme also tyrannized, being conceited as senior to both, as here it did, by the barbarou Saxons, upon the Poore, Wasted, and forsaken Britaines.
INQVIRES. 3. Whether 1. Vortiger with Rowan his Saxon wife, were consumed with wild fire from his besie∣gers, or with Lightning from Heaven? 2. The Rocks of Stone-heng, were brought thither out of Ireland by Merlins Inchant∣ments, or Ʋter-Pendragons forces? 3. Igren the Dutches of Cornewall, could be so deluded without some connivence of her own, as to mistake Ʋter-Pendragon in stead of her Husband? 4. The story of Arthur be for the most part fabulous? 5. That Pattent be undoubtedly from him, that is alleadged to justify the Antiquity of the Vniversity of Cambridge? 6. Austine the Monke arriving for the Sax∣ons conversion to Christianity, might not be suspected to have had a finger in the Massacre of the 2000 Monkes of Ban∣gor? 7. Cadwallador may be excused, that forsook his distressed Country to become a Monke?
Saxon Heptarchie. DINASTY. II. 1. THE Dynasties of the Britaines having been exhibited, in the former seaven Parcells. The second of the Saxons succeeds, and expires at the beginning of the Danish Go∣vernment. 2. It usually is divided into the Saxon, 1. Heptarchy. 2. Monarchy. 3. The Heptarchy is intricated with diverse bickerings, and Changes, that puzzell the Memory, and may be so farre only touched upon, as they preface to the Monarchy, which brings us to our direct discending line againe. 4. In it are reckoned these seven petty King∣domes. 1. KENT 2. SUSSEX. 3. EAST-SAX. 4. EAST-ANGLES. 5. MERCIA. 6. NORTHUMBERLAND. 7. WEST-SAX. Of all which some parti∣culars only may be pickt out, which are most re∣markable. In KENT with Hengist the first invador seventeene or eighteene are said to Raigne, amongst which Ethelbert was most eminent, for first receiving the Christian Faith, brought from Rome by Austine, and for converting Sebert King of the East-Angles to Christianity, and assisting him in building Paules in London, and St Peters in Westminster, as he him∣selfe built the Cathedrall of St Andrewes in Rochester. 6.  SOUTH-SAX from Ella to Adhumus, had about tenne
Kings (Authors agree not in the reckoning,) of which A∣dlewolf was the first Christened. It quickly fell into the hands of Ina of West-Sax. 7.  EAST-SAX from Erchwin to Swithred had thirteene Kings, whereof Sigebert the third was the first Baptized by Mellitus Bishop of London. 8. Amongst the fourteene Kings of the EAST-ANGLES, from Ʋffa to Edmund, Kadwallus appeared the first Christi∣an, but held not so long. Etheldreda King Inah's Daughter twice Marryed, kept her Virginity, and thence gained the Ti∣tle of St Audrie. Edmund the last King for his profession was shott to death by the Danes, honoured from Rome with a Sain-ship, and at home (insteed of a Tombe) with the Ti∣tle of the Towne of St Edmunds Bury. 9.  Of the twenty Kings of MERCIA from Crida to El∣fird, Christianity was first received by Penda that Founded Peterborough, as Ethelbald did the Monastery of Crowland, and Offa of St Albans. 10.  NORTHUMBERLAND had in it two Provinces Die∣ra, and Bertitia, which in their severall Governments had about 24 Kings, from Ida to Ethelbert: five Danes thrust in amongst them, Raigned successwely for a while, till the Government returned to the West-Saxons in the time of E∣thelstane, and his brother Edmund. Here Edwin was the first King Christened, Speed. whose deliverance from the furious Ethel∣fride by faithfull Redwall of the East-Angles, and the glori∣ous Victory he had over him afterwards, his Marriage with Ethelburg the Kentish Princesse (a great meanes of his con∣version) his preservation from a desperate Villaine, by the in∣terposition of his servant Lilla, who undertook a fatall thrust of a poysoned weapon, to save his Masters life, and lastly his overthrow, and death by Penda, are matters of especiall note; as also the Acts of Oswall that was Sainted, and left the name to Oswalstere in Shropshire. The humility of Oswin, Beds. Speed. and the piety of Oswie, that miraculously overthrew the Ty∣rant Penda of Mercia are worth the reading. 11. Amongst the 19 Kings of WEST-SAXONS from
Cerdicus, Kingills is registred to be the first Christian. Ive or Ina to have made good Lawes, set forth in the Saxon and Latine Tongue by Mr William Lambard, and to have granted to Rome Peter-pence. Ethelburg King Bithrick's Wife that sled for attempting to poyson her Husband, into France, where by reason of her exceeding beauty, she was put to the choyce, to Marry either Charles or his Sonne, she pitching on the Sonne missed both, and was thrust into a Monastery. From the Tyranny of this Bithrick fled 1.  EGBERT first to Offa of Mercia, and then into France, where he served in the Warres under Charles the great. There he became so accomplished a Souldier, that re∣turning he vanquished the petty Kings left behind him, and turned the Heptarchy into a Monarchy. 2. He was Crowned at Winchester King of the whole Kingdome, which then of his Angles brought with him, and followers in all his Conquests. He caused to be called England. 3. The Danes then begin∣ning to Invade are repelled. His Daughter Editha the Nunne is Sainted, his Eldest sonne. 2.  ETHELWOLFE succeeds him. He took for his first wife Osburga his Butlers daughter. Hath good successe in di∣verse Battles against the intruding Danes. 2. For placing the Lady Judith the King of France's Daughter, (whom he had taken for his second Wife) in a Chaire by him at his right hand, he was threatned to be Deposed by Adelstane Bishop of Sherburne his owne sonne by his former Wife, who in those dayes was a Prelate of great power, as was also Swi∣thene Bishop of Winchester, by whom the King was much advised to his advantage. But this presumption was intoler∣able, and by Royall Prudence soone hushed. 3. He ordained that Tithes, and Church Lands should be free from all Tax∣es, and Regall services. Of the diverse Children that he had by his first Wife, his Eldest sonne, 3.  ETHELBALD succeeds. He blasted all his eminent parts of Valour and Policy, by taking Iudith his Stepmother to be his Wife, so that she must lye in Bed by his side, who
might not fit in a Chaire by his Father. 2. This prodigious Incest was soone punished from heaven by his untimely death. His Wife without Issue returning to the Emperour her Father, was intercepted by the way, and forced by Baldwin Forrester of Ardenna, who at length appeasing her Father, was made by him Earle of Flanders, from whom & this Iu∣dith, descended Maud the Wife of our William the Conque∣rour. 3. In this Vacaency, the next brother to Ethelbald, 4. ETHELBERT takes his place. Much adoe he had to re∣sist the Danes, who swarmed continually about him, he withstood them manfully, for the time and Forces which he had, but by his death a greater storme fell upon his Brother, 5. ETHELRED that Raigned next. In his time Hungar, and Hubba, men of excessive strength and feirenesse, entered this Land with great Forces, and harrowed wheresoever they set footing, especially (being Pagans) Levelled all Su∣cred places with the ground. 2. To avoyd their fury, and preserve their owne Chastity, the Nunnes of Codingham (by a rare example) cut off their owne Lipps and Noses. St Edmund by these Barbarians gained the Crowne of Martyr∣dome, and to make them the more irresistable, Streg and Hal∣den two Danish Kings, furnish them with fresh supplies, whom the Earle of Berkshire ropelled neere Englefield, and cut off one of the new-come Leaders. 3. This while Ethel∣red is not Idle, but every where so bestirres himselfe, that he proves Victorious against them in nine sett Battles fought in one yeare, wherein with one of their Kings, nine Earles of the Danes were slaine. In the end at Merton he received his deaths wound, and left his torne Kingdome to the brave 6. ALFRED or Alured his Brother. Vpon him three more Danish Kings (as though Hell had bin brake loose) Guerthren, Eskittle, and Ammond are poured like haile-shott, with their innumerable followers. 2. To whom by Wil∣son, Exeter, and Abingdon, he gave great overthrowes, and no lesse then seven times in one yeare Routed and Scattered them. 3. Notwithstanding by their obstinate reinforcing, he was once brought to that extremity, that he was forced to
leave his Companies, and lurke in Somersetshire Marishes, where righting his bow and arrowes by the fire, in a poore Cottage, he was sharply blamed by the housewife, for letting a Cake on the hearth burne for want of turning. 4. From thence under the habit of a Fidler he ventures among the E∣nimies, and having noted their loosenesse, and many secret intentions, returnes to his sad Companies, surpriseth the Eni∣my unprovided, takes Rufan their Danish Banner, which had a Raven of needle-worke in it, that had good fortune ever at∣tendant, and so scatters their Forces, that they could not soone be reunited to indanger him. About which time the Devon∣shire men slew Halden the Danish King, with new supplies brought by his Brother, of whom the place neere Exceter beares the Name. 5. As his Valour and Prudence, so his Studies and Piety were beyond compare. Of the naturall dayes 24 houres, eight he allotted for Devotion and Contem∣plation, eight for refection and recreation, and the eight remai∣ning for matters of the Common-wealth. 6. He Translated Gregories Pastorall, Bedes History, and Boethius de consola∣tione Philosophiae into the Saxon Tongue, and began to do the like with Davids Psalmes. 7. He restored the decayed Ʋniversity of Oxford, by fixing therein a Colledg, (now bea∣ring the name of Ʋniversity Colledg) and annexed ample maintenance unto it. Honoured Scholasticall Exercises, with his Kingly attention, and incouragement. And so passing to his Fathers with the greatest applause, left the Heire of his renowne and virtue his sonne 7.  EDWARD the Elder to follow him, no way inferiour in Valour to his Father, and not much in Learning. 2. His many and dangerous conflicts which he had with the Danes of Northumberland, proved farre the more hazardous in re∣gard of his Nephew Ethelwald's Rebellions, who joyned with them, but to their owne overthrows 3. By his singu∣lar humanity, he gained Leolyn the insolent and surly Prince of Wales, to meet him in the Severne breast-hie, and to im∣brace his Boate, and afterward to doe him Homage. 4. His Sister Elfreda was a great help unto him, not only by her wise
directions, but more then manly Ʋalour which the Danes in diverse bickerings felt to their Cost. 5. After all these trou∣blesome passages, he peaceably at length with honour dyed at Faringdon, leaving behind him by three Wives, fix Sonnes and nine Daughters, whereof Editha was Married to the Emperour Otho the great. Edburga having the Bible and royall Apparell set before her at her choyce, she waving Royalty, laid hold on the Bible, and became a Votaresse. Of his sonnes, 8. ADELSTANE that succeeds him, is said to be the first Annoynted King of this Ile. He Married his Sister to Sithick the Danish King, that held Northumberland, on condition he should be Baptized, which was done, but to little purpose, for the ends intended, of furthering Peace or Religion, 2. with Constantine of Scotland he had great Conflicts, whom Anlafe of Ireland assisted, and taking upon him the habitt of an Irish Harper, had plotted to have surprized Adelstane, which was prevented by the discovery of an honest Souldier, and re∣venged by the losse of five petty Kings, and five Dukes of his Enimies in prosecuting the project. 3. Passing into Scot∣land he offers his knife (for good luck's sake) to St John of Beverly, subdues the whole Kingdome, makes a miraculous dynt in a stone at Dunbar, with one stroake of his Sword, of an Ell deep, to testifie his right to that Kingdome. 4. Welch Princes, Howell, & Wolferth are suffered there to Raigne un∣der him, professing that he held it more honourable to make, then to be a King. 5. Neare Winchester he was challenged by the insulting Danes, to provide a Champion to encounter one Colbrond a Danish Gyant, which they held invincible, and none of his venturing to undertake it, he gat a Pilgrim from among the Beggers, (as he was directed in his sleepe) that entred the Lists, and slew him. Lidgate. Rous. Papulwick. Graston. This proved to be Guy of Warwick, of whose Valour, and of his Wives Felices faith∣fulnesse, tradition hath bin very prodigall. 6. In what e∣steeme this King was with Neighbour Princes, may be ga∣thered by Presents sent unto him from Otho the Emperour, a Lanscip of Precious Stones, set to admiration. From the
King of Norway a Ship with a guilt Sterne and purple Sayles. From the King of France Constantines Sword, and Charles the great's Speare, the same that had wounded our Saviour, with a Nayle of the same Implements. 7. Which Riches and Reliques (according to the Devotion of those times) he bestowed on Consecrated Places, dyes peaceably, and leaves his Brother 9.  EDMUND to succeed him, he had a great hand against the Danes, whom he beat in the North, and bestowed Cum∣berland upon Malcolme of Scotland for his faithful assistance. 2. The good Lawes he made are extant in Saxon and La∣tine, by the Industry of Mr William Lambard. Where the Curse that he layes upon non-payment of Tithes should be more regarded. 3. In parting of a fray between two of his Servants, he is said to be wounded to death, others report, that it was done by a Villaine that he lay hold on too vnadvi∣sedly, which Dunstane foresaw by the Devils dauncing be∣fore him, and made Duke Elstane doe the like, only by Cros∣sing his eyes. In the Non-age of his sonne Edwy and Edwin; his Brother 10.  EDRED or Eldred assumes the Government. 1. The Danes in Northumberland oppose him, being animated un∣der hand by Wolstane Archbishop of Yorke, and calling in An∣lafe the Dane from Ireland, whom they made their King, and upon dislike of him, put one Hericus into his place, but mat∣ters at length were composed by the Kings Lenitie, and an Act of Oblivion obtained. 2. Dunstane Abbot of Glassen∣bury got such a hand over him, that he committed most of his Treasure into his hand, whereof there appeareth no ac∣count. 3. He made St Germanes in Cornewall a Bishops Sea, translated afterward to Kyrton by Canutus the Dane, and setled at last by Edward the Confessour in Exceter. His two sonnes left behind him, came not to the Crowne but his Ne∣phew 11.  EDWY his brother Edmunds Eldest sonne had it by right. 1. This man favoured not the Monkes which made them to write so scandalously of him: he thrust them out of
Malmsbury and Glassenbury, placing married Priests in their roome, and banished Dunstane into Flanders their great Champion. 2. This made the Divell to laugh (as the Monkes fable it) whose calumniations so set the people against him. 3. That some say he was Deposed, which brake his heart: Graft. he left behind him no Issue, and therefore the right descended to his brother 12. EDGAR, a man of a higher spirit, and warier carri∣age. 1. He recalled Dunstane from banishment, and was al∣together ruled by him, and his complices: this restrained not his Incontinency, for by Wolfchild a Nunne he begat St Edith. At Andevor plotting to lye with a Westerne Dukes daugh∣ter, he was fitted by the Mother, with a substituted waiting Creature, whom he retained afterwards for his Concubine. 2. More Tragicall was that of the Duke of Devonshires daughter, whose Husband he slew for beguiling him of her, whom he had trusted to Pander for him. For these pranket and other, he was enjoyned by B. Dunstane, not to weare his Crowne for seaven years, which he penitently submitted unto, but held on his lascivious courses. 3. It was a successe∣full device to free his Country from Wolves, by injoyning the Prince of North-Wales, to bring him yearly 300 skinnes of them for a Tribute, and another Ordinance he made for putting pinnes in cupps, that none should quaffe whole ones. 4. Vpon the river Dee, he had seaven petty Kings to row his Barge, to shew his greatnesse. 5. After his death, great stirre there was who should succeed him. Elfrida the Queene, and the Duke of Mercia interposed strongly for her sonne Ethelred, but Dunstane and the Monkes carried it for 13. EDWARD the sonne of his former wife, Ethelfreda the White. In this mans time the greatest troubles were be∣tween the Matried Clergy and Monkes. Duke Alfarus stand∣ing for the Married men, and Dunstane for the single. 2. At an Assembly in Winchester, the married Priests lost the day, by the decision of a Woodden Rood, which never spake be∣fore nor after; and at another meeting the ruine of the House (with the preservation in it of St Dunstane and his party)
ruind the poore Priests cause, although manifest delusion ap∣peared in both. 3. The end of this young King was lamen∣table, being stab'd (by his Step-mothers treachery) when he was drinking a cup of Wine on Horse-back, when he in kind∣nesse came to visit her: through which wound, fainting and falling from his Horse, he was drag'd to death by his foot in∣tangled in the stirrop. This made a bloody way for the suc∣cession of his brother 14.  ETHELRED or Egelred, who had little comfort in it: For the Danes grew upon him so fiercely, that he was for∣ced to purchase his Peace from them, with great summes of Mony, to the undoing of his poore Kingdome, who yet ne∣ver rested contented, but multiplied the oppression of the Subject, enforcing them to drudge to maintain these Lur∣dan's idle. 2. To put a period to this insufferable Ʋassalage, a Bloudy Massacre was executed upon them, by the Kings secret Commission, on St Brices day, but such brutish courses never find a wished close. 3. The Danes rather exasperated to revenge, then any way thereby dismaied, returne with Swaine their King, and desolate all the Country. The perfi∣dious Earle Edrick with other of the Clergy and Nobility underhand abet them: the King opposeth to his power, but with extreame difficulty. 4. After the death of Swaine, (who, some say, was miraculously gored by St Edmunds Sword, for his Sacriledge in Thetford) Canutus his Sonne arrives with greater forces. The King dyes after a lingering sicknesse. 5. His second Wife was Emma, tearmed the flower of Normandy, Duke Richards daughter, by whom he had diverse children: but more by his first Wife Elgiva, of which 15. EDMUND, surnamed Ironside, succeeded, in valour and performance, if not beyond, surely not inferior to any of his Predecessors. 2. He raised the Siege of London, worsted the valiant Canutus foure times at least in plaine field, and had in all likelyhood rid England of him, if the Traytor E∣drick, and others of the perfidious Clergy and Nobility, had not secretly assisted him. 2. In a Duell between him and
Canutus in the Ile of Alney, he overmatched the stout Dane, and wounded him to be supplicant. By compact they divide the Kingdome between them. 3. But that Villanous Duke Edrick found the means to have this excellent Prince gored, as he sate on a Draught, for whose head presented to Canutus, he had his own exalted upon a Pole, above the rest of his Peeres as it was promised him, An Advancement fit for betrayers of their King and Country. 2. THis Distance runs a long with the Period of Charles the Great and his successors, from whose Military Discipline, our Egbert learned to Conquer, and bring dis∣membred Polyarchies and Heptarchies, into the best kind of Government, which hath been approved by all, to be Mo∣narchy. 2. Notice may be here taken of the continued ir∣ruptions of the Northerne Nations to infest the Southerne, whom they excelled most commonly so much in boysterous strength, and number, as they came short of them in Learn∣ing, Civility, and Policy; wherein the providence of God appeared; that the Conquerors should be Conquered by those they had subdued, being of Pagans made Christians, and of boysterous Tyrants, submissive brethren, so that malum ab A∣quilone, became bonum Aquiloni, by Divine disposition, which permiteth not evill, but to produce good out of it. 3. Learning so stifled by tumults of former ages, begins here to bud againe, by Alcuinus, Beda, but especially by King Al∣freds liberality, encouragements, and good Example.
INQVIRES. 3. Whether 1. The Saxon Heptarchy, were distinctly vi∣sible at any one time, or grew up more successively by degrees? 2. Alfred were the first founder of the Vni∣versity of Oxford, or only a munificent Re∣viver? 3. The Relations of the humorous carriage, and strange atchievements of Guy of War∣wick, be for the most part put upon him without ground? 4. The Nunnes of Codingham did well, by mangling their faces to preserve their cha∣stity? 5. The miracles ascribed to St Dunstane were rather deluding sleights, or Divelish Ma∣gick, then Acts of Piety? 6. Edward basely stabbed by his Step-mo∣thers treachery, may be justly held a Mar∣tyr? 7. Ethelreds Massacre of Danes, may passe for warrantable Policy?
Of the Danes. DYNASTY III. THe third Dynasty that outed the Saxons, and pos∣sessed their Dominions, is that of the Danes: who partly invited by Beorn Bocador Vice-Roy of Northumberland, Speed. to revenge the ravishing of his Lady by Osbright, and partly taking occasion from the murther of Lothbrook, alias Lether-breech, by Benick St Edmunds Faulkouer, (for which no satisfaction could be obtained) ne∣ver desisted to Invade the whole Realme, till they became sole Masters of it. In this Dynasty or Government, we have but three Danes, and two others in this succession. 1. CANUTUS the Conquerour, a Valiant and prudent man. He was an enimy to Dissemblers, Traytors, and Flat∣terers: for the Nobility that to curry favour with him, as∣sented to the Disinheriting of Ironsides Issue, were ever af∣ter slighted by him, and came to Dishonourable ends. The Traytor Ederick, vaunting his good service, in murthering his Soveraigne, he caused to be executed, with the extrea∣mest, and disgracefull tortures; And a company of Flatterers, that extolled his Greatnesse and Power to be unmatchable, he caused to place him in a Chayre, where the Sea Ebbs and Flowes at South-Hampton, that by the disobedience of the Tyde, that would not stop at his Command, but presum'd to dash his Royall Garments, they might learne how Low man is at the Highest; & not to applaud his fortune, but feare his fall. 2. By the valour of Earle Goodwin, and English, he drove the Vandales out of Denmarke, which fell to him by his brother
Swaynes death, and got the neighbouring Norway, by subdu∣ing Olave the King, who had quarrelled with him, without any provocation. In like manner he vanquished Scotland, so that England, Denmarke, Norway, (some adde also part of Sweden) together with Scotland were wholy subject unto him. 3. His Iealousies of Ironsides Children moved him to send his sonnes, Edward and Edmund to Swanus King of Denmarke, to be dispatched, but he abhorring such Villny, transfer'd them to the King of Hungary, where Edmund dying, Edward Married Agatha, the Emperour Henry the fourths Daughter, by whom he had Edgar Etheling, the sur∣viving Heire of the Crowne of England, which he could ne∣ver recover. 4. To strengthen his Title (what he might) he takes Emma to wife King Etheldreds Widdow, M. Lambard. makes good Lawes extant in the Saxon tongue and Latine, gave one hun∣dred Talents of Silver, and one of Gold for St Augustince Arme, which he bestowed on Coventry, as a memoriall of his Zeale, though not according to knowledge. 5. He had Issue by Emma his second Wife the faire Gunhilda, and Har∣dy-Canutus. Gunhilda was Married to the Emperour Henry the third, where falling into suspition of Incontinency, she was vindicated by her English Page, overthrowing in her quarrell a great Gyant. Hardicanutus was designed to suc∣ceed by his Father here in England, but was put by in his absence by his Brother 2.  HAROLD called Harefoot by reason of his swiftnesse, Earle Goodwin withstands his entrance, but by secret pre∣vailing meanes, was soone made his friend. 2. A Letter is forged in Queene Emma's name, to bring over her sonnes Edward and Alfred, (which she had by Ethelred) to claim their Right to the Crowne. Alfred comes and by Earle Goodwin is made away, with all those that came with him at Gilford. 3. Emma is banished, but courteously entertai∣ned by Baldwin Earle of Flanders, Harold thus secured (as he thought) from Competitors, lives loosly, dyes speedily, and without Issue leaves the Kingdom to 3.  HARDICANUTUS, who made it his first worke to dis∣intombe
his Predecessors Corps, and threw it into Thamisis: but some Fishermen more courteous, recovered it, and bury∣ed it againe in St Clements neare Temple-Barre. 2. His re∣calling his Mother Emma, and half Brother Edward, and en∣tertaining them respectively, deserves commendations. As also the prosecuting Earle Goodwin, and the Bishop of Wor∣cester, for Prince Alfreds death, but the Earle quitted him∣selfe by his Oath, and a rich Present, and the Bishops questio∣ning is said to be for the Murther of the Kings Taxe-Colle∣ctors in Worcester, by the inraged Citizens, for which their City was afterwards consumed with fire. 3. His Epicurismo left an ill Custome to all posterity. Foure times a day, his Ta∣ble must be covered, to invite men to Intemperancy, Through which at a Marriage, he is thought to have Choaked himselfe at Lambeth, most rejoycing to be rid of him, in memory whereof Hock-tide a Feast of scorning was a long time con∣tinued after. In this third Heire expired the Danish Line, and the Saxon revived againe in 4. EDWARD the sonne of Ethelred, & Emma, common∣ly called the Confessour. 1. To gaine the more love of his Subjects at his first entrance, he remitted the Taxe of Dane∣gilts so greivous to the Commonds, collected the Lawes of his predecessors into a body for the administrationof Iustice, which some say are the ground of our Common-Law, though the Pleading be altered since the Norman Conquest. 2. He was threatned by the Dane, See M. Lam∣bards Arch∣nom. and vexed by Griffith the Welch Prince, who was quelled by Harold especially, who was im∣ployed against them. Betweene him and the potent Earle Goodwin, were such debates, that twice came to the hazard of dangerous Battles, if wise mediation of the Nobles had not prevented them, the death of which Earle is reported to be his Choaking with a bitt of Bread, upon an imprecation laid on himselfe, that that might be his last, if he had a hand in the death of the Kings Brother Prince Alfred, though some say he died of the deadpalsie. 3. Grafton. In this man's time Coventry purchased its Freedome from Earle Leofrie, by the Riding of his Countesse Godina naked through it, but such
order was taken by the Townesmen, that shutting up all Doores and Windowes none beheld it. 4. His unnaturall dealing with his good Mother Emma, and vertuous faire Wife Editha, Earle Goodwins Daughter, cannot be excused. For upon a poore surmise of Incontinency with Alwin Bishop of Winchester, his Mother in his presence was put to the Or∣dalium to passe Blindfolded between nine glowing Coulters, which she did untouched: and his spotlesse Queene Editha, denied Marriageright, (perchance for hatred to her Fa∣ther,) and with one Waiting-maid to live disrespected in a Nunnery. 5. Such actions so opposite to Gods word should Saint no man. The first curing the Kings Evill, is referred to him, and thence to have continued to his Successors. More Laudable was his respect to Edgar Etheling, (Grandchild to to Ironside by his sonne Edward the Out-law that died in banishment) whom he intended for his successour, and he had the best right to it, but he being young, and wanting meanes and friends to support him. 5.  HAROLD sonne of Earle Goodwin makes bold to take the place, a man of excellent parts, and approved valour, as the Welch and others which he subdued in his Predecessors time, found to their cost. 2. He, droven by Tempest into Nor∣mandy, was affianced to young Adeliza Duke William's Daughter, with whom he Covenanted upon Oath to make him successour to Edward in the Kingdome of England. 2. But this contract he held as a nicity, or complement, and constrained Oathes no way to bind, wherein he soothed him∣selfe, but God is not mocked, and usurpations thrive not long. 3. Three Enemies at one time assault him. Tosto his owne Brother, Harold Harefager, or Fairelocks, of Norway, and William Duke of Normandy. The two former he manfully quelled, but fell under the hand of William in that famous Battle of Hastings in Sussex, the setter up of the next Dy∣nasty.
2. IN those times whiles Princes sought the ruines one of another, Popes grew up to dispose of them, and their Kingdoms, and those that protested against such deformities, and enormities could not be heard. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Canutus had the largest Dominious of any that ever Ruled in this Kindome? 2. St Augustines Arme were worth so much as he gave for it? 3. Edward the sonne of Etheldred, deserved the Title of Confessour? 4. Our Common-Law have its grounds from his Collections? 5. Ordalium by hott Coulters, be fit to purge suspition of Incontinency? 6. Stopping the rights of Marriages without consent for a time of both Parties, be not directly against Gods word? 7. Harold were bound to keep his Oath to William of Normandy for the Crowne of England, in prejudice to Edgar Etheling the apparent right Heire?
Of the Normans. DYNASTY IV. THe Fourth Dynasty is of the Normans, to the Plantage∣nets, and hath in it 1.  WILLIAM the Conquerour, the seaventh Duke of Normandy: the sonne of Robert, begotten on Arlot, a poore Skinners daughter, whom he affected for her handsomenesse, and comely dauncing (which by chance he beheld) among her country companions. 2. After the overthrow of Harold with little lesse then the losse of 68000 men on both sides in Battle field, he quickly brought under the rest of the Kingdome. The Kentish men circumvent him by a stratageme, and thereby retained their ancient Customes and Liberties. 2. Edgar Etheling the right heire, formerly wronged by Ha∣rold, with the discontented Earles Edwin, and Morcar, make some resistance, but to no purpose. Edgar flyes with his Mother and Sisters, into Scotland; where King Malcolme entertaining them nobly, takes Margaret his Sister to Wife, and by his constant and effectuall standing for him, Edgar was reconciled unto the Conquerour, and had Royall allowance from him. 3. To those insurrections that here vexed him, his eldest sonne Robert added a more unnaturall in Normandy, which he hastening to appease, was in Battle Ʋnhorsed by his own sonne, whom upon submission he was content to pardon for the time. 4. The Church found no friend of him, whose Revenues he alienated, and burthened with unusuall taxes, not sparing the poore meanes of Ʋni∣versity Colledge in Oxford, which must be diverted from the
Students. 5. Besides the imposing of the Norman Lawes, he left the Doomesday Booke in the Exchequer, containing a Survay in generall of all England. For a groat to short in payment of some dues required, he forced the Monkes of Ely, to lay downe a 1000 markes: notwithstanding for all this, the Pope bucks him, and allowes his doings and Title. 6. He depopulated about thirty miles in compasse, Cambden i. Hantshire. and outed the Inhabitants to make a forrest for Wild-beasts, which pleasured not himselfe so much, as it proved unluckie to his Posterity. The plainnesse of these times of Letting Lands is worth the comparing with the intricate prolixity of our times. Then it passed for good. From me and mine, to thee and thine, As good and as faire, as ever they mine were, To witnesse that this is sooth, I bite the white waxe with my tooth. But now we find it otherwise. 7. After all these transacti∣ons abroad, he is summoned by Death, as he was in Norman∣dy, but had the place of his buriall compounded for, before he was interred, and then the Grave proved too little for him that had proved so great a Conqueror in the World. His se∣cond sonne 2.  WILLIAM Rufus by Arch-Bishop Lanfrankes working for him, gets the place. 1. He is strongly opposed by his elder brother Robert: whom he calmeth with pro∣mising faire words, without performance, and Robert joynes in the famous expedition to the Holy Laud, with Godfrey of Bullaine. 2. As his Father began, so he persisted to withstand Papall intrusions. He sleighted the Popes Binding & Loosing: and held it bootlesse to invocate Saints. Curbed Anselme Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and taxed the then swelling Clergy for their Pride, Luxury, Idlenesse, and Avarice. Heard a Disputation of the Iewes, (who bribed him to fa∣vour them) against the Christians, but they lost the day, and their mony togither. 3. A Groome of his chamber, on a time bringing him a paire of Breeches of three shillings price, was blamed of him, and commanded to furnish him with a paire
fit for a King, that should cost a marke. He goes, and pre∣senting him with a meaner paire, which he said cost so much, yea Bellamy (or by St Lucies face saith the King) they are well bought: such was the frugality of those times, and difference from ours. 4. His liberality to Religious per∣sons and places, shewes that he was not voyd of Religion, though he could not endure Appeales to Rome, and his build∣ing the Towre in London, and Westminster Hall, of 270 foot in length, and 74 in breadth, are sufficient testimonies of his Magnificence. 5. His death was casuall, by the glance of an arrow from a tree, Cambden in Hantshire ex G. Mapes. shot by Sir Walter Tirrell at a Stagge, in the New Forrest, wherein foure Abbies, and thirty fixe Pa∣rish Churches, had been demolished: with the removing of all the Inhabitants, to make roome for Beasts or Doggs game as one calls it. Rex cervum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tyrellus Non bene provisum transfixit acumine ferri. The King the Stagge, vengeance the King doth chase, Tyrells hard hap concludes this Tragick case. Also Richard his brother, and Robert his Nephew, came to their untimely ends in the same place: so dangerous it is to prove Abaddons, especially in consecrated things. A Col∣liars Cart that removes him thence, brake in the way, and left him in the dirt, whence he was after taken, and buried as a King in Winchester: dying without issue, his Scepter descended to his brother 3.  HENRY the first, surnamed Beauclark for his Learn∣ing. He was wont to say that an unlearned King was a Crowned Asse. 1. Great stirres he had with his brother Ro∣bert, who returning from Ierusalem, where he was made King to possesse England but missed of it: and at length lost Normandy, togither with his eyes, by his unnaturall brother. 2. He Married Maud King Malcolmes daughter of Scotland, by her Mother Margaret lineally descended from Edmund Ironside, to strengthen his title to the Kingdome. 3. As his predecessors did, so he stoutly denyes the Popes incroach∣ings,
Curbs Anselme, that continued Romes agent, establi∣sheth the Lawes of Edward the Confessor, Holinshed. and addes other convenient of his owne. 4. He is said to have held the first Parliament, which he ordained should consist of Three E∣states, of which himself was the Head. Martin. A great Bickering be∣gan in his time, between Canterbury and Yorke, for priority, which continued a long time after, till Canterbury carried it. And Cardinall Cremensis the Popes Legate, sent hither to interdict Priests Marriages, was taken in the Act with a common strumpet, which he excused, in saying he was no Priest himselfe, but a corrector of them. 5. The drowning of his sonne William, with diverse other Nobles, was repaired in some sort, by the Marriage of Maud his Daughter, first with Henry the fifth Emperour of Germany, and he dying without Issue, next with Jeffery Plantagenet Earle of An∣joy, by whom she had Henry Fitz Empresse Heire apparant to the Crowne. But his Grand-father dying unexpectedly, by eating of Lampresse, and he not upon the place, 4. STEPHEN of Blois steps in; sonne to Adeliza daugh∣ter to the Conquerour, and holds it. which was the cause of no small stirres, and blood-shed, especially it being against his Oath, which he had taken with the Nobles, for the Em∣presse Mauds succession, and first brake it. The Bishops ex∣cused it, that it was for the good of the Church, but Perjury promotes not Piety. 2. Lesse he could not expect then con∣tinuall oppositions from the Empresse, and her sonne Henry, to recover their right, wherein after various successe and windings on either side; At the Battle of Liucolne (not∣withstanding his Herculian laying about him with his slaughtering Axe) the King himselfe was taken Prisoner, Math. Paris. which in likelyhood might have ended the businesse. 3. But the Empresse upon this victory, carries her selfe so high, and disrespective, that she lost the hearts of her party, so that Stephen was freed, and she forced to shift for her selfe, from Oxford Castle in a great Snow, and other places. 4. Vntill her sonne Henry comes with better provision. The Armies confronting one the other, an agreement is made, especially
by the earnest mediation of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Stephen is to hold the Kingdome for his life, and Henry is pro∣claimed his Heire apparant, which took the surer effect, in regard of the drowning of Prince Eustace, Stephens sonne who might have been a block in the way, and a shrewd su∣spition there was (intimated some say by the Empresse her selfe) that Stephen had more interest in Henry, Holinsh. then Jeffry Plantagenet. 5. What became afterward of the Empresse may well (saith one) be made a Quere. But the King soon takes his leave of the World, wanting nothing to ranke him with the Eminents of his predecessors, bvt only a good Title, which the Pope was feed to justify, but it could not stave off Henry, from bringing in the next Dynasty. 2. VVIth this Dynasty may be ranked. 1. The intolle∣rable Insultations of the Popes now in the Zenith of their Exaltations, upon the superstitious and missed devo∣tions of Christian Princes, which our Normans stooped not so much to, as others. 2. The needlesse wranglings of Arch∣bishop Anselme, with Rufus and Henry the first, his Sove∣raigues, unbeseeming his Learning, which receives at this day scandall by it. 3. These quarrells between Canterbury and Yorke, for priority, more befitting Women, and Duelists. then men of their Places and Profession. Notwithstanding St Bernard may be well noted for an eminent Preacher, though Abailardus Schollers say, it was all the Learning he had. Lombard and Gratian must be acknowledged for Wit∣ty and painefull men, and Avicenna Averroes, and other A∣rabians, and Schoolemen for great Philosophers.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. The Lawes of Edward the Confessor, were any way bettered by those of the Conque∣rour? 2. The Kentish Gavelkind be not prejudiciall to elder brothers? 3. Harlot be a name of reproach, derived from the Conquerors Mother? 4. William Rufus in some sort might not be tearmed a Protestant? 5. See Holiaesis in his life. Parliaments had their first beginning from Henry the first? 6. His Dealing with his brother Robert, were not unnaturally Tyrannicall? 7. King Stephen might not as Lawfully put by his Daughter, and Grand-child from the Crowne, as he did his Elder brother Robert?
Plantagenets Ʋndevided. DINASTY. V. THE Normans thus expiring, give way to the fifth Dy∣nasty of the Plantaginets. This represents it selfe, 1. Before the division of the Houses of YORKE and LANCASTER. 2. After that division. 3. Before the division there runne on evenly in an unque∣stionable Line, eight Kings in this manner. 1.  HENRY the second called Fitz-Empresse, otherwise Shortmantle, who curb'd the Clergy at his first entrance, by seting on foot again his Grandfather Henry the first's Lawes. 2. He had great bickering with the Pope, and Thomas Becket, that Traytor Saint, made by him Archbishop of Can∣terbury, but made away by Pickthank Courtiers, who flew him (some relate as he was at Masse) for which the peni∣tent King Footed three miles afterward upon his bloody bare feet; to visit this Idoll shrine, & submitted himself futher to be breeched by the Orbilian Monkes, who bestowed eighty La∣shes upon him. 3. His love to faire Rosamund whom he Mewed up in Woodstock Labyrinth, wrought him much for∣row, through the Jealousie of his Queene, who at length there Poysoned her, leaving her to be buried at Godstow neere Ox∣ford with this Epitaph. Hic jacet in Tumbo Rosa mundi, non Rosa munda, Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet. Rose Of, not To the world here Rosamund lyes, Sweet once she was, but now 'tis otherwise.
Her Well, a faire spring by the Mannour of Woodstock con∣tinues there her name at this day. The King had two Sonnes by her, William Longsword, and Ieffery Archbishop of Yorke. 4. He subdued Ireland by oc∣casion of Dermott Ningals falling off from his Countrymen; appoints Judges of the Circuits in England. 5. Crownes his Sonne Henry Copartner with him in the Kingdom, who not using his Father well, and untimely dying, left Brethren too many to break the Old mans heart by their opposition, of which 2. RICHARD the first, called Cuer de Lion succeeds him. 1. Borne in Oxford; howsoever odious at last to his Father, yet dutifull to his Mother, whom he freed from 12. yeares Imprisonment, when he came to the Crowne. 2. Af∣terward goes to the Holy Land, Conquers Cyprus, and be∣comes King of Ierusalem, which Title his Father requested, by the Patriarch Heraclius had refused. In his absence the emulation between William Longshampe Bishop of Elye left Viceroy, And Iohn the Kings Brother (who deservedly with others stormed at it) brought all things into a Combustion; so that in these stormes brake out the famous Out-lawes, Robin Hood and Little John, of whom read Grafton. As also on William with the Longbeard, a notable Imposter then de∣luded the credulous people. This mans Valour an old Pees of theirs expresses. This King Richard I understand, Yet he went out of England, Let make an Axe for the Nones Therewith to cleave the Sarasens bones. The head in footh was wrought full weele, Thereon ware twenty pound of steele. And when he came in Cyprus lond, This ilkon Axe he took in hond. 3. His returne cost him deare, by falling in to the hands of Leopold of Austria, and Henry the sixth Emperour, his exasperated Enemies. 4. His Wife Berengaria, the King of Navarres Daughter, was neglected by him at
first, yet afterward received, never had Issue by him. 5. A French Preist one Fulco told him, that he had three Daugh∣ters, Pride, Covetuousnesse, and Lechery to be bestowed a∣broad of him, to prevent Gods punishments. To whom he suddainly replyed, that the Templers and Hospitallers should have his Pride, the Cistertian Monkes his Covetuousnesse, and the rest of the Clergy his Lechery. 6. The Motto of DIEV ET MON DROIT is attributed to him, ascribing the Victory he had at Gisors against the French, not to him∣selfe but to God, and his might. He was death-wounded by a poysoned Arrow at the Seige of Chalons, by one Bertrand Guerdon in revenge of his Father and Brethren whom the King had slaine, which Bertrand resolutely avowing before the King, the King pardoned him. 7. At his Mothers inter∣cession, he was reconciled before to his Younger brother 3.  IOHN who succeeds him. He was termed by his Fa∣ther Lackland. 1. The Faction of the Clergy cast the Crowne upon him by Election, whereas Arthur Plantagenet the sonne of his Elder brother Ieffery was the right Heire, and stickled for it, by the French Kings abetting, till he lost his life in the Quarrell. 2. The Clergy forsooke him for opposing Pope Innocent the third in Stephen Langtons preferment, to the See of Caterbury; & sleighting the Monks and vexing them. 3. Their Combinations forced him (after the Interdicting of the Realme for six years three moneths. and sixteene dayes,) to render his Crowne to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, and take it againe in Fee-Farme at the Rent of a Thousand Markes yearely; which exasperated his Nobles against him, howsoever it warped the Pope and Clergy to be for him. 4. His Bickering abroad with the French, and at home with his Barons, made his Raigne very Tragicall, which ended at Swansted Abby by Simon the Monkes Poy∣son (as some say) and gave way to his sonne 4.  HENRY the third, who Crowned between nine or tenne yeares Old, 1. Cleared this Realme of the French, (who had Invaded it by the Popes interdiction) by William Martiall Earle of Pembroke his Protector. 2. Hubert De
Burgo Earle of Kent did him much good service, for which he had small recompence. 3. His immoderate and exaspera∣ting favours cast on Strangers, drew on the Barons Warres, in which an Insanum Parliamentum held at Oxford, appoin∣ted twelve Peeres in prejudice of his Regality. The Earles of Leicester and Glocester are the greatest sticklers in it; who took Prisoners the King, with his brother Richard King of the Romanes, and his sonne Prince Edward, in the Battle of Lewes in Sussex. 4. He confirmes Magna Charta. The Earles fall at deadly fend between themselves, Prince Ed∣ward tels the King of it, and joyning with Glocester Rights himselfe, by the Ruine of Leicester in the Battle of Eversham in Worcestershire. 5. London is threatned to be Burnt by the King, for taking the Barons part. 6. Glocesters service failing of expected Favours, repines to no purpose, and undertakes to goe to the Holy Land, but shrinking; that enterprise is per∣formed by Prince Edward, and his Heroick Princesse Elia∣nor, who suck'd out there the poyson of an invenomed wound given him, with the hazard of her owne life, whereby he re∣covered. He did there great service, untill he was called back to succeed his Father, that dyed after fifty six yeares Raigne, by the Title of 5. EDWARD the first, commonly called Longshanks, 1. He brought the Welch with their Valiant Prince Lewil∣lin under the English Subjection. 2. Conquered Scotland, being at Variance, who should be King, brought thence the Marble Chayre, in which the Scottish Kings were wont to be Crowned, spoken of before. 3. Hesleighted the Popes Inhi∣bition to forbeare Scotland, and in the Parliament of Lincolne, under the subscription of the Peeres, utterly renounced Pope Boniface his Supreame Authority. 4. He banished the Jewes for their Exactions, and Censured the Judges and Officers for their Corruptions. 5. Vpon his Death-bed charged his sonne to continue the Banishment of Pearce of Goveston, and to convey his Heart to be buried in the Holy Land. 6. Of his sixteene Children which he had by two Wives, Elianour of Spaine, and Margaret of France.
6.  EDWARD the second surnamed Carnarvan (the first English hereditary Prince of Wales) succeeds him. 2. He a∣gainst his Oath, calls Gaveston twice out of Banishment, per∣mits him to convey beyond the Seas his Iewels, with a Table and Tressels all of Beaten Gold. 3. In place of Gaveston be∣headed by the Nobles, he takes the Spencers, Father and sonne to be his Favourites, worse (if it might be) then Gaveston. 4. At Estreveline, and twice afterwards, he received three notable overthrowes by the Scotts, to the losse of all his Inte∣rest there, and the Devastation of the Northerne parts of his Kingdome. 5. Vpon these preposterous events, Iohn Poydrus (an Exeter man) would needs prove the King a Changling, and said himselfe was Long-shanks sonne; But his claime was quickly strangled with an Halter. 6. To right these wrongs, the Barons by a Parliament get the Spencers banished. The King recalls them, the Barons take Armes, receive a great overthrow, and two and twenty of them are Behoaded. The Spencers the more insult. 7. The Queene flyes with the Prince into France, is deserted by her bribed Brother the French King, and commanded to returne by the Pope, finds favour with Robert of Artois Earle of Henalt, and Sr Iohn his brother, returnes by their help into England, is assisted by the Barons, takes the King and the Spencers at Bristow. The Londoners behead Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exeter for withstanding the Queenes proceedings: The Spencers are ex∣ecuted, the King is Deposed in Parliament, sent to Killing∣worth as Prisoner, and thence to Barkly Castle, where he was barbarously Spitted to Death, leaving his sonne 7.  EDWARD the third, (otherwise calied Edward of Windsor) to governe better. 1. He surprised Mortimer the Minion of his mother, and Executed him at Tyburne, who had by his pernicious plotting, caused King Edward the second to be made away by an Amphibologie. Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est, To shed King Edwards blood Refuse to feare I hold it good.
And the Scottish Ragman to be redelivered in the Non-age of this King, whereby the English laid claime to Scotland, together with their Black Crosse, so that the People cried out Vae pueris terrae, saepissime sunt ubi guerrae. Woe to the Land where Rulers age. Is not mature to stop mens rage. 2. Notwithstanding the King repaired this afterward by the overthrow of the Scotts at Hallidowne Hill, which wiped off their contumelious Rime made upon their Victorie over the English in his Fathers dayes, being this Long Beards heartlesse, Painted Hoods witlesse, Gray Coates gracelesse, Make England thriftlesse, And also in taking their King David the valiant Bruces sonne Prisoner at Nevils Crosse, in his absence in France by the Queene, and placing in Edward Balioll to be King. 3. Against the French, by himselfe and this Valiant sonne Edward the Black Prince, He obtained eminent Victories at Cressay and Poycters; In the last of which their King John was taken and brought into England. 4. He Founded the Order of the Garter, first quartered his Armes with France. In his old age was much abused by a Strumpet Alice Pears. 5. After he had seene the death of his Victorious sonne Edward the Black Prince, he died peaceably at Sheene in Surry, leaving to succeed him his Grandchild, the Black Princes sonne 8. RICHARD the second. 1. He misled by his Favorite Michael De La Poole, and other Syeophants, incurres the ha∣tred of his People. Iohn Wall Priest, Watt Tylor, lack Sraw, and Jack Shepherd, raise a Rebellion against him, which hap∣pily was quieted by the Maior of London's, William Wal∣worths mortall blow, given Watt Tylor. 2. Thirteene Com∣missioners were appointed to see matters reformed, but it came to nothing. 3. An Invasion of French with twelve hundred Ships under Sayle against England, by Gods pro∣vidence
were utterly scattered. Iohn of Gaunt his Vncle, Warreth successively in Spaine, and himselfe in Scotland. 4. He continues his hatred against his Nobles, executes di∣verse of them, Banisheth his Cosen Henry of Bullingbrook, for his freedome to have things reformed; In his absence sezeth upon his whole estate. Bullingbrook returnes when the King was in Ireland. The People flock to him. The King resignes his Crowne to him, is committed to Pomfred Castle, there assaulted by eight Assassines, valiantly kills foure of them and so is slaine himselfe. 2. WIthin compasse of this Section are remarkable, 1. The strange Ʋsurpation of Popes to make good, or disanull the Titles of Kings, and Demising of King∣domes to Farme. 2. The bringing in of Auricular Confessi∣on, and Transubstantiation, not for informing, but infatuating Gods People. 3. The persecutions of the poore Waldenses, not for detestation of their Tenents (which they laboured not to examine,) but out of a Iealousie, lest these mens plaine dea∣ling should discover their drifts, and marre their Makets. 4. The protestations of Wicliff, and his followers, against the grosse Superstition brought in by Monkes and Friers, in Do∣ctrine & Discipline, notably scourged by Ieffery Chaucer the Learned and Famous Poet of those times, 5. Lastly upon remissnesse in Government, and neglect of execution of Iu∣stice, the breaking out of such Out-Lawes, as were Robin Hood and Little John, with their Comrades, or starting up of such Impostors and Villaines, as were, 1. William Longbeard under Richard the first, a sharp reprover of Vice and Disor∣ders in the Common Wealth. Himselfe at last being found to be a Murderer, that had fleaed a man, and a Whoremaster that had used his Concubine in a Church, and a Witch that wor∣shiped at home a familiar in forme of a Catt. 2. John Poy∣dras a Tanners sonne of Exeter, that stood upon it that Ed∣ward the second was a Changling substituted in his Cradle for him, who was the right Heire to the Crowne. 3. Iohn Wall a Preist. 4. Wat Tyler, 5. Jack Straw. 6. Jach Shepherd, with
7. William Lister their Captaine, would make all Leveli without distinction of King or Subject, Master or Servant. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Henry the second consented to the Mur∣ther of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Can∣terbury? 2. The cause he suffered for, were pertinent to saint him? 3. Expiatory Pennance enjoyned for that murder, were fit for a Preist to propose or a King to undergoe? 4. King Iohn could forfeit his Kingdome to the Pope, or the Pope let it to Farme? 5. He were poysoned by a Monke or dyed o∣therwise? 6. Queene Isabell were not more to blame for prosecuting her Husband Edward the second, then the King was for sticking so close to Gaveston? 7. King Richard the second were starved to death, or barbarously Butchered by St Piers of Exton?
Lancastrians. DYNAST. V. SECT. II. THus farre the Plantagenets have continued in an unquestionable right line; Now followes the divisi∣on of the Houses of Lancester, and Yorke, three of each succeeding in their order. Of Lancaster we have 1.  HENRY the fourth surnamed Bullinbrooke. 1. This man backt his usurpation of the Crowne by Parliament, Wherein John the Religious, Learned, and resolute Bishop of Carlile openly contradicted, but could not be heard: whereupon the Duke of Anmerle his Cosen, Then the Per∣cyes joyning with the Scots, and French, together with Owen Glendore and his Welch, make a strong head against him. 3. But in the Battell of Shrewsbury, Henry Hotspurre is slaine outright, Douglas the valiant Scot taken, but relea∣sed without ransome; The Earle of Worcester beheaded, Owen Glendore pursued by the Prince into Wales, and famished there in the Woods. 4. The like successe he had, in discover∣ing and suppressing the Earle of Northumberlands Rebellion, with some Nobles, and the Scots his Complices. 5. Intend∣ing a voyage into the Holy Land, he is arrested by an Apo∣plexie, acknowledged to his sonne (who had seized upon his Crowne upon supposall he was dead) the little right he had to its and so by his Death leaves it to his eldest sonne, 2.  HENRY the fifth of Monmoth. 1. At his first en∣trance, he cashiered all his dissolute companions that follow∣ed him when he was Prince: Reformes abuses in the Com∣monwealth, growes upon the Clergy, but was Politiquely diverted by Henry Chichesly Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to
imploy his forces for the recovering of his Title to France. 2. Vpon which he enters (having cut off Richard Earle of Cambridge, brother to the Duke of Yorke, who by Treason would have prevented it) takes Harflew, gave the French with the oddes of about sixe to one, an admirable overthrow at Agencourt, where more Prisoners were taken, then their surprisers, whose throats were cut upon an after Alarum by Robinet of Bonvill. 3. In a Sea-fight before Harflew the French had another extraordinary overthrow. 4. He sub∣dues all Normandy, and takes Cane and Roane. 5. The Dol∣phin of France, being in disgrace by rifling his Mothers trea∣sure, and murthering John the young Duke of Burgoyne; an agreement is made that Henry should marry Katharine the Kings Daughter of France, and so succeed him in the King∣dome. 6. This was Proclaimed and Performed accordingly: He keeps his Court at Paris, as Regent, with incomparable Magnificence; Returnes with his Queene into England, who is delivered of a Sonne at Windsor, upon which he is said to have spoken Prophetically, I Henry of Monmoth shall re∣maine but a short time, and gaine much, but Henry of Windsor shall Raigne long and loose all. 7. In his returne into France. to rescue his friend Philip Duke of Burgoyne, he sickneth and dyes at Bloys, leaving his Sonne to succeed him, but of nine Months old. 3. HENRY the sixth of Winsor. 1. His Protector was Humphrey Duke of Glocester. Regent in France, Iohn Duke of Bedford. Manager of many weighty businesses at home, Tho∣mas Duke of Exeter, his three Ʋnkles. 2. All went well in Erance (of which he was Crowned King in Paris) untill the Seige of Orleance, where Ioane the Sheapherdesse of Lor∣raine, put in with her devices, which wrought much mis∣chiefe, but at length she was taken and executed. 3. Moun∣tecute the valiant Earle of Salisbury, and the Lord Talbot failing, all things in France went to wrack till all was lost. 4. Humphrey Duke of Glocesters murther, the Kings Marri∣age with Margaret (poore King Rayners daughter of Scici∣ly) with the Rebellion of Blewbeard and Iack Cade, weaken
the affaires at home. 4. Richard Duke of Yorke sets on foot his Title to the Crowne; got it by Parliament, so farre forth as to be Heire apparent to Henry, who was taken Prisoner in the Battle at St Albone, but in prosecution of that businesse he lost his life, with his Sonnes, young Rutland. 5. Not∣withstanding at length Edward, Richards Sonne, the right Heire, overthrew the King in Towton field, and so recovered his Due. 2. FAlling in with these times may be observed. 1. That as Popes had deposed Kings, now the Councells of Constance and Basill deposed Popes, and set other in their places, without the suffrages of Cardinalis. 2. The perfidi∣ous dealing with Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prague, which the Bohemians then complained of; and yet sticks to Rome as an indelible Character of Antichristian cruelty. 3. The successe of usurpations, which as most commonly they are undertaken, with treacherous cruelty, so ever they are at∣tended with Repinings, Insurrections, Massacres, and ending alwaies in shame and confusion.
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Henry the fourth for Policy, Henry the fifth for Ʋalour, Henry the sixth for San∣ctity, exceeded most of their Predecessors? 2. Those may be justly censured for Traytors that take up Armes against a manifest V. surper? 3. Henry the fourth, repented on his Death∣bed, the wrong usurping of the Crowne? 4. Henry the fift's dissolutenesse in his youth, experienced him the better to governe? 5. King Henry the sixth, were a better Chri∣stian then King? 6. His Queenes violentstirring, did not rather hurt then further his cause? 7. Ioan of Orleance, were no other but as Magdalene, Blewbeard, and Jack Cade a∣mongst us, a cheating Impostrix?
The House of Yorke. DYNAST. V. SECT. III. THE three of the House of Lancaster having thus Acted more then their parts, three other of the House of Yorke succeed upon a better Title, of whom the first was 1.  EDWARD the fourth. 1. He by main Valour overthrew Queene Margaret and her Partizans that opposed his Title. 2. But by suddain Marriage at home with the Lady Gray a Widdow, when he had ingaged himselfe by the Earle of Warwick to the Lady Bona of France; he exasperated War∣wick against him, who with much bloud-shed at length, Ʋn∣rownes him, and restores Henry againe yet living. 3. Ed∣ward by the Duke of Burgoyne recollects himselfe, and with the help of his Brethren Richard of Glocester, and George of Clarence, (who formerly had taken part with Warwick) overthrowes Warwick with his Complices, and kills him in Bornet Fields, Imprisoneth King Henry againe in the Tower, where he is Murthered, most say by the Duke of Glocester; as his sonne Prince Edward was afterward at Tewxbury, where the House of Lancaster had the last overthrow. In those catching times, a Iest of one Burdet a Mercer in Cheap∣side, telling his sonne if he would ply his book, he should be heire to the Crowne, (meaning his owne house that had that Signe) cost him his life. 4. He sets on foot his Title to France, enters upon it with an Army, but comes to Compo∣sition, represses the Scottish incursions by Glocester his Bro∣ther, and brings them to such Tearmes as he liked. 5. George
Duke of Clarence his brother clapt into the Tower (some say) for Treason, others from a Dreame the King had, that one whose name began with Gshould ruine him and his po∣sterity, was shortly after found drowned in a Butt of Malme∣sey. The King sickneth upon this, (and 'tis thought) hastned to his end by the same hand, and leaving the Crowne to his sonne 2. EDWARD the fifth, who of the age of thirteene com∣ming from Ludlow to London to be Crowned, was Trayte∣rously seazed on by his perfidious Ʋncle, the Duke of Gloce∣ster, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord Hastings. 2. Glo∣cester gets himselfe to be Protector, and under pretence of safe Custody, mewes up the King with his younger Bro∣ther Richard in the Tower, procures himselfe to be Proclai∣med King by the name of 3. RICHARD the third. 1. He endeavouring to make a League with the French, was deservedly rejected for his Vil∣lanies. 2. By meanes of Sr Iames Terrill, Forrest, and Digh∣ton, King Edward the fifth with his brother Richard, were Smothered in the Tower between two Featherbeds. 3. The Bishop of Elie Doctor Morton put the Duke of Buckingham upon the Plott of unkinging Richard, and setting the Crowne on Henry of Richmond, then beyond the Seas: who to make good his Title, should Marry with the Princesse Elizabeth King Edwards Eldest Daughter. 4. Buckingham looseth his life in the pursuit, Morton escapeth to animate Henry, in the prosecution. 5. Richard plotted by corruption to have Henry made away, but to no purpose. His Queene Anne dies suddainly, to make way for his plotted Incestuous Marriage, with Elizabeth his Neece. 6. Henry of Richmond Lands at Milford Hauen, the Welchmen and others flock unto him. 7. Henry and Richard meet at Bosworth Field, where the Tyrant (after desperate Valour shewen) is slaine by Henry his Corrivall. How odious his Tyranny was to all, appeares somewhat by these Rimes made against his Partakers. The Ratt, the Catt, and Lovell the Dogg, Rule all England under the Hogge,
And Lockey of Norfolke be not too bold For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold. This put an end to the bloody contentions between Yorke and Lancaster. In which were Fought here in England, tenne set Battels, five in Henry the sixt dayes. The Battell first of St Albones, 2. Black-heath, 3. Northampton, 4. Wakefield, 5. Tawton, and so many more in the Raigne of King Edward the fourth, 1. Exham, 2. Banbury, 3. The Battell of Loosecoats. 4. Barnetfield, 5. Tewxbury, bsides this concluding Bettle at Bosworth, which put a period to the Raigne of the Planta∣genets. 2. COoncurrant with this Dynasty, were 1. the continu∣ed persecution of the Waldenses, and Hussites, which here in England had their share under the name of Lollards. 2. The Deposing by the Pope of George Pogeibra∣cius King of Hungary, for Favouring them. 3. The base and blasphemous Rosary of the Dominican Fryers, set on foote by Alanus de Rupe, who sware that the blessed Virgin was Married unto him, whō he makes a Midwife, and a Gossip, to one Lucia, calling her sonne Marianus, which being worthy∣ly inveighed against, by our Mr Fox in his Martyrology, out of an old Manuscript, yet hath of late been set forth againe (with more trash of the same sinke) expressed with artifici∣all Pictures, and Dedicated to the Princes Isabella Clara Eu∣genia. 4. With these notwithstanding contemporize, the ne∣ver to be forgotten, Scourgers of the Turkes, John and Ma∣thew Huniades, with the renowned Scanderbeg, and nearer home. 5. the French maintainers of the Pragmaticall sancti∣on, and our Fortescue a great Assertor of our Lawes with o∣thers.
INQVIRES. 2. Whether. 1. Edward the fourth be more to be com∣mended for his Vabour, then censured for his Lascivious Vanities? 2. His Death were hastned by finister means? 3. Burdet of Cheapside had not hard measure to be hanged for a lest, concerning his Signe of the Crowne, which had no rela∣tion to the Crowne of the Kingdome? 4. Edward the fifth were Smothered in the Tower, or dyed of greife and sicknesse. 5. Perkin Warbeck were a Counterfeit or really Richard Duke of Yorke conveyed out of the Tower? 6. It were likely that Richard the third had His is Arme withered by the Witch∣crafts, of the Queene Mother, and Jane Shore? 7. The horrid Crimes, and deformities he is charged with, were rather forged by Malevolents, then proved?
The Tudors. DYNAST. VI. THe fourteene Plantagenets thus expiring with Richard the third. Five Tudors take their turnes in this manner. 1.  HENRY the seaventh, by marrying Elizabeth the el∣dest daughter of Edward the fourth, unites both the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster. 2. He was much vexed by Lambert Simnell, and Ferkin Warbeck, two counterfeits, set up by Margaret Dutchesse of Burgoyne King Edward the fourths fister, but wisely and valiantly he quitted himselfe of them. 3. The Cornish Rebells under Michaell Joseph, and Thomas Flammoch made a great head against him, distressed Exceter and Tanton, but in the end, were overthrowne at Black∣heath in Kent. 4. His cruelty in executing the harmlesse Earle of Warwick cannot be excused. 5. The King and Queene of Castile driven into Waymouth by a storme, were entertained Nobly by Sir Thomas Trenchard, and afterwards by the King, with great Pompe. 6. His eldest sonne Arthur married Katharine, Ferdinando's daughter of Arragon, and dyes not long after. 7. The King executes Penall Lawes, to the great grievance of the Subjects, by Empson and Dudley, which at his death he repents of. 8. He was buried in the stately Chappell he built at Westminster, where most of his successors lye. His Sonne 2.  HENRY the eight succeeds. 1. Marries his brother Arthurs wife Katharine, by a dispensation from the Pope. 2. He had Warres with the French and Scotts, who received a shamefull overthrow by the Earle of Surrie, in Flodden
eild, with the death of their King, while our King was in France, where the Emperour Maximilian was in his pay, with this Motto ICH DEIN, I serve. 3. His favourites Cardinall Wolsey, and Thomas Cromwell, after much honour, were at length cut off by him. 4. Exceptions were taken a∣gainst his Marriage, with his brothers Wife, and the Popes dallying with him in the businesse, lost him his Supremacy, and Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas Moore for standing for it, lost their Heads. 5. The Rebellions against him of Captain Cobler, and the Pilgrims under pretence of Religion, were quickly appeased. 5. He is blamed for his change of Wives. Was the first that wrot himselfe King of Ireland: set out a book against Martin Luther, and gained the title of Defender of the Faith. He grew in his latter time to be very harsh and bloudy. Dying he left to succeed him his sonne, 3. EDWARD the Sixth, by his wife the Lady Iane Sey∣mour, who lost her own life in his Birth, to preserve her Sonnes. 1. He being Crowned in the 11th yeare of his Age, had for Protector his Vnkle Edward Seymour Duke of So∣merset. 2. The Scots breaking their promise for the Marri∣age of the young Queene with King Edward, received a great overthrow at Muskleborough. 3. Three Rebellions a∣gainst him, The first from Cornwall and Devonshire, by Humphrey Arundell, and some Popish Priests and seduced Gentlemen, whom he distressed at Exceter, The second in the North, by Ombler a yeoman, and Dale a Parish Clearke, for Religion, The third by Kett the Tanner of Norwich, with his Complices, for Inclosures; were successively extin∣guished by his worthy Chiefetaines. 4. He excellently pur∣ged the Church from Popish Superstition, and setled the true Service of God, and Preaching of his word. 5. The unlucky dissentions of his two Ʋnkles, the Lord Protector and his bro∣ther Thomas Lord Admirall, arising from the siding of their Wives, who should take Place, was the Breakneck of both of of them: Thomas suffered for Treason, the Protector for Fe∣lony. Vpon which the Kings Death soon followes; leaving by his will the Lady Jane, (the Duke of Suffolkes daughter)
to succeed him: but it prevailed not against the Title of his Sister, 4.  MARIE, who especially won her right by the Nor∣folke men. 1. Beheaded the Lady Iane with her Husband Gilford Dudly, and Abettors. 2. Vpon her resolution to Marry with Philip of Spaine, Sir Thomas Wiat dangerously Rebells, under pretence to oppose it, and enters London as farre as Ludgate, but was at last taken, and executed. 3. The Lady Elizabeth is accused, as accessary to Wiats Insurrecti∣on, thereupon is committed to the Tower, afterwards remo∣ved to Woodstock, but at length enlarged by the unexpected favour of King Philip. 4. Who prosecutes the Quarrells between England and France, takes St Quintins. The French recover themselves, and get Callice, which stuck in the heart of Q. Mary, and with some other disasters, cast her into a mortall Melancholy. 5. She was ridiculously reported to have been with Child, and some triumphing there was at home and abroad for her deliverance, But it was but a Popish invention. 6. Cardinall Poole was recalled and made Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. Her brothers Reformation which ab∣rogated the Popes Supremacy, she restored, with the rest of that annexed Idolatry. 7. Gardiner of Winchester, and Bon∣ner of London play the Butchers, upon the Professors of the Gospell. Arch-bishop Cranmer, with the Bishops of Wor∣cester and London, Latimer and Ridley were burnt at Ox∣ford, with others of all sorts & conditions otherwhere. 8. The Dutches of Suffolke miserably flying to save her life. To all which Troubles and Persecutions, the Queenes death after five years Raigne set a Period, and the most happy succession of her Sister. 5.  ELIZABETH, who often solicited to Marry never consented. 1. Shee banished all Popish Idolatry, and resto∣red the Purity of Religion. 2. Pope Pius the fifth, deprived her by his Bull, fixed to the Bishop of Londons Gate, by de∣sperate Felton, but it proved but a Calfe. 3. The Insurr∣ctions thereupon, of the Earles of Northumberland, and Westmoreland ended with the Ruins of the Rebells, as also in∣finite
plots against her Person and State had the same Issue. See B. Carle∣tons desc∣ption of them in a Table. 4. Her protecting of the Low Countries, overthrow of the Invincible Armado of the Spaniards, in the Sea fight of 1588. Aiding Henry the fourth of France, to settle him in his Kingdome; Quelling the Irish Rebells, and such eminent Atchievements, renowned her throughout all the World; insomuch as the Proud Turke by an honourable Embassage acknowledged her Excellency, and desited her friendship. 5. For her mercifull returning home certain Italians, that were taken Prisoners in the 88 Jnvasion, she was tearmed St Elizabeth by some at Venice, whereof one told the Lord Carleton (afterward Vicount Dorchester) being there Em∣bassadour, that although he were a Papist, yet he would never pray to any other Saint, but that Saint Elizabeth. 2. WIthin the Compasse of this Government, may be observed. 1. The Protestations of Christian Di∣vines and Princes against Romes Tyranny, Errours, Idolatry, Cheatings, and Delusions, of which a necessary Reformation was began, and prosecuted. 2. The Politique Plotts and com∣bustions in the Councell of Trent to interrupt & frastrate it. 3. The censures, Treasons, and Massacres, inflicted upon them that any way stood for it. 4. In the mean while brave Huniades and Scanderbeg purchase immortall Glory, in their Heroicall exploits against the Turke, Columbus, & Ame∣ricus Vesputius for discovering, Cortez and Pizarro, for Conquest of the West Indies. Our Sir Francis Drake, and Mr Thomas Candish for compassing the Globe of the world. 5. But the chiefest thing of all was the cutting of the Combe of the Popes Supremacy, so that it may be said. As King Hen∣ry the seaventh Courted him, King Henry the eight Ʋnhor∣sed him: King Edward the sixth Banished him, Queen Mary indeed recalled him, and with some hot Waters revived him, so the Heroick Queene Elizabeth set him packing a∣gaine, And her Learned successor King James hath so stab'd and branded him with his Penne, that his Sonne our Sacred King CHARLES, is too well Catechized, and throughly
grounded, for permitting him to have any setling here, or countenance hereafter. To these times are referred the fa∣mous Sea-fight of Lepanto, and 88. wherein Turke and Pope felt Gods hand against them. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether 1. Henry the seavenths surest claime to the Crowne, were from his Queen Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Edward the fourth? 2. The executing of Edward Plantagenet the young harmelesse Earle of Warwicke, ill became a Statist, that professed Christiae∣nity? 3. Henry the eight, proved a better Defender of the Faith, by rejecting the Popes Su∣premacy, then retaining it? 4. Edward the sixt's Reformation, be free from the most and greatest exceptions, that Novelists have made against it? 5. The Martyring of Protestants in Queene Maries daies, were not rather through the blondinesse of some Praelates, then out of her own disposition? 6. There were ground to suspect, that Queen Elizabeth ever conspired against her Si∣ster? 7. Her passing the Statute of improvement, hath not conduced more to the benefite of the Church and Ʋniversities, then the Be∣nificence of many of the chiefest Founders put together?
The Stuarts. DYNAST. VII. THE Tudors breathing out their last Excellent in Elizabeth, STUARTS take their turne by an Ʋn∣questionable Title, as Lineally descended from Margaret the eldest Daughter of Henry the seventh, of these we have enjoyed 1. IAMES the first of England, but sixt of Scotland, Rex Pacificus. 1. He attained the Crowne without the least Contradiction, but greatest applause of all. 2. For his Con∣stancy, and admirable Ability, in maintaing the Truth of the Gospell against Popery, Two Treasons were Plotted against Him, that of the Preists, Watson and Clarke, with others misled by them, and that Prodigious Project of the GVN∣POWDER ƲILLANY. Pope Clement the eight had formerly charged his Cronies here in England by a Bull, not to admit Him King, without a Toleration first obtained; But God be praised it lay not in his Holinesse disposing. 3. His exquisite Learning, and exact Iudgment in Divinity, was e∣minently apparent; in the Conference at Hampton Court; in his Publique Disputations in the Ʋniversities, and interpo∣siing his Censure in the weightiest Matters; And last of all, in his excellent Works set forth to the view of the World in one Volume. 4. Now as these admirable Parts of his, were a Curbe to the Schismaticall humours at Home, so his Advice and Aide, availed especially in composing differences abroad amongst the Reformed Churches. To this end He sent certain Select and Worthy Divines to the Synod of Dort, and his Let∣ters
to others; whereby the world might witnesse, how truly he stuck to his Motto REX PACIFICVS. He caused the Bible to be Translated into English by Select Devines, and set forth more exactly then formerly it had been done. 5. And so this blessed Peacemaker, when He had Peaceably Raigned Twenty two Yeares and upward, in Peace departed in his Bed, leaving his Peaceable Raigne and Virtues to his SONNE. 2. CHARLES the first, whom God of his Infinite mercy preserve to Raigne long over us, &c. 2. MEmorable things in King Jame's time serioussy to be commendad to Posterity▪ are 1. The Tran∣slation of the Holy Scripture into English, more accurately then it had beene formerly performed. 2. The Conference at Hampton Court for the examining and setling Church Discipline against nibbling Sectaries. 3. His sending Divines to the Councell of Dort, and interposing for upholding Truth and Ʋirtue against Innovators abroad. 4. His quel∣ling the Popes utmost forces drawne up by the Iesuits, in point of Supremacy, so that since that defeat, we have little heard of it. 5. The setting forth of his Works concerning matters of Divinity and State, and sending them to be Libra∣ried in both his Ʋniversities, the like cannot be shewed of any Prince whatsoever. 5. His enlarging the Priviledges of the Ʋniversities, by granting them Burges in Parliament, and Augmenting the Professors places in Divinity, Law, and Physick, with ample and magnificent Additions. 6. His mi∣raculous discovery of the Popish Powderploet. And thereupon the contriving of the Oath of Allegiance, to discover true∣hearted Romanists from Traytors, and setting a day apart for solemnizing the remembrance of so admirable a Delive∣rance.
7. Lastly in his time brake out that desolating Ger∣mane Warre, which he endeavoured to prevent, but God hath reserved to himselfe wholy to extinguish, for which and the like pacifications all true Christians are bound to PRAY. INQVIRIES. 3. Whether. 1. Parsons, Doleman against King Jame's Ti∣tle to the Crowne of England, were not as ridiculous, as perfidious? 2. Learning ever more flourished in these Kingdomes, then in King Jame's and Queene Elizabeth's dayes? 3. The like Library can be shewen, to that Erected by the Famous Sr Thomas Bodley, in the Ʋniversity of OXFORD, throughout the World? 4 The Beneficence of Sr Henry Savill for Mathematique Professors, or Mr William Cambden Clarentius for History, or Sr Iohn Sedley, and Dr White for Philosophy, and of other for other Faculties, have not exceeded the Liberality of most for∣mer times? 5. The Building in these times for private or publique Ʋses, have not equalized or out∣vied the Magnificence of former Ages? 6. Discoveries, Plantations, and Trades a∣broad, were ever more frequent or better Thrived? 7. Any Nation have proved more ungratfull for such Multiplied Blessings then this of Ours, for which especially, we now justly Suffer?
Concerning History of Professions, As also, Naturall, Various, and Vaine Narrations. 1. FRom the Histories of Successions in States or Families, there will be an easy descent to the Histories of Professions, Designing the Famous men in all kind of Faculties. 2. Wherein a briefe may be taken of the Lives and Workes of 1. PHILOLOGISTS. 2. HISTORIANS. 3. MATHEMATICIANS. 4. PHILOSOPHERS. 5. PHYSICIANS. 6. LAWYERS. 7. DIVINES. 3. These make up the Seven courses of the Encyclopae∣dia, so much aimed at by roaving Witts, which catch at all, and take nothing, in regard they fixe not upon one certain Study, and make not the rest subservient unto it. 4. PHILOLOGY takes up in its walke. 1. Grammer. 2. Rhetorique. 3. Petry. 4. Logicke. 5. Anagnosticke, or the
method of reading Authors profitably. 6. Critiques, See Polanus de legendi Authoribus cum fructu. Alsted Ency∣clop. Vossius de Hi∣storicis. corre∣ctive, and directive. 7. Didactiques, or the Art of teaching others with facility, which we have learned by great indu∣stry. 5. In HISTORY, the Lives of the Ancient and Mo∣derne Writers, may be looked after in that particular espe∣cially we desire to be informed of, which is observed by di∣verse of our Chroniclers, more fully by Mr Isaacson, and Sir Richard Baker. 6. For MATHEMATIQUES, the Lives of 1. Arithme∣ticians. 2. Geometricians. 3. Perspectivists. 4. Astronomers. 5. Geographers. 6. Architectonists, or Builders. 7. And M∣sitians, will yeeld matter to worke upon. And so 7. In PHILOSOPHY (as 'tis termed) those that have written 1. Metaphysicks. 2. Pneumatology or the doctrine of Spirits. 3. Physicks. 4. Ethicks. 5. Oeconomiques. 6. Poli∣tiques. 7. Thaumaturgicks, in working strange conclusions, are almost innumerable, and therefore require the more painefull search. After which among 8. The Physitians, See Zacutu Lucitan. He that gathereth the Histories of the 1. Latines. 2. Greekes. 3. Arabians, and Iewes. 4. Paracelsi∣ans. 5. Galeno-chymicks. 6. Prophylacticks, and 7. Empe∣ricks, shall find more to doe perchance then he expected. As also in the throng of 9. LAWYERS that have written concerning 1. Lawgi∣vers and Lawes in generall. 2. Then distinctly, of the Law of Nature. 3. Nations. 4. Of the Lawes of the Hebrews. Melchior A∣damus. 5. Of Civill. 6. Canon. And our 7. Municipall Lawes, great judgement will be required, upon representation of so ma∣ny in History, to pitch upon the best to follow. 10. Lastly DIYINITY requires a larger scope: for the History of 1. Naturall. 2. Chatecheticall. 3. Exegeticall in Commentators. 4. Polemicall, in all sorts of Controversies: 5. Syneideticall for cases of Conscience. 6. Propheticall con∣cerning Preaching. And 7. Guberneticall, Divinity for set∣ling of Church Government. either of which, are distinctly handled by Authors of great Learning, and Piety, that wor∣thily
deserve to be Registred by them who intend to receive directions from them. neither are the 1. Glossators. 2. Postil∣lators, 3. Sententiaries, 4. Summists, 5. Cabalists, 6. Dictio∣narists, . Heb. 5.14. Ier. 15.19. 7. Or Conciliators wholly to be rejected, especial∣ly of those, who have exercised senses, to separate the preti∣ous from the vile, and (as one said) to gather Gold out of Enniu's drosse. Amongst all which the Historie of the 1. Pelagians, 2. Donatists, 3. Anabaptists, 4. Waldenses, 5. Bannians, 6. That of the Tridentine Councell, And 7. Thhose of diverse Subjects set forth by Hospinian in sea∣ven volumes, are worthy of especiall perusall. 1. See the Cata∣logue of Sir Francis Ba∣con L. Veru∣lam, and Vi∣count of S. Albons, pro∣posing no lesse then 130 particulars in this kind. Gerards and Perkinsous Herballs &c. Gesner, Al∣drovandus, Topsell, &c. Laurentius, Spegelius, Grooke, &c. THe Fift sort of History (which by Plinie in tearmed NATURALL, describeth 1. The Heavens with the fixed Starres and Planets, the Eclipses, New starres, or any other changes that have hapned in them. 2. The Elements, Fire, Aire, Water, Earth, with the strange alterations and contingencies in them. 3. The Meters, with their fearfull Stormes, Apparitions, and Prodigies, recorded in all Ages. 4. The Inanimate treasures in this inferior Globe, made up of Earth and Water, as Pretious stones, Mettalls, Mineralls, &c. 5. The Ʋegetant or Growing Creatures, as Hearbs, Shrubbs, Trees. 6. The Sensible, that have motion annexed, as Beasts, Fowles, Fishes, 7. And last of all, the rare structure of Mans Body, peculiarly called Anotomy. All which are comprised in the Hexameron or sixt daies Worke, under the Titles of Heaven and Earth, and Sea, and all that is therein. For contemplation of which (that should mount our soules to the Admiration and Celebration of the Omnipotent Crea∣tor, and preserver of them) one Day is set a side of seaven, to be imployed especially in the study of this Grand History. 2. In a VARIOUS HISTORY no other Method is to be expected, but the noting of the time and place as things come to hand: In this kind may be taken, Aristotles wonderfull re∣lations: Aelians various History: Valerius Maximus Memo∣rialls: Hackluits Navigations: Mr Purchases Pilgrims: Wol∣fius Mmorialls: Pancerollahs Nova reperta, and vetera a∣missa,
John Latius of the West Indies, &c. Gallobelgicus Newes, and all the rest of the Mercuries and Journals that dayly multiply in the same straine, last of all 3. ROMANCE'S or the Bastard sort of Histories, may be noted not for any great uses in them, See S. Augu∣tine confess. l. 1. c 23. ossivine Ic∣suit Biblioth. select l. 16. §. 4. c. 3. but for manifold abu∣ses by them, 1. In wasting pretious time which might be better imployed, 2. In stuffing the Fancy and Memory with ridiculous Chimerah's, and wandering Imaginations, to the excluding or stifling of more serious and profitable meditati∣ons, 3. For transporting and deluding the affections, with languishing Love, impossible attempts and victories, stupen∣dious inchantments, wherewith the weake Reader is often so taken, that he makes himselfe (as it were) a Party in the businesse, and rejoyceth or is sorry, as matters are brought to succede according to his Fancy, or otherwise. 4. Such Brats of Invention, and Spawne of Idle houres, are well most found to be, either. 1. Rude, or 2. Endlesse, 3. or Depraved, 4. or Superstitious, or else, 5. Morall, 6. Politicall, or 7. Satyricall. 5. Rude, those may be reckoned, which neither favour of Ingenuity, Language, or Invention, as that of Huon of Burde∣aux, Valentine and Orson, Arthur of Little Britaine, Fortu∣natus, seuen wise Masters, foure sonnes of Amn, Mervin Ge∣rilion of England, Bellianis of Greece, and others not worth the naming. 6. Endlesse may be accounted Amades de Gaule, Pal∣merin, and Primalion of Greece, the Mirrour of Knighthood, with the like, which though they may have some taking in∣citements to Noblenesse and Valour, yet continuing bound∣lesse, by Conjuring up new Spirits, they lead the Reader like an Ignis Fatuus into an endlesse maze, & leave him at length in a Quagmire. 7. To the Tattle of depraved Romances belong such Pee∣ces as we have of King Arthur, Camden. Mills. Heylin in his Geog. and his Knights of the Round Table, Guy of Warwick Bevis of Southampton, to which may be added Father Turpins Rolando or Orlando, Sr William Wallis of Scotland and the like. Who although they were
truely Famous in their times, and deserved an Homer or Vir∣gill to set them forth, yet falling into the hands of Illiterate, and sorded Monkes, their Stories are so depraved, that the Persons are made ridiculous. And 8. Metaphrastes Lippoman. Melchior. Ca∣nus. What should we call the Legends of Abdias Babilo∣nius, James de Voragine, and our Iohn Capgrave; to omitt in∣finite others, but superstitious Romances, of whose impuden∣cy, and doltish forgery, their owne men complaine, yet Do∣minus opus habet. Popery must have such props to uphold its policy, and hoodwinke the vulgar, and therefore the like Wares are at this day set forth to sale by Ribadineira, The∣naft, Messengham Yangas, and our Miracle-mongers in En∣glish, where the stuffe is the same, though the dresse be nea∣ter, the cuts more artificiall, and a new glosse set upon it. In a different way from these, 9. The wandering Knights, Spencers Fairy Queene, Sir Philip Sydnies Arcadia with other peices of the like straine may passe with singular Commendations for morall Roman∣ces, being nothing else but Poeticall Ethicks, that with apt contrivance, and winning Language, informe Morality. In which sense Heliodorus Aethiopicall History, and Achilles Statiu's his Clitophon and Licippe, were had in esteeme a∣mong diverse of the Ancients, And Horace tels us that Ho∣mer in his Iliads and Odysses, under those stories of Achil∣les and Ʋlisses. —Quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non, Plenius, & melius Chrysippo & Crantore dicit. Informes us better for our compleat behaviour, then Chry∣sippus or Crantor, or the exquisite Athenian Philosophers. 10. To Romances that poynt at Policy. Xenophons Cyro∣paedia, Sir Thomas Moores Ʋtopia, Lord Verulams Atlantis, Barkley's Argenis, and Euphormio. The Vocall Forrest, Ray∣nard the Fox, diverse passages in Chaucer, and many other in the same kind may be referred. The vanity especially of the foure first kinds is wittily scourged by the
11. Satyricall Romances of Don Quicshot, Lazarillo de Tormes, Gusman, Pantagruell, Don Diego's visit of the Inha∣bitants of the Moone, and the like. 12. Concerning all which it were to be wished, that 1. The Ruder, Endlesse, Depraved, and Superstitious were utterly abolished, or restrained at least from Youth of both kinds, for preventing of Fantasticall Impressions. 2. That the multiplying of new Follies (as that wild Romance of Roman∣ces) Pol Alexander as pernitious as the former, were strictly forbidden, and 3. That the Morall, Politicall, and Satyricall, might be permitted only to those that can read them with Iudgment, and make use of them with discretion. 2. TO this pile of Histories are reducible. 1. All Cata∣logues, as those of Gesner, Molanus, Draudius, those of Libraries and Marts continually increased. 2. All Jour∣nalls, Navigations, and Discoveries. 3. All Jesuiticall and other relations of strange things done in China or the like, which to continue the method (all along observed) may be shut up with these
INQVIRIES. 3. Whether. 1. Vpon a resolution to Study any Faculty, it would not doe well, to have an Historicall Catalogue of the Professors that have bin Eminent in it? 2. Sir Iohn Mandevills Travels, with the strange adventures in them, or Binjamin Tudelitanus Iewish Iournals of multitudes of his Countrymen found abroad, deserves the greater credit? 3. Hartmanus Schedels, Men-monsters inha∣biting diverse Parts of the World, or Ola∣us magnus Witches and Giants in the Nor∣therne Regions, be the hansomer creatures? 4. Giraldus Cambrensis relation of the black Rook under the North-Pole, or Ferdinan∣do's de la Quir, of the Civill Inhabitants neere to the South-Pole, be the truer History? 5. Prince Meredith of Wales discovered not the West Indies, long before Colum∣bus was borne? 6. The Irish St Brendons Travels to the Land of Beheast in the English Legend, or Ow∣ens Travels through St Patricks Purgato∣ry, described by Messengham amongst his Irish Saints, be the likelier Narration? 7. An Index, or rather Ignis Expurgatorius, be not more profitable, and proper for such delusions, then for castrating, and castigating such Authors as relate di∣sliked Truths? LAVS SOLI DEO.
