P4023 E394_1 99862116 114265
IX QVERIES Upon the Printed Charge of the Army against the XI. MEMBERS And the Papers thereto annexed: Submitted to the Publike consideration of the PARLIAMENT, ARMY, And all Lovers of Justice, Truth, Par∣liaments, and their Native COUNTRY. JER. 9. 4, 5. Take ye heed every one of his Neighbour, and trust ye not in any Brother; for each Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neigh∣bour will walk with slanders. And they will deceive every man his Neighbour, and will not speak the Truth; they have taught their tongues to speak Lyes; and weary themselves to commit Iniquity. LUKE 3. 14. And the Souldiers demanded of John, saying; And what shall we do? And he said unto them; Do violence to no man (or, put no man in fear, much less a whole Parliament, City, Kingdome) neither ACCƲSE ANY MAN FALSLY; and be content with your wages. London, Printed in the Year, 1647.
Nine QUERIES upon the Printed CHARGE of the Army against the MEMBERS, and the Papers thereto annexed: Submitted to the publick Consideration of the ARMY, and all Lovers of Justice, Truth, Parlia∣ments and their native Country. 1. BY what Law, Commission or Authority, the Ge∣neral, Officers and Soldiers of the Army can or∣der, not only their Letters and Declarations (of dangerous consequence), but their very Charge a∣gainst the Members of the Commons House, to be printed and published, without the Privity or Order of the House? And whether this be not an encroachment of a transcendent Ar∣bitrary power (which themselves condemn in others) and an high Breach of the Houses Priviledges; whereof the House and whole Kingdom (whom they represent) ought to be deeply sensible, and have more just cause to complain against the Ar∣my, then they against the accused Members? 2. Whether this Charge delivered into the House against these eminent Members, in the name of the whole Army (the greatest part whereof do neither know the persons impeached, much less their guiltiness of the crimes whereof they accuse them; without the names of any particular persons thereto subscribed undertaking to make good this charge at their utmost peril, or else to suffer and make them and the House full repara∣tion
for their false Impeachment, be warrantable or receivable by any Law of God, or of the Land, or former Presidents; and of a more arbitrary, dangerous and unjust constitution, and direful consequence, then any these new Pretenders to publick Justice, and Declaimers against Arbitrary power, complain of in their Charge or Remonstrances? and directly contrary to the See Rastal Accusation. Statutes of 25. E. 3. c. 4. 27. E. 3. c. 18. 38. E. 3. c. 9. 17. R. 2. c. 6. 15. H. 6. c. 4. And whether this Charge, de∣livered in by an whole mutinous Army, in their name alone, be not expresly made voyd and null by the Statute of 31. H. 6. c. 1. concerning Jack Cade and his Rebellious popular Army; which Enacts; That all Inditements (or Charges) and all things depending thereof, had and made, under the Power and Tyranny of Cade and his Army; during their Rebellion and Insurrection, ƲNDER COLOƲR OF JƲSTICE for Reformation of the Laws (who gather the people together in great number by false subtil imagined language) shal be voyd, ad∣nulled, repealed and holden for none: And that ALL IN∣DITEMENTS (or Charges) IN TIME COMING IN LIKE CASE, UNDER POVVER OF TYRANNY, RE∣BLLION AND STIRRING HAD, SHAL BE OF NO RECORD NOR EFFECT, BUT VOYD IN LAVV. And so not to be received by the Parliament, till the Army be disban∣ded; whose Proceedings, Remonstrances, and Pretences now, are very like that of Cades, and his party then; and may warn the Parliament and London to stand upon their guard; and not to let in the Army now, without resistance, as they did then, up∣on Speed. Chron. P. 849, 850. Grafion p. 610. &c. wor∣thy the rea∣ding. faire promises, and a prohibition of murder, rape or rob∣bery (which allured the hearts of the common people): Where∣upon being let in, they apprehended and beheaded the Lord Say, Treasurer of England, James Cromer his son in law and others, and rifled or fined divers of the Aldermen and other Citizens, and threatned the rest; who at last repenting of their folly, when it was almost to late, for the preservation of their lives and goods, raised and drew in forces; expulsed Cade, with his ungra∣cious company; and by that means dissipated his tumultuous Army: A story worthy both the Parliaments, Cities and King∣doms present consideration. 3. Whether a general Charge in ambiguous Terms against
XI. eminent Members at once (most of which have not only suffered, but done gallant service in the field for the Parlia∣ments Priviledges and Peoples Liberties) in general, ambigu∣ous and uncertain terms, without descending to particulars of fact, persons, time, place, or other circumstance, to which by Law they are bound to answer, and cannot possibly make defence; and their not determining or specifying which of them are guilty of all the Charge, which only of one or more (themselves confessing that some of them are only guilty of one Head, in the same paper) be not a most illegal, injurious, arbitrary Accusation and Proceeding, contrary to all Rules of Justice and Equity; and a greater invading, infringing, and endeavoring to overturn the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this Kingdom (and of Parliaments too) in arbitrary, violent and oppressive ways, then any chargeable against all or any of the XI. Members in the first Article? which they may now justly recharge against the Army, by way of recrimination, whose Proceedings give the Lye to their Pretences, as theSee Master Rheymes his Narration. King himself hath done to some of their Declarations, touching his willingness to remove from Holdenby; and this very Charge doth too: which makes no mention of any Plot or Conspiracy by these Members to re∣move the King from Holdenby, &c. Or of Joyce his pretences why his person was seized by the Army: which hereby appears to be a meer figment and unjust pretext, to colour that Treaso∣nable Action; and make wise men suspect, their other fair pro∣posals to the Parliament for Peace and publick Justice (contra∣dicted by subsequent Proceedings) are meer Fictions too, to ef∣fect some worse designes without opposition. 4, With what colour or shadow of Religion, Iustice or Con∣science can an Army, professing and stiling themselves Saints, grow so unchristianly impatient, outragious, and unlike their Sa∣viour, as upon a pretence of some fals informations, misrepresen∣tations & scandalous suggestions made against them to the House, concerning a Petition, & engaging the House by surprise to pass a Vote against them, since recalled; in stead of passing by, forget∣ting and putting up such an injury (after competent satisfaction) to fal into such distempers, as to be disobliged and discouraged from any further ingagement in the Parliaments service or Ire∣lands preservation, (as they unchristianly and ungratefully pro∣fess in their 2, 3, & 4. Articles of Charge) and in stead
thereof to march up against the Parliament, seize the King; im∣peach Members; demand all arrears before disbanding, endan∣ger the Parliament, Kingdom; scandalize Religion, rejoyce Malignants, sad the hearts of all good men; and forfeit their own honor and reputation, though better payd, rewarded, and dealt with by the Parliament, and less injured then any other Armies, Officers, Soldiers, imployed by them, who never manife∣sted such high contemptuous carriages against the Houses though never so deboyst or irreligious: Is this Conscience? this Religi∣on? this your piety, and humility, after all your experiences of Gods presence? Is God with you, or before your eyes in such impatience or miscarriages? Or is M. Peters with you to mind you of what he oft protested in the Pulpit in your names, Your rea∣diness to lay down your Necks, Lives, and to live under Rocks and Caves in America, rather then not to disband at the least intimation of the Parliament, or to do any act impeaching their priviledges or proceedings? And was he then, or wil ye presume now to make him a Lyar, to blast your own and his reputation with God & men? Consider this in cold blood when you are upon your beds, and desist with remorse and shame from such unchristian ways and tumults, which wil render you more odious and execrable then the Gunpowder-Traytors, and set all mens hearts, hands, tongues against you. 5. Whether the Army by such general and uncertain Charges as these might not impeach the whole House it self, as wel as these XI. Members? Whether their demand, that the House should forthwith suspend them, without the least shadow of proof upon such an illegal charge to which no certain answer can be made, be not an equalling, justifying and exceeding the Kings and his armed parties demands against the five Members only upon more particular Articles then these; which seem at first a meer plot to take away their Votes for the present (& after that the Votes of others both in Houses reserved for a future list) that their Independent party only may sway & Vote what they please in both; and their Officers in the Army that are Members▪ be both parties, accusers, witnesses and judges against these now accu∣sed, contrary to all Law and Justice, and so they wil be sure to suffer what ever their innocency be? or wil not the Army be more
incensed with their just acquittal, which wil much redound to dishonor and heighten their discontents? And wil not this be arbi∣trary and tyrannical Iustice in the superlative degree? 6. Whether the Armies silence in not propounding their pub∣lick demands for justice in their own and peoples behalf, or not impeaching any of the accused members, til they were voted to disband, or go for Ireland; and their charge against them in their 2. 3. and 4. Articles, to break the Army, and pul it in peices, by authority of Parliament (when there was no fur∣ther use of its service here,) amounting in plain English to no more; but that they endeavoured and caused the Houses to vote the Armies disbanding, and send some of them into Ire∣land, under Major General Skippons and Massyes commands, (which no rational man can deem a crime, the war being ended and the people eaten out with Taxes and freequartring of the Army, and Ireland in distress) be nor a clear demonstration to all the world; that this charge against the members, and quar∣rel against the Houses votes, is but a meer pretence to keep the Army from disbanding; til they have by its overawing power brought other designs to pass both in the Parliament, City, kingdom? one whereof is clearly intimated in their charge and o∣ther Papers; namely to suspend & throw out of the House all old, and new elected members (how duly soever chosen or returned) who are not of their party, or likely to oppose their Projects, to fil up their places with New members of their own godly party; and to dispose of all places of Power and Judicature, to mem∣bers of their own: (and then to effect what changes they please in Church and state) as their exceptions against these eminent Members, their desire actually to suspend them the House, upon this general, uncertain, frivolous Charge, be∣fore any the least proof or Conviction; their exception to the Elections in Cornwal, (though all very faire) Wales, and elsewhere; and their indirect forcible practises to bring in Mem∣bers and Officers of their own in all places, when this Army or their party had any power (of which there are many sad com∣plaints) with their exceptions to the Parliaments Judges, unan∣swerably demonstrate to the eye of all the world, besides other particulars, which may shortly see the light, with many late
printed Pamphlets (especially Englands Birthright,) and their late Propositions concerning the Change of Parliament Members &c. and Coronet Joyce his printed Relation, which accuseth two other Members not mentioned to this list, (re∣served with many others of both Houses for a second) which evi∣dence the same. A design so dangerous and destructive, as may a∣waken the Parliament, & all honest men in time to endeavour its prevention, which without Gods mercy and their utmost activi∣ty, is else unavoydably like to fall upon us in a moment. 7. Whether the Armies refusal to disband or march more remote from London according to the Houses Votes; their surprising and removing the Kings Person, and Commissioners of both Houses against their wils and Protestations, upon false pretences without and against the Parliaments privity; their re∣moving the Artillery from Oxford (throwing up their hats and crying out, hay for London &c. as they marched thence;) and advancing so near to London, as to seaze upon most passages near it, search many passengers repairing to it, and threatning to march up even to the Parliaments doors, (to which they make neerer approaches every day) in a tumultuous, violent and warlike manner, to impeach, affright and assault the Members of Parliament, in or near the Houses, and by violence outrage and threats, to awe and incense the Parliament to re∣tract their Votes, suspend their Members, grant them all their unreasonable demands before any expressions of their obedience to them, and to impose what conditions they please upon them; with their Letters and Remonstrances to the City and people to engage them against, and disingage them from the Parlia∣ment to side with them, (in some whereof they court the very Malignants once in arms, complaining of the breach of Articles and craving reparation for their wrongs &c.) their seising of Col. Birch a member, and removing his and other forces sent for Ire∣lands relief, &c. ought not more justly to be charged against some Officers and Souldiers in the Army (who have most appeared in these mutinous ways) by the accused Members, their Officers, Commanders, both Houses and the Kingdom, (being stil persisted in) then the Officers and Armies may or can charge the accused Members for inviting, encouraging, abetting, or Countenan∣cing, divers Reformadoes and other Officers and Souldiers tu∣multuously,
and violently to gather together at Westminster to affright and assault the Members &c. As they do in their fift Article: which tumult was soon quieted; and being an Injury only to the House not Army, since the tumults in the Ar∣my, and no ways relating to the Army (who stil act the same themselves or worse which they thus heavily Charge on o∣thers) is a very forraign Charge with reference to the Members; and no other (by an over-ruling divine hand of providence) but a Charge and Impeachment against themselves by way of just recrimination; for which they ought to yeeld up their Officers and principal Mutiners to the Parliaments and Kingdoms Iustice, by the same Law (and far more equity) as they demand the Members In which regard that divine text (aptly chara∣cterizing these Accusers) may justly be applyed to them, Rom. 2. 17. &c. Behold thou makest thy boast of God; and art con∣fident, that thou thy self art a guide to the blnd a light to them which are in darkness, &c. Thou therefore that teachest (im∣peachest) another, teachest (impeachest) thou not thy self? &c. Thou that makest thy boast of the Law; through breaking the Law (yea Priviledges of Parliament in an higher degree then those thou accusest) dishonorest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed omong the Gentiles (among Papists, Malig∣nants, Prelatical, prophane and carnal persons) through you, by these your Antiparliamentary and Mutinous Proceedings, which have opened their months wide against you, and made them to upbraid the Parliament and your dearest Friends with this taun∣ting language, to the very piercing of their souls: Lo these are Your Saints, Your Religious godly Party, and Army; Your Saviours and Protectors, who now rise up in arms against you to ruin the Parliament & Kingdom, and trample on you at their pleasure? Did ever the prophanest Officers or Soldiers under deceased Essex, Waller, Massey, Manchester, the Scots or any o∣ther Comander requite & use you thus, though more provoked by some Independents of the Hous with il language, casheering, jealousies, false aspersions and want of pay, then these devout and mortified Saints? &c. O consider now at last of these true s! and say with the Poet, Pudet haec opprobria Nobis & dici potuisse, & non potmisse refelli.
8. With what coulor of Conscience, Modesty or Justice can the Army demand of the Parliament, not only one moneths pay (though many of them have been lately listed since the wars without the Houses privity, and therefore can in Justice claim no wages from them) when they stand in such high terms of con∣tempt and breach of their Priviledges and Authority; but to receive equal pay with those who obey their commands in dis∣banding and lifting themselves for Ireland? or that they shal have no more Areares payd them, til the rest be payd their A∣reares? and that pending the debates and transactions betwixt the Parliament and the Army, the Parliament would not suf∣fer any new forces to be raysed within this Kingdom, for their own defence? when as themselves without any order have re∣cruted the Army, made new praparation for war, and block up London more and more dayly; as if they intended a new war against the Parliament and City; and yet prohibit them to de∣fend themselves, that so they may at their pleasure, (if they grant them not all their unreasonable (if not endless demands, now every day multiplyed) surprise and pillage them at their pleasures, as theSleidan. Com l. 10. Chytraeus. Ge∣nebrand. Anabaptists in Germany did the City and Magistrates of Munster under a pretence of peace, contrary to their faith, to the Prince, City and Country, as soon as by their fair promises, they had perswaded them to retire home and lay down their armes; whose extraordinary sufferings for such over-credulus folly should teach the Parliament and City wise∣dom, now to stand upon their guard, and not to expose them¦selves to the mercy of a boisterous discontented Army whose demands grow higher every day; and tend only to engage all others to their party, and disingage them from the Parliament; whose priviledges they pretend to support, whiles they thus infringe them, formerly refusing to have the solemn league and Covenant imposed on them: which would have enga∣ged them, (as wel as others) with sincerity, reality and CONSTANCY, to endeavour with their estates and lives to preserve the rights and priviledges of the Parliament; and not suffer themselves directly or indirectly by whatsoever com∣bination, perswasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this Covenant, &c. which how wel some members of the
House and Army with oth who have  it now per∣form, let their own con, the would, and that high God to whom they have lifted up their , when they solemnly swore this Covenant, judge; and either excite them to a stre∣nuous and real performance of it, or require the woful breach of it at their perjured hands. 9. whether any motions of the Army to the Parliament ought to be heard or granted by the rules of justice, whilst they continue in contempt against it? Whether an Army who profess this to be their principle, that no mans judgment or conscience ought to be forced, by any external violence, but left free; can by any coulor of justice or conscience, endeavour to enforce by menaces or violence, the judgment, and con∣science of the whole Parliament, whose Rights, Priviledges and freedom they are bound in duty, and raised to ? Whether every member of the Houses, who though sordid fear of any humane power, or complincy with the Army, shal desert or betray the freedom, Rights and Priviledges of the Parliament, which himself hath solemnly sworn, Cove∣nanted, and ingaged to maintain, to the uttermost, with his life and estate &c. Ought not in justice to be thrust out of the House by his fellow Members with contempt and scorn, as unworthy ever to set there more, and a most treacherous per∣jured person, betraying his trust to Parliament and King∣dom? And whether all members ought not in their greatest exi∣gencies, rather chearfully to lay down their lives, then the Houses freedom, Rights and Priviledges (wherewith the whole King∣dom hath intrusted them, for the present Common good, and ought to be intirely presented and transmitted to posterity for the kingdoms future safety) infringed? And to take up Davids magnanimous resolution in their present straits: Psa. 3. 6. & 27. 1, 3. I wil not be afraid of ten thousands of people who have set themselves against me round about. Though an host should encamp against me; my heart shal not fear: though war should rise up against me, in this wil I be confident. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shal I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shal I be afraid? That member who cannot raise up his spirit in the worst of
magnanimous resolution in their present straits: Psa. 3. 6, & 27. 1, 3. I wil not be afraid of ten thousands of people who have set themselves against me round about. Though an host should encamp against me; my heart shal not fear: though war should rise up against me, in this wil I be confident. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shal I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shal I be afraid? That member who cannot raise up his spirit in the worst of times to such an heroick Christian Resolution, preferring his own personal safety, life or wealth before his Countries, is scarce worthy ever to enter more within the Houses doors; and that true-bred Englishman unworthy to live, who wil not die at he Houses feet in maintaining of their just Freedom, Rights, and Liberties, though in some things they may have formerly failed in their duties; since if Parliaments be once trampled upon and made contemptible by any (especially by that Army which was raised by them, and hath hitherto fought for their defence, or any freinds to Parliaments) the Kingdom and people (who have subsisted by Parliaments) wil be eternally lost and ruined. Which ingaged both City & Kingdom to adhere so fast to the Parliament against the King and his Cavaliers heretofore, whom they can∣not in Justice or honor now desert, without infinite ingratitude, scandal and disgrace, nor any officers or souldiers in the Army o∣penly oppose or enforce without this guilt of Treason and Re∣bellion; the breach of Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3. and condemnation of all their former faithful services for its defence. FINIS.
