R971 E129_22 R19106 99860575 112698
THE REMONSTRANCE AND PROTESTATION, Of the GENTRY, AND COMMONALTY OF THE COUNTIES OF Buckingham, Bedford, Hartford, and Cambridge. Shewing the reasons why they take up Armes, and their Resoluti∣ons thereupon. Tendered by them at their meeting with the Parliaments Forces, to the view of the world, Decemb. 7. LONDON. Printed by L. N. and R. C. for F. Eaglesfield, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the Marigold, in Pauls Church-yard. December 9. 1642.
The Remonstrance and Protestation of the Gentry & Commonalty of the Counties of Buckingham, Bedford, Hartford, and Cam∣bridge, shewing the reasons why they take up Armes, and their re∣solutions thereupon. IT is notoriously knowne to all men how great the violence, oppressions, plun∣derings, and insolencies are that those wicked men, Forrei∣ners, Malignants, Papists and Trai∣tors, who call themselves the Kings Army, have and doe daily exercise
upon the people of this Kingdome, borne to the liberty and fruition of their owne lawes; and that Commis∣sions for raising of more Forces are daily issued to known Papists, whereby not only our Religion is in imminent danger to be altered to Popery, and all our iust priviledges overthrowne, but our wives ravished, our children murdered, and our estates absolutely ruined; and His Majesty, who ought in his duty to God and his Country to be the Father of his people, is now made the protector of the blasphemous and impious Crew, and of all their bloody and horrid actions, witnesse that cruell slaughter of his owne sub∣jects at Braintford, even during a Treaty. We therefore (out of a true sense of
the Kingdoms and our own dangers) have associated our selves, and taken up Armes, with full resolution to pro∣secute the enemies of our Religion and Country, and do hereby solemnly pro∣test and covenant before God, and one with another, that we will willing∣ly and resolutely sacrifice our lives in this religious and just quarrell, and that wee will never lay downe these Armes, till this which is called the Kings Army be dissolved, and till the principall advisers, actors and fo∣menters in these our heavie calami∣ties, such as are that blasphemous and plundering Prince Rupert be bani∣shed, and the Earle of Bristol, the Lord Digby, Master Piercie, Wilmot, Oneale, and Master Endymion Porter the illegall
Keeper of the great Seale, and Cul∣peper, and those notorious Papists commanding in that Army bee brought or left to a due course of ju∣stice, unlesse we shall be commanded by both Houses of Parliament to the contrary, which wee hope wee never shall. And whereas there are divers of the Scottish Nation, who beare of∣fice in that Army, against whom wee ought to expect justice; wee (out of that brotherly affection wee beare to that Nation) doe leave them to their just summons and censure, con∣ceiving that Kingdome bound there∣unto by that neere tye of Religion and Friendship with us, and by the Trea∣ty lately so happily concluded betwixt us.
Lastly, we doe invite all our fellow Subjects of this Kingdome, as having an equall share with us in the happi∣nesse or calamities thereof, to take Armes upon the same necessary grounds, and to enter with us into the same Covenant, conjuring them by their zeale to the glory of God, their affection to the honour and prosperitie of their native Country, by their loves to their wives, children, estates and liberties, to continue with us upon our just defence, till these calamities bee redressed, whereby we may all expect the blessing of God upon us and our posterity. FINIS.
