S135 E468_12 99864741 162333
NEW ARTICLES FOR PEACE, Delivered by the Kings Majesty to the Commissioners on Satturday last at the Treating-House in Newport, And the Commissioners Answer. With his Majesties Demands touching His comming to LONDON with Honour, Freedom and Safety, And the passing of an Act of Oblivion to all his Majesties Loyall Subjects in all parts of his Realms and Dominions. Whereunto is annexed the Declaration and Reso∣solution of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Communality of the towa of Newcastle in relation to the Kings Majesty and the proceedings of the Treaty. Examined by the Original Copies, and Published by authority for Ge∣nerall satisfaction of all his Majesties loyall Subjects. crude woodcut of king in castle THE TREATING HOUSE: THE ILE OF WAIT Octob. 18. LONDON, Printed for I. Iones, 1648.
Severall Articles of Agreement for peace, presented by the Kings Majesty, to the Commissioners upon Satturday last, and the Commissioners Answer thereunto. Honoured SIR, I Have sent you here inclosed the full and exact proceedings Betweene His Majesty and the Commissioners, being in order as foloweth viz. The King condescended to the Proposition for publike debts on Thursday last, and on Friday granted the Proposition sor recalling all Ho∣nours conferred on any person by him since 1642 as the Parliament desired. Yesterday he told the Parliaments Commissioners, that the dayes allotted for the Treaty drew towards an end, and therefore he thought it time to present his pa∣per of desires, which were. 1 That he might come to London with honour, free∣dom; and safety. 2 That he might have recompence for the yeares his Revenue hath been kept from him.
3 That there may be an Act of Oblivion, That so the Souldierp under the Command of the Lord Fait fax may not be justified in what they have (but as illegall) their astions requiring an Act of Oblivion for Conquering him and his Cavaliers. Some of the Commissioners were willing to receive these Propsitions from him, but the major part must needs dissent, because contraty to their Instructi∣ons, having other Propositions to present unto him, es∣pecially that concerning Delinquents, for whom an act of Oblivion could not be granted. The Parl. Commi∣ssioners therefore presented their paper about Delin∣quents to the King to which the King desired time till Monday to giue Answer; The three remaining. Concerning the Court of Wads. 2 Offices and places of Trust. And 3 London his Majesty will soon yeild to. Thus having sent you the chief heads of the Kings last Papers I remain, From Newport 16. of Octob. 1648. Your affectionate Friend R. S. Humbly sheweth, That we cannot but deeply resent, what hath been presented to you by the well-afected in the Southerne parts, as concerning this present Treaty: That if after all the Epexriences of the mischfes which hath happened to us from former Teaties, of all Gods wonderfull ownings of you, both formerly, and of late in midst of so many oppositions from all hands, and of all his gracious appearings, against the King & his party you go on to Treat before full and exemplaty Justice be done upon the great Incendiaries of the Kingdome, the fomenters of, and actors in the first and second War, and the late bringing in of the Scos, we can expect no∣thing
as the Issue thereof but the sudden dissolution of the Parl: and Army, the destruction of all the wel ffct∣ed the involvig of this Nation in more bloud then ever. May it therefore please you in this Iuncture of time to herken to your Petitioners, who have constan¦ly adhered to you, and before you conclude this treaty, to execute Impartiall and speedy justice (though upon the greatest offenders) wherein you cannot want assist∣ance from God, & from man, to strengthen you in or endeavours to settle this Kingdom in Peace and righte∣cusnes. The Scots Proceedings examined and onswered. There is a natuarll discord between tyranny and free∣dom, slavish popery and Christian liberty; Acubrese renders the reason thus, because Christ the King of Kings by his righteousnes, hath made his people free, therefore the Kings of the earth, by tyrany injustice or popish in∣terest, cannot make themselves. And do the Lawes of God, man & nature justifie the people in opposing, fighting against and imprisoning of Kinds who act contrary to their Oaths, and the trust im∣posed on them by the people? And do not the same laws as much justify them in opposiug the power of Par. when they betray their trust, in pleading the interest, & justifying the cause of such tytannous Pinces joyn with them to levy war against the poor people, whose trustees they are only, and by whose Votes & election they sit in parliament, to preserve, and nof to destroy them, to con∣demn, and not justify their enemies, who have brunke with the bloud of Saints, & have confest themselvs guil∣ty of the bloud of three hundred thousand souls, that have perished by war in the 3 Kingdoms
The Parl. gave great encouragement by their letter the 3 of Aug. last, to the Ministers of the Generall As∣sembly of the Kingdom of Scot. to oppose the Parl. of Scot. then siting a Edenb. who had made breach of their solemn league & Covenant and their many agree∣ments and Acts of Parl. passed in both kingdoms, in po∣sessing of Barw. & Carlile, and for your further satis∣faction take the words of the letter, And being assured these impious, and unwarantable actions (of the Parl. of Scot.) cannot be done with the approbation, and consent of the well affected people of the kingdom of Scot. and that they understood there were very few amongst these who were in this engage∣ment against them, that first engaged with them in the Covenant and cause, but such as have been professed e∣nemies unto the kingdom of Scotland (which were the Parl.) however they were content to pretend thereunto, that they may the better deceive the people of this king¦dom. That they were unwilling to impute such evills to the nation ingenerall but to those present that own, and ap∣pear in them, whom they were confident, God in his due time would judge whatsoever they may suffer in the mean while. Therefore they now send unto them that it may ap∣pear they will not by any provocation, be induced to withdraw themselvs from those in Scotland, who retain their former principles, & still own their cause, (though against the Pal. of Scot.) wherein they have with bles∣sing from heaven, bin so long solemnly United. vide P. 4. and 5. of that letter.
Upon this score and that encouragment, the minor dart of the people of Scot. raise an Army to oppose the Parl. of that Nation, and the Army raised by the su∣pream authority thereof, and put themselves under the Command of the E. of Argile, to fight with kill and slay them. And did not L. G. Crmwel, in pursuance of the Com∣mands of the Parl. of Eng. joyn with those handfull of people in Scot. to oppose the Parl. of Scot. and the ar∣my raised by that authoriy, and did not the efft ther of produce an absolute dissolution of that Parliament & Committee of Estates? By this time, the Reader may expect the authors In∣ference upon the whole, which he once thought to have wav'd, and therefore resolved only to tosse the Ball a∣mongst the multitude, that so each judgment might cach at it, but because my fellow Commoners may not be ignorant herein, I have set down a few undeniable con∣clusions upon the whole. 1. We se that the K. may erre, notwithstanding the maxim, in the law (Lex non potest errari) by laying ille∣gall taxes Monopolies, and Impositions upon the peo∣ple Introducing Popery, and Levying warre against them &c. 2. That in committing such errors, he falsifies the trust which the people of the land repose in him, & then his Commands being unlawfull, and destructive, it is lawfull for the people to disobey them, and on the con∣trary, it is no lesse then sinne, and the forsiuire of all the Liberties, Freedomes and Birth-rights of the people to give obedience thereunto. 3. That it is lawfull and of necessity for the people to
Leavy war against their King, and all that adhere to him for defence of themselvs, and preservation of their birth rights and freedoms, having once broken the rust repo∣sed in him, and put them out of his protection by levy∣ing war against them, ruling them as a tyrant at his plea∣sure oe not as a Kiug by the law of the Nation. 4. That it is lawfull for the peoples Trustees in Parl. to declare to the nation the miscarriages of such a tyranous prince, and to state the matters of fact therein, by way of charge against m. 5. That it is a breach of trust in the peoples Trustees and a great dishonor for the Eglish Nation to charge the King with such high crimes, and neither to prove them against him, nor to clear him of them. 6. It is a great breach of the trust, and the Nationall League and Covenant, not to bring delinquents to condigne punishment there being no person exempt by the same. From the second part of the assertion plainly appears. That a Parl. by breach of Covtnant, Treaties, and Acts of Parl. voting & acting against the Covenant, and siding with, and pleading the interest of the enemies thereof, and of that Nation, for which they are Trustees may erre. 2. That by breach thereof they have forfeited their Trusts to the people, for whom they seve, and by whom they were elected. 3. That it is lawfull for the people of that Nation to Levy war against them for the maintenance of ther Lives and Freedoms, which that Parl. endeavours to give to their enemies and make them and their posterity slaves for ever to them. FINIS
