s1816 99899466 153569
design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose A PROCLAMATION, For Adjourning the Parliament from the Sixteenth of September, 1691, to the Fourteenth of January, 1692. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To,  Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greet∣ing: Forasmuch as We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Did by Our proclamation of the date the fourth day of May last, Adjourn the current Parliament of this Our Antient Kingdom of Scotland, from the Fifteenth day of the said Month, to the sixteenth day of September next ensuing; And now in regard of our Absence out of Britain, and that the present State of Our Affairs, doth not require the Meeting of Our Parliament, so soon as the said Sixteenth day of September, to which it was Adjourned; And that the Members of Parliament may not be put to the Trouble and Charge of Meeting upon the said day: We therefore with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby adjourn Our said current Parliament, until the four∣teenth day of January, in the Year one thousand six hundred and ninety two; Hereby requiring all the Members of Our Parliament, to attend that Day at Edinburgh, in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the se∣veral Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our Antient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by o∣pen Proclamation, make Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said sixteenth day of September next ensuing, to the said fourteenth day of January thereafter, in the said year One thousand six hundred and ninety two; and Ordains these presents to be Printed and Publi∣shed, as ye will answer to Us thereupon: The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally, as said is, Our full Power by these presents, de∣livering them be you duly Execute and Indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty seventh day of August, and of Our Reign the Third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, & in Supplementum Signeti, DA. MONCRIEF, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno DOM. 1691.
