S4023 99895976 153597
A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE Deputy-Governour, AND THE Company of MERCHANTS Trading to the Levant-Seas, AT St Bartholemew-Exchange, May 1. 1689. By EDWARD SMYTH, A. M. Fellow of Trinity-Colledge near Dublin; And Preacher to the Factory at SMYRNA. May 28. 1689. IMPRIMATUR, Hen. Wharton, R.R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. à Sacris Domest. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the corner of Pope's-Head-Ally, over-against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1689.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE GEORGE EARL of BERKELY, GOVERNOUR, AND THE Company of Turky Merchants. Right Honourable, &c. THE following Discourse has no other pre∣tence to so Honourable a Dedication, but that your Command is the only reason it appears now in Print. Nor could any thing justifie the Publication of such a Trifle, but that I resolved to be wanting in no instance of an entire Obe∣dience; and that I would refuse no opportu∣nity of acknowledging to the World my Obligati∣ons, for the Honour of being elected into the Ser∣vice of so worthy a Society. to whose Industry and Ingenuity, the English Nation in a great measure owes those extraordinary Advancements
of Wealth and Reputation abroad, this last Century has made. Whose most eminent Vertues, exemplary Charity, and signal Services to your Country, have rais'd you up to be the Ornament of your own, as the Envy of all neighbouring Nations. I could here offer a very just Apology for the un∣correctness of this Paper, that it was conceived and brought forth in haste, that the Concern I had for my afflicted Brethren of Ireland, had so far the Ascendant of my thoughts, as not to give way to that serenity and calmness of mind, which such a performance did require. But since I address my self to Persons of your Candour, I am not to doubt of all favourable allowances. I hope here∣after to glean something in your own Harvest, to which with less blushing I may prefix your Names. And as 'tis now my Duty, so shall it ever be my Study to promote your Prosperity and Happiness, for obtaining which Blessings, shall be daily offer'd the Prayers of, Right Honourable, and Gentlemen, Your ever obliged, and most obedient Servant, EDWARD SMYTH.
A SERMON Preached before the Levant-Company. ISAIAH XXVI. latter part of Ver. ix. —For when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness. SO wonderful are the Methods by which the Divine Wisdom has contrived our Salvation; that the bare conceiving them is no less above our Capacity, than that Infinite Reward surpasses all our Pretensions to Merit. There is not one At∣tribute in the Divinity, which bears not a part in the miraculous Work of our Redem∣ption;
the Unspeakable Wisdom invented it, and the Almighty Power accomplished it; his Mercy has provided for our Infirmities, and his Justice has insured our Salvation, that our hope is not in vain in the Lord. And if ever Religion provided effectually for the salvation and happiness of Mankind, this is peculiar to Christianity. For if we have the least spark of Ingenuity or Good Nature in our Temper, the Evangelical Pro∣mises suited to the most prevailing Passions of our Soul, the Cords of Love, the Wings of Mercy, the Charms of Heaven, its De∣lights drawn to the Life, the Voice of the Charmer, who surely Charms most wisely; the Pleasure of Religion, and the Sweets of Vertue must make us Proselytes to Heaven, and force us to be Happy. But then, should we despise even all these powerful Inducements to Happiness, thô we are deaf to the Voice of the Charmer; the Long-suffering of God does not yet fail us. There are his terrible Judgments set out with all the Aggravations of Horrour and Amaze∣ment, to reclaim us; to awaken us from that sleep, which is surely unto Death, the Ter∣rours of the Lord, the Flaming Sword, an
Angry God armed with Power, and Venge∣ance must strike us into a religious reverence. When the Lion roareth who will not hear? Hos. 11.10. When the Almighty appears clad with his Robes of Vengeance, as the Prophet speaketh, and surrounded with the Terrour of his Judgments making Inquisi∣tion for Sin, how shall the amazed sinner ap∣pear? with what confusion of face must he loath his polluted Soul! If the still Voice could not, the Eloquence of God speaking in his Judgments must deeply affect him with the profoundest Dread and Reverence. Even the stupid Romans could then think of God, when Calamities were their severe Remem∣brancers: For when thy Judgments (O Lord) are in the Land, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness. Where, by Righteousness, as is obvious in Scripture-Phrase, we are to understand Ver∣tue and Religion in general: so that the sence of the words will be this, That the Di∣vine Judgments are most instructive of Duty and Religion; that this is their Drift, and that we ought to learn this Lesson from them. From which words I will take occasion to discourse to the following Particulars.
First, I will endeavour to Assign some Proper Marks, and Characters which may enable us to discern the Divine Judgments; as when dispensed by a Special Providence, and proceeding from the more immediate Hand of God. Secondly, I will enquire into the more Notorious Ends, to which the Di∣vine Wisdom has directed his Judg∣ments. Thirdly and Lastly, I will enquire, what is the Proper Behaviour of a Christian under the Judgments of God, and what Influence they ought to have on our Lives. First then, I will endeavour to Assign some Proper Marks and Characters, which may enable us to discern the Divine Judgments; as when dispensed by a Special Providence, and proceeding from the Hand of God. To ascribe every Petty Chance, that hap∣pens, to a Special Providence, may signifie Lightness; to father on God the Mischiefs arising from our Sin and Folly, may savour
of Prophaneness. By the Judgments of God therefore, I desire you will understand such extraordinary Occurrences, as carry in them some peculiar Marks of the Divine Anger; and are signal Instances of his Vindictive Ju∣stice. And here sometimes the Hand of God is made bare, rais'd up, and stretch'd out in the Performance of most surprizing Works: Thus the Earth swallow'd up Corah with his Ac∣complices; and a Fire from Heaven snatched away the prophane hands, which offer'd In∣cense; and many such signal Examples whol∣ly unaccountable from the Power or Efficacy of Natural Causes as to all their circumstan∣ces, do the Holy Scriptures afford us. But then again, that same Almighty Hand is wrapped up sometimes in a complication with Inferiour Causes when 'tis not lifted up so high, or so far extended in miraculous Works. And here the special Vindictive Providence may not be impressed on Events, in Characters so big and clear, as to be legi∣ble to the most prejudiced eye. The Tracts thereof may be sometimes too fine and subtil, to be descried by a dimn sight, with a tran∣sient glance, or upon a gross view it may
not affect the unreasonable sceptick, or such as are wholly indisposed to receive it. But shall not we adore his Almighty Power, and acknowledge his Judgments in inferiour Events, in a Plague or Famine unless a fla∣ming Comet sets the World on fire, and a∣maze us into a fit of Religion? must we wantonly prescribe to the Divine Wisdom? deny him the Ministry of Second Causes, and refuse all Nourishment, unless we are fed with palpable Miracles? For thô Special Pro∣vidence in the severer dispensation of Judg∣ments is sometimes clouded by the concur∣rence of Natural Agents, yet if we attend and consider them, we shall easily discover some Marks of Vengeance imprinted on them. And surely 'tis the practice of good men, to contemplate and study Providence; the Prophet ranketh him only among the wise, who understandeth the Judgments of the Lord: 'tis a Matter for pious meditation, warranted by the practice of good men, to implore the manifestation of God's Power and Justice. If we therefore approach with this preparation of mind, ready to attend the least intimations of his displeasure, and to ap∣ply them to the amendment of our Lives, to
learn Righteousness from them, the follow∣ing Marks and Characters may be of good use to us, to discern and reverence the Judg∣ments of God: And these Characters I shall draw either from the Nature, or some Cir∣cumstance of such Events. The first Character then of a Special Pro∣vidence, and the visible Hand of God, is the wonderful strangeness of Events; as when great Effects are accomplish'd, either by no apparent means, or by means wholly dis∣proportionate, and often repugnant to the effect. Thus have we seen the mightiest Forces discomfited; the firmest Structures demolish∣ed; Designs enforced, with all the advanta∣ges of Strength and Cunning confounded and how unaccountable the way? no visible means appear'd, Nature seeming to have ma∣naged the War, and the Elements to have fought against them: Panick Fears, or sudden Deaths, having seized the principal In∣struments. How ready is any part of the Creation to minister to the Divine Venge∣ance? the Stars in their courses fought a∣gainst Sisera, Judges 5.20. the Winds and Skys became Auxiliaries to Theodosius; the Lord thundred upon the Philistines; and
how should they stand against the Host of Heaven? the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of the Philistines 185000 Men. Thus the mighty Power of Antiochus was to be broken without hands. How often has Impotency, and the weak things of the Lord, triumphed over Might? Thus a Stripling, furnished only with the Breast-plate of Faith and a Pebble, shall fell down a monstrous Gyant. thô armed with an Helmet of Brass, a huge Target, Sword and Spear. How often have we seen the deep∣est Intrigue and Policy, whose Foundation was laid in Hell, either blasted of it self, or bafled by simplicity? the most perspicacious Counsellours blinded and infatuated? the subtil, treacherous, designing Politician not only supplanted in his wicked enterprize, but dismally chastised by it, and falling into his own snare? Surely then such Occurrences do more than insinuate the Divine Vengeance concerned to countermine and confound such devices. 'Tis he certainly that maketh the Diviners mad, turneth wise Men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish, Isaiah 44.25. When Plots contrived in darkness are by unaccountable accidents disclosed and
brought to light, a Bird of the Air telling the Matter, or the Stones crying out Treason, as the Prophet speaketh: and shall not this ar∣gue the Finger of God to be engaged? Be∣hold that very design, which contrived the de∣struction of David, encreaseth his Honour; the Stratagems to supplant Daniel, make him grow in the King's favour. Must not this then be the special Operation of that God whose peculiar it is to do wondrous things, to be terrible in his Judgments? A second Character of a Special Provi∣dence, is the seasonableness and suddenness of Events. When pernicious Enterprizes, which aim at nothing less than the subversion of a King∣dom are grown to maturity, and are just rea∣dy for execution, how often, beyond the Power of Humane Understanding, have we seen them either surprisingly discovered, or seasonably prevented? And shall not this be a pregnant evidence, that an ever-vigilant Eye, and the all-powerful Hand are enga∣ged? Thus was Pharaoh with his Host over∣whelmed, when he had just overtaken the Children of Israel. Thus when Sennacherib with an infinite force had invested Jerusalem,
when certain death seem'd to threaten the holy City, God put a Hook into his Nose, and turn'd him back into his own Land, 2 King. 9.28. When the prophane Caligula was just ready to discharge his bloody rage on the Jews, for their refusing to worship the presumptuous Wretch; a domestick Sword presently gave vent to his revengeful Breath. When Julian, by his Authority and Policy, had projected the overthrow of our Religion, his Plot is bafled, and he falls in∣gloriously by an unknown Hand. Certainly then we must here acknowledge the secret efficacy of God, who pours down such un∣expected Vengeance on the counsels of the wicked. This is the method of his peculiar Providence, he could as easily prevent the very beginning of wicked Designs; but he permits the Contrivers to mount to the top of Confidence and Expectation; and then  surprizingly, unexpectedly he issues forth a Judgment, and confounds the Ela∣borate Undertaking. Be astonish'd therefore and tremble all ye workers of Iniquity, and let the Lord be magnified in his Judg∣ments.
Thirdly, Another Character of the Divine Judgments, and of a special Providence in dispensing them, is from their kind and coun∣tenance, which often bear a significant resem∣blance to those sins, for which they are infli∣cted. Punishments (saith a Father) are the forced Off-spring of wilful Faults, and there∣fore carry the Complexions and Features of their Parents: And thus the sin becomes of∣ten legible in the Judgment, which is design'd to punish it, which provoked and wrested it from Heaven. How often have we seen am∣bitious Confidence mourning in Disgrace; Avarice cursed with Decay of Estate; the blasphemous Throat torn out; the bloody Oppressor weltring in his own Blood, who but just now glutted in his Brothers; an Ac∣cident which almost continually doth happen; so signal is the Revenge of Murder: the Treacherous betray'd; Places which prided themselves in Wealth and Greatness, Power and Magnificence, now buried in Ruins, and more desolate than the Wilderness. Surely such Occurrences do point out, and judicate the Finger of God, they speak plainly that they are his doings: by such Actions he most evidently declares himself the Judge and Go∣vernour
of Mankind; Who directeth the In∣struments of Divine Vengeance against Babylon, to take Vengeance upon her as she hath done, Jer. 51.49. Notwithstanding therefore any obscurity or intricacy that may sometimes appear in the course of Providence; as whether such E∣vents proceed from the more immediate hand of God: if we consider wisely, with pious Attention, and a devout Heart; if with Minds pure from vain Prejudices, and cor∣rupt Affections; the Marks, and Characters now assign'd, will be of good Use and Di∣rection to us. We are too apt indeed to put off the Re∣ligious Reflections, and with the Philistin loves to question whether this came by the Hand of God or not. But we may answer our selves by a cheaper Experiment than they did: If the Characters now assign'd could not direct us; our own Sins will tell us plain∣ly, we have deserved the Divine Judgments: and surely it were more useful for a Christi∣an to make this Application, then wantonly to dispute about the Nature of them. There are some who either through idle∣ness of humour, or an affectation to be repu∣ted
wise, have undertaken to arraign the Judgments of God; and to level them ordi∣nary Events, and Natural Effects. With such presumption some have attempted to account for that General Deluge, which swept away all Mankind, except Eight Persons, from Natural Causes. But surely these Men are more acted with a fondness of their new Con∣ceipts, than by any zeal for Truth. For whoever but seriously reflects on all the Cir∣cumstances of that Event, must confess it be∣yond the power of Nature or Chance; and will condemn that Philosophy as vain, which would advance such Extravagancies. Having thus vindicated the Divine Judg∣ments, and shewn them to you by their pro∣per Marks and Characters. I proceed, 2dly, To enquire into the more notorious Ends and Purposes to which the Divine Wis∣dom has directed them. The first end then of the Divine Judgments is to proclaim God's Omnipotence, and assert the just Power of God over the World. And can we imagine a more pregnant E∣vidence of a resistless and uncontroulable Power; for behold the Effects of his Indig∣nation; the Pillars of Heaven astonished,
and the Earth trembling with an awful Reve∣rence: Nature agast, and the Hinges of the World shaking. And now surely we are not of so Gygantick stoutness, to stand void of Sense and Fear, when Nature herself is in such Pangs and Convulsions. Are not these such Examples as carry Conviction with them? As ravish a Religious Fear and Reverence from us. Can any thing be more instructive of the deepest Humility, and most profound Adoration. When we shall see Fate submit to the Command of God, and Necessity be∣come as variable as Chance: For lo he ma∣keth the Earth to reel to and fro, he pulleth down and buildeth up as it pleaseth him. The proudest Monarchs, whom he some∣times stileth Gods, how suddenly does he al∣lay them with Dust, least their Spirits be∣come too much exalted. How easily does he bafle their most Elaborate Contrivances. Did not every thing we wear about us pro∣claim our weakness; the Divine Judgments could not fail to be a sufficient Amulet against Pride. Are we able to defend our selves a∣gainst the least Calamity; when the weakest Creature comes armed with a Commissi∣on from Heaven, the very Dust of the
Earth, or but a Troop of inconsiderable Lo∣custs can overcome an Egypt; though her Wealth and Power were as boundless, as her Sins were provoking. Can any Man then reflect on the many Judgments of God, on those astonishing Ef∣fects of his Indignation; and not presently tremble and stand amazed. With what an awful Regard, with what profound Humili∣ty must this fill our Minds. Are not these such effectual Arguments of Almighty Power, as must raise us in the greatest Security; thô all the Dalliances of Vice had enchanted us, thô the Lethargy of Sin had locked up our Reason and Consideration, yet such signal Examples must affect us: the most harden∣ed Hearts, and even sear'd Consciences can∣not escape some impression: For shall not we attend, when even Heaven and Earth are summon'd to hear. Lord, how can we sufficiently Adore thy Power, when we meditate on thy terrible Judgments: for behold any part of the Cre∣ation, shall at thy Command become a most powerful Executioner of Vengeance. Let but the Sea open her proud Waves, (and 'tis thy word that restrains them) and she
may shut in the World, as she once did the Host of Pharaoh. Surely then our Minds must be stupified; we are asleep even unto Death, if such instances cannot awaken us, For by his Judgments he sheweth himself, and lifteth himself up, Psal. 94.1, 2. The Lord is known by the Judgments he executeth, Psal. 9.16. If the several parts of the Creation dis∣play the several Attributes of God; if we may read his Power in the Firmament, and the Heavens declare it. In his Judgments certainly 'tis writ in the fairest and largest Print; and here we must read it, thô all o∣ther Arguments would pass without obser∣vation. If the wiser Heathens by Thought and Study, by Speculation and Philosophy were able from considering the Works of Nature to conclude an All-powerful Being: How strongly do his wonderful Judgments enforce this Truth, and exact from us the humblest Acknowledgments of Almighty Power. A second end of the Divine Judgments is, to vindicate his Justice in the Administration of the World: for were Men suffered with Impunity to proceed in a course of Impiety;
to enjoy the fruits of Rapine, Injustice, and other Vices, which then might appear gainful; were they suffer'd to defie Heaven with their crying sins; this might seem to arraign the Justice of God; it might give the Atheists and Epicureans Objection some colour, that in the Administration of the World there was no regard had to the good and vertuous. But tho' this, if true, might be abundantly answer'd; that the Methods of Wisdom, and Rules of Justice, by which the Almighty acts, do infinitely surpass our Capacities; either from the feebleness of our Reason, or finiteness of our Nature; and because the Divine Administration has no compleat deter∣mination here, but has regard to a future Judgment. Yet to the everlasting terrour of wickedness, most signal Vengeance often o∣vertakes the wretched sinner here; and Na∣tional sins seldome escape some signal Judg∣ment, or General Calamity. The Examples from Scripture, and such as I have already assign'd; yea, the Occurrences of our own Age will sufficiently confirm this. 3dly, Another end of the Divine Judg∣ments is, to work in us an entire hatred and detestation of sin.
'Tis the greatest force and provication to the Deity, when he pours down his wrath up∣on us, he does not willingly grieve us, or causlesly afflict us: 'Tis our sins which makes us smart under that Hand, which otherwise would showr down nothing but Blessings up∣on us. What ought our demeanour then to be, when Judgments are upon us, and we groan under the pressure of Afflictions? Why to reflect on our sins, to blush and be ashamed; to be humbled for our Iniquities, which were the cause of that and all our sufferings; assuring our selves, that whatever evil Instru∣ments are in the Judgments and Afflictions which befal us, our sins have set them all in motion. And when the Avenger is at the Gate, O how lashing the folly, how confounding must the guilt of sin appear? When Israel the Favourite of Heaven is led into Captivity for her crying Idolatry, how pungent must her Resentments be? How afflicting the remem∣brance of her Spiritual Fornications. Ex∣tremely blind and stupid therefore must we be, or monstrously profane, if such Experi∣ments of Divine Power and Vengeance do not awe us, and frighten us from sin. 'Tis
our incurable folly that Afflictions are the on∣ly effectual Physick of our Souls; that the bitter is the only Soveraign Potion. How must the wretched sinner appear confounded; when he sees Almighty God, whom but even now he openly affronted, whose Religion he ridicul'd, whose Honour he abused, coming on the Wings of Power, and making inquisition for sin; when there is an Earthquake ready to swallow him up, or a Fire from Heaven to consume him. O mi∣serable Miscreant! Whither wilt thou fly from the All-seeing, or shelter thy self from his presence? Can Darkness screen thee, or the Night cover thee? Abominate then thy sins, loath thy polluted self; Cut off the In∣struments of thy Destruction, which have rendered thee so obnoxious. 4thly, Another end of the Divine Judg∣ments is to beget in us a thorough Contempt of the World and its fatal Dalliances: to en∣force the Divine Precept of setting our Hearts on things above. For do not the Divine Judgments teach us; either how fugitive and uncertain, or how un∣satisfying and empty all sublunary Beings are. How suddenly have we seen the adamantine
works of Art and Contrivance subverted. E∣ven the Foundations of the World trembling, when the God of Nature was angry. Mo∣numents the vain Essays to Eternity, rais'd to perpetuate the Memory of some remarkable Accident, or to carry the Name of some Great Person to late Posterity, how often have we seen them buried in those very Ru∣ines, which 'twas hoped they should rescue from Oblivion. The best established King∣doms have been overturned in a moment. Those places which prided themselves in their imaginary Security; and boasted of the mul∣titude of their Inhabitants, and whose Mer∣chants were fit to be Companions to Princes; how has a Fire from Heaven, or any other Creature able to do it, when commissioned from Heaven to destroy, swept them away? So that scarce their Names remain to reproach their Pride. Common Prudence does strongly press up∣on us this observation, when every day in∣forms us of the great emptiness and uncertain∣ty of all worldly enjoyments. And did not the wise Heathens of old, from this very To∣pick raise themselves to a brave and generous contempt of the World; what else was the
Moral of that Chance, by which they belie∣ved all things here below to be governed: but that all things are subject to the same fleeting and uncertain condition. And tho' no Instrument of Vengeance were sent to de∣stroy, no earthly thing is in itself durable; but shall return to its original corruption. And do not the Divine Judgments enforce this Duty from higher Considerations; when Destruction falls in like a mighty torrent. The rich Man but begins to enjoy, and be∣hold that very Night his Soul is required from him. And this surely must correct our Do∣tage, it must secure us from the Syren Enchantments of but momentary Evils. For as sin is the lasting evil which has infected our Nature, so Judgment and Vengeance will always hang over us to frighten us from the gilded Poyson, and wean us by frequent disappointments from any fondness we may have for earthly things. Thus have I laid before you the more no∣torious Ends of the Divine Judgments, which are intended either to proclame the Power, or vindicate the Justice of God; to work in us a thorough hatred of sin, and a generous contempt of all worldly things.
I proceed therefore in the third and last place, to enquire what is the proper behavi∣our of a Christian under the Judgments of God, and what influence they ought to have on our Lives. Almighty God takes no delight in hurling the World into Confusion, and turning Ci∣ties into Ruines, making whole Countries a a desolation. Our provocations must cry aloud when he executes the severity of his Judgments. 'Tis therefore for the punish∣ment of sin, and frightning us from it by such dreadful Examples, by all the Rhetorick of the most amazing Instances, and all the Eloquence of the acutest Pain. To learn our Duty therefore in this parti∣cular, we are to reflect on all the Ends of the Divine Judgments already assign'd. Are the Divine Judgments then evidently declarative of an Almighty Power? This surely must imprint on us the profoundest Humility and most awful Reverence, it must affect us with all sorts of Religious Fear: it must strike into our Hearts the most sincere dread of his ever glorious Majesty; it must inflame us with the greatest Acknowledgments, with the loudest Acclamations of the Infinite Pow∣er
of God, and his adorable Perfections; for shall not we fear, when the Heavens do shake and tremble. And in this Duty we have the devout Psalmist's Zeal so ardent, that it must excite ours, and we shall cry out with one mouth: Men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts, and I will declare thy greatness. They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power. We must celebrate the adorable Perfections displayed in such wonderful Events. Do not the Divine Judgments glorifie his Justice; and shall they not inspire us to magnifie this glorious Attri∣bute, when his Judgments represent to us his signal Triumphs over Sin; all the Strength and Beauty of the World being made Priso∣ners to the Grave, and Captives to Destru∣ction, which but just now bid him so proud a defiance. We who just now finned with as much Security and Confidence, as tho' we had blinded the Eyes, bugbear'd the Justice, or commands the Power of God; cannot, however, but applaud his Justice: when of a sudden like one highly provoked he draws forth the Sword of his destroying Angel, com∣mands the Wretch who looked so big into the Dust, and hurls him into Destruction.
Are not the Divine Judgments sent from Heaven to raise in us an hatred and aversion to sin; and to wean us from the World. And surely the least serious reflection on them cannot fail of this effect. When the Instru∣ments of Vengeance are upon us, when Death in the ghastly appearance of a Judg∣ment stares us in the face; must we not then melt into such Complaints as these: O that I had served God as faithfully, as I have done the World, he would not have forsa∣ken me, as that now is like to do. Had I laid up my Treasure in Heaven, it would not have been in the power of any outward accident now to deprive me of him. If these Flames of Vengeance are so insupporta∣ble, who shall be able to dwell with everla∣sting Burnings. Is it not the height of mad∣ness, to defie any longer, to provoke an an∣gry God, infinitely more dreadful than this can be. Farewel then all ye deceitful Vani∣ties; tho' I plac'd my Riches next my Heart, that could not clip their wings, or stop their flight. Thô I preserved my Beauty with all the Extravagance of Art; I must lose it this instant. Now I understand by dear Experi∣ence, thee and my self better (O bewitching
World) then to fix my Happiness any lon∣ger here. I will hereafter lay up my Trea∣sure in Heaven, I will be no longer cheated with imaginary good, but will make provisi∣on for the true and everlasting happiness. Let these then be our reflections, and we shall rise with greater Glory, our inward Beau∣ty will outshine whatever we could boast of outward splendor. We shall come out puri∣fied from the Fire of Afflictions; with our Souls possessed of the only valuable Riches of Grace and Vertue. Our proper demeanour then, and the use we are to make of the Divine Judgments, the most signal expressions of Almighty God's displeasure is, what the Prophet in my Text draws from them, To learn Righteousness, to be instructed in the Ways of Vertue, and in all the Duties of Religion. And is not this the Moral and Natural Consequence of the Divine Judgments; which represent Sin in its proper Colours, attended with horrour and amazement, dread and confusion of face. And when we see Vice thus sinking into Hell, how much must we be enamoured with the Comliness, the Divine Pleasure, the Heaven of Vertue,
which the wretched Sinner only admires to aggravate his misery. Can any thing more effectually recommend Humility, than the exemplary downfal of Pride; when a Fire∣brand from Heaven levels us with the Dust, and forces the vain Bubble to an humble ac∣knowledgment of his true Original, where the Worm is our Sister, and a much happier Creature. When we see Luxury and In∣temperance chastised by some signal Calami∣ty, by the Desolation of a Plague, by an Earthquake, by a Fire from Heaven: How effectually must this press upon our Conside∣ration the contrary and proper Vertues of Sobriety and Temperance. All that deceit∣ful pleasure and advantage with which sin has so long imposed on us, appears now in its Native Deformity, with its true Off-spring Vengeance and Judgment. With what zeal and ardency must we fly to the Breast-plate of Faith, when all our imaginary Security shall betray us, when neither Palaces nor Bulwarks can defend us; and the Earth finking under the load of our Iniquities cannot afford us footing. Shall not the Hypocrite then un∣fold his Soul, when he sees that all his pre∣tensions to Religion make him only the more
obnoxious to Vengeance, and that his Rags and Nakedness are now most apparent. Is there any thing then which makes us more effectually bow to the Precepts of Religion, then the Terrours of the Lord, then his won∣derful, his dreadful Judgments. Whence do we proceed better Proficients then from the School of Calamities. A storm will inspire Devotion even into that thought∣less Wretch, who in his Security and Debau∣chery reviled every thing that was serious; who scorned to damp his Mirth with the me∣lancholy thoughts of Religion, and the sad countenance of Sobriety. Who knew no such thing as the Pleasures of the Mind, and would not value whether he had any ratio∣nal Faculties, unless it were for the contri∣vance of Oaths, and making new Discove∣ries in the ways of wickedness; who was as great a Monster in Morality as ever there was in Nature. How suppliant a Convert has a storm made him, how has an Earth∣quake reformed him. When the Angel of Vengeance is at hand, ready to smite the Co∣vetous and Oppressor; how does this melt him into love and kindness, into charity and good works; is he not ready to cloath the
naked, whom he even now spoiled, and to relieve that poor man, whose Face he had now been grinding. Had most sins no other punishment then there necessary and natural consequents; were there no other scourge for Luxury and Intemperance, but decay of Estate, a Cra∣sed Body, and that they sow the Seeds of all Distempers, this would be Amulet against them to a considering Man. But when a flaming Sword, a Plague and Famine, and infinite other Instruments of a most terrible Vengeance do certainly attend them. O stupified Man! O monstrous Security! If this will not awaken you and force you to Repentance. When your Cities lie in Ru∣ines, mourning in Dust and Ashes, because you neglected this Duty; when your Coun∣try welters in Blood, and even the Stones cry out against you, to melt your more har∣dened Heart. You cannot behold such De∣solation without making this reflection; 'Tis our sins surely which have made us thus liable to the Divine Vengeance; had we any reason to expect his Protection, we might sit quiet thô the World be overturn∣ed; this was the Hedge about Job, which
till withdrawn, bafled all the Attempts of Satan: But alas, our sins have put a Bar to this Claim, we have forfeited God's Pro∣tection, and our reliance is now but presum∣ption. And can any thing more effectually press upon us Vertue and Religion than such Considerations. And truly few Men are so hardned, as not to be struck with an awful Reve∣rence, to be forced into some Fit of Re∣ligion; when they labour under some e∣minent Judgment: For Vengeance carries with it such a convincing force, that few are able to resist it: Even the Atheist cries to Heaven, when Death in the dreadful shape of a Judgment (to him surely most terrible) do seize him. Thunder forces Caligula to seek for shelter; even the hardned Pharaoh relents, when the Almighty issues forth his Instruments of Vengeance; when the Strength of Egypt is overpowred by a Locust; how does it extort from him the ungrateful con∣fession of his own weakness, and forces him to fly to the Intercession of Moses. But then, alas, we are all Pharaohs too in our shame∣ful Ingratitude; the Religious temper seldom out-lives our Deliverance; those convictions
and reflections usually wear off, as the Judg∣ment intermits. When the Scene is shifted, and the succeeding Light has dispelled the Cloud, we then unbend the Bow, let our se∣verer thoughts disband, and return to our former Security. But this surely, as 'tis the greatest Abuse of the Divine Mercy in our Deliverance, so must it pull down an heavier Judgment upon us. 'Tis our duty then, to treasure up the se∣rious memory of all our past Sufferings, and so to perpetuate the effects of them; that we may come out the purer from the Furnace, and not like the New Moon return with the same Spots, not to imbibe again those stains of sin, which have already rendred us so ob∣noxious to Divine Vengeance. And was it not for this reason, that the Christian Church in all Ages has thought fit to Consecrate cer∣tain Days of Humiliation, as sure and perpe∣tual Remembrancers of the Divine Judgments, and her frequent Deliverances; least by a shameful Ingratitude she should trample on and bury the Mercies of God in Oblivion. But methinks common Prudence should direct us to this Practice, to beware of that Rod under which we have smarted, and to forsake those
sins which have so often exposed us to Death and Destruction. Many therefore are the Duties to which our Deliverance from past Calamities, and the consideration of Judgments we have esca∣ped, do oblige us. First we must ever glorifie Almighty God with the Songs and Triumphs of our Delive∣rance, we must write our Deliverance not on Tables of Stone, but on the fleshly Tables of our Heart. The Righteous shall be glad in the Lord. When he sees his Glory so conspicu∣ously advanced, and his holy Perfections so illustriously shining through his Judgments; this signal conviction of Infidelity, this con∣fusion of Prophaneness how does it confirm his Faith, and cherish his Hope. The just shall rejoyce, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. How exceeding the Comfort? How triumphant is the Joy, when we receive so clear Pledges of God's Love and Favour to us, express'd in his most tender Care over us, in protecting us from most imminent Dangers, and contriving our deliverance from such ter∣rible Judgments; for were we not saved even as by Fire, and as Fire-brands pluckt out of the burning. Let us then ever magnifie (O
Lord) thy infinite Mercy's the only cause of our deliverance, for this was our Sanctuary and Refuge, it was not our own Skill and Counsel, not our Strength and Industry that saved us; but thou art our mighty Deliverer. A Second Duty incumbent on us, is often to meditate on past Judgments. We must not barely remember them, for this is no Vertue; but we must remember them with those very passions of mind, those ardent thoughts, affections, and resentments we had when we suffered under them, and they were so visible before us; what indignation, and resolution we then expressed against sin; what submissions were then wrought in us to his Al∣mighty pleasure, and with what mortificati∣on and self-denyal we resigned our selves. And this is remembring in Scripture phrase, by which we may secure to our selves all the advantages of past afflictions, without the sting and misery which attends them; by setting them in a clear light before us, and making them present to us by a lively remem∣brance, so that they may be a constant bug∣bear to us against Vice. Let not those ar∣dors of Devotion expire, those struglings of the Spirit cease, which burnt them so bright;
if our Petitions kept equal pace with our Pain, let them do so with the remembrance of it now. Our Meditations on past Judgments ought also to beget in us a well grounded hope, and strong confi∣dence. The Lord hath delivered me, therefore he will deliver; I have often experimented his Mercy, therefore I will now fly to it. If we have strengthe∣ned our Prayers in the day of our Calamity, by any extraordinary Vow, or Sacred Promises (according to the pious Examples of Holy Men) we are now care∣fully to perform them, and to release that strict Ob∣ligation we have put our Souls under. And there are many other Religious Duties of the same nature (for there are scarce any which it does not confirm and encrease) which the remembrance of past Judgments strongly recommend to our practise. Nothing can more effectually secure to us all the ad∣vantages and fruits of the Spirit. But not having time now to enlarge on them, I must refer them to your own application. Only let me beg your attention, whilst in a few words, I remind you of that late signal Judgment, and deplorable Calamity; in which this Honourable Audience was deeply wounded. The late Judgment which befel Smyrna, that complicated Calamity of an Earthquake most terrible in all its circumstances, suc∣ceeded by a Fire, (too pregnant an instance of the Di∣vine Vengeance) cannot, if barely related, but fill the most hardned Heart with pity and astonishment; but on you surely, whose misfortune it was to be too much concerned in it, who were so great Sufferers in the De∣solation it wrought, it ought, it must make, a more deep and lasting impression.
The Lord surely was in the Earthquake, and in the Whirlwind; the suddenness of the Destruction even exceeding thought, and all the dismal circumstances at∣tending this Accident are too strong an evidence, that the destroying Angel came from Heaven, and that the Almighty put on Vengeance to the overthrow of that miserable City. For behold the trembling Earth sinking to her Cen∣ter, with the stroaks of God's Anger legible in her face; behold a great and opulent City, famous in ancient and sacred Annals, and even then restored to her for∣mer Grandeur, surpassing in Trade, and equal in ma∣ny other advantages to any of her Sisters in the East, reduced to ruin in a moment. The same instant saw her a most flourishing City, and an heap of Rubbish. And that nothing of her Beauty or Greatness might be legible in her Fall; a consuming Fire devours her very Bowels, what escaped the Earthquake becomes a prey to the Fire. So heavy was the Hand of Heaven that it pursues her to the very Grave, buries her very Ruins, and razes her Foundation. O the consternation of her living, and confusion of her perishing Inhabi∣tants! O the sighs and tears, frights and amazements! O the deaths! (and many were deny'd even this mercy) O the half Deaths (Heads and Hearts miserably sur∣viving the other Members) of Men, Women, and Children lamenting, yet unable to help themselves and one another! The Mother just lived to see her Dau∣ghter die, and the same Ruin involved the whole Fa∣mily. Such, had I courage, and were I sufficiently in∣formed to proceed in the description, you may imagine the lamentable Condition of Smyrna was. And was this done upon the earth, and the Lord hath not done it.
How swift (O Lord) is destruction, when thou dost give it Commission. Even the dull Earth shall become a swift Executioner of Divine Vengeance. One Instant can, and did overturn the Toil, the Im∣provement of an Age. Such is the folly and guilt of our sins, that against a City so advantaged, so culti∣vated, so blessed, they can extort the heaviest Ven∣geance, even from that hand whence all her Blessings derived. It was from their fatal influence that she is now forced to succeed in the Fate and Ruine, as in the Wealth and Splendour of her Neighbours; that she is now become like unto Sodom and Gomor∣rah. Were that City able to speak out of its Ruins; how Eloquent would she be on that Subject of her Sufferings; what heavy Complaints would she make against those Sins which have been the certain and fa∣tal Instruments of her destruction. Let her Brea∣ches then, let her Ruins and Desolation speak; be∣hold the genuine Off-spring of Vice, the fruit of those things of which we ought to be ashamed. And sure∣ly we cannot look on her Ruins but we must repent, we cannot see her miseries without bewailing our own sins. And let us not here flatter our selves, or run into that dangerous mistake; that the Infidelity of the Jew and Mahometan, that the Idolatry and Super∣stition of Popery are the only provocations which brought down this heavy Judgment. Our sins, alas, are but too much the ingredients, and its wounds and scars yet bleeding afresh, are but too strong an intima∣tion that we are still in our sins.
To conclude all then: You have heard how Eloquent the Judgments of the Lord are to perswade Repentance, and inforce all the Duties of Religion; how they recommend Vertue from the strongest Topicks of worldly Interest and Pleasure, as the surest means to preserve both. How they represent to us most sensibly the destructive na∣ture of Sin, that all the Misery and Unhappiness which befals Mankind, flow certainly from this Fountain. This being then our case, common prudence, the ob∣vious consideration of our own advantage must direct us to that Duty which Christianity commands. Sin and Folly will be found but two Names for the same thing. Let us therefore apply our selves to the study of true Wisdom. Let us make the true advances in Grace and Vertue. And now the Judgments of the Lord are upon the Earth. Let us learn, let us practise Righteousness, for Godliness we see is the true Gain, it has the Blessings of this World, and that which is to come. To which place of everlasting Happiness, Almighty God of his infinite Mercy, bring us all. Amen. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 5. last line, after view a Full Stop. p. 11. l. 24. judicate r. indicate. p. 12. l. 17. loves r. Lords. p. 16. l. 14. would r. should. p. 23. l. 23. bug∣bear'd r. bribed. l. 22. commands r. commanded. p. 24. l. 13. Treasure r Treasures. l. 15. him. r. them. p. 29. l. 17. do r. does.
