T2626 669.f.22[1] 99870043 163583
A TRVE COPY of a MESSAGE SENT TO GENERAL MONCK FROM Severall Officers of the Army, October twenty nine, 1659. Dear Brethren and Fellow-Souldiers, WEE most heartily wish Grace and Truth to be multiplyed to you, through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; and also we desire the God and Father of all Grace, to and to your Faith, Vertue; and to Vertue Knowledge, and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness, Charity. Dear Brethren, We cannot but be deeply affected, and afflicted in our own spirits, to consider of your dis-satisfactions with us, up∣on mistaken grounds; You have known us these many years, to be your faithful Brethren, that durst do nothing that is sinful, and we may affirm with plainness, honesty, and simplicity of heart, we have done nothing in the late Revolution, bnt that which the provi∣dence of the most wise God prepared to our hands, and led us out to, without so much as one half hours time to design, or resolve, to take take that course we are necessitated unto: since which, most of such persons that were not clear in the presenr, and suddain acti∣on, have made their acknowledgment of their full satisfaction, and were mutually reconciled; and they are received and tendered by us affectionate Brethren. And for a more full Narrative of the providential grounds and gradual steps that led us to the Work, (yet with aking hearts) and as answer to your Queries, signed in your name by VVilliam Clark Secretary, bearing date the 22 instant, We refer you to a Book, entituled, The Armies Plea, and also, The Armies Declaration; relation thereto being had, we hope will give you satisfaction. Loving Brethren, What have we done, that you are offended? we are not conscious, that any thing is acted by us, upon the pub∣lick Theater; but that which we judge, is acceptable to God, and that we have done hath proceeded from uprightness of heart, and for the glory of God, the good of his Interest, Cause, and People in these Nations; nothing lesse then these worthy Ends could have caused us to adventure our All that is dear to us, for yours and their sakes, and after such a hazard, our brethren to look shie, upon us, yea such, with whom we have lived and conversed together, prayed, fought, and jeoparded our lives together, and witnesses toge∣ther of the glory of the most high God in the high places of the fields; yea, we that are of one society, of one Family and Houshold, (that none hitherto, through the grace of God, could dis-unite us) now to be at a distance with us, is the greatest wound to us, which is unexpressable. If it had been from our enemies, we could have born it. Oh! but they are the wounds of the house of our friends, and all this arising, without first dealing brotherly with us, and without so much as sending to know the providential grounds that led us to these undertakings, And likewise your and our unhappyness hath been, possibly by mis-informations received by those, who have corresponded with the principal occasioners of this breach here. However, We are censured by you, we shall, we hope, carry it Christianly and brotherly towards you, and exercise our selves in the doctrine of our Saviour. If any be overraken in a fault, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, knowing also we are subject to like temptations: and we ought to pitty and pray for one another, and forgive one another, even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you. We hope the fear of God will guide you, so that you may do nothing to grieve him, and his little flock, and reioyce the common enemy abroad, and at home, nor give them advantages to make a prey upon these Nations. What can you propound to your selves? if you are for good things, so are we; if for a Free State and Common-wealth, so are we; if against a Single person so are we; if for Reformation, so are we; if for godliness and the Nations to be exalted in Righteousness, so are we; Why do we differ in the form and way to it? Oh dear friends, if you should precipitately engage into a war, and should conquer your Brethren, would not the consequence be a conquest over your selves, and all the good people of the Land? And if they are gone, certainly (if you retain your old principles) you will not desire to live long after them. Precious Brethren, we oommend unto you that place outure, Joshua 1. 14, 15. We shall with onr bended knees implore the God of Heaven and King of Saints, to guide you and perf, as holy Noah said in another case, Gen. 9. 7. God shall perswade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem. Finally Brethren , be of good comfort, let us be of one mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you and us, W Your most affectionate Brethren and fellow-Souldiers, John Lambert John Disbrow James Berry Tho. Kelsey Hierom Sankey VVill. Stane Samuel Clark John Hewson Daniel Axtel Rich. Ashfield John Biscoe dward Salmon William Packer Allen ard Creed bert Hope Robert Swallow VVilliam Simmons VVilliam Gough Daniel Kingswell John Duckenfield Dear friend we hope to hear in your Answer to this, that all our dear Friends now in Bonds, are at Liberty, and that the Lord hath satisfied your hearts, to Acquiesce in his present dispensations, so as we may not expose each other to further inconve∣niency.
