t2829C 42476389 151411
THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Session-House IN THE OLD-BAYLY Which began on Thursday the 1st. of this instant June and ended on Fryday the 2d. following. Giving an account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz, For Murder Fellonics, and Burglaries, &c. with a particular Relation of their Names, and the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condem∣ned to die, Burn'd in the Hand, Transported and to be whipt. RObert Saetor, was brought upon his Tryal for Robing one Mr. Cralling, living in Drury Lane, of 49. pieces of Gold. A Gold Watch, several Rings, Half-Shirts, and a Silvir Hilted Sword, which he Conveied out of his Lodging having been formerly a servant to the Earle of Argloss, with whom likewise, the Gentleman lived, the Prisoner upon his Tryal denyed the takeing the goods, and moneys although he had some time before confessed the Robery not on∣ly before the Justice but likewise in Prison, but being urged by the Court to tell the truth he could no longer deny the Fact, but Declared that he was Inticed to consent to the Robery and was Aiding and abet∣ting therein. But denyed he either broak open the dore or carried away the Goods and Mony, but ovvned that he had a share, as also the Gold Watch, whereupon he was found Guilty of the Fellony. Thomas Hermitage, was Tryed for Robing the Lady Williams, by entering the House at a back Window and taking thence Feather-Beds
Carpits Curtains, and the like, which being discovered in the place, where they had conveied them, he thought it not convenient to put the Court to farther trouble, but confessed he was Guilty. Catharine Cook, was Tryed for stealing several Silver Spoons, from Sr. Robert Jason in Fetter Lane, she being a servant in the House, and hav∣ing them under her Charge, but she pleaded that she never had them but did verily believe that a woman came in to ask for a person took them. But the Witnesses alledged that she promised to pay her share towards them but she producing several Witnesses to support her cre∣dit, who gave Testimony that she had behaved her self very well in many places, in which she had been a servant: and that she had had great Charges of Plate, and mony In her custody; the Jury, by reason no positive Evidence were produced accquited her. Liddia Letsworth, was Tryed upon an Indictment Exhibitted against her, for that she living with one Mr. Thead in St. Gileses Criplegate, and having several Oppertunitys to go into a Closet where several parcels of mony lay in a Cabinet, the which she took out it a mounting in Gold and Silver to the Value of 12 Pounds which she carried to one of her acquaintance and desired her, to keep it for her. But whether through fear or an honest Principle is uncertain she hearing of the Robery res∣tored the mony, at first the Prisoner denied it, but being but a young thief, could not long out-face whereupon she was found Guilty of the Fellony. Ann Bland, was Tryed for Picking a Market-Womans Pocket of 5 or 6 Shillings as she was siting in Hony-Lane-Market, taking it out of her Pocket-apron and went off with it, but the woman well noteing her, in a short time found her out, but she stifly denyed the Robery, but upon the positive Oathes of the Evidence she vvas found Guilty. It appearing in Court that it vvas her usual practice to haunt Markets and other places of resort. John Austine was Tryed for stealing Goods to the Value of 9 Shillings from John Ashton, in St. Martins in the Fields, on the 10th of April, which were afterwards found where he had sold them, but upon Tryal he utterly denyed that he knew any thing of the matter affirming that he never vvas at that place, nor knevv not vvhere it vvas, but the par∣ty to vvhom he sold them, attesting that he brought them to him and recieved mony for them he vvas found Guilty. John Welling a Stripling vvas Tryed for picking the pocket of a Gen∣tlevvoman in Hony-Lane, on the 6th of May, vvhich vvas proved thus. The Person vvho lost the mony, being upon search of the thief, a vvo∣man come to her and asked her if her pocket vvas not pickt; picked, tell∣ing her that she see som such a boy put his hand in her pocket: so that the boy being apprehended, declared he had not the mony but the tvvo boys that vvere in his Company had it. The vvhich he likvvise urged upon his Tryal, but the Evidence being plain he vvas found Guilty. James Cotton, vvas Indicted for Robing a vvoman in White-Chaple, of Goods to the Value of 30 Shillings to vvhich Indictment he pleaded Guilty.
William Sims, vvas Tryed for Robing a House in St. James's on the 16th of April. Taking thence Sheets, Table-Linnen and other Goods to the Value of 12 Pounds vvhich they sold at a Broakers, in Long-Acar, of vvhich their being pesitive proof made, he vvas found Guilty. Abraham Kent, vvas Tryed for stealing Iron-Work, from on Ship∣board, being the Goods James Yemans being taken in the very Fact yet he deny'd it upon Tryal till at last it vvas proved some part of the Goods were found in his Breaches, then he said that he Accidentaly droped into them, but he could not so Impose upon the Jury, for they found him Guilty. Several Presentments vvere made this Sessions, of Recusants many of them being of Note. Jane Harison, vvas Tryed for Robing a Shop, in Leaden-Hall Street on the 10th of May, and taking thence Ribons, Gloves, and Linnen, to a considerable Value, but the things not being found about her, as 'tis supposed conveied them avvay by a Second Person the Jury found her not Guilty of the Fact. John Spitle, was Tryed, for breaking open the House of Margret Tryer, in the Parish of St. James's Clarkenwell, on the 20th of May. And taken away Grates, Kettels, Pots and Puter, which was proved thus, that a Dray-man coming over Clarkenwell-Green, percieving a parsel of Fel∣lows of which he was somwhat Suspicious, he went to his fellows and told them of it, but they refusing to assist him, he went himself, and meet∣ing the Prisoner with a paire of Grates upon his back, stoped him and carried him into a House, where was taken into custody of a Constable but in Court he pleaded that the Grates were Delivered to him, but the Evidence being plain and that he was taken 40 Yards of the House that was broak open, and the Jury found him Guilty. Jane Kent, was Indicted For a Witch, for that she sometime past had bewitched Elizabeth Clambleton, Daughter of Richard Clambleton on Mile-Inn Green. As likwise his wife, he first gave Evidence to hold the Court along story of two Sows that he had had bewitched by reason he would not trust Jane Kent for two Pigs, that she had bespoke, and that he never killed them, but she would send to ask wheither he had killed any of the Pigs she bespoake and farther that after the death of his Swine, his Daughter fell sick and died in a strange manner and that his Wife falling sick likwise, he went to a Doctor in Spitle-Field who advised him to a Medecine that as he said took of the spell and put the Prisoner into such pain that she came howling to his house although he did not see her, being charged ta keep the dore shut. That a vvomon Lik wise swore that she had an unusual Tet, and feveral other strange Marks, but Evidence being given for her that she was a Labourious woman, and frequented Religious assemblys she was acquited. William Stafford, one of the Life-Gaurd, was Tryed for Killing one Roundwaith near Hide-Park, in fighting the defunct having recieved several Wounds, but the Prisoner pleading that it was Sedefendendo and that vvhen the Deceased died he retreated as far as he eould, and there appear into former Grudg the Jury gave their Verdict that he vvas Guilty of Man Slaughter.
Ann Hix was Tryed for Robing the House of David Kighorn on the 20th of April to which she pleaded not guilty. Evidence being called, first the woman, Wife to the party whose name the Indictment was Layd, Swore whilst she was absent the prisoners took the Goods out of her House but the Constable being produced that went to search for them he swore that the Prosecutor told him she had for∣merly taken them by her order to secure them from the Seasure of their Land-Lord So that it being Evident that the case had been Depending above two years, it was looked upon as a Malitious prosecution, and there upon the prisoner was cleared. Mary Coverton, brought upon her Tryal, for an accessary to a Robery, Com∣mitted by one Ann Stubs Convicted the Last Session, for that she bought Goods of her that were stolen from Captain Faisby, she knowing them to be stole but she Pleading to the Contrary and there being no positive proof she was found not Guilty. John Johnson, was Tryed for Breaking open the Chamber of the Esq Turner of the Temple on Sunday last, nature of the Fact this, he having Picklock keys, endea∣voured to open the dore, but finding it Bolted he with a betty forced it open, but bu entering found the Landress there, whereat he cryed he was betrayed and then drawing a Pistol out of his pocket and swore that unless she would let him de∣part without making any discovery he would Pistol her which foF fear she promis∣ed but he was no sooner gon but she shut the dore and cryed thieves, whereupon he was taken upon Evidence he was found Guilty. Henry Arnold, vvas Tryed for a Tobacco-Box and Watch from one Mr-Vox, taking it privily from his person, but it appearing that there had been tampering in the case and there being no positive proof he vvas acquited. A person vvas Tryed for Robing the Chamber of Mr. Hoole in the Temple, and taking thence Silk-Curtains, to the Value of Tvventy Pounds part of vvhich vvas taken in the Possession of the Prisoners Wife as she vvas going to pavvn them at a Broakers, and the Prisoner having con∣fessed it, he vvas found Guilty. There were four condemned, three Women, and one Man, Viz. John Welling, Lidea Littleworth Ann Blan, and Eliza∣beth Hunt. Five burnt in the hand, two to be whipt, one Transported, and one fined twenty pounds and so ended this Sessions. LONDON, Printed for L. C.
