t3448 e574_3 99865441 165410
TWO GREAT FIGHTS In IRELAND, On Sunday, Munday, Tuesday, & Wednesday last, between the Marq. of Ormonds Forces, and the Lord Lieut. Cromwels, at the two strong Garrisons of Tredah and Dundalke; shewing the manner how they four severall times sallyed out upon the Parl. forces beat up the Guards, the manner of their repulse, the num∣ber killed & taken prisoners, together with 6 pieces of Ordnance, and great store of Arms & Ammunition. As also, the Declaration of the great Engineer Col. Ashton, to fight under the Banner of loyalty, in preservation of the town of Tredah for Charles the II, and his new Engine of Warre for the cutting off both Legs and Arms of any that shall oppose him.
TWO FIGHTS IN IRELAND ON Sunday, Munday, Tuesday, and Wednesday last, between the Forces commanded by the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Lieutenant Cromwell. SIR, UPon the Lord Governour Cromwels neer approach with his Army, to the fron∣tier and impregnable Garrison of Tre∣dah, his Lordship sent a Summons to the Governour Colonell Ashton, for
the surrender thereof to the power and obedience of the Parliament of England, but the Governour retur∣ned a very resolute and peremptory Answer, intima∣ting, That he abhord with his soul the brand of perfidi∣ousnesse, that he was resolved to display the banner of loy∣alty, and to stand in the defence and preservation of the trust reposed in him to the last man, &c. Whereupon, the Lord Governour immediatly called a Councel of Officers, for the well-ordering of the Army, to the end the work might appear more facile and easie, and in∣deed so excellent were the debates and consultations thereof, that their Design was lookt upon with great admiration. And upon Saturday morning being the 8. of this in∣stant Septemb. twelve thousand Horse, Foot, and Dra∣goons, marched up in battell-array, with Trumpets sounding, and Drums beating against the Town, where they soon encamped themselves, cutting off divers pas∣ses, & using the rarest stratagems of war, for streight∣ning the enemies quarters. About 7 at night, the Army advanced somewhat neerer, and divers strong Guards both of Horse and Foot were placed within twice musket shot of the walls, where the Foot intrenched themselves. And a∣bout 5 in the morning, the besieged discovered us, who drawing neerer to each other, said, they would give us a dinner to welcome us into Ireland; and indeed they were very circumspect in keeping of their word, for between 11 and 12 they gave us a visit, sallying forth with a considerable party of Horse, and lining the obscure places with many hundreds of foot, but failed in their promise; for upon their first charg against one of our horse-guards, they were so gallantly received, that they
soon quitted the place, our horse pursued them with∣in musket shot of their works, receiving a great volley from their Ambuscado, in which we lost 4 men, and 7 horse; of the enemy kild and taken 13. The next morning being Munday they attempted another sally, but not daring to put it in execution, retreated in a∣gain without action, remaining all day very silent, till the Curtain of the most high Canopy began to expell and darken the splendor of Sols beauty, who even at the close of the day upon the relieving our guards, gave us a volley both with great and round shot, which grazed and did no execution. On Tuesday being the 11. instant, about break of the day, we received a new allarum from these troubled spirits, who (upon an unexpected salley) suddenly fell upon Col. Hewsons foot guard, but were repulsed, and the losse equally ballanced. On Wednesday being the 12. instant, Lieu. col. Ashton (a great Papist, and Nephew to the Governour) about two of the clock in the morning made a very despe∣rate salley upon two of our foot-guards, with 500. Irish, which by reason of the sudden surprizall of our Perdews, and Centinels, caused great difficulties to in∣tervene, yet notwithstanding, the Wings of providence seeming as a great Bulwark to preserve and defend us, our men received their furious onset, but being over∣powred, the Vau-guard retreated to the next, and bo∣dying, advanced to the other ingaged, fell upon the Irish killed 40, took 20 prisoners, and forced the rest to a dishonorable retreat, with the loss of ten; besides those in the former engagements, prisoners exchangd were equall, about 50. above 100 killed and wounded, wher∣of on our part 30. From the Siege at Tredah Sept. 13. 1649.
Other Letters from Ireland, purport the further en∣gagement of the two Armies. SIR, VPon the advance of the Lord Governour Crom∣well horse towards Trim, great was the prepara∣tion of the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin to receive him, and upon his neer approach with the Van, a selected party were drawn forth to represent the Royall salutation (as they call'd it) and according∣ly the Lord Inchiquin had the honour and conduct of leading those vanting Troops, who no sooner had march¦ed four miles from the town, but a discovery were made of a great Body of the Parl. horse; whereupon he drew out a Forlorn consisting of two hundred horse, commanded by Lieutenant Colonell Gerrard, who ad∣vanced about Musket shot from the Body, the rest marching after. The Parliaments forces seeing this, immediatly ec|'d choforth a great deal of alacrity to dispute an en∣gagement, drawing out a Forlorn likewise, and advan∣cing towards them; insomuch, that after an hours rallying, and wheeling for wind and ground, both bo∣dies had embattail'd themselves in a well-disciplin'd posture for the receiving of each others charge with the most advantage and safety. And after some short time spent in consultation by the Officers, the Trumpets sounded, and both parties
joyned battail, a most violent and desperate charge be∣ing given to each other at the first on set, during which conflict, sharp and cruell was the action, each man striving for Conquest, and endeavouring to become master of the field; but the victory seemed dubious a long time, untill by main force; the enemies left wing were disordered and put to a retreat, which the right wing, and the Center-body seeing (for they were divi∣ded into three bodies) began to decline farther engage∣ment, endeavouring an honourable retreat, but the L. Governours horse falling in with them, upon their wheeling off, divers of them were killed and taken pri∣soners, the rest received sanctuary neer a spacious bog, where they rallyed, and by the comming in of a fresh Reserve of three Regiments of horse, commanded by Colonell Steward, Colonell Cotton, and Collonell Cun∣ningham, the Lord Inchiquin attempted a second On∣set against the Lord Governours forces, who finding themselves to be both overpowred and unfitting for an second engagement, made an honourable retreat with the losse of thirty men, the enemy not daring to em∣brace pursuit for a mile together, whose losse we hear was exceeding great in the first engagement, by esti∣mation at least three hundred. Since which time they wholly decline engagement, and dare not stand a charge, unlesse at a place of great advantage; many of the English Horse under the con∣duct of the Lord Inchiquin desert him dayly, and come in to the Lord Governour, who solemnly protest and declare to be true to the English Interest, and to assist his Lordship, in the defence of the Parl. of England, with their lives and fortunes.
By Letters further from the Siege at Tredah in Ire∣land, thus: The Marq. of Ormond hath exceedingly victuald and strengthned this place, and all other Gar∣risons adjacent, most of the Foot being quartered there at present, but hath a very considerable Party in the field, which they call the flying Army, consisting of three thousand horse, three thousand Irish Foot-bog∣gers, and fifteen hundred Dragoons; all which are wel mounted and compleatly arm'd, men resolute & well disciplin'd, and as many affirm, not inferiour to the greatest Sons of Chivalry in Europe; yet notwithstan∣ding, the English renowned Heroes hath challenged them to a field, promising fair play, and to equallize them in number; but they decline engagement, and wil not fight them, unlesse forst. We hear that the Lord Lieutenant is advanced with a considerable party of horse and foot to Dundalk, and hath besiegd the same threatning a storm, if they do not speedily surrender; which they deny; the Lord Lieut. hath as stubborn an enemy to deal withall there, as at Tredah, some affirm∣ing that they have made a desperate salley, and dispu∣ted a sharp conflict, in which many lost their lives, but soon after the Lord Governour stormd a Fort, and at his gaining thereof, took and killed above four hun∣dred prisoners, 6 pieces of Ordnance, 2 Cariages, great store of arms and ammunition. The great Engineer Col. Ashton (its said) hath stu∣died a new stratagem of War, for the taking off either leg or arm, the Engine runs upon three wheels, and is to be planted both at Gates or Breaches upon any at∣tempt or storm. Imprimatur, J. T. FINIS.
