T494A E388_15 99862012 160239
Peace, Peace, and we shall be quiet. OR, Monarchie asserted, THE Kings right vindicated, AND The present Government of the Church proved to be one and the same with that in the Primitive Times. All which Assertions are composed for the regulating of distracted minds, and satisfying of tender consci∣ences, or misled in their Opinions. By J. T. Gent. LONDON, Printed for William Ley. 1647.
war) is hatefull, and of all island war a civill or domestique war in England and Scotland is the most dangerous and most to be detested: Experience and lamentable proofs have often ma∣nifested this to be true in former times, but if we will believe our owne eyes and eares, if we have any sense or feeling of our mi∣series, if we would collect our memories, and calculate our cala∣mities, comparing them with the unnaturall civill distractions of any former times in this Land, then may we soon perceive, that as our iniquities have filled up the measure of transgressions, which our fathers left three quarters empty, so the dreadfull wrath of the Almighty hath been justly powred upon us in show∣ers and innumerations of blood, beyond all parallels and example of precedent Ages. For what person or party in this Kingdome is there, that may not truly say, that (by these six years dissention) they (he or she) have not lost a father, a son, a husband, a kinsman, or friend by untimely death, either through murther, slaughter, captivity or famine; Martiall rage hath exceeded manly courage, and men have so far forgot to be men, that (in their barbarous abusing maids, wives, widdowes of allsorts and age) they have not re∣membred that they were borne of women. From whence this impetuous storme and raging tempest comes, (which threatens our totall shipwrack) is easily found, if we would or could change our pride and avarice for humilitie and charitie, by which means they may (by the grace and favour of God) purchase so much blessed Balme of Gillead, as may cure our wounds, and cleare our eye-sights, that we may see and say, every one of us, as Jonas did in the tempest, It is I. God is the God of order, but we are in such a confusion, that the Heathen may say of English-man, Where is their God? God is the God of peace, but the peace of God is not amongst us: the world is not now as God made it, nor is man in that in∣tegrity as his Creator did create him, but both the world and men are as the Devill, and men have marr'd both; and what can or could be expected but a great harvest of judgement for so many seeds of sin? Christ is the Prince of peace, Esa. 9. his Word the Gospell of
peace, Ephes. 6.17. his Ministers the preachers of peace, Esa. 52.7. the Anglles proclaimed peace to the Shepheards at the birth of Christ, Luk. 2. (at which time there was an universall peace over the universall world) our Saviour pronounced a blessing upon the peace-makers, Mat. 5. the Apostles salutations and prayers (to and for the people) were grace, mercy and peace: Christ (at his going out of the world) bequeathed peace as a blessed legacy to his servants, Joh. 14.27, If it be possible have peace with all men: Keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephes. 4.3. these are all good councels and instructions from the best and all-know∣ing most mighty Councellour the Prince of Peace; and it is to be lamented that such saving counsell from so loving and gracious a Counsellour is so gracelesly sleighted, and unreverently negle∣cted, with-stood, and contradicted, it was and is most heavenly admonition, if we had the grace to follow it, and it was wisely said of a Heathen, that there was no peace so bad but it was bet∣ter then a Civill War. What hope can there be of a setled peace in any Countrey or Kingdome where most men would rule, and few or none obey? where Government is despised, Authority contemn'd, Law trampled underfooot, mischiefe dawbed and vernished over with a shew of good? where too many Secta∣ries do use, or abuse Gods Word as Witches and Sorcerers doe, to deceive and entangle the simple under the vaile of devotion? These are those that professe they know not well what, having an itching desire of change, a mighty mind to alteration, and a fie∣ry zeale for a Toleration of new fangled Religions, they know not how. Errour and malice have been the causes of the greatest mista∣kings and jealousies in all times, places and Ages; it so blinded the Scribes and Pharisees, the wisest Doctors and Lawyers, that either ignorantly or enviously they misconstrued our Saviours di∣vine precepts and actions, for if he spake of Reformation of the Church, they said he would destroy the Temple, if he discours∣ed of the grace of God, they said he blasphemed Gods Law; if he declared the true way to the Kingdome of heaven, 'twas a∣gainst the Majesty of Caesar; if he wrought miracles, it was said to be by the Devill; if he alledged Scriptures, they said he was
but a Carpenters son; and lastly, they were so mad in their mis∣chievous and malicious mistakings, that they chose Barrabas (a murderous thiese) and refused Christ Jesus the blessed Messias, the onely Son of God and Saviour of the world. The Apostle S. Paul saith, that the Galatians would have pluc∣ked out their eyes to have given them him, Gal. 4.14. yet were they so unconstant, that (after his Doctrine and person had been with such mighty applausefull expression by them received) they quick∣ly forsooke and rejected him, and whereas before they received him as an Angell of God, yea as Jesus Christ, yet shortly after they termed him a trifler and a babbler: So the Jewes cryed Hezanna aloud, with shouts and acclamations, and the next day they made a louder noise with dispightfull exclamations, crying crucifie, cru∣cifie him. By these examples of old (which were written for our learning) we may perceive the slippery trust that is in the multi∣tude in generall, and also hereby may be considered what fickle∣nesse of trust and brittlenesse of confidence we are assured of (in particular) one with another. We are all bound by the bond and tie of nature and Nation, to serve and seek for the Church, the King, the Kingdomes and our owne peace: the Church wee see, is lamentably rent and torne with Sects and Heresies, (the Protestant Church I meane) whose Doctrine the most part and greatest number of people living in England were baptised in, and is believed to be the most pure, sincere, and most Orthodox agreeing with the infal∣lible holy Scriptures; this Doctrine is as old as since the passion of our blessed Saviour, it is the same that was written by the san∣ctified and all-sanctifying Spirit of God, by the Pens of the Evan∣gelists, it is the same that was written and preached by the Apo∣stles and Disciples, it is the same that was confirmed by mighty and many miracles, it is the same which S. Paul so highly com∣mends the faith of the Romanes for, when he wrote to them Rom. 1.8. that their faith was published, or famous through the whole world, it is the same that the Romanes and Rome are long since fal∣len from, it is the same which in all Ages and Generations hath been practised, professed, persecuted and sealed with the bloods and lives of most of the Prophets, Apostles, and noble Army of
Martyrs; it is the same which this Kingdome of England was ma∣ny Centuries of years depriued of; it is the same that was happi∣ly through Gods great mercy, restored to us againe; it is the same which hath been here profest, defended and maintained here these ninety years, since the restauration of it; it is the same which we ought to live and die in and for, and it is the same which hath glo∣rified God the giver of it, the good Kings who have defended it are thereby renowned, by it this Kingdome hath flourished, our Nation honoured, and our matchlesse Government admired through all the Bounds, Empires Kingdomes, and Regions of the inhabited world; in those daies Religion and subjection were relatives. This Church the Gun-powder Jesuited Papist hath attempted to blow up, and the mad zealous Anabaptist with the haire∣brain'd Brownist would pull her downe: The one would with a blast or a puffe turne her into smoke, cinders, and ashes, and the other would tread and trample her in the mire; the one would be above all authority and the other would obey none: But our confidence is, that our Church needs not to feare their force, re∣gard their malice, nor respect their love. The Church of God is the sanctified soules of all the true believers, in all and every Na∣tion, Tongue and Language of the world: mistake me not Rea∣der, I doe not meane the Church to be those erected stately Hou∣ses or Temples, which were founded, built, repaired, and contin∣ued by our pious devout Ancestors, which were made for the Ser∣vants of God to assemble and Congregate, which fabricks and stately structures were dedicated onely for Gods service, and no other prophane use, to which places the people might and ought to come to pray and praise their Creator and Redeemer, to par∣ticipate the heavenly Manna, the blessed Word and two Sacra∣ments: in which houses the Congregations were defended from the injurie of wind and weather; which buildings are, or should be in that reverend regard, that no Christian can but grieve at the small esteem and great spoile within these few yeares made to too many of them. The Church of God, as I said, is not made with mans hands, but it is the soules or soule of every true Be∣leever.
This Church hath a love of her owne, who is able and willing, and will defend her, as in that sweet song of the Canticles it is most graciously expressed, where she affirmes twice that she loves him with her soule, twice hee calls her fairest amongst women, the word beloved passeth seventeen times between them, eighteen times the words faire and love he gives her, she calls him rose of the field, and lilley of the vaileyes, and he calls her his veneyard, his undefiled twice, his sister twice, his dove four times, his beautifull and his spouse four times. And as he hath honoured her with these superexcellent titles and gracious expressions of his abundant love and favour, so to manifest his transcendent and most supreme love, (beyond all love most inestimable and infinite) he laid downe his life for her re∣demption and sanctification, and tooke it up againe for her pre∣servation here, and her eternall glorification hereafter; so that in spight of all the accursed crew of hell and hell-hounds, she is surely guarded and protected. Christ Jesus is the onely supreme head and governour of this Church, he who was hoped for by the Patriarchs, who was search∣ed after by the Prophets, who was served by the Angels, who was acknowledged by Stars, who was obeyed by seas, winds, and tem∣pests, by diseases, death and Devils: upon whom the Holy Ghost visibly descended at his Baptisme, at which time the Almighty Fa∣ther proclaimed his well-beloved Son, and commanded all men to heare him. He knew the thoughts of men, and the secrets of hea∣ven; the true confession of him to be the Son of God is the on∣ly way to open heaven, to prevaile against hell, and to obtain the fruition of eternall happinesse. Next (and immediate) Moderater and Governour (for the de∣fence, dignitie, honour, and safety of the Church Militant here) under God and his Christ, is our Soveraigne Lord King Charles, and in these his Majesties Dominions, he onely is Gods Vice∣gerent and Lievtenant here over us; to him is given the sword of Power, Justice, and Majesty; this sword is not given to Kings to be borne in vaine by them, Rom. 13. the King hath his power and this sword from God, and it cannot be wrested from the King by the hands of men, without the hazzard or assurance of the great∣est
danger: God saith, By me Kings raigne, which all Christian Kings, Princes, and Potentates doe acknowledge in all their Ti∣tles, Writings, Coynes and Inscriptions, and our Kings chiefest flower in his Crowne is, Charles by the grace of God. There is no Government so absolutely perfect that it can please all, there are some things alwaies that will deserve to be blamed; though Kings are Gods on earth, they are but Gods of earth, or earthen Gods. To honour and obey as I ought, and am comman∣ded to doe, is to serve God, and yet my just obedience and ho∣nour to the King doth not make the King to be my Idoll. god doth give a good King to a Nation as a blessing, and a bad one as a scourge; men may tell a King his fault, but not shame him or vilifie him, and a King may be praised and Commended without flattery, and it is worthy to be remembred that though a Kings Crowne is pure gold, inchased and adorned with most precious Jewels of inestimable value, yet that glorious Diadem is lined in the inside with thorns, and pricking perturbations, cares and trou∣bles, which (though they are not to be seen) are painefully selt by the royall head that wears it. As Kings are supreme or Soveraigne Rulers over good men, who obey for conscience and love, so Kings are subject to bad men, who serve onely for feare or reward, so are they also in dan∣gers of perfidious assassinations and intoxicate poisonings they cannot be secure without a guard, or walke abroad or sleep in safe∣ty; they seldome eat or drinke without a taster, nor scarce trust any man because most men flatter, and few there be who are so honest to will and dare to speak the truth. A Princes actions are weighed in the unequall ballances of every mans various opinion and censure: for, if he be just, he shall be said to be cruell; if he be pitifull, he shall be despised; if he be liberall, he shall be ter∣med prodigall; if he be sparing, he shall be accounted covetous; if he be peacefull, he shall be held a coward; if he be valiant, he will be thought ambitious; if he be grave and reserv'd, he shall be reputed proud; if he be affable, he shall be deem'd to be simple; if he be sollitarie, people will esteem him to be an hypocrite; if he be merry, report will call him dissolute. These are the miseries which wait upon Majestie, these are the slaveries which Royalty
undergoes: every mans eyes and ears are upon the words and actions of a King; Pompey the great must not scratch his head, and Scipio must not sleep, but some Criticks will be carping either out of ignorance or envy, and the good and best intentions of good Kings have ben taken as meer pretexts and pretences, by the ma∣levolent mouth of prejudicate misconstruction. For, Princes are blam'd, not only for what's ill, But for not doing all that all men will. Our gracious K. Charles (by the Almighties inspiration although) with the vertues of patience and fortitude into his royall heart, by which vertues he hath prov'd himselfe to be Trouble-proof, (but not trouble-free) wee may perceive that afflictions have been as Touch-stones, which shew him to be no counterfeit. In these his tribulations he commads his passions, (which is more then to con∣quer Nations) yet, all this being granted, we must conclude him to be a man, and all men have errours, for it is humane to erre; it is divine to repent, and it is divellish to be obstinate; of which three parts he doth with with griefe acknowledge humane frailty, and humbly practice divine contrition; as concerning obstinacy, his Ma∣jesty is not so wedded to his own judgment, but that he knowes that good reasons ought to yeeld to better, and better should be ruled by the best. He knowes Majesty consists in inward vertues, and not in out∣ward vestments, and he knowes that a good King should be like to the lightning, which never doth any hurt, but to such hard things and places, which oppose with strong obduracie and resi∣stance. Of all Governments, Monarchie is the best on earth, be∣cause it is an embleme of the gouernment in heaven, one God, one King. Of Monarchies there have been nine severall formes and sorts: some by gift, as Iuba, being taken prisoner by Octavius Au∣gustus, was by Octavius set at liberty again, and had the kingdome of Numidia or Barbarie, given him. And William the Conquerour had this Kingdome of England given to him, by King Edward the Confessor. Some Monarchies have been by custome, as France, who by their Law Salique, thhereby the females are excluded from that Crowne our Kings of Englands just wheritance hath been thereby too much
intrenched upon, or usurped by the French Kings. Some King∣domes have been by adoption, as Iulius Caesar adopted Augustus. So were many other Emperours and Kings by adoption. Some Mo∣narchies and Principalities have been gotten by policie, as Pisistratus changed the Government of Athens from a popular State to a Kingdome. Some Kingdomes are by Election, as the Kingdome of Poland, and the German Empire, Bohemia and others. Some Monarchies have by chance or lot been gotten, as Darius had the Empire of Persia, because his Horse neighed first. Some by conquest, as the King of Spaine got Portugal, Naples, Navarre, Sici∣lia, &c. and Charles the fifth got the Kingdome of Tunis, and the great Turke almost halfe Christendome. Some Kingdoms have been gotten by strength and might of bo∣dy, so was Maximinus, and so was Heliogabalus made Em∣perour for his faire feature and comely stature, not for his good conditions. But that Kingdome or Monarchy which is hereditary, and by the right of succession, it descends to the next of the royall posterity, or kindred; for the delayes in Elections is often dangerous, and breeds disorders and mischievous commotions (as hath been too much proved) therefore a Kingly government is most agreeable to the holding and keeping of peace and unity amongst men, because it hath a representation of the Divinity; for as the world hath one God, so should a Kingdome be governed by one King, as Gods Substitute; amongst the lights (innumerable) in the firmament one Sun is greatest in the day, and one Moone in the night. Amongst the Angels there are di∣stinctions, as Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominions, and Michael an Archangel. The very Pagans honoured love as chiefe of their ungodly gods. The fowles have
an Eagle for their King, the beasts a Lion; amongst all things created, there is more worth in the worthiest, and most respect to the best and greatest, as amongst grain, the wheat is in highest esteem: Amongst drinks the wine, a∣mongst metalls the gold, amongst the Elements the fire, one head governes all the Members, the soule rules the bo∣dy, and reason should command appetite: the bees have a master. So, amongst men, the Kingly government is best, and the most best is that Soveraignty which is hereditary, lineall, and by succession, as by just right, our King Charles is invested in the regalities, possessions, and inheritances of his most famous predecessors: which long may he live, and reigne in, to the glory of God, by whom he holds his crowne, to the blessed recovery and setling of his, his Peoples lost peace and happinesse: This is the humble and hearty desire of all true Patriots and loyall Subjects. FINIS.
