V463 669.f.6[88] 99871149 160949
THE VINDICATION AND CLEARING OF Sir IAMES RAMSEY From those base aspersions cast upon him through mis-information, &c. Concerning his Carriage in the Fight at Kyneton, 23 October 1642. COlonell Midleton, Major Baylie, and Major Melvill, being severally examined by those whom his Excellence the Earle of Essex, Lord Generall of our Army had appointed to examine the businesse of Sir James Ramsey his carriage and behaviour the 23. of October, at the fight in Kineton field, doe all unanimously agree and depose that the said Sir James, having the command of the left Wing of our Horse, did so place and order the severall Squadrons of Horse of the Wing at best advantage for fight, and did place severall Rankes of Musqueteers betwixt the Squa∣drons of Horse, and interlarded them so well for offending of the enemy, and for defending of themselves, as could be desired, and did also lay upon the left hand of the Horse, in a hedge two or three hundred Musqueteers, for to Flanke the Front of our Horse, and give fire to the Enemies at their charging of our Horse, and all those three above-named Gentlemen affirme that the said Sir James did before the Com∣bate exhort and entreate all the Troopes that stood thus imbattailed to stand firme, and doe for the honour of their Country and their owne Reputation, representing to them they were to fight for Gods Cause, for Religion, and for liberty of Lawes of the Kingdome, and safety of what was dearest unto them; withall telling them that they were to fight against Gods Enemies, men of no Religion, for the most part; Who sought their owne ends onely, by the overthrow of the purity of Religion, and liberties and welfare of the Kingdome: yet notwithstanding all this, they affirme that at the approach of the E∣nemy our Troopes did discharge their long peeces afarre of, and without distance, and immediately thereafter wheeled all about, and ranne disorderly, leaving the Musqueteeres to be cut in peeces by the Enemy, so did their Officers shew them the way, and their Lieutenants; whose Captaine were absent, running away, told that their place was to bring up the Reere. And Sir James himselfe being ingaged among the Squadrons of the Enemies Horse, was carryed violently out of the Field. The verity of which premises these three Gentlemen doe offer, and are ready to give their oath upon whensoever they shall be required. Sir James Ramsey his Declaration. AFter I had Orders from his Excellency the Lord Generall of our Army, and others my Superiours, for ordering and commanding the left Wing of the Caval∣lery, I did accordingly put them in Posture Defensive, and Offensive, interlining the Squadrons with a convenient number of Musqueteeres, and likewise did place three hundred Musqueteers on a Hedge on the left hand of the left Wing; which did Flanke the whole Front of the left Wing; Thereafter on the head of every Squadron exhorting them to magnanimity and resolution, shewing them the worth of their Ancestors, desiring them to shew themselves worthy such Noble Progenitors, and putting before them the justnesse of the cause, that it was the purity of Religion, the Liberty of the Subject, and the King and Parliaments Honour, that drew them into the Field, and no mans private Quarrell; and the more to incourage them, I did lay before them the unworthinesse of the adverse party, that they were Papists, Atheists, and Irreligious persons for the most part; and after desiring, and heartily exhorting them to give the enemy a brave mee∣ting, who were advancing to charge us, and commanding ours to receive them resolutely; (contrary to my expectation, and to my perpetuall regrate) ours dis∣charged their Carbines at a long distance, and thereafter basely runne away, and that in mighty confusion, so that I was ingaged in middle of the enemies Squa∣drons, and violently borne away out of the field, and so was carryed along, two miles at least; being thus among the Enemy in an inclosure, by leaping over a ditch, none of the enemies being able to follow me, I escaped, and then assuring my selfe we had lost the day, in respect the left wing of ours was altogether rou∣ted, and a great many of the Infantry on the right wing, with flying colours; I resolved to goe towards London, fearing the Parliament should be mis-informed of me, in respect that part of the Army I commanded, first gave ground to the enemy; Likewise knowing my hard condition if I should have beene Prisoner, in respect I came not onely my selfe to doe my best service to the King and Parliament, (though at this time things have falne out farre contrary to my expectation) but likewise did incite and incourage a great many others, brave Commanders, for the same service: And this upon my Conscience I declare. J. RAMSEY. The Report made by the Committee to his Excellency, of the examination of Witnesses. ACcording to your Excellencies command, we have called before us Sir James Ramsey, who hath made a relation to us, not onely of the forme of Battaile he had placed the Horse into on the left wing which was under his command, the 23. of October, at Kineton Field; but likewise hath told us what exhorta∣tion and intreaty he had made on the head of every Squadron of Horse, that they might carry themselves bravely against their Enemy. The which Declaration he hath set downe in writing under his owne hand, which is also fortifyed by the testimony of three worthy Gentlemen then present with him, that were wit∣nesses of his actions and speeches. In consideration whereof we are of opinion, that the misfortune that befell him, did not proceed from any defect on his part, he having done all that became a gallant man to doe, both in ordering the Battalions for fight, and in exhorting them to acquit themselves couragiously as brave Souldiers. As for his going to London, his Reasons being expressed in his owne Declaration, we remit them and the premises to your Honourable considerations. Cur. Milit. tent. in St. Albans, quinto die Novemb. 1642. Present. Sir John Meyrick President of the Councell. Earle of Peterborough Generall of the Ordnance. Sir William Balfoore Lieutenant Generall of the Horse. Colonell Ballard. Sir John Meldrum. Lord Willoughby of Parham. Sir Philip Stapleton. Lord of Rochford. Colonell Middleton. Sir William Fayrfax. VVHereas this day in the said Councell of Warre was questioned Sir James Ramsey, who commanded the left wing of the Cavallery, in Kineton field, the 23. of October last past, concerning his going up to London, after the routing and flying away of the said left Wing; the Councell taking into serious confide∣ration, the reasons alledged by the said Sir James Ramsey, which moved him to make his speedy repaire up to London after the said dysaster: Besides the said Coun∣cell resting sufficiently satisfied of the fidelity and care, and vigilancy of the said Sir James Ramsey, on the said day in Kineton field: hath clearely acquitted and dis∣charged; and by these presents, doth acquit and discharge the said Sir James Ramsey, of all manner of imputation, which any way may tend to the impeachment of his Reputation and Honour. Jo. Meyrick. Isaac Dorislaus, Advocate of the Army. Ro. Chambers, Secretary to the Army. November 6. 1642. I Have perused the annexed Declaration of the Councell of Warre concerning Sir James Ramsey Knight, and have given allowance for the Printing thereof, and of the Declaration made by himselfe, and allowed of by the said Councell. ESSEX. Printed at London for John Bellamy, & Ralph Smith. 1642.
