w2979c 99899802 137215
A Winding-Sheet FOR Traytors: With a Discovery of their great and dangerous Con∣spiracies; the horrid Perfidiousness and Treachery of di∣vers Usurping Tyrants; their Jdas-like Actings in several Counties; their Judgements, and Sel-Exections; their sddain Death; the Names of such who have both hang'd and drown'd themselves; And the Lamentation and Confession of Mr. Scot, and divers others of the wicked and cruel Judges, who most barbarously and inhumanely murther'd our late gracious So∣veraign Lord King CHARLES. London, Printed for J. Thomas, 1660.
THE Traytors Confession: Or, Strange News from the Tower of London. JUstice having taken place within these Brittish Isles, and a discovery made of the grand Traytors, who struck even at the Root both of King, Parliament, Laws, and Priviledges, their Confederacy in sinne being their onely security; give me leave in this following Narration, to present the Reader with a Catalogue of some of the Grandees, that could not be match'd in any place but where they now are, viz. in the Tower of London, where the Marquess of Argyle, the Earl of Antrim, Sir Arthur Ha∣silrigg, Sir Henry Vane, Col. Axtel, Mr. Thomas Scot, who was sent pri∣soner out of Flanders, and Col. Hacker, one of the Gentlemen for∣sooth, that carryed a Partizan, was on the Scaffold, and comman∣ded the Guards when our late gracious Soveraign was most in∣humanely and barbarously murthered; for which bloody act and wicked Treason, he, with the rest, are now honoured with an im∣prisonment in the Tower, where they may justly condole and la∣ment their by-past Enormities; and thus center with each other, in their direful Lachrymae: Oh! That the blood of that inno∣cent Prince were washed from our Soules: Oh! the horrour and guilt of Conscience: Let us surrender that which we cannot keep: Let us east off our vile and polluted Vizards, and appear in our Natural Colours, every one confessing his Villanies, which
we can no longer conceal: Let us turn Converts, and as we have always been Dissemblers, so now out of our natural disposition of dissimulation acknowledge his Majesty to be our Right and law∣ful Sovereign, (for we cannot help it) that we were the unjust and bloody Murtherers of his most Royal Father; that in all our Actions we sought our own profit, and not the publick good; that our endeavours tended to the advance of our own private Inte∣rest and Estates, and not the benefit of the Trust imposed upon Us; That we were plunderers both of Church and State, never thinking that the day of Accompt would come; That we made Religion and the glory of God the Cloak for all our Villany, Rapines and Murthers; That we did intend if our Designs had been fixed firm, to have made our selves perpetual Dictators and State-Robbers. But since their hopes are frustrate, and that seemingly here is pointed out such an inrolled Confession; be pleased, in the next place, to take a Review of the just Confession of some of the un∣just Judges, in these words: OƲr King we murdered, yet the Work's not done, For then on Holland, Capel, Hambelton Our pause we laid, by Ʋs was Derby's loss, As by the Scotch Kirk that noble Earl Montross: We Gerrard kill'd, and valiant Brown-Bushel, Sir Alexander Cary, and Mr. Vowel, Aston, Stacy, and Hewet, who doth lye A martyred Saint, with noble Slingsby: Besides, to aggravate our sins above The thoughts of Man, we murthered Mr. Love; With many more, we took no pitty, Drawn hang'd and quarter'd in fair London's City. There's none of us but do deserve to dye, Who for these cruel Evils new in prison lye, Where we had better be, our lives to save, Then (as deserved) the Gallow Tree to have. Our Brother Barkstead, once a man of power, Is fled whilst we have taken London's Tower. Like Hector bold, we did presume to kill Our King, though it be sore against our will
To answer that pretended good Old Cause, By which we rob'd poor England of just Laws Which would condemn us all, had we our due To be drawn hang'd and then quartered too. These were the King-killing Basilisks, and weeping Crocodiles, who not onely murthered their lawful Prince, but banished His Royal Consort the Queen, and caused the Off-Spring and Royal Issue for many years to suffer Exilement: Nay more, they destroy∣ed and imprisoned all the Kings Friends, and made it Treason for to name the King, or once to mention him. Nay more then that, they unjustly seized on all his Majesties Lands, and gave or sold them one to another, felling his Timber, destroying his Deer, demolishing his Castles and stately Palaces, poling and oppressing his Subjects, and what not. But they are now like to deliver up their unjust gotten Lands and Goods to the right Owners. The antient Palace of Old-Court is to be delivered up by Mr. Edwards, which he purchased for a small sum. And Gaffer Obey must now forsake his Mannor of Ampthill, and his Mannor of Mill-brook, and betake himself to the old Road. The like must Goodman Wha∣ley, for his two Mannors of West-Walton, and Trington; Lightly come, lightly go, he purchas'd them at a very easie rate. These are the arbitrary Youths that liv'd upon the sweat of other mens brows; and these are the Canicals that for many years joyned with the bloody Tyrant and Usurper; witness his insatiable proceedings against the Western Gentlemen, who upon their Ri∣sing for the King in the year 1655. he not onely proceeds against Col. Penruddock, and divers other Gentlemen, by capital punish∣ment; but he decimates all the Cavaliers or Gentlemen of the late Kings party, that had been in Arms for him, all over England; that is, he enjoyns them to pay yearly the tenth part of their whole Revenue, notwithstanding their former Compositions made for their Estates, and their Pardons sued out as the Parlia∣ment had enjoyned. And this Decimation was put in execution by the Major Generals of every County: In which Government, Cromwel much resembled the Turk; himself like the Grand Signi∣or, ruling by sole Command, had his standing Army (as a Guard for his Person) answerable to the Janizaries; and his Major Ge∣nerals representing the Bashaws in their several Provinces.
These are the State-Juglers, that could at pleasure impose new Oaths, and set up their Dagn or Westminsterian Engagement, in opposition to his Majesties Regal Government, and so deceitfully to glory and triumph in their pretended Providences and Suc∣cesses, ever since that fatal blow given to our late gracious Lord and Soveraign: But mark the apparent Demonstrations of Gods evident and eminent wrath and indignation against the Subscri∣bers of the said Engagement, and Complices with the late Jun∣toe, viz. One Mr. Bray a Presbyterian Minister, for the gaining of an Augmentation to his Living at Michaels in Lancashire, took the Engagement, turned a great Zealot for the Independent Faction, and immediately after, an Oder coming for pulling down of the late Kings Arms in Churches, he was so not therein, that he would needs (as he did) pull them down himself, and sent the boards on which the Kings Arms were painted, home to his hous, intending to have made a door of them, to one o the Rooms of his House; but it pleased the Lord presently to strike him with a suddain and violent sickness, whereof he presently dyed, and those boards were made his Coffin to bury him in. One Brown a Scottish-man, with other of his Countrey-men, ha∣ving betrayed his Majesty in several weighty businesses of great importance; and being extreamly oppressed with horrour and guilt, fell mad, and so dyed desperately: but Brown, the grand Impostor, going to Fern Island in the North Seas, within a League or two of the Holy-Island, wrapt himself in a White Sheet, and tumbled himself down from the Top of a Rock into the Main Ocean. Such was the horrid perfidy of the Treachery Scot, that in stead of the expected Safety of his Majesties Person, Jdas-like for Money, (though a far greater Sum) sold and delivered their So∣veraign LORD and KING, into the hands of his English Rebels, who by this means had under God a power to re-settle the Kingdoms peace: But they were blinded to their own de∣struction; and having taken the Lords Anointed in their pits, they now used him as they listed, carryed him whither they pleased, and indeed treated him no otherwise then as their priso∣ner; for with a strong Guard of Horse and Foot in the moneth of February, 1646. the depth of Winter, they removed him from Newcale to Holmby. Long had not his Sacred Majesty continued there, but He was by a part of the Army under one Joyce a Taylor, violently taken
from thence, and brought to his Honour of Hampton-Court, where for a while he began to reassume his Pristine Majesty, being ad∣mitted to see and to be seen; but Cromwel fearing the frequency of so great resort might spoil his grand Plot and Trayterous De∣signs, with much Serpentine Craft and Devilish Subtilty, per∣swaded and insinuated into his Majesties heart doubts and suspi∣tions of mischief intended against him; the onely way for pre∣venting whereof, he affirmed to be the withdrawing his Person from thence, to a place of more strength and security, and to that purpose nominated the Isle of Wight, to which place his Majesty led by the Innocency of his spotless Conscience, was decoyed, and at his arrival found himself over-reached; for he was imme∣diatly secured by Col Hammond, who then was Governour in the said Island, and kept a long time prisoner there in the Castle of Carisbrook; to the unspeakable grief of his Majesty, and all true Subjects. One Sir Thomas Martin Knight of Cambridgeshire, an Engager and great Complier with the Times, having been a Hunting in Holm∣by-Park, and the Deer being faln, stuck and opened, and he de∣sired (together with the other Gentlemen) to wash his hands in the Deers blood; No (said he) I had rather wash my hands in the blood of the young King of Scots: Immediately after this, riding home the same day at evening, his Horse very suddenly and vi∣olently threw him, in which fall, he pitched on his Head, mo¦tally break his Skill and Shoulder, of which wounds he ve shortly after died. Doctor Dorislaus, the Westminsterians Junctoes-first-Ambassado∣sent from them into Holland, and therefore no doubt a great En∣gager and desperate Complier in all things with them, as in th Kings Death; this Dorislaus being arrived in Holland, was imme∣diately and suddenly assaulted and slain as he sate at Dinner in his own house. Mr. Thomas Hoyle, formerly looked upon as a very pious and strictly Religious Gentleman, an Alderman of York and Member of Parliament; but having taken the Engagement, even against his Conscience, turned a great Complyer with them at Westmin∣ster: Not long after, it pleased the Lord so to leave him to him∣self, that on the very same day 12 moneth that King Charles was Beheaded; yea as near as possibly could e judged about the ve∣ry same hour of that day, this Gentleman hanged himself at his
own house in Westminster, and was found dead by his Wife when she came home, who had been abroad that morning. Mr. Shereman a Citizen and Silkman in Pater-Nster-Row in Lon∣don, who had formerly been looked upon as a Godly and Religi∣ous man, had been a Tryer and an Elder in the Presbyterian-Church-Government, a very good friend to Mr. Love, then his Pa∣stour; but afterwards he turning with the Times, took the En∣gagement, and that in form of an Oath, whereupon he was made a Common-Council-man, turned a desperate enemy and hater of the said Mr. Love, who shortly after being in the Shop with his Wfe, as well as eer in his lie, yet in the Evening standing at his Coun∣ter in his Shop, and his Wife close by him, he suddenly fell down dead by her, and spake one word. Ʋnto this I shall onely add this Qry, viz. Whether those persons that are living, that took upon themselves the Name, Stile, and Title of The Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland, (though bp their Writs by which they sate, they were but the fragments of the Parliament o England onely) Beheaded their Lawful Prote∣stant King, Banished his Posterity, overturning our antient Go∣vernment it el, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, which constitution continued many hundreds of years, and was the best and fittest fo thee Nations that could be, and brought the Na∣tion into such a Labyrinth and Confusion, by endea ouring to set up a Ʋtopian Commonwealth, a mere Ne-Nting? Whether the orersons may not justly fear They may all down Qk into He, or fall into the sme Exemplary Trrors, Judgements, and Self-Executions with Others, i they repent not for their Abominations. FINIS.
