W995 E265_6 99871046 123444
A declaration of the Right Honourable RO∣BERT, Earle of Warwick, Lord High Admirall of ENGLAND, and of all the Plantations belonging to any his Majesties, the King of ENGLANDS Subjects up∣on the Coasts of AMERICA, Governour of the Com∣pany of LONDON for the Plantation of the Summer ISLANDS; And of the said Company: To the Colony and Plantation there. AS the Happinesse of a Christian People is ever best advan∣ced, by their constant Progresse in the waies of Peace and Holinesse: So are they in nothing more miserable themselves, and offensive to others, then in their un∣charitable Contentions, and Discords interrupting the same. We have therefore thought meet, out of our most affectionate desires of your Welfare, to make this en∣suing Declaration; wherein, first, and above all things, we do, with all earnestnesse, bespeake all, and every one, That in their severall Places and Conditions, they will endeavour, by fol∣lowing the Truth in Love, to advance the Glory of God, and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. We intend not to anticipate, or prevent the Honourable Houses of Parlia∣ment, in any their Determinations, in matters Ecclesiasticall, or Civill; but with Prayer, and Patience attend that Resolution, which it shall please the Lord to direct them unto. And whilest we thus waite, we desire, and hope that you will doe the like. What the thoughts of the Parliament have been, and are, for all the Planta∣tions upon the Coasts of AMERICA, The Ordinance of Parliament here∣with sent, will abundantly declare; And what our endeavours are for your hap∣pinesse, this writing is a Witnesse; wherein we shall expresse our Desires in some particulars. We have thought meet, for the present, to continue the Government, as now it stands, by Commission, together with all Officers, and Commanders former∣ly chosen by us, untill we shall give further direction therein; as to prevent that
disturbance which an alteration might occasion; so for the better moderation, and improvement of Authority, to encourage Piety, Goodnesse, and Industry, and to suppresse Prophanenesse, wickednesse, and idlenesse in all sorts of People, and places of the Colony. We thinke it not meet, for the present to give any intimation, either to Mi∣nisters or People, touching the the publike Administration of Gods Worship, being in expectance of that Directory, which the Parliament, with the advice, of the Assenbly of Divines, shall hold forth according to sacred Scriptures. In the meanetime, we desire you would follow Peace with all men, and Holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord; looking diligently, lest any man faile of the grace of God, lest any root of Bitternesse springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. As a good meanes to promote Pietie in the minds of all, and to prevent Pro∣phanesse: we doe, in a speciall manner, recommend unto your best care, the observance of the Lords day; whereon, as wee hope the Ministers will so im∣prove their Labours at every Church within their severall Tribes, that all the peo∣ple may have the best conveniency to heare the Word of God Preached: So we also trust, that Masters of Families will be carefull by Catechizing, and other∣wise, so to instruct their Children, and Servants, that all may come to the know∣ledge of God, and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, whom rightly to know is life eternall. And that both Magistrates, and Masters of Families will restraine them under their Commands, from carelesse and sinfull expence of that precious time, in sloth, idlenesse, or any way to Gods dishonour, and their own hurt. For your better direction herein, we herewith send you an Ordinance of Parliament. The Company is very sensibly affected with your want of a Minister: And that thereby any particular person, or part of the Colony should suffer a Famine of the Word of God, is very grievous unto us. We intend, God willing, by the very first opportunity, to supply your want herein. In the meane while, we earnestly desire the Ministers would double their diligence in teaching the knowledge of God through the Land; knowing, that as their Labour therein cannot be in vain in the Lord; So shall they thereby exceedingly indeare them∣selves into the good Affections of the Company, who desire nothing so much as the Salvation of your soules. For Counsellors, Captains, and all other Officers, as we require all due ho∣nour, and respect to be given them: So, as a meanes thereof, we desire they may be as a Sanctuary, and City of refuge to all such as love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; improving all their Power, and Authority, as for the se∣curing of the Islands, preserving of Peace, and promoting the power of Godli∣nesse in all places, and Persons; so, for suppressing of all manner of sinne and wic∣kednesse. And, for that Tipling Houses, Idlenesse, and ill Company, are those Anvils, whereon Satan, with our owne Lusts, Forgeth out all manner of sinne and wickednesse; We desire great care be taken to prevent the same: That so, by the Officers faithfull performance of their Duties in their severall pla∣ces, The people being kept in Peace and Amitie, The multitude of Indict∣ments
and Presentments, commonly brought to the publike Assizes, may be pre∣vented. And though we would not encourage Appeales, which proove so trou∣blesome, and chargeble to them that make them: Yet in that case, we shall expect to receive from the publike Officers what ever may cleare the businesse to us; who, by Gods Grace, shall proceed according to the merit of the Cause, withour respect of Persons. In all Causes wherein Oathes are Administred, wee desire great care may bee used to informe both the Jury, and Witnesses, of the horrible sinne of Perjurie, with the dreadfull severity of Gods punishments thereupon, That so they may not adventure to sweare, but in Truth, Judgement, and Righteousnesse. We had good hope that ere now, by the small quantity, meane condi∣tion, and short returnes you have found of Tobacco, you would have beene put upon that diligence and industry, which might have introduced some more pro∣fitable and staple Commodity: whereunto, as we formerly have, so we are still ready to affoord all possible encouragement, and assistance. We shall now de∣sire all those that have made any essayes therein, with such others as have af∣fection thereunto, That they would improove their best Observations, and Ex∣perience, to finde out somewhat which may be of more benefit to you, and sa∣tisfaction to us; which, as we shall accept as an evidence of Affection to the Publike Good; So, we shall consider of some way for compensation, accor∣ding to their charge, and endeavours therein. We have just cause to complaine of the wrong we have suffered in the Case of Wrecks; not only by more private persons, but by publike Officers. And, truely, we are much troubled to finde so great injustice among you, as might occasion us to revoke that Law, which, in great favour, allowes a Moitie to the Reco∣verers. We shall expect, and hope for better Accompts then yet we have re∣ceived, both of that which lately happened, and what hereafter may. We have seriously considered of the want of Linnen Cloth, and other ne∣cessaries, by the publicke Letters, intimated to be in the Colony; which seems the more strange unto us, when we heare the Adventurers declare, that of great Proportions of Goods which they have sent to you, they have received very short Returnes. If there be a scarcity, we conceive it ariseth from your selves, whilest Factours are so unfaithfull in making returnes; private Persons so back∣ward in paying their dues; publike Officers so remisse in executing Justice here∣in; and all, or most so desirous to trade rather with Strangers then with the Com∣pany, which appeares by keeping their Tobaccoes untill our Ship be come away; whereby, both the Merchant is discouraged from sending, and the Company prevented of the duties. If any complain, that the Adventurers, or their Fa∣ctours doe overprise their Commodities, we feare your slow payments are acces∣sary to that errour, which we are so farre from excusing; that, when you have taken order, that speedy Returns be made, we shall endeavour, what is in our power, that no oppression be used. And, because we would remove all colours of complaint, we have desired particular Members of our Company, that they will, at present, send such Proportions as may supply your occasions; We hope they shall receive such Returnes by this Ship, as may both manifest your good
Affection, and encourage their future Adventuers. We are not unmindful of your desires for a free Trade, which you have both in∣timated to us, and sought for from the Governours with you: But the truth, is for the present, the Constitution of the Company, the Obligations upon them, and the propriety of the Owners are such, as be inconsistent with that freedome of Trade which is required. When, upon a serious consideration of all particulars, with a dis-ingaged re∣spect to the common good, it shall appeare, that what is required, is according to Right and Justice, and such as the Company can in faithfulnesse assent unto, you may rest assured, That we shall be most ready to manifest our Affection to any Liberty or Priviledge, which is for the good of the Colony: In the meane time whilst we concurre in allowing freedome of Trade for such Proportions of Cattell, Hogs, Fruits, and other Provisions as may be very well spared, without dammage to the Colony, danger of a Famine, prejudice to the poorer sort, or preventing the Owners of their dues; and, untill farther order hence, onely restraine Trade for Tobacco, which (as necessitie compels) we doe hereby abso∣lutely prohibite; That so, both we may receive our Rents; and by the duties thereupon, the Ministers may have their exhibitions, Ammunition, and other ne∣cessaries for the safety of the Hands, satisfaction of the Officers there, and the charge of the Company be provided for, we hope no man will finde just cause of Offence. But however, we desire to approve our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God, and so to carry on al matters, as that we may be free from each mans want, and from neglect of any thing, which is in our power to procure, for the good and happinesse of the Colony; whereto, as we are in neerenesse of relation, so we desire to manifest our good will and affection in every kinde of way. We shall conclude with that of the Apostle, Finally, Brethren, Fare yee well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde, live in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. Given under the Hands, and common Seale of the Governour and Company at a generall Court, the 23 of October, 1644. Warmicke Governour. Wil: Say and Seale. Arthur Wodenoth, Deputy. Thomas Allen, Tresurer. Persen Trot, Husband. Gilbert Gerard. I. Danvers. Ben. Rudyerd. Richard Knightley. Cor. Holland. Iohn Heydon. Anthony Wither. Edw. Carter. Owen Rowe. Ga∣briel Barber. Richard Casewell. Gedeon de Lawne. Maurice Thompson. Francis Allein. Iohn Iohnstoun. William Iessop. Iohn Graunt. Robert. Coyt∣mor. William Felgate. George Turbervile. Iohn Alcock. Robert Haughton. George Prynne. Anthony Pennyston. Elias Roberts. Iohn Welden. William Web. William Burges. Nath. Hawes. Tho. Turner. George Ward. William Price. Will. Wilkinson. Ioseph Todd. Michael Evans. Richard Hunt. Abra. Sheeres. Iohn Bardwell. Charles Calley.
To the Honourable Governour, and Com∣pany of Adventurers of the City of LONDON for the Plantation of the Sommer-Islands. The Humble Petition and Declaration of the ge∣nerall Inhabitants of the Plantation and Colony in the SOMMER-ILANDS. WEe have received your Declaration, and cannot but acknow∣ledge, That the happinesse of a Christian people is best advan∣ced by their progresse in the waies of Peace and Holinesse, &c. Which happinesse, we of the Sommer-Ilands, might still have enjoyed in these Latter times, as well as formerly, had not those men (whose duties) by their places and callings amongst us did require their best di∣ligence, to leade the people in that happy path; interrupted our peace, in arro∣gating to themselves an unlimited power, in seeking to draw the Inhabitants of this Plantation to worship their imaginations, contrary (as we conceive) to the Lawes of God and man. For whereas you intend not to anticipate, or prevent the Honourable Houses of Parliament &c. This, and onely this, hath beene the true cause of all our sufferings, and distractions in Sommer-Ilands; for our Di∣vines declare, that they are not subject to any humane Power, and in particular, Master Copeland affirmes, That if the King, Parliament, and Synod, shall com∣mand any uniformity in the Church, other then this, which is here set on foot by them, they will obey none. Now if any man shall beleeve that there is no better sacrifie then obedience, and desires so to continue, and with prayer and patience, waite (as you bespeake us) which hath beene the desire of the Inhabi∣tants in generall; the for wardest men in this obedience, are stiled Parliamentary Christians; And hence is that great taxe laid upon us, That Piety hath been dis∣countenanced, and Prophannesse encouraged; hence is it, that the ablest men in the Land are markt out to be the subject, yet privately, of all scandall and ca∣lumny, yea to be enemies to good men, and all goodnesse, and are deprived of the benefit and comfort of the Sacraments; yea, of their Prayers and Preaching; For Master White did publikely deliver in the Pulpit, That such as had not en∣tred into Covenant with him, and yet came to heare him Preach, were but intru∣ders, for he did preach to, and pray for none, but his little Flock. What the thoughts of Parliament have been, or shall bee for the Plantations,
when it shall be derived to us by Authority of your Court, wee shall in obedi∣ence submit thereunto. You have thought meet for present to continue the Government as now it stands by Commission, &c. We are glad that the Gouerment is yet in your hands to continue; but yet it is a grievance under which wee groane, That the Triumvirate Government cast upon us at first, and now continued, procures a scorne and contempt upon us, from all other Plantations, with other just ex∣ceptions which we omit, but especially in that you have by this continuance of Government put upon us a yoake insupportable; For our Saviour himselfe tells us, That no man can serve two Masters: yet such is our condition at present; for you in your Declaration doe desire, and hope that we will with patience attend the resolution of Parliament, as you doe; which desire and hope of yours, is a sufficient command to us, yea for conscience sake we hold our selves bound there∣unto; But yet in the meane time, you have continued such Governours, two of which, have submitted to the Independant Covenant, and have set up a supreme Governour in their Church, that will not wait upon King nor Keysar (their own words) yea, they will bring Scripture to prove that lawfull, though safely applied: And if any man amongst us have but so much wit, or knowledge; to detect such false applications of Scripture, then hee falls into the danger of the Temporall Sword, and is an opposer of the Gospell, &c. To which hand shall we now turne us, if to the right hand of obedience towards you, then we offend our Governors, and what followes thereupon, but all the malicious plots that may be to get such a man upon the snap; if we turne to the left hand in falling downe and worship∣ing these Imaginations for feare of these snares, then we sinne against our con∣science of obedience; What now shall we doe, our resolution is setled, wee will suffer as we have done, and by this our Petition do pray, That you would be pleased either to send us a dispensation of our Obedience, or a deliverance from that pressure of Governours and Ministers under which we groane: We told you before, that we are glad the Government is yet in your hands to continue, but how long it will be so we know not, seeing one of these ministers declared it publikely that they will maintaine what they have begun to the chinne in blood, and that it will never be well in Sommer-Islands, till we chuse our Governours here our selves. There is but this one impediment lies in their way. The children are come to the birth, but as yet there wanteth strength to bring forth. Touching the publike administration of Gods worship, we shall (as we have done) rest in expectance of that Directory, which the Parliament with the ad∣vise of the Assemblie of Divines shall hold forth, counting that a more safe course to confirme our selves, to the resolution of so grave a Senate and Synod, then to be led away to follow the divisions of three unstable mens braines. For the observation of the Lords Day, &c. As we dare not Pharisaically justi∣fie our selves, but rather when wee have done our best services acknow∣ledge our selves to bee unprofitable servants; yet wee durst appeale to all the Divines that ever lived heere, (if it might bee obtained) for testi∣mony of our willing and ready (though weake) indeavours in that kinde;
But what availes all that we do, or can do: For we are told out of the Pulpit, That let a man frequent hearing the Word, read the Scriptures in his house, sing Psalmes, Catechise and instruct his children and servants, &c. yet all is nothing worth, unlesse that man will be a Japheth alureable to dwell in the Tents of Sem, which is (as they would have us beleeve) their visible, Congregationall, Inde∣pendent Church. The Company is very sensibly affected with our want of a Minister, if our Mi∣nisters had been so affected, we had not lost Master Daniel Wight, for we con∣ceive upon good grounds that the difference in opinion betwixt them and him caused him to leave our Islands. For Counsellors, Captains, &c. Those amongst them that know their owne obedience, we account them worthy, and so do, and will yeeld them all due ho∣nour and respect; but such as know not how to obey, know not how to command and it is therefore a grievance unto us to be in subjection to such Commanders. For Tipling-houses &c. it is common to one and other and when money is to be gotten propitius esto tibi is an old rule, and that will set up three tapstries at once in the Secretaries house at Saint Georges for the time of the Assizes. For the matter of Oathes both in Juries, and witnesses, we could be large in this subject; Capt. Forster being Secretary observed some dangerous passages of this nature, and therefore when he was Governour sent out his Proclamation, that no Councellor should take any Attestation (except in case of Fellony or Treason) but in the presence of the defendant; but this was esteemed and term∣ed (by those that favoured nothing that he did doe) to be Grammaticall nonsence and we doe know that because of Oathes a Land mournes, and doe heartily wish that those whom it concernes would be carefull of their duty according to your advice; for we greatly feare that your Court hath beene too much abused in this particular. Concerning the raising of some more staple commodity &c. Capt. Parker his president in having invested so many hundred pounds of his own and his friends and his land now bought over his head, and cannot obtaine any grant of a lease, and insulted upon that he is undone, wife children and all; This will be but a poore encouragement for any man to adventure as he hath done, it having beene the common misery of us all, The more ingenious any man is to make a pleasant and profitable Plantation upon another mans land, the sooner he is undone, by ha∣ving this land and labours taken, or bought over his head, without any charity at all. For Wrecks or wronges to you therein, as it concernes those that live neare the place of Wrecks, so we leave each particular man to answer for himselfe. Your consideration of our want of linnen cloath, and desiring some of your members to adventure hither, wee render you humble thankes for your favour therein; For Factors unfaithfullnesse in making returnes, private persons back∣wardnesse in paying their dues, publike officers remisenesse in executing Justice, &c. We humbly beseech you to looke a litle further to the hand of God that hath taken away all or the greatest part of our labours for these seven together; which hath caused so generall a poverty, that, had we not fallen to set our litle ones to
spinning, hundreds amongst us would have gone naked, notwithstanding all their best endeavours or profits they could produce in mannuring their plantations, And of this we humbly crave your Charitable construction. Concerning matter of free trade, it is our desire rightly to be understood, for we require nothing that should any way tend to the prejudice of any propri∣ety of your Company or authority thereof, but onely that wee may make use of such Tobaccoes as which your Ships will not yeeld us any thing at all, but will (if it should be sent to London) be a great hinderance to your markets and not worth the Fraught. Besides your Ships of late yeares comming by way of the Indies have brought us nothing in comparison to the reliefe of our wants, as for keeping Tobaccoes here till your Ships are gone, it is a thing altogether un∣knowne to us, our desires being to deale with your ships before all others, if we may from them procure what wee want. For none of us all will (by our wills) desire any thing unbeseeming that reverence which we truly beare to your Au∣thority, assuring our selves that according to your declaration, you will not bee wanting to us in Justice of any just grievances, or in Charity of any our poore distresses. And thus have wee with humble and obedient hearts answered your Declara∣tion, wherein we doe humbly desire your favourable construction for the man∣ner, the matter being nothing but truth. Before we conclude, wee humbly beseech you to looke upon one more of our grievances, being of that nature that it concernes not only us, our wives, and chil∣dren for the present, but extends to our posterity, and it is comprized in one of the Articles exhibited by Mr. White against capt. Forster; wherein he writes thus; He so hates the ministers onely for religions sake, that it is justly feared up∣on probable grounds, when the Ships are gone he will suborne false witnesses to take away their lives; If Capt. Forster had beene so wickedly inclined (which the malice of man can never prove against him) then there must be men here that would be suborned, and Jurors what would be swayed by such subornation, there∣fore this concernes us as wee have said. It hath ever beene the honour of the Sommer-Islands their civility in obedi∣ence to Government, and reverend respect of Ministers; But by this unparalel'd flander, our honour is eclipsed, and not onely wee for present murdered in our good names, which is dearer then our lives, and next in value to our Soules. But also our posterity wilbe branded to be the children of them that would have slaine the Prophets, by suffering false witnesse to be suborned to take away the Ministers lives. But we beseech you to looke into the scope and ayme that this tends unto, which is, first to deterre all other Ministers from comming hither, for wee have beene told more then once out of the Pulpit; That we must never expect more Ministers to come hither, and this is true enough, for what gentle∣man of gifts and worth will ever adventure such a voyage to live amongst a peo∣ple where false-witnesse shall be suborned to take away their Ministers lives; Then secondly it will follow, that these already here must of necessity be sub∣mitted unto in all their imaginations, least the Islands be deserted; and so Master White may take both swords into his hands, which he will have, or else he with
the assistance of the prologitor (as Mr. Paynter termes himselfe) will set all on a flame; which flame had long or this broken forth, but that Capt: Sayle his more moderate, and temperate carriage towards us, which we must acknow∣ledge, hath prevented it. In this grievance wee our wives and children doe cry to you for Justice for vindicating our innocency for the present, and preventing future mischiefes, which otherwise wee feare will follow; For whatsoever you have intimated in your Declaration, or other private instructions to these gentlemen. Yet they goe on in their former resolutions, and Mr. Goulding bad one tell the Commissi∣oners that hee will give it under his hand that they will neither baptize our chil∣dren nor administer the Sacrament to us unlesse we will submit to their Cove∣nant. Have we not then cause to cry to you for Justice, that you would be plea∣sed to take away the cause that the effect may cease, in freeing us from the super∣lative Imperiousnesse of this supream Church Governour, and his powerfull Abettor Mr. Goulding his second: Suffer not we beseech you, our obedience to be trampled under-foot, but settle such a Governour and such Ministers as may lead and teach us in the wayes of faith and good life, and not trouble our heads with Christs comming to raigne upon earth a thousand yeares personally, with many such like fancies; But such ministers we desire as will submit to that which shall be established by Authority. And so we conclude with your owne conclusion, We will strive to per∣fection, we will desire peace and ensue it, but of one minde we shall ne∣ver be with this supream Independent Church Governour, that is submitted unto, next and immediatly under Christ; yet we will bee of good comfort, that our obedience to Authority shall not want cherishing, and in this we will rest, and pray the God of Love and Pence to be with you and us. Post-script. AFter this our Petition was roughly drawne, though fairely writ∣ten, and delivered into some mens hands to be shewen, and ad∣vised upon, to be reformed for matter and manner, according to truth and humility, that fell into our Governours hands, with Master White the Minister, and others, and the same night they drew another Petition, which was presented earely the next mor∣ning to Sandis Tribe, (who had not as then seene this of ours) and from thence to Southampton [with many passionate speeches] and and so to severall Tribes to be subscribed, questioning whether this, or ours, should be sent to your Honourable Court, by meanes whereof, the example of Superiours being very prevalent; some
men through feare, others through partiality, have beene drawne to subscribe to the last Petition, what the scaope thereof is, wee leave it to your Wisdomes to consider. Ours tending onely to be relieved by your Iustice from the power of such men, as dis∣claime Obedience to all Authority which they savour not. It is our humble desire to bee so understood, that in all the foregoing passages, wee have not the least ayme against the persons of any man whatsoever, but onely of the practises, occasioning our just grievances; both in conscience of our obedience by you commanded, as also in respect of the suffering which wee present∣ly feele; and future Inconveniences; which wee evidently foresee [unlesse by your wonted goodnesse, and care of this Plantation, pre∣vented] to be hanging over us and ours. Wee whose names are underwritten, doe testifie that this is the true Copy of their Petition. Robert Huson. Thomas Jenyngs. Richard Sothworth.
To the Right Honourable the Committees of both the Honourable Houses of Parliament for the English Plantati∣ons on the Coasts of America. The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Co∣lony and Plantation in Sommer-Ilands. Sheweth, THat whereas this Plantation and Colony, hath since the beginning thereof beene governed in peace, and tranquillity, by the just, pi∣ous, and religious care of the Honourable Company of Adventu∣rers of the City of London, for the Plantation of the Sommer-Ilands; Yet, so it is, that by the practice and wavering conceits of Master Nathaniel White, Master Patricke Copeland, and Master William Goulding, sometimes our Ministers here, and still resident amongst us, but not as Ministers: Our former peace hath beene disturbed, In that they the said Master Nathaniel White, Ma∣ster Patrick Copeland, and Master William Goulding, did on the last day of Ia∣nuary, in Ann. 1643. at a Fast by them ordained (and not commanded by Authority) to be held in the Parish Church of Pagetts Tribe, in the Summer-Islands, in the afternoone of the same day, draw themselves together in the bo∣dy of the said Church, and did then, and there, publikely manifest and declare, That they the said Master Nathaniel White, Master Patricke Copeland, and Ma∣ster William Golding, did lay downe, renounce, and relinquish their Office of Ministery received in the Church of England, acknowledging themselves to be but private men; Yet so, that they held themselves to bee a Church of them∣selves, and to that end had entred into Covenant amongst themselves, and would be ready to receive into their Covenant such as would submit thereunto. At which very time, Master Robert Kesteven, one of our Counsellors, submit∣ted unto the said Covenant, and after confession was admitted. Since which time, amongst others, two of our Governours, namely, Master Stephen Paynter, and Master William Wilkinson have submitted to the said Co∣venant, and have beene admitted. And about the 15th. of May. 1644. This new-set-up Church, in the same place proceeded to the Election of Officers, the manner whereof we think fit to omit, But Master Painter declaring that they held their Church to be Indepen∣dant, and Master White being chosen Pastor thereof, Master Paynter (one of our
Governours) made submission unto Pastor White, in name of their Church, in these words; We submit unto you, as Supreame Governour of this Church, next and immediatly under Christ, Which submission was no sooner made then ac∣cepted: From this ground, wee have been taught strange Doctrine, that these Gentlemen hold themselves to subject to no humane power, and that if the King, Parliament, and Synod, should command any uniformity in the Church, other then this which they have set on foot, they will obey none. But we of this Plantation, having learned to know no better Sacrifice then Obedience, have refused to submit to these fancies, resolving our selves, that it is a duty wherein we stand obliged, to wait upon that Directory which the Parli∣ment, with the advice of the Assembly of Divines shall hold forth unto us. But by reason of this dutifull and obedient affection in us; our Children dye unbaptized, to the terrour of many weake ones amongst us, our selves are depri∣ved of renewing our Covenant with our God, in using the meanes, The Supper of the Lord. Our daughter cannot be given in marriage, &c. with many other just grievances under which we groan. Some part of which grievances, we have in as briefe a manner (as our capacites will affoord) exhibited under our hands to the Honourable Company, under whose Government we have so long lived in peace. And because we have been informed, that a select Committee of both the Honourable Houses hath been appointed to looke into the affaires of the Plan∣tations, we doe present this our humble Petition to your Wisdomes considerati∣ons. Humbly praying, That (as occasion may be offered) you would be pleased to call for such our grievances, to the Honourable Company. That so the said Company may receive such aide from your Authority, as may tend to the safety and quiet of our obedience. And we shall pray, &c. Subscribed by us whose names are underwritten by Commission, under the hands of the Inhabitants of the severall Tribes, whereunto we belong. We whose names are underwritten doe testifie that this is the true Copy of this Petition. Robert Huson. Thomas Ienyngs. Richard Sothworth. FINIS.
