12484 S92778 56572848 180951
LIMBO'S BATTERIE, OR, An Answere, to a Popish Pamphlet, OF Christs descense to Hell: Where-in what can bee alleadged, for the locall descending of His Soule thither, af∣ter His Suffering, to liberate the PA∣TRIARCHES, out of anie LIMBVS, is clearlie refuted: Extorted at last, to a more publicke view, BY WILLIAM GVILD. Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 2. de Nuptiis & Concup. c. 2. Verba recta ac veritatis luce fulgentia, tortuosis interpretatio∣nibus obscurare & depravare moliuntur. Hieronymus Advers. Pelag. Ingemui, fateor, nobis minus inesse voluntatis ad propagandam ve∣ritatem, quam illis inest invidentia ad inculcandum men∣dacium. ANNO 1630. ABERDENE, Printed by Edward Raban.
crest with three towers flanked by two lions BON. ACCORD Insignia Vrbis abredoniae;
TO THE TRVE∣LIE NOBLE, Right Honourable, and Religious Lord, IAMES, LORD DESKFORD. MY LORD, ABoue three Yeares agoe, this Popish De∣maund, in the Iesuite's owne Hand-wryting, being given to
that moste Religious Gentle∣man, and hopefull Branch, of that Noble Stocke, FRAN∣CIS HAY, Sonne to the Earle of ERROLL; with no lesse bragging, than that all the Ministers were not able to an∣swere it: Amongst the meanest of whome, it having pleased that worthie Gentle-man, to imploy my Paynes; I drew vp an Answere, at that tyme, more to giue him-selfe contentment, (whose constancie they would haue brangled) than any-wayes to satisfie those, who by the more learned Travels of others, could never yet bee made sen∣sible, in anie poynt of their er∣ronius Giddinesse, by that in∣ebriating Cup of their who∣rish Mother. Alwayes, since that tyme, how-so-ever, I ne∣ver
heard more of that pur∣pose, and that the Demander re∣sted silent; yet the busie Surmi∣ses of late, and causlesse brags, of some of that Popish Crew, comming to myne Eares; al∣leadging in their vaunting and wanton humour, that a Demand had long a-goe beene made to some Ministers, concerning their BIBLES translation, and a mayne Article of the CREED; where-vnto they were never, hither-to, able to reply: Together with the ear∣nest desire of others, well-affe∣cted, hath made mee to revise my Paynes, and of new to put Pen to Paper; and so to bring foorth, to more publicke view, and more common benefite, what other-wyse was onlie in∣tended for a private vse: Wher∣by
anie, of indifferent judge∣ment, may see, how justlie they beltch foorth their boysterous Brags, and heaue with the stile of Invincible, (as they did a-before their Spanish Armado) what-so-ever commeth from the Finger-tops of their ghost∣lie Fathers: as if their Brayne could hatch nothing, but a per∣fect Pallas: tho with a-lyke suc∣cesse of disappoyntment, that preparation, and their paynes, are seene to symbolize. The LORD grant, that still HIS CHVRCHES Foes, may be as a rolling Wheele, and as Stubble before the Wynde; whom He may persecute,Psal. 83.13. with His Tempest, and make afraid, with His Storme. These Paynes, then, Most Noble, and Religious Lord, I
haue for this cause dedicated to your learned Patronage; as One, both in Blood, and Affe∣ction, most neare, and entirelie linked with that Noble Gentle∣man, who instigated mee, first, to the taking of the same. And in respect your fervent loue to RELIGION, is not onelie evident; but also your zealous and judicious Defence of the TRVETH, at all fit occasi∣ons is not our, (to all those that know Your Honour) never to bee wanting: And who is able, therefore, sufficientlie, by Skill and Arte, to mayntayne against all Opposers, This, and what poynt so-ever else of sacred VERITIE, which shelte∣reth it selfe vnder the Shield of Your learned Patrocinie. Wi∣shing, also, that This may re∣ceyue
such acceptation, accor∣ding to Your Lordships imbred courteous and gentle Disposi∣tion, that it may bee reputed, and remayne, as a small, but sincere Testimonie, of the most respectiue duetie, and entire af∣fection of one, who with the apprecation of all Happinesse, shall ever continue Your Lordships devoted, WILLIAM GVILD.
TO THE READER. COVRTEOVS READER, AS the Apostle distinguisheth, and (according to Augustine's wit∣nessing,Bell. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 9. cited by Bellarmine) as the orthodoxe CHVRCH ever believed, and primitiuelie professed, that they made but two Estates of the CHVRCH; one Militant on Earth, and another Triumphant in Heaven: So, altho our Beliefe and Profession, bee jumplie agree∣able; yet not onlie will our Ad∣versaries haue a third estate of Christians, vnder the GOSPEL,
after death, in Purgatorie; but also of the Fathers and Patriar∣ches, vnder the Law, in an Hellish Limbo; and, that thither our Sa∣viour behoved locallie to descend, after His death, for their libera∣tion.The state of the Con∣troversie. So that heere-in standeth the question betweene vs, (lest thou shouldest mistake the state there-of) Whether the Soules of the Patriarches, & Godly vn∣der the Law, vntill CHRISTS death, were detayned captiue, in a part of Hell, called Limbus Patrum? And, That CHRIST descended locallie in His Soule thither, for their liberation? They holde the Affirmatiue, and wee the Negatiue; seeing David, speaking of him-selfe, clearlie doeth say,Psal. 73.24. Thou wilt guide mee with Thy counsell, and there∣after (not inclose mee in an Hel∣lish Dungeon,) but receiue mee
vp in Glorie. Which made Au∣gustine to professe accordinglie,Aug. Epist. 99. ad Evo∣dium. That the Soules of the Iust, be∣fore CHRIST'S death, were in Abraham's Bosome, where they enjoyed constantlie the blessed presence of the divine Majestie. Wee controvert not, therefore, so much of CHRISTS descense into Hell; nor deny the same simplie, and everie-way; especiallie seeing with their owne great Master Durandus,Durand. in 3. Sent. Dist. 22. q. 3. all PROTESTANTS acknowledge His descense thither virtuallie, and by effect. But wee deny main∣lie the Popish ende of His descense thither, whether virtuallie, or lo∣callie the same were affirmed. Yea, taking Hell (as it should be) properlie, for the place of Torment onlie, and estate of the Damned, (all other Limboes beeing but imaginarie Chimeraes.) It is
the constant doctrine of all the Romanists with vs, that except virtuallie, or by effect, CHRIST no-wyse descended locallie into Hell, thus vnderstood. Therefore, if we proue, that the Patriarches, before CHRIST'S death, were not in Hell, (as both Scripture, and most orthodoxe Fathers doe witnesse) and consequentlie, that in Hell there was no such place of their detention, as a Limbus Pa∣trum; Wee shall, without contro∣versie, evince, that locallie CHRIST descended not thither, for that ende of their liberation: and so obtayning, that they were not in anie such Limbus, & that CHRIST descended not in Soule, to deliver them out of anie such Limbus; For anie other manner of His descense into Hell, (seeing both sides grant a descense vir∣tuall, and in effect to the place of
the Damned) betweene them and vs, there would rest no controver∣sie, nor can they bee anie way able vnjustlie to vpbrayd vs, with any denyall of a cleare Article in the Creed, Of CHRISTS descense into Hell; this Popish Limbus onlie being taken out of the way, into which onlie, for the fore-sayd liberation, they affirme a locall descending. Which detention of the holie Patriarches, and Godlie, in anie such Hellish Prison, vnder the Law, is a doctrine, not onlie cros∣sing the veritie of Scripture, and abating from the force of Man's Fayth, and GOD'S Mercie; but also, is no lesse derogatorie to the efficacie of CHRIST'S me∣rite, & vertue of His death, (who was that Lambe, slayne from the beginning of the Worlde;) nor Man's satisfaction, in that Popish
Purgatorie, vnder the GOSPEL now, is a-lyke abasing of the same Merite, and curtayling of the blessed power of His paynfull Pas∣sion: and so, are both sacrilegious Heresies, and accursed encroa∣chings vpon the LORDS Prero∣gatiue Royall, and Priestlie Pre∣heminence. Thus, the matter and state of things being rightlie considered, thou mayest the more profitablie peruse these succinct ensuing pains And the LORD giue thee vn∣derstanding, and a sober Mynde, zealous for His TRVETH, and carefull for thy preservation, from the seduction of deceitfull Errour. Thine in CHRIST IESVS, W. G.
The Contents of this Treatise. THAT the word [Infernus] doeth often-tymes signifie the Graue; and so, that both Infernus and Sepulchrum, in the Latine, are both frequentlie found of one signification. CHAPTER I. That  and , lykewyse, in the Greeke, are often-tymes put for one thing, and denotate the Graue, in lyke-manner. CHAP. II. That Sheol and Keber, also, in the Hebrew, doe frequentlie signifie one thing, and that by both the Graue is also meant. CHAP. III. Whether Hell, and Abraham's Bo∣some, bee one thing, as the Romanists af∣firme? CHAP. IV. Whether the Patriarches, & just Men, were in Hell, or anie part there-of, detai∣ned till CHRISTS suffering? CHAP. V. Whither CHRISTS Soule went im∣mediatelie, after His suffering on the Crosse. CHAP. VI. What is meant by the lower parts of the Earth. Ephes. 4.9. CHAP. VII. What is meant by the heart of the Earth. Matth. 12.40. CHAP. VIII. What is the meaning of leading Cap∣tivitie captiue. Eph. 4.8. CHAP. IX.
The true meaning of Hebr. 11.39. cleared. CHAP. X. The true exposition, also, of Heb. 9.8. and 10.19. set downe, and fred from Popish wresting. CHAP. XI. That place of Zachariah, 9.11. explained, adduced chieflie for Limbus. CHAP. XII. That CHRIST suffered as well in Soule, as in Bodie: proven by cleare Scriptures. CHAP. XIII. That CHRIST suffered in Soule, as well as in Bodie: proven out of the Fa∣thers. CHAP. XIV. That CHRIST suffered in Soule, against the Romanists: proven out of the Romanists themselues. CHAP. XV. What paynes they were, which CHRIST suffered in His Soule, for Man-kynde. CHAP. XVI. That CHRIST suffered the Punish∣mēt both of damni & sensus. CHA. XVII. The Defence of Beza's Exposition, of Acts 2.27. CHAP. XVIII. The place of 1. Pet. 3.19. alleadged for Limbus, clearlie expounded, and vin∣dicated from Errour. CHAP. XIX. In what sound sense, without con∣troversie, it is confessed, and may bee yeelded vnto, both by Papist, and Prote∣stant, That CHRIST descended to Hell. CHAP. XX. FINIS.
The Demaund of a Catholicke, to the Protestant Prea∣chours. I Demaund, How your two BIBLES can be both truelie translated, in the second Chapter of the Acts, 27. vers. where-in, in one, printed at LONDON, 1598. (and in sun∣drie others) is sayd of CHRISTS Soule, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Graue: In another, printed at LONDON, 1619.
Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Hell? I demaund, then, if Graue and Hell bee one thing, or no? Infernus and Sepulchrum?  and ? Sheol and Keber? And if they bee one thing in signification, I desire Testimonies, of authenticke Au∣thors, in the fore-sayde Langua∣ges, which holde this Opinion? If they be not one thing in sig∣nification, what moveth you to translate, agaynst all Antiquitie, yea, agaynst an Article of our Creed, That CHRIST His Soule was in the Graue? For we belieue, that CHRIST descended vnto Hell, not accor∣ding to His Bodie, (because indeed it was in a new Monument buried by Ioseph of Arimathea,Luke 23.53 as the Scripture witnesseth) therefore according to His Soule, which
went downe, to Abrahams Bo∣some, to deliver the Patriarchs, and the Iust, which were there detayned captiue. And this des∣cending can not be to the Graue, because Saynct Paul sayeth,Ephes. 4.9. That Hee descended first to the lower parts of the earth; which is a place opposite to that where He ascended when Hee led Captivitie captiue; and is called in our Creed by the Apostles, Hell; and by our Sa∣viour, The heart of the earth:Mat. 12.40. For as Ionas was three dayes and three nights in the Whales bellie, so shall the Sonne of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. But the heart of the earth was not the Graue; be∣cause as Saynct Ierome sayeth,Hierom. in cap. 2. Ionae. Sicut cor in medio est anima∣lis, ita infernus in medio terrae esse perhibetur. And in another
place,Idem, in cap. 4. ad Ephes. Inferiora terrae infernus accipitur, ad quem DOMINVS noster Salvatórque descendit, ut sanctorum animas, quae ibi tenebantur inclusae secum ad coelos victor abduceret. More-over; This place where-vnto CHRIST descended, can not be Heaven; because wee say not, that CHRIST descended into Heaven; but that Hee ascen∣ded, and led Captivitie captiue: which was the Patriarchs and Prophets, and the Iust, which died before CHRISTS suffering, and were not glorified, till the pryce of our Redemption was payed, by putting out, as Saynct Paul sayth, the Hand-wryting of Ordinances,Coloss. 2.14. that was agaynst vs, which was contrarie to vs; Hee even tooke it out of the way, and fastened it vpon the Crosse, &c. They were
not then glorified before that tyme, because all those, as Saynct Paul sayeth,Hebr. 11.39. through Fayth ob∣tayned good report, and rcceived not the Promise; GOD provyding a better thing for vs, that they without vs should not bee made perfect. And the reason is which Saynct Paul giveth, saying, That the way vnto the Holiest of all,Heb. 9.8. was not yet opened, while as yet the first Tabernacle was stan∣ding: for which cause the same Apostle sayeth, That the ente∣ring to the holie Place, that is,Hebr. 10.19. to Heaven, is a new way: but it had not beene a new way, if anie had entered before CHRIST our Sa∣viour. Where-by it is evident, that CHRIST was the first that ascended, when He led Captivitie captiue, &c. And also, that Hee descended first to the lower parts
of the earth; Ut educeret vin∣ctos suos de lacu, in quo non erat aqua,Zach. 9.11. as Zacharias the Pro∣phet sayeth. Farther: This descending of CHRIST vnto Hell,Lib. 2. instit. cap. 6. §. 10. can not bee vnderstood of the suffering of the paynes of Hell speciallie vpon the Crosse, according to Iohn Cal∣vines blasphemous doctrine; be∣cause in all the Scripture there is no mention made of such suffe∣ring:1. Iohn. 1.7. and Saynct Iohn sayth, that the Blood of CHRIST cleangeth vs from all sinne: and Saynct Paul to the Ephesians sayeth,Ephes. 1.7. We haue redemption through His Blood, even the forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to His rich Grace: and therefore I demaund, Whether suffered CHRIST vpō the Crosse, Poenam damni, or sensus, or both?
Hee suffered not the first, be∣cause His Soule was ever blessed: Hee suffered not the second, be∣cause Hee suffered not vpon the Crosse the payne of Fyre, nor vt∣ter Darknesse, in aeternall Bands: neyther suffered Hee the Worme which dieth not; nor Hee was not in Hell, in companie with the wic∣ked spirits, where is weeping, and gnashing of Teeth: for these are the paynes of Hell, where-of men∣tion is in Scripture. Thirdlie: If He suffered both poenam damni, and sensus, I de∣sire Scripture for the same: for, according to Theologues, all the paynes of Hell are comprehended vnder these two tearmes, Poena damni, & sensus? Finallie: It can not bee sayde, that when the Scripture sayeth, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule
in Hell; that it is to bee vnder∣stoode,In his Bi∣ble, 1556. as Beza interpreteth it, Thou wilt not leaue my Car∣case in the Graue: because the Soule, is not the Carcase; and Graue, is not Hell. There-after, the Soule in that place, can not bee taken for the Bodie; because it is distinguished from the Bodie, where-of it is sayde, that it shall not see Corrup∣tion;Act 2.27. nor was His Soule in Graue at anie tyme of those three dayes, where-in Hee descended vnto Hell; except immediatelie before His Glorious Resurrection.
LIMBO'S BATTERIE, OR An Answere to a po∣pish Pamphlet, or de∣maund, Concerning CHRISTS descense into Hell. THE POPISH DEMAND. I Demaund; How your two BIBLES can bee both true∣lie translated, in the second Chapter of th' Acts, vers. 27. Where-in, in one, printed at Lon∣don,
1598. (and in sundrie others) is sayde of CHRISTS Soule, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Graue: In another, printed at London, 1619. Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Hell? I demaund, then, if Graue and Hell bee one thing, or no? Infernus, and Sepul∣chrum? , and ? Sheol, and Keber? And if they bee one thing in significa∣tion, I desire testimonies of au∣thenticke Authors, in the fore∣sayde Languages, which holde this Opinion, &c.
THE PROTES∣TANT REPLY. CHAPTER I. That the word INFERNVS, doeth of∣ten-tymes signifie the Graue: and so, that both INFERNVS and SE∣PVLCHRVM, are frequentlie of one signification. WHere-as it is first demaunded, How our two BIBLES can bee both truely translated, Act. 2.27. where-in, in one, printed at LON∣DON, 1598. it is sayde, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Graue: And in another, printed also at LONDON, 1619. it is sayde, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Hell? The Demaunde there-fore, desi∣reth
to bee resolved; If Infernus and Sepulchrum, or Hell and Graue,  and , Sheol and Keber, bee one in signification? And if they bee, hee requyreth Testimo∣nies of authenticke Authors, in the fore-sayde Languages, which holde this Opinion. Where-in, before we satisfie his desire, wee must put him in mynde, of as great diversitie, in translation of this selfe-same Testimonie, in their owne BIBLES: Their vulgar translation, printed at LIONS, 1546. translating that place of the PSALME, cited Act. 2.27. after this manner,Psal. 16.10. Non derelinques animam meam in Inferno, or Hell. But their inter∣linear BIBLE, set foorth at the Ex∣pences of their Catholicke King, and approven by the Censure of the Vniversitie of LOVANE, prin∣ted at ANTWERPE, 1572. transla∣ting that place of the PSALME thus, Non derelinqes animam meam in Sepulchro, or the Graue. And so, in
our translation, wee are not found singular. But,Lyra in Isai 5. accipitur autē Infer∣nus in Scrip∣tura dupli∣citer: uno modo profos∣sa, ubi po∣nuntur mor∣tuorum ca∣davera: alio modo pro lo∣co ubi des∣cendunt ani∣mae damna∣torum. to satisfie this Demaund in particular; Whether Infernus and Sepulchrum, or Graue and Hell, be one thing in signification? I aunswere shortlie, in their owne LYRA his wordes, That Infernus is taken in Scripture, not onelie for the place of the Damned; but also for the Pit, or Graue, (sayeth hee) where the bo∣dies of the dead are layde. And, lest that LYRA shoulde seeme to haue spoken so without warrand, I will cleare the trueth of his speach, 1. by Scripture, and their owne trans∣lation there-of, 2. by Fathers, 3. by them-selues. 1. In Scripture, then, wee finde, that, PSAL. 89.48. it is sayde, What man is hee that liveth, that shall not see Death? or, deliver his Soule è manu Inferi? Which must bee rendered (as PAGNIN and VA∣TABLVS expound it) out of the hand, or power, of the Graue: be∣cause if Hell, or place of the damned,
were signified there-by, it might bee aunswered, That the Soule of the Godlie shall bee delivered è manu Inferi: and so the question, Quis homo? (excepting none) should bee vnfitting, and fale. Agayne, PSAL. 141.7. Our bones are scattered (sayeth the PSALMIST) secus Infernum, or, ad os Inferni: which PAGNIN, and EMMANVEL SA, the Iesuit, ex∣pound to bee Sepulchrum, or the mouth of the Graue: because, doe what Popish Sophists can doe, they can not bee so absurd, as other-wise to make the dispersion of the bones of dead men, to bee in the infernall place of the punishment of Souls. 2. Secondlie; by testimonie of Fathers, who lived within the first 00 yeares, wee will proue, that Infernus and Sepulchrum, are oft put for one. 1. ORIGEN (who lived Anno 230.) sayeth thus;Orig. tract. 35. in Math. cap. 27. Qui illum post diem tertium revocavit ab inferis, & nos revocabit tempore oportuno: that is, Hee
who raysed, or recalled, CHRIST, after the third day, from the infer∣nall partes; will also rayse, or re∣call, vs from thence, in the owne tyme. Now, it is from the Graue, and not from Hell, that the Godlie are raysed, or called foorth, at the last day: There-fore, by INFERI, the Graues, and not Hell, must bee vnderstood. 2. HILARIVS also (who lived Anno 360.) speaketh in this man∣ner;Hilar. de trinit. lib. 11 CHRISTI caro (sayeth hee) vivificata per se etiam, ex inferno exiit: that is, CHRIST'S Flesh beeing quickened by Him-selfe, came out of the Graue. 3. AVGVSTINE lyke-wyse (who lived Anno 410.) sayeth thus;Aug. orat. cont. Iudeos, Pagan. & Artan. tom. 6. cap. 17. Nonne inferna CHRISTO testimonium perhibuerunt? &c. that is. Did not the Graues (sayeth hee) giue testi∣monie to CHRIST, when loo∣sing their power, they reserved LAZARVS, (whom they had recei∣ved to dissolue) for foure dayes to∣gether, that they might restore
him safe agayne, when they heard the voyce of the LORD comman∣ding it? Prim. in Hebr. 13.4. PRIMASIVS in lyke manner, (who lived Anno 450.) by way of explication, sayeth; Deus Pater Fi∣lium reduxit è mortuis, hoc est, de Infer∣no, vel de Sepultura: that is, GOD the Father (sayeth hee) brought His Sonne from the dead, that is, from the infernall place, or graue. Ruffin. in expos. Sym∣boli.Whence it is, that RVFFINVS, (who lived Anno 390.) having declared, in his Exposition of the Creed, That in the Symboll of the Church of Rome in his tyme, ney∣ther in the Easterne Churches, there was no such Article, as, Hee descen∣ded vnto Hell. Yet, hee presentlie subjoyneth, That where it is found, Vis verbi (sayeth hee) eadem vide∣tur esse in eo, quod Sepultus dicitur: that is, That the force, or meaning of the word, seemeth to bee the same, with that where-in it is sayde, that Hee was buried.
Last of all, out of them-selues, and Iesuiticall owne confessions, wee will proue, that Infernus and Sepulchrum, are often-tymes one. Omitting, therefore, Lyra his fore-cited testimonie, Alcuinus,Alcuin. in Gen. inter∣rog. 256. an auncient Doctor, moving the que∣stion, howe that speach of Iaakob should bee vnderstood, Genes. 37.35. Descendam ad Filium cum luctu in Infernum. Inferni nomine (sayeth hee) Sepulchrum significavit: that is, By the word Infernus, hee signified the Graue, (sayeth hee.) So sayeth the Iesuit, Gaspar Sanctius;Gasp. Zan∣ctius, in Act. 2. Sect. 56. Est in Scriptura frequens, Infernum pro Sepul∣tura, atque adeo pro morte sumi: that is, It is vsuall (sayeth hee) that the word Infernus, in Scripture, is ta∣ken for Buriall, and for Death it selfe.Emm. Sa, in Indice Phraseon, Sac. Scrip∣turae. Alphonsus Mend. con∣trov. Theol. q. 1. positiv. Sect. 5. And Emmanuell Sa particularizeth sixteene places in the Olde Testa∣ment, where Infernus is put for the Graue. Imo fere semper Inferni nomen Sepulchrum sonat in Veteri Testamento, sayeth ALPHONSVS MENDOZA: that is to say, Yea, almost ever the
name Infernus, signifieth the Graue, in the Olde Testament. Andrad. defen. Con∣cil. Trid. l. 2.And, to conclude; Andradius, the defender of the Councell of Trent, speaking of this same place of the Acts, sayeth; Nullum erit in∣ter Latina Graecaq́ue exemplaria dissi∣dium, si animadvertamus INFERNVM hoc loco pro morte atque Sepulchro He∣breorum dicendi more usurpari: that is, There will be no discord betweene the Latine and Greeke Copies, if wee remarke that the word Infer∣nus, after the Hebrew phrase, is ta∣ken for Death, and the Graue. So that, I hope, wee haue satis∣fied, to the full, the Iesuits first de∣maund, Whether Infernus and Se∣purchrum bee one in signification; and haue given him authenticke Authors, according to his desire, and whom he can not reject, who holde this Opinion.
CHAP. II. That  and  are fre∣quently put for one, and are of a-lyke and the same signi∣fication. THe Iesuits next Question, being, Whether  and  bee all one thing? and where-in hee desyreth a-lyke proofe, and evidence, as in the for∣mer, wee are, there-fore, to proue the same, 1. by Scripture, 2. by the Fathers, 3. out of the Litur∣gies of the Greeke Church; and last, by their owne Confessions. First, then, for proofe by Scrip∣ture: Revel 20.13.14. it is sayde, That as the Sea gaue vp her dead,
(which were buried in the waters;) So  gaue vp her dead, (which were buried in the earth.) Which therefore, can not bee Hell, which contayneth no dead bodies to sur∣render; but onlie the Graue, Death proper jayle. Agayne, it is sayde, verse 14 That Death and  were both casten into the fyerie Lake, which is Hell, or the second Death. Now,  were Hell it selfe there, and not the Graue, or state of corrup¦tion, then Hell should bee sayde t bee casten into Hell, or the fyer Lake; which were vnfitting. There¦fore, it seemeth, that Basil of Selen¦cia had relation to this place, wh hee bringeth in CHRIST, saying I will teach , that it mu expect the resurrestion to succe vnto it. Now, wee knowe, th what succeedeth, importeth th abrogating of that which praece¦ded. Therefore, by , H can not bee meant; because the¦surrection
can not bee sayde to suc∣ceede there-to, but it rather in full impletion to the resurrection, but the Graue is fitlie meant; because after the resurrection, there shall be no more corruption of bodies, nor place destinate or proper for that vse. Secondlie, for probation out of the Fathers, that  and  are all one. 1. Gregorie Nyssene,Greg. Nys∣sen. in Pasch. & Christi resur. tom. 2. oper. Gra∣colat. p. 824, moving the question, how CHRIST could bee at one tyme, hoth in , and in PARADISE? he aunswereth, That Hee was in  onelie with His Bodie, which was dead; but in His Soule, Hee brought the Thiefe into possession of PARADISE. Nowe, seeing all confesse, that the Bodie of CHRIST lay onelie in the Graue; therefore it followeth, that  and the Graue heere are all but one thing. 2. Chrysostome also sayeth, That our Saviour spoyled , by des∣cending
into :Chrys. orae catechet. in S. Pascha tom. 5. oper. Chrys. edit. San, p. 916 . Caesar. dial. 4. . Athan. Grae∣colat. tom. 2. p, 59. tract. de defin. Hee made i bitter, (sayeth hee) when it ta¦sted of His Flesh. Now, all con∣sent, that the Graue onelie tasted o CHRIST'S Flesh; there-fore , which was made bitter by that tasting, was onlie CHRISTS Graue. And there-fore the sam Father sayeth a little after, It re∣ceived a Bodie, and lighted vp∣on GOD: It received Earth and met with Heaven: It recei∣ved that which it saw, and fel vpon that which it saw not. 3. Caesarius also sayeth, that , where-in the divine Bodie was hidden by buriall, did laven al man (sayeth hee) vnto resurre∣ction, and lyfe. 4. Athanasius lyke-wyse, or the Author of the Definitions amongs his Workes, sayth thus of CHRIST; That Hee was the first-begotten o the dead; because Hee was the first that rose from ; as wee shall
also ryse (sayeth hee) at His second comming. Now, it is well a-nough knowne, that our bodies shall ryse at His second comming, not from Hell, but from the Graue: there-fore by , the Graue is vnder∣stood. 5. Last of all, sayeth the two Cyrills: hee of Alexandria,Cyril. Alex, Glaphyr. in Gen. l. 5. p. 121. That CHRIST was raysed vp for vs: For, (sayeth hee) Hee could not bee detayned by the gates of , (or power of the Graue.) And Cyrill of Hierusalem, having sayde,Cyril. Hie∣rosol. catech. 14. That our Saviour descended into , doeth presentlie subjoyne, as an explanation, : For Hee descended vnto Death (sayeth hee.) Thirdlie: To qualifie that  and , are all one in the Li∣turgies of the Grecian Church at this day, who best know the signi∣fication of Greeke words, let these two instances testifie.
In one of these Liturgies they sing thus,Graeci in Oc∣toecho. Ana∣stas. : that is; The cor∣ruption-working Pallace of the Graue was dissolved, when Thou, O LORD, arose out of the Tombe. Where wee see, that the worke of corruption is attributed to , which is the propertie onelie of the Graue, and not of Hell, where there is no consuming, by anie putrifaction. Bibliothee. tom. 6. par. ed. an. 1589 col. 128.Agayne, in another Liturgie, these are their wordes; : that is; Thou who spoy∣ledst , or the Graue, by Thy buriall there-in, bee myndfull on mee. Fourthlie, for evidence out of them-selues, that  and  are often put for one, our probation shall bee, 1. from their dictionarie direction, 2. from their
locall expositions of Scripture, 3. from their reconciling of places seeming contrarious, and last, from force of argument, out of Bellar∣mines owne confession. As for the first: In the Greeke Dictionarie, set out by them-selues,Lexic. Grae∣col. in sacro appar. Bi∣blior. Reg. Antverpia, anno 1572. for the better vnderstanding of the Bible, it is intimated vnto vs, that  doeth not onelie signifie that which is the place of the dam∣ned, but the Graue also; as is cleare there, in the word . Next, for locall exposition of Scripture: In the Olde Testament, where the Septuagint, in the Greeke, Psal. 89.48. hath ; Pagnin expoundeth it, E manu Sepulchri. As also, Psal. 141.7. where the Septuagint hath ; the fore-named Pagnin, and Emmanuel Sa, the Ie∣suit, doe translate Sepulchrum, or the Graue. Lyke-wyse, in the New Te∣stament, where it is, 1. Cor. 15.55. O, , where is thy victorie?
Pagnin, and Arias Montanus, ex∣pound the same, the Graue. Thirdlie, for reconciling of dis∣cordant-seeming places, especiallie of that, Acts 2.24. some reading, the dolours of Death; and others, the dolours of Hell:Andrad. de∣fen. Trid. fid. l. 2. ANDRA∣DIVS sayeth, That will bee no dis∣agreement betweene the Latine and Greeke Copies, if wee remarke, (sayeth hee) that , in this place is vsed for Death, and the Graue, according to the Hebrew phrase of speach, Psal. 15. which Peter presentlie after citeth, saying, Because Thou wilt not leaue my Soule , or in the Graue. Last, by force of argument, out of Bellarmines owne confession, wee proue it thus: The Septuagint, (sayeth Bellarmine) doeth everie∣where put bades for sheol,Bell. l. 4. de Christo c. 10 in the in∣terpretation. But the Septuagint translating sheol in hades, taketh ha∣des often-tymes for the Graue. ER∣GO, by sheol, or hades, in the Sep∣tuagint,
often-tymes the Graue is signified. The minor resteth onelie to bee proven, which I doe, by these instances following: Genes. 44.31. In the Septuagint, (where the Hebrew word is Sbeol) Iaakobs sonnes say, Wee shall bring downe the gray hayres of our Father, with sorrow, : which is, the Graue; because no lower place can bee vnderstoode, than that, where-vnto gray hayres doe goe downe: Hell beeing a place for Soules onelie immediatelie after death; and not for dead bodies, or anie parte there-of. There-fore, Tobi 3.10. where it is sayde, I shall bring my Fathers olde age with sorrow, , ad infernum; it is clearlie set downe, Chap. 6. vers. 14. what hee meaneth by  saying, I shall bring my Fathers lyfe with sorrow, , to the Graue, sayeth e Text. So, 1. Kings, 2.6. DAVID ineth
charge to SALOMON, concerning IOAB: Let not his hoarie head, (sayeth hee) goe downe to  in peace. And, vers. 9. concerning SHIMEI, hee sayeth, His hoarie head bring thou downe to  with blood. In both which pla∣ces, by SHEOL in the Hebrew, and HADES in the Greeke, no-thing else can bee vnderstood, but the Graue, seeing thither onelie the hoarie head, or carcases of the dead, and slayne, doe descende allanerlie. There-fore, Isai 14.11. after these words of the Prophet, Thy pompe is brought downe to SHEOL, or, as the Greeke hath, HADES, imme∣diatelie is subjoyned the description of the Graue; to show, that by Sheol or Hades, no-thing but the Graue is there to bee vnderstood: saying, The Worme is spred vnder thee, and the Wormes doe cover thee: which  knowe to bee done in the, bye onelie, and not in the
place of the damned. So that the Iesuit, I hope, may, in this, also, rest fullie satisfied, ac∣cording to that parte of his De∣maund, That out of authenticke Au∣thors, HADES and TAPHOS, are both one. So that it resteth nowe onelie, to showe, if SHEOL and KEBER, bee lyke-wyse one, according to his inquirie.
CHAP. III. That SHEOL and KEBER (in the Hebrew) are frequent∣lie put for one, and are of a-lyke, and the same, signi∣cation. THE Probation, there-fore, that SHEOL and KE∣BER, (which pro∣perlie signifie the Graue) doe fre∣quentlie signifie one thing, shall bee, 1. out of Scripture it selfe: 2. out of Po∣pish Expounders of Scriptures them-selues: and 3. out of Rabbi∣nicall Interpreters of the Olde Testament, who best knowe the proper signification of their owne Language.
First, then, for Scripturall proofe. In the 88. Psalme, that same which is Sheol in the thirde verse, is called Keber in the 5. and 11. verses: which Arias Montanus testifieth to bee true, by expoun∣ding both to bee Sepulchrum, or the Graue. There-fore, Sheol and Keber are both of one signification. Agayne, Psal. 141. verse 7. the Prophet sayeth, Our Bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol. Which Pagnin, and the Iesuit, Em∣manuel Sa, declare to bee all one with Keber, and to signifie the Graue onelie; because it is vndenyable, that the bones of the dead are scat∣tered onelie at the mouth of the Graues, when they are opened, and cast vp; and not in anie infernall place, destinate for soules. Lyke-wyse, in all the praecee∣ding places, where-in wee proved a-before, Hades to bee put for the Graue, the Hebrewe Text hath Sheol. Whence wee inferre, That
in all these places, as Hades and Ta∣phos are all one; so Sheol and Keber are all one: which can not bee avoyded. There-fore, where Iob sayeth, If I wayte,Iob, 17.13. Sheol is my House; to show, that Keber, or the Graue, (as Arias Montanus expoundeth it) is signified there-by; for this cause he subjoyneth the properties there∣of, putrefaction, and consumption, saying, I sayde to Corruption, Thou art my Father: and to the Worme, Thou art my Mother, and Sister. Secondlie, For proofe out of Popish Expounders of Scripture, that Sheol signifieth the Graue, as well as Keber, and so, consequentlie, that both are of one signification, Lyra's wordes are cleare, saying, In Hebreo pro Inferno ponitur SHEOL,Lyra, in Psal. 114. quod non solum significat Infernum, sed etiam Fossam, seu Sepulturam, ut hic: that is, In the Hebrew, (sayeth he) for Infernus, is put Sheol; which
doeth not onelie signifie Hell, but also the Graue, or Buriall place, as the meaning is heere. Agayne: The Hebrew worde SHEOL, properlie signifieth the Graue, (sayeth both Iansenius, on Prov. 15.12. and Arias Montanus, in his Aunswere to Leo à Castro) and Hell, metaphoricallie. Yea, where-so-ever Saynct Ierome (sayeth Augu∣stinus Stenchus) or the Septuagint, haue translated Infernus, or Hades,Aug. Stench. in Gen. 37.35 it is in the Hebrew SHEOL: That is, (sayeth hee) the Ditch, or Graue. Thirdlie, (ut de Hebreis ad He∣breos provocetur) for proofe out of the Rabbinicall Doctors of the Iewes, and Masters of that Language, That Sheol and Keber, (which signifie the Graue) are all one, let these foure, moste famous amongst them, giue a full testimonie. R. Aben Ezra, on Genesis 37.35. interpreteth Sheol in that place, by Keber, or the Graue: and so doeth R. Salomo Iarchi the same, saying, Iuxta proprietatem ejus, significatio est Sepulchrum: that is, Ac∣cording
to the proper signification there-of, (sayeth hee) it denotateth the Graue. R. Mardochai Nathan, in his Hebrew Concordance, also, gi∣veth no other exposition of Sheol, Psalme 31. verse 17. but Keber, or the Graue. And Kimchi, in his Radicibus, doeth, in lyke-manner, expound Sheol, Psalme 16. verse 10. to bee no∣thing else, but KEBER, or the GRAVE. This onelie is to bee remarked, that when Sheol doeth signifie the Graue, that the tearme of [Graue] must bee taken in as large a mea∣ning, as it is in that speach of our SAVIOVRS, Iohn 5. verse 28. vvhere it is sayde, that all that are in the Graues, shall heare His voyce, and come foorth. By which Ori∣gen showeth,Orig. in Isai l. 28. citat. ab Euseb. in apol. pro Origine. That not onelie buil∣ded Tombes, or digged Graues in the earth, are to bee vnderstoode; but everie place (sayeth hee) where-in a man's bodie lyeth, eyther in∣tiere, or in parte: it beeing no ab∣surditie,
that all those places, where-in anie parte of the bodie disper∣sed doeth lye, should bee called the Sepulchre there-of. So that Bellarmines reason is ridiculous,Bell. l. 4. de Christo, c. 10. §. jam vero. vvhy Genesis 37. Sheol can not bee interpreted the Graue; when Iaakob sayeth, I will goe mourning to my Sonne, vnto the Graue▪ for (sayeth hee) the wilde Beastes haue devoured him (as Iaakob thought,) and so hee had no Graue. Not considering, that Sheol is taken, not onelie for a for∣mall, or digged Graue in the earth; but also for that which is in place of a Graue to one, or where-so-ever the bodie, or anie parte there-of is, in what-so-ever manner, whether the mothers wombe, as is sayde in Ie∣remie,Ier. 20.17. O that my Mothers Wombe had bene my Graue, (sayeth hee:) or the bellie of a Beast, as it is cal∣led in Ionas, Out of the bellie of Sheol I cryed, (sayeth hee:) mea∣ning
there-by the bellie of the Whale, where-in his bodie was, in a sorte, intombed. Neyther mea∣ned Iaakob, that hee would goe to that Graue, where his Sonne was; but vnto his Sonne by Death, and so to the Graue, as was sayde to ABRAHAM, Gen. 15.15. Thus is the IESVITS Demaund, in all the particulars, aunswered; and Infernus and Sepulchrum,  and , Sheol and Ke∣ber, proven to bee frequentlie of one signification.
THE POPISH CONFESSION, OF Christs Descense to Hell. FOR wee belieue, that CHRIST descended in∣to Hell, not according to His Bodie, (because, in-deede, it was in a new Monument buried by Ioseph of Arimathea,Luke 23.53. as the Scripture witnesseth:) therefore, according to His Soule, which went downe, to Abrahams Bo∣some, to deliver the Patriarchs, and the Iust, which were there detayned captiue, &c.
THE PROTES¦TANT REPLY. CHAP. IV. Whether Hell and Abraham Bosome, bee all one thing. IN the Examina¦tion of this Popi Confession, we sh first inquire, Whe¦ther Hell & Abra¦ham's Bosome, be all one? as the Iesuit would haue i Secondlie, Whether the Patriarch and just men, were in Hell, befor CHRIST'S suffering? And last, Whether CHRIST'S Soul went to Hell, for their liberation,
and was there locallie, till His resur∣rection? As to the first. I may shortlie replye in Augu∣stine's wordes, I haue not, hither∣to, found, and yet I inquire;Aug. l. 12. de Genesi. ad literam. ney∣ther doe I remember, (sayeth hee) that the Canonicall Scripture doeth anie way put Hell in the good parte. Now, that the Bo∣some of Abraham, and that Rest, vnto which the Godly poore man was carried, by the Angels, should not bee taken in the good parte, I know not, whether anie good man can endure to heare? and, there-fore, how wee may be∣lieue, that it is in Hell, I doe not see, (sayeth this holie Father.) The trueth heere-of, lyke-wyse, will more clearlie appeare, if wee consider these poyntes following: 1. Why it is so called: 2. Where it is: and 3. What it is. If wee consult, then, with CHRIST'S owne Mouth, in the
first, opened in holie Scripture, wee shall finde, that in the Gospell to bee in Abraham's Bosome, (as is sayde of Lazarus) and to sit downe with Abraham,Matt. 8.11. in the Kingdome of Heaven, (as CHRIST prophesieth of believing Gentiles) are both Metaphoricall speaches, taken from Banquetting; and where-by is signified, the frui∣tion of those Coelestiall joyes, where-with the LORD'S Elect shall bee satiate in that Heavenlie Kingdome: There-fore, it is sayd in Saynct LVKE, Blessed is he, who shall eate Bread in the Kingdome of GOD.Luke 14.15. And agayne, I appoynt to you a Kingdome, (sayeth our Saviour) as My Father hath ap∣poynted vnto Mee;Luke 22.29. that yee may eate and drinke at My Table, in My Kingdome. Now, in ban∣quetting wee see, (as in the example of IOHN, who leaned in CHRIST'S Bosome) that,Iohn 13.23. amongst the Iewes,
to rest, or leane in the Bosome, was a signe of moste speciall loue, Advauncement, and nearest con∣junction of familiaritie; and, there∣fore, did denotate in Lazarus, not onelie his happie Admission, and Assumption, vnto that Heavenlie Estate; but also his high Advance∣ment there-in, and nearest Associa∣tion, with the moste excellent and rarest Saynctes of GOD, (such as ABRAHAM was) in the joyfull par∣ticipation with them of the satietie of Blisse, in that Heavenlie King∣dome: So that, for this cause, the happie estate of Lazarus Soule in Glorie, is so compared in Scrip∣ture, and called, Abraham's Bo∣some. There-fore doeth the Iesuit, Maldonat, comment thus, on this place, saying, I belieue,Maldon. in Luc. 16. that the metaphore (sayeth hee) is taken from those, who sit downe at Ban∣quet, whose order was this; That to whom-so-ever one sate nearest,
hee did leane in his Bosome; even as Saynct Iohn is sayde to haue leaned in CHRIST'S Bosome, at the last Supper. There-fore, because that which is in our Bo∣some, is as it were moste neare and deare vnto vs; and hee who lo∣veth anie, taketh then most plea∣sure, when hee leaneth in their Bosome, whome hee loveth: as Iohn doeth show the same; who, when hee had sayde, There was a certayne Disciple, who leaned in IESUS Bosome; as it were for explications sake, hee addeth, whom IESUS loved. Hence, there-fore, it is, (sayeth hee) that the Bosome is taken for the place of greatest pleasure, and of nea∣rest conjunction, with the person beloved. Seeing, there-fore, this Meta∣phore is taken from banquetting, (as both Scripture showeth, and
their owne Iesuit confesseth) howe fitlie the hilaritie of Royall fea∣sting, agreeth with a darke place, or a hellish Limbus, or sorteth with the want, and with-drawing of his presence, who hath assem∣bled his Guests, let the judicious consider: Or, in such chearfull banquetting, if an afflicting expec∣ctation onelie, or longing for future Good delayed, hath corespondence with a joyfull, and present satura∣tion of good thinges bestowed. And if ABRAHAM him-selfe, in opposing the estates of these two after death, cleareth not vnto vs, That as the ritch Glutton had al∣readie, before, received his good thinges, in his lyfe; so had LAZA∣RVS, even then, received his good thinges, after his death, saying, Now hee is comforted, and thou tormented. Which speach coulde not haue beene true, if LAZARVS, in anie hellish Limbus, had beene depryved of the Vision of GOD;
for, so, LAZARVS had beene affli∣cted, and not comforted; seeing (as sayeth SALOMON) that hope,Prov. 13.12 which is differred, afflicteth the Soule: and Dives alone, also, had not beene in torment; because (as their owne Adrian Florentinus affir∣meth) this punishment of losse,Adrian. Flor. in 4. sent. agens de indulg. is the greatest torment, saying, The want of the sight of GOD, accor∣ding to the esteeme of all the Saynts of GOD, is reputed, of all tor∣mentes, or paynes, to bee the verie greatest. Having, then, set downe the reason, why the bliss-full estate of the Godlie, after death, is called Abraham's Bosome, which over-turneth Limbus; wee haue next to consider, where it is: vvhere-anent, if wee consult Ambrose and Beda,Mald. in Luc. 16. Maldonat will tell vs, that Ambrose and Beda, (sayeth hee) see∣meth to place it in Heaven: And Gregorie Nazianzen,Greg. Na∣zian. ora. 10 in laudem mortui frae∣tris Caesarij. also, will declare vnto vs, That it is, where the An∣gels,
and glorified Spirites, are nowe; saying of his Brother Caesa∣rius, I wish, that thou mayest pierce the Heavens, (sayeth hee) and mayest rest in Abraham's Bosome; where thou mayest be∣holde the companie of Angels, and the glorious shyning of the bles∣sed Sayncts. For which cause, al∣so, it is sayde in LVKE, that Laza∣rus was carried, by the An∣gels, into Abraham's Bosome. ANTIQVITIE, also, last of all, beeing inquired what it is, they will showe, not onelie, that it is in Heaven, and where the Angels, and glorified Spirites are; but, also, that it is Heaven it selfe; and, so, no parte of Hell:Chrysost. hom. 27. in Matth. There-fore (sayeth Chrysostome) hee called that Hea∣venlie Kingdome not by its owne name, (sayeth hee) but by the name of Abraham's Bosome. Ful∣gentius,Fulgen. ad Venantiam. lyke-wyse, calleth it a place, (not temporarie) but of aeter∣nall
Rest. Dionysius Areopagita, in lyke manner,Dion. Areo. Hierar. Ec∣cl. c. 2. & 7. defyneth the same, to bee those divine, and blessed Man∣sions, which receiveth all those, (sayeth hee) who are to see GOD; and where-in is never-fading, and moste blessed Perfection. And, that great Doctor of the Church, AV∣GVSTINE,Aug. quaest. Evang. l. 2. c. 38. hee sayeth, that Abra∣ham's Bosome, is the Rest of the blessed Poore, whose is the King∣dome of Heaven; and into which, after this lyfe, (sayeth hee) they are received. And, to conclude this poynt: Vnto this trueth, the Romish Doc∣tors them-selues, are forced to sub∣scribe; CARTHVSIAN saying, By Abraham's Bosome,Carthus. in Luc. 16. is mea∣ned (sayeth hee) the Rest of the Sayncts, which they haue in their natiue Countrey. Whence Saynct Martin did saye, The Bosome of Abraham shall receiue mee. Sado∣letus, also (who was the Pope's Le∣gate, to the French King, at the
Councell of Trent) declareth vnto vs, saying,Sadol. l. 3. Ep. 5. Histor. con∣cil. trid. l. 1. pag. 103. If anie place bee sought out, to bee signified heere∣by, the Bosome of Abraham is the Kingdome of Heaven (sayth he.) And, in lyke manner; I greatlie suspect,Mald. in Luc. 16. (sayeth Maldonat) that the highest HEAVEN is signi∣fied there-by. Then, to retort vpon them∣selues: Those who immediatelie are received into Abraham's Bo∣some, are received into Heaven, and into Coelestiall joye. But the Patriarches, and Godlie vnder the Lawe, were received into Abra∣ham's Bosome: There-fore, in∣to Heaven, and into Coelestiall joye. The Major is proven, by the Fathers, and the Romish Doc∣tors their owne Exposition: The Minor is also, by their owne con∣fession: there-fore, the Conclusion inevitablie followed.
So that wee may safelie now cloze, vvith AVGVSINES wordes, saying, It appeareth sufficientlie,Aug. Ep. 99. ad Evodiū. that the Bosome of so great Happinesse, is n parte, or member, of Hell, (say∣eth hee.) And, so, the Iesuit hath, heere-in, shot wyde of his Marke.
CHAP. V. Whether the Patriarches, and just Men, were in Hell, be∣fore CHRIST'S suffe∣ring? FOR Resolution heere-of, Whether the Patriarches, and just Men, were in Hell, de∣tayned captiue, before the suffring of CHRIST? If wee first consult with the Mouth of GOD, opened in holie Scripture, and heere-in addresse our selues, to the Lawe and Testimonie, the holie Psalmist will, even in his owne person, showe vs that comfortable
Assurance, which the Godlie had, of a glorious Estate in Heaven, af∣ter the finishing of their Course, where-in they were conducted, by the Spirite of GOD, on earth, saying,Psal. 73.24. Thou wilt guyde mee, with Thy counsell, and after, re∣ceiue mee into Glorie: Where Glorie in Heaven, after Grace on earth, showeth the onlie two-folde Estate of the Saynctes and Patri∣arches, vnder the Lawe, without anie mention of a Popish Limbus. Neyther was ever, according to Scripture *,Coloss. 1.20 or Orthodoxe Be∣liefe, any other distinction knowne, of the CHVRCH of the ELECT, from the beginning, but Militant on earth, and triumphant in Heaven: and, consequentlie, no middle estate, in anie infernall place of Hellish Captivitie, Whence it is, that, (as Saynct AVGVSTINE showeth,Bell. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 9. §. addit. and BELLARMINE citeth him) this was the Replye of the
sound Catholickes, agaynst the Dona∣tistes; who sayde they made two Churches: aunswering, that there was but one Church of CHRIST; but they distinguished onelie the two estates there-of; The one mili∣tant, and mixed with the Wicked on earth; and the other triumphant, free of that mixture, in the Hea∣vens: No mention beeing made of a third condition, in Limbo, before the comming of CHRIST; nor in Purgatorie now: For, so, the Dona∣tistes had vp-brayded the sound Ca∣tholickes, That they had made three Churches; and their Replye had beene, That they distinguished one∣lie the three estates there-of. For farther resolution of which poynt, AVGVSTINE'S wordes may suffice, in his 99. Epistle, to Evodius; where hee sayeth, That hee found not what profite could redound, by CHRIST'S Descense vnto Hell, to the just Men, which were in ABRA∣HAM'S Bosome; from whome hee could never see, that the LORD
departed, according to the blessed presence of His DEITIE. Whence wee argue. If the PATRIARCHES, and just Men, were al-readie happie in their Soules, before CHRIST'S suf∣fering, and in ABRAHAM'S Bo∣some, (which is Heaven, as is formerly proven) and there injoyed the blessed Vision of GOD conti∣nuallie, without getting anie newe benefit or profit, by CHRISTS Des∣cense to Hell: then it will folow, that they were not in anie infernall Pri∣son of Hell, captivated, and wan∣ting that blessed Presence, or Vi∣sion, till by CHRIST'S Descense in∣to Hell, they were liberate, and, so, received that Benefite, or profite, there-by. But, according to AVGVSTINE his Testimonie, they were al-readie happie in their Soules, both for Place, (beeing in Heaven) and for Presence, (enjoying the Vision of GOD.) There-fore, they were not in
anie Prison of Hell, wanting that blessed Vision, till by CHRIST'S Descense, they were liberate, and received that great Benefite. Besides, if wee consider the Prayses, which GOD'S Mouth gi∣veth to those His oddest Servants; and the rare Testimonies,Gen. 6.19. 2. Pet. 2.7. Iohn 8.56. Hebr. 3.2. 1. King. 14.8 of their match-lesse, and singular holinesse, as the Margine cleareth: And, if with these Testimonies, wee consi∣der what is sayde to haue beene by GOD layde vp for them, and which they, even in a firme hope, after death, expected, (as Hebr. 11.Hebr. 11.4.5.7.10.16.17.24.35. showeth;) to wit, A solide Ci∣tie, A glorious Recompense, and, An Heavenlie Countrey: which, as they sought for it in their lyfe; so they arryved at the same, as well as wee doe, at their deathHab. 2.4., living by Fayth, as well as wee, and1. Thess. 4.16. dying in CHRIST, as well as wee. If wee consider, then, (I saye) all these former due∣lie, wee will finde it a groundlesse,
and vncharitable conceit, agaynst Scripturall evidence, and Reason, to incarcerate such heavenlie livers on earth, so long after death, in an hellish Prison. What a store, also, of constant and glorious Martyres, haue beene amongst them? Of whome it is witnessed, That the Worlde was not worthie to haue such into it, for the short tyme of their lyfe. And shall wee not thinke, then, that Hell was much lesse worthie to haue had their noblest parte, which is their Soules, so manie thousands, or hundreths of yeares, after their death, detayned there-in cap∣tiue? What should the drye Braunch, then, of the best now looke for, if this should haue beene done vnto such greene Trees? Or, what in∣justice should it bee counted, in the moste just GOD, who is as rea∣die to rewarde the Good with Glo∣rie, as the Wicked with Torment, (sayeth their owne BELLARMINE)
not onelie so long to haue delayed His rarest Saynctes, and Servantes, of their due Rewarde promised; (who forbiddeth vs, to delaye but one night, to giue our Hyrelinges their Wages:) but, also, to haue imprisoned their holiest Soules, in so infernall a Prison, vnder so long Captivitie: and to haue in∣flicted vpon them, so great a part of the punishment even of the Wic∣ked, which is Poena Damni; depry∣ving them, after death, of the bles∣sed Vision of HIS Face, which some of them, even in their lyfe∣tyme, were so earnest to haue had a glaunce of?
CHAP. VI. Whither CHRIST'S Soule went, after His suffering on the Crosse. HAving thus fred the Soules of the PATRIARCHES, and just Men, be∣fore the suffering of CHRIST, of anie infernall Prison, wee are to make our next search, Whither CHRIST'S Soule went, after His paynfull Passion: Which, by His owne aunswere to the Thiefe, is cleare, To haue beene to PARADISE, saying, This day thou shall bee with Mee in Pa∣radise. Which Entrie into PA∣RADISE, was not according to His
DEITIE; because, so, Hee was ever There: and, there-fore, this, as a fond Errour in Euthymius,Bell. l. 1. de sanct. c. 3. §. Euthymius. Bel∣larmine refuteth. Neyther was it in that parte of His Humanitie, which was corporall, and cōmitted to the Graue; but in His Soule, or spirituall parte, as all doe confesse. There resteth onelie, then, to finde out, what is meaned by PA∣RADISE; where-by wee may more clearlie vnderstand, whither the Soule of CHRIST went, after His paynefull Suffering: Where-in, first, wee shall showe, out of the Apostle, That PARADISE spoken of in the GOSPELL, is the thirde Heaven, and Mansion-place of aeternall Blessednesse. And, this wee shall confirme, lyke-wyse, out of Romanists them-selues. Secondlie, That this PARA∣DISE, which is the thirde Hea∣ven, is that same thing, which was promised vnto the Thiefe vpon the Crosse.
Thirdlie, that this which was promised to the Thiefe, is not one∣lie a blessed estate of Soule, but, al∣so, in that same Place of Blessed∣nesse, where the Soules of the God∣lie, with GOD, and His Angels, haue their perpetuall Abode. All which shall bee proven out of Fa∣thers, and the Romanists owne Do∣ctors. First, then, the Apostle spea∣king of the aboundance of Revela∣tions, which were given vnto him, hee telleth vs,2. Cor. 12.2.4. That hee was caught vp, into PARADISE. Which thing expressing agayne, in other wordes, hee sayeth, That hee was caught vp, into the third HEAVEN. Showing, here-by, both these, to bee one. There-fore, sayeth Aquinas, wryting vpon that place, Non oportet nos aliud intellige∣re per Coelum, & aliud per Paradisum; sed unum & idem per utrumque: that is, Wee must not vnderstand ano∣ther thing by Heaven, and ano∣ther
thing by Paradise; but one, and the same thing, by both. This same, also, doeth Carthusian, and Catharinus, affirme, with sun∣drie other Authors: So that wee see PARADISE, and the Suprea∣mest, or thirde Heaven, to bee all one. Next, that this same Paradise, or Third Heaven, where-of the Apostle speaketh, is that same thing, which was promised, by CHRIST, vnto the Thiefe, let these ensuing testifie. Ambrose, on that place of the Apostle, sayeth, That the Apo∣stle was caught vp, in Paradisum coe∣lestem, (sayeth hee) in quo latroni dixit DOMINVS, quod futurus esset cum eo: that is, In that heavenlie Para∣dise, where-in our LORD sayde vnto the Thiefe, that hee should bee with Him. In lyke manner sayeth THEOPHYLACT, Raptus est in eundem, quem DOMINVS Latroni promisit that is, The Apostle
(sayeth hee) was caught vp int that same Paradise, which ou LORD promised to the Thiefe. The lyke doeth Arboreus, also, and Cajetane, clearlie affirme. Thirdlie, that this which was promised to the Thiefe, as Part-ta∣ker with CHRIST, was not onelie a blessed Estate of Soule, in anie place, (as the Romanistes would haue it:) but, also, in that same Place of Blessednesse, in particular, where the Soules of the Godlie, with GOD, and His Angels, haue their perpetuall Abode, these places en∣suing justifie. Saynct Ambrose cal∣leth it,Amb. in 2. Cor. 12. & sic caeteri. That Heavenlie HIERV∣SALEM, and those Coelestiall Places, where-vnto our Bodies, (sayeth hee) at the Resurrection, shall bee lifted vp: which shall bee not onelie to an Estate of Glo∣rie, but (as the locall vp-lifting testifieth) to the place of Glorie. Sedulius, also, calleth it, That Place,
ubi Angelicae virtutes continentur: that is, where the Angelicall Powers doe inhabite. Haymo, in lyke man∣ner, calleth it, That Place, ubi Ange∣li, & animae Sanctorum, in contemplatio∣ne DEI sunt positae▪ that is, where the Angels, and Soules of the Saynctes, are placed, to contem∣plate GOD. Cajetane, also, cal∣leth it, Supremum Coelum, & locum il∣lum summum, in quo DEVS, & Beati, babitare dicuntur: that is, The highest Heaven, and that Place, (sayeth hee) which is aboue all, where-in GOD, and the Blessed, are sayde to inhabite. Carthusian, lyke∣wyse, calleth it, Locum Beatorum, The Place where the Blessed remayne. Where-of it is spoken, Revel. 2.7. saying, To him that over-com∣meth, will I giue to eate of the Tree of Lyfe, which is in the midst of the PARADISE of GOD.
BELLARMINE, lyke-wyse establishing a conformitie, betwee CHRIST, and His Members, i their estate, betweene their death and resurrection, hath these words CHRIST, immediatelie af∣ter death, was not (sayeth hee) blessed in Bodie,Bell. l. 1. de sanct. c. 4. §. tertio. but rested thre dayes in the Graue: not-with¦standing, in the meane tyme, Hee was blessed in His Soule, and in Paradise; for so Him-self sayde, This day thou shalt bee with Mee in Paradise. There¦fore, lyke-wyse, the Saynctes t bee conforme with CHRIST, (sayeth hee) whyle they rest i their Graues, according to their Bodies: yet, in their Soules, they are happie, and blessed, i Paradise. Whence wee inferre: If th Members of CHRIST bee heere-in conforme to their Head▪
That, Where His Soule was, du∣ring the tyme of His Bodies lying in the Graue, till His Resurrection; so should theirs bee, till their re∣surrection: Then, it will follow, That, as His Soule was in PA∣RADISE, till His Resurrection, which was not onelie a bliss-full Estate, (saye wee) but in the pro∣per place of Blisse also, as hath beene proven: Even so shoulde their Souls bee, who are His Mem∣bers, in that Estate, and Place of Blisse, lyke-wyse, till their resurre∣ction. All which holdeth well, and orthodoxe, and militateth stronglie agaynst the Graecian Er∣rour, which BELLARMINE impugneth. But, on the contra∣rie, if these two bee separated, (as the Romanistes would haue them) to wit, that CHRIST'S Soule, betweene His Death and Resurrection, was in the Estate of Blisse; but not in the proper place of Blisse, which is HEAVEN; but rather, in the contrarie, and op∣posite
place there-to, which is Hell: Then, the conformitie will no wyse holde, betweene CHRIST, and His glorified Members, ex∣cept they make the Soules of the Godlie, after death, during the tyme of the abode of their Bodies in the Graue, to their resurrec∣tion, to bee blessed, onelie in Estate; but, yet, locallie, to re∣mayne in Hell, (as they saye CHRIST'S did:) quyte opposite to HEAVEN: And so, there-by, they shall jumpe, yea, fall, into a farre lurder Errour, than the Grecian heresie, vvho holde, That the blessed Soules of the Saynctes, remayne in hid Recep∣tacles, to the Daye of Iudge∣ment.
THE POPISH PROBATION, OF THEIR ASSER∣TION, CONCERNING Christs Descending into Hell. THIS Descending can not bee to the Graue, because Saynct PAVL sayeth, That Hee descended, first,Ephes. 4.9. to the lo∣wer partes of the earth: which is a place opposite to that where∣vnto Hee ascended, when Hee led Captivitie captiue; and is called, in our Creed, by the Apostles, Hell; and by our Sa∣viour,
The heart of the earth: For, as Ionas was three dayes, & three nights, in the Whales Bellie;Matt. 12.40 So shall the Sonne of Man bee three dayes, and three nightes, in the heart of the Earth, &c. THE PROTES∣TANT REPLY. CHAPTER VII. What is meant by The lower parts of the Earth. EPHES. 4.9. IN the due inqui∣rie, What is the true meaning of these wordes, wee shall, first, consult
with Scripture: secondlie, with Fathers: and thirdlie, with the Ro∣mish Doctors them-selues. First, then:Ezek. 32.24. The Prophet EZE∣KIEL, in his thirtie-two Chapter, speaking of the destruction of AEGYPT, and sundrie other Na∣tions, by the edge of the Sword; when hee commeth to showe their abasement, to the verie Graue, hee calleth it, Their going downe, to the nether partes of the Earth. And, to showe what hee meaneth there-by, hee calleth it, The set∣ting of their Bed amongst the midst of the Slayne. And agayne,Verse 25. The placing of their Graues in the side of the Pit: and,Verse 23. Their companie, rounde about their Graues. Next, for the verdict of Fa∣thers: AVGVSTINE, on that same place, showeth,Aug. in E∣phes. 4. Theophyl. in Ephes. 4. That the Apo∣stle's meaning is no other, But that CHRIST came from Heaven, to
the Earth, for our sake; and, That His lowest humiliation there-on, was to the Graue. THEOPHYLACT also, sho∣weth, That the same is meant there∣by, where-of olde IAAKOB spake, when hee sayde, Yee will bring my gray Hayres, with sorrow, to the Graue. And, in lyke man∣ner, EVTHYMIVS expoundeth the wordes, of the lower partes of the Earth, spoken of PSAL. 139.15. to bee the Graue, saying, Compac∣tum me vidisti in utero matris meae, & dissolutum iterum videbis in utero terrae. Last of all, what the Romish Doctors them-selues, doe mean by the lower partes of the Earth let vs heare, even out their own mouthes. Aquinas, then, sayeth, By the lower partes of the Earth, are vnderstood, those which wee in habite, (sayeth hee) which are called the lower partes, because
they are beneath the Heaven, and the Ayre; and to these the Sonne of GOD is sayde to haue come downe; not by locall motion, but by taking vpon Him our low and humble earthlie nature, accor∣ding to that which is sayde, PHI∣LIP. 2. That Hee emptied Him-selfe. In lyke manner, (sayeth LYRA) Hee descended, by His Incarna∣tion, to the lower partes of the Earth: that is, (sayth hee) to the partes of this Earth, which are called Lower, in respect of other partes of the Worlde. Cardinall Cajetane sayeth, also, thus, The addition of the worde [Terrae] is for clearer vnder∣standing, to determine, what lo∣wer partes are meant; for the lowest parte of the Worlde, is the Earth. For difference sake, then,
of the lower partes of the Hea∣ven, which is in the Ayre, it is sayde, as if more clearelie the Apostle had sayde, Hee descended first to the lowest parte of the Worlde, which is the Earth, (sayeth Cajetane.) Last of all, sayeth Catharinus, (and, with him, Gorranus, and Car∣thusian,) Hee descended into the lower partes of the Earth: that is, to this Worlde belowe, which is the Earth, & is lower than the Elementes, by taking our humane nature vpon Him, (as sayeth the fore-named Carthusian.) More-over: If by the. lower partes of the Earth, the Iesuit would haue, of force, Hell to bee vnderstoode, and not the habitacle Earth, nor CHRIST'S Incar∣nation, or intombing there-on, then must hee graunt, That much more, by the. lowest partes, (which is the Superlatiue) must
Hell bee vnderstood: and yet this, I thinke, hee will not bee so absurde as yeelde. There-fore, much lesse, by the lower partes, (which is the Comparatiue) can hee vrge vs to vnderstand the other: For, DA∣VID, speaking of his conception,Psal. 139.15. and framing secretlie, in his Mo∣thers Wombe, sayeth, That hee was curiouslie wrought, and his substance fashioned in the lowest partes of the Earth. Which, I hope, none will bee so absurde, as to saye, this was in Hell. For this cause it is, (comparing this place, with the other,) that some doe holde, That by the lower partes, in that Apostolicall speach, the Wombe of the blessed Virgine is meaned, where-in CHRIST, by His Conception, humbled Him∣selfe so low, by taking vpon Him our base and earthlie nature.
CHAP. VIII. What is meant, by the heart of the Earth. MATTH. 12.40. WHere-as the Ie∣suit, by the heart of the Earth, in that speach of our SAVIOVR, would haue Hell to be vn∣derstoode, and not the Graue, I will oppose vnto him, for his full con∣viction, first, The scope of the place, out of his owne Expositors: secondlie, The Authoritie of Fa∣thers: thirdlie, The Expositions of his owne Doctors: and, last, The lyke phrases of Scripture. First, then: His Exposition is agaynst the scope of the place, di∣rectlie: For, the Pharisees desired, to see a Signe; that is, visiblie some
evident and sensible Miracle: To whome CHRIST aunswereth, That Hee woulde giue them no other Signe, but the Signe of the Prophet Ionas, &c. Which could not bee the Descense of CHRIST'S Soule into Hell, and the returne there-of from thence; because that was all-to-gether invisible vnto them; and, so, no Signe at all: but it was His Death, Buriall, and Re∣surrection agayne from the Graue, which was visible, and is clearelie meant there-by, according as their own Ferus, on this place, commen∣teth, saying, That as Ionas, beeing casten into the Sea, and swallo∣wed by a Whale, seemed a dead Man, and quyte perished; and, yet, not-with-standing, within three dayes, hee was farre other∣wyse seene; to wit, alyue, beeing casten foorth, vpon the Shore of Ninive: So, altho the Sonne of Man, beeing crucifixed, and layd
in the Graue, seemed as one quyte destroyed, and whollie over-come by Death: yet, not-with-stan∣ding, (sayeth hee) Hee shoulde bee seene alyue agayne, vpon the third daye, and powerfullie to aryse agayne, as a triumphant Victor. So, in that Hee was seene to ryse, (as Ferus sayeth,) there-fore His Resurrection from the Graue, and not His Soules Des∣cense to Hell, or Returne from thence, was a Signe vnto them. Secondlie: The Iesuites Glosse is close contrarie to the Exposition of Fathers: For, Chrysostome, com∣menting on this place, sayeth thus, Non enim ait in terra,Chrysost. hom. 44. in Matth. 12. sed in corde terrae, ut Sepulchrum denotet: that is, Hee sayeth not, in the Earth, but in the heart of the Earth; to sig∣nifie His Graue there-by. Gregorie Nyssene, in lyke manner, sayeth, That whyle the DEITIE
was with CHRIST'S Soule in Paradise indivisiblie,Greg. Nyss. in Epist. ad Eustath. pag. 1093. making way, by the Thiefe, for an En∣trance vnto Man-kynd thither; it was with His Bodie, lyke-wyse, in the heart of the Earth; destroing him that had power of Death. Anselmus, also, sayth,Ansel. in Matth. 12. Fuit in cor∣de terrae, in Sepulchro scilicet: that is, Hee was in the heart of the earth; to wit, in the Graue. Euthymius sayeth, also, Cor ve∣ro terrae intelligit ejus profunditatem,Euthym. in Matth. 12. nam in profunditate illius lapidis inci∣sum erat Sepulchrum: that is, The heart of the Earth, signifieth the profunditie there-of: For, in the profunditie of the Rocke, was His Graue hewen out. Ignatius, also, interpreteth Cor terrae, :Ignatius ad Trallianos. Hierom. in cap. 2. Iove. Tertull. lib. de anima, cap. 31. that is, His Buriall vnder the Ground. So, also, doeth Ireneus applye these wordes, to CHRIST'S
Buriall: with whome consenteth Saynct Ierome, and Tertullian. Thirdlie: The Iesuites Sense of these wordes, is sensiblie agaynst the Expositions of his owne Do∣ctors. For, thus sayeth Lyra, The Sonne of Man shall bee in the heart of the Earth:Lyra in Matth. 12.40. that is, In the Graue (sayeth hee.) Carthusian, also, vpon the same place, sayeth, The Sonne of Man shall be in the heart of the Earth: that is, (sayeth he) vnder the Earth; to wit, in His Graue, three dayes, and three nights. Arboreus, also, their Parisian Do∣ctor, thus commenteth, CHRIST telleth, (sayeth hee) that Hee was to bee three dayes, and three nights, in the heart of the Earth: meaning, that Hee was to bee in His Graue. Last of all: Let the lyke oppo∣sition
bee seene, of the Iesuites Ex∣position, to other a-lyke phrases of Scripture. DEVT. 4. verse 11. the Hebrew hath, Et Mons ardebat usque ad cor Coeli: which the Septuagint inter∣preteth, : and the Latine, Vsque ad Coelum, Even to the Heaven. And, yet, who will say, then, that the Mountayne bur∣ned, even to the moste inwarde parte of Heaven, as the heart is in the moste inwarde parte of the Bodie? So, lyke-wyse, 2. SAM. 18.14. whyle ABSOLON was alyue, BELEB, or in the heart of the Oake, that IOAB slue him. And, yet, I hope, that none will saye, That by the heart of the Oake, the moste in∣warde parte, within the Barke, and bodie of the same, is anie wayes meaned, Sicut Cor est in medio anima∣lis. Where-fore it is, that the vul∣gar Translation hath, berens in quer∣cu; or, sticking in the Oake.
In lyke manner, EZEK. 27. verse 4. TYRVS is sayd, to haue its borders, in the heart of the Seas, because, as Vatablus sayeth, Vndique Mari alluebatur. And, yet, I hope, the Iesuite him-selfe, will not saye, that it was so in the Sea, as the heart of anie living creature is in the midst of the bodie, which wrappeth it close about. Therefore, to say, That by the heart of the Earth, Hell is vnderstoode, be∣cause, as the Heart, is in the midst of the Bodie, so it is in the center of the Earth, is but miere dotage, seeing that a Metaphore is, often∣tymes, diverslie considered: ney∣ther hath it ever for a ground, one, and the same propertie, of the thing, whence it is taken.
THE POPISH FARDER PROBA∣TION, Of Christs Descen∣ding to Hell, for deli∣vering the Patriarches, and just men, from thence. MOre-over: This place, where-vnto CHRIST descended, can not bee Hea∣ven; because wee saye not, that CHRIST descended in∣to Heaven; but, that Hee ascen∣ded, and led Captivitie captiue:Eph. 4.9. Col. 2.14. which was the Patriarches, and Prophets, and the Iust, which died
before CHRISTS suffering, and were not glorified, till the pryce of our Redemption was payed, by putting out, as Saynct Paul sayth, the Hand-wryting of Ordinances, that was agaynst vs, which was contrarie to vs; Hee even tooke it out of the way, and fastened it vpon the Crosse, &c. They were not, then, glorified, before that tyme, because all those, as Saynct Paul sayeth,Heb. 11.39. through Fayth, ob∣tayned good report, and received not the Promise; GOD provyding a better thing for vs, that they, without vs, should not bee made perfect. And the reason is which Saynct Paul giveth,Heb. 9.8. saying, That the way vnto the Holiest of all, was not yet opened, while as yet the first Tabernacle was stan∣ding: for which cause the same Apostle sayeth, That the ente∣ring
to the holie Place, that is,Heb. 10.19. to Heaven, is a new way: but it had not beene a new way, if anie had entered before CHRIST our Sa∣viour. Where-by it is evident, that CHRIST was the first that ascended, when He led Captivitie captiue, &c. And also, that Hee descended first to the lower parts of the earth;Zach. 9.11. Ut educeret vin∣ctos suos de lacu, in quo non erat aqua, as Zacharias the Pro∣phet sayeth. THE PROTESTANT REPLY. CHAP. IX. What is meant, by Leading Cap∣tivitie captiue. Epbes. 4.8. BY this speach of the Apostle, (and of the Prophet be∣fore him) what is meant, wee shall,Psal. 68.18.
first, cleare out of Scripture: se∣condlie, out of the Fathers: and thirdlie, agaynst the Iesuite, out of his owne Doctors. In SCRIPTVRE, then: in the Booke of the IVDGES, wee finde the verie same phrase of speach, vsed by DEBORAH, in her Song, after the victorie over Sisera,Iudg. 5.12. saying, Aryse, Barak, and leade thy Captivitie captiue, thou sonne of Abinoam. Where, by his leading of his Captivitie captiue, is no-thing else meant, (as all con∣fesse) but those his Enemies, a∣gaynst whome hee had foughten; and, over-comming them, had ta∣ken them captiue, to bee led awaye, and triumphed over. So, lyke-wyse, 2. CHRON. 28. verse 11. the Prophet ODED ex∣horting the people to mercie, sayeth vnto them, Now heare me, there-fore, & reducite Captivitatem, quam duxistis captivam, and deliver backe the Captiues agayne, which
yee haue taken captiue. Where, in lyke manner, by Captivitie taken captiue, are no others meant, but such as in an hostile, and cruell man∣ner, as Foes, they had subdued, and detayned in slaverie. Nowe, to applye: Let anie man judge, whether the Iesuit more rightlie expoundeth the Captivitie, which CHRIST, in lyke man∣ner, is sayde to leade captiue, to bee the holie PATRIARCHES, the Friendes of GOD, and willing Subjectes; and not His Foes, or repyning Rebells; for whom Hee was ever by Protection, but not a∣gaynst by Oppugnation; and, who were to bee Triumphers, with Him, but not triumphed over by Him. Or whether we more right∣lie expound the same, according to the former places of SCRIPTVRE, to bee CHRIST'S Foes, and ours, to wit, The Dominion of Sinne, the tyrannie of Satan, the sting of Death, the Curse of the
Law, the Victorie of the Graue, and Power of Hell, &c. All which Enemies, our SAVIOVR hath foughten agaynst, subdued, capti∣vated, and triumphed over, freeing all His Chosen, hence-foorth, both from their feare, and force. Secondlie: Let vs see what the Fathers meane, by this CAPTI∣VITIE. Philo Carpathius, (who lived Anno 410.) on the fift of the CAN∣TICLES, sayeth thus, in the person of CHRIST, I sleepe, to wit, on the Crosse, and My Heart waketh, when MY DIVINITIE spoyled Hell, and brought ritc Spoyles thence, of the Triumph (to wit) of ever-lasting Death over-come, (sayeth hee) and the Devils power over-throwne. Also, Having taken captiue the Tyrant of Captivitie,Athan. tom. 1. de saluta∣ri adventu CHRISTI. (sayet ATHANASIVS) HEE ascende vpon high.
Lyke-wyse,Tertull. l. 5. cont. Mar∣cion. HEE hath led Captivitie captiue, that is, (sayth TERTVLLIAN) Death, and that Slaverie, vnder which Man was helde. AVGVSTINE, in lyke man∣ner, sayeth thus,Aug. in Psal. 67. But what is this Captivitie? eyther (sayeth hee) because Hee over-came Death, which kept them captiue before, over whom it reigned; or men them-selues, which were cap∣tivated by the Devill: Capti quia subjugati (sayeth hee) sub leve illud jugum missi liberati à peccato, cujus servi erant, & justitiae servi facti, cujus liberi erant: that is, Taken captiue, because subdued, and put vnder that light Yoake, beeing fred from Sinne, whose Servauntes they were, and made the Ser∣vants of Righteousnesse, where-from they were free. THEOPHYLACT, also,
sayeth,Theoph. in Ephes. 4.9. Qualem autem captivitatem dicit? (sayeth hee) and then aun∣swereth, Diaboli captivum enim cepit, Satanam, & Mortem, & Maledictio∣nem, & Peccatum, &c: that is, What Captivitie speaketh hee of? (sayeth hee) even of the Devill; for Hee tooke Satan captiue, and Death, and the Curse, and Sinne, &c. HILARIE, lyke-wyse, sayeth,Hil. in Ps. 67 Omnes quoque inimicas virtu∣tes, mundiq́ue potestates, principesq́ue aeris hujus, ostentui reddidit: that is, Hee made triumphant showe, of all the Enemie-forces, and Po∣wers of the World, and Principa∣lities of the Ayre. In lyke manner, HAYMO, (who lived,Haymo in Ephes. 4.9. Anno 800.) decla∣reth, that this was the orthodoxe Exposition taught in his tyme, Hee led Captivitie captiue: Id est, Diabolum duxit captivum, (sayeth hee) & captivavit eum auferendo ab
illo potestatem, quam tenebat in hoc mun∣do, juxta illud, nunc Princeps hujus mun∣di ejicitur for as: that is, Hee led the Devill captiue, and tooke him captiue, by taking away from him, that power which hee had in this Worlde, according to that saying, Now the Prince of this World is casten foorth. Last of all, let vs heare what some of the Romish Doctors call this Captivitie, which CHRIST led captiue. ARBOREVS, that Parisian Doctor, sayeth,Arbor. in Ephes. 4.9. By this Captivi∣tie (sayeth hee) without anie absurditie, may bee vnderstood, that intollerable servitude of Sinne, and death, from which, CHRIST, by His Grace, hath fred vs. LYRA, in his interlineare Glosse, expoundeth it,Lyra in Psal. 67. Those who were captiue vnder the Law, or
the Devill, by Sinne, or rather Sinne, and Man's subjection, there-by, to Satan, and the Curse of the Lawe, were those our Enemies, which CHRIST led captiue. Lyke-wyse, LOMBARD, their Master of Sentences, his Exposi∣tion of this place, is just conforme with AVGVSTINE'S, and no word there-in of the PATRIARCHES freedome from Limbo. CHAP. X. The meaning of HEB. 11.39. cleared. THE Iesuite pro∣ceedeth, next, to proue, by foure se∣verall Textes of SCRIPTVRE, That the Soules of the
PATRIARCHES, and of the just, were not glorified, nor admitted vnto HEAVEN, before CHRIST suffered. All which, in order, let vs, severallie, examine. The first is, Because (sayeth hee) all those, through Fayth, ob∣tayned good reporte, (as Saynct Paul showeth) but received not the Promise: GOD provyding a better thing for vs; that they, without vs, should not bee made perfect. Where, in vnderstan∣ding by the Promise, the glori∣fying of their Soules, after the suf∣fering of CHRIST, beeing fred out of Limbo, howe farre hee debor∣deth from the meaning of the Apo∣stle, and of the Holie GHOST, let the Verdict of ANTIQVITIE, a∣greeing in one voyce, and the con∣junct Expositions of his owne Schoole-men, declare: and, so, howe this Text maketh no-wyse for his purpose.
First, then, concerning ANTI∣QVITIE, Bellarmine saveth vs pains, in the severall citation, or recitation of them, whyle as hee setteth downe, in this poynt, what is their common Exposition, and vnanime consent, saying, Or by the Pro∣mise,Bell. l. 1. de sanct. c. 3. §. 3. (sayeth Bellarmine) is vnder∣stoode, the perfect Beatitude both of Bodie and Soule, which, as yet, the Fathers haue not; that the same might not bee without vs. And this (sayeth Bellar∣mine) is the common Exposition of the Fathers vpon this place: For hee sayeth not, That they should not bee rewarded without vs, (sayeth Bellarmine) but that they should not receiue the full Rewarde both in Soule and Bodie, or bee so perfected without vs; but wee, and they, shall bee per∣fected so to-gether, at the last Resurrection.
Next, for the conjunct Exposi∣tion of the Romish Schoole-men, (beside Bellarmine, whome wee haue heard) Ribera, the Iesuite,Ribera in Heb. 11.39. no lesse ingenuouslie confesseth, That the Apostle speaketh, De consum∣mata beatitudine Corporis & Animae, (sayeth hee) in die extremi judicii: that is, Of the perfect Happi∣nesse, both of the Bodie and the Soule, at the Day of the last Iudgement. Arboreus, also, sayeth, Quod con∣summatio illa est absolutissima Corporis & Animae perfectio: that is,Arb. in Heb. 11.39. That most absolute consummation, is the per∣fection both of Soule and Bodie. Lyke-wyse, sayeth Carthusian, They received not the Promise,Cart. in Heb. 11.39. that is, (sayeth hee) Corporis sto∣lam, seu glorificationem: that is, The glorifying of their Bodies, till the day of Iudgement: but then, all of vs shall bee raysed, (sayeth
hee) and glorified together, that so wee may congratulate, one another, mutuallie, of so great an Happinesse. So that it is cleare, That by re∣ceyving the Promise, is not meant the glorifying of the Soules of the Godlie Patriarches, which they at∣tayned not vnto, till after CHRISTS suffering, and their delivering from Limbo; but the perfect glorifying of their Bodies and Soules, which they, with all others the Elect, shall attayne vnto, onelie at the generall Resurrection. So that the sense of this Text, by the Ie∣suit, hath beene sensiblie miss-ta∣ken.
CHAP. XI. The true meaning of HEB. 9.8. and 10.19. ex∣pounded. THE next two Textes, that the Iesuit adduceth, for the same pur∣pose, are HEB. 9.8. and 10.19. where hee sayeth, That Sainct PAVL giveth the reason, why, before CHRIST'S suffering, none went to Heaven, Because the way to the Holiest, was not yet opened, whyle as yet the first Tabernacle was stan∣ding: and for that cause hee sayth, that The entrie to the holie Place, (that is, to Heaven) is called a newe Way; which it had
not beene, if anie had entred there-in before CHRIST our Saviour. To whom I answere; That as in the former, so both in the scope, and sense of these words, the Iesuit is a grosse miss-taker; these beeing speaches, onlie of a cleare opposi∣tion of the Iewisb Rites, and legall Sacrifices, performed in the Mo∣saicall, and typicall Tabernacle, vn∣to CHRIST'S onlie one, and All-sufficient Sacrifice, perfected in that most excellent Tabernacle, and Temple of His owne Bodie: and showing, that it was not by anie efficacie of the one, but by vertue onlie of the other, that anie entrie into Heaven is. So, that these Speaches, and the scope of them, is onlie to debarre anie con∣fidence in legall observations, from having anie share with CHRIST, in the worke of Man's Salvation, effectuated onlie by His Death and Passion: and to show, that at the
Death of the Sonne of GOD on∣lie, was the cleare opening, and manifestation to all men, of the true Waye to HEAVEN, even CHRIST Crucified.Aquin. in Heb. 9.8. Qui latebat ante, (sayeth AQVINAS) sub figuris literae obumbratus: but by whose Death (sayth CAJETAN) Via sanctorum ad coelestem Patriam aper∣ta est: that is,Cajetan in Heb. 9.8. The Waye of the Saynctes vnto their Heavenlie Countrey, was opened: the legall Sacrifices, by that onlie one Sa∣crifice, hence-foorth ceasing; and the Vayle of the Temple (sayeth hee) beeing also rent, from the top, to the bottome. This Opening, then, is the full, free, and cleare manifestation, and exhibition to all Men, Iew and Gen∣tile, Of CHRIST IE∣SUS Crucified, as the onlie Salue for Sinne, and Saviour of the Worlde: and, therefore, Rev. 5.3. is the word [manifesting] and not
[opening] vsed by the holye Ghost, in the Originall; where-as, the Iesuit depraveth the Text, both in Scope and Wordes: who, in place of that which the Apostle sayeth, That the Way to Heaven, was not manifested, in regard of Knowledge;. hath set downe, That the Way was not opened, in re∣garde of entrie: and the Scope of the Apostle, beeing to institute the comparison of the People, and knowledge of Salvation, vnder both Covenants; but not to show, That the Soules of the Patriarches, and just Men, entred not into Hea∣ven, till after CHRIST'S suffe∣ring. The cause, lyke-wyse, where∣fore this Way so opened, or mani∣fested, is called, a new Way, the Iesuit's owne Schoole-men may giue him resolution: Therefore, (sayth CAjETAN) Viam quidem nova appellat, contra vetustatem peccati: He calleth it, A new Way, in oppo∣sition
to the olde way of Sinne: That,Rom. 5.21. (as the Apostle sayeth) as Sinne hath reigned vnto Death, (which was the old way) so Grace might reigne through Righteousnesse, vnto eternall Lyfe, through CHRIST (which is the new Way.) Againe, Ne introitum corporalem in∣telligeres explicavit eundem esse per viam novam, (sayeth this same Cardi∣nall:) that is, Lest anie should thinke, that a corporall entrie were vnderstood, (as was to the Holiest of olde.) The Apostle sho∣weth, That wee must enter by a new Way; seeing it is a spirituall entrie, which is requyred by Fayth, and the Way it selfe is Spirituall; to wit, Righteous∣nesse, and Holinesse, through CHRIST. AQVINAS, also sayeth,Aquin. in Heb. 10.19. That the newe and onelie Way,
now to ascende into Heaven, is, CHRISTO tanquam membrum capiti suo adherere: that is, To ad∣here to CHRIST, the Head, as a Member of His Bodie: And therefore, hee showeth, That who-so-ever now walketh in that New Way of Fayth, it shall bee sayde vnto him, I shall wryte vp∣on him My newe Name, and the Name of the newe HIE∣RVSALEM. CARTHVSIAN, also, giveth this reason, why it is called a new Way: Because, (sayth hee) it was first devysed by CHRIST, no Man, nor Angell, beeing able to finde out a way, to recon∣cile Man to GOD, (the Co∣venant of Workes, as the olde Way, fayling) but onelie the Lambe, CHRIST IESVS, (sayeth hee) by the Vayle of His Flesh, and His suffering there-in,
ma∣nifesting the same vnto vs. This way, then, wee see, is cal∣led, a new Way; not but that it was in beeing and existence before, but by way of clearer, and nearer patefaction: therefore, the Greeke word is , signifying, a renewing, by making, that which was before, in beeing, a new Way, as it were, in clearnesse, and vnder∣standing: CHRIST IE∣SVS, beeing still that Lambe of GOD, which was slayne from the beginning: As also, in opposition to that olde waye of Sinne, and to that legall, impassible; yea, impossible way of Workes: and not that it importeth, that the Soules of the PATRIARCHES, who relay on that onelie Sacrifice of CHRIST to come, and em∣braced the promise there-of, were al-together depryved of Coelestiall entrie, till by His Ascention, Hee opened that way, and made it new vnto them: CHRIST IESVS,
beeing ever lyke the Sunne in the Firmament, effectuallie spreading the Beames of His saving Grace, as well backward, as forward, even vnto both endes of the Worlde: and beeing, no lesse, a comfortable ante meridian Sunne, to them in their dimmer fore-noone, nor a postmeridian Sun, to vs in our clear Horizon, Even CHRIST IE∣SVS, yesterday, and to day, and the same, for ever. For farther discoverie, lyke∣wyse, of this Popish errour, In de∣nying anie entrie to the Soules of the Patriarches, and just Men, before CHRIST'S Ascention, I must mutuallie de∣maund: 1. Whether doeth not the Scripture testifie clearlie,Gen. 5.24. that Enoch, before CHRIST'S Ascention, was taken vp to Heaven, seeing it is sayde, That the LORD tooke him vp to Him-selfe: vsing the
same word there, which is vsed heere-after in the rapt of Elias? 2. Whether did not Elias en∣ter into Heaven, lyke-wyse,2. Kings 2.11. before CHRIST'S Ascention, seeing it is clearlie sayde, in expresse words, That Elias went vp into Hea∣ven? where-of Mattathias, on his Death-bed, when hee put his Sonnes in mynde, sayde,Machab. 2.58. That Elias, beeing fervent, and Zea∣lous, for the Law, was assumed vp into Heaven. 3. Whether did not Moses, al∣so, before CHRIST'S Ascen∣tion, enter into Heaven, (whose Bodie was so dignified, by an Arch∣angels burying of the same,Matth. 17. and whose name is so highlie praysed, Heb. 3.5.) seeing with Elias hee was seene in Glorie, at CHRIST'S Transfiguration? 4. Did not the Soule of the Thiefe, lyke-wyse, on the Crosse,Matth. 26. that same daye of his death, enter
into Heaven, before CHRIST'S corporall Ascention, (as hath bene proven before) according to CHRIST'S promise vnto him, This day thou shalt bee with Mee in Paradise? To say, then, that no Soule en∣tred into Heaven, before CHRIST'S Ascention, is blasphemouslie to re∣strayne, lessen, and imbase the ver∣tue of His Passion, which reacheth (as is sayde) to all Tymes, and Persons, and to make the Sinne of Adam more powerfull to Condem∣nation, than CHRIST His obe∣dience is vnto Salvation; the ones Fall casting his Posteritie, immediat∣lie after death, to Hell; but the others Righteousnesse, not bringing the Faythfull, but after hundreths of Yeares, to the Glorie of Heaven.
CHAP. XII. The place of ZACHARIE, 9.11. explayned, and fred from Popish wresting. THE last place, which the Iesuit ad∣duceth, for his probati∣on, of the de∣liverie of the Soules of the PATRI∣ARCHES, and just Men, out of his imaginatie Limbus, after CHRIST'S suffering, is that place of Zachariah, Vt educeret vinctos suos de lacu, (sayth hee) ubi non erit aqua: that is, That Hee might bring foorth His Prisoners, out of the
Pit, where-in there is no Wa∣ter. Which place, howe little it makes for his Hellish Limbus, I will, first, manifest out of the Fathers; and next, out of his grand Cham∣pion Bellarmine. This Text, then, which spea∣keth of that gracious Deliverance of sinnefull Man-kynde, by the Blood of CHRIST, out of the Prison of that spirituall Thraldome, where-in all men were, through Adams fall, and by the meanes of Sinne, Saynct Augustine doeth thus clearlie expound:August. de civit. DEI, l. 18. c. 35. What may bee vnderstood by this Pit, (sayeth hee) diverse expositions may bee thought vpon, agreeable to the true Fayth: but, it seemeth to mee, that none better can bee than this; That there-by is vnder∣stood, the drye and barren deepe∣nesse of Man's Miserie, where the Waters of Righteousnesse flow
not; but where-in is the puddle of Iniquitie. THEODORET, lyke∣wyse, after hee hath expounded this Pit, to bee eternall Death, then hee subjoyneth, saying, And when Men were bound (sayeth hee) in this Pit, our LORD IESVS CHRIST Hee loo∣sed them, and brought them foorth; and by His precious Blood, Hee delivered them, and brought them foorth to the way of Lyfe, when Hee gaue vnto them the new Covenant. Saynct IEROME, also, sayeth, That it is thus vnderstood, (sayeth he) By the Blood of Thy Suffering, in Mercie thou deli∣veredst them, who were bound Prisoners, in the Prison of Hell, where-in there is no Mer∣cie.
Saynct CYRILL, lyke∣wyse, hath this Exposition, By which wordes, (sayeth hee) wee affirme, eyther that Hell is vn∣derstood, where-in is no lyfe, (for wee may take Water for the sym∣boll of Lyfe) or else, wee will interprete the Pit, most fitlie, to bee the deceyving of false gods; for Idolatrie, is a Pit, truelie, in which who-so-ever falleth, hee shall bee depryved of eternall Lyfe. So, whether Man's Miserie, or eternall Death, or Hell, or heathen Idolatrie, bee meant by this Pit, yet anie such Limbus, is no wayes there-by signified. Bell. lib. 1. de Purg. cap. 3.Next: if wee consult with Bel∣larmine, hee showeth vs, that no such thing as Limbus Patrum, can bee meant there-by: where-of hee giveth this reason, Because (sayth
hee) There is aqua consolatio∣nis in Limbo; that is, There is the Water of Comfort, or Refresh∣ment, in Limbus; where-as in this Pitte where-of Zachariah speaketh, there is no Water at all. Therefore it is, that Bellarmine ta∣keth this place, for that cause, to fit better for the proofe of Purga∣torie. Lyke-wyse, those that are in this Pit, where-of the Prophet speaketh, are called Vincti, or fette∣red. Whence it would follow, if there-by Limbus were meant, that the Fathers were not onlie so long detayned in that hellish prison, but that they lay chayned, or in Fet∣ters, so manie thousands or hun∣dreths of Yeares, in that infernall Pit. Which estate, if it bee all one, with beeing in Abraham's Bo∣some, as the Iesuit confessed be∣fore, which is a place of receyving
Comforte, and enjoying good things, (as the Scripture showeth) let anie Man judge. Out of all which places, then, which haue beene formerlie addu∣ced, it is evident, how impertinent∣lie, and to no purpose, the Iesuit hath adduced the Authoritie of wrested Scripture, for his Popish Limbus, and liberating of the PATRIARCHES there∣from; and howe Foxe-lyke, on∣lie there-in, Vitreum vas lambit pultem haud attigit.
THE IESVITS IMPVGNING OF CALVINES EX∣POSITION, OF THE Article of Christs Descending into Hell. FArther: This descending of CHRIST into Hell, can not bee vnderstood of the suffe∣ring of the Paynes of Hell in His Soule, speciallie vpon the Crosse,Calvin. in∣stet. c. 16. §. 10. according to Iohn Cal∣vines blasphemous doctrine; be∣cause in all the Scripture there is no mention made of such suffe∣ring: and Saynct Iohn sayth,1. Iohn 1.7. that
the Blood of CHRIST cleanseth vs from all sinne: and Saynct Paul, to the Ephesians, sayeth, We haue redemption,Ephes. 1.7. through His Blood; even the forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to His rich Grace: and, therefore, I demaund, Whether suffered CHRIST vpon the Crosse in His Soule, Poenam damni, or sensus, or both? Hee suffered not the first, be∣cause His Soule was ever blessed: Hee suffered not the second, be∣cause Hee suffered not vpon the Crosse the payne of Fyre, nor vt∣ter Darknesse, in aeternall Bands: neyther suffered Hee the Worme which dieth not; nor Hee was not in Hell, in companie with the wic∣ked spirits, where is weeping, and gnashing of Teeth: for these are the paynes of Hell, where-of men∣tion is in Scripture.
Thirdlie: If He suffered both poenam damni, and sensus, I de∣sire Scripture for the same: for, according to Theologues, all the paynes of Hell are comprehended vnder these two tearmes, Poena damni, & sensus? AN ANSWERE TO THE IESVIT, IN DEFENCE OF CALVINE. CHAP. XIII. That CHRIST suffered in Soule, as well as in Bodie, proven out of Scripture. FIRST, then, we mayntayne, with CALVINE, That CHRIST suffered in Soule,
as well as in Bodie; and, That , & proprio sensu, and not per assistentiam, or by Sympathie, with the Bodie onlie, that so as perfect Man, consisting of both, perfectlie Hee might redeeme Man-kynde, who had sinned in both; and con∣sequentlie who, according to ju∣stice, in both, should haue beene punished respectiuelie. Seeing, there-fore, Hee was not onlie our Redeemer, by power to deliver, but our Cautioner, also, in justice, to satisfie, it became Him to satisfie for what-so-ever wee should haue suffered, and fulfill our obliedge∣ment: wherefore (sayeth Isidore) DEI verbum,Isidor. Pelu∣siotae Epist. 189. ut verè humanitatem induit, ita verè omnia, quae in hominem cadunt, explevit: that is, The incar∣nate Word of GOD, as Hee truelie put on our Humanitie, so truelie did Hee fulfill all things, which should befall Man. It beeing, also, requisite, that as that double Death over-came the first
Adam; so the same, by suffering, should bee vanquished by the Se∣cond. So that who-so-ever they be, that deny His Soules sufferings, (as the Iesuit doeth, referring all to His corporall Blood-shed) they deny His speciall suffering; which may bee called, The verie Soule of His suffering; and will bee for∣ced to grant one of these two: ey∣ther, that in His suffering, some∣thing more grievous, than anie corporall death, did distresse Him; or else, (which were open blas∣phemie) that of all Men, Hee had least cowrage, and was most dis∣mayed for Death. And if the first (which must of necessitie) bee granted, then, beyonde corporall and ordinarie death, what can bee vnderstood, but such spirituall and Soules-suffering, which from an angrie GOD doeth proceede a∣gaynst Sinne, and which was that bitter Cup, where-of the Sonne of GOD'S Loue dranke, for the sinnes of the World?
The veritie where-of is farther confirmed, first, by Scripture: se∣condlie, by Fathers: and thirdlie, by the Confession of Romanistes them-selues. In Scripture, wee haue prefigu∣ring things, fore-shadowing; Ty∣picall speaches, fore-signifying; E∣vident Prophecies, fore-telling; CHRIST'S owne words, decla∣ring; Evangelicall Harmonie, wit∣nessing; and Apostolicall Epistles, proclayming the same. First, then, what else was fore∣shadowed, by the roasting of that Paschall Lambe,Exod. 12. but that tormen∣ting Agonie, which CHRIST, our Passe-over, suffered in Soule, when His sympathizing Bodie, ray∣ned downe that bloodie Sweat in the Garden of Gethsemanie? be∣cause,Greg. 11.3. Moralium. (as Pope Gregorie sayth) Ru∣bigo peccati purgari non potuit, nisi ig∣ne tormenti: that is, The rust of Sinne, could not bee purged away, but by the fire of torment.
What else, lyke-wyse, did all other Sacrifices for Sinne, prefigure in their Denomination, Immolation, and Exclusion from the holiest Place, beeing called Sinnes, and Sa∣crifices for Sinne, and, next, bee∣ing whollie burnt with Fyre, and no part of them ever brought with∣in the Holiest of all? Lyke-wyse, that brasen Serpent, erected on a Tree, did not onlie prefigure the death of CHRIST; but also the cursed death of the Crosse, and, consequentlie, that CHRIST should bee (as Hee is called, GA∣LAT. Chapter 3. Verse 13.) made a Curse for vs; and where-by, em∣phaticklie, all that is comprehen∣ded, which GOD vseth, as a re∣venge of Sinne. For which cause, it is sayde,Deut. 21.23. Cursed is hee (of GOD) that is hanged on a Tree. Next, for Typicall speaches,Psal. 22.1.14. fore-signifying: Doeth not DA∣VID typicallie expresse our SA∣VIOVR'S distresse, and spirituall
desertion, when hee cryeth out in that PSALME, as CHRIST did on the Crosse, My GOD, my GOD, why hast Thou for∣saken Mee? And agayne, Myne Heart is lyke Waxe, it is melted, in the midst of my Bowels; and Thou hast brought Mee into the dust of Death. IEREMIE, lyke-wyse, in that Threnodicall Song,Lam. 1.12. expresseth hee not that matchlesse Sorrow, vvhere-vvith the sadde Soule of CHRIST was afflicted, imme∣diatelie by GOD, when it was heavie to the verie death? whyle as hee sayeth, Beholde, and see, if there bee anie sorrow, lyke to My sorrow, which is done to Mee, where-with the LORD hath afflicted mee, in the day of His fierce wrath. And subjoyning of his Agonie,Lam. 2.11. and bloodie Sweate, From aboue (sayeth hee) Hee
hath sent Fyre, into My Bones: Myne Eyes doe faile, with Tears: My Bowels are troubled, and My Liver is powred vpon the Earth. (and for the word , vsed by the Evangelistes,) Hee hath compassed mee (sayeth the Prophet) with Gall,Lam. 3.5.13.15. and Tra∣vell: Hee hath caused the Ar∣rowes of His Quiver to enter in∣to My Reynes: Hee hath filled Mee with Bitternesse, and made mee drunke with Worme∣wood. Thirdlie, for evident Prophe∣sies, fore-telling:Isai. 53.3.10.6. Doeth not that Evangelicall Prophet Isaias declare, That Hee should bee a Man of Sorrowes, (which ceazeth on the Soule) and acquaynted with Griefes, even accounted as smit∣ten of GOD, and afflicted by Him: and, That Hee should
make His Soule an offering for Sinne: for the LORD hath layde on Him the Iniquitie of vs all? Fourthlie: Doth not CHRIST'S owne wordes clearlie declare, That Hee suffered in His Soule, when Hee sayde, My Soule is heavie, vnto the verie death? Also, Father, let this Cup passe from Mee? And when rucfullie Hee cryed out vpon the Crosse, My GOD, My GOD, why hast Thou forsaken Mee? Fyftlie; for Evangelicall wit∣nessing:Matt. 26.37. Luke 22.44 Mark 14.33 doe they not, in full con∣sent, and Harmonie, showe, That Hee was not only exceeding sor∣rowfull, but, (as the word  hath) Girt about, or com∣passed, everie where, with sor∣row? and not onlie so; but with feare astonished: and not onlie a∣stonished; but so deeplie distressed,
(as Franciscus Lucas expoundeth ) Vt quasi exanimis, & extra se fuerit: and not onlie so, but in a fearfull, amazing, and agonizing Perplexitie. Last of all, for Apostolicall pro∣clayming of this Trueth, in their Epistolicke wrytings:Gal. 3.13. Saynct Paul telleth vs, That CHRIST re∣deemed vs from the Curse of the Lawe; beeing made a Curse for vs. Where-by, (as is sayde be∣fore) all is comprehended, what∣so-ever GOD inflicteth on Soule or Bodie, as a full Revenge of sinne.Heb. 5.7. As also, That in the dayes of His Flesh, Hee offered vp Prayers, and Supplications, with strong crying, and teares, vnto Him that was able to saue Him from death; and was heard, in that which Hee feared.
CHAP. XIV. That CHRIST suffered in Soule, as well as in Bodie: proven out of the Fathers. AS SCRIPTVRE, so manie vvayes Authorizeth the Trueth; so doeth the verdict of Fa∣thers homolate here-in, with vs. Amb. l. 2. de fide ad Gra∣tian. c. 3.Therefore, sayeth Saynct Am∣brose, Quia suscepit animam, suscepit & animae Passiones: that is, Because Hee assumed, or vnder-tooke a Soule for vs, therefore, also, Hee vnder-tooke the sufferings of the Soule. Iren. l. 5. c. 2.Agayne, sayeth Ireneus, (as
hee is cyted by Theodoret, in his third Dialogue) Proprio sanguine re∣demit nos DOMINVS, & dedit animam pro animabus nostris, & carnem suam pro carnibus nostris: that is, With His owne Blood, hath our LORD redeemed vs, and hath given His Soule, for our soules, and His Flesh, for our flesh. Lyke-wyse, sayeth Saynct Ie∣rome, Sicut corpus flagellatum ac la∣ceratum,Hieron. in Isai. 53. signa injuriae in vibicibus ac livore portabat, ita & animam verè do∣luisse pro nobis perspicuum est: that is, As His Bodie, which was scour∣ged, and torne, did beare the to∣kens of wrong, in His strypes and wounding; so it is evident, that His Soule was truelie sorrowfull for vs. In lyke manner, sayeth Cyrill,Cyril. lib. de recta fide ad Theodosium. Nemine cogente à seipso propriam ani∣mam posuit pro nobis, ut tam viventi∣bus quam mortuis dominaretur, carnem
quidem suam pretiam plane sufficiens pro omnium carne solvens, & animam pro redemptione animae quorumcunque: that is, No man compelling Him, Hee layde downe His owne lyfe for vs, that so Hee might bee LORD over both living and dead; making His Flesh a suffi∣cient Pryce for the Redemption of all our flesh; and His Soule, for the Redemption of all our soules. Ambros. in Luc. l. 10.Yea, Saynct Ambrose goeth farther, and sayeth, That Hee could not haue beene so perfect a Saviour, except Hee had thus suffered in His Soule: Minus enim contulerat mihi, (sayth hee) nisi meum suscepisset affectum; ergo pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret, & sequestrata delectatione divinitatis aeter∣nae, taedio meae infirmitatis afficitur; sus∣cepit enim tristitiam meam ut mihi suam laetitiam largiretur, & vestigiis nostris descendit usque ad mortis aerumnam, at
nos suis vestigiis revocaret ad vitam: that is, Hee had bestowed the lesse vpon mee, or avayled mee lesse, except Hee had vnder-ta∣ken myne affections; therefore, Hee was sorrowfull for mee, who had nothing to bee sorrowfull for Him-selfe; and laying aside the pleasure of His eternall Deitie, Hee was affected with the griefe of myne infirmitie; for Hee did vnder-goe the sorrow that was due to mee, that Hee might bestow His joye vpon mee: and by our foot-steps hee descended to the verie sorrowes of Death, that by His foot-steps Hee might bring vs backe agayne to lyfe. Last of all: if they will eyther reverence the Sentence of a great and canonized Pope, or feare his Curse and Thunder-bolt, let them heare what Damasus decreeth;Damasus ut citatur à Theodoreto Dial. 3. Si quis dixerit (sayeth hee) quia in
passione crucis dolorem pertulit Filius DEI DEVS, & non caro cum ani∣ma, quam induit servi farinam, quam sibimet assumpsit; sicut Scriptura dicit, anathema sit: that is, If anie man will say, that in His suffering on the Crosse, the Sonne of GOD, beeing GOD, suffered the do∣lour of the Crosse, and that His Flesh, and His Soule suffered not together, in that shape of a Ser∣vant, which Hee put on, and assu∣med, as the Scripture telleth vs; Let him bee accursed.
CHAP. XV. That CHRIST suffered in Soule, as well as in Bodie; proven out of the Ro∣manists them∣selues. AS the FATHERS haue here-in borne Witnesse to the TRVETH, so doe the Romanists owne Doctors pleade the TRVETH for vs. Their canonized Aquinas, then, out of the words of the 87 Psalme, first proveth, that CHRIST'S Soule was passible, or subject to suffering, saying, Dicit ex persona CHRISTI, repleta est malis anima mea, non quidem peccatis, sed humanis malis: id est, doloribus, ut glossa ibi ex∣ponit;
sic ergo anima CHRISTI fuit passibilis: that is, The Psalmist sayth in the person of CHRIST, My Soule is filled with evill; which were not sinnes, but hu∣mane evils: that is, As the Glosse expoundeth with Dolours, or Griefes, therefore, by beeing so, the Soule of CHRIST (sayeth hee) was subject to suf∣fering. Agayne, actuallie, that it did suffer,Aquin. part. 3. q. 46. art. 7. in the whole essence there-of, hee sayeth, Si intelligamus totam ani∣mam ratione suae essentiae, sic manifestum est totam animam CHRISTI pas∣sam esse: that is, If wee vnder∣stand (sayeth hee) the whole Soule, in respect of the essence there-of, it is manifest, that the whole Soule of CHRIST did suffer. Lyke-wyse, that it suffered in all the powers and faculties there∣of,
hee sayeth,Idem p. 3. q. 15. art. 4. Secundum illum modum passionis qua potentia aliqua dicitur pati ex parte sui subjecti, sic omnes poten∣tiae animae CHRISTI patiebantur: that is, According to that man∣ner of suffering, (sayeth hee) where-by anie facultie of the soule is sayde to suffer, by reason of its subject; so all the powers or faculties of CHRIST'S Soule did suffer. Last of all, hee showeth vs,Idem p. 3. q. 46. art. 6. what it did suffer, saying, In anima per tristitiam, tedium & timorem, ut in corpore per vulnera & flagella passus est: that is, Hee suffered in His Soule, (sayeth hee) by Sorrow, Griefe, and Feare; even as Hee suffered in His Bodie, wounding and whip∣ping. Pererius, lyke-wyse,Perer. in Exod. 12. disp. 7. speaking of CHRIST'S desertion on the Crosse, sayeth, CHRISTVS nullam tunc habuit in parte inferiori con∣solationem, neque à parte superiori ani∣mae,
nec adeo, quod significavit ipse di∣cens, DEUS Meus, DEUS Meus, ut quid dereliquisti Me? that is, CHRIST, at that time, had no comfort in the inferiour part of His Soule, neyther from the superiour part there-of, ney∣ther from GOD; which Him∣selfe signified, saying, My GOD, My GOD, why hast Thou forsaken Mee? Therefore, wee see, that this sor∣row without comfort, this pertur∣bation inward, and distresse-full Agonie, was not His corporall, but His Soules suffering. Lyke-wyse, Bellarmine him-selfe, speaketh to the same purpose,Bellarminus say∣ing, CHRISTVS non tantum non permisit ut redundaret ex parte superio∣re gaudium in partem inferiorem, sed etiam non avertit cogitationem a morte imminente, defixit mentem in omnia tor∣menta impendentia: that is, CHRIST not onlie permitted not, that jy
should proceed from the superiour part of His Soule, to the inferiour; but, also, Hee turned not away His thoughts from death, which was imminent, but stedfastlie fixt His mynde, vpon all the Tor∣mentes that were hanging aboue His head. And last of all, Carthusian sayth,Carth. in Matth. 27. That His soule was so vehement∣lie vexed, Vt nulla fieret pro tunc re∣dundantia consolationis & alleviationis à superiore parte, in partem ejus inferio∣rem: that is, That at that tyme, (sayeth hee) there was no sup∣plie of comfort and reliefe, from the superiour part of His soule, to the inferiour part there-of.
CHAP. XVI. What Paynes they were, which CHRIST suffered in His Soule, for Man∣kynde. NEXT, to this Conclusion, thus established, to wit, That CHRIST suffered in Soule, as well as in Bo∣die, wee must consider, (to satisfie the Iesuits Demand) what sort of paynes Hee suffered there-in for vs. Aquinas, therefore, telleth vs, That they farre exceeded all the paynes that men can suffer in this lyfe;Aquin. part. 3. q. 46. art. 6. not onlie for the sharpnesse, and vniversalitie of the same; but, also, in respect of the quick∣nesse
of the sense, and the strong and true apprehension of the Sufferer; as, also, the requisite measure of the payne, made pro∣portionable to the greatnesse of the Fruit, which vnto all aboun∣dantlie, was ever to redound. The reason of which acrimonie, and matchlesse excesse of Soules payne, was (as Saynct Basill giveth the reason, saying) CHRISTVS cum Angore crucem suscipit, passionem{que} pavor anticipat. Quare? Nimirum quia CHRISTVS contra viventem adhuc mortem armatur, cumq́ue nondum soluta tyrannide manus conserit, etenim impe∣rium quod in homines jam inde ab Adamo obtinebat, etiamnum ostentabat: that is, CHRIST vnder-goeth the Crosse, with such distresse-full Griefe and such feare fore-goes His suffering. Wherefore? Be∣cause (sayeth hee) CHRIST was armed agaynst Death, as yet living, and in full vigour; and Hee
encountereth with his tyrannie, as yet no-wayes over-come; for as yet Death was showing his domi∣niring power, which hither-to from Adams tyme, it had obtay∣ned over Man-kynde. As wee see, then, what those paynes were, and how great in the Generall; so let vs consider, how they are called, or descrybed, in par∣ticular. Acts 2.The Apostle calleth them, The Dolours of Death: which the Vul∣gare Translation tearmeth, Dolores Inferni; or, The Dolours, and Paynes of Hell: and, (as Cardi∣nall Cajetan affirmeth) the Paynes of Hell, truelie. Salm. in acta tract. 13.Salmeron, also, the Iesuit, calleth them, expresselie, The Paynes of Hell, with which the Soule of our Saviour was so mightilie distressed, saying, Superest ut intelligamus de dolo∣ribus acerbissimis passionis, quos ob id me∣taphorice inferni vocat, qui tamen finiti
sunt in morte: that is, It resteth, (sayeth hee) that we vnderstand heere-by, the most bitter paynes of His Passion; which for that cause, are by way of similitude, called, The Paynes of Hell; which, not-with-standing, were finished at His Death. Saynct Gregorie, lyke-wyse, a Pope, alluding to Hell,Greg. 11.3. Moralium. calleth those paynes of CHRIST'S Passion, The Paynes of fierie Torment, saying, Iuxta semetipsum, frustra affli∣ctus est, juxta vero acta nostra, non fru∣stra, rubigo quippe peccati purgari non potuit, nisi igne tormenti: that is, Considering His owne deserving, Hee was causeleslie afflicted; but not so, considering it was for our deedes: therefore it was, that the rust of Sinne, could not bee pur∣ged away, but by a fierie torment. A strange thing, then, it is, that in a Pope, a Cardinall, and a Iesuit, it
shall bee thought no Blasphemie, to affirme, That CHRIST suffe∣red the paynes of Hell, in His pain∣full Passion: but for Calvine, or anie Protestant, to affirme, That by His Descense to Hell, His Soules suffe∣rings are vnderstood, it is grossest blasphemie. But, wee must consider, that the paynes due to Man for Sinne, beeing divyded in these two, to wit, the paynes of the Bodie, and paynes of the Soule, and that CHRIST IESVS, our LORD, is not onlie a Redeemer to vs, but, also, a Cautioner for vs; and (as Aquinas showeth) in our place; for which cause,Aquin. loco quo supra. He ascrybeth to Him∣selfe, our sinnes, saying, in that 21 Psalme; Verba elictorum meorum: therefore, it was just, and requi∣site, that what man's sinnes deser∣ved,Isidor. Pelus. Ep. 189. who was principall, (as Isidore sayeth) that the incarnate Word, and Sonne of GOD, who hath truelie put on our humanitie, as our Cautioner, should fulfill, and satis∣fie
plenarlie: or,Calvin. l. 2. instit. c. 16. §. 10. as Calvine suteablie sayeth, Vt dependeret ille omnes quae ab illis expetendae erant poenas, hoc unico excepto, quod doloribus mortis non poterat detineri: that is, That He should vn∣der-goe all the punishment, which man should haue vnder-gone, this onlye one thing beeing excepted, that He could not be holden, by the dolours of Death. And, therefore, it is no marvell, if Hee suffered such a death, as by an angrie GOD is infli∣cted on sinners, subject to a sense of wrath, and rigour of divine revenge; which, indeede, to a dejected Soule, suffering for its owne sinnes, is an Hell vpon Earth. Next, that wee affirme, that GOD was wroth with the Sonne of His Loue, but that His Welbelo∣ved indured such punishment, at His Fathers hands, for vs, as they doe for their sins, who find an angrie GOD dealing agaynst them: for which cause, Hee is, therefore, sayde, to bee counted as smitten of GOD, and
sore afflicted; beeing stricken so, as our Cautioner, and yet by the hand of a loving Father. And that this apprehension, and sense of wrath agaynst Sinne, is cal∣led, in Scripture, a verie Hell to the Soule, (as is sayde) and, a des∣cending, or humiliation there-to, is manifest, by playne proofe of Scripture; where David, in the 88 Psalme, after hee hath sayde, in the sixt verse, Thou hast layde mee into the lowest Pit, in Darknesse, and in the Deepe: in the very next verse, hee subjoyneth, what he mea∣neth by the former words, in simi∣litude, saying, Thy wrath lyeth hard vpon mee, and Thou hast afflicted mee, with all Thy waues. So that the laying of him into the lowest Pit, or making him to des∣cend into Hell, and the laying of His wrath hard vpon him, is both there put for one.
CHAP. XVII. That CHRIST suffered the punishment both of damni and sensus. AFter that the Ie∣suite hath denyed in CHRIST, anie Soules sufferings, and counted it blasphemie, to say, that hee suffered the paynes of Hell in anie manner; hee there-after de∣mandeth, if Hee suffered anie such, Whether it was poena damni, or poena sensus? for vnder these two all Theologues (sayeth hee) comprehend the whole paynes of Hell. To whom, punctuallie, to an∣swere, we affirme, That our Saviour in His Soule suffered, in a manner, and by analogie, both: the one ma∣nifested
by His Agonie, and bloo∣die Sweat, in Gethsemanie, and the other expressed by His ruefull Com∣playnt, and Cry, vpon Mount Cal∣varie, the payne of sense being so sensible to Him, that Hee telleth His Disciples, that His Soule was compast about with Sorrow, and exceeding dolorous, to the verie death. And they agayne tell vs, That Hee was extreamlie dejected, sore amazed, and grievouslie distres∣sed; praying with strong Cryes, to bee delivered from that which Hee feared; and with manie Teares, that that Cup might passe from Him. The drinking where-of, to the soule, was such a bitter Potion, that that Vinegar & Gall on the Crosse, had with it no proportion: the ap∣proaching where-of, (beeing the sense of divine wrath) made Him so to feare, to kneele, to fall, to cry, to weepe, to sweat, to bleede, and everie way to bee in such a dreadfull Agonie.
And, as to a privatiue Punish∣ment, or poena damni, what else meant our Saviour's words, ruefullie cry∣ing on the Crosse, My GOD, My GOD, why hast Thou forsaken Mee? Vbi nulla fuit in tan∣ta necessitate virtutis exhibitio, (as fayth Saynct BERNARD) nulla ostensio majestatis: that is,Bern. Serm. 5. de verbis Isaiae. In which woe∣full desertion, there was no exhi∣bition, (sayeth hee) in so great a necessitie of anie divine power, neyther anie manifestation of any such Majestie. And, Giving vs to vnderstand,Bell. l. 4. de CHRISTO, c. 8. (sayeth BELLAR∣MINE) that most grievous and true were the dolours that He suf∣fered for vs: Vtq́ue hominis extrema patientis supplicia, & à DEO derelicti personam exprimat, sayeth the Iesuit MALDONAT: that is, That so Hee might expresse the punishment of a man, suffering in greatest extre∣mitie, and the person of one left, and deserted of GOD.
Next, to the places of Scripture, where-by the Iesuit would haue all our Redemption ascrybed to the Blood of CHRIST allanerlie; that is, to His corporall sufferings onelie, where-in was the effusion there-of: I answere, first, Altho in these places cited, no mention bee but of His bodilie suffering, yet it followeth not, that there is no men∣tion of anie other sufferings, in none other place, (the contrarie where∣of is evident, in manie partes of ScripturePsal. 22.1. Isai. 53.3.10.16. Matth. 26.37. Gal. 3.13.:) Nec ab unius affirma∣tione legittime concluditur negatio alte∣rius. Secondlie: To attribute our whole Redemption to the Blood, and corporall death of CHRIST, is false; for, our justification being a part there-of, is distinctlie attribu∣ted, Rom. 4.25. to His Resurrection, the Apostle there saying, Who was delivered for our offences, and was raysed agayne for our justi∣fication.
Thirdlie: By Blood in these places, is meant a bloodie death: which bloodie death, is that of the Crosse: and which death of the Crosse, because it is accursed, doeth comprehend not onlie the death of the Bodie, but it hath joyned with it, the Curse of the Law. For which cause, it is sayde, That CHRIST was made a Curse for vs: and this Curse, wee know, is extensiue, not onlie to the Bodie, but to the Soule lyke-wyse. Therefore, both Ireneus,Iren. l. 5. c. 2. Theod. Dial. 3. & Theodoret, when they haue shown, that by His owne Blood, our Savi∣our hath redeemed vs, they imme∣diatlie subjoyne, and conjoyne, His Soules sufferings therewith, saying, Ipso dante animam pro animabus nostris, & corpus suum pro corporibus nostris. Neyther thinke I, that the Iesuit him-selfe can bee so grosse, as to ex∣clude frō the work of our Redemp∣tion, the other corporall sufferings of CHRIST, which were not bloody at all, as His Wearinesse, Hungring, Thirsting, Weeping, Binding, Buf∣fetting,
Mocking, Spitting, Ray∣lings, &c, with manie the lyke; ex∣cept hee would accuse the Wisdome of GOD, as doing that, which, in such a worke, was but al-to-gether superfluous. And, therefore, in such speaches, of necessitie, by a part, must bee vnderstood the whole. Next, where-as the Iesuit inten∣deth to proue, that CHRIST suf∣fered neyther poenam damni, nor sen∣sus: non damni, Because (sayth hee) His Soule was ever blessed, to wit, in enjoying the vision of GOD; where-from the wicked, who suffer poenam damni, are altogether debarred. To whom I answere,Aquin. part. 3. q. 46. art. 8 in his owne Aquinas words; Quod gaudium fruitionis, non contraria∣tur directe dolori passionis, quia non sunt de eodem: that is, The joy of frui∣tion, is not directlie contrarie to the dolour of His suffering, because they are not conversant about the same thing. For, as hee sayeth, in
his conclusion, Quanquam tota anima CHRISTI per essentiam DEO frueretur in passione, non tamen secundum omnes suas potentias, sed solum superior pars in illo rationis proprio actu beatorum fruitione fruebatur: that is, Altho the whole Soule of CHRIST, ac∣cording to the essence there-of, en∣joyed GOD in the Passion, yet it did not so according to all the po∣wers there-of, but onlie the supe∣riour part, in the proper act of reason, is that which enjoyed the fruition of the Blessed. Next, sayth the Iesuit, CHRIST suffered not poenam sensus, be∣cause Hee suffered not the payne of fire, nor vtter darknesse in eternall bands, &c. To whom, lyke∣wyse, I may answere,Bell. l. 4. de CHRISTO, c. 8. in his Bellar∣mines owne wordes, saying, That the pryce of our Redemption, payed by CHRIST, ought not (sayeth hee) to bee weighed by the quali∣tie,
or endurance of the paynes suffered, but by the dignitie of the Person Sufferer. Agayne: How was not the Soule of CHRIST destitute of the bliss-full Vision of GOD, at least in the consequence there-of, which is the sense of heavenlie joy, when Hee complayneth, that Hee was forsaken? which could not befall to one that still had enjoyed that Vision, and that sort there-of which they want, who are sayde to suffer poenam damni: which Vision, is that perfect and cleare sight of GOD, in the Heavens with joy, where the Soule is subject to no evill of paine; where-of the Psalmist, in CHRIST'S Person,Psal. 87. Aquin. part. 3. q. 15. a. 4. proclaimed his soule, to haue beene full, as Aquinas doeth show. Againe: What were those paines where-of Hee declared Himselfe so sensible there-of in His Soule, in His Agonie, and complaynt on the Crosse, if they were not poena sensus? as also those dolours where-from
Hee was loosed, and which are cal∣led, Dolores inferni: if Hee was sen∣sible of them, were they not poena sensus? And in particular, as for the paine of fire, (which is metapho∣ricallie, and not materiallie vnder∣stood) if hee comprehend the po∣sitiue paynes of Hell, vnder the same, let him heare a Pope, declaring, That CHRIST suffered such, saying, Rubigo quippe peccati purgari non po∣tuit, nisi igne tormenti: that is, The rust of sinne (sayeth he) could no otherwyse be purged by CHRIST, but by the fire of Torment. And, as for the eternitie of en∣durance, it is a chyldish, and sophisti∣call forme of reasoning, to argue from that which is accidentall, to a thing, to the denyall of a thing it selfe: as, because the paynes which CHRIST suffered in His Soule, were not eternall for endurance, therefore they were not such, as are signified by CHRIST'S descense into Hell: for so might one con∣clude,
That CHRIST'S corpo∣rall death, was not the true death, that Adam, or other men died, be∣cause others continued more lin∣gringlie in the paynes of death than Hee, as the Thieues did, who were crucifixed with Him: and because the power of Death hath detayned other men so manie Ages vnder the same, where-as Hee was not detay∣ned, not three dayes: therefore, altho CHRIST'S sufferinges were not eternall in endurance, yet if they were the same in the quali∣tie, and kynde, with those which wee should haue suffered in eterni∣tie, it sufficeth, because wee must consider, that those paynes which CHRIST endured had an ende, not of their owne nature, but by the power of CHRIST, who over-came them, and which other-wyse had beene eternall.
CHAP. XVIII. The defence of Beza, his interpre∣tation of ACT. 2.27. against the fore-sayde Iesuit. The Iesuit's Challenge of BE∣ZA'S Exposition. FInallie: It can not bee sayde, that when the Scripture sayth, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Hell; that it is to bee vnder∣stoode, as Beza interpreteth it, Thou wilt not leaue my Car∣case in the Graue: because the Soule, is not the Carcase; and Graue, is not Hell. There-after, the Soule in that place, can not bee taken for the Bodie; because it is distinguished from the Bodie, where-of it is sayde, that it shall not see Corrup∣tion, &c.
The defence of Beza. FOR Answere: As to the last word, , seeing wee haue already shown at length, what the same doeth signifie, and howe justlie it may bee expounded, as Beza inter∣preteth it [the Graue:] therefore, wee remit the Reader, to the proper place, where hee may see the Iesuit answered, and himselfe to receiue cleare satisfaction. As to the second word, , which Beza interpreteth, Bodie, or (as the Iesuit sayth) Carcase, the ori∣ginall,Psal. 16.10. in that propheticall Psalme, out of which the Apostle citeth the fore-sayde testimonie, is, nephesh: which Bellarmine himselfe doth grant often-tymes to signifie,Bell. l. 4. de CHRISTO, c. 12. §. ad 3. the bodie, or flesh of man, As is evident (sayth he) out of sundrie parts of Scrip∣ture:
and the Rabbinicall Doctors they testifie the same. And that same which the Hebrewes call ne∣phesh, the Greeke, or Septuagint, (ac∣cording to which, the Apostle ci∣teth that Testimonie) hath . Betweene which words, nephesh, and , altho Bellarmine would beare vs in hand, that there is a great difference; Nephesh beeing more generall (sayeth hee) and signi∣fying eyther the whole Man, or the Soule, or the Bodie apart: but that , or anima, is onlie put for the Soule alone. And yet (contrarie to Bellarmine's assertion) it is evident, that nephesh, when it is translated , by the Septua∣gint, and anima, by the Vulgare; that then it often tymes signifieth the Bodie onlie, or fleshlie part of Man; as in that place of Genesis, 37. Non interficiamus animam ejus; the Hebrew being nephesh, the Greeke , and the Latine, Anima; Vbi anima
(sayth Bellarmine himselfe) non pro anima proprie dicta,Bell. loco quo supra. nec pro homine per tropum, (nam repugnat pronomen ejus) sed pro ipsa carne proprie accipitur. So, Numbers, 23.10. , or moriatur anima mea (sayeth BALAAM) morte justorum. Where, wee see, that to die, is attributed to , or anima: which cannot be competent to the Soule, which is immortall, but to the Bodie, which onlie is subject to death. The same is evident, lyke-wyse, out of the collation of Numbers, 19.13. where it is sayde, ; which the vulgar Latine translateth, Omnis qui tetigerit humanae animae mor∣ticinium: which beeing compared with the eleventh verse, where it is sayde, in lyke manner, : which the vulgar rende∣reth, Qui tetigerit cadaver hominis mor∣tui. The collation of these places, (I say) doeth clearlie showe, that
nephesh, or , which is cal∣led anima, in the one, is directlie rendered cadaver in the other. So that not onlie doeth nephesh, but , and anima, lyke-wyse, often∣tymes signifie the verie Carcase of Man, as the Poët, also, verifieth, saying, Animamq́ue sepulchro condimus.Virg. Ae∣neiad. 3. Aug. Epist. 157. ad Op∣tatum. Levit. 21.11 The reason of which sort of speach, Augustine prettielie giveth, saying, Where the Law sayeth, That hee is defiled, who shall goe to a dead Soule; that is, (sayeth hee) to the Carcase of a dead Man; so that by the name of a dead Soule, the dead Bodie may bee vnder∣stood, which did contayne the Soule; even as when the people are absent, which are the Church, yet the place, never-the-lesse, is still tearmed the Church. (sayth hee.) So that the Argument drawne from the word , doeth no-wyse impede, that these wordes, ACT. 2.27. should bee thus ex∣pounded;
that is, eyther, that Thou wilt not leaue mee in the Graue, as ROM. 13.1. it is sayde, Let eve∣rie soule bee subject to the higher Powers: that is, Let everie one bee subject. And agayne, ACT. 2.31. where the Greeke hath, That His Soule was not left; the olde vulgare Latine hath, That Hee was not left. Or els, (according to Be∣za) it may bee expounded, as the instances of GEN. 37. and NVN∣BERS 19. formerlie doeth teach, saying, Thou wilt not leaue my Bodie in the Graue. And, farther, to cleare Beza, that hee is not singular heere-in, in ex∣pounding so, nor was the first Au∣thor of this interpretation, let the Iesuit haue recourse to his owne Wryters; and hee shall finde Isidorus Clarius, saying on the same second of the ACTS, That the words [my Soule in Hell] according to the Hebrew phrase, (sayeth hee) is
there put for [my Bodie in the Graue.] Also, Non relinquos animam meam, hoc est, corpus meum in sepulchro, (sayth ARIAS MONTANVS, in Psalme 16.Arias Mont. in Hebraicae Linguae Idi∣otismis voce, anima, in sacra Bib. apparatu. edit. An∣twerp. An. 1572.) And to the same sense, doeth the exposition of Sheol, in the same Psalme, being rendred Sepulchrum; in their interlinear Bible, (approved by the Vniversitie of LOVANE, and generallie authorized) inevitablie enforce, seeing wee know it is dead Bodies, and not Soules, that goe to the Graue. And, therefore, Vata∣blus, in his Notes vpon the same place of the Psalme, expoundeth the word, Anima, to bee the Bodie, (by comparing it with LEVIT. 21.1.) So that the sence of that place of the ACTS, or PSALMIST, whence it is taken, may, according to BE∣ZA'S Exposition, bee orthodoxlie this: That altho our Saviour's Bo∣die went downe to the Graue, or place of Corruption, and continued
there, in that state of humiliation, as it were vnder Deaths dominion, three dayes almost; yet His Bodie was not to bee left in the Graue, (as other mens are) but here-in it was to bee priviledged beyond all Man∣kynde, (as the Psalmist fore-pro∣phesied) not onlie in the short loo∣sing, and deliverie there-of, from Deaths Dominion, or the Graue; but also, that whyle His blessed Bodie lay there, it should see no Corrup∣tion: and so that corruption-wor∣king power there-of, (as the Ea∣sterne Liturgie hath) had no power over Him.
CHAP. XIX. The place of 1. PETER, 3.19. expounded, and vindicated from Popish grosse wresting. THUS, having answered, fullie, the Iesuit, in his earnest Plea, for his Popish Limbus; there resteth onlie, (at the desire of some well-affected) that the place of Peter, (which is the Papists Achilles) may receyue a-lyke solution, being, by Bellarmine, for this purpose, so much vrged, and by our Papists, amongst vs, so much and vsuallie vpbrayded: the passing∣by where-of, by our fore-named De∣mander, is much to bee admired. The Text of Scripture, then, is this: Being put to death,1. Pet. 3.19. in the
flesh, but quickned in the Spirit, by which also Hee went, and prea∣ched to the Spirites in Prison; which, some-tymes, were disobe∣dient, when once the long suffe∣ring of GOD wayted in the dayes of Noah. In clearing of which Text, these poynts being considered, it shall ea∣silie (GOD willing) appeare, that it maketh nothing for them. 1. By what Spirit CHRIST went; to wit, That it was not in His Humane Soule, but by His Divine Spirit. 2. To what Spirites Hee went; to wit, That those were not the Godlie, or Iust; but the wicked, and impenitent. 3. The tyme when CHRIST went vnto them; to wit, Before the Deludge, and not after His owne Suffering. 4. The manner how Hee went; to wit, Mediatelie, by the ministrie of Noah, and not immediatelie, in His Humane Soule.
5. The cause wherefore He went; to wit, To preach Repentance, vnto them being on Earth: but not to de∣liver them, out of any hellish Limbo. 6. The place, where these Spirits were, even when Peter speaketh of them, after CHRIST'S Ascen∣sion; to wit, In the Prison of Hell, of the Damned, for the abuse of GOD'S long suffering: and from which place there is no liberation. All which poyntes, GOD willing, wee shall cleare, and con∣firme: first, By Scripture: second∣lie, By Fathers: and thirdlie, By Romanists them-selues. The first, and mayne poynt, then, to bee considered, is, By what Spi∣rit CHRIST went? To which question, the Apostle him-selfe an∣swereth; to wit, By which Hee was quickned. And if it bee farther as∣ked, By what Spirit was Hee quick∣ned? Saynct Paul will tell vs, That it was By the Spirit of GOD;Rom. 8.11. which shall, also, quicken our mor∣tall Bodies, (sayeth hee.)
Next, to Scripture, if wee con∣sult with Antiquitie,Aug. Ep. 99.  Evod. Augustine will tell vs, That it is CHRIST'S divine Spirit, that is meant here. Beda,Beda in 1. Pet. 3. lyke-wyse, telleth vs, That it was by the holie Spirit in Noah, (sayeth hee) who went, and prea∣ched to the Wicked of that Age; that they might bee converted to a better course of lyfe. OEcumenius, also, declareth, That it is the Spirit of His God-head, that is spoken of, saying, Mortificatus quidem natura car∣nis, id est, humana, resurrexit autem vir∣tute Deitatis, est enim DEVS Spiri∣tus: that is, Hee died (sayeth hee) according to the flesh, that is, ac∣cording to His Humane Nature; but Hee rose agayne, by the power of His Deitie; for this Spirit, is GOD. Last of all, if wee en quyre their owne Doctors,Carth. in 1. Pet. 3. Cartbusian declareth, That it was, Per Spiritus sancti missio∣nem seu inspirationem, (sayeth hee.)
And agayne, Per suae miserationis effe∣ctum spiritualiter veniens, & Spiritu san∣cto operante adveniens, (sayeth hee:) that is, That it was by the sending, or inspiration of the holie Ghost; and spirituallie by the worke of Mercie, that Hee came. Aquinas, also, showeth, That it was,Aquin. pa 3. q. 52. art. 2. Spiritu suae divinitatis, (sayeth hee) per ora justorum: that is, That it was in His Divine Spirit, by the Mouthes of Iust men. Lyra, lyke-wyse, sayeth, That it was, Per Spiritum sanctum in Noe, & caeteris bonis. And, to come to later Schoole-men, the Iesuit Salme∣ron, confesseth, That the Spirit,Salm. in 1. Pet. 3. where-by Hee was quickned, and went to preach by, was the holie Ghost. And, in lyke-manner, An∣dradius telleth vs,Andrad. de∣fens. Con. Trid. l. 2. That it was the same Spirit, whereby Hee came of olde: that wee may vnderstand, (sayth hee) that it is not now of late, that Hee tooke a care of His Church. By all which, wee con∣clude,
that it was not by the Hu∣mane Soule of CHRIST, but His Divine Spirit, that Hee went to those Spirits, which Peter speaketh of. The second poynt, is, To what Spirits Hee went? which will evi∣dentlie appeare, that they were not the Patriarches, or lust Men, by the opposition of the Titles, which in Scripture are given to the one, and the other.Heb. 11.8.17. For, the one are praysed for Fayth, and Obedience: but those Spirits, are called incredulous, and disobedient. Agayne, the Patriar∣ches, and Godlie, they knew the day of their gracious visitation: but of those, it is sayde, That they abused the long suffering of GOD, which waited for their conversion. In lyke-maner, if wee consider, what they are sayde to bee, by Fa∣thers, and Romanistes them-selues; Augustine doeth showe vs, That it was they, who were Captiues to Sinne. And Beda, most clearlie,
sayeth, That they were the Wicked, and the carnall livers, (sayth he) in the age of Noah. Carthusian, in lyke-manner, sayth, That they were, Increduli, & iniqui illius temporis: that is, The misbelievers, and wicked of that age. And so sayeth, lyke∣wyse, Lyra. And Andradius professeth, That they are those Spirits, that would not belieue Noah, giving good counsell, (sayeth hee) when the Arke was a-building before their eyes, to call them to Repen∣tance. The third poynt, is, the tyme when CHRIST went; which Scrip∣ture clearlie poynteth out, to haue beene in the dayes of Noah. Augu∣stine, also, resolveth this, (whome Aquinas doeth follow) saying, That it was in Noah's tyme, and from the beginning of the World, be∣fore ever Hee came in the flesh, to die there-in, for vs. Beda, lyke∣wyse, sayeth, Hee who in our tymes
preached the way of Lyfe, to the World; even Hee Himselfe, also, before the Flood, comming in the Spirit, preached to the Vnbelie∣vers. Their owne Carthusian, also, sho∣weth, that this is the scope of the Apostle's words, Asserere quod CHRI∣STVS, (sayeth hee) qui nostris tempo∣ribus carne indutus veniens, praedicabat bo∣minibus iter salutis, ipse etiam & ante di∣luvium eis qui tunc increduli erant, spiri∣tu veniens praedicabat: which are the words of Beda. Andradius, also, sho∣weth, (as a-before) That it was, whyle the Arke was a-building, before their eyes, to call them to repentance. Which Aquinas, and Lyra, homologate accordinglie. The fourth poynt, is, the man∣ner, how CHRIST went: Beda (and Walafridus Strabus, after him) say, That it was by Noah: and so, by a mediate Ministrie; and not by CHRIST immediatelie: for by
His holie Spirit, He was in Noah, (sayeth hee) and the rest of the holie men, that were at that tyme: who by their good conversation, preached to the Wicked of that Age; that they might bee conver∣ted. Aquinas, also, sayeth,Aquin. loco quo supra. His inquam praedicavit, qui increduli fuerant aliquan∣do, Noae scilicet praedicanti: that is, Hee preached vnto them, (sayeth hee) who were incredulous of old, to wit, to Noah, when hee prea∣ched to them. Carthusian, lyke-wyse, sayeth, Spiritu sancto operante adveniens praedicavit per Noae ut infra inuitur: that is, Comming by the operation of the holie Spirit, Hee preached by Noah: as heere-after is given to vnderstand. And Lyra, in lyke-man∣ner, sayeth, Spiritu veniens praedicavit (scilicet) per Noae. With these cleare Testimonies, also, agreeth the phrase of Scrip∣ture, as Nehem. 9.30. where the Le∣vites doe thus confesse vnto the
LORD, saying, Yet manie yeare didst Thou forbeare them,2. Sam. 23.2. and testified agaynst them, by Thy Spirit, in the Prophets: yet would they not giue eare. Which made that royall Prophet to say, The Spirit of the LORD spake by mee, and His Word was in my Tongue. Lyke-wyse, Zach. 7.12, is sayde, That the people indured their Hearts, left they should hear the wordes, which the LORD of Hoasts had sent in His Spirit, by the former Prophets. And last, in a more particular manner, in this same Epistle of Peter,1. Pet. 1.11. 2. Pet. 2.5. it is called, The Spirit of CHRIST, which spake in the Prophets; amongst whom, Noah (sayeth the Apostle) was a Preacher of Righteousnesse. And so, heere-by, the mayn doubt is solved; to wit, that these words of Peter, are to bee referre to CHRIST'S preaching, mediatelie onlie by the ministrie of Noah, vnt
the wicked then livng, before the Deludge: and not to His owne prea∣ching, immedatelie, in His Soule, after His suffering, to the Soules of the Patriarches, or others, in anie part of Hell. The fift poynt, is, the cause wherefore CHRIST went to those Spirits, of whom Saynct Peter spea∣keth: Where-in the Apostle him∣selfe giveth the resolution, when he sayeth, That Hee preached to them, for this ende, (as Beda sayeth) That they might bee converted to a bet∣ter course of lyfe. The like sayth, al∣so, Carthusian, & Lyra, calling this prea∣ching, An exhorting of them to repentance: as Andradius tearmeth it, Noah's giving them good coun∣sell, for their amendement. So, that it was not, for the deliverie of those Spirits, out of anie part of Hell, long after their death, that CHRIST is sayde, in Spirit, to haue gone vnto them; (for of anie such ende or er∣rand, there is not a title in the Text)
but in Noah's tyme, and by his mi∣nistrie, that hee preached vnto them repentance, and amendement of lyfe: the practise of both which, wee know, belongeth onlie to this lyfe, and our condition on earth. The sixt, and last poynt, is, the place where those spirites are sayde to bee, even when Peter wrote this Epistle, long after CHRIST'S ascen∣tion: which Saynct Peter himselfe telleth, that it was, in Prison. Where wee haue to remarke, first, that by Prison in Scripture, when it spea∣keth of imprisoning of Spirits, (as in this place) is onelie meant the Hell of the Damned; as is evidenr, Rev. 20.7. and Iude 1.6. which is therefore called, in the interlinear Glosse, The Prison of Darknesse, and Despare. Into which Hell of the Damned, the Papists themselues will not say, That the Soules of the just were, neyther that CHRIST'S Soule descended to that place, to free anie there-from: And so this
speach of Peters, can no-wyse make for Limbus. Next, the Apostle speaketh here of the present tyme, when he wote, saying, That are in Prison, as the wordes import, , scilicet, : which may bee confirmed, by the lyke forme of speach, everie-where in Scripture, as Matth. 6.9. , sci∣licet, : and Iohn 5.28. , scilicet, : as also, Matt. 24.16.17.18. Heb. 12.23. &c. and frequentlie else-where. And in conclusion, for confir∣ming the trueth heere-of, out of the mouth of an Adversarie, let Andra∣dius owne words bee heard, who wrote in defence of the Coun∣cell of Trent, Praedicavit Spiritibus illis,Andrad. l. 2. defens. Concil. Trid. (sayeth hee) qui nunc in carcere, meritas jam infidelitatis poenas luunt: that is, Hee preached vnto them, (sayeth Andradius) who even now being in Prison, are justlie at this
verie instant, suffering the pu∣nishment of their infidelitie. CHAP. XX. In what sound sense (beside Cal∣vine's former exposition) it may, without controversie, bee yeelded vnto, both by Papist, & Protestant, That CHRIST descended vnto Hell. HAving, then, suf∣ficientlie battered anie Popish, or Chi∣mericall Limbo; and it resting, therefore, that by Hell, no such imaginarie Pri∣son can bee vnderstood, but pro∣perlie the place or estate of the Dam∣ned; It remayneth to consider, in what sound sense, it may bee sayde, That CHRIST descended into
Hell, (beside the former exposi∣tion of Calvine's) which neyther Papist nor Protestant, can deny. This Descense, therefore, is in a virtuall manner or efficacie, where∣by through the powerfull opera∣tion of His Death and Passion, as Death and the Graue, so Hell was over-come, Death loosing its sting, the Graue its victorie, and Hell the dominion there-of. Heere-vnto Scripture confor∣meth, Councels conclude, Fathers consent, Romanists yeelde, and Pro∣testants grant. This is it, therefore, which the Apostle affirmeth, when hee sayeth, That Hee spoyled Principalities and Powers,Coloss. 2.15. and made a show of them openlie, triumphing over them. This, also, that famous Coun∣cell of Alexandria professed, and wrote vnto Nestorius, in their Con∣fession
of Fayth.Concil. Eph. c. 26. Concil. Chalced. Act. 5. Concil. Con∣stant. collat. 6. The lyke, also, did that third generall Councell at Ephesus, the fourth at Chalcedon, and the fift at Constantinople, vnanimlie acknowledge, That CHRIST, by His divine operation, and the powerfull efficacie of His Passion, spoyled Hell: or (as wee say vul∣garlie) herried the same; whether Inferi, bee taken for the Graue, or place of the dead, or for the estate of punishment, and place of the Damned; the one where-of Hee hath over-come, by alteration of the nature there-of, and spoyling it of Victorie; and the other, by way of prevention, defrauding it of its Prey. This is the onelie way, lyke∣wyse,Bell. l. 4. de CHRISTO, c. 15. Durand. in 3. Sent. Dist. 22. q. 3. (as BELLARMINE granteth) That the Romanists great Master DVRANDVS affirmeth our SAVIOUR'S descense into Hell; to wit, not properlie, and in substance; but virtuallie, and by effect; in that, without anie locall
motion, the power of His Death did reach there-vnto; as GOD is sayde to descend, (sayeth AV∣GVSTINE) when Hee doth any thing on Earth,Aug. de ci∣vit. DEI, l. 16. c. 5. which being won∣derfullie effectuated, beyonde the common course of Nature, may in some sorte manifest His presence. Other-wyse, (sayth DVRAND) His Soule had beene in two places together, seeing Hee sayde to the Thiefe, This day thou shalt bee with Mee, in Paradise. But this (sayeth DVRAND) is al-to-ge∣ther absurd. This, lyke-wyse, is the doctrine of THOMAS AQVINAS,Aquin. part. 3. q. 53. art. 2. and the other Schoole-men, That vir∣tuallie onelie, and not locallie, CHRIST descended to the place of the Damned. And which BEL∣LARMINE himselfe,Bell. recog. in l. 4. de CHRISTO. in his Recog∣nitions, acknowledgeth to bee a trueth, by all to bee professed. And last, to this, as orthodoxe Veritie, doe our Divines subscryue:
Therefore,Chamier. lib. 5. de CHRISTO, cap. 3. sayeth late CHAMIER, Praeterea cum dicimus descendit ad inferos, significamus efficaciam mortis CHRI∣STI, qua devicti sunt inferi: that is, More-over, when wee say, Hee descended into Hell, wee signi∣fie there-by, the efficacie of CHRIST'S death, where-by Hee over-came Hell. The fruit of which Victorie, not onlie per∣tayneth to them (sayth he) who were to come after; but also to them who long had gone be∣fore▪ FINIS.
unicorn and seal with three towers
