16835.5 44920359 173804
THE FRENCH KINGS DECLA∣RATION MADE IN FAVOVR OF THE PRINCES, Dukes, Peeres, Officers of the Crown, Lords, Gentlemen, and others, who had withdrawne themselues from his Maiesty. PVBLISHED IN PARLIAMENT the twelfth of May, 1617. Translated out of the French Copie. BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston for William Arondell, at the Angell in Pauls Church-yard. 1617.
THE FRENCH KINGS DECLARATI∣ON MADE IN FAVOVR OF the Princes, Dukes, Peeres, Officers of the Crowne, Lords, Gentlemen, and others who had withdrawne themselues from his Maiesty. Published in Parliament the 12. of May▪ 1617. LEVVIS, By the grace of God, King of France and Nauarre, to all present, and to come, greeting. Our commandment (since the death of the Marshall d' Ancre) hauing been so readily obeyed, by the Princes, Dukes, Peeres, Officers of our Crowne, Lords, Gentlemen, Officers of our soueraigne Courts, and all such as were their followers, against whom wee had decreed our
Letters Patents, of the monethes of Ianuarie, and Februarie last, doth sufficiently testifie vn∣to vs, that the onely desire of their conserua∣tion, and to withstand their apparant ruine, which was plotted by the insolent, violent, and pernicious designes of the said Marshall d' Ancre, had constrained them to withdraw themselues from vs, and to purchase their se∣curitie by Armes, though vnlawfull; for as much as the said Marshall made vse of my for∣ces to oppresse them, contrary to my intenti∣on. But as it concerned our Dignitie, to de∣cree our letters of declaration against them, when as they exploited actions contrary to their dutie, where they should haue expected our iustice. Now that we are assured of their fidelitie, and that they haue declared vnto vs, that the meere necessity of their conseruation, was the motiue to associate themselues, onely to oppose against the violences of the said Marshall; and that we haue been by them suf∣ficiently informed of their good intentions towards vs, and our Kingdomes; and of the de∣sire which they haue to spend their liues to augment the greatnesse thereof, and to main∣taine vs & our authority, & that they are very
sorie and displeased with themselues, for ha∣uing leuied men of warre, taken and detained our moneys, imposed contributions on our people, and caused our subiects (like toyle∣some drudges) to fortifie such places as were by them held, which they haue protested vnto vs they neuer would haue vndertaken, much lesse haue caused strangers to enter our Realmes, if they had not been thereunto con∣strained, to auoide the vtter ruine and desola∣tion of them and their families. Wee, of our clemencie and Royall bountie, are moued to deale fauourably with them; to pardon such defaults and ouersights, which might haue bin committed in the premisses, and to reestablish them in the charges, honours, and dignities, which they heretofore possessed; seeing with∣all, this may be a meanes to fortifie our King∣domes, with a necessary peace, of good men so much desired. Hauing therfore deliberated of these affaires in our Counsell, some of the Princes of our blood being present, with o∣ther Princes, Dukes, Peeres, Officers of our Crowne, and the chiefest of our said Coun∣sell; we giue all men to vnderstand, that by the aduice of our Counsel aforesaid, and our own
certaine knowledge, full power, and Royall authoritie, wee haue pronounced and decla∣red; and by these presents signed with our hand, doe pronounce and declare, that wee hold the said Princes, Dukes, Peeres, Officers of our Crowne, and all those which haue assi∣sted them, for our good and loyall subiects and seruants: wee will and ordaine, that the memorie of all that hath passed in these last troubles for the causes afore specified, and al∣so concerning the said leauie of Armes, and acts of Hostility, to remaine vtterly extinct and abolished, as wee doe by these presents a∣foresaid extinguish and abolish them; proui∣ded alwaies, that they doe hereafter containe themselues within the limits of the respect and dutie which they owe vnto vs, and shall yeeld that obedience vnto our commandements which they are bound vnto. And that from this present time they renounce all leagues and associations, which might by them bee made, betweene themselues, and other of our subiects, or strangers, as well within the Realme, as without, and of what condition so∣euer they bee; and shall generally performe the duties of good and faithfull subiects and
seruants, whereunto they are obliged by their births: the premisses considered, we haue ree∣stablished, and doe reestablish them into all and singular their goods, moueables, and im∣mouables, honours, dignities, charges, estates, offices and pensions, whereof wee giue them full and entire repossession; and to this end haue we reuoked and taken away all attach∣ments thereupon made. We will and ordaine, that they enioy our fauours, graces, benifi∣ces, honours, and gouernments, and that they exercise their charges and offices, euen as they formerly did, so that hereafter they may not be molested nor troubled in any forme or fa∣shion whatsoeuer. Thereupon imposing si∣lence on all our Atturneys General, their sub∣stitutes present and to come, and to all others: All declarations, interdictions, and other Let∣ters Patents, which haue been by vs hereto∣fore decreed and published in our Courts of Parliament, to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding; which we haue reuoked, and do reuoke, haue declared, and doe declare void and of no effect and value, as also all which hath been done in the execution thereof; the which to that effect, of our especiall grace, we
will cause to be taken away, and put out of the Registers of our Courts of Parliament. More∣ouer, we hold those released and discharged, whom they had appointed for the managing of our treasure, with others from whom they might haue exacted, and suddenly compelled to bring in their monies: prouided that within six weekes after the Publication of these pre∣sents, they deliuer into our Chamber of Ac∣counts, the copie of their bils of receits, sea∣led and signed by one of the said Princes and Dukes; likewise of the woods which they might haue felled, and carried out of our for∣rests. We will also, that our edicts and declara∣tions heretofore made, for the pacification of the troubles of our Realme; namely, that of Blois, at the issue and sequell of the treatie of Lodune, be inuiolably executed, kept, and iust∣ly obserued, according to their forme and te∣nure. And that vnder the authority and bene∣fit of the same, all our subiects, as well Catho∣lick, as those of the pretended reformed Reli∣gion, may hereafter liue in good peace, vni∣on, & correspondence, vnder our obedience, without vpbraiding one the other with any imputation of those things that are done and
past. Also we giue commission to our trustie & beloued Counsellors, holding our Courts of Parliament, Chambers of our accounts, Bayliffes, Seneschalles, Iudges, or their substi∣tutes, and to all our other Iustices and Offi∣cers, to whom it may, or shal appertaine, each one for himselfe to giue credit to these pre∣sents, and cause them to bee read, published, kept and obserued, according to their forme and tenure: And to the end they may bee for euer firme and stable, we haue caused to these presents to bee set our seale; for such is our pleasure. Giuen at Bois de Vincennes, in the moneth of May, in the yeere of grace, 1617. and of our Raigne the seuenth. Signed, LEVVIS. And on the fold in the bottome by the King, DE LOMENIE. And on the side is written, VISA. And sealed with the great Seale of green wax, on labels of red and greene silke.
Read, published, registred, and heard, and that at the request of the Kings Atturney generall, who ordaineth, that colationed copies shall bee sent to the Bayliwiks and Seneschallships, to be there read, published, & registred, through the diligence of the said Atturney generall, his Substitutes, who shall certifie the doing hereof within the moneth, on paine to answere it at their perill. At Paris in the Court of Parliament, the twelfth of May, one thousand, six hundred and seuenteene. Signed, DV TILLET. FINIS.
