d504 99885204 182562
Deaths Tryumph Dash'd: or, an Elegy On that Faithful Servant of God Master JAMES JANEWAY, Minister of the Gospel, who Resting from his most Zealous and Profitable Labours, fell asleep in the Lord the 12th of this Instant, March 1673/4. HOw! JANEWAY Dead! spare, Lord! oh spare thy Rod, 'Twill else too soon compleat our Icabod; If thus thou snatch the Pastors, who shall keep From Romish VVolves thy precious trembling Sheep? If Night be coming, whither may they stray, VVhen such sure Watchmen are remov'd away? VVe lost, alas! one JANEWAY before, Oh! when shall we have Two such JANEWAYS more? Men, whom Heav'n fram'd, and sent on purpose hither, To win, and bring whole Crouds of Converts thither! Death's now grown Rigid, and intends't should seem, To make our Teachers all Conform to him. E're we can dry our Big-swell'd eyes for one, Tidings surprize us, That Anothers Gone. Hush then Elegiacks! 'Tis in vain you come, Sleight Sorrows Roar, but mighty Griefs are Dumb. Behold! our troubled Hemisphere has lost Another Star, whose brightness might almost Vie Lustre with the Sun, whose Heaven-bred Rays Shot forth such Flames at Darkness, that our days Unsoil'd with shades, might hope to overthrow Hells Gates, and make another Heav'n below. But now our Skie is darkned, this bright Star Being Ravisht hence, our fainting Israels Carr Hath lost its nimblest VVheels; we change our Light For gloomy Clouds, and loose our Day in Night. That Star's remov'd, whose clear enlightned Head Gilt every Eye with Flame, and often led The wandring VVisemen of the world, to see The Sacred object of a bended Knee. For by his zealous conduct we addrest To view a CHRIST New born in every Breast. This was both his imployment and delight, Oh! how (like Son of Thunder) would he fright A stubborn Sinner! and an Earth-quake raise In guilty minds, reflecting on their ways. But then (not for to break the Bruised Reed) Like Son of Consolation, he'd proceed VVith Soveraign Remedies of Gospel-Balm To heal the wounds, and such Soul-Tempests calm. —Thus, would he woe, and plead for God, and then Prove no less Orator to him for men; As in the early morn a sprightly Lark Springs from some Turf, making the Heav'ns her mark, Shoots up her self through Clouds, higher and higher, As if she'd bear a part i'th Angels Quire: So would he rise in Pray'r, till in a trice His Soul became a Bird of Paradise. If our dull faint Devotions, prayers be, VVe must acknowledge his an Extasie. Knowledge (the depth of whose unbounded main, Hath been the wrack of many a curious brain, And from her yet unreconciled School, Hath fill'd us with so many Learned Fools) Had Tutor'd him with rules that could not erre, And taught him how to know himself and her. Furnishing his large soul in height of measure, Like a rich Store-house of divinest Treasure, From whence, as from a Sacred Spring did flow Fresh Oracles, to let his Hearers know A way to Glory, and to let them see That way to Glory, was to walk, as He; —Thus lab'ring as Heav'ns Agent here below For others good; His wasted Spirits flow: His Mortal Life he freely spent, that we Might gain a Life of Immortality. Still Preaching, VVriting, every way he tryes To Court the VVorld from endless miseries. Admonishes the Old, instructs the Young, And teaches Children to speak Sions Tongue. But now his painful labours all are o're, Methinks I see him welcom'd at Heaven's door, By Crouds of Saints, sent there by him before. —Hush then you Sighs! forbear you flowing Tears, You storms and showrs of Nature, stop your Ears. Let us no more with broken grov'ling numbers Disturb his Rest, now rock'd in sacred slumbers. Complaints are vain, subscribe to Heaven's will, VVhen God speaks, tis Mans duty to be still. He's Dead! let's imitate his Life, that we Dying like him may Live Eternally. And Glorifie that God, whose dying Breath, Made Man, whom Death had Conquer'd, Conquer Death. The Grave's our Common, and our truest Home, A House of Clay best fits a Guest of Loam. Death's but the good mans sleep, for as our eyes VVe close each night at Bed, in hope to Rise; So should we Dye, for when the Trump doth blow, VVe shall as easily awake we know. And as we after sleep, our Bodies find More fresh in strength, and chearfully inclin'd; So after Death, our Flesh scatter'd and dry'd, Shall rise Immortal and more purify'd. This is our Port, this is Sins perfect Cure, Till Lodg'd within a Grave, there's none secure. AN EPITAPH. ASk you why so many a Tear Bursts forth? Ile tell you in your Ear, Compel me not to speak aloud, Death would then grow too too proud; Eys that cannot vent a Tear, Forbear to ask, you may not hear. Gentle Hearts that overflow, Have only Priviledge to know. In these Sacred Ashes then Know, Reader! that a man of men Lies cover'd, and Eternal Glory Makes dear mention of his story. Nature when she gave him birth, Open'd her Treasures to the Earth: Put forth the quintessence of merit, Quickned with a higher spirit. Rare was his Life, his latest breath Saw, and scorn'd, and Conquer'd Death. Thankless Reader! never more Urge a why thus tears runs o're; When you saw so high a Tyde, You might have known JANEWAY dy'd. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1674.
