s1229 53981713 180336
I7 R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ACT Of Supply. Edinburgh, May 13. 1685. THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT Calling to mind the many great Bles∣sings they have, and do enjoy under the Protection of the Royal Go∣vernment, and especially by the many Deliverances from the Rebellious Insurrections and Designs of Fanatical Traitors, from whom they could expect no less then Consusion in Religion, Oppressions in their Estates, and Cruelty against their Persons and Families; And that the Terrour of His Majesties Forces hath been very Instrumental for procuring Our present Security. But Considering, that not only these Enemies continues their inveterate hatred against King and People, but that their frequent Disappointments have heihtned their malice to Despair, and that the present Forces may be too few to undergo all the Fatigue which His Majesties Service, or the Protecting of the Country doth require: And to demonstrat to all Seditious Men, that this Nation is resolved to bestow all they have in the Kings Service, rather then to be exposed to the least of their Insults: Do therefore, for Themselves, and the Nation represented by them, Make a hearty and dutiful offer to His Majesty of Two Hundred and Sixteen Thousand Pounds Yearly, Payable as two Terms, viz. Whitsunday and Martinmass each Year, beginning at Whitsunday next 1685, and so forth Termly, and that over and beside the Five Moneths Cess already Imposed on this Kingdom, by the 3. Act of the Parliament 1681, whereby there will be four Moneths Cess pavable at each Term here∣after, beginning at Whitsunday next 1685. And as a further evidence of their entire Affection to the Sacred Person of His present Majesty, They humbly and heartily Offer a Continuation and Prorogation of the said Four Moneths Cess Termly, from the said Term of Whitsunday 1685 inclusivè, During all the Terms of His Majesties Lifetime (which GOD Almighty long preserve,) that being the greatest of our Earthly Wishes, as it is the chief of our Temporal Felicity and Glory. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.
