s1426a 51784645 175051
HONI SOIT  MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For Naturalization of STRANGERS. Edinburgh, the 8. of December, 1669. C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent MAJESTY, 1669.
ACT For Naturalization of STRANGERS. Edinburgh, the 8. of December, 1669, OVR Soveraign Lord, out of His In∣nate bounty and Royal inclination to favour and protect Strangers, and for the encrease and promoving of Trade and Manufactories, being graciously pleased and willing to give encouragement to Stran∣gers to repair to, and dwell and reside within this Kingdom; Hath therefore thought fit, Likeas, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, doth hereby Statute, Ordain and De∣clare, That all Strangers, being of the Protestant Religion, either such who having Estates shall think fit to bring the same to this Kingdom, to dwell and inhabite within the same; or who shall come to set up new Works and Manufactories therein, and shall repair to, and settle their abode, dwelling and residence within this Kingdom; shall be, and are hereby na∣turalized as native born Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland, and are to enjoy His Majesties Royal Pro∣tection, the benefit of the Law, and all other Privi∣ledges which a Native doth enjoy, als freely in all respects, as if they themselves had been born within the same; and that they shall have liberty and free∣dom of Trade, and freedom to buy and purchase Lands, Heretages, and other Goods moveable and immoveable, and to enjoy the same by possession, pur∣chase
or donation, or any other way; and to dispose thereof and transmit them to their Heirs and Succes∣ors, who are to succeed thereunto: And to enjoy all other Liberties, Priviledges and Capacities which do belong to, and are competent, or may and shall belong to any native Subject born within this Kingdom. And further, His Majesty doth Declare that upon applications to be made unto Him by these Stran∣gers, He will grant unto them the free and publick exercise of their Religion in their own Languages, and the liberty of having Churches within this His Kingdom. It is alwayes hereby provided, that no person or persons shall have the benefit of this Act, untill first by petition to the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, containing an exact designation of their names, places of their birth and former re∣sidence, and that they are of the Protestant Religion, it be found by the Council, that they are qualified ac∣cording to this Act, and ought to have the benefit thereof. And it is hereby Declared, that these pre∣sents, with an extract of the Act of Council, in fa∣vours of the saids persons to the effect aforesaid, shall be unto them a sufficient naturalization to all intents and purposes. Which Extract shall be given to them freely, without payment of any money or composi∣tion; save only the Fee of nine pounds Scots money to the Clerks of Council and their Servants. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1669.
