s1548 53299254 179989
design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament to the 25 of March,  1691. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defen∣ders of the Faith; To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Bre∣thren Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Whereas by the last Act of the last Session of Our present Parliament, of Our Antient Kingdom of Scotland, Dated the tenth day of September last, Our said Parliament was Declared by Us to be Current, and was Adjourned till the twenty two day of October in∣stant; And We Considering, That the present condition of Our Affairs in that Our Antient Kingdom, doth not require, that the Members of Our said Parliament should meet upon the foresaid day, and We being unwilling that they should be put to any trouble, that may be dispensed with; Do therefore, with Consent of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Ad∣journ Our said Current Parliament, until the twenty fifth day of March next ensuing; Hereby Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to attend that day, in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straitly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authori∣ty, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said twenty two day of October Current, to the said twenty fifth day of March next ensuing, As ye will answer to Us thereupon; The which to do, VVe commit to you, conjunctly and seve∣rally, as said is, Our full Power, by these Presents, delivering them by you, duly Execute, and Indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of October. And of Our Reign the Second Year, 1690. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA. MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesties, Anno Dom. 1690.
