18507.79 S94469 [ocm]72799760 184111
The 25. of September. NEWES FROM MOST PARTS OF CHRISTENDOME. Especially from Rome, Italy, Spaine, France, the Palati∣nate, the Low Countries, and diuers other places. VVherein is contained a full and cer∣taine relation, of the last Battle fought at Bergen Vp-zome, and the great ouerthrow which SPINOLAES Forces receiued from those of the Towne. With the lamentable losse of the City of Heidlebergh, after many braue repulses given to the Enemie: and the names of some principall Leaders, as were slaine in defence of the towne. And diuers other speciall matters, continued from the last printed Newes of the twentieth, to this present. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and William Sheffard. 1622.
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
From Rome the 27. of August. 1622. THe King of Spaine hath increased the pension of the Duke of Zagarola, with 500. Crownes yeerely, and comman∣ded him to leuie a Regiment of foote, and to conduct them into Veltolina. Likewise there are sent to the Spanish Ambassador here resident 30000. crownes, besides his yeerely allowance: The Gallies of Naples which sai∣led, with the regiment of the Marquesse of Terrariso towards Spaine, haue taken a Pirat in the Hauen of Saint Maria, and made 350. of the Pirates slaues. From Prague the 1. of September. YEsternight is the Lord Michna at the command of the Emperour by post gone to Vienna. Next Sunday the Lord of Walstein, and the Lord Andrew Hanniball are to doe the same vpon like command: the said Hanniball shall receiue a new Commission for some which are to be called in question, so that Smet∣sianski is here only at this time of all the Commissio∣ners or Deputies. From Venice the 2. of September. FRom Chur we haue vnderstood that there were ar∣riued diuers Souldiers, and abundance of Corne
seeing the Switsers will besiege the Fort of Saint Ma∣ria and Parmio. In the meane time hath the Gouernor of Millaine giuen charge that the Castle of Garduno should be pulled downe because it should not be taken by the Switsers or Grisons, and came from thence vpon Cleue, which lies but two legues from thence. From Naples we learne that at Pauia are taken di∣uers Souldiers which were fled, and afterwards conueyed to Millane, where shall bee erected a Regi∣ment of Neapolitanes. The Count of Sulty with his Re∣giment, besides Batteuille and his Company, besides other more are to come from Alsatia, and to set vpon the Grisons. From Spier the 6. of September. AT Heidelberg it is as yet still, but the Bauarians plant 24. peeces to discharge them suddenly a∣gainst the City. The Boores of the Palatinate, and the Bishoppricks thereabout aid to make the Sconses be∣fore the same. Last Saturday was the Captaine Bohun being shot before Heidelberg in his head, carried to Vdenheim to be buried there. The Colonell Truchses is likewise shot in his legge, and his Lieutenant in his foote. Few dayes agoe the Garrison of Heidelberg made a sally, but did no matter of moment, and lost 18. men which were taken Prisoners. The next day they shot fiercely without, and the Bauarians did likewise into the City. From Vienna the 7. of September. THe 2. of this Moneth is here arriued the Prince Charles of Lichtenstain in a Litter, and is lodged
in the Lords streete, the Cardinall of Didrichstein is likewise come here, and they consult dayly together. Powell Michna who was Secretary at Prague, is created a Baron by the Emperour, and is receiued amongst the ancient Lords of the Kingdome of Bohemia. From Brussels. WE doe further vnderstand that Heidleberg is rendred, the manner of which is as followeth. There were many assaults made vpon the same by the enemy, and the towne very valiantly defended it selfe, till the enemy in a most furious manner with multitudes ouer-charged them; notwithstanding they still maintained the same for many daies together, till at last the Suburbs were lost, afterwards the Towne held out foure dayes, in which many were lost on both sides, amongst which the Gouernour is supposed to be one, who behaued himselfe most valiantly, and brake through the enemies Pikes, but most vnfortu∣nately he was by the enemy shot with a Musket in the brest, afterwards the Castle was assailed by the enemy, and did hold out for 4. dayes longer, but was forced to yeeld for want of supply of Victuals and other ne∣cessaries. The Deane of Paris hauing consent of the King to succeed his Brother the Cardinall, De Rhetz, in his Bishoprike of Paris, being vpon his way to Rome, to be confirmed by the Pope, fell sicke and dyed. Paris 18. Sept. 1622. From Madril the 13. of August. FEw daies agoe is deceased the Duke of Monleon, who was a priuy Counsellor of the
death the Emperour, the King of Spaine, and all Chri∣stendome haue sustained a great losse, and departing with the griefe of many, he hath left this world, going to the euerlasting ioy, his death hath beene so memo∣rable that it is put in print. Last night is Don Ferdinando Piemontel, brother to the late Count of Benevente, whom the King of Spaine did intend to make a Cardinall, slaine trayterously by his Vncle Don Diego Henriques in the streete being iea∣lous of a Lady: the murtherer went the next day to condole to the Brother of the deceased, but hee was presently taken by the Iustice, and carried away, what will become of him, the time will shew. From Rome the 20. of August. FRom Naples is mentioned, that the Captaine Me∣nero Antonio de Santi, hath offered to send to the citie 25000. bushels of corne from Abbruzzo. Like∣wise the Prince Philiberto Viceroy in Sicilia, hath offe∣red vnto the same 50000. bushels of Corne. The Kings Atturney hauing ceased vpon the goods of Don Geo. Baptista Santi, which he had in that Kingdom, being a Merchant of Genua, because he had transpor∣ted great sums of mony out of that Kingdome, he of∣fers to giue 100000. Crownes to cleere himselfe. From Spaine is made ouer a million of gold for Na∣ples to leuy new souldiers. At Bolingna is a Low-country man put in prison, which with 2. of his Companions had made a Libell against our Lady. From Siria wee vnderstand that the King of Persia by the aid of the English, and Hollandish ships hath ta∣ken the City and Country of Ormus.
From Venice the 26 of August. At Genua are arriued two Gallies with many chests with Ryals for the Merchants. Letters from Millan makes mention, that Doctor Peribello, who from Veltolina was gone to the Court of Spaine, is returned backe with a Golden Chaine of 1000 Crownes, and hath brought a yeerely assignation of 20000 Crownes for Veltolina, which are to be payed to the Grisons, if the King of Spaine keepes Veltolina. Wee vnderstand from Bundten, that the Engadiner, and Bundtner with the aide of the forces of Zurich haue inuaded Spisse, and slaine 80 men, and taken 15 prisoners, and gotten moreouer 95 Oxen, 300 Goats, 200 Sheepe, 20 Hoggs, and 200 Muskets, besides other prouision; and afterwards fired the two Villa∣ges, the vpper and the lower Spiesse; and since they sur∣prised the Village Drafft, and tooke 80 Oxen, and ha∣uing pillaged the same, they burnt it likewise. From the Alpes about Veltkirchen, they haue also driuen a∣way 600 Oxen in Bundten. The Abbot of Pfeffers is fled, fearing the Bundtner would surprise him. From Vienna the 26 of August. We looke here daily for the Prince of Lichtensteyn, who lies downe at gla, being molested of the Goute: but hee is according to his Maiesties desire to bee brougt here in a Litter. From Prage the 30 of August. The Siege of Glats is now earnestly to bee taken in hand; to which purpose there is sent a great deale of
munition out of Saxonie, but the Garrisons sallies still daylie out, and kills many Imperialls; and hath taken lately diuers Prisoners, besides a Captaine of a Troope of Horse. From Brussels the 4 of September. Vpon the 29 of August, Don Gonzales de Cordua ar∣riued early in the morning with his Army betwixt the Abbey of Viliers, and the Lordship of Tilly, neere vnto Flury in Walshbrabant, about foure leagues from hence, Count Mansfeild is likewise resolutely marcht on, not∣withstanding Don Corduas approches, & sent a Trum∣pet vnto him, to know whether hee would fight with him, or grant him free passage. Whereupon Don Cor∣dua answered, that hee would stay his passage, and would resist him vnto the last man. Vpon this an∣swere, Mansfeild caused our Horse (which were few and weary) first to be assaulted by a 1300 of his Horse, and afterwards with a 1000 of his Horse, and after∣wards with a 1000 more; and last of all compassed them with all his forces, which were ordered as a halfe Moone, and they set so fiercely vpon our, that it see∣med the Enemy had the Victory; and they got at the same instant one of our Pieces, a great deale of our Baggage, besides great store of mony. But afterwards when our Foote succoured our Horse, they set so brauely vpon our enemies, that they droue them back againe, and played with our Ordnance amongst them, so that they had enough to doe to beate themselues through our forces, and are so by strong hand past thorow our Country. Duke Christian of Brunswick is shot in his Arme; which because he was infected of a burning cold, is cut afterwards off, the young Duke of Weyman, besides diuers Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines,
and Commanders are slaine vpon the place, and a∣mongst many prisoners, there is taken a Rhyne-graue. At our side are killd the Spanish Collonell Don Fran∣cisco de Gueuarra, besides fiue of his Captaines. The Count of Isenburg hath but two Captaines left ser∣uiceable in health, tha other are all slaine or wounded. The enemie hath lost about 2500, and we about 700. Wee haue gotten seuen Cornets, and one Ensigne of the enemies, and the same haue been presented to day to the Infanta. Many wounded souldiers are brought hither, and as many to Namur, the greatest part of them being of Mansfetlds forces, they are through the com∣mand of our holy and pious Princesse, cured with all care, wherof some are healed, but they die for the most part. When the enemy was past by, Don Cordua com∣manded the Collonel Gauchier to follow him with the Horse. The next day he incountred with the enemies betwixt Saint Truyden and Turgem, and slue certaine thousands of them. And because they thought that our forces had strengthened themselues, or that Count Henry of the Berg was neare at hand, they made al hast to come away, and left both their, and our Baggage behind, and saued themselues by flight. From Venice the 20 of August, 1622. The commotion raised betwixt the great, will not cease as yet, and it seemes that the new Turkish Em∣peror hath many secret enemies. The Souldiers haue sworne a new, that they wil dine and die with him, and promised to massacre all those that will oppose them∣selues against him. The Ambassador of Hungary was departed frō the same Court at Constantinople homeward with the vsu∣all presents for his King.
The Ambassadour of the King of Polonia sent to the great Turke, hath dispacht a Gentleman to his Court, desiring to haue a pasport and safe conduct for him∣selfe and all his suits, that in case the peace be not con∣firmed, he may safely returne into Polonia: but he hath been flatly denied, by reason that it is not vsuall, nor euer any Ambassadour had requested the like. Many thinke, that the King of Polonta will make vse of the present dissentions in Turky, and will not confirme the Peace made with the late great Turke. From Prage the 26 of August. From Vienna we heare, that 10000 Souldiers, be∣sides 6000 Cossacks are marching towards the Siege of Glatz, where the Garrison hath made lately a great sally againe, and pillaged, and fired three Villages be∣longing to the Abbot of Kements. It was still rumo∣red, that the old Count of Thurne was vpon the way with 1000 Souldiers to rescue the Towne of Glatz. And that there were Letters intercepted of the said Count to his Sonne, whereby hee went about to per∣swade his Sonne not to leaue the Towne, but to de∣fend it valiantly, promising him moreouer that they should be soone rescued. At Vienna likewise there is brought a Post of Beth∣lem Gabor Prisoner, being sent by him to the King of Bohemia with Letters. Letters from Trier make mention, that there were arriued 4000 Cossacks, which went to the Low coun∣tries to serue the King of Spaine.
The Crabats doe great dammage about Franckfort, and yesterday, and the day before, they droue all the Cattell away that was about the said Citie. From Collen the 10. of September. Wee haue here certaine newes, That certaine thou∣sand Cossackes are marching towards the Low Coun∣tries, to aide the King of Spaine, and are already arriued in the Bishopricke of Trier. The Batterie which was sunke before Papemutz, is raysed againe, and made somewhat thicker. In the meane time they spare their shot on both sides. From Breda the 9. of September. Count Mansfield is here receiued with great pompe and state; and at his arriuall, the shot was brauely dis∣charged. Certaine Commissioners of the States be∣ing accompanied with our Horse, went to meete him, and to bid him welcome. Duke Christian of Bruns∣wicke is still of a good courage; so that wee hope, that hee is in no danger of his life. His Forces lye here in the Laughstrate and Waelwyck, to refresh themselues; where they are relieued sufficiently. They shall all be mounted, as our Foot and Horse are. From the Graue the 9. of September. Although here come dayly diuerse, that haue beene with Count Man field in his late Iourney; neuerthe∣lesse, wee cannot vnderstand the certaintie of all that
which happened in the same, seeing they differ so much in their Relations: but they agree almost all in this, That not aboue halfe his Campe is come into this Countrey: Not that they haue beene slaine by the Enemie, but that many haue forsaken the Campe through wearinesse, sicknesse, or hunger, seeing there were many which had seene no Bread in the space of tenne dayes. First of all, they were encountred by certaine thousand Boores: but as soone as they had discharged two Field-Pieces vpon them, they retyred, and suffered Mansfields Forces to passe. Whereupon they marched on for the space of eight dayes; and fin∣ding no where any meate or drinke, they fired by the way very neere two hundred Villages. And being very wearie, and almost starued they were met by Don Cor∣dua, who would stoppe their passage. But seeing that there was no other remedie, they set valiantly vpon his Forces, and beat through the same, and the Enemie o∣pening the passage, they got two Peeces of Ordnance from them. They haue had three or foure Encoun∣ters with the Enemie; in which, on both sides, diuerse were slaine. The Duke of Brunswickes Horsemen per∣ceiuing that hee was hurt, fainted, and would haue o∣therwise quite ouerthrowne the Enemies Campe: but neuerthelesse, his Forces haue sustained the greater dammage. From Berghen vp Zome the 10. of September. Since my arriuall here, there is little past, worth the writing, although there passeth neuer a day nor night, but they bestow some Bullets one vpon another. The
last night there was a great fire in a corner of the Ene∣mies Campe towards Roosendall; whereupon three Peeces of Ordnance were discharged. What this be∣tokens, wee cannot tell. Don Cordua is two or three dayes agoe arriued with his Forces in Spinola's Camp, whereupon the Ordenance of the Towne playes fierce∣ly. It is not onely strange, but likewise incredible, to beleeue, how many sundry and new Workes here are dayly made to defend the Citie; as likewise, what rare Weapons here are inuented to be vsed. When the Enemies assault our Workes, as strange Trushes to knocke the Climbers downe, and Hookes to pierce their Bodyes, and draw them vpon the Walls sudden∣ly. To be briefe, vnlesse God be disposed to punish our sinnes, the Towne hath no reason to feare the Siege. Likewise, to driue the Enemies from thence, there is but small hope, vnlesse their Conuoyes be kept backe, that they may get no Victuals from Antwerpe, and then the Cooke will make them to retyre.
¶ A TRVE DELINEATION AND Description of the great Fight or Battell fought the 29. of August, 1622. betwixt Count Mans∣field and the Duke of Brunswick on the one side, and Don Gonzales de Cordua on the other side; betwixt Gem∣blours and Flory. THe King of Bohemia hoping, that by the inter∣cession and intermedling of his Maiestie of Great Britaine, an agreement should be made betwixt the Emperour, the King of Spaine, and him; he retyred with his Army out of the Palatinate: and pas∣sing through Alsatia, Strasburg, and Lotteringia, arriued at last at Sedan, where hee dismissed the same, staying himselfe by his Vnckle, the Duke of Bouillon. Where∣upon the Army being set at libertie, resolued to serue the States of the Vnited Prouinces, and to march thi∣ther through the Prouinces belonging vnto the King of Spaine, being conducted by Count Mansfield and the Duke Christian of Brunswick. The Infanta hauing notice of this Designe, commanded Don Cordua in all haste to come with his Forces out of the Palatinate, to resist this Army; and caused likewise, to the same pur∣pose, a great number of Boores to be in Armes. Count Mansfield perceiuing certaine Boores vpon the way, at his first entry of the Low-Countries, would not med∣dle with them, saying, That it would be no credite for him to fight with Boores. But sone after, wee met with twelue Companies of Boores, which would stop our passage. Whereupon Duke Christian commanded a field-Piece with smal Bullets to be discharged against them; whereupon they fled, and retyred into a Wood.
And Count Mansfield, as likewise the Duke Christian of Brunswick commanded the Villages thereabouts to be fired; which was also performed. This was ten Leagues from Gemblours; where we receiued Don Cordua's Let∣ter, declaring, that hee was resolued to fight with vs. Whereupon wee espying afterwards Don Gonzales Campe, wee set our Forces in Battell-array. Duke Christian assaulted the enemie first with 600. horse: The Count of Styrum followed presently with his Regi∣ment; the like did Count Harman, and diuerse other Counts and Lords: afterwards Count Mansfield, the Count of Ottenburg, the Rhinegraue, and Colonel Ploech, euery one with their seueral Regiments came to second the other; as likewise the Regiment of the Duke of Saxon, Weymar, and the Landgraue of Hessen; and they fell so valiantly vpon the enemie, that they caused him to retire. At the first encounter, the Horse of the ene∣mie fled, whereupon we assaulted his Foot; and Count Mansfield, and Count Harman, went to take the Ord∣nance of the enemie: which they did, and caused them twice to be discharged vpon our enemies, hoping that our Foot would haue come on, but did not; so that we were forced afterwards to leaue them againe: Neuer∣thelesse, our two Peeces played vpon the enemies Foot without missing; and their Ordnance did not annoy vs, because it stood too high, and shot ouer our Camp. In the meane time, the Count of Mansfield, the Duke Christian, and the Count of Ottenburg rode about the Army, encouraging the Souldiers to fight valiantly, and did themselues the like; by reason whereof, diuerse Lords and Officers on our side are hurt, but few slaine. Duke Christian had on his backe a White Sattin Dou∣blet, and a Blew Feather vpon his head; and hauing his
sleeues drawne vp, hee slashed brauely among the ene∣mies with his Sword, but was afterwards hurt with a shot in his Arme. On the enemies side, there are di∣uers Commanders, and a great number of the com∣mon Souldiers slaine, and notwithstanding wee haue lost many, they haue lost more, and (God be praysed) wee haue gotten the victorie. The Battell being ended, wee were so wearie, that wee could not pursue our victorie, and our Horses could not stand almost any longer vpon their legges; which caused vs to rest for a while, and to refresh our selues: and the Duke being yet in heat, was conducted out of the Campe at the same time by the Count of Styrum, and two Gentlemen. But afterwards, wee marching againe in Battell-array were within the space of a League encountred with diuerse Boores, and o∣thers, which would stoppe our passage: but wee set vpon them, and slew foure hundred of the same; the rest wee berest the next Morning of their Apparrell and Armes. And from thence wee went straight on, ta∣king our way towards Tongeren, where wee strengthe∣ned our selues a little, and tarryed a while for the Horse and Foot which were behind; and our Horse being well accompanied, marched the same Night within six Leagues of Breda. This is set downe by one which hath beene in the Battell himselfe. Printed at Vtrecht by Ian Amelisson, for Crispin de Pas.
From Rome the 22 of August. 1622. In Spaine is sent a Million ouer into Sicilia for the Fleet in the said Kingdome. There are sixe Gallies sayled from thence to inuade Pisserta, and to endo∣mage the Turks. From Marsilia are departed sixe, and from Malta se∣uen Gallies, besides the great Galleon or Ship, to aide the Kings Nauie before Rochell. From Venice the 28 of August. The King of Spaine hath appointed 28000 Crownes for the maintenance of the warre in Veltolina, and to keepe his forces true vnto him. He hath giuen order likewise, that it should be told to the French Ambassa∣dor, That his King should first appease the Commoti∣ons in his owne Kingdome, before he should meddle with those which are risen in Veltolina. At Constantinople is the house of the Primo Visier pillaged; as likewise the houses of foure other Bashaes, because they would haue deposed the new confirmed Emperour Mustapha, and were only opposed by the Aga, or Collonell of the Ianisaries. Whereupon there is a new Primo Visier chosen, and Mustapha afore∣said is confirmed in his Empire for 6 yeeres; after the expiration whereof, a Brother of the late Osman, is to succeed him. Likewise at Constantinople the Secretary of the Po∣lonian Ambassador is put to death, because the Cos∣sacks do great hurt vpon the blacke Sea. From Vienna the 31 of August. Few dayes ago there is sent an Imperiall Post to the Lantgraue Mauritius of Hessen, with a command that he should dismisse his forces, & accommodate himself better then he hath done here before, or that other∣wise
his Ambassador should not bee inuested and in∣stalled in his name. The 27 of this moneth is the Electorall and Prince∣ly house of Brandenberg inuested and installed by the Emperour. Here are likewise arriued Ambassadors of the Im∣periall Towne of Nurenberg, and haue had speedily audience. The Electorall day at Regensburg shall be∣gin the 17 of September. From Prage the first of September. The Siege of Glatz shall now with earnest be taken in hand: in the meane time the Garrison makes diuers sallies, and of late they haue defeated and scattred three Imperiall troopes of Horse, and taken certaine priso∣ners, and amongst them a Receiuer. The Iudgements vttered at Brin against the Priso∣ners are sent to the Emperour, to vnderstand his plea∣sure touching the same. What the Iudgements are, and when they shall be executed, time will reueale. From Turingen the 4 of September. The meeting of the Electors of Saxen and Bran∣denberg shall bee at Sutderback the 18 of this moneth. The Duke of Saxony is shortly to dismisse his forces; and to the same purpose there is sent already great store of money from Leypsich to Dresden. From Collen the 10 of September. The Fort Papemutz is still besieged, and the Garri∣son within the same haue almost quite destroyed with their Ordnance the Fort which was made at this side, so that they are about to make it stronger then it was before: but in the meane time the Garrison within Papemutz doth great violence with her shot.
A Ship comming from Diepe, and another from Rochel, brings newes in Holland, that there is a Treatie betwixt the French King, and the Protestants, to see whether they can come to an agreement; and as is ho∣ped (by the grace of God) they shall. Letters from Riga aduise, that there is at last conclu∣ded a Truce betwixt the Kings of Polonia and Sweden respectiuely, for the space of nine moneths, to see whe∣ther before the expiration of the same they can make an absolute Peace. The King of Sweden was resolued very speedily to re∣turne to Stockholm. The Enemy hath broke vp his Siege before Sluys, and keepes onely the Fort of Saint Donaes, and two other Sconses beset. The Forces that came with Count Mansfield, lye for the most part in the Laughstraet, and thereabout, and are dayly relieued, diuerse shippes being sent to Ger∣truydenberg with Armes, and Munition, besides Bread, Cheese, Butter, Beere, and Herring, which is good pro∣uision for his and the Duke of Brunswickes Souldiers. It is thought, that they are sworne this Weeke to the high and mightie Lords, and States Generall of the Vnited Prouinces, and the Prince of Orange. There were likewise arriued certaine Commissioners of the States Generall with good summes of Money, to set them in order. It is reported, That the Lord of Dort is comming from Bremen with certaine thousand men, to ayde the States. FINIS.
