D1292C R174546 [ocm]64551172 184523
A DIALOGUE between a Coun∣try Gentleman and a Parliament-Man, concerning the late KING JAMES. C. G. I AM come, Sir, according to Custom and my Duty, to kiss your Hands, before you take your Journey for London; and to wish you a Happy one. P. M. Sir, your Servant: But you are so good a Husband of your Time, that it is not meer Ceremony which brings you from Home, and you will I Know be as free as formerly, in giving me your Thoughts concerning the present Juncture. C. G. Whilst the War, and consequently the Taxes, were much in my Neigh∣bours Mouths, and more at their Hearts, I was sufficiently furnished with Re∣marks upon them; but since the Happy Conclusion of the Peace, and the Uni∣versal Expectation of some Ease (especially for the Land) in our Publick Pay∣ments, all things now go on so smoothly, that the News Houses will be less frequented for the future. P. M. 'Tis very well, Sir; yet 'tis seldom seen, that after so rude a Tempest, so sudden and great a Calm should ensue; No rolling of the Waves? No mur∣mures remaining? C. G. Nothing, Sir, of Grumbling that I have met with, and little of Curio∣sity, unless I should take notice of the many wise guesses my good Neighbours make, what, or whether any Regard, has been, or will be had of the late King James, by or after the Peace. P. M. You mean, I suppose, as to his Support abroad: And how do you find them pray? In good Humour? C. G. As little of Resentment, considering how much he had affrighted 'em, as can be imagined. They have yet their accustomed Veneration for their Mo∣ney, and would hold it fast, but that, as they compute a very small matter for a particular share, would arise to a handsom Revenue in the Gross. P. M. They are in the right as to that; and my own Opinion in this case would be as little to the purpose, it may be, as their Guess, having been so long out of London, and not seen Sir E. S. in the large Tour he made amongst his Friends. C. G. A Pleasant Thing, I thought, was proposed by a Gentleman you know, which was this: That so great a number of Gentlemen, and of the Clergy, having appeared very favourable to the Person and Cause of their Old Master, as they stile him, during the War, it might now be allowed by a Law, (paying the common Duties equally with other good Subjects) and they should have leave voluntarily to devote what part of their Estates they should think fitting towards his Maintenance. That by this means he would be supplied, the Pub∣lick eased, and the Pretenders to such exact Conscience, Loyalty, and Honour, find an Opportunity of Testifying their Sincerity and Fidelity with all the Ap∣plause imaginable, and no Danger to themselves. P. M. Alas, Sir, were it reduced to that, I fear, for all their Zeal, he would often Dine upon Cold Meat. I am yet so pleased with the Humour, that should such a thing be proposed, though but in jest, I think I should give it my Vote. London, Printed in the YEAR 1697.
