F834 R177031 [ocm]64551272 184575
A FEW LINES MORE For thee O ENGLAND And for thy Lofty ones in thee, And for all others of thine IN HABITANTS, vven forth and sent abroad into the world, with two letters, for the comfort and consolation of the persecuted Church in God, and for the tribulated Flock in Christ, and mour∣ners amongst them, wheresoever they be.  the end the Children of Light, and all they that hunger and thirst, af∣ter righteousnes, may be comforted, and refreshed (in God) in the middest and depth, of all their persecutions, tribulations, suffer∣ings, and afflictions, that they may yet meet withall, from wicked, cruel and unreasonable men, who take delight to crucifie the Lord of life, light, and Glory, a fresh, and put him to open shame in his people. Also a few lines for the wicked People, and powers of the World, with some wholsome Councel and good advice, given unto me, from the Lord God Al∣mighty, to give unto them, (especially unto the people, and powers of England, Ireland, Scotland, Holland and Germany, where the name of God hath been and is so emenently professed, and so great a reformation pretended) that so they may all hearken, unto hear, and obey, the voyce of God; and so live in love and peace (out of persecution) and at last sit down in the Kingdom of glory, with Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Iacob. And therefore, and pray (that can) that ye enter not into temptations, for a work of wonders, is the Lord my God farther a doing in, and upon the Earth. And for all you Loftyons of the Earth that rebell against God, know that except you repent, you shall likewise perrish, Luke 13. ver. 3. and 5. And the Lord shall cut of all flattering lips (and) the tongue that speaketh proud things, Psalm. 12. ver. the 3. as he hath hither to done.
An Epistle to the Reader. LEt this serve as a warning and as an invitation of love, for all people (great and small, high and loe, rich and poor, old and young, professors and prophane, to turn you all (that are not yet turned) unto the living God, for it is brought forth (to publique view) in its appointed season, and time, part whereof, is already fullfilled; and the remainder, is fullfilling apace, yee in our dayes, and age. Watch therefore and pray (that can) that you enter not into temp∣tation, for the Lord God Almighty hath not forgotten to be graci∣ous, nor hath his compassions at any time, failed any of the sonnes and daughters of men, that have turned unto him, and walked, and abode in his light, life and dostrine. And because some of you (in England) &c. have misspent your pre∣cious time, in makeing a mock of sin. And have made an ill use of your stewardships, in the ill management of your affairs, so merci∣fully, friendly, and favourably put into your hands, therefore, is this (most principally) directed unto you, to let you know, that God is angry with you, and that he will (ere long) be avenged on you, for you in England, hath the Lord God began vvithall first: And there vvill the Lord Jehovah make his name famous, and everlast∣ingly Glorious; also God hath, and vvill vvork vvonders there, as vvell as in other places, and none shall let, or say vvhat dost thou. Friends, be not angry, nor partial, vvho ever you be, that hear or read this; And be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6. ver. 7. But in the light of the Lord Jesus Christ, see vvhither you have not almost sinned avvay your most precious time, and trifled a∣way the dayes of your visitation, in all manner of excess: And for you that have not so spent your precious time, that Gods spirit hath not done striving in you, or vvith you (and you are not be∣come as Pharoahs.) then turn you unto the light, within you, and obey the voice of God in you, for that is it, which vvill lead you into the li∣ving life, if you be found faithful to God for that light in you, vvhither you knovv, or believe in it, or no, is of God, & it is that in man, vvhich shevveth man, good and evil, and it vvill one day Judge you, and if
you doe but a little consider, it will now shew you vvhat you are. And what you have been, and then, if you, or any of you, that have been, and are, abominable sinners, shall in the true light and sence of your conditions, cleave unto God, and for sake your sins, and all your abominable doings, then shall you soon know a curb to your lusts and wicked wills, and such of you, as shall thus truly turn unto God, and follovv him, you shall quickly come to know, feel, and see, a bridle to your Tongues, and vvhat it is to be made partakers of the glory of the Lord, in the Land of the living; for the living be they, that shall praise thee o God, vvhen the dead (though alive) and them in the grave (though once never so mighty and great,) cannot, for the dead be they that shall hear the voyce of the son of God, and they that hear, and obey God, shall live forever and ever, vvorld vvithout End, Amen. And now my Friends (every vvhere) Arise from the dead; and come forth, and sing, all ye that dwell in the dust, for God is Just, and the Avenger he is, of the cause of the innocent, who hath often times sealed the deliverance of his people unto mee; and I am sure that God is rode forth Conquerring, and to Conquer, all the vvorld over, and to make a short vvork in righteousnesse, upon the Earth; And God it is, in Men, Women, and Children, (every vvhere) that calleth them to a turning unto himselfe, and to repentance from dead works, and to a seasing from sin, that so they may serve the living God in newness of life, and vvalking uprightly before God, in true holi∣nesse, peace and righteousness, all the dayes of their lives, vvhich many have promised God so to doe, in the dayes of their distresses, but some of them, have forgotten that, and so have sinned against light, as well now, as formerly, in runing a whoring after their own inventions, lusts, and immaginations &c. And thus they have and doe provoke the just and Iealous God, of Heaven and Earth, to vvrath against them, who is not slack in justice, and judgment. And therefore I plainly, tell you, who ever you are, that your going on in sin, have and will be your missery, & your not seasing from persecution, super∣stition, sin, & Idolitry is that which have provoked the just and jealous God, to wrath, judgement, and indignation against you, I say, God is now, as well as of old, jealous of his name in the children of Men, and his Glory. He will not give to graven immages, though many now adaies so do, (mark
that.) For such do dayly persecute and afflicting the children of the most high God, (that God,) which heareth and answereth prayers, who hath heard and answered his people, and God the mighty Iehovah, hath diverted, as well as revealed many of your secret and bloody intents, and so he will do againe, and though you in England, and the potentates of the world, should yet make farther confedracies, and decrees against the People and children of God (untill Gods decree, be accomplished) which you will do, yet know that God will, in spite, of you, and all the powers, and Priests of the Earth: execute his judgements written, which are herein declared. And as for you the People and Povvers in England &c. You have made strange idols, and acted contrary to your oaths, vows, promises, protestations, declarations. Letters, and proclamations, and thus have you hitherto dayly provoked God, by your neglecting to heare his voyce, and in contemning the word of God, which commeth out of the mouths of his sons and daughters. Now thus have many of you in England, already discovered your selves in making Ship rack of faith, and of a good conscience, (which is a shame) for that will not in the least help to save you, in the day of Gods vengance, nor will your making havock of the people, and flock of God, do you the least good in the world, as to your preservation, and deliverance, when God shall make inquisition for true, Royall, and innocent blood; Though many of you, may be yet suffered to go on, in your Road, plotting, and designing, and others of you persecuting, killing, and imlprisoning the children of light (a while longer) yet know, that God is, and will be just, who will call every one to an account for all his or their deeds done in the flesh, whither they be good or evill, and for you that oppress the seed of God in your own particulars also in others take heed of so doing, for in so doing, you have grieved persecuted, and smitten the just one, for which, Gods controversie hath been, and still is with you (that so do) for such things have been, and are grievous in Gods sight. And while you thus misuse your selves, and abuse others, you your selves defile the Temples of God, within you; for which the Lord God Almighty (if you so continue,) will you destroy, for it was written by the Prophets of old (as well as now.) Them will God destroy that defileth the Temples of God. Woe woe woe therefore will be unto such as so doe, and now I am assured that Heaven and earth shal pass avvay, before one Iot or tittle of Gods vvord, thus revealed, and spoken in and to mee shall fail, and as sure as the Lord liveth, there vvill that come upon many of you, in poore England &c. (of a sudden) that repent not, and turn not unto the living God, that vvill amaze you, and Astonish, and confound many elswhere
and doe you all the world over, what you can, deliverance must, and shall come, unto the remnant of Iacob; and this the Eternall God, hath sealed unto me, with much of the manner, way, and method Thereof. Therefore is this sent forth amongst you the sonnes and daughters of men, as another invitation, and warning, Believing, and knowing, that some thing els will (Ere long) follow, wherein the wickedness of the wicked in Eng∣land. &c. will be further discovered, and laid open, with a farther demon∣stration of the mystery of things, and for what the judgements of God have been executed, and are executing upon the inhabitants of the whole Earth. And in the mean time, be still, all ye children of light, and mour∣ners in Sion, for God seeth, & beholdeth your conditions, & will deliver you. And now rejoyce in God all you (that can) and in the Lord Jehovah, make melody in your hearts, when you see this; I say againe in the strength of the Lord God, rejoyce, for the Lord Jehovah is nigh at hand, to judgment, and for it, he is worthy of all prayse, glory, and honour, now hence forth and for evermore Amen; let our conditions be what they will, out of sin. Feare not therefore little flock: for it is our fathers good will and pleasure to give unto us the Kingdome, that fadeth not away. That Kingdome, which cannot be removed, its as mount Sion. And as for the mockers, scorners, scoffers, persecuters, plotters, blood suckers &c. a sad and lack day is come, and coming upon you, as well as a day of redemption and deliverance (in God, for Gods poore dispised and inno∣cent people) the fight whereof from God, hath often times made me to re∣joyce, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. And to water my pillow (many a time) with tears of joy, also the lamentation and mourning (from God) that I have been made to take up, for thee, and for thine inhabitants (O poor England &c.) have been more then I shall, at present perticulerly express, for some of your destructions, will be little inferiour unto that off Sodom. Gomoroah, and Jerusalem. Friends, you in England (not long ago,) were a field of blood since that, your mercies have been great, ye as great, as ever any peoples, nations, Kings, or Kingdomes was, and you in England may be said to be a people and land, flowing with milk and hony; Though many of you, now there, have (viz) spent Gods creatures, upon your lusts. &c. O how evilly, and unjustly have you requited the Lord God for all his mercies, to you wards, and how evilly have you (in England Ireland, and
Scotland. (and else where) intreated Gods poor and innocent people, let the God of heaven and earth, and all sober people, (unto whom I do Appeal) be judg, yea and the witness of God in your selves, and in the consciences of all men, yea in the wickedest, and vildest men that are, for that, (if not seared), will speak. And now take heed of lusting, revenge, lying, hardnes of heart, and unbeliefe, for that will carry you, the children of men, into confusion &c. and make you that yield thereunto, to run, farther and farther, from the living God, into sinne, untill you are seared, and wholy given over unto destruction, (Mark that,) Againe take heed all you professors, as well as prophane, for there is yee a great fault amongst you all: your yee, is not yee, nor is your nay, nay, therfore is God angry with you, and displeased at your doings; ye at the evill of your doings, and practices. Friends, this is plain dealings with the Children of men, and Counsell for a King, as well as for a Bagger, much of it, being from the Lord God, through a poor Earthen vessel, and one that is a servant of Jehovah, who is Re∣deemed from death, to life, by the power and Spirit of God, in the blood of Jesus: who subscribes himselfe, your Friend. Emmanuel Israelite. Which by Interpretation, is God vvith me, God vvith us, in vvhom there is no guile.
1662. A letter of Comfort and consolation unto the whole flock of Christ, wheresoever they be. Dearely beloved: A By de stedfast in mount Sion; for they that so do, shall never be removed, for the Church in God, is the ground and piller of truth: from whence I am moved of the Lord God everla∣sting, to write a few lines unto you, And to the whole Israel of God, and though I have a long time forborne it, and have as it were strugled against it, yet my life and love is with you, and amongst you, all the world over, and in the Eternall light and love of God, do I dearly salute you all. Friends, your lives in God, are a joy, and refreshing unto me, even in the midest of all that unhumane, and unceasonable dealings, that you do, And vvee may, yet farther meet vvith all, in this present evill earthly vvorld, from cruel, marciles, and unreasonable men, vvho have no mercy. Therefore, O Lord God everlasting, keep us thy babes and lambs and preserve us pure, that so our offrings unto thee (may be as they are, vvhen thou callest for them) a continual svveet savour, for in thy life do vve live, and in it, is our unity. O Lord our all is offred up unto thee. Thou art our Saviour, Re∣deemer, and deliverer, vve are thy people and heritage, plead thou therefore (O Lord,) thine ovvn cause, vvhich thou hast ingaged us in; vve must die. And because thou livest, doe vvee therefore live vvith and in thee, and so shall vvee do, novv and for ever and ever, vvorld vvithout end. And novv vvhile vve are here, & do cary about in us, a body of clay, let us in the life, light, povver, and strength of God, be ever doing our Fathers vvill, and as much good on earth as vve can; All flesh is as grass, and fadeth avvay, our strength is to sit still; God is vvith us, and in us, of a truth, and he vvill deliver us I am sure. Look not out therefore any of you, O my dear friends, brethren, and sisters: But sinke dovvn, sinke dovvn into the depth of the Lord God of life, and therein stand stedfast, and plead in and vvith him,
for as God hath, so vvill he asuredly here and ansvver (his people) and deliver us, and confound our enemies, as he did of Old. For the Prayers, Sighs, Grones, Suplications, Cries, Tears, and oppressions of the poor, and innocent; have ofttengon up unto the Almighty, and they do dayly reach to heaven, and God is come, and coming down to deliver us, his people, and to save us, in the mid∣est of all our tribulations: God is risen to plead our cause. Be there∣fore valiant in the Lord, strong, and of a good couradge; so fare yee well yours in truth: Emmanuel Israeliete. Friends and Brethren, this inclosed have laine (some part of it) as a thing lost, buried, & hid for some time (as you may see,) but it is now come to lightagaine; And is sent unto you. Therefore do with it, O Lord God of hosts, as seemeth good in thine own eyes, thy seerets (O Lord of Hosts,) & God of Life, are with them that feare thee, and thy wisdom is given unto thy chosen ones, to di∣rect them; the Spirit of the Almighty is free in his people, that walk and abyde in his light; to counsell, guide, lead, teach, and direct them, in all their wayes and undertakings for God, and as you find freedom in the Eternall Spirit; so let this be done with all; Either to imbrace it; or not, Friends, I'am and shall be (in the Lord) a fellow feeler and sympathizer with you, in what so ever you do, and suffer, for the Lord; for in God alone, is our victory, over all; in which victory, let us stand, triumph and rejoyce, and there in shall we trample on and tread under foot, our greatest Enemies, yee Sathan, the Father of them all. And as it is written, so shall it be, the last enemy that shall be de∣stroyed is death, and vvhen our vvorke is done, vvee must goe from hence, and vvee shall be changed; (but not dye) and that in a moment and twinckling of an Eye. And in the unchangable God, dearely beloved Brethren, doe I dearly salute you, and remain, your friend and Brother, in the unity of the eternall Spirit, and life of God, vvhere I shall for ever be and remaine, your Friend, yee and a Friend to publicans, and sinners. poscript. Friends Golden snares and bayts are laid, and laying for you to lift you up, out of the deapth, Holiness, and vvisdom, of the most high,
even vvhile the flesh and the lusts therein, doe fortifie, and fit it selfe, for your bodily destruction. Abyde still therefore in the dominion of God, and he vvill not on∣ly give you to see, vvhat is a doing on earth against you; but vvhat he is also a doing in heaven, for your preservation and deliverance, vvhich is, and must be in God, over all. That being unto God a dayly delight, and a joy, for God in us, is and vvill be, (unto them that love us not) a burthensome stone that vvill fall upon our enemies, and breake them in peices, and grind them to povvder, vvithout our using of any Carnall vveapons. O live therefore the life that's everlasting, and abyde in it, for therein shall you Raign over all that is evil, for ever and ever. And novv let none make us affraid, for vvhen any do let in fear, that bringeth the righteous into snares. Be therefore terrifyed in nothing, for you are Gods, and God is yours, to his everlasting praise doe I speake it, and rest. Your Friend, Emmanuel Israelite.
A Letter for the persecuted Church in God, and for the tribulated flock of Christ where soever they bee, and for the mourners amongst them. O Sonnes, and Daughters, of Sion, lift up your hearts, heads, and hands, unto the holy Lord, God, Almighty, and in his pure and everlasting life, light, power, and strength, crie aloud, day and night, unto the most high, for the holy, and righteous God, is Jealous of his name in you, and blessed are all they that are not offended in him, and are not at ease in Sion, while there are any mourners therein. And if it be so with any of you, as I know and believeit is, that many of you are already, entred into your rest, as God is entred into his rest, then shall your worke, and La∣bour of love in the Lord not be in vaine, but it will be taken notice of, and accepted of by the Lord, and then shall you be more, and oftener in the service of the living God, then ever, as I hope, and believe you will be, and you (that can), for get not the Angell Gabriel, whose work and service is not unknowne; Oh watchmen, watchmen, what of the night, lets give our God, no rest, untill he hath brought up all the mour∣ners in Sion, unto a continuall rejoycing, in the one eternall, and everlasting unity, where there is nothing but the unutterable Ioys of heaven, and that in the closest, hardest and most dificult service (for the living God) that is, Oh my Friends, the battell is ours all ready, onely our Father is, will, and must be, supream head and Governour. And therefore he will be sought unto (night and day) by the house of Israel, and by every individuall member therein, watch therefore in God, and in him, let us always pray and ever more rejoyce, and now take heed all ye my dear Friends, Bretheren, and Sisters, of negligence, and of slothfullnesse, in business, and of drawing back from the service of the living God, into wayes of sin and perdition, for if any so doe, the Lords soule will have no pleasure in them; Therefore have a care my deare Friends and so run, that you may obtaine, for there is a victory (but it is in God) in which victory; there is a conquest over sin, death, hell, and the grave, and a continuall living in and an Abyding with God, as in the begining, yee and in a more unutterable, and glorious state then Paradice, O my tongue cannot declare the glory, endlesness and unutterablenesse thereof. The whole is the glory of God; and that through mercy I have, and doe injoy a measure off, and had I the tongue of men, and Angels, I were not able to declare the whole; its endless, and Fathomless, yea its past finding out; But the babe of glory, (thats faithfull) shall live in, and abide in it, here, and for ever, world without end. And in this life, is the glory, honour, and renown, that God will cloath his withall and in time, he will make all his as the Lillie, which doth neither toyle nor spin; but yet doth grow up and Prosper; Oh what shall I say, my tongue is not able to express the infinit glory that is in God for all them that love, and fear, his holy & glorious name, and now the burthen that I have on me for the whole creations deliverance, is unknown for my bowels and all that is within mee, do earn after, yee after all them that do hun∣ger and thirst after the righteousness of the living God, that so they may all be brought into the knowledge, and enjoyment of the one onely true way, and into that sheepe fold (vvhich is the light Christ) vvhich leadeth into the life of God, thats Eternall immortall, and everlasting, for God is the vvay, the truth, and the life.
also there is a care, in mee that none be lost, and a sympathy and fellow feeling in me of some, that through negligence &c. are apt to draw back from the service of the living God, in the sence and feeling thereof, God hath inclined my heart, and moved me to write these Letters &c. and commanded me to send them forth amongst you, the sonnes and daughters of men, that so your rejoycing may be in the Lord, over all. Friends, these are dayes of tryalls, and of Winnowings, and siftings, that so the Temples of God may be made clean, and may no more be defiled, nor any Mony∣changers suffered to dwell, or abide therein, for all that defileth the Temples of God, must be whipped, and scourged out, for, that will God destroy, yea all that letteth must be taken out of the way, also all that worketh, or maketh a lie, for greedy gain, and filthy lucre; That so God may be (as he is) all and in all, unto them that truly know, love, feele, and feare, his holy, blessed, and glorious name. Therefore my deare friends, Brethren, and Sisters, and all others that would be accounted Christians, learn to know, and do the will of God, which is Sanctification in the cross, unto all that is not of God. And now let all such as profess themselves to be wisdoms children, walk in the light, in all things, as he (to wit) Christ, is in the light, that so you may all Iustifie wisdom, and thereby, manifest your selves to be the children of the most high, in deed, and in truth, Christians indeed, like God, and Christ. Then shall the mouth of iniquitie be stopt, & you shall see, feel, and know God, exalted, and exalting himselfe in you, over all that's humane, and setting himself in you, upon the top of all mountaines; And then shall you know, feel, and see, God reigning, and ruling in, and over you, his temples (not made with hands) for ever and ever, also you shall then know him to lead, guid, govern, teach, and direct you, in every thing you doe; distinct, from Satan, and then Satans workes will be known unto you, as they are unto God; a Loathing, and an Abomination. And though as yet, some of you have not known, witnessed, nor felt God, so to reign and rule &c. in and over you, yet God will, in patience posess your soules; Therefore in the light of God, (say I, againe) wait and be still, that at all times you may know, and heare the voyce of God in you, from Satans; and feel the power of God in you, that resisteth evill, and the Appearances, and motiones, thereof, for that onely, will make the evill one to flie; It's God Emmanuel, God with, and in us. Then shall you be kept alive in God, and in perfect peace whose mindes are stayed on thee, O God of life light, strengh, power, and glory, yee in that peace (and domi∣nion over all deceit) that passeth all understanding, which will continually keep your hearts and mindes alive, in the knowledge and love of God, Amen. so fare ye well. This Letter was written the latter end of the Sixth moneth 1662. and sent from farre; with the rest of these things into England. From him thats yours, in him thats ever lasting, God blessed for ever and ever, world without end, Amen. Emmanuel Israelite, The name of the Lord (is now, as well as of old) a strong Tower, the Righteous flye into it, and are safe.
A Few Lines more for thee O England, and for thy lofty ones in thee, and for all others, of thine inhabitants, also for the inhabitants of the whole Earth. Friends. THe Lord God Almighty, hath in these latter days, raised up Prophets as of Old, to tell you, and to foretell you, what have, and vvill befall you, as it hath befallen them, that vvent before you, yet many of you that are now alive, (and in power) will not hear, nor believe them, no more then they would, that went before you, nor vvill you obey the word of the living God, nor hearken too, nor hear his voice, as you ought to do, but you will harden your hearts, as they of Old did (in the wildernesse,) vvhen your Fathers tempted him. But because many of you novv in England, and Else-where, will not believe the word of the Lord, out of the mouthes; of his servants and Prophets; but are Curious and unbelieving, what the Prophets and servants of the Lord, have already said unto you, should come. Therefore hath the Lord God Almighty suffered signes, miracles, and wonders, upon the Earth, and in the Ayre, both lying ones, and true, and all this is to convince you, that are unbelievers, of the great Judgments of the Lord God, that are nigh at hand, come, and coming, amongst, and upon you the Inhabitants of the Earth. And as Nebuchadnezzer, Belshazzer, and Darius, Kings of Babylon did, even so have some great ones amongst you in England done (viz.) sent for Astrologers, Southsayers, Socerers, and Magitians, Wisemen &c. to come unto you, commanding them, to tell you the meaning of those strange, and wonderfull Appearances, and Appari∣tions that have been seen (by many), upon the Earth, and in the Ayre, in England, and Wiles, and Else-where; But when the Magitians, Southsayers, Socerers, and Astrologers, Wisemen, (so called) could not tell these Kings the meaning of those wonderfull things, that had then appeared, though they were sent for, on purpose to tell them, the meaning, and interpretation of their Visions and Dreames, also to read and interpret, the strange vvritting, that had appeared, and to tell
them the meaning thereof; But when those Wise-men that the King sent for, could not Read the writting, nor tell King Nebuchadnezzar the interpretation of his Visions and Dreams. Then was the Prophet Daniel spoken of, after which, the King com∣manded the Captain to fetch Daniel unto him, and when Daniel came before the King Nebuchadnezzar, then said the King, thou art greatly beloved of God, tell me therefore, (if thou canst,) the meaning and interpretation of those Dreams and Visions of the night, which haveappeared unto me, also read the writting, and tell me the mean∣ing thereof. Now (mark) Daniel was not hasty to answer the King in these things; nor was hee, though a Prophet of God and filled with the Spirit of the holy God) swift in speaking unto this great King, nor did the Prophet, when he did speak, tell the King any thing, but the truth, and that which God gave him a perfect and cleare sight of, and then, with holy booldness (in no small authority) did Daniel tell the King, the meaning and the interpretation of the whole matter. Farther Daniel spake of great and wonderfull things that God had then given him to behold and see; But neither the King, councellers, preists, not subjects understood him, nor do very many unto this day; This Prophet of God, was then had in great Esteem by the King, for that of God which was manifested, by him, in so much that Darius highly promoted, and greatly Esteemed him; & so did all save the evell and wicked Priests, Counsellers, and People, such wicked ones, as had before instigated King Nebuchadnezzer, to throw Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, into the fiery furnace, only for their speaking the truth unto all, (to wit) to the People, Priests, Counsellers, and Kings; Now take notice and see; where any, of those sad things had ever come upon those great Kings of Babylon; had they not suffered the Children of the most high God, to have been so wickedly abused, as they were; But God is just, and a recompeneer of every one according to his, or their deeds done in the flesh; whither they be good or evill, for Kings or Emperours must, not thinke to escape the just hand of God, though they may be above law, and out of the reach of man.
And a just recompence of reward; ye an exemplary one, doth God usually render unto every man that turneth not to him (in time) & such was Belshazzars reward, for while he was Drinking wine in Booles, to the confusion of the God of the children of light, his Kingdome was taken from him, (mark that) And after him, succeeded King Darius, who had Daniel the Prophet in very great Esteem, yet how wickedly did, Darius and his evil counsellers Act, in making a Law, that none should (for forty daies pray, for any thing) save unto the King, and unto this decree, did Darius unwisely signe, and when he had so inconsidratly signed, that Law, and decree, (Marke and see) what followed, They threvv Daniel the Prophet into the Lyons Den, onely for praying unto the God of light. And hath not this been the wicked practices of the Kings, Counsels, priests, and powers of the Earth, unto this day; Yes, yes. it hath. And no sooner at any time, when light hath sprang up, and broke forth, and God raised up Prophets and People unto himselfe, then the powers of the Earth, both Kings Priests and Rulors, yee and soldiers too; have combyned together, and taken counsel, of the evill one, and one of another, and thereupon they have made decrees and laws, to throw in to holes, and dens, and to stone, kill, burne, hang, frye, broile, banish, and to destroy the Prophets, yee the true Prophets, children of light, who have not provesied, lyes in the Name of Iesus (but truth,) nor have they divined for mony, nor preached for hire, nor for filthy Luker and Gayne, as persecutors, and blood∣suckers, belly-gods, and blind guides, do use to do. Who do greedily seek at this very day and time, to devoure the flock of Christ; ye the true and lively flock and followers of God and Christ. Now is there not very great need, and necessity, that you the people, and powers of the Earth, should be put in mind of these things; Least you should post altogether into blood, misery, and confusion, and many of you goe headlong to Hell; for such Priest, such a — and People. Be therefore warned & intreated once more, you that Rule over men, to be just, lo∣ving, tender, kind, & merciful; for the merciful, shall find mercy, and they that rule over men, should, and ought to be just, and for the praise of them that do well, and for the punishment of evill doers; least God smite you with his severe rod, and judgements, before you are willing, or are prepared for it. And now you that rule for God, labour to feel the blessing, in well doing; and to see how many have suffered before your faces, for evill doing, and you that are in ad∣versity, as vvell as they that are in prosperity, Consider. I beseech you, what God re∣quireth at your hands; also what he is now doing upon the Earth. O that it might not be laid any more to your charge (you mighty and powerful men) the neglecting of your duties, vvhen you have had povver enough in your hands to do good, that then you have not done it. (But evill,) and thus evilly have yourequited God for all his kindness, love & mercies, goodness, and good vvill, tovvards you. Friends, have not some in these dayes bin beaten vvith many stripes, and hovv can you your selves think to escape the hand, and just Judgments of the Lord God; sure you cannot Escape them. for Gods hand is stretching out against you Therefore all yee children of men, learn to know that God is good to Israel, and unto them that are of a pure and upright heart, for a vvitness, yee a svvife vvitness he is, and vvill be, against the evil ones Especially against the lofty ones of the Earth, that vvorke iniquity.
And novv unto you, O People, Priests, Kings, and Rulers, that have been in England vvithin this 20 years last past, & are now there. Query, Whither you have not found that to be true, vvhich the Pro∣phets have spoken off, and foretold you, vvhat vvould come. And as sure as that is come, vvhich is already past, so sure vvill the remainder of this Prophesy, be fullfilled, and Heaven and Earth shall pass avvay before one Jot or tittle of these things shall faile; for such hath the Lord God Almighty raysed upin the midest of you, in these lat∣ter dayes, that have told you, & fore told you (from God) vvhat vvould come, and vvhat is coming amongst you, and upon you, and out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings, vvill God perfect his prayes, for through such, hath the Lord God Almighty often spoken, to the for∣mer Powers, Priests, and People, of England, &c. As vvell as unto you; And unto you the Powers, Priests, & People, of Eng. (that now are) hath God spoken these things, that are come, and coming, upon you, and vvhilst Gods judgements are upon the earth, the inhabitants thereof, should, and ought, to learn righteousnesse; for the Lord God hath sent you in this ages, as vvell as them in other ages, many vvarnings by his servants the Prophets, though you the Priests, Powers, and People of the Earth, have not heeded them as you ought to do (mark that) as vvell as vvhat follovveth. For novv the Father of faithfullnesse, (God) hath made, and is making good his vvord spoken by his Prophets of Old, (to vvit) that old Men should dreame dreames, also that young men should see vi∣sions, and that God vvould in the latter dayes, povver forth his Spirit aboundantly upon his Sonnes and Daughters, and inable, both Sons and hand-Mayds, to Prophesic, speak, and vvrite, also that some in seeing, should not see, and in hearing, they should not understand, & as God the Father of faithfullnes, hath spoken, so hath he made good his word spoken in all ages, and as God did of old speak in & unto his ser∣vants the Prophets, even so hath, & did he speak, in & tome, (at sundry places,) and at several times in this latter age (in these particulers) to wit, in speaking to, & in foreshewing me, the dovvnfall of the old King of England, Charles the First, and many great ones more, the Rice and Fall of the Cromwels, the ruine of the Parliament and
Army telling them hovv often God vvould have gathered them to himself; even as a Henn gathereth her chickings, but they vvould not. Novv marke and see vvhat follovved thereupon, nothing say I, but destruction. And as the High-Priests, Seribes and Pharises did, even so have some latly done in England, I say they have given up the innocent People of God, into the hands of Rulers, and rude People, to be hardly dealt vvith all. Such vvere they that Crucified and killed Christ, as had joyned them selves unto idols, and vvere vvedded there unto, and resolved they vvere, to goe on in there idolletry and vvill vvorship, untill God came dovvne vvith his severe judgments upon them. And though the vvicked may doe vvickedly for a vvhile, in la∣bouring to keepe the ignorant, and simple People in sin, superstition and idolletry, ye and in blindness and darkness, &c. Yet knovv that God vvill not allvvays be so mocked. Therefore frends take heed all you that drive on so Iehu-like, in persecuting the People and Children of God: for it vvas once vvritten from the Spirit of the holy God, that the Rod of the vvicked should not all vvayes rest upon the back of the righteous, (mark that.) For vvhosoever they be that have yet (in this latter age) gone about to Lord it over Gods heritage, and thereupon, have persecuted and smitten the Babes, Lambs, and little ones, Children of Light, and they that have thereby had thoughts to vveary out the Saints and chil∣dren of the most High God, they have hither to been broken, and have broken one another to pieces, and many of them that so did, are all∣ready ground to povvder. O vvicked Generation of vipers, that have in all ages thus risen up against God, and his povver, life, light, and truth, made manifest in Gods people, have you not been often vvarned to fly from the vvrath to come, (by the Prophets,) and have you not been desired to decist from your bloody and cruel, intentions, and from the evill of your vvays, in killing and Crucifiing the Lord of life, light, and glory, a fresh, and of puting him to open shame, againe, and
againe in his People, and have you not been warned to fly from such abominations as these; and to seek reconciliation with God, and Man, yee with God and good men, while you have a day and time, and not to destroy such as feare the Lord; but it seems you will not stay your hearts in God, nor restrain your hands from blood; cruelty, perfecution and so forth: But you will fight against the wit∣ness of God, in your selves, and others, and so forget the sure mercies of David; untill the judgments of the Lord God almighty overtake you, againe. Friends, have not you the Backsliders in heart, every where, been the greatest persecutors, you that of old promised better things then these, and have not you the Backsliders in heart been filled with your own ways; and have you not often times been confused & (as it were) confounded, with the wicked devices of your own hearts, in almost every thing, and have you in these last 20 years Revolutions learned no more, no better things then these, have your persecutions and suffrings taught yōu no more good yet, what think you, vvill be∣come of you, vvhile you are thus found fighters against God; and the mercies that you have had; vvhat vvil become of you that think to eat up Gods children like Bread, and to scatter, & drive, his flock upon the Mountains by your vvolfuish actions tovvards them, as if they vvere not creatures of Gods ovvn making, or your fellow creatures. Give over your persecution in time I pray you, least (at last) you dig a pit, and be buried therein your selves; And novv O Lord passe by the innocent blood that hath been allready spilt in poor Ireland, England, and Scotland, O hovv did the bloody Pa∣pists at the first Rip up the poore Protestant Women great vvith child, in many places in poore Ireland, and all from the instigation of sathan and the Blood-sucking Priests; vvho pretended for a moderate Episcopal Clergy there, such vvere they that had a hand in that Bloody Massacre, at the beginning of the late Warre in that place, and in Englands for∣mer, and latter Martyrdoms. Be novv therefore convinced of your sins in time, and learn to knovv that God  have the hearts of Kings as vvell as Rulers and People, in his ovvn hands. Therefore O Lord of Hosts
turne the hearts of Kings as well Rulers and People if it be thy vvill, that so they may in time, come and stoop unto they Sep∣ter, for all the powers on Earth must come and bring their glory and honour unto God, or else they vvill Perish. For ever and ever. For novv the hand of the Lord God Almighty is stretched forth o∣ver all, and none can hinder God, from makeing good his ovvne de∣cree, revealed & sealed unto mee, (vvhich in the General is) that he will breake all the Kingdoms, and People of the Earth in pieces, that vvill not have Christ to Rule in and over them; the mouth of the Lord off Hosts hath spoken it unto me. O Remember, remember, therefore all ye Sons and Daughters of men, yee that drink Wine in Boules; and go on in your forgetfull∣ness of God and his mercies, you that sport your selves in your ovvn lusts, yee in the lust of your mindes, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of life, vvhich is the flesh, the World and the divell, I say remember that Tophat vvas prepared of old for such, yee for the Rebellious and disobedient, though they were never so mighty and great; and novv learn to knovv that God the Lord of Hosts, is no respector of Persons, and for Bishops, that are not as the Bishops, spoken off in the Scriptures of truth (vvere) They are a loathing and an abomination unto God, for such God hath allready spevved out of his mouth, and so vvill he do again. And for all you that are novv in prosperitie, take heed, least that glory you novv have, be stayned againe, by your slaying more of Gods poor Babes, and Lambs, and Sheepe, of our Fathers pasture. O that ever fulness of bread, and plenty, should cause great men so to forget God; and that ever Gods goodness and mercie, should so puffe up men; as it hath novv in this generation done, many vvho not long agoe, had scarce Bread to eat, or Garments to put on. Verily friends, vvhosoever you be, that vvill not turn to the light, and living God, but vvill goe on in your fins, '& abyde in your filthi∣ness, both of Flesh and Spirit, God vvill judge you, and at last de∣stroy you. Youridols, Temples, cannot, nor shall  you: the decree of God is gon forth and sealed against such as vvorship idols, and vvill not turn unto him.
And for you that vvill, and doe but truly turne from the evill of your vvays, and come unto God, God vvill love and imbrace you, in his everlasting armes of kindnes, and cover you as vvith a garment, and then you shall by little and little, see the glory of God in the Land of the living, and perhaps you shall, as others have done be∣fore you, see Gods wonders in the deep, for so did King David, vvho after his great abominations, and turning unto God again, and so have some others done after there returne unto God their maker, insomuch that their whole lives have been lives of hearty sorrow, and of everlast∣ing praises. And such can never sufficiently nor enough admire God; and as David saith in the 107. Psalme. so say I. O That the Children of men would but admire God for his vvonderfull works, done unto (and amongst) the Children of men. And in the conclu∣sion of that Psalm, the writer thereof saith. Who so is vvise, let them ob∣serve these things, and they shall see the loving kindness of the Lord, And so say I; though they be Kings. And when God shall raise up such a King to beare rule amongst any people; let it be where it will, the Lord God of heaven and earth will bless and prosper such a one, while he shall faithfully continue and abide in God, and then all his works and undertakeings (for God on Earth) shall prosper, and such a King shall be blessed for ever and ever. And then none can nor shall make such a one affraid, for if he doth well, who then shall harm him, but if he doth evill, (while he so doth) sin will continue, and lie at his doore; yee at Kings doors, as well as at others. For such as wee sovve, such usually do we reap, yee some times double and what measure men meet, it is usualy measured unto them again. Therefore, leave off all your Idoll-Gods for shame, all ye Kings and pretended Christians, leave of say I, all you High priests your super∣stitions, Cerimonies, Surplisces, Pipes, singing-boyes, and sursin∣gles, for they are all a loathing, and an abomination unto God, plaine down right Popery against which the vvitness of God is gone forth. And now take heed, I pray and beseech all you Kings, Priests and People of the Earth (for the Lord sake,) of praying, or finging out of the Spirit of God; for that is but a deceiving of your selves, and others;
that is a mocking of God, and whither you see it, or believe it, or no, it is so, and where you will hear or forbear, it is all a case; for Gods word and witness is, true and it will (in his owne time) prove so; and you the powers of the Farth shall assuredly know, and feel it, so to be. And for you that scoffe at the light, you Ignorantly, or knowingly, scoffe at that vvhich; you live & move by, for by the light all men have their moving living and being, even while they dvvell in darkness, and in the shadovv of death, & do doe the deceivers vvork, upon the Earth, for light hath shined in darknes but the darknes comprehendeth it not. Take heed therefore and bevvare of Gods heavie judgments, all you that laugh and scoffe, at Gods people (that vvalk in God, & are turned to the light,) and at their praying in the Spirit, or by the spirit, for such their have been, and novv are, that have been, and are, vvhole days in the Spirit, yee and nights too, vvhom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, hath heard and ansvvered. And though you the povvers of the Earth, should combine altogether, and make never so many decrees against such a praying People as Daniel the Prophet. &c. vvas, yet they vvill (vvhile they have life) pray; as Daniel did, and some such, do certainly knovv, that God vvill at last break all your cords in sunder, and in the mean time preserve them. And novv vvhile you the povvers of the Earth doe make such lavvs and decrees against Gods, praying Spirit, in man: the mouth of the Lord of Hosts vvill be against you, I say in God, that God hath determined that his People must, and shall pray unto him in the Spirit, yee and vvorship him in the Spirit, and honour him, and all men in the Spirit; for God himselfe is head over all, yee over all principallities, and povvers, and Spirituall vvickedness in high places, and thus God hath, and vvill rebuke Kings for his ovvn and Peoples sake: the mouth of the Lord of Hosts, hath spoken it. And novv the God and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, and in him our Father, hath required commanded, and in abled us,  to pray against Spiritual vvickedness in high places, and for all them that are in Authority over us, that so (under them) vve may live a godly and peaceable life, vvhich vvee the People of God doe, and shall doe. Farther, I am sure that God hath novv made some of his People vvatchmen in Israel, vvhom he hath commanded, and requi∣red
to give him no rest, untill he hath made Ierusalem the praise of the vvhole Earth: And this the Lord our righteousness, who is life, light, povver, and glory: hath raysed up Prophets, and children, unto himselfe to pray unto him in the spirit, more or lesse day & night, for the accom∣plishment of these things, and for the fullfilling of his vvord, and decrecrevealed, spoken and promised unto us, that so Kings might be∣come Nurssing Fathers, and Queens Nurssing Mothers, unto the Saints and People of God, for sure I am, that such Kings and Rulers (vvhile on Earth) would be for the praise of them that do vvell, and for the punishment, of such as do evill, I say, such as doe inqiuity, and spend Gods good creatures in drunkeness, and in all manner of excess of riot, God vvill punish, though they be ne∣ver so great, for usualy such doe studdie on their Beds of dovvn, & in o∣ther places, hovv they may feed the delight of their eyes the lust of their minds & pride of there lifs, even to the maintaining of the pride of life, in al manner of vvhordoms, both Spirituall, and carnall: the vvhich (I am sure,) God is highly displeased at, and greatlie against, and for such doings together, vvith the blood of the Saints. our God hath yet a greater controversie vvith the sons, and daughters of men, then ever, the dreadfullness and terribleness there∣of, vvhen (in God) I have beheld it, hath often times made me to tremble, ye and to fall dovvn before his holy presence, and to vvor∣ship his holy name, and to implore, and humbly to beg and be∣seech him, that he vvould pass such great iniquites by, if it vvere his vvill. But I finde no ansvver as yet from God, that he vvill so do, but I see the hand and judgments of the great God, still stretched out, and hasting over all the Inhabitants of the Earth. And as for thee, O England, vvith thy great Cities and Tovvns likned have they been unto mee, to great and little Babylon. I say unto you that have slain, misused, and often abused, and evilly  many of Gods dear People, his servants, and Prophets, yea his true Prophets, and children of the light, I say unto you, you have often times throvvn many of them into Prisons, Holes, and Dungeons vvhere vvicked persons have been, vvho have misused the inocent, even unto Death, and many have been killed by reason of such ill usage.
And have not you, or some of you the High-Priests, Kings, and Ru∣lers of the Earth, been the cause of all your ovvn, & the people misse∣ries in the sheding of innocent blood, I doe not mean that which you have sheed in the vvay you call justice, and though you have al∣ready destroyed many in that vvay, and thereby you have thought to have wearyed out the Saints of the most high, the vvhich you can never do, for God my God, hath other wayes decreed, and deter∣mined it. And though you in England in your great Cities, (to wit) in Lon∣don, Exetor, Sarum Alies Salisbury, Bristol, Worcester, Norwich, Rochester, Canterbury, Linckolne, York, &c. And you in the rest of your great and little Towns, I say, though you and the greatest part of your inhabitants, daylie doe despite unto the Spirit of God in man, and thus grieve the Holy one of Israel, and thereby plainlie manifest whose servants you are, for whose servants you are, him doe you obey, and so you forget, that the wages of sin is Death; I say though you forget God, yet God vvill not forget you, for he vvill revvard every man according to his vvorks. O what then can you that are found in so great iniquitie Expect (in this the day of Gods visitation) I say what can you think of: or expect for a requital other then the heavie & dreadfull judgements of God, upon you verely I knovv not. And as for you in England with the greatest part of your Inha∣bitants: you are poore and miserable, yea and great finners against light, for vvhich the Lord Iehovah, hath yet a greater controversie with you, then ever. Therefore consider and take this good counsell vvhich follows, vvithout goiing unto, your Astrologers, Southsayers, Socerers, or Magitions (Wisemen so accounted.) I say in stead of going unto them, goe unto God, who is light, which maketh all things, manifest, and then if you do but stand still a vvhile in Gods light; you shall see light, also you shall knovv, see and feel, that this good counsell cometh from Iehovah, through a poore servant of Gods, for all your good, if evill bee not all together predominate
in you, and deceit wholy become yōur Lord and Master, then that will make you run farther and farther from God, untill you perish (mark that) as well as what followeth. There vvill that come upon you in England of a sudden, you that cease not spedily from sin; and turn not unto the living God; I say there vvill that come amongst, and upon you (of a sudden) that will amaze terrifie and confound many of the great and mighty toge∣ther with many others of the Inhabitants, a little time more (in com∣parison) vvill manifest it. Murmur not therfore yee sons and daughters of men, but comfort yee one another in the Lord that can: for you in England, knovv not as yet hovv to avoid your falling into great coufusion, persecution, Blood, and missery; O England thou vvith thine Inhabitants, vvilt fall together by the eares, and then yee vvill rend, tear, and de∣voure one another, like so many beasts of prey: yee, like so many vvild Bores of the Forrest, vvill you stricke at one another. And the harmless and innocent ones amongst you, you vvill cut from off the Earth, if the Lord permit, at least as many of them as you judge, or think do stand in your vvay, such vvill you bannish, hale to prison or othervvise persecute, you thinking thereby, to vveary them out that God hath already raised up to be Saints of the most high, vvho doe novv vvitness against such abominations as cometh from him that de∣lighteth to make desolate the People of God. And as for thee, O King of England thou vvilt be hardly put to it, to escape, for in the light of the Lord, I have seen them nigh thee severall times, that vvill be the cause of thy ruine, if not thy utter de∣struction, and the time vvill come, that thou vvilt not knovv vvhat to doe, nor vvhither to goe, also thou shalt in vvords repent, and say that it had been better for thee that thou hadst never been born, (thy misseries vvill be such) then for thee to have done, and suffered that to be done, vvhich is already past. And that vvhich thou vvilt yet farther suffer, and mayest be accessary to the doing off, vvill help forvvard thy missery and Calam∣nity, for many there are, that vvill be by thy consent and permission, taken avvay from the evill to come, by untimely Death, and all this vvil be for the fullfilling of Gods decree, revealed, and made manifest, unto mee,
But thy end in it O Man, is not good, the which is well known to the Almighty, and unto some of his beloved ones, who have been com∣manded, and required from God, to signifie the substance of these things unto thee, and unto the inhabitants of the whole Earth, Friends, these things, have been wonderfully revealed and made manifest unto mee; from the Lord God Almighty, in so much, that I have (often times) been made to tremble before the living God, in the seeing and beholding thereof. And Verely true it is, the Lord God Almighty is just in bringing thee, O King of England, with others in, over your enemies; it being accord∣ing to his revealed word in and unto me; long before it came to pass. And as true it is, that God the Lord of Hoasts, is a rewarder of every man according to his, or there workes and deeds, done in the flesh, wheither they be good or evell. And wheither canst thou O Man, O King, flye from the presence of the Lord God Almightie, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; Verelie I knovv not vvheither thou canst flye from the presence of the great God, for fly whethersoever thou wilt; God will follovv thee vvith his judgments, untill the measure of thine iniquities are full; This have I seen, and the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it unto me. Forther I have (in the light of God,) seen terrible and dreadfull things that shall come upon the Earth, some of vvhich are not as yet lavvfull for me to utter, but vvhat is lavvfull and layd upon me to signifie unto thee and unto the children of men, I have and shall freely doe it (marke therefore vvhat followeth.) I have often times seen acertain number of men, nigh thee, O King of England, I say, I have certainly seen a num∣ber of men (nigh thee O King) severall times in consultation, coun∣selling thee, to doe, the things that are not good; neither in the sight of God, or man (viz) consulting together, hovv they, (with thee) might rid thy Territories and Dominions (so called,) of an innocent harmeles quiet peacable people, that hurt you not, nor vvill they harm any body; Though the bloody minded of all sorrs, doe goe about to make thee (O King) and others, believe, other ways of us. But my God, vvill Ere long, revvard all such, with the evell of there ovvne doings;
For there vvill yet be greater tribulations upon the Earth, then ever. Also I have (in the light of the Lord) seen great Lightnings and Thunders that shall be; the tirribleness thereof, shall make both men and beasts affraid, insomuch that they shall not know what to do, nor whither to goe to hide themselves from the presence of the Almighty. I have also seen other dreadful and tirrible sights, vvhich shall be seen upon the Earth; such things when they come, as will amaze terrifie and confound many of them that believe not in the living God. For Signes and Wonders there must be (for a while) that so the un∣believers may believe, and know, that Gods Word is true, which he hath spoken in these last dayes, by his Servants and Prophets; Now in this Book is part of Englands dome, (to come) Demonstrated. Therefore do I once more according to the Requirings of God made manifest, in and unto me; beseech you the Povvers and Peo∣ple of that place, not to harden your hearts any longer; least more of you become as Pharoahs. And do not you blind guids of the Earth, Hirelings of any sort, go about any longer, to make your Masters and People believe that there are no true Prophets novv upon the Earth, for in your vvillfullness, darkness blindness and ignorance of God, and of his misteries, (Christ being unto you a misterie) I say in your ignorance and blind Zeal, you have hitherto gon about, to make both the Povvers and People of the Earth, believe a lye, and you have insenced both the People & Povv∣ers of the Earth, against the Children of Light, Servants and Prophets of God, vvhom God hath, raised up; to bear testamony unto his name and truth, as it vvas in the begining, and it vvould have been better for you, if you had not so doné, sure I am if the Testamony of Jesus, be the spirit of Prophecy, as I both knovv & believe it is: Then God hath many true Prophets novv upon the Earth, who have and do in Gods Name, Authority Power and Strength, Prophecy; yea, and they have foretould you, the People, Priests, and Powers of England &c. what would come upon you, part whereof is already come to pass, and the remainder is comming, and such dare not Preach Lies in the Name of God and Christ, as the false Christians, blind Guides, and Hirelings of the Earth do, vvho Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and so Ride both Povvers, and People, even to Death. And now, had not the Lord God Almighty, given such his servants  of things to come, they durst
not have so spoken, and vvrote, as they have: Novv vvould the former King, Povvers, Priests, and People of England, but have believed, that vvhich vvas said unto them from God, by his servants, vvho vvere Ina∣bled both to speak and write unto them: sure there had been no more Innocent blood spilt, after the first War in England was ended, but they vvould not believe, nor take council of God, by his Children, but in stead thereof, they (to wit) the greatest and vvisest of them, vvould do as many Great Mighty, Wise, and Noble, novv do, laugh, jere, & scoffe at them, vvhich God had inabled, & comanded to speak to them, vvho (from God) did positively fore-tell them, of their ruine & destructi∣on, as they do of yours novv, if you repent not, and turn not unto God. For there vvill yet be greater trouble upon the Earth then ever vvas. Also there vvill be Earth-quakes in some places of the World, that vvill svvallovv up many, if not vvhole Countries. Farther there vvill be a Nation born in a day. These things hath the Almighty God given me, a perfect and clear fight off, as if they were already past: vvith many more, vvhich as yet I have no Authority nor command from on High, to publish, but this my God and Father, hath already assured me, that whatsoever (of it) shall make for his Glory, and for his Peoples good, he will (in his ovvn time) give me povver, and strength, to declare it, and for that vvhich doth particularly concern some men, I shall in Gods time, faithfully signifie it unto them. Novv blessed are the Mercifull, for they shall find Mercy, in the day (which is nigh at hand) when God will poure forth the Vials of his wrath, judgment, and Indignation, upon the disobedient, for Gods determination, is so to do, also God is staining the Glory of all flesh, that so none may glory any more in the flesh, but in the Lord aloan, who is Head over all. Now judgment is not only begun at the House of Gōd, but it is gon and going forth against Sathan, and his Instruments, every where, and all such as are found in Rebellion, and Disobedience against God, shall have no true comfort, rebellion against God, being as the sin of witchcraft, say for all such as shall be found in this iniquity of rebelli∣on against God, and in truth and peace-breaking, and in blood-guilti∣ness, persecution, sin superstion & Idolitry, shall have but little quiet, for God hath determined vvonderfull things to be.
And these things herein (called Englands dome) hath been from God often times signified unto me, to be that, which vvill surely come up∣on Englands Inhabitants, so sure vvill they come, as that which is all∣ready past: for none shall hinder, the decree of God. Now vvhen the Lord God Almighty first began to open these things unto me, great vvere his mercies, and infinit was his loving kindnes in and unto me, insomuch that if I had the tongue of men and Angels, I were not able to express and declare it, I being but as a child, and one as vvith a stamering tongue, hath in the strength of my God  made manifest vvhat God hath (at present) required at my hands, this being written from the requirings of God, the latter end of the yeare, 1661. I say, this called Englands dome, vvas then vvritten, but the other things vvere vvriten at other times. Novv the mightie vvonderfull and povverfull appearances of the Lord God of Wisdom, were such in and unto me, for days and nights that had not God in his mercy and goodnes tovvards me, borne up my Spirits, I had then laid dovvn the body, for vvhen God thus opened & revealed these things in and unto me, and gave me thus to behold & see his great and Glorious presence, I then had a cleare sight of all these things herein mentioned, and then, even then, I beheld and savv dreadfull and terible things that the vvicked of the Earth, should in a little time more be found doing of, against the Godly, further the Blood∣sheding, misery, Calamity and confusion, that in the light of God I then savv coming, not only, in & upon poor England, but else where; vvould make the stoutest Kings, Princes, Priests and People, of the Earth, there harts to tremble and quake, to behold and see it, as I have done; And this sound of the Spirit of God, have often passed through mee. O what would I do to save this people. So that through mercy I can truly say, & testifie to the vvhole world, that God is good to Israel, & unto them that obey him & are of a pure and upright heart, also that this Gods wonderfull dealings vvith me, is not for naught, for in the middest and deapth of all our tribulations, suffrings, and aflictions, that vvee the People of God, and sheepe of our Fathers pasture, may yet meet vvith all, I say from God, that in the hight of all our enemies fury towards us, God the Lord of Hoast, vvill deliver us his poor innocent, and oppressed ones that abide and trust
in him, these things hath my God opened and perfectly shevven unto me, againe and again, yea, and sealed them unto, and in me, to the end, that I should publish them, unto the sons and daughters of men, that so all the People of God, on earth, may be comforted, yee and be made to abyde stedfast and unmoveable, allvvays abounding in the vvorke, and service of God in the middest of our greatest suffrings. And novv vvhile the vvicked doe vvalke on every side, and the vildest of men are exalted, let us the People of God, be ever more found doing our Fathers vvill one Earth, as it is in Heaven, and as much good to our enemies, as vvee can, for in our so doing, our God and Father vvill be vvell pleased vvith us, and he vvill delight himselfe in us, to the perfecting of his praise for us and by us. And for all you Kings, Princes, Rulers, Preists, People, and Povvers of the Earth & of the Earthly mind, Flatter not your selves any longer, and suffer not your selves to be deceived and flatred withall, & fauned upon, by your high Priest & blind guids, for such doe but sevv pillows of downe under you, vvhich vvill deceive both you and them at last, I say deceive not your selves, nor them that you have povver & authority over. But turne you unto the light of God, vvhile you have a day and time, and ceace from sin, you little and lofty ones of the Earth, and do good, and be yee all found in Moderation, and in the vvorks of holi∣nes rightousnes peace and truth, for the Lords sake, other vvayes it vvill goe very hard with you all, I doe assure you. And novv vvhosoever you be, that shall be found in the path of righteousnes peace and truth, and in vvell doing, also in modera∣tion, it may then be trulie hoped, that such people doe knovv that the Lord God Almighty is nigh at hand to judgment for sin. And for all you Kings, Rulers and people, that shallbe found in the exercise of the things that are good, you shall have true comfort, there∣in, and the tryal of your faith and patience in your so doing, vvill be of much more comfort unto you, then all your Earthly crovvns, yea then al your gold & honour that perisheth, now that true honour which com∣eth from above is first pure & then peacable, it is also gentle and easy to be intreated, it is also full of love, & good vvorks, and vvhat not, that is of good and of honest report, and sure I am, that all they that live in this moderation, be they Kings, or others, they must needs knovv good from
evill, and avoid the one, and love the other; And novv friends did you but knovv vvho it vvas that came from Bozero vvith his Gar∣ments rouled in blood; sure you would tremble, for he it is that is come, and comming to judge the Earth: yea to judge both the quick and dead; or did you but consider, as vvell as knovv, that some men for sheding of innocent blood, have already payed deare; you vvould then seace from blood, and never do iniquity more. Novv doe you not knovv that blood is a crying sin, and that the cry thereof, hath often reached unto Heaven; And hovv God remem∣breth it, and that he vvill be avenged thereof. Have you forgotten that God judgeth amongst the Gods, and do you not knovv, for vvhat God hath cast dovvn some, and raised up o∣thers, and hovv he giveth the Kingdomes of men unto vvhomso∣ever he pleaseth: and that he is no respector of persons; and vvill you yet go on in your sins; sure you that Rule over men, ought to be kinde, loving, mercifull, and just; I say unto you, vvhosoever you be, that thus hunger and thirst after innocent blood, God vvill give you blood to drink again, & at last bring you into confusion, vvoe, missery, torment, and trouble: for there is innocency in many, vvho thirst not after blood, and vvrath in the Lamb of God (that taketh away the sins of the vvorld) on their behalfe; and God, my God, vvill in a lit∣tle time more manifest it, and make it apeare unto all thevvorld. And then you that have seen this Testimony, vvill say, that this vvas a plaine and faithfull vvarning, as vvell as a loving invitation, foresight and  for the healing of the Nations, and People of the Earth, especially them of England. And now I tell you in England &c. make vvhat confedracies you vvill vvith in your selves, & vvith Death, and Hell, that tends to blood, the Lord God (omnipotent, God over all) vvill reveale, and discover it & God in his own time, vvill blast you, & it, that shall be found therein Also make vvhat conjunctions & confedracies you vvill, vvithin your selves, and vvith other Nations (vvho are infatuated, as vvell as you, it shall all be for the fullfilling, and accomplishing of these things herein spoken off, and treated on. Friends novv learn to knovv that God is he, vvhich maketh all things manifest.
Therefore wait patiently (in God) all ye children of light, and be still, and think not much any of you, at your sufferings, for God behold∣eth it, and taketh care of all you that trust in him, For through suffrings must redemption come. Also knovv if any shall say, he or they hath a Revelation or Pro∣phesie, and commeth in the name of the Lord, and speaketh falsly, the Lord God will reward such, with the evil of their own doings, there∣fore let no man destroy such; also if any man shall draw back, from the service, of the living God; my soul saith God (through me) shall have no pleasure in such, let no man therefore now neglect to do the ser∣vice, and requirings, of God. Friends, I say again, wait patiently (in God) and see what a fevv yeares more will bring forth, and be not impatient, but watch, and pray, (that can) and as it is said before, so doe. And now take no care when you, or any of you, shall be had be∣fore Kings, and Princes, for his name sake, or before other Rulers, for the Lord careth for you; and remember, that it be the patient, and the meek, that do, and shall iuherit the Kingdome, that cannot be removed, in which Kingdome is the Crownimmortall, which fadeth not away, its Gods Kingdome. And for thou O King of England let this folowing Counsell be acceptable vnto thee (amongst the rest) Break thou of thy sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities, by showing mercy unto the poore, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillitie. But if thou shalt yet goe on in the fullfilling of thy lust and in suffer∣ing the truly Inocent peaceable people of God, to be worrowed, brused, abused, and beaten, a while Longer, as they have bin. As heavey a hand from the Lord God Allmighty will fall upon thee and them that cause such Greiuious and abominable things to be don, (as hither to hath bin don and Inflicted upon Gods pore babes Lambs, and little ons) As ever fell upon King Nebuchadnezzar: Belshazzer or Darious: For Great Babelon, is still in Remembrance before the Great God of heaven and Earth, whose reward is nye, for all There Creueltyes don unto the saints and people of God. The End.
