S1762 [ocm]80923624 191996
I7 R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Importation of Forraign Apples, except from France. JAMES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ire∣land, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting, Forasmuch as We understanding, that several Merchants and others, have, or are intended to Import into this Kingdom, Apples from Flanders, and other Places abroad, most unnecessarly: And whereas Our Leidges may be sufficiently furnished with Apples of all sorts within Our own Domi∣nions, and from the Kingdom of France; We therefore with Advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby expresly Prohibite and Discharge the Importing into this Kingdom any Forraign Apples from abroad, especially from Flanders, except those which shall be brought from France; with Certification to the Importers or Resetters, that they shall not only be Confiscated as to the Apples themselves, or Price and Value thereof, but shall incur what Penalty Our Privy Council shall think fit for such Contravention. And We hereby Require and Command all Our Tacks∣men, Collectors, Waiters and Customers, to take special notice, that no such prohibite Goods be Im∣ported or Entered, as they will answer at their highest Peril: Impowering hereby them or either of them, to make Seazure of the same; and ordaining them in case they shall be Clandestinely Imported, upon Information to make Intimation thereof, and of the Owners, Importers or Resetters, to the Clerks of Our Privy Council, that Our Privy Council may proceed against them as they shall find cause. And to the end Our Pleasure in the Premisses may be known, OƲR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Pro∣clamation, make Publication of Our Pleasure in the Premisses, that none may pretend Ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the tenth day of November, One thousand six hundred eighty seven. And of Our Reign the third year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls, Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM .
