T2325A R224460 [ocm]80924714 192106
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A most Terrible Storm of Thunder and Lightning, that happened at Cruise Morchard, four Miles distant from Ti∣verton in Devonshire, on Monday, being the 18th of February last past, about one of the Clock in the Morning. THE Publisher not intending to delay the Reader from perusing the following Relation, with an Harangue of attributing it to be the effects of Natural Causes, or as a Judgment of an Angry Deity, for Crimes either General or Particu∣lar, leaves all to their own Censure, and only sets forth the true matter of Fact, which take as followeth. That on Monday, the 18th of February last past, about One of the Clock in the Morning, John Cruise Esq; whose House is very near adjacent to the said Parish Church, with his whole Family, as well as the whole adjacent Country, being much affrighted with the terribleness of the Thunder and Lightning, and the appearance of the whole Element being in a Flame; and hearing a strange noise of Flames, imagined it to be his own House; but endeavouring to find out the certainty thereof, quickly
with astonishment discover'd that the Parish Church, and Tower thereof were all on Fire; and continu'd burning with that violence (till the whole were entirely consum'd) that 'tis difficult for Pen to express the same. The Bells in the Tower were so melted (excepting half of one) that the very substance of the Metal was turn'd into perfect Dross, and made useless to be remelted. Which Accident is the more admirable for the Season it hap∣pen'd in, when the least part of Thunder and Light∣ning is accounted Wonderful. I hope none will be difficult to give credit to what is here related, for that the said Gentleman hath written a particular thereof to two Members of this present Parliament, of the said Town adjacent; and an Esti∣mate of the Dammage, which is computed to be near Two Thousand Pound. Who likewise are desir'd to procure a Brief for a publick Collection of Charity towards the rebuilding of the said Parish Church, so dismally consum'd. There was also much more dammage done in the adjacent Country, by blowing up Trees by the Roots, the Roofs off some Houses, and Thatch off others; of which the particulars are not yet taken. Licensed, April 6. 1689. LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old-Baily. 1689.
