1021.5 S115754 99850972 176979
THE PRINCIPLE OF ALL PRINCIPLES Concerning RELIGION. OR THE SVMME OF certaine SERMONS: Prooving The Scriptures to be the very VVord OF GOD. Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures; For in them yee thinke to haue eternall life. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, At the South entrance of the Royall Exchange. 162
TO THE WORSHIPFVL, Mr HVMPHREY BROVVNE, Increase of Grace, and the saving knowledge of Iesus Christ. AMongst other Doctrines here∣tofore gathered from my Text, viz Act. 24.14.15.16. We learned, that, Wee are to ground our Faith onely vpon the Word written. Which Doctrine arose out of this Observation, That Paul doth not say, He beleeved
all things whatsoever as direc∣tions of his worshipping the God of his Fathers; but Belee∣ving all things written in the Law, & the Prophets, so wor∣ship I, &c. This point is wor∣thy due consideration, in these prevaricating times, wherein Papists doe so fearefully decline the Word written, and runne vnto Traditions, which they call Vn∣written Verities; though indeede Traditionall very lyes; they runne (I say) vnto these, as vnto the rocke of their refuge. For if they could, but in shew, iusti∣fie their Antichristian Idolatry, and Superstitions by the Word written, how boasting they would then be, may appeare
by their catching at syllables thereof, which sound, in phan∣tasticall eares, to some of their purposes. So that Christ his censure vpon the Scribes and Pharises, may be iustly layd vp∣on them, viz: Yee haue made the Word Mat. 15.1.6. written of none authoritie by your Traditions: But whosoever speaketh not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them Isa. 8.20.. For the whole Scripture that is, The Word written) is given by Inspira∣tion of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to cor∣rect, and to instruct in righte∣ousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto all good works 2 Tim. 3.15.16.17..
Amongst other Vses of the sayd Doctrine, this was one, If we are to ground our faith only vpon the Word written, then all, who are wise vnto Salvation, must diligently read the same; or, If they cannot reade, diligently heare them read in publique Congregati∣ons, & els-where, as they may. For to what ende was the Word of God committed to Writing; but that Gods people should reade, or heare it read diligently? Therefore let vs re∣ligiously take to heart, and con∣sider the wise exhortation of our Master Christ, viz: Search the Scriptures, For in them yee thinke to haue eternall life Ioh. 5.39.. Wherein ob∣serue,
that He calleth the word of God Scriptures, that is, Writings, and not onely so, but The Scrip∣tures, that is, Writings incom∣parably excelling all other. For (indeed) they are given by inspiration of God. There∣fore we are to search them. Which word Search, implieth Diligence. As where we are exhorted Pro. 2.3. to Search for the Know∣leage of God as for Treasures. But how are Writings searched o∣therwise, than by diligent rea∣ding? Thus did the Nobly-minded Baereans Acts. 17.1 Search the Scrip∣tures daily. So that Christ his ex∣hortation is this in effect. If ye thinke (indeed) to haue eternall life in the Scriptures, then
shew your selues wise vnto salvation by your diligence in reading, or hearing them read. This point requireth much pressing in these times, where∣in too many are like those, whom Isaiah taxeth. Isa. 29.10. VVho, being covered with a spirit of slumber, dreame of ea∣ting, but when they are a∣wake their soules are emp∣tie; Yet when a Booke is of∣fered them to be read, they refuse, saying either The Booke is Sealed, as doe the Papists; or, They cannot Reade, as doe thousands of irreligious people, whose carelesnesse to heare the Scriptures read, (discovered by their late com∣ming
to the Church, where the Scriptures be read, and their readinesse to heare the reading of vaine Bookes and Balldes) doth manifest their want of religious zeale, to supply their disability to reade the Scriptures, by diligence in giuing attendance to the reading thereof. But there may come a time of tryall, when the Deafe shall heare the words of the Booke, as ISAIAH Prophecieth in the same Chapter. Vers. 17.1 VVhich Prophecie implieth, that he, who sayd, He could not reade, should (yet) haue signified desire to heare the Booke read. To prevent
which tryall (if it may so please our most gracious God) let's imitate, yea, emulate the reli∣gious Iewes, Acts. 13.14.15. And 15.21. who so diligently heard the olde Testament read in their Synagogues every Sab∣bath day, that Christ, and his Apostles saw it not necessary to quote Chapter, and Verse, when they preached, or wrote. And why? Because, by diligent hearing the Scriptures read, their memory was so confir∣med, that they could presently acknowledge every allegation to be conteined in the Scrip∣tures. To which ende, viz: the confirmation of memory by reading, was the Word of God written; Yea so, That the chil∣dren
of Israel were commanded Deut. 11.19.18. as well to write Gods words vpon the posts of their houses, and vpon their gates, as to be speaking of them, when they sit, walke, &c. that they might lay them vp in their hearts. These things I now write, that thereby I may stirre you, and others vp, by reading, to renew, and confirme your memory, that it may, vnto your farther edification, reflect vpon this ground of Religiō. The Scrip∣tures be the very Word of God. VVhich (indeed) is, The Princi∣ple of all Principles concerning Religi∣on, and therefore is (as it ought to be) esteemed accordingly of all that doe the Truth Ioh. 3.2 Deut. 17.19, that is,
Obey God in Sinceritie, so as they come to the light thereof, that their deeds may be made manifest, that they be wrought according to God. Therefore not onely David a King, and an olde man, professed al. 37.25.9.105.9. Gods Word to haue beene a Light to his paths, but the Spirit also, by way of a Question, doth, with a strong asseveration, affirme, That young men (if they feare God) must re∣dresse their wayes in taking heede to them according to Gods Word. To which our most holy God, and to the Word of his grace, ct 20.32. which is able to build further, and to giue you an inheritance amongst all them which are sanctified, I heartily commend you.
THE PRINCIPLE OF ALL PRINCIPLES concerning Religion. Act. 24.14.15.16. 14. But this I confesse vnto thee, that af∣ter the way which they call heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers, be∣leeving all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets. 15. And haue hope towards God, which they themselues also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the iust, and vniust. 16. And herein doe I exercise my selfe, to haue alwayes a Conscience voyde of offence towards God, and toward men. IN these three Verses may be observed 4. grounds of Religion, whereof e∣very one is prooved by the other three, and is of that power∣full
truth, that if it be beleeved in∣deed, it perswadeth the beleever to make conscience of sinne, therefore all are worthy of due consideration, Viz. (1.) There is a God (by name, The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob) to be worshipped. (2.) There is a Word of God (Viz. The Bible, that is, the Booke of Bookes, consisting of the olde, and new Testament) to be beleeved. (3.) There is a Resurrection both of iust, and vniust to be expected. And (4.) There is a Consci∣ence to be tendered. The first ground hath beene layd as surely as I can. For none can be religious, who doth not beleeue it. The second is like∣wise to be surely layd. For if there be no such Word, there can be no true religion, but superstition. The Sama∣ritans . 4.20.22. and Athenians . 17.22.23. were supersti∣tious, because they worshipped God not according to his Word. That therefore we may haue true spirituall comfort in our Christian Religion, in which we worship God, let vs be
well perswaded, that the Bible is the Word of God. That imposter Maho∣met, to make the Turkes superstiti∣ously to regard his Alchoran, Compi∣led by himselfe, a Iew, and a Nestorian heretique, so plotted with his Com∣plices, that having tolde the Turkes that God would send his vndoubted Word about a Camels necke out of the Wildernesse, before the Sermon was ended, a Camell came into the Church with the Alchoran about the necke. Were not the Bible the vn∣doubted Word of God, we Christians are the most absurd in our Religion of all other. For we make him a God, and our onely Saviour, whom we ac∣knowledge to haue beene a man, and crucified. But if it be, then may wee, with comfort, avow our Religion, against Iewes, Turkes, and Papists. That we may be well grounded in this point, I haue determined to proue it not onely by the other three grounds, but also by imitating an or∣der
of proofes which Christ obser∣veth, Ioh. 5.31. to 39. With which I will begin as being most worthy in regard of the Author, and as shewing, that the Bible, which is the Word written, may be prooved to be the Word of God, by like Arguments as Christ prooveth himselfe to be the E∣ternall Word oh. 1.1.14. made flesh, that is, the Messiah. Which he prooveth by 4. testimonies. 1. Of Iohn Baptist. 2. Of his owne Workes. 3. Of his Father; And 4. Of the Scriptures.  In imitati∣tion therefore, let our first proofe be, The Testimony of the Church, which, throughout all ages, hath a∣vowed the Bible to be the vndoubted Word of God. Now all true Christi∣ans reioyce in the Church, as the Iewes did in Iohn Baptist. For it is The Pillar of truth Tim. 3.15.. Not because the Church supporteth the Scriptures, so as to be the Word of God, as Pa∣pists would make vs to beleeue. Nay, The Scriptures support the Church,
so as to be the Church of God. In∣deed, if there be no other vse of a Pil∣lar but to support, then that place of 1 Tim. 3.15. might seeme to make for the Papists: but there is another vse of a Pillar, viz. To haue that written, or engraven therevpon, which is to be remembred for ever. As in Rev. 3.12. Revel. 3.12. Christ sayth, Him that overcōmeth, I will make a Pillar in the Temple of my God. How? I will write vpon him the Name of my God, and my new Name. Indeed, The true sense of that to Ti∣mothie is this; As a Pillar doth pre∣ferue the memory of those things which are written thereon; So the Church preserveth Truth commen∣ded therevnto. This sense the place it selfe doth intimate; For (saith Paul) These things I write, that, if I tarry long, thou mayst know how to be∣haue thy selfe in the house of God, that it being the Church of the living God (therefore ever-living) may, as a Pillar, preserue Truth which it lear∣neth
of thee. Hence it is that Aust in sayth, ntra Epist. md. cap. 5. I had not beleeved the Scriptures to haue beene the Word, had I not beene mooued with the Churches credite. Thus was he mooved indeed, when he first turned from his Manichisme: But when he was setled in Religion, thus he writeth to Maximinus. Contra Maxim. ib. 3. cap. 14. Neither must I alledge the Councell of Nice in preiudice of the matter, nor you the Councell of Ariminum, Let matter striue with matter, cause with cause, rea∣son with reason, by authoritie of the Scriptures. And in another place. Reade this out of a Prophet, De Pastor. cap. 14. out of a Psalme, out of the Law, out of the Gospel, out of an Apostle; Thence recite I the Church disperst over the whole world; and our Lord saying. My sheepe heare my voyce. So that Austin did like the Samaritans, who, at the first, beleeved Christ to be the Messiah for the saying of the Woman, but afterward, they professed. Ioh. 4.39.42. Now wee beleeue, not be∣cause of thy saying; For wee haue heard him our selues.
Now then let vs proceede to the second Testimony from the proper workes of the Scriptures, which is greater then the former, as was the second Testimony, which Christ pleaded. I will now take knowledge but of two proper works of the Scrip¦tures. The former is; Though they be, for the most part, very simple, & plaine, yet (like God) they be migh∣ty in operation. For the word of God simply preached is the power of God 2 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 3.4... It being like fire, and an ham∣mer, Ier. 23.29.22. converteth the soule, Psal. 19.7. being not carnall, casteth downe imagina∣tions exalted, and bringeth every thought to the obedience of Christ 2 Cor. 10.4.. For it is the sword of the Spirit Eph. 6.17.; be∣cause the Spirit of God, being au∣thour thereof Pet. 1.21. by it worketh migh∣tily vpon the spirit of man. Heb. 4.12. For it accompanieth the same, Isa. 59.21. so as a man is compelled to ac∣knowledg the power of Gods word, when it is faithfully preached, 1 Cor. 4..
The other is, They prophecy ma∣ny great things, which are accom∣plished in due time. As the bondage of Israell in Egypt, Ezod. 12.41. Cap∣tivity in Babilon, Ier. 29.10. The suc∣cession of foure Monarches, Dan. 2.37. to 40. Comming of the Messiah, Dan 9.24.25.26. Calling of the Gen∣tiles, Isa. 2.2.3. And revealing of An∣tichrist, 2 Thess. 2.7.8. that is, the Pope revealed after the removall of the Emperour from Rome. So that, as God was acknowledged so to be, because he, by Daniel, opened secrets Dan. 2.47. and a Prophet is to be acknowled∣ged so to be, if his Prophecy come to passe Det. 18.18. &c., I may conclude, that, because so many, and great Prophecies in the Scriptures are duly fulfilled, they are therfore the vndoubted word of God Our third Testimony is frō the Fa∣ther that is God, Gal. 1. I who hath gi∣ven testimony to the scriptures, viva voce, & by his wonderfull works. He gaue testimony viva voce to the old Testament, when he gaue the Deca∣logue Deut. 5.2.
Whereof the Prophets, and the rest of the Scriptures are explana∣tions, so that as Law, and Prophets is here (per Synchdochen) put for the whole old Testament, so else wher is Prophets onely Acts. 26.27. Ephc. 2.20.. So that, as the whole lumpe, and branches be holy, if the first fruites, & roote be holy Rom. 11.16.: So the testimony given viva voce to the Decalogue, is an authorizing of the whole olde Testament, God like∣wise viva voce gaue Testimony to the new Testament, when, by a voyce out of a cloud Mat. 17.., he sayd This is my be∣loved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare him. Wherein should we heare him? To wit, In the Gospell, which is The word of Reconciliation 2 Cor. 5.19. by for∣giuenesse of our sinnes, and is there∣fore worthily called The word of Christ Colos. 3.16., Which reconciliation is in∣timated in these words. In whom I am well pleased. This word of Christ is contayned in the new Testament; Therefore, by this voyce, testimonie
is thereunto given. This inference is cōfirmed by the Apostle Peter 2 Pet. 1.16.17.. Who by this voyce, proveth, that the A∣postles followed not deceiveable fa∣bles, but opened the power, & com∣ming of Christ. God also gaue testi∣mony therunto by wonderful works. For) if Antiquity may be beleeved Iren. lib. 3 ap 25.) He confirmed the old Testament by this miracle. Ptolomy King of Egypt, hearing the books of the Iewes high∣ly exalted, set 70. learned Iewes in so many places, so as they could not conferre, to translate those bookes out of Hebrew into Greeke. When they had done, the 70. translations so agreed word for word, as if all had conferred, & agreed vpon one trans∣lation. The number of the bookes being thirtie nine, The puacitie, and ambiguity of Hebrew wordes, and experience of diversity in translating farre more intelligible languages, cō∣sidered, this is a great miracle. Tou∣ching the new Testament, the Text
sayth plainly that Mark 16.2 the Apostles prea¦ched every where; And the Lord cō∣firmed the word with signes that fol∣lowed: therefore God gaue testimo∣nie to the new Testament by won∣derfull workes. Here Papists may be answered, who require vs to shew by what miracles, we confirme our new Gospell, I answere; Indeede, if the Gospell, which we preach, were new, as they (like Iewes Mark 1.27.) doe terme it, then it is to be confirmed with new miracles, or not to be received: But being the same which Christ, & his Apostles preached, it is so sufficient∣ly confirmed by the miracles which Christ, & his Apostles wrought, that wee, with Austin Aug de Civi. Dei. l. 22. call him a won∣der of men who now requireth mi∣racles to that ende. God gaue testimony both to the old, and new Testament by preser∣ving them miraculously. Touching the former it is to be considered, that Israell was for a long season, without
the true God, without Priest to teach and without Law Chro. 15.3. Is it not a speciall worke of God, that the Scriptures then being were preserved, and that in purity? And the rather, if we con∣sider how despitefully Iehoiakim, cut and burnt Ieremies roule, Ier. 36.23. It is yet more remarkeable that the people of God were captiues. 70. yeares in Babylon Iere: 29.10. and 27.22., whether also the holy vessels were carried. How were the Scriptures preserved al this while otherwise than by the wonderfull providence of God? But it is most admirable, that Ierusalem, and the Temple were twice destroyed, once by Nebuchadnezzars servant 2 King 25., and a∣gaine after Christ his ascension, Luke 19.41 to 44 and yet the holy Books kept in the Tem∣ple are preserved. Touching the lat∣ter; It is not vnknown, that in the first ages of the Church Acts & Mo∣ments, p. 30. there were grie∣vous persecutions for three hundred yeares, by ten Tyrannicall Heathen Emperours of Rome, whereof (it may
be) Christ prophecyed, when he told the Churches they should haue tri∣bulation Revel. 2. ten dayes, or times. How were the Scriptures preserved all this terrible time, other-wise than by the wonderfull providence of God? Againe; Since those ten persecuti∣ons, Antichrist the Pope hath exerci∣sed his tyranny over the Churches for the space of about. 900. yeares. Vnder a type of a King, Daniel Dan. 11.31.36.37. pro∣phecyeth of him, which is to be con∣sidered. For it is sayd; His heart shall be against the holy Covenant; So the Popes heart is against the new Testament in Christ his bloud, to e∣stablish his merits by workes. It is also sayd, On that King's part armes shall stand, as now they doe on the Popes part; and they shall pollute the Sanctuary, and set vp the abhominable desolation: So doth the Pope, pollute the Churches, and setteth vp his ab∣hominable Masse. That King, Did what he listed, cared not for any God, but
magnified himselfe aboue all. Doth not the Pope all this? Lastly; That King, In place of the God of his Fathers, honou∣red the God, Mauzzim: Doth not the Pope honour in the Masse a God of bread in place of the true God? But what may induce vs to suppose that King to be a type of the Pope? Be∣sides the many agreements noted, It is to be observed, that howsoever all things, written of that King were true according to the letter: yet Christ sayth Mat. 24.15. When yee see the abhomination of desolation spoken of by Daniell, stand in the holy places &c, Whereby hee ap∣plieth this Prophecy to the destruc∣tion of Ierusalem, and the Temple by the Romane Emperour, as doth more plainly appeare in Luke 21.20. conferred with Dan. 9.26.27. Divines, not without Analogy, apply this prophecy to the Masse, that abhomi∣nation (indeede) of Desolation. A∣gaine, It is to be observed, that the Roman Emperour was the first beast evel. 13.1.  7.11.12.
that the Pope is another beast, which doth all that the first beast did; And that the Church of Christ is the House of God, 1 Tim. 3. as was the Temple. So then, as the Romane Emperour destroyed the Temple, so the Pope hath persecuted, and stil persecuteth the true Church of Christ. How did the new Testament, so opposite to Popery, escape so long a rage, and reigne? This is the more strange these things considered. The old Testa∣ment in Hebrew, and the new Testa∣ment in Greeke, were strangers in Israel ever since the Pope was, before the Gospell was renewed. The Pope will not suffer the Scriptures to bee read to the people in their mother tongue, & the second Commaunde∣ment condemning the worshipping of Images is in popish Catechismes thrust out of the Decalogue. So that I may conclude that as Nebuchadnez∣zar Dan. 3. acknowledged Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to haue beene the ser∣vants
of God, because they escaped the fiery furnace: so God giveth a remarkeable testimony to the Scrip∣tures, that they bee his vndoubted word, by his so wonderfull preser∣vation. Now it is time to proceede to the testimony of Scriptures. But first I will answer this question. Is the testi∣mony which the Scriptures giue to themselues of sufficient credit? Yes; For the same reasons, wherewith Christ ohn 1.13.14.17.18. iustified the record which he bare of himselfe. (1) We know from whence the Scriptures came, even frō Gods spirit Pet. 1.20.21. (2) The Father (as we haue proved) is a witnesse, therefore the testimony of two is true, and con∣sequētly of credit. Now Christ saith hn 5.39. The Scriptures, (that is the old Testa∣ment, which were before Christ) testifie of me. If of Christ, then of his Word, that is, his Gospell. For the woman of Samaria could tell hn 4.25. that the Messiah, that is, Christ, when he
came should tell vs all things. It may be she had heard, that Moses prophe∣cyed of Christ, who was to be heard in all things Acts 7. Besides, Christ is the corner stone of the foundation, (that is, doctrine) as of the Apostles, so of the Prophets. Therefore the Pro∣phets giue testimony to Christ, and his word. As Moses and the Pro∣phets (that is, the old Testament) giue testimony to Christ, and his word, which is the doctrine of the new Testament: So Christ in those words, Iohn 5.39. doth giue an ho∣nourable testimony to the old Testa∣ment, saying, In them ye thinke to haue eternall life. And two of the chiefe Apostles giue likewise testimony to the old Testament. For Peter sayth 2 Pet. 1. Wee haue a most sure word of the Pro∣phets. Here Prophets (as Eph: 2.20. is put for the whole old Testament. And Paul sayth 2 Tim. 3 The whole Scripture is given by inspiration. Whereby the old Testament, without doubt, is
signified, & the new Testament may be vnderstood. Having finished this course of Testi∣monies to the word by way of imita∣tion as well as I can, I am now to shew how the other three grounds doe proue this. ason 5. The first is, There is a God to be worshipped, therefore there is a word of God to be beleeved. There be many Gods, so called Cor. 8.5. Every one hath his prescribed worship, where∣by he is honoured according to his owne minde, as Saturne had his Sa∣turnalia, and drunken Bacchus his Bac∣chanalia. Yea, the Scriptures intimate as much, cts 7.43. Moloch had his tabernacle, and Remphan his Starre. So that the true God forbiddeth his people eut. 12.30 to enquire how other Nations serue their Gods. Now can we think that our great, and onely true God is lesse zealous of his glory, then false Gods be of their supposed honour? Hea∣then men concluded otherwise, For when they heard that the Samaritans
were devoured by Lyons, they dee∣med the cause was, Not worshipping the God of the Land after his owne man∣ner 2 King. 17.25.26.. God hath made all things for his owne sake, yea even the wicked for the day of evill Prov. 16., that he may be glorified, as by all things made, so by the lust condemnatiō of the wicked. Therefore he hath given a Word, that by holy Worship, according to it, he may be glorified. For by such worship especially is He glorified Levn. 10.2.3., and therefore the Glory departed from Israel, when the Arke, before which Israel worshipped, was taken by the Philistims 1 Sam. 4. Exod. 33.: So that God did iustly forsake the Gentiles, because, when they knew him by his Workes of Creation Rom. 1. &c., they did not glorifie him as God, by worshipping him ac∣cording to his will. That this conse∣quence may yet better appeare to be good, it is to be duely observed, that immediately after God, in the Deca∣logue Exod. 20.3, required Worship as due to
him onely, he commandeth that worship to be according to his word, and not by mans inventions: And that, where God forbiddeth to in∣quire how other Nations serue their Gods, Deut. 12.30.32. he commandeth to take heed to his Word. And lastly, that when God commanded his people to sanc∣tifie him, he presently commanded to binde vp the Testimony Isa. 8.13.16., and to seale vp the Law among his Disci∣ples. For (indeed) no Booke doth so glorifie God, as doth the Bible, there∣fore it is the true Word of God Ioh. 7.18.. All that is said, being well considered, this consequence is good. There is a God, to wit, Iehovah, therefore there is a Word of God, viz: The olde and new Testament. The other ground, and consequence is this. There is a Resurrection of the iust, and vniust to be expected, there∣fore there is a Word of God, that is, the Scriptures, to be beleeved. For howsoever Cicero held the Immorta∣litie
of the soule; yet the Athenian Philosophers deemed the resurrecti∣on of the bodie to be an vnheard of point Act. 17.1.32.. For, indeed, it is an Article of Christian faith, and not a Tenet of naturall reason. So that the Saddu∣ces (though Iewes) reiected it Mat. 22.33.. Ther∣fore if it be an Article of Faith, then the Scriptures, being the only booke, that doth clearely avouch, and proue it, must needs be the word of Faith. Againe; Why must there be a Resur∣rection? That the iust may arise vnto life, and the vniust vnto condemnati∣on Ioh. 5.29.. For the last day is, The day of the generall declaration of the iust iudgement of God Rom. 2.5. Dan. 12.2.. Now that God may appeare iust when he iudgeth, it is requisite, that he make his Will knowne by his Word; For where no Law is, there is no transgression Rom. 4.15. Therefore saith Christ, If I had not come, and spoken to them, they should not haue had sinne Ioh. 15.22.: but now they haue no cloake for sinne. The Gentiles
had not the Law Rom. 2.12.14.15., how can they be iudged? Yes, because they haue the effect of the Law written in their hearts. The third ground, and consequence is this. There is a Conscience to be ten∣dered, therefore there is a Word of God to be beleeved. For the Spirit of God, which speaketh in the Scriptures, so inlightneth the mindes of Gods peo∣ple, that the Word worketh vpon their Consciences. That as face an∣swereth face in Water Prov. 27.19.. So where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is such li∣bertie Cor. 3.17., that is, Freedome from the vaile over our hearts, that we behold, as in a glasse, the glory of the LORD with open face, and are changed into the same image. So that the Apostle doth presently affirme, And 4.1.2. That having this Ministry, he did not handle the Word deceitfully, but in declaration of the truth, he approoved himselfe to every mans Conscience. In ano∣ther place, Tes. 4.8. he thus writeth, He that
despiseth these things, despiseth not man but God, who hath even given you his holy Spirit. Which is as if he should say, The Spirit of God, in your reading, cannot but acknowledg the same Spirit in me writing, therefore take heede how yee despise those things. It may be obserued, that the more godly any is, the more readily doth his Conscience reflect vpon the Word. Which is intimated by the A∣postle, saying, 1 Cor. 2.6. I speake Wisedome a∣mong them that are perfect. Nay; the Consciences of them, who are not perfect, are mooved by the Word. The vnlearned man, the secrets of whose heart are made manifest by Prophecy 1 Cor 14.24.25., (that is, powerfull Prea∣ching the Word) is compelled, in Conscience, to say, God is in the Preacher indeede: And Agrippa was by Pauls Preaching, (though he a prisoner) compelled, in conscience, to say Acts. 16.27.28.; Almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian. So that the con∣science
giueth an evident testimony to the Word of God. All then due∣ly considered, we may collect, and conclude, &c. First, if the Church of God, through∣out all ages, haue avouched the olde, and new Testament to be the Word of God. Secondly, if, howsoever the Scriptures be for the most part, sim∣ple, and plaine, yet, Gods Spirit wor∣king by them, they be mightie in o∣peration. Thirdly, if the Scriptures conteine many Prophecies of great things, which accordingly came to passe in due time. Fourthly, if God gaue testimony to the olde, and new Testament, by a voyce from heaven. Fiftly, if he confirmed them by mira∣cles. Sixtly, if he haue wonderfully preserved them vnto this time. Se∣venthly, if the olde Testament giue testimony to the new, and the new to the olde; as Moses to Christ, and Christ to Moses. Eightly, if it follow, that, If there be a God to be worshipped, viz.
The God of Israel, there must needes be a Word, viz: the Scriptures, that according to them he may be wor∣shipped. Ninthly, if it be a good con∣sequence, A Resurrection of the iust, and vniust is to be expected, therefore there is a Word of God, viz. the Scriptures, that God may appeare iust, when he iudgeth in the last day; And tenthly, if this be a sound En∣thymeme, There is a Conscience, ther∣fore the Scriptures be the Word of God; Because the Conscience, both of perfect Christians, and other, doth giue an evident testimony to them; then, There is a Word of God, viz. the olde, and new Testament, to be beleeved. Here (perhaps) some would expect a resolution of the question betweene the Papists, and vs, touching the Apo∣cryphall Writings, viz. Esdras, Tobit, &c. Whether they be parts of the Ca∣nonicall Scriptures, or no. I told you, when I first entred vpon this Text,
that it offereth iust occasion of dis∣cussing many points of Religion, fit∣ter for the Schooles, than for this Auditory: Yet because many take occasion to deeme those Writings to be Canonicall, because they are ordinarily bound in the midst of them, (notwithstanding the wall of separation, prudently and provident∣ly set, by Authoritie, betweene the Bookes of the olde Testament, and them, I meane, the title [Apocrypha] with a declaration of the meaning therof, I will shew you my iudgment in a few words. I deeme them, or most of them, Writings worthy of reve∣rend estimation for their antiquitie, and many things worthy diligent reading: But I deny them to be Ca∣nonicall, that is, the wordes of God, or Rules, whereby our Faith is to be squared. For we are to be builded onely vpon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Christ him∣selfe being the corner stone Ephes. 2.20.. For re∣verence
to those Writings, and for my words sake, I forbeare to note ob∣liquities in them, such as are suffici∣ent to demonstrate that they be not endited by the Spirit of God. I there∣fore desire you to consider but this one Argument. If they be parts of Canonicall Scriptures, they are parts either of the olde, or of the new Te∣stament: But they are parts of nei∣ther; Therefore they are no parts of the Canonicall Scriptures. I never heard that any Papist affirmed them to be parts of the new Testament. And (indeed) their antiquitie, and contents doe manifest that they were written before any part of the new Testament was written. To prooue that they be not parts of the olde Testament, I will not vrge a reason of Hierom In Prolog Galeato., viz: They are not in the Register of divine Bookes, which the Iewes preserved: but desire this to be cōsidered, that they be in Greeke, whereas all the Bookes of the olde
Testament be in Hebrew. So (with∣out doubt) had these beene likewise, had they beene written by inspirati∣on of the Holy Ghost. For the Ora∣cles of God, the giving of the Law, the service of God, and the promises pertained to the Israelites .. If these were amongst them, should they not haue beene in the same Language? Againe; The Law, and the Prophets were read in the Synagogues of the Iewes 1.7.. If these Writings were a∣mongst them, should not they also haue beene read? But surely Popery had not then prevailed, to perswade the Scriptures to be read in a strange language to the people assembled on the Sabbath day. Therefore I may conclude, that the Apocryphall Wri∣tings are no parts of the Canonicall Scriptures. Now am I to proceede on to Vses to be builded vpon this ground of Religion. There is a Word of God, viz: The Bible, consisting of the olde
and new Testament, to be beleeved. If this be true indeed, then the holy Scriptures are to be highly esteemed, as the vndoubted Word of God. For, as when we know God, if we doe not glorifie him as God Rom. 1.2, he will not be better pleased with vs, than he was with the Gentiles: so if we acknow∣ledge the truth of this Doctrine, and doe not esteeme the Word as the Word of God, wee shall be iudged as despisers of it. For not to regard, as we should, is to despise. As Timothy had beene despised 1 Cor. 1.10.11., if (notwithstan∣ding his youth) the Corinthians had not convoyed him on his Iourney towards Paul, seeing he wrought the worke of the Lord, as Paul did. And Christ maketh not hearing, and de∣spising the Word Preached by the se∣ventie Luk. 10.16.11. to be aequivalent. How in∣dignely this despising is taken, shak∣ing of dust, and lessening of the iudg∣ments of Tyrus, and Sidon, in compa∣rison doe demonstrate. Therefore let
vs imitate David, who esteemed the Word better than Gold, yea than much fine Gold al. 19.10.; and the Merchant, who solde all he had to buy a Pearle of price at. 13.45.6.. And let vs deserue the commendations which Paul giveth to the Thessalonians Thes. 2.13., for receiving the Word, not as the Word of men, but as the Word of God. Suppose a true religious man had the onely Bi∣ble in the world, would he part with it, thinke yee, for the richest Iewel in the World? If a Booke being the Workmanship of a man be worthily so to be esteemed for the Contents sake, how highly are we to esteeme the doctrine of the Bible, being the Word of God? But how are we to manifest our high estimation of the Word of God? Not chiefely by bin∣ding the Bible faire, though that sheweth some good respect thereof: Nor by setting it handsomely in the Window, or some eminent place, and never, or seldome reade therein: But
by hearing, beleeving, and obeying it as the Word of God. In such hearing, two things are re∣quired, Readie diligence, and Reli∣gious reverence. Touching the for∣mer it is Prophecied; That in the last dayes, Christ his people shall come willingly at the time of Assembly, as an Army in holy beautie Psal. 110: and, That many people shall flow to the house of the Lord Isa. 2.2., inciting one another. And why? Because the Word of the Lord goeth from Ierusalem. This is to seeke after the knowledge of Gods will in his Word, as for treasure Prov. 2.. Ac∣cording to those Prophecies. The Kingdome of God was Preached, and every man pressed vnto it Luk. 16. after the comming of Iohn Baptist. The A∣postles would not goe from Christ Ioh. 6.67.68., (as some Disciples did) because He had the words of eternall life. And Cornelius a Captaine, when he heard that Peter should tell him what he ought to doe, sent immediately for
him, and having called together his kinsmen, and speciall friends, waited for him ct. 10.5.6.7 4.33., and were ready to heare whatsoever he should say from God. Hereby are condemned such as haue small zeale in repairing to the Word, but absent themselues vpon small oc∣casions, as prooving of Oxen uk. 14.19.1., with whom God is angry. Such as remem∣ber not the Sabbath day, so as to dis∣pose of their businesse, that they may be ready in due time to attend the Word. They will remember, and pleade, that it is a day of rest, & sleepe the longer that day: But they forget that the rest must be holy to the Lord od. 31.15.. Yea such are hereby condem∣ned, who though they seeme to haue some mind to heare the Word Prea∣ched, and therefore cast to come to that betime, yet are not diligent to come to heare the Word read. As if the Word read be not to be regarded as the Word of God, and, As if it be not necessary that Gods people
should know, in some measure, the letter, and body of the Scriptures; Wherevnto they cannot attaine by hearing onely those small Texts wherevpon Preachers Discourse. Therefore Christian Churches haue well imitated the auncient people of God Act. 13.1. & 15.21, in appointing the Scriptures to be read in the great Congregati∣ons, especially on the Lords day, so as the body thereof may be read over againe, and againe in time. Where∣vnto if the people doe not diligently resort, especially such as want lear∣ning, leisure, or Bibles to reade, doe they esteeme the Word read as the Word of God? A second thing required in hea∣ring the word, as the word of God, is religious reverence. When we pray we speake to God, & then we kneele Psal. 95, or should doe: when the word is read, or preached, God speaketh to vs, and shall we not heare him with religious reverence? We heare the
Iudge giving a charge in the Assises, with vncovered heads, and all civill reverence, and shall not our demea∣nure be religiously reverent, when God speaketh vnto vs in his word? Moses was to put off his shooes be∣cause of the presence of God speak∣ing out of a burning bush: od. 3.4.5.9.10.11.17. And the people were to be sanctified when they were to meete with God speak∣ing the tenne Commaundements. When we heare the word preached wee are in Gods speciall presence, therefore wee are exhorted by the Spirit cles. 5.1. to looke to our feete before we en∣ter into the house of God, and bee more ready to heare, than to offer the sacrifice of fooles. And Christ stood when he read his text ke 4.16.20.: but he sat after, when he preached. All this doth shew, that the word is to be heard with religi∣ous reverence. Yea there be some learned Divines, who hold that men ought to be vncovered, that is, put off their hatts the whole Sermon
while. But for my part, I dare not precisely binde the conscience of a∣ny man to this, or that particular de∣monstration of religious reverence. Though I graunt that a Sermon is to be heard with religious reverence as well as the word read: For Mini∣sters of the Gospell are the messen∣gers of God (as were the Priests of the Law Mal. 2.7. 2 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 4. ) and it is to be presumed, that their lips also preserue knowledge, therefore people must, with religious reverence, hearken to the word from their mouth. Heereby are condem∣ned such as come to Wisedomes feast Prou 9.3. without a wedding garment Math. 22., that is, due preparation and fitnesse. As also such as sleepe, talke, gaze a∣bout, or otherwise haue their minds drawne from hearing the word. Is this to haue either their eyes fastned Luke 4.2 vpon the Preacher, or to haue hearts opened by the Lord Acts 16.  to hearken to his word? It is not a sufficient estimation of
the Word to repaire therevnto with diligence, and to heare it with reve∣rence, except we beleeue it as the Word of God. For if the Word be not mixed with Faith in those that heare it Hebr. 4.2., it will not profit them vnto either reformation, aedification, or consolation, which are the effects of Prophecy 1 Cor. 14.3.24.25., that is, of powerfull Prea∣ching. Againe; He, who beleeveth the Word so as to receiue Ioh. 1.12., that is, to beleeue the testimony thereof, doth seale that God is true & 3.33.34.: But God is true (I may adde, Absolutely) and to be iustified in his wordes Rom. 3.4.; I may adde, because they be absolutely true as God is. Therfore they are to be heard with Faith, resting vpon them abso∣lutely without all doubting of their truth. For the Word of God is called the Faith of God Rom. 3.3.: Which intimateth, that if we beleeue Faith to be in God, we must beleeue his Word accor∣dingly. This is a maine difference be∣tweene the Word of God (which is
to be heard with Faith howsoever it crosse our iudgement; for Faith sur∣mounteth Reason) and the Word of man, which is no further to be belee∣ved, than it agreeth with the Word, which is, Truth it selfe Ioh. 17.1: For every man is by nature, a Lyar Rom. 3., and there∣fore is not to be iustified in all his wordes. So that, Gods people may lawfully (so it be with Discretion, and Humilitie) examine the Doctrine, by what Preacher soever delivered, whe∣ther it be warranted by the Scrip∣tures, or no, if the truth thereof be not evident to them, as did the no∣bly-minded Beraeans Acts. 17.1.11.. But if the truth of the Word be delivered to their Consciences, then must they beleeue it without any demurring. So the Apostles beleeved that Christ his flesh is meat indeed, and his bloud drinke indeed Ioh. 6.55..61.66.67.6, and followed him without any offence, because he had the words of eternall life, whereas o∣ther seeming Disciples were offen∣ded,
and gaue over following Christ, because it seemed to their naturall reason to be an hard saying. So Abra∣ham om. 4.18.19.20.21. aboue hope, in regard of his olde age, and his wife's barrennesse, but vnder hope in regard of Gods power, beleeved the Word of God, promi∣sing to make him a Father of many Nations. So Hezekiah sa. 39.5.6..8. (though a King) was not angry with the Pro∣phet, prophecying most grievous things to him, but beleeved his Pro∣phecy (so crossing natural affections) as the VVord of God, and sayd, The Word of the Lord is good. Here I sup∣pose, it will be some comfort to know how yee may iudge of your selues in the time of hearing, whe∣ther the VVord be mixed with faith; I'le shew you. If your hearts answer Gods VVord, as did Davids, when God sayd Psal. 27.8., Seeke yee my face, his heart answered, O Lord, I will seeke thy face. For Faith is such an assent to every VVord of God, as produceth affec∣tions,
and actions answerable to the VVord, wherevnto the heart assen∣teth. So that when Iohn Baptist Prea∣cheth Repentance Math. 11.1.16.17.18.1., we grieue in the sense of sinne: and when Christ Prea∣cheth the Gospell, we are comforted in hope of forgiuenensse. Hereby are condemned such as are like those proud men Iere. 43.2., who tolde Ie∣remy, that he spake falsely when he delivered the Word of God which crossed their purposes. Secondly, Such as be like the Prince 2 King. 7.1.2.17., who con∣traried the Word of God touching suddaine cheapnesse of Corne, be∣cause it was contrary to his sensuall reason: But the Word was fulfilled, and he perished. And thirdly, Moc∣kers 2 Pet. 3.3.4., which, in these last dayes, will walke after their lusts, not beleeving the promise of Christ his comming to iudgement, because it is deferred. Yea, fourthly, those weake ones, who are like to David Psal. 116.11., who sayd in his feare, All men be lyars, meaning espe∣cially
Samuel, who annointed him to be King Sam. 16.13: But before he got the Crowne, Saul so persecuted him, that he doubted of the word which Samu∣el had spoken. Fiftly, Much more are they hereby condemned, who, out of an humour troubled by the Word, doe cavill against it, contrary to the Apostle Iames his exhortation, Tam. 1.21.19 That we should receiue the Word with meeknesse, and therefore should be swift to heare slow to speake, & slow to wrath. For Wrath, because the VVord cros∣seth our mind, stirreth vp the tongue vnto gain-saying, and therefore the VVord is not beleeved as the Word of God. Sixtly, Hereby are condem∣ned such as despayre in the time of affliction, and doe not liue by Faith Hab. 2.3.4., waiting for the appointed time when the vision will speake comfort. And seaventhly, such as like the Elders of Israel Ezek. 14.1.3., set vp Idols in their hearts, which are stumbling blockes of ini∣quitie, stopping the way betweene
the VVord, and Faith, so as they cannot be mixed in them that heare, I meane those who heare the Word with preiudicate opinions, Papists or other, who will stop their eares, and not heare the Word, so as to beleeue it as the Word of God, charme the charmer never so wisely Psal. 58.5.. The third thing required to mani∣fest our high estimation of the Word, is, To obey it as the Word of God. For to heare the Word, and not to o∣bey it, is deemed by God a casting it away 1 Sam. 15.22.23.. Therefore wee deceiue our selues, though we be hearers, if we be not doers also of the Word Iam. 1.22.: But what is required of vs that we may o∣bey the Word as the Word of God? I answere, many things. Among the rest especially, Absolute obedience to whatsoever the Word comman∣deth, without making any question, or difficultie. For God is of abso∣lute authoritie, and therfore we pray, Math. 6.10. Thy will be done on earth, as it is in
heaven: and, His Word is perfect, and right Psal. 19.7.8., Therefore our absolute obedience is not blinde, as is the o∣bedience of Iesuites to their superi∣ours, whom they must obey, though they command the killing of Prin∣ces, not inquiring after the lawful∣nesse of such a Commandement: But their superstitious, and blinde o∣bedience condemneth vs, if we yeeld not absolute obedience to the Word of God, which is of absolute autho∣ritie, and altogether without errour. So be not the Commandements of the Pope, or of any humane Superi∣our whomsoever Let vs consider some few examples of obedience to the Word, as to the Word of God. That vnmatchable example of A∣braham, may well be Instar omnium, who obeying the Word of God, spa∣red not Isaac his onely sonne Gen. 22.1.2..9.10.16., be∣gotten in his olde age And 21.2., and in both these respects dearely beloved; Yea, the Sonne of Promise Gal. 4.28.; with whom,
and his seede, God promised to e∣stablish an everlasting Covenant Gen. 17.19.: But without pleading any of these things Zach. 12., arose early to goe to sacrifice him, with his owne handes. Now wheras Abraham is the Father of all Rom. 4.1, who walke in the steps of his Faith, I will tell you one other example of his obedience to the Word of God, which is remarkeable too, the rather because the Spirit of God taketh spe∣ciall notice thereof Heb. 11., shewing vs that Abraham obeyed God commanding him to goe he knew not whither. VVhich last words imply, that he o∣beyed readily without questioning whether dangers were in the way, and what commodious dwelling was in the place wherevnto he should goe; therefore it is said, that by Faith he obeyed. So also it is written in the same Chapter, Verse 17. that Abra∣ham offered vp Isaac by Faith. Where∣by the Spirit of God intimateth, that in both these obediences, Abraham
esteemed the Commandements, as the words of God. I shall expresse this point yet more plainely by an example of Peters walking vpon the Sea at Christ his bidding at. 14.34..36.37.8.39.. But note, that Peter perceiving that it was Christ, and not a Spirit, as he, and his fellowes feared, who walked on the Sea in the night, sayd, Master, if it be thou, bid me come vnto thee on the water. Which sheweth how highly he esteemed of Christ his Word, perswaded that obeying it he should neither tempt God 4.5.6.7., nor pe∣rish by going on the water. I will adde but another example, wherein yee may see both the Wisdome of the flesh, and obedience of Faith. Naaman was directed King. 5.10 12.13.14. by a messenger from Elisha, to wash himselfe in Ior∣dan for cure of his leprosie; He went away murmuring; But perswaded by his servants to haue due regard of the Prophets word, he obeyed, and was cured.
Hereby are condemned (1) rebel∣lious hearers of the word, who say, The word which thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lord, wee will not heare Ier. 44.16.: but we will doe what we thinke good, and as our Princes, and Fathers before vs haue done. (2) Presumptuous hearers, who blesse themselues in their hearts Deut. 29.1.2, when they heare iudgements out of the word against their sinnes, and so adde drunkennesse to thirst: but God will not be mercifull to such. (3) Hy∣pocriticall hearers, who call one vp∣on another Ezek. 33.30.31. to heare the word, and sit before the Preacher, as reverently as others, but they make a iest of it, and will not obey it. And (4) such as pretend obedience to the word out of a sudden flash of zeale, like the young man Mark. 10.17.21.22. who came running, and kneeling to Christ, to know what he might doe for eternall life: But when Christ bad him sell, and giue all to the poore, and follow him, hee went
away sorrowfull; for he was rich: So, many, when the word reprooveth them for drunkennesse, are grieved for the present, confesse it is their sinne, and wish they could leaue it, but they doe not. I haue told you of some to be con∣demned for not beleeving, and of o∣thers, for not obeying the word as the word of God; Now I must tell you of the Antichristian Synagogue of Rome, which shamefully offen∣deth in both those respects, in taking the second Commaundement out of the Decalogue, as hath beene said, contrary to the expresse word of God; who giveth this peremptorie charge Deut. 12.32., Whatsoever I commaund you, take heede you doe it. Thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought there-from. If the Papists did beleeue the word, as the word of God, durst they thus abuse ignorant people? God deliver vs from vnrea∣sonable, and evill men Thes. 3.2.: for all men
haue not faith. Now; why doe they this? Even because they are so ad∣dicted to Idolatry, that despising the censure of Christ, Mat. 5.19. they will neither obey this word of God themselues Mat. 5.1, nor suffer the people to obey it, in not worshipping Ima∣ges. For they feare, that if it were published in their Catechismes, the people would, in time, abhorre that babish, and Babylonish Idolatry, ob∣serving how precisely that comman∣dement forbiddeth the worshipping of Images, and how iealous God is thereof. And the more, when they know and consider, that the whole Decalogue was written twice in Ta∣bles of Stone Exod. 3.18. and 3 and 20.1, with the finger of God; which argueth the perpetui∣tie thereof, and that the Commande∣ment forbidding worshipping of I∣mages is twice recorded by the Spi∣rit Deut. 5., as the second of the ten Com∣mandements spoken by God him∣selfe. But I pray you take know∣ledge
of most damnable cousenage, viz. Because the Scriptures say ex∣pressely, that God wrote ten Com∣mandements in the two Tables eut. 10.4., and the people generally know that there must be ten Commandements, they divide the tenth Commandement, and make Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, the ninth; and Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, &c. the tenth. Note further, I pray you, as cousenage, so grosse absurdi∣tie; For the Commandement consi∣steth onely in these words, Thou shalt not covet; So that it is absurd to say that there be so many Commande∣ments as there be obiects of cove∣ting mentioned, as Oxe, Asse, &c. Were it not absurd to make two Commandements of the fifth, be∣cause therein be mentioned two ob∣iects, (viz. Father, and Mother) of Honour, the dutie commanded. If it be sayd, that Honour is but once commanded, whereas Coveting is
twice forbidden, yea so, as that Co∣veting a neighbours wife is first for∣bidden, as if there were a kinde of respect to the seaventh Commande∣ment: and Coveting a neighbours house, is forbidden afterward, as if there were a kinde of respect to the eight Commandement: I answer. All (yet) is but Coveting; which is twice vrged, because more know∣ledge should be taken of the Com∣mandement: For if Paul had not knowne Lust to be a sinne Rom. 7., had not this Commandement forbidden it, how would others haue knowne it? But further, I answere; That how∣soever, indeed, not-coveting a wife be first set downe Deut. 5.21. yet not∣coveting an house is first set downe Exod. 20.17. Which sheweth that not-coveting house, wife, &c. is for∣bidden by one, and the same Com∣mandement. Haue not we cause to thanke God, that we are delivered from Popery, which is the Mystery of iniquitie?
Here (it may be) some will grant that the Word spoken by God, or Christ, who was God as well as man ath. 1.23., is to be beleeved, and obeyed abso∣lutely without any doubting, or que∣stioning: But they thinke, that the doctrine of others is not so to be be∣leeved, and obeyed. Let such remem∣ber that God approoved the minde of the people, desiring that GOD would speake to them no more him∣selfe 5.25.26.27.28., and promising to heare, and doe whatsoever God shall speake vn∣to them by his servant. It may be it will be replied. Yea, we grant that Moses, Prophets, and Apostles sent immediately from God, or Christ, their words are to be beleeved, and obeyed absolutely: But so are not the Sermons of Preachers in these times. Indeed, the Persons of ordinary Pa∣stors, and Teachers, are not sent im∣mediately from God, or Christ, as were the persons of Prophets, and A∣postles: But their Ministery it selfe
was immediately 1 Cor. 12.. ordeined by Christ, wherevnto they having fit gifts for the same, are called by the voyce of the Church Acts. 14.2, and there∣fore to be esteemed as Ministers of Christ 1 Cor. 16.10.11.. For they performe the same ordinary worke of the Mini∣stery, in disposing the Mysteries of God vnto the aedification of the Church, which the Apostles did. Therefore the Apostle exhorteth Gods people Heb. 13.1 to obey (which im∣plyeth hearing, and beleeving) such as had the charge of their soules. If then people are to esteeme their Pastors, and Teachers, as the Ministers of Christ, they must, as did Cornelius Acts. 10.3.33., presume, that they will Preach the Word of GOD, and be prepared accordingly to heare, which implyeth beleeving and obeying. I grant, that the doc∣trine of Pastors, and Teachers, be they never so learned, and faith∣full, is subiect to errour; where∣as
the Prophets, and Apostles de∣livered an infallible truth, there∣fore people may the more diligent∣ly (so it be with humilitie) try the Spirits. Ioh. 4.1. But if the truth of Gods Word be declared to their Consci∣ences, let them remember what Christ sayth Luk. 10.1.16., speaking (not of the Apostles, but) of the seaventie Dis∣ciples; He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me. Lastly, let it be considered, Whether Naaman could haue excu∣sed his not-washing in Iordan 2 King. 5.10, by saying, He was commanded so to doe by a messenger, and not by the Prophet Elisha; seeing that, which the Messenger commanded, was the Word of God as well, as if Elisha had spoken it. If then Gods people are to say one to another, much more to their owne hearts, as did the people in Ezechiels time Ezek. 33.30., (but with better mindes) Let vs goe, and heare what
is the Word that commeth from the Lord. When they goe to heare their Pastors, and Teachers, they must not bring with them eares, either Anti∣christian to hearken after Doctrines strange, or not grounded vpon the Word (For Christ his Sheepe know his voyce, and follow him Ioh. 10.4.: They know not the voyce of a stranger, nor follow him) or itching 2 Tim. 4.3., to hear∣ken after the enticing speech of mans wisedome 1 Cor. 2.4.5., as if their faith de∣pendeth thereon: But let them be of Davids minde, who professed that he loued Gods Word Ps. 116.113., but hated vaine inventions. Much lesse are they to be so obstinate, and wicked, as to say, either in their hearts, or with their mouthes Isa 30.10.; Let not our Seers Pro∣phecy right things, but errours, and flattering things. Againe, if people must come to Sermons with minds expecting one∣ly Doctrine grounded vpon Gods Word, such as they must beleeue,
and obey as the Word of God, then the Preacher must be wise to seeke out the wordes of truth ccles. 12.9.0., and faith∣full to Preach them as the wordes of God Pet. 4 11., that is, with all authoritie Tit. 2.15., in the plaine evidence of the Spirit Cor. 2.4. For if any man Preach not according to the Word, what reading soever he make shew of, he hath no light in him Isa. 8.20.: And howsoever his affected humane eloquence be applauded by itching eares, yet he doth but make Merchandize of the Word of God 2 Cor. 2.17.. Let Ministers therefore speake (as God himselfe admonisheth Ier. 23.28.) the Word faithfully; For what is chaffe to the wheate? Lastly; Whereas I haue sayd that every one of the afore-mentioned grounds of religion is of that power∣full truth, that if it be beleeved in∣deed, it perswadeth the beleever to make Conscience of sinne, I must make it good touching this ground, viz. There is a Word of God, to wit,
the Bible, to be beleeved. This is soone done, both these Propositions being prooved; 1. Whosoever be∣leeveth the Word, as the Word of God, maketh Conscience of sinne; and 2. Whosoever maketh not Con∣science of sinne, beleeveth not the Word, as the Word of God. Tou∣ching the former. What other cause can be supposed why the Word was as a fire in Ieremy Ier. 20.7.9.10., compelling him to speak in the name of God, though in a strong passion he had said, he would not, but that he verily belee∣ved, that it was the Word of GOD which he was commanded to speake, & which cōmanded him to speake? The answer which Abraham gaue to the rich man in hell torments desi∣ring that Lazarus might be sent vnto his brethren to prevent their tor∣ments (viz. Luk. 16.2.28.29. They haue Moses, and the Prophets, let them heare them, that is, their doctrine) sheweth plainely, that whosoever heareth the words of
God as the Words of God, cannot but make conscience of sinne: And Paul telleth the Romanes Rom. 6.17., that how∣soever they had beene servants of sin, yet after they were delivered vnto the forme of doctrine, that is, heard the Word as the Word of God, they o∣beyed that forme from the heart, that is, made conscience of sinne. 2. That whosoever maketh not Conscience of sinne, beleeveth not the Word to be the Word of God, whatsoever he pretend, briefely thus appeareth. That wicked one who hath Gods Word in his mouth Psal. 50.16.17., and yet will not be reformed, is iudged by God him∣selfe to cast his words behinde him. The remnant of the people of Iudah, and their Chieftaines prayed Iere∣miah Ier. 42.1.2.3 6.19.20.21..43.1.2. to enquire of God whether they might not fly into Egypt to saue themselues from the Caldeans, prote∣sting to obey the Word of God what∣soever it should be: Yet, when the VVord crossed their purpose to fly
into Egypt, they would not beleeue it. And when the rich man in hell, fur∣ther pressed Abraham to send Laza∣rus, he had this further answere; Luk. 16.3 If they heare not (with Faith) Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be perswaded though one rise from the dead againe. Both the Proposi∣tions are confirmed by these wordes of Christ Ioh. 3.20.21.. He that doth evill hateth the light, that is, doth not beleeue the Word as the Word of God: But he that doth the truth commeth to the light, that his deedes might be made mani∣fest, that they be wrought accor∣ding to God. To whom be glory by all men in their obedience of FAITH. Amen. FINIS.
