E962 [ocm]11230393 204930
AN ABSTRACT of the proceedings in Parliament, in the time of Edward the 3. Truly collected out of the Parliament Rolles, containing (amongst other things) these particulars following, viz. 1 Many Petitions from the Parliament to the King, and his Maesties answeres thereunto. 2 A Protestation of the Commons, shewing their desire to d the King, and that if he had good Officers and faithfull Counsel∣lors, he might have been rich enough himselfe without their helpe. And the Parliaments Declaration concerning the same. 3 Ordinances concerning the Privy Councell, and other Offi∣cers. 4 The Parliaments proceedings against Delinquents that re∣fused to appeare upon Summons. 5 Concerning the Creation of the Prince of Wales. 6 That the King cannot grant the right of his Subiects. 7 Touching Iustices of the Peace and their Commissions. That our King was so magnificent by Sea, that he was called King of the Seas. Concerning Magna Charta, & Charta de Forrestae. Divers offences for which Clergy-men were to be deprived. Touching Protections and Franchises of Cities, &c. A Bill against the Pope, Cardinals, and Clergie, &c. shewing that God hath committed his sheep to the Clergy, to feed, and not to sheare. London Printed for Fr. Coles. 1642.
PARLIAMENT Anno. 45. ED 3. A Petition that it may be lawfull for every one of his owne free-will to make Fortresses, Townwals, &c. and that Cities and Boroughs may inclose their Townes withwals, dit∣ches, &c. denyed. Touching Writs in Assize. A Petition for wages for Commissioners, That exception to one as villain regardant to his Mannor, may be tryed where the Man∣nor is, and not where the writ was brought. That none be put out of his possession by office before the Eschea∣tor or other, without scire fac. Roy, let the statute stand, which is suffi∣cient in that case. That Sheriffes or Escheators continue but one yeare in their office and have twenty pound land. A Petition for a Declaration to be made what shall be done shall with the prisoners taken in France, which divers have now in their service, and some of them married. A Petition that the Statute made that no Justice by command∣ment of the great Seale and Privy Seale, shall surcease to doe right to the parties be kept. That the Statute made lately, that none shall answer without pre∣sentment, or matter of Record, be kept and confirmed. An Act that no imposition be laid upon Wools, besides the Cu∣stome, without assent in Parliament. A Petition that the Cmission for the levying of Subsidies be made to the most sufficient that are not here at the Parliament, denyed.
A Petition that all such as dwell by the Kings commandment, neere the Sea coast, for the defence of the Realme, may have Protections and Clausula volumus for the time they tarry, Roy, this is manifestly in the prejudice of the Commons. A Petition that hee that counterfeits the Seale of another, and puts it to any deed, to the disinheritance of any person, may be per∣petually imprisoned without release of the punishment. Roy, let the statutes and common Law, used in this case stand. Touching Scottish Money. Parliament, An. 46. E. 3. REcited how the King before hee went over Sea into France, had ordeyned Richard Sonne to the Prince of Gascoygne, Gar∣dian of the Realme in his absence, who summoned a Parliament at xv. Mich. by which time the King returned, whereby the Power of Richard ceased, and therefore the King may summon another. The Principiality of Quires (which hee had by grant from the King) surrendred by the Prince into the Kings hands. The Subsidy of Wools, Wool-fels, &c. granted to the King for 2 yeares. An ordinance that no Lawyer or Sheriffe, shall be returned Knight of the Shire. Magna Charta, &c. Confirmed for allowance of the Kings ge∣nerall pardon late graunted. 36. E 3. A Petition for the length and breadth of cloath. A Petition for the maintenance and increase of the Navy, which was wont to bee so plentifull, that all Countryes held and called our King, King of the Sea. That writs of Trespasse may bee as well returnable in the Com∣mon pleas, as Kings Bench, Roy. So they have been alwayes. That Escheators may not seise lands into the Kings hands by sur∣mise of Treason or felony of persons dead. Roy. Let the Statute in this case bee kept. A Petition for the beating downe of Gorses and other obstacles in the passages of ships in a certaine River between Bathe and Bristoll. That the Statute for present payment of purveyors bee kept. An Act that no pannels bee delivered to the Sheriffes to returne for the King nor other, but that the Sheriffe himselfe returne such as hee will answer to the party. Touching carrying of money out of the Realme to Aliens. A Petition that time of memory may bee abridged, and not kept from King Richard his time.
Touching wages for Justice of peace and Labourers. That Escheators may have Commission to make acquittances. An Act that the Chirographer and his Clerkes, take for the note and ingrossing of the fine not above foure shillings. For the yearly renewing of Sheriffes and Escheators. Touching ailowance to the Collectors of the subsidies of the Coasts. Touching forrest matters. A Petition. A Petition for remedy against excessive taking for probate of testaments, &c. A Petition against the Bishops and their officers that will not deliver administration to the Executors, unlesse they give them for a fine, their testators Seals and Chaines. Roy, let none bee constrai∣ned to do it. A Petition; that fines taken in Chancery, in many writs contrary to Magna Charta (nulli vendemui) &c. be taken away, Roy, the King will use as hee and his Ancestors have done before. But will charge his Chancellors, that fines bee reasonable according to the estate of the Person. A Petition that in all cases where a man is attained of damages by Inquest hee may have attaint without a fine denyed. A Petition for remedy against the Seising of mens Lands into the Kings hands, where the heires have entred without suing Li∣very twenty yeares after, denyed. A Petition against the ordinaryes for redemption of Sums of mo∣ny. Another, that Patrons may present to the Benifices of Parsons and Curates which keepe Harlots openly, for which they are depri∣vable if deprivation bee not had 6 moneths after. An Act that all men may search and have records exemplified, as well against the King as otherwise. Touching the number of watchmen on Sea coasts, for warning the comming of the Enemy, that they may bee abridged. A Petition for the Sheriffes of Essex and Hartford. A Petition of the Citie of London for the restoring of their Franchise taken away. Roy, declare what, and have remedy. An Act that the forfeiture of carrying of Wools beyond Sea, of Lords, &c. cease. Another Petition touching Wines. A Petition touching Wools, and the Staple. Parliament Ann. 47. E. 3. A Subsidie granted to the King with certaine conditions. Magna Charta, &c. confirmed.
The length and breadth of Clothes set down, and that if any be to the contrary, they be forfeit. A Petition of the Cities and Burroughes for confirmation of their Franchises taken away, Roy, shew what? Touching the Staple. An Act touching Scottish money, for what it shall goe. A petition whereas Protections are granted to divers, because of the Warre which yet continued in the Realme; notwithstanding that if any doe so a moneth after the passing, that the Petition bee voyd, Roy, let any man grieved herein, come into the Chancery, and he shall have remedy by the common Law. For a Staple to be at Lynne. The Statute confirmed that prohibition shall be granted, where Tithes of Wood above twenty yeeres of age are sued for. Against the Spirituall Court for incroaching Cognizance of Pleas belonging to the Crowne. Confirmation of the Ordinances for Purveyours. That if one pay his debt to the King in one place of the Exche∣quer, he be discharged in all. What the Chirographer shall have for engrossing of Fines. Touching Justices of Peace and Labourers. A Petition that Villenage may be taxed in the County, where the Villaine is alledged, denyed. An Act that ships be not stayed, but upon necessity, and that pay∣ment be made from the time of their staying. A Petition that Masters of Ships may be paid for the apparelling of their Ships, present in the Kings service. A Petition against provision by the Pope of Bishopricks. The Franchise of Bristoll confirmed by Parliament. A Petition that no Prior alien dwell neere the Sea-coasts. Touching bayling of men by the new Sheriffes. That none be put to answer without due proces of Law, according to the Statute. Anno 50. E. 3. THe Subsidies of Wooll, &c granted to the King for three yeeres Ordinances, touching the Kings Privy Councell, and divers other Officers. That any Freeman of the City of London may sell sweet Wine by retaile, and other, notwithstanding the Ordinance to the contrary. A Protestation of the Commons of their desire to aid the King in any thing they may, but that if he had good Officers, and faithfull Counsellors, he might have been rich enough himselfe without
their help. And thereupon they make Declaration of three points; First, for the licence of carrying of Wools to other places then Cal∣lis for their private Commodity; Secondly, that they had procured money to be lent to the King, by way of Usury, whereof they had their part. Thirdly, that they had bought debts due by the king, to common persons for the 10. 20th or hundred penny and made the King pay them all: of which things in particular, they accused divers, viz. Richard Lyons, Merchant of London, who had judgement upon his answer, and condemnation of imprisonment, at the Kings plea∣sure, and the seisure of all his Lands, Tenements, and hereditaments, Goods, and Chattels, into the Kings hands. The Lord Latimer Chamberlaine, and of the Kings Privy Coun∣cell had Judgement of imprisonment, fine, and ransome, at the Kings pleasure, and the losse of his Office and Privy Counsellor-ship, and putting divers Mainpenors to answer to those Articles, hee was dis∣charged of his Imprisonment. Complaints against William Ellis Deputy of Richard Lyons. Iohn Beecher of London accused, and his judgement. Complaint against the Lord Nevill, upon the third point, and his Judgement. An ordinance that no woman shall maintaine especially Alice Peres. A Petition for a Prior, who was put out of his Living, by a Clerke of the Lord Latimers. The accusation of Adam Barry of London, who was sent for to answer it in Parliament, and not comming, It was ordered that his goods and chattels should be arrested, stayed. A Petition of the Bishop of Norwich, to have a Judgement gi∣ven against him in the Common Pleas, reversed for errour. To which answer was made by all the Justices, that this must be amended in the Kings Bench. And that the Records and Proces in the Com∣mon-Pleas ought not immediately to come into Parliament. Repeales of a certaine Charter granted to the towne of Yer∣mouth, Richard, the sonne of Edward Prince of Wales, now dead, at the request of the Commons, commeth into the Parliament to bee honoured as heire apparent. The commons pray that he may be Prince of Wales as his father was, whereas answer is made, that that is not to be done at Parlia∣ment, but the King himselfe is to doe it at some solemne feast. Petition of the Commons. Magna Charta &c. confirmed. An Act that the Sheriffes Survey the Pannels before they re∣turne them.
Repealing of Franchizes granted to certaine Ministers whereby the Major and Bailiffes cannot doe their offices. Repealing of certaine Commissioners of approvers. Touching taking Samon and other Fish in the Thames, with Engines. Another Petition touching Fishing. A Petition against Lumbards, Brokers, that they be made depart the Realme. A Petition for the Franchise of the Cities and Boroughes. A Petition for repealing Protections, cum clausula volumus. A Petition against valiant Beggers. A Petition to have a Staple at Nichol. A Petition that Sigami may have their Clergy, suggesting the cause of their Bill to be the death of Wives and Husbands by the Pe∣stilence, A Petition about Indictment fo Venison. A Petition, that if any Officer, or Counsellor of the King be convict of deceit to the King, that he bee removed, and never be restored to his Office. Touching Religious Aliens. That Justices of the Peace be named by the King & his Counsell. The Statute of 10. cap. 45 confirmed. A Petition for pulling downe of certaine Nusances to the Ports. A Petition, that where men are indicted before the Coroner of Felony, and that they have fled for it, It may be nquired of whither it be so or no. Touching accounts in the Exchequer. A Petition touching the defence of the Sea Coasts. The Statute confirmed for the yearely removing of Sheriffes. An Act that Justices of Assize shall not be in the Country where they dwell. Repealing of the Charter granted to Yermouth, that no Herring nor other Merchandise should be sold within 10 miles of their towne, during their Faire. A Petition that no collaterall warranty may barre without assets as in the case of tenant by the curtesie of the statute of Glouce∣ster Roy advisera, till next Parliament. That Justices of Gaole delivery, make deliverance of the Gaoles once a yeare, at least, and have power to make assets also. An Act for Sheriffes and Escheators to be removed, &c. An Act that perambulation he made of all the Forrests, and the bounds set downe, and that the Charter of the Forrest be kept.
Touching the Prizes taken of Enemies goods, which saving one part to the Governour, ought to be the Kings, and the Lumbards, by assent between the Governour and them claiming them to be theirs, have deliverance of them. That no lands, &c. of any not attainted in his life be seized into the Kings hands for felony or treason, &c. An Act that no Sheriffe under Sheriffe, or Gaoler be Justice of Peace, during their Office. A Petition for a certaine summe to be set downe for probate of Wils, and that the Bishops inflict corporall penance upon offen∣ders, and not pena pecuniaria. A petition for travers of Officers wherby men are charged with goods of persons attainted, which they have not, denyed. Touching the Scottish money and sweet Wines. Touching waights and measures within the Verge. A petition, that where the King by Office is intituled to other mens lands, that no lands be thereof granted to others, till discussi∣on of the right between the King and the party grieved, he finding surety in Chancery, to answer the King of the issues and profits, in the meane time if he have right, Roy prendra advisement. That aliens have no benefices within the Realme. Touching the limits of the Verge. An Act that wager of Law shall be admitted in the Exchequer where the King is not party. What the Chirographer shall take for ingrossing of Fines. A Bill against the Pope, Cardinals, and Clergy with many forci∣ble reasons of Benefices, and other Ecclesiasticall promotions by the Pope, and with some sharpnesse and great boldnesse in many places. In which Bill it is said that the lands, rents and possessions of the Church were more then the third part of the Realme. And that the Court of Rome which ought to be the root and fountaine of sanctity, and distruction of Symony, hath by little and little subtilty, drawne to it selfe▪ the bestowing of so many Bishop∣ricks, or other Ecclesiasticall promotions, as the yearly value thereof is five times more then all the revenue the King hath throughout his Realme, for of every Benefice and Bishoprick he hath the tax, and if any dye before payment thereof, he will levy them with a new taxe of the successor, and to make many taxes of one avoydance, hee will make 2 or 3, by translations. And they say that God hath committed his sheep to the Pope, to feed, and not to sheere.
FINIS.
