E1359A [ocm]13273411 206081
A DECLARATION Of the Lords & Commons in PARLIAMENT, Concerning a printed paper intitled, A Letter sent from the Kings Majesty to the Lords of the Privy Counsell of the Kingdome of SCOTLAND. As also, Another Paper in forme of a Petition directed to the Lords of His Majesty Privy Counsell. Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Franke, and Edward Husbands, 1642.
A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT. THe Lords and Commons in Parliament have peru∣sed a printed paper under this title, a letter sent from the Kings Majesty, to the Lords of the Privy Councel of the king∣dome of Scotland, bearing in the front the appearance of his Maiesties usuall Sig∣nature and in the bottome this Date. Gi∣ven at our Court at Yorke the twentieth of
May, 1642. As likewise another Paper in the forme of a Petition with this inscrip∣tion, To the right Honorable, the Lords of His Majesties Privy Councell, the humble Petitien of many Noblemen, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Ministers occasionally mee∣ting at Edenborough: and having been credibly informed that they are true co∣pies of a Letter, and a Petition sent and delivered as the severall titles import, up∣on mature consideration of the matters therein contained, do declare and pro∣test, that those sufferings expressed in the papers betwixt his Maiesty and Parlia∣ment cannot Iustly bee imputed to any Actions or Intentions of ours, who have indeavoured with all fidelity to procure the happinesse of his Maiesty, and of this
Kingdome, and that we are not guilty of laying upon the King, any such calum∣nies and aspersions as are mentioned in that paper, and seem to reflect upon us, but on the contrary have labored to take the blame from His Maiesty and to lay it upon His evill Councel, and as touching the Petition aforementioned, VVee do with much contentment and thankefulnesse, observe the faithfulnesse and good affection of our Brethren of Scotland, in seeking to prevent all Ielou∣sies, and to preserve the peace betweene the two Nations, so timely expressed to the Lords of the Councell, whereby the hopes of those who practised to have drawn from their Lordships some decla∣ration to the preiudice of this Kingdome
were frustrated, and we shall never cease to answer this great care of theirs, with the like earnest and diligent indeavours to promote the Honor, VVealth, and prosperity of that Nation, and preserve that union so strongly fortified by pub∣like and mutual interest and affection on both sides; And we desire that the Com∣missioners may give notice to the Scots Commissioners how heartily and Ioyful∣ly wee doe embrace the kindnesse of that Kingdome, manifested in that Petition. And order this Declaration to bee forthwith printed, that so it may be pub∣lished to the whole Kingdom of Scotland, hoping that this constant and inviolable Amity betwixt Vs, wil not only conduce to the safety and honor of both King∣domes,
but prove very usefull for the advantage and security of the Protestant Religion in other parts. H. Elsyng. Cler. Par. D. Com. FINIS.
