E1711 [ocm]12265469 197323
AN ORDER OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament. For the Regulating of Printing, And For suppressing the great late abuses and frequent disorders in Printing many false, Scandalous, Seditious, Libellous and unlicensed Pamphlets, to the great defamation of Religion and Government. Also, authorizing the Masters and Wardens of the Company of Stationers to make diligent search, seize and carry away all such Books as they shall finde Printed, or reprinted by any man having no lawfull interest in them, being entred into the Hall Book to any other man as his proper Copies. Die Mercurii. 14 June. 1643. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Order shall be forthwith printed and published. J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum: Hen. Elsing Cler. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for I. Wright in the Old-baily, Iune 16. 1643.
woodcut of crowned Tudor rose woodcut of crowned thistle woodcut of crowned fleur-de-lis woodcut of crowned harp Die Mercurii, 14 Junii. 1643. WHereas divers good Orders have bin lately made by both Houses of Parliament, for suppressing the great late abuses and frequent dis∣orders in Printing many, false for∣ged, scandalous, seditious, libellous, and unli∣censed Papers, Pamphlets, and Books to the great defamation of Religion and government. Which orders (notwithstāding the diligence of the Company of Stationers, to put them in full eexecution) have taken little or no effect: By rea∣son the bill in preparation, for redresse of the said disorders, hath hitherto bin retarded through the present distractions, and very many, aswell Stationers and Printers, as others of sundry o∣ther
professions not free of the Stationers Com∣pany, have taken upon them to set up sundry private Printing Presses in corners, and to print, vend, publish and disperse Books, pam∣phlets and papers, in such multitudes, that no industry could be suficient to discover or bring to punishment, all the severall abounding de∣linquents; And by reason that divers of the Stationers Company and others being Delin∣quents (contrary to former orders and the con∣stant custome used among the said Company) have taken liberty to Print, Vend and publish, the most profitable vendible Copies of Books, belonging to the Company and other Statio∣ners, especially of such Agents as are imploy∣ed in putting the said Orders in Execution, and that by way of revenge for giveing informati∣on against them to the Houses for their Delin∣quences in Printing, to the great prejudice of the said Company of Stationers and Agents, & to their discouragement in this publik service. It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That no Order or De∣claration of both, or either House of Parliament shall be printed by any, but by order of one or
both the said Houses: Nor other Book, Pam∣phlet, paper, nor part of any such Book, Pam∣phlet, or paper, shall from henceforth be printed, bound, stitched or put to sale by any person or persons whatsoever, unlesse the same be first approved of and licensed under the hands of such person or persons as both, or either of the said Houses shall appoint for the licensing of the same, and entred in the Register Book of the Company of Stationers, according to An∣cient custom, and the Printer therof to put his name therto. And that no person or per∣sons shall hereafter print, or cause to be reprin∣ted any Book or Books, or part of Book, or Books heretofore allowed of and granted to the said Company of Stationers for their relief and maintenance of their poore, without the licence or consent of the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the said Company; Nor any Book or Books lawfully licensed and entred in the Register of the said Company for any particular member therof, without the license and consent of the Owner or Owners therof. Nor yet import any such Book or Books, or part of Book or Books formerly Printed
here, from beyond the Seas, upon paine of forfeiting the same to the Owner, or Owners of the Copies of the said Books, and such fur∣ther punishment as shall be thought fit. And the Master and Wardens of the said Company, the Gentleman Vsher of the House of Peers, the Sergeant of the Commons House and their deputies, together with the persons formerly appointed by the Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations, are hereby Authorized and required, from time to time, to make diligent search in all places, where they shall think meete, for all unlicensed Printing Presses, and all Presses any way im∣ployed in the printing of scandalous or unli∣censed Papers, Pamphlets, Books, or any Copies of Books belonging to the said Com∣pany, or any member thereof, without their approbation and consents, and to seize and ca∣ry away such printing Presses Letters, toge∣ther with the Nut, Spindle, and other materi∣alls of every such irregular Printer, which they find so misimployed, unto the Common Hall of the said Company, there to be defaced and made unserviceable according to Ancient Cu∣stom;
And likewise to make diligent search in all suspected Printing-houses, Ware-houses, Shops and other places for such scandalous and unlicensed Books, papers, Pamphlets and all other Books, not entred, nor signed with the Printers name as aforesaid, being printed, or reprinted by such as have no lawfull interest in them, or any way contrary to this Order, and the same to seize and carry away to the said common hall, thereto remain till both or either House of Parliament shall dispose thereof, And likewise to apprehend all Authors, Printers, and other persons whatsoever imployed in compiling, printing, stitching, binding, publish∣ing and dispersing of the said scandalous, unli∣censed, and unwarrantable papers, books and pamphlets as aforesaid, and all those who shall resist the said Parties in searching after them, and to bring them afore either of the Houses or the Committee of Examinations, that so they may receive such further punishments, as their Offences shall demerit, and not to be released untill they have given satisfaction to the Par∣ties imployed in their apprehension for their paines and charges, and given sufficient cau∣tion
not to offend in like sort for the future. And all Iustices of the Peace, Captaines, Con∣stables and other Officers, are hereby ordered and required to be aiding, and assisting to the foresaid persons in the due execution of all, and singular the premisses and in the apprehension of all Offenders against the same. And in case of opposition to break open Doores and Locks. And it is further ordered, that this Order be forthwith Printed and Published, to the end that notice may be taken thereof, and all Con∣temners of it left inexcusable. FINIS.
