M1848B 551.a.32[20] R232039 99888801 196012
A friendly and seasonable Advertisement concerning the Dog-days, by Nath. Merry Philo-Chim. IN regard there are many that perish in and about this City, &c. through an evil Custom, arising from a false Opinion, That it is not safe to take Physick in the Extreams of Heat and Cold, or in the Dog days; and some exclude Old People, Wo∣men with-child and Little Children, from the use of Medi∣cine; which is as much as to say, That God hath ordained no Medicine for such Times and such Ages, which would be absurd to imagine, seeing we know there is no Time, Age, nor Disease, exempted from proper, homogenial, and effctual Means (with Gods blessing) only against Death there is no Medicine, the time of which to us i uncertain. From the a∣foresaid Mistakes many labour under the tyranny of their Diseases, till the Catastrophe end in Death (before the time come which they have alotted for their Cure) which might by timely and suitable Remedies be prevented. It's granted
pro confesso, that there is a sort of Dogmatical Medicines that is unfit to be exhibited in those times, and are not innocent at any time, being impregnated with venemous beams, which by their virulent hostility invade the Vital Oeconomy of the Body. But you may have Archeal or Vital Medicines, truly a∣dapted for all times; being divested of their Crudities and He∣terogene Qualities, by a true separation of the Pure from the Impure, and impregnated with beams of Light, which give their influence and refreshing glances upon the Vital Faculties, expels Venoms, alters Ferments; co-unites with Nature and re∣unites its powers to their due Oeconomy: and such Medicines being most natural and most powerful in the most deplorable Diseases, being timely taken are most effectual, and are no more to be omitted at any time than Foods; and are altogether as safe. Such Medicines I have alwayes by me faithfully prepared by my own hands. which you may have of me at reasonable rates, at the Star in Bow-lane, next door but one to the Half Moon Court. My hours are from 8 in the Morn∣ing till 6 in the Evening.
