M2001 99832742 199091
The Midship-Man's GARLAND. Containing Three New SONGS. 1st. A new Dialogue Call'd, Billy, the Midship∣man's Welcome home to his Sweet-heart Molly. 2d. The Traders Medley: or the Cry's of London. 3d. Admiral Russel's Scowering the French fleet: or, the Battle at Sea. depiction of a ship or galleon with three masts, each topped with the flag of Saint George, six cannons, and male figures on deck and in the rigging E E C B Printed for J. Walter, at the Hand and Pen in high Holbourn.
The Midship-Mans Garland, &c. 2d. A new Dialogue Call'd Billy, the Midship man's Welcome home. Tune of, Ianthe, &c. Molly. YOu're welcome my Billy to the English shore, I hope you'l not cross the ruff Seas any more, Many a day too, and many a night, My heart grieved sore cause you were out of sight, But now to my comfort I see you again, Oh never dear Billy, Oh never dear Billy, Sail more on the Main. Billy. Dear Molly, said Billy, the joy of my heart, Daily I thought on you since we did part, And when the roaring waves mounting high they did move, In the greatest danger I thought on my Love, The billows did foam and the Rocks they were nigh, Yet nothing but Death, yet nothing but death, shall my Love part and I. Molly. I thank thee my dear for thy firm Love to me, In the midst of thy dangers upon the ruff Sea, Each Night in my Bed still as down i was lain, I dreamed of Ship wracks upon the salt Main, But now I do find from those dangers i'm free, Since him that I love, since him that i love, is come safe unto me.
Billy. Indeed my dear Molly, the Powers above, Preserv'd me from dangers for thy tender love, For I have been where thundering Cannons did roar, Their Bullets like Footballs flying from the Shoar, The danger of Tempest and Cannon balls too, I have undergone, I have undergone. for the sake Love of you. Molly. My dearest its true, for the fault is in me, for thou would'st have Wed, but i said go to Sea, But when thou wert gone, how my heart was opprest I scarce had a Minute of pleasure and rest, for by Day all my fear was of danger to thee, And by night i did dream, & by night i did dream Still of Storms on the Sea. Billy. My Dear thou dream'st right, for e're we got home, for several Days we had Storm after Storm, we lost all our Masts and our Tackle to boot, in Tempestuous nights on the Ocean did float. But thanks unto Heaven we had no Men lost, And the brave Royal Sou'rain, the brave Royal Sou' rain, come safe to our Coast. Molly. Oh my dear precious, my Billy my joy, There's nothing my happiness now can destroy,
for since thou art from all Cannon and storms, Thy person to me has a Million of Charms, Oh stay then on Shore never venture again Upon the ruff Seas upon the ruff Seas but with me love remain. Billy. Thy love unto me now is dearer then life, And happie am i since thou wilt be my Wife, And while i'm on Shore still with thee i will stay, Imbracing thy charms love by Night and by Day, Till our Admiral doth Sail with the Fleet on the main, Yet kind Providence I hope, yet kind Providence I hope brings me safe back again. 2d. The Traders Medly: or the Crys of LONDON: being a pleasant Copy of Verses on the Daily Cries in London, from Billingsgate to VVhite-Chapple Mount, and from thence to Tuttle-street in West∣minster, relating all sorts of Hawkers and Petty Chapmen. To the tune of, When Cold Winter storms are past. HOly and Ivy or Missleto, do you want any Greens Your Houses to strow, Old Cloaths to Sell, or Change for Earthen-ware, do you want any damsons or Burgume Pare, Buy my Oranges or Lemmons, With dainty Ropes of Oinions, Come Buy my sweet Williams, Have you got any Kitchen Stuff Maids.
Four pair for a shilling, Holland Socks, Your Knives for to Grind, buy my ripe Apricocks; Here's your sharp Vinegar three pence a Quart, Also new fresh Herrings, here's 8 for a Groat; Ends of Gold and Silver, Ribbons or Garters, buy my new well Fleet Oysters, Old Bellows, old Bellows to mend. buy my Cucumbers fit for the Pickle, Any Cony-Skins Maids be they never so little; Here's your Ripe Strawberries six pence a Pottle, Any old Chairs to mend, any broken Glass bottle, Curds and VVhay, VVill yo've any thing to day, If You must come away, A Pot or a Kettle to mend. Knives, or Scissars, Buckles, or Caps, here's an excellent way to Kill all your Ratts, hot Custards hot, for two pence a piece, Will you buy any Walnuts, or old rotten Cheese, Spectacles for your Noses, Will you buy any Poses, Of Curnations and Roses; do You want any Butter or Eggs. Old shooes or boots, will You buy any brooms, Maids, here's your fine brushes to scrub out Your Rooms; A Cock or a Pullet, a Capon or Hen, And here's Your old Pin Man, a coming agen; My Basket and Voider, Rare Patches and Powder,
Come buy my sweet Flounder, From Holland here's a new Express. Ripe Kentish Cherries for three pence a Pound, Figg Figg it away for i tell You they'r sound; hot Pudding Pies, here is two for a pennie; Come buy my Card Matches, as long as i've anie: flowers for Your Gardens, Come buy my bak'd Wardens, here's two for a Farthing, Will you buy any Furbeloe Pears. Hot Spice Ginger-bread, Taffety Tarts; here's a dram of the bottle, to comfort your hearts dainty fine Ink, you will lik't when you see't, here's very good trotters, with tripe and Neetsfeet Come, come away Sir, buy a pen Knife, or a Razor, VVhile i am at Leasure; have You got any Lanthorns to mend, buy a sheet Almanack, hot Grey Pease; come see what You lack and buy what you please: A brush for Your Shooes, and combs for Your hair; here's diddle diddle diddle dumplings, and Ladie fine ware; Old Rags for money, if Yo've never so many, I buy more than any; here's Milk for pennie Quart.
3d. Admiral Russel's Scowering the French-Fleet, Or, The Battle at Sea. THursday in the Morn the Ides of May Recorded for ever the famous Ninety two, brave Russel did discern by dawn of Day, the Lofty Sails of France advancing: Now All hands aloft, aloft, Let English Valour shine; Let fly a Culvering, the Signal of the Line, Let ev'ry hand supply his Gun, Follow me and You'll see, that the battle will be soon begun. Turvil o'er the main triumphant rowl'd, to meet the gallant Russel in Combat on the deep He led the noble train of Heroes bold, to sink the English Admiral at his feet, Now every Valiant mind to Victory does aspire the bloody Fights began, the Sea it self on fire, and mighty Fare stood looking on, whilst a flood all of blood fill'd the port holes of the Royal Sun. sulpher, smoak and Fire disturbed the air, with thunder & wonder to fright the gallick-shore, Their Regulated bands stood trembling near, to see their lofty streamers now no more: At six a Clock the Red, the smiling Victor L to give a second blow, their total overthrow; now death and horrow equal Reign, how they Cry, Run or Oye, brittish Colours ride the Vanquisht main.
see they run amaz'd thro' Rocks on sands: One danger they grasp at, to shun a greater fate in vain they crie for aid to weeping Lands, the Nimphs & Sea Gods mourn their Lost estate, for ever more adieu thou dazling Royal sun, from thy untimely end thy Masters sate begun enough thou mighty God of war: Now we sing, bless the Queen, Let us drink to ev'ry English Tar. Come Jolly seamen all with Russel go, to sail on the main proud Mounsieur for to greet and give our Enemy a second blow, and sight Turvil if that he dare to meet, Come brother Tar what cheer? Let each supply, And thump 'em off this Year or make Mounsier to fly, while we do range the Ocean Round, Day or Night we will fight, when our Enemy is to be found. Let it ne'er be said that English boys should e'er stay behind when their admiral goes but Let each honest Lad crie with one voice, brave Russel Lead us on to fight the foes, we'll give them gun for gun, some sink and others burn Broad-sides we'll give 'em too, till Monsieur crys mor∣blew Des Enleteer vill Kill us all; whilst they scower we will Pour, thick as hail amongst them Cannon-ball. Licensed according to Order. FINIS.
