M3138A 778.k.15.[14] R231684 99888716 203945
The Muscovy Operator. British royal coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE JE MAIN TIENDRAY Hapsburg coat of arms Elaborate woodcut of turbaned and gowned Muscovy Operator, riding a horse, in front of a city, bearing the implements of a Chirurgeon
Gloria sit Soli, qui Regit Astra Poli. xperientiae artem genuit in Experientia vero Fortuna & usus est optimis Artium Magister. AT the Still and Tobacco Rowl next Door to the Three Pigeons in West-Smithfield, is lately come the Muscovy Oc∣culist, Stone, and Rupture Master, who has Travelled in most Parts of Europe. First in Muscovy, next into Germany, and afterwards by his Great Travelling came into Turky, where he was for some Years, and Converse with most Famous Physitians in these Parts; from whom he has obtained such admirable Secrets or Arcaniums, that never was Communicated before. By which he has obtained a great deal of Credit and Honour, wherever he has Travelled; not only in Foreign Places, but also in this Kingdom. He cures these following Distempers, Viz. He cures and recovers such as are troubled with the Stone in the Kid∣nies or Bladder, by cutting, or particular medicines; He also takes Stones out of the Bladder of Women or Maids per dilicationem, without cutting; if any Person be troubled with Films, or Cataracts in the Eyes, if the Pupilla or Apple of the Eye be not hurt, I can restore them their sight presently, he also cures any Pearls of Blood in the Eyes, or overgrowing Flesh in a short time; he cuts and cures Hair lips in six days, Cancers in the breast and other parts of the body; The Nole me Tangere, and such like diseases in a short time. He can Arteficially cure P in the Nose, and cure weak Limbs, and dexterously cure all Carnosities or Swelling, he cures the French Pox with all it's Atten∣dants, the Running of the Reins, Shankers, Buboes, or swelling in the Groin, in a short time, after a new me∣thod, without Bath or Stove, and without Mercury, so as every one may follow their business. He can fortifie the cold Nature of Men or Women and hath a rare medicine for such as cannot hold their water, he hath a rare Art of curing Deafness if curable. I restore to perfect health, such as are troubled with Vomiting, Cholick, Rising of the Vapours, pain in the Milt, stitches in the side and all Scorbutical Distempers, which he cures in a short time, he cures all Persons that have broken or bursten Bellies, in Men, Women, or Children, according to their different Constitutions. He can help them without cutting, or hindering their going about their business without taking of Physick, with an outward application, without pain or danger. Therefore whoever hath occasion for this Renowned Operator, let them not loose time, but come to him while they have the fortune to have him in Town, and those that cannot come, may send their Urine, and shall have both advice and medicine, as their case requires. Note, If an Gentlewoman hath gotten a Rupture, or any other Distemper, and is subject to Obstructions, and is loath to discover her self to me, they may speak with my Wife very privately, and she shall relieve them very secret. And for further satisfaction to such as are over scrupulous, some few instances are given, of some Operations perfor∣med by him in this Kingdom, at the Places following. He cured one Thomas Smalsia in Spalding, in Lincolnshire, who was troubled with the stone in the bladder 28 years, and was cured by me in a short time. He cured Goody South of Boston in Lincolnshire, of a dangerous Cancer, who had been refused by all the Doctors in the Country, was cured by me in a Fortnight. He cured the wife of John Belling of Shamsby, who had been blind fourteen years, she was cured by me in three minutes time. He cured also Job Stuard in Maxfield in Cheshire, who was bed-ridden for a year and a half of a lameness in his back, which was iven over by all others uncurable; which by the Blessing of God he cured him in a Fortnights time. One Geo. Clark of the same Town he likewise cured of the Stone without cutting, only by a particular Secret that he has brought along with him and several others, which has been cured by the same medicine He cured a child of Simon Nells of Kincome in Dorsetshire of a double Hair-lip, which had been cut before by several Doctors, but could not perform the cure, but in a short time I made it a handsom and sound Lip. He cured Thomas Errall of Crowland in Lincoln-shire, who had been troubled with a Lame Leg for nine years, was cured by him in a short time. Robert Spicer of Chesson in Hertfordshire, who had been blind 20 years and cured by me in three minutes. Judith Nicholas of Cuman in the County of Oxon, of a large Cancerated breast, who had been troubled with  ten years, she was aged 65 years, and had been in several Hospitals, and could give no  but by the Grace of God I cured her in six weeks time. Robert Bacott living in Hasstings Sussex, who had been troubled with a Cancerated Lip for the  of ten years had been with most of the Doctors in the Country, and could get no cure, but in a fourtnights time  and made him a sound Lip. Altho he mentions but a few diseases here, yet his practice is general of all distempers, both inward and outward that can afflict the bodies of Men, Women, or Children, he having such proper medicines, so  the  of Life, that is most probable to cure their distempers, for he has cured many that have been  Incurable. He cures all manner of Scald Heads, wet or dry, if never so bad, without Pitch Plaister, or any  in 14 days. This Famous Operator doth cast all sorts of Humane Urine, none like him in that Art, he  all di∣stempers, and can resolve you if the disease be of 20 years standing, whither it be curable or not  pre∣vent further Charges, or else will use moderation, and according to the ability of the patient  water be brought that was made after midnight. Whoever hath occasion for this Renowned Operator may come to him, or else send for him and he will wait on them, and give such satisfaction, that one may easily know what an honest Physician for Counsell  perform, He had also a great secret Communicated to him in Turky for the Gout, which gives ease in  extremes of pain, if it be followed, it makes a perfect cure, which has been experienced by Hundreds in this Kingdom, and never was troubled with it, since they used it. You may have a Bottle from 5 Shillings to what price you please. This Famous Operator, J.A.K. is to be spoken with at his Lodgings every Day, from 8 in the Mor∣ning till 12 at Noon, and from 2 till 9 at Night; o the Six s  over-against his Stage, near Little Turn-stile in Holborn.
