P2652_pt5 R229305 [ocm]11081386 46328
PLUTARCH'S Morals Translated from the Greek by severall hands Volume London Printed for R. Bently
Plutarch's MORALS: Translated from the GREEK BY SEVERAL HANDS. Volume V. LONDON, Printed for T. Sawbridge, M. Gilliflower, R. Bently, S. Crouch, A. Churchil, W. Freeman, J. Taylor, T. Bennet, R. Parker, and S. Anson. MDCXCI.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD, Lord Bishop of WORCESTER. My Lord, THere is not perhaps any one amongst all the Ancient Ethnick Philoso∣phers, whose Writings have met with a more general Applause, than those of Plutarch; neither has the Re∣putation, they have gain'd, been undeserv'd, For, whether we consider his Biography, in which the Lives of the Noblest Heroes, both of Greece and Rome are most exactly record∣ed, and most accurately compar'd; or, whether we regard those excellent Precepts of Morality and Vertue, admirably deliver'd in his other Treatises; we every where find somewhat so great and inimitable, that it plainly shews him to have wanted nothing, but the Knowledge of a purer Religion, to have render'd him one of the best, as well as the most learned Men of his Age. No won∣der therefore, if most Nations have desir'd to
enjoy in their own Language the Works of so celebrated an Author: Wherefore, to gra∣tify those of our Country, who are no less ambitious of that Satisfaction than their Neighbours, several learned and ingenious Gentlemen have employ'd some part of their Time in cloathing him with an English Dress. His Lives were first taken in Hand, the Pub∣lication of which in five Volumes having been well accepted, it encourag'd the Undertak∣ing of his Morals; the Fifth and last Volume whereof being now compleated, I was re∣quested in the Name of all the Gentlemen, concern'd in it's Traduction, to lay it at Your Lordships Feet. The complying with this Request, my Lord, I must ingeniously confess, I endea∣vor'd with no small Earnestness to avoid, the Consciousness of my Insufficiency, making me tremble at the very Thoughts of appear∣ing before so discerning a Judge; but when I found that no Excuses would be admitted, I, Coward-like, emboldned my self by the Consideration, that you are no less conspicuous for Goodness and Clemency, than for those many other singular Endowments, both na∣tural and acquir'd, which have deservedly rais'd your Lordship to so eminent a Dignity in the English Church and Nation. Be pleas'd then, my Lord, favorably to ac∣cept this Tribute, paid to Your Vertues by
the Translators of this Part of our Authors Works, and with your wonted Charity to pardon all such Errors and Imperfections, as Your well known Skill in all sorts of Lan∣guages cannot but find in the Version of a Writer, the hight of whose Conceptions, 'tis difficult, not to say impossible, to transfer into another Language, without very much abating their Spirit. The Patronage, You shall vouchsafe to afford these our Endeavors, as it will be a more than sufficient Protection against the Cavils and Calumnies of carping and malicious Critics, so will it lay a perpe∣tual Obligation on us to have a constant and grateful Remembrance of so signal a Benefit, in which none shall more faithfully persist, than he, who is, with all imaginable Respect and Submission, My Lord, Your Lordships most Dutiful and Obedient Servant, Sam. White.
The Contents of each Treatise, with the Translator's Names. POlitical Precepts, [or Instructions for the Managing of State Affairs.] By Samuel White, M. D. Page 1 Whether Vice is sufficient to render a Man unhappy. By the same Hand. Page 78 Whether the Passions of the Soul, or [Diseases] of the Body are worse. By the same Hand. Page 88 Which are the most crafty, Water Animals, or those that breed upon the Land? By John Phillips, Gent. Page 91 That Brute Beasts make use of Reason. By Sir A. J. Page 155 Of the Face, appearing within the Orb of the Moon. By A.G. Gent. Page 171 Of Eating of Flesh. The First Tract. By William Bax∣ter, Gent. Page 234 Of Eating of Flesh. The Second Tract. By the same Hand. Page 243 Of Fate. By A. G. Gent. Page 250 Plutarch's Natural Questions. By R. Brown, M. L. Page 267 Concerning the First Principle of Cold. By F. Fetherston, D.D. Page 283. Whether Water or Fire be most useful. By the same Hand Page 306 Against Colotes, the Disciple and Favorite of Epicurus. By A. G. Gent. Page 314 Plutarch's Consolatory Letter to his Wife. By Robert Midgley, M. D. & Col. Med. Lond. Cand. Page 365 Of the three sorts of Government, Monarchy, Democracy, Oli∣garchy. By R. Smith, M. A. Page 375 Whether the Athenians were more renowned for their Warlike At∣chievments, or for their Learning. By the same Hand. Page 380 Against Running in Debt, or taking up Money upon Ʋsury. By the same Hand. Page 394 Plutarch's Platonick Questions. By R. Brown, M.L. Page 408 Of Moral Vertue. By C. H. Esq; Page 432 Plutarch's Parallels, or a Comparison between the Greek and Ro∣man Histories. By John Oswald M. A. Page 469 Of the Names of Rivers and Mounains, and of such things as are to be found therein. By R. White, M. A Page 495
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Political Precepts, [or Instructions for the Managing of State Af∣fairs.] Translated out of the Greek by Sam. White, M. D.I. Plutarch, to satisfy Menema∣chus's Re∣quest, who was en∣tring upon publick Employs, gives him a considera∣ble Num∣ber of Pre∣cepts and Advertise∣ments, ac∣company'd with seve∣ral Exam∣ples, to fit him for that De∣sign. IF ever, O Menemachus, that [Saying of Nestors in Homer,Iliad. 9.] There is no Greek, can contradict, or mend, What you have said; yet to no perfect End Is your Speech brought— Might pertinently be made use of, [and ap∣ply'd,] 'tis against those exhorting, but nothing teaching, nor any way instructing, Philoso∣phers, [who sufficiently indeed incite Men to the performance of their Duties, but lay not down any Precepts or Rules, by which they may be guided and directed:] for they do [in this respect] resemble those, who are in∣deed
careful in snuffing the Lamps, but negli∣gent in supplying them with Oyl. Seeing therefore that you, being by Reason mov'd to [engage your self in] the Affairs of the State, desire, as becomes the Nobility [of your Family,] Iliad. 9.Both to speak well, and act heroickly in [the Service of] your Country; and that, not having [attain'd to that Maturity of] Age, to have observ'd the Life of a [wise and] philosophical Man, openly spent in the Transactions of the State, and publick De∣bates, and to have been a Spectator of [wor∣thy] Examples, represented not in Word, but in Deed, you request me to lay you down [some] political Precepts [and Instructions,] I think it no ways becoming me to give you a Denial, but [heartily] wish, that the Work may be worthy both of your Zeal, and my Forwardness. Now I have, according to your Request,II. First, he requires of him, that will enter upon the Manage∣ment of State Af∣fairs, that he bring a good Inten∣tion, look∣ing at a right end, without Ambition, Envy, Jea∣lousie, &c. made use [in this my Discourse] of sundry various Examples. First then for the Administration of State Affairs, let there be laid, as a firm and solid Foundation, an Intention [and Purpose,] hav∣ing for its Principle Judgment and Reason, and not any Impulse from Vain-Glory, Emu∣lation, or want of other Employment. For as those, who have nothing grateful to them at Home, frequently spend their time in the Forum [or Common Hall,] thô they have no occasion that requires it: so some Men, because they have no Business of their own, worth em∣ploying themselves in, thrust themselves into
publick Affairs,Several sorts of Persons, who com∣mit great Faults in reference to this first Point. using Policy as a Divertise∣ment. Many also, having been by chance en∣gag'd in the Negotiations of the Common∣weal, and being cloy'd with them, cannot yet easily quit them: in which they suffer the same with those, who, going on board a Ship, that they may be there a little toss'd, and being after carry'd away into the Deep, send forth many a long Look towards the Shore, being sea sick and giddy headed, and yet necessitated to stay, and accommodate themselves to their present Fortune. Past is the lovely Pleasure, They took, when th'Sea was calm, and Weather bright, In walking at their leisure On the Ships Deck, Whilst her sharp Beck With merry Gale, And full-blown Sail, Did thrô the surging Billows cut its Course aright. And these do most of all discredit the Matter by their Repenting and being discontented, when either hoping for Glory, they fall into Disgrace, or expecting to become formidable to others by their Power, they are engag'd in Affairs, full of Dangers and Troubles. But he, who on a well grounded Principle of Rea∣son undertakes to act in the Publick, as an Employ very honorable, and most beseem∣ing him, is dismay'd by none of these things; nor does he [therefore] change his Opinion.Against thoe who through Avrice, Ambition, o nvy, thrust them∣selves into the State. For we must not come to the Management of the Common-weal on a Design of gaining and growing rich by it, as those about Stra∣tocles
and Democlides exhorted one another to the Golden Harvest, so in Mirth terming the Tribunal or Place of making Harangues to the People; nor yet as seized with some sud∣den Fit of Passion, as did heretofore Caius Gracchus, who, having, whilst his Brothers Misfortunes were hot, withdrawn himself to a retir'd Life, most remote from Publick Af∣fairs, did afterwards, inflam'd by Indignation at the Injuries and Affronts, put on him by some Persons, thrust himself into the State, where being soon fill'd with Affairs and Glo∣ry, when he sought to desist, and desir'd Change and Repose, he could not (so great was it grown) find how to lay down his Au∣thority, but perisht with it. And as for those, who through Emulation and [Desire of Glo∣ry] frame themselves [for the Publick,] as Actors for the Stage, they must needs repent [of their Design, finding themselves under a Necessity of] either serving those, whom they think themselves worthy to govern, or dis∣obliging those, whom they desire to please. III. He shews by fit Simili∣tudes, how they ought to be dis∣posed, who enter on the Ma∣nagement of great Affairs: that is, to consider, and throughly understand the Disposition of those, they are to govern, that by suiting themselves to it, they may win them by little and little.Now I am of Opinion, that those, who by chance, and without foresight, stumble upon Policy, falling as it were into a Pit, cannot but be troubled and repent; whereas they, that go leisurely into it, with Preparation and a good Resolution, comport themselves mo∣derately in [all] Occurrences, as having no other End of their Actions, but [the dis∣charging of their Duty with] Honor. Now they, that have thus grounded their
Choice within themselves, and render'd it im∣moveable, and difficult to be chang'd, must set themselves to contemplate the Disposition of the Citizens, [or People they have to go∣vern,] chiefly, as it appears to be most preva∣lent, being compounded of them all. For the Endeavouring presently to form the Man∣ners, and change the Nature of a People, is neither easie nor safe, but a Work requiring much Time and great Authority. But, as Wine in the Beginning is overcome by the Nature of the Drinker, but afterwards gently warming [him,] and mixing it self [in his Veins] assimilates and changes him, who drinks it, into its own Likeness: so must a States-man, till he has by his Reputation and Credit obtain'd a leading Power [amongst the People,] accommodate himself to the Disposi∣tions of the Subjects, knowing how to consi∣der and conjecture those things, with which the People are naturally delighted, and by which they are [usually] drawn. The A∣thenians, to wit, are easily mov'd to Anger,An Ex∣ample in the Peo∣ple of A∣thens. and not difficultly chang'd to Mercy; more willing to suspect quickly, than to be inform'd by leisure; and as they are readier to help mean and inconsiderable Persons, so do they embrace and esteem facetious and merry Speeches; they are exceedingly delighted with those, that praise them, and very little offended with such, as jear them; they are terrible even to their Governors, and yet courteous to their very Enemies. Far other is the Disposition of the Carthaginians, severe,Another Example in the Carthagi∣nians. rigid, obsequious to their Rulers, harsh to
their Subjects, most abject in their Fear, most cruel in their Anger, firm in their Re∣solutions, untractable and hard to be mov'd by sportive and pleasant Discourse. Should Cleon have requested them to defer their As∣sembly, because he had sacrific'd to the Gods, and was to feast certain Strangers, they would not have risen up, laughing and clapping their Hands for Joy; nor, if Alcibiades, as he was making an Harangue to them, had let slip a Quail from under his Cloak, would they have striven, who should catch her, and restore her to him again; but would rather have kill'd them both on the place, as contemning and deriding them: since they banish'd Hanno for making use of a Lyon to carry his Baggage to the Army, accusing him to affect a Tyran∣ny.A third Example in the Theans and Lace∣daemonians. Neither do I think, that the Thebans, if they had been made Masters of their Enemies Letters, would have forborn looking into them, as did the Athenians, when having ta∣ken the Messengers of Philip, who were carry∣ing a Letter superscrib'd to Olympias, they would not so much as open it, or discover the conjugal Secrets of an absent Husband, written to his Wife. Nor yet do I believe, that the Athe∣nians on the other side would have patiently suffer'd the Haughtiness and Disdain of Epami∣nondas, when refusing to answer an Accusati∣on brought against him, he rose up from the Theatre, and went away through the midst of the Assembly to the place of publick Exer∣cises. And much less am I of Opinion, that the Spartans would have endur'd the Contu∣mely and Scurrility of Stratocles, who per∣swaded the People to offer Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving to the Gods, as having ob∣tain'd the Victory, and afterwards, when, being truly inform'd of the Loss, they had re∣ceiv'd, they were angry with him, askt them, what Injury they had sustain'd, in having through his means spent three Days mer∣rily. Courtly Flatterers indeed,IV. A good Governour ought not to accom∣modate himself to the Vices of the People, but to ma∣nage them discreetly, and with∣drw them by degrees from Evil: and the Means of arriving at such an Happiness. like to Quail-Catchers, by imitating the Voices, and assimi∣lating themselves to [the Manners of] Kings, chiefly insinuate into their Favors, and entrap them by Deceit; but 'tis not convenient for a States-man to imitate the Peoples Manners, but to know them, and make use of those things towards every Person, by which he is most likely to be taken. For the Ignorance of [Mens] Humors brings no less Disorders and Obstacles in Common-weals, than in the Friendships of Kings. When therefore you shall have already gotten Power and Authori∣ty amongst the People, then must you en∣deavor to reform their Disposition, treating them gently, and by little and little drawing them to what is better. For the Changing of a Multitude is a difficult and laborious Work.1. He must re∣form him∣self the first, after the Exam∣ple of The∣mistocles, and o∣thers. But as for your own Manners [and Behaviour,] so compose and adorn them, as knowing, that you are henceforth to lead your Life on an open Stage; and if 'tis no easie Task for you wholly to extirpate Vice out of your Soul, at least take away and retrench those Offences, which are most no∣torious and apparent. For you [cannot but] have heard, how Themistocles, when he design'd to enter upon the Management of publick Affairs, withdrew himself from Drinking and
Revelling, and that Watching, Fasting, and studying, he said to his intimate Friends, that Miltiades's Trophy suffer'd him not to sleep. And Pericles also so chang'd himself, both as to the Comportment of his Body, and his manner of Living, that he walkt gravely, discours'd affably, always shew'd a [stay'd and] setled Countenance, continually kept his Hand under his Robe, and went only that way, which led to the pleading Place and Council. For a Multitude is not so tracta∣ble, as that it should be easie for every one to take it with Safety; but 'tis a Service, much to be valu'd, if, being like a suspicious and skittish Beast, it can be so manag'd, that without beingFor , I read . frighted either by Sight or Voice, it will submit to receive Instruction. These things therefore are not slightly to be observ'd; nor are we to neglect taking such Care of our own Life and Manners, that they may be clear from all Stain and Re∣prehension. For States-men are not only lia∣ble to give an Account, of what they say or do in Publick; but there is a busie Enquiry made into their very Meals, Beds, Marriages, and every either sportive or serious Action. For what need we speak of Alcibiades, who, being of all Men the most active in publick Affairs, and withal, an invincible Comman∣der, perisht by his Irregularity in his Living and Audaciousness, and who by his Luxury, and Prodigality, render'd the State unbenefit∣ted by all his other good Qualities? Since these [Athenians] blam'd Cimons Wine, the Romans, having nothing else to cavil at, found fault with Scipio's Sleeping, and the Enemies
of Pompey the Great, having observ'd, that he scratch'd his Head with one Finger, upbraided him with it.An apt and well chosen Si∣militude. For as a Freckle or Wart in the Face is more prejudicial than Stains, Maims, and Scars in the rest of the Body: so little Faults, discern'd in the Lives of Prin∣ces and States-men, appear great, thrô an Opinion most Men have conceiv'd of Go∣vernment and Policy, [which they look on] as a great [and excellent] thing, and such as ought to be pure from all Absurdity and Im∣perfection. Therefore not unjustly isFor , I read . Li∣vius Drusus commended, who, when several Parts of his House lay open to the View of his Neighbours, being told by a certain Workman, that he would for the Expence only of five Talents, alter and remedy that Fault, said: I will give thee indeed ten, to make my whole House so transparent, that all the City may see, how I live. For he was a tempe∣rate and modest Man. And yet perhaps he had no need of this Perspicuity: for many Persons pry into those Manners, Counsels, Actions, and Lives of States-men, which seem to be most deeply conceal'd, no less lov∣ing and admiring one, and hating and de∣spising another for their private, than for their publick Transactions. What then?An An∣swer to an Objection against what is requir'd, that a Go∣vernour should first re∣form him∣self. [perhaps you may say:] Do not Cities make use also of such Men, as live dissolutely and effemi∣nately? True: for as [we see] Women with Child frequently long for Stones [and Chalk,] as those, that are Stomach-sick, do for Salt-fish, and such other Meats, which a little af∣ter they spit out again and reject: so also the People sometimes thrô Wantonness and
Petulancy, and sometimes for want of better Guides, make use of those, that come first to hand, [thô at the same time] detesting and contemning them, and after rejoyce at such things, spoken against them, as the Co∣median Plato makes the People themselves to say: Quick, take me by the Hand, and hold me fast, Or I'll Agyrrius Captain choose in hast. And again he brings them in, calling for a Basin and Feather, that they may vomit, and saying: Mantile here by my Tribunal stands; And a little after, It feeds a stinking Head, most foul Disease. And the Roman People, when Carbo promis'd them something, and, [to confirm it,] added an Oath and Execration, unanimously sware on the contrary, that they would not believe him. And in Lacedaemon, when a certain dis∣solute Man, [nam'd] Demosthenes, had deli∣ver'd a very convenient Opinion, the People rejected it; but the Ephori, [who approv'd of his Advice,] having chosen by Lot one of the ancient [Senators,] commanded him to repeat the same Discourse, pouring it (as it were) out of a filthy Vessel into a clean one, that it might be acceptable to the Multitude: of so great moment either way in political Affairs is the Belief conceiv'd of a Persons
[Disposition and] Manners.2 He ought to be know∣ing and e∣loquent, that he may per∣swade and bring the People to Reason. Yet are we not therefore so to lay the whole [Stress] on Vertue, as [utterly] to neglect [all] Grace∣fulness and Efficacy of Speech, but esteeming Rhetorick, though not the Worker, yet a Coadjutor [and Forwarder] of Perswasion, should correct that Saying of Menander, The Speakers Manners, not his Speech, perswade. For both Life and Language [ought to con∣cur,] unless any one forsooth shall say, that, as it is the Pilot, who steers the Ship, and not the Rudder, and the Rider, that turns the Horse, and not the Bridle: so Political Ver∣tue, using not Eloquence, but Manners, as an Helm and Bridle, perswades and guides a City, which is (to speak with Plato) an Ani∣mal, most easy to be turn'd, managing and directing it, as it were from the Poop. For since those great, and as Homer calls them,An Ex∣ample in great Kings. Jove-begotten Kings, setting themselves out with their Purple, Scepters, Guards, and the very Oracles of the Gods, and subjecting to them by their Majesty the Multitude, as [if they were of a] better [Nature, and more excellent Mould than other Men,] desir'd also to be eloquent Orators, and neglected neither the Gracefulness of Speech, Nor publick Meetings, that more perfect they Might be for Feats of War:— not only venerating Jupiter the Counsellor, Mars the Slaughterer, and Pallas the Warri∣or, but invocating also Calliope,
Who still attends on Regal Majesty, by her perswasive Oratory appeasing, and moderating the Fierceness and Violence of the People: How is it possible, that a private Man in a Plebeian Garb, and with a Vul∣gar Meen, undertaking to conduct a City, should ever be able to prevail over, and go∣vern the Multitude, if he is not endow'd with alluring and all-perswading Eloquence. The Captains indeed, and Pilots of Ships make use of others to deliver their Commands; but a States-man ought to have in himself not only a Spirit of Government, but also a commanding Faculty of Speech, that he may not stand in need of anothers Voice, nor be constrain'd to say, as did Iphicrates, when he was run down by the Eloquence of those a∣bout Aristophon, My Adversaries have the better Actor, but mine is the more excellent Play, nor yet be often oblig'd to make use of these Words of Euripides, O that the Race of miserable Men Were speechless:— And again, Alas! Why have not Mens Affairs a Tongue, That those fine Pleaders, who of Right make Wrong, Might be no longer in Request? For to these Evasions perhaps might an Alca∣menes, a Nesiotes, an Ictius, and all such Me∣chanical Persons, as get their Bread by the
Labour of their Hands, be permitted to have recourse. As [it sometime hapned] in Athens, where, when two Architects were examin'd about the erecting a certain publick Work, one of them, who was of a free and voluble Speech, [and had his Tongue (as we say) well hung,] making a [long and] premedi∣tated Harangue concerning the Method and Order [of raising such a Fabrick,] greatly mov'd the People; but the other, who was indeed the better Workman, thô the worse Speaker, coming forth into the midst, only said: Ye Men of Athens, what this Man has spoken, I will do. For those Men vene∣rate only [Minerva, surnam'd] Ergane, [or the Artizan,] who, as Sophocles says of them, Do on the massy Anvil lay A lifeless iron Bar, where they With Blows of heavy Hammer make It pliant to the Work, they undertake. But the Prophet [or Minister] of Minerva Po∣lias, [that is, the Protectress of Cities,] and of Themis, [or Justice,] the Counseller, (Which both convenes Assemblies, and again Dissolves them,)— Making use of no other Instrument, but Speech, does by forming and fashioning some things, and smoothing and polishing others, that, like certain Knots in Timber, or Flaws in Iron, are averse to his Work, [embellish and] adorn a City.Ano∣ther Ex∣ample of the Pow∣er of Elo∣quence in Pericles. By this means the Government of Pericles was in name, (as Thu∣cydides
says) a Democracy, [or popular State,] but in effect, the Rule of one principal Man thrô the Power of his Eloquence. For there was [living at the same time] Cimon a good Man, as also Ephialtes, and Thucydides: Now he, being askt by Archidamus, whether himself or Pericles were the better Wrestler, thus answer'd: That is not easily known: for when I in Wrestling overthrow him, he, by his Words perswading the Spectators, that he did not fall, gains the Victory. And this did not only bring Glory to himself, but Safety also to the City: for being perswaded by him, it pre∣serv'd the Happiness, it had gotten, and ab∣stain'd from intermedling with foreign Af∣fairs. But Nicias, thô having the same De∣sign, yet falling short in the Art of Perswasi∣on, when he endeavor'd by his Speech, as by a gentle Curb, to [restrain and] turn the Peo∣ple, could not compass it, or prevail with them, but was fain to depart, being violent∣ly hurry'd, and dragg'd, as it were, by the Neck and Shoulders into Sicily. They say, that a Wolf is not to be held by the Ears; but a People and City are chiefly to be drawn by the Ears, and not, as some do, who, be-being unpractis'd in Eloquence, seek other absurd and unartificial ways of taking them, and either draw them by the Belly, making them Feasts [and Banquets,] or by the Purse, bestowing on them Gifts [and Largesses,] or [by the Eye,] exhibiting to them Masks and [Prizes, or publick] Shews of [Dancers and] Fencers, by which they do not so much lead, as cunningly catch the People. For to lead a People, is to perswade them by Reason [and
Eloquence;] but such Allurements of the Mul∣titude nothing differ from the Baits, laid for the taking of irrational Animals. Let not yet the Speech of a Statesman be youthful and theatrical,V. Hav∣ing prov'd that the good Life and Elo∣quence of him, who desires well to ma∣nage pub∣lick Af∣fairs, are the Foun∣dations of his Autho∣rity, and considering of what weight such a Per∣sons Speech is, he shews how he ought to behave himself in it. as if he were making an Harangue, compos'd, like a Garland, of cu∣rious and florid Words; nor again, as Py∣theas said of an Oration, made by Demosthe∣nes, that it smelt of the Lamp and sophistical Curiosity, let it consist of over-subtil Argu∣ments, and Periods, exactly fram'd by Rule and Compass. But as Musicians require, that the Strings of their Instruments should be sweetly and gently touch'd, and not rudely thrumm'd or beaten: so in the Speech of a Statesman, both when he Counsels, and when he commands, there should not appear either Violence or Cunning, nor should he think himself worthy of Commendation, for hav∣ing spoken formally, artificially, and with an exact Observation of Punctualities; but his whole Discourse ought to be full of inge∣nuous Simplicity, true Magnanimity, fatherly Freedom, and careful Providence and Under∣standing, joyning with Goodness, [and Ho∣nesty,] Gracefulness and Attraction, proceed∣ing from grave Expressions, and proper and perswasive Sentences. Now a political Ora∣tion does much more properly, than a juridi∣cal one, admit of sententious Speeches, Hi∣stories, Fables, and Metaphors, by which those who moderately and seasonably use them, ex∣ceedingly move [their Hearers:] as he did, who said,When there was a Design of de∣stroying Athens. Make not Greece one-ey'd: and Demades, when he affirm'd of himself, that he was to manage the Shipwrack of
the State; and Archilochus, when he said, Nor let the Stone of Tantalus, Over this Isle hang always thus; And Pericles, when he commandedSo he call'd the little I∣sland Ae∣gina. the Eye∣sore of the Piraeum to be taken away: and Phocion, when he pronounc'd of Leosthenes's Victory, that the Stadium [or Carrier] of the War was good; but that he fear'd the Doli∣chus [or Afterclap and Length] of it.1. The Dis∣course of a Statesman ought to be maje∣stick and great: witness the most excellent Magi∣strates. But in general, Majesty and Greatness more befits a political Discourse: a Pattern of which may be theOrati∣ons of De∣mosthenes against King Phi∣lip. Philippicks, and amongst the Orati∣ons set down by Thucydides, the Sthenelaida of Ephorus, that of Archidamus at Plataeae, and that of Pericles after the Plague. But as for those Rhetorical Flourishes and Harangues of Ephorus, Theopompus, and Anaximenes, which they made, after they had arm'd and set in or∣der the Batallions, it may be said of them, None talks thus foolishly so near the Sword. Nevertheless, both Taunts and Raillery may sometimes be part of political Discourse,2. It should some∣times be pickant, especially in Re∣plies but moderate∣ly. so they proceed not to Injury or Scurrility, but are usefully spoken by him, who either re∣prehends or scoffs. But these things seem most to be allow'd in Answers and Replys. For in that manner to begin a Discourse, as if one had purposely prepar'd himself for it, is the part of a common Jester, and carries with it an Opinion of Maliciousness: as was incident to the biting Jests of Cicero, Cato the Elder, and Euxitheus, an intimate Acquaintance of
Aristotles, who frequently began first to jear; but in him, who does it only in Revenge, the Seasonableness of it renders it not only par∣donable, but also graceful.Notable Examples. Such was the Answer of Demosthenes, when one that was suspected of Thievery, derided him for writ∣ing by Night, I knew that the keeping my Cande burning [all Night] is offensive to you. So when Demades bawl'd out, Demosthenes [forsooth] would correct me: [thus would] the Sow, [as the Pro∣verb has it, teach] Minerva: That Minerva, [reply'd Demosthenes,] was not long since taken in Adultery. Not ungraceful also was that of Xenaenetus to those Citizens, who upbraided him with flying when he was General, 'Twas with you my dearThe Greek has , which sig∣nifies Heads. Hearts. But in Raillery great Care is to be taken for the avoiding of Excess, and of any thing, that may either by its unseasonableness offend the Hearers, or shew the Speaker to be of an ungenerous and sordid Disposition, such as were the Sayings of Democrates. For he, going up into the Assembly, said, that like the City, he had little Force, but much Wind: and at the Overthrow before Chaeronea, going forth to the People, he said: I would not have had the State to be in so ill a Condition, that you should [be contented to] hear me also giving you Counsel. For this shew'd a mean Spirited Person, as the other did a Madman; but neither of them was becoming a Statesman. Now the Succinctness of Phocion's Speech was admir'd: whence Polyeuctus affirm'd, that Demosthenes was the greatest Orator; but that Phocion spake most forcibly: for that his Discourse did in very few Words contain abundance of
Matter; and Demosthenes, who contemn'd o∣thers, was wont, when Phocion stood up, to say, The Hatchet [or Pruning-Knife] of my Ora∣tions arise.3. He ought, af∣ter Peri∣cles and others, to use a Lan∣guage, brief, sen∣tentious, and pre∣medita∣ted, and be fram'd to answer and reply on Occasi∣ons. Let your chief Endeavour there∣fore be to use to the Multitude a premedita∣ted, and not empty Speeeh, and that with safety, knowing that Pericles himself, before he made any Discourse to the People, was wont to pray, that there might not a Word pass from him, forreign to the Business, [he was to treat of.] 'Tis requisit also, that you have a voluble Tongue, and exercis'd in speaking on all Occurrences: for Occasions are quick, and bring many sudden things in political Affairs. Wherefore also Demosthenes was, as they say, inferior to many, withdraw∣ing and absconding himself, when sudden oc∣casions offer'd. And Theophrastus relates, that Alcibiades, desirous to speak, not only what he ought, but as he ought, often hesitated, and stood still in the midst of his Speech, seeking and composing Expressions, [fit for his purpose.] But he, who, as Matters and Oc∣casions present themselves, rises up to speak, most of all moves, leads, and disposes of the Multitude. Thus Leo Byzantinus came to make an Harangue to the Athenians, being then at dissention amongst themselves, by whom, when he perceiv'd himself to be laugh'd at for the Littleness of his Stature, What would you do, said he, if you saw my Wife, who scarce reaches up to my Knees? And the Laughter thereupon increasing, Yet, went he on, as little as we are, when we fall out with one another, the City of Byzantium is not big enough to hold us. So Pytheas the Orator, who de∣claim'd
against the Honors, decreed to Alexan∣der, when one said to him, Dare you, being so young, discourse of so great Matters? made this Answer, And yet Alexander, whom you de∣cree to be a God, it younger, than I am. 'Tis requisit also for the Champion of the Com∣mon-weal to bring to this, not slight, but all-concerning Contest, a firm and solid speech, attended with a strong Habit of Voice, and a long-lasting Breath, lest, being tir'd and spent with speaking, he chance to be overcome by Some rav'ning Cryer, with a roaring Voice, Loud, asA Brook near A∣thens, the Waters of which fell with an extraor∣dinary Noise. Cycloborus.— Cato, when he had no hopes of perswading the People or Senate, whom he found prepos∣sess'd by the Courtships and Endeavors of the contrary Party, was wont to rise up, and hold them a whole Day with an Oration, by that means depriving his Adversaries of their Opportunity. And thus much concerning the Preparation and Use of Speech may be sufficient for him, who can of himself find out and add what necessarily follows from it. There are moreover two Avenues or Ways of entring into the Government of the State:VI. He now shews the two ways of entring into pub∣lick Af∣fairs, dis∣coursing very per∣tinently of the first, and declar∣ing, what is to be done, and what to be avoided in it. the one short, and expeditious to the Lustre of Glory, but not without danger; the other more obscure and slow, but having also greater Security. For some there are, who, begin∣ning with some great and illustrious Action, but which requires a couragious Boldness, do, like to those, that from a far extended Pro∣montory lanch forth into the Deep, steer di∣rectly
into the very midst of publick Affairs, thinking Pindar to have been in the right, when he said: If you a stately Fabrick do design, Be sure, that your Works Front with Lustre shine. For both the Multitude do thrô a certain Satiety and Loathing of those,1. He would have one behave himself so vertuous∣ly at his Entrance, that his Ill-willers should be constrain∣ed to make him way. to whom they have been accustom'd, more readily receive a Beginner, as the Beholders do a [fresh-en∣tring] Combatant, and the Dignities and Au∣thorities, which have a splendid and speedy Encrease, [dazle and] astonish Envy: For neither does that Fire, as Ariston says, make a Smoak, nor that Glory breed Envy, which suddenly and quickly shines forth; but of those, who grow up slowly and by degrees, some are attack'd on this side, others on that: whence many have wither'd away about the Tribunal, before ever they came to flourish. But when, as they say of Ladas, The Sound o'th BarFrom whence they set forth to run. yet ratled in his Ear, When Ladas having finisht his Carreir, Was crown'd— Any one suddenly and gloriously performs an Embassy, triumphs, or leads forth an Army, neither the Envious, nor the Disdainful, have like Power over them, [as over others.] Thus did Aratus ascend to Glory, making the O∣verthrow of the Tyrant Nicocles his first step to the Management of the Common-weal: Thus did Alcibiades, setling the Alliance with the Mantineans against the Lacedaemonians.
Pompey also requir'd a Triumph, being not yet admitted into the Senat, and when Sylla op∣pos'd it, he said to him: More adore the rising, than the setting Sun: which when Sylla heard, he yielded to him. And the People of Rome on a sudden, contrary to the ordinary Course of the Law, declar'd Cornelius Scipio Consul, when he stood Candidate for the Aedileship, not from any vulgar Beginning, but admiring the Victory, he had got, whilst he was yet but a Youth, in a single Combat, fought in Spain, and his Gests a little after, perform'd at Car∣thage, when he was a Tribune [or Colonel] of Foot, in respect of which, Cato the Elder cry'd out with a loud Voice: He only's wise, the rest like Shadows fly. Now then,2. Let him consider, that there is every where Work e∣nough cut out for Men of Courage. since the Affairs of the Cities have neither Wars to be manag'd, Tyrannies to be overthrown, nor Leagues and Alliances to be treated, what can any one undertake for the Beginning of an illustrious and splendid Government? There are yet left publick Causes and Ambassies to the Emperor, which require the Courage and Prudence of an a∣cute and cautious Person: There are also in the Cities many good [and laudable Usages] neglected, which being restor'd, and many ill Practices, brought in by Custom, to the Disgrace or Dammage of the City, which being redress'd, may gain him the Esteem of the People. Moreover, a great Suit rightly determin'd, Fidelity in defending a poor Mans Cause against a powerful Adversary, and Freedom of Speech in behalf of Justice to
some unjust Nobleman, have afforded some a glorious Entrance into the Administration of the State. Not a few also have been ad∣vanc'd by Enmity [and Quarrels,] having set themselves to attack such Men, whose Dig∣nity was either envy'd or terrible. For the Power of him, that is overthrown, does with greater Glory accrew to his Overthrower.3. One must not make ones Entrance by setting ones self to de∣grade the Good, but only the Wicked. In∣deed thrô Envy to contend against a good Man, and one, that has by Vertue been ad∣vanc'd to the chiefest Honour, as Simmias did against Pericles, Alcmeon against Themistocles, Clodius against Pompey, and Meneclides the O∣rator against Epaminondas, is neither good for ones Reputation, nor otherwise advantagious. For when the multitude, having outrag'd some good Man, soon after, as it [frequently] happens, repent of their Indignation, they think that way of excusing this Offence the easiest, which is indeed the justest, to wit, the De∣stroying of him, who was the Perswader and Author of it. But the rising up to humble and pull down a wicked Person, who has by his Audaciousness and Cunning subjected the City to himself (such as heretofore Cleon and Clitophon were in Athens) makes a glorious En∣trance to the Management of publick Affairs, as it were to a Play.4. He shews, how we must take beed of stum∣bling as 'tis said, at the Thre∣shold. I am not ignorant also, that some by opposing, as Ephialtes did at A∣thens, and Phormio amongst the Elaeans, an imperious and oligarchical Senat, have at the same time obtain'd both Authority and Ho∣nor; but in this there is great Danger to him, who is but entring upon the Administration of the State. Wherefore Solon took a better Be∣ginning: for the City of Athens being divid∣ed
into three parts, the Diacrians [or Inhabi∣tants of the Hill,] the Pedieans [or Dwellers in the Plain,] and the Paralians [or those, whose Abode was by the Waterside,] he, joyning himself with none of them, but being indifferent to them all, and saying and doing all things, for to bring them to Concord, was chosen the Law-giver to take away their Differences, and by that means setled the State. Such then,VII. The second manner of entring up∣on the Ma∣nagement of Publick Affairs, concerning which he proposes many Ad∣vertise∣ments. and so many Beginnings has the more splendid way of entring upon State-Affairs: But many gallant Men have chosen the safe and slow Method, as Aristides, Phoci∣on, Pammenes the Theban, Lucullus in Rome, Cato, and Agesilaus the Lacedaemonian.1. That one must advance under the Authority of those, that are most re∣spected in the State. For as Ivy, twining about the strongest Trees, rises up together with them: so every one of these, applying himself, whilst he was yet young and inglorious, to some elder and il∣lustrious Personage, and growing up and in∣creasing by little and little under his Authori∣ty, grounded and rooted himself in the Com∣mon-weal: For Clisthenes advanc'd Aristides, Cabrias preferr'd Phocion, Sylla promoted Lu∣cullus, Maximus rais'd Cato, Pammenes for∣warded Epaminondas, and Lysander assisted A∣gesilaus. But this last, injuring his own Re∣putation thrô an unseasonable Ambition and Jealousie, soon threw off the Director of his Actions; but the rest honestly, politically, and to the end, venerated and magnify'd [the Authors of their Advancement: as the Bo∣dies, which are oppos'd to the Sun, do by re∣flecting back the Light, that shines upon them, augment it, and render it more illustrious.
Certainly those, who lookt asquint upon Scipio, call'd him the Player [or Actor,] and his Companion Laelius, the Author of his Actions; yet was not Laelius pufft up by any of these things, but continu'd to promote the Ver∣tue and Glory of Scipio.2. That one must keep the Friend∣ship of those who are in re∣pute. And Afranius, the Friend of Pompey, thô he was very mean∣ly descended, yet being at the very point to be chosen Consul, when [he understood, that] Pompey favor'd others, gave over his Suit, say∣ing, that his obtaining the Consulship would not be so honorable, as grievous and trou∣blesom to him, if it were against the good Will, and without the Assistance of Pompey. Having therefore delay'd but one year, he both enjoy'd the Dignity, and preserv'd his Friendship. Now those who are thus by o∣thers led, as it were by the Hand, to Glory, do, in gratifying one, at the same time also grafy the Multitude, and incur less Odium, if any Inconvenience befalls them. Where∣fore also Philip [King of Macedon] exhorted [his Son] Alexander, whilst he had leisure, during the Reign of another, to get himself Friends, winning their Love by kind and af∣fable Behaviour.3. That the most Vertuous is to be followed, and the Danger of keeping Company with the Ambiti∣ous. Now he that begins to en∣ter upon the Administration of State Affairs, should choose himself a Guide, who is not only a Man of Credit and Authority, but is also such for his Vertue. For as 'tis not eve∣ry Tree, that will admit and bear the Twin∣ing of a Vine, there being some, which utter∣ly choak and spoil its Growth: so in States those, who are not Lovers of [Vertue and] Goodness, but only of Honour and Soveraign∣ty, afford not young [Beginners any] Op∣portunities
of [performing worthy] Actions, but do thrô Envy keep them down, and let them languish, [whom they regard, as] depriving them of their Glory, which is, as it were, their Food. Thus Marius, having first in Africk, and afterwards in Galatia, done many gallant Exploits by [the Assistance of] Sylla, forbare [any farther] to employ him, and [utterly] cast him off, being indeed vext at his growing [into repute,] but making his Pretence [the Device, engraven on] his Seal. For Sylla, being Quaestor [or Pay-master] un∣der Marius, when he was Praetor, [or Gene∣ral] in Africk, and sent by him to Bacchus, brought with him Jugurtha Prisoner; but as he was an ambitious young Man, who had but just tasted [the Sweetness of] Glory, he receiv'd not his good Fortune with Moderati∣on; but having caus'd the Representation of the Action to be engraven on his Seal, wore about him Jugurtha deliver'd into his Hands: and this did Marius lay to his Charge, when he turn'd him off. But Sylla, passing over to Catulus and Metellus, who were good Men, and at difference with Marius, soon after in a Civil War drave away and ruin'd Marius, who wanted but little of overthrowing Rome. Sylla indeed [on the contrary] advanc'd Pom∣pey from a very Youth, rising up to him, and uncovering his Head, as he pass'd by, and not only giving other young Men Occasions of doing Captain-like Actions, but even instiga∣ting some, that were backward [and unwil∣ling,] he fill'd the Armies with Emulation and Desire of Honour: and thus he had the Superiority over them all, desiring not to be
alone, but the first and greatest amongst many great ones. These therefore are the Men, to whom young Statesmen ought to adhere, and with these they should be [as it were] incorpo∣rated, not stealing from them their Glory, like Aesop's Wren, which, being carry'd up on the Eagles Wings, suddenly flew away, and got before her; but receiving it of them with Friendship and good Will: since they can never, as Plato says, be able to govern aright, if they have not been first well practis'd in Obedience. VIII. What Friends a Statesman ought to choose.After this, follows the Judgment, that is to be had in the Choice of Friends, in which neither the Opinion of Themistocles, nor that of Cleon, is to be approv'd. For Cleon, when he first knew, that he was to take on him the Government, assembling his Friends together, brake off Friendship with them, as that, which often disables the Mind, and with∣draws it from its just and upright Intention in managing the Affairs of the State. But he would have done better,1. He ought not to shun his Friends and be familiar with Flat∣terers. if he had cast out of his Soul Avarice and Contention, and cleans'd himself from Envy and Malice. For Cities want not Men, that are Friendless and unaccompany'd, but such as are good and temperat. Now he indeed drave away his Friends; but an hundred Heads of fawning Flatterers were, as the Comoedian speaks, lick∣ing about him; and being harsh and severe to those, that were civil, he again debas'd himself to court the Favor of the Multitude, doing all things to humor them, and taking Rewards at every Mans Hand, and joyning himself with the worst and most distemper'd
of the People against the best.2. He must not for the sake of his Friends derogate from the Authori- of the Laws. But Themisto∣cles on the contrary said to one, who told him, that he would govern well, if he exhibited himself alike to all: May I never si on that Throne, on which my Friends shall not have more [Power] with me, than those, who are not my Friends. Neither did he well in promising the State to his Friendship, and submitting the common and publick Affairs to his private Favors and Affections. And yet he said to Simonides, when he requested somewhat, that was not just: Neither is he a good Poet [or Musi∣cian,] who sings against Measure, nor he an up∣right Magistrate, who gratifies [any one] against the Laws. For it would really be a shameful and miserable thing, that the Pilot should choose Mariners, and the Master of the Ship a Pilot, Who well can rule the Helm, and in good guise Hoise up the Sails, when Winds begin to rise; and that an Architect [or Master-builder] should make choice of such Servants and Workmen, as will not prejudice his Work, but take pains in the best manner [to forward him in the Accomplishment of it;] and that a Statesman, who, as Pindar has it, The best of Artists, and chief Workman is, Of Equity and Justice,— should not presently choose himself like-af∣fected Friends and Ministers, and such, as might co-inspire into him a Love of Honesty,
but that one or other should be always un∣justly and violently bending him to other U∣ses. For he will be seen to differ in nothing from a Carpenter or Mason, who thrô Ig∣norance and want of Experience uses such Squares, Rules, and Levels, as will certainly make his Work to be awry.3. He must not let them abuse his Friend∣ship to the commit∣ting Dis∣orders in the State. For Friends are the living and intelligent Instruments of Statesmen, who ought to be so far from bear∣ing them company in their Slips and Trans∣gressions, that they must be careful, they do not, even unknown to them, commit a Fault. For this it was, that both disgrac'd Solon, and brought him into dis-repute amongst his Citizens; for he, having an Intention to ease Mens Debts, and to bring in [that, which was call'd at Athens] the Seisachtheia, (for that was the Name given by way of Extenuation to the cancelling of Debts) communicated this Design to some of his Friends, who thereup∣up did a most unjust Act; for having got this Inkling, they borrow'd abundance of Money, and the Law being a little after brought to light, they appear'd to have purchased stately Houses, and great store of Land with the Wealth they had borrow'd: and Solon, who was himself injur'd, was accus'd to have been a partaker of their Injustice.Several Examples to this purpose. Agosilaus al∣so was most feeble and mean-spirited in what concern'd the Suits of his Friends, being like the Horse Pegasus in Euripides, Who, frighted, bow'd his Back, more than his Rider would.
So that being more ready to help them in their Misfortunes, than was requisit, he seem'd to be privy to their Injustices. For he sav'd Phoebidas, who was condemn'd for having without Commission surpriz'd the Castle of Thebes, call'd Cadmeia, saying, that such Enterprizes were to be attempted without expecting any Orders. And when Sphodrias fled from Judgment for an unlawful and hei∣nous Act, having made an Incursion into At∣tica, at such time as the Athenians were Allies and Confederates of the Spartans, he procur'd him to be acquitted, being softned by the a∣morous Entreaties of his Son. There is also recorded a short Epistle of his, written in these Words. If Nicias is innocent, discharge him, if he is guilty, discharge him for my Sake; but however it is, discharge him.4. He mst after the x∣ample of Phcion and others prefe the Preserva∣tion of the Laws and his Coun∣trey to any par∣ticular person whatever. But Phocion [on the contrary] woul not so much as appear in behalf of his Son-in-Law Charillus, when he was accus'd for having taken Money of Harpalus; but having said, In all just things I hae made you my Ally, went his way. And Timo¦leon the Corinthian, when he could not by Ad∣monitions or Requests disswade his Brother from being a Tyrant, confederated with his Destroyers. For a Magistrate ought not to be a Friend [on this Condition only, that it be] even to the Altar, or till he comes to the point of being forsworn, as Pericles sometime said; but [that it be no farther than is agree∣able] to all Law, Justice, and the Utility of the State; any of which, being neglected, brings a great and publick Dammage, as did the not executing of Justice on Sphodrias and Phoebidas, who did not a little contribute
to the engaging of Sparta in the Leuctrian War. IX. How a States∣man ought to behave himself to∣wards his Friends. 1. He may favour them, af∣ter he has secur'd the Pub∣lick, and how far this Favor is to ex∣tend.Otherwise Reason of State is so far from necessitating one to shew himself severe on every [Peccadillo or] slight Offence of his Friends, that it even permits him, when he has secur'd the principal Affairs of the Pub∣lick to assist them, stand by them, and labor for them. There are moreover certain Fa∣vors, that may be done without Envy, as is the helping a Friend to obtain an Office, or rather the putting into his Hands some hono∣rable Commission, or [the employing him in] some plausible Embassy, such as is the Con∣gratulating or Honoring some Prince, or the making a League of Amity and Alliance with some State. But if there is some diffi∣cult, but withal illustrious and great, Action to be perform'd, having first taken it upon himself, he may afterwards assume a Friend to his Assistance, as did Diomedes, whom Ho∣mer makes to speak in this manner: Iliad. l. 7.Since a Companion you will have me take, How can I think a better Choice to make, Than the Divine Ulysses?— And Ʋlysses again as kindly attributes to him the Praise of the Atchievment, saying: These stately Steeds, whose Countrey you demand, Nestor, were hither brought from Thracian Land, Whose King, with twelve of his best Friends, lies dead, All slain by th'hand of warlike Diomed:
For this sort of Concession no less adorns the Praiser than the Prais'd; but Self-conceited∣ness, as Plato says, dwells with Solitude, [be∣ing hated and abandon'd by every one.2. He ought to associate his Friends in his Fa∣vors.] He ought moreover to associate his Friends in those good and kind Offices, [which are done by him,] bidding those, whom he has benefit∣ed to love them, and give them thanks, as having been the Procurers and Counsellers [of his Favors to them.3. To de∣ny them mildly, when they make any unfitting Request.] But he must reject the dishonest and unreasonable Requests of his Friends, yet not churlishly, but mildly, teaching and shewing them, that they are not beseeming their Vertue and Honor. Never was any Man better at this, than Epaminondas, who, having deny'd to deliver out of Prison a certain Victualler, when requested by Pelopi∣das, and yet a little after dismissing him at the Desire of his Miss, said to his Friend, Thes, O Pelopidas, are Favors, fit for Wenches to re∣ceive, and not for Generals. Cato on the other side acted morosely and insolently, who, when Catulus theA Ma∣gistrate in Rome, whose Of∣fice it was to regu∣late the Behaviour and Ex∣pences of the Citi∣zens. Censor, his most intimate and fa∣miliar Friend, interceded with him for one of those, against whom he, being Quaestor, had entred Process, said: 'Tis a Shame, that you, who ought to reform us young Men, should be thrust out by our Servants. For he might, thô in effect refusing the requested Favor, have yet forborn that Severity and Bitterness of Speech, so that his doing, what was displeas∣ing to his Friend, might have seem'd not to have proceeded from his own Inclination, but to have been a Necessity, impos'd upon him by Law and Justice.4. To help them grow rich, and how. There are also in the Administration of the State Methods, not dis∣honorable,
of assisting our poorer Friends in the making of their Fortune. Thus did The∣mistocles, who, seeing after a Battle one of those, which lay dead in the Field, adorn'd with Chains of Gold and Jewels, did him∣self pass by him, but turning back to a Friend of his, said: Do you take these Spoils, for you are not yet come to be Themistocles. For even the Affairs themselves do frequently afford a Statesman such Opportunities of benefiting his Friends: for every Man is not a Menema∣chus. To one therefore give the Patronage of a Cause, both just and beneficial; to ano∣ther recommend some rich Man, who stands in need of Management and Protection; and help a third to be employ'd in some publick Work, or to some gainful and profitable Farm. Epaminondas bade a Friend of his go to a certain rich Man, and ask him for a Ta∣lent, to be given him at the Command of Epaminondas, and when he, to whom the Message was sent, came to enquire the Rea∣son of it: Because, said Epaminondas, he is a very honest Man and poor, and you, by converting much of the Cities Wealth to your own Ʋse, are become rich. And Xenophon reports, that Age∣snaus delighted in enriching his Friends, him∣self making no account of Money. X. How a Statesman ought to behave himself to∣wards his Enemies.Now since, as Simonides says, all Larks must have a Crest, and every eminent Office in a common-weal brings Enmities and Dis∣sentions, 'tis not a little convenient for a Statesman to be forwarn'd also of [his Com∣portment in] these Rancounters. Many there∣fore commend Themistocles and Aristides, who, when they were to go forth on any Embassy,
or to command together the Army,1. When the Ser∣vice of the Publick is in questi∣on, he must lay aside his particular Concerns. laid down their Enmity at the Confines of the City, tak∣ing it up again after their Return. Some a gain are highly pleas'd with the Action of Cretinas the Magnesian: He, having for his Adversary [or Rival] in the Government one Hermeas, a Man, not powerful [and rich,] but ambitious and high-spirited, when the Mithridatick War came on, seeing the City in Danger, desir'd Hermeas, either to take the Government upon himself, and manage the Affairs, whilst he retir'd; or if he would have him take the Command of the Army, to depart himself immediately, lest they should thrô their ambitious Contention destroy the City. The Proposal pleas'd Her∣meas, who, saying, that Cretinas was a bet∣ter Souldier than himself, did with his Wife and Children quit the City. Cretinas then sent him forth before, furnishing him out of his own Estate with all such things, as are more useful to those, that fly from Home, than to those, that are besieg'd, and excel∣lently defending the City, unexpectedly pre∣serv'd it, being at the Point to be destroy'd. For if 'tis generous, and proceeding from a magnanimous Spirit, to cry out, I love my Children, but my Countrey more, Why should it not be readier for every one of them to say, I hate this Man, and desire to do him a Diskindness, but the Love of my Coun∣trey has greater Power over me? For not to condescend to be reconcil'd to an Enemy for those very Causes, for which we ought to a∣bandon
even a Friend, is even to extremity savage and brutish.2. But 'tis incompa∣rably bet∣ter, not to hate any one for ones own particular Interest, but only to be an Enemy to those, that would prejudice the Pub∣lick. But far better did those about Phocion and Cato, who grounded not any Enmity at all on their political Differen∣ces, but being fierce and obstinate only in their public Contests, not to recede from any thing, [they judg'd] convenient for the State, did in their private Affairs use those very Persons friendly and courteously, from whom they differ'd in the other. For one ought not to esteem any Citizen an Enemy, unless it be such an one, as is like Ariston, Nabis, or Cati∣lin, the Disease and Plague of the City; but as for those, that are otherwise at Discord, [a good Magistrate should,] like a skilful Musician, by gently setting them up, or letting them down, bring them to Concord, not falling angrily and reproachfully upon those, that err, but mildly [reprehending them in such like Terms,] as [these of] Homers, Good Friend, I thought you wiser than the rest, And Again, You could have told a better Tale than this; nor yet repining at their Honors, or sparing to speak freely in Commendation of their good Actions, if they say or do any thing ad∣vantagious [to the Publick.] For thus will our Reprehension, when it is requisit, be credited, and we shall render them averse to Vice, increasing their Vertue, and shewing, by comparing them, how much the one is more worthy and beseeming them than the
other. But I indeed am also of Opinion,3. He ought to paise them in just things and even uphold them, if they are calumni∣ated. that a Statesman should in just Causes give Testi∣mony to his Enemies, stand by them, when they are accus'd by Sycophants, and discredit Imputations, brought against them, if they are repugnant to their Inclinations: as Nero himself, a little before he put to Death Thra∣seas, whom of all Men he both most hated and fear'd, when one accus'd him for giving a wrong and unjust Sentence, said: I wish, Thraseas were but as great a Lover of me, as he is a most upright Judge. Neither is it amiss for the Daunting of others, who are by Na∣ture more inclin'd to Vice, when they offend, to make mention of some Enemy of theirs, who is better behav'd, and say, Such an one would not have spoken, or acted thus. And some again, when they transgress, are to be put in mind of their vertuous Progenitors. Thus Homer says, Iliad. l. 5. Examples.Tydeus has Left a Son unlike himself. And Appius, contending in the Comitia with Scipio Africanus, said, How deeply, O Paulus [Aemilius,] wouldst thou sigh amongst the infer∣nal Shades, wert thou but sensible that Philonicus the Publican guards thy Son, who is going to stand for the Office of Censor. For such man∣ner of Speeches do both admonish the Offen∣ders, and become their Admonishers. Nestor also in Sophocles, being reproach'd by Ajax, thus politickly answers him: I blame you not, for you act well, althô You speak but ill—
And Cato, who had oppos'd Pompey in his joyn∣ing with Caesar to force the City, when they fell to open Wars, gave his Opinion, that the Conduct of the State should be committed to Pompey, saying; That those, who are capable to do the greatest Mischiefs, are fittest to put a stop to them.4. How one may blame them. For Reprehension, mixt with Praise, and accompany'd not with Oppro∣briousness, but Liberty of Speech; nor working Animosity, but Remorse and Repentance, ap∣pears both kind and salutary; but railing Ex∣pression do not at all beseem Statesmen [or Men of Honor:] Do but look into the Speeches of Demosthenes against Aeschines, and of Aeschines against him; and again into what Hyperides has written against Demades; and consider whether Solon, Pericles, Lycurgus the Lacedaemo∣nian, or Pittacus the Lesbian would have spo∣ken in that manner: and yet Demosthenes us'd this reproachful manner of Speaking only in his juridical Orations or Pleadings: for his Philippicks are clean [and free] from all Scof∣fing and Scurrility. For such Discourses do not only more disgrace the Speakers, than the Hearers, [or those, against whom they are spoken;] but do moreover breed Confusion in Affairs, and disturb Councels and Assem∣blies. Wherefore Phocion did excellently well, who, having broken off his Speech, to give way to one, that rail'd against him, when the other with much ado held his Peace, going on again, where he had left off, said: You have already heard what has been spoken of Horsemen and heavy arm'd Foot; I am now to treat of such as are light-arm'd and Targuetiers. But since many Persons can
hardly contain themselves on such occasions,5. What manner of Replies one may be per∣mitted to make them. and since Railers have often their Mouths not impertinently stopt by Replies: let the Answer be short and pithy, not shewing any Indignation or Bitterness of Anger, but Mild∣ness joyn'd with Raillery and Gracefulness, yet somewhat [tart and] biting. Now such especially are the Retortings, of what has been spoken before. For as Darts, returning against their Caster, seem to have been repuls'd and beaten back by a certain Strength and Solidi∣ty in him, [or that,] against which they were thrown: so what was spoken, seems by the Strength and Understanding of the Re∣proach to have been turn'd back upon the Reproacher. Such was that Reply of Epa∣minondas to Callistratus, who upbraided the Thebans with OEdipus, and the Argives with Orestes, one of which had kill'd his Father, and the other his Mother: Yet they, who did these things, being rejected by us, were receiv'd by you.Remarka∣ble Ex∣amples. Such also was the Repartee of Antalci∣des the Spartan to an Athenian, who said to him, We have often [driven you back and] pur∣su'd you from [the River] Cephisus; but we, [reply'd Antalcides,] never [yet pursu'd] you from the River Eurotas. Phocion also, when Demades cry'd out, The Athenians, if they grow mad, will kill thee, elegantly reply'd: And thee, if they come again to their Wits. So when Domitius said to Crassus the Orator, Did not you weep for the Death of the Lamprey you kept in your Fish-pond? Did not you, said Crassus to him again, bury three Wives without ever shedding a Tear? These things therefore have indeed their Use also thrô all the rest of a Mans Life.
XI. He now treats, whether a Statesman ought to concern himelf in all public Affairs; and re∣slves, that he ought to manage only what is of great∣est Impor∣tance.Moreover some, like Cato, thrust them∣selves into every Part of Policy, [or every kind of publick Office,] thinking a good Ci∣tizen should not omit any Care or Industry for [the obtaining] Authority. And these Men greatly commend Epaminondas; for that being by the Thebans thrô Envy, and in Contempt, appointed Telearch, he did not reject it, but saying, That the Office does not only shew the Man, but the Man also the Office, He brought the Telearchate into great and vene∣rable Repute, which was before nothing but a certain Charge [or Overseeing] of the car∣rying the Dung out of the narrow Streets [and Lanes of the City,] and turning of Water-Courses. [Nor do I doubt, but that] I my self also afford matter of Laughter to many, who come into this our City, being frequently seen in public employ'd about such Matters. But that comes into my Assistance, which is related of Antisthenes: for when one wonder'd to see him carry a piece of Stockfish thrô the Market, 'Tis for my self, said he. But I on the contrary say to those, who upbraid me for being present at [and overseeing] the Mea∣suring [and counting] of Tiles, or the bringing in [and unloading] of Chalk and Stones: 'Tis not for my self, but for my Countrey, that IFor , I read . . perform this Service. For thô he, who in his own Per∣son manages and does many such things for himself, may be judg'd mean spirited and mechanical; yet if he does them for the Publick, and for his Countrey, he is not to be deem'd fordid; but on the Contrary, his Diligence and Readiness, [extending] even to these small Matters, is [to be esteem'd]
greater, and more highly valu'd.1. Because 'tis more august. But others there are, that hold Pericles's Manner of act∣ing to have been more magnanimous and au∣gust; amongst which is Critolaus the Peripa∣tetic, who is of Opinion, that, as at Athens the Salaminian Ship, and the Paralus, were not launcht forth for every Service, but [only] on necessary and great Occasions: so a States∣man ought to employ himself in the chiefest and greatest Affairs, like the King of the Uni∣verse, who, as Euripides says, Reserves great things for his own Government, But small things leaves to Fortunes Management. For neither do we approve the excessively ambitious and contentious Spirit of Theagenes,2. Because the con∣trary ren∣ders one suspected of Ambi∣tion and Vain-Glo∣ry. who, having not only obtain'd the Victory thrô a whole Course of Exercises, but also in many other Contests, and that not only in Wrestling, but in Buffetting, and Running of long Races; at last, being at the Anniversa∣ry Festival Supper of a certain Hero, after every one [was serv'd, or] had his Portion set him, according to the Custom, he started up, and fell to Wrestling, as if 'twere necessary, no other should conquer, when he was pre∣sent: whence he got together twelve hun∣dred Coronets, most of which one would have taken for Rubbish. Now [little or] nothing do they differ from him, who strip themselves for every public Affair, but render themselves reprehensible by many, becoming troublesome, and being, when they do well, the Subject of Envy, and when ill, of Re∣joycing. And that Industry, which was at the beginning admir'd, turns afterwards to
Contempt and Laughter.3. Because it makes one odi∣ous and ridiculous In this manner it was said: Metiochus leads forth the Army, Metiochus oversees the High-Ways, Metiochus bakes the Bread, Metiochus bolts the Meal, Metiochus does all things, Metiochus shall bear the Mis∣fortune. This [Metiochus] was a Follower of Pericles, and made use, it seems, of the Power, he had with him, invidiously and disdainful∣ly. For a Statesman ought to come to a People, that is, as they say, in love with him, and leave in them a Longing after him, when he is absent: which Course Scipio Africanus also took, dwelling a long time in the Coun∣trey, at the same time both removing from himself the Burthen of Envy, and giving those leisure to breath, who seem'd to be op∣press'd by his Glory.4. Because he ought to shun the ill Will of others, whether Great or Little. But Timesias the Clazo∣menian, who was otherwise a good Com∣mon-wealths-man, was ignorant of his being envy'd, and hated for doing all things by himself, till the following Accident befell him. It hapned, that as he pass'd by, where cer∣tain Boys were striking a Cockall-bone out of an Hole, some of them said, that the Bone was still left within; but he, who had stricken it, cry'd out, I wish, I had as certainly beaten out Timesias's Brains, as this Bone is out of the Hole. Timesias, hearing this, and there∣by understanding the Envy [and Spight,] born him by every one, return'd Home, where he imparted the Matter to his Wife, and having commanded her to pack up all, and follow him, immediately left both his House and the City. And Themistocles seems to have been in some such Condition amongst the Athenians, when he said: How is it, O ye blessed ones, that you
are tir'd with the frequent receiving of Benefits? Now some of those things have indeed been rightly spoken, others not so well. For a Statesman ought not to withdraw his Affecti∣on and providential Care from any public Affair whatever, but in that respect apply himself to understand them all; neither should he reserve himself, like the sacred An∣chor in a Ship, for the last Necessities and Ha∣zards of the State.5. That shewing hiself a Lover of the Pub∣lick Good, he must not ima∣gine him∣self able to manage every thing, but must, as do the Masters of Ships, make use of others. But as the Masters of Ships do some things with their own Hands, and perform others, sitting a far off by other Instruments, turning and winding them by the Hands of others, and making use of Ma∣riners, Boatswains, and Mates, some of which they often call to the Stern, putting the Helm into their Hands: so 'tis convenient for a Statesman, sometimes to yield the Com∣mand to his Companions, and to invite them kindly and civilly to the Tribunal, not ma∣naging all the Affairs of the Common-weal by his own Speeches, Decrees, and Actions, but that having good and faithful Men he may em∣ploy every one of them in that proper and pe∣culiar Station, which he finds to be most suita∣ble for him. Thus Pericles us'd Menippus for the Conduct of the Armies, by Ephialtes he humbled the Councel of the Aeopagus, by Charinus he pass'd the Law against the Megarians, and sent Lampon to People the City of the Thurii. For the Greatness of Authority is not only less liable to be envy'd by the People,6. That by this means public Af∣fairs are better re∣regula∣ed. when it seems to be divided amongst many; but the Business is also more exactly done. For as the Division of the Hand into Fingers has not weakned it, but render'd it more commo¦dious
and instrumental for the Uses, to which it serves: so he, who in the Administration of a State gives part of the Affairs to others, renders the Action more efficacious by com∣municating it. But he, who thrô an unsatiable Desire of Glory or Power lays the whole [Burthen of the] State upon his own Shoul∣ders, and applies himself to that, for which he is neither fitted by Nature nor Exercise, as Cleon did to the leading forth of Armies, Philopoemen to the Commanding of Navies, and Annibal to Haranguing the People, has no Excuse for his Errors; but hears that of Euripides objected against him, Thou, but a Carpenter, concern'dst thy self With Works, not wrought in Wood: — Being no good Orator,7. That 'tis a great Shame and Folly to think on doing ma∣ny things himself a∣lone, since he often finds e∣nough to do in per∣forming one, as he ought. you went on an Em∣bassage, being of a lazy Temper, you thrust your self into the Stewardship, being igno∣rant in keeping Accounts, you would be Treasurer, or being old and infirm, you took on you the Command of the Army. But Pericles divided his Authority with Cimon, re∣serving to himself the Governing within the City, and committing to him the Manning of the Navy, and making War upon the Bar∣barians: for the other was naturally fitter for War, and himself for Civil Affairs. Eubulus also the Anaphlystian is much commended, that having Credit and Authority in Matters of the greatest Importance, he manag'd none of the Grecian Affairs, nor betook himself to the Conducting of the Army; but employing himself about the Treasure, he augmented
the public Revenues, and greatly benefited the City by them. But Iphicrates, practising to make Declamations at his own House in the presence of many, rendred him∣self ridiculous: for thô he had been no bad Orator, but an excellently good one, yet ought he to have contented himself with the Glory, got by Arms, and abstaining from the School, to have left it to the Sophisters. But since 'tis incident to every Populacy to be malicious,XII. Of the Prudence, a States∣man ought to be fur∣nisht with for obvia∣ting Ca∣lumnies, and pro∣curing, what is for the Public Good, to be receiv'd by the People, yea, even by his very Enemies. and desirous to find fault with their Governors, and since they [are apt to] suspect, that many, even useful things, if they pass without being oppos'd or contra∣dicted, are done by Conspiracy, and since this principally brings Societies and Friend∣ships into Obloquy; they must not indeed leave any real Enmity or Dissention against themselves, as did Onomademus, a Demagogue of the Chians, who, having master'd a Sediti∣on, suffer'd not all his Adversaries to be ex∣pell'd the City: Lest, said he, we should begin to differ with our Friends, when we are wholly freed from our Enemies: for this would be in∣deed a Folly. But when the Multitude shall have conceiv'd a Suspicion against any im∣portant and beneficial Project, they must not, as if it were by Confederacy, all deliver the same Opinion; but two or three of them must dissent, and mildly oppose their Friend, and afterwards, as if they were convinc'd by Reason, change their Sentiment: for by this means they draw along with them the People, who think them mov'd by the Beneficialness of the thing. But in small Matters, and such,
as are of no great Consequence, 'tis not amiss to suffer his Friends really to differ, every one following his own private Reason: that so in the principal and greatest Concerns they may not seem to act upon Design, when they shall unanimously agree, to what is best. XIII. That he ought not to hunt after all Offices, but only accept of those, to which he is lawfully call'd, and how he ought to behave himself as well in great as little Em∣ploys.The Politician therefore is by Nature al∣ways the Prince of the City, as the King a∣mong the Bees: And in consideration of this, he ought always to have the Helm of public Affairs in his Hand; but as for those Digni∣ties and Offices, to which Persons are nomi∣nated and chosen by the Suffrages of the Peo∣ple, he should neither too eagerly, or often pursue them, the seeking after Offices being neither venerable nor popular, nor yet should he reject them, when the People legally con∣fer them on him, and invite him to them; but even, thô they are below his Reputation, to accept them, and willingly employ himself in them: for 'tis but just, that they, who have been honour'd by Offices of greater Dignity, should in return grace those of in∣ferior Rank. And in those more weighty [and superior] Employs, such as are the Com∣manding of the Armies in Athens, the Pryta∣neia in Rhodes, and the Boeotarchy amongst us, he should carry himself with such Moderati∣on, as to remit and abate something of their Grandeur, adding somewhat of Dignity and Venerableness to those, that are meaner and less esteem'd, that he may be neither despis'd for these, nor envy'd for those.
Now it behoves him that enters upon any Office,XIV. On what they ought to reflect, who intermed∣dle in pub∣lic Af∣fairs. not only to have at hand those Argu∣ments, of which Pericles put himself in mind, when he first receiv'd the Robe of State: Be∣think thy self, Pericles, thou governst Free-men, thou governst Grecians, yea, Citizens ef Athens; but farther also he ought to say thus with himself: Thou, being a Subject, governst a City, which is under the Obedience of Caesars Proconsul, or Lieutenant. These are not the Plains of the Lance, this is not the ancient Sardis, nor is this the Puissance of the Lydians. Thou must make thy Robe scantier, look from the Pavilion to the Tribunal, and not place too great Confidence in thy Crown, since thou seest Shooes over thy Head. But in this the Stage-Players are to be imita∣ted, who add indeed to the Play their own passionate Transports, Behaviour and Coun∣tenance, suitable [to the Person, they repre∣sent,] but yet give ear to the Prompter, and transgress not the Rythms and Measures of the Faculty granted them by their Masters.1. By not doing this men en∣danger their Lives. For an Error [in Government] brings not, [as in the acting of a Tragedy, only] Hissing and Derision; but many have by this means, sub∣jected themselves to that Severe Chastiser, the Neck-cutting Ax. As it befell those who were aboutFor , I read . our Countrey-man Pardalus, when they forgot theirFor , I read . Oaths. Another being confin'd to a [certain Desart] Island, became as Solon has it,
At last from a banisht Athenian, A Pholegandrian or Sicinitan. For we laugh indeed, when we see little Chil∣dren endeavouring to fasten their Fathers Shooes on their own Feet,2. Or at least ren∣der them∣selves contemp∣tible and ridiculous. or set their Crowns on their Heads in sport. But the Governors of Cities foolishly exhorting the People to imitate those Works, Atchievments, and Actions of their Ancestors, which are not suitable to the present Times and Affairs, ele∣vate the Multitude, and doing things, that are ridiculous, suffer not however, what is fit to be laugh'd at, unless they are Men altogether despis'd. For there are many other Facts of the ancient Greeks, the Recital of which to those, who are now living, may serve to form and moderate their Manners: as would be the Relating at Athens, not the warlike [Exploits of their Progenitors,] but, for Ex∣ample, the Decree of Amnesty [or general Pardon and Oblivion,] after the [Expulsion of the] thirty [Tyrants;] the Fining of Phrynichus, who represented in a Tragedy the Taking of Miletus; how they wore Garlands on their Heads, when Cassander rebuilt Thebes; that having Intelligence of the Scytalism, [or Slaughter] at Argos, in which the Argives put to death fifteen hundred of their own Citizens, they commanded a Lustration [or expiatory Sacrifice] to be carry'd about in a full Assem∣bly; and that searching of Houses for those, that were confederated with Harpalus, they pass'd by only one, which was inhabited by a Man newly marry'd. For by the imitating of such things, as these, they may even now resemble their Ancestors; but [the Fights at]
Marathon, Eurymedon, and Plataeae, and what∣ever Examples vainly puff up and heighten the Multitude, should be left to the Schools of the Sophisters. Now a Statesman ought not only to exhi∣bit himself and his Countrey blameless with the Prince,XV. That he must keep Friendship with othr Lords, of whose good Will he may stand in need: and refer all to the public Pro∣fit. but also to have always for his Friend, some one of those that are most pow∣erful above, as a firm support of Polity: for the Romans are of such a Disposition, that they are most ready to [assist] their Friends in their political Endeavors. 'Tis good also to produce [the Examples of] those, which haveI o∣mit , and for , read . receiv'd Benefit from their Friendship with Princes, as did Polybius and Panaetius, who, thrô the Favour of Scipio to them, greatly ad∣vantag'd their Countreys for [the obtaining] Felicity. So Caesar, when he had taken Alex∣andria, made his Entry into it, holding Areias by the Hand, and discoursing with him alone of all his Familiars: after which, Augustus said to the Alexandrians, who, expecting the utmost Severity, supplicated his Favor, that he pardon'd them for the Greatness of their City, for its Builder Alexander, and thirdly, ad∣ded he, to gratify this my Friend. Is it then fit to compare to this Benefit those exceeding gainful Commissions, and Administrations of Provinces, in the pursuit of which many even grow old at other Mens Doors, leaving their own Domestick Affairs in the mean time un∣regarded? Or should we not rather correct Euripides, singing and saying, that, if one must watch and sue at anothers Court, and subject ones self to some great Mans Familiarity, 'tis most commendable so to do for the Sake of
ones Countrey, but otherwise to embrace and pursue Friendships on equal and just Conditions. XVI. He ought to take heed, lest by seeking the Friendship of Princes he bring his Coun∣trey into Slavery.Yet ought not he, who renders and exhi∣bits his Countrey obsequious to potent Prin∣ces, to contribute to the oppressing of it, nor having ty'd its Leg, to subject also its Neck, as some do, who, referring all things, both great and little to these Potentates, upbraid it with Servitude, or rather wholly take away the Common-wealth, rendring it astonisht, timorous, and without Command of any thing. For as those, who are accustom'd nei∣ther to Sup nor Bath without the Physician, do not make so much use of their Health, as Nature affords them: so they, who introduce the Princes Judgment into every Decree, Council, Favour, and Administration, neces∣sitate the Princes to be more Masters of them, than they desire. Now the Cause of this is prin∣cipally the Avarice and Ambition of the chief Citizens: for either by injuring their Inferiors, they compel them to fly out of the City; or in such things, wherein they differ from one another, disdaining to be worsted by their Fel∣low Citizens, they bring in such, as are more powerful: whence both the Council, People, Courts of Judicature, and whole Magistracy lose their Authority. But he ought to ap∣pease private Citizens by Equality, and migh∣tier Men by mutual Submissions, so to keep within the Common-weal, and there determin Affairs, making for these things, as it were for secret Diseases, a certain Political Medi∣cine, both being himself rather willing to be vanquisht amongst his Fellow Citizens, than
to get the better by the Injury and Dissolution of his Countreys Rights, and requesting the same of every one else, and teaching them, how great a Mischief this Obstinacy in con∣tending is. But now, rather than they will with Honour and Benignity mutually yield to their Fellow Citizens, Kinsmen, Neighbours, and Colleagues in Office, they do with no less Prejudice than Shame, carry forth their Dissentions to the Doors of the Pleaders, and [put them into] the Hands of pragmatical Lawyers. Physicians indeed turn and drive forth into the Superficies of the Body such Diseases,XVII. If there is any Disease in the State, he ought to conceal it, and cure it within. as they are not able utterly to extirpate; but a Statesman, if he cannot keep a City altoge∣ther free from Disquiet, shall, concealing its Disturbance and Sedition, endeavour to cure and compose it, so as it may least stand in need of Physicians and Medicines from a∣broad.1. Reme∣dies from without are dan∣gerous. For the Intention of a Statesman should be fixt upon the Public Safety, and shun, as has been said, the tumultuous and furious Motion of Vain-glory; and yet in his Disposition there should be Magnanimity, Iliad. c. 1.And an undaunted Courage, as becomes The Men, who are for their dear Countreys Right Prepar'd to Death 'gainst stoutest Foes to fight, and [bravely resolve, not only to hazard their Lives against the Assaults of invading Ene∣mies, but also] to struggle with the most diffi∣cult Affairs,2. He must then act and speak freely. and [stem the Torrent of] the most dangerous and impetuous times. For as he must not himself be a Creator of Storms
and Tempests, so neither must he abandon the Ship of the State, when they come upon it, and, as he ought not to raise Commotions, and drive it into Danger, so is he oblig'd, when it is toss'd, and is in peril, to give it his utmost Assistance, casting forth from himself Freedom of Speech, as it were a sacred An∣chor, when Affairs are at the greatest Extre∣mity. Such were the Difficulties, that befell the Pergamenians under Nero, and the Rhodi∣ans lately under Domitian, and the Thessalians heretofore in the time of Augustus, when they burnt Petraeus alive. You shall not in this Case demurring see, or starting back for fear any one, who is truly a Statesman, neither [shall you find him] ac∣cusing others, and withdrawing himself out of Harms way; but [you shall have him rather] going on Embassies, sailing [to for∣reign Parts,] and saying first, not only, We're here Apollo, who the Murther wrought, No longer plague our Country for our Fault, but also ready to undergo Perils and Dangers for the Multitude, even thô he has not been at all partaker of their Crime.3. A Statesman should not desire to over∣live his Countrys Ruine. For this indeed is a gallant Action, and besides its Honesty, one only Mans Virtue and Magnanimity has often wonderfully mitigated the Anger, con∣ceiv'd against a whole Multitude, and dissipa∣ted the Terror and Bitterness, with which they were threatned. Such an Influence with a King of Persia had the Deportment of
Sperchis and Bulis, two noble Spartans, and equally prevalent was the Speech of Stheno with Pompey, when being about to punish the Mamertines for their Defection, he was told by Stheno, that he would not act justly, if he should for one guilty Person destroy a∣bundance of Innocents: for that he himself had caus'd the Revolt of the City by per∣swading his Friends, and forcing his Enemies [to that Attempt.] This Speech did so dis∣pose Pompey, that he both pardon'd the City, and courteously treated Stheno. But Syllas Host, having used the like Vertue towards an unlike Person, generously ended his Days. For when Sylla, having taken the City of Preneste, determin'd to put all the rest of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and to spare only him for the Hospitality, [that had been between them,] he, saying, that he would not be in∣debted for his Preservation to the Destroyer of his Countrey, thrust himself in amongst his Fellow Citizens, and was massacred with them. We ought therefore indeed to deprecate such times, as these, and hope for better things:XVIII. How he, that ma∣nages State affairs, is to converse with his Compani∣ons: and should honor, as a great and sacred thing, every Magistracy and Magistrate. Now the mutual Concord and Friendship of Magi∣strates with one another is a far greater Ho∣nor of Magistracy, than their Diadems, and purple-garded Robes. Now those, who lay for a Foundation of Friendship their having been Fellow Souldiers, or having spent their Youth together, and take their being joint Commanders, or Co-Magistrates for a Cause of Enmity, cannot avoid [being guilty of]
one of these three Evils. For either regard∣ing their Colleagues in Government, as their Equals, they brangle with them, or looking on them, as their Superiors, they envy them, or esteeming them their Inferiors, they de∣spise them, whereas indeed one ought to court his Superior, advance his Inferior, ho∣nour his Equal, and love and embrace all, as having been made Friends, not by [eating at the same] Table, [drinking in the same] Cup, or [meeting at the same solemn] Feast, but by a common and public Bond, and hav∣ing in some sort an hereditary Benevolence, deriv'd from their Countrey. Scipio therefore was ill spoken of in Rome, for that making a Feast for his Friends at the Dedication of a Temple to Hercules, he invited not to it his Colleague Mummius: for thô in other things they took not one another for Friends, yet in such [Occurrences, as these,] they should have [mutually] honor'd and caress'd each other for the Sake of [their common] Magistracy. If then the Omission of so small a Civility brought Scipio, who was otherwise an admira∣ble Man, under a Suspicion of Arrogancy: how can he, who seek to impair the Dignity of his Colleague, or to obfuscate the Lustre of his Actions, or thrô Insolency to draw and attribute all things to himself, taking them [wholly] from his Companion, be esteem'd reasonable and moderate? I remember, that, when I was yet but a young Man, being joyntly with another sent on an Embassy to the Proconsul, and my Companion, I know not on what Occasion, stopping by the way, I went on alone, and perform'd the Affair.
Now when at my return I was to render an account of my Charge, my Father, rising up privately, admonisht me not to say, I went, but We went, nor I spake, but We spake, and so thrô all the rest to make my Report by associating my Companion, and rendring him a Sharer in my Actions. For this is not only decent and courteous, but also takes from Glory, what is offensive, that is, Envy. Whence [it is, that] great [Men generally] co-ascribe their most glorious Actions to their Daemon or Fortune, as did Timoleon, who, hav∣ing destroy'd the Tyrannies [erected] in Sici∣ly, consecrated a Temple to Chance, and Py∣thon, when, being admir'd and honor'd by the Athenians, for having slain Cotys, he said, God did this, making use of my Hand. But Theopompus, King of the Lacedaemonians, when one said that Sparta was preserv'd, because its Kings were well skill'd in governing, re∣ply'd: 'Tis rather because the People are well vers'd in obeying. These two things then are effected by each other: yet most Men both say and think,XIX. Ha∣ving com∣mended those, who behave themselves modestly in their public Of∣fices, he takes occa∣sion from the Answer of King Theopompus to discourse on the Art of Government; shewing, wherein it consists, to wit, in teaching all to obey well, and subject themselves to him, who commands. that the Business of political Instruction is to render the People pliable to be govern'd. For there are in every City more govern'd than Governors, and every one, who lives in a Democracy, rules only a short time, but is subject all his Life, so that 'tis the most excel∣lent and useful Lesson, [we can learn;] to obey those, who are set over us, thô they are less furnisht with Authority and Reputation.
For 'tis absurd, that a Theodorus or a Polus, the principal Actor in a Tragedy, should of∣ten obey an hir'd Player, whose Part has not above three Words in it, and speak humbly to him, because he wears a Diadem and a Scepter; and that in real Actions, and in the Government of the State, a rich and mighty Man should undervalue and contemn a Magistrate, [because] simple and poor, in∣juring thus and degrading the Dignity of the Common-weal by his own, whereas he should rather by his Reputation and Authority have increas'd and advanc'd that of the Magistrate: As in Sparta the Kings rose up out of their Thrones to the Ephori, and whoever else were sent for by them, did not slowly obey, but running hastily, and with speed thrô the Forum, gave a Pattern of Obedience to their Fellow Citizens, whilst they glory'd in ho∣noring the Magistrates: not like to some ill∣bred and barbarous Persons, who, priding themselves in the abundance of their Power, affront the Judges of the public Combats, re∣vile the Directors of the Dances in the Bac∣chanals, and deride military Commanders, and those, that preside over the Exercises of Youth; neither knowing nor understanding, that to honor is sometimes more glorious than to be honor'd. For to a Man of great Authority in a City his accompanying and attending on the Magistrate is a greater Grace, than if he were himself accompany'd and attended on by him: or rather this indeed brings Trouble and Envy; but that real Glory, and such, as proceeds from [Kindness and] Good∣will. And [such a Man,] being seen some∣times
at the Magistrates Door, and saluting him first, and giving him the middle Place [or upper hand] in walking, does without taking any thing from himself, add Orna∣ment to the City. 'Tis also a popular thing, [and wins greatly on the Multitude,] to bear [patiently] the Reproaches and Indignation of a Magistrate, saying either with Dio∣medes, Iliad. l. 4.Great Glory soon will follow this;— or this, [which one sometime said] of De∣mosthenes: He is not now only Demosthenes, but a Lawgiver, or a Director of publick Dances, or a wearer of a Diadem: let us therefore lay aside our Revenge for a time. For either we shall come upon him, when he is dismiss'd from his Office, or shall by delaying gain a Cessation of Anger. Indeed one should in Diligence,XX. He consequent∣ly treats of the Du∣ty of good Subjects in a regulated State, and how they ought to help their Magi∣strates, and profit the Publick. Provi∣dence, and Care for the Publick, always strive with every Magistrate, advising them, if they are gracious, and well behav'd of such things as are requisite, and telling them, and giving them [Opportunities to put in practice, or] to make use of such things, as have been rightly counsell'd, and helping them to advance the common Good; but if there is in them any Sloth, Delay, or ill Dis∣posedness to Action, then ought one to go himself and speak to the People, and not to neglect or omit the Publick, on Pretence, that it becomes not one Magistrate to be cu∣rious, and play the Busy-body in another Pro∣vince. For the Law always gives the first
Rank in Government to him,1. Because the gene∣ral Law authoises him who does, what is just. who does, what is just, and knows, what is convenient. There was, says Xenophon, one in the Army, who was neither General, nor inferior Commander, but who by his Skill in what was fit, and Boldness in at∣tempting, raising himself to command, preserv'd the Grecians. Now of all Philopoemens Gests this is the most illustrious, that, Ags having surpriz'd Messena, and the General of the Achai∣ans being unwilling, and fearful to go and rescue it, he, with some of the forwardest, Spirits, did, without [expecting] a Commis∣sion,2. Yet on condition, that no Novelty be at∣tempted, unless in Cses of ncessity or great impor∣tance. make an Assault and recover it. Yet are not Innovations to be attempted on every light or trivial Occasion; but either in Cases of Necessity, as did Philopoemen, or for the performance of some honorable Action, as did Epaminondas, when he continu'd in the BoeotarchyThe Office of chef Ma∣gistrate amongst the Boeoti∣ans. four Months longer than was al∣low'd by the Law, during which he brake into Laconia, and perform'd the Actions a∣bout Messena. Whence, if any Complaint or Accusation shall on this Occasion happen, we may in our Defence against such Accusation, plead Necessity, or have the Greatness and Gallantry of the Action, as a Comfort for the Danger, [we have been expos'd to.] XXI. He returns to his Dis∣course, and contemning Jasons Ty∣rannical Saving, shews, in what things a Magistrate may gratifie his People.There is recorded a Saying of Jason, Mo∣narch of the Thessalians, which he always had in his Mouth, when he outrag'd or molested any, that there is a Necessity for those to be unjust in small Matters, who will act justly in great ones. Now that Speech one may pre∣sently
discern to be, a masterly one, [pro∣ceeding from him, who would arrogate all Power to himself.] But more political is this Precept, to gratify the Populacy with the passing over small things, that we may op∣pose and hinder them, when they are like to offend in greater. For he, that will be exact and earnest in all things, never yielding or conniving, but always severe and inexorable, accustoms the People to strive obstinately, and behave themselves perversly towards him. But when the Waves beat high,1. By ac∣commo∣dating himself to little Peo∣ple, when the pub∣lick Inter∣est is not concern'd. the Helm should be A little slackned,— Sometimes by unbending himself, and sport∣ing graciously with them, as in the [celebra∣ting of Festival] Sacrifices, [assisting at pub∣lick] Games, and [being a Spectator on the] Theatres, and sometims by seeming neither to see nor hear, as we pass by the Faults of little Children in our Houses, that the Faculty of freely chastising and reprehending, being like a Medicine, not antiquated or debilitated by use, but having its full Vigor and Authority, may more forcibly move and operate on the Multitude in matters of greater Importance. Alexander, being inform'd, that his Sister was too familiarly acquainted with a certain handsome young Man, was not displeas'd at it, but said, that she also must be permitted to have some Enjoy∣ment of the Royalty; acting in such his Conce∣ssion neither rightly, nor as beseem'd himself: for the Dissolution and Dishonouring of the State ought not to be esteem'd an Enjoyment. But a [good] Statesman will not to his Power per∣mit
the People to injure [any private] Citi∣zens, to confiscate [unjustly] other Mens E∣states, or to share the publick Stock amongst them, but will by perswading, instructing, and threatning, oppugn such irregular Desires, by the feeding and increasing of which those, who were about Cleon, caus'd many a stinging Drone, as Plato says, to breed in the City. But if the Multitude, taking occasion from some [solemn] Feast of the Countrey, or the Veneration of some God, shall be inclin'd, either to exhibit some Shew, to make some small Distribution, to bestow some courteous Gratification, or to perform some other Mag∣nificence, let them in such Matters have an Enjoyment both of their Liberality and Abun∣dance. For there are many [Examples of] such things in the Governments of Pericles and Demetrius: and Cimon adorn'd the Market-place by planting Rows of Plane-Trees, and making of Walks. Cato also, seeing the Po∣pulacy in the Time of Catilines Conspiracy put in a Commotion by Caesar, and dangerously inclin'd to [make] a Change in the Govern∣ment, perswaded the Senate to decree some Distributions of Money amongst the Poor, and this, being done, appeas'd the Tumult, and quieted the Sedition.2. By with∣drawing them dis∣creetly and with Sweetness from some great Danger. A fit Si∣militude. For, as a Physician, having taken [from his Patient] great store of corrupt Blood, gives [him] a little innocent Nourishment: so a Statesman, having taken [from the People] some great thing, which was either inglorious or prejudicial, does again by some small and courteous Gratuity still their morose and complaining Humor. 'Tis not amiss also dextrously to transfer, what is
desir'd by the People, to other useful things, as Demades did,Exam∣ples. when he had the Revenues of the City under his Management: For they, being bent to send Galleys to the Assistance of those, who were in Rebellion against Alexan∣der, and commanding him to furnish out Mo∣ney for that purpose, he said to them: You have Money ready, for I have made Provision a∣gainst the Bacchanals, that every one of you might receive half a Mna; but if you had rather have it employ'd this way, make use, as you please of your own. And by this means taking them off from sending the Fleet, lest they should be de∣priv'd of the Dividend, he kept the People from offending Alexander. For there are ma∣ny prejudicial things, to which one cannot di∣rectly put a Stop, but must for that end make use of turning and winding: As did Phocion, when he was requir'd at an unseasonable time to make an Incursion into Boeotia. For he immediately caus'd Proclamation to be made, that all from from their Pu∣berty. fourteen years of Age to fixty, should [prepare to] follow him, and when there arose upon it a Mutiny amongst the old Men, he said, There is no Hardship put upon you, for I, who am above fourscore years old, shall be your General. In this manner also is the sending of Ambassies to be put off, by joyning in the Commission, such as are unprepar'd, and the raising of unprofitable Buildings, by bidding them contribute to it, and the following of un∣decent Suits, by ordering the Prosecutors to appear together, and go together from the Court. Now the Proposers and Inciters [of the People] to such things are first to be drawn and associated for the doing of them: for so
they will, either by their shifting it off, seem to break the Matter, [themselves had pro∣pos'd;] or by their accepting of it, have their Share in the Trouble. XXII. With what Persons the Ma∣gistrate ought to be accompa∣ny'd in ex∣ecuting Affairs of Conse∣quence.But when some great and useful Matter, yet such, as requires much Strugling and Industry, is to be taken in hand, endeavor to choose the most powerful of your Friends, or [rather] the mildest of the most powerful: for they will least thwart you, and most cooperate with you, having Wisdom without a contentious Humor. Nevertheless, throughly understand∣ing your own Nature, you ought in that, for which you are naturally less fit, rather to make choice of such, as are of suitable Abilities, than of such, as are like your self: As Diomedes, when he went [forth] to spy, passing by the Valiant, took [for his Companion] one, that was prudent [and cautious.] For thus are Acti∣ons better counterpois'd, and there is no Con∣tention bred betwixt them, when they desire Honor from different Vertues and Qualities. If therefore you are your self no good Speaker, choose for your Assistant on the Bench, or your Companion in an Embassy, an elo∣quent Man, as Pelopidas did Epaminondas; if you are unfit to perswade and converse with the Multitude, being too high-minded for it, as was Cailicratidas, take one that is gracious and Courtly; if you are infirm of Body, and unable to undergo Fatigue, make choice of one, who is robust, and a Lover of Labor, as Nicias did of Lamachus. For thus did Geryon become admirable, having many Legs, Hands, and Eyes, which were all govern'd by one Soul. But it is in the Power of Statesmen
by conferring together, if they are unanimous, not only their Bodies and Wealth, but also their Fortunes, Authorities, and Vertues, to one [common] use, to perform the same Action with greater Glory than any other Person: not as did the Argonauts, who, hav∣ing left Hercules, were necessitated to have re∣course to Female Subtleties, and be subject to Enchantments and Sorceries, that they might save themselves, and steal away the Fleece. Men indeed entring into some Temples,XXIII. Of what Vi∣ces a Ma∣gistrate ought to o re. 1. Of A∣varice. leave their Gold without; but Iron, that I may speak in a Word, they never carry into any. Since then the Tribunal is a Temple, common to Jupiter the Counsellor, and Pro∣tector of Cities, to Themis [or Equity,] and Dice [or Justice,] from the very Beginning, before thou entrest into it, stripping thy Soul of Avarice, and the Love of Wealth, cast them into the Shops of Bankers and Usu∣rers, —And from them turn thy self, esteeming him, who heaps up Treasures by [the Management of] publick Affairs, to rob the Temples, [plunder] Graves, and [steal from] his Friends, [and enriching himself] by Treachery, and bearing of false Witness, to be an unfaithful Counsellor, a perjur'd Judge, a Bribe-taking Magistrate, and in brief, free from no Injustice. Whence 'tis not necessary to say much concerning this Matter. Now Ambition,2. Of Am∣bition. thô it is more spe∣cious than Covetousness, brings yet no less Plagues into a State. For it is [usually]
more accompany'd with Boldness, as being bred, not in slothful and abject Spirits, but chiefly in such, as are vigorous and active; and the Vogue of the People, frequently ex∣tolling it, and driving it by their Praises, ren∣ders it thereby headstrong, and hard to be manag'd.A Reme∣dy against Ambiti∣on. As therefore Plato advis'd, that we should even from their Infancy inculcate into young People, that 'tis not fit for them to wear Gold about them abroad, nor yet to be Possessors of it, as having a peculiar [Trea∣sure] of their own, immixt with their Souls, aenigmatically, as I conceive, insinuating the Vertue, propagated into their Natures from the Race, [or Stock, of which they are de∣scended:] so let us also moderate our Ambiti∣on, by saying, that we have in our selves un∣corrupted Gold, [that is,] Honour unmixt [or sincere,] and free from Envy and Reprehen∣sion, which is still augmented by the Dis∣course and Contemplation of our Acts and Gests in the Service of the Common-weal: Wherefore we stand not in need of Honors painted, [carv'd,] cast, or engraven in Brass, in which, what is most admir'd, frequently belongs to another. For [the Statue of] a Trumpeter or Halbardier is not commended [or esteem'd] for [the Sake of the Person,] whom it is made [to represent,] but [of the Workman,] by whom it is made. And Cato, when Rome was in a manner fill'd with Sta∣tues, would not suffer his to be erected, say∣ing, I had rather, Men should ask, why my Statue is not set up, than why it is. For such things are subject to Envy, and the People think them∣selves oblig'd to those, who have not receiv'd
them, whereas those, who have receiv'd them, are [esteem'd] burthensome, as seeking [pub∣lick] Employs for a Reward. For as he does no great or glorious Act, who, having with∣out danger sail'd along the [Gulf] Syrtis, is afterwards cast away in the Harbor: so he, who having kept himself safe in passing thrô the Treasury, and the [Management of the] publick Revenues, is caught with a Presiden∣cy, or a Place in theA Place in the Castle of Athens, where those, who had done the State any singu∣lar Ser∣vice, had their Di∣et at the Cities Cost, which was an extra∣ordinary Honor. Prytanaeum, dashes in∣deed against an high Promontory, but is like∣wise drown'd. He then is best, who desires none of these things, but shuns and refuses them all. But if perhaps it is not easie whol∣ly to decline a Favor or Testimonial of the Peoples Amity, when they are fully bent to bestow it, as on those, who have in the Ser∣vice of the State contended not for Silver or Presents, but have fought a Fight truly sacred, and deserving a Crown, let an Inscription, a Tablet, a Decree, or a Branch [of Lawrel or Olive] suffice, such, as Epimonides receiv'd out of the Acropolis [or Castle of Athens] for hav∣ing purify'd the City. So Anaxagoras, put∣ting back the other Honors, that were given him, desir'd, that on the Day of his Death, the Children might have leave to play and inter∣mit their Studies: and to the seven Persians, who kill'd the Magi, 'twas granted, that they and their Posterity should wear their Tiara, [or Turbant] on the Fore part of the Head: for this, it seems, they had made the Signal, when they went about that Attempt. The Honor also, which Pittacus receiv'd, had some∣thing political: for being bid to take, what Portion he would, of the Land, he had
gotten for his Citizens, he accepted as much, as he could reach with the Cast of his Dart: So Cocles the Roman, took as much, as he him∣self, being lame, could plow in a Day. For the Honor should not be a Recompence of the Action, but an Acknowledgment, that it may continue also long, as those did, which we have mention'd. But of the three hundred Statues, erected to Demetrius Phalereus, not one was eaten into by Rust, or cover'd with Filth, they being all pull'd down, whilst him∣self was yet alive; and those of Demades were melted into [Close-stool-pans and] Chamber-pots. Many other Honors also have under∣gone the like Fate, being regarded with an ill Eye, not only for the Wickedness of the Receiver, but also for the Greatness of the Gift. A Moderation in the Expence is there∣fore the best and surest Preservative of Ho∣nors: for such as are great, immense and pondrous, are like to unproportion'd Statues, soon overthrown. XXIV. A Statesman should not despise Glory, or true Ho∣nor; and how he is to govern himself in that Re∣spect.Now I here call those Honors, which the People, Whose Right it is, so name; with them I speak, as Empedocles has it: since a wise Statesman will not despise true Honor and Favor, con∣sisting in the good Will and [friendly] Dispo∣sition of those, who [gratefully] remember [his Services,] nor will he contemn Glory by shunning to please his Neighbours, as Democri∣tus would have him. For neither is the Fawning of Dogs, nor the Affection of Hor∣ses to be rejected by Huntsmen and Jockeys,
nay, it is both profitable and pleasant to breed in those Animals, which are brought up in our Houses, and live with us, such a Dispo∣sition towards ones self, as Lysimachus's Dog shew'd to his Master, and as theHomet. Poet relates Achilles's Horses to have had towards Patroclus. And I am of Opinion, that Bees would fare better, if they would make much of those, who breed them, and look after them, and admit them to come near 'em, than they do by stinging them, and driving them away: for now they punish 'em by smothering 'em with Smoak, but tame unruly Horses with [sharp] Bits, and Dogs, that are apt to run away, by [collaring them, and fastning them to] Clogs. But there is nothing, whch ren∣ders one Man so obsequious and submissive to another, as the Confidence of his good Will, and the Opinion of his Integrity and Justice: wherefore Demosthenes rightly affirm'd, that the greatest Preservative of States against Ty∣rants is Distrust. For that Part of the Soul, by which we believe, is most apt to be caught. As therefore Cassandra's Gift of Prophecy was of no Advantage to the Citizens [of Troy] who would not believe her. Apollo, who ren∣der'd her Prophe∣sies unbe∣liev'd, be∣cause she refus'd him the Enjoyment, she had promis'd him, when he bestow'd on her the Gift of Prophecy.The God (she says) would have me to foretel Things unbeliev'd: for when the People well Have smarted, groaning under Pressures sad, They stile me wise, till then they think me mad. So the Confidence the Citizens had in Archy∣tas, and their good Will towards Battus, were
highly advantagious to those who, would make use of them, thrô the [good] Opinion, they had of them. XXV. The two prin∣cipal Ad∣vantages, in which a Magi∣strate may glory, and by which he ought to think him∣self ho∣nor'd, are: That the People con∣fide in him; and that they love him, and wish him well.Now the first greatest Benefit, which is in the Reputation of Statesmen, is the Confidence, [that is had in them,] giving them an En∣trance into Affairs: and the second is, that the good Will of the Multitude is an Armor to the Good against those, that are envious and wicked: for, As when the careful Mother drives the Flies From her dear Babe, which sweetly sleeping lies, it chases away Envy, and renders the Plebei∣an equal in Authority to the Noble Man, the poor Man to the Rich, and the private Man to the Magistrates; and in a Word, when Truth and Vertue are joyn'd with it, 'tis a strange and favorable Wind, [directly carry∣ing Men] into Government. And [on the other side] behold and learn by Examples the mischievous Effects of the contrary Dis∣position.Examples shewing how pre∣judicial the ill Will of the Peo∣ple is to a Gover∣nor: and on the contrary, how ser∣viceable their A∣mity. For those of Italy slew the Wife and Children of Dionysius, having first viola∣ted and polluted them with their Lusts, and afterwards burning their Bodies, scatter'd the Ashes out of a Ship into the Sea. But when one Menander, who had reign'd graciously o∣ver the Bactrians, dy'd afterwards in the Camp, the Cities indeed by common Consent celebra∣ted his Funeral; but coming to a Contest about his Relicks, they were difficultly at last brought to this Agreement, that his Ashes being di∣stributed,
every one of them should carry a∣way an equal Share, and they should all e∣rect Monuments to him. Again the Agri∣gentins, being got rid of Phalaris, made a De∣cree, that none should wear a blew Garment: for the Tyrants Attendants had blew Live∣ries. But the Persians, because Cyrus was Hawk-nos'd, do to this day love such Men, and esteem them handsomest. That is of all Loves the strongest and divinest,On what this good Will is to be ground∣ed. which is by Cities and States born to any Man for his Vertue. But those false-nam'd Honors, and false Testimonials of Amity, which have their Rise from Stage-playes, Largesses, and Fencings, are not unlike the Flatteries of Whores, the People always with Smiles bestowing an un∣constant and short-liv'd Glory on him, that presents them, and gratifies them. He therefore, who first said,XXVI. Of the Magi∣strates Largesses to the Peo∣ple, and how they ought to be regulated. the People were overthrown by him, which first bestow'd Largesses on them, very well understood, that the Multitude lose their Strength, being ren∣der'd weaker by receiving. But these Be∣stowers must also know, that they destroy themselves, when purchasing Glory at great Expences, they make the Multitude haughty and arrogant, as having it in their Power to give and take away some very great Matter. Yet are we not therefore to act sordidly in the Distribution of Honorary Presents, when there is Plenty enough. For the People more hate a rich Man, who gives nothing of his own, than they do a poor Man, that robs the publick [Treasury,] attributing the former to Pride and a Contempt of them, but the latter
to Necessity.1. Let the Magi∣strate make the Largess of his own, and with∣out pre∣tending to any Recom∣pence. 2. For an ho∣nest Oc∣casion. 3. Without going in debt, and exposing himself to Derision. First therefore let these Larges∣ses be made gratis, for so they more oblige the Receivers, and strike them with Admira∣tion: Then on some Occasion, that has an handsome and laudable Pretence, with the Honour of some God, wholly drawing the People to Devotion. For so there is at the same time bred in them a strong Apprehensi∣on and Opinion, that the Deity is great and venerable, when they see those, whom they ho∣nor, and highly esteem, so bountifully and readily expending their Wealth upon their Honor. As therefore Plato forbad young Men, who were to be [liberally] educated, to learn the Lydian and Phrygian Harmony: one of which excites the mournful and melancholy part of our Soul; whilst the other increases its Inclination to Pleasure and sensual Delights: so do you, as much as possibly you can, drive out of the City all such Largesses, as either softer and cherish Brutality and Savageness, or Scurrility and Lasciviousness; and if that can∣not be, [at least] shun them, and oppose the Many, when they desire such Spectacles, al∣ways making the Subjects of your Expences useful and modest, having for their End, what is good and necessary, or at least what is plea∣sant and acceptable, without any Prejudice or Injury. But if your Estate is but indifferent, and by its Center and Circumference confin'd to your necessary use, 'tis neither ungenerous nor base to confess your Poverty, and give place to such, as are provided for those honora∣ry Expences, and not, by taking up Money on Usury, to render your self at the same time both miserable and ridiculous by such Services.
For they, whose Abilities fall short, cannot well conceal themselves, being compell'd ei∣ther to be troublesom to their Friends, or to court [and flatter] Usurers, so that they get not any Honor or Power,Notable Examples to this purpose. but rather Shame and Contempt by such Expences. 'Tis there∣fore always useful on such Occasions, to call to mind Lamachus and Phocion. For Phocion, when the Athenians at a solemn Sacrifice call'd upon him, and often importun'd him to give them something, said to them: I should be a∣sham'd to give to you, and not pay this Callicles: pointing to an Usurer, who was standing by. And as for Lamachus, he always put down in his Bill of Charges, when he was General, the Money laid out for his Shooes and Coar. And to Hermon, when he refus'd the Under∣taking of an Office because of his Poverty, the Thessalians ordain'd a Puncheon of Wine a Month, and a Bushel and an half of Meal every four Days. 'Tis therefore no Shame to confess ones Poverty, nor are the Poor in Ci∣ties of less Authority than those, who feast and exhibit publick Shews, if they have but got∣ten Freedom of Speech and Reputation by their Vertue. A States-man ought therefore chiefly to mo∣derate himself on such Occasions,XXVII. That the People must not be manag'd by superfluous Expences, but by Vertue, Prudence, and Elo∣quence. and neither being himself on foot, go into the Field a∣gainst well-mounted Cavaliers, nor being himself poor, vy with those, that are rich, a∣bout Race-matches, theatrical Pomps, and [magnificent] Tables [and Banquets;] but [should rather strive to be like] those, who endeavor to manage the City by Vertue and Prudence, always joyn'd with Eloquence; in which there is not only Honesty and Venera∣bleness,
but also a Gracefulness and At∣tractiveness, Far more to be desir'd than Craesus's Wealth. For a good Man is neither insolent nor odi∣ous, nor is a discreet Person singularly self-conceited, Nor with a severe look walks he amongst His Fellow Citizens;— but is [on the contrary] first courteous,A curious Descripti∣on of a States∣man, who has Ho∣nor and Duty in Recom∣mendati∣on. affa∣ble, and of easie access to all, having his House always open, as a Port of Refuge to those, that will make use of him, and shewing his Care and Kindness, not only [by being as∣sistant] in the Necessities and Affairs [of those, that have recourse to him,] but also by con∣doling with those, that are in Adversity, and [congratulating and] rejoycing with such, as have been successful; neither is he troublesom or offensive by the Multitude [and Train] of Domesticks, [attending him] at the Bath, or by taking up of Places on the Theatres, nor remarkable by things, invidious for their Luxu∣ry and Sumptuousness; but equal and like to others in his Cloths, Diet, Education of his Children, and the Garb and Attendance of his Wife, as desiring in his Comportment and Manner of Living to be like the rest of the People: then he exhibits himself an intelli∣gent Counsellor, an unfeed Advocate, and courteous Arbitrator between Men and their Wives, and Friends at variance amongst themselves; not spending a small part of the Day for the Service of the Common-weal at the Tribunal, or in the Hall of Audience, and
employing all the rest, and the whole Remain∣der of his Life, in drawing to himself from e∣very sort Negotiations and Affairs, as the North-east Wind, call'd Caecias, does the Clouds; but always employing his Cares on the Publick, and reputing Polity [or the Ad∣ministration of the State] as a busie and active Life, and nor, as 'tis commonly thought, an easie and idle Service; he does by all these, and such like things turn and draw the Many, who see, that all the Flatteries and Entice∣ments of others are but spurious and deceit∣ful Baits, [when compar'd] to his Care and Providence. The Flatterers indeed of Deme∣trius vouchsaf'd not to give the other [Poten∣tates of his Time, amongst whom Alexanders Empire was divided,] the Title of Kings; but stil'd Seleucus Master of the Elephants, Lysima∣chus Treasurer, Ptolomaeus Admiral, and Aga∣thocles Governour of the Isles.What O∣pinion those Men incur, who in Mat∣ters of Govern∣ment are guided by any other Affection, than that of the Publick. But the Mul∣titude, thô they may at the beginning reject a good and prudent Man, yet coming after∣wards to understand his Veracity, and [the Sincerity of his] Disposition, esteem him only to be a States-man, a publick spirited Person, and a Magistrate; and of the others, they think and call one a Dancing-master, a se∣cond a Feaster, and a third a Master of the Exercises. Moreover, as at the Banquets made by Callias, or Alcibiades, Socrates only is heard, and to Socrates all Mens Eyes are directed: so in [sound and] healthy States Ismenias bestows Largesses, Lichas makes Suppers, and Niceratus gives Masks [or Enterludes;] but 'tis Epami∣nondas, Aristides, and Lysander, that govern, manage the State, and lead forth the Armies.
Which if any one considers, he ought not to be dejected or amaz'd at the Glory, gotten a∣mongst the People from Theatres, Banqueting Halls, and publick Buildings: since it lasts but a short time, being at an end, as soon as the Prizes and Plays are over, and having in them nothing honorable or worthy of E∣steem. XXVIII. Of Sediti∣ons and ci∣vil Wars, and how a good Ma∣gistrate ought to govern himself in them.Those, that are verst in the Keeping and Breeding of Bees, look on that Hive to be healthiest and in best Condition, where there's most Humming, and which is fullest of Bustle and Noise; but he, to whom God has com∣mitted the Care of the rational and political Hive, reputing the Felicity of the People to consist chiefly in Quietness and Tranquility, will receive, and to his Power imitate the rest of Solons Ordinances; but will doubt and wonder, what it was, that induc'd him to de∣cree, that he, who, when there arises a Sedi∣tion in the City, adheres to neither Party, should be reputed infamous.1. He ought not to joyn with one Party to ruine the other. For in the Body the Beginning of its Change from Sickness to Health is not wrought by the Parts, that are infected with the Disease; but when the Tem∣perature of such Parts, as are sound, growing powerful, drives away what is contrary to Nature: and in a State, where the People are disturb'd by a Sedition, not dangerous and mortal, but which will after a while be [com∣pos'd and] allay'd, 'tis of necessity, that there be a Mixture of much, that is uninfected and sound, and that it continue and cohabit in it. For thither flows from the Wise, what is fit [and natural,] and passes into the Part, that is diseas'd. But when Cities are in an univer∣sal
Commotion, they are in danger of being utterly destroy'd, unless being constrain'd by some Necessity and Chastisement from abroad, they are by the Force of their Miseries re∣duc'd to Wisdom. Yet does it not become you in [the time of] a Sedition to sit, as if you were neither sensible nor sorry, praising your own Unconcernedness, as a quiet and happy Life, and taking delight in others Er∣rors.2. He ought to speak to both Par∣ties, with∣out joyn∣ing with either, to help them in com∣mon, and bring them to Agree∣ment. 3. He ought to prevent Sedition. But on such Occasions chiefly should you put on the Buskin of Theramenes, and conferring with both Parties, joyn your self to neither. For you will not seem a Stranger by not being a Partaker in Injustice, but a com∣mon Friend to them all by your Assistance; nor will you be envy'd for your not sharing in the Calamity, when you appear equally to condole with every one of them. But the best is by your providential Care to prevent the arising of any Sedition, and in this consists the greatest and most excellent Point, as it were, of the Political Art. For you are to consider, that the greatest Benefits, a City can enjoy, being Peace, Liberty, Plenty, abun∣dance of Men, and Concord, the People have at this time no need of Statesmen for the procuring of Peace: since all War, whe∣ther with Greeks or Barbarians, is wholly taken away, and banisht from us. As for Liberty, the People have as much, as the Emperors think fit to grant them, and more perhaps would not be expedient. Now such is the unenvy'd Plenty of the Earth, and the kind Temper of the Seasons, that being seen by a prudent Man, as also,
How Wives by bringing forth like Children make Their Husbands happy,— He will have nothing more to do, but to beg of the Gods the Preservation and safety of what is born and produc'd to his Fellow-Ci∣tizens. XXIX. The last Instruction he gives to him, who manages State Af∣fairs, is, that he procure the Continu∣ance of Peace and Ʋnion a∣mongst his Fellow-Citizens.There remains therefore to a Statesman, of all those things that are subject to his Charge, this alone, which is inferior to none of the other Benefits, the keeping of those who are Co-inhabitants [of the same City,] in perpe∣tual Concord and Friendship, and the taking away of all Contentions, Animosities, and Heart-burnings. In which he shall, as in the Differences between Friends, so converse with the Party appearing to be most injur'd, as if he himself seem'd also a Sharer in the Injury, and equally offended at it: endeavoring af∣wards so to appease him, by shewing him, how much those, who pass by Injuries, excel such, as strive to contend and conquer, not only in good Nature and Sweetness of Dis∣position, but also in Prudence and Magnani∣mity; and that by remitting a little of their Right in small Matters, they get the better in the greatest and most important. He shall afterwards admonish them both in general and apart, instructing them in the Weakness of the Grecian Affairs, which 'tis better for in∣telligent Men to enjoy, and to live in Peace and Concord, than to engage in a Contest, for which Fortune has left no Reward. For what Authority, what Glory is there remain∣ing for the Conquerors? What Power is
there, which the least Decree of a Proconsul cannot abolish, or transfer elsewhere; and which, thô it should continue, would not yet have any thing worth our Pains? But since,A Simi∣litude shewing the Source of most Seditions and Civil Wars. as a Conflagration [in a Town] does not fre∣quently begin in sacred and publick Places; but a Lamp [or Candle] negligently left in an House, or the burning of a little Trash or Rubbish, raises a great Fire, and works a com∣mon Mischief: so Sedition in a State is not always kindled by Contentions about publick Affairs; but oftentimes the Differences, aris∣ing from private Concerns and Jangles, being propagated into the Publick, have disturb'd a whole City:What Re∣medies are to be apply'd to them. 'tis no less becoming a Statesman to remedy and prevent also these: so that some of them may never have any Being, o∣thers may be quickly extinguisht, and others hindred from receiving Increase, or taking hold of the Publick, and confin'd amongst the Adversaries themselves. And as himself ought to take care for this, so should he advertise others, that private Disturbances are the Occasion of publick ones, and little of great ones, if they are neglected, and suffer'd to proceed without tak∣ing care to apply fit Remedies to them in the Beginning.A notable Example in Crates. In this manner is the greatest [and most dangerous] Disturbance, that ever hap∣ned in Delphi, said to have been occasion'd by Crates, whose Daughter Orgilaus, the Son of Phalis, being about to marry, it hapned, that the Cup, they were to use in the Espousals, brake asunder of it self, which he taking for an ill Omen, left his Bride, and went away with his Father. Crates a little after, charging them with taking away a certain golden Ves∣sel,
us'd in the Sacrifices, caus'd Orgilaus and his Brother, unheard, to be precipitated from the Top of a Rock to the Bottom, and af∣terwards slew several of their most intimate Friends, as they were at their Devotions in the Temple of Providence. After many such things were perpetrated, the Delphians, put∣ting to Death Crates and his Companions in the Sedition, of their Estates, which they call'd Excommunicated, built the Temples in the lower part of the Town.Another Example of two Syracusi∣ans. In Syracuse al∣so there were two young Men, betwixt whom there was an extraordinary Intimacy, one of which, having taken into his Custody his Friends Catamite, vitiated him in his Absence. The other at his Return, by way of Retalia∣tion, debaucht his Companions Wife. Then one of the ancient Senators, coming into the Council, propos'd the banishing of them both, before the City was ruin'd by their filling it with Enmity, [and engaging it in Factions] on their Account. Yet did not he prevail, but a Sedition, arising on this Occasion, by ve∣ry great Calamities overturn'd a most excel∣lently constituted Common-weal. You have also a Domestical Example in the Enmity be∣tween Pardalus and Tyrrhenus, which wanted little of destroying Sardis by embroiling it in Revolt and War on little and private Diffe∣rences.He con∣cludes from the foremen∣tion'd Ex∣amples, that the Beginnings of Evils must be prevented and extin∣guisht betimes, teaching the Means to attain easily to this. A Statesman therefore is not to slight the little Offences and Heart-burnings, which, as [Diseases] in a Body, pass speedily from one to another, but to take them in hand, suppress, and cure them. For as Cato says,
by Attention and Carefulness great Matters are made little, and little ones reduc'd to no∣thing. Now there is no better Artifice of in∣dulging Men to this, than the shewing himself easily pacify'd in his own private Differences, persisting without Rancor in Matters of the first importance, and managing none with Ob∣stinacy, contending Wrath, or any other Passion, which may work Sharpness or Bit∣terness in necessary Disputes. For as they bind certain round Muffles about the Hands of those, who combat at Buffets, that in their Contests there may not arrive any fatal Acci∣dent, the Blows being soft, and such, as can do no great Harm: So in such Suits and Processes with ones Fellow Citizens, 'tis best to ma∣nage the Dispute by making use of pure and simple Pretences, and not by sharpning and empoisoning Matters, as if they were Wea∣pons, with Calumnies, Malice, and Threats, to render them pernicious, great and publick. For he, who in this manner carries himself with those, with whom he has Affairs, will have others also subject to him. But Con∣tentions about publick Matters, where private Grudges are taken away, are soon appeas'd, and bring no difficult or fatal Mischiefs.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Whether Vice is sufficient to render a Man unhappy. Translated out of the Greek by the Same Hand. THô this Tract is so defective both in the Be∣ginning and End, that they cannot even to this present be so much as guess'd at; yet the Title and Fragment, we have left, sufficiently dis∣cover the Authors Intention. Now as by the Ru∣ins of an old Regal Palace our Imagination does in some sort represent to us, how beautiful it was, whilst it stood entire: so this little Remnant suffi∣ces to shew the greatness of our Loss. But thô the Injury of time has depriv'd us of this Benefit, and many others of like Nature; yet this Remain∣der, as unperfect as it is, may be profitable to us, and serve to put us in mind of our Duty. Our Author, having in the Beginning describ'd the Misery of a covetous Person, and of a Courtier, adds in prosecution of his principal Design, that
Vice is the absolute Effecter of Infelicity, having need of no Instruments or Servants, to render a Man miserable: whence he collects, that there is no Danger or Calamity, which we ought not ra∣ther to choose, than to be vicious. He afterwards answers the Objections, made to the contrary, and concludes, that no Adversity can prejudice us, if it be not accompany'd with Vice. The Beginning is lost. HE suffers much,I. The Mi∣sery of the Covetous. who for a Dowry has His Body sold,— As Euripides says, for he gets but small Mat∣ters by it, and those very uncertain. But to him, who passes not thrô much Ashes, but thrô a certain regal Pile of Fire, being per∣petually short-breath'd, full of Fear, and bath'd in Sweat by his crossing the Seas too and fro, she gives at last a certain Tantalian Wealth, which he cannot enjoy by reason of the continual Turmoil, that encumbers him. For that Sicyonian Horse-courser was well ad∣vis'd, who presented theAgamem∣non. King of the Achai∣ans with a swift-footed Mare, That to proud Iliums Siege he might not go, But stay at Home, and take his Pleasure, wallowing in the Depth of his Riches, and giving himself up to an unmolested Ease. But those,II. The Miseries of Courti∣ers. who now seem to be without Trouble, and Men of Action, do, without being call'd to it, thrust themselves headlong
into the Courts of Princes, where they must be oblig'd to tedious attending and watching, that they may gain an Horse, a Chain, or some such blessed Favor. In the mean time the Wife, of Joy bereft, Sits tearing her fair Cheeks, the House is left Imperfect, and half built.— Whilst the Husband is drawn and hurry'd about, wandring amongst others, allur'd by Hopes, of which he is often disappointed, suffering Disgrace and Shame. But if he happens to obtain any of those things, he so eagerly desires, after he has been turn'd about, and made dizzy with being Fortunes sport, he seeks a Dismission, and declares those to be happy, who live obscure and safe; whilst they in the mean time have the same O∣pinion of him, whom they see mounted so far above them. III. Vice is the most detestable Tyrant in the World.So absolutely does Vice dispose of all Men, being such a self-sufficient Worker of Infelici∣ty, that it has no need either of Instruments or Servants. Other Tyrants, endeavouring to render those Men miserable, whom they pu∣nish, maintain Executioners and Tormentors, devise Searing-Irons and Racks, to plague the reasonless Soul. But Vice without any Pre∣paration of Engines, as soon as it enters into the Soul, torments and dejects it, filling a Man with Grief, Lamentations, Sorrow and Re∣pentance. For a Sign, that this is so, you may observe, that many, being cut, are si∣lent, being scourg'd, take it patiently, and being rackt and tormented by their Lords and Tyrants, send not forth the least Shreek, since
the Soul, repressing the Voice by Reason, re∣strains and keeps it in as with the Hand; but you will scarce ever be able to quiet Anger, or to silence Sorrow, nor can you perswade one, that is in a Fright, to stand still, or one, that is stung with Remorse of Conscience, to forbear exclaiming, tearing his Hair, and smiting his Thigh: so much is Vice more vio∣lent than either Fire or Sword. Cities,IV. That there is no Danger or Calamity, which a Man ought not rather to choose, than to let himself be a Slave to Vice. when by fixing up of Writings they publish their Intention of building Temples, or erectingStatues or Monu∣ments of an ex∣cessive height and big∣ness. Colossuses, hear the Proposals of dif∣ferent Artists, contending about the Under∣taking of the Work, and bringing in their Ac∣counts and Models: after which they choose him, who will perform it best, quickest, and with the least Expence. Now imagine, that we also set forth a Proclamation of a Purpose to make a wretched Man, or a miserable Life, and that Fortune and Vice come with differing Proposals to offer their Service for the Perfor∣mance of this Design. The one (to wit, Fortune,) is provided with abundance of vari∣ous Instruments, and costly Furniture for to render human Life miserable and unhappy: She draws after her Robberies, Wars, the Mur∣thers of Tyrants, Storms from the Sea, and Lightnings from the Air; She mixes Poisons, brings in Swords, hires Slanders, kindles Fea∣vers, jingles Shackles, and builds up Prisons round about; althô most of these things are rather from Vice than Fortune. But let us suppose them to be all from Fortune; and let Vice, standing naked, and wanting no exte∣rior thing against Man, ask Fortune, how she will make a Mn unhappy and heartless.
Exam∣ples of such, as have de∣spis'd all Calami∣ties and even Death it self, rather than they would act against their Du∣ty. Fortune, let her say, dost thou threaten Pover∣ty? Metrocles laughs at thee, who, sleeping in the Winter amongst the Sheep, and in the Summer in the Porches of the Temples, challeng'd the King of the Persians, that winter'd in Babylon, and pass'd the Summer in Media, to by with him for Happiness. Dost thou bring on Servitude, Bonds, and the being sold for a Slave? Diogenes con∣temns thee, who being expos'd to sale by Pirates, cry'd out, Who will buy a Master? Dost thou brew a Cup of Poison? Didst thou not offer such an one to Socrates? And yet he mildly and meekly, without trembling, or changing either Colour or Countenance, drank it briskly up; whilst those, who surviv'd, esteem'd him happy, as one, that would not be even in the other World without a Divine Portion. Moreover, as for thy Fire, Decius the Roman General prevented it, when having caus'd a great Fire to be made in the midst between two Ar∣mies, he sacrific'd himself to Saturn according to a Vow, made for the aggrandizing of the Romans Do∣minion. And amongst the Indians such chast Wives, as are true Lovers of their Husbands, strive and contend with one another for the Fire, and all the rest sing forth the Happiness of her, who, having ob∣tain'd the Victory, is burnt with her deceas'd Husband. And of the Sages in those Parts there is not one esteem'd an holy and most blessed Man, if he did not, whilst he was yet living, and in the perfect Enjoyment of his Health and Ʋnderstanding, sepa∣rate by Fire his Soul from his Body, and purging a∣way, what was mortal, depart pure out of the Flesh. V. An An∣swer to the bjctions of such, as had rather be Slaves to vice, than fall into any temporal Calamity: to wit, that external Miseries only hurt the Wicked.But thou wilt reduce one from great Wealth, a stately House, a well furnisht Table, and abun∣dance
of all things, to a thredbare Coat, a Wallet, and the Begging of his daily Food. These things were to Diogenes the Beginnings of Happiness, and to Crates of Liberty and Glory. But thou wilt perhaps fasten one to the Cross, or empale him on a Stake. Now what cares Theodorus, whe∣ther 'tis above or under Ground, that he putrifies? These were the happy Sepultures of the Scythians: and amongsts the Hircanians Dogs, amongst the Bactrians Birds, did according to the Laws, devour the dead Bodies of those, who made a blessed End. Whom then do these things render unhappy? The unmanly and irrational, the ill educated and unex∣ercis'd, with such, as retain the foolish and frightful Opinions, they receiv'd in their Infancy. Fortune then does not perfectly produce Infelicity,VI. That Adversity is not preju¦dicial, un∣less accom∣pany'd by Vice: Il∣lustrated by several Simili∣tudes. unless it has Vice to co-operate with it. For as a Thred will cut in sunder a Bone, that has been steep'd in Ashes and Vinegar, and as Workmen bend and fashion Ivory, as they please, after it has been softned and ren∣der'd pliable by Beer, when it is otherwise in∣flexible: so Fortune coming upon that, which is already ill affected of it self, and render'd soft by Vice, pierces into it and hollows it. And as theWhat this Word  should in this place signify, I must with Xylander, who leaves it, as I have done, untranslated, profess my self wholly at a Loss. The old Translator, who, as he says, renders it by Externum alieno caetui se admiscentem, gives me no satisfaction: Amyot in French, and Holland in English, put in its stead Pharicum, a Poyson mentioned by Dioscorides, in his Sixth Book De Alexipharmicis; but this Reading is overthrown by the Adjectives joyn'd with it, which are all Masculine. Paroecus, thô hurtful to no other, nor any way prejudicing those, who touch it, or bear it about them, if any one, who is
wounded, is but brought into the Place, where it is, immediately kills him, being already by his Wound pre-dispos'd to receive the Defluxi∣on: so the Soul, which is to be overthrown by Fortune, must have in it self some Ulcer of its own, and some Malady within its Flesh, that it may render those Accidents, which come from abroad, miserable and lamentable. Is then Vice also such, that it should stand in need of Fortunes help for the working of Infelicity? Whence then does the Sea swell with Storms and Tempests? She besets not the Desarts, lying at the Feet of the Moun∣tains, with Robbers, she pours not down Storms of Hail on the fruitful Fields, she raises not up Melitus, Anytus, and Callixenus, to be Calumniators, she takes not away Wealth, she hinders not any from the Com∣mand of Armies, that she may make them unhappy; but she renders them rich, abound∣ing in Wealth, having great Inheritances on the Earth, she bears them Company at Sea, she sticks close to them, pining them with Lusts, imflaming them with Wrath, over∣whelming them with Superstitions, drawing them by their Eyes. The rest is wanting.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Whether the Passions of the Soul, or [Diseases] of the Body are worse. Translated out of the Greek by the Same Hand. HOmer,I. Mn the most mise∣rable of all Animals, and what are his most dan∣gerous Mladies. having contemplated the vari∣ous Kinds of mortal Animals, and compar'd them one with another, in respect to their Lives, and the Entertainments of them, cry'd out: Iliad. l. 17.Of all, that breath, or creep on Earth, there can No Creature be more wretched found than Man: Attributing to Man that unhappy Primacy of having the Superiority in Miseries. But we, [considering] Man, as having already gain'd the Victory for Infelicity, and being pub∣lickly declar'd the most miserable of all Ani∣mals, will compare him with himself in a Contention about his own Calamities, not un∣profitably,
but even altogether necessarily di∣viding his Soul from his Body: that we may thence learn, whether we live more miserably in regard of our Souls, or of our Selves, [that is, our Bodies.] For Sickness is indeed en∣gendred in the Body by Nature; but Vice and Malice in the Soul is first its Work, after∣ward its Passion. Now 'tis of no small Ad∣vantage towards Content of Mind, if that, which is the worse, is curable, and that light∣er,For , I read . II. The Maladies of the Soul are more dangerous than those of the Bo∣dy. which is unavoidable. The Fox in Aesop, disputing with the Pan∣ther for [the Superiority in beautiful] Varie∣ty, when this [latter] had shewn his Body, and its Superficies, curiously stain'd and spotted, whereas the Foxes tawny Skin was ill favor'd, and unpleasant to the Sight, said thus: But if you,1. They are more numerous, and very various. Sir Judge, will look within me, you will find me much fuller of Variety than this Leopard: mani∣festing the nimble Subtilty of his natural Dis∣position, frequently changing, as occasions require. Let us then say, also to our selves: Thy Body, O Man, naturally of it self breeds ma∣ny Diseases and Passions, and [many] it receives, befalling it from without; but if thou shalt open thy Interior, thou will find a certain various, and abundantly-furnisht Store-house, and, as Demo∣critus says, Treasury of Evils, not flowing into it from abroad, but having, as it were, their in∣bred and original Springs, which Vice, exceedingly affluent,2. They do not make known and disco∣ver them∣selves, as those of the Body. and rich in Passions, causes to break forth. Now whereas the Diseases in the Flesh are discern'd by [the Beating of] the Pulses, and the Flushings in the Color [of the Skin,] and discover'd by [unusual] Heats, and sud∣den Pains; and these Maladies of the Soul ly
hid from many who are affected with them, these are therefore worse, as removing from them the Sense of the Patient. For the Dis∣course of Reason being sound, is sensible of the Bodies Diseases; but being it self diseas'd with those of the Soul, has no Judgment in what it suffers: for it suffers by what it judges. We ought therefore to account,3. They are incu∣rable, be∣cause that which should discover them, is most con∣cern'd. that the first and greatest of the Souls Diseases, is Folly, by which Vice, being rendred incura∣ble, cohabits, lives and dies together with many. For the beginning of the Cure is the Sense of the Disease, leading the Patient to the Use, of what is helpful; but he, who thrô his not believing himself Sick, is igno∣rant of his own Necessities, thô a Remedy is presented him, refuses it. For also amongst the Diseases of the Body, those are indeed the worst, which are accompany'd with a Stupefaction of the Senses, as Lethargies, Head-achs, Epilepsies, Apoplexies, and those burning Feavers, which, carrying on the In∣flammation even to the Loss of the Wits, and disturbing the Senses, as it were, in a Musica Instrument, Move the Hearts Strings, till then untouch'd. Wherefore the Physicians do in the first place indeed desire,III. An Amplifica∣tion of the Mise∣ries at∣tending the Diseases of the Soul. that a Man should not be sick, and next, that being sick, he should not be ignorant, that he is so: which nevertheless befals all the Diseases of the Soul. For neither those, who are mad, those, that are lascivious, nor those, who act unjustly, think, that they sin; nay some of them [are on the contrary
perswaded,1. Those, who are so affect∣ed, have their Judgment overturn∣ed.] even that they do well. Never yet did any Man call a Feaver Health, a Consumption a good Constitution of Body, the Gout Swift-footedness, or the Wanness of the Face a fresh Colour; but many [there are, who] term Anger Courage, [unchast] Love Amity, Envy Emulation, and Co∣wardice Cautiousness [or Discretion.2. They shun the Remedy.] More∣over, those, [who are troubled with corporal Sickness,] send for Physicians, for they are sensible, what they stand in need of for [the Cure of] their Diseases; but these, [who are sick in Mind.] shun Philosophers, [and such discreet Persons, whose advices tend to re∣claim them:] because they think themselves to act excellently in those very things, in which they most offend. In this then making use of our Reason, we affirm, that the Blear∣ness or Soreness of the Eyes is a less [Malady] than Madness, and the Gout in the Feet than a Phrensie [in the Brain:] for in the one a Man is sensible of his Distemper, and crying out, calls for the Physician, to whom, when he is come, he shews his Eye to be anointed, stretches out his Vein to be open'd, and gives up his Head to be cur'd; but [on the contra∣ry] you hear Agave, when seiz'd with Mad∣ness, thrô [the Violence of her] Passion, not knowing the dearest [Pledges of her Womb, to cry out,] Euripi∣des in his Tragedy of the Bac∣hantes.From the Hills Top into the Plain, Bring me this young Fawn, newly slain, Which happily's become our Prey.
For he, who is sick in Body, presently yielding, and betaking himself to his Bed, lies there quiet, till he is cur'd; and if the Accessi∣on of some violent hot Fit makes him a little tumble and toss his Body, any one of those, who are by, saying to him, Lye still at ease, poor Wretch, keep in thy Bed, easily stays and retains him; but those [on the other side,] who are surpriz'd with the Passi∣ons of the Soul, are then most active, then least at quiet: for the Impulses of the Mind are the Beginnings [or principal Causes] of Actions, and Passions the violent Fits of [such] Impulses. Wherefore they suffer not the Soul to be at rest, but when a Man has most need of Patience, Silence, and Retirement, then is he drawn forth into the Light, then is he [chiefly] discover'd by his cholerick Hu∣mors, his Eagerness in contending, his [dis∣honest] Loves, and his [heart-breaking] Sor∣rows, which force him to commit many irre∣gular [Actions,] and speak [many Words,] unsitting for the Times. As therefore that Storm,IV. The Conclusion shewing by an excel∣lent Simi∣litude, that the Dis∣eases of the Soul are incom∣parably more dan∣gerous than those of the Body. which hinders a Ship from entring into the Port, is more dan∣gerous than that, which suffers it not to sail: so the Tempests of the Soul are more diffi∣cult, which permit not a Man to restrain himself, nor to settle his disturb'd Reason; so that being without Pilot or Cables, he is thrô Tumult and Deceit, hurry'd headlong by rash and pernicious Courses, till he falls into some terrible Shipwrack, where he casts away his Life. So that also for these Reasons
'tis worse to be sick in Soul, than Body: for to the one it happens only to suffer, but to the other both to suffer and do amiss. And what need is there to reckon up many Passi∣ons? This very Nick of Time is a [sufficient] Remembrance. Do you see this vast and pro∣miscuous Multitude, here crouding and thrust∣ing each other about theThe Bench, on which the Judges sate. Tribunal andThe Hall, or Place, where the Courts of Judica∣ture were kept. Fo∣rum? They are not assembled to sacrifice to their Countrey Gods, nor to participate toge∣ther in the same sacred Ceremonies: They are not come to offer up to Jupiter Ascraeus the First of the Lydian Fruits, nor to celebrate the Solemnities of Bacchus by the Observance of Festival Nights, and common Revellings; but the Force of the Disease, as it were by yearly Revolutions, irritating Asia, drives them hither to manage their Processes and Suits at Law: and a Multitude of Affairs, as it were of impetuous Torrents, fall into one place, where they grow hot, and the Contests are eagerly prosecuted, both by those, that destroy, and that are destroyed. Of what Feavers? of what Agues are these the Ef∣fects? What Instances, what Accidents, what Distemperature of Heat, what Superfusion of Humors [produces them?] Should you ask every Cause, as if it were a Man, whence it had its Original, whence it proceeded; you would find, that audacious Anger generated one, furious Obstinacy another, and unjust Covetousness a third.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Which are the most crafty; Water-Animals or those Creatures that breed upon the Land. Translated from the Greek by John Phillips, Gent. Autobulus, LEonidas being ask'd the question what he thought of Tyrtaeus? Made answer, that he was a good Poet to beautify and adorn the Minds of young Men: As a Person who by the Vigor and Spirit of his Poeti∣cal Raptures kindl'd that wrathful indignation, and am∣bition of honour which embolden'd them in combat to the contempt of death and danger. Which makes me afraid, my dearest Friends, least the Encomium of Hun∣ting, Yesterday recited, may have enflam'd our young Gentlemen beyond the bounds of moderation, so as to deem all other things Fruitless and of little worth, while they Randevouze from all Parts to this Exercise. So much the rather, because I my self, when I was but very young even beyond the strength of my Age, seem'd to be more then became me addicted to this sport, and to be over desirous with Phaedra in Euripides,
With Hounds and Horn and merry Hollow, The spotted Hart and Hind to follow. So did that discourse affect me, fortify'd with many and probable Arguments. Soclares. You say very truly, Autobulus. For that same Poet seems to me to have awaken'd the force of Rhetorick for a long time lull'd a sleep, to gratify the inclinations of the Youthful Gentry, and to make himself their Spring Companion. But I am most pleas'd with him for introducing the Example of sin∣gle Combatants, from whence he chiefly takes occasion to Praise the sport of Hunting, as being that which for the most part drawing to its self whatever is natural in us, or what we have by use acquir'd, to that delight in Men to fight with single Weapons one a∣gainst another, affords an evident prospect of Artifice and daring courage endued with understanding, and encoun∣tring brutish force and strength: Applauding that of Euripides, Small is the Nerveless Strength of feeble Man, Yet through the cunning of his reaching Brain, By various slights and sundry Stratagems: What ever Land or th' Ocean breeds, he Tames. Autobulus. And hence it was, as they say, my dearest Soclares, that Men at first became insensible and inhu∣man, having once tasted of Murther, and being ac∣custom'd by Hunting and following the Chase, not only to behold without remorse the Wounds and Blood of Wild Beasts, but to rejoyce at their being kill'd and slaughter'd. Afterwards as at Athens, some Sycophant was by the Thirty Tyrants set a part for death, as a proper object of Capital punishment, then a Second
and a Third; then proceeding by degrees, they seiz'd upon good Men, and at length spar'd not the best and most worthy Citizens; in like manner the first that slew a Bear or a Wolf, obtained applause. Then the Oxe and Hog were appointed to be killed, under pretence of ha∣ving tasted the sacred Things that lay before them. Next to them Deer, Hares and Goats were made use of for Food, and in some places the Flesh of Sheep, Dogs and Horses grew familiar to human Tast. The tame Goose also and Pigeon, Mans familiar Domestic, according to Sophocles, not for nourishment or to asswage hunger, as Cats and Weesels; but to indulge voluptuous Appetites were drest and mangl'd to pieces: Which gave strength and vigour to whatever was in Nature Blood thirsty and Savage, and rendring the disposition of Man inflexible to pity, had almost eras'd out of his Breast whatever was inclinable to humanity and mildness. Whereas on the other side the Pythagoreans, that they might ac∣custom Men to the Love of humanity and compassion, still inculcated into their minds, a particular care of being mild and gentle towards Beasts. For there is no∣thing more powerful then custom to win upon the wild affections of Man, and to draw him from extre∣mity to moderation. But I know not how it comes to pass, that being enter'd into this discourse, we have not only forgot the Subject we were Yesterday upon, but what we had also this day agreed to make the Theme of our Colloquy. For Yesterday, as well you know, having thrown out a Proposition, that all Creatures were in some manner partakers of Understanding and Reason, we gave an occasion to our young Hunts-men for a fair dispute, which of the two excell'd in craft and cunning, the Land-Animals, or the Creatures that breed in the Sea? Which, if you please, we will determin this day, if Aristodemus and Phaedimus will stand to their Agreement: Of which two Gentlemen, the one has
offer'd himself to his Friends to be the Patron of the Land-Animals, the other reserves the honour of being more crafty to those of the Sea. Soclares. They will be as good as their words, I as∣sure ye, Autobulus, and will be here presently: For I saw them both early this Morning preparing for the Combat. In the mean time, if you please, before they begin, let us resume something of what was Yesterday not so fully discoursed for want of time, or not so care∣fully argu'd in our Wine, as it ought to have been. For there seem'd a dispute to resound in my Ears from the Philosophers Portico, as if immortal were opposite to mortal, incorruptible to corruptible, incorporeal to corporeal; and in like manner that things void of rea∣son ought to be oppos'd to those Beings that are endu'd with reason, least among so many Connexions this alone should be found maim and imperfect. Autobulus. Good now, Friend Soclars, who was he that put such a question, as if that because there are certain Beings endu'd with reason, therefore there is no∣thing void of reason? For we abound with Examples in all things that are destitute of a Soul; nor do we want any other Antithesis to Irrational, but only to op∣pose whatever is depriv'd of a Soul, as being void of Reason and Understanding, to that which is endu'd with Reason and Understanding together with a Soul. But if any one will assert, that Nature is not defective, and therefore that every Animated Nature is partly rati∣onal, partly without Reason, another may at the same time alledge, that every Animated Nature is partly en∣du'd with imagination, partly depriv'd of it; partly sensible, partly insensible; to the end that Nature may not want these opposite Habits and Privations, as it were equally ballanc'd in the same Kind. For if it be absur'd to doubt whether some Living Creatures are sensible, others without Sence, it is as equally ridicu∣lous
to grant Imagination to some Living Creatures and not allow it to others; in regard there is no Living Creature that comes into the World, but what is pre∣sently endu'd with Sence and Imagination. And thus would he be as much out of the way, who should re∣quire one Living Creature to be rational, another to be void of Reason, distingushing between Men, as if he that had a share of Sense, did not also pertake of un∣derstanding; or that there were any Living Creature, from which a certain sort of Opinion and Ratiocination, otherwise called Sense and Natural Instinct, were ab∣sent. For Nature, which, as they truly say, made all things for the sake of some thing, and to some end, did not make a sensible Creature to be meerly sensible in bare∣ly suffering, but to be sensible of many things as familiar and agreeable, and of other things as baneful and perni∣cious. Nor can we omit, that without any teaching or instruction, they avoid some things, and covet the use and benefit of others. Sense it is therefore that affords to every Creature the distinction both of useful and hurtful; which eschewing or making choice of things profitable, and discerning and avoiding of things pernicious or troublesom by the Force of Sense can never be thought to reside in any Creature not capable to reason, to judge, remember and consider. Therefore if you will deprive the Creatures of Expectation, Memory, Design, Pre∣paration, Hope, Fear and Grief, you must at the same time deny them the use either of Eyes or Ears, as not having any manner of Sense or Imagination; which it is better for them to be without, then to la∣bour under grief and pain; to which they can never be Subject, if utterly depriv'd of Sense. There is an Oration of Strat the Phylosopher de∣monstrating that without Sense there can be no Under∣standing. For many times Letters cursorily glanc'd upon by the Eye, and Speeches little regarded by the
Ear, forsake our knowledge, but are entertain'd by those that are more attentive. Afterwards by Recol∣lection the same things return into our minds, for us to dispose and pursue the Dictates of our own thoughts as we please our selves. Whence we say proverbially, the Mind sees, the Mind hears, all other things are Deaf and Blind, in regard there can be no Sense in in the Eyes and Ears, if understanding be wanting. Therefore King Cleomenes after great Commendations given to a Copy of Verses recited at a Banquet where he was present, being ask'd whether it were not an ad∣mirable Piece, bid them that heard it give their judg∣ment, for that his Mind was in the Peloponnesus. There∣fore of necessity whatever Creatures are capable of Sense and Understanding, can no otherwise be sensible then by the Force of Understanding. But suppose we should grant that Sense has no need of the Understanding for the performance of the Duty incumbent upon it, nevertheless, when that same Sense which makes a difference between what is grate∣ful and what is averse to Nature is wanting in a Living Creature, where is that retention of the memory, that dread of things abominated, that desire of things use∣ful and profitable? which being absent, how comes it to pass that they are endu'd with that activity and foresight to provide Receptacles, and places of refuge for them∣selves, to look out after their Prey, and to avoid the Snares and Ginns of the Hunters? And yet those very Authors inculcate these things in their Introducti∣ons, even to the teizing our Ears; defining purpose to be an Indication of perfection; Aggression to be an Act of violence, before an Act of violence; Preparation to be an Action before an Action: Memory to be the comprehension of some certain past Axiom which at first was apprehended by Sense. In all which things there is nothing which may not rightly be said to partake
of Reason, and yet all these things are common to all Creatures: As indeed are certainly all those things, which refer to cogitation, which, while they lye conceal'd in the Brain, we call thoughts; but when they come to be in motion, we name the Acts of Thought; acknowledging in the mean time all passions and perturbations of the Mind to be false Judgments and erroneous Opinions. So that it is a wonder to me, that the same Men should over-see so many Operations and Motions, some of Desire, others of Fear; nay by Jupiter, many times of Envy and Emulation it self. And many times they themselves punish their Dogs and Horses, when they commit a Fault, and this not to no purpose, but to chastise them, by causing in them that same trouble of mind, which, being the effect of pain, we call Repen∣tance. Now the tickling the Ear by pleasing Sounds is call'd, Kelesis: But the bewitching the Eye is call'd Goeteia. Both which we make use of in the Domesti∣cating of Wild Beasts. Harts and Horses are allur'd by the Sounds of Pipes and Flutes. And there are a sort of Crabs, which are charm'd out of their holes by Flage∣lets made of Lote-tree-wood; and 'tis reported that the Shadd-fish are drawn to shew themselves above Wa∣ter by singing and clapping of hands. The Otus also, which is a Bird not much unlike a Night-Raven, is taken by allurement of the sight; for that while he stands staring upon the Fowlers Dancing before him in Measure and Figure, and out of Affectation will be striving to Act his Part, by aping their Motions with his Wings and Shoulders, he is frequently surpriz'd and taken. But as for those, that more foolishly affirm, that Beasts are neither affected with joy, nor anger nor fear; that the Nightingale or rather the Swallow does not build, that the Bee does not remember, that the Lion is not angry, that the Hart is not timorous, I would
fain know, what answer they will make to those who say, that Beasts neither see nor hear, but as it were see, and as it were hear; that they neither neigh nor bleat, but as it were send forth a certain sound; lastly that they do not absolutely live, but live as it were? For in my Opinion to aver this is as contrary to plain de∣monstration, as the rest. Soclares. Well then, Autobulus, suppose me to be one of those that affirm these things. For to say truth, while Men will be comparing the Actions of Beasts with the customs, actions and manner of living of Men, and yet deny that the same Beasts have the least Inclination or aim at any progress toward Vertue, to which we bent our discourse, I doubt whether Nature gave them a Beginning or no, since they are so uncapa∣ble to attain the end. Autobulus, Why truly, Soclares, this is not a thing that seems so absurd to those Men. For that while they assert the Extream love of Parents toward their Chil∣dren to be the Principle of Society and Justice, and find at the same time this vertue apparent and surpassing in brute Animals, yet they will not allow them in the least to partake of Justice. Like Mules, which though they are furnished with Genital Parts, as wanting neither Privities nor Wombs, and mixing with delight and pleasure, yet cannot attain the end of Generation. But then again I would have you consider, whether they be not as ridiculous, that affirm Socrates and Plato to be no less vitious then the meanest of Slaves; nay more, that they were Fools, intemperate and unjust; and then they find fault with the Nature of Beasts, as being impure, and no way accurately fram'd for the Reception of Vertue. As if the depravedness and imbecil∣lity of reason, were not vices of Reason, of which all brute Beasts are Guilty; the most of which we plainly find to be intemperate, fearful and unjust. Therefore he that re∣quires
perfection of reason in a Creature not framed by nature to receive and entertain it, little differs from one that should deny a Monkey to partake of deformity by nature, or a Tortoise of slowness, as being neither suscep∣tible of beauty or swiftness. Nor do they observe the Distinction that lyes before their Eyes. For reason is in the Creature by nature, but right and perfect reason is attain'd by Industry and Education; so that naturally all Creatures may be said to be rational. But if they look for perfection of reason, and true wisdom, they will hardly find those perfections in any Man whatever. For as there is a difference between sight and sight; and between flight and flight (for Haws and Grashoppers do not see alike neither do Eagles and Patridges flye with equal swiftness) so neither in all rational Creatures is there to be, found the same Perfection of cunning and acuteness. For as there are many Examples to be produc'd of se∣veral Brute Creatures, excelling in the Observance of Society, Fortitude, and Foresight as to their particular Oeconomy, and making Provision for themselves; so on the other side, there may be found among them, as many of Injustice, Cowardice and Folly. Which is evident from the present Contest, wherein these Young Gentleman have engag'd themselves, while the one has undertaken to maintain that Land-Animals, the other, that Creatures bred in the Sea, are most enclin'd to Vertue. Which is plainly demonstrated by comparing of River-Horses with Storks. For the one supports and cherishes their Parents, if they may be so call'd; the other kills them that they may enjoy their Damms. So likewise if you compare Doves with Patridges. For the Cock Patridge will not suffer the Hen to sit, but breaks her Eggs, and bangs her out of her Nest, refusing to be trod. But the Cock Pigeon takes upon him part of the Females duty, in brooding over the Eggs and feed∣ing the oung ones; and if the Hen happen to be too long absent, corrects her with his Bill, till he forces
her to return to her Nest. So that while Antipater found fault with Sheep and Asses for their nastiness, I wonder, how he came to pass by the Lynx and the Swal∣low; of which the one are so cleanly, that they always remove and hide their Excrements, the other teaches her Young ones to turn their Tayles out of their Nest, before they let fall their defilement. And indeed why may we not say, that one Tree is more docible then another, as Dogs are more docible then Sheep, or one Pot-herb more timorous then another, as Harts are more fearful then Lyons. Or otherwise, as among things immoveable, there is not one thing slower in Motion then another, nor among things, that are mute, one thing more vocal then another, so neither among things to which nature has not afforded a faculty of understanding, is there one thing more timorous, more sloathful, or more intemperate then another; But as to those Creatures where that faculty is present, the difference is manifest in the degrees of more or less. Soclares. However 'tis a wonderful thing to observe, how much Man differs from all other Creatures in probity of Manners, in Industry, and all those things, that re∣late to Justice and common Society. Autobulus. Nevertheless, my dear friend, this cannot be deny'd, that there are many brute Beasts that surpass Men both in bulk and swiftness, others that far surpass him in strength of sight, and exactness of Hearing: and yet for all this we are not to say, that Man is blind, without strength, or wants Ears: for nature has not depriv'd us either of Hands or Eyes, or strength, or bulk, though we must not compare with Camels or Elephants. In like manner we must not say, that brute Beasts are altogether depriv'd of reason and understand∣ing, because they are more dull of understanding, and not so quick at ratiocination as we are; as only enjoying a weak and muddy sort of Reason, like a dim and clouded Eye. And did I not presently expect these
young Gentlemen, being Persons both studious and learn∣ed to determine the Point in reference to Land and Sea-Animals, I could produce a thousand Examples of the Docility, and a thousand more of good Nature in Beasts, which the Famous City of Rome has given us an opportunity to fetch from her Imperial Theaters; but we will leave these things fresh and untouch'd, for them to embellish with their eloquent Discourse. In the mean time I have something to offer by the by, which is this, that I am of Opinion, that there is a mutilation, disease and defect peculiar to every part, and faculty, as Blindness of the Eye, Lameness of the Leg, and Stuttering of the Tongue, which defects cannot be appropriated to any other Members. For that Blindness can never be attributed to that, which was never created to see; nor Lameness to that, which never could go, nor can any thing be said to Stammer, that wants a Tongue, or to Lisp or Stutter, that has not a vocal Utterance. As nothing can be said to be a Changeling, or beside his wits, or mad, to which Na∣ture has deny'd the Use of Thought, Reason and Un∣derstanding; for it is imposible without some faculty or other to be affected; seeing 'tis only that same faculty that must suffer either privation or mutilation, or some other defect. But you have seen Dogs, that have been mad; and I have seen Horses under the same predica∣ment; and some there are, who say that Bulls and Foxes will be mad. But the Example of Dogs is suf∣ficient, which is unquestionable. Which makes it evi∣dent, that those Creatures have a sort of Reason and Un∣derstanding not to be despis'd, which being once con∣fus'd and troubl'd, is call'd madness. For we do not find either their sight or their hearing diminish'd; but only like a Man affected with Hypochondriac Melan∣choly, or in a delirium; of whom it would be absur'd to say, that he was not beside himself, or that his Sense
Reason and Memory were not disturb'd. For custom tells, that they who are in a raving condition are not in their right Senses, but are fallen from their Reason; and so whoever believes that there is any other cause why Dogs run mad, but only that their Senses, Reason and Memories are disturb'd, while they cease to know Faces the most familiar to them before, abandon their most usual Food, and oversee what is just before their Eyes, such a Man, I say, seems to me to contend against Truth it self, and out of ignorance to set himself upon the deny∣al of evident Matter of Fact. Soclares. You seem to me to be very much in the Right. For the Stoicks and Peripateticks, are lead to affirm the contrary upon this supposition, that Justice could have no certain Original, but would be altogether incomprehensible and inexistent, if all Brute Creatures should partake of Reason. For either of necessity it must be a very great piece of Injustice in us to devour and feed upon them, or if we forbear the use of them, it would be impossible for us to live; or rather we should in some measure live the Lives of Beasts, rejecting the use of Brute Creatures. I pass by those in∣numerable Myriads of Nomades and Troglodytes, that know no other Food but Flesh. But as for us, that seem to live lovingly and in friendship together, what neces∣sity would there be of labouring the Earth, of toyling upon the Sea, or mining in the Mountains; what need the care of dressing Victuals, if it were so that we must be bound to live, as it would then become us, not only without injury, but rather with all civility and humani∣ty toward all the sorts of Beasts, as being our Fellow rational Creatures? We have no cure, no remedy for an unquestionable necessity that deprives us either of Life or Justice, unless we observe that Ancient Bound and Dispensation which according to Hesiod, distinguishing Natures, and seperating every Kind by themselves, com∣mands
The Fish, wild Beasts, and all the winged Fowl, To prey upon their Kinds without controul; For among them no Law, nor Justice reigns, Only by Justice Man from Man abstains. And therefore as Brutes can extend no Act of Justice to us, so can neither we commit any Act of Injustice a∣gainst them. Which argument they who reject, have left us no benefit of Life, nor any the smallest en∣trance for Justice into the World. Autobulus. These things dear friend you utter, as the Opinion of those People; But we are not to allow Philo∣sophers a Remedy to procure easie delivery, as they do to Women that are subject to hard Labours, meerly that they may bring us forth Justice without any pain or trouble. For the same Persons will not allow it to Epicurus in the greatest things; when our of laziness he would make us believe the Starrs and all the Creatures were made at first by chance, meerly by the slight tender∣cy of so small and pitiful a thing as an Atome; and thereby prevent the Labours of Reason within us. Seeing therefore they neither make out what is uncertain, nor grant what is apparent, 'tis but requisite they should submit in what has been said concerning Beasts in re∣ference to Justice, if they will not acknowledge their Error, or otherwise demonstrate. For Justice has ano∣ther way to Establish it self, neither so steep nor slippery, nor leading to the subversion of evident Truths, but which, according to Plato's instruction, my Son, and thy Friend, Soclares, has shew'd to such as are not captiously contentious, but willing to learn. For cer∣tain it is, that both Empedocles and Heraclitus held it for a Truth, that Man could not be altogether cleared from Injustice toward the Beasts, often bewayling and excla∣ming against Nature, as if she were nothing else but
Necessity and War, having neither any thing unmixt, nor any thing truly pure, but still arriving at her end by many and those unjust and unlawful Passions. Whence they affirm that she Originally proceeded from Injustice, by the conjunction of immortal with mortal; and for that the thing engender'd is still delighted with the Parts of that, which engenders, dismember'd con∣trary to Nature from the whole. But this seems to be too luxurint and severe an Accusation of Nature: For there is yet a more moderate excuse, which does not altogether deprive the Beasts of Reason, yet justifies the necessary and convenient use of them; which when the Ancients introduc'd, they detested and utterly discoun∣tenanc'd voracious, and voluptuous gluttony. Pytha∣goras also resum'd the Argument, how we might reap the benefit of the Creatures without doing injustice. For they do no Injustice, that chastize and kill such Savage Beasts, that are both hurtful to Man, and never will be tam'd: But taming such as are gentle and loving to Men, thereby to make them assistant in the several Uses to which they were ordain'd. The Horse and Ass, that Backs to load resign, And race of Bulls, sweet milk-affording Kine, Which as Prometheus in Eschylus observes, Kind Heaven vouchsafed to Men by toyle distresse, With servile Limbs his labours to assist. Thus we make use of Dogs to guard our Goats and Sheep, while they are milk'd and shorn. For Life does not presently forsake a Man, unless he be fed with Periwinkles, or the Livers of Geese, or unless he may kill whole Oxen or Kids to supply his Banquets: Nei∣ther is it out of any extravagancy upon the Theatre,
or to pass away their time in Hunting, that they com∣pel some Beasts to be daring, and to fight against their wills, and kill others, whom Nature has not arm'd to defend themselves. For in my opinion, he that is for sport and pastime, ought to seek out for such as will sport and be merry with him. And therefore it was the saying of Bion, that though Boys throw Stones at Frogs in sport, yet the Frogs do not dye in sport but in ear∣nest; so in Hunting and Fishing, the fault is in the Men delighting in the torments and cruel deaths of Beasts, and tearing them without compassion from their Whelps and their young Ones. For 'tis not in the making use of Beasts that Men do them wrong, but in the wastfully and cruelly destroying them. Soclares. Contain your self, my dearest Autobulus, and forbear these accusations, for here are several Gentle∣men coming, all great Huntsmen, whom it will be very difficult to bring over to your Opinion, neither is it convenient to offend them. Autobulus. You give me good advice; however I know Eubiotus very well, and my Nephew Ariston; nor am I less acquainted with Aiacides and Aristotimus, the Sons of Dionysius the Delphian, as also with Nicander the Son of Euthydamus, all expert in the Forest-Chace, as Homer expresses it; and therefore likely to take part with Aristotimus. On the other side yonder comes Phaedimus too, bringing along with him the Islanders and Neighbours to the Sea, Heracleon of Megara, and Philostratus of Euboea, Whose whole delight is all the Day, The toylesom Pastime of the Sea. But as for Optatus, our equal in Years.
Which of the sides to range him, well, So vers'd in both, we cannot tell. For he is one that offers as well the first Fruits of his Fishery to Dictynna, as of his Forest spoyls to the Moun∣tain Deities: So that it is apparent, that he comes a∣mong us, as one that intends not to be partial to one side more then the other; or else our Conjecture is amiss, dear Optatus, that your design is only to be an Impartial Umpire between these young Gentlemen. Optatus. You Conjecture very truly Autobulus: For the Ancient Law of Solon is out of date, that punish'd those who stood Neuters and refus'd to adhere to nei∣ther side. Autobulus. Seat your self then here by us, that if there should be any occasion for a Testimony, we may not be troubl'd to run to Aristotles Writings, but acquiescing in your experience, may give our suffrages according to what you aver for Truth. Optatus. Go too then, young Gentlemen, are ye a∣greed upon the Method and Order of the Dispute? Phaedimus. Truly, worthy Soclares, that very thing occasion'd a great debate among us; but at length, according to that of Euripides, The Child of Fortune, Chance, the point agreed, And fix'd the Method how we shou'd proceed, By giving the Precedence to the Land-Animals to plead their Cause before Marine Creatures. Soclares. Then Aristotimus, 'tis high time for you to speak, and for us to hear. Aristotimus. The Court is open to all concern'd in the Controversie— Others there are that kill their young Ones, by leaping the Females at the very in∣stant
of their bringing forth. There are a sort of Mullets call'd Pardi, that feed upon their own slime. But the Pourcontrell or Polypus sits all the Winter feeding upon its self, In needy House and Domicills forlorn. so slothful, so stupid, so given to his Gut he is, or else so abandon'd to all those Vices together. And there∣fore Plato again and again forbids, or rather makes it his Wish in his Laws, that young Men might not be permitted to addict themselves to Marine Fishery: wherein there is no Exercise of Strength, no Cogitation of Wisdom; nor any thing that contributes to forti∣tude, swiftness or agility, in combating against Pikes, Congers or Scates; whereas in the Chase of Wild Beasts, the feircer sort accustom the Huntsman to contempt of danger; the more subtil sort, exercise and sharpen his wit and cunning; the swifter sort, exercise his Strength, and render him more apt to endure labour. These are the Advantages that accrue to a Man by Hunting; but in Fishing, there is nothing worth his while. For never any of the Gods got honour by the Sir∣name of a Conger-killer; as Apollo was Sir-nam'd the Wolf-slayer; never any of the Deities glory'd in being a Darter of Mullets, as Diana is honor'd with the Addi∣tion of Hart-darting; and what wonder is it? when it is accompted more Noble for a Man to kill then to buy a Wild Boar, a Hart, a Goat or a Hare, but more honorable to buy a Thunny, a Lobster, or an Amy, then to kill 'em. And therefore because there is nothing in Fishing that is noble, no using of Ginns and slight of cunning, it is accompted a sorry pitiful Ex∣ercise, not worth a Man's labour. In general then, since the usual Arguments by which Philosophers de∣monstrate that Beasts partake of Reason are these fol∣lowing,
Purpose, Contrivance, Memory, Passions, Care of their young Ones, Gratefulness to those from whom they receive Kindnesses, and the Remembrance of shrew'd Turns: To which we may add the search af∣ter, and choice of what is needful and beneficial for them, together with apparent shews of Vertue, as of Fortitude, Society, Continence and Magnanimity, if we consider the Marine Creatures, we shall not find, that our strictest Observation can perceive in them any of these Excellencies, or at best such obscure and im∣perfect glimmerings, as are scarce discernible. But in Terrestrial and Land-Animals, there is not any Man but may behold the most luculent, the most evident and uncontroulable demonstrations in the World of all that has been said. In the first place observe the De∣signs and Preparations of Bulls provok'd to Combat, and of Wild Boars whetting their Teeth. Again, Elephants, when they have digg'd up, or tore down the Trees, which they intend to feed upon, and thereby blunted and worn out one of their Tushes, they only make use of that for those purposes, but reserve the other strong and sharp for their own Defence. The Lyon also always walks with his Feet inverted, hiding his Claws within side his Paw, to prevent the Hunter from tracing him easily by his Footing. For the Track of a Lyons Claw is not easily to be found, so that the Hunters are frequently at a loss, and wander after the obscure and scarce discernible Footsteps of those Beasts. You have heard also, I suppose, of the Ichneumon, how that he Arms himself as compleatly as a Souldier with his Breast-plate and Cuirace prepar'd for Battle, in such a manner does that Creature sur∣round and wrap himself about with a Coat of Mud when he attacks the Crocodile.
Admirable are the Preparations of Swallows before they go to lay their Eggs, how they place the more solid Stubble for foundations, and upon that build up the slighter straws; and if they perceive that the Nest wants Mud instead of Glue, you may observe how they fly to the next Lake or Sea, and after they have skimm'd the Superficies of the Water with their Wings, they lick up the Dust, and so daub and bind together the loose and ill cohering Parts of the Nest. As for the Form of their Architecture, it is neither compos'd of Angles nor many sides, but smooth, and as much as may be, Spherical; for that such a Figure is lasting and capacious; and not easily affording entrance to Creatures that lye in wait for their destruction from without. Who is there that does not admire for more reasons then one the Labour of the Spiders, so like the Threads that Women spin, and the Nets that are us'd in hunt∣ing. For the extraordinary fineness of the Spinning, and evenness of the Thread, not discontinu'd or snapp'd off like the Yarn upon a Quill, but having the smooth and subtil texture of a thin Membrane, and knit and spun together, with a certain clammy moisture imperceptibly mixt; besides the Tincture of it, cau∣sing a kind of Airy and Misty colour, the better to de∣ceive; but above all the Conduct and Governing of this little Engin, in which when any thing happens to be entangl'd, you see how presently like an expert Huntsman, the subtil Artist contracts her Net, and binds her prey within it. All which were it not every day ob∣vious to our sight and Contemplation, gives Credit to to my Discourse, which otherwise might be accounted no less fabulous, then what is reported of certain Lybian Cranes, that when they are a thirsty, throw Stones into the Water, by that means to raise it to such a height, that they may be able to reach it with their Bills. Then again when I saw a Ship Dog in the absence of
the Seamen, putting in Stones into a half empty Jar of Oyl, it was to me a wonder how that Dog should un∣derstand, that the Compression of the heavier weight would make the lighter rise. And the same Artifices are reported of Cretan Bees and Cilician Geese. For the first of these, being to take their flight about some windy Promontory, ballast themselves with little Stones, to prevent their being carry'd away by the stronger blasts. And as for the Geese, they being afraid of the Eagles, every time they cross the Moun∣tain Taurus, carry great Stones in their Mouths to the end, that by that means, as it were, bridling their gagling Tongues, they may cross the Mountain in silence with∣out alaruming their Enemies. Extraordinary also is the Caution which the Cranes ob∣serve in their flight. For they flie when the Wind is very high, and the Air very tempestuous, not as in fair weather with their Beaks in their Breasts like a Half-Moon, but forming a Triangular Body, with the sharp Angle of that Figure they penetrate the Wind that ruffles round about 'em, and by that means pre∣serve their Order unbroken. On the other side when they fall upon the Ground, those that are upon the Night Watch stand with the whole weight of their Bodies upon one Leg, holding a Stone in the Claw of the other Foot. For the holding of the Stone keeps them awake for a long time together; and wakes them again with the noise of the fall, if they happen to drop asleep. So that it was no wonder, that Hercules laid his Quiver under his Arm-pit, and with his strenu∣ous Arm embracing his Bow; Slept all the Ntght, where e're he laid his Load, With his right-handed weight upon the Wood.
Nor do I so much admire at him, who was the first that hit upon the way to open an Oyster, when I meet with and consider the Artifices of the Herons. For a Heron, when he has swallow'd a gaping Oyster, en∣dures the trouble and vexation of it for so long time, till he perceives it soften and relax'd by the heat of his Stomac; then casting it up again gaping and divided, he takes out that which is fit for Food. But accurately to relate the Oeconomie and Contri∣vances of the Emmets, as it is a task of great Labour, so it would argue too much of Negligence to pass them over in silence. For there is not in nature a smaller Crea∣ture, and yet a most absolute Mirror of the greatest and most noble performances, and, as it were, in a transparent drop, the Appearance of all vertue. There is Friendship to be discern'd in Mutual Society. There is the Image of Fortitude in the patient undergoing of Labour. In them are to be seen many Seeds of con∣tinence, many of Wisdom and Justice. Insomuch that Cleanthes, who deny'd that Beasts were endu'd with Reason, could not forbear reporting how he met with the following Accident of a Crowd of Emmets, that came to another. Ant-hill, bringing along with them a dead Emmet. Presently other Emmets ascending out of their Ant-hill, seem'd, as it were, to meet them, and then disappear'd again, and this was done twice or thrice. Till at length, the one side brought up from under ground a worm, as the Price of the dead Emmets Re∣demption, which the other Party of Pimires receiving deliver'd the dead Emmet and so departed. But that which is apparent to all, is their Equity to each other when they meet one another, while they that carry nothing, always give way to those that are burdened, nor are their Corrosions and Partitions of things, too weighty for single carriage, less remarkable, to the end the Burdens may be divided among many. But
when they bring forth their little Eggs and expose them to the Cold, Aratus makes it a sign of Rainy wea∣ther. When from her hollow Cells th' Industrious Ant Her hidden stores brings forth of small Provant. For in that Sence many read the  or Ova, to the Providence of those little Creatures, who when they find their Provision in their Magazines to begin to taint, and grow rotten, bring it forth and expose it to the open Air, to prevent the Progress of the Putre∣faction. But that, which above all things, demonstrates the surpassing Excellency of their understanding is their pre-apprehension of the Germinating of Wheat. For the Wheat dos not remain dry and void of Putrefa∣ction, but grows moist and turns into a kind of milky substance, when it changes from Seed to become an Heb. For fear therefore that preserving the quality, it should become useless for food, they eat out the very principal part of the Grain, from whence the Wheat sends forth its blossom. I must confess, I do not ap∣prove of those, who dig up Ant-hills on purpose to im∣prove their Learning, as it were by Anatomy. How∣ever the tell us by Vertue of that cruel Information, that the Passage or Descent from the Top of the Hill to the Nest is not directly streight, nor easily penetra∣ted by any other Creature, but intercepted with seve∣ral turnings and windings, leading through several Un∣derminings and Perforations into three Cavities, of which the one is the common Place of Feeding and Converse for the whole Community, the next is the general Magazine of their Provision, and the third is the Apartment, where they dispose of their Dead.
I am afraid you may deem me too Impertinent in joyn∣ing Elephants with Pismires, and yet I cannot but think it seasonable, to shew the Nature and Force of understand∣ing as well in the smallest as in the greatest Bodies, neither obscur'd in the one, nor deficient in the other. Some there are that admire in an Elephant his apt∣ness to learn, and to be taught, and the many various Postures and Alterations of movement which he shews upon the Theaters, not easily to be equall'd by human Assiduity, as suttle and abounding in Memory and Re∣tention as he is. But for my part, I rather chose to prove his evident Understanding from the Passions and Inclinations of the Creature, that were never taught him, but only infus'd by Nature, as being altogether unmix'd and pure without the help of Art. At Rome not very long ago, there were many Ele∣phants that were taught many dangerous Postures, many windings and turnings and circular screwings of their bulky Bodys hard to be exprest, among which there was one, which being duller then the rest, and there∣fore often rated and chastiz'd for his stupidity, was seen in the Night-time, by Moon-light without be∣ing forc'd to it, to Practice over his Lessons with all the Industry imaginable. Agno tells a Story of an Elephant in Syria that was bred up in a certain House, who observ'd that his Keeper took away and defrauded him every day of half the Measure of his Barley, only that once the Master being present and looking on, the Keeper powr'd out the whole Measure. Which was no sooner done, but the Elephant extending his Pro∣boscis, separated the Barley and vided it into two equal parts, thereby ingeniously discovering, as much as in him lay, the injustice of his Keeper.
Another in revenge that his Keeper mix'd Stones and Durt with his Barley, as the Keepers Meat was boy∣ling upon the Fire, took up the Ashes and flung them into the Pot. Another being vext and provok'd by the Boys in Rome, that prickt his Proboscis with the sharp ends of their Writing-steels, caught one of them in his Probos∣cis and mounted him up in the Air, as if he intended to have squash'd out his Guts; but upon the loud out-crys of the Spectators, set him gently down again upon his Feet, and so went on, believing he had sufficient∣ly punish'd the Boy in skaring him. Many other things are reported of the Wild Elephants that feed with∣out controul, as being under their own Jurisdiction, but nothing more to be admir'd then their passing of great Rivers. For first of all the youngest and the least flounces into the Stream; whom the rest beholding from the shoar, if they see that the less bulky Leader keeps steady footing with his Back above Water, they are then assur'd and confident that they may boldly ad∣venture without any danger. Having thus far proceeded in our discourse, I can∣not think it well done to pass by the cunning of the Fox, by reason of the similitude it has with the for∣mers. The Muthologists tell us, that the Dove which Deucalcon sent out of his Ark, returning back again, was to him a certain sign of the Storm not ceas'd; but of serene and fair weather when she flew quite away. But the Thracians, to this day, when they design to pass a River that is frozen over, make use of a Fox to try whether the Ice will bear or no. For the Fox treading gently, lays his Ear to the Ice, and if he perceive by the noise of the Water that the Stream runs very close underneath, conjecturing from thence that the Con∣gelation is not deep, but thin and no way stedfastly solid, he makes a stop, and if he be suffer'd, returns back a∣gain;
but if he perceive no noise, he goes on boldly. Nor can we say that this is only an exquisiteness of Sense without Reason, but a Syllogistical deduction from Sense; concluding that whatever makes a noise is mov'd; whatever is mov'd, cannot be frozen; what is not frozen is moist, what is moist gives way. The Logicians say, that a Dog making use of the Argu∣ment drawn from many disjunctive Propositions, thus reasons with himself in places where several High ways meet; either the Wild Beasts is gone this way, or that, or that way; but not that way not that way, therefore this way: The force of Sense affording nothing but the Presumption; but the force of Reason affording the major Proposition, and inferring the Conclusion of the Assumption. But a Dog stands in no need of any such Testimonial; in regard it is both false and adulterate. For Sense it self shews which way, the Beast is fled by his Trachs and Foot-steps, bidding farwel to disjun∣ctive and copulate Axioms; and the Nature of Dogs is palpably to be discern'd by many other Actions, Affecti∣ons and dutiful Services, neither the effects of hearing or seeing, but only practicable by Reason and Under∣standing. It would be ridiculous for me to discourse the Continence, Obedience and Industry of Dogs in Hunting, to you, tha are so well confirm'd in the knowledge of those things by daily Experience and Practice. There was a certain Roman slain in the Civil Wars, whose Head no body durst cut off, before they kill'd the Dog that guarded his body and fought in defence of his Master. It happen'd that King Pyrrhus Travailing that way, lit upon the Dog watching over the Carkass of the Person slain, and hearing that the Dog had been there three days without meat or drink, yet would not forsake his dead Master, od red the Man to be buryed, but that the Dog should be preserv'd and brought to him.
A few days after there was a Muster of the Souldi∣ers, so that they were forc'd to march all in Order by the King with the Dog quietly lying by him for a good while. But when he saw the Murtherers of his Master pass by him, he flew upon 'em with a more then ordinary fury, barking and baying and tearing his Throat, and ever and anon turning about to the King; which did not only increase the Kings suspiti∣on, but the jealousie of all that stood about him. Upon which the Men were presently apprehended, and though the Circumstances were very slight which o∣therwise appear'd against them, yet they confess'd the Fact, and were Executed. The same thing is reported to have been done by a Dog that belong'd to Hesiod, Sir-nam'd the Wise, which discover'd the Sons of Ganychtor the Naucletian, by whom Hesiod was Murther'd. But that which came to the knowledge of our Parents, when they were Students at Athens is yet more evident then any thing we have said. For a certain Person getting into the Temple of Aesculapius, after he had stollen all the Massy Offer∣ings of Gold and Silver, made his escape not believing he was discover'd. But the Dog that belong'd to the Temple who was call'd Cipparus, when he found that none of the Sacristanes took any notice of his barking, pursu'd himself the Sacrilegious Theif; and though at first the Fellow paulted him with stones, he could not beat him off. So soon as it was day, the Dog still fol∣low'd him thô at such a distance, that he always kept him in his Eyes: When the Fellow threw him Meat he refus'd it; when the Theif went to Bed, the Dog watch'd at his door, and when he rose in the Morning, the Dog still follow'd him, fawning upon the Passen∣gers upon the Road, but still barking and baying at the Heels of the Theif. These things when they who were in pursuit of the Sacrilegious Person heard, and
were told withal by those they met the colour and bigness of the Dog, they were the more vigorous in the pursuit, and by that means overtaking the Theif, brought him back from Cromyon, while the Dog ran before leaping and capering, and full of joy, as it were challenging to himself the praise and reward of appre∣hending the Temple-robber. And indeed the Athenians were so grateful to him that they decreed him such a quantity of Meat to be publickly measur'd to him, and order'd the Priests to take care to see it done; in imitation of the Kindness of the Ancient Athenians to reward the Mule. For when Pericles built the Temple Hecatonpedon in the Acropolis or Tower of Athens, it so fell out, that the stones were to be fetch'd every day many furlongs off, and a world of Carriages were made use of for that purpose. Among the rest of the Mules that labour'd hard in this employment, there was one that though dismiss'd by reason of Age, wou'd still go down to the Keramicon and meeting the Carts that brought the Stones, would be always in their Company running by their sides, as it were by way of Encouragment and to excite them to work chearfully. So that the People admi∣ring the Zeal of the Mule, order'd him to be fed at the public charge, as they were wont to decree public Almes to the superannuated Wrestlers. And therefore they who deny that there is nothing of Justice due from us towards dumb Animals, may be said to speak true, so far as concerns them that Live in the Sea and haunt the Abysses of the Deep. For those Kind of Creatures are altogether unsociable, without affection for their Young Ones, void of all softness of disposition; and therefore it was well said of Homer speaking to a Person whom he look'd upon as a meer Savage,
But as for thee, so little worth, The green ey'd Sea did bring thee forth. In regard the Sea brings forth nothing friendly, nothing mansuete or gentle. But he that uses the same Dis∣course and Arguments against Land-Animals, is him∣self a Brute and Savage Creature. Unless any Man will affirm that there was nothing of Justice due from Lysimachus to the Hyrcanian Dog, that would not stir from the Body of his Deceased Master, and when he saw his Masters Carkass burning, ran and threw him∣self into the Flames. The same is reported to have been doe by a Dog that was kept by one Pyrrhus, not the King, but a private Person of that Name. For upon the death of his Master, he would not stir from the Body, but when it was carry'd forth leap'd upon the Beer, and at length threw himself into the Funeral Pile and was burnt alive with his Masters Body. The Elephant also which carry'd King Porus when the King was wounded in the Battle against Alexander, pull'd out several Darts out of his Wounds with his Pro∣boscis, with no less tenderness and care then the Chy∣rugeon could have done; and though the Elephant himself were but in a very bad condition, yet would he not lye down, till he perceiv'd the King all over of a goar Blood ready to sink; and then fearing least the King should fall, he stoop'd down gently, to ease the King in sliding to the Ground. Such was the Humor of Bucephalus, who before he was accouter'd, would suffer his Groom to back him, but when he had all his Royal Trap∣pings and Houses about him, would permit no Body but Alexander to bestride him. But if any other Persons approach'd him in curiosity to try what they could do, he encounter'd 'em open-mouth'd,
and neighing out his fury, leap'd upon their Shoulders, bore 'em down, and trampl'd 'em under his Feet, un∣less prevented by keeping at a distance or by speedy flight. Nor am I ignorant but that there is something of Variety in every one of these Examples, which you must acknowledge. And indeed it is not easie to find out the natural Dexterity of any one ingenious and do∣cible Animal, which is not accompany'd with more then one single vertue. Thus where there is affection to∣ward their Young ones, there is desire of Praise: where there is generosity, there is also moderation of Anger. Cunning likewise and Understanding are rarely parted from daring boldness and fortitude. But as for those that rather chuse to divide and distinguish every one of these vertues particularly themselves, they shall find in Dogs a fair demonstration of a gentle and yet lofty Mind at the same time, in turning away from such as sit quietly upon the ground: according to that of Homer, With hideous noise the Dogs upon him slew, But sly Ulysses who the danger knew, Sate husht and still, and from his Royal hand His Scepter dropt, as useless in command. For Dogs never bite nor worry those that prostrate themselves at their Mercy, and put on a face of Hu∣mility. Thus they say the bravest of those Indian Dogs that fought against Alexander, never stirr'd or so much as lookt about them upon the letting loose of a Hart, a Boar, and a Bear, but when they saw a Lyon, then they began to rouse, to shake and prepare thmselves for the Combat. By which it was plain that they only thought the Lyon an Antagonist worthy of their courage, but despis'd all the rest as below their anger.
Your Hounds that usually hunt Hares, if they kill the Hares themselves, take great delight in tearing them to pieces, and lapping up the blood. But if the Hare, desparing of her Life, as many times it happens, runs her self to death, the Hounds finding her dead, will never touch her, but stand wagging their Tayls, as if they did hunt not so much for the love of the Food, as for Victry and Triumphs sake. There are many Examples of cunning and suttlety abounding in Land Creatures; but to omit the Slights and Artifices of Foxes, Cranes and Jack-daws, of which I shall say nothing, because they are things already so well known, I shall make use of the Testimony of Thales, the most ancientest of our Philosophers, who is report∣ed to have chiefly admir'd the most excellent in any Art or Cunning. A certain Mule that was wont to carry Salt, in ford∣ing a River, by accident happen'd to stumble, by which means the Water melting away the Salt, when the Mule rose again, he felt himself much lighter; the Cause of which the Mule was very sensible of, and laid it up in his Memory; insomuch that every time he forded the same River, he would always stoop when he came into the deepest part, and fill his Vessels with Water, crouching down and leaning sometimes to one side, sometimes to another: Thales hearing this, order'd the Vessels to be well fill'd with Wooll and Spunges, and to drive the Mule laden after that manner. But then the Mule, as he was wont, filling his burthens with Water, reason'd with himself, that he had ill consulted his own benefit, and ever afterwards, when he forded the same River, was so careful and cautious, that by his good will he would never suffer his Burthens so much as to touch the Water.
Another Peice of Cunning joyn'd with an extraor∣dinary Affection to their Young ones is to be observ'd in Patridges, which instruct their Young ones, 'ere they are able to flye, when they are pursu'd by the Fowlers, to lay themselves upon their Backs, their Breasts cover'd with some clod of Earth, or little heap of Dirt, conglomerated as it were like a Ball. On the other side, the Old Patridges to deceive the Fow∣lers and draw them quite a contrary way, make short slights from one place to another, thereby inticing the Fowlers to follow them, till thus allur'd from their Young ones, the Fowlers give over all hopes of being Masters of their Game. In like manner Hares returning to their Forms, dispose their Leverets one in one place, another in another, at the distance many times of an Acre of ground: so that upon the tracing either of Men or Hounds, they are sure not to be all in danger at one time: themselves in the mean time not easie to be prick'd, by reason of the various windings and turnings which they make, and at length by giving a large leap discontinue the print of their Feet, and so betake themselves to their rest. A Bear when she perceives her self overgrown with Fat, before she grows stiff and unweildy, cleanses the place where she intends to conceal her self, and in her passage thither, lifts up her Paws as high as she can, and treads upon the Ground with the top of her Toes, and at length turning her self upon her back throws her self into her Receptacle. Your Hinds generally calve at a distance from all places frequented by Flesh-devouring Beasts: and Stags when they find themselves unwieldy through surplu∣sage of Flesh and Fat, get out of the way and hide themselves, hoping to secure themselves by lurking, when they dare not trust to their Heels.
The means by which the Land Hedge-hogs defend and guard themselves occasion'd the Proverb, Many slye Tricks the suttle Renard knows, But one the Hedge-hog greater then all those. For the Hedge-hog, as they report, when he spies the Fox coming, Round as a Pine Nut, or more Sphear-like Ball Lies with his Body palisaded all With pointed Thornes, which all the Foxes slight Can find no way to touch, much less to bite. But the Provision which the Hedge-hogs make for their Young Ones is much more ingenious. For when Autumn comes, they creep under the Vines, and shake off the Grapes with their Feet: which done they roul themselves up and down and take them up with their prickles, so that when they creep away again, you would think it a walking cluster (and this we have lookt on, and seen them do) after which returning to their Holes, they lay themselves down for their Young Ones to feed. Their Holes have two openings, one to the South, the other to the North. So that when they perceive the Alteration of the Air, like Pilots shifting their Sails, they stop up that which lyes to the Wind, and open the other. Which a certain Person that liv'd at Cyzycum observing, took upon him from thence at any time to tell in what corner the Wind would sit. As for Love and observance of Society joyn'd with Understanding and Prudence, Juba produces many Ex∣amples of it in Elephants. For it is the usual practise of the Elephant-Hunters to dig large Pits in the Ele∣phants Walks, and cover 'em slightly over with dry twigs or other materials; into which if any Elephant
happens to fall, the rest fetch Wood and Stones to fill up the cavity of the Pit, that the other may the more easily get out again. And some report of the Ele∣phants, that they make Prayers to the Gods by natu∣ral instinct, that they perform divine Ceremonies to the Sea, and worship the rising Sun, lifting up their Pro∣boscis's to Heaven instead of Hands. For which reason they are Creatures the most belov'd of any by the Gods, as Ptolomy Philopator testified. For having vanquish'd Antiochus, and being desirous to pay a more than ordi∣dinary Honour to the Deity among many other Oblations of Thansgivings for his Victory, he sa∣crific'd four Elephants. After which being terrify'd with a Dream, which threatned him with the Wrath of the Deity for that prodigious Sacrifice, he sought out several ways to expiate his offence, and among the rest by way of propitiation, he erected four Elephants of Brass to attone for the four Elephants he had slaugh∣tered. Examples not inferior of the observance of Society are to be found among Lyons. For the younger car∣ry forth the slow and aged when they hunt abroad for their Prey. When the old ones are weary and tyr'd, they rest and stay for the younger that hunt on; who when they have seiz'd upon any thing, call to the Old ones, making a noise like the bleating of a Calf: they presently hear, and so meeting all together, they feed in common upon the Prey. In the Amours of many Animals there is much varie∣ty; some are furious and Mad: others observe a kind of human Decency, and tricking of themselves to set off their Beauty, not without a Courtly kind of Conversa∣tion. Such was the Amour of the Elephant at Alexan∣dria, that rivall'd Aristophanes the Grammarian. For they were both in love with a Virgin that sold Gar∣lands; nor was the Elephants Courtship less conspicuous
then the others. For as he passed through the Fruit Market, he always brought her Apples, and stay'd with her for some time, and thrusting his Proboscis with∣in her Wastcoat, instead of his hand, took great delight in gently feeling her Breasts. No less remarkable was the Dragon in Love with the Etolian Woman. He came to her in the Night, and getting under her Garments to her very Skin, embrac'd her naked Body; and never either willingly or un∣willingly did her any harm; but always about break of day departed: which the Kindred of the Woman observing to be the common custom of the Dragon, remov'd her a great way off. After that, the Dragon came not again for three or four days together, being all the while, as it seem'd, wandring about in search of her: But at length having with much ado found her out, he did not approach her with that mildness as he was wont to do, but after a rougher manner with the Folds of his Body having first bound her Hands and Armes, with the end of his Tayl he lash'd the Calves of her Legs; expressing thereby a gentle and loving anger, which had more in it of indulgent expostulation then punishment. I say nothing of a Goose in Egypt in Love with a a Boy; nor of the Ram in Love with Glauce that play'd on the Harp: For the Story is in all Peoples Mouthes, and besides I am apt to think you are satiated with Examples of this Nature. But as for Starlings, Magpies and Parrets, that learn to talk, and afford their Teachers such a Spirit of Voice so well temper'd and so adapted for imitation, they seem to me to patronize and defend the rest of the Creatures by their Talent of learning what they are taught, and in some measure to teach us, that those Creatures also, as well as they, partake of vocal expres∣sion and Articulate Sound. From whence I conclude
it a most ridiculous thing in them, that would com∣pare these Creatures with a sort of Mute Animals, I mean the Fish, that have not voice enough to howle or make a mournful noise. Whereas in the natural and untaught Notes of these Creatures what Music, what a charming Grace do we observe? To which the famous Poets, and choicest Singers among Men bear Testimony; while they compare their sweetest Odes and Poems to the Singing of Swans and Melody of Nightingales. Now in regard there is more of rea∣son in Teaching then in Learning, we are to believe Aristotle, who assures us that Terrestrial Animals do that likewise; in regard that Nightingales have been observ'd instructing their young Ones to Sing. Of which this may be a sufficient Proof, that such Nightin∣gales are known to sing worse that are taken very young from the Nest, and depriv'd of the Education of the Old One. For they both learn and are taught from the Old one, not for hire, or to get Reputation, but meerly out of a delight in mixing their Notes to∣gether, and because they have a greater love for that which is excellent, and curious in the Voice then what is profitable. Concerning which I have a Story to tell ye which I heard from several Greeks and Latins who were eye Witnesses of the thing. A certain Barber in Rome who had a Shop right against the Temple which is call'd the Greek's Market, bred in his House a kind of a Prodigy of a Magpy, whose Tongue would be always going with the great∣est Variety imaginable, sometimes imitating human Speech, sometimes chattering her Wild Notes, and sometimes humouring the Sounds of Wind Instruments, neither was this by any constraint, but as she accustom'd her self, with a more then ordinary Ambition to leave nothing unspoken, nothing that her Imitaion should not master.
It happen'd a certain Person of the wealthier sort, and newly dead in the Neighbour-hood, was carry'd forth to be buried with a great Number of Trumpets before him. Now in regard it was the custom of the Bearers to rest themselves before the Barbers-shop, the Trumpeters being Excellent in their Art, and withal commanded so to do, made a long stop, Sounding all the while. After that day the Magpye was altogether mute, not so much as uttering her usual Notes by which she call'd for what she wanted, insomuch that they who be∣fore admir'd as they pass'd to and fro at the chattering and prating of the Bird, now much more wonder'd at her suddain silence; and many suspected her to have been Poyson'd by some that affected peculiar skill in teaching those Kind of Birds. But the Greatest Number were of Opinion that the noise of the Trumpets had stupify'd her hearing, and that by the loss of her hear∣ing the use of her Voice was likewise extinguish'd: But the cause of her unusal silence proceeded from nei∣ther of these Effects, but from her retiring to privacy by her self to exercise the imitation of what she had heard, and to fit and prepare her Voice as the Instru∣ment to express what she had learnt. For soon after she came of a suddain to sight again, but had quitted all her former customary Imitations, but only Soun∣ded the Musick of the Trumpets, observing all the Changes and Cadencies of the Harmony with that ex∣actness of time as was not to be imagin'd: An Ar∣gument as I have said before of a more rational aptness in those Creatures to learn of themselves, then from the Instructions of a teacher. Nor do I think it pro∣per to pass by in silence one wonderful Example of the Docility of a Dog, of which I my self was a Specta∣tor in Rome. This Dog belong'd to a certain Mimic who at that time had the management of a Farce,
wherein there was great variety of Parts, which he undertook to instruct the Actors to perform, and several Imitations proper for the matters and passions therein represented. Among the rest there was one who was to drink a sleepy Potion, and after he had drank it, to fall into a deadly drowsiness, and counter∣feit the Actions of a dying Person. The Dog, who had study'd several of the other Gestures and Postures, more diligently observing this, took a peace of Bread that was sopt in the Potion, and after he had eat it, in a short time counterfeited a trembling, then a staggering, and afterward a drowsiness in his Head: Then stretching out himself, he lay as if he had been dead; and seem'd to proffer himself to be drag'd out of the Place and carry'd to Burial, as the Plot of the Play re∣quir'd. Afterwards understanding the time from what was said and acted, in the first place he began gently to stir, as it were waking out of a profound sleep, and lifting up his Head, he gaz'd about him: Afterwards to the amazment of the Beholders, he rose up and went to his Master to whom he belong'd with all the signs of gladness and fawning kindness, insomuch that all the Spectators, and even Caesar himself, for Old Vespasian was present in Marcellus's Theatre, were taken with the sight. But perhaps we may seem ridiculous, for signalizing Beasts in this manner, because they learn, though with little reason, since we find that Democritus affirms us to have been their Schollars in greatest matters. Of the Spider, for weaving and repairing what we tear or wear out. Of the Swallow, for building Houses; and of the mournful Swan and Nightingale for singing and imitation of their Notes. Moreover in others we observe a Threefold Practice of Physic both natural and inbred. For Tortoises mae use of Basil, and Weasels eat Rue, when they have devour'd a Serpent;
and Dogs purge themselves from abounding Choller with a certain sort of Grass: The Dragon quickens the dimness of his sight with Fennel, and the Bear coming forth of her Cave, after long emaciation, feeds upon Wild Dragons; for the acrimony of that Herb opens and separates her Guts when clung together. At other times, being overcloy'd with food, she repairs to the Emmet-Hills, and thrusting forth her Tongue all soft and unctuous by reason of the sweet kind of slime that all besmears it, till it be crowded with Emmers, at length swallows them down her Throat, and so recovers. And it is reported that the Egyptians observe and imitate the Bird call'd Ibis, in purging and cleansing her Bowels with the briny Sea-water. For which reason, the Priests, when they hallow themselves, make use of the Water of which the Ibis has drank: For that those Birds will not drink the Water, if it be Medicinal, or otherwise infected. Some Beasts there are that cure themselves by Abstinence, as Wolves and Lyons, who when they are gorg'd with Flesh, lye still and digest their Crudities by the warmth of one anothers Bodies. It is reported also of the Tiger, that if a Kid be thrown to her, she will not eat in two days; but grow∣ing almost famish'd the third day, if she be not supply'd with another, she will tear down the Cage that holds her, if she have strength enough; yet all this while she will not meddle with the first Kid, as being her Com∣panion and fellow House-keeper. More then this the Elephants are said to make use of Chyrugery; for that being brought to Persons wounded they will draw forth the Heads of Spears and Arrows out of their Bodies with little pain, and without dilacerating and mangling the Flesh. The Cretan Goats, which by eating Dittany expel the Arrows shot into their Bodies, taught Women with Child to understand the vertue of that Herb so
prevalent to expel the Birth. For those Goats being wounded seek no other cure, but presently seek out and hunt for Dittany. But these things though wonderful, are not so much to be admir'd, as are those Beasts that understand the use of numbers, and will reckon to such a Proportion; like the Oxen about Susa. For there are Oxen in that place that Water the Kings Gardens with portable Buc∣kets, of which the number is fix'd: For every Oxe car∣ries a hundred Buckets every day, and more you cannot force them to take or carry would you never so fain, insomuch that when constraint has been us'd for ex∣periments sake, nothing could make them stir after they had carry'd their full number: Such an accurate ac∣compt do they take and preserve the same in their memory, as Ketias the Guidian, relates. The Libyans deride the Egyptians for the Fables which they report of the Oryx,A certain Beast resem∣bling a Goat in colour. which, as they say, makes a great noise upon the same day and at the very hour when the Dog-star, which they call Sothes, rises. However this is certain that all their Goats, when that Star rises truly with the Sun, turn themselves and stand gazing toward the East; which is a most unquestionable Argument of that Star's having finish'd its course, and cheifly acknowledg'd for such among the Astronomers Observations. But that my discourse may draw to a Conclusion, let us add something concerning the Divinity and Prophe∣tick nature, with which our Terrestrial Creatures are endu'd. Which when we consider, we shall find, that that same part of Soothsaying, which is founded upon the observation of Birds, is not the meanest or most ignoble, but very ancient and in great esteem. For the smartness and intelligible faculty of Birds, together with their capbility to receive all impressions of Fancy,
afford the Deity a Convenience to make use of those faculties as Instruments, to turn them into Motion, into Sounds, Chirpings, and Forms, sometimes immoveable, sometimes fix'd, sometimes volatile like the Winds, by means of some of these stopping short, by the means of others directing to their end the Actions and impetuous Impulses of Men: There∣fore Euripides in general, calls Birds the Cryers of the Gods; and particularly Socrates stiles himself a fellow Servant with the Swans. As among Princes, Pyrrus was pleas'd with the Sirname of Eagle; and Antiochus lov'd to be call'd Anticchus the Falcon: But they who deride Men insipid and void of Ingenuity, call them by the Names of Fish. And whereas we can produce millions of Things and Accidents which are fore-told us by Land and flying Creatures, there is not any one such Example that the Patrons of Water-Animals can pro∣duce in their behalf; but being all void of hearing, perfectly sottish, and without any sight or discerning of providence, they are all thrown apart into that same place unblest and hideous call'd the Sea, as it were into the Region of the Ungodly, where the rational and in∣tellectual part of the Soul, is extinguish'd; only being animated with some diminutive portion, the lowest that may be imagin'd of a confus'd and overwhelm'd Sence, they rather seem to palpitate them breath. Then Heracleo, prepare thy self Friend Phoedimus; after all this, 'tis time to rowse thy self in the defence of the Ilanders and others that live by the Sea side. For this has been no frivolous Discourse, but a hard-fought Contest, and a continu'd peice of Rhetoric that wanted on∣ly Lattices and a Pulpit to give it the Honour it deserv'd. Phoedimus. Therefore you see, 'tis plain here has been foul Play and Treachery in the Case; for a Per∣son sober and upon premeditation, to set upon us when we were Stomach-sick and doaz'd with our last Nights
Compotation. But there is no way to avoid the Com∣bat: for that being an Imitator of Pindar it shall never be said of me, Combats refus'd, when nobly set upon, Have Vertue into deepest darkness thrown. For we have leisure enough, as having nor only allow'd our selves a vacation from Jollity and Balls, but our Hounds and Horses a relaxation from their Labours; and with all having hung up our drag Nets and Spears, as having also this day granted, for Disputations sake, a general Truce to all Creatures as well upon the Lnd as in the Sea. However fear not; for I will use it moderately, without producing either the Opinions of Philosophers, or the Fables of the Egyptians, or the Re∣lations either of the Indians or Libyans wanting Testi∣mony: but such as shall be verify'd by good Witnesses, such as have made it their business to toil upon the Ocean, and gave Credit to their Eyes. For to say truth there is not any one of those Examples which are produc'd from the Land which do not confirm their Histories, as being manifested to Sense: Whereas the Sea affords but few but what are difficult to be dis∣cern'd. The Sea concealing the Generation and Nou∣rishment of most of her Creatures, their Antipathies, and ways of preserving themselves. In reference to which many Acts of their Understanding, Memory and Community being unknown to us, is the reason that we cannot be so copious in our Discourse. Then again, Land Animals, by reason of their amiliarity and cohabitation, being in some measure accustom'd to the Conditions of Men, become capable of their Nu∣triture, Education and Imitation: which sweetens and allays all their Acerbity and Morosness, like the mix∣ture of Fresh-water with Sea-brine; and awakening
that which is slow and disorderly in them, inflames it with human Motions. Whereas the living of Sea-Animals being by many degrees remote from the Con∣verse of Men, and having nothing adventitious, or that may be said to be acquir'd by Custom, and Familiarity, is altogether peculiar, genuine and unmix'd with Man∣ners strange and foreign to them; which proceeds ei∣ther from Nature, or the Place it self. For Nature re∣ceiving and cherishing whatever Knowledge comes to her self, affords it also to Fish, and makes many Eeles tame and familiar to Men; which for that rea∣son are call'd Sacred, like those in the River Arethuse; so that in many places there are Fish that will hear and obey when call'd by their Names: as the story goes of Crassus's Mullet, upon the Death of which he wept. For which when Domitius twitted him in these words, Did not you weep when your Mullet dy'd? he retorted upon him again, Did you bury three Wives and never wept at all? The Crocodiles belonging to the Priests not only know the Voices of those that call them, and suffer themselves to be strok'd and handl'd, but gaping hold out their Teeth to be cleans'd and wip'd by the hands of the Priests. Lately Philinus, after he had been long travelling in Egypt, returning to us, told us how he saw in the City, which derives its Name from Anteus, an Old Woman sleeping by the side of a Crodocile upon a low soft Bed well and decently dress'd up. In Ancient Histories we find that when King Ptolomy call'd the Sacred Crocodile; and that the Crocodile nei∣ther vouchsafed to appear at his call, nor would answer to the earnest Expostulations of the Priests, it was lookt upon as a Prognostication of the Death of the King, which happen'd soon after. Which shews that the Race of Water-Animals is neither without a share of that inestimable thing call'd Prophetic Signification,
nor undeserving those Honours ascrib'd to Land Crea∣tures. For that about Sura, which is a Village in Lycia between Phellus and Myro, I have heard it credibly re∣ported, that there are certain Persons who make it their business to watch the flights and pursuits of the Fish, and from thence by a certain Art which they have they gather predictions, as others from the Observation of Birds. But let these Examples suffice to shew that Fish are not altogether Strangers to Mankind, nor altogether void of human Affection. But for a great and common demonstration of their unmixt and natural Understanding, we find that there is not any Fish that swims, unless they be such as stick and cling to the Rocks, which are so easily taken by Men, as Asses are seiz'd by Wolves; Bees by Black-birds, Grashoppers by Swallows, Serpents by Harts; which are therefore call'd Elaphoi, not from their swiftness, but from a faculty which they have of drawing Ser∣pents to them by the force of their Breath. Or as Sheep call the Wolf by the sound of their Feet, or as the Panther allures to her Paws both Apes and other Creatures by the fragrant smell of her Body. But so suspicious is the Sense of all Water-Animals, and so watchful are they to avoid all Baits and Treacheries against them by reason of their extraordinary cunning, that Fishing thereby becomes no easie, or single Labour, but a Toyl that requires various Instruments and many Tricks of human Cunning and Deceit: and this is apparent from Examples near at hand. For no Man desires an Angling-Rod too thick, tho strong enough to hold against the twitches of the Fish when taken; but rather they require it slender, least by casting too great a shadow upon the Water, they should frighten the suspicious Creature. In the next place they never knit too many knots in the Line, but make it as smooth as may be; for that would too much discover the Deceit;
and then for the Hairs which are next the Hook, they endeavour to get the whitest they can meet with. For so by reason of the likeness of Colour, they lye the more easily conceal'd in the Water. Therefore some there are, who expounding the following Verses of Homer, This to the bottom quickly sinks like Lead, And drawing down the Curles of the Bulls Head, While thus the secret Baits concealed lye, Makes deadly havock 'mong the Ravenous Frye. believe that the Ancients made use of Bulls Hair for their Lines with which they angl'd; alledging that Keras then signify'd Hair, from whence Keirasthai to be shav'd, and Kura, shaving; and that Keroplastes in Archilochus, signify'd a Barber. But this is an Error. For they made use of Horse-Hair, more especially that of Stone-horses. For Mares by moistning their Tayles with their Urine, render the Hair weak and brittle. Tho Aristotle will not allow any thing to be said in all this that shew'd any such extraordinary suttlety in Men. Only he says, that the lower peice of the Line was fortify'd with a little hollow piece of Horn, which the Fish swallow'd before they could come at any thing else. Moreover that they made use of round Hooks to catch Mullets and Tunies, in regard they had but small Mouths, for that they were afraid of a strait Hook. He also farther says, that the Mullet many times suspecting the round Hook, will swim round a∣bout it, flapping the Bait with his Tail, and then turn∣ing round, secures to himself so much as he has bro∣ken off. Or if he cannot do that, he shuts his Mouth close, and with the extremities of his Lips nibbles off some part of the Bait.
The Fish call'd Labrax behaves himself more stoutly then the Elephant; for when he perceives himself struck with the Hook, without assistance he sets himself at li∣berty, widening the Wound by flinging his Head to, and fro, and enduring the painful Twingings of the Hook, till he have freed himself from it with the loss of his Flesh. The Sea-Fox, or the Fish call'd Alopex seldom bites but avoids the Deceit; or if he chance to be taken, presently turns the Inside of his Body outward. For by reason of the strength and moisture of his Body, he has a peculiar faculty to turn it so, that the inside coming to be outermost, the hook falls off. These things demonstrate understanding, and a subtle and extraordinary use of it in the nick and juncture of time. Other examples there are, which shew not only this same understanding and knowledge but the community and mutual Affection of Fish. Thus if one Scate hap∣pen to swallow the Hook, all the rest of the Scates that are in the same shoal, presently croud together, and bite the Line in pieces. The same Scates if any of their Companions fall into the Net, give the Prisoners their Tayles to take hold of with their Teeth, and so draw them forth by main force. But the Fish call'd Anthiae with far more courage assist their fellows in distress. For getting under the Meshes with their Backs, and setting up their Finns, they never leave till they have saw'd them in two. Now we know no Land Animal that will assist and defend his Kind in danger; neither the Bear, nor the Wild Boar, nor the Leaena, nor the Panther; true it is that when they are in Heards together, they will gather into a Circle, and defend each other in Com∣mon: but no single Land Animal either knows or
cares to assist a single Companion, but flyes and shifts for himself as far off as he can, from the Beast that is wounded and lyes a dying. For as for that same story of Elephants filling up the Ditches with heaps of ad∣joyning Materials whether Wood or Earth, for the unfortunate Elephant the more easily to get up again, it is so extreamly uncouth and foreign to us, as if we were bound to believe Juba's Books by ver∣tue of a Royal Edict. However if it were true, it does but serve to shew that many of the Marine Creatures are nothing inferior in Understanding and Community then the most intelligent of the Land Animals. But as for their mutual Society we shall discourse apart of that by it self. Now the Fishermen observing how that most Fish a∣voided the casts of their Hooks, by cunning or by striving with the Tackling, betook themselves to force, like the Persian Hunters, making use of Nets, that there might be no escape for those that were caught either by the help of reason or suttlety. Thus Mullets and the Fish call'd Julides are taken with Sweep-Nets and Drag-Nets, as are also several other sorts of Fish call'd Mormuri, Sargi, Gobii, and Labraces; those that are call'd Casting-Nets catch the Mullet, the Gilthead, and the Scorpion-Fish: and therefore Homer calls this sort of Fishing with Nets Panagra, or the All sweeper. And yet there are some Fish that are too cunning for these Nets. Thus the Labrax or Jack perceiving the drawing of the Sweep Net with the force of his Body beats a hol∣low place in the mud where he lays himself close till the Net be gone over him. But as for the Dolphin, when he finds himself taken and in the midst of the Net, he remains there without being in the least perplext, but falls too with a great deal of Joy, and feasts upon the numerous Fry within the Meshes: but so soon as he comes near the shoar,
he bites his way through the Net with his Teeth and swims away. Or if he chance to be taken, the Fisher∣men do him no other harm the first time, but only sow a sort of large Bulrushes to the Finny Crown upon his Head and so let him go. If they take him a second time they punish him with stripes, well knowing him again by the Prints of the Needle. But that rarely happens. For having got his Pardon the first time, for the most part of them, they acknowledge the favour, and abstain from spoil for the future. Moreover, among the many Examples that make evident the wariness of Fish in avoiding the Deceits and Craft of the Fisher-men, it would not be conve∣nient to pass by that of the Cuttle Fish. For this Fish carrying in that part of his Head which is near his Neck call'd his Nose, a certain black and inky sort of Liquor, so soon as he perceives himself discover'd, throws that Liquor forth, and darkens all the Water round about him in such a manner that the Fisher-men losing sight of him, by that means, he makes his escape: imitating therein Homers Deities, who when they had a mind to save any of their Heroes hid them in an Azure Cloud: but of this enough. Now for the extraordinary suttlery of Fish in hunt∣ing and catching their own Prey, we shall meet with several Examples of it in several Fish. Particularly the Star fish understanding his own nature to be such, that whatever he touches dissolves and liquifies, readily offers his Body, and permits himself to be touch'd by all that come near him. You know your self the property of the Torpedo or Crampfish, which not only benums all those that touch it, but also strikes a numness through the very Net into the hands of them that go about to take him. And some that have had greater experience of this Fish, report, that if it happen to fall alive upon the Land, they that
pour Water upon it, shall presently perceive a num∣ness seizing upon their hands and stupifying their feel∣ing through the Water affected with the Quality of the Fish. And therefore having an innate Sence of this faculty, it never makes any ressistance against any thing, nor ever is in danger. Only swimming circu∣larly about his Prey, shoots forth the Effluviums of his Nature like so many Darts, and first infects the Wa∣ter, then the Fish through the Water, which is nei∣ther able to defend it self nor to escape, being as it were held in Chains and frozen up. The Fisher-man is well known to many, who has his Name given him from his manner of catching Fish; whose Art, as Aristotle writes, the Cuttle Fish makes use of, for he lets down like a Line, a certain curle which nature has given him, so order'd as to let it run out at length, or draw it to him again, as he sees occasion. This when he sees any of the lesser Fish approach, he offers them to bite, and then by degrees pulls the curle nearer and nearer by vertue of the Bait, till he has drawn his Prey within the reach of his Mouth. And as for the Polypus's changing his colour, Pindarus has made it famous in these words, In any City may that Man expose His safety, who well knows Like Sea-bred Polypus to range, And vary colour upon every Change. In like manner Theognis, Change manners with thy Friends, observing thus The vary colour'd cunning Polypus; Who let him stick to whatsoever rock, Of the same colour does his Body look
'Tis true the Chamaleon changes colour, not out of any design, or to conceal himself, but out of fear, being naturally timorous and trembling at every noise he hears: And this is occasion'd by the extraordinary a∣bundance of breath which he enjoys, as Theophrastus affirms. For the whole Body of this Creature wants but little of being nothing else but Lungs; which de∣monstrates him to be full of Spirits, and consequently apt to change. But this same change of the Polypus is no product of any affection of the Mind, but a kind of Action. For he changes on purpose, making use of this Artifice to escape what he fears, and to get the Food which he lives by. For by fraud he takes those things that never avoid him, and avoids those things that pass him by without taking any notice of him. For that he devours his own Curles is an untruth; but that he is afraid of the Lamprey and Conger is certain: for by these he is ill treated, not being able to return them any Injury, by reason of their being so slippery: tho on the other side the Lobster having once got them within his Claws holds them with ease: For slender∣ness affords no help against roughness: but when the Polypus comes to thrust his Horns into the Body of the Lobster, then also the Lobster dyes. And this same Vicissitude of avoiding and pursuing one another, has nature infus'd into them on purpose to exercise their suttlety and understanding. Then again we have heard Aristotimus relating how the Land Hedge hog had a presentiment of the rising of the Wind, and praising the Triagonal Flight of Cranes. But for my part, I produce no particular Hedge-hog of Cyzicum or Byzantium, but all the Sea Hedge-hogs in general, who when they perceive a Storm a coming, ballast themselves with little Stones, least they should be overturn'd by reason of their light∣ness, or carry'd away by the rowling of the Waves,
which they prevent by the weight of their little Stones. On the other side the Cranes order in their flight against the Wind is not of one sort; But this is a ge∣neral Notion among all Fish, that they always swim against the Waves and the Tide, and always take care least the Wind being in their Tails, should force their Fins from their backs, and leave their naked Bodies expos'd to the cold and other inconveniences; and therefore they still oppose the Prows of their Bodies against the Waves. For that while they thus cleave the Waves at the top, the Sea keeps their Fins close, and lightly flowing over the superficies of their Bodies becomes less burthensom, besides that it suffers not their Scales to rise. This I say is common to all Fish, except that Fish which is call'd Ellops; which as they report always swims with the Wind and Tide, not minding the e∣rection or opening of the Scales, the Commissures of which do not lye next the Tail as in other Fish. Moreover the Tunie is so sensible of the Equinoxes and Solstices, that they teach even Men themselves without the help of any Astrological Table. For where the Winter Tropics overtake them, there they remain till the Vernal Equinox. As for that same Artifice of the Cranes, that keep themselves waking by clutching a Stone in their Claws, how much more cunningly done is that of the Dolphin; for whom it is not lawful to stand still or be out of Motion: For it is the nature of the Dolphins to be always in Motion; so that when they cease to move, they also cease to live. And therefore when sleep seizes them, they raise their Bodies to the superficies of the Sea, and so sinking down again with their Bellies upward, are carry'd along with the Tide till they touch again the Shoar. Waken'd in that manner,
with an impetuous noise they mount upward again, designing thus a kind of rest still intermix'd with Mo∣tion. And the same thing is reported of the Tunnies for the same Reason. Having thus concluded their Mathematical fore∣knowledge of the Mutations of the Sun, of which Aristotle gives Testimony, let me now relate their skill in Arithmetick; but first of all their knowledge in Op∣ticks, of which Eschylus seems not to have been altoge∣ther ignorant. For these are his Words, Casting a Squint-eye, like the Tunny. For Tunnies seem to be dim-sighted of one Eye: And therefore they fling themselves into the Water so as to have the Land upon the Right-hand; and go a shoar, so as to have it upon the Left. Prudently committing the care of their Bodies to the best Eye. But wanting Arithmetick, in order to the Preservation of mutual Love and Society one with another, they arriv'd in such a manner to the perfection of that Science, that in regard they are extreamly desirous to en∣joy the Society of each other, they always make up their whole Fry into the Form of a Cube, and make a solid of the whole Number, consisting of six equal Planes: And then they swim in such order as to observe a due Plae∣sium on both sides. So then if the Observer of the Tunnies does but exactly take the Number of the Plane, he knows the whole Number of the shole; well know∣ing that the depth is equal to the breadth and length. The Fish Amiae, which are another sort of Tunnies are so call'd, because they swim in sholes, as also the Pela∣mides, or Summer Whitings. As for the rest that are seen to swim in sholes and to observe a mutual Society, their Number is not to be expres't: And therefore let us proceed to those that
observe a kind of private and particular Society one with another. Among which is the Pynnotheras of Chry∣sippus, being a certain Fish that diligently observes and watches the Fish call'd the Nacre, upon which he has expended so much Ink, that he gives it the precedency in all his Books both Physical and Ethical. For Chry∣sippus never knew the Spongother, or else he pass'd it over out of negligence. The Pinnother is so call'd from watching the she Fish call'd Pinna or the Nacre, and in shape resembles a Crab, and cohabiting within the Nacre, watches the opening of his Shell, and then going forth stays by the open'd and gapping Shell, till he light upon some little Fish which he is able to conquer. Then entring the Shell again, he nips the Flesh of the Nacre to give him notice to shut his Shell: Which being done, they feed together within the fortification upon the com∣mon Prey. The Spunge is govern'd by a certain little Creature more like a Spider then a Crab. For the Spunge wants neither Sense nor Blood; but growing to the Stones as many other things do, has a peculiar Motion from its self, and to it self, which nevertheless stands in need as it were of a Monitor or Instructor. For being otherwise of a Substance loose and open, and full of holes and hollowness, by reason of the sloth and stu∣pidity of it, the Spunge-watcher assists to give notice when any thing of Food enters the Cavities of it, at what time the Spunge contracts it self, and falls to feeding. But if a Man approach and touch it, being nipp'd and admonish'd by the Spunge-watcher, it seems to shadder and shut up the Body of it, closing and condensing it self in such a manner, as makes it no easie thing to cut it from the place where it grows.
The Purple Shell-fish also, call'd Porphyrae, clustring together in a kind of Mutual Society, build up little Combs for themselves like Bees, wherein they are said to generate: and culling out the choicest Substance of the Moss and Sea-weed that sticks to their Shells, they seem to be in a circular Commons among themselves, feeding outwardly the one upon the others Nourish∣ment. But why should we admire Society in these Crea∣tures, when the most savage and most unsociable of all Creatures which either Lakes, Rivers, or the Ocean nourishes, the Crocodile, shews himself the most Soci∣able and Grateful of Water-Monsters in the Banquets which he bestows upon the Trochilus: For the Trochilus is a sort of Water-Fowl, and he Guards and Watches over the Crocodile, not as one that feeds at his Table, but lives upon his scraps and leavings only. For when this Bird observes the Crocodile asleep, and the Ichnenmon arm'd with mud and dirt ready to assail him, he ne∣ver leaves crying and pecking him with his Beak, till he rouse the drowsie Monster. In return of which the Crocodile is so tame and gentle toward this Bird, that he permits him to enter his yawning chaps, and is pleas'd with his picking out and cleansing away with his Beak the remainders of the devour'd Flesh that sticks between his Teeth. And when the Monster has an Inclination to shut his Mouth, he gives the Bird notice by a gentle loring of his Jaw, nor will he close his Chaps till he finds that the Bird is flown away. The Fish which the Greeks call Hegemen or the Captain or Leader, is a small Fish, in bigness and shape-not much unlike a Whiting, but by reason of the roughness of his Scales is said to resemble a Bird when she shakes her Feathers. This Fish always keeps company with the hugeous Whales, and swims before them to direct their course, least they should bruise themselves upon the shallows, or
fall into any mershy Place, or narrow Haven, whence he could not easily get out again. Therefore the Whale follows him, as the Ship follows the Helm, directing his course with confidence. All other things whatever, whether Skiff, whether Beast or Stone, that chance to light into the gaping Gulph of the Whales Mouth, immediately perish, being swallow'd by the Monster; but acknowledging his Conductor, he receives him and lodges him like an Anchor safely in his Jaws. There he sleeps, and all the while he takes his rest, the Whale lyes still, and when his Guide comes forth again, the Whale proceeds, never forsaking him night nor day; or if he wander without his Leader, the Monster Ship-wracks, like a Vessel cast upon a Rock, without a Helm. And this we saw not far from Anticyra, where they report, that in former times a Whale being cast and putrifying caus'd a Pesti∣lence. Is it worth while then to compare the Observations of Community and Association with those Sympathies which Aristotle relates between Foxes and Serpents, be∣cause the Eagle is an Enemy to both? Or of the Horn-Owles with Horses, whose dung they love to scrape about the field and nestle in? For my part, I observe no such care of one another in Bees and Emmets, which by reason of their multitude, carry on and perfect their work in common, but have no particular care or consideration one of another. Rather we shall observe this difference more evidently, if we direct our discourses upon the most Ancient and Greatest Works of com∣mon Society, which are the works of generation and procreation of Off-spring. For in the first place, those Fish that frequent the shoars next adjoyning to vast Lakes or great Rivers, when they are near their time of bring∣ing forth, retire up into those places, seeking the fresh-waters which are more gentle and void of Brine. For
Tranquillity is most convenient for such as bring forth; and there is most safety in Rivers and Lakes for their Young Ones as being freest from the devouring Monsters of the Sea. Which is the reason that there is the greatest plenty of Fish about the Euxin Sea, where there are no Whales but either small Sea-Calves, or little Dolphins. Besides, the mixture of Rivers, many in number, and those very large, that fall into the Pontus, make the mixture more kindly and proper for breeding, and bringing forth. And that is most won∣derful which is reported of the Anthias, which Homer calls the Sacred Fish, though some interpret Sacred to signifie great in that Place, as we call a great Bone Os sacrum, and the Epilepsie, being a great Disease, the Sacred Disease; though others interpret that to be Sa∣cred, which ought not to be touch'd, as being dedica∣ted to holy use. And Eracostbenes seems to take the Gilthead so call'd from the Golden-Hair about his Eyes, for the Sacred Fish; though many believe it to be Ellopps or Trout, from her Golden Scales; a Fish sel∣dom seen, and difficult to be caught; yet many times it appears in the Rivers of Pamphylia. So that thy that catch them are Crown'd, and their Boats are al∣so adorn'd with Garlands, and as they pass along re∣ceiv'd and honour'd with loud shouts and clapping of Hands. However it be, most People take Anhias to be a Sacred Fish, because that where the An hias ap∣pears, there are no Sea-monstrs, but the Spnge-cutters dive boldly, and the Fish as scarsely spwn, as having a pledge for their security. And the reason is twofold, either because the Sea-monsters dread the Anthias, as Elephants dread a Hog, and Lyons a Cock, or else it is a sign that there are no Sea-monsters in those places, which the Anthias knows and observes as being an in∣telligent Fish, endu'd with Sence and a good Me∣mory.
Then again the care of their young is common to both Sexes. For the Males never devour their Off∣spring; but remain and abide constantly by the Spawn, protecting it with a diligent watchfulness, as Aristotle relates; and those that accompany the Females moisten the Spawn with a small quantity of Milky Seed; for that otherwise the Spawn will not grow, but remains imperfect, and never arrives at the due proportion. Particularly the Fish call'd Phycides, Moles or Lepo's make themselves Nests in the Sea-weed to preserve their Spawn from the Waves. But the love of the Lamprey or Pout-Eel toward her Young Ones is beyond the Affection and Clemency of any the tamest of Creatures; for they lay an Egg, which being hatch'd, they nourish and carry them a∣bout not outwardly, but within their own Bowels, as if they could not breed their Young without a second Birth. When the Young Ones are somewhat grown, they put them forth again, and teach them to swim close by themselves, then resume them again through their Mouths into their Bellies, and afford them nourish∣ment and safe retirement in their Bodys, till they are able to shift for themselves. No less admirable is the care of the Tortois as to the bringing forth and preserving her Young. For she retires out of the Sea to lay, but not being able to stay long upon the Land, she hides her Eggs in the Sand, covering them over gently with the lightest of the Gravel, and when she has thus sufficiently and assured∣ly conceal'd them, some report, that she marks and streaks the place with her Feet, that she may be able to know it again; others affirm, that the Female being driven away by Male, leaves her particular marks and signatures behind her. However it be, this is most wonderful that after an Observation of forty days (for
in so many the Eggs come to break) she returns, and knowing where her Treasure lyes, as well as any Man understands where he hides his Gold, she opens them with great Joy and Alacrity. Many Observations like to these are made of the Crocodile. But the Superstition of the Place will not allow a Man to dive into the reason of the causes: In regard the foreknowledge of this Creature is im∣puted more to Divinity then Reason. For neither farther nor nearer, but just so far as Nilus that Year will increase and cover the Land, thither she goes forth and lays her Eggs: Which the Country-men finding, are able to tell one another how far the River will over-flow that Year, so truly does that animal mea∣sure for himself, that tho she live in the Water, she may lay her Eggs dry. But the Young Ones being hatch'd, which soever of them so soon as they are come to life, does not seize whatever comes next, either upon a Flye or a Worm, or a Straw, or a Tufft of Grass with his Mouth, the dam presently tears him to peices with her Teeth. But those that are feirce and active she loves and cherishes, according to the Judgment of the wisest Men, imparting her affection by the Rules of Judg∣ment, not the sway of Passion. The Sea-calves also bring forth upon the dry Land: but then fetching out their Young ones by degrees, they give them a taste of the Sea-water, and present∣ly lead them out again; and this they often do, till custom has made them bold, and brought them to love a Sea Life. Frogs when they couple, use a certain croaking in∣vitation which is commonly call'd Ololygon; and when the Male has thus intic'd the Female, they abide to∣gether all Night. For in the Water they cannot, and in the day time they are afraid to engender upon the Land, which in the Night time they do without con∣troul:
At other times they croak more shrill and loud, and then it is a sign of Rain, and holds among the most assured Prognostics of wet weather. But what an absurdity, dearest Neptune, would this Passion of mine lead me into, how ridiculous should I appear, if triffling among Sea-calves and Frogs I should omit one of the Marine Animals, the wisest and most be∣lov'd by the Gods? For what Nightingales are to be compared with the Halcyon for Musick, or who will presume to prefer the Swallows Industry, the Gentleness of the Dove, or the Art and Curiosity of the Bees to those vertues ascrib'd to the Halcyon? One Island, as History tells us, in love with Latonas's Birth, receiv'd and entertain'd her. But when the Halcyon brings forth, about the Winter Tropic, the whole Ocean re∣mains calm and undisturb'd without the wrinkle of a Wave. So that there is not any other Creature for which Man has so great an affection, seeing that for her sake for seven days and seven nights together, in the depth of Winter, they sail without fear of Ship∣wrack, and make their Voyages upon the Sea with greater safety then they travel upon the Land. But if it be requir'd that we should make a brief recital of her particular Vertues, she is so great an ex∣ample of Conjugal Affection, that she does not keep company with her Mate for a single season, but for whole years together: and that not for wantoness, for she never couples but with her own, but out of affection and friendship, like a truly vertuous Marry'd Wife. And when her Mate through Age bccomes in∣firm and not able to bear her Company, she takes care of him, and feeds and carrys him about in his Old Age, never forsaking nor leaving him alone, but taking him upon her Shoulders, carrys him from place to place, never abandoning him till death.
As to her affection toward her Young ones, and care of their preservation, so soon as she perceives her self near the time of her bringing forth, she presently be∣takes her self to the making of her Nest. For the building of which, she neither makes use of Mudd and Durt, nor props it up with Walls and Rafters, like the Swallows, nor does she weary several Members of her Body, like the Bees that employ their whole strength to compleat their labour, and when they o∣pen their Cells, toyl together in a narrow compass to divide their Apartments. For the Hacyon having but one single Instrument, one single Tool, which is her Bill nor any other help to assist her in labour and her care of her Young ones, what a wonderful Master∣piece of Workmanship does she er ct? Insomuch that it is a difficult thing for them that have not well con∣sider'd it to believe their Eye-sight; her Workman∣ship seeming rather the Art of a Ship wright, then of a Common Builder, of all Inventions being the only Form not be over-whelm'd and wash'd by the Waves. To this purpose she gathers the Thorns of the Sea-Needle, and twists and binds them together, sme streight, others oblique, like the Woof in the Loom where the Thread and Yarn are interwoven one wihin another, till she has fram'd a Nest round and oblong, resembling the usual Fisher-Boats. This when she has finish'd she launches into the Sea, where the Waves beating gently upon it, direct to reform what is amiss, by consolidating the loose and ill compacted Parts where the Water has forc'd any entrance: Insomuch that at length she fastens and strengthens what she has put together in such a manner, that it is not to be broken or peirc'd either by Stones or Steel. Nor is the Sym∣metry and Form of the inside and cavity of the Nest less to be admir'd. For it is so contriv'd as only to receive her self; the entrance into it not being to be
found out by any other Creature; nor can the Sea it self find a way into it. I am apt to believe that none of you ever saw this Nest. But for my own part, that have often seen, and handl'd one of them, I may safe∣ly say, that I In Delos Temple near Apollo's shrine, Something like this, a Fabrick most Divine, Have seen: That is to say the Horned Altar, celebra∣ted for one of the seven Wonders of the World, which without the help of Parget, Glue, Soder, Past, or any other binding is only fram'd of Horns that grew on the right-side of the Head of the Beast. Now may the Deity be propitious to one that is somewhat Musical, and an Islander, while mildly I de∣ride the questions which those Scoffers put, wherefore Apollo may not be call'd Triglobus o the Mullet-shooter,This place is all defective: else how he came to fall into this dis∣course and to leap from Sy∣rens to Mullets, is a riddle. when we find that Venus is call'd the Mullet-Protectrix: for which reason she is honour'd with Temples adjoyning to the Sea, and sacred Rights; and certain it is that she is displeas'd when any Mullet is kill'd Therefore at Leptis the Priests of Nep∣tune never eat any thing that breeds in the Sea; and you know the Mullet is in great Veneration among the Professors of the Eleusinian Mysteries; moreover that the Priestess of Juno at Argos abstains from the same Fish; and the reason is because the Mullets kil and destroy the Sea-hair, which is pernicious to Man▪ and therefore they spare those Creatures that are kind and beneficial to him. Then again we find among the Greeks Temples and Altars frequently dedicate to Diana Dictymna, so call'd from Dictys a Net, and Del∣phinian Apollo. And that same place which Apollo ha
peculiarly chosen for himself, was first of all inhabited by the Cretans having a Dolphin for their Leader. For the Deity did not swim before his Army in another shape (as the Mythologists dream) but sending a Dolphin to direct them in their course, the Dolphin brought them to Cirrha. Story also tells us that they who were sent to Sinope by Ptolomy Soter to fetch from thence Serapis and Bacchus, being driven by contrary Winds upon the Coast of Malea, having the Peloponnesus upon their right hands, while they were thus wandring and out of their course, a Dolphin appear'd before the Prow of the headmost Vessel, and as it were kindly inviting them, conducted them into safe Harbours and Roads, till by his good guidance and leading them, he at length brought the whole Fleet to Cyrrha. There, when they came to offer the usual Sacrifices for their safe landing, they came to understand, that of two Statues which were in the place, they were to take that of Pluto and carry it along with them; but as for that of Proserpina, they were only to make it clean and leave it behind. Probable it is that the Deity had a kindness for the Dolphin considering how much he delights in Music. For which reason Pindarus likens himself to the Dolphin, and confesses himself to be mov'd in the same manner as that noble Creature, Which Flutes beloved Sound, Excites to play Ʋpon the calm and placid Sea. Tho it is more probable that his Affection to Men is more pleasing to the Deity; being the only Creature that bears an Affection to Man, as he is a Man. For as for the Land-Animals, some kinds there are that fly him altogether, and the tamest and most gentle follow him and are familiar with him only for the Be∣nefit
and Nourishment which they receive from him; as the Dog, the Horse and Elephant. The Swallows by necessity constrain'd build in Houses, seeking shade and security but are no less afraid of Man then the Wild Beasts. Only to the Dolphin has nature be∣queath'd that excellent Quality so much sought for by the best of Philosophers, to love for no advantage. For that having no need at all of Man, he is a kind friend to all Men, and has lent his Assistance to many. There is no Man that is ignorant of the famous Story of Arion. And you my dear Friend, have seasonably put us mind of Hesiod, Thou didst not by a legal course Rightly conclude thy long discourse. For when you had spoken so much in praise of the Dog, you should not have pass'd by the Dolphin. For it was a blind story of the Dog that bark'd and flew with violence upon the Murtherers. 'Twas a more famous Story; that of the Dolphins that took the Carkass of Hesiod thrown into the Nemean Sea, and readily re∣ceiving it from one to another, landed it at Rium where∣by the Murther came to be known. Myrtilus the Lesbian writes, that Enalus the Eolian being in Love with the Daughter of Phineus, who by the Command of the Oracle of Amphitrite, was cast from the Penthidian Rocks, when he understood it, threw himself also into the Sea, but was sav'd by a Dolphin and carry'd to Lesbos. But the gentleness and kindness of the Dolphin to∣wards the Jasean Lad, was so extraordinary that it might be said to amount even to amorous Love. For he play'd and swam with him in the day time, suffer'd himself to be handl'd and bestrid by him: nor did he swim away with him, but joyfully carry'd him,
which way soever the Lad by the motion of his body turn'd him, while the Jaseans flock'd from all parts to the shoar to behold the sight. At length the Lad being thrown from the Dolphins back by a terrible showr of Rain and Hail, was drown'd. Which the Dolphin perceiving, took up the dead Youth, and threw himself upon the Land together with the body, from which he never stirr'd till he dy'd out of his own Element: deeming it but just to pertake of that end of which he seem'd to have been the occasion to his Friend and Play-fellow. Nor can the Jaseans forget the Accident, but keep it still in remembrance by the stamp upon their Coyn, which is a Lad upon a Dolphins back. And from hence it was that the fabulous Stories of Coeranus gain'd Credit. He was a Parian by Birth, who residing at Byzantium, at what time a draught of Dolphins caught in a Net, were expos'd to Sale, and in danger of Slaughter, bought them up all, and put them into the Sea again. It happen'd not long after that Coeranus took a Voyage in a Vessel of fifty Oars, carrying, as the story, goes several Pyrates. But between Naxus and the Bay of Paros he suffer'd Shipwrack; and when all the rest were drown'd, he alone was taken up by a Dolphin that ha∣sten'd to his Succour, and carry'd to Sycynthos, and set a shore near the Cave, which to this day bears the name of Coeraneum. Upon which Archilochus is said to have made these Lines. Of fifty Men, Great Neptune, gentle grown Left Courteous Coeranus alive for one. Some years after Coeranus dying, his Relations burnt his Body near the Sea side; at what time several Dolphins appear'd near the shoar, as if they had come to his Fu∣neral; nor would they stir till the Funeral was over.
Moreover Stesichorus writes that Ʋlysses bore a Dolphin painted upon his Shield; and for what reason, the Za∣cynthian Records tell us, as Critheus testifies: for they say that Telemachus when he was but a Boy falling into the Sea was sav'd by the Dolphins that took him up and set him a shoar. And therefore he made use of a Dolphin for the Impression of his Seal, and the Ornament of his Shield. But having promis'd before that I would pro∣duce no fabulous Stories; and yet being carry'd I know not how, to discourse beyond probability of Dolphins, by this repetition of the Stories of Coeranus and Ʋlysses, I will do Justice upon my self, by concluding here. Aristotimus. Now Gentlemen, it lyes on your part that are the Judges, to pronounce Sentence. Soclares. Assuredly then, for our parts, we shall give the same Judgment in this, as Sophocles did in a∣nother Case; Discourse upon discording Arguments, Is then determin'd best, when what was said Is duly weigh'd and stated on both sides. For thus comparing what you have both discours'd one against another, it will be found that ye have acquitted your selves on both sides like true Champions against those that would deprive Brute Animals of Sense and Understanding.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. That Brute Beasts make use of Reason. Ulysses, Circe, Gryllus. Translated from the Greek by Sir A. J. ALL these things Circe, I believe that I have learnt and well remember. But I would willingly ask thee, whether thou hast any Grecians here, which being Men thou hast transform'd into Wolves and Lyons. Circe. Very many, dearest Ʋlysses, but wherefore do you ask the Question? Ʋlys. Because in good truth, I am of Opinion, I should gain a High Reputation among the Greeks, if by thy favour I could restore these Men to human shape again, and not suffer them through any negli∣gence of mine to wax old in the Bodies of Beasts, where they lead a miserable and ignominious Life. Circe. Surely this Man; fool as he is, believes it re∣quisite that his Ambition should be unfortunate not only to his Friends, but to those that nothing belong to him.
Ʋlys. Thou art now jumbling and mixing another vilanous Potion of twittle twattle, and wouldst plainly turn me into a Beast too, if thou couldst make me be∣lieve that it were a misfortune to be transform'd from a Beast to a Man. Circe. What hast thou made thy self better then a beast, who forsaking an immortal Life, free from the Miseries of Old Age, with me, art making such hast through a thousand threatning Calamities to a Mortal, and as I may say, Old Wife, pursuing an empty Good and a Shadow instead of real Truth, and all this, thinking to be more conspicuous and famous then thou art. Ʋlys. Well Circe, let it be as thou sayst; for why should we be always contending about the same thing; however do me the favour to restore these Men, and give 'em into my Custody. Circe. By Hecate not so fast neither: these are no ordinary Fellows: but ask 'em first, whether they are willing. If they refuse, do you being such an Eloquent Gentleman, discourse 'em and perswade 'em: if you cannot perswade 'em, being too hard for ye at your own Weapon, then let it suffice ye that you have ill consulted your own and the good of your Friends. Ʋlys. Blessed Woman wherefore dost thou mock me thus; for how can they either talk or hear reason; so long as they are Asses, Hogs and Lyons? Circe. Be of good comfort most ambitious of Men; I will so order the business, that they shall both under∣stand and discourse: or rather, let one suffice to hear and return answers instead of all the rest: Look ye, here's one at hand; pray talk to him. Ʋlys. Prethee, Circe, by what name shall we call him? Who is this fellow of all te Men in the World?
Circe. What's this to the purpose? Call him Gryllus if you please; and for my part, I'le leave ye together, that you may not suspect him for speaking contrary to his mind to please me. Gryll. Save ye, Mr. Ʋlysses. Ʋlys. And you too, by Jove, Mr. Gryllus. Gryll. What is't, your Worship would have with me? Ʋlys. I knowing you were all born Men, pity the Condition ye are now in: and I pity ye the more, for that being Greeks ye are fallen under this misfortune: and therefore I made it my request to Circe, that she would restore ye again to your former shape, as many of you as were desirous, to the end ye might return home again with us. Gryll. Hold Mr. Ʋlysses, not a word more of this I beseech your worship. For we all contemn thee, as one that none but fools call cunning, and as vainly vauntst thy self to be wiser then other Men, and yet art afraid of being chang'd from worse to better; like Children that are frightn'd at Physitians Doses, and hate going to School, althô the Medicines and the Precepts of diseas'd and fools make them healthy and learned; just as thou refusest to be transform'd out of one thing into another: and now thy bones rattle in thy skin for dread of living with Circe, least she should transform thee into a Hog or a Wlf; and wouldst per∣swade us living in Plenty of all Enjoyments not only to forsake these Blessings, but to abandon her that has so well provided for us to sail along with thee, and to become Men again, the most miserable of all Crea∣tures. Ʋlys. In my Opinion Gryllus, this same wicked Cup has not only depriv'd thee of thy shape, but of thy sense and reason too: or else thou art got drunk with those Opinions which are every where exploded as nasty and
villanous: unless some voluptuous pleasure of custom and habit has betwitch'd thee to this Body. Gryll. Neither of these, O King of the Cephallenians. But if thou art come hither to dispute, and not to rail and swagger, we shall soon convince thee having Ex∣perience of both manners of living, that our way is to be preferr'd before that which thou so much applaudest. Ʋlys. Nay then go on; I'le listen with both Ears to hear this Paradox discuss'd. Gryll. Have at ye then, Sir; but it behoves us to be∣gin first with those Vertues which you so presumptuous∣ly assume to your selves, and for which you so highly advance your selves before the Beasts, such as Justice, Pru∣dence, Fortitude, &c. Now answer me, thou the wisest among Mortals; For I have heard thee telling a story to Circe of the Territory of the Cyclops, that being neither plough'd nor planted by any Person, it is so fertile and generously productive, that it bears all sorts of Fruits and Herbs spontaneously. Now which do you prefer, this Country, or your own Goat feeding stonyVal di Compare. Ithaca, which being cultivated with great labour and hardship, yet little as it is, and barren, scarce answers the Expectations of the Husband-men? now take it not amiss that I forewarn ye least your Love to your Country sway ye to give an answer contrary to Truth. Ʋlys. No, no, I will not lye for the matter: I must confess I Love and Honour my own Country more; But I applaud and admire theirs far beyond it. Gryll. Hence we must conclude that it is so as the wisest of Men has affirm'd; that there are some things to be prais'd and approv'd, others to be preferr'd by choice and affection. And I suppose you believe the same concerning the Soul. For the same reason holds in reference to the Soul as to the ground; that such
a Soul should be the best that produces Vertue like spontaneous Fruit without Labour and Toyl. Ʋlys. Grant all this. Gryll. Then you confess that the Souls of Beasts are the more perfect, and more fertilly endu'd for the Pro∣duction of Vertue; seeing that without any Com∣mand or Document it produces and increases that Ver∣tue which is requisite for every one. Ʋlys. Prithee Gryllus don't rave, but tell me what those Vertues are that Beasts partake of? Gryll. Rather, what Vertues do they not partake of in a higher degree then the wisest of Men? Look up∣on Fortitude in the first place of which you vaunt and brag to have such a terrible share, and are not asham'd of the magnificent itles of Ʋlysses the Bold, and City-Stormer, when indeed like a pitiful Knave, as thou art, thou dost only circumvent by Tricks and Artifices Men that only understand the simple and generous way of making War, ignorant altogether of Fraud and Faith-breaking, and by that means cover'st thy de∣ceit with the name of Vertue which never admits of any such Coney-catching Devices. But you observe the Combats and Warfare of Beasts as well one a∣gainst another as against your selves, how free from Craft and Deceit they are, and how with an open and naked Courage they defend themselves by meer strength of Body; and how neither afraid of the Law that calls them forth to Battle, nor the severe Edicts against Desertors, but only out of scorn to be overcome, they fight with obstinacy to the last for Conquest and Victory. For they are not vanquish'd when their Bodies are worsted, neither does despair cowardize them, but they dye upon the spot: And you shall see many times that the strength of many, while expiring, being re∣tir'd and crowded together in some part of the body, still makes resistance against the Victor, and pants
and fumes till at length it fails like extinguish'd Fire that goes out for want of Fuel. But there is no crying for Quarter, no begging of Mercy; no acknowledgment of being beaten; nor will the Lyon be a slave to the Lyon, nor the Horse to the Horse, as one Man is a slave to another, willing and patiently embracing Ser∣vitude, the effect of fear and cowardice. On the other side such Beasts as Men by Nets and treacherous Snares get into their Power, if fully grown, they rather choose to dye then serve, refusing Nourishment and suffering extremity of Drought. But as for their young Ones, being tractable and supple by reason of their Age, and fed with the deceitful mixtures and food that Men provide for them, their inbred fierceness languishing through the taste of preternatural Delights, they suffer that which is call'd Domestication, which is only an Effeminating of their natural fury. Whence it is ap∣parent that Beasts are naturally inclin'd to be couragi∣ous and daring, but that the martial confidence of Men is preternatural. Which most noble Ʋysses you may chiefly observe from hence: for that in Beasts, Nature keeps an equal ballance of Strength: so that the Fe∣male being but little Inferior to the Male, undergoes all necessary toils, and fights in defence of her young Ones. And thus you hear of a certain Cromyonian Sow, which tho a Female held Theseus tack, and found him work sufficient. Neither had the Wisdom of that same Female Sphynx that pester'd Phycium with her Riddles and Enigma's avail'd her, had she not far excell'd the Cadmaeans in Strength and Fortitude. Not far from whence the Telmesian Fox had his Den, a great pro∣pounder of Questions also; not to omit the Fe∣male Serpent that fought with Apollo for his Oracle at Delphos. Your King also took the Mare Aetha from the Sicyonian as a bribe to discharge him from going to the Wars, to shew how much he esteem'd a valiant
and generous Mare above a timorous Coward. You your self have also seen Female Panthers and Lionesses little Inferior to the Males in Strength and Courage: when your own Wife, tho a Lacedemonian, when you were hectoring and blustering abroad, sate at home in the Chimney-Corner, not daring to encounter the Swal∣lows that plagu'd both her and her Family. Whence it is apparent that Fortitude is not natural to Men, for then the Women, would pertake of it. So that the Fortitude which you exercise is only constrain'd by Law, not natural and voluntary, but subservient to the manners of the Place, and enslav'd to reproach; a thing made up only of glorious Words and adventitious Opinion: And you undergo labour, and throw your selves into danger, not out of a real Valour and Boldness, but because ye are more afraid of the other. Therefore as among thy own Companions, he that first makes hast to snatch up the light Oar, does it not because he contemns it, but because he is loath to be troubl'd with the more heavy, so he that endures a blow to avoid a wound, and defends himself against an Enemy to preserve him∣self from Wounds and Death, does it not out of da∣ring courage aainst the one, but out of fear of the other. Thus your Fortitude is only a prudent fear; and your Courage, a knowing Timidity, which understand∣ingly does one thing to avoid another. In short, if you believe your selves superior to the Beasts in Fortitude, why do your Poets call those that behave themselves most valiantly against their Enemies Wolf breasted, Lyon-hearted, and compare them to Wild-boars? but never call'd the Courage of Lyons Man-like, or resembl'd the Strength of a Wild-boar to that of a Man. But as they call the swift Wind-footed, and the beautiful Godlike-form'd, hyperbolizing in their Similies; so when they extol the Gallantry of the stout in Battle, they derive their Comparisons from the Superior in Bravery.
The reason is because Courage is as it were the tincture and edge of Fortitude; which the Beasts make use of unmix'd in their Combats, but in you being mix'd with Reason, like Wine diluted with Water, it gives way to danger, and looses the opportunity. And some of you there are who deny that Courage is requisite in Battle, and therefore laying it aside, make use of sober Reason; which they do well for their preservation, but are shamefully beside the cushion in point of Strength and Revenge. How absurd therefore is it for you to complain of Nature because she did not furnish your Bodies with Goades, and Teeth, and crooked Claws to defend your selves, when at the same time you would disarme the Soul of her natural Weapons? Ʋlys. In good truth, Gryllus, you are grown, in my conceit, a notable Sophister, to discourse at this rate out of a Hogs snout, and yet to handle your Argu∣ment so strenuously. But why have you not all this while spoke a word of Temperance. Gryll. Because I thought you would have contra∣dicted first what I have already said. But you are in hast to hear what I have to say concerning Tempe∣rance, because that being the Husband of a most tem∣perate and chast Wife, you believe you have set us an Example of Temperance by abstaining from Circe's Embraces; and yet in this you differ nothing from all the Beasts; for neither do they desire to approach their Superiors; but pursue their Pleasures and Amours a∣mong those of their own Tribe. No wonder is it then, if like the Mendesian Goat in Egypt, which is reported to have been shut up with se∣veral and those most beautiful Women, yet never of∣fer'd copulation with them, but when he was at liberty with a lustful fury flew upon the she Goats; so thou, tho a Man addicted greatly to Venereal Pleasures, yet being a Man, hast no desire to sleep with a Goddess.
And for the Chastity of thy Penelope the ten thousand Rooks and Daws that chatter it abroad do but make it ridiculous and expose it to Contempt, there being not one of those Birds but if she looses her Mate, con∣tinues a Widow not for a small time, nor for nine Ages of Men: so that there is not one of those Fe∣male Rooks that does not surpass in chastity thy fair Penelope above nine times. But because thou believest me to be a Sophister, I shall observe a certain order in my Discourse, first gi∣ving thee the Definition of Chastity, and then dividing Desire according to the several kinds of it. Chastity then is the contracting and well governing our desires, pruning off those that are superfluous and incroach up∣on our Wills, and ruling those that are necessary by the Standards of Season and Moderation. Now in desires you observe a vast number of Distinctions; as it is both natural and necessary to drink. But as for Venereal Desires, which derive their Originals from Nature; there is a time when they may be refrain'd without any inconvenience: These are therefore call'd Physical and not natural. But there is another sort which are neither natural, nor necessary, but infus'd from without by vain Opinion through the mistake of right and true; and these are they that want but very little of ruining all your natural desires with their num∣ber, like a multitude of Foreigners outnumbring the Natives, and expelling them from their Habitations. But the Beasts having their Souls unmix'd, and not to be overcome by these Adventitious Passions; and li∣ving Lives as distant from vain Opinion as from the Sea, are inferior to you in living elegantly and super∣fluously: but they are extreamly wary in the preser∣vation of their Chastity, and the right Government of their Desires, as being neither troubl'd with many, nor those Foreign to their Natures: and therefore formerly I was no less smitten with the Glister of Gold then
thou art now, as believing nothing else that a Man could possess to be comparable to it. Silver also and Ivory inveagl'd me with the same desires; and he that enjoy'd these things in the greatest measure seem'd to be a Man most happy and belov'd of God, whether a Phrygian or a Carian, whether more meanly descen∣ded then Dolo, or more miserable then Priamus. From thence forward being altogether sway'd by my desires, I reap'd no other pleasure nor delight in any other Bles∣sings of my Life, with which I abounded, believing that I wanted still and mist my share of those that were the chiefest and the greatest. Therefore I remember, when I beheld thee in Creet, at some Solemnity, most pompously attired, I neither envy'd thy Wisdom, nor thy Vertue, but the extraordinary fineness and exqui∣site Workmanship of thy Tunic, and the glystering of thy Purple upper Garment, and the Beauty of the Orna∣ments that strook me with admiration: and the Gol∣den Clasp, me thought, was a pritty Toy that had something of extraordinary Graving in it; and be∣witch'd with these Baubles I follow'd thee as the Wo∣men did. But now being altogether estrang'd from those vain Opinions, and having my understanding pu∣rify'd I tread both Gold and Silver under my feet as I do the common Stones: nor did I ever sleep more soundly upon thy Carpets and Tapestries, then now I do, rowl'd over head and ears in the deep and soft Mud. None of those adventitious desires reside in our Souls; but for the most part our manner of living is accustom'd to necessary Pleasures and Desires: and as for those pleasures which are not necessary but only natural, we make such a use of them as is neither without order nor moderation. And therefore let us consider these in the first place. The Pleasure then, that affects the sence of smelling with sweet Odors and fragant Exhalations besides that
it has something in it, which is pure in it self, and as it were bestow'd upon us gratis, contributes also in some measure to the distinction of nourishment. For the Tongue is said to be the Judge of sweet, sowre and tart, when the several juyces intermix'd with the distinguishing taste, undergo a kind of separation. But our smell, before the taste, becoming sensible of the ver∣tue and qualities of every one, and being more accurate then the Tasters attending upon Princes, admits what is familiar to Nature, and expells whatever is disagreea∣ble to it: Neither will it suffer it to touch or molest the taste, but accuses and declares the offensiveness of the thing smelt, before it do any harm. As to other things they breed no disturbance to it, constraining ye for the sake of the sweet scents of Cinnamon, Nard, Cephalic Herbs, and Aromatic Reed, to seek out for things dissimilar, and jumble them together with a kind of Apothecaries or Perfumers Art, and at vast ex∣pence to purchase an unmanly and effeminat delighte, for nothing profitable or useful. Now being such, this sence of smelling has not only corrupted all the Fe∣male Sex, but the greatest part of Men, insomuch that they care not to converse with their own Wives, un∣less Perfum'd with precious Oyntments, and Odorife∣rous compositions. Whereas Sows, she Goats and o∣ther Females attract the Boars, he Goats, and the males of their own kind by their own proper Scents; and the smell of the pure Dew, the Meadows and Grass incites them to copulation out of common af∣fection; the Females, without the Coynesses of Wo∣men, or the practice of little Frauds and Fascinations to inflame the lust of their Mates: nor are the Males, with amorous age and frienzy stimulated, enforc'd to purchase the Act of Generation with expensive hire or servile Assiduity, enjoying their seasonable Amours without deceit, or purchase of the satisfaction of their
Venery; which at such a time of the Year, like the Buds of Plants, awaking their desire, is presently quencht again, neither the Female admitting the Male, nor the Male attempting the Female after Conception. And thus Pleasure has but a small and slender esteem among us. So that even to this very day we Beasts were never tainted yet with coupling Male with Male, and Fe∣male with Female. Of which nevertheless there are many Examples to be produc'd among the greatest and most celebrated Persons: For I pass by those not worth remembrance. Agamemnon hunted all Boeotia in pursuit of Argynus who fled his Embraces, and after he had falsly accus'd the Sea and Winds, flung himself bravely no less brave into the Lake Copais, to quench his Love, and free himself from the Ardor of his Lust. Hercules in like manner pursuing his Beardless Friend, forsook his choicest Associates, and betray'd the Fleet. In the Supping Room belonging to Apollo Sirnam'd Ptous, one of your Country-men unknown, wrote this Inscription, Achilles the fair; when Achilles at that time had a Son: And I hear the Inscription is still remaining. Yet if a Cock tread a Cock, in the absence of the Hen, he is burnt alive, upon the signification of the South sayer that it portends some fatal calamity. Which is a plain confession in Men themselves, that the Beasts excel them in chastity, and that Force is not to be put upon Nature for the sake of Pleasure. But your incontinence is such, that Nature, though she have the Law to assist her, is not able to keep it within Bounds; insomuch that like a rapid inundation, those inordinate desires overwhelm Nature with continual violence, trouble and confusion. For Men have copulated with she Goats, Sows and Mares: And Women have run Mad after Male Beasts: And from such Capulations
sprang the Minotaurs and Silvans, and as I am apt to believe, the Sphinxes and Centaurs. 'Tis true that sometimes constrain'd by hunger, a Dog or a Bird has fed upon human Flesh, but never yet did any Beast at∣tempt to couple with human Kind. But Men constrain and force the Beast to these and many other unlawful Pleasures. Now being thus wicked and incontinent in reference to the aforesaid lustful desires, it is no less easie to be prov'd that Men are more intemperate then Beasts, even in those things which are necessary; that is to say, in eating and drinking; the pleasure of which we al∣ways enjoy with some benefit to our selves: But you pursuing the pleasure of eating and drinking beyond the satisfaction of Nature, are punish'd with many and tedious Diseases, which arising from the single Fountain of superfluous gourmandizing, fill your Bodies with all manner of wind and vapors not easie for purgation to expel. In the first place, all sorts of Beasts according to their kind feed upon one sort of food which is pro∣per to their Natures; some upon Grass, some upon Roots, and others upon Fruits. They that feed upon Flesh never mind any other sort of Food. Neither do they rob the weaker Animals of their nourishment: But the Lyon suffers the Hart, the Wolf permits the Sheep to feed upon what Nature has provided for them. But Man, such is his voracity, falls upon all, to satisfie the pleasures of his Appetite, tryes all things, tastes all things; and as if he were yet to seek what was the most proper Dyet and most agreeable to his Na∣ture, among all the Creatures is the only All devourer. And first he makes use of Flesh, not for want, as having the liberty to take his choice of Herbs and Fruits, the plenty of which is inexhaustible; but out of luxury and being cloy'd with necessaries, seeks after inconvenient and impure Dyet purchas'd by the slaugh∣ter
of living Creatures; by that meanes, shewing himself more cruel then the most Savage of Wild Beasts. For Blood, Murder and Flesh are proper to nourish the Kite, the Wolf and Dragon, but to Man they are de∣licious viands. Then making use of all, he does not do like the Beasts, which abstain from most Creatures, and only are at enmity with a few, and that only compell'd by the necessities of hunger; but neither Fowl, nor Fish, nor any thing that lives upon the Land escape your Tables, though they bear the Epi∣thites of Human and Hospitable. Let it be so: That no∣thing will serve ye but to devour whatever comes near ye to pamper and indulge your voracious Appe∣tites. Yet where's the benefit and pleasure of your per∣petual gourmandizing, considering how you are forc'd to toyl and labor for unprofitable experience? But such is the prudence of the Beasts as not to admit of any vain and unprofitable Arts: And as for those that are neces∣sary, they do not acquire them as being introduc'd by o∣thers, or taught for reward; neither do they make it their study to soder and fast'n one contemplation to another, but they are supply'd by their own prudence with such as are true born and genuine. 'Tis true, we hear the Egyptians are generally Physicians. But the Beasts are not only every one of them nationally ndu'd with knowledge and Art which way to cure themselves, but also to procure their Food, and re∣pair their strength; to catch their prey by slight and cunning, to guard themselves from danger; neither are some of them ignorant how to teach the Science of Music so far as is convenient for Them. For from whom did we learn to run to the Rivers when we are Sick, to search for Crey-fish but from the Hogs? Who taught the Tortoises when they have eaten Vipers, to Physic themselves with Basill? Who taught the Cretan Goats, when shot with Arrows that stick in their Bodys, to
betake themselves to Dittany? Which they have no sooner eaten, but the Heads of the Darts fall out of the Wound. Now if you say that Nature is the School-Mistress that teaches them these things, you acknowledge the prudence of Beasts to be deriv'd from the cheifest and wisest Original of Understanding. Which if you think not proper to call reason and wisdom, 'tis time for ye to find out a more glorious and honourable name for it; as indeed by its effects it shews it self to be greater and more wonderful in power: Not illiterate or without Education, but instructed by its self, and wanting nothing from without; not weak and im∣perfect, but through the vigour and perfection of its natural vertue, supporting and cherishing that natural contribution of understanding which others attain to by Instruction and Education. So that whatever Men acquire and contemplate in the midst of their luxury and wantonness, those things our understanding attains to, through the excellency of our apprehensions, even contrary to the Nature of the Body. For not to speak of Whelps that learn to draw dry Foot, and Colts that will Practice Figure Dances, there are Crows that will speak, and Dogs that will leap through Hoops as they turn round. You shall also see Horses and Bulls upon the Theatres lye down, dance, stop and move their Bodies after such a manner, as would puzzle even Men to perform the same things; which though they are of little use, yet being learnt and remember'd by Beasts, is a great Argument of their Docility. If you doubt whether we learn Arts; he convinces you that we teach them. For Patridges teach their Young Ones to hide themselves by lying upon their Backs just before a clod of Earth, to escape the pursuit, of the Fowlers. And you shall observe the Old Storks when their Young Ones first begin to take Wing, what care they take to instruct them upon the Tops of
Houses. Nightingales also teach their Young Ones to Sing: Insomuch that Nightingales taken Young out of the Nest, and Bred up by Hand in Cages, sing worse, as being depriv'd of their Instructors before their time. So that after I had been a while transform'd into this shape I admired at my self, that I was so easily perswaded by idle Arguments of the Sophisters, to believe that all o∣ther Creatures were void of sense and reason except Man. Ʋlysses. Why then, Gryllus, does your Transmutation in∣form ye also that Sheep and Asses are rational Creatures? Gryllus. From these very Creatures, most worthy and best of Men, Ʋlysses, the Nature of Beasts is chiefly to be discern'd to be as it is, neither void of Reason nor Understanding. For as one Tree is neither more or less without a Soul, but are altogether in the same condition of Insensibility (for there is no Tree that is endu'd with a Soul.) So neither would one Animal seem to be more slow to understand or more indocible then another, if all did not pertake of Reason and Understanding, tho some in a less, some in a gter Measure. For you must consider that the stupiity and slothfulness of some is an Argument of the quickness and suttlety of others, which easily appears when you compare a Fox, a Wolf or a Bee with a Sheep or Ass: As if thou should'st compare thy self to Polyphemus, or thy Grand-father Autolycus with that same Glaucus the Corinthian, mentioned in Homer. For I do not believe there is that difference between Beast and Beast, in Point of Reason and Un∣derstanding and Memory, as between Man and Man. Ʋlysses. Have a care, Gryllus, 'tis a dangerous thing to allow them Reason, that have no knowledge of a Deity. Gryllus. Must we then deny thy self, most noble Ʋlysses, to be so wise and full of Stratagems as thou art esteem'd to be, because begot by Sisyphus that got the start of thy Father upon the Wedding day? ***
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of the Face, appearing within the Orb of the Moon. Translated out of the Greek by A. G. Gent. The Beginning of this Discourse is lost. THese things then, said Sylla. For it agrees with my Story, and is taken thence. But I should first willingly ask, what need there is of making such a Preamble against these Opinions, which are at hand, and in every Mans Mouth, concerning the Face, that is seen within the Orb of the Moon. Why should we not, said I, being by the Difficulty, there is in these Discourses, forc'd upon those? For as they, who have long lain lingring under chronical Diseases, after they have been worn out and tir'd with experimenting all ordinary Reme∣dies, and the usual Rules of Living, and Diet, have at last Recourse to Lustrations and Purifications, to Charms and Amulets fastned about the Neck, and to the Interpretation of Dreams: so in such obscure, and ab∣struse
Questions and Speculations, when the common, apparent, and ordinary Reasons are not satisfactory, there is a necessity of trying such as are more extrava∣gant, and of not contemning, but enchanting our selves, as one may say, with the Discourses of the Anti∣ents, and endeavoring always to find out the Truth. For you see at the very first Blush, how impertinent his Opinion is, who said, that the Form, appearing in the Moon, is an Accident of our Sight, by its Weak∣ness giving way to her Brightness, which we call the Dazling of our Eyes: for he perceives not, that this should rather befall our Looking against the Sun, whose Lustre is more resplendent, and his Rays more quick and piercing, as Empedocles also in a certain Pas∣sage of his, has not unpleasantly noted the difference of these two Planets, saying: The sharp-ray'd Sun, andInstead of , I read , a Name gi∣ven to the Moon by Empedocles and here by Plu∣tarch de∣duc'd from , propitious, or favora∣ble. gently-shining Moon: For thus does he call her alluring, fa∣vorable, and harmless Light. No less ab∣surd appears the Reason, he afterwards gives, why dull and weak Eyes discern no difference of Form in the Moon, her Orb appearing to them plain and smooth; whereas those, whose Sight is more acute and penetrating, better descry the Linea∣ments, and more perfectly observe the Im∣pressions of a Face, and more evidently distinguish its different Parts. For it should, in my Opinion, be quite contrary, if this were a Fancy, caus'd by the Weakness of the vanquish'd Sight: so that where the Patients Eye is weaker, the Appearance would be more express and e∣vident. Moreover, the Inequality every way confutes this Reason: for this Face is not seen in a continuate
and confus'd Shadow; but the Poet Agesianax not unelegantly describes it, saying, With shining Fire, it circled deos appear, And in the midst is seen the Visage clear Of a young Maid, whose Eye's more gray than blew, Her Brow and Cheeks a blushing Red do shew. For indeed dark and shady things, encompass'd with others, that are bright and shining, sink underneath, and reciprocally rise again, being repell'd by them, and, in a Word, they are so interlac'd one within another, that they represent the Figure of a Face painted to the Life: and there seems to have been great Probability in that, which was spoken against Clearchus by Aristotle, who appears not inconveniently to be call'd yours. For this Aristotle of yours was intimately acquainted with the ancient one, althô he perverted many of the Peripatetic Doctrins. Then Apollonides taking up the Discourse, and asking, what that Opinion of Clearchus was: It would more, said I, beseem any Man, than you, to be ignorant of this Discourse, as being grounded on the very fundamen∣tal Principles of Geometry. For he affirms, that what we call a Face, are the Images and Figures of the great Ocean, represented in the Moon, as in a Mirror. For the Circumference of a Circle, being every way reflect∣ed back, is wont to deceive the Sight in such things, as cannot be directly seen. And the full Moon is for Evenness and Lustre the most beautiful and purest of all Mirrors. As then you hold, that the Heavenly Bow ap∣pears, when the Light is reflected back towards the Sun in a Cloud, that has got a little liquid Smoothness and Consistence: so, said he, there is seen in the Moon the Surface of the Sea, not in the Place, where it is situa∣ted, but from whence the Refraction gives a Sight of it
by its reverberated and reflexed Light, as Agesianax a∣gain says in another Passage: This flaming Mirror offers to your Eyes The vast Seas Figure, as beneath it lies Foaming with raging Billows.— Apollonides therefore, being delighted with this, said: A singular Opinion indeed is this of his, and, to speak in a Word, strangely and newly invented by a Man, suf∣ficiently presumptuous, but not void of Learning and Wit. But how, I pray, was it refuted? First, said I, if the Superficies of the Sea is all of a Nature, the Current of it must be uniform and continuate, but the Appearance of those black and dark Spots, which are seen in the Face of the Moon, is not continu'd, but it has certain Isthmes or Partitions clear and bright, which di∣vide and separate what is dark and shady. Whence e∣very Place being distinguisht, and having its own Li∣mits apart, the Approachings of the Clear to the Ob∣scure, taking a Resemblance of High and Low, express and represent the Similitude of a Figure, seeming to have Eyes and Lips: so that we must of necessity sup∣pose, either that there are many Oceans and main Seas, distinguish'd by Isthmes and Continents of firm Land, which is evidently absurd and false; or that if there is but one, 'tis not credible, its Image should appear so distracted and dissipated by pieces; and as for this, 'tis more secure, and there is less Danger in asking, than in affirming in your Presence: Whether the habitable Earth being equal in Length and Breadth, it is possible, that all the Sight, reflected and sent back by the Moon, should equally touch the whole Ocean, and those that sail, and dwell in it, as do the Britains: especially since the Earth, as you have maintain'd, has but the Propor∣tion of a Point, if compar'd to the Sphere of the Moon.
This therefore, said I, 'tis your Business to observe, but the Refraction of the Sight against the Moon belongs neither to you nor Hipparchus. And yet, my Friend Lamprias, there are many Naturalists, who approve not this Doctrine of his touching the driving back of the Sight; but affirm it to be more probable, that it has a certain obedient and agreeing Temperature and Com∣pactness of Structure than such Beatings and Repercussi∣ons, as Epicurus feign'd for his Atoms. Nor am I of Opinion, that Clearchus would have us suppose the Moon not to be a massy and weighty Body, but a celestial and light-giving Star, against which, you say, this Refracti∣on of our Sight should reach: so that all this Reflection and Reverberation comes to nothing. But if we are desir'd to receive and admit it, we shall ask why this Face or Image of the Sea is to be seen only in the Body of the Moon, and not in any of the other Stars? For the Laws of Probability require, that the Sight should suffer this equal in all, or else in none. But pray, Sir, said I, casting mine Eyes upon Lucius, call a little to mind, what was said at first by those of our Party. Nay rather, answer'd he, lest we should seem too injurious to Pharnaces, in thus passing by the Opinion of the Stoicks, without opposing any thing against it, let us make some Reply to this Man, who supposes the Moon to be wholly a Mixture of Air and mild Fire: and then says, that, as in a Calm there sometimes arises on a sudden a Breez of Wind, which curls and ruffles the Su∣perficies of the Sea, so, the Air being Darkned and ren∣der'd black, there is an Appearance and Form of a Face. You do courteously, Lucius, said I, thus to vail and cover with specious Expressions so absurd and false an Opinion. But so did not our Friend, but said, as the Truth is, that the Stoicks disfigur'd and mortify'd the Moons Face, filling it with Stains and black Spots, one while invocating her by the Name of Diana and Minerva,
and another while making her a Lump and Mixture of dark Air and Char-coal Fire, not kindling of it self, or having any Light of its own, but a Body hard to be judg'd and known, always smoaking, and ever burning, like to those Thunders, which are by the Poets stil'd lightless and sooty. Now, that a Fire of Coals, such, as they would have that of the Moon to be, cannot have any Continuance, nor yet so much as the least Sub∣sistence, unless it meets with some solid Matter, fit to maintain it, keep it in, and feed it, has, I think, far better than it is by these Philosophers, been understood by those Poets, who in merriment affirm, that Vulcan was therefore said to be lame, because Fire can no more go forward without Wood or Fewel, than a Criple without a Crurch. If then the Moon is Fire, whence has it so much Air? For that Region above, which is with a continual Motion carry'd round, consists not of Air, but some more excellent Substance, whose Nature it is to subtilize and set on fire all other things. And if it has been since engendred there, how comes it, that it does not perish, being chang'd and transmuted by the Fire into an aethereal and heavenly Substance? And how can it maintain and preserve it self, cohabiting so long with the Fire, as a Nail always fixt and fasten'd in one and the same Place? For being rare, and diffus'd, as by Nature it is, 'tis not fitted for Permanency and Continuance, but for Change and Dissipation; neither is it possible, that it should condense and grow com∣pact, being mixt wih Fire, and utterly void of Water and Earth, the only two Elements, by which the Nature of the Air suffers it self to be brought to a Consistency and Thickness. And since the Swiftness and Violence of Motion is wont to enflame the Air, which is in Stones, and even in Lead it self, as cold as it is: much more will it that, which, being in Fire, is with so great an Impetuosity whirl'd about. For they are dis∣pleas'd
with Empedocles for making the Moon a Mass of Air, congel'd after the manner of Hail, included with∣in a Sphere of Fire. And yet they themselves say, that the Moon, being a Globe of Fire, contains in it much Air dispers'd here and there; and this, thô it has neither Ruptures, Concavities, nor Depths (which they, who affirm it to be earthy, admit;) but the Air lies superficially on its Convexity. Now this is both against the Nature of Permanency, and impossible to be ac∣corded, with what we see in full Moons: for it should not appear separately black and dark, but either be wholly obscur'd and conceal'd, or else co-illuminated, when the Moon is overspread by the Sun. For with us the Air, which is in the Pits and Hollows of the Earth, whither the Rays of the Sun cannot penetrate, remains drk and lightless; but that, which is spread over its exterior Parts, has Clearness, and a lightsome Colour. For it is by reason of its Rarity easily transform'd into every Quality and Faculty, but principally of Light and Brightness, by which, being never so little toucht, it incontinently changes, and is illuminated. This Rea∣son therefore, as it seems greatly to help and maintain the Opinion of those, who thrust the Air into certain deep Valleys and Caves in the Moon: so it confutes you, who mix and compose her Sphere, I know not how, of Air and Fire. For it is not possible, that there should remain any Shadow or Darkness in the Superficies of the Moon, when the Sun with his Brightness clears and en∣lightens, whatsoever we can discern of her, and cut with our Sight. Whilst I was yet speaking, Pharnaces, interrupting my Discourse, said: See here again the usual Stratagem of the Academy, brought into play against us, which is to busy themselves at every turn in speaking against others, but never to afford an Opportunity for reprov∣ing, what they say themselves: so that those, with
whom they confer and dispute, must always be Respon∣dents and Defendants, and never Plaintiffs or Oppo∣nents. You shall not therefore bring me this Day to give you any Account of those things, you charge upon the Stoicks, till you have first rendred me a Reason for your turning the World upside down. Then Lucius smiling, said: This, good Sir, I am well con∣tented to do, provided only, that you will not accuse us of Impiety, as Aristarchus thought, that the Greeks ought to have call'd Cleanthes the Samian into question, and con∣demn'd him of Blasphemy against the Gods, as shaking the very Foundations of the World, because this Man, endeavoring to save the Appearances, suppos'd, that the Heavens remain'd immovable, and that the Earth mov'd thrô the oblique Circle of the Zodiack, turning about its Axle tree. As for us therefore, we say nothing, that we take from them. But how do they, my good Friend, who suppose the Moon to be Earth, turn the World upside down, more than you, who say, that the Earth remains here hanging in the Air, being much greater than the Moon, as the Mathematicians measure their Magnitude by the Accidents of Eclipses, and by the Passages of the Moon thrô the Shadow of the Earth, gathering thence, how great a Space it takes up? For the Shadow of the Earth is less than it self, by rea∣son it is cast by a greater Light. And that the end of this Shadow upwards is slender and pointed, they say, that Homer himself was not ignorant, but plainly ex∣press'd it, when he call'd the Night , that is, acute, from the sharp pointedness of the Earths Shadow. And yet the Moon in her Eclipses, being caught within this Point of the Shadow, can scarce get out of it by going forward thrice her own Bigness in Length. Consider then, how many times the Earth must needs be greater than the Moon, if it casts a Shadow, the narrowest Point of which is thrice as broad as the Moon. But
you are perhaps afraid, lest the Moon should fall, if it were acknowledg'd to be Earth; but as for the Earth, Aeschylus has secur'd you, when he says that Atlas Like a firm Pillar, Heav'n and Earth sustains, Whilst on his Back a heavy Weight remains. If then there runs under the Moon only a light Air, not firm enough to bear a solid Burthen, whereas under the Earth there are, as Pindar says, Columns and Pillars of Adamant for its Support: and therefore Pharnaces him∣self is out of all dread of the Earths falling; but he pi∣ties the Aethiopians, and those of Taprobane, who ly di∣rectly under the Course of the Moon, fearing, lest so ponderous a Mass should tumble upon their Heads. And yet the Moon has, for an help to preserve her from falling, her Motion, and the Impetuosity of her Revolution: As Stones, Pebbles, and other Weights, put into Slings, are kept from dropping out, whilst they are swung round, by the swiftness of their Moti∣on. For every Body is carry'd according to its natural Motion, unless it be diverted by some other interven∣ing Cause. Wherefore the Moon does not move ac∣cording to the Motion of her Weight, her Inclination being stopt and hindred by the Violence of a circulary Revolution. And perhaps there would be more reason to wonder, if the Moon continu'd always immoveable in the same Place, as does the Earth. But now the Moon has a great Cause to keep her from tending hi∣ther downwards; but for the Earth, which has no o∣ther Motion, 'tis probable, that it has also no other Cause of its Settlement, but its own weight. For the Earth is heavier than the Moon, not only because it is greater, but also because the Moon is rendred lighter by the Heat and Inflammation, that is in it. In brief, it appears by what you say, if 'tis true, that the Moon
is Fire, it stands in need of Earth, or some other Matter, which it may rest on, and cleave to, for the maintaining and nourishing of its Power. For 'tis not possible to imagine, how a Fire can be preserv'd with∣out some combustible Matter: and you your selves say, that the Earth continues firm without any Basis or Pe∣destal, to support it. Yes surely, said Pharnaces, being in its proper and natural Place, the very middle and Center of the Uni∣verse. For this it is, to which all heavy and ponderous things do from every side naturally tend, incline, and aspire, and about which they cling, and are counter∣pois'd. But every superior Region, thô it may perhaps receive some earthly and weighty thing, sent by violence up into it, immediately repels and casts it down again by force, or, to speak better, lets it follow its own proper Inclination, by which it naturally tends downwards. For the Refutation of which being willing to give Lucius time for the calling to mind his Arguments, I address'd my self to Theon, and ask'd him, which of the Tragick Poets it was, who said, that Physicians With bitter Medcines bitter Choler purge; and Theon having answer'd me, that it was Sophocles: This, said I to him, we must of necessity permit them to do; but we are not to give ear to those Philosophers, who would overthrow Paradoxes by Assertions, no less strange and paradoxical, and, for the oppugning extra∣vagant and admirable Opinions, devise others, yet more wonderful and absurd: as these Men do, who broach and introduce this Doctrine of a Motion, tend∣ing towards the middle: in which what sort of Absur∣dity is there not to be found? Does it not thence fol∣low, that the Earth is sphaerical and round, as a Ball, thô we nevertheless see it to have so many lofty Hills,
so many deep Vallies, and so great a Number of Ine∣qualities? Does it not follow that there are Antipodes, dwelling opposite to one another, sticking on every side to the Earth, with their Heads downwards, and their Heels upwards, as if they were Wood-worms or Cats, hanging by their Claws? That we our selves go not on the Earth strait upright, and rectangular, but obliquely, and bending aside, like drunken Men? That if Bars and Weights of a thousand Talents a piece should be let fall into the Hollow of the Earth, they would, when they were come to the Center or Middle, stop and rest there, thô nothing came against them, or sustain'd them, and that, if peradventure they should by force pass the Middle, they would of themselves return and rebound back thither again? That if one should saw off the two Trunks or Ends of a Beam on either side of the Earth, they would not be always carry'd downwards, but falling both from without into the Earth, they would equally meet and hide themselves together in the Middle? That, if a violent Stream of Water should run downwards into the Ground, it would, when it came to the Center in the midst, which they hold to be an incorporeal Point, there gather together, and turn round like a Whirl-pool, hanging about a Pole, with a perpetual and endless Suspension? Some of which Positions are so absurd, that none can so much as force his Imagination, thô falsly, to conceive them possible. For this is indeed to make that, which is above, to be be∣low, and to turn all things upside down, by placing that, which is in the Middle, beneath, and that, which is under the Middle, above: so that, if a Man should by the Suffrance and Consent of the Earth stand with his Navel just against her Middle or Center, he would by this means have his Foot and Head both upwards; and if one, having digg'd thrô that place, which is be∣yond the Middle, should come to pull him out from
thence, that Part, which is below, would at one and the same time be drawn upwards, and that, which is above, downwards. And if another should be imagin'd to stand the contrary way, their Feet, thô the ones were opposite to the others, would both be, and be said to be upwards. Bearing then upon their Shoulders, and drawing af∣ter them, I do not say a little Bag or Box, but a whole Pack of Juglers Boxes, full of so many Absurdi∣ties, with which they play the Hocus Pocus in Philoso∣phy, they nevertheless accuse others of Error, for placing the Moon, which they hold to be Earth, on high, and not in the Middle or Center of the World. And yet if every heavy Body inclines towards the same Place, and does from all sides, and with every one of its Parts tend to its Middle or Center, the Earth certainly will not appropriate and challenge to its self these ponderous Masses, which are its Parts, because it is the Center of the Universe, but rather because it is the Whole: and this gathering together of heavy Bodies round about it will not be a Sign, shewing it to be the middle of the World; but an Argument, to prove and testify, that these Bodies which had been pluckt from it, and again return to it, have a Communication and Conformity of Nature with the Earth. For as the Sun changes into himself the Parts, of which he is compos'd: so the Earth receives a Stone, as a Part belonging to it, in such manner, that every one of these things is in time uni∣ted, and incorporated with it. And if peradventure there is some other Body, which was not from the Be∣ginning allotted to the Earth, nor has been separated from it, but had its own proper and peculiar Consistence and Nature apart, as these Men may say of the Moon, what hinders, but it may continue separated by it self, being kept close, compacted, and bound together by its own Parts? For they do not demonstrate, that the
Earth is the Middle of the Universe: and this Conglo∣meration of heavy Bodies, which are here, and their Coalition with the Earth, shew us the manner, how it is probable, that the Parts, which are assembled in the Body of the Moon, continue also there. But as for him, who drives and ranges together in one Place all earthly and ponderous things, making them Parts of one and the same Body; I wonder, that he does not attribute also the same Necessity and Constraint to light Substances, but leaves so many Conglobations of Fire separated from one another; nor can I see, why he should not amass together all the Stars, and think, that there ought to be but one Body of all those Substances, which fly upwards. But you Mathematicians, Friend Apollonides, say, that the Sun is distant from the Primum Mobile infinitGr. , that is, ten thousands of Stadia or Fur∣longs. thousands of Miles, and after him the Day Star or Venus, Mercury, and other Planets, which, being situated un∣der the fixed Stars, and separated from one another by great Intervals, make their Revolutions; and in the mean time you think, that the World affords not to heavy and terrestrial Bodies any great and large Place, or Di∣stance one from another. You plainly see, it would be ridiculous, if we should deny the Moon to be Earth, because it is not seated in the lowest Region of the World, and yet affirm it to be a Star, thô so many Millions of Miles remote from the Firmament or Pri∣mum Mobile, as if it were plung'd into some deep Gulf: for she is so low before all other Stars, that the Mea∣sure of the Distances cannot be express'd, and You, Ma∣thematicians, want Numbers to compute and reckon it; but she in a manner touches the Earth, making her Re∣volution so neer the Tops of the Mountains, that she seems, as Empedocles has it, to leave even the very Tracks of her Chariot-Wheel behind her: For oftentimes
she surpasses not the shadow of the Earth, which is very short thrô the exceessive Greatness of the Sun, that shines upon it; but seems to turn so near the Superficies, and, as one may say, between the Arms, and in the Bosom of the Earth, that it withholds from her the Light of the Sun, because she mounts that shady, earth∣ly, and nocturnal Region, which is the Lot and Inheri∣tance of the Earth. And therefore I am of Opinion, we may boldly say, that the Moon is within the Limits and Confines of the Earth, seeing that she is even darkned by the Summits of its Mountains. But leaving the Stars, as well erring as fixt, see, what Aristarchus proves and demonstrates in his Treatise of Magnitudes and Distances, that the Distance of the Sun is above eighteen times, and under twenty times greater than that of the Moon from us. And yet they, who place her lowest, say that her Distance from us con∣tains six and fifty of the Earths Semidiameters, that is, that she is six and fifty times as far from us, as we are from the Center of the Earth: which is forty thousand Stadia: and therefore according to those; who make their Computation moderately, the Sun is above four Milli∣ons and three hundred thousand Stadia distant from the Moon: so far is she from the Sun by reason of her Gravity, and so near does she approach to the Earth. So that if Substances are to be distinguisht by Places, the Portion and Region of the Earth challenges to it self the Moon, which by reason of Neighbourhood and Proximity has a Right to be reputed and reckon'd a∣mongst the terrestrial Natures and Bodies. Nor shall we, in my Opinion, do amiss, if having given to these Bodies, which are said to be above, so vast an Interval and Distance; we leave also to those which are below, some Space and Room to turn them in, such as is that between the Earth and the Moon. For neither is he, who calls only the utmost Superficies of the Earth , or Above, or all the rest  or Beneath, moderate or
tolerable; nor is he to be endur'd, who confines  or Inferiority only to the Earth, or rather to its Center: seeing the vast Greatness of the World may afford Means for the Assigning farther to this lower Part some such Space, as is necessary for Mo∣tion. Now against him, who holds, that whatever is above the Earth, is immediately high, superior, and sublime, there is presently another Opposition to en∣counter and contradict it, that whatever is beneath the Sphere of the fixt Stars, ought to be call'd low and inferior. In a Word, how is the Earth said to be the Middle, and of what is it the Middle? For  or the Universe is infinite; and Infinite having neither Beginning nor End, 'tis convenient also, that it should not have any Middle; for the Middle is a certain End or Limit; but Infiniteness is a Privation of all sorts of Limits. Now he, that affirms the Earth to be the Middle, not of the Universe, but of the World, is certainly a pleasant Man, if he does not think, that the World it self is subject o the same Doubts and Difficulties; for the Universe has not left a Middle even to the very World, but being without any certain Seat or Foundation, it is carry'd in an infinite Voidness not to any Place, that is proper for it. And if perhaps having met with some other Cause of stay, it has stopt, not according to the Nature of the Place, as much may be conjectur'd of the Moon, that by the Means of another Soul, and a∣nother Nature, or to say better, of another Difference, the Earth continues firm here below, and the Moon moves. Besides this, see, whether they are not igno∣rant of a great Inconvenience and Error: for if 'tis true, that all, which is wihout the Center of the Earth, however it be, is above, there will then be no Part of the World below, but the Earth, and all, that is upon it, will be above; and in brief, every Body that shall be neer or about the Center, will be above, and there will be nothing below or underneath, but one only
Point, which has no Body, which will of necessity make head against, and oppose all the rest of the Worlds Nature, if Above and Beneath, High and Low, are natu∣rally opposite to one another. Nor is this the only Ab∣surdity, will that will follow, but all heavy and ponderous Bodies also lose the Cause, for which they move and tend downwards hither, for there will be no Body be∣low, to which they should move; and as for that which is incorporeal, 'tis not probable, neither will they them∣selves allow it to be so forcible, as to draw and retain all things about it self. But if it is unreasonable, and contrary to Nature, that the whole World should be Above, and that there should be nothing Below, but an incorporeal and indivisible Term or Limit, then is this, as we say, yet more reasonable, that the Region above, and that below, being divided the one from the other, have nevertheless each of them a large and spacious Room. Nevertheless, supposing, if you please, that 'tis a∣gainst Nature, for earthly Bodies to have any Motions in Heaven; let us consider leisurely and mildly, and not violently, as is done in Tragedies, that this is no Proof of the Moons not being Earth, but only that Earth is in a Place, where by Nature it should not be: for the Fire of Mount Aetna is indeed against Nature under Ground, nevertheless it ceases not to be Fire. And the Wind, contain'd within Bottles, is indeed of its own Nature light, and inclin'd to ascend, but is yet by force constrain'd to be there, where naturally it should not be. And is not our very Soul, I beseech you in the Name of Jupiter, which as you your Selves say, is light, of a fiery Substance, and imperceptible to Sense, included within the Body, which is heavy, cold, and palpable? Yet we do not therefore say, that the Soul is nothing within the Body; or that it is not a Divine Substance under a gross and heavy Mass, or that it does
not in a moment pass thrô Heaven, Earth, and Sea, pierce into the Flesh, Nerves, and Marrow, and is with the Humors the Cause of a thousand Passions. And even your Jupiter, such as you imagin him, and depaint him to be, is he not of his own Nature a great and per∣petual Fire? Yet now he submits, is pliable, and transform'd into all things by several Mutations. Take heed therefore, good Sir, lest by transferring and re∣ducing every thing to the Place, assign'd it by Nature, you so philosophize, as to bring in a Dissolution of the whole World, and put all things again into that State of Enmity, mention'd by Empedocles, or, to speak more properly, lest you raise up again those ancient Titans and Giants, to put on Arms against Nature, and en∣deavor to introduce again that fabulous Disorder and Confusion, where all, that is heavy, goes one way apart, and all, that is light, another; Where neither Suns bright Face is seen, Nor Earth beheld, spread o're with Green, Nor the salt Sea,— as Empedocles has it; where the Earth feels no Heat, nor the Air any Wind, where no heavy thing is mov'd up∣wards, nor any light thing downwards; but the Prin∣ciples of all things are solitary, without any mutual Love or Dilection one to another, not admitting any Society or Mixture together; but shunning and avoid∣ing all Communication, moving separately by particu∣lar Motions, as being disdainful, proud, and altogether carrying themselves in such manner, as every thing does, from which, as Plato says, God is absent, that is, as those Bodies do, in which there is neither Soul nor Understanding: till such time as by Divine Providence Desire, coming into Nature, engenders there Amity, Venus, and Love; as Empedocles, Parmenides, and Hesiod
have it, to the end that changing their natural Places, and reciprocally communicating their Faculties, some being by Necessity bound to Motion, others to Quiet and Rest, and all tending to the better, every thing remit∣ting a little of its Power, and yielding a little from its Place, they make at length an Harmony, Accord, and Society together. For if there had not been any other part of the World against Nature, but every thing had been in the same Place and Quality, it naturally ought to be, without standing in need of any Change or Transposition, or having had any Occasion for it from the Beginning: I know not, what the Work of Divine Providence is, or in what it consists, or of what Jupi∣ter has been the Father, Creator, or Worker. For there would not in a Camp be any need of a Man, who is well skill'd in the Art of ranging and ordering of Battles, if every Souldier of himself knew and under∣stood his Rank, Place, and Station, and the Opportu∣nity, he ought to take and keep; nor would there be any want of Gardiners or Builders, if Water were of it self fram'd to flow, where it is necessary, and irrigate such Plants, as stand in need of watering; or if Bricks, Timber, and Stones would of their own Inclinations and Natural Motions range and settle themselves in due and fitting Places and Orders. Now if this Discourse ma∣nifestly takes away Providence, and if the Ordering and Distinction of things, that are in the World, belongs to God, why should we wonder at Natures having been so dispos'd and ordain'd by him, that the Fire should be here, and the Stars there, and again the Earth should be situated here below, and the Moon above, lodg'd in a more sure and strait Prison, found out by Reason, than that, which was first ordain'd by Nature? For if it were of absolute Necessity, that all things should fol∣low their natural Instinct, and move according to the Motion, given them by Nature, neither the Sun, Venus,
nor any other Planet, would any more run a circular Course: for light and fiery Substances have by Nature their Motion directly upwards. And if perhaps Nature it self receive this Permutation and Change by reason of the Place, that Fire, having its Motion here, should in a direct Line tend upwards, but being once arriv'd at Heaven, should turn round with the Revolution of the Heavens, what wonder would it be, if heavy and ter∣restrial Bodies, being in like manner out of their natural Place, are vanquisht by the ambient Air, and forc'd to take another sort of Motion. For it cannot with any Reason be said, that Heaven has by Nature the Power to take away from light things the Property of mount∣ing directly upwards, and cannot likewise have the Force to overcome heavy things, and such as tend downwards; but that sometimes making use of this Power, and sometimes of the proper Nature of the things, it still orders every thing for the best. But if laying aside those serile Habits and Opinions, to which we have enslav'd our selves, we must frankly and fearlesly deliver our Judgment, it seems clear to me, that there is not any part of the Universe, which has a peculiar and separate Rank, Situation, or Motion, that can simply be said to be natural to it. But when every thing exhibits and yields up it self to be mov'd, as is most profitable and fit for that, for whose Sake it was made, and to which it is by Nature appointed, suf∣fering, doing, or being dispos'd, as is most expedient and meet for the Safety, Beauty, and Power of the same, than it appears to have its Place, Motion and Disposition according to Nature. As a Proof of this, we may observe, that Man, who, if any thing in the World be so, is made and dispos'd according to Na∣ture, has upwards, especially about his Head, heavy and terrestrial things, and about the Middle of his Bo∣dy such, as are hot, and participate of Fire; of his
Teeth also some grow upwards, and some downwards, and yet neither the one nor the other are contrary to Nature; neither is the Fire, which shines in his Eyes, according to Nature, and that, which is in his Heart and Stomach against it; but it is in each place proper∣ly and beneficially seated. Moreover, consider the Na∣ture of all Shell-fishes, and, that I may use the Words of Empedocles, Look on the Crabs, the Oisters of the Sea, And Shell-fish all, which heavy Coats enfold, The Tortoise too with arched Back, whom we Cover'd with Crust, as hard as Stone, behold: View them but well, and plain it will appear, They hardned Earth above their Bodies bear. And yet this Crust, stone-like, hard, and heavy, as it is, thus plac'd over their Bodies, does not press and crush the Moisture, inclos'd within them, nor on the contrary does their natural Heat fly upwards by reason of its Lightness, and vanish away, but they are mingled and compos'd one with another, according to the Nature of every one. Wherefore 'tis also probable, that the World, if it is an Animal, has in many parts of its Body Earth, and in as many Fire and Water, not thrust and driven into it by Force, but order'd and dispos'd by Reason: for nei∣ther was the Eye by its Lightness forc'd into that part of the Body, where it is, nor the Heart by its Gravity press'd down into the Breast; but both the one and the other were thus plac'd, because it was better and more expedient. In like manner we ought not to think, that of the Parts of the World either the Earth setled, where it is, being beaten down thither by its Ponderosity, or the Sun carry'd upwards by its Levity, like a Bottle or Bladder full of Wind, which, being plung'd into the
Bottom of the Water, immediately rises up again, as Metrodorus of Chios was perswaded, or that the other Stars, as if they had been put into a Ballance, were sway'd this way or that way, according to their Weight or Lightness, and so mounted higher or lower to the Places, they now possess. But Reason having prevail'd in the Constitution of the World, the Stars have, like to glittering Eyes, been fixt in the Firmament, as it were in the Face of the Universe, there to turn conti∣nually about; and the Sun, having the Force and Vi∣gor of the Heart, sends and distributes its Heat and Light, like Blood and Spirits, throughout all: the Earth and Sea are in the World, as the Paunch and Bladder in the Body of a living Creature: And the Moon plac'd between the Sun and the Earth, as the Liver, or some other soft Entral between the Heart and the Belly, transmits down thither the Heat of the Superior Bodies, and draws round about her the Vapors, which arise from hence, subtilizing them by way of Concoction and Purification. And whether its solid and terrestrial Quality has any other Property, serving for some profitable Use, is indeed unknown to us; but 'tis however securest and best, in all things to hold, what is necessary: for what Probability can we draw from that, which they affim? They say, that the most subtile and luminous Part of the Air, by reason of its Rarity, became Heaven; but what was thickned and closely driven together, was made into Stars, of which the Moon being the heaviest, is compacted of the grossest and muddiest Matter. And yet 'tis plainly to be seen, that the Moon is not separated or divided from the Air; but moves and makes her Revolution thrô that, which is about her, to wit, the Region of the Winds, and where the Comets are engendred, and keep their Course. These Bodies then were not by a natural Inclination thus plac'd and situated as they are,
but have by some other Reason been so order'd and dispos'd. These things being said, as I was giving Lucius his Turn to follow and continue the Discourse, there be∣ing nothing left to be added, but the Demonstrations of this Doctrine, Aristotle, smiling, said: I am a Witness, that you have directed all your Contradictions, and all your Refutations against those, who, supposing the Moon to be half Fire, affirm in general, that all Bodies do of their own accord tend either upwards or downwards; but if there is any one, who holds, that the Stars have of their own Nature a circular Motion, and that they are of a Substance wholly different from the four Ele∣ments, you have not thought of saying any thing, so much as accidentally, or by the way, against him: and therefore I am wholly unconcern'd in your Dis∣course. Indeed, good Sir, said Lucius, if you should suppose the other Stars, and the whole Heaven apart, to be of a pure and sincere Nature, free from all Change and Al∣teration of Passion, and should bring in also a Circle, in which they make their Motion by a perpetual Revolu∣tion, you would not perhaps find any one now to con∣tradict you, thô there are in this infinite Doubts and Difficulties. But when theFor , I read . Discourse descends so far, as to touch the Moon, it cannot maintain in her that Perfection of being exempt from all Passion and Alteration, nor the heavenly Beauty of that Body. But to let pass all other Inequalities and Differences, the very Face, which appears in the Body of the Moon, necessarily proceeds from some Passion of her own Substance, or the Mixture of another: for what is mixt, suffers, because it loses its first Purity, being fill'd by force with that which is worse. Besides, as for
the Slowness and Dullness of her Course, her feeble and inefficacious Heat, by which, as Ion says, The black Grape comes not to maturity, to what shall we attribute them but to her Weakness and Passion, if an eternal and celestial Body can be sub∣ject to Passion? In brief, my Friend Aristotle, if the Moon is Earth, she is a most fair and admirable thing, and excellently well adorn'd, but if you regard her as a Star, or Light, or a certain divine and heavenly Body, I am afraid, she will prove deform'd and foul, and disgrace that beautiful Appellation, if of all those Bodis, which are in Hea∣ven so numerous, she alone stands in need of Light, borrow'd of another, and, as Parmenides has it, Looks always backwards on the Suns bright Rays. Our Friend therefore indeed, having in a Lecture of his, demonstrated this Proposition of Anaxagoras, that the Sun communicates to the Moon, what Brightness she has, was well esteem'd for it. As for me, I will not say, what I have learnt of you, or with you, but hav∣ing taken it for granted, will pass on to the rest. 'Tis then probable, that the Moon is illuminated, not like a Glass or Cristal, by the Brightness of the Suns Rays, shining thrô her; nor yet again, by a certain Collustra∣tion and Conjunction of Light and Brightness, as when many Torches, set together, augment the Light of one another. For so she would be no less full in her Con∣junction, or first Quarter, than in her Opposition, if she did not obstruct or repel the Rays of the Sun, but let them pass thrô her by reason of her Rarity; or if he did by a Contemperature shine upon her, and kindle the Light within her. For we cannot alledge her Declina∣tions
and Aversions in the Conjunction or new Moon, as when it is half Moon, or when she appears tipt, cres∣cent, or in the Wane; but being then perpendicularly, as Democritus says, under him, that illuminates her, she receives and admits the Sun: so that then 'tis probable, she should appear, and he shine thrô her. But this she is so far from doing, that she is not only then unseen, but also often hides the Sun, as Empedocles has it: The Suns bright Beams from us she turns aside, And of the Earth it self as much doth hide, As her Orbs breadth can cover:— As if the Light of the Sun fell not upon another Star, but upon Night and Darkness. And as for what Possi∣donius says, that the Depth of the Moons Body is the Cause, why the Light of the Sun cannot pierce thrô her to us, this is evidently refuted: for the Air, which is infinite, and of a far greater Depth than the Body of the Moon, is nevertheless all over illustrated and en∣lightned by the Rays of the Sun. It remains then, that, according to the Opinion of Empedocles, the Light of the Moon, which appears to us, comes from the Re∣percussion and Reflexion of the Suns Beams. And for this reason it comes not to us hot and bright, as in all probability it would, if her Shining proceeded either from Inflammation, or the Commixtion of two Lights. But as Voices, reverberated, cause an Echo, or Re∣sounding more obscure, and less express than the Speech, that was pronounc'd, and as the Blows of Darts and Arrows, rebounding from some Wall, a∣gainst which they were shot, are more mild and gentle:
SoThe Sun, so call'd from Titan, Bro∣ther to Sa∣turn, whose Son Hyperion was Father to Sol. Titans Lustre, smiting the Moons Orb, yields but a faint and feeble Refluxion and Refusion of Brightness upon us, its Force being abated and weakned by the Re∣fraction. Sylla then, taking up the Discourse, said, There is indeed a great deal of probability in all that you have spoken: But as to the strongest Objection, that is brought against it, has it, think you, been any way weakned by this Discourse? Or has our Friend quite pass'd it over in Silence? What Opposition do you mean, said Lucius? Is it the Difficulty about the Moon, when one half of her appears enlightned? The very same, answer'd Sylla: For there is some Reason, seeing that all Reflexion is made by equal An∣gles, that, when the Half-Moon is in the midst of Hea∣ven, the Light, proceeding from her, should not be carry'd upon the Earth, but glance, and fall beyond and on one side of it. For the Sun, being plac'd in the Ho∣rizon, touches the Moon with his Beams, which, being equally refracted, will therefore necessarily fall on the other Bound of the Horizon, and not send their Light down hither; or else there will be a great Distortion and Difference of the Angle: which is impossible. And yet by Jupiter, reply'd Lucius, this has not been forgotten, or overpass'd, but already spoken to. And casting his Eye, as he was discoursing upon the Mathe∣matician Menelaus, I am asham'd, said he, in your Pre∣sence, dear Menelaus, to attempt the subverting and overthrowing of a Mathematical Position, which is sup∣pos'd, as a Basis and Foundation to the Doctrine of the Catoptricks concerning the Causes and Reasons of Mir∣rors. And yet of necessity I must: for it neither ap∣pears
of it self, nor is confess'd as true, that all Reflexi∣ons tend to equal Angles; but this Position is first check'd and contradicted in emboss'd and convex Mir∣rors, when they represent the Images of things, appear∣ing at one Point of the Sight, greater than the things themselves. And it is also disprov'd by double Mirrors, which being inclin'd or turn'd one towards the other, the Angle is made within, and each of the Glasses or plain Superficies yields a double Resemblance: so that there are four Images from the same Face, two answe∣rable to the Parts without on the left side, and two o∣thers obscure, and not so evident on the right side in the Bottom of the Mirror, where they yield Resem∣blances, appearing greater than themselves, at one only Point of the Sight. The same also is overthrown by those Mirrors, that are concave or hollow, wherein the Aspect is variable, of which Plato renders the efficient Cause: for he says, that, a Mirror being rais'd on the one and other side, the Sight varies the Reflection, fall∣ing from the one side to the other. And therefore, since of the Views or Visions, some immediately have re∣course to us, and others, sliding on the opposite part of the Mirror, do again return upon us from thence, 'tis not possible, that all Reflexions should be made at equal Angles: thô those, who closely impugn our Opinion, contend, that by these Defluxions of Light from the Moon upon the Earth the Equality of Angles is taken away, thinking this to be much more probable than the other. Nevertheless, if we must of necessity yield and grant thus much to our dearly beloved Geometry, first, this should in all likelihood befall those Mirrors, which are perfectly smooth, and exquisitley polisht; whereas the Moon has many Inequalities and Roughnesses, so that the Rays, proceeding from a vast Body, and carry'd to mighty Altitudes, receive one from another, and in∣tercommunicate
their Lights, which, being sent to and fro, and reciprocally distributed, are refracted and in∣terlac'd all manner of ways, and the Counter-Lights meet one another, as if they came to us from several Mirrors. And then, thô we should suppose these Re∣flexions on the Superficies of the Moon to be made at equal Angles, yet 'tis not impossible, that the Rays, coming down unto us by so long an Interval, may have their Flexions, Fractions, and Delapsions, that the Light, being compounded, may shine the more. Some also there are, who prove by lineary Demonstration, that she sends much of her Light down to the Earth by a direct Line, drawn plumb under her, as she enclines. But to make the Description and Delineation of it thus publickly, especially, where there were so many Auditors, was not very easie. But in brief, said he, I wonder, how they come thus to alledge against us the Half Moon, there being the same Reason, when she is on both sides emboss'd, and crescent. For if the Sun en∣lightned the Moon, as a Mass of etherial or fiery Mat∣ter, he would never surely leave one Hemisphere, or half of her Globe, always appearing dark and shadowy to Sence, as it is seen to be; but how little soever he toucht her Superficies, it would be agreeable to Reason, that she should be wholly replenisht, and totally chang'd by that Light of his, which by reason of its Agility and Swiftness so easily spreads and passes thrô all. For, since Wine, touching Water only in one Point, or one Drop of Blood, falling into any Liquor, dies and colours it all with a red or purple Colour; and since they say, that the very Air is alter'd and chang'd with Light, not by any Defluxions or Beams intermingled, but by a sudden Conversion and Change, made in one only Point; how can they imagine, that one Star, touching another Star, and one Light another Light, should not be immediately mingled, nor make any thorow Confusion or Change;
but only exteriorly illuminate that, whose Superficies it touches. For that Circle, which the Sun makes by fetching a Compass, and turning towards the Moon, sometimes falling upon the very Line, that distinguishes her visi∣ble Part from her invisible, and sometimes rising up directly, so that it cuts her in two, and is reciprocally cut by her, causing in her by several Inclinations and Habitudes of the Luminous to the Dark those various Forms, by which she appears but Half, Emboss'd on both sides, Horned, and Crescent: that, more than any thing else, demonstrates, that all this Illumination of the Moon is not a Mixture, but only a Touching; nor a Conflux or Gathering together of sundry Lights, but only an Illustration round about. But forasmuch as she is not only enlightned her self, but also sends back hither the Image of her Illuminati∣on, this confirms us yet farther, in what we say touch∣ing her Substance. For Reflexions and Reverberations are not made upon any thing, which is rare, and of thin and subtil Parts, nor is it easily to be imagin'd, how Light can rebound from Light, or one Fire from ano∣ther; but that, which is to make the Reverberation or Reflexion, must be solid and firm, that a Blow may be given against it, and a Rebounding made from it. As a Proof of this, we see, that the Air transmits the Sun, and gives him way to pierce quite thrô it, not obstruct∣ing or driving back his Rays; but on the contrary from Wood, Stones, or Clothes, put in the Sun, there are made many Reflexions of Light, and many Illuminati∣ons round about. So we see that the Earth is illumina∣ted by him, not to the very Bottom, as the Water, nor throughly and all over, as the Air, thrô which the Beams of the Sun have a clear Passage; but just such a Circle, as he makes in turning about the Moon, and as much as he cuts off from her, with such another does he compass the Earth, and so much does he enlighten,
the rest being left without Light: for what is illumina∣ted both in the one and in the other, is little more than an Hemisphere. Permit me therefore now to con∣clude after the manner of Geometricians by Proportion. If there are three things, which the Light of the Sun approaches, the Air, the Moon, and the Earth, and if we see, that the Moon is enlightned by him, not as the Air, but as the Earth, 'tis of necessity, that those two things must have one and the same Nature, which of one and the same Cause suffer the same Effects. Now when all the Company began highly to com∣mend Lucius's Harangue, This is excellently well done of you, Lucius, (said I do him,) that you have to so fine a Discourse added as fine a Proportion: for you must not be defrauded of that, which is your Due. Then Lucius, smiling, thus went on: I have yet a second Proportion to be added to the former, by which we will clearly demonstrate, that the Moon altogether resembles the Earth, not only because they suffer and receive the same Accidents from the same Cause, but because they work the same Effects on the same Object. For you will without Difficulty, I suppose, grant me, that of all the Accidents which befall the Sun, there is none so like to his Setting, as his Eclipse, especial∣ly if you but call to mind thatOur Author is here suppos'd to mean that Darknss, which cover'd the Fce of the Earth at the Time of our Blessed Saviours Passion, which continu'd from the sixth Hour to the ninth, that is, from Noon till three a Clock. Conjunction, which hapnd not many years since, and, be∣ginning immediately after Noon, shew'd us many Stars in many Places of the Heavens, and wrought such a Temperature in the Air, as is that of the Twi∣light in the Evening or Morn∣ing. But if you will not grant me this, our Friend Theon here will bring us a Mimner∣nus, a Cydias, an Achilochus, and besides these, a Stesi∣chorus
and a Pindar, lamenting, that in Eclipses the World is robb'd of its brightest Light, and saying, that Night comes on in the midst of the Day, and that the Rays of the Sun wander in the Path of Darkness; but above all, he will produce Homer, saying, that the Faces of Men were [in Eclipses] seiz'd upon by Night and Darkness, and the Sun quite lost out of Heaven by the Conjuncti∣on of the Moon.**** What is here lost, seems to have been some Discourse concern∣ing the Change of the Moon: for that the Suns Eclipse cannot by the Course of Nature, be at any other time. And ****** ****************** ******************* 'Tis natural, that this should happen, if I may use Homers Words, When one Moon's going, and another comes. For the rest of the Demonstration is, in my Opinion, as certain, and exactly concluding, as are the acute Ar∣guments of the Mathematicks. As Night is the Sha∣dow of the Earth, so the Eclipse of the Sun is the Sha∣dow of the Moon, when the Sight returns upon it self. For the Sun is at his setting kept from our Sight by the Interposition of the Earth, and at his Eclipse by that of the Moon. Now both of these are Obscurations: but that of his Setting is from the Earth, and that of his being eclips'd from the Moon, their Shadows intercept∣ing our Sight. Now the Consequences of these things are easily understood. For if the Effect is alike, the efficient Causes are also alike: because it is of necessity, that the same Effects, hapning in the same Subjects, proceed from the same Efficients. Now if the Dark∣ness in Eclipses is not so profound, nor does so forcibly and entirely seize the Air, as does the Night, we are not to wonder at it: for the Substance of the Body, which makes the Night, and of that which causes the
Eclipse, is indeed the same, thô their Greatness is not equal. For the Aegyptians, if I am not mistaken, hold, that the Moon is in Bigness the two and seventieth Part of the Earth; and Anaxagoras says, she is as big as Pe∣loponnesus; and Aristarchus shews the overthwart Line or Diameter of the Moon to have a Proportion to that of the Earth, which is less, than if sixty were compar'd to nineteen, and somewhat greater, than an hundred and eight compar'd to forty and three. Whence it happens, that the Earth, by reason of its Greatness, wholly withdraws the Sun from our Sight: for 'tis a great Obstacle and Opposition, and lasts all the Night. But the Moon, althô she sometimes hides all the Sun, yet that Eclipse continues not so long, nor is so far extended, but there always appears about the Circum∣ference a certain Brightness, which permits not the Darkness to be black, deep, and perfectly obscure. And Aristotle, I mean the ancient Philosopher of that Name, rendring the Reason, why there are oftner seen to happen Eclipses of the Moon, than of the Sun, a∣mongst other Causes alledges this, that the Sun is e∣clips'd by the Interposition of the Moon, and the Moon by that of the Earth, which is much greater, and more spacious, and consequently oftner opposes it self. And Posidonius thus defines this Accident: The Eclipse of the Sun is the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, the Sha∣dow of which darkens our Sight. For there is no E∣clipse, but only to those, whose Sight the Shadow of the Moon intercepting, hinders them from seeing the Sun. Now in confessing, that the Shadow of the Moon descends down to us, I know not what he has left himself to say. 'Tis certainly impossible for a Star to cast a Shadow: for tha, which is not enlightned, is call'd a Shadow, and Light makes no Shadow, but on the con∣trary drives it away. But what Arguments, said he, were alledg'd after this? The Moon, answer'd I then, suffer'd the same Eclipse.
You have done well, reply'd he, to put me in mind of it. But would you have me go on, and prosecute the rest of the Discourse, as if you had already sup∣pos'd and granted, that the Moon is eclips'd, being in∣tercepted within the Shadow of the Earth? or shall I take for the Subject of a Declamation the making a Demonstration of it by rehearsing to you all the Argu∣ments, one after another? Nay by Jove, said Theon, let this be the Argument of your discourse. For I indeed stand in need of some Per∣swasion, having only heard, that, when these three Bodies, the Earth, the Moon, and the Sun are in a direct Line, then Eclipses happen: for that either the Earth takes the Sun from the Moon, or the Moon take him from the Earth. For the Sun then suffers an Eclipse or Defect, when the Moon, and the Moon, when the Earth is in the midst of three: of which the one happens in the Conjunction, or New Moon, and the other in the Op∣position, or when the Moon is full. Then said Lucius: These are the principal Points, and the Summary of what is said. But in the first place, if you please, take the Argument, drawn from the Form and Figure of the Shadow, which is that of a Cone or Pyramid, with the sharp end forward, as be∣ing, when a great Fire or Light, that is round, or sphaerical, encompasses a Mass, that is also globular, but less: whence it comes, that in the Eclipses of the Moon the Circumscriptions of the Black and Dark from the Clear and Luminous have their Sections al∣ways round. For the Approaches of a round Body, which way soever it goes, whether it gives or receives Sections, do by reason of the Similitude always keep a circular Form. Now as for the second Argument, I suppose, you understand, that the first Part, which is eclips'd in the Moon, is always that, which looks to∣wads the East; and in the Sun that, which regards
the West: now the Shadow of the Earth moves from the East to the West; but the Sun and Moon from the West Eastward. The Experience of the Appa∣rences gives us a visible Knowledge of this, nor is there need of many Words to make us fully under∣stand it, and from these Suppositions the Cause of the Eclipse is confirm'd. For, inasmuch as the Sun is eclips'd by being overtaken, and the Moon by meeting that, which makes the Eclipse, it probably, or rather necessa∣rily follows, that the one is surpriz'd behind, and the other before. For the Obstruction begins on that side, whence that, which causes it, first approaches: Now the Moon comes upon the Sun from the West, as striving in course with him, and hastning after him; but the Shadow of the Earth comes from the East, as that, which has a contrary Motion. The third Argument is taken from the Time and Greatness of the Eclipses. For the Moon, if she is eclips'd, when she is on high in her Apogëon, or at her farthest distance from the Earth, continues but a little in her Defect or Want of Light; But when she suffers the same Accident, being low, and in her Prosgëon or near the Earth, she is very much oppress'd, and slowly gets out of the Shadow: and yet, when she is low, she moves swifter, and when high, slower. But the Cause of the Difference is in the Shadow, which is, like Pyramids, broadest at the Bottom or Basis, and, growing still narrower by little and little, terminates in a sharp point at the Top. Whence it comes, that, when she is low, she is em∣barrass'd within greater Circles, traversing the Bottom of the Shadow, and what is most obscure and dark; but when she is high, being thrô the Narrowness of the Shadow, as it were but in a shallow Puddle, by which she is but little sully'd, she immediately gets out again. I omit the Effects, which have particular Causes. For we see, that Fire shines forth and ap∣pears
brighter out of a dark and shady Place, thrô the thickness of the caliginous Air, which admits no Ef∣fluxions or Diffusions of the Fires Vertue, but keeps in and contains its Substance within it self: or rather, if this is a Passion of the Sense, as hot things, when neer to cold ones, are felt to be hotter, and Pleasures immediately after Pains are found more vehement: so things, that are bright, appear better, when they are neer to such, as are obscure, by means of different Pas∣sions, which more strain and extend the Imagination. But there seems to be a greater Appearance of Pro∣bability in the first Reason: For in the Sun all the Na∣ture of Fire not only loses its Faculty of illuminating, but is also rendred duller and more unapt to burn, be∣cause the Heat of the Sun dissipates and scatters all its Force. If it were then true, that the Moon, being, as the Stoicks say, a muddy and troubled Star, has a weak and duskish Fire, it would be meet, that she should suf∣fer none of these Accidents, which she is now seen to suffer, but altogether the contrary: to wit, that she should be seen, when she is hidden; and absconded, when she appears: that is, she should be conceal'd all the rest of the time, being obscur'd by the environing Air, and again shine forth, and become apparent and mani∣fest for six Months together, and afterwards disappear again five Months, entring into the Shadow of the Earth. For of four hundred sixty and five Revoluti∣ons of Lunary Eclipses, four hundred and four are of six Months to six, and the rest of five to five. The Moon then should all this time appear shining in the Shadow; but on the contrary we see, that in the Sha∣dow she is eclips'd and loses her Light, and recovers it again, after she is escap'd and got forth of the Sha∣dow. Nay she appears often in the day time, so that she is rather any thing else, then a fiery and starry Body.
These things assoon as Lucius had said, Pharnaces and Apollonides ran both together upon him, to oppugn and refute his Discourse: and then Pharnaces, assisted by Apollonides, who was present, and gave him way, said: This it is, that principally shews the Moon to be a Star, and of a fiery Nature, that in her Eclipses she is not wholly obscur'd, and disappearing; but shews her self with a certain Coal-resembling Color, terrible to the sight, yet such as is proper to her. As for Apollonides, he insisted much in opposition to the Word Shadow, saying, that the Mathematicians al∣ways give that Name to the Place, which is not en∣lightned, and that Heaven admits no Shadow. To this I thus answer'd: This Instance is rather alledg'd obstinately against the Name, than naturally or mathematically against the Thing: for if one will not call the Place, obfuscated by the Opposition of the Earth a Shadow, but a Place depriv'd of Light, yet, be it what it will, you must of necessity confess, that the Moon, being there, becomes obscure: and every way, said I, 'tis a Folly to deny, that the Shadow of the Earth reaches thither, from whence the Shadow of the Moon, falling upon our Sight here on Earth, causes the Eclipse of the Sun. And therefore I now address my self to you, Pharnaces: For this coal-like and burnt Color of the Moon, which you affirm to be proper to her, belongs to a Body, that has Thick∣ness and Depth: For there is not wont to remain any Relick, Mark, or Print of Flame in a Body, that is rare; nor can a Coal be made, where there is not a solid Body, which may receive into it the Heat of the Fire, as Homer himself shews in a certain Passage, where he says: When the Fires Flow'r was vanisht, and quite dead Its Flame, then the left Coals abroad he spread.
For the Coal seems not properly a Fire, but a Body enkindled and alter'd by the Fire, staying and remain∣ing in a solid Mass, and which has, as it were, taken Root; whereas Flames are the setting on Fire and Fluxions of a Nutriment and Matter, which is of a rare Substance, and by reason of its Weakness makes no long Resistance, but is quickly resolv'd and con∣sum'd: so that there could not be any more evident and plain Argument, to demonstrate, that the Moon is solid and earthly, than if her proper Color were that of a Coal. But it is not so, my Friend Pharnaces; but in her Eclipses she diversly changes her Colors, which the Mathematicians, determining with respect to the Time and Hour, thus distinguish. If she is eclips'd in the Evening, she appears horribly black for above three hours and an half; if about Midnight, she sends forth this reddish and Fire-resembling Color, and after seven hours and an half there arises a Redness indeed; and finally if about the Dawning of the Morn∣ing or Sun-rise, she takes a blew or grayish Color: which is the Cause, why she is by the Poets, and par∣ticularly by Empedocles, call'd Glaucôpis, or Gray-ey'd. Since then they clearly see, that the Moon changes into so many Colors in the Shadow, they do ill to attribute to her only that of a burning Coal, which may be said to be less proper to her, than any other, being only a small Remnant and Semblance of Light, appearing and shining thrô a Shadow, her own proper Color being black and earthy. And since that here below, the Rivers and Lakes, which receive the Rays of the Sun, seeming to take on their Superficies sometimes a red Color, sometimes a violet one, the neighboring shady Places take the same Appearances of Colors, and are illuminated by them, casting and sending back by rea∣son of Reflexions several rebated Splendors: what won∣der is it, if a copious Flux of a Shadow, falling, like
a great River, on an immense celestial Sea of a Light, not steady and quiet, but agitated by innumera∣ble Stars, walking over it, and besides admitting several Mixtures and Mutations in it self, takes from the Moon the Impression, sometimes of one Color, sometimes of another, and sends them hither to us? For 'tis not to be deny'd, but that a Star or Fire can∣not appear in a Shadow black, gray, or violet; but there are seen upon Hills, Plains, and Seas, several various Resemblances of Colors, caus'd by the Reflexi∣on of the Sun, which are the very Tinctures, that Brightness, mixt with Shadows and Mists, as if it were with Painters Colors, brings upon them. And as for the Tinctures or Colors of the Sea, Homer has indeed in some sort endeavour'd to name and express them, when he sometimes terms the Sea violet-color'd, or red as Wine, at other times the Waves purple, and again the Sea azure, and the Calm white. As for the Diversities of Tinctures and Colors, appearing upon the Earth, he has, I suppose, omitted them, because they are in number infinite. Now it is not probable, that the Moon has but one Superficies all plain and even, as the Sea; but rather that of its Nature it principally resembles the Earth, of which old Socrates in Plato seem'd to mythologize at his Pleasure, whe∣ther it were, that under covert and aenigmatical Speeches he meant it of the Moon, or whether he spake of some other. For 'tis neither incredible, nor wonderful, if the Moon, having in her self nothing corrupt or muddy, but enjoying a pure and clear Light from Heaven, and being full of Heat, not of a burning and furious Fire, but of such, as is mild and harmless, has in her Places, admirably fair and pleasant, resplendent Mountains, clear as Fire, purple-color'd Cinctures or Zones, store of Gold and Silver, not dispers'd here and there within her Bowels, but
flourishing in great Abundance on the Superficies of her Plains, or spread all over her smooth Hills and Mountains. And if the Sight of all these things comes to us thrô a Shadow, sometimes in one manner, and sometimes in another, by reason of the Diversity and different Change of the ambient Air, the Moon does not there∣fore lose the venerable Perswasion, that is had of her, or the Reputation of Divinity: being esteem'd by Men an heavenly Earth, or rather, as the Stoicks say, a troubled, thick, and dreggish Fire. For even the Fire it self is honor'd with Barbarian Honor among the Assyrians and Medes, who thrô Fear serve and adore such things, as are hurtful, hallowing them even above such things, as are of themselves indeed holy and ho∣norable. But the very Name of the Earth is truly dear and venerable to every Greek, and there is thrô all Greece a Custom receiv'd of adoring and revering it, as much as any other of the Gods. And we are very far from thinking, that the Moon, which we hold to be an heavenly Earth, is a Body without Soul and Spirit, exempt and depriv'd of all, that is to be of∣fer'd to the Gods. For both by Law we yield her Re∣compences and Thanksgivings, for what we receive of her, and by Nature we adore, what we acknowledge to be of a more excellent Vertue, and a more ho∣norable Power, and therefore we do not think, that we offend, in supposing the Moon to be Earth. Now as to the Face, which appears in her, As this Earth, on which we are, has in it many great Sinuosi∣ties and Valleys: so 'tis probable, that the Moon also lies open and is cleft with many deep Caves and Rup∣tures, in which there is Water, or very obscure Air, to the Bottom of which the Sun cannot reach or pene∣trate, but failing there, sends back a dissipated Re∣flexion to us here below.
Here Apollonides, taking up the Discourse, said: Tell me then, I beseech you, good Sir, even by the Moon her self, do you think it possible, that there should be there Shadows of Caves and Chinks, and that the sight of them should come even to our Eyes? Or do you not regard, what will come of it? I will tell you, what it is, and hearken to me, althô you are not ignorant of it. The Diameter of the Moon ac∣cording to that Bigness, which appears to us, when she is in her mean and ordinary Distances, is twelve Digits, and every one of these black and shady Spots is above half a Digit, that is, above the four and twenti∣eth part of the Diameter. Now if we suppose the Circum∣ference of the Moon to be only thirty thousand Stadia, and the Diameter, according to that Supposition, to be ten thousand, every one of these shadowy Marks with∣in her will not be less than five hundred Stadia. Con∣sider then first, whether there can possibly be in the Moon such great Gaps, and such Inequalities, as may make such a Shadow; and then how it is possible, that being so great, they are not seen by us. At this I, smiling upon him, said: You have done me a Pleasure, dear Apollonides, in having found out such a Demonstration, by which you will prove, that you and I shall be bigger than those GiantsOthus and Ephialtes, so nam'd of Aloeus, their suppos'd Father, on whose Wife Iphime∣dia they were begot∣ten by Neptune. 'Tis said of them, that they grew nine Fingers e∣very Month. Alöades, not in∣deed every hour of the Day, but principally Morning and E∣vening. Do you think, that when the Sun makes our Sha∣dows so long, he suggests to our Minds this goodly Argument: If that, which is shadow'd, is great, that, which shadows, must of necessity be yet excessive∣ly greater? I know well, that neither you nor I have
ever ben in Lemnos; yet we have often heard that Jambic verse, so frequent in every ones Mouth. : Mount Athos shall on either side The Cow, in Lemnos planted, hide. For the Shadow of that Mountain falls, as it seems, on the Image of a brazen Heifer, which is in Lemnos, extending it self in length over the Sea not less than seven hundred Stadia: not that the Mountain, which makes the Shadow, is of that Height, as to cause it; but because the Distance of the Light renders the Sha∣dow of Bodies manifoldly greater than the Bodies themselves. Consider then here, that, when the Moon is in the Full, and shews us the Form of a Visage most expresly by reason of the Profundity of the Shadow, 'tis then, that she is most remote from the Sun: for 'tis the Recoiling of the Light, that makes the Shadow bigger, and not the Greatness of the Ine∣qualities, which are on the Superficies of the Moon. And you moreover see, that the Brightness of the Suns Beams suffer not the Tops of the Mountains to b dis∣cern'd in open day; but on the contrary the deep, hol∣low, and shadowy Parts, appear from afar. 'Tis not therefore any way absurd or strange, if we cannot so exactly see the full Illumination of the Moon, and her Reception of the Suns Beams; but that by the approach∣ing of things, that are obscure and dark, to such, as are clear and shining, they are by reason of this Di∣versity more exquisitely seen. But this, said I, seems rather to refute and check the Reflexion and Reverberation, which is said to rebound from the Moon, because these, who are within the retorted Rays, do not only see that, which is en∣lightned, but also that, which enlightens. For when,
at the Resulting of Light from Water upon a Wall, the Sight shall fall upon the Place, which is thus illu∣minated by the Reflexion, the Eye there beholds three things, to wit, the Ray or Light, that is driven back, the Water, which makes the Reflexion, and the Sun himself, whose Light, falling on the Superficies of the Water, is repuls'd and sent back. This being confess'd, as what is evidently seen, 'tis requir'd of those, who say, that the Earth is enlightned from the Moon by the Reflexion of the Suns Rays upon it, that they shew us by Night the Sun, appearing upon the Superficies of the Moon in the same manner, as he may be seen by day appearing in the Water, on which he shines, when there is the said Reflexions of his Beams. But since the Sun does not so appear, they thence infer, that the Moon receives her Illumination by some other Means, and not by Reflexion, and if there is no Reflexion, the Moon then is not Earth. What Answer then is to be made them, said Apol∣lonides? For the Argument of this Objection against Reflexion is common also to us. It is indeed, answer'd I, in some sort common, and in some sort not. But first consider the Comparison, how perversly, and against the stream, they take it. For the Water is here below on the Earth, and the Moon there above in Heaven: so that the reflected and reverberated Rays make the form of their Angles quite opposit one to the other, the one having their Point upwards towards the Superficies of the Moon, and the other downwards towards the Earth. Let them not then require, that every Idëa or Form should be equally a Mirror, nor that from every Distance and Remoteness there should be a like and semblable Re∣flexion: for so doing they would repugn notorious and apparent Evidence. And as for those, who hold the Moon to be a Body, not smooth, even, and subtil,
as the Water, but solid, massy and terrestrial, I can∣not conceive, why they should require to see the I∣mage of the Sun in her, as in a Glass. For neither does Milk it self render such peculiar Images, nor cause Reflexion of the Sight, by reason of the Ine∣quality and Ruggedness of its Parts: How then is it possible, that the Moon should send back the Sight from her Superficies, as Mirrors do, that are more po∣lisht? And if in these also there is any Scratch, Filth, or Dulness on their Superficies, whence the reflected Sight is wont to receive a Form, they indeed may well be seen, but they yield no Counterlight. He then, who requires, that either the Sun should appear in the Moon, or that our Sight should be reverberated and redoubled against the Sun, let him also require, that the Eye be the Sun, the Sight Light, and Man Hea∣ven. For it is probable, that the Reflexion of the Suns Beams, which is made upon the Moon, does by reason of their Vehemence and great Brightness re∣bound with a stroke upon us. But our Sight being weak and slender, what wonder is it, if it neither give such a stroke, as may rebound, or, if it rebounds, that it does not maintain its Continuity, but is broken and fails, as not having such abundance of Light, that it should not disgregate and be dissipated within those Inequalities and Asperities. For 'tis not impossible, that the Reflexion of our Sight upon Water, or other sorts of Mirrors, being yet strong, powerful, and neer its Origin, should from thence return upon the Eye. But thô there may perhaps from the Moon be some Glimmerings, yet they will still be weak and obscure, and will fail in the way by reason of so long a Distance. For otherwise hollow and concave Mirrors send back the reverberated and reflected Rays stronger, than they came, so that they frequently burn, and set on fire; and those, that are convex and imboss'd like a
Bowl, because they beat them not back on all sides, render them dark and feeble. You see, for certain, when two Rainbows appear together in the Hea∣ven, one Cloud comprehending another, that the Rain∣bow, which outwardly environs the other, yields dim Colors, and such, as are not sufficiently distinguisht and express'd, because the exterior Cloud, being more remote, makes not a strong and forcible Reflexion. And what needs there any more to be said, seeing that the very Light of the Sun, reverberated and sent back by the Moon, loses all its Heat; and of his Brightness there comes to us with much ado but a small Re∣mainder, and that very languishing and weak. Is it then possible, that our Sight, running the same Course, should bring back any Part of the solar Image from the Moon? I for my part think, 'tis not. But con∣sider, I said, your selves, that, if our Sight were in one and the same manner affected and dispos'd towards the Water, and towards the Moon, the full Moon would of necessity represent to us the Images of the Earth, Trees, Plants, Men, and Stars, as is done by the Water, and all other sorts of Mirrors. And if there is no such Reflexion of our Sight, as to bring us back these Images, either by reason of our said Sights, Weakness, or thrô the rugged Inequality of the Moons Superficies, let us no longer require, that it should re∣bound against the Sun. We have then, said I, related, as far as our Me∣mory would carry it away, whatever was there said. 'Tis now time to desire Sylla, or rather to exact of him, that he would make us his Narration, as being on such Condition admitted to hear all this Discourse. If you think good therefore, let us give over walking, and sitting down on these Seats, make him a quiet and settled Audience.
Every one approv'd this Motion. And therefore, when we had seated our selves, Theon thus began: I am indeed, ô Lamprias, as desirous, as any of you can be, to hear, what shall be said: but I would gladly first understand something concerning those, who are said to dwell in the Moon, not, whether there are any persons inhabiting it, but whether 'tis possible, there should be any: for if 'tis not possible for the Moon to be inhabited, 'tis also unreasonable to say, that she is Earth: otherwise she would have been created in vain, and to no End: not bearing any Fruits, nor affording a Place for the Birth or Education of any Men, for which Causes and Ends this Earth, wherein we live, was made and created to be our Nurse and true Guar∣dian, producing and distinguishing the Day from the Night. Now you know, that of this matter many things have been said, as well merrily and in jest, as seriously and in earnest. For of those, who dwell under the Moon, 'tis said, that she hangs over their Heads, as if they were so many Tantaluses; and on the contrary of those, who inhabit her, that being ty'd and bound, like a sort of Ixions, they are with so much Violence turn'd and whirl'd about, as if they were per∣petually in danger of being flung out. Nor is the Moon indeed mov'd by one only Motion, but is, as they are wont to call her , Trivia, or Three-way'd: performing her Course together according to Length, Breadth, and Depth in the Zodiack: the first of which Motions Mathematicians call a direct Revolu∣tion; the second Volutation, or an oblique Winding and Wheeling in and out; and the third (I know not why) an Inequality; althô they see that she has no Mo∣tion, uniform, setled, and certain, in all her Circuits and Reversions. Wherefore 'tis not greatly to be ad∣mir'd, if thrô Violence of her Motions there some∣time fell a Lion from her into Peloponnesus; but 'tis
rather to be wondred, that we do not daily see ten thousand Falls of Men and Women, and Shocks of o∣ther Animals tumbling down thence with their Heels upwards on our Heads: for 'twould be a Mockery to dispute about their Habitation there, if they can have there neither Birth nor Existence. For seeing the E∣gyptians and the Troglodytes, over whose Heads the Sun directly stands only one Moment of one day in the Solstice, and then presently retires, can hardly escape being burnt by reason of the Airs excessive Dryness: is it credible, that those, who are in the Moon can bear every year twelve Solstices, the Sun being once a Month just in their Zenith, or exactly over their Head, when the Moon is in Conjunction. As for Winds, Clouds, and Showers, wihout which the Plants can neither come up, nor, when they are come up, be preserv'd, it cannot be so much as imagin'd there should be any, where the ambient Air is so hot, dry, and subtil: since even here below the Tops of Moun∣tains never feel those hard and bitter Winters, but the Air, being there pure and clear without any Agi∣tation by reason of its Lightness, avoids all that Thick∣ness and Concretion, which is amongst us; unless, by Jupiter, we will say, that, as Minerva instill'd Nctar and Ambrosia into the Mouth of Achilles, when he receiv'd no other Food: so the Moon, which both is call'd, and indeed is, Minerva, nourishes Men, producing for them, and sending them every day Ambrosia, with which, as old Pherecydes was wont to say, the Gods themselves are fed. For as touching that Indian Root, which, as Megasthenes says, some People in those Parts, who ne∣ther eat, nor drink, nor yet have any Mouths, being there∣fore call'd Astomi, burn and smoke, living on the Smell of its Perfume: whence should they have any of it there, the Moon not being water'd or refresh'd with Rain?
When Theon had spoken these things: You have very dextrously and gentilely, said I to him, by this Facetiousness of yours smooth'd as it were the Brow, and taken off the Chagrin and Sowrness of this Discourse: which encourages and emboldens us to re∣turn an Answer, since, however we may chance to fail, we expect not any severe or vigorous Chastise∣men. For, to speak the Truth, they, who are ex∣treamly offended with these things, and wholly discre∣dit them, not being willing mildly to consider, what Probability and Possibility, there may be in them, are not much less in Fault than those, that are too excessive∣ly perswaded of them. First then I say, 'tis not neces∣sary, that the Moon must have been made in vain, and to no End or Purpose, if there are not Men, who dwell in it: for we see, that this very Earth here is not all cultivated, or inhabited; but that only a small Part of it, like so many Promontories, or Demy-Islands, arising out of the Deep, engenders, brings forth, and breeds Plants and Animals: the rest being thrô exces∣sive Cold or Heat wholly desart and barren, or (which is indeed the greatest Share of it) cover'd and plung'd under the vast Ocean. But you, who are always so great a Lover and Admirer of Aristarchus, give no Ear to Crates, thô you read The Sea, which gave to Gods and Men their Birth, Covers with Waves the most part of the Earth. And yet these Parts are far from having been made in vain: for the Sea exhales and breaths out mild Va∣pors, and the Snow, leisurely melting from the cold and uninhabited Regions, sends forth, and spreads over all our Countreys those gentle Breezes, which qualify the scorching Heat of Summer, and in the midst, as Plato says, is plac'd the faithful Guardian and Operator
of Night and Day. There is then nothing to hinder, but that the Moon may be without living Creatures, and yet give Reflexions to the Light, that is diffus'd about her, and afford a Receptacle to the Rays of the Stars, which have their Confluence and Temperature in her, for to digest the Evaporation, rising from the Earth, and moderate the over violent and fiery Heat of the Sun. And attributing much to ancient Fame, and the Opinion, handed down to us by our Ancestors, we will say, that she is stil'd Diana, as being a Virgin and fruitless, but otherwise greatly salutary, helpful, and profitable to the World. Moreover of all, that has been laid, my Friend Theon, there is nothing, which shews it impossible for the Moon to be inhabited. For her Turning about, being gentle, mild, and calm, dul∣cifies and polishes the ambient Air, which she in so good order distributes, and spreads about her, that there is no occasion to fear the Falling or Slipping out of those, who live in her, unless She her self also comes tumbling down. And as to the Diversity and Multiplicity of her Motion, it proceeds not from any Inequality, Error, or Uncertainty, but the Astrologers shew in this an ad∣mirable Order and Course, enclosing her within Cir∣cles, which are turn'd by other Circles: some suppos∣sing, that she her self stirs not, others making her always move equally, smoothly, and with the same Swiftness. For 'tis these Ascensions of divers Circles, with their Turnings and Habitudes, one towards ano∣ther, and with Respect to us, which most exactly make those Heights, Depths, and Depressions, that appear to us in her Motion, and her Digressions in Latitude, all join'd with the ordinary Revolution, she makes in Lon∣gitude. As to the great Heat and continual Inflamma∣tion of the Sun, you will cease to fear it, if first to the twelve estival Conjunctions you oppose the Full Moons, and then to the Excesses the Continuity of Change,
which permits them not to last long, reducing them to a proper and peculiar Temperature, and taking from them both what is overmuch: for the Middle, or what is between them, 'tis probable, has a Season, most like to the Spring. And moreover the Sun sends his Beams to us thrô a gross and troubled Air, and casts on us an Heat, fed by Exhalations, whereas the Air, being there subtil and transparent, dissipates and dis∣perses his Lustre, which has no Nourishment, nor Body, on which it may settle. Trees and Fruits are here nourisht by Showers, but elsewhere, as in the higher Countreys with you a∣boutHe means here the Aegyptian, not the Boeotian, Thebes. Thebes and Syene, the Earth, drinking in, not aërial, but earth∣bred Water, and being assisted with refreshing Winds and Dew, will not, such is the Vertue and Temperature of the Soil, yield the first place for Fertility to the best-water'd Land in the World. And the same sorts of Trees, which in our Countrey, having been well winter'd, or having suf∣fer'd a long and sharp Winter, bring forth Abundance of good Fruit, are in Africk, and with you in Aegypt, soon offended with, and very fearful of Cold. And the Provinces of Gedrosia and Troglodytis, which ly near the Ocean Sea, being by reason of Drought barren, and without any Trees, there grow nevertheless in the adjacent Sea, Trees of a wonderful Height and Big∣ness, and green even to the very Bottom: some of which they call Olive-trees, others Laurels, and others the Hairs of Isis. And those Plants, which are nam'd Anacampserotes, being hang'd up, after they are pluckt out of the ground, they not only live, but, which is more, bud and put forth green Leaves. And of the Seeds, that are sown, some, as namely Centaury, if they are sown in a rich and fat Earth, and there well drencht and water'd, degenerate from their na∣tural
Quality, and lose all their Vertue, because they love Driness, and thrive in their own proper natural Soil. Others cannot bear so much as the least Dew, of which kind are the most part of the Arabian Plants, that, if they are but once wet, wither, fade, and dy. What wonder is it then, if there grow in the Moon Roots, Seeds, and Plants, which have no need of Rains, or Winters Colds, and are appropriated to a dry and subtil Air, such as is that of Summer? And why may it not be probable, that the Moon sends forth warm Winds, and that her Shaking and Agitation, as she moves, is accompany'd by comfortable Breezes, fine Dews, and gentle Moistures, which are every where dispers'd to furnish Nutriment for the verdant Plants? seeing She is not of her Temperature ardent, or parch'd with Drought, but rather soft, moist, and ingendring all Humidity. For there comes not from her to us any Effect of Driness, but many of a femi∣nine Moisture and Softness, such as are the Growing of Plants, the Putrefaction of Flesh, the Changing and Flatness of Wines, the Tenderness and Rotting of Wood, and the easy Deliveries of child-bearing Wo∣men. But because I am afraid of irritating again and provoking Pharnaces, who all this while speaks not a Word, if I should alledge the Flowing and Ebbing of the great Ocean, as they themselves say, with the In∣creasings of the Friths and Straits, which swell and rise by the Moon, augmenting the Moisture: and there∣fore I will rather turn my self to you, my Friend Theon: for you, interpreting this Verse of the Poet Alman, Such things, as Dew, Joves Daughter and the Moons Does nourish,—
tell us, that in this Place he calls the Air Jupiter, which, being moistned by the Moon, is by Nature chang'd into Dew: for She seems, my good Friend, to be of a Na∣ture, almost wholly contrary to the Sun, not only in that she is wont to moisten, dissolve, and soften, what he thickens, dries and hardens; but moreover, in that she allays and cools his Heat, when it lights upon her, and is mingled with her. Those then, who think the Moon to be a fiery and burning Body, are in an Error: and in like manner those, who would have all such things to be necessary for the Generation, Life, Food, and Entertainment of the Animals, dwelling there, as are requisite to those, that are here below, consider not the vast Diversity and Inequality, there is in Nature, in which there are found greater Varieties and Differences between Ani∣mals and Animals, than there are between Animals, and other Subjects, that are not animated. Neither would there be in the World any Men without Mouths, or whose Lips are so grown together, that they feed only on Smells, if it were so, that Men could not live without solid and substantial Food. But that Power of Nature, which Ammonus himself has shewn us, and which Hesiod has obscurely signify'd in these Words, Nr how great Vertue is in Asphodels And Mallows,— Epimenides has made plain to us in Effect, teaching us, that Nature sustains a living Creature with very little Food, and that, provided it has but the Quantity of an Olive, it stands in need of no other Nourishment. Now, if any, those surely, who dwell within the Moon, should be active, light, and easy to be nourisht with any thing whatsoever: since they affirm, that
the Moon her self, as also the Sun, which is a fiery Animal, and manifoldly greater than the Earth, is nourisht and maintain'd by the Moistures, that are upon the Earth, as are also all the other Stars, whose Num∣ber is in a manner infinit: such light and slender Ani∣mals do they assign to the upper Region, and with so small Necessaries do they think them contented and satisfy'd. But we neither see these things, nor consider, that a quite different Region, Nature, and Tempe∣rature is accommodated to those Lunar Men. As therefore, if we were unable to come near and touch the Sea, but could only see it at a distance, and had heard that its Water is brackish, salt, and undrinkable, any one, who should tell us, that there are in its Bot∣tom many and great Animals of various Forms and Shapes, and that it is full of great and monstrous Beasts, making the same use of the Water, as we do of the Air, would be thought only to relate a parcel of strange and uncredible Stories, newly found out and invented for Delight and Amusement: in the same manner we seem to be affected and dispos'd towards the Moon, not believing, that there are any, who inhabit it. And I am of Opinion, that they themselves do much more wonder, when they behold the Earth, which is, as it were, the Dreggs and Mud of the Universe, appearing to them thrô moist and foggy Clouds and Mists, a little Place, low, abject, and immoveable thing without any Brightness or Light whatever, how this pittiful inconsi∣derable thing should be able to produce, nourish, and maintain Animals, that have Motion, Respiration and Heat. And if peradventure they had ever heard these Verses of Homer; A filthy squalid Place, abhorr'd even by The Gods themselves:—
And again, Hell is as far beneath, as Heav'n above The Earth: — they would certainly think them to have been written of this Place, where we live, and that here is Hell and Tarta∣rus, and that the Earth equally distant from Heaven and Hell, is only the Moon. I had not yet well ended my Discourse, when Sylla, in∣terrupting me, said, Forbear, Lamprias, and put a stop to your Discourse, lest running, as they say, the Vessel of your Story on ground, you confound and spoil all the Play, which has at present another Scene and Dis∣position. I my self therefore shall be the Actor, but shall, before I enter upon my Part, make known to you the Poet or Author, beginning, if there is nothing to hinder, with that of Homer; Far off within the Sea Lies th' Isle Ogygië, distant about five Days sail westward from Britain: and before it there are three others, of an equal Distance from one another, and also from that, bearing North∣west, where the Sun sets in Summer: In one of these the Barbarians feign, that Saturn is detain'd Prisoner by Jupiter, who, as his Son, having the Guard or keeping of those Islands, and the adjacent Sea, nam'd the Saturni∣an, has his Seat a little below: and that the Continent, or main Land, by which the great Sea is circularly en∣viron'd, is distant from Ogygia about five hundred Sta∣dia, but from the others, not so far, Men using to row thither in Gallies, the Sea being there low and ebbe, and difficult to be pass'd by great Vessels, because of the Mud, brought thither by a Multitude of Rivers, which, coming from the main Land, discharge them∣selves
into it, and raise there great Bars and Shelves, that choak up the River, and render it hardly naviga∣ble; whence anciently there arose an Opinion of its being frozen. Moreover the Coasts of this Continenr, lying on the Sea, are inhabited by the Greeks about a Bay, not much less than the Moeotick Fens, the Mouth of which lies in a direct Line over against that of the Caspian Sea. These name and esteem themselves the Inhabitants of the firm Land, calling all us others Islanders, as dwelling in a Land, encompass'd round a∣bout, and washt by the Sea. And they think, that those, who heretofore came thither, and were left there by him, mixing themselves with the People of Saturn, rais'd up again the Greek Nation, which was well neer extinguish'd, brought under, and supplanted by the Language, Laws, and Manners of the Barbarians, and made it again flourish, and recover its pristine Vigor. And therefore in that Place they give the first Ho∣nor to Hercules, and the second to Saturn. Now when the Star of Saturn, by us call'd Phaenon, and by them Nycturus, comes to the Sign of Taurus, as it does once in the Time of thirty years, they, having been a long time preparing, what is necessary for a solemn Sacrifice, and a long Voyage or Navigation, send forth those, on whom the Lot falls, to row in that vast Sea, and make their Abode for a great while in for∣reign Countreys. These Men then, being embarqu'd, and departed, meet with different Adventures, some in one manner, others in another. Now such as have in safety pass'd the Dangers of the Sea, go first ashore in those opposite Islands, which are inhabited by the Greeks, where they see, that the Sun is scarce hidden one full hour during the Space of thirty Days, and that this is their Night, of which the Darkness is but small, as hav∣ing a Twy-light from the going down of the Sun, nor unlike the Dawning of the Day: that having continu'd
there ninety Days, during which they are highly ca∣ress'd and honor'd, as being reputed and term'd holy Men, they are afterwards conducted by the Winds, and transported into the Isle of Saturn, where there are no other Inhabitants but themselves, and such as have been sent thither before them. For thô 'tis lawful for them, after they have serv'd Saturn thirty years, to re∣turn home to their own Countreys and Houses, yet most of them choose rather to remain quietly there: some, be∣cause they are already accustom'd to the Place; others, because without any Labor and Trouble, they have a∣bundance of all things, as well for the offering of Sacri∣fices, and holding Festival Solemnities, as to support the ordinary Expences of those, who are perpetually conversant in the Study of Learning and Philosophy. For they affirm the Nature of the Island, and the Mild∣ness of the Air, which environs it, to be admirable; and that there have been some Persons, who, intending to depart thence, have been hindred by the Divinity or Genius of the Place, shewing himself to them, as to his familiar Friends and Acquaintance, not only in Dreams, and exterior Signs, but also visibly appearing to them by the Means of familiar Spirits and Daemons, discours∣ing and conversing with them. For they say, that Sa∣turn himself is personally there, lying asleep in the deep Cave of an hollow Rock, shining like fine Gold, Jupiter having prepar'd Sleep instead of Fetters and Shackles, to keep him from stirring: But that there are on the Top of this Rock certain Birds, which fly down and carry him Ambrosia: that the whole Island is fill'd with an ad∣mirable Fragrancy and Perfume, which is spread all o∣ver it, arising from this Cave, as from an odoriferous Fountain: that these Daemons serve and minister to Sa∣turn, having been his Courtiers and nearest Attendants, when he held the Empire and exercis'd Regal Authority over Men and Gods: and that having the Science of
divining future Occurrences, they of themselves foretel many things; but the greatest, and of the highest Im∣portance, when they return from assisting Saturn, and reveal his Dreams: for whatever Jupiter premeditates, Saturn dreams; but his Awakenings are Titanical Passi∣ons or Perturbations of the Soul in him. His Sleep is alto∣gether, and *** the Royal and divine Nature pure and incontaminate in it self. This Stranger then, having been brought thither, and there serving the God in Repose, and at his Ease, attain'd to as great Skill in Astrology, as 'tis possible for any one to do, that has made the greatest Progress in Geometry. As for the rest of Philosophy, having given himself to that, which is call'd Natural, he was seiz'd with an extraordinary Desire and Longing to vi∣sit and see the great Island: for so they call the Conti∣nent, inhabited by us. After therefore his thirty years were pass'd, and his Successors arriv'd, having taken leave of all his Relations and Friends, he put to Sea, in other respects soberly and moderately equipp'd, but having good store of Voyage-Provision in Vessels of Gold. Now one Day would not suffice to relate unto you in particular, what Adventures befel him, how many Nations he visited, thrô how many Countreys he pass'd, how he search'd into Sacred Writings, and was initia∣ted in all holy Confraternities, and Religious Societies, as he himself recounted it to us, exactly particularising every thing. But give ear, I pray you, to what con∣cerns the present Dispute. For he continu'd no small time at Carthage, a City, not a little also esteem'd by us, since the Destruction of the former, where he found certain sacred Skins of Parchment, which had been se∣cretly convey'd thither, when the old Town was sack'd, and had there long lain hidden under Ground. Now he told me, that of all the Gods, which appear to us in Heaven, we ought chiefly to honour the Moon, and
earnestly exhorted me to be diligent in venerating of her, as having the principal Influence and Dominion o∣ver our Life. At these things when I was amaz'd, and entreated him to declare and explain them a little more fully to me: The Greeks, said he, O Sylla, deliver many things concerning the Gods, but they are not always in the Right: for first, when they tell us, that there is a Ceres, and a Proserpine, they say well; but not so well, when they put them both in one and the same Place: for the one, to wit, Ceres, is on the Earth, and the Lady and Mistriss of all earthly things; and the other, to wit, Proserpine, in the Moon, and is by those, that inhabit there, call'd Core and Perse∣phone: Persephone, as being a Bringer of Light and Brightness; and Core, because the Apple or Sight of the Eye, in which the Image of him, who looks into it, is represented, as the Brightness of the Sun appears in the Moon, is by the Greeks call'd Core. And as to what they say concerning the Wandring about of Ceres and Proserpina, and their mutual seeking of one another, there is in it somewhat of Truth: for they long after each other, being separated, and often em∣brace in Shadow. And that this Core is sometimes in Hea∣ven and Light, and sometimes in Darkness and Night, is not untrue; only there is some Error in the Computation of the Time: for we see her not six whole Months, but every sixth Month, or from six Months to six Months, caught in the Shadow by the Earth, as by her Mother; and this rarely happens within five Months, because 'tis impossible she should forsake Pluto, being his Wife: which Homer also covertly, but not unelegantly signify'd, when he said, Into th'Elysian Fields, Earths utmost Bounds, The Gods will bring thee.— For he has there plac'd the End and Boundary of the Earth, where the Shadow ceases, and goes no farther. Now into
that Place no wicked or impure Person can have Access. But good Folks, being after their Decease carry'd thither, lead there indeed an easie and quiet, but yet not a blessed and di∣vine Life, till the second Death. But what that is, O Sylla, ask me not, for I am of my self going to declare it to you. The common Opinion, and which most Persons hold, is, that Man is a compound Subject, and this they have reason to believe; but they are mistaken in thinking him to be com∣pounded of two Parts only: for they imagin, that the Ʋn∣derstanding is a Part of the Soul; but the Ʋnderstanding as far exceeds the Soul, as the Soul is better and diviner than the Body. Now this Composition of the Soul with the Ʋnder∣standing makes Reason, and with the Body Passion: of which this is the Beginning or Principle of Pleasure and Pain, and that of Vertue and Vice. Of these three Parts, conjoyn'd and compacted together, the Earth has given the Body, the Moon the Soul, and the Sun the Ʋnderstanding to the Generation of Man. *** as therefore Brightness to the Moon. Now of the Deaths, we dy, the one makes Man two of three, and the other one of two. And the former indeed is in the Regi∣on and Jurisdiction of Ceres, which is the Reason of our Sa∣crificing to hr. The Athenians also heretofore call'd the Deceas'd , or Cerealians. As for the other Death, it is in the Moon, or Region of Proserpina. And as with the one the Terrestrial, so with the other the Celestial Mercury inhabits. This suddenly, and with Force and Vio∣lence plucks the Soul from the Body; but Proserpina mildly, and in a long time disjoyns the Ʋnderstanding from the Soul. And for this Reason is she call'd , that is, Only begotten, or rather, Begetting one alone; for the better Part of Man becomes alone, when it is separated by her. Now both the one and the other happens thus according to Nature. 'Tis ordain'd by Fate, that every Soul, whether with or with∣out Ʋnderstanding, when gone out of the Body, should wan∣der for a time, thô not all for the same, in the Region, ly∣ing
between the Earth and the Moon. For those, that have been unjust and dissolute, suffer there the Punishments, due to their Offences; but the good and Vertuous are there de∣tain'd, till they are purify'd, and have by Expiation purg'd out of them all the Infections, they might have contracted from the Contagion of the Body, which is as it were the Au∣thor of all Evil, living in the mildest part of the Air, call'd the Meadows of Pluto, where they must remain for a certain prefixt and appointed time. And then, as if they were re∣turning from a wandring Pilgrimage or long Exile into their Country, they have a Taste of Joy, such, as they principally re∣ceive, who are initiated in sacred Mysteries, mixt with Trou∣ble, Admiration, and each ones proper and peculiar Hope. For it drives and chases out many Souls, which already long after the Moon. Some take Pleasure to be still below, and look yet again as it were downwards towards the Bottom; but those, that are got on high, are there most securely seat∣ed. First, they are, as Victors, crown'd with Garlands, call'd the Wings of Constancy, because in their Lives they restrain'd the unreasonable and passible part of their Soul, rendring it subject and obedient to the Curb of Reason. Secondly, They resemble in Sight the Rays of the Sun. Thirdly, The Soul, which is thus rais'd on high, is there confirm'd and fortify'd by the Air, which is about the Moon, where it gathers Strength and Solidity, as Iron and Steel do by their being tem∣per'd and plung'd in Water. Fr that, which was hitherto rare and loose, is compacted and made firm, and becomes bright, and transparent: so that 'tis nourisht with the least Exhalation in the World. And this is what Heraclitus meant, when he said, that the Souls in Pluto's Region have their Smell exceed∣ing quick. Now they first see the Moons Greatness, Beauty, and Na∣ture, which is not simple and unmixt, but a Composition as it were of Earth and Star. For as the Earth, mixt with Wind and Moisture, becomes soft, and, as the Blood, tem∣per'd with the Flesh, gives it Sense: so they say, that the
Moon, being mingled with an Aethereal Quintessence, even to the very Bottom, is animated, becomes fruitful and generative, and is equally counterpois'd with Ponderosity and Lightness. For even the World it self, being compos'd of some things, na∣turally moving upwards, and others, by Nature tending down∣wards, is exempt from all local Motion or Change of Place. These things also Xenocrates seems by a certain divine Rea∣soning to have understood, having taken his first Light from Plato. For Plato it was, who first affirm'd, that every Star is compounded of Fire and Earth, by the means of certain intermediate Natures, given in Proportion: forasmuch as no∣thing can be an Object of human Sense, which has not in some Proportion a Mixture of Earth and Light. Now Xenocra∣tes says, that the Stars and the Sun are compos'd of Fire and the first or primitive Solid, the Moon of the second Solid, and its own peculiar Air, and the Earth of Water, Fire, and the third Solid. For neither is the Solid alone by it self, nor the Rare alone by it self, capable or susceptible of a Soul. And let thus much suffice for the Substance of the Moon. Now as to her Breadth and Magnitude, 'tis not such as the Geometricians deliver, but manifoldly greater. And she sel∣dom measures the Shadow of the Earth by her Greatness, not because it is small, but because it adds most fervent Motion, that she may quickly pass the shady Place, carrying with her the Souls of the Blessed, which make haste and cry. For when they are in the Shadow, they can no longer hear the Har∣mony of the Heavenly Bodies. And withal, the Souls of the Damn'd are from below presented to them, lamenting and wailing thrô this Shadow. Wherefore also in Eclipses, many are wont to ring Vessels of Brass, and to make a Noise and Clattering about these Souls. Moreover, that which is call'd the Face of the Moon, affrights them, when they draw near it, seeming to them a dreadful and terrible Sight, whereas indeed it is not so. But as our Earth has deep and great Bayes, one here running between Hercules's Pillars into
the Land to us, and others without, as the Caspian, and those about the Red Sea: so in the Moon also there are Hollows and great Depths, Now of these the greatest they call the Gulf of Hecate, where the Souls perish, or are punish'd according to the Evils, they did or suffer'd, whilst they were here. The two others are little Straits, thrô which the Soul must go sometimes to that part of the Moon, which is towards Heaven, and sometimes to that, which is towards Earth. Now that part of the Moon, which is to∣wards Heaven, is call'd the Elysian Fields, and that, which is towards Earth, the Fields of Proserpina, not her, that is opposite to the Earth. Now the Daemons do not always stay in the Moon, but sometimes descend down here below to have the Care and Superintendency of Oracles: They are assistant also, and joyn in celebrating the sublimest Ceremonies, having their Eye upon Misdeeds, which they punish, and preserving the Good as well in Perils of War, as of the Sea. And if in the Performance of this Charge they commit any Fault, either thrô Anger, Envy, or any unjust Grace and Favor, they smart for it: for they are again thrust down to the Earth, and ty'd to Human Bodies. Now those, who were about Saturn, said, that themselves were some of the better of these Daemons, as were formerly those, that were heretofore in Crete call'd Dactyli Idaei, the Corybantes in Phrygia, and the Tro∣phoniades in Lebadia, a City of Boeotia, and infinite o∣thers in several Places of the Habitable Earth, whose Names, Temples, and Honors continue to this Day; but the Powers of some fail, being by a most happy Change translated to ano∣ther Place, which Translations some obtain sooner, others later, when the Ʋnderstanding comes to be separated from the Soul: which Separation is made by the Love and Desire to enjoy the Image of the Sun, in which, and by which, shines that di∣vine, desirable, and happy Beauty, which every other Nature diffe∣rently long after, and seeks, one after one manner, another af∣ter another. For the Moon her self continually turns thrô the Desire, she has to be joyn'd with him. Thus the Nature of the
Soul remains in the Moon, retaining only some Prints and Dreams of Life: And of this think it to have been well and truly said: The Soul, like to a Dream, flies quick away; which it does not immediately, as soon as it is separated from the Body; but afterwards, when it is alone, and divided, from the Ʋnderstanding. And of all, that Homer ever writ, there is not any one Passage more divine than that, in which speaking of those, who are departed this Life, he says, Next these I saw Alcides Image move; Himself is with th' Immortal Gods above. For every one of us is neither Courage, nor Fear, nor Desire, no more than Flesh or Humors; but the Part, by which we think and understand: And the Soul, being moulded and form'd by the Ʋnderstanding, and it self moulding and form∣ing the Body, by embracing it on every side, receives from it an Impression and Form, so that, althô it be separated both from the Ʋnderstanding and the Body, it nevertheless so re∣tains still its Figure and Semblance for a long time, that i may with good right be call'd its Image. And of these Souls, as I have already said, the Moon is the Element, because Souls resolve into her, as the Bodies of the Deceased do into Earth. Those indeed, who have been vertuous and honest, living a quiet and philosophical Life, without embroiling themselves in troublesome Affairs, are quickly resolv'd, because being left by the Ʋnderstanding, and no longer using corporeal Passions, they incontinently vanish a∣way; but the Souls of the Ambitious, and such as have been busy'd in Negotiations, of the Amorous, and who have been addicted to Corporeal Pleasures, as also of the Angry and Re∣vengeful, calling to mind the things they did in their Lives,
as Dreams in their Sleep, walk wandring about here and there, like that of Endymion: because their Inconstancy, and their being over subject to Passions, transports them, and draws them out of the Moon to another Generation, not letting them rest, but alluring them, and calling them away. For there is nothing small, staid, constant, and accordant, after that being forsaken by the Ʋnderstanding, they come to be seiz'd by corporeal Passions. And of such Souls,Instead of , I read . destitute of all Reason, and suffering themselves to be carry'd away by the proud Violence of all Pas∣sions, came and were bred afterwards the Tityi, and Ty∣phons, and particularly that Typhon, who, having by Force and Violence seiz'd the City of Delphi, overturn'd the Sanctuary of the Oracle there. Nevertheless, after a long Tract of Time, the Moon receives those Souls, and re-composes them: and the Sun, inspiring again, and sowing Ʋnder∣standing in their vital Faculty, makes them new Souls: and the Earth a third time gives them a Body. For she gives nothing after Death of all, that she takes to Generation: And the Sun takes nothing, but resumes and receives again the Ʋnderstanding, which he gave. But the Moon gives and receives, joyns and disjoyns, unites and separates, accord∣ing to divers Faculties and Powers: of which the one is nam'd Ilithyia, or Lucina, to wit, that, which joyns; and the o∣ther Artemis, or Diana, to wit, that, which separates and divides. And of the three Fatal Goddesses or Parcae, she, which is call'd Atropos, is plac'd in the Sun, and gives the Principle of Generation; and Clotho, being lodg'd in the Moon, is she, who joyns, mingles, and unites; and the last, nam'd Lachesis, is on the Earth, where she adds her help∣ing Hand, and with her does Fortune very much participate. For that which is without a Soul, is weak in it self; and liable to be affected by others: the Ʋnderstanding is Soveraign over all the rest, and cannot be made to suffer by any. Now the
Soul is a certain middle thing, mixt of them both: as the Moon was by God made and created a Composition and Mix∣ture of things high and low, having the same Proportion to the Sun, as the Earth has to her. This, said Sylla, is, what I understood from this Guest of mine, who was a Stranger, and a Traveller: and this, he said, he learnt from the Daemons, who serv'd and ministred to Saturn. And you, O Lamprias, may take my Relation in such part as you please.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of Eating of Flesh. The First Tract. Translated from the Greek by William Baxter, Gent. YOu ask of me then for what reason it was that Pythagoras abstained from Eating of Flesh. I for my part do much admire in what humor, with what Soul, or Reason the first Man with his Mouth touched slaughter, and reach'd to his Lips the Flesh of a dead Animate: And having set before People Courses of ghast∣ly Corpses and Ghoasts could give those parts the Names of Meat and Victuals, that but a little before lowed, cryed, moved and saw: How his sight could endure the Blood of slaughtered, flayed and mangled Bodies: How his smell could bear their Scent: And how the very nastiness happened not to offend the taste, while it chewed the sores of others, and participated of the Saps and Juices of deadly Wounds. Fleeces did creep, Flesh on the Spits did bellow, Both Raw and Roast.
This indeed is but a fiction and fansy, but the Fare it self is truly monstrous and prodigious; that a Man should have a Stomach to Creatures while they yet bel∣low, and that he should be giving directions which of things yet alive and speaking is fittest to make Food of, and ordering the several manners of the seasoning, and dressing them, and serving them up to Tables. You ought rather in my opinion to have enquired who first began this Practice, than who of late Times left it off. And truly as for those People who first ventured upon Eating of Flesh, it is very probable that the whole reason of their so doing, was scarcity and want of other Food. For it is not likely that their living together in lawless and extravagant lusts, or their grow∣ing wanton and capricious through the excessive va∣riety of Provisions then among them, brought them to such unsociable Pleasures as these, against Nature. Yea, had they at this instant but their sense and voice restored to them, I am perswaded they would express themselves to this purpose. Oh! Happy you, and highly favoured of the Gods, who now live! Into what an Age of the World are you fallen, who share and enjoy among you a plentiful Portion of good things! What abundance of things spring up for your use! What Fruitful Vineyards you enjoy! What wealth you gather from the Fields! What delicacies from Trees and Plants which you may gather! You may glut and fill your selves without being polluted. As for us, we fell upon the most dismal and affrighting part of time, in which we were exposed by our first Production to manifold and inextricable wants and necessities. As yet the thickned Air concealed the Hea∣ven from our view, and the Stars as yet confus'd with a disorderly huddle of fire and moist and violent Fluxi∣ons of Winds. As yet the Sun was not fixed to an un∣wandring and certain course: But drew both East and West
round about you: And then again return'd behind you, twisting about the Fruitful Seasons, like Garlands upon a Cup. The Land was also spoiled by the Inundations of dis∣orderly Rivers: And a great part of it was deformed with Loughs, and utterly wild by reason of deep Quagmires, un∣fertile Forrests and Woods. There was then no producti∣on of tame Fruits, nor any Instrument of Art, or In∣vention of Wit. And hunger gave no time, nor did Seed-time then stay for the yearly Seasons. What wonder is it if we made use of the Flesh of Beasts contrary to Na∣ture, when Mud was Eaten and the Bark of Wood, and when it was thought a happy thing to find either a sprouting Grass, or a Root of any Plant. But when they had by chance tasted of, or eaten, an Akorn, they danced for very joy about some Oak or Esculus, calling it by the Names of Life-giver, Mother and Nourisher: And this was the only Festival that those times were acquainted with: Upon all other occasions all things were full of anguish and dismal sadness. But whence is it that a certain ravenousness and frenzy drives you in these happy days to pollute your selves with Blood, since you have such an abundance of things necessary for your subsistence? Why do you belye the Earth as unable to maintain you? Why do you profane the Law-giver Ceres, and shame the Mild and Gentle Bacchus, as not furnishing you with sufficiency? Are you not ashamed to mix tame Fruits with Blood and Slaughter? You are indeed wont to call Serpents, Leopards and Lions Savage Creatures, but yet your selves are defiled with Blood; and come nothing behind them in cruelty. What they kill is their ordinary nourishment, but what you kill indeed is your better fare. For we eat not Lions and Wolves by way of revenge: But let those go, and catch the harmless, and tame sort, and such as have neither Stings nor Teeth to bite with, and slay them; which so may Jove help us, nature seems to us
to have produced for their beauty and comeliness only. Just as if one seeing the River Nilus over-flowing its Bancks and thereby filling the whole Country with genial and fertile moisture, should not at all admire that secret power in it that produces Plants and plen∣teousness of most sweet and useful Fruits, but beholding somewhere a Crocodile swimming in it, or an Aspe crawling along, or Flyes, (Savage and filthy Creatures) should presently affirm these to be the occasion of all that is amiss, or of any want or defect that may hap∣pen. Or as if indeed one contemplating this Land or Ground, how full it is of tame Fruits, and how heavy with Ears of Corn, should afterwards espy somewhere in these same Corn-feilds an Ear of Darnel or a Wild Vetch, and thereupon neglect to reap and gather in the Corn, and fall a complaining of these. Such another thing it would be, if one seeing the Harangue of some Advocate at some Bar or Pleading, swelling and enlarging and hastening towards the relief of some im∣pending danger, or else, by Jupiter, in the impeaching and charging of certain audacious Villanies or Indict∣ments, flowing and rowling along, and that not in a simple and poor strain, but with many sorts of passions all at once, or rather indeed with all sorts, in one and the same manner, into the many, and various and dif∣fering minds of either Hearers or Judges, that he is either to turn and change; or else, by Jupiter, to sof∣ten, appease and quiet; should overlook all this business, and never consider or reckon up the labour or struggle he had undergone, but pick up certain loose expres∣sions, which the rapid motion of the discourse had carried along with it as by the stream of its current, and so had slipt and escap'd the rest of the Oration; and here∣upon undervalue the Orator. But we are nothing put out of countenance, either by the beautious gayity of the colours, or by the charmingness of the Musical
Voices, or by the rare Sagacity of the Intellects, or by the cleanliness and neatness of Diet, or by the rare discretion and prudence of these poor unfortunate Ani∣mals; but for the sake of some little mouthful of Flesh, deprive a Soul of the Sun and Light and of that pro∣portion of Life and Time it had been Born into the World to enjoy. And then we fancy that the Voices it utters and screams forth to us are nothing else but certain inarticulate sounds and noises, and not the several Deprecations, Entreaties, and Pleadings of each of them, as it were saying thus to us; I deprecate not thy necessity (if such there be) but thy wantoness: Kill me for thy feeding: But do not take me off for thy better feeding. O horrible cruelty! It is truly an affecting sight to see the very Table of Rich People laid before them, who keep them Cooks and Caterers to furnish them with Dead Corpses for their daily Fare: But it is yet more affecting to see it taken away, for there is more mammocks left than was eaten. These therefore were slain for no purpose. Others there are that though they have abstained from what had been set before them, yet will not suffer o∣thers to cut or slice what they themselves had rejected; and yet would not abstain from them while alive. Well then, we understand that that sort of Men are us'd to say, that in eating of Flesh they follow the conduct and direction of Nature. But that it is not natural to Mankind to feed on Flesh, we first of all demon∣strate from the very Shape and Figure of the Body. For a human Body no way resembles those that were Born for ravenousness: It hath no Hawk-bill; no sharp Tallon; no roughness of Teeth; no such strength of Stomach, or heat of digestion as can be sufficient to convert or alter such heavy and fleshy Fare. But even from hence, that is from the smoothness of the Tongue, and the slowness of the Stomach to digest Nature seems to disclaim all pretence to Fleshy Victuals. But if
you will contend that your self was Born to an inclina∣tion to such Food, you have now a mind to eat: Do you then your self kill, what you would eat. But do it your own self; without the help of a Chop∣ping Knife, Mallet or Axe; as Wolves, Bears and Lyons do, who kill and eat at once. Rend an Oxe with thy Teeth, worry a Hog with thy Mouth, tear a Lamb or a Hare in pieces, and fall on and eat it alive as they do. But if thou hadst rather stay until what thou eatest is become dead, and if thou art loath to force a Soul out of its Body, why then dost thou against Nature eat an Animate thing? Nay there is no body that is willing to eat even a lifeless and a dead thing as it is, but they Boyl it, and Roast it, and alter it by Fire and Medicines, as it were changing and quenching the slaughtered Gore with Thousands of sweet Sawces, that the Palate being thereby deceived, may admit of such uncouth Fare. It was indeed a witty Expression of a Lacedemonian, who having purchased a small Fish in a certain Inn, delivered it to his Landlord to be dressed: And as he demanded Cheese and Vinegar and Oyl to make Sawce, he replyed, if I had had those I would not have bought the Fish. But we are grown so wanton in our bloody Luxury, that we have bestowed upon Flesh the Name of Meat, and then require another Meat to this same Flesh, mixing Oyl, Wine, Honey, Pickle, and Vinegar with Syrian and Arabian Spices, as though we really meant to embalm it after its de∣cease. Indeed when things are dissolved, and made thus tender and soft, and are as it were turned into a sort of a Carriony Corruption, it must needs be a great difficulty for Concoction to master them, and when it hath mastered them, they must needs cause grievous oppressions, and qualmy indigestions. Diogenes ven∣tured once to eat a raw Pourcontrel, that he might
disuse himself from Meat dressed by Fire: And as several Priests and other People stood round him, he wrapp'd his head in his Cassock and so putting the Fish his to Mouth, he thus said unto them: It is for your sakes, Sirs, that I undergo this danger, and run this risk; a No∣ble and Gallant risque, by Jupiter. For no otherwise than as Pelopidas ventured his Life for the Liberty of the Thebans, and Harmodius and Aristogiton for that of the Athenians, did this Philosopher encounter with a raw Pourcontrel, to the end he might make human Life more brutish. Moreover these same Flesh-eatings are not only preternatural to Mens Bodies, but also by clogging and cloying them render their very Minds and Intellects gross also. For it is well known to most that Wine and much Flesh-eating make the Body indeed strong and lusty, but the mind weak and feeble. And that I may not offend the Wrestlers, I will make use of Examples out of my own Country. The Athenians are wont to call us Boeotians Gross, Senseless and Stupid Fellows, for no other reason but our over much eating. And sometimes also Hogs for the same reason. Menander the Comoedian, calls us, Fellows with long Jawes. It is observed also, that ac∣cording to the saying of Heraclitus, A dry light has the wisest Soul. Earthen jars if you strike them will sound, but if they be full they perceive not the strokes that are given them. Copper Vessels also that are thin communicate their sound round about them, un∣less some one stop and dull the ambient stroke with his Fingers. Moreover the Eye when seized with an over great plenitude of humors grows dim and feeble for its ordinary work. When we behold the Sun through a humid Air and a great quantity of gross and indigested vapours, we do not see it clear and bright, but obscure and cloudy and with glimmering Beams. Just so in a muddy and clogged
Body, that is swagged down with heavy and unna∣tural nourishments, it must needs happen that the gayety and splendor of the Mind be confused and dulled, and that it ramble and rowl after little and scarce discernible Objects, since it wants clearness and vigour for higher things. But to pass by these considerati∣ons, is not accustoming ones self to mildness and an human temper of mind an admirable thing? For who could wrong or injure a Man that is so sweetly and humanly disposed with respect to the ills of strangers that are not of his kind? I remember that three days ago, as I was discoursing, I made mention of a Saying of Xenocrates, and how the Athenians gave Judgment upon a certain Person who had flayed a living Ram. For my part I cannot think him a worse Criminal that torments a poor Creature while living than a Man that shall take away its Life and Mur∣ther it. But (as it seems) we are more sensible of what is done against Custom than against Nature. These are now their more common and vulgar Reasonings upon this Subject. As for that grand and mysterious Principle which (as Plato speaks) is incredible to base minds, and to such as affect only mortal things, I as little care to move in this discourse, as a Pilot doth a Ship in a Storm, or a Comoedian his Ma∣chine while the Scences are moving. But perhaps it would not be amiss by way of Introduction and Pre∣face to strike up and Sing certain Verses of Empedocles. For in those by way of Allegory he hints at Mens Souls, as that they are tyed to mortal Bodies, to be punished for Murthers, eating of Flesh, and of one another. Although this Doctrine seems much ancienter than his time. For the Fables that are storyed and related about the discerption of Bacchus, and the At∣tempts of the Titans upon him, and of their tasting of his slain Body, and of their several punishments
and Fulminations afterwards, are but a Representation of the Regeneration. For what in us is unreasonable, disorderly and boisterous, being not Divine but De∣moniack, the Ancients termed Titans, and that is it that is to suffer torments, and to undergo vengeance after death.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of Eating of Flesh. The Second Tract. Translated from the Greek by the same hand. REason persuades us now to return with fresh Cogi∣tations and Dispositions to what we left cold yesterday of our Discourse about Flesh-Eating. It is indeed a hard and a difficult task to undertake (as Cato once said) to dispute with Mens Bellys that have no Ears; since most have already drunk that Draught of Custom, which is like that of Circe, Of groans and frauds and sorcery replete. And it is no easy Task to pull out the Hook of Flesh-Eating from the Jaws of such as have gorged themselves with Luxury, and are as it were nailed down with it. It would indeed be a good action, if as the Aegyptians draw out the Stomach of a dead Body, and cut it open and ex∣pose it to the Sun, as the only cause of all its evil Actions, so we could by cutting out our Gluttony and Blood∣shedding,
purifie and cleanse the remainder of our lives. For the Stomack it self is not guilty of Bloodshed, but is involuntarily polluted by our intemperance. But if this may not be, and we are ashamed by reason of custom to live unblameably, let us at least sin with dis∣cretion: Let us eat flesh, but let it be for hunger, and not for wantonness. Let us kill an Animal but let us do it with sorrow and pity, and not abusing and torment∣ing it, as many now a days are used to do, while some run red hot Spits through the Bodies of Swine, that by the tincture of the quenched Iron the Blood may be to that degree mortified, that it may sweeten and soften the Flesh in its circulation: and others jump and stamp upon the Udders of Sows that are ready to Pig, that so they may take off (Oh! Piacular Jupiter,) in the very pangs of delivery, Blood, Milk and Corruption, (de∣stroying the young ones besides) and so eat the most inflam'd and diseased Part of the Animal: others sow up the Eyes of Cranes and Swans, and so shut them up in darkness to be fatned, and then sowce up their flesh with certain monstrous Mixtures and Pickles. By all which it is most manifest, that it is not for nourishment, or want, or any necessity, but for meer gluttony, wan∣tonness and expensiveness that they make a Pleasure of Villany. Just as it happens in such Persons as when they cannot satiate their Intemperance upon Women, ha∣ving made tryal of every thing else, and falling into vagaries, at last attempt things not to be mentioned: even so inordinateness in feeding, when it hath once passed the bounds of nature and necessity, studies at last to diversify the Lusts of its intemperate Appetite by cruelty and villany. For the Senses when they once quit their natural Measures, sympathize with each other in their distempers, and are enticed by each other to the same consent, and intemperance. Thus a distempered Ear first debauched Musick, the soft and effeminate
Notes of which provoketh immodest touches and lasci∣ous tickling. These things first taught the Eye not to delight in merry Jiggs, gesticulations of Hands, Cur∣rants and Borées, nor in Statues and fine Paintings; but to reckon the slaughtering and death of Mankind, and Wounds and Duels, the most sumptuous of Shewes and Spectacles. Thus unlawful Tables are accompanied with intemperate Copulations with unmusicianlike Balls, and Theatres become Monstrous through shameless Songs and Rehearsals: and Barbarous and Brutish Shews are again accompanied with an unrelenting temper and savage cruelty towards Mankind. Hence it was that the Divine Lycurgus in his Three Books of Laws (called by him Rhetrae) gave Orders that the Doors and Ridges of Mens Houses should be made with a Saw and an Ax, and that no other Instrument should so much as be brought to any House. Not that he did hereby intend to declare War against Augres and Planes, and other Instruments of finer Work; but because he very well knew that with such Tools as these, you will never bring into your House a guilded Couch, and that you'l never attempt to bring into a slender Cottage either Silver-Tables, Purple-Carpets, or Costly-Stones: But that a plain Supper and a homely Dinner must accompany such a House, Couch, Table and Cup. The beginning of a vitious Diet is presently followed by all sorts of Luxury and Ex∣pensiveness: Ev'n as a Mare is by her thirsty Colt. And what Meal is not expensive, for which an Ani∣mal is put to death? Shall we reckon a Soul to be a small expense? I will not say perhaps of a Mother, or a Father, or of some Friend, or Child, as Empedocles did; but one participating of Feeling, of Seeing, of Hear∣ing,
of Imagination and of Intellection; which each of them hath received from nature for the acquiring of what is agreeable to it, and the avoiding what is disa∣greeable. Do but consider this with your self now, which sort of Philosophers render us most tame and civil, they who bid People to feed on their Children, Friends, Fathers and Wives, as if they were dead; or Phythagoras and Empedocloes, that accustom Men to be just towards even the other Members of the Creation. You laugh at a Man that will not eat a Sheep: But we (they'l say again) when we see you cutting off the Parts of your dead Father, or Mother, and sending it to your absent Friends, and calling upon and inviting your present Friends to eat the rest freely and heartily, shall we not smile? Nay peradventure we offend at this instant time while we touch these Books without having first cleansed our Hands, Eyes, Feet and Ears: if it be not (by Jupiter) a sufficient purgation of them, to have discoursed of these Matters in potable and fresh Language (as Plato speaketh) thereby washing off the brackishness of Hearing. Now if a Man should set these Books and Discourses in opposition to each other, he will find that the Philosophy of the one sort, suites with the Seythians, Sogdians and Melanchlaenians of whom Herod his Relation is scarce believed: but the Sentiments of Pythagoras and Empedocles were the Laws and Customs of the ancient Grecians. Who then were the first Au∣thors of this opinion, that we owe no Justice to dumb Animals? Who first beat out accursed Steel, And made the lab'ring Oxe a Knife to feel. In the very same manner Oppressors and Tyrants be∣gin first to shed Blood. For example, the first Man that the Athenians ever put to death, was one Epitedius,
the basest of all Knaves; after him they put to death a second and a third: After this being now accustomed to Blood, they patiently saw Niceratus the Son of Nicias, and their own General Theramenes, and Po∣lemarchus the Philosopher suffer death. Even so in the beginning some wild and mischievous Beast was kil∣led and eaten, and then some little Bird or Fish was entrapped. And conquest being first experimented and exercised in these, at last passed even to the la∣bouring Oxe, and the Sheep that Cloathes us, and to the poor Cock that keeps the House: Until by little and little unsatiableness being strengthened by use, Men came to the slaughter of Men, to Blood-shed and Wars. Now if one cannot demonstrate and make out that Souls in their Regenerations make a promiscuous use of all Bodies, and that that which is now rational will at another time be irrational, and that again tame which is now wild (for that nature changes and trans∣mutes every thing; With different Fleshy Coats New Cloathing all.) This thing should be sufficient to change a Man that hath taken up an intemperate and luxu∣rious Life, that it brings sickness and heavyness upon the Body, and that it inclines the mind the more bru∣tishly to warm Blood-shed and destruction: When we have once accustomed our selves neither to entertain a Guest, nor keep a Wedding, nor to treat our Friends, without Blood a Slaughter. And if what is argued about the return of Souls into Bodies is not of Force enough to beget Faith, yet methinks the very uncer∣tainty of the thing should fill us with apprehension and fear. Suppose for instance one should in some Night Engagement rush on with his drawn Sword up∣on one that had fallen down and covered his Body
with his Arms, and should in the mean time hear one say, that he was not very sure, but that he fansyed and believed, that the party lying there, was his Son, Brother, Father, or Tent-companion; which were more advisable think you, to hearken to a false sug∣gestion and so to let go an Enemy under the notion of a Friend; or to slight an Authority not sufficient to beget faith, and to slay a Friend instead of a Foe? This you will all say would be insupportable. Do but con∣sider the famous Merope in the Tragedy, who taking up a Hatchet and lifting it at her Sons Head, whom she took for her Sons Murtherer, speaks thus as she was ready to give the fatal blow; Villain, this piercing blow shall cleave thy head; What a bustle she raises in the whole Theatre, while she raises her self to give the blow, and what a fear they are all in, least she should prevent the Old Man that comes to stop her hand, and should wound the Youth. Now if another Old Man should stand by her and say, strike it is thy Enemy, and this, hold it is thy Son; which think you would be the greater In∣justice, to omit the punishing of an Enemy for the sake of ones Child, or to suffer ones self to be trans∣ported with anger at ones Enemy to Murther ones Child! Since then neither hatred, nor wrath, nor any revenge, nor fear for our selves, carries us to the slaugh∣ter of a Beast, but the poor sacrifice stands with an inclined neck only to satisfie thy st and pleasure; and then one Philosopher stands by and tells thee, cut him down, it is but an unreasonable Animal; and another cries, hold: What if there should be the Soul of some Kins∣man, or God inclosed in him? Good Gods! Is there the like danger if I refuse to eat Flesh; or if I for want of Faith Murther my Child, or some other Friend?
The Stoicks way of reasoning upon this Subject of Flesh-eating is no way equal nor consonant with them∣selves. Who is this that hath so many Mouths for his Belly and the Kitchin? Whence comes it to pass that they so very much womanize and reproach Plea∣sure, as a thing that they will not allow to be either good, or preferable, or so much as agreeable, and yet all on a sudden become so zealous Advocates for Plea∣sures? It were indeed but a reasonable consequence of their Doctrine, that since they banish Perfumes, and Cakes from their Banquets, they should be much more averse to Blood and to Flesh. But now just as if they would reduce their Philosophy to their Diaryes, or Day-books, they lessen the expences of their Suppers in certain unnecessary and needless Matters, but the untam'd and Murtherous part of their expence they nothing boggle at. Well! What then (say they?) We have nothing to do with Brute Beasts? Nor have you any with Perfumes, nor with Foreign Sawces, (may some one answer:) And yet you every where expel these from your Banquets, as both useless and needless. Let us therefore in the next place consider, whether we owe any Justice to the Brute Beasts: Neither shall we handle this Point, artificially or like subtle Sophisters, but by casting our Eye into our own Breasts, and conversing with our selves as Men, we will weigh and examin the whole Matter. ******
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of Fate. Translated out of the Greek by A. G. Gent. I Will endeavor, my dearest Piso, to send you my Opinion concerning Fate, written with all the Clearness and Compendiousness, I am capable of: since you, who are not ignorant, how cautious I am of writing, have thought fit to make it the Subject of your Request. You are first then to know, that this word (Fate) is spoken, taken, and understood two man∣ner of Ways: the one, as it is an Action; the other, as it is a Substance. First therefore, as 'tis an Action, Plato has under a Type describ'd it, saying thus in his Dialogue, entitled Phaedrus: And this is a Sanction of Adrastea, or an inevitable Ordinance that whatever Soul being an Attendant on God: And in his Treatise, call'd Timaeus: The Laws, which God in the Nature of the Ʋniverse has establish'd for immortal Souls. And in his Books of a Common-weal he says, That Fate is the Speech of the Virgin Lachesis, who is the Daughter to Necessity. By which Sentences he not Tragically, but Theologically, shews
us, what his Sentiments are in this matter. Now, if any one, perhaps taking again the fore-cited Passages, would have them express'd in more familiar Terms, the Description in Phaedrus may be thus explain'd: That Fate is a divine Sentence, intransgressible thrô a Cause, which cannot be divested or hindred. And according to what he has said in his Timaeus, 'Tis a Law ensuing on the Nature of the Ʋniverse, according to which all things, that are done, are transacted. For this does Lachesis effect, who is indeed the Daughter of Necessity, as we have both already related, and shall yet better understand by that, which will be said in the Pogress of our Discourse. Thus you see, what Fate is, when 'tis taken for an Action; but, as it is a substance, it seems to be the univer∣sal Soul of the World, and admits of a threefold Di∣stribution: the first Destiny being that, which errs not; the second that, which is thought to err; and the third that, which, being under the Heaven, is con∣versant about the Earth. Of these the highest is call'd Clotho, the next Atropos, and the lowest Lachesis, who, receiving the celestial Influences and Efficacies of her Sisters, transmits and fastens them to the terrestrial things, which are under her Government. Thus have we declar'd, what is to be said of Fate, taken as a Substance, what it is, what are its Parts, after what manner it is, how it is ordain'd, and how it stands, both in respect to it self, and to us: but as to the Par∣ticularities of these things, there is another Fable in his Common-weal, by which they are in some measure covertly insinuated, and we our selves have in the best manner, we can, endeavour'd to explain them to you. But we now once again turn our Discourse to Fate, as it is an Action: For concerning this it is, that there are so many Natural, Moral, and Logical Questions. Having therefore already in some sort sufficiently defin'd, what it
it is, we are now in the next place to say something of its Quality, althô it may to many seem absurd. I say then, that Fate, thô comprehending as it were in a Circle the Infinity of all those things, which are and have been from infinit Times, and shall be to infinit Ages, is not it self infinit, but determinate and finit: for neither Law, Reason, nor any other divine thing can be infinit. And this you will the better under∣stand, if you consider the Total Revolution, and the universal Time, when the Swiftness of the eight Peri∣ods, that is, of the eight Spheres, having, as Timaeus says, finisht their Course, return to one and the same Point, being measur'd by the Circle of The same, which goes always after one manner. For in this Reason, which is finit and determinate, shall all things, which as well in Heaven as in Earth consist by Necessity from above, be reduced to the same Situation, and restor'd again to their first Beginning. Wherefore the only Habitude of Heaven, ordain'd in all things, as well in regard of it self, as of the Earth, and all terrestrial mat∣ters, shall again after long Revolutions one day return, and those things, that in order follow after, and, being linkt together in a Continuity, are maintain'd in their Course, shall consequently also every one of them de∣liver, what it brings by Necessity. Now for the better clearing of this matter, let us suppose, that all, what∣ever is in us or about us, happens and is wrought by the Course of the Heavens and heavenly Influences, as being entirely the efficient Cause both of my writing, what I now write, and of your doing also, what you at present do, and in the same manner, as you do it. Hereafter then, when the same Cause shall return, we shall do the same things, we now do, and in the same manner, and shall again become the same Men: and so it will be with all others. And that, which follows after, shall also happen by the following Cause: and
in brief all things, that shall happen in every one of these universal Revolutions, shall again become the same. By this it appears, as we have already said be∣fore, that Fate, being in some sort infinit, is neverthe∣less determinate and finite: and it may be also in some sort seen and comprehended, as we have farther said, that it is as it were a Circle: for as the Motion of a Circle is a Circle, and the Time, that Measures it, is also a Circle: so the Reason of things, which are done, and happen in a Circle, may be justly esteem'd and call'd a Circle. This therefore, thô there should be nothing else, almost shews us, what sort of thing Fate is, but not particularly, or in every respect. What kind of thing then is it in its own form? It is, as far as one can compare it, like to the Civil or Politick Law. For first it commands the most part of things, if not all, at least by Supposition, and then it comprizes, as far as is possible for it, all things, that belong to the Publick in general: and the better to make you understand both the one and the other, we must specify them by an Example. The Civil Law speaks and ordains in gene∣ral of a valiant Man, and also of a Deserter, and a Coward, and in the same manner of others; now this is not to make the Law speak of this or that Man in par∣ticular; but principally to propose such things, as are universal or general, and consequently, such, as fall under them. For we may very well say, that 'tis le∣gal to reward this Man for having demean'd himself valiantly, and to punish that Man for flying from his Colors: because the Law has virtually, thô not in express terms, and particularly yet in such general ones, as they are comprehended under, so determin'd of them. As the Law, if I may so speak, of Physicians and Ma∣sters of corporal Exercises potentially comprehends par∣ticular and special things within the general: so the
Law of Nature, determining first and principally gene∣ral Matters, secondarily and consequentially determins such, as are particular. Thus general things being decreed by Fate, particular and individual things may also in some sort be said to be so, because they are so by Consequence with the general. But perhaps some one of those, who more accurately examin, and more subtly search into these things, may say on the contrary, that particular and individual things precede the Com∣position of general things, and that the general is ga∣ther'd for the particular: now that, for which another thing is, always goes before that, which is for it. Nevertheless this is not the proper Place to treat of this Difficulty; but 'tis to be remitted to another. How∣ever that Fate comprehends not all things clearly and expresly, but only such, as are universal and general, let it pass for resolv'd on at present, as well for what we have already said a little before, as for what we shall say hereafter. For that, which is finite and determinate, agreeing properly with divine Providence, is seen more in universal and general things, than in particular: such therefore is the divine Law, and al∣so the Civil: but Infinity consists in Particulars and In∣dividuals. After this we are to declare, what this Term, By Supposition, means: for 'tis to be thought, that Fate is also some such thing. That then is said to be by Supposition, which is not set down of it self or absolutely, but as truly suppos'd and joyn'd to another: which signifies a Suit and Consequence. And this is a Sanction of Adrastea, or an inevitable Ordinance, that whatever Soul, being an Attendant on God, shall see any thing of Truth, it shall till another Revolution be exempt from Punishment, and if it can always do the same, it shall never suffer any Dam∣mage. Thus you see, what is meant by this Expres∣sion, By Supposition, and also universally. Now that
Fate is some such thing, is clearly manifest, as well from its Substance, as from its Name. For it is call'd , as being , that is, dependent and link'd: and it is a Sanction or Law, because things are therein ordain'd and dispos'd consequentially, as is usual in Civil Government. We ought in the next place to consider and treat of mutual Relation and Affection: that is, what Reference and Respect Fate has to Divine Providence, what to Fortune, what also to that, which is in our Power, what to Contingent, and other such like things: and fur∣thermore we are to determin, how far and in what it is true or false, that All things happen and are done by, or according to, Fate: For, if the Meaning is, that all things are comprehended and contain'd in Fate, it must be granted, that this Proposition is true; and if any would farther have it so understood, that all things, which are done amongst Men, on Earth, and in Heaven, are plac'd in Fate, let this also pass as granted for the present: But if, as the Expression seems rather to im∣ply, the Being done by, or according to, Fate, signifies not all things, but that, which is a Consequent, and de∣pendent on it, then it must not be said or granted, that all things happon and are done by, and according to, Fate; thô all things are so according to Fate, as to be compriz'd in it. For all things, that the Law compre∣hends, and of which it speaks, are not legal, or accor∣ding to Law: for it comprehends Treason, it treats of the cowardly Running away from ones Colors in time of Battle, of Adultery, and many other such like things, of which it cannot be said, that any one of them is law∣ful. Neither indeed can I affirm of the performing a valorous Act in War, the killing of a Tyrant, or the doing any other vertuous deed, that it is legal: because that only is properly to be call'd legal, which is commanded by the Law. Now if the Law commands
these things, how can they avoid being Rebels against the Law, and Transgressors of it, who neither perform valiant Feats of Arms, kill Tyrants, nor do any other such remarkable Acts of Vertue? And if they are Transgressors of the Law, why is it not just, they should be punisht? But if this is not reasonable, it must then be also confess'd, that these things are not legal, or according to Law; but that Legal, and according to Law, is only that, which is particularly prescrib'd, and expres∣sly commanded by the Law, in any Action whatso∣ever. In like manner those things only are fatal, and according to Fate, which are the Consequences of Causes preceding in the divine Disposition. So that Fate in∣deed comprehends all things, which are done; yet many of those things, that are comprehended in it, and almost all, that precede, should not, to speak properly, be pronounc'd to be fatal, or according to Fate. These things being so, we are next in order to shew, how that, which is in us, to wit, Free-will, Fortune, Pos∣sible, Contingent, and other like things, which are plac'd amongst the antecedent Causes, can consist with Fate, and Fate with them: for Fate, as it seems, com∣prehends all things, and yet all these things do not hap∣pen by Necessity, but every one of them according to the Principle of its Nature. Now the Nature of the Possible is to presubsist, as the Genus, and go before the Contingent; and the Contingent, as the Matter and Sub∣ject, is to be presuppos'd to that, which is in us; and that, which is in us, or our Free-will ought, as a Master, to make use of the Contingent; and Fortune intercurs be∣tween that, which is in us, or our Free-will, thrô the Property of the Contingent, which is to encline to either Part. Now you will more easily apprehend, what has been said, if you shall consider, that every thing, which is generated, and the Generation it self is not done with∣out a generative Faculty or Power, and the Power is not
without a Substance; as for example neither the Gene∣ration of Man, nor that, which is generated, is without a Power: but this Power is about Man, and Man him∣self is the Substance. Now the Power or Faculty is be∣tween the Substance, which is the Powerful, and the Generation and the thing Generated, which are both Pos∣sibles. There being then these three things, the Power, the Powerful, and the Possible, before the Power can ex∣ist, the Powerful, must of necessity be presuppos'd, as its Subject, and the Power must also necessarily subsist be∣fore the Possible. By this Deduction then may in some measure be understood and declar'd, what is meant by Possible, which may be thus grossly defin'd: Possible is that, which Power is able to produce; or yet more ex∣actly, if to this same there be added, Provided there be nothing from without to hinder, or obstruct it. Now of Possible things there are some, which can never be hindred, as are those in Heaven, to wit, the Rising and Setting of the Stars, and the like to these; but o∣thers may indeed be empeach'd, as are the most part of human things, and many also of those, which are done in the Air. The first, as being done by Necessity, are call'd Necessary; the others, which may fall one way or other, are call'd Contingent: and they may both thus be describ'd. The Necessary Possible is that, whose con∣trary is Impossible; and the Contingent Possible is that, whose contrary is also Possible. For that the Sun should set, is a thing both Necessary and Possible, for as much as 'tis contrary to this, that the Sun should not set, which is Impossible; but that, when the Sun is set, there should be Rain, or not Rain, both the one and the other, is Possible and Contingent. And then again of things contin∣gent some happen oftner, others rarely and not so often: others fall out equally or indifferently, as well the one way as the other even as it happens. Now 'tis manifest, that those are contrary to one another, to wit, those, which fall
out oftner, to those, which happen but seldom, and, they are both for the most part in Natural things; but that, which happens equally, as much one way as another, is in us. For that under the Dog it should be either hot or cold, the one oftner, the other seldomer, are both things Subject to Nature; but to walk, and not to walk, and all such things, of which both the one and the other are submitted to the Free-will of Man, are said to be in us, and our Election, but rather more generally to be in us. For there are two sorts of this Being in us: the one, which proceeds from some sudden Passion and Motion of the Mind, as from Anger, or Pleasure; the other from the Discourse and Judgment of Reason, which may properly be said to be in our Election. And some Reason there is, that this Possible and Contingent, which is said to be in us, and according to our Free-will, should not be call'd in other Respects the same: for in re∣spect of the Future 'tis stil'd Possible and Contingent; and in respect of the Present 'tis nam'd In us, and in our Free-will. So that these things may thus be defin'd: The Contingent is that, which is both it self, and its contrary Possible: and That, which is in us, is either part of the Contingent, to wit, that, which is presently in doing according to our Will. Thus have we in a manner declar'd, that the Possible in the Order of Na∣ture precedes the Contingent, and that the Contingent subsists before That, which is in us; as also what each of them is, whence they are so nam'd, and what are the Qualities, adjoyn'd or appertaining to them. It now remains, that we treat of Fortune and Casual Adventure, and whatever else is to be considered with them. 'Tis therefore certain, that Fortune is a Cause: Now of Causes there are some, which are Causes of themselves and by themselves, and others by Accident. Thus for Example, the proper Cause by it self of an House or of a Ship is the Art of the Mason, the Car∣penter,
or the Shipwright; but by Accident Musick, Geometry, and whatever else may happen to be join'd with the Art of building Houses or Ships, in respect ei∣ther of the Body, the Soul, or any exterior things. Whence it appears, that the Cause by it self must needs be determinate, certain, and one; but the Causes by Accident are never one and the same, but infinit and undetermin'd: for many, nay infinit, Accidents, wholly different one from the other, may be in one and the same Subject. This Cause therefore by Accident, when it is found in a thing, that is done for some End, and that is in our Free-Will and Election, is then call'd For∣tune: as is the finding a Treasure, while one is digging a Ditch, or making an Hole to plant a Tree; or the doing or suffering some extraordinary thing, whilst one is flying, following, or otherwise walking, or on∣ly turning about, provided it be not for the sake of that, which happens, but for some other Intention. Hence it is, that some of the Ancients have declar'd Fortune to be a Cause unknown, and that cannot be foreseen by the Discourse of human Reason. But according to the Pla∣tonicks, who have approach'd yet nearer to the true Reason of it, 'tis thus defin'd: Fortune is a Cause by Accident in those things, which are done for some End, and which are in our Election: and afterwards they add, that 'tis unforeseen and unknown to the Discourse of human Reason: althô that, which is rare and strange, appears also by the same means to be in this kind of Cause by Accident. But what this is, if 'tis not sufficiently evidenc'd by the Oppositions and Dispu∣tations made against it, will at least most clearly be seen by what is written in Platoes Phaedo, where you will find these words. P H. Have you not heard, how and in what manner the Judgment pass'd? E H. Yes in∣deed: for there came one, and told us of it: at which we wondred very much, that, the Judgment having been given
long before, he dy'd a great while after. And what, ô Phaedo, might be the Cause of it? P H. It was a Fortune, which hapned to him, ô Echecrates: for it chanc'd, that the Day before the Judgment the Prow of the Galley, which the Athenians send every year to the Isle of Delos, was crown'd: In which Discourse it is to be observ'd, that the Ex∣pression, Which hapned to him, is not simply to be under∣stood by Which was done, or Which came to pass, but much rather by which befel thrô the Concurrence of many Causes together, one being done against another. For the Priest crown'd the Ship, and adorn'd it with Gar∣lands for another End and Intention, and not for the sake of Socrates; and the Judges also had for some other Cause condemn'd him. But the Event and Accident was very strange, and of such a Nature, that it might very well seem to have been effected by the Providence either of some human Creature, or rather indeed of some Superior Powers. And so much may suffice as to the Definition of Fortune, by which we have shewn, that it must of necessity subsist with some one of those Contingent things, which are meant for some End: whence also it has itsBeing call'd . Name: and we have farther taught, that there must be first some Sub∣ject of such things, as are in Us and our Free-Will. But Chance or Casual Adventure is of a larger Extent than Fortune: which it comprehends, and also several other things, which may of their own Nature happen sometimes one way, sometimes another. And thus, as it appears by the Derivation of its Name, which is in Greek , Chance is that, which happens instead of another, when that, which is ordinary, happens not, but another in its Place: such as Cold in the Dogdays seems to be; for it is sometimes then cold, and not in vain nor ** Once for all, as that, which is in us, and arbitrary, is a
Part of Contingent, so Fortune is a part of Chance or casual Adventure, and both the two Events are con∣join'd and dependent on the one and the other, to wit, Chance on Contingent, and Fortune on That, which is in us, and arbitrary, and yet not on all, but on what is in our Election, as we have already said. Wherefore Chance is common to things inanimate, as well as to those, which are animated; whereas Fortune is proper to Man only, who has his Actions voluntary. And an Argument of this is, that to be fortunate and to be happy are thought to be one and the same thing: Now Happiness is a certain Well-doing, and Well-doing is proper only to Man, and to him perfect. These then are the things, which are compris'd in Fate: to wit, Contingent, Possible, Election, That, which is in us, For∣tune, Chance, and their Adjuncts, as are the things sig∣nify'd by these Words Perhaps and Peradventure: All which indeed are contain'd in Fate, yet none of them is fatal. It now remains, that we discourse of Divine Provi∣dence, and shew, how it comprehends even Fate it self. The supreme therefore and first Providence is the Under∣standing, or, if you had rather, the Will of the first and soveraign God, doing good to every thing, that is in the World, by which all divine things have univer∣sally and throughout been most excellently and most wisely ordain'd and dispos'd. The second Providence is that of the second Gods, who go thrô the Heaven, by which temporal and mortal things are orderly and regularly generated, and which pertains to the Con∣tinuation and Preservation of every kind. The third may probably be call'd the Providence and Procuration of the Demons, which, being plac'd on the Earth, are the Guardians and Overseers of human Actions. This threefold Providence therefore being seen, of which the first and supreme is chiefly and principally so nam'd,
we shall not be afraid to say, althô we may in this seem to contradict the Sentiments of some Philosophers, that all things are done by Fate and by Providence, but not also by Nature. But some are done according to Providence, and that different, these according to one, those according to another, and some according to Fate: and that Fate is altogether according to Provi∣dence; Providence in no wise according to Fate. But let this Discourse be understood of the first and Su∣preme Providence. Now that, which is done accord∣ing to another, whatever it is, is always posterior to that, according to which it is done: As that, which is according to the Law, is after the Law, and that, which is according to Nature, after Nature: so that, which is according to Fate, is after Fate, and must consequently be more new and modern. Wherefore supreme Providence is the most ancient of all things, except him, whose Will or Understanding it is, to wit, the Sovereign Author, Maker, and Father of all things. Let us therefore, says Timaeus, discourse, for what cause the Creator made and fram'd this Machine of the Ʋniverse. He was good, and in him, that is good, there can never be imprinted or ingendred any Envy against any thing. Being therefore wholly free from this, he desir'd, that all things should, as far as it is possible, resemble himself. He there∣fore, who admits this to have been chiefly the most principal and proper Original of the Generation and Creation of the World, as it has been deliver'd to us by wise Men, receives that, which is most right. For God, who desir'd that all things should be good, and nothing, as far as possibly might be, evil, taking thus all, that was visible, restless as it was, and moving rashly and confusedly, reduc'd it from Disorder to Order, esteeming the one to be altogether better than the o∣ther. For it neither was nor is convenient for him, who is in all perfection good, to make any thing that should not be
very excellent and beautiful. This there∣fore, and all thatfor . I read  follows, even to his Disputation concerning human Souls, is to be understood of the first Provi∣dence, which in the Beginning constituted all things. Afterwards he speaks thus: Having fram'd the Ʋniverse, he ordain'd Souls equal in number to the Stars, and distri∣buted to each of them one, and having set them, as it were in a Chariot, shew'd the Nature of the Ʋniverse, and appoint∣ed them the Laws of Fate, Who then will not believe, that by these Words he expresly and manifestly declares Fate to be, as it were, a Foundation and political Con∣stitution of Laws, fitted for the Souls of Men. Of which he also afterwards renders the Cause. As for the second Providence, he thus in a manner signifies it, saying: Having prescrib'd them all these Laws, to the end that, if there should afterwards happen any fault, he might be exempt from being the Cause of any of their Malice, he dispers'd some of them upon the Earth, some in∣to the Moon, and some into the other Instruments of Time. And after this Dispersion he gave in charge to the young Gods the making of human Bodies, and the making up and ad∣ding, whatever was wanting and deficient in human Soul, and that, after they had perfected, whatever is adherent and consequent to this, they should rule and govern in the best manner, they possibly could, this mortal Creature, to the end it should not be the Cause of its own Evils. For by these Words, that he might be exempt from being the Cause of any of their Malice, he most clearly signifies the Cause of Fate: and the Order and Office of the young Gods manifests the second Providence: and it seems also in some sort to have touch'd a little upon the third, if he therefore establish'd Laws and Ordinances, that he might be exempt from being the Cause of any of their Ma∣lice. For God, who is free from all Malice, has no need of Laws or Fate; but every one of these petty
Gods, drawn by the Providence of him, who has en∣gendred them, performs what belongs to his Office. Now that this is true, and agreeable to the Opinion of Plato, these Words of the Lawgiver, spoken by him in his Book of Laws, seem to me to give sufficient Testimony. If there were any Man so sufficient by Na∣ture, or by divine Fortune so happily engendred and born, that he could comprehend this, he would have no need of Laws, to command him: For there is not any Law or Ordinance, more worthy and powerful than Knowledge; nor is it fit, that he, who is truly and really free by Nature, should be a Subject or Slave to any one, but he ought to command all. I therefore do for mine own part thus understand and interpret this Sentence of Plato: There being a three∣fold Providence; the first, as having engendred Fate, does in some sort comprehend it; the second, having been engendred with Fate, is with it totally compre∣hended and embrac'd by the first; the third, as having been engendred after Fate, is comprehended by it in the same manner as are That, which is in us, and Fortune, as we have already said. For they, whom the Assistance of a Daemons Power does aid, are those, (says Socrates, declaring to Theages, what is the inevitable Ordinance of Adrastea) whom you also mean: for they grew and come forward with speed. In which Words, what he says of a Daemons aiding some is to be ascrib'd to the third Providence; and the growing and coming for∣ward with speed to Fate. In brief 'tis not obscure or doubtful, ut this also is a kind of Fate. And perhaps it may  sound much more probable, that the second Providence is also comprehended under Fate; and in∣deed all things, that are done: since Fate, as a Substance, hus been rightly by us divided into three Parts. And the Discourse of the Chain comprehends the Revolutions of the Heavens in the Numbers and Rank of those things, which happen by Supposition: but
concerning these things I will not much contend, to wit, whether they should be call'd Hapning by Supposition, or rather Conjoyn'd with Fate, the precedent Cause and Commander of Fate being also fatal. Our Opini∣on then, to speak compendiously, is such. But the contrary Sentiment does not only include all things in Fate, but affirms them all to be done by and according to Fate. Now all things accord to the Other, and that which accords to another, 'tis clear, that it is also the o∣ther. According to this Opinion then Contingent is said to be the first; and, That which is in us, the second; and the third Fortune and Chance, and whatever depends on them; Praise, Blame, and whatever depends on them, the fourth; the fifth and last of all may be said to be Prayers to the Gods, with their Services and Cere∣monies. For the rest, as to those, which are call'd I lle and Harvest Arguments, and that, which is nam'd Beside or against Destiny, they are indeed but vain Subtleties and captious Sophisms according to this Discourse. But according to the contrary Opinion, the first and principal Conclusion seems to be, that there is no∣thing done without a Cause, but that all things de∣pend upon antecedent Causes: the second, that the World is govern'd by Nature, and that it conspires, consents, and is compatible with it self: the third seems rather to be Testimonies: of which the first is Divination, approv'd by all sorts of People, as be∣ing truly in God; the second is the Equanimity and Patience of wise Men, who take mildly, and bear pa∣tiently whatever befals, as hapning by divine Ordi∣nance, and as it ought; the third is the Speech, so common and usual in every ones Mouth, to wit, that every Proposition is true or false. Thus have we contracted this Discourse into a small Number of short
Articles, that we might in few words comprehend the whole Matter of Fate. ** Into which a Scrutiny ought to be made, and the Reasons of both Opini∣ons to be weigh'd with a most exact Balance; but we are now coming to discuss Particulars. ***** The Rest is wanting.
Plutarch's Morals. Vol. V. Plutarch's Natural Questions. Translated by R. Brown M. L. WHat is the reason, that Sea-water nourishes not Trees? Is it not for the same reason, that it nourishes not earthly Animals? For Plato, Anaxagoras, and Democritus think, Plants are earthly Animals. Nor, though Sea-water be aliment to marine Plants, as it is to Fishes, will it therefore nourish earthly Plants; since it can neither penetrate the Roots, because of its grossness, nor ascend, by reason of its weight: for this, among many other things, shews Sea-water to be heavy and terrene, be∣cause it more easily bears up Ships and Swimmers. Or is it, because drought is a great Enemy to Trees? And Sea-water is of a drying faculty; upon which ac∣count Salt resists putrefaction, and the Bodies of such as wash in the Sea, are presently dry and rough. Or is it, because Oyl is destructive to earthly Plants, and kills things anointed with it? But Sea-water participates of much fatness: for it burns together with it. Wherefore when Men would quench Fire, we forbid them to throw on Sea-water. Or is it because Sea-water is not fit to
drink, and it is bitter (as Aristotle says) through a mixture of adust Earth? For a Lixivium is made by the falling of Ashes into Sweet-water, and the disso∣lution ejects and corrupts what was good and potable, as in us Men Fevers convert the Humors into Bile. As for what Woods and Plants Men talk of growing in the Red-Sea, they bear no Fruit; but are nourished by Rivers, casting up much Mud: therefore they grow not at any great distance from Land, but very near to it. Why do Trees and Seeds thrive better with Rain than with Watring? Whether is it because (as Laitus thinks) showers parting the Earth by the violence of their fall, make passages, whereby the Water may more easily penetrate to the Root? This cannot be true; but Laitus never considered, that Marsh-Plants, as Cats-tail, Pond∣weeds and Moss neither thrive nor sprout, when the Rains fall not in their season. But it is true, what Aristotle said, Rain-water is new and fresh, that of Lakes old and exolete. And what if this be rather probable than true? For the Waters of Fountains and Rivers are ever fresh, new always arriving: Therefore Heraclitus said well, that no Man could go twice into the same River. And yet these very Waters nourish worse, than Rain-water. But Water from the Heavens is light and aërial, and being mixt with spirit, is the quicker passed and elevated into the Plant, by reason of its tenuity: for Pompholyx is made by mixture of Brass with the Air. That nourishes most, which is subacted by the thing nourished: for this very thing is Con∣coction. On the contrary Inconcoction is, when the Aliment is stronger than to be affected by the thing nourished. Now, thin, simple and isipid things are the most easily altered, of which number is Rain-water, bred in the Air and Wind, which falls pure and sincere. But Fountain-water being assimilated to the
Earth and Places through which it passes, is filled with many qualities, which render it less nutritive, and slower in alteration to the thing nourished. Moreover, that Rain-water is easily alterable, this is an Argument; be∣cause it sooner putrifies than either Spring or River-water. For Concoction seems to be Putrefaction, as Empedocles says, In the Barrel putrified Water becomes Wine. Or, which may most readily be assigned for a Reason, is it because Rain is sweet and mild, when it is presently sent by the Wind? For this reason Cattle drink it most greedily, and Frogs in expectation of it raise their Voice, as if they were calling for Rain to sweeten the Marsh, and to be Sawce to the Water in the Pools. For Aratus makes this a sign of approaching Rain. When wretched Frogs, to Watry Snakes sweet Food, Their fathers Song do croak, and sing in Mud. Why do Herdsmen set Salt before Cattel? Whether (as many think) to nourish them the more, and fatten them the better? For Salt by its acrimony sharpens the Appetite, and by opening the passages brings Meat more easily to digestion. Therefore Apollonius, Hero∣philus his Scholar, would not have lean Persons, and such as did not thrive, be fed with sweet things and Wheat, but ordered them to use Prickles and Salt things for their Food: whose tenuity serving instead of frication, might apply the aliment through the passages of the Body. Or is it for health's sake, tht Men give Sheep Salt to lick, to cut off the redundance of nutriment? For when they are over fat, they grow sick, but Salt wasts and melts the Fat. And this they observe so well, that they can more easily fley them: For the Fat, which agglutinates and fastens the Skin, is made thin and weak by the acrimony. The Blood also of things that lick Salt, is attenuated: nor do things with∣in
the Body stick together, when Salts are mixt with them. Moreover consider this, whether the Cattel grow more fruitful, and more enclined to coition: For Bitches do sooner conceive, when they are fed with Salt Victuals: And Ships which carry Salt, are more peste∣red with Mice, by reason of their frequent coition. Why is the Water of Showers, Which fall in Thun∣der and Lightning, fitter to Water Seeds? For they are therefore called Thunder-showers. Is it, because they contain much Spirit, by reason of their confusion and mixture with the Air? For the Spirit moving the humor, sends it more upwards. Or is it, because Heat fighting against Cold causes Thunder and Lightning? Whence it is, that it Thunders very little in Winter; but in Spring and Autumn very much, because of the inequality of temper, and the heat concocting the hu∣mor, renders it friendly and commodious for Plants. Or does it Thunder and Lighten most in the Spring for the foresaid cause, Seeds having great occasion for the Vernal Rain, before Summer? Therefore that Coun∣try which is best Watred with Rain (as Sicily is) pro∣duces abundance of good Fruit. How comes it to pass, that since there be eight kinds of Tasts, we find the Salt in no Fruit whatever? Indeed at first the Olive is bitter, and the Grape acid; one whereof afterward turns fat, and the other vinous. But the acerb in Dates and the austere in Pomegranates turns sweet: Some Pomegranates and other Fruit have only a simple acid tast. The acrid is frequent in Roots and Seeds. Or is it, because no Salt taste is natural, but arises when the rest are corrupt? Therefore such Plants and Seeds as are nourished, receive no nourishment from Salt; it serves indeed some instead of Sawce, while it abates superfluity. Or, as Men take away saltness and bitingness from the Sea-water by distilling, is salt∣ness so abolished in hot things by heat? Or indeed is
the taste (as Plato says) Water percolated through a Plant? And Sea-water percolated loses its saltness: For it is terrene and of gross Parts. Therefore People that dig near the Sea, happen upon Wells, fit to drink. Several also, that draw the Sea-water into waxen Buc∣keets, receive it sweet and potable, the Salt and earthy part being percolated. Besides, Rest, and a long Cur∣rent makes Sea-water potable, when it contains in it self, and does not let go its earthy parts. And since things are so, it is very probable, either that Plants receive no Saltness extrinsically, or if they do, they put it not forth into Fruit; for things terrene and consisting of gross parts cannot pass, by reason of the straitness of the Passages. Or may saltness be reckoned a sort of bitterness? For so Homer says Out of his Mouth the bitter Brine did flow, And down his body from his head did go. Plato also says, that both these tastes have an abstersive and colliquative faculty; but the Salt does it less, nor is it rough. And the bitter seems to differ from the Salt in abundance of heat: Since the Salt has also a drying quality. What is the reason, that if a Man frequently pass a∣long dewy Trees, those Limbs that touch the Wood are seized with a Leprosy? Whether (as Laitus said) that by the tenuity of the Dew, the Moisture of the Skin is exhausted? Or as Smut and Mildew fall upon moistened Seeds, so when the green and tender Parts on the Superficies are eaten up and colliquated, a certain noxious taint is carried and imparted to the most blood∣less Parts of the Body, and there eats and frets the Superficies? For that by nature there is a corrosive fa∣culty in Dew, sufficiently appears, in that the drinking of it makes People lean: And gross Women gather it
either with Linen or Woollen Clothes, to take down their Flesh. Why in Winter do Ships sail flower in Rivers; but do not so in the Sea? Whether, because the Ri∣ver Air, which is at all times heavy and slow, being in Winter more condens'd by the Cold, does more resist Sailing? Or is it long of the Water rather than the Air? For the piercing Cold makes the Water heavy and thick, as one may perceive in an Hour-glass: For the Water passes more slowly in Winter than in Sum∣mer. Theophrastus talks of a Well about Pangaeum in Thrace, how that a Vessel fill'd with the Water of it weighs twice as much in Winter, as it does in Sum∣mer. Besides, hence it is apparent, that the grossness of the Water makes Ships Sail slower, because in Winter River-Vessels carry greater burthens: For the Water being made more dense and heavy, makes the more renitency. But the Heat hinders the Sea from being condensed. Why, since all other Liquors, upon moving and stir∣ring about, grow cold, does the Sea by being toss'd in Waves grow hot? Whether, that motion expells and dissipates the heat of other Liquors as a thing asci∣titious, and the Winds do rather excite and encrease the innate heat of the Sea. It's transparentness is an Ar∣gument of heat, and so is it's not being condensed, thô it is terrene and heavy. Why in Winter is the Sea least bitter to the taste? For they say; that Dionysius the Hydragogue reptored, that the bitterness of the Sea was not devoid of all sweetness, as receiving so many Rivers into it. But by reason the Sun exhales the sweet and potable Wa∣ter thereof, arising to the top by reason of its levity, and that in Summer, more than in Winter, when it affects the Sea more weakly by reason of the debility of its heat: Then a great deal of sweetness is left, which
tempers and mitigates its excessive, poysonous bitterness. And the same thing befals potable Waters: For in Summer they are worse, the Sun wasting the lightest and sweetest part of them. And a fresh sweetness re∣turns in Winter, of which the Sea must needs partici∣pate, since it moves, and is carried with the Rivers in∣to the Sea. Why do Men pour Sea-water upon Wine? They say the Fisher-men had an Oracle given them, whereby they were bid to dip Bacchus in the Sea, they that live far from the Sea, cast in some Lacynthian Earth tosted. Whether, that heat is good against cold? Or, that it quenches heat, by diluting the Wine and destroying its Strength? Or, that the aqueous and aerial part of Wine (which is therefore prone to mutation) is staid by the throwing in of terrene Parts, whose nature it is to constipate and condense? Moreover, Salts with the Sea-water atenuating and colliquating whatever is Fo∣reign and superfluous, suffer no fetidness or putrefacti∣on to breed. Besides, the gross and terrene Parts being entangled with the heavy, and sinking together, make a Sediment or Lee, and so make the Wine fine. Why are they sicker that sail on the Sea, than they that sail in Fresh Rivers, even in Calm Weather? Of all the Senses, Smelling causes nauseousness the most, and of all the passions of the Mind, Fear. For Men tremble, and shake, and bewray themselves upon ap∣prehension of great danger. They that Sail in a River are troubled with neither of these. And the smell of sweet and potable Water is familiar to all, and the Voyage is without danger. On the Sea an unusual smell is troublesom; and Men are affraid, not knowing what the issue may be. Therefore tranquillity abroad avails not, while an aestuating and disturbed Mind dis∣orders the Body.
Why does pouring Oyl on the Sea make it clear and calm? Is it, for that the Winds slipping the smooth Oyl, have no force, nor cause any Waves? This may be probably said in respect of things external; but they say, that Divers take Oyl in their Mouths, and when they spout it out they have light at the bottom, and it makes the Water transparent, so that the slipping of the Winds will not hold good here for an Argument. Therefore it is to be considered, whether the Sea, which is terrene and uneven, is not compact and made smooth by the dense Oyl: And so the Sea being com∣pact in it self, leaves passages and a pellucidity pene∣trable by the sight. Or whether that the Air, which is naturally mixt with the Sea, is lucid, but by being troubled grows unequal and shady: And so by the Oyl's density smoothing its inequality, the Sea recovers its evenness and pellucidity. Why do Fisher-mens Nets rot more in Winter than in Summer, since other things rot more in Summer? Is not that the cause, which Theophrastus assigns: That heat (to wit) shuns the cold, and is constrained by it on every side: Hence the Waters are hottest in the bot∣tom of the Sea? And so it is on Land: For Springs are hotter in Winter, and then Lakes and Rivers send up most vapors; because the heat is compelled to the bottom by the prevailing cold. Or it may be, Nets do not rot at that time more then at another. For being frozen and dried in the Cold, since they are therefore the more easily broken by the Waves, they are liable to something like putrefaction and rottenness. And they suffer most in the cold (as strained Nerves are aprest to break in such a Season) because than there be most frequent Storms at Sea. Therefore Fisher-men guard their Nets with certain Tinctures, for fear they should break. Otherwise a Net neither tinged nor daubed with any thing might more easily deceive the Fish; since Line is of an Air-color, and is is not easily discerned in the Sea.
Why have the Doriens bad making of their Hay? Is it, because Hay rained upon is never well made? For the Grass is cut down green and not dry, where∣fore it putrefies, when wet with Rain-water. But when before Harvest it rains upon Corn, this is a help to it against the hot South-Winds, which otherwise would not let the grain fill in the Ear; but by their heat would hinder and destroy all coalition, unless by watering the Earth there come a moisture, to cool and moisten the Ear. Why is a fat and deep Soyl Fruitful of Wheat, and a lean of Barley? Is it because a stronger Grain needs more nourishment, and a weaker a light and thin one? Now Barly is weaker and laxer than Wheat, therefore it affords but little nourishment. And, as a further Testimony to this reason, Wheat that is ripe in three Months, grows in dryer ground; because it is juyce∣less, and stands in need of less nourishment, and there∣fore is more easily brought to perfection. Why do Men say, Sow Wheat in Dirt, and Barly in Dust? Is the reason (as we said) because Wheat takes up more nourishment; And Barly cannot bear so much, but is choaked with it? Or does Wheat, because it is hard and lignous, thrive better, when it is softened and loosened in a moist Soyl, and Barly at the first: in a dry, because of its rarity? Or is the one temperament con∣gruous and harmless to Wheat, because it is hot: And the other to Barly, because it is cold? Or are Men af∣fraid to Sow Wheat in a dry Soil, because of the Ants, which presently lye in wait for it; but they cannot so easily deal with Barly, nor carry it away, because it is a lar∣ger grain? Why do Men use the Hairs of Horses rather than Mares for Fishing-lines. Is it, that the Males are stron∣ger in these Parts, as well as in others, then the Females? Or is it, that the Females spoil the Hair of their Tails by bepissing them.
Why is the sight of the Cuttle-fish a sign of a great Storm? Is it, because all Fishes of the soft kind cannot endure cold, by reason of their nakedness and tender∣ness? For they are covered neither with Shell, Skin nor Skale, (thô within they have hard and bony Parts.) Hence the Greeks call them , i. e. Soft Fish. Therefore they easily perceive a Storm coming, since they are so soon affected by the cold. When the Polypus gets to Shore, and embraces the Rocks, it is a sign the Wind is rising; but the Cuttle-Fish jumps up, to shun the cold and the trouble in the bottom of the Sea: For of all soft Fishes she is the tenderest and soonest hurt. Why does the Polypus change colour? Whether, as Theophrastus writes, because it is an Animal by nature time∣rous, and therefore being disturbed it changes colour with the Wind as some Men do (of whom it is said, an ill Man ever changes colour.) But though this may serve as a reason for changing its colour, it will not for the imitation of Colours. For the Polypus does so change its colour, that it is of the colour of every Stone it comes nigh: hence that of Pindar, Mind the colour of the Marine Beast and so converse cunningly in all Cities. And that of Theognis; With th' Polypus in manners be all one, Who, where he lies, is like to every Stone. And they say that such as are excellent at Craftiness and Jugling, have this in their Eye (that they may the bet∣ter cheat them they have to do withal) ever to imitate the Polypus. Some think the Polypus can use her Skin as a Garment, and can put it on or off at pleasure. But if fear occasion this change in the Polypus, is not some thing else more properly the cause? Let us consider what Empedocles say, that Effluvia proceed from all things
what ever. For not only Animals, Plants, the Earth and Sea, but Stones and even Brass and Iron do continually send out many Effluvia. For all things corrupt and smell, because there are always Effluvia. Drawing along or falling occasions Effluvia. Some suppose Embraces, o∣thers Blowes, some Impulses, others Circuitions. But especially about the Sea Rocks, when they are wet and cooled with the Waves: for some are of opinion, that constantly some small particles are washt off, which do not incorporate with other bodies, but either pass by the smaller passages, or pass through the lar∣ger. Now the flesh of the Polypus, as one may judge by the Eye, is hollow, full of Pores and capable of Effluvia. When therefore she is afraid, by changing breath, she changes her self, and by straitning and contracting her Body she encloses the neighbouring Effluvia. And, as a good Token of this Argument, the Polypus cannot imitate the colour of every thing he comes near, nor the Chamaeleon any thing that is white: But each of these Creatures is assimilated only to such things, as to whose Effluvia they have Pores proportionable. What is the reason, that the Tears of Wild-Boars are sweet, and the Tears oF the Hart salt and hurtful? The reason seems to be the Heat and Cold of these Animals: for the Hart is cold, and the Boar is very hot and fiery; therefore he flies from, and this defends him∣self against his pursuers: for when great store of heat comes to the Eyes, (as Homer says, With horrid Bristles, and Eyes darting fire) Tears are sweet. Some are of Empedocles his opinion, who thought that Tears proceed from the disturbance of the Blond as Serum does from the Churning of Milk: since therefore Boar's blood is harsh and black, and Hart's blood thin and watry; it is consentaneous, that the Tears should be such, as the one sheds excited to anger, and the other dejected with fear.
Why do tame Sows farrow often, some at one time and others at another, and the Wild but once a year, and all of them about the same time, whence it is said, The Wild Sow farrowing, that night falls no rain? Is it because through plentiful feeding tame Sows breme oftner? For abundance of nourishment breeds abundance of Seed both in Animals and Plants. Now wild Sows live by their own travel, and that with fear: the tame have always Food enough either by nature, or given them. Or may it not be ascribed to their rest and ex∣ercise? For the tame do rest, and go not far from their Keepers, the wild get to the Mountains and run about; by which means they waste the nutriment, and consume it upon the whole Body. Therefore either through continual converse, or abundance of Seed, or because the Females feed in Herds with the Males, the tame Sows, call to mind coition and stir up lust, as Empedo∣cles talks of Men. But in Wild Sows, which feed a∣part, Desire is cold and dull, for want of love and con∣versation. Or is it true, what Aristotle says, that Homer Called the Wild Boar , because he had but one Stone? For most Boars Spoil their Stones, by rubbing them against Stumps of Trees. Why are the Paws of Bears the sweetest and plea∣santest in Food? Because what Parts of the Body do con∣coct aliment the best, the Flesh of those Parts is sweetest. And that concocts best, which transpires most by moti∣on and exercise. But the Bear uses the fore-Feet most in going and running, and managing of things, as it were with hands. Why are the steps of Wild Beasts most difficultly traced in Spring time? Whether the Dogs as Empedo∣cles says, with Noses find the steps of all Wild Beasts, while they draw in those Effluvia, which the Beasts leave in
the Ground, and the various smells of Plants and Flow∣ers lying over the Foot-steps, do in Spring time obscure and confound them, and put the Dogs to a loss at win∣ding them? Therefore about Aetna in Sicily no Man rears any hunting Dogs; because abundance of wild Marjoram flourishes and grows there the Year round, and the perpetual fragrancy of the place destroys the scent of the wild Beasts. There is also a Tale, how Proserpine, as she was gathering Flowers thereabout, was ravished by Pluto, therefore People revering that place as an Asylum, do not catch any Creature that feeds thereabout. Why are the tracks of wild Beasts worst scented a∣bout the Full-moon? Whether for the foresaid cause? For the Full-moons bring down the Dews. Therefore Alcman calls Dew the Daughter of Jove and Luna in a Verse of his, Fed by the Dew, bred by the Moon and Jove. For Dew is a weak and languid Rain, and there is a little heat in the Moon, which draws from the Earth, as the Sun does: but because it cannot raise it on high, it soon lets it fall. Why does Frost make Hunting difficult? Whether is it, because the wild Beasts leave off going far abroad by reason of the cold, and so leave but few signs of them? Therefore some say, wild Beasts spare the neighbouring places, that they may not be sore put to it by going far abroad in Winter; but may always have Food ready at hand. Or is it because that for Hunting the Track alone is not sufficient, but there must be scent also? And things gently dissolv'd and loosened by heat, afford a smell; but too violent cold binds up the scent and will not let it reach the sense. Therefore they say, that Unguents and Wine smell least in Winter and cold
weather: For the then concrete Air keeps the scent in, and suffers it not to disperse. What is the reason, that Brutes, when they ail any thing, seek and pursue remedies, and are often cured by the use of them? Dogs eat Grass, to make them vomit: Swine seek Crey-fish, because the eating of them cures the Head-ach: The Tortoise, when he has eaten a Viper, feeds on wild Marjoram: They say, when a Bear has surfeited himself, and his Stomach grows nauseous, he licks up Ants, and by devouring them he is cured. These Creatures know such things neither by experience nor by chance. Whether therefore, as Wax draws the Bee, and carcases the Vulture afar off by the scent; do Crey-fish so draw Swine, wild Mar∣joram the Tortoise, and Ants the Bear, by smells and effluvia accommodate to their nature, they being promp∣ted altogether by Sense, without any assistance from Reason? Or do not the Temperaments of Bodies create Appetites in Animals, which sometimes create Diseases, producing divers acrimonies, sweetnesses, and other un∣usual and absurd qualities, the humors being altered; as is plain in Women with Child, who eat Stones and Earth? therefore skilful Physicians take their Prog∣nostick of recovery or death from the Appetites of the Sick: For Mnasitheus the Physician says, that in the beginning of a Disease of the Lungs, he that craves Onyons, recovers; and he that craves Figs, dies: be∣cause Appetites follow the Temperament, and the Tem∣perament follows Diseases. It is therefore probable, that Beasts, which fall not into mortal Diseases, have such a disposition and temper, that by following their temper they light on their remedies. Why does Must, if the Vessel stand in the Cold, con∣tinue long sweet? Is it because Concoction is the chang∣ing of that which is sweet into Wine? But Cold hinders Concoction, because it is caused by Heat. Or on the
contrary, the proper taste of the Grape is sweet, and then it is said to be ripe, when the sweetness is equally diffused all over it: But Cold, not suffering the Heat of the Grape to exhale, and keeping it in, conserveth the sweeness of the Grape. And this is the reason, that in a rainy Vintage, Must ferments but little: for fer∣mentation proceeds from Heat, which the Cold does check. Why, of all wild Beasts, does not the Boar bite the Toil? Is it, because his Teeth stand so far within his Head, that he cannot well come at the Thread? For his Lips, by reason of their thickness and largeness meet close before. Or does he rather rely on his strength, and so rends the Toyls with his Feet? Or does he both use his Feet and Mouth at the same time, with them tearing the Toil, and with this defending himself against the Hunters? His chief refuge is rowl∣ing and wallowing, therefore rather than stand gnaw∣ing the Toyl, he rowls often about, and so clears him∣self, having no occasion for his Teeth. What is the reason, that we admire hot Waters (i. e. baths) and not cold, since it is plain, that Cold is as much the cause of one sort, as Heat is of the o∣other? It is not (as some are of Opinion) that Heat is a Quality, and Cold only a privation of that Quality, and so that an Entity is a Cause, but a Non-entity no Cause. But we do it, because Nature has attributed Admiration to what is rare, and she puts Men upon enquiry how any thing comes to pass, that seldom hap∣pens. You see the high and vast Sky, which with a gentle turn encompasses the Earth, how many Specta∣cles it astords by Night, and what Beauty by Day; the Rain-bow, the pleasant Pictures of the Clouds, and the darting of Lightning are all matter of ornament to it and of admiration to us.
Why are rank Vines fruitless, and fat Goats less apt to procreate, nay scarce able to use Coition, by reason of their fatness? Seed is the Superfluity of the Aliment, which is allotted to the Body: now, when either an Animal or a Plant is of a very strong Con∣stitution and grows fat, it is a sign, that all the Nourish∣ment is spent within, and that there is little or no Ex∣crement; and so the thing is left barren. Why does the Vine irrigated with Wine dy, espe∣cially since Wine comes from the Vine; Is it as baldness happens to great Wine-bibbers, the heat of the Wine evaporating the moisture? It may be when the Vine is outwardly irrigated with Wine, it is as Fire to the Vine, and destroys the nutritive faculty. Or be∣cause Wine is obstructive, it gets into the Roots, stops the passages, and so hinders any moisture from coming to the Plant, to make it grow and thrive. Or, it may seem contrary to nature, that that should return into the vine which came out of it: For whatsoever moisture comes from Plants, it can neither nourish nor assimilate, nor be a part of a Plant.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Concerning the first Principle of Cold. Translated out of the Greek by F. Fetherston, D. D. IS there then, Phavorinus any First or Principal Pow∣er or Existence of Cold, as Fire is the Principle of Heat, by the presence and imparting of which all other Things of the same Nature become cold? Or rather is not cold, the Privation of Heat, as they say, Darkness is the Privation of Light, and Rest the Privation of Motion? In regard that Cold seems to be firm and stable, and Heat always in Motion; and for that the Refrigeration of hot things is not caus'd by the Presence of any active Power, but by the Departure of the Heat. For we find the Heat go off in great quan∣tity, and then that which remains grows cold. Thus the Vapor which boyling Water sends forth, ceases also when the Heat is gone. Therefore Refrigeration ex∣pelling the Heat, diminishes the Quantity, while no∣thing supplies the Place of it. Or what if any Person should question this way of Arguing, as being that which would abolish several manifest Faculties, as being neither Qualities nor Habits, but the Privations of Ha∣bits and Qualities? So to make Ponderosity the Priva∣tion
of Levity; Hardness the Privation of Softness; Black, of White, Bitter of Sweetness? Or else for this Reason, because all Privation is a thing altogether slug∣gish and without Action, as Blindness, Deafness, Silence, and Death: for they are the Departures of Forms, and the utter Defacings of Substances, not Natures, nei∣ther Substances of themselves. But Cold, where-ever it resides, causes no less Passiveness and Alteration in Bo∣dies than Heat. For many things are congeal'd by Cold, many things thereby condens'd. So that what∣ever is solid in it, and difficult to be mov'd, cannot be said to be sluggish and void of Action, but firm and ponderous, as being supported by its own Strength, which is endu'd with a Power to preserve it in its pro∣per Station. Wherefore Privation is the Deficiency and Departure of the opposite Power, but many things are subject to be cold, though abounding with Heat within themselves. And there are some things which Cold the more condenses, and consolidates the Hotter they are, as Iron quench'd in Water. The Stoicks also affirm, that the Spirit which is in the Bodies of Infants, is quickned by Refrigeration, and changing the Nature of it, turns to a Soul. But this is a thing much to be disputed. Neither is it rational to believe, that Cold, which is the productive Agent in many other Things, can be a Privation: besides, that no Privation is capa∣ble of more and less. Neither can any Man say, a∣mong those that cannot see, that one is more blind then another; or among those that cannot speak, that one is more silent then another; or that any thing is more dead then another, among those things that never had Life. But in cold things, there is Excess and Diminuti∣on to several degrees: little, and not very little, and in a Word, there is both Intense and Remiss, as well as in hot things. Now then, because the Matter suffers in some things more violently, in others more languidly,
therefore some things are hotter, somethings colder than others, according to the Nature of the Matter: for there is no Mixture of Habit with Privation. Neither does any Power admit of Privation opposite to it, nor associates with it in the same Subject, but withstands it altogether. Some things also continue hot till they come to be mixt with cold things, as Black with White, Hea∣vy with Light, and Sowr with Sweet; by this Com∣munity and Harmony of Colours, Sounds, Medica∣ments and Sawces, affording several Tastes and Plea∣sures grateful to the Sences. But the Opposition of Pri∣vation and Habit, is an Antipathy never to be reconcil'd; the Being of the one enforcing the Destruction of the other. Which Destruction, if it fall out seasonably, according to the Opposition of contrary Powers, many Arts make use of, but chiefly Nature, and that too, a∣mong other Occasions, in the Alterations of the Air, and in all other things, of which the Deity being the Adorner and Dispenser, obtains the Attribute of Harmonical and Musical: not that those Attributes are given him for the Disposal of Deep and Shrill, Black, and White, so as to make them agree together; but for his governing in the World the Sympathies and Antipathies of Cold and Heat in such a manner as to unite, and separate again, and for reducing both to a decent Order, by taking that which we call the Overmuch from both. Then again, we find that there is the same Sence and Feeling of Cold as of Heat. On the other side, Privation is nei∣ther to be seen, heard, or felt, neither is it known to any of the other Sences. For the Object of Sence is Sub∣stance: but where no Substance appears, there we un∣derstand Privation to be. Which is a Negation of Sub∣stance, as Blindness of Sight; Silence, of Voice, and Vacuity, of Corporeal Substance. For there is no Sence or Perception of Vacuity by Feeling; but where there is no Body to be felt, there a Vacuity is imply'd:
neither do we hear Silence; but where we do not hear any thing at all, there we imply Silence. Therefore if Cold were a Privation of Hot, there would be no be∣ing sensible of Cold, but only where Hot ceas'd to be, there Cold would be imply'd. But in regard that as Heat is perceptible by the Heat and laxative Softness of the Flesh, so Cold is no less perceptible by the Contracti∣on and Condensation of it; it is from thence apparent, that there is some peculiar Original and Fountain of Cold, as well as Hot, consequently the Privation of both Kinds is something single, and simply particular; but in Substances there are several Differences and Effi∣cacies. For Silence is a thing but of one sort; but of Sounds there are great Variety, sometimes molesting, sometimes delightful to the Sence. There are also the same Differences in Colours and Figures, which vary as they occur to the Sences. But that which is not to be felt, is without Colour and void of Quality, can never be distinguished, but is like it self. Is Cold therefore to be numbred among those Privations that never act upon passive Qualities? Rather the contrary, in regard that Pleasures very great and beneficial to our Bodies, arise from cold things, as no less terrible Mischiefs, Pains and Stupefactions on the other side; which the Heat does not always avoid and give way to, but many times in∣clos'd within the Body, withstands and opposes. Which Contention of theirs is call'd Quivering and Shaking, at what time, if the Cold overcome the Heat, thence pro∣ceeds Numness and Stiffness of the Limbs: but if the Cold be vanquish'd by the Heat, there follows a pleasing warmth and opening of the Skin, which Homer expres∣ses by the Word , in Latin Calefacere, whence Calefaction or gentle Heating. These things are past dispute, and chiefly by these passive Qualities it is, that we find Cold to be opposite to Heat, as Substance to Substance, or passive Quality to passive Quality, not as
Negation or Privation: neither is it the Destruction or Abolishing of Hot, but a Kind of Nature and Power tending to its Destruction. Otherwise we should ex∣empt the Winter out of the Seasons, and the North Winds out of the Number of the Winds, as being Pri∣vations of the warmer Seasons, and the Southern Gales not having any proper Original. Now in regard there are four first Bodies in the Universe, which by reason of their Number, their being uncompounded, and their Efficacy are allow'd for the most part to be the Prin∣ciples and Beginnings of all other, that is to say, Fire and Water, Air and Earth; is there not the same Necessity that there should be as many first and uncom∣pounded qualities? And what are they but Heat and Cold, Drought and Moisture, by Vertue of which it comes to pass that all the Principles act and suffer? Thus, as there are in Grammar Abbreviations and Extensions of Rudiments; In Musick, deep and acute Sounds, tho not one of them the Privation of the other, we must leave the dry oppos'd to the moist Principles, and the Hot to the Moist; if we intend to have the Effects answerable to Reason and what is visible in Nature. Unless, as it was the Opinion of the ancient Anaximenes, we will not allow either Cold or Hot to be in Substance, but only to be common passive Qualities accompanying the Altera∣tions of the Matter. For he affirms the Contraction and Condensation of the Matter to be Cold: but the Ra∣rification and Laxation of it (for by that Word he calls it) to be Hot. Whence it may not be improperly said, that a Man breaths Hot and Cold at once. For the Breath grows Cold being compress'd and thicken'd by the Lips; but coming out of the open Mouth, it is hot, as being rarify'd by that Emission. But for this Aristotle con∣vinces the sme Person of Ignorance: for that when we blow with the Mouth open, we blow hot from our own Bo∣dies; but when we blow cold, we do not breath forth the
Air From our selves, but the Air that is before our Mouths is thrust forward, and lights upon what is next it. But if we must grant that both Heat and Cold are Substances, let us proceed a little farther in our Discourse, and enquire what sort of Substances they are, and what is the first Principle and Nature of them. They then who affirming that there are certain Tri∣angular Figures of equal sides in our Body, tell us also that Shuddering, Trembling and Quivering, and what∣ever else we suffer of the same Nature, proceed from the Roughness of those Figures, who if they mistake in the Parts, nevertheless derive the Beginning from whence they ought. For we ought to begin the Question, as from Vesta, from the Substance of all things. By which it chiefly appears, wherein a Philosopher differs from a Physician, a Husband man, or a Piper. For it is suffi∣cient for them to contemplate the remote Causes. For if their nearest Consideration of the Cause of the Affection go no farther, then to find, that the Cause of a Fever is intensness of Heat, or the lighting of some Humor where it ought not to be; that the Cause of Blasting is the scorching Heat of the Sun after Rain; and that the Cause why a Pipe falls, is the Contraction of the Pores of the Wood; it is enough for the Artist to know in re∣ference to his Business. But when a Philosopher for Contemplations Sake, scrutinizes into the Truth, the Knowledge of remote Causes is not the End, but the Beginning of his Proceeding in search of the first and ultimate Causes. Wherefore Ploto and Democritus enquiring after the Cause of Heat and Gravity, did not stop at the Consideration of Earth and Fire, but bring∣ing things perceptible to Sence, to Beginnings only in∣telligible by the Mind, they went on even h the smallest, as it were Seeds of what they sought for. But it is much the better way for us in the first place to move forward upon those things which are perceptible to Sence, where∣in
Empedocles, Strato, and the Stoicks plac'd the Sub∣stances of active Qualities. The Stoicks ascribing Pri∣mitive Cold to the Air, Empedocles and Strato to the Wa∣ter; and perhaps there might be some Body else who might affirm the Earth to be the Substance of Cold. But first let us consider the Opinions of those already nam'd. Seeing then that Fire is both hot and bright, there∣fore there must be something opposite to Fire which is Cold and Dark: for as Dark is opposite to Light, so is Cold to Hot: besides, that as Dark confounds the Sight, so Cold confounds the Feeling. But Heat diffuses the Sence of Feeling, as Light diffuses the Sence of Seeing. Therefore that which is first dark in Nature, is first cold. Now that the Air is first dark, was not unknown to the Poets: for that they call the Air Darkness. The thicken'd Air the Fleet with Darkness cover'd, Nor could the moon-light be from heav'n discover'd. And again, Then Darkness scatter'd and the Fog dispell'd, The Sun brake forth, and all, the Fight beheld. They also call the Air, when it is without Light Cnephas, Darkness or Twi-light, as being as it were , void or empty of Light. The Words also  and , the one signifying a Fog, and the other a Mist, and whatever else restrains the Perception of Light from the Sence, are but Distinctions of the Air; insomuch that the same part of it which is invisible, and without Colour, is call'd Hades and Acheron. So that as the Air grows dark when the Splendor of it fails, in like manner, when Heat fails, that which is left is no more then cold Air, which by reason of its Coldness is call'd Tartarus.
And this Hesiod makes manifest, when he calls it , or Ayrie Tartarus; and when a Man quakes and shivers for Cold, he is said to Tartarize. And so much for this. But in regard Corruption is the Alteration of those things that are corrupted into that which is contrary to every one of them, let us consider whether it be a true Saying, The Death of Fire is the Generation of Air: For Fire dyes like a living Creature, being quench'd by force, or going out of its own accord. Now Quench∣ing makes the Alteration of it into Air more conspicu∣ous: for Smoak is a sort of Air, or according to Pindar, a fuliginous Vapor of the Air, in opposition to Smoak, otherwise call'd Steam or Exhalation. On the other side, when Fire goes out for want of Fuel, as in Candles, you shall observe a thick and cloudy Air ascending from the Top of them. Moreover, the Vapor steaming from our Bodies, upon the pouring of cold Water after hot Bathing, or Sweating, sufficiently declares the Alterati∣on of extinguish'd Heat into Air, as being naturally op∣posite to Air; whence it follows, that the Air was at first dark and cold. Then again, Congelation, which is the most forcible and violent of all things that befal our Bodies, by reason of Cold, is the Passiveness of Water, but the Action of Air. For Water of it self is easily diffus'd, loose in its Parts, and not readily congeal'd to∣gether; but it is thicken'd and compress'd by the Air, by reason of the Coldness of it. Which is the Reason of the Proverb, But if the Southern Wind provoke the North, Snow streight will cover all the Earth. For the Southern Wind preparing the Moisture for Matter, presently the North Wind receives and con∣geals it. And this is manifest from the Consideration of
Snow, which 'ere it falls, you shall observe a thin and sharp cold Air breathing before it. Aristotle also tells us, that Whetstones of Lead, will melt and run in the Winter through excess of Freezing Cold, meerly upon the setting of the Water near them: for 'tis probable that the Air compresses and gripes the Bodies so close together, that at length it breaks and crumbles them in pieces. And therefore Water drawn from a Fountain soonest congeals: for the More of Cold in the Air over∣comes the Less of Cold in the Water. Thus if a Man takes cold Water out of a Well, and puts it into a Ves∣sel, and then lets the Vessel down again into the Well, so that it may not touch the Water, but hang for some time in the Air, the Water will be much colder. Whence it is apparent, that the Coldness of the Water, is not the first Cause of Coldness, but the Coldness of the Air. For you do not find that any of your great Rivers are ever throughly frozen, by reason of their Depth. For the Air does not pierce through the Whole, only so much as it can seize and embrace with its cold Quality, so much generally freezes and no more. Therefore the Barbarians never cross over frozen Rivers, till they have sent a Fox before to try the Depth of the Ice. For if the Ice be not very thick, but only superficial, the Fox perceiving it by the Noise of the Water flowing under∣neath, returns. And some there are that melt the Ice with hot Water, to make way for their Lines, when they go to catch Fish in Winter. So that nothing suf∣fers from Cold in the Depth of the Water. Neverthe∣less, so great has been the Alteration of the upper Parts of the Water by Congelation, that several Vessels riding in the Stream, have been bruis'd and broken by the for∣cible Compressure and Griping of the Congelation; as we have heard from them who lately had their Winter Quarters with Caesar upon the Danaw.
And indeed what happens to our selves is sufficient to demonstrate the Truth of this. For after hot Bath∣ings and Sweatings we are most sensible of Cold, at what time our Bodies being open, and the Skin relax'd, we give a freer Entrance to the Cold, together with the Ambient Air. And after the very same manner the Water it self suffers. For it sooner freezes if it be first heated, as being thereby rendred more easie for the Air to work upon. And therefore they who lade out fcalding Water, and let it fall again from a good height in the Air, do it to no other purpose then to mix it with a great deal of Air. And therefore Favorinus, the Ar∣guments that attribute the first Power of Cold to the Air are grounded upon these Probabilities: those that allow it to Water, lean upon Principles of the same Nature. And this was intimated by Empedocles, where he says, Behold the Sun, how warm he is, And brightly shining every where; But Rain and Tempests Black and Dark With Horror fill the Air. And thus opposing Heat to Cold, and Dark to Bright, he gives us to understand, that Black and Cold are both of the same Substance, as also are Bright and Hot. Now that Black is proper to the Water and not to the Air, Sence it self bears witness: Nothing being darkned by the Air, all things being clouded and blacken'd by Water. So that if you throw the whitest Wooll that is, or a white Garment into the Water, it comes out black, and so remains, till the Moisture be dry'd up again by the Heat, or that it be squeez'd forth by Presses or Weights. Also when the ground is water'd, the Places that re∣ceive the Drops grow black, the rest retaining their former Colour. And therefore the deepest Waters, by reason of their Quantity always appear blackest, but the
Parts, which are next the Air, afford a lovely and smiling Brightness. But of all Liquids, Oyl is the most transpa∣rent, because of the great Quantity of Air that is in it. And of this, the Lightness of it is an unquestionable Proof; the reason why it swims above all things, as carry'd upward by the Air. Being pour'd forth upon the Waves it will cause Calmness upon the Sea, not be∣cause it is so slippery that the Winds can have no Pow∣er over it, as Aristotle thought, but because the Waves will fall and sink when smitten by any moist Body. And this is also peculiar to Oyl, that it shines and shews it self transparent at the Bottom of the Water, while the Watry Humors are dispiers'd by the Air. For being spurted out of the Mouth into the Sea, not only by those that take Spunges in the Night upon the Superfi∣cies of the Water, but also by those that dive for them to the bottom of the Sea, it will cast a Light in the Water. Water therefore has more of Blackness then the Air, but less of Cold. Oyl therefore partaking more of Air, then most liquid things, is least cold, nor will it easily or suddainly freeze: for the Air which is mixt with it will not suffer the Congelation to grow hard. And therefore, as for Needles, Steel Buckles, and such sort of small Iron and Steel Wares, they never quench them in Water but in Oyl, fearing least the Over-coldness of the Water should make them too brittle. And indeed the Truth is more truly enquir'd into from the Conside∣ration of these Experiments, then those of Colours. For Hayl, Snow and Ice, as they are most transparent, so they are most cold; and Pitch, as it is hotter, so it is blacker and darker then Honey. Which makes me ad∣mire at those who affirm the Air to be cold, because it is dark and obscure, unless it be because they find others affirming it to be hot, because it is light. For Dark is not so proper and familiar to Cold, as Heavy and Stable. For many things that are void of Heat, partake of
Splendor and Light, but there is nothing cold that is light, nimble or apt to ascend upward. Even the Clouds themselves while they preserve the Nature of Air, towre a loft in the Sky; but changing into moi∣sture they presently fall down and having admitted coldness, they loose their lightness as well as their heat. And so on the other side, having regain'd their heat, they again return to Motion, their Substance being carry'd upward, as soon as it is chang'd into Air. Neither is the Argument produc'd from Corruption true. For nothing that perishes is corrupted into what is opposite, but by what is opposite to it: as Fire extinguish'd by Water changes into Air. And therefore Eschylus spake not so much like a Tragoedian, as a Philosopher when he said, The Water curb, that Punishment of Fire. In like manner Homer oppos'd in Battle Vulcan to the River, and Apollo to Neptune more like a Philosopher then a Poet or Mythologist. And Archilochus spoke not amiss of a Woman whose Thoughts were contrary to her Words, when he said, She, weaving suttle Trains and slye Fegaries, Fire in one hand, in th' other Water carry's. Among the Persians there were several Customs of Sup∣plication of which the chiefest, and that which would admit of no Refusal was, when the Suppliant taking fire in his hand, and entring into a River, threatned if his Supplication were deny'd, to throw the Fire into the Water. But tho his suite were granted him, yet he was punish'd for Threatning, as being against the Law, and contrary Nature. And this is a Vulgar Pro∣verb
in every body's Mouth, to mix fire with water, spoken of those that would attempt Impossibilities: to shew that Water is an Enemy to Fire, and being ex∣tinguish'd thereby, is destroy'd and punish'd by it; not by the Air, which upon the change and destruction of it receives and entertains the substance of it. For if that into which the thing destroy'd be contrary to it, much more does Fire seem contrary to Air then Wa∣ter. For Air changes into Water by Condensation: but into Fire, by dissipation: as on the other side Wa∣ter is destroy'd into Air by Seperation; into Earth, by Condensation. Which in my Opinion happens by reason of the Propriety and near Affinity between both, not from any thing of Contrariety and Hostili∣ty one to another. Others there are that which way soe∣ver they maintain it, spoil the Argument. For it is most irrational to say that Water is congeal'd by the Air, when they never saw the Air congeal'd in their Lives. For Clouds, Fogs and Mists are no Congelations, but Thicknings and Condensations of the Air, moist and full of Vapors: but a dry Air void of moisture never undergoes refrigeration to such a change. For there are some Mountains that never admit of a Cloud, nor Dew, nor Mist, their tops being so high, as to reach into an Air that is pure and void of moisture. Whence it is manifest, that it is the Condensation and Con∣sistency below which contribute that cold and moisture to the Air, which is mix'd with it. Now that great Rivers never freeze downward is but consentaneous to reason. For those Parts which are frozen above transmit no Exhalation outward: for that being penn'd up within, and forc'd downward, it affords heat to the moisture at the bottom. A clear demonstration of which is this, that when the Ice is dissolv'd you may observe a steam arising out of the Water upwards in a very great quantity. And there∣fore
the Bodies of living Creatures are warmest within▪ in the Winter, for that the heat is driven inward by the ambient Cold. Now those upward exhalations and ascensions of the Vapors, not only deprive the Wa∣ters of their heat but of their coolness: and therefore they that vehemently desire their drink to be cold, ne∣ver move the Snow nor the moisture that is press'd out of it: for Motion would deprive them both of the Vertue which is requir'd from them. Now that this Vertue is not the Vertue of Air but of Water, a Man may hence collect by reasoning. First it is not probable that the Air which is next the Sky, and touching the fiery Substance is also touch'd by it, should be endu'd with a contrary Vertue: for otherwise it is not possible that the Extremities of the one should touch and be contiguous to the extremities of the other. Nor is it agreeable to reason that Na∣ture should constitute that which is corrupted next in order to that which corrupts, as if she were not the Author of Community and Harmony, but of Combat and Contention. For she does not make use of things not pure and without mixture, nor of things dissimilar, but such as have alternately a certain Disposition and Order not to advance Privation, but apt to communi∣cate and co-operate one with another by ordain'd means. And this is the nature of the Air being expanded un∣der the Fire above the Water, contingent and adhering to both, neither hot in it self nor cold, but containing an intermixture and communion of hot and cold, harm∣lesly intermix'd in her self, and lightly cherishing the contrary Extremities. Therefore the Air is of an e∣qual temper in all places; but Winter is not in all Places alike, nor equally cold, but some parts of the habitable World are cold and moist, others hot and dry; not by chance, but because there is but one Sub∣stance of heat and cold. For the greatest part of Af∣rica
is hot and without Water. But they that have travell'd Scythia, Thrace, and the Pontic Regions re∣port them to be full of vast Lakes, and large and deep Rivers. And as for those Regions that lye between both, those parts that joyn upon Lakes and Mar∣shes are most cold by reason of the Exhalations from the Water. Posidonius therefore affirming the moistness of the Air to be the cause of Cold, has no way disturb'd the probability of our Argument, but rather added to the strength of it, for the Air would not always be the colder, the fresher it is, unless Cold had its Original from Moisture. And therefore Homer much more truly shews us the Fountain of Cold, when he says, A cool Refreshment frm the River breath'd. Then again it many times happens that our Sence de∣ceives us. So that when we feel cold Garments or cold Wool, we believe we feel them to be moist, by reason of the Substance which is common to both, and of their Natures which are coherent and familiar one with another. But in Climates where the Cold is ex∣tream, it oft-times breaks and cracks both Pots and Vessels whether made of Earth or Brass; none empty, but all full; the cold giving force and might to the Liquor within: which made Theophrastus say, that the Air breaks those Vessels making use of the cold as of a Hammer; whther more eloquently or more truly spoken, I leave you to judge. For then Vessels full of Pitch or Milk should be more subject to be broken by the Air. But Water seems to be cold of it self, and that pri∣mitively too: for in respect of the coldness of it, it is opposite to the heat of the Fire, as to drought in re∣spect of it's moisture, and to ponderosity in regard of
the lightness of it. Lastly Fire is altogether of a dissi∣pating and dividing Nature: Water, of a Nature to fasten and contain, holding and joyning together by vertue of its moisture. Which was the reason why Empedocles call'd Fire a Pernicious Contention, but Wa∣ter a Vehement Friendship. For the Nourishment of Fire is that which changes into Fire, and it changes that which is as it were of Kin and familiar to it. What is contrary to it as Water, cannot be chang'd by it, or at least with great difficulty. True it is, that as for it self, as I may so say, it cannot be burnt, but as for green Wood and wet Straw it overcomes them with much strugling, while the heat and cold contending to∣gether by reason of their moisture, and their natural Antipathy produces only a dull flame, clouded with smoak, that makes little progress upon the Materials. Compare these Arguments with theirs and consider 'em well. But Chrysippus beleiving the Air to be the primitive Cold, because it is dark, makes mention only of those that say the Water lyes at farther distance from the Sky then the Air; and being desirous to give some Answer to them, If so, says he, we may as well af∣firm the Earth to be primitively cold, because it is the farthest distant from the Sky; rejecting that as alto∣gether improbable and absurd. But for my part I am of Opinion that there might be many probable and rational Arguments brought for the Earth, beginning with that which Chrysippus chiefly makes use of for the Air. Which is thus? First, that it is dark. For if he assuming these two Contrarieties and Faculties, believes that the one follows the other of necessity, then there might be produc'd a thousand Oppositions and Repug∣nances of the Earth in respect of the Sky, which would of necessity follow upon this which we have mention'd. For it is not to be only oppos'd as heavy to Light, or as
that which tends downward to that which moves up∣ward, or as slow and stable to swift and full of Mo∣tion; but as that which is heaviest to that which is lightest; that which is thickest to that which is most thin; or lastly as that which is immoveable of it self, to that which moves spontaneously, and as possessing the mid∣dle space, to that which is in a perpetual circular Mo∣tion. Would it not be absurd to aver that the opposition of heat to cold is accompany'd with so many such re∣markable Contrarieties? But Fire is bright, the Earth is dark; nay the very darkest and most void of Light of all things. The Air first of all participates of Light, is soonest alter'd, and being replenish'd with radiancy disfuses the Splendor of it far and near, and shews it self a vast Body of Light. For the Sun rising, as one of the Dithyrambie Authors writes, —Presently fill'd The spacious House of the Air-prancing winds. From thence the descending Air disposes a part of her brightness to the Sea and standing Lakes, and the hidden depths of profound Rivers laugh and smile so far as the Air penetrates into them. Only the Earth of all other Bodies remains without light and im∣penetrable to the Beams of the Sun and Moon. But it is cherish'd and comforted by them, and suffers a small part of it to be warm'd and foster'd by entrance of the heat. But the solidness of it will not admit the brightness of Light, only the Surface of it is en∣lighten'd: But the innermost parts of it are call'd by the Names of Darkness, Chaos, and Hades: and Erebus is nothing else but that same perpetual darkness and horror in the Body of the Earth: besides that the My∣thologists tell us that Night was the Daughter of the Earth. The Mathematicians also shew us the Shadow
of the Earth eclipsing the Body of the Sun. For the Air is fill'd with darkness by the Earth, as with Light by the Sun: and that part of the Air which is most void of Light, is that same length of the Night which is caus'd by the Shadow of the Earth. And therefore both Men and Beasts make use of the exterior part of the Air and ramble in the dark, guided only by some footsteps of Light and certain Effluxes of a dim twinkling that are scatter'd through it: but he that keeps house and shuts himself up in his Chamber, as being encompass'd by the Earth, remains altogether blind and without Light. Also the Hides and Horns of Beasts will not admit of Light by reason of their Solidness; but being burnt and shav'd they become transparent, the Air being intermix'd with them. More∣over I am of Opinion that the Earth is every where by the Poets said to be black, by reason of the darkness of it, and want of Light. So that the Antithesis of Light and Darkness is much more remarkable in reference to the Earth, then in respect of the Air. But this is nothing to the Question. For we have shewn that there are many cold things which are bright and transparent, and many hot things which are ob∣scure and dark. But Ponderosity, Stability, Density, and Immutability are Qualities more properly belong∣ing to Cold, of none of which the Air partakes, but of all which the Earth has a far greater share then the Water. And yet in all these things Cold by the Judg∣ment of Sense it self, appears to be hard, to cause hard∣ness, and to make resistance. For Theophrastus tells us of Fish that have been frozen by extremity of Cold, when they have chanced to bounce ashoar; and that their Bodies have been broken and crumbled to peices like a Vessel of Glass or Potters Clay.
You your self have heard at Delphos, how that cer∣tain Persons ascending to the Top of Parnassus to suc∣cor the Thyades that were overtaken with a violent Storm of Wind and Hail, their Coats were frozen so hard and into a substance so like Wood, that being spread upon the ground they broke and crumbled to peices. It also stiffens the Nerves and deprives the Tongue of Motion, congealing the moist and softer parts of the Body: which being obvious to sight, let us thus consider the Effect. Every Faculty, where-ever it prevails, changes into it self whatever it overcomes. Thus whatever is over∣come by heat, is set on fire: that which is vanquish'd by Wind, is chang'd into Air. That which falls into Water, becomes well moisten'd, unless quickly sav'd. Of necessity therefore those things which are violently affected by Cold, must be chang'd into the primi∣tive Cold. For Freezing is an excess of Refrige∣ration; which Congelation ends in Alteration and Putrefaction, when the Cold prevailing every way, congeales the liquid Substance, and presses forth the Heat: so that the bottom of the Earth is, as it were, a kind of Congelation, and altogether Ice (for there the Cold inhabits simple and unmixt and remov'd hard and rigid at the greatest distance from the Sky) but as for those things which are conspicuous as Rocks and Precipices, Empedocles believes them to be thrust forth and supported by the fire that burns in the Bottom of the Earth. Which appears the more, in regard that whereever the Heat is press'd forth and vanishes away, all those things are congeal'd by the Cold; and there∣fore Congelations are call'd , Coagmentations or fastnings together: and the extremeties of many things where Heat fails growing black, make them look like brands when the fire is out. For Cold congeals some
things more some things less; more especially such things wherein it is primitively existent. For as if it be the Nature of Hot to render Light, that which is hottest is lightest; if of moist to soften, that which is moistest is softest; so if it be the nature of Cold to congeal, of necessity that which is coldest must be most congeal'd, that is to say the Earth: and that which is most cold must be that which is by nature and primitively cold: which is no more then what is apparent to Sense. For Mud is colder then Water, and Earth being thrown upon Fire puts it out. Your Smiths also when their Iron is melted and red hot, strew upon it the dust of Marble, to cool it and stop the running of it too fluidly. Dust also cools the Bodies of the Wrestlers, and dries up their sweat. To go no farther, what means our own yearly Practice to alter our Lodgings and Habitation▪ while we remove in the Winter so far as we can into the upper parts of our Buildings, but in the Summer descending against and seeking convenient refuge in the lower Edifices, and sometimes enjoying our selves under ground in the very Arms of the Earth? Do we not do it, as being guided by our Senses for coolness sake to the Earth, and thereby acknowledging that to be the seat of primitive Cold. And certainly our co∣veting to live near the Sea in Winter, may be thought to be a kind of flight from the Earth of those that seem to forsake it by reason of the nipping Frosts, and run to encircle themselves with the Air of the Sea for warmths sake: but then again in the Summer by reason of the scorching heat, we desire the Earth born Up-land Air, not because it is cold of its self, but beeause it had its Original and blossom'd from the primitive na∣tural Cold, and is inbu'd with that power which is in the Earth, as Iron is inbu'd with the Vertue of the Water wherein it is quench'd. Then again, of River
Waters we find those are the coldest, that flow upon Gravel and Stones, and fall down from Mountains; and of Well-waters, those which are in the deepest Wells: for with these the exterior Air is no longer mix'd by reason of the depth of the Wells, and the other arise out of the pure and unmixt Earth: like the River that falls from the Mountain Taenarus, which they call the Water of Styx, rising out of a Rock with a parcimonious Spring, but so cold that no other Vessel except the Hoof of an Ass will hold it; for all other sorts of Vessels it breaks and cracks to peices. The Phy∣sitians also tell us that the Nature of all sorts of Earth is binding and restrictive; and they number up several sorts of Metals which are made use of in Physic by reason of their styptic and binding Qualities. For the Element of Earth is neither fit to cut, nor move, nei∣ther has it any points, neither is it subject to be soften'd or melted; but is firm and stable like a Cube; and therefore it has both ponderosity and coldness, had it but the faculty to thicken and condense moist things: nevertheless it causes tremblings and quiverings in our Bodies by reason of its inequality, and if it get the better by the utter expulsion and extinguishing of the Heat, it occasions a frozen and deadly habit of Body. There∣fore the Earth never consumes by burning, neither does Fire consume it, or prey upon it, but with a very slow and difficult Progress. But the Air many times darts forth flame from its self, and being once set on fire, grows fluid, and flashes out in Lightning. Heat also feeds upon moisture; for it is not the solid part of the Wood, but the moist and oyly part that is com∣bustible. Which being consum'd, the solid and dry is left behind in the Ashes. Neither do they arrive at their mark, who pretending to burn the Ashes also, sprinkle them with Oyl and Grease; for when the Liquid is consum'd, the earthy part remains, do what they can.
Therefore, because the Earth is of a Nature not to be mov'd from its Station, unalterable in its Substance, and always abiding in the habitation of the Gods, the Ancients call'd it Hestia or Vesta from standing, by rea∣son of its Immobility and Concretion, of which Cold is the Bond or Ligament, as Archelaus the Philosopher term'd it, which nothing is able to unloosen, or soften, as not being capable of heat and warmth. As for those who say they have been sensible of the cold of Air and Water, but never felt the Earth so cold, They consider only the surface of the Earth, which is a mixture of Air, Water, Sun and Heat; a sort of People who deny the Air to be naturally and primitive∣ly hot, but either scalding Water, or red hot Iron; because they feel and handle the one, but are not sensible of the pure and celestial Fire; in like manner, neither do they see the Earth which lyes conceal'd at the bottom, thô that be what is chiefly to be taken for the Earth, separated from all other things. The truth of which is demonstrable▪ from several Rocks, which from the Deep send forth a cold Vapor so sharp and vehement that it is hard to be endur'd. They also that desire cool drink, throw small Flint-stones into Water. For it becomes thick and quicker to the taste, through the Cold which is carry'd upward fresh and unmix'd from the Stones. Therefore it was the Opinion of the Ancient Philosophers and learned Men, that terrestrial and celestial Things were not to be mix'd together, not so much out of a local Consideration of upper∣most and lowermost in respect of place, but with a respect to the difference of Faculties, attributing hot and splendent, swift and light to the Immor∣tal and Sempiternal Nature, but believing dark, and cold and slow, to be the unhappy Portion of the dead under the Shackles of Corruption. More especially
since the Body of a living Creature while it breaths and flourishes (as the Poets say) enjoys both Hea and Life. But being depriv'd of these and only the ter∣restrial Parts remaining, presently cold and stiffness takes place as if heat were naturally existent in every thing else, but only in the Earth. These things, dear Favori∣nus compare with what has been said by others; which if they neither come too short of probability, nor too much exceed it, bid all their Opinions farewel, as believing it much more becoming a Philosopher to pause in du∣bious Matters, rather then over hastily to side with any one particular Party.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Whether Water or Fire be most Useful? Translated out of the Greek by the same Hand. WAter, the best of things, but Gold is burning Fire, says Pindarus. There∣fore he positively assigns the second Place to Fire. With whom Hesiod agreed, where he says, First of all Chaos Being had— For most believe that by the Word Chaos he meant Wa∣ter, from Caos signifying Diffusion. But the Ballance of Argument as to this Point seems to be equal. For there are some who will have Fire to be the Principle of all things, and that like Sperm it begets all things out of it self, and resolves all things again by Conflagration. Therefore, not to mention the Persons, let us consider the Arguments on both sides, which are to us the most convincing. Now then is not that most useful to us, which in all places, and always, and most of all, we stand in need of? Like a Piece of Houshold-stuff, or a Tool, nay, like a
Friend that is ready at all Hours and Seasons? But Fire is not always useful; for sometimes it is a Prejudice to us, and we avoid it all we can. But Water is useful, Winter and Summer, to the Healthy and Sick, Night and Day, neither indeed is there any time, but that a Man has need of it. Therefore it is that the Dead are call'd Ali∣bantes, as being without Moisture, and by that means depriv'd of Life: and Man may be without Fire, but never was any Man without Water: besides, that that which was existent from the beginning, and with the first Creation of Man must be thought more useful than what was afterwards invented. From whence it is ap∣parent, that Nature bestow'd the one upon us as a thing absolutely necessary: the other Fortune and Art found out for Superfluity of Uses: nor was the time ever known that Man could ever say he never stood in need of Wa∣ter, or that it was an Invention of any of the Gods or Heroes: but the Use of Fire was a late Invention of Prometheus, at what time Life was without Fire, not without Water. And that this is no Poetical Fiction, is demonstrable from this, that there are many sorts of People, that live without Fire, without Houses, with∣out Chimneys, in the open Air. And Diogenes the Cynic made no use of Fire; so that after he had swallow'd a raw Fish, This Hazard, said he, do I run for your Sakes; but without Water no Man ever thought it convenient or possible to live. But why do I confine my Discourse only to the Nature of Men? Seeing there are so many Infinite Sorts of Creatures (the Use of Fire being only known to Man) that live and feed, without Fire, upon Roots, Fruits and Raw Flesh; but without Water, neither Fish, nor Fowl, nor Land Animals can sub∣sist. For all Beasts that feed upon Flesh, of which there are some, as Aristotle reports, that never drink, nevertheless support Life and Being meerly by Moisture. So that of necessity, that must be most
profitable, without which no sort of Life can subsist or endure. Let us therefore make a Step from things that make no use of Fire, to things that we our selves make use of, such are Plants and Fruits; of which some are altoge∣ther void of Heat, others enjoy it but imperfectly and obscurely. But Moisture causes all things to germinate, increase and bring forth. Why should I stand to reck∣on up Wine, and Oyl, and whatever else we reap, and milk forth, and see before our Eyes? when Wheat it self, which is lookt upon as a dry Nourishment, grows by Alteration, Putrefaction, and Corruption of the moist Matter. Then again, that is most useful, which is no way detrimental. Now Fire easily becomes most pernici∣ous, but the Nature of Water is never preju∣dicial. In the next place, that is most useful which affords the Benefit which it brings with least Expence, and without any Preparation. But the Benefit of Fire re∣quires Cost and Materials, and therefore the Rich make more use of it than the Poor; and Princes, then Pri∣vate Persons; but Water has that Kindness for Man∣kind, that it freely prostrates its self to all alike, a Bene∣fit perfect in its self, indigent of nothing, and wanting neither Tools nor Implements. Moreover, that which by Augmentation looses the Benefit of it, is of least use. Such is Fire, which like a devouring Beast, ravages all before it, useful rather by Art and skilful Moderation, then of its own Nature. But from Water there is nothing to be fear'd. Furthermore, that is most useful, which may be joyn'd with another. But Fire will not admit of Water; nei∣ther is it any way profitable by Conjunction with it. But Water becomes profitable by joyning with Fire, and therefore hot Waters are wholesome and sensibly
cure several Diseases. Neither shall you ever find moist Fire, but Water both cold and hot, profitable for the Body of Man. Then again, there being four Elements, Water pro∣duces a fifth out of its self, which is the Sea, no less beneficial then the rest, as well for Commerce, as for many other things. So that it may be said this Ele∣ment united and perfected our manner of Living, which before was wild and unsociable, correcting it by mutu∣al Assistance, and creating Community of Friendship by reciprocal Exchanges of one good Turn for another. Therefore said Heraclitus, If there were no Sun, it would be perpetual Night: as much as to say, if there were no Sea, Man would be the most savage and shameless of all Creatures. But the Sea brought the Vine into Greece, and out of Greece transmitted the Use of Corn to For∣raign Parts: from Phoenicia translated the Knowledge of Letters, the Memorials that prevent Oblivion: fur∣nish'd the World with Wine and Fruit, and prevented the greatest part of Mankind from being Illiterate and void of Education. How is it possible then but that Water should be the most useful, when it thus far exceeds the Element of Fire? Or what can any Man say in de∣fence of the Contrary? We say then, the Deity appointed the four Elements to compleat the Fabrick of the Universe: and these again different one from another; only that Earth and Water were subjected, as being made and form'd instead of Materials: and participating of Form and Order, and of Power to procreate and bring forth, so far as they are assisted by Air and Fire, the great Artificers that mould them into various Shapes; and lying dead, till rous'd by them to act and generate; of which two latter, Fire is the ruling Agent; as is manifest by In∣duction.
For Earth without Warmth and Heat is altogether barren and unfruitful; but Fire, by Vertue of its rows∣ing and inflaming Quality, renders it diffusive and swells it into Generation. Nor can any Man find out any o∣ther Cause, why Rocks and the dry Tops of Mountains are not productive; but because they participate either nothing at all, or very little of Fire. Then generally for Water, it is so far from being sufficient of it self, for the Generation and Preservation of other things, that it is it self destroy'd for want of Fire. But Fire is that which upholds every thing in its proper Being, and preserves it in its proper Substance, as well Water it self, as all other things; so that when Fire leaves it, Water will stink, and it may be said, that the Want of Fire is the Death and Destruction of Water. And thus we find that Pools and all manner of standing Waters, and such as are setled in Cavities not to be come a, what an offensive and dead Stench they send forth, and all for want of Motion; which as it kindles Heat in all things, so more especially in running Waters and swift Streams, which being thus agitated and enliven'd by Heat, we commonly say such Waters Live. Why then should not that be accounted the most useful of the two that affords to the other the Cause of its Being, as Fire does to Water? For there is Moisture also in things after they are dead, nor are they altogether dry'd up; for otherwise moist Bodies would never putrifie; since Putrefaction is the Alteration of Dry into Moist, or rather the Corruption of Moisture in Flesh. Neither is Death any other then an absolute Defect and want of Heat: and therefore dead Carkasses are the Coldest of all. So that if you do but touch them with a Razor, they will blunt the Edge of it, through Excess of Coldness. Also in living Creatures, those Parts that least partake of Heat, are most insensible, as the Bones and Hair. And those Parts which are most distant from the
Heart: So that the Difference which appears in living Things, is more or less, as their Heat is more or less vigorous. For Plants and Fruits are not produc'd by Moisture, but by the Warmth of the Moisture; and cold Waters are most certainly, either less productive, or altogether barren. For if Water were fruitful in it self, it would always, and that spontaneously too, bear Fruit. But the contrary is apparent, and that it is rather bane∣ful to generation from another Principle. Now as to the Use of Fire, consider'd as Fire, we have no need of Water, rather the contrary is to be made out: for Water extinguishes Fire. And as for Water, there is no use to be made of it in most things without Fire. For Water heated becomes useful, where∣as otherwise it is prejudicial. So that of the two that is to be accounted best, which is profitable of it self, with∣out the Assistance of another. Besides that Water is only beneficial to the Feeling, when you either wash with it, or touch it; But Fire is profitable to all the Sences; not only being felt, but seen at a Distance; so that you may add this to the rest of the Vertues of it, that they are manifold and extraordinary. Then to say, that Man did once subsist without Fire, is a Mistake, it being impossible that Man should be without it. But we must acknowledge there are Diffe∣rences in this Kind, as well as in other things. Thus Heat has rendred the Sea more beneficial, as having a greater Portion of Heat in it then other Waters, from which it otherwise differs not at all. And as for those that have no need of outward Fire, they do not avoid it because they do not want it, but because they abound in Heat within themselves. So that the Use of Fire seems to be more excellent in this, that Water is never in such a Condition as not to want external Aids; but Fire, endu'd with manifold Ver∣tues, contents it self with its own Sufficiency. There∣fore,
as he is the best Commander, who so manages the Affairs of his City, as not to have any need of For∣reign Assistance; so that Element excels, that supplys us in such a manner▪ as to want the least of other Helps from without. And this is to be said of other Creatures that have no need of external Heat. Now to argue on the other side, a Man may say thus, that whatever we make use of singly and alone is more profitable, and that is chiefly best, which we ap∣prehend to be so by our Reason. For what is more useful or beneficial to us than Reason? and yet brute Animals want it. What then? is it the less profita∣ble, because found out by foresight of its Utility? And since our Discourse has brought us to it, What is more beneficial to Life then Art? Yet Fire in∣vented and preserves all manner of Arts: and there∣fore Vulcan is feign'd to be the Prince of all Artificers. Man has allow'd him but a little time to live, and as Aristo said, Sleep, like a Toll-gatherer, de∣prives him of the one half of that too. But for my Part, my Opinion is, that if a Man should wake all Night in the Dark, he would have no Benefit of his Watchfulness, unless Fire at the same time discover'd to him the Benefit of Light, and dis∣play'd before his Eyes the Difference between Night and Day. Since then there is nothing more beneficial to Man then Life, and that this is prolong'd by Fire, Why should not Fire be accounted the most beneficial of all things? Lastly, That is to be thought most profitable, which most apparently communicates to the Sences the Effects of its Temperament. Now do you not find that there is not any of the Sences, which of it self makes use of Moisture, without an Intermixture of Air and Fire? But every Sence partakes of Fire, as being that which
quickens the vital Faculty: more especially the Sight, which is the most acute of all the Sences in the Body, being a certain fiery Efflux, that gave us our first Light into the Belief of a Deity, and by Vertue of which we are able, as Plato says, to conform our Souls to the Motions of the Celestial Bodies.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Against Colotes the Disciple and Favorite of Epicurus. Translated out of the Greek by A. G. Gent. COlotes, whom Epicurus was wont diminutively and by way of Familiarity or Fondness to call Colota∣ras and Colotarion, compos'd ô Saturninus, and publish'd a little Book, which he entitled, That according to the Opinions of the other Philosophers one cannot so much as live. Now I suppose, that 'twill not be unpleasant for you to read, when set down in Writing, what came into my Mind to speak against this Colotes, since I know you to be a Lover of all elegant and honest Treatises, and particularly of such, as regard the Science of Antiqui∣quity, and to esteem the bearing in Memory, and ha∣ving, as much as possible may be, in hand the Dis∣courses of the ancient Sages, to be the most Royal of all Studies and Exercises.
Not long since therefore, as this Book was rea∣ding, Aristodemus the Aegian, a familiar Friend of Ours, (whom you well know to be one of the Aca∣demy, and thô he bears not aIt was the Custom of those, who celebrated the Orgia or Feasts of Bacchus, to carry in their hands a Ferula, or piece of Wood, wound about with Ivy and Vine-branches, which they call'd Thyrsus, and there∣with to strike all such, as, coming in their way either oppos'd or refus'd to joyn with them in their furious Revellings: In Allusion to this Cu∣stom, Plutarch here stiles Aristodmus, an exceed∣ingly earnest Asserter of Platoes Doctrin, . Ferula, to be nevertheless a very vehement, not to say fran∣tick, Celebrater of Platoes Orgia) did, I know not how, keep him∣self, contrary to his Custom, very still all the while, and pa∣tiently gave ear to it, even to the end. But the Reading was scarce well over, when he said: Well then, whom shall we cause to rise up and fight against this Man, in Defence of the Philoso∣phers? For I am not of Nestors Opinion, who, when the most valiant of these nine Warriers, that presented themselves to en∣ter into Combat, was to be cho∣sen, committed the Election to the Fortune of a Lot. Yet, answered I, you see, he so dispos'd himself in refe∣rence to the Lot, that the Choice might pass according to the Arbitrement of the wisest Man: And th' Lot, drawn from the Helmet, as they wisht, On Ajax fell.— But yet since you command me to make the Election, How can I think a better Choice to make Than the divine Ʋysses?— Consider therefore, and be well advis'd, in what manner you will chastse this Man.
But you know, reply'd Aristodemus, that Plato, when highly offended with his Boy, that waited on him, would not him∣self beat him, but requested Speusippus to do it for him, saying, that he himself was angry. As much therefore may I say to you: Take this Fellow to you, and treat him, as you please: For I am in a fit of Choler. When therefore all the rest of the Company desir'd me to undertake this Office: I must then, said I, speak since 'tis your Pleasure: But I am afraid, that I also shall seem more vehemently, than is fitting, transported against this Book, in the defending and maintaining Socrates against the Rudeness, Scurrility, and Insolence of this Man, who, because Socrates affirm'd himself to know nothing certainly, instead of Bread, as one-would say, presents him Hay, as if he were a Beast, and asks him, why he puts Meat into his Mouth, and not into his Ear. And yet perhaps some would make but a Laughing-matter of this, considering the Mildness and Gentle∣ness of Socrates; But for th' whole Host o'th Greeks,— that is, of the other Philosophers, amongst which are Demo∣critus, Plato, Empedocles, Parmenides, and Melissus, who have been basely traduc'd and revil'd by him, 'twere not only a shame to be silent, but even a Sacriledge, in the least point to forbear or recede from Freedom of Speech in their Be∣half, who have advanc'd Philosophy to that Honor and Repu∣tation, it has gotten. And our Parents indeed have with the Assistance of the Gods given us our Life; but to live well, comes to us from Reason, which we have learnt from the Phi∣losophers, favouring Law and Justice, and restraining our Concupiscence. Now to live well is to live sociably, friendly, temperately, and justly: Of all which Con∣ditions they leave us not one, who cry out, that Mans Soveraign Good lies in his Belly, and that they would not
purchase all the vertues together at the Expence of a crackt Farthing, if Pleasure were totally and on every side remov'd from them. And in their Discourses con∣cerning the Soul and the Gods, they hold, that the Soul perishes, when it is separated from the Body, and that the Gods concern not themselves in our Affairs. Thus the Epicureans reproach the other Philosophers, that by their wisdom they bereave Man of his Life; whilst the others on the contrary accuse them of teach∣ing Men to live degenerately, and like Beasts. Now these things are scatter'd here and there in the Wri∣tings of Epicurus, and dispers'd thrô all his Philosophy. But this Colotes by having extracted from them certain Pieces and Fragments of Discourses, destitute of any Arguments whatever, to render them credible and in∣telligible, has compos'd his Book, being like a Shop or Cabinet of Monsters and Prodigies: As you bet∣ter know, than any one else, because you have always in your Hands the Works of the Ancients. But he seems to me, like the Lydian, to open not only one Gate against himself, but to involve Epicurus also in many and those the greatest Doubts and Dif∣ficulties. For he begins with Democritus, who receives of him an excellent and worthy Reward for his Instructi∣on: It being certain, that Epicurus for a long time call'd himself a Democritean, which as well others affirm, as Leonteus, a principal Disciple of Epicurus, who in a Let∣ter, which he writ to Lycophron, says, that Epicurus ho∣nor'd Democritus, because he first attain'd, thô a little at a Distance, the right and sound Understanding of the Truth, and that in general all the Treatise concerning natural things was call'd Democritean, because Democritus was the first, who hapned upon the Principles, and met with the primitive Foundations of Nature. And Metodorus says openly of Philosophy; If Democritus had not gone before, and taught the way, Epicurus had never
attain'd to Wisdom. Now if it be true, as Colotes holds, that to live according to the Opinions of the other Philoso∣phers is not to live, Epicurus was then a Fool in follow∣ing Democritus, who led him to a Doctrin, which taught him not to live. Now the first thing, he lays to his Charge, is, that by supposing every thing to be no more such than such, he wholly confounds human Life. But Democritus was so far from having been of this Opi∣nion, that Nothing is more such than such, that he op∣pos'd Protagoras the Philosopher, who asserted it, and writ many excellent Arguments, concluding against him, which this fine Fellow Colotes never saw, nor read, nor yet so much as dream'd of; but deceiv'd himself by misunderstanding a Passage, which is in his Works, where he determins, that  is no more than , naming in that Place the Body , and the void , and meaning, that the Void has its own proper Nature and Subsistence, as well as the Body. But he is of Opinion, that Nothing is more such than such, who makes use of a Sentence of Epicurus, in which he says, that all the Apprehensions and Imaginations, given us by the Senses, are true. For if of two, saying, the one, that the Wine is sowr, and the other, that 'tis sweet, neither of them shall be deceiv'd in their Senti∣ments, how shall the Wine be more sowr than sweet? And we may often see that some Men, using one and the same Bath, find it to be hot, and others, to be cold: Because those order cold Water to be put into it, as these do hot. 'Tis said, that, a certain Lady, going to visit Berrhonice, Wife to King Deiotarus, assoon as ever they approach'd each other, they both immediatly turn'd their Backs, the one, as it seem'd, not being a∣ble to bear the smell of Perfume, nor the other of But∣ter. If then the Sense of one is no truer than the Sense of another, 'tis also probable, that Water is no more cold than hot, nor sweet Ointment or Butter, better or worse
sented one than the other. For if any one shall say, that it seems the one to one, and the other to another, he will, before he is aware, affirm, that they are both the one and the other. And as for these Symmetries and Proportions of the Pores or little Passages in the Organs of the Senses, about which they talk so much, and those different Mixtures of Seeds, which, they say, being dispers'd thrô all Savors, Odors, and Colors, move the Senses of different Persons to perceive different Quali∣ties, do they not manifestly drive them to this, that Things are no more one than another? For to pacify those, who think, the Sense is deceiv'd, and lies, because they see contrary Events and Passions in such, as use the same Objects, and to solve this Objection, they teach, that, all things being mixt and confounded together, and yet one nevertheless being more suitable and fitting to one, and another to another, there is not made a Contact and Comprehension of one and the same Quality, nor does the Object equally move all with all its Parts; but every one, meeting only those, to which it has its Sense commensurate and proportion'd, they are too blame so obstinately to insist, that a thing is either color'd or not color'd, white, or not white, thinking to establish their own Senses by destroying those of others: whereas they ought neither to combat the Senses, because they all touch some Quality, each one drawing from this con∣fus'd Mixture, as from a living and large Fountain, what is suitable and convenient; nor to pronounce of the whole, by touching only the Parts, nor to think, that all ought to be affected after one and the same man∣ner, seeing that one is affected by one Quality and Faculty of it, and another by another. Are we then to seek, who those Men are, which bring in this Opi∣nion, that Things are not more one than another? Or are those they, who hold, that every sensible thing is a Mixture, compos'd of all sorts of Qualities, like a Wind-Instrument,
fitted for all sorts of Tunes? Now they confess, that all their Rules are lost, and their Faculty of judging quite gone, if they admit any sensible Object, that is pure and simple, and do not make each one thing to be many. See now to this purpose, what Discourse and Debate Epicurus makes Polyaenus to have with him in his Banquet concerning the Heat of Wine: for when he askt: Do you, ô Epicurus say, that Wine does not heat? Some one answer'd: 'Tis not universally to be affirm'd, that Wine Heats. And a little after: For Wine seems not to be uni∣versally an Heater; but such a Quantity may be said to heat such a Person. And again subjoining the Cause, to wit, the Compressions and Disseminations of the Atoms, and having alledg'd their Commixtures and Conjunctions with others, when the Wine comes to be mingled in the Body, he adds this Conclusion: 'Tis not univer∣sally to be said, that Wine is endu'd with a Faculty of Heating; but that such a Quantity may heat such a Nature, and so dispos'd; but that such a Quantity to such a Nature is cooling. For in such a Mass there are some Natures and Complexions, of which Cold might be compos'd, if it were necessary, that being joyn'd with others, they should yield a refrigerative Vertue. Wherefore some are deceiv'd, who say, that Wine is universally an Heater, and others, that 'tis uni∣versally a Cooler. He then, who says, that many are deceiv'd, and err, in holding that, which is hot, to be heating, and that, which is cold, to be cooling, is him∣self in an Error, if he does not perceive it to follow from his Assertion, that one thing is not more such than another. He farther adds afterwards, that oftentimes Wine, entring into a Body, brings with it thither nei∣ther a calefying nor refrigerating Vertue, but, the Mass of the Body being agitated and disturb'd, and a Transposition made of the Parts, the Heat-effecting Atoms, being assembled together, do by their Multitude
cause an Heat and Inflammation in the Body; and sometimes on the contrary disassembling themselves, cause a Refrigeration. But 'tis yet moreover wholly evident, that he has proceeded so far, as to say, that of all those things, which are call'd and esteem'd Bitter, Sweet, Purging, Dormitive, and Luminous, not any one of them has an entire and perfect Quality to produce such Effects, nor to do, rather than to suffer, when they are in the Bodies, but are there susceptible of various Tem∣peratures and Differences. For Epicurus himself, af∣firming, that Colors are not connatural to the Body, but are engendred there according to certain Situations and Positions with respect to the Sight of Man, says: For this Reason the Body is no more color'd, than destitute of Color. And a little above he writes thus word for word: But without this Part, I know not, how a Man may say, that those Bodies, which are in the Dark, have Color; al∣thô very often, an Air equally dark being spread about them, some distinguish Diversities of Colors, others perceive them not thrô the Weakness of their Sight: and moreover going into a dark House or Room, we at our first entrance see no Difference of Color, but, after we have stay'd there a while, we do. Wherefore we are to say, that every Body is not more color'd, than not color'd. Now, if Color is a Rela∣tive, and has its Being in regard to something else, so also then is White, and so likewise Blew: and if Co∣lors are so, so also are Sweet and Bitter: so that it may truly be affirm'd of every Quality, that it is not rather such than such: For to those, who are in such manner dispos'd, they will be such; but to those, who are not so dispos'd, they will also not be such. Colotes therefore has bedash'd and bespatter'd himself and his Masr with that Dirt, in which, he says, those ly, who maintain, that things are not rather such than such.
But is it in this alone, that this excellent Man shews himself To others a Physiian, whilst himself Is full of Ʋlcers?— No indeed; but yet much farther in his second Repre∣hension he, without any way minding it, drives Epicurus and Democritus out of this Life. For he affirms Demo∣critus to have said, that the Atoms are to the Senses Color by a certain Law, or Ordinance, that they are by the same Law Sweetness, and by the same Law Concretion: And that he, who uses this Reason, and persists in this Opinion, cannot himself imagin, whe∣ther he is living or dead. I know not how to contra∣dict this Discourse; but this I can boldly affirm, that this is as inseparable from the Sentences and Doctrins of Epicurus, as, they say, Figure and Weight are from Atoms. For what is it, that Democritus says? That there are Substances, in Number infinite, call'd Atoms, because they cannot be divided, yet different, without any Quality, which move, being dispers'd here and there, in the infinit Voidness, and that when they ap∣proach one another, or meet; and are conjoin'd, that of such Masses, thus heap'd together, one appears Water, another Fire, another a Plant, another a Man: and that all these are Atoms still, call'd by him Ideas, or Forms, and that there is nothing else: For there can be no Generation; and of those things, which are, not any one can become Nothing: because, these Atoms are so firm, that they can neither be chang'd, alter, nor suffer. Wherefore there cannot be made Color of those things, which are without Color, nor Nature or Soul of those things, which are without Quality, and impassible. Democritus then is to be blam'd, not for confessing those things, that happen upon his Principles,
but for supposing Principles, upon which such things happen. For he should not have suppos'd immutable Principles; or having suppos'd them, not have seen, that the Generation of all Quality is taken away; but having seen the Absurdity, to deny it is most impudent. But Epicurus says, that he supposes the same Principles with Democritus, but that he says not, that Color, Sweet, White, and other Qualities are by Law and Ordinance. If therefore not to say is this, does he not confess, that he does something of what he is wont to do? For it is, as when taking away divine Providence, he nevertheless says, that he leaves Piety and Devotion towards the Gods; and when choosing Friendship for the sake of Pleasure, that he suffers most grievous Pains for his Friends; and supposing the Universe to be infinit, that he nevertheless takes not away High and Low. But it is *** Indeed having taken the Cup, one may drink what he pleases, and return the Rest. But in Reasoning one ought chiefly to remember this wise Apophthegm, That of Principles, which are not ne∣cessary, the Ends and Consequences are necessary. It was not then necessary for him to suppose, or, to say better, to steal from Democritus, that Atoms are the Principles of the Universe; but having suppos'd this Doctrin, and having pleas'd and glorify'd himself in the first probable and specious Appearances of it, he must afterwards also swallow that, which is troublesom in it, or must shew, how Bodies, which have not any Quality, can bring all sorts of Qualities to othes only by their Meeting and joyning together. As, to take that, which comes next to hand, whence does that, which we call Heat, proceed, and how is it engendred in the Atoms, if they neither had Heat, when they came, nor are become hot, after their being join'd to∣gether? For the one presupposes, that they had some Quality, and the other, that they were sit to receive
it. And you affirm, that neither the one nor the other must be said to agree to Atoms, because they are in∣corruptible. How then? Do not Plato, Aristotle, and Xenocrates produce Gold from that, which is not Gold, and Stone from that, which is not Stone, and many o∣ther things from the four first simple Bodies? Yes in∣deed; but with these Bodies immediately concur also the Principles for the Generation of every thing, bring∣ing with them great Contributions, that is, the first Qualities, which are in them: then, when they come to assemble and join in one, the Dry with the Moist, the Cold with the Hot, and the Solid with the Soft, that is, active Bodies with such, as are fit to suffer and receive every Alteration and Change, then is Generation wrought by passing from one Temperature to another, Whereas the Atom, being alone, is de∣priv'd and destitute of all Quality and generative Fa∣culty, and when it comes to meet with the others, it can make only a Noise and Sound, because of its Hard∣ness and Firmness, and not any other Accident. For they always strike and are stricken not being able by this means to compose or make an Animal, a Soul, or a Na∣ture, nay not so much as a Mass or Heap of themselves: for that as they beat upon one another, so they fly back again asunder. But Colotes, as if he were speaking to some igno∣rant and unletter'd King, again attacks Empedocles for breathing forth these Verses: I've one thing more to say: 'Mongst Mortals there No Nature is, nor that grim thing, Men fear So much, call'd Death: there only happens first A Mixture, and mixt things asunder burst Again, when them Disunion does befall: And this is that, which Men do Nature call.
For my Part, I do not see, how this is repugnant and contrary to Life or Living, especially amongst those, who hold, that there is no Generation of that, which is not, nor Corruption of that, which is; but that the Assembling and Union of the things, which are, is call'd Generation, and their Dissolution and Disunion nam'd Corruption and Death. For that he took Nature for Generation, and that this is his Meaning, he has himself declar'd, when he oppos'd Nature to Death: and, if they neither live, nor can live, who place Ge∣neration in Union, and Death in Disunion, What else do these Epicureans? Yet Empedocles, gluing, as it were, and conjoining the Elements together by Heats, Softnesses, and Humidities, gives them in some sort a Mixtion and Unitive Composition; but these Men, who hunt and drive together the Atoms, which they affirm to be immutable and impassible, compose no∣thing, proceeding from them, but indeed make many and continual Percussions of them. For the Interlacement, hindring the Dissolution, more and more augments the Collision, and Concussi∣on: so that there is neither Mixtion, nor Adhaesion and Conglutination, but only a Combustion and Com∣bat, which according to them, is call'd Generation. And if the Atoms do now recoil by reason of the Shock, they have given, and then return again, after the Blow is past, they are above double the time absent from one another, without either touching or approaching, so as nothing can be made of them, not even so much s a Body without a Soul. But as for Sense, Soul, Under∣standing, and Prudence, there is not any Man, who can in the least conceive or imagin, how 'tis possible, they should be made in a Veidness and of Atoms, which neither when separate and apart, have any Quality; nor any Passion or Alteration, when they are assembled and join'd together, especially, seeing this their Meet∣ing
together is not an Incorporation, or Congress, mak∣ing a Mixture, or Coalition, but rather Percussions and Repercussions: so that, according to the Doctrin of these People, Life is taken away, and the Being of an Animal deny'd, since they suppose Principles, void, impassible, and invisible, and such, as cannot admit or receive any Mixture or Incorporation whatever. How then is it, that they admit and allow Nature, Soul, and Living Creature? Even in the same manner, as they do an Oath, Prayer, Sacrifice, and the Adoration of the Gods. Thus as they adore by Word and Mouth, only naming and feigning that, which by their Principles they totally take away, and abolish: so they call that, which is born, Nature, and that, which is engendred, Generation, as those, who ordinarily call the Wood it self, the Framing and Fashioning of the Wood, and the Voices, that accord and sound toge∣ther, Symphony. Whence then came it into his Mind, to object these Words against Empedocles. Why, says he, do we tire our selves in taking such care of our selves, in desiring and longing after certain things, and shunning and avoiding others? For we neither are our selves, nor do we live by making use of others. But be of good Cheer, my dear and sweet Friend Colotari∣on, may one perhaps say to him, there is none, who hinders you from taking Care of your self by teach∣ing, that the Nature of Colotes is nothing else, but Colotes himself; or that forbids you to make use of things (now things with you are Pleasures) by shewing, that there is not the Nature of Tarts and Marchpanes, of Sweet Odors, or Venereal Delights; but there are Tarts and Marchpanes, Parfumes, and Women. For neither does the Grammarian, who says, that the Strength of Hercules is Hercules himself, deny the Be∣ing of Hercules, nor do those, who say, that Sympho∣nies and Opinions are but bare Prolations, affirm, that
there are neither Sounds nor Opinions: since also there are some, who, taking away the Soul and Pru∣dence, do not yet seem to take away either Living, or being Prudent. And when Epicurus says, that the Nature of things are Bodies and their Place, do we so comprehend him, as if he meant, that Nature were something else than the things, which are? or as if he insinuated, that it is the things themselves, which are, and nothing else? As, to wit, he is wont to call Voidness it self the Na∣ture of Voidness, and the Universe, by Jupiter, the Nature of the Universe. And if one any should thus que∣stion him: What sayst thou, Epicurus, that this is Void∣ness, and that the Nature of Voidness? No by Jupiter, would he answer: But this Communication of Names, one for another, is it in use by Law and Custom, or is it not? I grant, it is. Now what has Empedocles done else, but taught, that Nature, is nothing else, save that which is born; and Death no other thing but that which dies? But as the Poets very often, forming as it were an Image, say thus in figurative Language: Strife, Tumult, Noise, plac'd by some angry God, Mischief, and Malice, there had their Abode; So do many attribute Generation and Corruption to things, that are contracted together and dissolv'd. But so far has he been from stirring, and taking away that, which is, or contradicting that, which evidently appears, that he casts not so much as one single word out of the accustom'd use; but taking away all figurative Fraud, that might hurt or endammage things, he again restor'd the ordinary and usual signification to words in these Verses.
When from mixt Elements we sometimes se A Man produc'd, sometimes a Beast, a Tree, Or Bird, this Birth and Geniture we name; But Death, when this so well campacted Frame And Juncture is dissolv'd.— And yet I my self say, that Colotes, thô he alledg'd these Verses, did not understand, that Empedocles took not a∣way Men, Beasts, Trees, or Birds, which he affirm'd to be compos'd of the Elements, mixt together: and that by teaching, how much they are deceiv'd, who call this Composition Nature and Life, and this Dissolution unhappy Destruction and miserable Death, he did not abrogate the using of the customary Expressions in this respect. And to me indeed Empedocles seems not to have aim'd in this place at the disturbing the common manner of using and pronouncing these Words; but that he really, as it has been said, had a Controversy about Generation from things, that have no Being, which some call Nature. Which he manifestly shews by these Verses: Fools, and of little Thought we well may deem, Those, who so silly are, as to esteem, That what ne're was, may now engedred be, And that what is, may perish utterly. For these are the Words of one, who cries loud e∣nough to those, which have Ears, that he takes not away Generation, but Procreation from nothing, nor Corruption, but total Destruction, that is, Reduction to nothing. For to him, who would not so savagely and foolishly, but more gently calumniate, the follow∣ing Verses might give a colorable occasion of charging Empedocles with the contrary, when he says:
No prudent Man can e're into his Mind Admit, that, whilst Men, living here on Earth, (Which only Life they call) both Fortunes find, They Being have; but that before the Birth They nothing were, nor shall be, when once dead. For these are not the Expressions of a Man, who de∣nies those, that are born, to be, but rather of him, who holds those to be, that are not yet born, or that are already dead. And Colotes also does not altogether accuse him of this; but says, that accordng to his O∣pinion we shall never be sick, never wounded. But how is it possible, that he, who affirms Men to have Being both before their Life and after their Death, and during their Life to find both Fortunes, or to be accom∣pany'd both by Good and Evil, should not leave them the Power to suffer? Who then are they, ô Colotes, that are endu'd with this Privilege, never to be wound∣ed, never to be sick? Even you your selves, who are compos'd of Atoms and Voidness, neither of which, you say, has any Sense. Now there is no great Hurt in this; but the worst is, You have nothing left, that can cause you Pleasure, seeing an Atom is not capable to receive those things, which are to effect it, and Voidness cannot be affected by them. But because Colotes would immediatly after Democri∣tus seem to inter and bury Parmenides, and I have pass'd over, and a little postpon'd his Defence, to bring in be∣tween them that of Empedocles, as seeming to be more coherent and consequent to the first Reprehensions, let us now return to Parmenides. Him then does Colotes accuse of having broacht and set abroad certain shameful and villainous Sophistries: and yet by these his Sophisms he has neither rendred Friendship less honorable, nor Voluptuousness or the Desire of Pleasures more auda∣cious
and unbridled. He has not taken from Honesty its attractive Property, or its being venerable or recom∣mendable of it self: nor has he disturb'd the Opinions we ought to have of the Gods. And I do not see, how by his saying, that All [or the Universe] is One, he hinders or obstructs our Living. For when Epicurus himself says, that All is infinit, that 'tis neither engen∣dred nor perishable, that it can neither increase nor be diminisht, he speaks of the Universe, as of one only thing. And having in the beginning of his Treatise concerning this Matter said, that the Nature of those things, which have Being, consists of those small indi∣visible Bodies, which he calls Atoms, and of Voidness, he makes a Division as it were of one thing into two Parts: one of which has in reality no Subsistence, be∣ing, as your selves term it, impalpable, void, and in∣corporeal: so that by this means, even with you also All comes to be One, unless you desire in speaking of Voidness, to use Words empty and void of Sense, and to combat the Ancients, as if you were fighting against a Shadow. But these Atomical Bodies, you will say, are, ac∣cording to the Opinion of Epicurus, infinit in number, and every thing, which appears to us, is compos'd of them. See now therefore, what Principles of Gene∣ration you suppose, Infinity and Voidness: one of which, to wit Voidness, is unactive, impassible, and incorporeal; the other, to wit Infinity, is disorderly, unreasonable, dis∣solving and confounding it self, because it cannot for its Multitude, be contain'd, circumscrib'd, or limited. But Parmenides has neither taken away Fire, nor Water, nor Rocks and Precipices, nor yet Cities, as Colotes says, which are built and inhabited as well in Europe as in Asia: since he has both madeFor  I read . Jupiter the World, and mixing the Elements, to wit, Light and
Dark, does of them and by them compose and finish all things, that are to be seen in the World. For he has written very largely of the Earth, Heaven, Sun, Moon, and Stars, and has spoken of the Generation of Man, and being, as he was, an ancient Author in Phy∣siology, and one, who in writing deliver'd his own, and not anothers Doctrin, he has pass'd over none of the principal things in Nature, of which he has not di∣stinctly treated. Moreover he, first before all others, even before Socrates himself; understood, that in Na∣ture there is one Part, subject to Opinion, and another subject to Intelligence. As for that, which is Opina∣ble, or subject to Opinion, it is always unconstant, wandring, and carry'd away with several Passions and Changes, liable to Diminution and Increase, and to be variously dispos'd, not always after one manner, nor to the same. But as to the Intelligible Part, it is quite of another kind, Constant, entire, and still ingenerable, as himself says, always like to it self, and perdurable in its Being. Here Colotes, Sycophant-like, catching at his Expres∣sions, and drawing the Discourse from Things to Words, flatly affirms, that Parmenides in one word takes away and subverts all things by supposing Ens, or That, which is, to be One. But on contrary he takes away neither the one nor the other Part of Nature; but ren∣dring to each of them, what belongs to it, and is con∣venient for it, places the Intelligible in the Idea of One and of That, which is: calling it Ens, or That, which is, be∣cause it is eternal and incorruptible; and One, because it is always like it self, and admits no Diversity. And as for that Part, which is Sensible, he places it in the Rank of Uncertain, Disorderly, and always Moving:
Of which two Parts we may see the distinct Judgment in the Soul: One certain Truth and sincere Knowledge is, as regarding that, which is intelligible, and always alike and of the same sort. The other does on Mens Opinions rest, Which breed no true Belief within our Breast: Because it is conversant in things, which receive all sorts of Changes, Passions, and Inequalities. Now how he could have left Sense and Opinion, if he had not also left Sensible and Opinable, 'tis impossible for any Man to say. But because to That, which truly is, it appertains to continue in its Be∣ing, and because Sensible things sometimes are, sometimes are not, continually passing from one Beig to another, and perpetually changing their State, he thought, they re∣quir'd some other Name than that of Entia, or Things, which always are. This Speech therefore concerning Ens; or That, which is, that it should be but one, is not to take away the Plurality of Sensible things, but to shew, how they differ from that, which is Intelligible. Which Difference Plato, in his Treatise of Ideas more fully de∣claring, has thereby afforded Colotes an Opportunity of Cavilling: and therefore it seems reasonable to me to take next into our Consideration, as it were all in a Train, what he has also said against him. But first let us contemplate a little the Diligence to∣gether with the manifold and profound Knowledge of this our Philosopher, who says, that Aristotle, Xenocra∣tes, Theophrastus, and all the Peripateticks have follow'd these Doctrins of Plato. For in what Corner of the uninhabitable WorldFor  I read . have you, ô Colotes, written your
Book, that, composing all these Accusations against such Per∣sonages, you should never have lighted upon their Works, nor have taken into your Hands the Books of Aristotle concerning Heaven and the Soul, nor those of Theophrastus against the Naturalists, nor the Zoroastres of Heraclitus, nor his Book of Hell, nor that of Natural Doubts and Difficulties, nor the Books of Dicaearchus concerning the Soul: in all which Books they are in the highest degree contradictory and repugnant to Plato about the princi∣pal and greatest Points of Natural Philosophy? Nay Strato himself, the very Head and Prince of the other Peripateticks, agrees not in many things with Aristotle, and holds Opinions, altogether contrary to Plato, con∣cerning Motion, the Understanding, the Soul, and Generation. In fine, he says, that the World is not an Animal, and that what is according to Nature, follows what is according to Fortune: for that Chance gave the Beginning, and so every one of the Natural Effects was afterwards finisht. Now as to the Ideas, for which he quarrels with Plato, Aristotle, by moving this matter at every turn, and alledging all manner of Doubts concerning them, in his Ethicks, in his Physicks; and in his Exoterical Dia∣logues, seems to some rather obstinately, than philoso∣phically, to have disputed against these Doctrins, as having propos'd to himself the Debasing and under∣valuing of Plato's Philosophy: so far he was from fol∣lowing it. What an impudent Rashness then is this, that having neither seen nor understood, what these Persons have written, and what were their Opinions, he should go and devise such things, as they never ima∣gin'd, and perswading himself, that he reprehends and refutes others, he should produce a Proof, written with his own hand, arguing and convincing himself of Igno∣rance, Licentiousness, and shameful Impudence, in saying, that those, who contradict Pato, agree with
him, and that those, who oppose him, follow him? Plato, says he, writes, that Horses are in vain by us esteem'd Horses, and likewise Men. And in which of Plato's Commentaries has he found this hidden? For as to us we read in all his Books, that Horses are Horses, that Men are Men, and that Fire is by him esteem'd Fire, because he holds, that every one of these things is sensible and subject to Opinion. But this fine fellow Colotes, in whom there is not the least Grain of Philo∣sophy, apprehends it to be one and the same thing, to say, Man is not, and Man is a Non-ens, or That, which has no Being. Now to Plato there seems to be a wonderful great Difference between Not to be at all, and To be a Non-ens, or That, which has no Being: because the first im∣ports an Annihilation and Abolishment of all Sub∣stance; and the other shews the Diversity, there is be∣tween that, which is participated, and that, which participates. Which Diversity those, who are come after, have only distinguisht into the Difference of Genus, and Species, and certain common and proper Qualities or Accidents, as they are cll'd, but ascended no higher, falling into more logical Doubts and Dif∣ficulties. Now there is the same Proportion between that, which is participated, and that, which partici∣pates, as there is between the Cause and the Matter, the Original and the Image, the Faculty and the Passion. Wherein that, which is by it self, and always the same, principally differs from that, which is by another, and never in one and the same manner: because the one never was, nor ever shall be non-existent, and is there∣fore totally and essentially an Ens or a Thing, that has Being; but the other has not that very Being, which it has not of it self, but happens to take and participate from another, firm and constant, but goes out of it by its Imbecillity, the Matter always gliding and sliding about
the Form, and receiving several Passions and Changes towards the Image of the Substance, so that it is con∣tinually moving and shaking. As therefore he, who says, that the Image of Plato is not Plato, takes not away the Sense and Subsistence of the Image, but shews the Difference of that, which is something of it self, from that, which is in regard of it: so neither do they take away the Nature, Use, or Sense of Men, who affirm, that every one of us is by participating the Idea of a certain common Substance become the Image of that, which affords Similitude to our Gene∣neration. For neither does he, who says, that a red-hot Iron is not Fire, or the Moon the Sun, but, as Parmenides has it, A Torch, which round the Earth by Night Does bear about a borrow'd Light, take away therefore the Use of Iron, or the Nature of the Moon. But if he should deny it to be a Body, or affirm, that it is not illuminated, he would then con∣tradict the Senses, as one, who admitted neither Body, Animal, Generation, nor Sense. But he, who by his Opinion imagin, that these things subsist only by Participation, and how far remote and distant they are from that, which always is, and which communicates to them their Being, does not reject the Sensible, but affirms, that the Intelligible is: nor does he take away and abolish the Passions, which are wrought, and ap∣pear in us; but shews to those, who follow him, that there are other things, firmer and more stable than these in respect of their Essence, because they are nei∣ther engendred, nor perish, nor suffer any thing, and, more purely touching the Difference, teaches to express it by the Names, calling these Entia, or Things, that have Being; and those Fientia, or Things engendred. And
the same also usually befals the Moderns: for they de∣prive many and those great things of the Appellation of Ens or Being: such as are Voidness, Time, Place, and simply the whole entire Genus of things spoken, in which are compris'd all things true. For these things, they say, are not Entia, but somethings and they per∣petually make use of them in their Philosophy, as of things having Subsistence and Existence. But I would willingly ask this our Fault-finder, whether themselves do not in their Affairs perceive this Difference, by which some things are permanent and immutable in their Substances, as they say of their Atoms, that they are at all times and continually after one and the same manner because of their Impassibility and Hardness; but that the things, compounded of them, are fluxible, changeable, breeding, and perish∣ing: forasmuch as infinit Images are always departing and going from them; and infinit others, as 'tis pro∣bable, repair to them from the ambient Air, filling up, what was diminisht from the Mass, which is much di∣versify'd and transvasated, as it were, by this Change, since those Atoms, which are in the very Bottom of the said Mass, can never cease stirring and reciprocally beating upon one another, as they themselves affirm. There is then in things such a Diversity of Substance. But Epicurus is in this wiser and more learned than Plato, that he calls them all equally Entia, or Things, that have Being, to wit, the impalpable Voidness, the solid and resisting Body, the Principles, and the things com∣pos'd of them: and yet thinks, that the Eternal does not so much as participate of the common Substance with that, which is generated, the immortal with the Corruptible, and the Natures, that are impassible, per∣durable, unchangeable, and can never fall from their Being, with those, which have their Essence in suffering and changing, and can never continue in one and the
same State. But thô Plato had with all the Justness imaginable deserv'd to have been condemn'd for having offended in this, yet should he have been sentenc'd by these Gentlemen, who speak more elegantly and cor∣rectly, only as having confounded the Terms, and us'd improper Expressions; and not as having taken away the things, and driven Life from us, because he nam'd them Fientia, or Things engendred, and not Entia, or Things, that have Being, as these Men do. But because we have pass'd over Socrates, who should have come next after Parmenides, we must now turn back our Discourse to him. Him therefore has Colotes begun at the very first to remove, as the common Pro∣verb has it, from the sacred Line, and having mention'd, how Chaerephon brought from Delphos an Oracle, well known to us all, concerning Socrates, he says thus: Now as to this Naration of Chaerephons, because it is odi∣ous, full of Ʋntruth, and sophistical, we will over-pass it. Plato then, that I may say nothing of others, is also odious, who has committed it to writing; and the La∣cedaemonians are yet more odious, who reserve that of Lycurgus amongst their most ancient and most authen∣tick Inscriptions. The Oracle also of Themistocles, by which he perswaded the Athenians to quit their Town, and in a Naval Fight defeated the barbarous Xerxes, was a sophistical Fiction. Odious also were all the ancient Legislators and Founders of Greece, who establisht the most part of their Temples, Sacrifices, and solemn Festivals by the answer of the Pythian Oracle. But if the Oracle, brought from Delphos concerning Socrates, a Man ravish'd with a divine Zeal to Vertue, by which he is stil'd and declar'd Wise, is odious, fictitious, and sophistical, by what Name shall we call your Cries, Noises, and Shouts, your Applauses, Adorations and Canonizations, with which you extoll and celebrate him, who incites and exhorts you to frequent and con∣tinual
Pleasures? For thus has he written in his Epistle to Anaxarchus: I for my part incite and call you to continual Pleasures, and not to vain and empty Vertues, which have no∣thing but turbulent Hopes of uncertain Fruits. And yet Metrodorus, writing to Timarchus, says: Let us do some extraordinarily excellent thing, not suffering our selves to be plung'd in reciprocal Affections, but retiring from this low, and terrestrial Life, and elevating our selves to the truly, holy and divinely reveal'd Ceremonies and Mysteries of Epicurus. And even Colotes himself, hearing one day Epicurus, as he was discoursing of natural things, fell suddenly at his Feet, and embrac'd his Knees, as Epicurus himself, glo∣rying in it, thus writes: For as if you had ador'd, what we were then saying, you were suddenly taken with a Desire, proceeding not from any natural Cause, to come to us, prostrate your self on the Ground, embrace our Knees, and use all those Gestures to us, which are ordinarily practic'd by those, who adore and pray to the Gods: so that you made us also, says he, reciprocally sanctify and adore you. Those, by Jupiter, well deserve to be pardon'd, who say, they would wil∣lingly give any Money for a Picture, in which should be represented to the life this fine story of one, lying prostrate at the Knees, and embracing the Legs of another, who mutually again adores him, and makes his devout Prayers to him. Nevertheless this devout Service, how well soever it was order'd and compos'd by Colotes, receiv'd not the condign Fruit, he expected: for he was not or∣der'd and compos'd by Colotes, receiv'd not the condign Fruit, he expected: for he was not declar'd wise; but it was only said to him: Go thy ways, and walk immortal, and understand, that we also are in like manner immortal. These Men, knowing well in their Consciences, that they have us'd such foolish Speeches, have had such Motions, and such Passions, dare nevertheless call o∣thers odious. And Colotes, truly having shewn us these fine First-fruits, and wise Positions touching the Na∣tural
Senses, That we eat Meat, and not Hay or Fo∣rage, and that when Rivers are deep and great, we pass them in Boats, but when shallow and easily for∣dable, on foot, cries out: You use vain and arrogant Spee∣ches, ô Socrates: You say one thing to those, who come to dis∣course with you, and practice another. Now I would fain know, what these vain and arrogant Speeches of Socrates were, since he ordinarily said, that he knew nothing, that he was always learning, and that he went enquir∣ing and searching after the Truth. But if, ô Colotes, you had hapned on such Expressions of Socrates, as are those, which Epicurus writ to Idomeneus: Send me then the First-fruits for the Entertainment of our sacred Body, for our self and for our Children: for so it comes upon me to speak: what more arrogant and insolent Words could you have us'd? And yet that Socrates spake otherwise, than he liv'd, you have wonderful Proofs in his Gests at Delium, at Potidaea, in his Behavior during the time of the thirty Tyrants, towards Archelaus, towards the People of Athens, in his Poverty, and in his Death. For are not these things beseeming and answerable to the Doctrin of Socrates? They would indeed, good Sir, have been indubitable Testimonies, to shew, that he acted otherwise, than he taught, if, having propos'd Pleasure for the End of Life, he had led such a Life, as this. Thus much for the Calumnies, he has utter'd a∣gainst Socrates. Colotes besides perceives not, that he is himself found stain'd with the same Crime of Impiety, he objects a∣gainst Socrates. For this is one of the Sentences and Propositions of Epicurus, That none, but the wise Man, ought irrevocably and unchangeably to be perswaded of any thing. Since then Colotes, even after those Ado∣rations, he perform'd to Epicurus, became not one of the Sages, let him first make these Questions and In∣terrogatories his own: How is it, that being hungry,
he eats Meat, and not Hay, and that he puts a Robe about his Body, and not about a Pillar, since he is not indubitably perswaded, either that a Robe is a Robe, or that Meat is Meat? But if he not only does these things, but also passes not over Rivers, when they are great and high, on foot, and flies from Wolves and Serpents, not being irrevocably perswaded, that any of these things is such, as it seems, but doing e∣very thing, according to what appears to him: the Opinion of Socrates concerning the Senses was then no Obstacle to him, but that he might in like manner make use of things, as they appear'd to him. For neither did Bread appear Bread, nor Hay appear Hay to Colotes, because he had read those holy Rules of Epicurus, which came down from Heaven; nor yet did Socrates thrô his vanity take a Fancy, that Hay was Bread, and Bread Hay: for these wise Men use better Opinions and Reasons, than we. But to have Sense, and to re∣ceive an Impression in the Imagination of things, as they appear, is common as well to the ignorant, as to the wise, as proceeding from Causes, where there needs not the Discourse of Reason. And the Proposition, which affirms, that the natural Senses are not perfect, nor certain enough to cause an entire Belief, hinders not, that every thing may appear to us; but leaving us to make use of our Senses in our Actions according to that, which appears, permits us not so to give Credit to them, as if they were exactly true, and without Error: for 'tis sufficient, that in what is ne∣cessary and commodious for use, there is nothing better. But as for the Science both of Knowledge, and Perfecti∣on, which the Soul of a Philosopher desires to have con∣cerning every thing, the Senses have it not. But as to this Colotes will farther give us occasion to speak of it hereafter, for he brings this Objection against several others.
Furthermore, whereas he profusely derides and de∣spises Socrates for asking, what Man is, and in a youth∣ful Bravery, as he terms it, affirming, that he was ig∣norant of it: 'tis manifest, that he himself who scoffs at it, never so much as thought of this matter; but Heraclitus on the contrary, as having done some great and worthy thing, said: I have been seeking my self. And of the Sentences, that were written over the Gates of Apollo's Temple at Delphos, the most excellent and most divine seems to have been this: Know thy self. And this it was, which gave Socrates an Occasion and Be∣ginning of doubting and enquiring into it, as Aristotle says in his Platonicks. And yet this appears to Colotes ri∣diculous and fit to be scofft at: and I wonder, that he derides not also his Master himself, who does as much, whenever he writes concerning the Substance of the Soul, and the Beginning of that confused Mass. For if that, which is compounded of both, as they them∣selves hold, of the Body, to wit, and the Soul, is Man, he, who searches into the Nature of the Soul, conse∣quently also searches into the Nature of Man, beginning from his chiefest Principle. Now that the Soul is very difficultly to be comprehended by Reason, and altogether incomprehensible by the exterior Senses, let us not learn from Socrates, who is a vain glorious and sophistical Disputer, but let us take it from these wise Men, who, having forg'd and fram'd the Substance of the Soul, as far as to her Faculties about the Flesh, by which she gives Heat, Softness, and Strength to the Body, of somewhat hot, spiritual, and aërial, proceeed not to that, which is the principal, but give over faint and tir'd by the way. For that, by which she judges, re∣members, loves, hates, and in a word that, which is prudent and rational, is, say they, made afterward of I know not what nameless Quality. Now we well know, that this nameless thing is a Confession of their
shameful Ignorance, whilst they pretend, they cannot name, what they are not able to understand or com∣prehend. But let this, as they say, be pardon'd them: for it seems not to be a light and easy Matter, and which every one can at the first Attempt find out and at∣tain to, but has retir'd it self to the Bottom of some very remote Place, and there lies obscurely conceal'd: so that there is not amongst so many Words and Terms, as are in use, any one, that can explain or shew it. Socrates therefore was not a Fool or Blockhead for seeking and searching, what himself was; but they are rather to be thought shallow Cox-Combs, who enquire after any o∣ther thing before this, the Knowledge of which is so necessary, and so hard to find. But granting a little to Colotes, that there is nothing so vain, useless, and o∣dious, as the seeking into ones self, let us ask him, what Confusion of human Life is in this, and how it is, that a Man cannot continue to live, when he comes once thus to reason and discourse in himself: Go to now, what am I? Am I a Composition, made up of Soul and Body, or rather a Soul, serving it self and making use of the Body, as an Horse-man, who, using his Horse, is not a Subject, com∣pos'd of Horse and Man? Or is every one of us the principal Part of the Soul, by which we understand, discourse, and act, and all the other Parts both of Soul and Body, only Organs and Ʋtensils of this Power? Or, to conclude, is there no proper Substance of the Soul at all apart, but only the Tem∣perature and Complexion of the Body so dispos'd, that it has Force and Power to understand and live? But Soceates does not by their Questions overthrow human Life, since all natural Philosophers treat of the same Matter. But those perhaps are the monstrous Questions and Enqui∣ries, that trouble the Common-weal, and turn it upside down, which are in Phaedrus, where he says, that every one ought to examin and consider himself, whether he is a savage Beast, more cautelous, outragious, and fu∣rious,
than ever was the Serpent Typhon; or on the con∣trary, an Animal more mild and gentle, partaking by Nature of a certain divine Portion, and such, as is free from Pride. Now by these Discourses and Reasonings he overturns not the Life of Man, but drives from it Presumption and Arrogance, and those haughty and extravagant Opinions and Conceits, he has of himself: for this is that Serpent Typhon, which your Teacher and Master has made to be so great in you by his warring against the Gods and divine Men. Having done with Socrates and Plato, he next attacks Stilpo. Now as for those his true Doctrins and good Discourses, by which he manag'd and govern'd himself, his Country, his Friends, and such Kings and Princes, as lov'd him, and esteem'd him, he has not written a Word; nor yet what Prudence and Magnanimity was in his heart, accompany'd with Meekness, Moderation, and Modesty: But having made mention of one of those little Sentences, he was wont in Mirth and Raillery to object against the Sophisters, he does, without alledging any Reason against it, or solving the Subtilty of the Objection, stir up a terrible Tragedy against Stilpo, saying, that the Life of Man is subverted by him, inas∣much as he affirms, that one thing cannot be predicated of another. For how, says he, shall we live, if we cannot stile a Man good, nor a Man a Captain, but must separately name a Man a Man, Good Good, and a Captain a Captain; nor can say, ten thousand Horse-men, or a fortify'd Town, but only call Horse-men Horse-men, and ten thousand ten thousand, and so of the rest? Now what Man ever was there, that liv'd the worse for this? Or who is there, that, hearing this Discourse, does not immediately perceive and understand it to be the Speech of a Man, who raillies gallantly▪ and proposes to others this Logical Question for the Ex∣ercise of their Wits? 'Tis not, ô Colotes, a great and dan∣gerous Scandal to say, that Man is not good, or that
Horse-men are not ten thousand; but to affirm, that God is not God, as you and the rest do, who will not confess, that there is a Jupiter presiding over Generati∣on, or a Ceres giving Laws, or a Neptune watering the Plants. 'Tis this Separation of Names, that is pernici∣ous, and fills our Life with Audaciousness, and an A∣theistical Contempt of the Gods. When you pluck from the Gods the Names and Appellations, that are ty'd to them, you abolish also the Sacrifices, Mysteries, Processions and Feasts. For to whom shall we offer the Sacrifices preceding the Tilling of the Ground, call'd Proteleia? to whom those for the obtaining of Health and Preservation, call'd Soteria? How shall we celebrate the Phosphoria or Funeral Rites, the Bacchanals, and the Ceremonies, that go before Marri∣age, if we admit neitherThe Priests of Bacchus. Bacchantes,The Gods presiding o∣ver Funeral and Marriage Solemnities, so call'd from the bearing of Torches, which was usual in both. Phosphori,Those, that were invo∣cated at the Beginning to plow and break open the Ground. Pro∣ëresii, norThose that had Care of Mans Safety and Pre∣servation. Soteres? For this it is, that touches the principal and greatest Points, being an Error in things, and not in Words, in the Structure of Propositions, or Use of Terms. Now if these are the things, that disturb and sub∣vert human Life, who are there that more offend and fail in Language than you? For saying, that Propositions are the only Substance of Speech, you utterly abolish the Being of simple Words, and admitting only, what is by Composition, you take away in the mean time the things, particularly signify'd by them, by which are wrought Disciplines, Doctrines, Anticipations, Intelli∣gences, Inclinations, and Assents, which you hold to be nothing at all. But as for Stilpo, thus the Matter stands.
If of a Man we predicate Good, and of an Horse Running, he says, that the Predicate, or thing predica∣ted, is not the same with the Subject, or that, of which it is predicated; but that the essential Definition of Man is one, and of Good another; and again, that to be an Horse, differs from to be Running: For being askt the Definition of the one and of the other, we do not give the same for them both; and that therefore those err, who predicate the one of the other. For if Good is the same with Man, and To run the same with an Horse, how is Good affirm'd also of Food and Medi∣cin; and again, by Jupiter, To run, of a Lion and a Dog? But if the Predicate is different, then we do not rightly say, that a Man is good, and an Horse runs. Now if Stilpo is in this exorbitant, and grosly mistaken, not admitting any Copulation of such things, as are in the Subject, or affirm'd of the Subject, with the Subject it self; but holding, that every one of them, if it is not absolutely one and the same thing with that, to which it happens, or of which it is spoken, ought not to be spoken or affirm'd of it, no not even as an Accident: 'tis nevertheless manifest, that he was only offended with some Words, and oppos'd the usual and accustom'd Manner of Speaking, and not that he overthrew Mans Life, and turn'd his Affairs upside down. Colotes then, having got rid of the old Philosophers, turns to those of his own time, but without naming a∣ny of them; thô he would have done better, either to have reprov'd by Name these Moderns, as he did the Antients, or else to have nam'd neither of them. But he who has so often employ'd his Pen against Socrates, Plato, and Parmenides, evidently demonstrates, that 'tis thrô Cowardise, he dares not attack the Living, and not for any Modesty or Reverence, of which he shew'd not the least Sign to those, who were far more excellent than these: But his Meaning is, as I suspect, to assault
the Cyrenaicks first, and afterwards the Academicks, who are Followers of Arcesilaus: for these were they who doubt∣ed of all things; but those, placing the Passions and I∣maginations in themselves, were of Opinion, that the Belief, proceeding from them, is not sufficient for the as∣suring and affirming of things; but, as if it were in the Siege of a Town, abandoning, what is without, they have shut themselves up in the Passions, using this Word, It seems, and not asserting of things without, It is. And therefore they cannot, as Colotes says of them, live, or have the Use of things. And then speaking comically of them, he adds: These deny, that there is a Man, an Horse, a Wall; but say, that they become Walls, Horses, Men. In which he first maliciously abuses the Terms, as Calumniators are usually wont to do. For thô these things follow from the Sayings of the Cyrenaicks; yet he ought to have declar'd the Fact, as they themselves teach it: for they affirm, that things then become sweet, bit∣ter, lightsome, or dark, when each thing has the Effect of these Passions in it self, so that it cannot be distract∣ed from it. But if Honey is said to be sweet, an Olive-branch bitter, Hail cold, Wine hot, and the Nocturnal Air dark, there are many Beasts things, and Men, that testifie the contrary: for some have an Aversion for Ho∣ney, others feed on the Branches of the Olive-Tree; some are scorcht by Hail, others cool'd with Wine; and some, whose Sight is dazled in the Sun, see well by Night. Wherefore Opinion, containing it self within these Passions, remains safe and free from Error; but when it goes forth, and attempts to be curious in judg∣ing and pronouncing concerning exterior things, It often deceives it self, and opposes others, who from the same Objects receive contrary Passions, and different Imagina∣tions. And Colotes seems properly to resemble those young Children, who are but beginning to learn their Letters: for being accustom'd to learn them, where
they see them in their own Horn-Books and Primers, when they see 'em written any where else, they doubt and are troubled: so those very Discourses, which he praises and approves in the Writings of Epicurus, he nei∣ther understands, nor knows again, when they are spo∣ken by others. For those, who say, that the Sence is truly inform'd and moulded, when there is presented one Image round, and another broken, but nevertheless permit us not to pronounce, that the Tower is round, and the Oar broken, confirm, that the Passions are their Imaginations, but they will not acknowledge and con∣fess, that the things without are so affected. But as those say not, that they are an Horse or Wall, but that in∣deed they are imprinted with the Figure of an Horse, or of a Wall: so also it is necessary to say, that the Sight is imprinted with a Figure round or triangular, with three unequal Sides, and not that the Tower is in that manner triangular or round: For the Image, by which the Sight is affected, is broken; but the Oar, whence that Image proceeds, is not broken. Since then there is a Difference between the Passions and the ex∣ternal Subject, the Belief must either remain in the Pas∣sion, or else the Being, that is confirm'd by the Ap∣pearance, is reprov'd and convinc'd of Untruth. And whereas they cry out, and are offended about the Sense, because the Cyrenaicks say not, that the thing with∣out is hot, but that the Passion of the Sense is such: is it not the same, with what is said touching the Taste, when he says, that the thing without is not sweet; but that some Passion and Motion about the Sense is such? And for him, who says, that he has re∣ceiv'd the Apprehension of an human Form, but per∣cives not, that it is a Man, whence has he taken occa∣sion so to say? Is not from those, who affirm, that they receive an Imagination and Apprehension of a bow'd Figure and Form; but that the Sight pronounces
not the thing, which was seen to have been bowing or round, but that a certain Effigies of it was such? Yes, by Jupiter, will some one say; but I, going near the Tower, or touching the Oar, will pronunce and affirm, that the one is strait, and the other has many Angles and Faces; but he, when he comes near it, will con∣fess, that it seems and appears so to him, and no more. Yes certainly, good Sir, and more than this, when he sees and observes the Consequence, that every Imaginati∣on is equally worthy of Belief for it self, and none for another; but that they are all in like Condition. But this your Opinion is quite lost, that all the Imaginations are true, and none false or to be disbeliev'd, if you think, that these, being near, ought to pronounce positively of that, which is without; but those, being far off, you cre∣dit no farther, than that they are so affected. For if they are in equal Condition, as to their being believ'd, when they are neer, or when they are far off, 'tis just, that ei∣ther upon all of them, or not upon these, should follow the Judgment, pronouncing, that a thing is; but if there is a Difference in the being affected between those, that are neer, and those, that are far off, it is then false, that one Sense and Imagination is not more express and evident than another. As those, which they call Attestations, are no∣thing to the Sense, but somewhat to Opinion: so they would have us, following them, to pronounce concern∣ing exterior things: and making Being the Judgment of Opinion, and what appears the Affection of Sense, they transfer the Judicature from that, which is totally true, to that, which often fails. But how full of Trouble and Contradiction, in respect of one another, these things are, what need is there to say at present? But the Reputation of Arcesilaus, who was the best belov'd, and most esteem'd of all the Philosophers in his Time, seems to have been no small Eye-sore to Epicu∣rus:
who says of him, that delivering nothing, peculiar to himself, or of his own Invention, he imprinted in illiterate Men an Opinion and Esteem of his being very know∣ing and learned. Now Arcesilaus was so far from desir∣ing any Glory by being a Bringer in of new Opinions, and from arrogating to himself those of the Ancients, that the Sophisters of that Time blam'd him for attri∣buting to Socrates, Plato, Parmenides, and Heraclitus, the Doctrines concerning the Retention of Assent, and the Incomprehensibility of things, having no need so to do; but only that he might strengthen them, and render them recommendable by inscribing them to such illustri∣ous Personages. For this therefore Thanks to Colotes, and every one, who declares, that the Academick Do∣ctrine was from higher Times deriv'd to Arcesilaus. Now as for the Retention of Assent, and the Doubting of all things, not even those, who have much labour'd in the Matter, and strain'd themselves to compose great Books, and large Treatises concerning it, were ever able to stir it, but bringing at last out of the Stoa it self the Ces∣sation from all Actions, as the Gorgon to frighten away the Objections, that came against them, were at last quite tir'd and gave over. For they could not, what Attempts and Stirs soever they made, obtain so much from the Instinct, by which the Appetite is mov'd to act, as to suffer it self to be call'd an Assent, or to acknowledge Sense for the Origin, and Principle of its Propension, but it appear'd of its own Accord to present it self to act, as having no need to be joyn'd with any thing else. For against such Adversaries the Combat and Dispute is lawful and just: and Such Words, as you have spoke, the like you may Expect to hear.—
For to speak to Colotes of Instinct and Consent, is, I suppose, all one as to play on the Harp before an Ass. But to those, who can give ear, and conceive, it is said, that there are in the Soul three sorts of Motions: the Imaginative, the Appetitive, and the Consenting. As to the Imaginative or the Apprehension, it cannot be taken away, thô one would: for one cannot, when things approach, avoid being inform'd, and, as it were, mould∣ed by them, and receiving an Impression from them. The Appetitive, being stirr'd up by the Imaginative, effectually moves Man to that, which is proper and a∣greeable to his Nature, just as when there is made a Propension and Inclination in the principal and reasona∣ble part. Now those, who withhold their Assent, and doubt of all things, take not away this, but make use of the Appetition or Instinct, naturally conducting e∣very Man to that, which seems convenient for him. What then is the only thing, that they shun? That, in which is bred Falshood and Deceit, that is, Opining, applying and giving their Consent, which is a yielding thrô Weakness to that, which appears, and has not any true Utility. For Action stands in need of two things, to wit, of the Apprehension or Imagination of what is agreeable to Nature, and of the Instinct or Appetition, driving to that, which is so imagin'd: of which, nei∣ther the one nor the other is repugnant to the Retention of Assent. For Reason withdraws us from Opinion, and not from Appetition or Imagination. When there∣fore that, which is delectable, seems to us to be proper for us, there is no need of Opinion to move and carry us to it, but Appetition immediately exerts it self, which is nothing else but the Motion and Inclination of the Soul. But a Man must have a Sense, as it were of these things, and be Flesh and Blood, and so the Pleasure also will appear to be good. Wherefore also it will seem good to him, who witholds his Assent: for he also par∣ticipates
of Sense, and is made of Flesh and Blood, and as soon as he has conceiv'd an Imagination of Good, desires it, and does all things that it may not escape from him; but, as much as possible he can, he will be, and keep himself with that, which is agreeable to his Nature, being drawn by Natural, and not by Geometrical Con∣straints. For these goodly, gentle, and tickling Moti∣ons of the Flesh, are, without any Teacher, attractive enough of themselves, even as these Men forget not to say, to draw even him, who will not in the least acknow∣ledge and confess, that he is softned and rendred pliable by them. But how comes it to pass, perhaps you will say, that he, who is thus doubtful, and withholds his Assent, hastens not away to the Mountain, instead of going to the Bagnio? or that rising up to go forth into the Market-place, he runs not his Head against the Wall, but takes his way directly to the Door? Do you ask this, who hold all the Senses to be infallible, and the Apprehensions of the Imagination certain and true? 'Tis, because the Bagnio appears to him not a Moun∣tain, but a Bagnio, and the Door seems not a Wall, but a Door, and the same is to be said of every other thing. For the Doctrine of Retention does not pervert the Sense; nor by absurd Passions and Motions work in it an Alteration, disturbing the imaginative Faculty, but only takes away Opinions, and for the rest makes use of other things according to their Nature. But 'tis impossible, you will say, not to consent to things, that are evident: for to deny such things as are believ'd, is more absurd, than neither to deny, nor af∣firm. Who then are they, that call in question things believ'd, and contend against things, that are evident? They, who overthrow and take away Divination, who say, that there is not any Government of Divine Provi∣dence, who deny the Sun and the Moon, to whom all Men offer Sacrifices, and whom they honor and adore,
to be animated. And do not you take away that, which is apparent to all the World, that the Young are con∣tain'd in the Nature of their Parents? Do ye not, con∣trary to the Sense of all Men, affirm, that there is no Medium between Pleasure and Pain, saying not to be in Pain, is to be in the Fruition of Pleasure, that not to do, is to suffer, and that not to rejoyce, is to be griev'd? But to let pass all the rest, what is more evident, and more generally believ'd by all Men, than that those, who are seiz'd with Melancholy Distempers, and whose Brain is troubled, and their Wits distracted, do, when the Fit is on them, and their Understanding alter'd and trans∣ported, imagin, that they see and hear things, which they neither see nor hear? Whence they frequently cry out: Women, in Black array'd, bear in their Hands, To burn mine Eyes, Torches and fiery Brands. And again, See, in her Arms she holds my Mother dear. These and many other Illusions, more strange and tragical than these, resembling those Mormoes and Bug∣bears, which they themselves laugh at and deride, as they are describ'd by Empedocles to be, Bow-legg'd, Ram-headed, body'd like an Ox, And fac'd like Man,— with certain other prodigious and unnatural Phantoms, these Men, having gather'd together out of Dreams, and the Alienations of Distracted Minds, affirm, that none of them is a Deception of the Sight, a Falsity, or Inconsistence; but that all these Imaginations are true,
being Bodies and Figures; that come from the ambient Air. What thing then is there so impossible in Nature, as to be doubted of, if it is possible to believe such Reveries as these? For these Men, supposing, that such things, as never any Mask-maker, Potter, Framer of wonder∣ful Images, or skilful and all-daring Painter durst joyn together, to deceive, or make Sport for the Beholders, are seriously, and in good earnest existent, nay, which is more, affirming, that if they are not really so, all Firmness of Belief, all Certainty of Judgment and Truth is for ever gone, do by these their Suppositions and Af∣firmations cast all things into Obscurity, and bring Fears into our Judgments, and Suspicions into our Actions, if those things which we apprehend, do, are familiarly acquainted with, and have at band, are grounded on the same Imagination and Belief with these furious, ab∣surd, and extravagant Phansies. For the Equality, which they suppose to be in all Apprehensions, rather derogates from the Credit of such, as are usual and rati∣onal, than adds any Belief to those, that are unusual and repugnant to Reason. Wherefore we know many Phi∣losophers, who would rather, and more willingly grant, that no Imagination is true, than that all are so, and that would rather simply disbelieve all the Men, they never had convers'd with, all the things, they had not expe∣rimented, and all the Speeches, they had not heard with their own Ears, than perswa them∣selves, that any one of these I∣maginations, conceiv'd by these frantick,The Greek has , which Xylan∣der reners by Corbanteo furore exagiti, that is, posses'd with such a Fury, as agited th Corytes, or Servtors of Cybl, when running like ad-men a∣bout the Streets, they cut themselves with Knives, struck such, as they met, and committed several other extravagant Actions. sanatical, and dreaming Persons, is true. Since then there are some I∣maginations, which may, and others, which may not be re∣jected,
'tis lawful for us to retain our Assent concerning them, thô there were no other Cause, but this Discor∣dance, which is sufficient to work in us a Suspicion of things, as having nothing certain and assur'd, but being altogether full of Obscurity and Perturbation. For in the Infinities of the World, and the Nature of A∣toms, and the Differences of Individuums and Declina∣tions, althô they trouble and disturb very many, there is yet this Comfort, that none of all these things, that are in question, is near us, but rather every one of them far remote from Sense. But as to this Diffidence, Per∣plexity, and Ignorance, concerning sensible things and Imaginations, presented to our Eyes, our Ears, and our Hands, what Opinion does it not shock? What Con∣sent does it not turn upside down? For if Men, neither Drunk, Intoxicated, nor otherwise disturb'd in their Senses, but sober, sound in Mind, and professedly writing of the Truth, and of the Canons and Rules, by which to judge it, do in the most evident Passions and Motions of the Sense set down either that, which has no Exis∣tence, for true, or that, which is existent, for false; 'tis neither to be admir'd, nor incredible, if they give no Judgment of the Imaginations, that appear, but are ra∣ther of contrary Judgments. For 'tis less to be wondred, that a Man should neither affirm the one nor the other, but keep himself in a Meen between two opposite things, than that he should set down things, repugnant and con∣trary to one another. For he, that neither affirms nor denys, but keeps himself quiet, is less repugnant to him, who affirms an Opinion, than he, who denies it, and to him who denies an Opinion, than he, who affirms it. Now if 'tis possible to withhold ones Assent con∣cerning these things, 'tis not impossible also concerning others, at least according to your Opinion, who say, that one Sense does not exceed another, nor one Imagi∣nation another. The Doctrine then of retaining the
Assent, is not, as Colotes thinks, a Fable, or an Invention of rash and light headed Young Men, who please themselves in babbling and prating; but a certain Habit and Dis∣position of Men, who desire to keep themselves from mistaking and falling into Error, not leaving the Judgment at a venture to such suspected and inconstant Senses, nor suffering themselves to be deceiv'd with those, who hold, that things, which appear, are credi∣ble, and ought to be believ'd, as certain, when they see so great an Obscurity and Uncertainty in Imagi∣nations and Appearances. But the Infinity, you assert, is a Fable, and so indeed are the Images, you dream of, and he breeds in Young Men Rashness and Self-conceitedness, who writ of Pythocles, not yet eighteen years of Age, that there was not in all Greece a better or more excellent Nature, that he admirably well ex∣press'd his Conceptions, and that his Case was much like that of Women, praying, that all these extraordi∣nary Endowments of the Young Man might not work him Hatred and Envy. But these are Sophisters, and arrogant, who write so impudently and proudly against great and ex∣cellent Personages. I confess indeed, that Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus and Democritus contradicted those, who went before them; but never durs any Man, bsides Colotes, set forth with such an insolent Title, as this, against all at once. Whence it comes to pass, that like to such, as have offended some Divinity, confessing his Fault, he says thus towards the end of his Book: Those, who have established Laws and Ordinances, and instituted Monarchies and other Governments in Towns and Cities, have plac'd human Life in great Repose and Security, and deliver'd it from many Troubles; and, if any one should go about to take this away, we should lead the Live of savage Beasts, and should be every one ready to eat up one another, as we meet. For these are the very words of Colotes, thô neither
justly nor truly spoken. For if any one, taking away the Laws, should leave us nevertheless the Doctrins of Parmenides, Socrates, Plato, and Heraclitus, we should be far from mutually devouring one another, and leading the Life of Beasts: for we should fear dishonest things, and should for Honesty alone venerate Justice, the Gods, our Superiours, and Magistrates, believing, that we have Spirits and Daemons, who are the Guar∣dians and Superintendents of human Life, esteeming all the Gold, that is upon and within the Earth, not to be equivalent to vertue, and doing that willingly by reason, as Xenocrates says, which we now do by force, and thrô fear of the Law. When then will our Life become savage and bestial? When, the Laws being taken away, there shall be left Books and Doctrines, inciting Men to Pleasure, when the World shall be thought not to be rul'd and govern'd by divine Provi∣dence, when those Men shall be esteem'd wise, who shall spit at Honesty, if it is not joyn'd with Pleasure, and such Discourses and Sentences, as these, shall be scoft at, and drided: Gods Justice has one Eye, which all things sees: And again: God near us stands, and views, what ere we do: And once more: God, as Antiquity has deliver'd to us, holding the Beginning, Middle and End of the Universe, makes a direct Line, walking according to Nature. After him follows Justice, a Punisher of those, who have been deficient in their Duties by trangres∣sing the divine Law. For they, who contemn these things, as if they were Fables, and think, that the So∣veraign Good of Man consists about the Belly, and
in those other Labours, by which Pleasure is procur'd, are such as stand in need of the Law, and Fear, and Stripes, and some King, Prince, or Magistrate, ha∣ving in his hand the Sword of Justice: to the end they may not devour their Neighbours thrô their Gluttony, render'd confident by their Atheistical Impiety. For this is the Life of Brutes, because brute Beasts know nothing better, nor more honest then Pleasure, understand not the Justice of the Gods, nor revere the Beauty of Vertue, but if Nature has be∣stow'd on them any Point of Courage, Subtilty, or Acti∣vity, they make use of it for the Satisfaction of their fleshly Pleasure, and the Accomplishment of their Lusts. And therefore Metrodorus is esteem'd by them a very wise Man, when he says; All the sine, subtle, and ingenious Inventions of the Soul have been found out for the Pleasure and Delight of the Flesh, or for the Hopes of attaining to it and enjoying it, and every Act, which tends not to this End, is vain and unprofitable. The Laws being by such Discourses and Philosophical Reasons, as these, taken away, there wants nothing to a beast like Life, but Lions Paws, Wolves Teeth, Oxens Paunches, and Camels Necks: and these Passions and Doctrins do the Beasts themselves for want of Speech and Letters express by their Bellowings, Neighings, and Brayings, all their Voice being for their Belly, and the Pleasure of their Flesh, which they embrace and rejoyce in either pre∣sent or future; unless it be perhaps some Animal, which naturally takes Delight in Chattering and Garrulity. No sufficient Praise therefore, or equivalent to their Deserts, can be given those, who, for the restraining of such bestial Passions, have set down Laws, establish'd Policy and Government of State, instituted Magistrates, and ordain'd good and wholsom Decrees.
But who are they, that utterly confound and abolish this? Are they not those, who say, that the Garland of Tranquillity and a repos'd Life is not comparable to, but far more valuable than all the Kingdoms and Prin∣cipalities in the World? Are they not those, who declare, that Reigning and being a King is a mistaking the Path, and straying from the right way of Felicity? And who write in express Terms: We are to treat, how a Man may best keep and preserve the End of Nature, and how he may from the very Beginning avoid entring of his own Free-will and voluntarily upon Offices of Magistracy, and Go∣vernment over the People: And yet again these other Words are theirs: There is no need at all that a Man should tire out his Mind and Body to preserve the Greeks, and to obtain from them a Crown of Wisdom; but to eat and drink well, ô Timocrates, without prejudicing, but ra∣ther pleasing the Flesh. And yet in the Constitution of Laws and Policy, which Colotes so much praises, the first and most important Article is the Belief and Perswasion of the Gods: wherefore also Lycurgus heretofore sancti∣fy'd the Lacedaemonians, Numae the Romans, the ancient Ion the Athenians, and Deucalion universally all the Greeks, by rendring them devout and affectionate to the Gods in Prayers, Oaths, Oracles, and Prophesies, by means of the Hope and Fear, they imprinted in their Minds. And if you will take the Pains to travel thrô the World, you may find Towns and Cities without Walls, with∣out Letters, without Kings, without Houses, without Wealth, without Money, without Theatres and Places of Exercise; but there was never seen nor shall be seen by Man any one City without Temples and Gods, or without making use of Prayers, Oaths, Prophesies, and Sacrifices for the obtaining of Blessings and Benefits, and the averting of Curses and Calamities. Nay I am of Opinion, that a City might sooner be built without any Ground, to fix it on, than a Common-weal be constitu∣ted,
altogether void of Religion, and the Opinion of the Gods, or being constituted, be preserv'd. But this, which is the Foundation and Ground of all Laws, do these Men, not going circularly about, nor secretly and by enigmatical Speeches, but attacking it with the first of their most principal Opinions, directly subvert and overthrow: and then afterwards, as if they were haunted by the Furies, they come, and confess, that they have grievously offended in thus taking away the Laws, and confounding the Ordinances of Justice and Policy, that they may not be capable of Pardon. For to err in O∣pinion, thô it be not the part of wise Men, is at least human; but to impute to others the Errors and Offen∣ces, they commit themselves, how can any one declare, what it is, if he forbears to give it the Name, it de∣serves? For if in writing against Antidorus, or Bion, the Sophister, he had made mention of Laws, Policy, Order, and Justice, might not either of them have said to him, as Electea did to her mad Brother Orestes: Lye still at ease, poor wretch, keep in thy Bed, and there cherish thy Corpusculum, leaving those to expo∣stulate and find fault with me, who have themselves liv'd oeconomically and politically? Now such are all those, whom Colotes has revil'd and rail'd at in his Book. Amongst whom Democritus in his Writings advises, and exhorts to the Learning of the military Science, as being the greatest of all, and to the accustoming ones self to bear the Fatigues of it, by which Men attain to great Wealth and Honor. And as for Parmenides, he beautify'd and adorn'd his native Country with most ex∣cellent Laws, which he there establish'd, so that even to this Day the Officers every year, when they enter first on the Exercise of their Charges, are oblig'd to swear,
that they will observe the Laws and Ordinances of Parmenides. Empedocles brought to Justice some of the principal of his City, and caus'd them to be condemn'd for their insolent Behavior, and Embezling of the pub∣lick Treasure, and also deliver'd his Country from Sterility and the Plague, to which Calamities it was before subject, by immuring and stopping up the Holes of certain Mountains, whence there issu'd an hot South-wind, which overspread all the plain Country, and blasted it. And Socrates, after he was condemn'd, when his Friends offer'd him, if he pleas'd, an Oppor∣tunity of making his Escape, absolutely refus'd to make use of it, that he might maintain the Authority of the Laws, choosing rather to dy unjustly, than to save himself by disobeying the Laws of his Country, Melissus, being Praetor, or Captain General of his Coun∣trey, vanquisht the Athenians in a Battle at Sea. Plato left in his Writings excellent Discourses concerning the Laws, Government, and Policy of a Commonweal, and yet he imprinted much better in the Hearts and Minds of his Disciples and Familiars, which were the Cause of Dions delivering Sicily from the Tyranny of Dionysius, and that Thrace was set at liberty by Pytho and Heraclides, who slew Cotys. Chabrias also and Phocion, those two great Generals of the Athenians, came out of the Academy; or Plato's School. As for Epicurus he in∣deed sent certain Persons into Asia to chide Timocrates, and remov'd him out of the Kings Palace, because he had offended his Brother Metrodorus; and this is written in their own Books. But Plato sent of his Disciples and Friends Aristonymus to the Arcadians, to set in order their Common∣weal, Phormio to the Eleaeans, and Menedemus to the Pyrrhae∣ans. Eudoxus gave Laws to the Cnidians, and Aristotle to the Stagirites, who were both of them the Intimates of Plato. And Alexander the great demanded of Xenocrates Rules and Precepts for reigning well. And he, who
was sent to the same Alexander by the Grecians, dwel∣ling in Asia, and most of all inflam'd and stimulated him to embrace and undertake the War against the Barbarian King of Persia, was Delius the Ephesian, one of Plato's Familiars. Zeno, the Disciple of Parmenides, having attempted to kill the Tyrant Demylus, and fail∣ing in his Design, maintain'd the Doctrin of Epimenides, like pure and fine Gold, try'd in the Fire, that there is nothing, which a magnanimous Man ought to dread, but Dishonor, and that there are none, but Children and Women, or effeminate and women-hearted Men, who fear Pain: for having with his own Teeth bitten off his Tongue, he spit it in the Tyrants Face. But out of the School of Epicurus, and from among those, who follow his Doctrin, I will not ask, what Tyrant-killer has proceeded, nor yet what Man, valiant and victorious in Feats of Arms, what Lawgiver, what Prince, what Councellor, or what Governor of the People; neither will I demand, who of them has been tormented or dy'd for supporting of Right and Justice. But which of all these Sages has for the Benefit and Service of his Cuntrey undertaken so much as one Voyage at Sea, gone of an Embassy, or expended a Sum of Money? What Record is there extant of one Civil Action in matter of Government, perform'd by any of you? And yet because Metrodorus went down one day from the City as far as the Haven of Pyreum, taking a Journey of forty Stadia or four or five Miles, to assist Mithres a Syrian, one of the King of Persians Court, who had been arrested and taken Prisoner, he writ of it to every one, and in all his Letters, Epicurus also highly manifying and extolling this wonderful Voyage. What value then, think you▪ would they have put upon it, if they had done such an Act, as Aristotle did, who procur'd the Restauration and Rebuilding of Stagira, the Town of his Nativity, after it had been destroy'd
by King Philip, or as Theophrastus, who twice deliver'd his City, when possess'd and held by Tyrants? Would not the Rlver Nilus sooner have given over to bear the Paper-reed, than they have been weary of writing their brave Exploits? And is it not a very great Indignity, that of so many Sects of Philosophers, as have been extant, they alone should enjoy the Benefits, that are in Cities, without having ever contributed to them any thing of their own? There are not even any Tragical or Comical Poets, who do not always endeavor to do or say some good thing or other in defence of the Laws and Policy: But these Men, if peradventure they write, write of Policy, that we may not concern our selves in the Government of the Commonweal; of Rhetorick, that we may not perform any Act of Eloquence; and of Royalty, that we may shun the Living and Conversing with Kings: nor do they ever name any of those great Personages, who have intermedled in Civil Af∣fairs, but only to scoff at them, and abolish their Glory. Thus in Words alone do they say, that Epaminondas had something of Good, but that as little as possible, or , for that is the very word, they use: they moreover call him iron-hearted, and ask, what ail'd him, that he went marching his Army thrô all Pelopon∣nesus, and why he did not rather keep himself quiet at home with a little Garland or Chaplet on his head, employ'd only in cherishing and making much of him∣self. But methinks I ought not in this Place to omit, what Metrodorus writ in his Book of Philosophy, when utterly abjuring all Medling in the Management of the State, he said thus: Some thrô an Abundance of Va∣nity and Arrogance have so deep an Insight into the Business of it, that in treating about the Precepts of good Life and Vertue, they suffer themselves to be carry'd away with the very same Desires, as were Lycurgus and Solon. What
is this? Was it then Vanity, and Abundance of Vani∣ty, to set free the City of Athens, to render Sparta well-policy'd and govern'd by wholsom Laws, that young Men might do nothing licentiously, nor get Children upon common Courtesans and Whores, and that Riches, Delights, Intemperance, and Dissolution, might no longer bear sway, and have Command in Cities, but Law and Justice? For these were the De∣sires of Solon. To this Metrodorus by way of Scorn and Contumely adds this Conclusion: It is then very well beseeming a Gentleman to laugh heartily, as at other Men, so especially at these Solons and Lycurguses. But such an one, ô Metrodorus, is not a Gentleman, but a servile, and dissolute Person, and deserves to be scourg'd, not with that Whip, which is for free-born Persons, but with thatThis was a Scourge of several Strings, at the Ends of which were fastned Ankle-bones, call'd Astragali, to render it more smarting. Astra∣galote or Cat-of-nine-tails, with which those gelded Sacrificers, call'dThese were the fu∣rious Priests of Cybele, suppos'd to be so call'd from the River Gallus, by the liberal Drinking of whose Water they fell mad, and castrated them∣selves. Galli, were wont to be chastis'd, when they fail'd of per∣forming their Duty in the Cere∣monies and Sacrifices of the God∣dess Cybele, the great Mother of the Gods. But that they made War not against the Lawgivers, but against the Laws themselves, one may hear and understand from Epicurus: for in his Questions he asks himself; Whether a wise Man, being assur'd, that it will not be known, will do any thing, that the Laws forbid: to which he answers: A simple Determination is not ready, that is, I will do it indeed; but I am not willing to confess it. And a∣gain, I suppose, writing to Idomeneus, he exhorts him not to make his Life a Slave to the Laws, nor to the Opinions of Men, unless it be to avoid the Trouble,
they prepare, by the Scourge and Chastisement, so near at hand. If then those, who abolish the Laws, Go∣vernments, and Policies of Men, subvert and destroy human Life, and if Metrodorus and Epicurus do this by dehorting and withdrawing their Friends from concern∣ing themselves in publick Affairs, by hating those, who intermeddle in them, by reviling the first most wise Lawgivers, and by advising the Contempt of the Laws, provided there is no Fear and Danger of the Whip and Punishment, I do not see, that Colotes has brought so many false Accusations against the other Philosophers, as he has alledg'd and advanc'd true ones against the Writings and Doctrins of Epicurus.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Plutarch's Consolatory Letter to his Wife. Translated out of the Greek by Robert Midgley, M. D. & Col. Med. Lond. Cand. Plutarch to his Wife, All Health: AS for the Messenger you dispatched to tell me of the Death of my little Daughter, it seems he miss'd his way as he was going to Athens. But when I came to Tanagra, I heard of it by my Neice. I suppose by this time the Funeral is over. I wish, that whatever happens as well now as hereafter, may create you no Dissatisfaction. But if you have designedly let any thing alone, depending up∣on my judgment, thinking better to determin the point if I were with you, I pray let it be without Ceremony and timerous Superstition, which I know are far from you. Only, dear Wife, let you and me bear our Affliction with Patience. I know very well, and do comprehend, what a loss we have had; but
if I should find you grieve beyond Measure, this would trouble me more than the thing it self; for I had my Birth neither from a Stock nor a Stone; and you know it full well, I having been assistant to you in the Education of so many Children, which we brought up at Home under our own Care. This much-lamented Daughter, was born after four Sons, which made me call her by your own Name; therefore I know she was dear to you, and Grief must have a peculiar Pungency in a Mind tenderly affectionate to Children, when you call to Mind how naturally witty and innocent she was, void of Anger and not querelous. She was naturally mild, and compassionate to a Miracle. And she show∣ed Delight in, and gave a Specimen of her Humanity and Gratitude towards any thing that had obliged her; for she would pray her Nurse to give suck, not only to other Children, but to her very play-things, as it were courteously inviting them to her Table, and making the best Chear for them she could. Now, my dear Wife, I see no Reason why these and the like things, which delighted us so much when she was alive, should upon Remembrance of them afflict us when she is dead. But I also fear, lest while we cease from Sorrowing, we should forget her, as Clymene said, I hate the handy horned Bow, And banish Youthful Pastimes now: because she would not be put in Mind of her Son, by the Exercises he had been used to. For Nature always shuns such things as are troublesome. But since our little Daughter afforded all our Sences the sweetest and most charming Pleasure; so ought we to cherish her Memory, which will many Ways conduce more to our Joy than our Grief. And it is but just, that the same Arguments which we have oft-times used to others, should prevail upon our selves at this so seasonable a
time, and that we should not supinely sit down, and overwhelm the Joys which we have tasted, with a Multiplicity of new Griefs. Moreover, they who were present at the Funeral, report this with Admiration, That you neither put on Mourning, nor disfigured your self or any of your Maids; neither were there any costly Preparations nor magnificent Pomp, but that all things were managed with Prudence and Moderation. And it seemed not strange to me, that you, who never used richly to dress your self, for the Theatre or other Public Solemnities, esteeming such Magnificence vain and use∣less even in Matters of Delight, have now practis'd Frugality on this funest Occasion. For, a vertuous Woman ought not only to preserve her Purity in Rio∣tous Feasts, but also to think thus with her self, That the Tempest of the Mind in violent Grief must be calmed by Patience; which does not intrench on the Natural Love of Parents towards their Children, as many think, but only struggles against the disorderly and irregular Passions of the Mind. For, we allow this Love of Children to discover it self, in lamenting, wishing for and longing after them when they are dead. But the excessive Inclination to Grief, which carries People on to unseemly Exclamations and furious Behaviour, is no less culpable, than luxurious Intem∣perance. Yet Reason seems to plead in its Excuse; because, instead of Pleasure, Grief and Sorrow are In∣gredients of the Crime. What can be more Irrational, I pray, than to check excessive Laughter and Joy, and yet to give a free Course to Rivers of Tears and Sighs, which flow from the same Fountain? Or, as some do quarrel with their Wives for using some Arti∣ficial Helps to Beauty; and in the mean time suffer them to shave their Heads, wear the mournful Black, sit disconsolate, and lie in pain? and, which is worst of
all, if their Wives at any time chastise their Servants or Maids immoderately, they will interpose and hinder them; but, at the same time suffering them to torment and punish themselves most cruelly, in a Case which peculiarly requires their greatest. Tenderness and Hu∣manity? But between us, dear Wife, there never was any Occasion for such Contests, nor, I think, ever will. For there is no Philosopher of your Acquaintance, who is not in love with your Frugality, both in Ap∣parel and Diet; nor a Citizen, to whom the Simplicity and Meanness of your Dress is not conspicuous, both at Religious Sacrifices, and Public Shews in the Theatre. Formerly also, you discovered on the like Occasion, a great Constancy of Men, when you lost your Eldest Son. And again, when the lovely Charon left us. For I remember, when the News was brought me of my Sons Death, as I was returning Home with some Friends and Guests who accompanied me to my House, that when they beheld all Things in Order, and ob∣served a profound Silence every where, (as they after∣wards declared to others) they thought no such Cala∣mity had happened, but that the Report was false. So discreetly had you settled the Affirs of the House, at that Time when no small Confusion and Disorder might have been expeced. And yet you gave this Son suck your self, and endured the lancing of your Breast, to prevent the ill Effects of a Contusion. These are Things worthy of a generous Woman, and one that loves her Children. Whereas, we see most other Women to receive their Children in their Hands as Play-things, with a Feminine Mirth and Jollity, and afterwards, if they chance to die, they will drench themselves in the most vain and excessive So ow. Not that this is any Effect of their Love (for tht gentle Passion acts regularly and discreetly) but it rather pro∣ceeds from a Desire of Vain-glory, mix'd with a little
Natural Affection, which renders their Mourning bar∣barous, brutish and extravagant. Which Thing Aesop knew very well, when he tells the Story of Jupiter's giving Honours to the Gods; for, it seems, Grief also made her Demands, and it was granted that she should be honoured, but only by those who were willing of their own Accord to do it. And indeed, this is the Beginning of Sorrow. Every Body first gives her free Access; and after she is once rooted and settled, and become familiar, she will not be forced thence with their best Endeavors. Therefore she must be resisted at her first Approach, nor must we surrender the Fort to her by any exterior Signs, whether of Apparel, or shaving the Hair, or any other such like Symptoms of mournful Weakness; which hapning daily, and wounding us by Degrees with a kind of foolish Bash∣fulness, at length do so enervate the Mind, and re∣duce her to such Streights, that quite dejected and be∣sieged with Grief, the poor timerous Wretch dare not be merry, or see the light, or eat and drink in Com∣pany. This Inconvenience is accompanied by a Neg∣lect of the Body, Carelesness of Anointing and Ba∣thing, with whatsoever else relates to the Elegancy of Human Life. Whereas, on the contrary, the Soul, when it is disordered, ought to receive Aid from the Vigor of a healthful Body. For, the sharpest Edge of the Souls Grief, is rebated and slack'd when the Body is in Tranquility and Ease, like the Sea in a Calm. But where, from an ill Course of Diet, the Body becomes dry and hot, so that it cannot supply the Soul with commodious and serene Spirits, but only breaths forth Melancholy Vapors and Exhalations, which perpetually annoy her with Grief and Sadness; there it is difficult for a Man (tho never so willing and desirous) to recover the Tranquillity of his Mind,
after it has been disturbed with so many evil Affecti∣ons. But, that which is most to be dreaded in this Case, does not at all affrighten me, to wit, the Visits of foolish Women, and their accompanying you in your Tears and Lamentations; by which they sharpen your Grief, not suffering it either of it self, or by the Help of others, to fade and vanish away. For, I am not ignorant how great a Combat you lately entred, when you assisted the Sister of Theon, and opposed the Wo∣men who came running in with horrid Cries and La∣mentations, bringing Fewel as it were to her Passion. Assuredly, when Men see their Neighbors House on Fire, every one contributes his utmost to quench it: but when they see the Mind inflamed with furious Passion, they bring Fewel to nourish and encrease the Flame. When a Man's Eye is in pain, he is not suf∣fered to touch it, tho the Inflammation provoke him to it, nor will they that are near him meddle with it. But he who is gaul'd with Grief, sits and exposes his Di∣stemper to every one, like Waters that all may poach in; and so that which at first seem'd a light Itching, or trivial Smart, by much fretting and provoking, be∣comes a great and almost incurable Disease. But, I know very well, that you will arm your self against these Inconveniences. Moreover, I would have you endeavor to call often to Mind that Time, when our Daughter was not as yet born to us; then we had no cause to complain of Fortune. Then, joining that Time with this, argue thus with your self, that we are now in the same Condition as then. Otherwise, dear Wife, we shall seem discontented at the Birth of our little Daughter, if we own that our Circumstances were better before her Birth. But the two Years of her Life, are by no means to be forgotten by us, but to be numbred amongst our Blessings, in that they afforded
us an agreeable Pleasure. Nor must we esteem a small Good for a great Evil; nor ungratefully complain a∣gainst Fortune, for what she has actually given us, because she has not added what we wish'd for. Cer∣tainly, to speak reverently of the Gods, and to bear our Lot with an even Mind, without accusing Fortune, always brings with it a fair Reward. But he who in such a Case calls prosperous Things to Mind, and turning his Thoughts from dark and melancholly Objects, fixes them on bright and chearful ones; he wil either quite extinguish his Grief, or by allaying it with contrary Sentiments, will render it weak and feeble. For, as a Perfume brings Delight to the Nose, and arms it against ill Scents; so, the Remembrance of Happiness gives necessary Assistance in Adversity to those who avoid not the Recollection of their past Prosperity, nor com∣plain at all against Fortune, which certainly would little become us, to accuse our Life, if like a Book it hath but one little Blot in it, tho all the rest be fair and clean. For you have oftentimes heard, that true Happiness consists in the right Discourses and Counsels of the Mind, tending to its own constant Establishment; and that the Changes of Fortune are of no great Im∣portance to the Felicity of our Life. But yet, if we must also be governed by exterior things, and with the common Sort of People have a Regard to Casualties, and suffer any kind of Men to be judges of our Hap∣piness; however, do not you take notice of the Tears and Moans of such as visit you at present, condoling your Misfortune; for, their Tears and Sighs are but of Course. But rather, do you consider how happy every one of them esteems you, for the Children you have, the House you keep, and the Life you lead For it would be an ill thing, while others covet your Fortune, though sullied with this Affliction, that you should ex∣claim
against what you enjoy; and not be sensible from this Tast of Affliction how grateful you ought to be for the Happiness which remains untouched. Or, like some, who collecting all the Defective Verses of Homer, 'd over at the same time so many excellent Parts of s Poems, so shall we peevishly complain of and reckon up the nconveniencies of our Life, neglecting at the me time promiscuously the Benefits thereof? Or, shall we imitate covetous and sordid Misers, who having heap'd together much Riches, never enjoy what they have in Possession, but bewail it if it chance to be lost? But if you ament the poor Girl, because she died unmarried and without Off-spring; you have where∣withal to comfort your self, in that you are defective in none of these Things, having had your share. And these are not to be esteemed great Evils where they are wanted, and small Benefits where they are enjoyed. But so long as she is gone to a Place where she feels no Pain, she has no need of our Grief. For, what Harm can befall us from her, when she is free from all Hurt? And surely the Loss of great Things abates its Grief, when it is come to this, that there is no more Ground of Grief or Care for them. But thy Timoxena was deprived but of small Matters; for, she had no Knowledge but of such, neither took she de∣light but in such small Things. But for that which she never was sensible of, nor so much as once did enter into her Thoughts, how can you say it is taken from her? As for what you hear others say, who perswade the Vulgar, that the Soul when once freed from the Body suffers no Inconvenience or Evil, nor is sensible at all, I know that you are better grounded in the Doctrines delivered down to us from our Ancestors, as also in the Sacred Mysteries of Bacchus, than to believe such Sto∣ries; for, the Religious Symbols are well known to
us who are of the Fraternity. Therefore be assured, that the Soul being incapable of Death, suffers in the same Manner as Birds that are kept in a Cage. For, if she has been a long time educated and cherished in the Body, and by long Custom has been made familiar with most Things of this Life, she will (though separa∣ble) return again, and at length enter the Body; nor ceaseth it by new Births now and then to be entangled in the Chances and Events of this Life. For, do not think that Old Age, is therefore evil spoken of and blamed, because it is accompanied with Wrinkles, Gray-Hairs, and Weakness of Body: but this is the most troublesome thing in Old Age, that it staineth and corrupteth the Soul with the Remembrance of Things relating to the Body, to which she was too much ad∣dicted; thus it bendeth and boweth, retaining that Form which it took of the Body. But that which is taken away in Youth, being more soft and tractable, soon returns to its native Vigor and Beauty just like Fire that is quenched, which if it be forthwith kindled again, sparkles and burns out immediately, As soon as e're we take our Breath, 'Twere good to pass the Gates of Death, before too great a Love of bodily and earthly Thing be engendred in the Soul, and it become soft and tender by being used to the Body, and as it were by Charms and Potions incorporated with it. But, the Truth of this will appear in the Laws and Traditions received from our Ancestors: for, when any Children dye, no Libations nor Sacrifices are made for them, nor any other of those Ceremonies which are wont to be per∣formed for the Dead. For, Infants have no part of Earth or Earthly Affections. Nor do they hover or arry about their Sepulchres or Monuments, when
their dead Bodies are exposed. The Religion of our Coun∣try teaches us otherwise, and it is an Impious Thing not to believe what our Laws and Traditions assert, That the Souls of Infants pass immediately into a bet∣ter and more Divine State. Wherefore, since it is safer to give Credit to our Traditions, than to call them in Question, let us comply with the Custom in outward and publick Behaviour; and let our Interiour, be more unpolluted, pure and holy.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of the three sorts of Government, Monar∣chy, Democracy, Oligarchy. Translated out of the Greek by R. Smith M. A. AS I was considering with my self to bring forth and propose to the Judgment of this wor∣thy Company the Discourse, I held yesterday in your Presence, methoughts, I heard Politi∣cal Vertue, I know not whether in the Illusion of a Dream, or in a true and real Vision, say thus to me: A golden Ground is laid for sacred Songs. We have already laid the Foundation of the Discourse by perswading and exhorting persons to concern them∣selves in managing the Affairs of the Commonweal, and now we proceed to build upon it the Doctrin, which is due after such an Exhortation. For after a Man has receiv'd an Admonition and Exhortation to deal in the Affairs of the State, there ought consequent∣ly
to be given him Precepts of Government, follow∣ing and observing which, he may, as much as 'tis pos∣sible for a Man to do, profit the Public, and in the mean time honestly prosecute his own Affairs with such Safety and Honor, as shall be meet for him. There is first then one Point to be discours'd, which, as it is precedent to what we have hereafter to say, so it depends on what we have already said before. Now this is, what sort of Policy and Government is best: for as there are many Sorts of Lives in particular Men, so also are there in People and States; and the Life of a People or State is its Policy and Government. 'Tis therefore necessary to declare, which is the best, that a Statesman may choose it from among the rest, or, if that is impossible for him to do, he may at least take that, which has the nearest Resemblance to the best. Now there is one Signification of this Word Policy, which imports as much as Burgess-ship, that is a Parti∣cipation in the Rights and Priviledges, belonging to a Town, City, or Borough: as when we say, that the Megarians by an Edict of their City presented Alexander the Great with their Policy, that is, their Burgess-ship, and that, Alexander laughing at the Offer they made him of it, they answer'd him, that they had never de∣creed that Honor to any but Hercules, and now to him∣self. This he wondring to hear, accepted their Pre∣sent, thinking it honorable, inasmuch as it was rare. The Life also of a political Person, who is concern'd in the Government of the Commonweal, is call'd Policy, as when we praise the Policy of Pericles or Bias, that is, the manner of their Government, and on the contrary, blame that of Hyperbolus and Cleon. Some moreover there are, who call a great and memorable Action, perform'd in the Administration of the Com∣monweal, a Policy, such as is the Distribution of Money, the Suppressing of a War, the Introduction of some
notable Decree, worthy to be kept in perpetual Memory. In which Signification 'tis a common manner of speak∣ing to say, This Man to day has done a Policy, if he has peradventure effected some remarkable Matter in the Government of the State. Besides all these Significations there is yet another, that is, the Order and State by which a Commonweal is govern'd, and by which Affairs are manag'd and ad∣ministred. According to which we say, that there are three sorts of Policy, or publick Government, to wit, Monarchy, which is Regality or Kingship; Oligarchy, which is the Government by Peers and Nobles; and Democracy, which is a popular, or, as we term it, a free State. Now all these are mention'd by Herodotus in his third Book, where he compares them one with another. And these seem to be the most general of all: for that all other Sorts are, as it were, the Depravation or Cor∣ruption of these, either by Defect, or Excess, as it is in the first Consonances of Musick, when the Strings are either too streight or too slack. Now these Three Sorts of Government have been distributed amongst the Nations, that have had the greatest Empire, or greater than any other. Thus the Persians enjoy'd Regality or Kingship, because their King had full and absolute Power in all things, without being lyable to render an Account to any one. The Spartans had a Council, consisting of a small Number, and those the best and most considerable Persons in the City, who dispatcht all Affairs. The Athenians main∣tain'd popular Government, free and exempt from any other Mixture. In which Administration when there are any Faults, their Transgressions and Exorbitancies are styl'd Tyrannies, Oppressions of the Stronger, un∣bridled Licentiousness of the Multitude. That is, when the Prince, who has the Royalty, permits himself to outrage whom ever he pleases, and will not suffer any
Remonstrance to be made him concerning it, he be∣comes a Tyrant: When a few Lords or Senators, in whose Hands the Government is, arrive at that Arro∣gance as to contemn all others, they turn Oppressors: And when a popular State breaks forth into Disobe∣dience and Levelling, it runs into Anarchy and un∣measurable Liberty: and in a word, all of them toge∣ther will be Rashness and Folly. Even then as a skilful Musician will make use of all sorts of Instruments, and play on every one of them, accommodating himself in such manner, as its Quality can bear, and as shall be fit to make it yield the sweet∣est Sound; but yet, if he will follow Plato's Counsel, he will lay-aside Fiddles, many string'd Virginals, Psal∣teries, and Harps, preferring before all other the Lute and Bandore. In like manner, an able Statesman will dextrously manage the Laconick, and Lycurgian Seignory, or Oligarchy, fitting and accommodating his Compani∣ons, who are of equal Authority with him, and by little and little drawing and reducing them to be ma∣nag'd by himself: he will also carry himself discreetly in a Popular State, as if he had to deal with an Instru∣ment of many and differently sounding Strings, one while letting down and remitting some things, and a∣gain extending others, as he shall see his Opportunity, and find it most convenient for the Government, to which he will vigorously apply himself, well knowing, when and how he ought to resist and contradict; but yet, if he might be permitted to make his Choice from amongst all sorts of Government, as from so many Musical Instruments, he would not, if Plato's Advice might be taken, choose any other but Monarchy, or Regal Authority, as being that, which is indeed only able to support that most perfect and most lofty Note of Ver∣tuè, without suffering him, either by Force, or by Grace and Favor, to frame himself for Advantage
and Gain. For all other sorts of Government, do in a manner as much rule a Statesman, as he does them, no less carrying him, than they are carry'd by him; forasmuch as he has no certain Power over those, from whom he has his Authority; but is very often con∣strain'd to cry out in these Words of the Poet Aeschylus, which King Demetrius, surnam'd the Town-taker, often alledg'd against Fortune, after he had lost his King∣dom; Thou mad'st me first, and now undoest me quite.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Whether the Athenians were more renown'd for their Warlike Atchievements, or for their Learning. Translated out of the Greek by the same Hand. THese things he rightly spoke to the Commanders that accompany'd him, to whom he open'd the way for future Performances, while he ex∣pell'd the Barbarians, and restor'd Greece to her Ancient Liberty. And the same thing may be said to those that magnify themselves for their Writings. For if there were none to act, there would be none to write. Take away the Political Government of Pericles, and the Naval Trophies of Formio at Rium, and the brave Atchievements of Nicias at Cythera, Megara and Corinth, Demosthenes's Pylum, and the four hundred Captives taken by Cleo, Tolmias sayling round the Peleponnesus, and Myronidas vanquishing the Boeotians in the Vine∣yards, and you Murder Thucydides. Take away the youthful Braveries of Alcibiades in the Hellespont, and of Thrasyllus near Lesbos, and the Dissolution of the Oligar∣chy
by Theramenes, Thrasybulus, and Archippus, and the Seven∣ty that from Phyla ventur'd to attack the Lacedemonian Tyranny, and Conon again enforcing Athens to take the Sea, and then there's an end of Cratippus. For as for Xenophon, he was his own Historian, relating how he lead and govern'd the Army under his Command, and The∣mistogenes the Syracusian wrote the same Story over a∣gain, dedicating the Honour of his Writing to ano∣ther, that writing of himself as of another he might gain the more Credit: But all the other Historians, as the Clinodemi, Dyuli, Philochorus, Philarchus, were but the Actors of other Mens Amours, as of so many Plays, while they compil'd the Acts of Kings and great Gene∣rals, and thrusting themselves into the Memory of their Fame, partake of a kind of Lustre and Light from them. For there is a certain shadow of Glory which reflects from those that act to those that write, while the Actions of another appear in the Discourse as in a Mirrour. But this City was the Mother and charitable Nurse of many other Arts and Sciences, some of which she first invented and illustrated; to others she gave both Efficacy, Honour, and Increase: More especially to her is Painting beholding for its first Invention and the Per∣fection to which it has attain'd. For Apollodorus the Painter, who was the first that invented the heightning and softning of Shadows, was an Athenian. Over whose Works there is this Inscription, 'Tis no hard thing to reprehend me, But let the Men that blame me, mend me. Then for Euphranor, Nikias, Aschepiodorus, and Plestaenelus the Brother of Phidias, some of them painted the Victories, others the Battles of Great Generals, and some of them the Hero's themselves. Thus Euphranor, comparing his
own Theseus with another drawn by Parrhasius, said that Parrhasius's Theseus eat Roses, but his fed upon Beef. For indeed Parrhasius's Piece was somewhat softly and effeminately painted, and perhaps it might be something like the Original. But he that beheld Euphranor's Theseus, might well say, Who's Here, the brave and bold Erechtheu's Son Whom Pallas bred, and cherish'd as her own? Euphranor also painted the Battle of Mantinea fought by the Cavalry between the Lacedemonians and Epami∣nondas. The Story was thus. The Theban Epaminondas, pufft up with his Victory at Leuctrae, and designing to insult and trample over falling Sparta, and the Glory of that City, with an Army of Seventy Thousand Men, invaded and laid waste the Lacedemonian Terri∣tory, stirr'd up the Neighbouring Cities to revolt, and not far from Mantinea provok'd the Spartans to Battle; but they neither being willing, nor indeed daring to incounter him, being in expectations of a reinforcement from Athens, Epaminondas disldg'd in the night time, and with all the Secresy imaginable fll into the Lace∣demonian Territory; and miss'd but little of taking Sparta it self being destitute of Men to defend it, had not the Allies of the Lacedemonians made hast to its Relief. Thereupon Epaminondas made a shew as if he would again return to spoyling and laying wast the Ctry; and by this means deceiving and amusing his Enemies, he retreats out of Laconia by Night, and with swift Marches coming upon the Mantineans unexpectedly, at what time they were deliberating o send Relief to Sparta, presently Commanded the Thebans to prepare to storm the Town. As soon, the Thebans, who had a great Conceit of their Warlike Furniture, took their several Posts and began to surround the City.
This put the Mantineans into a dismal Consternation, and fill'd the whole City with dreadful Outcries and Hurly-burly, as being neither able to withstand such a Torrent of armed Men ready to rush in upon them, nor having any hopes of Succor. But at the same time and by good Fortune, the A∣thenians came down from the Hills into the Plains of Mantinea, not knowing any thing of the Critical Mo∣ment that requir'd more speedy haste, but marching lei∣surely along. However so soon as they were inform'd of the danger of their Allies by one that scouted out from the rest, tho but few in respect of the number of their Enemies, single of themselves, and tir'd with their March; yet they presently drew up into Battalia, and the Cavalry charging up to the very Gates of Man∣tinea, there happen'd a terrible Battle between the Horse on both sides, wherein the Athenians got the better; and so sav'd Mantinea out of Epaminondas's Hands. This Conflict was painted by Euphranor, and you see in the Picture with what strength, what fury and vigor they fought. And yet I do not believe that any one will compare the Judgment of the Painter with that of the General; or would endure that any one should prefer the Picture before the Trophic, or the imi∣tation before the Truth it self. Though indeed, Si∣monides calls Painting silent Poetry, and Poetry, Speaking Painting. For those Actions which Painters set forth as they were doing, those History relates as they were done. And what the one sets forth in Colours and Figures, the other relates in Words and Sentences; only they differ in the Materials and manner of Imi∣tation. However both aim at the same end, and he is accompted the best Historian who can make the most lively Descriptions both of Persons and Passions. There∣fore Thucydides always drives at this Perspicuity, to make the Hearer as it were a Spectator, and to incul∣cate
the same Passions and Perturbations of Mind into his Readers, as they were in, that beheld the Causes of those Effects. For Demosthenes embattelling the Athe∣nians near the Rocky-shoar of Pyla, Brasidas hastning the Pilot to put out to Sea; then going to the Row∣ers-seats, wounded, fainting, and leaning on that part of the Vessel where the Oars could not trouble him; the Land-Fight of the Spartans from the Sea, and the Sea-Engagement of the Athenians from the Land; then again in the Sicilian-War, both a Land-Fight and Sea-Engagement, so fought that neither had the better; all these things are so lively and sensibly describ'd, that the Reader feels almost the same Motions and Con∣tentions of the Body, as if he had been present and beheld the Actions themselves. So that if we may not compare Painters with Generals, neither must we equal Historians to them. Thersippus the Eroensian, brought the first News of the Victory at Marathon, as Heraclides of Pontus relates. But most report, that Eucles running Armed with his Wounds reeking from the Fight, and falling through the Door into the first House he met, expir'd with only these Words in his Mouth, God save ye, we are well. Now this Man brought the News himself of the success of a Fight wherein he was present in Person. But suppose that any of the Goat-keepers or Herds-men had beheld the Combat from some High-hill, at a distance, and seeing the success of that great Atcheivment, and grea∣ter than by Words can be exprest, should have come to the City, without any Wound or Blood about him, and should have claim'd the Honours done to Cynegyrus, Callimachus, and Polyzetus, for giving an Accompt of their Wounds, their Bravery, and Deaths, wouldst thou not have thought him Impudent above Impu∣dence it self? Seeing that the Lacedemonians gave the Mes∣senger
that brought the News of the Victory at Mantinea, no other reward, then a quan∣tity of Victuals from thePlace where the Lace∣demonians banqueted in public with great Parci∣mony and Frugality. Phi∣dition. But Historians are, as it were, well voic'd Relators of the Actions of Great Men, who add Grace and Beauty, and Dint of wit to their Re∣lations, and to whom they that first light upon them and read them, are indebted for their pleasing Tydings. And being read, they are applauded for transmitting to Posterity the Actions of those that do bravely. For Words do not make Actions, though we give them the Hearing. But there is a certain Grace and Glory in the Compiling Part when it resembles the Grandeur of the Actions themselves. According to that of Homer, And many Falsities he did unfld That look'd like Truths, so smoothly were they told. It is reported also, that when one of his Familiar Friends should say to Menander, The Feasts of Bacchus are at hand, and thou hast made ne'er a Comedy, he made him this Answer, by all the Gods I have made a Co∣medy, for I have laid my Plot; and there remains on∣ly to make the Verses and Measures to it. So that the Poets themselves believe the Actions to be more necessary then the Words, and the first things to be considered. Corinna likewise, when Pindar was but a Young Man, and made too daring a use of his Elo∣quence, gave him this Admonition, that he was no Poet, for that he never compos'd any fables, which was the cheifest Office of Poetry. In regard that Elo∣cution, Figures, Metaphors, Songs, and Measures were invented to give a sweetness to Things. Which Ad∣monition Pindar laying up in his Mind, wrote a certain Ode which thus begins,
Shall I Ismenus Sing, Or Melia, that from Spindles all of Gold Her twisted Yarn unwinds, Or Cadmus that most ancient King, Or else the sacred Race of Spartans Bold, Or Hercules that far in Strength transcends. Which when he shew'd to Corinna, with a smile, when you sow, said she, you must scatter the Seed with your hand, not empty the whole Sack at once. And indeed we find that Pindar intermixes in his Poetic Numbers a Collection of all sorts of Fables. Now that Poetry employs it self in Mythology is agreed by Plato likewise. For a Fable is the Relation of a false Story resembling Truth; and therefore very remote from real Acti∣ons; for relation is the Image of Action, as Fable is the Image of Relation. And therefore they that feign Actions, are as different from Historians, as they that speak differ from those that act. Athens therefore never bred up any true Artist in Poetry or Lyric Verse. For Cnesas was a troublesom writer of Dithyrambics: A Person of mean Parentage and of no repute; and being jeer'd and derided by the Comedians, prov'd very unfortunate in the Pursuit of Fame. Now for the Dramatic Poets, some of them lookt up∣on Comedy to be so ignoble, and troublesom, that the Areopagites publish'd a Law that no Man should make any Comedies. But Tragedy flourish'd, and was cry'd up, and with wonder and admiration heard and beheld by all People in those days, deceiving them with Fa∣bles and the display of various Passions; whereby, as Gorgias says, he that deceiv'd, was more just then the Deceiver; and he that was deceiv'd, wiser then he who was deceiv'd. He that deceiv'd was more just
because it was no more then what he pretended to do: And he that was deceiv'd was wiser; for that he must be a Man of no Sence, that is not taken with the sweet∣ness of Words. And yet what Benefit did those fine Tragedys procure the Athenians? But the shrewdness and cunning of Themistocles wall'd the City; the In∣dustry of Pericles adorn'd their Arsenal, and Cimon ad∣vanc'd them to command their Neighbors. But as for the Wisdom of Euripides, the Eloquence of Sophocles, the Lofty Stile of Eschylus, what calamity did they avert from the City? Or what renown or Fame did they bring to the Athenians? Is it fitting that Dramatic Poems should be compar'd with Trophies, or Schola∣stic Discipline with Noble Atcheivments? Would ye that we should introduce the Men themselves carrying before them the Marks and Signals of their own Acti∣ons, permitting them double entrance like the Actors upon the Stage? But then it would be requisite that the Poets should go before them, saying and singing, A Panegyric, Gentlemen, Curious Words, give way to us whoever he be that understands not Encomiums of this Nature, that has not a pure Tongue, that never Sang the Orgies of the High-born Muses, nor ever officiated at the Bacchanals of the Bull devouring Deity. And then there must be Scenes, and Vizards, and Altars and Versatil Machines. There must be also the Tragedy∣Actors, the Nicostrati, Callipidae, Mnescisci, Theodori, Poli, the Dressers, and Sedan-men of Tragedy, like those of some sumptuously apparell'd Lady, or rather like the Painters, Guilders, and Colourers of Statues; together with a costly preparation of Vessels, Vizards, Purple-Coats, and Ma∣chines, attended by an unruly Rabble of Dancers and Guards; which a Lacedemonian once beholding, not improperly said he, how strangely are the Athenians mistaken, consuming so much cost and labour upon Ridiculous Trifes: that is to say, wasting the Expen∣ces
of Navies, and Victualing whole Armies upon the Stage. For if you compute the cost of those Dramatic Preparations, you will find that the Athenians spent more upon their Bacchae, Oidipodae, Antigones, Medeas, and Electras, then in their Wars against the Barbarians for Liberty, and extending their Empire. For their Generals oft-times led forth the Souldiers to Battle, commanding them only to make Provision of such Food, as needed not the tedious preparation of Fire. And indeed their Admiral and Captains of their Ships went a Board without any other Provision then Meal, Onyons and Cheese. Whereas the Masters of the Chorus's, feeding their Dancers with Eeles, Lettice, the Kernels of Garlic, and Marrow, feasted for a a long time, exercising their Voices and pleasing their Palates by turns. And as for these if they were overcome, it was their misfortune to be contemn'd and hist'd at. And for the Victors, there was neither Tripos, nor consecrated Ornament of Victory, as Demetrius calls it, but a life prolong'd among Cables, and an empty House for a Tomb. For this is the Tribute of Poetry, and there is nothing more splendid to be expected from it. Now then let us consider the Great Generals going thither, to whom so soon as they pass by us, we must rise up and pay our Salutations, especially those who eing never Famous for any great Action Military or Civil, were never furnished with daring boldness, nor experience in such Enterprises, nor initiated by the hand of Miltiades that overthrew the Medes, or Themi∣stocles that vanquish'd the Persians. This is the Marti∣al-gang, combating sometimes with Phalanxes by Land, and engaging with Navies by Sea, and laden with the spoiles of both. Give ear Enyo, the Daughter of War, to this same Prologue of Swords and Spears. Hasten to death, when for your Country vow'd,
As Epaminondas said, for your Country, your Sepulchers, and your Altars throwing your selves into most Noble and Illustrious Combats. The Victors of which me∣thinks I see approaching toward me, not dragging after them a Goat or Oxe for a reward, nor crown'd with Ivy, and smelling of the Dreggs of Wine. But whole Cities, Islands, Continents, and Colonies well peopled are their rewards, being surrounded with Trophies and Spoils of all sorts. Whose Statues and Symbols of Honor areA Promontory shouting into the Black-Sea, where stood a Chappel dedi∣cated to some Virgin Godhead, and famous for some Victory thereabout obtain'd. Par∣thenons, a hundred furlongs in length, South-walls, Roads for Ships, the Pass of Thermo∣pyle, the Chersonesus and Amphi∣polis. Marathon displays the Victory of Miltiades, and Sa∣lamis the Glory of Themistocles, triumphing over the Ruins of a thousand Vessels. The Victory of Conon brings away the Phoenician Galleys from Eurymedon. And the Victory of Cleo and Demosthones brings away the sheild of Brasidas, and his Captives Souldiers in Chains from Sphactria. The Victory of Conon and Thrasebulus Walls the City, and brings the People back at liberty, from Phyla. The Victory of Alcibiades nere Sicily, restores the languishing condition of the City; and Greece beheld Imia rais'd again by the Victories of Neleus and Androclus, in Lydia and Caria. If you ask what benefit every one of the rest procur'd to the City; one will answer Lesbos, another Samos, another Cyprus, another the Pontus Euxinus, ano∣ther five hundred Galleys with three banks of Oars, another ten thousand Tallents, the rewards of Fame and Trophies won. For these Victories the City observes Public Anniversary Festivals; for these Victories she Sacrifices to the Gods; not for the Victories of Eschylus and Sopho∣cles;
nor because Carcinus lay with Aerope, or because Astydamas was familiar with Hector. But upon the sixth of August even to this day, the Athenians Celebrate a a Festival in memory of the Fight at Marathon. Upon the sixteenth of the same Month the Conduits run Wine in remembrance of the naval Victory won by Chabrias near Naxos. Upon the twelfth they offer thanks∣giving-Sacrifices for the recovery of their liberty. For upon that day they return'd back from Phylae. The third of the same Month they won the Battle of Pla∣taea. The sixteenth of March was consecrated to Diana the Moon appear'd in the Full to the Greeks Victorious at Salamis. The twelfth of May was made sacred by the Battle of Mantinea, wherein the Athenians, when their Confederates were routed and fled, alone by themselves obtain'd the Victory, and Triumph over their Victo∣rious Enemies, such Actions as these procur'd Honor and Veneration and Grandeur to the City For these Acts it was that Pindar call'd Athens the Support of Greece not because the Greeks were aggrandiz'd by the Tragedies of Phrynichus and Thespis; but because as he says, near Artimisium the Athenian Youth the first Foun∣dation of their Freedom lay'd; and afterwards fixing it upon the Adamantin Pillars of Salamis, Mycale and Platea, multiply'd their felicity to others. But as for the Writings of the Poets they are meer baubles. But Rhetoricians and Orators indeed have something in them that renders them in some measure fit to be compar'd with great Captains. For which reason. Aeschines deriding Demosthenes is reported to have said of him, that he had commenc'd a Suit between Oratory and the Art of conducting an Army. But for all that, do you think it proper to prefer the Plataic Oration of Hyperides, to the Victory of Aristides; or the Oration of Lysias against the thirty Tyrants, to the Acts of Thrasibulus and Archias that put them to
Death; Or that of Aeschines against Timarchus for Whoring, before the releiving of Byzantium by Pho∣cion, by which he prevented the Sons of the Confede∣rates from being the Scorn and Derision of the Mace∣donians; Or shall we compare the Oration of Demo∣sthenes concerning a Crown before the public Crowns which he receiv'd for setting Greece at Liberty, where∣in the Rhetorician has behav'd himself most splendidly and learnedly swearing by the Progenitors of those that ventur'd their Lives at Marathon for the Liberty of Greece, rather than by those that instructed Youth in the Schools; among which were Isocrates, Antiphontes, and the Isaei. All which the City buried at the Ex∣pences of the Publick, honouring the Sacred Relicks of their Bodies, and translating those renowned Hero's into the number of the Gods; and by these it was that the Orator chose to swear, tho he could not follow their Example. Isocrates also was wont to say, that they who ventur'd their Lives at Marathon, fought as if they had been inspir'd with other Souls then their own; and extolling their daring Boldness and Contempt of Life, to one that ask'd him being at that time very aged, How he did? As well, said he, as one who being now above Fourscore Years Old, esteems Death to be the best of Evils. For neither did he spend his Years in whetting his Sword, in grinding and sharpning his Sphear, in scouring and polishing his Helmet; in commanding Navies and Armies, but in knitting and joyning together Oppo∣sites, Adequates, and like Cases, and smoothing and adapting of Periods and Sentences; only that he did not make use of Files, Plainers, or Chizzels. How would that Man have been affrighted at the clattering of Weapons, or the routing of a Phalanx, who was so afraid of suffering one Vowel to clash with another, or to pronounce a Word where the Syllables were un∣even. Meltiades, the very next day after the Battle of
Marathon, return'd a Victor to the City with his Army. And Pericles having subdu'd the Samians in Nine Months, derided Agamemnon that was Ten Years ta∣king of Troy. But Isocrates was no less then three O∣lympiads (or fifteen Years) in writing a Panegyric, in all which time he had neither been a General nor an Embassador, neither built a City, nor been an Admiral; notwithstanding the many Wars that harrass'd Greece within that time. But while Timotheus freed Euboea from Slavery, while Chabrias vanquish'd the Ene∣my near Naxus, while Iphicrates defeated and cut to pieces a whole Battalion of the Lacedaemonians; at what time the Athenians having shak'n off the Spartan Yoke, set the rest of Greece at Liberty; with as ample Privi∣ledges to give their Voices in the general Assemblies of the whole Nation, as they had themselves, he sits poring at home in his Study, seeking out proper Phrases and choice Words for his Oration; during which time Pericles had erected stately Porticoes, and the goodly Temple Hecatonpedes. Tho the Comic Poet Cratinus, seems to deride even Pericles himself, as one that was none of the quickest where he says, In words the Mighty Pericles Has rais'd us up a Wall But 'tis a Wall in only Words For we see none at all. Consider now the poor Spirit of this great Orator, who spent the ninth part of his Life in compiling one single Oration. But to say no more of him, is it ra∣tional to compare the Harangues of Demosthenes, as he was an Orator, with the Martial Exploits of Demo∣sthenes, when a great Leader. For example, that which he made to set forth the inconsiderate folly of Conon, with the Trophies which himself erected before Pyla:
Or his Declamation against Amathusius, concerning Slaves, with the noble Service which he perform'd in reducing the Lacedaemonians to Slavery. Neither can it be said, because he compos'd an Oration for grant∣ing the Freedom of Athens to all that came to inhabit there, that he therefore deserv'd as much honour as Alcibiades, who made one People of the Mantineans and Elians, and joyn'd them Confederates with the Atheni∣ans against the Lacedaemonians. And yet we must ac∣knowledge that the public Orations of Demosthenes de∣serve Applause, and particularly his Philippies, in which he bravely encourages the Athenians to take Arms, and extols the Enterprize of Leptines.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Against running in Debt, or taking up Money upon Usury. Translated out of the Greek by the same Hand. PLATO in his Laws permits not any one to go and draw Water from his Neighbors Well, who has not first digg'd and sunk a Pit in his own Ground, till he is come to a Vein of Clay, and has by his sounding experimented, that the Place will not yield a Spring, because the Clay or Potters Earth, being of its own Nature, fatty, solid, and strong, retains the Moisture, it receives, and will not let it soak or pierce thrô: But it must be lawful for them to take Water from anothers Ground, when there is no Way or Means for them, to find any in their own: for the Law ought to provide for Mens Necessity, but not favor their Laziness. The like Ordinance there should be also concerning Money: That none should be allow'd to borrow upon Usury, nor to go and dive into other Mens Purses, as it were into their Wells and Foun∣tains, before they have first searcht at home, and sound∣ed every Means for the obtaining it, having collected, as it were, and gather'd together all the Gutters and Springs, to try, if they can draw from them, what may suffice to supply their most necessary Occasions.
But on the contrary many there are, who, to defray their idle Expences, and to satisfy their extravagant and superfluous Delights, make not use of their own, but have recourse to others, running themselves deeply into Debt without any Necessity. Now this may easily be judg'd, if one does but consider, that Usurers do not ordinarily lend to those, which are in Distress; but only to such, as desire to obtain and get somewhat, that is su∣perfluous, and of which they stand not in need: so that the Credit, given by the Lender, is a Testimony, sufficiently proving, that the Borrower has of his own; whereas on the contrary, since he has of his own, he ought to keep himself from borowing. Why shouldst thou go and make thy Court to a Banker or a Merchant? Borrow from thine own Table. Thou hast Tankards, Dishes, and Basins of Silver: make use of them for thy Necessity, and, when they are gone to supply thy Wants, the pleasant Town of Aulis, or Isle of Tenedos will again refurnish thy Board with fair Vessels of Earth, far more cleanly and neat than those of Silver: for they are not scented with the strong and unpleasant Smell of Usury, which like Rust, daily more and more sullies and tar∣nishes the Lustre of thy Sumptuous Magnificence: they will not be every day putting thee in mind of the Calends, and new Moons, which being of themselves the most holy and sacred Days of the Months, are by reason of Usuries rendred the most odious and accurs'd. For as to those, who choose rather to carry their Goods to the Brokers, and there lay them in pawn for Mo∣ney, taken upon Usury, than to sell them outright, I do not believe, that Jupiter Ctesius himself can pre∣serve them from Beggary. They are asham'd for∣sooth to receive the full Price and Value of their Goods; but they are not asham'd to pay Use for the Money, they have borrow'd on them. And yet the
great and wise Pericles caus'd that costly Robe of fine Gold, weighing about forty Talents, with which Mi∣nerva's Statue was adorn'd, to be made in such a man∣ner, that he could take it on and off at his Pleasure; To the end, said he, that when we shall stand in need of Money to support the Charges of an expensive War, we may take it, and make use of it on so weighty an Occasion, putting again afterwards in its place ano∣ther of no less Price and Value than the former. Thus ought we in our Affairs, as in a besieged Town, never to admit or receive the hostile Garrison of an Usurer, nor to endure before our Eyes the Delivering up of our Goods into perpetual Servitude; but rather to cut off from our Table, what is neither necessary nor profitable, and in like manner from our Beds, our Couches, and our ordinary Expences, so to keep our selves free and at Liberty, in hopes to restore a∣gain, what we shall have retrench'd, if Fortune shall hereafter smile upon us. The Roman Ladies heretofore willingly parted with their Jewels and Ornaments of Gold for the making a Cup, to be sent as an Offering to the Temple of Apollo Pythius in the City of Delphi. And the Carthaginian Matrons did with their own Hands cut the Hair from their Heads, to make Cords for the managing of their Warlike Engins and Instruments in defence of their besieged City. But we, as if we were asham'd of being able to stand on our own Legs, and without being supported by the Assistance of others, go and enslave our selves by Engagements and Ob∣ligations; whereas it were much better, that re∣straining our Humor, and confining it, to what is profitable for us, we should of our Plate, which we should either melt, or sell, build a Temple of Li∣berty for our selves, our Wives, and our Children.
The Goddess Diana in the City of Ephesus gives to such Debtors, as can fly into her Temple, Freedom and Protection against their Creditors: but the Sanctu∣ary of Parsimony and Moderation in Expences, into which no Usurer can enter, to pluck thence, and car∣ry away any Debtor Prisoner, is always open for the Wise, and affords them a long and large Space of joyful and honorable Repose. For as the Prophe∣tess, which gave Oracles in the Temple of the Pythian Apollo about the Time of the Median Wars, answer'd the Athenians, that God had for their Safety given them a Wall of Wood, upon which forsaking their Lands, their City, their Houses, and all their Goods, they had recourse to their Ships for the Preservation of their Liberty: so God gives us a Table of Wood, Vessels of Earth, and Garments of course Cloth, if we de∣sire to live and continue in Freedom: Aim not at gilded Coaches, Steeds of Price, And Harness, richly wrought with quaint Device. For how swiftly soever they may run, yet will Usuries overtake them, and outrun them. Take rather the first Ass, thou shalt meet, or the first Pack-horse, that shall come in thy way, and fly from that cruel and tyrannical Enemy the Usurer, who asks thee not Fire and Water, as heretofore did the barbarous King of Persia, but, which is worse, touches thy Liberty, wounds thy Honor by Proscriptions, and sets thy Goods to Sale by Outcry. If thou payst him not, he troubles thee; if thou hast wherewithal to satisfy him, he will not receive it, unless it be his Plea∣sure. If thou sell'st, he will have thy Goods for no∣thing, or at a very under rate; and if thou wilt not sell, he will force thee to it: If thou suest him, he speaks to thee of an Accommodation; if thou swear'st
to give him Content, he will domineer over thee: If thou goest to his House, to discourse with him, he shuts his Door against thee; if thou stay'st at home, he is always knocking at thy Door, and will never stir from thee. Of what use to the Athenians was the Decree of Solon, by which he ordain'd, that the Body should not be oblig'd for any publick Debt: for they, who owe, are in Bondage to all Bankers; and not to them alone, (for then there would be no great hurt,) but to their very Slaves, who are proud, insolent, barbarous, and outragious, and in a word exactly such, as Plato de∣scribes the Devils and fiery Executioners to be, who in Hell torment the Souls of the Wicked. For thus do these wretched Usurers make the Court, where Justice is administred, an Hell to the poor Debtors, prey∣ing on some, and gnawing them, Vulture-like, to the very Bones, and Piercing into their Entrals with sharp Beaks; and standing over others, who are, like so many Tan∣taluses, prohibited by them from tasting the Corn and Fruits of their own Ground, and drinking the Wine of their own Vintage. And as King Darius sent to the City of Athens his Lieutenants Datis and Artaphernes with Chains and Cords, to bind the Prisoners, they should take: so these Usurers, bringing into Greece Boxes, full of Schedules, Bills, and Obligatory Con∣tracts, as so many Irons and Fetters for the Shackling of poor Criminals, go thrô the Cities, sowing in them, as they pass, not good and profitable Seed, as did heretofore Triptolemus, when he went thrô all Places, teaching the People to sow Corn; but Roots and Grains of Debts, that produce infinite Labors and intolerable Usuries, of which the End can never be found, and which, eating their way, and spreading their Sprouts
round about, do in fine make Cities bend under the Burden, till they come to be suffocated. They say, that Hares at the same time suckle one young Leveret, are ready to kinnle and bring forth another, and con∣ceive a third: But the Usuries of these barbarous and wicked Usurers bring forth, before they conceive: for at the very Delivery of their Money they immediatly ask it back, taking it up at the same moment, they lay it down, and letting out that again to Interest, which they take and receive for the Use of what they had lent. 'Tis a Saying among the Messenians: Gate before Gat, and still a Gate behind: But it may much better be said against the Usurers: Ʋse before Ʋse, and still more Ʋse you'l find. So that they laugh at those natural Philosophers, who hold, that Nothing can be made of Nothing, and of that, which has no Existence: for with them Usury is made and engendred of that, which neither is, nor ever was. They think the Taking to farm the Customs and other public Tributes, which the Laws nevertheless permit, to be a Shame and Reproach: and yet them∣selves on the contrary, in opposition to all the Laws in the World, make Men pay Tribute for what they lend upon Interest, or rather, if Truth may be spo∣ken, do in the very letting out their Money to Use basely deceive their Debtor: for the poor Debtor, who receives less, than he acknowledges in his Obligation, is falsely and dishonestly cheated. And the Persians indeed repute Lying to be a Sin only in a second Degree, but the first they repute to be in debt: forasmuch as Lying fre∣quently attends those, that owe. Now there are not in the whole World any People, who are oftner guilty of
Lying, than Usurers, nor that practice more Unfaithful∣ness in their Day-books, in which they set down, that they have deliver'd such a Sum of Money to such a Person, to whom they have not given nigh so much. And the moving Cause of their Lying is pure Avarice, not Want, or Poverty, but an insatiable Desire of al∣ways having more, the End of which is neither pleasura∣ble nor profitable to themselves, but ruinous and de∣structive to those, whom they injure. For they neither cultivate the Lands, of which they deprive their Deb∣tors, nor inhabit the Houses, out of which they eject them, nor eat at the Tables, which they take away from them, nor wear the Clothes, of which they strip them. But first one is destroy'd, and then a second soon follows, being drawn on, and allur'd by the for∣mer. For the Mischief spreads like Wild-fire, still consuming, and yet still increasing by the Destructi∣on and Ruine of those, that fall into it, whom it de∣vours one after another. And the Usurer, who main∣tains this Fire, blowing and kindling it to the Undoing of so many People, reaps no other Advantage from it, but only that he now and then takes his Book of Ac∣counts, and reads in it, how many poor Debtors he has caus'd to sell, what they had; how many he has dispossess'd of their Lands and Livings; whence he came, and whither he is gone by always turning, win∣ding and encreasing his Money. Think not, that I speak this for any Ill Will or En∣mity, that I have sworn against Usurers: For never did they drive away my Kine, Or Horses.— But my only Aim is, to shew those, who are so ready to take up Money upon Use, how much Shame and Slavery there is in it, and how it proceeds only from
extream Folly, Sloth, and Effeminacy of Heart. For if thou hast of thine own, borrow not, since thou hast no need of it; and if thou hast nothing, borrow not, because thou wilt not have any Means to pay. But let us consider the one and the other apart. The el∣der Cato said to a certain Old Man, who behav'd him∣self ill: My Friend, seeing old Age has of it self so many Evils, why doest thou go about to add to them the Reproach and Shame of Wickedness? In like manner may we say to a Man, oppress'd with Poverty: Since Poverty has of it self so many and so great Miseries, do not heap upon them the Anguishes of borrowing and being in debt. Take not from Poverty the only good thing, in which it is superior to Riches, to wit, Freedom from pensive Care. Otherwise thou wilt subject thy self to the Derision of the common Proverb, which says: A Goat I cannot bear away, Yet you an Ox upon me lay. Thou canst not bear Poverty, and yet thou art going to load on thy self an Usurer, which is a Burden, even to a Rich Man insupportable. But you will say perhaps, How then would you have me to live? Is this a Question, fit for thee to ask, who hast Hands, Feet, and a Voice, who in brief art a Man, whose Property it is to love, and be belov'd, to do, and receive a Courtesy? Canst thou not teach Grammar, bring up young Children, be a Porter or Door-keeper, travel by Sea, serve in a Ship? There is in all these nothing more shameful or odious, than to be dunn'd with the importunate Clamors of such, as are always saying: Pay me, give me my Money. Rutilius, that rich Roman, coming one day to Musonius the Phi∣losopher, whisper'd him thus in his ear: Musonius, Jupiter the Saviour, whom you Philosophers profess to imi∣tate
and follow, takes not up Money at Interest. Masonius, smiling, presently answer'd him: Nor yet does he lend for Ʋse. For this Rutilius, who was himself an Usurer, up∣braided the other with borrowing upon Use: Now what a foolish Stoical Arrogance was this. For what need was there of bringing in here Jupiter the Saviour, when he might have given him the same Admonition by things, that were familiar, and before his Eyes? Swallows run not themselves into Debt, Ants borrow not upon Inte∣rest, and yet Nature has given them neither Reason, Hands, nor Art. But she has endu'd Men with such Abundance of Understanding, that they maintain not only themselves, but also Horses, Dogs, Partridges, Hares, and Jays. Why then doest thou condemn thy self, as if thou wert less able to perswade than a Jay, more dumb than a Partridge, and more ungenerous than a Dog, in that thou canst not oblige any Man to be assistant to thee either by serving him, instructing him, delighting him, guarding him, or sighting in his Defence? Doest thou not see, how many occasions the Land, and how many the Sea affords thee for thy Maintenance? Hear also, what Crates says: Here I saw Micylus the Wool to card, Whilst his Wife Spun, that they by Labor hard In these hard times might scape the hungry Jaws Of Famin.— King Antigonus, when he had not for a long time seen Cleanthes the Philosopher, said to him: Doest thou yet, ô Cleanthes, continue to grind? Yes Sir, re∣ply'd Cleanthes, I still grind, and that I do to gain my Living, and not to depart from Philosophy. How great and generous was the Courage of this Man, who, coming from the Mill and the Kneading
Trough, did with the same Hand, which had been employ'd in turning the Stone, and moulding the Dough, write of the Nature of the Gods, Moon, Stars, and Sun! And yet we think these to be servile Works. Therefore, forsooth, that we may be free, we take up Money at Interest, and to this purpose slatter base and servile Persons, wait on them, treat them, make them Presents, and pay them Pensions, and this we do, not being compell'd by Poverty; (for no Usurer will lend a poor Man Money) but to gratify our Prodigality. For if we would be content with such things, as are necessary for human Life, Usurers would be no less rare in the World, than Centaurs and Gorgons. But Luxury and Excess, as it produc'd Gold∣smiths, Silversmiths, Perfumers, and Diers of curious Colors, so has it also brought forth Usurers. For we run not into Debt for Bread and Wine, but for the purchasing of Stately Seats, numerous Slaves, fine Mules, costly Hangings, rich Tables, and for all those foolish and superfluous Expences, to which we frequently put our selves for the exhibiting of Plays to the People, or some such vain Ambiti∣on, from which we frequently reap no other Fruit but Ingratitude. Now he, that is once intangled in Usury remains a Debtor all his Life, not un∣like in this to the Horse, who, having once taken the Bridle into his Mouth, and the Saddle on his Back, receives one Rider after another. Nor is there any Means for these Debtors to make their Escape in∣to those fair Pastures and Meadows, which once they enjoy'd, but they wander about, like those Dae∣mons, mention'd by Empeducles to have been driven out of Heaven by the offended Gods:
By the Skies Force they're thrust into the Main, Which to the Earth soon spues 'em back again: Thence to bright Titans Orb they're forc'd to fly, And Titan soon remits them to the Sky. In like manner do such Men fall from the Hand of one Usurer or Banker to another, sometimes of a Corinthian, sometimes of a Patrian, sometimes of an Athenian, till having been deceiv'd and cheated by all, they finally find themselves dissipated and torn in pieces by Usury. For as He, who is fallen into the Dirt, must either rise up and get out of it, or else ly still in the Place, into which he first fell, for that by tumbling, turning, and rolling about, he does but still more and more bemire himself: so also those, who do but change their Credi∣tor, and cause their Names to be transcrib'd from one Usurers Book to anothers, do by loading and embroil∣ing themselves with new Usuries, become more and more oppress'd. Now in this they properly resemble Persons, distemper'd with Choler, who will not receive any Medicine, sufficient to work a perfect Cure; but are continually taking away that, which drops from the cholerick Humor, and so make way for it to gather more and more: For in the same manner these Men are not willing to be cleans'd at once, but do with grie∣vous Anguish and Sorrow pay their Use at every Sea∣son of the Year, and no sooner have they discharg'd one, but another drops and stills immediately after, which causes them both aking Hearts and Heads; whereas they should have taken care to get wholly clear, that they might remain free and at Liberty. For I now turn my Speech to those, who are more wealthy, and withal more nice and effeminate, and whose Discourse is commonly in this manner: How, shall I remain then without Servants, without Fire, and
without an House, or Place, to which I may repair? Now this is the same thing, as if one, who is sick of a Drop∣sy, and puff'd up as a Barrel, should say to a Physi∣cian: How? Would you have me become slender, lean and empty? And why not, provided you thereby get your Health? Thus 'tis better, you should be without Ser∣vants, than that you should your self become a Slave; and that you should remain without Possessions, than that you should be made the Possession of another. Give Ear a little to the Discourse of the two Vultures, as it is reported in the Fables. One of them was taken with so strong a Fit of Vomiting, that he said: I believe, I shall cast up my very Bowels. Now to this his Companion answer'd: What hurt will there be in it? For thou wilt not indeed throw up thine own Entrals, but those of a deceas'd Person, which we devour'd the other Day. So he, who is indebted, sells not his own Inheritance, nor his own House, but that of the Usurer, who lent him the Mo∣ney, to whom the Law judges the Right and Possessi∣on of them. Nay, by Jupiter, will he say to me, but my Father left me this Estate. I believe it well, but he left thee also Liberty and a good Repute, of which thou oughtst to make more Account, and be more careful. He, who begat thee, made thy Foot, and thy Hand, and nevertheless, if they happen to be mortify'd, thou wilt give Money to the Chirurgion to cut them off. Calypso presented Ʋlysses with a Robe, breathing forth the sweet-scented Odor of an immortal Body, which she put on him, as a Token and Memorial of the Love, she had born him. But when his Ship was cast away, and himself ready to sink to the Bottom, not being able to keep above the Water, by reason of his wet Robe, which weigh'd him downwards, he put it off, and threw it away, and having girt his naked Breast with a certain broad Swadling-band,
Swam safe to Shore.— And afterwards, when the Danger was over, and he seen to be landed, he wanted neither Food nor Ray∣ment. And is it not a true Tempest, when the Usu∣rer after some time comes to assault the miserable Debtors with this Word Pay? This having said, the Clouds grow thick, the Sea, Is troubled, and its raging Waves beat high, Whilst East, South, West Winds thrô the Welkin fly. These Winds are Use, and Use upon Use, which roll one after another; and he, that is overwhelm'd by them, and kept down by their Weight, cannot save himself, nor make his Escape by Swimming, but at last sinks down to the Bottom, where he perishes, carrying with him his Friends, who were Pledges and Sureties for him. Crates the Theban Philosopher acted far otherwise: for owing nothing, and consequently not being press'd for Payment by any Creditor, but only tir'd with the Cares and Troubles of House-keeping, and the Sollicitude, re∣quisite to the Management of his Estate, he left a Patri∣mony of eight Talents Value, and taking only his Cloak and Wallet, retir'd to Philosophy and Poverty. Anax∣agoras also forsook his plentiful and well-stockt Pastures. But what need is there of alledging these Examples? Seeing that Philoxenus a Musician, being one of those, who were sent to people a new City, and new Land in Sicily, where there fell to his Share a good House, and great Wealth, with which he might have liv'd well at his Ease, yet seeing, that Delights, Pleasure and Idleness, without any Exercise of good Letters, reign'd in those Quarters, said: These Goods, by all the Gods, shall not de∣stroy
me; but I will rather lose them: and immediately leaving to others the Portion, that was allotted to him∣self, he again took Shipping, and return'd to Athens. Whereas those, who are in Debt, bar and suffer them∣selves to be su'd, tax'd, made Slaves of, and cheated with false Money, feeding with King Phineus certain winged Harpies. For these Usurers fly to them, and ravish out of their Hands their very Food, neither yet have they Patience to stay and expect the Season: for they buy their Debtors Corn before it is ready for Har∣vest; bargain for the Oil, before the Olives are ripe, and in like manner for their Wine: I will have it, say the Usurer, at such a Price, and immediately gets the Writing sign'd; and yet the Grapes are still hanging on the Vine, expecting the Month of September, when the Star Arcturus rises and shews the Vintage.
Plutarch's Morals. Vol. V. Plutarch's Platonick Questions. Translated out of the Greek by R. Brown M. L. WHat is the Reason, that Socrates his God bid him to act the Mid-wife's Part to others, but charged himself not to generate? For thus he talks to Theae∣tetus, not after his merry jesting way, because he would never have used the Name of God in such a manner; thô Plato in that Book makes Socrates several times to talk with great Boasting and Arrogance, as he does now. There are many (dear Friend) so well affected towards me, that they are ready to fall rudely upon me, when I offer to cure them of the least Madness: for they will not be perswaded that I do it out of good Will, because they are ignorant, that God bears ill Will to no Man, and that therefore I wish Ill to no Man; but to stand in a Ly, or to stifle the Truth, nei∣ther of these things I can do. Whether therefore did he stile his own Nature, which was of a very strong and pregnant Wit, by the Name of God, as Menander says, For our Mind it God, and as Heraclitus, Man's Ge∣nius is a Deity? Or did some Divine Cause, or some Ge∣ius or other impart this way of Philosophizing to So∣crates,
whereby as he was interrogating others, he clear∣ed them of Pride, Error and Ignorance, things that made them troublesome both to themselves and others. For about that time there happened to be in Greece se∣veral Sophisters, to these some young Men paid great Sums of Money, for which they purchased a strong O∣pinion of Learning and Wisdom, and of being stout Disputants; but this sort of Disputation spent much time in trifling Squablings, which neither were of any Credit or Profit. Now Socrates using an argumentative Discourse, by way of a purgative Remedy, procured Belief and Authority to what he said; because in re∣futing others, he himself affirmed nothing; and he the sooner gained upon People, because he seemed rather to be inquisitive after the Truth, as well as they, than to maintain his own Opinion: for that useful thing, Judg∣ment, is taken with Familiarity, and the Lover is blind∣ed with the thing loved; and nothing of a Man's own is so beloved, as is his Opinion, and Discourse by him that made it: And the Distribution of Children, said to be the justest, in respect of Discourses, is the unjust∣est; for there a Man must take his own; but here a Man must chuse the best, thô it be another Man's. Therefore he that has Children of his own, is a worse Judge of other Mens: it being true, as the Sophister said well, The Eleans would be the most proper Judges of the Olympick Games, were no Eleans Gamesters. So he that would Judge of Disputations, cannot be just, if he either seeks the Bays for, or is himself Antagonist to either of the Antagonists. For as the Graecian Captains, when they were to give their Suffrages, who had be∣haved himself the best, every Man of them voted for himself: so there is not a Philosopher of them all, but would do the like, besides Socrates, and those, that ac∣knowledge, they can say nothing, that is their own; and these only are the pure and incorrupt Judges of the
Truth. For as the Air in the Ears, unless it be still, and void of Noise in it self, without any Sound or Tingling, does not exactly take Sounds. So the Philosophical Judgment in Disputations, if it be disturbed and obstre∣perous within, is hardly comprehensive of what is said without. For our Familiar and inbred Opinion must have Philosophy to rectifie the best things it is capable to do; all others err from the Truth. Furthermore, if Men can comprehend and know nothing, God did just∣ly interdict Socrates the Procreation of false and unstable Discourses, which are like Wind-eggs, and bid him convince others who were of any other Opinion. And Reasoning, which rids us of the greatest of Evils, Error and Vanity of Mind, is none of the least Benefits to us: For God has not granted this to the Aesculapians: Nor did Socrates give Physick to the Body, indeed he purged the Mind of secret Corruption. But if there be any Knowledge of the Truth, and if the Truth be one, he has as much that learns it of him that invented it not, as the Inventer himself. Now, he the most easily at∣tains the Truth, that is perswaded he has it not, and he chuses best, just as he that has no Children of his own, adopts the best. Mark this well, that Poëtry, Mathematicks, Oratory, and Sophistry, which are the things the Deity forbad Socrates to generate, are of no Value; and that of the sole Wisdom about what is Divine and Intelligible (which Socrates call'd Amiable and Eligible for it self) there is neither Generation nor Invention by Man, but Reminiscence. Wherefore So∣crates taught nothing, but suggesting Principles of doubt, as Birth-pains, to young Men, he excited, and at the same time confirmed the innate Notions: This he called his Art of Midwifry, which did not (as others pro∣fessed) extrinsecally confer Intelligence upon his Audi∣tors; but demonstrated it to be inna, yet imperfect and confused, and in want of a Nurse to feed it.
Why does he call the supreme God Father and Ma∣ker of all things? Is he (as Homer calls him) of created Gods, and Men the Father, and of Brutes and things that have no Soul the Maker? If Chrysippus may be cre∣dited, he cannot be said to be Father of the Field, who scattered the Seed in it, thô Corn grow from that Seed; he only, as his way is, used a Metaphor, and called the Cause of the World the Father of it: As in his Convivi∣um he calls Phaedrus the Father of the amatorious Dis∣course, which he had introduced, and as in his Phaedrus he calls Lycias, who had been the occasion of an excel∣lent Discourse about Philosophical Matters. Or is there any difference between a Father and a Maker, or be∣tween Procreation and Making? For, as what is pro∣created is also made, but not on the contrary; so he that procreated did also make: for the Procreation of an Animal, is the making of it. Now the Work of a Maker, as of a Builder, a Weaver, a musical Instru∣ment Maker, or a Statuary, does altogether differ from its Author; but the Principle and Power of the Procrea∣tor is implanted in the Progeny, and contains his Na∣ture, the Progeny being a Piece pull'd off the Procreator. Since therefore, that the World is neither like a piece of Potter's Work, nor Joyner's Work, but that there is a great Share of Life and Divinity in it, which God from himself communicated to, and mixed with Matter, God may as well be called Father of the World, it having Life in it, as the Maker of it. And since thse things come very near to Plato's Opinion, consider, I pray, whether there may not be some probability in them. Whereas the World consists of two Parts, Body and Soul, God indeed made not the Body; but Matter be∣ing exhibited, he formed and fitted it, binding up, and confining what was infinite within proper Limits and Fi∣gures. But the Soul partaking of Mind, Reason an Harmony, was not only the Work of God, but part o
him, not only made by him, but begot by him. There∣fore in the Republick Universal, suppose the Universe, as one Line, to be cut into two unequal Sections, again cut each of these Sections in two after the same manner: Suppose this to constitute the Genera of things sensible, and of things intelligible in the Universe, the first repre∣sents the Genus of Intelligibles, comprehending the first Species; the second the Mathematicks. Of Sensibles, first the Genus comprehends solid Bodies, the second com∣prehends the Images and Representations of them. Moreover, to every one of these four he has assigned its proper judicatory Faculty, viz. to the first the Mind; to the Mathematicks the Intellect; to Sensibles Belief; to Images and Representations Likelihood and Probability. But what does he mean by dividing the Universe into un∣equal Parts? And which of the Sections, the Intelligi∣ble or the Sensible, is the greater? For in this he has not explain'd himself. But it appears, the Sensible is the greater Portion. For the Essence of Intelligibles is indi∣visible, and in the same respect ever the same, being contracted into a little and pure; but an Essence divisi∣ble, and running about Bodies, constitutes the sensible part. Now, what is immaterial is limited; but Body in respect of Matter is infinite and unlimited, and as it is sensible it partakes of Intelligible, when it is defined. Besides, as every Sensible has many Images, Shadows and Representations, and from one and the same Origi∣nal several Copies may be taken both by Nature and Art; so the former must needs exceed the latter in Number, according to Plato, who makes the Notions of things sensible to be Copies or Ideas, like Statues or Pictures of things material. Then the Mind conceives one sort of Ideas abstracted from Body, which belongs to the Mathematicks: This leads from Arithmetick to Geome∣try, thence to Astrology, then to Musick or Harmony. For things became Geometrical by the Accession of
Magnitude to Quantity; Solid by the Accession of Pro∣fundity to Magnitude; Astrological by the Accession of Motion to Solidity; Harmonical by the Accession of Sound to Motion. Abstract then Sound from Motion, Motion from Solids, Profundity from Superficies, Mag∣nitude from Quantity, we are then in notional Ideas, which have no Distinction among themselves, in respect of Unity and Solitude: For Unity makes no Number, unless joyned by the infinite Binary, then it makes a Number: And thence we proceed to Points, thence to Lines, from them to Superficies, and Profundities, and Bodies, and to the Qualities of Bodies so and so qualifi∣ed. Now, the Mind is the only judicatory Faculty of Intelligibles, and the Intellect is the Mind in the Ma∣thematicks, as to Intelligibles, appearing by Reflexion in a Glass. But as to the Knowledge of Bodies, because of their Multitude, Nature has given us five Powers or Distinctions of Senses; nor are all Bodies discerned by them, many escaping Sense, by reason of their small∣ness. And thô every one of us consists of a Body and Soul, yet the Hegemonick and intellectual Faculty is small being hid in the huge Mass of Flesh. And the Case is the same in the Universe as to sensible and intelli∣gible: for Intelligibles are the Principles of bodily things, but every thing is greater than the Principle whence it came. Yet on the contrary some will say, that by comparing Sensibles with Intelligibles, we match things mortal with divine in some measure: for God is in In∣telligibles. Besides, the thing contained, is ever less than the Containing, and the Nature of the Universe in the Intelligible contains the Sensible: For God having plac'd the Soul in the middle, hath extended it thrô all, and hath covered it all round with Bodies. The Soul is invisible, and cannot be perceived by any of the Senses, as Plato says in his Book De Legibus, therefore every Man must dye, but the World shall never dye.
For Mortality and Dissolution surrounds every one of our vital Faculties. The Case is quite otherwise in the World, for the corporeal Part contained in the middle by the more noble and unalterable Part is ever preserv∣ed. And a Body is not said to be without Parts and in∣divisible for its minuteness: But what is Incorporeal and Intelligible is so, as being simple and sincere, and void of all Privation and Difference. Otherwise it were Folly to think to judge of corporeal things by incorpo∣real. Now a thing is said to be without Parts and in∣divisible, which is every where, and no part of the World void of it: But all Affections and Actions, and all Corruptions and Generations are contained by an In∣stant. But the Mind is only Judge of what is intelli∣gible, as the Sight is of Light, by reason of their Simplicity and Similitude. But Bodies having several Differences and Diversities, are comprehended some by one Judicatory, others by another, as by several Or∣gans. Yet they do not well, who despise the Dianoëtick Faculty in us: For it being great, comprehends all Sen∣sibles, and attains to things Divine. This must be a great thing, which (as he says in his Convivium) shows us, how we should use amatorious Matters, turning our Minds from sensible Goods, to things only dis∣cernible by the Mind, that we ought not to be enslaved by the Beauty of any Body, Study or Learning; but laying aside such Pusillanimity, we may turn to the vast Ocean of Beauty. What is the Reason that, thô Plato always says that the Soul is ancienter than the Body, and that it is the Cause and Principle of its Rise, yet he likewise says, that neither the Soul exists without the Body, nor the Mind without the Soul, but the Soul in the Body, and the Mind in the Soul: for so the Body will seem to be and not to be, because it both exists with the Soul, and is begot by the Soul? Perhaps what we have often said is
true, viz. that the Soul without Mind, and the Body without Form, did mutually ever co-ëxist, and neither of them had Generation or Beginning. But after the Soul did partake of Mind and Harmony, and being through Concent made wise, wrought a Change in Mat∣ter, and being stronger than the others Motions, it drew and converted these Motions to it self: so the Body of the World drew its Original from the Soul, and be∣came conformable and like to it. For the Soul did not make the Nature of the Body out of its self, nor out of nothing; but it wrought an orderly and plyable Body out of one disorderly and fomless. Just as if a Man should say, that the Virtue of the Seed is with the Bo∣dy, and yet that the Body of the Fig-tree or Olive-tree was made of the Seed, he would not be much out (for the Body, its innate Motion and Mutation proceeding from the Seed, grew up and became what it is.) So when formless and indefinite Matter was once formed by the in-being Soul, it received such and such a Form and Disposition. Why, since Bodies and Figures are contained partly by Rectilinears, and partly by Circles, does he make aequilateral Triangles, and Triangles of unequal Sides, the Principles of Rectilinears; of which he made the aequilateral Triangle and the Cube, the Element of the Earth; and  Scalenum and a Pyramid, he made the Seed of ir, an Octaedron of Air, and an Eicosaë∣dron of Wtr▪ but why does he not meddle with Cir∣culas, ô h doe mention a Sphaeroïdes, where he says, that of th  reckoned Figures, every Circumference of a Body  e ivid into equal Parts? Or is their Opinion  ho think that he ascribed a Dodecaedron to the  tht God made use of it in delineating  Unirse? or upon account of the Multitude o , and th Ouseness of its Angles, avoiding all , it is flexible, and by Circumten∣sion,
like Globes of twelve Skins, it becomes circular and comprehensive. For it has twenty solid Angles, each of which is contained by three obtuse Planes, and each of these contains a Right, and the fifth Part of a right Angle. Now it is made up of twelve equilateral and equangular Quinquangles, each of which consists of thirty of the first Scalena. Therefore it seems to re∣semble both the Zodiack and the Year, it being divided into Parts and Portions alike. Or is a Right in Nature prior to Circumference? Or is Circumference but an Accident of Rectilinear. For a right Line is said to bend, and a Circle is described by a Center and Distance, which is the place of a right Line, by which it is measured: for a Circumference is every where e∣qually distant from the Middle. And a Cone and a Cylinder are made by Rectilinears. A Cone by keep∣ing one side of a Triangle fixt, and carrying the other round. A Cylinder, by doing the like with a Paralle∣logram. Further, that is nearest a Principle which is less; but a Right is the least of all Lines, as it is simple, whereas in a Circumference, one part is concave with∣out, another convex within. Besides, Numbers are be∣fore Figures, as Unity is before a Point, which is Unity in Position. But indeed Unity is a Triangle: for every triangular Number taken eight times, by adding an Unity, becomes quadrate, and this happens to Unity. Therefore a Triangle is before a Circle, and a right Line before a Circumference. Besides, no Element is divided into things compounded of it self; indeed there is a Dissolution of all other things into an Element. Now, a Triangle is divided into no Circumference; but two Diameters cut a Circle into four Triangles. Therefore a Rectilinear Figure is before a Circular, and has more of the Nature of an Element. And Plato himself shows that a Rectilinear is in the first place, and a Circular is only consequential and accidental. For where he says,
the Earth consists of Cubes, each of which is contain∣ed with Rectilinear Superficies, he also says the Earth is Spherical and round. Therefore there was no need of making a peculiar Element for round things, since Rectilinears, fitted after a certain manner among them∣selves, do make up this Figure. Besides, a right Line whether great or little, preserves the same Rectitude; but the Circumference of a Circle, the less it is, the crookeder it is; the larger, the streighter. Therefore Lines falling on a Convex Superficies, some touch the Subject plane in a Point, others in a Line. So that a Man may imagine that a Circumference is made up of little right Lines. But observe this, no Circle or Sphere is exact, and thô there be a latent Difference in the Station, or Extension, or Minuteness of the Particles, yet it seems circular and round. There ore no corrup∣tible Body moves circularly, but altogether in a right Line. To be truly Spherical, is not in a sensible Body, that is the Element of the Soul and Mind, to whom he has given circular Motion, as being agreeable to their Nature. How comes it to pass, that in Phaedrus it is said, that the Nature of a Wing, by which any thing that is heavy is carried upwards, participates most of the Bo∣dy of God? Is it because the Discourse is of Love, and Love is of Beauty inherent in a Body? Now Beauty by Similitude to things divine moves and reminds the Soul. Or it may be (without too much Curiosity) he may be understood in plain meaning, t wit, that the several Faculties of the Soul being empoyed about Bodies, the Power of Reasoning and Understanding, partakes most of the Divine Nature, which he says is employ'd most about divine and heavenly things; and which he did not only tropically call a Wing, it raising the Soul from mean and mortal things, to things above.
In what Sense does Plato say, that the Antiperistasis of Motin, by reason there is no Vacuum, is the Cause of the Efects in Physicians Cupping-glasses, in Glewing, in bearing of Burthens, in the running of Water, in Thunder, in the Atraction of the Load-stone, and in the Harmony of Sounds? For it seems unreasonable to ascribe the Reason of such different Effects to the self same Cause. How Respiration is made by the Antiperistasis of the Air, he has sufficiently shown. But as for the rest, he says, they act miraculously, that nothing stands and how things thrust, and change Postures with others, he has left to us to determine. As to Cupping-glasses, the Case is thus; the Air next to the Flesh being comprehended and inflamed by the Heat, and being made more rare than the Pores of the Glass, does not go into a Vacuum (for there is no such thing) but into the Air, which is without the Cupping-glass, and has an Impulse upon it. This Air drives that before it, and as it gives way, succeeds into the place of what was va∣cuated by the Cession of the last. And so the Air ap∣proaching the Flesh, comprehended by the Cupping-glass, and being in a Ferment, draws the Humors into the Cupping-glass. For the Cavities about the Mouth and Stomach are full of Air, when therefore the Meat is squeez'd down by the Tongue and Tonsils, the elided Air follows what gives way, and also forces down the Meat. Weights also thrown, cleave the Air, and dis∣sipate it, as they fall with Force, the Air recoyling back, filling the Vacuity, following the Impulse, and accele∣rating the Motion. The Fall also of Thunderbolts is like to darting any thing. For by the Blow in the Cloud, the fiery Matter exploded, breaks into the Air, and it being broken, gives way, and being contracted above beyond it self, by main Force it presses the Thun∣der-bolt downwards, contrary to Nature. And neither Amber nor the Load-stone draws any thing to them,
which is near them, nor does any thing spontaneously approach them. But this Stone emits strong Exhalati∣ons, by which the containing Air being impelled, forceth that before it, and being turned round, and returned to the vacuated place, it forcibly carries about the Iron. In Amber there is a flammeous and spirituous Nature, and this by rubbing on the Surface, being emitted by recluse Passages, does the same that the Loadstone does. It also draws the lightest and driest of adjacent Bodies, by reason of their Tenuity and Weakness; for it is not so strong, nor so endued with Weight and Strength, as to force much Air, and to act with Violence, and to have Power over great Bodies, as the Magnet has. But what is the reason the Air neither draws a Stone nor Wood, but Iron only to the Loadstone? This is a com∣mon Question both by them who think the Coition of these Bodies is made by the Contraction of the Load∣stone, and by such as think it done by the Incitement of the Iron. Iron is neither so rare as Wood, nor al∣together so solid as Gold or a Stone, but has certain Pores and Asperities, which in inequality are proportio∣nable to the Air, and the Air being received in certain Seats, cannot get out, and being comprehended by the Iron moderately resisting, as the Air returning the Stone happens upon it, it draws the Iron along with it to the Stone. And the reason is this. But the manner how the Waters running over the Earth, run against the Wind, is not so evident. But it is observable, that the Waters of Lakes and Ponds stand immoveable, because the Air about them stagnates immoveable, and admits of no Vacuity. For the Water on the Surface of Lakes and Seas, is troubled and fluctuates, as the Air is mov∣ed, it following the Motion of the Air, and moving as it is moved. For the Force from below causes the Hollowness of the Wave, and from above the Swelling thereof, till the Air ambient, and containing the Water,
is still. Therefore the Flux of such Waters, as follow the Motion of the Air, is continued without end. And this is the reason that the Stream encreases with the Wa∣ters, and is slow, where the Water is weak, the Air not giving way, nor finding greater Resistance. So the Water of Fountains must needs run out, the extrinsick Air succeeding into the Vacuity, and throwing the Water out. In a close House, that keeps in the Air and Wind, the Floor sprinkled with Water causes an Air or Wind, be∣cause as the sprinkled Water falls, the Air gives way. For it is so provided by Nature, that Air and Water force one another, and give way to one another: because there is no Vacuity where one is, in which the other is not moved. Concerning Symphony, he shows how Sounds harmo∣nize. A quick Sound is acute, a slow is grave. There∣fore acute Sounds move the Senses quicker, which dy∣ing, and grave Sounds supervening, what arises from the Contemperation of one with the other, causes Plea∣sure to the Ear, which we call Harmony. And by what has been said, it may easily be understood, that Air is the Instrument of these things. For Sound is the Stroak upon the Sense of the Hearer, caused by the Air, and the Air strikes, as it is struck by the thing moving; if violent, acutely; if languid, softly. The violent Stroak comes quick to the Ear; then the Circumient Air receiving a slower, it affects and carries the Sense along with it. What means Timaeus, when he says, that Souls are dispersed into the Earth, the Moon, and into other In∣struments of Time? Does the Earth move like the Sun, Moon, and five Planets, which for their Motions he calls Organs or Instruments of Time? Or is the Earth fixt to the Axis of the Universe, yet not so built as to remain immovable, but to turn and wheel about, as A∣ristarchus and Seleucus have shown since; Aristarchus only supposing it, Seleucus positively asserting it? Theophrastus
writes how that Plato, when he grew old, repented him, that he had placed the Earth in the middle of the Universe, and not in its place. But is not this contra∣dictory to Plato's Opinion elsewhere? In the Greek, in∣stead of  it should be wrote , taking the Da∣tive Case instead of the Genitive, and so the Stars will not be said to be Instruments, but the Bodies of Ani∣mals; as Aristotle has defined the Soul to be an Act of a natural organick Body, having Life in Power. The Sense then must be this, That Souls are dispersed into meet, orga∣nical Bodies in Time. But this is far besides his Opini∣on. For it is not once but several times, that he calls the Stars Instruments of Time. As when he says, the Sun was made, as well as other Planets, for the Di∣stinction and Conservation of the Numbers of Time. It is therefore most proper to understand here, the Earth to be an Instrument of Time, not that the Earth is moved, as the Stars are; but that they being carried about it, it standing still makes Sun-set and Sun-rising, by which, the first Measures of Time, Nights and Days are circumscribed. Wherefore he called it the infallible Guard and Artificer of Night and Day. For the Gno∣mons of Dials are Instruments and Measures of Time, not in being moved with the Shadows, but in standing still, they being like the Earth in interposing between the Sun, when it is down, as Empedocles says, That the Earth makes Night by intercepting Light. This therefore must be Plato's meaning. And so much the rather, if a Man do but consider, that the Sun is not absurdly, nor without probability said to be made for the Distinction of Time, nor the Moon and the rest of the Planets. For as in other respects the Dignity of the Sun is great; so by Plato in his Republick, the Sun is called the King and Lord of the whole sensible Nature, as also the Good of the Intelligible. For it is said to be the Off∣spring of Good, it giving both Being and Apparence
to things visible; as it is from good that things intelli∣gible are, and are understood. But that God having such a Nature, and so great Power, should be made for an Instrument of Time, and a sure Measure of the Dif∣ference that happens among the Orbs, as they are slow or swift in Motion, seems neither decent, nor highly ra∣tional. It must therefore be said to such as are startled at these things, that it is their Ignorance, to think that Time is the Measure of Motion, in respect of sooner or later, as Aristotle calls it; or quantity in Motion, as Speusippus; or an Interval of Motion, or a certain No∣thing, as some of the Stoicks define it by an Accident, they not comprehending its Essence and Power, which Pindar has not ineptly expressed in these Words, Time, who surpasses all in the Seats of the Blest. Pythagoras, also, when he was askt, What Time was? answered, it was the Soul of the Heavens. For Time is no Affection o Accident of Motion, but the Cause, Power, and Prin∣ciple of that Symmetry and Order that confines all cre∣ated Beings, by which the animated Nature of the Uni∣verse is moved: Or rather Motion, Order and Symme∣try it self is called Time. For Walking without Stum∣bling, it justly administers all mortal Affairs. Accord∣ing to the Ancients, the Soul is a Number moving it self. Therefore Plato says that Time and Heaven were co-ëxistent, that Motion was before Heaven had Being; but so was not Time. For then there neither was Or∣der, nor Measure, nor Determination; but indefinite Motion, as it were the formless and rude matter of Time. But when Matter was informed with Figures, and Mo∣tion with Conversions or Circuïtions, from that came the World; from this, Time. Both are Representati∣ons of God, the World of his Essence; Time of his Invisibility in Motion, as in Production God is the World. Therefore they say Heaven and Motion be∣ing bred together, will perish together, if ever they do
perish. For nothing is generated without Time, nor is any thing intelligible without Eternity, as this endures for ever, and that never dies when once bred. Time therefore having a necessary Connexion and Affinity with Heaven, cannot be called simple Motion, but as it were Motion in Order, having Terms and Periods; whereof, since the Sun is Praefect and Overseer, to de∣termine, moderate, produce and observe Changes and Seasons, which (according to Heraclitus) produce all things, He is Coädjutor to the governing and chief God, not in trivial and little things, but in the greatest and most momentous Affairs. Since Plato in his Common-wealth, discoursing of the Faculties of the Soul, has very well compare the Symphony of Reason, and of the iascible and concu∣piscent Faculty to the Harmony of the lowest, middle and highest Chord; some Men may enquire, whether he placed the rational or irascible Faculty in the middle: for he is not clear in the Point. Indeed according the Place of Parts, the Order of the irascible Faculty must be in the middle, and of the rational in the highest, which the Greeks call Hypate. For they of old called the Chief and Supreme Hypatos. So Xenocrates calls Jove, in respect of immutable things, Hypatos (or High∣est) in respect of sublunary things, Nes (or lowest.) And long before him Homer lls the chief Gd , Highest of Rulers. And Nature has of due given the highest Place to what is most excellent, hav∣ing placed Reason as a Steers-man in the Head, and the irascible Faculty at a Distac, lst of all and lowest, and the lowest place they call Nat; as the Names of the Dead  and  do show. And sme say, that the Winds which blow from a lw and obscure place, are called Ntos. What Oppositin therfore the Lowest has to the Highest, and the st to the First, since the Conciscent Faculty stands in the same to
Reason, the Lowest cannot be first, nor any thing highest but Reason. For they that ascribe the Ruling Power of the Middle to it, are ignorant how they de∣prive it of a higher Power, namely, of the highest, which is neither competible to the irascible, nor to the concupiscent Faculty: since it is the Nature of them both to be govern'd by, and obsequious to Reason, and the Natu of neither of them to govern and lead it. And the most natural place of the irascible Faculty seems to be in the middle of the other two. For it is the Na∣ture of Reason to govern, of the irascible Faculty both to govern and be governed, which is obsequious to Reason, and commands the Concupiscent Faculty, when this is disobedient to Reason. And as in Lettrs te Semi-vowels are midling between Mutes and Vowels, these having something more, and they something less; so in the Soul of Man, the Irascible Faculty is not pure∣ly passive, but hath often an Imagination of Good mixt with the irrational Appetite of Revenge. Plato himself, after he had compared the Soul to a pair of Horses and a Charioteer, likened (as every one knows) the rational Faculty to the Charioteer, and the Con∣cupiscent to one of the Horses, which was resy and un∣manageable altogether, bristly about the Ears, Deaf and Disobedient both to Whip and Spur, and the Irasci∣ble he makes very obsequious to the Bridle of Reason, and assistent to it. As therefore in a Chariot, the Cha∣rioteer is not midling in Virtue and Power, but one of the Horses is worse than his Guider, and yet better than his Fellow. So in the Soul, Plato gives not the mid∣dle place to the principal part; but to that Faculty which has less of Reason than the principal part, and more than the Third. This Order also observes the Analogy of the Smphonis, i. e. of the Irascible to the Rational, as Hypate to Diatessaron; to the Concupiscent, as Nete to Diapente. Of the Rational to the Concupis∣cent,
as Hypate to Nete a Diapason. But should you place the Rational in the middle, you would make the Irascible farther from the Concupiscent; thô some of the Philosophers have taken the Irascible and the Concupis∣cent Faculty for the self same, by reason of their Like∣ness. But it may be ridiculous to describe the First, Middle and Last by their Place; since we see Hypate highest in the Harp, lowest in the Pipe, and whereso∣ever you place the Mese in the Harp, provided it is tunable, it sounds more acute than Hypate, and more grave than Nete. Nor does the Eye possess the same place in all Animals; but where-ever it is placed, it is natural for it to see. So a Paedagogue, thô he goes not formost, but follows behind, is said to lead; like the General of the Trojan Army, Who sometimes fought in Front, And kept Command, thô he retir'd upon't. But where ever he was, he was first, and chief in Pow∣er. So in like manner, the Faculties of the Soul are not to be ranged in order of Place or Name, but ac∣cording to their Power and Analogy. For, that in the Body of Man, Reason is in the highest Place, is acci∣dental. But it holds the chief and highest Power, as Mese to Hypate, in respect of the Concupiscent; as to Nete, in respect of the Irascible. Insomuch as it depres∣ses and heightens, and in fine, makes a Harmony, by abating what is too much, and by not suffering them to flat and grow dull. For what is moderate and sym∣metrous, is defin'd by Mediocrity. Besides, it is an Imperfection, to make the Mediocrities of the rational Power, which they call Sacred Beings, to be in the Pas∣sions. For in Chariots, the best of the Beasts is not in the middle; nor is the Skill of Driving placed in the highest Place; but it is a Mediocrity in the Inequality
of the Swiftness and Slowness of the Horses. As the force of Reason takes up the Passions irrationally mov∣ed, and reducing it to Measure, constitutes a Mediocri∣ty betwixt too much and too little. Why said Plato that Speech was composed of Nouns and Verbs? For he seems to make no other Parts of Speech but them. Indeed Homer, for the Help of Youth, has comprehended them all in one Verse. . For in it there is Pronoun, Participle, Noun, Preposi∣tion, Article, Conjunction, Adverb and Verb, the Par∣ticle  being put instead of the Preposition , for  is said in the same Sense as . What then shall we say for Plato? That at first the Ancients called that , or Speech which is now called Protasis, Axi∣om, or Sentence; which as soon as a Man speaks, he either speaks true or false. This Speech consists of a Noun and Verb, which Logicians call the Subject and Praedicate. For when we hear this said Socrates philoso∣phizeth, Socrates is changed, requiring nothing more, we say the one is true, the other is false. For very likely in the beginning Men wanted Speech and articulate Voice to enable them to express at once the Passions and the Patients, and the Actions and the Agents. Now, since Actions and Affections are lively expressed by Verbs, and they that act and are affected by Nouns, as he says, these seem to signifie. And one may say, the rest signifie not. For instance, the Groans and Shrieks of Stage-players, and even their Smiles and Aposiopeses make their Discourse more emphatick. But they are not so necessary to signifie any thing as a Noun and Verb, they being only ascititious, to vary Speech; just as they vary Letters, who mark Spirits and Quantities upon Letters, these being the Accidents and Differences
of Letters. As the Ancients have made manifest, whom sixteen Letters sufficed to speak and write any thing. Besides, we must observe, that Plato says, that Speech is compos'd of these, not by these: as if a Man should say such a Medicine is compos'd of Wax and Galbanum, and another should cavil at it, because Fire and Uten∣sils are omitted, without which it cannot be made. Just so we may blame Plato for leaving out Conjunctions, Prepositions, and the like. For Speech is not com∣pos'd of them; yet by their Means, and not without them, Speech must be compos'd. As, if a Man pro∣nounce beateth, or is beaten, and put Socrates and Pytha∣goras to the same, he shows he understands or means something. But let a Man pronounce Yea or For, and no more, none can conceive any Notion of a Body or Matter, and unless such Words as these be uttered with Verbs and Nouns, they are but empty Noise and Chattering: for neither alone, nor joyn'd one with ano∣ther, do they signifie any thing. And joyn and con∣found together Conjunctions, Articles, and Prepositions, supposing you would make something of them; yet you will be taken to bable, and not to speak Sense. But when there is a Verb in construction with a Noun, the Result is Speech and Sense. Therefore some do make only these two Parts of Speech. And perhaps Ho∣mer was willing to declare himself of this Mind, when he says, —. For by the Word  he usually means a Verb, as in these Verses. .
And . For  is neither Conjunction, Article nor Preposi∣tion, nor is , but only an emphatick Verb of a base Action, proceeding from a foolish Passion of the Mind. Therefore when we would praise or dis∣praise Poets or Writers, we are wont to say, such a Man uses Attick and good Words, and such a one uses rascally Words; and none can say that Thucydides or Demosthenes ever used such Articles. What then (may some say) do the rest of the parts conduce nothing to Speech? I answer, they conduce, as Salt does to Victu∣als, or Water to Rice. But Euenus calls Fire the best Sawce. Thô sometimes there is neither occasion for Fire to boyl, nor for Salt to season our Food, which we have always occasion for. Nor has Speech always occasi∣on for Articles. I think I may say it of the Latine Tongue, which is now the universal Language, that it has taken away all Prepositions, saving a few, nor does it use any Articles, unless as Lace and Ornament to Nouns. Nor is it any Wonder, since Homer, who in fineness of Epick surpasses all Men, has put Articles only to a few Nouns, like Handles to Cans, or Crests to Helmets. And these Verses are remarkable, wherein the Articles are ex∣pressed, viz. — And
And some few besides. But in a thousand others, the Omission of the Article hinders neither Perspicuity nor Elegance of Phrase. Now neither an Animal, nor an Instrument, nor Arms, nor any thing else is more fine, efficacious, or grateful, for the loss of a part. Yet Speech, by taking away Conjunctions, often becomes more perswasive; as here, , . And that of Demosthenes, . And fur∣ther, does not Midias at this Day invign, exclaim and thunder at the same rae?  Therefore the Figure Asyndeton, whereby Conjunctions ar mitted, is highly commended by Writers of Rhetorick. But such as keep over strict to the Law, and (according to Custom) omit not a Conjunction, Rhetoricians blame them for using a dull, flat, tedious Style, without any Variety in it. And in as much as Logicians mightily want Conjunctions for the joyning together of their Axi∣oms, as much as Charioeeers want Yoaks, and Ʋlysses wanted Withs to tye Cyclop's Sheep; this shows they are not parts of Speech, but a Conjunctive Instrument thereof, as the Word Conjunction imports, nor do they joyn all, but only such as are not spoken simply: Unless you will make a Cord part of the Burthen, Glew a part of a Book, or Distribution of Money part of the Government. For Demades says,
That Money which is given to the People out of the Exche∣quer for publick Shows, is the Glew of a Democracy. A Conjunction does just so of several Propositions make one, by knitting and joyning them together, as melt∣ed Iron joyns Marble; but yet Iron neither is, nor is said to be part of the Marble; only by being mixt and joyned together, several things become one. But there be some, who think, that Conjunctions do not make any thing one, but that they are an enumera∣tive Dialect, as of the Time when such and such were Magistrates. Moreover, as to the other parts of Speech, a Pronoun is manifestly a sort of Noun; not only because it has Cases alike, but because it naturally makes a proper Declaration of Notions brought from things defined: nor do I know whether he that says Socrates, or he that says This Man, does more by Name declare the Person. The thing we call a Participle, being a Mixture of a Verb and Noun, is nothing of it self (as are not the common Names of Men and Women) but in construction is put with others; in regard of Tenses belonging to Verbs, in regard of Cases to Nouns. Logicians call them , i. e. broken or torn of, as  comes from , and  from , having the force both of Nouns and Verbs. And Prepositi∣ons are like to the Crests, Bars, and Tyes of a Hel∣met, which one may rather say, do belong to Words, than are Words themselves. Have you a care, they rather be not pieces and scraps of Words, as they that are in haste, write but Dashes and Pieces of Letters. For it is plain, that  and  are Abbrevia∣tions of the whole Words,  and , and  for , and  for . As, undoubtedly for haste and bre∣vities sake, instead of  and ,
Men first said  and . Therefore every one of these is of some use in Speech; but nothing is a Part or Element of Speech (as has been said) except a Noun and a Verb, which make the first Juncture containing Truth or Falshood, which some call a Pro∣position or Protasis, others an Axiom, and which Plato called Speech.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of Moral Vertue. Translated out of the Greek by C. H. Esq; MY Design in this Essay is to treat of that Vertue, which is called and accounted, Moral, and is chiefly distinguished from the Contemplative in it's having for the Matter thereof, the Passions of the Mind, and for it's Form, Right Reason: And herein to consider the nature of it; how it subsists: And whether that Part of the Soul wherein it resides be indued with Reason, of it's own, inherent in it self, or whether it participates of that which is foreign; And if the latter; whether after the manner of those things which are mingled with what is better then themselves; or rather as being distinct it self, but yet under the Dominion and Super∣intendency of another, it may be said to partake of the Power of the praedominant Faculty. For that it is possible for Vertue to exist and continue altogether in∣dependent of Matter and free from all Mixture, I take to be most manifest. But in the first place I conceive
it may be very useful briefly to run over the Opinions of other Philosophers, not so much for the vanity of giving an Historical Account thereof, as that they being premised Ours may thence receive the greater Light and be more firmly established. To begin then with Menedemus of Eretria he took away both the Number and the Differences of Vertue, by asserting it to be but One although distinguished by several Names; Holding that in the same manner as a Mortal and a Man are all One, so what we call Tem∣perance, Fortitude, and Justice are but one and the same thing. As for Ariston of Chio. He likewise made Vertue to be but One in Substance and called it Sanity, which as it had respect to This, or That was to be va∣riously multiplied and distinguished: Just after the the same manner as if any one should call our Sight when applied to any White Object by the Name of. White-look, when to one that is Black, by the Name of. Black-look, or by any other such like affected Name, and so in other Matters. For according to him Ver∣tue when it considers such things as we either ought to do or not to do, is called Prudence; When it mo∣derates our Desires, and prescribes the Measure and Season for our Pleasures, Tmperance; and when it governs the commerce and mutual Contracts of Man∣kind, Jsce. In the same manner for instance as a Knife is one and e same Knif still notwithstnding sometimes it cuts one thing, sometimes another, and just as Fire does operate upon different matter, and yet retain the ve same Nature. Unto which Opiin, it seems also as if Zeno the Citien did in some measure incline; He defining Prudence while it distributes to every Man his own, to be Justice; When it teches wha we are to choose and what to reject or avoid, Temperance; and with respect to what is to be born or suffered, Fortitude: But it is to be observed that they who take upon them
the Defence of Zeno's Notions do suppose him to mean Science by what he calls Prudence. But then Chrysippus whilst he imagined from every distinct Quality a seve∣ral and peculiar Vertue to be formed, before he was aware Raised (as Plato has it) a whole swarm of Vertues never before known or used among the Philosophers, for as from Brave, he derived Bravery; from Mild, Mildness; and from Just, Justice: so from Pleasant he fetched Pleasantness; from Good Goodness; from Grand Grandeur; and from Honest, Honesty; placing these and all kind of dexterous application of Discourse, all kind of Facetiousness of Conversation, and all witty Turns of Expression in the Number of Vertues, thereby over-running Philosophy, which requires nothing less, with a multitude of uncouth, absurd and barbarous Terms. However all these do commonly agree in this one Thing, viz. in supposing Virtue to be a certain Disposi∣tion and Faculty of the governing and directive part of the Soul of which Reason is the Cause, or rather to be Reason it self, when it consents to what it ought, and is firm and immutable: And they do likewise think that part of the Soul which is the seat of the Passions, and called Brutal or Irrational, not to be at all distinct by any Physical Difference from that which is Rational, but that that part of the Soul (which they call Rational and Directive) being wholly turned about and changed by it's Affections, and by those several Alterations which are wrought in it with respect either to Habit or Dis∣position, becometh either Vice or Vertue, without ha∣ving any thing in it self that is really Brutal or Irra∣tional. But is then called Brutal or Irrational, when by the over-ruling and prevailing Violence of our Ap∣petites it is hurried on to something absurd and vicious against the Judgment of Reason. For that, Passion, according to them, is nothing else but depraved and in∣semperate reason, that through a perverse and vici∣ous
Judgment is grown over vehement and head∣strong. Now it seems to me, all these Philosophers were per∣fect strangers to the clearness and truth of this Point, That we Every one of us are in reality Twofold and Com∣pound: For discerning only that Composition in us which of the two is most evident, namely that of the Soul and the Body; of the other they knew no∣thing at all. And yet that in the Soul it self also there is a certain Composition of two dissimilar and distinct Natures, the Brutal Part whereof as another Body is necessarily and physically compounded with and conjoyned to Reason, was, it should seem, no secret to Pythagoras himself: As some have guessed from his having introduced the Study of Musick amongst his Scholars, for the more easie calming and asswaging the Mind: as well knowing that It is not in every part of it Obedient and Subject to Precepts and Discipline, nor indeed by Reason only to be recovered and retreived from Vice, but requires some other kind of perswasives to cooperate with it, to dispose it to such a temper and gentleness as that it may not be utterly intractable and obstinate to the Precepts of Philosophy. And Plato very strongly and plainly without the least hesitation maintained the Soul of the Ʋniverse to be neither sim∣ple, uniform nor uncompounded; But that being mixed, as it were, and made up of That which is always the same and of That which is otherwise in some places it is continually governed and carried about after an uni∣form manner in one and the same powerful and pre∣dominant Order, and in other places is divided into Motions and Circles one contrary to the other, unsettled and fortuitous, whence are derived the Beginnings and Generation of all Things. And so in like manner the Soul of Man being a part or portion of That of the Ʋni∣verse, and framed upon reasons and proportions an∣swerable
to it, cannot be simple and all of the same Na∣ture, but must have One part that is Intelligent and rational, which naturally ought to have Dominion over a Man: And Another which being Subject to Passions, Irrational, extravagant and unbounded stands in need of direction and restraint. And This last is again sub∣divided into Two other parts, One whereof being al∣ways Corporeal is called Concupiscible; and the Other, which sometimes taking part with this, and sometimes with Reason gives respectively to either of them Strength and Vigor, is called Irascible. And that which chiefly discovers the difference between the One and the Other, are the frequent Contests of the Intellect and Reason with Conoupiscence and Anger, it being the Nature of things that are different amongst them∣selves to be often times repugnant and disobedient to what is best of all. These Principles at first Aristotle seems most to have relyed upon, as plainly enough appears from what he has written: Thô afterwards he confounded the Irasci∣ble and Concupiscible together, by joyning the one to the other, as if Anger were nothing but a Thirst and Desire of Revenge: However to the last he constantly maintained that the Sensual and Irational was wholly di∣stinct from the Intellectual and Rational part of the Soul; not that it is so absolutely devoid of Reason neither as those Faculties of the Soul which are Sensative, Nutritive and Vegetative, and are common to us with Brute-Beasts and Plants. For These are always deaf to the Voice of Reason and uncapable of it, and may in some sort be said to derive themselves from Flesh and Blood, and to be inseperably attached to the Body and devoted to the service thereof; but the Other Sensual Part subject to the sudden Efforts of the Passions and destitute of any Reason of its own, is yet nevertheless naturally adapted to hear and obey the Intellect and
Judgment, to have regard to it, and to submit it self to be regulated and ordered according to the Rules and Precepts thereof, unless it happen to be utterly cor∣rupted and vitiated by Pleasure, which is deaf to all in∣struction and by a luxurious way of Living. As for those who wonder how it should come to pass, that, that which is Irrational it self, should yet become obsequious to the dictates of Right Reason, they seem to me, not to have duely considered the Force and Power of Reason, how great and extensive it is, and how far it is able to carry and extend it's Authori∣ty and command, not so much by harsh and Arbitrary methods, as by soft and gentle means, which perswade more, and gain Obedience sooner then all the Severities and Violences in the World. For even the Spirits, the Sinews, Bones, and other parts of the Body, are destitute of Reason, but yet no sooner do they feel the least Motion of the Will, shaking, as it were, (though never so gently) the Reins of Reason, but all of them Observe their proper Order, agree together and pay a ready Obedience. As for instance, the Feet, if the Impulse of the Mind be to run, immediately betake themselves to their Office; Or if the Motion of the Will be, for the throwing or lifting up of any thing, the Hands in a moment fall to their business. And this Sympathy and Consent of the Brutal Faculties to Right Reason, and the ready Conformity of them thereto Homer has most admirably exprest in these Verses. In tears dissolved She mourns her Consorts Fate, So great her sorrows, scarce her charms more great. Her tears Compassion in Ulysses move, And fill his Breast with Pity and with Love; Yet Artful he his Passion secreet keeps, It rages in his Heart; And there he inward weeps.
Like Steel or Ivory, his fixt Eye-balls stand, Placed by some Statuaries skillful hand; And when a gentle fear would force it's way, He hides it falling or Commands it's stay. Under such perfect Subjection to his Reason and Judg∣ment had he even his Spirits, his Blood and his Tears. A most evident Proof of this Matter we have also from hence, that our natural Desires and Motions are as soon repressed and quieted as we know we are either by Reason or Law forbidden to approach the Fair Ones we at the first view had so great a Passion for: A thing which most commonly happens to those who are apt to fall in Love at sight with beautiful Women with∣out knowing or examining who they are; for no sooner do they afterwards find their Error, by discovering the Person with whose charms they were before captivated to be a Sister or a Daughter, but their flame is presently extinguished, by the interposition of Reason. And Flesh and Blood is immediately brought into order and becomes obedient to the Judgment. It often falls out likewise, that after we have Eaten some kinds of Meat or Fish (finely dressed, and by that means artificially disguised,) with great pleasure and a very good Sto∣mach, at the first moment we understand they were either unclean or unlawful and forbidden, Our Judgment being thereby shocked, we feel not only remorse and trouble in our Mind, but the conceit reaches further, and our whole Frame is disordered by the nauseous qualms and vomitings thereby occasioned. I fear I should be thought on purpose to hunt after too far-fetched and youthful instances to insert in this Discourse, if I should take notice of the Lute, the Harp, the Pipe and the Flute, and such like Musical Instruments invented by Art and adapted to the Raising or Allaying of Hu∣man Passions: Which though they are void of Life
and Sense do yet most readily accommodate themselves to the Judgment, to our Passions and our Manners, either indulging our Melancholy, increasing our Mirth, or feeding our Wantoness as we happen at that time to be disposed. And therefore it is reported of Zeno him∣self that going one day to the Theatre, to hear Amoebeus Sing to the Lute, he called to his Scholars, Come, says he, Let us go and learn what Harmony and Musick, the Guts and Sinews of Beasts, nay even Wood and Bones are capable of by the help of Numbers, Proportion and Order. But to let these things pass I would gladly know of them, whether when they see Domestick Animals, as Dogs, Horses or Birds by use, feeding and teaching, brought to so high a degree of perfection, as that they shall utter articulately some senseful words; and by their Motions, Gestures and all their Actions shall ap∣prove themselves governable, and become useful to us: And when also they find Achilles in Homer encouraging Horses as well as Man to Battle; whether, I say, after all this, they can yet make any wonder or doubt whether those Faculties of the Mind to which we owe our An∣ger, our Desires, our Joys and our Sorrows, be of such a Nature that they are capable of being Obedient to Reason, and so affected by it, as to consent and become intirely Subject, to it: Considering especially that these Faculties are not seated without us, or seperated from us, or formed by any thing which is not in us, or hammer'd out by force and violence: but as they have by Nature their intire dependance upon the Soul so they are ever conversant and bred up with it, and also receive their final complement and perfection from use, custom and practice for which reason the Greeks very properly call Manners : For they are nothing else in short but certain Qualities of the Irrational and Brutal part of the Mind, and hence by them are so named in that
this Brutal and Irrational part of the Mind being for∣med and moulded by Right Reason, by long Custom and Ʋse, which they call , has these Qualities or Differences stampt upon it. Not that Reason so much as attempts, to eradicate our Passions and Affecti∣ons, which is neither possible nor expedient, but only to keep them within due bounds, reduce them into good Order, and so direct them to a good End; and thus maketh Moral Vertue to consist not in a kind of Insensibility or total Freedom from Passions, but in the well ordering our Passions, and keeping them within measure, which is effected by Wisdom and Prudence, bringing the Faculties of that part of the Soul where our Affections and Appetite are seated to a good Habit. For these Three things are common∣ly held to be in the Soul, namely, a Faculty or Aptitude, Passion, and Habit. This Aptitude or Faculty then is the Principle or very Matter of Passions, as for Example, the Power or Aptitude to be Angry, to be Ashamed, to be Confident and Bold, or the like; Passion is the actual Exercise of that Aptitude or Faculty, as Anger, Shame, Confidence or Boldness; and Habit is the strength, firm∣ness and establishment of the Disposition or Faculty in the Irra nal part of the Soul gotten by continual Ʋse and Custom, and which according as the Passions are well or ill governed and directed, becomes either Vertue or Vice. But Forasmuch as Philosophers do not make all Vertue to consist in a Mediocrity, nor call it Moral; to shew the difference more clearly it will be necessary to take our rise a little further off. Of all things then in the Ʋniverse some do exist absolutely, simply and for themselves only, others again relatively for and with regard to us. Among those things which have an Absolute and Simple Existence, are the Earth, the Heavens, the Stars and the Sea, and of such things as have their Being relatively with respect to us are Good and Evil, things desirable and
to be avoided, and Things pleasant and hurtful. And seeing that both are the proper Objects of Reason; while it considers the former which are absolutely and for themselves, it is Scientifical and Contemplative; and when the other which have reference to us, it is Deliberative and Practical: And as the proper Vertue in the latter case is Prudence, in the former it is Science. And between the one and the other namely between Prudence and Science there is this difference, that Prudence consists in a certain Appli∣cation and Relation of the Contemplative Faculties of the Soul to those which are Practical, for the Government of the Sensual and Irrational Part according to Reason, to which purpose Prudence has often need of Fortune: Whereas neither of that nor of Deliberation has Science any occasion or want to attain it's ends; forasmuch as it has nothing to consider but such things as remain al∣ways the same: For as a Geometrician never deliberates about a Triangle whether all its three Angles be equal to two right Angles, because of that he has a clear and distinct knowledge: And Men use to deliberate about such things only as are sometimes in one state or con∣dition and sometimes in another, and not of those which are always firm and immutable: so the Mind when meerly Contemplative exercising it self about first Principles and things permanent, such as retaining the same nature are incapable of mutation, has no room or occasion for Deliberation. Whereas Prudence, de∣scending to Actions full of Error and Confusion, is very often under the necessity of encountering with fortuitous accidents, and in doubtful Cases of making use of Delibe∣ration, and to reduce those Deliberations into Practice, of calling also to its Assistance even the Irrational Faculties, Which are (as it were) forceably drag'd to go along with and by that means to give a certain Vigor or Impetus to its Determinations. For its Deter∣minations do indeed want something which may inliven
and give them such an Impetus: And Moral Vertue it is which gives an Impetous or Vigor to the Passions; but at the same time Reason which accompanies that Impe∣tous, and of which it stands in great need, does so set Bounds thereunto that nothing but what is Moderate appears, And that it neither out-runs the Proper Seasons of Action, nor yet falls short of them. For the Sensual Faculties where the Passions are sea∣ted, are subject to Motions, some over-vehement, sudden and quick, and others again too remiss and more slow and heavy then is convenient, so that though every thing we do can be Good but in one manner, yet may it be Evil in several, as there is but one single way of hitting the mark, but to miss it a great many, either by shooting over or under or on one side. The business therefore of Practical Reason governing our Actions according to the Order of Nature, is to correct the Excesses as well as the Defects of the Passions by reducing them to a true Mediocrity. For as when through infirmity of the Mind, effeminacy, fear or laziness the vehemence and keeness of the Appetites are so abated, that they are ready to sink and fall short of the Good at which they are aimed and directed, there is then this Practical Reason at hand exciting and rousing and pushing them on∣ward; so on the other hand when it lashes out too far and is hurried beyond all measure, there also is the same Reason ready to bring it again within compass and put a stop to its carrier: And thus prescribing Bounds and giving Law to the Motions of the Passions it pro∣duces in the Irrational Part of the Soul these Moral Vertues, (of which we now treat) which are nothing else but the mean between Excess and Defect. For it cannot be said that all Vertue consists in Mediocrity, since Wisdom or Prudence, (one of the Intellectual Ver∣tues) standing in no need of the Irrational Faculties, as being seated in that Part of the Soul which is pure and
immixed and free from all Passions, is of it self abso∣lutely perfect, the utmost Extremity and Power of Rea∣son, whereby we attain to that perfection of knowledge which is it self most Divine and renders us most Hap∣py. Whereas Moral Vertue, which because of the Body is so necessary, to us, and to put things in Practice stands in need of the Instrumental Ministry of the Pas∣sions, (as being so far from promoting the Destruction and Abolition of the Irrational Powers as to be altogether im∣ployed in the due regulation thereof) is with respect to its Power or Quality the very top and extremity of Per∣fection, but in respect of the proportion and quantity, which it determines, it is Mediocrity, in that it takes away all Excess on the one hand, and cures all Defects on the other. Now Mean or Mediocrity may be differently under∣stood. For there is one mean which is compounded and made up of the two simple extreams, as in Colors, Gray, of White and Black; and another, where that which contains and is contained, is the Medium between the containing and the contained, as, for instance, the Num∣ber VIII, between XII and IV. And a third sort there is also, which participates of neither extream, as for Ex∣ample, all those things which as being neither Good nor Evil in themselves we call Adiaphorous or Indifferent. But in none of these ways can Vertue be said to be a M Mediocrity: For neither is it a mixture of Vices; o comprehending that which is defective and short, is it comprehended by that which runs out into Excess; Nor yet is it exempt from the Impetuosity, and sudden Efforts of the Passions, in which Excess and Defect do properly take place. But Moral Vertue properly doth and so is commonly taken, especially to consist in a Mean or Me∣diocrity most like to that which there is in our Greek Mu∣sick and Harmony, whereas there are the highest and lowest Musical Notes in the extremities of the Scale,
called. Nete and Hypate, so like∣wise is there in the middle thereof between these two another Musical Note, and that the sweetest of all, called. Mesé (i. e. mean) which doth as perfectly avoid the extream sharpness of the one, as it doth the over flatness of the other. And so al∣so Vertue being a Motion and Power which is exercised about the Brutal and Irrational Part of the Soul takes away the Remission and Intension and in a word the Excess and Defect of the Appetites reducing thereby e∣very one of the Passions to a due Mediocrity and perfect State of Rectitude. To begin then with Fortitude; that is said to be the mean between Cowardize and Rashness, whereof the one is a Defect, as the other is an Excess of the Irascible Fa∣culty; Liberality between sordid Parsimony on the one hand and extravagant Prodigality on the other; Clemen∣cy between Insensibility of injuries, and its opposite re∣vengeful Cruelty; and so of Justice and Temperance; the former being the mean between giving and distributing more or less then is due in all Contracts, Affairs and Business between Man and Man, and the latter a just Mediocrity between a stupid Apathy touched with no sense or relish of Pleasure, and dissolute softness abandoned o all manner of Sensualities. And hence (namely from this instance of Temperance) it is that we are most clearly given to understand the difference betwen the Irrational and the Rational Facul∣ties of the Soul, and that it so plainly appears to us, that the Passions and Affections of the Mind are quite a distinct thing from Reason. For otherwise never should we be able to distingush Continence from Tempe∣rance, nor Incontinence from Intemperance in Lust and Pleasures, if it were one and the same Faculty of the Soul, wherewith we Reason and Judge, and whereby we
Desire and Covet. Now Temperance is that whereby Rea∣son governs and manages, (as it were some Wild Crea∣ture brought up by hand and made quite tame and gentle) that part of the Soul which is subject to the Pas∣sions, having gained an absolute Victory over all it's Appetites, and brought them entirely under the Domi∣nion of it. Whereas we call it Continence, when Reason has indeed gain'd the Mastery over the Appetites and prevail against them, though not so clearly and indispu∣tably, but that, They being perverse and continuing to strug∣gle, as not having wholly submitted themselves, it is not without great difficulty able to preserve its Govern∣ment over them, being forced to retain and hold them in, and keep them within compass as it were with stripes with the Bit and Bridle, while the mind all the time is full of nothing but Agony, Contentions and Confusion. All which Plato endeavours to illustrate by a similitude of the Chariot-Horses of the Soul the one whereof being more unruly not only kicks and flings at him that is more gentle and tractable but also thereby so troubles and disorders the driver himself, that he is forced sometimes to hold him hard in, and sometimes a∣gain to give him his head Least from his hands the Purple Reins should slip. as Symonides speaks, And from hence we may see why Continence is not thought worthy to be placed in the number of perfect Vertues, but is taken to be a degree under Vertue. For there is not therein produced a Mediocrity arising from a Symphony of the worst with the better, nor are the Excesses of the Passions retrenched; nor yet doth th Appetite become obedient and subservient to the reason¦able Faculties, but both makes and feel disorder a disturbance, being repressed by violence and constrain
and, as it were by necessity, as in a Sedition or Faction in a City or State, the contending Parties breathing no∣thing but War and destruction and ruin to one ano∣ther do yet cohabit together, (it may be) within the compass of the same Walls; insomuch that the Soul of the Incontinent Person with respect to the conflicts and incongruities therein may very properly be compared to the City, Wherein all sorts of Luxury abound; Where with Huzza's and groans the Streets resound. And upon the same Grounds it is that Incontinence is held to be something less then Vice also, but Intemperance to be a compleat and perfect Vice; for that therein not the Appetite only but Reason likewise is debauched and cor∣rupted, and as the former incites and pushes forward the Desires and Affections to that which is Evil, so this by making an ill Judgment is easily led to consent and agree to the soft whispers and tempting allurements of corrupt Lusts and Passions, and soon loseth all Sense of sin and evil: Whereas Incontinence preserves the Judgment, by the help of Reason right and sound, but yet by the ir∣resistable Force and Violence of the Passions is even a∣gainst Judgment drawn away. Moreover in these re∣spects following it differeth also from Intemperance: In∣asmuch as Reason in that is over-powered by Passion, but in this it never so much as struggleth: The incontinent Person after a noble resistance is at last forced to submit to the Tyranny of his Lusts and follow their guidance, but the intemperate approves them, and glady goes along with and submits to them; He feels remorse for the Evil he commits, while the other prides himself in Lewd∣ness and Vice; Again the one wilfully and of his own ac∣cord runs into sin, while the other even against his Will is forced to abandon that which is good.
And this difference between them is not to be collected only from their Actions, but may as plainly aso be dis∣covered by their words. For at this rate do intemperate Persons use to talk, What Fop would quit Loves Pleasures for a Crown? Or live without them were the World his own? 'Tis Love that makes the nauseous Drought of Life go down. And thus says another, The Joys of Wine and Beauty once secured, The rest of Life perhaps may be endured, As if from his very Soul he were wholly abandoned and given up to Pleasures and Voluptuousness, and e∣ven overwhelmed therein. And much of the same Mind was he, and his Judgment as totally depraved by his Passions who said, Let me, ye dull and Formal Fops, alone, I am resolved, 'tis best to be undone. But quite another Spirit do we find runing through the Sayings of the Incontinent, Blame Nature only for it, blame not me, Would she permit, I then should Vertuous be. Says one of them. And another, Ah! 'Tis decreed by Fate: We know, 'tis true, We know those Vertues, which we ne're pursue.
And a Third, What will my swelling Passions Force Asswage? No more can I sustain this Tempest's Rage, Then Anchors Flook, dropt on loose ground, a Storm. Where and not improperly he compares the Flook of an Anchor dropt in loose ground, to that ill grounded, feeble and irresolute Reason which by the Vanity, Weakness and Luxury of the Mind is easily brought to forsake the Judgment. And the like Metaphor has another made use of happily enough in these Verses To us, in Ships, moor'd near the Shore who lye, (Tho' strong the Cables;) when the Winds rise high, Cables will prove but (non, ut male in vulgat. ) cum Turnebo, Camerario, &c. Plutarchum scripsisse puto. small Security. Where by the Cables the Poet means the Judgment op∣posing it self against all that is Evil or Dishonest, which is however oftentimes disturbed and broken by violent and sudden Gusts of the Passions. For, indeed, the Intem∣perate are born away directly and with full Sail to their Pleasures, to them they deliver up themselves intirely, and thither it is they bend their whole course. While the Incontinent; indirectly only as endeavouring to sustain and repel the Assaults of the Passions and withstand their Temptations, is either allured and does as it were slide into Evil, or else is plunged violently into it whether he will or no. As Timo in his bitter way of Railleur reproaches Anaxarchus, When first the dogged Anaxarchus strove The Power of Vertue 'ore his Mind to prove,
Firm, though he seem'd, and obstinately good, In vain th' Impulse of Temper he withstood. Nature recoil'd whatever he could do, He saw those ills, which yet he did pursue: In this not single other Sophists too Felt the same Force, which they could n're subdue, And neither is a Wise-man, Continent but Temperate, nor a Fool, Incontinent, but Intemperate, the one taking true pleasure and delight in Good, the other having no dis∣pleasure against Evil. And therefore Incontinence is said to be found only in a Mind that is Sophistical, (or which barely makes a shew of being governed and directed by Prudence,) and which has indeed the use of Reason but in so weak and faint a manner, that it is not able to persevere in that which it know to be right. And thus having seen the diversity between Inconti∣nence and Intemperance; as for Continence and Intemperance, their Differencs are Analogous and be proportin to those of the other, bu in contrary respects. For Remorse, Grief and Indignaion do always accompany Continence; whereas in the Mind of a Temperate son there is all over such an Evenness, Cam and Firmness, tat seeing with what wonderful easiness and tranquillity the Irrational Facul∣ties go alog with Reason and submit to is Directions, one cannot but cal to Mind tht of the Poet, Swift the Command ran through the raging deep, Th' Obedient Waves compose themselv s to sleep. Reason hving quite deadned and repress'd te vehement, raging, and fur  Mins of the Passions and ecti∣ons: And ths so whose Assistnce Nature does ne∣cessariy require, ae by it rendd so agreeable and consing, so submssive, fendly and coperative in the Execution of all good Designs and Purposes, that
they neither out-run it, nor recede from it, nor behave themselves disorderly, nor ever shew the least Disobedience; but every Appetite willingly and chearfully pursues it's dictates. As Sucking Foal runs by his Mother-Mare. Which very much confirms what was said by Xenocrates of those who are true Philosophers, namely, that they alone do that voluntarily, which all others do against their Wills for fear of the Laws: Being diverted and restrained from the pursuit of their Pleasures, as it were by the Hazard and Apprehension of being bitten by a mad Dog, or an Antipathy,Lego  ut ex M. S S. reponendum esse pro  censet Xylander in An∣notat. ad loc. dread and honour for a Wild Cat, having regard to nothing else in the Mat∣ter but their own Danger. It is manifest then from what has been discoursed, that the Soul does perceive within it self, something that is firm and immovable, totally distinct from it's Passions and Appetites, as being what it does always oppose and is ever contending with. But some there are nevertheless, who Affirm that Reason and Passion do not materially differ from one another; and that there is not in the Soul any Faction, Sedition or Dis∣sension, of two several and contending Faculties, but only a shifting, conversion or Alternation of the same Reason or Rational Faculty from one side to the other backward and forward, which by reason of the suddeness and swift∣ness of the change is not perceptible by us; and there∣fore that we do notPro , ut pessimè habetur in vulgat. legere placuit , & sic pulchrè cohaerent omnia. consider that the same Faculty of the Soul is by Nature so adapted as to be ca∣pable both of Concupiscence and Re∣pentance or coming to it self again; of Anger and of Fear; of being drawn to the Commission of any Lewdness or Evil by the
Allurements of Pleasure, and afterwards of being again re∣trieved from it. And as for Lust, Anger, Fear and such like Passions, they will have them to e nothing but perverse O∣pinions and false Judgments, not arising or formed in any in∣ferior Part of the Soul, peculiarly belonging to them, but be∣ing the advances and returns or the Motions forward and backward, the good liknings and more vehement Efforts, and in a word such Operations and Energies of the whole rational and directive Faculty as are ready to be turned this way or that with the greatest ease imaginable, like the sudden Motions and Irruptions in Children, the vio∣lence and impetuosity whereof by reason of their im∣becillity and weakness are very fleeting and inconstant. But these Opinions are against common Sense and Experience, for no Man ever felt such a sudden change in himself, as that whenever he chose any thing, he im∣mediately judged it fit to be chosen, or that on the other hand, whenever he judged any thing fit to be chosen, he immediately made choice of it. Neither does the Lover who is convinced by Reason that his Amour is fit to be broken off, and that he ought to strive against his Passion, therefore immediately cease to Love; nor on the other side doth he desist reasoning and cease from be∣ing able to give a right Judgment of things even then, when being softned and overcome by Luxury he delivers himself up a Captive to his Lusts: But as while by the Assistance of Reason he makes opposition to the Efforts of his Passions, they yet continue to sollicit and at last over∣come him, so likewise when he is overcome and forced to submit to them by the light of Reason does he plainly dis∣cern and know that he has done amiss; so that neither by the Passions is Reason Effaced and destroyed nor yet by Reason is he rescued and deliveed from them, but be∣ing tossed to and fro between the one and the other, he is a kind of Neuter and participates in common of them both. And those, methinks, who imagin that one
while the Directive and Rational Part of the Soul is changed into Concupiscence and Lust, and that by and by Reason opposes it self against them, and they are changed in to that, are not much unlike them, who make the Sports-man and his Game not to be two but one Body, which by a nimble and Dexterous Mutation of it self, one while appears in the shape of the Huntsman, and at another turn puts on the Form of a Wild Beast: For as these in a plain evident matter seem to be stark Blind, so they in the other Case bely even their own Senses, seeing they must needs feel in themselves not only a change or mutation of one and the same thing, but a down-right struggle and quarrel between two several and distinct Faculties. But is not say they the Deliberative Power and Facul∣ty of a Man often divided in it self and distracted among several Opinions contrary to one another about that which is expedient, and yet is but one, simple uniform thing. All this we grant to be true, but it does not reach the Case we are speaking of; for That part of the Soul where Reason and Judgment are seated is not at Variance with it self but by one and the same Faculty is conversant about different Reasonings, or rather there is but one simple Power of Reasoning which imploys it self on several Arguments as so many different Subject Matters. And therefore it is that no disturbance or uneasiness accom∣panies those Reasonings or Deliberations, where the Passions do not at all interpose: Nor are we at any time forced as it were, to choose any thing contrary to the dictates of our own Reason, but, when as in a Bal∣lance, some lurking hidden Passion lays something in the Scale against Reason to weigh it down. And this often falls out to be the case, where it is not Reasoning that is opposed to Reasoning, but either Ambition, or Emulation, or Favour or Jeaousie or Fear, making a shew as if there were a variance or contest between two differing Rea∣sons according to that of .
Shame in denyal, in acceptance Fear; And of another Poet. Hard fate to fall, but yet a glorious fate, 'Tis cowardly to live, but yet 'tis sweet: And as in determining of Controversies about Contrcts between Man and Man, 'tis by the Interposition of the Passions that so many disputes and delays are Crea∣ted. So likewise in the Consultations and Counsels of Kings they who design to make their Court, incline not to one side of the Question or Debate more then the other upon the Reason of the thing, but only to serve and gratifie their Masters or their own Passions, without any regard to the Interest of the Publick. Which is the Reason that in Aristocratical Governments the Ma∣gistrates will not suffer Orators in their Pleadings by Dclaiming and Haranguing to raise the Passions and move the Affections. For Reason not being disturbed or di∣verted by Passion tends directly to that which is Ho∣nourable and Just, but if the Passions are once raised, there immediately follows a mighty controversie and struggle between Pleasure and Grief on the one hand and Reason and Judgment on the other. For otherwise how comes it to pass that in Philosophical disputes and disquisi∣tions we so often and with so little trouble are by o∣thers drawn off from, and wrought upon to change our own Opinions? And that Aristotle himself, Demo∣critus and Chrysippus have without any concern or regret of Mind, nay even with great satisfaction to themselves retracted some of those Points which they formerly so much approved of and were wont so stifly to maintain? For no Passions residing in the Contemplative and Scienti∣fical Part of the Soul to make any tumult or disturbance therein, the Irrational and Brutal Faculties remain quiet
and calm, without busying themselves to intermeddle in Matters of that kind: by which means it falls out that Reason no sooner comes within view of Truth but rejecting that which is false, it readily embraces it; for as much as there is in the former what is not to be found in the other, namely, a willingness to assent and disagree as there is occasion, whereas in all Deliberations had, Judgments made, and Resolutions taken about such things as are to be reduced into Practice, and are mixed and interwoven with the Passions and Affections, Reason meets with much opposition, and is put under great difficul∣ties, by being stopt and interrupted in it's Course by the Brutal Faculties of the Mind, throwing in it's way ei∣ther Pleasure or Fear or Grief or Lust or some such like temptation or discouragment. And then the decision of these Disputes belongs to Sense which is equally affected with both the one and the other; and which soever of them gets the Mastery, the other is not thereby destroyed, but, (thô struggling and resisting all the while) forced only to comply and go along with the Conqueror. As an Amo∣rous Person for Example, finding himself ingaged in an Amour he cannot approve has immediate recourse to his Reason, to oppose the Force of that against his Passion, as having them both together actually subsisting in his Soul, plainly discerning them to be several and distinct, and feeling a sensible conflict between the two, while he endeavours as it were with his hand to repress and keep down that part which is inflamed and rages so violently within him. But on the contrary in those deliberations and disquisitions where the Passions have no∣thing to do, such I mean as belong properly to the Contemplative Part of the Soul, if the Reasons are e∣qually ballanced, not inclining more to one side then a∣nother, then is there no determinate Judgment formed, but there remains a doubting, as if there were a Rest or suspense of the Understanding between two contrary Opi∣nions.
But if there happen to be any Inclination or Determination towards one side, that prevailing must needs get the better of the other, but without any re∣gret or obstinate opposition from it against the Opinion which is received. In short whenever the contest seems to be of Reason against Reason, in that case we have no manner of Sense of two distinct Powers, but of one simple uniform Faculty only, under different Apprehensions or Imaginations; but when the dispute is between the Irrational Part and Reason, where Nature has so ordered it that neither the Victory nor the Defeat can be had without anxiety and regret, there immediately the two contending Powers divide the Soul in the Quarrel, and thereby make the difference and distinction between them to be most plain and evident. And not only from their contests, but no less also from the consequences that follow thereupon, may one clearly enough discern the Sourse and Original of the Passions to be different from that of Reason. For seeing that a Man may set his Affection upon an ingenuous and vertuously disposed Child, and no less also upon one that is naughty and dissolute; and seeing also one may have unreasonable and indecent transports of Anger against his Children or his Parents; and on the contrary may justly and unblamably be Angry in their Defence against their Enemies and Tyrants; as in the one case there is perceived a struggle and dispute of the Passions against Reason, so in the other may be seen a ready submission and agreement of them, running to it's Assistance, and lending as it were their helping hand. To illustrate this with a familiar Example, after a Good Man has in Obedience to the Laws Married a convenient Wife, he then in the first place comes to a resolution of conversing and cohabiting with her wisely and honestly, and of making at least a civil Husband, but in process of time, Custom and constant Familiarity having bred within
him a true Passion for her, he sensibly finds that upon Principles of Reason his Affection and Love for her is eve∣ry day more and more improved and grows upon him. As in like manner, Young Men having met with kind and gentile Masters, to guide and inform their Minds in the Study of Philosophy and the Sciences, make use of them at first for Instruction only and Information, but after∣wards come to have such an Affection for them, that of familir Companions and Schollars they become their Lovers and Admirers and are so accounted. And the same happens also to most Men with respect to good Magistrates in the Common-wealth; to their Neigh∣bours; and to their Kindred; for beginning an Acquain∣tance upon Necessity and Interest, for the Exchange of the Common Offices of Intercourse and Commerce with one another, they do afterwards by degrees, 'ere they are aware grow to have a Love and Friendship for them, Reason in such and the like cases having over-perswaded and even compelled the Passions to take delight in and pursue what it before had approv'd of and consented to. As for the Poet who said, Tho' Modesty our highest Praise deserve, Small rais it is, for Modesty, to starve, doth he not plainly hereby intimate that he had often∣times found by Experience that this Affection of the Mind by a sheepish, shamefaced backwardness, and by foo∣lishly bashful delays against all Reason had lost him the Opportunities and Seasons of making his Fortune and hin∣de▪ and disappointed many brave Actions and noble Enterprizes. But these Men, thô by the Force of these Arguments sufficiently convinced, do yet seek for Evasions, by callig Shame, by the Name of Modesty; Pleasures, by that of Joy; and Fear, by that of Caution: No Man
going about to blame them for giving things the softest Names they can invent, if they would be so just as to bestow these good Words upon those Passions and Affecti∣ons only which have put themselves under the conduct and direction of Reason, and leave those which oppose Reason, and offer Violence to it to be called by their own proper and odious Names; but when fully convinced by the tears they shed, by the trembling of their Joynts, and by their sudden changing of Colour back and forward, if instead of plainly calling the Passions, whereof these are the effects, Grief and Fear, they make use of the Phantastic Terms of Compunctions and Conturbations, and to varnish over and disguise the Lusts and Affections give them the Name only of so many forwardnesses of Mind and I know not what else, they seem not to act like Philosophers, but relying upon little shifts and Sophi∣stical Artifices, under an Amusement of strange Words, vainly hope to cover and conceal the Nature of things. And yet even These Men themselves sometimes make use of very proper Terms to express these Matters, as for instance, when they call those Joys, Volitions and Cautions of theirs, not by the Name of Apathies as if they were devoid of all manner of Passion; But of Eu∣pathies, that is to say good Affections well disposed. For then is there said to be an Eupathy or good Disposition of the Affections, When Reason has not utterly de∣stroyed, but composed and adjusted them in the Mind of Discreet and Temperate Persons. But what then becomes of Vicious and Dissolute Persons? Why if they should judge it reasonable to love their Parents instead of a Mistress or a Gallant, this they are not able to per∣form; But should they judge it fitting to set their Hearts upon a Strumpet or a Parasite, The Judgment is no soon∣er made, but they are most desperately in Love. Now were the Passions and Judgment or Reason all one, it could
not be but that the Passions of Love and Hatred would immediately follow upon Judgments made what to Love and Hate: But we see the contrary often happen, for the Passions as they submit to some Resolutions and Judg∣ments, so others again they oppose themselves to, and refuse to comply with. Whence it is that compelled thereto by Truth and the Evidence of things, they do not affirm every Judgment and Determination of Reason to be Passion, but that only which excites too violent and inordiate an Appetite; Acknowledging thereby that the Faculty we have in us of Judging is quite another thing then that which is susceptible of the Passions, as isƲt integra sit senten∣tia, post verbum  Cod. M S. Petav. In∣serenda sunt , quae, vulgo Librario∣rum culpâ intercide∣runt. that also which moveth from that which is moved. Nay, even Chrysippus himself in many places defining Patience and Continence to be Habits of submit∣ting to and pursuing the Choice and Direction of Right Reason, doth thereby make it apparent that by the force of truth he was driven to confess, that it is one thing in us which is Obedient and Submissive, but another and quite different which being either not disobeyed, is quietly sub∣mitted to, or disobeyed and neglected meets with Op∣position and Resistance. Now as for those who make all Sins and Faults to be equal, to examine whether in other Matters, they have not also departed from the truth is not at this time and in this place seasonable; since they seem not herein only but in most things else to advance unreasonable Paradoxes against common Sense and Experience. For according to them all our Passions and Affections are so many Faults, and whosoever Grieves, Fears or Desires commits Sin: But with their leave, nothing is more visi∣ble and apparent then the mighty Difference in those and all other Passions, according as we are more or less
affected with them. For will any Man say that the Fear of Dolon was no more then that of Ajax who being forced to give way before the Enemy, Sometimes retreated back, then faced about, And step by step retired, at once, and Fought? Or compare the Grief of Plato for the Death of Socrates, to the Sorrow and Anguish of Mind which Alexander felt, when for having murdered Clytus, he attempted to have laid Violent Hands upon himself: For our Grief is com∣monly increased and augmented above Measure by sud∣den and unexpected Accidents, And that which surprises us on the sudden contrary to our hope and expectation is much more uneasie and grievous then that which is either foreseen or not very unlikely to happen: as must needs fall out in his Case who expecting nothing more then to see the Happiness, Advancement and Glory of a Friend or a Kinsman, should hear of his be∣ing put to the most exquisite Tortures, as Parmenio did of his Son Philotas. And who will ever say that the Anger of Magas against Philemon, can bear any propor∣tion to the Rage of Nicocreon against Anaxarchus? The Occasion given was in both cases the same, each of them having severally been bitterly reproached and re∣viled by them: For whereas Nicocreon caused Anaxar∣chus to be broken all to pieces and brayed in a Mortar with Iron Pestles; Magas only commanded the Execu∣tioner to lay the Edge of the naked Sword upon the Neck of Philemon, and so dismist him. And therefore Plato called Anger the Nerves of the Mind, because as it may swell and be made more intense by Sourness and ill na∣ture, so may it be slacken'd and remitted by gentleness and good nature.
But to elude these and such like Objections, they will not allow these Intense and vehement Efforts of the Passions to be according to Judgment, or so to proceed from it as if that were therein faulty, but call them Ces∣sations, Contractions and Extensions or Diffusions, which by the help of reason are capable of being increased or diminished. But that there are also differences of Judg∣ment is most plain and evident: For some there are who take Poverty to be no Evil at all; Others who look up∣on it as a great Evil; And others again who esteem it to be the greatest Evil and worst thing in the World, insomuch that rather then endure it, they would dash themselves in pieces against the Rocks, or cast themselves headlong into the Sea. And among those who reckon Death to be an Evil, some are of that Opinion in re∣gard only that it deprives us of the Enjoyment of the good Things of the World; as Others are with respect to the eternal Torments and horrible Punishments under Ground in Hell. As for bodily Health, some Love it no otherwise then as it is agreeable to Nature and very con∣venient and useful; while others value it as the most So∣veraign Good, in comparison whereof they make no Reck'ning of Riches, or Children, no nor of, Scepters and Crowns which do Ambition move, And make Men equal to the Gods above. Nor will they in fine allow even Vertue it self to signifie any thing or be of any use without good Health: so that hence it sufficiently appears that in the Judgments Men make of things, they may be mistaken and very faulty, with respect to both the extreams of too much and too little, but I shall pursue this Argument no further in this place.
Thus much may however fairly be assumed from what has already been said on this head, that even themselves do allow a plain difference between the Judgment and the Irrational Faculties by means whereof, they say, the Passions become greater and more violent, and so while they cavil and contend about Names and Words, they give up the very cause to those who maintain the Irrational Part of the Soul which is the Seat of the Passions to be seve∣ral and distinct from that Faculty by which we Reason and make a Judgment of things. And indeed Chrysippus in those Books which he wrote, of Anomology, after he has told us that Anger is Blind, not discerning oftentimes those things which are plain and conspicuous, and as frequently casting a mist upon such things as were be∣fore clear and evident proceeds a little further in this manner; For, says he, the Passions being once raised not only reject and drive away Reason, But, (things by their means appearing otherwise then they would) do likewise violently push Men forward to Actions that are contrary to it; And then he makes use of the Testimony of Menander, say∣ing, What have I done? Where has my Soul been stray'd? Would she not stay to see her self obeyed, But let me Act, what I abhorr'd but now? And again the same Chrysippus a little after; every Ra∣tional Creature is by Nature so disposed as to use Reason in all things and to be Governed by it; but yet oftentimes it falls out that we Despise and Reject it being carried away by another more violent and over-ruling Motion. In these Words plainly enough acknowledging what uses in such a case to happen upon the account of that Difference and Contest which there is between the Passions and Rea∣son.
And upon any other ground, it would be ridiculous (as Plato says) to suppose a Man to be sometimes Better then Himself, and sometimes again worse; One while to be His Own Master, and another while His Own Slave. For how can it possibly be that a Man should be Better and Worse then Himself, And at once both his own Master and Slave, if every One were not in some sort naturally Double or Twofold, having in Himself at the same time a Better Part and a Worse? For so may He be reckon'd to have a Power over Himself and to be better then Himself, who has His worse and more inferior Faculties in Obedience and Subjection to the Superior and more Excellent; Whereas He who suffers his Nobler Powers to fall under the Government and Direction of the Intemperate and Irrational Part of the Soul is less and worse then himself, and has wholly lost the Command over himself, and is in a State which is contrary to Na∣ture, For by the Order of Nature Reason which is Divine ought to have the Sovereignty and Dominion over the Irrational and Brutal Faculties, which deriving their Ori∣ginal from the Body, and being concorporated as it were and throughly mixed therewith bear a very near Re∣semblance to it, are replenished with and do participate in Common of the Qualities, Properties and Passions thereof; As is plain from our more Vehement Mo∣tions and Efforts towards corporeal Objects, which do always increase in Force and Vigor according to the seve∣ral Changes and Alterations which happen in the Body. From whence it is that Young Men are in their Lusts and Appetites because of the Abundance and Warmth of their Blood, so Quick, Forward, Hot and Furious: Whereas in Old Men all their Natural Fire being almost extinguish∣ed, and the First Principles and Sourse of the Affections and Passions seated about the Liver, much lessen'd and debilitated, Reason becomes more vigorous and praedomi∣nant, while the Appetites Languish and Decay together
with the Body. And after this manner it is that the Na∣ture of Beasts is framed and disposed to divers Passions. For it is not from any Strength or Weakness of Thought, or from any Opinions Right or Wrong which they form to themselves, that some of them are so Bold and Ventu∣rous, and dare encounter any thing, and others of them as Fearful and Cowardly shrinking at every Danger; But from the Force and Power of the Blood, the Spirits and the Body does this Diversity of Passions in them arise; For that Part where the Passions are seated being deri∣ved from the Body as from it's Root, Retains all the Qualities and Propensions of that from whence it is ex∣tracted. Now that in Man there is a Sympathy and an agree∣able and correspondent Motion of the Body and the Passions and Appetites, is proved by the Paleness and Blushings of the Face; by the Tremblings of the Joynts, by the Palpitation of the Heart; And on the contrary by the Difussion or Dilatation which we feel upon the Hope and Expectation of Pleasures. But when the Mind or Intellect doth Move of it self alone, without any Pas∣sion to Disorder and Ruffle it, then is the Body at Re∣pose and rests Quiet, having nothing at all to do with those Acts and Operations of the Mind; As when it takes into Consideration a Proposition in Mathematics or some such Scientifical thing, it calls not for the Aid or Assistance of the Irrational or Brutal Faculties. From whence also it is very apparent that there are in us two Distinct Parts Differing in their Powers and Faculties from One Another. In Fine, throughout the whole World, all Things (as they themselves are forced to Confess, and is Evident in it self) are Governed and Directed some by a Certain Habit, some by Nature, Others by a Brutal or Irrational Soul, and some again by that which has Reason and Ʋnderstanding. Of all which things Man does in some measure participate and is concerned in all the a∣bove
mentioned Differences. For He is contained by Habit, and Nourished by Nature; He makes Ʋse of Reason and Ʋnderstanding; He wants not his Share of the Irrational Soul; He has also in him a Native orse and inbred Principles of the Passions, not as adventitious but necessary to him, which ought not therefore to be utterly rooted out, but only pruned and cultivated. It not being the Method and Custom of Reason in Imitation either of the Manner of the Thracians, or of what Lycurgus Or∣der'd to be done to the Vines, to destroy and tear up all the Passions and Affections indifferently, Good and Bad, Use∣ful and Hurtful together, but ra∣ther like some. Kind and Care∣ful Deity, who has a tender re∣gard to the Growth and Improve∣ment of Fruit-Trees and Plants, to cut away and lop off that which grows Wild and Rank, and to dress and ma∣nage the rest, that it may serve for Use and Profit. For as they who are afraid of being drunk, pour not their Wine upon the Ground but dilute it with Water, so nei∣ther do they who fear any violent Commotion of their Pas∣sions go about utterly to destroy and eradicate, but ra∣ther wisely to Temper and Moderate them. And as they who use to break Horses and Oxen do not go about to take away their Goings or to render them unfit for La∣bour and Service, but only strive to cure them of their Unluckiness and Flinging up their Heels, and to bring them to be patient of the Bit and Yoke so as to bcome Useful: After the same Manner Reason makes very good use of the Passions after they are well subdued and made Gentle, without either tearing in pieces or over much weakning that Part of the Soul which was made to be obedient to her. In Pindar we find it said,
As 'tis the Horses Pride to win the Race, And to Plough up the Fruitful Soyl, Is the Laborious Ox's Toyl, So the fierce Dog we take the Foaming Bore to chace. but much more useful then these in their several kinds, are the Whole Brood of Passions when they become Atten∣dants to Reason, and being assistant and obedient to Ver∣tue do give Life and Vigor to it. Thus Moderate Anger is of admirable Ʋse to Courage or Fortitude; Hatred and Aversion for Ill Men promotes the Execution of Justice; And a Just Indignation against those who are prosperous beyond what they deserve, is then both convenient and even necessary, when, with Pride and Insolence their Minds are so swolen and ela∣ted, that they need to be repressed and taken down. Neither by any means can a Man, tho' He never so much desire it, be able to seperate from Friendship, In∣dulgence and a natural Propension to Affection; from Hu∣manity and good Nature, Tenderness and Commiseration; Nor from true Benevolence, a mutual participation of Joys and Grief. And if they run into an Error who would take away all Love, that they may destroy Mad and Wanton Passions, neither can those be in the Right who for the sake of Covetousness Condemn all other Ap∣petites and Desires: Which is full as ridiculous as if One should always refuse to Run, because one time or other he may chance to catch a fall; Or to Shoot, because he may sometimes happen to miss the Mark; Or should forbear all Singing, because a Discord or a Jar is offensive to the Ear. For as in Sounds the Musick and Harmony thereof takes away neither the Sharpest nor the Deepest Notes; And in our Bodies, Physick, procureth Health, not by the Destruction of Heat and Cold but by a due and proportionable Temperature and Mixture of them
both together, so in the same Manner it happeneth in the Soul of Man when Reason becomes Victorious and Triumphant, by reducing the Faculties of the Mind which belong to the Passions and all their Motions to a due Moderation and Mediocrity. And tho' neither Joy nor Grief nor Fear simply in themselves, yet excessive and unmeasurable either Joy or Grief or Fear in the Soul may very properly be resembled to a great Swelling or In∣flamation in the Body. And therefore Homer where he says, No Dastard Fear the Valiant Man rebukes, And even in Death he keeps his Living Looks, does not take away all Fear, (but that only which is extream and Ʋnmanly) that Bravery and Courage may not be thought to be Fool-hardiness; Nor Boldness and Resolution pass for Temerity and Rashness. And therefore in Pleasures and Delights he that can prescribe bounds to his Lusts and Desires, and in Punishing Offences can moderate his Rage and Hatred to the Offenders, shall in one case get the Reputation not of an Insensible but Temperate Person, and in the other be accounted a Man of Justice without Cruelty or Bitterness: Whereas if all the Passions, if that were possible, were clean rooted out, Reason in most Men would grow sensibly more Dull and Ʋnactive then the Pilot of a Ship in a Calm. And to these things, (as it should seem) Prudent Law-givers having regard, have wisely taken care to Excite and Encourage in Common-wealths and Cities, the Ambition and Emulation of their People amongst one another; and with Trumpets, Drums and Flutes to whet their Anger and Courage against their Ene∣mies. For not only in Poetry (as Plato very well ob∣serves) he that is Inspired by the Muses and as it were possessed by a Poetical Fury will make him who is other∣wise
a Master of his Trade, and an Exact Critique in Poetry appear Ridiculous: But also in Fighting those who are Elevated and Inspired with a Noble Rage, and a Resolution and Courage above the common Pitch, become Invincible, and are not to be withstood. And this is that Warlike Fury which the Gods s Homer will have it infuse into Men of Honour, He spok—And very Word new Strength Inspir'd. and again, This mo then Humn Rage is from the Gods. As if to Reason the Gods had Joyned some or other of the Passions as an Incitement, or, if I may so say, a Ve∣hicle to push and carry it forward. Nay we often see these very Men against whom I now dispute, Exciting and Encouraging Young Persons with Praises, and as often checking and rebuking them with severe Reprimands, whereupon in the One case there must follow Pleasure and Satisfaction as necessarily as Grief and Trouble are produced in the other: Reprehension and Admonition certainly striking us with Repentance and Shame, whereof this is comprehended under Fear, as the other is under Grief. And these are the Things they chiefly make use of for Correction and Amendment: Which seems to be the Reason why Diogenes to some who had magnified Plato, made this Reply, What can there be in him, said he, so much to be valued who having been so long a Philosopher, has never yet been known so much as to Excite the single Passion of Grief in the Mind of any One? And certainly the Mathematical Sciences cannot so pro∣perly be called, (to use the Words of Xenocrates,) the Handles of Phiosophy, as these Passions are of Yung Men, namely, Bsfullness, Desire, Repentance, Pleasure, Pain,
Ambition; whereon Right Reason and the Law discreetly laying their Salutary hands, do thereby effectually and speedily reduce a Young-man into the Right Way. Agree∣able hereunto the Lacedaemonian Instructor of Youth was in the Right when he professed that he would bring it to pass that Youths under his care should take a Plea∣sure and Satisfaction in Good, and have an Ahhorence for Evil, then which there cannot be a Greater or Nobler End of the Liberal Education of Youth Proposed or Assigned.
Plutarch's Morals. Vol. V. Plutarch's Parallels, or, a Comparison between the Greek and Roman Hi∣stories. Translated out of the Greek by John Oswald, M. A. MOst People are apt to take the Histories of former Times for mere Forgeries and Fa∣bles, because of many Passages in those Relations that seem to be very extrava∣gant. But yet according to my Observation, we have had as strange Occurrences of a later Date, as any we have received from Antiquity; for proof whereof I have here match'd several Stories of the Ancients with modern Instances, and cited my Authorities. Datis, an eminent Persian Commander, drew out three hundred thousand Men to Marathon, a Plain of Attica, where he encamped, and denounced War to the Inhabitants. The Athenians made no Reckoning at all of so barbarous a Rabble, but sent out nine thousand Men against him, under the Command of Cynaegyrus, Polyzelus, Callimachus, and Miltiades. Upon the joyning
of Battle, Polyzelus was struck blind at the Sight of a wonderful Apparition: Callimachus his Body was struck thorow with a great many Lances, continuing in an up∣right Posture even when he was dead: Cynaegyrus had both his Hands cut off upon laying hold of a Persian Ship that was endeavoring to get away. King Asdrubal, having possest himself of Sicily, pro∣claim'd War against the Romans. Metellus, who was ap∣pointed by the Senate to command in chief, overcame him. L. Glauco, a Patrician, laid hold of the Vessel that Asdrubal was in, and lost both his Hands upon it. Aristides Milesius gives this Account in his first Book of the Affairs of Sicily, and Diodorus Siculus had it from him. Xerxes march'd with an Army of five hundred thou∣sand Men to Artemisium, and declar'd war against the Country. The Athenians in a very great Surprise, sent Agesilaus, the Brother of Themistocles, to discover the Motions of the Enemy, notwithstanding a Dream of his Father Neocles, that his Son had lost both his Hands. This Agesilaus put himself in a Persian Habit, and en∣tred the Barbarians Camp; where, taking Mardonius (an Officer of the Kings Guards) for Xerxes himself, he kill'd him: Whereupon he was immediately seiz'd, bound, and carry'd to Xerxes, who was just then about to sacri∣fice an Ox to the Sun: The Fire was kindled upon the Altar, and Agesilaus put his Right Hand into it, without so much as shrinking at the Pain. He was order'd up∣on this to be unty'd; and told the King, that the Athe∣nians were all of the same Resolution, and that if he pleas'd, he should see him burn his Left Hand too. This gave Xerxes an Apprehension of him, so that he caus'd him to be still kept in Custody. This I find in Agatharchides, the Samian, in the second Book of his Persian History.
Porsena, a King of Tuscany, encamp'd himself beyond the Tiber, and made War upon the Romans, cutting off the Supplies, till they were brought to a great Want of Provisions. The Senate were at their Wits end what to do, till Mutius, a Noble-Man, got leave of the Consuls, to take four hundred of his own Quality to advise with upon the Matter. Mutius, upon this, put himself into the Habit of a private Man, and cross'd the River; where finding one of the King's Officers giving Orders for the Distribution of Necessaries to the Souldiers, and taking him for the King himself, he slew him. He was taken immediately, and carried to the King, where he put his Right Hand into a Fire that was in the Room, and with a Smile in the middle of his Torments, Bar∣barians, says he, I can set my self at Liberty without ask∣ing you leave, and be it known to you, that I have left four hundred Men in the Camp as daring as my self, that have sworn your Death. This struck Porsena with such a Ter∣ror, that he made Peace with the Romans upon it. A∣ristides Milesius is my Author for this, in the Third Book of his History. There happen'd a Dispute betwixt the Argives and Lacedaemonians about a Claim to the Possession of Thyrea∣tes. The Amphictiones gave their Opinion for a Tryal of it by Battel, so many and so many of a Side, and the Possession to go to the Victor. The Lacedaemonians made choice of Othryades for their Captain, and the Argives of Thersander. The Battel was fought, and the only two Survivers that appear'd, were Agenor and Chromius, both Argives, who carry'd their Principals the News of the Victory. In this Interim, Othryades, who was not as yet quite dead, made a shift to raise himself by the help of broken Lances; gather'd the Shields of the Dead toge∣ther, and erected a Trophee with this Inscription upon it in his own Blood, [To Jupiter, the Guardian of Trophees.] The Controversie still depended, till the Amphictiones
upon an ocular Examination of the Matter, gave it for the Lacedaemonians. This is according to Chrysermus in his Third Book of the Peloponnesian History. In a War that the Romans had with the Samnites, they made Posthumius Albinus their General. He was surpriz'd in a difficult Pass call'd Furcae Caudinae, where he was hemm'd in, and lost Three Legions, he himself likewise falling upon the Place grievously wounded. In the Dead of the Night, finding himself near his End, he gather'd together the Targets of his dead Enemies, and raised a Trophee with them, which he inscribed with his Hand dipt in Blood, [Erected by the Romans to Jupi∣ter, Guardian of the Trophees, for a Victory over the Sam∣nites.] But Fabius Gurges, that was dispatch'd away with Troops under his Command, so soon as he came to the Place, and saw the Trophee, took up an auspicious Omen upon it, fought the Enemy, and overcame them, took their King Prisoner, and sent him to Rome. This is in the Third Book of Aristides Milesius his Italian History. Upon the Persians falling into Greece with a Body of five hundred thousand Men, the Spartans sent out Leoni∣das with a Party of three hundred Souldiers to secure the Pass of the Thermopilae. As they were at Dinner, the Barbarians fell in upon them; upon which, Leonidas bade them eat heartily, for they were to sup in another World. Leonidas charg'd in the Head of his Men into the Body of the Barbarians, and after many Wounds re∣ceiv'd, got up to Xerxes himself, and took his Crown from his Head. He lost his Life in the Attempt, and Xerxes causing him to be cut up when he was dead, found his Heart all hairy. Aristides, in the First Book of his Persian History. In the Punick War the Romans sent out three hundred Men under the Command of Fabius Maximus, where they were all lost, and he himself, after he had receiv'd
a mortal Wound, assaulted Hannibal, tore his Diadem from his Head, and died in the Action, according to Aristides Milesius. There was a terrible Earth-quake, with a wonder∣ful Eruption of Water, at Celaenae, a City of Phrygia, that swallow'd up a great many Houses, People and all. Midas upon this, consults the Oracle, which gave him for answer, That if he would cast into that Gulph the most precious thing that he had in the World, the Earth should close again: Whereupon he threw in a Mass of Gold and Silver, but never the better. This put it in the Head of Anchyrus, the Son of Midas, to consider, that the most precious thing in Nature, is the Life and Soul of a Man; so that he went presently and embraced his Fa∣ther and his Wife Timothaea, and mounted his Horse, and leapt into the Abyss: The Earth closs'd upon it, and Midas rais'd a golden Altar in the Place, laid his Hand upon it, and dedicated it [TO JƲPITER IDAEƲS.] This Altar becomes Stone at that time of the Year when it was usual to have these Eruptions, and after that Season was over, it was turn'd to Gold again. My Author is Callisthenes, in his second Book of Trans∣formations. The River Tiber, in it's Course over the Forum, open'd a huge Cavity in the Ground, so that a great many Houses were buried in it. This was lookt upon as a Judgment upon the Place, from Jupiter Tarsius; who, as the Oracle told them, was not to be appeas'd without throwing into it what they held most valuable. So they threw a quantity of Gold and Silver into it. But Cur∣tius, one of the bravest young Men they had, gave a better Guess at the mind of the Oracle, and reflecting upon it, that the Life of a Man was much more excel∣lent than Treasure, took his Horse, and plung'd him∣self into the Gulf, and so redeem'd his Country. Aristides in the Fortieth Book of his Italian History.
As several great Captains were making merry with Polynices, an Eagle passing by, made a stoop, and car∣ried up into the Air the Lance of Amphiaraus, who was one of the Company, and then letting it fall down, it stuck in the Ground, and was turn'd into a Laurel. The next Day, when the Armies were in action, the Earth open'd and swallow'd up Amphiaraus with his Chariot, in that very place, where at present the City Herma stands, so call'd from that Chariot. This is in Trisimachus his Third Book of the Foundation of Cities. When the Romans made War upon Pyrrhus, the King of the Epirotes, the Oracle promis'd Aemilius Paulus the Victory, in case he should erect an Altar in that place where he should see an eminent Man with his Chariot swallow'd up into the Ground. Some three days after, Valerius Conatus, a Man of a Divine Spirit, was com∣manded in a Dream to take the Pontifical Habit upon him. He did so, and led his Men into the Battle, where, af∣ter a prodigious Slaughter of the Enemy, the Earth o∣pen'd and swallow'd him up. Aemilius built an Altar here, obtain'd a great Victory, and sent a hundred and sixty Castle-bearing Elephants to Rome. This Altar de∣livers Oracles about that Season of the Year in which Pyrrhus was overcome. Critolaus has this in his Third Book of his History of the Epyrotes. Pyraichnes, King of the Eubaeans, made War upon the Boeotians. Hercules, when he was yet a Youth, over∣came this King, had him drawn to pieces with Horses, and threw away the Carcase unburied. The Place where this was done is call'd [Pyraichnes his Horses.] It lies upon the River Heraclius, and there is heard a Neighing whensoever any Horse drinks of that River. This is in The third Book of Rivers. Tullus Hostilius, a King of the Romans, wag'd War against the Albans, whose Kings Name was Maetius Fu∣entius, and he many times kept off from fighting. He
had the ill Luck to be once worsted, upon which the Albans gave themselves up to Drinking and making good Cheer, till Tullus fell in upon them when they were in their Cups, and tore their King to pieces betwixt two Horses. Alexarchus, in the Fourth Book of his Italian History. Philip had a Design to make himself Master of Olyn∣thus and Methone, and in trying to pass the River Sandanus, was shot with an Arrow by one Aster an O∣lynthian, with these Words [It is Aster that sends Phi∣lip this mortal Shaft.] Philip, upon this, swam back again to his own People, and with the loss of an Eye sav'd his Life. Callisthenes, in the Third of his Macedonicks. Porsena made War upon the Romans, and pitch'd his Camp on the further side of the Tiber, where he inter∣cepted all Relief, till they were pinch'd with Famine. Horatius Cocles took possession of a Wooden Bridge, where he oppos'd himself to the Enemy that were pressing to come over; but finding himself overpower'd with Numbers, he commanded his People to cut down the Bridge behind him, by which means he hindred them from coming over, but in the mean time receiving a Wound in his Eye, he threw himself into the River, and swam over to his own Party. So Theotimus in the Second Book of his Italian History. Eratosthenes, in Erigone, tells a Story of Icarius, that entertain'd Bacchus under his Roof; and it runs thus. Saturn having taken up his Lodging with an Husband∣man who had a very beautiful Daughter, took her to his Bed, and had several Sons by her, as Janius, Hym∣nus, Faustus and Faelix. He taught his Host Icarius the Use of Wine, and the Way of Dressing his Vines, with a Charge that he should likewise instruct his Neigh∣bors in the Mystery. His Acquaintance hereupon find∣ing that this strange Drink had cast them into a deeper Sleep than ordinary, took a Fancy that they were poy∣son'd,
and ston'd Icarius in Revenge, whereupon his Grand-Children hang'd themselves for Grief. Upon a Time, when the Plague was very hot in Rome, the Pythian Oracle being consulted, gave this Answer, That upon the appeasing the Wrath of Saturn, and the Genii of those that were unjustly kill'd, the Pestilence would cease. Lutatius Catulus, a Man of the first Quality, caused a Temple upon this Occasion to be erected near the Tarpeian Mount, which he dedicated to Saturn, pla∣cing an Altar in it, with four Faces; possibly with a respect to Saturn's four Children, or to the Four Seasons of the Year. He also instituted the Month of January; but Saturn translated them all to Heaven among the Stars, some of which are call'd Protrigeteres, as Forerunners of the Vintage; only Janus rises first, and has his Place at the Feet of the Virgin. Critolaus in his Fourth Book of Celestial Appearances. In the time of the Devastation of Greece by the Persi∣ans, Pausanias, a Lacedaemonian Commander, took a Bribe of five hundred Talents of Xerxes, to betray Spar∣ta. The Treason being discover'd, his Father Agesilaus prest him so hard, that he was fain to take Sanctuary in the Temple of Minerva, call'd Chalciaecos, where he caus'd the Doors to be brickt up, and his Son to be im∣mur'd till he dy'd of Hunger, and his Mother after this would not suffer the Body to be buried. Chrysermus, in the Second Book of his Histories. The Romans being in War with the Latins, made choice of P. Decius for their General. Now there was a certain Patrician, a young Man, and poor, (Cassius Brutus by Name) who propos'd for a certain Reward to open the Gates to the Enemy; but being detected, he fled to the Temple of Minerva Auxiliaria: But his Fa∣ther Cassius, an Ensign-bearer, shut him up there till he died of Famine, and his dead Body was not allow'd Bu∣rial. Clitonymus, in his Italian History.
Darius the Persian, had a Battle with Alexander near the River Granicus, where he lost seven eminent Gover∣nours, and upward of five hundred armed Chariots; and yet would have tryed the Fortune of another Bat∣tle the Day following: But his Son Ariobarzanes, in Fa∣vour of Alexander, undertook to betray his Father into his Hands. The Father was so transported with Passi∣on at the Indignity of the thing, that he cut off his Son's Head for't. Aretides Cnidius, in the Third of his Macedonian History. Brutus, that was created Consul by the unanimous Vote of the Citizens, forc'd away Tarquinius Superbus into Banishment, for his abominable Tyranny. He fled to the Tuscans, and by their Assistance made War upon the Romans. The Sons were treating to betray the Father; the Business was discover'd, and they lost their Heads for it. Aristides Milesius, in his Italian History. Epaminondas, a Theban General, manag'd a War a∣gainst the Spartans. He went from the Army to Thebes, to be present there at a publick Election of Magistrates, but first enjoyn'd his Son Stesimbrotus, that he should not fight the Enemy in his Absence, upon any Terms. The Spartans being inform'd that Epaminondas was not with the Army, reproach'd the young Man with want of Courage, and so far provok'd him, that without any re∣gard to his Fathers Command, he gave the Spartans Battle, and overcame them. His Father was so in∣cens'd against him for this Action, that though he crown'd him for the Victory, he cut off his Head for his Disobedience. Ctesiphon, in his Third Book of the Boeotian History. In a War that the Romans had against the Samnites, they gave the Command to Manlius, surnamed Imperi∣osus. He had occasion to go to Rome, to be present there at the Choice of Consuls, and gave his Son in
charge, not to engage the Enemy in the mean time. The Samnites understanding this, irritated the young Man with opprobrious Words, as if he declin'd fight∣ing out of Cowardize, and in the end provok'd him to a Battle, upon which action he carried the Day; but his Father caus'd his Head to be struck off for breaking his Order. This is in Aristides Milesius. Hercules made Love to Iole, but she gave him the Repulse, and so he went and assaulted OEchalia. Iole threw her self head-long down from the Wall, but the Whiffling of the Wind under her Garments broke the Fall, and she had no Hurt. This Story is in Nicias Maleotes. Valerius Torquatus was the Romans General in the War they had with the Tuscans, who, upon the sight of Clu∣sia, the Daughter of the Tuscan King, fell in Love with her, and when he found he could do no good on't, laid Siege to the City. Clusia upon this threw her self headlong from a Tower; but Venus was so careful of her, that by the playing of the Wind in the Folds of her Garments, she was wafted safe to the Ground. Torquatus however offer'd her Violence, and for so doing, he was banish'd by a publick Decree into the Isle of Corsica. Theophilus, in the Third Book of his Italian History. While the Carthaginians were treating an Alliance with the Sicilians against the Romans, the Roman General, Metellus, was observ'd to omit sacrificing only to Vesta, who reveng'd her self upon him, by sending a cross Wind to the Navy: But Caius Julius, a Sooth-sayer, being consulted in the Matter, gave answer, that this Obstacle would be remov'd upon the Generals sacrificing his Daughter; so that he was forc'd to produce his Daughter Metella for a Sacrifice. But Vesta had Com∣passion for her, and so sent her away to Lamusium, substituting a Heifer in her stead, and made a Priestess of
her to the Dragon that is worshipt in that Place. So Pythocles, in the Third Book of his Italian History. Something like this happened to Iphigenia in Aulis, a City of Boeotia. See Meryllus, in the First Book of his Boeotick History. Brennus, a King of the Gauls, after the wasting of A∣sia, came to Ephesus, and there fell in Love with a Country Girl, who promised him, that for such a cer∣tain Reward in Bracelets, and other Curiosities of Va∣lue, he should have the Use of her Body, and that she would further undertake to deliver up Ephesus into his Hands. Brenneus order'd his Souldiers to throw all the Gold they had into the Lap of this avaritious Wretch, which they did, till she perisht under the Weight of it. Clytophon, in the First Book of his Gallican History. Tarpeia, a Virgin that was well born, and had the keeping of the Capitol in the War betwixt the Sabines and the Romans, past a Promise unto Tatius, that she would open him a Passage into the Tarpeian Mount, pro∣vided that he would give her all the Jewels that the Sa∣bines wore, for a Reward. The Sabines hearing this, took her alive, and buried her under the Weight of her Rings and precious Ornaments. Aristides Milesius, in his Italick Story. After a long War betwixt two Cities, Tegea and Phe∣nea, they came to an Agreement, to refer the Decision of the Controversie, by Combate, to three Twin-Brothers on each side, the Sons of Reximachus for Te∣gea, and for Phenea, the Sons of Damostratus. Upon the encounter two of the Sons of Reximachus were slain; but Critolaus, the third, had a Fetch beyond his two Brothers; for, under a Pretence of running away, he divided his Enemies that pursued him, and so taking them one by one, he kill'd them all. The Tegeans upon his Return, went all overjoy'd to gratulate the Victor, only his Sister Demodice was not so well pleas'd; for she
was betroth'd, it seems, to Demoticus, one of the Bro∣thers that was now slain: Which Critolaus took so ill, that he kill'd his Sister, and being afterwards indicted for Murder, his Mother acquitted him. Demaratus in his Second Book of the Arcadian History. In the heat of a War betwixt the Romans and Albans, they came to this Agreement, that the Cause should be determin'd by a Tryal at Arms, betwixt three and three Twins on each side, the Curiatii for the Albans, and the Horatii for the Romans. Upon the encounter, the Curiatii kill'd two of the other; the third Survivor, under the Colour of flying, destroy'd his Enemies one by one as they follow'd him. All his Friends came to joy him of his Victory, save only his Sister Horatia; for one of the Curiatii, that her Brother kill'd, was her Sweet-heart. Horatius for this, kill'd his Sister. Aristi∣des Milesius, in his Italian Commentaries. The Temple of Minerva in Ilium happen'd to be a-fire. One Ilus ran presently to save the Palladium, (an Image dropt from Heaven) but upon the taking of it up he was struck blind; it being a thing unlawful for any Man to look upon; but upon appeasing the Deity, he was afterwards restor'd to his Sight. Dercyllus, in his First Book of Foundations. Metellus, an eminent Man, as he was walking out of the City, was interrupted by Ravens that laid hold of him, and kept a flapping him with their Wings. This Omen surpriz'd him, and back he went into the City again, where he found the Temple of Vesta all in a Flame. He went and took away the Palladium, and fell blind upon't. But some time after, the Goddess being pacifi∣ed, gave him the use of his Eyes again. Aristides Mile∣sius, in his Italian History. Upon a time, when the Thrasians were engag'd in a War against the Athenians, the Oracle promis'd them Victory, if they would but save the Life of Codrus.
Codrus upon this puts himself in a coarse Disguise, and away he goes into the Enemies Camp, with a Scyth in his Hand, where he kill'd one, and another kill'd him, so that the Athenians got the better on't. Socrates, in the Second Book of his Thrasian History. P. Desius, a Roman, at a time when they were in War with the Albans, had a Dream, that his Death would bring a great Advantage to the Romans: Upon which Consideration, he charg'd into the middle of his Enemies, where he kill'd many, and was slain himself: His Son Desius did the like in the Gallick War, for the Conservation of the Roman State. Aristides Milesius is my Author. There was one Cyanippus a Syracusian, that Sacrificed to all the Gods but Bacchus, who took the Contempt so heinously, that he made him drunk, in which Fit, he got his Daughter Cyane into a Corner and lay with her; she in the mean time, slipt his Ring off his Finger, and gave it to her Nurse to keep, as a Circum∣stance that some time or other might come to be brought in evidence. There brake out a Pestilence, and the Pythian Oracle advis'd the sacrificing of an Incestuous Person to the Gods that are the Averters of such Cala∣mities, as the only Remedy. Cyane, that understood the Meaning of the Oracle better than other People, took her Father by the Hair of the Head, first stabbing him, and then her self. Dositheus, in the Third Book of his Sicilian History. In the time of celebrating the Bacchanalia at Rome, Aruntius, that had never drunk any Wine since he was born, did not show that Reverence for the Power of the God as he ought to have done, so that Bacchus intoxi∣cated him, and in that Freak, Aruntius ravisht his Daughter Medullina. She came to know the Ravisher by his Ring, and an Exploit came into her Head, a∣bove what from her Age could have been expected.
She made her Father drunk, and set a Garland upon his Head, carrying him to the Altar of Thunder, where with Tears she kill'd him for robbing her so treache∣rously of her Virginity. Aristides, in his Third Book of his Italian History. Erechtheus was told in a War he had with Eumolpus, that he should have the better of his Enemy if he would but sacrifice his Daughter. He advis'd upon the Matter with his Wife Praxithea, and deliver'd up his Daughter after the manner of a common Sacrifice. Eu∣ripides, in his Erechtheus. Marius finding himself hard put to't in the Cimbrian War, had it reveal'd to him in a Dream, that he should overcome his Enemies, if he would but sacrifice his Daughter Calpurnia: He did it (preferring the common Safety before any private Bond of Nature) and he got the Victory. There are two Altars in Germany, where about that time of the Year, may be heard the Sound of Trumpets. Dorotheus, in the Fourth Book of his Italian History. There was one Cyanippus, a Thessalian, a great Lover of the Chase, and was often abroad a-hunting. This same Cyanippus was newly married, and his staying out so long, and so often in the Woods, gave his Wife a Jealousie of an Intreague there with some other Wo∣man; insomuch that she follow'd him one time, and got into a Thicket to watch him. The Rustling of the Boughs in the Place where she lay, brought the Dogs thither, in expectation of some Game, where they tore this tender-hearted Woman to pieces, as if she had been a brute Beast. Cyanippus was so surpriz'd with so dismal, and unthought-of a Spectacle, that he kill'd himself. Parthenius the Poet. Sybaris is a City of Italy, were there was one Aemilius, a very handsome young Man, and a Lover of Hunt∣ing. His Wife (whom he had lately married) took up a
Suspicion, that under colour of the Chase, he carry'd on an Assignation with some other Woman. She trac'd him to the Wood, and upon the Noise of the Boughs in her Passage, the Dogs ran presently to her, and worried her, and her Husband stabb'd himself immediately upon this miserable Accident. Clitonymus, in the Second Book of his Sybariticks. One Smyrna (to whom Venus ow'd a Shame, it seems) fell passionatey in Love with her Father, and made the Nurse her Confident. She goes craftily to work with her Master, and tells him of a Maid there in the Neigh∣bourhood, that lov'd him above all things in the World; but she could not in Modesty appear publickly to him: So the Father lay ignorantly with his own Daughter. But some time after, having a great mind to see his Mistriss, he call'd for a Light, and when he saw who it was, he pursued the Incestuous Wretch with his drawn Sword; but by the Providence of Venus, she was res∣cu'd from that Danger, and turn'd into a Myrtle-Tree. Theodorus, in his Transformations. One Valeria Tusculanaria (for whom Venus had no Kindness) fell down right in Love with her Father Vale∣rius. She told the Nurse the Secret, who order'd it so, that she brought the Father and the Daughter together, telling him, that a Maid there hard by was faln des∣perately in Love with him, but that she durst not lye with him for fear of being known. The Father was got into his Cups, and as he was in Bed with his Daugh∣ter, call'd for a Candle. The Nurse wak'd Valeria, and away she goes, wandring up and down the Coun∣try with her great Belly. She had at last a Fall from a Precipice, but scap'd without so much as any Miscarri∣age; for she was deiver'd at her ime, and the Childs Name was Sylvanus (in Greek, Aegipanes.) Valerius, in the Anxiety of his Mind, threw himself from the same Precipice. Aristides Milesius, in the Third Book of his Italian History.
Diomedes after the Destruction of Troy was cast by stress of weather upon the Coast of Libya, where Lycus the Son of Mars was King, whose Custom it was to Sacrifice all Strangers to his Father; but his Daugh∣ter Callirrhoe falling in Love with Diomede betray'd her Father, and set Diomede at liberty; who presently went his way without any regard to his benefactress, and Calirrhoe hang'd her self upon it. Juba Book 3d. of his Libyan History. Calpurnius Crassus a famous Man, bearing Arms with Begulus, was sent to the Massilians, to attack the Castle of Garetius being a very strong piece. He was taken in the Enterprize, and design'd for a Sacrifice to Saturn; but Bysatia the King's Daughter, out of a passionate kindness to Calpurnius, betray'd her Father. Calpurnius left her, and after his departure Bysatia cut her own Throat. Hegesianax's Third Book of the African Histo∣ry. When Priamus found that Troy was given for lost, he sent his Young Son Polydore into Thracia with a vast Sum of Gold, and put all into the hands of Polymestor his Kins∣man. So soon as Troy was taken Polymestor kill'd the Child, and took the Gold to himself. Hecuba, being driven upon that quarter, over-reach'd Polymestor by Craft under pretence of giving him a great Treasure, at which time she with the Assistance of her Fellow-Prisoners tore out his Eyes with her Nailes. Euripides the Tragedian. When Hannibal was ravaging the Country of Cam∣pania, L. Thymbris deposited his Son Rushius with a vast Sum of Money in the hands of Valerius Gestius his Kins∣man, who upon Intelligence that the Enemy carried all before him, out of pure avarice, and without any re∣gard to Humanity or Justice, kill'd the Child. It so fell out that Thymbris as he was walking about the Fields found the dead Body of his Son; Whereupon he
call'd his Kinsman under pretence of a Treasure that he would show him: He took his opportunity, put out his Eyes, and hung him up upon a Gibbet. Aristides's 3d. Book of his Italick History. Aeacus had two Sons by Psammathe, Phocus and Tela∣mon, the former better belov'd than the other. Telamon one day took out his Brother a-Hunting, and a Boar presenting himself, he threw his Lance in pretence at the Boar, but in truth at his Brother, whom he hated, and so kill'd him; for which his Father banisht him. Dorotheus's 1st Book of Transformations. Cajus Maximus had two Sons, Resus the one by Ameria whose Sirname was Conon, and the other Similius. The Brothers were a-Hunting together, and Resus having kill'd the other, put it off when he came at home, that it was by chance and far from any design of doing it: But his Father, when he came in time to know the truth of it, banisht the Son. Aristocles in the 3d Book of his Italian History. Mars is said to have begotten Meleager upon Althea. Euripides in his Meleager. Septimius Marcellus took to wife one Sylvia, and a great lover of Hunting he was. Mars put himself in the ha∣bit of a Shepherd, whor'd his new Wife and got her with Child: Which being done he told her who he was, and gave her a Brand, telling her that the fate of the Child she went withal, was wrapt up in the fate of that Brand. Septimius slew Tuscinus, but Mammercus, in his sacrificing to the Gods for a fruitful Season, omitted only Ceres, who in revenge sent a wild Boar into his Grounds: Whereupon a knot of Huntsmen got toge∣ther and kill'd him, and deliver'd the Head and the Skin to his Sweet-heart; But Simbrotes and Muthias the Maid's Uncles, took them away from her. Mammercus in a rage kill'd them upon it, and the Mother burnt the Brand. Meryllus in the 3d Book of his Italian History.
When Telamon the Son of Aeacus and Endeis came to Euboea, he debauch'd Periboea the Daughter of Alcathous, and fled away by Night. The Father understanding this, and suspecting the Villany to be done by some of the Citizens, he deliver'd his Daughter to one of the Guards to be thrown into the Sea: But the Souldier in compassion to the Woman, rather sold her, and she was carried away by Sea to the Island of Salamina, where Telamon bought her, and had by her, Ajax. Aretades Cnidius in his 2d Book of Islands. L. Troscius had by Patris a Daughter call'd Florentia, who being corrupted by Calpurnius a Roman, was deli∣ver'd by her Father to a Souldier, with a charge to throw her into the Sea and drown her. The Man had compassion of her, and rather sold her: Calpurnius bought her, and had Contruscus by her. Aeolus a great King of Itruria had by Amphithea six Daughters and as many Sons. Macarius the youngest of them had the carnal knowledge of one of his Sisters, who was deliver'd of a Boy. Her Father sent her a Sword to kill the Child with, but that was so impious, that she chose rather to kill her self, and Macarius laid violent hands upon himself too. Sstratus's 2d Book of his Tuscan History. Papirius Volucer married Julia Pulchra, by whom he had six Sons and six Daughters. Papirius Romanus, the eldest of the six, got Canulia his Sister with Child. When the Father came to the knowledge of it, he sent his Daughter a Sword with which she kill'd her self, and Romanus did the same. Chrysippus's 1st Book of his Italian History. Aristonymus an Ephesian and the Son of Demostratus, was a Woman-hater, but had to do with an Ass, which brought him forth in the ordinary course of time, a most beautiful Daughter which he call'd Onoscelis. Ari∣stotle's 2d Book of Paradoxes.
Fulvius Stellus had an aversion to Women too, but entertain'd himself to his satisfaction with a Mare, by which he had a very handsom Daughter, that he call'd Hippena, and this is the Goddess that has the care of the breed of Horses; According to Agesilaus in the 3d Book of his Italian History. The Sardians being engag'd in War with the Smyr∣naeans, besieg'd Smyrna, and sent them word by the Ambassadors, that they would never raise the Siege, till the Smyrnaeans should deliver up their Wives to their Embraces. The Men of Smyrna would have been hard put to it upon this pinching necessity, if it had not been for the advice of a pretty Wench that was a Maid-servant to Phylarchus. Her Council to her Master was this; that instead of sending free Women, they should rather dress up the Servants and send them. The Smyrnaeans follow'd her advice, and when the Sardians had wearied themselves with their Mistresses, the Smyr∣naeans easily overcame them: From whence there is a Festival day observ'd under the name of Eleutheria, which is celebrated among the Smyrnaeans with great Solemnity, the Servants being drest up with all the Ornaments of the free Women. Dositheus in the 3d Book of his Lydian History. Atepomarus a King of the Gaules being in War with the Romans, made a public Declaration that he would never agree to a Peace, till the Romans should prostitute their Wives to them. The Romans advis'd with the Maid-servants, and sent them in the place of the free Women; the Barbarians ply'd the Work so hard, that they were even tir'd and fell asleep Retana (who was the Autho∣ress of the Council) climb'd a Fig tree, and so got on the Wall, and finding how it was, gave notice of it to the Consuls. The Romans upon this made a sally and rout∣ed the Enemy; in memory whereof was instituted the Servants Holiday, and this was the rise of it. Aristides Milesius Book 1st. Hist. Ital.
In the War betwixt the Athenians and Eumolpus, Pro∣visions falling short, the Commissary Pyrander, upon a point of Prudence and good Husbandry, made some small abatement in the Souldiers Proportions: The Ci∣tizens suspected Treachery in the case, and ston'd him to Death. Callisthenes's 3d Book Hist. Thrace. The Romans being in War with the Gauls, and Pro∣visions for the Belly being very scarce, Cinna contracted the Souldiers allowance to a less proportion than they had formerly: The Citizens interpreted this abatement to be an ambitious Design he had upon the Government, and so ston'd him for it. Aristides Book 3d. Hist. Ital. In the time of the Peloponnesian War, Pisistratus an Orchomenian, had a spite at the Nobility, and to make himself popular favour'd the Common People. The Senate conspir'd against him and treacherously kill'd him, cutting him into small Gobbets that they carried away with them in their Bosoms, and paring off the Surface of the Ground that no signs of the Murder might appear. The Common People however upon a jealousie of the Matter, went tumultuously to the Senate; House but the Kings younger Son Tlesimachus that was dipt in the Conspiracy, diverted them with a sham-story, telling them, that he himself had seen his Father in a form more than human, walking as lively as was possible up the Pisaean Mountain: And so he impos'd upon the Peo∣ple: Theophilus's 2d. Book Hist. Pelopon. The Senate of Rome being hard put to it for the main∣taining of a War with so many of their Neighbours, thought it good Husbandry to shorten the People's allow∣ance of Corn, which Romulus took very ill, and did not only restore it to the People, but several great Men were punisht for it. Upon this he was murder'd in the Senate by a Conspiracy of the Nobles, who cut him all to pieces, and carried them severally away in the lappets of their Garments. The Romans came to the Court in
a hurry, and brought Fire with them to set all in a flame; but Julius Proculus, one that was in the Plot, told them, that he saw Romulus upon a Mountain of a size larger than any Man, and that he was translated into the Number of the Gods. The Romans believ'd him and quietly withdrew. Aristobulus in the 3d. Book Hist. Ital. Pelops the Son of Tantalus and Euryanassa, had two Children, Atreus and Thyestes, by his Wife Hippodomia; and by his Mistress Danuis he had Chrisippus, whom he lov'd better than his lawful Children: But Laius a The∣ban, in the heat of his Lust forcibly abus'd his Body, and being taken by Atreus and Thyestes, obtain'd his Pardon yet from Pelops, in regard that Love had provok'd him to it. Hippodamia's Advice to Atreus and Thyestes was, that they should kill Chrysippus, as one that would inter∣pose between them and the Crown. Upon the refusal to do so base a thing, she her self put her own hands to the work, and in the dead of the Night took Laius his Sword when he was asleep, wounded Chrysippus with it, and left the Weapon in his Body. This circumstance of Laius his Sword brought him into a Suspicion of the Murder, till he was clear'd by Chrysippus himself, who being as yet but half dead, gave his testimony to the Truth. Pelops buried his Son, and then banisht his Wife. Dositheus in his Pelopidae. Ebius Toliex had two Sons by his Wife Nuceria, and the third call'd Firmus by an enfranchis'd Woman who was very handsome, and better belov'd by the Father then those that were legitimate: Nuceria that hated this By-blow, advis'd her Sons to dispatch Firmus; but upon the refusal she did it herself, and in the depth of the Night got the Sword of him that guarded the Body of Firmus, gave him a mortal Wound, and left the Weapon stick∣ing in his Body. The Boy clear'd his Keeper by a particular Account of the Matter of Fact; the Father buried his Son, and sent away his Wife into Banishment. Dositheus Book 3d Hist. Ital.
Theseus the Son of Neptune had Hippolytus by the Ama∣zon Hippolyta, and afterward married Phaedra the Daugh∣ter of Minos, who fell deep in Love with Hippolytus, and made use of the Nurse's Mediation to help forward the Incest. But Hyppolytus upon this left Athens and went away to Traezen, where he di∣verted himself with Hunting; Now this lascivious Woman finding her design disappointed, forg'd several scandalous Letters to the prejudice of the chaste young Man, and ended her days with a Halter. Theseus gave Credit to the Slander, and Neptune having promis'd him a grant of any three-things he would ask, he made it his request that he would destroy Hippolytus. So Nep∣tune sent a Bull to the Coast where Hippolytus was driving his Chariot, which put his Horses into such a fright that they ran away with them, and overturning the Chariot kill'd the Master. Comminius Super a Laurentine, had a Son which he call'd Comminius by the Nymph Egeria, after which he married one Gidica who fell passionately in Love with her Son-in-Law, and receiving a repulse, she fram'd slanderous Letters against him which she left behind her, and so hang'd her self. Comminius reflecting upon the Crime, and believing the Calumny, applied himself to Nep∣tune, who with a terrible Bull frighted the Horses so, while the Youth was in the Chariot, that they overturn'd all and kill'd him with the fall. Dositheus Book 3d. Hist. Ital. In the time of a Great Plague in Lacedemon they were told by the Oracle, that the Pestilence would cease upon the Sacrificing of a Noble Virgin according to Custom: It fell one time by lot to Helena, who was brought out and drest up ready for the Sacrifice: An Eagle at that time Flying by took away the Sword, and carrying it into an herd of Cattle, laid it down upon an Heifer; Whereupon they spar'd the Virgin. Aristo∣demus in his Third Collection of Fables.
There was a dreadful Plague in Phalerii, which the Oracle said would be remov'd upon the Sacrificing of a Virgin to Juno every Year. While this Superstition was in course, it fell to Valeria Luperca's lot to be the Sacrifice. An Eagle flew away with the drawn Sword, and laid it upon an Heifer feeding near the Temple. And there being a stick laid upon the fewel prepar'd for the fire with a little Mallet fix'd to it, the Virgin assisted at the Sacrificing of the Heifer, and taking up the Mallet went about from House to House, and with a gentle knock call'd to those that were sick, bidding them be of good health. And this was the rise of the Cere∣mony which continues to this day. Aristides's Nineteenth Book Hist. Italian. Philonome the Daughter of Nyctimus and Arcadia, went in many times to the Chace with Diana. Mars lay with her in the shape of a Shepherd, and fetcht up her Belly: She was deliver'd in time of two Twins, which for fear of her Father she threw into the River Ariman∣thus, but by a strange fatality of Providence they were driven safe into a hollow Oak, which happening to be the Kennel of a Wolf, this Wolf threw her Whelps into the River and Suckled the Children. Tyliphus a Shepherd that had seen this with his own Eyes, took these Children and brought them up as his own, calling one of them Lycastus, and the other Parrasius which reign'd successively in Arcadia. This is reported by Zopyrus Byzantius in the Third Book of his Histories. Amulius dealing very Tyrannically with his Brother Numitor, kill'd his Son Anytus, as they were a-Hunting, and made his Daughter Sylvia Julia a Priestess of Juno: Mars got her with Child, and when she had laid her Belly of two Twins, she confest the Truth to the Tyrant, which put him in such an apprehension that he exposs'd them both on the side of the River Tiber, where they were carried by the stream to a place where
a she Wolf had her Whelps. The Wolf cast away her own, and gave Suck to these Children. Faustus observing this took the Children to himself, and call'd them by the Names of Remus and Romulus which came afterwards to be the Founders of Rome. Aristides's History Italian. After the destruction of Troy, Agamemnon and Cassandra were kill'd, but Orestes that was brought up with Strophi∣us reveng'd the death of his Father. Pyrander's Fourth Pe∣lopon. History. Fabius Fabricianus of the House of Maximus, having taken Tuxium the chief City of the Samnites, sent to Rome the Image of Venus Victrix, which among them was held in great veneration. His Wife Fabia was debauch'd by Petronius Valentinus a handsom Young-man, and afterwards she treacherously Mur∣ther'd her Husband; but for her Son Fabricianus who was yet in his Infancy, she shifted him away to be privately brought up, and so provided for his secu∣rity. When he was grown up, he destroy'd both his Mother and the Adulterer, and was formally acquitted for it by a decree of the Senate. Dositheus's Third Book History Italian. Busiris the Son of Neptune and Anippe the Daughter of Nilus, was us'd to invite strangers in to him under a pretence of Hospitality, and then to Murther them; but Divine vengeance met with him at last, for Hercules found out the Villany, and kill'd him with his Club. Agatho the Samian. Hercules as he was driving Geryon's Oxen through Italy, took up his Lodging with King Fanus there the Son of Mercury, whose Custom it was to Sacrifice Strangers to his Father: He set upon Hercules, and had his Brains beaten out for his pains. Dercyllus's Third Book History Italian.
Phalaris of Agrigentum, a cruel Tyrant, was wont to put Strangers and Travellers to the most exquisite tor∣ments. Perillus a Brass-founder made a Bull of Brass, and presented it to the King for a New Invention of burning People alive in it. Phalaris for this once, was just, in making the first Proof of it upon Perillus himself; and the Invention was so artificial, that upon putting it in execution, the Engin it self seem'd to bellow. Second Book of Questions or Causes. In Aegesta a City of Sicily, there was a certain Tyrant call'd Aemilus Censorinus, who was so inhuman, that he propos'd rewards to the Inventors of New Tor∣tures. There was one Aruntius Paterculus that had fram'd a Brasen-Horse, and made a Present of it to the Tyrant to practise with it upon whom he pleas'd. It was the first piece of Justice that ever the Tyrant did, to make Tryal of the Torment upon the Author of it, that he might first feel himself the Torments he had provided for others▪ He was afterwards thrown down from the Tarpeian Mountain. It may be thought that unmerciful Rulers are from this Tyrant call'd Aemilii. Aristides's Fourth Book History Italian. Evenus the Son of Mars and Sterope had a Daughter Marpissa by his Wife Alcippa the Daughter of Oenomanus; and this Girl he had a mind to keep a Virgin: But Idas the Son of Aphareus ran away with her; Evenus pursued him, and finding he could not overtake him he threw himself into the River Lycorna, and became immortal. Dositheus's First Book History Italian. Anius a King of the Tuscans had a delicate handsom Daughter whose Name was Salia, and he took great care to keep her a Virgin; but Cathetus a Man of Qua∣lity, seeing her sporting her self fell passionately in Love with her, and carried her away to Rome. The Father made after her, and when he saw there was no catch∣ing of her, he threw himself into a River that from
him took the name of Anio. Cathetus begot Latinus and Salius upon the Body of Salia the root of a Noble Race. Aristides Milesius, and Alexander Polyhistor Third Book History Italian. Hegesistratus an Ephesian committed a Murther and fled to Delphus; consulting the Oracle what place to settle in; the Answer was, that when he should come to a place where he should see the Country-people Dancing, with Garlands of Olive-leaves, he should set∣tle there. He travell'd into a certain Country of Asia, where he found as the Oracle told him, and there built a City which he call'd Elaeuns. Pythocles the Samian in the Third Book of his Georgicks. Telegonus the Son of Ʋlysses by Circe was sent to find out his Father, with order that where he should see the Country-People Dancing with Garlands he should there erect a City. He came into a certain place of Italy where he found the Country-men dancing with wreaths of Oak∣en Boughs about their Heads; so that there he built a City, and call'd it Prinistum; for an Oak in Greek is . (The Romans corruptly call this City Praeneste.) Aristotle in the Third Book of his Italian History. WE have it upon the Authority of a Credible Tradition, That this Chapter of Parallels was none of Plu∣tarch's, and that in the Margin of an Ancient Greek M.S. there is the Mark set upon it of a Spurious Piece; which is the rather to be believ'd, for that there is not so much as one Line or Thought in it, that comes up to the Spirit of that Illustrious Author. But however since it has pass'd thus long in the World plausibly enough under the Authority and Protection of so great a Name, the whole Work would look as if it were im∣perfect without it. So that the preventing of that Inconvenience, is the only reason that has mov'd me to this Translation.
Plutarch's Morals: Vol. V. Of the Names of Rivers and Mountains, and of such things as are to be found therein. Translated out of the Greek by R. White M.A. THis Peice was never printed with Plutarch's Works before; and some there are who question whether it were Plutarch that wrote this Treaise or no. But Philip Jacob Maussacus proves as well by the Style, as from other good Authorities that it was a legitimate Off-spring of the same Author. For which reason, since it was never printed in the English before, it was thought but a peice of Justice to add it to the rest of his Work. Hydaspes. Now the Indian Rowey, as most suppose. CHrisippe, by the impulse of Venus, whom she had offended, fell in Love with her Father Hydaspes, and not being able to curb her pre∣ternatural desires, by the help of her Nurse, in the dead of the Night, got to his Bed, and receiv'd his
Caresses: After which, the King proving unfortunate in his Affairs, he buried the Old Bawd, that had be∣tray'd him, alive, and crucify'd his Daughter. Never∣theless such was the excess of his Grief for the loss of Chrysippe, that he threw himself into a River of India, which was afterwards call'd by his name Hydaspes. This is a River of India which falls with an extra∣ordinary swift stream into the Saronitie Bay. Moreover in this River, there grows a Stone, which is call'd Lycknis, which resembles the colour of Oyl, and is very hot to the touch. And when they are searching after it, which they do when the Moon encreases, the Pipers play all the while: nor is it to be worn by any but the richer sort. Also nere that part of the River which is call'd Pyle, there grows an Herb which is very like a Mary-Gold; with the juice of which the People anoint their Skins to prevent Sun-burning, and to secure them against the scorching of the excessive Heat. The Natives, when ever they take their Virgins tardy, nail them to a Wooden Cross and fling them in∣to this River, singing at the same time in their own Language a Hymn to Venus. Every year also, they bury a condemn'd Old Woman, nere the top of the Hill, call Therogonos; at what time an infinite Multi∣tude of creeping Creatures come down from the top of the Hill, and devour the infects that hover about the buried Carkass: as Chrysermus relates in his History of India. Tho Achelaus gives a more exact accompt of these things in his Treatise of Rivers. Nere to this River lies the Mountain Elephas, so call'd upon this Occasion: When Alexander the Mace∣donian advanc'd with his Army into India, and that the Natives were resolv'd to withstand him with all their force, the Elephant upon which Porus, King of that Region, was wont to ride, being of a suddain stung with a Gad-bee, ran up to the top of the Mountain of the
Sun, and there utter'd these words distinctly in hu∣man Speech. O King, my Lord, descending from the race of Gegasius, forbear to attempt any thing against Alexander, for he is descended from Jupiter; and having so said, he presently dy'd. Which when Porus under∣stood, afraid of Alexander he fell at his Feet, and su'd for Peace. Which when he had obtain'd he call'd the Mountain Elephas; as Dercyllus testifies in his third Book of Mountains. Ismenus. Now Ismeno. Ismenus is a River of Boeotia that washes the Walls of Thebes, it was formerly call'd the Foot of Cadmus, upon this occasion. When Cadmus had slain the Dra∣gon which kept the Fountain of Mars, he was afraid to taste of the Water, believing it was poyson'd; which forc'd him to wander about in search of another Fountain, to allay his Thirst. At length, by the help of Minerva, he came to the Corycaean Den, where his right Leg stuck deep in the Mire; and from that hole it was that after he had pull'd his Leg out again, sprung a fair Ri∣ver, which the Hero after the solemnity of his Sacrifices perform'd, call'd by the name of Cadmus's Foot. Sometime after, Ismenus the Son of Amphion and Niobe being wounded by Apollo, and in great pain, th w himself into the said River, which was then from his name call'd Ismenus, as Sostratus relates in his Second Book, of Rivers. Nere to this River lies the Mountain Cithaeron, for∣merly call'd Asterion for this reason. Boeotus the Son of Neptune being desirous, of two Noble Ladies, to Marry her that should be most beneficial to him, while he tarry'd for both in the Night time upon the top of a certain nameless Mountain, of a suddain a Star fell from Heaven upon the Shoulders of Eurythemistes, and immdiately vanish'd. Upon which Boeotus understand∣ing
the meaning of the Prodigy, Marry'd the Virgin, and call'd the Mountain Asterion from the Accident that befel him. Afterwards it was call'dNow Citherone. Cithaeron upon this occasion. Tisiphone one of the Erinny's or Furies of Hell falling in love with a most beautiful Youth whose name was Cithaeron, and not be∣ing able to curb the Impatience of her Desires, declared her Affection to him in a Letter, to which he would not return any Answer. Whereupon the Fury mis∣sing her Design, pull'd one of the Serpents from her Locks, and flung it upon the Young Lad, as he was keeping his Sheep on the Top of the Mountain Aste∣rion; where the Serpent twining about his Neck, choak'd him to Death. And thereupon by the Will of the Gods, the Mountain was call'd Cithaeron, as Leo of Byzantium writes in his History of Boeotia. But Hermesianax of Cyprus, tells the Story quite o∣therwise. For he says, that Helicon and Cithaeron were two Brothers, quite different in their Dispositions. For Helicon was affable and mild, and obedient to his Pa∣rents and Elders: but Cithaeron being covetous, and greedily gaping after the Estate, first kill'd his Father, and then treacherously threw his Brother down from a steep Precipice, but in striving together, fell himself along with him. Whence, by the Providence of the Gods, the Names of both the Mountains were chang'd. Cithaeron, by reason of his Impiety occasion'd the Fable of the Furies. Helicon, for the Young Man's Love to his Parents, became the Habitation of the Muses. Hebrus. Now Mariza. Hebrus is a River of Thrace deriving it's name from the many Gulphs and white-pools in the Water. Cassander, King of that Region, having Marry'd Crotonice, had by her a Son whom he namd Hebrus:
But then being divorc'd from his first Wife, he Mar∣ry'd Damasippe, the Daughter of Atrax, and brought her home over his Sons Head; with whom the Mo∣ther in Law falling in Love, invited him by Leters to her Embraces. But he avoiding his Mother as a Fury, gave himself over to the sport of Hunting. On the other side, the Impious Woman mising her pur∣pose, bely'd the chast Youth, and accus'd him of At∣tempting to ravish her. Upon this Cassander, raging with jealousy, flew to the Wood in a wild fury, and with his Sword drawn pursu'd his Son, as one that treacherously sought to defile his Fathers Bed. Upon which, the Son finding he could no way escape his Fa∣thers wrath, threw himself into the River Rombus, which was afterwards call'd Hebrus, from the Name of the Young Man; as Timotheus testifies in his 'le∣venth Book of Rivers. Nere to this River lies the Mountain Pangaeus so call'd upon this occasion. Pangaeus the Son of Mars and Crito∣bule, by a mistake lay with his own Daughter; which perplex'd him to that degree, that he fled to the Car∣manian Mountain; where overwhelm'd with a sorrow which he could not Master, he drew his Sword, and slew himself. Whence by the Providence of the Gods the Place was call'dNow Malca and Castagna. Pan∣gaeus. In the River before mention'd grows an Herb, not much unlike to Basil; the tops of which the Thacians cropping off, burn upon a gentle fire; and after hard drinking hold their heads over the smoak, and snuff it up into their Nostrils, and lt it go down their Throats, till at last they fall into a profound sleep. Also upon the Mountain Pangaeus grows an Herb, which is call'd the Harp, upon this Occasion. The Women that tore Orpheus in peies, cast his Limbs in∣to the River Hebrus; and his Head being chang'd, the
whole body was turn'd into the shape of a Dragon. But as for his Harp, such was the Will of Apollo, it remain'd in the same form: and from the streaming Blood, grew up the Herb which was call'd the Harp; which during the solemnity of the Sacrifices to Bacchus sends forth a Sound like that of a Harp when play'd upon. At what time the Natives cover'd with the Skins of young Hinds, and waving their Thyrsus's in their hands, sing a Hymn of which these are part of the Words. And then shalt thou be wise When folly does thy Brain surprize; As Clitonymus reports, in his third Book of Tragical Relations. Ganges. Ganges is a River in India so call'd for this reason. A certain Calaurian Nymph, had by Indus a Son call'd Ganges, conspicuous for his Beauty. Who growing up to Manhood, and desperately overcome with Wine, in the heat of his Intoxication lay with his Mother Dio∣pithusa. The next day being inform'd by the Nurse of what he had done; such was the excess of his Sorrow, that he threw himself into a River call'd Chliarus, after∣wards call'd Ganges from his own Name. In this River grows an Herb resembling Bugloss; which the Natives bruise, and keep the Juice very charily. With this Juice in the dead of the Night they go and besprinkle the Tigers Dens; The Vertue of which is such that the Tigers not being able to stir forth by reason of the strong Scent of the Juice, are starv'd to Death, as Callisthenes reports in his Third Book of Hunting. Upon the Banks of this River lyes the Mountain call'd the Anatole, for this reason. The Sun, beholding the Nymph Anaxibia innocently spending her time in
the fields fell passionately in Love with her, and not able to curb his loose Amours, pursu'd her with a pur∣pose to ravish her. She therefore finding no other way to escape him fled to the Temple of Orthian Diana, which was seated upon the Mountain call'd Coryphe, and there immediately vanish'd away. Upon which the Deity, that follow'd her close at the Heels, not knowing what was become of his beloved, overwhelm'd with Grief, rose in that very place. And from this Accident it was that the Natives call'd the top of that Mountain Anatole, or the rising of the Sun. As Cae∣meron reports in his Tenth Book, Of the Affairs of India. Phasis. Now Fasso, and Phazzeth. Phasis is a River of Scythia, running by a City of the same Name. It was formerly call'd Arcturus, de∣riving its Name from the Scituation of the cold Regions through which it runs. But the name of it was al∣ter'd upon this occasion. Phasis the Son of Sol, and Ocyrrhoe Daughter of O∣ceanus, slew his Mother whom he took in the very act of Adultery. For which being tormented by the Fu∣ries appearing to him, he threw himself into the Ri∣ver Arcturus, which was afterwards call'd by his own name Phasis. In this River grows a Reed which is call'd Leuco∣phyllus, or the Reed with the White Leaf. This Reed is found at the dawning of the Morning Light, at what time the Sacrifices are offer'd to Hecae, and this too, by the divine Inspiration of Pan, at the beginning of the Spring: when they who are troubl'd with jealous Heads gather this Reed, and strew it in their Wives Chambers to keep them chaste: And the Nature of this Reed is such, that if any wild extravagant Person happens to come rashly in drink into the room where it lyes, he presently becomes depriv'd of his rational
thoughts, and immediately confesses whatever he has wickedly done or intended to do. At what time they that are present to hear him, lay hold of him, sow him up in a Sack, and throw him into a hole call'd the Little-mouth of the Wicked, which is round like the mouth of a Well; which after thirty days empties the Body into the Lake Moeotis that is full of Worms; where of a suddain the Body is seiz'd and torn to pieces by several Vultures unseen before, nor is it known from whence they come; as Ktesippus relates in his se∣cond Book of Scythian Relations. Nere to this River lyes the Mountain Caucasus, which was before call'd Boreas's Bed, upon this occasi∣on. Boreas in the heat of his amorous Passion ravish'd away by force Chloris the Daughter of Arcturus, and carry'd her to a certain Hill which was call'd Niphantes, and upon her begot a Son whom he call'd Harpax, who succeeded Heniochus in his Kingdom. For which rea∣son the Mountain was first call'd Boreas's Bed; but afterwards Caucasus upon this occasion. After the Fight of the Gyants, Saturn to avoid the Menaces of Jupiter, fled to the top of Boreas's Bed; and there being turn'd in∣to a Crocodile slew Caucasus one of the Sheperds-inhabiting that place, and observing the situation and disposition of his Entrails, foresaw that his Enemies were not far off. Presently Jupiter appearing and binding his Fa∣ther with a woollen List, threw him down to Hell. Then changing the name of the Mountain in Honour of the Shepherd Caucasus, he chain'd Prometheus to it, and caus'd him to be tormented by an Eagle that fed upon his Entrails, because he was the first that found out the inspection of Bowels▪ which Jupiter deem'd a great Cruelty. As Cleanthes relates in his Third Book, Of the Wars of the God. Upon this Mountain grows a Herb, which is call'd Pro∣metheon, which Medca gathering and bruising made use of to protect Jason aganst her Fathers obstinacy.
Arar. Now La Saone. Arar, is a River in that part of France, formerly call'd Gallia Celtica, deriving the Name from its being mix'd with the River Rhodanus. For it falls into the Rhosne within the Country of theWhere now stands the Cities of Cham∣bery, St. Jean Mou∣sters, Geneva, Gre∣noble and Vienne. Allobroges. It was formerly call'd Brigulus, but afterwards chang'd its Name upon this occa∣sion. Arar, as he was a Hunting, entring into a Wood, and there finding his Brother Celtiber torn in pieces by the Wild Beasts, mortally wounded himself for grief, and fell into the River Morgulus; which from that accident was af∣terwards call'd by his own name Arar? In this River there breeds a certain large Fish, which by the Natives is call'd Clupaea. This Fish during the increase of the Moon is white; but all the while the Moon is in the wain it is altogether black: and when it grows over bulky, is as it were stabb'd by its own Fins. In the head of it is found a Stone like a Corn of Salt, which being apply'd to the left Parts of the Body when the Moon is in the wain, cures Quartan Agues, as Callisthenes the Sybarite tells us in the thirteenth Book of Gallic Relations; from whom Timagenes the Syrian bor∣row'd his Argument. Nere to this River stands a Mountain call'd Lugdunus which chang'd its name upon this occasion. When Momorus and Atepomorus were dethron'd by Seseroneus, in pursuance of the Oracles Command, they design'd to build a City upon the top of this Hill. But when they had laid the Foundations, great numbers of Crows with their Wings expanded cover'd all the neighbour∣ing Trees. Upon which Momorus being a Person well skill'd in Augury, call'd the CityNow Lyons. Lugdunum. For Lugon in their Language signify'd a Crow,
andWhence proba∣bly our English word Down. Dunum any spacious Hill, or wide place; as Clitophon reports in his thirteenth Book of the Building of Cities. Pactolus. Now Sarabat. Pactolus is a River of Lydia that washes the Walls of Sardis, formerly call'd Chrysorrhoas. For Chrysorrheas, the Son of Apollo and Apathippe, being a Mechanic Ar∣tist, and one that only liv'd from hand to mouth upon his Trade, one time in the middle of the Night made bold to break open the Treasury of Croesus, and con∣veighing thence a good quantity of Gold made a di∣stribution of it to his Family: but being pursu'd by the King's Officers, when he saw he must be taken, he threw himself into the River which was afterward from his Name call'd Chrysorrhoas; afterwards chang'd into that of Pactolus upon this occasion. Pactolus the Son of Jolis and Leucothea during the performance of the Mystenes sacred to Venus, ravish'd Demodice his own Sister, not knowing who she wa. For which being overwhelm'd with Grief, he threw himself into the River Chrysorrhoas, which from that time forward was call'd Pactorus from his own Name. In this River is found a most pure Gold Sand, which the force of the stream carries into the happy bosom of the River Hermus. Also in this River is to be found a Stone which is call'd Arourophylax (or the Preserver of the Fields) resembling the colour of Silver, very hard to be found, in regard of its being mixt with the Gold Sand. The Vertue of which is such, that the more wealthy Lydians buy it, and lay it at the doors of their Treasuries, by which means they preserve their Treasure, whatever it be, safe from the seizure of pilfering Hands. For upon the ap∣proach of Theives or Robbers the Stone sends forth
a sound like that of a Trumpet. Upon which the Theives surpriz'd and believing themselves appre∣hended by Officers, throw themselves headlong and break their Necks: insomuch that the Place where the Theives thus frighted come by their violent deaths is call'd Pactolus's Prison. In this River also there grows an Herb that bears a Purple Flower, and is call'd Chrysopole; by which the Inhabitants of th Neighbouring Cities try their purest Gold. For just before they put their Gold into the Melting-Pot, they touch it with the Herb; at what time if it be pure and unmixt, the Leaves of the Herb will be tinctur'd with the Gold, and preserve the sub∣stance of the Matter; but if it be adulterated, they will not admit the discolouring moisture, as Chrysermus relates in his Third Book of Rivers. Nere to this River lies the Moun∣tainNow Tomalize. Tmolus full of all manner of Wild Beasts, formerly call'd Carma∣norion, from Carmanor the Son of Bacchus and Alexi∣thoe, who was kill'd, as he was a Hunting by a Wild-Boar; but afterward Tmolus upon this occasion. Tmolus, the Son of Mars, and Thegne, King of Lydia, while he was a Hunting upon Carmanorion, chanc'd to see the fair Virgin Arrhipe, that attended upon Diana, and fell passionately in love with her. And such was the heat of his love, that not being able to gain her by fair means, he resolv'd to vitiate her by force; who seeing she could by no means escape hs Fury otherwise, fled to the Temple of Diana: Where the Tyrant contemning all Rligion, ravish'd her. An Infamy which the Nymph not being able to sur∣vive, immediately hang'd her se. But Diana would not pass by so great a Crime, and therefore to be re∣veng'd upon the King for his Irreligious Insolency, she set a mad Bull upon him, by which the King being
toss'd up in the Air, and falling down upon Stakes and Stones, ended his days in torment. But Theoctumenus his Son, so soon as he had Buried his Father, altered the name of the Mountain and call'd it Tmolus after his Fathers Name. Upon this Mountain grows a Stone, not unlike a Pumice-stone, which is very rare to be found. This Stone changes it's color four times a day; and is only to be seen by Virgins that are not arriv'd at the Years of Understanding. But if Marriageable Virgins happen to see, they can never receive any Injury from those that attempt their chastity, as Clitophon reports. Lycormas. Now Phidari. Lycormas is a River of Etolia, formerly call'd Evenus for this Reason. Idas, the Son of Aphareus, after he had ravish'd away by violence Marpissa, with whom he was passionatly in love, carry'd her away to Pleuron (a City of Etolia). This rape of his Daughter Euenus could by no means endure, and therefore pursu'd after the treacherous ravisher till he came to the River Lycormas. But then despairing to overtake the fugitive, he threw himself for madness into the River, which from his own name was call'd Euenus. In this River grows an Herb which is call'd Sarissa, because it resembles a Spear; of excellent use for those that are troubled with dim sight. Nere to this River lies Myenus, from Myenus, the Son of Telestor, and Alphoesibea; who being belov'd by his Mother in Law, and unwilling to defile his Fathers Bed, retir'd himself to the Mountain Alphius. But Telestor being made jealous of his Wife, pursu'd his Son into the Wilder∣ness, and follow'd him so close that Myenus not being able to escape, flung himself headlong from the Top of the Moun∣tain, which for that reason was afterwards call'd Myenus. Upon this Mountain grows a Flower call'd the
White-Violet, which if you do but name the Word Stepdame, presently dyes away; as Dercyllus reports in his Third Book of Mountains. Meander. Now Madre. Meander is a River of Asia, formerly call'd Anabai∣non, (or the Returner back): for of all Rivers in the World (except Neda) it is the only stream, which taking it's rise from it's own Fountain, seems to run back to it's own Head. It is call'd Meander from Meander the Son of Cercaphus and Anaxibia, who waging War with the Pessinuntians, made a vow to the Mother of the Gods, that if he ob∣tain'd the Victory, he would Sacrifice the first that came to congratulate him for his good success. Now it hap∣pen'd that the first that met him were his Son Archelaus, his Mother, and his Sister. All which though so near∣ly related to him, he offer'd to the satisfaction of his vow. But then no less griev'd for what he had done, he cast himself into the River Anabainon, which from the accident was afterwards call'd by his own name Meander; as Timolaus tells us in his Tenth Book of Phrygian Relations. Agathocles the Samian also makes mention of this Story, in his Common-wealth of Pessi∣nuntum. But Demonstratus of Apamia relates the Story thus. Meander being a second time elected General against the Pessinuntines, and obtaining the Victory quite con∣trary to his Expectation, gave to his Souldiers the Of∣ferings due to the Mother of the Gods. At which the Goddess being offended, she depriv'd him of his reason to that degree, that in the hight of hs madness he slew both his Wife and his Son. But coming some∣what to himself, and repenting of what he had done, he threw himself into the River, which by his Name was call'd Meander.
In this River there is a certain Stone, which by Antiphrasis is call'd Sophron, or the Sober-stone; which if you drop into the Bosom of any Man, it presently makes him mad to that degree as to Murther his nearest Relations, but having once atton'd the Mother of the Gods, he is presently restor'd to his Wits, as Damaratus testifies in his Third Book of Rivers: And Archelaus makes mention of the same in his First Book of Stones. Nere to this River lies the Moun∣tainNow Cusinas. Sipylus, so call'd from Sipylus the Son of Agenor and Dioxippe. For he having kill'd his Mother by mistake and being haunted with the Furies, retired to the Ceraunian Moun∣tain, and there hang'd himself for grief. After which by the Providence of the Gods the Mountain was call'd Sipylus. In this Mountain grows a Stone that resembles a Cylinder, which when Children that are Obedient to their Parents find they lay it up in the Temple of the Mother of the Gods. Nor do they ever after transgress out of Impiety; but reverence their Parents and are Obedient to their Superior Relations; as Aga∣tharchides the Samian relates in his Fourth Book of Stones. And Damaratus in his Fourth Book of Phrygia. Marsyas. Marsyas is a River of Phrygia, flowing by the CityAfterwards call'd Apamia, now Apamiz, poor and uninhabited. Ketene, and formerly call'd the Fountain of Midas for this Reason. Midas, King of Phrygia, travelling in the remoter Parts of the Country, and wanting Water, stampt upon the Ground, and presently appear'd a Golden Fountain: but the Water proving Gold, and both he and his Souldiers being ready to perish for thirst, he invok'd
the compassion of Bacchus, who listning to his Prayers, supply'd him with Water. The Phrygians having by this means quench'd their thirst, Midas nam'd the Ri∣ver, that issu'd from the Spring, the Fountain of Midas. Afterwards it was call'd Marsyas upon this occasion. Marsyas being overcome and flead by Apollo certain Satyrs are said to have sprung from the streams of his Blood; as also a River bearing the name of Marsyas, as Alexander Cornelius recites in his Third Book of Phrygian Relations. But Eumeridas the Phrygian tells the Story after this manner. It happened that the Wine bag which was made of Marsyas's Skin being corroded by time, and carry'd away negligently by the wind, fell at last from the Land in∣to Midas's Well; and driving along with the stream, was taken up by a Fisher-man. At what time Pisi∣stratus the Lacedemonian being commanded by the Ora∣cle to build near the Place where the Relicks of the Satyr were found, reflected upon the accident, and in obedience to the Oracle having built a fair City, call'd it Noricum, which in the Phrygian Language sig∣nifies a Wine-bag. In this River grows an Herb call'd, the Pipe or Flute; which being mov'd with the wind yields a melodious sound; as Dercyllus reports in his first Book of Satyrics. Nere to this River also lyes the Mountain Berecyn∣thius, deriving it's name from Berecynthus, the first Preist to the Mother of the Gods. Upon this Moun∣tain is found a Stone which is call'd Machera, very much resembling Iron; which if any one happens to light upon, while the Solemnities of the Mother of the Gods are performing, he presently runs mad; as Aga∣tharchides reports in his Phrygian Relations.
Strymon, Now Stromona, Radini, and Marmara. Strymon is a River of Thrace, that flows along by the City Aedonis, formerly call'd Palestinus from Palestinus the Son of Neptune. For he being at War with his Neighbors, and seiz'd with a violent sickness, sent his Son Alyacmon, to be General of his Army, who rashly giving Battle to his Enemies, was slain in the Fight. The tydings of which misfortune being brought to Palestinus, he privately withdrew himself from his Guards, and flung himself into the River Conozus, which from that accident was afterwards call'd Palestinus. But as for Strymon, he was the Son of Mars and Helice, who hearing that his Son,He was slain at Troy by Diome. Rhesus was slain, flung himself into the River Palestinus, which was after that call'd Strymon, by his own Name. In this River grows a Stone which is call'd Pausilypus, or the Greif easing Stone. This Stone, if any one find who is oppress'd with Greif, he shall presently be eas'd of his Sorrow; as Jason of Byzantium relates in his Tragics. Nere to this River lye the MountainsNow by the Greeks, Basiliss: by the Itali∣ans, Monte Argentaro. Rhodope andNow by the Turks, Balkan; by the Salaveni∣ans, Cumoniza; by the Italians, Catena del mondo. Hae∣mus, who being Brother and Sister, and both falling in love with each other, the one was so presumptuous as to call his Sister his Juno, the other to call her Bro∣ther her Jupiter; which so offended the Deities, that they changed them into Mountains, bearing their own Names. In these two Mountains grow certain Stones, which are call'd Philadelphi, or the Loving Brethren. These Stones are of a Crow Colour, and resembling human Shape, and if they chance to be nam'd when they are separated one from another, they presently and sepa∣rately,
as they lye dissolve and waste away; as Thra∣syllus the Mendesian testifies in his third Book of Stones; but more accurately in his Book of Tragies. Sagaris. Now Zagari and Sangari. Sagaris is a River of Phrygia, formerly call'd Xeraba∣tes, because in the Summer time it was generally dry. But it was call'd Sagaris for this Reason. Sagaris, the Son of Myndon and Alexiroe, contemning and slighting the Mysteries of the Mother of the Gods, frequently affronted and derided her Priests and Galli. At which the Goddess heinously offended▪ struck him with Mad∣ness, to that degree, that in one of his raging Fits, he flung himself into the River Xerabates, which from that time forward, was call'd Sagaris. In this River grows a Stone, which is call'd Autogry∣phus, that is naturally engrav'd; for it is found, with the Mother of the Gods by Nature engrav'd upon it. This Stone, which is rarely to be found, if any of the Galli, or guelded Priests happen to light upon, he makes no wonder at it, but undauntedly brooks the Sight of a preternatural Action; as Aretazes reports in his Phrygian Relations. Nere to this River, lyes the Mountain Baleneus, which in the Phrygian Language signifies Royal: so call'd from Baleneus, the Son of Ganymed and Medesigiste, who perceiving his Father almost wasted with a Con∣sumption, instituted the Ballenean Festival, bserv'd among the Natives to this Day. In this River is to be found a Stone call'd Aster, which from the latter end of Autumn, shines at Mid∣night like Fire. It is call'd in the Language of the Na∣tives, Ballen, which signifies a King, as Hermesianax the Cyprian affirms in his second Book of his Phrygian Rela∣tions.
Scamander. Now Scamandro. Scamander is a River of Troas, which was formerly call'd Xanthus, but chang'd its Name upon this Occasi∣on. Scamander the Son of Coribas and Demodice, having suddainly expos'd himself while the Mysteries of Rhea were solemnizing, immediately ran mad, and being hurry'd away by his own Fury to the River Xanthus, flung himself into the Stream, which from thence was call'd Scamander. In this River grows an Herb, like a Vetch, that bears a Cod with Berries ratling in it when they are ripe, whence it deriv'd the Name of Sistron, or the Rattle: This Herb, whoever has in his Possession, fears not the Ap∣paritions either of Gods or Dvils; as Demostratus writes in his Second Book of Rivers. Nere to this River lyes the Mountain Ida, formerly Gargarus; on the Top of which stand the Altars of Ju∣piter, and the Mother of the Gods. But it was call'd Ida upon this occasion. Aegysthus, who descended from Disphorus, falling passionately in Love with the Nymph Ida, obtain'd her good-will, and begat the Idaean Dactyly, or Priests of the Mother of the Gods. After which, Ida running mad in the Temple of Rhea, Egysti∣us, in remembrance of the Love which he bare her, call'd the Mountain by her Name. In this Mountain grows a Stone call'd Cryphius, as being never to be found, but when the Mysteries of the Gods are solemnizing; as Heraclitus the Sicyonian writes in his Second Book of Stones. Tanais. Now the River Don. Tanais is a River of Scythia, formerly call'd the Ama∣zonian River, because the Amazons bath'd themselves therein; but alter'd its Name upon this Occasion. Ta∣nais, the Son of Berossus and Lysippe, one of the Ama∣zons,
became a vehement Hater of the Female Sex, and looking upon Marriage as ignominious and dishonora∣ble, apply'd himself wholly to Martial Affairs. Which so offended Venus, that she caus'd him to fall passionate∣ly in Love with his own Mother. True it is, at first he withstood the Force of his Passion, but finding he could not vanquish the fatal Necessity of yielding to Diving Impulse, and yet desirous to preserve his Respect and Piety toward his Mther, he flung himself into the Amazonian River, which was afterwar call'd Tanis, from the Name of the young Man. In this River grows a Plant which is call'd Halinda, resembling a Colewort. Which the Inhabitants bruis∣ing, and anointing their Bodies with the Juice of it, find themselves in a Condition  able to d the Extremity of the Cold; and for that reason, in heir own Language, they call it Berosss's Oyl. In this River grows a Stone not un ie to Crystal, resembling the Shape of a Man, with a rown upon his Head. This Stone, whoever finds when the King dyes, and has it ready against the time that the People meet upon the Banks of the River to choose a new Soveraign, is presently elected King, and receives the Scepter of the deceased Prince: As Ctesiphon relates in his Third Book of Plants; and Aristobulus gives us the same Account in his First Book of Stones. Nere to this River also lyes a Mountain, in the Lan∣guage of the Natives, call'd Brix∣aba, which signifies theNow Tanar, or Ta∣mar, a high Promonto∣ry in the Tauric Cher∣sonese, or Chrim Tar∣tarie. Fore∣head of a Ram. And it was so call'd upon this Occasion. Phryx∣us having lost his Sister Helle nere the Euxine Sea, and as Na∣ture in Justice requir'd, being extreamly troubl'd for his Loss, retir'd to the top of a certain Hill to disburthen himself of his Sorrow. At what time certain Barbarians
espying him, and mounting up the Hill with their Arms in their Hands, a golden fleec'd Ram leaping out of a Thicket, and seeing the Multitude coming, with articu∣late Language, and the Voice of a Man, awaken'd Phryxus fast asleep, as being tir'd with his Journey, and oppress'd with Sorrow, and taking him up upon his Back, carry'd him to Colchos; and from this Accident it was that the mountainous Promontory was call'd the Rams Forehead. In this Mountain grows an Herb, by the Barbarians call'd Phryxa, not unlike our common Rue. Which if the Son of a former Mother have in his Possession, he can never be injur'd by his Step-dame. It chiefly grows nere the Place which is call'd Boreas's Den, and being gather'd, is colder then Snow. But if any Step-dame be forming a Design against her Son-in-law, it sets it self on Fire, and sends forth a bright Flame. By which means, they who are thus warn'd, avoid the Danger they are in; as Agatho the Samian testifies in his second Book of the Scythian Relations. THERMODON. Thermodon is a River of Scythia, deriving its Name from the Accident. It was formerly call'd Chrystallus, as being often frozen in the Summer, the Situation of the Place producing that Effect. But the Name was alter'd upon this occasion. Caetera Desunt. NILE. Nilus is a River of Egypt, that runs by the City of Alexandria. It was formerly call'd Melas, from Melas the Son of Neptune; but afterwards it was call'd Egyptus, upon this occasion. Egyptus, the Son of Vulcan and Leu∣cippe, was formerly King of the Country, between
whom and his own Subjects, happen'd a Civil War. At what time the River Nile not increasing, the Egypti∣ans were opprest with Famine. Upon which the Ora∣cle made Answer, that the Land should be again blest with Plenty, if the King would sacrifice his Daughter, to attone the Anger of the Gods. Upon which the King, though greatly afflicted in his Mind, gave way to the publick Good, and suffer'd his Daughter to be lead to the Altar. But so soon as she was sacrific'd, the King not able to support the Burthen of his Grief, threw himself into the River Melas, which after that was call'd Egyptus. But then it was call'd Nilus upon this Occasion. Garmathone, Queen of Egypt, having lost her Son Chry∣sochoa, while he was yet very young, with all her Ser∣vants and Friends, most bitterly bemoan'd her Loss. At what time Isis appearing to her, she surceas'd her Sor∣row for a while, and putting on the Countenance of a feigned Gratitude, kindly entertain'd the Goddess. Who willing to make a suitable Return to the Queen for the Piety which she express'd in her Reception, perswaded Osiris to bring back her Son from the subterraneal Re∣gions. Which when Osiris undertook to do, at the Op∣portunity of his Wife, Cerberus, whom some call Phobe∣ros, or the Terrible, barkt so loud, that Nilus, Germathone's Husband struck with a sudden Frenzy, threw himself into the River Egyptus, which from thence was after∣wards call'd Nilus. In this River grows a Stone, not unlike to a Bean, which so soon as any Dog happens to see, he ceases to bark. It also expels the Evil Spirit out of those that are pos∣sess'd, if held to the Nostrils of the Party afflicted. There are other Stones which are found in this Ri∣ver, call'd Kollotes, which the Swallows picking up a∣gainst the time that Nilus overflows, build up the Wall which is cal'd the Chelidoman Wall, which restrains the Inundation of the Water, and will not suffer the Coun∣try
to be injur'd by the Fury of the Flood; as Thrasyllus tells us in his Relations of Egypt. Upon this River lyes the Mountain Argyllus, so call'd for this Reason. Jupiter in the Heat of his amorous Desires, ravish'd away the Nimph Arge from Lyctum, a City of Creete, and then carry'd her to a Mountain of Egypt, call'd Argillus, and there begat a Son, whom he nam'd Diony∣sius, who growing up to years of Manhood, in Honor of his Mother, call'd the Hill Argillus; and then muster∣ing together an Army of Pans and Satyrs, first con∣quer'd the Indians, and then subduing Spain, left Pan behind him there the chief Commander and Governor of those Places, who by his own Name call'd that Country Pania, which was afterwards by his Posterity call'd Spania; as Sosthenes relates in his Ibeian Relation. Eurotas. Now Basilipotamo. Himerus, the Son of the Nymph Taygete and Lacedaemon, through the Anger of offended Venus, at a Revelling that lasted all Night, deflowr'd his Sister Cleodice, not knowing what he did. But the next Day, being inform'd of the Truth of the Matter, he lay'd it so to heart, that through excess of Grief, he flung himself into the Ri∣ver Marathon, which from thence was call'd Himeros; but after that Eurotas, upon this Occasion. The Lacedaemonians being at War with the Athenians, and staying for the Full Moon, Eurotas their Captain General, despising all Religion, would needs fight his Enemies, though at the same time it thunder'd and light∣en'd as if Heaven and Earth would have come together. However, having lost his Army, the Ignominy of his Loss so incessantly perplext him, that he flung himself into the River Himerus, which from that Accident was afterwards call'd Eurotas. In this River grows a Stone which is shap'd like a
Helmet, call'd Thrasydeilos, or Rash and Timorous. For if it hears a Trumpet sound, it leaps toward the Bank of the River; but if you do but name the Athenians, it pre∣sently sinks to the bottom of the Water. Of these Stones there are not a few which are consecrated and laid up in the brazen Temple of Minerva, as Nicanor the Samian relates in his second Book of Rivers. Nere to this River lyes the Mountain Taygetus,Now Portes, and Monte di Sperlunga. deriving its Name from the Nymph Taygete, who after Jupiter had deflowr'd her, ended her days for Grief, upon the Mountain Ar∣mycleus, which from thence was call'd Taygetus. Upon this Mountain grows a Plant call'd Charisium, which the Women at the beginning of the Spring ty'd about their Necks, to make themselves more passionately to be belov'd by Men; as Cleanthes reports in his First Book of Mountains. But Sosthenes the Cnidian is more accurate in the Relation of these things, from whom Hermogenes borrow'd the Subject of his Writing. Inachus. Inachus is a River in the Territories of Argos, former∣ly call'd Carmanor. Afterwards Halyacmon, for this Reason. Halyacmon, a Tyrinthian by Birth, while he kept Sheep upon the Mountain Coccigium, happen'd against his Will to see Jupiter and Rhea sporing together; for which be∣ing strook mad, and hurry'd by the Violence of the Frenzie, he flung himself into the River Carmanor, which after that was call'd Halyacmon. Afterwards it was call'd Inachus upon this Occasion. Inachus, the Son of Oceanus, after that Jupiter had de∣flowr'd his Sister Io, pursu'd the Deity close at the Heels, blaspheming and cursing him all the way as he went. Which so offended Jupiter, that he sent Tisiphone, one of the Furies, who haunted and plagu'd him to tha
degree, that he flung himself into the River Halyacmon, afterwards call'd by his own Name Inachus. In this River grows an Herb call'd Cyura, not unlike our common Rue. Which the Women that desire to miscarry without any Danger, lay upon their Navels, being first steep'd in Wine. There is also found in this River, a certain Stone, not unlike a Beryl, which in the Hands of a false Witness will grow black. Of these Stones there are ma∣ny laid up in the Temple ofSo call'd from Pro∣symne, a City in the Ter∣ritory of the Argives. Prosymnea Juno; as Timosthenes relates in his Argelicks, and A∣tho the Samian, in his second Book of Rivers. Agathocles the Milesian in his History of Rivers, also adds, that Inachus for his Impiety was Thunder-strook by Jupiter, and so the River dry'd up. Nere to this River, lye the Mountains Mycaenae, Apae∣santus, Coccygium, and Athaeneus; so call'd for these Reasons. Apaesantus was first call'd Selenarius. But Juno resolving to be reveng'd upon Hercules, call'd the Moon to her Assistance, who by the help of her magical Charms, fill'd a large Chest full of Foam and Froth, out of which sprang an immense Lyon; which Iris binding with her own Girdle, carry'd to the Mountain Opheltium, where the Lyon kill'd Apiesantus, one of the Shepherds belong∣ing to that Place: and from that Accident, by the Will of the Gods, the Hill was call'd Apesantus; as Demodocus writes in his first Book of the History of Hercules. In this River grows an Herb call'd Selene, or the Moon, with the Froth of which being gather'd in the Spring, the Shepherds anoint their Feet, and keep them from be∣ing bit or stung by any creeping Vermine. The Mountains of Mycenae were formerly call'd Ar∣gyon, from the many-ey'd Argos; but afterwards the name was chang'd upon this occasion.
When Perseus had slain Medusa, Stheno and Euriale Sisters to her that was kill'd, pursu'd him as a Murderer. But coming to this Hill, and despairing to overtake him, out of that extream love which they had for their Sister, they made such a howling noise, that the Natives from thence call'd the top of the Mountain Mycaenae, us Cnesias the Ephesian relates in his first Book of the Acts of Perseas. But Chrysermus the Corinthian relates the story thus in the first Book of his Peloponnesiacs. For he says, that when Perseas was carry'd aloft in the Air, when he lit upon this Mountain, he lost the Chape of his Scabbard. At what time this same Gorgophonos, or Gorgon-slayer, King of the Epidaurians, being ex∣pell'd his Kingdom, receiv'd this answer upon his consul∣ting the Oracle, that he should visit all the Cities of the Argolic Territory, and that where he found the Chape of a Scabbard, he should build a City. Thereupon coming to the Mountain Argolic, call'd in the Greek , and finding there an Ivory Scabbard, he built a City, and from the Accident, call'd itNow Agios, Adria∣nos in the Morea. Mycenae. In this Mountain there is found a Stone which is call'd Corybas, of a Crow colour, which he that finds and wears about him, shall never be afraid of any mon∣strous Apparitions. As for the Mountain Apesantus, this may be added, that Apesantus, the Son of Acrisicus, as he was a Hunting in that place, chanc'd to tread upon a venomous Serpent, which occasion'd his Death. Whom when his Father had buried, in memory of his Son, he nam'd the Hill Apesantus, which before was call'd Setinuntius. The Mountain Coccygium deriv'd its Name from this Accident. Jupiter falling desperately in Love with his Sister Juno, and having vanquish'd her by his Importu∣nity, begot a Male Child. From whence the Moun∣tain
before call'd Dicaeus, was nam'd Coccygium; as Aga∣tho relates in his Persis. In this Mountain grows a Tree, which is call'd Pali∣nurus, upon the Boughs of which whatever Fowl hap∣pens to perch, they are presently entangl'd as it were with Bird-lime, and cannot stir; only theWhich seems to be a better reason why the Mountain should be call'd Coccygium, then that before gi∣ven. In regard that Cccyx in Greek sig∣nifies a Cuccow. Cuccow it lets go free, without any harm; as Ctesiphon testifies in his first Book of Trees. As for the Mountain Athenaeus, it derives its Name from Minerva. For after the destruction of Troy, Diomede returning to Argos, ascend∣ed▪ the Mountain Recaunius, and there erecting a Temple to Minerva, call'd the Mountain Athenaeus from her Name Athena. Upon the top of this Mountain grows a Root like to that of Rue, which if any Woman unwarily taste of, she presently runs Mad; This Root is call'd Adrastia, asRather Lysimachus. Phesi∣machus writes in his Second Book of the Returns of the Hero's. Alpheius. Now Carbon, or Darbon. Alpheius is a River of Arcadia running by the Walls of Pisa a City of Olympia (or as others would have it wash∣ing the feet of the Mountain Olymphius) formerly call'd Stymphelus, from Stymphelus the Son of Mars and Dormo∣thea, who having lost his Brother Alcmaeon, threw him∣self for Grief into the River Nyctimus, for that reason call'd Stymphelus: afterwards it was call'd Alpheius upon this occasion. Alpheius, one of those that derives his descent from the Sun, contending with his Brother Kerkaphus about Courage and Vertue, slew him: for which being
chas'd away and pursu'd by the Shepherds, he flung himself into the River Nyctimus, which after that was call'd Alpheius. In this River grows a Plant which is call'd Kenchrytis, resembling a Honey-Comb, the Decoction of which being given by the Physitians to those that are Mad, cures them of their Phrensy; as Ctesias relates in his first Book of Rivers. Nere to this River lyes the Mountain Cronium, so call'd upon this occasion. After the Giants War, Saturn to avoid the Threats of Jupiter, fled to the Mountain Cturus, and call'd it Cronium from his own Name. Whee after he had absconded for sometime, he took his op∣portunity, and retir'd to Caucasus in Scythia. In this Mountain is found a Stone, which is call'd the Cylinder, upon this occasion. For as oft as Jupiter either Thunders or Lightens, so often this Stone, through fear rowles down from the top of the Mountain; as Dercyllus writes in his first Book of Stones. Euphrates. Now Frat. Euphrates is a River of Parthia washing the Walls of Babylon (now Bagdat) formerly call'd Medus from Me∣dus, the Son of Artaxerxes. He, in the heat of his Lust, having ravish'd away and deflowr'd Roxane, and finding that he was sought after by the King, in order to be brought to punishment, threw himself into the River Zaranda, which from thence forward was call'd by his name Medus. Afterwards it was call'd Euphrates up∣on this occasion. Euphrates the Son of Arandacus finding his Son Axurta a Bed with his Mother, and thinking him to be some one of his Courtiers, provok'd by his Jealousy, he drew his Sword, and nail'd him to the Bed. But perceiving himself the Author of what could not be recall'd, he flung himself for Grief into the River Medus, which
from that time forward was call'd by his Name Euphrates. In this River grows a Stone call'd Asterites, which Mid-wives applying to the Navils of Women that are in hard Labor, causes them to bring forth with little pain. In the same River also there grows an Herb which is call'd Exalla or Axalla, which signifies Heat. This Stone they that are troubl'd with Quartan Agues, ap∣plying to their Breasts, are presently deliver'd from the Fit, as Chrysermus writes in his Thirteenth Book of Rivers. Nere this River lyes the Mountain Drimyllus, where grows a Stone, not unlike a Sardenyx, worn by Kings and Princes upon their Diadems, and greatly available against dimness of sight, as Micias Mallotes writes in his Book of Stones. Caicus. Now Girmasti, Castri, and Chiay. Caicus is a River of Mysia formerly call'd Astraeus from Astraeus the Son of Neptune. For he, in the height of Minerva's Nocturnal Solemnities having deflowr'd his Sister by a mistake, took a Ring at the same time from her Finger; by which when he understood the next day the Error which he had committed, for grief he threw himself headlong into the River Adurus, which from thence was call'd Astraeus. Afterwards it came to be call'd Caicus upon this occasion. Caicus, the Son of Hermes and Ocyerhoc the Nymph, having slain Timander one of the Noble Men of the Country, and fearing the revenge of his Relations, flung himself into the River Astraeus, which from that accident was call'd Caicus. In this River grows a sort of Poppy, which instead of Flowers bears several Stones. Of these, there are some which are black and shap'd like Harps; which the Mysians throw upon their plough'd Lands; and if the Stones lye still in the place where they are thrown, 'tis a sign of a Barren Year; but if they fly away like
so many Locusts, they prognosticate a plentiful Harvest. In the same River also grows an Herb which is call'd Elipharmacus, which the Physitians apply to such as are troubl'd with immoderate fluxes of Blood, as having a peculiar Vertue to stop the Orifices of the Veins; according to the Relation of Timagoras in his first Book of Rivers. Adjoyning to the Banks of this River lies the Mountain Teuthras, so call'd from Teuthras King of the Mysians. Who in pursuance of his Sport, as he was a Hunting, ascending the Hill Thrasyllus, and seeing a Monstrous Wild-Boar, follow'd him close with the rest of his Train. On the other side the Boar to prevent the Hunters, like a suppliant, fled to the Temple of Orthosian Diana, into which when the Hunters were about to force their en∣trance, the Boar in Articulate Words cry'd out, spare, O King, the Nursery of the Goddess. However Teuthras, exalted with his good Success, kill'd the poor Boar. At which Diana was so highly offended, that she restor'd the Boar to Life, but struck the Offender with a scurf and madness. Which Affliction the King not endu∣ring, betook himself to the Tops of the Mountains. But his Mother Leucippe, understanding what had befallen her Son, ran to the Forrest, taking along with her the Sooth sayer Polyidon, the Son of Cyanus, by whom being inform'd of all the several Circumstances of the Matter, by many sacrifices she at last atton'd the Anger of the Goddess, and having quite recover'd and cured her Son, erected an Altar to Orthosian Diana, and caus'd a Golden Boar to be made with a Mans-Face; which to this day if pursu'd by the Hunters, seems to enter the Temple, and speaks with the Voice of a Man. Thus Teuthras being restor'd to his former Health, call'd the Mountain by his own name Teuthras. In this Mountain grows a Stone call'd Antipaths, or the Resister, which is of excellent Vertue to cure Scabs
and Leprosies, being powder'd and mix'd with Wine; as Cnidius tells us in his Second Book of Mountains. Achelous. Now Astropotomo, Geromlea, and Pachicolmo. Acheolus is a River ofNow, il Despotato. Aetolia for∣merly call'd Thestius. This The∣stius was the Son of Mars and Pesi∣dice, who upon some Domestic discontent, travell'd as far as Sicyon,Now Bsilica or Vasilica in the Morea. where after he had resided for some time, he return'd to his Native home. But finding there his Son Calydon and his Mother both upon the Bed together, believing him to be an Adulterer, he slew his own Child by a mistake. But when he beheld the un∣fortunate and unexpected Fact he had committed, he threw himself into the River Axenos, which from thence was afterwards call'd Thestius: And after that, Achelous upon this Occasion. Achelous the Son of Oceanus and the Nymph Nais, ha∣ving deflowr'd his Daughter Clestoria, flung himself for grief into the River Thestius, which then by his own name was call'd Achelous. In this River grows an Herb, which they call Zaclon, very much resembling Wool, this if you bruise and cast into Wine, it becomes Water, and preserves the smell but not the Vertues of the Wine. In the same River also is found a certain Stone of a mixt Black and Lead color, call'd Linurgus from the effect; for if you throw it upon a Linnen-cloth, by a certain effectionate Union it assumes the shape of the Linnen, and turns white, as Antisthenes relates in the Third Book of his Meleagris; though Diocles the Rhodian more accurately tells us the same thing in his Aetolics. Nere to this River lies the Mountain Calydon, so call'd from Calydon the Son of Mars and Astigone; For that he by an accident having seen Diana bathing her
self, was transform'd into a Rock, and the Mountain which before was nam'd Gyron, was afterwards call'd Calydon. Upon this Mountain grows an Herb call'd Myops, which if any one steep in Water, and washes his Face with it, he shall loose his sight, but upon his attoning Di∣ana, shall recover it again; as Dercyllus writes in his Third Book of Aetolics. Araxes, Now Arass, Arais, Achlar and Caiacs. Araxes is a River in Armenia, so call'd from Araxus the Son of Pylus. For he contending with his Grand-Father Arbelus for the Empire, stabb'd him with an Arrow. For which being haunted by the Furies, he threw himself into the River Baetros, for that reason call'd Araxes; as Ctesiphon testifies in his First Book of Persian Affairs. Araxes King of the Armenians, being at War with his Neighbours the Persians, before they came to a Battle, was told by the Oracle that he should win the Victories, if he sacrific'd to the Gods two of the most noble Virgins in his Kingdom. Now he out of his paternal Affection to his Children, spar'd hi own Daughters, and caus'd two lovely Virgins, the Daughters of one of his Nobility to be laid upon the Altar. Which Mnesalkes, the Father of the Victims laying to heart, for a time conceal'd his Indignation, but afterwards, observing his opportunity, kill'd both the Kings Daughters, and then leaving his native Soyl fled into Scythia. Which when Araxes understood, for grief he threw himself into the River Halmus, which then was alter'd, and the River call'd Araxes. In this River grows a Plant which is call'd Araxa, which in the Language of the Natives signifies a Virgin Hater. For that if it happen to be found by any Vir∣gin, it falls a bleeding and dyes away. In the same River there is also found a Stone, of a
black color, call'd Sicyorus. This Stone when the Ora∣cle advises the sacrificing of a human Victim, is laid upon the Altar of the Mischief diverting Gods. And then, no sooner does the Priest but touch it with his Knife but it sends forth a stream of Blood; at what time the superstitious sacrificers retire and with howlings and loud Ohonings carry the Stone to the Temple, as Doritheus the Caldaean relates in his Second Book of Stones. Nere to this River lies the Mountain Diorphus; so call'd from Diorphus, the Son of the Earth; of whom this Story is reported. Methras desirous to have a Son, yet hating Woman-kind,Saxum Sarrivit, ac∣cording to that of Martial, Quid Sarrire si velit Saxum? lay with a Stone till he had heated it to that degree, that the Stone grew big, and at the prefix'd time was deliver'd of a Son, call'd Diorphos, who growing up and contending with Mars for cou∣rage and stoutness was by him slain; and the Moun∣tain where the Contender was buried was call'd Dior∣phos by his Name. In this Mountain grows a Tree, not unlike a Pome∣granate-Tree, which yields plenty of Apples, in taste like Grapes. Now if any one gather the ripest of this Fruit, and do but name Mars while he holds it in his hand, it will presently grown green again, as Ctesiphon Witnesses in his Third Book of Trees. Tigris. Now Tegil, Sir, and Ser. Tigris is a River of Armenia, flow∣ing into Araxes and the LakeNow Lac de Va∣stan, or Mer d'Arme∣nie. of Arsacis, formerly call'd Sollax, which signifies running and carry'd downward. It was call'd Tigris upon this occasion. Bacchus, through the Anger of Juno, running mad, wander'd over-Sea and Land, desirous to be quit of his
Distemper. At length coming into Armenia, and not being able to pass the River before mentioned, call'd upon Jupiter, who listning to his Prayers, sent him a Tiger that carry'd him safely over the Water; in re∣membrance of which Accident he call'd the River Tigris, as Theophilus relates in his First Book of Stones. But Hermesianax tells the Story thus. Bacchus falling in Love with the Nymph Alphesiboea, and being able to vanquish her neither with Presents nor Intreaties, turn'd himself into the shape of the Ri∣ver Tigris and overcoming his Beloved by fear, took her away, and carrying her over the River, begot a Son whom he call'd Medus; who growing up in Years, in remembrance of the accident call'd the River by the Name of Tigris; as Aristonymus relates in his Third Book. In this River a Stone is to be found call'd Myndan very White; which whoever enjoys, shall never be hurt by wild Beasts; as Leo of Byzantium testifies in his Third Book of Rivers. Nere to this River lies the Mountain Gauran; so call'd from Gauran the Son of the Satrap of the Province of Roxanes; who being extreamly Religious and Devout toward the Gods, receiv'd this reward of his Piety, that of all the Persians he only liv'd three hundred Years; and dying at last without being ever afflicted with any Disease, was buried upon the Top of the Mountain Gau∣ran, where he had a sumptuous Monument erected to his Memory. Afterwards, by the Providence of the Gods the name of the Mountain was chang'd to that of Mausorus. In this Mountain grows an Herb, which is like to Wild-Barley. This Herb the Natives heat over the fire, and anointing themselves with the Oyl of it, are never sick, till the necessity of dying overtakes them, as Sostratus writes in his First Collection of Fa∣bulous History.
Indus. Now Sinde. Indus is a River in India flowing with a rapid violence into the Country of the Fish-devourers. It was first call'd Mausolus, from Mausolus the Son of the Sun, but chang'd it's name for this reason. At the time when the Mysteries of Bacchus were so∣lemniz'd, and that the People were earnest at their De∣votion, Indus one of the chief of the Young-Nobility, by force deflowr'd Damasalkidas, the Daughter of Oxyalcus the King of the Country, as she was carrying the Sa∣cred-Basket, or Canistrum; for which being sought for by the Tyrant, in order to bring him to condign Punishment, for fear he threw himself into the River Mausolus, which from that accident was afterwards call'd Indus. In this River grows a certain Stone call'd Carpyce which if a Virgin carry about her, she need never be afraid of being deflower'd. In the same River also grows an Herb, which is call'd Carpyce, not unlike to Bugloss. Which is an Ex∣cellent Remedy against the Kings-Evil, being admini∣ster'd to the Patient in warm-water; as Clitophon, the Rhodian, reports in his First Book of Indian Relations. Nere to this Mountain lies the Mountain Lileus, so call'd from Lileus a Shepherd; who being very super∣stitious, and a sole-worshipper of the Moon, always per∣form'd her Mysteries in the dead time of the Night: Which the rest of the Gods taking for a great disho∣nour, sent two Monstrous Lions that tore him in pieces Upon which the Moon turn'd her Adorer into a Moun∣tain of the same name. In this Mountain a Stone is found which is call'd Clitoris, of a very Black-color, which the Natives wear for Ornaments-sake, at the solemn sacrifices which they make after their escape from any Danger or Sickness; as Aristotle Witnesses in his Fourth Book of Rivers. FINIS.
