10877 99850256 15445
ON WINGS OF FEARE, Finch Flies away. One paire of legges is worth two paire of hands: Whirre: ALAS Poore Will, Hee's forc'd to stay. Ide try the conclusion, were I out of these bands. Heigh-ho. 1. REader, I know thou canst not choose but smile, To see a Bishop tide thus to a ring? Yea, such a Princely prelate, that ere-while, Could three at once in Limbo patrum fling; Suspend by hundreds where his worship pleas'd, And them that preach'd too oft; by silence eas'd. 2. Made Lawes and Canons, like a King (at least) Devis'd new oaths; forc'd men to sweare to lies? Advanc'd his Lordly power 'bove all the rest; And then our Lazie Priests began to rise? But painfull Ministers, which plide their place With diligence; went downe the wind apace. 3. Our honest round-heads to, then went to racke, The holy sisters into corners fled; Coblers and Weavers preacht in Tubs; for lacke Of better Pulpits; with a Sack instead Of Pulpit-cloth, hung round in decent wise, All which the spirit did for their good devise. 4. Barnes, Cellers, Cole-holes, were their meeting-places, So sorely were these babes of Christ abus'd, Where he that most Church-government disgraces Is most esteem'd, and with most revrence us'd. It being their sole intent religiously To raile against the Bishops dignity. 5. Brother, saies one, what doe you thinke, I pray Of these proud Prelates, which so lofty are? Truly, saies he, meere Antichrists are they. Thus as they pare, before they be aware, Perhaps a Pursivant slips in behind, And makes 'em runne like hares before the wind, 6. Downe tumbles parson prick-eares, chaire and all, Making a noise, which frightens all the rest. Here two or three stand quivering close to th'wall. There halfe a score lie cram'd up in a chest, And though the Candles all extinguish'd were, A blind man easily might have smelt their feare, 7. Thus still the Bishop kept the Brownists short, And oftentimes was catcht beyond his bounds; But if he were what man durst tax him for't? His very breath the silly wretch confounds: He quel'd 'em all; to no man hee'd shew favour; But now hee's bound (yee see) to's good behaviour. 8. A yeere a gone 'tad beene a hanging matter; T'avewrit (nay spoke) a word 'gainst little WILL; But now the times are chang'd, men scorne to flatter: So much the worse for CANTVRBVRY still, For if that truth once come to rule the roast, No mar'le to see him tide up to a post. 9. His high-Commission kept us once in awe; There men paid fees before they knew for what. Honest Lambe and Ducke could make it good by law, To squeese mens purses, when they look't too fat. But now your Master's catch't, run Lamb fly Duck; See, see, his Court's pul'd down, and hee's chain'd up. 10. By wicked counsels, faine he would have set The Scots and us together by the eares; A Patriarks place, the Levite long'd to get, To sit bith' Pope, in one of Peters chaires. Ad having dranke so deepe of Babels cup, Was it not time d'ee thinke to chaine him up? 11. 'Twas time, 'twas time; this is the generall cry; And who alas can swim against the streame? His corner Cap, me thinkes stands all awry; His sleeves have lost both whitenesse and esteeme: All's former honour's vanish'd, he displac'd. Thus is his grace, for want of grace, disgrac'd. 12. But stay what Bird's that, flies away so fast? O, tis a Goldfinch; let him goe I pray, Something has frighted him, he makes such hast, Perhaps some snare was layd, to take away His life; if so, wisely he did to flie On wings of safety, danger being so nigh. 13. 'Tis thought he was a good Astronomer; And did a storme fast comming on foresee? Which made him, when the clouds began to appeare? Into another place for shelter flee. O subtill Finch, 'tis well he scaped is, His singing else had beene quite spoild ere this. 14. But here's the spight; one sheep breaks thorow th'hedge And makes a gap, to let out all the rest: Finch flowne, our other birds grew quickly fledge; And all that could flie, thought that way the best. The Finch indeed lost more then all that fled, But who'd not part with's purse, to save his head. 15. Oh, had the Bishop beene as wise as he, He might have found a way to cure his care. Now sure he vexes, frets, and fumes to see How like a wretch he lies in sorrowes snare. And how his running friends eschew'd the danger. Whilst he stands tide up like an Asse toth' manger. 16. In this fine Finch my Lord tooke great delight, Ere now they've sung harmonious notes together. But un shine daies are clouded oft ere night So theirs; and now none cares a pin for either: Thus I conclude and pity 'tis I say, Though one be tyed that th' others flowne away. No mas no mass will we allow. To keepe it downe, w'ave ropes enow. He that in England thus desires to doe, Must swing-am, swang-am, thus, a turne or two. And if that cure not his ambitious hope, Let me be next that capers in a rope. Be warn'd by him who thus hath crackt his credit, Tis true,M Qui antea non caveat post dolebit. I. C. V. B. poore CANTVRBVRY in a tottering state; A. P. O. P. you sought to be, now tis too late. R. V. Y. Y. before their eyes that are among you: V. R. A. K. if that you say that they will wrong you. S. C. O. T. some say was he which brought all this to light. I. C. V. R. in some great feare your Lawne sleeves are not white, G. R. E. G. sweares certainely that he shall have the Miter. H. E. A. D. and all for me, but you will fall the lighter. FINIS.
