1288 99840196 4672
Actus Primus. Our heauenly blessynge, be with you euerychone Omnes simul. All prayse and glorye, to your maiestie alone. Christi lex. Here styll to tarye, I thynke it be your mynde. Nature Lex. My offyce ye knowe, is to instructe Mankynde. Moseh lex. Than God be with you, we leaue you here behynde. ¶ Finit Actus Primus. ¶ Incipit Actus secundus. Exeunt. Nature lex. THe lawe in effect, is a teacher generall What is to be done, and what to be layde asyde But as touchynge me▪ the fyrste lawe naturall A knowledge I am, whom God in Man doth hyde In his whole workynge, to be to hym a gyde To honour his God, and seke his neyghbours helth A great occasyon, of peace, and publyque welth. A sore charge I haue, Mankynde to ouerse And to instructe hym, his lorde God to obaye That lorde of heauen graunt, I maye so do my duetie That he be pleased and Man brought to a staye His brytle nature, his slyppernes to waye Moche doth prouoke me, but yf God set to his hande He shall do full well, for none maye hym withstande. Infidelitas. ¶ He cōmeth in syngynge.
Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye Bye. bromes for shoes and powchrynges, botes and busayus for newe bromes. Brom, brom, brom. Marye God gyue ye good euen And the holy man saynt Steuen Sende ye a good newe yeare I wolde haue brought ye the paxe Or els an ymage of waxe If I had knowen ye here. I wyll my selfe so handle That ye shall haue a candle Whan I come hyther agayne At this your sodayne mooyon I was i suche deuocyon I had nere broke a vayne. Nature lex. That myght haue done ye smart. Infidelitas. No, no it was but a fart For pastyme of my hart I wolde ye had it forsoth In syroppe or in sowse But for noyaunce of the howse For easement of your toth, Nowe haue I my dreame in dede God sende me wele to spede, And swete saynt Antony
I thought I shulde mete a knaue And nowe that fortune I haue Amonge this company. Nature lex Why dost thou call me knaue? Infidelitas. I sayde I wolde be your slaue Yf your grace wolde me haue And do your worke anon. I wolde so rubbe your botes The rofe shulde from the rotes Whan ye shulde do them on. Nature lex. Thou art dysposed to mocke Sone mayst thou haue a knocke If thou with me so game. Infidelitas. Your mouth shall kysse my docke Your tonge shall it vnlocke, But I saye what is your name? Nature lex. I am the lawe of Nature Infidelitas. I thought so by your stature And by your auncyent gature Ye were of suche a ature Whan I fyrste hearde ye speake. Ye commoned with God lately And nowe ye are his bayly Mankynde to rule dyscretly Welcome sy huddypke. Nature lex. If thou vse suche vyllanye.
I shall dysplease the trulye. Infidelitas. By the masse, I the defye With thy whole Cukoldrye And all that with the holde. Nature lex. Why doest thou me blaspheme And so vngodly deme? Infidelitas. For by this blessed boke I wende ye had ben a Cooke And that made me so bolde, For a Cooke ones, hauynge age With a face demure and sage And auncyent to beholde. As you haue here in place With a bearde vpon your face What is he but a Cooke olde? Nature lex. Ye are dysposed to dallye. To leape and ouersallye The compasse of your wytte I counsayle ye yet in season Somwhat to folowe reason And gnawe vpon the bytte. Infidelitas. Then after our great madnesse Let vs fall to some sadnesse And tell me what ye entende. Nature lex. God sent me vnto Man To do the best I can To cause hym to amende.
Suche creatures as want reason My rules obeye eche season And that in eueryborder The sonne and mone doth moue With the other bodyes aboue And neuer breke theyr order. The trees and herbes doth growe The sea doth ebbe and flowe And varyeth not a nayle The floodes and wholsom sprynges With other naturall thynges Theyr course do neuer fayle. The beastes and byrdes engender So do the fyshes tender Accordynge to theyr kynde Alonely man doth fall From good lawes naturall By a frowarde wycked mynde. Infidelitas. Nowe wyll I proue ye a lyar Next cosynto a fryar And on the gall ye rubbe Ye saye they folowe your lawe And varye not a strawe, Whiche is a tale of a tubbe. The sunne ones in the clyppes Awaye the clearenes slyppes And darkened is the daye Of the planettes influence
Aryseth the pestylence. To many ones decaye. Doth not the sea sorage That none can it aswage, And swallowe in towne and streate The ayre whiche gyueth breath Someyme infecteth to death By his most pestylent heate. The beastes of vndemure Whiche were lefte to mannes cure Wyll hym somtyme deuoure Thus are you rulers forgote As thynges of slendre note In Creatures daye and houre. Nature lex. It is the wyll of God To vse them as a rod Of his iust punysshment Whan Man doth not regarde The lorde nor his rewarde Nor to his lawes consent. They neuer are so ronnysh But whan God doth Man ponnysh For his vnhappynesse From God they neuer fall. Nor from lawes naturall Doynge his busynesse. Infidelitas. And you are the same lawe That kept them vnder awe
By your most polytyke wytte? Nature lex. God hath appoynted me Mankynde to ouerse And in his harte to syt To teache hym for to knowe In the Creatures hyghe and lowe His gloryous maiestie And on his name to call, Or power celestiall, In his necessytie. To thynke hym euerlasynge And wonderfull in workynge And that he createth all Both gouerne and conserue From them he neuer swerue That to suche fayth wyll fall. Infidelitas In dede here is good sporte. But why do you resorte Unto this present place? Nature lex. Man alwayes to exhort To seke all helth and confort, Of the onely God of grace. First in the hartes reioyce And than with open voyce To worshyp hym alone Knowledgynge his deytie His power and eternytie Whan he shall make his mone. Infidelitas.
I shall kepe ye as well from that As my grandame kept her cat From lyckynge of her creame. Nature lex. What wylte thou kepe me fro? Tell me ere thou farther go Me thynke thou art in a dreame. Infidelitas. From causynge of Mankynde To gyue to God his mynde Or his obedyence. Nature lex. What is thy name? tell me. Infidelitas. Marye Infydelyte Whiche neuer wyll agree To your benyuolence. Nature lex. Thou canste not kepe me from man. Infidelitas. Yet I wyll do the best I can To trouble ye nowe and than That ye shall not preuayle I wyll cause ydolatrye And moste vyle Sodomye To worke so vngracyouslye Ye shall of your purpose fayle. Nature lex. I defye the wycked fynde With thy whole vene mouse kynde God putteth now in my mynde To fle thy companye. Infidelitas.
Ye are so blessed a Saynt And your selfe so well can paynt That I must me aquaynt With you no remedye. Nature lex. Auoyde thou cruell enemye I wyll none of the truelye But shurne thy companye As I wolde the deuyll of hell. Exit. Infidelitas. And are ye gone indede? Small wyttam be your spede. Except ye take good hede I wyll be next of your counsell. Now wyll I worke suche masterye By craftes and suyle polycye The lawe of nature to poyson With pestylent ydolatrye And with most stynkynge sodomye That he shall haue no foyson Where are these vyllen knaues? The deuyls owne kytchyu slaues That them I can not se I coniure you both here And charge ye to appere Lyke two knaues as yebe. Monachu Sodomismus. Ambo is a name full cleane Knowe ye not what I meane? And are so good a clarke. Infidelitas.
By Terragramaton I charge ye appere anon And come out of the darke Intrantsut. Sodomismus Haue in than at a dasshe With swasshe mery annetswasshe Yet may I not be to rasshe For my holy orders sake. Necromantia. Idololatria. Nor I sonne by my trouth Tha caua orage of slouth And suche a comberouse cought. Yeh wote not what to do. Infidelitas. At Christmas and at Paske Ye maye daunce the deuyll a maske Whyles his great cawdron plae you suche a pretye mynyon And you nowe in relygyon Suche two I neuer sawe Is not thy name Idolatrye▪ Sodomismus. Yes, an wholsom woman verelye, And wllsn in phylosophye Mennes fortunes she can tell She can by sayenge her Aue marye And by other charmes of sorcerye Ease men of the loth ake by and bye Yea, and farche the deuyll from hell She an cnyike the Cowe and hunte the foxe And helpe men of the ague and poxe So they bryng money to the boxe Whan they to her make mdne.
She can fatche agayne all that is loste And drawe drynke out of a rotten post Without the helpe of the holye Ghost In workynge she is alone. Infidelitas. What somtyme thou wert an he. Idololatria. Yea, but nowe yeh am a she And a good mydwyf perde Yonge chyldren can Icharme▪ With whysperynges and whysshynges With crossynges and with kyssynges With blasynges and with blessynges That sprytes do them no harme. Infidelitas. Then art thou lyke to Clysthenes. To Clodius and Euclides, Sardinapalus and Hercules Whiche them selues ofte transfourmed Into a womans lykenes With agylyte and quyckenes But they had venus syckenes As wryters haue declared. Sodomismus. Let her tell forth her matter. Idololatria. With holy oyle and water I can so cloyne and clatter That I can at the latter Many sutelties contryue I can worke wyles in battell If I do ones but spattle I can make corne and cattle
That they shall neuer thryue. Whan ale is in the fat If the Oruar please me nat The cast shall fall downe flat And neuer haue any strength No man shall tonne nor bake Nor meate in inseason make If I agaynst hym take But lose his labour at length. Theyr welles I can vp drye Case trees and herbes to dye. And slee all pullerye Where as men doth me moue I can make stoles to daunce, And earthen pottes to praunce That none shall them enhaunce And do but cast my gloue. I haue charmes for the plowghe And also for the cowghe She shall gyue mylke nowghe So longe as I am pleased Apace the myl shall go. So shall the credle do And the musterde querne also No man therwith dyseased. Infidelitas. Than art thou for me fytte. Sodomismus. The woman hath a wytte And by her gere can sytte.
Thoughe she be somwhat olde? It is myne owne swete bullye My muskyne and my mullye, My gelouer and my cullye Yea myne owne swete hart of Golde. Infidelitas. I saye yet not to bolde. Idololatria. Peace fondelinge, tusshe a button Infidelitas. What wylte thou fall to mutton? And playe the hungrye glutton Afore this company? Ranke loue is full of heate Where hungrye dogges lacke meate They wyll durty pudynges eate For want of befe and conye. Heyghe mynyon for monye As good is draffe as honye. Whan the daye is whote and sonnye, By the blessed rode of kent. Sodomismus. Saye forth your mynde good mother For this man is none other But our owne louynge brother And is very well content. Idololatria. I neuer mysse but paulter Our blessed ladyes psaulter Before saynt Sauers aulter With my bedes ones a daye And this is my comoncast
To here Masse fyrste or last And the holy frydaye fast In good tyme mought I it faye. With blessynges of Saynt Germyne I wyll me so determyne That neyther for nor vermyne Shall do my chyckens harme For your gese seke saynt Legearde And for your duckes saynt Leonarde For horse take Moyses yearde There is no better charme. Take me a napkyn folte With the byas of a bolte For the healynge of a olte No better thynge can be For lampes and for bottes Take me saynt Wylfrides knottes And holy saynt Thomas lottes On my lyfe I warrande ye. For the cought take Iudas are With the parynge of a peare And drynke them without feare If ye wyll haue remedy Thre syppes are for the hyckocke And. vi. more for the chyckocke Thus my prety pyckocke Recouer by and by. If ye can not slepe but slumber Geue Otes vnto saynt Unumber
And beanes in a certen number Unto saynt Blase and saynt Blythe Gyue onyons to saynt Cutlake And garlycke to saynt Cyryake If ye wyll shurne the heade ake. Ye shall haue them at quene hythe. A dramme of a shepes tyrdle And good saynt trances gyrdle With the hamlet of an hyrle Are wholsom for the pyppe Besydes these charmes afore I haue feates many more That I kepe styll in store Whom nowe I ouer hyppe. Infidelitas. It is a sporte I trowe To heate howe she out blowe Her witchecraftes on a rowe By the Masse I must nedes smyle. Nowe I praye the let me knowe What sedes that thou canst sowe Mankynde to ouerthrowe And the lawe of nature begyle. Sodomismus. My selfe I so behaue And am so vyle a knaue As nature doth depraue And vtterly abhore I am suche a vyce truelye As God in his great rye Dyd punysshe most tryblye In Sodome and in Gomorr▪
In the flesshe I am a fyre And suche a vyle desyre As brynge men to the myre Of fowle concupyscence. We two togyther beganne To sprynge and to growe in manne, As Thomas of Aquyne scanne In the fourth boke of his sentence. I dwelt amonge the Sodomytes The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes And nowe the popysshe hypocrytes Embrace me euery where I am nowe become all spyrytuall For the clergye at Rome and ouer all For want of wyues to me doth fall To God they haue no feare. The chyldren of God I dyd so moue That they the doughters of men dyd loue Workyng suche wayes as dyd not behoue Tyll the floude them ouer went. With Noes son Cham I was half ioyned Whan he is dronken father scorned In the Sodomytes I also reygned. Tyll the hande of God them brent. I was with Man not vnacquaynted Whan he on the grounde his increase shed For me his bretherne Ioseph accused As Genesis doth tell Dauid ones warned all men of vs two. Do not as mules and horses wyll do.
Confounded be they, that to ymages go Those are the wayes to hell. Both Esaye and Ezechiell Both Hetemy and Daniell Of vs the abhominacions tell With the prophetes euerychou For vs two God strake with fyre and water With battayle, wt plages, & fereful matter With paynefull erl, than at the latter Into Egipt and Babylon. As Paule to the Romans testyfye The gentyles after Idolatrye Fell to suche be stiall Sodomye That God dyd them forsake Who foloweth vs as he confesse The kyngdome of God shall neuer possesse And as the Aparalyps expresse Shall synke to the burnynge lake. We made Thalon and Sophocles Thamiras, Nero, Agathocles Tiberius and Iristoteles Themselues to vse vnnaturallye I taught Aristo and Fuluius Semiramis and Hortensius Crathes Hyliscus, and Pontius Beastes to abuse most monstrouslye. Infidelitas. Marrye thou art the deuyll hym selfe Idololatria. If ye knewe howe he coulde pelfe
Ye wolde saye he were suche an elfe As none vnder heauen were els. Infidelitas. The fellawe is well decked Dysgysed and well necked Both knaue balde and pypecked He lacketh nothynge but helpe. Sodomismus. In the fyrste age I beganne And so perseuerde with manne And styll wyll if I canne So longe as he endure If monkysshe sectes renue And popysshe pre estes contynue Whiche are of my retynue To lyue I shall be sure. Cleane Marryage they forbyd, Yet can not theyr wayes be hyd, Men knowe what hath betyd Whan they haue ben in parell Oft haue they buryed quycke Suche as were neuer sycke Full many a propre trycke They haue to helpe theyr quarell. In Rome to me they fall Both Bysshope and Cardynall Monke, fryer, pryest, and all More ranke they are then antes Example in hope Iulye Whiche sought in his furye Two laddes, and to vse them beastlye.
From the Cardynall of Nautes. Infidelitas. Well, you two are for my mynde Steppe forth and do your kynde Leaue neuer a poynt behynde That maye corrupt in man The lawe wrytte in his harte In his flesshe, do thy partAd Sodo. And his soule so pernartAd Idol. Do thou the best thou can. Here haue I pretye gynnes Both brouches beades and pynnes With suche as the people wynnes Unto Idolatrye Take thou part of thē hereAd Idol. Beades, rynges, and other gere And shortely the beete To deceyue Man properly Take this same staffe and scryppe With a God here of a chyppe And good beldame forewarde hyppe To set forth pylgremageAd Sodo Set thou forth Sacramentalles Saye dyrge, and synge trealles Studye the popes Decretals And myxt them with buggerage Here is a stoale for the A ghostly father to be To here, Benedicite A boxe of creame and oyle
Here is a purse of rellyckesAd Idol. agges, rotten boues, and styckes A taper with other tryckes Shewe them in euery soyle Sodomismus. I wyll corrupt Goddes Image With mose vnlawfull vsage And brynge hym into dottage Of all concupyscence. Idololatria, Within the flesshe thou art But I dwell in the hart. And wyll the soule peruart From Gods obedyence. Infidelitas. Spare none abhomynacion Nor detestable fasshyon That mannes ymagynacion By wytte maye comprehende To quycken our sprytes amonge Synge nowe some metysonge But let it not be longe Leaste we to moche offende. Post cantionm, Infidelitas alta voce dicet. Oremus. OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ad imaginem et si∣militudinem nostram formasti laicos, da quesumus, vt sicut corum sudoribus diuimus, ita corū vxoribus filiabus et domicellis perpetuo frui mereamur. Per domin nostrum Papam, Infidelitas.
Nowe are these horesons forth It wyll be somwhat worth To se howe they wyll worke The one to poyson the hart The other the outwarde parte Ingeniously wyl lucke. The lawe of Nature they wyll Infect, corrupt and spyll With theyr abhomynacion Idolatrye with wyckednesse And Sodomye with fylthynesse To his most vtter dampnacion. These two wyll hym so vse Eche one in theyr abuse And wrappe it in suche euyll That by theyr wycked cast He shall be at the last A morsell for the deuyll. Nowe vnderneth her wynges Idolatrye hath kynges With theyr Noylytie Both dukes, lordes, knyghtes and arles Fayre ladyes with theyr pearies And the whole comynaltie. Within the bownes of Sodomye Doth dwell the spyrytuall clergye Pope, Cardynall and pryest Nonne, Chanon, Monke and fryer With so many els as do desyre
To reygne vnder Antechrist. Detestynge Matrymonye They lyue abhomynablye, And burne in carnall lust. Shall I tell ye farther newes? It Rome for Prelates are stewes Of doth kyndes. This is iust. The lawe of nature I thynke Wyll not be able to wyke Agaynst the assaultes of them They hauynge so hygh prelates, And so many gteat esates From hens to Ierusalem. Pause nowe a lytle whyle Myne eares doth me begyle If There not a sounde Yn folke hath sped I gesse It is to by the Messe Awaye nowe wyll I round. Exit Nature lex. I thynke ye maruayle, to se such alteraion At this tyme in me, whom God lefte here so pure O me it cometh not, but of mannes operacion Whom dayly the deuyll, to great synne doth allure And his nature is full bryttle and vnsure By hym haue I gote this fowle dysease of bodye And as ye se here, am nowe throwen in a leprye. I wrought in his hart, as God bad trestlye. Hym oft prouokynge, to loue God ouer all
With the inner powers, but that false Idolatrye Hath hym peruerted, by slayghtes dyabolycall And so hath Sodomye, throughe his abuses carnall That he is nowe loste, offendynge without measure And I corrupted to my most hyghe dyspleasure. I abhorre to tell, the abusyous bestyall That they dayly vse, whiche boast theyr chastytie Some at the aulter, to incontyuencye fall In confessyon some, full beastly occupyed be Amonge the close Nonnes, reygneth this enormytie Suche chyldren seythey, as they chaunce for to haue And in theyr preuyes, prouyde them of theyr graue. Ye Christen rulers, se ye for this a waye Be not illuded, by false hypocrysye By the stroke of God, the worlde wyll els decaye Permyt prestes rather, Gods lawfull remedye Than they shulde icr, most bestyall Sodomye Regarde not the pope, nor yet his whorysshe kyngdom For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodome With Man haue I ben, which hath me thus defyled With Idolatrye, and vncleane Sodomye And worthy I am, from God to be exyled Pytie me yet lorde of thy moste bounteous mercye I wyll forth and mourne, tyll thousende remedye Promyse haste thou made, to a gloryous lybercie To bring heuē & erth, thē wylt thou (I trust) restore me. Incipit Actus tertius. Moseh lex. THe lord perceiuyng, his fyrst law thus corrupted With vnclene vices, sent me his law of Moses To se hym for synne, substancyallye corrected And brought in agayne, to a trade of godlynes
For I am a lawe of rygout and of hardenes I strayghtly commaunde, and yf it be not done I threti, I curej, and sle in my anger sone. To God I requyre a perfyght obedyence Conempnynge all sache, as do it not in effecte I shewe what synne is, I but dē sore mānes conscyence To hym am I death, whan his lyfe is infect Yet yf he take hede, to Christ I hym dyrect Forgyuenes to haue, with lyke helth and saluatyon. Leaste he shuloe dyspayre, and fall into dampnacion. Infidelitas. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, A pastyme quoth a, I knowe not the tyme nor whan I dyd laghe so moche, sence I was an honest man Beleue me and ye wyll, I neuer sawe suche a sporte I wold ye had ben there, lye might haue made the fort. Moseh lex. Where woldest thou haue had me, tell me good brother myne. Infidelitas. At the Mynorasse syr, late yester nyght at complyne. Moseh lex. At the Mynorasse? why what was there a do? Infidelitas. For suche an other, wolde I to South ampton go In dede yesterdaye was theyr dedycacion And thythe in Goddes name, came I to se the fasshion An olde fryer stode forth, with spectacles on his nose Begynynge this Anteme, a my fayth, I do not glose. pides prciosi.
Moseh lex. And what dyd folowe of this? Infidelitas. I shall tell ye by Goddes blysse Then came Dame Isbell an lde Noune and a cale Crowynge lyke acapon, and thus began the Psalme. Sepe expugnauetun me a iuentte Moseh lex. And what includeth this mysterye? Infidelitas. A symple probleme of bytcherye Whan the fryer begonne, afore the Nonne to synge of precyous stones From my youth sayth she / they haue comforte me As it had ben for the nones Moseh lex. I assure the playne, I set not by suche gaudes Thy vsage shewe the, to be brought vp amonge baude Infidelitas. It was a good world, whā we had such holsom storys Preached in out churche, on sondayes and other feryes With vs was it inrye Whan we went to Berye And to our lady of grace To the bloue of hayles Where no good chere fayles And other holy place.
Whan the pryestes myght walke And with yonge wyues talke Than had we chyldren plentye Then Cuckoldes myght leape A score on a heape Nowe is there not one to twentie. When the Monkes were fatte And ranke as a ratte With bellyes lyke a Bore. Then all thynges were dere Both beafe, breade and bere Nowe grudge the iourers sore. Whan Bysshoppes myght burne And from the truth turne The syllye symple sowle. Than dut no man creake Open mouth nor speake Of Christ nor yet of Powle. No we are the knaues bolde With Scriptures to bolde And teache them euery where The carter, the sowter The bodger, the clowter That all wyll awaye I fere. At vs so they pulle Our lyuynges are dulle We are nowe lyke to fall If we do not fyght For the churches ryght By the Messe we lose all.
But I praye ye syr, tell me what is your name▪ Moseh lex. The lawe of Moses, to lye were I to blame Infidelitas. In the same partyes, what do you intende? Moseh lex. Mankynde to refourme, that he his lyfe amende I shewe what synne is, & what thynge pleseth God I comforte the iust, and the yll, I ponysshe with rod The cōmon people, haue thought it commodyous Dyuers Goddes to haue, with rytes supersticious. My cōmaundement is, to seke one God alone And in all theyr nedes, to hym to make theyr mone Amonge the Gentyles, was it thought none iniurye If a man were hurte, to slee his aduersarye This thynge I forbyd, and saye, thou shalt not kyll Lawe is the reuenger, the man maye do no yll. Some persones there are, that inordynatlye loue Those are perswaded, all thynges them to behoue Whiche I inhybyte, sayenge contynuallye No rape shalt thou do, nor yet cōmyt aduouteye Thou shalt do no thefte, nor coueyte that is not thyne Agaynste thy neyghbour, shalt thou not falsely dyffyne. Infidelitas. We maye do nothynge, yf we be pynned in thus Neither you nor God, to that harde trade shal bryng vs We must haue one God, and worshyp hym alone Matye that in dede, wolde make a Turke to gne If we be stryken, we maye not stryke agayne? Aprope gyne▪ and dyscretlye vt rd lane For companyes sake, ye saye we maye not loue
I defye your worste, and to you there is my gloue. Moseh lex. What? thou wylt not fyght thy wits are better than so. Infidelitas. In the quarell of loue, I shall proue ye ere I go By the Messe I thynke, to put ye to your fure. Moseh lex. Thou were moche better, to kepe thy pacyence. Infidelitas. Naye by Cockes sowle frynd, I must laye ye on y• coate In loues cause to fyght, ye may soone haue ma f ar Naye but haue at your pych, defende ye yf ye maye. Moseh lex. Suche a foole art thou, as sekes thyne owne decaye If I ones medle, t the, it wyll be death Dyddest thou neuer here, that law sleeth in his wrath. Infidelitas. By the blessed lorde, than wyll I playe Robsons parte. Moseh lex. Whye what part wylte thou playe? Infidelitas. By cockes soue geue ouer, so soone as I fele smarte Moseh lex. It wyll be to late, it I one scupple with the Infidelitas. Then let me aon, and we shall soone agre And I shall be glad to be acquaynted with ye. Moseh lex. Acquaintace good felaw, thou mayst soone haue of me Infidelitas. The worste faulte I haue, I am haste nowe & than But it is sone gone, I toke it of a woman But what meane those tables, y• ye haue in your hande.
Moseh lex. Kepe scylence a whyle, and thou shalte vnderstande Thre things I declare, the fyrst are y• preceptes moral Next, the lawes iudicial, and last the rytes ceremoniall The morall preceptes, are Gods cōmaundementes ten Whiche ought euermore to be obserued of all men The lawes of Nature, the morall preceptes declare And y• plesaunt workes, to God they teache & prepare They sturre man to fayth & prouoke hym also to loue To obey, to serue, and to worshyp God aboue Into sony tables, God wrote them fyrste of all That they shulde remayne, as thynges contynuall▪ The first hath but thre, whiche tende to Goddes hyghe honour, Seuen hath the seconde, & they concerne our neybour. The fyrste doth expounde, the fyrste lawe naturall The ext the other, makynge them very formall Inspryt i the fyrst, y• we shulde God honour and loue To outwarde workynge the seconde doth vs moue Forydoynge all wronges preseruynge iust maryage Norysshynge true peace, and other godly vsage. Infidelitae. What is the effecte, of your lawes Iudyciall? Moseh lex. Suche thynges to cōmaunde, as are cyuyle or tēporall From vyce to refrayne, and outwarde iniurye Quyet to conserue, and publyque honestie These are to supporte, the lawes of the seconde table Ceremonyall rytes are also commendable In holy dayes, garmētes, temples & consectaions Sacryfices & vowes, with offerynges and expiacions Which are vnto Christe, as fygures, types, & shadowes
As Paule doth declare, in his Epistle to the Hebrues These are onely fygures, and outwarde testymonies No man is perfyght, by suche darke ceremonyes Onely perteyne they, vnto the thyrde cōmaundement Of the Sabboth daye, tyll Christ the lorde be present. In his death endynge, the whole Iudiciall presthode. Infidelitas. Good dayes myghte ye haue, ye speake full well by the roode. I am a poore lad, and by my trouth bent earueslye▪ To wayte vpon ye, and to be your very lackye. Moseh lex. What art thou called, I praye the hartelye. Infidelitas. Graye fryer am I none, by the Messe I can not flatter. I am Infydelytie, to tell the truth of the matter. Moseh lex. And hast thou so longe dyssembled thus with me? Infidelitas. Yea, for aduauntage to smellout your subtyltie. Moseh lex. Auoyde hens I saye, thou false Infydelyte. Infidelitas. Naye that I wyll not, by yngham Trynytie. Moseh lex. Wylt thou not in dede, thā wyll I fet hyther the poure Of Iudges & kynges, to subdue the within this houre. Exit. Infidelitas. Suche knyghtes wyll I haue, as shall cōfounde thē al▪ Is Sdduces & scrybes, with the sec pharysaycal By helpe of my chyldren Idolatrye and Sodomye The lawe of Nature, I cast ones in a leprye
I haue yet two more, Ambycion & Coneytousnes Whiche wyll do as moche to the lawe of Moyses Where are my whorsons, that they come not awaye. Iutisconsutus. Auaritia. Yea, whorson on thy face, euen in thy best araye I wyll thou knowe it, I am a worshypfull Doctour A Scrybe in the lawe, and a profytable proctour. Infidelitas. Guppe with a vengeaunce, howe comest thou so alofte. Auaritia. I shall tell the man, yf thou wylt comen more solte By fayned flattery, and by coloured adulation Ambycion here also, ose of a lyke foundacion. Infidelitas. Come, are me blessynge, pretye boyes apace Ambitio. I wyll not bowe sure▪ to suche a folyshe face. Infidelitas. Axe blessynge I saye, and make me no more ado. Ambitio. Unsemely were it, we Prelates shulde do so. Auaritia. For no compusyon wyll I do it by swete Marye. Infidelitas. I must fatche ye in, there is no remedye A noughty horsons, haue I brought ye vp hytherto? And know not your father, ye shall drynke both ere I go Ambosimul. No more at this tyme, forsoth we crye amercye. Infidelitas. Downe on your knees than, & axe me blessynge shortly. Ambosimul. Blesse me gentell father, for swete saynt charytie. Infidelitas.
Aryse noughtyknaues, God let ye neuer to the Though among our selues, we mumur, brag, & face Somtyme for lucre, somtyme for the hygher place Yet for aduauntage, in this we all agree To blynde the rulers, and deceyue the comynaltie. Auaritia. Art aduysed of that, by the Messe we are in dede Yet of our knaueryes, the fole & wyll neuertake hede. To labour with a spade Our colour wolde it fade We maye not with that trade We loue so moche our ease We must lyue by theyr sweate, And haue good drynke and meate Whan they haue not to eate The substaunce of a pease. We leade them in the darke And so theyr conseyence marke That stutdye they are and starke, In euery wycked euyll We teache Idolatrye And laught full merelye To se eche companye Ronne headlonges to the deuyll. Ifwe maye haue the tythynges And profytable offeryages We cae not to what doynges They customablye fall We are suche mercenaryes And subtyle propryetaryes
As from the flocke all carryes The wlle, skynne, flesshe and all. In our perambulacyons We looke for commendacions And lowly salutacions In temple, howse and strete. Our lowsye latyne howres In borowes and in bowres The poore people deuoures And treade them vnder fete. Ambitio. I am Ambycion, whose bysposycyan Is honour to appete I gape for empyre, and worshyp desyre As Mynos dyd in Crete I loke vp Aloft, and loue to lye softe Not carynge for my flocke Haue Iones the flese, with pygges, lambes, and gese They maye go turne a Socke. Lucifer I made, so hyghly to wade, To God he wolde be equall Of Adam and Eue, I slewe the beleue And caused them to fall What nede I rehearce, the gyauntes most fearce With the buylders of Babell Nemrod the tyrraunt, with them there applyaunt, Agreed to my counsell. From me wolde not go, cruell Pharao No more wolde Amalech Saul, Achitophell, Absolo, Iesabel
Nor Adonisedech. I made Roboam, and Hierobeam With Nabuchodouosor Triphon, Alchmius, and Simon magus To abuse them euermore. Inpryde I excede, and no people fede But with lyes for aduauntage As Mantuane tell, to leade men to hell Is my most common vsage. Hyghe thynges I attempt, and wyll in exempt From prynces iurisdition A am suche an enyll, as brynge men to the deuyll Without any contradiction. Infidelitas. Here is a prelate euen for myne owne toth Suche an other is, not in the whole South Clappe thou somwhat more, as thou hast begunne I lyke wele your takynge, by the holy Nunne. Auaritia. I Coutyse am, the beuyll or his dam For I am insacyate I rauysshe and plucke, I drawe and I sucke After, a woluys she rae. Father nor mother, Syster nor brother I spare not in my moode. I feare neyther God, nor his ryghtfull rod In gatherynge of goode. But howse and medowe, from the poore wydowe
I spare not forto take Ryght heyres I rob, and as bare as Iob The fatherles I make. With me toke Nadab, Nabal and Achab With all the clergye of Bell Iudas and Giezi, with the sōnes of Hel And the sonnes of Samuell. Iannes and Iambres, also Diotrephes Wrought wylfull wyckednesse So dyd Menelaus, with false Andronicus And all for Coueytousnesse. Ambicio. With vyces seuen, I close vp heauen And speare vp paradyce I oppen hell, by my counsell Mayntaynynge euery vyce. Auarititia. For Syluer and golde, with falsehed I holde Supportynge euery euyll I haue it in awe, for to thoke the lawe And brynge all to the deuyll. Infidelitas. By the blessed Trynytie, no men more fyt for me To do my busynes. Ambycion to begyle, and Auaryce to defyle The lawe of Moyses. Tell me fyrste of all, what wylte thou do Ambycyon. Ambitio. I am thyne owne chylde, thou knowest my dysposycion I wyll sure do, as dyd the Phylystynes. Infidelitas.
Why what dyd those knaues? Ambitio. They stopped vp Abrahās pyttes, as Genesis diffynes With mudde and with myre, & lf them full vnclene Infidelitas. By the same practyse, tell me what thou dost meane. Ambitio. With fylthy gloses, and dyrtye exposytion, Of Goddes lawe wyll I hyde, the pure dysposycions The keye of knowledge, I wyll also take awaye By wrastynge the text, to the scriptures sore decaye. Infidelitas. And what wyte thou, my felowe Coueytousnes? Auaritia. A vayle wyll I sprede, vpon the face of Moyses That none shal perceyue, the clerenes of his coūtenaūce Whiche is the lawe, the meanyng & true ordynaunce. Infidelitas. Wy what wyll ye saye, vnto the ten cōmaundemētes Ambitio. We must poyson them, with wylworkes, & good intētes Where as God doth saye, No straunge goddes thou shalte haue With Sayntes worshyppynge, that clause we wyl depraue. And thoughe he cōmunde, to make no graued ymage For a good intent, yet wyll we haue pylgremage Thoughe he wyll vs not, to take his name in vayne With tradycions yet, therunto wyll we constrayne. No Sabboth wyll we, with Gods worde sanctyfye But with lyppe labour, and yde ceremonye. To father and mother, we maye owe none obedyence
Our relygion is, of so so great excellence. Thoughe we do not slee, yet maye we hertyckes burnè If they wyll not soone from holy Scripture turne What though it be sayde, thou shalt do no fornycacion Yet wyll we mayntayne, moche greater abhomynacion Though thefte be forbyd yet wyll we contynuallye Robbe the poore people, throughe prayer & purgatorye God hath inhyyted▪ to gyue false testimonye Yet we wyll condempne the Gospell for Heresye. We shulde not coueyte our neybours house nor wyfe His seruaunt nor bast, yet are we therin most ryfe Of men make we swyne, by the draffe of our tradycions And cause them nothynge to regarde but supersticions As Dogges vnreasonable, on mosvyle carren fede So wyll we cause them, seke ydolles in theyr nede. And alwayes theyr grounde, shalbe for a goodintent Infidelitas. More myscheuous I trowe, the deuyll coulde not inuēt Than you two can do, by the Messe ye are alone Lytle coulde I do, were ye ones from m gone To the corruptynge, of the lawe of Morses Go forwarde therfore, in your deceytfules Auaritia. With superstitions, the Iewes ceremoniall lawes I wyll so handle, they shall not be worth▪ ii. strawes The lawes Iudiciall througe cawtels and dlayes I wyll also drowne, to all ryghteous mēnes decaye To set this forwarde, we must haue sophystrye Phylosophye and Logycke, as scyence necessarye The Bysshoppes must hold theyr priestes in ygnoraūee With long laten houres, lest knowledge to them chaūce
Let them haue long mattens, longe euen songes & long Masses And that wyll make them as dull as euer were asses That they shall neuer be able to prophecye Or yet preache the truth, to our great iniurye. Let the Cloysterrs be brought vp euerin scylence Without the Scriptures, in paine of dysobedyence Se the laye people, praye neuer but in latyne Let them haue theyr Crede, and seruyce all in latyne That a latyne beleue, maye make a latyne sowle Let them nothynge knowe, of Christe, nor yet of powle If they haue Englysshe▪ let it be for aduauntage For pardons, for Dyrges, for offerynges & pylgremage I teken to make them, a newe Crede in a whyle And all in Englysshe, theyr Conscyence to begyle. Infidelitas. Reherse vnto me, the Artycles of that Crede. Auaritia. The Artycles are these, geue eare and take good hede First they shall beleue, in our holy father Pope Nexte in his decrees, and holy decretals. Then holy churche, with sencer, crosse and cope In the Ceremonyes, and blessed Sacramentals In purgatorye then, in pardons and intrentals In prayenge to sayntes, and in saynt Frances whoode In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed roode They shall beleue also, in relyckes and relygion In our ladyes psalter, in frewyll and good workes In the ember dayes, and in the popes remyssyon In bdes and in belles, not vsed of the turkes In the golden Masses, agaynst such sprites as lurkes
With charmes and blessynges. This crede wyll bryng in money In Englysshe therfore, we wyll it clarkely conueye. Infidelitas. Yea, and burne the knaues, that wyll not beleue ye crede That into the dytche, the blynde the blynde maye lede. Ambitio. Then I holde it best, that we alwayes condempne The Byble readers, least they your actes contempue. Infidelitas. Yea, neuer spare them, but euermore playe the bytar Expressyng alwayes, the tropes and types of thy mytar Ambitio. Why, what doest thou thynke, my mytar to sygnyfye. Infidelitas. The mouth of a wolfe, and that shall I proue by & by If thou soupe downward, lo, se how y• wolfe doth gae Redye to deuoure the lambes, leaste any escape But thy woluyshnes, by thre crownes wyll I hyde Makynge the apope & a captayne of all ryde That whan thou dost slee, such as thy lawes cōtempne Thou maist say, not I, but the powers did thē condēpne The Cabels betoken, the lawes of se non & cannon Ambicio. I trow thou wldest say, the. ii. lawes Cyuyle & Canon Infidelitas. As I spake I thought, & styll thynke by saynt Iohan Yea, persecute styll the instructers of the people And thou Coueytouses, let no bell rynge in Steple Without a profyght. Tsshe, take money euery where So nygh lyppe and shaue, that thou leaue neuer a here Auaitia. I caused the Pope, to take but nowe of late
Of the graye fryers, to haue a canonyzate Franciscus de pola, thre thousand duckattes and more And as moche besydes / he had not longe afore For a Cardynall hatte, of the same holy ordre Thus drawe we to vs, great goodes from euery border Pope Clement the seuenth payed ones for his papacye Thre hondred thousād, good duckates of lawful money Infidelitas. I maruayle howe he coulde come to so moche good. Auaritia. Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blode. Crosers and Mytars, in Rome are good merchandyce And allto lyttle, to mayntayne theyr pompe and vyce Ambitio. The pope for whordom, hath in Rome and Uiterbye Of golde and syluer, a wonderfull substaunce yearely Tush they be in England yt moch rather wold to dwell Whores in theyr dyoceses, than the readers of Chri∣stes Gospell. Infidelitas. They do the better, for by thē they maye haue profyght As for the other, do trouble them daye and nyght Well, nowe steppe forewarde, and go do your busynes To the corruptynge, of the lawe of Moyses. Auaritia. Doubt not but we shall, make hym a crepple blynde. Infidelitas. Synge then at our farewell, to recreate our mynde. Finita catiuncula exeunt ambo. Infidelitas. Nowe am I lefte alone, And these. ii. marchaūtes gone Theyr myschyefe to seclude
I thynke within a whyle, they wyl trap and begyle The worthy lawe of Iude. Ambycion fyrste of all, with his rytes bestiall Wyll make the people swyne In draffe wyll he them lede, and with tradycions fede Where they shall suppe or dyne Coueytousnes wyll warke, that many one shall barke Lyke dogges agaynst the truth Some shal goddes word defyle, and some wyll it reuyle Suche beastlynes ensuth. Ambicion hath this houre, al the whole spyritual poure And maye do what hym lust Now coueytousnes doth rule, & hath both horse & mule All matters by hym dyseust Now bysshoprytes are ole, & the holy ghost for golde The pope doth bye and sell The truth maye not be tolde, vnder paynes manyfolde With sendynges downe to hell The people preestes do famysshe, and theyr gooddes frō them rauysshe Yea and all the worlde they blynde All prynces do they mocke, and robbe the sellye flocke Nothynge they leaue behynde On the face of Moyses, a vayle they haue cast doubtles The lyght of the lawe to hyde Least mē to christ shulde come, frō ceremonyes dōme As to theyr heauenly gyde The lawe can neuer be, at any lybertie Where suche two enemyes rayne Nowe is it tyme to walke, of this more wyl I talke
Whan I come hyther agayne. Exi▪ Moseh lex. If pytie maye mou, your gentyll christen hartes Let it nowe sturre ye, to mourne this heuye chaunce Two enemies with me, haue played most wicked partes And lefte me starke blynde, God knoweth to my sore greuaunce. And I thynke also to your mothe hynderaunce To leade you to Christ, somtyme a gyde I was Nowe am I so blynde, I can not do it, alas. Most rygorously those enemyes nowe of late Dyd fall vpon me, and spoyle me of my syght One was Ambycion, whiche euer ought me hate And Coueyeousnesse, the other enemye hyght Now forsoth and God, iutheyr most cruell spyght The one made me blynde, the other made me lame And whā they had done, therat they had great game. Thus a blynde cryple, I wander here alone Abydynge the tyme and grace, of restauracion By the sonne of God, to whom I make my mone My cause to pytie, and graunt me supportacion Least I be left here, to vtter desolacion And extreme decaye without any remedye, If he dyd not helpe of goodnesse and of mercye. Ye christen prynces, God hath gyuen you the poure With scepture and swerde, allvyces to correcte Let not Ambycion, nor Coueytousnesse deuoure Your faythfull subiectes, nor your offycers infect Haue to your Clergye, a dylygent respecte And se they do not corrupt the lawes of God
For that doth requyre, a terryble heuy rod. God gaue me to man, and lefte me intables of stone That I of hardenes, a lawe shulde specyfye But the Pharysies, corrupted me anone And toke from me cleane, the quyuerus of bodye With cleruesse of syght, and other pleasures many Nowe wyll I to Christ, that he maye me restore To more perfection, than euer I had afore. Finis Actus tertius. Incipit Actus quartus. Euangilium. VN faythfulnes hath, corrupted euery lawe. To the great decaye, of Adams posterytie were it not for me, which now do hither draw Al flesh wold perysh, no man shulde saued be I am Christes Gospell, and infallyble verytie Suche a power of God, as saueth all suche as beleue No burden nor yoke, that any man wyll grue. In the bloude of Christ, I am a full forgyuenes Where fayth is grounded, with a sure confydence I am suche a grace, and so hyghe tydynges of, gladnes As rayse the synner, and pacyfye his conscyence. I am spyryte and lyfe, I am necessarye scyence I requyre but loue, for mannes iustyfication With a fayth in Christ, for his health and saluacion. Infidelitas. Goddes beneson haue ye, it is ioye of your lyfe I haue hearde of ye, and of my maystresse your wyfe. Euangilium. If thou hardest of me, it was by the boye of God.
Infidelitas. Naye, he that spake of ye, was ellynge of a God In an Oystre bote, a lytle beyonde quene hythe A Northen man was he, & he besought ye to be blythe Euangilium. If he spake of me, he was some godly preacher. Infidelitas. Naye syr by the rooe, nor yet a wholsom teacher. Euangilium. After what maner dydhe speake of me? tell. Infidelitas. He swore lyke a man, by all contentes of the Gospell He swore and better swore, yea, he dyd sweare & sweare agayne. Euangilium. That speakynge is suche, as procureth eternall payne Wyll not the people, leaue that most wycked folye? And it so damnable, to heare it I am sorye But what dyddest thou meane, whau thouspakest of my wyfe? Infidelitas. Nothynge, but I thought it was ioye of your lyfe That ye were so good to your neyghboures as ye are Euangilium. Why, howe good am I? thy fantasye declare. Infidelitas. Ye ease them amonge, yf it be as I heare Whan ye are abrode, there is fyne merycheare. Euangilium. As thou art, thou speakest after thy hertes abundaune For as the man is, suche is his vtteraunce. My wyfe is the churche, or christen congregacion Regenerate inspyryte, doynge no vyle operacion
Both cleane and holy, without eyther spot or wryncle The lambe with his bloud, dyd her wash & bespryncle. This is not the churche, of dysguysed hypocrytes Of apysh shauelyngs, or papisticall Sodomytes Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone But a lyuysh buyldynge, grounded in fayth alone On the harde rocke Christ, whiche is the sure fosidacion And of this churche, some do reygne in euery nacion And in all coūtreyes, though theyr nombre be but smal Infidelitas. Theyr nombre is suche, as hath ronne ouer all The same Danes are they, men prophecye of playne Whiche shuld ouer ronne this realme yet ones agayne. Euangilium. What Danes speakest thou of? thy meanynge shewe more clerely. Infidelitas. Dae Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane Harrye. The same are those Danes, that laye with other mens wyues. And occupyed theyr landes, to the detryment of theyr lyues. These are acccounted, a great part of the churche For in Goddes seruyce, they honourably wurche Yellynge and cryenge, tyll theyr throtes are full sore. Euangilium. That Churche was descrybed, of Esaye longe afore This people (sayth God) with theyr lyppes honour me In vayne worshyp, they teachynge mēnes fatuyte Apparaunt is that churche, and open to the eyes Theyr worshyppynges are, in outwarde ceremonyes That coūterfetchurch standeth al by mēnes tradycions
Without the scriptures, & without y• hertes affections My churche is secrete, and euermore wyll be Adorynge the father, in spyryte and in verytie By the worde of God, this churche is ruled onelye And doth not consyst, in outwarde ceremonye This congregacion, is the true Churche mylytaunt Those Counterfayte Desardes, are the verye Churche malygnaunt. To whom Christ wyll saye, I knowe none of your sor Infidelitas. Moche are they to blame, that brethren so report Euangilium. Suche are no brethren, but enemyes to Christes blode As put saluacion, in shauen crowne mytar, or whoode. Infidelitas. I praye ye how lōge, haue your swete spowse cōtynued Euangilium. Sens the beginnynge, and now is in Christ reued. Adam dyd promyse, of Christes incarnacion So had Abraham, with his whole generation Whiche was vnto them, a preachynge of the Gospell Into saluacion, and delyueraunce from hell. Infidelitas. By this tyme I hope, ye haue a fayre increase? Euangilium. She is not baen, but beareth and neuer cease The Corinthes first epistle, hath this clere testymonye In Christo Iesu, per Euangilium vos genui I haue begot you, in Iesu Christ sayth Powle By the Gospell preachyng, to the cōfort of your sowle. Infidelitas. Than are ye a ouckolde, by the blessed holy masse As I sayde afore, so cōmeth it nowe to passe
For I am a prophet, by hyghe inspyration led Nowe lyke I my selfe, moche better than I dyd Ye say y• saynt Paule, begate your wyfe with chylde. Euangilium. By mysunderstandyng, thou art vngracyously begylde An only mynyster, was paule in that same doynge That he therin dyd, was by the Gospell preachynge His mynde is the Gospell, to haue done that operation And this must thou holde, for no carnall generacion. Infidelitas. Mary so they saye, ye fellowes of the newe learnynge Forsake holy churche, and nowe fall fast to wyuynge. Euangilium. Nay they forsake whordom, with other dāpnablevsage And lyue with theyr wyues, in lawfull maryage Whyles the popes oyled swarme, aygne styll in theyr olde buggerage Infidelitas. Yeà, poore maryed men, haue very moche a do I count hym wysest, that can take a snatch and to go? Euangilium. Thou semest one of them, that detesteth matrymonye▪ Whiche is afore God, a slate both iust and holye. Of suche as thou art, saynt Paule dyd prophecye By the holy Ghost, that a certayne companye In the latter dayes from the truth of God shulde fall Attendynge to spyrytes, of errour dyabolycall Whiche in hypocrysye, wyll teache lyes for aduaūtage With marked conseyences, inhabytynge maryages Thou apperest by thy fruytes, to be Infydelyti Infidelitas. I am none other, but euen the very he
And hyther nowe come I, to cōmenthe matter with ye Euangilium. Auoyde cursed fende, and get the out at the gates. Infidelitae. Nay fyrst wyl I serue ye, as I lately serued your mates And hence wyll I not, for this place is for me Who shulde here remayne, but I Infydelyte? Euangilium. Well, than for a tyme, I must departe from hens But this fyrste wyll I saye, before this andyens Easyer wyll it be, concernynge punysshment To Sodom and Gomor, in the daye of iudgement, Than to those Cyties, that resyste the verytie At the suggestions of Infydelytie. That people wyll be foreuer and euer lost For it is the great synne, agaynst the holy Ghost In the olde lawe fyrste, the father his mynde exprest Then came his sonne Chryst, & made it more manyfest And nowe the holy Ghost, is come to close vp all, If he be not hearde, extreme dampnacion wyll fall No prayer remayneth, nor expyracion for synne To them that no profyght, of the worde of God wyll wynne. Take good hede therfore, & saye that ye haue warnyng Exit. Infidelitas. God sende your mother, of you to haue a fondelynge. By the masse I thynke, he is wel out of the waye Nowe wyll I contryue the dryfte of an other playe I must worke such wayes, Christes lawe maye not cō∣tynue, In a whyle am I lyke, to haue none els of my retynue Com anyons I haue, to begynne this tragedye, Namely false Doctryne, and his brother Hypocrysye
They wyll not belonge, I suppose nowe verelye By cockes soule me thynke, I se suche a companye Hem, I saye chyldren, wyll not my voyce be hearde As good is a becke, as is adewe vow garde. By my honestie welcome, myne own companyons both Intran Pseudodoctrina. Thou shalt haue a liuery of the same cloth, Gramatcyes by God, my olde frende Infydelyte. Hypocrisie. What brother supsuap, how go the worlde with the▪ Infidelitae, What, fryre ypflap, how saye ye to, Bendicite? Hypocrises. Marry nothynge but well, I crye now aduaūtage Infidelitae. At her purse or arse, tell me good fryre fuccage? Hypocrisie. By the Messe at both for I am a great penytensar And syt at the pardon, tush I am the popes owne vycar If thou lackest a pece, I know where thou mayst be sped With choyse of a score, and brought euen to thy be▪ Pseudodoctrina. Art thou not ashamed, to talke so lyke a knaue? Hypocrisie. No, for it is such gere, as the holyest of vs wyll haue Pope, cardynall, byshop, mōke, chanon prist & fryre, Not one of ye all, but a woman wyll desyre. Pseudodoctrina. Our ordres permyt vs not, to haue them in maryag Hypocrisie. No, but ye fatche them in, by an other carryage. Ye do euen as we do, we both are of one rate. Infidelitae. By the Messe I laugh, to here this whoreson prate▪
Pseudodoctrina. What fasshion vse ye, to vs here intymate. Hypocrysie. Ego distingu, whyther ye wyll haue Lyons or Parys. Pseudodoctrina. Of them both to shewe, it wyll not be farre amys▪ Hypocrisie. In Parys we haue, the mantell of saynt Lewes Whiche women seke moche, for helpe of theyr barēnes. For be it ones layde, vpon a womans bellye She go thens with chylde, the myracles are sene there daylye And besydes all this, ye wolde marueyle in confessyon What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgressyon Iohan Thessecelius, assoyled a yonge woman ones Behynde the hygh aulter, tyll she cryed out of her bones And as for lyons, there is the length of our lorde In a great pyller, she that wyll with acorde Be fast bounde to it, and take suche chaunce as fall Shall sure haue chylde, for within it is hollowe all Tush, I coulde tell ye, of moche more wondre thā this In course to here them, I thynke ye wolde ye blys. Pseudodoctrina. As thou hast begonne, go forwarde in it and te. Infidelitae. Suche a knaue I suppose, is not from hens to hel. Hypocrisie. In our relygyon, was an holy popysh patryarke Whiche of all bawdrye, myght be the great monarke. The Nunnes to confesse, he went from place to place And two hundred of them, he broached in that space
Many spyces he eate, his courage to prouoke Suche a fellowe was he, as of that gere had the stroke Pseudodoctrina. Now somwhat wyl I tel, to confyrme thy tale withall In kyng fdināds tyme, in Spayne was a Cardynall Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I meane Of lemmans he had, great nombre besydes the quene One of his bastardes, was an earle, an other was duke Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke. Ioannes Crmona an other good Cardynall For reformation, of the clergye spyrituall Came ones into Englād, to dāpne preestes matrymony And the next nyght after, was taken, doynge bytcherye Doctor Eckius also, whiche fearcely came to dyspute In psia with luther, myndyng there hym to conute. For maryage of pryestes, thre chyldren ad that yeare By this may ye se, that somtyme we make mery cheare Euangelium. Mary that do ye, I shall beare ye recorde nowe But howe wyll ye answere, for breakynge of your vow. Pseudodoctrina. We neuer breake vowe, so longe as we do not marye Thoughe we in whordome, be neuer so bolde and busy. Infidelitas, By your ordre than, ye maye walke moche at large What hast thou hypocresy, to laye for thy dyscharge Hypocrisie. Saynt Frances habyte, with the holy gyrdle & whoode Noue can go to hell, that therin dye by the roode In case saynt Frances, be sure vpon theyr syde
Els maye they fortune, to be of theyr purpose wyde For I teade of one that shulde haue gone to the deuyll But the spyrytes of hell, coulde do no hym no euyll. Tyll saynt Frauces came, & loke from hym this cowle Then went he to hel, the fryers dyd here hym howle. I wyll therfore serue S Frances, with hert and mynde With dayly memoryes, that he maye be my frynde And than I care not for all the deuylles in hell That I haue tolde you, is more true then the Gospell. Infidesitas. Then are ye more sure, than monkes for your herytage For theyr landes are here, but ye clayme heauen for aduauntage. Pseudodoctrina. Yet is it to them, a very pleasaunt thynge Theyr Abbot at home, tobe called lorde and kynge. Infidesitas. Naye monke and churle, for here s no kynge but one, If he be a kynge, his mace is a mary bone And his crowne a cowtorde, suche knaues as come frō the carte Must be called kynges, for playenge a popysh par. Pseudodoctrina. It becometh not the, the Romyshe pope, so to lurche Consyderynge he is the hyghest of the churche. Infidesitas. If he be the hyghest, than is he the thercocke Pseudodoctrina. Ah, nowe I pereyne, thou art dysposed to mocke Of all holy Churche, he is the pryeypall heade. Infidesitas. Mary that is true, he sendeth out bulles vnder lead And he hath two yes, the one to open hell The other speaeth heuen, thus do new here tyekes tell
They reporte also that Dogges haue no deuocion To his holy lawes, nor his olde instruction. Pseudodoctrina. Why shuld dogges hate him? make that more euident Infidesitas. They loue no pse portege, nor yet red herynges in lent Steckfysshe nor oysters, but curse hym body and bone And wolde his red sprottes, & rotten fysshe were gone Tush, I heare them I, and that maketh me full sad. Hypocrisis. Eyther thou doest mocke, or els thou art sure mad. Infidelitas. Theare the people complayue very moche of the. Pseudodoctrina. What is theyr pratlinge, I praye the hartely tell me. Infidelitas. They say thou teachest, nothynge but lowsy tradictōs. And lyes for lue, with damnable supersticions And thus they cōclude, that the draffe of popysh prysies Is good ynough for Swyne, by whome they do meane the Papystes. Yea, and they saye also, the dyet of men is all To most byle carryen, the dogges wyll soonest fall Pseudodoctrina. Than do they compare, the papistes vnto dogges. Infidelitas. Marye that do they, and to suche swynys she hogges As in swyllandsosse, are brought vp all theyr lyfe Suche are the Papistes, they saye both man and wyfe They saye also, that thou art a noughty knaue By prowlynge and lyge, ye fryers wolde all haue Thyne ordre they saye, is spronge euen out of hell And al this knowledge, they haue now of the Gospell.
Hypocrisis, Why, where is he nowe, I beseche the hartely tell. Infidelitas. By the messe abrode, & I warrande ye maketh reuell. I comoned with hym, and he dyd vs despyse Agaynst hym therfore, somwhat we must de uyse. Pseudodoctrina. Mary that must we, or els it wyll be wronge He wyll sure dystroye vs▪ yf we do suffre hym longe Nedes must we serue hym, as we ones serued Christ. Infidelitas. Why mad brayed whorsons, how did ye handle Christ Pseudodoctrina. As he preached here, we folowed frō place to place To trap hym in snare, and his doctryne to deface Than founde we the meanes, to put hym so to death Leaste he agaynste vs, shulde open any more breath And we set foure knyghtes, to kept hym downe in his graue That he neuer more, our lyuynge shulde depraue. And thus must we serue the Gospell, no remedye Els wyll he destroye our lyuynges perpetuallye. Bttr one were lost, than we shulde perysshe all As Cayphas ones sayde, in Counsell pharisacall. Infidelitas. By god well sayd, whan ye haue hym in his graue Stāpe hym down, tyl he shyte, & serue him lyke & knau Hypocrisis. We must so ordre hym, that he go no more at large. Pseudodoctrina. Foure knyghtes wyllwe hyre, whom we shall streyght∣lye charge.
To kepe hym downe harde, the fyrste are ambycyous Prelates. Then Coueytous lawyers, that Goddes worde spyght fuliye hates. Lordes without learnynge, and iustyces vnryghtfull These wyll kepe hym downe, & rappe hym on the scll. Theyr Somners and theyr Scrybes, I warrande ye shall stere With baylyurs and catchplles, to holde hym downe euery where I trow Rug & Corbet, at Norwith wyll do theyr part With wharton of ongaye, and for my sake put hym to smart. Hypocrisis. And I wyll rayse vp in the vnyuersyties The seuen slepers ther, to aduaunce the popes decrees As Dorbell and Duns, Durand & Thomas of Aquyne The master of sentens, with Bachon the great deuyue Hēricus de Gandauo, and these shall read ad cletū. Aristotle and Albert, de secretis mulierum With the Cōmentaryes, of Auien and Aueroyes And a Phebo Phebe, whiche is very good for boyes Infidelitas. Yea and let the pope, as Gods owne Uicat here In his hand▪ iii. croses, &. iii. crownes on his head ere His power betokenynge in heauen, in earth, & in hell That he may comaūde all kynges, & subdue the gospell Pseudodoctrina. His selfe maye do that he nede comaunde none other Is not he the heade of the holy churche out mother May not be make sayuts & deuyls at his owne plesure Which hath in his hādes, the eyes & churches tresure So well as he made saynt Herman fyrst a saynt And twentye yeares after, of Heresye hym attaynte.
Fyrste he sent hym to heauen, by his canonyzacion And from thence to bell, by auexcommunycation We reade of formosus, that after he was deade One pope his fyngars, another cut of his heade And threwe his Carkasse, into the floude of Tyber With the head and fyngers, as Platina doth remēber In token that he, is iudge ouer quycke and dead And maye dampne and saue, by his pardons vnder lead Syluester the seconde, to the deuyl hymselfe ones gaue For that hyghe offyce, that he might dampne and saue He offered also his stones to Sathan, they saye For priestes chastytie, and so went theyr maryage away Hypocrisis. Here is one cōmynge, enquyre what he entende. Infidesitas. Ha? it is the Gospell, from hym God vs defende. Exit secreto, Pseudodoctrina. Shewe me brother myne, who dyd the hyther sende. Euangelium. The father of heauen, of his mere beuyulence I desyre therfore, of free audyence. Pseudodoctrina, Ye mynde than to preache afore this companye? Euangelium. In the lawes of God, wolde I instructe them gladly For none other waye, there is vnto saluacion But the worde of God, in euery generation That qayckeueth, that saueth, yt bryngeth vnto heuen. As before his death, Christ taught the Apostle aleuen. Pseudodoctrina. Preache here thou shalt not, without the Aucthorytie Of pope or byshop, or some of theyr affynytie.
Euangelium. Goddes worde, neuer taketh his auctorytie of man. Pseudodoctrina, Thou shalt not here preache, do thou the best thou can. Hypocrisis. Goddes blessynge on your harte, it is spoken euen lyke a man. Ye knowethis daye syr, we haue a full holy feast And must go processyon, with the blessed roode of reast We haue longe mattens, longe laudes, longe houres, longe pryme. Masse, euensong, complyne, & all must be done in tyme Sensynge of the Aulters, and castynge of holywater Holy breade makynge, with other necessarye matter. Euangelium. Haue God cōmaunded any suche thynges to be done Pseudodoctrina. What is that to the? go medle with olde shone Canst thou saye, but they are good sygnyfications? Euangelium. I saye they are fruytes of your ymagynacions. To brynge in luere, and darken Goddes hyghe glorye. Of you God doth axe, no suche vayne beggerye Christ neuer sent his, to she we sygnyfications But his lyuynge worde, to all the Christen nations Ye forsake the Lorde, as Esaias doth tell And hyghly blaspheme, the holy of Israell. In his fyrste chapter, this horryble sentence is Quis hec frusteanea quesiuit, be manibus Bestris, Who hath requyred, of yousuche sacryfyce In vayne offre you, that vntō maunded seruyce
Your incense to me, is great Abhomyuation I sore abhorte it, and moche detest your fasshyon Whan ye pray to me, I gyue ye none attendaunce But auert my face (sayth God) & my countenaunce By this ye maye se, that the lorde doth not regarde your mangre mutteryng, neither graūt it any rewarde No man wylleth Paule, to speake in the congregation In a straunge language, without interpretation. In your latyn houres, the flocke do ye not consyder But declare your selues, to be Romys she all togyther Be not led aboute (sayth Paule, by any straūge letuyng What els is your doctryne, but a blynde popysh thyng? He testifyeth also, Non enim vt baptizatem Dist tu Christue, sed vt Euangelizrem. Christ hath not me sent, that I shulde baptyse, sayth Paule But to preache his worde, to the cōforte of mans soule Loo, thoughe baptyme be a thynge very necessitye yet must it gyue place, to Goddes worde, no remidye Why than preferreye, your draffys she ceremonyes To the Gospell preachyuge, O dampuable iniuryes. Hypocrysis. Why suffre ye hym, to pratle here so longe? Pseudodoctrina. Get the hence shortly, or with the, it wyll be wronge. Intran. Infidelitas. Peace be here and God, mayster Doctour by your leaue That I maye declare, a pardon here in my slene Of our Ladye of Boston, Ingham, and saynt Iohan∣nes Frarye With the indulgence, of blessed saynt Antonye
Pseudodoctrinai Well, take thy pleasure, and do it hardelye. Hypocrisie. Syr he doth me wronge, for this daye it is my stacion To preache my brotherhed, and gather my lymytacion Pseudodoctrina. Who fyrste spake, fyrste spede, steppe forth and rede thy pardon And whan he hath done, your course is, father warden. Euangelium. What course appoynt ye, for preachynge of the Gospell Pseudodoctrina. I wolde thy Gospell, and thou, were both nowe in hell Euangelium. Why and shall this baggage, put by the worde of God Pseudodoctrina. Thou wylt not be answered, tyl thou fele a sharper rod Infideita, Good Christen people, I am come hyther berelye As a true poctour, of the house of saynt Anonye Of cleane remyssyon, I haue brought ye indulgence A pena et culpa, for all your synne and ffure By the Auctorytie of pope Leo and pope Clement Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan, and pope Innocent. And here I blesse ye, with the wynge of the holy ghost From thundre to saue ye, and frō spyrytes in euery coo Lo, here is a bell, to hange vpon your hogge And saue your Cattell, from the bytynge of a dogge So many as wyllcome, to this holy fraterytie Come paye your money, and ye shall haue letters of me Pseudodoctrina.
Let me haue a letter, for I wyll be a brother Hypocrisie. Then gyue me a bell, for I wyll be an other. Euangelium, O damnble leadyuge, of Babylonicall sodomytes Your selues ye declare, to be shamefull hypocrytes Lorde pytie thy people, and take awaye these gydes These scorners, these robbers, these cruell homycydes Suche prophetes are they, as God dyd ueuer sende As Hiere mye sayth, they damnable wayes pretende. Wo Hypocrytes wo, for here ye tryfie and mocke With christen people, & the kyngdō of heauen vp locke Ye counte it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought With his precyous blode, & here most derely sought O ye are wretches, and pestylent Antichristes Mynysters of Dagon, and most deceytfull papistes. Lyke tauenouse Wolues, poore Wydowes ye deuoure By tytle of prayer▪ eternall dampnacion is youre Your owne dreames ye folow, but matter moche more wayghtye Ye do not esteme, as iudgement, fayth, and mercye Wo Pharyses wo, ye make cleane outwardelye But inwardes ye are full, of coueytousues & bawdrye. Paynted tumbes are ye, apryenge tyght beautyfull But within ye stynke, & haue thoughtes very shamefull Ye slewe the prophetes, your doynge yet beare wytnes. How thynke ye to auoyde, that poynt of vnrighteousnes Oh ragynge serpentes, and vyperouse generation Howe can ye escape, the daunger of dampnacion Pseudodoctrina.
Who made the so bolde, to medle within my cure? And teache newe learnynge? an heretyke art thou sure If due serch were made, we shulde fynde the (I thynke) no pryest Euangelium, Yes, anoynted of God, but no popysshe Antichrist. Pseudodoctrina. Let me se, where are the letters of thy ordres? Euangelium, Where Chryste his selfe is, & not in the same borders No suche pryest am I, as is anoynted with oyle But the holy Ghost, for I am none of this soyle. Pseudodoctrina. Here I attache the, for a buysye scismatyke And wyll the accuse, for an haynouse heretyke Laye handes vpon hym, & depryue hym of this apparell Hc Beste spotiatum sordidiorius induunt. Loo, thus wyl I handle al thē, that shal take thy quarel Holde awaye with this gere, and laye it forth asyde. Hypocisis. Nay, tary brother myne, for away shalt thou not slyde Euangelium. I am not goynge, why doest thou slaunder me? Infidelitas. But ne hym to ashes and shewe to hym no pytie. Pseudodoctrina. Brent shall he not be, if he wyll nomore do so. Felowe howe sayst thou? wylt thu here abiute or no? Euangelium, I wyll neyther abiure, nor yet recant Gods glorye. Pseudodoctrina. I offered the reason, and therto thou wylt not applyd, Well get the forewarde for thou shalt sure dye
The temporall power, shall iudge the to the fyre At our Accusement, and holy relygyous desyre. Euangelium. Thought you for my sake impryson men cruellye Famysshe them, stocke them, and them with fagots frye Hurte me ye shall not, for I can neuer dye And they for my sake, shall lyue perpetually. Pseudodoctrina. Here is a pratynge, with a very vengeaunce hēnce. Exunt cum ol Hypocisis, This horryble hetetycke, now shal we well recompence Infidelitas. Yea, hurne hym well fryre, and let hym no longer raigne Laye on greue faggottes, to put hym to more payne By the messe I laugh, to se howe this gee doth wurke He is lyke of thē, to haue no more grar than a turke For suche knaues they are, as a man shall not lyghtly fynde. And take ouer hell, companyons they are to my mynde My busynesse all, is nowe at good conclusion That I haue brought these. iii. lawes to confusion Nowe shall I be able, to lyue here peaceablye And make frowlye chere, with hey how frysfa Iolye The lawe of Nature, I caste fyrste in a leprye By the secrete helpe, of ydolatrye and sodomye. The lawe of Moyses, I made a crypple blynde Auaryce and Ambycion, to helpe me were not behynde And nowe Christes lawe, I haue brut for heresy By helpe of false doctryne, and my cosyn hypocrysye On these same thre lawes, all other lawes depende And can not prenayle, nowe these are at an ende.
If Christen gouerners, do not these lawes vpholde Theyr Cyuple ordynaunces, wyll soone be very colde Well, this valeaunte George, hath made them all to stoupe. Cheare nowe maye I make, and set cocke on the houpe Fyll in all the pottes, and byd me welcome hostesse And go cal me hyther, myne own swete mynyon Besse▪ Finit Actus quartus. Incipit Actus quintus. Uindicta Dei. QUid gloriaris in malicia? qui potens es in iniquitate. Thou vengeable wretche, replete with poy∣son and vyce Why doest thou thus, reioyce in crueltie and maiyte? Thynkest thou that God slepeth, & wyl not his defende And that thy myschyefe, shall neuer haue an ende The blode of Innocentes, to hym for vengeaunce call And therfore this houre, must I fearcely vpon the fall Infidelitas. Thou spyryte of the ayre, I straygtly coniure the here By Panton & Craton, and charge the to come no nere. Uindicta Dei. Thynkest thou to stop me, with thy foolysshe cōsuracion Whom God sendeth hyther, for thy abhomynacion.
Infidelitas. What art thou called? thy name to me reherse. Uindicta dei. I am Uindicta Dei, in punysshement most fearce, With water, with sooerde, and with fyre I muste thee pearce Infidelitas. Be good in thy offyce, & thou shalt haue money & meat Uindicta Dei. By fylthy rewardes, thou canst not me entreate But that I wyll do, as God hath me commaunded For yf worldely gyftes, my furye myght haue changed The buyuetfall worlde, had ben drownde with water Nor Sodome & Gomor, with so fyery fearefull matter Nor yet the Israelyties, with terrour of the sworde With hungre & pestylence, in the angre of Gods worde Pharao in Egypte, the plagues had neuer felte Myght I haue bene stopped, for syluer or for gle Into Egipte I brought, ten terryble punysshementes Upon the people, for breakynge his cōmaundementes Theyr wholsom waters, I tourned into bloude I multyplyed frogges, to poyson therwith theyr foode. I made waspes and Dranes, them greuously to stynge And all kyndes of flyes, soone after dyd I in brynge Upon theyr cattell, I threwe the fowle pestylence Both botche, byle, and blayne, they had for theyr offence Lyghtenynges and haylynges, destroyed theyr Corne and fruyte. A swarme of hungry locustes, theyr pastours destytute The space of thre daies, I gaue thē palpable darkenes I slewe the fyrst goten, of mā and beast, for thy rudenes
For I neuer stryke, but for the Infydelytie. Infidelitas. Stryke for me quoth ? By y• mary Masse I defye thē Uindicta Dei. What thou wylte not so, thy braynes are not so lyght Infidelitas. Angre me not to moche, for if thou do, I fyght Uindicta dei. All that wyll not helpe, thy wycked workynges nowe Whan the stronger come, the weaker must nedes bowe The lawe of Nature, infected thou hast, with a leprye. Infidelitas. Naye, it was not I, but that wytche Idolatrye And that polde shorne knaue, that men cal Sodomye Uindicta Dei. Of whom syronge they fyrste? but of Infydelytie? Therfore thou shalte haue, that plage of penaltie Whiche they fyrste tasted, for theyr Iniquitie For those two vyces, I drowned the worlde with water In token wherof, I plage the, with the same matter. Hic Infidelitatem  pha perctit, Infidelitas. Tusshe, I defye thy worst, this shall not dryue me hē For after the floude, with Cham had I resydence And so contynued, tyll Moyses lawe came in With his iolye tryckes, a newe rule to begyn Uindicta Dei. And hym thou cortuptest, with Auaryce and Ambicion And so dydst leaue hym in myserable condycion Thou shalte haue therfore, that than to them was due Most terryble battayle, the Israelties vntrue That tyme dyd suffre, for theyr Infydelytie Wherfore with this swerde, I iustlye banysshe the.
Bycause thou shalt here, gyue place to Christes gospel Gladio Infidelitatem denuo cedit. Infidelitas. Yet wyll I not hence, but agayne ones rebell. Dyd not I remayne, with Iudas, and other more? Whan Christe preahed here, and taught them to ve hym sore. Yes, and after that, was I with Simon Magus With Saunder Coppersmyth, with Elimas and De∣metrius. And nowe I perseuer, amonge the ranke rable of Papistes Teachynge theyr sholynges, to playe the Antichriste Uindicta Dei. The Innocent bloude, of sayntes contynually Dothe all vnto God to reuenge theyr iniurye▪ Agaynst false doctryne and cursed hypocresye Whom thou hast raysed the glory of the Gospell To darken, and his fryndes most myserably to quell. Wherfore thou shalt haue lyke as thou hast deserued For thy wycked doynges, thy punysshmēt now doubled. Ignis ipsum precedet. The Prophet Dauid sayth thus. At{que} inflammabit in citcuitu inimicos eiue. A consumynge fyre, shall ronne before the iudge His enemyes consumynge, they shall fynde no refuge. Ob scesera et culpas hominum, titus{que} nephandes In cineres ibit tissus, tenuim{que} fauillam As Mantuan writeth, for the wickednesse of the The earth to asshes, by fyre, shall turned be. Ignis flamnia Infidelitatem  coget. Infidelitas,
Credo, credo, credo. I saye, credo, credo, credo, To the Denyll of hell, by the Messe I wene I go. Exit. Deus Pater. As e haue sene here▪ howe I haue stryken with fyre The pestylent vyce of Infydelytie Sowyll I destroye, in the fearcenes of mytyre▪ All sectes of errour, with theyr enormytie Whiche hath rysen out of that iniquytie For as it is sayde, that my hande hath no set Shall vp by the roote, no power maye it let. The Apostle Iohan, in the Apoalyps doth saye He sawe  newe he euen, and a newe earth appearynge The olde earth and se, were taken cleane awaye That heauen is mannes fayth, that earth his vnder∣standynge. Whom we haue renued, by our most sexxet work ynge The olde cauered earth, exylynge with the see Whiche is supersticion, and Infydelytie. A newe Hierusalem, the sayde Iohn also se As a beautyfull  to her husbande Our ue faythfull churche is that same fayre Cytie Whō we , by the power of our ryght hand As a souse to Christ, in euery Christen lande the ecres, of Babylonicall poperye That in yyte, maye walke to our glorye. thre lwes, for you wyll I lere also Of suche infections, as by Infydelytie Ye haue reciyued, that ye with he maye go Declarynge the wayes, of Christen lybertie , she may take,
For her onely God, and be our people styll In our lawes walkynge, accordynge to our wyll. Omnes simue. At your commaundement, we are most blessed lorde, Deus pater. Approche nyghar than, and ye shall be restorde. Thou lawe of Naturewe fyrste begyn with the Restorynge the agayne, to thy first purytie Auoyde Idolatrye, Auoyde vyle Sodomye. We charge ye no more, this lawe to putryfye Kepe styll that same hart for a sygne perpetuall That thou wert written, in mannes hart firste of all. Thou lawe of Moses▪ gyue me that vayle from the No longer shalt thou, neyther blynde nor croked be Hence thou Ambycion, and cut sed Coueytousns I here banysche you, from this lawe euer doubtles Lose not those tables, whiche are a token ture That thou in the flesche, shalt euer more contynue. Thou lawe of the Gospell, thoughe thou be last of all In operation yet, thou art the pryacypall From the I exyle, hypoetysye and false doctryne With all that depende, vpon the papisticallyne Reserue the came boke, for a sygne of heauenly poure For ye boke thou art, that Iohn frō headuē dyd deuoure. Nature lex. Euerlastyng prayse, to thy gloryous maiestie. Moseh lex, Our heauenly gouernour, great is thy gracious pytie, Christi lex. Of mankynde thou art, the eternall felycitie.
Nature lex. Nowe leauest thy seruauntes, in thy perpetuall peace To do the seruyce, from hence, wyll we notcease. Moseh lex. For your eyes haue see, what thou hast nowe prepared For thy peoples health, which hath benhere declared. Christi lex. A lyght thou hast sent, whiche is thy ioyous Gospell To the consolacion of the howse of Israell. Nature lex. In reioyce of this, make we some melodye. Moseh lex. The name of our God, to prayse and magnyfye. Christi lex. I assent therto, and wyll synge very gladly. Hic ad Dei gloria cantaunt. In exitu Israel de Aegipto, l aliud simile. Deus Pater, Nowe haue we destroyed, the kyngdome of Babylon And throwen the great whore, into the bottomles pyt Restorynge agayae, the true fayth and relygyon In the Christen churche, as we haue thought it fyt Depurynge these lawes, so to contynue it Man is our creature, and hath grace in our syght To dwell with hym now, is our whole hartes delyght. Man is our people, his God we are agayne With hym wyll we haue, contynuall resydence A waye wyll we wype, from all sorowe and payne He shall no longer dyspayre, for his offence Nor haue in his soule, any carefuldoubte of conscience The olde popyshnes is past, whiche was dampuacion We haue nowe reued, our Christen congregation.
Stande forth Christen faith, and take our aduertismēt We here appoynt the, to gouerne our congregacion Se thou do nothynge, without the admonysshement Of these thre lawes here, Imprynt theyr declaration Of my swete promyses, and than make thou relation To my folke agayne, that they maye walke to me Without popysshe dreames, in a perfyght lybertie. Fid Christiana. Most heauenly maker, in it thoudoest cōmaunde me Euermore wyll I, full prompt and dylygent be. Deus Pater. Thou lawe of Nature, shalt ache man God to knowe And thatto refuse, wherby any yll maye growe. Nature lex. From this your precepte, shall I not varye I crowe▪ Deus Pater. Teache thou hym also, to worshyp one God about And his proper neyber, to persecute with loue. Moseh lex. I hope blessed lorde, to do as me shall behoue. Deus Pater. And thou shalt teache hym, to loue God in his hart. And those to forgyue, by whom he sufferethsmarte. Christi lex. In your appoyntmentes, wyll I do also my part. Deus Pater. Worke thou in the harte, a knowledge necessarye In the flesshe, worke thou, by outwarde Ceremonye. Change thou notto the spet▪  workyns of these wo And cause our people, in a perfyght waye to go Take hede christē fayth, to the techynges of these thre And moue our people, to walke in the verytie.
The promyses we made, in all these thre are Gospell We wolde thou shouldest so, to our Congregation tell Our eurlastynge bestynge, be with you euer more. Omnes simul. To thy swete name lord, be prayse & perpetuall honour▪ Fides Christiana. It hath pleased God, to put me in this offyce To gouerne his churche, and christen Congregation And theri do, as ye shall me entyce Gyue me I praye you, suche holsome exhortation As maye be to Man, aclere edyfication And I wyll be glad, to take your adurttyshment As it shall become, any chylde obedyent. Christi lex. Ye speake it full wele, than marke what shalbe sayde And dylygently, looke that it be obeyed. Nature lex. The effecte of me, is for to knowe the lorde Euerlastynge, stronge, most gracyous and godlye And as touchynge Man, to haue fraternall concorde Fr to norysshe, and to do non iniurye To  uenasites made, and loue true matrymonye Tese noble effectes, so temper you in Man. That them to fulfyll, he do the best he can. Moseh lex. The effect of me, is for to worshyp the lorde As one God alone, and to flye from Idolatye Not to flee nor stele, nor yet to beare false recorde To shewe what is synne, and to seke the remedye Publyque peace to hold▪ and sore to punysshe the gyltie From these good effectes, se that man neuer soorue Thau shall he be sure, that God wyll hym preserue. Christi lex.
The effecte of me, is for to worshyp the lorde In the inwarde spyryte, and to fauoure frende & eumye And in all poyntes els, with Gods wyll to accorde To preache remyssyon, to saue and to iustyfye In Christ all to seelyfe, iustyce, peace and mery These heauenly effectes, in man so incorporate That he maye in spyryte, be newly regenerate. Fides Christiana. More swete than honye, are your thre exhortacions And regestred they be, in my memoryall Nowe wyll I forwarde, to all the Christen nations And se in effecte, these lawes obserued all To the abolyshment, of the dreames papisticall Nowe the lyght is come, the darkenes dyeth awaye I truste in the lorde, men wyll walke in the daye. Good Christen people, to these thre lawes applye First knowe that ye haue, a lyuynge God aboue Than do hym honour, and his name magnyfye Worshyp hym in spryte, as the Gospell you doth moue Than obey your quen, lyke as shall you behoue For she in her lyfe, that lorde doth represent To sauegard of the iust, and fynners punysshement. Se that ye regarde, suche lawes as she doth make For they are of God, as Salomon doth reporte Of these lawes doubteles, those lawes theyr groun∣dynges take To the publyque wealth, to gyue ayde, strength, and comforte For preseruacion, of all the christen sort In no case folowe, the wayes of eygnolde Pole To his dampnacion, he doubtles playeth the foole.
Haue  due respecte, vnto your countrey natyue Whiche hath brought ye vp, and gyuen ye noryshment Euen from your cradelles, to these dayes nutrytyue Do that ye maye do, to her wealth and preferment Mynyster to bet, no hatefull detryment A dogge to his frende, wyll neuer be vnlouynge Let reason in ye, not lose his naturall workynge. Nature lex. Who lyueth without lawe, shall perysshe without lawe And therfore we haue, thre lawes to you descrybed That after theyr lyues, ye shulde in your lyuyng drawe We haue also shewed, howe they haue ben corrupted By fowle Idolaters, and Sodomytes poluted. By coueytous preestes, and by ambytyous prelates Hypocrytall fryers, false Doetours and false Cutates Mose lex, Who hath restored, these same thyr lawes agayne But your late Iosias, and valeaunt kynge Henrye No prynce afore hym, toke euer yet suche payne Frō Englāde to banysshe, Idolatrye & fowle Sodomye Coueytousnes, Ambycion, false Doctryne & hypocresye It was he that brought, Christes verytie to lyght Whan he put the pope, with his fylthynes to flyght. Christi lex. Frō dāpnable darkenesse, as my brother here doth saye He hath delyuered, this realme of Englande godlye Bryngynge his Subiectes, into the true path waye Of theyr soules sauegarde▪ if they now folow it wysely And lefte them he hath, the same waye styll to fortyfye His noble sonne Edwarde, suche a kynge of God electe As questionles, whyle helyued, did perfourme it in effect Fides christiana.
Praye we to the lorde, for the longe contynuaunce Of Quene Elizabeth, in this worldes habytacion And that of her Noblesse, she haue true mayntenaunce In the pryncyples of this most worthy foundacion hat she maye to Christ, brynge vs from desolation And for her noble Counsellours, to god let vs all praye That in the true fayth, theyr hertes directe he maye. Amen. The ten comaundementes bryefelye. Loue thy Lorde God. Sweare thou no othe Thy sobbeth kepe. Please thy fryndes bothe. Wytnes none yll. Holde no mannes wyfe. Brybe mannes good. Slee not with knyfe Wysshe no mannes house. Nor Oxe nor Asse As thou wylte haue. Do thou lyke case. ¶ These Cōmaundementes nede not be rehersed in the Enterlude.
¶ A songe vpon Bene∣dictus: Compyled by Iohn Bale. BEnedictus domi∣nus, Deus Israel Which hath ouer throwne, the migh tye Idoll Bell The false God of Rome, by power of the Gospell And hathe prepa∣red from the depe lake of hell. Redēptionem ple∣i su. t rexit cornu, of mercye, health and grace That cruell Tyraunt, nowe clearely to de face Whose blodye kyngdome, dymynyssheth apace By the worde of God, whiche lately hath take place. In omo Dauid, pueti sui▪ Sicut Iocutus est, the Lorde celestiall That Romys she Antichrist, is lyke to haue a fall With his whole rable, of sectes dyabolycall And nowe the nombre, wyll florysshe ouer all Propetatum eiu.
Salutem ex inimicis, nowe we maye dayly heare The enemyes of Christ, with hym doth wytnesse beare Saule is become a Paule, and preaching euery wheare Nowe may we receyue, most heauenly wholsom geare De manu corum qui dt nos. Ad faciendam misericodiam The sonne of our God, from his hyghe gloryecam To redeme the synne, of the chyldren of Adam And to remembre, to faythfull Abraham Testamentisui sancti. Ad iusiurandum, whiche God hath made afore Unto our fathers he wyll kepe euermore Promysed he hath if we regarde his lore For sakynge the Pope, with his dampnable store Daturum se nobis. Ut sine timore, from Romysh tyrauntes fre The lorde graunt vs grace, that we maye speakers b Of his holy worde, and therin to agree That in the Gospell and Christen lybertie Seruiam ii. In sanctitate, and purenes of lyfe Let vs nowe trauayle, both mayden man and wyfe All tyghtrous doynges, in vs be euer ryfe That we perseuet, without debate orstryfe Omnibu dicbus nostri. Tupuer Propheta, elected of the lorde Our Quene Elizabeth, to haue Goddes lawe restorde
Folowest Iosias, therofto take recorde In all thy doynges, and in Goddes holy worde Patate viaiu. Ad dandam scicentiam, for mens helth and saue garde Christes holy Gospell, by the is frely hearde Wherin doth cousyst, theyr lyfe and full rewarde With preseruacion, from daungerous iobadye. Peccatorum corum. Pt viscera misericordie Christ our dere mayster, vs dayly ouer Least we here perysshe, in our iniquytie Our mediatour, continuallye is he. Orins ex afto. Illuminare, swete lorde we the desyre To menin darkenes, and in the popysshe myre Let not his baggage, thy faythfull seruauntes tyre But vs delyuer, from them and from hell fyre. In viam pacis. Amen. THVS ENDETH this Cōmedye, concernynge thre Lawes, of Nature, Moyses, and Christ, corrupted by the Sodomytes, Phary∣sies, and Papistes most wicked. Compyled by Iohn Bale.
IMPRYNTED AT London / in S. brydes Churchyarde, ouer agaynste the North Doore of the Churche, by Thomas Colwell. Anno Domini. M. D. LXII. vi. Die Nouembris.
