13608 s109432 99845079 9955
¶ A deuout treatyse cal∣led the tree & xii. frutes of the holy goost.
¶ The tree of the holy goost. Folio. ij. ❧ Grace in this worlde, & ioye with∣outen ende. ❧ ❧ ❧ ❧ RElygyous syster, for as muche as ye arte now planted in the gardyn of ho¦ly relygyon, yf thou wylt at the last be a tree of ye heuenly paradyse, thou must vertuously growe here, and bryng forthe good goostly fruyte. For as our lorde sayeth. Omnes arbor bona, fruct{us} bonos facit. Euery good tree (he sayth) bringeth forth good fruyte. ☞ yf a tree materyall sholde bryng forth good fruyte, it must be first depely roted, afterward wel watred, than sprede his braūches abrode, and at last to waxe hye. In the same wyse, if y• wylt be a good tree, and bryng forth vertuous fruyte. first thou must be veryly, and depely ro∣ted in mekenesse, whiche is the keper, and very true grounde & foundement of all vertues. For as saynt Gregory sayth. ☞ He ye gadreth ver∣tues without mekenesse, is lykened to such one that bereth blasyngly precyous powdre in the wynde. It is euydently knowen, the deper a tree is roted, the hyer it waxeth. In the same wise the more meke thou art for Chryste loue, ye hyer thou shalt encrease in grace in this lyfe, & at the last to be enhaunced in ioye as our blys¦sed lorde sayeth. Quise humiliat exaltabitur.
He that is beray meke here, shall at laste be en∣haunced in ioye. ☞ If thou wylt lerne veray mekenesse, for to be a relygious plante, beholde the mekenesse of our blyssed lorde Iesu, how he lowed hymself for vs in his incarnation, in his natyuyte, and in all his conuersacyon bothe in lowly wasshyng of his dysciples fete. And also in his bytter passyon he lowed hymself, so that he was for vs obedyent vnto the dethe. For the whiche lowly obedyence almyghty god the fa∣ther enhaunced hym, and gaue hym a name a∣boue al names And that is for vs that we in re¦lygion sholde mekely obey vnto our dethe. Be∣holde also very mekenesse in his blyssed moder our lady saynt Mary the holy vyrgyn, whiche nexte vnto hym in erthe was moost mekest, for she was chosen of hym specyally therfore, as it is wryten, Quia respexit humilitatem ancille sue.  Beholde also very mekenesse in all ye ho∣ly apostles, euangelystes, martyrs, cōfessours, and vergyns / and many other chosen soules, which worthyly therby pleased our lorde. And thynke that they were meke bothe in herte, spe¦che, and in dede, to gyue vs that ben in relygion exsample to be meke, bothe in herte, speche, and dede. In herte holde thy selfe moost vyle, moost abiect, and moost synner / and moost wretche of all. And than thynke yt yf our blyssed lorde had
gyuen to the moost synner in erthe that grace yt which he hath gyuen to the, that the same syn∣ner wolde be more meker than thou arte, & mo∣re loue hym than thou doost. Thus to thynke quencheth pryde of all relygious folke. In this wyse thou mayst thynke euery body in erth bet¦ter than thy selfe. And yf thou mayst not ouer∣come pryde of herte in this wyse / thynke than that in this vyce of pryde thou passest all other, bryngynge to thy mynde the wordes of saynt Iames the holy apostle, where he sayth of our lorde thus. Qeus superbis resistit, humilib{us} dat gratiam. That is. Our lorde withstandeth proude hertes, and gyueth greate graces to all meke hertes. Syster suche knowlege of thyne owne pryde shall be cause of wynnyng of very mekenesse. ☞ But now for as moche that it is ryght harde to escape the fyrst styringes of pry¦de, namely of thoughtes which do crepe ryght pryuely into the herte. Therfore as soone as yu perceyuest such proude thoughtes, anone thro∣we them vpon ye meke stone Chryst Iesu. that is. Ren̄e to the mekenesse of Christ Iesu, & the∣re all to brest thy proud thoughtes, & also shew thē in cōfession to thy cōfessour. For our lord by the prophete Dauyd, blysseth all suche / where he sayth thus. Beatus qui tenebit et allidet {per}∣uuios suos ad petrain. ☞ Blyssed be he (sayth
our lorde) yt shall kepe well in mynd his proude thoughtes, and all to breke them at the stone, yt is Chryst, consyderyng his mekenesse. Suffre neuer good sister, pryde to rest within the / wor¦kyng after ye councell of Thoby, which taught his sone very mekenesse in herte, saynge thus. Fili su{per}biam nun{que} in tuo sensu, aut ī tuo ver∣bo dn̄ari permittas, ab ea enim sumpsit initiū ois {per}ditio. ☞ Sone (he sayth) suffre neuer pry¦de haue domynacion in thy wyttes, & in thy fe¦lynge, ne in thy worde. For thereof euery mys∣chefe hath his begyn̄yng. Beleue it well syster the begynnynge of all synne is pryde. Beware therof I praye the, specyally now thou arte in relygion. Make no partyes / mayntene no que∣rels. I sayd also, thou must haue mekenesse in mouthe. In mouthe yu must be meke, as in an∣swerynge mekely, and reuerently, to thy soue∣rayns and elders. I sayd also, thou must be me∣ke in all thy werkes: fulfillyng all maner lowe seruyce, in relygyon & werkes. And than haue mynde of our lordes lowlynesse / how he beyng souerayn god, and lorde of all, dysdayned not to wasshe his disciples fere. Shewe therfore me∣ke seruyce to thy sisters, & deuoutly obey them, hauyng in mynde the wordes of our sauyour, where he sayth thus. Non veni ministrarised ministrate. That is, I come not (sayth he) for
to be serued, as a mayster, but for to mynystre, as a seruaūt. ☞ And for as moch as mekenesse gooth neuer alone in relygion, wtout the felawe of obedyence, therfore obey mekely to all, & na∣mely to thy souerayns and elders. Thus do all thy besynesse and dyligence, I pray the for the loue of our lorde & his holy moder, to put away all thyn owne wylles: whiche somtyme thou vsed in the worlde / and obey gladly to thy soue∣rayns, bothe in indyfferent thynges, and gene∣rally in all thynges whiche is not agaynst god and thy holy rule. ☞ Beholde afore thyn eye a good ensample of our lorde, thy spouse Iesu, yt was subiect and obedyent to his owne handy werke, bothe to Ioseph & Mary. For he sayth hymselfe. Non vem facere volūtatem meam. That is, I come not (sayth he) in to this erthe for to do myn owne wyll. Than sholde euery re¦lygious persone be sore abasshed, and ashamed of hymself, yf he do ony parte of his own wyl, syth the maker came not for to do his wyll, but yt wyll of his fader, obeyng to creatures in erth in ye name of his fader. Trust right well syster, that if thou obey lowly to thy souerayns, thou obeyest to god. At the begynnyng of thy obedy∣ence yu yeldest thyn handes in to thy souerayns handes, in token that she myght lede the vertu∣ously whyder she wyll. Saynt Bernard sayth
a very obedyent yeldeth to his souerayns han∣des bothe his wyll and his nyll, in his obedyē∣ce makyng, so that suche one excludeth hymsel∣fe of euer eyther for euermore, and wyll doo vt∣terly as his souerayn wyll. It is not right gre¦te meryte for to obey alway in such thynges as pleaseth, but rather in suche thynges that dys∣pleaseth / therin lyeth grete meryte, yt is whan ony harde thyng or greuous thyng is cōmaun∣ded for to be done, whiche an obedyencer dooth gladly with grete repugnaunce of ye self wyll. There is no sacry fyce that man dooth, be it in watching / fastyng / and other goostly and body¦ly exercyses so acceptable to our lorde, as is su∣che obedyence. Nor there is nothyng that so dis¦pleaseth our lorde, and deserueth tourment, as dooth self wyll and vnobedyence, for it dishono¦reth our lorde, and withdraweth from hym yt is his, that is self wyl. as saynt Austyn sayth. ❧ None ought to haue selfe wyll but god. To hym it longeth proprely. ☞ As for the seconde thyng whiche longeth to a relygious tree that is planted in relygion is watrynge. Syster yu must be moysted and watred, yf the rote of me¦kenesse shold vertuously encrease, that is with the holy water of cōpūccion reducyng & bryn∣gyng to thy mynd mekely syn̄es that thou hast done, good dedes yt thou hast left vndone, tyme
that thou hast lost, and payne that thou hast de¦serued. Thus after the councell of saynt Grego¦ry consyder .iiij. thnnges. which .iiij. yf they be holly consydered may gendre in the veray com∣punction, and gracyous moysture, for the wa¦tring of the very rote of mekenesse. ❧ Fyrst is, thynke where thou hast ben / where thou arte now / where thou shalt be / and where thou art not yet. where thou hast ben, thynke thou hast ben conceyued in synne / borne in synne / & after / warde greuously fallen in synne, where yu arte now. Thynke that thou arte in this wretched vale of mournyng lyuyng but a lytell tyme, cō∣syderynge the tyme that euer shall last in ioye. And than thynke that this vale is full of myse∣ry and wretchednesse, whiche is proued better by experyence than I can tell it / where yu shalte thynke that within a fewe dayes haply thou shalt be deed, and than be brought before thy iu¦ge, yeldyng accompt to hym there of al thy wer¦kes: dedes: and thoughtes, whiche were neuer by confessyon counted here, or in wyll to be con∣fessed therof. And thynke also the styryng wor∣des oftentymes of saynt Anselme, which may styre the moche to compunction, saynge thus to thy self as he sayth. ☞ Thou vnfruytfull tree where be now thy fruytes of vertue? O drye tre and vnprofitable, worthy to be cast in to the
fyre. How shalt thou answere at the daye of iu∣gement, where shalbe ared of all the space and tyme of thy lyfe? how it hath benspent / yea vn¦to the leest twynkling of thyn eye. Than shalbe demed and condempned that is founde in the of ony ydle worke, ydle worde, or vn{pro}fytable scy¦lence, vnto the leest thought of thyn hert / but if it be amended here, and satysfyed by in warde sorowe and compunction. ☞ Lo syster this is a harde sentence. therfore I pray you wasshe all thy defautes away, whyles thou arte here, by water of compūction, ❧ The thyrde is / to haue in mynde where thou art not yet. Thyn∣ke syster by the mercy of our lorde thou shalt co¦me vnto his blysse, where thou arte not yet / to the whiche he made the. For the whiche with his precious blode he bought the▪ and for ye whi¦che I hope thou hast forsaken all the fals dely¦tes of this wretched worlde / and hast closed vp perpetually thy self in religion. O syster it we∣re ryght mery oft to haue in mynde the swete wordes of the prophete Dauyd, whiche saynt Austyn expoundeth, and ben these. Meius est dies vna in atrijs tuis et super milia. O, sayth saynt Austyn, good lord better is one day in thy heuēly halle, than a thousand here. There is so grete plenty of fayrnesse, of swetnesse, of glad∣nesse, of goostly myrth, and haboundaūce of shy∣nyng
lyght endlesly. That yf it were lefull noo lenger to dwell there than one houre in a day, for that houre alone all the yeres of this wret∣ched lyfe / though they were as full of all ma∣ner wretched delyces, pleasures, or delytes, & haboundaunce of temporall goodes, they may lawfully be dyspysed, & set at nought. For our lorde hymselfe is there all ioye and blysse. And he it is, that gloryously there shall fulfyll all ye capacyte of a soule, by clere knowȳg of trouth, by ioyful fruycion of his souerayne goodnesse / and by sue beholdyng of his endlesse felycyte. He also it is, that shall there gloryfy the body, in foure maner of goostly clothes / that is with the stoole of mine cayle, neuer after to deye. with the stoole of vnpalsibylite / neuer after to suffre passyon nor payne. with the stoole of agy¦lyte / euer to be swyfter than a thought. And with ye stoole of subtylyte / euer to be as subtyll as a soule wtout pōderosyte. ☞ Lo syster what myrth and ioye is in yt place ordeyned for clene soules, and bodyes vndefyled. Thyder I pray the cast thy goostly eye, and thynke on the fyrst stoole of imortalyte, sorowynge for thy synnes in place where thou hast ben. ¶ Thynke on ye second stoole of vnpassy bylyte / sorowynge for thy myseryes, & wretchednesse that thou suf∣fred in this presēt lyfe where thou arte nowe.
¶ Thynke also on the thyrde stole of agylyte or swyftnesse, and sorow lamentably for the dre∣de of strayt ingement in place where thou shalt be. And thynkyng on the fourth stole of subtyly¦e, sorowe for the long delay of eternall felycyte and ioye of heuen, where yu shalt be. And doubt not syster yf thou inwardly desyre these thyng{is} thou shalt rather haue lust to wepe than to doo ony thyng elles. Beleue it well thou shalt haue more conforte in suche wepyng, than euer thou haddest in laughyng, so that thou mayst say to our lorde god with the prophete Dauyd thus.  eundum multitudinem dolo♃ in corde meo consolationis tue letificauerunt animam meā. That is. Lo lorde Iesu the multytude of my so wes were neuer so grete many hert, but that  grete heuenly confortes hath moche more gladded my soule. Thynke this veryly syster yt we neuerred that our lorde laughed, but many tymes he wept we rede not for hiself he wept, but for vs, in tokening that as long as we be in this wofull vale of teares, we sholde euer be so∣rowful for wepyngly we came into this worl¦de, and with payne we lyue, & at last with pay∣ne the soule shall departe from the body. ❧ If thou moyst thus syster) the rotes of mekenesse with water of compunction, thou shalt haue ye mery blyssyng whiche our blyssed lorde graun∣ted
in his testament to all suche compuncte her∣tes, where he sayth thus. Beati qui nūc fletis quia ridebitis. Blissed be ye yt now wepe here, for ye shall after this be full mery with me. ¶ Now the thyrde thyng that I spake of is ye spredyng abrode of the braunches of a relygy∣ous tree planted in our lordes gardin / by ye whi¦che thou shalt vnderstande charyte. For lyke as braunches in a tree spreden abrode, so shold cha¦ryte in relygion. So syster must thou do after ye depe rotes of mekenesse, & after the water of ve¦ry compunction, thou must extende thy braun¦ches of charite, that bothe in dede and wyll yu lo¦ue all creatures in our lorde, or for our lorde. For he that hath charyte hath all goodnesse, & ma∣keth all others goodnes his goodnes, as saynt Austyn sayth. Such one presumeth neuer prou¦dely agaynst other / for he holdeth all other bet¦ter than hymselfe. Suche one hath none enuy to other. for yf he lacke goodnesse, he fyndeth it by charyte in other. Suche ont kepeth neyther yre nor hate in his herte / for chary tably he for∣gyueth lyghtly. Thus by charyte synnes ben¦hyd, as the apostle sayth. Caritas operit mul¦titudmem peccatorum. That is. suche charyte hydeth the multitude of syn̄es / for it destroyeth them. Syster suche charyte thou must haue in relygion to all, and namely to thy systers, in la∣boryng
for them, in supportyng of theyr char∣ges / and if thou mayst not, than pray for them. for without suche charyte there is nothyng so acceptablene merytoryous to god, whiche ma∣keth heuēly chyldren to be knowen fro worldly chyldrē, as doctours say en vpon the text, whe∣re our lorde sayth to his dyseyples. In hoc co∣gnoscēt omnes qd mei discipuli estis: si dilectio∣nem habueritis ad inuicem. ☞ In that sayth our lorde, ye shall be knowen for my dyscyples and for my chyldren yf ye haue loue and chary∣te eche with other. For as saynt Austyn sayth, he that kepeth charyte in his owne lyuyng, he it is that hath fully the law within him, bothe the mysteryall felyng therof, and also the play∣ne vnderstandyng. But now for bycause saynt Paule sayeth. Caritas non agit perperam. Charyte dooth nothynge frowardly, nor wyc∣kedly he sayth, but ryghtwysly, and ordynat∣ly. I councell the beware (as moche as thou mayst) that thou offende none in erthe. And yf thou offende ony persone, anone lowely meke thy selfe, and aske forgyuenesse. Be no stryuer in wordes in ony congregacyon. Nor vse thy tō¦gue to speke wordes of foly, or folyshly, ne fals wordes. for as saynt Austyn sayth. ¶ what so euer is sayd or doone agaynst conscyence, it edy¦tyeth and buyldeth to hell warde. Somtyme
it is lefull to hyde trouthe / but it was neuer le∣full to say fals. If it happen the somtyme of ly¦ghtnes to here of ony persone ony euyll tale, be well ware among other cōmunycacion it passe the not / ne in no wyse thou breke not out with∣all. To here and lytell to speke it is a good tokē, and namely of yong folke. If thou hast benacu¦stomed to here or to speke euyll afore the tyme that thou entrest in to relygion, thou art nowe more bounde to kepe thy tōgue. What is relygi∣on without resteynyng of the tongue? The sen¦tēce of ye holy apostle Iames is this. Si qs pit tat se religiosū esse non reseruās linguā suā, sed seducens cor suū, huius vana est religio. That is. He that weneth he be a religious man or wo¦man / & refreyneth not his tōgue, his religion is nought worth. for such one deceyueth his own hert, whiche shold be occupyed with vertuous scylence. If yu wylt be a true relygious woman speke scantly in thyn owne cause. as Salomō sayth. Adolescens vix ī tua causa loq̄re. That is to say. Thou yong man scantly speke in thy owne cause. Therfore it is that our lorde hath gyuen a man and a woman two eares, and one tōgue, yt they shold be redy to here, and lothe to speke. Be therfore seld rare in wordes, neyther dysputer, nor defender of maters. If thou be blamed ryghtfully or wrongfully / be it of thy
systers, or of thy souerayns. yf thou wylt be a veray ouercomer of the herte, lerne for to suffre mekely. & all this is for kepyng of charite. Cha¦ryte is better kept in scylence than in speche. I pray the therfore kepe vertuously scilēce in cloy¦ster / frater / dorter / and quere, and in all tymes and places. After complyn aboue all thyngrs lo¦ke that thou kepe specially than scilence, but yf be for grete ineuytable nede, and yet with lea¦ue yf yu mayst. And as soone as thy nede is done than cease. Be neuer pryuely mony place with ony persone, wherof myght aryse obloquye. es∣chue this as moche as thou canst. Be well wa∣re in ony wyse that no maner deformyte in thy lyuyng, neyther of carnalite nor of worldlynes blot or dymynys she charyte, whiche is the ve∣ry ornament or arayment of all relygyous ly∣nyng. No carnal loue sholde be among you, but spyrituall, or for spyritual loue. Of carnall and flesshely loue it nedeth me not moche to speke of at this tyme / for it shold be to all relygious fol∣ke moche abhomynable, and lothsome to here. But there is one maner of loue, whiche is coue¦red vnder colour of charite, and feyneth him for to haue zeale of vertue, as is loue affectionate, not fully spyrituall, but it is myngled or myxte with carnalite. All suche louers do delyte to spe¦ke oft togyder / whiche alway is not of goostly
thynges. And yf it be sōtymes of goostly thyn∣ges a lytell in the begynnyng, anone or soone af¦ter it is chaunged in to worldly thynges. God graunt it be no wors / that is into carnall thyn¦ges. What euyll hath come of suche affectiona∣te loue, god knoweth / which knoweth all pry∣ue thynges, and to whome nothyng is hydde. This loue, for as moche as it hath his fyrst be¦gynnyng of the assent of the flesshe by affectiō, it is more flesshely than goostly. And it is well knowen of suche that haue had this maner of loue in experyence, how moche a soule is distra¦cte, which is encombred in such carnall affecti∣on. Grete sclaūdre aryseth therof, though thou be enclosed. Thou hast nede to be well ware of sclaundre, for yt crepeth out of an vnclosed hous meruelously. I say not this for to lete the of thy goostly cōmunycacion, as moche as longeth to cōfessyon / nor to be relygyously mery with thy systers / namely with suche ye morne euery day after our lorde / & syng mornyngly in theyr her¦tes thus. Ubi cubas, vbi pascis in meridie. That is. Lorde where is thy resting place, and where doost yu fede at noone tyme. As though they myght say thus. ☞ Good lorde I desyre to wite in what hertes / and in whose hertes of feruent loue and charyte hast thou thy restyng place? and in what place art thou fed with swe¦tenesse
and deuocion. with suche cōmyn oft, for they may set the on fyre, and brenne the all in lo¦ue. All such desyre for to be departed out of this worlde, and be with theyr forde Iesu. with all suche I wolde thou had thy specyall cōmuny∣cation. with all other thou mayst speke by the way of charyte, though thou kepe cōmunycati¦on, not with them so specyally as thou doost wt other / so it be doone measurably after the place and tyme without offence and euyll suspytion. Therfore it is that saynt Ierome sayth in a py¦stle hat he wryteth to Nepotianum, where he sayth thus. ☞ Beware he sayth of all maner suspiciō that may be feyned on the, erthan it be feyned eschue it. Thy swetenesse / thy lyght / & thy desyre shold be thy spouse Iesu chryst. On holy days whan folke desyre to speke with the eschue al maner ydle tales, or soone charytably take thy leue. For I assure the it is ful perillous to cōmyn moche with ony, specially with secu∣ler people, and namely of men / but it be for goo∣stly instruction. and yet loke it be of no long tari¦eng, but in short wise speke as is best to ye helth of soule, and honeste of lyuing. What shold nede maydens of religion to haue often communyca¦cion with men. but it be onely whan goostli coū¦cell is required, or confession. And yet I con̄cell the syth thou shalt be oft confessed, vse no longe
abydinge in confession / rather come the ofter. Presume neuer to moche of thy clene conscien∣ce▪ nor of thy chastyte. For trust me right well presumpcion of chastyte and oportunyte hathe torned many a clene soule to euyll. ☞ Trust ne¦uer so moche to thy self, weuing that thou hast ouercome all maner of styringes of fleshly syn∣nes, though our lorde of his grete mercy hathe keptthe vnto this tyme. For if thou haue no sty¦rynge now, drede to haue in tyme for to come. ¶ Saynt Gregory sayth. Euery chosen soule eyther in his begynnynge, or in his myddle ae∣ge, or in his last dayes shall suffre temptacyon. In his begynnyng suche shall suffre temptaci∣on easely. In his mydell cōuersacyon suche one shall suffre temptacion more greuously but in his laste dayes suche shall suffre temptaciō mo¦ste greuously. Therfore beware of communica¦cion. For suche thynges do let the braunches of charyte to be spredde abrode. ¶ If thou wylt also sprede abrode thy charyte, I wolde thou sholdest gladly fulfyll and stoppe fawtes in dy¦uyne seruyce, for ease of thy systers, as moche as in the is possible. Desyre neuer therfore ony praysyng nor fauoure of ony creature, but one∣ly of almyghty god. For one thynge I shall tell the that what soeuer he be that desyreth for to becommended and praysed of other persones,
Somtyme he shalbe moche made of. somtyme lytell / somtyme nought. And where that suche one for his charytable dedes sholde receyue of our lorde grete rewarde in heuen, al is blowen away with the blast of a man̄es mouthe. Alas ye suche dysceyuable worldly prayse or fauour shall so deceyue a soule, and defraude him from heuenly, and perpetuall graces. It is not all wt¦out cause that Salomon calleth all worldly fa∣uour deceyuable graces. For who that trusteth sore vpon suche graces, it may stand a whyle / but at last it shall fall, bycause his ground is fe∣ble. ❧ Therfore syster whan thou art eyther praysed or blamed euer renne to thy cōscyence, hauyng in mynd the wordes of saynt Austyn / were he sayth that a true conscyence may ney∣ther be hurt by wronges, ne be holpen by fals praysynges. Also as for thy meate and drynke shewe thy charite of suche that is set afore the. Holde the content without grudgyng, and fede the therof without superfluyte, thankyng our lorde. For as saynt Gregory sayth. Meate and drynke sholde be taken as a medycyn, onely for nede, and not in superfluyte or in voluptuosyte. Therfore be not soo gredy vpon thy meate and drynke, but that euer our lorde be thanked ther¦fore. And more set thy hert to gyue attendaūce to ye lesson which is red among you, than to thy
bodyly meate. So that with refresshing of thy body, thy soule may also be refresshed. Thinke also that thou eatest synnes of thy founder / god rest his soule, and other benefactours, whiche haue endued your monastery, or by whose goo¦des ye be endued to pray for them. thou art boū¦de so to pray for theyr soules. ¶ Also in places of solace and recreacyon, shew thy charyte and sprede thy braūches abrode whan thou takest (in the gardyn with thy systers) bodyly recrea¦cyon, cōmyn there of some maner of edyficacy∣on. or here some good thyng which may edyfy thy soule. And bicause oftentymes after meate many ben dysposed to lyghtnesse, and to vnrely¦gious myrthes, I pray the as moche as thou mayst eschue that. And yf thou here ony bachy¦tyng or dyshonest communycation, (as I hope there is no such thynges vsed among maydēs) do thy dylygence, or do that lyeth in the to tur∣ne suche maters vnto better cōmunycacyons. And yf thou mayst not, relygyously go thens / lest thou be {per}tyner of theyr synnes. All by sho∣nest playes I forbyd the, for moch euyl cometh of such dysportes. Neuertheles holy disportes for recreation bothe of body and of soule is nede full, somtyme for to be had / so that it be done so brely, sadly, and relygiously. And that ye herers and seers may rather be edifyed than sclaundre
in it. For our lordes loue syster, spend thy tyme profytably & deuoutly. There is none so greate a losse, as is the losse of tyme. Another thynge yf it be loste, may be founden agayne / but tyme whā it is lost, may neuer be foūde agayn. Thin¦ke therfore why thou comest to relygion. I tro we for the profyte of thyn owne soule, & of thin ordre. It is not ynough for the onely to entre re¦ligion for thyn owne profite, except thou do thy dyligence in lernynge that thou may be able to further thine ordre by connyng, as other of thy sisters done. And though thou mayst not come to connyng anone, leaue not therfore, though yu sholdest euery day lerne right lytel. For hasty cō¦nyng wexeth soone drye, but easily and soking∣ly won̄e encreaseth, and abideth. Loke thou be in ony wyse euer well occupyed, in some chary∣table occupacion, that the goostly enmy the fen¦de fynde the not ydle. ☞ Idlenesse is the moost hyndrynge that thou mayst haue to thy soule. moche sorowe cometh therof. If thou be wery in redyng, refresshe thy soule by prayer, or me∣ditacion, or in some other vertuous and charita¦ble werkes. Now rede, now pray / now labour besily. and so shall thy houre be shorte, and thy labour light. ¶ Thus moche syster I haue spo¦ken of the spredinge abrode of the braunches of charite. ☞ I sayd also of the fourth properte
which lōgeth to a tree, that is how it groweth on hye. ❧ After tyme thou arte mekely roted in relygion / and graciously watred by compun∣ction, and than spred abrode by braūches of cha¦rite, thou hast nede, or it is expedyent for the to be enhaunced in deuocion by contemplacion vn to heuen, ☞ But fyrst if a tree shold grow hye the water bowes is nothyng els, but cuttynge away the superfluite of temporall goodes in dy¦spising them. Therfore sister, lyke as thou hast forsaken all outwarde worldly goodes, for the loue of heuenly goodes. so now put them out of thy mynde, as moche as thou mayst / and haue mynde of the vowe of pouerte, not to haue one pynne mo to thy heed than is taxed in thy holy rule. Be none other in thy soule, than yu apperest outwarde in thyn habyte. For of al synnes ypo¦crisy is a peryllous synne / namely amonge re∣lygious folke. Good sister be well ware of that cursed synne ypocrisy / and kepe the from al ma¦ner curyosite, and superfluyte, whiche ben ve∣ry deedly enmyes to the holy pouerte of relygi∣gion. ☞ whan ony maner temptacyon of worldely couetousnesse is at ony tyme presented vn∣to thy soule, anone haue mynd of the moost blis¦sed pouerte of our worthy sauyour Iesu chryst thy chosen spouse, and of the moost holy virgin his moder, in worshyp of whome thy relygion
is grounded. Of the pouerte of Chryst and his blyssed moder, beryth wytnesse the poore cryb and few clothes which he was wrapped in at his byrth. Se now what pouerte he suffred in his begynnyng / and also all the tyme of his be∣yng in this lyfe. who was euer poorer thā he? For he sayth hymself in his holy gospell. Uul∣pes foueas habent, et volucres celi nidos: fili{us} autem homims non habet vbi caput suum recli¦net. That is. Foxes (he sayth) haue dennes and holes to hyde them in. and byrdes haue nestes, but the sone of the vyrgyn is soo poore in erthe that he hath not wherin he maylye his heed. Also that he loued pouerte at his endynge, that is in his passyon / the blyssed crosse whiche he hyng vpon bereth wytnesse. where herde euer ony man or woman that ony body in his dethe (what passyon soeuer he shall suffre)▪ sholde be denied his clothes for to couer them wt. Or if he axed drynke, shold it not be gyuen to hym? yes rather than fayle water. But our lorde Chryst Iesu in his holy passyon hong naked vpon the crosse. And whan he was athyrst tasted galle with eysell for his drynk. Lo syster where her∣dest thou euer an hyer pouerte. ☞ Of this po∣uerte and other suche thou must haue mynde, yt thou mayst suffre the better pouerte of relygy∣on. If thou hast meate and drynke & clothyng,
and a boke to loke vpon / it is inough to the. And yf thou hast more than these, and namely more than is assigned in thy rule. or more than yu hast leue of thy souerayne to haue, thinke that thou arte ryght ferre from our lordes blyssed pouer¦te / and his holy moder. ¶ Good syster folowe this holy pouerte, that thou mayst deserue for to haue that kyngdom whiche is ordeyned for poore in spyryte / as our blyssed lorde {pro}myseth hymself, where he sayth. Bearti pauperes spi∣ritu, quoniam ipsorum est regnum celorum. Blyssed be tho (he sayth) that be poore in spyry¦te, for theyrs of ryght is the kyngdom of heuē, for theyr herytage. If thus thy water bowes be lopped away, thou mayst growe ryght hye in deuocyon, and contemplation. ¶ what shol∣de be thy hye growyng? Truely but deuocyon in prayers. For as doctours sayen, prayer is no thyng els, but ascension or lyftyng vp of ye sou∣le to god by deuocyon. which is deuyded & par∣ted in two partes / that is in to vocall prayer, & mentall prayer. Vocall prayer is prayer made by mouthe, accordyng with the soule. Mentall prayer is all onely of the soule or mynde, with sylde spekyng of the mouthe. To vocall prayer yt is euery day to serue our lorde Iesus, and his blyssed moder. in sayng matyns, pryme, tierce sext, none, euensong, & complyn, thou art boūde
by thy relygion, but yf thou be lawfully letted. And therfore to these, I councell the to haue a zeale and a loue to say them distinctly and apert¦ly, with a pronoūcyng of thy wordes, gyuing therto the intent of thyn herte / so that thy tōge be not in the quere, and thyn herte in the town. In suche sayenges (as moche as thou mayst) eschewe distraction. And that thou may so do, make there dy afore, after the councell of Salo∣mon where he sayth thus. Fili accedēs ad ser¦uitutem dei sta in timore & prepara animam tu¦am ad temptationē. That is▪ whan thou goest to the seruice of god, stande there in drede, & ma∣ke redy thy soule for to withstand temptacion. For than wycked spirites ben right besy for to let deuout soules from the good spede of prayer by immyssions of theyr subtyll temptacyons. we haue neuer so many temptatyōs whan we be out of the quere, as whan we be in the quere of gods seruyce. ❧ Therfore I councel the for eschewyng of all euagacions, cast downe thyn eyes vnto a certayn place all the tyme of dyui∣ne seruyce, be it nyght be it day, ymaginyng in thy herte as though yu se lyeng afore the Christ Iesu streyned vpon the crosse. And he with the crosse togyder lyft vpon hygh with woundes bledyng. And in that lyfting, than lift vp thyn tyes suynge after, and renne from wounde to
wounde, and so sigh and sob pryuely. Now for the nayles, now for the thorns, now for the spe¦te, now for the crowne, now for the fete, now for the handes / and so thanke him for his pas∣syon whiche he suffred for the. ¶ And among all suche goostly medytacions, loke in (ones or ofter if thou mayst) and entre in to his herte by the wounde of his syde, wherin thou shalt fyn¦de all maner treasour of pyte. There are harbo towe for charyte, and in the name of god entre a goddes behalfe. Quenche thy thurste there with plente of haboundaunce of his moost blis∣sed blode. For he sayth hymselfe. Quiscitit ve¦niat ad me et bibat. He that thursteth, come to me and drynk, Of suche deuocion in dyuine ser¦uyce our lorde is hyghly pleased. Blyssed aun∣gelles nygh at hand to such a soule / and not one¦ly aungels, but also our lorde hymselfe speketh to suche a soule thus occupied, & sayth. Dough¦ter aske what thou wylte, and thou shalt haue it. ☞ O, now is this a voyce of grete ioye and gladnesse. Answere agayne, and say to hym in thy thought. Lorde I desyre nothyng els, but that I and all tho which trusten, and shal trust vpon thy grete mercy, may be admytted amon¦ges thy chosen people in thy heuenly blysse. And as the holy prophete Dauyd sayth. Ad let andum in leticia gentes tue.
For to ioye in gladnesse among thy chosen peo∣ple. ☞ Lo syster suche thoughtes (whyle thou standest indyuyne seruyce) sholde fyll thy hert with so moche gladnesse, loue, and swetenesse / that thou shalt be lothe to thynke on ony other thynge vnder god. Also yf thou myghtest haue medytacion than of his blissed moder Mary en¦tryng in to the quere, beryng Iesu her blyssed sone in her holy armes / vysytig now one, now another, ye syngen deuoutly and corageously in dyuine seruyce, without dulnes or slepynes. o∣uerpassing all suche that ben sluggisshe and ste¦py, or slouthfull, without confortable vysitacy¦on, it sholde cause the to be the more quycker, & deuouter. For afore feruent syngers with glad hertes praysyng and louyng theyr maker Ie∣su her blyssed sone with deuocyon, she standeth long styll and beholdeth them face to face. And so gladly to the mayde, & to al thy maydenly sy¦sters wyll offre her blyssed sone, yt ye may ioy∣fully clyppe ye chylde, kysse that chylde, enbra∣ce that chylde to your clene brestes. O now is this a mery medytacyon for maydens. whan thou hast long had this holy chylde in thyn ar∣mes, beholde now and se how deuoutly the mo¦der receyueth her blyssed sone agayne. Knele doune in thy soule sister I pray the than, & dely¦uer ye blyssed chylde to his blyssed moder, for she
must now goo for to chere other of thy systers, Be not sory though other be gladded as well as thou. Se now how she gooth full mayden∣ly for to vysite other of thy systers. And this is not ones, but oftentymes, whyles ye be at ma∣tyns, and at all other tymes and houres. And whan she hath so done, se now how the chylde by the prayers of his blyssed moder lyfteth vp his holy hande and blysseth you all namely su¦che as singen with a corage, sauourly & deuout¦ly. ☞ Lo syster, I trowe veryly that suche me¦dytacyons (yf they be deuoutly cōceyued in thy soule) shold put away dulnes in psalmody / eua¦gacyons, and dystractions / slepynesse / slouth / & suche other temptacions indyuyne seruyce. Al so whan ony maner of carnall thoughtes crepe in to thyn herte in tyme of gods seruyce, anone crye in thyn hert, knockyng and crossyng pry¦uely thy brest. and say thus. Cor mundū crea in me deus. Lorde I praye the forme in me a clene herte. I doubt not syster yf it be a fleshly thought with suche grete cryeng and crossyng it wyll ryght soone auoyde. Also yf thou wylt eschue laughyng in dyuine seruyce, I pray the kepe well thy syght. And yf it happe somtyme that yu be wery by long abydynge in gods seruy¦ce, thynke that for euery verse our lorde wyll re¦warde the in heuen a thousand yere and mo.
¶ Myghtyly therfore and dyligently laboure in the seruyce of almighty god after thy might and saye to our lorde in thyn herte thus. If I more might, more I wolde. That I haue lord I gyue the. Beleue veryly sister, our blissed lor¦de Iesu crist thy chosen spouse acceptyth thys gyfte for a worthy gyfte and a greate. In this wyse syster thou maist ascende vp vnto god by deuocion in vocall prayers, and also in mentall prayers, that is by suche holy meditacion in ty¦me of diuyne saruice, bothe in redyng and syn∣gyng. I mene not to be an hygh synger, but for to be a deuout synger and a herty synger. For in our lordes care sowneth not the crye, but the lo¦ue. not the voyce, but the hert and wyl for to la¦bour in his seruyce for his loue. Lo sister, thus mayst thou be a good singer, though thou be no high synger. He syngeth high whome our lor∣de hereth. ¶ Also sister whan thou arte at our lady masse, there behaue the deuoutly and reue¦rently. And thynke how somtyme whan thou were in the worlde, with what reuerence, and what dyligence thou seruedest an erthly lorde, or an erthly lady, onely for to eschue theyr dys∣pleasure, and for to wynne theyr benyuolence. So now do thy dylygēce or indeuour with mo¦che more reuerence, and more dylygence for to serue our heuenly lorde, and our heuenly lady,
in herȳg of her holy masse, and of all other mas¦ses. For to such holy seruyce thou hast now ful¦ly commytted the, wherfore thou shalt haue a grete rewarde. what rewarde is that wenest thou? Truely Iesu hymself shall be thy mede, and thy rewarde. ☞ O, now is this a grete re∣warde, for so lytell a labour. Aboue all thynges therfore I praye the, in tyme of herynge of thy masses, refreyne the from all maner vnreueren¦ce and dissolucion. For be ryght sure yf thou ha¦ue more deuocyon in heryng of that masse than the preste hath that singeth or sayth the masse, thou shalt receyue more grace of that blyssed sa¦crament than he ¶ On saterdayes, or on other solempne dayes whan thou shalt be cōmuned, than do all thyn inwarde & outwarde dylygēce goostly and bodily to receyue that blyssed sacra¦ment with all maner sadnesse and deuociō. But aboue all thynges make fyrst a clene conscience by confessyon. Be often cōfessyd and mekely, & in suche wyse that thy cōfessour may moost cle¦rely vnderstande the. So that by oft vsynge of bothe these sacramentes of penaunce and how∣selyng, purete, clennes, and deuocion may euer encrease and be kept in the ¶ In what wyse yu mayst best & moost deuoutly dispose the to that moost holy sacrament after pure confessyon, I wolde thou axed it of our lorde god, and than ye
holy goost shal teache the. But yet sōwhat shall I say to styre the for to receyue that blyssed sa∣crament deuoutly, and it shall be but a short les∣son. ¶ Fyrst thynke how lytell thou art in his syght, whiche holdeth vp bothe the and all the worlde. In this thought as moche as yu mayst set thy self at nought. Haue in mynde also how euery day thou synnest, & therfore thynke thy selfe ryght vyle and wretched, and all vnwor∣thy for to receyue that blyssed sacrament. And in this thought thynke that though thou had∣dest be about to make the redy a thousand yere afore, it had ben lytel ynough, as for so worthy a sacramēt. Thynke also that thou art vnwor¦thy for to loke vp into heuen, and to them that lyue in heuen, or heuenly. Therfore cōsydering thy vnworthynesse, long afore or thou receyue that blyssed sacrament, caste doune thyn eye in to purgatory, where paynes be ordeyned for to purge synners. Among all thynke on some pay¦ne there ordeyned for thy syn̄es, and for thy tre¦spaces / where peraduenture thou art worthy to lye vnto the day of dome / were not the grete mercy of our lorde god. Therfore thynke thus, and say alway in thyn hert before thou go to re¦ceyue that holy sacrament. O lorde yf a thou∣sand yere suffyse not a soule to be worthyly re∣dy to receyue this blyssed body and blode, good
lorde haue mercy on me that soo vnworthily & vnredyly come therto, which am a ryght wret¦ched creature, dayly synnyng, & not amēdyng. O. good lorde Iesu there is no stynkyng fylthe fouler than my soule is, for to receyue thy blys∣sed body and blode. I beseche the lord make so∣me ryuer of compunction fyrst to renue by that foule stynking pyt of my soule to wasshe away the fylth or that thou entre. O lorde, I dare not els put the there. Now blyssed be thou good lor¦de, I fynde grete confort in thy mercy, I wote well now without ony comparyson thyn infy¦nyte mercy is more than all my wyckednesse. And therfore through the felyng of that heuen∣ly grace, which thou hast now indued my soule trustyng onely vpon thy benygne mercy, I go to receyue it as a seke body to a leache, that thy blyssed goostly medycin may make my seke sou¦le hole. The seker that I am lorde, the more ne∣de haue I to come to the, that thy greate pyte & mercy may be shewed in me, by delyueraunce of my synnes. Vpon this trust lorde I come to the. for thy mercyes (I wote well) be infynite. There lorde I shal fynde heuenly delycates, in the whiche delycates I purpose euer to dwell, in the lorde and in none other Soo feruently I wyll set my hert as I wyll of the euer for to ha¦ue ioy with the withouten ende. ☞ Lo syster
by suche short meditacions, and other lyke the∣se, thou mayst clense thy herte and thy soule wt rennyng ryuers of very compunction. Before yu go to receyue that blyssed sacrament, say also in thy herte (yf yu haue leyser in thy goyng thus.) O, I that am powdre and asshes, shall I now go to my lorde? Than answere agayne, and say with a reuerēt mekenesse. yea, that shall I, as an vnprofitable seruaunt gooth to his benygne mayster. And as an hongry soule gooth to his meate. And as a seke man gooth to his leache. Say also as saynt Austyn sayth. My lorde, my mercy, my refuge, my desire. to the I come, for I may not helpe my selfe with myn own wer¦kes. And therfore lorde releue me / socour me / & haue mercy on me. I mystrust of my merytes / but I trust in thy grete mercyes more, than I mystrust of myn euyl dedes. Lord thou art my hope. To the alone I haue syn̄ed. mercy lorde. ☞ Many folke vse to saye, longe afore they be houseled, the .vij. psalmes of penaunce, with a etany. Prayeng to all those sayntes for helpe. which psalmes saynt Austyn toke out of ye psal¦ter, and set them togyder. And named thē psal∣mes of penaūce. It is a good deuociō for to say. I wyll not charge the withall, considering the contynual labour that thou hast in thyn ordre. ¶ Thynke also on the grete charite whiche he
sheweth to synners / in gyuyng his blyssed bo∣dy to them for theyr goostly helthe, and goostly meate. And that it is very goostly meate, he pro¦ueth it well hymselfe, where he sayth thus. Caromea, vere est cibus, et sanguis meus, ve¦re est pot{us} ¶ My flesshe, sayth he, is very mea¦te / & my blode is very drynk. ☞ This is ye mea¦te whiche is fygured by that manna in the old testament, which had all maner of delyce, & all maner sauour of swetenesse. yt at the last shal be gyuen to thy grete mede and rewarde of euerla¦styng blysse. as he sayth hymselfe thus. Qui manducat meam caruem & bibit meum sangui¦nem, habet vitam eternam. That is. He that re¦ceyueth my flesshe & drȳketh my blode, shal ha¦ue for his hye rewarde euerlastyng lyfe, here by grace, & after this lyfe by ioye. ¶ Now sy∣ster after ye gracious receyuynge of his blyssed sacramēt / thanke our lorde for ye grete benefite, & say thus in thy herte. Inuem quē diligit aia mea tenebo eū et nō dimittā. ye is. I haue found whome my soule loueth, now shal I kepe him. & neuer shall I leue hym. And for bycause it is called a sacrament of loue. I wold thou prouy∣dysted some maner of prayers of loue, whiche might styre ye poynt of thy loue, as is this ory∣sō. Dule{is} iesus memoria. or such other. & than I drede not but thou shalt fele grete deuocyon.
¶ O, good syster, somtyme my goostly dough∣ter, I pray the than for to desyre of thy spouse for me one drop of that deuocion. I wolde also thou sholde desyre of him suche deuocion for all my goostly frendes. Among all other of thy de∣uocion and vocall prayers, it were a medefull sayeng for to saye. Placebo, & Dirige. at leest wt thre psalmes, thre lessons, and laudes. thyn∣kyng that thou hast thy lyuelode of them yt per¦aduenture lyen in paynes of purgatory. which paynes as some doctours done say, passeth all the paynes of the world, and is more greuous. ¶ This thou myghtest vse well at after none, whan thou walkest in the gardyn. And thynke that he were an vnkynde frende, & a ryght cru¦ell, whiche myght se the in a brennynge fyre, & were in his power for to delyuer the, and wyll not. Truly ryght soo our lorde hath graunted ye one frende in erth may delyuer his frēde in pur¦gatory, by deuout prayers & other goostly mea¦nes / If suche one be neclygēt, his frende in pur¦gatory may well thynke yt suche one is rather a cruell enmy than a frende. Sende therfore in spare tymes thy prayers to our lorde for them that ben in purgatory / recommendyng to hym thy kynne, thy founders, benefactours of thy monastery, and all other which ben passed out of this worlde. Lo sister all this before is sayd
moche of bocall prayer, & lytell of mentall pra∣yers. For euer amonges all goostly exercyses prayer is a holy meane. Vocall prayer & men∣tall prayer they two ben so nygh of kynne that the one is neuer founde without the other. If vocall prayer haue chefe occupacion, medytaci¦on medleth somwhat with hym. And yf medy¦tacion haue chefe occupacion, than prayer bre∣keth out among. And therfore in as moch as it is longyng to prayer, somwhat shall I say of mentall prayer, whiche is called medytacion. And also for to styre the whan thou arte alone, how thou shalte be occupyed in medytacion. ¶ Syster, suche mentall prayer by medytaci∣on is ryght swete, merytorious, and precyous to a deuout soule / but right few vse it, and that is pyte. And as saynt Hue sayth in a boke whi¦che he maketh of the maner of suche medytaty¦ue prayer, that such prayers is called deuociō, purely of the soule, which is a very tornyng in to god, by meke and mylde affection, By this yu mayst knowe that medytacion sholde be meke, by consyderacyon of hym that so prayeth. Of this we fynd a good example by the publycane in the gospell, whiche in his herte prayed. sub∣myttyng thy self (mekely to god) a very syn̄er. sayeng outward by right fewe wordes. as for vocal prayers, whan he sayd thus. Deus pro¦picius
esto michi peccatori. For all his pray∣ers were inward for the moste parte. All suche that praye by medytacion, they speake fewe wordes. In other properte meditatiue prayer hathe: yt is shorte, as short wordes of loue or of mercy, and sendith out his flames and bea∣mes Such a short medytatyf prayer sister per¦ceth heuen. For all suche soules that so ben occu¦pyed in meditacions, done rest in god, as in the begynnyng & endyng of his medytacyon. And thus suche medytatife prayer is short. Not for the shortnesse of deuocion, but for the shortnesse of the length in wordes. Another properte that longeth vnto medytatyue prayer, that is desy∣rous by waylyng, sobbyng, and syghing, to be with our lorde. So that suche one may say wt the {pro}phete Dauyd. thus. Sitiuit anima mea ad deum fontem viuum quādo veniam et appa¦rabo ante faciem det fuerūt micht lactime mee paries die ac nocte. That is. my soule thursteth to our lord, which is ye quicke gracious welle ye refressheth euery mournynge sowle. O. whan shal I come and appere before thy gloryous fa¦ce blissed lorde. Euery day my soule is fed with teares, as my bodi is with breades. for they be the loues of my soule, vnto the tyme yt I maye se the face to face. ❧ Syster is not this avery good mournynge myrthe. If thou wylt come
come to suche mery mournynge of medytacion thou must as moch as thou maist sequester thi selfe from all maner outwarde noyses & distra¦ctions, and soo entre into the pryue chambre of thyn hert and there exclude all thynges vnder god, and than assende vp vnto him by suche de∣uout medytacions. ¶ In the whiche medyta¦cions, fyrst thou shalt bethynk the of thyn ow∣ne fraylte. How redy thou art to euyll., & how dull and slowe to good. After this thynke vpon ye grete cruelte of thy goostly enmies. How day and night they lye in awayte by many wicked suggestions & fals subtyltees how they might deceyue thy soule, and drawe it to synue. And after this thynke vpon ye grete goodnesse of god how moch grace he hath wrought for yt, Fyrst in makyng the of nought. And than how he wt his precyous blode bought the. Departynge & disceueryng the from all mysbeleuyng people, paynyms, and heretykes. Gyuyng the a chry∣sten name, by receyuyng of the sacramēt of ba∣ptysme. And also abyding mercy ably and beny gnely thy tornyng out of synne. Delyuerynge the out from the fendes mouth, and from ye va∣nyte of this fals worlde, by entryng into rely∣gion. And so gyuynge the many other vertues and graces without nombre. ❧ The first me dytacion wyll styre the to compūction & sorow.
The seconde to drede. And the thyrde to loue. ¶ Of this me semeth saynt Hue in a boke that he made (De arra amme,) sayth a right swete worde, and it is this. I am sayeth he hyghly bounde to loue my lorde Iesu, of whome I ha∣ue receyued many benefytes of loue. For fyrst he sayth, hath gyuen me my essensiall beynge in hym, not onely with all vnsēsible creatures, but effectuall, beyng of fayrnesse aboue essensy¦ble creatures. But effectual beyng of fayrnesse he hath gyuen me also lyfe in hym. not onely wt beestes, beestly / but for to lyue by grace heuen∣ly. He hath gyuen me a body wt wyttes. A soule with strengthes. Erth with that which is con¦teyned therin, for my sustenaūce. Gyftes of gra¦ce, with holy sacramentes of the chyrche. And hymselfe with his tormētes, which he suffred in his passion. ☞ After these thre maner medy¦cacions, ascende vp with an hye trust to our lor¦e Iesu. And yf thou mayst, with habundaun¦ce of teares. & say with meke boldnes as saynt Austyn sayth thus. ❧ I shall now surely go to my lorde Iesu, and crye vpon hym mekely, to moue hym for to helpe me / consyderyng by his mercy full goodnesse bothe my fraylte, and the grete cruelte of my goostly ēmyes. ¶ Than after this rest a whyle by medytacyon / and be ryght sure he wyll fulfyll thy desyre, & graunt
the thyn askyng. And though yu fynd no swete∣nesse anone, leaue not therfore / but cry vnto hȳ¦mekely, & importunely. sayng thus in thy sou∣le. Non dimittam te donec benedixeris michi. Lorde I shall not leaue the, vnto the tyme thou hast gyue me thy blissynge. yea, though he put the to scylence. Or put the from hym with his hāde. Or shoue the away with his fote. yet lea¦ue not, but crye vpon hym mekely alway. And I tell the for a trouthe, yf thou contynue thus in such importunyte, it shall encrease thy deuo∣cyon ryght moche. And yet therto thou shalt ha¦ue thyn askyng, and be sped of thy desyre. Whi¦che I fynde well proued by example of the ho∣ly writynge of Thoby, to whome the aungell sayd thus. Quando orabas cum lacrimis ego optuli orationem tuam deo. ☞ whan thou dy∣dest praye with wepynge, than I offered thy prayers to god. ❧ Lo syster set neuer lytell by prayers whiche holy auugels don offre to oure lorde god, and namely there as it is contynued with Christ. ☞ In all such medytatyue pray¦ers, I wolde thou had a specyall insyght vnto our blyssed lady moder of mercy, and pray her to be a tender meane to her dere sone for the. na¦mely at her masse, & other tymes also. And gre¦te her with Auees, and other specyall deuocy∣ons made of her. ❧ And I praye the yf thou
mayst, vse often for to say yt blyssed swete wor∣de of saynt Anselme, in the ende of thy medyta tyue prayer to our blyssed lady, which is this. ¶ Gloryous vyrgin gods moder / as thou veri¦ly louedest thy sone, and verily woldest that he were loued▪ gete me that grace of thy sone, that I may veryly loue hym. ❧ Truely I hope yt thou sholdest fynde grete confort in such deuout wordes. And yf thou may, I wolde thou say∣dest to her among, her psalters of Auees, called our ladyes psalter. Also I wolde thou were oc∣cupyed, namely on holy dayes, with redyng of deuout bokes. as is Stimulis amoris. or such other. In the which specially I recommend to thy medytacyon ye holy passyon of our lorde Ie¦su, and namely after complyn, & after matins. And beleue it ryght well it shal inflame thy sou¦le feruētly in his loue / and teche the for to dispy∣se this wretched worlde. And also it wyll teche the for to wynne grete pacyence in al maner ad¦uersiters. And it wyll arme the agaynst thy go¦stly enmyes. and gyue the myght & strength to ouercome thē worthyly. For as saynt Bernard sayth. Be a man neuer so delycate, yf he consy∣der inwardly the bytter passyon of Chryst / he must nedes absteyn hym, be he neuer so wrath full he must nedes forgyue, be he neuer so maly¦cious, he must be bothe ful of pyte & compassiō.
Say therfore with the same holy Bernarde, & say it inwardly & intentyfly thus. ☞ O good Iesu, how myghtyly hast thou called me & en∣braced me to the with thyn holy armes of thy holy passyon, where thy soule passed out of thy body, and water out of thy syde, & blode out of thy herte. O, mercyful Iesu, yu louedest me thā full hote / & ful feruently, good lorde forsake me not now. Thus mayst thou growe on hygh by deuocion, bothe in vocall prayers, and in men∣tall prayers. ¶ It is necessary for the also sy∣ster yf thou wylt encrease and grow deuoutly incongregacion, for to eschue syngularite in all thin own outward obseruaunces, & myngle or tempre dyscrecyon with all thy dedes, lest it be sayd of the, as our lord sayd in his gospell. Ec∣ce homo q cepit edificare, et non potuit consum∣mare. Lo sayth our lorde, this man hath begon to buyld, but he can make no ende. Therfore do so discretly as yu mayst cōtinue. Take no specia¦lites on the wtout leue / but kepe a comyn forme of lyuing. For by dyscretion and iugemēt of all good folke it is the surest lyfe. I say not yt thou sholdest kepe a comyn forme of lyuing wt volup¦tuous lyuers, or idle lyuers, or of {pro}ude lyuers. For yt is called a comyn lyfe among worldly ly∣uers, & not of the relygious lyuers. But I mea¦ne yt thou sholdest kepe suche a comyn lyuynge
which is ordeyned & approued of holy fathers & assigned in thy holy rule. Is it not ynough to the to do as they dyde, and as ye {per}fection of thy hly rule techeth, without syngularite, And yf thou wylt nedes cost be synguler, than I wold thou were synguler in keping better than ony other) thyn obedyence / thy chastyte / thy pouer¦te and deuociō, and loue bothe to god and man. In this wyse be synguler. ¶ And yf I sholde say as saynt Bernard sayth, than I wold thou keptest well thre wordes, which he taught his dyscyples. And they ben these. ❧ I wolde he sayth in congregacion thou lyuedest ordynate∣ly, felawly, and mekely. Ordynately to thy sel¦fe felawly to thy systers, and mekely to god. ¶ O now is this a short charitable rule. Thou lyuest syster in congregacion ordynately whan thou doost thy besynesse in relygion, for to kepe thyn obseruaunce, bothe in gods syght, and in presēce of thy systers so that thou kepe thy self from synne, and thy relygyon from sclaunder. Thou lyuest in congregacion felawly, whan yu doost thy dylygence for to loue all creatures in our lorde. and for to be loued for our lorde. She∣wyng thy self obsequious and seruysable to all thy systers. Louyngly in supportyng of theyr bodyly charges, and also goostly charges, And to haue pyte and ruthe of all theyr if yrmytees.
Thou lyuest also in congregacion mekely to god whan thou doost all thy besynesse to put away vaynglory and vanyte in all thy dedes. ☞ Lo syster, in this wyse thou mayst encrease & gro∣we in relygyon as a vertuous tree. And at last by gods grace be able to bere the worthy heuē∣ly fruytes. Of the which saynt Paule spketh and sayeth. Fructus autem spiritus est, cari∣tas, gaudium, pax, pacientia. ¶ In the which auctoryte he speketh of. xii. maner of fruytes. Of the which I wold speke and declare, but I haue no leyser. Therfore I leaue of at this ty∣me, and make an ende. Besechynge our blyssed lorde, the tendre and veray spouse, and keper of chast soules. which hath planted the in the gar¦dyn of holy relygion, gyue the grace to be roted in very mekenes. to be moysted and watred by very compunction. to be extended and spred a∣brode by very charyte. And at last to be reysed vpon hye by very deuocion. that somtyme after this lyfe thou may be cōpted or nombred endle∣sly among the holy trees of his heuenly parady¦se, by the helpe & meanes, or intercessyon of our blyssed lady. Amen. ¶ And pray for me good syster, which am yet but an vnprofytable braū¦che, and vnfruytfull of relygion. That at last I may be suche a tree, as our lorde wold I were. Amen. Benedictus deus.
¶ Here endeth the tree of ye holy goost, Enpryn¦ted at London in the Fletestrete, at the sygne of the rose Garlande. by Ro¦bert Coplande. Anno dn̄i. M. CCCCC. xxxiiij. ❧❧ ❧❧❧ Robert Coplande. printer's device of Robert Copland
¶ The. xij. fruytes of the holy goost.
¶ The table of this present boke. ¶ The fyrst fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuyng is called Charyte. Ca. i. folio. ii. ¶ The second fruyt of ye tree of goostly lyuyng is called Ioye. Ca. ii. fo. xi. ¶ The thyrd fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuing is called Peas. Ca. iii. fo. xx. ¶ The fourth fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuing is called Pacyence. Ca. iiii. fo. xxv. ¶ The fyfth fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuyng is called Suffraunce. Ca. v. fo. xxxiii. ¶ The syxt fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuynge is called. Goodnesse. Ca. vi. fo. xxxix. ¶ The seuenth fruyt of ye tree of goostly lyuing is Benyguyte. Ca. vii. fo. xliiii. ¶ The eyght fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuing is called Myldnesse. Ca. viii. fo. xlix. ¶ The nynth fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuing is called fayth. Ca ix. fo. liii. ¶ The tenth fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuyng is called Good lyuyng Ca. x. fo. lvii. ¶ The enleuenth fruyt of the tree of goostly ly∣uyng is called Contynence. Ca. xi. fo. lxi. ¶ The twelfth fruyt of ye tree of goostly lyuȳg is called Chastyte. Ca. xii. fo. lxvi. ¶ Explicit tabula.
¶ Here begynneth an epistle sent to a re∣lygious woman, of the .xii. fruy¦tes of the holy goost. ❧ RElygious syster it is not longe a goo that I wrote to the a pystle of relygi¦ous exhortacyon, how thou sholdest growe in relygyon vertuously as a goostly tree. Which tree I sayd shol∣de be fyrst depely roted in mekenesse, than wa∣tred and moysted in cōpunccyon. After yt exten∣ded abrode by charyte. And than to growe on hygh by deuout cōtemplacion. In the whiche pystel at ye last ende I made menciō of .xii. swe∣te fruytes of the holy goost, whiche all goostly trees in relygion sholde bryng forth. Therfore now to fulfyll the ende of that pystel. I send the writen what those .xii. fruytes ben, wherby thou mayst know how thou sholdest lyue in re∣lygion. Of whom the holy apostel saint Paul speketh & sayth thus. Galat .v. Fructus au∣tem spūs est caritas, gaudiū, pax, pacientia, lōg nanimitas. Bonitas, beniguitas, māsuetudo, fides, modestia, continencia, castitas. ❧ That is. The fruytes of the holy goost in goostly tre∣es of relygyon is charite / ioye / peas / pacience▪
sufferaūce / or long abydyng. Goodnes / bening∣nite / or gentylnes of hērt / myldenes / fayth in true louyng / maner of good leuyng / cōtinence / & chastite. ¶ The fyrst fruyt of ye tree of goostly ly∣uyng is Charyte. Ca .i. ¶ Of Charyte. THe fyrst fruyt of this holy tree is called Charite. Cha¦rite is a coupling of the sou¦le with god, whiche is the lyfe of the soule. For lyke as a naturall dethe depar∣teth the soule from the bo∣dy, so goostly dethe bysyfie departeth the soule from god. The holi doctour saynt Augustyn sayth that there is a very deth which that mendrede but lytel, and that is the departyng of the soule fro almyghty god. God is the blyssed lyfe of soules, for by charyte be lo¦ued all that ought to be loued as vertue, and all that ought to be hated as vyces. Good sister eat oft of this precyous fruyte of charyte, for it is ryght precyous, in as moche as it is the pryce for to haue the kyngdome of heuen. And it is so
precyous a fruyt that wtout that, man is of noo pryce in the syght of god, as saynt Paul sayth. i. Cor xiii. Si charitatem autē non habeo, nihil sum. ❧ Also (he sayth) al the werkes that we done without it be of no value. Saynt Gregory sayth. As the braunches of a tree come out of ye rote, soo all vertues spryngeth out of Charyte, She is mother of all vertues, and norse. For a∣fore her was no vertue, and without her is no vertue merytoryous. She informeth and gy∣ueth strength to all vertues, that they may be acceptable to god. without charyte may no sou¦le be safe nor please god. Charyte longeth to all folke, and namely to relygious. which shold be more parfyte than the comyn people. ☞ what profyte is it syster to professe hygh lyuyng, and in habyte to shewe parfeccyon yf we endeuor vs not to lerne vertue and exercise it in dede? It is a great shame to vs (and rather worthy pay¦ne than mede) to professe or promyt great thyn∣ges, and do the leest. Therfore yf we be in chari¦te we shall thynke hard thȳges lyght and easy. ❧ Now {per}aduēture thou woldest wyte what is this worthy fruyt of charyte, that I speake of? To this I answere and say ye charyte is an ordynate and well dysposed wyll to serue god, to please god, and to haue fruycion & vse of god. Charyte and loue is all one. Charyte is suche a
souerayne vertue that it ioyneth & coupleth to∣gider the louer and the loued. For mekenesse ma¦keth vs swete vnto almyghty god. Pouerte ioy¦neth, and blyssed charyte maketh vs one with god. Charyte is fayrest of all vertues. Charyte is a thyng by the which god loueth vs, and we god, & eueryche of vs other. Charite is a desyre of the hert, euer thynkyng on that, ye it loueth. And whan it hath that it loueth than it ioyeth, & nothyng may make it sory. Charyte is an ho∣ly desyre betwene two wt lasting of thoughtes. Charite is a strength of the soule to loue god for hym self, and other thinges for god, and in god. which charyte whan it is so set in god, it dooth away all inordynate loue. And so charyte put∣teth away deedly syn̄e, for it is the richest affec¦cyon of mannes soule. Charyte is the fruyte of trouthe, stablynge of wyttes and of connynge. Se how good charyte is. who wolde forsake that blissed fruyt whiche is so good? If we suf¦fre to be slayne, yf we gyue all that we haue yf we knowe as moche as men may in erthe, all this without charite is nothyng els but sorow and torment. Charyte is a very true turnynge from all erthly thynges, and a ioynynge to god without departynge, kyndled with the fyre of the holy goost, fer from the fylthy fyre of carnal corrupcyon, subiect to no deedly vyces, but a∣reysed
vp aboue all flesshely lustes, euer redy & gredy to contemplacyon. Charyte is also the fo∣ne of all good affeccyons, helth of good maners, dethe of synnes, lyfe of vertues, without whi∣che may no man please god. with it man deuout¦ly seruethgod. Very charyte clenseth the soule and delyuereth it from the paynes of helle, and out of the felawshyppes of deuylles, and soone maketh it the seruaunt of god, parte takers of the herytage of heuen. ☞ Lo syster, in suche lo¦ue and charyte thou must enforce the to be ara∣yed and clothed, as yron and stele is clothed in fyre whan it brenneth as fyre. And as the ayre or the fyrmament is clothed in the son̄e whan it shyneth as lyght. ❧ O blyssed be all they yt be so turned all in to fyre and shynynge heate of charyte in euery prosperyte, and in all aduersy∣te. Suche charite maketh a deuout soule for to desyre for to be losed out of this wretched lyfe, and be endlesly with god. All suche liue in great pacience by tedious abydyng of the deth euery daye and euery houre desyryng a departyng of the body & the soule by naturall deth, ye though they were hard tormentes and passyons. Su∣che charite made saynt Andrew for to halse de∣syrously the deth of the crosse. And saynt Ste∣uen to pray deuoutly for them the whiche sto∣ned him to deth, by the which he se into heuen
that he had longe before desyred. It made also saynt Laurēce to scorne his tormentours, saint Vincent to haste his tormentors fast, for to put hym to his deth. Saynt Agate gladly and ioy∣fully to go to her passion, as though she had ben∣byd and desyred to a great feast, and other glori∣ous martyrs to ioy in theyr tribulacions, and to loue theyr enemys which pursued them, by the whiche they were styrred to desyre most ha¦styly heuenly ioye and blysse which they loued here in erth. Nethelesse though charite be so fer∣uent, that it maketh a soule to desyre departȳg out of this worlde, yet the same charyte is soo kyndled with the loue of goo that it styryth vs to abyde here after his wyll though it be payn∣full to vs, in asmoche we may not here haue co∣pyouse plente in vse of that blyssed welle of lyfe Iesu chryst, yet by his blyssed grace in the mea¦ne tyme of all our desyrous abydyng here after his wyll, he norysheth vs & conforteth vs with in great confortes, as it were by the .iii. heuen¦ly droppes of goostly graces. One is, by inwar∣dely recreacyon of the blyssed sacrament of the aultre, whan we receyue ye blissed body, which is to all deuout folke a synguler confort for rele∣uyng of the tedious desyre of this wretched ex∣yle, for therin they receyue veryly and holsom∣ly hym, whome they best loue, oure lorde Iesu
Chryst. Another is by multyplyeng of goostly fruyt, that is in sekyng the encrease of other for to multyply the nombre of saued soules to the worshyppe of god. By suche goostly multyply¦yng, they suffre more easely the euyls of thys present exyle. The thyrd is for ye presēce of god∣des chyldren with whome they be in a maner conforted of the blysse of heuen here in erth, for as moche as they se suche encrease in charyte & loue of vertue, though suche a soule by fer∣uent charyte mourne for the blysse of heuen in desyre for to be losed out of this wretched exyle and be with her spouse Iesu, yet som gladnes she hathe for to abyde, namely for the swetnes that she fyndeth in receyuynge here of our lor∣des blessid body. In the turnyng of synners to vertue, and in the profyt and increase of lyuers and so this exyle is the more tollerable, in that it is more fruytfull. For albe it yt suche a mour∣nyng soule in charite come late to her spouse Ie¦su, yet she hopith to come & bryng many wt her. Thus by suche charite was saynt Paul coar∣ted for to abyde in this wretched world betwe¦ne desyre of losyng for to be with god, and pro∣fytable increase of his subiectes. Of suche pro∣fytable encrease he cōforted hym selfe betwene whyles agaynst his tedyous delay frome the kyngdome of heuen, sayeng thus. Philip .i.
Coartor enim eduobus desideriū habens dis¦solui, et esse cum christo multo melius {per}manere in carne necessarium est propter vos. That is. I am coarted & anguysshed in my selfe of two thyuges. One is, I desyre to be vnlosed out of my deadly body and be with christ, & that we∣re right passyng good to me. An other is. I wo¦te well yt is ryght necessary to abyde in my bo¦dely lyfe only for you, of these two I know not which I may rather chose. Lo sister what swe¦te frute charite is. Thus frute of charite shuld euer be in thy hart, and in thy wyll, not only in thy dedes, but also in thy soule. Many spekith charitably and doth charitably, but yet they lo¦ue nother god nor be in charyte, as ypocrytes whiche suffren greate penaunce and seme holy to the sight outward, but by cause thy seke out¦ward worshyp and praysyng, & fauour, they haue lost theyr mede, whan a man gyuith him to penaunce and to pouerte, and dothe great al∣mes dedes, it is a token he is in charite, yet he is neuer ye more in charite for that alone, with∣out more. But whan he forsakyth the worlde only for goddes loue, & settyth all his thoughte to good, and is in charite with all folke, and all good dedes that he may do, he dothe thē in that intent for to please our lorde Iesu, and to com to the blysse of heuen, than he is in very charyte,
and that charite is in the soule, for so his dedes shewith outwarde. If thou therfore syster spe¦ke good, & do good, folke that herith ye so speke & do, wene ye thou art in charite, for they wene thy wordes and thy dedes accordyth with thy soule in god, els thou art a deceyuer of the peo∣ple and dampnest thy soule. Lo syster thus cha¦rite is in wyll veryly, not in werke only, for in werke only it is a token of charite, but he that sayth that he is in charyte, and wyll not do in dede that in hym is for to shew loue, truely he is not in charite as saynt Iohn̄ sayth. For cha¦rite is neuer ydel, it is euermore workyng som good. And yf it cease of workynge know right wel it wastyth a way, what is very workyng of loue and charite? Truely very loue and cha∣rite, is to loue god with all thy strength mygh∣tyly, with all thy hert wysely, wt all thy soule deuoutly & swetly, wylt thou be in loue & chari¦te myghtely. Than must thou be meke, for all goostly strength cometh of mekeneesse. Our lor¦de saith. Esa. lxvi. Su{per} quem requiescet spūs meus nisi super humilē. On whome shall the holy goost rest sayth our lorde, but in the make soule. Mekenes kepith vs & gouernith vs in all our tēptaciōs, so yt they may not ouercome vs. But many be ouerthrowen by ye fende in theyr mekenesse by tribulacions, reproues, & bacby∣tynges.
yf thou be wrothe and lose thy chary∣te for ony anguysshes of this casuall worlde, or for ony worde that men saye to the, thou art not yet very meke, ne in myghty charite, for yf thou be in parfyt charite, it shall not greue the what shame or anguisshe that thou suffre, but thou shalte haue delyte and ioye in suche repro∣ues and shames, and glad for to suffre al maner reproues for the loue of Iesu, and fare as a dea¦de body, whiche answerith not, what so euer ye people sayeth or dooth to hym. Right so, if thou be in parfyt charite, thou wylt not be sterid for no worde that may be sayd to the. Trewly sy∣ster it is a very token that thou canste not loue  be in very charite yf yu may not suffre payne or anger for thy frēdes loue Iesu. For it is wry¦en thus. Charitas penam non habet. Very harite hathe no payne of all suche outwarde thynges. All vnmeke people in relygion be not in myghty charite, for they be so feble & weyke that they falle at euery steryng of the wynd of temptacion. And why is that? Truely for they wyll haue theyr wyll done, and not theyr soue rayns wyll, whiche is goddes wyll. Therfore syster be very meke, that thou may be in mygh¦ty charite, and do not thy wyll in this worlde. that thou may haue it more plenteously in the other worlde, and so thou shalt ouercome thyn
ennemye the fende. Thou must also haue cha∣rite and loue god wysely with all thy hert, and that thou mayst not doo, but yf thou be wyse. whan art thou wyse? Truely whan thou art poore without couetyse, and despysest thy self for the loue of Iesu, & despendyst all thy wyt∣tes and thy wyl in his seruice. They that seme most wysest in this world, be most fooles whi∣che done spende in couetousnes & in besynes all theyr wysdom, and forsake that thou haste ta∣ken pouerte / penaūce / and gostly trauayle. For thy pouerte thou shalt haue riches wtout ende. For thy penaūce and sorow for thy syn̄es, and that thou art so long in this exyle from thy coū∣trey heuen blysse, thou shalte haue the endlesse ioye of heuen. And for thy trauayle of relygion for wakyng / fastyng / prayers / medytacions / hūger / thrust / heate and colde / mysease and an∣guysshe that thou suffrest for the loue of Iesu, thou shalt come to rest whiche lasteth endlesly. Thus mayst thou se that yf thou be wysely in loue and charite, thou must loue lastyng thyng lastingly, passyng thyng passyngly / so that thy herte be set and fastened in nothyng but in god, or for god charytably. Thou must also not only be in loue and charyte myghtely and wysely, but also swetly & deuoutly. Swete loue & cha¦rite is whan thy body is chast, & thy thought
clene. Of ye whiche chastite by the grace of god I purpose to wryte in the last ende of this trea∣tyse, as for the .xii. fruyte of euery goostly sou∣le. For as I begyn wt the swete fruyte of chary¦te, so shall I ende with the swete fruyte of cha∣styte. ❧ Deuout loue and charyte is whan thou offrest thy prayers and thoughtes to god with goostly Ioyes in the holy goost. Of this goostly ioye I purpose for to wryte in the next goostly fruyte of euery goostly soule. Nowe wylt thou knowe whan thou arte in loue and charyte. Truely syster there is none in erthe yt knoweth whan he is in charyte, but suche yt be inspyred or haue ony specyall grace which god hath gyuen to him for to knowe it by, of ye whi¦che all other may take example. All blyssed ly∣uers trust and hope yt they be in charyte / and in that doo as well as they may for to encrease in vertue, & trust verily that they shold be saued / they knowe it not anone. For yf they knewe it theyr meryte were the lesse / so yt it is kepte vn∣certayne vnto another worlde wt hope. Neuer∣thelesse certayne tokens there be, by the which thou mayst knowe yf yu be in charyte. ☞ Fyrst is whan all couetyse of erthly thynges is quen¦ched in the. For where yt couetyse is, there is no charite nor loue of god. the loue of yt one putteth out the other. The second token is hertely desy¦rynge
in all tymes eatyng and drynkyng, wa∣kyng and sleping of heuen blysse. Yf thou be set in loue and charyte syster, that thou canst fynd no ioye in this lyfe, it is a token that thou arte in charyte. And the more thou sauourest of he∣uen the more thou desyrest it. The thyrd token is chaungynge of thy tongue. For yf thy tōgue be chaunged whiche was wonte (peraduentu¦re) to speke of erthly thynges, nowe speketh of god and of heuenly thinges, it is a token that yu arte in charyte. The fourth token is exercyse of goostly profyte / as it is to be gyuen entyerly to goddes seruice and intermyt nothing of no erth¦ly besynesse, but it be vnder obedience. And yet than euer cast vp thyn hert to heuen in all suche besynesse. The fyfth is whan all harde thyn∣ges seme lyght to the / and yt maketh charyte. The syxte is, whan thou suffrest all āguysshes and hurtes mekely. For yf thou be in very cha¦ryte thou hatest nothyng but syn̄e. thou louest nothynge but god, or for god. & thou dredest no∣thyng but to dysplease god. The .vii. is whan thou hast ioye of all trybulacions / and praysest god in euery āguysshe that yu suffrest. This she∣weth wel ye thou arte in charite. ¶ Many the∣re be syster that can loue god, and be in charyte whan they be in rest and ease, but in aduersyte they doo grudge, and be sorowfull. and be thro∣wen
doune so lowe that vnethes ony man may conforte thē, & so sclaūder they god in grudging agaynst his domes. That is a great wretched∣nes, that ony aduersite sholde make him for to grudge agaynst goddes wyl. But that is a bles¦syd charyte that no violence of sorow may put away. Good syster loue well charite and these tokens of charite. Syster thou art callyd to re∣lygion for to be a louer of charite. Foure maner kȳdes of louers of charite be there in relygion. The fyrst is a begyn̄yng louer, the seconde is a growyng louer, the thyrde is a parfyt louer, & the fourth is a moste parfyt louer. The fyrst lo¦ue is newe borne, the seconde loue is norysshed in growyng, the thyrde loue is myghty & well strengthed, and the fourth is lowly abydynge his departynge out of this wretched worlde. Of these foure degres of charite our lorde spe∣keth in holy scrypture, where as he makyth a symylytude of corne sowen in the groūde. First he sayeth, corne apperyth grene and tender as an herbe. Afterward it apperith as an eare. After that it appereth as full corne in the eare, and than it abydyth nothynge els but haruest, for to be ledde into the barne. Yf thou be yet but tendre in loue & charite, so that ofte tymes thou fyndest thy selfe frayle to falle out therof lyght¦ly by the leaste blast of temptacyon or styrynge
of other, thou art yet but an herbe whiche ne∣dyth moche kepyng that it be not destroyed by beastes, that is by beastly lyuynge, more after the body then after yt soule, and so with sad goo¦stly lyuyng it wyll growe man eare of mygh∣tier strength that thou may suffre to be wedin by sharp rebukyng & reproues, if it nede. After suche vertuous pacience in wedyng of thy cor∣ne of charite it wyll growe parfitly into full corne & rype in the eare, nothyng feryng ne dre∣dyng than of any disease, of any anguysshe, of any aduersite how so euer ye wynde blow, but only dredyng for to displease god, desiryng eue∣ry houre the tyme of haruest, whiche is the de∣partyng of the hody by the thresshyng of yt flay¦le of dethe, that it may become charitable corne and clere without chaffe, and brought within the garner of blysse there to be herboured wtout ende. This garner desyred ye charytable corne saynt Paule whan he sayd. Cupio dissolui et essecum xp̄o. Phi .i. I desyre he said to be vnlo¦sed out of my wretch edbody and be wt my loue Chryst Iesu. ❧ Lo syster he that hath suche moost parfyte charyte, he lotheth all wordly de¦lytes. He setteth no more store by all temporall goodes than he dooth by foule stynkyng fylth, but he is glad to suffre for ye lóue of Iesu al ma¦ner trybulacions, and desyreth to be endlesly wt
Chryst. Suche charyte is stronge as dethe as Salomō sayth. Cant .viii. Fortis est vt mors dilectio. For ryght as dethe dooth to the body, so dooth loue to ye soule. Deth departeth a man fro bodyly lustes, and fro worldly bytternesse. It maketh hym neyther fele cryenges nor we∣pynges, nor beatynges. Ryght so doth ye loue to the soule. It departeth the soule fro ye lykyng of all erthly thinges, & maketh it heuenly. And what euer it hereth in erthe of worldsly noyses it is so rauysshed in loue yt it hereth nor felyth it not. Now is suche charyte (syster) an holsome fruyte for to vse, & namely for relygious folke / for it hath .iiii. vertues. One is, who so eateth therof it healeth his goostly infyrmyte. For he yt is in charyte he is dysposed to all godlynesse. Euery thyng sauoreth to suche one as it ought for to sauour, erthly thing vyle, & goostly thing fayre / worshypes / riches / and worldly power and such other that seme worthy & precious in the syght of worldly people, seme in the syghte of goostly soules right foule. And if relygious people whiche shold be goostly, set moche by su¦che dignityes, they haue a great goostly sycke∣nes, for they lacke charite, whiche shold hyde & put away all fylthynes. Also suche charite put¦teth away & hydeth our offences to god. Of the whiche hydyng speketh Salomon. Prouer .x.
Uniuersa delicta operit caritas. All trespaces and all offēces charyte putteth away, as it had neuer ben he sayth. For as saynt Bernarde sa∣yeth. whan our lorde forgyueth our synnes he forgyueth them fully and mercyfully, not dam¦puyng by vengeaunce / not shamyng vs by re∣proues / nor lesse louynge vs by vpbraydynge. And yf our lorde neuer vpbrayde vs of our syn¦nes that we haue doone. it is as it neuer had be in his syght. Lo syster how this fruyte of cha∣ryte hydeth bothe our inwarde goostly synnes & our outwarde bodyly synnes, as they had ne∣uer ben. The second vertue of this fruyte of cha¦rite is, that it maketh man wyse as Salomon saith. Eccl. i. Dilectio dei honorabilis sapiētia. The loue of god (he sayth) is a worshipful wys¦dome. Thou art not very wyse but yf yu cherish derely all goostly good thynges. For right as he were no wyse marchaunt ye wolde gyue golde for fylth, & put it in his chest as golde. ryght so is he vnwyse yt loueth better tēporall goodes yt be but as fylthe, than goostly goodes. Kepe wel this fruyte of charyte sister, & it shall teache the to set lytell by all worldly thinges. The thyrde vertue of this fruyte of charyte is, yt it maketh a man ryche. For charyte is so precyous that it is lykened in holy write to pure proued golde in the fyre, as I fynde wryten in the apocalypse.
Apoc .iii. Suadeo tibi emere a me aurum igni∣tum et {pro}batum vt locuples fias. I councell the sayeth our lorde for to bye of me pure golde and wel tryed that thou mayst be made ryche. that is all that euer thou doost do it for the loue of pu¦re charyte & thou shalt be ryche, that is, yu shalt haue parte of all the good dedes of holy chyrch, and at the last be ryche with heuen blisse. The fourth vertue is that it maketh a man lykyng & pleasaūt to god. For whan a soule loueth our lorde, our blyssed lorde wyll loue hym agayne, which passeth al other loue. As our lorde sayth by Salomon. Prouerb .viii. Ego diligētes me diligo. I loue thē ye loue me he sayth. And in an∣other place our lorde sayth thus. Io .xiiii. Qui diligit me diligetur a patre meo et manifestabo meipsum. He that loueth me (he sayth) shall be loued of my father, & I shall loue hym, & make me all open to hym in shewyng me to hym as a louyng father. Thus syster charite is pleasaūt and lykyng to god. I praye the kepe well this fruyt, & ofte eate therof bothe late and erly, full and fastynge. For it is as good after meate as a fore meate. in the nyght as in the daye. & parte with thy systers, but eate it neuer colde. Roste it well & make it ryght hote in the fyre of Chry¦stes loue whiche sent among his dystyples brē¦nyng tongues of charyte, that bothe they & all
his folowers in erthe sholde speke brennyngly of loue and charyte eche to other, and so to lyue euer in loue, our blyssed lorde graunt vs all for his blyssed charyte. Amen. ¶ The seconde fruyte of the tree of goostly lyuyng is Ioye. Ca. ij. THe second fruyte of the holy goost in ho∣ly lyuers is called Ioye. Truely Ioye in the holy goost, that is goostly ioye / not erthly ioye, but for to ioye in god & in hope of endlesse goodes / and in the grete benefytes of our lorde. All suche ioye is for to be glad and ioyfull of the encrease of vertue of other, & for to thanke god for them / and for to lothe all vanytees, and for to be quycke and mery goostly in dyuyne seruy¦ce. This is that fruyte of ioye which I wolde thou eate of, whā worldly wretched gladnesse is about to chaunge thy soule in to dyssolucion and banyte. That is whan it wold make the to ioye in affluence of temporall goodes / of laugh∣ynge and scornyng of ydle tales and dyshouest playes. And also wolde make vnsauery to the al that longeth to godward / as is to be dulle in dyuyne seruyce, in besynesse of deuocyon & ver∣tue, and suche other. All this is no goostly ioye but worldly ioyes. It is no very ioye, but vay∣ne
ioye. Gostly ioye is very ioye, though it be no full ioye. This ioye may none haue. but suche yt be in charyte, & eate therof swetely, as I sayd before in the fyrst fruyte of charyte. Very chari¦te axeth very ioye. Of this ioye speketh Salo∣mon thus. Eccl .xxx. Non est oblectamentum su{per} cordis gaudiū. That is, there is no ioye to ye ioye of the herte. In thre thynges ioye of herte yt is goostly ioye passeth all carnall ioyes. Fyrst is that it is contynuall. An erthly man though he syt at a delycate bodyly feast, yet at the laste he shall iothe it, be the feast neuer soo delycate. But a sure ioyfull soule set in vertue, is euer as it were at a contynuall feast without lothynge. The seconde is, that goostly ioye is more pure than erthely or carnall ioye. Aglotonous man fyndeth many bitternesses annexed to his ioye. One is afflyction and torment within hymsel∣fe of longe delay from his delycates that he de∣syreth. Another is defaut that he findeth in thē whan that they be set afore hym / which is not made to his lykynge. And yf that they be made to his lykynge, than he receyueth them so lusty¦ly ioye / the more it is had, the gladder is the ha¦uer. Neuer wery, nor seke of yu vse therof. The thyrde is, that carnall ioye is of vyle thynges,
& not lastyng. But ioye of herte is of very good thynges euerlastyng. Many thynges I fynde that causeth a man to be glad in herte and also in godstly ioye. One is parfyte purete and clen∣nesse of conscyence. A very gentyll soule resteth moche rather in the bedde of a clene conscyence, than of an vnclene conscyence. For kyndely the the pure and clene soule abhorreth, and hath ab¦homynacyon of vnclenesse / and hath right gre∣te ioye of clennesse. As oft as the soule is syke, so often it is vnclene. Sykenesse of the soule is vnclennesse. whan yu soule is hole, that is whan it is in clennesse / than it is in reste and ioye, as Salomon sayeth in his prouerbes. Prouerbio∣rum .xvi. Dulcedo anime samtas ossiū. That is. The swetenesse of the soule (he sayth) that is the clennesse of the soule is helthe of the boo∣nes. By these bones be vnderstande gyftes of graces of the holy goost, which be myghty and stronge as bones, and kepeth the soule in stren∣gthe and vygour. It is not so with worldly lo∣uers whiche haue erthely ioye. For theyr ioye is not lastynge, in as moche as they lacke clen∣nesse of theyr conscience. The seconde is the dys¦chargynge of the burden of euerlastynge dethe. whiche all wretched synners be charged with. As the holy prophete Dauyd sayd. Ps .xxxvii. ❧ Iniquitates mee supergresse sunt capud
meum, sicut onus graue grauate sūt super me. The wyckednesse (he sayth) of synners haue o∣uerpassed theyr heed, for as a greuous burden they be passyng greuous aboue hym. Of this all clene soules be dyscharged, for asmoche as they haue clensed theyr conscyence by oft cōtry¦cion, so that they fele an herty ioye in god. The thyrde is Fredome of soule, for they be not boun¦de in the bōdes of the fende. Who that hath the holy goost hath fredome as saynt▪ Paule sayth it. Cor .iii. Ubi spiritus dūi ibi libertas. Whe∣re the holy goost is there is fredome out of ye de∣uylles daunger, whiche causeth in a clene soule grete gladnesse. This fredome hath not wret∣ched synners, for they be so bounde in ye deuyls bondes that they may not do as they sholde do, after the hygher parte of reason. Of this bonde speketh Salomon & sayth. {pro}uer .v. Iniquita∣tes sue capiunt ipium, et funib{us} peccato{rum} suo{rum} vnusquis{que} cōstringitur. ❧ with wyckednesse a synner is taken, and so with ye bondes of syn∣nes euery synner is bounde. Our synnes be the bondes wherwith we be bounde. lete vs breke these bondes, and than may we haue fredome of spyrite and be in grete gladnesse. The fourth is rest of tormentes from all euyl affections, by the whiche all wretched synners be oft tymes tormented in herte / that is wt richesses, with de¦lytes,
and with worshypp. And so they be tor∣mented with suche thinges that they perysshe and spyll withall. They be also tormented som¦tyme with drede, as it sheweth well in a couey¦tous man. For though there be peas ynough, yet he supposeth euer yt he shall be deceyued by theues. Somtyme also they be tormēted with wrathe & suche other passyons. All these euyll affections & wretched passyons cease in them yt lyue well, and therfore they fele right grete rest and grete ioye in herte. The fyfth is rest from ye worme of conscyence. A synner as long as he is in synne, so longe he is prycked of the worme of conscyence, that he hath no rest. And this is ye fyrst vengeaunce that our lorde taketh of a syn∣ner, for he wyll not suffre shame of synne be in mannes herte, whiche sholde be his divellyng place without shame of vengeaunce, as saynt Austyn sayeth. Inclene soules it is not soo, for whan synne is put out by contrycion and cōfes¦syon, than ceaseth theyr worme of conscyence, that is the freatyng and the remors of cōscyen∣ce, and so they be in good rest. For lyke as a man hath better rest in a swete bedde ful of fluores, than in a sharpe or harde bedde full of thornes. So suche a ioyful soule resteth more swetely in suche a vedde of clēnesse than in a bedde of syn̄e. Of this swete bedde of floures speketh Salo∣mon
in the boke of loue in the persone of all me∣ry soules in clennesse. Canr .i. Lect{us} noster flo∣ridus. Our bedde (he sayth) of our conscyence smelleth swete with floures of vertue wherin we rest without tormentes of remors. The .vi. is the presence of our lordes grace which lyght¦neth a clene soule by knowlege, and sprynkleth it with the dewe of grace, of the which ye soule is in greate gladnesse & ioye. It is not soo with synners, for they be in derkenesse of syn̄e. what ioye may suche haue in theyr cōscyence, which lyue in such derkenesse of synne, and may not se for derkenesse of syn̄e the lyght of heuen? This lyght I call the ioye of heuen as Dauyd sayth. Ps .lrxxviii. One in lumme vultus tui ābula∣im{us}. Lorde (he sayth) we shall walke, that is we shall iyue in ye ioye of the, whiche is ye lyght of thy blyssed face. Also al clene soules haue gre∣ cause of ioye. For all the vertues yt they haue meth from the welle of heuenly swetnesse, & e sprynkled in theyr hertes, which causeth h to be glad. ¶ Saynt Austyu sayeth, where he speketh of the rauysshyng of saynt Paule in to heuen, that in that blyssed kyngdome of heuen where blyssed lyuynge is fully soped vp in his wue welle, from thens some dropes of vertue & of grace be sprynkled downe on erthe to man∣kyno, that in the tēptacyons of this wretched
worlde they may lyue more temperatly, more myghtyly, more ryghtwysly, and more prudēt¦ly & wysely. And how that vertue in soule cau∣seth a man to be glad sheweth well saynt Ber∣narde sayeng thus. Euery vertue naturally is good / there is no vicekyndly, nor naturall. ther¦fore vertue syth it is natural and kyndly whan it cometh in to the soule, though he come not al∣way without labour, yet whan he cometh, he cometh as in to his owne naturall place, whe∣re he sytteth full truly, & accordeth well with ye soule, as with his owne nature and kynde. Lo how grace and vertue (syster) gladdeth the sou∣le, whiche gladnesse all synners lacke. The .vii. is the wytnesse of the holy goost whiche is win a clene soule, yt maketh it so glad. Of the which gladnesse saynt Paule sayth thus. Ro .viii. Spi¦ritus sctūs testumoniū reddit spūm nostro quod sum{us} fili dei. The holy goost (he sayth) bereth wytnesse to all clene soules, yt they be the ioyful chyldrē of god. This wyn̄esse is that gladsome oyle whiche the wyse maydens toke in theyr vesselles as our lorde sayth. And it is also ye ioye ye saynt Paule speketh of, where he sayth thus it. cor .1. Gloria nostra hee est testunoniū consci∣entiente. Our ioye he sayth is the wytnesse of our cōscience. This ioye brigeth forth in a clene soule true cōpunction, swete deuocion, holsome
labom of penaunce, werkes of pyte, besynesse of prayer, very obedyence, fulnesse of loue, and hygh contemplacyon in god. The .viii. is good pay. All gladsome soules haue god in theyr elawshyp, and all good folke which ben full wt d. For amonge suche a company resteth ye ho∣ goost gyuyng to suche true confelawes & ho∣ for to dwell togyder in peas & duyte. O how  suche a company ryght gladsome to dwell a∣nge? as auyd sayth. Ps. C .xxxii. Ecce  & qu todum habitare fres in  Lo (he sath) how good & how mery it  todwell all togyder in loue and hye of the  goost. The .ix. is gladnesse of good werkes.  they that lyue in holy workes & dedes,  be gretly reward▪ do god, as Dauyd . custodied is s retributio . A grece rewarde shalbe in at yt kepe wor¦ good werkes, not nely che at the laste,  also here in thys for theyr kepyng they  fraue greate ioye in soule, as doctours say∣ that is so greate ye yt it may not be sayd.  eiter be felt than spoken. for al good wer¦ be kyndly ye chyldren of the soule. And eight  a good wyse hath ioye in the bringyng forth  well shapen chylde, and greate drede and cō¦fusyō if she brought forthe rather a serpent or a  worne than a childe. Right so a sou¦ls
is glad whan she bryngeth forthe good wer∣kes, as fruyte whiche is best accordyng to ye sou¦le. and sholde be sory yf that she bryng forth in stede of good werkes ye bad fruyete of euyll wer∣kes, for that is agaynst kynde of the soule. Loke how sory a wyfe shold be yf she brought forthe rather a foule serpent than a chylde / soo sholde we be of synne. The .x. is sykernesse of ye soule. Clene soules be so syker that of outwarde pay∣nes they be not hyng afterde, for they wote well they sholde do them no harme, but purge them and make them clene. All theyr besynesse is for to kepe them from inwarde euylles, that is fro¦synnes. And therfore they fele greate gladnesse wtin, in the soule. The .xi. is, that our lorde spa∣reth a clene soule from many greate laborous & peryllous werkes, as saynt Gregory sayeth. ¶ Our mercyfull lorde hydeth his true louers (whiche he loueth tendrely) from all laborous & peryllous werkes, whome rather he calleth his seruaūtes than his chyldren. Them he spa¦reth for tendrenesse, and wyll not yt suche be oc∣cupyed in suche outwarde occupacyons, but ke¦peth them without vexacion and in fayrenesse. There he wyl ye his seruaūtes be not put to out ward labour, & foule theyr fere onely in ye duste of out warde besynesse. Lo syster all suche yt be not dysposed to gladnesse of soule wt swetenesse
of our lorde in contemplacyon, he wyll that su¦he be put to outwarde besynesse. And yet he of his great mercy kepeth them from fylthynesse aut of the fere, that is of the affections, which way not escape some maner of dust, which our lorde hymselfe wyll wasshe away wt his owne hādes as he dyde to saynt Peter and all his dy∣yples whan he sayd. Io .xiii. Qui let us est on indiget  t pdes lauet. He that is cle∣ (saythour lorde edeth not to be purged but  of his affections whiche I my selfe wyll hasshe away for theyr great mekenesse yt they  ynystryng to my swere louers whi∣  ioye of me. The .xii. is that ye hertes  soules be lyffe by from erthly thynges.  may  suche a soule to the fyrmament.  is  clere for there in suche clerenesse  all suche soules buylde theyr ne∣  all erthly thynges by holy medyta∣. The .xiii. is that al clene soules ben often∣ , eyther in redyng or in heryng  good  of wysdome, or elles in swet∣yers, or in suche other goostly exercyses. Suche can not syue blissedly and ioyfully with out suche holy contrnplacyon, for they haue eyther but rnesse nor heuynesse, but ioye and adnesse. Salomon sayth. Ecclesia .xxiii. Ni∣ dulrs quam inspicere in mandatis dei.
There is nothyng so swete (he sayth) as it is to beholde in the wysdome of our lorde, and in his cōmaundementes. Therfore it was that Moy∣ses whan he had talked with our lorde and re∣ceyued his cōmaundementes, that he neyther dyde eate nor drȳke afterwarde for ioye of that holy presence forty dayes and .xl. nyghtes. It was a great feast to hym, him thought, for ma¦ny dayes the confore of our lordes presēce and his speche. ☞ O syster there be many ferre fro suche Ioyfull swetenesse, that be lothe to here our lorde speke to them. Anone they waxe dulle in soule, & haue no sauour of his speche. whan speketh our lorde to vs: Truely whan we rede suche thynges that be holsome to the soule. Ex here other say to vs by preachyng or exhortacy o. I pray the be none of tho. The .xiiii. is, that all suche clene soules gouerne dyscretely theyr bodyes from excesse of mysrule in eatynge and drynkynge and stepynge. They haue not suche hodyly dyseases as haue mysruled folkem ex∣cesse, nor they dye not so soone as other, but ly∣ue longer to goddes worshyp, out take suche yt our lorde withdraweth out of this worlde by his preuy domes. The .xv is, the greatnesse of dyuyne loue that suche clene soules doo fele in within them selfes. Loue is a very easy yoke and what some euer thynge is drawen with
suche an easy yoke is made very easy and soft. Saynt Bernard sayth. ¶ O thou yoke of holy loue how graciously drawest thou to the suche as thou wylt drawe to the. All harde thynges & greate thynges loue maketh lyght, & vneth of ony charge The .xvi. is, that al suche gladsome lene soules make theyr wylles euer to accorde to the wyll of god. For ryght as the wyll of god is fulfylled in them, so the wyll of thē is fulfyl∣ed in other as though god bade it. The .xvii. is that suche ioyfull and clene soules haue ioye vp  ioye. yt is, they haue double ioye here in erth. ere is, they haue ioye in Chryst & all his wer∣s. Another is, they haue ioye of his body, yt is  sayntes that be in heuen, and of holy lyuers erthe. The greatenesse of this ioye vpon ioye ay be fully consydered in suche that haue gr¦ arite win them, & greate goostly gladnesse.  ryght as a mother hath greate ioye of her  whan he is made a bysshop, or singeth his  masse, or hath ony greate dygnyte, which  rekeneth for her owne worshyp / so all suche full soules thynkes that it is theyr worship hat sayntes be worshypped in heuen, and also  chrysten men encrease in vertue here in erthe. which may also be vnderstande by all ye lymes of a mānes bodi. yf one parte of his bodi is wel  case, it is ioyfull and glad of the ease of euery
other lym̄e, so clene and ioyful soules in god ha¦ue ioye of eche other, both of good that be in er∣the, and also of all holy that be in heuen. The xviii. is that causeth a clene soule to be in ioy, is the longe vse of them that haue longe contynu∣ed in goodnesse. Lo sister ye longe contynuaunce of good lyuyng bryngeth in gladnesse of soule. The .xix. is hope of mede for our long abydyng in good lyuyng. As saynt Paul sayeth. Ro. xii. Spe gaudentes. They that hope of endlesse re¦warde, suche soules wax ioyefull. The .xx. is ioye of contemplacion that suche clene & ioyfull soules fele somtyme, with the whiche contem∣placiō a soule is moche illumined and lyghtned Suche a soule seyth in his ioyfull cōtemplaciō ryuers flowyng bothe hony and butter. As say¦eth Iob .xx. Vidit riunios stueris torrentis inellis et butirs. Saynt Gregory sayeth vpon the same texte, that these ryuers be callyd of ye holy goost, and they be rēnyng ryuers, for they be right plenteously gathered togyther in a con¦templatyue soule, whiche blyssed spiryt, with all his holy gyftes fyllyth a contēplatyue soule bothe wyth the swete hony of the godhed, and also with the swete butter of passion that was thristed out vpon the cherne of the crosse. Right as hony is gathered of flowers and of the ayre and butter of the body, so contemplacion is got¦ten
of the godheed of our lorde, & of swete heue∣ly thinges, & of the bytter paynes of our lordes body. And so by the gentyll bee of clennesse that hony of contemplacyon is brought to the hyue of the soule. And by tendre compūction the buc∣er of Chrystes passion is brought in to ye cher∣e of the herte, for to souple it, and make it softe agaynst all maner anguysshes. Oh, well were  soule at ease that might ioyfully souke of this hony, & eate of this swete butter. Suche a con∣eplatyue soule sholde then fele great rest / great ernesse / great delyte / great ioye / great loue & uour in Iesu ye lasteth euer, lytel hauyng mȳ¦de of ioye of this lyfe. Also suche one though it ray lytell with the mouthe, yet it is full with od, and seeth oftymes into heuen, & beholdeth there the sayrnesse of aungels, and of holy sou∣es. O syster now is this ioyfull contemplacyō  wonderfull ioye of loue, which ioye canno tō∣ tell. And though that wonderfull beholdīg  all the soule, yet for habundaunce of ioye & enesse whiche ascendeth in to the mouthe, the body & soule ioyeth in god. There is none that hath this grace of contemplacyon, but su∣che that our lorde first inspyreth to forsake this worlde & alwordly vanytees, & the couetyse of ye byle lust therof. And than after that heledeth suche a soule by herself alone, and speketh hym
selfe to her herte, and there gyueth her souke of his swetenesse of loue, and than he styreth her to holy prayers, medytacion and teares. At last he maketh her gather her herte togyther, and set it in hym. And than he openeth to the eye of the soule the gates of heuen, so that the eie may loke in to heuen. And than the fyre of loue is ve∣ryly in her herte, and brenneth therin, and ma∣keth it clere from all erthly fylthe, and from all noyous thoughtes. All suche so set be called con¦templatyue soules, & be rauysshed in the loue of god. For contemplacion is nothyng elles to me∣ne but a syght, by the whiche a soule seeth in to heuen, as I sayd before. And yet {per}fyte sight of heuen may not be had here in this lyfe, for the cloude of ye body that letteth our goostly syght. But as soone as they dye suche are brought be∣fore god, and seeth hym there face to face, & eye to eye / and soo dwell with hym without ende, whome they sought, desyred, and loued, why∣les they lyued in erthe. Oh. whyder saynt Au∣gustyn felt not this ioyfull cōtemplacion whan he sayd thus? ❧ Lorde Iesu thou hast led me in to a wondrefull and an vncustomable swete∣nesse, which yf it were fulfylled in me ye I fele, thā I can not tell what I might be, but it were endlesse blysse. Also I fynde of saynt Bernard how he sayd whan he felte contemplacyon. ❧
(he sayeth) sodeynly vnwares haboun¦ in are so moche trust and goostly gladnesse  ye whan I selfe of thy dutyne swetnesse that yst neuer what it myght be, but it were  selfe, O good Iesu contynue it mine, and v  in the, that I may of the laste se y•  in blysse. Suche contempla¦  Iesu, becomyth well chrystes  the loue of Iesu than brenneth  soule. There may no ma∣  be of vanyte, where suche occupa∣  of loue and ioyfull charyte Thus epe  and thou shalt thou fe∣  as Salomon sayth. Prouerb .iii.  sayth  contemplacyon, and that.  right swete. The moost  good folke is for to be in the sight of god  hym face to face which syght som¦  she  to some clene soules he  theyr ver, to make them kno¦  to what ioye they shall come whan  be paed hens. Suche a syght sawe saynt  whan he was rauysshed. Of this sight  saynt Bernarde and sayth. ¶ who so  be able so for to se Iesu it is full necessary  herte be clene. As it is wryten. Math .v.  vndebunt,
Blyssed be all they that haue clene hertes, for they shall se god contemplacyon. ❧ O now is this (syster) a swete fruyte, for it hath foure vertues. Fyrst is yt the vse of this swete fruyte of goostly ioye maketh a soule godly, lyuying by the lyfe of grace, as Salomon sayth. Eccl .xxx. Iocunditas cordis hee est vita hominis et the∣saurus sine defectione sactitatis. Ioye of herte (he sayth) is the lyfe of a soule, and ye treasou of holynesse whiche shall neuer fayle. The con∣trary dooth vnholsome sorowe of herre, which somtyme is ye cause & occasyon of goostly dethe. Therfore who so wyll be longe of lyfe in grace be ioyful goostly in herte, and put away vnhol some sorowe. of the which speaketh Salomon in another place & sayth. Eccl. xxx. Vristician longe repelle ate, multos enim occidit tristicra Put away (he sayth) fer fro the all vnholsom sorowes. For suche sorowes sleeth oftentyme many goostly soules, and bryngeth them out of the lyfe of grace in to a goostly dethe / & maketh them drye from the humour of grace, as Salo∣mon sayth. {pro}uerb .xvii. Spiritus tristis exsi∣cat ossa. An vnholsome sorowe in the soule dry¦eth the bones. That is the strengthes of ye soule fro the moysture of grace, soo that suche a soule so dryed vp fro grace oft tymes is all to broken by impacience. A tree that is dryed wyl rather
breake than bowe. The seconde vertue of goost¦ly gladnesse is, ye maketh a soule to lyue well & felowly amōges other, as Salomon sayth. {pro}∣uerb .xv. Cor gaudens exhilarat faciem. A ioy¦full hert gladdeth ye syght of other. Vneth may a body be gladsome and astable to another, but yf he haue a ioyful herte in god. The thyrd ver¦tue of goostly gladnesse is, that maketh a soule for to dyspyse all erthly thynges, as saynt Au∣styn sayth. who so hath an inwarde sauour of the holy goost, all erthly thynges is to hym vn∣sauery. Of this dispysynge of erthly thynges sayth Salomon. Eccl. i. Vbi multa sapientia multa indignatio. That is. where as is moche sauour and goostly gladnesse, there is moche in dygnacyon & contempt of erthly thynges. The fourth vertue of goostly gladnesse is, that it ma¦keth a soule to haue the vyctory of the fende, as I rede in the lyfe of saynt Anthony ye he taught his disciple saynt Paule the hermyte, and sayd thus. There is one thyng sone (he sayd) by the whiche yu mayst myghtily ouercome thy goost∣ly enmy. and that is goostly gladnesse. whan ye fende seeth moche goostly gladnesse in a soule, than he is sory, for he woteth wel god is there. Of this I fynde also a fygure in holy wryte to proue that it is sothe. whan the Phylysiees by whome be vnderstande the multytude of fēdes
se the chyldren of Israell make great ioye amō¦ges themself. they sayd. Alas, alas, god is amō that hoost .i. lx. iiii. Nō enim fuit tanta exulta¦cio ab heri enudius terci{us}. There was not so moche ioye yesterday and thre dayes agone as it is now, they sayd. ☞ Lo syster, by this ye may knowe by wytnesse of holy wryte, that ye lyfe of good folke is more mery than the lyfe of euyl folke. Eeate oft therfore I pray the of this swete fruyt of goostly gladnesse, and parte it wt thy systers, whiche be heuy in herte, and make them glad in god, that ye may al come to heuen blysse, where is ioye without ende. Amen. ❧ ¶ The thyrd fruyte of the tree of goostly lyuyng is Peas. Ca. iii. ¶ The thyrde fruyt of the holy goost. THe thyrde fruyte of the holy goost in holy lyuers is called Peas. ¶ This is a precious fruyte, in as moche as I fynde that our lorde Iesu had oft this fruyte in his mouthe, and aun∣gels, & his dyscyples also. That our lorde loued wel this fruyt I fynd well, for he had it in his mouth whan he sayd oft to his disciples thus.
Ioh. xx. Pax vobis. yt is. peas be among you. And this he sayd to the more thā ones, bycause  he wold they shold oft receyue this fruyt. And n another place also I fynde thus that he sayd to the. ioh. xiiii. Pacē relinquo vobis, pacē meā do vobis. Peas (he sayth) I leaue with you, & equeathe you. And peas at the last I shall gy∣ue you, yfye kepe well the peas that I haue b¦quearhed you. It semeth also ye it is a precyous ruyte / for aungels had it in theyr mouthes at our lordes byrth, whan they sayd & song. Luc. . In terra pax homnibus bone voluntatis.  It semeth well also ye it is a precyous fruy∣ for he wolde that his dyscyples had it oft in  mouthes, whan he bad them say in ye en∣ of euery hous ye they ētred in to. Math .x . Peas be euer in this hous.  precious a fruyte is this? which fruy¦  synde fygured in holy wryte, longe before  lordes incarnacyon, of ye culuer which was nt out of Noes shyp, and brought home in her mouthe a braunche of an olyue tree. By ye olyue is vnderstande Peas, and by the culuer ye holy goost. whiche betokeneth that all goostly folke in whome the holy goost dwelleth, sholde euer bere peas, bothe in theyr brest & in theyr mou∣the, and styre other to peas, as saynt Martyn oyde, whose mouthe was euer in spekynge ey∣ther
of Chryst / or mercy / or peas, and soo made peas among other. Also it semeth wel yt peas is a precyous fruyte in that, yt our lorde bought ye fruyte with his deare precyous blood / soo that he made peas therby throughout all the worl∣de. ¶ Also it is wel proued that it is a precious fruyt, for all martyrs toke theyr dethe to bryng peas among vs. Therfore sory may al they be that refuse so precious a fruyte, whiche our lor¦de & his aungels, all his apostles, all his dyscy∣ples, and all his martyrs & sayntes set so moch therby. This precyous fruyte our lorde Iesu hath left to his spouse holy chyrche, that all her chyldren may take ynough therof yf they wyl. ☞ But now to knowe veryly peas, thou shalt vnderstande that there is two maner of peas of good folke. One is peas of hertes here ī this ly∣fe, and peas euerlastyng in another lyfe. By ye fyrst peas we may come to ye second peas Ther¦fore true it is ye our lorde sayth. Math .v. Bea∣ti pacifici qm̄ filij dei vocabunt. Blyssed be they that be peasyble, for they be called goddes chyl∣dren. All suche be called peasyble that be louers of peas / whiche alway besy them to reforme peas & kepe peas, fyrst in hymself / and seconds ryly in other. Peas in hymself is for to make ye flesshe subiect to the spyrite, and for to make the styrynges of the soule subiecte to the ouer parte
of reason. Be therfore syster fyrst a maker of pe∣as with in thyself, makynge thy body subiecte to thy soule, and than a maker of peas of other. For yu canst not be a very maker of peas of other but yf thou be fyrst in peas within thy selfe. This fyrst peas lyeth in repressing of all carnal lustes & desires, and that the lawe of the flesshe repugne not the lawe of the soule, but that ye bo¦dy serue ye soule vnder trybute, that is for to ser¦ue the soule as a seruaunt serueth the body, and elles there shal no peas be. The body is as a ser¦uaunt to whome it longeth for to serue, the sou∣e is as a lady to whome it lōgeth for to haue ye soueraynte. whan the seruaunt taketh awaye from y• lady her herytage, than is there a grea∣te erthquake, as Salomon sayth. {pro}uerb .xxx. Vnum est per quod terra mouetur, quando an cilla heres fuerit domine sue. ❧ There is one greate thyng he sayth, whiche causeth ye erth∣quake, and that is whan the seruaunt is heyre of the lady. The body whiche is the seruaūt, is than ye ladyes neyre, whan he by fleshly lyuȳg ereth away the herytage of the soule, & so mys¦pendeth it, by the whiche the soule that is lady is depryued from spyrytuall and endlesse dely∣tes. And this causeth an erthquake, that is, the erth which is thy flesh may not suffre vertues to growe in the soule, but ouertorneth all ye edy∣fyenge
and buyldyng of vertue vp and downe. Alas that suche a wretched seruaūt shold ouer∣come suche a gentyll lady of our lordes kynne. yf there shold be very peas betwene them two, nedes the seruaunt must come and lowe herself to her lady. That is, she must be compelled to obey to the soule, and to all the profytes ye longe to the soule for to be dylygent. who so can make the flesshe to lowe he shall haue peas ynough in himself, & be able to make peas amonges other Though thou fele sōtyme styrīges of thy flesshe to synne, (yf reason folowe not) deme it not con∣sent, but onely a felynge, whiche is called but a tourneyment betwene the soule and the body, Trowest thou that therfore, that thou hast lost peas. Naye syster, as longe as thou neuer con∣sentest for to be ouercome. There is no maner of thynge forboden the in all suche tourney mētes betwene the soule and the body, but onely con∣sent in the felynge of ony suche temptacyons. Playne not and saye that thou hast loste peas, bycause that thou doost fele great temptacions of thy flesshe. For as long as thou cōsentest not to suche temptacyons thy peas is not broken. The seconde peas that I dyde make mencyon of is peas of herte. and that is whan all the sty¦ringes and moueinges of the soule be made sub¦iecte and obedyēt vnto the ouer parte of reason.
This peas is all inwarde, and it cometh of affe¦ction & of a ryght intent. yf thyn affection be cle¦ne & thyne intent be ryght for to profyte in ver∣tue, anone without ony delay our lorde wyll de∣lyuer the from all vnquyetnesse of herte, & ma∣ke thy conscyence a peasyble dwellyng place of ryght wysnesse. This peas of conscyence, whi∣che is called peas of herte, is nothyng elles but a maner of ernest, and a taste of that ioye & peas whiche is euerlastyng in heuen. And ye we shall haue at the last, yf we kepe very peas and rest. Also they that haue rested them here from wic¦ked workes, there shall they rest from endlesse trybulacion. Of these bothe peases that is of cō¦scyence & of ioye our blyssed lorde made his te∣stament. The fyrst peas whiche is called peas of hert, he bequethed here to his dysciples whā he sayd. Io. xiiii. Pacem, relinquo vobis. My peas I bequethe to you. The second peas whi∣che is peas of endlesse blysse he bequethed to su¦che that kepe ye fyrst peas, whan he sayd. Ioh. xiiii. Pacem meā do vobis. My peas endlesly I gyue to you. The fyrst is not now in this er∣the to vertuous folke ful, stable, namely for trou¦bles and vnquyetnesse, which many vertuous folke fele somtyme among. And no wonder, for all such peas is but the relyef and almesse of he∣uenly peas, which is gyuen to the poore in spy¦ryte
syttyng at ye gates of Ierusalem, abyding there some peas sēt from our lordes table. The almes that cometh fro a lordes table is not al∣ways able to be eaten. For somtyme among in such almesse be founde bones bare from flesshe and other fragmentes, which be not able for to be eaten. So such peas that is graunted of our lorde to clene hertes here in erth is somtime ful barayne from rest & quyetnesse, as is a bone fro flesshe. And yet all such maner vnquietnesse co∣meth from our lordes table of heuen, for to pro∣ue a soule. ☞ Lo syster, blyssed be all such yt be thus peasyble, which bothe make peas betwe∣ne the soule & body, and also kepe peas in herte. For they be made our lordes chambrelayns, in as moche as they make redy for hym, (in theyr own hertes & soules) a resting place as Dauyd sayth. Ps. lxxv. In pace factus est locus eius. His place (he sayeth) is made in peas, whan ye euer therfore ye this lord of peas cometh & bryn¦geth wt hym his swete peas. or gooth awaye & withdraweth his peas, leauing the in trouble as the semeth, chaūge neuer thy hert fro hym, lest he passe for euer away fro the. But peasibi byde in prayer his comyng agayn, and so thou shalt kepe rest of herte. wylt yu kepe well peas? than conformethy wyll to goddes wyll, and so shalt thou kepe peas. For so sayd the aūgels in
christes byrth. Pax hominibus bone volunta¦tis. Peas they said be to al people of good wyl. If thy wyll with stonde our lordes wyll, thou shalt fynde no rest, for he wyll at the laste haue his wyll done. wyll thou, nyl thou, wylt thou also kepe well thy peas, than withdrawe thy hert frō all erthly loues, For yu shalt neuer haue peas, if yu set thy hert in sekyng of suche thyng¦es. Saynt Gregory sayeth. ❧ What is more laboryous, than to set our hert sore on worldly thīges. And what is more restful then nothing for to desyre of worldly thynges, but only oure bare necessaris. Thou mayst also kepe this pea¦ce, yf thou kepe dylygently thy .v. wyttes, for whan the gates were shet & the disciples with in, our lorde sent in peas amonges them, & said Ioh. xx. Pax vobis. what is it els for to close thy gates, but to refrayne al thy .v. wyttes frō vnlefull desyres whiche dryueth away peace. Thus sister kepe peace within thy selfe & than shalt thou be a good maker of peace amonge o∣ther, and yet wyll they neuer hertly be reconsy¦led to suche that are them forgyuenesse, what be suche scorners of peas, and not louers of pea¦ce, for they be no verilouers of peas. but if they be as redy to seke peas of those that haue tres∣paced to them, as suche that haue trespased to them, be glad to offre them peas. As Dauid sai¦eth.
Ps. xxxiii. Inquire pacem et persequere¦cam. That is for to say. Seke peas and sue to haue it parfitly. There be also many which be redy for to receyue peas of other that haue tre∣spaced to thē, but not so redy for to offre it fyrst to other to whome they haue offended. It is more glorious in the syght of god for to seke pe∣as before thou be called to peas, than whan yu art called. For it is more curtesy to gyue a gyfte before it be axed, than to graunte it whan it ys axed. All suche that seke noo peas, but refuse it whan it is offred, they vnderstande not ye peas is the herytage of chrysten people. For yf they vnderstode verily that peas were the heritage of chrysten men. whiche Chryst dyde bequethe them in his testament they wolde neuer abyde for to recouer theyr herytage tyl they were pra¦yed therto, but they wolde sue therafter with all maner of haste for to haue it. Also all they be called peasyble that labour & do theyr besynesse for to breake strife and debate among other. For that was the offyce of our lorde Iesu, whiche laboured to his lyues ende, and shed his bloode for christē peas, And in token ye he laboured sore for our peas, after his resurrectiō he appered to his dyscyples, and shewed them his handes & his fete, and also his body all wounded, ye they myght vnderstand therby what costes & expen¦ces
he had done for to purchace peas for them. as though he had sayd to them thus. Set not lytel by peas, for it hath cost me my lyfe. Now syster this is a deynte fruyte, for vneth it may be founde, it hath so many lettynges for to gro¦we. ☞ which ben they yt letteth peas of hert? Truely syster wrathe / hatred / stryfe / debate / worldly besynesse / & outward noyse. Therfore yf thou wylt haue very peas in herte, beware of all these. This fruyte syster hath .iiii. greate eertues and fayre. One is, that all they yt haue peas be made goddes chyldren in erthe. as our lorde sayth hymselfe. Beati pacifi qm̄ fili dei vocabuntur. Blyssed be they that be peasfull, for they shalbe called goddes children. His chyl¦dren by folowyng his steppes. For the offyce of our lorde was in erthe to make peas, and so do all suche. The seconde vertue of peas is this / ye it clenseth the eye of ye soule. For peas is of such clennesse that it clenseth a soule so clerely that it may se god, as the holy apostle sayeth. Heb. xii. Pacem sequimini et sanctimoniam cum omni b{us}, sine qua nemo videbit deū. That is. Shew peas and holynesse with all folke. wtout which peas may no man se god. The thyrde vertue of peas is that it maketh redy a place to our lorde. There is no place so pleasaunt to our lorde, as is the place of the herte whan it is in rest. Doo
well thy dyligence for to loue well this fruyte, and pray our lorde to take parte with the of his owne fruyte of peas. And than shalt thou haue god at thy feast, as saynt Paule sayth .ii. co xiii Pacem habete et dominus pacis erit vobiscū. Haue peas with you, and the lorde of peas shal be with you. The fourth vertu of peas is that our lorde gyueth for our erthly peas here, peas euerlastyng without ende. For they that haue peas, & kepe peas and loue peas here they may be sure of endlesse peas, as the prophete Esay sayth. Esa. xxxii. In pacis pulchritudine cōqui esces. In fayrnesse of peas all suche shall rest. Here thou sholdest slepe in peas, and there thou shalt rest in peas, as Dauyd sayth. Ps. iiii. In pace in idipsū, dormiam et requiescam. In pe∣as (he sayth) with my selfe I shall slepe & rest. That is. I shall so slepe here in rest and peas wt in my selfe, which peas & rest is in me vnchasi∣geable and vnuaryable that I may at the laste partytely rest in blyssed peas without ende. O how mery (syster) y• mayst be in kepīg of peas. For veray peas (where it is had) bryngeth the soule into great clerenesse  tranquylyte. what is peas but tranquylite of soule, symplenesse of erte, the bonde of loue, and y• felawshyp of cha¦ryte? Suche peas putteth away dyscorde / re¦oresseth wrathe / destroyeth pryde / and louerh
mekenes / it seketh god / it loueth god / it cannot hate / it teacheth to loue / it cannot be proude. He that hath suche peas kepe it will. And he that hath lost it hye him fast that he may wyn̄e it a∣gayne. ❧ Lo syster yf thou be thus peacyable and in peas sue after such peas with clennesse. Thou mayst be meke and mylde, and symple in herte, pure in thy wordes, innocēt in thy wyll, according with god in thyn affecion, that thou may at last be with thē in blysse that haue fruy¦cyon, & vse of this fruyt of peas without ende. ❧ AMEN ❧ ¶ The fourth fruyt of the tree of goostly ly∣uynge is Pacyence. Ca. iiii. ¶ Of the fruyt of pacyence. THe fourth fruyte of the holy goost in holy lyuers is called pacience This fruyt is a ryght necessary fruyt, na∣mely for vs that be here ī this wret∣ched vale of mysery, amonge so ma∣ny passyons of euyll. Pacyence is suche a vertu that it ordeyneth vs to the fruicion & vse of end∣lesse peas. whiche pacyence is brought forth of charite and mekenesse. For charyte & mekenesse be the father and mother of pacyēce. Whan we
suffre no maner heuynesse nor dysease, than be we not called pacyent, but peasyble. For pacien¦ce is in suffryng of all maner wronges, and not to be troubled with no maner passyons therof. Some there be which be pacyent for nede, and some for symulacyon. Pacyence of nede is whā we wolde reuenge vs of our aduersaryes, and may not, nor dare not, dredynge more harme. This Paence is nothynge vertuous. ❀ The other pacyence which is called symulacyon or ppocrysy is whan onely for vaynglory we she∣we vs pacyent in aduersyte, for to be praysed therfore here in erth. this pacyence is also vycy¦ous and nothing vertuous. ¶ There is also an other fayned pacyence, of the which saynt Ere∣gory speketh. that is whan we fayne pacyence in wronges to ye entent we may be reuēged ano¦ther tyme, whan we haue oportunyte & leyser. This pacyence is also vycyous and not vertu∣ous. ❧ There be .v. kyndes of vertuous paciē¦ce ye cometh in suffrīg of .v. wronges, wherin ve¦ray pacyence is proued. The fyrst is, not for to be impacyent, for hurtyng of thy body. The se¦ond, not to be impacyent, for losynge or with∣drawynge, or for scrarcenesse of temporall goo∣des. The thyrde is, not for to be impacyent for ony offences or harmes done to thy kyn̄e or ony of thy frendes. The fourth is, not for to be vn∣pacyent
for lesyng of thy worshyp. The .v. is, not for to be vnpacient for no trouble of tranquylite lyte of soule. This last conteyneth all the other iiii. within hym, though it so be that sornty me it may be vnderstand partyculerly by it selfe wt∣out other. As whan {per}aduēture we be troubled and vnpacyent for the rayne, or suche other dy∣stemperate wether, that letteth vs from our b dyly dysporte, or erthly gladnesse. In all these pacyence is proued & knowen for pacyice. But whan soeuer we be troubled for defaut of right wysnesse, or for decay of ye gostly helth of other. This trouble shold not be called vnpacyēce, but zeale of ryghtwysnesse, and of vertue. but yf i be out of measure & vndyscrete, than it is called impacience. So than by this it semeth that eue¦ry passyon that is had to proue our pacyēce, ey∣ther it is of suche thinges that we desyre & loue and is denyed vs and withdrawen from vs, or elles of suche thynges that we hate and d noy∣ous to vs, and yet be put to vs, & also be threat∣ned withall. In all suche thinges it is a necessa¦ry vertue, namely for telygyous persones to be pacyent. For ryght as for these .v. causes it is & great vertue of pacyence not for to be troubled, ryght so for defaut of ryghtwysnesse not for to be troubled, it is a vyce of slouthe & obstynacy. Eueryche of vs for our self sholde be sory for our
detes which we haue done, namely of right¦wysnesse and than is this paceience called a ver¦tue of penaunce. We sholde also be sory for our defautes that we do, and than is suche pacyēce called a feou of encreas in vertue. We shold also be sory for our synnes that we may do, and than is suche pacience called a sleyght of drede. Also we shold be sory with pacyence for ye har∣mes and losse of our euen chrysten, but measu∣rably for the Iosse of theyr temporall goodes / & moche more for the losse of theyr spyrytual goo∣des / & of such thynges as lōgeth to theyr helth. To this last pacient sorow, be souerayns most bounde. For it they be pacient in sufferyng of yt vicious lyuinges of theyr subiectes, not correc¦ting ting thē after theyr power as they shulde, they shall haue no mede for such pacience, but rather they wyn therby the wrathe of god, as Hely the hyghe prest had, for because he wolde not sharply chastise his chyldren for theyr grete de∣fautes, with the whiche our lowe was displea¦sed, therfore he selfe payne with the wrathe of god. Thus than pacyence is a ryght necessary fruyte, namely for rely gious persones. ❧ Lo syster, yf thou wylt be very relygyouse yu must be pacyent and suffre easyly all sorowes & dys∣eases Which pacience must be strong yt no temp∣tacion ouer come it. It must also be stedfast that
neyther dredes elabours make it no co warde. It must also be of a myghty wyll, that thou he not afrayde to do the moost harde thynges that is commaunded to the, for the helth of thy sou∣le. It must also be a long abydyng wyll, that ye long delay of mede breke not thy hope of desye. It must also be mylde, that thou be not chaufed & styred for no maner of hate of other for to gy∣ue euyll for euyll, but rather good for euyll. It must also be easy that thou caust or may in al su∣che che wronges be without hastynesse of hert, sou¦ple & treatable. So to be pacient thou shalt fynd great ease. Is it not a greate ease trowest thou to suffre all thyng easyly? For aduersyte wtout pacyence hurteth in thre maner of wyse. Oue is that it tormenteth vs outwarde. Another yt it maketh vs tesly or frowarde inwarde by im∣pacyence. And the thyrde is, that such an vnpa¦cyent conseyence freateth the soule within. Yf thou be very pacyent thou shalt fynde a greate refresshyng to thy soule. For ryght as the body is fed with dylycate feastes, so is the soule fed with precyous vertues, and namely with this vertue of pacience it is made fat, as with one of the moost deynty morcelles of our lordes disshe. In suche pacyice is great edyfication to other. For many taketh hede rather of that vertue in other than of ony other vertue. Many we fynd
chaste / abstynent poore / full of abnesse / besy in prayers / and stedfast in the faythe. but fewe in maner mekely pacient in reproues, detractiōs, and other . For in such thynges anone we wyll excuse  efende vs, lest other be slaundred therby, sup not we be gylty yf we holde our eas. And ye th  we do shewe our self more reproueble in that we ven∣ge our selfe by suche impaciency. It were more prayse or commendacyon worth to vs yf yt we wolde folowe our lorde for to suffes such wron∣ges pacyently, than by ausweryng for to ouer∣come other, as saynt Gregory sayth. For to suf∣fre it purgeth bothe our sysies that we haue do¦ne, and also it kepeth vs warely that we fall no more in them. It gyueth vs bothe grace of ver∣tue and goostly gyftes in this lyfe, & also a grete ioye in heuen whan we come thyder, as our lor¦de sayth hymself to all suche as suffre for his lo¦ue. Math .v. udete ex exultate in̄ snerces vestramulta est i eelis. yt Be ioyfull and glad (He sayth) for your mede is great in hauen. Pa∣ye is also fe we to Chrystes passyon, and  of kynne. ☞ Se now how by pacyence yu peldest to our lorde suche thynges as our lorde suffred for the greuous anguysshes & discases, so to suffre withour lorde in ioyeng of trybula∣yon shold be the delyte of all chrysten folke. O
now it may be a great confusyon and shame to all them yt nothyng hath suffred for hym, whā our lorde shall come at the day of dome & shewe his woundes of his passyon, and greate ioye to all suche that for his loue haue suffred pacyētly many greuous iniuryes, in as moch as they be lykened and cōformed to Chrystes passyon. Pa¦ciēce is also a great token of goostly swetenesse. For to them that our lorde sendeth aduersitees, wotsauf of his goodnesse for to make them here some parte of his crosse. This is a great gentyl¦nesse of hȳ that he wyl make vs felawes of his passyon, and parteners of his charge. This is to them a great token of trust, that our lord tru∣steth them well and loueth them so, yt he wyl de∣uyde with them his charge. For lyke as a man beryng a burden which he wold were not lost, hauyng many felawes goyng with him in his iourney, rather wyl pray suche one for to helpe him to bere it ye wyl not lese it, but kepe it saul, thā and ther that wyll lese it. So our blyssed lor¦de which is with vs al the dayes of our lyfein our wayes that we walke, beyng wery for the great labour of his passion, that he yet suffreth in his spouse holy chyrche, that is in his mysly call body, axeth whyther ony will haue cōpas∣syon on hym to helpe to bere the burden of try∣bulacyon that he yet suffreth in his membres
of holy chyrche. For the passyon Whiche he suf∣fred whan he was in erthe he distry buted it to all his membres of chrysten people. that ryght as he entred in to blysse by paynes & passyons, so he wolde that all his membres shold entre in to ioye by paynes and passyons. Lete vs ther∣fore haue compassyon of his paynes, and helpe to bere his crosse of his passion in our selfe, and than shall we be {per}teyners of his ioye, And he yt hath moost compasson therof by very pacyence he shall be moost next to our lorde in ioye. Thre degrees I fynde of pacience. ¶ The fyrst degre is yt a man besy hym to lerne to represse by ba∣tayle all maner styrynges of wrath and impact¦ence, lest it breake out by vnlawful wordes & de∣des, but lete it be quenched as fyre in his owne smoke, for but yf it be restreyned it wyll encres¦se and growe and brenne all that cometh nygh. In .iiii. maner wyse I fynde that fyre is quen∣ched. One is by water, another is by stopping, the thyrde is by wastyng, and the fourth is for faut of mater. In the same wyse the fyre of im¦pacyence must be quenched. Fyrst by shedynge of water, that is by wyse councell, for to be ad∣uysed what we say. And thynk how moch pro¦fyte is in pacyence, and how moche harme co∣meth of impacyence. The second is by stopping that is by kepyng and stoppyng of thy mouthe
& thy handes, lest thy tongue in speking do bre∣ke out in to wordes of falsnesse, and thy handes in to dedes of fury and hastynesse. The thyrde is by wastyng, that is by tournyng maters of pre and wrathe in to other maters. For as fyre is quenched by withdrawing of wood eche frō other, so maters of wrath by withdrawyng of the maters wisely into other maters that may helpe to peas. The fourth is by defaute of ma∣ters, that is, yf all pryue rownynges be put a∣way, than all occasyons of impacyence sholde cease. Preuy rownyng is a subtyll suggestyon whiche is the greatest cause of debate, yf there be no herers there shall no rowners be. ¶ The second degre of pacyence is, that a man by long vse of pacyence / & in refrynynge of impacyēce hath so lerned yt he is not afrayd nor trobled for ony aduersyte, but hym semeth yt he is in a pla¦ce of such great sykernesse & rest, where be seeth his aduersaryes go besyly about hym for to dis¦ease hym, & yet he trusteth verily yt they shal do hym no harme, for bycause he feleth soo greate swetenesse in pacyence. Lo syster, so longe is a man aferde of aduersyte, as longe as he loueth tēporall thynges, eyther in hiself or out of hym self, which he dredeth to lose, or els hath sorow in ye losse, as is in hurting or losyng of his own body, his worship, his godes, his frēdes, & his
owne wyll. Yf he loue not these thynges inordy¦natly, nor haue no great delite in them, than he hath no great sorow in the losse of them. What harme may our aduersary do to vs? wherfore sholde we be sory? If he hate vs, his own euyl is inclosed in his owne hert, yt it may not touch vs, nor do vs no harme. it is his own payn alo∣ne, be we in peas wtin our self, & pray for him. A fyre inclosed in another mafies bosome bren̄eth him and not vs. If he say ony worde that shold be agaynst vs, it is but a wynd that passeth by ye ayre, it hurteth vs not. For lyke as yu woldest not be sory, but well apayd yf a darte were pyc¦ked or throwen to the and touched the not, but rafie in to the ayre, so do of such cursed wordes. for it is but a barkyng and no bytyng. If he bac¦byte the in thy absence, yet be yu not troubled, he hurteth hymself & not the. In that he sheweth himself an enuyous man and a detractour, and maketh hymself odyble to other, & not for to be set by. Therfore be thou styl and hold thy peas, and than our lorde and other shal defende the a∣gaynst hym, and haue compassyon on the. And yf thou begyn to strugle & stryue agaynst hym by answerynge or defendynge thyselfe by some maner of excusyng, than all they that fyrst had cōpassion on the shall stand & beholde you bothe as two cockes fyghtyng, & set ryght nought by
you bothe, but reproue you bothe for your enuy and impacy ence. Yf thou drede suspycyon that might fall to the by suche detraction, yet suffre mekely and gyue place, and than shall thy pacy¦ence put away suspyycon out of other mennes hertes, that they sholde not deme none euyll of the. Yf thy hert be anguysshed and brent sore wt¦in thy self for rācour, yet labour pryuely with∣out shewyng of outwarde tokens, and put it a∣way with easy suffraunce, considering ye great {pro}fyte that foloweth thereof. For ryght as a mā hauyng an impostume must suffre a lytel why¦le bothe brennyng and cuttyng in hope to haue sooner helthe of his sekenesse. Ryght so must yu fyght and stryue within thy selfe, in dystroyēg of suche brennyng & rancour. And so thou shalt within short whyle fynde helth & rest. Suffre bachyters as thou must do the bytyng of a fle. In this degre of pacyence (yf thou be well ler¦ned therin) thou wylt not be troubled with ad∣uersyte, but suffre and be styll. ¶ The thyrd de¦gre of pacyence is to be ioyfull in try bulacyōs, and glad whan thou felest them, and desyre thē whan thou lackest them. Ryght as a famous & a worthy knyght wold be glad whan he might proue his knighthode with another knight as he is. Such gladnesse had that worthy knight of god saynt Paul whā he said thus .ii. Co. xii
Placebo mihi in infirmitatibus: in contume∣lijs: in necessitatibus: in angustijs: in {per}secutio∣nib{us} pro Christo. It lyketh me well (he sayth) & it is pleasaūt to me for to be in sekenesse, in re∣proues, in necessitees, in anguysshes, & in {per}secu¦cyōs for Chrystes loue. ❧ I rede also that our lorde taught how that the chyldren of Israell sholde do sacryfyce, whan he sayd thus. Deut. xxxiii. Immolabunt victimas iusticie, & quasi iundationem maris lac sugēt. They shall sou∣ke the waues of ye see as they wolde souke myl∣ke, (he sayth) and so they shal sacryfice to me ye sacryfyce of rightwysnesse. What is this for to mene syster? Thou shalt vnderstande that ye see is ryght bytter, how may thā a man souke out mylke of such bytternesse? I shal tel the. Thou soukest well mylke out of the waues of the byt¦ter see whan thou art glad, as it were by ye swe¦te mylke of goostly conforte of euery aduersyte, whiche encreaseth and haboundeth in ye bytter see of this wretched worlde, and than thou sa∣cryfyest the sacryfyce of ryghtwysnesse to our lorde god. For as sayth saynt Gregory. ❧ It is more mede for to suffre paciently aduersytes than for to do all the good werkes that may be done without that. For yf thou somtyme in de∣syre for to please god doost put to thyn owne bo¦dy some maner of affiction & torment wilfully
in chasty syng of it. or els tormentest thy self for goddes loue by compūction & mournyng. why than art thou not as well willyng gladly for to suffre outward occasyons of pacience profered by other. Good syster be as glad for to suffre the one as ye other. For it is more mede for the to suf¦fre of another than of thy selfe. Yf thou settestly tell by thy self, why art thou not well apayd to be lytell set by of other? For right as very meke¦nesse is as ioyfull to be set lytell by of another, as he is of himself. so very pacience suffreth as gladly aduersyte of other as he wolde of hiself. ☞ Lo syster he that is moost pacyent in wron∣ges moost shall be set by in the kyngdome of he∣uen. O syster, now is this vertue of pacyence a necessary vertue, whiche causeth a man to loue them that hurt hym, & not to hurt them agayn. And forgyueth them which do hym wronge, & not dooth wrong agayne. And spareth thē that noyeth hym, and not noyeth agayne. Therfore pacience is called by doctours the roote and the keper of all vertues. For our lorde sayth. Luc. xxi. In pacientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras. In your pacyence (he sayeth) ye shall kepe in true possessyō your soules, that is in rest and peas. The fruyt of such pacyence hath .iiii. fayre vertues. One is yt a pacyent soule is stron¦ger than yt myghtyest man that lyueth in erth.
For a pacyent soule suffreth all euylles & wron¦ges more myghtyly, than the strongest man in all the myghtyest dedes ye euer he dyde, though he had won̄e bothe townes and castels, as Sa¦lomon sayth. Prouerb. xvi. Melior est vir paci∣ens viro forti & qui dominatur animo suo expu∣gnatore vrbium. More stronger and better in ye syght of god is a pacyent soule in suffrynge of wrōges, than the myghtyest man in erthe. For he that ouercometh & wyn̄eth his owne wyll, is more commendable than he that wyn̄eth ca∣stelles and townes. we fynde many such great conquerours of townes, but fewe conquerours of theyr wylles. He that ouercometh hymselfe is stronger than ony other. Suche wyn̄eth not a towne or a cyte in ouercomyng hymself, but ye kyngdome of heuen. Math .xi. Regnum ce∣lorū vim patitur et violenti rapiunt illud. The kyngdome of heuen must be won̄e with suche a vyolent strength. For all vyolent ouercomers of thēself bereue it. It is more maystry to ouer∣come al a regyō than for to ouercome thyn own wylfull soule. The second vertue of this fruyt of paciēce is, that it maketh a man ryght wyse. as Salomō sayth. {pro}uerb. xiiii. Qui paciēs est multa gubernat̄ sapiētia. He yt is pacient is go∣uerned wt moche wysdome. (he sayth) In thre maner of wyse a wyse man is pacyent. One is
that suche one purchaceth hym full wysely by his pacyēce as it were in maner without great labour many great iewels of golde and syluer, and of precyous stones, to make hym therwith an endlesse crowne in the blysse of heuen. The contrary dooth he that is vnpacyent, as saynt Bernarde sayth. ❧ For he with his cruelte de¦pryueth his crowne from all suche precyous it wels. Another is that he is wyse in kepynge. For though somwhat he leseth by fraylte, yet he waxeth wyse afterwarde that he wyll kepe the remeynant well and wysely, so that he wil not lese all. The contrary dooth he that is īpa∣cyent. yf he lose his lande he wyll for angre soo stryue therfore that he wyll lese also the kyng∣dome of god. ☞ Lo for a lytell erthly thyng he casteth away from hym for angre all his goost∣ly goodes. The thyrd is that he amendeth such thynges as he wyn̄eth, as is whan he torneth to good al the euyll yt he suffreth, as saynt Pau¦le sayth. Ro. viii. Diligentibus deum omnia cooperautur in bonum. To them that loue god all thynges tourne to good. Soo it fareth not wt them yt be impacyent. For yf they haue wrong with theyr āgre they put more to, and so make it wors. ¶ The thyrd vertue of this fruyte of pacyence is that it kepeth a man frō goostly ve¦nym, as our lorde sayth. Math. vlt. Simor∣fer{rum}
d biberint nō eis nocebit. Though a paci¦ent soule drynke venym of dyspytful and veny mous wordes, it shall do hym no harme, but it is holsome to hym, & ye maketh the vertue of pa¦ciēce. Saynt Gregory sayth in his dialogues yt the vertue of pacyence is more worth than for to do bodyly myracles. ¶ The fourth vertue of the fruyt of pacience is, that it crowneth endle∣fly a soule in heuen. ❧ Saynt Iherom sayth, what saynt in heuen is crowned without pacy¦ence? ❀ And holy chyrche from the begynnyng vnto this tyme wanted neuer {per}secucion no. suf¦fres of {per}secucyōs And therfore all pacyent sou¦les of {per}secucyōs haue for to shewe for them our lordes patent lettres, that the kyngdme of he∣uen is theyrs. whiche patent lettres begyn in this wyse. Math .v. Beati qui {per}secutionem paciuntur propter iusticiam: qm̄ ipsorum est re¦gnum celorum. Blyssed be all them (he sayth) that suffre {per}secucyon for rightwysnesse, for the kyngdome of heuen is theyrs of ryght. ☞ Lo syster what vertue may be founde in this neces¦sary fruyt of pacience that thus cōmendeth vs to god, and kepeth vs frō al euyls? For it tē{per}eth yre, it refeeyneth the congue, it gouerneth ye sou¦le, it kepeth peas, it breketh hasty lykyng, and swageth the vyolence therof. it quencheth stry∣le and debate, it maketh vs meke in {per}rosperite,
stronge in aduersyte, mylde agaynst iniuryes & wronges, it ouercometh tēptacyous, it suffreth {per}secucyons, it wardeth myghtyly the grounde of our fayth, it encreaseth worthyly our hope, it gouerneth wysely all our dedes, it dyrecteth vs sadly in Chrystes way, and confyrmeth vs surely that we may be gods chyldrē. This ver∣tue (syster) sholde be beloued with great ioye, & be cleped & enbraced with all our myghtes. So to eate of this fruyte w thy systers vnto thy ly∣ues ende, our lorde Iesu graunt it, yt ye all may in blysse receyue the crowne of pacyence which is endlesse. AMEN ❧ ¶ The fyfth fruyte of the tree of goostly ly∣uyng is suffraunce. Ca. v. THe fyft fruyte of the holy goost in all goostly lyuers is called suffraūce or long abydyng. This is a good fruyt & a hard, But it is {pro}fitable, whiche lyeth in suffraūce & abydyng of our lord as Dauid sayth. ps. xxvi. Expecta dn̄m & viriliter age. If ye aske our lorde ouy thynge in thy prayer ye is longyng to thy helth, abyde our lorde in myghty suffraūce, & than shal thy hert be cōforted. Thre causes there be why we wold abyde & suffre our lorde tyll he wyll graunt vs
yt we aske. One is, for a grete rewarde is prepa¦red to suche long abydyng. And there is nothīg better to be abyden & taryed for, than our lorde wt his medes and rewardes. Another is. for he deceyueth neuer a suffring abyder frō his desy¦re, as Dauyd sayth. Ps. xxiiii. Vniuersi qui te expectant nō confūdent̄. All they which abyde mekely the lorde (he sayth) yu shamest neuer nor deceyuest. Thynke it not sayth saynt Augustin ye our lorde deceyueth the, and iapeth with the though yu haue not anone that thou woldest ha¦ue of hym. For though he defer it he wyll not vt¦terly put it away frō the. Though yu be not her∣de anone of the court of heuen sayth saynt Gre∣gory, thynke not yt they haue forgoten the. The thyrd is that he deferreth suche thynges whi∣che we desyre of hym for our profyte. For ye len∣ger that we desyre suche thinges, the more we be tormented in meke mournyng. And the more that we be tormented in meke mournynge, the more we be purged and clensed. And than we be able for to receyue suche thynges as we desy¦re of our lorde. ❧ Thus sayth saynt Gregory. Our lorde in deferryng of desyres of chosen sou¦les he tourmenteth thē, & in ye tourment he pur∣geth thē. ¶ The secōd cause why we shold aby¦de & suffre our lord is ye our desyre shold icrease. For the more that our lord deferreth yt we aske.
And though it seme that our askynge is not ta∣ken hede to the more deper in ye roote of our fou∣le be our desyres fastned, though we can not fe∣le it. For ryght as the sede of corne is hyd longe vnder erth by harde frost and come late vp, and at the last encreas in manyfolde cornes. so holy desyres with delaye groweth and encreaseth. And yf they sayle by suche delay from increas, trust ryght well that they were neuer holy de∣syres. Saynt Austyn sayth. Though our lorde gyue sōtyme late that thou desyrest, yet his gyf¦tes be neuerthelesse commendable. But therfo∣re he dooth it, that it shold swetely be kept whi¦che is long desyred. That yt is soone gyuen and graunted is set lytell by. Our lorde therfore ke∣peth it safe to the, the which he wyll not anone graunt the. that thou mayst lerne therby to de∣syre great thynges worthyly. The thyrd cause is why we shold abyde and suffre our lorde, al∣though he graunt vs not that we aske hym is, that we sholde kepe wisely that he hath gyuen vs. And saynt Gregory sayth. ❧ A thing that is foūde and hath belong desyred, is kept more warely. Therfore they that somtyme be chosē soules seme yt theyr desyres be not herd of god. there ryseth moche wynnyng of vertue in such pacyent abydynge. ❀ O now is this a mer∣ueylous dyspensacyon of pyte, that where they
wene theyr purpose of desire is adnulled, there they aryse more rather in vertu than they we∣re. And yet that same thyng whiche they haue desyred with long abydyng, (though they ha∣ue it not anone as they wolde by suche longe de∣lay) they shall haue it more larger thā they cou∣de desyre it. And so that whiche myght by im∣portune desyre be lytel, our lorde by his mercy∣full disposition ordeneth that it is made right plenteous. Of this I fynde that Salomon spe¦keth in ye name of our lordes spouse thus. Cant. iii. Quesiui quem diligit anima mea, quesiui et non inueni. I haue sought (she sayth) hym ye my soule loueth, I sought hym and haue not founde hym. Our lorde hydeth hym in maner whan he is sought, that he sholde feruently be sought, before that he be founde. And a chosen soule whiche is his spouse is delayed in her se∣kynge of her desyre, that by suche taryenge she may be made ye more able to receyue manyfold that she hath sought. Therfore syster our holy desyres by delayes in suche meke suffryng and longe abydyng be made more larger to vs than we coude desyre, and so they be increased to our profyte. It is a swete conflyct and a merytory∣ous batayle so for to mekely abyde our holy de∣syres of our lorde, for the which meke conflyet we shal hope for to haue a great rewarde of me∣de,
by whiche labour and conflict increaseth a crown of victori. Be not loth therfore for to lōge abyde our lord in thy prayers or in thy syknes. For though our lorde heare the not anon, yet in suche repulsyon he draweth the to hym full lo∣aūgly, albeit thou canst not espy it. He fareth as a wise leche. A leche though a sicke man which is infected with a sore and contagious dysease cry vpon hym neuer so moch for to cease of hys cuttyng, he wyll cease neuer the more vnto the tyme he be hole. So fareth our lorde with vs, whan we pray hym of any thyng yt we wolde haue our self, he denyeth vs, why, for paraduē¦ture he aspyeth in vs som defaut that is repro∣uable the whiche we can not espy our self, and that he cutteth a way, for vnto the tyme that it he cut away with the yren of som tribulation, be wyll not graunt vs that we aske, so that he wyll haue vs all hole woue suche greuous seke¦nesse, before that he graūt yt we desyre. Other causes ther be why we be not herd anon of our lord in our prayers. One is, for our systes whi¦che be not yet fully forsaken in wyll as I haue rehersed. Another is, for because we pray not and aske not in our prayers feruently & deuout¦ly that we desyre. Of this the prophet sayeth thus. Hie. xxix. Orabitis et exaudiam vos cū¦quesicritis me in toto corde vf̄o. ye shall praye
(sayeth our lord) and I shall here you, namely whan you seke me in all your hert, and not els The thyrd is for because we perseuer not & con¦tynew in our prayers tyll we haue that we de¦syre. Of this our lord sayeth thus. Luc. xi Si perseueraueris pulsans propter inprobitatem surget & dabit. If thou cōtynew in prayers be sely knockyng, at the last he sayeth I must ne∣des graunt thyne askyng for thy great impor∣tunite that thou makest to me. ¶ The fourth why we be not herd anone is, for because we pray doubtȳg and without any great trust. Of the which ye holy apostle saynt Iames sayth. Iacob. i. Si quis vestrum hesitat non estimet quod aliquid accipiat. He that doubteth in his prayers, lete none suche suppose that he shall haue his askynge. Therfore we sholde not tem¦pre oure lorde to our wylles, for to wyte why∣ther he wyll graunte vs that we demaunde or not. But we sholde tempre our soules vnto his wyll afore we do praye that whyther he wyll graunt vs or not. His wyll be fulfylled and not ours. ¶ The fyfth why we be not herde is, for it is not dyscretely, and wysely asked that we pray for, but hurtfull to vs. As the chyldren of zebedee, whiche asked nothyng for theyr helth and therfore it was not grauuted vnto them. ❧ The blyssed apostle saynt Iames sayeth.
Iaco. iiii. Detitis et non accipietis eo qd male petatis. Ye aske & ye shall not haue that ye aske for as moche as ye aske not well. In suche as∣kynges sister though thou wepe and sobbe for to haue thyn askynge, as is for to aske to be fay¦re / semly / worldely wyse / and suche other, our lorde wyl not here the, for it is not for thy helth The .vi. cause why we be not herd in our pray¦ers anon, is that whan we haue our desire, we shold kepe yt wysely, that so longe and with so great hardnesse hathe be desyred. ☞ Lo here mayst thou se two great profytes in longe aby∣dyng. One is that wanton pride shold be repres¦sed in that that we be humbled and made meke in our taryēg, and another that the gift which our lorde gyueth vs better than we can desyre shold be made moch of, and not to be set lytel by. The seuenth cause why we be not herd anon in our prayers of our lorde, is because our lorde wyll delay and defer our desyre and peticion vn¦to a more conuenient tyme, for our profyt, than if we had it anon. So Moyses whan he desy∣red ye ioye of god to be shewed vnto hym, he had not anon his desyre, but it was delayed that he se it afterward. The eyght cause why we be not anon herd in our prayers of our lorde is, for because our lorde wold be sought helpe of other to pray for vs, and helpe vs in our prayer, for
paraduenture that we aske is a hard thing, or els it is done for to put away our pryde & foule presūpcyon that we shold haue yf we thought that our lorde dyd so moch for vs without help of other. So prayed that holy kyng Ezechie to the holy prophete ysay for to pray for him and all his people. So prayed also that deuout kȳg Iosias to a holy woman ye was a prophetesse, for to pray for hȳ. So also prayed saynt Paul. Ro. xv. Obsecro vos vt adiuuetis me in or̄o{us} vr̄is vt liberet ab infidelibus qui sunt in iudea. I pray you (he sayd) helpe me in your prayers that I may be delyuered from the vnfaythfull people that ben in Iury. ❀ Thus syster in all our nedes we shold ren̄e to the remedy of pray∣ers, not onely for our selfe but by help of other, trustynge more to the prayers of other than to our own. ¶ The .ix. cause is why we haue not that we aske in our prayers of our lorde. For {per}∣aduenture that we aske is not so profytable for vs as some other thīg that were more nedefull for vs which we aske not, which was wel pro¦ued by saynt Paul that asked one thyng of our lorde, and he had another. He asked for to be de∣lyuered from the styringes of his flesshe, for he thought it was foule & not maydenly for to suf∣fre suche foule temptacyon, and yet was he not delyuered therof. But our lorde gaue hym ano∣ther
better than that which was more profita∣ble to him and that was strength of vertue and grace of wtstondyng .ii. Cor. xii. Or virt{us} ī infir¦mitate {per}ficitur. For vertu is made parfit in wt standyng of suche temptacion of infirmite. So than it is more profitable for vs for to haue ex∣ercise of trybulacions, than for to be in rest and quyetnesse of prosperyte, though we oft desyre more the one than the other, ❧ Loo syster by this thou mayst knowe whiche thynges they be that let vs to be herde of god in our prayers. Therfore yf thou wylt be herde in thy prayers of god, fyrst be clene fro syn̄e asmoche as it is in thy power. Be feruent and besy in prayer. Ha∣ue great trust in prayer. Be meke, & seke help of other. Kepe ye graces that our lorde gyueth the, and thanke him for them. And aske nothing of hym but suche thing that he knoweth is best & moost spedefull for the. ❧ Now wyll I tell the of the great vertue of this blyssed fruyte of long abydynge. ☞ Foure vertues I fynde of this fruyt. One is, that it kepeth al other good¦nesse. For in one houre long or {per}seueraunt aby¦dyng, dooth as moch as other vertues haue do∣ne .xxx. yeres, or many yeres afore. why tro∣west thou? Truly for yf that perseueraunce in abydyng kepe not well in that is gadred afore, all our labour in vertue were lost. what profy∣te
were it for vs all our lyfe for to wyn̄e vertu∣es and lose them at last? Saloman sayth. Eccl. ii. Ce hijs qui {per}diderint sustinentiam. ❧ wo be to them (he sayth) that haue lost all theyr su∣stenaunce. What is the sustenaūce of the soule? but vertues whiche be gathred in to the barne of the conscyence, there the soule to be fed with them, vnto the tyme that it be departed from ye body. Therfore yf suche vertues of long tyme gathred be lost for defaut of {per}seueraunce, sory may that soule be that so lacketh her sustenaun¦ce for defaut of her houswife Perseueraunce or longe abydynge. ¶ The second vertue of this fruyt is, that it maketh a soule true to god. For onely all perseueraunt soules in long abydynge forsake neuer our lorde in theyr trybulacyons, but euer be true to hym. And therfore they alo∣ue worthyly shall here that swete worde whe∣re our lorde sayth thus to all perseueraunt sou∣les. Luc. xxii. Vos estis qui permansistis me cū in tribulationibus meis: et ided ego dispono vobis sicut disposuit mihi pater meus regnum vt edatis et bibatis supermensam meam. ❀ ❧ Lo sayth our blyssed lorde Iesu chryst to al perseueraunt soules, ye be those that haue par¦fytely contynued with me in my trybulacyons & in my temptaciōs, and therfore I dyspose for you as my father hath ordeyned for me a king∣dome
there to eate & drynke at my table with∣out ende. This meat and this drynke on our lor¦des table syster is nothyng els but ioy and fruy¦cyon and vse of endlesse blysse for the sorowes yt w uffre here. ¶ The thyrd vertu of this fruy¦te is, that though all vertues deserue hygh re∣warde of god. This vertue of {per}seueraunce and longe abydyng receyueth the felyng and veray possessyon for them all, for there shall no vertue receyue the blysse of heuen without yt {per}seueraū∣ce or longe abydyng take possessyos afore them all. All they ren̄e to heuen, but one hath ye mede. and that is {per}seueraūce. why is that trowest yu syster: Truely for {per}seueraunce in long abyding is the moost specyal doughter yt our lorde hath. Of al vertues she alone is the very heyre of he∣uen. ¶ The fourthe vertue of this fruyte is that it increaseth our crowne in blysse, as Sa∣lomon sayth. Eccl. ii. Coniungere deo et susti∣nent crescat in nouissimo vita tua. Be coupled and knyt to god (he sayeth) by vertue, & {per}seuer contynually, and long abyde therin, that thy re∣warde in lyfe euerlastyng may encreas at last. ❧ Thus syster to be fed of this fruyt of {per}seue∣raūce or of long abyding in vertue. It kēpeth al goodnes. It maketh a soule faythfull and true to god. It receyueth possessyon of heuen blysse, and inereaseth our mede therin. Kepe well ther¦fore
this vertuous fruyt, so that it may last all the yere without rotyng, that is all thy lyfe ty¦me without grudgyng and repentyng that you may come where that vertue shalbe herboured without ende. AMEN ¶ The .vi. fruyt of the tre of goostly lyuers is goodnesse. Ca. vi. ¶ Of Goodnesse. THe syxt fruyt of ye hole goost in all gostly lyuers is called Godnes. what is this fruit of goodnesse (sister) but swe¦tenesse of soule, as doctours sayth whā a soule reioyceth in good lyuing. what it swe¦ter than good lyuing? Tru∣ly nothyng, what is more bytter than vycious lyuyng? Certaynly nothyng. ❀ O now is this than swere fruyt of good lyuynge ryght precy∣ous, and not onely a swete fruyte, but also it is called swetnesse it selfe. For it maketh vs swete in our thoughtes / swete in our worde / & swete in our dedes, bothe to god and man. And it is so
swete that it turneth to a clene soule all the byt∣ter trybulacyons and aduersytees of the see of this worlde in to swetenesse. Saynt Bernard sayth. ☞ what thyng is it that this swetnes of good lyuyng may not tempre, the which ma¦keth dethe swete? ¶ what asperyte and sharp∣nesse is there which may withstand this swe∣tenesse? Truly none. For all maner of sharpnes is turned in to the swetenes of good lyuyng in a good soule. Thou art swete in good lyuyng sy¦ster yf thou hate this worlde, and set onely thy medytacions in god and in his goodnes. Thou art swete in good lyuing yf thou auoyde and fle from syn̄e of malyce, and louest our lord that is bothe benygne and meke. And yf thou hast ofte in thy minde chaste thoughtes and holy. Thou arte also swete in good lyuyng whan thou thin¦kest often tymes of the moost dredefull daye of iugement, the whiche thought dooth clense the from all foule thoughtes, and kepeth the fre to god from all maner of vayne besynesses. Thou art also swete in good lyuyng whan thou doost thy dylygence and indeuer for to wasshe away the woundes of thy soule with the ryuer of tea¦res. Blyssed be all suche good swete soules the whiche ben made of our lordes grace as a clow¦de for to rayne and bedewe water of teares, by the whiche they may quenche and put out the
heat of vyces. Thou arte also swete in good ly∣uyng yf thou walke euer in the way of our lor∣des commaundementes, and do dylygently ho∣ly werkes, & do kepe thy soule clene from all vy¦ces. Thou art in swetenesse of good lyuyng, yf thou euery day by holy obseruaunce of thy rely¦gion increacest in goodnesse, hauyng a sure and parfyte trust in god that thou shalt se hym at ye last in his gloryous kyngdome and ioye. Thou arte swete in good lyuyng, yf thou kepe thy tō∣gue, and be right well ware that thou speke no wordes of dyscorde or malyce. Thou art swete in good lyuyng yf thou be poore in worldly sub¦staunce and meke in spyrite. Thou art swete in good lyuing yf thou be mylde in hert. Thou art swete in good lyuynge, yf thou be full of pyte & of mercy. Thou arte swete in good lyuynge yf thou hōgre and thurst more vertu than eyther meat or drynke. Thou art swete in good lyuing yf thou be clene in hert and peaceable. Thou art swete in good lyuynge, yf thou be pacyent, and suffre for gods loue all maner of aduersytees, {per}∣secuciōs and wronges. Thou art swete in good lyuyng yf thou oftentymes haue mynde of thy last ende, that thou mayst be founde than redy without drede of syn̄e or of ony wycked grudge of thy conscyence. Thou arte swete in good ly∣uyng yf thou plant in thy soule holy plantes of
holy vertues and the lyfe of fathers. Thou art also swete in good lyuyng, yf thou so moyst and water thy plantes with teares, that they may growe and increas and bryng forth to god acce∣ptable fruyt. Thou art swete in good lyuing yf thou bren̄e so in the fyre of charyte that yu consu¦mest, thereby all foule thoughtes in thy soule. Thou arte swete in good lyuyng yf thou be ma¦de so good on erthe that thou bryng forth yt hou∣dredfolde ftuyt, which longeth to maydenhode and vyrgynyte. Thou art swete in good lyuing whan thou so west euer good sede in the felde of thy herte, and castest awaye therfro all erthely thynges for to haue yt. Thou arte swete in good lyuynge yf thou kepe vertuously thy scylence. Thou art swete also generally in good lyuynge yf thou kepe vertue and leaue vyces. And thīke it not harde to lerue vertue, for it begynneth in euery deuout soule with swetnesse, the myddle is myxt with laboure, and it endeth with rest. The begynning is swete as mylke, the myddle is soure as the crab, and the end is dulcet as ho¦ny. ☞ Loue well syster the begynnyng of good lyuyng, drede not the myddle, but suffre & pray and our lord wyll make a good endyng. In thy begynnyng thou shalt fynde lytell temptaciōs, in the myddes thou shalt fyght with temptaci¦on, and in thy endyng thou shalt haue a crowne
of victory, leaue not of though thou be vexed in such temptacion, but holde forth batayle, for ye reward of the mede syttyth on hygh and behol¦deth the batayle for to reward the if thou haue the victori. It is no wondre though thou catch or take som spot of fylth in feyghtyng agaynst syn̄e, for syn̄e is foule, and the more thou hast knowlege of god and of vertues, the more besy is the fende to impungne and let the by īmyssiō & puttīg of vicious thoughtes in to thy mynd, and for to let the of such knowlege of god and of good lyuynge. That was well knowen by the chyldren of Israel, for the more that Moyses tolde them and taught them of the wyll of god, the more sorow they sufferd of the Egipcians. Before a man be turned frō vices to god, vices be in peas with him as it semeth, and a sleape. And whan he begyneth to loue vertue, and put out vices, than vices begin to feyght with him sharply, and where as they fyrst flateryd him, afterward for his turnyng from them they be his enemys. ☞ O, what conflict there is be∣twene a seruaunt of god and syn̄e, and namely of the mynde of olde syn̄es, which tormenteth sore a true turned soule. Some there be ye after theyr turnyng & conuersacion to god, fele many stirynges of syn̄e, and namely of fleshly syn̄es wenyng therby that they fele suche styryng for
theyr dampnacion for asmoche as they can not veryly know in suche conflict whether they cō¦sent or not, because they fele somtyme delectaci¦on, but it abydeth not / and yet they wene other wise, let them not dreade of syn̄e dampnable in suche batayle, though delectacion somtyme ap¦pere. It is right nedefull that suche a new tour¦ned soule and faythfull from syn̄e haue an ene∣my for to withstond, so they cōsent not to hym, for to put away sluggy shnes. wylt thou wyt whan yu cōsentest to thyn enemy? Truly whan thou withstondest hym not, but suffrest him to do his wyll with the, and syttest styll as a slug¦gard and lystith not to defend the for drede that he shold ouercom the (do not so, for holy scriptu¦re sayth. Iob. . Qilitia vita hoīs su{per} terrā. That is, knyghthod is a man̄es lyfe in erth, fy∣ghte we must nedes, knowe we therfore right well syster thou art neuer the fouler in suche fe∣lyng, but rather the clener, for ye feare that thou hast of falling to syste. Before that a man is tur¦ned from vice to vertue and good lyuyng the cō∣pany of syn̄es go afore hym, & after that a man is turned to god veryly, than ye company of tem¦ptacyons foloweth hym, and cometh behynde, that is, synnes whiche go afore vs in our con∣uersion be about to let vs that we shold not tur¦ne to god. Temptacyons that folowe vs whan
we be tourned be about to let vs that we sholde not frely se god. The noyse bothe of the one and of the other letteth oftentymes by theyr many∣folde wyles our purpose and intent of good ly∣uyng. ☞ Suche temptacyons is ryght profy¦table to gods seruantes. For it kepeth them frō dulnesse and neclygence, that they be not slug∣gysshe in theyr goostly batayle. All good folke in as moche as they desyre nothyng of ye world therfore oftentymes in theyr hertes they be as∣sayled with tēptacions and noyses of ye world, but yet they labour to throw out of theyr herts all suche inordynat styrynges of desyres with the hand of holy lyuing, so that they wyll in no wyse suffre longe to abyde within them suche wanton thoughtes. ❀ These be in the syght of god swete & good in lyuyng. For they onely de∣syre the heuenly countree, and not this worldly countree. And therfore all suche be in great rest and ease of hert. Is it not a great rest of hert tro¦west thou syster to put out from the pryuyte of our hert all noyses of erthly desyres. and by an holy intent for to asspyre vpward to the loue of endlesse rest. I trowe yes. For suche noyses of erthly besynesse, Dauyd the holy prophete de∣syred to be departed and taken from, whan he sayd thus. Psal. xxvi. Vnam petii a domino hanc requiram inhabitatem in domo domini.
❧ One thyng (he sayd) I haue asked of god, and that shall I besyly seke, for to dwell in his hous of endlesse blysse. ☞ Lo syster how swete a soule this prophete was, which sought besy¦ly in this lyfe rest and contemplacyon from all outward thinges, that he myght haue at ye last therfore but one thynge, that is endlesse blysse. This is that wyldernesse which the same pro∣phet desyred whan he sayd. Ps. liiii. Pece elon¦gam fugiens & mansi in solitudines. Lo (sayth he) I haue fled far away that I dwell in wyl∣dernesse. Thou fleest far away sister yf thou es∣ue and voyde from all maner noyses of erthly ynges, and rennest to the wysdernesse of con∣  in god. Thou dwellest also in wyl∣nesse whan thou dwellest far in thyn intent  all worldlynesse. ❧ Lo syster all this is alled good lyuyng & swetnesse of soule. A swe∣ lyfe to god also knowe I none than to synge in hert to Iesu soges of loue, songes of praysing and to fele in thy soule ye swete fernour of loue. What is sweter than Iesu? Truly nothyng. yf thou can thus loke inward to Iesu thā felest thou swetnesse in good lyuyng, whan thou bre¦kest out somtyme in swetnesse of louely teares wt a swete mournyng for desyre of Iesu than yu art in swetenesse of good lyuyng. Suche swete teares do goo afore and lede the daunce of loue.
Thus thā begyn in such swete teares gladly to ioye in good lyuyng, & thou shalt fele great rest. Kepe an holy intent to god & a redynesse of wyl, and a feruent desyre, and a true turnyng to god by contynuall myndyng and thynkyng of him, and thou shalt neuer syn̄e deedly. And though yu syn̄e by fraylte or by ygnoraūce venyally, ano∣ne such swete feruour conceyued in god shal sty¦re the to very penaūce, for it wyll not suffre the to lye long in syn̄e. yea, though thou feltest ther in delectacion. yet al is consumed in the feruour of good lyuyng, so it be not oppresed with such neclygence that thou wenest such lyght synnes is no syn̄e, as god it forbyd yt thou sholdest thȳk so. Els it is cōsumed wt such feruour though it come not to thy mynde whan thou arte confes∣sed. yf it come to thy mynde than she we it, and contynue in suche desyre of swetnesse & of good lyuyng. Lo what good lyuyng is, what rest & what swetenesse of soule cometh therof. Now shall I tell ye vertue of this swete fruyt of good lyuyng. ¶ Foure vertues I fynd of this swete fruyt. ❧ Fyrst is that it healeth the corrupciō of our body, as Salomon sayth. Prouerb .xviii Pulcedo anime sanitas ossū. Swetenesse of soule is helth of bones (he sayth) that such swe∣tenesse of soule in contynuyng of good lyuynge causeth the body to be wtout corrupcion of syn̄e.
the body is lykened to a bone, for it is barayne from vertue as is a bare bone from flesshe, but yf it be holy and conforted by swetenesse & good lyuyng of the soule, which kepeth the barayne body from syn̄e. ¶ The second vertue is, that it saueth a man in the fyre of trybulacyon, so ye the least hear of his good thoughtes and purpo¦se shall not perysh therin. This was well fygu¦gured by the .iii. chyldren which were cast in to ye fyre by Danyels dayes, where I rede thus, that the fyre touched them in no wyse, nor dyd them ony harme. In so moche that ye least hear of theyr heades were not brenned. why was this trowest thou? Truly for theyr swetenesse of good lyuyng made ye ouen as the wynd that bloweth with the dewe of grace, which quen∣cheth the fyre of trybulacion. ¶ The thyrd ver¦tue is, that it maketh suche a swete soule meke¦ly to receyue blames and correction of relygion. ❀ This is well fygured by that swete Manna which was put in our lordes arke. with ye whi¦che Manna also among other thinges was put specyally Moyses rod. By this rod syster thou shalt vnderstand correction and blame of thy so∣uerayne for thy defautes. And by this Manna which is swete thou shalt vnderstand swetnes of good lyuyng, that causeth the rod of correcti∣on to be borne pacyently. Whan thou suffrest it
grudgyngly, thou hast not yet this Manna of swete lyuyng. Kepe well in the arke of god that is in thy herte whiche is called gods hutche, or gods arke Mekenesse. and than shalt thou fynd great swetnesse in correcciō of relygion, whiche rubbeth away so thy syn̄es that thou shalt at the laste appere afore thy spouse Iesu without oni spot. ¶ The forth vertue is, that it maketh the to speke swetly and gentylly of vertu, for to multyply many swete soules to god as Salo∣mon sayeth. Pro. xvi. Qui dulcis est eloquio maiora reperiet. He that is swete in spekyng (he sayth) shall wyn̄e many soules to god, and at the last for his wynnyng shall receyue great rewardes. So a precher and a souerayn in ex∣horting of theyr subiectes shold swetely shewe theyr exhortacyon. And so shold they multyply ye frendes of god, as Salomon sayth in another place. Eccl. vi. Verbum dulce multiplicat ami¦cos. ❧ A swete exhortacyon or prechynge (he sayth) multyplyeth the frendes of god. Thus to eate (syster) of this swete fruyt of good lyuīg that thou may therby growe to heuenward, & also multyply many louers our lorde graūt the. AMEN
¶ The seuenth fruyt of the tre of goostly lyuers is Benygnyte. Ca. vii. ¶ Of Benygnyte. THe seuenth fruyt of the holy goost in goostly lyuers is called Benygnyte, or gentylnesse of hert. This is a gen¦tyll fruyt, for it maketh a soule com∣munycable, & not straunge by solyen¦nesse. The more cōmunycable that thou art in vertue, the more gentyl thou art in the syght of god. Be not straunge therfore to comen or to he∣re of vertue. there shewe gentylnesse and beny∣gnyte of spyrite. All bodyly gentylnesse (be we neuer so nobly borne) is but thraldome in com∣paryson of goostly gentylnesse and benygnyte. The hygher that thou art in good lyuynge, the more benygne & gentyll thou sholdest be in ver∣tuous cōmunycacyon. ☞ Example we haue of the son̄e and the mone, and of all the heuenly bo¦dyes whiche appere to man here in erth, how gētyll and cōmunycable they be of theyr lyght. Therfore syster the more heuenly thou art, the more gentyll thou stoldest be. ❀ Many there be which ben gyuen to {per}fection and they be ryght straūge and soleyn in cōmunycacyon of vertue. Do not thou so, but shewe gentylnesse and lar∣genesse
of herte to all. So to be benygne in herte wyll make the affable, compassyble, treatable, easy to be bowed to councell, communycable in goodnesse, glad, mylde, and iocund, true, felaw∣ly, dyspysing none, denyeng none, kynde, well∣wyllyng. and gracyous to all. Therfore whan thou shalt shewe benygnyte of hert in speking speke easily, & āswere mekely wtout bitternesse or sharpe rebukyng or scornynge. Forme so thy wordes to other that what soeuer is said to the of other thou be not greued with them. & speke so of them that be absent, as though they were present and myght here it. for it is a great vyce to a relygious persone to say ony thyng in absē¦ce that he wold be ashamed to speke in presēce. In all thy cōmunycacyon here no bachytings, but eyther take thy leaue and go thy waye, or els yf thou mayst cease such mater. It is no pro¦fyte to the for to here suche thynges, but for to make the greued agaynst hym of whome it is sayd, or vpon hym or her that sayth it. Therfo∣re in all suche communycacyon fynde vp some other maner mater of edyficacion for to speke of that myght bothe edyfy the and hym, or els ta∣ke thy leue and go thy way. In all thy benygne cōmunycacyon beware also of hearyng of tydȳ¦ges, for they vnquyet thy hert and put it out of rest, and dystract thy mynde, and dystrop deuo∣cion,
and wasteth the tyme without profyte, nor speke not al that yu knowest, though they be good thynges. Be not as a vessell that lacketh his coueryng, or his lyd, or is not stopped, that as soone as it is bowed doune it poureth out al that is therin, and is made open for to receyue all maner fylth and dust. But open the vessel of thy hert dyscretly, and close it agayn whan ty∣me is. Be neuer in such company gladly where is no cōmunycacion of god or edyficacion of sou¦le. Cry not whan thou speakest be not to hasty in thy speche for to shewe out all that is closed win. And beware also in all thy cōmunycacyon that ryght as thou sholdest be lothe to here bac∣byters, soo neuer tell hym or her that is so spo∣ken of, what thou hast herd of another lest they be greued agaynst hym. but yf thou coudest tur¦ne it into such kynd that it be thelesse suspecy∣ous for thy wordes. For {per}aduenture it myght so be that he that sayd it ment not so as it is ta∣ken. Or els yf it were euyll sayd and suspeciou¦sly, yet thou canst not tell how sone paraduentu¦re he or she repented them of that sayng, purpo¦syng hym euer after to beware of such speking. yf it be so that such thynges be sayd of another that thou hearest, which were nedefull that he were admonysshed and warned of, thā say it so and in suche wise that the teller be not accused,
and that the persone of whome that is sayd of be in wyll to amend them of such thynges. For to that intent lightly it was sayd to the in great symplenesse, not in waye of detraccyon. In all thy cōmunycacyon also beware of bostynge of ony good dedes that thou hast doone, make ne∣uer other to perceyue by thy wordes ony thing of cōmendacion or praysyng in the. For though thou neuer spake therof, vneth shall there ony thyng be in the commendable, but it shal be kno¦wen to the worshyp of god, though thou hyde it, and speke it neuer. For yf thou hyde it and speake not therof, our lorde and they shalbe plea¦sed with the. yf thou speake it and shewe it, fol∣ke wylderide and scorne the, and set nought by the. So that all they which were fyrst edyfied by the shall afterward scorne the, and set lytell by the. In all thy cōmunycacyon also beware of ydle speche, exchue at all tymes. And though they be not rekened among great synnes, yet ye contynuall custome of them causeth great syn∣nes. For oftentymes yf we gladly open our ton¦gue largely to speke ydle wordes or we be wa∣re we fall into noyous wordes, wherof spryn¦geth sōtime trobles, dissoluciōs or other greuo{con} fretynges of the conscyence. In all thy cōmuny¦cacyon also beware of moche spekȳg leest yu fall by such long dalyaunce into lesynges or othes.
Of dyshonest wordes I hope thou wylt bewa¦re wel ynough, for that is very poyson to may∣dens. In all thy cōmunycacion also be rather a herer than a speker, Here mekely and paciently good thinges which be sayd of other. Dyspute not agaynst it as some do yt heryng good thinges anone lest they shold be taken or counted lewd & vnconuyng begyn to dyspute therof, that other shold know they can some skyl therof. All those seke not theyr edyficacion in suche cōmunycaci∣on, but theyr ostentacyon and bostynge, yt they shold be knowen connyng. And therfore many good cōmunycacyons be left among relygyous persones bycause of such proud dysputacyons. In all thy cōmunycacion also be not in nothing contencious and full of stryuing wordes, but ra¦ther soone gyue it vp. For yf it be good and true that the other hath sayd, thou sholdest not saye there agaynst. And if it be not good nor true yt is sayd, thou sholdest rather amend hym paciētly by turnyng away, and by meke shewyng of ye trouthe than by sharp informyng. In all thy cō¦munycacion also whan thou shalt speake, spea¦ke with a meke voyce, with a glad chere, with quyetnesse of spyrite, & than what soeuer thou speakest of good it shalbe more profytable & mo∣re of auctorite than it shold be otherwyse. Be ne¦uer bold for to speake afore thyne eldres, but sha¦mefaste.
And lysten rather to here other speake than for to speake thy self. For it longeth to olde folke for to teach, and to yong for to here & lern. In all thy cōmunycacion also beware of moche laughynge. I mene not that thou sholdest not laugh, but I wold that thy laughyng be not to moch, but ryght selde and soft, without great noyse. And in all thy cōmunycacyon be glad for to speake of god and of good edyficacion. For all suche speche intyceth the hert to vertue and the soule to deuocyon. There is no membre of ye bo∣dy that is so nedeful to be kept as is the tōgue. For in the tongue we may offend in many ma∣ners, in spekyng fals thynges wytyngly, true thynges trecherously, sharp thynges hastyly, foule thynges vnclenly, good thinges bostyngly, and {pro}fytable thynges vnwysely. ❧ Senow syster how by the speche of the tongue our lord may be offended and pleased. Therfore I fynd that the holy goost appered rather in lykenesse of tōgues than in ony other membre of man̄es body. For a tōgue is the moost profytable parte of man yf it be well ruled. But why appered ye holy goost in fyry tongues? Truely for bycause he wold that our tongues were euer speakyng of god and of goostly thynges in brennyng loue. So speake syster that thou mayst set all thy sy∣sters afyre in loue. Haue suche a new tongue as
our lordes dysciples had that yu may speke beny¦guely and graciously, that in thy speche may be bothe hony and mylke. that is, that it be swete and benigne in speakyng, haue also such a new tongue, that it maye be feruent and brēnyng in charite, and medcinable by confortyng, than is thy tongue made the pen̄e of the holy goost, for therby he writeth in the hertes of good people holy wordes, holy dedes, & holy vertues, but a¦monges all thynges be neuer so redy for to spe∣ke but that thou haue euer a loue to scilence, for taciturnite & scilence is the vertue of mekenesse and token of sadnesse, noryssher of vertue & ke∣per of soules. As Salomon sayeth. Prouer. xxi Qui custodit os suū et linguam suam, custodit ab angustijs animam suā. He that kepeth his mouthe & his tongue (he sayth) kepeth his sou¦le from anguysshe, that is, delyuereth his soule from anguysh of endlesse payne. He that loueth moche stylnesse, his tongue must nedes be kept from euyll spekynge, from all folysh and dayne speakyng. Foure fayre vertues I fynde of this fruyt of benygne spekyng, and of gentyll cōmu¦nycacyon of thynges by the mouthe. ¶ The fyrst vertue is, that suche gentyll cōmunycacy¦on maketh vs to be loued, and it is so expedyent that it maketh of enmyes frendes, for good cō∣munycacyon bryngeth them into frendshyp a∣gayne
that were enemyes afore, as Salomon sayth. Ecclesiastic. vi. Uerbum dulce multipli¦cat amicos et mitigat inimicos. ❧ Agentyll & a swete vertuous cōmunycacyon multyplyeth frendes (he sayeth) and swageth enemyes. ¶ The second vertu is that it maketh our mou¦thes our lordes oratory, wherin he is prayed & praysed by suche vertuous cōmunycacion. For lykewyse as the chyrch which is ordeyned to prayse god in, to pray to god, and to preache. so a mouth is ordened to prayse god, to please god and to teache vertues by good cōmunycacyon. Thus a man̄es mouthe is made our lordes or a tory, and therfore it shold be of great clennesse and holynesse, and without all vnclennesse, ❧ ¶ The thyrd vertu is, that it maketh our mou¦thes our lordes fertour or his arke, wherin be put holy relykes. For yf clothes or ony other thyng which touch holy relykes be hold for re∣lykes, why than the good wordes which come out of a vertuous mouth shold not be hold for re¦lykes? ❧ That good wordes be as relykes it is well proued by goostly myracles whiche be all day done by such good wordes. For goostly blynd be made to se by such cōfortable wordes, & for to know theyr cōscyēce, as Dauyd sayth. ps. xviii. Preceptū dn̄ilucidū illuminās oclos. ¶ The holy wordes of our lorde shewed out by
a deuout mouth, which is bryght and shyning maketh goostly blynd to se. Also goostly dead be areysed to lyfe, as our lorde sayth. Io. v. Ue∣uit hora et nunc est quandomortui audient vocē fili dei, et q• audierint viuent. ❧ An hour shall come (he sayth) and that is now in these dayes whan goostly dead shall here the voyce of gods chyld. that is good cōmunycacyon of gods chyl¦dren. And they yt here such cōmuncacyon shall be reysed from theyr goostly dethe and lyue ver¦tuously. ¶ The fourth vertu is that it maketh our mouthes gods cup or his chalyce, wherī is put and layde his blyssed body. And therfore it must nedes be holy & clene. For right as it were great syn̄e to throwe in a chalyce fylth wherin shold be put ye holy body of our lorde, So it we∣re ryght great syn̄e for to defoule the mouth by foule spekyng or ydle spekyng, where it sholde euer brynge forth holy wordes, and wordes of blyssed cōmunycacyon. ☞ Lo syster thus thou mayst knowe how swere this fruyt of gentyll cōmunycacion is medled with sad scylence. Of yt which fruyt Iesu fulfyll the, that thou may speke wysely, soberly, sadly, and vertuously a∣mong thy systers. AMEN
¶ The .viii. fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuers is Myldnesse. Ca. viii. ¶ Of Myldnesse. THe .viii. fruyt of ye holy goost in gost∣ly lyuers is called Myldnesse. Of ye whiche fruyt our lorde sayth thus. Math. v. Beati mites quoniam ip̄i possidebunt terram. ❧ Blyssed be all they that be mylde in hert, for they shall ha∣ue for theyr heritage the land of lyfe, that is the blyssed land of heuen. This is also syster a pre∣cyous fruyt and a delycate, for it groweth out of our lordes hert, which must be fetched there he sayth hymselfe. Math. xi. Discite a me quia mitis sū et humilis corde. Lerne of me (he sayeth) For I am both meke and mylde in hert Thus it semeth wel that it is a delicate fruyt. For all such mylde hertes shold se that same lan¦de that it groweth in. And there may none felt the vertu of that fruyt, but such that be mylde. Yf thou wylt be very mylde, kepe not in mynde but forgete what is sayd agaynst the for to ma¦ke the wrothe. And that thou mayst neuer do, but yf yu arme the afore by quyetnesse of herte, that what soeuer is sayd to the for to styre the, thou wylt not be vnmylde, and than it shal not
greue the. For lyke as a man that sholde make batayle and fyght with another, fyrst he assay¦eth his armure, and so proueth how he coud de¦fend hym by his target in auoyding of strokes, lest he be wounded. So must thou do. Thynke euery houre (thou wotest not how soone) thou shalt be assayed by some sharp wordes, which {per}aduenture shold make the vnmyl in here but thou were ware afore. I saye not impacyent, though it be almoost lyke. For impacience is cal¦led suche a thyng that wyll suffre and not loue. But myldnesse is that, that wyll bothe suffre & loue, & also do good in dede for euyll, as our lord fayth, Luc. vi. Benefacete hijs qui oderunt vos. ❧ Do ye good to them that hate you (he sayth). To myldnesse of herte also longeth sha∣mefastnesse. As whan thou art assayled, or sup∣posest to be assayled, than thynke of thy vertu∣ous state of relygiō, that yu hurt not that nor cau¦se other to sclaundre, that in the thynkyng that in thyne entre of relygyon thou offredest the to all maner of myldnesse, with loue of vertu. Mo¦che vncase cometh of suche vnmyldnesse of hert It putteth away deuocyon, and it troubleth ye conscyence, Wylt thou well kepe thyne herte in myldnesse? than absteyn thy selfe from cōten¦cion and striuīg. Stryue neuer in no mater but it be agaynst vyces in thy self. And if thou haue
charge of other, than so tempre thy stryuyng ye thy hert lese not therby this myldnesse, how so euer it is takē of other. This teacheth vs saynt Paul sayeng .ii. Ti. ii. Seruum dei non oportet ligitare, sed mansuetum esse ad omnes. ❧ It besemeth not (he sayth) gods seruaunt for to be a stryuer, but for to be mylde vnto all folke. For ryght as yf thou felt within the an inordynate heate by the which thy body is dystempered & mayst not serue god, I trowe thou woldest af∣ter the councell of a physicien refreyne thy selfe from such thinges that shold make the more ho¦te, lest thou sholdest be more seke. Moche more than thou art bound to kepe thy soule from dy∣stemperaūce of heates wherby thou myghtest be the more vnmylde in hert. There be two thȳ¦ges that make a soule mylde. One is, that thou speke neuer boystously. Another is that thou be no threatener. It is not ynough for the not for to speke boystously, but also yt thou be no threa∣tener. The one teacheth the to hurt no body by word. And ye other teacheth the to haue an easy hert of forgyuenesse, without rebukīg or threa∣tenyng. The fyrst longeth to trouth of good ly∣uyng, the other to mercy and cōpassyon. These be the two ways of our lorde, of the which spe∣keth the prophet thus. Ps. xxiiii. Uniuerse vie dn̄i et mīa et veritas. All the wayes of our for∣de
for to come to blysse by, be trouth and mercy. ❧ These wayes be taught of our lorde to all mylde folke, as Dauyd sayth. Psal. xxiiii. Do¦cebitmites vias suas. ❧ He shall teach (he sa∣peth) all mylde hertes his wayes of true lyuīg without stoborne spekynge and threatenynge. A herte that is souple and myloe may lyghtly be applyed to receyue the impressyon of our lor∣des swete and meke doctryne. Therfore syster yf thou wilt haue a mylde hert, fyrst apply the to here holy doctryne holy exhortacion holy in formacyon and īstruction, bothe of thy soueray¦nes in relygion and also of other. For to all such that be glad to here our lordes holy doctryne, he sayth hymself that he was sent. Esa. lxi. Ad annunciandum mansuetis misit me. ❧ I am sent he sayth) in to erthe for to teache and infor¦me mylde hertes. That is by such that haue au¦ctoryte for to teache and informe in my name. what shold they teache all myld folke? Nothīg els but as I sayd before by the auctoryte of the prophete ye ways of god. what be these ways? Veryly trouthe and mercy. Trouthe for to aske & requyre forgyuenesse mekely of them that yu hast doone wronge to. Mercy for to forgyue all those that haue done the wrong. and neyther of them to speake boystously or threatyngly. By these wayes thou must come to that lande that
our lorde hath bequeathed to all mylde in hert, which is the lande of blysse. All mylde folke be peasably inclosed here in this life in the possessi¦on and hauyng of our mylde lorde Iesu. & ther∣fore by ryght they must nedes be had & posses∣sed of our lorde at last in endlesse blysse. There shall none be veryly had of our lorde, but suche as be had of hym veryly in this lyfe. All vnmyl¦de folke whiche be not had and possessed of god with in themself, but ben from themself, & had and possessed of yre and wrathe must nedes be excluded from that worthy possession of blysse, which our lorde hath ordeyned for almyld, but yf they turne and amend them. ☞ Syster yf yu wylt come to this vertue of myldenesse yu must be ful of pyte, which maketh a hert swete, by ye whiche swetenesse a hert is made louyng vnto all creatures for god. In the which swetenesse as a Bee such a hert goth about in his thought and gadereth of euery maner of creature some maner of hony. Of some it gadreth swete hony of obedyence, whan it seeth how mekely some do obey. Of some it gadreth pacyence / of some deuocion / of some discrete abstynence / and of so∣me chastyte & clennesse. It beholdeth not theyr defautes, but theyr good dedes. And that yt it loueth that it prayseth. and than it seketh swe∣tenesse of deuocyon. of the which the herte is re¦plete
and made mylde. O now is suche a mylde herte swete bothe in the syght of god and man. For all that it speketh is of swetenesse of loue, of peas, of vnyte, of chastyte, & of charyte. Su∣che a soule is euer occupyed in vertu, eyther in deuout wepyng & waylyng, or in holy redyng or heryng of vertue, or els holy medytacyon of our lordes passion, restyng here in his precious woūdes, wherin she fyndeth full sure rest in all her labours, full sure abyding in all her nedes, felynge no maner dyseases of her bodyly infyr∣mytees, bycause she feleth the blissed woundes of her lorde. Rather chusing euer after to suffre wrong than for to do wronge. ☞ O how mo∣che ioye hath a mylde soule than? She that is thus myld is neuer heuyed with yre, nor with enuy, nor with couetyse. Suche one wyl not lo∣ke to be taken & counted mylde, but euer it hath ioye to be lytell set by. There be some that be ab¦iect in theyr own syght. but they wold not that they were so taken. All suche be not yet mylde. There be some also that be abiect in theyr own syght, but they can not suffre of other for to be set lytell by. Also suche be not yet mylde in hert. Good sister as thou art abiect and vyle in thyne owne syght, so desyre that all other sholde per∣ceyue the same of the, and than thou mayst ha∣ue that swete vertue of myldnesse. Foure fayre
vertues I fynde that cometh of this fruyte. ❧ ❧ One is, that it kepeth a soule without hur∣tyng. For all vnmylde hertes be oftentimes bro¦ken by impacyence. And therfore it is that our lorde byddeth vs by Salomon for to kepe our soules in myldenesse, where he sayth thus. Ec∣clesiastic. x. Fili in mausuetudine serua ani∣mā tuā. Sone (he sayth) kepe thy soule in myl∣denesse. ¶ Another vertue is, that it wynneth loue & grace bothe of god and man. It maketh our lorde to loue vs tendrely. For in that we be∣re the prynt of his own hert, in as moche as he is mylde. It maketh vs to be loued of man, as Salomon sayth. Eccl. iii. Fili in mansuetudi∣ne opera tua {per}fice & super gloriam hominum di¦ligeris. ❧ Sone (he sayth) make all thy wer∣kes and dedes parfyte in myldenesse, and thou shalt be loued aboue all erthly ioyes Thus we rede that Moyses was moost mildest of al men whyle he lyued in erth, and therfore he was lo∣ued of god and man. ❀ Myldenesse is lykened in holy wryt to an Adamant stone, which is of suche kynd that it draweth to hym hard thyn∣ges. So all mylde hertes drawe vnto them all other for to be meke and mylde. A Flynt is ly∣kened in holy wryte to pacyence, which sholde be harde as the Flynt, neuer to be ouercome by yre and impacyēce. Of these two stones I fynd
by the prophete thus. Eze. iii. Ut adamantem et silicem dedi faciem tuam. ❧ I haue gyuen a token in thy face that thou shalt drawe to the by myldenesse other, as ye Adamant dooth. And also I haue gyuen another token in thy face ye thou shalt be harde as the Flynt in suffraunce. ¶ The thyrd vertue is, that it amendeth ye sou¦le. It maketh suche a mylde soule to se clerely her own defautes, as though she loked in a my∣rour. Of this myrour sayeth Dauyd thus. Ps. lxxxix. Qm̄ super venit mansuetudo & corripie¦mur. ❧ Lo (he sayth) whan ye myrour of myl¦denesse is shewed to our soule, anone we se our defautes and amned vs. ¶ The fourth vertue is, that it gyueth to vs euerlasting helth, with out which there is none helthe. Of this maner of helthe speketh also the same prophete thus. Ps. lxxv. Cum exurgeret in iudcio deus vt sal∣uos faceret omnes mansuetos terre. ❧ whan our lorde shall syt in iugement where all bodies and soules togyder shall appere afore hym in ye dome, than amonge all other specyally he wyll gloryfy all mylde soules which haue in this ly∣fe borne ye impression of his hert by myldnesse. ❧ Thus syster our lorde that is soo mylde in hert gyue the such specyal grace that thou may euer be meke and mylde, and soo to eate of this swete fruyt with thy systers, that ye all at last
may receyue the lande of blysse, which is ordey¦ned for all suche AMEN ¶ The .ix. fruyt of the tree of goostly ly∣uers is Fayth, Ca ix. ¶ Of Fayth. THe .ix. fruyte of ye holy goost in goostly lyuers, is called Faythe, whiche is a ryght fayre fruyt. In the whiche fruyte our lorde is hyghly pleased. ❧ what is al our ly¦uyng wtout fayth, as saynt Paul sayth. Heb. xi. Sine fide īpossibile est placere deo. ❧ without fayth (he sayth) it is īpossible to please god. Fayth is the lyfe of a ryghtwyse soule. Ro. i. Iustus ex fide viuit, ❧ To that it semeth, and sothe it is that fayth without good werkes is dead, Thā as for the artycles of thy beleue I wyll not in this treatyse wryte nothing to the, For I wote well thou beleuest well ynough, But of ye wer∣kes of beleue that is of true lyuȳg it is my pur∣pose for to declare, that thy lyuyng may accord
to thy faythe, For of true lyuynge our lorde is hyghly pleased, as Saloumon sayeth, Eccl, i, Beneplacitum est diio fides et mansuetudo, True faythfull lyuyng and myldnesse of herte pleaseth our lorde ryght moche. This fruyt is the more precious that it is seldom had, as the same wyse man sayth. Pro. xx. Multi miseri∣cordes vocantur virum autem fidelem quis in∣ueniet. ❧ Many ben called mercyable folke & pyteous, but few we find true in lyuyng. The begynnyng of good lyuyng is for to drede god, whiche drede causeth a soule not for to leue vn∣done the good dedes that shold be done, as Sa∣lomon sayth. Eccl. vii Qui timet deū nichine cligit. ❧ He that dredeth god is in nothyng ne∣clygent. But for bycause many there b ye glad∣ly do good, and yet they leaue not certayn euyill dedes which they haue vsed of custome. Ther∣fore all suche good dedes is nothyng acceptable in the syght of god, that is so myxt or mengco and defouled wt euyldedes, as Salomon sayth. Eccl. ix Qui in vno offēderit multa bona {per}det. ❧ He that offendeth (he sayth) in one vyce, ma¦ny vertues he destroyeth. A lytel gobbet of sou∣re dough, soureth all a batche of bread. A lytell galle maketh bytter a great quantyte of hony. Euery clne soule which desyreth to lyue vertu¦ously begynneth fyrst with drede and endeth wt
charyte, and so by suche louely drede it hath no wylt to syn̄e. But such one ye yet dooth good for feare and drede of payn, and not for drede of god he leueth not euyl fully in as moche as he wold syn̄e yf he durst for feare of payne. ☞ Lo syster yf thou wylt lyue well, fyrst ground thyn intēt of loue in drede, and than begyn to do well, Oft tymes many there be that forsake the ways of euyl lyuyng and take an habyte of holy lyuȳg, which as soone as they haue an entre of vertue anone they forgete what they haue ben, & wyl not wasshe away theyr olde synnes by waylīg and penaūce doyng, but rather be glad for to be cōmēded & praysed for theyr takyng of {per}feccion desyrynge to be made more of, and the better to be set by than other of more longer tyme in {per}fe∣ction, which therfore be wors in ye sight of god, vnder ye habyte of holynesse than euer they we¦re before vnder a seculer habyte. All suche haue holy wordes but lytel of holy lyuing They can wel teache other, but they norysshe not that tea¦chyng with holy exsample. And so as moch as in them is those that they edyfye in wordes by theyr lyuyng dystroy them. All symulacyon sy¦ster auoyd away from the. Shewe in worde e∣uer and in dede as thou sholdest relygiously. Be¦gyn and make an ende with contynuaūce. Ma∣ny, begyn and make none ende, but mar or lose ye
merite of theyr good begynnyng with a bad en¦dyng. Therfore lyue as thou dydest begyn. Be euery houre as thou was the fyrst daye. Loke how meke, how lowly, how charitable, & how deuout, and how sad thou were the first day, so be euery day. Lete thy fyrst day be thy myddel days, and thy last day. For thou hast taken vpō them thyn entre of religion for to go in ye ways of the lorde. In the begyn̄yng the ways semed {per}aduenture ryght streyt and harde, but wt good vse and contynuaūce, & with good wyll it wyll waxe large, easy, & pleasaunt There is nothȳg hard to a good wyll, for the yoke of good lyuing whih is our lordes yoke is full easy to them yt haue ones begon for to bere it. Of one thynge I wold that all newe begynners were wel ware ye whan they be torned from euyll to good, they waxe not proude for vertue yt they haue found, but be goostly glad, & thanke our lorde lest they fall moch wors by vayn glory than they fell a∣fore by other vyces or they knew vertu. In eue¦ry begynnyng of vertue old customes of old con¦uersacyon putteth them oft in prease. To let ye intent of vertue that vneth they may be ouerco∣me. Therfore {per}seraunce must sore labour for to bryng vertue in vse. As many styrynges as the soule hath to vertue, soo my paces she gooth to vertue, & profyteth therin. Many there be that
the more they encreas in aege the more they dis¦creas in vertue. Alas chosen soules do not so, for ye more they increas in aege ye more they growe inwarde in aege of vertue. Therfore syster yf yu wylt not wax wery of newe begon vertues, it is full nedefull for the to thynke euery daye as long as thou lyuest that thou art but a begyn̄er and not yet waxen olde in vertue, and soo shalt thou neuer be wery of vertue. All vertuous fol¦ke the more higher they be toward god in wor∣thynesse of vertue, the more subtylly they espy in themself that they be vnworthy and vnkind seruauntes to god. why is that trowest thou? Truely for the more nere they be to the lyght, ye more better and clerer they se themself & fynde synnes which haue long ben hyd within them and so the more that they do knowe themself, the more indygnacyon they haue of wycked & bad workes doone afore. who so wyll increas in vertuous lyuyng he may not consider what euyls other do, but what good he shold do. ❧ ¶ Thus syster suffre grace to growe in the wt thy bodyly aege. For the more older thou art in grace, ye more parfyte is thy good lyuyng. Euer mysse lyke thy self in thy selfe, yf thou wylt co∣me to that ye yu hast not yet. For there that yu hast pleased thy self in thy self, there stode vertu styl and it increased not, but decreased. yf thou wylt
that vertu increase adde therto mo vertues and walke forth ryght. Stand neuer styll, turne ne¦uer backward agayne, go not out of the way, thou standest styl whan thou profitest not, thou goest backward whan thou turnest agayne to that that thou hast forsaken, and thou goest out of the way whan thou fallest from the fyrst in∣tent and purpose of relygion. Good syster ther∣fore ren̄e fast from vertue to vertue, that at the last thou may se that contre where al vertuous people be, thy frendes, for there is a blissed com¦pany which abyde the and desire thy presence. for thoughe they be sure of theyre owne endles helth, yet they be full besy for thy helth, therfo¦re as I sayd stand not styll, but be euer ren̄yng. for eyther thou must ascend or discend. If thou stand styll thou must nedes fall. There is none so parfyt that whan they haue won̄e the hyest poynt of parfeccion as it may be had in this lyf yet they shall seme somwhat least vntowched of the fyrst degre of {per}feccion. And why is that? Truely for they shold fele in themself by meke∣nesse as if they had no parfeccion at al, & thynk that vneth they haue towched the least point of parfeccion. It is a great parfeccion, knowlege of im{per}fecciō. Therfore sister ye more yu knowest thyne im{per}fection, the {per}fyter yu art in ye syght of god. And the more yu felest the diseases & sorows
of other, the more is thy {per}fection. The condyciō of all {per}fyte folke is in euery good werke for to seke the praysyng of our lorde the auctour or be¦gyn̄er of all good werkes ye in all other pryuate praysinges they may haue no ioy. Euery {per}fyte soule as soone as she hath ouercome a vyce, ano¦ne she armeth her agaynst ye releue & woundes which is least of vyces, lest they enfester & styn¦ke. Also yf yu wylt be {per}fyte in good lyuing be ne¦uer vnpacyent of ye im{per}fection of other. For if yu can not suffre the ī{per}fection of another yu shewest well ye thou art not parfyte. Also euery parfyte soule in true lyuyng hath euer ynough of tem∣porall goodes whan it hath ynough scarsly. It desyreth no gyftes. Scarsyte of lyuelode it suf∣freth wtout grudgyng. It stryueth neuer for no nede. It can hongre & not grudge. It can be po∣re & haue no nede. He is poore in vertue & not in possessyon of tēporall goodes yt cannot suffre pe¦nury. He is riche in soule yt hath nought, & desy¦reth nought, for to haue of tēporall goodes. He yt is {per}fyte desyreth nothyng. for that yt is nedeful for ye body it receyueth, yf he may easyly haue it. And yf it may not be had, it is easily suffred. Euery {per}fyte soule is mighty & strōg in suffraū¦ce of scarsyte. ☞ Of this {per}fection I fynd fewe & namely in relygion. I fynd many in relygion yt begyn feruētly & goostly, but they end fleshly.
Alas. Therfore syster yf yu wylt contynue as yu hast begon, be true to god in thy thought, in thy promys, in thy werke, & in thy dedes. Be euer feruent in spyrite, and be well ware that thou trust not to thyne owne merytes, for soo shalt yu lose grace. An holy desyre helpeth moche vnto a soule to good dedes. where that euer a soule is besy in good werkes, & glad in feruour of good lyuyng, in such one is very fayth of true lyuig. This fruyt of true faythfull lyuyng hath .iiii. vertues. ¶ Syster one is that it maketh a sou∣le truly to be commended. as Salomon sayth. Prouerb .xxviii. Uit fidelis multum laudabi∣tur. ❧ A true lyuyng soule (he sayth) shall mo¦che be cōmended This cōmendacyon is not one¦ly of a man, but also of god, and of all his sayn∣tes. For it is great lykyng to sayntes for to kno∣we good lyuers in erthe. The second is that it maketh a soule hyghly to be enhaūced and pro∣moted to goostly dygnyte. And therfore it was that our lord sayth. Math. xxiiii. Quis putas est fidelis seruus et prudens quem constituit do minus super familiam suam. ❧ whiche tro∣west thou is he whome our lord shold enhaun∣ce and promote aboue all his meyny? As who sayth, none but suche one that is bothe true and wyse. True in good lyuyng, and wyse in gouer¦naunce. Lo though it so be that two thynges be
rehersed in this auctoryte, yet faythfulnesse of true lyuyng is put afore. The thyrd is that it maketh a soule vertuously to be loued as wel of god as man, as Salomon sayth. Ecclesi. xxxiii. Si est tibi seruus fidelis fit tibi quasi amicus: quasi fratrem sic tracta eum. ❧ yf thou fynd a true seruaunt, cherisshe him as thou woldest thy frende, and as thy brother treate hym. Lo syster by this thou mayst know that in ye syght of god, a true lyuer is cherysshed as a frende, & in ye syght of man as a brother. The fourth ver¦tue is, that it maketh a soule to receyue ye crow∣ne of endelesse mede, as our lorde sayth to euery true lyuer thus. Math. xxv. Super pauca fui∣fti fidelis, supra multate cōstituam. Vpon few thynges (he sayth) thou hast be founde true in this lyfe, and therfore I shall ordayne for the a crowne of endlesse mede and rewarde, so to be set aboue many thynges. O now is this fruyt of good true faythfull lyuyng a fayre fruyt. ❧ Good sister eate specially of this fruit, for with out this fruit is there no fruit saueri. It is so sa¦uerly a fruit that it smelleth and sauoreth in to the blysse of heuen, where all true faythful sou∣les through eatyng of that fruyt whyles they lyued in this life benow her boured wout ende. Amonge whome I hope to se the Amen. ❧
¶ The .X. Fruit of the tree of goostly lyuers, is maner of good lyuyng. Capitulo. Decimo. ¶ Of good Lyuyng. THe .x. fruyt of the holy goost in euery goostly lyuer is called maner of good lyuyng, which is also a ful precious fruyt. This maner of good lyuynge standeth in a reasonable conuersacy on, as whan thou gouernest manerly after rea∣son all thy wordes and all thy dedes, so that all thy lyuyng may sauoure swetly to all folke as saynt Paul sayth. Phi. iiii. Modestia vestra no¦ta sit om̄ibus hominibus. Solyue (he sayth) that your vertuous cōuersacion may be know∣en to all men, who so foloweth the hastines and beastlynes of his owne wyll, and is not gouer∣ned by modestnes or softnes, or manerly conuer¦sacion, is lykened rather to a beastly man, than to a reasonable man. O this maner of lyuynge our lord. Iesus gaue vs example, for he himself disposed all thynges in measure and in easy ma¦ner, that we shold manerly and easly without hastynes be gouerned. This is syster one of the vertues wherin all chosen soules be arayed, as the apostell sayth. Col. iii. Induite vos sicut e∣lecti
dei sancti et dilecti viscera mie benignitatē humilitatem, et modestiam. ❧ Araye you (he sayth) as gods chosen and wel beloued chyldren with mercy, benygnite, mekenesse, and maner∣ly softnesse of good conuersacyon. It is also one of those ornamentes wherin bysshops ben ara∣yed, as the same apostle sayth. Tit. i. Oportet episcopum esse irreprehensibilem, non {per}cusorē sed modestum. ❧ A bysshop he sayth must be in all his lyuyng vnreprouable, no smyter, but modest and soft in all good conuersacion. ☞ Lo syster all thy good lyuȳg auayleth not, but it be gouerned manerly, that is in hert, in mouth, & werke. Manerly modestnesse is in two thiges / that is in refreynyng of superfluyte of though¦tes and superfluyte of desyres. Beware that thyne hert be not occupyed about vnprofytable thoughtes. & that desyre is nothyng but suche thyng as is very nedefull. Holde the content wt meat and drynke and clothes, rather in a scarse wyse than in a large wyse. Manerly easynesse of mouthe restreyneth superfluyte of wordes, whiche maketh vs for to speke easyly, softly, & demurely without hastynesse in refreynyng of our vnreasonable Wylles. Manerly softnesse of werke restreyneth the excesse of our dedes, that we be not to importune and besy in all our wer∣kes, But softly and easyly we shall wyn̄e ver∣tue
without struglyng or stryuynge with god. For all suche hasty gatherers of vertue fall oft in sin̄e, and so be made poore and nedy, & lose al theyr good dedes which they haue gadred afo∣re. Though it so be that a modest laborer and a manerly gaderer of vertue do not so many good dedes as do hasty gaderers. yet al soft and easy gaderers kepe better that they haue won̄e, and haue moch more goostly rest in theyr gadering than haue such hasty befyers in good werkes, as wyse Saloman sayeth. Ecelesiastic. xxxi. Sompnus suauitatis in homine parco. ❧ A slepe of swetenesse is in a scarse man. By this slepe is vnderstand easynesse of vertu, yt is rest & quyetnesse of soule is more plēteously in an ea¦sy man manerly gaderyng vertue, than in a ha¦sty gaderer. Vertue that is softly or sobrely ga∣dered proueth, and that yt is hastyly gadered & sodeynly standeth in great peryll for to be loste. Therfore syster desyre neuer to be hastyly & so∣deynly vertuous, that thy lyfe may shyne cōty¦nually by good exsample, and abyde {per}petually without ceasyng. why is that trowest thou? yt some which were somtyme parfyte be now vn¦parfyte? Truly for theyr parfection caught no rote of abydyng, bycause of hasty settyng, whi¦che oftentymes with euery wynd be ouerthro∣wen and cast doune. Do not yu so, but wyn̄e ver¦tue
softly and sobrely, and that shal euer abyde what wynde soeuer come. ☞ yf thou wylt ve¦ryly wyn̄e sure abydyng vertue, Fyrst labour in all that thou mayst to haue a good and a true conscyence, and than shall all thy conuersacyon smell swete in good fame to all folke. Thy good conscyence is necessary for thy selfe, & thy good fame for other. It is not ynough for the to lyue well, but yf thy lyuyng be good exsample to o∣ther. Therfore it is that whā a chylde is chryst¦ned it is anoynted with holy creme whiche is made with oyle & bawme. By the oyle which is shynyng is vnderstond a clere shynyng cōscy¦ence to god, and by the bawme that hath a swe¦te smell is vnderstonde a good fame & a good ex∣sample of true lyuyng. Be dyligent therfore to wyn̄e a good conscience, and soone wyl folow after a good name. Be not neclygent for to haue a good name. Saynt Augustyn calleth him cru¦ell and not mercy full yt is neclygent of his good name. Of this our lord sayth thus. Math. v. Sie luceat lux vestra coram hominibus vt vi∣deant vestra hona opera. &c. ❧ Soo he sayth. Lete your lyuynge shyne aforemen, that they may se your good workes, and thanke hym for them. Cure or set moche to haue a good name yt it may euer shyne in vertu. For better is a good name than moche rychesse sayeth Salomon.
☞ Thus syster kepe manerly in vertue thy cō∣scyence and thy name, and specially in al thy ly¦uyng measure thy wordes in spekyng, for els thou mayst lyghtly rather wound or slee than heale. Lyue manerly & gentylly in thy lyuȳg, & thou shalt fele great rest and swetenesse therin. And than by thy lyuīg they that be dead in bad lyuynge shall be reuyued and quykned to good lyuyng, And they that be quykned in good ly∣uyng shalbe strengthed and made more mygh∣ty therby. what soeuer thou shalt do, do it gen∣tylly and swetely, that thy dedes be warely or deyned, and thy tongue be mylde & easy in spea¦kyng. And yf it so be that thou be put in charge of gouernaunce, namely of temporall and erth∣ly thynges, by very necessyte of obedience kepe them manerly and warely that they perysshe not. And yf it so be that some take them away, thou mayst not therfore by hastynesse lose thy pacyence, but easyly suffre it. And to some that take them awaye ye must, charytably forbyd them, so that in all thynges good gentyll & cur∣teys maner be kept. Also in thy goyng beware that thou ren̄e not, for manerly goyng and easy becometh a relygious {per}sone, except it be eyther for great nede, or that ony great peryl cause the to goo fast or to ren̄e. And though it so be that maner or measure of lyuyng be soo gentyll and
lowly in it self that it vsurpeth nothyng, yet it is ful ryche ayenst god. For in measurable low¦lynesse is great tranquylyte of soule, myldnesse of spyryte, grace of moderacyō, care of honeste, and consyderacyon of clerenesse. Thou must be also manerly in thy goynge, in thy standyng, in thyne habyte, and in all thy maner of lyuynge, so that nothyng be found in the which shold of∣fend the sight of other, but rather edify other to holynesse. ☞ what is maner in good lyuīg, but measure yt nothyng be had to moch, nor to lytell but in scarse meane? This is one of the pryncy∣pall thinges that longeth to good lyuyng, for to shewe thy profession, bothe in habyte and in go¦yng. so that in thy goyng thou shewe symple∣nesse and sadnesse, in thy mouyng purite & glad¦nesse, and in thy dedes honeste & clennesse. Thy lyfe is neuer vnparfyte syster yf it be honest, & therfore be neuer constreyned to wyn̄e vertue, but with a good wyll wyn̄e it, and kepe it ho∣nestly. wylt thou be easy and moderate in ly∣uyng? than thynke oft vpon that rest which is now had of blyssed soules in heuen that somty∣me wan̄e it here with moderat lyuyng. Amōg all other bytternesse of this wretched lyfe yma∣gyne in thy soule how those blyssed soules ben in the sight of god, sad, sobre, & in louyng chere, and than shalt yu soone fele how swete this fruit
of easy moderate lyuyng is. And than also shalt yu fele more gladnesse of a good conscyence whā ony heuynesses come, than of a bad conscyence among erthly delytes. Which shall be to the thā as a paradise full of temperaunce, myldnesse, & ryghtousnesse. O how mery it is, to haue a tē∣{per}ate and a moderate conscience, with a symple hert full of quyetnesse and innocency. There is nothyng fo blyssed in erth as is a symple herte. For there that an hert sheweth symple innocen¦cy to other, in spekyng, in goyng, in workyng, yt hert is neuer aferd to suffre pacyently what soeuer is done to it. The more it is scorned of o∣ther, the more worthy it is to god▪ the whiche symple innocency kepeth a soule from worldly wyckednesse. A moderate and an innocent lyfe is not for to be greued with thē that noyeth the. And though thou be noted and marked of all fol¦ke, suppose rather yt they speke good than euyl. If thou wylt haue this grace (syster) of symple innocency, in all thy lyuing moderatly kepe the from hatred, malyce, and enuy, which be the se¦des of all wyckednesse / of whome groweth all wretchednesse of syn̄e. Kepe not onely innocēcy in thy speche and in thy dedes, but also & pryn∣cypally in thy hert. who so hath such easynesse and manerly lyuing in innocency he shalbe pre∣serued from ony great offence. For though he be
tempted, by that he wynneth great profyte. yf he be lytel set by of other, in that he is in ye sight of god exalted the more. Yf he fyght agaynst vy¦ces he shall haue ye maystry. Yf he ouercome vy∣ces he shall be crowned. There is nothynge soo worthy to god in a new begynnyng soule, as is suche softnesse of lyuyng. Be a man neuer so de∣uout, but yf he haue that, his lyfe pleaseth ney¦ther god nor man. O now is this a well smel∣lyng fruyt / for it sauoureth bothe to god and to man. ¶ This fruyte of easynesse or maner of good lyuing hath .iiii. vertues. One is it kepeth good lyuyng bothe bodyly and goostly. For mo∣deracyon or easynesse is a meane which setteth in measure and in rule al vertues, that they bre¦ke not asondre, but hold togyder. He may neuer come to sadnesse of vertu that lacketh this mea¦ne of moderacion. The second is that it maketh a soule iocund and mery in good lyuing. Measu¦re and easy moderacion causeth great gladnesse to a set soule, lyke as vndyscretnesse in gaderīg of vertues causeth the soule to be vnglad for the losse that it fyndeth in vertue therby. The .iii. is, that such a soule so lyuing in easy moderaci∣on is in maner lykened to the worthy prouydē∣ce of god, which ordeyneth all his ordynaūces in nombre, weyght, and measure. So yf thou discretly with easynesse gouern thy soule in all
vertues, in that it semeth ourlorde hath inpres¦sed his prynt of prouydence in thy herte. The iiii. is, it maketh a soule seme ye it hath ynough and is content, holdyng her well pleased meke∣ly with that lytell vertue that god hath gyuen to her, tyll it please hym to gyue more, myldely abydynge our lordes grace. ☞ Losyster how worthy a vertue thou hast, yf yu haue this ver∣tue of easynesse & maner of good lyuyng. Eate oft I pray the of this fruyte, that thou may co¦me at the last thyder where as all easynesse is without trouble or trauayle in gaderyng of ver¦tues. AMEN ¶ The .xi. fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuyng is Contynence. Ca. xi. ¶ Of Contynence. THe .xi. fruyt of the holy goost in eue∣ry goostly lyuer is called Contynēce which is a precyous fruyte ye ston∣deth moch by abstynence. For by ab¦stynence vyces shold be destroyed, & not the body. but that the body wax not bold in
syn̄e but rather quycke in good werkes, therfo¦re abstynence is very expedyent. The vertue of contynence is nought but yf the body be tamed dyscretly by abstynence, so that all inordynate affections be therby withdrawen. For els al ab¦stinence standeth in none auayle, yf the body be suffred inordynatly to be encombred in vyces. If our meate be euer taken as we wold take a medycyne than shall we lyue contynently. And as soone as we lete go at large and release ye rey¦nes or the brydle of contynence in taking of our meate and drynke inordynatly, hastyly, and wt pleasure, anone the snare of lyking & carnall lust is about priuely for to deceyue vs. Therfore as oft as nede requyreth we eate and drynk, so oft we of ryght serue the flesshe and ye body, as lor¦des gyue to theyr seruaūtes that nede is. What is this vertu of contynence in this place? but so∣brenesse of lyuyng, by the which sobrenesse the body receyueth bothe meat and drynke & slepe. There be many maners of sobrenesse in conty∣nent lyuyng. Of the which sobrenesse inconty∣nent lyuyng. One is abstynence for medycyne, and that is for helth of body. Another is abstinē¦ce of auaryce, & that is for to spare costes. The thyrd is abstynence of ypocrisy, and that is frō vaynglory. And the. iiii is abstynence of pouer∣te, and that is for nede. The .v. is relygious ab∣stynence,
and that is for wynnyng of vertue, for dystroyenge of vyces, and for sharpynge of our goostly vnderstanding, in wyn̄yng of wys∣dome. For ryght as erth stoppeth a wyndowe that the lyght may not come in, so the vnderstā∣dyng goostly is stopped with excesse of meate & drynke that we may not fele nor se the waye of vertue. Sobrenesse is than a merytoryous ver¦tue, whan it is done pryncipally for god, and in good forme, in suche wyse that the body be pro∣uyded after his nede without superfluyte, so ye it fayle or faynt not afore his tyme, for to moch scarsyte or labour, but that it be wysely kept ye t wax not wanton in moch reste. All our intent shold be occupyed about the profyte of the soule in loue and knowlege of god, and in al such thin¦ges that may lede vs to the loue of god. For the soule is not made for the body, but the body for the soule, that it shold bothe serue it and help it, to that intent yt the soule with the body myght come to the knowlege of god. The soule is only made for god, for to be knyt and coupled to god. To our lord it longeth for to slee, and for to quic¦ken agayne such as he made. Therfore it is vn∣lawfull to vs for to slee that he hath made, that is our body. vyces he wold we sholde fle in our body, but not the body by to moche abstinence, whiche shold be ruled soberly by contynence, &
not dystroyed by abstynence. He dystroyeth and sleeth hymself that vndyscretely by abstynēce and other grete labours (past measure) maketh hymselfe so feble that he may not serue god as he sholde discretly and so decayeth from his ser¦uyce, or than the ordre of kynd wold, though it so be that feruour of deuocyō or pure sȳplenesse excuse some. The holy apostle wold that our ser¦uyce shold be reasonable, and not vnreasonable as it is wryten thus. Ro. xii. Bacionabile sit obsequium vestrum. ❧ Now syster yf yu wylt wyte in what thynges lyeth contynent sobre∣nesse I shall tel the? Sobrenesse standeth in .iii. thynges. that is in qualyte, quantyte, and ma∣ner. ☞ In qualyte, that thou desyre no delyca∣tes nor precyous meates and drynkes, nor also costyous, but such symple meates and drynkes that lyghtly may be had, and that nature may be susteyned without excesse, that thou fall not in to the syn̄e of glotony. ❧ In quantyte, that thou eate nor drynke not to moche, nor ofter thā it nedeth, as thy rule techeth. But temperatly that it be to the body refresshyng, and not as a burden. All seke folke be fre from this rule / for they may eate and drynke as oft as theyr seke∣nesse requyreth. In maner that thou take not thy meate and thy drynke to gredyly, nor to ha¦styly. nor to receyue it vnmanerly, but easyly,
and relygyously / so that your eyes be not lo∣kyng about hyther nor thyther, for to se what thy syster hath in her dysshe. But only hold the content with such thynges as thou hast afore the. Eatyng and drynkyng with drede of god & in scylence / not hastyly as though thou shold ne¦uer haue ynough. Fyll neuer thyne eyes before thou fyllest thy palate. But with thankynges of god hold the content. rather suffryng scarsy∣te than habundaunce. Set not lytell by thy ser∣uyce, nor dyspise nothing yt is set afore the. Nor grudge not though thou lacke sauce, ne though thy meat be mysse sod or rosted. But think that many better than thou art hold them pleased wt fewer meates, and more homly drest than thou hast. For that thou puttest away from the they take for great deyntees. Suffre pouerte Chry∣stes famylier frend to be homly with the, and yt loue with all thy myght bothe in meat & drinke clothes and in all other thinges. Se and behold how meke poore folkes be in theyr apporte, in theyr answeres, and how ferefull. soo do thou. Playne neuer nor grudge neuer for wantyng of meat & drynke nor clothyng. Euer hold thyself vnworthy for to haue y• thou hast. For lacke or want of outward thīges mekely borne encrea∣seth inward thynges by grace into grete goost¦ly rychesse of a good conscyence. The contrary
dooth habundaūce and plente. For where that moche habundaunce and plente is in outward thynges, therfore the moost parte is great scar∣syte inwardly of graces. Of ye measure of eatīg and drynkyng it is full harde for to gyue a cer∣tayn rule, but thus, that thou kepe a good mea¦ne betwene to moche and to lytell, so that thou eate not soo lytell that thou may not serue god, but be faynt and wery of thy comyn labour in religion. And that thou eate not so moch that af¦ter thy meat thou haue no wyll for to pray, nor for to rede, nor for to be quycke vnto suche thyn¦ges as thou art bound to. betwene these two ke¦pe a meane. Also of thy sleping kepe the same ru¦le & meane. Thus yf yu gouerne the in thyne ea∣tyng & drinking thy meat shalbe to the more sa¦uery. more {pro}fitable, more holsom, & lesse greue thy stomake, and lyghtly for to be digested, & al¦so it is more honeste & relygious, & wtout syn̄e. He ye lyueth sobrely is right able to vertu, for he is quyk to do all good ded, more chast in his ly∣uīg, wyser in his speche, redier to deuociō, & cle¦uer in his affection. Also al sobre folk be more re¦tētyue in wyt than other. There be .iii. degres of abstinēce or sobrenes. The first degre of sobre¦nes is to absteyn fro to moch meat and drynke. & kepyng of due tymes & houres in eatyng and drinking, not for to breke the fastyng day ordey¦ned
of holy chyrche, nor for to lyue in delectaciō of meat and drinke in vnlawfull tyme. And not for to set his intent for to eate & drink such thin∣ges as be lykerous / rather styrȳg to vnclēnesse thā to clēnes. A beest yt only can none other thīg but for to serue the body kepeth his time in ea∣tyng & drynking / & also the maner of eating ac∣cording to his kynde. Than moch more sholde a reasonable creature do whiche is indued with reason, els it were better yt he lacked reason as a beest, than for to be ruled without reason. for if he lacke reason as naturall fooles do, he shold not syn̄e. ¶ The second degre of sobrenesse is to absteyn from certayn lawful thinges / as is frō flesshe / from wyne / from mylke / from fysshe / & for to be wel contented with sharpe vitayles, yt is with homly bread / with thyn̄e ale / with co∣myn potage / & oft for to fast / and for to abstryne from suche meates & drinkes ye ben moost lyke∣rous. as religious folke / deuout folke / & repen∣taunt folke do. But religious must do theyr spe¦ciall abstynēce, yf they do other than the couent doth byleue or els it standeth hym to no mede. The thyrd degre of sobernes is for to tame glo∣tony, and so to teche ye pallate that a man may hold hym content with right scarce lyuelod, su¦che as is only sufficient to necessite of kynd and not to the lust that is both in qualite & in quanti¦te
of meat and drynke. so the more symple ye ly∣uelode is the better it shold beloued. And yf som¦times we must nedes eate delicate meates, thā not for to receyue them delycatly, but onely for to receyue them nedefully and sobrely wtout ex∣cesse. ☞ Lo syster thus to loue abstynence & so∣brenesse is for to lyue contynent. Therfore yf yu wylt come to the very vertu of contynency in se¦bre lyuyng yu must be cōtent though yu lackest of suche meat & drynk sōtyme as yu woldest haue. And be not sory though yu lackest them as some be, which somtyme whan they want ye meat yt they desyre they be sory & grudge, & put away shame, nothyng thynking of theyr professyon, consydering how yt ryche folke want somtyme that they wold haue. moch more than poore fol¦ke shold hold them content ye ryche folke want. Thou must also be glad to lacke, & in wyll for to want for gods sake, and for ye loue of sobrenesse, & for good exsāple of other. ❧ O syster se what vertue is in such contynent lyuing. It purgeth the soule / it reyseth the wit it maketh ye flesshe subiect to ye spyrite / & it maketh the hert lowe & contryte. Scarfite is ye mother of holynesse. By abstynence & by fasting the batayles of ye flesshe agaynst the soule, and ye batayle of the soule a∣gaynst the flesshe do cease. Which abstynence let¦teth the seruannt ye body, for to aryse agaynst ye
lady ye soule. & so all such cōflycts & batayles by fastīges & abstynēce do cease Scarsyte of meat & abstinēce of drȳk make vices to be vnknowē, for lyke as ye spettel of a fastyng body sleyth an erthly serpent. So moch more the fastyng of a deuout soule sleyth ye serpent of vicious lyuing Abstinēce both quickeneth & sleeth, it sleyth the vicious leuyng, and quickeneth ye soule to god. Abstinence wt good workes is moch acceptable to god. They yt abstayn & fast from meates and do euyl, they folow the cōdicion of fendes whi∣che neuer eate, but they be neuer wtout wicked∣nes. If thou wylt be very cōtinent in sobrenes and abstinent leuyng, let not only thi throte fast from meat, but the eye from vanite, thy eares from mysheryng, thy tongue frō mysspekyng, thy hand from mystouchyng, & thy soule from proper wyll, & so shalt thou be a cōtinent soule. Of this fruyt of continence I fynd .iiii. vertu∣es. One is that it prolongeth the lyfe both bodi¦ly and goostly as Salomon sayth. Eccl .xxxvii. Qui abstinens est prolongat vitam. He that is abstinent lengthyth his lyfe, for if the body be kept frō corrupcion of gloteny & excesse, ye soule is fre from syn̄e, & so both to lyue at the last end¦lessy in blysse for suche abstinence. The seconde vertu is, that it maketh the bodely wantonnes to be repressed, for a leane body by abstinēce, is
cōstrayned for to obey to the soule, & leaue wan¦tonnes, As saynt Paul sayth .i. Corinth .ix. Castigo corpus meū et in seruitutē redigo: I chastyse my body (he sayth) and bryng it vnder in to seruitude & bondage vnto the soule, yt by su¦che chastysyng by abstynence it may the better serue the soule & obey therto. The .iii. vertu is yt it gladdeth bothe god & his aūgels. That this is sothe I fynd by a figure of Abraham which made a grete feest in wynnynge of his chylde. What meneth this wynnyng? Nothīg els but a departyng from ye swete mylke of delycates. For our lord hath great ioye of all such that for∣saken all worldly and bodely delytes, as a man wold be of a great feast. yf we vse therfore scar∣sly meates & drynkes, we shall be kept both cle¦ne in our self, & also haue fruiciō & felawshyp of holy saȳtes in heuen. The .iiii. vertu is, ye it ke∣peth a soul from ye wicked enemy of lust which lust is bitterer than deth. As Salomon sayth. Eccl .vii. Inueni amarierē morti mulierē. Lo (he sayth) I haue foūde a more bitterer enemy than is dethe. And what is yt? Truly lust. For lust sleeth not onely the body but also the soule. ¶ Thus syster leaue lustes in meat / drynke / & slepe, and lerne to lyue cōtynently in abstynēce. For though abstynence be but a homely fruyte, Yet it is a holsom fruyt and a sauery, in asmoch
as it dysposeth bothe body and soule to al other vertue. Of this vertuous fruyt our lorde bothe fede and fyll the. AMEN ¶ The .xii. fruyt of the tree of goostly lyuers is Chastyte. Ca. xii. ¶ Of Chastyte. THe .xii. fruyt of the holy goost in eue∣ry goostly lyuer is called Chastyte, whiche is a ryght precyous fruyt, for as moche as it longeth onely for holy spouses of our heuēly kȳg. Cha¦styte is the doughter of sobrenesse. For she is no rysshed of her, lyke as vnclennesse by glotony. Syster it is a great dyfference betwene vyrgy¦nyte & chastyte, as it is betwene whytnesse of kynde and whytnesse made by craft. The lylly is whyte by kynde, & clothe is made whyte by craft. By the lylly is vnderstand vyrginite, and by the white cloth is vnderstand chastyle. Vyr¦gynyte is called puryte of soule & body afore fal¦lyng, and chastyte is called purete of body & sou¦le after fallyng. For after long chastisyng of the flesshe the soule and body is come to whytnesse & clennesse of chastyte. Vyrginite hath no suche labour, for it groweth and contynueth wt nege of yeres, & euer is kept hole in whytnesse vnto ye
self aege, as a lylly dooth wtout ony laboure, by kyndly growing. It is not so of chastyte which I lyken to byce or whyte lynen clothe, made wt great besinesse. Fyrst the fler therof is grene as grasse, & than it is dryed. after that beaten, & so made clothe. whiche clothe is oft watred & son∣ned vnto the tyme it hath taken whytnesse. So chastyte must be won̄e and kept. For chastyte bereth his name of chastysing. ☞ First who so wyll be chaste & is no vyrgin, he must dry vp ye erthly gren̄esse of lyking & fleshly lustes by loth¦nesse & hate of syn̄e, than for to kepe hm therin, by chastysing or by reasonable abstynence and wakinge wt other bodyly exercises. And after yt to water it by oft waylyng and wepyng ye god wold kepe such clen̄es in them ye he may be son¦ned in the light of grace, euer to be kept clene frō falling. Thus sister a man may be chast yt is no vyrgyn. For as saynt Austyn sayth, vyrginite is a {per}petuall medytacion of īcorrupcion in a cor¦ruptyble flesshe, & a holynesse wtout experyence of cōtagious filth. Such virginite is euer kept as long as the hert wtstondeth yt it consent not to no maner of corruption. but euer to haue a loth∣nesse. He yt wyll be a vyrgin he must in the begī∣nyng of nege & discrcion fyrst refreyne the kynd¦ly styringes of corruption of nature, & so distroy yt fyrst sawtes of kynde, which be ryght sharpe
in ye begyn̄yng, and than euer after he shall find good peas wt his flesshe, and ryght seldom saw¦tes, but suche yt may easyly be withstand wtout ony peryll of lesyng of vyrginite, for the head of the fyrst suggestyon is broken. The contrary la¦bour hath chastyte. For as soone as he hath afo¦re lyued vnclenly & vnpurely, begynneth for to lyue chaste, anone he fyndeth batayle, & as it se¦meth many intollerable heates of styringes, wt vnsacyable fannynges & ymagynacions of the deuyll, whiche styreth the flesshe to be īportune and for to moeue a man to syn̄e by many {per}cussy¦ons of vnkyndly heates. O how in such batay∣les a wretched man stādeth in grete peryll, but yet yf he myghtily wtstand it he shall haue ye vy¦ctory and also great mede. Is it not trowest yu a great maystry for to ouercome him of ye which sōtyme we were ouercome. A wound ones hea¦led if it be agayn soone after broken, it can neuer be healed agayn wtout some marke. And therfo∣re though the batayle of chastite be neuer so me∣defull, yet it is a batayle of suffraunce & of stro∣kes, but vyrgynite which was neuer hurt is a batayle of gyuyng of strokes, for it hath quen∣ched the styrȳges of ye flesshe, & therfore it recey¦ueth none. It hath broken ye serpētes heed, & he therfore fleeth fro hȳ, & dare not abide batayle. Thre great rewardes I fynd that our lorde gy¦ueth
to virgins & maydēs. One is. ye amōg al re¦wardes, he maketh virgins receyue a. C. folde fruit, where clēnesse of wedlocke receyueth but xxx. fold, & the clēnesse of wydowhed but sixty. The second is, that all virgins & maydens. syn¦geth a new song which none may sing but they The .iii. is that they folow the lambe where so euer he go. All chast soules be as aūgels in erth, & cosyns to aūgels, for there is none of so nygh affinite that may approche to aungels, as vyr¦gyns & maydens do. Of this I fynd auctorite in holy writ, where it is writē thus. Mat. xxii Qui ne{que} nubent, ne{que} nubent̄: Erūt sicut ange¦li dei. They yt nether wed nor be wedded in erth shall be as aungels of god. ☞ Lo syster this is the souerayn singularite or pryuylege, whiche is giuen to virgins & maydens, for to be cosyns to aūgels. Vyrgyns & maydens receyueth a. C folde fruyt, yt is a. C. fold rewarde in blysse, & so they excede in meryte & rewarde the syxty fold. fruyt of wydowes, & the .xxx. fold fruyt of wed¦locke, whiche shalbe benethe them as ye nōbres ben. The second is, yt all vyrgyns and maydēs do syng a newe song which none may syng but they. But what song is this yt is so syngulerly gyuen to maydens & vyrgis? where shold we fynd this song that is called a newe song to thē? Fyrst we must seke out this song among all the
songes yt we fynd in holy wryt, whyther it be the song that aungels syng in heuen Alleluya. Nay it must be such a song ye maydens may vn¦derstand. That song is onely aūgels song, desy∣ryng our saluacion. it is good, but yet it is an ol¦de song afore the incarnacyon. we must haue a newe song. whyther it be yt song which Moy∣ses song whan he had led the children of Israel ouer ye read see, whan he song thus. Exodi .xv. Cantemus dn̄o. &c. ❧ Syng we now to our lorde (he sayd) for gloryously he is magnyfyed, in as moche as he hath bothe hors and man of our enemyes drowned and throwen in the see. Nay, this is not a newe song, but an olde song, yet it is partynent vnto mannes saluacyon. Many songes I rede of olde songes full good & vertuous, but none of these songes I fynde sin∣guler and new longyng to virgins & maydens. There is one songe whiche is new and syngu∣ler for them, and that is the song whiche ye blys¦sed virgin Mari our lady made, when she was with our lorde, and our lorde wt her by his wor¦thy incarnaciō. This new song is called. Luc. i Magnificat aīa mea dn̄m. My soule (she said) magnifyeth and maketh our lorde great. After the great ioyeng of saint Iohn̄ whyles he was yet in his mothers wombe, & after the worthy cōmendable propheci of Elizabeth his mother,
This blissed virgin & mayd in cōforting not on∣ly of virgyns and maydens, but also of all man kynde began mekely & wysely a new songe and sang. Magnificat aīa mea dn̄m. As who my∣ght say thus. All other of olde tyme pronounce our lorde a great lorde, and a worthy, as all rea¦sonable creatures sholde. Other also proued & shewed our lorde great & worthy. But I now make our lorde grete. For lyke as the worker is more cōmendable than ye worke, so is this song more cōmendable than all other sōges. For it is new bryngyng in our saluacyon. ☞ Lo syster this song was made of a vyrgyn & a mayden. All maydens may be ioyfull, for by a vyrgyn & a mayden was fyrst begon this newe songe of our saluacion, Than the song of vyrgyns shold nothyng els be but the mynde and meditacyon of our lordes incaruacion, and euer newly to ha¦ue in mynde the byrth of our lorde whiche is yt new song of our saluaciō. None may syng this so veryly but virgyns & maydens, for because a mayde and a vyrgyn was ye fyrst that caused it and made it, & that blissed lady our lordes mo¦der vyrgin & mayde was the fyrst yt made a vo∣we to vyrginite and offred ye glorious gyft first of all to our lord. For though our lord sayd by yt lawe. Gen̄. i. Crescite et multiplicamini et re∣plete terram. ❧ Growe and encrease, & fulfyll
the erthe (he sayd). to vyrgins & maydēs, gro∣we and multyply & fulfyl heuen. So than only the quere of vyrgyns after our lady may synge worthyly this newe song of our saluacion. Luc i. Magnificat aīa mea dn̄m. ❧ The .iii. thing is, that all vyrgins & maydens folowe ye lambe whyder soeuer he gooth. By this lambe I vn∣derstand our lord god & man, which ran̄e in the wretched way of this worlde in great purete & holenesse bothe of body & soule without ony cor¦ruption. Onely vyrgins folow next this lambe in great purete of clennesse bothe body & soule. All other maydens yt be no vyrgins in holynesse of vyrginite folow hym, but not so swyftly, for they halt on the one fote. The body and ye soule hath not be kept so hole wtout brekyng. It was broken, & is made hole by chastyte. The fote of chastyte is neuer so strong as is the fote of vyr∣gynite. In .iiii. maner of wyse I fynst yt our lor¦de that blyssed lambe walked in this wretched worlde whyle he lyued here after the .iiii. fete of a lambe. ¶ One is in erth he walked mekely whyles he was amonge vs. In hell after his dethe he walked among fendes full fearefully. Vpon the see after his resurrection he walked full merueylously. And in heuen after his ascē∣cyon he walketh now full hyghly. In these sa∣same. iiii? maner of wyse walketh all vyrgins
and maydens in this lyfe, for they folowe this blyssed lambe fote by fote. They walke mekely yf they be very maydens, for the felaw of may denhode is mekenesse, & the token therof is sha∣mefastnesse. Euer they be shamefast of ye thyng that longeth to breakyng or hurtyng of vyrgy∣nyte and maydenhode. They walke also drede¦fully. For vyrgynite & maydenhode among all the conflyctes of this fyghtyng chyrch in erth be more dredefull batayles to fendes, than ony batayle of ony other good creature. For ye fende findeth no marke of his brennyng in the flesshe of maydens, & therfore he is aferd moost of thē, for they onely breke his heed. There may no de¦lectaciō of carnal syn̄e by fals suggestion rest in them. They walke also in erthe merueylously. Is it not a merueylous thyng, & a wondrefull for to lyue in flesshe, & not to be ouerthrowen in passyons of the flesshe. truly yes, and worthy great meryte & hygh ioye. They walke also in erthe hyghly, for they passe in hyghnesse all o∣ther of lyuynge, bothe prelates and subgectes, but yf they be vyrgyns & maydens as they be. ❧ Lo syster what pryuylege longeth to meke vyrgins & maydēs. Fewe I fynd vyrgins, but many I do fynde maydens, and therfore this twelfth fruyt is called ye fruyt of chastyte. Vyr¦gyns be all they whiche set ther lyfe so hygh in
heuenly lyuynge, yt though batayle of ye flesshe be profered them, they lightly and mightily wt stand it, so that ye fend in his {pro}fer is more aferd of thē than they of hym. Maydens ben all they yt suffre batayle, and mightily ouercome them, but euer they drede to fall, & therfore they kepe vnder theyr flesshe in chastysing for feare of fal∣lynge. Foure thynges I fynde of chastyte. One is yt it clenseth the body, as the cōtrary wyse le∣chery defileth it, so ye though there were none o∣ther mede of chastite but clēnesse, ne none other torment of lechery but ye stynkyng fylth therof. The honeste of chastyte shold be desyred, and ye fylthynesse of lechery sholde be abhorred. Ano∣ther is ye chastyte maketh a man̄es mynde fre. For it hath noo thought, neyther for chyldren, how they myght be made ryche, but onely the mynde is set frely on god. The .iii. is, yt it glad∣deth the conscyēce, in as moche as suche one for the loue of Chryst dispyseth & forsaketh all flesh¦ly delytes. The .iiii. is, ye bothe to man & to aun∣gels it maketh such a chaste soule to be loued, so yt bothe good and bad haue in reuerēce all chaste folke, but aūgels specially. For lyke as natural¦ly euery kynde loueth his own kynd, so aūgels for as moche as they be clene, loue more famyli¦erly all chaste folke, as moost lyke to theyr own kynde. ¶ For to wyn̄e this vertuous fruyte of
chastite, & to come to the {per}formyng and {per}fection therof is the eschewīg & seperacion of all such yt be eyther spekers of vnclennesse or doers of vn∣clēnesse, & for to be louers of the cōpani of chaste spekers & chaste doers, by whose exsample cha¦styte is taught & lerned. Also eschewing of dely¦cates eyther in meate, or drynke, or slepyng, or eatyng, or els of fyne & soft weryng. whiche be norysshers of the flesshe. Also kepyng of the out ward wyttes and senses ye nothyng be sene nor herde, nor touched. which that shold tempt the. Also by eschewyng of ydlenesse, which is ye ga∣tes of all vyces, & namely of carnall vyces. Also kepyng of the inward thoughtes & affeccyons of the hert, by the which affeccyon the wycked serpent ye fende putteth in his venymous heed of vnclennesse. Also besynesse of prayer wherby is goten of god helpe agaynst tēptacions. who so gouerneth hym thus may lightly come to clē¦nesse of chastyte. There be many degrees of cha¦styte. There is chastite of wedlocke, of wydow hode, & of maydenhode. There is also chastyte in dede, & chastyte in affection. Some be chaste in body & not in soule, as all such ye kepe theyr bo¦dyes clene from all actuall corruption, but yet in hert and wyl they be wedded, for they desire to be wedded. All such for the moost party delite to here & speke of corrupt loue, desyryng to loue
and to be loued, and soo hyndre many a soule by theyr affection. But now of the degrees of cha∣styte the whiche belongeth to relygyous folke, and to all deuout maydens, lete vs se. ❧❧ ¶ The first degre is kepyng & contynence from actuall dedes wt a purpose for to lyue so and to wtstand al maner cōsent to any vnleful styryng. This degre is yet full nygh to lykyng and lust, for new tornyng therfrom, in as moche as yet it smelleth of carnall temptacions, & therfore it is full necessary ye suche one so new torned from carnal syn̄es vnto chast leuyng, loke not agayn to suche carnalytees, least it perysshe: but that in all hast it aspyre vpward to another degre & in an hygher degree of chastite, that he may be safe from peryl therof. This fyrst degree is yet in labour of batayle & vncertayn of victory, for asmoch as only wyll with gods grace fyghteth agaynst .iiii. enemyes yt is agaynst the styryng of the flesshe, agaynst the appetite of affection, agaynst the styryng & prouokyng of ye world to lust, & agaynst suggestiōs of fendes. And so, iiii be agaynst twayne. yet lete good wyl trust and leane to our lorde truly & faythfully that sayth. Io. xvi. In mūdo pressurā habebitis, sed confi¦dete q ego vinci mundū. ❧ In ye worlde (our lorde sayth) ye shal haue moch tormentes of sty¦ryng to syn̄e, but fyght mightyly theragaynst
with good wyl, & trust faythfully me, & ye shal ouercome the worlde, for I ouercame it. ❧ Lo syster. thus is the worlde ouercome wt good wil and helpe of grace. Also yf yu wilt ouercome the fend, haue also good wyll & trust in god, which bound the fend, & depryued him, and dispoyled hym frō all his robbery of soules. For he is as weyke as a mous yf he be withstand wt a good wyl. As for the other .ii. enmyes which be to ye fende & to the world but exactours and tollers & seruauntes to them, as is the flesshe lykynges and vnlefull affections may soone be ouercome whā theyr lordes & maysters be ouercome. All this dooth good wyl wt gods help. ¶ The secōd degre of chastyte is whan by chastysyng of the flesshe, & by other goostly exercises ye vnclene af¦fection is clensed, and the body is made subiect to the soule, so that it is very seldome tempted, And yf it be tempted it is but ryght easyly. For at all tymes without temptacion is it not, but yet it is so easy and so lytel that lyghtly wt lytel labour the styryng may be ouercom more with bydyng than with stryuyng, more wt easy tor∣nyng away & lothing, than wt struglyng, but it so be that by neclygence and slowth it is suffred to gather strengthe & myght agaynst the soule. as though no force ware gyuen therof, than it is no wondre thought a cleane soule be troubled
and ouercom in such long sufferaūce of tempta∣ciōs. If we wyll myghtyly wtstand our goostly enemyes whan they begyn̄e for to īpugne vs. anon despyse those temptacions that they send in, and so shall we neuer be ouercom of them as for yt tyme, and not only we shal not be ouecom, but also they shall be soo made weake in theyr batayl that they shall not dare to assayle vs af∣terward. And if they assaile vs, they wote wel that they shall be lyghtly ouercom, so that they dare not ons quynche vpon vs. Lo what good wyll can do, but many be ryght slow in wtstan∣dyng, by the whiche sluggyshnes we gyue the fende strength & boldnes agaynste vs to īpugne and assayle vs the ofter & the more sharperly or fiersly. Of one thyng take hede, that whan our aduersary ye fende is myghtyly euercome, som∣tyme he abydeth long before ye he wyll assayle vs of yt same vyce of the which he is ouercome, vnto ye tyme it be forgoten & put out of vse. And thā soone after vnauysed & sodeynly he falleth vpon vs for to throwe vs doune in to the same vyce the more surelyer yt we be vnauysed. And bycause he findeth vs vnredy to wtstand him. I may lyken suche one to a man in batayle, that whan he hath long fought agaynst his enemy∣es than he dooth of his armour & resteth him, & sendeth away from hym all his meyny, for he
hath no suspeciō of no more batayle, & so he pla∣peth holyday in quyetnesse and rest. In suche faynt holy dayes I fynd many kylled. Therfo∣re syster be yu euer redy armed, thynkynge that thyn enemyes wayte sore vpon the, we shold e∣uer be redy myghtyly for to withstand thē, for they cease neuer frō assaylȳg, but it befor a wy¦le & craft, & for a whyle. and it semeth that they rest. and it is not so, theyr ceasyng from assayl∣lyng is to assayll vs, for ye ceasyng is for no kyn¦denesse or loue that they haue to vs, nor for we∣rynesse, but for gyle and wylynes. Syster bele¦ue hym not in his wyles, nor trust not to hym, for he is full of wyckednesse & at the last he wyl breke out. ¶ The .iii. degre of chastyte is to ha∣ue all the lustes & delytes of the flesshe so tamed and chastysed, yt vneth and seldome & ryght ly∣tell the styrynges of the flesshe ben felt. For the soule is so arayed wt affection and loue of chasti¦te ye it hath great abhominacion of vnclēnesse & flesshely styrīges. It is so squaymous therof yt it may not suffre to hert, ne to be spoken of fles∣shely workes wtout great lothnesse, so that it se∣meth that it wold cast, ye hert is so squaymous whan it hereth therof. O now is this a blyssed clēnesse of chastyte. Yf it happen sōtyme for pro∣fyte of other, & for reuerence of the sacrament ye such a chaste mayde must nedes speke of ye cases
of matrymony, than she speketh therof so sobre¦ly, so chastly, and so clenly yt she feleth her flesshe so quyet & restfull wt such cōmunycacion, as yf she spake of stones, or fylth, or such other ye sty∣reth not. Also in slepyng suche one slepeth ful su¦rely without any naturall habundaūce, wtout foule ymaginacions or illusyons, in so moche ye she shall fele no maner of styryng slepyngly, but that it may wakyngly be sone ouercom gracy∣ously. This is a very discrypcion of parfit cha∣stite, as it may be had here in this synful body, full seldom this grace of clennesse is had here of ryght {per}fyte folkes. But yf yu wylt be stabled in this {per}fyte degre of chastyte, & contynue therin I trowe thou must aske of our lorde a specyall priuylege of grace, in as moche as it is aboue ye bondes of naturall possybylite for to lyue in the flesshe without felyng of ye vycyousnesse of the flesshe. Such as be cold of complexion, or els be feble in body lacke oftentymes styringes of the flesshe. But yet them nedeth wt that clēnesse and puryte of flesshe, for to haue clennesse & chastite of soule, which is had onely of vertu & of grace. for els such one is no mede worthy. Of all such yt so haue tamed theyr flesshe & feleth no styring speketh the prophete wt great admyracyon, as though it were a wōdre thyng, whan he sayth thus. Ps .xlv. Uenite et videte o{per}a dei que po∣suit
prodigia su{per}terram, auferēs bella vs{que} ad finem terre. ❧ Come & se (he sayth) ye werkes of god, for he hath ordeyned vpon erth wonder thynges in wtdrawyng of batayles of tempta∣cyons, from ye end of flesshely styringes. ☞ Lo how he calleth this a wōderfull thyng, & truly so it is, to lyue in flesshe & fele no styring therof. But what sayth he more? Ps. xlv. Uacate et videte qm̄ ego sum de{us}. ❧ Therfore he sayth, and our lorde sayth by the same prophete. Ta∣ke hede restfully, & se inwardly. for I am ye god dooth these wonderous thynges & none other. As who sayth, whan batayles be ouercome & enemyes ouerthrowen, the soule may than rest in hymself, and be in quyet vnderstandyng and seyng inwardly god, yt he it is which so mighti¦ly. & so mercyably wold represse & ouerthrowe vnclene temptacyons of vyces, & gyue fynally peas and rest to all such that haue good wyl for his loue to lyue in clēnesse. Of such peas our lor¦de sayth thus. Leuit. xxv. Dabo pacem finib{us} vestris dormietis, et nō erit qui exterreat aufe∣ram malas bestias. ❧ I shall gyue you peas in your flesshe, & ye shall slepe, and there shal no fend make you aferd by illusions. I shal also wt drawe froyou wycked beastes of flesshly ly kyn¦ges. Lo what our lorde dooth to all suche yt ha∣ue a good wyll to lyue in clēnesse. Haue a good
wyll syster, and thou shalt haue rest fro all vn∣clēnesse, & inwardly set thyne hert on hym. For who so wyll inwardly behold our lord, & haue all his delyte in hym, he must lyft hymself abo¦ue hymself, as the prophete sayth. Treno. iii. Bonū est prestolare cū silēcio salutare dn̄isede bit solitarius et tacebit quia leuabit se supra se. ❧ It is ryght good and well done to abyde in swete stylnesse the helth of our lord in al our ly¦uyng, & so to syt solytaryly & aloue wtin himself set asyde from all outward lettynges. for ye sou¦le wyll lyft herself by grace aboue herselfe. In suche solytarynesse & stylnesse a clene soule fyn∣deth great rest fro concupiscēces, fro troubles, & fro worldly occupacyons. These .iii. thinges do let a chast soule fro inwardly beholding of god. I mene of such worldly occupacions that be all worldly wtout ony intent of goostlynesse. Out∣ward occupacion in relygiō is not worldly occu¦pacyons, for it is done for a goostly ende, & for a heuenly rewarde, bycause of obedyence. But yt call I worldly occupacions which is done only for wynnyng of worship of temporal good, & of fauour. He yt desyreth nothyng of all these, ney∣ther for hymself nor for his worldly kyn & fren∣des, than hath he nothyng wherby he shold be troubled & let from inwardly beholding of god. for he dredeth nothyng to lese of suche thynges,
neyther of worldly worship nor of {pro}fyte, nor of tēporall goodes. Also yf such one shake fro hym his curyous beholdyng of other folkes dedes, & yf he be no demer nor occupy his thoughtes in thinking about such thynges, he may right fre¦ly be occupyed about inward thynges. For he yt wyll be occupyed wt hygh heuenly thynges. He must be fre from all lower worldly thynges. A byrde yf his wynges belymed or bound or bro∣ben or plucked or cut, he may neuer fle hygh. Ryght so yf the winges of the soule yt is goostly loue & affecton be lymed with worldly affecciō or bounde by worldly gyftes, or plucked with worldly delytes, or cut by wtdrawyng of goost∣ly loue, it shall neuer well fle goostly. ❀ Many thynges there be which shold moeue & styre vs to chastyte. One is fredome to entend about the soules helth & about ye pleasaūce of ye loue of god For besynesse about worldly thynges & fleshly desyres is so inordinate & peryllous yt it letteth the spyrituall fruyt of chastyte. Fleshly loue is to a chaste soule as byrde lyme ye letteth it to fle chastly. Who so wyll not be shakled & tyed with suche byrd lyme of fleshly loues, lete them lyue in fredome of chastyte & clennesse bothe of body and soule. Another thyng yt ought to styre vs to chastyte is the excellency & worthinesse therof, by the which it excedeth & ouerpasseth in fruyt
and rewarde all other maner of chastyte, bothe of wedlocke & widowhed. For where as our lor¦de assygneth vnto ye bodyly spousayle, but .xxx. folde fruyte, he rewardeth the chastyte of wy∣do whode with .lx. folde fruyt, & the chastyte of maydenhode with a. C. folde fruyt, as it is afo∣resayd. Therfore saynt Paul exhorteth and coū¦celeth bothe maydens & wydowes, and all vn∣wedded {per}sones to chastyte, as to thestate of mo¦re {per}feccyon, and sayth .i. Cor .vii. Dico autem non nuptis et viduis bonum est illis si sic {per}ma∣neāt. ❧ I say (he sayth) to thē that be vnwed¦ded and wydowes. It is good for them to lyue in clene chastyte yf such rewardes be ordeyned for all .iii. degrees of chastyte. I trowe a relygi∣ous woman which hath made her vowe to ly∣ue in chastite shall haue thre rewardes. One is for her vyrginite and maydenhode. Another for her goostly spousage to god. And the. iii, for her meke abyding here in maner of a mournȳg wy∣dowe, in as moche as she lyueth here vnder a mournyng habyte. So than such shall receyue of god .xxx. folde fruyt, lx. folde fruyte, and a. C. folde fruyt. O how precyous & gloryous is the fruyt of chastite, whan it is the spyrytual aray of all chosen spouses of the kynge of heuen. O, how ryall is this aray, & semely vpon a chaste soule, whan it causeth almyghty god to chuse
suche a soule vnto his dere beloued spouse. Cha¦styte it is that arayeth the soule wt merueylous sayrnesse with inwarde clennesse, wt plenteous fruyt, It arayeth ye soule with glorious bright¦nesse with the rewarde of īmortalyte, and wt la¦styng worshyp bothe in heuen and in erth, as yt holy goost wytnesseth in holy wryte, where he sayth. Sap .iiii. O quā pulcra est casta genera∣tio cū claritate, imortalis est enim memoria illi∣us qm̄ et apud deū nota est et apud hoīes. ❧ O (he sayth) how fayre is chast generacion with bryghtnesse? the mynde of whose remembraū∣ce is īmortal. For it is knowen bothe ayenst god and ayēst man. ye. and not onely knowen before god & man, but it maketh also of men & women aungelles, as saynt Bernard sayth. Quid in∣quit castitate decentius que de hoīe angelum fa¦cit. ❧ what is more semely (he sayth) than chastite? that maketh of chaste men and womē aungels. For though the chastyte of aungels be in more blysse, yet the chastyte of man or wo∣man that standeth in batayle is more stronge. Chastite (he saith) is alonly that thyng that in the tyme & place of this mortalyte rep̄senteth a maner of īmortall glory and blysse. Therfore it was that our mercyful & chast louer and lord Iesu although he wolde haue his holy mother spoused to Ioseph, to shewe ye spousage were
good, yet he wold in her spousayl that she shold kepe the chastyte of vyrgynite to shew that it was moche better & more glorious, than bodely spousayle. Therfore also it was that our heuen¦ly spouse Iesu kyng of blysse called a way his owne chosen derlyng & holy apostel saint Iohn̄ the euangelyst from his bodely spouses, and be¦cause he lefte his bodely spousayl for our lorde, therfore he made hym more famylyer & homly with hym before all other apostels. And becau∣se he forsoke ye carnall loue of wedlocke, therfore our lorde fulfylled hym with ye swetnes of his goostly loue more plenteous than other. In soo moche yt at his last souper he made knowen to hym that yt was hyd fro all other. And there sle¦pyng on our lordes brest dyde se the preuytees of his godhede, which afterward he wrote me¦re hyghly than euer dyde ony other. To him by¦cause of chastyte our lorde in his passyon com∣mended the kepyng of the moost holy, chaste, & gloryous vyrgyn his owne gloryous mother. For loue of chastite also it was that this same a postell loued specially the holy kyng saynt Ed∣ward for, to whome he appered & receyued his ryng in almes, & sent it agayn warnyng hȳ be¦fore the time yt he shold depart out of this lyfe, & receyue in heuen the great rewarde of chastyte which is full plenteous & synguler as our lorde
promyseth by his prophet I saye & sayth. Esa. lvi. Dabo ennuchis meis in domo mea locū et nomen melius a filijs et filiab{us}. ❧ I shall gy∣ue (sayth our lorde) to my chaste seruauntes a place and a name in my hous of heuen. better & and more worthy before other of theyr sones or doughters. O, therfore now thou mayst se by this, how worthy and excellent a vertue is cha¦styte, and how acceptable and pleasyng it is to our lorde Iesu thy heuenly spouse. Kepe it ther¦fore and halse it to the as yt thyng that may ma¦ke the full louely & pleasyng vnto the hye kyng▪ and thyn endlesse spouse Iesu. whither saynt Agate knew not this, whan for the loue & faith of chastite she went vnto deth as she wold go to a great feast, whyther also saynt Margarete & faynt Katheryn knew not this, whiche for the loue of clene chastite chose rather to be marty∣red than for to lese it. whither also saynt Lucy knew not this, that for the loue of chastyte, the holy goost made her so heuy that she myght not be drawen wt many folde tyemes of oxen to the brothell or strumpet hous. whyther also saynt Agnes that was so tendre of arge which was led vnto the brothell hous, where an aungell of god kept her, & by ordinaunce of god was more clad wt her heare than by ony clothes. I trowe yes. Loke syster and yu shalt fynde that all these
holy vyrgyns rather wold be dead than to lose theyr chastyte. The thyrd thynge yt may styre vs to the vertue of chastyte is the inwarde cal∣lyng of our lorde & the cōfortable inspyracion of graces whiche our lorde sheweth to all meke & chast soules, for all suche desyreth. vii thynges of god. One is the syght & the loue of hym, and set ryght nought by outward beaute of any cre¦ature, as for any lykyng in syn̄e. An other is yt all suche desyre to haue right noughte but only wherof to lyue, & yt to theyr only nede wtout ony superfluyte. The .iii. is all suche fle & eschewe vayne & ydle wordes. The .iiii. is they care not for to se theyr worldly frendes, neyther faders nor mothers, for our lorde they loue and desyre. The .v. is al such coueyt to kepe mekenesse wtin∣forth in theyr conscyence, and withoutforth in theyr habyte. The .vi. is that all such be in wyl neuer to doo vnclennesse, but rather for to dye. The .vii. is that all such bryng forth to our lor∣des seruyce mo chyldren by theyr good conuer∣sacyon & good exsample (by spekyng of spyritu¦al and goostly wordes) than they shold haue do¦ne yf they had ben wedded. ☞ Lo syster what graces our lorde gyueth to all meke maydens. Thus than chast vyrginite is peas of ye flesshe, scylēce of charges, pryson of lustes, stoppyng of the .v. wyttes as touchyng to euyl, the bedle of
good name & fame, ioye of conscience, parte of ye nature of aūgels, fayrnesse of good lyuyng, lord shyp of vertue, ye bed & restyng place of Chryst, and the foundament of al goodnesse. Chaste vyr¦gynite is also as a lylly vndefyled. ¶ In a lylly be .vi. whyte leaues, by the whiche clennesse of chastyte is sygnyfied. The fyrst is sobrenesse of meat & drynke. The second hard waring. The iii. besynesse of labour. The .iiii. keping of the. v wyttes. The .v. casynesse of wordes. The .vi. auoyding and eschuyng of ydlenesse. Such cha¦styte as doctours say rauysshed ye {pro}phete Elyt in a fyry charet in to paradyse. By such chasty¦te ye same prophete reysed dead to lyfe. By such chastyte Elizie the prophete had gyuen to hym of god a double spirite. one of prophecy, and ano¦ther of myracles. Such clēnesse & chastyte quē∣ched the outward fyre of the .iii. chyldren whi∣che were cast in to the fire, as is rehersed in Da¦nyel the prophete. And no wondre though such outward fyre myght not bren̄e thē, for as mo∣che as the feruour of vnclennesse brenneth not them wtin. All suche may in no wyse be brēned of ony mannes ordynaunce withoutforth, that quenche the deuyls fyre withinforth. And that hath be wel {pro}ued by holy vyrgīs afore, whose materyal fyre our lorde quencheth wt his dewe without forth, bycause they had quenched the
fyre of hell withinforth. Such chastyte delyue¦red Danyel fro deuouring of lyons. bycause he dystroyed in hymself yt moost cruell beest of fles¦shely delectacyon, whiche is wylder & wodder more than ony other wylde beest. Thus than chast vyrgynite is ye spouse of Chryst, the thro∣ne of god, the temple of the holy goost, the hale of the endlesse king, the treasure of heuen, the er¦nest & dowry of euerlastyng rewarde, and ye ga∣te of paradyse. And for to say shortly chaste vyr¦gynite maketh a man or a woman in this wret¦ched body blyssedly to clepe, and gracyously to wyn̄e the blysse of heuen. ¶ For to conclude vp this holy fruyt of chastyte, foure great vertues I fynd wherby it is hyghly cōmended, & pray∣sed in ye syght of god. ❧ One is that chaste vyr¦gynite groweth among worldly people, as the lylly dooth among thornes. For lyke as a lylly among thornes groweth vpright without hur¦tyng, so dooth worldly chaste vyrginite among worldly people, thus sayth Salomon. Cant .ii. Sicut lilium inter spinas, sic amica mea inter filias. As a lylly sayth our lorde by Salomon groweth without hurtyng among thornes, so doth my deare beloued spouse chast virginite a∣monge all myne other doughters. The seconde vertue is, that chast vyrgynite beryth the preci¦ous floure aboue all other maner of chastite, be
it of wedlok or of wydowhed. For lyke as one sterre passeth an other in shynȳg in the fyrma∣ment, so doth chastite among all the clennesse of the erth. The thyrd vertue is, that chast vyrgi∣nyte hath the hygh seate in heuen next vnto the trinite, in as moche as our blyssed lady goddes mother that holy virgyn is inhaunsed in blysse aboue all the orders of aungels. Therfore glad may all chast maydens be, whiche hathe so spe¦ciall a vyrgin nygh the trynite. The fourth ver¦tue is, that chast vyrgynite here in erth is most next vnto Chryst bothe bodely and goostly. Bo∣dely bothe by famylyer conuersacyon and also by naturall knowlege. ❧ The fyrst was well knowen by saynt Iohn̄ the euangelist whiche by the merytes of his chastite was most famy∣lyer with Christ aboue all the apostles, and mo¦che preuy to the secretes of his godhed. The se¦conde was wel knowen in our blissed lady that holy vyrgyn whome our lorde chase to his mo∣ther, because of her meke vyrgynyte, & so was borne of a chast vyrgyn, to shew therby that he loueth euer the clennesse of meke and chast vyr∣gynyte. ☞ Lo how vertuous chastyte is, kepe it well, for yf it be lost, it may neuer be won̄e a∣gayne. Though yu lese charyte thou may haue it agayn as well as euer thou hadest, so of goost¦ly ioy, of pacience, of sufferaunce, of goodnesse,
of benyngnite, of myldnesse, of true lyuing, and of contynence, whiche I call here sobernesse of lyuyng, but not so of chastyte. For yf ye lose that it may neuer be had agayn as it was. And ther¦fore I pray the kepe it wel. Which if it be meke wyll brynge in all the other vertues. ❧❧❀ ¶ Now syster I pray the specyally eate oft of this fruyt bothe wakynge and slepyng, for it is swete in smellyng, that it sauoureth among aū¦gels in the blysse of heuen. Parte with thy sy∣systers of this fruyt that ye all at the last may come thyder where as your holy cosyns be aungels, there for to se the vyr∣gyn of vyrgyns, & our lord your louynge spouse her blyssed so∣ne endles∣ly. AMEN ¶ Here endeth an epystle made and sent to a relygyous woman, of the .xii. fruytes of the holy goost. ❧
Robert Coplande printer's device of Robert Copland
