17124A 99847940 13010
The true reporte of the prosperous successe which God gaue vnto our English Souldiours a∣gainst the forraine bands of our Romaine enemies, lately ariued, (but soone inough to theyr cost) in Ireland, in the yeare, 1580. Gathered out of the Letters of moste credit and circumstaunce, that haue beene sent ouer, and more at large set foorth then in the former printed Copie. For a singuler comfort to all godly Christians, & true harted sub∣iectes, and an exceeding encouragement to them to persist valiantly in their true Religion and faithe towards God, their due obedience and looue to their Prince, and to repose their whole assured confidence in the strengthe of the Almightie, as moste safe vnder the Shield of his protection. Seene and allowed. Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North doore of Paules Church, at the signe of the Gunne.
WHo wayeth well each point of this discourse, How crooked hap encounters canckred minde: How rightfull cause subdueth wrongfull force, How he is caught that layes the snare: shall finde, Naught bootes it then to trust to any ods, Who Giantlike doo fight against the Gods. To rob all Princes of their rule and right, God of the glory due to him alone: Man of his soule, and Sathan of his might, To boulster Rebelles, gainst their Princes throne: To seeke Gods truthe and Gospell to suppresse. Let all men iudge if this be holynesse. O Roome, the roome, where all outrage is wrought, The Sea of sinne, the beast with seuenfold head: The Shop wherein all shame is sould and bought, The Cup whence poison through the world is spred. VVell maist thou draw the simple with a Dreame, And ween to winne, yet striue against the streame. VVho fauours; feares, or followes with desire, Thy state, thy strength, thy vaine and wicked reed: Deserues, dislikes, and iustly dooth acquire, The swoord, thy swaye, destruction for his meed. Let Pope, let Turke, let Sathan rage their fill: God keepeth vs, if we doo keepe his will. Esto Honor & gloria Domini.
To the Reader. BEcause there go many and diuers reports of the late conflict in Ireland, proceeding of sundry Letters sent ouer, which, although they agree in effect and substaunce of the matter, yet haue not euery one the same, nor any one the whole circumstaunce of the manner thereof: And hauing considered how that it is not onely vsuall among the people, to be desirous to know newes, but also necessary that this happy newes should be knowen vnto all (aswell to the true religious and obedient subiect, for his comfort, as to the super∣sticious disloyall recusant, for his vtter dismaying and confusion): I haue thought it not amis to bestow some light paines of my little leisure, in gathering one sound discourse out of those sundry fragments which haue come to my hands, some presented vnto me in writing out of Ireland, and some imparted vnto me (by the ad∣uertisements of men of good credit) out of those letters which were sent vnto her Maiestie, the true collec∣tion whereof I present vnto the well affected Reader, in such order as the time would serue me to dispose them.
Newes out of Irelande. THe enimies lying (as it séemed) very surely entrenched in the Forte which they had made, which they called, Il Castel del Oro, and sufficiently manned with Soldiers, to withstand a farre greater force then our Englishe men were, they béeing in number sixe hundreth within the Forte, and our men but eyght hundreth abroade: which is a verie vnequall match (as they knowe well, which are skylfull, and haue bene exercised in those af∣fayres) considering the ods of place, the one béeing vnder co∣uert, well fortified, and hauing theyr Ordinaunce, placed at all aduauntage, the other naked, vtterly without Municion, or opportunity of placing any Ordinaunce, wherby to auoyde theyr enimies, béeing them selues continually subiect to their annoyaunce. The Lord Deputie, béeing (in so great disad∣uauntage) almost in dispayre of dooing any good, was soone re∣comforted with the happy arriuall of the Quéenes Shippes, The Swift sure, one of the Quéenes Maiestis ships, ari∣ued at Smi∣therick xvii. daies before the rest of her fellows in which time, the e∣nemy shot 30. shot a day, and neither could hit Ship nor man. which it is to be thought that the verie great and woonderfull prouidence of God (quite beside their expectation) sent thither so luckely for their succour. They béeing arriued, there were certayne great Péeces brought out of the Shippes, and a Trench made, & that great Ordinaunce planted about fowre hundreth paces from the enimies Forte, to batter it: which Ordinaunce was so well plyed all that day (béeing the ninth of Nouember) that they galled the enimie gréeuouslie, and beat them away from plying theyr Ordinaunce. On the tenth day in the morning, they cast an other Trench for small shotte, within an hundreth, and thrée score paces of the Forte, and began a freshe batterie, and espying cer∣tayne Péeces within the Forte, that were lyke to annoy the Campe, planted theyr Ordinaunce against them, and dis∣mounting two of theyr Demicanons, brake and defeated the rest, to the number of fouretéene or fiftéene great Péeces. And the same night made a third Trench for small shotte; within a hundreth and twenty foote of the Fort. Afterward percey∣uing that the Spanish Musket shot was the hottest, and espy∣ing a house of oordes, where they were bestowed: they beat
that downe with the Ordinance, and scattered the Muskets. Which doone, the enimies finding them selues thus dismem∣bred, and vtterlie dispoyled of theyr chéefe force, whereto they trusted: beganne to chaunge theyr countenaunce, and hung out theyr banners of Truce, quietly calling for Parle. Then issued out a braue Italian, who béeing demaunded by my Lord Deputie, who sent him thether? answered. The holy Father? Wyll you (sayd my Lord) aduenture in the seruice of a shaue∣ling, an Antichrist, a murtherer bothe of soule & body, against such a Prince as my Mistresse is? You shall haue the iust re∣ward of your seruice. And requiring him to bring foorth the chéefe of the Spaniardes, he asked the sayd Spaniarde, who sent him thether? He sayd he could not tell. Whether the King of Spaine? He sayd no: Whether with the Kinges knowledge? He aunswered no: But (sayd he) at Porto in Portugall, the Gouernor there cōmaunded mée, to goe to such a place, where I should receyue my chardge, which I dyd, but whether I should goe, or against whome I knew not, and so brought to this place as blindfld, and (as I sée now) vtterly betrayed. Then (quoth my Lord) if you be not sent by the King, you come as a runnagate, and must receyue the lyke hyer. They desiring to depart with the honor of Soldiers, it was denied them. Then resolued they to surrender vp the Fort, to yéelde theyr money and Iewels, and other things of price, in∣to the Lord Deputies handes, and them selues to his mercy: Whereof he accepting, receyued thrée of them pledges vntyll the next morning, when according to that conclusion, they re∣turned, and the chéefe of them (whome it is néedlesse to name, they onely remayning a lyue) to the number of twenty were saued. The rest to the number of fiue hundreth and sixe were slaine, and seuentéene hanged. The poore English Soldiors that lacked hose & shooes, and were barely cloathed, by means of this medley, foūd to apparell them, Al modo Italiano. Wine and Bisket they met with good store, and other victuals for a good space: fowre thousand Armors, with many good Péeces, and (as they say) some reasonable share of Ecclesiasticall Ita∣lian Maister Iohn Cheek my Ladie Cheekes sonne. money. In all this conflict there were onely two hurt of our men, whereof the one was Maister Iohn Cheeke, who is thought vnlikely to recouer. Thus may we sée how God figh∣teth for vs, and subdueth our enemies, who by all mans rea∣son
and likelyhood were not to be ouerthrowne by ten times the nomber that our men were, in that vnreasonable ine∣qualitie of defence and Furniture. For our men were in that opinion, that if they had béene within the Forte so well ap∣pointed of great and small shot as the enemies were, it would haue cost 10000, lyues before it would haue béene wonne. But by the good prouidence and assistaunce of God (notwith∣standing their great aduantage) the Lord Deputie with his worthy endeuor by land, and our ships (through their fortu∣nate ariuall) by water did so coupe them vp on euery side, that they could no way escape. They sayd that if our Ships had stayed but two dayes longer, out of that Harboroughe, they would haue béene gone. For at their first ariuall, there came syxe sayle of them, being of men in number about 800. who so soone as they beheld the barrennesse of the Countrey, and the brutishnes of the people, two of the greatest Shippes departed home againe, with about 300. men in them, and left the rest to taste of the good entertainement that they looked for there: which (thanks be to God) they found not so satisfi∣able to theyr wicked expectacion, as agreeable to their iust de∣sarts, which would be incited by a blasphemous Antichristi∣an Prelate, against a true zealous Christian Prince, wrong∣fully to inuade her rightfull inheritaunce and possessions, and to assist her disobedient and rebellious Subiects, against their most gracious renowmed Soueraigne. Wherein, although the Popes holines forsoothe followed the footesteps and exam∣ple of his Predecessors, which haue béene euer sowers of sedi∣tion, raisers of Rebellion, maineteyners of disobedience, Au∣thors of infinite bloudshedding, which is euen growne to be the Badge of their Catholike (or rather Cacolike) profession, and the true Cognisance of their holinesse: yet these Gallants should haue had more wit, to haue looked or they had lapt, and sounded the depth, ere they had entred the shore of a for∣raine Princes dominion. But as theyr gréedynes of gaine, or superstitious deuocion towardes an infamous Idole, hath brought them to the Shipwracke of theyr lyues (at the least) so hath their vnaduised rashnes vtterly sunck, all excuse of theyr guiltines, and pittie of theyr miscarying. They confessed vnto my Lord Deputie, that the Pope theyr paymaister, whose Ensignes they spread on theyr Fort, with
his Crownes, Miters, Croskeyes, and other lyke trumperie, promised to send them a greater power, for which cause they brought much Treasure with them, béeing appoynted to stay for that supplie, for which our Englishmen were not greatly sorie. It is reported that eyther they or other, were already comming at that tyme: for the fowretéenth of Nouember, there was escried a Pynnis, towardes the coast of Irelande: but I take it to be rather an opinion or imagination of some cōming, conceyued through that former report: then any true apparaunce of the verie persons approching. Howsoeuer it be, it is no great matter, for our Soldiers stay there, and cer∣tayne of our Ships this winter, to welcome them. The Earle of Desmond, and his brother Iohn, were cōming towards the reskew of the Spaniards & Italians: but hearing how the Forte was taken, and what was become of theyr as∣sistaunts, they thought it wisdome to beware by theyr exāple and to kéepe them selues out of such sharpe clawes, and so re∣tyred them backe, & are fled into the Mountaynes. Our good coūtrymā of the Deuils owne dubbing, Doctor Saunders (an Apostata towards his Sauiour, an Archtraytor to his Soue∣raigne) is there in the countrey, but where, it is vnknowen. One of his mē was takē in the Fort, & a Préest of that order, who were hanged & quartered in the Forte. Thus much hath bene certified out of Ireland, of what was doone there be∣fore the fiftéene day of Nouember last past. For which ioyfull and happy newes, let vs render harty thankes vnto our al∣mighty protector, attributing the whole prayse thereof vnto his omnipotencie, beséeching him to preserue our most grati∣ous Princes, vnder whose prosperous gouernment we haue receyued bothe this & other infinite blessings at his hands: to strengthen our good Captaines and Soldiors, with force and power to ouercome our bodily foes, and vs al with his grace, to withstand the assaultes of the Deuill, and the tyranny of Antichrist his dearling (our spirituall enemy) & to serue our Redéemer in true feare and holynesse, and his true Ministers with due looue and reuerence, to be faithfull vnto him, loyall to her Maiestie, lyke minded and charitable one to an other, to the glorie of his name: vnto whome all glorie, power, and dominion belongeth. FINIS.
