1715 99837103 1412
A Christ¦mas bankette gar∣nyshed with many plea∣saunt and deynty dis∣shes, newely prepa∣red by Theodore Basille. Luce. 14. ¶ Blessed is he that ea∣tethe breade in the kyngdome of God.
¶ To the ryghte honorable Syr Thomas Neuelle Knyghte, Theodore Basille wyssheth long lyfe, cōtinual helth, and prosperous fe∣licite. ✚ I feare vnlesse some men wyll accuse me of teme∣rite & rasshnes, seynge ye so boldly I dare offer to youre ryghte honorable maystershyp thys lytle lucubracion & worke, which I made now of late, & entitled a Christmasse bancket, in asmuche as I haue ben so seldoe in your cōpany, & haue not attempted nor proued at any tyme perfectly by mutuall confabulacion howe youre mynde is affected towarde me. To thys I answere, that I syttynge at your table before syx monethes past where it pleased you very benignely to talke with me, perceyued in youre
maystershyp at that tyme, as at all other so great humanite, comite, gē∣tlenes & affabilite towarde al men, yt it hath syns that tyme greatly ani∣mated and encouraged me to excogi¦tate & inuent somewhat yt I myght dedicate to your name, trustyng by this meanes that your beneuolence toward me should not only be encre∣sed, but also made consumate & per∣fecte. Whyle I sought diligently an argumēnt fytte & worthy youre be∣nignite, among all other it came to my remēbraūce that this tyme of ye yeare men vse customabye to make feastes & banckettes, and there vnto for to cal theyr frēdes, louers & neigh¦bours. Whan I considered this ma∣ner & custome, it dyd so much please me, seyng that mutual loue is mayn¦tained therby, that hereof I toke an occasion also to make a Christmasse bancket. For I thought although I were poore & not of habilite to make
such a feast or bācket, as the custome requireth, yet I woulde accordyng to that kynde of rytches, which God hath indued me, prepare some banc∣ket, & call vnto it, not twenty or for¦ty, but euen so many as wyll come, ye all men myght cōmende Baille ha∣uynge no house of his owne, for hys housholde kepynge & large maynte∣nāce of hospitalite. And for asmuch as ther shall not want vniuersaly, which shal make feastes for the body at this tyme, I thoughte it beste, to make my bancket, a bancket for the soule, yt men hauynge theyr bodyes fedde of other, might also haue theyr soules fed at my hande. I haue ther∣fore prepared a Bancket, not such a bancket,Ioan. vi. as the meate wherof peris∣sheth, corruptethe, and commethe to nought, but that abideth into euer∣lastyng lyfe. And because it maye be a Christmasse bancket in dede, & wor¦thy wherat Christ should be present
I haue garnysshed it with many de¦licious, pleasaunt, deynte, yea & hea∣uenly dysshes of the moost holy scrip¦tures. So that whosoeuer eateth of this bancket, shall fynde in it muche confortable noryshmēt for his soule & be occasioned therby, I doubt not to geue God hertye thankes, whiche hath vouchedsafe of his deuyne cle∣mency, & vnmesurable goodnes, fre∣ly to call him to his celestiall bācket. Woulde God that by this my bācket makynge, I might excyte & moue o∣ther to vse like cōmunicaciō at their table, as they shall fynd here, or at ye leese that they woulde enterlase in some parte of theyr repast theyr tal∣ke with suche honest & godly wordes as they shall here read, & vtterlye re∣iecte & cast awaye all fylthy and vn∣cleane cōmunicacion, all iestynge & raylyng, all blaspheming & cursing. So shoulde they haue Christe more present wyth them at theyr feastes,
than many haue nowe a dayes, at whose table such kynde of talke is v∣sed, as may iustly seme not to be wor¦thy of God & his sōne Iesus, but of Bacchus and Uenus. These be no Christmasse banckettes, but Christ∣lesse & dyuellysh bankettes. They be no feastes fytte for christen men, but for Gentiles & Ethuyckes. God ba∣nysshe once this great absurdite frō ye tables of thē that professe Christe. Nowe in as muche as at the begyn∣nyng of a newe yeare the vniuersa custome is to gyue gites one to ano¦ther, wherby the proteste theyr mu∣tuall good wyll, loue & fauour. I be∣cause I wyll not seme to be estraun∣ged from this poynte of humanitie, do here hubly offer to your right ho∣norable maystershyp this my Christ¦masse bācket for a new yeares gyft, most īstātly desyrīg you fauourably to accept it, as ye gyfte of him, which wyssheth to you from God ye father,
longe lyfe, continuall elth & prospe¦rous felicite. Hereafter God prospe¦ryng me in my studies, & directyng my pen in the trauaile of his word, I truste to cōpyle vnto the glory of God, & the īmortalite of your name other workes no lesse godly & profi∣table to the reders. In ye meane sea¦son that god, whose blessed word you must intirly fauoure and followe, mought preserue in safe estate, your good maistershyp to the anaūcemēt of his glory, & the great quietnes of vs all in this countre, by executyng on your behalfe, accordyng to your ofyce cōmitted worthelye vnto you by th kynges moost gracious hygh¦nes, suche iustyce & equitie in youre iudgementes, as shal maye turne to the vtter expulsion of all vyce, & the hygh promocion & furtheraūce of al vertu. In the trauayle wherof that LORDE mought assist you, by whom kyng sraygne, & y• makers of lawes
scerne righteous thīges, by whom also, as Salomon sayeth: Prynces beare rule, & the heade officers gyue iudgement accordynge to iustyce. AMEN. The Christmasse Banckette. ¶ Philemon the maker of the Bāc∣kette, Theophyle, Eusebius, and Christopher the gestes. PHILEMON. I Thinke it very lng vn¦tyl my nighbours whō I haue biddē to this my Christmasse Bācket do come. For I woulde be gladde, that before we fede our hun∣grye bodies, we should sustayne and fede also our hungry soules, whche do no lesse hunger for y• word of God beyng the only norysshemēt therof▪ than y• bodies do for corporal meate
as Christ wytnesseth:Det. viii Math. iiii I man, sayeth he, shall not lyue wyth bread alone, but wt euery worde yt procedeth oute of the mouth of God. Therfore that it myght be a Christmasse Bancket in dede, that is to saye, suche a feast, as wherby Christ maye be glorified, & our soules no lesse refresshed thā y• bodies: I desyre very much to se my neyghbours here shortely, that fyrt we maye taste, as it is coueniente & ryght, of the celestiall table f Gods worde of the cōsolacion of oure sou∣les helth, and afterward refresh our mortal bodies, with such alementes and noryshynges, as we haue recey∣ued this daye of Gods great libera∣lite. And beholde I praye you where they come. Brothers & neyghbours welcome vnto me. THEO. Brother Philemon we thanke you hertelye. EVSE. We are come hyther this daye to put you both to payne and cofte. PHIL. I pray you thynke not so, it is
to me neyther payne nor cost, but ra¦ther conforte and pleasure, to se you thus frēdly cōe & visite your neigh∣bour. And I thanke you righte her∣tely that ye haue not disdayened to come at my requeste. I beseche you, that ye wyl take the paynes to come hyther into my parlour. CHRISTO. I am lothe to go so sone oute of this your haull, which fedeth myne eyes with so many godly and goodly spec∣tacles. PHIL. Why, is here ony thyng that you thynke worthy to be loked vpon? CHRI. Euery thyng is here so pleasaunt & confortable to the eye of a christen man, that he beyng in this haull maye iustly seme to be in a de∣lectable Paradyfe, I had allmooste sayd, in a nother heauen. For here is nothyng dumme, all thynge speake. THEO. I pray you what is ther writ∣ten vpon your parclose dore? PHIL: The sayeng of Christ.Ioan. x I am the dore By me yf ony mā entreth in, he shall
be safe, and shall go in & oute, & shall fynde pasture. This is done to put me and my houshold in remēbrance, that Christ is the dore, by whome we must enter into the fauoure of God, & obtayne the glory of heaven, as he hymselfe witnesseth,Ioan, xiiii sayeng, I am y• waye, the trueth, & the lyfe. No man commeth to the father, but by me. EVSE. This is christenly done. What is this, that is written vpō your chi¦ney? PHIL. The sayenge of the Pro∣phet Esaye.. ixvi. The fyre of thē shal not be quenched. CHRI. This is a terry∣ble and harde sayenge. PHIL. I haue paynted this sentence in ye place, y• as the other fyxed vpon the dorema¦keth me to reioyse and to putte my whole affiaunce in Christ, so this in lyke maner should abstere & feare me and myne from doynge euell, whan by lokyng on this texte we consyder with our selues ye inextinquible fla∣mes of hel fyre, & moost greuous pay¦nes,
which are ther prepared for the wicked transgressours & breakers of Gods lawe. This doth incute & bete into our hertes the feare of GOD, which expelleth synne, and is the be∣gynnyng of wysdom.Psal. c. Pro.  x. . Psa.  For he that▪ fe∣reth God, shall do good thynges, say¦eth the Scripture, & shal haue al his pleasures in y• LORDES cōmaūdemen¦tes. EVSE. What haue ye ther wryt∣ten in your wyndow? PHIL. Christes sayeng in the Gospel of.Ioan. v. S. Io. I am the lyght of the worlde. He that foloweth me, waketh not in darke∣nes, but shall haue the lyght of lyfe. This techeth vs, that as by this ma¦teriall wyndowe we receyue lyghte into our house, so by Christe are our soules & sences lyghtened wyth the deuyne intellygēce and godly vnder¦standyng of his blessed worde, which els shoulde contynue in darkenes & ignorancy, in asmuch as a naturall man vnderstondeth not these thyn∣ges
that pertayne to the spyryte of God.Ioan. i. For Christe is that true lyght, which doth lyghten euery man that commeth into this worlde. THEO. Your table also, me thynke speketh. PHIL. Herein is growen the sayenge of Christe:Luke. xiiii. Blessed is he that eate the bread in the kyngdom of God. This is to admonyshe vs that we shoulde not haue all our pleasure in eatynge drinkynge, & banckettyng after the maner of the Epicures, but rather desyre so to lyue in this worlde, that after this lyfe we maye be fedde in y• ioyefull kyngdome of God by enioy∣enge the moost glorious syght of the deuine maiesty. EVSE. What haue ye paynted ouer your table? PHIL. The sayeng of the Prophet Esaye, yea ra¦ther the cōmaundemente of God by his Prophete.sal. viii Breake thy breade to the hungry, & lede in the nedy & way arynge into thy house. Whan thou shalt se a naked man, couer hym, and
halte not despyse thy flesshe. CHRI. Do ye accordynge to this cōmaun∣dement. PHIL. I woulde be loth bro∣ther Christo. to professe one thing by mouth, & to practyse another in my lyuing.Luke. xi For that seruaunt that kno¦weth his LORDES wyl, & doth it not▪ shalbe beatē wt many strypes. But ī asmuch as we all are to much slouth¦ful in doyng our duetye, & chesely in this one poynt, therfore I haue cau¦sed this text to be here painted, that it maye alwayes put me in remem∣braūce of doyng my office to yt poore members of Christe.Mark  well. For I tell you trueth, I thynke hym no good chri∣sten man, which receyuyng many be¦nefites at the hand of God, & cā not vouchsaufe to imparte & gyue some of them to the indigent & nedy. You remēber,Luke. xvi. I am sure, ye story of ye rych mā in ye Gospell of Luke, whiche sa∣red dentely euery day at his table, & yet would haue no pitie and mecye
vpon y• pore Lazar whē he came to his dore, but suffred hī to dy for wāt of succoure, & therfore was he cast in to hell fyre, and there greuousy pu∣nyshed. EVSE. I remember it well. PHIL This one story ought to moue vs for to haue cōpassion & pitie vpon the poore people, excepte we be myn∣ded in this world to fare wel, & after this lyfe with the rytch mā to be or¦mented in hell fyre.. xxxiiii▪ For the wyse mā sayeth: The bread of the nedy is the lyfe of the poore, he that defraudeth him of it is a māssear. THEO. Would od that all men woulde remember this, thā hould y• poore people fynd more gentlenesse at mennes hades, thā they do now a daies. But what haue ye wrytten iust by the forsayd text. PHIL. The sayeng of S. Paul to the Collos. Be ye thākefull. This sentence is placed there for to putte me in remēbrance, that I should at all tymes gyue God thankes for all
thynges yt I receyue of hym, meate, drynke, cloth, health, &c. But chefely whan I haue dyned or supped, to be thanckeful for his boūteous gyftes wherewith he hath fed both me and my houshold.om. lxi. D  For Chrisostome sayth it is conuenient that we both when we go to the table, and com from it, geue God thankes. For he that em∣ployeth hymselfe to do this, shall ne∣uer faul into drōkēshyp or lewdnes, he shal not be diseased with suretīg but hauing the expectacion of pray¦er put vpon his senses in the stede of a bridle, he shal eate of al thinges set on the table with a decent modstye & honest temperaunce, & shall reple∣nysshe both his soule and body with much blessyng. For that table which beginneth and endeth of prayer, shal neuer wante, but shall brynge to vs all good thynges more plenteouslye than any fountayne. These are the wordes of Chrisostome. CHRI. Godly
forsoth, and worthy to be followed. EVSE. Neyther is this cup dū & spech¦les. PHIL. Vpō this is wrytten Chri∣stes sayenge:Ioan. vii. If ony man thyrsteth, let him come to me & dryncke. This is not done to prouoke men to super fluous drynckyng, but to put thē in remēbraūce that yf they thyrst, that is to say, desyre remissiō of theyr sin¦nes, encrease of vertue, perfecciō of a spirituall lyfe, quetnes of mynde, purenes of herte,Esa. lv. Ipo. xxii. or ony other good thynge, they should haste to Christe, which giueth to him that thyrste the of the water of lyfe frely. For who so euer drynketh of the water yt Christe gyuethe hym,Ioan. iiii. he shall neuer thyrste more, but the water which is gyuen hym, shall be made in hym a well of water, spryngynge vp into euerla¦stynge lyfe. THEO. Uerye godlye for∣soth. Youre dysshes also wante not speche. PHIL. They reherse ye sayenge of christ in ye gos. of Iohn̄: Verely, ve¦rely
I saye vnto you,Ioan. v▪ excepte ye eate the fleshe of ye sonne of mā, & drinke his bloude, ye haue no lyfe in you. But he that eateth my flesshe & drin¦keth my bloud, hath eternall lyfe, & I wyll rayse hym vp at the last day. For my flesshe is very meat, and my bloud very drynke, he that eteth my flesshe, & drinketh my bloud, he dwel¦leth in me, and I in him. This put∣tethe vs in remembraunce when we eate oure meate of the breakynge of Christes moost blessed body and the sheddīg of his moost precious bloud & by the remembraūce of it, & ye bele∣uyng of the same, our soules at that very present, are no lsse fed & sustey¦ned, than oure bodyes are wyth the meate yt is brought vnto vs in these dysshes.Beholde what he rembrāce of christes deth doh. And this remembraunce of christes death, maketh vs to be thāk¦full vnto God the father, & to ende∣uour oure selues to lyue worthy his inestimable kyndnes, & in all poyn∣tes
to do oure diligence y• God maye dwel in vs by his spiryte, & we ī him thorowe that fayth, which worketh by charite. EVSE. Here is euery hīge so godly & pleasant, yt it ouercōmech al prayse. But seynge yt we haue be∣gun to demaund of you these questi∣ons cōcerning ye scriptures in your house, we wyll go forth so to do , tu∣sting y• ye would not be greued with vs for so doynge. PHIL. Brother Eu∣sebius I am not only not greued wt you, but also very gladde that these my deuices haue in ony poynte plea¦sed youre mynde. EVSE. I praye you what is it that your chayres & stoo∣les haue carued on thē. PHIL. A say∣enge of Christe in the Reuelacion of Iohn:po. i. To him that ouercōmeth wyl I graūte to syt wt me in my throne. CHRI. A very swete sayenge. But what meane you by this? PHIL. It it not nknowen to you, I am sure, howe confortable a thyng it is for a
wery body to syt & to haue a restyng place. CHRI. Trueth, what than? PHIL. Certes it is a thousand tymes more cōfortable to haue a place whe body and soule after so many great & daungerous conflictes in this mi∣serable worlde, maye quietly reste. Therfore haue I written this tet on my chayres & stooles, to putte me & myne in remembrance, that yf we wyl fynd rest after this life, we must seriously not dally,. Pet. . Ephe. v. but fyght wt Sa¦tan our enemy. We may neuer giue place to the world, the dyuel, nor the flesshe, but maynly resyst thē, beyng clothed wt the armature of God and neuer leaue vntyll we haue gotten the victory of them all. So shall we rest in the kyngedome of God, or els not. For the Scripture sayeth: To hī yt ouercōmeth, wyl I graūt to syt wt me  my throne. THEO. What scrip¦ture, I praye you, haue ye wrytten here ouer your lauer? PHIL. The say¦enge
of Esaye: Be ye wasshed, be ye cleane,Esai. . take awaye the euell of your thoughtes from my eies. Here so oft as we wasshe our handes, we are mo¦ued to remēber with oure selues,he. iiii. yf ony malyce or hate be in our hertes towarde our neyghbour. If ther be ony at all, we suffer not the Sonne to fall downe vpō our anger, but ac∣cordynge to Christes precepte we go streyght and reconcyle our selues to such as with whōe we are at debate or they with vs.Math. v. Moreouer yf there be ony other vncleanesse or notable vyce in vs, we streight put it aware oute of our hertes by true & vnfay∣ned repentaūce, & not only banysshe the vice from vs, but also embrace ye vertue contrarye vnto the vyce,Psa. xxxiii i. Pet. iii. sa. i. as the scripture sayeth. Declyne from euell, & do good. I gayne, cease to do eull, and learne to do good. By this meanes hath synne no dominion in vs, but vertue very muche. EVSE.
I woulde wysshe soner to come into this house, thē into any place eyther of Emperour or kynge, I count him to dwell in a fortunate yle, yt dwel∣leth in a house so adourned & garnis¦shed with the moost odiferous, redo∣lent, & swete smellynge floures of the holy scriptures. THEO. It semeth vn¦to me also, that youre vyrginalles speake, although no man playeth on thē.Esa. xxii, i. Lor. ii. PHIL. They saye thus: The eye hath not sene, nor the eare hathe not hearde, neyther hath it entred into the harte of man, that God hath pre¦pared for thē that loue hym: It ma∣keth that though the sound of yt in∣strument which is but vayne and fe¦deth ye eare for a lytle whyle, semeth pleasaunte & ioyefull to the hearers for the tyme, yet is that nothyng in cōparison of the celestiall melodye & heauenly ioye, that God hath prepa∣red for thē that loue hym. Therefore are we here admonysshed not to de∣lyghte
in fantasticall instrumentes the pleasure wher of is more vayne, than the smoke, but in that melodye & ioye, whiche is perpetuall & neuer decayeth, & so to institute our lyfe yt we maye be partakers of that vnspe¦kable pleasaunce & ioye. CHRI. The longer I behold the partes of youre house, the more I am moued to mer¦uayle, seyng so rare spectacles ful of all vertue & godlynes. Your postes also salute your gestes, so farre as I can perceyue. PHIL. They expresse this sentence of S. Paule,. Lor. iii. vi. i, Lor, vi. the tēple of God is holy, which you are. This putteth vs in remēbraunce in what seuer parte of the house we go, that we should so kepe oure hertes cleane from the infeccion of mortal synne, that God in them by his holy spirite myght dwel perpetualy. EVSE. I praye you what two great tables haue you hangynge there openly. PHIL. This is the table of the. xcom∣maundementes,
which teachethe vs what we oughte to do, & what to er∣chew. The other is a table also whi∣che contayneth in it the offyces of al degrees and estates. It teacheth vs whatte we owe to oure mooste noble Prince, to oure parentes, & to al su∣perioures. In this table euery man from the hyghest degre to the lowest may lerne his offyce & duety. Ther∣fore are these two tables redde euery daye openlye in my house, my wife, & chyldrē, wt al my seruauntes, beyng called therunto, & geuynge attēdāce diligently to the readyng of ye same. If any of my houshold transgresse a¦ny percel of gods law, he is brought streight waye to these tables, and by them is his faut declared vnto hm. So that here by he taketh an occasi∣on to amende his lyfe, & to be ye more circumspecte & ware, that he falleth not agayne into yt synne afterward. This is ye order of my house. Other
correccion thā this vse I none. Yet not wtstandyng, I thanke my LORD God, all do theyr duety so well that I cā not wysshe it to be done better. THEO. O mercifull God, what haue I herde and sene this day? so christi∣an a house, so godlye an order neuer sawe I in my lyfe. All householders may take an example of you. Would God yt many seynge this youre acte, would in lyke maner folow it in eue∣ry condicion, garnyshyng theyr hou¦ses with holy scriptures, & trayning theyr lyes accordyng to the same. Oh what a floryshynge realme than shoulde we haue? Wyth howe syncer fayth shoulde we serue God. Wyth howe feruent charite should we pro∣cure ye cōmodite of our neyghboure? With howe redy myndes endued wt al hūbly submissiō shoulde we faythe fully obey our moost christen Empe∣roure, moost redoubted Kynge, and moost excellent ruler? With how fer¦uent
herte should we profligate and chase awaye synne: With howe vale aunte courage shoulde we amplecte & inhaunce vertue? It can not be ex¦pressed with howe many & great cō∣modities this moost prosperous re∣alme shoulde florysshe to the glory of God, the aauncement of y• kynges moost excellēt maiestie, to the great pleasure & contentacion of all youre mindes, yf this thing were brought to passe▪ PHIL. I am here vnder God and my Prince a ruler ouer this my lytle housholde, & I thynke my selfe to be so muche bounde in conscience to bryng thē vp vertuously, that yf ony of them shoulde perysshe,Eze. xxxi theyr bloud should be required of my hād at the dreadfull daye of iudgement, CHRI. Woulde God that all houshol¦ders, yea all Bysshoppes & Curates would waite & attent vpō theyr pa∣rysshes wyth no lesse dilygence than you do on your flock. EVSE. The very
ame woulde I wysshe. THEO. Than should christē mē knowe Christ & his lawes better thē they do nowe a day¦es, and serue theyr Prince wt a more faythfull and obedient herte. PHIL. Well thus haue ye sene my symple wytte in diuisynge these aforesayde thynges for the ryght institucion of my selfe & family. And it pleseth me wel, seyng that it doth not displease you. EVSE. The lyght hereof hath so delyghted vs, that nothyng hereto∣fore hath fed our eyes with so great delectaciō & pleasure. Neyther haue we bē here vaine & ydle spectatours but haue reposed all theise thynges in oure brestes, that euery one of vs intende to gyrnysshe his house and order his familye in lyke maner, gy∣uynge you ryght herty thankes for the callynge of vs hyther this daye. HIL. Seyng yt ye haue now sene the moost prīcipal plesures of my haull, I praye you vouchesafe to take the
payne for to come into my parlou. THEO. We followe you gladly. PHIL. Nowe are ye welcome hyther. CHRI. I praye you neyghbour Philemon, what haue we here to do? I am now more rauysshed then I was before. Here is euery thynge so godly, plea∣saunt that it semethe vnto me to be a figure of the newe & celetial Ieru¦salem,Apoc. xx. which is so gorgiouly decked & garnysshed wyth all kynde o hea∣uenly treasures. But I praye you, what do ye mene bi your table spred wt a fayre white & fyne cloth? Again what four bokes haue you layd vp∣on the table, cladde & couered moost preciously with cloth of gold. PHIL. It is not vnknowen to you neygh∣bours that I dyd bydde you vnto a Christmasse Bancket, & very frende¦ly ye are come to me. Nowe that it myght be a Christmasse Bancket in¦dede, I was mynded not only to pro¦uyde meate for youre bodies, as the
common fasshyon of the worlde is, but also for your soules, or els howe coulde it be a Christmasse Bancket? These oure bokes that lye here, are thus named. The fyrst is the fiue bo¦kes of Moses wt certayne other vo∣lumes of the olde Testamēt. The se∣conde is the Prophetes. The thyrd the new Testamēt. The fourth, the Doctours of the chyrche. For euery one of vs here is a boke of lyke nom∣ber, & for euery one of vs, all. Theise are the maysters of the Christmasse Bancket. These are they which shal feaste you. Theyse are they, that haue in store so many godly & goodli dysshes mooste confortable for oure soules healthe. Whan we haue once taken our repast of these moost dely∣cious disshes, than by Gods fauoure wyll we repare to the feast of th bo∣dy, which the cōmon forte only cele∣brate, neglectyng yt, which is prynci¦pall & moost precious. CHRI. We de∣syre
very much to taste of these plea∣saūt and deynty dyshes. THEO. My herte reioyseth to heare these thyn∣ges. EVSE. Me thynke it a hundred yeare tyll we begynne our bancket. PHIL. Seynge yt yeare so desyrous to tast of this moost godly bancket, come of, & that it may be done amōg vs with the more fruyte, let vs al wt one consente knele downe & praye to God for the assistance of his spiryte. EVSE. Agreed. PHIL. If it wyll please you to gyue audience, & quietelye to heare, I wyll praye in the name of you all. THEO. Let it be so. EVSE. Yea I praye you. CHRI. That is best PHIL. Heare nowe. ¶ The prayer. O Good God & mercyefull fa∣ther the uthor & gyuer of all wisdome,Iacob. . whych at the in¦tercession of thy welbeloued sonne Iesus Christe our LORDE and sauioure dyddest sende downe accor∣dynge to thy promyse thy holye spy∣ryte
to lyghten the hertes & senses of the apostles before they could syn∣cerly vnderstand the hygh misteries of thy deuyne wyll:Act. ii▪ We moost hum∣bly besech the, that all cloudes of ig∣norancy & darkenes dispelled & put awaye, we beyng here gathered togi¦ther in thy name, may thorowe that same thy spyrite enioye the lyght of thy eternal verite, & so reuerentlye read & talke of thy most blessed word at this presēt, yt we vnderstandyng y• same beīg enflamed wt ye loue & redīg therof, maye in all poyntes fasshyon oure lyfe accordinge vnto thy holye worde, & seriously prouyde, that the lyght of all our actes & maners may so shyne before mē,Ma. . yt they seyng our good workes, maye gloryfy the oure father which arte in heauē, to whom wyth thy welbeloued sonne Iesus Christ & the holy ghost thre distincte persones in deite, and yet one verye true & perfecte God in essence, be all
honour, prayse, & glory for euermore THEO. Amen. EVSE. So be it. CHRI. LORDE let it so come to passe. PHIL. Nowe let vs fall in hande with our Christmasse bancket. I beseche God so to temper our tonge thorowe the influence of the holye Ghoste, that we speake here this daye nothynge dissonante from the veitie of Gods worde, but altogyther to the glorye of his moost blessed name, and the cō¦forte of al our soules, THEO. The ve∣ry same thynge we also wysshe. PHIL. Nowe wyll I bringe forth vn¦to you the bancket, & bycause I wyl not onerate & ouercharge your sto∣mackes with to much meat at ones (although thr ought not to be ony sufficiēcy, much lesse any nimiete in spiritual thinges, so desyrous of thē should we be) I haue at this presnt only prepared accordyng to the nū∣ber of vs foure dysshes, that we ta∣stynge of thē, yea rather eatynge, de¦uouryng
& digesting them wt gredy stomakes, maye haue the more luste & desyre to retourne to thē shortlye, I praye you syt downe euery mā in a chayre. Nowe wyll I serue you wt your fyrst dysshe, cōtayned in ye fyrst¦boke of Moses. Fayle not you ther¦fore to whette your stomakes, & gre¦dely to deuour whatsoeuer I bring forth vnto you. ¶ The fyrst dysshe. Gne. iii.CUrsed is ye erth in theyr worke. It shall brynge forth vnto the thornes & brābles. THEO. This is a disshe lytle pleasūt for the begynnynge of our bancket. PHIL. Content youre selues. it is ne∣cessary that this dysshe hath y• fyrste place, yt the other that follow may sa¦uour y• more deliciously to your mou¦thes. The acrimony and tartenes o this dysshe shall so pearce youre sto∣mackes that it shall minister to you
an appetyte & lust to deuour y• other y• more gredely. For I do not ī this behalfe followe the maner of Satā, which promised fyrste to Eue swete & delectable thynges, & afterwarde payed her wt thynges moost sower & displeasaunt,Esay. i. Mat. iii. but rather of the Pro¦phet Esay & of Iohn̄ Baptist, which fyrst of all greuously rebuked y• wic¦ked in theyr sermons, & afterwarde cōforted thē agayne moost swetelye. Neyther differed Christ and his Apo¦stles from this maner of preaching. Tak therfore thys dysshe in good worth, & heare me now paciently. Whan thorowe y• suggestion of the olde wyly serpēt Adā & Eue had trā¦gressed Gods cōmaūdement, God ac¦cordynge to theyr desertes epulsed them out of Paradyse, & sente them into this vale of misery, sayeng vn∣to Adam amonge all other thynges this aforesayd text: Cursed is ye erth in thy worke.Gen.  It shall brynge for the
vnto thornes & brymbles. Here do we learne yt for the synne of Adā all the earth, that is to say, all the crea∣tures are cursed & made subiecte to vanite. They nowe brynge forth no more goodly & pleasaūt fruytes, but thornes & brēbles, that is, synne, wic¦kednes, vice, & all other abhominac¦on. This one synne of our fyrst fa∣ther Adā hath condēned vs all that euer haue ben borne syns, or shall be here after. EVSE. Me thynketh that thoughe he offended, yet his offence should not turne to our dānacion, se¦ynge we were not then borne. PHIL. Yies in good fayth brother Eusebi∣us. For his synne was oure synne. His dānacion was our damnacion. His death was our deth. I wyl read vnto you the mynde of the famous Doctour Origen,In epile. ad Rom. lib. . apit. v. concernyng this matter: If Leuy, sayeth he, whiche was borne the fourth generacion af¦ter Abraham, was than counted to
be in the loynes of Abraham, muche more all men that are borne or haue ben borne in this world, were in the loynes of Adm, when he was yet in Paradise. And all men wt hym & in him were expulsed out of Paradise, when he was put out from thēce, & by him death, which came vnto him by the enterpretacion, came also con¦sequētly vpon thē, whom he had in his loynes. PHIL. I praye you lette vs heare what the holye scriptures say in this behalfe. THEO. We reade in the fourth boke of Esras y• third chap. on this wyse. The fyrst Adam bearyng a wicked herte dyd synne, & was ouercome, & not onely be, but al that were borne of hym.se.  Also Ose the Prophete sayeth: They euen as Adam haue trāsgressed the couenāt & therin haue they synned agaynste me,Tm. . that is, sayth S. Ierome, vpon this texte, in Paradyse all haue syn¦ned agaynste me, euē lyke vnto the
synne of Adā For it is no meruayle, sayeth he, yf that which went before in the father, be also condemned in y• chyldren.. x. But I wyl reherse to you more scriptures: Of a woman came the begynnynge of synne,oan. iii. Mat. xii. sayeth the wyse man, & by her all w dy. Christ also sayeth, y• whych is borne of flesh is leshe. Agayne, how can ye speake good thynges,oan. iii. hen ye youre selues are euell? Also in an other place, eue¦ry one that doth synne,Rom. v. i. Lor. vi. Rom. iii. sl. . is ye seruaūt of synne. S. Paule also sayeth: By one mā synne entred īto this world & by synne death, & so went deth tho rowe all men, in as muche as all we haue synned. Agayne, in Adā all are dead. In another place also he sayth all haue synned, & want the glory o God. Therfore Dauid cōfesseth that he was begottē in synne, & borne in synne. And saynte Paule affyrmeth playnelye, yt we are borne by nature the chyldren of wrath. What saye ye
nowe my frendes, do ye not now at the laste perceyue that the synne of Adā hath condemned vs all, so y• his synne is oure synne. CHRI. We per∣ceyue it well & beleue it also. PHIL. I wyll reherse vnto you a sayeng of S. Bernarde.Sermo. in e¦na Domini. In the faull of ye fyrst man, sayeth he, dyd we all faull. We fell vpon an heape of stones & in the myer, so that we are not only inqui¦nated, spotted and defyled, but also woūded & greuously shaken, brused & broken.Ibidem. Agayne he sayeth: Verely we are begotten in synful pleasure, therfore although it be agaynst our wyll, yet do we fele certayne vnlaw∣full & beastlyke mociōs of concupis∣cences in our selues. Hereto agreeth S. Austen sayenge,De veri apost. S. iiii. marke brothers behold that mankynde came forthe from the fyrst death of the fyrst mā. For sinne from the fyrst man entred into the worlde, & by synne death, & so went death thorowe all men.
Marke this word went thorow.Roma. v. Cō¦sither that ye haue herde, loke what this is, went thorowe. It went tho∣row. Hereby is ye yong chylde gilty. Syn he hath not done, but drawne. For yt syn dyd not remayne in ye foū∣taine, but went thorow, not hī or hī but went thorow al mē. The fyrst si¦ner, yt fyrst preuaricatour begat syn¦ners bonde to death. Thus se you yt both the holy scriptures & also y• aū∣cient Doctours do conclude that all we are dāned righteouslye for Adās offence.o. xxxvi. e aden. Domini. Ephe. ii. Gn. iii. So that euery mā natural∣ly, as S. Iohn & Chrisostome sayth, is not only a synner, but also euery whytte synne, as the Apostle sayeth: we were by nature ye sōnes of wrath And this is it, that God the father sayde to Adā: Cursed is the earth in thy worke, as I rehersed to you be∣fore. THEO. Than haue we learned here, that all we are cursed & dāned in Adams worke, that is, for ye synne
which he he cōmytted in breakynge Gods moost holy cōmaūdementes. PHIL. Ye saye trueth. EVSE. This is a thynge necessary to be knowen.Mrr this thynge well, PHIL. Withoute y• knowledge of our selues, we cā neuer truly know god nor vnderstand his holy scriptures. Therfore wyl I go foth to minister vnto you the residue of youre fyrste dysshe. It followeth: It shall brynge forth vnto the thornes & brābles, I praye you what other thynge dothe your corrupte nature brynge forth vnto vs than thornes & brambles, yt is to saye, synne, wickednes, vngod∣lynes, & all that euer is contrary to the wyll of God?Synne cō∣red lyke to  thorne. And in dede synne may well be compared to a thorne or bramble. For as the thorne & brēble prycketh the body & woūdeth it gre∣uouslye, yea and bryngeth many ty∣mes destruccion vpō it, except other wyse it be holpen, so lykewyse synne moost greuously prycketh, woūdeth
and vtterly destroyeth the soule, ex∣cepte it be redemed by Gods mercye thorow Iesus Christ. THEO. I thīke this to be true. PHIL. It therfore fo∣loweth yt ī asmuch as all we are dead in Adam, we are not able of oure sel∣ues to ryse agayne from death vnto lyfe. And seyng that we are synners all that euer we do, muste nedes be synne, yea it is synne in dede, & deser¦ueth euerlastynge death. For as the scripture sayth.ene. viii. sa: lvii. The disposiciō and thought of mānes herte is prone to euel from his yonge age.api. xii. Psa. xiviii Roma. vii Luke. xvii saie. liii. saie. i. Psal. cxv. sai. liii. We are wic¦ked chyldren, & a wicked seed. We are that seed, whiche was cursed frō the begynnyng. We are lyke bruyte bea¦stes. We are carnall & flesshely, sould vnder synne. We are vnprofitable seruaūtes. We all haue gone astray lyke shepe. We all are Hypocrites & wycked. We are all lyers. We all are vncleane, & all our ryghteousnesses as a cloth polluted with mensture.
All haue synned.Rom. ii. Psa. xiii. o. xxv. Po. xx. Hie. xv i.ii. or. iii. Gen. iii. There is not one y• dothe good, no not one. There is no man cleane from fylthynes, no not the yonge chylde. Ther is no man a¦ble to say, my hert is cleane, & I am pure from sinne. For our hartes are wicked and incrutable. We are not able to thynke a good thoughte. All that euer we bryng forth is thornes & brābles, that is to saye, synne, vn∣godlines, & all abhominacion.Note. What are we nowe of oure selues I praye you tell me. CHRI. Very synners. EVSE. Yea and al that euer we do in Adā, & of our own strēgth, is plaine synne and wickedness. PHIL. I am glad that we haue learned what ye are of your selues by Adam. I pray you what are ye able nowe to do for to saue your selues from this perel, wherunto ye are fallen by Adam? THEO. Verely I can not tell. EVSE. Forsoth I thynke very lytle.The captii¦te of man thorow sy. PHIL. Ye might right well haue sayde, no∣thinge
at all. For I ensure you that ye beyng lefte vnto your selues can do none otherwise but synne, & faull headlyng into all kynde of mischefe Your wytte strength, polecy, imagi¦nacion, reason, & free wyll auayleth here nothynge, to delyuer you from the captiuite of Satan, He leadeth you as the mayster dothe his bonde slaue,Ioan. viii. whyther soeuer it pleseth him as Christ witnesseth: euery one that doth synne, is the seruaūt of synne. Ye remember, I am sure, the storye of the wounded man, in the Gospell of Luke,Luke. x. which beyng dispoyled and robbed of all his clothes & greuously woūded,rk here laye styll halfe dead. THEO. I remēber it very well. PHIL. This woūded mā signiieth euerye chylde of Adam. The clothes signify fayth charïte, iustice, mercy, & such other vertues. The theues are Satā and his aungels. The woundes are syn¦nes. Haulfe deade is to be alyue in
the flesshe, & slayne in the soule tho∣rowe synne. All this are we by Adā. And as this woūded man could not be holpen of the Preste nor Leuyte, vntyll the Samarytane came, no more can we be holpen by ony crea∣ture or worke, tyll christ cōmeth the true Samaritane. We can not cer∣tes, we can not helpe our seues, but euen lye styll the stynkynge pud∣dle of synne. Loke in what case Sa∣tan leaueth vs, in the verye same do we remayne, excepte God of his mer¦cy thorowe Christe helpeth vs. Ney∣ther canfre e wyll nor all the wytte & polecye that we haue, profyte here any thynge,Epist. ci. ad Paul. tyll God indueth vs wt strēgth from aboue. For as S. Au∣sten sayeth: The nature of man all though it dyd remayne & cōtinue in that integryte & purenes, wherin it was made, yet could it kepe it selfe by no meanes, if the creator & maker of it dyd not helpe. Therfore seynge
that wtout the grace of god it could not kepe the health that it receiued, howe is it able to repare and get a∣gayne that which it hath lost, with¦out ye grace of God?ib. e vo∣cāt.  a. viii . e cor¦ ga∣ ii. Phil. ii. Ioan. xv. Againe he saith free wyll sufficethe vnto euell, but vnto good it auayleth lytle, excepte it be holpen of that almyghty God. Therfore is it well sayde of the Apo¦stle, God worketh in vs oth the wil & the dede. Hereto agreeth the sayēg of hrist. As the vyne braunche can not beare fruyte, excepte it abyde in the vine, no more can ye except ye a¦byde in me. I am the vyne & ye are y• braunches. He that abideth in me, & I in him, the same bryngethe for the much fruyte. For without me ye cā do nohyng. If any mā abydeth not in me, he is cast out as a braunche, & is wythered, & men gather thē & cast thē into y• fyre, & there burne. Thus se ye what e are of youre selues by Adam, & that no strengthe ye haue
ones to aspyre or breath towarde o∣ny goodnes, much lesse to do or work any good thynge, excepte ye be hol∣pen of God. Ye se also howe full of sinnes, diseases, woundes, sores, bot¦ches, canckers, & al y• euer nought is ye are. Ye se agayne, how ye are not able of your selues to recouer youre innocēcy, that ye lost by Adā. CHRI. Alas what is now to be done? THEO The rehersyng of these thynges ma¦keth me very sadde. PHIL. It shoulde rather make you very glad.In dil.  For as S. Hierome sayeth: This is y• true wysdome of a man to knowe hym selfe to be inperfecte, & as I maye so speake, the perfecciō of all righteous men in the flesshe is imperfecte. Agayne he sayeth: ag. li. . Than are ye righ¦teous, when we confesse oure selues synners, & our righteousnesse consi∣steth not of our owne merite, but of the mercye of God, as the holy scrip∣ture sayth,Pru.  the righteous mā is the
accuser of himselfe in y• begynnynge of his spech. Therfore must ye cōfesse your selues to be that in dede, which ye are, y• is, very synners, yf ye wyll be set free from this miserable capti¦uite, wher wt ye are nowe to muche wrapped and ouerwhemled. EVSE. We confesse ye same. THEO. We nowe knowledge yt of oureselues by Adā, we are nothynge but synners, & all that euer we do without the spiryt of god is playne sinne,Rom. xiiii. as S. Paule sayeth: What soeuer is not of fayth is synne. PHIL. Well seynge that ye haue so fruytfully digested the fyrst dysshe of your Banket, nowe haue I a fyt place, a conuenient tyme, & a good occasion to brynge vnto you the seconde dysshe, as it followeth in order. CHRI. I praye you let vs tast of it. THEO. That thynge also do I desyre. ¶ The seconde dysshe.
YOur second dysshe is cōtay∣ned in that same chap. wher in the fyrst is recited. Ther¦fore deuoure this wt no lesse gredy appetyte than ye haue done y• other. For this dysshe is much delici¦ous & very wholsome forthe vertu∣ous preseruaciō of the soule. I now brynge it for the vnto you. Beholde here it is.Gene. iii. I wyll sette ennemyt be∣twene the & an womā, betwene thy seed & her seed, & that selfe seed shall tread downe thy heade. Nowe dothe this fauour in your mouth? THEO. Very pleasaūtly forsoth: but we do not perceyue what it meneth. PHIL. Heare therfore: These were the wor¦des of God the father to the serpent whan by his craft & sutelty he had made Adā to offende, & in thē is com¦prehended an whole See of treasu∣res. For they declare both oure free delyueraunce from captiuite, & also
the victory ouer Satan and all his army. When Satan had thought yt he had gottē the ouerhand of man, and brought him into the same case wherinto he was throwen for his to much arrogancy & pryde, thynking by this menes to deceiue God of his purpose, which had made man for to supply ye nōber of Aungelles, which perysshed when Lucifer fel from he¦uen: God wyllyng to shewe himselfe of no lesse puissaunce to saue mā tho¦rowe his mercy, than Satā was to condēne hym thorowe his crafte, py¦tied streyght way the miserable fall of mā, & afterwarde spake these con¦fortable wordes to the great cōfusi∣on of Satan, & the excedyng conso∣lacion of man. I wyl set enimite be¦twene the & an womā, betwene thy seed and her seed, that selfe seed shall treade downe thy head.The womā: Thys wo∣man is the mooste blessed and pure virgyn Mary, which was here pro∣mysed
to brynge forth yt seed, whiche should tread downe Satans heade.The see This seed is Iesus christ which toke sesh vnfaynedly of that moost pure virgyn, & became man for our sake. And he it is, which was promised of God the father to treade downe the heade of the Serpent. THEO. I per∣eyue that by the serpente ye meane Satan.The tredī downe of y• Serpentes head, But what is mente by the treadyng downe of his head. PHIL. The destruccion of his power. For ye these strēgth & power of a serpent cō¦systeth ī his head. Though his tayle or body be stryken or woūded, he for¦ceth not much. For he wyl put them both in perrel for the safegard of his head, but yf his head be once striken or wosided, thā loseth he his power, than dyeth he shortelye. Therfore is Christe promysed here, not to tread downe the tayle or bodye of the ser∣pent, but his head, wherby is sygni∣fied the destruccion of his whole po∣wer.
So that nowe Satan shall ne¦uer more triūph agaynst Gods electe Do ye nowe perceyue this matter? EVSE. Yea forsoth. CHRI. I neuer hearde so muche before. PHIL. Well, nowe beholde the great & excedynge mercye of God toward you, that ye maye learne that to be true, whiche God speaketh by his Prophet Ose:e. xiii. Thy destruccion, oh Israell, cōmeth of it selfe, but thy saluacion cōmeth only of me. Ye haue heard that Adā synned, & that thorowe his synne all we were dāed. THEO. I remēber it well.Gen. iii. PHIL. The scripture testifieth y• so sone as Adam had offēded, he hyd hymselfe, & fled from the face of god, he was so gretly ashamed of y• synne that he had cōmytted.The mise∣ry of Adā. For after his offence he came not to GOD as he ought to haue done, neyther sought he grace & remission of his synne at the goodnes of God, by cōfessing his synne with a faythfull repentaunto
herte, but streyghtway after y• trā∣gressiō of ye precept he fled from God & hyd himselfe frō y• face of god, & as they vse to saye, putte his head in a busshe lyke a cowarde for feare? Oh where are the powers of free wyl, y man be once withoute the spirite of God? Man hath nowe no power to seke for saluacion, but rather conti∣nueth styll in his olde wickednes, & seketh to be far from the face of god, couetynge rather to be damned thā he would once approch vnto y• sighte of God, synne hath so slayne his cou¦rage. Satā in him hath so great do∣minion, yea whan he cōsidereth his wickednesse, he is angrye wt GOD, hateth God, and wyssheth that ther were no God, that he myghte escape vnpunysshed, euen as an enemy of y• publigue weale wyssheth that there were no kynge, no Emperour, no ru¦ler, no gouernor, no magistrate, but all lyke himselfe, that freely & wtout
punysshement he myght deforme, re¦ne teare, despoyle y• publigue wee at his owne pleasure.The good¦nes o god Nowe beholde the vnspeakable benygnite of God. When Adam had fled from him, and hyd himselfe, so that he had no hoope of helth, but vtterly despayred of all consolaciō, lokyng for extreme tyrā¦ny, to be exercysed vpon him at eue¦ry houre accordyng to his desertes. God lyke a mercyfull father sought hī vp, & spake before hī ye swete wor¦des heretofore rehersed to Satan, yt by this meanes he might receyue cō¦solaciō, & so be saued by geuyng ear∣nest fayth to that moost confortable promyse. O the vnmesurable good∣nes of this celestial father: he is that shepe herde,Luke. xv▪ whiche neuer leaueth se¦kyng vntyll he hath found the shepe that was loste. He is yt father, which ioyefully receiueth agayne into his house that sonne, whiche prodigally had spente all his substance. He is y•
Samaritane,Luke. x. Mat. xxvi. Act. ix. which healeth y• woū¦ded man. He is that LORDE, whiche maketh of a blasphemer an Apostle, of a {pro}secutor a preacher. And whēce commeth this his goodnes? of vs: of our good dedes? of our merites? Na¦verely, but of his bounteous mercy and great goodness. Frely and with out deserte worketh he this thynge. We are saued by grace thorow faith & that not of our selues,Ephe. ii▪ for it is the gyfte of God, & commeth not of wor¦kes, bycause no mā should bost him¦selfe.Tit. iii. We beīg iustified by his grace are made heyres, accordyng to hope of euerlastyng lyfe. Not for the wor¦kes of ryghteousnes which we haue done, but accordynge to his mercye hathe he saued vs.Rom. iii. We are iustyfyed frely by his grace. By grace are we saued, & not by workes. Yf by grace thē not of workes,Rom. xi. or els grace were not grace.Ioan. xv. He dyd chose vs by hys grace, & not we hym by our workes,
as christ wytnesseth, ye haue not cho¦sē me,phe. . but I haue chosē you. Paule also sayth, God did chose vs in Christ before the foundacions of the world were layd. Hereto pertayneth yt say¦eng of the Psalmograph:Psa. lxiiii. Blessed is he o Lord, whome thou haste chosen and taken vnto the, for he shal dwel in thy inner courtes. That God of his free mercy did chose vs without our desertes, whan we were synfull & poore wtoute onye goodnes or god¦lynes, he hymselfe testifyeth by hys Prophet,Esa. xviii sayeng: I haue chosen the in the fyre of pouertie. EVSE. So far as I can perceyue nowe, God alone is y• author of our saluacion, & he of his free mercy and aboūdant grace dyd chose vs to be his heyres,phe. . before the foundacions of the worlde were layde. CHRI. Yea and that before we wrought ony goodnes, or shewed o∣ny poynte of kyndnes toward hym, PHIL. Ye saye trueth. And that ye
maye knowe that I wraste not the scriptures, I wil read vnto you the layeng of S Austen:De ver.  Sc. xv. He was gyuē sayth he, for our sines, & rose againe for our iustificacion. Thy iustifica∣cion, thy circumsicion is not of thy selfe. By grace are ye saued thorowe sayth, & that not of your selues, but it is the gyfte of God, not of workes vnlesse {per}aduēture yu wouldest say, I haue deserued it, & therfore haue I receiued it. Thinke not yt yu dydest re¦ceyue it by deseruīg, which couldest not haue deserued except yu haddest receiued it. Grace wēt before thi me¦ryte, grace is not of meryte, but me rite of grace For if grace were of me¦rite so haddest yu boght it, & not recei¦ued it frely. Thou shalt saue thē say¦eth he, for nothynge: What is this, thou shalt haue them for nothinge? Thou fyndest in thē nothyng wher¦by thou mayst saue them, & yet doste thou saue them. Freely thou gyuest
frely thou sauest. Thou goest before all merytes, that thy giftes may o¦tayne thy merytes. Vtterye doeste thou geue frely, saue frely, which fin¦dest nothynge, wherof thou mayeste saue, & fyndest muche wherby thou mayest cōdemne.In po. Psa. xxxi. Agayne he sayeth, thou haste done no good, & yet is re∣mission of synnes gyuen vnto the. Let thy workes be looked vpon, and they be all foūd euell, Yf god shoulde gyue the ye which is due to thy wor∣kes, he shoulde surely condemne the. But God doth not gyue vnto the yt payne which is due, but giueth the grace, which is not due. Also vpon this texte,a p. a Roma. to al that are at Rome be¦loued of God, saynctes by cyllynge: Here also, sayeth he, he sheweth that it is the excedyng mercy of God ra∣ther then thy meryte. For he say∣eth not, to them that loue God, but to thē that are loued of God. For he loued vs fyrst, that we beyng loued
shoulde also loue hym.In ant. er. lxvi▪ S. Bernarde also sayth: Grace maketh me iustifi∣ed freely, & lykewyse delyuered from the bondage of synne. Hereto agre∣eth Fulgētius,Lib. i. a menmū. sayenge: God giueth grace to the vnworthy frely wherewt the wicked beynge iustified maye be lyghtened wt the gyfte of good wyl, & with the power of good workyng, that mercy preuentyng and goyng before he maye begyn to wyl good, & mercy subsequent and folowyng, he maye be able to do the good that he wylleth. Thus perceyue you, yt whē¦ther was nothynge in vs, wherfore God should loue vs, yet he freely lo∣ued vs ▪ chosed vs by his grace to be his chyldrē,l. Ioan. i as S. Iohn sayeth: Be∣hold, what a loue the father hath gi¦uen to vs, that we should be called ye sonnes of God. Agayne he sayth: In this is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs,l. Ioan.  & sent his sōne to make agrement for oure synnes.
And a lytle after: We loue hym, be∣cause he fyrst loued vs. THEO. What moued God to be so beneficiall vnto vs, seyng we had offēded so greuous∣ly, & were than by no meanes able to pacify his wrath wt ony good work? EVSE. This woulde I also gladdely knowe. PHIL. His owne mere good∣nes was the occasion of his loue to∣ward vs for his sōne Iesus Christes sake. In hym, by hym, & for hym, is God the father mercyful vnto vs, & freely saueth vs wtout ony respecte of our good workes.Gala. iii. For as s. Paule sayeth: Yf righteousnes came by the lawe, thā dyed Christ in vayne. And God hymselfe sayth by the Prophet I am,Esae. xliii I am he, which putteth away thyne īiquittes, yea & that for myne owne sake, & wyll remember thy syn¦nes no more. Put me in remēbraūce & let vs iudged togither: Declare yf thou haste any thynge, that thou mayest he iustified.ene. iii. And this is it, yt
we speke of before, that selfe seed shal tread down thy head. Furthermore God sayde to Abraham:Gene. xxi. In thy seed shall all naciōs of y• earth be blessed. This seed,Gala. ii. sayth S. Paule is Christ by whom al are we blessed, that is to saye, receyued into fauour, forgiuen of oure synnes, freelye iustified and made heyres of eternal glory? CHRI. Now cōmeth this to passe by Christ I praye you. PHIL. Uerely on this wyse, when all we were dampned in Adā, God of his mere mercy and ex∣ceadyng grace promised to Adam & his posterite, that ther should be one borne, which should delyuer thē out of theyr seruitude and restore them agayne to grace.Gne. lii. and. xxii. Deut. xvii. Exod. xii. and. xvi. Num xx. This dyd God the father in the olde lawe not only ma∣ny times promise, but also obsibrate & shadow by dyuers misteries, figu∣res, cloudes and ceremonies that by them ye saythfull might receyue con∣solaciō. And at the tyme appoynted
of GOD the father this mā Iesus Christ came into the world.Esae. vii. Roma. i. He was conceyued by the holy ghost, & orne of the virgyn Mary, accordynge to the holy scriptures: He was begottē of the seed of Dauyd as pertainyng to the flesshe. THEO. Yea & that with¦oute the seed of man. PHIL. Ye saye trueth.Luke. . He receyued very flesshe by y• wonderfull operaciō of gds spirite of Mary, the styl remaynyng a pure and cleane virgyne. It was necessa∣rye that he shoulde be borne of a vir∣gyn, in asmuch as the nature of mā is full of carnall concupiscence, & de∣yled by Adam, or els coulde not he haue ben a pure & sufficient sacrifice before God for vs. For by nature all we are borne the chyldren of wrath,Ephe. ii. sayth S. Paule. Therfore without the seed of ony man,e. ii. iiii. which is corrup¦ted in Adā, was he borne of ye moost pure and vndefyled virgyn Marye, beyng conformable to vs in all thyn¦ges,
synne alone except. For our syn was so great, that it could be put a waye neyther by any chylde of Adā nor yet by aungel, but only by such one, as beynge of our fleshe, shoulde be borne without the seed of man, & without ony carnal concupiscence. And for asmuche as this coulde not be brought to passe by anye carnall man, therfore was it necessary that the sonne of god should come downe from the right hande of God the fa∣ther,olo. . and be made very man for our sake, that he beyng both God & man myght by his moost precious bloud pacify god the fathers wrath, & recō cycle vs agayne to him. God so loued the world,Ioan. . sayth Christ, that he gaue his only begotten sonne, that euery one that beleueth in hym, maye not perysshe, but haue euerlastyng lyfe. For God sent not his sonne into the worlde for to condemne the worlde, but that the worlde should be saued
by hym. He that beleueth in him, is not condēned. But he that beleueth not, is alredy condemned, because he hath not beleued on the name of the only begotten sonne of god.Rom. viii. GOD spared not his owne sōne, syth S. Paule, but gaue hym for vs all. Rom .Agayne, God setteth out his loue y• he hath to vs, seynge that whyle we were yet synners, Christ dyed for vs much more than now, seyng we are iustified this bloud, shal we be preser¦ue from wrathe thorowe him. For yf when we were enemies, we were reconcyled o God by the deathe of his sonne, much more synge we are reconcyled, we shall be preserued by his lyfe. Not only so, but we also ioy in god by the meanes of our LORD Iesus Christ, by whome we haue re∣ceyued this attonemente.. Ioan. ii. . Ioan. iiii Also S. Iohn sayeth: For this purpose appe¦red the sonne of God, for to loose the workes of the euel. Agayne, t this
appeared y• loue of God to vswar▪ bycause that God sent his onlye be∣gottē sonne into the world, that we myghte lyue thorowe hym. Thus se you yt whan ther was no hope of sal¦uaciō or vs in ony creature God of his owne free goodness sēt dwne hs only begotten sonne to be a Sauy∣our vnto vs. EVSE. This do we per∣ceyue right wel. PHIL. Nowe mark agayne,Math. . howe that by him alone we are saued. His name is IESVS, that is to saye, a sauyour, for he it is that saueth his people frō theyr synnes, neyther  there any other name gy¦uen vnto men vnder heauē, wherin they must be saued, but only by this name IESVS.Act. ii. c ▪ To hym geueth all the Prophetes witeg▪, that thorow his name, ll shall receyue remission of synnes, that beleue in hī. Be it kno∣wen vnto you,Act. xiii. ye men & brothers, ye by this Iesus Christ remissiō of syn∣nes is preached vnto you, & from al
thynges, from the whiche ye coulde not be iustified by the law of Moses by him is eueri one that beleueth u¦stified. He is y• Lābe of God,Ioa. l. whiche taketh awaye the synne of y• worlde.Ioan. xi. He is our resurreccion & lyfe. He is the waye,Ioan. xiiii. trueth & lyfe. No man com¦meth to the father but by him. He is the good shepeheard, by whom we be saued from the wolfe. He is the dore, by whom we must enter into grace. He is the vyne,Ioan. xv: in whome we beyng ingrassed muste nedes brynge forth muche fruyte.. Lor. i He is oure wisdome, righteousnes, sanctificacion & redē∣ciō. He is our peace.Ephe. ii. . Timo. ii. . Ioan. ii.  oca. xxi. Roma. v. He is our medi∣atour & aduocate. He is alpha & ome¦ga, that is, both the begynnyng and endyng of our saluacion. Moreouer by him are we at peace with God. By him haue we a waye in thorowe sayth vnto this fauoure, wherin we stond, & reioyce in hope of the prayse that shall be gyuen of God. By hym
is the fauoure of God plenteous to∣warde vs.Rom. vi. By hym & his righteous∣nes are we made righteous By him hath the lawe of the Spirite of lyfe made vs free from the lawe of ynne & deth. By hym hath god the father blessed vs with all spiritual blessyng in heauenlye thynges.Ephe. . By him dyd God chose vs, before the foundaciōs of the worlde were layd, yt we should be sayntes & fautles before hym. By hym are we made dere to god the fa¦ther.Ephe. . By hym haue we redempcion, by his bloud remission of sinnes. By him are all thynges both in heauen & earth gathered togyther. By him we, which in tymes paste were farre of, are made nigh thorow his bloud. By hym we haue and open waye vn¦to the father. By him are all our sin¦nes forgyuen vs.Lol. . l. Th. . By hym are we de¦lyuered from the wrath to come. By hym and by his bloude are we made cleane from all synne.. Ioan. . By hym & by
the oblacion of his moost blessed bo∣dy done once for all,Heb. x. are we sanctifi∣ed. Yea by that one oblacion hath he made perfecte for eurmore thē that are sanctifyed. To conclude, by hym is euerlastyng lyfe gyuen vnto vs.Rom. v▪ Thus se you that by Christ all good thynges chaūse vnto vs, & that god the father is wel pleased & set at one wt vs for his sake, as he himselfe wit¦nesseth. This is my welbeloued sōne in whome I am well pleased,Mat iii. or for whose sake I am fully contented wt man. Hereto agreeth the sayenge of S. Austen:In vital. p. cv. All y• euer receyue euer∣lastynge lyfe, receyue it not but by Christ.In manu. l cap. . Therfore sayth he in another place: All my hope is in the death of my LORDE. His death is my meryte my refuge, succour, health, ife, & my resurreccion. My merite is the com¦passsiō of the LORDE I am not wtout meryte, so long as yt LORDE of merci¦es shal not wāt. And yf yt mercies of
y• LORD be many, I am plenteous in merites. The stronger is to saue, the more without iopardy am I,Lib. l. om. xiiil. let vs therfore gyue thākes, sayeth he, to the LORDE & our sauiour, whiche no merites goynge before, hathe he∣led vs that were wounded, reconcy∣led vs his enemyes, redemed vs frō captiuite, brought vs againe out of darkenes into light, called vs again from death to lyfe, & let vs humblye confessyng our fragilite & wekenes desyre hys mercy, & in asmuch as he hath preuented vs, as the Psalmo∣graphe sayth, wt his mercye he maye vouchae not only to preserue and kepe in vs, but also to augment and encrese his giftes or benefytes, wi∣che he hath vouchedsafe to gyue vs. CHRI. Amen. THEO. So be it. EVSE. LORDE let it so come to passe. PHIL. Home dothe this seconde seruyce of your Bācket please you? THEO. We neuer ī our lyues tasted a dysh more
pleasaunt & confortable to our sou∣les health. EVSE. We haue now lear¦ned what we are of oureselues, and wher remedy is to be gotten, but by what meanes shall we come by it? What thynge maye be the occasion wherby we maye receyue so many & o great benefytes at ye hande of god the father for Iesus Christes sake? I praye you a good fellowshyppe de¦care this vnto vs. PHIL. I neuer heard a questiōared in better tyme for the answere to it is your thyrde dysshe, whiche before you proponed this question, I was fullye determi¦ned to set before you. And now here it is. ¶ The thyrde dysshe. PHILEMON. REpent, & beleue the gospell. These were ye wordes that our sauiour christ as marke testifieth,Marke. i. vsed whē be begā to preach. In the which he declareth
by what meanes we may obtaine re¦mission of our synnes, & the celial heritage of gods glorye.Hom. lrr. e peniten¦tia Repent, sat¦eth he, & beleue the gospell. Fryrste he exorteth vs to repentaunce, whiche is, as Chrisostome sayth, not only to cease from the oldewith¦our euelles, but also to folowe better offices, & such thyn∣ges as ought of dutie to be done, as Dauid sayeth:Psal. xxxiii Declyne frō  euel, & do good. S. Iohn̄ the Baptyse in lyke maner in the begynnyng of his preachyng sayd:Math. iii. Luke. xxiiii. Repēt, for the king¦dome of heauen is at hand. Christ al∣so after his resurreccion commaun¦ded his Apostles to preach repētāce and remission of sinnes in his name vnto al nacions. Lykewyse we read in the Actes of ye Apostles then whē Peter preached to the Iewes much of christ,Act. . & shewed that he was the same LORDE Iesus, whom they had crucyfied, they were prycked in theyr hertes & sayd: Ye mē & brerē
what shall we do? Peter sayde vnto thē: Repent, & be baptised euery one of you in the name of Iesus Christe for the remission of synnes, & ye shall receyue the gyfte of the holy Ghost. Here se you that Christ and his Apo¦stles declared Repentaunce to be a meane wherby we maye obtaine re∣mission of our synnes & euerlastying lyfe. And that you maye perceyue ye matter yt more playnly. I wyll lyue¦ly paynt in moost euydent coloures and set it out before your eies wt cer¦tayne other histories of both Testa∣mentes yt ye maye learne to be true, whiche Chrisostome sayeth.I Mah.  xiii. THEO. I pray you what sayth he? PHIL. Ther is not, sayeth he, there is not, beleue me, ony synne in y• worlde, that doth not gyue place to the vertue of repē¦tance, yea rather to ye grace of God, which when we turne to better thi∣ges, dothe streyght wayes worke wt vs. EVSE. This is a confortable say∣eng
for synners. PHIL. Yea and in al pointes agreable to the holy scriptu¦res.Math. . For Christ came not to call the ryghteous, but synners vnto repen¦taunce. Nowe marke for your helth and consolacion.. eg. xi. Dauid committed both māslaughter & adultrye, & ther¦fore was he threatened many euels of God by his Prophet Nathā. Not withstandynge he had not so sone re¦pented hym of his acte, & cōfessed his faute, sayenge: I haue offended the LORDE, but the Prophet sayde: The LORDE hath turned awaye thy syn, thou shalt not dye.iii. Reg. . Kynge Achab al¦so dyd slaye his subiecte Nabotch, yt he myght enioy his vyneyeard. And God therfore sent his Prophet Heli as vnto hym for to tell him that the dogges shoulde lycke his bloude olso euen there, where they lycked the blonde of Naothe, and that euery one of the house of Achabbe that ma¦keth water agaynst y• wull, should
be slayne. &c. Achab streyghte waye was ashamed of his faulte, repēted, cutte his clothes, couered his flesshe with garmētes of heere, fasted slept in sacke cloth, & walked with a heuy countenaunce, & therfore god seyng his repentaunte herte, sayd that he would not bryng in that euel in his dayes, but ī his sōnes tyme. Agayne kinge Manasses,i. Reg. xxi. . Pa. xxiii in asmuch as he re¦pented, for all the abhominaciō that he committed agaynst god & his glo¦ry, was forgiuē, & afterward nōbred among ye fredes of god.Ionas. ii. The Niniui∣tes were threatened withī forty dai∣es to be subuerted for theyr dissolute & wicked lyuynge. But they beynge striken with repentaūce in ye meane season, & mendynge theyr lyfe, recey∣ued fauour & were saued. As I may come nerer home,Luke. vi. as they saye, who was more famous in sinne thā Ma¦ry Magdalene, yet in asmuch as she faythfully repented, & bewailed her
synfull lyuyng, her synnes were for¦gynen her. Peter denyed Christ,Mat. x yet seynge he repented & wepte bytterly for his offēce,Luk. xv: he was fauourably re¦ceyued to grace: The prodigal sonne althoughe he had consumed all hys goodes, was ioyfully receyued in as muche as he repented & knowledged his offēce.Luk. xxiii. The thefe called neuer for grace tyl ye hour of deth, yet seyng, yt he bewayled than his misery, & axed merci, he was herd, & wēt wt Christ ī to Paradyse. Do not these histories besydes other, shewe of what greate strength repentaunce is. CHRI. Cer∣tes they be very cōfortable for poore afflicte synners. PHIL. Thus se you that repentaunce is a great cause of the mitigacion of gods wrath,Psal. . yea & an acceptable Sacrifice to God as Dauid saith, a sacrifice to God is a troubled spirite,Behold what true repetaūe woreth in ma. a contryte & hūble herte god wyl not despyse. Thus re∣pentaunce maketh a man to dye vn¦to lynne, & to syne to righteousnes.
It maketh vs so lōg as we ī this worlde valeantly to enarme our sel¦ues, and to enter battayle with Sa¦tā & his army, & cōtinually to fyght against our enemies. It maketh vs to hate all wyckednes, & enbrace all vertue, so y• dayely we procede more & more from faith to faith & frō ver¦tu to vertue.Rom. .  Mat. v. Phl. . It maketh vs to hun∣ger & thyrst after ryghteousnes. It makethe vs to desyre to be dissolued from this mortal body, & to be with Christ. No mā is able to expresse suf¦ficiently ye excellency & vertu of this true and faythfull repentaūce. And this is it, which maketh Chrisostom to crye out on this maner:e. xxix. De penite¦tia. O repen¦taunce, which thorowe gods mercy forgyuest sinne, & openest Paradise, which healest a man contryte & bro∣kē, & makest merye hym that is sad, callest agayne lyfe frō deathe, resto∣rest the state, renuest the honour, gy¦uest boldenes, reformest strēgthes, &
powrest ī agayne grace more aboun¦dāt. O repetaūce, what new thyng shall I tell of the? Thou doste losē al¦thynges that are bounde. All thyn∣ges losened doste thou set at liberty. All troublous thynges doste yu mit¦gate. All thynges broken doste thou make whole. All confused thynges doste thou make cleare. Al desperate thynges doste yu encourage O repen¦taunce more rutulante than golde, more bryght than the sonne, whome synne doth not ouercome, nor, defec¦cion suppresse, nor desperaciō put a∣waye. Repentaunce refuseth coue∣tousnes, abhorrethe lecherye, exche∣weth furour & madnes, maketh loue stronge, treadethe downe pryde, re∣frayneth the tonge, fasshyoneth ma∣ners, hateth malyce, excludeth enuy Perfecte repentaunce compelleth a synner to suffer all thynges gladly. If a violente persō seke that that he hathe, he forbyddeth hym not. Yf he
taketh awaye his garment, he stry∣ueth not agaynst hym. To him that striketh the one cheke, he profereth ye other. If ony man wyl compell him to go a myle with him, he wyll of his owne free wyll go two. If he be cha∣stised he geueth him thankes. If he be prouoked, he holdeth his peace. If he be sharpeye spoken vnto, he spea∣keth gentely agayne. To his superi¦our he geueth reuerence. To his in∣feriour, he is lowlye, In his herte is contricion, in his mouth confession, in his worke all humilite. This is y• perfecte and fruytful repentaunce. To him that repenteth so, God is at hand, a noryssher to hym that is hū∣gry, a gyuer of drinke to him that is thyrstye. O repentaunce the mother of mercye, the maystres of vertues, thy workes are great, wher wt thou dost loosen the gylty, refressheth thē that offend, reuelest them that slyde, ecreatest ye desperate. By ye Christe,
appoynteth vs that y• kīgdom of he¦uen is at hande, sayenge, repent, for the kyngdome of heauen is at han. Nither to haue I rehersed vnto you the mynd of Chrisostome cōcerning repentaunce, whereby ye maye per∣ceyue, as I sayde before, that repen∣taunce is one of the principal mea∣nes, wherby we obtayne remissiō of synnes & the kyngedome of heauen. EVSE. God gyueth vs all grace truly to repent. THEO. But howe shall we know, whā we truly repent on such maner, that it prouoketh God to be mercyfull to vs. CHRI. In dede this is a thynge necessary to be knowen. PHIL. To this youre question shall S. Austen aunswere,Ser. ter. e Na, do. which sayeth: Whan thou dost so repent, yt yt thing sauoereth to the bytter ī thy mynd, which before was swete in thy life: & that, whiche dyd delyght the before in thy body, doth trouble the in thy herte, than doste thou repent well, &
saye to God, to the alone haue I syn¦ned, & euell haue I done before the. So that the whole summe of repen∣taunce is this,Mark wel. to dye vnto synne, & to lyue vnto righteousnes, which is signified by our plonginge in y• font when we are baptised, & by ure a∣yng out agayne, as S. Paule say∣eth, we are buryed togyther wt hym by baptisme īto death, yt as Christ is raised vp from the dead by the glory of his Father,Roma. vi. so we in lyke maner shoulde walke in a newe lyfe. THEO. If we repent, be sory for our sinnes, cōfesse our wickedness, amende oure lyfe, is this ynough? PHIL. This is much certes, but not all. For repent is not only contayned in your dysh, but also,Repentace a Faythe muste be ior∣ned togither. Beleue the Gospell. Thys pour repentance must be ioyned wt sayth, & lyncked with a sure perswa¦sion, that God the father according to his promyse wyll vndoutedly for gyue you your synnes for his sonne
Iesus Christes sake. For Caym, E∣sau, Pharao, Saul, Antiochus, Iu∣das & many other repented & graū∣ted theyr offēces, yet were they not forgyuen. Many also among the ve¦ry Neithen & gentiles glystered out wardely with a meruaylous godly conuersacion, & sorowed very great¦ly yf at any tyme tey dydde defyle theyr innocencye with ony spotte  vncleanes, yet were they not made heyes of eternall glorye. And why? Uerely they tasted after a certayne maner of ye fyrst parte of your dysh, b not of the laste. They repented, but they beleued not ye gospell, that is, they sought for no helpe of theyr wickednes at gods exceadyng mer∣cy thorowe Iesus Christ. They had not the christen fayth in thē, whche commynge from a repentaunt & so∣rowfull herte, maketh haste to God, and approcheth boldly to the throne of his grace,bre.  that it maye obtayne ¦uour
and remission of synnes.Marke this well. Repē¦taunce without fayth bryngeth des∣peracion, but repentaunce accompa¦nieth fayth, bryngeth remissiō of sin¦nes, tranquilite of conscience, & euer lastinge lyfe, as we maye easely per∣ceyue by two of Christes Disciples. Iudas sold Christ,Math. xxvi. & Peter denied & forswore Christ. Here bothe synned, both repented, both confessed theyr offence. One by manifest it wordes, & the other by teares. Yet was Peter saued, and Iudas damned. Now so? Because that the repentance of Pe∣ter was ioyned with faith & hope of forgyuenes, & the repentance of Iu∣das was not so.Luke. vii. Mary Magdalene dyd not only repent of her synfully∣uynge, but also beleued to haue re∣mission of her synnes. And therfore dyd not Christ only saye of her vnto Simon the Pharise, many synnes are forgyuen her, because she loued muche, but he also sayd vnto her wt
a lyuely voyce, thy fayth hath saue the, go thy waye in peace. Heare what Chrisostowe sayth: If thou be wythered & worne away of synne, re¦newe thy selfe by repētaunce.om. l. Depniti Why, may he that repenteth be saued? yea vndoutedly? Wherof of commeth it to passe? of y• LORDES fauourable mer∣cye. Truste not to thy repentaunce. For thy repentaunce can neuer put away so great sinnes. If it were thy repentaunce alone, thou myghteste well feare, but seyng that the mercy of God is accompanied with repen∣taunce, be on a good conforte, for it ouercommeth thy wickednes, & god is exceadynge mercyfull, & so full of gentlenes,Roma. v that he dyd not spare his owne sōne for to redeme the vnkind seruauntes. Saye not vnto me, I haue synned to much, howe can I be saued? Thou canste not in dede saue thy selfe, but thy LORDE can. And he so putteth awaye thy synnes, yt ther∣neth
no prynte, syghe or toē of thē. Here ye se also by Chrisostome that repentaunce wtout an earnest fayth had & reposed in the mercye of God, can by no meanes put away synne. This your dyshe therfore teacheth you both to repent & also to beleue. For what so euer is not of faythe, is synne sayeth S. Paule:Rom. xiiii The worde of the LORDE is right,Psal. xxxii sayth Dauid and all his workes are in fayth. In Math. Rom. xix.A worke without fayth, sayeth Chri∣sostome, is nothyng. Agayne he say∣eth: we must haue fayth euery wher I meane that fayth, which is the mo¦ther of all good thynges,In Ioar. om. xxxii ye medicine of helth, without the which a man cā¦not perceyue the doctrine of great & excellent thynges, but is lyke vnto them, which takynge in hande for to swymme ouer ye see wythout a shyp, whan they are a lytle forward,In. i. . om. i. they hādes & theyr fete beying once ery, are vtterlye ouerwhelmed wyth the
waues of ye see. Also in another place All oure elders are reported yt they pleased God by fayth, therfore with out that, all thīges come to nought. Hereto agreeth S. Austen, sayenge: The medicyne of the soule and of all woundes,De ve. do. Sermo. xl. & the alone sacrifyce to ap¦peae Gods wrath for the synnes of all men, is to beleue in Christe. Ney∣ther canne anye man at all be made cleane, eyther from originall synne, whiche he hath drawne of Adam, in whom all haue synned, & be made na¦turally the chyldren of wrath, or frō the synnes, which they, by not resi∣stynge the carnall concupicēce, but by followynge it & seruyng it by vn¦graciousnes & wycked lyuyng haue added & put therto, excepte by fayth they be enunied & ioyned togyther ī the body of him, which without ony carnall entysemente & mortiferous delectacion was conceyued. Thus se you that repentaunce wythoute
fayth anayleth nothyng, but enun¦ed & ioyned with fayth is a singuler and hyghe treasure,. ata. vi. Psal. ii. Sap. i. Sap. iii. Eccl. xxxiii. se. ii. Ioan. iii. Gal. iii. Act. xv. Ioan. i. Gala. iii. Roma. v. Gala. iii. iiii. ebre. xi. . oan, v. For by fayth doth God heare vs. By fayth are we blessed. By faythe dothe God appere vnto vs. By fayth do we vn¦derstond the trueth. By fayth do we kepe the commaundemētes of God. By fayth are we maryed to God. By fayth haue we eternall lyfe. By fayth are we purifyed. By fayth are our hertes made cleane. By faythe are we made the sonnes of God. By fayth are we iustifyed. By fayth we please God. By fayth we be borne of God. By fayth we subdue Satan. By fayth do we ouercome the world To conclude, by fayth all goodnesse chaūse vnto vs, and without fayth all euell thynges fall vpon vs. No meruiale, for as Chrisostome sayth: Fayth is the foundaciō of the moost holy religiō, the bonde of charite, the subsidie of loue. This fayth confyr∣meth
holynes,Ephe. v. 1. Pet. . 1. oan. . corrobratethe & ma¦keth strōg pure lyuyng, garnissheth digities. In chyldrē it shyneth, in yonge men it storyssheth, in olde mē it is a godly spectacle, it confirmeth al kyndnes,De ile Ab . . xxxiii. it exalteth degrees, it ke¦peth all offices, in the poore man it is pleasaunt, in the meane man me∣ry, in the rytch honest. Fayth preser¦ueth frendeshyypes, gathereth togy¦ther assemblies, reporteth euer wel, it despyseth no man, it contenmeth no man, it fayle the no man, excepte perchaūse he fyrst fayleth her. Faith vnderstandeth the commaundemen¦tes, kepeth the preceptes, fulfylleth promises.Repentaūce and Faythe are the only mene, to ob¦tayne to re∣mission of si∣nes. Faith maketh vs acquain¦ted with God, & constituteth vs frē¦des with Christ. Thus haue I decla¦red vnto you in this your thyrd ser¦uyce, that the onelye meanes to ob¦tayne remission of oure synnes, & to be made heyres of eternall glorye, is vnfaynedly to repent, & faythfullye
to beleue, that is to saye, to forsake oure olde lyuynge & to become newe men, garnisshyng our lyues with al the fruites of the spiryte, and to be∣leue earnestly, that thorowe this re∣pentaunce and fayth, God wyll vn∣doubtedly for Iesus Christes sake for gyue vs all oure synnes, receyue vs agayne into fauour, & make vs hey∣res of his eternall glory. EVSE. This is the moost pleasaunt dysshe that e∣uer I tasted. THEO. These thiges that you haue spoken vnto vs are so confortable ye me thynke I am now enflamed & more set on fyre thā euer I was before.The pre∣hynge of od n¦nes make the mē   to loue God. and  for to ful∣yl his wil CHRI. As I maye vn∣aindly reporte vnto you the affect of my herte, verely synce that ye de∣clared to vs the goodnes of God ye fa¦ther toward v thorow Iesus christ I haue felte in my herte such an ear¦nest fayth & burnyng loue towarde God and his worde, that me thynke a thousande fyres coulde not plucke
me away from the loue of hym. I be gynne nowe vtterlye to contemne, despyse, reiecte, cast awaye, & sette at nought al ye pleasures of this world, herein I haue o greatlye reioyced in tymes past. All the thretes of god, all the displeasures of God, al ye fyres & paynes of hell coulde neuer before this daye so allure me to the loue of God, as you haue nowe done by ex∣pressynge vnto me the excedyng mer¦cye & vnspeakable kyndeses of God towarde vs wretched synners, inso¦much that now from the very herte I desyre to knowe what I maye do, that by some meanes I maye shewe agayne my herte to be full fyred on the sekynge of his glory. For I nowe desyre nothyng more thē the auaūce mēt of his name. PHIL. It reioyceth me to heare these thynges of you. Therfore nowe wyll I, as due order requireth brynge forth your fourth yea & last dyshe, that ye may knowe
what ye ought to do agayn toward God for his vnmesurable bountie, & infinite benefites toward you, that yelyuynge in this worlde worthy of his kyndnes, maye after this lyfe re¦ceyue the crowne of glorye. THEO. I praye you brynge it forth streyghte wayes, for we much desyre to tast of it. EVSE. There is nothynge that I wysshe more than continually to be fedde with the meate of such an hea∣uēly bancket. Therfore I praye you go forth to minister vnto vs the resi¦due of oure mooste delicious feaste. PHIL. Agreed, but marke well, for here it is. ¶ The fourth dysshe. Ephe. ii.WE are the workemanshyp of God, created in christ Iesus vnto good workes, whiche God hath prepared that we should walke in them. This is y• say¦nge of S. Paule, whiche a lytle be∣fore this sentence in his Epistle to ye
Ephe, declareth, as I haue hitherto taughte you, that by nature we are the chyldrē of wrath, & are saued on∣ly by grace thorow fayth, & that not of our selues, for it is ye gyfte of god, & commethe not of workes, bycause no man shoulde boste hym selfe. And whan he hath this done, immediate¦ly he exorteth vs to good workes, sai¦enge that we are the workemanship of God, created in Christ Iesu vnto good workes, which God hath prepa¦red ye we should walke in them. Here maye ye learne, what is your duety to do vnto God agayn, seing that he frely thorowe sayth hath saued you withoute any merites, deseruynges or good dedes on your behalfe.What the du¦ty of y• fayth ula. Your duty is to lyue wel, to practyse good workes, to exercyse al godlye actes, to lede a vertuous conuersaciō, and in all your lyfe thorowe the study of innocency to seke the glory of God. Now shall your cōuersacion declare
and shewe by externall workes whe¦ther your repentaunce be vnfayned or not, whether your fayth & loue to¦warde God be syncere, true, & proce∣dyng from a godly herte or not.In. . in. om. ii. For yf your repentaunce, faith & loue be christian & vnfayned, than shal good workes ensue & followe agreable to the same. For faythe, sayeth Chriso∣stome, sheweth that, whiche is true. And out of syncer fayth cōmeth cha∣rite, in so much that he, whiche bele∣ueth truly in God, cā neuer be with out it.Be oat Gen. a. v. .ib.i. S. Ambrose also sayth: fayth is the mother & brynger for the both of good wyll & righteous workyng. Agayne he sayeth:Ibidem. A new creature hath this property by grace, ye they which are the workemanshyp of god which are made in Christ by an hea∣uenly natiuite, be no more sluggysh nother gyuē to lyue dissolutely,D vo. e. cap. vii. ib. ii. but they go forth & profyte from vertue to vertue, in walkynge by the waye
of good workes. Also ī another place he sayeth, God gyueth to thē whom he choseth without merites, whereof they maye be garnysshed with meri¦tes also.Marke this well. And it is not truely sayde, that the entent and determinacion of wel workyng is not in the electe. For the gyftes of vertues cā not be¦ydle. Thus se you that lynysh fayth whereby ye are ingrassed in Christe, brynge the forth good workes. Ney∣ther is true repentāce, syncer faith, vnfayned loue in you, yf good & chri∣sten workes do not followe your con¦uersion. Yea they that bost of fayth and brynge not forth the workes of fayth, derogate muche the glorye of fayth, & cause the true and christian fayth to be slaundered & yll reported amonge thē which neuer tasted, nor yet at ony tyme in theyr hertes felte what a precious thyng, and of howe great strength effycacy & power, the syncere faythe is. Therfore yf youre
fayth be not accōpanied wyth good workes, youre fayth is dead, as S. Ia. fayeth,ap. ii. y• is to saye, it is a true & christen fayth no more, than a deade corse is a man.Gala. v. For that faith, which is approued before God, worketh by charite, & charite cā not be ydle, but brasteth out into good workes, wh so euer it seeth an occasiō gyuē, who can loue his neighbour, & suffer him to perysshe for want of his helpe? Therfore is a faythfull man compa¦red in y• first Psalme to a tree, which is planted by the waters syde, & brin¦geth forth her fruytes in due tyme. I am the true vyne,Ioan. xv. sayeth Christ, & ye are the braunches. He that aby∣deth in me, & I in hī, yngeth forth much fruyte. Agayne he sayeth: He that beleueth ī me, floudes of lyuish water should flowe out of his belly. Here se you that he which dwelleth ī Christ by fayth,Ioan. vii. & beleueth in hī brī¦geth for the plenty of good workes.
He therfore that is an vnruytfull tree, & brīgeth forth no good fruite, surelye he beleuethe not arighte in Christ, neyther hath he the Christen faythe, boste and crake he neuer so much of it. EVSE. Methinke than by your wordes, y• good workes necessa¦rely follow the christen fayth. PHIL. Yea euen as necessarelye as the sha∣dow followeth the body, & death the lyfe.Mae. THEO. They than whiche lyue dissolute, & withoute doyng of good workes haue not the christen fayth. PHIL. No verely, no more than a deade cole hath in it the vertue and strength of burnynge.et. . CHRI. Ther∣fore ought all men not to quenche ye spirite, but with all mayne & frācke courage to apply themselues to y• di¦ligēt practyse of good workes. PHIL. Ye saye trueth,Ephe. ii. for as ye herd before we are the workemāshyp of God cre¦ated hath prepared that we shoulde
walke in thē. But I praye you note a fewe thynges, which I wyl nowe declare vnto you concernynge this our dyshe & laste seruyce, Fyrste S. Paule sayeth: We are the workemā¦shyp of God,. This sheweth that god made vs,Psal. xcliii and not we our selues. He wrought vs by his deuyne power. But by this workemanshyp not we only are made th beleue ī god,A double-reatiō one ī dā, an  but also the vnfaythfull, yea the verye brute beastes, & wormes, with al thi¦ges contayned in heauen and earth. Therfore of this makynge haue the faythfull no more caue to reioyce, thā the vnfaythfull haue. Therfore it doth followe: Created in christ Ie∣ss. Beholde here is a newe creaciō. Here is another byrth. Here is re∣generacion, whiche far differeth frō the olde natiuite. Here are we made newe creatures. In whom, in Mo∣ses by the lawe? Nay verely, but in christ by fayth. By fayth are we re∣generate,
borne a new, created agen in Christe Iesus.Good wor∣kes declare  mā to be cre∣ated anewe christ Iesus. Wherunto? Unto wicked maners? Nay certes, but vn¦to good workes. Note that he saith, vnto good workes. They that are borne anewe in Christ thorow fayth are created in hym to good workes. If ony mā therfore be not studious of good workes: he is not created in christ, but remayneth styll in ye crea∣cion of Adam.Good wor∣kes are not the fantasie of mā  but  cōmaūdemē∣tes of God. But vnto what good workes is the faythefull created in Christ? vnto Rome runnynge? gad∣ynge of pylgrimage? settyng vp of candels? gyidynge of your ymages? payntyng of tabernacles? building of monasteries? purchasynge of par∣dons? & such other trifelyng fanta∣sies inuented of the ydle braynes of the Papistes for lucres sake? na be∣rely. For these are no good workes ī dede before god, but only so called to blynde the eyes of carnall men with such goodly and godly tytles, Vnto
what good workes thā are they cre∣ated? In good faythe, to those good workes which God hath prepared y• we should walke in thē. Marke that he sayth, which God hath prepared, & not that man inuented. In them should we walke, yt is to saye, labour dayely more and more to fufyll thē, & neuer to cease vntyll we were aun¦cient & perfecte in the accomplysshe¦ment of Gods wyll. THEO. Me thāke you right hertely for the declaraciō of this terte. For we perceyue now oure duety better than euer we dyd before. EVSE. But what are those good workes, whiche God hath pre∣pared that we should walke in thē? PHIL. His commaundementes. We read that the Iewes sayd to Christ, what shal we do, that we may worke the workes of God? Christe aunswe¦red & sayde to thē:Ioan. vi. This is y• worke of God that ye beleue in him, whom he hath sent. This is the greatest &
most principal worke of God, yt ye be¦leue in his only begottē sōne Iesus Christ. He that truly fulfylleth this worke,True faythe in christ is the mother of all goo workes. doth very easely accōplyshe ye residue. For oute of this worke, as out of y• head foūtayne, do all other workes of God spryng & procede. Yf yu cāst beleue, sayth Christ, all thīges are possible to hym yt beleueth.Mat. i. He yt beleueth truly in Christ, abuseth not the name of God, prophaneth not ye Sabboth daye, dishonoreth not the magistrates of the publygue weale, contēneth not the ministers of gods worde, despyseth not his parentes & superiours, kyllethe not, cōmytteth not adultrye,Lerne her the christ and true good wor∣kes. iteleth not, beareth no false witnes, couereth not his neigh¦bours goodes, but rather doth ye cō∣trary, hatyng y• vyce, & enalsyng ye vertue. He mortyfyeth olde Adā. He maketh the bodye subiecte to the spi¦rite wt the moderate vse of eatyng & drynkyng. He exercyseth himselfe in
godly meditacions, in readynge the holy scriptures, in offryng vp pray∣ers & thankes continually to God. He socoureth the poore members of christ. He leueth no man confortles. He goeth about to hurte no mā, but studieth to profytte all men. He wis∣sheth & procureth no lesse goodnes to other, than he dothe to him selfe. To be shorte all his whole lyfe tyme, he doth nothyng els thā dye to synne, & liue vnto righteousnes. These are the workes of God, wherin so many as are created ī Christ, ought vnfay¦nedly to walke. Theise are ye workes of God, which ledeth to heuē, which thorow christ we deserue ye reward of euerlastīg life. In these workes ther¦fore (most dere brethrē) exercise your selues both daye & nyght. Beleue in god, loue God, feare God. Cōfesse hī frō ye very herte to be y• alone & true God. Knowledge him to be your on¦ly & oīsufficiēt sauiour. In al aduer¦site
flye vnto his moost blessed name as vnto a stronge Bulwarke. Haue youre hertes at peace with God. Study daye and nyght in the LOR∣DES lawe.Psal. i. Exercyse faythfull & con∣tinuall prayer. Procure in all thyn∣ges the glory of God. Honour youre moost victorious Prynce,Admoniciō for true obe∣dience to∣ward y• kin¦ges grace. & redoub¦ted kynge. Be faythfull to hym both in herte, worde & dede. Do nothyng that may in any poynt derogate his graces honour.Rom. xiii. Knowe that he that resisteth him, resisteth ye ordinaunce of God,i. Pet. ii. & getteth to hīselfe dānaciō. Honour also at the magistrates that are sent & appoynted of him. Youre parentes & superious haue ye in re∣uerence. Manslaughter, adultrye, thefte, false wytnes, carnall concu∣piscence, & all the workes of ye flesshe hate ye,col. iii. & vtterly cast thē from you. To conclude, loke for those thynges that are aboue, & not for those that are vpon the earth. Lyue no more to
your selfe,Rom. iiii. but to hym that dyed for your synnes, & rose agayne for your iustification. CHRI. We wyll to the vttermoost of our power laboure to accomplysshe youre moost godly ad∣monicions.This time hath great nede of good wor∣kes. PHIL. Laboure and God wyl helpe. And to saye the trueth to you, it was neuer more nedefull for christen men to brynge forth good & christen workes, than it is at thys tyme. You se (thankes be to God) yt the deuyne scrypture is come nowe amonge vs more plenteouslye than euer it was before, insomuch yt nowe it is lawefull for all men to reade it, heare it, talke of it, so that it be done reuerently. This hath God vnfay∣nedly brought to passe by his welbe∣loued seruaunt & our kynge Henrye the eyght a Prynce of mooste noble fame & immortal glory. Ye se againe that this worde of God hath manye enemyes, whiche both labour to sup¦presse that▪ & also so many syncer∣ly
professe it.The enemi  of gods words. Ye se that theyse aduer¦saries of Gods worde haue no other pleasure than to haue an occasion both to blaspheme the worde, and al¦so the earneste fauourers of it. Be∣hold, say they, are these Gospellers? Are these professours of gods word? Are theyse they yt mayntayne Gods trueth? Perysshe mought they with theyr Gospell. For they wyl not fast nor praye, nor gyue almes, nor vse a∣ny kynde of vertue. Theyse, whome they cal Pharises, do much excel thē in euery degree of godly lyuynge. They wyll shewe themselues confor¦mable to no poletyke ordinaunce. They hunte carnall libertie. They seke to synne freely and without pu¦nysshemente. Theyr whole religion consisteth in breakynge mens lawes and auncient customes. Farewell they therfore with theyr gospel. We wyll followe our forefathers. This and such lyke talke is hearde dayely
amonge the enemies of Gods word. Therfore oughte they yt loue Gods trueth to walke circūspectly, seyng the dayes are euell,Ephe. v. as S. Paule sai¦eth, & to haue an honest conuersaciō amonge Goddess enemies, that they which backbyte them as euell doers, maye se theyr good workes, & prayse God in the day of visitacion. For so is the wyll of God,i. Petre. ii. sayeth S. Peter that with wel doynge ye should stop the mouthes of ygnoraunt men, as free, & not as though ye toke lyber∣ty for a cloke of maliciousnes, but e∣uen as the seruaūtes of God. Which thyng (moost dere brothers) woulde God ye would do, that by your ver∣tuous conuersacion ye myghte not plucke men from, but vnto the Gos∣pell, not dishonour but honour god, not hynder but prouoke the Euan∣gelical trueth, that with one mynd, herte, wyl, tonge & dede we al might togyther professe one God and one
trueth. Than should God be glorifi∣ed among vs. Thā should his moost blessed worde be enhalsed of all men. Than shoulde we vnder one kynge liue ī an vnite, peace & cōcord of chri¦sten religion, without ony scisme, he resy or dissencion.Roma. v. Gala. ii. Than myghte we well saye, that the true repentaūce and syncer fayth, wherby a christen man is iustified in the syght of God were in vs. For so longe as we conti¦nue ī our old wickednes, & amēd not our maners, certes neyther true re∣pentaunce, nor christen faythe is in vs, and to saye the trueth, neyther haue we ony parte of Christ or Chri¦stes merytes, but pertayne styll to Satan & his synfull synagoge. For as S. Iohn sayeth:i. Ioan. . If we saye, that we haue fellowshyp with God, & yet walke in darknes, we lye & performe not the trueth. But & if we walke in lyghte, euen as he is in lyghte, than haue we fellowship wt him, & ye bloud
of Iesus Christ his sōne, maketh vs cleane frō all synne.Roma. xiii. itum. ii. Therfore (deare¦ly beloued) let vs cast away the wor∣kes of darkenes, walke in the lyghte of Gods trueth, lyue accordynge to our vocacion, garnysh the doctryne of christ our sauiour with godly ma¦ners, & so in al pointes institute and order our lyfe accordyng to Goddes wyll, that we maye be that same in lyfe & dede, that we desyre to be re∣ported, that is to say, perfecte & true christen men both in herte, worde, & dede. So maye we be certayne in this lyfe to haue God a mercyfull fa¦ther vnto vs thorowe Iesus Christ his sonne, & after the departing out of this world to enioye the glorious syght of the moost blessed Godhead, & there to remayne in ioye & glorye, worldes without ende. Amē. Thus endeth your bancket. EVSE. Pray∣sed be the LORDE for it. THEO. Both now & euermore. CHRI. For he alone
is worthy all honoure & glory. PHIL. If it shall please you, I wyll nowe gather togither in few wordes that which hytherto I haue dispersed in many, that they may the more easly remaine in your brest.A brefe rehe¦sal of al thi¦ges spoken of before. THEO. I pray you let it be so. PHIL. In youre fyrste disshe I ministred vnto you y• know¦ledge of your selues, & declared what ye are by Adā, that is to say, chyldrē of wrath, all carnall, & wtout the spi¦rite of God,In Ioan rat.  Cap. xi. as S. Austen sayeth, let no man stond in his owne conceyte. For of his owne, he is very Satan, but of Gods, he is blessed. What is this to saye, of his owne, but of hys synne? Take away the synne, which is thyne, & the righteouses, sayethe god,i. Cor. ii. is of myne. Fore what hast thou, that thou hast not taken? In youre seconde dysshe ye receyued the know¦lege of Goddes fauour toward you frely thorow Iesus Christ. In your thyrde dysshe, ye perceyued by what
meanes ye may obtayn this fauour of God, verely by true repentaunce & syncer fayth. In your fourth dish I proued vnto you that of this your repentaunce & fayth, workes muste nedes followe, yea & that those wor∣kes,Ephe. ii. whiche God hath prepared that we should walke in them. Here is in few wordes concluded y• whole sūme of your banckette. I praye you loke that ye both remēber these thynges well, & also exercyse them in your ly¦uynge. EVSE. We wyll labour to the vttermooste of oure power.Ioan. xv. And be∣cause we can do nothyng withoute the helpe of God, we shall at all hou∣res with fyrme and sure faith moost instantly desyre God to worke that thynges in vs his holye spirite, yt he commanndethe vs to do, that we maye neyther thyncke, breath, speke or do ony thing, but that may turne to his glorye. PHIL. It is godly spo∣ken. This one thynge than remay∣neth
that we gyue God thankes for this our bancket. CHRI. I pray you, let it be so. ¶ The thankes gyuynge. PHILEMON. PRayse,Ioan. v honour and glory be vnto the (O heuēly father) which at this tyme hast fed vs wt meate not ye perisheth but yt abydeth into euerlastying lyfe. Graunte (O good God) that we ha∣uynge the knowledge of thy worde, maye also practyse the same in oure conuersacion, that we both intierly louyng and vnfaynedly lyuyng thy holy word, maye after this lyfe lyue wt the in that lyfe, whiche is immor∣tall. THEO. Amen. EVSE. So be it. CHRI. LORD let it so come to passe. PHIL. Seynge that accordynge to the commaundemēte of Christe,Mat. vi. we haue nowe fyrste soughte the kynge¦dom
of god, & the righteousnes ther¦of, & haue fedde our soules with this celestiall bancket of Gods worde, I praye you nowe vouchesafe to come with me, and take such poore repast for the sustenaunce of your body, as it hathe pleased God to prepare for vs. THEO. We gyue you right herty thākes. EVSE. I pray God yt we may once recōpense your kyndnes. PHIL. My power is smale, but my wyll is muche, folowe me I besech you. CHRI. Praysed be the LORD for this our most cōfortable bancket. THEO. PHIL. AMEN. ¶ Gyue the glory to God alone.
¶Imprynted at London in Botulphe lane at the sygne of the whyte Beare, by me Iohn̄ Mayler for Iohn̄ Gough. Anno Dn̄i. 1542. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum.
