18078.5 23184287 26348
¶The Boke of the fayre Gentywoman, that no man shulde put his truste, or confy∣dence in: that is to say, Lady Fortune: flaterynge euery man that coueyteth to haue all, and specyally, them that truste in her, she decey∣ueth them at laste. The Lady Fortune.
¶The Prologue. IS often as I cōsydre, these olde noble clek Poetis, Oratours, & Phylosopher sectes thre Howe wonderfull they were, in all theyr werkes Howe eloquent, howe inuentyue in euery degre Halfe amased I am, and as a ded tre Stonde styll, ouer ude for to brynge forth Any fruyte or sentence, that is ought worth ¶euertheles though rude I be, in all cōtrynyng Of matts, yet sōwhat to make, I nede not to care I se many a one occupyed, in the same thynge o vnlerned men nowe a dayes, wyll not spare To wryte, to bable, theyr myndes to declare Trowynge them selfe, gay fantasyes to drawe when all theyr cunnynge is not worth a strawe. ¶Some ī french Cronycles, gladly doth presu Some in Englysshe, blyndly wade and wander Another in laten bloweth forth a darke me As wyse as a great hedded Asse of Alandr Some in Phylosophye, lyke a gageyng gand Begynnth lustely the browes to set vp And at the last concludeth, in the good ale cup ¶Finis Prologus. uod. T. M.
FOtune peruersse Qui le monde versse Toult a ton desyre Iamais tu nas cesse Plaine de finesse Et y prens pleasite ¶ Par oy vēnent malx Et gures mortlx Touls inconueniens Parmos et par vauy Et aulx hospitalx Meent tant de ens.
FOrtune, O myghty & varyable wat rule thou laymst, with thy ruel poer Good folk thou stroyest, and louest reruable hou mayst not waraunt thy gyf{is} for on houre Fortun vnworthy men settet in hooure Thorowe fortune tīnocent ī wo & soow shiheth The iust man she spyth, & the vnust enrycheth. ¶Yonge men she kylleth, & leteth olde men lyue Vryghtuously deuydynge, tyme and season That good en leseth, to wyckd doth she gyue She hath no differēce, ut iudgeth all good reason Inconstaunce, slypper, rayle, n full of treason Nether for euer cherysynge,  keth Nor for euer oppressynge, whom se forsketh. ¶Finis. {quod}. T. M.
¶The wordes of Fortune to the people. {quod}. Tho. Mo. MYne hyghe estate, power and auctoryte If ye ne knewe, enserche an ye shall spye That rychesse, worshyp, welth, and dygnyte Ioye, rest, and peace, and all thynge fynally That any pleasure or profyte maye come by To mannes comforte, ayde and sustenannce all at my deuyse, and ordynaunce. ¶Without my fauoure, there is no thynge wonne any a matter haue I brought at laste To good conclusyon, that fondly was begonne And many a purpose, bounden sure and faste th wyse rouysyon, I hue ouercaste thout good hppe, there may no wyt suffyse Better is to be fortunate, than wyse. And therfore hath there some men ben or thi y deedly fooes, and wrten many a boke o my disprayse, and no othr cause thre i ut for me lyt, not frendly on thm loke hus lyke the fox they fare, that ones forsoke he pleasaunt grapes, and gan for to desy them ycause he ept & ept, & coulde not come by thē,
¶But let them wryte, theyr labo is in vayne For well ye wot, myrth, honoure and ychesse Better is than shame, penury and payne The nedy wryteth, that lyngeryth in dystresse without myne helpe, is euer comfortlesse A wity brden odyouse and lothe To all the world, and to hymslfe both. ¶But he that by my fauoure maye ascen To myghty power, and excellent degre A cōmon wele to gouerne, nd defende O in howe blessd condycyon, standeth he Hym selfe in honour and felycyte And or that, my forther and encreace An hol regyon, in ioyeest and pace. ¶Now in this poynt, tere is no more to saye Eche man hath o hym selfe the gouernaunce Let euey wyght, than ae his ow waye And he tht out of pouert, and myshaunce Lyft for to lue and wyll hym selfe enhaunce In welth & rychesse, come orth and wayte on me And he that wyll be a begger, let hym be.
¶To them that trusteth in Fortune. THou that art proude of honour shape or kyn That helpest vp this wretched world{is} tresure Thy fyngers shryned with golde / thy tawny skyn With fresshe appareyll, garnyshed out of mesure And wenyt to haue fortune, alway at thy plesure Cast vp thyne eye, and l howe slypper chaunce Illudeth her men with chaunge and varyaunce. ¶Somtyme she loketh, as louely fayre & bryght As goodly Venus, mother of cupyde She becketh and smyleth vpon euery wyght ut this feyned chere, may not abyde There cōmeth a cloude, and farewell all our pryde Lyke any serpent, she begynneth to swell And loketh as fearse, as any fury of hell. ¶Yet for all that, we brothle men are fayne So wretched is our nature, and so blynde As soone as fortune lyst, to laughe agayne With fayre countenaunce, and deceytfull mynde To croutche and knele, and gape after the wynde Not one or twayne, but thousandes in a rout Lyke swarmyng bees, come flakerynge her about. ¶Then as bayte, she bryngeth forth her ware Syluer, golde, ryche perle, and precious stone On whiche, the mased people gase and stare
And gpe therfore as oges for the bone Fortune at them lugheth, and in her trone Amyd her tresure and wauerynge ryhesse Prowdly she loueth, as Lady and Empresse ¶ Fast by her syde doth wery laboure stande Pale fere also and sorowe all be wepte Dysdeyne and hatred, on that other hande Eke rstle watche, fo slepe with trauayle kep His eyes drowsy, and lokynge as he slepte Before her standeth Daunger and nuye Flatery, Dysceyte, Myschyfe, and Tyrrannye ¶Aboute her cōmeth, all the worlde to begge He aseth londand he to passe wolde bynge Ti ioye and that, and all not worth an egge He wolde in loue prospre, aboue all thynge He kneleth downe and wolde be made a kynge He forceth not so he maye money haue Thoughe all y• worlde accompt hym for a kna ¶Lo tus dyuers heddy, dyuers wyttes Fortune alone, a dyue  thy all Vnstable here and there, amone them flyttes And at auenture, downe hr gyftes fall Catche who so may, she throwth great and sin Not to all mn, as ōmeth sonne or dewe But for the most prte, all among a fewe.
¶And yet her brotell gyftes, maye not last He that she gaue them, loketh proude and hye She whyrleth aboute, and plucketh away as fast And gyueth them to an other, by and by And thus from man to man, contynually She vseth to gyue and take, and syy tosse One man to wynnynge, and of an others losse. ¶And whē she robbeth one, downe goth his pryde He wepeth and wayleth, and curseth her full sore But he that receyueth it, on that other syde Is glad, and blesseth her, a .M, tymes therfore But in a whyle whan she loueth hym no more She glydeth from hym, and her gyftes to And he her curseth, as other fooles do ¶Alas the folysshe people, can not seace Ne voyde her trayne, tyll they the harme f Aboute her alwaye, besely they preace But lorde what he thynketh hym selfe, wee That maye set ones, his hande vpon her whele He holdeth fast, but vpwarde as he styeth She whyppeth her whee about, & there he lyeth. ¶Thus fell Iulius, from his myghty power Thus fell Darius, the worthy kynge of perse Thus fell Alexandre, the souerayne conqueroure
Thus many mo, then I maye well reherse Thus double Fortne, when she lyt reuerse Her slypper fauoure, fro them that in her trut She flyeth her waye, and lyeth hym in the dust ¶She sodenlye enhaunce hym a lofte And sodenly myscheuyth, all the flock The hed that late laye, easely and softe In stede of pylouse, lyeth after on the blocke And yet alas, the cruell proude mocke The deyntye mouth, that ladyes kyssed haue She bryngeth in the case, to kysse a knaue. ¶Thu whē she chanseth, her vncertayne course Vp starteth a knaue, & downe ther fallth a knight The begger ryche, and the ryche man poore i Hatred is turned to loue, Loue to despyght This is her sport, thus proueth she her myght Great bot she maketh, yf one be by her power welthy and wretched, both in an houre. ¶Pote that of her gyfes, wyll no thynge tak with mey chere, she loketh on the prese And seeth howe frtunes, how shulde go  wake Fast by h standeth, the wyse Socrates Aristippus, Pithagoras, and many a lyfe Of olde Phylosophe, and eke agaynst y• sonne Bkeh hym ore Dnes in his onn
¶with her is Bia, whose countrey lacked defens And whylom of theyr fooes stode so in dout That eche man hastely gan to cary thense And aked hym why, e nought caryed out I bere quod he, all myne with me about wysdome he ment, not fortunes brotell fees For nought he counted his, that he myght lese. ¶Heraclits to, lyst felowsshyp to kepe with glad pouerte, Democrytu also Of whiche the yrs can neuer but wepe To se howe thycke, the blynd people go with great labour, to purhale care and That other laugheth, to se the folysse aps Howe arnsly, they walke about theyr Iape ¶Of this poore secte, it is the vsage Onely to take, that nature maye sustayne Banyshynge clene, all other surplusage They be content, and o nohynge complayn No ngarde ee, is of his golde so fayne But they more pleasure aue, a thousande fol The scete draughes of nature and to beholde. ¶Set fortunes seruauntes by them ad ye wull That one is fre, that other uer thrall That one content, that other neuer full
That one in suerty, that other lyke to fall who lyst to aduyse them, both perceyue ye shall As great dyfference betwene them, as we se Betwyxte wretchednes, and felycyte. ¶Now haue I shewed you both, hese which ye Stately fortune, or humble pouerte That is to saye, nowe lyeth it in your fyst To take you to bondage, or fre lyberte But in this poynt, and ye do after me Drawe you to fortune, and labour her to please Yf that ye thynke your selfe, to well at ease. ¶And fyrst vpon the, louely shall she smyle And frendly on the cast, her wanderynge eyes Embrace the in her armys, and for a whyle Put the into a fols paradyse And forthwith all, what so thou lyst deuyse She wyll the graunt it, lyberally perhappes But for all that beware of fter clappes. ¶Rekyn you neuer, of her fauour sure Ye maye in the clowdes, as easely trace an ha Or in dry londe cause fysshes to endure And make the burnynge fyre his hete o spare As all this worlde encompasse to forfare A her to make by cafte, or engyne stable That of her nature, i  varyable.
¶Serue her daye and nyght, as reuerntly Vpon thy knees, as any seruaunte maye And in conclusion, that thou shall wynne thery Shall not be worth thy seruyce I dare saye And yet, loke what she gyueth the to daye with labour wonne, she shall haply to morowe Plucke it out of thy hande agayne with sorowe ¶wherfore yf thou in suerte lyft to stande Take pouerties parte, and le proude fortune go Receyue nothynge that cōmeth from he hande Loue maner and vertue, for they be onely tho whiche double fortune maye neuer take the fro Thē mayst thou boldely defy her turnynge chaūce She can the neyther hyner, nor anaunce. ¶Bu & thou wylt nedes medle with her tresure Trust not therin, and spende it lyberally Bere he not proude, nor take not out of mesure Bylde not thyne house, hyghe vp in the skye None falleth farre, but he that clynbeth hye Remembre nature sent the hyther bare The gyft{is} of fortune compt thē, as borowed ware ¶who so delyteth to prouen and assaye Of wauerynge fortune, the full vncertayne lot Yf that the answere please ye not alwaye
Blame not me for I cōmaunde ye not Fortune to trust, and eke full well ye wo I haue of her no brydle in my fyst She reneth loose, and turneth where she lyst ¶The rollyng dyse, in whō yor lucke doth sta with whose vnhappy chaunce ye be so wrought Ye knowe yur selfe, came neue in myne hande o in this ponde, be fysshes and frogges both Cast in your net, bt be ye lyefe orloth Holde you content a Fortune lyft assygne It is your owne fysshynge and not myne. ¶And thoughe in one chaūce fortune you offen Grudge not therat, but bere a mery face In many another, she shall it amende There is no man so t out of her grace But he somtyme, hath comforte and solace Ne none agayne so set forth in her fauoure That fully satyfyed is with her behauyou. ¶Fortune is stately, solempne, proude, and hye And ryches gyuth, to haue seruyce therfore The edy begger catcheth an hale peny Some man a .M. pounde some lesse some more But for all that, she kepeth euer in store From euery man some parcell of his wyll That he may praye therfor, and serue her y.
¶Some man hath good, but chyldren hath none Some ma hath both, but he can get none het Some hath all thre, but vp to honoures trone Can he not crepe by no maner of stelth To som she sendeth, chyldren, ryches welth Honoure, worshyp, and reuerence all his lyfe But yet she pyncheth hym, with a shrewed wyfe. ¶Then for as moche as it is fortunes gayse To graunt no man all thynge that he wyll axe But as her selfe lyst order and deuyse Doth euery man his parte dyuyde and taxe I counceyll you trusse vp your packys And take nothynge at all, or be content With suche rewarde, as fortune hath you sent. ¶All thynges in this booke that ye shall ede Do as ye lyst, there shall no man you bynde Them to beleue, as surely as your crede But notwithstandynge, certyes in my mynde I durste well swere, as trewe ye shall the fynde In euery poynt, eche answere by and by s are the iudgementes of Astronomye ¶Here Fineth Lady Fortune.
