18864 99848876 13995
THE THIRD PART of the first booke, OF THE MIRROVR of Knighthood. vvherein is set forth the WORTHIE DEEDES OF THE knight of the Sunne, and his brother Ro∣sicleer, both sonnes vnto the Emperour of Grecia: with the valiant deedes of armes of sundry worthie knights. Verie delight∣full to the rea∣der. Newly translated out of Spanish into English by R. P. Imprinted at London by Thomas East.
To the right courteous Gentleman, my especiall good friend, Maister Richard Morris: health. &c. THE famous Philosopher Aristotle being demaunded what benefit he hadde obtained by the studie and practise of Philosophie, answered, This, that vncommanded I can doe that I ought, and auoide the doing of that I should not. For (saith he) the ignorant and ruder sort abstain from euill, compelled, for feare of punishment: but the wise and learned doe shun the same, of their owne accord, because it is euill. A worthie saying, and well beseeming the excellencie of so noble a Philoso∣pher. For what is there that can more effectually expresse the benefit that ariseth by the studie of any thing, then to shew the effects that it worketh in them that applie them∣selues therevnto? And what effect is there equall vnto this when a man vncommaunded, can conforme his iudgement, frame his will, and order his actions, according to the rule of reason, and auoide whatsoeuer is contrarie to the same? And as the studie of Philosophie worketh this in the followers thereof: so doth the studie of other laudable things also, bring foorth verie commendable effectes, eche one in their owne kinde. For which cause sundrie men in times past haue penned with great labour, the laudable workes of antiquitie, and some also in these our daies, imitating the painefull dili∣gence of those auncient writers, haue with no lesse trauaile written Histories of later yeeres, which by the reading of thē might be aswell profitable to repell other vaine delights, as pleasant to passe away the tediousnesse of the time. Among which, I haue caused this [Third part of the first booke
of the Mirrour of knighthood] to be translated out of the Spanish tongue, moued thereunto with the earnest request of sundry persons, as also being willing of my selfe to further so worthie a worke, adorned with all good examples of ho∣nour & magnanimitie, that may serue to the exalting of ver∣tue and weldoing, and to the repressing of vice. Which be∣ing done, I aduised with my selfe where I might finde out an English Patron of conformable qualitie, & hauing heard of your vertuous and euerie way Gentlemanlike dispositi∣on by others, as also had tryall of your great & singular cur∣tesie in my selfe: I thought good to Dedicate this woorke vnto you, Maister Richard Morris, in lieu of better, to te∣stifie my thankfull remembrance of your great good will shewed vnto mee, desiring you to accept in woorth the pre∣sentation hereof, if not for the worthinesse of the thing offe∣red (and yet I trust you shall not finde it altogether vnwor∣thie of the good fauour and acceptaunce) yet as a testifi∣cation of my affection which by this I here present vnto you, declareth what I would if I had better to giue. Thus hoping that you will friend∣ly accept of this my doing, I take my leaue. Yours to vse, Thomas East.
TO THE READER. GEntle and friendlie Reader, I haue caused to be translated (according to my promise) this worke, entituled, The third part of the first booke of the Mirrour of Knighthood: which I doubt not, will be delightfull vnto thée, for that it concludeth the Hystories of these thrée partes of the first booke, following orderlie one after another: after which thrée partes before mentioned, foloweth the second part of the Mirror of Knighthood, which booke is diuided into two partes: so that now is extant in the English tongue fiue bookes. Desiring thée to accept my labour in good part, which I present vnto thée, wherein thou shalt finde the strange and wonderfull prowesse of the wor∣thie Emperour Trebatio, and his two sonnes, with sundrie other couragious knights, mixed with many lamentable & sorrow∣full Hystories. Thine, T. E.
WHat hapned with the knight of the Sun the night before he should be married vnto the Prin∣cesse Lindabrides. Chap. 1. Fol. 1. What hapned in the court of the Emperour Alicandro, when they vnderstood of the departure of the knight of the Sunne. Chap. 2. 4 How the Princesse Claridiana departed from Constantinople, & returned vnto the Empire of Tra∣pisond, for certaine newes which were brought her. Chap. 3. 7 What happened to the knight of the Sun and Oristedes, trauailing through Tartaria. Chap. 4. 9 How the Empresse Claridiana being in Trapisond, there aiued her damsell Arcania, and declared vnto her news of the knight of the Sun, which brought her almost to the point of death. Chap. 5. 11. How Rosideer caried the Prin∣cesse Oliuia by sea, wher they met with a great storme, & were in pe∣rill, and how meruailouslie they were succoured. Chap. 6. 17 How the knight of the Sun, Ro∣sicleer, & the rest went a land, and wer meruailoustie receiued by the Emper Trebatio, &c. chap. 7. 25 How the Prince Don Siluerio, without all hope of recouerie of the Princes Oliuia, her returne, & what happened in the court of the king Oliuerio. Chap. 8. 31 How the Princes Lindabrides did craue of her father reuengemen of the knight of the Sun, & how the Emperor at her request did call a Parliament, and what happened in the same. Chap. 9. 32 How the Emperor Alycādro did consult with his Nobles about his iourney into Grecia, & what Bra∣marant did concerning the same. Chap. 10. 36 How there came to the Court of the Emperor Trebatio a strange knight, & did defie the knight of the Sun, and of the stout battaile fought betwixt them. chap. 11. 42 How the knight of the Sun came againe vnto himselfe, & as one de∣sperate for the battel he had with Claridiana, departed the Court. Chap. 12. 49. How the knight of the Sun was found lacking in the court, & be∣ing all verie sorowful, there came Letters from the wise Lirgandeo which amazed them all. cha. 13. 54 How the knight of the Sun came forth of the wildernesse of Grecia, and sailing by sea, was by a storme caried into the solitarie Ilād, wher the diuellish Fauno was. ch. 14. 57 How the knight of the Sun ariued at the Iland of the possessed Fau∣no, & of the perillous battaile that he had with him. chap. 15. 79 What the Empresse Claridiana
did after the knight of the Sunne was departed frō Const. cha. 16. 78 How the great armie of the Em∣peror Alicādro ioyned in the port of Tenedon, and of diuerse sorts that went into Grecia. chap. 17. 84 How the Emperor Trebatio had newes of the comming of the Pa∣gans, & of his preparatiō. ca. 18. 85 Of the mightie armie the king O∣liuerio prepared to goe into Gre∣cia. Chap. 19. 86 How the great fleet of the Empe∣ror Alicandro came to Constanti∣nople, & forcing to go a land, the Pagans had with the Christians a great eucounter. chap. 20. 86 Of the great succour that came to the Emperor Trebatio, &c. c. 21. 93 Of the second battaile the Greeks had with the Pagans, &c. ch. 22. 94 How the Prince Meridian had vnderstanding of the comming of his father into Grecia, &c. c. 23. 99 How the king Oliuerio with his host ariued in Grecia, & what else happened. Chap. 24. 102 What Rosicleer did after the bat∣taile, and how by his meanes the king Oliuerio was reconciled, &c. Chap. 25. 11 How it was concluded in the cāp of the Pagans to challenge the Greekes, & how it was accepted, & by what knights. chap. 26. 18 How that Claridiana came vnto the caue of Atidon, & what hap∣pened there. chap. 27 112 How the Princesse Claridiana went a land at the Iland of the di∣uellish Fauno, and what she did there. Chap. 28. 126 The life the knight of the Sunne lead in the solitaie Iland, & how he was foūd by his Lady. c. 29. 130 Of the stout battaile fought be∣tween fifteene knights of the Em∣peror Trebatio, and fifteene of the Emperor Alicandros. chap. 30. 18 How the Pagan Bramarant being angrie at words spoken by Meri∣dian & Brandimardo, departed, &c. Chap. 31. 146 How the knight of the Sun and the princesse Claridiana after they were departed from the solitarie Iland, did deliuer, &c. chap. 32. 150 How the knight of the Sun with out knowing Meridian or Brandi∣mardo, made battaile for thē with Bramarant. Chap. 33. 154 How Bramarāt after he was come vnto himselfe, returned againe to seeke the knights, and what he did when he found his father dead. Chap. 34. 160 How the princes Lidabrides had vnderstanding of the comming of the knight of the Sun, &c. c. 35. 166 How Bramarant destroied all the Idols in the campe, and how the Emperour Alycandro to appease him, caused to bee brought with honor the grā Capiō, &c. c. 6. 72
What the Greekes did, and how the king Lis. & the faire queene Radamira came to aide the Em∣peror Trebatio, &c. chap. 37. 174 Of the rigorous and bloudie bat∣taile that was betweene the people of the Emperor Trebatio, & those of the Emperour Alicandro, &c. Chap. 38. 176. How the Emperour Alycandro sailing by sea, was through a tem∣pest, by the which he was driuen vnto the strong Iland, wheras they were taken prisoners, he and the Princes Lindabrides, &c. c. 39. 198 How Rosicleer departed out of Constantinople in the demand of the knight of the Sun, & how the knight of the Sun in following the Emperor Alicandro ariued at the strong Iland, &c. chap. 40. 201 What happened vnto Rosicleer after his departure from Constan∣tinople. chap. 41. 210. How the Emperor Alicandro & his companie departed from the strong Iland vnto the Grecian Empire, &c. chap. 42. 215 How Rosicleer and Liriamandro at the commandement of the Em∣peror Trebatio went into Hunga∣a, to make themselues knowen to the king, & to giue him to vnder∣stand of all that had passed in Grecia. chap. 43. 220 Of the great treason that the duke Roberto orained to haue the fai Polisena to be his wie. ca. 44. 226 How Rosicleer & Liriamandro, & the gentle Lusiano had battaile with the Duke Roberto and his companions. chap. 45. 229 How the king Tiberio, with the Queene Augusta, Rosicleer, & Li∣riamandro, departed out of Hun∣garia, and tooke their iourney to∣wards Constantinople. ca. 46. 235 How the Prince Claramante was nourished in the court of the Em∣peror Trebatio, & of other things that was spoken by the wise Ar∣temidoro & Lirgandeo, with other things that happened. ca. 47. 238. How the faire Lindabrides by art of the two wise men Artemidoro & Lirgandeo was inchanted, & the order of the inchātmēt. c. 48. 240. How the valiant & worthie prin∣ces did proue the aduenture of the disloiall tower, and what hapned of the successe thereof. ca. 49. 243 How the Emperor Trebatio with all those high Princes and worthy knights, Ladies and damsels that were in Constantinople, went to sport thēselues a hunting into the wildernes of Grecia, &c. c. 50. 246 How the stout Pagan Bramarant came vnto the place whereas the Empresse Briana, with all those faire Princesses and Ladies were, &c. chap. 51. 250 FINIS.
THE THIRD PART of the first Booke of the Myrror of Knighthood. VVhat happened vvith the Knight of the Sunne the night before the daie that hee should be married to the Princesse Lindabrides. CHAPTER. I. IN the second part of the first booke of this Historie, it hath bene shew∣ed vnto you, how that the Prin∣cesse Claridiana, at such time as the knight of the Sunne departed from her, gaue vnto him a Damsell cal∣led Arcania, for to go with him, and o beare him companie till such ime as he should returne againe. And the great charge which the Princesse had giuen vnto her, as well in the discouering of the great loue that she bore vnto the knight of the Sunne, as also to haue a great care of all things that should passe with the Princesse Lindabri∣des in that iourney, that afterward she should thereof giue certaine and iust relation. The Historie doth now saie, that Arcania did neuer de∣part nor was absent out of the companie and conuersation of the knight of the Sunne, so that she did see and vnderstand all that did passe, and how that the marriage was concluded in such sort, that there was no remedie. Her sorrowe was great  caused in her much heauinesse, to thinke of the great
griefe that her Ladie should receiue when she should vnder∣stand the newes thereof, & it séemed that her estate woulde litle profit to pacifie her, hearing that the knight of the Sun is married to the Princesse Lindabrides. This damsell Ar∣cania determined that night to depart towardes her owne Countrie, and thinking that she should doe well first to giue the knight of the Sunne to vnderstand of her departure. At such time as he was in his bed with great light in the cham∣ber, she entered in, and finding him all alone, she said: God blesse the good knight of the Sunne. He answered: Thou art welcome my good friend Arcania, what makest thou heere at this time of the night? I come (said she) to take my leaue of you, for that I meane to returne vnto the Princesse Cla∣ridiana my Ladie and mistres, for whereas she is forgotten and no memorie of her seruice, I know not what reward I shall looke for of my part. How is this, said the knight of the Sun? Hast thou no hope that I will gratifie thée for all thy good seruice? Doest thou not know, y• if I should forget my selfe, there is the Princesse Lindabrides my Ladie, who wil reward thée in ample maner. Hope I haue none at al in you, sayd Arcania, for he that hath falsified his faith made vnto the most highest & precious damsell in all the world, he will ill obserue and kéepe it with so base and poore a damsell as I am. Of the Princesse Lindabrides I request no paiment at her hands, for being a damsel of the Princesse Claridiana, I thinke it a great reproch to receiue reward of anie other. Oh knight of the Sun, how may the fame of thy great déeds from this day forwards cease, & the praise of thy high knight∣hood, with the continuall report of thy great vertue: & increase the newes of thy disloialtie, when the falsifieng of thy ord shall be knowen abroade, all men will iudge of thy litle vn∣derstanding, and will saie that thou lackedst reason for to ac∣knowledge the good. How is it, good knight, is your memorie past, haue you lost your vnderstanding, doe you not remem∣ber how the roiall. Princesse Claridiana onely for your loue, left her owne Countrie of Trapisonda, & came into Grecia, at such time as you did offer your selfe to be her knigh shée
accepted you as her owne, discouering vnto you the great ex∣cellencie of her beautie, wherby you did vnderstand that you were by her beloued, & thought at that time that there was not borne in all the world one so happie as you were. How is it now that there remaineth in you so little force, and so great villanie, that the presence of the Princesse Lindabrides can worke more in effect than the memorie of the Princesse Claridiana. Doe not you remember, how that in the Court of the Emperour rebatio, they were both present together, whereas they did manifest their great beauties, being with rich ornaments adorned, who was then of you most estéemed and best beloued? Call to remembrance the good wil which you had at your departure out of Grecia, and ioyne it to that which you haue at this present, then shall you sée and vn∣derstand, how all things is changed cleane contrarie, not for anie other thing, but that you doe more estéeme the things present, although they be small, than those which are to come, though they be more higher and of greater valour, the which procéedeth of base thoughts and conditions. Oh how fraile and miserable is humane nature, that whereas is so much force and strength for to ouercome and conquere so many knights and gyants, doth lacke heart and strength to make resistance against one thought and appetite. If that you vpon the sheeld of memorie of my Ladie and mistres, did receiue the blowes of the presence of the Princesse Lin∣dabrides, neither could the blowes be so strong, nor the shéeld so weake, but that with great ease you might remayne with the victorie. But as you haue forgot your faith and promise, so haue you forgot the remembrance of her greate beautie and high valour, and verie easilie you were ouer∣come with the presence of the Princesse Lindabrides, I doe therefore meane to returne vnto the Princesse my Ladie and mistres, and make manifest your great disloialtie, there∣fore the Lord bée with you. When that Arcania had conclu∣ded these wordes, without tarrying ani answere, she depar∣ted out of the chamber, and went downe the staires, where∣as she had lefte her Palfraie in a readinesse, and taking
his backe, she departed out of the Citie, and tooke her iour∣ney towards Trapisonda. The knight of the Sunne recei∣ued great griefe and sorrow for that the damsell would de∣part, and rose out of his bed, and went after her, but séeing that she was gone, hée made little account of her, for that the loue of the Princesse Lindabrides had so inueigled him, that although he did well vnderstand her wordes, yet they did worke no more effect in him, than in one that had béene cleere of all cares and passions, till such time as he was laid againe in his bed, whereas it did not let somewat to alter his profound imaginations, to remember what Arcania had said of the Princesse Claridiana, and of his faith and worde giuen her to be her knight: which was the occasion that ther grew in his thought a verie great alteration, and troubled verie much his mind, in such sort, that it disturbed him from sléepe or taking anie rest, but tumbling and tossing from one side of the bed vnto the other, which did increase in him by little and little the remembrance of the Princesse Claridia∣na. So after a while, being somewhat in quiet by reason of the great disquietnesse that he had suffered, his minde recei∣uing some ease, and being in a slumber neither sléeping nor waking, hauing all his senses occupied with the Princesse, it seemed that she appeared before him with so great maie∣stie and beautie, that it dazeled the sight of his eies, equall vnto the shining of the Sunne when he appeareth out of the Orient, her bodie al armed, sauing her head & face was who∣lie discouered with her yeolow golden haire, which was dis∣parsed behinde her eares, and hung downe vnto the grounde like thréeds of golde, she had her swoord naked in her hand; and with an irefull semblaunce, lifting vp her arme for to strike him, she said. Oh false and traiterous Knight, thou art now at the ex∣tremitie and point to receiue the guerdon for thy great disloi∣altie. Then the knight of the Sun who did behold her, con∣templating himselfe with her strange beautie, accompanied with her great maiestie, was straight waies ouercome with the force therof, so that the Princesse Lindabrides in her pre∣sence
séemed to be verie foule, & caused the sparkes of loue new to kindle within him, which before were put out by the long absence from her, and began so much to repent himselfe of that which was past, that he fel prostrate vpon the ground before the Princesse, crauing pardon at her hands, but shee vnto his séeming came verie irefull, making no account of that which he had said, but alwaies séemed for to strike him with the sword she had in her hand: who being meruailously amazed thereat, did sodainlie awake out of that imagination or dreame, with so great shaking & quaking, that all the bed shooke therewith. So when he was come wholie vnto him∣selfe, and considered well of al that had passed, the presence of the Princesse remained so graued in his heart & minde, that it séemed vnto him that she was so naturallie before him in presence, as when he last sawe her in the Citie of Constanti∣nople, and the old wound wherewith he was wounded at the first sight of her, did now worke so much effect in him, y• the remembrance of the Princesse Lindabrides was cleane for∣gotten, & the loue of the Princes Claridiana so grassed in his hart, that by no meanes he could take anie quietnesse or rest within his bed, but calling to remembrance all y• was past, & the marriage that was ordeined for the next day following, he fell into a great perplexitie, & abhorred himselfe. Where∣fore vpon a sodaine and in great ha hee arose vp from his bed, and put on his apparell, & looked about for his armour, which he found hanging in a corner of his chamber, where∣with he armed himselfe in all assaies, & tooke the light Torch that was in his chamber burning, & descended into the great Pallace, and so into the Court, and comming vnto the sta∣ble, he found that the horsekéepers were a sleepe, and waking one of them in great secret, he commanded him in great hast for to saddle his horse. The horsekéeper when he knew him was greatlie amazed, and said: My Lord, whether is it your pleasure to goe in this sort, and at this time of the night? I goe (sayd the knight of the Sun) after a damsell that is gone awaie from me, therefore hold thy peace and be quiet, for I will returne againe by and by. This young man without
anie farther replying, did saddle his horse with a trice, & lead him out at a posterte gate, on whom the knight of the Sun leàpt with great lightnesse, and so departed out of the great Citie, & tooke an vnknowen waie by a valley, for that if a∣nie should follow him, they should not finde him. So he tra∣uailed so long by that valley, that it brought him vnto ma∣ny rockes and hilles which was at the foote of the mightie mountaine called Taurus, which is one of the largest in all the world, and entered into the said mountaine at such time as the Sun appeared, and for that he found himselfe wearie with the great trauaile that night, he determined there for to rest himselfe, supposing that no man would come to séeke him in that place▪ wherewith he alighted, and pulled off his horse bridle, and committed him vnto the gréene field to féede at pleasure. Then did he laie himselfe down vpon the greene hearbes, the which were so delightfull, that it yéelded occasi∣on vnto his afflicted sorrow, to contemplate himselfe in the highnesse & beautie of the Princesse Claridiana, which cau∣sed him for to tumble and tosse vpon the gréene grasse with∣out taking anie rest, yéelding forth great sighs, forced by re∣pentance of all that was passed, & shedding many sorrow∣full and itter teares, the which distilled from the veines of his heart, he spake as followeth. Oh cruell & false traitor that I am, how doth it behoue me now to shun the companie of people, that do vnderstand and know the occasion of this mishap, but to conclude & end this my sorrowfull life amongst the rocks. & mountaines, in the companie of brute beasts that doth not vnderstand my disloialtie and great treason. What was become of my rea∣son, and where was mine vnderstanding? Where did I loose my wits and memorie, that being blinded with follie, & for∣getting my selfe, I should vse so great treason against that roiall Princesse Claridiana, whom I doo honour? Oh euill traitor that I am, how can I be so bold for to mentiō in my mouth the name of so high & mightie a Princesse, endowed with so great beautie and vertue, whom all that now liue in the world doth not deserue to serue, much lesse I, wretch
as I am. Alasse what shall become of me? From this daie forwards may I frustrate my selfe of all hope euen for to sée her, hauing so great reason, that iustlie I cannot present my selfe in her presence. Ah wretch, at such time as by her dam∣sell Arcania she shall vnderstand all that hath passed with me, how blindlie and foolishlie I haue vsed my selfe, then wil she make no more account of me than of a base & vile knight, & with iust reason according vnto her high bountie take re∣uengement of me. But alasse, the punishment that I do iust∣lie deserue, according vnto my desert, shall I abide to receiue it at her handes? No surelie, but first I will take it with mine owne hands, for that I could not consider the great be∣nefit that God did shew vnto me, the high throne wherevn∣to I was exalted, the great glorie that I did receiue when I was accepted and receiued for knight vnto the royall prin∣cesse, what ioy might haue bene compared vnto mine? If I had not bene foolish and out of my wits, I had bene equall with those that doth continuallie recreate themselues in the presence of the almightie, without desire of anie other plea∣sure. But alasse and woe, euen as so high a name cannot be comprehended in so base a knight as I am, so in short time I haue lost the preheminence, and am depriued of all. Oh that my fortune were so happie, that the course of my natu∣rall life were come to conclusion, to make an end of this my sorrowful torment, for that liuing I might not féele & suffer so great misfortune. In saying these & many other wordes, very dolorous to heare, this passiened knight remained a good while ashamed of himself, with great repentance of all y• was past, & wished that he had neuer ben borne, especiallie when y• he called to remembrance what the Emperour Alicandro with all the mightie kings and Princes of his Court would doe, when that in séeking of him he shoulde nt bée found, likewise when y• they shall vnderstand of his departure. So considering his owne shame, & the reproch y• would be impu∣ted to him for disturbing the court, the storie leaueth him for to declare what passed in the Court of the Emperor Alican∣dro, when his departure was knowen.
What happened in the Court of the Emperour Alicand, when they vnderstood of the departure of the knight of the Sunne. Chap. 2. THe next daie being come, wherein should be celebrater the solempne marriage of the knight of he Sunne with the faire Prin∣cesse Lindabrides. The Emperour with all those mightie kings & Princes, tooke the vantange of the morning, & did apparel thē∣selue verie richlie, in such excellent sorte, that it séemed all the  of the world was there ioyned together, & for that the knight of the Sun séemed to tarrie long in his chamber, the Troian Oristedes, & many other that did loue and beare him good will, did repaire vnto his lodging for to séeke him, but when they came thether and found him not there, they were greatlie amazed, & the more, for that there was none y• could tel them anie newes of him, but searching for his ar∣mour & horse, and not finding them, they straight waies vn∣derstood that he was departed. This newes was published throughout the pallace, which brought them all in a maze, at which report the horsekéeper that did saddle his horse came before the Emperour, & told him of his departure, and what words he expressed at that time, whereat the Emperor great∣lie meruailed (and entering into his cogitation some sparke of suspitiō) he straight waies cōmanded many of his knights and Gentlemen, that they should follow the quest of séeking him, which commandement being published, there was with a trice more than ten thousand knightes armed, & separated themselues diuerse waies, some one waie, and some another, and amongst them went Oristedes, with the two Princes of Cambray & Candaria, vnto whom it séemed that the knight of the Sun would not follow nor take anie knowen or bea∣ten waie, but rather towards the mountaines, the better to haue his trauaile in secret. So being departed, they tooke their waie towards the mount Tauro by vnknowen waies, and fortune did so serue them, that they followed the right
waie whereas the knight of the Sun had gone, and in many places they discouered the steps of his horse, which séemed to be new troden, & followed the same so long, till in the end they came vnto the place whereas they found him lying all along the gréene grasse, with his face and eies swollen with wéeping, and séemed to bée so wearie that he had no power to arise, but when they sawe him, and were fullie satisfied of knowing him, they were verie glad because it was their for∣tune to finde him, and yet not a little amazed to see him in that trance. Then Oristedes came vnto him, and did awake him, saying: Sir knight of the Sunne, my good Lord & verie friend, what vrgent cause hath moued you at such time to de∣part from the Court of the Emperour. The Knight of the Sunne knowing them, was verie sorrowfull for that they had found him, and being ignorant what answere to make them, he kept silence, but in a great confusion, imagining how he might separate himselfe out of their companie. Then they all thrée together, with great loue requested him to shew them the cause of his departure, & the occasion of this perplexitie into the which he was brought: who determi∣ning to giue them to vnderstand the whole effct thereof, be∣gan to declare to them as followeth. My good friends, if héeretofore you haue had anie experi∣ence in loue, then are you not ignorant, that his power is such, that it doth depriue men of all reason & vnderstanding, in such sort, that they cannot féele nor know anie thing, and especiallie them that be conformable vnto their amorous de∣sires and disordinate appetities, which is the occasion that we haue apparant before our eies, so many thousands of disa∣stres in this world, and loue the onelie cause thereof, and for to declare them, time doth not now serue: Euen so I béeing taken prisoner with the loue of the Princesse Lindabrides, and blinde without anie discretion, had not so much reason for to consider nor to allow more than that which was con∣formable vnto my wil and amorous desire, being bound vn∣to all inconueniences and perills resistant vnto my will, by the which I was brought vnto the point, as you my Lords
haue séene & vndersfood, how that this night past was dila∣ted the marriage betwéene the Prinsse me, fo the which I receiued great griefe, but that mightie God & redéemer of all the ries, & maker of heauen and earth, who hath power ouer all things, against whose infinit power there is no resi∣stance, by his great mercie did permit y• al my corporal senses which were inchaunted, and prisoners vnto the loue of the Princesse, was this night set frée from all subiection by the which I was awaked out of that blinde dreame wherein I laie, so that I did sée and consider the great errour that I did commit in taking the Princesse Lindabrides vnto my wife: for she being a Pagan and I a Christian, it is the most re∣prochfull thing that can be vsed in all Christian religion, so that either she must returne to be a Christian, or else I must forsake my profession, and become a Pagan. The other, for that I being a Christian, shuld euil preserue so great a mul∣titude of Pagans, as is in the whole state of the Emperour Alicandro, for that they will not haue a Christian knight for their Lord and gouernour, neither should I be in securitie amongst so many Pagans. Besides all this, the great griefe which the Emperour my father and all his subiects shall re∣ceiue, when they shall vnderstand how that I am married in a strange Country so far distant from his, with great rea∣son they may all desire & wish my death. So my verie good friends, I considering of this and many other things which I omit to declare, determined this night past to depart, be∣cause I would not heape one errour vpon another, for y• there is amendement in that which is past, so that I am fullie de∣termined not to retourne anie more vnto the Court of the Emperour Alicao, and therefore I desire you in my be∣halfe; to declare  him, that I craue pardon at his hands, and to consider the iust occasions that moueth me not to ac∣cept the high proffer offered me, and how that in whatsoeuer place I shall become, he shall alwaies finde me his true and faithfull seruaunt. These thrée knightes were verie much amazed at these wordes of the knight of the Sunne, and were verie sorrowfull for that which he had giuen them
to vnderstand, who replied vpon him with louing requests for to returne againe vnto the Court of the Emperour, and to put all such thoughtes out of his minde. Who hearing those new replies, he arose vp vpon a sodain, and finding his horse at hand, without anie more tarrying, presetly hée br∣deled him, and with great lightnesse he tooke his backe, saying. My good Lordes and friends, I doe most heartelie de∣sire you that in this matter you will not importune me a∣nie more, for that I will first consent to die rather than to accomplish or fulfill your request, and rest you in the power of good fortune, for I will depart. And in saying these words he set spurres vnto his horse, and like vnto the winde he ranne vp a high and mightie hill. Oristedes when he sawe the knight of the Sunne depart in that sort, he set spurres to his horse, and sayd vnto his companions: My Lordes, may it please you to carrie these newes vnto the Emperour Aly∣andro, for that I wil not leaue the companie of the Knight of the Sunne, and therewith he forced his pace after him so fast, that in the end of an houre he ouertooke him at the top of the mount Tauro, whereas they found verie faire plaines and pleasant Forrests, but when the knight of the Sunne sawe him follow all alone, he was verie glad and tarried for him, who certified him how that his companions remained behinde, and how that he would not leaue his companie, if it were his pleasure to accept it. The knight of the Sunne gaue him great thankes, gratifying his good will, at which instant there was confirmed betweene thē so great & perfect loue, that it endured vntil their deaths. These two knights trauailed together many daies vppon the mightie moun∣taine, whereas they did not lacke of all sortes of meates for their diets, in Castles and houses which they found vppon the mountaine, whereas this Historie doth leaue them, for to retourne vnto those two Princes that came with Oristedes, who remained in great confusion with that which the knight of the Sunne and their companion had done, in such sorte that they knew not what to saie. But in
conclusion they Agr together for to depart, & at such time as the night approched, they came vnto the mightie Citie of Naptaria, whereas they found the Emperour meruailouslie trobled, and all the whole Court in great alteration. But wheir they had declared all that the knight of the Sun had said vnto them, his griefe was such, that he tore the haire frō his head and beard, and smote himselfe vpon the face, that it was great pittie to behold, how the great loue that before he bare vnto him, is now charged into mortall hate, & swore by his high Gods, that he would vtterlie renounce and de∣nie them, if he might not bée reuenged of that iniurie which was done vnto him by the Knight of the Sunne, in which rage, hée straight waies called together all those mightie kings and noble men of his Court, vnto whom he did declare all which had passed, and made manifest vnto them the great anger the which he receiud, and sayd that his honour con∣formable vnto his  not receiue iust satifaction, except the knight of the Sunne be taken prisoner, and pu∣nished according vnto his desert, and for the accomplishing thereof, hée knew no other remedie, but to ioyne together a great hoast and number of people, and with them to passe into Grecia, and to destrie all that Empire, full such time as they haue taken prisoner the knight of the Sunne, and the mightie Emperour his Father, vpon whom he might ex∣ecute his wrath, and take reuengement on their persons for the iniurie done vnto him. And as amongst friends, and such as bée priuate vnto noble men, there neuer lacketh one or other that will rather be conformable vnto their wills, and aide and helpe them in the executing of their wrath, sooner with anie reason to make resistance to auoide inconuenien∣ces: euen so it fell out in this assemblie (although there were some there present that did not like well of the Emperours words) yet ther were many other y• did cōmend his pretence in saying y• it was well done, & to the contrarie, if the Em∣perour did not séeke reuengement of the knight of the Sun, that for euer after he should remain iniured & infamous. Also there was added therevnto by certaine young braines and
grene heads (who were verie desirous to get honour) that vnto the Gods they should doe great honour and seruice, for to destroie that Emperour of Grecia, for that they were Christians, and enimies vnto their lawe, and the better for to accomplish the same, they did offer themselues i person with their goods and vassals, with pretence to ioyne together the greatest armie that euer was made in all the world, and for that these young Knights tooke the vantage in speaking first, others y• wer ther present (who had other things in their thoughts) held their peace, & almost perforce did consent vnto all y• which the Emperour would doe, who being somewhat comforted in that he sawe how euerie one receiued part of his anger, he forthwith commanded that it should be proclaimed throughout all the Court, that all noble men & principall go∣uernours in all his Realmes & dominions, should assemble together in his great Citie before the end of two moneths, pronouncing great penalties vpon them y• did not performe the same. So for y• the newes of the departure of the knight of the Sun was throughlie knowen amongst the people, it could not be hidden from the faire Princes Lindabrides, who hauing an inkling of the same, commanded to call before her the Prince of Cambray, and declared all that passed with the knight of the Sun in his presence, but when the Princesse had well heard & vnderstood the effect of his tale, she straight waie suspected what was the occasion thereof, & vnderstoode verie well y• the remembrance of the Princesse Claridiana was the cause of his departure more than anie other thing, which was the reason that her sorrow increased so much, y• there was no euill in all the world that might be compared vnto hers, which was in such sort, y• after she had remained in a trance for the space of more than one houre, in comming againe vnto her selfe, she gaue such terrible shrikes, y• it sée∣med to penetrate the heauens, tearing in péeres her kerchers & head attire which was verie fine, pulling her golden & ru∣bicond haire, vttering words of so great dolour & griefe, y• all those that heard them were moued with great compassion to wéep, & ther was not one that could giue her anie comfort, for
that they were all oppressed with sorrow, and could not speak vnto her one word, but the passioned princesse amongst other lamentations, said: O high & immortall Gods, let my sorow∣full complaints ascend vnto your diuine maiesties, & let your eares be pertakers of these my passions, & let these my griefs be manifest before you, y• with sodain death I may be taken out of this world, & let not your soueraigne prouidence con∣sent that I liue anie longer, for to suffer so strong repuise of fortune: Oh disgrace so vnhappie, and fortune so terrible, I would I had died a thousand deaths before I had knowen so great isaster, and who would not first desire to die, rather than to liue & sée so great euill: oh destinie, signes, & planets, vnder whom I was borne and subiect, with none could you dse your crueltie so much as you do with me, it had ben better that I had neuer ben borne, than vnder so cruell constellati∣ons to maintain life, but what do I saie, vnhappy that I am, for according vnto my misfortune, and the greatnesse of my griefe and sorrow, the high Gods, who doth excéede the ope∣rations celestialls, did make the knight of the Sunne of so great valour, that my misfortune shoulde excéede the influ∣ence of the signes and planets celestialls, and in saying these wordes, the faire Princesse fel into a sound, and was so farre out of all remembrance that her Ladies and Gentlewomen did thinke verilie that she was dead, yet had thy great care, & tooke great paines for to comfort her, but all did profit verie little, for that she suffered a long time, and neuer entered in∣to her breast any ioy or comfort, but many times to the point of death she was brought, she grew to be verie heauie and sad, alwaies hoping of the reuengement which her Father did promise to take of him, which was the whole occasion thereof. Whom the Hystorie doth leaue at this present, for to tell you of the Princesse Claridiana, who remained in the Court of the Emperour Trebatio. How the Princesse Claridiana departed from Constantine∣ple, and returned vnto the Empire of Trapisond, for cer∣taine newes which were brought her. Chap. 3.
YOu haue vnderstood by the History, how that the Princesse Claridiana, at such time as the knight of the Sun departed from her, remai∣ned in the Citie of Constantinople, with de∣terminatiō not to depart thence, til such time as he should returne from the gran Catayo. Now saith the Historie, that she being in the Court of the Emperor Trebatio, with great ioye, for the high honour and good entertainmēt which she receiued of al persons, although with much griefe for the absence of her knight. Upon a daie it hapried, that there came vnto her twelue ancient knights and of great honour from the Empire of Trapisonda, all ap∣parelled in blacke, which did signifie great heauinesse, who with sorrowful countenance did humble themselues on their knées before her, and did kisse her hands, as their Ladie and mistres, and they gaue her to vnderstand, how that the Em∣perour her Father, and Empresse her Mother, were both de∣parted the world, vpon a sicknesse that tooke them both toge∣ther, and so ended their daies, & how that all the nobilitie of her Empire did request her, y• out of hand the should depart, to put in quietnesse▪ and set in good order her high estate, for her absence (being without Lord) might be the occasion of some great peril. When that this dolefull newes was heard by the Princesse, she receiued great sorrow at her heart, for the death of her parents, whom she loued verie much, & consi∣dering of her departure frō Grecia, which was of compulsion, her sorow did double increase, yet was she somwhat cōforted by the parents of the knight of the Sun, who did honour her in all respects, then she séeing y• of necessitie she must depart out of hand, she went vnto the Emperor & Empresse Briana, & gaue them to vnderstand therof, crauing lisence for her depar∣ture, promising thē to returne againe as soone as she had put in order her estate, & set it in quiet. The Emperor & the em∣presse receiued great griefe at those dolefull newes, & also that the departure of the Princesse was of pure necessitie, for that the loue which shée had recouered amongst them in the smal time y• she was there, was very much, but séeing the
iust reason that she had to , in lamenting the death of her parents, they saide that it was in her choice to vse her pleasure as she should thinke best, and how that they were all at her commandement, in anie thing she would imploie them. This good Emperour did not alonelie offer vnto her knights of great renewin for to beare her companie into her Countrie, but also did contend that himselfe in person would do the like. This roiall Princesse surrendering great thanks for the same, would not consent that the Emperor neither a∣nie of his knights should go with her, but alonelie her owne Ladies & Gentlewomen in companie with those knights ye came frō Trapisonda. So taking hir leaue of them all, where amongst thē was shed many teares, the roiall Princesse de∣parted out of the great & mightie citie of Constantinople, ac∣cōpanied with the Emperor & the most principal knights of his court they did conduct her vnto y• sea side, whereas they did embrace her & commend her vnto God. She straight waies did embarke her selfe with all her companie, & began to saile towards the Empire of Trapisonda, and the Emperor with all his knights returned againe vnto the Citie, whereas he feit great griefe for the lack of his sons, & of the good knights that were absent for their respects from the court. Now doth the Historie returne vnto the Princesse Claridiana, & saith, that they found the wind so prosperous, that in a short time they ariued at the mightie Empire of Trapisond, whereas she was receiued of her nobles & vassolls with great ioy and pleasure vnto thē all, who receiued great content, for y• they had so noble & faire a gouernesse, y• in all the world they be∣léeued was not her equall, as truth is she was, as well in beautie as in customes & comlie grace, that she had not her péere in her time. So after y• the funerall was concluded for the Emperor & Empresse, as did appertaine vnto their high estates, the roiall Princesse was crowned for Empresse, & in the time y• she remained, her gouernment was such, y• in y• as wel as in all other things, appeared y• God did vse great bountie in her behalfe aboue all other, who with great care did psse the time many daies, alwaies awaiting when she
should heare newes of the knight of y• Sun, whose long ab∣sence was cocasiō of her great sorrow & griefe, in such sort, y• whatsoeuer pastimes & pleasures her subiectes did ordaine to giue her contēt, yet could she not receiue anie comfort or ioy, neither could she put him out of her remembraunce a mo∣ment, for that she was not in quiet: neither could she not refraine from the great oppressions of her thoughts, suspec∣ting the great perill wherein the knight of the Sunne was, with the continuall presence and conuersation that he hadde with the faire Princesse Lindabrides, which séemed vnto her such, that according vnto the great valour and desert of the knight of the Sunne, with the soueraigne beautie and grace of the Princesse: it were a thing impossible but that the one must néedes lone the other. So with thi great care and troubles of minde, the storie doth leaue her, for to tell you of the knight of the Sunne, who in companie with the valiant Oristedes, was trauailing through the gran Tartaria. What happened vnto the knight of the Sunne and Oriste∣des, trauailing through the gran Tartaria. Chap. 4. WIth great trauaile and hast did these two great friends the knight of the Sunne, & the troian Oristedes, make their iourneies, ouer the mightie féedes of the mounre Tauro, which was verie fresh and delightfull, and polished with manie Castells, and faire houses, in which trauaile for the space of manie daies, they did sundry feates of armes, by reason that the inhabitants ther, were verie barbarous, so that euerie daie they were driuen to armore and to make their defence. And in al places wheresoeuer they became, they hadde contention with the dwellers there aboutes, and although all that mountaine was replenished with Castiles and houses, somwhat apart the one from the other, yet did they passe the greatest part thereof with little daunger, till vppon a night it happened being verie darke, and they in the field where as they could
not discouer neither castle nor house, whether they might go to lodge themselues, & being in such a constillation, as was very colde, so that the first part of the night they passed with great trouble, till such time as from far of they discouered a light of fier, which séemed to be in a great and déeps valley, they thinking that it was made by some shepherds that kept their shéepe there, being very glad, went thether wards. And when they came nigh vnto the place, they saw that it was a companie of more then thirtie barbarous people of y• coun∣trie, being of a high and large stature, and either of them had but one eye, and that was in their foreheads, as big as a smal looking glasse. They were al apparailed with the skins of beares, and of other beastes, sitting round about a great fier which they had made, and some of them were rosting of certaine Uenison, and of other beastes (which they had ta∣ken) vpon spits of wood. Their talke which they had was verie barbarous and strange, so that these knights could not vnderstand them, for it séemed to be a kinde of howling or bleating: but when they came nigh vnto them, they were greatly amazed to sée people so brutish, & staied themselues, not knowing what to say. These barbarous monsters whē they saw them vpon the Horse backes, and so richly armed, straight waies one which semed to be the principal amongst them, began to speake in their barbarous tongue, making signes that they should alight, & come vnto the fire to warme them, and to take part of their supper, which was there a dressing. So when the knights vnderstode their meanings, the knight of the Sunne saide vnto Oristedes, my very good friend what doe you thinke best that we doe: Then Oriste∣des said, Sir it séemes vnto mée requisite to do that which necessitie doth constraine vs, that is, that we alight & go vn∣to the fier, and suppe with this people, for that colde & hung∣er, will not consent that we doe any other thing. And after∣ward if they demaund of vs paiment for the shotte, then is there your fine cutting sworde which will pay for vs all. Be it done as you haue saide, my very good friend Oristedes, said the knight of the Sunne, for that your bountie, in what
soeuer perill, doth put vs in suretie: but yet mée thinks it not requisite to sléepe much among this people. And in say∣ing these words, these two worthie knights did alight, and pulled the bridles from their Horses, and gaue them leaue to féede on the gréene grasse, of which there was great store, so they came vnto the fier and sat themselues downe by the principall of them, with their beuers lifted vp. But when these barbarous people did sée them so faire and of so gallant disposition, they all had a great good will for to kill them & to eate them, for that they hadde rather féede vpon humaine flesh when they may get it, then of any other beast. So that in their bleating speach, they concluded amongst them for to execute their pretence. And these knights for that they did not vnderstand them, held their peace, warmeing themselues by the fier, making hast by signes, that the supper were made readie, for that  were veris colde and hungerie. So that when their ison and other meate was roasted, all these company of barbarous people did set themselues vpon the ground round about their vittailes, and began to teare it in péeces with their handes, and to eate with lustie cou∣rages. The chiefe captaine of them, gaue vnto these knights of the Uenison for their parts, who at that present made lit∣tle account of the great abundance that they were wont to haue, at the Emperour Alicandro his table, and at the feasts of the Emprour Trebatio, but fell vnto their vittailes with tooth and naile: Yet that supper had cost them very déere, if that the soueraigne creator had not remembred them. For that in the best and chiefest time of their supper, when most contentment these perfect friends receiued, two of these bar∣barous Tartarians dissembling to serue the rest, arose vp from their companie, and toke eche of them a mightie great and heauie clubbe, which they vsed for their weapon, & very softly without making any noyse, they came behinde y• two knights, & with all their sorce & strength of both their hands, they discharged their blowes vpon these two knights, which did astonish them, that they were out of all remembrance, & fell presētly to ye ground, whereas they moued neither hand
nor foote, but lay as though they had bene dead. Then these barbarous Tartarians arose vp alogether and came for to vnarnie them, verie glad for that which they had done: but for that they had no experience in armour, and neuer be∣fore had vnlased anie, in more then a quarter of an houre there was not one of them, that could lose anie péece ther∣of, nor knew not where nor which waie to begin, but tum∣bling rounde about from one place vnto an other, vewing of all partes, but yet were they neuer the nearer, in which time ye worthie knight of y• Sunne receuing aire, was wholie come to himselfe, & of perfect rememberaunce, & considering in what state they were brought, with a trice, in spite of all those barbarous people that did hold him, he a∣rose vppon his féete, and finding by him his good sworde (which was the best in all the world, and that which hée won of the Prince Meridian) he tooke  both his hands, and stroke such a blow at him that , that he cut him a sunder by the wast, that the two partes fell the one from the other, dead to y• groūd, & ther with he stroke at an other that was vnarming of Oristedes, that his right arme with the whole quarter of the body he made flie to the earth, not staying with that, but with great courage and furie, he put himselfe amongst the thickest of them, wounding and killing all that he might fasten blows vpon: but these Tar∣tarians, recouering their clubbes, with loude cryings they did assault him on euerie syd, charging him with mightie and terrible blowes, but by reason that they were cleane without armour, and this valiant and stoute knight, in the heate of his furie, in short speace, by kiling of some, and wounding of other some, the rest ranne awaie, for feare of his mortal blowes: so that not one of all these barbarous Tartarians did remaine in sight. This being concluded, he was going towards his friend the Troyan Oristedes, for to succour him, who at that instāt was come vnto himselfe, and with great courage and furie, he arose vp, thinking that his enimies hadde bene there still: but loking about for them and seing so manie slaine, and none in presence but
the knight of the Sunne, with great ioye and pleasure he went vnto him, & embracing him with great loue he saide: now am I fullie certified and perswaded, (worthie and va∣liant knight) that the high mightie & soueraigne gods haue not forgot you, but haue great and speciall care of your great valour, the which is made maniefest vnto me, in the preuenting of this present perill, otherwise this supper had bene full dere vnto me. Then the knight of the Sunne embracing of him saide. The liuing god, who knoweth the secret of all things, would not consent that so worthie a knight as you are, should be slaine by so great reason. And his pleasure was, for to deliuer mée by his bountifull goodnesse, whereby I should make defence to saue vs both from so great rebuke and shame. And now seeing that here is none for to disturbe vs: Let vs sit downe and make an ende of our supper, and take our rest here till to morow morning. Let it be as you doe commaund, saide Oristedes, séeing that here is none to trouble vs: therwith these two good companions did sette them selues downe, and did eate of the vittailes that was there, till they were satisfied. But yet they durst not sléepe all y• night, fearing that those Tartarians, which fled awaie would being some other of their companions & trouble them, so that they passed awaie that night in walking rounde about the fire, discoursing of that wherein they receued most content, alwaies haue∣ing an eye vnto the maine chaunce, least any should come vpon them on a sdaiue. But they might verie well haue taken their ease without anie care, for that those which were fled awaie were so scarred with the mightie great and terrible blowes of y• knight of the Sunne, that they thought it not for the best to retourne backe againe, and although they were fled verie far, yet did not they thinke themselues in anie securitie. So when the daie was come these two knights did bridell their horses, and mounting vppon their backes they departed from that place, & after trauailed ma∣nie daies vppon the skirt of the mount Tauro, wherein chaunced vnto them manie notable aduentures, the which
the auctor doth omit for to make briefe cōclusion of this first part, but the Historie saith, that after great trauaile & strāge aduentures which happened vnto them in this iourney: in the ende they came vnto the distroyed Troy, whereof Ori∣stedes was Lorde, whereas they did repose and take their restes many daies: In the ende whereof it was agréed be∣twixt thē, not to soiourne there any longer, but from thence to embarke thēselues for the Empire of Grecia: they straight waies cōmaunded to rig a ship that was in the port of Te∣nedon, and to make her readie wel furnished with all things necessarie, wherein they determined to make their voiage. So being all furnished and readie to depart, they put them selues within the ship, their sailes were hoysed, & the mai∣ster directed his ship towards Grecia, whereas the knight of the Sunne thought for to finde the Princes Claridiana, ha∣uing her beautie so printed within his brest, that he thought euerie daie a whole yéere, till he came vnto her presence. Here the Historie doth leaue these two companions sayling on the Sea, for to retourne to tell you what happened to the Princes y• time y• the remained in her empire of Trapisōda. How the Emprisse Claridiana, being in her Empire of Tra∣pisonda, there ariued her Damsell Arcania, and declared vnto her the newes of the Knight of the Sunne, which brought her almost to the point of death. Chap. 5. WIth no lesse care then desire for to heare newes of the knight of the Snime, remained this soue∣raigne Emprisse Claridiana, in her Empire of Trapisonda, which time séemed vnto her so long, that ther entred into her heart no kinde of ioy nor pleasure, although she did exercise her selfe in hunting, and feates of armes, procuring to put away y• pensiuenesse of her thought, but nothing would serue, to put the remembraunce of the knight of the Sunne one minute of an houre out of her minde. And there was nothing so acceptable vnto her as so∣litarinesse, the better to vse her conceit in thinking on him,
alwaies wishing that y• daie were come that the might se him. And as she was one morning in hir chāber at such time as the Sunne did spred abroade her beames, out from the Orient, vpon the whole Earth, she addressed her face y• way beholding the Sunne, & with a pittiful sigh which proceeded from the bottome of her heart, she said. Oh beames of the se∣lestial Febo, which commeth from y• place wher as my heart is fixed, Oh that I were now in thy celestiall course & mo∣uings, that I might euerie daie sée him whome you doe sée & beholde. Oh that the diuine prouidence were so pleased, that I might now haue some newes brought from him, where∣with my soule should receue no lesse ioy then the immortal soules, which doe comfort themselues continuallie in thy di∣uine presence. Oh that I were fullie certified, that he were now beholding the brightnesse of the Sunne with his eies, as I doe with mine, which thing alone would be some com∣fort, & giue me in part ease of this great sorow the which I doe féele, wherof his absence is the onely occasion. Oh you inuisible and swift windes that commeth from the Oriental Heauens, blow some comfort into these my eyes, if that peraduenture with your face you haue disperied abroad any of his golden locks, Oh what comfort & pleasure should it be vnto mée, if that I were fully certified that you did en∣counter with him. Oh you cleare and resplendant lights ce∣lestiall, whose course doth compasse round about the whole world, Oh that I had in one of you mine eyes fixed, that I might with great ease, behold the valour of my knight. How swift should those celestiall mouings seeme vnto mée at their departure, and how short should your returne seme to the contrarie. Oh happie countrie of the Scitas, that the valiant and worthie déedes of such a knight doth deserue to sée, and happie Princesse that had so much power for to ca∣rie him out of my presence. Oh Princesse of the Scitas, how manie daies, nights and houres, hast thou enioyed the sight of the knight of the Sunne. Suffer now pacience, if that he doe depart from thée to come and sée mée. Consider that God hath not created mée of so base and vnséemely beautie
amongst all other ladies and damsells, but that I should de∣serue y• knight of most valiancie, amongst all other knights. Oh that I were now fullie certified that the knight of the Sunne were departed out of thy presence, there is nothing in all the world that could giue mée so great contentment. This and manie wordes more like in effect, did this Em∣presse vtter, making her complaint, euerie morning when she did sée the Sunne to appeare in the Orient, and at night when as she saw the Moone and the Starres, where in ma∣nie times she did contemplate her selfe, immagening that the Knight of the Sunne did likewise behold them. Likewise, manie times her immagination was occupied with suspection, that the great beautie of the princesse Lin∣dabrides, with the continuall conuersation hadde with the knight of the Sunne, should be an occasion by the force ther∣of, to bring him in such captiuitie, that forgetting all other, he should remaine in her presence for euer. And hauing this in her remembrauance, was the occasion of great sorow, and to shed from her christalline eyes great aboundance of teares, watering all her faire face and rubi∣cond chéekes. Yet otherwaies to the contrarie, she did com∣fort her selfe, when that she called to remembraunce the word and promise that her knight had made vnto her, and saide within her selfe, that he could not be of so small dis∣cretion and lacke of reason and vnderstanding, to forget her for any other Ladie in all the world, and in especiall, the Princesse being a Pagan, and he a Christian: so that in this and in other diuers and contrarie thoughts, did y• Empresse Claridiana occupie her selfe, looking euerie daie when that she should heare some newes from the knight of the Sunne, and of his returne. In all this time the Damsell Arcania, did not foreslow her selfe, but with great care and hast, trauailed, with de∣sire for to come vnto her Ladie the Princes Claridiana, to declare vnto her y• whole course of y• disloialtie of y• knight of y• Sunne, as one y• was ignorant of all y• succeded afterward, but beleuing for truth y• he had bene married to the princesse
Lindabrides. And so not happening vnto her anie thing in her iourney that might disturbe her: in the end of certayne daies after her departure from the gran Cataio, she ariued at the Empire of Trapisonda, and she vnderstanding howe that the Emperour was dead, and how that her Ladie was crowned Empresse of Trapisonda, she directed her iourney thetherwards, & came thether at such time as the Empresse was most desirous to heare newes of her knight, because his tarying was so long, thinking euerie daie to bée one whole yéere. So when that Arcania came into the Citie, she went straight waies towards the roiall pallace, & entered in there∣at, at such time as the Empresse was all alone in her clo∣set, occupied with no other thing, but with her continual an∣guish and sorrowful thoughts, who being certefied of her so∣litarinesse, made no more adoe but entered into her closet, & shut the doore after her, and comming before the Empresse, fell downe vpon her knées, and craued her handes to kisse them, with so great abundance of teares that distiled from her eies, that she had not the power to speake one word. The Empresse séeing her on such a sodaine to enter in, shée was greatlie ameruailed, and went and embraced her, saying. Ah Arcania, the true & faithful secretarie of all my secrets, what sodaine comming is this of thine, that maketh me so much amazed and astonied. How is it that thou commest alone, and lefte the companie of him that thou wentest withall, where hast thou left my knight, tell me whether he bée come into this Countrie or not, for that there is nothing in this world that at this present can giue me more content or ioy vnto my hart: tell me out of hand some newes of him, make no tarrying, for y• euerie moment séemeth to me one whole yéere of thy delating. The sorrow and griefe the which Ar∣cania had (for those heauie newes that she should giue vnto her Ladie) was such, that he could doe no other thing but wéepe, and was not able to speake one word, the which being well considered by the Empresse Claridiana, it brought her into the greatest perpleritie and sorrow that euer shée was in, in all her life, suspecting the euill newes that she brought,
for that she was so long in declaring them vnto her. And hauing not the heart to suffer any longer, but shedding great abundance of teares wherewith she did all to be bathe her face, she burst out and said. Oh high, mightie, and immortall God, creator of all the worlde, what is this, that Arcania maketh so long delae, in telling vnto mée her newes: if they be anie that apper∣taineth vnto my long hope & desired pleasure, let me heare them. But oh vaine hope of men, how can any of vs liue but in great feare, séeing that so many waies and times we are deceited by you, with sodaine and vnlooked for doubts: Alas, what is he dead? he, that onely y• hope that I had to sée him; did sustaine my whole life? As all humaine creatures hath their humours, and there is none y• liueth but euery houre are subiect vnto a thousand euills and misfortunes, and the least of them all suffiseth to cause death. In the high Firma∣ment is congeled Thunderboults againste humaine crea∣tures, the waters doth swell by force of raine, the windes doth combat and cause earthquakes, the depthes of the Seas doe roare, by force that they doe receiue, and hoyse the ships at times, vp vnto the heauens, and straight waies downe vnto the depth of the waters. The earth which séemeth vn∣to vs to be in securitie, is full of perills, vpon the face ther∣of the terrible lightnings and thunderbolts hath their cour∣ses. Likewise the déepe and profound Riuers doth excéede their limits. Upon the earth is ouerthrowen and doth fall the mightie Mountaines and Rockes, wherein doth happen great diseases. Horses doth make their course y• one against the other, at whose encounters their riders be ouerthrowen: men trauailing quietly by the way, vpon a sodaine and vn∣looked for, are beset and ouerpressed with théeues & robbers. The furious Tyger & cruell Lions, the huge Elephant and fearce Griffens, vnmercifull dragons and Basilists, with a thousand kinde of wilde beasts & Serpents, that liueth vpon the earth, what mortal man is he that is not afraide of thē, as being the occasion that they haue not their liues in anie securitie.
Alas, what shall I say, if any of all these misfortunes, auigating by Sea, or trauailing by land, hath chaunsed vn∣to the flower of all Knighthood, that my Damsel Arcania, is afraide to vtter it, and hath no tongue to speake. But alas, I suppose that none of all these perills hath chaunced vnto him, but considering that the world is great and wide, and the knight of the Sunne hath trauailed through many coun∣tries & landes, and it cannot be otherwise but that he hath had the sight of many faire Ladies and damsels, that theyr presence hath bene the occasion to put mée cleane out of his: remembraunce. And wen there were no other but the prin∣cesse Lindabrides, daughter vnto the Emperour Alicandro, of the gran Tartaria, in whome the soueraigne creator, hath bestowed so great beautie & grace, y• she alone were sufficiēt wt her presēce to cause y• empres Claridiana, to be forgotten. This faire Empresse séeing these and many other words of great dolour, wherewith her thought was troubled, she une vnto her Damsel Arcania, and embrasing her, said. Ah my louing and faithful Arcania, make an ende and declare vnto mée this sorowfull newes, for that thy delaying doth cause vnto mée mortall griefe. But Arcania durst not de∣clare vnto her that sorowful and heauie newes, for that she knew the great griefe that would procéede thereof: but yet she was so much importuned, that in the ende she was con∣strained to vtter it, who began as followeth. Ah my Ladie and Emprisse, I would (if that God were so pleased) that this newes that I doe bring you, were of the death of the knight of the Sunne, how that the vnmer∣ciful waues of the Sea had swallowed him vp, or else how that the ground had opened and he consumed therein. For if that it had happened in this sort, then should you haue no oc∣cassion to cōplain of him. But alas, he is wel & in good health, wheras y• sight of an other ladie hath made him captiue, & al your loue forgotten, that y• recouerie is without remedie. For after our departure out of Grecia, til we came to y• gran Ca∣taio, y• knight of y• Sun neuer left y• princes Lindabrides, inso¦much y• her great beautie & cōtinual cōuersatiō wrought such
effect within his heart, that you were cleane blotted out of his remembraunce, and the promise that he made vnto you cleane forgotten: so y• in the way of our trauaile, he did offer himselfe whollie vnto her, intreating of loue, and made her prontise that so soone as they should come vnto the Gran Cataia, he would marrie her, the which promise, she did ac∣cept, by reason whereof she did make her defence, till such time as they came vnto the court of the Emperour Alican∣dro, where as they were with great pompe and maiestie re∣ceued. So the daie of the marriage being appointed, all the nobles of the land were called and assembled together, and for the space of twentie daies that I was there, they gaue themselues to no other thing but to bankets and feasting, for the marriage of the Princesse, whereas the knight of the Sunne did so high and wonderfull feates of armes, that his fame will neuer be forgotten in that countrie. To conclude, I séeing that the time was short and at hande, for the cele∣brating of the marriage, with great sorow and griefe I de∣parted from thence, and made so great haste as possible I could, for to come hether to giue you to vnderstand thereof. So whē that y• Empresse Claridiana had heard these newes of so great dolour and griefe, and vnderstoode the whole ef∣fect thereof, there was no paine, torment & griefe that might be compared vnto hers at that present, neither was there a∣ny sufficiencie in her heroicall and baliant courage (where∣with she did quaile & ouercome those terrible guards of the Princesse, Elisea) for to suffer and to dissemble so cruel, con∣trarie, and peruerst fortune, but that losing the vse of her re∣membraunce, (as one past all hope) she fell in a sownd in the armes of her Damsell Arcanie, whereas she remained more then one whole houre, before she came againe vnto her selfe, in such sorte, that Arcania who did helpe her, thought verelie that she was dead altogether, and did repent her selfe that euer she did declare vnto her those heauie newes. In the ende, the Princes came againe somewhat vnto her selfe, who in mortall anguish did yeald out: from her troubled breast such cruell sighes, as though her life would follow af∣ter,
then she began to saie as followeth. Oh high and soueraigne maiestie, how is it that your di∣uine maiestie doth permit and suffer, that your Empresse Claridiana should receiue so great treason, and especiallie of him, whom in al the world she best loued. Oh false and trai∣terous knight, now am I fullie certified or y• occasion of thy long tarrying, and thy dispitefull wordes and promises are manifest vnto me, as also who doth detaine thée: Oh knight of the Sunne, what mist of darknesse hath daseled thy eyes, that the sight of the princesse Lindabrides could so bleare and blot out of thy memorie the figure of Claridiana. Be these the effect of thy amorous words which thou vtteredst vnto me comming by sea from Lidia, and the fained teares that thou diddest impart with me. How oftentimes diddest thou desire me for to receue thée to be mine, & after y• I offered my selfe to be thine: consider of thy promise made vnto mée, the which now thou hast vtterlie falsified and broken. If thou haddest well considered (O thou traitor) who I was, & how that my desert is without comparison, thou wouldest neuer haue changed me for anie other, and that which séemeth vn∣to me to be without reason is, that thou hast matched with one that is not of thy lawe and faith: What was become of thy wits, and where was thy vnderstanding, that thou diddest not see and consider, how much thou hast offended the soueraigne creator with that marriage, and how worthie thou art of punishment, in committing of such wretched sin. I doe not now much meruaile, that thou hast not kept thy word and faith with me, when thou hast not kept thy faith with the liuing God, neither doe I meruaile at the commit∣ting of so great sinne, for that not long since, thou fainedlie diddest take the name to be a Christian, the which I doe sus∣pect thou hast reiected and denied. And the better to bring thy pupose to effect, thou doest publish thy selfe to be a Pa∣gan. Oh that the wrath of the diuine iustice might now de∣scend vpon thée, and the burning lightnings and thunder en∣gendered in the high clowves, might make reuengement on thée, for thy great tniurie shewed. Oh that thy misfortune
had bee such, that thou haddest fallen into some of those pe∣rills and dangers, that I suspected to chaunce to thée, or else that thou hadst died with some sodaine & vnlooked for death. What cruell death, punishment, or euill fortune, might bée conformable vnto thy desert, in committing so great an er∣ror. There is nothing that grieueth me so much, as y• thou wert the floure of all knights, and being gone, there is not in all the world that is worthie of my excellencie: & although I am not married, yet doe I remaine a widow, & the grea∣ter my griefe, to sée him ye which I thought should haue ben my husband, in the power of another. Oh fortune, how con∣trarie haue you bene vnto me, in that you haue giuen me so great beautie and soueraigne dignitie. If thou haddest cre∣ated me foule, euill fauoured, and of base birth, then had not the one bene occasion of my pardition, neither the other had reason for to destroie me. If that my singuler beautie & high∣nesse were not, I might put remedie in my great griefe, as Ariadne that was left of Theseus, and Medea forgotten of Iason. But who is there now in all the world, with whom I may make change of so faithfull loue? What woman is there in all the world, that euer felt so great griefe for loue? Trulie there is no comparison to be made vnto mine: no not that of Deyamir, whom Hercules changed for Yole, nor that of Penelope for Vlysses, nor of Phillis for Demophoon. Let not that be spoken of Io, that was conuerted by Iupi∣ter to a cowe, and presented vnto Iuno, and that of Biblis, that followed that cruell Cadmo. Neither may be compared that of Tisbe and Pramus, nor of the Queene Dido that built Carthage, for Aeneas. Great reason had Gero for to bewaile her welbeloued Leander, when she sawe him drow∣ned and laie vpon the sandes of the huge riuer, but yet com∣fort thy selfe with mée, for that thy great dolour and griefe should I receiue for glorie, if that I did sée the knight of the Sunne to die for my loue, and with a great deale more spéede than Gero, would I beare him companie in death. Comfort thy selfe with me than Gofreda, which was the oc∣casion of his death that loued her best. And if that File and
Laudonia, were comforted with their sodaine deathes: Com∣ort your selfe with me, by y• euil fortunes of locasta, whose misfortunes were such as was not in the whole worlde to be compared, yet may it not be compared vnto mine. Oh for∣tunate Eucuba, and soueraigne Quéene, who alonely remai∣ned for to sée the sorowfull sight of the destruction of Troy, and the death of thy husband, and valiant sonnes and faie daughters: and after for the same cause, thou wert of thy eni∣mies stoned to death: Comfort thy selfe with my misfor∣tune, for that it is not lesse dolorous then thine. Oh Sopho∣nis be Queene of Numidia, who being with thy husbande prisoners in the power of thy enimie, and being comforted to marrie with him, first before that thy marriage was se∣lebrated, thou wert slaine by poision: I consider with great griefe, thine not to be equall vnto mine, for that thou did∣dest lack time to acknowledge thy hurt, & in me it remaines for to suffer so great griefe. Oh Cornelia, wise vnto Crasso, & of that mightie Pompey of Rome banished with thy hus∣band, lette our sorowes be ioyned together, when that with great hope for to sée thy Pompey thou wert lost, and wert comforted by Cato Vticense. Happie werte thou Cleopata Quéene of Aegipt, sée∣ing that thou werte forgotten by Caesar, in so short space, thou diddest quench so great a fire, thy faire breasts béeing drawen or sucked by Snakes, till such time as they sucked thy bloud, which made an ende of thée. Oh how pleasant should thy death be vnto mée, (if that in the seruice of God so great crueltie might be permitted.) I should thinke my selfe happie, if that the bloud of my brestes with those cruell Snakes, were drawen out, so that ioyntly therewith, the furious anguish of my heart should be expelled. Oh pittifull tears of Licurgus, for thy Arquimoro, and those of Atalante, for her Partenopio, how farre doe mine excéede yours, and with much more iust cause I doe shedde them. Oh falce and disloyall knight, what reason coulde con∣straine
thée to falsifie and break thy worde & promise giuen to be whollie mine. It appeareth that thou dost follow the law Gentilica, of the god Mercurio, that doth not obserue & kéepe their woord: they say that it is more polesie then dis∣ceit. Oh how I doe know now to be true, that there is no∣thing so difficil to be vnderstoode, as the humaine heart. Who would euer haue thought that so great crueltie and disloyaltie might be comprehēded in a knight that doth sur∣pas all other knights in the worlde. What man hath bene in the world so cruell and peruerst, as thou (traitour) hast bene vnto mée, of truth none: no, not Iupiter, god of y• Gen∣tiles, whome thou dost worship, that banished out of his kingdome his Father, the king Saturno. Neither that Pto∣lomeo king of Egipt, that slewe his owne father & brother, and in the ende, his wife Euridice, onely for the loue of his friendes. Orestes was not so cruel that slew his mother Cli∣temnestra, nor Nero for Agripina, nor Antipater for Thesalo¦nica, nor Theseus for Hipolito, nor Phelipo for Demetrius, nor Constantine Emperour of y• Romances, for his son Chri∣sippo, nor Marco Cataginense, that did crucifie his sonne Cartalon, neither that Phaces king of Parcia, the most per∣uerst of all kings, who slew Herodes his olde and afflicted father, with thirtie of his bretheren, and his onely sonne: nor any whatsoeuer, that hath bene cruell in the world, so cruel as y• knight of the Sunne hath bene vnto Claridiana: for vnto them was giuen the death, and afterward they felt nothing, so that their crueltie was but in slaying of them, but this is more crueltie vnto mée then the death, for that from hence forth, I shall wish to die, because I deserue not to liue, for to féele so cruell griefe and paine. How can I li∣uing, suffer one moment so great dolour, to sée the knight of the Sunne in the power of an other Ladie. Oh that he were now in this countrie, surely I would be slaine in bat∣taile with him, or else his great disloyaltie should be reuen∣ged by mée. In saying these words, the Empresse Claridiana her so∣row was so great that she receued, that many times she fell
in a sound in the armes of Arcasia, and all the comfortable wordes which she spoke vnto her, were not sufficient in a∣nie point to appease her great griefe, and certaintie guish & dolour was so great, that it cannot be imagined that the griefe of anie woman whom she haue named, might be compared vnto hers, for as in wisedome, reason, and discreti∣on, with soueraigne bountie and highnesse, she doth exceede all other in the world, euen so is her griefe the more, and the greater reason she hath to complaine, for that she knowing to be without comparison in beautie & estate, with all other excellent gifts that should be in a noble Ladie, and hauing set her minde vpon the knight of the Sun (as one that alonlie did deserue her) and now to sée her selfe forgotten & changed for another, not leauing in all the worlde anie conformable vnto her highnesse, with whom she might marrie, so that she desired no other thing but to die the death, for to euitate the suffering of so great euill, and from that daie forwards her life was cleane changed ouer that it was before, neither did she exercise her selfe in armour nor  huning, as at other times, but as one that was past all hope euer to be marrried, and as a widowe, she spent her time in her closet all a∣lone, occupying her selfe alwaies in praier, leading the lyfe more of a religious woman, than of so high a Ladie as shée was, alwaies waiting the comming of the knight of the Sun for to be reuenged on him. Whereas the Historie doth leaue her, for to tell you of Rosicleer that was sailing by sea with the Princesse Oliuia. How Rosicleer carried the Princesse Oliuia by sea, whereas they met with a great storme, wherewith they were in & how meruailouslie they were succoured. Chap. 6. THe Historie hath declared vnto you how & in what sort Rosicler in companie with his good friend Sacridoro did carrie the Princes Oliuia but of England, & how that they sailed on the sea with prosperous winde, in the
in béeing so much before the other Fléete. All the diligence of the Marriners, nor the greate desire of the Prince was sufficient for to ouertake them, for that they were a great waie before, which was the occasion that with great anger be cursed the windes because they did blow stif∣fer, & lifting vp his eies vnto heaven, shedding many teares he sayd. Oh diuine maiestie, how doe you permit that so greate force and iniurie shuld be done vnto me, and that my louing spouse should bée carried awaie from me in this sort. How is it that thou dost not execute thy iustice, and let thy wrath to fall vpon this robber Oh that thy diuine maiestie were
so pleased, that the same ship might strike vpon some rocke, or else that that little  called Remora; in climbing vnto the ship, might stay the furie of their sailing, that I might reuenge this my great wrath and ire vpon him that hath of∣fered me this iniure▪ So in vttering these and other wordes of great griefe, sailed Don Siluero, making so great mentation, that his knights by no meanes could giue him anie comfort. And to the contrarie sailed Rosicleer, as one from himselfe, with great pleasure, hauing in his armes her whom he so much loued, with so great glorie, that it was wonder and alwaies thought to be worthie of so excellent  well. Likewise the Princesse Oliuia, although she was not as yet in quiet of the great trouble in the which she was brought, but yet séeing that she was cléere from the  of Don Siluerio, & in the companie of him whom shée loued more than her selfe, shée was satisfied of all those troubles and griefes past, and receiued great contentments; & thought it better to be drow∣ned in that déepe sea, in the companie of Rosicleer, than to liue vpon the land with so great importunances of her father and Don Siluero. And as these two faithful louers were to∣gether with great contentment, making manifest by words the great glorie that they receiued in their hearts. Then for∣tune who neuer is content that men should remaine in one manner, but mingling sorrow with pleasure, like vnto the whéele of Amyl she turned about, in such sort, y• she did shew her selfe enimie vnto Rosicleer, in the midst of all his plea∣sures, y• in a small time he was driuen without repentance of his sins to yeeld vnto death. For that being his ship, with all the whole fléete of the Prince, entered into the Tirreno sea, at such time as the one after the other sailed with pros∣perous windes. Out of the partes of the Leuant, there arose vpon a sodaine so mightie a winde, and with so great force, that  not onelie against them in staying the swifte course of the shippes, but also did moue the waters in such sorte, forcing the waues to swell and to rise of so greate height, that it did signifie vnto them great danger and perill,
th which  a little time did so much increase, that the déepe waues did shew themselues cruel and  against the beating their sailes to the asts, tearing them in péeces with so great force, that they could not take them in, but tumbling  ships from one part to another,  towards that place, wheras the force of that outragious winde would carrie them. This tempest endured with them one whole daie and a night, in the end whereof all that were in the shippes committed themselues vnto the frie of the sea, and imploied themselues in no other thing, but in paying vnto God to deliuer them from that great perill. In this sort they passed all that daie and the next night, till in the morning at the breake of the daie the tempest ceased, and the ship of Rosicleer and the Fléete of Don Siluerio, were all together driuen into the porte of Cerdenia, be whole Nauie of the Prince were twelue great ships, besides other small Princes, whereof foure of them with the tempest were driuen into some other partes, and were not there present. And for that there were in the eight ships more than foure thousand knights, Don Siluerio recei∣ued, so great ioy, for to sée by him the shippe of Rosicleer, as though he had bene made Lord ouer all the world, & com∣manded straight waies that all the whole Fléete should bée put in order, the which was done, and began to assault the ship on euerie side with so great alarum, that it had ben suf∣ficient to haue terrified a great many of more ships than they were. But when Rosicleer sawe himselfe compassed round about, and assalted with so many ships, he left the Princesse Oliuia in a cabine in the poope, being the highest part of all the ship, in so great confusion, that he thought she wold haue died, and he with more courage to die in the defence of his praie, than anie feare that he had of that great multitude of his enimies, tooke vnto him his armour, and descend into the wast of the shipps, whereas hée found the good king Sa∣cridoro, all armed with his swoorde in his hands, in a rea∣dinesse to make his defence, but when that he sawe him, his hart was ready to break with the great griefe he receiued,
and the water ranne downe his chéekes, calling to remem∣brance how many times that good knight had put his lyfe in aduenture for him, and how that he neuer came vnto that estate, whereby he might haue made him some parte of re∣compence for the same. He went vnto him, and embracing him with great loue, he said. Oh my good and perfect friend, how peruerse and contra∣rie hath fortune shewed her selfe vnto me, that so manye times my friendship hath put you in daunger of your life, God doth know whether we shal be slaine or no in this con∣flict, yet iurelie your death shall be more grieuous vnto me than mine owne. To whom this good king Sacridoro with a valiant courage did aunswere, saying: My verie good friend, this is the greatest glorie that I can receiue, and the thing that I haue in most estimation, and séeing that death is ordained for all mortall creatures, wherein may I better emploie the same than in your seruice. Come on let vs goe and make defence that our enimies enter not vpon vs, & let vs venture our liues, and offer it as a sacrifice for to accom∣plish that which is due and doth appertaine to our honours and high estate. This good king had not so soone spoken these wordes, but the knightes of the Prince had grapled their ships together, and boording the one the other, in such sorte, that they might well leape out of the one into the other, Don Siluerio accompained with the most valiant knightes that were with him, with his sword in his hand & his shéeld on his arme, he put himselfe formost of them all to the ship side, and with a loude voice he saide: O Rosicleer yéeld thy selfe straight waies vnto my curtesie, & surrender the prise that thou hast in thy power, for that fortune cannot so much fauour thee, for to escape out of my handes. But Rosicloer being readie for to receiue them at the shippe side with his sword in his hand, answered neuer a , but yéelded him selfe vnto fortune. At that time the Princesse Oliuia by the importunitie and good dicretion of her damsell Fidelia, put her selfe vpon the poope of the ship, in such sort, that she might be séene of all that were there in the Fléete, with a naked
sword in her hand, and with a high voice that it might bée heard of all the people, she sayd. O all you knights that appertaineth to the king Oliue∣rio my father, if there be anie in these shippes, doe not shew your selues at this present so contrarie vnto me, but to fa∣uour and helpe the Géeke Prince, for that many daies past I haue chosen him to be my naturall spouse and husband, and doe you not consent vnto his death, for if you doe, I doe héere make a vow vnto God, that at the very instant that he shall receiue his death, with this sword I will cleaue mine owne heart asunder. At which words Don Silueio made no account, although it was a griefe vnto him to vnderstand the great loue that she bore vnto Rosicleer, by her outward semblance, yet notwithstanding there were in that companie knights of the king Oliuerio that did reioyce to heare those wordes, for to haue the better occasion to helpe Rosicleer, without anie colour to attempt anie thing against the king their Lord, amongst whom was the valiant Zoylo, Bargan∣dl, Lyriamandro, and Almades of Cornwaile, all which did beare good will vnto Rosicleer, and were in the fore part of the ship readie to giue the first assault vnto the expectation of the rest. At this time was Don Siluerio with thirtie of his knights entering into the ship of Rosicleer, who recei∣ued them with such mortal blowes, that quicklie they ouer∣threw sixe of them dead into the water, and Don Siluerio had ben one of them, if that his inchaunted armour had not defended him, but yet for all that, with his terrible blows he was so terried, that he withdrew himselfe backe, and put his knights forwards, and by reason that there were so ma∣ny of them, and euerie one did procure to enter into the shippe of the two knightes, there was such a noise amongst them, that they could not one heare another. All this time was the Princesse Oliuia beholding the ttaile, lamenting verie much to sée her Rosicleer in so great perill, in such grieuous wise, that it would haue mo∣ued anie man to compassion to haue séene her, and with ve∣rie anguish she had ved there, if that her damsell Fidelia
had not béen, who did comfort her in the best wise she could. But this valint and worthie Rosicleer séeing that they did in great hast compasse his shippe round about for to enter in, with so great strength and courage as euer was séene in Knight, hee besturred himselfe from the one part vnto the other, defending the enterie of his enimies with such mor∣tall blowes, that hée might account himselfe vnhappie that was within the reach of his sword, which was that of the Quéene Iulia, and so noble a cutter, and he so valiant who flourished therwith about him with so couragious a strēgth, as one which next vnto God hoped to set his lyfe at liber∣tie, for that hée neuer stroke blowe, but that either hée slew or ouerthrew a knight, so that all his aduersaries were won∣derfullie amazed at him, and not one amongst them all that was so hardie, that durs come nigh the place whereas hée was. Likewise that good king on the other side, did meruai∣louslie defend the enterie, and gaue them wel to vnderstand by his terrible blowes, the great good will that he bare vnto Rosicleer, who dyd not estéeme to venure his lie for his good friend, and did so behaue himselfe amongst his enimies, dealing such mortall blowes, that hée slew and ouerthrew a great number of them, in such sorte, that all those which dyd beholde him, by reason they knew him not, were greatlie a∣mazed. At this time the thrée worthie Princes, with the King Alamades séeing that it was high time for to succour and fa∣uour Rosicleer, with great lightnesse they leaped into his ship, and returned against Don Silueio with their swordes drawen in their hands, and sayd: Enforce and courage thy selfe valiant knight, or wée that be heere are  friendes, And all together with a oude voice sayd, ataria, Tartaria, Hungaria, Hungaria, Bohemia, Bohemia, Cormuala, Cornu∣alia. So when Rosicleer by the naming of their Countries did know them, he receiued great comfort, and not hauing space for to answere them, he did no ore but humble him∣selfe, and for that his shéelde at that time was shieuered
and broken all to péeces with the mightie blowes he had re∣ceiued, he tooke his sword in both his hands, and put himself amongst his aduersaries, and did so great meruailes, that all that did beholde him wondered greatlie, and they which did not sée them, afterward did thinke it a thing impossible, and in declaring of it, verie hard to be beleeued. The thrée Prin∣ces, with the king Alamades, all foure together did defend the entrie of the shippe, killing and wounding many of the knights of Lusitania, and likewise receiued many blowes on euerie side. The number of their aduersaries were so ma∣ny, that they were driuen into a meruailous exsegent. But when that Don Siluerio sawe that the foure knights were on his contrarie part, he receiued great dolour and anguish at his heart, and with the great desire that hée had to take reuengement of them all together, he encouraged and enfor∣ced his knights all that euer he could for to enter the ship and vanquish them, and by reason that there were so many, and verie valiant knights, and continuallie entered in a fresh, (although that Rosicleer and his friends did incredible won∣ders, yet in the space of one houre after that the battaile was begun, they were put in a great extremitie) for that Don Siluerio was verie wise, and his knight valiant and experi∣mented in the warres and battailes, and did assalt their ship on eueri side with great strength, so that there was not one so soone slaine, but another entered into his roome straight waies, in such sorte, that the other valiant knightes had no time for to ease themselues, which was the occasion, that in the end of two houres after that the battaile was begun, all the water round about the shippes was dyed red with the bloud of the dead knights f Lusitania, and the strong armes of Rosicleer and his friends, (as of mortall men) beganne to ware wearie, and their force and strength did abate, and they could endure no longer, yet their valiaunt and couragious heartes were prompt and readie for to receiue the death, and neuer moued counteance thereat, but determined there to die all together like valiant knightes, without yéelding or surrendering in anie point, but amplisying their forces with
their valiant hearts, making their defence in such sort, that their aduersaries did not perceiue that anie wearinesse were in them, so that the battaile at that instant was verie cruell and wonderfull, and the noise verie great which they made, in such sort, that the inhabitants of Cerdenia came forth and did beholde that cruell and well foughten battaile, dreadul∣lie beholding the sea, how it was stained with bloud, & could not beléeue thy should be humane knightes that did defend themselues (in  ship alone) against so many. At this time were the good friends of Rosicleer verie wearie with the oppressing of so great a multitude of their contraries, in such sort that they could not lift vp their swords, at which time many knights of the Prince Don Siluerio beganne to enter their ship, of the which Bramides was the first, with a great number of other valiant knights, who with great fu∣rie and shouts began to laie vpon their aduersaries, and say∣ing, Upon them, vpon them, for they be ouercome. But whē Rosicleer hear those wordes, and sawe no other thing but perdition, he began greater to lament y• death of his friends more than his owne, but that which did grieue him most was, that after so many troubles & sorrows the which he had passed for the Princesse Oliuia, and had her in his power, al∣wais hoping at her hands to receiue reward for the same, he should now be constrained therefore to die, and to leaue her in the power of another, hauing this in his remembraunce, lifting vp his eies vnto heauen to aske mercie of God for his sinnes, he sawe his welbeloued mistres in a sound in the armes of Fidelia, as she which made no other reckoning but to die, the which did cause vnto him so great dolour & griefe, that it kindled in him mortall wrath and ire, determined to sell his life verie déere vnto them that so much desired his death, wherewith hée tooke his sword in both his handes, and stroke so terrible a blowe at the Captaine Bramides, vp∣pon the wast, that cutting him in two péeces, he ouerthrew him dead to the ground, and therewith at other sixe blowes he slew other sixe knightes, behauing himselfe so amongest them, that they fled from him as from the death. But hée as
one that had his death certaine, without anie care of his life, all alone he maintained the battaile against the knightes of Don Siluerio, for that his friends could not doe anie thing in his defence they weare so wearie. And although the knights of Lusitania were valiant, and did charge him with many heauie blowes, that had bene sufficient to haue cloue aman∣field in péeces, yet did he defend the entrie of the ship alone, for the space of halfe an houre against all the companie, and had about him on euery side a great number of dead bodies, shewing so great wonders among his aduersaries, that it was scarce credible to the beholders. Whereat Don Silue∣rio receiued great griefe to sée so many of his knights slain, but yet he durst not come nigh him himselfe, but forced his knights forwards with reproch, that it was a shame to him, that one alone knight shoulde make his defence so long a∣gainst so many. Who hearing those wordes made no more a doe, but put their liues in aduenture for to accomplish that which was their deaths, and therewith they leaped into the ship of Rosicleer, and charged him so much & with so many terrible and heauie blowes, that it had not bene possible for him to haue indured long, if that by the wonderfull myracle of God he had not bene succoured. You shall vnderstand that fortune did serue him so wel, that the ship wherein was that valiant and worthie knight of the Sunne, and that stout Oristedes was constrained by the force of the storme and tempest past, to enter into th same port of Cerdenia, and entering in thereat, they straight waies did sée the execution of that cruell battaile, and were greatlie amased to sée all the water so stained with bloud, and how that one alone ship did make his defence against all the rest: but when they sawe so few knightes did main∣taine themselues against so great a multitude of their eni∣mies, their meruaile was the more, and remained astonied for a great space to sée the incredible acts that Rosicleer dyd, as one that was desperate of his own life, which was with so great courage, that if he had séene it with his owne eyes, he could not haue beléeued that any humane creature could
haue done it. And as he was with great attention behold∣ing them with great good will for to aide and helpe them. The knight of the Sunne did know him by the deuice of his armour, although that they were all to be raid with bloud, as also by the comelie proportion of his bodie, & therewith vpon a sodaine with a loude voice he said: O good God, it séemeth vnto me, that yonder knight should be Rosicleer my brother, or els my sight doth deceiue me: Oh my good friend, now shew forth your great bountie to defend and saue the life of the person of him that I loue best in all the worlde. Come on let vs go, sayd Oristedes, forwith▪ verie good will I wil offer my selfe in anie thing that doth appertaine vnto you or to your brother. And insaying these words, these two good friends did cause their ship to be grapled vnto the ship of Rosicleer, and with their swordes drawen in their hands they leapt into the sayd ship, and sayd: Courage, courage, good knight, and take a good: heart, héere is come vnto thée thy brother the knight of the Sunne. And therewithall tur∣ned against his aduersaries, and made so great a slaughter amongst them, that in a short space al the hatches of the ship laie full of dead bodies, and the knights of Lusitania béeing greatlie amased at such sodaine and strge succour, they fled before them with all the speede they could into their owne ships, and in making such hast, many of them leaped short & fell into the water, so that by this meanes their shippe was quicklie ridde of their enimies. But when that Rosicleer heard those comfortable words of his worthie brother, and knew him as well by his wonderfull blowes giuen, as by the deuice of his armour, what ioy and pleasure might bée equall vnto his, I saie vnto you, it was much more than it was, at that time when that he was succoured by him in the Iland of Canmarte, for that his death at that time shoulde not haue béene so grieuous vnto him, as at this pre∣snt the death of his good and perfect friends, and hauing in his power the fayre Princesse Oliuia. And as one who by the aide and succour of his Brother was in good hope to be set frée and at libertie of so rigorous and cruell a traunce,
with a new and vnlooked for ioye, did so hearter, and incou∣rage himselfe, recouering so great force and strength, that hée began to make so great a destruction among his enimies, as though the battaile were but as then begun, and comming nigh vnto the knight of the Sunne, he sayde: Oh my Lorde and welbeloued brother, what great benefit is this that God hath shewed vnto me, that it hath pleased him that I am succoured by your great power and strength, and now that I find my selfe in your companie, if that all the whole world were against me, I should not haue anie feare. At this time the knight of the Sunne could not make him anie answere, for that he was so occupied amongst his enimies, where hée did so great slaughter, that there was none that durst tarrie before him. Likewise the Troian did so defend his partie, that it was wonderfull to beholde, at whom Rosicleer was greatlie amazed, not knowing who that valiant and worthie knight should be. Then the king Sacridoro and the other Princes, when they sawe that sodain and soueraigne fauour which was come vnto them, & how that their enimies were brought into a greater straight than they were before, al∣though they were verie wearie and ouercome with labour, yet the ioy which they receiued did renue in them so great strength, that they returned vpon their enimies, and slewe many of them with their terrible blowes, & the feare which the knights of Don Siluerio receiued by the great prowesse of the knight of the Sunne and the Troyan was such, that there was not one that durst giue anie attempt, but with∣drew themselues all that euer they could, for which cause O∣ristedes in companie with the king Sacridoro, and the other Princes, remained in the ship as sufficient for to defend the same, and the two brethren leapt into the ship of their eni∣mies, as in  and contention the one of the other, they be∣gan to wound and to slaie their enimies, and kept such a stur amongst them, in killing some and making other some to fal into the water, and other some to run away for to saue them∣selues, that in a small time there remained in the ships none for to make anie defence. Then Don Siluerio who did be∣holde
all this that passed, with great sorrowe and griefe of heart he complained against fortune, for that she was so con∣trarie vnto him, and for that hee knew not the knight of the Sunne, but sawe with his eies the great wonders and va∣liant deedes done by him, he thought verilie that it was some diuell of hell that was come to aide and succour Rosi∣cleer, in séeing the feare that his knights had of him, y• there was not one that durst appeare before him, but ran awaie, so that he was without all hope of the victorie, which caused him with déepe sighs to saie: Ah Oliuia, now I see that it is not Gods will that thou shalt be mine. At which time Fide∣lia had her in her armes in a sound, and séeing the good suc∣cesse which happened vnto them, and how that fortune dyd shew her selfe fauourable, with such diligence as she mini∣stred vnto her, she brought her againe vnto her selfe, and sayde. What is this my Ladie and mistres, arise and comfort your selfe, and beholde the great succour (which God hauing compassion on vs) hath sent vs in such sort that the victorie is verie certaine on your knights behalfe. Then the Prin∣cesse who was as one halfe dead, beholding the battaile, when she sawe that there was none so hardie that durst abide be∣fore Rosicleer and his companions, but ranne awaie from them as from their deaths, she receiued therewith great con∣solation and comfort, and had great hope of the victorie, and being greatlie amazed at the high bountie of the Knight of the Sunne, she asked of her damsell Fidelia who that vali∣ant knight should be: Ah my good Ladie and mistres, sayde Fidelia, in this thing onelie may you consider of the good for∣tune of Rosicleer, for according vnto the wordes which hée sayd at his comming, he should be his brother the knight of the Sunne, who as I haue heard many times, is the knight that in all the worlde is not his like, but the other that is come with him I know not, but his valiant demeanour doth shew that he is one of the best knights that I haue séene. At which words the Princesse receiued great ioy and pleasure, and with better comfort than she had at anie time before,
she arose vp and put her selfe to beholde the battayle, he which did not endure long, for that after that the two bre∣thren had entered into their ship, they almost did yéeld vn∣to them, finding not one that durst abide their furie, for the which Don Siluerio fearing he encounter, and séeming a thing impossible for his knights to haue the victorie, he de∣termined to depart, without all hope of good fortune, finding her at that time so contrarie in all points. So with great sor∣row and griefe he commanded his ship to be vngrapled frō the ship of Rosicleer, and the Pilots to hoise vp sailes, and to depart, the which was nothing grieuous vnto his knightes, greatlie at the mightie valiantnesse and blowes of their aduersaries. The ship wherein was the knight of the Sun and Rosicleer remained, but the other seauen departed with such people as were lost, there were slaine more than halfe of them that came in companie with the Prince, Don Siluerio So when these two breth saw thmsele  of their oimies, they did embrac one ano∣ther with great loue, and their ioy was such, that they could scare speake. At this time came vnto him Oristedes, & the knight of the Sun declared vnto Rosicleer who he was, by whō he was embraced with great ioy & pleasure, but the good Troyan was greatlie amazed at the great beautie of Rosi∣cleer and how boistrous and stout he séemed; when that hée was beholding the great wonders the which he did alone in the ship▪ which caused him to saie within himselfe, that not without great mysterie were these two brethren borne and created with such high bountie, resembling another so much. Then straight waies came vnto them the thrée Princes, and y• king of cornualia, who were verie desirous to sée Rosicleer, as those who sustained great trauaile in his demand, he re∣ceiued thē with great ioy, & embraced them, yéelding thanks for the great pleasure which they had done for him at that present▪ Then came vnto them the good king Sacridoo, whō they did embrace, with great ioy amongst them all to méete together at that present, whereas they gaue one another to vnderstand what they had passed, and by what aduenture
they came thether but when the knight of the Sun vnder∣stood all that was done & passed with his brother Rosicleer and the Princesse Oliuia, he gaue great thankes vnto God, for that it was his will to bring him thether at that instant, and hauing great desire for to see and know her, he sayd, that if it were their pleasures he would go & speak with her. So therewith they went vnto the cabin whereas the Princesse Oliuia & her damsell Fidelia were, who receiued no lesse ioy (to sée her knight frée and at libere of that great perill and danger) than if she had ben made Ladie ouer all the world. And the knight of the Sun and Oristedes verie much mer∣uailed at the great bountie & beautie of the Princesse, who séemed vnto them to be one of the fairest Damsels that was to be found in all the world. Then the knight of the Sunne wold haue kissed her hands, but she wold not consent ther∣vnto, but did embrace him with as great loue as though hée had ben her owne naturall brother the Prince Edward, and th gaue vnto him great thanks for that which he did in her succour. To whom the knight of the Sun answered, that not he alone doth owe that dutie, but also all the world in consideration who she was, ano that he gaue great thankes vnto almightie God, in that he did know her to be his soue∣raigne Ladie and sister. Then the good Troyan Oristedes went and offered to kisse her handes, and yéelded himselfe wholie vnto her grace. The Princesse did surrender vnto him thankes, and receiued great contentment to haue in her companie so high and valiant knights. For with iust reason might be sayd, that there was ioyned together all the boun∣tie and prowesse of the whole world. So all together with great ioy and pleasure, they commanded their shippes to be made in a readinesse, and sayled together towardes the Em∣pire of Grecia. And being at sea, they met with a great and mightie shippe, wherein came the worthie and valiant Prince Clauerindo, who with the company of his vnkle Fla∣mides, brought with them the faire Princesse Lindaraza, And when they knew the one the other, there was great reioycing of all theyr partes, bu in especiallie, béeing
giuen to vnderstand by what strange aduenture the Prince did bring her, and of the good will which he had for to mar∣rie with her, at such time as they should ariue at the migh∣tie Citie of Constantinople, in the presence of the Empe∣rour, the ioy of the brethren was the more, and they recei∣ued Lindaraxa with great loue, vnto whom she séemed to be in all points of great valour, and she lykewise with more ioy and pleasure than euer she receiued before in all her life, went along with them, and gaue great thankes vnto God for that good fortune she had to meete them. Then she embra∣ced with great loue the Princesse Oliuia, who with great ioy dyd receiue her, being either of them verie much amazed at the strange beautie the one of the other, and verie gladde that they should enter together into Grecia. So with great ioye and delight they sailed on their voiage, and had so gal∣lant conuersation amongst themselues, that they neuer felt the trauaile of the sea. There dyd the Princes, Zoylo, Bar∣gandel, and Lyriamandro vnderstand of Rosicleer all his ad∣uentures, and what he had passed in them, after that he de∣parted out of England, who receiued great pleasure to heare him▪ although to the contrarie they did complaine much of him, for that they taking so great paines in séeking of him, with great desire of his companie, he woulde not discouer himselfe vnto them. So passing the time with these and other such like sports they sailed towardes Grecia, and in few daies with prospe∣rous windes they ariued at the port of Constanstinople, and thinking it great reason before that they did dismbarke thē∣selues, to giue the Emperour Trebatio vnderstanding of their ariuall, it was concluded and agréed amongst them, that the king Sacridoro should goe vnto Constantinople, for that he knew the whole discourse of Rosicleer, and sawe by experience the most part of his valiant worthinesse, that hée might declare the same vnto the Emperour and Empresse, and in what sort he doth bring with him the Princesse Oli∣uia and Clauerindo, & Lindaraza, and how they are all toge∣ther in the port of that Citie, readie for to come a shore, and
by reason that the daie was farre spent and the night drew on, they dyd inferre it till the next morning when that the king Sacridoro went a land and did his message. How the knight of the Sunne, Rosicleer, and the other Princes and knigtes, with the Princesses Oliuia & Lin∣daraza, went a land, and were meruailouslie receiued by the Emperour Trebatio, and the Empresse Briana. Chap. 7. WHen the next morning was come, the good King Sacridoro went a land, beeing armed with his whole armour verie richlie, alonely with one Squire, and entered into Constan∣tinople, who finding the Emperour Trebatio and the Empresse Briana in the great hall together, without anie dolour he came in whereas they were, who when they sawe him, receiued him with great ioy and pleasure, as well for that he was so great a friend vnto their sonne Rosicleer, as also because they hoped to heare some newes from him, the which they longed verie much for, for of long time they had not heard from him. Then the king went to kisse the hands of the Emperour, who did embrace him with great loue, and said: King Sacridoro, my verie good friend, you are heartelie welcome into this Countrie, for with your comming I doe receiue great ioy and pleasure. Therefore tel me what is become of your greatest friend Ro∣sicleer, for that I meruaile greatlie that he is not come in your companie, & I am fullie perswaded that it is a great thing that should depart you a sunder. Then the king after that he had done his due reuerence, answered him and said: Mightie Emperour, I came in the companie of Rosicleer, and God forbidde that so long as I liue, I shoulde sepa∣rate my selfe out of his companie, for therewith I receive more honour and contentment, than with all the whole kingdome of Antiochia, the which I holde by his valyant worthinesse. And héere I giue you to vnderstand (most
high renowmed princes) that your mightie valiant & most worthie sonnes, the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer, are in the port of this Citie, accompanied with worthie & vali∣ant princes and knights, and doe bring in their companie, the most excelent and faire princesse Oliuia, daughter vnto the puisant king Oliuerio, whome Rosicleer, falling in loue with, did by force of his strong arme, take out of the court of the king her father, and with one alone shippe (in the which we are come) made his defence at the sea, against more thē sire thousand knights, & there did he shew vnto him a great part of all that had passed in that enterprise, and of the great sorow which he receued for the worthie knight of the Sunne and of Oristedes his friend, as also how by fortune at the sea they met with the prince Clauerindo, who brought in his companie the faire Lindaraza, with her vnckle Fla∣nides, with the whole discourse how he brought her out of the castle, in such sort as he tolde them at the sea. But whē the Emperour and the Empresse heard these newes, they receued great ioy and comfort thereat, & as those who haue great experience in cases of loue, did not greatly meruaile at that which Rosicleer did for the loue of Oliuia, likewise they receued content, for that he had accomplished his desire, being fullie certified that the princesse should inherit the kingdome of great Britaine, after the deceace of the king her father, and how that Rosicleer could not marrie with a damsell in all the world of more higher estate. Also theyr ioy did encreace at the newes of the comming of the knight of the Sunne. Then the Emperour and the Empresse dyd render vnto the king Sacridoro great thankes, for that he would come to bring them so ioyfull newes. And the Em∣perour did straight waies commaund his nobles and wor∣thie princes & knights that were then present in his court, to be in a redinesse for to goe and receue them, who in com∣panie with them all with great pomp & maiestie, went forth of the Citie with so great a troupe, that all those wide and broade fieldes were full of people, for that when the com∣ming of these two princes were published & knowen, there
were few or none that remained, but all went forth for to receue thē. The Emperour went in the middest of all those Princes and knightes, and by him the good King Sacri∣doro, with so graue and seuere countenance, that he dyd very well manifest his high estate. So when that they came vnto the sea port, at the sound of Trumpets & other kinds of instruments, these princes did disembarke themselues a land; Rosicleer brought by the hand his welbeloued princesse Oliuia, who was of so great beautie, that all that did behold her were greatly amazed, so that there grew betwixt diuers great contention, whether that the beautie of the Princes Claridiana did excéede the beautie of the princesse Lindabri∣des, but all in generall said, that Rosicleer had great reason to put himselfe in such perill, for the loue of so faire a ladie. Then straight waies came forth the faire Lindaraza, whose beautie did worke no lesse admiration in the beholders, then the princesse, and was lead by that worthie knight of the Sunne her brother, accōpanied with those renowmed prin∣ces Clauarindo, Bargandel, and Liriamandro, likewise with the Tartarian Zoylo, and the good Troyan Oristedes, and the valiant king Alamades of Cornewaile, all the which came foorth so séemely and richly aryed, that it put in great admiration all them that did behold them. So when they all came before the Emperour (who re∣ceued great ioy and pleasure to sée his two worthie sonnes & those two so excelent Princesses, he went & embraced them with great pleasure & delight, but in especial, the two faire Ladies, saying, I am much more bound vnto God then any other man in the world, and to giue him greater thanks, for that he hath not alone brought mée to the sight and know∣ledging of my two so valiant sonnes, but also by them I haue recouered and obtained for my daughters, two so wor∣thie Princesses, as the like are not to be founde in all the world. How is it that by my desert I am worthie to sée in mine Empire of Grecia, so high and soueraigne beauties, as these worthie peeres are. Then they did hūble thēselues vpon their knées before the
Emperour, and would haue kissed his handes, but the Em∣perour would not consent therevnto, but returned and dyd embrace them a new, & caused them to arise frō the ground, and then with excéeding ioy and pleasure he gaue entertain∣ment vnto his sonnes, and vnto those high Princes and Knights, saying vnto Bargandel, Lyriamandro, & Zoilo: now my verie good friends am I satisfied, séeing that with so ioy∣full comming you wil requite me the euill newes, the which you gaue mée in Constantinople, of the death of my sonne Rosicleer. In this shall your highnesse sée, said Zoylo, how far your good fortune doth extend, & the more to estéeme the acknow∣ledging of your sonne, Fortune wold first present before you those so sodaine and heauie newes of great dolour, that after when it should be found vnto the contrarie, the ioy and plea∣sure might be the more. Then the Emperour did embrace them all one after another, & receiued so great contentment to sée those so worthie knights that brought his sonnes, that he neuer rested, nor could not bée satisfied in giuing thankes vnto almightie God, for exalting him vnto so high estate. Likewise they were no lesse amazed at the surpassing and gentle disposition of the Emperour, and the great maiestie that hée dyd represent in his person, they dyd beholde him with great attention, and sayde within themselues, that hée was worthie to bée Father of those two Myrrors of knight∣hoode throughout all the worlde. And the Princesses Oliuia and Lindaraza receiued meruailous greate contentment to sée what great loue and humanitie he shewed vnto all peo∣ple, and what great ioye and pleasure he receiued of their comming. So after that ther had passed much cōmunication, in this their first méeting, then the other Princes Rodamar∣te and Rodofeo, and other noble men that came in the com∣panie of y• Emperour, went & welcmmed their noble Prin∣ces, who dyd embrace and receiue them with great ioy and loue. This being done, the Emperour and all the rest moun∣ted vpon their horses, and the two princesses vpon their pal∣fraies, which were brought thether for thē, wel garnished, &
tooke their waie towards the mightie Citie of Constantino∣ple, accompanied with so many knightes and Citizens, that all the mightie wide and broade fields seemed to be couered with them. In this sort they entered into the Citie with great maiestie & pompe, whereas was so meruailous sweet noise of all kindes of instruments and musicke, that it was thought (that the entring of Caesar into Rome afer his great victorie) was not equall vnto this, and passing through the stréetes of the Citie, the windowes were furnished with Ladies and damsels, who greatlie meruailed at the strange and excellent beauties of Oliuia and Lindaraza, and praised God of all partes for séeing that daie, in the which the Em∣perour receiued his so worthie sonnes, who brought so great ioy, contentment, honour, and pleasure vnto that mightie Court. So when they came vnto the mightie pallace, Linda∣raza was alighted from her Palsraie in the armes of the knight of the Sunne her brother, and the faire Oliuia in the armes of the Emperour, who would not consent that anie other should doe it, and at their ascending vp into the greate hall, there the Empresse Briana accompanied with al her La∣dies and Gentlewomen came orth and did receiue the two Ladies, embracing them with so great loue, as though they had bene her owne naturall dauhters. But when she sawe the great beautie and soueraigne grace of the Princesse O∣liuia, she receiued within her selfe a meruailous great con∣tentment, and thanked God for the good fortune that Rosi∣cleer had obtained for the recouering of her. Then the Prin∣cesses both of them did knéele downe before the Empresse, & would haue kissed her hands, but she would not consent vn∣the same, but caused them to arise, and with great loue shée sayde. Ah precious and déere daughters, what great pleasure doth my heart receiue, and how ioyfull vnto me is this your comming into this Countrie, and turning vnto Oliuia shee sayd: How much am I bound vnto God, that in loosing the name of a sister in lawe, I doe inioy you for my Daughter. So passing betwixt them many amorous and louing com∣munications, came vnto her the knight of the Sunne and
Rosicleer to kisse her hands, but she dyd embrace them with so great loue, as vnto so noble & worthie persons did apper∣taine. Thē gaue she entertainment vnto all the other Prin∣ces & knights, with so gallant grace & demeanor, that al were contented therwith, & said, that of so high & worthy parents, reason is, that they should bring forth so worthie sunnes. So after that they had spent a good while in these their gréetings & receiuings, they entered into a meruailous faire and great quadran, where al these knights were vnarmed, & had giuen vnto them rich & precious robes to couer them, the which being done, with great ioy they sate downe to dinner, wher∣as they were serued with so great maiestie, as did wel agrée vnto their high estates. Thus with great delight vnto them all, they remained certaine daies making great triumphs, & exercising meruailous feates of armes, whereas the stout Troyan, the king Sacridoro, and the Tartarian Zoylo with the other worthie Princes, gaue such testimonie of their bountie, that from that time forwardes they were estéemed as their worthinisse did deserue. In this time was Rosicleer in so great ioy and pleasure, as before hée sawe himselfe in sorrow and sadnesse, for he had his welbeloued Oliuia in his power, and that there was concluded & finished all his cares and mortall griefs that he had receiued for her cause, so that there as no pleasure in all the world that might be com∣pared vnto his, wherewith he went as one from himselfe, thinking himselfe not worthie to inioy so great glorie. The Princesse Oliuia likewise receiued no lesse contentment, for calling to remembrance the great trauaile & afflictions that she had sustained and passed for her welbeloued friend, and now séeing her selfe frée and cléere from them all, and put in so high estate, she thought verilie that there was not a Ladie nor Gentle woman in all the world so fortunate as shée, so that the ioy of them both was without comparison, which was cleane contrarie vnto the knight of the Sunne, for that he found not there the Princesse Claridiana, her ab∣sence caused vnto him great anguish and griefe. And béeing in such sort, that hée could not suffer nor abide it, he deter∣mined
straight waies to depart toward Trapisonda, at such time as he saw that the Emperour his Father was most in quiet, and when that his departure should lesse grieue him, otherwise he would not for all the world doe that whereby he should receiue anie displeasure. For you shall vnderstand that this knight and Rosicleer his brother, amongst all other vertues with the which they were indued, this did surmount all the rest, for that there was not a knight in all the world that better dyd loue their Father than these two, for that they did not alonelie serue and honour him, but the more to exalt his maiestie, not one of them in his presence woulde make anie estimation of themselues, but would that all ho∣nour and reuerence should be giuen vnto him onlie, who for the worthinesse of his person dyd deserue the same. So that the knight of the Sunne, for not displeasing him in his de∣parture, did passe awaie his anguish and griefes as well as he could, thinking euerie houre a whole yéere till such time as he might sée his Claridiana. This might be a spectacle vn∣to all such as hath Fathers, for to procure and doe as this knight did, for to make equall his pastimes and pleasures vnto the troubles and necessities of his Father, alwaies de∣siring and procuring his honour more than his owne, ha∣uing before his eyes neuer to haue quietnesse nor rest, at such time as his father is in anie trouble, for that the gift of the father, although it be not profitable to his possessions, yet is hée most excellent to giue counsaile, and profitable vnto the sonne: and is neuer wel knowen till such time as hée is lost, when that with many sighs and teares it ought to bée bewailed. Who is he that would not séeme to be a good child vnto his parents, if he do well consider how troublesome his bringing vp hath bene vnto them, and how that his life is but a burthen of anger and sorrowes, sonnes of great griefe, a continuall labour & timerous care? How many times are we the occasion to make frustrate their desires, & a breaking of their sound sléepes, taking awaie their stomackes, y• they cannot eate, and with our fained teares, disturbe their p∣sures? How many sodain feares & griefs caused by y• vaance
of our actions, and many times the disgrace and death of the sonnes, is cause of the death of their mothers. And y• which is more, many with the ouermuch pleasure and ioy receiued, to heare how that their children be aliue, dieth sodainlie, as it chanced vnto those two, the same daie that they returned vnto Rome, that dyd remaine and escaped from the losse of Trasimeno, when as they sawe their sonnes aliue, whereas before it was certified them that they were slaine, and ha∣uing no measure to eschue so great and sodaine ioy, dyd die presentlie therewith. Therefore séeing that the loue of the parents is so great vnto their children, he is worthy of great punishment that doth not honour them, and shall haue lesse reason to leaue vndone, that which is a common Prouerbe, that the whole fault consisteth in the Father, for that many times the hardnesse of the Father is profitable vnto the sonne, and alwaie the cockering of them is hurtfull, because we that be sonnes and youthfull, be alwaies stubburne, and cannot be mollified but by stubburnnesse, as many times it falleth out, that the pittiful Chyrurgion leaueth the wound euill cured, wherof did grow the olde custome that was vsed amongst the Romanes, that not alonelie Princes and Con∣sulles, vnto whome was giuen the whole power ouer the common wealth against such as did offend, but also all per∣ticular fathers had iurisdiction ouer their children, to punish them, and to put them in prison, tormenting them, yea, and to put them to death. The crueltie of Cassio and Fuluio was much estéemed in putting to death of their sonnes, not for that they did hate them▪ but because they coulde not correct their customes. So that the sonne must vnderstand that the good Father must not séeke who should cocker & make much of him, but one that may doe him good. And many thinges doth séeme vnto the sonne to be verie hard & terrible, which seemeth vnto the Father to be verie profitable. Neither is he deceiued therein, for that his affection is not with passi∣on, and youth hath no more consideration than that which is before his eies, and waring riper in yéeres, he séeth many things a fare of, and alwaies the seueritie of the father, is
more profitable vnto the sonne than méeknesse. It is a strange thing to consider, that a man can better suffer the hardnesse of a tyrannous maister, than of his owne Father, the which although they be not alowable, yet should not they reproue their fathers, but rather suffer them. We reade that Alexander did neuer incurr so great reproch, as in that hee dyd not onelie rebuke his Father, but that hée was also en∣uious, and receiued griefe at his ertollings. Wise men saie, that there is no superioritie on the earth more iuster than that of the Father, nor more honester subiection than that of the sonne, therefore let children honour their parents, & shew their due duties vnto them with reuerence: and not doing the same, it is a iust sentence that rebellious sonnes doth suf∣fer. And this punishment is not so small, but vnto him that suffereth, it séemeth verie much, for that there is nothing that doth so much afflict and torment the minde of man, as an iniurious word spoken by a rebellious childe. And as by these two worthie knights, all children may take an ensam∣ple, so lykewise there is to be noted, the great parte that is their fathers, as appeareth by this Emperour, that deserued to be so estéemed and beloued with so great reuerence of his sonnes, considering his excellent vertues, and the great loue that he bare vnto them, did constraine them for to loue him, and shew him humble reuerence. Also when that their sons doe not proue to be good, then ought their Fathers to suffer and beare with them, til such time as their childhood is past, then after as they doe increase, to correct their vnbrideled nature, forcing them to leaue their vice, wherto they are in∣clined, and to learne to embrace vertue, which is the badge of all Christians. Dauid & Methridates king of Pontus, and Seuerus Em∣perour of Rome, did suffer and beare with their rebellyous sonnes. Affricano dyd heartelie loue his sonne, although in nothing he did resemble him, but cleane contrarie to him in his vertues. Héere we will leaue these admonitions vnto auncient and olde men, who hath greater authoritie to giue them. Returning to our Hystorie, which saith, that the Em∣perour
Trebatio and the Empresse Briana, receiued meruai∣lous great ioy, contentment, and pleasure, to sée in their com∣panie their two so valiant and obedient sonnes, accompani∣ed with so high and  ompanie. Likewise they were ioyfull that the Prince Clauerindo was so desirous to mar∣rie with the faire Lindaraza, and thereto asked the good wil o the Emperour and the Empresse, who at the request and desire of the knight of the Sunne dyd graunt it vnto him, whereat Clauerindo receiued great ioye and pleasure, and shewed himselfe verie pleasant and gallant for the same, and wrote vnto the king Oristedes his father, that he would thinke well thereof, and to request the Emperour Trebatio to thinke well of the same. Thus as the Court of that mightie Emperour was in great ioy and pleasure, with this gallant companie, came thether at that present the wise Artemidoro, and béeing knowen who he was, he was meruailouslie well receiued of the Emperour, and of those Princes and Knights there present, but in especiall of Rosicleer, who calling to remem∣brance what he had sayd and done for him, did beare him so great loue as vnto his naturall brother. Héere did the wise Artemidoro aske the Empresse Briana, if shée did remem∣ber at such time as she was first troubled with passions, how that a Nymph out of the Fountaine of water, dyd giue her comfort and consolation, giuing her to vnderstand that it was done by his arte, and how if shee dyd call it well to re∣membrance (that next vnto God) shée was by that consola∣tion comforted at that present, who séeing that al that which the wise man had sayde was alreadie fulfilled and come to passe, shée knew not how for to gratifie him for so greate a benefite done vnto her: but hée was meruailouslie ho∣noured of her, the Emperour, his sonnes, and of all that were there present. Then did Artemidoro (as one that dyd knowe it verie well) make manifest all that had passed with Rosicleer, from the time of his first birth vnto that present, ioyntlie with all that which had passed by the Emperour with the Em∣presse
Briana, collected into one booke, which did declare all things perticularlie, as though he had béene present at the doing: whereat the Emperour was meruailouslie ioyfull, & gaue vnto the wise man great thankes or the same. So that the Emperour and all the  Princes and knightes that dyd reade those wonders, meruailed greatlie at the strange thinges which Rosicleer had passed, and were verie glad that all his trauailes & troubles for loue were brought to so good an end. And for that there was not written, nor anie mencion made of the wonderful acts done by the knight of the Sunne, the Emperour dyd aske of the wise man wherfore they were forgotten? Who answered him in the presence of all the nobles in the Court, that hée dyd leaue off the writing of them, for that there was another greate wise man who had better intelligence thereof than hée, and had the charge for to write and put in memorie all things that toucheth the knight of the Sunne, and how that before long time doe passe they shall sée him in that Court, who will discouer by writing so many wonderfull and straunge acts, that neuer shall bée forgotten so long as the worlde en∣dureth. And although the mightie Emperour Trebatio and all that were with him, did not vnderstand who that wise man should be of whom he spake of, yet did the knight of the Sunne know that it was the wise Lyrgandeo, and was ve∣rie gladde to heare him saie that he would come vnto that Court, for that hée desired much to sée him, with his nephew king Florion, and did not forget that which for him hée had done, and was verie desirous to haue opportunitie to grati∣fie him for the same. But when the Prince Clauerindo had tolde vnto him the misfortune at sea that happened vnto the Prince Brandizel his sorrow was so great, that many daies after hée verie heauie and sadd, thinking verilie that his verie friend Brandizel had béene lost. But the wise Ar∣temidoro who knew it to the contrarie, to put remedie to his sorrowe, tolde him that hée was safe and sound, and in a place greatlie to his contentment, and how that he shoulde sée him verie shortlie.
The knight of the Sunne gaue him great thankes for the same, and the wise man in the meane time that he was in the Court dyd write with his owne hand in the fore front of that mightie Pallace, in greate Letters, that all men might reade it, a Prophesie, which sayd as followeth. At such time as the mightie shepheard hath best kept & gathered together his locke, shall come the braue and stout Lions with rauenous and hungrie wrath, and betwéene her and the most stout Lion, shall passe a verie cruell and peril∣lous contention, and being put a sunder by the mightie shep∣heard, the stout Lion shall fall at the roaring of the furious Lions, and for a long time shal loose his name, till such time as the roaring of the sayd Lions doth awake him, and with her strong armes raise him vp againe. At that time shal the mightie shepheard be verie heauie, and there shall come vp∣pon him the great she Beare verie irefull, and in her com∣panie so many Wolues and dreadfull Tygers, that shall make all the world to wonder, and the locke of the mightie shepheard by them shall be scattered abrode, and the gréene and flowred fields shall be turned into red coulour, and the earth shal séeme as though it had rained much bloud. The huge and mightie riuers shall burst out of their course, and the wide and broade seas shall chaunge the coulour of their profound waters, shewing the great earthquake that shall come. Then afterward the daie shall come, that the Sunne at noone tide shal be , loosing the greater part of his light and brightnesse, a which verie instant, the mig∣tie shepheard shall be in great care and perplexitie, and all his slock dispearsed abroade, and at the point to be lost, but straight waies the San shal  his whole brightnes, & the Lion brought by the stout Lions, by her immortat déeds shall recouer his lost name, and by his comming, the migh∣tie shopheard shall gather together his good locke, and with o great courage shall returne vpon those hungrie Walus Tygers, that they  kil the most part of them, and those withshall remaine, shall slie and leau the Coun∣trie desolate. And héere the Griffins that came  the new
world against the mightie shepheard, shal lose their furious wrath and betwixt them and those of his lock, shalbe made great friendship and very profitable. The she beare with the mightie he beare, shalbe taken prisoners by new enimies, & being deliuered by the stout Lion, shalbe made friends with the mightie shepheard. And at the request of the Lyon and Lionesse, they shall come together, and of that societie shall proceede one that the deedes past, shall make all mortalitie e forgotten. Beare this in your minde, for as I haue saide, so it shall come to passe. This Prophesie béeing written by the wise Artemidoro, the Emperour and all those worthie Princes and Knights did behold it. And as they vnderstoode verie little what it did signifie, they were greatly amazed at the great vnderstan∣ding of the wise man: and desired him to declare somewhat the meaning thereof, but he excused himselfe, saying, that it was not giuen vnto him for to declare that which was to come, but to make manifest vnto them by figures: for that if it should fall out to proue to the contrarie, it would be the occasion of great daunger, harme & perill. But yet notwith∣standing all shal come to passe in such sort, that the time shal declare it, and make it most manifest. These & many other things did this wise Artemidoro declare vnto them, that if they had not bene of noble courage, his prophesies had put them in great wonder & feare. So they being in great ioye, pastimes and pleasures in the mightie Citie of Constanti∣nople, (although to the contrarie great sorow & griefe vnto the knight of the Sunne, for that the Empresse Claridiana, his mistresse, was not there present) this Historie doth leaue them, till time doe serue, for to tell you what Don Siluerio dyd, that returned vnto great Britaine. How the Prince Don Siluerio, without all hope of the reco∣uery of the Princes Oliuia, her returne vnto great Britaine, and of all that was determined in the court of the King Oliuerio. Chap. 8.
THE wrath and anger was very great that Don Siluerio receued, in that he was past all hope of recouerie of the princesse Oliuia, by reason that the most part of his knights were slaine, and she remaining in the pow∣er of Rosicleer, the thing that he most lo∣ued in all the world, without any hope of recouerie. And a∣gaine, séeing that the princes his friends with the king Ala∣mades, that went in his companie, became his enimies, and likewise remembring the great furie and stoutnesse of them with whome he had the battaile, with great complaints we∣pings and lamentations, he bewayled his misfortune, which was vnto him so contrarie, and so fauourable vnto his eni∣mies. So in the ende of certaine daies after his departure, he ariued in great Britaine, and going a land he sent the king word of his ariuall, appareling himselfe and all such knights as came with him in black and mourning apparell, and so entered into the mightie Citie of London, whereas the king did receue him, to whome with great sorow and griefe he gaue the King to vnderstande of all that had happened vnto him at the sea. And because at that present the rancour and mallice which he had against the Emperour Trebatio, was great in him, for the death of prince Edward his sonne, he was very glad that he had so good occasion and oportunitie to arme himselfe against him, & therefore did not onely com∣fort y• prince Don Siluerio to folow his poysoned enterprise, to take reuengement against him, but did rather procure to kindle his wrath the more, in saying, that vnto them both it should be a perpetuall dishonour, if they did not procure the reuengement, the iniurie offered was so great, and that it were better for them to dye in the quarrell, then to liue in so great dishonour for euer. Then the Prince who desired no other thing, but verie ioyfull to see that the king was wholly of his minde and de∣termination, made a great Othe, that he would neuer take to him wife in marriage, till such time as that great iniurie
done by Rosicleer, were reuenged. So that straight it was agréed betwixt them both, that it should be praise to take reuengement. The King commaunded all the nobles of his Court to come together to a parle, & being come together, he put them in remembraunce of the death of his sonne prince Edward, how he was slaine by the Emperour Trebao, and then of the spoyling and carying away of the Princesse Oliuia, don by his sonne Rosicleer: shewing and perswading them by many reasons, how much they were bound to procure re∣uengement of that great iniurie. And although that there were some to whome the determination of the king semed nothing good, yet in the ende they all concluded and agréed, that all should be done as he thought best, and that out of hand they should begin to muster and procure souldiers and men of war to be made in a readinesse, for to passe the seas, and to enter into Grecia. And although Don Siluerio had there with him manie knights of Lusitania, yet did he promise to retourne into his countrie, and to bring from that kingedome, and also ot of Spaine, a great number, for that he that was King of Spaine at that present, was a verie great friend vnto his father, and he was verie certaine that he would not denie to helpe and ayde him with all the force and strength he could possible. He béeing willing to put all things in effect, tooke his leaue of the King and departed straightwaies from great Britaine, and put himselfe vnto the rough and boysterous Seas, taking his voyage towards Lusitania. In the meane time King Oliuerio, did ordaine and made in a redinesse all the people that possible he could, and writ his letters vnto all kinges that were his friends, as well Christians as Pa∣gans, geuing them to vnderstande of the great iniurie and wrong done vnto him, in murthering his onely sonne and heire of his kingdome, and then his daughter to be stolen and caried away: requesting of them all fauour possible, to helpe him to take reuengement for the same.
that to conclude, some there were that for verie friend∣ip and loue, did ayde him. And other some for the ill will they bare vnto the Gréekes, of very enuie of their prosperi∣ies, dyd ayde and help hm, and not onely with their people, but with their owne proper persons,  vnto the King Oliuerio, and there was so great hast and diligence made in the executing thereof, that many daies was not past, whan that in great Britaine there was ioyned together more then ne hundred and fiftie thousand knights, where as the Hi∣storie doth leae them, putting all things in good order, as appertained vnto so valiant an enterprise, for to tell you of other things that happened in the meane time. How that the Princesse Lindabrides did craue of her father the Emperour Alicandro, reuengement of the knight of the Sunne, and how the Emperour at her request, did call a Parliament, and what happened in the same. Chap. 9. IN great confusion and alteration remained the whole Court of the Emperour Alican∣dro, for so sodaine departure of the knight of the Sunne, but aboue all the rest, was the fayre Princes Lindabrides, whose lyfe was so full of sorow and griefe, that manie times she was at the point of death. And there was nothing that could comfort her▪ in séeing that y• knight of the Sunne was departed and returned to his owne countrie, and was verie certaine, that if once he came into the presence of the princes Claridiana, it were past all remedie for him to haue her any more in his remembraunce, so that she might vrie well abandon her selfe of all hope, euer to sée him any more: the which was more bitter & grieuous vnto her, then death. And cōsidering with her selfe by reason of the great loue she bare vnto him, that it should be great comfort vnto her, and remedie for her griefe, if that she did once againe returne in∣ Grecia, by what maner of meanes so euer it was she ca∣red not, thinking by that meanes for to disturbe the knight
of the Sunne, that he shoulde not haue aie time nor space for to serue the Princesse Claridiana, neither for to marrie with her, for the which to put in effect the  nothing so good as for to craue reuengement of the Emperour her a∣ther, for the iniurie done by the knight of the Sunne, which might be the occasion that he with all his power should passe into Grecia, and to tarrie her with him thether to be crow∣ned Empres of Grecia, séeming by those meanes the knight of the Sunne shall be constrained to doe perforce, y• before he wold not by his frée will, the which she put in vre accor∣ding vnto her thought. And as many times the Emperour her father came into her closet to visit & comfort her (where∣as she continuallie remained and neuer went abroe) vpon a daie when that hée was fullest of griefe comforting her, whose sorrow pricked him to the verie heart, for the greate loue hée bare vnto her. The Princesse shedding many teares from her christaline eies, said. It is lost labour, my Lord and Father, for to comfort or giue anie consolation vnto this vnhappie and vnfortunate Damsell your Daughter, for that thers is nothing that can remedie nor helpe mée but onelie the death, the which if the high Gods were so pleased, were so high ee, that I could not make an end of this my speaking, for that death were a great deale better vnto mee, than to liue, for to feele and suffer so great an iniurie as tha which the nigh of the Sunne hath done against you and mee, for if you my Lord would consider thereof as is right and reason, you woulde leaue off comorting of your Daughter, and  by all meanes that this our reproch may bée , wherewith if pesencie I should depart out of this world, I should ge with comfort, but of the  that from their high Throe they ill yeele seeing that you doe so little esteme it.  should other Damselles of base birth looke for,  that a Dam∣sell of so high estate as I am,  oweth participate with the diuine  of the hgh Gods, and being  by one alone  griefe
of her great wrong, nor anie that will take vpon him to aunswere the quarrell. With great reason therefore from this daie forwardes, may your vassalles and subiectes take heart at grasse, and bée bolde to rise vp against you, seeing that you will put vp such an iniurie and euill proffer, done against you by one alone Knight, and an enimie vnto your lawe, and will suffer mée that am your Daughter to liue without reuengement. My Lord and Father, I praie you beholde and consider your high estate, which is such, that all the kinges and Lordes of the Orient are obedient at your commandement and seruice, and doeth honour and reue∣rence you as a parent and kinsman vnto the immortall Gods, and if now you doe dissemble this great iniurie which vnto you and mée hath béene committed, without making cruell reuengement, you shall neither bée feared nor estée∣med, but had in lesse reputation than héeretofore you haue béene, and your honour ouerthrowne from the throne, which your predecessours vntill this present daie hath maintai∣ned and vpholden. And that which séemeth to bée worst of all, is, that the diuine prouidence will féele and acknow∣ledge part of this great iniurie, the which I do most earnest∣lie praie and desire, that they doe not execute against you their wrath, in that you haue neglected to take reuenge∣ment. For this cause onelie hath the diuine Gods giuen vn∣to you this high estate, exalting and placing you aboue all other that are in the world, because you should execute iust∣lie héere vpon the earth, as they haue ordained in their di∣uine Consistorie. This faire Damsell had not so soone concluded these her wordes, when that the Emperour her Father vnderstan∣ding the effect of her omplaint, with great griefe and sor∣rowe vnto his heart, béeing full of anger and wrath, arose vp, and laide his hand vpon his head, as vpon a precious re∣like, and said these wordes following. Héere I doe sweare vnto thée by this sacred head, and by the diuine Deitie, that I doe participate of the immor∣tall Gods, for to goe with all my power into Grecia, and
in reuengement of this great iniurie to mée done, I will de∣stroie the Emperour Trebatio, and giue a cruell and disho∣noured death vnto his wife and children, and crowne thée my daughter, for Empresse of that Empire. So with this con∣clusion, & without speaking anie moe words, hee went forth of her Closet, and calling together certaine of his counsaile, he concluded that a Parliament shoulde bée proclaimed throughout all his kingdomes and dominions, commaun∣ding all Kinges, Princes, and Nobles of the same, to come vnto the sayd Parliament in paine of death. Lykewise hée did write Letters of greate loue vnto other Ilandes that were not subiect vnto him, which were inhabited with Gy∣ants and furious people, requesting them to come vnto his Court of Parliament. Among all, hée wrote a Letter vn∣to Bradaman Campeon, who was returned into his Coun∣trie againe, the effect thereof was as followeth. GRan Campion, Lorde of the Orientall Ilandes that are in the Octian Sea, I doe beleeue that it is manifest vnto thée the iniurie done by the Gréeke Prince vnto our sacred estate, and the great offence that hee did vnto th immortall Gods, therefore now thou shalt vnderstand that by the vertue of that part of the diuine deitie that is in vs, it is concluded in our diuine Consistorie, that order shoulde bée taken in such sorte, that reuengement may be taken for the same, in such ample wise, that the whole Empire of Grecia may bée destroyed downe to the ground, and not to leaue one stone vpon another, as a iust punishment for the offendours, and an example to all others, howe they shall offende against the diuine maiestie. For the  end, to the executing of the same, wée doe desire  in this en∣terprise thy fauour maye bée the first, for that as the diui Gods haue created thee so strong and mightie ouer all mortall creatures, so lywise art thou maintaine and defend their diuine honours, to make reuengement of this Prince hath done vnto vs.
Héerein I do inlarge no farther, but abiding thy comming, for to haue thy opinion what were best to be done héerein. Written in our sacred Court, &c. When that Bradaman had receiued this Letter, in all his life he was not so glad and ioyfull, for that occasion dyd so erue, that hée might execute that great anger and wrath that hée had conceiued against the knight of the Sunne, be∣cause it was a great shame vnto him that hée was ouercome by him, and hée could not forget that great iniarie receiued, but had as much desire to bée reuenged for the same. And you shall vnderstand that this Bradaman had at that time a sonne of twentie yéeres olde, the most brauest and iercest creature that euer was séene by men: of whome shall bee made more mencion in this Hystorie. Bradaman had not this sonne by a faire Gentlewoman, but of the cruellest and furious in condition amongest al women, for that after y• by the mightie power of his person he came to bée Lorde ouer the Orientall Ilands, which was a kinde of people which for their fiercenesse neuer before could be brought in subiection, he determined within himselfe, for that he would not that that Segniorie should be lost after his death) to procure to haue so valiant a sonne, who for the worthinesse of his per∣son should be sufficient to sustaine that estate, as he did get it in his life time. And with this determination and desire, he made many sacrifices vnto the Gods, desiring them to giue him such a sonne to bée his heire, of no lesse force and strength than he was for the defence of those kingdomes. At the same time there was in one of those Ilandes a wo∣man of so stout and furious condition, & of so great strength, that with her owne handes shée slew a great number of gy∣ants, and other terrible and dreadfull beasts. Bradaman did know her, in such sorte, that nature working in her by the will of the high Gods, shée was deliuered of that furious and fierce sonne, and gaue him to name Bramarant. At whose birth Bradaman his Father was verie ioyfull, and caused him for to bée nourished with the milke of Lions and Tygers, and other arious beases, such as were to
be found in those partes, and would neuer consent that hée should proue of his mothers breasts, for that he would his sonne should be the more fierce and strong. In this sort hée was nourished, so that afterward it appeareth that the dou∣ble strength and fiercenesse of the Father and o his mother, was comprehended in him, with the aide of the milke that he sucked, which did worke such effect in him, that when he came to twelue yéeres of age, he would go alone into the de∣serts & mountaines, without anie armour more than certain sodden skins hardned in the Sun, and would seeke out the strong Lions and fierce Tygers, with other furious beasts, and all that euer he could take, he would teare them to peeces with his hands, as though they had bene young and tender Kids. He would eate no other meate in all the time of his hunting, but the milke of those she wild beasts that he met withall, and sometimes of the flesh of the most fuious best that he killed, and that should be rawe. But when that hée grew vnto more yeres, he left of his hunting of wild beasts, and fell to exercising himselfe in armour & feates of armes, in such sort, that his great force and strength was verie déere vnto a great number, for that he would neuer heare reason in the triall of his strength, as did become good and curte∣ous knightes, but without anie occasion in the wolde, ee would haue contention with all them that he met withall, béeing armed, without anie feare, if they were two, twen∣tie, or thirtie, with them all hée woulde contend and kill them, tearing them in péeces with so great cuelte, that hée was feared of all, & could finde none that was able to make rsistance against him, although all the  of those I∣lands were verie stout and couragious, and almost all Gy∣ants. And or that Nature dyd shew her selfe uch auou∣rable vnto Bramarant, the Hystorie sayth that hee was not in stature of his bodie so , but hee was as bigge as anie knight might  Gyant, and of so mightie, huge, and great members, that what∣soeuer hée lacked in his height, hée  it comprehended in his bignesse, and was of so great force and strength, that
there was no equalitie in that of Milo, of whom they saie, that there was not his lyke in all the whole world, for that he dyd things that séemed to bée incredible to all that dyd sée them, and besides his great strength, he was so swit and light, that he would ouertake Lions, and other wilde beasts in the plaine running after them▪ This young Bramarant séeing himselfe to bée so pusant and mightie aboue all others, was so stout and proude, that at such time as he came to twentie yéeres of age, there was not one (if hée were dis∣pleased with him) that durst come into his presence, so y• in all those Oriental Ilands he was feared, & more estéemed thā his Father, and was not content that they had him for their Lord, but also would bée worshipped of his as their princi∣pall God, and said that al the Gods the which they did wor∣shippe, had no power ouer him, neither were they equall in valour. And Bradaman his Father séeing him so feared and reuerenced of all, and how great and mightie his strength & fiercenesse was, was thereof excéedinglie  ioyfull, be∣léeuing of a certaine, that it was not possible for him to loose his kingdomes, hauing so valiant and strong a sonne. So at such time as the Letter of the Emperour Alicandro came vnto his hands, there was present with him his sonne Bra∣marant, who when that hee heard the Letter read, he tooke a great desire for to goe with them into Grecia, and thought the time long to sée himselfe on the iourney, and requested his Father that hée might goe with him, for that hée would that his mightie power were manifest vnto all the worlde. Then Bradaman who desired no other thing did graunt him lisence, and out of hand they entered their iourney towards the Court of the Emperour Alycandro, Bramarant caused to bee made for himselfe armour all of little bones of small fishes that they finde in those seas, of so great hardnesse, that neither sword nor anie other weapon could cut or breake it, it was of the same making that the Princes Meridian his armour was, which afterward the knight of the Sunne ad, yet this of Midian was more ier and of greater orce. Bramarant caused his armour to bée garnished with
golde and precious stones, wherwith after they were made, hée was so proude and furious, that hee had neithe seare nor dreade of all the worlde. Then Bradaman called before him twelue kings, Captaines of his Ilandes, who were as the Hystorie declareth great and mightie Gyants, and in the companie of them and his sonne Bramarant tooke his iour∣ney towards the Court of the Emperour Alycandio. So when they came thether, they were of the Emperour mer∣uallouslie well receiued and entertained, as of him that sée∣med to haue great néede of their helpe. In the meane time y• they there tarried, till all the whole hoast were ioyned toge∣ther, Bramarant did many & mightie feates of armes, where∣in he gaueful testimonie who he was, putting so great won∣der in all them that did behold him, that with great admi∣ration they sayd, that the Gods did put vpon that knight all their powers and strengths, for the punishment and destruc∣tion of the Christians. Wherewith the Emperour was ve∣rie ioyfull, and did them all great honour, and it seemed vn∣to him, that if they alone with their people should passe into Grecia, they were sufficient to destroye the whole Empire and power of the Christians. How the Emperour Alicandro did consult with the Nobles of his Court, about their iourney into Grecia, and what Bramarant did concerning the same. Chap. 10. AFter that the Parliament was proclaimed by the commandement of  Emperour A∣licandro, there were few  Lordes amongst the Pagans in Asia but came the∣ther, and being all together in the greate Citie of Neptaya, the Emperour entered in∣to the Parliament house with all his whole assemblie of Kings, Princes, and other noble men, wheeas there was placed his Emperiall seate in his roome appointed, hang round about with cloth of golde, and somewhat more below was the places for the rest made, of verie fine and shining
siluer, whereas this mightie Emperour when he was set in his Emperiall seate (which was all of fine gold and precious stones) and all the other kings and Lords, euerie one in his degrée, which was to the number of more than one hundreth, silence being commanded, with great maiestie of his roiall person, hée dyd pronounce vnto them these wordes fol∣lowing. LOiall subiets, true vassalls, and my verie friendes, im∣mortal thanks I render vnto the high Gos, not onlie for that it hath pleased them to place me in this high and sacred estate, in making mee Lorde ouer so many Countries and innumerable riches, but also for that it hath pleased their di∣tne maiesties to consent (which is a thing more to bee estée∣med than all the rest) that amongst so many mightie kings and noble Lordes that are héere present, and subiect vnto this sacred Empire, there is not one amongst you but hath béene (and I suppose will bée) loiall and faithfull, which is the thing that Princes ought to haue in greatest price, for that it is no lesse perillous and daungerous vnto a King that hath a peruerse and an vnreasonable subiect, than for a man of meaner or baser sorte to haue a strong and mightie eni∣mie. So that now for that I am fullie perswaded and certe∣fied of the great fidelitie & truth that you haue alwaies vsed vnto me. I haue requested you al to come vnto this assembly & Court of Parliament, for to communicate with you cou∣ching a matter whereof you are not ignorant, not for that therein you should do ought to accomplish my will, but that you should aide and helpe me with your good counsailes, for that in great and profound matters one must propone, and many must determine. I thinke it is not néedfull to make much relating thereof, because it is well knowen vnto you all, how the knight of the Sunne, and sonne vnto the Em∣perour of Grecia came into this land, and was receiued & en∣tertained by vs, with so great loue and good will, as though it had bene the Prince Meridian our sonne. Likewise how that it was our pleasure to marrie him vnto the Princesse
Lindabrides our daughter, the which was almost concluded and celebrated, whether it was his euil hap, or vnhappie for∣tune, vpon a night he departed, and left our daughter flou∣ted, & vs astonied & ashamed, in recompence of the great ho∣nour that we did and shewed vnto him. All the which doth not grieue vs so much for our parte, for the euill sact done vnto vs, as it doth for the great offence done therein vnto the immortall Gods, beleeuing that a greater could not haue bene inuented vpon the earth, nor a thing more contrarie a∣gainst their diuine maiestie. What Emperor, King, Prince, or Knight amongst mortall men, that durst be so bold as to refuse or take vnto his wife the Princes Lindabrides, being successour, descending from the diuine stocke, but this onelie knight of the Sunne. Of truth and with great reason may the diuine Gods execute their wrath vppon vs, if so be that we doe not reuenge this great iniurie done vnto vs, and of∣fence vnto their diuine maiesties: and with no lesse reason their diuine iustice may fall vpon you, if that (not onely with your subiects and goods) but also your selues in person doe not procure to make this reuengemēt. A man ought to haue a respect vnto the griefes & offences done vnto themselues, but much more the wrongs which are done against the high Gods. We doe well vnderstand, that for to take reuenge∣ment of the knight of the Sun, it cannot be so easilie done, but it will cost vs many people and much treasure, yea, and our owne persons in the performance thereof, but yet consi∣dering your mightie power, strength, and valiant hearts, we doe beleeue that it doth not astonish you, neither do you feare to take vppon you this iourney, for that greate delayes doth proceede of little prudence, and feare, of great coward∣nesse, but heroicall knightes, such as doe procure to haue a fame in al the world, with equal courage ought to offer their persons in doubtfull attempts as well as in prosperous af∣faires, & with like constancie to harden themselues against afflictions, as vnto delights & pleasures. Of our owne part, we doe saie, y• although our yéeres doth require more to take rest & ase in our owne Countrie, than to trauaile into ano∣ther,
yet if it so be concluded that we shall take this iourney vpon vs, so farre off, and so costlie, wée will that you doe no more therein, than you sée vs to doe, as trauailing by the waie, nauigating by Sea, cléering our passage, assaulting our enimies, in all these wée will bée the first, and not the last. To conclude, our verie good friends are desirous to be reuen∣ged of this great iniurie done vnto vs by the knight of the Sun, & that you wold not thinke (agreeing héereto with vs) that these our white haires shall lacke good wil for to passe into Grecia, for that if once wée come thether▪ wée hope in the immortall Gods, (not alonelie to bee reuenged of this iniury done vnto vs) but also to make subiect vnto our con∣secrated estate that whole Empire. And wée are fullie per∣swaded that the diuine prouidence hath permitted this of∣fence to be done, that we should haue occasion for to destroie the whole power of the Christians. We do not meane héere∣by to bring vnto your remembrance, how oftentimes it hap∣pened in times past in this Countrie, the Emperors & Cap∣taines of Rome came, not onlie to make reuengement of the iniuries & offences done vnto themselues, but also for them that were their friends & subiects vnto y• Empire of Rome, in executing whereof, they did neither respect the largenesse of their iourney, expenses of their treasures, neither the tra∣uaile of their persons, so y• their camps & armies were as cō∣mon in Asia, as in Italie or Rome: so that in consideration, if those onelie for the honor of their friends did little estéem their long trauailes into those Countries, wherefore should we thinke it much, in reuenging of our owne iniuries, to passe into Grecia. Wée desire the high Gods y• no such cow∣ardnesse may be found in your noble minds, neither so many mightie kings & Princes as be here present to consent to the contrarie, but y• this great iniurie should be reuenged. Now séeing that we haue declared vnto you the occasion of calling you together vnto this our court of Parliament, we do desire you so let vs haue your iudgements vpon this that we haue proponed, hoping to haue it in so ample sort as alwaies wée haue receiued at your hands.
When all those that were present with the Emperour had well heard the words that were spoken, and that concer∣ning the same he had asked their counsailes, yet his deter∣mined purpose was for to passe into Grecia, so that ther was amongst them some that were verie glad and ioyfull for the same, and other some that did not like of the iourney, as it is a naturall thing amongst men, in like affaires to be of con∣trarie opinions. The Emperour at that time did looke for their answere, but nothing was supplied, til such time as they did all together desire the old king of Gedrosia in the name of them all to answere vnto the Emperours proposition, for that he was estéemed in all those kingdomes to be wise, and one that was well séene in the warres, and as it hath béene told you in this Hystorie, he was well seene in Astrologie, who being by them verie much importuned, arose vp and spake as followeth. The speech which the olde king of Gedrosia made vnto the Emperor Alicandro before all those high kings & no∣bles concerning the passage of their ar∣mie into Grecia. MOst high and mightie Emperour & our Lord, I would verie faine excuse my selfe to giue my iudgement, con∣sidering this grieuous case, which you haue declared vnto vs, for that you haue it for custome to aske counsaile of your nobles in causes of importaunce and things requisite. And yet in the end saie they what they can, yéelding their iudgements according vnto reason, all things must be done according vnto your desire & will, whether it be good or bad, giuing to vnderstand, that the counsaile which you doe aske of your nobles & subiects, is more to complie with them, than anie good will you haue to be counsailed. But yet for all this, although I doe know, that my iudgement in this case will bée as much as nothing, and will bée conceiued to another intent & purpose contrarie vnto my meaning, yet will I de∣clare it, for that héereafter you shall not complaine at anie
time of the olde king of Gedrosia, in that he did not aduise you in time that you might proue your fortune. And héere I protest before the immortall Gods, that this which I doe pretend to saie vnto you, is not so much for the feare & dread the which I haue of the Gréekes, as it is for the great loue & good wil which I do beare vnto you and to al our Countrie. I would not (most mightie Lord) that you shuld put so great confidence & trust in this your puisant & high estate, thinking therewith to be verie firme and sure, voide of the subiection of vncertaine and immutable fortune, and neuer to slide or fall from the high throne in which you are exalted, if you do beléeue this to be true. There are many things past in this world long since of mightie Princes, that if you will enter into iudgement of them rightlie, as you ought for to doe, you shall plainlie sée and perceiue that it is all false and contra∣rie, as a spectacle of many Caesars Romanes, in which time past were Lords and rulers ouer all the world, as Iulius Cae∣sar, Caio, Caligula, Nero, Claudio, Galba, Oton, Vitelio, Domiciano, Comodo, Pertinax, Basiano, Macrino, Helio∣gabilo, Belusiano, Valeriano, Galiego, Probo, Iuliano, Ba∣uio, Constantio, Valente, Graciano, Valentiniano, and an infinit number more, which hath béene ouerthrowen from the imperiall throne in the which Fortune did exalt them, and no other occasion to the same, but that all humane things hath no securitie nor firmnesse, and hée that is ex∣alted and set in the highest of the whéele of mooueable For∣tune, the same is most apt and readiest to fall. And in this thing you may beléeue me, that looke how much the humane power doth surmount, so much is the Empire, or what estate so euer it be, subiect vnto fortune, and all the great fire laden with wood, is charged with the mightie windes in the high∣est partes: euen so likewise (most mightie Emperour) this estate is not so high, but it hath with it great perill, so that you néede not to goe and séeke other daungers in strange Countries so farre from this, that when it shal fall out, all thing to succéede and bée prosperous vnto you, yet shall it bée greate meruaile, if you doe returne backe againe
aliue into your owne countrie, how much more the victorie against the Gréekes is so vncertaine, and as you may make iust accompt thereof, although you think it to the contrarie, without any consideration of peruerse fortune, which may so fall out, that they shall remaine al libertie, and you decei∣ued: although the host of men which you may carie, wil be a great multitude, mightie and strong, yet many times it falleth out, that the greatest host is ouercome by the lesser, as it happened vnto Xerxes, and vnto Darius, and a great number more, who with hosts of innumerable companie of people were destroyed and ouercome. Likewise before that this shall come in effect, if you doe well consider, and haue an eye into the great angers and molestacions, presumpti∣ons, alterations, and contrarieties, which doth happen daylie in these mightie hostes. I beleue that you will think it bet∣ter to remaine and liue at home in your owne countrie, then to passe into Grecia with so mightie an host, for that there is no iniuries nor cruelties that may be compared vnto the condicions of men of warre. And these which you do think to be your owne, it may so fall out, that for a little occasion, they will change their copie, and perhaps betray & el them, so that of knights and subiects, they may become thy eni∣mies. Behold and consider of that great and mightie Alex∣ander, who in his time accompted himselfe of no lesse estate then you doe now at this present, yet that which all his eni∣mies could not conclude and bring to passe, was finished by his owne knights, in killing him by poyson. If you wil that I shall declare vnto you many other examples by Empe∣rours of Rome: beholde who slew Pertinax, and the two Maximos, father and sonne, Baluino, Maximo, Probo, Graci∣ano, & Valentiniano, the least of all these were good & valiant men, and yet slaine by the hands of those of their host. Like∣wise I will declare the great perills and misfortunes that happeneth at the sea, by y• which you must of necessitie passe this your great multitude of people, I would it were not my fortune to speake, but could excuse my selfe, for that it is well knowen vnto all men, how readie y• mightie windes
are to augment perills, the mightie, greate and vnmercifull waues, the hidden rockes vnder the water, the continuall tempests and whirle windes. What is that so strong, that the power of the heauens and the sea doe not rent and teare all to péeces, and carrie awaie by sodaine stormes and tem∣pests of the windes, and therefore it is said that the going to the sea is easie, but the comming from the sea is perillous, but putting all the perills and daungers a parte, and that Fortune wil shew her selfe fauourable vnto you in all these affaires, and that with prosperous windes and times you are entered into the Empire of Grecia, yet I would you should consider and knowe, how doubtfull is the victorie at that present, for that in all thinges hope is doubtfull, and much more in great warres and contentions. Uerie prudent and well experimented in armes was hée that saide, that there is nothing that hath his ende more vncertaine than the warre, and that it is farre better a certaine and sure peace, than the hoped victorie. One thing all you may be∣léeue of a certaine, that verie few or none entereth into bat∣taile without hope of victorie, but yet consider if it bée not a thing that hath often happened, the losse of the ouercome to be lesse than of the ouercōmers. How many times doth men goe vnto the warres in hope to haue the victorie, and to the contrarie, remaines ouercome, and that which is worst, they remaine dead in the field, so that they returne not backe a∣gaine to their houses ouercome, nor with victorie. And yet will I say more in contradiction of your hope, that if you did know of a verie certaintie and truth, that the victorie should be on your parts against the Gréekes, yet for all that I will not let to giue you counsaile for to remaine in quiet at home in your owne Countrie, for as the victorie is alwaies doubt∣full, euen so many times it is sorrowfull & bloudie, & is not got with ease, that which is sought with perill of their liues, & déerelie sold y• is bought with bloud, & more deerer, if it cost their liues. We haue séene many times an host to haue the victorie, & yet their generall slaine in the battaile, & this is without all doubt, y• some shal be slaine on your part, & possi∣ble
it may be your lot before any other, for that your enimies (as vpon the principall staie of your host) will seeke to pro∣cure your death. How sodainlie & vnlooked for may you méet with the knight of the Sun, he that was heere in your court, at which tune you would willingly giue all that now you do possesse, for to be as farre distant from him as you are at this present. Of truth according vnto his furie & great worthi∣nesse, brauerie & stoutnesse, the which experience hath shew∣ed me, by the incredible things done in sight of al men in this court, surelie I shuld thinke no securitie in my life, although I were in the middest of your great & mighty host, if I were certaine that he were against me in the field. And héere I do desire & praie the almightie & immortall Gods, to saue & kéep thée from his furious hands, for surelie my heart doth trem∣ble to heare you saie that you will goe and seeke him to con∣tend with him. Héere is now in presence Rodaran king of Arabia, and the king of Media, who hath proued the experi∣ence of his mightie blowes. I doe desire your highnesse to aske of them, if they haue anie good will to returne and proue them againe, as also if Rodaran be in the same opinion that he was before he went into Grecia. Therefore O high and mightie Emperour, conserue and maintaine this soueraigne estate into the which the high and immortall Gods hath ex∣alted you, and leaue off this enterprise, for to goe and séeke perilles and daungers in other straunge Countries, for that innumerable bée the misfortunes that wée are day∣lie subiect vnto. And you shall not doe little for to conserue and kéepe that which you doe now possesse. Wise men in times past dyd not thinke it to bée done with ease (who sayde) that it was great trauaile to suffer prosperitie, and that it was necessarie to learne to suffer, hauing Fortune at will, for that it is more difficult to gouerne himselfe there∣with, than in aduersitie. Héere therefore I thinke not amisse to staie my talke, for that in this which I haue sayde you maye verie well vnderstand my iudgement, not onelie that you shoulde restraine from executing your will, but also that you should
seperate and blot it cleane out of your thought and minde, & neuer more remember it. For that if the knight of the Sun had done vnto you any iniurie (as hetherto he hath not, for that possible he would not accept at your handes the thing which he thought himselfe not worthie of) it were much better for you to pardon the same, then to séeke reuenge∣ment. For an iniurie done vnto so mightie a prince as you are, it is a small satisfaction the death of one knight, & there is no forgetfulnesse so generous and noble, as is of him that hath offended. This olde king of Gedrosia, had not as yet full concluded these words (with pretence to goe forwards with his talk) whan that, that furious youth, Bramarant arose vp vpon his féete, from the place where as he sate next vnto Bradaman his father, with so yreful a semblant, which put great won∣der in all them that dyd behold him, he began to saie these wordes following. With great paine and griefe haue I suffered the con∣clusion of these thy words, thou light and folish king of Gedrosia, dost thou think that in such sort should be entrea∣ted the vse of armes amongst knights, as you (who doe call your selues Philosophers) doth vse them in your scooles & vniuersities. Dost thou think that the varietie in their cau∣ses must of force follow one rule, as you doe imagine, or is your vnderstāding so simple to conceue that, the iudgemēts and strength of men should be equall, and that there should not some be more stronger and couragious then other. Thy counsell were good and profitable for a king that were foolish, and a coward, as thou arte, but not for so mightie a prince as the Emperour is. What feare or inconuenience may that be, to be sufficient to withdraw him from his will, although it were for to conquere y• whole world, how much more for to destroy the Empire of Grecia. By the immor∣tall gods I doe sweare, that if we doe goe thether, I alone doe thinke for to destroy all the Gréekes, although they cme foorth altogether in the féelde to battaile against me, neither wll I for all their force and strength, step one foote backe.
This doth procéede of couragious hearts, and any thing else to the cōtrarie, is of cowardnesse, and although I haue spent my youth in exercise of armes, more then in reading of Philosophie: yet doe I know that he that is fearefull can giue no good counsell for the warres, neither he that is ti∣merous doe any good act therein. And I am fully perswa∣ded that Alexander had not bene Lord ouer all the world, if ther had ben any sparke of cowardnesse within his heart, neither should Agamemnon haue destroyed Troy, nor Ha∣nibal, Sagunto, nor Cartago, nor Numancia the Affricano, if they had followed the counsell that thou hast now giuen vnto the Emperour. Beleue mee, that as commonly fortune doth shw her selfe fauourable vnto those that be generous and valiant of minde, euen so vnto cowards & weake peo∣ple, feare is an ill prognostication, as it was of that Flami∣neo in Trasimeno, and of Crasso in Cannas, and of Pom∣peo in Tessalia. To conclude, for that the Emperour our Lord doth in these actions that which is nedeful and requi∣sit, he must not follow the iudgements of fooles & cowardlie Philosophers, but take the counsell of them that be stout, valiant, and couragious knights, vnto them should be com∣mitted matters of Iustice, & vnto vs the state of the wars. For my part, I doe say, that if the Emperour will passe in∣to Grecia, I will serue him with my owne person: & this knight of the Sunne (of whome the king of Gedrosia hath so much feare) I wilbe bound to apprehend him, & to bring him prisoner before his presence, that he may take reuenge∣mēt of him at his pleasure, yea, if he were a seond Iupiter, yet should he not be so mightie as to cleare him selfe out of my hands. So when that Bramarant had concluded these words, he sat himselfe downe againe in his place. There was present at that time one Graco, sonne vnto the king of Gedrosia, a young knight, very valiant and gallant, and very vnto many kings that were there in that Court: who seing with what iniurious wordes his father the king was in∣treated, arose vp from his seate and said, as followeth.
Bramarant, if thou werte so valiant in thy déedes, as thou art discourteous in thy wordes, then would not I think much but thou wouldest accōplish all this which thou hast said against the Gréekes: but I hope in the high and im∣mortal gods, that if we goe thether, thou shalt meete with one alone amongst all the rest, that will make thée for to know, that thy pride is more then thy déedes, & wil reuenge the iniurie which thy words hath done vnto my father. This valiant Graco had not fully concluded these words, when that the fierce Bramarant kindled in wrath, with a diuelish furie, arose vp from his seate, and went vnto him, clasping him with one of his handes by the arme, lifting him vp in the ayre (without hauing any power this young knight to withstand it) he threw him out of the window of that great hall, and saide, herein shalt thou sée whether my deedes be confirmable to my words or not. And for that the windowes were verie high from the ground, this vn∣fortunate Graco fell with his head downewards, where as he was slaine, which was so great sorow and griefe vnto his father, that he wished the misfortune had chaunced vn∣to him and not vnto his sonne. This king was mightie & puisant, and had many kings in that court present, which were his kinsemen, who seeing that which was done by Bramarant, for that they had no armour, (neither could they be suffered to enter to that court of parliament with anie) they altogether arose vp and went towards him, thinking to haue thrown him out of the same window, that he threw out Graco, but their determination fell out contrarie: for although that they were more then twentie, & Bramarant had neither armour nor sword, yet with both his hands he tooke tw of thē that came first vnto him, liting them vp in the ayre, he threw them against a wall that was ouer against him, with so great strength, that their ribbes were brken, and they fell to the ground halfe dead, where as they lay a good whle and could not are. And not staying with this, but with a dlish furie & quicknesse, he threw other two out at the window. Then arose vp his father Brada∣man,
with whose helpe, not one y• was in that great hall, which was against his sonne, had , if that the Emperour in great ast had not himselfe in the middest amongst  with prayings, desires, and sweete wordes, commaundement, did put them in peace,  Bra∣daman and , whole eyes with great furie and wrath was quickly concluded amongst them, they receiued was such, that euery his friend. So when that the Emperour hadde , he began to reply a newe, touching he had saide: and the urie and Bramarant was such, in procuring that should be accepted, that some for they had of them, and other some for thereof. In the ende, they did conclude, that the should go forwards. Then after certaine daies that they remaid in that Court, all those kings and mightie Lords owne Countries, for to ordaine and , all such people as they would carrie with warres. But first before their departure it was concluded amongst them, that at a certaine day all meete with their people at the port of  where∣as the Emperour hadde commaunded for  to be made in a readinesse, a mightie great and of Shippes, for to carrie their : and beng all occuped in these , the Hi∣storie doth leaue them, till tyme  to tell you of other things that passed in the Court of the Emperour Trebatio.
How that there came to the court of the Emperour Treba∣tio, a strange knight, & did defie the knight of the Sunne and of the stout and well foughten battaile that was be∣twixt them. Chap. 11. VVIth great content & ioye, did this Historie leaue the Emperour Trebatio, and the Empresse Bu∣ana, for that they had with them their exelent & worthie sonnes, accompanied with those high & worthie Princes, who were no lesse glad and ioyful, for that they were in that Court, as well for the great friendship which they had with the Gréekes, as for the affable con∣uersation that they had with the good Emperour Trebatio, who séemed vnto them to be the most exelentest & noblest Lord that euer they had sene or knowen. But yet aboue all the rest, the ioye and pleasure that those oyall louers Rosi∣cleer, and Oliuia receiued, did far surmount: who being at quiet, resting themselues, of those great troubles & mortall anguishes, the which the one for the other receiued, that ve∣relie they did séeme to recreate thēselues with all soueraine glorie, and vnspeakeable ioye. The princesse Oliuia, receiued so great contentment for that she had with her Rosicleer her loue, and also to sée the great maiestie & highnesse of the Emperour, with the great loue and good will which he bare vnto her, that in a short time she had cleane forgotten great Britaine, and the court of the king Oliuerio, her father, and was neuer satisfied in giuing thankes vnto almightie God, for that he had brought her vnto so high estate. The knight of the Sunne was he alone that liued not to his contentment, neither receiued any ioye nor pleasure, in seeing himselfe absent from his Ladie the Empresse Cla∣ridiana, all pastimes & pleasures that were there ordeined, were vnto him great anguish and griefe, thinking himselfe to be alwaies in darknesse, pensiue, and imagining when the daye should be that he might reioyce and comfort him∣selfe
with her precious sight, but yet calling to remembrance his disloialtie past, it seemed vnto him that hee was voide of all desert, and coulde not imagine howe ee might excuse himselfe to come into her presence. So all  Court béeing in their contrarietie of thoughtes and dispositions, vpon a daie béeing all together in a faire hall of the migh∣tie pallace, after that dinner was done, they sawe entering in at the gate a knight all armed with blacke Steele, which was of so greate finenesse, that it seemed to bée christaline glasse, he was of a gallant stature and well made, and of so gentle disposition, that it caused great admiration in all them that beheld him, his helme was on his head, and the beauer down, so y• none could sée his face, he brought leading by the hand a verie faire Ladie, with a rich crowne vpon her head, and after them came other two Damells, the one of them bare the traine of the Ladie, and the other brought the shéeld of the Knight, which was wise of blacke steele, all appa∣railed in blacke, séeming to bée mourners. So when they entered into the hall there was great silence, then the Ladie which had the Crowne vpon her head, without doing anie reuerence, saide. Who is hée amongest you that is called the Knight of the Sunne? Hée béeing there present, arose vp and said: Faire Ladie, what is your demaund? Heere I am he that you do aske for. In good time, sayd the Ladie, and I am verie gladde that I haue found you héere, although our com∣ming can turne no goodnesse vnto thée. Thou shalt vnder∣stand that I am Media, daughter vnto that Raiartes, whom thou traiterouslie and falselie didst kill in Babilonia, whose strength as thou doest well know, was no lesse than diuine, nor could not be slaine by humane hands, expt it were by great trason and falsehood. I remained a damsell and of ten∣der yéeres at the time of his death, and by reason that my beautie was such as thou doest sée, there dyd not lacke ma∣ny Princes and Knightes that dyd request mee in marry∣age, from whence I did defend and excuse my selfe,  that straight waies vppon the death of my Father, I made a
solempne oath and vowe, neuer to marrie with anie knight but with him that first of all shal make me reuengement or the death of my father. And for that the fame of thy greate bountie is so blowne throughout the world, I haue found none y• is desirous to marrie with me with so great a charge, but this alone knight, who by fortune ariued at the Iland of Zardo, whereas I am gouernesse, who falling in loue with my great beautie, did binde himselfe to come and make bat∣taile with thée, and giue mée reuengement for the death of my Father, the which I do so much desire, and I seeing with my owne eies the great bountie and valour of this knight, in a certaine contention which hée had with certaine knights of mine, receiued great contentment for to come with him, and according vnto the great wonders that I haue séene him doe, I suppose that there is not a knight in all the world that is equall vnto him, so that the reuengement of the death of my Father, I haue it so certaine as though it were alreadie done. This is our demaund Knight of the Sunne, and the occasion of our comming hether, and to knowe why this my Knight doth not speake vnto you, is for that hée is a straunger verie farre from this Countrie, and cannot speake nor vnderstand anie Gréeke. And in concludng these wordes, the Ladie helde her peace, and the straunge knight who was verie attentiue vnto that which was sayde, behol∣ding the knight of the Sunne, dyd decline his head downe∣wardes, in signe that hee dyd graunt vnto all that which the Ladie had saide. So this demaund béeing vnderstoode by the knight of the Sunne, without anie chaunge of coun∣tenaunce, but with a seuere semblaunce aunswered and sayde. Ladie Medea, I woulde that your demaund were some other than this which you doe bring, not for that I woulde excuse the battaile that this knight will make with me, for as I am cléere and without fault of the death of Raiartes your father (as is wel knowen) so do I litle estéeme the great bounte of this knight, hauing right and iustice on my part, but yet I wish, if it were your pleasure, that you would com∣mand
me some other thing wherein I might do you seruice, that shoulde more import the satisfaction of the ager which you haue conceiued against me, the which I woulde accomplish with a better will, than to enter into battaile with your knight, for if it should so fall out that I should gt the victorie ouer him, yet must I needes serue you, but see∣ing it is so, that you doe demand of mee the death of you father, I cannot but must néeds make my defence, for that I slew him not by treason or falsehoode, but as I accustome to doe, in equall battaile and orderlie lawe of knighthood, ther∣fore from this time I doe accept the battaile, and anie other thing that shall be demanded. This béeing sayd, the Ladie aunswered for her knight, accepting the same, then they tooke their handes together in signe of gages to the battaile, which béeing done, the strange knight departed from thence with the Ladie by the hand, gi∣uing them to vnderstand that hée would abide the knight of the Sunne, in the place appointed for their combat, who straight waies tooke his leaue of the Emperour his Father, and went vnto his chamber to arme himselfe. In the meane time that the knight of the Sunne was arming himselfe, the Prince Cluendo did declare vnto all them that were in the great hall, how Raiartes was father vnto Medea, and in what sort the knight of the Sunne slew him, as ne that knew the effect thereof verie well, for that hee was present and dyd sée the whole battaile. So when the knight of the Sunne was armed with his rich and strong armour, that was sometimes the Prince Meridians (as this Hystorie hath tolde you, which dyd not a little stand him in  that daie, béeing accompanied with his Brother , and all the troupe of those valiant knightes, hee descended rom the Pallace, and went whereas the straunge knight was, tarrying his comming,  vppon a , with so gallant proportion and semblance, that he seemed to be one of the best knights that euer he had , and moun∣ting vpon his mightie horse Cornerino, who was all trap∣ped with cloth of golde full of precious stones, with a
plume of white feathers bespangled with golde vppon his helme, which was a gallant sight to beholde, for as in this hi∣storie it hath bene tolde you in many places, that ouer and a∣boue that this knight was of a high stature, he was therwith so well proportioned of his bodie, that when hée mounted vpon his horse béeing armed, there was not a thing of more wonder to be séene, and all they that did beholde him were greatlie amazed, whose presence alonelie did declare that hée should be a knight of great force and strength. So after that he had moued his courser once about the place, the Emperour and the Empresse, with al the rest of the Court, being at the windowes and battlements of the mightie pallace, and al the whole place ful of people. Then the strange knight began to moue his mightie courser with so gallant disposition and fu∣rie, that all men did iudge him to be a knight of great force and strength, and sayd that in his semblance he did resemble much to Rosicleer, who shewed no lesse gallant proportion and grace than the Knight of the Sunne. And the Emperour Trebatio who was beholding him, and pleased at his gen∣tle disposition, sayde vnto them that were with him: The gallant order and gentle demeanour of this Knight, doeth make mée beléene, that this battaile will be better fought, and more doubtfull than wée thought for, and wée shall see great meruailes therein. So it séemeth vnto mée, sayd the good Troyan Oristedes, and I doe not looke for an ende of this battayle till it bee almost night, at such time as the daie draweth to an end, till that time the furie of the knight of the Sunne doth not beginne to kindle. The bountie of this worthie Prince is so straunge, that the more the bat∣tayle doth indure, and the stronger hée is assaulted, it seemeth that his force and strength doeth the more increase. When that ristedes had ended these wordes, all the whole place was in quiet and attentiue, waiting for the rigorous bat∣tayle that shoulde bée made betwixt those two Knightes, who firming themselues i their Saddles with their speares in their hande, they stayed the sound of Trumpets, which was ordained for their beginning, at the sound wherof they
set spurres vnto their coursers, and ranne the one agaynst the other with great impetuous force, the swiftnesse of their horses was such, that quicklie they met together, and made so strong incounters, that by reason their armour was so excellent, that the sharpe point of their Speares coulde not enter, their staues were shieuered all to péeces, and they passed the one by the other so vpright and well setteled, as though they had not receiued anie encounter at all, but tur∣ned their horses about in the aire, and came the one against the other with their swordes in their handes, and began to laie on such vnreasonable blowes, that their sheeldes (al∣though they were of fine stéele) were quicklie broken all to peeces, and their guilt mailes were scattered vppon the ground, and with the furie of their blowes, there procéeded so many sparkes of fire, that it séemed that they burned, and the sound of their armour rang lyke an eccho, throughout the whole Citie. Béeing more than one whole houre ouer∣passed, that these two valiant Knightes beganne their com∣bat, yet in such sort dyd they so double heir strong blowes, as though they dyd but as then begin, and no vantage was knowen of either parte, but either of them beganne to féele the great strength of his aduersarie. And the knight of the Sunne, who was meruailous full of wrath, for that one a∣lone knight did endure so long against him in that combat, in the presence of his Father and mother and those highe Princes and knightes, sayde within himselfe, that hée ne∣uer combatted with knight before, that dyd so stronglie strike his blowes, and with so valiant a courage dyd defend him∣selfe, but onelie Rosicleer his brother, who was hée that brought him into the greatest perill and necessitie aboue all other. Likewise the straunge knight dyd not so little féele the great force of the knight of the Sun, but that he thought it impossible to cleere himselfe well of that battaile, but hée as one that little estéemed his life, for to reuenge some parte of the great anger which he had against his aduersary, did so inforce and animate himselfe, that the battaile endured thrée houres betwixt them, without anie knowledge of vauntage
of the one part or of the other. The blowes which they stroke were of so great force and strength, that many times it dyd astonish and amaze them, and brought them so farre out of remembraunce, that their horses carried them round about the place, and all those that dyd beholde that stoute and rigorous battaile, were greatlie amazed, and iudged it to bee equall vnto that combat which before hee had with Rosicleer his Brother. Likewise the Emperour Trebatio and all those high Princes and knightes that were with him, dyd not a little meruaile at the great bountie of that straunge knight, saying that hée shewed himselfe to bée one of the valiauntest knightes that was to bée found in all the worlde, for that hée had so long sustained battayle a∣gainst the knight of the Sunne: and Rosicleer who was at a windowe next vnto the Emperour his Father, with the Princesse Oliuia, with greate admiration dyd beholde the battaile, (and as one that had well experimented the strength and force of his brother,) dyd greatlie prayse the straunge knight, for that he dyd so wel defende himselfe a∣gaynst him, yet hée sayde, God deliuer mée from the furie of my Brother. It is now foure houres since the battayle beganne, and now is the time that his wrath will bgin to kindle, then is there no resistance to be made against his last blowes. So when Rosicleer had sayde these wordes, it was not long after that it fell out true as hée had sayde, for beeing more than foure houres since the beginning of the battaile, at such time as the Sunne woulde sette, the knight of the Sunne seeing that the daie woulde passe awaie, in such sort hée beganne to rage and burne with ire, that séemed vnto his aduersarie, that his force dyd rene and augment, and that hée beganne the battayle a freshe, for that his blowes were such and so thicke, that manye times it made him to loose his remembraunce, so that at that time the battaile was more terrible and cruell than it was all the daie be∣fore, yet neuerthelesse the straunge knight was such, that hée abated not one pointe of his mightie and soueraigne
force, but with renued strength hée so charged the knight of the Sunne, that many times hée was without all hope of the victorie. In this sorte the battayle remained in ballaunce almost all the daie without knowing anie vauntage betwt them, til such time as the Sunne had left his orisent, and the night beganne to appeare, then the straunge knight began to ware wearie, and little and little his strength did abate, in such sort, that it was well seene that he had not the cou∣rage that hee had at the first, for that hée lift vppe his armes with great paine, and his swoorde turned in his hande: the which was cleane contrarie to the knight of the Sunne, who at that present was more stout and couragious than at the beginning, and in such sorte dyd laye vppon his aduersarie, that as one amazed, he chased him rounde about the place, (but hée séeing that the vauntage of that combat was on his parte, and how the straunge knight was the best knight that euer hée met withall, next vnto his Brother Rosi∣cleer) hée withdrewe himselfe and lefte off his striking, in such sorte, that the straunge knight might take ayre and breath himselfe, which was the occasion that after he retur∣ned vnto the battayle, he shewed himselfe so valyaunt and strong, that it séemed the daye woulde cleane passe awaie before the battayle woulde bée ended, if they had let them a∣lone: but Medea who was meruailouslie in loue with the straunge knight, as shée was beholding this braue bat∣tayle all daie, thought it impossible for her knight to haue there anie victorie, and béeing verie desirous to part them, shée went vnto the Emperour, and requested him, for that the night yd approch, for to commaunde that the knightes shoulde cease their battayle, for that they hadde the next day following at their commandement, for to conclude the same. Then the Emperour who esteemed much of the straunge knight, with great desire that the battaile might not come to conclusion, for feare of euil, withdrew himself from the win∣dow, and descended into the great Court, whereas he moun∣ted vpon a mightie horse, & being accompanied with all those
high Princes and knights, he went vnto the place whereas those knightes made their combat, and putting himselfe be∣twéene them, he sayd. Worthie and valiant knightes, I doe most heartelie de∣sire you, y• for this time you would cease and leaue off your battaile, for that it is now night, and neither of you hath he∣therto lost anie point or iot of your honours. Then came the∣ther also the faire Medea mounted vpon her palfray, and put her selfe in the middest of them, and sayde: Héere openlie I doe professe and saie, that I hold my selfe verie well conten∣ted with the prowesse of my knight, and I doe set him frée & at libertie of the promise that he made vnto me, in reuenge∣ing of the death of Raiartes my Father, & without anie other condition, I will straight waies receiue him for my hus∣band. So when the Emperour and Medea had sayde these worde, the knight of the Sunne did straight waies with∣drawe himselfe (for that he did verie much estéeme of the strange knight), saying, that it was great pleasure vnto him to obey their commandement, and not to contend for the end of that battaile. Then the strange knight when he sawe the Emperour in the midst betwixt them, & also heard the words which Medea had spoken, séeing that it could be no otherwise, also withdrew himselfe, although it was with great sorrow, anger, & griefe, for that he had rather haue ben slaine in that battaile, than to escape with life. So when that their battell was separated, the knight of the Sunne went vnto the strange knight, with determination to be his friend, and to knowe him, and being verie nigh vnto him readie for to speake, the strange knight without the hearing of anie other sayd: O Traitor and false Pagan, how doth God permit that the earth doth sustaine thée? Se that thou doest returne hether againe to morrowe in the morning, for that héere in this place I will abide thy comming, and will neuer depart from hence till I haue bereft thée of thy life, for that it is a∣gainst the diuine prouidence thou shouldest liue anie longer to deceiue others. The strange knight had not well concluded these wordes,
whan that in his spech and vtterance of words, as also in his proporcion & gentill demeor, the knight of the Sun did know of a very certaintie, that it shoul be the royall Princes Claridiana, for whome he had passed so great sorow and griefe, theu knowing her, and considering of the cruell and rgorous battaile that he made with her, and being by her knowen and defyed, he receiued so great sorow and griefe at his heart, that he fell in a snd, and cleane from all remembrance, wherewith he fell from his Horse to the earth. Then the Emperour and all the princes & knights that were with him, not knowing the occasion of that so∣daine alteration, but being greatly amazed to see that sodain al, alighted from their horses, & toke him vp in their armes and pulled of his healme that he might receiue aire, but it did little profit, for that he was so farre gon that he semed to be dead, and although they threw water in his face, yet could they not bring him againe vnto himself, for the which the emperour and all the rest were verie sore troubled, and was the occasion that there arose in that place a great tu∣mult, saying that it could be no other thing but that he was dead. And the Empresse his mother which was a the win∣dow beholding all that passed, as astonished and full of an∣guish and sorow, withdrew her selfe into the pallace, and fell downe in the armes and lappe of the Princesse Oliuia, who was by her, wher as she remained a good while as one from her selfe, till such time as the Emperour came & com∣forted her: but yet in all this time the knight of the Sun was not come vnto him selfe. Then the Emperour com∣munded that he should be carried into the pallace, so Rosi∣cleer his brother and those worthie princes, did carrie him in their armes into his chamber, vnarming him & pulling of his apparell, they laide him in his bed, whether came straight waies the best doctors in Phisicke and Surgere that were in all Constantinople, and perusing him in all parts of his bodie, they ound that in no part he had receued any such blow that might be the occasion of such dismay, the which they made manifest vnto all that were ther present,
saying, that it should procéede of some other thing in secret, and not of the battaile passed, for that he had be receiued no such-blow that should cause him so much griefe, requesting to comfort themselues, for that that traunce would soone passe away, if that they would let him alone and suffer him to take his rest. So when the doctors had said these words, the Emperour and all the rest were very glad, and hauing intelligence how that the Empresse was verie ill with that sodaine chaunce of her sonne, they left the knight of the Sunne in his bed, and went vnto her & comforted her say∣ing, that the malade of her sonne was nothing, & that spe∣dely he should be well againe. By reason of all this trou∣ble with the knight of the Sunne, the Emperour hadde no time for to speake vnto y• strange knight for to know him, although he had a great desire thereto: but remembring him, he cōmunded certaine knights for to go & seeke him, but he could not be found in the pallace, neither in all the citie, for that straight waies at such time as they had cari∣ed the knight of the Sunne out of the place into the palace, the royall Empresse Claridiana, (who was of certain that strange knight) went foorth of the citie, in the companie of Medea, and her damsels, and although it was mght & erie dark, yet did they not let to trauaile thrée miles from Con∣stantinople, & in a faire gréene forrest they passe away the rest of the night that remained, whereas she was required of loue, by Medea, for that she loued her meruailously wel, thinking y• she had bene a knight. For as the  faith, that as the Empresse Claridiana remained in rapisonda, verie dolorous and heauie, for the newes that her damsell Areania had brought her, she did somewhat quiet her selfe such time as she might heare of the cōming of the knight of the Sunne into Grecia, for that then (by reason of th great anger she had receiued against him) she would with her owne hands take reuengement, of the faith which she thought he had alsified, and the loue was not so great which before she bare vnto him, but now the euill will and hate did farre surmount the same.
And when she vnderstood that he was come into Grecia, she armed her selfe with blacke armour, and alone with the com∣panie of those two  she departed out of the mightie Citie of Trapisonda, and béeing at Sea, her fortune carrid her vnto the kingdome of the Sardos, whereas was this Medea, daughter vnto Raiartes, who had a mightie strong Castle whereon the sea dyd beate, hard vnto the port where∣as her most abiding was, and had continuall in her com∣panie one hundreth knights, who al her commandement did arest all that came vnto that port, and carried them prisuers befoe her, whom she made to sweare to aide  helpe her for to make reuengement vpon the knight of the Sunne for the death of her father, with all their force and powers possible, and if they did denie, rusing to  that oath, she caused them to bée put prsoners into a déepe dungeon, till such time as they should by force doe that which she commanded. So likewise she made a vowe, neuer to marrie till such time as she were reuenged on the knight of the Sunne. So as soone as the Empresse was entered unto the port, straight wayes her ship was oorded on either side with two mightie great full of knightes, and willed her to yeeld her selfe priso∣er, with whee shée had a rigorous battaile in the defence thereof, wherein she slew many of those knights, the conten∣tion went forwards, and she meruailously defended her selfe, at which time Medea was at a window of the Castle, & dyd behold all that did passe, the strange knight did content her verie much, and she greatly meruailed at his mightie boun∣tie and worthinesse, and fearing the great slaughter y• might happen, she called vnto her knights with a loude voice, com∣manding them to withdrawe themselues, and to leaue their battaile with the knight▪ Who when they heard her, they straight  rtred and left him. Then Medea spake vn∣to the  her to goe a land, and  come be∣fore her, for that shee hped to conclude with her with re∣que, that whch her knightes could not by orce, so as it vnto her in  her rquest, coulde not pro∣de nothing but good, shee went a lande, and entered
into the castell where as Medea was, who receiued her ve∣rie courteously, and shewed her the occasion wherefore her knights laboured so much for to take her prisoner. Then she who at that present desired no other thing but to be reuē∣ged on the knight of the Sunne, straight waies sayde, that if she hadde knowen thereof before, she would neuer haue maintained that contencion against her knightes, for that she likewise came foorth of her countrie to séeke the knight of the Sunn, with the like demaund for a certaine anger and griefe conceiued against him. But when that Medea heard that, with so great ioye and pleasure as euer she re∣ceiued in all her life, she embraced the Empresse and reque∣sted him to pull of his helme, who at the great request and importaunce of her, did pull it of. And for that she had her rubicond haire knit vp in a call of golde, Medea did beleue verely that she was a knight, & was with the sodaine sight of her so stroke with loue & prisoner thereto, that she could not refraine but must néedes discouer the same vnto her, & promised to marrie with him, if he made reuengement on the knight of the Sunne: the which séemed vnto the Em∣presse to be a good occasion and coulour for her to enter into Grecia, and to defie the knight of the Sunne, she would not discouer her selfe vnto Medea, but did dissemble with her, saying, that he did her great pleasure therein, and would straight waies depart for Grecia. But Medea, who was meruailously in loue with her, and loth to leaue her, sayd, that she would beare her companie, for that she would be present to sée her make the battaile with the knight of the Sunne. The Empresse was verie glad thereof, and betwixt them was appointed the time of their departure. So after that she had remained ther two daies, they went to sea and ariued in Grecia, and came vnto the citie of Constantino∣ple, in the order as you heard before. In the meane time that they were in the forrest, after the battaile made with the knight of the Sunne, Medea was still deceiued, belee∣uing that the Empresse had bene a knight, and for that they should remaine there all that night, after they had supped,
with certaine vittailes brought thether by her damsels. Medea did neuer eace requiring the Empresse of loue, of∣fering her selfe to be her wife, and said, that she would take her to be her husband, without any other consideration, and that it was not her will that she should returne any mor to combat with the knight of ye Sunne: at the which words the Empresse would haue laughed very much, if the great griefe which she had receued in her heart, would haue con∣sented to the same, but by reason that one waye her minde was occupied, in considering what she was of her selfe, and to be forgotten for an other damsell. And againe calling to remembrance in what estate the knight of the Sunne re∣mained at their departure out of Constantinople, she was so full of anguish, sorow and griefe, that she little minded the amorous words y• Medea spake vnto her, neither could the wrath and anger that she conceiued against the knight of the Sunne, doe so much, but that y• loue which was prin∣ted within her heart could doe much more, and caused her to repent her selfe for that which she had done, and to receiue great griefe for y• estate in the which she had left the knight of the Sunne. Likewise in that she had proued his mightie force and courage, her loue did so double and increase, that she thought verely that there was not in the whole world but he alone that dyd deserue her to be his wife, which was the occasion that her griefe was y• more, by reason that she was without all hope. And it is to be belued, as the wise Ligandeo saith, that there was neuer sorow of a damsel for loue, equall vnto this of the royall Empresse Claridiana, for that she séeing her selfe to be without comparion, as well in beautie & fairnesse, as in all other graces which should be in a gentlewoman, likewise in bloud and highnes, none did passe her: and séeing that a knight, whome she did loue with all her heart, and with whome she alonely might mar∣rie, confirmable vnto her highnesse, and he receiuing her for his owne, and now to haue forgotten her and changed her for an other of meaner estate. And againe seeing that there remained not in all the world a Prince nor knight that is
worthi of her lou, so that the had ist cause to receue grief and sorow, more then any other, and as her cause is great, so much more should her griefe be, in especiall hauing (as she had) so excelent and cleare vnderstāding, for to conceiue the same. So with this mortall anguish doth the Historie her & Medea, for to tell you of the knight of the Sun, which was in his bedde. How the knight of the Sunne came againe vnto himselfe, and as one desperate for the battaile that he had with the Empresse Claridiana he departed the court of the Em∣perour Trebao. Chap. . GReat part of y• night was the knight of the Sunne so farre out of all remembraunce, that it séemed to be mortall, till such time as was passed the dolour of his senses, the which y• sodaine griefe did cause vnto him, and transported vnto a verie ound & swete sléepe, in such sorte, hat all men did sée that he slept verie qietlie, which was the occasion that the Emperour and those high Princes and knights went to take their restes, and le him all alone with his two squires, Biniano, and Aurelio, In this order he lpt a while, and being past mid∣night, he dremed that he was in battaile as the day before, with the which he awaked and started vs, as one that was scared, but when he saw him selfe in his bed, and by him certaine torches burning, he straight way called to remem∣brance the battaile that he had had with the strange knight, and how that it was his istresse the Empresse Clarida∣na: The remembraunce whereof did cause so great sorow and griefe, that as a furious man and one from himselfe he threw all the clothes from him and arose vp from his bed, and inding his apparell he put them on, and began to arme himselfe without y• hlp of anie, till such time as his squires (w ere a sléepe) with the noyse thereof did awake, and séeing what their Lord did, with great meruaile they asked
him why he did arme himselfe, but the knight of the Sun made them no aunswere, but made hast to be armed. The they séeing that he made no accompt of their and did helpe him, till that he was wholly being done, he commanded horse in a readinesse, and o bring him the pallace, who séeing his Lord with so ; durst not aske him any other question, but , and went and made his horse in a redinesse, and were sadled and brydled and brought to the pallace gate, the knight of the Sunne descended out of his when he saw the horse of his squires asked Biniano wherefore he had owne, who aunswered him and with him. I will none of , there shall none of you goe with you remaine here with the may gatifie you for the gread good vnto , for that I de go thether haue no power to doe you anie good: neither whether euer I shall returne againe into this no, anie more. When his squires heard him saye these wordes, sor the great good will that they did heare him, they began to la∣ment and wéepe for verie griefe, and their teares were so great, that almost they could not speake, yet Acho sake, at such time as our father did giue vs vnto you to be our Lorde, he did not giue vs for that you should make vs ei∣ther Kings or Lords, neither to giue vs anie recompence for our seruice, for that he did not know you as then to be s noble a prince, but a trauailing knigh, but his gift of vs vnto you was onely to serue you, and at We  take you for our Lord, all the daies of our of any other reward, but to learne of you good maners and conditions, and new séeing it is so, we doe praye and desirs you, that you would not leaue vs tute of your campanie, with this excuse y• you haue told vs,
for that we had rather die with you, in what place soeuer it be, then to haue all that the Emperour our Lord can giue vs, and we shall haue great reason to complaine of you, if that in the ende of so long time that we haue bene in your séruice, you will leaue vs, for surely our father will think no other occasion, which driueth you to leaue vs, but onely that we are not for to serue you▪ With no lesse  then Au∣relio, his brother Biniano said as much vnto the knight of the Sunne, desiring him that he would think well of them, and to take them with him in his companie: who when he saw their great portunatie, without speaking any word he mounted vpon his Horse, and departed out of the pallace, and his squires followed him, and being foorth of the Citie, they made so great haste in their trauaile, that when the daie did breake, they were a great waie of from Constanti∣nople, and fearing that some would follow after them, they left the high waie and put themselues into a faire gréene & fresh forest, merualously full of trées, and in a part of the wildernesse of Grecia, verie famous and nota, as well for the mightinesse thereof, as to be verie plaine, for that in one hūdreth myles trauailing, you could not finde anie one mountaine or hill, the which was verie fresh and delight∣full, full of orchards and gardines, and thick trées, that few times they that doth enter into the same, can finde the way out againe. And trauailing in the same this valiant knight with his heart so furious and full of sorow, griefe and an∣ger, that he thought it would breake within his bodie. His squires séeing him so full of anguish and griefe, they kept themselues a good waie behinde him, for feare of his wrath and displeasure, but he was so pesue and heauie in his heart and minde, that his Horse carryed him at his pleasure, for that he made no accompt to rule him to the one side nor vnto the other: and as he rode all alone, in these pensine cogitations, as you before haue heard, they heard him saie as followeth. OH traytor and false knight, whether doest thou goe, and what dost thou éeke, how is it that thou doest now liue
in the world, hauing committed so great treason: O earth why doest thou not▪ open and swallow me vp into thy pro∣foundnesse, for that such a traitor as I am doth not delexue other sepulchre: Oh if it were Gods will, that thou diddest now open, and that all the foure Glements might fall to∣gether vpon me, as the fire did against Alebatls the good Captaine of Grecia, and the aire and water as against Pom∣peyo, being drowned in the deep seas of Aegypt, & Alexan∣der horne in Epiro, and drowned in the iuer Lucano, Like∣wise that the earth might bée against me, as it was against him, who with a great and mightie armie was drowned n the sants: Oh high and coniealed cloudes, how swéete and in peaceable sorte shoulde ound in my eares the timerous noise of your wonderfull and sodaine thunders, if that from them might descend vpon me the beames of burning fire, as they did descend vpon Carro Emperor of Rome in the wars of Tigre, and vpon Hostio king of the Romanes, who bée∣ing in his pallace, was slaine by two sodaine lightninges: Oh that my force and strength were so contrarie now vnto me, as was the force of Milo, and that this my horse might drawe mée through this forrest, or that by some other occasi∣on I might end my life, so that I dyd it not my selfe for the safegard of my soule, and when that all these disasters dooth faile mée, then doe I desire God that my wittes may faile me, and my vnderstanding, as did Hercules and Aiax Tela∣mon the Gréeke, for y• I being mad & furious as they were, might not féele my misfortune and vnhappie lot. What is he in all the world that euer felt anie anguish, sorrow, and griefe, that may be compared vnto mine? What shall I doo, and whether shall I goe? Why should I liue anie longer vpon the earth, for that I haue not alonelie bene a traitour vnto my Ladie and mistres, but also as a mortall enimie I haue laid vpon her with my sword? What misfortune may happen worse vnto me than this, to sée her desire my death, in whome standeth all the state of my life, yet haue I com∣mitted against her so great euill and errour, that shée hath iust cause to procure my death, and I lacke of reason for to
excuse me, but now séeing that it is so, that I am abhorred of my Ladie, I will not kill my selfe, for the safegard of my soule lyke a faithfull Christian, but I will thether whereas none shall know nor heare anie newes of me whether I hée aliie or dead, yea, there whereas the brute beasts cannot liue, for that so false and distoiall a man as I am deserueth not to liue, whereas they do receiue comfort of the Sun and the swéetnesse of the aire. So saying these and many other things, this good knight trauailed, being verie furious, not desiring anie other thing, but wherein it might cost him his life. And as he trauailed a space in this sort, and being entered a good waie into the wildernesse, looking before him that waie which his horse carried him, he sawe come forth out of a narrow path, from amongst a bushment of thicke trées, a mightie bigge knight, mounted vpon a mightie horse, all armed in blacke armour, so bigge membred, that he lacked little to be a Gyant, and as hée drew nigh vnto him, hée sawe that hée carryed his eauer lift vp, and that he was of so furious semblaunce, and braue countenaunce, and by his bigge stature and well proportioned members, hée séemed to bée verie valiant, and séeing him come in this manner, he sayde within him∣selfe. Oh that my fortune were such, that this whom I now méete, were that Milo, or that mightie Hercules, or some other of no lesse force, strength, and valiantnesse than they, that might so orment my strength in such sorte, that this my bodie so disoial, might remaine in these fieldes for oode, vnto the brute beasts: but my soule into the place of ease in eternall glorie, for whome it was created. In saying these wordes, this bigge knight merailing verie much at the braue and gentle disposition of the knight of the Sunne, dyd staie his mightie horse, and beholding him hée sayd: Tell mée Knight, art thou by fortune of the court of the Emperour rebatio? I am, sayde the knight of the Sunne: Then tell me, if thou commest from thence, if there remaineth a knight that is called the knight of the Sunne,
sayd this bigge knight? Wherefore wouldest thou knowe this, sayd the knight of the Sunne? I would know this, sayd he other, for that I come from a farre Countrie in his de∣mand, for to kill him. The knight of the Sun was so farre out of order and angrie, that it grieued him nothing to heare him saie so, & therefore he said: Tell mée who thou art, and what is the occasion that thou wilt kil him, for that I am he that in this world doth most desire the death of this knight, and if thou doest tell mée this which I doe aske thée, I wil tell thée where thou shalt finde this knight of the Sunne, and not farre from this place thou shalt méete with him. Then the great knight who was glad of these newes, sayd: Thou shalt vnderstand that I am called Brandimardo, and sonne to Affricano that was king of Media, hée that the knight of the Sunne slew in Babylon, and I am come for no other thing into this Countrie, but to reuenge the death of my Father, and trauailing towardes the mightie Citie of Constantinople, there were certaine Knights which did mis∣vse mée, and hauing battaile with them, of seauen that were together I slew foure, and the other thrée fled, and harboured themselues in this wildernesse, & I following them lost my waie, in such sort, that I haue béene foure dayes wandering héerein without eating anie other thing than such wilde fruites as these trées doth yéeld. This is the whole resolu∣tion of thy demaund, therefore tell mée now that which thou promisedst vnto mée, for that I shall receiue so greate pleasure as though I were made Lorde ouer all the world, to méete with this knight so quicklie as thou hast sayde. Then Brandimardo (sayde hée) thou shalt vnderstand that I am this knight of the Sunne whome thou doest seeke, and truth it is that I slew Affricano in a valiant battael that we hadde in the mightie Citie of Babylon, but I slewe him in equall battayle béeing defied by him first, so that thou nor none other hath anie reason for to demaund his death at my handes. Oh immortall Gods (sayd Brandimardo) what great cur∣tesie is this that your diuine maiesties hath shewed vnto
me this daie, in that I haue met with this knight, which is the thing that I haue most desired in this world. And in say∣ing these words he put downe his beauer, and hauing neuer a speare, for that he brake his with the seauen knights that before he did combat with, hée drew out a verie heauie and , and layd  the Knight of the Sun; Come and let us begin the battaile, for that I am determined not to depart from hence till such time as one of vs doth re∣maine héere dead in this wildernesse. Then the kniht of the Sunne béeing determined not to make battayle with him with  woord, for that hée had stroken therewith the Claridiana his , supposing that there was no knight worthie to receiue anie blowes therewith, hée went vnto an ouer-growen Oke, whose branches were very bigge, he set both his handes vnto a branch thereof, and dyd teare it as though it had bene a great willow, and cutting off the al branchs, and reteining it with his hands, he made full of knots, and of so great waight, that sonie other knight had inough to doe to lift it from the ground. But Brandimardo séeing that hée would enter with him in , not knowing what should moue him there∣vnto, hauing other weapon, he sayd: Knight of the Sunne, wherfore haue you done this, hauing at thy girdle a sword? It séeeth vnto: me that thou haddest rather make thy bat∣aile with bates like a base Countrie man, than with thy sword, as becommeth a good knight. Then the knight of the Sunne sayd: Thou shalt vnderstand Brandimardo, that I do refuse to make battaile with my sword for no other thing ilt this, for that few dais past (without anie knowledge thereof) I made battaile with a damsell who is of high estate , considering that I did strike and oppresse her here with, there is no mortall knight that is worthie to blowe therewith, and héere I do tell thee, that first I woulde consent to bée torne in peeces than to vnheath it to strike thée. This Brandimardo was a young knight, Affricano was slaine, hee had not  the order of Knighthoode, and was one of the
most valiantest & strongest that was to bée found in all the Pagan Countrie, & as it seemed afterward vnto the of the Sunne, he was of reater force and strength than his Father, and ws of more dexteritie in battaile. Also with this he was verie furious and sut, that at such time as he was angie, there was none so hardie as durst abide before him, although they were a thousand knightes, yet hée feared not them for that he was so valiant and hardie, who séeing that his aduersarie wold not make battaile with the sword, because he would not haue that vantage, he sheahed his sword againe, and went vnto that great Oke whereas th knight of the Sun had rent off his branch, hée set both his handes vnto another of no lesse greatnesse than his, and renting it off with great facilitie, as one of great srength, after that hée had dressed and righted it in the best manner he could, with great furie he went against the night of the Sunne, who was abiding his comming, at which meeting, they did the one charge vpon the other with so  furie. that before hath not beene séene a battaile in such order and of so vnvsuall weapons, so well foughten, for y• ther blowes were verie thicke, and stroke with outragious urie, in such sorte that there was none that id behold them but had great feare and dreade onelie in the sight of their blowes. In this sort they  more than one houre, and neuer , charging one another that it was wonderfull to behold, and no aduantage knowen of either part, yet were they greatly amzed eer of them at the force and in epeciall Brandimardo, for that before me hee had  the force of many knightes and sout did he neuer proue the like in all points, in him which was before him, & that not without great reason he was so praised and ealted amongest all the , yet notwithstanding of his person he was  and furious, that not one point of his courage dyd  him in that battaile, but he did in such sorte inforce  and charge the knight of the Sunne, that hee gaue him verie wel to vnderstand, that it was conuenient to vse the vttermst
of his courage, and the two Squires that were present dyd tremble for verie feare to see with what great furie these two dyd make their terrible combat, but both these knightes bée∣ing verie full of wrath and anger because the battaile endu∣red so long betwixt them, they stretched themselues vppon their stiroppes, and tooke their knotted battes in both theyr handes, and stroke each other such terrible blowes vppon their healmes, that all astonyed they both fell downe vppon their horses neckes forwardes, and their bates béeing bro∣ken al to péeces flew into the aire and made a terrible noise, but when these noble warriours came vnto their remem∣braunces and found themselues without weapon, either of them layde handes vppon his aduersarie, and dyd embrace other with so great strength, that it séemed their breasts and backes would méete together, if theyr good armour had not defended the same. In this sorte they were wrastling the one with the other a good while without anie aduauntage, so that in conclusion they were constrained to separate them∣selues, and with greate furie either of them ranne vnto a mightie Oke, and laying holde on bigger branches than be∣fore they had, with great swiftnesse they fore them off, and dressing them in the best wise they could, they returned vn∣to their former battaile, striking the one vppon the other so strong and mightie blowes, that all the wide and great wil∣dernesse dyd sound at the furie of them. But yet this second battaile dyd indure but a while, for that although that Brandimardo was verie valiant, and shewed himselfe to ée excéeding stout and furious, yet the knight of the Sunne béeing wrathfull and kindled in ire, at his terrible blowes there was no resistance to bée made, for that hée stroke them in such order and so thicke, that this stout Brandimardo dyd plainlie see that his strength dyd increase, and repented himselfe that euer hée came from so farre Countries to haue contention with him, yet notwithstanding because he would vauntage himselfe of his great strength, hée raysed himselfe in his stiroppes, and with both his handes hée stroke such a blowe at the knight of the Sunne, that hée astonied him,
and his horse carried him about the field: but Brandimar∣do dyd not long glorie in giuing this blowe, for that the knight of the Sunne came straight wayes againe vnto his remembraunce, abandoned with wrath and , hée retur∣ned his horse with great furie, and with both his handes hée stroke him so furious a blowe vppon the his healme, that hée made it flie from his head a great waie from him, and gaue a ound lyke a Bell, and his mightie bat fell to the ground all to shieuered, Brandimardo remaining so astonished and from himselfe, as though hée had béene dead, and laie a long vppon his horse necke, voiding from his mouth, nose, and eyes great abundaunce of bloud, his horse béeing tormented with the force thereof, dyd carrie his maister into the woode amongest the thicke trées, in such sorte, that not making anie staying, he ranne more than two miles with him before that euer Brandimardo came againe vnto himselfe. Then the knight of the Sunne séeing him in that case, dyd leaue him, without making anie account thereof, but forthwith sette spurres vnto his horse, and rode forwardes on his iourney, saying vnto himselfe. Oh that I had met with Brandimardo at some other time than now, then would I haue made more account of him, and woulde haue done him more honour than I dyd at this pre∣sent, for that he séemeth vnto me to be a merualous good and valiant knight. But what account can hée make of another, that estéemeth not his owne lyfe? In this sorte trauailed the knight of the Sunne foure daies in that wildernesse, where∣soeuer his horse woulde carrie him, and not by his gouern∣ment, maintaining himselfe with such wilde fruit as were there nourished, no more than was sufficient to nourish na∣ture, because hée would not kill himselfe desperalie. It was one houre after the battaile was ended before that the stout Brandimardo came againe vnto himselfe, who finding him∣selfe alone and without his healme, his noe and face all swelled, and his eares full of bloud, hée straight wayes ell into reckoning in what perplexitie and miserie h was brought, then like a mad man, urious, and from himselfe, hee
did blaspheme against his Gods, and against all their pow∣ers, for that they had shewed themselues so contrarie against him, and returning to séeke his healme, the Hystorie dooth leaue him and the knight of the Sunne, for to tell you what passed in this time in the Court of the Emperour rebatio. How in the Court of the Emperour Trebatio was found lacking the Knight of the Sunne, and being all verie sad and sorrowfull, there came Letters from the wie Lyr∣gandeo, which made them all amazed. Chap. 13. THE night being past in which the knight of the Sunne departed, earlie in the mor∣ning the next daie, the Emperour Treba∣tio with his sonne Rosicleer, accompamed with those worthie Princes and Knightes, went vnto his chamber for to sée him, but when they could not finde him, his armour, nor his squires, they were all verie sorrie for his sodaine departure, yet wer they glad because he was escaped and void of perill: but the Emperour commaunded straight waies that many knights should goe forth and séeke him, as also the straunge knight, for that he was verie sorrowfull that he departed in such sort without knowing him, because he shewed himselfe to be a valiant and worthie knight. So by reason of the depar∣ture of the knight of the Sunne, they were all that daie in suspence, being all together in a quadran that was in the great hal, after that dinner was done, there entered in at the doore of the pallace, a Gentlewoman of verie strange attire, contrarie vnto that Countrie, and after her entered a sauage Gyant, ferce and terrible to beholde, without anie other ap∣parell or armour, but a verie thicke and bushie haire where∣with he was couered, with two great hornes lyke a Bull on his orehead, and a great taile behinde him like an Oxe, who brought vpon his shoulder a chest fast locked, and made no more a doe at his entering into the hall, but set it downe on the ground, and so departed againe that he was neuer more
séene, whose strange , caused great laughter vnto the Emperour and all those worthe Princes, and to the contrarie, great feare and dread vnto the Empresse, the princesse Ouia and Lindaraza, and vnto all the rest of the Ladies and damsells that were there present, for that his sauage countenaunce was verie terrible to behold. Then the strange gentlewoman making great reuerece vnto the Emperour, said as followeth. HE that doth rule and gouerne the high Heauens and Earth, saue and increase thy high estate, most mightie Emperour Trebatio: the wise Lirgandeo, & the king Florion of Persia, (who greatly desireth to serue thée) as well for the highnesse of thy person, as for the great friend∣ship that they haue with thy sonne the knight of the Sun, doe send gréeting, and doe kisse thy emperiall handes, and doth most hartely request thée by mée, that you would take and accept them as your owne subiects, for that thou shalt finde them alwaies faithfull and loyall vnto the death: and besides all this, y• wise Lirgandeo doth send thée this pack∣et of letters, by the which, as one that hath atchiued by his wisedome, the acknowledging of things for to come, doth giue thée aduisement o some that is requisite and doth ac∣complish verie much thy honour, as shall appeare by the same. And in saying these wordes, the gentlewoman knée∣led downe before the Emperour, and kissing his hands she deliuered vnto him the letters. Then the Emperour with great loue did cause her to arise, and tooke the letters and gaue them vnto his sonne Rosicleer, for to reade them, who did open them and reade them, that all that were present, might heare it, the contents were as followeth. HIgh and mightie Emperour of Grecia, although these my letters be strange and new vnto thée, yet is it no new thing, in the good wil which I haue to serue thée, for that aboue all Princes in the world thou doest deserue the same, as also for the great dutie and seruice in which we are bound vnto thy sonne, doeth con∣straine vs to acknowledge thée to be our Lord, and to giue
the counsell as vnto our vrie good friend. The hearts of valiant and stout barons, there is nothing suffiient to di∣sturbe them, and thereore in few words I will shew thée the cause wherefore I doe write vnto thée. Thou shalt vn∣derstande good Emperour, that all the Pagans of the against thée, and in a short time there will together so great an armie, that those of Darins & Xerxes, altogether were not so manie, and the chiefe Cap∣taine and generall of them all is, the Emperour Alicandro, father vnto the Princesse Lindabrides, Emperour of the , king of the Scitas and Lord ouer the orientall region, who as thy  will passe into Grecia; with determination and good will for o destroy the. He hath in his companie so manie  and valiant knightes & other of mightie stature, that it shall be requisite, thy great power and valiant courage, with the ayde and helpe of all thy friends. On the other side doth arise the  re∣gions, who with great and mightie armies, shall  all the Grocian fieldes against thée, but haue a good heart i all things, and make thy selfe readie for that these mightie things are not ordained for hase stomacks, but for the migh∣tie and generous as thou art. Neither doth the valiantnesse of the heart shew it selfe so much, as it doth in receiuing the blowes of Fortune, who alwaies showeth it selfe most contrarie, at such time as he is exalted vnto the high∣est of her whole. And for that all that euer I can declare vn∣to thée in this matter is spoken of in a Prophesie, which the wise Artemidoro writ vpō y• fore front of this palace, I wil inlarge no , but saye, that all shall come to passe as it is ther written. Also my nephew king  and I, wilbe shortly in Grecia, with so much people as possible we , and take you no sorow and grief for the  of the knight of the  for although manie daie sha passe before you sée him, yet the time will come, that his sight shalbe more acceptable vnto thy royall person, then at this present, wherewith▪ I conclude in kissing thy Emperiall hands.
This Letter being read by Rosicleer, it caused in them some alteration, saue onelie in the Emperour Trebatio, and in him that did reade it, for the which they  mo∣ued semblance, neither did appeare in their faces that they receiued anie trouble thereat, although the Letter did im∣port much matter of great importance, because in equal sort they could suffer both aduersitie and prosperitie. This bée∣ing done, the Gentlewoman did straight waies open the coffer that the sauage brought in, & tooke out thereof a sute of armour all red, of so fine a coulour and glittering stéele, that all the péeces thereof séemed as though they had béene made of fine Rubies, and vpon the réast of the there a crowne of verie  and rich sones, that them verie wel to vnderstand for whom it was. And when she had taken it all out, shée turned her selfe vnto the Em∣perour and saide: This armour the wise Lyrgandeo doth send vnto thée, for that considering the great daungers and perilles that are ordained against thée, hée hath nothing at this present to send thée, that shall bée more profitable, and hée doth desire thée that thou wilt put on no other armour but this, for that hée hath made it with his owne handes, and vsed therein all his knowledge, onelie for the safegard of thy person. The Emperour Trebatio was verie gladde and ioyfull of that armour the which the Gentlewoman brought him, but much more of the good aduise and war∣ning the which the wise Lyrgandeo dyd write him, as from his good and perfect friend, and knew not how to gratifie so great friendship & good wil as the wise man did shew vnto him. Then those mightie Princes & worthie knights which were there present, sayde vnto the Emperour, that it was good he should vnderstand in putting remedie to preuent that which the wise man did giue him warning of, & to put all the people of his Empire in a readnesse that he bée not taken tardie, and also to write vnto his friendes for their aie and helpe all that was possible. So amongest them all, he first that arose vppe was the Prince Clauerin∣do, and offered himselfe to departe out of hande into
the kingdome of Fraunce, and to bring from thence all the people that euer he could make. Then straightwaies arose vp the good king Sacridoro, and said as much: and after him Bargandel of Bohemia, and the two princes Rodomarte and Rodofeo, and many other mo that were there present, and subiect vnto the Emperour, whome altogether did offer vn∣to him ayde, with their owne persons, and with all the peo∣ple that they might well bring out of their countries. Here the valiant Tartarian Zoylo, could not offer anie ayde or helpe vnto the Emperour, for that he was certaine and sure, that the king his father, and all his people would not be against the Emperour Alicandro, neither could not that worthy Oristedes, for that the people of that destroyed Troy, were verie fewe, neither could not the king Alama∣des, for that hi kingdome of Cornewall, was in great Bri∣taine▪ Likewise the Prince Liriamandro, for that he was fullie certified, that his Father the King of Hungaria, came in the fauour of the king Oliuerio, against the Em∣perour Trebatio, but yet all foure of them did offer to ayde him with their persons, promising neuer to faile him, so long as life did last. At which friendly offer, the Emperour Trebatio, receiued so great ioye & pleasure to sée with what good will they did offer themselues, that his ioye did much more surmount the anger that he receued, when he heard the newes sent him by the wise Lirgandeo, and gaue vnto his sonne Rosicleer, the charge in aunswering of the wise man, gratifying him very much for his good aduice, as also for the ayde of his person and people, as he wrote vnto him. So Rosicleer, tooke the charge vppon him for to dispath the Dainsell, vnto whome the Empresse his Mother gaue ma∣ny rich and precious iewells. And he wrote vnto the wise man a letter, in the name of the Emperour, such a one, that he receued great pleasure in the sight thereof. So after that this Damsell was departed from the Citie, within fewe dayes after the prince Clauerindo departed for France, and Bagandel for Bohemia, and the other princes euery one in∣to his owne countrie.
Then the good king Sacridoro at such time as hée shoulde depart towards his Countrie, hee went to take his leaue of his great friend Rosicleer, who as vnto the best friende hee had in the worlde, did embrace him, and not without shed∣ding of many teares, he sayd. Ah my good friends, I had thought that all my euill for∣tunes had bene concluded, that you might haue gone, as is great reason, to haue taken your rest and ease, whereas you haue béene so long looked for of that worthie éene Ori∣selua, but now I sée my fortune to be such, that wh a man doth thinke himselfe to bée at most quietnesse ad ease, then doth shée beginne a new to giue mee troubles, to that new I haue more néede of your helpe and aide thn heeretofe, desiring of God to gratifie you for the same, for that of my selfe I am not able, and hee doth well  how ∣uous it is to mée as now to leaue your considering the state of all thinges, it is I should be absent one daie from the Court. Then the good king Sacridoro with great loue dyd embrace Rosicleer, and sayd. My good Lorde, in nothing can fortune shew her selfe more fauourable vnto me, than to ofer occasion wherein I may imploie the good will that I haue to serue you, onelie to paie parte of that wherein I am so greatlie bound vnto you, and these which you doe call misfortunes, are vnto mee good and happie fortunes, as well to haue occasion not to loose your companie so soone, which is so acceptable vnto me, as also the more for the extolling of your fortune: and my good Lorde, you ought not so greatlie to  that thinges should so fall out to make you carefull, and put your friendes to trouble, for that béeing your Father and bro∣ther and you of so great highnesse, of pue force you shoulde shew your selfe stout against enuie, and enimie vnto them of the worlde, for that the most highest Pine  are more assaulted of the windes than the other lowe tres, and the highest mountaines more subiect vnto the thundering and tempests that are conicaled in the Clowdes. Thus these
and many other thinges passed betwéene these two good and perfect friendes, till such times as with many teares they tooke their leaue the one of the other. So after that the king Sacridoro had taken his leaue of the Emperour, the Empresse, and of all the rest of his friends, hée departed out of the mightie Citie of Constantinople, and comming to the sea side, he dyd embarke himselfe in a good shippe, and made saile towards the kingdome of Antiochia, and Rosicleer re∣mained in great solitarinesse for lacke of his companie, for that the loue which hée bare vnto him was verie greate, who séeing how much it did touch him, that which shoulde happen, although his father the Emperour Trebatio, with great diligence did vnderstand in the prouiding of all things necessarie. He likewise on the other part did all that euer he could for to ioyne together the armie, and in writing vnto his friends, giuing them to vnderstand of the great néede that he had of them. But the absence of the knight of the Sunne was vnto him verie grieuous, for that he would not that at that time he should bée absent from the Court, and for to tel you what passed with him, the Hystorie doth leaue the other till time. How the knight of the Sunne came forth of the wildernes of Grecia, and sailing by sea, was by a mightie storme carried vnto the solitarie Iland, whereas was the diuellish Fauno. Chap. 14. VVIth great sorrow & griefe did this Historie leaue the knight of the Sun, trauailing through that wide, long, & thicke wildernesse of Grecia, after that he had made the battaile with Brandimardo, in the which he trauailed many daies, and could neuer find the waie out, in which time there happened vnto him many great and notable aduentures, the which the author doth leaue to rehearse, for to make short this first part. So after a good while that the knight of the Sunne had trauailed in that wildernesse alone with his two Squires, in the end he
came vnto the sea side, whose fortune was such, that at the same instant there was come a land out of a boat certaine Mariners y• came to séeke fresh water for a ship that was at the sea a good waie from the land, in the which ship was to the number of thirtie knights that came from the Iland of Canda, and were bound vnto Mfia, which is now called Transiluania, vnto certaine triumphs and feasts that were there ordained, and as the Mariners were returning for to imbarke themselues, the knight of the Sun did request them to receiue him into their boate, for y• it stood him  vp∣pon to passe into y• Country. The Mariners séeing him of so gentle disposition & wel armed, they durst not say to the en∣trarie, but said they were verie well content therewith. So this good knight did alight from his hore, & also his squires, and entered into the boate with their horses, the which being done, the Mariners began to row with great force till such time as they came vnto the ship, whereas they were verie well receiued of the knights, for y• the comlinesse of his per∣son, ioyntlie with the strange riches of his inchanted aror, caused all them that did beholde him to haue him in great estimation, and to giue him the honour that he deserued, but when that he did lift vp the beauer of his , they were all meruailouslie amazed to see how nature had wrought so great perfection in his face. Besides all this, in his cose∣nance he shwed so great grautie and , that as he was tall and verie well made, that there was  one, as the wise Artendoro sayth, that euer dyd see him, but his heart did alter, and waxed timerous. And this was  of the excellentest vertues that was in this Knight, tht hée neuer sawe knight in the face, although he were a straun∣ger; or otherwise knowen, that he would  or make anie euill account of him, and this vertue did increase in him from his youth, till such time as hée came vnto the perfect∣nesse of his strength, which was at such time as he had bat∣taile with that stout and valiaunt Bramarant, as shall bée shewed you in the sequale of this Hystorie, for vntyll that time, his force and strength, as also the bignesse of his
members did dailie increase. So hauing verie good enter∣tainment by the knightes that were in the shippe, one of them asked him of whence hée was, and he sayde, that hée was of Grecia, and for that he sayde no more vnto them, there was not one of them that asked him anie other questi∣an, although it séemed vnto them by his semblance, that there was some thing that did trouble and grieue him verie much hée was so heauie. Thus they trauailed two daies together with prosperous windes, passing awaie the time in the best manner hée could, but the third daie there arose a greate torment in so terrible sorte, that the shippe wherein they were was in great perill to bée lost. The windes dyd in∣crease euerie moment more and more, in such furious sort, that all the cunning of the mariners did not serue for the go∣uernment of the ship, but were driuen of necessitie for to yéelde her vnto the curtesie of the winde and seas, driuing wheresoeuer it pleased them. In this sort were they tum∣bled and tossed with that tempest all that daie and the night following, without anie semblaunce of calmenesse, and loo∣ked euerie minute for to bée cast awaie, which put greate feare amongest them all, sauing vnto the knight of the Sun, who séeing the Sea so troubled, and the mightie waues cau∣sed by those terrible windes, fighting one with another, he was not alonelie without all feare, but also dyd lyke well thereof, and it was agréeable vnto his minde, as vnto one that was wearie of his owne lyfe, but the next daie follow∣ing, at such time as they were without all hope to escape that danger, fortune dyd so serue them, that the storme be∣ganne to asswage, in such sorte, that the Mariners might gouerne their shippe, but they found that they were put a great waie leward from the place whether as they were de∣termined to goe, and sailing forwards on their iourney, they discouered a farre off an Iland, and out of the middest there∣of they might perceiue ascend vp into the aire at times, great flames and sparkes of fire, with a terrible darke and thicke smoake, as though they hadde béene burning of some drie things. And when they came nigh vnto the same Ilande,
the knights were all desirous to goe there a land, for to ease and refresh themselues for that they were out of quiet with the storme passed, but the Marriners knowing the Iland, haled iackes aboord, and ran of from the land all that euer they could, crying out & saying, they would not go thether, for that it was the Iland of the diuell, called the solitarie I∣land, and how that if they went thether they should all die the death. When the knights of Candia heard these wordes, they were all greatlie amazed, for they hadde heard before time verie much of that Iland. But the knight of the Sun who was inclined by his valiant heart to attempt high & migh∣tie things, with great desire for to sée what it was that they so greatlie feared, he asked of the Mariners wherefore they called that the Iland of the Diuell, and why they feared so much the death if they should go thether? And although all the knights that were there present had heard verie much of the great perill and daunger of that Iland, yet there was none that could declare the certaintie thereof, but an olde Pilot that came as passenger in the same shippe, who had heard the whole truth thereof by certaine men which lefte the sayd Iland in respect of the great daunger, and he séeing that the knight of the Sunne had great desire to knowe the mysterie therof, in the presence of all the knights that were there present, began to declare the same as followeth. YOu shall vnderstand (gentle Knight) that this Ilande was called in times past, the Ilande of Artimaga, for that it was gouerned by a woman so called, who was so abhominable and euill, that neuer the lyke was séene nor heard of amongst women, for that after she came vnto the age of fiftéene yéeres vntill the time of her death, which was more than thirtie yéeres, shée neuer beléeued in God but in the diuell, and there was no daie that passed ouer her head, but she sawe the diuell in the figure of a man, and had talke and conuersation with her, as though he had bene her husband, and she did euerie daie twice humble her selfe
vnto him and did worship him. The father and mother of this Artimaga were verie euill and peruerse, & being Lords and gouernours of this Iland at their death, they left this Artimaga of the age of ten yéeres, little more or lesse, and for that there was no heire male at their decease, she was forth∣with accepted for Ladie and gouernesse of the whole Iland, who when she sawe that she was absolute of her selfe, and all in her disposition, she gaue her selfe so much vnto all the and vies of this worlde, that for her abhominable sinnes and wickednesse, God dyd permit that when this Artimaga came vnto the age of fiftéene yéeres, shée was de∣ceiued with the diuell, and would neuer consent vnto mar∣riage, for that shée would not submit her selfe vnder the obe∣dience of her husband, but yet she had more than thirtie gallants at her commaundement, and had a great delight to chaunge euerie yéere so many more, and with the greate conuersation that she had continuallie with the diuell, she came to bée so wise and cunning in the art Magicke, that there was none in all her time, although hée were neuer so cunning, that might bee compared vnto her. Shée vsed so many and diuerse sortes of inchauntmentes, that all those of the Iland dyd feare her verie much, and although her ab∣hominable and horrible lie séemed verie euill vnto them all, yet durst they doe no other thing, but to obey her for their Ladie and gouernesse. It so fell out that this cur∣sed woman was neuer brought to bedde, nor neuer was with childe, although (in consideration thereof many times shée woulde not for the space of two or thrée moneths to∣gether vse the companie but onelie of one man, for the which shée receiued great sorrowe and griefe at her verye heart, in séeing that shée coulde not haue anie issue of her bodie that might succéede her in the Lordshippe of that I∣lande, and many times when shée was in companie with the Diuell, shee dyd complayne verie much thereof, pray∣ing him earnestlie with greate deuotion to doe so much for her, that she might haue a sonne, with whom she might com∣fort her selfe, and put some remedie vnto the great sorrowe
which she receiued at her heart, for lacke thereof. Then the deceitfull diuell, full of pollicie, & enimie vnto all humaine generatiō, hauing great desire to bring vnto ende that euill fortuned woman, the more surer to make his pray vpon her soule, bethought himselfe of a meruailous eull, and sayde, that vnto that time he would not consent that she should haue any generation, in consideration that she loued him so wel, he wold not that she should conceiue by anie humaine creature, but onelie by him, and that he determined to lye with her, certifying that she should fullie persuade her selfe that y• sonne that should be borne of her, should be the most strongest that should be found in all the world, and in res∣pect of her loue, that Iland should be spoken of in all the world. These words of the diuell, caused so great ioye and plea∣sure in Artimaga, that as one from her selfe she fell downe prostrate at his féete and kissed them, for that great benefit offered vnto her, and with great importunaie she desired him straight way to put it in vre. Then the diuell hauing no other determination but onely to deceiue her, saide: thou shalt vnderstande Artimaga that there is not giuen vnto mée so much power, for to know thee nor no humaine wo∣man, in the forme of a rationall man, but in some other fi∣gure and forme of a wilde beast that is furious and won∣derfull, the which is onely for to shew the difference that is betwixt our great power, and that of men. And againe, that which shalbe begotten by mee, to be of much more force and strength. When that Artimaga heard him say these wordes, with the great ioye which she receiued, she was voide of all care, and saide vnto him, that she should receiue great content∣ment and pleasure therein, although he came in the most vgliest and fearefullest forme that might be. So the diuell fell at agréement with her, that vpon a certaine day she should goe into a Parke that was in that Ilande, being full of meruailous great and thicke trées, (whereas she did manie times goe a hunting) and that he
would there tarrie her comming. Then the diuell for to accomplish and bring to passe that which he had promised, went vnto the desarts of Affrica, & out from the most high∣est and aspar parts of all the mount Atlas, he brought forth a monstrous beast called Fauno, the most terriblest amongst all beasts, and they saie that by reason of the great abhomi∣nation vsed in times past by men, hauing copulation with monstrous beastes, did so alter humane nature, that in pro∣cesse of time it concluded in this so terrible and monstrous beast, the fashion and forme thereof was as I will declare vnto you: His bodie was as bigge as a great bull, in forme and shape lyke a Lion, with his féete full of rugged haire, and the clawes of his féete as bigge as twice a mans finger, and a span long, his breast as big as of a horse, and necked like an Elephant, and from that part vpward both head and face like a man, with a long beard of hard and thicke haire, but the head was verie bigge, and out of the middest of his forehead came forth an horne as big as a mans arme and as long, whose force was such, as also in his armes, that there was no beast so furious and fierce, that was able to indure before him. Almightie God shewed great fauour vnto man∣kinde, for that of these beastes there are but a few in the world, and they are not to be found but on the highest parts of the mount Atlas, which is all desert and no inhabitation, for if they were whereas here is people, one of these beasts alone were sufficient for to destroie a whole kingdome. So the diuel finding out this monstrous beast, he entered with∣in him, and brought him vnto this Iland, and tarried with∣in the Parke till the comming of Artimaga at the houre appointed, who with the greate desire that she had to con∣ceiue by the diuel, detracted no time, but kept her houre, and although she had great astonishment at the fiercenesse and terrible semblance of that monster, yet for all that it did not abate her courage, beléeuing of a certaintie that it was the diuell, and for that the diuell was within the monster, hée spake by the mouth of y• Fauno all that was requisite. To conclude, he deceiued Artimaga, and by the permission of
God, for her sinnes and abhominable desire, she was concei∣ued by that diuellish Fauno, in such sort, that she remayned with child. Then she returned againe vnto her house, and the diuell carried the monster vnto the place from whence he brought him, and in the end of thrée moneths she felt her selfe with child, for the which she receiued so great ioy and contentment as euer she did in all her life, beleeuing of a cer∣taintie that the sonne that shoulde be borne of her, shoulde bée the most strongest and mightiest in all the world, and neuer ceased giuing thankes vnto the diuell, for that he was the author and father thereof. But in consideration that his originall is euill, and hath no other desire nor delight but to deceiue all humane generation: euen so all his workes and déedes cannot be but euill, and in great daunger & pre∣iudice vnto our soules. So the time was expired & the houre come that Artimaga should be deliuered, and she was so big, broade, and swelled, that she could not moue her selfe from one place vnto another, in such sort, that all that dyd sée her were greatlie amazed, for that shée séemed to be foure times so bigge as she was before, and by reason that the fruit of her cohabitation was deformed, monstrous, and diuellish, they had no hope of anie naturall birth by ordinarie course, but rent and tore the bellie and entrailes of the mother, wherewith shée dyed and yéelded her soule vnto him whom shée so much beléeued and worshipped, and the childe came forth, the most horriblest and terriblest creature that euer nature formed. This childe was scarce out of his mothers wombe, when that with a diuellish furie he tore in péeces all that euer were before him, and ran out o the doores and tooke the field, destroying and killing all that euer hée met withall, and neuer ceased till he came vnto the Parke and woode wheras he was begotten, and there he remained cer∣taine dayes, and neuer came forth till hée was growen to a bigger stature, although then when he was borne, he was as bigge as reasonable Lion. He had not remained full halfe a yéere in these woodes, but he increased so much, that he sée∣med to be as bigge as an Elephant, his forme and figure
was much more horrible than that of his father, although he did resemble him verie much, and besides all this, he had a whole legion of diuels within his bodie, who in a figure of armed men, many times came forth at his horrible mouth, and did great harme whereas they went, so that for this oc∣casion he is called the diuellish or possessed Fauno. So after∣ward when that he was come vnto his full strength, which was within halfe a yéere, he left the woods, & went through∣out all the Iland, & did so much harme, that he left none a∣liue where he became, some slaine, and other some hearing the report of his crueltie, fled awaie, so y• the Iland is lefte desolate, and no inhabitants therin, neither anie other liuing thing. So all those y• haue anie notice of this Iland, doe not onelie refuse to land vppon it, but also they dare not come nigh it with their ships, for that many times this possessed Fauno hath ben séene enter into the sea a great stones cast, when that anie ship or barke were nigh the shore, and if that by misfortune those vnhappie trauailers doe fall into his hands, there is none that escapeth with their lius, for that with the horne that he hath in his forehead, at one only blow he teareth a ship in péeces, then after with his strong armes and vnmercifull téeth he rents & teares in péeces all that is before him, and there is no strength of man, nor armour so strong, that can withstand his urie, for that his hoarie skin is of so great hardnes, y• it is not possible for anie weapon to enter it. This is y• occasion (gentle knight) y• this Iland is so much spoken of, and so feareful vnto all sailers that passeth this waie, and why it is called the Iland of the diuell, and that fire which we doe sée, with that thicke smoake that as∣cendeth into the aire, is all that which procéedeth out of the terrible and horrible mouth of that diuellish Fauno, for that it is full of infernall diuells. By this you may iudge what the monster should be, that throweth from him such won∣derfull and terrible infections. This worthie knight of the Sun at this discourse of the olde Pilot was greatly amazed, and so were all the knights of Candia that came in the same ship, the which thing seemed
vnto them to be one of the straungest that euer happened in all the world, yet the straungenesse thereof was not so ter∣rible vnto all the rest of the hearers, as it gaue great desire vnto the valiant & worthie knight of the Sun to go a land at that Iland, and to goe and seeke out that possessed Fauno, for that the hearing thereof did not cause anie feare or dread in his couragious heart, as he who for such like attempts (a∣boue all other stout knights) was created, & did litle estéeme the venturing of his life, whereas the honour and glorie of such worthinesse is put in aduenture, and in especiall in that time abhorring himselfe in consideration of his fact, he was so furious and desperate, that he neither feared nor dreaded the entrie into hell, much lesse the Iland. Thus he béeing fullie determined to goe a land, called vnto him Aurelio and Biniano his squires, and calling them apart, in shedding many salt teares which ranne down his graue countenance, he sayd these wordes. My good friends, God doth know what great griefe it is vnto me for to declare this which I haue to saie, and what sorrow I doe féele at my heart before I doe vtter it, not so much for that it doth touch me (although my misfortune a∣boue al other in the world is most strangest) as it is for that I doe sée, at such time as I should doe some thing for you, & to giue you reward for your great good seruice done vnto me, I am constrained to abandon and leaue you alone, with∣out any hope euer to sée you more, this is the thing that doth so grieue me, ioyntlie to consider how my losse will bée la∣mented of my father and mother, my brother, and all my friends, that to declare it my tongue doth faile mee. Ah my good friends, you shall vnderstand that my departure out of Constantinople was for no other intent but for to leaue the worlde, and for to goe whereas I might shorten my daies, and thether whereas it might not bée knowen vn∣to anie whether I be aliue or dead, for that my euill for∣tune is such, that it doeth not atcomplish mée for to liue anie longer héere amongest men, and in consideration heereof (I dyd at our departure) so much request you that
you should haue remained with the Emperour my Father, for that he and my brother Rosicleer might reward you for the great seruice done vnto me, for that I am not able to doe it, and being at that time so much importuned by you, that by anie meanes I could not leaue your companie, but now the time is come that my sorrowfull destinie hath per∣mitted, that from this daie forwardes I am constrained to leaue you, and to make reckoning that of you nor of my fa∣ther and brother I was neuer knowen. The occasion therof I will not declare vnto you, for that alonelie my hart (who doth suffer the inconuenience) shal know it. But thus much I will saie vnto you, that if the perill in loosing of my soule did not disturbe me, I haue sufficient cause to giue my selfe a thousand deaths with my owne handes, and for that my life is so heauie and grieuous vnto mée, and that my force & strength is not sufficient for to suffer the same, I am deter∣mined for to go a land on this Iland of y• Fauno, and there to end my vnhappie daies, and if it so fall out, fortune to be fauourable vnto me, in that I do ouercome and kil the mon∣ster, I shall doe great seruice vnto God, in taking out of the world a thing so fierce and abhominable, then afterwarde shall that Iland be verie solitarie and fit for my purpose, where I meane to end my sorrowfull daies. And if my for∣tune be such that I die in the power of the Fauno, (as sure I am that I owe a death) then shall I there paie the death that is due vnto this my mortall bodie, and the debt that is due vnto this vnhappie and troublesome world. There∣fore my good friends, I doe most heartelie desire you, for the great good loue which you dyd alwaies beare vnto me, that at this present you will shew it to be more than héeretofore, and to be conformable vnto my will, and to thinke well of this my pretence, and to haue patience, and perswade with your selues in this my departure, and to comfort your selues in that it is a great griefe vnto me for to leaue you, and to conclude, the lyfe of man is briefe and short, and full of mi∣serie and anguish, and I praie and beséech the vniuersall cre∣ator, that we may in the other world with more ioy, quiet∣quietnesse,
and pleasure. So my will is, that after I am departed, you go with these knights vnto Transiluania, and from thence to returne into Grecia, and there to establysh your selues with the Emperour my father, without giuing him to vnderstand of anie thing that hath happened vnto me, since my departure out of the mightie Citie of Constan∣tinople, but saie that you lost me in the wildernesse of Gre∣cia, and remaine with him, for that I am sure that hée and my brother Rosicleer will doe as much for you, as though I were there my selfe: and if at anie time by fortune you doe méete with the Empresse Claridiana, you shall saye vnto her, that at such time as I departed from you, I left your companie, for that I went out of the worlde, because that in liuing I shoulde not bée odious vnto her, nor cause her anie more anger, and of one thing she shall bée sure, that so long as shée liueth, shée shall neuer haue anie newes of mée. When the knight of the Sunne had sayd these wordes, these two his good Squires did weepe so bitterlie, that they had no power to speak in a good space, in the end they caught him by the armour, and held him fast, saying: Oh our good Lord, wherefore is it you pleasure for to leaue vs in so great sorrow and care, and to cause your father and mother, bre∣thren, and friendes, alwaies to liue in great heauinesse and griefe. What great griefe is this that you haue conceiued, which is the occasion that you doe desire the death? What greater euill may happen vnto the world, than to haue the lacke, & sustaine the losse of such a knight as thou art? Con∣sider our good Lord, that if you doe performe this which you saie you will, you doe not alonelie loose your life, but also your soule, for in conclusion, it is a desperate death. For the loue of God (our good Lord) let not such things passe once into your thought, for that no man in all the world can ima∣gine a thing of a worser determination, and héerein you shall also loose both bodie and soule, and shall be the occasion of the death of the Emperour Trebatio your father, and of the Empresse Briana your mother, for as they doe loue you
more than themselues, they will die with verie anger and griefe, when they shall heare of your perdition, & vnto none it wil be so griouous as vnto the Empresse Claridiana, who is the occasion of all this your sorrow. What shall we doe (vnhappie as we are) when that wée shall finde our selues all alone without your companie? How can we returne vn∣to Grecia, when that the subiects doth lacke their so great estéemed Prince? With what semblance or countenance can we come in the presence of your Father, not daring to de∣clare the losse and death of his sonne? Ought not we great∣lie to be sorrowfull to thinke how our hearts must be hard∣ned, that when your brother and friends shall demaund of newes of you, and we knowing the conclusion, dare not be so hardie as to vtter it? What is he that can suffer so great griefe, or dissemble so great sorrow? God forbid that euer anie such thing shoulde bée permitted, wée will first consent to bée drowned in this déep sea, than to returne in∣to Grecia without your companie. And if you doe still con∣tend to goe a land on that Iland of the diuellish Fauno, we will goe with you and beare you companie, for that wée shall thinke our deaths happie to loose them with yours, and had rather ioyntly to die with you, than to liue one moment in this worlde for to lament and feele the griefe of your death. These and many other thinges in effect, sayd these good Squires, shedding many salt teares for to withdrawe their Lord the knight of the Sunne from his determination, but all did profit nothing (for although it was great anguish and mortall griefe vnto him for to depart from them) yet was he so firme in his determination to accomplish that which he had said, that if all the whole world had bene there pre∣sent for to disswade him, yet had they not ben sufficient for to withdrawe him from the doing thereof. And therewithall he requested the Mariners to launch out their skiffe on the water. But when the Mariners and all those knightes of Candia did vnderstand his determination, and sawe how pittiullie his Squires did wéepe for him, they were greatly
amazed thereat, and thought him to be a desperate knight, and one that was wearie of his life, that wold giue attempt to so strange aduenture, hauing heard the wonderfull thing that the olde Pilot had tolde them of that Iland, who bee∣ing there present, & saw with what determination, he wold goe vnto the Iland, and with what efficacie he dyd demand the skiffe for to goe a land, before them all hée sayde these wordes. I greatlie meruaile at you (Sir knight) hauing heard the wonderfull things that I haue tolde vnto you of this I∣land of the diuell, and yet you haue so great will to go the∣ther, of truth I cannot iudge that it doth procéede of anie strength or couragious heart, but of some desperation that you haue with you, whereby you doe abhorre your owne life, for that stout and couragious Barons doe neuer put their liues in aduenture, but whereas they haue hope to get honour and victorie, but that man which doth put himselfe there wheras he doth aduenture no other honour, but to die the death, it may be wel said y• it is more of desperatiō, than of force or courage. What account doe you make of your owne strength? I saie, if it be equall with that of Hercules, & that of Thebano, yet were it not sufficient to escape from the hands of that possessed Fauno, if once you goe a land, and it is well knowen that all the people of the Iland coulde not make anie defence against him, although there were a∣mongst thē more than thrée thousand knights, besides other common people verie stout and clubbish, and yet will you take vpon you alone the enterprise, surelie it is a plaine thing to vnderstand, that you will kill your selfe, for that you will put your selfe in that aduenture, whereas it is im∣possible to saue your life, the which is a thing most abhor∣red before God, and this proceedeth onelie of the lacke of wisedome, weaknesse, and want of patience, and to the con∣trarie, each one where wisedome remaineth with equal hart and valiant courage doth suffer all humane troubles, & not for euerie little trouble, doth straight waies abhorre them∣selues, and so from a little euill fall into another far greater.
What other thing haue you in al this world that maketh a man more to abhore and hate himselfe and his owne life than afflictions and troubles? And it is manifest vnto vs, as it is spoken by the wise, that troubles appertaineth onelie vnto men. Likewise that holie and afflicted Iob saith, that for trauailes and troubles man was borne, but those which haue no patience nor strength for to suffer aduersities, thin∣keth (that al things that doth not fal out according vnto their desire and appetite) that they haue iust occasion to desire and procure the death, and vpon the sodaine they are in such a rage, that for euerie light thing they doe not onelie anger themselues against fortune, but also against themselues, and that which is worst of all, they are out of patience with God that dyd create them, vsing against him wordes of greate abhomination, as though that if God did not all things vn∣to their willes, then doth he them great iniurie, but vnto them that bée wise, what state so euer God doth send them, they accept it in good part, if it bée with prosperitie and ioy they accept it with a good will, and if it bée sadde and sor∣rowfull, they suffer it with suffer it with patience, and when that with the occasions they cannot bée merrie, then doe they comfort themselues with patience, for that there is nothing so com∣fortable and pleasant as is patience: therewith heauie and sorrowfull heartes are made glad and ioyfull, wronges are brought to perfection, it mollifieth hard hearts, & do mitigate difficultnesse, aspar things it maketh plaine, and ceaseth all quarrels and sodaine motions, and finallie there is nothing of more quietnes and comfort than is the life of the patient. These wéepinges, these complaintes, these clowdes and stormes, that causeth the weake barke of our humane lyfe to bée dashed and broken in péeces against the rockes, pro∣céedeth of no other thing but of the follie and impatience of men. So that (gentle Knight) if you dyd suffer with pati∣ence the troubles and afflictions of this life (considering that in the end there cannot bée found a thing more com∣mon amongst men) then shoulde no peruerse fortune, al∣though it dyd neuer so stronglie assault you, bée able
to cause you to be wearie & abhorre your owne life, neyther to goe and put your selfe into the handes of that diuellish Fauno, whereas you doe aduenture no other thing but mar∣tirdome to your bodie, and perpetual condemnation to your soule. Let the Lord dispose of thy bodie according vnto his will, séeing he made it, there is no reason to the contrarie, doe not procure to destroie the Castle, whereas thou laied neither stone nor timber, and no other thing is thine but onelie the compassion? Doe not abridge God of that work, whereas he did not onelie create the flesh, but also bones, bloud, and spirit. And it séemeth vnto me (as it is most true) that there is no other Lord ouer celestiall and terrestriall things, but he that made all things? Well then, séeing that of our selues we are nothing, but all is of God, and com∣meth from him, wherfore doe we humane creatures thinke that we may liberallie we all things vnto our ? Curteous Knight, if you haue anie sorrowe and griefe, pos∣sible God doth it to proue you, the which although it bée now troublesome vnto you, may yet so fall out, that ano∣ther time it will bée profitable, and if it bee intollerable, it cannot endure long, tarrie the voice of the Lord, for that hée will call you, and make no aunswere before hée call you, for that it is determined not onelie the daie but the houre of thy end, the which thou oughtest not to abreuiate and cut off, for that thou art not able to dilate it, for it is impossible. There hath béene some that hath taken it before their time, thinking thereby to eschue a little briefe and momen∣tarie trouble, and drowned themselues in that which ne∣uer shall haue end. A mightie King or Lorde leaueth in a Castle or fortresse a lieuetenant to garde and kéepe the same, who thinketh that hée doth commit great treason to depart from thence without lisence of his Lorde. Why then shall wée not thinke that the treason is farre greater that the soule doth against the king of heauen, for to depart from the bodie, whereas he put it to be his liefetenant and gard. We reade that there was neuer wise man y• did so euil a
fact, as dyd Cato in killing of himselfe, for that hée woulde not looke Caesa in the face. Let not so much bée spoken of you (gentle knight) it will séeme much worse, because you are a Christian, and it  thing prohibited and forbidden by God, wheras he saith. Thou shalt not kill. Why should wée then kill our selues? Likewise hée doth bidde vs loue our neighbours as our owe selues. Therefore haue a good confidence and trust in all ng, for that it is not the part of a , but to beare a good  vn∣to the double face of , and to the contrarie, a wo∣mans heart that doth yéelde for feare. Therefore touching this matter (gentle knight) I wil saie no more, for that vn∣to them that hath a better vnderstanding than I haue, I haue sayd nothing but to put in remembrance. Like∣wise it is néedfull, for that if you haue your witts occupi∣ed in passions, the same doth blinde the vnderstanding, in such sorte, that you cannot discerne thinges at hand. With this the olde Pilot concluded his talke, and although the knight of the Sunne at that time was in better plight to ight against fiftie knightes, than to take counsaile of one man, yet for all that he dyd conceiue well of the wordes of the Patrone, as of him that was indued with no lesse wise∣dome and vnderstanding, than with force and strength, and for that his determination was so firme to accomplish his desire, and againe the knightes that were there pre∣sent, as also the Pilot shoulde not iudge him to be an imp∣tient man and one of all discretion, hée said these words following. If so bée that the life of man might bée perpetuall and indure for euer, as immortall, and the soule to die, then with great reason ought we to cherish and make much of our bo∣dies and ie from all such perills as might giue an occasion vnto death, for that hée that should so die, might certain account himselfe vnhappie, for wheras before hée was some thing, he should be conuerted into nothing. But as it is a thing naturall to be borne and to die (as wise men saith) that the entering into the worlde with life, is the beginning of
death, and the same life is the path waie therevnto, and wée ought to feare death more than to be borne, and we ought to flie from the death, yet both of them maketh nature per∣fect, and nothing of necessitie doeth accompanie Nature which ought to be feared, and he that doth abhorre and fea things naturall, it followeth that he should likewise fear & abhorre nature, which was the occasion of life & to be borne, (sauing if you thinke that in part you ought to praise, and in part to despise and abhorre) but all men of small discretion doe feare death, and I doe not meruaile thereat, for that all their felicities is in their bodies, the which without al doubt doth end with death, and with great reason they doe fear that, which they esteeme as their chiefe delight, for that hu∣mane nature is such, that it wil not refuse nor lacke their fe∣licitie: but that Baron which is wise & couragious, & ∣meth of his bodie, no more thn of , and hath all his desire set vppon the  of the oule, who when it departeth from the bodie, maketh no more account, but as one that in the morning departeth from an heauie & combersome lodging where he remained all night. If man dreade death, feare is not to be , for that th soule is immortall & cannot die, but the bodie onelie: is it not  mans dutie to haue care of his , and if he feare it procéedeth of follie, but yet it is more foolishnesse for to desire the thing he which he cannot obtain, & to put from him that which is impossible to leaue. All creatures borne, as wel as those that are to be borne, although there be a great  of liuing & of their deaths, yet to die is naturall vnto them all. What do you thinke to flie from that which your fathers & grand∣fathers, & their predecessors, y, Emperours & kings could neuer escape? let vs turne our backes all that euer we can frō death, & auoide the perils thereof, yet in the end it shall hap∣pen vnto vs, as vnto hint th sutteth his ies at the blow of his enimie, suffering the griefe thereof because hée would not sée it. And whereas you saie, that it is good for mée to liue longer, and not to procure my death before my time, I  vnto you that there is none that dieth before his time,
for that all men dieth not at one time, and as wise men saie, euerie one hath his time appointed; the which béeing accomplished, hée concludeth his fine, and for that wée haue not so much lisence to call time backe againe, neither to staie of necessitie wée must procéede forwards▪ No man ran die but at his time appointed, sauing  hee take the time for him, that himselfe hath assigned, and not by him that dooth assigne nature and fortune. It is a small matter touching the immortalitie of the soule, some to liue foure score éeres, and other to lie eight yéeres, the time being past, it séemeth the one to bée no  than the other▪ Men do deceiue themselues in many thinges, but in especiall concerning their death (not for that all men doe thinke to die) but be∣cause they hope the time will bée long, séeming to be farre of, that which one waie by the briefnesse of life, and swift∣nesse of time, and another waie by the force of fortune, and by the diuersities of humane chaunces, béeing alwaies at hand. Death vnto a young man should neuer seeme grie∣uous, although he made reckoning of no other goodnesse, for abiding the time of auncient yéeres, there procéedeth there∣of nothing but sadnesse and miseries. The young man doth well-knowe what he hath passed in his time, but yet he kno∣weth not what he shall passe if that he endure long. In this cruell and inconstant kingdome of Fortune, hée that first dyeth, doeth deceiue and mocke his fellowe. You will now saie vnto me, that séeing that death is necessarie and of force, it were better to abide the time of naturall death, than to goe and receiue it of that diuellish Fauno. Then you might well saie, if that I were certaine thereof, that the death that I shoulde die, shoulde bée more happie than fortunate, but whosoeuer doth knowe it, for that many a one haue hoped to die in their beddes, when that afterward they were han∣ged, and some throwne from the toppe of a mountaine, some torne with Lions, and some eaten with wilde Bores; yea, that Euripides, the light of al great pollicy▪ next vnto Homer, was cruellie rne in péeces with dogges. Likewise Lu∣recio Prince of Poets, by drinkes that were giuen him
by his concubine, did raue in such sort, that he thought it the best remedie to kill himselfe with a knife: with what great good will would the Emperour Adriano suffered himselfe to haue bene torne in péeces of a furious Lion, if his people would haue suffered him, rather then haue abidden that ter∣rible sicknesse whereof he dyed. Many other mo as is well knowen, did hope to die of their naturall deathes, and yet in the ende they died of verie desperate and cruell deathes, and possible before they eschewed farre worse. And you who doth giue coūsell for to flie from death, I would you would tell mée how farre you are from it your selfe, of trueth if you doe consider verie well, you shall finde that there is but a thin borde betwixt you and death: and not yet two daies past when that you thought the houre was come. Oh false and folish world of men, that flyeth with great dili∣gence from one little perill on the land, (in resisting wher∣of, there is no honour to be gotten) & yet putteth not doubt to put themselues vnto these déepe seas, wheras their liues is at the courtesie of the windes to ouerthrow them, and of the terrible waues to drowne them, they flie from one follie on the land, and putteth their liues in foure farre worse vp∣pon the seas, in a shippe that is alwaies mouing, the mari∣ners neuer in one accord, the water that neuer stādeth still, and the winde that neuer resteth. What Dragon or furie is vpon the land that doth feare vs more then vpon the ea, whereas it is well knowen an innumerable sort of men hath bene drowned. There is no furie nor wilde beast vpon the lande, but that it is possible by the force and strength of man, to make defence and resi∣stance: but vpon y• sea, if you ioyne together all y• strengthes of the most valiantest men in all the worlde, yet are they not able to make any resistāce against one storme or tēpest, but if they please they may make thrusts with their speares into the water, and strike with their swordes against the windes. And now séeing that ther is all these perills on the sea, wherefore my good friend, doe you not take the counsel for your selfe, the which you doe giue vnto mée? What doe
you thinke that it is not more possible for mée for to ouer∣come the diuelish Eauno, then you to haue y• victorie of two so terrible Elements, as is the water and winde. Finallie, to conclude, when that man thinketh himselfe most farthest from death, it is then nighest at hande: therefore barons that be stout and couragious, in nothing they should feare the death, wheras they doe venter themselues to get honor, and not to apart themselues from perills and dangers, for that they be alwaies readie at hand, and in the ende when that it shal please God that they shal die, it is no other thing but a cléering of the soule out of this miserable captiuitie & prison, and to leaue this troublesome & wearie world, where in I doe sée that there is no pleasure, without sodaine mis∣thiousnesse, no peace without discord, no loue without sus∣pition, no ease without feare, no aboundance without lacke, nor no estate without complaints, all doth wéepe, all doeth sigh, all doth complaine, all doth shrike and sobbe, and all things doth ende. I sée none that liueth content, I sée no∣thing that is firme and stable, I sée all in confusion & tossed vpside downe, as wel in things liuing, as insensible, as wel the brute beastes as reasonable creatures, the high & migh∣tie towers be torne and rent with thunderboults, walles be ouerthrowen with Canon shot, great flouds doth carrie away Cities and townes, Trées be eaten with wormes, & the gréene corne with the Grassehoppers, Timber doth rot and moulder away, the brute and wilde beastes doth fight with an other, betwéene the Ownce and the Lion there is great contencion, and the Rinoceront with the Crocadil, the Egle with the Estridge, the Elephant with the Mino∣tauro, and one man with an other, and that which is worst, women against men: besides all these, the continual wars and contencions that is amongst vs, for that we haue the perills of death continuallie before our eyes. What a num∣ber of things there is that doth put vs in great ieperdie, & threaten vs euerie moment, vnto death: the earth doeth open against vs, the water doth drown vs, y• fier doth burne vs, the aire doth distēper vs, the winter doth runne through
vs, the sūmer doth trouble vs with heate, dogges doth bite vs, Spiders doth poison vs, Gnats doth pricke vs, Flies doth ouerpresse vs, Serpents doth eare vs, and aboue all, trauailes and cares doth ouer watch vs, none can goe with securitie vpon y• earth, for yt euery pace men doth fiue stones to stumble at, bridges wherof they fall, brooks wheras they are drowned, hills frō whence they tūble & be ouerthrowne, thunder cracks y• maketh them afraide, déepe  that doth stay their passage, & thunde bolts that both kill them. And now séeing that both land and sea be all full of perlls, and whether so euer we doe flie, death will ouertake , I will say no more vnto you, but that I am determined to goe a land on the Iland of the Fauno, or I had rather die wher¦as I doe aduenture to get honor, (making my defence with my sword in my hand like a knight) then to be drowned in the Sea, or to kéepe my bed with sicknesse: therefore my good friends I doe desire you to hoyse out your bote on ye water, and procure no further to disturbe mée in this my pretence, for that I will not let to accomplish this my desire, or any thing that is in all the world, and these my squires I pray you to carrie them with you, and not to let them to folow mée, neither to giue thē any ship or bote, for yt their deathes shalbe vnto mée much more greuous then mine owne. Uerie autentiue were all the knights of Candia, and the olde pilot, vnto all that which the knight of the Sunne had said, by the which they iudged him to be discreete & wise, & by the vttering of his words as also in his semblance, they iudged him to be valiant, wherein he shewed so great gra∣uitie of his person, that ther was not one amongst them all that durst speak any more vnto him in y• matter, neither to disturbe him of his will & determined purpose, for that ther was not any that could say any thing vnto him, but that he vnderstode it better thn they: yet they sing the perill he put himselfe in, they all greued verie much thereat, in such sorte, that with their wéepings they cold scare speake, but in especiall his two Squires, who hauing heard all his speache, and sawe the resolute determination of theyr
Lord, did beate their heads against the shippes sides, and gaue such shrickes and cries, as though they had bene cut of their wits, and although the knight of the Sunne did com∣fort them, with many swéete & louing words, yet all would not serue, for the more he spake vnto them, the more did in∣crease their sorow and griefe. Then he séeing that all which he did, did little profit to goe with their good wills, & how y• the longer he staied, the worse it was, he desired the mari∣ners to hoise the boate into the sea, who were not willing therevnto, the which being by him perceiued, as one which had as great forc & strength as anie man in all the world, he tooke the boate in both his hands, and without the helpe of anie other, he hoised it into the sea, and caused his horse to be put therein, the which being done, he would haue ta∣ken his leaue of thē all, but his squires when they saw that he would depart, they gaue such shrickes and cries, that it séemed the noyse to reach vnto the heauens, and fell downe at his féete, shedding so manie teares, that it was great com∣passion to behold thē, desiring him that he would not leaue them in so great heauinesse, and for that it was so manifest that he went to loose his life, that he would take thē in his companie, for to dye with him, for y• his life was no longer then he abode in their companie. They complained verie much of him, for paying thē with such reward, after so long time, that they had serued him: but the griefe of this good knight was such, for his two squires, that with the great aboundance of teares that fell from his eyes, he could scant speake vnto them one worde: especiallie, considering with what intencion he departed, which was neuer to sée them a∣gaine in all his life, neither returne anie more into Grecia, for that he was determined if God did giue him victorie a∣gainst the Fauno, to remaine in that solitarie Ilande, and there to ende his daies: But for that he loued his squires verie well, and likewise knowing the great loue that they bare vnto him, his heart was readie to burst in péeces for to apart himselfe from them. Likewise all those knights of Candia, and ye olde pilot, did labour all that euer they could,
for to breake him of his purpose, but all would not serue, and he séeing that his tarrying did him no profit, he went vnto the shippes side, and with a light heart he leapt into the boate, and taking the oares in his handes, he began to rowe towards the Ilande, leauing so great sorow & griefe amongst all them that were in the shippe, that there was not one of them but wept bitterlie to see him depart in that sorte, as one desperate to receiue a cruell death, and being a knight that seemed vnto them all not to haue his lyke in all the world, yet all the griefe which they receiued, was nothing vnto that of his squires, when they sawe their lorde depart, who like desperate men would haue throwne themselues into the sea, if those knights had not lette them, and seemed vnto them to be true and loyal vnto their lord, and of a good disposition, so with the great care that they had of them, they did kéepe them from destroying thēselues. After this good knight was departed, within a shorte space he ariued at the Iland, and those of the ship lost sight of him: but there were some of the shippe that saide that it were good to tarrie ther a few daies, for to sée what should become of him, to whome the pilot saide, that it was great follie so to doe, for two causes, the one for that he was cer∣taine, so soone as the knight should come a land with a trice he should be torne all to péeces by that diuelish Fauno, so that it were lost labour to abyde anie more newes of him, and the other, for that all they should be in great perill of their liues, if that the Fauno should discouer the shippe, and before that we could doe anie thing for to saile from him, he would ouertake vs, and giue vs all cruell deathes, as he hath done to manie others heretofore. In conclusion, at these words, the knights consented not to aie, but to departe, and according vnto the great feare which they receued, they thought they tarried to long, but the two squires when they saw that they departed, and caryed them in their companie, leauing their Lord in so great perill, it cannot be declared the great complaints that they made, requesting y• knights and pylot, for to carrie them vnto the Ilande, wherewith
they should receiue great contentment, and be ioyfull, but all their requestes were in vaine, for that they would not consent that they should dye so desperate a death, as also for the great peill which should be vnto them all, they would not consent therevnto, wherewith these good squires were so desperate, that if time had serued them therevnto, they would haue throwen themselues into the sea, and by swim∣ming as well as they could, they would haue gon to the I∣land of the Fauno, but the knights caused them to be kept in the shippe, and put into a cabin and locked the dore, and caryed them in their companie, till in the ende of certaine daies they ariued at Transiluania, whereas they did disem∣barke themselues and went a and, but the Squires were so leane & so féeble, for that they would not eate anie thing, and againe by shedding of so manie teares, that they could scarce stand vpon their féete. And now to returne to the knight of the Sunne, the Hi∣storie maketh no more mencion of them, but when they came vnto Transiluania after that they had remained there two daies for to refresh and strengthen themselues, they sought an other shippe, where in they returned to seeke the Ilande of the diuelish Fauno, with determined good will there to dye with their Lorde, in which iourney they were taken prisoners, so that they could not accomplish their de∣sire, as shalbe declared vnto you in the processe of this Hi∣storie. ¶How the knight of the Sunne ariued at the Iland of the possessed Fauno, and of the wonderfull and perillous bat∣taile that he had with him. Chap. 15. SO when the knight of the Sunne was de∣parted from the knights of Candia, he made such hast in rowing wt his great & mightie strength that small bote, that in a short space he ariued at the solitarie Iland, and surelie it was a thing of great meruaile, & worthie
to be put in memorie, all that happened with this valiant and happie knight, for one way the water stode in his eies, and his heart was redie to breake with sow, griefe and pittie, to sée his Squirs remaine so sorowull and without all comfort, & an other waie, acknowledging in what peril he was of his life in that iourney, and how he went to put himselfe in the greatest perplexitie that euer was man, he remmbred and armed himselfe with so great hardinesse & courage, that he thought the time long till he did sée that di∣uelish Fauno. When that he came a lande, he sawe that all the Iland was plaine, and verie fragarant and fresh, reple∣nished with greene Trées, although there appeared manie buildings the which were destroyed and fallen downe to the ground, in such sorte, that it well appeared that the people that there dwelled to be diuelish and abhoiminable. And as he was beholding ye countrie which séemed to be verie good and fertill, he straight waies discouered where the diuelish Fauno was, yet was he not nigh him but a great waye of, neither did he sée him, but that which proceeded from him, which was an infernall fier, which seemed to reach vp vnto the Skies, with so great a noyse, as though it had thundred, (and as y• wise Lirgandeo saith, that there was no humane heart of so sufficient courage for to séeke out so terrible and wonderfull attempt, as was this of that worthie & valiant knight) in whose heart neuer entred any feare, but with so valiant and couragious a stomacke, determined to seeke that mishapen and infernall beast, ull of so manie legions of di∣uells. And for that he would not that there should remaine any thing that might carrie him out from that Ilande, hée drew the bte that brought him thether a lande, and with one of the oares with the which he rowed, he broke it all to peeces, and scattered them abroade alongst the water syde, that the force of the waues might carrie awaie the péeces. But before he departed from that place where he ariued, he fell downe vppon his knées, and with manie sorowful sighes, & triikling teares, which ranne downe his chéekes, in
signe that he was a true and faithfull Christian, he sayde as followeth. OH soueraigne creator, both of heauen and earth, without whose good will there is no diuell that hath any power, neither without it can men, fowles, nor brute beastes liue vpon the face of the earth, nor be sustained nor gouerned, without it the Elements would be confounded, & the hea∣uens lose their course and naturall mouings. The earth would quake, and the high and mightie mountaines would fall: The waters of the Seas would ouer flow the lande, and no liuing thing should finde where to be sustained, but thou by thy infinit goodnesse and mercie, doest ordaine and sustaine all, not for that it is to thée necessarie, but for the profit of man. Therefore séeing that thou doest vse so great pittie and mercie with them, here Lorde I doe desire thée, that in this perillous danger, thou wouldest not leaue me, and if I haue anie desire herein to gette the victory, it is not for anie honor nor vaine glorie that I hope to maintaine thereby, but onely to haue a little more time for to liue in this dispeopled and solitarie Ilande, whereas I may fully repent mée for the life which hetherto I haue lead, and for to doe some penance for the euills which I haue committed a∣gainst thy diuine magestie: But if it be thy will that I dye in this trance, I doe most hartely desire thée, not to looke vpon my sinnes and wickednesse, but to haue mercie vpon this my soule, which is immortal, and by thée created to thy similitude and likenesse, for eternal lie, and diddest redéeme it with thy most precious bloud, the which I pray thée to pardon and to receiue, at such time as it doth depart out of this wretched bodie: my death doth not greue mée so much, as that I haue not time enough to serue thée. When this good kght had saide these wordes, he arose vp vpon his féete, and looking towards that part the which was toward Grecia, with deepe & profound sighes he saide. OH Empresse Claridiana, how ioyfull would it be vnto my heart, if y• I did know of certaintie, that thou wert
acquainted with this my daungerous attempt, with the which I am bestead, for that seeing that my fortune hath not giuen place in my life time to doe you anie seruice, it may be that the acknowledgeing of my death might do you good, for that I am fullie certefied you take great pleasure therein. Oh that my fortune and cruell destiie had per∣mitted, that in the battaile the which you made with me in Constantinople, I had bene slaine, sure it had ben a crowne of martyrdome vnto me, for to haue receiued the death by your soueraigne hands. But alasse, in this doe I know that my misfortune is great, and in the end cannot be denied of this glorie, to knowe that you take pleasure in my death, for that taking so great paines for to giue it mee with your owne handes, I cannot beléeue that in so short space you haue repented you. And séeing (good Ladie) that it is so that you desire so much my death, let not god permit that against your will I liue anie longer in this world. Oh Princesse Lindabrides, how ioyfull will it be vnto you to heare of my death, knowing that she alonly was the occasion for whom I forgot the great loue that I bare vnto you, and verifie the sentence to be iust, and according vnto my desert to be ab∣horred of her, for whose sake I forgot you, and worthie to receiue the punishment of her that was the occasion to leaue so high and soueraigne a Ladie. But what doe I saie? I did neither leaue her nor forget her, and is no other thing but my fortune to be so base, that I did not deserue to mar∣rie with the one, nor to serue the other. Oh Emperour Tre∣batio my Lord, & my Ladie and mother the Empresse Bria∣na, I desire you to pardon me, for the Lord doth know that the greatest griefe that I haue in this world, is to consider of the great sorrowe that you will receiue, when that the newes of my death shall come vnto your eares, let this bée account of comfort vnto you, to make eckoning that you ne∣uer heard of me, since the time that I was carried awaie in the barke by the force of the riuer when that I was a child, and héere I beseech the almightie God and loueraigne crea∣tor to comfort you, and put this aforesayd in your mindes.
Oh my good brother Rosicleer; oh how much is the sorrow that I doe now feele, for that I so quicklie do apart my selfe out of your companie, and a great griefe to consider, howe sorrowfull the newes will be vnto you when that you shall heare that I am out of this world. Ah my good brother, you that are the flower of all knighthood, comfort our father and mother that are so mentioned amongest all Nations, for whereas you are in person, my presence will not be thought vpon. Oh my verie good and perfect friends Oristedes, Bran∣dizel, and Claueryndo, the Lord doth knowe how much it doth grieue me, to sée my selfe separated from your compa∣nie for euer, but alasse what shall I doe, séeing that fortune will that I shall shew my selfe vnto you and all the world in this condition. And now I doe desire you neuer more to séeke mée, for that in briefe I shall out of this worlde. Take for your friend my Brother Rosicleer in my place, as well for that of your owne persons is meritorious, as for the great good will which alwaies I did beare vnto you, hée I am sure will bée vnto you a verie good and perfect friend. These and many other things spake this good knight, in shedding so many teares, and vttering so many sighes, that whosoeuer had heard them (although his heart had bene so hard as anie Diamond) yet could he not haue refrained but wept ther at. And as he would haue put himselfe in the way to goe toward that diuellish Fauno, he bethought himselfe how and in what sort he might make battaile with him, and it it séemed that if fortune shuld shew her selfe in anie thing fauourable vnto him, it should be to make the battaile better on foot than on horsebacke, & now according vnto his deter∣mination, whether he did liue or die, he had no more néede of his horse Cornerino, therfore he determined to let him loose, & go at his frée liberty, in recompence of his good seruice done vnto him, and because he might more at his plasure take his repast of the field & go whether he list, he pulled off his bri∣dle and saddle, and set him at libertie, the which was done with shedding many teares, saying.
Oh my good horse, what a great griefe it it vnto mée or to leaue thée, not for that I haue néed of thée from hence∣forth, but onelie for that I would it were knowen the great good seruice which thou hast done vnto me, & that thou shoul∣dest be intreated, dressed, & cured as thou doest deserue. If that Alexander of Macedon did make so gorgious a tombe for his horse, to burie him when he was dead, & commanded a citie to be called after his name, I should haue greater rea∣son to honor thée being thou aliue & his dead, & much better than euer his was. Augustus made a graue for his horse be∣ing dead, for y• he would not that the soules of the aire shuld eate his flesh. Dido Iulio did consecrate in the Temple of Venus, the image of his horse made in marble stone. Antho∣nio Vero made the image of his horse being aliue in gold and now I hauing done nothing for thée being farre better than euer anie of those were, what can I doe but set thée at libertie whereas thou maist take the pleasure of the fieldes as other beasts do, therfore go thy waies good horse, for thou art the last companie that I doe leaue in this world. In saying these words he draue him from him for to de∣parte, but it was great meruaile to sée the nature of this horse, for although he was loose and at libertie without anie incomberance, yat wold he not depart, but drew nigher and nigher his maister, and trembled meruailouslie with all his bodie, & the more he did procure to driue him awaie, y• more he did approch vnto him, trembling as with feare, then the knight of the Sunne knew not what to do, for one waie the great perill of his horse if that diuellish Fauno should sée him, & another waie he could by no meanes driue him away for anie thing he could do, but in the end he bethought him∣selfe, y• if he left him there loose, possible when he did sée the diuellish Eauno, he would runne awaie, and therewith hée left him, and began to trauaile a foote into the Iland, and as he passed through a companie of great and ouergrowen Okes, he remembred himselfe of the battaile which hée had with Brandimardo in the wildernesse of Grecia, & how that he made the same with a club made of a branch he tore off
from a trée, for that he would not strike him with y• sworde wherewith he dyd make the battaile with the Empresse Claridana, and calling this to remembrance, with great fu∣rie he sad vnto himselfe. God forbidde that the sword wherewith I did strike so high and soueraigne a Ladie, should now be defiled in the bloud of so foule & infernall a monster. And in saying these wordes, with great furie and force he laide holde with both his handes vpon a great and knotted branch of one of those Okes, and tore it from the bodie of the trée, and trimming it in the best manner he could, he laid it vpon his shoulder, the which was so great and heauie, that many other knightes should lacke strength to lift it vp from the ground. And as he trauailed in this sort, he thought within himselfe, that if hée should be slaine in that battaile, that then his good swoorde should remaine in the fielde, and then afterward it might so fall out, that in time that Iland might againe bée peo∣pled, then oulde it not be other wise, but that sworde must come to the hand of some knight, wherewith he might shed the bloud of others, and for that he would not doe so greate iniurie vnto so precious a Ladie, hée determined first for to break it all to péeces, in such sort, that afterward none might profit himselfe therewith. Then considering how & in what manner he might execute his determination to breake th sword in péeces, he sawe by him a little rocke the height of , although it were farre bigger, and of very hard stone, and thinking thereon to break it to péeces, he drew out that ne sword, & laide vpon that rocke so many strong blowes, that it séemed to burne with the great quantitie of fire that flew out thereof, but by reason of his great goodnesse, for that it was one of the best that was to be found in all the world, all the strength that he had, neither the hardnesse of the rocke was sufficient to breake it, it was the sword the which he had of the Prince Meridian, whereat this wor∣thie Prince was in so great furie and wrath, that with dou∣ble strength he assaulted againe the rocke, and in a short space he did cut and breake it all to péeces, and the swoorde
neuer the worse. (In this, saith the wise Lyrgandeo, that this knight had the greatest force & strength that euer hu∣mane creature had before or after him, and an euident token to consider, y• in so smal time he should cut & breake to péeces such a rocke as that was, the which no humane force was able to doe it, but he onlie) then this good knight séeing that all that euer he could doe was not sufficient to breake that sword (although he made it many times to double & bow the point vnto the hilt) he determined to leaue it there, and for that afterward it shuld be the better estéemed of him whose fortune it should be to finde it, in the highest part of peae of that rocke that remained, with the point of his sword hee engraued in Gréeke vearse these wordes following. IF héereafter in anie time it chanceth anie knight to finde this sword, you shal vnderstand that it is the knight of the Suns, sonne vnto the Emperour rebatio, who comming to this Iland in the demaund & séeking out of the diuellish Fauno for to battaile with him, & because he would not haue the said sword defiled on him, he left it, & wold not carrie it with him, & for that after his death he would it should not come into the power of anie other, he did procure to breake it vpon this rocke, the which was cut and broken therewith in such sort as you finde it, and yet the sword could not be broken, therefore I desire thée, whose fortune it is to find it, neuer to strike or wound anie therewith, because his ow∣ner in the time of his greatest necessitie did leaue the same, in consideration that he stroke therewith the most highest and soueraigntest Ladie and Damsell that euer was borne amongst humane creatures. Thus when the knight of the Sun had engrauen these wordes, he put the sword into the ich scabbard, & hanged it girdle & all of gold vpon the aid rocke, and tooke his knot∣ted club vpon his shoulder & began to go forwards his way a good pace, his horse followed after him a good waie off. In this sort the knight trauailed, & did discouer from a far the fire that procéeded out at the mouth of this diuellish Fauno, wherby he might discerne where he was. So halfe an houre
after that he departed from the rocke, with the large pace in his going he came within an arow sht of the place whereas the Fanno was, from whence he discouered the wonderful & mishapen figure of that monser, whose force & furiousnesse, no humane creature was able to discerne, but that which made this knight meruaile most, was to sée come forth at the mouth of this beast, with the fire & smoake, so infinit a com∣paine of diuels in the shape of: armed men, yt it  all the diuels in hell to be ioyned thee together, & of them he sawe comming towards him a bushment, which seemed to the number of two hundreth, making so great a noise, as though the whole Iland would haue sunke, his good horse Corne∣rino till that time did follow him, but at that great noise he returned backe againe like vnto a whirle winde, vnto the place from whence he came, & although y• infernal companie came against him with so great force, yet this valiant and couragious knight did dismaie nothing theret, but with an irefull semblance he larged his pace towards them for to worke his furie on them, who when they came vnto him, did first assalt him with infernall visions, & then did laie vpon him with their shod clubs & yron mases, so thicke & terrible blowes, y• it séemed to be the forge of Vulcan, but this vali∣ant knight taking his club in both his hands, began with so great furie to besturre himselfe amongst them, that all that euer was before him he ouerthrew to the ground, & by rea∣son that they did ouerpresse him very much with their thick & terrible blowes, he waxed verie wathfull, & did redouble his furious blowes, in such sort, y• in a short time y• infernal companie began to flie & returne vnto the place frō whence they came, making such houllings & shrikes, y• it would haue feared anie man to haue heard them: This infernall compa∣nie had scarce returned, when there came forth at his mouth another legion of diuels, such as y• first were, all armed with mases of yron in , & did resemble giants & came towards the good knight, making a greater noise than it doth when it thundieth & throweth out some thunderblt, & when they came vnto him, they assalted & compassed him  a∣bout,
& charged him with so many heauie & terrible blowes, that thrée times they made him to stoup with knées & hands downe to the ground, but commending himselfe vnto al∣mightie God with his heart, he likewise charged them with so terrible blowes with his knotted club, that in a smal space he made them to shrike  dog when they are hurt, and not being able to suffer  force and strength of the knight, euen as the other did they returned in great hast vnto the place from whence they came, and altogether they threw themselues into the mouth of that diuellish Fauno, who at this tune (as one that did awake out of his sléepe) turned about and stretched himselfe, gnashing and grinding his vnmercifull teeth, stretching out his cruell nailes both on handes and féete, and bristed vp his haire wherewith he was couered, as doth the wilde Boare when that he is cha∣sed with dogges, he did also increate the fire that procéeded from his mouth, making it to fume vp into the Clowdes, whose sparkles scattered abroade, as doth in the Smithes forge, at such time as blowing he throweth sand into his fire, and after a while that he had thus roused himselfe, hée arose from the ground whereas he was laide, and looked to∣wards the place whereas the knight of the Sunne was, with such terrible eies, that at noone daies they did shew as much light as doth two torches in the night, there was not to bée seene in all  world a thing of greater meruaile and fierce∣nesse, and the wise Lyrgandeo (who did see this monster af∣ter that he was slain) saith, that he supposeth that there was no humane creature that had so much courage as once to be∣holde and looke vpon this infernall monster, who laie on a gréene place which was betwixt a mountaine and a water brooke that ranne  him, but when that hée had séene the knight of the Sunne, hee gaue a mightie leape into the aire, and passed therewith ouer the brooke with so terrible a noise, that it séemed all the whle Ilane woulde haue sunke, and therewith hee went towardes the knight, and bare his head verie lowe for to strike him with his horne, (as dooth the Bull against the furious ) thinking
therewith for to wound him, if he had fastned that blow he had stroke him all to péeces, but this couragious knight, who was as light and nimble, as hardie & bold, with a light leape cléered himselfe of that perilious encounter, without doing him anie other harme, but that he thought he shoulde haue ben burnt with that  fire that he threw out of his mouth, and as this infernall Fauno did passe forwards with the hastinesse of his running, the knight of the Sunne had no time for to strike him, who was not scarce well when that with another impetuous course he returned vp∣pon him, and the fire and smoake that he cast out before him was of so great abundaunce, as also the great furie of the beast, that this valiant Knight had no time nor space for to cléere himselfe from that encounter, but it fell out verie well with him, that his horne chaunced betwixt his arme and his left side, and dyd him no other harme, but with his head hée gaue him so strong an encounter, that hauing no power to sustaine himselfe, hée fell backwardes vnto the earth, and passing ouer him, hée was meruailouslie tormen∣ted as well with the blow of the fall, as with the fire which dyd secalde him verie much. And suelie till that time this good knight neuer sawe himselfe in so great perplexitie, but by reason that hée was of so greate magnanimitie in all thinges, his courage dyd increase, so that without anie whit of feare and dreade, he arose vp againe with great lyght∣nesse, being verie furious and angrie with himselfe, for that hée could neuer fasten one blowe vpon the Fauno, hee then firmed himselfe verie stronglie, and tooke, his clubbe fast in both his handes, abiding when that he shoulde retourne a∣gaine vpon him with his accustomed furie, hée putting him selfe with great pollicie on the one side, at such time as hée should passe by, the beast missing his purpose, he stroke him such a blowe with his clubbe vpon his horne with so great furie, force, and strength, that he brak it from the scull, and it fell downe to the ground. Great was the paine and griefe that this infernall Fauno felt by that terrible blowe, and it could not bée imagined the fiercenesse that hée as then vsed,
and roared and houled with so great noise, that in ten miles compasse it might be heard, but little profit was this vnto the knight, for when the Fauno found himselfe without his horne, he vsed a new meanes (and no lesse perillous than the other) to assault the knight, and procured by all meanes for to catch him betwixt his  and strong armes, and sharpe nailes, throwing out at  mouth greate flames of fire, as though his bodie had  ull of gunpouder, where∣with this good knight had ben burnt to ashes with that in∣fernal fire, if it had not ben for that good armour (which was of Meridian) the which had a meruailous propertie, and it was this, y• those great & small bones wherof it was made, were extreame cold, & made great resistance against the fire. Likewise his helme was garnished ful of verie fine rubies, and those (as saith the wise Lirgandeo) doth resist the ouer∣much force and strength of the fire, in such sort, that he was not much troubled therwith, yet for all y• the soultring heat was such, y• if it had ben anie other knight of lesse strength, he could not haue suffered it, so as this diuellish Fauno la∣boured by al meanes possible to get this knight betwixt his armes: euen so did he with all lightnesse y• might be, procure to defend & kéepe himselfe out of his clawes, many mes striking him with his mightie club vpon y• deformed bodie, but it did him no more harme than if he had stroke vpon a rock, yet had he a great aduantage of him, for out of his fore∣head from whence he stroke his horne, there issued great a∣bundance of bloud, which ran downe ouer his eies, & trou∣bled him very much, but by reason y• hée had within him so many legions of duels the which did aide & helpe him, that this good knight could not make his defence in so good order, but that he was caught betwixt his big and hairie armes, which was of so great strength that he could not imagine thing of greater force, & meruailed much how that with his nailes he was not rent & torne all to peeces, but héere at this present, might the knight of the Sunne estéeme his good ar∣mour of great price, as of the best that were to be found in all the whole world, for although the force & strength of that
inernall Fauno was sufficient to destroie a whole armie of souldiours, yet lacked he strength for to break or buckle one péece of all that armour, & his strong and sharpe nailes that could teare in péeces a stith of stéele, could not enter into this armour, so that this Fauno carried him from one place vnto another, and did him no more harme, but that which he re∣ceiued by the heat of the fire, for as he carried him nigh vn∣to his mouth, he thought verilie to haue bene burned, but y• which the knight of y• Sun was most grieued at, was, that he helde him so fast betwixt his armes, that he had no po∣wer to put forth his armes, neither to vse his own strength. In this sort the monster caried him vp & down a good while, till at the last the knight felt that he might firme his féet on the ground, at which time he stretched his legs, & made so strong resistance against the Fauno, that he made him som∣what to recoile, whereat giuing a hastie & strong turne, hée wrong himselfe out of his clawes, & with great lightnesse tooke againe his club (the which was fallen from him) & as the Fauno with great impetuositie returned vpon him, hée was in a readinenesse with his bat in both his hands abi∣ding his cōming, but before he approched nigh him, he stroke him so terrible a blow with his club vpon his head, that al∣though his scull was more harder than a stith, yet he made him to tumble on the earth more than halfe amazed, & before he could recouer himselfe for to rise vp, he redoubled another blow, and stroke him in the same place, that he made him to ioyne both head & breast vnto the ground cleane out of re∣membrance, at which time there was so timerous a noise of shrikings & howlings which those infernall diuells made, comming forth of his mouth, shewing such ill fauoured fi∣gures & mishapen visions, that no humane creature y• shuld behold it, but would haue receiued great feare & dreade, but this knight the flower of all other, if all hel had risen against him (with the fauour of almightie God, vpon whom he did call) would not haue feared them, so that he was not onelie without dreade, but also with a greater force and strength than before, he lift vp his heauie knotted club, and at such
time as this infernall Fauno would haue risen vp, he with all his force dyd strike him such a blow vpon the head, that by reason that before his scull was crazed, he now did beate it into his braines, and made them to runne abrode, where∣with this diuellish Fauno fell altogether to the ground, and shaked with all his bodie, and scrawling with hands & féet he made the earth to flie from him a great waie with the pangs of death. This monster was not so soone fallen down, but all that infernall crue that were within his bellie be∣gan to come forth at his mouth, with so great quantitie of fire, that they séemed all to burne therewith and vpon a so∣daine, (the Sunne which shined as then verie cléere) was as though it had ben couered with a cloude, and all the heauen was so darkned, that throughout all that Iland it séemed as though it had ben night, and therewithall it thundred and lightned in such terrible sort, as though heauen and earth would haue sunke, and ther appeared vnto this good knight many infernal visions, in as horrible maner as might be, all full of fire, in such sort, y• although it was as darke as night, yet there appeared a meruailous and an innumerable num∣ber of thē so light as firebrands, that he thought verily that all the diuels of hell had ben there ioyned together. In this sort they continued a while, and then vpon a sodaine he saw together a mightie legion of diuells in a bushment, who brought in the midst amōgst them a naked woman, whom they tormented in as cruell sort as might bée imagined, she gaue great and pittifull shrikes, and complained in such sort, that the knight well vnderstood she should be the wise Ar∣timaga, who was brought thether by those diuells where∣as her sonne laie dead, and as they carried her round about the place, some of them did strike her with srebrandes, that euerie blowe séemed to burne her vnto the guts, and other some dyd whip her so cruellie, that euerie gyrke dyd make the bloud to spring out of her bodie, and she with greate shrikes and cryes (that seemed to bée heard vnto the hea∣uens) sayd. Oh Artimaga, cursed be the daie & hour that thy father &
begot thée, and the day wherein thou wert borne, & cursed be that day wherein the diuel did deceiue thee, and the day that first thou didst put thy trust and confidēce in him, these be his promises, and this infernal fruite is that which he promised thée, this is he that I so much desired, by whom I and all this Iland should be so much spoken of, all hath fallen out to be true, for that the sonne which was borne of mée, did proue to be such, that the remembraunce of him shall not be forgotten▪ so long as the world endureth. These and other such words vttered this Artimaga, in the time that these diuells carryed her round about, where as her sonne lay with continual torments of her, that it moued the good knight (that did beholde all this) vnto great com∣passion. So after a while that this endured, it began to ligh∣ten and thunder much more then before, in which terrible noyse, all this infernal companie began to vanish away, and all those diuells that brought Artimaga likewise returned, neuer ceasing in tormenting hir one minute of an houre. So when they were all vanished and departed, the day be∣gan to cléere vp, & the Sunne to shine as bright as before, and was nothing séene in all the Iland, but this good knight standing by the Fauno, who was altogether starke dead, but Cornerino his good horse being scared with that great noyse of thunder, ranne and put himselfe into the sea, wher¦as he remained swimming vp and downe, till all was past and gon, and then he came a land againe: after that all this was finished, the knight of the Sunne knéeled downe vpon the ground, and gaue great thankes vnto almightie God, for the  which he had giuen vnto him, and finding himselfe all sowltering hot with the fire of the Fauno, he pulled of his armour, and with the water of the brooke he did refresh himselfe in drinking thereof, and washing his bodie, this being done, he returned to behold the Fauno, whereas he lay dead, and in séeing him, he began a new to meruaile at his wonderful and mishapen forme, & thought it a thing impossible that nature should bring foorth to mon∣strous a creature.
Then after that he had vewed him a while, he went and vewed all the Iland, and founde it to be solitarie, and not one left in all the whole compasse, wheras before it was meruailously replenished with all maner of beastes, and as then not one remaining, for that this infernall Fauno, had eaten & destroied them Likewise he found y• all the edifices and buildings were outhrowen with weather, and bro∣ken downe, which seemed before time to be meruailously well peopled, where at he receiued great griefe, and moued vnto great compassion, to vnderstande that for the sinne of one woman there should come so much harme and damag vnto that Iland. He saw likewise that it was replenished with many Trées full of diuers sots of fruite, as well for the Summer as for the Winter, and such as he might ve∣rie wel sustaine his life, without dying desperately for hun∣ger. So when y• he had very well perused all these things, he receiued great contentment, for that the place seemed vnto him verie necessarie and aparant for him to liue out of the world, and there to ende his daies, wherefore he dyd determine to remaine there, and for the defēce of raine and stormes, he thought it good to make himselfe a cottage for his continuall habitation, to kéepe him selfe from the furie thereof, and that farther within the Ilande, for that the stinke and euill sauour of the dead Fauno should not trou∣ble him, but first before he would begin to put this in prose, he thought it good to leaue some remembrance, where the infernall Fauno was slaine, for that if it should so fall out, in time to come, the Iland to be peopled againe, the inha∣bitants thereof might know and vnderstand who had slame him, and as a man that as then had no more neede nor ne∣cessitie of his armour, he layde them downe by the Fauno, vpon a great stone, wherevpon he wrote with the point of his dagger in Gréeke, these wordes following. This is the diuilish and infernall Fauno, the diuells sonne, and begotten on Atimaga, and slaine by the knight of the Sunne, Prince of Grecia, who being determined to leaue the
world, would ende his daies in this solitaie Ilande: this was his armour, the which he doth leaue heare in signe and to∣ken that it was the last victorie that he made in his life time. Then when that this was done▪ he went from that place a good mile farther, and came where as he founde a verie faire and fresh fountaine vnder the side of a little groue, ful hge and great Trées, the which place séemed verie good and conuenient for his determined purpose, he staied there, and after that he had dronk of the water of that fountaine, the which was very cleane and cleare, he determined vnder those trées to make himselfe a little cottage of oghes, wher¦in he might harbour himselfe at such time as it was fowle and contagious wether. Then he ore and rent from those trées, braunches and boughes, wherewith he made him a little cottage, greatly vnto his contentment, and at the en∣trie thereof he set a crosse so high as himselfe, and knéeling downe before it, he lift vp the eyes of his heart vnto heauen and saide as followeth. O Lord the creator and maker of all things, thou which dost permit to be crucified vpon a crosse (as this is) for to redéeme all humaine linage, here I doe desire thée to giue vnto mée force and strength to suffer with pacience here to ende my daies, in thy holy seruice, and to be heartelie sorie for my sinnes: euen as thou diddest giue vnto those holie Fathers, (who for to cléere themselues from the craftes and deceites of this wicked worlde) went and liued in the de∣serts. And in saying these wordes and other lyke, (not without shedding of many teares) he remained on his knées a good while prostrating himselfe on the ground. In this sort liued this worthie knight many daies, not rating anie other thing but wilde fruites, and dronke of the water of that fountaine, because he would not desperatelie destroy himselfe: he sustained himselfe with such hearbes and fruites, as were in the Iland, which was in so strange and straight maner, that if the zeale which moued him therevnto, had bene coressondent vnto his sufferance, his
pacience might haue bene accounted equall vnto the lye of saints. But oh Lord, how mightie is thy force, for that vnto him that dyd tame the most strong & furious beastes that was to be found vpon the earth, and he that did abate the courage and pride of the most valiantest knightes and mightie Giants that were to be founde in all the world, neither all the legions of internall diuells were sufficient to abate his courage, and put him in any feare, yet with one alonely dis fauour of his loue and mistresse, was ouer∣come and ouerthrowen, in such sort, that he did abhorre his armour and his owne life, forgot his parents, brother, and friends, and tooke & those vnto himselfe this solitarie and straight lyfe, with determined good will there to ende his dayes, without séeing any other liuing thing, but onely his horse, who many times did passe that way wheras he was, where this Historie doth leaue him, for to tel of other thing that happened in the meane time. ¶What the Empresse Claridiana did after that the knight, of the Sunne was departed from Constantinople. Chap. 16. WIth great sorow and griefe this Historie dyd leaue the Empresse Claridiana, in the companie of Medea, daughter vnto Raiartes, by whome she was continuallie required of loue, as she that was meruailous faire, which was the occasion that her loue was the more feruent and kindled in her, till such time as the Empresse (being verie desirous to leaue her companie, the better to complaine her selfe) put her out of all doubt and declared vnto her who she was, at which sodayne and strange discouerie, Medea was greatly discomforted and a∣shamed, and after certaine dayes that she there remayned, in the ende she returned into her owne countrie, whereof she was Empresse.
Empresse had  in the Coun∣trie of  certaine daies, with the companie of her dam∣se, determined to returne vnto Constantinople, with sort of armour, whereby she might not bée Lirgandeo saith, that he knew not whether it was to returne to make battaile againe with her knight, it was forced by loue that she bare vnto him, as it is a thing naturall amongst louers, that when they haue an occasion more to hate than otherwise, then doth loue more increase in them, and although she desired to haue and take, reuengement of the knight of the Sunne, yet it was vnto her a great griefe to be absent from hm one houre: the damsells  the Empresse carried alwaies with them choise of armour and apparell, so leauing that armour which shée had, she armed her selfe all in Azure full of flowers of gold, and tooke her waie towards the Citie of Constantinople, & when she came nigh vnto the same, she was greatlie ama∣zed to sée all the field thereof round about peopled full of ar∣med knights, and amongst them seemed to bée a great pre∣paratiō for the warres, & furniture for a great armie: the oc∣casion of all this was, by reason y• the letters of aduise were come from the wise Ligandeo, giuing to vnderstand of the comming of the Tartarians, into Grecia, the Emperour commaunded to ioyne together all knights possible at that present, and at such time as the Empresse brew nigh vnto them, the Emperour and Rosicleer, with all such worthie Prices and knights as were at that present in the Court, were assembled together in y• field, mustering of such knights as were thr prese, which were a great companie in num∣br, verie gallant, stout, and braue, and comming nigh vnto them, she new the Emperour & those y• were with him, but she sawe not the knight of the Sunne in their companie, whereat he meruailed greatlie, and being ignorant of the occasion of that great preparation, she commaunded one of her damsels to goe and to informe her selfe of one of those where∣ore that mustering was, and whether the knight of the Sun were in the Court or not.
In the meane space that her damsell went to informe her selfe, she put her selfe a horsebacke in close maner vnder the shadow of a great and mightie Pine tree, which was nigh vnto the armie, and for that she was of a gallant proporci∣on and well armed, the Emperour and such as were with him, séeing her, iudged her to be one of the best armed and well proporcioned knights that euer they had séene. So her damsel put her selfe amongst those knights, and calling one a side, (he which she thought most fittest for her purpose) the demauded of him that which her Ladie had commaū∣ded her. Then y• knight perceiuing that the was sent from that gallant knight (who was a myour vnto all the com∣panie to looke on) and he verie desirous to show him that courtesie, saide as followeth. YOu shall vnderstand faire Damsell, that the occasion wherefore our Emperour and Lord doeth ioyne toge∣ther all this gallant companie of knights, is for that he doth looke dayly for the greatest warre that eur was made against Christians, for that fewe daies past he was giuen to vnderstand, that the Emperour Alicandro, father vnto the Princesse Lindabrides, doth come against him, and bringeth with him almost all the Pagans of Asia the great, and almost all the nations of y• Orientall Ilands, that are in the Ocean, the occasion that moued the Empe∣rour Alicandro to make this warre against the Emperour Trebatio, (as we all doe wel vnderstād) hath bene y• knight of the Sunne, for at such time as he went with the Prin∣cesse Lindabrides vnto the Gran Tartarin, at his comming thether, the Emperour and kings of his estate, whan they vnderstoode that he had ouercome the Prince Meridian, were willing that he should marrie with her, as it was or∣dained in their demaund, the knight of the Sunne, not bée∣ing willing therevnto, at such time as they thought y• mar∣riage and all thinges to be fullie concluded without anie interruption. Then he secretlie departed in the night from the court, without taking any leaue of the Emperour, or
giuing anye  thereof: what for this an∣ger, as also for the great desier that the Princesse Linda∣brides, hath to returne into Grecia, by her meanes they wer indused, so that the Emperour Alycandro is fullie deter∣mined to make this warre, with petence to destroye the Emperour Trebatio, and to crowne the princesse Lindabi∣des, for Empresse of Grecia. This is the aunswere of that you asked mee, touching the first, and to the other cōcerning the knight of the Sunne, you shall vnderstand that he hath not bene in this court manie dayes since, for after that hée had made battaile with a strange knight that came hether in the companie of Medea, he departed and was neuer séene sinc, neither is there any newes of him, for the which the Emperour and the Empresse his brother and friends, are verie heauie and sorowfull. Herewith he concluded, and the Damsell being certified of her demaund, did gratifie him with thanks for the same and returned vnto her ladie and mistresse, vnto whome she declared all that which y• knight had tolde her, she vnderstanding the same and considering well thereof, in her life time before she neuer felt her selfe so troubled & in so great confusion, for that before she was crediblye informed how that the knight of the Sunne was marryed vnto the Princesse Lndabrides, and now to finde it contrarie, by that which at y• present she heard, she knew not what to saye nor what to doe, neither which of these contraries she might beléeue, and being dobtfull to giue cre∣dit vnto that which the knight had told vnto her Damsel, neither could she put her selfe in any securitie of the thing that she so much desired, the better her selfe, she commaunded her damsell to go vnto Rosicleer, and in her part, as a strange knight that was verie desirous to serue the Emperour Trebatio, to request him to giue her to vn∣derstand, the occasion wherefore the Emperour Alicandro, doth come (as they saye) againste Grecia, and the trueth if they doe abyde the comming of all these Pagan enimies aforesaide. So the damsell departed with this demaund vnto Rosi∣cleer,
and by reason that hée was meruailouslie vertuous, and full of curtesie and good manners, he receiued the Dam∣sell, and himselfe gaue the answere, wholie in effect as the knight before had  sent her word, that whensoeuer it was his pleasure to come and offer himselfe vnto them, that then the Emperor his father and he would receiue him to their friend. Therewith the damsell doing her dutie with reuerence, departed from him▪ and comming vnto the Em∣pesse, declared vnto her all that which Rosicleer had olde her, the which lacked nothing vnto y• which the other knight had aduertised her. But when that the Princesse vnderstood that the warres with the Emperour  was cer∣tain, & of truth, she knew not what to saie nor to doe in thing so confused and incertaine as that was, for that one waie she beléeued to be true that which her damsell Arca∣nia had told her, and another wai it séemed verie strange and contrarie, that the Emperour Alycandro shoulde come into Grecia with determined wars and displaied Ensignes, if that the knight of the Sunne were married vnto his daughter, and as she was in this great doubt and confusion, shée thought vpon the wordes that Arcania had tolde her at her returne from Tartaria, and did argue▪ within her selfe, finding great diuersitie and doubtfull vnderstanding, for that sometime it séemed that shée had tolde her that she left the Knight of the Sunne married vnto the Princesse, and straight wayes a contrarie opinion, that shée sayd that she left him at the point to bee married, and béeing so, it might bée that it was left vndone, for that the knight of the Sunne would not consent therevnto, and this might bée a grat occasion that the Princesse Lyndabides dyd procure and induce her Father therevnto, oneli for that she would reourne againe into Grecia. And béeing not fullie certefi∣ed of the greate doubtfulnesse that shee had in either of these contraries, shée thought it th best remedie for her, (for that Arcania as then remained in Trapisonda (for to re∣turne thether forthwith, & ther to certefie her selfe throughly of al y• she had séene passe in y• gran Tartaria, & in what order
and point; she had left y• knight of the Sunne: this thought was not  considered of, but straight waies she put it in vre, and departed from thence, and tooke her iourney to∣wards ropisionda, & comming  sea side, she with her Damsells embarked themselues in a good shippe, and made saile towards her owne Empire, not without great sorrow and griefe, to sée that her knight was departed fom the court of the Emperour Trebatio, & there was no newes heard of him since the time that he made the battaile with her, which gaue her to vnderstande that that should be the ust occasion of his departing, as one desperate, for that vn∣knowne he made that combat, he would departe thether whereas they should neuer thre heare any newes of him, at this time was abated y• great anger that she had against him, and her selfe was determined to goe and séeke him, if that her damsell. Arcania did not fullie satisfie her of that confused hope that she had. With these & other like thoughts they sayled foure daies with faire winde and wether, in the ende whereof there arose a geat and furious tempest, by whereof the good ship was put in great hazard to be lost, if God for his infinit mercie and goodnesse had not deli∣uered thei, and hauing no gouernement in the shippe by fore of that great tempest, they were driuen to sea, a great distant from the place, whereas they desired to goe, and the storme endured thrée daies and thrée nights without a∣ny , but caùsed the seas to arise vp in so furious sort, that the marriners could doe no good therein, but yéelded themselues and the shippe vnto the mercie of the wyndes, seas, and fortune, who in the ende, séemed to shew her selfe fauourable. The fourth day théy were launched into the great and sure port of the kingedome of , wherein they saw other two shippes y• were driuon thther by force on the same storme, and by the  of the sanguine wa∣ter, she saw the conclusion of a great battaile that was bée∣twixt the people of the saide two shippes, likewise she sawe in the shippes that there was dead knights, and heard the shrikes and  of Ladies and Damsels: the
which being heard by Claridiana, she commaunded her ship to be grapled vnto those two, where by she might be fullie certified what it should be, and she found that there was a knight of a verie bigge bodie and well armed, and in his companie other tenne which séemed to be his vassalls & sub∣iects, that came in one of the two shippes, and by force made a conquest of the other shippe, & slew diuers that came ther∣in, and toke prisoner the principal that was amongst them, with a very faire damsell, & other thrée ladies that were in her companie, whome they had in their armes for to put them into their owne shippe. And these ladies séeing them∣selues to be carryed in that forcible sort, began to giue great shrikes and cryes, lamenting in such sort, shedding manie teares, that it moued the Princesse Claridiana vnto great compassion. And as she would haue demanded of that bigge knight (who séemed to be the chiefest amongst them) what should be the occasion of that their great lamentation, he straight waies came against her, putting him to the shippes side and willed her to yelde her selfe prisoner: soft said the, we are not yet come vnto that, but tell mée wherefore dost thou apprehend them, as thy prisoners. Then the great knight aunswered, with great wrath and anger, the migh∣tie Cleonidas should séeme to haue great space & leasure, if that at euery ones demaund he should staye for to giue him an accompt wherefore he doth apprehend and take his pray. Thou shalt vnderstand that I am a sea ouer, and I neuer as yet met with shippe that I could ouercome, but I did take it, and dyd apprehend all that were therein, and if they be Christians, I doe sell them vnto the Pagans, and make them slaues, and if they be Pagans, I doe sell them vnto the Christians & make them likewise slaues, so that I am friend to none of them both, and in all the ports and hauens of the Mediterraneo sea, they are in confederasie, league, and friendship with mée, and doe suffer mée in great quietnesse to make sale and the best of my marchandise. And I doe tell thée, that I doe more exteme and haue in greater price, this damsell which this daye I haue taken,
then any prise that euer I made in all the dayes of my life, for that I hope to make a present of her vnto a mightie pa∣gan Lord, who will giue me for her, all that euer I wil de∣maund. And now séeing I haue told thée that which thou diddest request to know, doe now out of hand that which is my pleasure, for that the ritchnesse of thy armour, and thy gentle disposition, doth giue mée to vnderstande, that thou wilt be vnto mée as precious a prisoner, as euer came to mée since I vsed the sea. You shal vnderstand that all was trueth which in this Historie hath bene declared, for that this ouer was called Cleonidas, and with great reason he tooke to himselfe this name, for that he was no lesse a rouer then that famous Cleonidas, which was in the time of king Tolomeo, who did take the king, and commaunded him to be glystred or boxed with bagges of scalding oyle, for that he dyd the lyke vnto all such as he dyd take. This was called the second Cleonidas, he continued more then fiftene yéeres vpon the Seas, and neuer went a land, but tooke and robbed all that euer he met with all, and vsed no other office but as afore is declared. He went not alone with one shippe as he was at that present, but alwaies had with him more then twen∣tie, that were verie good, and fortified with all necessaries and people, but by fortune of a great tempest, they were scattered abroade, and seperated the one from the other into diuers parts, and his ship alone chaunced into that porte, whereas he met with the other shippe, and made his prise, as before hath bene tolde vnto you. Then Claridiana, when she heard of the euill lyfe of this rouer, and how without all shame he did boast and aduance him selfe of his ill doing, she was very glad and ioyfull for that it was her fortune to come thether at that time, and drawing out her sword, she sayde these words following. CALL to remembraunce Cleonides, that an other of thy name, and aunswerable vnto thy conditions, who had a greater power at the Sea then thou hast,
with a cruell and desperate death he receiued his paiment a lande for all his euill déedes done: likewise that Dionides who was also a rouer in the Leuant seas, & of great power in the time of Alexander and Darius, yet in the ende, was taken prisoner, and punished for his euill deedes by Alex∣ander. Also Etilcon was a famous rouer, yet was he taken and put to death by king Demetrius. But yet more famous was that valiant and worthie Febatio, who with one hun∣dreth Gallies and thirtie great shippes, was serued by all the kings of the Leuant, and was feared of all them that dwelt towards the Ponients, yet in the ende he was taken prisoner by king Cirus, and in one houre he had his reward for all the euills that he had done in all his time. The rouer Militas, with Curreo, which were both in y• time of the first Dionisius the Siracusian, the one destroyed Sicilia, and th other did rob & spoyle all Asia, but after y• they had vsed this trade y• space of xxx. yéeres by sea, in y• end, the rouer Militas was taken prisoner by them of the Rodes, and when that he was brought into the place of execution, he did aduaunce and reioyce in himselfe, for that with his owne proper hands, he hadde cut of the heads of fiue hundreth men, and threw fortie into the Sea, and thirtie thousande were slaine in battaile with his Gallis, and in the ende, was executed by them of the Rodes, according vnto his deserts. This and many other moe, which I could rehearse, were famous ro∣uers, yet when their houe was come of their sorowfull de∣stinie, they were rewarded for their sinne and wickednesse, and neuer inioyed the ritches that they had stollen. There∣fore I doe beleeue, Cleonidas, that thou in all thy actions, being so conformable, that the Iustice which happened vnto them, cannot be lacking vnto thée. Consider from whence thou commest, and what thou hast bene, and then I hope in God that thou wilt leaue of to be a rouer, or else thou wilt goe to receiue the reward of all the harmes which thou hast done in this world, vnto the diuel of hell, who is author and guide of such as thou art. Then Clonidas hearing y• princes Claidiana vtter these
wordes with so great boldnesse and courage, burst out in a great laughter and saide, Now of my faith knight, I tell thée, that I neuer knew a more foolish man then thou arte, that in this sort doest threaten Cleonidas, and telleth him Histories of Rouers, as though that he were lesse in force and strength then Dionedes, and thy selfe of more power then euer was Alexander. Stay a while, and I will make thée to: vnderstand and know who I am, and likewise will teach thée to know to whome thou speakest: and in saying these words, he drew out his swoord, & went against Clari∣diana, then there began betwéene them a very fierce & cruel battaile, & they layed the one vpon the other such strong & heauie blowes, that in short space their shields were hewed & broken in péeces, & all those that beheld thē, were greatly amazed, at their great force & stoutnesse, and it séemed vnto them that they were two of y• brauest & strongest knights that euer before they had séene. This battaile was so rigo∣rous, that in a short space Cleonides began to féele & know the high bountie of his aduersarie, as he that neuer in all his life, met with anie that did charge him so strongly, neither brought him into the like extremitie, and the more he stri∣ned against her, the more he felte the waight and furie of her blowes. This battaile endured betwixte them more then a whole houre from the beginning, at which time the royall Em∣presse Claridiana was more fresher & fought more stronger then at the beginning, and Cleonidas began to wax werie and faint, and would very faine haue had the ayde & succour of his knighte: but the Empresse perceiuing it, fearing all that might happen, did so inforce her selfe, y• striking thrée mightie blowes at him on his healme, all in one place, in great hast the one after the other, she made him to fall for∣ward vpon his hands to the ground, and before that he had any time to recouer himselfe againe, she stroke him so ter∣rible a blow betwéene the gorget and his helme, that she stroke & cut of his head cleane from the bodie, so that they fell boh together downe to the ground.
Then the knights of Cleonidas, which were to the number of ten, when they sawe their Captaine headlesse, they alto∣gether assaulted Claridiana, charging her with thicke and strong blowes, but she receiued them in so gallant and va∣liant sort, that in a short space she slew iue of them, and the other séeing her mortall blowes dyd yéeld themselues, and craued pardon for their liues. In this sort did this famous rouer end his daies, God permitting that he should be with∣out the aide and succour of the rest of th Nauie for that hée whom all the coasts of the sea feared, shuld receiue his death and be slaine by the handes of a Damsell. Thus he being dead and his knightes yéelded, straight waies Claridiana commaunded to be set at libertie all those prisoners that hée had taken, the which being done, there came before her pre∣senting themselues a damsel who was very faire, & brought by a principall knight that was taken prisoner at that in∣stant by Cleonidas, and both of them gaue her great thankes for the worthinesse the vsed in laying of their enimie, and meruailed verie much at her great bountie and valiantnes. The Empresse receiued them verie curteouslie, and asked of them who they were, and of what Countrie? Wherevnto the damsell answered, saying. You shall vnderstand (worthie knight) that this Knight and I are both of the confines of Sarmasia, and I am Ladie ouer sixe Castles of mine owne the which be verie strong and good, all scituated in one great and fresh valley, and this knight is Lord ouer other thrée Castles, round about mine, and being ouercome with my beautie, fell in loue with mée, and would haue taken me for his wife, I liked wel of him, but there was one thing that did disturbe me, and hindered the accomplishing of his desire, which was, that I had some suspition that he bare great good wil and loue vnto a Dam∣sell that is verie faire, and Ladie ouer another little valley, which is verie faire and pleasant, and till such time as I was fullie certefied of this doubt, I wold neuer consent vn∣to his request, for the which, séeing that there was no order howe and which waie I might entirelie satiste my selfe.
There was a conclusion conserted betwixt vs both, that we should goe together into the kingdome of Rusia, vnto the caue of the wise Artidon, who doth answere a full conclusi∣on vnto all that is demanded of him, and doth knowe the se∣cret of all heartes, and what they doe desire, although they doe dissemble and kéepe it neuer so secret. So this séeming vnto vs the best remedie, wée straight waies gaue order for the same, the which being in a readinesse, wée embarked our selues in this shippe, and departed, bringing with vs to the number of twelue knightes to bears vs companie, and béeing by fortune put into this port, our mishappe woulde that wée shoulde méete with this rouer Cleonidas, who straight waies with his knights dyd ioyne in battaile with vs, and hauing slaine the most part of those that came with vs, this knight béeing so sore oppressed with them, in the end was taken prisoner with mée and these women that came with mée, according as you Sir knight, dyd finde vs. This is all that I can declare for aunswere vnto your de∣maund, and the occasion wherefore wée departed out of our Countrie. The Empresse Claridiana reioyced verie much at the good discourse of the damsell, and meruailed not a little of that which she heard told of the caue of Artidon, and as one that desired no other thing, to the intent she might bée fullie cer∣tefied of her knight, shée requested the Ladie once agayne to certefie her of that caue, and to giue her to vnderstande, what is the reason that they that entered in shoulde knowe all that they demaunded. Then Elisea, (for so the Damsell was called) who knew verie well the whole aduenture of that caue, declared it vnto her peticularlie in such order as it was and passed, saying that the sayde Artidon was th wisest that was in all his time, and hetherto could neuer bée found the like, he did inchaunt that caue in such sort, that all persons may knowe what they will desire, and this was of a verie truth, for that shée hath béene certefied by them that haue béene at the same place, and there made the proofe.
When that Claridiana vnderstoode verie well the aduen∣ture of the caue, she straight waies had a great desire to goe thether, as well to sée a thing of so greate meruaile, as also for that it séemed that by that meanes she might come vnto the knowledge of that she desired so much to knowe of the knight of the Sunne. And so she said vnto the damsell and vnto the knight, that she would goe and beare them compa∣nie, onelie for to sée that meruailous caue of Artidon, wher∣at they were verie gladde and ioyfull, thinking their iour∣ney to bée made with more securitie. And therewith they all went a shoare together, and beganne to trauayle by lande, and passing by the skirt of the kingdome of Bala∣chia, they entered into Russia, and trauailing towardes the caue of Artidon, the Hystorie doeth leaue them for to tell you of the Pagans, that in all this time were muste∣ring and gathering together of their people for to goe to∣wards Grecia. How the great and mightie armie of the Emperour Alican∣dro were ioyned together in the port of Tenedon, and of diuerse varieties of people that there were ioyned to go in∣to Grecia. Chap. 17. IN all this time was not idle the great and mightie Emperour Alycandro, for that after he had concluded vpon the voage into Gre∣cia, he made so great spéed in the ioyning and gathering together of his people, that in a short time all his Captaines had in a readi∣nesse what hée shoulde haue on his charge. Likewise such kinges as were his subiectes hauing the charge for to ioyne and gather together in their kingdomes, all the people that possible they coulde, so that they obserued the time ap∣pointed, and met in the kingdome of Phrigia, whereas is the great and mightie Port of Tenedon. The number of people were infinit that were ther ioyned together of di∣uerse nations, so contrarie the one to the other, that it séemed
all the people in the whole world to be there assembled, and if euerie Nation had not ben diuided and separated the one from the other in verie good order, they should not the one haue vnderstoode the other, which would haue bene the oc∣casion of a great confusion amongest them, by reason of the diuertie of their spéeches. And for that the wise Lyrgandeo would declare some of the Nations that were héere met in this mightie armie (which was the greatest that euer was made in all the world) as he that knew it verie wel, he hath named some of them in this Hystorie, and faith, that there came first thether the Emperour Alycandro, King & Lorde ouer thē all, who brought with him fiftie thousand knights of Tartaria, and thirtie thousand knightes of the Scits, and twentie thousand of the Orientall Indias, he brought in his companie the faire Princesse Lyndabrides, for to crowne her Empresse of Grecia, who came with no small content∣ment, for that it séemed vnto her by that order, shée might with great facilitie haue in her companie the knight of the Sunne. There came also the mightie and worthie Gyant, Bradaman Campeon Lord of the Orientall Ilandes, who brought in his companie that most valiant and proud youth Bramarant with two thousand of his Gyants, all mounted vpon Elephants, for that in those Countries they doe vse them for their necessities, as in other places they doe horses. Also the king of Seras with twentie thousand on horseback, all warlike people and gallant souldiers. Also the Prince of Cambray, and in his companie other fue kings of the Me∣dias, with an infinite number of people. Also the King of the Palibotos, who (as it is affirmed by many authors and writers) that at all times when he pleaseth, he bringeth in∣to the field one hundred thousand foote men of warre, and thirtie thousand on horsebacke, & eight thousand Elephants. Also the stout Rodaran king of Arabia, and with him the Quéene Carmania, with each of them fiue thousand knights. Thether came the king of Media, the king of the Patos, the king of the Arrianos, the king of the Sandaros, the king of the Parianos, the king of the Bastros, the king of the Sugianos,
the king of the Suspios, the king of the Masagetas, the king of the Corsitas, the king of the Paristeos, the king of the Ri∣faces, y• king of y• Mardos. Also the king of Arcania, the king of Yuoria, the king of Armenia, and all the Nations of the riuer anges and of the mount Tauro. Also the king of Trapabona, and the king of Aegypt, and the king of Aethi∣opia, and the Prince of Candoria, and the olde king of Ge∣drosia, onelie for to sée himselfe reuenged on the Emperour Alycandio, who did not estéeme, but set at naught his coun∣saile, and also of Bramarant, who slew the good knight Gra∣co his sonne. To conclude, there came these & many other nations m, which he let passe for to auold ediousness: but yet one thing in all this great armie, is as greatly to be la∣mented as noted, and that is, y• being there ioyned together more than the third part of all the world, yet was there not amongst so many thousands of people, not one that dyd be∣léeue in God, nor obserued his lawes, for that they were all Gentiles: some worshipped Estatuas, & other some the stars, and there were many amongst them that did worship verie foule beasts, and for their principall Gods Oxen and dogs, a very lamentable thing, yet God did permit & suffer it for the great and abhominable sinnes of man. Thus when that all these people were in a readinesse, the great Nauie wherein they shoulde be imbarked was assembled altoge∣ther, the which fléet was so great, y• it couered from the port Tenedon, a great part of the Egean sea, and all the Helles∣ponto vnto the Proponte, and it was not to bée meruailed, that so great and mightie a fléete of shippes should be ioy∣ned together, for that many dayes before the Emperour A∣licandro caused all the maisters and shipping that was to bée found in all the coastes of Asia to bée brought thether, so that in a short space after that they were ioyned toge∣ther, this mightie Fléete was furnished with all kindes of victualls and other necessaries, abiding winde and weather for to depart, the which when that it came, they hoysed their sailes, and began to take their iourney towardes Grecia, with so great a noise of diuerse kindes and sortes of instru∣ments,
that euerie Nation brought, that it was a wonder to heare. So in this their iourney the Hystorie doth leaue them till time doth serue. How the Emperour Trebatio had newes of the comming of the Pagans, and how he made all things in readinesse to receiue them. Chap. 18. AS the Emperour Trebatio was aduertised of the comming of the Pagans before they deuarted out of their Countrie, euen so had h intelligence by certaine scouts & messen∣gers, at such time as they were ioyned toge∣ther, and imbarked in the Port of the Te∣nedon, and how that they were all at the Sea, at which time the Emperour was readie and had all things in good order, although there were not come vnto him the aide and help that hee looked for from many other places, but yet of his owne Countries and other kingdomes subiect vnto his Empire, he had ioyned together one hundreth and twentie thousands of verie good knightes and chosen men, for besides al Grecia, ther was subiect vnto his Empire the kingdome of Macedonia, and the kingdome of Epiro, and the King∣dome of Arcadia, all Ciilia was his and Italia, Pannonia, Dalmasia, Dardania, Hungaria, Bitania, Sueuia, Saxonia, the Ilandes Ciclades, Creta, and Rhodas, and many other I∣landes which I leaue in the Tirreno Sea, whose gouern∣ment is by mightie Princes, all subiectes vnto the Empire, and are at the commaundement of the Emperour at all times when that hée will call them vnto the warres. So that the Emperour Trebatio was in a readinesse as well with all these people, as also with those valiant and wor∣thie Knightes which were at that time in the Court, and others which hée looked for euerie daie, and although hée receiued greate sorrowe and griefe for the absence of his sonne the knight of the Sunne, in the time of so great ne∣cessitie, and for that it was long since his departure, and ne∣uer
to that houre hée coulde heare anie newes of him, his heart gaue him that he should not heare of him so quick∣lie, for the which hée was verie sadde and heauie, although his valiant heart and courage was of so great force, that hée dissembled his sorrowe, and shewed so pleasnt and ioyfull a countenaunce vnto all people, that of none it was perceiued. And in all this time that they were awaiting the comming of the Pagans, hée nor his sonne Rosicleer were not idle, but alwayes procured to fortifie and stren∣then the Citie with armour, armes, and victualles, in a∣mending the walles, and trimming the gates, causing the fieldes to bee made cleane▪ for disturbing of themselues. So that this good Emperour was alwaies occupied, and readi at all pointes, as he who looked for against him, the greatest power and mightiest armie that euer was séene. Héere the Hystorie doth leaue to speake of him, and returne to speake of the greate and puisaunt Fléete that was ordaining in England. Of the great and mightie armie the which the King Oliue∣rio ioyned together in great Britaine, for to passe into Grecia. Chap. 19. NOw saith the Hystorie, forsomuch as the King Oliuerio had verie gréene in his me∣morie the death of his sonne the Prince Edward, and also Don Siluerio the robbing and taking awaie of that precious and faire Princesse Oliuia, the which hée hoped to haue to wie, both the one and the other dyd procure to make reuenge with all diligence and spéede possible. So that Don Siluerio was not contented with such  as hée coulde take out of the Kingdome of Lusitania, but also hée went vnto the king Zenodoro, who was at that present king and Lorde ouer the Godos in , (who were the richest and mightye people that
were to be founde in all Christendome) who for that they were neighbours and friends, he gaue vnto him twentie thousands knights all very good and well armed, & amongst them there were some young knights of the Godos, who for to show foorth the worthinesse of their persons, thought i good to goe foorth in these warres, and dyd vse themselues very valiatly, as shall be declared vnto you in the processe of this Historie. With these and other thirtie thousand more that Don Silurio brought out of his countrie, which made to y• num∣ber of fiftie thousand very good souldiers, he went to great Britaine▪ and at his ariuall theher, the king Oliuerio had in a redinesse other fiftie thousand chosen men out from a∣mongst all other kingedomes that were, subiect vnto him, as Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and Cornewall, and other mightie Lordes of  so that there was ioyned toge∣ther in great Britaine, one hundreth thousād fighting men. Likewise, he receiued letters from the king of Hungaria, that he had in a redinesse for his comming, fortie thousand knights, very good and chosen men, and well armed in all points: this he had besides others of great number, which would méete him by the way, the which did giue courage & stomacke vnto king Oliuerio, not alonely to assalt the Em∣peror Trebatio, but also to conquer a great part of y• world. So making his fléet in a redinesse, and all other necessaries néedefull for such an enterprise, the historie doth leue them, and retourne vnto the Emperour Alicandio. How the great and mightie fleet of the Emperor Alicandro came vnto the port of Constantinople, and forcing to goe a land, the Pagans had with the Christians great and rigorous encounters. Chap. 20. THE time is come that the great and puisant fléete of the barbarous Nations did faile and nauigate with prosperous winde and wether, to wards Grecia, with so great  and power, that it séemed they were
sufficient for to conquere the whole compasse of the world, for that since the arte of Nauigation was firste inuented, there was neuer so puisant and mightie a léete séene on the seas, for the first onset of them did couer the greatest parte of the Proponto, besides these that remained for to passe the straights into Egeo. Upon a daye earely in the morning at such time as the Sunne began to spred abroade his beames vpon the earth, this great and puisant fléete of shippes was so nighe vnto the lande, that they were discouered by them of Constanti∣nople, that dyd abide their comming, who were not a little amazed when that they saw the seas couered with so great and innumerable companie of shippes, and it séemed vnto them that there could not remaine any more people in all Asia, that was of any accompt, but that they were come in that fléete, and with the great ioye and contentment that they receiued for the discouerie of the lande, there was so great a noyse of diuers kindes of instruments, that it sée∣med all the world to ioyne together, as at the daye of the vniuersall iudgement. They that came formost and first to the lande, was the king of Media, & the king of the Partos, who with an infinit number of small Piises and boates made for the purpose, began to put a land a great multitude of their people y• came in their great shippes, wherein they vsed great diligence, and made all hast possible, because they would not disturbe, but giue place vnto them that followed after. Being a land, and not yet put in good order, neither had they taken a shore their horse and munition, when that by the commaundement of the Emperour Trebatio, there issued out of the mightie citie of Constantinople the prince Rodomarte, armed with very good and sure armour, and in his company ten thousand knights likewise very well ar∣med, and went towards the sea side, who with so valiant courage and furious force, did put themselues in the middest amongst the Pagans that were landed a shore, that they flew many of them, & many they ouerthrew to the ground very sore wounded, so that there were very fewe of them
but were sorie, that they were the first that came a lande: but by reason that they were verye manie in number and continually they did disembarke more and more, they re∣turned vpon the Gréekes, so that betwixt them there began a mightie and terrible battaile, for that the Medianes and Partes, were stoute and valiant men, and were all well ar∣med, and defended well themselues. Likewise, the Greekes were all chosen knights, and the great courage the which they receiued by the hearing of their valiant captaine, dyd cause them to put the Pagans in so great extremitie, that of force they retyred towards the sea, in which time there was so great hast in that mightie fléete, for to disembarke themselues a land, that all was in an vprore, and so great a noyse that the one could neither heare nor vnderstand the other, till such time as the Emperour Alicandro, (with great anger, for that he could not with his people goe and ayde them that were a land) commaunded that they should all retire back, and that euerie nation in his order as he a∣riued, should disembarke themselues, the wich being obay∣ed, straight waies there went a land the Ssas, Arianos, and the Gandaros, who when they ioyned with the other that were before a land, were so many in number, y• the Grkes began to loose ground, and to retire towards the citie. The Emperour séeing that, commaunded to issue foorth y• Prince of Dalmacia, and y• Prince of the Rodes with fiftene thou∣sand knights, who entred into the battaile with so furious yre, that in killing & slaying many of y• Pagans, they made them to loose that which before they had gotten of the field, and to retire backe vnto the sea side. There might you see thes Princes do so great actes, that they were all embrued with bloud of their enimies. Likewise the king of Media & of the Partes, & other kings, princes, & captaines of the pa∣gans, were all a great defence vnto their knights, for that they were of great & high stature of their persons, & verie valiant, strong and stoute, which caused great destruction a∣mongst the Christians. In all this time was Bradaman and Bramarant his sonne, so angrie, furious & outragious, y• there
was no one that belonged vnto them that drst abide their presence, for that they were appointed for to come in y• mid∣dest of all that great fléete in the garde & companie of the Emperour Alicandro, and they séeing so many shippes be∣fore them, (the which should first vsembarke) and they so farre from y• those whereto they could not by anie meanes send anie of their men for to aide & helpe the Pagans that were in battaile and oppressed by the Christians, were rea∣die to teare themselues in péeces with anger and griefe, and commanded the marriners, that they should with all sailes bearing, rush through the thickest of all the fleete, with all spéede possible for to come first to the shore▪ and for that the passage was verie perilous for to passe through, where as to manie shippes were at an anker in the port, the pylot did withdraw himselfe in all y• euer he could, not to passe forwards, the which being perceiued by the stout Brama∣rant, his anger was so great, that he had against the pylot, that he tooke him by the héeles and threw him headlong into the sea, and said, goe thy waies whereas thou shalt lose all the feare and dread that thou hast of the Sea, for that marriners ought not to haue anie more feare at the Sea, then knights on the land: and therevpon he tooke the go∣uernement of the shippe to himselfe, who with stretched sailes, thrust himselfe amongst the thickest of the fléet, with so great furie, that all pylots procured to let slip their ca∣bles for to giue waie vnto him that he might passe, and by reason of his first course, there were some shippes that had not so much time, receiued the wracke, and sunke into the Sea. Thus by force hasting to the shoreward, launching out the shippe boate, both the father and sonne went to gether, and there were so great a number of them and their barkes at the sea side, discharging of souldiers, that they could not gette to the shore, and they not minding to staye for anie turnes or degrées, made no more a doe but leapt from one oate vnto an other, for to recouer the lande, and yet were they forced for to leape into the water vp to the knées before
they could get a shore, who when they found themselues vpon the firme lande, & against them a number of Gréekes that dyd disturbe their disembarking, they did in suche sort beginne to besturre themselues amongst them, that in a shorte time with their wonderfull and terrible blowes, they dyd so intreate them, that of very force they were con∣strained to retire, for that they neuer stroke blow, but that they slew or ouerthrew a knight to the ground, that by their mightie force, they had place for to disēbarke the rest a land. And in this sort being a foote as they were, they put them∣selues into the middest of the battaile, by whose comming, many Gréekes lost their liues, and they carryed the flower of the victorie, for that whereas they went, there was not one that saw their terrible blowes, but did flye away before them, as from the death: so that by reason hereof, y• Gréekes lost a great parte of the field, and retyred themselues to∣wards the citie, the which being perceiued by the captains, they did incourage and animate them all that euer they could, for to holde their owne, and to remaine in the field, but they respecting the two Paganes and saw that they were the onely occasion of their retyring, and signe of de∣struction, the two Princes Radamarte and Rodafeo, toke to them two bigge and strong staues, and setting spurres to their Horses, with so great furie as possible was, the one made his encoūter against Bradaman, and the other against Bramarant, who although they were on foote, yet for all that by reason of the greatnesse and mightinesse of their persons, were séene aboue all the rest: but it fell not out well with these two Princes, for although they made their encounter verie strongly, and brake their staues, yet did they them no harme, neither made any motion of mouing thereat, but passing by, they strok either of thē such a blow at his enimie with so great furie, on their wastes, that they ouerthrew thē to the earth, and if their armour had not bene verie good, they had parted them a sunder in the middest. Forthwith these furious Pagās passed forwards for to put themselues in the thickest of the Gréekes, who fled meruailously before
them, in which time the two Princes had space for to reco∣uer againe their horses, and with great anger and griefe for that misfortune that happened vnto them, they put them∣selues amongst the Pagans, requiting on them the iniurie done by the other two, determining not to return anie more to proue themselues vpon the two Pagans that had ouer∣throwen them, because they sawe that they coulde get but little honour at their hands. In this time the Greekes re∣tired backe all that euer they could, and lost a great part of the field, so that the rest of the Pagan fleete had roome and space inough for to disebarke themselues, so y• all the fields were peopled with the Pagan host. The which the Empe∣rour rebatio perceiuing, he straight waies commanded the Prince of Dardania and the king of Esclauonia, y• they with twentie thousand knights should issue out into the battaile, and do so much, that by force they might make the Pagans for to retire, onelie for that they should not thinke Grecia so be so ill prouided of knights and defence. Then these two Captaines who were verie valiant and stout knights, with those knights that the Emperour had commanded, depar∣ted out of the citie, and passing two great fields that were betwéene the Pagan host and them, they came vnto the bat∣taile, and séeing that the Grecians retired and were like to lose the victorie, with all the force and furie possible, they entred all together into the battaile, and slew many of their enimies, and got againe the field the which before they had lost, & made the Pagans to retire vnto y• sea side, although they were a great number more, then there were of the Gréekes, and continually did disembarke more and more, all alongst the coast, some armed, and other some tarrying for theyr armour and horse, yet for all this it dyd well ap∣peare that those which came from the citie a fresh, had not felt the great power and infernall furie of these braue Pa∣gans, the father & the sonne, who with great ease did bat∣tayle with the rest, but quickly they felt their mortall and wonderfull blowes, which caused them to loose a great part of their brauerie, & semed that those two were sufficient for
to destroy them all, who with verie broade and heauie fau∣chins, dyd put themselues amongst the Gréekes, some they cut a sunder by the wastes, and othersome they cloue down to their breastes, and othersome vnto the saddle, and made great slaughter in such sort, that amongst the Gréekes, ther was not one knight although he were neuer so valiant & stoute, that durst abyde before them, but ranne away from te place whereas they saw them come, thinking them to be more like diuels of bell, then knights. At this time y• Em∣perour Alicandro was come a shore, and moted vpon a tri∣umphant Chariot, such a one as the princesse Lindabrides brought: out of the which he did behold all that passed in the battaile, and was verie ioyfull for to sée the great wonders which Bradaman Campion, and his sonne dyd, and semed vnto him that they two alone were sufficient for to destroy a whole armie, and he saw that by their force, the Gréekes began to loose ground, although euerie one of them did ve∣rie wel, by the great incouraging of their captaines. At this time the good knight Rosicleer (finding himselfe agreued) would not detaine himselfe any longer in the citie, & seing that the battaile was meruailously moued, he armed him∣selfe with his strong, rich, and glistering armour. And al∣though the Princesse Oliuia, and the Emprisse Briana his mother did all that they could for to disturbe his going, yet dyd it profit thē very little, for that in taking lisence of the Emperour his father, he issued out of the citie, accompanied with those valiant knights, the Troian Oristedes, the Tar∣tarian Zoylo, the two princes Bargandel and Liriamandro, and the king Alamades, all these sixe together without car∣rying any other people in their companie, but onely cer∣taine squires for to carrie their speares. In this sort went towards the battaile a gallope with their horse and accor∣ding as they were of gallant proporcions, and very well ar∣med, they gaue contentment vnto all that dyd behold them, and the etring of these knights into the battaile, fell out euel vnto a great number, for that in this day a great num∣ber of the pagans lost their liues by their hands.
With great furie entred these sixe worthie knights, into the battaile, and so valiātly besturred themselues, that vn∣to the rest of the Gréekes they gaue new force and courage to returne vnto the fight, and great wonder vnto the Pa∣gans to sée their brauerie, with great anger they put them∣selues amongst their enimies, ouerthrowing and killing all that euer was in their waies, in such sort that they left all the field, (whereas they went) full of dead bodies, & there was not one, although he were neuer so stout, that durst a∣byde before them, but in especiall, that worthie Rosicleer, who had the forehand, dyd charge his enimies with so great and furious blowes, that the Emperour Alicandio, & other Pagan kniges that dyd behold them out of the triumphant Chariot▪ did think verely y• it was the knight of the Sunne, for that in his gallant proporcion, and mightinesse of bodie, he did resemble him verie much. And their bloud waxed colde in their bodies to see how he did cut their knights a∣sunder in the middest, and some cloue downe vnto the ger∣delsted: likewise they were greatly amazed at the stoute Troyan that rode by him, who ouerthrew & slew with his sword, all that euer he could reach, and dyd in this day make aparant vnto all people, the valiant discent from whence he did procéede. Also that valiant Tartarian, did here shew the great loue that he bare vnto Rosicleer, for whose sake, he forsooke his owne natiue countrie, & slew so many of those barbarous people, that he was all imbrewed with y• bloud of them, the lyke dyd the two Princes and the king, that if they had not bene approued knightes, they could not haue followed Rosicleer, by reason he put himselfe with so great furie amongest the Pagans: but what dyd profit all this that they dyd, for although on that part whereas they were they got the better hand, yet in all other parts of the bat∣taile the Gréekes sled away and lost the fild, by reason of the two furious Pagans, Bradaman and stode, who did such dilish wonders, that ther was non that could what to make of them. There  knight to Rosicleer, declaring the
mischiefe the which those two Pagans did, who hearing the same, turned aboute his horse, and went towardes that place whereas they were acompanied with their freindes: and he had not gon farre when that a farre of he saw them, for that Bradaman being on foote, was higher then any man on horsebacke from the brest vpwards, and Branarant was equall on foote with the horsemen, and these two Pagans were all to be rayed with bloud, and the place whereas they were full of dead bodies round about them, procuring con∣tinually to presse forewards in the battaile, all that euer they could, for to ouertake them that fled away before thē. The which being séene by Rosicleer, his valiant and coura∣gious heart could not suffer it, but tooke in his hand y• big∣gest speare that he could finde, crying out vnto the knights for to giue him way: he lyke vnto a whirle winde, made towards Bramarant, at which noyse an the Pagans and Gréekes gaue way for to behold tha encounter, then this furious Pagan when that he sawe him comming, with his broade faucheon in his hand, did abide him, and  still, thinking him to be one as the other knights were, but this good knight made his encounter in the middest of his broad and great breast, with so great force and strength, (that al∣though he was accustomed not to make any muing encounter that was made against him) yet at this pre∣sent he was ouerthrowen and fell backwards to the ground, that he thought verely all his bones had bene broken, at whose fall there was so great a noyse, as though a tower had fallen downe, the which fall troubled him so much, that almost with griefe he could scarce ryse againe. At which encounter all those that dyd behold it, were greatly amazed, for the Pagans thought verely, that there was no humaine force that was able to make the like. But much more was the wonder of y• proud pagan, for that he thought that all the power of those false gods in whome he beleued, were not of force to ouerthrow him to the grounde: & as yet he was not wel raisd vp  his , when y• this good knight , with aspere of no lsse bignesse thē the other, with so great force
and impetuositie, that he séemed a whirle wind, returned vp∣pon the gran Campeon, and made so strong an encounter in the middest of his breast, that neither more nor lesse as his sonne, he fell with his backe on the ground, and therwith he and his friend pressed forwards, making great slaughter a∣mongst the Pagans. But when that the Emperour Aly∣candro sawe those two most valiant Pagans (in whom hée had so great confidēce) to be ouerthrown by one alone knight, he thought verilie to die in that place with verie anger, and complained against the Gods, for that they did giue vnto one knight so great force and strength, and more, being a Chri∣stian. But his anger and griefe did straight waies increase the more, for that the olde king of Gedrosia who was with him, and as one that receiued no griefe at anie euill y• should happan vnto the Pagans, saie. You shall vnderstand (mightie Emperour) that yonder knight who hath put you in so great admiration is not the knight of the Sunne, as you doe thinke, for that as yet he is not come forth vnto the battaile, but this is a brother of his, and such a one, that when that he doth ioyne with the other, there is not people inough in all this thy mightie armie suf∣ficient for to kill them. The Emperour did verie well vn∣derstand the intention of the king of Gedrosia, and meruai∣ling greatlie at that which he had sayd, he did dissemble at that present, and returned to beholde the battaile, to sée the conclusion thereof. It cannot be héere declared the great an∣ger and diuellish furie which the two Pagans, Father and sonne receiued, to sée themselues so ouerthrowen by one a∣lone knight in the presence of all the whole Campe, which caused them to do such things, & to srike so terrible blowes, that they seemed to be diuells of hell. And they seeing that they could not by anie meanes followe and ouertake that knight which had ouerthrowen them for that they were on foote, they straight waies commanded that in great hall their horses should be brought vnto them, so they brought vnto Bradaman a mightie Elephant whereon he did vse to ride, for that there was no horse that could beare him, and vnto
Bramarant the mightiest horse of bodie that euer was séene, for that he was engendered by a horse and a she Elephant. When that these two were mounted (for the euill of many) they put themselues into the battaile, killing and slaying all that euer they met withall, till such time as they had disco∣uered the worthie knight Rosicleer in the companie of his good friends, & for that Bramarant did shew himselfe of grea∣ter force than his father, by the mightie and mortall blowes which he stroke, Rosicleer would take with him the conten∣tion, and the Troyan Oristedes with the stout Zoylo, went against Bradaman, so that betwéene them there began a ter∣rible battaile, that all those that might sée them, forgot to fight, and stood to behold them, & séemed that in all their liues they neuer sawe the like, for that they iudged to be ioyned together there, all the force and strength in the world, there did the good knight Rosicleer féele the great force and furie of the Pagan, and it séemed vnto him that hée was the bra∣uest and most strongest that euer he proued in all his life. Likewise the stout Bramarant did knowe his high bountie and valiant force, for féeling the mightie blowes which hée stroke on him, and séeing the little harme that his blowe did vnto the knight, with an angrie courage he blasphemed a∣gainst the heauens, and against the earth, and redoubled his blowes with so great furie, that if the armour of Rosicleer had not ben excéeding good, euerie blow of them had ben suf∣ficient for to haue clouen him a sunder in the middest, and yet for all that he many times astonied him, & brought him so farre out of remembraunce, that he fell forwards on his saddle bow and embraced his horse necke, yet notwithstan∣ding this stout Pagan did not much aduance himselfe of his valiantnesse, for y• this worthie Gréeke being kindled with ire, did with mortal courage so charge him in such sort, that his téeth did breake the  against the other, by the force of his blowes, that great abundance of bloud ranne out at his mouth, and many times he was so amazed, y• he was readie to fal from his horse, so that betwixt them the battaile grew so terrible, that all those that were in the field forgot them∣selues,
and did beholde them, and were greatlie amazed that so much power and force shoulde be in humane creatures. No lesse worth for to be looked on at that present, was the mightie battaile that passed betwixt the stout Bramarant & the two good knights, the Tartarian & the Troyan, for that Bradaman was the strongest that was to be found amongst all the Gyants in the whole world at that time. Likewise the two knights were the best that were to be found in all that great hoast, next vnto Rosicleer and Bramarant, which was the occasion that the battaile which was betwixt them was the more rigorous, for that the stout Tartarian stroke Bradaman such terrible blowes on the one side, that he asto∣nied him, and the valiaunt Troyan so charged him on the other side, that he made the bloud to runne out both at his nose and mouth, yet for all that the mightie Pagan did not dismaie himselfe, but was so couragious, that euerie blowe that hée fastned on his enimies, did make them to double their bodies in their saddles, and many times to loose their remembrance, and if they had not béene both against him together, either of them alone should haue passed verie euill. Thus after that this battaile had endured betwéene them the space of halfe an houre, the night drew on, and then was there disembarked a land so great and infinite a companie of Pagans, that the Greekes could not suffer them, but were constrained to retire, the which Rosicleer séeing, and consi∣dering the great perill that might happen vnto them, for to remine there alone and so farre from their companie, pre∣sently left Bramarant with whom he did combat, and called vnto his friends, who did the like, so that in short space with their light and swift courses, they put themselues amongst the Greekes, and returning backe in verie good order, they got into the citie, the which was no griefe vnto the Pagans, although the gran Campeon and Bramarant remained ve∣rie angrie and furious, for that they could not be reuenged on those knightes that dyd so much abase them. And by reason that the night drew on a pace, the Emperour Aly∣candro commaunded his Tents to bée pitched, and all
that night they had inough to doe to disimbarke the rest of the people that came in that fléete. But when that the next morning was come, they might sée all the field of Grecia so replenished with barbarous people, that neuer before that time was séene so many people in one armie, there was so many that they could not be numbred, to know how many they were, but that they might discerne euerie Nation was diuided by themselues, and knowen the one from the other. Likewise to sée the great difference they had the one from the other in their tents, the fashion of their armour, the di∣uersities of spéeches, and the contrarietie of their customes and manners, that no man whatsoeuer he were that should haue séene them, but woulde haue meruailed, and receiued great admiration, the Emperial tent of the Emperour was all wrought with gold and siluer, full of an infinite number of fine, prcious, and glistering stones, and was of so huge bignesse, that a thousand armed knights might walke ther∣in. Within the same tent was the Emperiall seate of the Emperour, and round about it the seates of all the other kings his vassals, in such order placed, as it was in the em∣periall hall of his pallace, and round about the same Tent was placed the tents of the Tartarians and of the Scitas, with an infinit number of tents and pauillians belonging vnto them. In like order was placed the tents of the other kings his vassals, euerie one in his degrée. These Pagans were eight daies, and had inough to do to fortefie their tents and trenches, in which time the Gréekes gaue no attempt a∣gainst the Pagans, for that the Emperour Alycandro dyd send and asked truce of the Emperour Trebatio for eight daies, the which was for no other thing, but onelie that the Gréekes might fréelie enter into their campe for to sée & dis∣cerne their mightie power, and so they did, for in the space of that eight daies, the Gréekes did no other thing but goe and come into the camp and hoast of the Pagans, and were greatlie amazed to sée so many and so different Nations ioy∣ned together, and so conformable for to obey and accomplish the commandement of their Lord. Likewise in this time the
good Emperour Trebatio hearkened to no other thing but to send to his knights from one place vnto another, in the demand and séeking of the knight of the Sunne, and when that he could not heare anie newes by them, hée was verie sad and sorrowfull for the same, as well for the suspition hée had of some misfortune that might happen vnto him, as al∣so for the great lacke of his aide and helpe that they might haue in that time of necessitie. The Princesse Lyndabides likewise in the time of these eight daies of truce, was infor∣med by certaine Gréekes, how that the knight of the Sunne was absent from the Court, and that many daies since they neuer could heare anie newes of him, for the which newes she was meruailouslie sad and heauie, for that she was de∣termined to enter into Constantinople, that vnder coulour to speake with the Empresse Briana, she might sée him, who was the onelie occasion of her comming out of her Country, and it séemed vnto her that in onelie séeing of him, her hart should receiue great comfort & ease, and she had great hope, (onelie for to eschue the great warres that were ordained a∣gainst them) that they would thinke it the best that he shuld be her husband, but when that shée sawe that all fell out contrarie to that which she thought, she beganne a new to grieue her selfe, and to féele her misfortune, whereas the Hy∣storie doth leaue her, to tel of all that happened afterwards. Of the great succour that came to the Emperour Trebatio, and of a cruell battaile that the Christians had with the Pagans. Chap. 21. THE last daie of the truce that was put be∣twéene the two Emperors, ariued in Gre∣cia the Prince Claueryndo, who came in aide and succour of the Emperour Treba∣tio, with twentie thousand knightes, of the best proportioned and armed, that were at that time ioyned together in Grecia, and they disimbarked themselues in the sight of all the Pagans, and entered into
Constantinople, at whose comming the Emperour Treba∣tio receiued as great ioy and pleasure, as the Emperour A∣lycandro sorrow and griefe, for that those knights came in the time of their truce, and his will was to the contrarie, for that he would haue giuen them a recompentibus before their entering into Constantinople, but straight waies his griefe began to double, for that within one houre after ari∣ued there the good king Sacridoro with eight thousand of his owne knights, and in his companie came the Prince Don Lucindo, with great desire for to shew the good will that he bore vnto Rosicleer, all the which came a shore in the face of all the Pagans, & passed through the great field, and so ente∣red into Constantinople, whereas they were receiued of the Emperour Trebatio & Rosicleer, with that loue and friend∣ship as was alwaies betwixt them. Likewise the last daie of the truce lacked not the comming of the good and valy∣ant king Florion, and in his companie the wise Lyrgandeo and his sonne, the stout Brandizel, who met with him at the Sea, by the industrie and wisedome of the wise man, and in his companie twentie thousand knights, who came to paie the greate debt in the which hée was bound vnto the knight of the Sunne, and at their entrie into Constan∣tinople they were receiued of the Emperour and of the Em∣presse, as such persons as they were deserued, who knew not how to gratifie the great paines and trauaile which they had taken, in comming from so farre Countries to fauour, succour, and helpe them▪ Héere the king Floion and the wise Lyrgandeo began a new for to declare vnto them, how & in what sort the young Gentleman of the Sunne was found, and how he was nourished and brought vp into his compa∣nie, till such time as he departed from them. Whereat the Emperour and the Empresse receiued great contentment to heare it told. Then the wise man turned vnto Rosicleer & did embrace him with great loue and sayd: Séeing that it is so (worthie Prince) that the euill fortune of your brother is fallen out so contrarie, that hée is now absent out of this Countrie, and you alone doe remaine the shield and defence,
of your father and Countrie, shew your selfe now as euer héeretofore you haue béene, & let no troubles nor trauailes ouercome you, nor wearinesse enter into your benes, for see∣ing that God hath created and made you so valiant & wor∣thie, let the honour of your mightie & valiant attempts ap∣peare in your high knighthood, and you may wel make this account, that if you goe through with this enterprise, you haue conquered all the world from the Orient vnto the Oc∣cident (beside the small companie that is on your part) they be all against you, & this much I can tell you of the knight of the Sun your brother, that since his departure frō hence, he hath not bene greatlie at his ease, for that he hath passed greater perils & dangers thā you can passe in these wars, & it doth not behoe vs to speak any more of him, for y• of force he must passe the troubles the which his destinie hath ordai∣ned for him. Héere did Rosicleer gratifie very much the wise man for that which he had sayd vnto him, and after thanks giuing, he said, that hauing him on his side, there was no∣thing y• he did feare. At this instant came thether fiue thou∣sand knights from the kingdome of Thessalia, and in their companie came the faire Quéene Arquirosa, who after y• she vnderstood that Rosicleer (by whome shée recouered her kingdome) was sonne vnto the Emperor Trebatio, she was not content to send to him of her knightes, but she her selfe would come in person vnto Constantinople, as wel for to sée Rosicleer, as also because she hoped to receiue & take a hus∣band at his appointment. The Emperor & Rosicleer thought great friendship of the comming of this aide, by whom as also by the Empresse the Quéene was receiued with great honour. All these were ioyned together in the mightie Citie of Constantinople, whereas the Emperor found of the one & of the other 100.  foure score thousand knights, so y• if there were not ioyned together so many of their aduersaries, they had ben sufficient to haue conquered al the whole world, yet was there of the Pagans foure for one, & amongst thē there were the most bruest & stoutest giants y• were to be found in all the world, for y• the Emperour Alicandro sent for thē
from the Ilands of the farthest part of the Ocean seas, and Bradaman Campeon brought with him two thousand, that he tooke out of the Oriental Ilands, so that all these were of so furious and stout a Nation, that the Emperour Trebatio had héere great néede of the aide and help of almightie God. All this aide and succour aforesaid entered into Constanti∣nople in the face of the Emperour Alycandro and all his, wherat he was wonderfull wrathfull, as well for their com∣ming to aide their enimies, as also for that they entered in the time of their truce, so that hée and all that were with him had great good will for to distrube them of their entrie into the Citie, and swore that after their truce was ended, if there came anie more aide & succour, that first they would put them all vnto the sword, rather than consent that they should enter into Constantinople, for that he might better deale with them abroade in the field than in the Citie, and from that daie forwardes the Emperour Alycandro com∣manded that there should be put spies and scoutes in all pla∣ces, for to aduertise them if there came anie more succour vnto the Gréekes, the which was no small harme vnto them (as shall be tolde you héereafter in this Hystorie) but God who is the author of al goodnesse, did so ordaine, that by their owne spies and scoutes they came to prdition & were lost, for that hée would not that his Christian people should re∣ceiue so much harme as was ordained for them by theyr enimies. Of the second battaile which the Greekes had with the Pa∣gans, and of the notable acts that were done in the same. Chap. 22. AFter that the eight daies were past of the truce that was taken betwéene the Gréekes and the Pagans, the next daie following, which was the ninth daie, the Emperour Trebatio determined to issue out of the Ci∣tie with his knightes into the field, and giue
battaile vnto his enimies, who were likewise in a redinesse, and verie desirous they dyd abide their comming, thinking it long to sée them in their clouches, but in especiall those two furious Pagans the gran Campion and Bramarant, vnto whome y• eight daies of truce séemed to be eight yéeres according vnto the great desire which they had to be reuen∣ged on those knights which had so shamed them in the first battaile, who so soone as they sawe anie people begin to come forth out of the citie to enter the field, put themselues before all the whole armie, for that they would be the first that should enter into the battaile. So he that came the for∣most of the Gréekes, was that good knight Rosicleer, and next vnto him the stoute Oristedes, with the good king Sa∣cridoro, & with them twentie thousande of Greeke knights, who vpon a sodaine, did set vpon a great bushment of Pa∣gans that tooke the fore frunt of the host, in the which was more then fortie thousād knights of the Seras & of y• Medos, who had for their captains y• king of Seras, & the king of the Medos, both of the which were young men and verie va∣liant knightes, and in their companie came Bradaman and Bramarant, in the foreward, the one mounted vpon his E∣lephant, and the other vpon his mightie horse, and either of them a speare in his hand so great, that it séemed the mast of a ship, who pricked before their company, and made great hast towards the Gréekes. Then came there forth to receue them Rosicleer and his good companions, in such sort, that he made his encounter with Bramarant, and the good Troyan with the king Sacridoro, made their encounter with Bra∣daman, so that all fiue together made so strong & mightie an encounter, that the noise thereof made a terrible sound throughout all those broade and wide fields, as though some thunder bolt had fallen when their Speares were broken, they remaining all firme in their saddles passed the one by the other forwards, & neuer staied till they put themselues in the ace of their enimies, and with so great fuie they en∣tered amongst them, that they couered the fields with dead knights, and the dust that arose into the aire did cuer all
the whole hoste that they could scarce sée one another, and the horse ran masterlesse about the field which was a show how manie they had ouerthrowne  that their first entrie: At this time those two furyous Pagans being somewhat wery in killing of their aduersaries, retourned back to séeke out them who had iusted with them, and they sawe them in the midest of their aduersaries & enymies all to berayed with bloud, kylling and ouerthrowing all that they could méete with all, and when they came nighe vnto them, Bramarant went against Rosicleer, and Bradaman against his two companions, so that betwixt them there began such a battaile, that many y• were there dyd leaue of their figh∣ting, onely to behold them, for that their blowes which they did strike, did make them all to wonder, and there was no man that did behold them, but receiued great feare & dread. Here in this conflict might be séene how necessarie is the armour, vnto good knights, such as are made and forged by maisters of Arte Magicke, for if they were not forged, with their compositions & subiections, according vnto Arte, then were the best knightes in all the worlde as readie and as subiect to be clouen in y• middest vnto their wasts, by y• ter∣rible blowes of these monsters, as any other simple wretch and feble person, for whan their armour is not good, many times in the breaking they loose an arme and some other ioynt, or receiue some great wound, whan that at all times at their néede they shall not finde a Surgeon o cure & heale them. Therefore such as were good knights in those dayes, and desired to put themselues in mightie perills & dangers, did more procure to get their armour made by arte, then to get a kingedome, and in this sort they did defend themselues the one from the other, assuring their owne persons in such sort, that all the condition of their battailes did depend in their great force and stregth, and in him that most mighte∣ly and worthely with dexteritie did strike and deliuer his blowes. So that in this conflict, although the blowes of Bramarant were wonderfull and terrible, yet dyd Rosicleer receiue & abide them on the finenesse of his armour, which
were of the best that was in all the whole world: likewise in the valiantnesse of his courage, which was not onely for to make resistance against that furious Pagan, but also he did so furiously and so strongly charge him with his blowes, that many times he made him astonied and to sweat drops of bloud, for that of trueth Bramarant thought before hée made a profe of this knight, that in all the heauens and vp∣pon the earth, there was not to be found one that durst a∣byde his importunate furie, wherewith he receiued so great courage and anger, that with an infernall stomacke he re∣doubled his blowes against the strong & worthie Rosicleer, in such sort that his owne flesh and bones dyd ake, & it sée∣med that the other was all on fyer, with the great quanti∣tie of sparkes that he made flie out of his fine forged armor. Likewise, was no lesse rigorous, the braue & stout battaile the which Bradaman Campion, had with the two valiant knights, for that the Gran Campion, next vnto his sonne Bramarant, was the most mightiest and strongest that was in all the whole Orient, whome the stout Troyan and the valiant King Sacridoro, together, dyd so stronglie charge with their blowes, that it could not be better executed, i that he hadde bene assauted by the two worthie Troyans, Hector, and Troylus. In this sort was these two so stoute captains matched with their contraries, & the other knights and souldiers did all that euer they could for to driue theyr enimies out of the field, but by reason that on the Pagans part, there was that stout and valiant knight Rodaran, the King of Media, and the King of Seras, and on the contrarie part, there was none for to make resistance vnto those, they made great slaughter vpon the Gréekes, by reason whereof, as also for that there were twise so many of the Pagans as they were, they began to retyre, & to lose ground, the which being perceiued by the Emperour Trebatio, he would not detaine himselfe any longer in the Citie, but taking in his companie those high and mightie Princes the king Florion and Brandizel his sonne, the Tartarian Zoylo, Bargandel, & Liriamendro, with Don Lucindo, & other mightie princes
and knights the most principal of all his court, he issued out of the citie, and had with him thirtie thousand knights ve∣rie good and chosen men, and so entred into y• battaile with great furie, deuiding themselues into two parts, that what with killing, wounding, and slaying, they oppressed so much their enimies, that they forced the Pagans to retyre into their trenches, whereas the Gréekes in following of them, ouerthrew many tents, but straight waies ther came forth against them more then fiftie thousande Pagans with va∣liant and stout captaines, & made their encounter with the other that came vppon them a fresh, in such sorte, that the battaile was renewed and waxed verie bloudie. Here was to be séene y• great meruailes done by the Emperour Tre∣batio, in distroying and killing all that was before him, for some he cut a sunder in the middest, and other their armes, and other their heads, in such sort, that who soeuer had sene him with that impetious furie, they could not haue iudged him, but to be either his sonne Rosicleer, or y• knight of the Sunne, and in his mightie déedes, he did demonstrate, that there was not a Christian prince that with more reason did deserue to beare the name to be father of so excelent sonnes. He did not content himselfe to kil & destroy meane knights, but did séeke out the principall captaines, & knowing them by the richnesse of their armour, he would assalt them, ma∣king rekoning, that in ouercomming them, he ouerlayed the whole state and force of the battaile, and there with he met with the king of the Seras, and knowing him, by a riche crowne of Gold and precious stones which he had vpon his helme, he tooke a speare from one of his knights, and ranne at him therewith, making his encounter in the middest of his brest, that the speare pearsed through his bodie, and he fell dead to the ground, this being done he made an other encounter against the king of the Balibotros (who receiued little benefit of his thirtie thousand knights, and eight thou∣sand Elephants, which he brought out of his countrie) for that at one thrust with a speare, his heart was clouen a sunder, and the head appeared all bloudie at his backe, and
he tumbled to the ground: likewise with another blow with his sword he cloue the head of another king of the Ni∣dias, which had his healme more furnished with golde and precious stones, than of strength. In this sort he passed into the battaile doing such meruailes, that whereas he passed, they all made him roome and gaue waie. Then the Empe∣rour Alicando who saw all that passed from his triumphant Chariot, sayd vnto many kings that were with him. With∣out all doubt this is the knight of the Sun, and new come into the battaile, and of truth his power is verie great, and he would giue s the repulse, if there were not so infinit a number of knights in this my armie to make resistaunce. Tarrie a while (sayd the olde king of Gedrosia) for that is not the knight of the Sun as you do saie, but it is the Em∣perour Trebatio his Father, who when that he himselfe in the middest betwixt his sonnes, and accompanied with that bushments of knights which now are with him, he wil not feare all the whole world, if they were all together against him. At this time who so had séene the great slaughter which that valiant Florion & his sonne Brandizel did, as also the Prince Clauerindo with the Tartarian Zoylo, and all the other precious and worthie knights, surely they would haue saide, that by experience of the great slaughter which they did, they had ben sufficient to haue destroied a great armie, that although the Pagans were almost twice so many as they were, yet by their occasiō they lost continually ground, and if there had not béene amongst them one Bradaman and one Bramarant that did incourage them, they shoulde haue had inough to doe to haue defended themselues from them with whom they were so earnest in battaile withal, for that it was good two houres since they first began fight, and at that time there was no more aduantage to be knowen than at their first beginning, at the which these braue Pagans were so furious, that it séemed that they threw out smoake from the beauers of their healmes, and béeing verie desi∣rous to satisfie their hungrie wrath with the bloud of the others, Bramarant dyd leaue Rosicleer with whome he dyd
combat, and like a diuell of hell hée put himselfe into the battaile, destroying and killing all that euer hee met with, so that before him hée made a broade lane, and sayd within himselfe, that Rosicleer was verie valiant and strong, and could not beléeue that the knight of the Sunne had so much strength, but yet if that he might haue him in place where∣as they might haue more roome, and time for to finish their combat, hée would be wholie reuenged of him according vn∣to his will and desire. Likewise at that time Bradaman his Father, with his sword in both his hands stroke so strong a blow at the good Troyan vpon his helme, that béeing all amazed and from himselfe, his horse carried him round a∣bout the field, and turning himselfe about, hée stroke ano∣ther blow at the king Sacridoro, that hée fell backwardes vpon his horse crouper, and had fallen to the ground, if that he had not béene succoured by the Gréekes, and without ma∣king anie more account of them, hée put himselfe into the battaile after his sonne, and béeing both together, they made so great slaughter, that all did flie from that part whereas they went. It dyd not much grieue Rosicleer nor his com∣panions to sée themselues separated from those diuells, yet with great furie they put themselues into the battaile, kil∣ling and ouerthrowing all that euer came into their waie, in such sorte, that it went euill with a great number, for that they were separated from the battaile which they had with those stout Pagans. At this time the Emperour Trebatio met with that strong knight Rodaran king of Arabia, and knowing him by the deuice of his armour, with great anger that hée had against him for▪ the treason hée vsed, hée made towardes him, (and for that Rodaran was one of the valiantest Pa∣gans that was in all the whole armie) it was the occasion that betwixt them there began a stout and braue battaile, that many had inough to doe to behold them, and the rest of the daie was almost spent before that they were parted a∣sunder, and for because there were at that present in the battayle few principall Knightes in parte of the Pagans,
and on the Emperour Trebatio his side there were a great number, and it séemed vnto the Pagans that the Gréekes got much ground on them. The Emperour Alcandro straight waies commaunded the two thousand Gyantes of Bradaman for to enter into the battaile, who obeied his com∣mandement with so great impetuositie and furie, that ma∣ny of their aduersaries they ew and ouerthrew vnto the ground. At this present were to be séene the great meruailes done by Rosicleer, and by all the other worthie Princes and knightes, who being ioyned together with the number of one thousand of their knightes, did put themselues to make resistance against all those Gyants, and with their strong and worthy armes did resist that impetuous companie, who were sufficient to put them all to flight. Héere did the stout Oristedes verie well shew his manhoode, and the valiant & worthie Clauerindo, the Tartarian Zoilo, and the king Sa∣cridoro, the Prince Don Lucindo, Liriamandro, & Bargan∣del, the king Alamades, Rodamarte & Rodafeo, euerie one of these did so much, that the reader thereof may coniecture of their great bountie, but yet in the end by reason that the Pa∣gans were double as many as they, and againe those two diuells the Father and the sonne, against whom there was small resistance to be made, for that these worthie and estée∣med knights of Grecia had inough to doe to make resistance against the giants of Campion, which was the occasion that all his people when the night drew on began to retire and to loose ground a little and little, the which being considered of by the Emperour rebatio, and fearing the great perill that might happen vnto his people, he  vnto Rodaran, that if he thought good to leaue off their battaile & contenti∣on vntill the next daie, for that as then it was verie late, he would. Then Rodaran hauing that offer, as one y• desired no other thing, withdrew himselfe, & the Emperour perceiuing the night at hand, blew a rich horne of Iuorie that hée had at his neck, the which being knowen by his people, they be∣gan to withdraw themselues and to retire towards the Ci∣tie, the like did the Pagans retire towardes their treches,
sauing onelie Bradaman and Bramarant his sonne, who was so fleshed in killing and slaying and shedding of bloud, that hée followed the Gréekes almost vnto the Citie before they would retire, neither at that time woulde they haue retur∣ned, but that the valiant Rosicleer with all those worthie knights returned vpon them, so that betwixt them there be∣gan a terrible and cruell battaile, for that Bramarant stroke such cruell blowes at the stout Oristedes and the Tartarian Zoylo, that with two alonelie strokes hée amazed and lefte them without remembraunce, and made the bloud to gush out at their mouths and noses, at which season came Bran∣dizel and stroke him such an ouerthwart blowe vppon his healme, that he depriued him of his sight, & made him some∣what astonied, but Brandizel departed not boasting of this blow, for that Bramarant turning himselfe about with his sword in both his handes so saluted him, that he had fallen to the ground if that he had not embraced himselfe with his horse necke. In like manner Bradaman intreated the strong Florion and Clauerindo, for that at two blowes he left them with∣out remembrance, at which instant came Rosicleer with the good Emperor Trebatio, and with them the king Sacridoro, & in such sort they began to deale their blowes vpon those furious Pagans and knights that were in their companie, that it séemed to be no other thing but a Smiths forge, for that the great noise of their blowes were heard throughout the whole armie, and although it was night, yet there repai∣red an infinit number of Pagans to aide and help them, but yet for all that they would not abide, séeing how stronglie they were assaulted and laide on, vppon a sodaine they set spurs vnto their mightie horse and Elephant, and ranne through the rout of knights like a whirle winde, and went towards their owne campe as diuells that came new out of hell, méeting by the waie more than one hundreth thousand Pagans that came to helpe them, and béeing night, they all retourned vnto their trenches together, but Bramarant was so farre out of charitie and angrie because that one
alone knight had almost all that daie maintained the field a∣gainst him, that he would not come in the presence of the Emperour Alycandro, till such time as hee in person came vnto his tent, and taking both father & sonne by the hands, he carried them both vnto his tent, whereas he did them so much honour as vnto his owne person, and praysed verie much the meruailous déeds the which he did that daie, be∣cause he would giue them contentment, for that in the great force and strength of these two, the Emperour had better confidence than in all the kings and Captaines together in all his whole armie. The same night hée did inuite to sup∣per in his Emperiall Tent, all the most principall amongst them, whereas they were together with great ioy, pleasure, and pastimes, although it grieued them verie much the death of their kings which the Emperour Trebatio ew, and there was not one amongst them all that was so har∣die as to praise the high déedes of knighthoode the which were done by Rosicleer, the Emperour Trebatio, and the other worthie knightes their aduersaries (of whome they were greatlie amazed) for that they would not giue anie oc∣casion of anger vnto Bradaman and Bramarant that were present, who in the time that they were at supper so frow∣ned, and shewed so ill fauoured a countenance & fierce sem∣blance, that it caused feare in all them that did behold them. At this time the Gréekes were entered into the Citie, and being all lodged, euerie one according vnto his calling, they all supped with the Emperour in his mightie pallace, whereas they had inough for to declare of the mightie pow∣er of the two Pagans, and of the wonders which they dyd in the battaile, which was the occasion that of new they felt the lacke of the knight of the Sunne, in saying, that he and his brother Rosicleer were sufficient for to make resistance against those furious beasts, who had made so great slaugh∣ter amongst the Gréekes. So that night passed, and the next daie in the morning the dead bodies that appeared in the field were of so great quantitie, that they were constrained, by reason of the euill sauour that did procéede from them, to
take truce for a certaine time for to burie the dead & burne the other. So ther was ordained a truce for x. daies, in which time the Gréekes dyd burie the Christians, and the Pa∣gans did burne them of their Nation, so that the whole field was cléered of all the dead bodies. And leauing them at this present, the Hystorie returneth to declare of mane other things that happened in the meane time. How the Prince Meridian had vnderstanding of the com∣ming of his father into Grecia, & how he tooke the Prin∣cesse Floralindia out of her fathers pallace, and departed from Macedonia, & came into the camp of his father, ha∣uing first in the waie battaile with the stout Brandimar∣do. Chap. 23. OF long time this Hystorie hath not told you anie thing of the valiant & worthie Prince Meridian, not for that hée in all this time was vnoccupied, and that his déedes deser∣ued not to haue anie rehearall thereof, but onelie for to conclude and make an end of this first part of the mightie Hystorie of the knight of the Sunne and of Rosicleer his brother, which is the occasion that héere his acts cannot bée mentioned perticularlie, but remaineth, and it declareth vnto you all those things which are requisite touching this present historie of the knight of the Sunne. You shall vnderstand that the Prince Meridian was one of the most noted Knightes that was amongst all the Pa∣gans, who for the loue of the Princesse Floralindia turned Christian, and dyd after such valyant déedes of Knighthood, that hée alone deserued a Hystorie to bée written, but now that which is requisite at this present is, that in the time that hée was in the kingdome of Macedonia dooing many notable thinges in the seruice of the Princesse Floralindia, who shewed him great fauour, at which time they dyd mu∣ster
and oye together many knightes and soiourners for the  and helpe of the Emperour Trebatio, whereby hée vnderstoode how the Emperour Alycandro was comming into Grecia with all his power, and meruailing verie much thereat, hée abode the time to heare of his ariuall, for to goe and sée him, for that he had a great desire therevnto, and for that the king of Macedonia and the Prince went vnto Con∣stantinople with such people as they had ioyned together, the Prince Meridian and the princesse had more opportuni∣tie for to talk together, so that in the end by reason that they loued one another excéedinglie, it was agréed and conclu∣ded betwixt them, that the Prince should priuilie in the night take her awaie out of her Fathers pallace, and carrie her vnto the campe of the Emperour his Father, so that first hée should giue and graunt vnto her his faith to marrie her and take her for his wife. This béeing concluded in a night when that it was verie darke, with a Ladder hée tooke her out at a windowe which opened into a garden out of her Chamber, and hauing Palfraies all in a readinesse, he tooke her and a damsell that knew all her secrets, and carried them awaie, and trauailed so much the same night, that when the daie came, they had put themselues verie farre into the wildernesse of Grecia, whereas they were sure not to bée found, by reason that it was so great, and so thicke of trées in many places. At their departure shée left a Letter in her Chamber, dedicated vnto the Queene her mother, wherein shée gaue her to vnderstand the effect of their doings, reque∣sting her to thinke well thereof, because she had chosen and taken for her husband the most high and mightiest Prince in all the world. At the which sight the Quéene receiued great griefe, yet in the end she did comfort her selfe, for that her daughter did not loose anie honour in the doing of the same. Now to returne vnto the Prince Meridian and vnto the Princesse, the Hystorie saith, that after they had trauailed two daies in that wildernesse, & were verie nigh vnto the ci∣tie of Constantinople (finding themselues in a gallant and
fresh shadowe vnder a companie of thicke trées, full of fra∣grant and swéete flowers) they sawe come towardes them running with their horses as fast as possible they could two knights, and following after them one alone knight of a ve∣rie bigge stature and mounted on a great horse, with his sword drawen in his hand, and ouertaking one of them, hée stroke him such a blowe vppon his helme, that he cloue his head in two péeces, & ouerthrew him vnto the ground dead, and the other knight with the great feare he had, went vnto the Prince Meridian, and séeing him of so gallant disposi∣tion and well armed, he sayd. Ah Sir Knight, saue and defend mée from this traitor, who hath slaine the rest of my companions, and would also slaie mée. Then the Prince who was indued with all ver∣tue, drew out his sword, and put himselfe before that migh∣tie knight that followed the other, and saide. Sir Knight, stand and kéepe your selfe aloofe, and let vs vnderstand the occasion wherefore you will in this sorte kill this knight? Then the great knight sayde: Tarrie and I will quicklie make thée account of this which thou doest demaund. And therewithall he stroke him with his sworde in both his handes such a blow vpon his helme, that he daseled his sight, and made him to boow forwards vpon his saddle bow. Yet he boasted not much of the striking of the same, for that the Prince stroke him such another blowe, that he declined his head to his breast, giuing him to vnderstand his greate va∣lour, which was the occasion that betwixt them began a ri∣gorous battaile, and they laide the one vppon the other so stronglie, that all the woods did sound with the noise of their blowes, and the sparkles of fire flew from their healmes, as out of a Smiths forge. In this sorte this battaile endured betwixt these two valiant knights one whole houre, & there was no vauntage knowen of either part. But the Prince Meridian was greatlie amazed at the mightie force and strength of his aduersarie, and it séemed vnto him that they were equal vnto the blows which he receiued of the knight of the Sunne, at such time as he had battaile ith him▪
The like thought his aduersarie, for you shall vnderstand that this stout and valiant knight was Brandimardo, who had trauailed many daies in those woods and wildernesse, in the demand of the knight of the Sunne, for to conclude with him this battaile, and by fortune he met that daie with the foure knights that fled awaie from him, & were théeues that ranged in that wildernesse, two of them he had slaine, and the other two he chased at such time as hée met with Meridian, and as these two valiant and worthie knightes had continued a long time in this their furious battaile, without resting themselues, in the end they began to waxe weary of their great trauaile, and withdrawing themselues a part the one from the other, Brandimardo béeing greatlie amazed at the strength of his aduersarie, saide: Knight, let vs take breath and ease our selues, for that there remaineth time inough to make an end and conclude this our battaile. Let it be as your pleasure is, sayde the Prince, but yet I would gladlie know before we doe returne vnto the same againe, what is the occasion that moueth thée to make this contention with me, and to take so much trauaile & paines for to ouercome me. There is no other thing that doth moue me (sayd Brandimardo) but onlie because thou doest deliuer out of my handes that false knight which is runne awaie from me, who is a thiefe and a robber, and kept companie with other sixe whome I haue slaine, and ranged this wil∣dernesse, forcing of damsels, and did great harme and robbe∣ries. Then am I greatlie deceiued (sayde Meridian) for I thought verilie that you followed him to kill him without cause, as he tolde me, but if it be true as you do tell me, I am verie sorrie for that which I haue done, for I had rather he should receiue the merite of his desert, than to contend with you. These words which Meridian said did not grieue Bran∣dimardo anie thing at all, for that he had  will to returne againe to battaile with him, but said: Sir Knight, the dis∣charge which doest giue of thy selfe is reasonable, and ther∣fore there is no iust cause wherefore we should prosecute a∣nie farther our battaile, I will be thy friend, if so bée thou
wilt be mine, and I do most heartelie desire thée to tell me who thou art, for that I cannot persuade with my selfe that in this Countrie there should be found so valiant a knight as thou art, but onelie he who is called the knight of the Sunne, whom I doe goe in his demand and séeking in this wildernesse. Héerein (sayd Meridian) I am verie well con∣tent, and am glad that so valiant a Knight as thou art wilt become my friend, and héere I doe protest to bée yours, and therefore you shall vnderstand that I am called Meri∣dian, and am sonne vnto the Emperour Alycandro, Lord of the gran Tartaria. Let all graces and thankes ascend vnto the high Gods (sayd Brandimardo) that a knight of so high bloud and diuine generation hath giuen himselfe this daie to bée my friend, and therefore (worthie Prince) you shall vnderstand that I am called Brandimardo, sonne vnto Af∣fricano king of Media, who was slaine in the warres at Ba∣bilonia, (of the which warres I am sure you haue heard off before this time) hée was a knight verie much mentioned in all the Pagan Countrie. Then Meridian who had heard great report and men∣tion of his Father, was verie gladde of his méeting, and embracing the one the other, they remayned great friendes, and a conclusion was made betwixt them for to depart to∣gether vnto the Emperour Alycandro his campe, at whose comming there was great ioy and pleasure. This they put straight waies in execution, and departing from that place they left the wildernesse of Grecia, and in a few daies after they came vnto the great and mightie armie of the Empe∣rour Alycandro, who were not a little amazed to see so great a multitude of people, and of diuerse Nations as were there ioyned together. When they came vnto the Empe∣riall Tent, they were knowen by the Emperour, who re∣ceiued them with so greate ioye and pleasure at that present, that there was nothing that could giue him more contentment, for that many dayes hée was verie sadde and sorrowfull, because hée coulde heare no newes of his sonne the Prince Meridian, and thought himselfe at that present
in so great securitie and quietnesse, as though hée were in his owne Countrie of the gran Cataya. Likewise all such Pagan Kings and mightie Lordes as were there present, dyd honour Meridian as their naturall Prince, giuing great entertainment vnto Brandimardo, and receiued the Princesse Floralindia as spouse vnto so high and mightie a Prince. The Emperour was verie gladde and ioyfull at his sonnes aduenture, whereas the Hystorie doth nowe leaue them to tell of other thinges which happened in the meane time. How the king Oliuerio with his mightie hoast ariued in Grecia, and how by the industrie and pollicie of the good knight Rosicleer, those of great Britaine had a cruell and bloudie battaile with the Pagans, & what happened ouer and aboue in the same conflict. Chapter. 24. IN the meane time of the successe, as the Hy∣storie hath tolde you, the king Oliuerio cea∣sed not to make all the spéed possible towards Grecia with his great and mightie armie, for after that they had once passed the Sea, they crossed ouer land through Almania and Ger∣mania, till they came vnto Hungaria, whereas the king dyd giue and aide them with fortie thousand knights, the which hée had in a readinesse, more for to accomplish that the which hée was bound for to doe for the King Oliuerio, for that his sonne was slaine in his seruice, than for anie good will he had towards those warres, for with a better good will hée would haue holpen the Emperour Trebatio for to make his defence against his enimies, than to doe that which hée did, but for onds sake. When these two armies were ioyned together, with all spéed possible they trauailed til they came into the Empire of Grecia, and at their ariuall thrée miles from the Citie of
Constantinople, the Emperour Trebatio had aduertisement of the same. Who séeing that almost all the whole worlde was risen vp against him, he praied vnto God to be his aide and succour, and that he would not permit that in such sort the Christian Countrie should be destroied. Then the good knight Rosicleer séeing his Father in so great distresse, and he himselfe verie desirous to knowe what people they were that were come from great Britaine, hée went forth of the Citie all armed with new armour, which was brought and giuen him by the wise Lirgandeo, mounted on a verie good horse, with his speare in his hand, alonelie with one Squire which did beare him companie, and went towards the hoast of the king Oliuerio, & when he came within a mile where∣as they laie, he went vppon a little mountaine which was nigh vnto the high waie, from the which by reason that they marched forwards vpon plaine ground, he might frō thence discouer and sée all the whole armie of the king Oliuerio, and part of the hoast of the Pagans, and séeing so gallant a companie of armed knights, and so many Ensignes with red crosses, to make warre against Christians, the one agaynst the other, he receiued great sorrowe and griefe at his heart, séeming that all Christendome was then at the point to bée lost, and praied vnto God from the bottom of his heart that he would not looke vpon the sinnes of the Christians, but in that great extremitie to defend them with his owne hands. Thus he being in this Oration, he sawe come a farre off to∣wards that place a knight, with his galloping like vnto a post, and séemed that he came from the armie of the Pa∣gans. Then he falling into reckoning what it might be (as he that was of a rare and quicke vnderstanding) straight waies he descended from the mountaine whereas he was, and passed to the other side, in such sort, that y• knight might not sée him, and ranne with his horse all that euer he could towards the host of the king Oliuerio, so that he was a good waie off from the mountaine, and séeing himselfe a good distance from the knight, he turned his horse about, and lit∣tle and little he trauailed, dissembling as though hée had
come from that mightie armie. Then the knight when hée had discouered him, who was a valiant Pagan and king of the Masageras, called Antipatro, and by the commandement of the Emperour Alycandro went for to discouer & knowe what people they were, for that it was tolde him that a mightie armie was entered into Grecia, with Ensignes and flags with the armes of Christians, and hée beléeuing that they came in the fauour and helpe of the Emperour Tre∣batio, he sent the king to know who they were, and what companie of people, onelie for that hée had heart & good will for to giue them battaile, first before they could recour the entrie into Constantinople, for that he was verie angrie and wrathfull for the other succour which came vnto him be∣fore, and being within the Citie, it was at the will of his ad∣uersaries at all times to giue them battaile, and to the con∣trarie, to take their ease at their pleasures, without anie so∣daine alarum for to disturbe them. The which was contra∣rie vnto the Pagans, for that it dyd behoue thē at all times to be in a readinesse, because they did not know the time nor houre when that their aduersaries would assault them, for the which occasion the Emperour Alicandro was verie an∣grie, and determined to giue them battaile in the field, be∣fore they should haue anie time or leasure for to recouer the entrie of the Citie, thinking they had come in the aide and succour of the Emperour Trebatio. The king Antipatro comming in the demand, as you haue heard, when that hée came vnto the mountaine, went vnto the top thereof for to discouer the whole armie that was comming, & was great∣lie amazed to see such a multitude of gallant knightes, but when that he sawe Rosicleer come that waie, who séemed that he came from the hoast, with all the spéede he coulde he descended from the mountaine, and at the foote thereof hée did abide till such time as Rosicleer should passe by, who did salute him verie curteouslie, and the king said. Tell mée sir Knight, are you of that great armie that is héere before? I am thereof (sayd Rosicleer) but wherefore doe you aske mée that question? I doe aske, (said the king) because I woulde
knowe what people and Nation they are, and what is the occasion of their comming hether. All those that you sée there comming (sayd Rosicleer) be Christians, and their comming is for to defend Christendome, for that there are so many Pagans ariued in Grecia. Then the king Antipatro hea∣ring these wordes, not knowing who it was with whome he talked and demaunded that question, sayd: Knight, thou shalt vnderstand that the Emperour Alycandro my Lorde hath sent mée to knowe perticularlie what people those be, and for that I will not staie for to knowe it at thy handes in that order, I thinke it best that I carrie thée prisoner with mée, and then thou maist declare it better vnto him, and aunswere him vnto all that shall bée demaunded of thée, whereby hee shall bée fullie certefied of his request, therefore come and goe with mée out of hande, if thou doest not deter∣mine first to proue the great force of my encounter, and the swift course of my horse. It is follie (sayd Rosicleer) of him that is at libertie, to become bondman vnto another, before hée first proue a ca∣réere, hauing Speares in our handes, therefore let vs be∣ginne, and hée that is first pushed vnto the ground, let him remaine prisoner vnto him that kéepeth himselfe in his Saddle. I am thereof verie well content (sayd the Pagan with a gallant courage) but yet I woulde not that by the encoun∣ter which I shall giue vnto thée, that thou shouldest be hurt or receiue anie harme, whereby I could not carrie thée with mée prisoner. I commit my selfe vnto fortune (sayde Ro∣sicleer) but if it should so happen it would bée the worse for mée. Wherewith both of them tourned about their hor∣ses, who were verie fierce and swift, and when they hadde taken the vauntage of the ground as they thought best, with great furie, and like vnto a whirle winde they came the one against the other, the Pagan king with great brauerie flou∣rished with his Speare, thinking verilie to sée his aduer∣sarie on the ground, but yet his great pride fell out contrarie vnto his expectation, for that in the middest of his course,
they made their encounter in such sort, that hée shèeuered his speare all to péeces vpon the hard harneis of Rosicleer, with∣out doing vnto him anie harme at all, nor mooued him in the Saddle, more than if hée had encountered against an harde Rocke, but Rosicleer made his encounter in such sorte, that he pushed him out of his saddle, making him slie into the aire, and fell on his backe to the grounde a great waie from his horse, and as Rosicleer woulde haue retourned againe vpon him, hée found that hée was verie euill intreated with that encounter and fall, so that he coulde not arise from the ground without greate paine and griefe, and was so asha∣med of that which had happened, that he had no tongue for to speake one word. Then Rosicleer said: Sir knight, arise vp and take thy horse, and goe thy waies vnto the Emperour Alycandro thy Lorde, and declare vnto him all that which hath happened vnto thée, and also tell him how that there is in this armie so great and infinite a number of knightes, that with their helpe the Emperour Trebatio will verie shortlie driue all the Pagans out of his Countrie. The king Antipatro was verie glad to sée himselfe at li∣bertie, for that he thought verily he would haue carried him awaie prisoner. So without determining of himselfe anie longer, hée tooke his leaue of Rosicleer, and mounting vp∣pon his horse, with all the spéede possible he could, he retur∣ned vnto his companie, and comming before the Emperour Alycandro (who was in his tent with a great number of kings and Princes) before them all he declared what had happened vnto him with the christian knight, and although it was a griefe vnto them for the aide & succour which they thought was come vnto the Emperour Trebatio, yet could they not let but to laugh at that which had happened vnto the king Antipatro. Then straight waies the Emperour with the consent and agréement of all the principalls that were ther present, com∣manded y• they should put in order their battaile against thē, which they thought were come in fauor of their enimies, for
that in fiftéene daies before they of the Citie neuer came forth, and they without were in despaire, because it was at the will of them that were within to come forth when they thought best, but in especial those two furious Pagans Bra∣daman and Bramarant, who were verie hungrie, and desi∣rous for to shedde humane bloud. Likewise those valiant knights, Meridian, Brandimardo, Rodaran, and the king of Media, and other that were verie stout thr present, thought the time long till such time as they might giue a shew of their great bountie and strength, there was in that campe to the number of fiftie principall knights, such as might well be said to be the flower of all the Pagans, and besides them there were so infinit a number of verie furious and stout Pagans, that there remained but a few more in all the I∣lands of the Ocian sea, and amongst them ther was twelue kings, subiects and vassals vnto the gran Campeon, & other twelue mightie Lordes of other Ilandes that were subiect vnto the Emperour, with whom the Emperour Alycando thought that there was no humane force in all the whole world that might be compared vnto them. Thus being put in a readinesse and good order those which should goe forth vnto the battaile, the gran Campeon and his sonne Brama∣rant tooke the foreward, and had in their company the twelue giant kinges, with all those that they brought out of their Countries, besides those, they carried fortie thousand knights of the Tartarians, and next vnto them followed Rodaran king of Arabia, and the stout king of Media, the king of the Partes, and the king of the Affricanos, Candaros, and Baricanos, all the other which wer verie valiant & stout, they also carried with them other fiftie thousand Pagans of other Nations. The third battaile was lead  gouer∣ned by that most valiant Prince Meridian, who carried in his companie that stout Brandimardo, & the Prince of Can∣daria with twelue Gyants verie bigge, furious, and terrible to beholde, which went onelie with him for the safegard of his person, hée carried also fortie thousand knightes of the Scitas.
This being done, the Emperour would not ordaine anie more battailes, for that those which were ordained, serued sufficient for to maintaine the battaile all that daye: and being in a readinesse, they remained, waiting till such time as they did appeare in sight with their Ensignes, for to set vpon them, thinking them to be their enimies. Now lette vs declare what Rosicleer did in the meane time, who was verie desirous to goe forwards with his pretence, after that he had made the contencion with the king Antipatro, he straight waies ascended vp againe that mountaine whereas he was before, he had not bene long there, when that he descouered to come from that great ar∣mie of the king Oliuerio foure knights in maner of postes, who came before the rest for to discouer the enimie: but when he saw them somewhat farre of from the armie, and nigh vnto the place where as he was, he descended from the mountaine, and put himselfe in the high way, and trauailed forwards til such time as he met with them, who séeing him they went towards him, and demaunded of him if he were of that countri, I am saide he, but wherefore do you aske mée this question, we doe aske thée this (said one of them) for to know how manie miles it is from hence vnto Con∣stantinople, and to know in what estate remaines the Em∣perour Trebatio, where he hath aduise of our comming or not, therefore knight aduertise vs the trueth thereof, if thou wilt not be our prisoner. To whome Rosicleer aunswered and saide, as followeth. Of trueth I am very well content to certifie you of this that you doe demaund of mée, for that it is not a thing de∣gressing from knighthood, but that I may verie well do it without anie compulsion: You shall vnderstand that from this place vnto Constantinople, you haue two miles, and touching the estate of the Emperour, know of trueth, that he is all in a redinesse and tarrying your comming in the field, with no lesse mightie and puissant an armie, then this which your Lord the King Oliuerio, doth bring with him, and be you assured of this, that when you shall come nigh
within a mile of the citie of Constantinople, he will méete with you in the way with all his people, and giue you a ve∣rie terrible and rigorous battaile. The foure knights were verie much amazed at this which Rosicleer had told them, for that they thought verely that the Emperour had not bene in so great readinesse, and without any more wordes they left him, and returned from whence they came, for to giue aduice vnto the king, how that his enimies were in a redinesse and would méete him in the way and giue him battaile. So when they came before him, and gaue him to vnderstand of all that had passed, he straight waies com∣maunded to put all his owne armie in a redinesse, for as they were gallant and well armed knights, it was a iolie thing to behold: he made then repetition of his armie, and deuided them in foure parts, the forefront he gaue vnto the gouernemēt of the two knights of Spaine, being brthren, and were of the principall house of the Godos, they were both very valiant, the one of them was called Don Claros, and the other Arcalus, and there comming vnto these wars onely for to proue themselues, and giue to vnderstand vn∣to the world, their great valour. These two carryed with them fortie thousand knights, twentie thousand of them were of Spaine, and the other twentie thousand of Don Siluerio, and in their companie went to the number of twentie knights of the Godos, who did not a little in this battaile. The second battaile was gi∣uen vnto the gouernement of Don Siluerio, with other for∣tie thousand knights, and with him went the Princes of England, Ireland, & Scotland: the third battaile had a prin∣cipall knight of Hungaria, with all y• knights of that king∣dome. And the fourth and rereward, the king had, with all the high Princes of his kingdome, and the rest of all the people that remained. When that they were all diuided and seperated in foure battailes, and in good order and rea∣dinesse, they began to march forwards by little and little, till such time as the scoutes as well of the one parte, as of the other, had discouered the armies, which came to the bat∣taile,
and hauing aduice of the same, they marched on the faster, till such time as the forewards of either part, was within a cros bow shot, the one from the other, which might be about two of the clocke in the after none. All this time was Rosicleer beholding what passed, vpon a littell hill, where at he receiued great contentment, thinking the tyme long to sée them together by the eares in battaile, his desire was not long delated, for as those two urious Pagans, Bradaman and Bramarant came before all the rest, thinking the time long to sée themselues amongst their enimies, they pressed forwards towards them with so great furie, that it smed the earth to shake. And although their furious coun∣tenaunces was sufficient to put in feare anie good knight that did behold them, yet those two valiant brothers, Don Claros and Arcalus, putting themselues before all their companie, went forth to meete them, and in the face of both armies, they made their encounters verie strongly, Brada∣man, who did encounter with Don Claros, lost his stirrups and declined somewhat vpon his Elephant, and Don Cla∣ros embrased himselfe with his horse necke, and spurring forwards his horse, he setled himselfe againe, & passed for∣wards without falling. Bramarant was encountered by Arcalus vpon the vizar of his helme, that the sperkes of fier flew out in great abundance, and being halfe amazed with that blow, it made him to lose his encouner which he made with is aduersarie. So in this sorte they passed all foure of them, without any falling, & the two brethren were highl coended by Rosicleer, that dyd with great content ment beholie them, and also of the Pagans that were there present, for that they had made so strong and valiant resistance against the furie of those two Pagans, the which fll out euell, for a great number, the little profit that they had by this encoun∣ter: for being full of great courage, and encenced with an∣ger, in a short space they furnished the wide and broade fieldes full of dead bodies of their enimies, not sparing any degrée, that they dyed all the grasse with bloud of the great
destruction they made on their aduersaries, and in such sort they besturred themselues amongst them, that all that did sée them iudged them to be diuelles of hell, for that they cut knights asunder in the wast, slashing and cutting all that euer they could reach, and some they cloue from the head downe vnto the girdell, with the which their aduersaries receiued so great feare, that they fled before them as sheepe before wolues, on the contrarie part the two brethren dyd such maruailes and wonders vpon the Paganes, that their déedes were to be noted that day: therewithal the first two battailes were ioyned together, which was as gallant a sight to be séene as euer was, the brauerie of the knightes was such, for that in the forefront came the twelue kinges Giantes, with the two thousand that came with them from their Ilands, against whome there went to receiue them, twelue knights of the Godos, who séeing them so great and huge vpon the Elephants, made their encounter in such sort, that the one and the other were ouerthrowen to the ground: likewise, all ye rest made their encounters, so that in a mo∣ment, there were more then ten thousand ouerthrowen, and their horses roming about the fielde, fighting one with an other, so that betwixt them there was a new battaile be∣gunne: here in this conflict, did the knights of Spaine show their great valour, for that there was none that did make their resistance with so great force against those Gyants, killing some of them, and recuing their owne deathes with great courage. In this battaile Don Claros slew one of the twelue knights of Bradaman, with a speare that he thrust through and through his bodie, with a forcible and strong encounter. And Arcalus slewe an other with the strength of his arme, in tormenting him with his terrible blowes vppon the head, which was the occasion that they were in great perill of death, if that the valiaunt knights of Spaine had not come in time to haue succored them, for that a great number of those monsters had compassed them about, who were mightie and verie strong, so that those two valiant
bretheren should euill haue escaped their hands, but being ioyned together their battaile was more equall then before and better fought: yet all dyd profit verye little the Chri∣stians for the getting of the field, for that the bushment of those Orientall Gyants, made so great slaughter amongst them, that they were not able to make any resistance, but to receiue cruel death. On the other side was those infernal pa∣gans, father & sonne Bradaman and Bramarant killing and slaying with great crueltie, all that euer they could reach with their swords, they made so great destruction, that it séemed there were not people enough in ye campe for to hold them play that daye, which was the occasion that within halfe an houre after that the battaile was begon, the Chri∣stians began to lose ground, and to retyre towards their ar∣mie, and in some place they were not content to retyre lit∣tle and little, but turned their backes and ranne away all that euer they could, in especial, there whereas was Brada∣man and Bramarant and the rest of the other Gyants, who were sufficient for to destroy a whole armie. Then when that Don Siluario sawe that the Christians lost ground, he straight waies commaunded y• all those of his charge should march forwards, who straight waies with great fiercenesse put themselues into the battaile, at whose entre, many of the Pagans lost their liues, and the Christians began to get ground againe: but straight waies that mightie knight Rodaran, and the king of Media, and the other kings that were with him, put themselues orwards with their peo∣ple, and when they came vnto the battaile (by reason that they were so many, and their captaines so valiant) they did make great slaughter vpon their came in the enimies, and to conclude, the power of their enimies was so great, that they made the Christians to runne awaye almost round about the fielde, in such sort, that the valiant knights of spaine, could not succour them, for that they were enclosed in battailing with the Gyants, and had enough to doe to defende themselues from them. Then straight vpon that, came in the knig hts of Hungaria, at whose entrie, the battale was renewed and
began to get ground, and had put them to the foyle, if that the third armie of the Pagans had not stepped forwards, in the which came that worthie prince Meridian, and the stout knight Brandimardo, who entred into ye battaile with so great furie, that that day was wonderfull vnto the Chri∣stians, and knew not how and in what sort the Emperour Trebatio, should haue so great a power of knights and gy∣ants, except they should come out of Persia, for that they knew and vnderstoode, that all that countrie were in great friendship with the knight of the Sunne, and manie there were that repented themselues of their comming into Gre∣cia, in especiall Don Siluerio, when he saw so great destruc∣tion amongst his men, and the field so full of dead bodies, the teares fell from his eyes, with the great sorow & griefe which he receiued at his heart, and accused himselfe of the euill counsell which he gaue vnto the king Oliuero. When that two howers was passed since the beginning of the battaile, all the people of his part began to retire, for that they could not suffer the great furie of the Pagans, so that of verie force and necessitie, it did accomplish the king Oliuerio, to enter into battaile with all those knights that remained on his charge, who were manie in number, and verie good. And although the Pagans were Lordes of the field, yet at their comming they lost all that euer they had got before, and the battaile renewed and better fought, and the field so full of dead bodies, that the liuing could scarce passe for them. Here was to be noted, the diuelishnesse of Bramarant, and his father, and the high knighthood of Meridian, and of Brandimardo, and of that stout knight Rodaran, and of the king of Media, that it might be saide they were sepulchres vnto the Christians: which was not a litle griefe vnto Ro∣sicleer, (who from that little hill did behold all that passed) for to sée so much Christian bloud so spilt and shed, with those heathenish Pagans, although he thought all might be well suffered, for to eschue a greater inconuenience that (vnto the contrarie) might happen vnto Christendome.
To conclude, the day passed awaie, and there remained no more but one houre of the Sunne setting, when that the battaile was in equall sorte, and the one got no ground of the other, but followed their entresse, the one killing the other, without all pittie, at which time the fourth armie of the Pagans entred, which were many in number, and en∣tred with so great furie into the battaile, that those of the king Oliuerio, not being able to suffer their force, began to loose ground: The which being perceiued by Rosicleer, that by no meanes they could not, but be ouercome and disper∣sed, (as one that was a good knight & verie pittifull) would vse charitie with them, for that the king Oliuerio, was Fa∣ther vnto the princesse Oliuia, as also for to saue the liues of so many Christians, which looked for no other but death that daie, and hauing before sent aduice of all that had pas∣sed vnto the Emperour Trebatio, by his page, he then des∣cended from that hill, and so fast as his horse could runne, he went vnto Constantinople, whereas he sound the Em∣perour his father, with all his knights in a readinesse to goe foorth, if néed should require. And at his comming thether, he declared vnto him in what point and estate the battaile remained, and in the ende he saide, that considering in how much he was bound vnto the king Oliuerio, and the great loue that he bare vnto those christians that came with him, dyd constraine him that with all the power possible that he could make, for to goe and succour him, for to saue the king Oliuerio from death, and a great number of valiant and worthie knights that were at the point to be slaine. Then the Emperour who was no lesse endued with excelent ver∣tues then his sonne, aunswered him as followeth. That he should ordaine and doe all at his owne will and pleasure, for that therein he should receiue great content∣ment. At which words Liamandro, Bargandel, and the King Alamades, were verie glad & ioyful, for whatsoeuer damage or harme should happen vnto king Oliuerio, should be great sorow and griefe vnto him, and they dyd all praise & greatly
alow the great courage of Rosicleer. Then straight waies and in great hast, issued out of the citie, the Emperour Tre∣batio, and carryed in his companie all that valiant crue of knights, with thirtie thousand other knights, all Gréekes, galopping with their horses, keping very good aray and or∣der, they came into the fielde whereas the battaile was, and when they saw that all the campe of the king Oliuerio wer dispersed and out of all order and aray, running some one way, and some an other way, and all those worthy princes of the whole hoast, were compassed round about with theyr enimies, and put in great ieoperdie, and at the point for to lose their liues, without any hope of ayde and succour for to deliuer them. At which time the Emperour Trebatio, & all those valiant knights that came with him, with great furie and force, put themselues in the middest amongst the Pagans, that again the whole field was couered with dead bodies, and it séemed that all the furie of the world came there together, for on the one part went Rosicleer, the king Sacridoro, the Tartarian Zoylo, Bargandel, Liriamandro, and other valiant and worthie knights, that all they found before them, they slew and ouerthrew to the ground: and on the other side went the good Emperour Trebatio, and with him the stout Florion, the Prince Brandizel, Clauerindo, and the valiant and strong Oristedes, and the good knight Flamides, making so great slaughter on their enimies, that they were all dyed in bloud. And the desire which the good knight Rosicleer, had to kill Pagans, that they which were with him, were not able to kepe him companie, but all a∣lone he pressed forwards and put himselfe amongst his eni∣mies, doing such wonders, that ther was not one that could resist him. And as he pressed thus forwards, he came where as he saw a great number of Pagan knights gathered to∣gether in maner of a ring, and had in the middest amongst them, fiue knights all on foote, verie valiantly defending themselues with their swords in their hands, but their ad∣uersaries were so manie that charged them, that before his face, thrée of those knights fell downe vnto the ground, as
though they had bene dead, and the other two were so wea∣rie, that their deathes were at hand. And as he rew nigh vnto them, he saw that one of the two knights that defen∣ded themselues was the king Oliuerio, and the other Don Siluerio, whome he might very wel know by their armour, and tokens which they had, when he saw them first enter into the battaile, and those who had compassed them about was the king of Bartos, and the king of the Arrianos, and had crownes of golde vpon their healmes, with more then fiftie knights that were about those two knights, and none nigh for to succour and take their parts. The which being seene by Rosicleer, with great furie, he put himselfe amongst those companie of Pagans, killing and ouerthrowing all that was in his waye, and with his sword in his hand hée came whereas the two kings were, and stroke one of them such a blowe vppon his righte shoulder, that the whole arme with part of his backe he ouerthrew to the ground, and stroke the other such an other blow vpon the head, that cleauing the Crowne of gold and the Healme, he cut him downe to the throate, so that these two kings fell downe dead to the ground, and their horses which were verie good, remained without maisters. And for that the king Oliue∣rio, and y• Prince might haue leasure to mount vpon those horses, Rosicleer began to charge them with so many & ter∣rible blowes, that the most part of them that were there to∣gether, he slew with his owne handes, and the rest which remained, for feare of death, ranne away, but the king and the prince were so wearie, that they had no power to mount vpon those horses, for the which Rosicleer alighted with a trice, and tooke the king in his armes with so great ease, as if he had bene a childe, and set him vpon his owne horse, saying, take and receiue this seruice of Rosicleer, in token of a great deale more that he doth desire to serue you, the which being saide, he retourned vnto Don Siluerio, and in the same order as he did vnto the king, he set him vpon of the horses of the Pagan kings, and he with a trice moun∣ted vpon y• other, striking mortal blowes vpon his enimies,
he departed from that place, leauing the king Oliuerio, and Don Siluerio, verie greatly amazed at that which he hadde done for them, and how he shewed himselfe to be on their part. Also they were verie glad and ioyful to sée themselues deliuered from the death which they thought verelie there to haue receiued. At that time the king Oliuerio, remembred the wordes which the wise Artemidoro, had sayd vnto him, when that in London he carryed vnto him the gentleman Rosicleer, for to be an armed knight at his hands, which was, that the time should come, that he should more estéeme to haue him by his side, then any thing in all y• whole world, the which wordes were there accomplished, in that he cléerely deliue∣red him from death. From that place the king & the prince Don Siluerio, did behold the battaile, and were verie much amazed to sée how the Christians had the better hand of the battaile, and that ther were so many and so good knights in their fauour, ayde, and succour. At this time the battaile was so ioyned and knit toge∣ther, that if the night had not bene so nigh at hand, it semed that their determination was all to be slaine at that instāt, for that, although on the part of the Emperour Trebatio, there were so valiant and worthie knights that were able for to ouercome a mightie armie, yet on the other part was those two Pagans, Bradaman Campion, and Bramarant, that dyd so great destruction on their aduersaries, that it se∣med that there remained not one before them whereas they went: on the other parte went those furious and valiant knights Meridian, and Brandimardo, with the twelue Gy∣ants in their gard and kéeping, staying so many of their eni∣mies, that they were all stained in bloud, and made great way whereas they went. Likewise there was that stout knight Rodaran, and the king of Media, with other valiāt kings and knights Pagans, which did great harme vppon their aduersaries: and although those dyd so worthely on their parts, so likewise did those valiant knights on ye part of the good Emperour Trebatio, so much harme on their
enimies, that the Pagans bagan to lose ground by little and little. And as the worthie Rosicleer, went discouering and ranging throughout the battaile, he by fortune met with the Gran Campion, who was all alone, slaying and killing all that euer was before him, & cmming vnto him he stroke him so cruell and strong a blow vpon the wast, that he had parted him in two péeces, if it had not bene for his good ar∣mour, which was such, that his good sword could not enter into it, yet for all that, the blow did so bruse and crush his bones and flesh, in such sort, that Bradaman felt that blow not to be like vnto the blowes giuen by other knightes, which was the occasion that with great furie he turned himselfe about, and repaide the same with an other like, vppon his shoulder, that he had ouerthrowen him to the ground, if y• he had not embrased himselfe about his horse necke: then began these two to strike the one vpon ye other very strongly, and the battaile betwixt them endured till the closing vp of the night, when that they could not know the one from the other: then the Pagans began to with∣draw themselues a part, and these two knights were con∣strained to part thēselues, but Bradaman, went away with so great anger & that one alone knight should make him so strong resistance, that no one of all his men durst come into his presence. At this time came more then one hundreth thousands Pagans, which the Emperour Alicandro, did send a fresh, after that it was tolde him that much people had issued out of Constantinople, but their comming was to little pur∣pose, for that it was night, all the troupes of the Pagans were retyred, and méeting the one with the other, they re∣turned vnto their trenches, there to take their ease vntill the day following, for that they ment to encounter with their enimies with a fresh supplie. Then the Emperour Trebatio, for to retire all his peo∣ple, dyd sound his horne, the which he alwaies carryed with him, like a good Captaine, (at the time of warre) at which sound, all the Gréekes assembled together, and leauing a
part the king Oliuerio aud all his people in good order, he re∣tourned vnto the Citie with all that noble crew of knight∣hood, whereas they were receiued with great ioye and plea∣sure of the Empresse Briana, and of the farie Oliuia, who did not a little reioyce when that she vnderstood what Ro∣sicleer had done for the king her father, and it séemed vnto her that it was a good meane to obtaine friendship, which was at that time, the thing that the most desired, and to the contrarie, it was a great griefe & corasiue vnto her heart, that betwéene the king Oliuerio and her spouse Rosicleer, should passe any contention or euil wil. Thus leauing them the Historie doth returne vnto the king Oliuerio, who ga∣thering his people together, sound that he lacked more then the halfe of those he brought into Grecia: likewise, he com∣maunded great fiers to be made, at the light whereof he pitched his tents, and made his trenches verie nigh vnto the citie of Constantinople, whereas it was giuen him to vnderstand that all the people with whome his armie had the battaile with, were Pagans, and were come into Gre∣cia against the Emperour Trebatio, and of the great power that the Emperour Alicandro had there, and how for that he thought that they were come thether in fauour of the Gréekes, he sent out his knights for to giue them battaile. But when that king Oliuerio and Don Siluerio vnderstood the trueth thereof, with verie anger and fretting, they were ouercome, and requested the death, for that on the one part they saw the most part of their knights destroyed, and the power of the Pagans deminished, the which if that it had not so fallen out, the reuengement of the Emperour Tre∣batio, had bene verie certaine. But that which greued them most, was that which Rosicleer did for them, and how much they were bound vnto him, for deliuering of them from death, and it seemed vnto them to be such a byt to withdraw them from their wills and desires to make their reuenge∣ment, determined before they came foorth out of their owne countries, who with great confusion and verie pensiue, in thinking what was best to be done, they passed away that
night in their trenches, and commaunded good watch to be kept, till the next day, wherein passed many things, as shal be tolde you in the Chapter following. ¶What Rosicleer did the next day after the battaile, and how by his meanes the king Oliuerio was reconciled to the Emperour Trebatio, and the prince of Lusitania and he were made friends. Chap. 25. THE Gréekes were verie glad and ioyfull for that which had passed with the host of the king Oliuerio, and the Pagans, and all people did allow the great polesie of Rosi∣cleer, which he vsed in causing thē to ioyne the one against the other in battaile, which was not a little profit vnto them, for by that meanes his enimies were lessened more then one hundreth thousand. The next day following after the battaile, when that both the hosts, that of the Emperour Alicandro, and that of the king Oliuerio, were both in sight of the Citie of Constanti∣nople, being none tide past, Rosicleer had a great desire to goe forwards with that which he had determined, which was to procure friendship with the king Oliuerio, onely for the great good will which he bare vnto his welbeloued princesse Oliuia, & also for that in the which he was bound vnto him, for the great friendship receiued at such time as he was in great Britaine. And with this determination, he did apparell himselfe with the ritchest garments and robes that was possible, & likewise the princesse Oliuia, & the Quéene Arquirosa, in the most gallantest maner that they could. Then after that he had conference with the Empe∣rour his father, giueing him to vnderstand what was his determination to doe, he straight waies caused the princes∣ses to be mounted vpon verie gallant and well dressed pal∣fries, and mounted himselfe vppon a mightie & great horse
and put himselfe in the middest betwéene them. And bée∣ing in this maner, in the great and wide court, whereas the Emperour and the Empresse with all those valiant kings, Princes, and knights, did behold them, and a new they be∣gan to meruaile to behold their great beauties and gallant dispositions. And as it hath bene declared vnto you before in this Historie, that Rosicleer was of a high stature, and well proporcioned of his bodie according vnto his height, for that continually vnto that time, he did encrease daylie more & more, as well in the one as in the other, and ioynt∣ly with this his face was perfect and well proporcioned, verie white and faire, and of a merrie couutenaunce, and there was none that did behold him, but had a great delight to sée him: he was at that time apparailed in a Iacket of cloth of golde, garnished round about with a great number of precious stones, and a hat vpon his head after the Gréeke fashion, full of verie fine Rubies and Diamonds, and car∣ryed no other weapon with him but that precious sworde of the Quéene Iulia, at his girdle, which was suteable vnto the apparell he ware, for that the scabbert was garnished with gold and precious stones, he was mounted vpon a big and lustie horse, all baye, sauing he was full of black spots, which became him verie well, and being in this maner on horse  to be a Gyant, and in beau∣tie and fairenesse, Narcissus. On the other part was the Princesse Oliui, with Arquirosa, so faire and richlie appa∣railed, that it was verie strange to behold, and Rosicleer, being in the middest betwixt them, there could not a more gallanter sight be séee of thrée persons. So in this order they tooke their leave of the Emperour & of the Empresse, and departed out of that mightie pallas, being accompani∣ed with all those mightie and valiqnt Princes and Knights, till such time as they came into the fielde out of the Citie, whereas at the request of Rosicler, they all retourned back againe, and they thrée alone wont toward the compe of the king Oliuerio, being verie much looked at of at the people of the citie, and with no lesse admiration they were looked
at by them of the campe when they came nigh vnto them, and not knowing the pretence of their comming they could doe nothing but behold them, and abyde the time to vnder∣stand the effect of their comming. When they were come vnto the camp, they asked which was the tent of the king Oliuerio, and being shewed by a knight that was there, they neuer rested nor staied till they came vnto it, at which time the king shas within, accompa∣nied with the prince of Lusitania, and with the other prin∣ces of Scotland and Ireland, consulting wha were best to be done in their affaires: but when they saw them & knew Rosicleer, and the Princesse Oliuia, all apparailed after so gallant a sort, they were wonderfully amazed, and were si∣lent to heare what should be their demand. There was no mouing amongst them till such time as Rosicleer, descen∣ded from his horse, who straight waies alighted y• princesse Oliuia, and the quéene Arquirosa, and taking them both by the hands they entred into the tent, then the king and all that were with him did arise from their seates, and dyd sa∣lute the one the other, with such courtesie as appertained vnto so high persons: and although that Don Siluerio, was greatly amazed and his bloud did rise when that he saw the princesse Oliuia, yet when that he saw her in the power of Rosicleer, and considering the great reason she had therevn∣to, he dyd not let to haue a great regard vnto the Quéene Arquirosa, and liked very well of her, and said with in him∣selfe, that next vnto the princesse Oliuia, she was the fairest gentlewoman that euer he saw in all his life, and greatlie desired to know what she should be. His desire was quickly accomplished, for that Rosicleer putting himselfe before the king, hauing the princes & the Quéene by their hands, said. HIgh king of great Britaine, I will not call you migh∣tie, (for that according vnto the opinion of wise men) there is none amongst mortall men can attaine to so glorious a name, sauing alonely he may call himselfe migh∣tie, that is Lorde and gouernour ouer men, and hath the power of all fortunes, he at whose will the Heauens doth
moue, the windes doth blow, the waters of the sea doth a∣rise and rage, and by him the earth with all beasts & plants are sustained: Here I doe giue you the name of high, for that séeing your selfe in what estate you are in, you may know how perilous and slipper it is, and how readie you are and open vnto the thundering blowes of fortune. Ma∣ny things doth men begin and put in vre, who cannot bring it to passe as they would, and according vnto their mindes, but in the ende it finisheth cleane contrarie vnto their ex∣pectation, and this procedeth onely for that it is in theyr hands to begin them, and in the power of God to giue the conclusion vnto his pleasure. Our hearts he valiant and couragious, for to attempt against all the whole world, and doe not consider and sée that humaine force is so féeble and weake, that one little and hidden euill, doth ouercome it, and whatsoeuer blow of fortune doth ouerthrow it. This we ought to haue alwaies in our remembraunce, because we should not put our selues in difficult things, for that if after∣wards it doth not fall out according vnto our mindes, then should we not haue any occasion for to be angrie, neither reason for to complaine vs of fortune, for that the whole fault is in our selues, and with more reason we may be angery with our selues. You doe well vnderstand how that the Prince Edward your sonne with fortie thousand good knights of great Britaine, came into Hungaria, with what intent. I doe not iudge, but according as it was notorious and manifest vnto all, he came for to destroy the Emperour my father, & for to make the king of Hungaria Lord ouer all Grecia, and for that this was an attempt as vniust as difficult, it was in his hands to begin the same, but in the hands of him that hath power ouer all, to conclude the ende according vnto his will. If the Emperour my father was to be blamed herein, iudge you, and then sée if there be anie reason for him to make restitutiō, to whome fortune would seme fauourable: but now let that goe, for that I doe be∣léeue you are certified. And touching the marriage which I made with the princesse Oliui without your lisence, I
will giue you to vnderstand, that if you doe well consider and looke into all these things passed, then should you verie manifestlie and cléerelie sée, that it is not for anie iniurie towards you, but that the diuine prouidence hath ordained the same for to euitate and cut off the great griefe and innu∣merable euils that were looked for betwéene my father and you, for séeing that the harme was committed, there was no other meanes for to recouer and make friendship againe, but onelie by this marriage betwixt vs, by the which my father doth claime of you kindred, and you may receiue mée as your owne naturall sonne, and séeing that this hath ben ordained by the diuine prouidence, who is he that shoulde grant me this inclination, to haue so great a desire as I had for to goe into great Britaine, being in such delightes, ioye, and pleasure, vnder the wings of the Empresse my mother? Consider with how much honour, (you nt knowing mee) I receiued the order of knighthood at your hands, and how fauourable Fortune did alwaies shew her selfe vnto mee in your Court? What force could be so great, that did con∣straine my will, and the will of this precious Princesse, so perfectlie to loue the one other, in such sort that there is no∣thing in all the world that may bee compared therevnto? In what heart may be comprehended so great singularitie (no, that although there were heere present those three worthie and famous Captaines, Iosue, Dauid, and Iudas Machabeus, and with them thse thrée Pagans, Hector, Iulius Caesar, and Alexander) if it doth not come of the diuine prouidence, neither without it could there be anie such force comprehen∣ded in me, and in my companion, for to giue the enterprise of such an attempt with so great boldnesse, for to take away ou of your power the Princesse Oliuia, and what wée pas∣sed at the sea to deliuer and defend her? Heere is the Prince of Lusitania who found himselfe present at the sport, and can saie that the resistance was not made by anie humane force and strength, for that being but fiue knights, we alone did defend our selues so long time against so great a fléete of ships and men. Likewise hée can declare of the great mise∣rie
in the aide and succour that came vnto vs in that great extremitie. I will not héere inlarge nor procéede anie far∣ther in these matters, neither wold I haue said so much, but onelie because you shall vnderstand that all doth procéede from aboue, and that it is Gods will, that this marriage be∣twixt me and the Princesse shall be the occasion for to eui∣tate and take awaie all these inconueniences which are loo∣ked for, and likewise to remedie and make attonement for all that is past, & do you not thinke that this wil bée an euil meane for things past, besides, as now the doing thereof can∣not be restrained, and many times, as héeretofore hath fal∣len out, their sonnes in lawe to be as profitable to their Fa∣thers in lawe, as are their owne naturall sonnes. As to aske the question of Caesar Augustus, and hée will saie that there was neuer sonne to true and trustie vnto his Father, as was vnto him Marcus Agrippa his sonne in law. Like∣wise consider of Antonius Pius who had for his sonne in lawe Marcus Aurelius, who vsed so great fidelitie with him all the daies of his life, which was for the space of twen∣tie and thrée yéeres, that for his great fidelitie and continuall diligence, hée did not alonelie deserue to bée beloued of him, and to haue his Daughter, but as his owne naturall sonne hée dyd succéede him in the Empire. So that by these and many other examples that might bée declared, you maye plainelie sée what a swéete spice of friendshippe and per∣fect kindred is that which commeth by the Sunne in lawe, and in especiall this, that from the beginning vnto the end, it appeareth to bée gouened by the diuine prouidence, so that thereby there is no other thing to be looked for, but vn∣to you great good, and rie profitable for all your king∣dom. And that whic  I will desire of you is no other thing, but your plesure  sider how that al these things are ordained by him, who ath the rule & gouernment of al, and being fullie perswaded therein, for to ioyne & confirme your will vnto his will, and to procure & doe no other thing but that which is agréeable vnto his pleasure, which is to confirme a peace betwixt you and my Father, for that you
be both Christians, and it is the thing that our sauiour Ie∣sus Christ dyd leaue most in charge vnto his Disciples. And if there séemeth vnto you anie fault to bée in the Em∣perour my Father, or that I and the Princesse Oliuia haue offended your Maiestie in anie thing, apart and put awae from your heart all anger and wrath, for that you doe vn∣derstand, that the most noblest manner of reuengement is to forgiue, and how that there is nothing so inconuenient and hurtfull vnto man as is wrath and anger, for that it doth properlie appertaine vnto furious beastes, and not vn∣to men, but vnto such as bée most cruell and furious, and to the contrarie there is nothing more conuenient vnto man than is méeknesse and mercie, and much better and more honour it is to forget iniuries, than to reuenge them, and there is not a more nobler and generous forgetting, than is in the offence, which was attributed vnto the prince of Cap∣taines for that he did praise himselfe, that hée did neuer for∣get anie thing but offences done. The pleasure in taking reuengement doth passe awaie in a moment, and the ioy & pleasure in shewing mercie endureth for euer. There is no∣thing so necessarie amongest men, nor ought to bée more common than to forgiue, for that there is none but hath néede of mercie, séeing that the Sunne must shine vpon him, the earth sustaine him, and all creatures must bring forth. The winde must haue his course, the clowdes must poure out their waters, the Sars must haue their influence, the heauens must moue, and the waues of the sea must bée in quiet, and not to ouerwhelme the earth when they are in a rage and higher than it, and to conclude, all things of the gouernment of this worlde doth vse Mercie, and be neces∣sari for the conseruation of humane life, and mercie cannot be lacking in him, or at least waies may not, that cannot sustaine himselfe one iote without it, and that which is more, there is not one but that hée sinneth, so that hée can∣not, but hée néedes must desire mercie for his sinnes and of∣fences. What is hée that can salue and make whole the wounded consciences of humane creatures, if the wrath
of God doth perseuer, then shall you neuer haue end of con∣tentions and troubles, armour shall neuer cease on the land, neither lightnings and thunders, with cruell shaking of the heauens, therefore it is necessarie (most worthie King) that you doe forgiue, and refraine the ire of your heart, for other∣wise with iust reason you cannot aske of God pardon, when that you will not vse pardon with your daughter and sonne in lawe. Beware, take héede, and helpe your selfe from that which is written, That man doth kéepe wrath and ire a∣against man, and both doth séeke vnto God for Physicke. You are wise and discréete, therefore you shall vnderstand, that all this which I haue said vnto you, is onely to put you in remembraunce, that the passioned minde can neither sée nor discerne things farre nor nigh hand. And as concerning Don Siluerio, I haue committed nothing against him wher∣in I am bound to make satisfaction, neither hée to pardon me, for if you haue promised vnto him the Princesse Oliuia for wife, first before that she chose me for her husband, God and my good fortune hath giuen her vnto mee, so that hee hath not to complaine himselfe but of fortune, that woulde not be fauourable vnto him for to recouer her, so that I doe not take from him her that should haue bene his wife, but I haue taken out of your and his power, the same whome God did promise and ordaine to giue me for wife. Notwith∣standing for all this, I euer hadde Don Siluerio for my friend, and before that these things fell out in this order, I beléeued that he had mée in the same profession, I do great∣lie desire that this friendshippe may procéede and goe for∣wards, and if so be that anie lacke or fault hath béene of a∣nie part, let satisfaction be made for the which I for my part will make satisfaction vnto Don Siluerio, in giuing vnto him for wife, the most faire and precious Quéene Arquiro∣sa, Quéene of Thessalia, and is this that is héere present with me, who with all the power that shée could make came into Grecia, to the aide and succour of the Emperor my Father, & it is in my power, for I haue promised her to giue her a hus∣band, such a one as her estate & beautie doth deserue, there∣fore
Don Siluerio consider & sée if you can like of this , for that there be few damsels, or not one, at this time o bée found in the world with whom you may be better married withall than her. Now haue you vnderstood the effect of our comming, and héere I doe desire you both straight waies to giue me your answere. The king Oliuerio was verie attentiue vnto all y• was spoken by Rosicleer, and one waie he liked verie wel of their intent, and it séemed vnto him that all things were placed in verie good order, and another waie, the gallant presence of Rosicleer with the faire Princesse Oliuia seemed to force & constraine his heart to like verie well of the one & to loue the other, as his owne naturall children, and seeing them with so great humilitie before him, Rosicleer being so high a Prince, hauing confidence y• in his great bountie he came to aske him pardon & forgiuenesse, not mistrusting his high∣nesse, the teares gushing out at his eies with the great loue he bare vnto either of them, & calling to remembrance that by him he was deliuered from death the daie before, so that if it had not bene for him he had béen slae and all his peo∣ple destroied, and seeing the great clemencie that both Fa∣ther and sonne vsed with him (he comming to destroie them in his Countrie) he found it great reason to vse the same with them, and to forget the death of Prince Edward, for that God had giuen vnto him in his place that valyaunt Prince and knight. Thus hauing his minde occupied in these and other things, hee remained a good while without wering them, looking alwaies when Don Siluerio wold speake, because the greatest part of y• matter did touch him, and till such time as he did knew his will, he thought it not good to vtter his iudgement, which was the occasion that he did importune him verie much to make the first answere as he thought best, who after such time as the Quéene ente∣red into the tent, was continuallie with great attention be∣holding her whose beautie gaue him greater contentment than anie Ladies or Gentlewoman in the world, next vnto the Princesse Oliuia. And when he vnderstood the demand
of Rosicleer, in his life he neuer receiued greater ioy & con∣tentment, in séeing that without anie demand or asking, he offered vnto him so high a Ladie and damsell for wife, & had cleane forgotten all the anger and wrath that he had before conceiued and taken against Rosicleer, with the friendship receiued of him the daie before in deliuering of them from death. So perceiuing that the king would not answere in anie respect till such time as he had vittered his minde, hée spake these wordes following. HIgh and worthie Prince of Grecia, of all that you haue héere so highlie declared, as also of all other things that haue so prosperouslie fallen out on your part, I do vn∣derstand no other thing but y• God hath created you amongst all Princes the most highest, & amongst al knights the most noblest, and in strength the most stoutest, & amongest men of vnderstanding the most wisest, and aboue all fortune hath shewed her selfe fauourable and prosperous, for whosoeuer doth consider the highnesse of your estate, shall plainlie sée & perceiue that there is none that commeth nigh vnto you, & for worthinesse, none equall, and to consider of your high knighthood, they shall see that it is without comparison, and almost aboue nature, likewise considering how prosperous all things hath fallen out on your part, they will not onelie saie that fortune is fauourable vnto you, but also that you haue her at commandement to do al things at your pleasure, and séeing that you haue so many and high things on your side, what enimie is there that will resist you, or friend that will loose your friendship. The wise man saith, that there are thrée things which ought to be feared: the waues of the sea, the thūderbolts of the heauens, & the furious wild beasts on the earth: but yet aboue all things (he saith) ought to bée feared, the enimie prosperous & fortunable, for that he which doth not nauigate at the Sea, is out of all daunger of the waues, and he that kéepeth his house, is out of the danger of wilde beasts, and the thunderbolts verie seldome strikath, but from the prosperous enimie, there is none that can ap∣parte himselfe, neither can he finde anie place whether to
runne, for whereas he thinketh himselfe most surest, many times it falleth out, that there is most perill, and héere I say that fortune hath shewed her selfe more prosperous vnto you than vnto anie, and vnto me more contrarie than vnto anie other, for that she did not content her selfe in giuing you the victorie ouer me, but the more to cralt you, shée brought me into that extremitie, that of necessitie I must be defen∣ded frō death, and receiue life at your hands, the which you gaue mée as a friend, whereby you got of mee the greatest victorie that euer man had of his enimie. Therefore God forbid that now I should haue anie enmitie with him, who with the great force and strength of your arme dyd ouer∣come me, and I doe yéeld my selfe vnto the strength of your worthinesse, and this offer which you doe promise vnto me with the precious Quéene Arquirosa is of so great high∣nesse & valour, that with iust reason I may thinke that shée will bée the occasion that I shall conclude friendship with you, yet God who doth know the secrets of all things, I doe take to witnesse, that I am not constrained by loue to take you for my friend, but onelie your great vertue doth binde me therevnto, and this being a meane betwixt vs, I saie that this is the greatest friendship that euer I might receiue of anie humane creature, this thing which you doe ffer vn∣to me (not being of me dserued) to giue me so high a dam∣sell and worthie a Princesse to be my wife, whom from this time forwards, if she be so pleased, I do receiue for my La∣die and Mistres: likewise I do desire her to conceiue so wel of me, & to take me for her owne, & héere I do desire the king Oliueio my Lord, to aunswere vnto the rest y• remaineth, & I hope in God y• his answere shall be such, as he is bound to giue vnto so excellent a sonne, and therewithall Don Sil∣uerio concluded his reasons, & the king with great content∣ment with that which he had said: but the answere which the king made was in embracing Rosicleer and the Princesse Oliuia, with shedding many teares that trickled downe his chéekes with pure loue, he said. Oh my welbeloued children, God forbidde that in mée
should raigne so great ingratitude against his soueraigne maiestie, and to let you vnderstand and know the great cur∣tesie that he hath shewed vnto me, in giuing mée so good fortune, as by his owne handes is come vnto me so preci∣ous children, héere I doe receiue you, and I doe loue you, and will not haue, neither do I looke for anie other content∣ment in all the world. The almightie God doth know, and he is a good witnesse therevnto, that I came not forth out of great Britaine with so great a multitude of knightes for anie euill will that I had, but for to accomplish that where∣in I was bound vnto the Prince Don Siluerio, and now séeing that he is content and satisfied, there remaineth no other thing, but let vs goe vnto the Citie of Constantino∣ple, whereas I may acknowledge and know the Emperor and Empresse for my brother and sister, and aide and helpe him with these few knights that doth remaine. When the king had sayd these wordes, Rosicleer and the Princesse O∣liuia did knéele downe before the king, and by force did kisse his hands, but the king with words of great loue did cause them to arise, embracing them many times, and went and embraced the faire Quéene Arquirosa, and said, I doe now acknowledge that all these things are ordained by the will and disposition of almightie God, in that I doe see so excel∣lent a Damsell hath béene reserued and kept, and now at this time come hether, to the satisfactin of the Prince Dn Siluerio, and I beséech his almightie maiestie to giue you so good fortune as I doe desire for my selfe, and therewithall Rosicleer and Don Siluerio did embrace one another, & from that daie forwards there was betwixt them great loue and friendshippe. Therewith came all the rest of the worthie Princes and Knightes, (such as knew him in great Bri∣taine,) and talked with him, who neuer forgot the greate friendshippe that was betwixt them. Lykewise the knighs of Spaine for the valiant déedes which they sawe him  in the battaile, as also for the greate fame which heard of him, with excéeding good will came and offered themselues to bée his friends. Then hée who had
them in great estimation, did offer vnto them the like, and estéemed them for the most stoutest and valiantest knights that were in all the armie. Thus after that they had bene together in these ceremonies, receiuing the one the other a good while, they all mounted vpon their horses, and the prin∣cesse Oliuia and the Quéene Arquirosa vpon their palfraies, and tooke their waie towards the Citie of Constantinople, the Prince Don Siluerio lead the Quéene Aquiosa by the bridle, with whom he vsed many loue trickes and amorous discourses, and shée likewise answered him with a gallant grace and curteous demeanour giuing thankes vnto al∣mightie God, for that so worthie a Prince had guen him vnto her for to be her husband, and receiued great content∣ment. They had not long trauailed in this order towards the Citie, but the sawe a farre off come out of the Citie a great companie of gallnt and glistering knightes comming towardes them, it was the Emperour rebatio accompa∣nied with all his nobles and valiant knightes, who beeing aduertised by a Page of Rosicleers of all that passed, and of their comming towardes the Citie, issued out to méet them, and when they came nigh the one vnto the other, the king and all those that were with him, wee greatlie amazed at the gallant and gentle disposition of the Emperour, and of all those worthie Princes and knightes that came with him, and sayd that all the flower and worthinesse of knight∣hood in the world was there ioyned together. Then straight waies the Emperour went towardes the king Oliuerio, and the one receiued the other with so great loue, and with such excéeding courtesie, as commonlie is vsed betwixt so high persons, and at that instant was there confirmed be∣twixt them such and so great friendship, that neuer after so long as they liued was separated. Then the Emperour re∣ceiued the other knightes with so gallant grace and demea∣nour, that they all receiued great contentment at the sight of him, but most especiallie the king Oliuero that was tal∣king with Bargandel, Lyriamandio, and the Tartarian Zoi∣lo, and the king Alamades, who all together went and kis∣sed
his handes, crauing pardon of all that was passed. Then he with great loue did embrace them all, pardoning all the rancour and euill will that he had against them, and it sée∣med verie well vnto him, in y• they had shewed themselues so faithfull, and had accomplished all that they ought, could doe no lesse but beare the like to them againe. So from thence they all returned vnto the Citie, but when they came vnto the mightie Pallace, the king and all those that came with him, were in great admiration to sée and behold vpon the fore front of the same all y• whole Histories of the knight of the Sunne, and said that by his figure he resembled ve∣rie much Rosicleer, which was verie true, for that there was no more difference betwixt them, but that the knight of the Sunne was somewhat in his face more furious, and more fatter of his bodie, but of one stature, & in all other pro∣portions of their bodies were all one, and resembled one a∣nother verie much, so that the remembrance of those valy∣ant and worthie déedes which were there so naturallie set forth, vnto them that knew not thereof, that it put in them so great admiration, that they saide with great reason the knight of the Sunne was worthie of the great fame & praise that was published throughout all the world, and onelie for the sight thereof the knights of Spine thought their com∣ming into Grecia to be well emploied. Being alighted, they entered into the Pallace, whereas they were meruailouslie wel receiued of the Empresse Brina and the Princesse Lin∣daraza, and of all the whole companie of faire Ladies & Gen∣tlewomen of high estate that came forth to beare her com∣panie, and there passed betwixt them wordes of great loue & friendship. With great ioy, pleasure, and pastime they pas∣sed awaie all that daie, in the which the Prince Don Silue∣rio, and the precious Quéene Arquirosa were made sure and ioyned hands, abiding the marriage to be made at such time as Rosicleer should be married, and Clauerindo, with other mo Princes and knights that did abide the same daie. Then the next daie being come, for that the Citie was meruailous∣lie pestered with the great number of people that were in
it, and could not verie well at their ease be lodged, it was a∣gréed betwéene the Emperour and the king Oliuerio that a trench should be made without in the field nigh vnto the walls of the Citie, and there to pitch their tents, whereas should be all the whole armie of the king Oliuerio, and the halfe of all the Emperours knights. Thus according vnto their conclusion it was commanded to be done, which was a gallant and roiall thing to behold, it was stronglie forte∣fied with déepe ditches and barres a the entrie, so that they were as sure within that trench as though they had beene within the Citie. In this sort they were lodged in sight the one of the other, & betwixt the trenches of the Pagans & the Christians there was a mightie, great & broad field, where∣as they might at their ease make their battailes. At this time were the Pagans verie glad and ioyfull when that their enimies were come forth of the Citie, and fortefied their trenches, for that it was then in their handes to giue them battaile at all times at their pleasures, & they cared not al∣though they were many in number, & more than before, yet for all that of their part they were fiue for one. How it was consented and concluded in the campe of the Pagans, for to make a challenge to the Greekes, and how it was accepted, and by what knightes of the part of the Emperour Trebatio. Chap. 26. NOw the Hystorie saith, that on a daie the Emperour Alycandro being in his Empe∣riall tent, accompanied with the most prin∣cipallest of his whole hoast, in great coun∣saile what was best for them to doe, there were some amongst them that did not let for to praise the high knighthood of the Emperour Treba∣tio, and of his knightes, amongst whome the olde king Ge∣drosia did praise them more than anie other, for to prouoke Bramarant to anger, vnto whome he alwaies bare ill will, after that hée had slaine his sonne the young man Graco.
To the which ther néeded not much matter, for that straight waies this stout and furious Pagan arose vp with so fierce semblance, that it feared all them that did beholde him, and sayd these wordes. THe heartes of cowards and base men doe feare small things, and receiueth great admiration, the which doth procéede because they are but for little matters: all that doth surmount them doth seeme vnto them mon∣strous, and almost aboue nature, and by their great coward∣nesse they doe feare and dreade more one enimie that is in the fielde prepared for to fight against them, than one hundreth that are on their part, although euerie one of them can doe much more than his aduersarie, but vnto such as bée generous of heart and valiant, high things do giue content∣ment, and there is nothing that they do heare or sée that doth make thē to meruaile or wonder. The force of a little thun∣derbolt y• doth cleane a tower in the middest, is much more than the strength of an Elephant that carrieth a Castle of timber vpon her backe, and that of the little fish called Re∣mora, that staieth the ships against the force of the windes, than of a man that cleaueth an armed knight asunder in the middest. But you doe meruaile more at the one than at the other, for two causes, the one for e feare which you haue of the people at hand of your enimies, and the other, for that you iudge by your owne strength all the whole power of humane nature, séeming farre to exceede yours. I doe not meruaile that our enimies doe cu knightes asunder in the middest, and cleane them downe vnto the breast, for lyke∣wise doe the sae, cleaning them downe to the saddle, yt much was the strength of Mlo, that with the force of hs strong armes did cleae asunder harde and great Okes, and for that you shall perceiue and vnderstand how little I doe esteeme th force of our enimies, I will straight wayes make and send vnto the Emperour Trebatio a challenge, shall bée that foure of the strongest and most renow∣ knights that he hath with him, come forth to morrowe
into the field to make battaile with me, for that I alone wil combat with them all together, in the face of both those mightie enimies, and if he hath not foure such knights that durst take vpon them to accept this challenge, I will doe the like with sixe or with eight, and with so many as they will charge me withal, for it shal be all one with me, to be foure, or to be fiftie, for that I will tt these cowards may sée, how little I doe feare and estéeme the Gréekes. This proude Pagan had scarce finished these wordes, when that the gran Campion arose vp, and saide that ee would send likewise to challenge other foure, and make bat∣taile with them altogether, ionthe with his sonne. Like∣wise there were other of no lesse valour and valiant cou∣rage than they, who for that they woulde make manifest their great and mightie power, woulde also enter into the challenge, and there were of those super-valiant knights, the strong and stout Meridian and Brandardo, who had be∣fore either of them proued by experience the force of the Gréekes, and knew verie well the generositie of their harts, which was the occasion that they would not make the chal∣lenge but against other two, for that they knew it was but a follie to charge thēselues wt anie moe, because the Gréekes should not haue the vauntage, & againe, in the battaile past, they sawe such knightes, that gaue them inough to do to de∣fend themselues. Then straight waies arose vp that valy∣ant Pagan Rodaran king of Arabia, & after him the strong king of Media, ad with them the king of Trapobana, who was a meruailous strong knight, and of so bigge bodie, that hée séemed to bée a Gyant, hée was called Zoroastes, all the which said that they would enter into the challenge, and at that time if that the Emperour Alycandro had not distur∣bed them, there were a great number that would haue ente∣red thereinto, especiallie the kings and Gyants that were there present, who had a great desire for to shew themselues. Thus this challenge being concluded amongst them, it was consented to send for messenger vnto the Emperour Tre∣batio the king of the Gandaros, a young a valiant knight,
who at the commaundement of the Emperour Alycandro straight waies departed, being verie richlie armed, with a crowne of golde vpon his head in token that he was a king. When that he came vnto y• trenches of the Christians, say∣ing that hée was a messenger, they dyd let him passe till hée entered into the mightie Citie, and then was carried vnto the royall Pallace, whereas hée alighted from his horse, and leauing him with a page that came with him, he moun∣ted into the great hall, whereas he found the Emperour ac∣cōpanied with all his Princes, noble men, & valiant knights in great counsaile for to giue battaile vnto the Pagans, but when the Pagan king entered, they all held their peace, & tarried to sée what was his demand, who without doing any reuerence, said. THou shalt vnderstand (Emperour Trebatio) that I am a messenger of the diuine and consecrated Emperour Ali∣candro, Lord of the mightie Asia, who doth send me vnto thée to giue thée to vnderstand, that certaine knights of his camp being verie desirous to proie their strengthes with thy knights, hath ordained a challenge, and to be vsed & ordained in this sort, that the gran Campeon, Lord of the Oriental I∣lands, & his sonne Bramarant, doth challenge eight knights of the principallest and stoutest that are to be found in all thy hoast, and they two wil maintaine the battaile against them all, likewise our precious and most renowmed Prince Meridian, and the stout Brandimardo, and Rodaran king of Arabia, with the king of Media, and the mightie Zoroastes king of Traprobana, doe challenge as many more of thy knights as they be to come forth and battaile with them. Al these doe aie, that to morrow being past, they will prsent themselues in the middest of this great field, with their or∣ses and armour, and abide the comming of those that will come forth against them, and the Emperour my Lord saith, for that all people with their ease at their wils may behold what shal passe in this battaile he concludeth a truce for two daies, in the which time all such of our campe as are dispo∣sed, without armour may fréelie enter into the Citie, & those
of thy part likewise in the same order may enter into our trenches. This is the effect of the message that I do bring, therefore giue me answere what thou doest pretend héeren, & also these thy knights to answere me vnto the challenge. The Emperour who verie well vnderstoode the greae pride of the Pagans, at the request of them all, answered as followeth. Of truth (King) the power of these two Pagans, Brada∣man and Bramarant, is verie great, but yet their pride is much more as it séemeth vnto mee, for that they are not con∣tent to challenge other two knightes, but will that they be eight, it doth well appeare, that although they haue proued the force and strength of some of these knights, yet doe they not knowe the valiantnesse of their hearts. Thou shalt re∣turne vnto the Emperour thy Lord, and declare vnto him and vnto them that sent thée hether, that I haue heard thy Embassage, and the answere of these knightes is, that to morrow at their houre appointed they shall finde vs armed in the field, no more but one to one, as is the vse and custome amongest vs, and this vauntage which they doe offer vnto vs, wée doe release and pardon them of the same, and giue them thankes, and in all things touching the truce, let it bée done as he wil command it, for I shal receiue great content∣ment therein. With this answere the king would haue departed, but first he desired to know the names of those knights y• would go out vnto the battaile, and called to haue a sight of them, and for that there was no agréement who they should bée, many of the most valiantest that were in the hall arose vp, and offered themselues vnto the battaile, amongest them was Rosicleer, the strong Oristedes, the prince Clauerindo, the king Sacridoro, the Tartarian Zoilo, the king Florion, y• Prince Brandizel his sonne, the Emperour Tebatio in per∣son, the worthy knight Flamides, the two vliant knights of Spaine, Don Claros, & Arcalus, the Prince Don Siluerio, and the Princes Bargandel, Liriamandro,  Rodamarte, eue∣rie one of these requested the Emperou to
thm vnto the battaile, who séeing that they were so many and so worthie, it séemed vnto him that it should be a great deasing of their honours to choose some & leaue other some, which caused him to ordaine the matter in such sorte, that none should remaine discontent. Wherevpon he sayd vnto the Pagan king, that forsomuch as there were so manie stout and valiant knightes in their armies, that they should let the battaile of challenge & efiance be, fiftéene to fiftéene, then shall it be better and the more to bée looked on. Then the Pagan king said that he wuld returne with that mes∣sage vnto the Emperor his Lord, and before night he would bring him answere thereof, & taking in writing the names of the fiftéene knightes, he departed out of the Citie, and re∣turned vnto his campe, and finding the Emperour in his tent, accompanied with his nobles, in the presence of them all did declare the answere that he brought, the which was straight waies accepted of them all, sauing of Bramarant, who knowing that there should come forth against him but one alone knight, he refused to be in that battaile, and sayde: Let not the Gods permit that I go forth vnto the challenge against one alone knight into the field, for that the victorie that should growe thereby, should be more vnto his shame than to his honour▪ But when that excellent, vliant, and couragious knight Meridian heard him saie so, he could not himselfe but to saie Of truth Bramarant, others as good as thou art, hath gone forth and doe goe forth vnto the battaile one for one, and it doth well appeare, that thou hast not experimented the force and strength of the Gréekes, for if  didest knowe them so well as , thy greate pride would  be so great  to the which likewise (sayd the stout ) there is one that I know and preued my selfe with him;  thou didest enter with him into battaile, before two horses were finished hee woulde make thee to sweate droppes of bloud, and to loose the most part of thy bruerie. At whose wordes this brue, Pagan receiued so greate ire and wrath, that  of fire seemed to flie out at his
eyes, and many times he was moued to buckle with them, but considering the presence of the Emperour, (with whom he had great friendship) and againe for that he was vnar∣med, fearing the great number that would ouercharge him, he refrained himselfe, and kept his furious wrath, in his heart, for to reuenge y• same, when that time would serue. And although that many that were there had great dread to sée Bramarant so furious and angrie, for his eyes lighte∣ned like burning torches, yet the two valiant and worthie knights, Meridian, and Brandimardo, made no rekoning thereof, for that either of them were of as valiant a courage as he, and as stoute. Then straight waies ther arose vp many other knights that would be in the battaile, fiftene to fiftene: amongst all, at the request of the Emperour, (although his will was to the contrarie) was the gran Campion, and the two worthie princes Meridian and Branbimado, and the stout Rodaran, the king of Media, Zoroastes king of Taprobana, the prince of Cambray, the king of the Gandaros, that was the messen∣ger, and the prince of Aegipt, all these were verie stout & valiant knights, and for to make vp the number of fiftene, the Emperour commaunded that sixe of the most strongest giants that were to be found in all the whole armie, should goe with them, they were all bretheren and Lords of the Ilandes Diamantinas, and are so called because there are found in them more Diamonds then in any other part of all the whole worlde: they were all sonnes vnto the gran Thition, the most famous giant that was in all Asia, and for the great friendship that their father hadde with the Emperour, they came for to serue him in those warres, with a great number of their owne knights. When that it was fully ordained and concluded who should goe forth in this challenge: the king of the Gandaros straight waies de∣parted, and went to carie the aunswere vnto the Emperor Trebatio, whereas the Historie doth leaue them till time serueth for to tell you of the faire Empresse Claridiana, who went in the demaund of the caue of the wise Artidon.
¶How the Empresse Claridiana came vnto the caue of Artidon, and what happened there. Chap. 27. WIth great desire to come vnto the Caue of Arti∣don, trauiled the royall Empresse Claridiana, through the mightie kingdome of Russia, in the companie of Elizea, and her knight, thinking the time verie long till she came thether, for to know the trueth of that which had brought her into so great care and heaui∣nesse: the Cae was greatly mencioned in all those parts, and by reason of the great hast that they made, within few daies after that they had entred into the kingdome of Rus∣sia, they attained to the caue, but when they came vnto the entrie thereof, they were greatly amazed to sée the wonder∣full fire that came foorth thereat, which séemed to be some infernall thing. But when they had read those letters and vnderstoode the propertie of the fire, they straight waies en∣tred in thereat, but gaue the preheminence of the first en∣trie vnto the royall Empresse, so after that they had passed the narrow lane, they came into a faire great court, where∣as they were strangely amazed, as wel at the greatnesse the which séemed to be in that great work, as also at the migh∣tie force which the bull séemed to show, being fastned vnto the piller, (who in that order as they saw him) began to giue such terrible and wonderfull brayings, that all that mightie worke séemed to shake thereat. And if it had not bene for the Princes, who dyd animate and comfort them, Elizea, and her knight had retourned backe againe, with the great feare the which they receiued, after a while that they had beholden the great fiercenesse of the Bull, sodain∣ly their eyes aside vpon an other wal almost right against the same, the which was vnder the gallerie of the pallace, they saw grauen in the same, verie naturallie, the whole historie of the mightie and perillous battailes there,
done by Rosicleer, and of all that had happened vnto him in that Caue, the which being well vnderstoode by the roall Princes, and greatly wondered at those worthie actes, not without shedding of a few teares which trickled downe her rubicall chéekes, sayde. Oh high and happie Emperour re∣batio, in how much art thou bound vnto God, that out of thy noble loynes, hath come foorth those, that hath lled all the whole worlde with the fame of their wonderfull and immortall déedes: Oh that my destinie would permit, and my fortune be so fauourable, that our blouds might ioyne together, that some part of those worthie deeds of thy poste∣ritie, might be allotted in mée. Therefore come that come will, for that I cannot perswade with my selfe, that from the descent of so cléere and worthie a stock, may be compre∣hended so blind a iudgement, but that they doe vnderstand the great valour of my desert. And in saying these words she went forwardes, and Elizea, and her knight followed her, and went all to gether vp the staires into the galles, whereas a new they began to meruale at the strangenesse of that worke, as also at the delightfull gardaines and or∣chards which they sawe out at certaine windowes: after a while that they had well perused the same, they proceded forwards, & with the great desire which the Pinces Cla∣ridiana, had to sée her selfe with the wise man, she neuer re∣sted till she came vnto the dores of shining  that were shutte, which was the entrie into the inchaunted hall, but so soone as she had layd hand on them for to open them, they straight waies opened of themselues with so great a noyse, that all mightie woorke séemed as though it woulde haue sonke, when the royall Princes entred in thereat, where∣as she saw the high and rich throne, and thereon the wise Artidon, with his breast all open, shewing forth his heart which was a verie pitifull and lamentable thing to behold, at which time there chaunced a great meruaile, e which was neuer séene béefore, but at suche time as Rosicleer, entred into that inchaunted quadran, (and it was) that when the royall Princes béeganne to enter in at the hall
doores, there began so swéete and peaceable Musicke, that it rauished all the hearers of their sences, and they semed as though they had bene transported into an other world, and Elizea and her knights (who were without) at the swéete melodie thereof, were likewise rauished, and it séemed vnto them to be some celestiall noyse, they would not presume to enter into that inchaunted hall, till such time as the prin∣ces came forth, for that they might haue space for to aske and know that which was their desire. After that the prin∣ces had a while beholden the great wonders and straunge things of that inchaunted quadran, she straight waies con∣ceiued, that the swéete Musicke was made, which was the occasion that from that time, she had a better hope then she had before, of a good resolution of that she so long desired, for wheras with such Musicke she was receiued, she hoped her answere at her departing forth, could not be but verie good; So with the great desire she hadde to talke with the wise Artidon, after a little while that she had there staied, she mounted vp the siluer staires y• carryed her vnto the throne whereas shaking with all parts of her bodie, for the sorow∣full or heauie newes which she looked to receiue, she plast her selfe before the wise man: who being in obedience of her soueraigne maiestie, did somewhat decline his head, whereat the princes receiued great admiration, then she humbling her selfe vnto him, saide these words following. MOst mightie and famous Artidon, the high fame of thy great & wonderfull meruailes, hath brought mée into these strange countries, so farre of from mine: and if it doe so fall out that I carrie from hence no more then I haue brought, yet shall I think my trauaile well bestow∣ed, and my selfe verie well rewarded, in that I haue séene and vnderstood thy great wisedome, for as Plato the Philo∣sopher saith, for to sée and know a wise man, a man ought for to trauaile throughout all the whole world, which was the occasion that many times, he passed from Athens vnto Sicilia, for to sée his friend the wise and prudent Focion.
Apolonio Thianeo, departed from Rome, and trauailed through all Asia, sayled through the Riuer Nilus, sustained the cold of the mount Caucasus, suffered the great heat of the mountaine Rifeos, and crossed ouer the whole countries of the Masagetas, till such time as he entred into the great India, and all this trauaile and pilgrimage was for to see and communicate, with the famous wise . How much more would those haue passed greater trauailes, for to haue séene those his meruailous workes, if that in their daies and times they science and great wisedome had bene manifest. I cannot say that this is the onely cause of my comming for to see thée, as it is manifest vnto thee, yet I doe say, that if there were no other occasion, this should bee sufficient for to come and see thée. The great care which hath ben the occasion of my comming hether, (although I doe beléeue that thou doest know it) yet will I declare it vnto thée, for that he that loued so faithfully and firmely in his time, will not meruaile at any force whatsoeuer it be that loue doth vpon humaine hearts. I loue the knight of the Sunne aboue all other things in this world, so that if my fortune and euill destenie doe permit that he take an other to be his wife, I desire to know the trueth thereof, for that I may remember my selfe, & take order what is best to be done. It hath bene told mée that he is made sure vnto the princesse Lindabrides, and that he loued her with all his heart, therefore (for that there is nothing hid from thée) I doe desire thée for to tell mée if it be true, and put me out of all doubt, for whatsoeuer that thou shalt tell mée, I shall beléeue it to be true, and conformable therevnto I wil take order with my selfe what is best to be done. This being saide, the royall princes held her peace, aby∣ding the answere which should be pronounced by the wise man, who as then opened his eyes which before were shut, and saide as followeth. OF trueth, soueraigne Lady and Empresse, for that your highnesse doth verie well employ, the great trauile the which you haue passed in this your long iourney, onely for
the sight of those my workes: much more may I thinke these my trauailes better imployed, the which I had in ma∣king of them. I being now gratified with so high a reward, in that you are come for to sée them. And I doe not mer∣uaile, that loue hath had so great power for to ouercome your highnesse, for that alwaies against the most highest & most worthiest of courage, there doth he vse the greatest force, but in especiall with the knight of the Sunne, for that his fortune and destinie doth promise him vnto you, as vnto her that in all the whole world doth best deserue him, and for you alone is he kept and defended. And touching the trueth of this which you haue demaunded of mée, I tell you, that the knight of the Sunne was neuer made sure vnto the princesse Lindabrides, neither hath he hadde any more to doe with her then he hath had with you, although the great and mightie Emperour Alicandro her father dyd giue her to him for wife, and left vnto him his high & migh∣tie Empire of Tartaria, with an infinite number of other kingedomes, with the which he should be made the mighti∣est prince and lord in all the whole world. And for that he would not receiue her and all the rest, cleane contrarie vn∣to his will, secretly in the night he departed and left the gran Cataia, almost distract of their wits, with great desire for to enioye the sight of your soueraigntie, the which time he thought long, and after he came to Constantinople, and had that rigorous battaile with you, the which contencion was so cruell vnto him, after that he knew you, that despe∣rate and wearie of his life, he would goe seeke his death, to cléere himselfe out of this worlde. So he departed out of Constantinople, and went into the wildernesse of Grecia, whereas he had battaile with one of the most valiantest and stoutest Pagans that was in all the Paganisme, and yet in all that rigorous battaile, he would neuer strike him with his sworde, for that he hadde smitten you with the same. And from thence he departed and went to sea, whereas by a rough & great tempest, he was driuen vnto the Iland
of the diuelish Fauno, where (as one desirous to dye and receiue the death) he went a shore, and had a meruailous battaile with two legious of infernall diuels, and after∣ward with the diuelish Fauno, wherein happened verie strange things, as is apparant if you please to goe thether to sée, where you shall finde him all alone, without anie other companie, more then his horse, neither is there in all the Iland any other beast or foule. There doth he leade and passe the most sharpest and as∣perest life that euer was holden by man, with desire there to ende his dayes, and neuer more to retourne and weare armour. All this he doth for your occasion, and you are in a great fault before God, if you doe not finde remedie in the recouering of him againe, for that by your occasion there doth languish and dye, the best and worthiest knight in all the whole world, and one that doth loue you better then any thing therein: therefore it doth accomplish your high∣nesse out of hand to goe and sée him, for it is so that if your succour doe stay long, it may so fall out that after he shall haue no néede thereof, for that at this present his life is in great perill. In concluding of these words, the wise Artidon closed his eyes againe, & did put himselfe as he was before, with∣out aunswering or speaking any word, leauing the royall princes one way with so great ioy and pleasure, that she al∣most knew not her selfe, her comfort was so great, and an other way with great sorow, repenting her selfe of that which she hadde done against the most worthie knight of the Sunne, and blamed her selfe verie much, in that she sawe not any further proofe of his disloyaltie, and giuing him so malicious and euill reward, for the great good loue and often perills which he aduentured for her sake, and dyd thinke the tyme very long, till she departed for to haue re∣medie for his euill. Moreouer, she toke her leaue of the wise man, & he made the like in declining his  at her departure, this soue∣raigne Princes was not so sone departed out of the inchan∣ted
quadran, but the swéete Musicke ceased, and straight waies, Elizea and her knight entred in, and when they were mounted whereas the wise man was, there they knew all that they desired. The knight was her true and faithfull lo∣uer, so that Elizea departed from thence with great content∣ment and satisfied of his loyaltie, they were not so soone de∣parted out of the inchaunted hall, but the steele dores were shut with a great noyse. So the princes and the rest went into the galaries and desended into the great court, but stai∣ed not there long, the ioye and contentment of the princesse was such: but being forth of that wonderfull and miracu∣lous caue, they toke their iourney towards the port where∣as they came a shore. And at their comming thether, the princes would haue informed her selfe where the ylande of the diuelish Eauno was, she found many that did giue her to vnderstande of the wonderfull things of that Iland, by reason of the great fame that was spread abroade thereof, but not one that knew expressely where abouts it oode, whereby she might take her direct course thether, which caused a great desire in her heart to commit her selfe vnto fortune, for execution of the which, she tooke her leaue of E∣lizea, and her knight, accompanieng her selfe with alonelie two damsels, with whome she ment to enter into the ship, with determination not to come any more a shore, till such time as she had found the place whereas her knight was, and giueing Elizea to vnderstand hereof, she was very sad and sorowfull so for to lose her companie, for that they ac∣counted themselues happie and fortunate to be in her com∣panie: but when they vnderstoode that it was her will and desire, with many teares shed, of her and her knight, they toke their leaue of her, alwaies hauing in minde in how much they were bound vnto her, for that she deliuered them out of prison from that mightie and famous Rouer Cleoni∣das. The princes being departed from them, she commen∣ded her selfe vnto fortune, & began to make saile, hauing no certaine way whether to goe, but wheras the winde would driue the ship, hauing their sailes all abroade, for that they
would that they might nauigate with the more force, all the which she thought to be verie little, her desire was so great for to sée the knight of the Sunne, who for her sake, had put himselfe in so straight a life. Being in the cabbin of the shippe all alone, she fell downe on her knées, listing vp her eies and heart vnto heauen, shedding great abundance of teares that ran downe her christalline chéekes, she sayde as followeth. OH, Creator of all things, both celestiall and terrestrial, by whose will and power the heauens doth moue, the starres doth giue their light, the Sunne the and the Moone doth giue light vpon the earth, and the earth doth sustane all beastes, the waues of the déepe and proound seas doth swel and abate againe, the wyndes doth rage and become calme, and all things are obedient vnto thee: here I doe desire and craue of thy diuine maiestie and great clemencie, that the force of this inuisible windes, (being gouerned by thy will) to direct the full course of this my shippe, through these déepe seas, in such sort, that in a short time I may ariue at Iland of y• diuelish Fauno, wheras I may make satisfactiō and recompence of that great euill and wrong the which I haue committed against the knight of the Sunne. Permi (O Lord) that I may receiue the reward of this my great offence, and not he that is without fault. Oh good knight, if that I had had the eyes of my vnderstanding open, no occa∣sion nor newes had bene sufficient for to haue perswaded mée, that in a knight of so perfect excelencie (more then in any other man) should remaine so great treason: how is it possible that in so noble and worthie a person, should be bro∣ken, the faith & promise which he made vnto mee▪ of trueth no, for his amorous words, and profound sighes the which he vttered vnto mee, he neuer pretended to make so euill a conclusion of. Oh vnfortunate that I am, how was I decei∣ued, and how lightly was I moued to doe that which I dyd, what reason or cause was there, to constraine mee to lay hands vpon my knight, and to employ all my force vp∣pon him, striking him with my sword, to procure his death.
Oh wonderfull case and horrible, how am I worthie of great punishment, the windes & waters of this déepe seas with iust reason  well and rise against mée. Oh, vn∣to this day, how much ell haue I conceiued against my loyall friend, and how euell and vniustly haue I condem∣ned him in his absence: surely those were smal things that so lightly I should giue credit vnto, neither was it in that happie knight to doe them, for if that I had considered of the great exelencie, and of the high and fortunate destinie of my loyall friend, then had it ben apparant to haue bene belée∣ued, and no lacke of vnderstanding, but that I alone was she that deserued to be his spouse, and alone the whole con∣clusion of his triumphant ioye. And if that I had well considered of all those things, what great trauailes, sighes, sobbes and teares, heates and coldes, had I euitated and cut of. But alas what shall I saye, for that true louers in fewe things doe chaunce of the right, but in a great number doth erre, sodaine chaunces & iealous thoughts may be compared vnto the water of this sea, being tossed with the surging waues and blustering windes. Louers doeth beléeue all things, for that loue is full of bread, and that which is contrarie vnto his desire, he doth lightlie beléeue, and vnto that which giueth ioye and plea∣sure he giueth slender credit, and this happeneth most in women, for that they are more light and moueable in their actions, which causeth vs to giue sooner credit vnto varia∣ble and contrarie things. Ah good knight, although that there ought to be in mée great shame to come into thy presence, yet the great and perfect loue which I doe beare vnto thée, ought to be este∣med in more, my desire is to be in thy presence, whereas thy sight shalbe as ioyfull vnto mée, and lightsome to my vn∣derstanding, as the Sunne is vnto all mortall creatures, whose light doth beautifie the Moone and the starres, and all the compasse of the Firmament, as also the whole face of the Earth.
Alas, when shall I sée the houre, that all the teares and anguishes by mée passed, and caused by your absence, I may make manifest vnto you, and that your troubles told vnto mée, I may excuse being heard: but alas, what doth it pro∣fit mée all this desire, for that mée thinketh that I shall not liue for to enioy so soueraigne ioye and pleasure. Let that day come quickly, & make no longer tarying, for the death which vnto this daye hath bene so desirous of mée, I not now alonely hate, but the naming thereof doth make mee agast. These and many other things sayd the royall Princes, and she had not fullie concluded these her words, when that she felt the windes to begin to rage, and the waters to a∣rise, striking against the shippe sides, as though they would breake it in peeces, and the Mariners began to crie out, pub∣lishing euell fortune, and fearing to be drowned, for that in a verie short spare, the Ayer which was verie faire and cléere, was tourned to be verie darke and cloudie, and from the Heauens procéeded soorth so great aboundance of thun∣der and lightnings, as though the heauens and seas would ioyne together, and the Mariners sayde, that they neuer saw at the Sea in all their life time, so great a storme and tempest. But this worthie Princes who was at that time vppon her knées, earing nothing of the tempest, sayde as followeth. LORD if it be thy blessed will that I shall sée againe the knight of the Sunne, I doe verely beleue, that this tempest commeth by thy prouidence and apointment, for that this my Shippe being forced by the furie of these baysterous windes, I may the soner come vnto the place whereas he is. And if it be so Lord, (as vnworthie) thou hast not heard my prayer and petition, but that all things doth worke according vnto their nature: yet héere I doe desire thy diuine maiestie, for that it is in thy power, to stay the celestial powers, in such sort, that they may not disturbe mée in this my iourneie, nor bée contrarie vnto mée.
And I am fully perswaded Lord, that if it were thy will that I should die before that I doe sée y• knight of the Sun, it were not néedefull the force of the Elements, nor the noyse of so great thundering and lightening for to kill mée, for alonely thy will is sufficient for to sinke this my ship downe to the center of the sea. And againe, if it be thy wil that I shalbe saued, then wherefore should I feare fortunes tempestes, or the force of the great and furious waues? the good Prophet was in greater peril, when that he was swa∣lowed vp by the mightie whale, and the mightie Apostle in the deapth of the sea, and for that it was thy will for to de∣liuer them, those perills did little trouble them. The wrath and yre of Esau did little profit against Iacob, nor that of the Chaldes against Abraham, nor that of Pharao against thy people, nor that of Holophernus against Iudith, nor that of the Lyons against Daniel, and little can this tem∣pest hurt mée, if it be thy will for to saue and deliuer mée as thou diddest deliuer them. So in saying these words, the royall Princes it séemed vnto her that the storme en∣creased more and more, and so dyd all that day & the night following, without any hope of calmenesse: The next day in the morning, whether it was by the will of God, for that his pleasure was that the troubles & sorowes of the knight of the Sunne should haue ende, or whether it was by arte of the wise Lirgandeo, I know not, but the shippe with that torment was ariued at the solitarie Iland, whereas hap∣pened vnto the royall Princes, as shalbe tolde you in the next Chapter following. ¶How that the Princes Claridiana, went a lande at the Iland of the diuelish Fauno, & what she dyd there. Chap. 28. WHen that the ship of the princes Claridiana was ariued at the solitarie Iland, she, her damsels and the Mariners were verie glad, and gaue great thanks vnto God for that he had deliuered them
out of that great storme and tempest: and being somewhat wearie of the sea, the Princesse determined to go a shore, as well for to sée the fertilenesse of the Ilande, as also for that her heart did giue her that by the hande and will of God, all those things were ordained. Then straight waies she disembarked her selfe, and commaunded her damsells to tarrie in the shippe til she returned backe againe, so that all alone with her horse and armour, she went a shore. And being a land she was great∣ly amazed, to sée the countrie so plaine and no habitation therein, she found it voyde of all people, and the foundati∣on of certaine houses, which in times past had bene there builded, but now ouerthrowen and fallen downe with the wether. She saw that the Iland was very fresh & gréene, and full of trées, but not a beast nor bird she could sée in all the Iland, but as an vnpeopled and desert place, and being very much amazed at all this, she could not iudge otherwise but that should be the Iland of the diuelish Fauno, coniec∣turing of all things, as hath bene tolde her before, of that Iland & it dyd plainely appeare, that it was in all thinges conformable vnto that which she hadde heard declared by the mouth of others. And being in this troubled thought, she saw vppon the sea side somewhat aparted from the place whereas she was, a boate broken all to péeces, (the which was the boate that brought the knight of the Sunne thether, and he brake it all to péeces, because he would haue nothing to carie him from thence) but when she came nigh vnto it, she saw the prints of the blowes, which gaue her plainly to vnderstand, how it should be broken with the oares, the which laye by sheue∣red all to péeces, she being greatly amazed thereat, passed further into the Iland, wheras she discouered the saddle and brydle, with all the trappings of the good horse Cornerino, scattered vppon the ground, which although it was euill intreated with the wether, raine, and dust, yet might shée well perceiue that they were of estimation, and verie rich, for that they were all wrought with silke and golde, and
the pomell and arson of the Saddle gold, was of purefie set full of prcious stones, which caused her straight waies to suspect, that it should be the saddle and trapping of Cor∣nerino, for that many times she had séene the knight of the Sunne with them, and he wa them of the Prince Meri∣dian. When that she saw this, with a  from her horse, and the better to satisfie her selfe, she tooke the trappings in her hands, and wipte of the dust that was on them, then did she perfectly know them to be the knights of the Sunne, for that in all her life she neuer saw the like, neither was there any prince in all the whole world that had the like: the sight whereof, dyd so trouble and amaze her, that she was in  dumpe with great meruaile, & knew not what to saye, neither whether she should reioyce, or be sorowfull, for that one way she saw plainely that to be the Ilande whereas the knight of the Sunne ariued, and an other waye, those tokens with the wonderfull things which she hadde heard of that diuelish Fauno, did put her in great feare that he was slaine, and it séemed vnto her a thing im∣possible, that any humaine creature could bring in subiecti∣on so diuelish and misshapen a beast. Being in this thought, for feare and griefe of the worst, she shed so manie teares, that they ranne trickling downe her faire chéekes, that she was all to be bathed in them: so after a while that she had bene there, she mounted againe vpon her horse, and went forewards, but she had not gone farre from that place, when as she saw the good horse Cor∣nerino, who was loose an at his libertie in the fielde, who like a wilde beast came running towardes her like vnto a whirle winde, leaping and frisking in the ayre, and neighed as though he receiued great ioye and comfort at the compa∣nie of the other horse, as one that manie dayes before had bene there all alone, but when the Princes sawe him and knew him verie well, she thought verilie that her heart would haue burst with sorrow, where with her eyes burst out with teares, and hauing no power to speake one word, she sayde with in her selfe, Oh good horse how is it, that thy
maister hath left thy companie: surely it cannot be well with him, séeing that he hath left thée, for thou art so good a péece, that thou art to be estéemed of all the Princ in the world: and neither thy maister nor thy selfe doth eserue to dwell in deserts. But alas what shall I saye, I am she that hath bone the occasion of all this, and I beséech the so∣ueraigne creator of all the worlde, that it fall not out, that I am the occasion of his death, for if it be so that I haue ben y• author and chiefe instrument of his death, I will al∣so with these my handes be reuenged on my selfe with cru∣ell death, and neuer depart from out of this Ilande, but make it my sepulture, for that one countrie shall possesse the bones of vs bothe, so shall we remaine in death toge∣ther, although that cruell Fortune and my euill destinies would not permit and suffer that in our liues we could en∣ioye the one the other. In saying these words to her selfe, the Princes procured for to take the horse, somewhat for to comfort her selfe with his companie, for that the knight of the Sunne manie times dyd ryde him, but by no meanes she could not doe it, for that the horse was fierce and coura∣gious, and would not suffer himselfe to be taken of anie other but of his maister the knight of the Sunne, whome he dyd visit manie times, and fedde diuerse and sundrie times before him, in the place whereas he abode. This sée∣ing, the royall Princes, all to be bathed with teares, which for her knights sake she shedde; passed forwards on her de∣termined iourney, but she hadde not trauailed farre, when as she came vnto the craggie and hard Rocke that he hadde so cutte and sheuered to péeces, but yet such was his force and strength of his arme, and the goodnesse of his sworde, and vppon the toppe of the same, shee sawe where hunge the rich sword of the knight of the Sunne, with the scab∣bard and the hangers, which were wrought and embrode∣red with gold, and set with precious stones: and knowing it verie well, she was at that present more astonied & amazed then she was before, and comming nigh vnto it, she reade that which was written in a plaine place of the same stone,
but when she had well understoode the effect thereof, it can∣not be rehearsed what she felt at that time at her heart, considering of hrée strange & meruailous things that was represented there, of the knight of the Sunne. The one the great loyaltie and reuerence that he had vnto her, insomuch that he had stroke her with his swoord, yet in the time of that great necessitie, he left the same, because he would not defile it with any other bloud. An other, in the great and soueraigne force and courage which he had, for to goe fight with that diuelish Fauno, without any sword. The third, in the great and incredible strength which he had, for to cut and cleane that cragged and hard Rock, sheuering of such greate péeces, as verie plainely it might be séene, that eue∣rie sheuer was a blow with the sword: all the which bée∣ing by her considered, the great ioy and pleasure which she should receiue in acknowledging the great loyaltie of her knight, was tourned into great anguish and griefe, in seing the rewarde he receiued at her hands in recompence of the great loue & fidelitie he had borne vnto her. And the more greater his wonderfull and excelent déedes séemed to be, so much more she waxed penitent, and repented her selfe, and with so great griefe, that it séemd her soule would depart her bodie, she saide as followeth. OH my verie good friend, if you be a liue, how dare I presume to come into your presence, that in recompence of so great fidelitie and loue (which your déedes doe make manifest) you had vnto mée, and I to haue showed my selfe so cruell and contrarie vnto you. And if it be so that you be departed this world, what reuenge may I take of my selfe, to make it equall vnto the great errour which I haue committed: of trueth no other but with this thy sword, I will open my entrailes and take out myne owne heart, that ioyntly it may remaine in this solitarie and vnfortunate Iland, as a signe and token of thy great fidelitie and faith∣full good will vnto mée: and contrariewise, my great cru∣eltie towards thy guiltlesse person, and yet this wilb but a
small reuenge for so great an euill committed for the death of so high and ecellent a Prince cannot be reuenged by my death. In saying these words and other more of great dolour, & griefe, and in shedding great abundance of teares, she ouer∣wept her selfe, and was verie desirous to proceede forwards to knowe what was become of the knight of the Sunne, leauing the sworde hanging whereas shee found it, shée departed from thence, and as she trauailed for a great space with a sodaine feare that came ouer her heart in such sorte, that all her members shaked, that shée coulde not almost go forwardes, still misdoubting the successe of the knight of the Sunne. Then after a while hauing not trauailed the full quan∣titie of a mile, a great waie before shée came whereas the Fauno was slaine, shée sawe from a farre off the great bulke of the monstrous and mis-shapen bodie, which seemed to be a great house ouerthrowen, it was so great, and imagining what it should bée, shée went that waie, but when she came there shée was straunglie amazed to sée the infernall figure of that mishapen beast, and yet more horrible and wonder∣full it was than héeretofore it hath beene tolde you, for that there was no vnderstanding of man that was sufficient to imagine the great deformitie of this beast, beeing dead as hée was, but the good Princesse had not much time to per∣vse the great vglinesse of this beast, for when shée salve all the armour of the knight of the Sunne there laide vppon the stone, and knew them verie well by the straunge and rich worke that was in them, her heart was readie to breake with dolour and griefe, and almost from her selfelshe fell from her horse downe to the grounde, whereas she laie a good while vpon the gréene grasse in a sound, and coulde not speake anie one worde, but laie as though shée hadde bene dead, but within a while after shée came againe vn∣to her selfe, and arose vp, and went forthwith vnto the ar∣mour, and embracing her selfe with them, shée vttered these wordes, with so great sorrowe and griefe, that shée
would haue moued anie man to compassion to haue heard her, but in especiall when that shée hadde read that which was written vppon the Stone, which was in this manner following. This is the diuellish Fauno, sonne vnto the diuell, be∣gotten of Artimaga, who was slaine by the knight of the Sunne, Prince of Grecia, who being determined to leaue the world, would conclude and end his daies in this solita∣rie Iland, this was his armour, the which he doth leaue héer in signe of the last victorie that hée concluded in his life time. When the Princesse had concluded the reading of these lines, shée lacked but a little to conclude her ende, for that by those wordes shée conceiued that the knight of the Sun was dead, especiallie when shée looked about on euerie side, and could sée no other signe nor token of him, shée conieu∣red euill in er owne imagination, and hauing net so much force and strength for to suffer that mortall griefe, in great rage and anguish of her heart, she embraced her self with the armour and sayd. OH good knight, what is become of thée, that in this sort thou hast left thy excellent and precious armour, God hath created thée of so great magnamitie aboue all other knightes in the worlde, for to leade thy life in the desarts, like vnto brute beasts, and if it bée so that I am in ault, and haue béene the occasion of all this euill, héere I doe promise and make a vowe vnto thee, neuer to depart from hence a∣lone, except it be in thy companie, héere will I end my sor∣rowfull dayes, héere will I for euer make my bedde on this hard ground, and neuer laie my head vpon anie other thing than the harde stones, for that with the hardnesse of them I may mollii my harde heart that was so hardned against the, my sustenaunce shall bée no other thing but griefes and sighes, and that which I will drinke shall be the teares that distilleth from the fountaines of my eyes, and I will not haue anie other companie but alonelie this armour,
the which so many times and oft hath béene vppon the worthie bodie of that good Knight, and defended him from my raging and mortall blowes. These shall bée onelie my comfort, and the myrrour whereon I will looke, for that the memorie of them shall euerie moment increae my hea∣uie dolour. I will wander all alone in these desarts lyke the Turtle doue, that hath lost her louing mate, and giue shrikes in this wildernesse lyke vnto Narho, to see if thou wilt aunswere mée, as the Nymph Eco dyd aunswere him. These and many other thinges spake the Princesse, tormenting her selfe with exceeding greate anguish and griefe. Then in the end of halfe an houre that she was there, shee remembred how that the wise Artidon had tolde her, that she should finde him in that Iland, yet she doubted ve∣rie much of his life, to see all that she hadde seene before, although by that remembrance thee  some hope. Likewise shee called vnto her remembrance, that hee sayde that shée should make hast in his demaund, for that it might so fall out, that his comfort might come to late, by reason that he was brought into so great  and daunger of his lyfe. which doubt brought her  so greate consion, that hee heart sayled her, and it  that thee had neyther force nor strength sufficient for to  anie farther for∣wardes, but as ended dyd verie well behole that diuellishe and infernall Fauno, to see how that rgorous battaile was , shee sawe the greate and wonderfull horne that was broken off from his head, and his scull broken all to péeces, and his great and mightie clubbe lying thereby, whereby she dyd vnderstand howe and after what manner he was slaine, and giuing a greate and deepe sigh the sayde as fol∣loweth. Oh excellent knight, howe worthie are thy déedes to bee published throughout all the worlde, and with great reason the déedes of all other knightes ought to bee put to silence, and neuer more to bée spoken of, for the worthinesse of thy deeds being so excellent as they are, so manie, and of so great
admiration, and dispearsed abroade in so many Countries, that they cannot be séene, neither be hearde of, and those which doth not sée them, how can they beléeue them? Héere I doe desire the vniuersall creator, that now, neyther in the times to come they may not bée forgotten. After that this royall Princesse had sayde these wordes in the praise of her knight, shée departed from thence, and began to goe and to séeke him, and for that shée could not finde him there aboutes, she woulde haue mounted vppon her horse to séeke farther into the Iland, but it fell out, whe∣ther it was with the feare of the Fauno, or for to goe with the horse Cornerino, by anie meanes shée could not take her horse, but he fled from that place with so great swiftnesse, that in a short space the Princesse lost the sight of him, for the which shée receiued great griefe, so by force shée was constrained a foote to goe and séeke her knight, the which she dyd on euerie side, but coulde finde no mention of him, which caused in her great suspition to thinke verilie that he was dead, so that many times she staied, and was so trou∣bled, th shée thought verilie shée should haue dyed with sorrowe. In this  shée passed all the daie and all the night, till the next daie in the morning, and neuer coulde finde the knight of the Sunne with so great sorrow and griefe, as though her soule would depart from her bodie. And for to tell you what passed with him, the Hystorie doth leaue her till time doth serue. The life which the knight of the Sunne lead in the so∣litarie Iland, and how hee was found by his Ladie the Princesse Claridiana. Chapter. 29. AFter that the knight of the Sunne had slaine that di∣uellish Fauno, till such time as the Princesse Claridia∣na came vnto thé solitarie Ilande, there was two
moneths betwéene, as saith the wise Lygandeo, in which time he passed his life with sorrowes and complaints, sighs and sobs, all the daie long, & in the night time to sléepe vpon the hard ground, although for to withdrawe himselfe in the time of water and raine, and from the heate of the Sunne, he made a cottage couered with boughs, compassed round about with a fountaine, scituated vnder a companie of thick trées, this place was a great waie separated from that wher∣as the auno was slaine, so that by reason that the Prin∣cesse was a foot, as yet she was not come vnto that place, but in all the time that this good knight was there, he neuer eate anie other thing but such wilde  and rootes as he found in the Iland, so that with great hnesse he did su∣staine his lie, by which meanes, as also for the gret heaui∣nesse and griefe which hee had taken in his heart, he was brought verie loe, & wared leaue and  such sort, that whosoeuer had seene him shuld not haue knowen him, all the which he  with great patience, and determi∣ned in that sorte to ende his daies, he was brought verie weake and feeble, and could not long haue ndyred if reme∣die had not come in time▪ neither could  to straight and wearie a  condi∣tion and strong of nature. There was not in all the Iland anie person for to comfort him, neither  thing to recreate his understanding, but , which many times came that him, who one waie gaue him some comort when hee sawe him, and another waie he did double his , in calling to rmembrance the great and worthie that he did with him. Likewise the  of his friends turned him to great sorrow, as he Emperour c∣batio his father, and the roiall Empresse  his mother, his good brother Rosicleer, and of all the rest of his friends, and he found himselfe verie solitarie without their com∣panie, but by reason that the griefe was much more which he printed in his heart, in considering the misliking and euil loue of the Princesse Claridiana, there was nothing suffici∣ent,
neither that raging and solitarie life which hée suffe∣red, for to cause him once to change his minde for to departs from that place, for that many times he said vnto himselfe, séeing that the Princesse Claridiana desired his death, and that she procured to giue it him with her owne handes, hée desired to liue no longer in this world, at least waies not in place where he might be séene of people. Thus in the end of all this time that hée was there, it chaunced the finall daie of all his troubles to bée verie hot and soultering, and being passed a great parte of the same, hée went forth of the cottage whereas hée was, and went and put himselfe vnder the shadow of a companie of thicke trées, whereas the water of the fountaine passed by with a swift course, the place was verie pleasant and delectable, and béeing sitten downe vpon the gréene grasse, and the pit∣tering leaues vpon those gréene trées béeing moued with a most swéete and peaceable winde, ioyntlie with the cleere water of that fountaine, & running out betwéene the stones, made so pleasant and delightfull a noise, that the knight of the Sunne being ouerwatched with his continuall care, fell asléepe, and béeing in this order asléepe, lying a longe vpon the gréene hearbes, it chaunced to be the verie same daie that the Princesse Claridiana went to séeke him, with great sorrowe and griefe because shée could not finde him, neither aliue nor dead, and by reason that shée went a foote, and the daie verie hot, shée waxed somewhat wearie, for in all the other daie past, and in that daie shée neuer ceased sée∣king of him round about in all partes, yet notwithstanding her great wearinesse, the greate care that shée had at her heart was the occasion that shée rested not till such time as fortune brought her whereas the knight of the Sunne laie vnder the trées in the shadow all along a sléepe, but when shee found him whereas hée laie in that order vppon the ground, and knew him, there was no humane pleasure that might bée compared vnto that which shée receiued at that instant, for shée remained a good space as if it had bene one transported into a new world without anie remembrance,
and it séemed verilie that it had not bene possible so greate ioy and pleasure should haue entred into her brest, although to the contrarie when as she sawe that good knight, the flow∣er of all the knighthoode in the worlde, to be so leae and wanne, and put into so asper and straight life, shee shedde great abundaunce of teares which ranne downe her faire face, wherwith she was so bathed, that when she came nigh vnto him, she remained a pretie while as in contemplation, and could not satisfie her selfe in beholding him, for although hee was vnarmed, and laie along vpon the harde ground, yet dyd hée shew forth that soueraigne maiestie and graue semblance wherewith hée was adorned, hee was apparelled in a doublet of cloth of golde somewhat worne out, and his faire yeolow haire, which séemed to bée kaines of golde, was spread vppon the gréene grasse, and his seuere counte∣nance, although it were leane and wanne, did shew forth the gallant perfection wrought therein by nature. For as the wise Lyrgandeo sayth, and as it hath beene declared in ma∣ny places of this Hystorie, the proportion of his bodie, hée saith that he had a long visage, almost a spanae and a halfe long, besides his beard, which at this time was somewhat growen, a broade forehead and bigge eies, his eye browes compassing like an arke, and almost a hande breadth from point to point, his nose was somewhat sharpe, a lyttle mouth, and his lippes verie redde, hee was of a gallant sta∣ture, which was about eight fote long, and is sufficient for a Gyant, and all his members so well proportioned, that it séemed Nature dyd straine her selfe, and indued him with all graces. Therefore because hee was so bigge and well made in euerie part, with that greate maiestie in his coun∣tenaunce as hée laie along vppon the grasse, that sure it was a straunge thing to beholde, and the Princesse dyd neuer vntil that daie sée him in apparaile that it better please her, and giue her greater contentment, which was the occasi∣on that shée remained there a good while beholding of him as one greatlie astonished, and it séemed vnto her that his shape dyd verie farre surpasse all humane vnderstanding,
and she sayd within her selfe that God had not created that knight of so good a disposition for to liue in the deserts, and how that she deserued all euill for that she was the occasion of his sorrowe and troubles. In the meane time that shée thus debated with himselfe, the good knight began to moue himselfe and turned into another place, and began to distill from his eies so greate abundaunce of teares, that it was a griefe to beholde. Then she because she woulde not wake him quicklie, withdrew her selfe on the one side, and stoode behinde a trée, where she tarried to sée▪ what he would doe, but could not satisfie her selfe in beholding him, and giuing thankes vnto almightie God for that she had found him a∣liue. All this time the good knight was in a dreame, and drea∣med that the Princesse Clandiana his mistres was come in∣to that Iland, and how that she went round about in seek∣ing him and could not finde him, and he hauing a desire to goe vnto her, procured himselfe to arise, but by anie meanes he could not, for his strength would not serue him, and shee séeing that she could not finde him, returned againe vnto the Sea side, whereat he receiued so great sorrow and griefe that he wept, and shed those teares which the Princesse, had séene. Likewise it séemed vnto him that she was departed, which caused in him so great anguish and griefe, that in the end he awaked as one scared and amazed, but when he saw it was but a dreame, his griefe increased the more, & tum∣bing himselfe from one part vnto another, wih mortall griefe and raging anguish he said. Oh loue how is it that thou art new become lesse pitti∣full and more cruell than anie furie, and more stronger and terrible than anie of the elements? All things created hath but one kinde of death, but against mortal men thou hast so many and so different kinde of torments, for to cause them to die, as there is difference in the diuersitie of thy thoughts and desires, but yet if God were so pleased, that some of them might make an end and separate this soule from this my sorrowfull and heauie bodie, for that it might be cléere from
this outragious and burning fire, but this is thy order of crueltie, to kill him that is liuing, & not him that hath time to bewaile his death. Let it suffice thée (Loue) this great dis∣fauour that I haue receiued at thy hands, and let it content thée in that I was of the world, and now thou hast banish∣ed me into this solitarie Iland, and doe not now giue mee anie new kindes of tormet, in making me beleeue in dreames, that the Princesse Claridiana my mistres doeth come to seeke me, and to set me at libertie of this exile to the which I am committed? How is it possible that shee should haue anie care, sorrow, or griefe ouer me, she lifting vp the sword with her rigorous arme for to kill me, and againe, so high and soueraigne a Ladie shoulde come and seeke a knight so vnfortunate and abased as I am? It may well be said that it is a dreame, being a thing so variable and out of all consert, and I doe now well vnderstand, that it is a new procuration of loue to call vnto my remembraunce, setting before mine eies that high and soueraigne glory, that after being deceiued, and finding my selfe frustrate and not worthie thereof, it may be the occasion that my sorrow and griefe maye the more augment. But now (Loue) vse thy will against me, and let fortune shew me as much crueltie as she can, for that the crueltie of the one nor the tyrannie of the other is sufficient for to make me to leaue off and not for to loue the Empresse Claridiana my Ladie & Mistres, and louing her, for to suffer & abide anie kinde of torment whatsoeuer for her sake, for that the daie will come that the life shall leaue this mortall bodie, & the burning fire which continuallie flameth shall cease his furie. In saying these wordes, the knight of the Sunne expres∣sed so great sorrow, throwing from him such profound sighs, that the Princesse did verie well vnderstande the greate griefe that he had at his heart, and thought it not at that time perillous to giue vpon a sodaine knowledge of her be∣ing there, for that she could not suffer anie longer to hide her selfe, but would put remedie to her euill, but yet for that shée would that that pleasure should enter into him by little
and little she pulled downe the beaue of her helme, in such sort that he could not know her, and began to goe towards him, making a noise with her going that the knight of the Sunne heard it, and looking about to see what it was, he was greatlie amazed to sée that knight there a foote, and one of a gallant disposition and well armed, wher withall he straight waies arose vp vpon his féete and did abide his comming, then the Princesse, changing her voice all that she could, sa∣luted him, saying. God defend and kéepe thée noble and famous knight, for that as I vnderstand, and according vnto the things which I haue séene in this Iland, you should be the knight of the Sunne, who hath slaine the diuellish Fauno. So the Lorde increase in you gentilitie and worthinesse, Sir Knight, (he answered) truth it is that I am the knight whom you haue named, and meruaile greatlie to see you in this place, for that many daies past there hath not landed at this Ilande anie other person but I alone. I doe verilie beléeue it (sayde the Princesse) for that this was not a Countrie that anie other should enter in of lesse bountie & valiant force than y• of yours, for that there is none other in al the whole world amongst humane creatures, but onelie you, that was suffi∣cient for to cléere and set at libertie the entre into this I∣land. And you shall vnderstand that by the force of a greate storme that wée had at the Sea, we were driuen vnto this Ilande, and being desirous for to knowe what Countrie it was, I came ashore, whereas I haue seene so many strange things, that so long as I doe liue, I shall haue inough to do to tell of the same, and I giue great thankes vnto almightie God who hath brought mée hether, as well for that I haue séene some parte of your worthinesse, as also for to impor∣tune and desire you for to leaue this solitarie life (which ap∣pertaineth vnto brute beasts) and to departe from hence, tur∣ning a new to vse and exercise your armour, for that such a worthie Knight as you are, shoulde not bée absent from the worlde, and héerin you commit great offence against God, for that hée hath employed in you so greate bountie,
and you not to vse it, you shall vnderstand that God did not giue it vnto you for your selfe alone, but also for to defend and succour all such as hath neede thereof. Lykewise it cannot bée without grieuous offending of the almighte God, to cause vnto your parents so great sorrow and griefe, alonelie for your absence, which is no lesse griefe vnto them than the death, and for my parte heere I doe aduertise you, that if you doe not out of hande departe from hence in my companie, that I wil remaine héere with you and beare you companie, and will not departe from hence till that death doth conclude and make an ende of one of vs or both toge∣ther. The Knight of the Sunne was greatlie amazed as well at the gentle disposition of the Princesse, as also at the great bountie and curtesie which shée offered vnto him, and be∣léeued verilie, as well in the riches of his armour, as in all other thinges, that hée shoulde bée some knight of highe estate, and beeing verie desirous to gratifie his wordes, hée sayde. Sir Knight, I doe giue you great thankes for this your curtesie and great good will which you doe offer vnto mée, and I woulde if it were Gods will that my fortune might bée such, that I were able to doe you anie seruice or plea∣sure, but my fortune hath béene so contrarie, and my euyll destinie hath brought me vnto this estate, that I cannot affoorde my selfe to leade anie other lyfe than this which I doe now leade, neither haue I remaining in mée so much power and libertie for to accomplish anie thing of this which you haue spoken vnto mée off, for that according vn∣to the greate fire wherewith I am tormented, I haue not anie more hope of my life, neither haue I anie more certaine continuance than the flame that in hast consumeth a candle, and he that hath his end so nigh at hande, to what purpose, (I praie you) should he goe and séeke his owne naturall Countrie, for to die there, for that it is death to leaue both both the one other, and as wise men haue sayde, That vn∣to man there is no Countrie proper, but all the whole
world is a common Inne touching this misrable life, and for that Grecia is my naturall Countrie, in no part in all the world can the death be more grieuous vnto mée than there, the lamentations of my parents, the teares and wéep∣ings of my brethren, the complaints of my friends, the cry∣ings of my subiects, all the which will be an occasion to me of greater torment, and the griefe much more greater vnto them, so that for to excuse all this I am determined to die there, whereas nothing else but my sorrowful death shall be grieuous vnto me, and there whereas I shall alwaies haue it in memorie, and now séeing that my fortune will not suf∣fer nor consent to anie other remedie, I do most heartely de∣sire you (gentle knight) to returne againe vnto the sea vnto your owne companie from whence you came, and let mée remaine héere alone in this Iland, and although it be solita∣rie, yet am I accompanied with so many sorrowes, griefes, and tormentes, that I haue no néede of anie other com∣panie. Héere the Princesse could not choose but féele at her hart verie grieuous the wordes of her knight, but of his greate fidelitie she was verie glad and ioyfull, and had great pittie of his sorrow and griefe, and willing to proceede in farther talke with him, she said: Of truth (worthie Prince) I doe not knowe what euill this of yours should be, so great and so strane, that in this sort hath taken awaie your stngth, that all the power you haue is not able to resist it, if it bée not that the which could tame the mightie Samson, the most strongest of all men, and that Hercules, that had so greate power and force against the Centauros, which is Loue, that did bring these in subiection and many others moe in the world, if it be this which hath brought your life into this estate, I knowe not what she shoulde bee that against you should shew her selfe so crull, except it be such as wll per∣uert the courses and naturall mouings, for being as you are amonst Princes the most highest, and amongst the most ex∣cellentest, and inducd with all goodnesse of nature, I doe be∣léeue that there is no damsell in the worlde, of what estate
and beautie so euer he be, but would receiue great content∣ment, and thinke her selfe happie to bée of you beloued, knowing the loue that you beare vnto her to bée perfect and oiall, and if it fall out not to be such (beléeue mée) for that I knowe thus much of women, that first they will consent themselues to die burning in amorous fires, than to make anie shew of loue vnto them that they thinke to haue their thoughtes occupied in other partes, and so farre foorth as I can see they haue great reason, for that the heart of a man being set vpon more than one, there is none that hath anie parte in him, neither can his loue with anie bée per∣fect, the which you maye verie well iudge by your selfe, in thinking of that which you would do, if so bee that you did sée this to bée in her whome you at this present doe so ear∣nestlie loue. Ah good knight, sayde the knight of the Sunne, this is the hidden fire wherewith I am scorched, and that where∣with the bones of this my mortall bodie doth consume. This is that which hath me prisoner and hath inchaunted me, and that to whom all my force and strength is yéelded, without hauing anie other thing in mée to make anie resi∣stance, but to doe that which hée desired, and suffer with a good will all such paines and tormentes as hée giueth mée, estéeming much of the wound, making poison to bée sauou∣rie, bitter swéete, paine delectable, torment, ioy and pleasure, and finallie, death to bée verie swéete and easie. And if that loue hath shewed her selfe so cruell against mée, good knight doe not meruaile thereat, for that, that high and so∣ueraine Damsell, the which my fortune and destinie dyd permit mée to loue, is of so greate valour and high desert, that héere I doe confesse that I am not worthie of her, for that fortune amongest humane creatures did exalt her most highest, and nature did painte her in such sorte (that put∣ting a parte the power of God) I am perswaded that there was to bée done no more on her. This waie hath shée bene cruell vnto mée, and not that waie (Sir Knight) which you haue giuen mée to vnderstand, for that shée it is alone
whom I loue, and my heart is fixed vppon no other but onelie vpon her. It is not néedfull that I saie anie more heerein, for that my lyfe doth beare witnesse of my greate fidelitie, for i so be that I had my thought fixed in anie other place, then should not my disfauour haue so much force and power ouer mée, as to cause mée to receiue suche mortall griefe. Then shée sayde, of my faith (Sir Knight) according vn∣to your wordes, and as you haue giuen mée to vnderstande by them, it can bée no other for whome you doe suffer this sorrow and griefe, but Claridiana, the Empresse of Tapi∣sonda, for that shée is a Damsell, as well in highnesse as in beautie and gifts of nature, that doth surpasse all other that be in the world, and if this bée not true, I tell you that you doe iniurie mée in this which you haue sayd, for that I haue séene her, and I doe beléeue that she hath not her equall in the world. The great sorrow and griefe of my heart (said the knight of the Sunne) vnto her alone I wold that it were manifest, but for that I will not doe so great iniurie vnto so high a damsell a you haue héere mentioned, and again because you shall not saie that I lack reason in this which I haue said, I giue you to vnderstand of a truth, that she is the partie, and now seeing y• I haue tolde you, I most heartelie desire you, that so long as you do liue, you keepe it secret, for that séeing I must die for her sake, yet I would not for all the worlde that she should be accounted culpable of my death. Now wil I giue you to vnderstand, said the Princesse, that there is re∣medie put in all this your sorrow and griefe, and that your fortune is much better than you did make reckoning of, for that I doe know this damsell, and am certaine that many daies since she hath trauailed in your demand with greate sorrow and care for to finde you, and according vnto the wordes which I heard, and the profound sighs which I haue séene her vtter, I doe beléeue of certaintie, that she doth beare you as much good loue as you doe beare vnto her, & if it bée so that you haue receiued anie disfauour or discurtesie at her
hands, it is not vnknowen, that ouer much loue many times is the occasion of iealous thoughts conceiued against them whom they loue, the which she might well haue, in seeing you in companie with some other faire damsell, & afterward being certefied of your fidelitie, repented her selfe, and then the loue which before she bare vnto you, to be a new redou∣bled in her, for that there is nothing that doth iname and kindle the amorous hearts, so much as dth a false iealousie, when that faithfullie they are certefied to the contrarie, for then all wrath and anger is turned vnto loue, and is the oc∣sion the more to augment and increase, and so it may be now in Claridiana, that if so be that you alonelie doe loue her, then was it not possible the truth to be hid, and now she be∣ing repented of that which is past, it doth cause her (as I haue tolde you) to goe in your demand, and with no other intent but to aske you pardon for that which is past, the which you ought out of hand for to pardon, and to go & séeke her, for that there is nothing more worthie to be pardoned, than those errours which are committed by ouer much lo∣uing. Then he said: Ah sir knight, tell me I praie you where you did see my Ladie and mistres the Empresse Claridiana, and how you doe vnderstand y• she trauaileth in my demand, for that of truth if it be true, I wil presentlie depart and go séeke her vnto the worlds end, onelie for to sée her, wherein there shall bée no man in all the worlde so happie as I. I will tell you how I doe know it, said the Empresse, for that it is not many daies since that I saw her, and if thou wilt that I shal tell thée true, not many hours, and you shal vn∣derstand that yesterdaie shée ariued in this Iland in your demand, and shée is a aland, and not farre from you, and I doe beléeue that that is shée that commeth yonder. This she sayd, pointing with her hand towards one part of the For∣rest, that waies which shée came. Then the knight of the Sunne all amazed and ameruailed, as of a thing in mock∣age and impossible, did looke towards that part, in the meane time the Princesse pulled her gantlets frō her white hands, and tookeoff her helme, wherewith all her rubicond haire,
which séemed to be skaines of golde spread abrode vpon her shoulders, of so great length, that it reached vnto the ground, and shewed forth that faire face with so great strangenesse and maiestie, that there was nothing in the worlde that might bée compared therevnto, and the more her beautie shewed for that shée was hot in trauailing a foote, by rea∣son whereof her coulour was in her face, and it séemed in the middest of her white chéeks to be two fragrant red Ro∣ses, her faire and rowling eies glistered like vnto two verie fine and greate Emerodes, glittering with a gréene cléere∣nesse, in so profound wise, that in them it might be natural∣lie sayd, whosoeuer did beholde them, to bée conuerted into stones, for that all humane vnderstanding they did amaze and leaue as astonied. But to conclude, the soueraigne Prin∣cesse in all pointes séemed rather to bée a diuine thing than humane, but the knight of the Sunne, who with great atten∣tion was looking towardes that place whereas shée tolde him that shée was comming, had not as yet seene the Prin∣cesse in that order, till within a while after, séeing that hée could sée no bodie comming, hée tourned his head about for to aske the Knight where hée hadde séene and lefte her, but when he sawe her healme off, and knewe her by her fayre face, it cannot bée sayde and tolde what that worthie knight at that instant felt within himselfe, but remayned wonderfullie amazed, and meruailing more than anie man in the worlde, without anie power to speake one worde, neither mooued hée anie eie lidde, but stoode still beholding that seraphicall face, out of the which he receiued so many dazeling sightes and glittering cléerenesse, as though he had continuallie looked vpon the Sunne in the morning, at such time as he spreadeth his golden beames abroade vpon the earth. Then the royall Princesse séeing him in that greate perplexitie, with the excéeding ioye and pleasure shée recei∣ued, clasping him about the necke, and embracing him, shée sayde. Iust, true, and good knight, séeing that I am shée alone
that haue committed this errour, and hath bene the onely occasion of all this your sorow and griefe, I am héere come in presence to make a meanes for the same, and to crae pardon at your hands for all that is past, for if I haue com∣mitted any offence, beleue mee, it was by the ouermch loue which I did beare you, and your troubles and sorowes hath grieued mée as much, and gone as nigh my heart, as mine hath bene vnto you, in such sort, that if God of his infinit mercie and goodnesse had not permitted mée to finde you here, of trueth I doe tell you, that I would neuer haue departed from hence aliue, for that I was determined to ende my dayes, leading the most strictest & sorowfull life that might be immagined, in recompence of my great error, In the meane time that the Princes spake these words, the knight of the Sunne receiued so great ioye and pleasure, in séeing him in the presence of his so desired mistresse, that he embrased her, excusing himselfe with such amorous & swéet words, that he thought himselfe transported into an other world, and knew not whether he was in heauen or on the earth. And comming vnto himselfe after that he had recei∣ued that curtesie at her hands, knéeling downe before her, he tooke and kissed her lilie white hande perforce, receiuing thereby more glorie, then if he had bene made Lord ouer all the world. Then the Princes a new, did embrace him, and almost by force, dyd cause him to arise, saying, your highnes (worthie Prince) doth not consent, that you vse with anie this courtesie, much lesse with mée, that am whollie yours, Then the good knight said, ah mistresse, as you are all one∣ly she in all the world (next vnto God) that may shew me courtesie, so haue you now this my mortall bodie glad, ioy∣full, and happie: I am not onely bound vnto you to kisse your hands, but if so be that the great loue which I beare vnto you doe not deserue it, then is not my high estate suf∣ficient that I deserue to enioye so great courtesie, and héere in I doe receiue so great glorie, that if continuallye I may enioy your presene, with a verie good will I would for∣get all highnes and royall estates, and liue and leade my
lyfe here, with as great ioye and pleasure in your companie better then in any royall pallace, and thinke my selfe ve∣rely to be in eternall Paradise. I would to God (replyed the Princes) that with our honors and emperial states, we might accomplish the same, leading our liues here together in this solitarie Iland, for that for my pleasure and contentment, I request no other thing, but onely the enioying of your companie, in place whereas I might not be desturbed one minute of an houre, but for that fortune hath exalted vs vnto so high estate, and that God hath not created vs with so great callings, onely to serue our selues, but we must (as we are bound) accom∣plish and performe our duties to our subiects, and goe and sustaine our emperiall estates, and in especially you, ha∣uing so excelent parentage, you are the more bound for to goe and see them, and to take from them by your presence, the great and long heauinesse which they haue receiued by your absence. Then the good knight saide, Mistresse, I doe receiue so great ioye and contentment of heart, onely in beholding of you, that as the happie saints vnto whome the losse of pa∣rents, nor any worldly thing can cause them to féele anie paine, sorow, and griefe: euen so I being in your presence, there is no absence, nor any other thing, that can giue or cause vnto mée, sorow and griefe, but yet for all this, vse you your will and discretion, for that I haue no will, but whereas is yours. These and many other mo amorous words passed bée∣twixt these two true and perfect louers, and yet could nei∣ther of them manifest entirely, the great ioye and pleasure the which they receiued at their hearts. After a while that they had passed the tune in this their ioyfull méeting, they sate themselues downe vpon y• gréene grasse, in the shadow vnder those huge and mightie trées, whereas with swéete words, & still more amorous then eloquent, they discoursed the one with the other, of all thinges that hadde happened vnto them, since their departure out of Constantinople. And
the princes did giue the knight of the Sunne to vnderstand the occasion why and wherefore, she made battaile with him, and how much sorow and griefe the supition thereof dyd cause vnto her, and how and in what sort she was put out of all doubt concerning the same. Likewise she tolde him of all the great preparation to the warres which was made in Grecia, at her departure, and how she vnderstoode that all the whole Paganisme, and a great part of Christen∣dome, came against the emperour Trebatio, for which cause he dyd put himselfe in a redinesse to receiue them, and was verie sad and sorowfull for his absence: all which when the knight of the Sunne vnderstood, he straight waies had a great desire to be in Grecia, séeming that in time of so great necessitie, there was no reason that he should be absent, in especiall for that the chiefest occasion and greatest part of those warres were for his sake. Being in this communication, they could not be certifi∣ed the one to heare the other, they saw comming towardes them two damsells, vpon two palfraies, whome the prin∣ces dyd straight wayes know to be her Damsells, whome she left in the shippe, and being greatly amazed that the princes taryed so long and not retourned, came a land, and went in her demaunde, with great sorow and heauines, because they could not finde her: but when they sawe her and knew the knight of the Sunne, they were wonderful∣ly glad, as well for the ioye which theyr mistresse receiued therein, as also for the strange things which they had séene in that Iland. And surely they were verie sad, thinking that the knight of the Sunne hadde bene dead, because he had not bene heard of a long time. When these two Damsells came vnto them, they left & ceased their amorus communication, and receiued them ve∣rie courteously. Presently vppon the gréene grasse they dyd eate of such vittailes as the Damsels had brought a shore from the ship, for their Ladie & mistresse, whereas y• knight of the Sunne, with the great ioye and pleasure that he re∣ceiued at his heart, the coulour and semblant of his face
was chaunsed, so that he séemed an other maner of man, and shewed the true and perfectperfection in coulour and pre∣sence, the which nature had wrought in him. And the Prin∣ces for to sée him in that sort was so glad & ioyful, that ther was no pleasure that might be compared vnto hers. After that they had eaten & well refreshed themselues, the knight of the Sunne séeing his good horse Cornerino in companie with that of the Princesse, he lured, and straight waies he came vnto him, for that he had vsed him therevnto, so he tooke him, and after that, that of the Princes, and being both desirous to depart from thence, they tooke each other by the hande and went vnto the place whereas the knight of the Sunne had left his good armour, & there he armed himselfe againe with them, being holpen by the princes, for that her Damsells, with the great feare which they had of the diue∣lish Fauno, the which was dead, durst not come nigh them. And the knight of the Sunne, séeing him so fauoured and holpen by the hands of his Ladie and mistresse, was in that case that he knew not whether he was in heauen or vppon the earth, and being in this glorie, readie for to depart out of the solitarie Iland, the Historie doth leaue them, till time doe serue. ¶Of the strong and well foughten battaile, that was betwixt the fiftene knights of the Emperour Tre∣batio, with the fiftene of the Emperour Alican∣dro. Chap. 30. WHen that the day was come of the challenge, and that the battaile should be tryed betwéene the fiftene knights of the Emperour Trebatio, and the other fiftene of y• Emperour Alicandro, they were all in a redinesse, and the field whereas the battaile should be fought, was appointed, in y• middest betwixt both the Armies, nigh vnto the Citie, in place whereas those
of the mightie pallace might verie well sée and behlde all that passed, from the battilments of the same. At this time was the faire princesse Lindabrides verie sad, and full of sorow, for hat she could not beare by any meanes newes of the knight of the Sunne, and therewith was verie dei∣rous to sée the battaile that was appointed that day, to the ende to behold the Emperour Trepation his father, and Rosicleer, his brother, she requested the Emperour Ali∣candro, to carie her for to see it, who for to please her, recei∣ued great contentment, and commaunded the triumphant Chariot of Iuorie, to be made in a readinesse, the which be∣ing done, the faire princesse mounted into it, & in her com∣panie were more then thirtie damsels, all verie faire and richly apparailed, and amongst them was the princesse Flo∣ralindia, spouse vnto the prince Meridian, & the wise quéene Iulia, and other quéenes and ladies which the princes Lin∣dabrides had brought in her companie, all mounted into that triumphant Chariot, and twelue furious gyants, with their great and stéelie mases in their hands, for their garde and keeping, who plast themselues rounde about them. So with great noyse and sound of trumpets and Musicke, twelue horses began to draw forwardes the Chariot, and caryed it nigh vnto the place, whereas the battaile should be made, hard vppon the host of the Pgans, in such sorte, that they were backed with them. Then straight waies the Emperour Alicandro, the better for to see the battaile, com∣maunded an other triumphant Chariot, like vnto that of the princesse, to be brought, and therein to place his impe∣riall seate of golde, with all the seates of the other kinges round about it, in such order, as they were in his Tent, the Chariot was drawen with foure Elephants verie great, who had strength enough for to draw a tower. And when they came whereas the battaile should be made, they plast it hard vnto that of the princesse. Then the Emperour Ali∣candro, and those kings his vassailes, who came thether a horseback, alighted from them, and mounted into the Cha∣riot, and placed themselues euerie one in his seate. The
Emperour set in the Empeiall  aboue them all, and béeing accompanied with so many kinges, euerie one with his crowne of gold vpon his head, and he with his Empe∣riall Scepter in his hand,  publish there his great pow∣er and , and about those two Chariots were place all the rest of the other people for to sée the battaile, and the Emperour commanded twentie thousand Tar∣tarlans to be armed for the garde of the battaile. This when all was in a readinesse, it was high noone, at which time the Emperour Trebatio with the rest of his knightes were all armed, and béeing readie for to depare into the field, they went  tooke their leaue of the Empresse Bria∣na and of the rest of the Ladies and Gentlewomen, who with many teares did commend them vnto God, and the sorrowe and griefe which they receiued to sée them departe vnto to cruell a battaile was such, that they could not de∣parte from them, neither would they let them goe, till such time as the Emperour almost by force went out of the great hall, then straight waies all the rest followed after him, and béeing mounted vpon light and good horses, with twentie thousand Gréekes for to kéepe the fielde, they went out of the Citie, and surelie it was a gallant and straunge sight to behole, for that the fiftéene Knightes went by themselues somewhat aparted from the others, and because they were all mightie Princes and worthie Knightes, they were all armed with verie strong and rich armour, bordered aboute with golde and precious stones, likewise the trappings of their horses was all of cloth of Golde verie sumptuous, with gallant bunches of eathecs on their foreheades of di∣uerse coulours. The worthie Emperour Trebatio rode in the middest of them all, and was armed in redde armour, these which the wise Lyrgando hadde sent him before, the muele of so léene mettall, that they séemed to be all of fine Rubies, he carried no crowne vpon his head, for that hée dyd uer accustome the same in battailes, saying that there was no  of a Crowne, whereas they should more profite theselues of their force end strength, than to
of iuorie, which hée threw at his packen which became him▪ singular well, and gaue testimonie vnto all these that he helde him who hée was. On the one side went with him his sonne Rosicleer, then after him▪  all the other Knightes in verie good order, and for that they were all ve∣rie bigge and richlie armed, the Ladyes had inough to doe to beholde them, but most especiallie the Empresse Briana, the excellent Princesses, Oliuia, Lyndaraza, and the Quéene Arquirosa, who from the windowes of their mightie pal∣lace dyd beholde them, as they that had their ioyes in that companie, coulde neuer aparte their eies from them, and with greate deuotion they prayed vnto almightie God for to saue and defende them from the handes of their eni∣mies. In this sorte went this noble Emperour and his knights into the fielde, euerie one of them with his Speare in his hande, accompanied with a gallant crewe of moste wor∣thie knightes, which was a goodlie sight to beholde: but yet the teares trickled downe the chéekes of that high and worthie Emperour Trebatio and his valyant sonne Ro∣cleer, because they wanted in their companie at this pre∣sent the worthie knight of the Sunne, as we for that hée should bée at that time a great staie vnto them in the con∣flict, as also for that of long time past they had not heard a∣nie newes of him. Likewise all the rest of those his friends sayde, that if they had him there in their companie, they woulde not feare all the whole hoast of the Pagan Em∣perour. In this order when they came vnto the place where∣as the battaile should bée made, the valiant and couragious Prince Meridian, with the gran Campeon, and the stout Brandimardo, withall the rest of the companie of the other knights which were of their part, were all readie armed, and mounted vpon their horses with their speares in their hands abding the comming of their aduersaries & when they
was in them, euerie one thought his aduersarie to be verie stout and valiant. There cme on the part and behalfe of the Pagans for Iudge of the battaile, that proude and valiant youth Bra∣marant, being  vpon his great horse, rode and put all things in order, apperting the people out of the field, that there might be space enough for to make the battaile. And on the part and behalfe of the Emperour Trebatio, came forth for Iudge of the field, the king of Macedonia, then the two Iudges parted the field, putting euerie knight ouer a∣gainst his aduersarie, so his thoyse and desire. They were placed in this order, against the great and mightie Campi∣on, was placed Rosicleer. Against the prince Meridian, the valiant prince of Fransia. Against the stout Brandimardo, the mightie Troyan Ostedes. Against the stoute Roda∣ran king of Arabia, the Emperour Trebatio. Against the king of Media, the couragious Floon, for that it was gi∣uen 0him to vnderstand, that he was a valiant knight. Against Zoroastes, king of Trprobana, was placed Bargan∣del. Against the prince of Cambray, Liriamandro. Against the king of the Gandaros, Don Siluerio. Against the prince of Aegipt, Rodomate. Against the sixe most valiant Gy∣ants, sonnes vnto the gan Titeon, was placed the prince Brandizel, the king Saridoro, the Tartaria Zoylo, the stout knight Flamides, with the valiant knights of Spaine, Don Claros, and Arcalus, who according vnto the great strength and power that was in the Giants, had néede of no small courage and valour for to counteruaile with them. And of trueth you may be leee,  before that the battaile was , there was not two amongst that great number of thousand of Pagans, that was in the whole Campe, but thought surely the victorie to be on their part, for that the fifitene Pagā knights, next vnto Bramarande was the whole and strength of all the Pagan. Being all in a readinesse, and the people in quiet, the
Iudges commaunded the Trumpets to ound, in sgne and token of battaile: and all these knights sette spurres vnto their light horses, who ranne with so great force and furie, that all the earth whereas they were, séemed to tremble, & when they came to make their encounter, the noyse was so great of their sheuered speares, as though they had shot of great ordinance: and surely in many dayes before, in that countrie was there not seene the like encounter, of so many worthie and valiant knights, the good Emperour Trebatio made his encounter against that valiant Pagan Rodaran, whose encounter was such, that they sheuered their speares in small péeces, and passed the one by the other, but by the force thereof, Rodaran lost his stirrups, and the raynes of his bridle fell out of his hand, and complained very much of that encounter. The like dyd the two most valiant Prin∣ces Meridian and Brandimardo, making their encounters with their two strong and stout aduersaries, Clauerindo, and Oristedes, they passed all foure, the one by the other, in gallant maner, sheuering their speares into small péeces, but no vauntage perceiued of the one part nor of the other, in this their encounter. Then the sixe sonnes of the gran Titheon, made their encounter againste those sixe valiant knights that came against them, and the strength was so great which they vsed in their encounters, that if their ar∣mour had not bene verie good, all twlue together had bene thrust through and through, but by reason that the force of their armour was a deence against the sharpnesse of theyr speare poynts, there was no more harme done, but the one and the other with their horse betwixt their leggs foundred backwards to the ground, but straight wayes they recoue∣red againe and began their battaile with their swords. The like dyd the stout king Florion, and the king of Media, and the foure princes Bargandel, and Liriamandra, Don Silue∣rio, and Rodamarte, who made their encounter against their aduersaries, in such sort, that without mouing in their sad∣dels, they passed the one by the other, with a gallant demea∣nr and stout courage.
But now hearken and be attendant, howe that the gran Campion as bigge as a tower vpon his Elephant ade his encounter with that strong and mightie knight Resicleer, who lyke vnto a whirle winde with all the furi of his mightie horse Rondarte came against him, and in the mid∣dest of his course made so strong an encounter, that although their Speares could not pearce their fine armouys, yet the stout Rosicleer béeing astonied by the forc of that encoun∣ter, lost the raines of his bridle out of his hande, and if hée had not well staied himselfe by the pommell of the saddle, it could not haue béene otherwise, but of force hée must haue fallen vnto the ground, but firming and staying himselfe verie stronglie, hée passed forwardes on, greatlie tormented therewith, but this gran Campion receiued so strong an encounter of Rosicleer, that his mightie force was not suf∣ficient for to holde him, but doubled his backe in such sorte, that hée fell ouer the crouper of his Elephant vnto the ground. If the fayre Princesse Oliuia (who dyd sée and beholde all that passed from the windowes of the Pallace) receiued anie ioy and pleasure at that gallant and stronge encounter, I reporte ée vnto your iudgement, and on the contrarie, the griefe and anger which his sonne Bramaran susteined, to sée his mightie and valyant Father by the en∣counter of one alone knight to bée ouerthrowen vnto the ground, and hauing no patunce in himselfe, neyther coulde his couragious hear  him to bée silent, but in a rage he urst out and said. It is not possibl; but that the Gods (béeing  a∣gainst vs and our great strength  ioyne  in a conclusion, and she forth  strengths against vs, in this stout and valiant knight for otherwis to the con∣trarie, ther is no humane force that is able to  the strength of my Father Bada but  séeing it is so, that they will shewe themselues so contrarie against vs, from this time forwardes I doe renounce them and blas∣pheme them, and  to take mee enimie, and if so bée that this knight maye fall into my
handes, there shall be no sufficiencie in his greate force bée it either humane or diuine, for to withdraw me to giue him the death. Then the Father with no lesse furie and brauenesse than his sonne arose vp from the ground, proclaiming no lesse iniuries against their false Gods, for that in such sorte they shewed themselues so contrarie against them, and therewith hée drew out a mightie greate and heauie fau∣chon which hée hadde, and with a hastie pace hée went a∣gainst Rosicleer, thinking in a short space to hew him to péeces with his variable and mortall blowes, but there was thrée thinges in this battaile cleane contrarie, which was the occasion that hée coulde not execute his furious and an∣grie desire: the one, the great lightnesse that Rosicleer had, that béeing on foote his Brother the knight of the Sunne had no aduauntage on him, so that it was a great meruaile, for the gran Campion to fasten a blowe vppon him in anie respect, the other was the finenesse of his armour, which was made by the wise Artemidoro of so great valour, that no humane force, nor edge of anie sword was sufficient for to cut or buckle them, the third was the great dexteritie and strength wherewith Rosicleer did strike him, and so thicke, that he did not let him rest one minute of an houre, neyther gaue him anie aduauntage for to profit himselfe of his great strength, and although that Rosicleer had these thrée things on his parte for to make his defence against his aduersarie, yet could hée not with so great ase get of him the victorie, for that Bradaman after that hée had the battaile with the knight of the Sunne, dyd alwayes after arme himselfe with verie strong and inchaunted armour, and it was so excéeding good, that the good swoorde of the Quéene Iulia was not a∣ble by anie meanes to cut it, and besides this, his blowes were so strong and heauie, that when so euer he chaunced to strike a full blowe vppon him, hée made him to stoupe with his knées and handes vnto the ground, and hée had as much care for to cléere himselfe from his terrible blowes, as he had for to strike him, so that the battaile betwéene them
was very well fought and in great doubt, and put great admiration in the Emperour Alicandro, & in all them that dyd behold thē. In all this time dyd the other knights make their combat verie strongly, some a foote and some a horse∣backe, the which was a thing worthie to behold, to sée what terrible, blowes were stroken, the breaking of shieldes, ct∣ting of harnesse, vnmailing of goriets, making the fire to flye out of their stéely healmes and harnesse, of so great a∣boundance, that it was strange to beholde: so that the bat∣taile was so strong and well foughten of euery part, that one whole houre was passed, and there was no aduauntage knowen nor séene of any part, amongst them, and the great valiantnesse of either of them was such, that they did de∣serue particulerlie their worthinesse to be declared, but by reason that there were so many together, and mingled the one with the other, they could not desere the worthinesse that they did. Amongst them all their blowes were terrible, but in especiall those valiant Princes Meridian, and Claue∣rindo, who with so great furie did strike their blowes, that many times they were both astonied, and either of them were greatly amazed at the great strength of his aduersary, and the prince Meridian said, that the knight in his blowes resembled the knight of the Sunne. Likewise those stout and valiant knights Brandimardo and Oristedes, with no lesse furie and redoubled blowes, did charge their aduersa∣ries, and put great admiration in all them that did beholde the battaile, who saide, that they twaine were two of the stoutest knights that were in all the world. It was no lesse worthie of beholding the great contēcion that was betwixt the good Emperour Trebatio, and the stout king of Arabia Rodaran, whose blowes were of so great force, that they wer heard a great way of, and being an houre past since the bat∣taile began, the strong Pagan was greatly amazed at the great force and strength of the Emperour, and sayd within himselfe, that it was impossible for him to get any honour in that cruell battaile, for that continuallie the force and lightnesse of his aduersarie encreased, and a thing to be won∣dered
at, was his valiant courage, of whome naturally his sonnes had receiued the like. And the Emperour Alicandro, and all those kings which were with him, that dyd beholde him, and knew him, being greatly amazed, said, that he was one of the most valiantest knights in all the whole world, and one that was most fiercest in battaile. Then the olde king of Gedrosia, sayde, My flesh and my bones trble, when I doe thinke of that I shall sée this Emperour doe, in the field against vs, he being in the middest betweene both his sonnes, and it séemeth vnto mée, that there is no securi∣tie, whereby from the furie of their armes, we cannot make any defence: and this good knightes that we haue on our part, behold how many there is to the contrarie, who doeth make resistance and detaine them, till the other doth destroy▪ these miserable people. At which words all those mightie kings that were in the triumphant Chariot, laughed verie much, and imputed them vnto the great feare and little force the which the king had, for that he was olde. But yet time happened afterward, that they did féele and know that the words which he spake, procéeded more of wisedome and vnderstanding, then of feare. Likewise, it was a thing worthie to be séene, the furious and well foughten battaile, that was betwixt the sonnes of the Gran Thiteon, and the sixe knights their aduersaries, for according as they were all strong and valiant, it were enough to doe in this Chapter, onely to declare of their va∣liantnesse, for the force of the Gyants was wonderfull, and they stroke their blowes with so great furie, that either of them was sufficient to cleaue an armed knight downe to to the wast, but yet they contended with such knights who knew verie well how to resist their great strengthes, and made them to sweate droppes of bloud, for that they hadde amongst them that mightie and strong knight Brandizel, who by reason that he was verie bigge of bodie and of great force, and hot in courage, brought his aduersarie in a great perplexitie, and all his armour broken and vnbuckled, al∣though they were a finger thicke, and this was the eldest of
the sixe bretheren, with whome he combatted, and the most valiantest and strongest: on the other side did combat, those two valiant warriors the king Sacridoro, and the worthie Tartarian Zoylo, and behaued themselues in such sorte in their battaile, that they gaue them verie well to vnder∣stand, who they were. Likewise, with no lesse couragious force, those two most valiant knights, Don Claros, and Ar∣calus, did oppresse with their mightie blowes, the two Gi∣ants their aduersaries, in such sort, that in the space of one houre, they brought them in that case, that the victorie appea∣red to be theirs, and for that those two knights were not knowne, they were greatly amazed there at, for their highe and strange bountie. The good knight Flamides, did make battaile, with the younger brother of the sixe Giants, and although the bat∣taile betwixt them was well foughten and verie perilons, yet for all that by reason that his armour was excelent good, and he verie light and stoute, he had the vauntage of his aduersarie. Also the valiant king Florion, and the king of Media, made their battaile with mightie & furious blowes, but before that one houre was past of the battaile, it was well knowen that the king Florion, was the valianter of both. At this time the foure princes had so entreated their aduersaries, that they were verie wearie and faint, and they likewise were well moyled, for that they had receiued great and mightie blowes of them, for they were stronge, stoute, and valiant. Thus in this sort was this cruel battaile betwixt them all the best fought that euer was séene, betwixt so manie knights, for that all those that dyd behold them, hadde their eares deafened, with the continuall sounde of the hard and thicke blowes, that were stroke amongst them, and there could not have bene a greater noyse, if ther hadde bene a hundreth Smithes together working and striking vppon their aells. Likewise in this time it was a meruailous thing to sée and beholde Rosicleer, with Bradaman, with although hée
lacked but one finger bredth of eight foote high, which was a gallant stature, yet before the Gran Campon, he seemed nothing, for that he was almost fiftene foote high, neuerthe∣lesse the blowes of the one and of the other was equall in furiousnesse, for that Rosicleer, did so charge with his furi∣ous blowes Bradaman, that although he could not cut his armour, yet dyd he all to torment and bruse his flesh and bones, and with more lightnesse then was comprehended in him, he made him to besturre himselfe and turne about on the one side and on the other: the like dyd Bradaman, vnto him, for although that Rosicleer, dyd saue and defend him∣selfe from the most parte of his blowes, by his great nim∣blenesse and lightnesse, yet for all that, when he fastened a blow vpon him, he made him to stoope both with knées and hands to the grounde: and the armour of Rosicleer, dyd make such a sound, as though it had bene a bell, and out of both their armours there flewe so great quantitie of sparks of fier, as though they should be burned in them. In this sorte the battaile betwixt them continued more then two houres, in which time some of those Ladies that dyd behold them from the mightie pallace of the Emperor Trebatio, were not much at quiet and ease at the hearts, for that the Princesse Oliuia, séeing her spouse and loyall louer to combat so terriblie with that furious Pagan and monster, her face began to be wan and pale, and the bloud waxed colde within her bodie, so that fell downe in a sound amongst the Ladies: in the like perplexitie was the royall Empresse Briana, for her husband and sonne, and the faire Princes Lindaraza, for her louing and faithfull spouse Clauerindo, and the like hadde that faire Ladies Arqui∣rosa, for Don Siluerio. Furthermore you shall vnderstand, that after two hou∣res was passed from the firste béeginning of the battaile, and that there was not one of those worthie champions that hadde anie will or desire (as it séemed) to rest them∣selues, then the good Emperour Trebatio, béeing very de∣sirous to make a final ende & conclusion of his battaile, with
the vttermost of all his force, he raysed himselfe in his styr∣rups, with his sword in both his hands, & therewith stroke so strong and terrible a blow vpon the healme of the stout pagan Rodaran, the which by reason that it was somewhat crazed, with that battaile, as also with other battailes be∣fore: he altogether vnbuckled from his head, and breaking his skull (by the force thereof all to péeces) he ouerthrew him from his horse dead to the ground, and sayd, Now shal it be séene if thou canst deliuer thy selfe from my handes, and what can profit thée, the subteltie & desceit of the quéene of Carmania. The which being concluded he withdrew him selfe a part, and did behold the battaile of the other knights, whereat all that were on his part receiued great pleasure and contentment, but in especiall, the Empres Briana, who knew not where she was, with the great ioye and pleasure she receiued. But the sorow and griefe of the Pagans was very great, but in especial the Emperour Alicandro, who had Rodaran in great estimation, for that he was one of the strongest knights that was in all the whole Paganisme, as of trueth he was so. But yet the griefe of his heart did not herein ende, for that the worthie prince Brandizel, at that instant ouerthrew at his féete the Gyant with whome hée had his battaile, who was the eldest of the sixe brethren, wherewith he vnlased his healme and cut of his head. And it was not long after when that the two valiant brethren, Don Claros, and Arcalus, did the lyke with their aduersa∣ries, which were the second and third brothers, and were the most fiercest and strongest of them all, and they with∣drew themselues apart, and dyd behold the battaile of them that remained. Then straight wayes, Bargandel, dyd ouercome the va∣liant King of Taprobana▪ and Liriamandro, made for to yelde the Prince of Cambray, and within a little while Don Siluerio, dyd cut of the head of the stoute king of the Gandats, and not long after the king Sacridoro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, ouerthrew theyr aduersaries to the earth, who were the fourth and fift bretheren, of the Gyaunts
who as the other before did cut off their handes, of all the which the Emperour Alycandro receiued great sorrow and griefe, and the like did all the Pagans, and they repented them verie much in making of that challenge. Then Roda∣marte tooke the Prince of Aegypt prisoner, for being verie wearie and féeble, of his owne good will he did yéeld himself to be prisoner, so likewise the valiant knight Flamides dyd force so much vpon the youngest brother the Gyant, that in the end he was slaine as the rest, so that all the generation of the gran Thiteon was slaine in that bataile. It was not long after that the king Florion ouerthrew the king of Media at his féete and pulled off his healme, helping him to arise from the grounde, he tooke him prisoner, and put themselues on the one side, and dyd beholde the battaile of the other thrée that remained, the which at that time were so entangled and furious, that all those that dyd be∣holde them were put in great admiration, meruailing great∣lie how they could suffer so great & long trauaile, and make anie defence from so terrible and cruell blowes which were giuen of all partes. Those which remained were those precious and valiant knights Meridian and Claueryndo, ad the mightie Troi∣an and Brandimardo, who in force and deteritie were so equall, that almost there was not anie one that could know anie aduauntage to bée of either parte, and being nowe more than three houres since they first beganne the battaile, and both partes agreeing therevnto, they ceased for to take breath, and to ease themselues, in the which time they dyd beholde the great contention that was betwixt that valiant and worthie knight Rosicleer, and the stout Pagan Brada∣man, the which was condigne and worthie to be séene, for that without al order and measure they stroke their blowes, with so great force, that all the fields and the mightie Citie rong with the great noise of their battaile. All this time did the faire and precious Princesse Lyndabrides from her triumphant Chariot beholde Rosicleer and the Emperour Trebatio, and for that both of them did resemble verie much
the knight of the Sunne, shée reioyced greatlie to sée them, although another waie her heart was verie sadde and sor∣rowfull; for that she did not sée the knight of the Sunne a∣mongst them, and shée imagined within her selfe that hée should be in Trapisond with the princesse Claridiana (which went vnto her verie heart,) and other waies she did argué within her selfe that hée should not bée in Trapisond, for if he should bée there, it were not possible but that hée shoulde vnderstand the great necessitie that his Father had of him, and hauing knowledge thereof, there is no estate that should cause him to bée absent so long, but that hée would haue come thether for to haue holpen him. Thus hauing these and many other such like thoughtes and cogitations in her minde caused onelie by loue, shée did beholde the battaile, the which at this time seemed to bée more kindled and better fought than at the beginning, and gaue signe and token that as that night the victorie was doubtfull, for that it was but almost noone when the battaile began, and now it was al∣most night, at which time there was more doubt of the vic∣torie than at the beginning, and all waxed wearie to behold them, and yet in them appeared not anie manner shew of trauaile or wearinesse, although all the daie before they did no other thing but laie loade the one vppon the other, but when that Rosicleer sawe that it drew towards night, hée was so greatlie ashamed in that hée could not ouercome his enimie, that a new he beganne to saie vppon him with all his force and strength, but Bradaman was of so great strength, and stroke his blowes so terrible, that all his care and thought was in vaine, and brought him many times vnto the point for to loose the victorie, yet at the last, hauing thrée times rested themselues, the gran Campion with ve∣rie wearinesse withdrewe himselfe aparte, and lifting vp the eauer of his healme, hée requested Rosicleer that the battaile might remaine as it did till the next daie, for that it was late, and coulde not bée concluded except it were in the night, who for that hée was no lesse wearie and out of breath than hée, dyd lykewise withdrawe himselfe backe,
and sayde that it should be as hée woulde haue it, so shal be∣twixt them the battailè was separated: At this and Oristedes, béeing retourned anewe-vnto their bat∣taile waxed faint and wearie, by reason that all the after noone they did not anie other thing but giue and great number of terrible and cruell blowes, the appr∣ing of the night dyd nothing grieue them, and when they sawe the battaile betwixt Rosicleer and Bradaman to be se∣parated, they straight waies withdrewe themselues backe, and lifting vp the beauers of their healmes, they requested their aduersaries that the battaile might cease betwixt them for that daie, who were so outragious and angrie because they could not ouercome them, that they would not depart from thence vntill such time as the battaile were conclu∣ded, but they seeing that it was night, and howe that they were verie sore brused and wearie, they coulde doe no lesse but withdrawe themselues, and lifted vp their beauers to receiue aire, so that the battell was wholy separated betwixt them. Then straight waies there was made a great noise of instrumentes, that all the whole fieldes were filled with the sound, in such sorte, that one coulde not heare ano∣ther. Then the Emperour Trebatio being accompanied with those noble knightes of his parte, went to speake vnto the faire Princesse Lyndabrides, offering vnto  his Citie and mightie pallace for her lodging, for all the time that she shoulde remaine in Grecia, and shée with no lesse good will than if it had béene the Emperour Alycandro gaue him intertainment, and surrendered great thankes for his large proffer vnto her. Then the Emperour Alycandro béeing ac∣companied with all those mightie kings and vassals, descen∣ded from his triumphant Chariot, and came and talked with the Emperour Trebatio and his knightes, and the one re∣ceiued the other with such curtesie as was requisite betwéen so high estates▪ Then after a while that they had talked together verie friendlie, the Emperour Alycandro did giue vnto the Emperour Trebatio great thankes, for the good
intertainment which he gaue vnto his daughter for the time that she was in his Court. It was then verie late, so that the Emperour Trebatio and all his knightes did take their leaue of him, offering their Citie at their commandement, and so returned, whereas they were receiued of all those Ladies and Gentlewomen, with that ioy and pleasure as reason required for to sée them returne safe and sound from so terrible a battaile as they had maintained all that after noone before, and euerie one receiued the praise as his valy∣ant déedes deserued: and to the contrarie, the Pagans re∣mained verie sadde, sorrowfull, and angrie, for the good knights that were slaine on their partes, and Meridian and Brandimardo were greatlie amazed, in that the Emperour Trebatio had on his part so worthie and valiant knightes, and praised in especiall Rosicleer, for that hée indured and maintained battaile so long with the gran Campion. Then the Emperour Alycandro commanded straight waies, that the dead bodies of all them that were slaine in that chal∣lenge shoulde bee burnt, and the dust of them to bee put in vesselles of golde, and so carried into their owne Coun∣tries. In this sort they passed awaie that night, and other two daies, wherein was done nothing neither of the one parte nor of the other, till the third daie, in the which happened all that which shall bée declared▪ vnto you in the next Chapter following. How the proude Pagan Bramarant beeing angrie at the wordes which were spoken by Meridian and Brandi∣mardo, departed out of the campe, and sent to call them for to combat with them, and what happened besides. Chapter. 31. THE proude and insolent heart of Bramarant coulde not suffer nor dissemble the anger which he receiued at the wordes spoken by Meridian and Brandimardo,
at such time as was concluded the battaile of the challenge past, but as one that was verie desirous to be reuenged for the same, he determined in great secret to depart out of the campe, and to send and call them into a secret place, where∣as he might make battaile with them, and none to be pre∣sent for so parte or separate them, and as he determined, so he put it in vre, for that in a morning before the breake of daie, at such time as the people of all the whole campe were most at rest, in as secrete wise as was possible, beeing ar∣med with his strong armour, and mounted vpon his great horse, he departed out of the campe with alonelie one man that he carried with him, and being verie desirous to finde a secret place to accomplish his desire, he neuer rested till hee came vnto the skirt of the wildernesse of Grecia, whereas he finding it a place fit for his purpose to accomplish his de∣sire, staied, and from thence sent his man that he brought with him, vnto Meridian and Brandimardo, for to giue them to vnderstand how that he did tarrie there for them, who when he came backe againe vnto the campe, went straight vnto the tent of the Prince, whereas he found them both together, for that they were great friends after such time as they battailed together the one with the other, and there hee declared vnto them the message that he brought from Bra∣marant, who when they heard it, were of so valiaunt a cou∣rage, that they were nothing troubled thereat, but rather it séemed to be a great shame vnto them to goe together, bee∣ing their aduersarie but one alone, so that betwixt them there grew a contention who should go first, but in the end for that they could not conclude that point, and neither of them would be the last, it fell out that they must goe toge∣ther, and according vnto the great force and strength of that worthie Pagan their aduersarie that did abide their com∣ming, afterwarde it did not repent them of their so going. Thus these two friendes being armed with their rich and strong armour, without giuing anie knowledge vnto the Emperour or anie other person whether they went, depar∣ted out of the campe, and béeing guided by the man who
brought the message, in a short time came vnto the wilder∣nesse of Grecia, and not hauing trauailed long therein, they found Bramarant a foote from his horse, lying along vnder the shadowe of certaine trées a sléepe, for that the Sunne was verie hot, and he laide his head vppon his healme, and slept so soundlie, that although they came vnto him making a great noise, yet could he not awake, vntill such time as Brandimardo with his Speare stroke him a little blowe vppon the breast, wherewith this mightie Pagan awaked, and séeing his aduersaries before him, as one amazed arose vp, and put his helme vpon his head, and with a trice leapt vpon his horse whom he had there at hand tied vnto a tree, and tooke his Speare in his hand. Meridian séeing him in that case, sayde: Bramarant, what is it that you would haue with vs, wée are now come he∣ther at thy challenge? That which I will haue, answered hee with greate pride, is to make you both vnderstand to∣gether, that my force is much more than the force of all the knightes of Grecia, and to reuenge the wordes that you sayde vnto mée before the Emperour Alycandro, and those that were with him. Unto proude and arrogant persons, answered Meridi∣an, a little occasion is sufficient for to cause contention and strife, of little effect or profite, and lesse necessarie or néed∣full, but seeing that it is so, that thou hast so good a will for to haue battaile with vs, let vs straight waies come to∣gether, and I hope in the high Gods that either of vs both will giue thée inough to vnderstande. And in saying these wordes, with his Speare in a readinesse in his hande, he ad∣dressed himselfe vnto the course, and desired Brandimardo that hée shoulde not aide nor helpe him, for anie thing whatsoeuer that hée shoulde sée passe in the battaile. Thus Bramarant béeing in a readinesse, they both set spurs vnto their horses, and made their encounter together with great furie, and for that they were both of verie greate force and strength▪ they shéeuered their Speares all to péeces, and without doing anie more harme, passed the one by the other
with a gallant demeanour, and vpright in their saddles, but they had not gone forwardes many paces, when that they tourned about their horses, with their swordes rea∣die drawen in their handes, and ioyning together in such sorte that they might strike the one the other, they stroke at each other such cruel blowes, that they cloue their shields in péeces, and the pointes of their swords descended downe vpon their healmes with so greate urie, that greate abun∣daunce of fire flew out of either of them, then they stroke each other another blowe, with so great furie, that they de∣clined their hades downe vnto their breastes, and then Bra∣marant did verie well féele that the force and strength of Meridian was verie much, and hée likewise on the other side gaue him to vnderstand that his blowes were wonder∣full, and that it was requisite with greate care to defende himselfe from them, for the which Meridian with a grea∣ter courage dyd laie vppon and charge his aduersarie, and with all lightnesse possible did cleere himselfe from his blowes. In this sorte they executed their battaile more than halfe an houre, making so greate a noise, that three mites compasse in that wildernesse the sound of  great blowes were hedroe. Thus they continued for the space of more than three quarters of an houre in their battaile, without a∣nie point of aduauntage betwéene them. Then Meridian with both his handes stroke such a blowe vppon the healm of Bramarant, that hée tooke his remembraunce from him, and without anie féeling his horse carryed him round a∣bout the fielde. But this mightie Pagan straight waies came againe vnto himselfe, and with greate furie setting spurres vnto his horse, hée retourned vpon Meridian, and with an infernall furie stroke so terrible a blowe vppon the healme of that worthie and valiant Prince, that if it had not béene so good as it was, hee had clouen him downe vnto the waste, but yet for all that, hée made the bloud to gush out both at his eyes and nose in great abundance, and depriued him of all vnderstanding, so that his horse carryed
him about the field as though he had bene dead, and hauing no power to make resistance against his vnbrideled wrath, he went after him with great villanie, for to strike him a∣nother blowe before that he should come vnto himselfe, the which being perceiued by that stout knight Brandimardo, with great furie he set spurres vnto his horse, and before that Bramarant had space for to strike Meridian, hée ouer∣tooke him, and stroke him such a blowe with his sworde in both his handes vpon the right shoulder, that he had ouer∣throwne him vnto the ground, if that he had not embraced himselfe with his horse necke. Then the furious Pagan séeing himselfe so intreated, straight waies setled himselfe in his saddle, and returned and stroke such a blowe at Bran∣dimardo vpon his healme, that he thought verilie his téeth had bene all broken in his head with beating one agaynst another, his head was so ouerladen, and almost from himself the raines of his bridle fell out of his hand, & his horse ran awaie with him, at which time the valiant Prince Meridi∣an was come againe vnto himselfe, and was verie sorrie for that Brandimardo was come for to helpe him, but with ve∣rie great wrath and angrie courage he returned vpon Bra∣marant, his aduersarie did the like, as also Brandimardo, so that betwéene thrée the battaile was so well fought, that it was a strange thing to behold. But now let vs leaue them for to tell what happened after this. You shall vnderstand that by and by after that these thrée valiant knights were departed out of the campe, by many they were found lacking, yet there was not one that knew wherefore they went, neither did they imagine that betwixt them there should bée anie defiance, so that the Emperour Alycandro and all the rest were without anie care or sus∣pition of that matter, but thought verilie that they had ben gone all thrée vpon some aduenture which was offered vn∣to them in that Countrie. Likewise the great valour that was in all the thrée, did assure them to be without anie care of whatsoeuer peril might happen vnto them, but that man whome Bramarant carried with him, fearing the great pe∣rill
that might come vnto his Lord, for that he was assaul∣ted with so strong and valiant knightes, straight waies af∣ter that he sawe the battaile begunne, retourned vnto the campe, and secretlie declared vnto the gran Campion all that passed, who straight waies without anie staying armed himselfe with his strong armour, and mounting vppon a mightie Elephant departed out from the armie, and gaue none to vnderstand whether he went, but all men thought that he went to recreate himselfe in the Countrie, as the others were gone. Then taking his waie towards the wil∣dernesse, by reason of the great pace of the Elephant, in a short space he came thether, but yet two miles good before he came vnto the place of their combat, he heard the great noise the which they made with their terrible blowes, which gaue such a sound through the woodes and valleies, as though a companie of péeces of Ordinance had bene shot off, and fol∣lowing the sound, by aime he came vnto the place, hée was not as yet come vnto the place of the battaile by a good stones cast, when that he saw comming towards him on the one side in great hast a knight of a bigge stature and great members, who séemed to be a gyant, mounted vpon a great horse verie well armed, and his Speare in his hand, and as it appeared by his hastie comming, he was allured thether by the noise of the battaile betwéene the thrée knights, but when he sawe the gran Campion, he neuer rested till hée came vnto him, and sayd. Whether art thou iourneying this waie Bradaman? Then he verie angrie because the knight was so bolde to aske him whether he went, wold not answere him because he would not be deteined, till such time as he sawe in what state the battaile was betwixt the thrée knights, but setting spurres vnto his Elephant, he rode on, and this big knight followed him till they came wheras the battaile was made, and sawe that it was the best fought battaile that euer they had séene in all their liues, for that the two Princes Meri∣dian and Brandimardo were verie valiant knights, and of great force and strength, and charged Bramarant with their
mightie blowes, verie thicke and stronglie, in such sort, that if he had not bene of so great valour and force as he was, be could not haue preuailed against them. But this furious Pagan was so braue and couragious, that he estéemed in nothing their mightie blows, but repaied them with others of so great strength, that many times hée made them so a∣stonied, that they were driuen to sustaine themselues by their saddle bowes and horse neckes to kéepe themselues from falling, but by reason that they were two of great va∣lour, they alwaies put him in great perplexitie, which cau∣sed his anger and wrath the more to increase. At this time the gran Campion setled himselfe for to helpe his sonne, the sooner to make a conclusion of that battaile, but the big knight that came thether with him (who receiued great con∣tentment to sée the thrée how they made that battaile) dyd put himselfe before Bradaman and said, that if he would aid and succour his sonne, that then he shoulde be constrained first of all to combat with him: who being verie an∣grie at those wordes, answered and said: Sir knight, tar∣rie a little, and I will make thee to vnderstand what a foole thou art for to take with me contention. In saying these wordes he departed from him, and setting spurres vnto his Elephant, with his Speare in his hand, which was as bigge as the mast of a ship, he came running against the knight, whose with so great swiftnesse as his horse could run, came against him, whereas they made their encounters in such sort, that their speares were shieuered in péeces, & the shie∣uers slew into the aire, and either of them declined somwhat backwarde vppon the arsons of their saddles, but straight waies they arose and setled themselues againe, and draw∣ing out their swordes they came the one against the other, whereas begun betwixt them such a battaile, that it was a wonder to  the great and heauie blowes that they stroke, that the fire lew out of their healmes and harnesse, & ma∣ny times they were verie sore astonied & from themselues. Then the fierce Pagan Bramarant, and the two knights that did battaile with him, with the great noise that the other
two made in their contention, left off their combat, and dyd behold the other, and were greatlie amazed to sée with what great furie and force they executed their blowes the one vp∣pon the other, the gran Campion they knew, but not the other knight, yet they had him in estimation of a worthie knight, and were verie desirous to know who he was, for that they could not imagine whom he should be, so mighte∣lie did he behaue himselfe. Thus after a while that they beheld the battaile of the two, béeing verie desirous for to conclude and make an end of theirs, they beganne a new to charge the one the other so stronglie, that it seemed they were more fierce and furious at that time than they were at the beginning. And béeing in this angrie and doubtfull battaile, the Hystorie doth leaue the one and the other, for tell you of the knight of the Sunne, who with the Prin∣cesse Claridiana remained in the solitarie Iland. How the knight of the Sunne and the Princesse Claridiana after that they were departed from the solitarie Iland, did deliuer their Pages and the knightes of Candia from the Roauer Cleonidas, who carried them Prisoners. Chapter. 32. VErie glad and ioyfull did this Hystorie leaue the knight of the Sunne and the Princesse Claridiana in the solitarie Iland, whereas with the companie and swéete conuersation of them both, with a verie good will they woulde haue lead their liues, cleane voide of all care and thought of their high and royall estates, if they might haue béen frée of the great bondage in the which they were bound, but hauing a great respect for to accom∣plish their duties, the same daie that they met together, and knew the one the other, they departed out from the Iland, and embarked themselues in the Princesse ship, and hauing a faire winde and prosperous, with great ioy they began to
saile towardes the Empire of Grecia, and the fourth daie after their departure from the Ilande being at thrée of the clocke in the morning, a great waie from them they saw comming two great ships, and as it séemed with all sayles bearing they came towardes them. So in a short space by reason that the one sailed towards the other, their ships met together. Then they that were within the two ships ioy∣ned with the other ship, and grapled them together, and cri∣ed out with a loude voice, commanding them to amaine, & to yeeld themselues prisoners. The which being hearde by those two faithfull louers, they straight waies laced on their helmes, and came forth to the ship side, and asked what they were that would take them prisoners? Then straight waies more than ten knights of a gallant proportion and wel ar∣med, came forth vnto them, and sayd. That vnto two alone knights as they were, there was no néede for to make that account, but yet for that you shall vnderstand vnto whome you shall yéeld your selues prisoners, know that we are all belonging vnto the gran Cleonidas, and we doe pardon vn∣to none their liues, except they doe yéeld vnto vs at the first to be our prisoners. Of truth (sayde the Princesse) this cannot be, that you should be belonging vnto that rouer Cleonidas, for that he is not in this world, neuerthelesse if that you be in your workes and deedes as hée was, you shall quicklie be wher∣as he is, and that is with the diuell. How is this, sayd they, is our Lord Cleonidas dead? It is not possible, for that there is no humane power, neither yet diuine, that is of so much power for to kill him. Then you shall vnderstand of a truth (sayde the Prin∣cesse) that I dyd sée him slaine onelie with one blow. But these knights would not beléeue it, but thought verilie that they sayd it because they woulde deliuer and cleere them∣selues from their hands, and one of them would haue laide holde vpon her, and sayd. False Knight, they mocking shal little profite thée, for in spite of thy heart you shall goe with vs prisoners. Then
the knight of the Sunne who heard and sawe all that pas∣sed, without drawing anie sword, stroke him with his ar∣med fist such a blowe vppon▪ the head, that he buckled his helme into his braines, and ouerthrew him dead at his féet. Then all the rest greatlie amazed at that blow, drew their swords and leapt altogether into their ship, and beganne to charge them with their blowes in the best wise they could, but these two who in the like conflicts were verie well ex∣perimented, drew out their fine and slashing swords, and so besturred themselues, that with a few blows they slew sixe of them, & the other which remained, making a great noise leapt againe into their ships, out of the which came straight waies forth more than thirtie other knights, who séemed to be verie good and well armed, and altogether began to leap into the other ship, and charged the knight of the Sun and the Princesse with their blowes all that euer they coulde, but▪ it wel appeared that they did not know their great wor∣thinesse, in that they approched vnto them without order, but in a short space they lost all their brauerie, for that in the space of lesse than halfe a quarter of an houre that the battaile was begun, they ouerthrew more than twentie of them to the ground, with such mortall blowes, that the rest which remained aliue being terrified and amazed, retyred backe vnto their ships, and the knight of the Sunne and the Princesse followed them, whereas they found a new resist∣ance, with certain fresh knights and other people that were in the ships, who began to charge them verie greatlie, and laide vpon them many heauie blowes, but the knight of the Sunne taking the foreward of his mistres, setled himselfe in such sort, that if there had ben a thousand knights before him, he wold haue estéemed them little, and being verie de∣sirous to bée reuenged on the long time that he was idle in the solitarie Iland, he put himselfe amongest his enimies, and charged them with such mortall blowes, and without all pittie, that if the battaile had indured but a little longer, he had not left one aliue of all that were in the ships. Then those which remained, seeing there was no resistance to bée
made against the furie of those two knights, downe before them, and craued pardon for their liues. Then they who were redie to accomplish their requests, did grant them their desires, and vnderstanding the truth how they were rouers, & how that they had many prisoners in their ships, they commaunded them to bring them forth before them. Then they obeying their commandement, carried them into certaine bigge cabbines in their ships, whereas they found many men and women with chaines and boltes of yron, and amongst them the knight of the Sunne knew his good Pages Binnano and Aurelio, and the twentie knightes of Candia that were in his companie. Likewise the auncient Pilot that tolde vnto him the storie of the diuellish Fauno, of the which he was not a little glad, for that they were de∣liuered by his handes. But when they knew him as well by his armour as by his face, for that at that time his bea∣uer was lifte vp, it is not to be spoken how greatlie they meruailed, and what ioy and pleasure they receiued, and as amazed they looked the one vpon the other, and could not be∣leeue that he should be aliue, and his two Squires as from themselues, came vnto him, and knéeled downe before him, and began to kisse his armed hands, and the skirt of shirt of maile, saying: O Lord God, how can we gratifie this great curtesie which thou hast done vnto vs, in letting vs sée be∣fore our deaths this excellent and worthy prince our Lord. The knight of th Sunne receiued them with great loue, and raised them from the ground, saying: My good friends, those who haue had you in their powers did not loue you so much as I haue done, and I giue thankes vnto almightie God that I doe now see you, and I doe desire him to giue so much libertie that I may gratifie you, these greafe troubles the which for my sake you haue sustained, for sure∣lie it was a great griefe vnto my heart for to leaue you a∣lone in that case without all comfort, when I thought to goe and leaue my life. Goe and kisse the handes of my La∣die and mistres the Princesse Claridiana, who next vnto God hath deliuered me from death. They hearing the same,
meruailed verie much thereat, and went and knéeled downe before her, and would haue kissed her hands, but the Prin∣cesse caused them to arise, and receiued them verie curte∣ouslie, for that she knew the knight of the Sunne did beare them great loue, and for that she would not be knowen of the other, she did not raise vp her beauer, but commaunded that it shoulde not be knowen who she was. Then the knights of Candia and the auncient Pilot came and kissed the hands of the knight of the Sunne, giuing him greate thankes for their libertie, which at his handes they obtai∣ned, who receiued them with great loue, and commaunded their chaines and shakles to be pulled off. Then they asked the knight of the Sun what had happened vnto him▪ in the Iland of the diuellish Fauno. My good friends (sayd the knight of the Sunne) God of his infinit goodnesse and mercie gaue me power for to cléere and deliuer my selfe from him, and to kill him, for that in that Iland he may be serued, being peopled, as he hath ben hetherto dishonored by the euill life and demeanour of that euill Artimaga. Whereat all those knights and the aunci∣ent Pilot (as well at these newes, as also at the great de∣struction which they sawe done in those ships on those roa∣ners which had taken them prisoners) were greatlie amazed and knew not what to saie, neither coniecture who that va∣liant and worthie knight should be, neither durst they aske him the qustion, but had a great good will all the whole sort of them for to goe vnto the solitarie Iland, for to sée the de∣formed shape of that diuellish Fauno which remained dead. Thus afterwards all together went vnto the solitarie I∣land, and when they came aland, they sawe the rocke hewed all to péeces, and the Fauno wheres he laie dead, and by the writing that was vpon the stone, they vnderstood y• he which did that worthie act as the knight of the Sunne, & sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio, & hauing a great desire, that that worthie & famous deed should be manifest vnto all the world, they commanded the Fauno to be skinned or slaied, & filled the skinne full of straw, and so carried it vnto many
Countries, causing great admiration vnto all those that did sée it, in the end they carried it vnto Grecia, as in the euent of this Hystorie shall be told you. When the knights of Candia vnderstood all that they de∣sired, they gaue the knight of the Sunne to vnderstand how that fiftéene daies past, as they were all together nauigating towards Candia, they met at the sea with that roauer, and after a long time that they had made battaile with them, by reason that they were many, they were constrained to yéeld and be their prisoners, and how that long before that, they had taken his Pages, and they returned backe againe for to séeke the solitarie Iland in his demand, and there to die in his companie. Thus after a while that they had bene with him, and giuen him to vnderstand of al that had passed with them, saying, that he had a iourney in hand with his com∣panion, that he could not by anie meanes excuse, and so com∣mitted them to God and good fortune, and gaue them the ships of the roauers, and all the riches that was in them, which was a great quantitie, for the which they gaue him great thankes and kissed his handes, taking their leaue of him, although with a better will they woulde haue gone with him in his companie. And being departed they tooke their iourney towardes the solitarie Iland, hauing inough to do all their liues after for to tel of the knight of the Sun. Then he with the Princesse, embarked themselues into their owne ship, and hauing the winde prosperous, with all sales bearing, they sailed towardes the Empire of Grecia, and not being troubled with contrarie winds, neither with stormes nor tempests, in a short space they ariued in a port the which was but two daies iourney from Constantinople, whereas they vnderstood of the great multitude of Pagans that were entered into Grecia, and in what state the wars were in, then they gaue great thankes vnto almightie God, and departed from thence, and for that the knight of the Sunne would not be knowen, till such time as he had done some valiant act worthie to be noted, they agréed y• he should leaue his armour and his horse that he had, and to arme
himselfe with some other strong armour, which the princes hadde, packed in fardels, the which her damsels caryed al∣wayes with her, for to chaunge at all times at her pleasure, because she would not be knowne. This thing they straight waies put in vre, and the knight of the Sunne vnarmed himselfe of that good armour that was of the Prince Meri∣dian, and gaue them vnto the damsells of the princes, for to put them into their fardels, and he armed himselfe with others, the which was all Asure, and full of starres of gold, and garnished about full of fine precious Stones, and in strength and goodnesse, nothing inferiour vnto his owne, for that they were made by the wisest men that were to be found in all the Empire of rapisonda, and although they were made for the princes, yet were they it for the knight of the Sunne, for that in stature they were almost equall, but yet the knight of the Sunne was more fuller of fleshe then she was, although she was meetelie reasonable in all parts. Being thus armed as you haue heard, he tooke a bigge and light horse, one of them that the Damsels brought, and left his owne to be lead alongst by the , and couered his horne that he had on his forehead, because he should not be knowne. Likewise, the princes being armed with other strong & bright armour, both of them to gether with great ioye and pleasure, tooke their iourney towads the mightie citie of Conslantinople. And the second daye after their de∣parture from the port, they entred into the wildernesse of , wherein they hadde not traualed fully two miles, but they heard a great and continuall noyse, which ronge and sounded throughout all the wildernesse, and it séemed vnto them to be the noise of some strong and well foughten battaile or combat on horsebacke, And being verie desirous to know what it should bée, they amended their horse pace, and rode that waye from whence they thought the noyse should come. In the ende of a good houre that they had tra∣uailed, the noyse brought them vnto the place whereas the Gran Campion and his aduersarie made their combat on
the one side, and on the other side the stout Bramarant, with Brandimardo and Meridian, and for that the knight of the Sunne knewe none of all those knightes, but onelie the gran Campion, which was by his great and huge bignesse, they all greatlie meruailed to sée that strong and rigorous battaile that was betweene them, and coulde not imagine who that valiant Pagan Bramarant shóuld be, for that vn∣to his remembrance he had not séene a knight of so bigge a stature, and one that stroke so terrible blowes, neither could he fall into the reckoning of those stout and valiant knights Meridian and Brandimardo, who so stronglie did charge their aduersarie, and made so great resistaunce against the furie of that Pagan. On the other parte they greatlie be∣held the gran Campion and his aduersarie, and as they were beholding the singular disposition of the knight, and the high bountie wherewith hée made his combat with Bradaman, hée sawe that it could bée no other but his bro∣ther Rosicleer, and greatlie reioyced to sée with what cou∣rage and mightie force hée made his combat, as also in what féeble state he had brought him, and there they staied a good while to beholde them, and the Princesse Claridiana sayde within her selfe, that ouer and aboue all knights that were in the world, God had created the sonnes of the Emperour Trebatio to bée most mightiest, and with great reason they deserued to beare the praise aboue all other, for that theyr high knighthoode and meruailous feates of armes were without comparison. Truth it was, for that knight which at that time combatted with Bradaman was Rosicleer, who being aduertised by a knight howe that he sawe the Gran Campion depart out of the Campe, he hauing a great desire to make an end of their former battaile begunne, verie se∣cretlie (without giuing anie knowledge vnto the Emperour Trebatio, went forth of the Citie, and rode so fast vpon his horse Rondarte, that hée ouertooke Bradaman, as hath béene tolde you before.
How the knight of the Sunne without knowing Meri∣dian or Brandimardo, made battaile for them with the stout Pagan . Chap. 33. WIth great desire for to know those two wor∣thie and valiant knights, Meridian & Bran∣dimardo, with the mightie Pagan Brama∣rant, was the knight of the Sunne and the Princesse beholding the strong and rigorous battaile that was betwixt them and they sée∣med vnto them to be the most strongest & valiantest knights that euer they sawe in all their liues, and for that hée was fullie perswaded that he who made the combat with the gran Campion was Rosicleer, so likewise he thought that it could not be otherwise, but those who dyd combat with Bra∣marant must néeds be of his companie, and possible to bée those two Princes Brandizel and Claueryno, or that migh∣tie Troyan Oristedes, for that they id resemble verie much those knights. Then the worthie knight of the Sunne being verie desirous for to make peace and quietnesse betwixt them, for that they were all valiant and strong knights, as also for to know who Bramarant was, left the Princesse and went vn∣to them, and putting himselfe betwixt them, he sayde: Sir knights, I shall receiue it in great curtesie, if that at my re∣quest you will leaue off this battaile betwixt you, for that it is a great griefe vnto me to sée such worthie and valiant knightes as you are, contend to kill one another, without hauing anie iust occasio therevnto. Then the two wor∣thie Princes Meridian and Brandimado séeing the gentle disposition of the knight of the Sun, & the great curtesie hée vsed in his wordes, straight waies withdrew themselues a part, in saying that they were verie well content at his request so for to doe, for that as then they themselues knew
not for what cause they dyd make that battaile. But this proude and fierce Pagan Bramarant, who was verie furi∣ous and wrathfull, with a great desire to reuenge himselfe vpon them, with a proude disdainefull and horse voyce, faming at the mouth, sayde: Knight get thée away straight waies from that place, and so that thou speakest no more vnto mée of that matter, for if thou dost, I doe sweare vnto thée, that in concluding of the battaile with these two, I wil begin it with thée, and then thou shalt quickly pay mee this anger and griefe which thou haste giuen mée. And as the knight of the Sunne did reply in requesting him againe to accomplish his request. He verie furious and angerie, lift vp his heauie sword, and stroke him such a blow vpon the healme, that he daseled the sight of his eyes, and saide, now come you all thrée against mée, for I will reuenge my selfe on you all. Then the knight of the Sunne, who receiued not so much griefe in receiuing that blow, as in the discourtesie of Bramarant, in drawing out his good sword sayde, here I doe promise thée proude and discourteous knight, that this which thou wouldest not accomplish nor doe at my request, this my mortall battaile shall make thee to doe by force, and concluding these words, he tourned vnto the other two knights, desiring them to let him deale alone with him. But they for that they did not know him, and had felt by expe∣rience, the mightie power of Bramarant, would not consent thérevnto, for that they thought it a thing impossible, for him to make defence against that mightie and fierce Pagan halfe a quarter of an houre. ut yet in the ende, he did so much importune them, that they were constrained there∣vnto, with condition that they should succour him, when that they did see that he stoode in anie néede of either of their helpes. Here was the stout Pagan Bramarant greatly amazed to sée how that knight durst venter to combat with him alone, and to refuse the ayde of the other two good knights, could not immagine who it should be, but iudged rather that
his bouldnesse should procéede more of folly then of orce: but he was put quickly out of that doubt, fo that as the battaile was begun betwixt them, he quickly vndr∣stoode stoode that he was the most brauest & strongest knight that euer he had proued, for that many tmes he dyd depart him of his sight, and made him to decline his head to the horse necke, making him to puffe & blow lyke a Lion, who wax∣ed therewith more wrathfull and furious, which caued him with mortall yre, to strike such blowes vpon the knight of the Sunne, that he gaue him well to vnderstand how great & mightie was the power of Bramarant, who mused great∣ly who that mightie knight should be. In this sorte was shere betwixt them the brauest battaile that euer was sen fought betwixt two. All this while were the two Princes Meridian, and Brandimardo, in great admiration, whē that they saw the great worthinesse of the knight: but the prin∣ces Claridiana, who also dyd beheld them, dyd nor meruaile at that which her knight dyd, for that she had before time knowen his great bountie, but yet she greatly wondred to sée how strongly Bramarant, dyd combat with him, who al∣though more then two houres before he hadde maintained battaile against the other two knights, yet at this time ther appered no point of wearines in him, but rather he shewed himself to be more brauer & furious then at y• beginning. Then after when that the knight of the Sunne began to be kindled in wrath, and that his yre increased, was the battaile worthie to be loked on, to sée what he did therein, for that his terrible blowes were such, that euei one of thē was sufficient for to haue clouen an armed knight from toppe to toe, if they had not bene defended by their inchaun∣ted armour: great aboundance of sparkes of fire flew out of their armour, and slew vp a great way in the ayre, be∣fore they lost their light, and with the great noyse which they made in striking theyr blowes, all that wildernesse did ring there with, and Meridian and Brandimardo that were talking together, could scarce heare the one the other, but had their eares  with the noyse thereof.
, with mortall furie and diuelish wrath, stret∣ched vp himselfe in his stirrups on his mightie horse, and tooke his sword with both his hads, and stroke this good knight such a blow vpon his left shoulder, which glaunced downe from his healme, that he thought verly he had bene clouen in péeces, the paine was so great he fol: and agine, if he hadd not embrased himselfe about his horse necke, he hadde surely fallen to the ground. And as ye he hadde not well righted himselfe in the saddle, when that this stronge Pagan, stroke him an other blow ouerthwart the healme, that he daseled the sight of his eyes, and it lacked little to depriue him of his remembraunce. Then this valiant knight séeing himselfe so entreated of his enimie, being all kindeled in wrath, raysed himselfe in his stirruppes, and with his sword in both his handes, dyd strike such a furious blow at this stout and diuelish pagan, vpon his enchanted healme, that being depriued of his sight and remembraunce, he declyned backewards so much, that his head almost touched his horse buttockes, in such sorte, that if he hadde not straight wayes come to his remem∣brance, and with all the strength of his legges and bodie, procured to bustle vp himselfe againe, with that alone blow hée hadde bene ouerthrowen to the earth: then with great furie and wrath, they began to charge the one the other with their heauie and fell blowes, and according vnto the terrible force with which they stroke, it séemed that the battaile began anewe. Meridian and Brandimardo, who dyd behold all that hadde passed, sayde, it may be that this is the knight of the Sunne, who so long time hath bene ab∣sent, and could not be heard in all the countrie of Grecia, for that it is not to be beléeued, that any knight in all the whole world, should doe that which this worthie and vali∣ant knight hath done in our presence, except the knight of the Sunne. They dyd also on the other part beholde the cruell and
had with the Ga Campi∣on, who likewise they dyd not knw, whereat they were greatly wondered, and it séemed vnto them, that those foure which at that present dyd there combat, were foure of the most  in all the worlde, and they sayde within  that the Emperour Trebatio, had not in all his court, a knight that one to one could resist the great and mightie strength and furious rages of the two Pagans, but onely the valiant Rosicleer, whome they dyd iudge of a truth, to bee the same that dyd combat with the stout Bradaman. Now was it a good houre and a halfe, since the battaile was begunne, at which time the stoute and furious Bra∣marant, séeing that his aduersarie endured his mightie and heauie blowes so long before him, was readie to burst with anger, and began to blaspheme and curse himselfe, for that at one blow he could not cleaue him a sunder, right downe from the toppe of his head to the wast, the which strong re∣sistaunce, made him to thinke verely, that he should be one of his false goddes, or else all they together, hadde placed their force and strength in that alone knight, for to battaile against him: which caused his great pryde the more to en∣crease, and being troubled with that thought, he forced him∣selfe by his pride, for to surmount the diuine Goddes, he tooke his heauie sword in both his handes, and raysing him selfe all that euer he could in his stirruppes, and like a furi∣ous whirle winde, he went against the good knight of the Sunne, and his wrath was such, that I thinke there was no stéele or Diamonde, nor any other hard thing in all the world, that could make any resistance against that mortall and diuelish blow, for that this fierce Pagan for to accom∣plish his furie, forced himselfe all that euer he could, to haue bereaued the valiant knight of the Sunne of life and im, and his wrath was suche, that the wise and learned clarke Lirgandeo, was in doubt, that againste that mightie force, should support any thing the inchauntement of the armour which the wise man sent to the good knight of the Sunne:
but he who saw him come so wrathfull and furious, with a mightie and valiant courage, dyd abide him. And at such time as he would haue discarged his heauie sword vpon his helme, he lift vp his sword with both his hands for to ward the same, and receiued that mightie  same, & for that the edge of his swore was  finer fier and sharper then his, it cut the sword of Bramarant a sunder in the middest, and the péece which remained towards the hilt lighted vpon the healme of the knight of the Sunne, and al∣though it was not much, yet dyd it depriue him of his sight. Then the good knight being greatly amazed at the mortall furie of his enimie, dyd pray vnto God from the bottome of his heart for to remember him, & not to forget & leaue him in that perilous conflict. It séemed at that time that he had great néede of the diuine fauour for to get victorie in that battaile, at which time his wrath and yre increased with so great anger to sée himselfe so intreated before his mistres by one alone knight, that he retyred backe somewhat from the place whereas they made the battaile, from whence hée set spurres vnto his horse & came against Bramarant, with so great furie, that the earth séemed to tremble vnder him, and his fiercenesse was such, that it séemed to put some dread into the heart of that fierce Pagan, in the which before ne∣uer entred any feare, for I insure you, who so euer had sene that furious knight, with his sword aboue his head in both his hands, and with what wonderfull furie he came against him, would haue had no lesse feare of him, then of the thun∣derbolt that falleth out of the ayre: so in this sorte when he approched vnto the Pagan he stroke, and chaunsed such a blow vpon his great, thick, and inchaunted healme, with so great furie, that it hadde bene sufficient for to haue clouen a Smithes stithe asunder in the middest, and for that the fine cutting edge of his sword, could not cut the magical arte and inchauntment of his strong healme, yet dyd that blow so ouercharge his head by the great waight thereof, that it tooke his remembrance cleane from him, and lyke a dead thing he fell forwards vppon his saddle bow, and horse neck,
hanging downe his head, and out at the ioynts of his helme issued great of bloud, and his mightie horse be∣ing tormented with the force of that blowe, anne out of that place, and put himselfe into the thickest of that wilder∣nesse with his Lord, then the knight of the Sunne who de∣sired not to folow him, retourned vnto Meridian and Bra∣dimardo, saying, Sir knights, I doe desire you to pardon mée, if you haue any anger against mée, in that I tooke vp∣pon mée the battaile with that proude knight, that did com∣bat with you, for I ensure you that his great pride would not let mée to giue place, vnto y• I am bound to your great courtesie and bountie. Then dyd Meridian and Brandimar∣do, verie much behold him, and were greatly amazed at his great strength, and said within themselues, that he was the most valiant in all the whole world, for that he alone hath done, that which the whole armie of the Emperour Alican∣dro could not doe, and according therevnto they answered and said. Of truth Sir Knight, your great bountie and courtesie is such, that we should accompt our selues for happie, for to know you, and therby to serue you, and to haue you in that estimation as your great worthinesse doth deserue, and wée doe giue you great thankes for the trauaile and perill from the which you haue deliuered vs. Your bountie and worthi∣nesse is such, so farre forth as I haue seeme, (saide the knight of the Sunne) that of your selues you are a sufficient se∣curitie to deliuer you from all perill: neuerthelesse, if I haue done any thing, it was nothing but by vertue of your great courtesie, considering the great villanie vsed by that knight. And in that you doe require for to know my name, I doe most heartely desire you, that for this present, you would not request the same, for that it is not in my power for to declare it vnto you, till such time as I haue accom∣plished and perfourmed a promise, the which I haue made vnto yonder knight, who came with mée: Then they séeing that he hadde no will for to declare who he was, but to kéepe himselfe in secrete, would not im∣portne
him anie more for the , and  themselues that it could be the knight of the Sunne, and that constrained through some great occasion▪ he would not suffer himselfe to be , and the more to prouoke him therevnto, they fted vp the beauers of their helmes, in such sort that the knight of the Snne did knw them, and was verie glad thereof, for that hée had them in great estimation, although at that time he woulde not giue them o vnderstand in anie wise that he dyd knowe them. In all this time the Princesse Claridiana receiued great contentment in that which the knight of the Sunne hadde done, and all foure together did put themselues to beholde the cruell contention and rigorous battaile that was be∣twixt the valiant knight Rosicleer and the gran Campion, who at the great noise of the last blowe that the knight of the Sunne gaue vnto Bramarant, did aparte themselues from their battaile to sée what it shoulde bée, and they sawe the mightie Pagan cleane voide of anie remembrance, and his horse carrying him into the thickest of all that wilder∣nesse. Then Rosicleer meruailing greatlie at that knight, for that he had so great power for to bring him into that per∣plexitie, made no more a doe, but retourned vnto his bat∣taile, whose blowes were so many, and of great force and strength, that it was a wonder to beholde, and for that it was more than foure houres since the battaile was begun, the gra Campion waed wearie, and it séemed that Rosi∣cleer had somewhat the vantage of him, but yet with y• exce∣ding great griefe which he receiued to sée his sonne Brama∣rant carried by his hose in that sorte, he waed therewith∣all▪ so wrathfull and furious, that he neither felt trauaile nor wearinesse, and charged Rosicleer with such a multi∣tude of blowes, that many times he did astonish and amaze him, but yet in the ende, the cruell destinie of this Gran Campion was such, and againe, for that his cruell death was ordained from aboue, the ire of that worthie and va∣liant
Rosicleer, so encreased in him, that with a mortall fu∣rie, he stroke so mightie a blow at Bradaman, ouerthwart his wast, that he made him decline on the other side almost from himselfe, and being in this sorte almost out of his sad∣dle, his euill fortune was such, that in his stouping, he dis∣couered a naked place vnder his arme, whereas was no other defence but his shirt of mayle, the which being séene by Rosicleer, being very desirous to make an ende of that long contencion, he thrust at him with the point of his good sword, with so great force and strength, that he made his sword to enter vp to the harde, hiltes, and pulling it out all blodied, the Gran Campion fel from his Elephant downe to the ground, and within a little while after he yelded his soule vnto the Diuell, who had deceiued him in the blinde law of his false gods. Oh false and weake foundation of man, for that they which are most endewed with corporall force, doth thinke their liues in most securitie, without respecting that con∣trarie vnto the confidence which they haue in their great strengthes, fortune doth double hers, and that many tymes with great anger, for that he doth finde no equall contem∣ner. And for to shew what a weake animall man is, with an vnsemely weake and hidden euell, be the mightie great Gyants ouerthrowen. As he that slew Hercules, was very little, who was he that had the victorie in all things. Likewise Milo, the stout∣est amongst men, an Oke dyd staye him, so that he was torne in péeces with wilde beastes, so that wée may saye that that force the which was without comparison, was lesse then a clouen Oke: what doeth he think then to doe, that is but of a meane strength, what doth he think to haue his lyfe in more securitie, and to be more aparted from the lyght and mouable whéele of Fortune, then was this stout and fierce Bradaman Campion, the most valiant and migh∣tiest of all Gyants, one that hadde force and strength, for to bringe in subiection, those fierce and indomable people of the whole compasse of the Orientall Ilandes, and yet
at this present he lacked strength for to defend himselfe from one alone knight, of a great deale lesse stature than he was of, who with one alonelie blow he slew him, and dyd abate his pide, the which many thousands of Gyants could Likewise mortall men doe thinke, and doe boast themselues more of vertue, than of valiantnesse or strength, for that alone the force of the soule, in that which receiueth no strength cannot be ouercome, neither hath fortune anie power against it, and as it is placed in the soule, it hath no néede of anie corporall strength, and according vnto the say∣ing of the wise Lygandeo and Artemidoro, they were not so much moued, by the high knighthood and mortall conflicts of these two so worthie Princes, for to write this mightie Hystorie, as they were by their great vertues, and excellen∣cie of courage and gallant demeanours, the which in all their life times did shine in them, for which cause (saie they) they were more esteemed and had greater fame, than for the great force and strength which they had, and alwaies they did estéeme themselues, and delighted more in vertue than in their strength, and therefore these wise men saie, that if this mightie Hystorie be pleasant and delightfull vnto the readers, so shall it be no lesse profitable vnto them, that with great care and diligence will note and consider well, how these knightes were giuen vnto vertue all their lyfe times. Thus as it is verie profitable and necessarie for the ta∣king out of anie worke to haue a patterne before him, euen so likewise it is no lesse necessarie and profitable vnto him that will giue himselfe to vertue, the good patterne or ex∣ample of vertues, in especiall of these so high and worthie Princes in whom by reason of their high estates, their ver∣tue and bountie doth shine the cléerer. But now to returne to our matter. The Hystorie saith, that when the gran Campion was dead, Rosicleer dyd make cleane his sworde, and put it vp into his sheath, giuing infinite thankes vnto almightie God for that victorie permitted vnto him, and when he sawe the
other foure knights comming towardes him, he likewise went towards them, and receiued them with great courte∣sie, for that he knew both Meridian and Brandimardo, by reason their faces was discouered. And for that he had them in estimation to be no lesse vertuous then worthie and va∣liant knights, he lift vp the beuer of his healme, and disco∣uered himselfe vnto them, saying, My good Lords, I doe verely beléeue, that the battaile the which you hadde with Bramarant, ought more to be attributed vnto his great pride, then of any misusing committed of your parts against him, for that it is not in your conditions. Then Meridian and Brandimardo, receiued him verie courteously and reioysed verie much in knowing him, and Meridian sayde: Worthy prince, I doe giue great thankes vnto all our gods, for that they haue giuen mee to know so great worthinesse, as this day I haue séene in you, and in this worthie and valiant knight. And I promise you th occasion of our battaile was for a very light matter, for that vnto proude and hautie persons a little thing is enough to bring them out of quiet There dd he declare vnto them all that euer hadde passed betwixt them till such time as that knight came thether, and put Bramarant in that estate as you haue heard. All this time dyd the knight of the Sunne behold Rosicleer, his brother, and reioysed very much to sée him so good, strong, and valiant, and if it had not bene, be∣cause he would not anger nor giue any discontentment vn∣to the princes, he would haue giuen him selfe to be knowen vnto him, his ioye and pleasure was so great, but because it was the princes will, not at that present to be knowen, it was dissembled, although that Rosicleer, and the other prin∣ces dyd desire it verie much, who being greatly amazed, at the mightie and gallant disposition of both of them, could not be perswaded to the contrarye, but that one of them should be the knight of the Sunne. At this time the knight began to approch, and the prin∣ces sayde that it was time for them all for to retourne, they vnto their campe, and the other vnto the citie.
And as they saide, it was concluded, and they all departed together from that place: and when that they came nigh vn∣to their campe, Meridian and Brandimardo, dyd take their leaue of Rosicleer, and of the knight of the Sunne, giuing thein great thankes, for that which they had done for them, offering vnto them great courtesie. When that they were departed, Rosicleer, dyd aske the knight of the Sunne and the princes, if it were their plea∣sure for to goe and take their lodging with him in the citie and pallace of his Father the Emperour, who will take great ioye and pleasure for to honour such knights as they were, within his owne pallace. Then they aunswered him with great courtesie, giuing him thankes for his gentle of∣fer, but desired him at that time that he would pardon them, and heareafter they shall haue better oportunitie of time for to goe and kisse the handes of the Emperour, but first their determination was, for to doe him some seruice in those warres: and how that with this pretence, they came forth of their countries, the which is verie farre, and a great way out of Grecia, for which occasion they came vnproui∣ded of things necessarie to their persons, requesting him to pleasure them so much as to send them a Tent, for to lodge themselues, and their squires: whereat Rosicleer was ve∣rie glad, for that they would be of their part, and for to send them out of hand, the Tent, he tooke his leaue of them, leauing them in the field, harde by the other campe, he en∣tred into the Citie and went vnto the royall pallace, wher∣as he founde the Emperour, and all the other high princes, in a great alteration, determining for to arme themselues for to goe and seeke him, for that they could not heare any newes of him, where he was become, mistrusting that some euill had happened vnto him, he was so long out of the ci∣tie, but when they saw him enter in, they were all verie glad and ioyfull, but in especiall the Emperour, who asked of him where he hadde bene, then he in the presence of them all, declared what had happened vnto him since his depar∣ture out of the citie. But when he said that he left the Gran
Campion, dead in the wildernesse, their ioye and pleasure dyd redouble in them all, likewise when that he told them of the battayle, which the strange knight had made with Bramarant, they were greatly amazed, and could not im∣magine what knight he should be of so great power and force, except it were the knight of the Sunne, who of long time they neuer heard any newes of: yet they thought ve∣rely that if it were he, he would not keepe himselfe secret, so that the Emperour and all the rest remained in a con∣fusion, and prayed vnto God, that it might be the knight of the Sunne, for that hauing him with them, they should thinke themselues in great securitie of the mightie power of the Pagans, surely they receiued great griefe for his ab∣sence, although the good Emperour dyd make no shew ther∣of, yet dyd there neuer enter any mirth into his heart, since his departure out of the court, and in especial for that he had sent many knights into diuers parts, for to séeke him, but yet could he neuer heare any newes of him: and now was his minde full o suspection that it should be he, that made the battayle with Bramarant. Then straight waies, he sent vnto the two knights two Tentes, verie ritch of gold and silke, with bedding verie good for them and for their damsels and squires, and all other things which he thought néedful and necessarie for them, and sent the king of Macedonia, in his behalfe vnto them, with them that carryed the Tentes. When that he came into the field, he straight wayes mette with them, to whome the king dyd present that which was sent, and sayde that the Emperour did send them great com∣mendations, saying, that if it were their pleasures for to en∣ter into the Citie and take their lodging, he should receiue great pleasure and contentment therein, for that there hée could better giue them such honour as vnto so good knights doth appertaine: the which they receiued with great thanks, and sent him word that they did kisse his Emperiall hands for the great courtesie shewed vnto them. When that the king was departed, the squires of the knight of the Sunne and the damsels, did arme and raise vp their Tents, som∣what
what aparted from the tents of the armie, the which béeing done and made close in such sorte that they coulde not bée séene and knowen, they supped together with great ioy and pleasure, whereas they passed a good parte of the night, at such time as they were most in quiet, they heard a greate noise and tumult in the Camp, as shall be tolde you in this Hystorie, who doth leaue them at this present, for to tel you of the stout Pagan Bramarant, who remained in the wil∣dernesse of Grecia, & of other things that happened with him. How the stout Pagan Bramarant after that he was come vnto himselfe, returned againe to seeke the knightes, and what hee did when he found his Father dead. Chap. 34. WIthin a little while after that the foure knightes with the Princesse was departed from the place whereas the battaile was made with the gran Campion, Bramarant who was astonied, was come againe wholy vnto himselfe, & finding himselfe alone, and aparted from the place whereas the battaile was made, and besides, that he himselfe was all to be raied with bloud that gushed out at his nose and mouth, and without the halfe sword the which remained in his hand (for that it was fal∣len away) the fury and outragious wrath which he did take against himselfe was such (considering in what estate hée was brought) that many times he would haue slaine him∣selfe, the which he would haue done in effect, his desperation was such, to see that one alone knight should bring him in∣to that perplexitie, but his great desire was such, for to bée reuenged for the same, that hée dyd as then withdrawe himselfe from the dooing thereof, presupposing in his heart for to make the cruellest reuenge that euer was executed, and with that rage puffing out great abundance of smoke, hée went vnto a mightie Oake, and renting off a greate
branch from the same, the made thereof a huge and knotti clubbe, and taking it in both his handes h et spurres vn∣to his horse, and with so great furie that it séemed a whirle winde, hée returned vnto the place from whence hée came, in the demaund and seeking out of the knightes that hadd made battaile with him, swearing  he would not leaue one of them aliue, but when he came vnto the place where∣as the battaile was made, and found none other but the gran Campion his Father dead, lying along vppon the ground all to bée rayed with his owne bloud, there was no comparison to bée made with the wrath of so famished a Lion, neither that of the firce Tyger, when that they haue lost their whelpes, as vnto the furie and wrath of that stout and diuellish Pagan, when that he sawe his Father to lie in that sorte dead, his wrath, courage, and furie was such, that he séemed rather to bee an infernall diuell, than a knight, & he might haue accounted himselfe vnhappie, that should haue passed by him at that present, for at that time he would haue combatted with all the legios of infernall diuells, and not finding vppon whom he might execute his furious wrath, he lifte vp his eies vnto heauen, and sayde thus. Oh false and traiterous Gods, enimies vnto my generous and naturall bloud all you together haue beene confederate vnto the death of my diuine Father, come downe all toge∣ther vpon the earth with all the power of your impetuous and wonderfull thunderings and lightnings, or else shewe mée some waie whereby I maye ascend into the celestiall Regions, whereas you haue your habitations and dwel∣ling places, that I may take most cruell reuengement vp∣pon you for the death of the Gran Campion my Father, who was much better than all you. Descend therefore and come downe O yée traiterous and false dogges, and haue a courage to come before my presence, for that I am now héere alone, I  that it is a great shame and reproch vnto you  you dare not descend vnto one alone knight. Héere I doe sweare ad promise you, that if you dare not
come in my presence, neither shew me which waie I maye ascend into the heauens, that I will neuer take anie reste till such time as I haue gone throughout all the Paganis∣me, and destroyed all the Idolles and Temples that be de∣dicated and consecrated vnto you, neither will I not leaue one Pagan aliue, that will not renounce and denie your alse and deceiueable lawe, and I will make them all to turne Christias, for to scorne and burne your Idolles, for that he séemeth to be a better God than all you, that giueth so great strength vnto Christians: Oh my good Father Bradaman, who is hée that hath slaine you, and so cleere de∣liuered from my handes? Héere I doe promise you neuer to pull off this armour from my backe, vntill such time as I haue torne him in péeces with my téeth, and staunched my great thirst in his hot bloud. But oh what ill fortune and mishap is this of mine? What reuengement may Braina∣rant take, although he destroie the whole worlde, in recom∣pence of this so great harme and iniurie which is done vn∣to me. In saying these and many other wordes this furious Pagan did alight from his horse, and tooke the broade and heauie sword of his Father, and hung it at his girdle, and mounted againe vpon his horse, determining for to goe and séeke those knights that he left there, or some other, where∣on he might reuenge his furious wrath, and there withall hée set spurres vnto his great horse, and lyke vnto a diuell he made him a runne throughout all the fieldes with so great furie, that the earth séemed to tremble vnder him. At this time it was darke night, and Rosicleer was within the Citie, and the other in their Tents at their ease, but Bra∣marant not finding or méeting anie for to deteine him, ne∣uer staied till hée came into the Campe of the Christians, whereas was more than one hundred thousand of knights, and as many footmen, some lying a long vppon the gréene grasse, and other some in their tents and pauillions, yet was there in the garde and watch of the hoast sittie thou knights and so many footmen.
But when this surious Pagan sawe so many before him, vpon whom he might reuenge his outragious wrath, with more arrogancie, pride, and hardinesse, than the hun∣grie and rauening Lion, that thrusteth her selfe in the mid∣dest amongest the féeble and timerous flockes, hée thrust∣eth himselfe in the middest amongst all those of the campe, charging the footmen of the watch with terrible and cru∣ell blowes, killing and destroying so many of them, that all the waie whereas he went was full of dead bodies, and the rest who were greatlie amazed at that sodaine and mortall mischiefe, beganne to crie out  call to armour, so that in a short time all the whole  was in a vproare, and thinking that they were assaulted with many enimies, they ranne from the one parte vnto the other for to aide and help their companions and friends, but when they saw there were no enimies, they were worse amazed than they were before, and knew not what to make o that tumult, but they were all quicklie put out of doubt, and cerlefied what it was, for that this fierce and diuellish Pagan not staying in anie one place,  himselfe from one part vnto the other all to be embrued in bloud, and according vn∣to the great slaughter and destruct on the which he made, he seemed rather to bée an infernall diuell than a mortal man. But when they vnderstoode and knew that it was Brama∣rant, there was but a verie sewe of them which with feare dyd not tremble or to sée him, and with all the speede that euer they could make, they dyd aparte and separate them∣selues from him, thinking that thereby they shoulde haue their liues in farre greater securitie and safetie when that they are most farthest from his furious and mercilesse handes, whereby hée hadd opportunitie and space for to doe what  and mischiefe so euer it pleased him, and none so bold for to put himself before him, whereby to make anie resistance against his outragious furie, except it were alonelie two knightes which were verie couragious and vatiant, who were Captaines oner the rest: the one was called  Adriano, and the other the Earls of edo
vassalles vnto the Emperour , who offering their liues, as they were bound, came both against him, and made their encounter with their speares in such sort, y• they were shéeuered to peeces, but yet their appeared no more mouing in him, than if they had encountred against a strong tower, at their passing by he stroke one of them such a blow, that beeing verie fore hurt, hée ouerthrow him off his horse vnto the ground, & at the second blowe his companion was constrained to beare him companie. This béeing past, the stout Pagan put himselfe into the thickest amongest the, people, and ouerthrew all that euer hée met before him, and neuer stayed vntill hée came vnto the  whereas; hée beganne to cut the cordes and tyonbers wherewith they were armed, in such sorte, that in a little space he ouerthrew twentie Tents, and as many Pauillions downe vnto the ground. But all this was nothing vnto the furious and outragious wrath of Bramarant, who thought it but a pa∣stine, in consideration of the bloud that hée determined for to shedde, in recompence of his Father death. There were some in the Campe which séeing the great destruction that hée made, ranne vnto the Citie, and gaue aduertisement vn∣to the Emperour Trebatio of all that passed, who out of hande with all the other worthie Princes and knightes, made themselues in a readinesse for to goe forth and make resistance against that proude Pagan. At this time for that the great vproare and tumnlt that was in the Campe was verie well heard by the worthie knight of the Sunne and the Princesse Claridiana, who were somewhat aparted and separated from the rest, and verie desirous for to know what it should bée, with a trice they caused themselues to be armed with their rich and strong armour, and mounting vpon their horses, they rode forthwith towardes the place whereas they heard the noise of the battaile, but when they came whereas Bramarant was, they were wonderfullie a∣mazed at the great furie & wrath of the Pagan, and suppo∣sed that in anie humane man coulde not ée comprehen∣ded such excéeding force and strength, and hauing greate
griefe and compassion for the great quantitie of blod that was there shed, the knight of the Sunne , and putting himselfe before him, he said  and r∣uishing furie, leaue off the shedding of innocent bloud, for looke what thou doest heere, so much the more will the hor∣rible paines bée y• thy soule shall indure in hell. The night was verire cléere for the Moone did shine and was at the full, and by the light thereof this proude Pagan dyd know the knight of the Sunne, by his armour, to be he with whom he did combat the daie before, who with as greate pleasure as euer he receiued in all his life (thinking at that time to haue opportunitie to bee reuenged of that was past) sayd. Art thou by fortune that knight that did combat with mée this daie past? I am the same, sayde the knight of the Sunne. Then the Pagan said: Heere I doe tell thee, that all the whole power of the heauen and on the earth, are not sufficient for to defend the from my fingers. And in saying these words, he lift vp his heuie and great cutting sword, & with it in both his hands, he stroke this good knight such a blowe vpon his helme, that it made him to  his head downe to his breast, and the fire flew out thereof, as out of a  stone, but the knight of the Sunne required him that blow with both his hands, and stroke him such a one vpon, his shoulder, that he had ouerthrowne him to the ground, if he had not imbraced himselfe with his horse necke, then be∣gan the one to laie vpon the other verie strenglie, with so great charge, that many thimes they were both astonied, and the sparkes of fire were so many that flew out of their armours, that if the Moone had not shined so bright, by the light of the sparkes, they might haue well seene how to com∣bat, at this time were all the people of the campe round a∣bout them for to sée that strong and well fought battayle, and were all greatlie amazed at the high bountie & strength of the knight of the Sunne, and the noise was so great the which they made with their terrible blowes, that it was as well heard within the Citie, as in the campe whereas they
did combat, which was the occasion, as well for that they were aduised thereof, that the Emperour Trebatio and Ro∣ficleer, with all those worthie Princes and knightes, came straight waies forth of the Citie, and with great hast came vnto the place whereas they heard the great noise of the battaile, and thether whereas the most people were gathe∣red together, and when they came thether, they sawe that fierce Pagan and the knight of the Sunne, how they be∣haued themselues in their battaile, and by reason that it was night, and their blowes strong and great wherewith great abundance of fire flew out of their armours, it was a strange and wonderfull thing to beholde, so that the Empe∣rour and all those that came with him meruailed greatlie at the strong and mightie force of them both. Then when this stout Pagan sawe himselfe compassed rounde about with so many people, and knew that the Emperour and all the rest of those precious and worthie knightes that came with him were there present, he sawe that as then it was verie néedfull for him to vse all his whole force & strength, and béeing desirous in their presence to shew forth all his greate and mightie power, hée charged the knight of the Sunne with terrible and heauie blowes, reuenging and blaspheming against himselfe, and this he sayd within his heart. Oh Iupiter, if it bée so that thou art he that doth combat with mée, I doe desire thée to tell mée, for that if thou be he, héere I doe promise to acknowledge thée to bée a God, and I will honour thée as thou doest deserue, and I doe at this present confesse that thy power is great. And when hée had sayd these wordes, and sawe that the force and strength of his aduersarie dyd still increase, hée was verie furious and wrathfull against himselfe, and sayd: Oh base and vile knight Bramarant, wherefore shouldest thou acknowledge him to be a God, although he were the same Iupiter, hauing force and strength inough, not onelie for to defend thy selfe from him, but also for to destroie and rase out all those false and traitrous gods And in saying
these wordes his wrath and furie did increase, and he char∣ged the knight of the Sunne in such ort with his terrible blowes, that it did well appeare how his strength was aug∣mented. But then his aduersarie séeing himselfe beore his Father and those high mightie Princes, as also in the presence of his mistres the Princesse Claridiana, who did be∣holde him, he was so angrie and wrathfull, that there was nothing that did abide before him, and he charged this stout Pagan with such furious blowes, that he gaue him well to vnderstand that he was the mightiest and strongest knight that was in all the world. In this sort did these two make their combat, putting great admiration in all those that did beholde them. Then after that they had battailed together more than the space of one houre, this furious and fierce Pa∣gan. sayd within himselfe, that his aduersae was so strong and furious, that he could not iudge to the contrarie but that he must néeds be some infernal diuell, or that Pluto Prince of diuells. And more than this, I am compassed about with so many and good knights, that when so euer I get the vie∣torie of this battaile, I shall haue inough to doe with them, therefore it shall béee better for me (séeing that I get no ho∣nour) for to depart. And in saying these words, the stout Pa∣gan stretched himself vpon his stirops all that euer he could, and clasping his sword fast in both his hands, gashing his téeth one against another, he stroke so strong a blow at the knight of the Sunne, that it had bene sufficient to haue clo∣uen him downe vnto the wast, if that his healme had béene as the helmes of other knights, but the finenesse therof, with the inchanted mixture did withstand the sharpe edge of his sword, in such sort, that it did not damage anie part therof, but yet for all that, the force of the blow was such, that hée made him to fal forwards, & with his head to strike his horse a great blow vpon the necke, and againe if that with both his armes he had not embraced his horse necke, of force hée must néedes haue fallen vnto the ground, and with the blow he was so amazed and astonied, that hee knew not whether he was in heauen or vppon the earth. But yet
this stout Pagan had not bragged nor aduanced himselfe of this blow if that he had  a little longer, for that the knight of the Sunne came straight waies againe to him∣selfe, and setled himselfe in his sabbl, and according vnto the anger and wrath the which he had, it could not be other∣wise but his answere to bée verie perillons, but hée woulde not holde the same, for that he hadde not so soone giuen the blowe, when that he turned his horse about and set vnto his sides, and with great furie he put himselfe into the thickest of all the people that were beholding the battale, and although they were verie close together the better to be∣holde all that passed, he verie quicklie made a great & brode waie, what with killing and wounding, he oerthrew ma∣ny with his sworde, and with an infernall force he thrust himselfe in the middest of all the campe, killing and flaying all that euer he met with, so that there was none that burst come before him, and although the knight of the Sunne & all the worthie Princes would haue followed him, yet by anie meanes they could not, by reason of the great number of-people that were ioyned together  to sée the battaile, so that first Bramarant escaped out of the campe: but when he sawe himselfe cléere of them; he set  vnto his horse, and made him runne like a whirle winde towards his own campe, and without speaking vnto Emperour Alycan∣dro he went vnto his owne Tent, but when that he came shether, calling to remembrance how that he left the Gran Campion his Father dead, the anger and wrath the which he receiued was so great, that it repented and grieued him verie much, for that he was depare and come from the , & being verie desirous to execute his irefull wrath vpon ioine thing, with great courage he went out of his , and he alone went through all the whole campe of the Pagans, séeking out all the Idols the which they , and all that euer he found he brake them to péeces, and  without to the ground. Many there were that found fault in  him verie much for do∣ing that , but he answered them no other thing, but
that the Gods should come and reuenge themselues if that they were agrieued. With the which Bramarant did put the whole campe in an vprore, and many ripaired vnto the place whereas he went, and although he did rase and de∣stroie all their Idols, yet there was not one that was so har∣die or durst make anie defence against him, till such time as he came vnto Meridian, who entered in battaile him, and would haue perseuered in the  that the Em∣perour Alycandro, accompanie with all those kinges and mightie princes had not come, and put peace betwéene them, appeasing the great furie of Bramarant with faire wordes. Now to retourne vnto the knight of the Sunne, that re∣mained in the Campe of the Christians, the Hysto∣rie saith, that the great desire which the Emperour Trebatio and Rosicleer, and al the other worthie Princes and knights had, for to know who the knight of the Sunne was, and his companion, they would not depart from them till such time as the Princesse Claridiana by great importunation did pul off her helme, and went vnto the knight of the Sunne and pulled off his, and returned vnto the Emperour and sayde: My good Lord, let your highnesse behold, if that contentment and satisfaction be not made of all the tumult and trauaile which hath bene caused vnto you this night, by this knight and that Pagan which is runne awaie. But when that the Emperour and all those knights did know them, it cannot be rehearsed the great ioy, mirth, and pleasure that they all receiued, for that there was not one amongst them all, that desired anie thing so much as to heare newes of the knight of the Sunne. Then the Emperour sayde: Faire and worthie Prin∣cesse, I was alwaies fullie perswaded with my selfe, that your soueraigne highnesse could not let but come and suc∣cour vs, and put vs all in great securitie. Then the knight of the Sunne came for to kisse the handes of the Empe∣rour, who receiued him with that great loue that he alwaies bare vnto him. Then straight waies came forth the king Florion, and with him the wise Lyrgando, and sayd vnto the
Emperor. Lord, let your highnesse giue vs part of the sight of this knight, whom we haue all desired so much to know, and therwith they embraced him many times, as they that entirelie and with all their harts did loue him. Then those good and perfect friends of his, Claueryndo and Brandizel, and that good Troyan, as all the rest of the othr worthie knights. It cannot be rehearsed the great mirth that all of them receiued, as also the worthie things that passed at that méeting, especiallie with the roiall Princesse Claridiana, for that all did receiue her with that dutie and curtesie as was due vnto so high a Princesse. Then was there complaints made, for that they till that time woulde not make them∣selues to be knowen, as also for that they were absent so long out of the Countrie. Whereto the wise Lyrgandeo re∣plied, requesting them to let that demaund passe for that time, because to giue them to vnderstand thereof, it will aske a great time, and how that he had it all written, and when time did serue he woulde shew it vnto them, forso∣much as they were thinges worthie to be knowen & publi∣shed. After they had passed these and many other things be∣twixt them, they all together went and returned into the Citie, and the king Sacridoro went before to carrie newes vnto the Empresse Briana of the comming of the knight of the Sunne, and vnto all the rest of the Ladies and Gen∣tlewomen that were there with her, who were meruailous gladde and ioyfull at those newes, but most especiallie the Empresse, who alwayes was verie sad and sorrowfull, af∣ter that the knight of the Sunne was departed from the Court. Then at the sodaine noise of these newes, great pre∣paration was made, and an innumerable companie of Tor∣ches was light, that it séemed in the Citie to be noone daie, and all the stréetes were full of people for to sée their good Prince, then at their entrie into the emperiall Pallace, the Empresse accompanied with all those Ladies and Gentle∣women, came forth for to receiue them, whereas betwéene the Empresse and the roiall Princesse Claridiana passed ma∣ny
wordes of great loue. Then the knight of the Sunne went for to kisse the hands of his mother, who did embrace him, and kissed him on the chéeke, saying: Oh my welbelo∣ed sonne, for this your comming I doe giue thankes vnto this roiall Princesse, and if it had not bene for her, your pardon at my handes had failed, in that you haue forgotten vs so long time. These and many other wordes of great loue, said the Empresse vnto her sonne, and vnto the Prin∣cesse, the which this Hystorie doth let passe vntolde for to a∣uoide tediousnesse, and telleth of no more, but how that all the rest of the night that remained, they passed awaie with mirth and pastimes, whereas the king Florion and the wise Lyrgandeo could not satisfie themselues in beholding the knight of the Sunne, meruailing greatlie to sée him so much growen, as well in bodie as in the rest, since he departed from them out of Persia, and héere began he to tell of many things that passed as well with the one as with the other, but when he came to tell of the solitarie Ilande, and of all that passed there, they were wonderfullie amazed, and eue∣uerie one did double their good willes and loue which before they bre vnto the knight of the Sunne. At this time came the king Oliuerio, with those of great Britaine, & those wor∣thie knights of Spaine for to speake with the knight of the Sunne, who would haue kissed the kinges handes, but hée would not consent thervnto, but said: Worthie Prince, for well emploied I doe account my comming into this Coun∣trie, for y• I haue séene the magnanimitie of all bountie and fairenesse of a knight, comprehended in your person. To whom the knight of the Sun answered: My good Lord, how & in what sort so euer I am, I am readie at your comman∣dement to serue you, in as ample manner as my brother Rosicleer, for that it is our dutie vnto your highnesse & great valour. In like sort he gaue intertainment vnto all the rest of those worthie knights, who meruailed to heare tolde the great wonders of the knight of the Sunne, as also to sée his mightie and soueraigne proportion and grace, with y• great maiestie of his seuere countenance, wherin only was sufficiēt
for to publish & delare who he was, so that after departed into their owne Countries they had inough to do all the daies of their life, for to tell of the meruailous and strange things that they saw in Grecia, as well of the Gre∣cian knights, as of she without, comparison in beautie, faire∣nesse, gentle , and grace, the Princesse Claridia∣na, who of the , and of the Empresse, and of all people, was most estéemed, and had in reputation aboue all the rest, But when they vnderstoode that they hoped shée should be spouse vnto the knight of the Sunne, with grea∣ter loue and good will they did serue and honour her of all parties, and she likewise did the like vnto them, and was not a little amazed at the great beautie of the Princesse Oli∣uia, who séemed vnto them to be one of the fairest Gentle∣women that euer they had séene, next vnto the worthie and faire Princesse Lyndabrides, who séemed to them to bée a pearle in excellencie. So from that time forwards the two Princesses Oliuia and Claridiana did beare good will and loue one to another wonderfullie, so y• with great reason all those that did beholde and sée them together might saie, that they did deserue to be spouses vnto those two brethren the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer, as vnto the best knights in all the world. Héere was giuen to vnderstand vnto the knight of the Sunne all that had passed in the battailes, and many other things more. In this sort they passed awaie the night till the next daie, in the which happened as shall be declared vn∣to you in this Chapter following. How the faire Princesse Lyndabrides had vnderstan∣ing of the comming of the knight of the Sunne, home she wrote a Letter, and of other things that to  in the meane time. Chapter. 35.
WHen the next daie was come, all the Gréekes re∣ceiued great ioy and pleasure, for that it was pub∣likelie knowen vnto them the cmming of the knight of the Sunne and the Princesse Claridia∣na, so that the newes thereof was carried into the Campe of the Pagans, which was sorrowful newes vnto all them, especiallie when they vnderstoode of the death of the Gran Campion, and how that their valiant and worthie knightes did euerie daie decrease and waxe fewer in number on their part, and how that on the part of the Emperour rebatio, they dyd increase eurie daie more & more, yet was all this nothing in comparison vnto that griefe which the fayre Princesse Lyndabrides felt, when she vnderstoode how that the knight of the Sunne, in companie with the Princesse Claridiana, was come into Constantinople, vnderstanding verilie that he was continuallie with her in presence all the time that he was absent out of Grecia, and how that he had taken her to be his wife. It cannot bée heere rehearsed the grea griefe and exceeding anguish the which the felt with∣in her selfe, in such sort, that many times shée was readie to die therewith, and putting her selfe in a closet by it selfe in her tent, she dyd nothing but wéep, complaining against her selfe and fortune, and after that many contrarie thoughtes had occupied her minde and senses, fighting one against an other, without finding anie comfort or case in thinking of them, with great wrath and anguish of heart shée tooke pa∣per and Inke, and with her owne hand shée wrote a Let∣ter vnto the knight of the Sunne, the contents were as followeth. A Letter written by the Princesse Lyndabrides vnto the knight of the Sunne. IF the diuine Gods and my cruell destinie had permitted, that as I am constrained to loue thée, I might I  had so much libertie for to forget thée, then had not I returned a∣gaine into Grecia, neither had consented that the Emperor
my Father with so infinite a number of people had enterd into this Countrie for to be reuenged of thée, for that it had béene a sufficient reuengement and satisfaction vnto mée, for to leaue thée, and not to thinke that I was shée that was of thée forgotten, but to leaue thée as one nworthie of my great beautie, not deseruing to inioy my emperiall and con∣secrated estate. But oh my euill fortune and mishap, which caused mée so firmlie to loue and beare thée good will, that there remaineth no part within mee, but it is yeelded to bée all thine, neither haue I so much power as for to put thée one moment out of my remembrance. I knowe not what cruell and vniust lawe is this of Loue, for the more that thou diddest vnderstand and know that I did loue thée, thou haddest the greater libertie for to forget mée, and the more that thou wert cruell and forgetfull of mée, the more did my loue and good will increase towardes thée. I am aduerti∣sed that thou and the Empresse Claridiana are come toge∣ther to Constantinople, the companie of so worthie a Dam∣sell is not to be left, neither is there anie reason to speake euill of her, but for her that doth loue thée as I doe, it cannot bée without suspition, for that my sorrowfull heart hath de∣uined it, and mine eyes doth now sée, that thou doest desire her to bee thy wife, and shée is not displeased therewith, but when that I doe imagine with my selfe what thou hast bne, and consider lykewise what thou nowe art, I cannot thinke anie other thing, but that there are two knightes called of the Sunne in this world, and that thou art ano∣ther, and not the same that was wont to bee all at my commaundement? Is it possible that thou art hee, who at the first time that thou diddest beholde mée in my trim∣phant Chariot, ert troubled in such sort, that if thou had∣dest not been succoured by thy Page and my Damsell, thu haddest follen from thy horse vnto the ground? Art thu by fortune that same knight of the Sunne, that for to defende my iustice, thou tookest vpon thée that strong and perillos contention with the Prince Meridian  brother? not bee that thou shouldest bee that knight of  Chariot,
that diddest so long time defend the great and singular beau∣tie of the Princesse Lyndadrides in the Court of the Em∣perour Trebatio? Of truth it must néedes bée some other, that did shew so great and entire loue vnto mée, and so ab∣solutlie dyd publish himselfe to bée all and whlie at my commaundement. What is become of those amorous and swéete wordes that thou wert wont to vtter and speak vnto mée, and those deepe and profound sighes, with the which thou gauest mee to vnderstand the greate griefe that thou receiuedst for my loue? Is it possible that thou hast for∣got thy selfe, or hast thou lost thy wits and memorie? With what great ioy and contentment thou wentest in my com∣panie towards the gran Tartaria, hoping at thy comming thether to be married vnto me, and how many times I was required of thée in that iourney? Hast thou forgotten that for the celebrating of our nuptials, thou diddest cause in the gran Catya to bée ioyned together all the kings and migh∣tie Lords, almost all the Pagans, & how that my father the Emperour Alyandro had receiued thée for his sonne, and all his subiects for their Lorde? Of truth I doe verilie be∣léeue that all this thou hast forgotten, and doest not remem∣ber anie of these things, of the which I doe not greatlie mer∣uaile, for that hee who did forget the lawe of the diuine Gods, and doth renounce the same, it is not much that hée doe forget and denie all this that betwixt him and mée hath passed. My verie heart doth cleaue and part a sunder, and my soule is readie to depart my bodie with great griefe, when that I doe thinke thereof, and the great abundance of water that dailie distilleth from my eyes, doth declare and testifie that it cannot indure long, but that my life will likewise distill and consume awaie, the which I do beséech the immortall Gods that it might shortlie come to passe, for it shall bée vnto me a great glorie to lacke lyfe, rather than to féele such excéeding great anguish and mortall paine. I woulde write vnto thée more at large, for according vnto the great reason the which I haue to complaine my selfe of , although I dydde nothing else in two dayes, yet
should I haue matter inough against thinges which doth withdrawe my handes and my will not to consent that I shall doe it: the one is, that they who haue borne thée so much good will, and loued thée as I haue done, it is not good for to inlarge much with anger, for that vttering with passion, causeth for to saie that, which after doth repent them: the other, for whereas doth lack loue and good will, many times briefe reasons doth séeme large and prolixious: the third is, for that I doe know that all what∣soeuer I shall write vnto thée, thou wilt stoppe thy eares thereat, so that all my writing shall bée in vaine, and there∣fore I am determined to bée quiet and holde my peace, and conclude with this, that either the bones of this sorrow∣full and vnfortunate Princesse Lyndabrides shall remaine in Grecia, or else to take of thée cruell reuengement before she doth depart from hence, and séeing that thou wert so har∣die and bold for to offend the diuine maiestie, make thy selfe readie for to receiue the paine and punishment for the same, for that it cannot be otherwise, but that the immortall Gods will haue a regard vnto this my great iniurie, and for the part of kindred that belongeth vnto them, will punish thée conformable vnto thy deserts. Lyndabrides. In the meane time that this faire Princesse was wri∣ting of this Letter, at euerie word her eyes ranne downe with water, and her anguish and griefe which shée felt was so great, that many times before shée coulde conclude the writing of her Letter, she fell in a sound. In the end when it was concluded, she called a damsell vnto her, (in whome the had great confidence and trust) and gaue vnto her the Letter, saying, that incontinent she should depart vnto the Citie of Constantinople, and in the secretest wise that pos∣sible was, shée should giue that Letter vnto the knight of the Sun, and y• she shld not returne againe in anie man∣ner of wise without an aunswere vnto the same. Then the Damsell who was wise, and verie well vnderstoode
all her secrets did their promise, and gaue her word to doe and accomplish all her request. So in taking her leaue of her, she depated towards the Citie of Constantinople, and when she came vnto the mightie pallace, the aske for the lodging of the knight of the Sun, and being certefied therof she went thether and entering in, she found him not there, for that he was gone vnto the Emperour, but yet the found there a young man, by whom she sent him word that there was a damsell tarrying for him at his lodging, who bring∣eth vnto him a message. He then so soone as he heard there∣of, did take his  of the Emperour and departed with the young man, but when he came whereas the damsell did abide his comming, he was greatly amazed to see her, for that by and by he knew her to be one belonging vnto the Princesse Lyndabrides, wherewithall his hart seemed for to turne vpside wne within his breast, according vnto the great alteration that he felt within himselfe, but hee was troubled a great deale mre when that the damsell deliuered the Letter, and said that it came from her Ladie & Mistres, and being in a great confusion, with a pale and wan colour he receiued the Letter, & opening it he read the whole con∣tents thereof. In the meane time that he was reading the same, the damsel that brought it di verie much behold him, for so she was commanded by her Ladie, to see that is by outward semblance he made anie signe of sorrow, at which time all his whole members shaked, by the which the dam∣sell did verie well vnderstand that he was not a little trou∣bled, in the concluding and reading of the same, for that his eyes were still full of teares, with great pittie, which hée conceiued by the wordes of that Letter, and hée who had great and force, courage for to cumbat with the most furi∣ous, fierce, and brauest knightes and gyantes in all the worlde, had not now anie heart for to dissemble the greate pine and sorrowe manifested by that Letter, that the faire Princesse Lyndabrides receiued. Then after a while that he had studied with himselfe what was best to bee done, straight wayes tooke paper and inke, and orthwith wrote
her a Letter in answere vnto that which he receiued, the which being concluded, he gaue it vnto the damsell & sayd, that in Gods name she might returne againe vnto her mi∣stres, although before she departed he demanded many que∣stions of her touching her estate, receiuing great pleasure to be certefied of the same, as he who sometimes did loue her a∣boue all things in the world, and as yet he could not so per∣fectlie cléere himselfe from her, but there must néeds remain in his heart some sparkes of that amorous fire before past, the which could not but many times trouble his conscience. and although the roiall Princesse Claridiana in beautie and worthinesse was without comparison, yet was that precious Princesse Lyndabrides so faire and gratious, that there was no peron in all the whole world but would haue bene in loue with her, in especiall that continuall and long conuersation which the knight of the Sunne had with her, did worke so much in effect, that what with his procure∣ment, as also with the great maiestie wherewith shee dyd alwaies defend her honestie and purenesse, was not of so small force, but was sufficient of it selfe to worke so great effect in him, that he could not by anie meanes wholie roote out the great loue the which he receiued in his heart. Thus when the Damsell was diparted the knight of the Sunne returned vnto the place whereas the Emperour rebatio was, for that with the presence of the Princesse Claridiana he might einguish those firie flames which the remem∣brance of the Princesse dyd cause desire for to kindle with∣in him, the which did assure him in all pointes, for that in her presence there was not anie one so much to be desired as the royall princesse Claridana, because shée had so great exquisitenesse and bountie, that shée séemed amongest all the whole companie of the other Ladies and Damsells, as doth the fragrant Rose amongest the other small flow∣ers. When that the Damsell was returned into the Campe, shée straight wayes went vnto her mistres, who taking her by the hand, entered into her Closet, with great abundance
of teares and profound sighes, (before that she read the Letter) the ire Princesse dyd aske the damsell where and in what place she did finde the knight of the Sunne, whe∣ther he was with Claridian, or whether hée made aie token, , or alteration, when that he knew her, and receiued the Letter. Likewise when that he read it, if his countenance dyd continue, or altered in anie point. These and many other perticular things she did aske and demand of her Damsell, which were caused by the hot burning loue that did molest her minde. Unto all the which her Dam∣sell did make her answere, and gaue her aduertisement of all that she had séene in the knight of the Sunne. Which was not vnto her small contentment and ioy, to heare how that he was troubled in mind with the reding of her Let∣ter. So that such like comfors (although they be small re∣medies vnto ue louers) yet for all that they be great ease vnto amorous passions, though in the end it be occasion of farther heate. Thus after a while that they had passed the time in the demauds, the aire princesse would reade the Letter, but she was so troubled to thinke what should come written therein, that she almost wanted courage and heart for to open it, but yet in the end with rat alteation of co∣lour in her face, she did open it, which sayd as heereafter fol∣loweth. A Letter of the knight f the Sunne sent to the Princesse Lyndabrides. SOueraigne Princesse of Tarria, by one of your damsels I receiued a Letter of yours, with the which is that I could make ma∣nifest by wordes all that I felt at my hart, I doe thinke verilie that you woulde holde your selfe for satisfied, and not to desire to haue of me more reuēge, for y• you see my whole hart burne in bright flames, and hath not so much libertie as to quench one sparke of that fire. Faire princesse, do you not beléeue
that the loue which you saie I was wont to beare vnto you, with the great solempnitie of teares, and profound sighes published, is forgotten. For héere I giue you to vnderstand that it hath hetherto indured, and shall indure so-long as life doth last, for that it was in such sorte rooted within my heart, that first it shall consume into dust and ashes, be∣fore the rootes thereof bée pulled cleane out. I am hee that I was wont to be, and in no point altered nor changed vn∣to that I haue béene before nowe, and if you saie that before I was yours, so I will now bée yours, and yours all the daies of my life, and you haue no reason to saie that there is in the world two knights of my name, if it were so, yet I am he alone that doth loue you, and first I wil con∣sent to death, rather than anie héerein should beare me com∣panie. You doe saie, that how is it possible that I should be he that was so dismaid-the first time that I saw you in the triumphant Chariot. If it were a thing that you might sée and beholde what I felte, and the greate alteration of my heart at such time as I sawe your Damsell, onelie for to know the occasion of her comming: with greater reason you might saie, that you shoulde sée me in a greater confusin if you sawe mée now in your presence. And whereas you doe saie that I had battaile with the Prince Meridian in the defence of your iustice, I am now more readier in that qua∣rell to combat with all that are in the world, and first I wil consent to bee hewed all to péeces, than in one-point to con∣sent vnto your iniurie, so that in conclusion, high & migh∣tie Princesse, in all things that shall accomplish your ser∣uice, my good will at this time is more prompt than heere∣tofore it hath béene, and the knight of the Sunne you may estéeme him as wholie your owne, sauing one thing which I doe reserue from your subiection, which is my soule, for that is immortall, and the soueraigne creator did create it vnto his owne similitude and likenesse, the which shall loose his whole price and estate, if I doe yéeld it to be yours, for to obey your commandement, and therin I shall offend the di∣uine maiesie, & what greaer offence may I commit, thā for
to ioyne with you in matrimonie, you being a Gentile, and I a Christian. And againe, you that doe presume to des∣cend from the high originall of the high Gds, vnto whome you shall doe great iniurie, if that you doe ioyne issue and bloud with a knght that is contrarie vnto your lawe and profession, I doe beléeue that you cannot long time suffer mée to bée your husband, neither your vassalls and subiects obey mée for their Lorde, for either I shall bée constrained for to turne mée vnto your lawe, or else you and all yours vnto my posession. All this I had forgotten when that (as you doe saie) we trauailed together towards the gran Ca∣taia, and nothing was the occasion of this forgetfulnesse, but that it was so little past that I became a Christian, that as then my soule was not well awaked out of that obscure and darke lawe in the which I was deceiued, but after∣wardes I called my selfe to remembraunce, and I giue in∣finite thankes vnto almightie God, that he hath giuen mée such inspiration, that if it had not come from him (according vnto the great loue which he bore vnto mee) I had not ben able for to haue cléered my selfe from you, but that néedes I must haue fallen into that perillous snare. And by that I doe knowe that the vniuersall creatour of all things, of his owne handes created with so greae exellencie the royall Princesse Claridana, who for that shee is a myrrour, with∣out offending of the diuine maiestie, I may receiue her for my spouse, and with the sheelde of her beautie I will labour for to defend the encounters of your greate beautie, the which is of so great sorce and strength, that if I had not so excellent a sheeld, there were not in me sufficient force for to make resistance, but that néedes I must bée ouercome. Therefore soueraigne and worthie Princesse, haue pati∣ence, and thinke (because fortune hath bene so aduerse and contrarie vnto our desires, and that our destinies woulde not permit the same) that the diuine prouidence was not serued therein, and as a thing that was neither conuenient for you nor mée, hée woulde not consent nor giue that in this our purpose our willes shoulde bée accomplished. You
saie that you write to me briefe, for that you will not write to me with anger, wherein I receiue great curtesie, for that being as I am, so much yours, it should grieue mée verie much that you should speake against me wordes of greate cholar. And in that which you doe saie, that whereas loue doth lack, your brief reasons wil séeme vnto me prolixious, and that you knowe to all thinges I will make my eares deafe, if it were a thing possible without preiudiee for to open these my entrailes, for to shew vnto you my heart, where∣in you might plainlie sée, how you are deceiued, for that there is nothing in all the world that doth delight mée more than in the receit of your Letter, and in reading of the same, so that if it were a thing possible, I would it should neuer conclude. You doe conclude in your Letter, that you neuer will depart out of Crecia, till such time as you haue of mée reuengement. I would verie faine know in what order you would haue it, because I would excute it my selfe, and if it bée your pleasure and commandement that I put my self in your power, giue me straight waies to vnderstand there∣of, and I will be as readie to obey, as you for to command mée, and I do not much estéeme that loue, if you thinke that with my death you should remaine satisfied, with the which I conclude, kissing your emperiall hands. The knight of the Sunne. In the meane time that this faire Princesse was rea∣ding the Letter, she shed so many teares from her faire eies, that she was all to be sprinkled therwith, and when the had concluded the reading thereof, all her members failed her, and her heart was ouercome, & her amorous passions were more kindled with the louing wordes that he wrote vnto her. But when she saw cléerelie that the knight of the Sun did discouer the loue that he bare vnto the Princesse Clari∣diana, and that her suspition fell out to be true, she remai∣ned as one dead, and knew not what to saie nor to doe, but to complaine of her Gods and of fortune, and it is to belée∣ued, that her lyfe had not endured long, if that shée had not
béene wonderfullie succoured, as shal bée declared vnto you héereafter in this Hystorie. How the stout and furious Pagan Bramarant ouerthrew and destroyed all the Idolls in the Campe, and how the Emperour Alycandro for to appeale him, caused to be brought with great honor the bodie of the gran Cam∣pion that was in the wildemesse of Grecia, and what happened ouer and aboue this. Chap. 36. THe great wrath and furie was so excéeding of that proude and barbarous sonne of the gran Campion for the death of his Father, that there was not roome inough for him in all that mightie campe of the Pagans, but he ranne vp and downe from one place to another, like vnto a mad man, or one from himselfe, crying out, making a great and terrible noise, casting vp his firie eies vnto the heauens, blaspheming and deieng his Gods, vttering wordes of great reproch and anger, thinking there∣by to prouoke them vnto wrath, to cause them to descende vpon the earth against him, where he might execute his wrath vpon them. As he was wholie ignorant of the im∣mortall paines, which these false Gods (in whom the Pa∣gans do beleeue and worship) hath in hell, and for that in no place he could take anie rest or be in quiet, hée went into all the Tents of the Campe, whereas he found many Idolles verie rich and of great price, whome hée ouerthrew and cut in peeces with his sword, and left not one standing, nei∣ther was, there anie king or knight of so great hardinesse, that durst make anie resistance against him, but onelie those two mightie and valiant knightes, the Prince Meridian and Brandimardo, who with a verie good will woulde haue baunted the pride of that proude and insolent Pagan, if the Emperour had not disturbed them, in requesting them
not to returne to renue anie more their contention and an∣ger, so that finding not one that durst make anie resistance against him, the pride of this furious and fierce Pagan Bra∣marant encreased so much, that he neuer stayed till that hée came into the Emperiall Tent of the Emperour Alycan∣dro, within the which was a verie greate and rich stature of golde full of precious stones, dedicated vnto the God Iu∣piter, the which was made by the diuells arte, in such sort, that the Diuell was within the same, and spake by the mouth of that Idoll, deceiuing those wicked and miserable Pagans, who with great reuerence and dutie did prostrate themselues vnto the ground and worshipped him, it was set vppon a verie rich Alter, whereas none durst be so bold as come nigh vnto it, except certaine Priestes, which were consecrated for to doe sacrifice vnto him dailie. Besides this, the Emperour Alycandro had in many places round about his great Tent many other Idolles, whome hée dyd worship and all his subiects, and being that daie in his great Tent, accompanied with all those mightie kings and Lords of his whole Campe, ordaining for to giue battaile vnto the Emperour Trebatio, this mightie Pagan armed with his strong armour, mounted vpon his mightie horse, entered in∣to the Tent, and when hée sawe the stature of the God Iu∣piter vppon the Alter, as soone as he was entered in, hée went towards the same, and in drawing out his sword hée sayd. Now will I sée if the power of that Christian Knight bée more than thine. And in saying these wordes he stroke him such a right downe blowe, that although it were made of massie golde, yet hée cloue it downe to his breast, and fal∣ling one peece from another, there was sodainlie hearde a great and timerous thunder clappe, wherewith it séemed that the heauens woulde haue rent a sunder, and in the middest of the great Tent was séene a vestigell or spirite so dreadfull and horrible to beholde, that it séemed to bée some infernall vision, casting out fire at his nose and eyes, and in both his handes he had a great mase of yron, with the
which he made a shewe as though he would haue stroken Bramarant vpon the head, as those which had no more pow∣er but onelie for to put in feare with those his visages and semblances, so that alone with the sight of him there was not one in all that Tent but dyd tremble ansd was afraide, thinking verilie that they should be destroied for that which Bramarant had done. But this proude Barbarian who fea∣red not all that infernall companie, with no more dreade than if it had bene a weake and féeble damsell, he did abide his comming, and as this vestigell or diuell did make a pro∣fer to strike him with his mase, the Pagan stroke a terri∣ble blow at him with his sword, and thinking to haue clo∣uen him a sunder in the middest, hee stroke at nothing but at the aire, for that the vestigell as a fancie consumed a∣waie, and was no more séene in the Tent. But the Em∣perour and all those that were with him were verie sorrie for that which Bramarant had done, & mistrusted that there would happen vnto them great euill and misfortune for the same, yet for all that there was not one amongest them all that durst retourne against him in the quarrell of their Gods, but one Meridian and Brandmardo, who because they would not anger the Emperour were in quiet, wherewith Bramarant went out of the tent with great furie. Then the Emperour thought within himselfe that it were good (som∣what to appease his furie,) for to send for the bodie of the gran Campion, which laie dead in the wildernesse of Gre∣cia, and to burie him with that honor and solempnitie as is vsed in their Countrie: euen so as he thought he put it in vre, and straight waies commaunded that thirtie crowned kings, the most principallest of all the armie, should put on mourning apparell, and cause him to be laide vpon a béere, and so brought vnto the Campe, and commanded to accom∣panie them ten thousand armed knightes, and all those Gy∣ants that came from the Orientall Ilands, that were sub∣iect vnto Bramarant shoulde goe with them. And in this sorte these thirtie kings with all their companie departed, according vnto the vse and manner of their Countrie, which
was a strange thing to sée, & when they came into the wil∣dernes, they straight waies found the bodie of y• gran Cam∣pion, which was begun to bée eaten with the fowles, and after that they all for a while had made great lamentation and bewailed his death, those kings (for to doe him more ho∣nour) did balme him, and then laid him vpon a Béere which they brought with them, that was verie rich, and couered with a faire cloth of Tissue, and so carried him towards the Campe, whereas he was receiued with great honour, by the Emperour and all those mightie Princes that were with him, who went forth and met with them a good mile off. The manner which they vsed for to giue his sepulchre with more honour (according vnto the vse of their Countrie) was, that they laide the dead corse vpon a verie broade and smooth marble stone all white, whereas they burned and consumed the bodie all to ashes, and in the meane time that hée was a burning, all the principallest of the whole armie, were placed round about the fire, all couered with robes of Sackcloth, so long, that it trailed vppon the ground, and made great sorrow and lamentation, and praied vnto their Gods to receiue him into their companie, in which time all the praiers which his sonne Bramarant made, was no other but blaspheming against all the Elements, and against na∣ture, for that they had power for to consume and burne the bodie of the Gran Campion his Father. Thus when that the bodie was all consuned and burned, the ashes remai∣ning vpon the Marble stone, the which was taken and put in verie rich vessells of golde, wherevnto they put water and stirred it together, and put the vessells vpon a faire Ta∣ble. Then the Emperour Alycandro (the more to honour the Gran Campion) beganne first for to drinke of the same mixture, and after him Bramarant, and after them in order all those Kings, Princes, and worthie Knightes that were in the Campe, till such time as they left no mention of the water and ashes, so the mightiest Lords that were in all the Paganisine, made their bodies the sepulchre of that mighty Pagan, and this they had amongst them for the most hono∣rablest
burying that could be. With these and many other thinges moe which the Emperour Alycandro commaunded to bee done for the Gran Campion, making great lamenta∣tion for his death, Bramarant was somewhat appeased, and lost great part of that outragious furie and wrath which he had conceiued, and vnderstoode and procured no other thing but onelie how and by what meanes he might make terri∣ble and cruell reuengement for the death of his welbeloued Father. Then after certaine daies were past of the truce which was taken with the Gréekes, they beganne of all partes to prepare and make themselues in a readinesse against the battaile that was determined, and was thought to be of both partes the brauest and most cruellest and bloudie that euer was séene vpon the earth, for that the Emperour Aly∣candro had commaunded, that the first daie that the Gréekes should come forth for to giue them battaile, that all the peo∣ple of their Campe shoulde procéede against them, for that they wold at once conclude that enterprise, and not to leaue their aduersaries anie force and strength at all, for to return againe vnto the fielde, for although there were many bat∣tailes betwixt them, as the Hystorie hath shewed you, yet there went not forth the third parte of the people that was there with them which were so many in number, that there might well bée made of them thrée mightie armies, and of truth there was neuer séene in all Asia nor buropa so ma∣ny and so valyant, stout, and worthie knightes gathered together, as were at that present in the fields of Constanti∣nople. Now let vs leaue the Pagans in readinesse for the bat∣taile to come, and let vs veturne vnto the Gréeks that were in the mightie Citie of Constantinople. What the Greekes did, and how the king Liseo and the faire Queene Radamira came to aide the Emperour Trebatio, and what happened besides. Chap. 37.
IT was a thing of great wonder vnto the Gréekes, to sée themselues closed within the Citie, and so compassed about in their owne fields, for their enimies were so great and infinit a number of Pagans, that it might well be sayd, that they had against them all the whole force of the world, for there were in the field an infinite number of barbarous people, of different and diuerse Nations, and the most part proude and terrible Gyants, that the like were neuer seene in all the world, but God of his goodnesse created such heartes in that mightie Emperour Trebatio and in his worthie proicnie, as also in those high Princes, and stout, worthie, & valiant knights that were in his companie, that not onelie they were with∣out all feare and dreade, but also had great force and cou∣rage for to destroie and ouercome all those that had compas∣sed them about, and there were few or none amongst them but receiued great contentment to be there at that present, for that the Emperour Trebatio (séeing with him his sons and so many worthie Princes & knights) receiued so great ioy and pleasure, that he thought himselfe to be the most hap∣piest and fortunatest Prince in all the world. And of the knight of the Sun, & of the faire and soueraigne Empresse of Trapisonda, it may wel be said that ther was neuer sne two hearts with so great contentment, for that hauing one the other in presence, either of them thought themselues in paradise, although you must vnderstand that in all this time the knight of the Sun could neuer bring to effect his desire with the roiall Princesse, for she was of so high a courage y• the knight of the Sun neuer durst in heart cause her, to re∣ceiue anie anger, neither woulde shée consent to anie thing that was against her honour, the which she had alwaies be∣fore her eies more than anie damsell in her time. With no lesse ioy than they, liued those two faithfull and perfect lo∣uers, the faire Princesse Oliia and Rosicleer, who being in presence together, thought themselues cléere of all sorrowes and griefes the which the one had sustained for the other,
whereat the king Oliuerio receiued no small glorie and con∣tentment, for y• it séemed vnto him, y• with no other Prince in all the world he could not haue married his Daughter so highlie and worthilie as he had married her, neither coulde she haue bene exalted to no higher estate. So that he & all those that came with him from great Britaine were wonder∣fullie amazed to sée the mightinesse of the Emperor Treba∣tio, & the highnesse of his Court, so furnished with a greate number of worthie Princes and valiant knightes, as also with so many faire and precious damsells, that of truth it might be spoken, that there was neuer seene so great high∣nesse and maiestie in the court of anie Prince before y• time. And the Pagans that came forth of Persia with the king Florion, meruailed greatlie to see the orders of the Court of Grecia, for by the sacrifices & ceremonies of the Christians, (for that they did see and behold them euerie daie, to be done with great iumptuousnesse & reuerence) they were partlie inclined to thinke well of the lawe and faith of Iesu Christ true God and man, and truce (although there were many that died for this loue which the knight of the Sunne had wich the  Lyndables) yet grew there not so little effect  of these famous wars, but that by occasion of those Pagans were saued, for that there was  that came out of Persia but turned all Christans Likewise the valiant and worthie Prince of Fraunce in this time did reioyce himselfe with his loue, the faire Princesse Lindaraza, as two that loued together exeée∣dinglie The like did all the other Princes that had their Mistresses there in the Court, as the Prince Don Siluerio with his loue the Quéene Arquirosa, and Rodomarte and Rodofeo with their Ladies, and as all these receiued great delight, so to the contrarie, Bargandel, Liriamandro, the king Sacridoro and Brandizel were verie sorrowfull for the ab∣sence of their Ladies, although the great good wil which they had for to serue the Emperor Trebatio in those warres, did witigate the great griefe which otherwise they should haue receiued for their louers.
After this sorte they were all in sundrie and different thoughts, although for to giue battaile against their eni∣mies they were conformable, in which time vpon a sodaine there was brought newes vnto the Emperour, how that the king Liseo and the faire Quéene Radamira were come into the port, they for whome the knight of the Sun made bataile with the stout and doubtfull knight Raiartes, & re∣stored vnto him the kingdome of Lidia, the Quéene brought with her foure thousand knights, & the king sixe thousand, all valiant and well armed, who comming towards Gre∣cia, by fortune did méete together at sea, and comming both in one demand, they kept companie together vntill they came into the port. Then so soone as the newes was know∣en in Constantinople, the Emperour Trebatio did so much that his sonnes and all that worthie crew did go forth to receiue them, & being together in the field, they went vnto the sea side, whereas they found at their comming thether, that the king and the Quéene were landed a shore, & com∣ming vnto them to giue them entertainment, the knight of the Sunne said: My good Lords, from this daie forwards we may haue little feare of our enimies, hauing your high∣nesse on our side. This feare may we all put a part, being in your companie (sayd the Quéene Radamira) for he that deliuered me from that furious and fierce Raiartes, will de∣liuer me from all the knights of the world. Well then (said the king Liseo) I am no lesse bound vnto this happie Prince than all the rest, for that by him I haue my life, & all my whole kingdome, and there withall they embraced one ano∣ther with great loue, & all that were there reioyced of their comming, for that the king was a verie good knight, & fur∣nished with all good manners and conditions, & the Quéene Radamira was verie faire and gratious, and receiued won∣derful ioy and contentment to sée the knight of the Sun, for there was nothing in all the world that she desired so much to see, but when she sawe him so much growen, as well in bignesse as in height, more than he was at such time as hée was in Babylon, she meruailed verie much. When the
knight of the Sun and those that came with him had giuen them their welcome, they tooke their waie towards Con∣stantinople, & passed by the camp of the Pagans in sight of them all, who did behold them, & offered them no harme nor discurtesie, for that there was a truce betwixt them. When they came vnto the Citie, the Emperour and the Empres, and all those Ladies and Gentlewomen that were with her receiued great ioy & loued their new guests, grasifieng very much their comming. And héere you shall vnderstand that at this present that worthie and valiant Tartarian Zoylo, when he sawe the Quéene Radamira was taken in loue with her, with great good will for to take her to he his wise and spouse, if that she were so content therewith, and from that daie forwardes he did procure by all meanes to giue her knowledge thereof, and she when she was aduertised & knew him to be so valiant a knight and high a Prince, she tooke great pleasure in his seruice. So by reason that the time drew nigh of the generall battaile, with great dili∣gence the Emperour and all those worthie knights minded no other thing but to visite their people, commanding that they should be prouided of good armour & & of all other things necessarie for the battaile, as they that made account, that they had all that remained in the world against thē. Like∣wise on the other part in the campe of the Pagans they did as much, for in all the daies and time of their truce, they vnderstoode no other thing but to make all things in a re∣dinesse against the daie appointed, being determinded amon∣gest themselues to goe forth all the whole Campe vnto the battaile, for that they would at that time make an end and destroie all the Gréekes, and straight wayes enter into the mightie Citie of Constantinople, and so remaine Lords ouer all the whole Empire. Thus after this sorte they passed awaie the daies of the truce, and afterwardes there happened many other things, as shall be tolde you in this Chapter following.
Of the rigorous and bloudie battaile that was betweene the people of the Emperour Trebatio, and those of the Emperour Alycandro, and of such meruailous things as happened therein. Chapter. 38. I Had néed of an vnderstanding & iudgement much more higher thanthat of Plato, who was amongst the Philosophers had in re∣putation of a diuine vnderstanding, & more prompter than that of Epaminondas, or of Cirus amongst the Gréekes and Persians, who were accounted without comparison, and also a memo∣rie more greater than that which maye be giuen me by the Memoratiue art of Simonides: eloquence more eminent than Homer or Demosthenes, to declare here the worthie and in∣credible déedes, and memorable acts of those heroicall & fa∣mous knights that in the last battaile betwéene the Empe∣rours were ioyned together in the field of Grecia, in the sight of newe Rome, founded by Constantine the Prince, for that if with good affection you read the Historie before writ∣ten, you shall sée this pleasant Hystorie so intangled, and the worthinesse of renowmed knights so exalted, that for to de∣clare perticularlie euerie one of their mightie acts, you shall well perceiue that it were néedfull of the diuine fauour: & againe if you do remember the most parte of the names of those worthy knights, and the varietie of Nations there ioy∣ned together, you had neede of a good memorie, and to tell of them and euerie thing in order, it is for to manifest all the whole world, and all worthinesse therein: So I séeing this worke to mount and ascend so high, & my small vnderstan∣ding not able for to comprehend the same, was determined for to  last Chapter, and not to procéede anie farther, but leaue this trauaile vnto some other, that hath a more sharper vnderstanding than I haue, and remayned
certaine daies in this determination, and occupied my wits in other diuerse and variable things, béeing fullie perswa∣ded that my vnderstanding was not sufficient for to de∣clare and make manifest so high and worthie things: for one waie the mightinesse of these two Emperors did make mée to wonder, for that to bring in subiection the whole vniuersall world they lacked nothing, and another waie, I did greatlie meruaile, that the great number of so manye worthie and valyant knightes, who according vnto their great valour shewed in the battaile for to come, of either of them might be made a perticular Hystorie. But when that it commeth to my remembrance, that I shall finde that shi∣ning Alphebo in the same battaile, I am then tongue tide, and my wittes troubled, to thinke that I doe put my selfe for to declare his déedes, for although I had so manye and more eies than Argos, yet were they not sufficient for to beholde them. Who lykewise should beholde the other son of Trebatio, and the sonne of the gran Campion, shall finde that their actes are not worthie of anie lesse memo∣rie. I knowe not whether you doe remember or not, the names of those two valiant Pagans, Meridian and Brandi∣mardo, that onelie in hearing them named the earth doeth tremble, as much more shall be done by their equalls, the Prince of raunce and the mightie Troyan. Let not bée forgotten the mightie Emperour of Grecia, with all the remnant of the inclite and generall knighthood of his soue∣ragne Court, for according as they are all most valiant and stout, so are they sufficient to make the whole vniuersall world to be their owne. What shall we then doe if we re∣member so many thousands of Pagans which are vnder the banner, and at the commandement of the worthie Empe∣rour Alycandro, amongst whome (besides the Nations of strong Gyantes that came from the Orientall Ilandes, of the Gran Campion) there were one thosand more of Gy∣ants, who were so bigge, mightie, and strong, that they were sufficient to bée accounted walles vnto a great Citie.
I knowe not what you do thinke of this, you that doe reade this Hystorie, but I for my parte when that I doe thinke of things of so great worthinesse, my memorie and wittes doth faile mée, And I am fullie certefied, that if you did see this great battaile concluded, all the Hystories that heereto∣fore you haue read and séene, treating of loue and of wars, if that they were laide before this, you woulde account them as nothing. I will not contend anie farther héerein with reasons, but certefie you, that I béeing determined to staie here and pro∣céede no farther, yet for all that, as the wearied horse being forced by the sharpe pricking spurre to bée quicke in his course: euen so the ouermuch affection the which I haue vnto those high and worthie Dames and valiant Knights, doth constraine mée to procéede forwardes, till such time as I doe conclude the first parte of this mightie Hystorie, and in that my weake and wearied vnderstanding cannot comprehend, let my affection supplie the same, the which hath mounted my wittes so high, that although with great trauaile, yet haue I translated that which I thought neuer to comprehend, séeking it out of greate volumes, from the originall written by the wise Artemidoro, who béeing hol∣pen by the wise Lyrgandeo and the Magitian spirite, lefte it in writing, according as héereafter you shall heare decla∣red. At such time as the daie apprched of that heauie and sorrowfull time (wherein was ought that generall and bloudie battaile, in which was concluded the expedition of new Rome) was séene great wonders and tokens terrible to beholde, and sufficient for to terrifie the heartes of those valiant and stout warriours, for that the heauens and the earth did manifest the excéeding great griefe which they felt of that mortall destruction, and it séemed verilie vnto them that the end of the worlde was at hande, by manifest tokens which were séene that daie, for that there was ne∣uer so great multitude of people séene slaine in one daie, as appeared afterward by the greate streames of bloud which
was in so great abundance, that it was sufficient for to chaunge the coulour of the great Sea of geo into Fuxino. In testimonie whereof, at such time as the daie shoulde breake, the same daie of the battaile all the whole region of the aire séemed to bée on fire, with great abundaunce of lightnings, accompanied with so many and dreadfull thun∣der clappes, that all the celestiall moouinges séemed to haue fallen vpon the earth, and at such time as the daie dyd som∣what appeare, the dew that was wonted to fall from hea∣uen in the mornings, appeared to bée of red bloud, wherwith al the grasse and flowers in the fieldes of Grecia was laden. Likewise there were that sawe, that whereas the shining starres alwayes at the breake of daie dyd vanish and take their leaue, that now at that instant many Comets of fire dyd fall from heauen into the campe of the Pagans, and did as much harme as thought they had béene thunderbolts amongest them. And at such time as the Sunne shoulde shew her selfe, they sawe plainlie how that it had lost his rubicond coulour, and was chaunged into the coulour of bloud, but after that this earthquake and storme of lighte∣ning and thunder was past, yet there appeared not one clowde in all the whole region and compasse of the aire, and the daie was verie obscure and darke, by reason of the sor∣rowfull and vnaccustomed coulour the Sunne shewed. The earth quaked and trembled verie terriblie, whch was the occasion that many edifices dyd fall and were ouer∣throwen downe, and many high mountaines dyd sinke and were censumed, so that with the one and with the other all the people were greatlie amazed, and there was not one, (although hée were neuer so valiant and strong) but at those sighes and tokens receiued both feare and dreade, sauing onelie that superbious Pagan, the sonne vnto the gran Campion, who saide within himselfe and spake it plainlie that the heauens and the earth dyd shew those signes, in token of the great abundance of bloud that should be shedde that same daie,  of the death of his Fa∣ther, and thought it  such time as the battayle
was begunne, and their companions ioyned together, that he might execute his mortall furie, but it was not long af∣ter that his dsire was accomplished, for that, that worthie and valiant Emperour Trebatio séeing that the daie was come of the battaile, verie earlie in the morning at the daie breake, was in the field accompanied with all those valy∣ant and worthie knights, putting in order all his people in the best manner they could, for to execute their battaile, and although they dyd sée those wonderfull signes and to∣kens, which caused them to haue some feare and dreade, yet for all that, the good Emperour neuer once abated anie whit of his valiant courage, but had great hope and confi∣dence in the onelie liuing God, that he with his mightie hand and outstretched arme woulde defend the whole state of Christendome, and did continuallie in his heart call vp∣pon God, requesting him of his infinite mercie and good∣nesse for to graunt vnto him the victorie in that battaile, and not to permit that that worthie crew of Knighthoode should bee vanquished and lost in that battaile, and did confesse and acknowledge that his great power and all that mightie Campe was in effect as much as nothing, if that bée of his beneuolence dyd not aide and succour him. These and such like things sayd the good Emperour in his heart, and neuer rested in going from one place to another, putting his people in good order, with a Tipstaffe in his hande, lyke a valiant and expert Captaine, wherein there was not one that dyd passe him, neither in his owne Campe nor in the whole Campe of the Pagans was there anie dyd so well. The first battalle that he ordained was of the Gréekes, saying, that in the defence of their Countrie it was greate reason that they shoulde haue the foreward, wherein there was foure and twentie thousand knightes, all verie well armed, and excéeding expert, and committed the charge and gouernment thereof vnto that valyant and worthie Alphebo, the lyght of all Chialrie and knighthoode, and put in his companie that worthie and royall Princesse
Claridiana, for that they being together y• one for the other, would force themselues to worke the greater wonders, and on the otherside, he placed with them, his great friend Ori∣stides, that valiant Troyan, so that they thrée being toge∣ther, they were sufficient for to put feare and dread in all the whole Pagan hoast. The second battaile, he dyd commend vnto that valiant and worthie Rosicleer, (called by an other name, the knight of Cupid) who dyd so great wonders that day, that so long as the world doth endure, his fame will be mencioned ther∣in, he gaue with him in company, his very good friends the Tartarian Zoylo, and the king Sacridoro, with twentie thousand Gréeke knights, of great courage, who followed after his brother. The third battaile he gaue vnto that mightie king Flo∣rion, with all his knightes that he brought with him out of Persia, and other tenne thousand of his owne people, and in his companie that valiant prince Brandizel, being father and sonne, that made great destruction amongst the Pa∣gans that day. The fourth battaile he gaue vnto the worthie prince of Fransia, and vnto the king of Lidra, with all the people that they brought out of their countries. The fift baitaile he gaue vnto the gouernment of the king Oliuerio, and vnto the prince of Lusitania, with all the people that cme out of great Britaine, and in this battaile went those two worthie princes Bargandel, and Liriaman∣dio, with other worthie princes and valiant knights that belonged vnto the king Oliuerio. The sixt battaile the Emperour Trebatio, tooke vnto himselfe with all the rest of the knightes that remained, which were to the number of thrée score thousand knights. There went in this battaile in companie with the Empe∣rour, the king of  the two princes of , and Transilunia, with the two gallant princes Rodomarte, and Rodoteo, and the two most valiant & worthie knights, Don Clarus, and Arealus, who in this daye dyd not a little
exalt the honour of the Godos of Spaine. There went also with the Emperour, those two good knights Flamides, and Florinaldes, who were great friends vnto the knight of the Sunne. Also, there went with him those foure brethren, sonnes vnto the gran Torcato, with that stout Rogelio, who were so couragious, that there were fewe in all the whole armie that were more valianter then they, being but young youthes. There went also with him, the King of Bohemia, and many other mightie Lords, belonging vnto the Emperour of Grecia, whose names be not héere rehearsed, for to auoi tediousnesse. So that this mightie Emperour hadde about him such a companie of valiant and worthy knights, and of high estate, that neuer the like was séene, who little and lit∣le in the order aboue mencioned, dyd begin to fill those fields and plaines, that it was a thing worthie to be séene, so great number of worthie and valiant knights to be ioyned toge∣ther, although they saw before their eies, put in good order their enimies and occasions of the great destruction looked for, as also those fearefull signes and tokens which the hea∣uens and the earth dyd shew vnto them, the which was a thing of great wonder and dread to behold, in especiall, for those Ladies and gentlewomen that were in Constantino∣ple, who séeing their husbandes and children to depart in that sort, their clamors and cryes seemed to assend vnto the heauens. And in the mightie citie of Constantinople, there was séene no other thing but olde men, women and chil∣dren, who went bare foot & bare legged, through the stréetes from one church vnto as other, praying vnto God to graunt the victorie on their parts, and to defend his christian flock. At this time was the Empresse Briana, and the fayre prin∣cesse Olima, with the beautifull Linderaza, the Queene Ra∣damira, and Arquirosa, and many other mo verie faire and beautifull Ladies and gentlewomen, mounted vp into a high tower of the mightie pallace, from whence they might at their ease, discouer and sée all the whole armies, but when they sawe so great a multitude of infidells, against
them whome they loued more then themselues, they re∣ceiued great sorow and dread at their hearts, which caused them to shed many teares, and to pray vnto God for the victorie from the bottome of their hearts. Now let vs leaue them, and tell of the Pagans, who were so many in number, that all the night past, with good part of the morning they hadde enough to doe for to set all things in good order and in a redinesse for the appointed battaile. The first battaile ordained by the Emperour Alicandro, he gaue vnto the rule and gouernement of that proude pa∣gan Bramarant, who like vnto an hungery Lyon or wolfe, wold be the first, and he had with him fiftie thousand horse∣men, the most furious and fiersest that was to be found in all the whole campe, amongst whome he caryed all those giants that his father the Gran Campion, had brought out of his owne countries, which were more then one thousand and all mounted vppon Elephants, who with certaine en∣gens that they brought with them, made them to be verie swifte. Bramarant hadde with him in that battaile all the kinges of the Orientall Ilandes, who as you haue heard, were little inerour vnto gyants, and were the most strrong∣est and stoutest that was in all the whole Ilands, and bee∣ing this braue Barbarian in the middest amongst them, he thought verely that all the whole world (if they had bene ther together) were not able to make resistance against him. The second battaile was gouerned by those two migh∣tie Pagans Meridian and Brandimardo, who hadde with them three score thousand horsemen, all of the Gran Tar∣taria, meruailously well armed, although the most part of them were armed with the hard skinnes of wilde beastes: there were in this battaile, twentie braue and furious Gy∣ants, whereof twelue of the most furious and ill fauored, had no other charge, but to keepe the person of the worthie Prince Meridian. The thirde battaile was giuen vnto the charge of the king Orlan, and the king, Tiderio, who were two mightie
and strong gyants, and had in their companie all the people of Arabia, Carmania, and Palibotros, for that their gouer∣ners were slaine in the battaile past, all the which were to the number of more then thrée score thousand, but yet verie ill armed and nothing expert. The fourth battaile was giuen vnto the prince of Cam∣bray, who as you haue heard, was a young knight, but ve∣ry valiant: He had in his companie three kings of the In∣dia, who were verie fierce giants and stoute, and carryed with them in charge foure score and tenne thousand horse∣men, but not all mounted, vpon horses, but on other wilde beastes, that were verie light and swift, and straunge to be seene in that countrie. The fift battaile was giuen vnto the king Balardo, Lorde of all the Seras, who was meruailously esteemed a∣mongst all the Pagans, and feared, as well for his great brauerie and fiercenesse, as that he was a mightie Lord and of great power and strength he hadde in his companie fiue kings, with all their people, which were to the number of more then foure score thousand; he had also with him fiue gyants, who being in the fore front of the battaile, seemed aboue all the rest like vnto towers. The Emperour Alicandro, had for the gard and kéeping of his person, twelue gyants, the most fiercest and missha∣pen that could be found in all the whole Paganisme, who neuer were out of his presence & companie, day nor night, so y• the Emperour, by reason of their great force & strength, dyd accompt himselfe in great securitie. He was meruailously feared of all his subiects, for that who so euer disordered himselfe at any time in his presēce, (although he were a king or mightie Lord) straight waies those misshapen giants with battell ares of fine steele which they alwaies had in their hands dyd hew them all to pée∣ces. The most principall and strongest amongst them all, was called Organte the furious, he was all full of hare his bodie ouer and had so fierce and terrible a countenaunce, that there was none that dyd behold him, but was afraide,
and therefore he was called furious. This Organte, the Emperour tooke a part and gaue vn∣to him fiftene thousand knights chosen out of all the whole armie, & sayd, that they should put themselues into a thicke wood, which was somewhat on the one side apart whereas the battaile should be fought, and they should not goe forth from thence, neither shew themselues, nor be séene, till such time as he dyd send them word what they should doe. So when that Organte the furious, was departed, the Empe∣rour tooke vnto himselfe the sixt and last battaile, with the rest of all his people, which were as many as were ordai∣ned beore, in all the fiue battailes. He had in his companie many kings and mightie Lordes, who estéemed themselues to be verie stoute and valiant knights. Now all you that doe reade the Historie of this battaile, consider that neuer before you haue read, to be séene ioyned together in one field, so great a number of barbarous and stoute people. And likewise, what should be the hearts of those Greekes, who with so great good will doth march to∣wards the battaile, hauing so great a multitude of enimies against them. Now let vs returne to tell you of the first battailes that was gouerned by the knight of the Sunne and Bramarant, who marching little and little, the one against the other: This furious barbarian in y• middest betwixt two of thse gyant kings that went with him, they marced a pace be∣fore all the rest of the campe, and put themselues in the face of their enimies, abiding to sée if that an of the principalest knights and most valiantest, would come to receiue them. The which being séene by the royall princes Claridiana, she tourned her selfe vnto the knight of the Sunne, and sayde, Hauing so good and red knights by mée, I will not let to proue my speare with one of ynder three which are come forth before the rest, although according vnto their great∣nesse, they seeme rather to be diuell then knights, & those speares which they bring with them, may well serue for mastes of Barkes. Lde and Mstresse, sayd the knight of
the Sunne, I should haue bene better contented if that you had remained in the citie, and from thence to haue beheld vs, and not for to haue come to take all this trauaile: but séeing that it was your pleasure for to doe vs this high cour∣tesie, let vs goe whether your pleasure is to commaund vs, for that▪ I doe more estéeme your fauour and helpe, then all the srogth of this mightie armie, so that & if there should come against mée all the whole infernall companie, hauing you in prsence, I would not let to assalte them. I will not refuse to be the third (said the good Troyan) for hauing such worthie persons for my companions, I am fully assured of the field. And there with these thrée went foorth for to méete the thrée Pagans, that came foorth against them, so that all sixe made their encounters together, and their furie was so great which they had in their swift course, that they made the earth to tremble a good way from them. The first encounter (by reason of the swift course of Corneino) was made by the two mightie and stout war∣riers the knight of the Sunne and Bramarant, and by rea∣son that either of them did put ouer much force to their en∣counters, their speares which séemed to be mastes, were she∣uered all to péeces, and the splinters flew into the ayre, and both of them fell backwarde vpon their horse croupers, and so passed the one by the other, but straight waies they righ∣ted vp them selues againe in their saddels, & either of them thought to haue made his encounter against some rock, for that they thought by their strengthes to haue ouerthrowen a tower to the ground, such was the valiantnesse of those worthie knights. The royall Princes made her encounter with one of those Kinges called Beligro, who made his encounter so strongly, that the point of the speare with more then halfe the staste had passed through her bodie, if that her inchaun∣ted armour had not made resistance against the force there∣of, and yet for all that, she lost the raines out of her hande, and her stirrps, and a good while she could not settle her sefe againe in her saddle, till such time as the knight of the
Sunne (retourning from his course) tooke hr by the arme and dyd helpe her to stay her selfe, and was greatly ama∣zed at the strong encounter which she made, for that she had with her great strength thrust her speare through the bo∣die of that Gyant, and therewith ouerthrew him to the ground, whereas he laye without mouing either of hande or foote. Oristedes, made his encounter with the other Kinge, who was called Leopardo, and dyd so valiantlie herein, that he dyd verie well make apparant the high progenitie from whence he dyd descend, for being verie strongly en∣countered with that Giant, which made him to loose the raines of his bridle and his stirruppes, and to embrace him selfe with his horse necke: yet dyd he make his iust with so great force and strength that he ouerthrew him and his Elephant downe to the ground, one vpon an other, and by reason of the great waight of the fall which dyd bruse him so ore, that he could neuer arise, but dyed presentlye in the place whereas he laye. Now at such time as these encounters were made be∣twéene the fire knights, the two first battailes were ioyned together, whereas was so great a number slaine on the one part and on the other, that the liuing could not passe but vpon the dead bodies: and by reason of the great dust that dyd arise amongst them, they could scarce see any other thing, but the great number of horses and Elephant, that ranne loose out from the thickest of the peace. And sure it was a most pitifull and lamentable thing to heare the great shrickes and cryes of those that were hurt and may∣med, for without all doubt manie a thousand of them might haue bene cured and haue liued, if they could haue bene by anie meanes holpen to arise and come forth, but by reason of the great preace and multitude, they dyed a miserable death vnder the horse feete. But who so euer hadde séene at that present the knight of the Sunne in presence of his mistresse the princes Clari∣diana, how y• in a smal time he ouerthrew & ew more then
thirtie of those giant knights that came with Bramarant, some of them he cutte off their armes, other he cloue their heads, and othersome he cloue down to their breasts, in such sort, that in so small time there was neuer séene so great a slaughter done by one alone knight. And the royall Prin∣ces with Oristedes, who followed him, many times did with draw themselues from fighting for to beholde the meruai∣uailous actes that he dyd, and the sight thereof dyd so alter them, that the bloud within their bodies séemed to ware colde, to see the terrible and mortal blowes which he stroke: and although they for their parts dyd kill and ouerthrow all that came before them, yet had they enough to doe to o∣low him, his furie was so great, wherewith he put himselfe amongst his enimies, and his souldiers that dyd behold the wonders which those thrée dyd, tooke meruailous courage themselues in such sorte, that in a little time the battaile had bene ouer come, if it had no bene for that strong and stout Bramarant, who played y• diuell amongst the Gréekes, killing all that euer he could reach with his long & broade cutting sword, against the which they could make no more resistance then against a thunder bolte. This daye was the death of the Gran Campion, vnto many verie deare and sorowfull, for that his sonne for to make cruell reuengement for the same, with furious wrath and mortall anger, doth destroy & ouerthrow all that com∣meth before him, wherewith he doth increase the streames of bloud in the fielde, that it flowed with great aboundance. The kings likewise of the Oriental Ilands, such as remai∣ned, dyd healpe him verie much in this slaughter, for that they were great Gyants and deformed, the people fled a∣way before them, as from the diuell of hell. Likewise, all the rest of the people that came with the gran Campion from those Ilands, by reason that they dyd surmount in stature and bignesse, the people o Grecia, and more in number, dyd kill and destroy manie o them, and in that place whereas they went, they had the better hand, so that y• battaile was in ballance, for that on the one side the Grkes , and on
the other side the Pagans lost and had the worst. In this sort the battaile mingled together, and on both parts was done great slaughter, till such time as they ioyned with the second battiles. But these worthie knightes séeing howe their people were ouercome and fled before their enimies, and the great destruction that was done vppon them, they turned about their horses for to rescue them, and the knight of the Sunne procured to come to that place whereas Bra∣marant was, and when that he came thether, one of those Gyants that was with him, stroke so terrible a blowe at the Princesse Claridiana, vpon her helme, y• it made her eies to sparkle with fire, and againe if that she had not embraced her selfe about her horse necke, she had falne to the ground. But this Pagan dyd not aduaunce himselfe of that blow, for that béeing séene by the knight of the Sunne, who was all kindled in ire, with a mightie courage he raised him∣selfe in his stirops, and stroke him such a blowe vppon his left shoulder, with so great furie and force, that he cloue him downe to the saddle bow, in such sorte that hee fell downe to the ground in two péeces, with so great wonder vnto all them that sawe that terrible blow, that they could not per∣swade with themselues that he shuld be a humane knight, and the royall Princesse who verie well sawe the executi∣on of that blow, was verie glad and ioyfull at her heart, for that shée had so nigh her so valiant aide and succour, and be∣ing almost ashamed to sée her selfe so euill intreated before him, she tooke her sword in both her hands, and stroke such a blow at another of the Gyants, (who had his sword in the aire all aloft readie for to discharge it vpon her) that she cut both his armes a sunder, that his hands, sword and all fell to the ground, and the gyant ranne awaie and put him∣selfe in the middest of the battaile, roaring and houling like a Bull. From that time the worthie Alphebo and the roi∣all Princesse so behaued themselues in the thickest amongst their enimies, that what with killing and wounding all that euer they could reach, in such sort, that they were great∣lie feared of their aduersaries. At this time the good Troi∣an
was not idle, but all to be raied with the bloud of them that he had slaine, and at one terrible thrust which he threw at one of the Gyant kings, hée passed his sword through his bodie, so that hée fell downe dead to the ground. But when that Bramarant sawe the great destruction the which these thrée knightes made amongst his people, he rowled his eies in his head as though fire would flie out of them, and with great wrath he came towardes the knight of the Sun, (for that it séemed vnto him that he was the knight that stroke the mortallest blowes of all the rest) and when hée came vnto him, he stroke him such a terrible and ouer∣thwart blowe vppon his healme, that he made the sparkes of fire to flie out a great waie off, and with the force there∣of it dazled his eies, and did somewhat astonish him, and this infernall Pagan had not so soone stroke this blowe, but that hée stroke another at the Princesse with so great furie, that t might well bée saide, that next vnto God, her in∣chaunted armour dyd saue her lyfe, for that his greate cu∣ting sworde coulde not cut nor enter into them, yet for all that hée brake them and made the peeces to flie a great waie of, so that all her one side was vnarmed and lefte naked. Then the stout Troyan séeing his companions so euill in∣treated, forcing himselfe with great courage, stroke such a blowe at Bramarant vpon his healme, that he amazed him in such sort, that his sword fell out of his handes, and hung by the wrist band, the which blowe made this stout and proude Pagan to knowe that his knight was of noble bloud and courage. Then the knight of the Sunne, when that he sawe his Ladie vnarmed, he went vnto her and re∣quested her to depart out of the battaile to auoide the great daunger and perill in the which shée was brought for lacke of her armour. And therewith he left Oristedes in conten∣tion with Bramarant, and went with the Princesse to set her fr out of the battaile; and did so much betwéene them both, that quietlie they cléered themselues out of the prease, and be∣ing frée thereof, the royall Princesse (with great griefe for to depart from her knight) returned vnto the , whereas
she was honourablie receiued, and gaue great comfort vnto all those Ladies and Gentlewomen. The knight of the Sun returned againe into the battaile whereas he left the valiant Oristedes, and found that the stout Pagan had ouerthrow∣en him vpon his horse crouper all astonied and amazed, and as the Pagan would haue stroke him againe, the knight of the Sunne put himselfe before him, and sayde: With mée Bramarant thou viddest begin the battaile, therefore conclude it with me before thou makest anie farther contention with this knight. And in saying these wordes he stroke him such an ouerthwart blow vpon the helme, that it seemed hée had béene all on fire, with the burning sparkes and flames of fire that flew out thereof, and the force was so great, that if hée had not embraced himselfe with his horse necke, he had fal∣len downe to the ground. Then this furious Pagan righted vp himselfe againe, blaspheming against the heauens and a∣gainst them that gaue so much power vnto nature, for to cre∣ate a knight of so great force and strength, and therewith went against him, and began to charge him with such terri∣ble blowes, that if it had bene some hard Marble rocke, in a short space he had broke it all péeces, but yet the good armor of the knight of the Sun was of so great force, that it wold haue made resistance against a farre greater strength than his, by reason of the finenesse of the bones of those little fi∣shes, which were found in the frosen sea, as you haue heard before, wherewith the armour of the knight of the Sunne, as also that of the Pagan were made, whereby we may sée and vnderstand, how great and strange be the secrets of na∣ture, that in so little bones nourished in the water, shoulde make more greater and stronger resistance than anie yron or stéele, so that these two worthie warriours being in such securitie by reason of their armour, did execute the furie o their great strengthes, and laide so cruellie the one vppon the other, that it was a wonder to beholde them, and many nigh vnto them left of their owne fighting for to beholde them, meruailing greatlie at their terrible and most cruell battaile.
Now héere let vs leaue them for a while in this their contention, wherein either of them had inough to doe to de∣fend themselues, and also the valiant Troyan, who was in∣tangled with a stout Gyant in battaile, and had great care for to cléere himselfe from him, and let vs tel of that inclite and generous knight Rosicleer, that had the charge of the second battaile, who when he sawe the other battaile so in∣tangled, with great desire that he had to sée himself amongst his enimies, he and his two friends, the king Sacridoro and the Tartarian Zoilo, did put themselues before their camp, and setting spurres vnto their horses, went against them that came in the second battaile, who likewise did mooue themselues to receiue them. There came in their fore front the Prince Meridian, and the stout and strong Pagan Bran∣dimardo, and with them a king of the Indias, called Albi∣ro, a young knight and verie proude, these thrée came a∣gainst Rosicleer and his companions, and in the middest be∣twéene the two battailes they made their encounter in this sort. Rosicleer and Brandimardo made their encounter the one against the other, and shéeuered their speares in pée∣ces, passing along without receiuing anie harme, but Bran∣dimardo being greatlie amazed at the strength of his ad∣uersarie, sayd within himselfe: Out of all doubt this is hée that did combat with Bramarant in the wildernesse of Gre∣cia, or else it is he that slew the gran Campion his Father, for that I canot beléeue, that in anie other knight shoulde be so great force and strength. The like dyd Rosicleer thinke of Brandimardo, whose encounter seemed to be equall vnto those of the knight of the Sunne, and sayde within him∣selfe. Oh that God were so pleased that this valiant Pagan were a Christian, for surelie it shuld grieue me verie much that such a knight should perish. Then the strong king Sa∣cridoro and the Prince Meridian made their encounters, in such sort, that their speares were shéeuered all to peeces, but the king declined so farre backe, that his head touched
his horse crouper, and he staied himselfe so stronglie, that hée fell not, but passed along being greatlie amazed at the great agiliie of his enimie y• Prince, who in the same incounter lost one of his stirops, and therewith put himselfe into the battaile, hauing his aduersarie in great estimation, but hée that had the best lucke in these their encounters, was the valyant Tartarian, who meeting this proude , strik∣king him in the middest of the breast, he thrust his Speare through his bodie, that it appeared at his backe, and ouer∣threw him dead to the ground. With that encounter hée likewise had fallen to the ground, if there he had not embra∣ced himselfe with his horse necke. When that these encoun∣trs were finished, the two battailes ioyned together, and the noise was so great which they made at the breaking of their Speares, that the mountaines and hilles seemed to shake therewith, and the great slaughter that was on both partes was meruailous great. But when that Rosicleer with that gallant courage (as he was wont to haue) did put himselfe in the middest of the gard of Meridian, who (as you haue heard) to be twelue strong Gyantes, he did that which neuer before time of auncient people was the lyke heard of hée assaulted them in such sorte, that one of them hee cut off his right arme, wherewith he did gouerne his great and mightie cutting sword, so that he was and another he cloue his heart asunder with a thrust hee threw at him, he had not at that time  pulled out his sword from the gyants bodie, when that two of those which remained, with their great and freelie hatchets, gaue eyther a blowe the one after the other, vppon his rich and precious healme, but it was forged by that wise Atemido, by his Maicall art, so that it might well be sayde, that it saued his lye, for that thei  hatchets could not enter anie, more unto it, than if they had be ade of yet for all that, the blowes were exceeding strong , that it  him of his vnderstanding, and to fall forwardes vppon hs saddle bwe,
and his horse carried him about the field, but all fell out for the best, for that the Gyants hauing no more care to garde the person of the Prince, for that he had put himselfe in the thickest amongst his enimies, hée and Brandimardo ma∣king such destruction and slaughter amongest them, that whereas they went they left all the ground full of dead bo∣dies. But when Rosicleer came againe vnto himselfe, and sawe that the Gyants were gone, hée put himselfe into the thickest of them that were next him with greate furie, de∣stroying and ouerthrowing all that was in the waie, so that it was an vnhappie daie for him that once proued his sword. Not long after when that the third battaile sawe the battailes so intangled, they marched on a pace for to ioye together, and for that there might be space inough for one to haue his fill of fighting, marched forwardes straight waies the fourth and fift battaile, for that there were such knights amongst them, whose stomacks were so great, that they could not refraine themselues oneminute of an houre, in séeing that others were executing their furies, and they to be idle, so that in a verie short space there were so many dead bodies in the field, that the liuing could not passe but vpon them, and whereas so many people were ioyned toge∣ther, it could not bée but some encounters must bée made for tobée noted aboue the rest. As that worthie king Florion and the valiant Prince his sonne, made their encounters a∣gainst the king Orlan, and the king Triderio, whose en∣counters were such, that the Prince ouerthrew the first dead to the ground, and although hée was somewhat astonyed at that encounter, yet hee kept his saddle, and passed for∣wards on, and the king. Florion ouerthrew Triderio from his Elephant, whereon hée was mounted, in such sorte, that with great griefe he could not arise againe. Likewise the valiant and worthie Prince Claueryndo, with one of those Gyants that came with the Prince of Cambray, did make their encounters the one against the other, in such sort, that
the Prince laide his aduersarie alongin the feld dead, and the stout king Lieo thrust the Prince of Cambray ouer the crouper of his horse. Also the king Oliuerio and thePrin∣ces, Bargandel and Liriamandro, Don Siluerio, and the king Alamades, made their encounters against the king Balar∣do, and his companions, and there had like to haue beene a meruailous misfortune, for that Lyriamandro and the furi∣ous king Balardo fell both of them to the grounde, and in great perill before they coulde recouer themselues againe. Bargandel made his encounter with one of those kinges of the Indias, with so great furie, that the point of his Speare appeared at his backe. Don Siluerio and the king dyd ouer∣throw other two, but vnhappie were they that made their encounters with the fiue Gyants that came with the king Balardo, for that they were all ouerthrowen dead to the ground, sauing the king Alamades, who by reason of his good armour could not receiue anie hurt, yet for all that he laie vpon the ground more than an houre, cleane from himself, before he could come againe to his remembrance. So in con∣clusion of these encounters, these worthie knights dyd put themselues into the battaile, at whose entrie the slaughter was so great, that the little brookes were made mightie ri∣uers with the abundance of bloud that was there shed, & for to declare perticularlie the mightie déeds & wonderfull acts done by Rosicleer, it wer requisite to haue an hundreth thou∣sand eies for to behold them. Likewise the worthines done by all that valiant companie, as the Tartarian Zoylo, the king Sacridoro, Brandizel, and Clauerindo, his very friends, with all the rest of that gallant companie, as the Hystorie hath shewed vnto you. On the other part goeth those furious Pagans Meridian and Brandimardo, the king Balardo, and the other mishapen Gyants, all to be raed with bloud, and killing and destroying all that commeth before them. At this time the good Emperour Trebatio could no longer abide nor suffer, seeing his people in so great trauaile, but com∣manded incontinentlie to sound a great and infinite num∣ber of Trumpettes and other instruments of warre,
and made Proclamation that none should remaine behind but all to enter into the battaile. And therewith they mar∣ched forwardes with so great a noise, that the earth seemed to open therewith. Then the Emperour Alycandro séeing that (who was in a readinesse) would not be the last, but straight wayes marched forwardes with all the remainder of the knights, and sure it was a thing of great compassion and pittie for to beholde, so infinite a number of people slaine, when that these two battailes ioyned together, for that the Horses of Darius, Cirus, & Alexander, being ioyned all together, were not so many as were there at that present. The worthie and renowmed Emperour Trebatio made his encounter with the king Orilardo, who was a mightie Pagan, and was almost so bigge of his bodie as a Gyant, but this good Emperour made his incounter in such sorte, that he broke his gall within his bodie, and thust him euer his horse crouper to the ground. Likewise all other knights of fame that were in the companie made worthie incoun∣ters. After which being done they put themselues in a bush∣ment together round about their good Captaine, & put them∣selues into the campe, killing ad ouerrowing those Pa∣gans all that euer came befor them. On the other part g∣eth the Emperour Alycandre compassed about with those mightie gyants, and other kigs and knights of estimati∣on, that it was a lamentable ting to beholde the great de∣truction that they made amgst their enimies, & for that there was on both parts knihts of great valour & estima∣tion. The battaile was in allance, although there were of the Pagans three times so many as were of the Christi∣ans. All this while we haue forgotten those two stout war∣riours, the knight of the Sunne and Bramarant, for to com∣plie with other worthie and valiant knights. But you shal vnderstand that they cntinued alwaies in their cruell bat∣taile, and dyd no other thing but charge the one the other with their terrible blowes out of all order, and with so great furie, that if they had béene two Rockes, they hadde
broke them all to péeces, and the anger and courage of ey∣ther of them was so great, because they could haue no victo∣rie, that they left one another, and put themselues into the battaile, whereas they slew and ouerthrew to the ground, and couered the fields with dead bodies, as the Mower with his Sith couereth the sorrowes with corne. The knight of the Sunne put himselfe amongst those monstrous Gyants of the Orientall Indias, and made so great slaughter amon∣gest them, that those which were liuing, although they were fierce and rough people did flie before him, he put himselfe with so great furie amongst them, that the stout Oristedes remined behinde him, and could not followe, but yet with the great desire that he had to kéepe him companie, hée did strange exploits and of great wonder. Then the knight of the Sunne looking backe, and seeing him all alone, did tar∣rie his comming, making a breade waie in euerie place whereas hee went, at which time came forth against him a rough and , named Othibe, and was Lord ouer the Iland of , his armour was edged round a∣bout with golde and precious stones of great price, who stroke so strong a  at the knight of the Sunne vppon his helme, that he somewhat amed him. But this proude Pagan departed, aduancing himselfe thereof, but was rewarded for his boldnesse, with his head clouen asunder to his breast, so that he fell downe dead to the ground, yet ther lacked not another more hardie than wise, that thought to make reuengement for the same. There was a king cal∣led Armelion, who hauing a great confidence in his strength and in the excellencie of his armour, wherewith hee was armed, and was verie good, went towards him, and stroke him a mightie blowe vpon one of his shoulders, but he that had receiued so many of that furious Bramarant, receiued that of him as nothing, but in paiment of his great follie, the sonne of Trebatio stroke him such another vppon his head, that both helme and skull he stroke into his braines, the which being done, he staied not, but procéeded forwards on, not finding anie that did disturbe him in his waie, and
alwaies he had an eie vnto such as séemed vnto him to bée the principall of his enimies, so it chanced he discouered two mightie great and deformed Gyants, that were both toge∣ther with mightie mases in their handes, and made great slaughter and destruction vpon the Gréekes, these Gyantes were two brethren, and Lords ouer an Iland in the Indi∣an sea. The one was called Zario, and the other Drago, and in all the whole hoast was not to bée found two Gyants, more mightier and fuller of pride than they were. But as this gallant louer of the royall Empresse Claridiana hadde séene them, without anie consideration that they were two, and hée all alone hée tooke a Speare from a Pagan that was next him, and se spurres to his good horse Cornerino, and with so great fuie, that hée séemed a whirle winde, he went towards those Gyants, (who were séene aboue all the rest more than two ubites) and in sight of all the people he en∣countered wit one of them in the middest of the breast, in such sort (that though his armour was twelue plates thick) yet did he thrst his Speare a good yard through his bodie, that the sharpe point of his Speare appeared at his backe, and this great Gyant fell downe dead to the ground, and made so great noise as though a tower had fallen downe, and at such time as this good knight dyd passe alongst in his course, the other Gyant that did abide his comming with his yro mase in his hand all alofte, hee discharged such a right downe blowe at him, that if hee had chaunced to fa∣sten the same, it had not gone well with him, but the great furie and swiftnesse of his horse Cornerino was such, that before hée coulde discharge the same, hée was passed by with his Maister, so that the blowe fell downe to the ground, and entred into the earth thrée spans, and as yet hée had not lift vp his mase when that the knight of the Sunne tourned about his horse with great lightnesse, and ioyning himselfe with the Gyant, hée cast a thrust at him with the point of his sword in the middest of his belle, and put so great force and strength ther vnto, that without anie staying it passed through his double and thicke armour, and entered into
his guts vp to the hard hiltes, and pulling his sworde out, his guttes followed after. And therwithall the Gyant▪ with an infernall furie stroke such a terrible blowe with his mace on his backe, that hée hadde ouerthrowen him to the ground, if that he had not embraced himselfe with his horse necke. But so soone as this blowe was giuen, the mightie Gyant fell downe dead to the earth, and the knight of the Sunne doing thee and many other great meruailes passed forwardes on, discoueringthrough all the whole battaile, beholding the mightie deedes, greate meruailes, and highe knighthood which was done by the famous knightes on his part, vnto whome it seemed that they alone were a sheelde and defence vnto all his people, for without them they had beene all ouercome and dispearsed, for that in comparison there were a great number more on the pat of the Pagans than there was on theirs. Hee lykewise looked about for Rosicleer, and sawe where hee was all alone so berayed and bathed in bloud, that scarce hée could bee knowen from another knight, but onelie by the incredible deedes which he did, and seeing him in that sorte all alone, without anie of his confortes, that could come vnto him for to succour him, hee fell greatlie in loue with him and his estimation, and praied vnto God with all his heart to saue and defend him from all perill and daunger. Likewise hee sawe in another place the good Emperour his father in the middest betwixt the two Spanish knights, who went all three together with equall courage and mag∣nanimitie, and made exceeding great slaughter amongst the Pagans. At this time the good knight would not staie anie lon∣ger to beholde them, but thrust himselfe into the middest of the battaile, and went from one place vnto another, ayding and helping there whereas hee sawe was the greatest pe∣rill. At this time the daie was wel spent, for it was past noone and the knight of the Sun éeling the wether to be hot (as he, that had trauailed more than the rest, for to refresh himselfe
and to take some aire, as also to sée in what estate the bat∣taile was) went out of the camp, & stood vnder a little wood side that was there hard by the Campe, and alighted from his horse, and pulled off his helme, and dyd from that place beholde all that passed, and sawe that on euerie side all the whole fields was full of people, and by reason of the greate multitude, he could not knowe those worthie knightes his friendes from the other, but the most that he could discouer was, that those which were of his part got ground on their enimies. Now let vs leaue him in the place where he is, who for a greater destruction vnto his enimies, is refreshing him∣selfe and taking aire, and let vs returne to tell of them that remaine in the battaile, where are so many of renewmed, worthie, and famous knights, dooing and executing so great wonders and meruailous déedes, that for to tell them perti∣cularlie, it were needfull of another great Hystorie. On the other parte goeth the Emperour Alycandro, accompanied with those kings his vassals, and his deformed Gyantes, that it is great lamentation and griefe to behold the slaugh∣ter that they doe. Againe, what is to bée sayde of those two valiant Pa∣gans, Meridian and Brandimardo, of truth not one that bea∣reth good will vnto the Emperour Trebatio would see it. On th other side goeth that mightie king Balardo, and the king hiderio, ouerthrowing to the ground all that com∣meth before them, but yet for their euill were they séene, by the  Princes, Clauervndo and Brandizel, being toge∣ther, for they went against them, so that betwixt them be∣gan a rigorous and furious battaile, but yet in the end the two Gyants were slaine, and the two Princes procéede for∣wards, doing great meruailes in the middest of the battaile. As much as that doth the Tartarian Zoilo, and the king Sacridoro, who in séeking of Rosicleer doth put themselues in the middest of the battaile, making brode waies whereas they went, till such time as they met with two strong and stout Pagans, who staied them a while, & they had inough
to doe for to cléere themselues from them. All this while was not idle, but did their partes in ample manner, Bar∣gandel and Lyriamandro, and the king Alamades, Flami∣des, and Florinaldus, and the Prince Don Siluerio, Rodo∣marte & Rodofeo, all these together did wonderfull things, aiding and helping whereas was most necessitie, yet was there none that was with Rosicleer, for he was all alone, and did verie well cleere the waie whereas he would goe, and dyd so much on euerie side, that in the ende he came whereas the Emperour his Father was, and sawe that hee alone with those two Spanish knightes were in combat with the fiue Gyants of the king Balardo, and waxed verie faint and wearie, but when that he sawe it, lyke a hungrie Lion he went towards them, and when he came whereas they were, he stroke such a blowe at the first vpon his shoul∣der, that he cloue him downe to the breast, and ouerthrew him to the earth, and straight waies tourned vnto another, whome he slew, with another blowe stroke off his arme wherewith he hld his sword, and as he was turning for to strike another, that did charge much the Emperour, he saw that the Emperour at one blow ouerthrewe him to the earth, for that he stroke him ouerthwart the wast, in such sort, that his sword entered into his bowels, that hée fell downe dead. And when he sawe the good succour that he had of his sonne, in the tune of so great extremitie, he was verie glad and ioyfull. Likewise at this time the two valiant brethren, Don Cla and Arclus had so wounded the other two Gyants, that in the end they ouerthrew them to the ground. Then Rosicleer seeing that the Emperour was meruailouslie ac∣companied, for that the other Princes were come vnto him, set spurres to his horse, and put himselfe in the thickest a∣mongst his enimies, and neuer rested till he came whereas the stout Pagan Brandimardo was, and séeing the greate slaughter that he and Meridian made, he went towardes them, and at his approching, betwéen them was dealt migh∣tie, strong, and terrible blowes, in such sort, that Brandi∣mardo
thought verilie within himselfe that his aduersarie should be the knight of the Sunne, with whom he did com∣bat in the wildernesse of Grecia, for that he supposed Rosi∣cleer was not of so great strength, although many times hée heard him greatlie praised and spoken of, which gaue him great good will to proue himselfe with him. And for that at that present Brandimardo did shew the vttermost of all his force and strength, it gaue Rosicleer to vnderstand that hée was one of the strongest knights that euer he had proued, he was so valiant and full of dexteritie. You may well beléeue that in all this time was not that furious Pagan Bramarant vnoccupied, but with inernall furie he destroyeth and ouerthroweth all that commeth be∣fore him, who when he sawe that the most part of the daie was past, and sawe that there was no aduantage gotten on their part, but rather they had lost ground, thought verilie that there was no other occasion thereof, but onelie the wor∣thie, famous, and valiant knights that were of the Greekes part, and it séemed that it did profit verie little for to kil and saie so many of the common people, before that first he had ouercome the principall knightes. So this infernall and di∣uellh Pagan hauing his mind occupied theewith, he pre∣sentlie left off the slaughter which he made before, & tooke a mightie great, and big Speare from one of his men, and setting spurres vnto his furious horse, he put himselfe into the thickest of the battaile, looking round about where hée might ee anie knight of valour and prowesse, and vppon a sodaine he saw the king Oristedes, who at that present con∣cluded and slew the king of the Patos, with one blowe, wherewith he cloue his head asunder in the middest, Brama∣rant rane against him, and made his encounter on the one side, in uch sorte, that he ouerthrew him on the other side of his horse with his saddle betwixt his legges, and hadde with that blowe slaine him, if that his inchanted armour had not resisted his furie, so that he departed from thence, and wen whereas hée found the Tartarian Zoylo, and the king Sacridoro, and ouerthrew them both to the ground in
iusting, and passing forwardes on, hée sawe the stout king Florion, who at that instant slew a mightie Gyant, and ma∣king his encounter against him, hée thrust both horse & man to the earth. This mightie and furious Pagan stayed not in this place, but passed forwards, and came whereas he found the two Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo, making their com∣bat with the king Balardo, and his companion, at which time they obtained the victorie with the death of those two Gyantes, hée came vpon them vnbewares, and one of them hée ouerthrew with the iust of his Speare, in such sort, that his valyant strength and courage coulde not profite him a∣nie thing at all, and the other he iustled him with his horse, who ranne with so excéeding greate furie, that hée ouer∣threw him to the ground, and as hée procéeded forwardes on in the battayle, looking round about him, he sawe a farre off the worthie Emperour Trebatio, accompanied with a great number of Princes and valyant knightes, who dyd great meruailes and wonders vppon their enimies, and ta∣king the bgest lance that hée could find, hee went towards them, and stroke the good Emperour on the one side, vnbe∣wares, and thrust him cleane out of his Saddle. The lyke hee dyd vnto the two bretheren Don Clarus and Aculus. Then the other Princes when they sawe the Empe∣rour vnhorsed, they came forthwith for to succour and helpe him, but their comming had lyke to haue cost them deare, for that at two blowes which hee stroke with his sworde, he astonyed and left without remembrance the two Princes, Bargandel and Lyriamandro, and within a little while af∣ter he ouerthrew to the ground Don Siluerio and the two Princes Rodamarte and Rodofeo, Flamides and Floinal∣dus, and thinking that they were dead, this diuellish and outragious Pagan proceeded farther on, till hee came whereas Rosicleer and Brandimardo were combatting to∣gether, and hée seeing their battaile so intangled, and know∣ing him for certaintie to bée the same which slew the gran Compion his Father, beeing full of mortall courage,
as sparkes of fire should flie out at his eies, he went vnto him and stroke him an ouerthwart blowe with both his hands vpon his helme, which was of so great force and strength, that the bloud gushed out at his eares and nose, and depriued him of his remembrance, so that his horse car∣ried him a while about the field. Then the stout Brandimar∣do, who was more vertuous than he, saw the great villanie the which Bramarant had done, with a wrathfull courage he went against him, and sayd. Oh thou vncurteous villaine, come to the battaile with me, for that it shal cost thée full déere, this shame and discur∣tesie which thou hast shewed vnto me. And therewith hée stroke him such an ouerthwart blow vpon the healme, that with the sparkes of fire that flew out thereof, he burned all the haire vpon his browes and eie lids. Then Barmarant, who alwaies did beare him ill will since the time that hée did combat against him and Meridian in the wildernesse of Grecia, returned a replie against him with so great furie, that the noise of their new begun battell betwixt them was heard throughout all the whole campe, but their combat indured not long, for that Rosicleer came straight againe vnto himselfe, and remembring what had passed, he went vnto Brandimardo, and gaue him great thankes for that which he had done for him, and requested him to let him to haue the battaile against Bramarant, who vnderstanding what Rosicleer had sayd, with great pride sayd: Come both of you together against me, for if there were ten such as you are, I would not esteeme you in anie thing. Well said Brandimardo, for that I will not doe thée so much honour, I will leaue the battaile, for that thy selfe alone shall con∣clude it with this knight, who I am perswaded is such a one that will abase and breake the heart of this thy great pride. And in saying these wordes he withdrew himselfe a backe, & straight waies began Rosicleer for to combat with Bramarant, and at two blowes that he stroke at him, dou∣bling one after another, did intreate him in such sort, that he
knew not whether he was in heauen or on the earth, so that betwixt them there began a braue battaile, in such sort, that Bramarant did well vnderstand that he had inough to doe to cléere himselfe from the furious blowes of Rosicleer a∣lone. without the help of the companion that he esteemed vn∣to to him, and Meridian and Brandimanrdo who stoode and did dyd beholde the  not a little reioyce, to  how much that alone knight did  the great courage and pride of Bra∣marant, and with the great contentment that they tke to beholde them in the battaile, they staid and withdrew them∣selues a while from fighting. At this time all those knights that were ouerthrowen by that monster, found themselues in a great perplitie, for that much people dyd ouercharge them, in such sorte, that they could not mount themselues againe on horsebacke, but in especiall the Emperour Trebatio, and the two brethren Don Claos and Arcalus, who were all aoote together ma∣king their defence with their swordes in their handes, kil∣ling & slaying so many, that round about them laie a great number of dead bodies. But the king of Gandaros did trou∣ble them verie much, with two great ill fauoured and de∣formed Gyantes, that he had in his companie, with other knights, who put them in great perill. Not farre from that place were these Princes, Bargandel and Lyriamandro, Ro∣domarte and Rodofeo, Hamides, and Hormaldus, all toge∣ther, whereas they did great wonders, but by reason that they were a foote, (and charged with much people) they passed great trouble. The like meruailes did those two worthie Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo, who were compassed about with more than twentie Gyants of the Orientall Ilands. But he that was in greatest perplexitie more than all the rest, was the Troyan Oristedes, for that he was all alone and a foote, and was closed in with thrée kings of the Indians, and with and infinite number of other people, in such sorte, that by no meanes he could get out from amongst them, except he should flie into the aire. But yet this good knight in
daie did make manifest the noble and valiant stocke from whence hée dyd descend, for that hee slew a great number, and made his partie good, defending himselfe till such tim as succour did come vnto him, but yet they y• did best cléere themselues was the Tartarian Zoylo, and the king Sacri∣doro, for that the fiue sonnes of the mightie Torcato and the stout Rogelio, all together chanced to passe that waie wher∣as they were, & with the high knighthood which they vsed, they mounted againe vppon their horses, and ioyned with the king Oliuerio and his knights, so that they all together put themselues into the thickest of the campe, whereas they did great wonders. Now let vs leaue them in this sort in the battaile, doo∣ing of valiant and worthie déedes on euerie side, and al∣though the common people and souldiours on the part of the Pagans were without number, yet those on the part of the Christians were farre better and better armed, and dyd great slaughter vpon their enimies, and let vs tell of that dreadfull Organte, who was in an ambushment in a woode with his people. When the Emperour Alycandro sawe that the daye passed awaie, and that it was then time to put in execution that which hee had dtermined (for that the battaile was at that time in a balance) he sent out of hande a messenger vnto him for to issu forth. So when that Organte had re∣ceiued the commandement of his Lord, lyke as the hungrie Lyon runneth out o the thicke woods for to seeke his praie in the plaine amongst the Cattell: euen so he with all his people went out o the ambushment, and with as greate expedition as might bée, thy went to put themselues into the battell, but it so fell out before they came thether, that there happened nother thing cleane contrarie vnto that which they look for. For if you doe call vnto your re∣membrance the knight of the Sunne, where wée left him vpon a lyttle bake vnder the woode side, beholding the battayle, as hée cast his eie aside towardes that place, hée sawe those people comming out of the Forest, whereat
hée was greatlie amazed, and if dyd not a little molest and grieue him, for that hee sawe they were Pagans, and in so great exeremitie for to enter into the battayle. But com∣mitting himselfe vnto almightie God, desiring him if it were his pleasure to graunt the victorie vnto the Christi∣ans. And therewithall descended from the place whereas hee was, and put himselfe in the plaine, whereas that most dreadfull Organte with his people should passe, and béeing there with his speare in his hande abiding his comming, he sawe comming towards him a bigge knight and verie well made, whose proportion dyd giue him great contentment, hée was mounted vppon amightie great horse, and was armed with armour, brodered about with golde and preci∣ous stones, so fresh and bright, that it seemed thereby that it should be the first time that hee was armed with them, and béeing verie much delyghted in his gallant disposition, hée was desirous for to knowe who he was, but hée hadde no time for to informe himselfe thereof, for that at the same verie instant approched that dreadfull Organte, who came a good space before his people, and was mounted vppon a mightie and straunge beast, not inferiour vnto the bignesse of an Elephant, verie strong, and as light and swift as anie horse, and by reason that hée was so mightie and huge of his person béeing on horse backe, hee séemed lyke vnto a Tow∣er, his countenaunce and expectation was so terrible and grim, that it was sufficient for to put feare and dreade in anie knight, how heroycall and valyant so euer hée were. But this flower and mirrour of all Knighthood, who neuer made anie other account, but vnto that which reason and honour did binde him, without anie feare and dreade came vnto him, and sayd: Gyant, tell me whether thou doest goe with so great hast. Then the Gyant verie wrathfull and angrie at that demand, beholding him with a fierce counte∣nance, answered and said: As thou art one, if thou were one hundreth, I would make the answere to be verie déere vnto thée, but yet whether is it that I shoulde goe, but to make mightie riuers of the Gréekish bloud. bloud.
Then the knight of the Sunne sayde: first before that thou doest attempt that enterprise,, thou must combat with mée, for I doe tell the, that before thou canst make great ri∣uers, thou must first make litte brookes. Then with great furie, throwing out smoake from his ealme; this dreadfull Organte tourneth about his mightie beast, and sayd in this manner. Oh Iupiter, how hast thou giuen vnto one alone knight so great hardinesse, that being armed in the field he durst challenge and dose the dreadfull Organte. And when he had taken of the field so much as he thought sufficient for his course, with his Speare in his hand, which séemed to bee a high and mightie Pue tree, he came against the knight of the Sunne, who so fast as his Cornerno could unne, came against him, and according vnto the great furie that eyther of them brought▪ it séemed that the earth dyd thunder and quake, but whn they ioyned to make their encounter, the Spea of the Gyant was  all to pes vppon the of the knight of the Sunne, and conside∣ring the  thereof;, and with what force and furie it was broken, it had beene sufficient to haue ouerthrowen a wall, for that it made so great a noise as though a thunder∣bolt had fallen from heauen, and yet for all this it made no more  that good knight, than if it had ben but a small  but he made his encounter, in the middest of his  and that he thri through and through, not sping his thicke and  of make, but with the force thereof he made the point of his Spears to  all bloud at  wherewith he ouerthrw  and his beast the  that some Castle had Lkewise  worthinsse of that  was sufficent, for
he was verie desirous to know who he was, she came the∣ther in that sort out of the Citie for to sée the estate of all the whole campe, vpon that litte mountaine, whereas the knight of the Sunne was, as he had done before▪ whose ge∣nerous heart hauing no power to kéepe her selfe in anie longer▪ being in presence of him whom she so much ∣ned, and knowing him, receiued great contentment that worthie encounter, he went vnto him and sayd them, vpon them my good friend, and leaue not one of them a liue. But when the knight of the Sun knew her, it could not bée expressed the great ioy that he receiued. But by rea∣sn that the people of Organte drow nigh vnto him, he had no time to make her answere according vnto his desire, but onelie he sayd: My good Ladie, hauing  good and succour as I haue of you, I haue no reason for to feare all these people, although they were many more than they be. Thus they both together went towards the battaile, and gathered many people that were scattered abrode from the fight. In the meane time that they were doing this, the peo∣ple of Organte came vnto the place whereas their Captain was slaine, and were verie strangelie amazed for to sée him in that case, with so terrible and mortall a thrust, and could not imagine that anie mortall man could giue it, and being all of them verie desirous for to be reuenged of his death, they went towards the campe, and with a great noise and shouting, they put themselues into the middest of the bat∣taile, in such sort, that by reason at that present th battaile was in ballance, and that to enter in a fresh, was the occasi∣on that the Gréekes receiued great damage, and the whole battaile like to haue bene lost, for that the Emperour and the rest of the principall knightes were detained and a foote as you haue heard. But at this instant the knight of the Sunne, and the most excellent and roiall Princesse Claridian, with more than thréethousand knightes, such as were dispearsed and gone abroade, and by them gathered together, pressed themselues into the battaile with great fuie and force ma∣king
great and mightie slaughter, in such was more filled with blod, and all those of their parte re∣couered force and strength, and to the contrarie parte the Pagans séeing so great slaughter and destruction of their people, beganne to giue waie and to loose grounde. Now at this time might bée séene verie well accomplished the Prophesie of the olde king of Gedrosis, for that accor∣ding vnto the great destruction that the knight of the Sun and the royall Princesse made on their enimies, it séemed that there were not people inough in all the whole campe for to satisfie their furious appetite, and there was not  one in all the whole armie that was in perfect securi∣tie, from their furious and bloudie handes. Within a while the knight of the Sunne came into the place whereas was the good Emperour his Father a foote, and so weary that almost he could not lyft vp his arme to his head, hée and the two Spanish knightes, although they had done greate and meruailous  and incredible wonders, yet were they at the point to haue béen slaine, for that they were charged and assaulted by the king of the Gandaros, and with two migh∣tie, great, and deformed Gyants, with an infinite number of other people, who brought them into a meruailous per∣plexitie. But quicklie they were rescued, and their enimies deceiued of their prai, for when the knight of the Sunne knew him to bée his Father, with a new force (more than of a knight,) hée strke one of these Gyantes such a blowe vnder the gorge of is healme, that hée cut his head clean from his bodie. The which béeing done, with great lyght∣nesse hée turned himselfe about, and with both his handes hée stroke such an ouerthwart at the other vpon his wast, that almost  vnto his saddle bowe hée parted him in two péeces, and the royall Princesse stroke such another blowe vppon the healme of the king of the Gandaros, that with the increible force thereof shée cloue his head quite downe vnto hs téeth, and ouerthrew him dead at his féete. The bloud waxed colde within their bodies, and theyr
members shaked of all them that did sée these mortall and deformed blowes, in especiall those Pagans that were ther nigh at hande, who had compassed about the Emperour, and the other two Princes, so that it was not néedfull of anie other occasion for to cause them to depart thence, for that they gaue them such entertainment, that they all fledde awaie, and put themselues into the battaile, and thought not them∣selues in anie securitie wheresoeuer they shoulde become. And although the good Emperour Trebatio had time and space inough for to mount vppon his horse, yet hee was so wearie, that he had no force for to doe it. Likewise the two Spanish knightes were readie for to lie downe with wea∣rinesse. The which beeing séene and perceiued by that good Knight, with a trice he alighted from his horse , and tooke the Emperour his Father in his armes, and with his owne strength he put him into the saddle, and gaue vnto the two bretheren other two horses, and with his owne handes he mounted them. The which béeing done, in spite of all those that were against them, hée tooke vnto him∣selfe the horse of the king of Gandaros, which was both strong and swift, and with great lightnesse he leaped into the saddle, and passed forwardes on, leauing the Emperour Trebatio no lesse amazed, than ioyfull and content, to see the wonderfull dédes of his sonne, who with new force and strength, the which hee recouered with that sodaine ioy and pleasure, pressed forwardes into the battaile, being in the middest betwixt the two Spanish knightes, and dyd such acts, that it seemed he had but as then entered into the battaile. Then the knight of the Sunne came vnto the place (with the Princesse Claridiana) whereas they found on foote the princes Bargandel and Lyriamandro, Rodomarte & Rodoeo, Flndes and Florinaldus, by whose comming they were quicklie set at libertie, and had space for to mount them selues on horsback, the which being done, he did the like vnto the Tartarian Zoilo & the king Sacridoro, & neuer staied til he  whereas the stout Oristedes was, which was a strange thing to beholde, to sée the great number of dead
bodies at his féete round about him, but by reason that hée was ouerpressed with so many against him▪ hée was verie wearie, and almost out of breath, which being perceiued by the knight of the Sunne, with a great good will he did suc∣cour him, slaying and ouerthrowing to the ground all those that he found against him, and of the thrée kings of the In∣dias; the royall Princesse ouerthrew two of them dead to the ground, and the third ranne awaie, for if he had tarried, his golden crowne: the which he had on his head, would little haue auailed him. Then the good Troyan being verie glad of that aduan∣taged succour, tooke vnto him a verie good horse, and moun∣ting vpon him, they all together thrust themselues into the battaile, and neuer staied till they came whereas the two Princes Brandizel and Claueryndo, who were compassed round about with those gyantine knights, but quicklie they were deliuered out of their hands, and unted vpon other horses. At this time were ioyned together the Emperour Tre∣batio, with all the rest of the worthie and valiant knights, with the knight of the Sunne, and the royall Princesse Cla∣ridiana, and all was néedfull, for that the Emperour Alycan∣dro, accompanied with those Gyants his gard, and with the most principallest kings of their hoast; came vnto that place of the camp, making such destruction and slaughter, that they alone had béene sufficient to haue got the whole victorie of the field. But being discouered by this generous companie, they all together moued towardes them, whose encounter was a thing worthie to haue bene séene, for that the knight of the Sunne, the royall Princesse, with the mightie Empe∣rour Trebatio, Don Claros, and Arcalus, the two princes, Brandizel and Claueryndo, the king Florion, and the king Sacridoro, with the Tartarian Zoilo. All the together made their encounter against the ten Gyants of the Gard of the Emperour, and that which séemed not to be beléeued, and impossible to bée executed, amongest all them that were in the whole armie, fell out nwe deane vnto the contrarie,
for that euerie one of these worthie Princes missed not, but ouerthrew his aduersarie to the earth, either starke dead or sore wounded, and although some of them of the Emperour Trebatios part were vnhorsed, yet quicklie and with a trice they were mounted againe. And of other twelue kings that were mightie and stout, and of great va∣lour, that came in companie with the Emperour Alycan∣dro, there remained but two of them, but all the rest were ouerthrowen and slaine by Bagandel and Lyriamandro, Rodomarte and Rodofeo, Flamides and Florinaldus, the sonnes of the gran Torcato, and the stout Rogelio. When these Pagan kings were slaine and ouercome (although the number of Pagans were infinit) yet they beganne to loose ground, for that they had no other Captaines for to gouerne them, but onelie that mightie Pagan Bramarant, who was deteined in battaile with Rosicleer, and the two worthie knights Meridian and Brandimardo, if there had bne ma∣ny in the campe lyke vnto them, before the Pagans would haue yeelded anie ground, there had bene greater destruc∣tion and bloud shed more than there was, but by reason that they were but two onelie, they were not sufficient for to gouerne and rule them, although they did make so greate slaughter, that they seemed not to be anie humane crea∣tures. But now was the time come of the good fortune and de∣stinie promised vnto the Emperour Trebatio to shewe it selfe fauourable, and the Prophesie before sayde by the olde king of Gedrosia to worke effect, and accomplish the truth thereof in confirming of the same, for that the Pagans be∣gan to retire, and night drew on, and it wared darke, they receiued great feare, in such sorte, that they put themselues vnto flight, and ranne awaie with great shame, so that a little before the shutting of the euening, the Pagans put themselues in such feare and hast in running, that there was no force of resistance in them, but to be all slaine by the Gréekes, who followed them at their héeles. And the Emperour Alycandro when that he sawe himselfe left alone
without his strong gard, and mightie kings (his vassals that were wont to kéepe and beare him companie, and all his people) to run awaie before him ouercome, and cleane with∣out anie hope of victorie, he larged the raines vnto his horse, and ranne about the field, complaining verie much against the Gods, (whome he tooke to bée his parents and kinsfolke) as also against Fortune, for shewing her selfe so contrarie against him: but most he complained against himselfe, for putting so great confidence and trust in his owne power, in that hée would not giue anie credit vnto the good and true counsailes of the olde king of Gedrosia, and going in this sort, he came vnto his Tents, and taking the faire Prin∣cesse Lyndabrides, and the rest of the Ladies and Damsels that were with her, with other such things as conueniently he could, hée fled downe vnto the sea side, whereas was all his whole Fléete, whereof the Christians had burnt a great part of them, such as were at the Sea, for although the saide ships of the Christians were but few in number, yet when that they sawe the great destruction that was made on the land, they recouered great courage or to assault them that were at the Sea, in such sorte, that they set fire on manye shippes that were in the Fléete, in spite of them that were there, for that they found small resistance. Thus as I haue saide before, when the Emperour came vnto the Sea side, there was so great hast of embarking, that with great tra∣uaile hée embarked himselfe▪ into a shippe with those that came with him, and being embarked, yet he thought not himselfe in anie securitie, but in great hast caused the Sailes to bée spread abroade, and launched themselues into the Sea, leauing all this troupe and power ouerthrowen in Grecia. Then the Prince Meridian and Brandimardo, when that they sawe how that the people were dispearsed, and that by no meanes possible they coulde not staie them from flying and running awaie. Then went they from one place vnto another séeking of the Emperour Alycandro, but could not finde him, till such time as they came vnto the Sea
side, whereas it was tolde them how that hée was embar∣ked into a shippe, and departed with the Princesse Lynda∣brides, and the other Ladies and Gentlewomen that were in her companie amongst whome was the faire Princesse Floralinda, spouse vnto the Prince Meridian, who when that hée vnderstoode of their departure, dyd straight wayes embarke himselfe in another shippe, and followed after them. In all this while the Gréekes vnderstoode in no other thing but in killing and slaying of Pagans as they ranne awaie, and made such slaughter, as in all the daie before was not the lyke, at which time all the water in the Tirreno sea, from the geo vnto the Euxino, was redde, and tur∣ned into the coulour of bloud, with the great quantitie that were slaine as well on the sea as on the land, which was a thing of great terrour and wonder to beholde. But the knight of the Sunne when he sawe that the battaile was dispearsed, and how that the Pagans sledde before them, hée made no farther account of them, but went and sought for the Emperour Alycandro and the Princesse Lyndabrides; fearing that in the moouing and running of the people they should receiue some damage or harme. The which he would not that it should so fall out for anie thing in all the world, for that hée considered verie well in his minde how much he was bound vnto them for the great loue which they bare vnto him. And when he came vnto the Tents, he went from one vnto another, enquiring for the Emperour, and it was tolde him how they were fled and gone, wherewith he gallopped his horse till hée came vnto the sea side, whereas hée sawe the Pagans making great hast for to embarke themselues, and many of them did swimme aboord, because they would not abide the furie of the Greekes a land. Then the Knight of the Sunne came vnto one of those Pagans, and put the point of his sword to his face, and sayd that hee would kill him, if hée dyd not tell him newes of the Emperour Aly∣candro.
Then the Pagan who sawe him depart for feare of death; tolde him how that he was departed from thence in a ship, with the princesse Lyndabrides and all her Ladies and gen∣tlewomen. Whereat when the knight of the Sunne heard of their departure he was verie sorrowfull, as well for the perill in the which they put themselues, as also for that hée would haue done vnto them the honour and seruice that they deserued, and for that his valiant courage could not suf∣fer that they should depart in such sorte, with a setled pur∣pose and determination full of vertue, he put himselfe into a Boate, and caused the Marriners to rowe him vnto a good ship that was there at hande, whereas he found certaine knights that did resist him at his entrie, whom he slew, and threatned the Maister and Marriners that he woulde lyke∣wise kill them if they did not gouerne the ship right that waie which the Emperour Alycandro was departed and gone. Then they who sawe the great destruction that hée had made in so short a time, being greatlie amazed thereat, and with great feae did obey all that he commanded, so that in companie with the other ships, they hoised saile, and depar∣ted through that bloudie sea, whereas we wil leaue them in their iourney, and returne vnto them that were left in the field. At this time the good Emperour Trebatio when he saw the night come on a pace, and that it waxed darke, being ve∣rie wearie he all & his companie in killing of pagans, began to blow and sound his rich horne, which lyke a good Cap∣taie he carried alwaies about his necke, and he dyd sound it i such sort, that in all those broade and wide fields it was heard, at which sound all his people dyd obey his comman∣dement, and gathered themselues together. But yet in all this time the battaile betwixt Rosicleer and Bramarant ne∣uer ceased, but rather as then was more furious and kind∣led in wrath, and they did no other thing but procure to charge the one the other with their terrible blowes, all that euer they could. At which time Bramarant thought not that
the Emperour Alycandro had bene spoiled and lost the vic∣torie, but rather suspected that the Greekes had lost the field, but verie quicklie hée was put out of that doubt, for that by reason of the great noise which they made in their battaile, the Emperour Trebatio and all those worthie Princes that were on his part, came thether whereas they were, for as then they were all ioyned together, & put themselues round about these two warriours, with determination for to part them from that contension: but this valiant and worthie pagan when he saw them in that sort, and knew them, hee was greatly amazed, and straight waies suspected that they had got the victorie, who as then with a hoarse voyce and proude semblant, sayd. Oh fortune, how is it that thou hast had so great power, for to shew thy selfe so contrarie against the pagans: who is that mightie and valiant prince that hath had so great force for to ouerthrow the mightie Alican∣dro and the gran Campion my father, who was sufficient to set fier on all the whole worlde. To whome Rosicleer answered and said, if thou wilt know him it is easie to bee vnderstood, for I doe giue thée to vnderstand that all which is here done, commeth alonely of him, that dyd create and make all things, and hath power ouer all men, and at his will is gouerned both nature and fortune. And this is Ie∣sus Christ true God and man, in whome all christians doe beleeue and worship: and it hath bene his pleasure to giue vs the victorie against so many thousands of Pagans, by the which thou maist vnderstand, how false and deceiuable be your Gods, who were not able for to ayde and succour the Emperour Alicandro, who presumeth to desend from the race, and stocke. Then this proude Pagan replyed and sayde, I neuer beleeued in any gods, neither am I now de∣termined to beleeue in any, for that both their gods & thyne, and all the rest, I holde them for my enimies, and I will spoyle them all where soeuer I may finde or méete with them. And in saying these words he raysed himselfe in his stirrups, and with his sword in both his hands he stroke so strong a blow at Rosicleer vppon his inchaunted healme,
that it séemed a Thunderbolt to haue fallen from heauen, the noyse was so great, which made him somewhat astoni∣shed: But when this Pagan sawe that he was compassed about with so much people, & that it was night, he thought it not good to abide there anie longer, but set spurres vnto his horse, and rushed thorough the thickest of them, & ouer, threw to the ground all them that was in his way, & lyke a whirle winde he runneth through those fields, and neuer stayed till he came into the wildernesse of Grecia, with in∣tension not to depart from thence till such time as he hadde very well and to his contentment reuenged the death of his father. Rosicleer would verie faine haue followed him, for that he hadde a great desire for to conclude and giue ende vnto that battaile, but the Emperour his father and those that were with him dyd distrube him. Then when they sawe themselues together, and missed the knight of the Sunne, they were greatly amazed, and seperated themselues some one way and some an other waye, and went into all places for to séeke him: but when that in all the whole field they could not finde him, they could not immagine where hée should bée, for the which they were all very sad and sorrow∣full, but in especiall the royall princes Claridiana, for that she thought euery hower a yéere till she hadde spoken with him, and trauailed from one place to an other with great care in his demaund, but could not finde him, nor haue anie newes of him, till in the ende of great enquirie, it was tolde her by a souldier that he dyd sée him embarke him∣selfe in a shippe, and all that he procured was for to know some newes of the Emperour Alicandro. When she heard this, she was somewhat quieted in her selfe, and went and informed the Emperour Trebatio, thereof, who with all the rest of the other princes receued great ioye, and began at that instant to celebrate and re∣ioyce the lae victorie wonne, and in very good order retour∣ned to the Citie of Constantinople, where as they were in the armes of those Ladies, with such ioye, as the reader
may iudge, yet I must néedes say, that if the absence of the knight of the Sunne had not mittigated somewhat the ex∣tremitie of their pleasure, there had neuer bene in Grecia the like ioye and triumph. Let vs now leaue them in all their pastimes, for that I am sure this long chapter hath somewhat wearied you, and let vs retourne to tell you of other thinges wherein you shall receiue pleasure and delight. ¶How that the Emperour Alicandro sayling by sea, was through a tempest, by the which he was dri∣uen vnto the strong Iland, whereas they were ta∣ken prisoners, he and the princes Lindabrides, with all her Ladies, by the Gyant Roboan and his sonnes. ¶Chap. 39. WIth great sorrow and heauinesse of heart dyd the Emperour Alicandro nauigate the Sea, with the faire and precious Princes Lindabrides, in com∣panie with a small number of Knightes that entred into the ship with him: who when they considered with what great pomp and force they entred into the Empire of Gre∣cia, & with what disgrace they departed from thence, their hearts were readie to breake with sorrrw, for that they saw no other thing, (of so great a number of thousands of peo∣ple that they brought with them out of their countries) but onely the water of the Sea, couered with bloud, and a few other shippes full of people that had escaped from the furie of the Gréekes, some one way, and some an other, without any order, but whether soeuer the wynde & fortune would carrie them. The night was very dark, so that the ship of the Empe∣ror was all alone, & fortune who would shew her selfe more
contrarie for to giue im to  what small trust there was in her, it happen that in the night there arose a great mpest, that dyd not onelie hinder them of their iourney, but also dyd put the shippe many times in great daunger to be drowned, so that the marriners and such as were in the shippe, had enough to doe, for to voyde and cast out the water, that was forced in by that tempest, and the faire princesse Lindabrides, with all her ladies and gentle∣women, receiued so great feare that they all amased remai∣ned as dead persons: although vnto this faire princesse, the griefe was not so much in beholding before her eyes, that great perill of death in the which they were brought, as to sée her selfe in that sorte for to depart from Grecia, where as remained the knight of the Sunne: and againe to consider how euell her purpose and desire was brought to passe, so that she remained without all hope or remedie. And prayed vnto her gods and fortune, not to appease the torment, but to be so contrarie vnto their iourney, that they might retourne againe (by the force thereof) into Grecia, either a liue or dead: for that she thought in her heart, that there was no death could be more crueller vnto her, then to retourne into her owne countrie whereas she should lose all hope euer for to sée the knight of the Sunne. In this sort vttering great and profound sighes, which procéeded from the bottome of her heart, she sayd as followeth. Oh my soule, depart and leaue this my sorowfull and afflicted bodie, séeing that my fortune and cruel destinie wil that I shal leaue the land whereas the knight of the Sunne doth remaine: Oh you wyndes and celestiall mouinges, that doth carrie the shippes vpon the Seas, here and there in all places, carrie vs now into some parte whereas wée may be taken prisoners by some Grecian, and carryed be∣fore the Emperour Trebatio, for that it shall be vnto mée more comfortable to be prisoner and  in his pallas, then to be Quéene in the gran Scithia or Empresse in Tartria. Oh you blouddie waues ossed vp and downe by the furi∣s wyndes, and forced into riuers, show your selues so fa∣uorable
vnto mée, that when by this torment and storme, we shalbe drowned, you would (dead as I shalbe left) car∣rie me vnto some part of Grecia, for that possible the knight of the Sunne hearing of my death, will not be so cruell but that he will giue sepulture vnto this my vnhappie bodie, and at times remember mée, and be sorrowfull for this my vntimely and cruell death. Ah when that this shall lacke in him, yet shall my sorrowfull bones take comfort, in that they shall remaine in so glorious and happie a land. In vttering of these and manie other things of great griefe, did this sorrowfull princesse nauigate, and with so great trouble of minde, that I doe verelie beleeue, if the knight of the Sunne had heard them, he would haue hadde great compassion on her. Likewise it was of no lesse sorow & griefe to sée the demeanour of the Emperour Alicandro, for that the day before he saw himselfe in the estate to bée lord ouer all the whole world, and at this present for to be a land in his owne countrie, he would haue bene content to haue had the gouernement, and to be lorde of a poore ca∣stell: an estate vnlooked for, & they that doe thinke to sléepe in great securitie, whome fortune hath put in the highest part of her mouable and inconstant whéele, they may well behold this Emperour, for that possible he may be vnto thē a greater securitie, and cause them to loose the condicion of hope that alwayes they had in her, for that alwaies when that she dothe once beginne to frowne and to tourne her back vnto any, she is not content to touch them with a lit∣tle aduersitie, but will so follow them, as their fall shalbe equal vnto their first triumph of exalting, as by experience you shall sée in this Emperour, who was not content to bring him into this estate of perplexitie, but straight waies did ordaine a greater and crueller conclusion greatly to be considered of: for that the next day in the morning at such time as the Sunne did arise, the furious force of the windes and seas, did carrie their ship into the port of any land, with so great extremitie, that it brake all to péeces, and they with great trauaile escaped, being all wet, out of comfort, and in
a place vnknowen, and for that you shalbe certified of the comfort and ease that they found there. You shall vnder∣stand that this was called the strong Ilande, the most fa∣mous in all the Tirreno Sea, it is called strong, for that it is all compassed round about with the Sea, & on the parts towards the sea, high and mightie Rockes, and hath no en∣tring into it but onely one part, in the which the Emperor Alicandro and his companie were driuen by force of that great tempest: at the entrie of the same sort, was two great high and mightie towers, and of great strength, and at the foote of them into the Iland, a great and large plaine, in the which was manie gallant peaceable and freshe foun∣taines, that dyd inuite all them that passed by, to take their ease and repast, and beyond the same plaine, there was a beautifull mountaine, vppon the which was edified a verie faire castell and strong, compassed round about with a high wall▪ and watch towers, with a  very broade & déepe, vpon the which was a drawen bridge of timber, and before the same a gallant little plaine in maner of & court. The highest part of the tower was full of windowes and gal∣leries▪ some towards the Sea, and others towards the en∣trie of the saide Castell, so that for strength and beautie, in all the whole Sea, was not an Iland to be found equall vnto the same▪ but onely that of Lindaraza, the which was edified and made by arte of inchantment. The Lord of this Iland was a Gyant, called Roboan, who by liniall dissent doth procéede from Nemroth, he that built the high and statelie tower of Babel▪ and from his time to that daye, hath bene maintained and gouerned, by that linage, as appeared by olde and ancient writings which they had amongst them. This Roboan was verie bigge of bodie, and of strength more thn anie other Gyant, and he hadde foure sonnes all young men, the most stoutest and grymmest that was to be found amongst▪ all the Ilands of the Sea. So that by the of them, as also  the great strength of the Ilande, Roboan  all the whole world, if they coem
against him, which was the occasion that he dyd great harm and robberies at the Sea. And dyd maintaine in his Iland an ill custome, which was, that euerie time at the wayne of the Moone, he did sacrifice two damsells, the most fairest that could be found, and when that the Moone did increase he dyd sacrifice two knights, the which they dyd, by the encreasing of their great sinnes, whereby his ancestours did fall into a great and abhominable Idola∣trie, to honour and worship the Moone, without knowing any other God or Lord, but onely her, saying, that with her brightnesse she dyd illuminate the earth, and cause it to en∣gender Gyants, and that she wa the occasion that the earth dyd bring forth all maner of fruites and hearbes, for the which occasion they hadde her for their Goddesse and Mo∣ther. Also they sayd, that when the Moone was in the waine, she dyd hide her brightnesse for that she was angrie with men: for which cause they did sacrifice vnto her two dam∣sels, because with their bloud as they saide, her anger was appeased. And at such time as she did beginne to increase, they did sacrifice vnto her two knights, in giuing to vn∣derstand, that they did acknowledge her for their Goddesse. And for the executing of the same, they hadde caused to be made betwixt the two towers in a verie faire plaine, a rich and gorgeous throne of Alablaster, nigh vnto a faire cleane and cléere fountaine, whereas Roboan prostrate vppon his knées, and apparailed with white garments, and a towell vpon his shoulder, did make this Sacrifice, cutting of the heads of those damsels and knights with a broade & sharpe knife. This order and custome was maintained and kept in that Iland by the auncestors of Roboan, euer since the time that they fell into that diuelish Idolatrie. And this Robo∣an did kéepe and celebrate the same with greater care and diligence, then all his auncesters had done before him, in such sort that on a time at the waine of the Moone, hauing in his custodie but one damsell for to Sacrifie, because hée would not lacke the number of two, hée dyd Sacrifice
a daughter of his owne, whome he loed verymuch, he which extremitie afterwards was the occasion that he put such diligence to séeke out for  and knights, that alwaies after they had still great sorrow. The sonnes of this Gyant were named, the first Langereon, the second Andricardo, the third Rubero, the fourth Acorante▪ all the which were very well spoken and of good conditions, and had no other fault amongst thm but blindenesse in that cur∣sed law & custome, wherein they did so much estéeme them selues, that all the world besides they made little accompt off, as though they were of small valour, as well in state of degrée, as in obseruing their law, with valiant force and strength. And at such time as they dyd elebrate their sacri∣fice vnto the Moone, whome they worshipped as their God, the higher of bloud that those damsels & knights were that they did sacrifice, the more was their ioye and pleasure. And they pardoned none although she were a Quéene. Two of these his sonnes were alwaies in the two Towers at the side at the port, with diuers other knights that dyd beare them companie, & when that any by fortune or other wise ariued in their port, they dyd take & apprehend them. The other two were continually at the Sea, apprehending and taking prisoners all that euer they dyd méete, and ha∣uing taken any pray, they returned vnto the Iland. Their father Roboan, was in the castle with his wife, who was lady Gyantesse, and many times he would descend vnto his sonnes in the two towers, & they likewise vnto the castell, when that it was their pleasure for to méete. This was the Iland whereas the Emperour Alicandro with the Prin∣cesse Lindabrides and all her Ladies and gentlewomen ari∣ued, who were scarce out of the water a land, whē that they were beset and apprehended by the two gyants, Langeeon & Andricardo. who were in the towers with their knights. And although some that came with the Emperour would put themselues in dsece, yet dyd it little profit them, for that the two bretheren were such that they would not haue one of them aliue, if they hadde not yéelded themselues
prisoners. Then the two brethren with as great ioy and pleasure as euer they receiued in their liues to sée them∣selues possessed with so rich a praie of damsels, went vp in∣to the Castle with them, sauing one damsell of the Princes∣ses, (for that she would not sée her selfe in the power of those Gyantes) woulde put her lyfe in aduenture for to escape from them, and ranne and put her selfe amongst a compa∣nie of Rockes, whose fortune was so fauourable (for that there was a great number of them) that she was not séene, so that she remained there all alone hidden amongest the Rockes. And héere you shall vnderstand that this was the Quéene Iulia, she that forged and made the sword that Ro∣sicleer wonne in great Britaine of Candramarte, who came in companie with the Princesse Lyndabrides out of the gran Tartaria. Thus when the Emperour and all those damsels were carried into the Castle, Roboan receiued great ioy and pleasure for the rich praie, and it seemed vnto him that the Princesse Lyndabrides was the fairest creature that euer he had séene in all his life, and he sayd that with the bloud of so high a Damsell, their Goddes the Moone, shoulde receiue great contentment, and cause the fruits of their Countrie to bring forth in greater abundaunce than heeretofore it hath done, and commanded straight waies that they should be put in holde and good assurance, their prison was ordained in the highest part of all the Castle, whereas were great galle∣ries and battlements, from whence they might discerne all the whole Iland, and a great part of the Sea. But when that the Emperour Alycandro sawe himselfe prisoner vnto such euill and vnmercifull people, and well vnderstoode to what end they were prisoners, you may well iudge the sor∣row and griefe that he receiued at his heart, who before was Lorde ouer so many Countries, and of power more than anie one in all the whole worlde, and now to bée prisoner in the custodie and power of them that at his first entrie heard the sentence of his death. The Princesse Lyndabrides of this imprisonment receiued no great griefe, for that shée
was not farre parted from the Empire of Grecia, but dyd comfort her selfe verie much, for that shée hoped in some time for to sée the knight of the Sunne, being in that place, and not in the gran Tartaria, whether as her Father dyd carrie her. And she said within her selfe, that forasmuch as in that land they dyd commit and vse so greate crueltie a∣gainst Ladies and damsells, it could not be, but at one time or at another, it should come vnto the eares and hearing of the knight of the Sunne, who was of so valiant a courage and generositie, that he would not let, but to proue and force himselfe to take awaie that great crueltie and disobedience against God, and had so great confidence in his worthinesse and valour, that hauing him before her, she estéemed all the world as nothing. Let vs now leaue them in this their sorrow and griefe, for that you doe well vnderstand héereby the small securi∣tie that is in fortune, how hurtfull a thing it is for to aban∣don wise counsaile, and to leane so much vnto her whole, as dyd this Emperour in the great and ouermuch confidence that he had in her, for that she had put him in so high estate, he did estéeme the wise counsaile of the olde king of Gedro∣sia as nothing, and for that he woulde not vse thereof, hée was brought into the estate whereas wée now lefte him. Let vs now tell of such other thinges as happened in the meane time. How Rosicleer departed out of Constantinople in the de∣mand of the knight of the Sunne, and how the knight of the Sunne in following the Emperour Alycandro ariued at the strong Iland, and what happened about the same. Chap. 40. THe next daie after the fierce and bloudie battaile, which was the whole expedition of Constantinople, all such Pagans as remai∣ned aliue (which was but the third parte of those which came from the gran Tartaria)
fled and ranne awaie towards the sea coast, whereas they embarked themselues, so that there remained but certaine kings and nobles, such as were knowen, and were priso∣ners vnto the Gréekes. At which time the Emperour Tre∣batio with all his nobles, hauing a great good will to cele∣brate with triumph the great and ioyfull victorie which God had giuen them, were greatlie disturbed by the ab∣sence of the knight of the Sunne, for without him it seemed that they could not reioyce, nor take anie ioy or pleasure, for which occasion at that instant departed many knights from the Court, in the demaund and seeking of him, amongest whom Rosideer was one, who departed al alone from Con∣stantinople, and in such sorte that he was not knowen, nei∣ther would he carrie anie bodie with him, for that hee had great desire for to méete with Bramarant, and to conclude with him the battaile, before that anie knight be present for to separate or part them, and comming vnto the sea side, whereas he could not heare anie newes of him, he straight waies there embarked himselfe into a ship, whereas we wil leaue him and all the rest in Constantinople, for to tell you of the knight of the Sunne, who being verie desirous for to ouertake the Emperour Alycando and the Princesse Lyndabrides, nagating by Sea, was lykewise the same night constrained with the torment (that tooke the Empe∣rour) for to loose his waie. But whether it was by the will of God it should so fall out, for that the end thereof was verie good, or else by the arte of the wise Lygandeo, or else by good fortune that gouerned his shippe, in such sorte the worthie knight of the Sunne was throwen by force of the sayde storme and tempest into the porte of the strong Ilande, the which béeing perceiued and knowen by the Mariners, they would straight wayes haue departed from thence, hauing that quiet prte farre more perillous than to bée at the Sea, with that great storme and tempest, whose great feare béeing manifest vnto the Knight of the Sunne, hee was verie desirous to knowe the occasion thereof, and they declared the cause, verie much extolling the force and
strength of Roboan, and of his sonnes, as also of the great crueltie that was vsed there, with such knights and dam∣sells as they did take. And although the knight of the Sun would first haue accomplished his voyage in following of the Emperour Alycandro, and haue left that enterprise vn∣till some other time, yet for all that, séeing that it woulde lyttle profite for to returne vnto the Sea, by reason that the waues were greatlie increased with the force of the storme, hée determined with himselfe to go a land, and in the meane time till it pleased God to appease the rage of the weather, he would put in practise to sée if hée could doe anie thing against those people, for to cause them to breake that euill and diuellish custome, and as hée was determined within himselfe, hée put it in vre, but the marriners would not enter into the Port, nor boord their ship aland with a good will, but he did so threaten them that he made them by force to doe all that he commanded. When that hée was a land, and had not well mounted vpon his horse, (which was that which hée wonne from the king of the Gandaros in the battaile,) there came forth a∣gainst him ten knightes on horsebacke, and as many on foote, all armed, with their hatchets of armes in their hands, and bad him to yéeld to them as prisoner, and some of them approched to laie hands on his horse bridle. But this good knight answered not one worde vnto these villanous peo∣ple, but hauing his Speare in his hande, stroke one of them such a blowe therewith, that his strong armour dyd not profite him, but hée ouerthrew him backwardes starke dead vnto the ground, and as one that as then was not to learne to shedde the bloud of such vnhappie wretches, in a short time hée made such slaughter amongest them, that there escaped no more aliue but thrée of them, who fledde and ranne with all hast possible vnto the Castle, which was vppon the little mountaine, whereas were the two oldest bretheren, Langereon and Andricardo, with Roboan their Father, for that after that they had carried prisoner vnto the Castell the Emperour Alycandro, and his companie, vn∣till
that time they had not descended vnto their Towers, whereas they were wont to bée continuallie, which was the occasion that the knight of the Sunne was not assaul∣ted, but by their Knightes and footmen, who remayned be∣lowe in the Towers for to kéepe and defend them, for that all the rest were gone into the Castell with their riche praie. But when the knight of the Sunne sawe himselfe cléere of all those that came forth against him, and that there came no more people out of the Towers, hee imagined within himselfe that the Gyantes shoulde bée in that highe Castle, which hée sawe before him somewhat a farre off, which caused him to take the waie thetherwardes, and it seemed vnto him to bee one of the most fayrest and strongest that euer before hee had séene, and as yet hée was not come vnto the plaine that was before the entrie, which was in manner of a Court, when that hee sawe come forth of the Castle by a false doore one of the Gyantes, all armed with thicke plates of stéele, and mounted vppon a mightie, great, and strong horse, with a great cutting hatchet of Steele in his handes, who seemed vnto the knight of the Sunne to bée one of the best furnished, and well made and proportio∣ned Gyants that euer hee saw in all his lyfe. And this was Langereon the eldest and most valyantest of all the foure brethren, who béeing aduertised by one of them that ranne awaie, of the great slaughter and destruction that that alone knight had made amongst his people, he issued out to séeke him, for to take reuengement of the same, and at such time as the knight of the Sunne came into the plaine ground, by the Castell, the Gyant approched nigh vnto him, and lyfte vp the beauer of his healme. But when hée sawe him of so bigge and gallant proportion, and considered the newes which his men had declared vnto him, hée helde him straight wayes in reputation, and thought him to bée a knight of a most singular and valyant courage, but ma∣king no account of him, he said. By thy vnaduised ariuall and comming hether (Sir
Knight) I doe vnderstand that thou knowest not who is Lord of this Iland, neither the vse and custome that is héere maintained, for if thou haddest béene aduertised thereof, then wouldest thou not haue come hether to séeke him, whom thou hast so much grieued and angered in the slaying of his knightes. With as little feare and gallant semblaunce as hée spake, the knight of the Sunne aunswered him and sayd. Gyant, I doe verie well know, that this is the strong I∣land, and how that Roboan is Lord of the same, who ioynt∣lie with his sonnes doth maintaine so euill and abhomina∣ble a custome, that whatsoeuer good knight hée bée, he ought for to aduenture his lyfe for to cause the same to be broken, as well in the great Idolatrie vsed in the worshipping for God his creatures, as also in the great crueltie vsed agaynst all knightes and damsells, so that I am come hether, and haue so great hope and confidence in the diuine iustice, to doe so much, that you shall not perseuer with this great vio∣lence, and if that thou art Roboan or anie of his sonnes, de∣termine and put order to amend thy life, or else come pre∣sentlie with me to battaile. Then Langereon with great laughter and disdaine, said: Of truth (Sir Knight) thy great boldnesse and courage is the greatest that euer I haue heard or seene, that thou hast so valiant a heart for to approch and giue attempt in that which all the whole world is not sufficient, but because thou shalt sée and vnderstand that thy attempt is more of follie than of anie valiant courage or feare, doe now what thou canst against me, for that I am one of the sonnes of Roboan, whom thou hast named. And in saying these words this worthie and valiant youth did lift vp his great tren∣cheant and stéelie hatchet, and therewith went towardes the knight of the Sunne, with so terrible and dreadfull semblance, that it was sufficient to put great feare in anie good Knight. But vnto him who had béene accustomed vn∣to such lyke enterprises, it was not onelie without feare and dreade, but also a Spare which hée had in his hand,
and taken from one of those knightes which hée stew, hée threw vnto the ground, and drew out his sword, and went towardes Langereon, who was greatlie amazed at that which hée did, so that these two the one against the other charged each his aduersarie with such terrible blowes vpon their healmes, that with the great force thereof they caused perorce their horses to stoope downe to the ground, and by reason that the healme of the Gyant was not of so fine met∣tall as it should haue béene, it was clouen by the knight of the Sunne, in such sorte, that hée made a lyttle wounde in his scull, out of the which procéeded great abundaunce of bloud that fell in his eyes, and about his face, the which did disturbe him verie much in this battaile, and this Lange∣reon meruailed exceedinglie at that terrible blowe which he had receiued, which was the mightiest that euer in all his life he had felt, and being verie desirous raight wayes and out of hand to bée reuenged of the same, for that in con∣tinuing in battaile, it might fall out vnto him verie peril∣lous and daungerous: hee flourished with his stéelie hatchet about his head, and with it in both his handes hée stroke so strong a blowe at the knight of the Sunne ouerthwart vp∣pon his conaled healme, that he thought verilie a whole Tower had fallen vpon him, it so amazed and astonied him, and with a trice hee redoubled another blowe with no lesse force and strength, with the which the knight of the Sunne had passed great daunger, if that he had stroke it full and right, but with the force and strength that hée put in striking of the first blowe, the bloud of the wound in his had burst out a new, and fell with greate abundaunce downe about his eyes, in such sorte, that whereas hée thought to haue stroken the worthie and valyant knight of the Sunne, hée was deceiued, and stroke his horse hard by the poell of the saddle, that without anie staying hee cut him cleane asunder in the middest, so that he par∣ted him in two péeces, and hee straight wayes fell downe dead vnto the grounde, whereby hée was con∣strayned to ouerthrowe his Maister: but this valiant
knight was not so soone fallen, but he arose vp againe on his féete, and meruailed greatlie at the mightie force of the Gyant, and seeing himselfe so intreated, he sayde within himselfe, that it did well appeare, that there was not pre∣sent his Ladie and Mistres the Princesse Claridiana, for that one alone knight had brought him vnto that extremitie. And in saying these wordes he did abide the comming of Langareon, who approched with his hatchet aboue his head for to strike him another terrible blowe, and at such time as he would haue discharged the same, he stepped on the one side with so great dexteritie, that the blowe fell downe to the ground, and as the Gyant by reason of the force where∣with it was stroke, dyd bowe his bodie and armes after the same, the Knight of the Sunne laide holde on the gorget of his healme with so greate strength, that hee brake the la∣cings and buckles thereof, and pulled it from his head, and ouerthrew him from his horse to the ground, and before that hée could arise, hee stroke him with his healme vppon his vnarmed head, that hée astonied him, and layde him a long vpon the earth, and not willing to doe him anie far∣ther euill, hée left him, and tooke his hatchet and mounted vpon his horse, the which was both bigge and verie swift. And looking towardes the Castle to see if another did come forth, hée chaunced to cast his eyes vp vnto the battle∣ments therof, whereas hee discouered the persons of the Em∣perour Alycanidro, and the fayre Princesse Lyndabrides, and some of her Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were be∣holding and dyd sée all that passed in the battayle with the Gyant, and by reason that all his armour was berayed and imbrued in bloud, and neuer made cleane since the greate battayle that was fought in Grecia, and againe, that he had not his horse Cornerino, they coulde not imagine or deuise who he shoulde bée, but the Princesse Lyndabrides sayde within her selfe. Oh how I would pardon and forgiue fortune all these trauailes and aduersities which she hath giuen vnto mée, that my fortune might nowe bée so good and happie,
that this might be the myrrour of all knights, or his bro∣ther Rosicleer, or some of his friendes, that might doe so much, in this Iland, as to carrie vs prisoners into Grecia. But when that the knight of the Sunne dyd sée that faire and rubicnd face of the Princesse, he was not so greatlie troubled with the mightie and terrible blowes which he hadde receiued of the Gyant, as he was for to see her, who some times was gouernesse of his heart, in that place: wher∣with he trembled and shaked, striking himselfe vpon the brest, as one that walketh by night in securitie and with∣out feare discouereth vpon a sodaine, some vision or fantasie before him. And being somewhat amased, he remained a good while, beholding her, without mouing of hand or foote, that he thought all his sences were disturbed, with the so∣daine sight of this faire Princesse, whose beautie was so rooted within his heart, and the olde sore so festered, that of truth it was very hard and euell to be healed, if that the wisedome of Lirgandeo and Artimidoro, with others more auncienter then they, had not put remedie in the same, for that the valour of this precious princesse was such, that the knight of the Sunne in her presence, could neuer haue his frée libertie. And being in this maze Andricardo, the second brother came forth out at the castell gate, all armed with very thick armour of hardened stéele, and mounted vpon a mightie horse, who was of no lesse stature and bignesse then the first: but when that the knight of the Sunne did sée him, he saide within himselfe, that neuer in all his life he saw giants of so gallant proporcion, nor of so great force & strength as Langereon seemed to haue. But when that An∣dricardo approched and saw his brother lye along vpon the earth, thinking that he had bene dead, it could not be im∣magined the great sorrow and griefe he receiued, which cau∣sed him with so great furie and lightnesse, as the arrow that is forced out of abowe, to throw at the knight of the Sunne a mightie great boare speare which he brought in his hands, that if his armour had not bene that of Meridi∣an▪ it had passed his bodie through and through to the other
side, for that it stroke him in the middest of his breast with so great strength, that it made him to double his bodie back∣wards vpon his horse crouper, and for that the stéelie pointe could not enter into his armour, it doubled & recoiled backe againe, and the shéeuers flew into the aire, making a greate noise, but this good knight with great lightnesse did settle himselfe againe in his saddle, and remembred that the faire Princesse Lyndabrides did behold him, and therewith went against Andricandro, with his hatchet in both his handes, & stroke him so mightie a blow vpon his healme, that if it had chanced to be a full blow, he had clouen him downe vnto the wast, but it chanced somewhat aside, in such sort, that it cut awaie a péece of the helme with one of his cares, and from thence descended his fine cutting hatchet along his breast, cutting all that was before it, till it came to the saddle bow, the which it cloue asunder, and cut his horse almost in two péeces, so that he fell downe dead to the ground with his ma∣ster, and caught one of his legges vnder him, in such sorte, that what with the wound that hée had on his breast, and the doubling of his legge, hée could not by anie meanes a∣rise, but was the greatest amazed man in all the worlde, to see that terrible and wonderfull blowe the which he had re∣ceiued, and it séemed to bée done by a knight of the biggest force that was to bée found in anie parte of the vniuersall world. Then Roboan who was all armed, and at a windowe beholding the battaile, when that he sawe his sonnes ouer∣come and in that perplexitie, it coulde not be expressed the great sorow and griefe which he receiued, for that he thought it a thing impossible, that ten of the best knightes that were to be found in all the world, were not able to do that which was there done, and thinking in a short space to be reuen∣ged for the same, he mounted vpon a mightie horse, and tooke a great speare in his hand, and went forth at the Castle gate with so furious and terrible a semblance, that the knight of the Sunne did verie well perceiue that he was of no lesse force and strength than his two sonnes, for that he was high∣er
of person, and bigger of members, and when that he came nigh vnto the knight of the Sunne, with a hoarse & terrible voice, he sayd. Knight, tell me who art thou of such courage and hardi∣nesse, that hauing slaine my two sonnes, darest abide mée in the field? I am a knight (said he) that in the name of Iesus Christ, in whom I doe beléeue and worship, doe hope to de∣stroie thée, and all those that are obedient vnto thy lawe, for that the diuine iustice beeing angrie at the great sinnes and euils by thée done in this Iland, is now come to punish thée according vnto thy deserts, in the déepest partes of hell. Oh Goddesse, the creator of all Gyantes, and the bringer forth of all the fruites vppon the earth, (answered Roboan) how canst thou suffer that one alone knight shall saie that he will destroie thy lawe, and maketh a mocking stocke there∣at. In saying these wordes he spurred forwardes with his horse, and stroke him such a blowe with his speare in the middest of his breast, that he would haue sworne, that the point with halfe the staffe would haue appeared at his back, but it fell not out according vnto his thought, for at the force thereof he made no more mention nor mouing thereat, than if he had stroke against a tower, but with his mightie hatch∣et he repaied him in such sort, that a mightie great and thick shéeld, that he had, wherewith he would haue warded that blow, he cut in two péeces, and the blowe descended vppon his healme, cutting the same, and also a steele cap which hee had vnder it, and made a cruell wound in his head, and as they ioyned with their bodies verie nigh the one the other, the Gyant laide holde with his armes about his necke, thin∣king by his great force and strength to hoise him out of the saddie, but he that was indued with no lesse strength than he, and with more dexteritie, laide hold on him by the wast, & held him so fast, y• by reason their horses pressed forwards, they both ell to the ground, and let go their holds, & rose vp vpon their feet. The knight of the Sun drew out his sword & the gyant a great fauchon, so that they began the battaile a foot, & made so great noise, y• they were heard throughout
the whole Iland, and it séemed that there were in battaile together, more then one hundreth knights. Here was to be séene the great fortitude and strength of Roboan, who dyd combat in such sort with the knight of the Sunne, that he troubled him very much, and many times his vnmeasura∣ble blowes did put him in great perill, and had brought him into much more danger, if that the great strength and good∣nesse of his armour, and his great lightnesse, had not holpen him. There was also an other thing that dyd profit him ve∣rie much, which was y• great furie of his temerous blowes, which made the Gyant to besturre himselfe from one part vnto an other, for to cléere himselfe from the furie of them, with more lightnesse then his bigge and great bodie requi∣red. So that after halfe an houre that the battaile was begonne, his vnwildy bodie not being able to indure anie longer, waxed weake & feeble, by reason of certaine wounds which he had receiued, out of the which issued verie much bloud, in so great aboundance, that all the ground was stai∣ned there with. At which time the knight of the Sunne considering, that if the battaile shold goe forwards, it wold not be well with Roboan: and againe, for that he had him and his sonnes in respect of strong and valiant knights, & for such would estéeme them, if that he might cause them to leaue this great errour the which they had maintained a long time, he there with all withdrew himselfe aback, and lifting vp the beauer of his healme he said. Heare mée a lit∣tle what I will say vnto thée Roboan, first before that this our battaile be finished, thou shalt vnderstand that I doe estéeme thee and thy sonnes verie much, as wel for the great valiantnesse that is in you, as also you doe séeme vnto mee to be good and courteous knights: my will and desire is, that this our battaile betwixt vs may cease, and that reme∣die be put in the curing these thy wounds, and the wounds of thy sonnes, in case that thou wilt leaue this law Gentili∣ca, wherewith thou hast bene so much deceiued, and from this day forwardes not to obserue nor maintaine the euell and most cruell custome, as hetherto thou hast. For that if
thou wilt sée and behold with the eyes of thy vnderstan∣ding, and consider of the law in the which thou doest liue, thou shalt cléerely sée and perceiue the great errour and de∣ceit wherein thou art wrapped. Tell mee I pray thee Ro∣boan, who ought to be honored and worshipped for God, but he alonely that created and made all things both cee∣stiall and terrestriall, and hath power ouer all things, for to punish the wicked, and to gratifie and reward the good and iust. Well then, if he alone that hath all this power, ought to be estéemed, honoured and worshipped, for God, what reason is there for to beleue that the Moone is the Goddesse. Thou shalt vnderstand for her to shine and giue light, hath neede of the cléerenesse and brighnesse of the Sunne, with∣out the which, of her selfe she is verie darke and obscure, and cannot be séene. God created the high couloured Ru∣bies, the gréene Emeralds, the blew Saphires, the white Pearles, the shining beams of the Sunne, that giueth light vnto the Moone, the Starres, the gréene trées on the earth, and her Plants, the quietnesse of the heauens, the round∣nesse of the world, and the meruailous course of the celestial mouings, not for that we should occupie our wits and vn∣derstandings in these things: but by the great beautie and sight of them, our spirits may be moued vnto the beautie and loue of the creator and maker of all them, from whom like as from a fountaine, procedeth all that is faire and de∣lectable vnto the sight of man. In the meane time that the knight of the Sunne was saying these words, Roboan was very attentiue, taking as great pleasure, at that he sayde, as at his great force and strength, and looking vpon himselfe, he sawe that he was berayed with bloud and his armour broken in many places, and his aduersarie not to haue re∣ceiued any wound, but rather was more stronger and ligh∣ter then at the beginning, which was vnto him apparant, either to be slaine, or to loose the victorie. Likewise he well vnderstood to what ende the knight of the Sunne had spo∣ken those words, which did procéede more of vertue & good will towards them, then for any feare or dread he had in
the conclusion of the battaile: but by reason that he saw his sonnes lying a long on the ground in the field, the eyes of his vnderstanding were so blinded, that he could not sée the great profit which might come vnto him in leauing of his law and custome. And said vnto the knight of the Sun, that he should not speake any thing more therof vnto him, for that he was determined to follow and take his fortune, whether it were good or bad, against him, or with him. And therewith they both retourned againe vnto the battaile, & for that they had somewhat breathed & rested themselues, it was then a thing worthie to be seene, the strong and ter∣rible blowes which the one stroke at the other. For as I haue said, Roboan was a stout and strong giant, and suffi∣cient of himselfe to destroye and kill one hundreth knights that should contend against him altogether in battaile. The knight of the Sunne had great desire quickly to con∣clude and make an ende of that contension, to sée what the Emperour Alicandro and the Princesse Lindabrides dyd in the castell, who being greatly amazed at his great force and strength, could not immagine who it should be, except it were the sonne of Trebatio, he who had done great mar∣nailes in his presence. And he that should at this instant haue certified the faire princesse, how that it was the knight of the Sunne, you may well beleeue that he should haue caused her to receiue greater ioye and contentment, then if they had giuen her all the whole world for a present, as she who should not receiue so great griefe, if her soule should depart from her bodie, as she should receiue in departing from the countrie whereas doth remaine her knight of the Sunne, who dyd so much against Roboan, that in the ende of one houre, that the battaele was begun, he fell downe a long at his féete, so séeble and weake, by reason of the great quantitie of bloud, that he had lost, that till such time as the knight of the Sunne did pull of his healme, and gaue him ayre, he could not come againe vnto himselfe. But when that he was in his remembraunce, the knight of the Sunne florishing with his sworde aboue his head, sayde,
with this sword will I seperate thy head and bodie a sun∣der, if that thou wilt not amend thy lyfe, and apart thy selfe from the law, wherein thou hast liued hetherto. The feare of death (sayd Roboan) shall not make mée to doe any thing that is against my honour, but thy great vertue and force, doth make mée to beléeue that thy law and faith is better then this, the which I haue hetherto main∣tained, in the which I doe confesse greatly to haue erred and bene deceiued. And here I doe promise thée in the faith of whome I am, and by the high bloud from whence I doe descend, neuer to maintaine any longer this euill custome, but will esteeme and worshippe for my God all the dayes of my life, him whome thou hast tolde mée off, who vniuer∣sally did create all things. Then the knight of the Sunne who was very glad and ioyfull for to heare him so say, dyd healp him to arise from the ground, and embrasing him with great loue, they went both together vnto Andricardo and Langereon, whom they found both a liue and without perill, but that they were ve∣rie weake and féeble, with the great quantitie of bloud the which they had lost: but when the sonnes had vnderstood all that which had passed with their Father, God had inspi∣red his holy spirit within them, in such sort, that they were very well content therewith, and premised him that from that day forwards, they would hold him for their Lord and verie friend, and requested him to tell them, who he was, & how he was called. Unto whome he saide, that they should goe vnto the castell and there in the presence and before his prisoners he would giue them to vnderstand. And therwith they went all foure together vnto the castel, and being with∣in they mounted vp vnto the battelments whereas the Emperour, and faire princesse, with her damsells were. And when they came vnto them, the knight of the Sunne pulled of his healme, and kneeled downe before the Emperor & the princesse y• were together aparted from the rest, & with that graue & merrie countenāce y• he was wont to haue, he spake these words. If the errors don by the knight of ye Sun could
moue the generositie of your hearts, to come with so great wrath accompanied with so mightie a number of knights, into Grecia, for to take reuengement of me alone, behold mée here now vnder your obediēce, for that with this sword straight waies you giue mée my reward, as my desort doth deserue, for greater force to this effecte hath the greate loue and good will which alwaies I beare vnto you, then all the great and mightie armies, which you ordained to passe the Seas, for that to counteruaile them an other force equall is sufficient for to destroy them, but against the good will which alwayes I had for to serue you, there is no force, nor peruerse fortune sufficient for to oppresse the same: and if hetherto my Lords, I haue séemed vnto you to vse the con∣trarie, for that I made resistance against your in these bat∣tailes passed, it was not for to excuse mee to be yours, but to withstand that the Emperour of Grecia were not whol∣ly destroyed: and againe, that they should not suffer & abide the smart, that were nothing in the fault hereof. In the meane time that the knight of the Sunne was saying these words, the faire Princesse did beholde him as though she had bene transported, or from her selfe with the soueraigne ioye and pleasure which presētly she receiued, to sée before her with so great humilitie, him whome she loued much more then her owne selfe, and his fight so greatly wished & desired for. But when that the Emperour Alicandro dyd know the knight of the Sunne, and had well vnderstoode his humble and courteous words, who could immagine or coniecture the great admiration and wonder that he recei∣ued in his heart, with the varietie of diuers things that oc∣cupied his minde and vnderstanding at one instant. For one waye he called to remembrance, that once he thought that this knight should haue bene his sonne, and how that he gaue vnto him his daughter, Empire and high estate. Likewise he remembred to the contrarie, how that for to be reuenged on him, he left his owne countries, and depar∣ted with a great number of people into Grecia whereas happened vnto him all his ill fortunes and ouerthrowes.
he remembred also how that he sawe him in the fielde a∣gainst him with so great furie and fiercenesse, that hée alone did make to quake all his great and mightie armie, and how that by his rigorous arme the most principallest kings and Lordes of all his hoast were destroyed and hewen to péeces, and now likewise he sawe him vppon his knées be∣fore his presence with so great humilitie, that more coulde not be done by his sonne Meridian, if at that present he had béene there. In this sort was his minde troubled and tossed withall these thoughts, which was the occasion, that he stood and did beholde him without speaking of anie word a good space, till such time as comming vnto himselfe, and remem∣bring that he was the Myrrour of all Princes and knights in the world, and as then thought him to bée equall vnto the eternall Gods, and that his great valour & estate would not suffer that he should continue in that sort before him, he determined to consent and to suffer with patience, all that was ordained by fortune, and to accept and receiue the ly∣bertie of his imprisonment at the handes of him, who hath béene the occasion of all his euill, but in especiall the neces∣sitie in the which he was brought, woulde not giue waie vnto anie other thing, so that he went vnto him, and did em∣brase him, and kissed his chéeke, and in shedding of many teares that ranne downe his chéekes, hée vttered these wordes. WOrthie Prince and welbeloued sonne, I am he that al∣onelie haue erred, & most worthelie doth deserue the pu∣nishment, for the great quantitie of bloud which I haue cau∣sed to bee shedde of those that were without fault or blame, for I may well knowe and vnderstand, that whome the Gods dyd make of so great magnanimitie aboue all others in the whole worlde, it cannot bee but Fortune must bée fauourable vnto him and vnto mee the contrarie, for that I will maintaine against him the warre and contention, yea, and besides all this, the destinis hath béene fauoura∣ble vnto thée, in that by thy greate force and strength, wée
shall be set al libertis out of this prison in the which wée were committed, therefore I will acknowledge the great subiection and submission I owe vnto fortune, and giue her thankes, that although in the one she hath bene vnto mee contrarie, yet héerein hath she bene fauourable, in bringing you hether into my presence in this great néede and necessi∣tie. Therefore I will (if you be contented therewith) returne with you vnto Constantinople, for to conclude an entire and euerlasting friendship with the Emperour Trebatio your Father, and to do that now by peace, which I could not be∣fore conclude or finish by warres. Héere did the knight of the Sunne take great pleasure and contentment, in that the Emperour Alycandro would returne into Grecia, for the which he offered to kisse his hands: but yet the ioy and pleasure was much more, that the faire Princesse Lyndabrides receiued, in that the iourney should be such, that she might not so quicklie depart out of the presence of the knight of the Sunne. And more it is to be considered of them that in the like operations hath had experience, for to giue iudgement of the imagination of those two, when they sawe themselues together before the Em∣perour Alycandro, whereas they coulde not manifest anie part of that which they thought within their hearts. At this time approched vnto them Roboan and his sonnes, & when they vnderstoode who they were that were their prisoners, and also the knight of the Sunne, they fell downe vppon their knées at their féete for to kisse their handes, and craued pardon of them for all that was past. Then the knight of the Sunne sayd vnto the Emperour: My Lord, may it please your Highnesse for to honour these knights, for that they doe deserue it, for the great bountie and curtesie that is in them. Then did the Emperour embrace them, & caused them to arise from the ground, & offered himselfe to be their friend euer after, & for that he saw them sore hurt, he caused them to be cured & laid in their heds, whereas we wil leaue them, to declare of other things that happened in this time, & is néedfull in this Hystorie for the accomplishing of the
Prophesies past. What happened vnto Rosicleer after his departure out of Constantinople. Chap. 41. IN the beginning of the Chapter past, it was told you, how Rosicleer was departed from Constantinople, as well to séeke the knight of the Sun his brother, that was departed from the battaile past, as also for to méete with Bramarant, for that he had great desire for to combat with him, for that he séemed to be the most strongest and mightiest Pagan that was to be found in all the Paganisme. Now the Hystorie saith, that after he was gone to sea in a little ship that he found in the port, the passed storme and tempest did carrie them so farre, that they were in sight of the strong Iland, and béeing discouered, the Mariners did declare vnto him whose it was, and the euill custome that was there maintained. Which when he heard it did giue him a great good will for to goe thether, & when that he came nigh vnto, the Iland within a bow shoote, hée sawe vpon the tops certaine mightie rockes amongst the cliffes, a damsell which made great hast in running awaie, giuing great shrikes and cries, and following after her two mightie, great, and deformed Gyants, with great desire to ouertake her, the which when he sawe, with great good will for to succour her, he caused the small ship to bee carried to the shore, whereas this worthie knight leaped a land, and began a foote to climbe vpon those rockes, with all the spéed possible he could, not respecing the manifest perill that was ordained, with them whome hée went to séeke, but onelie that wherevnto hée was bound by iustice and honour. And when that hée was thus ariued, at the top of those rockes, hee sawe come forth from amongest those cliffes the two Gyanted, who brought betwixt them the Damsell that be∣fore hee sow, giuing great shrikes and lamentations be∣cause that shee was carried prisoner after that sorte.
These two Gyants were Rubero and Acorante, the two younger sonnes vnto Roboan, who ariuing at the Ilande, had seene the damsell vpon the top of the rockes, looking out if she could discouer anie ship wherein she might haue sa∣ued her selfe. This damsell was the Quéene Iulia, and dam∣sell vnto the Princesse Lyndabrides, who for to deliuer her selfe from the prison whether as they carried her mistres, did fall into another daunger as ill, whereas all her wise∣dome and cunning could not deliuer her, although she dyd deuine and prophesie of the same, who when the Gyants did sée her, and that she séemed to be verie faire and well pro∣portioned (as of truth she was) they straight waies follow∣ed after her, and tooke her prisoner, and carrying her in that sort as you haue heard, Rosicleer did put himself before them and said. What is the occasion that you doe carrie this Dam∣sell prisoner in this sorte? Then the Gyants who had not séene him before he spake vnto them, did verie much behold him, and séeing him of so gallant a proportion and so well armed, the elder of the twaine called Rubero went against him, and said. Thou shalt be prisoner with her, and when the time doth serue, thou shalt haue  answere of this thy bolde demand, with the sacrifice that shall be done with both of you. And as he would haue taken him in his armes, Ro∣sicleer stroke him with his close fist such a blow vppon the stomacke, that he all to buckled the plaies of stéele wherwith he was armed, & without breath ouerthrew him backwards to the ground, whose fall was so great, that his brother A∣corante thought verilie he had bene dead, who like a raue∣ning Lyon, giuing a great shrike, went against Rosicleer, and with a great fauchon that he had, hée stroke so strong a blowe vpon his shéeld, that hée cut it cleane asunder in the middest, and the fauchon descended downe vpon his helme, and hauing no power against the inchauntment thereof, it made him to stoupe with his knées to the ground. Then Rosicleer drew out his sworde, which was the same of so great value, forged by the Quéene Iulia, who was present,
wherewith he made him aunswere, in such sorte, that hée cloue his shéeld asunder that he had on his left arme, and al∣so his thicke and strong armour with the flesh, vnto the hard bone. Then betwixt them two began a braue and stout battaile, striking the one the other so great and furious blowes, that they were heard throughout all the whole I∣land, in such sorte, that the Emperour Alycandro and those that were with him in the high Castle of Roboan were greatlie amazed, and could not imagine what it should bée. After this sort their combat endured betwixt them more than a quarter of an houre, in the end whereof, the fine cut∣ting sword of the Quéene Iulia, being flourished by the fu∣rious arme of Rosicleer, brought the stut Acorante into that perplexitie, that he was all berayed in bloud with the great number of wounds that was giuen him on all parts, that if he had not bene so stout and couragious, & of so great force, he could not haue sustained himselfe vpon his féete, the which was to the contrarie in Rosicleer, that although the blowes of the Gyant were verie strong, and caused him ma∣ny times to stoupe with his hands and knees to the ground, and gaue him great paine and griefe whereas he dyd fa∣sten anie blowe, yet for all that, his excellent armour dyd assure him from wounds, and his great lightnesse did make him to strike many of his blowes in vaine. Thus in the meane time that Acorante was so feeble and saint with the losse of bloud, and waxed wearie, Rubeo the other brother was come vnto himselfe againe, and remembring what had passed him, and seeing the greate perill whereinto his brother was nowe brought, with a trice hée arose vp from the ground, and taking his sworde in his hande hée began to laie vppon Rosicleer such greate and mightie blowes, (that by reason hee entered in a fresh, and the other béeing samewhat wearie) hée put him into great extremitie, so that all his valour and worthinesse was verie néedfull at that instant. Then when the Quéene Iulia saw how that that knight did all alone combat for her against the two Gyantes,
she straight waies called to remembrance that which many daies before she had prophesied, and beholding the swoorde, which the knight had, she knew it to bee the same which she had forged with her owne hands, and then she thought all her rauale to be well bestowed, hauing great hope that the knight should haue the victorie against those Gyantes, for that she sawe him verie nimble and light, and that hée wounded the Gyants in many places of their bodies, and all the ground was beraied with the bloud that ranne out of their wounds, but by reason that they were so boistrous and so stout, they so doubled their blowes with so great fu∣rie vpon Rosicleer, that it had bene sufficient to haue hewen a rocke in péeces, so that in a short time they made him ve∣rie faint and wearie, brusing his flesh and bones, although their swordes could not enter nor cut his inchanted armor. And of truth, if that this battaile had endured long, hée had béene brought into the greatest perill that euer he saw him∣selfe in, in all his life, for that these two Gyants were young∣men, and the most strongest that were to be found amongst all Gyants. But yet at this instant Acorante was so weak and féeble by the losse of much bloud, that he coulde not stand on his féete, but fell downe to the ground as though he had béene dead. Then he finding himselfe alone with Ru∣bero, the battaile was more indifferent, & the one did charge the other verie stronglie▪ striking whereas they thought they should doe most harme, each to his aduersarie, but Rubero for the death of his brother was so full of wrath and ire, that he made little account of the blowes that Rosicleer did strike him, although his ine cutting sworde had so sore wounded him in many partes, that his death could not bée long dila∣ted, by reason of the great quantitie of bloud that ranne out of them. These Gyantes had certaine knightes which alwayes went with them, who at this verie instant came vnto the same place whereas they made their battaile, but yet in anie manner of wise they durst not helpe their Lordes, for that many times before they had plagued them, and giuen
them warning, that whensoeuer they were in battaile with equall knightes, that none of them shoulde aide or suc∣cour them, for which occasion they stoode still, and were in quiet, till such time as they sawe one of their Lordes lie a∣long vpon the ground as though he had bene dead, and the other so sore wounded, that he could not long indure, neither could they anie longer refraine themselues, but all together (who were more than fifteene) all wel armed, went against Rosicleer, and began to charge him with verie thicke and strong blowes, but Rubero when he sawe this did put him∣selfe before them, and cried out that they should departe and let him alone, but they would not retire, but still pressed on all that euer they coulde. Then he returned against them with his sword, and did so much, that against their will hee made them to retire. Then would he haue returned againe vnto the battaile, but Rosicleer lit vp the vizor of his heme and sayd. God forbid that I should be ouercome at thy hands more than at one time, for this which at this time thou hast vsed with me, hath rendered mee so much, that I will put my selfe wholie into thy power, or to doe with mée according to thy pleasure, vpon this condition, that you giue vnto this Damsell free and whole libertie, who was the occasion of this battaile which hath béen begun and continued betwixt vs. You shall vnderstand, that all the sonnes of Roboan were by nature well conditioned, and this Rubero the third sonne was the best of them all, who acknowledging the greate vantage that Rosicleer had of him (although all the knights had hlpen him) and how that his wordes which hee hadde spoken proceeded of great vertue, hée then vnlaced his healme and sayd. Let not my fortune permit, that against him who hath so great vauntage on me, as well in vertue as in strength, that I make anie more contention or farther , for that in the ende both in the one and in the other, I cannot choose but néedes must bée ouercome and loose the victorie.
This damsell is thine and thou hast wonne her, and nowe looke what is thy pleasure to be done with vs, for that all shall be accomplished as you wil command. Then Rosicleer did embrace him with great loue, and both of them together went to helpe vp Acorante, who was so féeble that he could not moue himselfe, but when that they had pulled off his healme, and giuen him aire, hée began to come better vnto himselfe, and gather some strength. Then the Quéene Iulia with a péece of a vaile which she had, bound vp his wounds and stanched the bloud, by vertue of a stone which she had in a ring, as one that in all things was a damsell verie wise, and of great discretion. When all this was done, the Quéene sayd vnto Rosicleer. Happie and fortunate knight, if you doe well remember the condition wherewith you got this sword that you now possesse, in great Britaine, it was, that you should combat with two Gyants together for the deliuerie of a Damsell. When Rosicleer heard these wordes, being greatlie amazed how she should come to the knowledge thereof, he said: I doe well remember the same. Well then (said she) now may you well vnderstand and sée, how that the condition is well accomplished, for that you haue had the battaile with these two Gyants for to deliuer me that am the Quéene Iulia, she who with her owne handes did forge the sword that you now haue at your girdle, hauing experience before, how much it should profit you in this battaile for my deliuerie. Good Ladie (saide Rosicleer) what fortune hath brought so wise and high a Damsell in this sorte into this Countrie? That fortune (sayd the Quéene) that could ouerthrowe the mightie Alycandro from the high throne wherevnto he was exalted, and bring him to bée prisoner, oyntlie with the Princesse Lyndabrides his daughter, in the power of two Gyants, who carryed them yesterdaie vnto the high Castle that standeth vppon yonder mountaine. This is shée that no force nor humane wisedome is able for to deliuer from the subiection of her tumbling and tourning whéele. And as I came with the Princesse, thinking for to escape
from the prison (whether as they carryed her) I ran away secretly and put my selfe amongst these Rocks, but yet in the ende I chaunced to fall into a daunger no lesse perillous then that, out of the which I thought to haue escaped. At which words Rosicleer was greatly amazed and saide, is it possible to be true, that the Emperour Alicandro and the Princesse Lindabrides are prisoners. It is of trueth sayde the Quéene, for that two Gyants did carrie them vnto yon∣der castell. Well then let vs goe thether out of hand, sayd Rosicleer, for with a verie good will I will aduenture my life for to et at libertie, so high personages. It shall not be nedefull said Rubero, for that those two who did carrie thē be our bretheren, and sonnes vnto Roboan our Father, therefore let vs go straight waies thether, for by your in∣tercession they and all those that be prisoners in the castell shal be set at libertie. Rosicleer receiued great contentment at that which Rubero had sayde, and gratifying him, they all together went towards the castell, and their knights did carrie Acorante in their armes, for that he was very sore wounded. And it fell out in this sort, that as those that were in the castell did heare the great noyse that was made in the battaile, with clittering of their armour Roboan and his sonnes were in their beddes very sore hurt, and could not aryse, but the knight of the Sunne being very desirous to know what it should bée, for that it séemed vnto him, to be some contension or cumbat fought by valiant and wor∣thie knights, he went foorth of the castell, and all alone on horsebacke he rode that way, whereas Rosicleer and the gi∣ants should come. And when that he saw them comming a farre of, he straight waies vnderstoode that they should be the sonnes of Roboan, that came from the Sea, & brought with them some prise, but when that he came nigher vnto them, he was greatly amazed to sée those Gyants so sore wounded, & could not immagine who should doe the same, till such time as he asked of one that came formost, with whome they had had battaile, but they were all so sad and sorowfull, that they would not aunswere him any word,
but passed forwardes on without making anie reckoning of him, for the which the knight of the Sunne being somwhat angie, tooke one of them by the horse bridle, and sayde that hée should not depart thence till such time as he had tolde him. Then this knight who was more proude than curte∣ous, without speaking anie worde drew out his sword, and stroke the knight of the Sunne a mightie blwe vppon his helme, thinking therewith to haue parted his head in two péeces, but it had ben much better for him not to haue begun that contention with him whome he did not know, and to haue answered him to his demand, it would haue hindered him nothing at all. But the knight of the Sunne being ve∣rie angrie at his great villanie, stroke him such a blowe with his armed fit vpon his armed head, that he buckeled his healme to his scull, that his braines flew out, and he fell from his horse dead vnto the ground, so that it cost him his life, because hée woulde not speake, but vse villanie. And the rest which were of his companie when they sawe their companion thus ouerthrowen, straight waies beganne to make contention with the knight of the Sunne, in drawing out their swordes, and charging him with their blowes on euerie side, but before that they could fall in the reckoning of the great errour the which they had committed, the most part of them were slaine and ouerthrowen to the ground, and not one of them had remained aliue, if that at this in∣stant had not come Rosicleer, who was behinde all the rest, who when hée sawe the great slaughter that the Knight of the Sunne had done in so short a time, hée was greatlie a∣mazed, and for that hée could not knowe who hée was, and was verie desirous to proue himselfe with him, for to bée reuenged for the death of those knightes, he caused the other for to aparte themselues, and with his sworde in his hande he assaulted him, charging him with those strong and hea∣uie blowes which he was wont to vse, and the knight of the Sunne not knowing him, but beleeuing within himselfe that he had bene one of the companie of the other knightes of the Gyantes, dyd receiue him after such manner,
that in a short space the wrath and anger both of the one & the other was greatly increased, & as mortall enimies they layde the one vpon the other, making so great a noyse, that it séemed al y• whole Iland would haue sunke, where at the Emperour Alicandro and the princesse Lindabrides did put themselues at the windowes of the castell, and were great∣le amazed when that they sawe the battaile betweene the two knights, not knowing who he shold be of so great orce and strength, that could endure so long the blowes of the knight of the Sunne: a good halfe houre in this sorte they endured, charging one the other with their thicke blowes, and had no time to breath themselues, and séemed to be all in burning ier, with the great quantitie of sparkes that flewe out of their armour. Either of them were greatly a∣mazed at the great force and strength of his aduersarie, as they who neuer had seene themselues in so terrible and fu∣rious battaile, for that, although they dyd combat together in the great court of Constantinople, at that time they had not their force and strength so perfect, neither were they so bigge growen in parsonage. And now if it were not for that neither of them would seme to be the first, they wold both haue withdrawen them∣selues, for to haue knowen eche others contrarie, before they would haue proceeded in executing their furious bat∣taile: but this point of honour was the occasion that they would not withdraw themselues, but procured to ouerpresse each his aduersarie, all that euer he could, with their migh∣tie and furious blowes. Amongst a great number that was strooke Rosicleer seled one blow at the knight of the Sun with his sword in both his hands ouerthwart his healme, that it depriued him of all his sences, that he was as one dead, till such time as he redoubled an other blow on him, whose force was of such strength and might, that it made him to come againe vnto himselfe, so amazed, that he knew not where he was. Then he foorthwith setled himself firmely in his Saddel, very furious & full of courage, he gaue him his paiment in
such sort, that Rosicleer in all his life before receiued not so mightie and terrible a blow, except it were that the which concluded their contencios battaile in Grecia. His nose gushed out with bloud, and he fell forwards vpon the pomel of his saddle, and his armes hanging downe as though hée had bene dead, and his horse tourned round about twise in the field with him, in which time the knight of the Sunne would not strike him, till such time as he was come againe vnto himselfe. Rosicleer called vpon God for his aide & suc∣cour, as he who found himselfe in so great extremitie, that he thought it vnpossible to escape from death, if he should receiue such an other blow, equal vnto that he had receiued. He then setled himselfe againe in his saddle, and prepared himselfe, to be reuenged on his aduersarie, and dyd abyde his comming with his sword in his hande, with terrible & furious semblaunt. In the meane time whilest they were recouering of more furie and courage for to charge the one the other, it so fell out that the Quéene Iulia being very de∣sirous to know who those knights should be, that semed vn∣to her to be the most biggest of proporcion and most vali∣antest that euer she had séene in all her lyfe, tooke out a li∣tle quadrangel, (the which continually she carried in her bo∣some wherewith she did vse to make her cuniurations) and thereby she found that these knights should be both sonnes vnto the Emperour Trebatio, and being certified hereof, with a trice she went vnto them, and at such time as with furious courage they began to strike the one the other, she put her selfe betwixt them saying: I doe most heartelie request you sir knights, that you would staye your furie a little, and to graunt vnto mée a bowne the which I will craue at your hands, for as it will be vnto me great ioye and pleasure, so will it be vnto you profitable. Then they who were indewed with no lesse vertue thē force and valour, withdrew themselues a part, and sayde, that either of them for their parts, did graunt her request. Well then sayd the Queen, seeing that you haue graunted me my request, here I doe demaund of you, that first before
you doe retourne any more vnto the combat, that either of you doe pul of your healme, for that I am desirous to know who you are before you proceede any further. She had not so sone spoken these words, but these knights without any longer tarrying did vnlace their healmes, and pulled them of, being greatly amazed at that bowne, which she demaun∣ded. But when their healmes were off, and they knew them selues to be bretheren, it could not be immagined the great and vnlooked for ioye and pleasure that they receiued. For in place of their mortall blowes which they had giuen be∣fore, they embrased the one the other, as they which did loue the one the other excéedingly. And giuing great thanks vn∣to the Quéene for that which she had done, they declared the one vnto the other the whole discourse what had hap∣pened vnto either of them. Then the knight of the Sunne spake vnto the two bre∣theren Rubero and Acorante, and tolde them of all that had happened, who were not a little amazed, to heare how that their Father and bretheren were ouercome by that alone knight, and as a thing impossible they would not beléeue it: then they went all together vnto the castell, whereas they were well receiued by the Emperour Alicandro, and the Princesse Lindabrides, when they knew that that was Ro∣sicleer, brother vnto the knight of the Sunne, they could not satisfie their eyes in beholding of them, séeming that na∣ture did very much straine her selfe in the forming of these two bretheren. After a while that they hadde passed away the time in treating of many things, they sat downe and dyd ease themselues, and determined to stay there till the next day, whereas they were very well  of the wife of Roboan, who was Ladie (of the Gyants nation) verie honorable, and neuer tooke pleasure and contentment of the euill custome that was maintained in that Iland, by her husband and sonnes. The Quéene Iulia did cure the woūds of them that were hurt; as one that was experimented and knew more in that art then anie other. So they sept and tooke their rest all that night in the castel: but the knight
of the Sunne, was not very much in quiet, for that with the presence of the faire and beautifull princesse Lyndabri∣des as also the remembrance of the royall princes Claridi∣ana, his minde was so troubled, that he thought there was the greatest contention that might be immagined with in his breast. And againe, for to declare the profound thoughts with their varieties which the faire princesse was troubled with, it may be equall in numbring the sands of the sea, and for that her remedie draweth now at hand, the historie conclu∣deth this Chapter. How the Emperour Alicandro & his companie de∣parted from the strong Ilande vnto the Grecian Empire, and of a strong battaile that the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer had with two knights at the Sea, and how they were parted, & after went together to Constantinople. Chap. 42. THE next day after that the Emperour A∣licandro was taken prisoner, they al made them selues in a readinesse for to depart towards Grecia, the which being don, they all together entred vnto Roboan and his sonnes for to take their leaue of them, who lay in a great quadran, euery one by himselfe, in very faire beds. Then he, (who receiued great sorrow for that they would depart so quickly) requested them to heare certaine matter that he had for to say and tell them. Who being at∣tendant, held their peace, and he said. My Lords, it is noto∣rious vnto all people, how long time here, I, my sonnes, and forefathers, haue liued in this lawe which hetherto I haue kept, and the euell custome which alwaies we haue main∣tained. It hath now pleased God (and as I beleeve for a farther benefit vnto vs) that this happie and fortunate knight of the Sun as came and ariued at this Iland. In the
which he dyd not onely ouercome by force of armes, my selfe and two of my sonnes, but also by the orce of his surmoun∣ted vertue doth binde vs, from this day forwards for to ac∣cept and serue him, as our proper and naturall Lord, ioynt∣ly with Rosicleer his brother, vnto whome hath fallen part of this victorie. At such time as I saw my selfe mortall in the battaile, and that by no meanes I could not escape, but be either slaine or ouercome, I dyd promise at that time, that which now I doe a new confirme, and will performe, which is, that I and my sonnes doe here promise and vow before your high personages (for that none of vs hereafter shall flye from the same) for to leaue this law Gentilica, in the which we haue liued hetherto, blinde and deceiued, and also the euell and cruell custome the which hetherto we haue maintained, and of our proper and frée good will, be∣come christians, and beléeue in that true God maker of all things, in whome the knight of the Sunne doth beléeue, in the which law I doe promise to beléeue, so long as my life shall last. When that Roboan had concluded these words, straight waies his sonnes dyd promise to performe the same. Then the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer béeing verie glad and ioyfull for the same, did gratifie them verie much, and dyd promise vnto them that so soone as God dyd send them into Grecia for to send vnto them Preachers and Ministers for to instruct and teach them in the law, and minister vnto them the holy Baptisme, the which euery good Christian is bound to take. Passing betwixt them these and manie other thinges, they all of them tooke their leaue of Roboan & his sonnes, and of the Ladie Giantesse, who receiued no small griefe of their departure, and yet afterward it gréeued her much more, for that there passed not many yéeres, there came vn∣to that Iland a Pagan, a young man, who all a lone dyd put them in great extremitie, in such sort that they were driuen of necessitie for to sende vnto the good knight of the Sun, (who neuer failed to help the distressed) to craue of him
fauour and helpe. As shalbe ould you more at large in the second part of this historie, whereas shalbe made manifest, the immortall actes and déedes of this knight. When they came vnto the Sea side, they all imbarked themselues in a shippe that was there made readie, and ha∣uing the winde prosperous, they hoised out their sailes and began to nauigate towards Grecia. And here you may wel beléeue, that the faire princesse Lindabrides did not thinke long this nauigatorie, although it had bene more longer then that of the Gréeke Vlisses: for that she dyd there whole∣ly recreate her selfe in the sight and swéete conuersation of the knight of tho Sunne. Yet for all that she feared verie much (at the comming to Constantinople) the presence of the princesse Claridiana, with the which she should be clean wipte out of the heart of her knight. So nauigating in this sort, the next day in the morning, two houres before daye, it chaunced that by their ship there passed an other ship hard aboard, in the which was certaine knights, & one of them, who séemed to be of a very bigge stature and members, and being aboue hatches, and the shippes ioyning very nigh to∣gether, commaunded to cast out his grapple into the other ship, because we should not depart till such time as they had demaunded what it should be, and who was there within. Then he asked of a knight that was the Emperour Ali∣candros, if that he could tell him anie newes of the Empe∣rour Alicandro, and of his daughter the faire princesse Lin∣dabrides, or of any damsel of hers. Ah sir, yes said the knight, for they are in this shippe, & certaine Gréeke knights doth carrie them vnto Grecia. At which words this bigge knight and an other, made no longer tarrying, but leapt into their ship with their swords drawen in their handes, & straight wayes met with the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer, who when they vnderstood of the grapling of their shippes, lased on their helmes, and went forth to see what it shoulde bée, and when they saw the great hast that the two knights made to enter, with their swordes in their handes, they straight waies drew out their swordes and put themselues
before him, and sayd: What is it that you would haue (Si knights) that you make so great hast to enter? We would sayd one of them, that out of hand you doe deliuer vnto vs the prise that you haue in your ship. That shall you not haue, nor carrie with you, sayd the knight of the Sunne, for that we haue it in great price and estimation. In this sort it shall be full déere vnto you, aunswered one of the other knights, and straight waies without anie more speaking, they began to strike at the two brethren, each of them a blow vpon their helmes, that caused either of them for to stope with their knées to the ground, and made them verie well to vnderstand that they were knightes of estimation and prowesse, but yet thinges did not fall out on their parte as they thought, for that they, as those that in all the whole world were without comparison, gaue them their answere in such sorte, that they were forced to step backwardes thrée paces, to sustaine themselues from falling, and were won∣derfullie amazed at the great force and strength of their ad∣uersaries, so that then betwixt them beganne the battaile to bée well fought with charging each other with mightie blowes, that it was a verie straunge thing to beholde, and with the noise of their mightie and timerous blowes, it sée∣med that those long and wide seas did sound of them, much lyke vnto the forced waues, being driuen by tempest into the hollow caues of the rockes. And by reason that it was before the breake of the daie (béeing at such time as there is silence with all thinges) the mightie noise of their terrible blowes seemed more great and timerous. Neither at that time had they neede of anie Torches, or of the cléernesse of Diana for to make their combat, for that the innumerable sparkes of fire the which flew out of their fine armour, gaue such excéeding great light and cleerenesse, that if there had beene ten knights, they might haue séene to haue fought by the brightnesse thereof. All the which battayle and contention dyd the Empe∣rour Alycandro and the faire Princesse Lindabrides behold, with all her damsells; amongst whome was the faire lora∣lindia,
daughter vnto the king of Macedonia, who were all greatlie amazed, and could not imagine who those worthie knights should be, that against the knight of th Sunne and his brother could make so great resistance. Thus after one whole houre that the battaile was begunne, those two bre∣thren, the sonnes of Trebatio were halfe ashamed that their aduersaries should so long endure before them, which caused them to waxe verie furious and wrathfull, and to redouble their blowes in such sorte, that I beléeue there was no strength nor finenesse of Diamond that was able to resist their terrible blowes, and their aduersaries féeling the force of them were greatlie amazed, and it séemed that their vi∣gor and strength was increased halfe so much more as it was at the beginning of the battaile, for that they neuer stroke blowe, if it chaunced aright, but it made them to stoupe both with their handes and knées vnto the groud; and gaue them no spate for to breath themselues, so that they were put in the most greatest trauaile that euer they were in all their liues, but yet these knightes were such, that first they would consent to bée hewed and cut all to péeces, be∣fore they woulde yéeld, and if their aduersaries had not bene the myrrour of all the world, they shoulde haue had inough to doe to haue escaped out of their hands, and although they séemed to bée wearie, yet was it in such sorte, that they could not iudge or discerne anie point of weaknesse in them, but rather made heartes of their guts, and so charged their aduersaries, that many times they were in doubt of the victorie, and it had ben a battaile verie long and well fough∣ten, but that at this instant the daie dyd breake, and as the cléerenesse came on, the Emperour Alycandro and the Prin∣cesse Lyndabrides and Floralindia did knowe those two knights by their armour, who were Meridian and Brandi∣mardo, the which béeing knowen, with a trice they went and put themselues betwixt them, saying. Worthie and va∣liant knightes, let this our rigorous battaile cease, for that there is no reason that it shoulde procéede anie farther. Then those knightes when that they sawe
betwixt them, did straight waies withdrawe themselues, and made vnto them great reuerence. The Emperour straight wayes went and embraced Meridian and Brandi∣mardo, naming them by their names, the which the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer hearing, they pulled off their helmes, and with great ioy and pleasure went and embraced those two knightes, for the loue was great that they bare vnto him, the one for that he was brother vnto the Princesse Lyndabrides, and the other for that which he did when that hee tooke the battaile for Rosicleer with Bramarant, and be∣sides all this, for their great valour and bountie they were to bee esteemed amongst all in the world. But when that these two vnderstood with whome they had made their bat∣taile, it was no small ioy and pleasure that they receiued, for that they desired verie much their friendship, after such time as in the wildernesse of Grecia, they sawe the one to kill the Gran Campion, and the other dyd combat for them twaine with Bramarant, but more was their ioy when that they vnderstoode what they had done in the deliuerie of the Emperour out of prison, with the Ladies and all their dam∣selles from the power of Roboan and his sonnes, they knew not how to gratifie that great goodnesse, but offered themselues to be their friends, and craued pardon of all that was past. And when they vnderstoode that the Emperour of his owne good will went vnto Grecia, for to conclude a league of friendship with the mightie Emperour rebatio, these two valiant knightes were excéeding gladde and ioy∣full, for that they had a most earnest desire to hee in that Court. Thus after there had passed betwixt them many things, their ioy and pleasure was such, that it séemed to make void the remembrance of all troubles and aduersities past, and so dyd prosecute their voiage owardes Constantinople. The Prince Meridian was more ioyfull than the rest, and recei∣ued greater contentment for that he had with him his wel∣beloued spouse the Princesse Floralindia, and againe, for that hee went towardes Grecia, whereas was the
king of Macedonia forth vnto the Princesse, with whom he hoped to make friendship, in such sorte, that he might haue her to wife, which was the thing that the Princesse most desired. After this sort they did nauigate by sea foure dayes with prosperous windes, in the end whereof they ariued at Grecia in the mightie Porte of Constantinople, whereas straight wayes they gaue to vnderstand vnto the Empe∣rour Trebatio of their ariuall. With which newes, hée and all those of his Court were excéeding ioyfull, for that they lacked no other thing entirelie for to celebrate the triumph of that victorie which they had got. Then straight waies the Emperour Trebatio béeing accompanied with those mightie kinges and Princes, and worthie knightes that were with him, went forth of Con∣stantinople for to receiue them at the port, and the quantitie of people was so great that went forth with them, that all those wide and broade fields and mountaines séemed to bée peopled with them, and although the dead bodies by the com∣mandement of the Emperour were burnt, yet for all that, all those feldes and plaines were stained with the bloud that was there shed. When the Emperour Trebatio with all that royall and worthie companie came vnto the Port, straight wayes the Emperour Alycandro and all those that came with him, went a land, whereas their receiuing was as vnto such personages did appertaine, but in especial with those two Emperours, for in a great space they were em∣braced together, and did not loose the one from the other, in which time there passed betwixt them many wordes of sin∣gular great loue, as though they had béene alwaies before great friends, and the Emperor Trebatio did giue him great thanks, gratifying him for his comming into Grecia, offering him great offers by word of mouth, in such sort, that the Em∣perour Alycandro thought himselfe fullie satisfied, & receiued more pleasure at that returne, than he did at his first cōming into that Countrie. Then straight waies the Emperor re∣batio receiued with great curtesse the two Princes, Meridi∣an & Brandimardo, & did embrace them with as much loue as
he did his owne sonnes that came with them. For you shal vnderstand, that he was a Prince, that in all the world could not be found his equall, in maintaining & honouring of good and valiant knights, which was the occasion, that whatsoe∣uer knight he was that once came into his companie, could neuer finde himselfe in anie other place, but onelie in his Court. Then he receiued the faire Princesse Lyndabrides, in doing vnto her great curtesie and honour, as vnto the highest damsell in al the whole world, and vnto one that did deserue it. But when the king of Maedonia dyd see the faire Princesse  his daughter, and the Prince Mrridian to demand his hands for to kisse them, there was no oy and pleasure that might happen vnto a Father, to be compared vnto is, and hée went and embraced them, keep∣ing them betwit his armes a great while before that hée would let them loose. Thus afer one whole houre that there had  betwixt them many  at their mee∣ting, they all together with  triumph tooke their waie towards the Citie of . And it was a wonderfull thing to beholde, and wothie to bée noted, to see so noble and worthie nightes to accompanie them, that it might well bee sayde, that there was neuer seene so highe and worthie a companie ioyned together. Likewise at this present it was needfull of a better Painter than euer was Appelles, or that worthie Pirgoti∣les, for to paint and set forth the faire and rubicend face of the Princesse Lyndbrides, by reason of the differences of varietie of coulours which went and came, at such time as shée remembred how that the Princesse Claridiana shoulde receiue her in the Pallace of the Emperour Trebatio, and also of that which the knight of the Sunne would conceiue in his heart when he sawe the same, the which thoughts did make her to go in so great confusion, as to your iudgement I doe referre it, her loue was so great the which she bare vnto him, that shée could not bée without great iuspition of alteration, when that she considered of the great worthinesse and desert of the Princesse Claridiana. So that the whole
world was nothing in comparison, that she would giue, on condition that the knight of the Sunne might neuer sée the Princesse. If she were sure thereof, then were she fullie cer∣tefied that the knight of the Sunne would not chaunge her for anie other Ladie or damsel in all the whole world. When they were entered into the Citie, and came vnto the pallace, those worthie Princes and knightes did descend from their horses those faire Ladies and damsels, and being mounted into the great hall, the Empresse Briana with the Princesse Claridiana, and the Princesse Oliuia and Lindaraza, with al the rest of those high and worthie Ladies & Gentlewomen that were with them, came forth and did receiue them with that honor that was requisite vnto so high and mightie per∣sonages. And the Emperour Alycandro, with Meridian and Brandimardo, meruailed greatlie to sée the soueraigne beau∣tie that was there assembled together, which seemed vnto them, as it was true, that in all the whole worlde could not the like be séene, but when the faire Princesse Lyndabrides went to embrace the roiall Princesse Claridiana, Good Lord how her hart was troubled, to see in her rubicond face, al the beautie in the world to be comprehended, and alo how that her knight of the Sunne had his eies fixed on her. At that instant shee thought verilie her soule would haue departed from her bodie, & almost she could not go forwards, neither scarce speake a word she was in such a trance. The which was all contrarie in the Princesse Claridiana, for as shee was sure of the loue of the knight of the Sunne, o did shée shew her selfe verie merrie and content, and gaue the prin∣cesse to vnderstand that shée receiued great ioy at her com∣ming thether. Likewise with no lesse ioy and louing embracings dyd the faire Princesse Oliuia receiue her welbeloued Rosicleer, as though they had not séene themselues together in one whole yeere. Then the Empresse Briana tooke by the hands the two Ladies Lindabrides and Floralindia, & hauing done their salutations the one vnto the other, they altogether en∣tered into a verie faire and great qudran, wheras the Em∣presse
and all those Ladies and damsells did sit downe in a place by themselues, and the two Emperours with all those worthie Princes & knights on the other part by themselues, whereas they passed awaie the time in gallant and pleasant conuersation, till such time as it was time to goe to dinner, and sitting downe, they were serued verie highlie & sunip∣tuouslie, as in the pallace o so mightie a Prince was requi∣site, and in the meane time that they were at dinner, there was herd no other thing but the sweete noise of many in∣struments, and in all the whole Citie was there so great tri∣umph and pastimes, that it semed at that instant the Geekes did celebrate the victorie of their won battailes. How Rosicleer and Lyrimandro at the commande∣ment of the Emperour Trebatio went into un∣gara, to mke themselues knowen vnto the king, and to giue him to vnderstand of all that had pas∣sed in Grecia. Chapter. 21. WHen the next daie was come, and the Em∣perour sawe his Court of so great sone∣ragntie, as neuer was the lyke séene by Price in all the whole worlde, hee thought that there lacked nothing  for to re∣ioyce the victorie of their triumphant bat∣tailes wonne, but onelie the presence of the king of , Father vnto the Empresse Briana, his louing and wel∣beloued wife, and for to intreate with him of that concord and friendship as ought to be betweene Father and sonne in lawe, and also that he might see the great magnisicence and high throne, into the which Fortune (gouerned by the will of God) hath mounted him vnto, so that if he did see that his Court in so great abundance of riches, and adorned with so soueraigne Princes and knightes, hee would thinke him∣selfe verie well contented and satisfied of the chaunge
that was made for the Prince of great Britaine, and also that he might recreate himselfe in that ioy and glorie which should procéede of the sight and acknowledging of his wor∣thie newnesse, by the which he should receiue great content∣ment, and account himselfe to be the most happiest & fortu∣nate Prince in all the whole world. And hauing this in his minde, he straight waies went vnto the Empresse , for to communicate with her about the same, who was in the same determination and care, as she that desired no other thing but to sée her Father present, for that he might bée pertaker of hr great triumph and glorie. Thus being both of one minde and determination, they straight waies gaue their valiant and worthie sonnes to vnderstand thereof, be∣twixt whom there straight waies grew a great contention, which of them two should be the messenger. The knight of the Sun sayd, that in times past (without knowing anie kindred to be betwixt them) he did him a great griefe & an∣ger, & that now he would make a recompence for the same, in carying him this message. And Rosicleer said, that he was nourished and brought vp in the Monasterie of the iuer, & how that there remaineth his fained parents Leonardo and his wife, whom he thought to haue bene his naturall father & mother, and had great desire to sée them, and to recompence them the great benefit that he ought them, & more hee sayd, how that Lyriamandro was so much his friend, that he left his Father for his loue, for the which his perfect friendship will not consent, but that he must beare the Prince compa∣nie, for to giue him that great ioy and contentment which he shall receiue at the seeing of him, séeing that by his occasi∣on he hath ben so long without his companie. The conten∣tion was so great betwixt these two brethren, which of them should goe vpon this message, that in the conclusion they should goe both of them together, if that the Emperor Tre∣batio had not staied them, in saying that it did not séeme wel that in the time of great ioy and pastimes, accompanied with so many strange and worthie knightes in this Court, they should both be lacking, or at least wayes one of them.
In conclusion, séeming vnto  that Rosicleer had grea∣test reason for to goe and acknowledge the king his graun∣father, for that he had neuer seene him, they were content that he should goe on the message, and that the knight of the Sunne shoulde remaine in the Court, for that he shoulde haue time enough to be knowen of the king, and that he was fullie satisfied of his great beautie. These two knights wer such and of so great obedience, that they hadde no other delight but to giue contentment vnto their parents, so that Rosicleer prepared himselfe for the voyage. But first he went vnto his verie friend Liria∣mandro, and told vnto him all that the Emperour his Fa∣ther had ordained, who receiued great pleasure thereat, as he that had great desire for to see the king his Father, wher∣by he mght acknowledge his neuewes, and vnderstand of the good and happie fortune of the Empresse his sister, who aboue all the Ladies in the whole world is most exalted, & therewith he embrased Rosicleer very much, and was ve∣rie glad of that which was determined, and straight waies they both together went and dyd take their leaue of the Emperour and of the Empresse, who dyd recomend them vnto Gd, and gaue them great charge, that their retourne with the king might be short, for that till their retourne they should not reciue any ioy or contentment. So hauing taken  leaue for to depart, such as did loue him, as the king Sicridoo, and the valiant Tatao, with Bargandel, were verie desirous for to beare them companie, as his per∣fect and good friends, came vnto him and offered their ser∣uice. But Rosicleer whole desire was for to goe that iour∣ney alone, with courteous woords did gratifie their good wil, and desired them to pardon him, at that instant, for that by the helpe of almightie God, his retourne should be verie shortly. And there with these two worthie princes with al∣onely two Squires, departed out of the mightie Citie of Constantiope, and hauing passed through all the whole Empire of , that came vnto Danubia, the which des∣cendeth from Hungaria. (And when they should passe the
mightie bridge wherea th knight of the Sunne was ta∣ken prisoner by the parents and friends of Florinaldus they were strangelie amazed to see the great and mightie edifices of the Castle that eemed wee burned and destroyed▪ and such relikes as remained, as péeces of towers and walls with their foundations, did put geat admiration in al them that passed that waie, and béeing veie desirous to knoe what was the occasion of so great destruction, they stayed and procured o sée if they could fide anie that could giue them relation thereof, and by caunce they found certaine men that did dwell in the sme place, wo declard vnto them the whole circumstance of that which the knight of the Sunne had there done, from the first con∣tention that he had with Flonaldos, till after he was clre out of prison whereas he was, and how the Castle with all the towers wer destroied, and left in that order as they aw it, the which when they vnderstoode, without lacing anie part thereof, they were wonderfullie amazed, as well a the strange buildings which séemed to hae at the valiant and worthie  of the knight of the Sunne, and they who had séene by experience many of his wonderfull deedes, sayde that with great reason they ought to put in obliuion the acts done by the ancient and fmus knights, of whose worthie deedes the world doth resound, for that the knight of the Sunne was such a one, that not one of them might bée compared vnto him. In this sorte, when they had heard the whole discourse of their desire, bée∣ing verie glad and ioyfull thereof, they gaue great thankes vnto him who had made it manifest vnto them, and depar∣ted from thence, and hauing vnderstanding how that the king was in a itie called Viana, which was vpon Danu∣bia, they tooke their iourney along the riuer vpwardes, to∣wards the said Citie, and hauing traualed many daies the∣therwards, in the end they came within thrée miles of the mightie Citie, about the houre of one of the clocke in the af∣ter noone, at which time the great heate of the Sunne vnto such as doe trauaile is most troublesome, and beeing trou∣bled
with the great heate, these two knightes determined to put themselues out of the high waie, and to enter into a verie faire and fresh Orchard that was there at hand, and there to rest and recreate themselues till the force of the heate were past, and looking towards the Citie, they sawe comming to∣wards them a damsell mounted vppon a Palaie, with so great speede as her palsraie coulde runne, and as one that made hast to accomplish some great necessitie. And séeing her to come with so great hast, they were verie desirous to knowe the occasion thereof, which made them for to staie vntill her comming thether, and drawing more gher vn∣to them, they awe that the wept and made great lamenta∣tion, in such sorte, that shée was all wet with teares. But when shee sawe the two knightes, shee began to weepe more pittifullie, and to lift vp her lamentable voice, saying after this sort. Oh iusice of God, how do you permit that so great trea∣son be done vto so high a damsell as shée is, & that there is not a knight in all the world that will defend her iustice and qarrll? Thse two knights when they heard these words were more desirous than before, to vnderstand the effect thereof, and put themselues before the damsell, and staying her haie iouney, one of them said: Damsell, we praie you to let  a while this your complaint and wéeping, and declare vnto vs the occasion of this your great sorrow, for that we are knight that with a verie good will, will offer our persons to put remedie therein, if it bee a thing that with reason and with our honours wee maye performe. Then the Damsell when shee heard those curteous wordes did verie much beholde them, and sawe that they were knightes verie stronglie and richlie armed, and of a gallant and stout proportion, shee coniectured that they shoulde bée knghts of great bountie, and straungers in that Countrie, for that at anie time shee had not seene in the Court of the king,  of so gallant and warlike disposition, and ha∣uig more hope than shee brought with her, shée answered them  sayd.
Sir knights, a heauie thing it is that you doe demaund of mée, to cause mée now for to stay, and declare vnto you the dolorous care that I haue within mée, the which onely for to expresse, will cause my griefe to renew and increase, and I doe beléeue that there is no heart so hard, but of my sorrow will take great compassion. But for that you haue vsed vnto mée so great courtesie in your words, and againe the good disposition of your persons, doe giue mée to vnder∣stand that my labour shall not be in vaine, for to giue you to vnderstande of the greatest treason that euer you haue heard of, the which was done vnto a faire Damsell of high estate, and is the occasion of all this my sorrow. You shall vnderstand sir knights, that in the court of the king Tbe∣rio of Hungaria, who is at this instant in the citie of Vi∣ana, the Quéene Augusta, wife vnto the king Tiberio, ath in her companie manie Ladies and gentlewomen of great beautie and high estate, of all the principallest of Germa∣nia, amongst whom, there was one, who as well in beautie as in riches and estate, did passe and surmoun all the rest, and is the Dutches of Austria, called the faire Polisena, for that her great beautie and fairenesse (as they say) is equall vnto that, that was of the daughter of Pao. When this damsell came vnto the age of twelue yéeres, her father dy∣ed, and for that she was so young and tender of age, (al∣though heire vnto that high estate) the Queene Augusta did take her into her companie, and it is now full foure yéeres since her first comming into the court. In which time as she increased as well in beautie as in yéeres, manie wor∣thie knights of high estate and renowme that saw her, dyd procure by all meanes possible, for to marrie with her, a∣mongest whome there was none that she could fancie or beare any good will, or perfect loue vnto, but the gallant Lu∣siano, prince of Suuia, who was the gallantest proporcioned and stoutest knight, that at this present is to be found in all the prouinces of Germania. It is now more then thrée yéeres since this Prince did begin to loue and serue her, in which time, for her sake, he did many valiant deedes wor∣thy
to be put in memorie. Likewise the faire Polisena be∣ing no lesse ouercome & vanquished with his loue, did not loue him with any other entension but to marrie with him, thinking that with no other knight she might better match her selfe then with him, so that these two, were verie con∣formable together in their wills and desires, as I who was a third person betwixt them, do know and am a witnesse to the same, and also doe iustifie, that betwixt a knight and a ladie, there was neuer so perfect loue, as was betwixt these two, or that more intirely dyd loue the one the other. And yet not being satisfied nor well content with this, but the more to be in securitie the one of the other, I was as a meane betwixt them, that this Lusiano should come on a night appointed vnto a window that had a grate of Iron, out of the chamber of the saide dutches, whereas he should finde her, & there the one vnto the other to assure the bands of Matrimonie by word and promise betwixt them, in such sort, that from that day forwards they might liue in more securitie. It fell out that all was done as it was agréed, that this gentle Lusiano in a darke night came vnto the windo whereas he found his faire Polisena, and betwixt them was concluded the bandes of Matrimonie by word of mouth, in my presence, and in the presence of an other damsell of the Dutches, (who I doe beléeue is not cléere of this treason that I will tell you.) This being done, the dutches for that she would not that they should be discouered or spyed, dyd desire the gentle Lusiano that he would straight waies de∣part, and she likewise did withdraw her selfe and caused the window to be shoot: and being verie feareful that it should be discouered vnto the Quéene, she neuer after durst speake vnto her knight, neither be with him in companie in any suspicious place, as one that was fully persuaded of the loue to be perfect that was betweene them, in this sort all things dyd prosper verie well betweene these two louers, but yet their loue was not so perfect, as their fortune was contra∣rie; to apart them from the ioye and glorie that they hoped to be betwixt them. For that (Sir knights) you shall vn∣derstand,
that little more then halfe a yéere past, there came vnto the court of the king Tiberio, the Duke of Saxonia called Roberto the mightie, for that he was so bigge of his bodie, that he lacked but a little to be as bigge as a gyant, and of so great force & strength, that there was not a knight to be found, that man for man durst enter with him in battaile, but alonely this gentle Lusiano, who feared not the bignesse of his bodie, neither his great fame. At such time as this Duke Roberto came vnto the court, the king gaue him good entertainment, and dyd him great honour, as well for y• he was of high estate, as for the great fame the which he had. This Duke so soone as he had séene the faire Poli∣sena, was so farre in loue with her, that straight waies he thought to haue her vnto wife, which was the occasiō that straight waies he laboured all that euer he could to bring his determination to effect. But she that nothing dyd more abhorre and hate, (as well for the loue which shée bare vn∣to Lusiano) as for the boysterous and brauenesse of his per∣son, for that he had a fearce face, and terrible countenance, by no meanes she could not abyde him, but dyd refuse his offer, and many times she sayde vnto him in my presence, that he should not come any more before her, for that his presence should be greuous vnto her, yet for all that would he not giue ouer his sute, but still dyd contende to impor∣tune her, in such sort, that she was determined for to giue the King to vnderstande thereof, if that I had not persua∣ded her to the contrarie. Then the Duke Roberto, seing that nothing whatsoe∣uer he dyd profited any whit for the obtaining his purpose and desire, determined to séeke some other meanes, how and which way he might make the Dutches for to doe by force that which now she would not of her good will. I promise you I know not, neither can I immagine how and which way the diuell did helpe him, for to cause three knights of the court of the king, for to suffer themselues and be , such as were in bountie of armes, as also of good crdit their persons, haue not their equalls to be found in all
the land, that I promise you the king would put them in trust with all his ritches, he and all people had such coni∣dene in them. The one is called Ricardo, and Duke of Barbaria, the other Anibardo, Lord of the Albios, and the third, Carme∣lio, Lord of Marehomandia, all thrée subiects vnto the king Tiberio, and norished and brought vp in his court from the time of their tender age. Then Duke Roberto hauing these knights on his part, watched his time, and went before the king at such time as the Quéene was present, and made a great complaint vnto them saying, that of long time he lo∣ued with true and perfect loue, the Dutches of Austria, and how that by the good will and consent of them both, they were made sure together, so that he was her husband and she his wife. But now since the conclusion of this matri∣monie, the Dutches doth denye it againe, and hath sworne neuer to marrie with him, not knowing wherefore she should be thus angrie with him, to denie that which she be∣fore hath promised, requesting him as his king and soue∣raigne Lord, to doe him Iustice therein, and to commaund the Dutches to perfourme the matrimonie the which she promised vnto him, and to deliuer her into his power, for that she was his naturall wife. The king receiued no con∣tent, but was very sorie at this embassage of the Duke, for that the king hadde better good will to marrie her vnto the gentle Lusiao, then vnto him, but because he loued iustice, and was a very good Christian, he straight waies commaū∣ded to come before him the faire Polisena, and asked of her if it were true which the Duke had said. Then she who vn∣derstood the diuelish intent of the Duke, was so amazed, that for a good space she could not speak a word, (wherat the king and the quéene had great suspicion) but when that she came vnto her selfe, with great anger she sayde vnto the Duke, that he lyed in all that he hadde sayde, and how that there neuer passed any such thing by woord nor in thought. At which answere the Duke was very angrie & furious, whi was the occasion y• the king cōmanded the faire olisena for
o depart, , the Duke straight waies presen∣ted before the king, the thrée knights before rehearsed, who swore in the presence of the King, that Duke Roberto and the faire Polisena were made sure together, in so ample ma∣ner, as man and wife ought to be, and how that ouer and aboue all this, they had bene together: and that it was of a trueth, for that they were present thereat, in a garden that is next adioyning vnto the lodging of the Dutches. Ah la∣mentable case and a thing neuer the like before heard off, that so great falsehood should be found in the mouthes of such thrée knights, whose credit is so great with the king, that he doth beléeue th more and better then if all the knights in his court had spoken and sworne it. And as a thing verified to be most true, the King commaunded the Quéene that straight wayes she should deliuer vnto the Duke the faire Polisena, for that she had chosen him to be her husband. Now sir knights I pray you iudge what the gentle Lusiano might féele in his heart, who found himself present at all that passed, and had more condence in the loue and loyaltie of the Dutches, then of the credit, of those knights, & with great payne did suffer that reproch for that he would not discouer the secret betwéene them. But when that he vnderstoode that which the king had commaunded▪ he as then could not suffer it any longer, but put himselfe before the king and said. Lord and soueraine, here I doe saie that all which the Duke Roberto and these knights hath saide against the Dutches of Austria is the greatest trea∣son and falsehood that euer was sayde or inuented: For that that shée is my legittimate spouse, and she neuer gaue her faith neither her loue vnto any other knight (in all her life) but vnto mée, and this will I proue vpon the Duke, or vpon any of these thrée knights. This Prince had arce concluded these words, when that the Duke and these thrée knights, layde hand vpon their swords against him, and he dyd the like against them, so that there had bene done great harme, if that the king had not put himselfe betwixt them, and parted them & commaunded that either of them should
kéepe his house and not to come abrode. Then the king be∣ing verie desirous to knowe whether it were true or not, which the Prince Lusiano had said, commaunded that the Dutches should be brought before him, and asked her if that the Prince Lusiano were her husband or not? Then she sée∣ing that it was not at that time to kéepe it in silence, sayde that it was true, that he was her spouse and none other. When the king vnderstoode that, he commaunded that the Dutchesse should bée put prisoner in a strong tower, belée∣uing verilie that shée had made her selfe sure and giuen her word vnto both of them, and the great good will which shée bare vnto Lusiano, was the occasion that shee did falsifie and denie that which shée had promised vnto the Duke Ro∣bero, and for that hee would cléere this doubt by iustice, he gaue straight waies sentence, that the Duke and the thrée knightes that were his witnesses should maintaine and de∣fend that which they had spoken and sworne, and that Lu∣siano and the Dutchesse should in the space of one moneth bring knightes, such that vpon their iust quarrell shoulde take and make combat with them, in this sorte, that if those which are of the Dukes partie doe get the victorie, that then the Dutchesse should bée his, and straight waies to bee de∣liuered vnto him, and to the contrarie, if the Prince and is knightes doe get the victorie, that then the beautifull and faire Polisena should be his, the which sentence being decla∣red vnto them, they were all consent therewith, for that the Duke thought that in all the whole world there were not to be found foure knights, that against him and his compani∣ons were able to wage battaile. And Lusiano hoping in his iustice as much as in his strength, presupposed the victorie to be on his part, but alasse Fortune hath fallen out cleane contrarie vnto his expectation, for that this is the last daie of the moneth, and in all this time he could neuer finde anie knight that durst take his part in the battaile, one waie, for that the other foure knightes were commended to bée so strong and valiant, and féared of all others, and other waies, for that they thought of a truth, that the Duke Roberto had
reason, for that it was verified and affirmed by thrée knights of so great credit, so that now the Prince séeing himselfe al alone, is determined all alone to goe forth vnto th battaile this daie against those foure knights, for that first he wil suf∣fer himselfe to be slaine, rather than to sée the faire Polisena deliuered into the power of the Duke, so that this euening the battaile shall be tried, the which cannot otherwise bée, but that the gentle Lusiano must be slaine, whose death vn∣to all people will be verie grieuous, and he shall not bée so soone slaine, when that the Dutchesse will kill her selfe with her owne hands, for so she is determined to doe, if that in the meane time God doth not ordaine some remedie for the same. This is the occasion (gentle knights) of all this my great sorow, which causeth me to come forth into these fields and high waies, making my cries vnto the heauens, and be∣cause I doo know the truth héereof better than anie other, I cannot suffer to abide in the Citie, to sée before my eies slain such two persons by a treason so manifest & euill, but come to sée if that in this short space I could méete with anie knight that wold haue compassion on them, and now séeing God hath permitted that I haue met with two such knights as you doe séeme to bée, héere I doe desire you by the great obligation in the which you bound your selues at such time as you receiued the order of knighthood, that you would take compassion of that gentle knight Lusiano, and of that sor∣rowfull and afflicted Ladie the Dutches, & if it so fall out, that you shew them anie curtesie, they be persons that will verie well gratifie the same, and because you shall be fullie certefied of their iustice, héere I doe sweare vnto you by that God that created and made both heauen and earth, and af∣terwards by his death and passion dyd redéeme vs, that all this which I haue told you is the verie truth of all that hath passed, and againe, the more to certefie you héerein, you haue néed of no other thing, but to beholde the ill fauoured face and barbarous countenance of the Duke, and the geat beu∣tie of Polisena, whereby you may iudge the great vnlikeli∣hood, y• the dutches should treate of loue with him in secret.
When the damsell had concluded the whole discourse of this treason, the two knightes who were replenished with all vertue, were moued vnto great compassion, and gaue thankes vnto almightie God that he had brought them the∣ther at that instant, and thought it long till they saw them∣selues in battaile with the Duke, and said vnto the damsel that they would goe with her, and take  with Lusiano for to defend his right towards the Dutches. And shée who verie well noted their gentle dispositions, and the great ri∣ches of their armor, by the which she was fullie perswaded with her selfe that they were knights of great estimation, & that her trauaile and comming thether was well emploied, for that there was some hope by their aide, on the parte of Lusiano, much better than to battaile alone, for the which she asked their hands for to kisse thē, for the great curtesie they offered vnto her, and therewith she returned with them to∣wards the Citie againe, and sayd. Oh that it were Gods will (Sir Knightes) that my for∣tune might be this daie so happie and prosperous, as it was vnto another damsell in times past, who brought vnto this Court a strange knight, for to defend an honourable Ladie from the power of the stout Aridon, who alonelie dyd not kill him in battaile, but afterwards had so much power and force for to defend himselfe from all the power and force of the King , maintaining battaile a great part of the daie with more than two thousand knightes, till such time as night drew on, and they all thought it best to leaue him, so that he went free awaie, and none of them all able to hurt or doe him anie outrage, who afterward was tolde vs to bée the knight of the Sunne, and sonne vnto the Empe∣rour rebatio and of the Empresse Briana, daughter vnto my Lord the king Tberio, and if it were not for the greate warres, as is tolde vs, that doth detaine him, and also for the great  that the king hath against him, the Dut∣chesse would haue sent vnto him in commending her whole cause, in hope that hée woulde haue had some compassion on her.
All this time Rosicleer, and Lyriamandro did greatlie reioyce to heare tolde the wonderfull acts and déedes of the knight of the Sun, for wheresoeuer they went, they found all the world full of his great fame. Thus in trauailing, they talked of these and many other things, till at thrée of the clocke in the after noone they entered into the mightie Citie of Viana, at such time as the great place was full of people, tarrying for to sée the battaile that should bee made betwixt the Prince Lusiano and Duke Roberto. Then they put themselues into such a place whereas they were verie secret, and commanded the damsell to goe forth at such time as the Duke and his knightes were in the place, that then she should come and tell them, for that they woulde not bée séene till such time as they were in the field, and for that in this next Chapter you shall vnderstand the whole truth of all that which passed, I doe conclude this and referre mée to the next. Of the great treason that the Duke Roberto ordained, for to haue the faire Polisena to bee his wife. Chap. 44. NOw the Hystorie faith, that all that which the damsell had told vnto Rosicleer and Li∣riamandro was most certaine true, but yet there was another secret vnknownen, and knowen vnto none but vnto the Duke, and another damsell of the Dutchesse, which was this, inso∣much as the Duke Roberto had lost all his hope for to haue at his wil the faire Dutchesse Polisena, he determined with∣in himselfe to vse some other meanes, which was the worst that euer was procured or done by anie knight, for when hée sawe nothing could preuaile him, he then laboured with all diligence, for to know which of the damsels that waighted vpon the dutches, was y• basest of linage & poorest, for y• these two things in inconstant minds be easiest to accōplish their
lusts and desires. And when he had learned out this, and found that there was one (amongest them that serued the Dutchesse) which had these qualities (or better to saie incon∣ueniences) he did secretlie practise to talk with her, the which being done, what with requests, & gifts, and faire promises, in the end he brought her vnto the bent of his bow, and ha∣uing her at his commandement, & as he would wish, vpon a night, at such time as the Moone did shine most cléerest, hée practised with her, that she should apparell her selfe with the same apparell & attire of her head, that the Dutches her La∣die did weare the daie before, & being so attired shée shoulde come forth into a gallant fresh garden, which was vnder the window of the Dutches, whereas many times shée would recreate her selfe with her damsells, and could not bee seene of anie, by reason that the wals were so high, & being there, she should present her selfe to be the faire Polisena, and hee would méete with her in the sayd garden, whereas betwixt them they would plight their faith & troth of matrimonie, & how that he would take her into his armes, as though she were his spouse and lawfull wife. When this and all the rest which the Duke requested was concluded with that damsell, he then began to increase the friendship which be∣fore he had begun, with those thrée knighs, Ricardo, Carme∣lio, & Ambardo, who were thrée of the principallest knights & of most credit that were in all the Court, vnto whom ma∣ny times before (because he would haue their friendshippes more surer) he did impart the secret & great loue which hée ha with the Dutches, & did not onelie declare vnto them the sharpe answeres which she gaue him, but rather sayd, that he was verie well beloued of her, and how that she had promised him many times to receiue him for her husband, although shée dyd delaie the time from one night vnto an other. Then after a while when that they were partlie per∣swaded of the truth, the daie before the night that he had con∣orted with the Damsell to come forth into the garden, hée went vnto these three knights, and in great secret he sayde vnto them these wordes.
It is not vnknowen vnto you my Lordes, how long time I haue trauailed with sorrow for to conclude this loue that I haue alwayes had with the Dutchesse, & to no other intent and purpose but to marrie with her, and to haue her in that honour as her high estate and great worthinesse doth deserue, shée hath driun mée off from daie to daie, dilating the time, and hindering mée of that great glorie and con∣tentment, the which I hoped long ere this to haue inioyed, as you doe verie well knowe, but now by the good successe that alwayes I hoped for of this my Matrimonie, it hath pleased God, that the Dutchesse hath now conserted with mée, that this next night that commeth, she will come forth into a garden that is on the backe side of her lodging, where as she willeth me to méete her, and there she wil accomplish all that I haue desired, and for that I doe know and haue proued by experience the inconstancie and varietie of wo∣mens heartes, I am verie desirous that you (my Lordes) would shew me so much pleasure, as to go with me thether, and to be in secret there whereas you may heare and sée all that passeth, because if it shoulde so fall out by my euill fortune, that the Dutchesse of Austria for feare of displea∣sing the king or Quéene, or by anie other occasion that shuld moue her now: pretended purpose, shall denie and flie from this her promise, that then you (if occasion did so serue) as witnesses of that ye sawe, may declare the truth of all that which you haue séene and heard. And againe, I being in my glorie with the Dutches in the garden, should chance to bée discouered and bewraied, to haue your helpe and succour, as of my verie perfect and good friends. When the Duke had concluded this his fained protesta∣tion, the thrée knightes who were so much his friendes, dyd promise vnto him for to accomplish all his request. Then when the night was come, about twelue of the clock at mid∣night, at such time as the Dutchesse and all the rest were in their found sléepe, the Duke with the thrée knights went vn∣to the garden, and although the walls were verie high, yet by Ladders they went vp to the top thereof, the wall was
somewhat broade aboue, and on the inside towards the gar∣den, hard vnto the wall dyd growe a great number of thick and high Cypres trées, which shadowed all the wall, in such sort, that the thrée knightes might remaine vppon the wall, and heare and sée all that should passe in the garden, and they not to be séene and discouered of anie. In that place did the three knightes remaine, and the Duke descended downe by those trées into the garden, whereas he remained till within a little while after he heard a little poserne to be opened, whereat came forth that false damsell, who by rea∣son that the Moone did shine so bright, yea nigh hand shée did seeme to bée the Dutchesse, for that shee was faire, and of her owne stature, and was apparelled with a gowne of gréene veluet, set full of brouches of golde, wherein was set many fine presious stones, shée also had her haire hanging about her shoulders, which reached downe to the ground, and vpon her head a garland set full of Diamonds and ru∣bies of great price, with the which garment and garland the thrée knightes dyd sée the Dutchesse the daie before, in cer∣taine bankets and feasts that were made, and by reason that it was night, although the Moone did shine verie cléere, yet because shee was somewhat a farre of, they coulde not discerne anie other but that she was the Dutchesse. Like∣wise shee had in her hand a bunch of feathers, wherewith this Damsell did dissemble and hide her face, in such sorte, that shée could not bee knowen. Then so soone as the Duke had spied her to come forth, he straight wayes went & knée∣led downe before her, and sayd. Oh my Ladie Polisena, what Prince or knight in all the worlde, was euer worthie to receiue so great curtesie and fauour as this is? Giue mée these your faire and white handes, that I may kisse them, as one vnworthie to receiue so great honour and glorie, and yet I cannot thinke but that it is a dreame. My Lord (sayde the Damsell) giue thanks vnto almightie God, who hath done so much for you, that you do deserue this at my hands, the which I haue done for your sake, arise vp from the ground, for that your state
courtesie vento any damsell, in all the the whole world, much lesse vnto the Dutches of Austria, who is altogether yours, and in saying these wordes, she tooke him by the hand and caused him to arise from the ground, and the Duke straight waies began to embrace and kisse her, and tooke their way towards a fresh fountaine there at hand, compassed rounde about with Iasmires and Muske Roses. And before that they could come thether, the Damsell sayde. My Lord, you doe well know, that I doe not come hether for any other thing, but to plight vnto you my faith and troth, to be your wyfe, and you my husband and spouse, and that to the con∣trarie, I would not come for all the world into this place, so much against my honour. My desire is, that this should bée done out of hand, and that we might depart, for that I feare to be discouered. My good Ladie & Dutches (sayd the Duke) this is that the which I so long haue looked and hoped for. And now séeing that we are both agréed, and conformable in our good wills, now I doe saye that I doe receiue my Ladie the Dutches Polisena, for my welbeloued spouse and wife, and that I doe renounce all other and cleaue my selfe onely vnto her, so long as we shall liue. Well then my good Lord, sayd the Damsell: Héere your true and faithfull Polisena, doe receiue and take Roberto Duke of Saxonia, for her spouse, and will that no other shal be her husband, but you alone. All this that passed betwixt them, was very well heard by the thrée knightes that were in secret: and surely they were out of all doubt to the contrarie, but that should be the Dutches of Austria. For if they had knowen otherwise, or had any other thing in their thoughts, they were such knights, that they would not haue affirmed that which they had sayd for all the kingedome of Hungaria. When that this communicacion of matrimonie was concluded betwixt them two, the Duke went with the Damsell towardes the Fountaine, and at their coming thether she making the matter somewhat strange, so that it
might be heard by the thrée knights, although they could not sée any thing, by reason of the thicknesse of the trées whereas they were, there the Duke did accomplish his wil with the Damsell. And when it was houre and time for to withdraw themselues, they went hand in hand together vnto the posterne where she came forth, and there the duke with many imbracings and kissings, did take his leaue of her, and she entred in, and went to sléepe, leauing the appa∣raile of the Dutches in the place whereas she tooke them, and was not séene by any: And the Duke retourned vnto the thrée knights, and departed from thence. It fell out within a while after happened all that this Historie hath declared vnto you, the which fell out to be vn∣to the Prince Lusiano great sorrow and griefe, for that hée dyd loue the Dutches so entirely, and was so fully certifi∣ed of the good will & loue she bare vnto him, that it brought him into a great alteration of minde, and almost from him selfe, to sée the witnesse that was brought against the Dut∣ches, by those thrée knights, whome he had in estimation to be loyall, faithfull, and of great credit: and beleeued verely that they would not but tell the trueth, in that behalfe, if that to either of them should be giuen a whole kingdome. And to the contrarie, he had so great a confidence in his la∣die and mistresse, that he was fully determined first o bée saine, then to consent, that any such shame should be offered vnto her. But his great bountie did little profit, for to de∣liuer him from the death, for that euerie one of the foure, were so strong and valiant knights, that in all Hungaria was not to be found one that could match any of them. But yet for that aboue al things Iustice is of greater force, God dyd permit, for that Lusiano had Iustice on his part, that he should be succoured in this his great extre∣mttie: as shalbe told you in this Chapter following.
How that Rosicleer and Liriamandro, and the gen∣tle Lusano, had battaile with the Duke Robert and his companions. Chap. 45. AFter that the Damsel of the Dutches was departed from Rosicleer and Liriamandro, she went straight waies into the place ap∣pointed for the battaile whereas she kept her selfe verie close, till such time as the Duke and his companions came foorth all foure together, and armed with rich and glittering armor, mounted vpon a great and gallant horse, & had with them so gallant semblance, that they semed to be knights of great valour & worthinesse, as well in their armour, as in their gallant proporcion. In this ort they ridde about the place, and when that the king Tiberio and the Quéene Augusta with all the principallest of the court were set in their pla∣ces at the windowes of the mightie pallace, then straight waies came farther the gentle Lusiano, all armed in blew armour, garnished about with golde and rich stoones, which was conformable vnto his estate, and was mounted vpon a mightie horse trapped with blewe veluet and bordered with gold, and was in all things of so gallant and gentle disposition, that ther was not one in all the place, but when they saw him, did receue great sorrow and griefe, in such sorte, that there was amongst them a great sound in ma∣ner of a lamentation, for that they made rekoning that he was a dead man, and there were fewe amongst them but would haue giuen a good part of their goods, vpon condici∣on that the gentle Lusiano might cleere himselfe of that en∣terprise, in especial the king and the Queene, who loued him almost as well as though he had bene their owne sonne, and would haue bene verie glad if y• the prince  would giue ouer that demaund, for that they beleued y• the Duke
Roberto had reason on his side, and again (as it was likely) they thought it impossible that he should escape from that battaile with his life. Then the king commaunded that the Dutches should be brought foorth for to see and behold the battaile that was ordained for her sake, who very much a∣gainst her will, was brought vnto a window of the pallas: but when she saw her gentle spouse, her heart was all co∣uered with sorrow and griefe, and as dead she fell down to the ground, whereas her life had bene in great perill, if that within a short space she had not bene comforted with the comming of the two knights. So soone as the damsell saw that it was houre & time, with a trice she went vnto the In whereas she had left Ro∣sicleere and Liriamandro, and giuing them to vnderstand of that which had passed, and how that they were readie to goe to battaile. They straight waies mounted vpon their horses, and with all the spéede possible, came vnto the place, at such time as the Iudges did part the Sunne and the field vnto the knight, readie to leaue them to their battaile. And as they pressed to enter into the place, all the people dyd make them large and broade way, for to passe, as well to cleere themselues from the furie of their great hast, as also for that they sawe them to be armed with so precious and rich armour, and of so gallant proporciō, that straight waies they thought they came vpon some set purpose and deter∣mination. When they came vnto the place whereas the knights were, without speaking euer a woord, they plased thēselues the one on the one side, and the other on the other side of the Prince, with their speares in their hands, readie for to goe vnto the battaile. Then the Damsel who was well knowne went vnto the king and saide: You shall vnderstand wor∣thy and mightie king Tberio, that I this daye going forth of this citie, because I would not see the death of the price Lusiano, by my good fortune I met with these two knights, who whē as they vnderstood by mée, the occasiō of my sorow and griefe, hauing no other occasion, but as they are bound
by reason and Iustice, are come hether with mée, and will defend the cause on the part and behalfe of my Ladie the Dutches. Therefore on their parts I am come vnto your highnesse, to request you to graunt thē licence for the same, for so much as they be strangers, and would not erre in a∣ny thing that is dewtifull vnto your seruice. The king, who all this time dyd verie well behold the two knights, and lyked them meruailously well, was ve∣ry glad and ioyefull at the words of the Damsell, and ha∣uing some hope (more then before) of the deliuerie of the Prince, by the ayde of those two knights, aunswered and sayde, that the Duke and his companions were foure, so that Lusiano might likewise take vnto him other thrée com∣panions, and that there was no reason in him for to denie them, therefore the knights might doe what their pleasure was, and that he should be well content therewith. The Duke and his companions when that they sawe how that Lusiano had companions, made no rekoning ther∣off, for that if they were tenne of them, they hoped before an houre were ended, they would bring them vnto their endes. But the Prince when that he sawe himselfe in the middest betwixt two such knights, receiued no small con∣tentment, for that they séemed to be of high estate & great renowme, as well in their rich armour, as of their gallant and stoute proporcions. But in especiall Rosicleer, for that there was not a knight in all that place, but he had foure fingers vauntage of him in height, so that it séemed vnto him that in all his life he had not séene a knight of a gallan∣ter disposition. And hauing no time for to speak vnto them, he bowed downe his head, in token of humilitie, giuing them thankes for the great courtesie which they shewed vn∣to him. At this time the houre was come, and the trumpets be∣gan to sownde, making a great noyse, whereat the Duke & his companions, with their speares in their hands, set spurs vnto their horses, running with al furie possible. The other thrée knights sacked no time, to runne and receiue them,
so great furie, that it séemed a whirle winde, and made their encoūters the one against the other in this sort. The Duke Roberto and the gentle Lusiano made their encounters to∣gether all alone, in such ort, that by reason they were both rong and valiant knights, they brake and sheuered their spares all to péeces, but iustling together with their horse and bodies they both fell downe vnto the ground, who with great lightnesse arose vpon their feete, an as mortall eni∣mies, made battaile together with their swords, Liriaman∣dro made his encounter with Ricardo, who was a gallant knight. And now whether it was for that he was in pre∣sence of his parents, or by his great bountie and worthi∣nesse, Liriamandro ouerthrew the stout Ricardo, horse and man to the ground. And although by the force thereof he lost his stirrups, yet lyke a good knight he passed forwards and kept his saddle: and for that he séemed to haue the vauntage on his aduersarie, he dyd alight from his hose, & made his battaile on foote. Then against Rosicleer (for that he seemed to be the biggest and most valiantest of them all) he was encountred by the two most valiantest and stout∣est knight of the foure, who was Carmelio, Lord of the Al∣b, and Anibard Lord of Marchomandia. And for that neuer at any time before they met with their equalls, they thought verely at that encounter, to lessen the number of their aduersaries, by one. But it fell out vnto them contra∣rie, for that  of them brake their speares vppon Ro∣cleere, without mouing him any thing in his saddle, but he made his encounter vpon the stout Carmeli, in such sort, that thrusting him out of his saddle, he bare him to the ground ouer his hore crouper, and he had enough to doe afterwards to arise againe he was so tormented with the fall. The king was wonderfully amazed, and all those that dyd behlde  to see those gallant encounters betwixt them, and could not  that the  of Lusiano were of so great force and strength, that so lightly had ouer∣throwen their aduersaries, and from that time forwardes
had a better hope of the victorie. Then the Dutches who was as one halfe dead, being comforted with those newes, with a better good will then before, put her selfe at the win∣dow for to behold the battaile. Then the worthie Rosilceere finishing the furie of his swift course, with great lightnesse, he tourned his horse a∣bout, & retourned vpon Ambardo, who remained on horse∣backe, and stroke at him such a blow with his sword, that the shylde he lift vp for to ward the furie thereof (although it was of fine and hard stéele) hée cloue it in two péeces, and from thence descended vpon his helme with so great furie, that it made him to stoope with his head, declyning it to his horse necke. And this stout Ambardo, when that he felt him selfe ouercharged with that mightie blow, being greatly a∣mazed, he said within himselfe, what is this, mée thinketh I féele all the furie of the world against mée, is this by fortune the sonne of Trebatio, that passed this way when he slewe Aridon, or else is that strong Achilles, sonne vnto Peleo, risen againe from death to life, or that first begotten of Pri∣amus: for according as I doe féele the great force of this knight, it is not possible, but he must néedes be one of thē. And in saying these wordes, for that he was a valiant and couragious knight, with all the furie of his armes he stroke such a blow at Rosicleere vpon the head, that he gaue him well to vnderstand that he was a verie valiant and chosen knight. All this time Liriamandro and Ricardo combatted to∣gether, in such sort, that the battaile was worth the behol∣ding, they were both stout and valiant knights, and char∣ged the one the other with so great power & strength, that it made them all to meruaile. But he that was most oppres∣sed and had greatest trauaile in this battaile was the prince Luiano, for that being in battaile with the Duke, came al∣so against him the stout Carmelio, and although he was of great bountie, yet had he enough to doe for to cleere himselfe from either of them: and he had passed great euell betwixt them two, if that at this instant had not chaunsed that the
worthie Rosicleer being in battaile with Anibardo, séeing himselfe before his graundfather, his courage so increased in him, that with the furie of all his force, he stroke so migh∣tie strong and furious a blow vpon his helme, that he had clouen him downe vnto the wast, if that his helme had not bene the finer, and forged by art magicke, which was the occasion that his fine cutting sworde could not enter nor cut it, but yet by the great force of the valiant Anibardo, cleane from himselfe fell from his horse to the ground, not without great wondering vnto all them that saw that ter∣rible and furious blow: and looking on the one side, he saw the Prince Lusiano, how he was in fight against both the other knights, who then with a trice leaped from his horse, and went and put himselfe before the Duke, and stroke his first blow at him in such sorte, that he made him to stoope with both his hands to the ground. Then the Duke, who was of a valiant and stout courage, let Lusiano in battaile with Carmelio, and began to charge Rosicleer with such mightie and strong blowes, that he made him to vnder∣stand, that he was a valiant and worthie knight. And it gréeued Rosicleer verie much to thincke that in the Duke should remaine so great treasō, he being a knight of so great bountie and valour in armes. And being verie desirous that the truth thereof might be knowne, he forced himselfe all that euer he could, for to ouercome the Duke, who for a while did defend himselfe very valiantly, being greatly a∣mazed at the strange bountie and force of his aduersarie, and could not immagine who it should be, except he were sent from heauen for to punish the great treason which hée had done against the Dutches, as one worthie thereoff. All this time the prince Liriamandro séeing himselfe in the pre∣sence of his father and mother, and desirous to get honour before them, dyd so ouercharge his aduersarie, that in a smal time he abated the courage of Ricardo, y• the vauntage was on Liriamandros part. Likewise y• gentle Lusiano & the stout Carmelio who were almost equall in bountie, with great force charged the one y• other with such blowes, y• they semed
to be all on fire, with the great quantitie of sparkes that flew out of their armour, and although for a good while there was knowen no aduauntage betwixt them, yet in the end the couragious force of the Prince endured longest, and he did so intreate his aduersarie, that he would haue giuen a great part of his estate, so that he might haue béene cléered of that battaile with honour. The which grieued nothing at all the faire Polisena, who séeing her knight so stout and light in the battaile, receiued great ioye and pleasure, and with shedding of many teares praie vnto God for to deli∣uer him cleere from that battaile, as one that made no reck∣ning to liue anie longer than the sawe him aliue, but quick∣lie she was brought out of that care, for that the inclite and worthie Gréeke that dyd combat with the Duke  charged him so fast with his terrible and furious blowes, that hée made him all astonied and amazed, that he knew not whe∣ther he went, nor where he stroke his blowes, and éeing him in that perplexitie, with his right hand hée tooke him fast by the goriet, and pulled him with so greate strength, that hée ouerthrew him at his féete, and before he could arise again, he put his knée vpon his breast, and pulled his healme from his head, and put his swoorde vnto his throate, and sayde thus. Duke, thou art but dead, if thou doest not confesse the truth of this treason which thou hast raised against the Dut∣chesse of Austria. Then the Duke séeing himselfe in that extremitie, thought of truth that the diuine iustice was come vppon him, and that he was some Angell sent from God for to de∣stroie and kill him, and fearing least both bodie and soule should bée destroyed, he determined to tell the truth of all the whole treason, so that he sayde vnto Rosicleer, that hée should holde his hands and not kill him, not for that he fea∣red to die, but to saue his soule, he would tell him the truth thereof. Then Rosicleer did assure him his life, and gaue him his hand, and dyd helpe him to arise from the ground, and when
he sawe the other knights in battaile, he and Rosicleer went and did part them, and put themselues betwéene them, and sayd. Sir knights, let this your contentious battaile cease, for there is no reason wherfore you should receiue anie harme, but I alone who is in the fault and worthie to be blamed. At which words saying, Liriamandro had ouerthrowen the stout Ricardo, & Lusiano had brought Carmelio into a great perplexitie, so that they had not much a doe to part them, the which being done, the Duke with an high voice, that the king and all that were there about him might heare, decla∣red all the whole treason, how and in what sort, in all points as he dyd it, and as you haue heard. But when the gentle Lusiano sawe the honour of his spouse so cleere, and the great fortune and victorie that he had in the battaile, whereas be∣fore both the honour of his Ladie and his lyfe was cleane lost, it cannot bée expressed the great ioy and pleaure that entered into his heart, and how thankfullie he gratified Ro∣sicleer and Liriamandro, desiring them to shew him so much pleasure as to tell him who they were, & to take of his trea∣sure all that was their pleasure and wills, for that was too little for them, in consideration of the great pleasure that they dyd for him. But the ioy and contentment which the faire Polisena receiued, no man is able to expresse. Likewise the King and the Queene were verie ioyfull, for they loued meruailous well the Prince Lusiano and the Dutchesse, and meruailing verie much at the straunge bountie of the knites, they thought it long till they knew what they were, for that they vnderstood they were not of that Coun∣trie. The king then commaunded that they shoulde come before him, who straight wayes with Lusiano went be∣fore the king, and when that they had done their dutie, and before that they pulled off their healmes, or treated of anie other matter, they craued of the king that both the Duke and the Damsell might bee pardoned, and although the king determined to punish them as they had deserued, yet in the ende at their request hee dyd pardon them, with this
condition, that the Duke with the Damsell should out of hand depart the Court, and neuer more in all their liues to enter into the same. The Duke straight waies gaue great thankes vnto the knightes for that which for him they had done, & the same daie after that they knew who the knights were, he departed from the Court with his damsell, and the reward which he gaue vnto her for her labour, was, that the same night he slew her in a Forrest, being ashamed of that which with her he had done. And this is the reward that all such ought to looke for, for although there be many that would profit themselues of the treason, yet in conclusion (by great fortune) there are few traitors that doe escape their re∣ward, & surelie they ought not to be suffered amongst men, for that there is no perill or daunger that may be compared vnto the mischieuous practise and pretence of a traitor no not the raging waues of the sea, earthquakes, whirle winds, thunder boltes, stormes, warres, no nor the furie of the ele∣ments, for the proofe whereof I doe referre mée vnto the mightie Alexander, whose lying in the aire, and trauailing on the seas, whose conquests of the whole world, with wars and battailes, none of all these were sufficient for to bring him vnto his end, but onelie a traitor, one of his owne reti∣nue, by treason did kill him. If this example be not suffici∣ent, consider of Darius that was before him, and of Priamus the mightie, Achilles, Minos, Nisus, Agamemnon, Romulus, Tarquinus, Seruius, and the minor , the mightie Bompeus, Iulius Caesar, and many other Emperours and kings, vnto whom no perill was so dangerous, as treason, ordained and wrought by their owne seruants, so that with great reason the traitor ought to be abhorred, as wel as they that doe inioy the benefite of treason rewarded, as well the Damsell as the Duke Roberto, who thought she went for to bée rewarded for her trauaile, yet she receiued the iust pu∣nishment for her fault. But now to returne vnto that which did remaine, the Hystorie saith, that after the king had pardoned and forgi∣uen the Duke, he had great desire for to knowe whome the
knights were. Then Rosicleer and Liriamandro pulled off their helmes, and knéeling downe before the king, Liriaman∣dro sayd: Let your Highnesse know and be acquainted with this knight, who is Rosicleer, sonne vnto the Emperor Tre∣batio, and of the Empresse Briana, whom al the whole world for his great bountie ought to honor, & me for Liriamandro your sonne, and of the Quéene Augusta my Lady & mother, who with newes of great ioy and pleasure doe come to kisse your handes. When the king knew to be in his presence his so long desired sonne, and the other to be Rosicleer his nephew, it cannot be expressed the great ioy, contentment, & pleasure he receiued at his heart, as he that in all the world desired no other thing, and as one from himselfe with great ioy he went & embraced them, saying: Oh my sonnes, what ioyfull and happie newes is this vnto me, for that in it is accomplished the thing that I most desired before I should die, how is it that you haue consented so long time to kéepe from me this great ioy? The king had scarce concluded these wordes, when that the Queene with incredible ioy & great hast came vnto them, & threw her armes about their necks, whereas she remained embracing of them both a greate while, and could not speake one word for ioy. Thus after there had passed betwixt them many wordes of great ioy in this their ioyfull meeting, straight waies the Prince Lu∣siano came and kneeled downe before them, and would haue kissed their hands, as well for the great curtesie which they had done for him, as also for y• Liriamandro was his Prince and naturall Lord, but they who had him in great estima∣tion, did receiue nd embrace him with great loue and ioy. Then after him came vnto them the three valiant knights, Ricardo, Carmelio, and Ambardo, and offered great curtesie vnto the two Princes, who did them great honour, and made them friends with Lusiano, as persons that were without blame in the treason . But when these newes were published in the court, there came so great number of people to se Rosicleer & Liriamandro, y• the pallace wold not holde thē, & al people meruailed at their strange dispositions, but in
in especiall of Rosicleer, for that they sayd that in all things he did resemble the knight of the Sunne his brother, he that was so famous and feared in that Court, for that they part∣lie vnderstood and heard of his wonderfull acts and déeds, & vnto the king it was notorious all the whole Hystorie of Rosicleer, from the time of his first creation & bringing vp, with his daughter the Princesse Briana, till such time as hee was knowen vnto the Emperour his father and Empresse his mother. Of all the which the king was verie ioyfull & pleasant, and loued the Emperour Trebatio and his sons, as he did his owne sonne Liriamandro, and for that he had not vntill that time heard of the successe of the wars that he had against the Emperour Alycandro, he was verie sorrowfull and full of care, and thought long till y• hée had heard some newes thereof, and if he gaue anie aide & succour of knights vnto the king Oliuerio, it was not for anie hatred or ill will that he bare vnto the Emperour Trebatio, but for to accom∣plish that wherin he was bound vnto the king Oliuerio, be∣cause his sonne Prince Edward was slaine in his seruice, & was fullie perswaded that all the whole armie of the king Oliuerio was not of sufficient power for to doe anie harme vnto the Emperour Trebatio, yet afterwards when he vn∣derstood of the mightie power of Pagans that were come vpon Grecia, it grieued and repented him of that he had done, so that if it had not bene verie much against his honor, ma∣ny times he was moued in conscience for to go and succour him in person, with all the power that euer he could make, & being verie desirous to know the whole successe thereof in all points, he requested the Princesse for to tell him, who (as those that knew the truth thereof) in the presence of the Quéene, and all those worthie Princes and knightes of the Court, did giue him to vnderstand as well of the successe wt the king Oliuerio as with the Emperor Alycandro, y• which being published amongst them, they al receiued great ioy, in as ample maner as though it had touched either of them in perticular, but in especial y• king & the quéene, in y• they saw how much to their honar they had accōplished their promise
vnto the king Oliuerio, as also of the high estate wherevnto their daughter the Empresse Briana was exalted, so that they could neuer satisfie themselues in giuing thankes vnto al∣mightie God for those great benefites shewed vnto them. When these things were passed, straight waies came the∣ther Leonardo and his wife, the fained parents of Rosicleer, with whom Rosicleer receiued great pleasure, as he that had great desire for to sée him, & for that which he was indeb∣ted vnto them, the which he did meruailouslie well gratefie in all points their great seruice done vnto them, for he carri∣ed them with him vnto Grecia, whereas the Empresse Bri∣ana did make them owners of great possessions, so that they were verie well content, and thought their trauaile verie well emploied the which they had in the bringing vp of Ro∣sicleer. Likewise Rosicleer reioyced verie much with those Gentlewomen, with whom he was brought vp in the Mo∣nasterie of the Riuer, and the most part of them he carried into Grecia, whereas he did verie much for them all. Then for that the king dyd beare great good will vnto the Prince Lusiano, and had him in high estimation, he straight waies commanded that his spouse the Dutchesse of Austria should bée deliuered vnto him. After this sort within few daies that their nuptialls were celebrated with great honour and triumphs, which those knights his friendes dyd ordaine, in the which the gentle Lusiano dyd so much, that he got vnto himselfe honour for euer after. And in the meane time of all these sportes and feasts, Rosicleer and Lyriamandro did declare their message vnto the king, desiring him in the part and behalfe of the Emperour Trebatio, and of the Em∣presse Briana, that he woulde thinke well for to goe with them vnto Constantinople, for to reioyie themselues of the victorie and ioy, the which the Emperour and the Empresse doe receiue. Likewise they gaue great and lawfull excuses, wherfore the Emperour Trebatio did abstaine from comming into y• Countrie, for that he had in his court such mightie Princes and Lords, that there had ben no reason for him to leaue thē.
Then the king and the Quéene, as they which desired no other thing, cōmanded Straignt waies that all things should be put in a readinesse néedfull for their iourney, and for that we haue other matters to declare for the conclusion of the first part of this Hystorie, there is héere no more to be said, but that Rosicleer and Liriamndro did passe awaie the time in Hungaria, till such time as they were readie to depart, as shall be tolde you in the next Chapter following. How the king Tiberio with the Queene Augusta, Rosicleer, and Liriamandro, departed out of Hun∣garia, and tooke their iourney towards Constan∣tinople. Chap. 46. WHen the daie appointed was come of their departure, the king and the Quéene, with all the other worthie Princes and knightes of his Court departed out of Viana, & tooke their iourney towards the mightie Empire of Grecia, in the which they trauailed many daies, without happening anie thing worthie the telling, in the end whereof they ariued within two miles of the mightie Citie of Constantinople, and when the Emperour Trebatio had knowledge of their comming, with great ioy and pleasure, he and all those mightie Princes and valyant knights together went out of Constantinople with so great maiestie, that it séemed all the whole worlde were ioyned together, the number was so excéeding great, so that the king of Hungaria and the Queene Augusta his wife, with all those that came with them, were wonderfullie amazed to sée so royall and worthie knighthoode to come forth of Con∣stantinople, for of truth they neuer woulde haue thought that so many as there were, might haue béene receiued in the court of anie Prince whatsoeuer he were in al the whole world. But when the king and the Emperour sawe one an other, they both went & met together, & did embrace the one the other, with such great loue as ought to be betwéene Fa∣ther
and sonne, and as though they had knowen one another long time before. And if before the king Tiberio and the Queene Augusta did account themselues happie & fortunate to haue so high a Prince for their sonne in law, yet now they did much more when they sawe his person & presence to be so strange & wonderfull, for alonelie by his semblance and proportion they knew him for father of the two brethren, the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer; aboue all other Princes that came in that worthie crew. The king and the Empe∣rour had not yet fullie concluded the louing words of their first méeting, when that the Quéene Augusta came vnto them, and with the selfe same loue wherewith she did em∣brace her sonne Liriamandro did embrace the good Emperor▪ Then came the knight of the Sunne (who aboue all the rest might be séene, he was of so gallant and tall statue) & of∣fered to kisse the kings hands, but the king would not con∣sent vnto it, but embraced him, and the king clasped him verie hard betwéene his armes, saying: Oh happie and for∣tunate kinsman, I doe now finde my selfe in great securi∣tie, for that I am in the armes of him that alone did defend himselfe from all my power, & made my kingdome to trem∣ble and quake, tell me I praie you, if that you haue forgotten that anger or not, if you haue not, then am I fullie perswa∣ded that I haue no securitie in my owne. Countrie of Hun∣garia, much lesse in Grecia? My good Lord and grandfather (said the knight of the Sunne) your highnesse in whatsoeuer place you are, is in great securitie from my handes, for al∣though I would procure anie outrage, yet am not I suffici∣ent to doe you anie harme, and if I were fortunate against your knights, it was nothing else but the wil of God to saue and deliuer me, for that afterwards when you should know me you should not haue so great reason to bée sorrowfull, as now you shoulde bée, if I had at that time béene slaine. Then the king said: Ah my sonne, if that had happened, my life could not haue endured so long, but God who doth know the secret of all things that shuld happen vnto vs, did
guide and gouerne all things, in such sort, that it is come to this point and instant, wherein I doe account my selfe the most fortunatest Prince in all the whole world, not onelie in knowing thée to bée my sonne, but in recouering you to bée my friend. The king had scarce concluded these wordes, when that the Quéene came to embrace the knight of the Sunne, but he did offer to kisse her hands, and there passed betwixt them many swéete and amorous wordes, such as might passe be∣twéene the mother and the sonne, at such time as of long time they had not séene the one the other. The Quéene Augusta receiued so great ioy and contentment to haue him in her pre∣sence, that she knew not almost where she was. Then ap∣proched vnto them the king Oliuerio, with the Emperour Alycandro, and all those mightie Princes and Lords, wher∣as passed betwixt them great curtesie, with such dutie as ap∣pertained vnto so high and worthie estates. In this noble méeting they spent a good while, the which being finished, the Emperour Trebatio accompanied himselfe with the king, & euerie one hose his companion as best liked him, and began to returne towardes the mightie Citie of Constantinople. The knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer did carrie betweene them the Quéene Augusta (who went with so great ioy and pleasure that she knew not were she was) to sée her selfe in the middest betwixt so worthie nephewes. When the Em∣perour Trebatio had opportunitie, he sayd vnto the king: Now is my desire fullie accomplished, in that I do sée your Hignesse in this Countrie, for although all other thinges succeded vnto me prosperous, as I haue desired, yet had I no conclusion of all this my victorie, neither could I receiue anie glorie therein, till now I haue your Highnesse in my presence, and doe honour and obey you as dutifullie as your owne naturall sonne. And if the great obligation in the which you were bound vnto the king of great Britaine, had not béene betwixt vs, I and the Empresse Briana many a time long ere this, had come vnto you to haue craued par∣don for that which is past, with lisence and consentment
for that which was to come. For although the Empresse Briana séemed to receiue contentment to be with mée in Grecia, yet receiued I great griefe, for that I could not ac∣complish of my part, the dutie which I owe vnto your high∣nesse. When that the Emperor had concluded these words, then the king (who receiued great pleasure thereat) sayd: Soueraigne Emperour, if that you haue receiued great ioy, contentmēt and pleasure, at my comming into Grecia, how much more reason haue I to reioyce and receue pleasure to haue so glorious a sight of your person and presence, being accompanied and honoured with the most highest & migh∣tiest Emperours and kings of all the world, and mounted vnto the highest estate of honour that fortune may extend, the which is apparaunt before my eyes, & also endued with such sonnes, that there is not the lyke knightes in all the whole world. And here I doe acknowledge that I am not worthie of so high a kinseman: and in that you haue saide (of my consentment) it might haue bene excused, for that I doe sée it cléerely before myne eies, to be the will and per∣mission of God, by whome all thinges hath bene gouerned, for the which neither I, nor any of your aduersaries could withstand or resist. And séeing my daughter hath brought vnto mée the highest and worthiest Prince of all the world to be my sonne in law, and that this marriage was made by the diuine will and permission, from whence hath pro∣céeded so excelent,  what haue I to saye vnto it, but giue vnto the soueraigne creator infinit thankes, for his great goodnesse shewed vnto mée. And doe most heartelie desire him to let you enioy for manie yéeres, this high estate into the which you are exalted, and also the high and wor∣thie progenie that he hath giuen you. With many swéete and courteous wordes the Emperour Trebatio did gratifie with thanks, all that which the king had sayd. So passing betwixt them, these and many other things in communi∣cation, which were to long here to rehearse, they came vn∣to the  of Constantinople, whereas the king of Hunga∣ria and the Quéene Augusta were wonderfullie amazed,
for to sée the great knighthood of that Court, for that with great difficultie, they might passe the wide stréetes, the mul∣titude was so great, so that it was a good while before they could come vnto the mightie pallas: but when they came thether, they all alighted and entred into the mightie broad court, whereas the Empresse Briana dyd receiue them, with that ioy and pleasure, as you may immagine, and there pas∣sed betwixt them many louing and sweete words, as be∣twixt Fathers and children, the which I doe let passe, to es∣chue tediousnesse. And the royall Empresse Briana was so gallant & faire, that her Father did not know her, she was so chaunged. Yet they well perceiued in her the ioye and pleasure she receiued, and the more to manifest her glorie, she did shew vnto the king Tiberio and vnto the Quéene Augusta her Mother, her third sonne, who was the faire Prince Claramante, and at that present was norished in the court with his Mother, with so great care, as in this next Chapter following shalbe declared vnto you, for the which this Historie doth leue of all the surplus of this receiuing and comming of the king of Hungaria and the Queene Au∣gusta, for that they remained a long time after in the court, whereas they declared at large the one vnto the other, the whole circumstances of all that had passed, and from that day forwards, the king Oliuerio and the king of Hungaria were great friends, as well for the kindred that was bée∣twixt them by the marriage of Rosicleer vnto the Princesse Oliuia, as also for y• in times of necessitie, these two kings did verie much the one for the other. But in especiall the king of Hungaria, setting apart the great loue that he bare vnto his sonne in law and neuew, he would accomplish his dutie bound vnto the king Oliuerio, and ayde him with his people to goe against Grecia, as hath bene told you in this Historie. All this noble crue remained certaine daies in the Ci∣tie of Constantinople, in which time they spent their time in no other thing but in mirth, pastimes & triumphes, which were made as well by strange knights as by them of Gre∣cia:
and might well be saide that there was ioyned toge∣ther all the magestie of the world. How the young Prince Claramante was nourished in the court of the Emperor Trebatio, & of other things that was spoken by the wife Artimidoro, and Lirgandeo, with other things that happened. Chapter. 47. IN all the time that the Emperour was in Constantinople, there lacked not the two wise men, Artemidoro and Lirgandeo, who were of the Emperour Trebatio and of his sonnes and of all that were in the court, verie much estéemed and honoured, for that their great wisedome & vnderstanding did deserue the same, and they knew that they had in charge to write and put in memorie all things that should passe. And al∣though for that as then it was not time for to discouer the secret loues of the knight of the Sunne, they would not in this part make them manifest, neither of the Prophesies before saide, although the most part of them hath come to effect: yet in all that euer these two wise men dyd write, they neuer writ any thing of this faire youth, the Prince Claramante, sonne vnto the Emperour Trebatio, but onely one chapter, which was written by the wie Artemidoro, of his wonderful Natiuitie. The occasion hath bene as I be∣léeue, the great trouble which they had in penning of such things past, as séemed to be most necessarie in this part of y• Historie. And now for that it semed they wer all occupied in trumphes & feastes, these wise men were at more leisure, so that both of them did write of the yoūg prince Claraman∣te, as of a person, whome they knew afterwards should be made great accompt of. They said, that at the season that the Emperour Alicando remained in Constantinople, Clara∣mante was nour & brought vp in the pallas of the Em∣perour his father, and was of the age of thrée yéeres, the semeliest, whitest and fairest creature that was to be found
in all the worlde, for that his force séemed to be a celestiall Seraphin, as may be immagined here amongst men, & his haire was lyke vnto thrids of gold. Likewise of stature tall, such as did well appeare in him, y• when so euer he should come to his perfect groth, he should be iof bigge stature, hée was of a grcious semblaunt and merrie, yet had he there∣withal so great seueritie, that of himselfe he séemed to haue the deitie of a Prince. But to conclude, what shall we saye of this childe, the wise men say, that in all things he dyd so much resemble his brother the knight of the Sunne, that many times (as shalbe declared vnto you in the second part of this mightie Historie) the one was taken for the other. Oh happie and fortunate Claramante, (saith Ligandeo) that vnto such a knight and soueraigne Prince thou arte compared, wherein can we more eralt thée, but in this thy age to attribute ye excelencies which thy brother had being but a childe. But after y• he was an armed knight, this faire childe was of all knights Ladies and damsells so welbelo∣ed, that none would willinglie depart out of his compa∣nie. And now for that he was so amorous, all people recei∣ed with him great pleasure and sport, but aboue all other he was estéemed and beloued of the precious princesse Lin∣dabrides. For that he did resemble so much that figure the which she hadde printed in her heart, she could neuer leau him out of her armes, so that when the childe should depart, he conceiued a displeasure, and the princesse an inward so∣row for his absence, equall to the absence of the knight of the Sunne. The occasion thereof was, for that she dyd coc∣ker and make more of him, then any other, the childe con∣ceiued a greater loue vnto her then vnto the Empresse his mother that nourished him with her breastes, so that the child could neuer be from her, wherat the Emperour & the Empresse receiued great pleasure, and it was the occasion that they loued and bare a greater good will vnto that roy∣all Princesse. And as vpon a day, in the mightie quadran, were ioy∣ned all those mightie Princes and knights, and all the La∣dies
and damsells of the court, shwing great ioye and p∣stime, there was amongst them the olde king of Gedrosia, for that he and other fiue kings, vassailes vnto the Empe∣rour Alicandro, after the blouddie field was done, were ta∣ken prisoners, by reason they were ouerthrowen from their horse, they could not flye out of the campe as other dyd: & as it hath bene toulde you in this Historie before, that this king was very wise, and well seene in deuinations, and partly knew of things to come, and tolde many things vnto the Emperor Alicandro, before he departed out of the gran Tartaria, that afterwards came to passe, that if they had giuen credit vnto his good counsell, the Emperour had not bene brought vnto that extremitie in the which he was. Not for that those things which are ordained by God may be eschued, but for that all men hath frée will, to apart them selues from such things as be euill & hurtfull: but if God doe first determine and predestinate any thing, it is for that he doth know to what ende the frée will of man will row vnto. Being there in that conuersation with the king of Ge∣drosia, and séeing the great pleasure and pastime that was amongst them, giueing a great sigh that was heard of them all, he saids: Oh miserable world, that for one pleasure a∣lone, thou doest giue and retourne two thousande griefes and sorowes. In saying these words he hild his peace and would say no more, till such time as the Emperour Treba∣tio (who had him in reputation of a man of vnderstanding, and greatly meruailed at those his words, being spoken at that time) asked of him wherefore he spake those wordes. I doe speake them (sayde the king) for that the world doth se vs as children, at sometimes singing, & at other times wéeping, & many times a faire and cléere morning, is turned into a clowdie and sorowfull euening. And there is no plea∣sure or pastime can be so great, but that sorow and heaui∣nesse doth disturbe i, we be like vnto the ayer, that being so cleare and faire that we cannot almost discerne it from the firmament, vpon a sodaine, with a little wind that doh
arise, is troubled and darkenot: so likewise when that vn∣to our iudgements we are most ioyfull and merrie vpon a sodaine, not knowing from whence it commeth, we finde our selues put in great sadnesse and teares. This doth pro∣céede for that all our felicitie and prosperitie; we doe build vpon things that of themselues doe perish and decay. We are also like vnto trauailer  Seas, whose faire and calme wether is vpon the ▪ who of it selfe is mouea∣ble and of small foundation, and looke so many times as they be assalted with the winde, so many times their plea∣sure doe abate, and their sorrowes double. Euen so doe we put all our felieitie in thirgs wherein is no stabilitie, but like vnto the loaes that is caried away with euerie winde, as it apeareth in high estates and dignities, for the higher he is the greater is his fall. In riches, difficultie in the get∣ting, with care in the kéeping, and sorow in the losing: vn∣to manie it causeth death, and depriueth all of their case. The most fairest in a short time doth  and fade a way like a flower, and he that is of most force & strength, is ouerthrowen with a little Feauer. When a friend doth dye or is lost, in especiall of chil∣dren, then swéete mingled by-tternesse, Honey mixt with gall, miserable fortune, rarefull pleasures, and many times sorowfull, successours of follie, vnto them that alonely doth recreate themselues with the blossome of the trée, we our selues doe it, in that we doe reioyce and shew so much pleasure and pastimes vnto little children, who are no lesse subiect vnto misfortunes, then the delicate flower. Of ma∣ny things, that I haue spoken of, you haue had experience, so likewise, verie shortly, you shall see the proofe of the rest that lacketh, if that Nature or Fortune, doth not disturbe or lette it. I will saye no more vnto you, for that it is not giuen vnto vs to affirme that which we doe deuine, but to de∣clare that which the order of Nature doth show vs, to the inconeniences▪ which might happen f that perad∣uenture we should be deceiued.
Héerewith the olde king concluded his reasons, & for that all those Lords that were there present were wise & of great vnderstanding, they well vnderstood that his words did ex∣tend vnto some thing that should happen vnto that faire & young child Claramante, and could not let but receiue some trouble of minde, but yet for that his Father and brethren were or noble and valiant hearts, they did not onelie with equall and quiet minde abide that which the starres did per∣mit, but also referred all things vnto the determination of the soueraigne creator, so that they answered nothing vnto that which the king had said, but the wise Artemidoro, that had more vnderstanding in the art Magicke than the king answered vnto his wordes and sayd. By your word we do vnderstand (wise king of Gedrosia) that you would declare some things that should happen vnto this faire child Clara∣mante, as of truth it is so, for that his parents shall sustaine great sorrow and griefe for him, but according as his good fortune and destinie doth promise vnto him, it shall be for a greater glorie and extolling of the Gréekish Empire, and so much more ioyful shal his prosperitie & good fortune be, than his sorrowfull & peruerse fortune which is ordained, great reason hath his father to reioyce of such a son, for the excellent frit which shall procéed of so worthie a blossome, & yet there is no peruerse fortune that can be so contrarie vnto him, to be compared in equalitie vnto that which happened vnto his brothren in their first age, who hauing now passed all their misfortunes, with more ioy and pleasure do inioy the time of their prosperitie. So shall it bée of this faire Cla∣ramante, for that his high and strange birth doth not prog∣nosticate anie other thing. When the wise Artemidoro had concluded these words, it gaue great conteatment vnto them all, whereas before the words of the king of Gedrosia did cause in them great sorrowe, thinking that some euill hap and misfortune had béene ordained against that most singular and gracious childe, Claramante, but most especiallie, the beautifull and exouisite Princesse Lindabrides, who scarcelie dyd
shed many teares, as one that dyd ou him more then her owne parents, onely for the loue of that figure that he dyd represent. And for that it is now time that the great griefe & ouermuch sorrow of this precious Princesse should cease, this Historie doth declare what the two wise men Artemi∣doro, and Lirgandeo dyd for to put remedie in the same. ¶How the faire Lindabrides by arte of the two wise men Artimidoro and Lirgandeo, was inchanted, and the order of her inchantment. Chapter. 48. NOw saith the Historie, the Emperour A∣licandro remaining manie dayes in the Court of the Emperour Trebatio, was the occasion that the griefe of the faire Princesse Lindabrides dyd euery daye in∣crease more and more, one waye for that the presence of the very faire and worthie Princes Clari∣diana dyd make her suspect that which her knight (he of the Sunne) had determined within his heart: & an other way, in remembring that in the ende the Emperour her Father would  into his countrie againe, and that forseably she must  with him; all the which she could not suffer with pacience, neither immagine that it should be possible for her to departe out of Gecla ,  that in thinking hereof, her dolour and griefe was such that many times it brought her o the point of death. And for that all this was not hyd from the two wise men Ligandeo and Areinido∣o, and vnto the Quéene  her damsell, many times ha∣uing great compassion on this faire Princesse, they dyd de∣termine amongst themselues to put some remedie in the same, in such sort, that she might not liue in so great sorow and griefe. Being fully persuaded in their determination, and knowing what afterwards would happen and come to to∣gether
all those worthie Princes and knights, Ladies, and damsells, in the emperiall pallace, the daie being verie faire, and the Sunne cléere and bright, vpon a sodaine there came ouer the Citie a great cloude, that was so blacke and darke, that béeing together they could scarcelie sée one another, out of the which procéeded great thunderinges and lightninges that were terrible to behold, in such sort, that all the whole Citie trembled as though it would haue sunke, and not one amongst thē all, he of most courage, but was in great feare, because they knew not what it should meane. This storme and tempest indured halfe an houre, & was so darke as the night, at such time as when the Moone is in her coniunction, and all those worthie Princes and knights were together in a mightie quadran, and would not depart from thence, for that they would not leaue that gallant & faire crew of La∣dies & Gentlewomen alone, who was meruailouslie afraid and in great dreade of that which they sawe. Being in this sort, and dazeled with the darknesse, they sawe out of the mightie windowes (which were open) comming towardes them in the aire, a great burning fire which did lighten all the earth, & extinguish the darknes, the which when it drew nigher vnto them, they sawe that it was two furious dra∣gons that did throw out all that fire which they did sée, at their mouthes, noses, & eies, and séemed to be infernal diuels, that it did surmount y• noise of thunder. These two dragons were yoked together, and brought with them a Coch all of bright and shining Christall, in the which were set two of the same Christall set full of bliew Saphires and Rubies, the one of them was emptie, and in the other was set a Damsell or great beautie, who séemed vnto them all to bée the wise Quéene ulia, and shée brought in her hand a little violl of Glasse, full of verie faire and cléere wa∣ter. When these Dragons came vnto the windowes the which were as though they had béene verie wide gates, they entered in thereat, and straight waies put themselues with their Coch into the middest of the great Quadran, where∣at
all y• were there present receiued great feare & dreade, but in especiall the women, who remained as dead persons. Then the knights séeing the great perplexitie and fearefull estate of the women, would haue drawen their swords and made contention against the dragons, but the Quéene I∣lia who came in the Coch, said vnto them: My Lords and worthie knights, holde your hands a while, for that you are in securitie, and you shall vnderstand that I am not come for anie other thing, but to aske and craue a bound of the Princesse my Ladie and Mistres. At which wordes they were all in quiet. Then the Quéene descended downe out of the Coch with her Glasse violl in her hand, and went vn∣to her Ladie the Princesse (who was in great feare of the Dragons) and knéeled downe before her and sayd as fol∣lowth. Madame, if anie part of my seruice doth deserue anie re∣ward at your Highnesse hands, let me craue now in recom∣pence of the same, that your Highnesse will graunt vnto me a bowne, the which I will demand. Then the Princesse be∣ing greatlie amazed to sée her in that order, with great cur∣tese and gentle grace, said: I doe graunt it vnto you. The Quéene then kissed her hands for the great curtesie shew∣ed vnto her, and shewing vnto her the little Glasse violl she had in her hand, sayd: The bowne which your Highnesse hath granted vnto me is this, and no other thing, but onlie y• you drink vp this water which I bring in this viol, wher∣by your Highnesse shal receiue no harme nor inconuenience. Of truth (sayd the Princesse) to doe this at thy request is a small recompence, to that which they seruice doth deserue. And in saying these wordes she tooke the violl of her, and without anie more circumstance she dronke vp the water, which was not much, she had not so soone dronke it, but straight waies she forgot her selfe, and remembred nothing that euer she had done, the water was of so merualous ver∣tue, and brought from the Fountaine of forgetfulnesse, that Merlin made in the highest part of the mount Olimpus, ther whereas neither winde nor weather doth trouble it, but the
aire is alwaies cléere and calme, of the which we wl declar more at large in the second part of this Historie, for that many learned Hystoriographers doe saie, that this meruai∣lous Fountaine is scituated in another place. When this faire Princesse had forgot her selfe, and was epriued of all remembrance, shee straight waies forgot all that was in the Quadrans, as though she had neuer séene them, and tooke the Quéene Iulia by the hand, and went with her to the Chri∣staline Coch, and going into it, they sate themselues downe in the two Chaires, then straight waies the Quéene made the Dragons to mount into the aire, for to goe forth where∣as they entered. The which being séene of all that noble crue, and thinking that it was some treason pretended a∣gainst the Princesse, in great hast the knight of the Sunne and the worthie Prince Meridian her brother, arose vp with their swords drawen in their handes, and went against the Dragons for to take the faire Princesse out of the Coch, yet were they not able to approch vnto them, for that the Dragons lung their tailes about them, in such sorte, char∣ging the two knightes with such terrible blowes, that they made them to recoile backwards with more spéed than they pressed forwardes, and before they could recouer to assault them a new, they were out of the windowe with the Coch, and being out, straight waies ceased all the tempest of thunderings and lightnings, and the cloude vanished away, so that the daie was as faire and as cleere as it was be∣fore. And as these worthie princes did put themelues at the windowes for to sée whether this wonderfull Coch was carried, they discouered in the middest of the mightie Court a péece of worke, the straungest to beholde that euer was séene, which was a great Tower foure square, and of twen∣tie paces broade euerie waie, cut out of one stone, of so great cléerenesse & brightnesse, that it soomed to be of Diamonds, and vppon the toppe of the Tower there was an excéeding faire steeple, which shined lyke vnto burnished Stéele in the shining Sunne, and was of so great height, that the
toppe could scarce be discerned from the groūd, verie strange and the like neuer before séene, which did declare it to be a thing neuer made by humane creatures, and in all the tow∣er there was no other window nor loope hole, but onelie the doore the which was open, wherein they might discerne the staires, the which was turning, the steppes verie broade and of shining Christall, and although there were no wi∣dowes for to giue light vnto the staires, yet was it so lyght within by reason of the brightnesse of the walls, that it see∣med to bée more brighter than abroade. There was at the entrie of the doore two Images of Brasse, as bigge as Gy∣antes, the one on the one side and the other on the other side, and had in their handes each of them a greate Fauchon of fne stéele, and had them aboue their heades readie for to strike them that shoulde giue the attempt for to enter in at the doore, and had so furious and fierce semblaunce, that they caused great feare in all them that did beholde them, and aboue ouer the doore were written Letters, which see∣med to be of golde, which afterwardes were read by those worthie Princes, who were meruailouslie amazed in behol∣ding that straunge and wonderfull worke, and looking for the Coch wherein the faire Princesse was carried, they saw it of so great height, that it was equall with the Clowdes, and within a little while after, in the sight of them all, the two Dragons descended downe out of the aire, and lighted vppon the Twer, who ioyntlie with the Coch consumed into the Tower, and could not anie more bée séene. Where∣at all that were there present meruailed greatlie, and for that they knew not what it should meane, they requested the two wise men Lyrgandeo and Artemidoro to tell them, who answered them to nothing, but said: Let vs go & reade the writings that are vpon the gates, and then afterwardes they wold declare vnto them the whole circumstance of that remaineth. Then straight waies the two Emperours with those worthie Princes and knights, descended out of the pal∣lace into the Court, & when they came vnto the gates of the tower, they saw in thrée parts written in Gréeke letters, on
each side one, and in the middest the third, which was as fol∣loweth. The first sayd. This is the disloiall tower, into the which, let none at∣tempt the entrie, except his heart be voide of all loue, for if he doe, you shall vnderstand that the first Porters will de∣fend the entrie. The second sayd. Heere within is the precious Princesse of the Scitas, who aboue all other Ladies in her time doth deserue to bee Ladie of this tower, & shall not goe forth of the ame till such time as commeth a knight, who with his great force and strength shal conquere the entrie, and mount into the tower, and con∣clude this aduenture. And the third said. He had neede of great force and strength that is able to comprehend to see the great meruailes of this tower. When that these writinges were read, they were all greatlie amazed, but the wise Lyrgandeo séeing them in that dumpe, said. My Lordes, héere is nothing to be mused at, but if it bée your pleasures that the faire Princesse Lyndabrides shall come forth of this tower, it is conuenient that you proue this aduenture, for it is a thing without remedie and not to be spoken off, that she shall not come forth héereof till such time as all things bée accomplished according as these writings haue declared, and héere I doe saie vnto you, that so farre as I doe (or can) vndersand by this aduenture, that long time shall passe before anie shall come for to finish the same, al∣though on the part of the Princesse there shall no time bée lost, for that shée shall goe forth out of the Tower according vnto nature, of the same age that shée is now of, although shée remaineth there one hundreth yéeres, and in all this time shée shall not want anie thing, but of all ioy, pleasure, and pastime, shée shall haue vnto her contentment, for that the Quéene Iulia, (knowing what should happen and come to passe héereafter) for the good will and seruice that shée dyd owe vnto the Princesse her Ladie and mistres, dyd
ordaine this aduenture, the which will fall out more for her honour and glorie. But when the wise man had concluded his wordes, it grieued much the Emperour Alycandro, for that hée loued the Princesse verie much, and doubted whether he shoulde liue so long as to sée the deliuerie of his Daughter. The like care receiued the valiant and worthie Prince Meridi∣an her Brother. The like griefe receiued all the rest of the whole crue that were there present, for that they loued her verie much for her great valour and desert, but in especiall it grieued the knight of the Sunne, as of one that to for∣get her néeded the processe of a long time, yea, and the tra∣uaile vnto the mount Olympus, and if it had not béene that there was in his presence his welbeloued and royall Princesse Claridiana, hée would haue detracted no time, but haue béene the first to haue giuen the attempt to proue that aduenture of the Tower, but for that hée woulde not giue anie suspition of that which he felt in his heart, he bri∣deled his affection and desire, till time some other knights went and armed themselues, and proued the entrie of the Tower, as shall bée declared vnto you in the next Chapter following. How the valiant and worthie Princes did proue the aduenture of the disloiall tower, and what hap∣pened of the successe thereof, Chapter. 49. WHen the knightes beganne to come forth ar∣med for to proue that aduenture of the dis∣loiall Tower, straight waies the Emperor Trebatio, and all those high Princes and knightes, went & put themselues at the win∣dowes of that mightie pallace. The lyke did the Empresse Briana, with the rest of those principall La∣dies and Damselles, for to sée what should be done with
those knights in y• attempt of y• tower. The first knight that came into that Court, was that valiant and worthie Prince Lyriamandro, brother vnto the Empresse riana, who was armed with guilt armour set full of rich stones, and aligh∣ting from his horse, with his sworde drawen in his hand he went towardes the gate of the tower, without receiuing anie feare or dreade at the furious and fierce countenaunce of the two Gyantes, but as one whose amorous effects to∣wardes the faire Princesse Rodasilua dyd make him more couragious and bolde. But yet nothing might bée more con∣trarie vnto him, as now it happened, than for to see the se∣cretes of this faire Tower, for that as he woulde haue put his foote vppon the thresholde, before he was within, one of these Images discharged vppon him a terrible blowe, with such force, that it astonied him, and ouerthrew him to the ground without the gate, that he seemed to be dead. Where∣at they all meruailed greatlie, as well at the mightie blowe which the Gyant stroke, as to see the Prince in that perplexitie, but quicklie their feare that they hadde of the Prince was quieted, for that so some as they had pulled off his healme; and gaue him aire, he came againe vnto him∣selfe, and was as well as he was before, but hauing no will to approue the attempt anie more, he withdrew himselfe. It was not long after when that his good friend Bargan∣del came forth into the place, who as one that loued with all his heart the faire Princesse Rodasilua, did no more in that atempt than the prince Liiamandro, for that at the first blow of the Image, he was ouerthrowē to the ground, with∣out the gate, so that it was verie wel vnderstood by them all (according vnto the letters that was written,) how y• these two knights were amorous, which was the occasion that the enterie of the Gate was denied vnto them. The like happned vnto the worthie Tartarian Zoilo, and vnto the valiant king Sacridoro, and vnto other valiant princes and knights that presumed to be amorous. Whereat they were greatlie amazed, and had much sport and pastime to sée how these knights were ouerthrowen by the two Images.
The first vnto whom was granted the entrie of the dis∣loiall tower, was vnto the stout knight Flamides, vnkle vn∣to the princesse Lindaraza, who being cléere of such passions, and neuer subiect vnto loue, went vnto the gate, and entered in thereat, without receiuing anie harme of the Gyants (as the other did) but the Images did rather humble themselues in declining their heads, whereat they all meruailed great∣lie, but although there was no defence made against him at the entrie of the gate, yet there lacked not them that made resistance against him for the going vp the staires, for that so soone as hée put his foote vppon the first step of the Chri∣stall staires, verie sodainlie hée felt himselfe charged with many thicke and strong blowes, that it séemed he had twen∣tie knightes vppon him. But by reason that hée was va∣liant and of great courage, hée drew out his swoorde, and going vp the staires hée laide about him on euerie side, stri∣king such terrible blowes that it was a gallant thing to be∣holde, and by his mightie prowesse he dyd winne parte of the staires, although that euerie step he ascended, it séemed vnto him that the resistance did double, as truth it was, for as he mounted, so much more did the thicke & strong blowes ouercharge him. After this sort when that he had ascended ten staires, not béeing able for to suffer the mortall furie of those vnrea∣sonable blowes, waxing faint, and his strength failing him, hée came tumbling downe the staires, and as one dead was throwen out at the gate, but his shéeld remained behinde, & was hanged vp at the tenth staire, which was so farre as he mounted, and vnto that place might all men sée through the walles all that was within, so cléerelie, as though they had béene of Christall, and there was nothing to hinder their sight, and so was all the whole staires afterwardes so farre as anie knight did ascend, and all that did beholde the same, receiued great contentment, and were wonderfullie ama∣zed thereat, for that it was the strangest that euer they had séene.
Then straight waies came into that mightie Court, the two valiant and worthie knights, Don Claros and Arcalus, being armed with their bright and rich armour, and for that they were two knights of a gallant  gentle disposition, they gaue great contentment vnto all them that dyd behold them. But the first that gaue the attempt vnto this aduen∣ture, was Don Claros, who alighting from his horse, with his sword drawen in his hand, went towards the gates of the tower, and for that he was voyde of loue, and had not his heart troubled with any amorous passions, he entred with in the gate, and the Images dyd bow themselues vn∣to him, but when he came vnto the staiers and began to as∣cend, he felt himselfe charged with many & terrible blowes, yet for all that defending himselfe and laying about him on euery side, he ascended vp the staires, and although the resi∣stance was great, and the blowes encreased (at euerie step he ascended) double, yet for that he was young, valiant, and of a good courage, and in spight of them that did defend him, he mounted fiftene staires, the which being séene of all that were in the court, they gaue him great praise, and saide, (as they hadde great reason) that he was one of the valiantest knights in his time. And as he dyd pursue and striue for to ascend higher, the resistance was so strong, that spight of his heart he was forced to defend two staires of that which he had got, he procured all that euer he could to get thē againe, but it dyd profit him little, whereby it was conuenient for to leaue the demaund, and depart out of the Tower, lea∣uing his shilde at the fiftenth stayre, so farre as he assended. Then straight waies his brother Arcalus, entred in the de∣maund, and to conclude, he dyd very well, and with great trauaile he ascended so high as his brother Don Claos did, but in the ende he was ouerthrowen downe the staires, and his shielde remained and was hanged next vnto his brothers, in the same place. Not long after came  that mightie court, two knights, who by their gallant dispositi∣on and rich armour, were knowen to be the two Princes, Brandizel and Cluerindo, who came for to proue y• aduen∣ture
of the Tower. But straight waies as they would haue put their desire in execucion, it did little profit them all that euer they could doe, by reason that the one was in loue with the Princesse , and the other with the faire Lin∣daraza, so that with two blowes that was strooke at them, they were both ouerthrowen to the earth without any re∣membrance, and therefore they retourned into the pallas, somewhat abashed, and vnderstòode very well the secret of the disloyall tower. Then the last that came foorth that day, was the valiant royan the stout Oristdes, who by the iudgement of all that were there, should by force of armes make a conquest of the stayres, and assend vnto the oppe: for that as this Historie hath told you, he was one of the best knights in all the world, and dyd well apeare in him the worthie stocke from whence he dyd proceede, who be∣ing alighted from his horse, with his swoord in his hande, went towards the gate of the Tower. And for that he ne∣er knew what loue ment, the porters dyd let him go in, doing their reuerence. And when he was within, he straight waies went vp, the staires with so great lightnesse, as though there had bene made no resistance against him, but when that he had assendid so high and came vnto the place whereas the other knights had bene, he was put in great trouble and care, for that he thought all the whole world had bene against him, the blowes were so manie and strong where with he was charged. But this valiant and couragi∣ous Troyan seeing himselfe in the presence of so high prin∣ces, forced himselfe all that was possible, and ascended more higher, laying about him on euery side, and it séemed vnto him that he stroke his blowes vpon armed knights, so that all that euer he dyd was for to get vnto the toppe of the stayres. And although they that were without dyd sée but Oristedes alone, yet dyd they heare the noyse of the great battaile, whose thicke and mightie blowes dyd resound thoroughout all that mightie pallas, as though a thousand knights hadde combatted together: in this contempt was Oristedes, and they were all greatly amazed how he could
fer so great trauaile, and thought verely that he would con∣clude and make an ende of that aduenture. But it fel out otherwise, for that before he came vnto the top of the staires by foure steppes, the blowes were so many wherewith hée was charged, that he was constrained of verie force to lose two steppes of those which he had gotten, and neuer after could recouer them againe, but in the ende he tombled down the staires cleane out of all remembrance, and was thrown out of the gate, but his shielde remained and was hanged aboue all the rest. But when that he was come againe vn∣to him selfe, he was very sorowfull, for that he could not conquere the whole stayres, of the Tower. At this time it waxed late, and night drew on, so that for that daye it was conuenient for to giue ouer the of that aduenture, so they went al and vnarmed themsels, and the Emperour Trebatio with all those high Princes, dyd suppe together in the royall pallas, hauing enough to occupie themselues in talke of the strange aduenture of the Tower, and according vnto the condicions of the same, they thought verely that there was very few to whom was graunted the ascending to the toppe of those staires, for that so worthie knights as there was receiued the repulse, for the which the Emperour Alycandro dyd not lette but receiue some griefe, for that of necessitie he must be constrained to leaue there his worthie and welbeloued daughter Linda∣brides, yet dyd he comfort himselfe verie much, in that she was there in great securitie, and also of the words which the wise Lirgandeo had tolde him (not long before) of her deliuerie. The night being past, the nexte daye in the morning came foorth the stout and strong king Brandimardo, for to proue the aduenture of the Tower, and dyd so much that he lacked but two steppes for to conquere the toppe of the stayres, and for that he was mightie boned, bigge and ve∣rie fatte and heauie, when that he came thether he was with his great trauaile (for want of exercise) so wearie and faint, that hée could not goe anie whit farther at all
but was constrained to  backe againe, so that hée was thrust out at the gate, but his shield remained aboue all the rest, with great honour, as to him (that next vnto Bramarant) was the most strongest Pagan that was in all the Pagan countri. At this time, the two bretheren, the knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer would not proue the aduenture, for knowing the condition of the disloyal Tow∣er, they were flly  that the entrie should be de∣fended vnto them, by the Images that kept the gate, yet for all that in the meane time that all those high Princes were  together, there were many knights that dyd  aduenture, of whome for that they were not so rincipall as the other, this Historie doth make no . ¶ that the Emperour Trebatio with all those Princes and worthie knights, Ladies & dam∣sells that were in Constantinople, went to sport themselues a hunting into the wildernesse of Gre∣ia, and what happened therein. Chap. 50. ALL the care which the Emperour Trebatio had was, that all those high Princes and worthie knights that were in his Courte, should be well serued, and haue great con∣tentment, for herein (as this Historie hath tolde you) he had the vauntage of all other that was in his time: & as he dyd alwaies procure to séeke out newe inuentions and pastimes for to giue them plea∣sure and contentment, he determined one daye for to carie the a hunting into the wildernesse of Grecia, alongst the Sea side, and to carie in their companie the Empresse Bri∣ana, and all the rest of the worthie Ladies and Damsells, for that the place was gallant, fresh and delightfull, & great store of game, of Bears, Déere, and other wilde beastes. He being fully determined, gaue them to vnderstand ther∣f, who when they heard it, they all receiued great pleasure
