19088.3 24356595 27564
Nine Sermons vpon sun Texts of Scripture: First, The Allegeance of the Cleargie. The Supper of the Lord. Secondly, The Cape of good Hope: Deliuered in fiue Sermons, for the vse and b¦fite of Marchants and Marriners. Thirdly, The Remedie of Drought. A Thankes-giuing for Raine. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Diuin LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oks for Si rson,  Church-yard, at the Signe of the Crowne.
THE ALLEGEANCE OF THE CLEARGIE. A Sermon preached, at the meeting of the whole Cler∣gie of the Dyocesse of Rochester, to take the Oath of Allegeance to his most excellent Maiestie, at Greene∣wich, Nouem. 2 1610. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Diuinitie. LONDON Printed by Nicholas Okes for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Crowne. 1616.
¶ TO THE MOST Reuerend Father in God, my most Honourable good Lord, the Lord Bishop of London. MOst reuerend, and my honorable good Lord, in these fruitful times wherin so many pain∣full in Gods husban∣drie, doe make daily Presents to the Church, of their profitable Labours: I thought my selfe behinde-hand too much, to sit out so long, without giuing some testimony of my equall desire, to aduance so good a Worke. I am too cōscious of my insufficiencies, to presse
in with the first, and I feare to doe no∣thing. These days afford plenty of rea∣ders, if plenty of writers ouer-charge▪ variety may delight. These my medi∣tations haue hope of welcome from the Argument, which is our own loiall Al∣legeance to his Maiestie, who are the Preachers of Loyalty to our People: and from your Honorable protection and countenance, to whom the Church of God here owes many acknowledge∣ments of honorable seruice by you per∣formed to her, & to whom I best know how much my selfe in particulars doe stand obliged. I pray God for the en∣crease of his best blessings on you and yours, and rest wishing your Lordsh: S. P.
THE ALLEGEANCE OF THE CLEARGIE. The first Sermon. ROM. 13. 2. And they that resist, shal receiue to themselues Iudgement. GOD is a God of Order, a∣gainst the Anabaptisticall doctrine of Anarchie; and cōfusion: he hath made men on earth, as hee hath distin∣guished the starres in the fir∣mament, one starre differing from another in glorie: hee hath taken the aduauncement of men into his owne hands: his wisedome saith, By me Princes reigne, Pro. 8. 15. and Dauid saith, Preferment com∣meth
not from the Est, &c. he confesseth that Gods hand is in that work, as Paul in this chap. saith, the powers that be, are ordained of God. The Relatiue to these Powers, is Submission; the Extent of this Sub∣mission, omnis anima, euery Soule. I thinke Saint Paul preuentingly, and by propheticall spirit, pro∣uided in this caution against all Aequiuocators and Mentalists, who are ready to tender their Soue∣raignes some outward and formall Submission, without the Soule, and inward affection, there∣fore hee saith, Let euery soule submit. The foundation of this Law of Loyaltie, is laid in the conscience of a Christian man, not because of wrath onely, but for conscience sake. The illation following on the premises, is my Text. The pro∣position wherof is indefinite, & equiualent to an v∣niuersal; They that resist, all they shall receiue iudge∣ment. If any aske, what is the Extent of this po∣wer, which God giueth to his annointed seruants the Kings & Princes of the earth; let them learne of Israel, who tendred this Allegeance to Ioshua: All that thou hast commaunded vs, we will do, and whither-soeuer thou sendest vs, wee will goe: as wee obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee: on∣ly the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Mo∣ses, Iosh. 1. 16. 17. So farre then, as GOD is with our Princes, and that their commaunds, bee no preiudice to the superior ordinances of God: e∣uery soule doth owe them submission, and must sweare them their obedience: for whatsoeuer the person of the Prince is, the power is of God: euen
Pilates power is of God, though hee armed it a∣gainst Christ, by our Sauiours owne testimonie, Iohn 19. 11. saying, Thou couldst haue no power a∣gainst mee, except it were giuen thee from aboue: therefore Christ submitted himselfe to that po∣wer▪ euen hee that could say, To mee is giuen all power in heauen and in earth, Matt. 28. 18. Our gratious soueraigne King, reading in the bloudy practises of his rebel-Popish-subiects, the danger of his owne royall person, & of his hope∣full posteritie, hath with the most honourable Parliament deuised a Shiboleth, euen this oath of Allegeance (which is now tendered to vs of his Cleargie of this Diocesse) to distinguish betwixt his Israelites and his Ephraimites, betweene his faithfull, louing, and peaceable Protestants, and the tumultuous, factious, and Popish Incendia∣ries, who desire to see our Ierusalem turned to dust and ashes. This Oath wil shew him who hath most disciples in his kingdome: this Paul our A∣postle that taught the Romans, omnis anima, let e∣uery soule submit; or Paul the fift that now tea∣cheth the Romans, and all his Romish Catholiques, the Contradictorie to his doctrine. Non omnis a∣nima, let not euery soule be so obliged. I wonder at Burgese of Rome, that being so opposite to Saint Paul, he would vsurpe his name, at his investiture in the Papacie, except hee meant to set Paul a∣gainst Palu, Romans against Romans, his Breues a∣gainst Saint Paules Epistles; our Apostle cast off a name vpon his conuersion, that would become
his Holinesse of Rome much better. But concerning the power of Secular Princes, by this Paul the fift, and his vsurping Predecessors strangely restrained to make their peace with S. Paul, they doe thus vnderstand my Text; They that resist; that is, They of the Laity that resist: for saith their Glosse, Ecclesiasticall persons, and Ecclesiasticall causes are exempt. The quarrell is wel knowne between the Pope, and the State of Venice, for their iudiciall processe pursued to the execution, and death of a fowle malefactor of their Cleargie, and the Pope (if he had been strong enough to reuenge such a quar∣rell) would haue made it knowne much better. Therefore it concerneth his most excellent Ma∣iesty, to vnderstand how his Cleargie affect his gouernement, and what subiection and Allege∣ance they will performe to him: which shall dis∣couer, whether we follow the example of the old Romans, who in their purer, and Primitiue times gaue vnto Caesar that which was Caesars, or whether we resist with the late Roman Catholiques, turning Caesar all into Name, and diuesting him of all his Roialties. Saint Bernard epist. 42. to the Archbishop of Senona vrgeth that place of Saint Paul, omnis ani∣ma, Let euery soule be subiect: thus, Si omnis, & ve∣stra, quis vos excipit ab vniuersitate? Si quis tent at excipere, conatur decipere. If euery soule must bee subiect, then yours, that is, those persons who are Ecclesiasticall: who excepteth you when hee
nameth All? hee that assayes to except you (of the Church) goeth about to deceiue you. Therefore to sort this Preface to the occasi∣on, and to the present hearing more properly, I learne of S. Bernard thus to limit to my selfe; they of the Cleargie, Ecclesiasticall persons, that resist, shal receiue to themselues damnation. And heerein wee haue our high Priest for an example, of whom S. Bernard saith, Conditor Caesaris non cunctatus est reddere censum Caesari, exemplum enim dedit vobis, vt & vos ita faciatis. He that made Caesar, payed tribute to Caesar, for therein he gaue ensample to you, (to you of the Cleargie) that you should also doe the like: thus did Saint Bernard teach, who flourished eleauen hundred yeares after Christ. Origen interpreting this Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, vpon this Chapter lib. 9. giueth a reason, why the Apostle in an Epistle to the Bre∣thren in Antiochia, Syria, and Cilicia, Acts 15. 29. doth only admonish them to abstaine from things sacrificed to Idoles, from the strangled, and from bloud, not adding any prohibition of adulterie, murther, theft, &c. Superfluum videbatur, ea di∣uina lege prohibere, quae sufficienter humana lege plectuntur: It seemed to him more then needed by diuine decrees to inhibite those things which hu∣mane lawes did sufficiently punish. His collecti∣on from hence is very notable, and sorteth with my present Argument: Ex quo apparet, iudices mundi partē maximā Dei legis implere, omnia enim
crimina quae vindicari vult Deus, non per antistites, & principes Ecclesiarum, sed per mundi iudices vo∣luit vindicari. Hence it appeareth, that the Se∣cular Iudges doe fulfill the greatest part of the Lawe of GOD; for all crimes which GOD will haue punished, hee referreth to the vindica∣tion of these, and not of the Prelates, and chiefe Priests in his Church. And heerein he hath met with the Church of Rome, in an euasion learnd of the Donatists, and detected, and despised by Saint Augustine, contra Parmenianum Donatistam Episco∣pum. libr. 1. saying; Nisi forte (quemadmodum non∣nulli eorum sane imperitissimi intelligere solent) de honoribus Ecclesiasticis dictum esse velint, vt gladi∣us intelligatur vindicta spiritualis: cùm prouiden∣tissimus Apostolus satis aperiat, quid loquatur, dicens, propter hoc tributa praestatis. Vnlesse perchance (as some most foolishly are wont to interprete these words) they would vnderstand Saint Paul, as speaking of Ecclesiasticall powers, that by the Sword is meant Excommunication: whereas the Apostle wisely prouided, to preuent any such interpretation, and expresseth himselfe plainely, when hee sayth, For this cause pay you tribute, and Tribute is not due but to Secular powers. And Saint Ambrose maketh good this interpre∣tation Tom. 5. vpon this place, saying; Principes hos reges dicit, qui propter corrigendam vitam, & prohibenda aduersa creantur, Dei habentes imagi∣nem, vt sub vno sint caeteri. The Apostle Paul in this place meaneth Kings, who are created for
the correction of mens liues, and the defending of them from aduersitie, bearing the Image of God, that one should sit aboue the rest. And Theophilact (as for the most part he doth) followeth Saint Chrysostome, in the interpretati∣on of this Text, saying; Vniuersos erudit, siue Sacerdos sit ille, sine Monachus, siue Apostolus, vt se principibus subdant. Hee teacheth all sorts of men, whether he be Priest, Monke, or Apostle, hee must submitte himselfe to his Soueraigne Prince. And the ho∣lie Apostle Saint Peter whom the Roman Vsurpers boast to succeede, taught the same generall do∣ctrine, 1. Pet. 2. 13. &c. Submit yourselues to all ma∣ner ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether to the King as superiour, or vnto gouernours as sent of him, &c. for so is the will of God. Saint Gregory the great who sate Bishop of Rome sixe hundred yeares after our Lord and Sa∣uiour Christ, knew no other, nor taught none other doctrine: for hereof, his Epistles giue good witnesse. Mauritius the Emperour had made a De∣cree, That no olde Souldiers should be admit∣ted or receiued into anie of the Monasteries, because hee perceiued that many of them vsed this as a shift to shunne and escape from going to the warres, and hee was thereby likely to bee the worse serued: such power had that Christian Emperour to decree in matters concerning the Church, and Gregorie then Bishoppe of Rome,
grieued at this constitution of the Emperor, did not conuent the Emperour to his Consistorie, drew not out against him the sword of Excom∣munication, did not menace him with interdi∣ction, depriuation, or any other shew of Papall iurisdiction, but as an humble and duetifull▪ sub∣iect, addressed to him his earnest petition, by an Epistle, wherein he pleadeth for the Church, and as if it became him ill to contest with his Soue∣raigne, hee bringeth in Christ Iesus, thus expo∣stulating with him. Ego te de notario comitem ex∣cubitorum, de comite Caesarem de Caesare imperato∣rem, & patrem imperatorum feci: In a word, I haue aduaunced thee from lowe to high degree; Sacerdotes meos tuae manui commisi. I haue giuen thee charge and gouernement of my Priests, Re∣gistr. lib. 3. epist. 61. And to make his suite more possible, he wrote an earnest Letter to Theodorus the Emperours Physician, to intreate him, who might best chuse an opportune time, to sollicite this request, in which he complayneth, saying; Epist. 64. Valde mihi durum videtur, vt ab eius seruitio milites pro∣hibeat, qui dominari illum, non solum militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus concessit. It seemeth hard to mee, that hee whom God hath made to rule, not only Souldiers, but Priests also, should restraine Souldiers from doing seruice to that GOD: So making Theodorus his competitor to the Empe∣rour, for repeale of that Law. But this Gregorie the first of that name, was so
farre from the present Antichristian pride of his successor, as that he would not suffer the Title of Oecumenicall Bishop to be put vpon him; here∣in following Pelagius his most worthy predeces∣sour. He writ an angry reprehension to Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria, for stiling him Vniuer∣sall Bishop, in an Epistle sent to him: And when Iohn Patriarch of Constantinople, had vsurped that title, he wrot to him to rebuke him for it. And to Mauritius the Emperour, whose loue to him and the Church could haue affoorded him so hono∣rable a title, he said, whosoeuer assumeth to him∣selfe, or admitteth of any such title, Elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit, he doth fore-runne Anti∣christ in his pride. He calleth that title, Nefan∣dum, stultum, superbum vocabulum, a wicked, foo∣lish, and proud title. He saith that the counsell of Calcedon offered it to his predecessors, to bee so stiled, sed tamen nullus sibi hoc temerarium nomen arripuit: none of them took this rash and in con∣siderate name vpon him. He would haue staid the pride of that Roman See at the first: for when in respect of the Empire seated at Rome, the chamber of that great Monar∣chie, there was giuen the first place in Councels to the Bishop of Rome: the next ambition was to be chiefe Bishop: and then to be vniuersall ouer all the Church, as Hart saith, the Pope cannot be non resident, for all the world is his Diocesse▪ and what was then left, but to intrude vpon the rights of temporall Princes, as in succeeding
times they did, and at this day doe? But we heare God promising, Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queenes thy nurces; not Bishops, not Popes, and Prelates, Esay 49. 23. Two proofes let mee but name, because we haue them fully pressed by most learned and iudicious Diuines, which ex∣presse the power of Princes ouer the Church. First, their inuention of generall Counsells, so Pighius himselfe confesseth, Constantinus primus authr fuit conuocandi generalia consilia: Constan∣tine was the first who deuised to assemble generall Counsells, but the power heereof was by GOD himselfe giuen to Moses, to whom hee commit∣ted the making and vsing of the two siluer Trum∣pets, and from him deriued to all Princes and States imperiall. And the Church storie since Christ maketh it plaine, how Emperours and Kings in their seuerall dominions, haue both cal∣led Counsells, and sate Presidents, to order the meeting, to censure and punish offendours, to keepe them to the point that would digresse, and in their absence to depute secular Iudges in their places, and at last to dissolue their meeting at their pleasure. Yea sometimes the great Bishop of Rome hath made request to the Emperour, as Leo for example, for the calling a Counsell in I∣talie, and preuailed not. And lastly, the Canons of Counsells were by the imperiall power ratifi∣ed, and without that soueraigne approbation had no strength. Secondly, for Appeales, the Princes haue bin
in the Church, the end of them all, euen in cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall. More, Socrates reporteth libr. 5. cap. 10. That many Bishops differing in iudge∣ment, concerning the Doctrine of the Trinitie, Theodosius the Emperour conuented them before himselfe, hee tooke the seuerall Coppies of their Doctrines; and praying first to God to assist him, in that holy businesse, that he might choose and maintaine his truth against all heretical opinions: after mature aduice, hee resolued vpon the truth of Doctrine, and in the presence of all the As∣sembly, hee tore in peeces all the rest: and this truth he did not measure by the depth of his own iudgement, but by comparison with that Canon of Faith, which both holy Scriptures, and for∣mer Counsells had sufficiently maintained. And this was in a matter meerely Ecclesiasticall. And for Ecclesiasticall persons; the law of Appeales in our Land, when Popery passed for true religion, in the reigne of King Henry the second, had this Processe, from the Archdeacon, to the Bishop of the Diocesse, from the Bishop of the Diocesse to the Archbishoppe of the Prouince, and from him to the King, which was the finall hearing and determination, beyond which there was no fur∣ther prouocation, but to leaue all to God. There∣fore we determine, that our Causes and our Per∣sons are all vassalles, and subiect to our Soue∣raignes; and the immunities and liberties which wee possesse, wee holde them of the indulgence, and gracious fauour of our most worthie, and lo∣uing
Princes, and our Salomon, our Ecclesiastes requireth of his Cleargie, no vndue obedience, that the iudgement remaineth most iust. They that resist (euen of the Cleargie) shall receiue vnto themselues damnation. They resist this power, who refuse this Oath of Loyaltie to his most excellent Maiestie, as all Popish Recusants do, who set vp a demy-god, as Bellarmine his Parasite fawneth, and faineth, De Pontif. 5. 6. qui potest mutare, conferre, & auferre principibus regna: who hath power to change, to giue, and take away Kingdomes from Princes. Our Soueraigne doth not set vp an Inquisiti∣on, to finde out Papists, as Rome doth to discouer Protestants: hee doth not make bare suspition quarrell enough to apprehend, conuent, impri∣son, racke, and torture men, to force them to selfe∣accusation: hee onely deuiseth to know sheepe from goates, loyall subiects from hereticall re∣bells; he is the Image of that King of whom wee reade, Matt. 21. 5. Ecce, rex tuus venit tibi mansu∣etus: Thy King commeth to thee meeke, and gra∣cious. It is the glorie of a King to passe by an of∣fence. How many Princes of the earth would haue put vp such an attempt as the Gun-powder treason was, with such patience? Might not Chri∣stian Princes haue thought his anger iust, if it had drawne his Sword against all of that Religion, till none of them had beene left, and it had beene no more then the equitie of my Text, for they that resist must receiue iudgement heere, by iust Ma∣gistrates,
who beare not the Sword in vaine, and heereafter damnation, by the Sentence of the great Iudge of Quicke and Dead. The Israelites thought this Sentence iust; for thus they say to Ioshua; Whosoeuer will rebell against thy Commaun∣dements,Ioshua 1. 18. let him be put to death: And God gaue a fearefull example hereof in the rebellion of Co∣rah. The reason is giuen by the Almightie him∣selfe in this case of opposition to soueraigne do∣minion, why he taketh it so to heart: For hee said to Samuel, They haue not cast thee away, but they1. Sam. 8. 7. haue cast me away, that I should not raigne ouer them. In these cases of resisting, GOD is most sensi∣ble, for his owne Scepter of Rule is touched in them: For by mee Princes raigne, saith his Wise∣dome. Therefore the vsurping pride of Rome, struggling and wrastling with the Holy one of Is∣rael for the Scepter of Regiment, may now looke, that the censure of Saint Gregorie the Great then Bishop, giuen vpon the Patriarch of Constantino∣ples ambition of the name of Oecumenicall, may turne into a prophesie of these times, and then Elatio tanto citius rumpitur, quanto magis inflatur. And we may all expect the breaking of the head of Leuiathan in the great waters. Dauid said, they that hate thee haue lifted vp the head. Saint Augustine vpon that place saith, Nec capita, sed caput quando eo peruenturi sunt, vt etiam illud caput habeant, quod extollitur super omne quod dicitur Deus, & quod colitur, quod Deus interficiet spirituoris sui: that is, he saith not their heads, but they shall lift vp the
head, seeing they shall come to that passe, that they shall haue that head which is lifted vp aboue all that is called God, or is worshipped, which GOD shall destroy with the breath of his mouth. The time of my warning to this place, and the time limited to this short Preface to a long busi∣nesse, are both impatient of prolixitie. Let mee therfore addresse my speech to you my reuerend Brethren, in the holy Ministery of the word of God, to stirre you vp, not onely to expresse and approoue your owne vndoubted loyalty to your Soueraigne, by your oath publiquely giuen for the same, but further, to employ the vttermost of your wittes, and tongues, and pennes, to re∣couer so many of our recusant brethren, as are not frozen in their dregges of superstition, but led in blindenesse, for want of light, to the vnitie of our Church, and the obedience of our Soue∣raigne: and withall, to stirre vp the Magistrate to zeale and feruour in the cause of God, to detect, and pursue recusant Papists, and to lay them at the foote of our gracious Lord the King: For Salomon saith right well; A King that sitteth in the throne of Iudgement, chaseth away all euill with his eye, Prou. 20. 8. or if they be so grounded in their disloyalty, that they dread not the power of that Sword which hee beareth, and not in vaine: if they be so blinded with superstition, that they cannot see in the Maiestie of Soueraigne gouern∣ment, the ordinance, and Vicegerencie of God. A wise King (as a wise King saith) scattereth the
wicked, and maketh the wheele to turne ouer them: verse 26. Our King hath Wisedome like an Angell of God, to dispute with them, and confute them: Euen a diuine Sentence is in the mouth of our King, Prouer. 16. 19. He hath Iustice like the Deputy of of the most High, to punish them that are obsti∣nate, hee hath mercy like the Sonne of God, to manage Iustice, with moderation, and to pardon those that offend, not of malitious and precipi∣tate rebellion, but of ignorant and mis-led ouer∣sight. And his search tending to the detection of Gods enemies, I wish my Text written by the fin∣ger of Gods spirit, in the royall heart and hand of our most gracious Lord the King, that all his faithfull subiects may reade it in his practise; They which resist, shall receiue to themselues iudgement. For, what greater discouragement to our Mi∣nistery, then this, to see the bold freedome of re∣cusant Papists, daring to affront our Church, to impugne our doctrine, to despise our Bishops, to scorne our Ministery, and to pronounce vs all damned to the second death without hope of re∣demption; and all this with such assurance, as if they had no law to contradict them, or no Magi∣strate to see the lawe executed vpon them. God himselfe hath written a law against such, in their bloud, and let Gods subordinate Deputies on earth from the King that sitteth vpon the throne, to the lowest Magistrate trusted with the Sword of Iustice, lay to heart the speech of God by his Prophet to Ahab, 1. Reg. 20. 42. Because thou hast
let goe out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall goe for his life. Let this sentence fall vpon the Kings enemies, and rather then one haire should fall from the head of the Lords an∣noynted for his remissenes herein to those whom God hath appoynted to die: let his milke-white mercy be dyed into a crimosin tincture of iudge∣ment. Exurgat Deus, dissipentur inimici. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered. VVhat their mercy is, the day shall declare it, the fift of No∣uember shall declare it to posteritie, their vault, their powder, their barres of yron, their logges, and billets of wood, euen all their instruments of sodaine and cruell death, which if men should forget, God would remember, for though men winke and sleepe, the holy one of Israel seeth, and God the auenger will arise, and They that resist shal receiue to themselues condemnation. The Pope that absolueth others, herein cannot be absolued. Saint Paul hath sealed Paul the fift, now liuing & dying in his present Religion, to condemnation: and my Text is sufficient proofe, that no Romish Catholique, liuing and dying in the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, and in difloyal rebellion, and resistance to their lawfull Soueraignes, can hope by the reuealed will of God to bee saued: for his sinne is resistance to Gods ordinance, which is flatte Thomachie. Let vs all therefore be instant and earnest in the maintenance of this truth: our tepidity and luke-warmenesse in religion maketh vs iustly ta∣taxed
to resemble the church of Laodicea, which is threatned to be cast out of Gods mouth. It is the cause of God, it is the cause of Iesus Christ, the cause of the Church, the cause of the Common∣wealth. It is the cause of the supreame head of the Church and Common-wealth next vnder Iesus Christ, our wise, learned, gracious, and peaceable Salomon. He is neither good Christian, nor good subiect, that is not stowe, and confident, in so reli∣gious, and loyall a quarrell. I presume I haue but spoken the thoughts and affections of all my reuerend and learned bre∣thren in the holie Ministerie; and I say no more but Amen. Let God ratifie and confirme it: euen so be it for Iesus Christ his sake: to whom with the Father and the holie Spirit, be giuen all glorie, and power, and dominion, now and euermore. AMEN. Laus Deo.
THE SVPPER OF THE LORD. ¶ A Sermon preached at Hampton. September 10. 1615. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Diuinitie. REVEL. 19. 9. Write: Blessed are they which are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lambe. LONDON Printed by Nicholas Okes for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Crowne. 1616.
¶ TO THE RIGHT Honourable, the Ladie Anne Howard of Effingham. MAdame, these Me∣ditatiōs acknowledge themselues yours, as drawn from your first request, and addres∣sed to your eare, and now returned to your eye. You were more then a Guest at this feast, for your euer-honoured Lord, and you, were also bidders, and you inuited a gracious Congregation to this holie Supper in the house of Wisedome. You giue an honourable
euidence to the Church of God, of your loue to Religion, affecting greatnesse in no way, but in the way of goodnesse. I pray God for your growth vp to per∣fection, and the Crowne of it, desi∣ring your Honour to receiue your owne againe, from him who shall reckon it amongest the great blessings of his ho∣lie calling, if he may adde any fire to your zeale of Gods glorie, or speede to your pace in the wayes of God. Your Honours in all humble seruice and acknowledgements of duety. S. P.
THE SVPPER OF THE LORD. The second Sermon. PROV. 9. 5. Come eate of my Bread, and drinke of the Wine, which I haue drawne. In the beginning of this chap∣ter, Wisedome buildth her an house, that is, Christ, a church, and it is not like to our great houses, without hospitalitie: here are three rooms expres∣sed in it: a Slaughter-house: For she hath killed her beasts:Matth. 22. 4. the Oxen and Fatlings in the Parable: heere is her Wine-presse: for shee hath mingled her VVine, saith the new translation, it is the phrase of Scrip∣ture, to expresse the making of wine of the iuice
of many grapes commixed: or it is her cellar, for the olde reading was, that shee hath drawne the wine. Heere is also her dining roome, or place to eate in, which is not some close, thriftie par∣lour neere the kitchin, but a very spacious roome, where the table is prouided: the largenesse of the roome is easily gathered, and guessed by the inui∣tation. Wisedome sendeth sorth her Maidens: that is, Iesus Christ his Ministers: so called, not in re∣spect of the virginity of Priests, so much vrged in the Church of Rome, so little practised; for Da∣uid doth not alwayes esteeme that happy: the fire consumed their yong men, and their maydens werePsal. 78. 63. not giuen in marriage: but in respect of their mo∣desty, and curteous affabilitie, louingly bearing themselues in the businesse of this inuitation. The Commission is large: for all that are simple and want vnderstanding, are inuited, so the house had neede to bee of good receipt, and the Table both large and well furnished, to entertaine so many guests. All sinne is folly, and all sinners are fooles, these doth Christ our Wisedome inuite: For hee came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repen∣tance: but they must be such, as will forsake their folly, and embrace vnderstanding, that is, peni∣tents. VVee will examine the Inuitation to a word, there must not a crumme of this bread fall beside the Table; and the best Methode, to handle
these words in, is, to imitate and follow the or∣der, in which they are set downe to vs, by Wise∣dome. The parts of this Text be as many (almost) as the wordes thereof. 1 VVe must cme. 2 Beeing come, we must eate. 3 The prouision for eating is Bread. 4 Not euery bread; My bread. 5 VVe must also drinke. 6 This drinke must be Wine. 7 This wine must be of Wisedomes owne drawing or mingling. 1 Come. VVee must come to Wisedomes house, that is, to the Church of God. He that bids vs, seemes not to come home to our houses. Behold, IReuelat. 3. 20. stand at the doore and knock, and if any man open vn∣to mee, I will come in to him, and suppe with him. Hee now desireth the like good fellowship from vs, that wee would come to his house: he will be our guest vnbidden: let vs be his. Dauid was glad when they said vnto him; Come let vs goe vp to the house of the Lord, Psalme 122. 1. And when he was hindered in that liberty, his soule longed yea and fainted for the Courts of the Lords house. Psalme 84. 2. It is a pleasing resort to Gods house, for there the Lord sitteth betweene the Cherubins: Psal. 99. 1. 77. 13. 96. 6. Gods way is in his Sanctuarie: yea,
Gods power and beauty are in his Sanctuarie, That was one of the great inducements to mooue Da∣uid, so earnestly to desire that house, to beholde thePsalme 27. 4. beauty of the Lord. This is no where more clearly, and cheerefully discerned then in the house of God. Blessed are they that awell in thy house, theyPsalme 84. 4. will euer praise thee. And, in his temple euerie onePsalme 29. 9. doth speake of his glory. The new Translation rea∣deth in the margent, Euery whit of it vttereth his glorie: So full of maiesty is the place it selfe, where God hath put his name: and, where his ho∣nour dwelleth. Therefore no place like vnto the Church of God, to beholde the beautie of the Lord. Augustine vpon the words of Salomon; Goe toProuer. 6. 6. the Ant thou sluggard, beholde her waies, and bee wise saith; Vide formicam Dei, surgit quotidie, cur∣ritIn psal. 6. 6. ad Ecclesiam, audit lectionem, recondit intus gra∣na electa de horreo. Behold the Ant of our Lord, hee riseth day by day, hee speedeth to the church, there he heareth the reading of holy Scriptures, and he maketh his prouision of choice grains out of that barne, which he laieth vp in store. The vse is this. In time of winter and tribulation. Come∣dit intus labores aestatis, hee feedeth in fowle wea∣ther vpon his summer labours. Beloued, this is absolutely the richest blessing of our Church, and Kingdome, vnder the religi∣ous gouernement of our gracious Soueraigne, the libertie of the Church, and our free and open accesse to the house of Wisedome.
It is made a lawe and ordinance to Israel, that the Tribes shall all go vp thither, euen a Statute lawe enacted in the high Court of Parliament, That all of all sorts shall diligently resort to their Parish Churches, and a paine is set vppon the heades of them that doe refuse to Come. There∣fore, they that Come not, doe not onely offend the lawe of God, but they also violate the ordi∣nance of the Kingdome and State, and so shew themselues, both in Religion, and in ciuill O∣bedience irregular. In this ranke are all recusant Papists, who directly refuse our Church, and all negligent Professours, that care not for the publique seruice of Almightie GOD, and all prophane worldlings, to whom the Sabbaoth day is as a common day, and the house of God is despised; and all Seperatists, that will goe to their owne Synagogues, and Parlour-Conuenti∣cles, but will not once come at the house of the Lord. The Parable in the Gospel concludeth against all these: First, they are giuen ouer, and no more inuited: Secondly, the Maister of the Feast pro∣nounceth against them, saying; Verily I say vntoMatth. 24. 8. Luke 14. 24. you, they are not woorthy, they shall not taste of my Supper. These be the daies of the sonne of man, where∣in hee sheweth himselfe in the word of his holie Gospel, and is euen Crucified in our sight. LetGalat. 3. 1. vs feare lest CHRIST IESVS beholding our negligence doe say vnto vs: The daies come, in
which you shall desire to see one of the dayes of theLuke 17. 22. Sonne of man, and shall not see it. Luke 17. 22. Come then whilest you may, and thanke God that you may come and goe safely. 1. Come. Come then your selues, and bring with you asmuch good cōpany as you can; it is S. Au∣stins counsell. Adduc eos ad domum Dei tecum, qui sunt in domo tuâ tecum: mater Ecclesia aliquos à te petit, aliquos repetit: petit quos inunit apud te: re∣petit quos prodidit per te, acquirat quos non habuit, non pangat quos habuit: that is, Bring those with thee to Gods house, who are with thee at thy own house: our mother the Church requesteth some of thee, some shee requireth, shee requesteth of thee those whom she findeth with thee, and shee chalengeth thee for those whom she hath lost by thy meanes: let her gaine those which she neuer had, but let her not bewaile the losse of those whom she hath had sometimes. Your own good example who haue charge of families, is full of power, to fil the church of God, & the more eminent you are in your state and de∣gree, aboue your brethren, the more inducing is your good example, and the fuller your families are, the fuller shall you make the congregation in the Lords house, if you bring them all with you, thither. Is it not strange! play-houses, ale-houses, and tauerns haue no steeples, nor rings of bells to toll men to them, and yet they haue full resort. Chur∣ches are (for the most part) furnished with these
lowd voices to ring in our eares this duety, and to say to vs, come, yet wee come not so readily. Is it the Signe, that hath such vertue to draw multi∣tudes together. Surely the house of God doeth not want a Signe: if that will doe it, VVisedome shall neuer want guests at her house. I reade of foure Signes in holy Scripture, and they doe all belong to the house of God. 1 Iesus Christ himselfe is a Signe, God dwel∣leth at this Signe, and here is his Ordinarie kept.Isay 11. 10. And in that day the roote of Ishai shall stand vp for a Signe to his people: the Nations shall seeke to it, and his rest shall be glorious. Heere is a Signe. Here is good Company, and good Lodging: for heere is rest. But this is that which maketh so many forsake the house of God, the Signe is not liked of many: so old Simeon prophesied of Christ, being then inLuke 2. 34. his armes. This Childe is set for a Signe that shall be spoken against. 2 God dwelleth at the Signe of the Sabaoth, I am the Lord your God, hallow my Sabbaothes, and they shall bee a Signe betweene mee, and you, that you may know that I am the Lord your God. Ezechiel chap. 20. verse 20. And indeede, what neede is there of any other Signe, to summon vs to ap∣peare before the Lord in his Sanctuarie, then the name of a Saboath, the day of God. Vpon this Signe, Almightie GOD hath written a Memento; Remember that thou keepe holie the Sa∣baoth day.
3 The word of the Lord, is an other Signe: So doth the Prophet call it; An euerlasting Signe,Esay 55. 13. which shall not be cut off. 4 The Ministers of this word are Signes: Loe I,Esay 8. 18. and the children that thou hast giuen mee, are for Signes: The Prophet and the Prophets children: Signes and wonders, and such sights doe drawe company, but these signes doe withall contract scorne and contempt, by the vnwelcome message which they bring to sinners, and Gods house is vnfrequented by this meanes. Yet these are they whom VVisedome sendeth to inuite her guests: yet their preaching is by the world called Foolish∣nesse.1. Corint. 1. 18. 2. Eate. VVee are inuited to eate, and that is good newes to a good stomacke; an euill stomacke hea∣reth of eating, with some loathing. And there are not many good stomackes to this eating: for wee surffeited in Paradise, vpon the forbidden Fruit, and there wee lost our appetite. Gods ta∣ble is the best remedy against the danger of that surfeit; for his guests do euer get them a stomacke with eating: for none doe more desire to eate there, then they that eate most. They that make their meate their god, haue nothing so good stomackes, as they that make God their meāte. GODS guests doe so, for they feede vpon the flesh, and drinke the bloud of IESVS CHRIST, by faith in the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord: heere is no danger of surfet at this Table:
for Wisedome maketh the Feast. The Maister of the feast saith to euerie guest: Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Psal. 81. 10. Come not to the Table of this eating without appetite: the Prouision heere is very great, and the Maister of the house open handed. Thou ope∣nestPsal. 104. 28. thy hand, and fillest all things liuing with plen∣teousnesse. Of him is said, Thou fillest the hungrieLuke 1. 53. soule with good things. There be some that will come to the house of GOD, but being come, they will not eate: such are our Church-Papists, who will lend vs their company at the diuine Ser∣uice, but will not receiue the Sacrament. There is also a great fault, which many are guiltie of, and few are sensible, that they doe e∣uill: this is to come to a Church, where there is a Communion, and there to heare the word of God, and after to forsake the Congregation euen at the Table of the Lord. Our Church in our English Liturgie, hath appoynted a speciall exhortation, to be vsed, and read publiquely, when the Minister doth finde the people negligent, in the receiuing of the holy Sacrament, in which two things are seuere∣ly, reproued. 1 VVhen men goe away from the Communi∣on, being present, where they may receiue it, which is there called a great iniurie to God. 2 VVhen men goe not away from Church, but stand, and looke on, whilest others doe re∣ceiue the Sacrament, but doe refuse to receiue it
themselues, this is there called Decision and Con∣tempt of these holie mysteries. Therefore, Come, but eate also. Some do come for feare of the law, and eate also, to saue charges, but it is against sto∣macke, for they loue not the meate. Others come, and they like the meate well, but they are loth to eate, in regard of the sauce which they like not the taste of, that is the Ceremonies of our Church, vsed in the administration of the Sacrament. Yet hath our Church protested suf∣ficiently, that the Sacrament is entire, and pure without them, and there is no cause to require, and exact the reuerent vse of them, but for out∣ward decencie; of which it is more fitte, that a Church should iudge, then euerie particular person to haue liberty to vse his owne forme and fashion. Others keepe state, they are willing sometimes to eate, but they are loath to take the paines to Come, and eate: They looke to haue it brought home to their owne houses. This will one day be iudged, too much keeping of state: And, if God make strange, to admit them to his Eter∣nall house, to eate with Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cobMatth. 8. 11. there, they may thanke their owne idlenesse and pride for it. Me thinks that this eating should be a good reward of their comming so farre, as to Church, and it should be no dishonour to a∣ny person on earth, to be seene often, at the house of God. Let vs then doe both: Come and eate. Christ
cheereth vp his guests. Eate O friends! hee ac∣comptethCantic. 5. 1. them his friends, that will come and eate with him. When the three men passed by Abraham sit∣ting at his Tent doore, in the heate of the day, Abraham besought them earnestly, to come in and eate with him. If I haue now found fauour in thy sight, passe not away from thy seruant. Genesis 1. 18. Hee would haue taken it for a great vnkind∣nesse, if they should haue refused his entertaine∣ment, as hee acknowledgeth it a fauour done to him, for them to eate, and rest with him, but e∣uen a while. And no doubt but our Inuiter will as much take it to heart, if wee shall neglect him, and will as kindely take it, if we Come and eate. This Foode is not carnall but sacramentall; it is Mentis, non dentis cibus. The foode of the in∣ward, not of the outward man. The Element is literall, and corporeall, the grace is inward and spirituall; Doe this: that is, Eate in remembraunce of me. The next circumstance sheweth vs what our fare shalbe. 3 Bread. Our fare in the house of God is Bread; First, that Dauid saith, that it strengthneth the hart of man: The penitent sinner hath neede of this: for hee hath a broken heart, which doeth want strength. The Bread of this Supper of the Lord, is the seale of our Faith, in the beliefe of our re∣demption, wrought & accomplished by Christ, the bread of life: The metaphysicall faith of Rome,
doth beleeue the very flesh and bloud of Christ in this Sacrament; and affirmeth, that heere is neyther Bread nor VVine, but onely the acci∣dents thereof, the formes, colour, and taste, and they miraculously, and vnnaturally subsisting without subiect. I will not bid the aduersary bat∣tell in this quarrell now, my businesse is the po∣sitiue Diuinity of our true Chucrh. We haue heard with our eares, out of Wisedomes inuitation, that we must eate bread heere, and our Fathers haue tolde vs so. This which we receiue heere, is Bread, com∣mon in the nature of it, sanctified in the vse: butDe natur. ser. 4. as Leo saith, with the same difference that was betweene the Virgin Mary before the Annunci∣ation, and after, for in both The holy Ghost came vpon her, in the Annunciation, vpon the Bread, in the Consecration, and the power of the Highest ouer∣shadowed both. Luke 1. 25. Or as Saint Chrysostome; vt Saram non natura, sed Dei promissio fecit matrem: As Sara was not by Natures way, made a mother, but by vertue of the promise: so it is not Nature but Grace, and the Ordinance of God, that maketh this Bread of the Supper, the body of Christ; yet, as Sara ceased not to be Sara, when shee became a Mo∣ther, neyther doth this Bread cease to be bread, when it is made and consecrated an holie Sacra∣ment. Cyprian saith, Adest veritas signo, spiritus Sa∣cramento: Truth commeth to the Signe, Truth
doth not abolish the Signe, the Spirit commeth to the Sacrament, it doth not extinguish the Sa∣crament. For as yron heated red hote in the sire, hath the very heate and burning force of fire, yet it ceaseth not to be yron still: so the Bread of this Supper, by the vertue of the Spirit which com∣meth to it, is Bread of life, and is the Instrument to conuey to euery worthy receiuer the force of the holy-Ghost, yet ceaseth not to be Bread: and so S. Paul calleth it: The Bread which wee blesse, is1 Corin. 10 16. it not the Communion of the bodie of Christ? I conclude then with Wisedome; Come and eate Bread. 4 But Wisedome addeth; My Bread. For they that feede at this Table, must feede of such Bread, as the sonne of God doth prouide for his guests. We haue Bread too. In the sweatGenes. 3. 19. of thy face, thou shalt eate Bread: And we do pray, Giue vs this day our daily bread. But this Bread of the Sacrament, is Gods bread; so made in the con∣secration, by diuine institution, in remembrance of Christ; yet so, that by our worthy receiuing of it, we may make it our Bread: For, to vnworthy Communicants, it is common Bread, and they finde themselues after it, no more refreshed, then they were before: as a Deed sealed, is but Parch∣ment and Wax to any, but them whom it doeth concerne: therfore if thou eate not of his Bread, that inuiteth thee, it will not nourish thee. 5 and drinke. VVisedome maketh not a dry Feast, her guests
shall drinke too: it is so in our Sauiour Christs owne Institution of this Sacrament: Drinke yee all of this: And Saint Paul an Apostle of IESVS CHRIST 1. Cor. 11. 26. putteth them both toge∣ther; So oft as yee eate of this Bread and drinke of this Cuppe. The Papistes will come, and eate, but they will not drinke: the Lay men and the Priests that doe not Consecrate, may not drinke. This is one of the most vnprobable and weakest defen∣ded absurdities, in any reall poynt of difference, betweene them and vs. But they doe affirme, that whole CHRIST, and the memoriall of his whole Passion is comprehended sufficiently in either part, and therefore the Bread alone doeth suf∣fice, without the Wine. Yet VVisedome prouideth both to eate and drinke at her Feast, and Christ, who instituted the Sacrament, thought both ne∣cessary, and gaue both to his Church in equall precept. But if they would needes seperate whom the Lord hath ioyned together, had it gone by most voyces, the eating had rather beene layd aside, then the drinking: For that doeth not so much to the life expresse the Passion, with the benefits, as the drinking doeth, but this will appeere much more clearely in the next point. I will con∣clude this with Saint Basils blessing, and let it light vpon all them that violate the Institution of CHRIST, without repentance: Cursed bee that man, that forbiddeth, where CHRIST bid∣deth,
or biddeth where IESVS forbiddeth. 6 Wine. Gods prouision is VVine. VVee may say of this VVine, In vino veritas. Heere is truth in this VVine; for it is the very soule of that sauing Truth, the shedding of the most precious bloud of our Redeemer for his Church. I can not find the Lay man left out in this Inuitation, or in this part of it. All that are simple and destitute of vn∣derstanding are bidden: and I am sure and cer∣taine they bee not all Cleargie men. Hee mea∣neth indefinitely, all that are sensible of their owne defectes, and imperfections, who see their owne follie, and are ashamed of it, and de∣sire amend it, whether Ecclesiasticall or Lay persons. To them hee offereth Wine, the fruit of the Grape, as himselfe calleth it, as the Sacrament of his Bloud: and it is that seasonable Wine men∣tioned in the one and thirtie chapter and the sixt verse of the Prouerbs; Giue Wine vnto those that be of heauy hearts. Such are the true Penitents, bit∣ter in their soules, for their trespasses committed against Almightie God. They that doe refuse to drinke of this Wine, shall taste of another cup: For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cuppe, the Wine is mixed: the wicked of the earth shall drinke the dregges thereof, Psal. 75. 8. VVhat shall they doe amongst the rest, who mangle the holy Sa∣crament, and robbe the guests of VVisedome of halfe their entertainement? So did the Conuen∣ticles
of Trent. Heare their Canon. Si quis dixe∣ritDe Conc. sub v∣nâ specie. cap. 2. Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, non iustis de cau∣sis & rationibus adductam fuisse, vt Laicos & eti∣am Clericos non conficientes, sub panis tantùm spe∣cie communicaret, aut in eo errâsse, Anathema sit. If any man shall say, that the holy Catholique Church was not ledde by iust and reasonable in∣ducements, to minister the holie Communion, only in the one kind, in Bread, to the Lay men, and also to the Priests, that doe not themselues consecrate the Hoast, or that the Church hath er∣red in so doing; let him be accursed: whereas their owne Gelasius calleth it Sacrilege to diuideDe Cons. dist. 2. Comperimus. the Communion so; saying: Aut integra Sacra∣menta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur: Let them either receiue the Sacraments entire, that is, according to the Institution, or let them bee denied them altogether. Tertullian saith rightly of them, Credunt sine Scripturis, vt credant con∣traDe prescript. Scripturas: They beleeue without Scriptures, that they may beleeue against Scriptures. The Counsell of Calcedon determineth, Euagrius lib. 1. cap. 17. Concil. Calced. Actio. 2. Cursed be hee that parteth, cursed be hee that di∣uideth the Sacrament. Saint Cyprian saith excellently well: Non iun∣gitur Ecclesiae, qui ab Euangelio seperatur: Hee is not ioyned to the Church, who is diuided from the Gospel: Against those who pretend the au∣thoritie of the Church, for the violation of that Institution, which is set downe in the Gospel.
The pouring out of VVine, hath a visible re∣presentation of the effusion of CHRIST bloud: and, in the drinking of the VVine, which pre∣sently warmeth, and comforteth the stomacke, more sensibly than in the eating of the Bread, is the powerfull operation of the inward Grace, comforting the conscience to the receiuer there∣of expressed. So Hugo defining a Sacrament, requireth thatHugo de sancto Victore de Sa∣cram. lib. 6. part. 9. citat. in Sum. Hug. in casibus Consc. tit. Sacra∣mentum. it be ex institutione figurans: it must bee the signe of something, according to the institution; but in the denyall of the Cup▪ the Institution hath wrong, and so the Figure imperfect. Hee saith also, that it must be, ex similitudine representans: that in the similitude to that whereof it is a Fi∣gure, it must make a visible representation: but the breaking of the Bread onely, maketh no such sensible remonstrance to the outward sense of the shedding of CHRISTS bloud, as the powring out of VVine, ioyned also with it doth. There∣fore Wisedome saith; Eate of my Bread, and drinke Wine. 7 Which I haue drawne or mingled. The Maister of our Feast, will haue the wine of his owne drawing and mingling. He hath not thought it fit, to trust men with the drawing of his VVine, or the stopping of it vp, at their plea∣sures. This cannot be vnderstood better, then of the wine of this Sacrament. For it is the sole In∣stitution of Iesus Christ, the wisedome of God. He ordained it, and the purer Churches haue e∣uer
receiued it according to his preparation. Where men haue taken vpon them to draw, and to furnish this Table with prouisions, sundrie fowle and grosse aberrations haue succeeded. Some haue mingled water with this wine, it is a precept of the Romish church since the corrup∣tion of it: And Cyprian, otherwise a worthie Fa∣ther of our Church, seemd to incline to this mix∣ture. The Maister of the Sentences saith, Aqua ve∣ròLibr. 4. dist. 11. Cyprian. epl. l. 2. epistola 3. admiscenda est vino, quia aqua populum significat, qui per Christi passionem redemptus est: vino misce∣tur aqua, Christo populus. But water is to be min∣gled with the VVine, for water signifieth the people, redeemed by the passion of Christ; the wine is mingled with the water, Christ with the people. The people haue the more wrong, who are forbidden the wine, saying, they who forbid it, doe giue it out to be the Sacrament of their v∣nion with Christ. Others haue ministred in water onely, withoutLib. de Heres. beres. 64. wine: so saith Augustine, Some Heretiques were called Aquarij: quod aquam offerant in poculo Sacra∣menti: Because they offered water in the Cup of the Sacrament.See the Iesuits gospel by Ma∣ster W. Crashaw De Consecr. dist. 2. Cum omne. Quo de diuinis officijs. Others haue ministred, not in wine, or water, but in milke; and I wonder that the Iesuites of late times, haue not preferred this practise, who a∣scribe equall efficacy to the milke of the Mother, and the bloud of the Sonne of God: at least, that they haue not mingled wine and milke. Others
haue giuen bread dipped in the wine. The worst drawer of wine for this feast, was hee who drew the wine, and mingled it for Pope Vi∣ctorAct. & Mon. volum. 1. p. 168. the second. Brazutus, who is recorded with∣in the space of 13 yeares to haue empoisoned six Popes, he mingled poison with wine in the Cha∣lice for that Pope; as their owne Stories report. All the mysteries of religion, and doctrines of faith, must be of Christs owne preparing for his Church: therefore we hold, that no counsell, nor all the Church hath power to alter any thing, in the doctrine of faith, or in the doctrine of the Sa∣craments, the seales of our faith, contrary to the ordinance of Christ. They must needs be fooles that doe not follow the directions of Wisedome. You my beloued brethren are now in the house of Wisedome, and you are inuited to VVisedomes Feast: Come therefore, & eate of Wisedomes bread. Surely, this is your Fathers house, and heere is Bread enough: taste it, and you will be all ready toIohn 6. 34. say; Lord giue vs euermore of this Bread: Drinke of the wine now which wisedome hath drawne for you,Psal. 116. 13. and say euery soule of you within it selfe: I will now take the cuppe of Saluation, and call vpon the name of the Lord. Come eate (my friends) drinke, and make merry,Cantic. 5. 1. and much good may it doe your soules, Amen, Amen.
The Cape of good HOPE. ¶ Fiue Sermons for the vse of the Merchant and Mariner. Preached to the worshipful Com∣panie of the Brethren of the Trinitie-House: and now published for the generall Benefite of all Sea-men. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Diuinitie. LONDON Printed by Nicholas Okes for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Crowne. 1616.
¶ To the Honourable and Religi∣ous Knight, Sir THOMAS SMITH, Gouernour of the East-India Companie, and to all the Honourable and worthie Aduenturers in the same Societie. THese Sermons, deli∣uered in the hearing of our chiefest Mariners the Brethren of the Trinity house, at their anniuersary meeting, which they reli∣giously obserue, are especially addres∣sed to the vse of the Sea-men. I haue conceiued hope, that they whom they most concern, may make some good vse of these Meditations, euen then, when they are far off from those many helps which our Church at home affoordeth,
both for Knowledge and Deuotion. I haue also made choice to recommend them by especiall direction, to you, the honorable Gouernor, and worthy Ad∣uenturers of that Societie, which sends forth the Sea-man furthest frō home, to the remotest partes of the knowne world, beseeching you to admit of this mine aduenture amongest yours, with which you shall euer haue my earnest praiers to God, for the prosperous suc∣cesse of your commerce & nauigation. For this I rest Gods petitioner for you all, humbly acknowledging my thank∣full duety to you, by whose vnexpected and vndeserued hounty, my Labours and Studies haue been comforted and encouraged. S. P.
THE Cape of good Hope. The first Sermon. DEVT. chap. 33. vers. 18. 19. Verse 18. And of Zebulun hee said: Reioyce Ze∣bulun in thy going out, and thou Issachar in thy Tents.Verse 19. They shall call the people to the Moun∣taine: there they shall offer the Sacrifices of righteousnesse: for they shall sucke of the abun∣dance of the Sea, and of the Treasures hid in the Sand. I May with a little restraint of the words of the first verse of this Chapter, giue you the contents and summe of my Text in a few words: Now this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the two Tribes of Zebulun, and Issachar before his death, and said; Reioyce, O Ze∣bulun, &c. The better welcome, may I hope to
this Discourse, because the Argument of it is a Blessing, & he that breathed it was acceptable with God, euen Moses, though a man, yet noted with that honourablest of all Appellations, a man of God. The meekest man, and the faithfullest in the house of God, that liued in his times vpon the earth. And it is his dying farewell, propheticall, and patheticall. For it is the happy euidence of his wisedome in foreseeing, and of his charitie in wishing all this good to the twelue Tribes, and to their posteritie. Concerning Zebulun, whose blessing I haue chosen for my Text, as best befitting this present hearing, and the occasion of this holy meeting; it consisteth of two parts. 1 A well-wishing to that Tribe. 2 A Prophesie concerning that Tribe, which Prophesie doth containe a double prediction. 1 One is, of the seruice that they shall doe to God. 2 The other is, of the mercies which they shall receiue from God. 1 Of the well-wishing of Moses. Reioyce O Zebulun in thy going out. Zebulun was to helpe his estate by voyages at Sea, hee was the Merchant-Aduenturer, and the Sea-man; of his Tribe were the best Mariners, the greatest Trauellers. Moses by a Spirit of Pro∣phesie did foresee this, and remembring also what olde Israel had prophesied of this Sonne, and his posteritie. Zebulun shall dwell by the Sea∣side,
hee shall be an Hauen for Ships: he doth wish this Tribe good successe, and ioy in their goings out, that is, in their voyages by Sea. In which wee are taught these things: 1 That God hath long before, not onely de∣termined of vs, but of all our courses of life, and vocations, and meanes of liuing: for Moses did reade this future estate of this Tribe, in the Book of Gods prouidence, opened and reuealed vnto him, by the mighty God of Iaacob. Therefore, let vs make this double vse hereof. 1 That no man ascribe it to fortune, or chance, that one man is a Scholler, another a Souldier, a third a Sea-man, a fourth Mechanicall; and that some by one, others by other meanes raise, and aduance their estates. For this is the direction and ordination of diuine Prouidence. 2 That no man repine at his lot, in what groūd soeuer it hath fallen, but let him with all thanke∣fulnesse to God, indeuour himselfe diligently in the calling, whereunto God hath called him, to pursue both his owne particular good, and the good of the state, in which he liueth. Secondly, we are taught, that this is a lawfull, & honest vocation, to trauell vpon the great wa∣ters, and to practise and exercise Nauigation: for otherwise, this man of God Moses, would not haue wished them good prosperitie in it. Yet it falleth out, that euen this course of liuing also (as all other the most honest vocations that are in vse on the earth) is often abused; yea it is thought
somewhat more then the rest. The auncient Fa∣thers doe obserue, that our Sauiour Christ did expresse himselfe to this Sea-tribe, more then to any of the rest: For he was conceiued at Naza∣reth, a city in the Portion of Zebulun, and in this city he was brought vp: hee beganne to preach first heere: and Mount Thabor, vppon which hee was transfigured, was in the Tribe of Zebulun also. The reason which they giue, is this, because hee thought, that Tribe did most neede this ex∣traordinarie direction of his doctrine, and exam∣ple, of any of the rest. Indeede those places that doe confine vpon the Sea, and are Hauens for shippes, partly, in respect of the continuall dan∣gers that they doe behold, and the grecuous los∣ses of men and goods, which happen in sight and heare-say, haue their hearts more hardened then others: partly, in respect of the ready passage to conuey away such as haue deserued euill, and are pursued by the Sword of Iustice, and so by im∣punity are encouraged to offend, partly by the entertainement of such as come thither with the spoile of their Piracies, and Sea-robberies, which commonly are as wastefully rioted at Sea-towns, as they are desperately, and with hazard gotten vpon the Seas, and partly by the importation of strange and corrupt manners brought out of o∣ther countries, which Apish imitation can scarce forbeare to entertain and affect: surely, by some, or all these meanes, such places are so corrupt, that they needed all this mercie of the Sonne of
God. Therefore these abuses in your calling, you that are graue experienced men, and that haue eminent place of charge, and authority in these affaires, may doe God good seruice, to make a conscience of admonishing those, that are vnder your commaund, of all these things: and heere in let Almighty God giue you both to will and to performe that, by which his blessed name may be glorified, both aboord, and ashoare. Thirdly, wee are taught by the holy, and cha∣ritable example of Moses the man of God, to wish Zebulun good speede in his Voyages, and surely the prayers and well-wishings of Gods seruants, and the breath of charitable benediction, is an happy gale for all that goe to Sea. In vs it is cha∣rity; for they are our Brother-tribe, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. The Church, and the Common-wealth doe both beare a great Aduen∣ture in euery vessel, that goeth to Sea, and there∣fore the Church doth teach vs to pray For all that trauell by land, or by water. The rather let vs wish them all good, because Sea-losses are losses with∣out recouery commonly, that malice it selfe (me thinkes) should not be so malicious, to wish that to perish, by whose losse no aduantage commeth to him that suruiueth. Againe, these Aduentu∣rers deserue our charity, more then others, be∣cause they seeke their owne poore meanes of bet∣tering their petty estates, in the general aduance∣ment of the state, in which they are subiected: for what is the particular mans gaine, in comparison
of that good, which the Common-wealth recel∣ueth by the seruice & employment of these men? Therefore it shall be very worthie of our Christi∣an charitie, to say to Zebulun, Reioyce O Zebulun in thy goings out. And to Zebulun, that is, to the Sea-men themselues; it is most necessarie, that they haue the holie and deuout prayers of the Seruants of God; the paines, the vnrest, the wants, the dan∣gers that they endure, are infinite, so that of all men that liue, none are more often, or more se∣riously admonished to prepare themselues for death, then these men. I doe not speake this, as though all were so well with vs ashoare, that here were no danger at all. For many doe thinke, that it is little better then a desperate aduenturing of ones selfe to goe to Sea: they feare the close∣nesse of the Cabbins, the infectious ayre of the shippe, the danger of drowning, they see no necessitie to enforce this hazard. To such I say, and I speake with griefe of heart, to see the iudge∣ments of God vpon our Land, euen in the com∣passe of a few yeares. For, did not our last great plague teach vs, that the open ayre of the Coun∣trey, breathed no more health in her Inhabi∣tants, then the close Cabbins in a shippe, or the thicke▪ set houses in our greatest Cittie? Did not the great floudes in diuerse partes of our Land shew them, that dare not goe to Sea, for feare of drowning, how God can bring home the Sea to our houses▪ and drowne vs in our beds? Did
not the great Frost, which paued our waters, as the streetes of our great Cittie, teach vs, that God can as well punish vs with too little water, as too much. And did not the great dearth suc∣ceeding, in which wee felt the hardnesse of mens hearts, not yet thawed, but keeping in prouision of corne, till the poore bring foorth their curses vpon them, which God in Heauen heareth and ratifieth? Doth not this teach vs, that our Land, as plentifull as it is, and though it seeme surchar∣ged with store, that it sendeth much away, yet it may neede the helpe of other Countries, to supply her wants, and to put bread in the mouths of her children. To this purpose, let Zebulun weigh Anchore, and set-Saile; and God giue him ioy in his going out, and his returne. Reioyce, O Zebulun, in thy goings out. It is a lamentable thing, that any should bee found in a Christian Common-wealth voyde of this charitable well-wishing to Trauailers, ra∣ther desiring that they might perish in their iour∣ney, and neuer returne in peace to their owne places of habitation. To discourage any such vn∣charitable hart, let me giue you an example, euen a fearefull president of Gods displeasure expres∣sed on two men, two Christians, two Diuines, two Preachers, two Bishops, they were in their times,Socr. eccl. dist. 6. 13. great, cleare and worthy Lights in the Church of God: the one was Epiphanius Bishop of Constance
the Metropolitane city of Cyprus. The other was Iohn Chrysostome Bishop of Constantinople, who being at great ods, by reason of some difference in opinion; Epiphanius did saile from Cyprus, to Constantinople, to speake with Chrysostome, and no accord being made there betweene them, rather their emulation and wrath mutually encreasing, they parted, with this vncharitable exchange of most vnchristian imprecation. Epiphanius said to Iohn Chrysostome, I hope thou shalt not die a Bishop: Chrysostome said to Epiphanius; I hope thou shalt not returne aliue into thine owne countrey. The Lord that dwelleth in heauen brought these two iudge∣ments vpon them both; for Epiphanius dyed a∣boord the shippe home-ward bound: and Iohn Chrysostome was depriued of his Bishopricke, and died in exile. Farre be this vncharitablenesse, and the suc∣cesse of it from the children of God, from all professed Christians, and in stead heereof, let Moses the man of God teach vs, to wish Zebulun good passage, good successe, good returne in his voyages. And now the rather, because I haueAnno 1609 not heard of any time, in our memorie, which hath shewed to vs more heauy and sorrowful los∣ses, then haue happened of late. The Lord blesse Zebulun in his voyages, the Lord blesse his going out, and his returne, the Lord heare him in the day of his trouble, and the God of Iaacob mighti∣ly defend him. 2 The Propheticall part of my Text, first doth
fore-tell what seruice this Tribe shall performe to God: and that hath two parts of holy duety. 1 Concerning themselues in their owne par∣ticular duety to God: for they shall be religious, and shall goe to the mountaine: that is▪ to Ierusa∣lem, and Sion, and the holy Temple to worship there, though they doe dwell a good distance re∣mote from it. 2 Concerning others, They shall call the people to the Mountaine, and draw others, not onelie of their owne brethren, but of strangers also, to the same seruice▪ for their owne affection in mat∣ters of religion. There must be a ground of Reli∣gion, and a loue of religion, and a practise of re∣ligion in themselues, before they can winne o∣thers: and the often threatning of their life, hath a notable force, and strength this way. For there is nothing doth more abette sinne, then hope of long life. Nothing makth a man more truely re∣ligious, then expectation of death; and therfore men of wise and setled iudgement, doe vse before they goe to Sea, to set their houses in order, to dispose of their estate, by their VVill and Testa∣ment, to make euen with God and the world, not because they must, but because they may die, they may die all together, and not one remaine, as in the losses, and land-wrecks of blessed Iob, to bring word, and to tell the heauy tidings of their losse: and who can tell how Death found them? whe∣ther prouided for it, or asleep? or drinking drunk? or swearing and cursing, and blaspheming the
name of God? or any otherwise offending: so carrying them presently away to their iudgement and answer for all these things. O happy is their preparation then, to whom no death can bee sodaine, whensoeuer it com∣meth. And to this purpose it is most requisite, that Zebulun bee well grounded in his Religi∣on; because when hee is at the Sea, hee is di∣uided from the Mountaine of the Lord, from the holie Temple, and the Congregation, and the assemblie of them which meete together, to heare the holie word of Almighty God: they that are thus remoued from the ministerie of the word of God, had neede to consider, how they are now left to the exercise and practise of that, which they haue learned already, and vnto the continuall reading, and meditation of the holie word of God. To this purpose it is a godlie, and religious vse that you haue aboord, to pray to God mor∣ning and euening, with an vnited heart, and to sing holie Psalmes, to praise the GOD of your help and trust, with a lowd and cheerefull voyce, and priuately, to bestow houres of leasure vpon the reading of such good Bookes, as may stirre vp your zealous and religious hearts to a serious worship and seruice of your God. And blessed be the God which teacheth vs, wee haue helpes in this kinde for our vnderstanding, and for our comfort in so great plentie, that wee cannot bee without great and iust blame, if we leaue this du∣tie
to God vndone. But it sufficeth not, that Zebu∣lun be zealous himselfe, he must do good with his zeale, and by all good meanes indeuour to win o∣thers to the knowledge, & loue, and obedient ser∣uice of his God. That doth Moses also foretell. They shall call the people to the Mountaine. That is, they shall call sheepe to the fold, or to the greene Pastures, and sweete riuers of waters: and this fruitfull pietie in them, shall shew stran∣gers, the way to the house of the Lord, and shall tell them what things hee hath done for the peo∣ple that hee hath chosen to bee his inheritance. This were an happy benefite to our Church, and a great honour to our Tribe of Zebulun, if our Maisters and Mariners were so expert in the ma∣naging of the holy word of God, that they could winne others of forraine Countries to the loue of our Religion, and the forsaking of their owne superstition. This would bee ioy to both the Ie∣rusalems, the Church of God on earth, and the Congregation of Angells and Saints aboue. But it is much to be lamented, that our Sea-voiages, and the trauells of our Protestant gentlemen and others to forren parts, doth rather loose vs many, to the two great agents for Sathans kingdome of darknes, the Turke, and the Pope, then gaine vs any from them; & that our mē could but return home with the same Religion that they carry out with them, and that they would not buy the profites,
and pleasures of forraine Countries, with the losse of their Religion, and the pollution of their consciences, and the shipwrecke of their faith. VVhen Epiphanius Bishop of Constance was to part from Costantinople, where he misliked many things, and that some of the City brought him to his shippe, he tooke his leaue of them in these words, Relinquo vobis hanc vrbem, hanc re∣giam, hanc hypocrisin: Ego autem me hinc maturè expedio, valete. I leaue you this your Citty, this your Court, and this your hypocrisie, and I make all the haste I can to be gone away from you, fare you well. So let all true English christian and re∣ligious hearts, take leaue especially of our Po∣pish aduersaries: wee leaue you your great City of Rome, the seate of Antichrist your holy Father, the vsurper of Gods right, your ignorant deuo∣tion, your blinde guides, your idle and super∣stitious ceremonies, your dissembling with God, and your deceiuing of men, and wee hasten from you with all speede we can make: Fare you well. This would become our protestation of faith well, and there is neede of all the caution that we can deuise, to arme our trauellers against the entising and bewitching perswasions, and tiring importunities of the Church of Rome; for looke vpon the shew, and Religion looketh more like deuotion amongst them then amongst vs, anie man that commeth into their Townes, shall pre∣sently see a face of Religion, and shall finde that the lawes of their Church, doe not creepe feare∣fully
the lawes of their Church, doe not creepe feare∣fully vpon the ground, amongest the common people onely, but they are bridles for Princes, and the greatest States. They shall see that their grandes scorne not to forsake their horses, and their coaches, to kneele downe in the streetes and high-wayes, in all weathers, to worship their sacrament, as it is Theatrically carried vppe and downe, whilest all the many that are within the sight of it, are vpon their knees, beating their breasts, and casting vp their eyes to Heauen, muttering of some of their blinde deuotions in a tongue that they vnderstand not. Hee shall see them fasting in good earnest, euen to the weake∣ning of their bodies, their hands ful of almes, and their seuere discipline drawing out of their owne backes, with most cruell selfe-whippings, and many vndertaking long Pilgrimages, in which they sustaine exceeding great paines, and many wants. And they want not learned, and eloquent faire-spoken Iesuites, and Friars, that can set foorth all this, to the vttermost, to perswade strangers to come vnto them. But amongest vs, it is too much contrary, it is hard for a stranger to finde out, whether wee haue anie religion, or not: for it is not easily discerned by our conuer∣sation. For, doe wee not liue, as if Bacchus were our God, in drunkennesse and sensuall superflui∣tie? Doe wee not sweare and blaspheme, as if there were no God to be angry with it; or as if the God whom we serue did delight in it, as a daily
sacrifice? doe we tremble at any sinne? or, do we labour to win any to righteousnes? how hath the prince of darkenes benighted vs, that wee can see lewd and vngodly men, take vpon them the fashi∣ons, and speeches, and behauiours of honestie, and religion, and conscience to serue a turne; and we feare to appeare like our selues indeed, righte∣ous and religious in shew, as our heart is true to God. Perchance, because men see Puritans so shaken vp, and their teachers depriued, they are a∣fraid to make any shew of religion, for feare of being taken for Puritanes. No (beloued) let vs neuer be ashamed of the gospel of Christ, though powers and principalities oppose it: that euer will be, The power of God to saluation to all that be∣leeue. Take heed of appearing what you are not, and take heed of concealing what you are. Si bonumIf it be good to seem good, it is better to be so. est bonum apparere, melius est bonum esse. And it is said of God, in him wee line, mooue, and haue our being, not our seeming, and shew of what is not, but a realitie of existence. Sathan is all for the out side, and no more. I beseech you that are the heads of our tribe of Zebulun, that you would be careful of these things for your selues, and for your companies, of which you do take charge; that wheresoeuer you come, you may be knowne to be Christians, and to bee Protestants, that it may be heard in the Psalmes which you sing, that it may be seene in the deuo∣tion that you vse, that it may be testified by all
your carriage in bargainings, in your eating, and drinking, and vniuersally in your whole conuer∣sation, that you may shunne the diuell, and those false Iesuites and Priests which haue belyed our Land to the Aduersary to be without Churches, our people without a God, or any forme of reli∣gion. And if any could returne home so fortu∣nate, and successefull in the cause of God, as to bring home but one of them frō his superstition, to the sincere worship of our God, that one soule won from the seruitude of Popish bondage, and reconciled to the Church of God, were the best, and worthiest fraight that euer your vessell trans∣ported; and the Church of God should haue very great cause to reioyce, and clap their hands, say∣ing, Truth is great and it preuaileth. To this purpose let vs blesse Zebulun with the blessing of Moses the man of God, and say, Reioyce O Zebulun, in thy going out, God of Heauen pro∣sper thy voyage, that in it thou mayest call the people of other Nations to the Mountayne of the Lord thy God. But what shall Zebulun, and what shall the peo∣ple that hee bringeth along with him doe at the Temple and Mount of God? Surely they shall not come empty-handed: For they shall offer the sacri∣fices of righteousnesse to the Lord their God there. And this is that which Dauid requireth in Psal. 4. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousnesse, and call vpon the name of the Lord. Religion in these times of Moses, was very full of ceremony, and so it con∣tinued
long at Ierusalem, by direction from Al∣mighty God, as may appeare in the holie histo∣rie of Exodus, Leuiticus, and Deuteronomie, &c. These Sacrifices are called Sacrificia iustitiae, because they were Sacrificia iusta, that is, due Sa∣crifices. For, seeing God required them, they that offered them, merited nothing by them at the bands of God; they did but giue God his due, it was but the payment of a debt to him: or, they were called Sacrificia iustitiae, Sacrifices of righ∣teousnesse, in respect of Gods eye vpon them, which was not vpon the Sacrifices so much, as vpon the righteousnesse of the offerer of them to him. For God doth not respect quantum, but, ex quanto, not how much is in the hand, but how much is in the heart; not what is giuen, but with what zeale of Gods glorie, with what holy affe∣ction: or they are called Sacrifices of Righteousnes, because all Sacrifices were types and representa∣tions of that true, and absolute propitiatorie Sa∣crifice, which was once offered for all, euen IE∣SVS CHRIST our righteousnesse. For in them hee was offered. But now to sort this Doctrine, and to per∣swade this duetie to those times, in which olde things are passed away, and all things are become new, let vs learne our duetie heerein of the holie Apostle Saint Peter 1. Pet. 2. where hee saith, Yee are made an holie Priesthoode, to offer vp spirituall Sacrifices acceptable to God by Iesus Christ: And of all the Sacrifices that in the old Law were offred
to God, let the Holocaust, or Burnt-offering be our example, for that resembleth our holie and true mortification: for therein all was consumed to ashes, and nothing thereof was left. So saith Saint Gregorie Sunt quidam qui nihil sibi reseruan∣tes, totum Deo immolant. Againe, Omne quod ha∣bent, omne quod viuunt, omne quod sapiunt, Deo offerunt. There bee some that offer all to God without reseruation, all that they haue, whatsoe∣uer, is in their life, or in their knowledge. Of such a man hee saith, Ipse qui sacrificat immolatur. He that sacrificeth, is the Sacrifice. This kinde of immolation pleaseth Almightie God best, this resembleth the Sacrifice of IESVS CHRIST, who was Sacerdos & victima, for he offered vp to the Father, himself, the price of our redemption. This is the Doctrine of Saint Paul; I beseech you Brethren, that you offer vp your bodies a liuely Sacri∣fice vnto God, &c. To this purpose is this your holie meeting in the house of God once by the yeare, that you may recount the manifolde, and gracious mer∣cies of God vouchsafed to you in your voyages, in the protection of your persons, and of your goods, in deliuerance of you from perills of the Sea, from perills of the Windes, from perills of Rockes, and Sands, from perills of professed ene∣mies, and of false brethren. And for that hee hath blessed you with the blessings of the earth, both natiue and forraine, with the blessings of the Sea, and of the great Deepes. Aud that you may
for this offer vnto God sacrifices of righteousnes and pay your vowes to the most High, euen your sacrifices of praise and thankes-giuing. I will conclude this point with the holie benediction of the Prophet Dauid, which I pray God to giue to the whole Tribe of our English Zebulun, both at home and abroad. The Lord heare you in the day of your trouble, the name of the God of Iaacob defend you. Send you helpe from his Sanctuarie, and strengthen you out of Sion. Let him remember all your offerings, euen your of∣ferings of righteousnesse, and turne your burnt-offe∣rings into Ashes. And grant you according to your heart, and fulfill all your purpose. That you may reioyce in your saluation, and set vp the banner in the name of your God, when he shall per∣forme all your petitions. Concerning the second part of the Prophesie which promiseth mercies to the Tribe of Zebu∣lun: wee see how blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, and walketh in his wayes: For hee shall eate the labour of his hands; his labours at home and abroade, ashoare and aboord, wheresoeuer hee laboureth: thus Dauid putteth the seruice of God, and the mercies of God together. First, Let the people praise thee (O God) let all the people praise thee. And Then shall the earth bring forth her en∣crease, and God euen our God shall blesse vs. Such is the consequence of my Text. Zebulun shall offer to
God sacrifices of righteousnes, and then shall the Sea bring forth her encrease: for they shall sucke of the a∣boundance of the Sea, and of the Treasure hidden in the Sand. But I will reserue the handling of this Poynt, vntill it please Almightie God, wee meete vpon this like occasion: till then, The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, &c. Laus Deo.
Zebuluns Blessing: the second Part. To the same Audience, Iune the twelfth, being their Ele∣ction day, as before. Anno 1609. DEVTER. 33. 19. For they shall sucke of the abundance of the Sea, and of the Treasure hid in the Sand. THE second Part of Moses his prediction to this Tribe, is in these wordes, and they are a good encouragement to them that aduenture by Sea: for it assureth vs of the lawfulnesse of that vocation, seeing God blesseth it. There be many on earth, that striue and struggle to encrease their meanes, and to make themselues an estate, who because they worke not in a lawfull calling, faile of the blessing of God vpon their labors, their treasures are hid in bottomlesse bagges. Therefore let Ze∣bulun
goe forth and prosper: God doth blesse him, and Moses ministerially pronounceth it, saying, They shall sucke the abundance of the Seas, and of the treasures hid in the Sands. In the meditation of which blessing let vs con∣sider these three things. 1 That God hath filled the Seas with abundance: 2 That God hath hid treasures in the Sands: 3 That both these shall be Zebuluns blessing. The first. In the first creation of the world God made the waters, and he called the gathering of them togi∣ther, Seas; and God saw that it was good: Genesis 1. 10. And God, not louing a barren good, added this blessing; Let the waters bring foorth in abun∣dance euerie creeping thing that hath life, Genesis 1. 20. Then God created the great whales. Dauid saith, There is Leuiathan, who taketh hisIob 41. 24. pastime therein. Iob saith of him, In earth there is none like him, his iaws are like to doores, his scales to shields, and the Sea is said to boyle like a pot about him. For the vse of this aboundance of the Sea, Moses sheweth, that God appoynted man to beVerse 26. the Lord ouer it: Let vs make man, and let him rule ouer the fish of the Sea. Yea those great whales (by vertue of this dominion) are subiect vnto man, and he maketh them his prey. This abundance of the Sea was created for the vse of man. It hath beene an auncient practise
in the Church to diet her children, appoynting some dayes for eating of fish, and forbidding the vse of flesh in those dayes. The reasons heereof in medicine, I am more ready to learne, then to teach. But because Gods workes are seene on the Seas, and his wonders in the deep waters, and that our Sea-fish doth come with more aduenture of the fisher-man, and with more seene prouidence of God, when men fish for an vnseene prey: therefore euen this diet ad∣uiseth vs, to value the creature more, and to ho∣nour the bountifull giuer thereof vnto vs. For Abrahams seruant to fetch in a Calfe from the stalles. Iaacob to bring a Kid from the fold; Esau some venison from the field: this doeth not so much expresse how God filleth vs with plente∣ousnesse, as doth the vnseene prey, which the fisher-man bringeth from Sea: therefore they may say with Iaacob most fitly and properly, Gene∣sis 27. 20. Because the Lord my God brought it to my hand. Thus our meate may make vs meditate on the good prouidence of God. So, whether wee eate or drinke, or whatsoeuer we doe else, we shall take continuall occasion to glorifie our God. Some haue made question, which is richest, the Land, or the Sea? we reade of a blessing of abundāce giuen to the great waters, God doth all abundantly; but this sea-aduenture is knowne to vs but generally, and but little of it (in compari∣son) is yet discouered to men, the abundance of the earth is much more in sight. All Scriptures
doe testifie that God is plenteous▪ aboundant in goodnesse and in truth: he filleth the hungry with good things. Hee filleth euery liuing thing with plenteousnesse: he gaue Manna to Israel, till they cried out vpon it, they were wearie of that light meate, and hee gaue them flesh till it came out againe at their nosthrills. It is noted in the Sonne of this God, liuing on earth, that in the miracles which he wrought, he did worke more abundantly in the quantitie, and in qualitie made all things very good. No better wine could be, then that at the Marriage in Cana of Galile, and hee caused the measures to be filled vp to the brimme. Hee turned the fiue Loaues, and two Fishes; at another time, the seuen Loaues, and a few little Fishes into so plentifull a prouision, that multi∣tudes were sufficed, and great remaines of the broken meate left, euen more then the first pro∣portion, when they sate downe to eate. And not on earth onelie did he performe this plenty, but to shew his power, euen in the great waters, hee comming to some of his Disciples when they were fishing, commaunded Peter to cast his net into the Sea, and Peter doing it vpon his word, contrary to the rules of fishing: there yet was so great a draught of fish, that the nets brake with the weight thereof. Thus hath God sowne the great and boisterous element of wa∣ters, with the spawne of all sorts of fish, and crow∣ned the deepes with abundance.
Besides this blessing of the seas, God hath made the great waters pervious to our vessels, and hath taught vs to find paths in those desarts of waters, to stranger shoares, so leading vs to a new abun∣dance, by commerce and importation of com∣modities vsefull for the necessities of men. This tribe of Zebulun is the Merchant and Ma∣riner, his goods and life are aduentured to fetch in this forraine abundance, these transplant the plentie of other Nations into their owne Land, and bring home abundance. VVho can discerne that our Land doth want the two rich commodities of Wine and Oile, and the fruits of neighbour-nations. Great is the distance of those Indies, which furnish vs with Spices of all sorts, yet our ships semi-circle the world, going and returning rich fraights of those commodities: all this is the A∣bundance of the Seas. And wee inhabiting these Countries of Great Britaine and Ireland, being Ilanders, and lying in the Sea, as Tyrus sometimes did, do much de∣pend vpon the Seas, for our store of many neces∣saries. This moat which the hand of God hath digged about our Lands, this girdle of great wa∣ters, wherewith hee hath surrounded vs, doeth bring vs also abundance of strength, that we may say of our God, hee husbandeth and tilleth the Seas for our vse, for our profit, for our pleasure, and for our defence, And I hope there is none a∣mongest vs, so vnthankefull, but he will confesse,
that as the wisedome and power of the Almigh∣tie: euen so, the gracious prouidence of God, is, That Spirit which mooueth vpon our waters: so great is the extent of mans domination, not li∣mited on the drie groūd, but spread on the deeps. They who take vse of these benefits of God, and taste of the abundance of the Sea, must either ad∣uenture their persons, or their goods, to fetch in this plenty there will be expected from them, ve∣ry great industrie. This earth on which wee liue without culture, and much paines of the Hus∣band-man, yeeldeth nothing but the curse of weedes, and great is his trauell that diggeth or ploweth vp the furrows thereof. The Sea-man tasteth of the abundance of the Sea, but he earneth it with much losse of his rest, with many fearefull conflicts with winde and wa∣ter, and oftentimes, with the present horrour e∣uen of visible death. So neither Land nor Sea feedeth the idle, both of them say nay to such, as would eate, and would not worke. Yet there is a worke, and trauell to fetch in by Sea transmarine abundance, and this is much in vse now: it is by Sea-theeuing and piracie, illis robur & aes triplex: Surely their hearts are more hard then Adamant, who trauelling in the con∣tinual fight of death, and hell. Dauid saith of their Sea-tosses vp to heauen, and downe to hell; the Sea opening vpon them like a graue, and their ships seeming to them but Coffins, in which they goe
downe quicke into the deepes: who hauing in continuall sight, not the ordinary works of God, but his wonders: and seeing the right hand of God armed against them, yet doe not feare to dare the Almighty with their profest rebellions, both against God, who hath giuen a contrarie law, and against their neighbors, whose liues and goods, thou oughtest, by the law of true charitie to tender, and preserue to the benefit of their bre∣thren, as carefully, as their owne to their proper vse: and against the mercifull loane of the crea∣tures, the Sea, and windes, and shipping lent to vs by our Maker, to make vs more able to doe him seruice, and to be more comfortable one to another. These gather in the abundance of the Seas, and ingrosse the gatherings of their bre∣thren, bought with the dear hazard of their liues, and with many sorrowfull sufferings. Let me deliuer my opinion and thoughts con∣cerning these men, as I hold no life on earth that hath liberty, so ful of gall, as is the Sea mans, nor any goods more dearly bought then what he fet∣cheth from far: so I hold no theft so mischieuous, as to rob him, to strip him out of the fruits of his great labours, to take his victualls from him, and to spoile him of his munition: it is all life blood, that is so taken away, and no robber can deserue more seueritie of iustice, then the pirate doth. In this woorld I may safely, and I iustly doe wish it; Let there be iudgement without mercy to him that sheweth no mercie. Therefore let Almightie God
and man punish such in this world, that God may saue their soules in the world to come. The second. 1 Hidden. In the next place wee considered, that God hath buried treasures in the Sands: And no doubt but Sea and Land haue yet a plentifull store of riches vndiscouered to man: Some may aske, were not all these things created for the vse of man? how is it then that man hath them not? To this our answer is, that God is not pleased to let vs haue all those things in sight, both out out of his iustice, and out of his wisedome. For the iustice of God heerein we may behold the strength of Adams curse vpon his posteritie: Thou shalt eate thy bread in the sweate of thy face: God will put man to the paine, to seek out for this treasure: he loueth not that man should eate the bread of idlenesse; labour may be called Sacra∣mentum maledictionis humanae, euen the sacramen∣tall signe of mans curse; it putteth vs in minde of our sinne, and still calleth vpon vs to take heede, lest some worse thing fall out against vs. Man (saith the Prophet) goeth forth to worke, and to his labour til the euening: the Sea-man doth hold it out often from morning to morning, hee cannot call the night his sleeping time, but in the worst of weather, when all ashoare hide them∣selues from the furie of a storme, hee must beare the violence and rage thereof, in the darkest night he must say to his eyes, close not, and to the rem∣ples of his head, take you no rest.
Thus hath the iustice of God set man aworke, hiding these treasures out of sight, to put vs to paines to finde them: and how many be there of our brethren, who haue put their liues and their little All, that they haue, into one aduenture, in one Bottome, casting all vpon the prouidence of God, to trauel his paths in the Seas, and to search forren Sands for these hidden treasures. O that we were wise to vnderstand this! and to behold the riches of the mercie and loue of God to vs; he hath hid our temporal treasures, but hath opened to vs our spiritual riches, the treasures of grace are not kept vnder locke & key, the light of his countenance is not hid vnder a bushell: Hee spake the word, & ther were multitudes of Preachers: he hath giuen vs his word, verbum faciens, in our creation, a making word, verbum loquens, in the mouth of all his Prophets, which haue been since the world began, a speaking word: verbum factum a word made for vs, euen his Son, Iesus Christ ma∣nifested in the flesh: verbum scriptū, a word writtē for vs, which he hath left to his church. Neither isDeut. 30. 13. it beyond the seas, that we should say, who shall goe o∣uer the Sea for vs, and bring it to vs, and cause vs to heare it, that we may do it. But the Word is very neere14, vnto thee, euen in thy mouth, and in thy hart to do it. And Christ bids, Search the Scriptures, for in thēIohn 5. you thinke to haue eternall life. The word that is neare to vs let vs search, the most feare we haue, is, of the word brought from farre, and of religi∣on that is imported in strangers Bottoms.
Thus God that opens his hand in spirituall gra∣ces, inhearteth it in temporall, so that these are hidden and our industry exacted to seeke them out: yet a promise is annexed: Seeke and yee shall find: Yea a caution is prefixed, Seek first the king∣dome of God. God is a great hider, for euen in spirituall fa∣uors, our faith beholdeth many things vnseene: and we see in Anigmate, in a darke saying▪ and wee know but in part. There is a great measure of louing kindnesse, which God hath laied vp for them that feare him, beside that which he hath done before the sonnes of men. But where are the trea∣sures here mentioned? 2 Hid in the Sand. This concealement, hiding riches in Sand, is; 1 Paruum in magno: A little hidden in a great deale, the Sands are infinite, great treasures are hardly found: if hidden in them, this requireth a great search and industry. The veine and rich thread of gold in the earth is but little, yet it dis∣courageth not men, for it to digge deepe, and to remooue great quantities of earth, to discouer it, and to bring it forth. But indeede such are all the comforts of life: Dij omnia vendunt laboribus: God selleth men his treasures for their labours. 2 It is Pretiosum in vili, in vile sands are hid∣den pretious treasures; and it teacheth how these riches of the world are to be valued, their Maker thinketh the sands treasuries good enough for
them. Whereas foolish man ouerweeneth them so much, as to thinke Cor Cordis, the in most cham∣ber of his heart a place, scarce good enough, to lay vp the loue of these things: ô that we would take notice where our God disposeth of these things, Dust in dust. 3 It is Incertum diuitiarum; these bee discoue∣red to be vncertaine riches: ô trust not in vncer∣tain riches, you are vnsure to find thē, they be hid, the foundation of them is sands, & sands by the sea, subiect to the wash and remoue of the water∣breach, he builds on sands that trusteth them. 4 It is Fructus in sterili, Fruite in a barren soyle: For of the sand it is said, Pluuium recipi, & fru∣ctum non facit: yet here hath God hidden trea∣sure for vs, so gratiously turning all to our vse, and benefite: Onely man is a barren soyle, he bringeth forth no fruit; and worse then these sands, for hee hath no treasure hidden in his nature. Onely some rich men are like these sands, that hide and heape vp much treasure, yet neither bring forth any fruite, nor shew it; except the wash of the sea, some troubles of life, discouer it. Let the good seruants of God take comfort of this; that God is so rich in his mercies, and hath so enabled all creatures to the seruice of man, that the barren sands of the sea shall bee their store-houses, of rich treasures, to retaine their wants. 3 Moses blesseth Zebulun with these things:
In which obserue: first, that no Tribe nor people doe better deserue to haue hidden treasures re∣uealed to them then the Mariners. Reuben is safe in the noise of the bleating of his Lambes. Issa∣char takes his rest in his tents. These men depriue themselues of the ease, and plenty, and pleasure of the earth, & endure all weathers: yet for al this Moses doth wish these treasures to thē as Gods blessings, and not as the deseruings of their pains. They deserue of them that set them aworke, but not of God, and therefore let them esteeme the fruits of their labours, the free fauours, and bles∣sings of the Almightie: that this consideration may both make them more thankefull, for the re∣ceipt, and lesse wastefull in the expense of these gettings: For is it not pittie, that Gods good treasures should be profusely squandered, which hee had so carefully hidden. And that is to turne the good blessing of God into a curse. 2. Note in the Phrase heere vsed: They shall sucke: The tendernesse of God to his seruants, of whom Dauid saith, As a father hath pitty on his children, so shall the Lord haue compassion on all them that feare him. Here hee putteth out his children to nurse, to the Sea, and this is a boysterous and rough nurse, but her milke is abundance: to the Sands, and this seemeth a dry and barren nurse, but her milke is Treasures. Thus are we all in this life like children at the breast, to be fedde, and it is the gracious goodnesse of God to vs, that when we begge of
him nothing but panem quotidianum: Daily bread, he giueth vs abundance, and enricheth vs with treasures. This is the reward (my Brethren) of your La∣bours, in your lawfull vocation: let the Giuer of euery good and perfect gift be pleased to fraight you with this abundance, and with these Treasures. But do not you withhold Gods Custome from him, the humble and deuout thankes-giuings of your hearts, and voyces, the calues of your lippes to his praise: so shall you, by his fauour, make many rich returnes, and God shall giue vnto you the Blessing of peace. Laus Deo.
Zebuluns Blessing: The third Sermon. PSAL. 37. 5. Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to passe. THESE words leade vs into foure especiall Considerati∣ons, fitte for the occasion of this meeting: 1 That the Sonnes of men haue their wayes, that is, their vocation, wherein they must walke [Thy way.] 2 That true Christians, euen all the faithfull Seruants of God, in these their wayes, cast their care vpon God, vsing the means, but depending vpon God for the successe: [Commit to the Lord.] 3 That they doe this meerely out of faith, and trust in God, not out of presumption, or i∣dlenesse [and trust in him.] 4 That this is done with good successe, and most happy reward of faith: For [hee shall bring it to passe.]
Of the first, that is, The wayes of men. Almighty God that gaue a being to the sonnes of men, and wrote in the hearts of men, a Law of Nature, did not suffer his reasonable part to be so much decayed in the ruines of our first Parents, but that men, so soone as they grew vp to the vn∣derstanding of themselues, beganne to bethinke themselues of, and shortly to apply themselues to meanes of promising likeliehoode to giue them maintenance. God gaue this light first, who turned Adam out of Paradise, to till the earth, and solde the sonnes of men, the fruits of the earth for the sweat of their browes. This made Adams sonnes, and childrens chil∣dren fall to worke, Iubal in Tents, Iubal in Mu∣sicke, Tubalcain in Brasse and Iron. Thus was the world kept in breath, thus were wants supplyed, and thus were many excellent things deuised daily. All these be the wayes of man, the seuerall im∣ployments in this life: Issachar for Burthens, Ze∣bulun an Hauen for Shippes: some trauailing vp∣on the Land, some vpon the great Waters. In all these we behold; 1. That God who maketh vs, leaueth vs not so, but being created, hee taketh care to dispose of vs also in the world: wee doe not come vnder the tree of Fortune, (as it pleaseth the Painter to
set it foorth) to take such choice as befalleth vs, but God propoundeth vnto vs our course of life, and frameth our likings to it, so that wee giue it the name of Vocation, because God calleth vs vn∣to it. This is giuen vs in precept; Let euery man a∣bide in that calling wherein hee was called.: Cor. 7. 20. And there is a gracious promise; Hee shall giue his Angells charge ouer thee, to keepe thee [in all thy wayes.] This the Diuell skipt in the quotati∣on of this Scripture, when he tempted our Lord, that it might giue vs hope, euen when we are out of our wayes, and doe things without the warrant of a lawfull calling. If you be in any euill way, as∣sure your selues, that you are out of your way; for yee are not called by God to vncleanenesse, but to holi∣nesse, 1. Thessal. 4. 7. Therefore, whosoeuer liue heere by vnlawfull meanes, vniustifiable by the word of God, are all out of their way; and the faster they goe, the further they flee from grace and glorie. 2. Wee may inferre properly, that if God dis∣pose men in all lawfull callings, he doth enable so many as he doth dispose with vnderstanding, iudgement, and discretion in some suitable mea∣sure, to the businesse of that calling. For waies do imply walking: So he filleth Bezaleel, and Ahali∣ab with his Spirit to carue in wood, and brasse, and for all curious needle-worke. So that a naturall indisposition to such a course of life, or a naturall vnfitnes in vs, for it, is a great
argument to discouer our vndertaking such a trade or profession; for it is via: but not via tua: it is a good profession, but not thy profession. Surely, the Lord faileth not them that do go aright: hee maketh their feete like vnto Hindes feete. Hee prepareth their way, and enableth them in their expedition, and facilitateth their iourney. 3. This painefull varietie of industrious pro∣fessions in the life of man, serueth to shew vs the reward of sinne, for sinne did put vs to all this paines, and neede found out Sciences, and Artes: this differs much from the pleasing exer∣cise of Adam, in the state of Innocencie, which was, to walke the Garden of Eden, and to dresse that. For hee could haue found himselfe worke in that Garden, in the experience of many naturall Conclusions, whereof hee had the theorie and contemplation, in the perfection of his Image, but now by sinne expulsed thence, hee was put into a courser and homelier seruice. Thank sinne for the trauell of your whole life: and when you groane vnder wearie burdens, and feele the tedi∣ous length of painefull iournies, cry peccavi: for that hath brought vpon thee all this. 4 Let vs thanke our God, who hath by these our callings, set vs into a course: first, of thrift, both to relieue our necessities, & to gather some∣thing for posteritie: secondly, of charitie to sup∣ply the wants of our needy brethren, whom God
hath cast vpon our charity, & for whom we must labour: thirdly, of policie, to support the Com∣mon-wealth, in which we liue: For the Plough helpeth to support the Crowne, and all lawfull vocations haue as a particular & priuate gaine to the industrious agents themselues, so also a most profitable resultance to the Common-wealth. In which kinde the Merchant and the Mariner haue their speciall right done them, to be estee∣med men working bono publico, for the common good. They that plow the sea for an haruest, and goe to a people whose language they vnderstand not, to vent the ouer-plus of our plentie: and to import into these Dominions, the rich exchange of forraine commodities: these giue much con∣tent at home and abroad, and diuide the benefit of their labours amongest vs, and our neygh∣bours: the fruits whereof are these two, Riches, and Peace. 5 Let the name of a way giuen to our calling, set vs a going. Wayes are not for sitting or stan∣ding, or lying, for eating, or sleeping, but pro∣perly for going: And let vs walke in these wayes, not as Fooles, but as Wise, not in surffeting and drunkennesse: For that turneth men into beasts: not in wantonnesse, for that softneth the hard temper of validitie, and melteth magnanimi∣tie▪ and high spirites into basenesse: not in couetousnesse, for that maketh vs Idolaters, to giue our Golde the honour which is onelie due to him that hath made both it and vs also:
Not in pride, for that robbeth vs of our selues, and maketh vs our owne Idoles: not in enuy, for that maketh vs fall when others rise: not in con∣tention, for that armeth the right hand against the left, and teacheth the teeth to bite the tongue: not in idlenesse, for that is the rust of Vertue: not in disobedience to Superiours, for that is Anarchie and confusion: not in disobedience to God, for that is theomachy and rebellion: and if thou doe fall into any of these wayes, thou arte not in the way, wherein of right thou oughtest to walke. There was a rich yong man and a Ruler, (for so the Euangelists doe expresse him) who fearing that hee went not in the right way, came run∣ning with all speede in his body, and with as much zeale in affection: and kneeling with humi∣litie and reuerence in outward gesture, demann∣ded of IESVS CHRIST, Maister, what shall I doe thay I may inherite life euerlasting? Let him be our example, seeing wee must needs walke, let vs goe to IESVS CHRIST to enquire the way. I am the way (saith hee) and no man goeth to the Father but by me. They that make their owne reason and vnderstanding, or their owne appetite and will, the Bynosure or Pole-star, by which they stiere their course, in this Medi∣terrane Sea of humane life. They that sound their deapth with their owne lead, their owne leaden and mis-led iudgement: they that fill their sailes with the gale of popular breath, and haue no bet∣ter
Anchors then earthly hopes, nor truer Com∣passe then humane fore▪cast, wonder not if they founder in the Sea, or wracke in the hauen where they thinke to sing Welcome home. 6 The name of Wayes here vsed, admonisheth vs, that wee are farre from home, we are in via, trauelling home-ward, let the hope of home∣cheere, the tedious passages of our weary pilgri∣mage heere on earth: and let the name of a waie, put vs out of desire to build Tabernacles heere, or to seeke residence where wee haue but our passage. 2 We must commit these wayes to God. Devolve te super Iehovam: Cast thy selfe vpon God; it is as much as, Cast your care vpon God: it is a Precept much vrged by our Sauiour, in his Sermon vpon the Mount, that wee should not bee too solicitous for the things belonging to this life. Many arguments are there vrged: Con∣sider, 1 The power of God, who can prouide for vs. 2 The goodnesse of God, who will doe it. 3 The euill that wee suffer in the racke, the distraction of minde. 4 The disabling of vs in the seruice of God: For these cares doe not allow vs time to serue God: and they be those thornes that choake the good Seede in vs. It was merrily spoken of the Cynicke Philosopher, who being laid downe to rest, & his purse by him, espied one who thought
him asleepe, secretly reaching at it, to whom he said; Aufer vt vter{que} securius dormiamus. Take it that wee may both sleepe the sounder. He found that a little mony troubled his rest, and brought him care, and therefore easily parted with it: they that doe know these things to be cares, stoope vnder them as burthens, they that esteeme them as rich treasures, stoope to them, and adore them as idoles. Let thy wayes be honest and lawfull, and com∣mit them to the Lord boldly: let no man thinke, that God wil beare him out in dishonest courses. And bee thou moderate in the way, for it ad∣uauneeth the speede of thy iourney. VVhen Ia∣cob recommended his way to God, hee made ve∣ry few and moderate demaunds. If God will bee with mee, and will keepe me in this iourney, which I goe, and will giue mee bread to eate, and cloathes to put on, &c. Genesis the eighteenth chapter and twentith verse. Such a way wee may boldly cast vpon God, and he will take charge of vs. Agur the sonne of Iakeh so desired to be limi∣ted by Almighty God: Giue mee not pouertie, nor riches, feede mee with foode conuenient for me, Pro∣uerbs the thirtieth chapter and the eighth verse: This hee thought a safe way, betweene the dan∣ger of Fullnesse, which is The deniall of God: and the danger of Necessitie: which is, Taking of the name of God in vaine. To speake more particularly to you, whose goodes, and whose persons, in the eie of man,
seeme a great deale more endangered, being ad∣uentured on the Seas, then theirs, who abide on firme land: to you I say; Commit your wayes to the Lord: his way is also in the Sea, and vpon the great deepe: and his prouidence is not confined to the shoare, in the many fearefull appearances of danger and death, in the hideous noyse of the windes and waters, remember to cheere vp your selues as the Apostle doth. But I know whom I haue trusted, I haue committed my wayes, and re∣sted my hopes vpon him that careth for me. To this purpose, it is an holy wisedome in the Ad∣uenturers, to make good choice of the Maister, and Officers of the shippes, that take charge: let them be such as feare God, that for their sakes God will be fauourable to the voyage, and bring them to the Hauen where they would be: and let God be earnestly solicited for his blessing vpon the voyage. For (as Moses saith) so may you all say, at the setting saile first, & at your first weigh∣ing of anchor: If thy presence goe not foorth with vs, carry vs not hence, Exodus chapter thirty three and fift verse: So shall he bring you to the Ha∣uen where you would be. 3 This is done by faith in God: trust in him. True faith is knowne by this note among ma∣ny others, it trusteth God only, with the successe of all our actions, but vseth all the meanes that God affords for th'accomplishment of our ends. He that at Sea sits still, hauing charge of a shippe, and commands his company to rest, saying God
shall be Maister of the Ship, and hee shall bring it to the desired Port; shall neuer arriue. Dauid expresseth Gods ready and gratious helpe, but it is when the Marriner hath done his best, and is now at his wittes end, when all his Cunning is gone, when the Saylors stagger like drun∣ken men, then the Lord commeth betweene them and their danger, and maketh the storme to cease: Teaching that where we haue vsed our whole en∣deuour, there wee may safely cast our selues vpon Diuine Prouidence. An excellent example hereof Saint Luke rela∣teth in Paules voyage, where the danger was great, the ship laden, and the soules aboue 276, they had so sore a tempest, that with their owne hands they cast forth the very Tackling of the ship, Neither Sunne, nor Starre, for many daies ap∣peared, and no small tempest lay on them, all hope that they should bee saued was taken away, then God, by his Angell, promised to Paul by night, that hee would giue him all that sayled with him: yet the same S. Paul did require, that they that could swimme should cast themselues into the sea, and eseape so: others, should lay hold on boords and broken peeces of the ship; so trusting vpon the promise of God that they did neglect no meanes of safety. That wee may boldly trust to him in times of danger, it is required that wee seeke him in faire weather, least hee know vs not in a storme: they that make no conscience to offend God in their
mirth, doe loppe the tree which should shade them from the Sunne-beames, and shelter them from a shower: they that prouoke God to anger, cut the bough they stand vpon, and make them∣selues fall. It is holy policie, to maintaine friend∣shippe and loue with our God, that in the most growne Sea of tribulation, wee may Commit our way to the Lord, and trust in him. Saint Paul thinketh it the most reasonable ser∣uice of God, for vs to giue vp our bodies to him a liuing sacrifice, to make a Present of our felues to God, and we cannot loose by it. It is recorded of Socrates, that whereas he re∣ceiued great rewards of his Schollers, for his rea∣ding to them, Aeschines a poore Auditor of his hauing nothing to giue him, said; Quod vnum ba∣beo, meipsum tibi dono, qui plus dederunt, tibi reli∣querunt plus. Hauing nothing else to giue thee in reward, I bestow my selfe vpon thee; they that haue giuen thee more, haue left thēselues more: and he did this to his owne great aduantage: for Socrates tooke it so kindly, that he answered him: Habebo curam, vt te tibi reddam meliorem quam accepi. I wil haue a care to restore thee to thy selfe better then I receiued thee. Our God requireth, saying, My sonne, glue me thy heart. And Danid saith, Thou shalt make me to vnderstand wisedome in the secret in my heart: so gaining by the giuing of himselfe away to God. But this is no sufficient trial of our trust in God, if wee onely trust to him in respect of the good
which wee receiue from him. Sathan will in∣forme against vs, that if Almightie God shall once punish vs, Then we will curse God to his face. Therefore the triall of our Faith and Trust, is in affliction and want, when wee are vnder the rod of God, when hee smiteth, and yet we praise his name, euen when we smart, and when our feare commeth. This will be a good euidence for vs, that it is not because wee are idle, that wee doe depend so confidently vpon God. It was the false chal∣lenge of Israel by King Pharaoh, That they desi∣red to goe and serue their God, because they were idle; and therefore hee put more worke vp∣on them. Certainly, the Elect trust in the Lord, so as they neglect no duety by him enioyned, but doe mingle Obedience with their Faith: and al∣though there be many things which wee possesse in this world, which doe serue for good vse; for helpe, for delight, for necessity, all of them or∣dained for our good; yet wee finde none of all these worthy to be trusted; Trust not in Princes, nor in any sonne of man: Cease from man, whose breath is in his nosthrils; for wherein is he to be esteemed? Trust not in riches; If riches encrease, set not thine heart vpon them. Trust in God onely, hee can adde to thy sta∣ture, hee is thy auncient acquaintance, he knew thee in thy first shapelesse infirmity, he fashioned thee in the wombe, hee hath giuen thee breath and life to thy bodie, hee hath taken accompt of
euerie haire of thine head: hee saith, Put all thy teares in his bottle: and onely hee can say to thy Soule, I am thy saluation. Thus did Dauid recomfort his disconsolate Soule, why art thou so disquieted within me? trust in God: and such a trust it must be, as in this Psalme is followed with good life: For Dauid hauing first perswaded to trust in the Lord, ver. 3. He exhorts to be doing of good, verse 4. He requires to delight in the Lord: shewing that true Faith hath obedi∣ence to expresse it, and delight to encourage it. 4. The successe of this dependance: He shal bring it to passe. He that soweth, soweth in hope of an Haruest, the righteous are promised to eate, The fruit of their labours. How can hee but prosper in his wayes, who maketh his beginuing at him, who is the alpha, and beginning of all things? how can the tree be vnfruitfull, which the right hand of God hath planted, and set by riuers of waters, to water it at the roote, and refresh it with sho∣wers of the earely and latter raine? Learne then, 1 To acknowledge God the author of the suc∣cesse of all thy affaires, that thou mayest enter∣taine both prosperous & disastrous euents, with equall thankes-giuing. The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, in both Blessed be the name of the Lord: take heed of Sacrificing to thine owne net: or kissing thy owne hand: in which two phrases is ex∣prest our thanking our selues, for the successe of our delights.
2 Learne to know how far thy care may stream it selfe, and where it must rest, the industry in the vse, aswell as the wisedome in the choice, of law∣full and likely meanes; both these are Gods gifts to thee, and he requireth of thee, that thou em∣ploy them in thine affaires and businesses of life, but the issue is the Lords; let not thy care disquiet thee for the euent: take heede of that compasse wisedome which so belaieth euents, as if God should not interpose a Crosse: this tasteth much of selfe-confidence, and distrust in God. The ser∣uants of God haue euer found it safe, to cast their care vpon God: it must needes be a way of thrift: for God which holdeth nothing from them that bee of an vpright heart. And the Apostle saith, That Godlinesse is great riches. There be few of vs, but haue experience sometimes, the Mariner more then the most, that God doth sometimes plunge vs in such hopelesse impossibilities, that our best reason can finde no euasion, the Mariners cun∣ning failes him, & we are lost in our bethinkings, yet he giueth an issue, and all to make vs acknow∣ledge that it was he that he brought it to passe. To him be giuen all glory, of whom we begge all things necessary, and in him be all our trust and confidence, from this time forth and for euer∣more, Amen.
Zebuluns Blessing: The fourth Sermon. PSAL. 95. 5. The Sea is his, and hee made it. IN this Psalme, the faithfull doe prouoke one another to praise the Lord: two things are especially vrged, to in∣duce this duetie: First, the greatnes: Second, the good∣nes of God: his greatnes is 1 proclaimed v. 3. for the Lord is a great God &c. 2 exem∣plified 1 on earth, 2 at Sea: in my Text, in which, 1 in profundis, the deep places. 2 in summ. lati Sus, the highest mountaine.
let vs consider these three things; 1 Opus, the worke done, the Sea. 2 Opificem, the Worke-maister, he made it. 3 Dominium, the soueraigntie ouer it, it is his. 1 The workConcerning the worke done, the Sea, it is a worke of that nature, that it hath in it, opera, and mirabilia, both Workes and Wonders: for here is. 1 Miraculum in modo: a miracle in the maner of the operation. For as S. Ambrose saith: eodem modo producitur balaena, quo rana, non laborat Deus in maximis, non fastidit in minimis: he makes the whale as easily as the frog, he doth not trauell in the production of greatest creatures, nor scorne the production, and creation of the least. 2 Miraculum in modo: a wondet in the knitting together of these two elements of water, & earth in one sphaericall and round body. There bee foure things which make the worke of this creation of the Sea most admirable. 1 Situs. The situation of the Sea, which God hath so wonderfully diuided from the earth, that wee may haue a drie land to dwell vpon, and yet so ioyned it to the earth, that it is one Globe with it. 2 Motus. The ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which is the naturall Motion, and the violent Agitation of the great waters by the force of the windes: the first is rather disputed then resolued in the Schooles of natural learning, and the won∣der is of all confessed.
Faetus. The breed of the Sea is yeelded to bee full of wonder, so many sundry sorts of fishes, & they multiplying so innumerably, that the Sea is thought more rich in the varietie of creatures, then the earth, & in the number more populous, and many of our creatures on earth daily disco∣uered to resemble those on the shoare. 4 Vsus The vse of the Sea is another wonder, for it is diuers, I wil limit my selfe; it is foure-fold: 1 Naturall, 2 Artificiall, 3 Morall, 4 Diuine. In the naturali vse of the Sea S. Ambrose noteth:1 Naturall. 1 It is Hospitium fluuiorum, the receptacle of all riuers: for as all riuers come from the Sea tho∣row the secret passages of the earth, whereby the inward parts of the earth are humected, and the secret mines of the earth, which are hidden trea∣sures, are hereby maintained: so do all riuers re∣turne againe to the Sea, and here they exonerate themselues, whose ouerflow would else oppresse the earth, that they seem rather ad sitim, to quēch the thirst of the dry Land, then ad ebrietatem, to drowne it: Thus the earth is dreined, and the Sea is that common Sewer to carry away all the waste thereof. 2 It is Fons imbrium; For from hence doth the Sunne exhale those vapours which being bound vp in clouds, by the almighty hand of God, are by the same hand let lose againe, to water the earth, and to refresh the surface thereof, with the earely and latter raine, whereby the inheritance of God is cheered and repaired.
2 ArtificialSecondly, the Art of man hath made the sea vsefull, as S. Ambrose obserueth further, for sundry purposes. The first is inuectio Commeatuum, it yeeldeth vs for food sundry sorts of fishes, both wholesome, and delicate prouisions, that the sea contendeth with the earth both for plenty, variety, and deli∣cacy. The second is Copula distantium: For nauiga∣tion hath by exportation and importation, made such exchange of commodities of seuerall Nati∣ons, as hereby Marchandize, one of the strong sinewes of Common-wealthes, the riches and peace of ciuill States is maintained, and distant Nations heereby confederate. The third is Compendium it ineris: For shipping doth make great burthens light, and long waies short: And Art hath scatce brought forth two more admirable inuentions for common good, then the building of good shippes, and the naui∣gation in them. The fourth is partly naturall, and partly artifi∣ciall, and it is Furoris impedimentum; for nature hauing digged this ditch betweene diuerse King∣domes, they are so much the more out of one anothers danger, seeing the preparation for Na∣uigation, and sea-fight, aske time, and giue the bloud leaue to coole, that passion cannot make sudden incursion, and the windes are at no mans command; and Art hath deuised both defenses at Sea fit for the propulsation of an enemy in equall
correspondence, and fortifications ashoare in fit landing places, to keepe off the enemie; all ser∣uing to stoppe fury in the greatest and most vio∣lent pressure. 3 The morall vse of the Sea in Nauigation, is also foure fold. 1 As Saint Ambrose saith, it is Secretum tempe∣rantiae; the secret of Temperance: for there doe men liue priuately, content with small cabbins, garments rather for necessary vse, then vnneces∣sary shew; foode no more then sufficient: vtun∣tur mundo: men there doe but vse the world to serue their turnes, and a little serueth them. 2 It is Exercitium continentiae: the exercise of Continence: for ashoare the eye doth euill offi∣ces to the heart, and it is the window of concu∣piscence: one of the best conseruators of holines in the heart, is priuatio obiecti, the want of that obiect which is full of temptation. Iob made a couenant with his eye against tempting obiects: at Sea men are remoued from this danger, and depriued of the meanes to offend, so the tempta∣tion is disabled, & the tempter vnweaponed: the things of this world turne often into facultates male agendi, instruments and abilities to offend, but the poore that want these, receiue the Gos∣pel: faire sights, full meals, soft lodgings, and lei∣sure, be Satans arms against the sonnes of men. 3 It is Domus laboris, the house of Labour; men at Sea rest by turnes, there is no shutting vp of doores, and all to bed: this labour doth make
their rest sweete, and their dyet wholesome, and nourishing: surely worke is no where done with more speed, and with lesse feare of wind and wea∣ther, then at Sea; and the labours of the body bee armours of thr soule against temptations. Here is labor necessitatis, Necessity maketh euery man put hand to worke: and labor charitatis: charity maketh some to spell others, that some do watch, whilest others sleepe, and some labour whilest o∣ther rest. Some haue compared a shippes company to a Common-wealth; I would our Common∣wealth were comparable to a shippes company, euen for this, that we would be content to watch and labour one for another, all for the safety of the whole body: if in a shippe no mans safety is in single care for himselfe, but in the common good of the company; so is it in the Common∣wealth also: therefore no politike body can pro∣sper, or make a good voyage, where priuate re∣spects make prize of publique proiects, where the little finger will weare a Diamond, though the stomacke which feedeth all, doe want meate to sustaine the whole body. This S. Paul so earnest∣ly disswadeth, that he calleth the mutuall loue of Christians, the bond of loue tying vs together. 4 It is Schola disciplinae,; the schoole of disci∣pline, for in a ship all men know their places, and seruice: and there be two waies in which men go; faciendo bonum, euery man doing his duety: or, patiendo malum, the offenders suffering worthie
punishment. Discreete Maisters and Captaines haue such encouragements for such as deserue well, and bilbowes, and the yard arme, and o∣ther punishments for foule offenders; they haue spurres for the idle, and resty, & restraints for stay of the rash and ouer-hardy. They find order to be one of the well-fares of their voyages, and some stormes within-boorde, as necessary to rouze vp their men, as fowle-weather without. Many haue compared the Church of God to a shippe, both of our Protestant, and of our Ad∣uersary-writers, but we do not both acknowledge one maister thereof. Our master is a master of the Trinitie-house, the second Person in the holy Tri∣nity: God the sonne, who hath called his Apostles & Euangelists, and Disciples, & their successors, the now ministers of the word of God, to be Mai∣sters-mates in this spirituall Nauigation. Their master is the Pope of Rome, who like a notorious Pirat, boords the ship, & then runs away with hir. Let some of our owne, who doe not relish our church-gouernment, see how they can like theirs in a ship, which is the modell of a Church. 4 The Diuine vse of the Sea, and the nauigati∣on4 Diuine. 1 Contempla∣tion. vpon it, is, 1 for Contemplation: 2 for Deuo∣tion: we haue there a double contemplation: first, of God: in whom wee doe there behold; first of God: secondly, of our selues. 1 His power in the whole element it selfe, and the working of it, and the creatures in it, toawe vs with feare of his so great Maiesty.
2 His wisedome, in the gouernment of all, and his managing of the whole creature, and the fur∣nishing of it with such admirable variety. 3 His mercy, in addressing all this to the vse and seruice of man: O what is man that thou art so mindefull of him: thou hast made him to haue dominion ouer the Sea, and of the Fishes thereof, thy paths are in the great waters, thy way is in the Sea: and thou hast taught man to find a way there. 2 For our selues; Two things fall into our contemplation: 1 There is no place that better sheweth vs whereof wee are made, then the Sea doth. There is no difference of hands, but as all are made of the same stuffe, so they goe all to the same vse; for in times of danger, euery man put∣teth his whole strength▪ and wit to it to saue the whole, and in want of victualls, euery mans share is alike: the force of weather beats vpon all alike: Nature euer carrieth an equall hand to all the sonnes of Adam, it fauours none more then o∣ther: the world is a flatterer, and putteth diffe∣rence. 2 There is no place that better admonisheth vs of our end, for it bringeth death so neare the eye, and filleth the sense so full of it, that often dangers can not but be a meanes to set the house in order, and prepare for death. And expectati∣on of death hath euer prouided aboue all perswa∣sions, to bring a man home to himselfe, and to God. 2 For Deuotion. Saint Ambrose calleth it In∣centivum2 Deuotion.
devotionis: The kindler of Deuotion: for heere is euermore matter for Diuine Seruice, seeing occasions are often renued for prayers and thankes-giuing, much more sensible, then ashore: And the Seruice of God generally, is both more frequently, more reuerently, and more heartily performed in well-gouerned shippes at Sea, then on the dry Land: For ashoare our zeale, is like fire in a chimny, which hath much colde aire a∣bout it, to allay the heate thereof: aboorde our zeale is like fire in a Stoaue, so inclosed and kept in, and out of the colde gale of temptations, that Deuotion is ready to come and fall downe, and kneele and worship before the Lord our Maker. The fault is, that this holinesse and deuotion in many doth liue but the age of a storm, or some fearfull danger; and in most, but the age of a voy∣age. The Fare-well and Well-come home, are commonly as giddy and reeling as the storme at Sea: but the danger more, because the feare is lesse; the one seasoneth a Soule for Heauen, the other transformeth men into beasts, and robbeth them of themselues. Of the worke thus farre: The Sea. 2 The worke∣maister.2 God is the Creator of this worke: He made it: euen he alone, who standeth thus differenced from all other gods. Who is so great a God as our God? Lord, who is like to thee? The Sea was part of the worke of the third day, and God saw it good: all inferior workemen haue praise from their worke, when it is well done: Gods workes
doe praise him, but he them much more: it is the glory of the great and little world too, that God made both. The Sea remayneth of all things beneath the maine most like to the Creation, for we reade not of any speciall curse put vpon the Sea, at the fall of man: and in the punishment of the olde world, the Sea was the rod of Gods wrath: & God honoured the Sea in a memorable Miracle of the Israelites passage through the middest of it on dry land. Saint Ambrose limiteth this worke too much, Fecit mare Deus propter elementi pulchritudinem: God made ths Sea for the beuty of that Elements sake, that is true, but not enough. For all is  The world is beauty: but hee saith, Non ad naui∣gandum: God did not make the Sea, to saile vpon it. Dixit Deus, dominamini piscium maris, non, na∣uigate in fluctibus. God said (saith he) beare rule ouer the fishes of the Sea: he said not, saile you in the way thereof. Alas! it were a poore domi∣nion that man should haue ouer the Sea, if there were not nauigation; and God made it not for shew, without vse. It is enough to proue it good in the Creation, and good for the vse of man, that he made it: for he made all things for man, & man for himselfe, and his owne especiall seruice. Heare Dauid particularizing Gods words, & mans lord∣ship: Thou madest him to haue dominion ouer thePsal. 8, 6. works of thy hands. thou hast put all things vnder his feet: all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field.
The fowle of the ayre, and the fish of the Sea, & what∣soeuer passeth through the paths of the Seas. And from thence we heare of his glory, and they that vse nauigation, doe behold it. S. Ambrose challengeth man most iustly. God said to the waters: Be you gathered together in one place, and they were so: He often calleth vpon men, saying; Congregamini, gather yee together in full congregations, to call on the name of the Lord, and they are slacke in the performance of this du∣tie. God loueth full assemblies in the house of his seruice, as all the waters runne into the Sea. Schis∣maticall conuenticles be but ponds, and fennes, they are not collectio aquarum, the gathering toge∣ther of waters into one. Further, He made it, concludeth against the e∣ternitie of it, the dreame of some Philosophers, who fancied an eternitie of this lower world. Must we needs determine the world eternall, be∣cause we are not made priuy to the operations of God before time? Here in is a sinnefull curiositie, to be ouer-busie-Questionists, where there is a certaine impossibilitie to be resolued. Dauid saith hee made the Sea; so doth Moses, let the Sea therefore do him all the honor it can; much more wee, for whom hee made the Sea, and who haue found our paths in the great waters. 3 The lord∣ship and do∣minion of the Sea.3 God is Lord and owner of the Sea. The Sea is his: he made not the Sea, as workmen on earth, who when they haue sinished their work, do then forsake it, but he retaineth the lordship, and he
performeth gouernance and protection to it, and euer keepeth the possession of it; Man hath but the vse and seruice of these inferiour creatures. A great happinesse is this to man, that the sea is his, and not ours: for what man on earth would, rather all the men on earth could not, rule and manage this vnruly and boisterous ele∣ment, onely God can and doth, still the noise of the sea, and appease the waues thereof. The waues of the sea are wonderfull, but God on high is morePsal. 65. 7. Psal. 9. 4. mighty. Thou rulest the raging of the sea, when the wauesPsal. 89. 9. thereof arise thou stllest them: Of which Dauid maketh this vse: O Lord of Hosts, who is a strong God like vnto thee? This rule, which God doth exercise vpon the sea, sheweth, that wee can go no whither out of Gods Dominions: Ionah fled from the presence of the Lord to sea, and God met him there in a violent storme, for the sea is his: Of all sorts of offendours God hath no fugitiues to punish: For whither shall I flie from thy presence? If I abide on earth: The earth is the Lords: If I clime vp in∣to heauen, thou art there: If I go to sea, the sea is thine also: Thine, 1 By right of creation. 2 By right of Dominion, for none but hee, and hee can command it: Hee setteth it bounds which it shall not passe: Hee hath said: HithertoIob 38. 11. shalt thou come, and heere shall the pride of thy waues stay.
3 He hath right of protection, for it is he that protecteth by his prouidence the Sea, and al that liueth in, or trauelleth vpon it. Therefore whatso∣euer good we expect at Sea, we must goe to him for it: and whatsoeuer good wee receiue by the way of the Sea, we must thanke him for it. Many doe call Sea-aduentures, especially in long voyages, casuall, and they thinke liues des∣perately hazarded vpon great waters, let them re∣member, The Sea is his: it neither swelleth nor swalloweth without leaue: he hath done whatsoe∣uer he will in the Sea, and in the great deepes. Ther∣fore let God haue glory of all our good successes there, let him haue our deuout prayers for all ad∣uentures both of goods, and especially of persons employed there: and when losses come, let vs say with Iob: The Lord hath taken away, and I was dumbe, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord diddest it. With Dauid, The Sea shall giue vp the dead, which it hath swallowed, in the resurrecti∣on of all flesh, as well as the earth: and the Elect of God shal find as ready a way to the rest of God throgh these waters, as the people of Israel, found to Canaan through the red Sea. God giue vs all an happy and glorious meeting there. For wee haue heere no abiding Cittie; Amen, Amen.
Zebuluns Blessing: The fifth Sermon. Preached Anno 1610. DEVTER. 30. Verse 13 Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou shouldest say, who shall goe ouer the Sea for vs, and bring it vs, and cause vs to heare it, that we may doe it.Verse 14 But the word is very neare vnto thee, euen in thy mouth, and in thy heart for to do it. MOses, in this whole Chapter perswadeth Israel to Obedi∣ence of the Law and word of GOD: the Argument which hee vseth in this my Text to enforce this, is drawne from the facilitie of obtaining the benefite of this word: in the vrging of which argument, Mo∣ses presseth two considerations.
1 Of the trauell that many men are put to for many necessaries, to goe to Sea, and to seeke them in forraine and remote parts. 2 Of the benefit Israel had, who for the grea∣test and best commodity of all, euen for the word of God, needed no such paines, for they had that neare them. In which comparison he discouereth clearely to them, the mercy of their God in mat∣ters of most deare account, not to faile them. Of the first: In the diuision of countries one frō another by the great sea, God maks Zebuluns por∣tion to border by the sea side, & sets men aworke to study and practise the art & skil of Nauigation, which both in religion and policy aduaunceth a common good: For since the curse of God for sinne doth presse sweate out of all mens browes: and seeing Saint Paul would not haue them Eate that refuse to labour, and policy it selfe cannot dis∣pense with idlenesse; this is one of the meanes by which many are set on work, both in the building of ships, and in the vse of them at Sea, and in the necessary businesses of merchandize, or of warre wherein they are employed. And therefore, if a∣ny man be so vnwise, to thinke that the charge giuen to Adam, to till the earth, doth binde men, euen all his posteritie, to that onely labour for their liuing vpon the earth, and that all other trauaile is vnlawfull: let him, know, that when Moses said, The Lord made the Heauen and the Earth, he included the Sea also. And therefore their calling is also lawfull, that
till and plow the Seas for an Haruest, and thrifti∣tily husband them, to their owne priuate, and to the common good. So that saying of God to man, Vesceris pan tuo, doth intend more then foode, and more foode then bread, as wee doe see the extent of that word in the Lordes prayer, where daily bread doth include all things of ne∣cessarie vse for the life of man, which things are not alway on this side the seas; & where the great deep diuides vs from these things, we must trauel & vēture our goods or persons or both of them. Thus God wil haue it knowne that he hath set his right had on the flods, that both land & sea might praise him. This diuision of kingdome from king∣dome was not to diuide so much, as to vnite thē, that too neare neighbour-hood might not make one troblesome to another, and that by exchange of comodities Princes & people of diuided nati∣ons might maintaine trading, which are the per∣swaders to, and the fruits and signes of peace. Yet it seemeth that men multiplied exceeding∣ly, & it was very long before the art of Nauigation was in any vse; for most writers do agree, that the Arke of Noah was the first flotie vessell, that euer was made, & a very auncient Greeke author that writeth the Testaments of the Patriarchs affirmes, that Zebulun the Sonne of olde Israel, was the first that euer deuised, either to set mastes aboord, or to spreade sailes: whosoeuer hee were that first aduentured it, the Poet thought him to be a man of a during spirit, and bold vndertaking.
Illi robur & as triplex circa pectus erat, qui fragi∣lem truci commisit pelago ratem primus. The mat∣ter which Moses presseth in this Text, is the tra∣uell and perill that men endure on earth, especi∣ally Sea-men, and Merchants that trauaile for the meanes of their maintenance vpon the great waters. Yet euen these men haue these notable comforts of their life, accompanying them in these their wayes. First, they see the workes of God▪ and his wonders in the deepe: and seeing this is the meditation of Gods power, it breedeth in them the feare of the Lord, which is the beginning of their wisedome: And the way to Obedience is, to beginne at the feare of Gods power, and to pro∣ceede to the loue of his goodnesse and mercie: for we must beginne at the consideration of our our sinne, and that will bring vs to the Court of Gods iustice, and from hence wee shall very di∣ligently seeke out CHRIST our Redeemer ap∣pealing to the Court of Gods mercie. Secondly, you that are Sea-men, haue a most notable & continuall consideration of the good prouidence of Almightie God going in and out with you, and protecting you from dangers, and making his vnruly and boisterous creatures, the windes, and the Seas to serue you, and teaching you to finde out a path in the inuious and vast waters. Thirdly, as amongest the auncient Romans this had wont to be a principle in experience that ca∣stra were scholae virtutum, Tents in war, were the
Schools of Virtues, because men that liued there in continuall expectation of their death, liued preparedly to entertaine an end of their delights, and dangers: so mee thinkes we may as properly say that Naues be scholae virtutum: shippes are the schooles of Virtues: For therein are learned ma∣ny notable vertues, Diuine and Morall: For ex¦ample. 1 Diligence in the Seruice of God: For in all well-gouerned shippes, they beginne and end the day with Prayers, and hearing of the holy word read vnto them, they sing Psalmes with a most vnited cheare of heart and voyce. They pray with affection and zeale, euen with a full and perfect sense of their wants, and hereunto they haue ma∣ny prouocations. For the rule of Almighty God is true eternally, I will smit them, and they will call vpon mee. Perills and hazards of body and goods, will soone moue vs to seeke the face of God, euen as the Prophet Dauid saith, right earely. 2 Sparing and contentment with alittle both in diet and apparrel for these be the Schooles of temperance, and therefore those that do so farre forget their owne dangers,, and prouoke Gods displeasure by drinking immoderately, till they stand as vnsteady as their Vessell, which is tossed vpon the waters, sinne presumptuously against Almighty God, and shew that they despise the ri∣ches of Gods mercie: inciting them by so many in∣ducements to repentance and mediocritie.
3 Vigilancy is taught here, for the charge of so much worth as the vessel that houseth thē, and the goods that fill it, and the lines of those persons that menage and rule it is so great, that they share and diuide the night, and time of rest, amongst them, to keepe continuall and carefull watch to preuent such dangers as may encounter carelesse and sleepy negligence: O that in our Spirituall Nauigation, vpon the seas of this troublesome world, our soules did keepe so true, and vnsleepy watch, to auoid all temptations that either, of our three dangerous enemies, the flesh, the world, and the deuill, by the helpe of our owne corrupt concupisence shall at any time suggest, to with∣draw vs from the obedience which wee owe to our God. 4 Expedition and dispatch of present busi∣nesse is notably taught aboard your shippes, that which you do is directed and performed at once, and without delay: the counsell of the Maister is seene in the hand of the company, and directi∣on goeth the neerest way from the head to the hand: present perill, requires present aduise, and execution: Make it your soules case with al∣mighty God, and delay not your repentance, for the gusts and stormes of wrath and iudge∣ment, menace this vessell of frailty with foun∣dring and ouersetting. 5 Your shippes are the schooles of hardnesse and patient endurance, high winds, rough seas, raging waues, cold nights, wet skinnes, parching
heats, thinne diet, hard lodging, watchings, and vntimely breakings of the houres of rest; these be the familiar and ordinary guests, which Sea-men doe entertaine. And these they beare out with such easie sufferance, that they are fit for action and employment abroad, & their seruice is made by this meanes profitable to the common-wealth in which they liue: And if you endure thus much abroad, to seeke your temporall goodes, let it not grieue you, nor any true Christian, to put vp more sorrowes for an eternall weight of glo∣rie, graciously prouided for all them that serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce before him with re∣uerence. One thing more I remember as a great com∣fort in the furthest distance from home, and from any land, consider how farre God hath remoued you from those many and dangerous temptati∣ons, which ashoare doe entertaine your eies and eares, and thoughts, with varietie of false delight and pleasure, to divert and swarue your thoughts from grace and gooduesse; and the better to giue way to this happy weaning of you from vanitie, it shall testifie well of your holie desires that way, to make good choice of your companie that goe with you, that there be none of notorious euill condition: and for that, the example of king Da∣uid in his house-gouernement is verie notable, make it your owne by imitation of it, and say; Mine eie shall be vnto the faithfull of the Land, thatPsal. 101. 6. they may goe in my shippe, he that walketh in a per∣fect
way he shall serue mee. There shall no deciptfull person lye aboord my shippe, hee that telleth lies shall not abide in my sight. A master thus accompanied, a companie thus gouerned, a shippe thus managed, giue and take comforts by mutuall exchange. To such a shippe is the vertuous Woman com∣pared by Salomon: She bringeth her Merchandise from farre away. The scond part of my Text sheweth the riches of the mercie and loue of God, which in this comparison appeareth most gracious: for you take all this paines for the meate that perisheth, and for the cloathes that weare out, and come to nothing; but there is yet a farre more worthie and noble diet then this. For, Man shall not liue by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. This Word of God is to be had and enioyed at home, without our trauelling to forraigne and remote parts. Thus Israell had it: thus wee haue it: By the Word of God is meant in this place, the Law of God, and so by consequent the Gospell: for the Law is our Schole-master to CHRIST. These two bee the Rodde and the Staffe of the great Shepheard of our soules, IESVS CHRIST, with which he doth correct and sup∣port his flocke. This commoditie must not, as o∣thers, bee valued by the desire that men haue to it: For Merchants employ their stocke in those things that may yeeld them the best market, and their transmarine wares are valued, according
to the want of them heere with vs: but the com∣moditie of the Word of Almightie God is such, as the greatest part of the VVorld doe neglect and esteeme no better of then Foolishnesse: onely some few that haue made proofe thereof, haue found it to be such an haruest, that like vnto the couetous rich man in the Parable in the Gospel: they haue not spared to pull downe the olde and narrow Barnes, and haue built new in their pla∣ces; euen new hearts, to receiue in the VVord of GOD, with an holie couetousnesse, striuing to engrosse, and to stirre vppe the commoditie thereof. And this thriftie couetize, is an infallible marke of the Childe of God, as CHRIST our Lord and Sauiour hath expressed it, saying; He that is of God, heareth Gods word: you doe not heare because you are not of God, Iohn chapter 8. Dauid the Prophet had a perfect taste of this sweetnesse, and well vnderstoode how to value and esteeme it, as the whole hundred and nineteenth Psalme doth testifie for him; in which Psalme hee pre∣ferreth it to the honnie and the honnie-combe in sweetenesse; aboue Golde, and that refined Golde in puritie: and aboue precious and rich stones in worth and price: And wee, if wee will prize it according vnto the necessitie wee haue of it, must needes giue the first place to this holy word of God. For there is no way to the Father, but that which it teacheth: there is no passage to life, but by obedience, that is taught in the word
of the Law. No obedience openeth heauen, and satisfieth Gods iustice, and reconcileth man to God, but the obedience of IESVS CHRIST: that is the argument and summe of the word of the Gospel. Therefore aske CHRIST, What may I doe that I may haue eternall life? and hee wil presently send mee to the word; Keepe my Com∣maundements, Doe this and thou shalt liue. If then we value commodities by the necessa∣ry vse of them, the word of God chalengeth the first place, for there is no passage to the Father, but by IESVS CHRIST, and he is that word which was made flesh for vs. If wee value commodities by the profit, which they bring in to vs, the word of God doth carrie it away from all things else, seeing it is that which sheweth to vs the way of euerlasting life. When the Angell of God had loosed the Apostles out of prison, their charge was this: Goe your way and stand in the Temple, and speake to the people all the words of this life, that is, of life euerlasting, Acts 5. 20. S. Peter being sent for to Caesarea, the man of the house tolde him, that hee had seene an An∣gell which bade him send for him, saying: HeeActes 11. 14. shall tell thee wordes whereby thou and all thy whole house shall be saued. And what commodity like the word then, seeing it were no purchase, to gaine this world, and all the riches of it, and to for feit our soules to iudgement and death. If pleasure set price vpon our commodities,
what delight like to that which the word of GOD bringeth with it? Dauid calleth it the very ioy of his heart: and at such time as his heart had most neede of ioy. For Except thy Lawe had beene my delight, I had euen perished in mine affliction. Therefore when God threatned the sinnes of his people, to bring vpon them the rodde of his wrath. Hee threatned not a famine of bread, nor a famine of water, but of the word of God, meaning to depriue them of all spirituall comforts, and to expose them to temptations, taking from them the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, where∣with they should bee armed to offend their ene∣mies. We may therefore blesse the God of mercies, who hath opened to vs these rich treasures of grace, that wee haue both the word of God it selfe in plentie, and no Nation vpon the earth hath more helpes to aduaunce Religion and pure Deuotion then wee haue: so that wee neede not send beyond the Sea for the word of God. Indeede we are all afraid of that word of God, which is brought into our Land from beyond the Sea: for that is falsely so called, it is the word which commeth thence, that breedeth treasons and insurrections, which pioneth in the earth, and vnder the Parliament house, which buyeth, and congesteth great quantities of gunne-poul∣der, which toucheth the Lords Annoynted Prin∣ces, and doth his Prophets harme, which tur∣neth Religion into Policie, Veritie into Acqui∣uocations
and lies, charity into robbery, this word is written in the bloud of Princes. And in this particular you are men that may do good seruice to God and his Church, to our Soueraigne and this State, if you establish reli∣gious orders in your shippes, if you confirme your company in the true seruice of God, that they may take no infection abroad by the sug∣gestion of contrary doctrine, if you keepe your company aboard, so much as may bee, in places of danger to our Religion, and keepe watch vp∣on them in your necessary employments of them a shore, that the flye of Aegypt blow them not, that the Romish spider, which spreadeth vn∣seene nets, entangle them not, to inspire them with the naturall vnnaturall poison of their su∣perstition. And further, if you haue especiall care that there bee no importation of any dangerous bookes, or instruments of superstition, which being spread abroad in our Land, may infect the ignorant. And most of all, if you keepe good watch vp∣on such persons, as shall desire passage hither from beyond the seas; for an honest eye hath ad∣uantage of a dissembling presence, and the wise∣dome of a serpent, will soone detect the malice of a serpent: Take heart to you to doe these things, for God and your Country may haue most happy vse of your good seruice herein: And your businesse heerein is not great; for all idola∣ters,
and enemies vnto the trueth of Almightie God, are Fooles, and they may be taken in the craftie wilynesse that they haue imagined: All this to keepe Idolatry out of our Land. Remem∣ber the Israelites which sate weeping by the waters of Babel: They hung vppe their Harpes vpon the Willowes: for how should they sing the Song of the Lord in a strange Land? VVee shall haue more cause of griefe, and lesse patience to beare it, if euer those sonnes of strangers should come to sing their Songs in our Land to make Musique in our Church, and to set vp their Dagon, where wee haue now the Arke of Gods Couenant so well setled. Blessed be Almightie God for it, neuer since Ioseph that buried the bodie of CHRIST IESVS our Lord in his owne graue, did first preach the Gospel in this Land (as our Histories doe make faith) had this Land lesse need to send ouer Seas for the word of GOD: our Churches are many of them learnedly furnished with sufficient Pa∣stours. I dare say boldly and truely, neuer yet so well. Our Vniuersities the Seminaries of the Church, are like fruitfull gardens, neuer more hopefully growen: our Libraries neuer so bookt with all kind of learning. Thirdly, wee haue had Manna for gathering, now many happy years of peace togither: the tēp∣ter is potent to assault, and cunning to take ad∣uantage, and ready to surprize: the word of God is that double-edged weapon which hee feareth
most. They that haue it in a strange tongue, haue it always sheathed, it will not, it can not cut; they that haue it, and vse it not, haue it not, because they vse it not. You see it is a blessing to haue it neare to you, there is no better light in obscurity, or bridle in prosperitie, or spurre in stupiditie, or comfort in aduersitie, then to haue this word neare you: let Cor be Cordus; your hart your storier, os promus, your mouth the dispenser of this word: for with the heart man beleeueth this word to righ∣teousnesse, and with the tongue man confesseth to saluation: so shalt thou be a conuert, and a con∣uerter, because thou beleeuest, therefore thou wilt speake, and thou being conuerted shalt strengthen thy brethren. The God of this, and all other mercies, say: So be it. Laus Deo.
THE Remedy of Drought. ¶ Two Sermons, THE FIRST, Preached at Deptford, alias west-Greenewich, in the County of Kent, the thirty day of Iuly. 1615. By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Diuinitie. LONDON Printed by Nicholas Okes for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Crowne. 1616.
¶ To my Honoured friend, Sir John Scot, Knight. VVorthy Sir, TO keepe fresh the memorie of the mercie heerein expressed, I haue put these two Sermons into this way of suruiuing with posteritie, here is our Semination in prayers: and our Haruest in preuailings. Heere is Gods Semination in his benefite of
raine: and his Haruest our deuout Thankesgiuing. These I haue made bolde to communicate to the Church of God vnder your wel knowne and wel∣beloued name, as an acknowledgement of my debt to your loue of mee, who in short time haue learned to be euer bound vnto you. Deptford. S. P.
THE Remedy of Drought. The first Sermon. 1. KINGS 8. 35. When Heauen is shut vp, and there is no raine, because they haue sinned against thee: if they praie towardes this place, and confesse thy name, and turne from their sin, when thou afflictest them, &c. THese words are a part of that holy Prayer which Salomon sent vp to God, in the Dedi∣cation of his Temple: the Ar∣gument and Substance here∣of is, a remedy against Drowth: and they are a Supposition of a speciall inconuenience, which may heereaf∣ter fall vpon the people of Israel for sinne: For in this Prayer the King wisely and carefully fore∣casteth,
how the people may, in time to come, prouoke God to displeasure, and so draw vpon themselues seuerall iudgements, as corrections of their sinne, wherefore hee prayeth God, if a∣ny such thing befall, to receiue all those into fa∣uour, who by repentance and prayer do seeke to recouer him againe. The Supposition is double 1 Mali, of euill: and that is also two-fold. 1 Mali poenae, of the punishing euill, in the shutting vp of heauen: no raine. 2 Mali culpae, of the euil of transgression, because they haue sinned. 2 Remedij: of the remedy which is, 1 Prayer. 2 Confession of his name. 3 Repentance. First, of the Supposition of the euill that is in pu∣nishment, when Heauen is shut vp: that is, when there is no raine. For the Heauens are the store∣houses of this lower world, containing those treasures wherewith God doth enrich the earth: so God speaketh by Moses: The Lord shall open to thee his good treasure, the Heauen to giue thee raineDeut. 28. 12. to thy Land in his season. But heere he supposeth this treasure shut vp: and this iudgement is great:
for God promised to his people; The Land whi∣ther thou goest to possesse it, shall not be like the land of Egipt, from whence yee came out, where thou so∣wedst thy seede, and wateredst it with thy foote, as a Garden of hearbes▪ But the land of Canaan is a land of hilles and vallies, and drinketh water of the raine of Heauen. This Land suffered Drought in Dauids time, for the trespasse against the Gibeonites, three years, which brought an heauie famine vpon the Land, 2. Sam. 21. Againe, in Ahabs time, Heauen was shut vppe, three yeares; and sixe moneths, 1. Kings 17. Drought is one of the roddes of God, where∣by hee scourgeth the Land, and maketh a fruit∣full Land barren: it is the sorrow of our Land at this present, and hath continued now many weeks vpon vs. I presume we are sensible enough of the euill which we suffer. That which I would vrge, is, That as the drought in Dauids time, made him goe to aske counsell of the Lord, that he might know both the cause and the remedie of it: so might we seri∣ously and religiously bethinke vs how this euill hath come vpon vs, that wee may quit the cause and embrace the remedie of so great smart. 2 The cause is sinne: Malum culpae; Because they haue sinned against thee: in which consider, 1. VVhat is done amisse: they haue sinned. 2. By whom: The Israelites Gods people. 3 Against whom: Against thee.
4 How dangerously. Because of this; therefore is all this punishment come vpon them: this is it which hath shut vp Heauen against them. 1 Of the offence, Sinne. It is not expressed what speciall sin it was that Salomon most feared, neither did he fore-cast par∣ticularities. There is but one way, all the rest are errours. There is but one good, all the rest is e∣uill. Wee haue a naturall free will to that which is euill, wee haue a naturall Antipathie, to that which is good. This made Iob feare his sonnes, and daughters at their feasts, lest they should of∣fend God in their mirth, Iob 1. 5. Saint Gregorie saith, In bono itinere contrahitur puluis: Men ga∣ther dust, that trauell vpon occasion, and the best of our actions doe relish of our corruptions. But this is not the sinne which Salomon feareth, mans naturall frailties: he feareth Crying sinnes, such as awake Iustice, and make the Father of mercies Reueale his wrath from Heauen. Not errours, but rebellions, of which sort is Idolatrie, which set∣teth vp a new god in the place of the true God, and it was one of the Nationall trespasses of that people: Sensualitie was another, eating, drinking, and rising vp to play, requiring meate for their lust, and then both surffering vpon it, and despising of it. Murmuring at God was another, and these were eminent sinnes amongest this people. For these was the care and feare of Salomon; and hee had cause to dread this, in the posteritie of Israel, see∣ing he found the present propēsion of the people
to these sinnes. To come home to our selues, our sinnes haue not beene of lowe growth, nor of a still voyce, but shooting vp high, and crying in the eares of God, horrible blasphemy, prophane swearing, breach of the Sabaoth, contempt of the word, euen treading vnder foot the bloud of the co∣uenant of grace, and despising the long suffering of God, inuiting vs to repentance: wantonnesse, con∣tention, oppression, secret vnderminings. These things are done, & the Sunne shines vpon them, the Land mourneth for them, and the earth gro∣neth vnder the burthen of them, and God held hisAsal. 50. 21. peace: and we thought him to be like one of vs: but hee hath vttered his voice now, and that a mightie voice. The sinnes which doe deserue best this iudgement of Drought, are the abuses of the fruits of the earth to sensuality, drunkennesse, and gluttony: for doth not God doe well, to with∣draw from vs the faculties of euill doing, and to depriue vs of the meanes by which we do disho∣nour him? And wee haue cause to thinke these sinnes the present prouocation of the wrath of God in this drought. 2 They. The consideration of the persons supposed to sinne, doth adde weight to this matter. They, that is, the Israel of God: the people whom God hath singled out, to poure on them the riches of his mercie, of whom Dauid saith; Hee hath not done so to euerie Nation. If they sinne. Their sinne is in∣iurie,
and vnkindnesse too, Thou, O man, my com∣panion and my familiar frieud. Heare Nathan pleading this quarrel of vnkind∣nesse2. Sam. 12 7. for God to Dauid, after his double sinne, Thus saith the Lord, I annointed thee King ouer Is∣rael, and I deliuered thee out of the hand of Saul &c. And if that had beene too little, I would haue doone such and such things vnto thee. Wherefore hast thou despised the commandement of the Lord? So might God say to Israel, I brought thee out of the land of Egipt: I saued thee from thine enemies that pur∣sued thee: I diuided the red Sea for thy passage out of Aegipt: and the waters of Iordane for thy entrance into Canaan; why hast thou despised the commaundement of the Lord thy God? And semblably, may not personall considera∣tions aggrauate our sinnes, whom Almightie God hath deliuered from the Pope, a worfe op∣pressour then was King Pharaoh: to whom God gaue a religious, wise, virgine Soueraigne, the wonder both of the ranke and sex, to rule ouer vs so many happy years of gracious peace at home, and glorious victories abroad: and with whom this fauour of God did not die, but hath conti∣nued in the succession of our gracious King, vn∣der whom wee continue to enioy peace, and the holie libertie of the Gospell: to whom God hath giuen a plentifull land, and hath enriched vs with the riches of neighbour and remote Nations: If we sinne, can there be lesse then a fearefull expe∣ctation of iudgement?
For Turkes that haue a Mahomet, a Mammet for their Messiah, for Iewes who know no IESVS yet in the Flesh, for Papists that worship Idoles, for Indians that worship the Diuell, to despise the commaundement of God, this God taketh not so much to heart, for brambles beare no figges. But hee must needes take it vnkindely, if we liuing a∣mongest so many assurances of his tender loue, whose sheepe haue brought forth thousands, and tenne thousands in our Pastures, and haue eaten the fat of the earth, and drunke of the riuer of his pleasures, if we turne the grace of God into wan∣tonnesse, and abuse his mercy to prouoke his an∣ger. Nehemiah in chap. 6. vers. 11. said, should such a man as I flie? Consider what kinde of man thou art; borne in the Church, and washed in the wa∣ter of holy Baptisme, taught in the word, fed with the body and bloud of CHRIST, possessing the fruits of the Land in peace, should such a man as I liue? 3 Against thee. The next circumstance maketh the fault grea∣ter, the sinne is supposed to be against God: con∣trary to him, and wee doe in some sinnes expose our selues to God. Israel was guilty of two sinnes which were against God: one against the maiesty of God; that was Idolatry in the worship of strange gods: wherein it is a wonder, that a people to whō the true God did so manifestly reueale himselfe, should be so led to the embracing of strāge wor∣ship: an other against his mercie, in abusing the plenty of outward things, to their lust, vntill the
wrath of God came vpon them, euen whilest the meate of plenty, was in the mouth of surfet. For Idolatrie, the light of the Gospel hath so long time shined vpon this Land, that (except with those of the Popish straine) Idoles are out of request: and wee may say, The knowledge of God is amongest vs: yet Drunkennesse and Glut∣tony make their belly their god. But for abuse of the good Creatures of GOD, wee are as much in fault, as if Dauid, when Saul had armed him against Goliah, should haue pre∣sently encountred Saul himselfe: So wee fight a∣gainst Almighty God with his owne weapons, so that the Lord complayneth, All these things are against me. 4 Because of this. Heere is the prouocation. You see now where to lay the fault, because a people so much behol∣ding to me, haue made no conscience to com∣mit sinne, a thing so hatefull to me, sinning a∣gainst my Maiestie, or my mercie; therefore I haue shut vp Heauen, and there is no raine. Sinne then is found to be the cause of drought I deny not but there be naturall causes, which produce drought, and the learned Students in the▪ Bookes of celestiall bodies, giue good accompt often of these accidents: but Nature is Gods ser∣uant. Eliah telleth Ahab: As the Lord God of Isra∣el1. Kings 17. 1. before whom I stand, liueth, there shall be no deaw nor raine these yeares, but according to my word: and CHRIST expresseth the time, three yeares andLuke 4 25.
sixe moneths. The Prophet was Gods Progno∣stication to them, to tell them what weather they should haue: for God tooke the matter into his owne hand: and Nature sate all the while, and looked on. See what a Sequence heere is at this foolish game of sinne. First sinne, then anger, then no raine, and no fruits of the earth, and the perishing of man and beast; God taketh it vpon2. Chron. 7. 13. him: If I shut vp Heauen, and there be no raine. God saith to Iob, Hath the raine a father? or,Iob 38. 28. who hath begotten the droppes of deaw? Canst thou lift vp thy voice to the Cloudes, that a∣bundance of waters may couer thee? Surely manIob 37. 6. cannot help himselfe in this. He saith to the snow, be thou on the earth, likewise to the small raine, and to the great raine of his strength. So Eliphaz, who giues raine vpon the earth?, andIob 5. 10. sends waters vpon the fieldes? Wonder not then seeing you know who is Lord of these treasures, if hee be spare of them, and shut his hand, Because they sinned against thee. It is not enough to thinke vpon our sinnes, but if we doe thinke vpon them, as the cause of this iudgement, these haue made the heauens aboue vs as brasse, and these haue locked vp the trea∣sures of raine. The earth is sensible of this cala∣mitie, the face of it is discoloured, the grasse is burnt vp, the fruits faile, the greene hearb is wi∣thered, the earth openeth her mouth wide, and gapeth for thirst, and no clouds but of dust, haue for a long time rained vpon vs: the beasts of the
field haue felt this woe, who haue wanted their necessary foode: onely wee who know the cause of all this, and are too blame for all this, for whose sins, the earth, & the beasts of the field suffer, wee doe not change garment, or countenance for the matter, the drunkard drinkes not a draught the lesse, nor comes to Church the more for it; the wanton abateth nothing of his delights, nor the worldely man of his desires: But aske the Rich man of the earth, will all the wealth which they haue heaped vp buy vs one shower of raine now in this our extreamest necessitie: I say not to quench the great thirst, but to lay the dust there∣of▪ VVith what heart then can any considerate man sin against God, who bethinks himselfe, that if he sin, he shutteth vp Heauen against him: that if men did regard things temporall onely, this life can not be happy, but in the fauour of God; nothing but Godlinesse hath the promises of ehis life and of the life to come. And it is as easie to be hap∣py in both worlds, as in this onely, the feare of God doth it in both. 2 The Supposition of the remedie. The meanes to bee vsed to diuert this iudge∣ment, are three. 1 Prayer: If they pray toward this place. 2 Confession of Gods name: and confesse thy name. 3 Repentance: and turne from their sinnes when thou afflictest them.
1 Prayer: Heere he supposeth, 1 That they will flie to praier. 2 That they wil performe this in their owne persons. 3 That they wil direct their prayer to God. 1 They will flie to praier. Prayer hath euer been esteemed and approued the best remedy against calamitie; and therefore the Saints of God haue vsed it in all afflictions: soIames 5. 16. saith S. Iames, Is any man afflicted? let him pray: This medicine hath a probatum est: The effectuall feruent praier of a righteous man preuaileth much: He prooueth it thus: Eliah was a man subiect to theVerse 17. like passion that wee are, and he prayed earnestly, that it might not raine, & it rained not on the earth three yeares and sixe moneths: And hee prayed againe, andVerse 18. the Heauen gaue raine, and the earth brought forth her fruit. Heere is the force of Prayer, euen in this poynt, concerning the watering of the earth, prayer openeth Heauen, and prayer shutteth it. Any man afflicted with anie affliction, let him pray: but our prayer must be: 1 Multiplicata: we must be frequent in praier, Saint Paul biddeth vs to be  such as put our whole strength of spirit into our prayers. Or as in another place; Pray continually. Our Saui∣our CHRIST prayed thrice in the Garden, the same wordes. Iohn sawe another Angell, who offered much incense with many prayers. Reuelat. 8. 3.
He requireth not here long praiers, but often, lest Deuotion languish, and Zeale take cold. Au∣gustine saith, That the brethren had in the wilder∣nesse, Crebras orationes, but breues: often, but short Prayers, for feare of wearing and weary∣ing their intention, for flesh and blood are soone tyred and out of heart. Dauid vsed this frequent prayer, but his pray∣ers were short, but they were effectuall: one thing haue I desired of the Lord that I will require. I will not be said nay. The Widdow in the Gospell is made our example; not for the length, but for the importunitie of her Petition: and the A∣postle wisheth the Romans  to striue with God by their Prayers for him, that is, to wrastle with the Angell for a blessing, or to striue with Sathan: For Origen saith, In oratione daemones obsistunt: The Diuells doe oppose vs when wee pray. The Prophet biddeth, Keepe not silence, giueEsay 62. 7. the Lord no rest, yee that make mention of the Lord: So he gaue them example for Sions sake, I will notVerse 1. holde my peace, for Ierusalems sake I will not rest. In the common calamities of whole Nations, the Church of God hath vsed to set apart solempne dayes to the deprecation of Gods wrath, in the publique conuenings of the faithfull: and we do heare that this drought hath in som places, where Poperie is professed, brought forth solemne and publique Processions, and set Seruices to diuert this woe. I expected all this while, the commaund of
authoritie, to put this vpon our generall practise, but perceiuing that their Wisedomes do cast this vpon the holie discretion of particular Pastours in their seuerall Charges: I haue blamed my tar∣die, and behind hand omission of this duetie: yet presuming that none of you in your priuate De∣uotions haue neglected this good office, as you haue ioyned also in the prayers of the Congrega∣tion, now I admonish you to stirre vp your selues to giue the Lord no rest, till he haue mercie vpon vs, and take away from vs this, euen this calami∣tie also. VVee haue aerumnas multiplicatas, our sorrowes multiplied, let our prayers be multipli∣ed also. 2 But our prayer must be praesentataper Christum: CHRIST our Aduocate must present our prayers to God: for our prayers are but the fe∣well, CHRISTS mediation puts fire into them, and maketh them incense. Prayer is Medicina, the Medicinall Antidote against miserie; but CHRIST is vehiculum, the meanes to conuey this Medicine into the inward partes, and there∣fore as, we beginne our prayers, In the name of IESVS CHRIST, so we vse to end them, tho∣row IESVS CHRIST our Lord. VVee haue no grace with God for our owne sakes; CHRIST saith, Whatsoeuer you aske in my name, it shall bee giuen you. Matt. 21. 22. For without me you can do nothing. Iohn 15. 5.
3 Our prayer must be acceptabilis Deo: Such as God will accept. God heareth not sinners plea∣ding for themselues, either sleightly, with a cu∣stomary Miserere: Lord haue mercie vpon vs, orLuke 18. 11. prowdly, I thanke thee, I am not as other men are, as the Pharisee. But if we come to him by Christ, He cannot denie himselfe, as Diez a Portugall Fri∣ar2. Tim. 2. 13. wittily noteth: If we begge of God the riches or honors of this world, these are not himselfe; if reuenge, that is not himselfe: but if wee beg mer∣cie, that is God himselfe. Hee is called the Fa∣ther of mercies; that is, the Father of CHRIST: For Christ is our righteousnesse to God, and Gods mercie to vs. 2 They must pray themselues: If they pray. Although we are commanded to pray one for another, yet we are not thereby freed from pray∣ing euery man for himselfe. Is the affliction com∣mon, let the prayer be also generall: let euerie man solicite God in IESVS CHRIST for him∣selfe, euery man for all, all for one another, euen for the whole Land, of which wee are partes: let vs not onely trust to the prayers of others for vs. Saint Paul entreating the Romans to pray for him, desireth them also to pray with him. Poperie hath the credit to haue first deuised this lazie and idle doctrine of borrowing, hiring, and buying prayers: so that rich men haue turnd praying into paying: But Salomon supposeth that
they will pray for themselues that sinne against themselues, and against God, and vnlesse they so do, they haue no part in these his prayers. Sa∣muel, Iob, Daniel, all the holy men on earth, loose labour, if they pray for such as will not pray for themselues, God putteth them off thus: I will not heare them. Euen in this calamity haue not all and each of vs our particular woe: let vs therefore pray all and each of vs. 3 They are supposed to pray towards this place: i. toward the Temple at Ierusalem. They pray to God, & therefore addresse them∣selues toward the Temple, which is Gods house, wherein God did put his name, and establish his worship, and wherein was the Arke of the Coue∣nant, the Sacrament of Gods reall presence. Daniel being in a strange Land, went into hisDan. 6. 10. house, and his window being open in his chamber toward Ierusalem, hee kneeled vpon his knees, and prayed three times a day. In Daniels example wee see a frequent resort to God by prayer three times, not three set Cano∣nicall houres, but thrice, at times of fit leasure; and we find his worship directed to God, to∣wards this place: peraduenture as Dauid did, Eue∣ning, morning, and at noone: for so we recommendPsalme 55. 17. to God, Initium progressum, & exitum; the be∣ginning, the proceeding, and ending, of busi∣nesses of the day.
This vnhurtfull ceren ony was in vse amongst the Iewes. 1 In respect of the promise which God made of his presence there. 2 In a mysticall reference to Iesus Christ, for hee was the fulfilling of all the ceremonies of that place, and all the Sacrifices offered there, were types of his one Oblation of himselfe. To this place their resort was commanded. But vnto theExod 12 5. place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all the Tribes, to put his name there, euen to his habita∣tion shall yee seeke and thither thou shalt come. This was too much for them to do often, because that many dwelt farre off, therefore they did this. They worshipped and prayed towardes this place. Dauid did both. But as for mee, I will come in∣toPsalme 5. 7. thy House in the multitude of thy mercie: and in thy feare will I worship towardes the Temple of thy Holinesse. If the reuerence of the house of God so farreEcclesiast. 4. 17 off, did make impression; Take heede to thy foote when thou entrest into the House of God. The sancti∣fication and vse of this place calleth vpon thee for holy preparation. Thanke God (beloued) for the happy libertie that wee haue in the house of God, the Doores are open, the Belles inuite vs to it: God is at home, and at good lesure to heare our suites, and to giue vs remedy. 2 They flie to Confession, and confesse thy name. The name of anie thing is that whereby it is
known and distinguished from other things: the confessing the name of God here required, is the honoring of God, to the vttermost of our know∣ledge of him, and of his reuelation of himselfe to vs, and this is that which wee begge of God, say∣ing, Hallowed be thy name. And euen in this, they that seeke to God for remedy, when he hath brought any iudgement vpon the earth, must confesse the name of God, & giue him the glory due to him, which is done, 1 By confession of their sinnes, for his name appeareth so much the more glorious, by how much our vnworthinesse is more in sight, so Io∣shuaIoshua 7. 19. said to Achan: Giue glorie to God▪ and make confession vnto him, and tell mee now what thou hast done, hide it not from me. 2 By confession of Gods Iustice to be such, as that hee will exact of vs an accompt of our whole life, because all our wayes are before him. 3 By confession of his goodnesse and mercy, who is not so vnplacable but that wee may come to him with our prayers: many men prouoked to anger, are so violent, that they can not brooke a∣ny sight of the party with whom they are offen∣ded, they will not heare him, or any that pleade his cause: God doth not so, but receiueth the petitions of sinners for his names sake. 4 By confession of his name, seeing the holie name of God is violated in our sinnes, and wee haue neglected him▪ whose name should haue beene a sufficient disswasiue, to haue daunted vs
from vnrighteousnesse, there is no better waie then by confession of his name to declare to the world, that not in it selfe alone, but euen in our e∣stimation also, Holie and reuerend is his name. 5 By confession of his name in our punish∣ments, acknowledging that it is God who hath brought vpon our Land this generall drought, it is he who sent the bitter Frostes to keepe in the Spring, and the parching heate in the Summer, to burne vp the foode of our cattell, who opened the heauen in the Spring, and sent downe such plenty, and continuance of Snow, that the earth was shut vp against vs, and the beasts of the field: and who hath now a long time shut vp the Hea∣uens, that no raine doth fall vpon the earth, to refresh the withered beauty thereof. 6 By confession of his name in the remedie: for wee must also declare, that our helpe standes onelie in the name of the Lord, who hath made Heauen and Earth. For as we must burie all our murmurings in his name: Because thou Lord hast done it: so wee must quicken and enlighten all our hopes at his name; for onely the hand that wounded vs, can heale vs, and none but our God can renew the face of the earth. 3 They flie to Repentance: This is called 1 A turning from their sinnes. 2 It hath Externum motiuum: an outward motiue: affliction.
The turning heere mentioned implieth two termes. 1 Terminus à quo: from what wee must turne. 2 Terminus ad quem: to whom we must turne. 1 From what. 1 That from which wee must turne is sinne, and this is hard to do, because sinne hangeth so fast on, especially the sinnes of plenty, as gluttons, drunkards, and wantons, sinnes committed with such delight, that men are loth to part with them, and we see very few recouered from them: Sure∣ly, many seeme rather turned into these sinnes, then turned from them. And if God should not haue mercie vpon vs out of the multitude of his owne tender compas∣sions, and for the fauour that hee beareth to a few righteous soules, that do make conscience of these sinnes, till the sensuall drunkards, gluttons, and wantons of the earth, doe turne away from these sinnes, to seeke his mercy, who of vs should hope to see an other showre of raine fall downe vpon the face of the dry and thirsty earth againe? The phrase of turning from sinne, importeth a great mercie; for God knowing whereof wee be made, and how fraile the sonnes of men are, ex∣acteth not a perfect integrity, a pure, and full se∣peration from all our sinnes, onely hee requireth of vs to turne away from them, as wee doe from those things which are loathsome to vs, and that we do expresse our dislike and hatred of them.
The phrase of Christ to Peter: Get thee behind me, doth shew as much: Let vs esteeme our sinnes our enemies, that wee may striue to leaue them asterne of vs. We say, They go farre that ne∣uer turne: They do indeed; so farre, as they that would go thence to Abrahams bosome, cannot. But euery turning will not serue the turne; thou maist turne away thy hand from the action of euill, and turne not away thy heart from the affe∣ction to it: Many so farre ouer rule desire, as to keep them from operation, but thou must turne away, not onely the instruments of sinne, the members and parts of thy body, but euen the heart that setteth them all aworke, from sinne and iniquity. These euils which wee would put behind vs, will bee still courting of vs, and Sathan will ne∣uer leaue tempting vs to them, but God is our Terminus ad quem, wee must turne to God. 2 To whom. Repentance seeketh the face of God: the pe∣nitent go not back-ward to their Father, as Sem and Iaphet did, but forward, like the vnthrift in the Gospell, who said within himselfe: I will goe and say to my Father, Father I haue sinned, &c. for hee thought, no doubt, many others, euen all that trace mee and my euils, haue gone to my father, and said as much of mee, and this cannot chuse but bee an extreme griefe to him, now I will go my selfe and say so to him, and I hope it will please him well.
This is that (Beloued) which would soone pre∣uaile with God, and obtaine the opening of hea∣uen. Thus Peter who had ouer-weened his owne loue of his Maister, and whilest he warmed him∣selfe at the high Priests fire, lost the heate of his owne zeale, and denied his Maister, but he went forth, and when Christ looked vpon him, Hee wept bitterly: so Mary Magdalen turnd to Christ, and in his louing seruice she employed her eyes, her lockes, her lips, her hands, her knees, her feet∣ointment, which shee had not alwayes bestowed well, it is more then likely, most times ill. Turne thus to the Lord, and let those knees which haue beene bent in drunken Healths to the earth, dwell vpon the Earth in our prayers to Al∣mightie God for forgiuenesse. Trie now if you can surffet vpon the Fatnesse of Gods house, who haue forsaken the house of God to doe seruice to your bellies, making them your gods, or haue come hither so full of your owne houses, that you haue but come to take your rest heere. Trie if your tongs, vsed to blasphemous swearing, cur∣sing, bitter iesting, slanderous reuiling, lying, and filthy speaking, can change their tune, and turne into the Publicans Miserere; Lord be mercifull vn∣to me a sinner. We haue great encouragement hereto, for the Lord to whom we turne, is gracious and mercifull,Ioel 2. 13. 14 slow to anger, and of great kindnes, and such a one as repenteth him of the euill. Who knoweth if he will re∣turne and leaue a blessing behinde him? And againe,
the sins from which wee turne, are well forsaken, Repent and turne your selues from all your transgres∣sions,Ezech. 18. 30. so iniquitie shall not be your ruine. 2 The eternall motiue, when thou afflict est them. This commeth somewhat neare the hart, for it seemeth an hard condition, that a man, a congre∣gation, a kingdome & nation, should seek to him that afflicts them, yea euen when he makes them smart. But such is the wholesome correction of God, that it draweth vs to him when all his good mercies doe but arme vs against him: this com∣monly is Gods last refuge, amongst his outwardHosea 5. 15. means of mans conuersion. Heare himselfe. I will goe & returne to my place, till they acknowledge their offence, and seeke my face: in their affliction they will seeke mee earely. And where this faileth, the Pro∣phet seemes to be out of hope of turning them to God. The people turneth not to him that smiteth them, neither do they seeke the Lord of Hoastes: there∣foreEsay 9. 13. 14. the Lord will cut off from Israel head and taile: roote and branch in one day. It is then a signe of the good presence of Gods good spirit with vs, if affliction do not put vs into passion, and make vs murmure against God, but that we haue the grace to pray, and confesse the name of God, euen while the rod of God is on vs. Thus did Dauid, The sorrowes of death compassedPsal. 116. 3. me, and the paines of hell gate holde vpon me: I found trouble and sorrow: Then called I vpon the name of the Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliuer my soule. Af∣fliction first found out Dauid, as he was wandring
out of the way of Gods commaundements: then Dauid found affliction, and made the right vse of it, to put him to his prayers, that God would bee his deliuerance. Affliction found him in his pro∣speritie, euen then when he said; I shall neuer bee moued: and sodainely hee found himselfe in ad∣uersitie, but still aduersitie was the best incentiue to enflame him, with the zeale of Prayer: the best impulsiue to put him on vpon his God. This therefore is our season and fittest Seedes time for our prayers and our repentance, whilest our soules do finde trouble and anguish. Yea but the heauens are shut vp against vs: how shall our Prayers ascend thither? Be of good comfort, ThePsal. 34. 15. eies of the Lord are vpon the righteous, and his eares are open to their praiers: and the penitent sinner is in the roll of the righteous: He also wil heare their crie, and will helpe them. This is such a fauor, that Dauid saith; Blessed be God which hath not turnedPsal, 66. 20. my praier from him, nor his mercie from mee. This taketh away feare from vs, euen in the euill day: when the iniquitie of our heeles, which Bellarmine vnderstandeth Iniquitas extremae vitae: The ini∣quityPsal. 49. 5. of our last of life doth compasse vs about: or when iniquity followes me at the heeles, to bring iudgement on me: or when my heels offend God in running from him, & turning my backe to him. The death-bed is not fearfull to such: The Lord will strengthen him vpon the bed of languishing: he will make all his bed in his sickenesse. Pray then e∣uen whilest the soare is running, whilest all thy
sinnes lie open before God, and Heauen is shut vp against thee: pray and open the Heauens, and leaue not thy God vntill he bow the Heauens and come downe to thee. We haue his promise. If youLeuit. 26. 3. 4. 5 walke in my statutes, and keepe my commaundements to doe them: then will I giue you raine in due season, and the Land shall yeeld her encrease, and the trees of the field shall yeeld their fruit: and the threshing shall reach to the Vintage, and the Vintage shal reach to the sowing time, and you shall eate your bread to the full. Now beloued, you haue heard both of your sin, the punishment of it, and the remedy of your griefe, let me conclude with this earnest request vnto you, That you be not like to the people of Israel, of whom God himselfe saith to the Pro∣phet Ezechiel thus; They speake one to an other, euery one to his brother, saying; Come I pray you, & heare what is the word of the Lord, that commeth to you: and they heare thy wordes, but will not doe them: with the mouth they shew much loue: but their heart goeth after their couetousnesse. Your affection cryeth for God, Seeke yee the face of God, let your soule answer for you; I will seeke thy face, O Lord, right earely. To that God, that is, to the Father, Sonne, and Holy∣ghost be giuen al praise, and thanks∣giuing; now and euer, Amen.
A Thankesgiuing for Raine. The second Sermon. PSAL. 68. 9. Verse 9. Thou O God diddest send a plentifull raine, whereby thou diddest confirme thy Inheritance when it was wearie. BEloued Brethren; my last bu∣sinesse in this place, was to call you to a consideration of the heauy iudgement of God vpon our Land, in the shut∣ting vp of raine, whereby the earth was parched and defa∣ced: and thereupon I moued your Christian de∣uotions, to send vp to the Throne of God, your humblest Supplications for remedy. Your pray∣ers were no sooner gone vp to Heauen, but The
Heauen heard the Earth, and God heard the Heauen: And thou (O God) diddest send a plentifull raine vp∣on thine inheritance, and diddest refresh it when it was wearie. VVhen Christ had healed tenne Le∣pers, & but one of them returned to giue thanks, he enquired but Where are those nine? Thankes-gi∣uing is our duety, and his expectation. To this purpose I haue made choice of this Text, which putteth into our mouthes a Song of Thankes-gi∣uing, containing a thankefull Commemoration of the mercie vouchsafed to vs; In which, 1 The benefit receiued is, Raine. 2 The fulnes of the benefit, a plentiful raine 3 The nature of the benefit, Thou didst send. 4 The benefit of the benefit, Whereby thou didst confirme thine inheritance when it was weary. 1 Of the benefit, Raine. The people of Israel being in Egipt, where they had no raine, (for the earth is there watered once a yeare by the inundation of Nilus) had this pro∣mise; That the Land whither they went to possesse it, should not be as the Land of Egipt, from whence they came, where they sowed their seed, and wateredDeuter. 11. 12. it with their foot, as a garden of hearbs: but the land of Canaan, is a land of hilles and vallies, which drin∣keth water of the raine of heauen. And Dauid here confesseth that God hath performd that promise, and hath giuen them raine from Heauen, and sa∣ued them the labour of watering the earth. This
Moses calleth Gods opening to vs his good treasure:Deut. 28 12. Isay 55. 10. For the raine commeth downe, and the snow from heauen, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth, and bud, that it may giue seed to the Sower, and bread to the Eater: so the benefite of raine is bread for this yeare, and seed for the next yeare  called a trea∣sure, that is,  for it is prouision for to day, and store for to morrow; raine is the milke of heauen, whereby the hearbes, and graine, andIsay 44. 14. the plants of the earth are nourced: Man plan∣teth the Ash, and the raine nourceth it: Dauid ex∣presseth this thankfully, obserue his sequent: SingPsal. 147. 7. 8 9. vnto the Lord with thankesgiuing, sing praise vp∣on the Harpe vnto our God, who couereth the hea∣uens with clouds; and therein, hee prepareth raine for the earth; and thereby, hee maketh grasse to grow vpon the mountaines, and giueth to the beast his food: This is now our benefite, these must be our thankes: our sinnes depriued vs of this bles∣sing, our prayers haue re-obtained the same: It remaineth now, that by our thankfulnesse and obedience heereafter, together with our deuout supplications, wee keep heauen open, and con∣tinue vpon vs the shewers of blessing, whereby theEzech. 34. 26. tree of the field doth yeeld her fruite, and the earth shall yeeld her increase. What can wee desire more of God? This is all that the holy Prophet wish∣eth to the King in name of the Church: ThePs. 20. 1. 2 3▪ 4. Lord heare thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Iacob defend thee; send thee helpe
from his Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Syon, remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt Sa∣crifice: grant thee according to thine owne heart, and fulfill all thy counsell. This, all this, hath God done for vs; for in the time of trouble when wee wanted raine, hee heard our prayers: From hea∣uen did the Lord behold the earth, hee accepted the burnt sacrifices of our deuotion, and zeale, & the offering vp of our hearts, and the calues of our lippes, and gaue vs raine according to the desire of our owne hearts: Wee must adde out of the next verse, Wee will reioyce in thy saluation: Dauids example is a good guide to vs herein. IVerse 5. loue the Lord because hee hath heard my voice and supplications, because hee hath enclined his eare vn∣toPsal. 116. 1. mee, therefore will I call vpon him as long as I liue: Wherein two things by him promised are expected from vs: 1 To loue God; this is the Law of our duety, and God doth exact this as debt, yet hee also purchaseth, and buyeth, it of vs with his bene∣fites. 2 To pray to him, and to this duety it is a good encouragement, Because thou hearest the prayers, therefore vnto thee shall all flesh come. 2 The fulnesse of the benefit. This raine is called in some readings, A graci∣ous raine: the Interlinearie readeth, Pluuium mu∣nificentiarum: The raine of bounty: Arst: Fel: pluuiam liberarum voluntatum; the raine of free∣willes: All expresse a full and free benefit: a raine
of his free-will, to shew how frankely his bene∣fites come from him: or a Raine according to the full desire of our will, so seasonable for the time, so reasonable for the quantity, so gentle in the fall, as the heart of man could desire. Here then is pluuia voluntatis diuinae; Gods will was, that we should haue it. And pluuia voluntatis huma∣nae: Mans desire is graciously satisfied: the thirst of the earth is quenched, and yet the Haruest∣man not hindred from gathering in the rich trea∣sures of the ripe fruits of his fields with ioy, euen the ioy of Haruest: For the Mower fills his hand,Psal. 129. 7. 8. and he that bindeth his sheaues his bosome, and they which goe by, say: The blessing of the Lord be vpon you; we blesse you in the name of the Lord. Thus hath God renewed the face of the earth, and made the field reioyce, and all that is therein. Now, full benefits would haue full thankes-gi∣uings: God hath sowen plentifully, let him also reape plentifully: Pluuia voluntatum; Raine ac∣cording to our hearts desire hath gone before: gratitudo voluntatum; the thankefulnesse of our willing hearts to praise God must follow it at the heeles. God loueth a cheerefull giuer of thanks to him. 3 The Author of this benefit: Thou O God. Now we see that Salomon directed vs well, to send vs to him, for heere it appeares, that he shut vp Heauen before: and now we finde that he is the onely giuer of Raine. Thou diddest send: And thy messenger did his errand faithfully. It is God that
maketh the small droppes of water, they powre downe raine according to the vapour thereof, which the cloudes doe droppe and distill vpon man aboundantly, Iob 36. 27. And the Prophet enquireth, Are there any a∣mong the vanities of the Gētiles, that can giue raine, or can the heauens giue showers? Art not thou hee, O Lord? Therefore wee will wait vpon thee, for thou hast made these things, Ierem. 14. 22. You may know the Author by the plentie, for when God giueth, he stilleth abundantly. He is a∣bundant in his goodnesse, and in his truth. He is ne∣uer spare and reserued but in his iudgements, there hee is alwayes slowe to wrath, and behinde∣hand with vs, but he is prior in dilectione: we can∣not preuent him in his loue, he loued vs first. This will make vs both seeke to him for raine, when we want it and thanke him only for it, whenDe Ciu. Dei 2. 3. wee obtaine it. Saint Augustine sheweth the spite and malice of the heathen Romans of olde, against Christians, who vsed this Prouerb; Pluuia defecit causa Christiani: The Christians is the cause that we haue no raine. Tertullian complained of them that they thought omnis publicae cladis, omnis po∣pularis incommodi, christianos esse causam. That the Christians were in fault, for all the destruction in the Common-wealth, for all inconueniences that befell the people. Si Tiberis ascendit ad moenia, si Nilus non ascendit in arua, si terra mouit, si fames, si lues, statim Christianos ad leones acclamatur: If the Riuer of Tiber swelled too high vp to their
walles: if Nilus did not drowne their fieldes: if there were any Earth-quake, any famine, or in∣fectious disease, then they cryed: Let the Chri∣stian be giuen vp to the Lyons to be deuoured, for hee is the cause of all, and for his sake all this euill is come vppon vs. So complayneth good Saint Cyprian, That the Christians are traducedContra Demetr. for the cause of all these euills, because they doe not adore and worshippe the Gods of the Hea∣thens: but hee searcheth out the true cause, e∣uen Salomons cause, because they sinne against thee: Heathens agree that the cause is sinne, and the Iudge is Almightie GOD: onely they knew not the true GOD, that they might seeke to him, nor the right worship and seruice, that should and ought to be done vnto him, who onely prepa∣reth raine for the Earth, and watereth the drie furrowes thereof: who also maketh a fruitfull Land barren, for the iniquitie of the people that dwell therein. Take not then this benefit of Gods gracious raine, as a naturall and customary debt, which the Heauen doth owe to the Earth, but as a speciall fauour and bounty of Almightie God, and giue vnto him for it, the honour due to his Name. 4 The benefit of this benefit: whereby thou did∣dest confirme thine inheritance, when it was wearie. The Author of this benefit of Raine hath be∣stowed it.
1 VVisely: vpon his owne in heritance. 2 Effectually: thou diddest confirme. 3 Seasonably: when it was wearie. 1 Wisely. The people vpon whom God bestoweth this fauor is called here Gods inheritance: the Church of God: the children of Abraham: so called, be∣cause God made them the heires of his promise, and vnder this title, all the Elect are comprehen∣ded, the children of Abrahams faith. Wherein we are taught: first, That none haue right and in∣terest in the good fauours of God, but the Elect, those are heires of the promises of God: so that the way of righteousnes is the onely way of pro∣sperity, and there is no such thrift, as true religi∣on: for godlines with contentednes is great riches, onely that hath The promises of this life, and of the life to come. Daniel that feedes on Pulse, though he fare worse, lookes much better, then they that are fed at the Kings Table: it is not the benefit re∣ceiued in outward things, but the blessing of God vpon it, that maketh vs fat and well liking: it was Dauids obseruation, The Lions doe lacke and sufferPsal. 34 10. hunger, but they that seeke the Lord, shall not want any good thing. VVhereupon Dauid readeth this Lecture of Thrist to the sonnes of men. Come yePsal. 34 11. children hearken vnto mee, and I will teach you the feare of the Lord. What man is hee that desireth life, and loueth many dayes that hee may see good? Keepe12. &c.
thy tongue from euill, and thy lippes that they speake no guile. Depart from euill, and doe good. Seeke peace, and pursue it. The eies of the Lord are vpon the righ∣teous, and his eares are open to their crie. Saint Augustine vpon these words saith, Si ad li∣teram accipias, videtur te fallere: If thou vnder∣standest this place literally, it seemeth to deceiue thee: and therefore he thinks it safest to expound these words of the life to come. I thinke that the scope of the place wil presse another sense: name∣ly, the goodnesse of God vpon them: the iust, e∣uen in this life, which doth not consist in riches, and outward things, but in the blessing of God, and in the watchfull eye of his Fatherly proui∣dence, who faileth not to take care of the Elet, teaching them how to abound, and how to went: & in all the miseries of life stil supporting them. This blessing is not so much in sight, as the out∣ward things are, yet not altogether vnseene. For haue we not seen many men great in power, great in fauour, great in reuenue, and yet bare and nee∣dy, borrowing, and much indebted, yea borrow∣ing of those, who haue lesse meanes to enrich themselues: when some of poorer estates are still purchasing, and in cheerefull vegetation. Some like ships with too much saile ouer-set in the Sea of this world, whilest others, that spreade lesse cloth bring home their fraight. The blessing of God is the cause of this difference. This seemeth a foolish doctrine to the worldling: but giue me a little with this blessing, rather then Sathans
offer of all the Kingdomes of the world, and the glo∣rie of them, without it. Dauid saith in the fourth Psalme and the eight verse, I will lay me downe in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord onely which makest me dwell in safetie. And hee chideth them that Rise earely, and goe late to bedde, and eate thePsal. 127. 2. bread of carefulnesse, for God giueth his beloued sleep. Set your rest vpon this, be faithfull in your ser∣uice of God, and in the dueties of your lawfull callings, and then permitte Deo caetera: Leaue the rest to God. Cast your care vpon him, for he careth for you. Your leafe shall not wither, and looke what∣soeuer you doe, it shall prtsper, Psal. 1. 3. Heare the word of your God by his Prophet Ieremie 22. 13. Woe to him that buildeth his house by vnrighteous∣nesse, and his chambers by wrong, that vseth his neighbours seruice without wages, and giueth him not for his worke. And particularly hee saith to the sonne of Iosiah; Shalt thou raigne because thou clo∣sestVerse▪ 15. thy selfe in Cedar? Did not thy Father eate and drinke, and doe iudgement, and iustice, and then it was well with him? Was not this to honour me, saith the Lord? Here is a faire example, they that make conscience of their lawfull calling, haue their portion in the fauour and blessing of Almightie God. Striue then to bee, and to declare your selues the Inheritance of God: For the eie of God is vpon such, and his eare alwayes open to their suites. Dauid instanceth, I haue seene the wicked in great power, and spreading himselfe like a greene Bay tree: yet he past away, and he was not: I sought him,
but he could not be found. Marke the perfect man, and beholde the vpright man, for the end of that man isPsal. 37. 35. peace. That which deceiueth the world in the comparison of the iust and vniust, one with an o∣ther, is the oddes in quantitie. The vniust hath much often: and the righteous but alitle: against which, let vs oppose that infallible rule of Dauid,Psal. 37. 16. A little that a righteous man hath, is better then the riches of many wicked. 2 We are taught further out of this place, that seeing it is in respect of Gods inheritance, that God is so plentifull in watering the earth, whereby the wicked of the earth grow rich, and their portion waxeth fat, by this means, surely we may cōclude, that the wicked euen in temporall things, do fare much the better, for the sake of the righteous: for they haue the greatest share in these outward and temporall things. A cleare proofe of this point is in Sodomes case, in which, if but ten iust men could haue been found, the sinning cities had beene spa∣red: and in that story, the Angell of God said to Lot, Haste thee, escape thither, for I can not doe anieGenesis 19. 22. thing, till thou be come thither. And what is it that deferreth the day of Iudge∣mnent of all flesh, but Gods expectation to ac∣complish the number of his elect? when his num∣ber is once full, he will come to iudge the quicke and the dead. Therfore it was a mischieuous sug∣gestion of Satan, that Christians were the causes of common calamities: No (beloued) the righte∣ous are they that hold Gods hands: good Kings
such as Salomon was, who prayed for his people, good Samuels that say, God forbid that wee should cease praying for you: good Dauids, whose eyes do gush out in riuers of waters, for them that keepe not the Law: good Daniels, that open their win∣dowes toward Ierusalem, and pray thrice in a day to God: good Ieremies, that wish their heads fountaines of teares, to bewaile their people: good Obadiahs that hide, and feede the Prophets of the Lord in time of persecution. These be they that keepe heauen open, and the mercie-seate ac∣cessible; for the Sonne of God is their elder bro∣ther, and they are able to doe all things through him, that strengthneth them. This church of God is scattered ouer the face of the earth, and all the earth doth fare the better for it. Abimelech con∣fesseth to Abraham, God is with thee in all that thou doest: and therefore desired an oath of confede∣rationGenesis 21. 22. with him. Abimelech requireth the same of Isaac his Son:Genesis 26. 28. For wee sawe certainely, that the Lord was with thee. Laban obserueth, I haue found by experience, thatGenesis 30. 27. the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake: and in Iosephs story, both Potiphars house, and the prison, and all the Land of Aegypt, found the benefite of Iosephs company: he was homo boni pedis: a luckie man, as the Prouerb saith, where euer he came: there∣fore the Apostle saith of sundry worthy persons, of whom the world was not worthy, Hebrews 11. 38. For as God said to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. Thou
shalt be a blessing: So are all the seruants of God, blessings to the place in which they liue, and I haue willingly imbraced their pious iudgements, who haue thought, that when S. Stephan prayed for his persecutors (Saul by his owne confession being one of them) the prayers of that holy Mar∣tire were a most holy and helpful meanes of Sauls conuersion, who was after that, shortly, Paul an Apostle of IESVS CHRIST, and preached the Gospel, which before he persecuted. And in this generall ouer-growth of iniquitie, in this Land, those few that watch, and fast, and pray, and make conscience of their wayes, and of the seruice of our God; these are they that binde the hands of God, that hee cannot smite the Land: if he shut Heauen, these open it againe: Such a treasure is piety, such a liberty is in the seruice of God: Striue therefore to be the fauorites of God. Prin∣ces fauorites haue but their seasons, their great Maisters may die, or their liuing loue may run in another channell: Trust not in Princes, for there is no helpe in them: What a glory is this to reli∣gion, that it is not wordly pompe, and high Ti∣tles, full Tables, full Coffers, gay Garments, that preuaile with heauen, but godlinesse, Which hath the promises of this life, and of the life to come. 2 Effectually: Thou diddest confirme thine inheritance: this is more then to refresh it; for hee did settle and establish his fauour vpon it: such is the loue of God in duration, whom hee loueth to the end he loueth them; and the continuace of
our seruice cannot faile of the continuance and confirmation of his loue to vs; and vpon that condition do all his promises passe to his owne Israel, to Abrahams seed, to Dauid and Salomon, If they keepe my Commandements: Do you desire that God should confirme and settle his mercy vpon you and your children: Bee you his chil∣dren, serue the Lord in feare all the daies of your life; for all the benefites of life depend vpon the mercies of God to giue them to vs, and to settle them vpon vs. Thus was the inheritance of God, the people of Israel, confirmed in the assurance of Gods fauourable protection; they found now that God was good to Israel in the performance of that gracious promise of raine, whereby the land of their possession became friutfull vnto them: and hereby the faithfull in the Land were confirmed in the faith of his truth, and in the loue of his mercy, and in the obedience of his will. Our Sauiour required this good seruice of Peter: Thou being conuerted strengthen the bre∣thren. Let not vs vnconstantly wauer in his obe∣dience, who doth constantly continue his lo∣uing kindnesse to vs; but let vs winne as many by our experience of his loue to vs as we can: so did Dauid: Come hither, hearken vnto mee, and I will shew you what the Lord hath done for my soule: So shall wee confirme our selues and others in the mercies of God, which are called, the sure mer∣cies of Dauid. In this grieuous drought which so long par∣ched
the face of the earth, wee had now and then a gracious showre, which refreshed the face of the earth, and laid the dust of it; but wee wanted two degrees of the fauour now obtained, and in my Text expressed, for we had not liberatem plu∣uiam: wee had not a plentifull raine, neither had wee that title confirmed, and setled vpon vs, but the Sunne soone dryed it vp: But now God hath remembred vs in the fulnesse of his mercy, for wee haue the earely and the latter raine, pluuiam voluntatum: euen such, and so much raine, as wee our selues would haue: What shall wee render to the Lord for this? let vs pay our vowes in the sight of the Lord, euen now, in presence of all his people. 3 Seasonably: when it was weary. The Earth was weary of suffring thirst so long, the cattell were weary with pining for want of ne∣cessary foode. Men were weary with watering of the earth with the foote, weary with bearing the weight of Gods long displeasure, weary with cry∣ing, and calling vpon God for helpe; Because theIeremy 14. 4. ground was chapt, for there was no raine vpon the earth: the Plow men were ashamed, and couered their heads, and the eyes of the cattell did faile, because there was no grasse: Euen then did God visite vs with a liberall raine, to refresh the earth, and to Confirme his inheritaunce: yet so moderately, as not to hurt our hopefull haruest, that all handes worke cheerefully to gather in the riches of the earth. Now let me say to you: Behold you are made
whole, sinne no more lest a greater iudgement fall vp∣on you: lest he punish you with too much raine, as he hath done with too little: for God hath many Arrowes in his quiuer of Vengeance. Keep hea∣uen open with your prayers, and send vp thither a morning and euening sacrifice of praises, and say vnto your God as the Prophet doth; O the hope of Israel, the Sauiour thereof in time of trouble, whyIeremy 14. 8. shouldest thou be as a stranger in our Land, and as a way-faring man, that turneeh aside to tarry for a night? Thou (O Lord) art in the middest of vs, and we are called by thy name. Leaue vs not. I conclude, and heerein I desire your thanke∣full hearts to ioyne with me in all serious and sin∣cere deuotion: The Lord hath done great things for vs, whereof we reioyce. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy-ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and euer shall be, world without end, Amen. FINIS.
