19410 99855008 20478
A LITTLE TREATISE CONCERNING TRIAL OF SPIRITS: TAKEN FOR THE MOST part out of the Works of the R. F. ROBERT PARSONS, of the Societie of IESVS. WHEREVNTO IS ADDED a Comparison of a true Roman Ca∣tholike with a Protestant, wher∣by may bee discouered the difference of their Spirits. With an Appendix taken out of a later Writer. My dearest beleeue not euery Spirit, but prooue the Spirits if they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. 1. Ioh. 4. 1. ✚ IHS Permissa Superiorum. 1620.
A COMPARISON OF A TRVE ROMAN CATHO∣LIKE WITH A PROTESTANT, whereby may be discouered the diffe∣rence of their Spirits, not only in things belonging to faith and beleefe, but also concerning their liues, conuersations and manners: taken out of a more ample discourse of this subiect, made by that worthy and reue∣rend Father, F. Parsons, is the 20. Chapter of his Ex∣amen of Fox his Ca∣lendar, the last six Moneths. FIRST the Roman Catholike A com∣parison of a true Roman Catho∣like with a Prote∣stantin matter of doctrine. (whom Fox calleth Papist) tou∣ching matters of Faith and be∣leefe, composeth himselfe to that humi∣litie, as whether he bee learned or vn∣learned, or what arguments soeuer hee hath on the one or other side: yet pre∣sumeth hee to determine nothing of himselfe, but remitteth that determi∣nation (if any thing be doubtfull or vndetermined) vnto the judgement
and decree of the vniuersall Church, and Gouernours thereof. And hence proceedeth the agreements and vnitie of Faith, which they haue held and con∣serued in so large a body, for so many ages, as haue passed since Christ and his Apostles. Whereas Protestants in this behalfe following another Spirit of selfe-will, and selfe judgement, and loosing the raynes of libertie to the pregnancie of each mans wit, doe hold and determine what their owne judge∣ments for the time doe thinke to bee true, or most probable, and are subject to no authoritie in this behalfe, but to their owne Spirit; which is variable, according to the varietie of arguments and probabilities that doe occurre. And hereof doe ensue the great varietie of sects and opinions among them, euen in this one age since they began, as you may see by that which is set downe in the third and seuenteenth Chapters of the fourth part of the three Conuersi∣ons of England. Next to this, for so much as apper∣taineth to life and actions; the Catho∣like man holdeth that wee can doe no∣thing
at all of our selues, no not so much as to thinke a good thought, but we must be preuented and assisted by Gods holy grace, as may bee shewed out of the Councell of Trent, which teacheth with Saint Paul, that our suf∣ficiencie rid. Sess. 6. cap. 16. is of Christ; yet is the force of this grace so tempered notwithstan∣ding, as it vseth no violence, nor exclu∣deth the free concurrance of mans wil, preuented and stirred vp by the fore∣said grace of our Sauiour, and motion of the holy Ghost: So as freely by this helpe, we yeeld to the said good moti∣ons, and doe beleeue in God, and his promises: and this act of Faith (as you may learne out of the said Councel) is the first foundation and root of all our Sess. 6. c. 8. justification: but yet not sufficient of it selfe, except Charitie and Hope (two other Theologicall vertues) doe ac∣company the same; so as we doe both loue and hope in him, in whom we be∣leeue. And out of these, and by dire∣ction of these, doe flow againe other Christian vertues, called morall: for that they appertaine to the direction of life and manners, which vertues doe
consist principally in the inward habits and actes of the mind, and from thence doe proceede to the externall actions and operations, whereby wee exercise our selues in keeping Gods Comman∣dements, and exercising workes of pie∣tie toward our neighbour, as cloathing the naked, feeding the hungry, visiting External actions flowing of inter∣nall ver∣tues. the sicke, and the like. In workes of deuotion in like maner, as singing, and praying to God, kneeling, knocking our breasts, mortifying our bodies, by fasting, watching, and other such like. All which exteriour actions are so farre forth commendable and meritorious, as they proceed from the inward ver∣tues and motions of Gods Spirit. And albeit (as Saint Thomas saith) these exteriour actes doe adde nothing S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 20. art. 4. in substantiall goodnesse to the inward acts, but haue their merit from thence; yet, for that man consisteth both of spi∣rit and flesh, it was reason that hee should bee bound to honor God with both, that is to say, both with inward acts of vertue, proceeding from Gods grace and motion, and with outward vertuous actes, testifying the inward,
whereby wee see what an excellent Christian Common-wealth the Catho∣like Religion doth appoint, if it were executed according to her doctrine, to wit, that all mens minds should be re∣plenished with all sort of vertues, to∣wards both God & our neighbor, and that their actions should be full of all righteousnesse, pietie and charitie in exteriour behauiour, so as neither in thought, word, nor deede they should offend either of them both. And thus much for the Catholike man, concer∣ning his actions, life and manners. But this Catholike Religion doth not stay heere, nor teach onely in gene∣rall what actions a Christian man should haue, and from what internall principles of grace and vertue they should flow, but doth offer vs diuers particular means also how to procure, The Ca∣tholike doctrine of seuen Sacra∣ments, and their vse. and conserue, and increase this grace, which is the fountaine of al goodnesse: for first, it exhibiteth vnto vs, besides all other meanes of prayer, and parti∣cular indeauours of our part, seuen ge∣nerall meanes and instruments left vs to that purpose, by the institution of
Christ himselfe, which are seuen Sacra∣ments, that being receiued with due disposition of the receiuer, doe alwaies bring grace by the vertue and force of Christs merit and institution, without dependance of the merit, or demerit of the Minister that administreth them. By vse of which Sacraments, infinite grace is deriued daily by Christ our Sa∣uiour vnto his Church, and particular members thereof, in euery state and de∣gree of men. Moreouer, Catholike Religion not contented with these generalities, doth The par∣ticular direction of a Chri∣stian man from his Baptisme vntill his death, by helpe of diuers Sacra∣ments. Baptisme. come yet more in particular to frame direct, and helpe a Christian man in the way of his saluation, euen from the first houre of his birth in Christ, vntill his soule, departing from this world, be rendered vp againe into his Creators hands. For first, he hauing all his sins forgiuen clearely and freely by the grace of Christ receiued in Baptisme, hee is strengthened to the fight and course of a true Christian life, by the Sacrament of Confirmation, and impo∣sition Confirma∣tion. of hands: his soule also is fed, and nourished spiritually by the sacred
food of our Sauiours bodie in the Eu∣charist: Eucharist. two seuerall states of Christian life are peculiarly assisted with grace of two particular Sacraments, Priests and Clergie-men by the Sacrament of Ho∣ly Orders; and maried people by the Holy Or∣der. Sacrament of Matrimony. And for Mariage. that in this large race and course of life (as Saint Paul calleth it) we often fall and offend God by reason of our infir∣mitie; there is a most soueraigne Sa∣crament of Penance, for remedie here∣of Penance. appointed by our prouident Saui∣our, founded in the merits of his sacred Passion, called Secunda tabula post nau∣sragium, by holy Fathers, that is, the Hier. in cap. 3. Esa. & ep. 8. ad Demetr. second table or planke, whereon wee may lay hands, and escape drowning, after the shipwracke of our pardon, Pacian. ep. 1. ad Sym∣pron. grace and justification receiued in our Baptisme, which was the first table: by which second table of Penance, all sorts may rise againe how often soeuer they fall; which Sacrament consisteth of three parts, sorrow for our sinnes, and confessing the same, for the remission Contrition Confession Satisfa∣ction. of the guilt, and some kinde of satisfa∣ction on our behalfe, for remouing the
temporall punishment remaining: the true vse whereof bringeth such excee∣ding helpe and comfort to a Christian soule, as it is vnspeakable. For that by the first two parts a man is oft brought sweetly to sorrow for his sins, to thinke vpon them, to detest them, aske pardon of God for them, to make new purpo∣ses of better life for the time to come, to examine his conscience more parti∣cularly, and other such heauenly effects as no man can tell the comfort thereof, but he that receiueth them. By the third part also, which is Sa∣tisfaction, though a man performe ne∣uer The force of Satisfa∣ction. so little thereof in this life, yet doth it greatly auaile him, not onely in re∣spect of the grateful acceptation there∣of at Gods hands, for that it commeth freely of his owne good will, but also for that it humbleth euen the proudest minde in the sight of almightie God: it restraineth also greatly our wicked appetites from sin for the time to come, when we know wee must giue a parti∣cular account, and satisfie also for our sensualities somewhat euen in this world. And finally, it is the very chiefe
sinew of Christian conuersation and behauiour one towards another: for when the rich man knoweth (for exam∣ple sake) that he must satisfie one way or another, and be bound by his ghost∣ly father to make restitution so farre, as hee is able, of whatsoeuer hee hath wrongfully taken from the poor, when the poore also are taught that they must doe the like towards the rich, the sonne towards his father, the seruant towards his master, if hee haue deceiued him; when the murmurer in like manner knoweth that he must make actuall re∣stitution of fame (if he haue defamed any) this Catholike doctrine, I say, and practise, must needs be a strong hedge to all vertuous and pious conuersation among men, that beleeue and follow the same. And finally, not to passe to more particularities, whereas Catholike do∣ctrine teacheth vs, that all or most dis∣orders of this life in a sensuall man (to omit the infirmities of our higher powers in like manner) doe proceede originally from the fountaine of Con∣cupiscence, and law of the flesh remai∣ning
in vs after our baptisme, and, ad The war of Con∣supiscēce and helpe of Gods grace for the same. certamen, as holy Fathers do tearme it, that is to say, for our conflict and com∣bate, to the end our life may be a true warfare, as the holy Scripture calleth it. This Concupiscence, I say, or sen∣suall motion, being the ground of our temptations, though it be not sinne of it selfe, except we consent vnto it, yet is shee busie in stirring vs daily to wic∣kednesse; as a Christian mans principall exercise, and diligence, ought to be in resisting her, which he may doe by the helpe and assistance of Christs grace, (merited by his sacred Passion) where∣in he extinguished the guilt of this ori∣ginall corruption, though hee left still the sting and prouocation for our grea∣ter merit, and continuall victory by his holy grace, in them that will striue and fight, as they may and ought to doe. But yet, for that this fight is com∣bersome, and fastidious in it selfe, and deadly also to many, that suffer them∣selues to be ouercome; the Catholike Religion doth teach a man how he shal fight in this conflict, what armes, and defence he may vse in particular to de∣fend
himselfe, and to gaine victorie. And to this head or branch are redced all our spirituall bookes and volumes about mortification, as well of our wil, judgement, and affections of minde, as all other parts also of our inferiour sensualitie, to wit, how you may resist this and that temptation, what preuen∣tion you may make, what bulwarke you may raise, what defence you may rest vpō, wherin do enter all particular directiōs, of fasting. prayer, watching, haire-cloath, lying on the ground, and other bodily afflictions so much vsed by olde Saints, and may bee vsed al∣so now by all (if they will) for gaining of this important victorie: there en∣treth also among other defences, that great and soueraigne remedie of flying the world wholly, and retyring to the port of a religious life, for such as o∣therwise see themselues either weake, or in danger to bee wholly ouercome by this venimous beast of Concupi∣scence, or else doe desire to merit more aboundantly at Gods hands, by offe∣ring themselues wholly and entirely to his seruice, and to the more neere imi∣tation
of their Lord and Sauiour. By all which helpes, assistances, and directi∣ons deliuered in this behalfe by Catho∣like doctrine, to euery mans state and degree of life, a Catholike Christian passeth on more securely during his life, and at his last going out of this world, receiueth finally the grace and comfort of the last Sacrament of Ex∣treame vnction, instituted by Christ, and Extreame vnction. Iames 5. recommended vnto vs by Saint Iames his Apostle; and from thence passeth to receiue that eternall joy and king∣dome at his Sauiours hands, which hee hath prepared for them that beleeue in him, and striue and fight for him in this life against sinne and iniquitie. And thus haue we described brief∣ly, but seriously and truely, the state and condition of a Roman Catholike man, to oppose the same against a ridi∣culous vaine definition, or rather ficti∣on of IOHN FOX. But now if wee would paragon the same with the Pro∣testants Doctrine and practise, in all these points before mentioned, we shal quickly see the difference. And as for the first point of all, concerning Faith
and beleefe in generall, the difference is so palpably set downe in that which hath bin alreadie said, as it is needlefse to say any more. In the second point concerning the inward principles of our outward acti∣ons: The com∣parison of the foresaid Catho∣like do∣ctrine, with that of the Prote∣stants. truth it is, that they agree with vs in somewhat, to wit, that all good commeth originally from Gods holy grace and motion; but presently they disagree againe, for that they hold our grace of Iustification to be no inherent qualitie, but onely an externall impu∣tation, and that Gods motion to our minde is such, as it excludeth wholly all concourse and cooperation of our Free-will, whereby they cut off at one blow, all endeauours of our part to do any goodnesse at all, and leaue vs as a stone or blocke to be moued by God onely, whereof also ensueth, that hee must needs be author of our sins, and other blasphemies, and infinite incon∣ueniences, not only in matter of Faith, but in life and actions also; for that this principle being once receiued, that our Free-will, though it be preuented, mooued and strengthened by Gods
grace, can doe nothing at all, nor coo∣perate to any good worke, or resist any euill: who will haue care afterward to endeauour, labour, striue, or wearie himselfe about any thing that is diffi∣cult, or displeasant vnto him? Next to this, concerning the vertues Theologicall, of Faith, Hope and Cha∣rity, Protestants are content with Faith only to our justification, as you see by Iohn Fox, who saith that the Scriptures ox. p. 22. doe expresly exclude both Hope and Charitie. And albeit some others of his sect will seeme to couer the matter, by Cap. pro ed. saying, that Hope and Charitie do fol∣low Faith as fruits thereof, if it be true Faith; yet in practise is there no man of thē indeed, that will permit his faith to this triall: but whether he haue these fruits or noe, he will defend his faith to be good, and that himselfe is justified thereby. So as from hence you see an∣other gappe opened to all presumpti∣on and liberty of life: for howsoeuer a Protestant liueth, yet will he not yeeld thereby that his faith is nought (and indeed the argument inforceth it not) and then followeth it, that his faith be∣ing
good, hee is justified, and conse∣quently, howsoeuer he liue, yet is hee a just man, and who will trouble him∣selfe with the labour of a good life, if beleeuing onely be sufficient. And this for internall vertues. But as for externall actions, euen those of the Law and ten Commande∣ments commanded by Christ himselfe, Fox derideth them in our people, as may be seene in his Definition, and re∣quireth onely two exteriour actions in his people, to wit, Baptizing and sup∣ping, or celebrating the Lords Supper, for all other matters, hee saith, no one thing is necessary for the exercise of his new Gospell, or to make a perfect Christian after his definition. So as if you lay before you two sorts of peo∣ple, the one labouring and wholly oc∣cupying themselues in all godly life, fructificantes in omni bono opere, fructi∣fying Coloss. 1. vers. 10. in all good workes (as the Apo∣stles words are, who also in the same place calleth this worke, The true wis∣dome and right vnderstanding of Gods heauenly will, and worthie walking before him:) you may behold, I say,
the one sort of these people, which Fox The con∣tinuall exercises of Catho∣likes in good workes. calleth Papists, not onely endued with inward good desires, but externally al∣so busied altogether in good deeds, shewing the same by the fruits of their inward vertues, to wit, in building of Churches, Hospitals, Monasteries, Col∣ledges, giuing almes, maintaining Or∣phanes, Widdowes and Pupills, recei∣uing Pilgrimes, and other such Christi∣an exercises, as also meeting at Chur∣ches, praying on their knees, sighing and sobbing for their sinnes, and con∣fessing the same to Gods substitute, to wit, their ghostly father, asking pardon also of their neighbours, and making restitution, if any thing with euill con∣science they haue taken or withholden, &c. Whiles in the meane space, the o∣ther sort accounted Saints of the new making by Fox, doe walke vp and downe, talking of their beleefe, but lay their hands vpon no good external worke at all by obligation, if wee be∣leeue Fox, except onely the Lords Sup∣per, nor is it incident to their vocation. And hereby also may we consider, how great a difference there is betweene
these two sorts of people in a Com∣mon-wealth, where they liue together, and what an infinite gate is laid open by this loosse new doctrine, to idlenes and lasie behauiour in Christian con∣uersation, quite opposite not onely to the doctrine and practise of ancient Fathers, and the Primitiue Church, but to the whole course of Scriptures, in like manner, which euery where doe inculcate with all sollicitude, the con∣tinual performance of externall good works, and that thereby indeed true Christians are knowne, in exercising themselues in Christs Cōmandements. And as for Sacraments, which ac∣cording to our doctrine, are heauenly The dif∣ference about Sacra∣ments and ef∣fects thereof. conduites and most excellent instru∣ments, appointed by God, for deriuing of grace vnto vs in euery state and con∣dition of Christian men; these fellowes doe first cut off fiue of the seuen, and the other two they doe so weaken and debase, as they are scarce worthy the receiuing: for they doe not hold, that either their Baptisme, or the Lords Sup∣per, doth giue any grace at all to him that receiueth them, though hee pre∣pare
himselfe neuer so well thereunto, but onely that they are certaine signes of their election & justification, which signes notwithstanding, hauing no more certaintie in them, then them∣selues list to apprehend by their special faith, concerning their owne justifica∣tion, and the matter standing in their owne hands to shew themselues justi∣fied, when they will; by these signes it seemeth indeed to be a very jest or co∣medie, but yet breaketh down a maine bank of Christiā discipline, care & sol∣licitude, that is to be seene in our men, when they receiue any Sacrament, for that beleeuing (as Catholique Faith teacheth them) that all Sacraments bring grace to them, that receiue them with due preparation, and of their own part, put no let by their indisposition; they doe labour and endeauour to pre∣pare The dif∣ferent prepara∣tion to receiue Sacra∣ments. themselues worthily, to the said receiuing therof, by Penance, Fasting, Prayer, Almes-deeds, and other like holy endeauours, assuring themselues also on the contrary side, that negligent receiuing of Sacraments doth not one∣ly not bring grace, but encreaseth ra∣ther
their owne offence. So as this pre∣paration of Catholike people to the re∣ceiuing of Sacraments, is a continuall kinde of spurre to good purposes, ver∣tue and renouation of life: whereas this other sort of good fellowes, per∣swading themselues that their Sacra∣ments are onely bare signes of things already past; and as it were, a continu∣all representation of justification alrea∣die receiued, there needeth not any such laborsome indeauour for due pre∣paration, nor yet care or sollicitude of life or manners; for that alreadie they haue the thing, which they desire, and that those are but signes, tokens and testimonies that they haue receiued it indeed, which yet, as I said, hath no more assurance, then euery mans owne perswasion and apprehension will af∣ford. Lastly, concerning the foresaid fountaine of temptation in our flesh and sensualitie, called Concupiscence: they differ from vs in two essentiall points: first, that they hold this concu∣piscence, not for a tempter onely, but rather for a conqueror, for so much as
they teach that euery motion of her to sensualitie in vs, is a finne, whether it bee yeelded vnto by our will or noe. The second point following necessari∣ly The dif∣ference about mortify∣ing and refisting of our Concu∣piscence. of this first, is, that all resistance of our part to the motions of this concu∣piscence, is either needlesse or boot∣lesse; for that the motion it selfe being sinne without our consent, it followeth consequently, that the matter is not remediable by our endeauours; and heere now breaketh in a whole sea of disorders to Christian life, for that sup∣posing first, that which is most true, that euery Christian man hath this as∣sault of concupiscence within him; and secondly, by this new doctrine, that no man can auoid to sinne thereby vpon euery motion that is offered, what nee∣neth, or what auaileth any resistance of ours, or any conflict to the contrary? sinne it is, though we resist neuer so much, and but sinne it is, if we yeelde. And seeing that by another principle of this new doctrine, all sinnes are e∣qually mortall, what is gained by stri∣uing, or what is lost by yeelding? And to what end are all those large Treati∣ses
of ancient Fathers, about fighting against this concupiscence, and morti∣fication of her appetites and motions? What doe auaile all their exhortations to this purpose, as also those of the Scriptures, to continencie, chastitie, virginitie, abstinence, sobrietie, and o∣ther like vertues; for so much as euery first motion of our concupiscence to the contrary (which first motion wee cannot auoid) is sin in it selfe, to what purpose (I say) are wo perswaded and animated, to fight and striue against this enemie, seeing there is no hope of victorie, but that at euery blow shee conquereth and ouerthroweth vs, as the Protestants teach? Wherefore to proceed no further in this comparison, you may easily by this, that is said, consider the differences be∣tweene Fiue principal inundati∣ons of li∣centious∣nesse, brought in by Prote∣stants do∣ctrine. these two people, and in parti∣cular, you may with griefe and teares contemplate among other points, fiue generall inundations of loosenesse and wicked liberty, brought into Christian conuersation, by the foresaid fiue prin∣ciples of these mens doctrine, to wit: First, in taking away wholly all con∣currance,
and good endeauors of mans will to any vertuous action whatsoe∣uer, though neuer so much preuented or assisted by the helpe of Gods grace. Secondly, in ascribing all justificatiō to  onely Faith, and thereby moouing the concurrance of Hope, Charitie, Piety, Deuotion, and other vertues. Thirdly, in disgracing and denying the necessity  of the exercise of externall good workes, proceeding from those inter∣nall vertues, and commended vnto vs to walke therein. Fourthly, in deba∣sing the force, dignity, and number of  Sacraments, appointed for instruments and conduites of Gods holy grace vn∣to all sorts of men. And lastly, in at∣tributing  a kingdome of sinne irresi∣stable to our concupiscence, in fauour of temptations and sensuall motions, and discomforting thereby all people from fighting against the same. Which fiue principles being well weighed & considered, together with the practise and successe that haue en∣sued vpon them throughout Christen∣dome, where this new doctrine hath preuailed; no indifferent man can bee
so simple, but that he will easily disco∣uer the true difference betweene these two people, and their Religions; as al∣so betweene Fox his lying fond Defi∣nition of a Catholike, and this our De∣scription of Catholikes & Protestants, containing the most substantiall points of Faith, and life, both of the one and the other. AN ADDITION MADE by the Collecter. NOW because I haue mentioned IOHN FOX, I would desire thee (good Reader) to reade that learned Treatise of Three Conuersions, especi∣ally the third part, wherein IOHN FOX The 17. Chapter of the six last Months, §. 6. in the be∣ginning, to the §. 8. his booke of Martyrs (so called) is par∣ticularly examined and confuted, where thou mayest clearely descrie the erroneous and false spirit of the Protestants, for so much as they make choice of any sort of people whatsoeuer, bearing the name of Christians, to be of their Church and fra∣ternitie, notwithstanding that they held and beleeued many most damnable errors
and herefies; but howsoeuer, if they spake freely against the Pope, or floutly denied but one article of the Catholike Faith, for which they haue been condemned for He∣retikes by our Church, they were presently accounted for right good Protestants, and fit for IOHN FOX to Canonize and make Martyrs. Of this that worthy Au∣thor in the foresaid Treatise sheweth briefely in a Consideration which hee ma∣keth, what sort of people be put by IOHN FOX into his Kalendar. It is then to be noted (saith hee) that Three Conuers. part. 3. chap. 17. n. 6. in the Kalendar and story thereof (to wit, FOX his Actes and Monuments) are comprised all the heads of Factions and Sects that haue been different from the knowne Catholike Religion, and among themselues for these three or foure last hundred yeares, as Waldo of Lyons, and his Waldensians, the Earle of Tholosa, and his Albigensians, Iohn Wickliffe of England, and his Wickliffians, Iohn Husse of Bemeland, and his Hussites, Iohn Zisca of the same Nation, and his Thaborites, Walter Lollard in Germa∣nie, and his Lolardians: and in our daies, Martin Luther, and his Lutherans, both
sects, Molles and Rigidi Vldericus, Zuinglius, and his Zuinglians, Iohn Caluin, and his Caluinists both mingled, and Puritans; and other the like: All which are allowed and commended by Fox, eyther in his Kalendar or Historie, thongh they did not a little disagree, as well among themselues, as with the Ca∣tholike Church, both in words and actions, manner of life, preachings and writings, as before hath been shewed. And whereas we that follow Catholike doctrine, are so exact for holding vnitie therein, as we reiect and hold for wicked (according to the Creed of Saint Atha∣nasius, and first Councell of Nice) who∣soeuer doth not beleeue inuiolably the said Catholike Faith, and intirely in euery point, and doe sometimes condeme euen to death, and burne some for dissenting in one only point of Faith, (as Iohn Fox himselfe hath diuers times complained) how can it be, that he and his Church can gather vp and tye together in one vnion of Faith, and communion of Saints, all these different and opposite heads, together with their members and followers? Truely no other way, but onely as Samson tyed his
Foxes together by the tayles, though their heads and faces were opposite, and contra∣rie one to another, which serued him not to plow nor sow, plant nor tyll, but only to set a fire, waste, and destroy the corne which others haue sowed before, which is the on∣ly office and peculiar worke, that these wrangling opposit hereticall heads do bring forth in the Church of God, to wit, pull downe, digge vp, destroy, discredit and disgrace that which was sowen, planted, and established before them, and thereby to bring all to misdoubt, vnbeleefe, and atheisme. So F. PARSONS. And because peraduenture euery one, desirous to know more of this matter, cannot so easily procure to see or reade that discussion or examination of Iohn Fox his Saints, and of their different spirits from the Catholike; I will let you see the summe of both Ka∣lendars, as it is set downe by the fore∣named Author in the end of the Ka∣lendar, both in the first and last sixe Moneths of that his Examen.
The summe of all Saints named in both Kalendars. In the Catholike Kalendar. The number of all mentioned 1704. whereof are Popes Martyrs 27. Popes Confessors 8. Bishops Mar∣tyrs 37. Bishops Confessors 63. Virgins Martyrs 76. (besides the 11000. slaine with Saint Vrsula) Virgins Confessors 11. Kings and Queenes Martyrs 3. Kings and Queenes Confessors 8. other ho∣ly men and women 3429. other men and women Confessors 42. All these were of one Faith and Religion agreeable to the Roman at this day. In the Foxian Kalendar. The number of all mentioned 456. Bishops Pseudomartyrs 5. Bishops Confessors 1. Virgin Martyrs 000. May d Martyrs 2. Kings & Queenes Martyrs and Confessors 1. other men & women Martyrs 393. other men and women Confessors 53.
These were of diuers sects and opinions, and contrary in many points the one to the other: as for example. Waldensians and Albegensians 13. Lollards and Wickliffians 36. Hus∣sites and Lutherans 78. Zuinglians and Caluinifts 268. Anabaptists, Puritans, and doubtfull of what sect 59. Againe of those were Husbandmen, Weauers, Sawyers, Shoo-makers, Curriers, Smithes, and other such like occupations 282. Poore women and Spinsters, 64. Apostata Monks and Friers 25. Apostata Priests 38. Ministers 10. Publike Malefactors, and condem∣ned by the Lawes for such, 19. The greatest Disputers of this ranke a∣gainst the Catholike Bishops and learned men, were George Tankerfield a Cooke, August 13. Iohn Mandrell a Cowheard, Men. March 27. Richard Chrashfield a
yong Artificer, March 28. Raph Al∣lerton a Tayler, September 19. Iohn Fortunea Black-smith, September 30. Richard Woodman an Iron ma∣ker, Iune 23. Ellen Erwing a Millers wife, August Women. 23. loane Lashford a maried maide, Ianuary 18. Isabell Foster, a Cut∣lers wife, Ianuary 17. Anne Ale∣bright, a poore woman of Canter∣bury, Ianuary 19. Alice Potkins, Spinster, Nouember 15. Alice dri∣uer, a famous Doctrice, Nouem∣ber 22. And to giue you some particular taste of this roauing spirit which raigned in some of Master Fox his principall Protestant Martyrs; Master Iohn Brad∣ford, whom Fox most highly extolleth See this in the Examen of Fox his Kalendar chap. 11. num. 28. 29. in many leaues, and stileth him Prea∣cher-Martyr; was accustomed much to bragge of his singuler assurance that he had of the right course hee was in, which he said was so cleare and euident to him, that there could be no more doubt thereof, then whether the Sunne did shine vpon a faire day: and when the Bishops
asked him How he came to so great a cer∣tainty, he answered, I am certaine of my saluation and religion by the Scriptures: but when they posed him further, how hee could bee sure of Scriptures them∣selues, and of their true meaning with∣out the testimony of the Church; hee had no other shift, but to runne to the assurance of his owne spirit, telling them, that albeit he receiued the know∣ledge of the Scriptures by the testimo∣nie of the Church (as those of the Ci∣tie of Sychar did the notice of Christ by the woman from the Well) yet that Iohn 4. when he once had them, then could he vse them well enough, for vnderstan∣ding them; and for shew hereof, when a little after hee had occasion to inter∣pret some peeces of Scriptures, he did it so absurdly as a man might well see, how much might be builded vpon the assurance of that his particular and priuate spirit, as for example, among other places, hee tooke vpon him to proue by Scripture that the Pope was Antichrist, and cited for it onely those words of the Apostle to the Thessalo∣nians, That Antichrist shall sit in the
Temple of God, &c. which though it proue nothing, as you see, for that wee deny not but that Antichrist when hee commeth, shall sit in the Temple of God, yea and pretend to be God him∣selfe, (which no Popes euer did or shal doe;) yet to Bradford the allegation of this place seemed much to the pur∣pose, and to Iohn Fox, that admireth all which the other vttered, it appeareth so full a proofe, as he maketh this note in the margent: The Pope proued to bee Antichrist by Scriptures. But this proofe (as you see) standeth only vpon Brad∣fords interpretation, which interpreta∣tion is not onely not conforme to any ancient Fathers exposition whatsoeuer, but is manifestly also contrary to the text it selfe, where immediatly before the words alledged, That he shall sit in the Temple of God, are these words, Ex∣tolletur supra omne quod dicitur Deus, aut qued colitur, That Antichrist (when he commeth) shall bee extolled aboue all that is called God, or that is wor∣shipped for God, so as he shall not call him Gods seruant (as the Pope doth) nor the seruant of his seruants, but
chiefe God himselfe, which no Pope, as is said, euer did or will, and conse∣quently these words cannot possibly agree to the Pope, and yet forsooth the spirit of Bradford, that cannot erre or be deceiued, doth expound it so, and thereby you see the certaintie of his spirit. After this, againe he went about to perswade the two Bishops, who exa∣mined him, that he agreed with them, and with their Church in substance of Faith and beleefe, and consequently might bee saued with them, notwith∣standing this deniall of two articles, for which only he said he was condem∣ned: to wit, Transubstantiation, and that the euill men doe not receiue the body of Christ, when they communicate, which two articles Bradford affirmed not to appertaine to the substance of faith, or foundation of Christ, and con∣sequently, that he was vnjustly cast our of the Church for them, for so much as hee firmely beleeued all the articles of the Creede with them: whereunto, when the Bishops smiling replied say∣ing, Yen, Is this your Diuinitie? BRAD∣FORD
answered Noe; it is PAVLS, which saith, That if men hold the foun∣dation 1. Cor. 3. 11. Christ, though they build vpon him straw and stubble, yet they shall be saued. So he, whereby you see that this great learned Cleake would proue by Saint Paul, that both Protestants and all o∣ther Sectaries, that in words doe pro∣fesse to beleeue all the Articles of the Creede (though each one in seuerall sense to himselfe) shall be saued toge∣ther with Catholikes, and that all these our contentions with them, and other Sectaries are but straw and stub∣ble, and touch not the foundation of Christ at all: This was his spirit, and doe you thinke that this spirit could be deceiued, or will our English Prote∣stants at this day, allow this spirit, or joyne with Bradford in this paradox? I know they will not, and would bee a∣shamed to interpret the place of Saint Paul in that sense, for so much as it is euident, that he meaneth of the straw and stubble of workes, and not do∣ctrine, or at least such principall points of doctrine as those are, which
Bradford did professe contrary to the Catholique truth. Notwithstanding there bee some principall Protestant Doctors, who, howsoeuer they inter∣pret the foresaid place of Saint Paul, 1.Cor. 3. and vpon what other place soeuer of Scripture they pretend to builde, yet doe they holde and main∣taine the same Paradox in Christian Religion (as I may call it) and the same exorbitant grosse errour, which the phanaticall spirit of Iohn Bradford sug∣gested vnto him for an assured truth, to wit, that all, euen Heretikes, as well as Catholikes, may bee saued, so long as they hold the foundation Christ. For so Master Doctor Morton (now Morton in his Trea∣tise of the Kingdom of Israel, pag 91. called a Bishop) saith, Wheresoeuer a company of men doe ioyntly and publikely by worshipping the true God in Christ, professe the substance of Christian Reli∣gion, which is Faith in lesus Christ, the Sonne of God, and Sauiour of the world, that there is a true Church, notwithstan∣ding any corruption whatsoeuer. And, giuing this title to one section in his booke, That Heretikes are members of Ibidem.
the Catholike Church. In proofe hereof he saith further, Who professe IESVS CHRIST to bee the Sauiour of the world, &c. although they doe indirectly by wickednesse of life, or heresie in do∣ctrine deny their owne profession, yet are they to be accounted Christians, and true members of the Church: by whose ac∣count you see all Heretikes whatsoeuer are to be accounted for true members of the Church, seeing all doe confesse Iesus Christ to bee the Sauiour of the Supra pag. 94. world, and therefore hee holdeth the Arrians, who deny the God-head of Christ, to bee also of the Church of God. The like doth Doctor Field, con∣cerning the Greeke Churches, though they erre against the holy Ghost; say∣ing in his Treatise of the Church: Wee Field of the Church. pag. 220. cannot condemne the Grecians as Here∣tikes: And againe, before that pag. 70. It no way appeareth that the Churches of Greece are hereticall, or in damnable. Schisme. Which opinion and judge∣ment of these principall new Ministers in our Protestant Kingdome of Israel, if it were sound and good, and procee∣ded
from the true Spirit; wee might easily grant and beleeue that all sort of Heretikes whatsoeuer are, or euer haue been, may be saued, notwithstanding their abominable and blasphemous heresies, which they haue taught and beleeued, concerning God, the blessed Trinitie, the Incarnation of our Saui∣our, or in a word, against any, or al∣most all the Articles of our Creede: which strange paradox how contrary it is vnto the whole current of holy Scripture, which saith expressely, That an hereticall man is damned; let any Tit. 3. indifferent man consider and judge, surely the whole streame of all Anti∣quitie, the graue, holy, and wise judge∣ment of holy men that haue liued in Gods Church throughout all ages, were of another beleefe and opinion, and of a quite contrary spirit to this of Protestant Doctors: you shall heare one or two speake for the rest. Saint Cyprian saith, Whosoeuer is seperated Cyprian. li. de Simpl. praelat. from the Church, and ioyneth himselfe to an adulteresse conuenticle (which euery Heretike doth) is seperated also from the
promises of the Church, nor euer shall hee come to enioy the rewards thereof, if hee leaue her; he is an alien, a prophane per∣son, an enemie, he cannot haue God for his Father, that hath not the Church for his Mother: yea though hee should bee slaine for the confessing of Christs name, yet can Much lesse may Prote∣stants flatter & deceiue them∣selues, by thinking they liue well, and may bee saued. he not be saued; Macula ista nec sangui∣nae abluitur, this crime of seperating him∣selfe from the Church cannot bee washed away with bloud: Inexpiabilis culpa nec passione purgatur, It is a fault vnexpia∣ble (supposing one continue in it) nor can it be purged by death it selfe. Saint Augustine also, Neither is Baptisme (saith he) profitable to an Heretike being out of the Church, nor yet if for the confes∣sion Aug. l. 4. de Bapt. cont. Do∣nat. c. 17. of Christ he should be put to death, for that hee is conuinced to want charitie, where of the Apostle saith, Though I should deliuer my body so that I burn, and haue not charity, it aoth profit me nothing. The same hath S. Austen in many pla∣ces of his Workes, and the same is the constant and common opinion of all holy Fathers: and therefore whether these holy ancient Fathers, or our late
moderne Protestant Doctors are most likely to be guided by the true spirit of God, as well in this, as in many most important points of our Christian be∣leefe, wherein they differ as much as light from darknesse, truth from false∣hood; I leaue vnto euery Christi∣an man, who hath a true and ear∣nest care of his eternall salua∣tion, seriously and diligent∣ly to weigh and con∣sider.
ANOTHER DIFFERENCE worthy of obseruation betweene the Catholike and Protestant spirit, consisting in the willingnes of the one, and vnwillingnesse of the other to admit publike and in∣different triall of their Doctrine. WHEREAS one principal mark by which a good Spirit may be discerned from a bad, is that the good Spirit loueth light, and wil∣lingly commeth to the light, admitting any reasonable and indifferent meanes of triall. But the bad Spirit hateth light, and commeth not to the light, but flyeth all publike and indifferent meanes, by which it may be examined. I wish the gentle Reader duely to con∣sider how this propertie of the good spirit agreeth to the Catholike Church and the propertie of the bad spirit a∣greeth to the Protestants Congrega∣tion. On the one side it may easily bee seene how much the Catholike Church loueth light, in that the Doctors there∣of
in théir publike writings ordinarily vse to explicate and set downe clearely and sincerely, the state of the question in controuersie. Secondly, They truly set downe the opinions and arguments of their Aduersaries, and this some∣times more fully then is done by their Aduersaries themselues. Thirdly, They explicate the Catholike doctrine, con∣firming it with cleare testimonies of holy Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, and Reasons, and answering fully all, or the strongest Obiections. Fourthly, They are ready both in their publike Schools and in their Prouinciall and Generall Councels to admit, yea inuite, their greatest Aduersaries to speake freely whatsoeuer they thinke good, for triall of the truth in all matters of Contro∣uersie. This to be true, appeareth partly by the learned and methodicall books of our Catholike Authors, namely, Bellarmine, Stapleton, Valentia, and o∣thers; partly by the practise of our publike Schooles, where any may free∣ly make whatsoeuer arguments they will, for disputation sake, partly by some especiall examples of free dispu∣tation
permitted to be made in Catho∣like Countries, euen by knowne Here∣tikes: as for ancient times, wee reade how the Councell of Carthage inui∣ted the Donatists to a publike and free Conference or disputation, saying, Eli∣gatis exvobis ipsis, &c. Choose some among your selues who may vndergoe this businesse to proue your cause, that we also may do the like, and that some from among this Councell may be ap∣pointed, who may at the same time and place agree vpon, examine or trie together with those which shal be cho∣sen among you, whatsoeuer controuer∣sie it is which hindereth vs from com∣municating with you, &c. For if you doe brotherly admit thereof (to wit, of this conference) the truth will easily appeare. But if you refuse to accept of this, your infidelitie (or false faith) will presently be made knowne. Thus this ancient Councell did inuite Heretikes to a triall, also in latter times in our owne Countrey, to wit, in the raigne of Queene Mary, there were permit∣ted seuerall open disputations, once in Pauls Church in London for sixe daies,
and after at Oxford, and again second∣ly at Oxford with liberty to make ele∣ction of Notaries vpon their part, and with offer of books and libertie of fur∣ther time to amend their answeres, all which is affirmed and granted by Fox in his booke of Actes and Monuments, and clearely conuinceth the Catholike Spirit to bee a good Spirit, which ad∣mitteth so willingly, and offereth so freely such publike triall of the truth. But chiefely this which I said appea∣reth to be true, by the most ample free offer, and Inuitement, and safe con∣duct made and granted by the holy ge∣nerall Councell of Trent to all Prote∣stants, both of Germany and other pla∣ces, the tenor of which is as followeth. Salvus conductus concessus Germanica Nationi: The Safe-conduct granted vnto the German Nation. In the generall Congregation the fourth day of March, MDLXII.
Sacro sancta oecumenica & generalic Tridentina Synodus, &c. THe most Sacred oecumenicall and generall Councell of Trent most lawfully gathered together in the ho∣ly Ghost the Legates of the holy Sea Apostolike, president in the same, doth make knowne vnto all men, that it doth graunt vnto all and euery one, Priests, Electors, Princes, Dukes, Mar∣quesses, Counts, Barons, Nobles, Knights, Commons, and to all other whatsoeuer, of whatsoeuer state and condition, or qualitie they bee of the Prouince and Nation of Germany, to all Cities and other places thereof, and to all other Ecclesiastical and Secular per∣sons, especially those of the Confession of Augusta, who shall come, or any who together with them shall come or be sent, or whosoeuer haue hitherto come vnto this Generall Councell of Trnt, by what name soeuer they bee called, or may be called by the tenour of these presents, doth grant by pub∣like promise a most full & true security, which is called A safe Conduct, freely
to come vnto the Citie of Trent, and there to remaine, stay, abide, propose, speake, treate, examine together with the Councell, and discourse of what businesse soeuer, and freely to offer vp and publish whatsoeuer it shall please them, and whatsoeuer Articles, as well in writing, as by word of mouth, and to declare, maintaine, confirme, and proue the same by the holy Scriptures, and by the words and sentences of ho∣ly Fathers, and by reasons; and if need require, euen to answere vnto the ob∣jections of the Generall Councel, and to dispute with those who shall be ap∣pointed by the Councell, or peaceably to conferre without any impediment, all approbrious speeches, reuilings, and contumelies wholly laid aside, and in particular, that the matters in contro∣uersie shall be handled in the foresaid Councell, according to the holy Scrip∣tures, and traditions of the Apostles, approued Councels, the consent of the Catholike Church, and the Authoritie of the holy Fathers, adding this more∣ouer, that it doth yeeld and absolutely grant, that they shall not be punished
vnder the pretext of Religion, or of any offences committed, or to be com∣mitted against the same, so as by rea∣son of their presence, none shall in any case need to cease from performing the diuine seruice either in journey or in going, abiding, or returning from any place, noe, not in the Citie of Trent it selfe: & that these businesses being fini∣shed or not finished, whensoeuer they shal please, or by commādment & con∣sent of their Superiors they shal desire, or any one of thē shal desire to returne to their owne dwellings; presently, without any let, hinderance, or delay, their goods, their honour likewise and persons preserued, they may freely and securely returne at their pleasure, as often as they will, with the knowledge notwithstanding of such as shall bee appointed by the Councell, to the end that prouision may bee made in due time for their securitie, without fraud or deceit. Moreouer, the holy Councell will, that in this publike promise and Safe∣Conduct bee included and contained, and to be held for included all clauses
whatsoeuer, which shall bee necessarie and conuenient for their full effectuall and sufficient securitie in their going, staying, and returning: expressing this moreouer, for their greater securitie, and for the good of peace and agree∣ment, that if any of them either in jor∣ney comming vnto Trent, or whilest they abide there, or in returning thēce, should doe or commit (which God for∣bid) any enormous crime, whereby the benefit of this publike fidelity and as∣securation might bee annullated or made voide, that it is the Councels will, and it doth grant that such as are found to haue committed such offence, be presently punished by those of the Confession of Augusta themselues on∣ly, and not by any other, with such condigne penaltie and sufficient satis∣faction as may bee well liked of, and approued by some part of the Councel, the forme, conditions, and manner of their assecuration (or securitie) remai∣ning still vnuiolated. In like manner also, the Councels pleasure is, that if one or more of the Councell shall either in their jorney or
abiding, or returning, doe or commit (which God forbid) any enormous crime, whereby the benefite of this publike fidelity and assecuration might be violated, or in any sort broken, they who are taken in such offence, are to bee punished by the Councell it selfe alone, and not by any other, with such condigne penaltie & sufficient amend∣ment, as may rightly be well liked of by the Lords of Germany, of the Con∣fession of Augusta, being at the same time heere present, the forme, conditi∣ons, and manner of their assecuration (or securitie) remaining still vnuio∣lated. It is moreouer the will of the Coun∣cell, that it may be lawfull for the Em∣bassadors, all and euery one to goe a∣broad out of the Citie of Trent, so of∣ten as they shall thinke fit or needfull to take the ayre, and to returne into the same: as also freely to appoint or send their messenger or messengers, as also to receiue messengers or any mes∣senger, sent as often as they shall think expedient: so that some one or more of such as are deputed (and appointed) by
the Councell, doe accompany them, who may prouide for their securitie. Which Safe-Conduct and securitie ought to stand and continue from the time, and during the time that it shall happen they be receiued into the care of the protection of the Councel and Officers thereof, and be brought vnto Trent, and all the time of their abode there: and againe, when they shall haue had sufficient audience, then after the space of twentie dayes, when they shall require it, or the Councell after such audience had, shall giue order vn∣to them to depart, they shall bee con∣ducted from Trent, vntill they be (God willing) restored vnto that secure place where euery one shal choose vnto him∣selfe, and this without all fraud and deceit. All which the Councell doth pro∣mise, and with assured fidelitie doth professe shall bee inuiolately obserued (and kept) for and in the name of euery faithfull Christian, all Princes whatso∣euer, as well Ecclesiasticall as Tempo∣rall, and all other Ecclesiasticall and Secular persons, of what degree or
condition soeuer they be of, or by what name soeuer they be called. Moreouer, without all fraud and deceit, it doth truely and faithfully promise, that the Councel will neither openly nor couertly seek any occasion, or in any sort vse, or permit any to vse any authoritie, power, right, ordinance or priuiledge of the Lawes or Canons, or of any Councel whatsoeuer, especi∣ally of Constance and Seenes, in what forme of words soeuer expressed, vnto any prejudice of this publike fidelitie and ful assecuration, & publike and free audience graunted vnto them by the Councell, all which (authority, power, &c.) it doth abrogate in this behalfe, and for this time. And if the Holy Councell, or any one thereof, or of their adherents, of whatsoeuer condition or state, or dig∣nitie they be, shal in any point or cause violate (which neuerthelesse wee be∣seech God forbid) the forme and man∣ner of the aboue written assecuration and Safe Conduct, and that sufficient amendment be not presently made, yea and such as in the judgements of those
of the Cōfession of Augusta, shall right∣ly be approued and well liked of, let them account, and it shall be lawful for them to account the Councell it selfe to haue incurred al the penalties, which either of the Law, of the Law of God and man, or custome, the violators of such Safe-conducts can incurre (& this) without all excuse, or any gain-saying in this behalfe. The extenting of the former Safe-conduct vnto all other Nations. THe same most sacred Synod, being most lawfully gathered together in the holy Ghost, the said Legates de∣latere (so called) of the Sea Apostolike presiding, doth grant the publike fide∣lity or Safe-conduct vnder the same forme, and with the same words, wher∣with it is granted vnto the Germans, vn∣to all and euery one who doe not par∣ticipate with vs in matters belonging to Faith, of whatsoeuer Kingdom, Na∣tion, Prouince, Citie or place where is publikely & freely preached, or taught, or beleeued, contrary vnto that which the holy Church of Rome doth teach.
A SPEECH OF CARDI∣nall BARONIVS placed in the beginning of the second Tome of his Annals. I thinke it fitte to adioyne in this place a Speech of that worthily renowned and learned Cardinal Baronius, directed vn∣to all Heretikes; shewing how assured the faithfull children of Gods Church are, and euer haue been, concerning the vn∣doubted truth of their holy Catholike and Apostolike Roman Religion, & how prompt and ready they haue euer been to admitte of any indifferent triall of the same. The Speech or Admonition he en∣tituleth thus: An Appendix or Addition vnto the Reader, who is out of the catholike church. AT nec te dispiscimus, &c. We con∣temne not thee (I speake to the Reader much auerted from the Catho∣like Faith) nor set vpon thee with re∣bukes, prouoke thee with reproaches, loade thee with contumelies; because we are not moued with any perturba∣tion
of mind against the persons, when we reprehend mens errours, wee deale most kindly with thee, to the end thou mayest vnderstand that the Truth it selfe, rather then the Patron thereof, fighteth against thee: yea we will bee most liberall to thee, so farre forth, as that we will not feare, with all lenitie and submission of minde, to allow thy selfe perusing diligently these our workes, and desiring to finde forth the truth, as a just arbitrator. We hauing a confidence in the goodnesse of our cause, will yeeld so much vnto thee, as not to disdaine to vndergoe thy judge∣ment, concerning the truth of those things we speake of, prouided that thy reason, as it were, equally ballanced, be placed betweene, but aboue both parties, that is, supposing thee to be of a sound and sincere judgement, voyd of all perturbation, wanting particular affections, and so inclining to neither partie. If thou bee ready to shew thy selfe such a judge, I appeale from thy selfe, when at other times thou haddest thy minde troubled, vnto thine owne selfe, now examining things more ex∣actly
with the cleared eye of thy vn∣derstanding, the which power of mans soule is most vigorous, if being vnchai∣ned and free, it bee suffered freely to discourse. This consideration enfor∣ced our Auncestors, relying vpon the truth of their doctrine, when they had occasion to deale with most obstinate Heretikes, refusing and contemning the Church her judgement, to conde∣scend so much vnto them, as to permit their cause to the arbitrement of Hea∣thens, and demand their sentence in the same. These being Iudges, the Iews after much contention ouercame the Samaritans. In like manner, Origen Ioseph. An. tiq. lib. 13. cap. 6. choosing by consent of his aduersaries a Gentile for Vmpire, ouerthrew fiue most peruerse Heretikes, and conuer∣ted him who sate as Vmpire in their dispute. Likewise the holy Mesopota∣nian Bishop, Archelaus, confuted the Epiphan. Heres. 66. most impious Arch-heretike Manes, by the arbitrement of Gentiles, chosen to decide by common consent of both disputants. There are many other like examples, by which it appears the pro∣fessors of the truth to haue refused no
mans judgement or sentence, no not so much as of those who seeme to be condemned by our Lord himselfe, say∣ing: Hee that beleeueth not, is alreadie Iohn 3. iudged. All these we seeme to ouer go in our maner of free dealing with thee, because wee seeke no other arbitrator then thy selfe, if thou follow the rules of reason, most certainly assuring our selues, that thou wilt giue sentence for, and agree with vs, if thy reason of it owne nature most affecting equitie, do willingly heare the truth. One thing wee expect as the sole reward for our labours, that is, to see thee at length so condemned by thy selfe, judging most justly, as that thou mayest be quitte of thy errours. God grant we may once joyfully meete thee rectified in judge∣ment, embrace and kisse thee as our bro∣ther, Cant. 8. sucking the brests of our Mother: at this present although it be vnlawful for vs, because of the prohibition of the A∣postle (we speake it not without a most hearty sorrow) to salute thee, or to say so much as all haile vnto thee, notwith∣standing there is none that will forbid vs, to beg of almightie God by earnest
prayer thy saluation, which wee most earnestly desire. By this it appeareth how much the Catholike Spirit loueth light, & wish∣eth to haue a full and free triall of the truth. Contrariwise, the Protestants Spirit sheweth it selfe to hate light, first in that ordinarily their professors write confusedly of Controuersies, seldome setting downe sincerely and clearely the state of the question, but often per∣uerting it, making that seeme to be the question, which is not, also ordinarily wronging the Catholike sentence, in making it seeme to say what it sayeth not, also vsually concealing, or not ful∣ly vrging the arguments of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, & Reasons brought by Catholikes in their publike wri∣tings. Their owne sentence and opini∣on also they set downe so darkely and obscurely, as that often times they scarse vnderstand themselues, and much lesse is it vnderstood by others, what they hold, or would say. The arguments also which they bring for confirmation of their opinion▪ as likewise their answers to our objections are so light and vn∣sound,
yea sometimes so farre fetched and ill framed, as it is wonder that men of witte and learning can suffer such stuffe to passe from them. I omit to speake of their falsification and corruption of Scriptures and Fa∣thers, where of a taste may be taken by that which is set downe in M. Walsing∣ham his Search into matters of Religi∣on. I omit also their flying the judge∣ment of ancient Fathers and Councels, and their retiring themselues into the mist of their owne priuat fantasies, co∣uered with the spacious titles of onely Scripture and Gods Spirit. That which chiefly sheweth Prote∣stants Spirit to loue darknes, is that by any meanes they will not be drawne to permitte Catholikes liuing in their quarters, to come to such a publike, free and in different triall of the truth (euen by such grounds as Protestants them∣selues doe admit, or which by force of argumēt Catholikes wil soundly proue ought to be admitted) as Protestants haue bin permitted, yea inuited, yea ve∣hemently vrged vnto by the Catholike part: How ofteu haue euen our Eng∣lish
Catholikes Challēged Protestants to such a publike triall of truth? Heare I beseech you the the words of one of Defence of the Censure in the E∣pistle to M. Charke. them, writing about this point, against a Minister called Master Charke: And heere (M. Charke saith he) because we are fallen into this matter, I am in the name of my fellow Catholikes to re∣new our publike Challenge, of equall Disputation to you, and to all your brother Ministers againe. M. Campian is gone, whom you name in this mat∣ter to be our onely Champion, you see that Master Sherwin is made away with him, whom you are wont to say (for more abasement of the other) to haue been far better learned then M. Cam∣pian himselfe. But howsoeuer that was, both of them haue you dispatched, and thereby (in your opinion) greatly wea∣kened our cause; yet notwithstanding we are the same men that we were be∣fore: yea much more defirous of this triall then before. Wherefore wee re∣quest you now at length, yea we con∣jure you either for the truth sake, if you seeke it, or for your owne credit sake, if you will reteine it, that you yeeld vs
after so much suite and supplication, some equall triall, either by writing, preaching, or disputing. There is no reason in the world (but onely feare) that may mooue you to deny vs this our request. For the reason (of State) which you alledge (M. Charke) in the reply, is most vaine. For what can a peaceable disputation, granted to vs for Religion, indanger the State? but only (that you would say) that this di∣sputation may chance to discouer your errors, and so make the hearers detest the state of your herefie, for other dan∣ger there can be none to your State. And if you had the truth with you (as you pretend) whose property is, the more to shew her selfe, the more shee is examined, you should much increase your State by this publike triall: for that you should both gaine more to your part, by opening the said truth, and also confirme many of your owne side, that now justly doe wauer vpon this open discouery of your feare in triall. Wherefore once againe, I say vnto you Ministers, obtaine vs this disputa∣tion,
though it be only but for a shew, thereby onely to hold and maintaine your credit: we protest before God, that we seeke it onely for the triall of Christs truth, for search whereof, wee offer our selues to this labour, charges, and perill of life, we aske for our safe∣ties, but only such a warrant from her Majesty, as the late Councell of Trent did offer vnto all Protestants in the world, wherof you haue the copy with you: we will come in what kinde and number, at what time, to what place you will appoint. If you wil haue your own Countri∣men, they are ready to come. If you wil haue strangers to dispute in your Vni∣uersities before the learned only, there shal not want. For your selues, we giue you leaue to call all the learned Prote∣stants of Europe for your defence; wee wil take only our owne Country-men, if you permit vs. We giue you leaue to oppose or defend, to appoint questiōs, to choose cōtrouersies, to begin or end at your pleasure, and to vse any other prerogatiues that you please, so that they impugne not the indifferencie of
Triall: What can you alledge why you should not accept this? If you had rather make trial in other Countries, then at home before your own people, as perhaps you had, chuse you what Protestant state you list, and procure vs therein the foresaid safetie from the Prince, and wee will neither spare labour nor cost to meet you ther∣in also. Or if this seeme hard, and like you not, then take you but the paines some number of you, to come into any Catholike Kingdom or Coūtry where you please, and we will procure what security soeuer reasonably you shal de∣mand for your persons. And more then that, we will beare your expences also, rather then so good a worke shall re∣maine vnattempted. And if you can deuise any other condition to bee per∣formed on our parts, which I haue left out, do you adde the same, and we will agree (by the grace of God) to fulfil it. If we offer you reason, then deale som∣what reasonably with vs againe. For al the world wil crie shame, and begin to discredit you, if you will neither giue nor take vpon so great oddes as are
heere offered you. If you dare not ven∣ture with Disputations, yet grant vs at the least certaine Sermons to encoun∣ter with you vpon this matter: or if that also be so dangerous, procure vs but a little passage for our bookes. Now wheras the Denfence of the Cen∣sure, wherein the fore-rehearsed Chal∣lenge made by our learned Country∣men is set downe, was published Anno Dom. 1582. the same Challenge vnto the Ministers of England, with humble suit and earnest petition to the Prince for the same, hath bin continually euer since made, during the late Queenes dayes, and the same also more often reitterated and vrged since the raigne of his Majestie, vnto whom the graue and learned Doctor Kellison presented the same petition in the name of al Ca∣tholikes, yea and after that intreated for the same in his Epistle Dedicatorie to the Kings Majestie, prefixed before his learned booke called The Suruey of the new Religion. The same petition al∣so for disputation & triall (to omit ma∣ny others) was made vnto his Majestie by that learned Priest M. Brierley, in his
vnanswerable booke entituled, The Protestants Apollogie for the Romane Church, where hauing directed the whole current of his discourse vnto his learned Majestie, hee closeth vp the same with a finall petition and humble intreatie for some open and equall tri∣all of disputation. For the obtaining Tract. 3. Sect. 7. whereof (saith he) we presume hereby to become most humble and earnest petitioners vnto your Majestie. The euident and necessary incertaintie of our Aduersaries judgemēts in doctrine may well seeme to need it. The weight and consequence of the cause (being no lesse then the matter of Faith and Religion) deserueth. Our Aduersaries rule of reducing all things to examina∣tion and triall, appointeth it. Our ear∣nest desire of their conuersion thirsteth greatly after it. Their full perswasion of our pretended erring, and like cha∣ritable care of our reformation, should in all reason be no lesse willing of it. Our often admitting, or rather prouo∣king of them to open and equal dispu∣tations had in Queene Maries time, doth as now againe by way of requi∣tall
answerably requite it. The serious and resolued confidence of our Catho∣like Diuines, men confessedly no lesse able to performe, thē willing to vnder∣take the same, doth with most graue, and not to be neglected solicitation, prouoke and challenge it. The seueral examples of the same course, hereto∣fore obserued and practised in sundrie Nations, and by our very Aduersaries prescribed, doe as it were conduct and lead vs to it. The venerable and con∣fessed antiquitie of Catholike Faith established, but neuer hitherto con∣demned in any Generall Councell (and therfore vn worthy to be now rejected without some indifferencie of triall) presumeth very confidently to obtaine it. And lastly, your Highnesse mature and ripe judgement, able to moderate and censure the same, maketh vs so much the rather to become most hum∣bly desirous and earnest for it. Thus you see with what confidence in the truth of their cause, and with what feruent desire of disputation, and publike trial of their Spirits, these lear∣ned Catholikes in the name of the rest
desire it. With the same carnestnesse doe our learned Catholikes abroad call vpon the Protestant Ministers, in all such places where they beare sway, to come vnto some publike triall of their cause: Witnesse Sir Edwine Sands, who .21. in his Relation of the Religion vsed in the West parts of the world, reporteth of our Catholike disputers, that they crie out mainely in all places for triall by disputations. This saith he, Campian did many yeares since with vs. This as I passed through Turrick, did the Car∣dinall of Constance and his Iesuits, with their Ministers, being by ancient right within the Diocesse. Not long be∣fore, the same was done to them of Geneua. And very lately the Capuchines renewed the challenge: so this Knight a Protestant. FINIS.
