20464A 99850535 15744
HISTRIO-MASTIX. THE PLAYERS SCOVRGE, OR, ACTORS TRAGAEDIE, Divided into Two Parts. Wherein it is largely evidenced, by divers Arguments, by the concurring Authorities and Reso∣lutions of sundry texts of Scripture; of the whole Primi∣tive Church, both under the Law and Gospell; of 55 Synodes and Councels; of 71 Fathers and Christian Writers, before the yeare of our Lord 1200; of above 150 foraigne and domestique Protestant and Popish Authors, since; of 40 Heathen Philosophers, Hi∣storians, Poets; of many Heathen, many Christian Nations, Repub∣liques, Emperors, Princes, Magistrates; of sundry Aposto∣licall, Canonicall, Imperiall Constitutions; and of our owne English Statutes, Magistrates, Vniversities, Writers, Preachers. That popular Stage-playes (the very Pompes of the Divell which we renounce in Baptisme, if we beleeve the Fathers) are sin∣full, heathenish, lewde, ungodly Spectacles, and most pernicious Cor∣ruptions; condemned in all ages, as intolerable Mischiefes to Churches, to Republickes, to the manners, mindes, and soules of men. And that the Profession of Play-poets, of Stage-players; together with the penning, acting, and frequenting of Stage-playes, are unlawfull, infamous and misbeseeming Chri∣stians. All pretences to the contrary are here likewise fully answered; and the unlawfulnes of acting, of beholding Academicall Enterludes, briefly discussed; besides sundry other particulars con∣cerning Dancing, Dicing, Health-drinking, &c. of which the Table will informe you. By WILLIAM PRYNNE, an Vtter-Barrester of Lincolnes Inne. Cyprian. De Spectaculis lib p 244. Fugienda sunt ista Christianis fidelibus, ut tàm frequenter diximus, tàm vana, tàm perniciosa, tàm sacrilega Spectacula quae, essi non haberent crimen, habent in se et maximam et parum congruentē fidelibus vanitatē. Lactantius de Verò Cultu cap. 20. Vitda ergo Spectaculo xia,  ne quid vitiorum pectoribus iside et, &c. sed ne cuius nos volup∣tatis consuetudo delineat, atque à Deo et à bri operibus vetat. Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 299. B & Hom. 8 De Poenitentia, Tom. 5. Col 750. mmo vero, is Theatralibus ludis eversis, non leges, sed iniquitatem evertetis, ac emnem civitatis pestem ex∣tinguetis. Etenim Theatrum, communis luxuriae officina, publicum incontinentiae gymnasium; cathedra pesti∣lentia; pessus locus; plurimermone moherum plena Babylonica fornax, &c. Augustinus De Civit. Dei, l. 4 c. 1. Si tontummodo boni et honesti homines in civitate essent, nec in rebus humanis Ludi scenici esse debuissent. LONDON, Printed by E.A. and W.I. for Michael Sparke, and are to be sold at the Blue Bible, in Greene Arbour, in little Old Bayly. 1633.
TO HIS MVCH HONOVRED FRIENDS, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTERS OF THE BENCH of the Honourable flourishing LAVV-SOCIETY of LINCOLNES-INNE. RIGHT WORFVLL, The due respect I owe un∣to your famous Nurserie both of Law and Piety, as my last Nursing Mother, and to your Worships in particular, as my especiall good Friends; hath at this time imboldened me to commend this HISTRIO-MASTIX to your worthy Patronage; which being wholly compi∣led within your Walls, implores no other San∣ctuary but your benigne Protection; of which your former Play-oppugning Actions promise it good assurance. For whereas other Innes of Court (I know not by what Malus usus abolendus. Lis telton sect. 12. evill custome, and Plus exem∣plo quam pec∣cato nocent; quod non so∣lum vitia con∣cipiunt ipsi, sd ea infunduut in civitatem; neque solum obsunt, quod illi ipsi corrum∣puntur, sed eti∣am quod cor∣rumpunt. Cicero De Legibus lib. 3. worse example) admit of common Actors and Enterludes upon their Viz. All-Saints, & Can∣dlemasse day. two grand Festivals,
to recreate themselves withall, notwithstanding the Statutes of our Kingdome (of which Lawyers of all others should be most observant) 22 H 8. c. 12 14 Eliz. c. 5. 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Iac. c. 7. See here p. 492, to 497. have branded all professed Stage-players for infamous Rogues, and Stage-playes for unlawfull pastimes, See 1 Car. c. 1. 5 & 6 E. 6 c. 3. & here p. 241, 242, 243, 492, to 497. especially on Lords-dayes and other solemne Holy-dayes, on which these Grand-dayes ever fall: yet such hath beene your pious tender care, not on∣ly of this Societies honour, but also of the young Students good, (for the advancing of whose piety and studies, you have of late erected a magnifi∣cent Chappell, and since that a Library;) that as you have prohibited by late publike Orders, all disorderly Bacchanalian Grand-Christmasses, See here p. 743, to 783. (more fit for Pagans thā Christians; for the deboisest Roarers, than grave civill Students, who should be patternes of sobriety unto others;) together with all publike Dice-play in the Hall; (a most per∣ncious, infamous game; condemned in all ages, all places, not onely by See here Act. 7. Scene 3. especially pag. 618, 626, 627, 655. Councels, Cyprian. De Ludo Aleae lib. Tertullian d Pallio c. 8. p. 233. Ambr. de Tobia, lib. c. 11. Tom. 2 p. 280, 281. Chrysost. Hom. 15. ad Pop. Antioch. here p. 43. Ber∣nard. ad Mili∣es Tempii Ser∣mo, c. 4 here p. 560. Isiodo Hisp. Originum . 19. c. 60, to 66. Ioannis Saresberiensis de Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 5. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 74. Fathers, Bp. Hoopers 3. Sermon upon Ionah, Bp. Latimer his 4. Sermon on the Lords Prayer, fol. 2. his 6. Sermon beore King Edward, ol. 70. his Sermon at Stamford, ol. 16. Thomas Beacon his Catechisme, f. 61, 369, 400. Rober us de Sorbona, De Conscientia lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 13. p. 382. with others here quoted, p. 626. in the margent. Divines, See here p. 626. in the margent. Civilians, Vid. ibidem. Canonists, Andreas Fricius de Repub. Emendanda, l. 1 c. 17. p. 62, 63. See here p 626 Poli∣ticians, and Petrarcha de Reedio utrius{que} Fortunae, l. 1. Dia∣log 26, 27. Erasmus Moriae Encomium p. 68, 69. Osorius de Regum Instit. l. 7. ol. 233. See p. 626. other Christian Writers; by Ovid. De Remedio Amorisl 1. p. 215, 216. Virgil. Epigram de Ludo p. 432 Horat. Carm. l. 3. Ode 24 p. 98. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 18. p. 269. Iuvenal Satyr. 8, 1, 14. p. 75, 110, 125. Suetonii Octavius sect. 71. Claudius s. 5, 33, 39. Nero s. 36. Domitianus s. 2. Athenaeus Dipnosoph. l. 10, c. 15, p. 703, 704. Platonis Lysis p 401. Zenopho hist. Graecae, l.  593. Cic Philip. 1.  tus de Mo  Germ. c. 8.  tarchi Athegm. Aleder p. 409. mianus Malinus Hist. l.  c. 9, 10. See annis Saririensis De gis Curiali l. 1, c. 5. Pet Blesensis Epi 74. Danaeus  Ludo Aleae. lexander ab lexandro l. 3.  21. Purchas Pilgr. l. 5, c. 15. & l. 3, c. 4. He∣rodoti Clio sect. 18. accor∣dingly. di∣vers
Pagan Authors of all sorts, and by See here p. 655. Ma∣homet himselfe; but likewise by See here p. 657, to 661. Iu∣stinian Codicis l. 3, Tit. 43, Lex. 5. George Whetston his Enemy of Vn∣thriftinesse, p. 15, 16. Centu∣riae Magd. 13. Col. 79, l. 42. The generall History of France, p. 114, 123, 138 Paulus Geschinius Constitutiones Carolinae, Rubr. 30, 31. p. 14, 15. sundry Hea∣then, yea Christian Magistrates Edicts, and by the 12 R. 2, c. 6. 17 . 4, c. 3. with sundry others here quoted, p. 494, 495. Statutes of our Kingdome; as the occasions of much idlenesse, prodigality, cursing, swearing, for∣swearing, lying, cheating, mispence of money and time, theft, rapine, usurie, malice, envie, fretting, dscontents, quarrels, duels, murthers covetousnes, acquaintance with ill company, povertie, ruine of many young Gntlemens, yea & Tradesmens fortunes and estates; with a world of such like mischiefes: which as they proclaime all publike Dice-play un∣sufferable in a Republike; so much more in an innes of Court: which cannot more dishonour it selfe, than in turning a professed Christmas Dice-house, or publike receptacle of all sorts of Dicers, of pur∣pose to enrich the Butlers, or to defray their Christmas expences; as if Innes of Court Gentlemen were so beggerly, that they could neither main∣taine their Officers, nor Christmas Commons, with∣out the infamous Almes, or turpe lucrum of their Dice-boxes; which empty many a young Students, trades-mans, apprentices, unfortunate gamesters purse, and See 17 E. 4, c. 3. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 74. Cyprian. De Ludo Aleae, with others accordingly. bring divers unhappy Di∣cers yearely to the Goale, if not the Gallowes, whiles they seeke to repaire their losses by robbery, cheating, and unlawfull meanes; leaving the guilt of all their sinnes, with many a bitter execration upon those Societies where they have lost their mo∣ney:
(All which your Worships have piously prevented to your deserved honour, by suppres∣sing Dice-play:) So likewise in imitation of the See Act. 6, Scene 5, p. 455, to 465. ancient Lacedemonians and Massilienses, or rather of the See here p. 465, to 473. & Act. 7, Scen. 2, 3 7. primitive zealous Christians, you have alwayes from my first admission into your Society, and long before, excluded all Common Players with their lewd ungodly Enterludes, from all your solemne Festivals; not suffering them so much as once to enter within your gates, for feare they should See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5, &c. cor∣rupt the mindes, the manners, the vertuous educati∣on of those young hopefull vertuous Gentlemen com∣mitted to your care, by drawing them on to idlenesse, luxurie, incontinencie, prophanesse, and those other dangerous vices which Playes and Play-houses oft oc∣casion: they being no other, as the Fathers phrase them, but See here Act. 6, Scene 5, p. 474, to 477. Tempore illo∣rum Consulum gravissima pe∣stilentia uni∣versam Romā per biennium afflixit, pro qua depellenda Pontifices lu∣dos scenicos instituerunt: et sic pro de∣pellenda peste corporum, ac∣cessit morbus animarum. Her∣mannus Schedel. Chron. Chronico∣rum, AEtas 3, f. 83. a. the very plagues and poysons of mens mindes and soules. Which praise-worthy imitable act of yours, assures me of your kinde enter∣tainment of this my last-borne Issue: which though (by reason of some intervenient sub∣jects diverting my studies into another chan∣nell) it be ultimus in executione, yet it was pri∣mus in intentione, of all my printed Treatises, as some scattered passages against Stage-playes in my See my Perpetuity, Edit. 2, p. 586, 587. Healthes Sicknesse, Edit. 2, p. 74, 75. The Survey & Cen∣sure of Mr. Co∣zens his coze∣ning Devoti∣ons, p. 90. Lame Giles his Haul∣tings, p. 1. & the Appendix to it, p. 14. former Impressions, evidence. For having upon my first arrivall here in London, heard and seene in foure severall Playes (to which the pressing importunity of some ill acquaintance drew me whiles I was yet a novice) such wick∣ednes, such lewdnes as then made my penitent
heart to loath, my conscience to Ille poeni∣tentiam digne agit, qui sic praeterita mala deplorat, ut fu∣tura iterum non committat Isidor. Hisp. de Summo bono, l. 2, c. 13. abhorre all Stage-playes ever since: and having likewise then observed some wofull experiments of the lewd mischievous fruits of Playes, of Play-houses in some young Gentlemen of my acquaintance, who though civill and chast at first, became so vitious, prodigall, incontinent, deboist, (yea so farre past hopes of all amendment) in halfe a yeares space or lesse, by their resort to Playes, where whores and lewd companions had invea∣gled them, that after many vaine assaies of their much desired reformation, two of them were cast off, and utterly disinherited by their loving Parents, whom I heard oft complaining even with teares; That Playes and Play-houses had un∣done their children, to their no small vexation: (A good caveat for all young Students to Faelix qui∣cunque dolore Alterius disces posse carere tuo. Tibullus Elegiarum l. 3. Eleg. 7. keepe themselves from Play-houses by these two Youngsters harmes:) hereupon I resolved (out of a desire of the publike good) to oppugne these common vice-fomenting evills: For which purpose a∣bout some 7 yeares since, recollecting those Play-condemning passages which I had met with in the Fathers and other Authors, I dige∣sted them into one entire written Discourse; which having since that time enlarged beyond its intended Bulk, because I saw the number of Players, Play-books, Play-haunters, and Play-houses still increasing, there being above forty thousand Play-books printed within these two yeares, (as Stationers informe mee,) they be∣ing now more vendible than the choycest Ser∣mons;
The Fortune and Red-bull. two olde Play-houses being also lately ree∣dified, enlarged, and one White Fiers Playhouse. new Theatre erected, the multitude of our London Play-haunters be∣ing so augmented now, that all the ancient Di∣vels Chappels (for so the Fathers stile all Play-houses) being five in number, are not sufficient to containe their troopes, whence wee see a sixth now added to them; whereas even in viti∣ous Nero his raigne there were but Whence Se∣neca (writing of the vastnesse & populosity of Rome) thus com¦plaines: Quod tribus eodem tempore The∣atrs viae po∣stulantur. De Clementia l. 1, c. 6. And if three Play houses were too much in heathen Rome, shall sixe be suffered in Christian London? God forbid. three stan∣ding Theaters in Pagan Rome, (though farre more spacious than our Christian London) and those three too many: Hereupon I first commended it being thus augmented to the Licencer, and from him unto the Presse, where it hath lingred longer than I did expect. Which being now at last brought forth into the world in such a Play-adoring age, that is like to bid defiance to it, I here bequeath it to your pious Patronage, to whom it was at first devoted, not caring how it fares abroad, so it may doe good and please at home. Thus wishing all grace, all happines and prosperity to your Worships, and to the whole Society of Lincolnes Inne, together with all prosperous successe to these my unworthy la∣bours, I commend both you and them to Gods owne blessing. Ever resting Your Worships, in all devoted Service and respect, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
TO THE RIGHT CHRISTIAN, GENE∣ROVS YOVNG GENTLEMEN-Students of the 4 famous Innes of Court, and especially those of LINCOLNES INNE. RIGHT Summa apud Deum est no∣bilitas, clarum esse virtutibus. Sola apud De∣um libertas est, non servire pec∣catis. Hierom. E∣pist. 4. c. 5. vertuous, pious, and most accomplished Gentle∣men, the present hope, the future prop and honour of our English Nation; that cordiall longing de∣sire of your temporall and eter∣nall felicity, which hath a long time harboured in the very innermost receptacles of my soule, hath, as at first provoked me to pen, so now at last to publish this HISTRIO-MASTIX for your common good, which here lieth prostrate at your feet, imploring not onely your naked acceptations, but your unprejudicated affections too; that so you may tho∣rowly scan it with an impartiall scrutinie, before you preposterously fore-judge it out of a misinformed pre∣judice.
It is not I suppose unknowne to any, Homines vi∣tiis suis sapien∣tiam inscri∣bunt, ut ab∣scondenda pro∣fitentur. Ita non ab Epicu∣ris impulsi lux∣uriantur, sed vitiis dediti luxuriam uam in Philosophiae sinu abscon∣dunt, et eo con∣currunt, ubi audiunt lauda∣ri voluptatem; quaerentes libi∣dinibus uis patrocinium a∣liquod ac vela∣mentum. Itaq, quod unum habebant in ma∣lis bonum per∣dunt, peccandi verecundiam. Laudant enim ea quibus eru∣bescebant, et vitio glorian∣tur: ideoque ne resurgere qui∣dem adolescen∣tiae licet, cum honestus turpi desidiae titulus accessit. Senec De Vita Beata cap. 12. what favour, what estimation Playes and Players have lately purchased in the opinions and hearts of most; which I feare are so strangely forestal∣led, so desperately infatuated with their Syre∣nian enchantments, that they will hardly brooke the sight, much lesse the reading of this Play-scourging Discourse, whose very title will be a sufficient war∣rant for many to condemne it, if not a Supersedeas to them to peruse it: such being the froward dispo∣sition of prejudicated persons, (especially when their popular universall overspreading pleasures of sinne in which they most delight, come once to See August. Enarratio in Psal. 128. p. 750, 751, 752, accordingly. be con∣trolled by some one private person, which is now the case of Stage-playes:) that let the truth be never so evident, the arguments, the authorities against them never so convincing, yet they will quite reject and precondemne them, ere they have once examined them. What therefore Octavius, pag 96. Minucius Felix, that famous Christian Lawyer, and De Idolorum Vanitate Tract. St. Cyprian complained of long since, against the Pagans of their age, in the name of all the Christians: Sic occu∣pant animos et obstruunt pectora, ut ante nos incipiant homines odisse quam nosse, ne cogni∣tos aut imitari possint, aut damnare non possint: Or what Apologia advers. Gentes, c. 1, 2. Tertullian writes in the selfesame case; Nolunt audire quod auditum damnare non possint. Malint nescire, quia jam oderint, adeo quod nesciunt praejudicant id esse, quod si sciant odisse non poterant, quando si nullum odij de∣bitum
depraehendatur, optimum utique si, de∣sinere injustè odisse. Quid vero iniquius, quam ut oderint homines quod ignorant, etiamsi res meretur odium? Tunc etenim meretur cum cog∣noscitur an mereatur. Vacante autem meriti no∣titia, unde odij justitia defenditur? quae non de eventu, sed de conscientia probanda est, &c. Or what De Iustitia l. 5. c 1. Lactantius of olde lamented upon the like occasion: Student damnare tanquam nocentes quos utique sciunt innocentes; itaque constare de ipsa innocentia nolunt; quasi vero major ini∣quitas sit probatam innocentiam damnare quā inauditam: the same I feare may be the just com∣plaint of this my HISTRIO-MASTIX now Many, I doubt, will censure, if not exclaime against it ere they reade it;Omnis enim malus ideo per∣sequitur bonū, quia non illi consentit bo∣nus ad malum. Facia aliquid mali, non ob∣iurget Episco∣pus, bonus est Episcopus, ob∣iurget Episco∣pus, malus est Episcopus So∣nat verbum, sonat sermo contradictor libidinis. At ille amicus libidi∣nis suae, et ini∣micus sermoni contradicenti amicae suae, in∣festus est, et o∣dit sermonem Dei. August. E∣narratio in Ps. 128, Tom. 8. pars , p. 751. Vid. Ibid. because it reprehends their vices: and some perchance will purposely disdaine to cast their eyes upon it, for feare they should approve it, at leastwise be unable to controll it. But however others may chance thus ignorantly or maliciously to forejudge it; yet I hope it shall finde no such ungen∣teile discourteous entertainment frō you deare fellow-Brethren, whose generous ingenuous education hath taught you thus much courtesie, whose religion and profession have learned you this good Lesson; to heare and know, before you sentence: since Gods Law, & ours too, Iohn 7.51. doth not judge any man, before it heare him, and know what he doth. What Seneca, Me∣dea, Act. 2, f. 145. Medea therefore requested of Creon; Si judi∣cas, cognosce: or what Epistola 110. Seneca desired of his friend Lucilius; Adhibe diligentiam tuam, et intuere quid sint res nostrae, non quid vocentur;
shall be my present suite to you;Legant prius et poste de∣spiciant, ne vi∣deantur non ex iudicio sed ex odii praesump∣tione ignorata damnare. Hie∣rn. Apologia advers Rfinū, l. 3. c. 9, p. 21. to peruse my HI∣STRIO-MASTIX first, and then to censure it as you finde it. Perchance it may seeme some Paradox, some meere fantastique Novalty, or strang Monster at the first in this Play-admiring age; wherein most men like the Acts 17.18, 19, 20. See Chrysostome, Theophylact, HRabanus Maurus, & Lyra, Ibidem. Athenian Epicurean Stoicke Philosophers, who encountred S. Paul, will be ready to demand in scorne, What will this Babler say? May we know what this new do∣ctrine whereof thou speakest is? for thou bring∣est certaine strange things to our eares; wee would therfore know what these things meane. But if you will doe it so much honour as considerate∣ly to revolve it, you shall finde it to containe nought else but resolved, uniuersally receiued ancient (though now forgotten) truthes; so farre from any suspicion of factious Novalty, or puritanicall singularity, that they have the concurrent testimonies, the una∣nimous resolutions of See Act. 7, Scene 1, here p. 545. sundry sacred texts of Scripture, of the See Act. 7, Scene 2, p. 551, & Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. whole primitive Church and Saints of God, both before and under the Law and Gospell; See Act. 7, Scene 3, p. 570, to 668 the Canons of 55 seve∣rall oecumenicall, nationall, provinciall Synods and Councels of divers ages and Countries: to∣gether with the canonicall, the imperiall Con∣stitutions of the Apostles themselves, of Em∣perours, Popes and other Bishops, See Act. 7, Scene 4, p. 668, &c. & Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. the workes of 71 Fathers and ancient Christian Writers of chiefest note, from our Saviours Nativity to the yeare 1200. the suffrages See Act. 7, Scene 5, p. 688, & Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. of above 150 Christian Authors of all sorts, from the yeare 1200 to this present; the sentence of
See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7, Scene 6. p. 70, &c. 40 Heathen Philosophers, Orators, Histori∣ans, Poets; together with the Play-condemning See Act. 6, Scene 5 p. 455, to 473. & Act. 7, Scene 7. p. 713 &c. Lawes and Edicts of sundry Christian, yea Pagan Nations, Republikes, Emperours, Prin∣ces, Magistrates in severall ages; with the See Act. , Scene 5 p. 485, to 498. Act. 7, Scene 5, & 7. p. 715, 716. Statutes, Magistrates, Vniversities, Writers and Preachers of our owne renowned Kingdome; to back, to second them in all particulars; who all have long since passed this heavie Censure against Stage-playes: that they are the Se here p. 42 to 62. Act. 6, Scene 12. p. 522, to 525. & Act. 7. Scene 2. p. 561, to 68. very workes, the pompes, inventions and chiefe delights of the Divell, which all Christians solemnly abjure in their baptisme:See Act. 6 Scene 5. p. 447, &c. the most pestilent corrup∣tions of all mens (especially young mens) minds & manners; See Act. 6. throughout.the chiefe fomenters of all vice and wickednesse; the greatest enemies of all vertue, grace and goodnesse; the most mischie∣vous plagues that can be harboured in any Church or State; yea lewd infernall pastimes not tollerable among Heathens, not sufferable in any well-ordered Christian Republike; not once to be haunted or applauded by any civill vertuous persons, who are either mindfull of their credits, or of their owne salvation. Which as it controlls the grosse mistake of divers voluptu∣ous paganizing Christians in our dayes, who dote on Stage-playes as the most laudable, generous, if not necessary recreations; so it should now at last ingage all Christians for ever to abandon them; as the See Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 6, Sene 3, 4, 5, 12, 20. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. accor∣dingly. very best of Saints, of Pagans have done in former ages. Alas, what goodnesse, what profit doe men reape from Stage-playes, that should any
way ingage their affection to them? Doe See Act. 7, Scene 3, 4, 5. they not enrage their lusts, adde fire and fewell to their unchast affections; See Act. 6, Scene 5. deprave their minds, corrupt their manners, See Act: 6, Scene 12, 18, 20. cauterize their con∣sciences, obdurate their hearts, multiply their heinous transgressions,See Act: 6, Scene 1, 2. Haec mala dedecoris impieatisque plenissima, a∣dorentur in templis, rideantur in thea∣tris, cum his victimas im∣molant, vaste∣tur pecus etiam pauperum; cū haec histriones agunt et sal∣tant effundan∣ur patrimonia divitum. Aug: Epist: 202, Tom: 2, p: 953. consume their estates, mispend their time,See Actus 6, throughout. canker their graces, blast all their vertues, interrupt their studies, indis∣pose them to repentance and true godly sorrow for their sinnes; make all Gods ordinances inef∣fectuall to their spirituall good, draw downe the guilt of sundry Play-house abominations on their persons, incorporate them into lewd ungodly company, and without repentance damne their soules Doe See Act: 3, 6, & 7, through∣out according∣ly. they not disho∣nour their most holy God, abuse their most blessed Saviour sundry wayes, blaspheame and grieve Gods holy spirit, prophane the sacred Scriptures and the name of God, deride and jeare religion, holinesse, vertue, temperance, grace, goodnesse, with all religious, vertuous persons, advance the Divels scepter, service, kingdome, by sowing, by cherishing the seedes of atheisme, heathenisme, prophanesse, incon∣tinency, voluptuousnes, idlenes, yea, of all kind of wickednes both in their Actors and Specta∣tors hearts? How many thousands have Stage-playes drawne on to sinne, to lewdnesse, to all sorts of vice, and a last sunke downe to hell, with the weight of those prodigious evills which they had quite avoi∣ded, had they not haunted Play-houses? How many Novices and Youngsters have beene corrupted, de∣bauched,
and led away captive by the Divel, by their owne outragious lusts, See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5. by Panders, Players, Bawdes, Adulteresses, Whores, and other lewd companions, who had continued studious, ci∣vill, hopefull, towardly and ingenious, had they not resorted unto Stage-playes, the originall cau∣ses of their dolefull ruine? which bring no other be∣nefit to their Actors, their Spectators at the last, but this, See Act. 6, Scene 12, 18, 19, 20. to post them merrily on to hell with a greater loade of soule-condemning sinnes; Hieron Epist: 3, cap: 3. quasi vivendi sensum ad hoc tantum accepe∣rant ut perirent; as if they had received life for no other purpose, but to worke out their owne eternall death, which needes no other instruments to effect it, than lewd lascivious Enterludes. O therefore (deare Brethren) as you tender Gods honour the publike welfare, or your owne soules safety, abominate these glittering gawdy pompous snares, these See Act: 8, Scene 5, p: 789 &c. sugered poysoned potions of the Divell, by which he cun∣ningly endeavours your destruction when as you least suspect it: and if any of you have formerly frequen∣ted Stage-playes, either out of Adhuc enim non pueritia in nobis est, sed quod est gra∣vius, puerilias remanet: et hoc quidem peius est, quod au∣ctoritaem ha∣bemus senum, vitia puero∣rum, nec pue∣rorum tantum, sed infantium. Seneca Epist: 4. childish vanity, or injudicious ignorance of their oft-condemned mischievous lewd effects; or through the Arbitror ese hic nonnullos quos amici sui volebant rape∣re ad Circum, ad theatrum, et ad nescio quas hodiernae festi∣vitatis nugas. Forte ipsi illos adduxerunt ad Ecclesiam: sed sive ipsi illos adduxerunt, sive ab iis ad Circum adduci non potuerunt, in aqua contradictionis probatisunt: August: Enar: in Psal. 80, Tom. , pars 2, p. 8. over-pressing importunity of voluptuous carnall ac∣quaintance; or by reason of that popular erronious good opinion which our wicked times conceive of Stage-playes which humour them in their lusts; or because such In vitia alter alterum trudimus: Quomodo autem ad salutem re∣vocari possint, quos iam nemo retinet, populus impellit? Seneca, Epist: 41. multitudes resort now daily to
them, that they carry one another headlong to these sinfull pleasures without any sense of dan∣ger, or hopes of reformation; be you henceforth truly penitent for what is past, August. Enar∣ratio n in Psal. 84, p. 55. Quem delecta∣ba spectare, delectet orare; quem delectabant cantica nugatoria et adulterina, delectet hym∣num dicere Deo, currere ad Ecclesiam, qui primo currebat ad theatrum: as St. Augustine sweetly councels: and wholly abandon them for all fu∣ture time. And so much the rather, that you may now at last falsifie that ignominious Censure which some English Writers in their printed Workes have pas∣sed upon Innes of Court Students; of whom they re∣cord See Earles Character of a Player, Cha∣ract. 38. & Sir Thomas Over∣bury his Cha∣racter of an Innes of Court man, accor∣dingly. That Innes of Court men were un∣done but for Players; that they are their chiefest guests and imployment, & the sole busines that makes them afternoons men: that this is one of the first things they learne as soone as they are admitted, to see Stage-playes, Bishop Halls Epistles Decad. 6, Epistle 6. Mr. Bolton his ge∣nerall Directi∣ons for our comfortable walking with God, p. 73, 74; here p. 364, 365 Stephen Gos∣son his Epistle to the Right Worshipfull Gentlemen & Students of both Vniver∣sities and the Innes of Court prefixed to his Playes confu∣ted in five A∣ctions. & take smoke at a Play-house, which they commonly make their Studie; where they quickly learne to fol∣low all fashions, to drinke all Healths, to weare favours and good cloathes, to consort with ruf∣fianly companions, to sweare the biggest oaths, to quarrell easily, fight desperately, game inor∣dinately, to spend their patrimony ere it fall, to use gracefully some gestures of apish comple∣ment, to talke irreligiously, to dally with a Mistresse, and hunt after harlots, to prove alto∣gether lawlesse in steed of Lawyers, and to for∣get that little learning, grace and vertue which they had before: so that they grow at last pas
hopes of ever doing good, either to the Church, their Country, their owne or others soules. Which heavie Censure, if any dissolute Play-haun∣ters have justly occasioned heretofore, to the disho∣nour of those famous Law-Societies wherein they live, I hope their subsequent reformation will re∣verse it now; that so all England may henceforth experimentally discerne, that Stage-Playes and A∣ctors are as well condemned, detested by her Law∣yers, as by See here pag. 492, to 498 her Lawes and Statutes, which brand all Stage-playes for unlawfull pastimes; all common Actors, for notorious Rogues; too base Companions for generous spirits to beholde or dance attendance on, who were created for more no∣ble objects, more sublime imployments than base in∣famous Enterludes, or most abject Players. O there∣fore let the serious consideration of your owne native generositie, of your heroicke Studies, elevated with the sublimer contemplations of your transcendent Christian Nobility; which makes you Rom. 8.17 heires of heaven, coheires with Christ, yea,Revel. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Kings and Priests unto God your Father, (who hath not onely Hebr. 2.7, 9. 1 Pet. 5.4. crownes of glory, but likewise an Luke 12.32. 1 Thes. 2.12. Hebr. 12.28. Iames 2.5. heavenly eternall Kingdome to bestow up∣on you) raise up your depressed mindes and thoughts so farre above these earthly childish vanities, as with a kinde of holie magnanimitie to trample them un∣der feete Hebr. 11, 25 as drossie filthie pleasures, unworthy any Christians presence, much lesse his approbation, who hath farre better, farre sublimer spectacles to beholde; even those which I shall here commend unto you in Cyprians words, in his elegant Booke against
Stage-playes: De Specta∣culis lib. Tom. 2, p. 244, 245. See Augustine Enarratio in Psal. 39, Tom. 8, pars 1, p. 416 417, 418. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos l. 2, Tom. 9, pars 1, p. 1393, here p. 345, to 347; & Tertullian de Spectaculis, c. 28, 29, &c. to the like pur∣pose. Habet Christianus Spectacula meliora, si velit; habet veras et profuturas vo∣luptates, si se recollegerit, et ut omittam illa, quae nondum contemplari potest, habet istam mundi pulchritudinem, quam videat atque mi∣retur; solis ortum aspiciat, rursus occasum, mu∣tuis vicibus dies noctesque revocantem, globum lunae, temporum cursus incrementis suis, decre∣mentisque signantem, astrorum micantium cho∣ros, et à summo de summa mobilitae fulgentes, anni totius per membra divisa, et dies ipsos cum noctibus per horarum spatia digestos, et terrae molem libratam cum montibus, et proflua lu∣mina cum suis fontibus, extensa maria cum suis fluctibus atque littoribus: Interim constantem pariter summa conspiratione nexibusque con∣cordiae, extensum aërem medium tenuitate sua cuncta vegetantem, nunc imbres contractis nubibus profundentem, nunc serenitatem refe∣cta raritate revocantem, et in omnibus istis in∣colas proprios, in aëre avem, in aquis piscem, in terra hominem. Haec inquam, et alia opera divina, sint Christianis fidelibus Spectacula. Quod theatrum humanis manibus extructum i∣stis operibus poterit comparari? magnis licet lapidum molibus extruatur, crusta sunt monti∣um; et auro licet ecta lucanaria reluceant, astro∣rum fulgore vincentur: nunquam humana ope∣ra mirabitur quisquis se cognoscerit filiū Dei. Dejicit se de culmine generositatis suae qui ad∣mirari aliquid post Deum potest. Therefore e∣very Christian though a Lay∣man ought t reade the Scriptures. Scripturis in quam sacris incumbat Christianus: (let Papists,
and those who are given so much to Play-bookes co∣sider this:) ibi invenie condigna fidei Specta∣cula. Videbit instituentem Deum mundum su∣um, et cum caeteris animalibus hominis illā ad∣mirabilem fabricam melioremque facientem: spectabit mundum in delicijs suis, justa naufra∣gia, piorum praemia, impiorumque supplicia: maria populo siccaa, et de pera rursus populo maria porecta: spectabit de coelo descendentes messes, non ex areis: inspiciet flumina transitus siccos refraenatis aquarum agminibus exhiben∣tia: videbit in quibusdam fidem cum igne luctu∣antem: religione superatas feras, et in mansue∣tudinem conversas: intuebitur et animas ab ipsa morte revocatas: considerabit etiam de sepul∣chris admirabiles ipsorum consummatorū jam vitas corporum redactas: et in his omnibus jam majus videbit Spectaculum, Diabolum illum qui totum detriumphaverat mundum, sub pedi∣bus Christi jacentem. Quàm hoc decorum Spe∣ctaculum Fratres? quàm jucundum? quàm ne∣cessarium? intueri semper spem nam, et oculos aperire ad salutem suam. Hoc est spectaculum quod videtur etiam luminibus amissis. Hoc est spectaculum, quod non exhibet Praetor, au Consul, sed qui est solus et ante omnia, et super omnia, immo ex quo omnia, Pater Domini no∣stri Iesu Christi, cui laus et honor in saecula sae∣culorum. These (my beloved Brethren) are the true celestiall worthie Spectacles of every pious Christian: O let your hearts, your mindes, your affections, your eyes and eares be wholly ravished and taken up with
these, which will onely bring true comfort to our soules. Let mee therefore lose up my Epistle to you with St. Augustines words: Enarratio in Psal. 80, & 81. Tō. 8, pars 2, p. 1, 18. Intendite ad mag∣na haec spectacula. Ista sunt spectacula utilia, sa∣lubria, aedificantia non destruentia, imò et de∣struentia et aedificantia: Destruentia recentes Deos, aedificantia fidem in verum et aeternum Deum: Let other men therefore who love their Stage-playes 2 Tim. 3.4 better than their God, their soules, resort to Theatres whiles they please; (August. Enar. in Psal 81. p. 18 Illi ha∣beant mare in theatro; nos habeamus por∣tum in Christo:) but let Christ Iesus be your Ephes. 1.23. 1 Cor. 15.28. all in all, your onely solace, your onely Spectacle, and joy on earth, whose soule-ravishing heart-filling pre∣sence, shall be your eternall solace, your everlasting 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Iohn 3.2 Rev. 21.22, 23.visible all-glorious most triumphant Spectacle in the highest heavens; whither God bring us all at length for this his Sonne and mercies sake. Amen. Your loving Christian Friend, and Brother to command: WILLIAM PRYNNE.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. THREE things there are, beloved Readers, in this my HISTRIO-MASTIX, for which I am neces∣sitated to make some Apologie, to prevent all causelesse cavills. The first, is its tedious prolixitie;  which as it far exceeds its primitive intended Brevity, so it may somewhat derogate from its welcome acceptation, as being too large for so slight a sub∣ject: But as it was no disparagement to Phaebus his pal∣lace; that Materiam su∣perabat opus; Ouid. Meta∣morph. l. 2. the workmanship of it did exceede the matter; so I hope it will be no prejudice to this Treatise, if Hierom Com. in Matth. c. 21, Tom. 6, p. 45, C. Malo nodo malus cuneus, may be allowed for a Plea. Hee who intends to encounter a potent enemie, Luke 14.31, 32. & Ioanni Sarisberiensis, de Nugis Curi∣alium, lib. 1, c. 1 2, 3, 4, 5. had neede provide a puissant armie: Hee who will cure a large spreading gangrene, must proportion his plai∣ster to the maladie; he who would discover or refute an inveterate generally received Error, must come strongly armed with convincing reasons and authorities, else he is like to do more harme than good. Players and Stageplaies, with which I am now to combate in a publike Theatre in the view of sundry partiall Spectators, are growne of late so powerfull, so prevalent in the affections, the opini∣ons of many both in Citie, Court and Country; so univer∣sally diffused like an infectious leprosie, so deepely rivited
into the seduced prepossessed hearts and judgements of vo∣luptuous carnall persons, who swarme so thicke in every Play-house, that they leave no empty place, and almost crowd one another to death for multitude; as they did in Sunt enim multi non dig∣ne viventes baptismo quod perceperunt. Quam multi enim baptizati hodie Circum implee quam istam basilicam maluerunt. Si mimus est, cur∣ritur ad Amphi∣theatr̄; quan∣tis turbis im∣pletur? stipan∣tur parietes, pressuris se ur∣gent, prope se suffocant mul∣titudine: isti super nume∣rum sunt. In Psal. 39, Enar. Tom. 8, ars 1, p. 418; & in Psal. 80, pars 2, p. 5. Augustines time, chusing rather to fill the Theatre than the Church; that had not this my HISTRIO-MASTIX overgrowne its first intended pigmies sta∣ture, it had Magnis enim telis, magna portenta feri∣untur. Seneca Epist. 82. never beene able to foyle those many Giantlike Enemies with which it is now to grapple; nei∣ther could it have borne any geometricall proportion with those festring ulcers, those many practicall applauded Errors, whose cure and refutation it indeavours. Ben-Iohn∣sons, Shacks∣peers, and o∣thers. Some Play-books since I first undertooke this subject, are growne from Quarto into Folio; which yet beare so good a price and sale, that I cannot but with griefe relate it, they are now Shackspeers Plaies are prin∣ted in the best Crowne paper, far better than most Bibles. new-printed in farre better paper than most Octavo or Quarto Bibles, which hardly finde such vent as they: And can then one Quarto Tractate a∣gainst Stage-playes be thought too large, when as it must assault such ample Play-house Volumes? Besides, our Quarto-Play-bookes since the first sheetes of this my Treatise came unto the Presse, have come forth in such Above forty thousand Play-bookes have beene printed and vented within these two yeares. abundance, and found so many customers, that they al∣most exceede all number, one studie being scarce able to holde them, and two yeares time too little to peruse them all: And this made this Treatise swell the greater, be∣cause these Play-bookes are so multiplied. Againe, I consi∣dered with my selfe, that our Players, our Play-haunters are now more in number, more various in judgements, in humours, in apprehensions, than they have beene in for∣mer ages; whereupon I thought good to produce Nam quoniam variant animi variavimus artes: Mille mali species, mille salutis unt. Ouid. De Remedio Amoris, l. 2. p. 225. more store of different Play-refelling Arguments and Au∣thorities than else I should have done; that so I might satisfie every Reader to my power, and meete with all
evasions. All which being lid together, will easily ex∣cuse my overmuch pines; which if it seeme irkesome to any Reader, I am sure it as farre more troublesome to me the Author, who if I am peccant in this kinde, it is onely out of too much loe to doe the Readers greater good: who if they complaine for want of time, may soone peruse it without any losse, by devoting their Play-house houres to it, till they have read it over. The second, is some passages, termes and phrases, which  may give offence to such, who consider not the grounds and reasons of them: and these are of different natures. Some of them may seeme to be over sharpe and virulent against Players, Playes, and Play-haunters: Others of them may be constred to be over malepart and censonious: O∣thers, too immodest, too amorous, and obscene: Others, heterogeneall, and impertinent to the intended theame. To the two first of which I answer: First, that I have  used no more tartnesse against Players, Playes, or Play-haunters, nor passed no other Censures upon them than the Fathers themselves, with sundry approed Writers have done before me, whose phrases and invectives I have onely revived: You must therefore lay the blame on them, not me, who onely speake in their language.Ioan. Sares∣beriensis Pro∣logus in lib. De Nugis Curia∣lium, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 15. p. 341. G. Novi enim quod et praesens aetas corrigitur, dum praeterita suis meritis objurgatur. Secondly, inveterate Vt valeant alii ferrum pa∣tiantur et ig∣nes. Fert aliis tristem succus amarus opem. Corpora vix ferro quaedam sanantur acuo. Auxilium aliis succus et herba fuit. Ovid. Epist. 19, p. 83. De Re∣medio Amoris l. 2, p. 225. gangrend ulcers, as Playes and Players are, neede sharpe em∣plaisters, biing corrosives, else they will not be cured; because gentle lenitives cannot cleanse them. Thirdly, the greatest virulency is onely against Players and Play-haunters vices, not their persons; Tertul. Apol. Advers. Gentes. Hostes plane sumus, non generis humani tamen, sed erroris: Yea I have therefore censured their errours, their vices so severely, because I love their persons, whose happinesse, salvation and amendment I here onely seeke, by withdrawing them from Playes and Play-houses, the very greatest corruptions of their mindes and manners. Leo de Iiun. Pent. Ser. 1. c. 2. fol. 158. Hoc enim interiora maximè corrumpit, quod exteriora delectat.
What therefore St. Augustine writes to Macedonius in this very case; Epist. 54. Tom. 2. p. 271. Facile est atque proclive malos o∣disse, quia mali sunt, rarum autem et pium eosdem ip∣sos diligere quia homines sunt, ut in uno simul et cu∣pam improbes, et naturam approbes; ac propterea cul∣pam justius oderis, quod ea faedatur natura quam dili∣gis. Non est igiur iniquitatis, sed potius humanitatis societate devinctus, qui propterea sit criminis persecu∣tor ut sit hominis liberator: the same shall be my Apo∣logie now. And if any Play-Ators or Spectators thinke themselves injured by any censure I have here past upon them, I must returne them an answer in St. Bernards words: Bernard. Ep. 78. f. 196. Cum carpuntur vitia, et inde scandalum ori∣tur, ipse sibi scandali causa est, qui fecit quod argui de∣beat, non ille qui arguit: or at leastwise in Epist. 2. ad Nepotianum, cap. 20. Tom. 1. p. 7. St. Hie∣roms language: Aut enim nihil scribendum fuit, ne ho∣minum judicium subiremus, aut scribentes nosse, cun∣ctorum adversum nos maledicorum ela esse torquen∣da. Quos obsecro, ut quiescant, et definant maledicere. Non enim ut adversariis, sed ut amicis scripsimus; nec invecti sumus in eos qui peccant, sed ne peccent, mo∣nuimus. Nullum laesi, nullius nomen mea scriptura de∣signatum est. Neminem specialiter meus sermo pulsa∣vir. Generalis de vitijs disputatio et. Qui mihi irasci voluerit, prius ipse de se, quod talis sit, confitebitur. Wherefore, since all I aime at in this Treatise is mens e∣ternall good;Bernard. Epist. 42. Sustinete hanc virgam corripientem, ne sentiatis malleum conterentem: remembring that good lesson of Salomon: Prov. 12.1. c. 15.10, 32. He that hateth reproofe, is bru∣tish; yea, he despiseth his owne soule, and he shall sure∣ly die. To the third of these, I answer; that hee who stirres a noysome kennell, must needes raise some stench; he who would lively portraiture  Divell, or a deformed monster, must needes draw some gastly lines, and use some sordid colours: so he who will delineate to the life, the no∣torious lewdnesse of Playes, of Play-haunters, is necessa∣rily enforced to such immodest phrass as may present it
in its native vlenesse; else he shall but conceale or masque their horrid wickednesse that none may behold it, not rip it open that all may abhorre it. This is the onely reason of those more uncivill or seemingly immodest passages and phrases that are here and there scattered in this Dis∣course; which as they are for the most part the Fathers, or some other Authors, not mine owne, and so the more excusable; so necessity onely hath enforced mee to them; the impurity and lewdnesse of Stage-playes being such, that a man can hardly remember, much lesse reprove them without sinne or shame. De Gubern. Dei l. 6. p. 185, 186. Talia autem sunt (writes Salvian) quae in theatri fiunt, ut ea non solum dicere, sed etiam recordari aliquis sine pollutione non possit. Quae quidem omnia tam flagitiosa sunt, ut etiam explicare ea quispiam atque eloqui salvo pudore non vaeat. Quis enim integro verecundiae statu dicere que∣at illas rerum turpium imitationes, illas vocum ac ver∣borum obscaenitates, illas motuum turpitudines, illas gestuum faeditates? quae quanti sunt criminis, vel hinc intelligi potest, quod et relationem sui interdicunt. Nonnulla quippe mxima scelera incolumi honestate referentis et nominari et argui possunt, ut homicidium, latrocinium, sacrilegium, cateraque hujusmodi. Solae theatrorum impuritates sunt, quae honest non possunt vel accusari: ita nova in coarguenda harum turpitudi∣num probrositate res evenit arguenti, ut cum absque dubio honestus sit qui accusare ea velit, honestate ta∣men integra ea loqui et accusare non possit. It was this Fathers Preface to his Play-condemning Treatise, and it shall be my Apologie. To the fourth of these, I answer;  that there are severall passages in this Discourse, which prima facie may seeme heterogeneous to the present sub∣ject, as See Act. 5 throughout. Act. 7. Scene 3. & 8. Scene 3, 7. those concerning Dancing, Musicke, Apparell, Effeminacy, Lascivious Songs, Laughter, Adultery, obscene Pictures, Bonefires, New-yeares gifts, Grand Christmasses, Health-drinking, Long haire, Lords-dayes, Dicing, with sundry Pagan customes here re∣felled:
but if you consider them as they are here appli∣ed, you shall finde them all materially pertinent to the theame in question they being either the concomitants of Stage-playes, or having such neare affinity with them, that the unlawfulnesse of the one are necessary mediums to evince the sinfulnesse of the other. Besides, though they differ in Specie, yet they are homogeniall in their generi∣call nature, one of them serving to illustrate the quality, the condition of the other: It is no impertinentie there∣fore for me to discourse at large of all or any of these, the better to display the odiousnesse of Stage-playes, with which they have great analogie, to which they have more or lesse relation, as the passages themselves sufficiently manifest. But admit that some of them are heteroge∣niall, yet it is no absurdity by way of digression, to touch on such partiulars, as See Claudi∣us Espencaeus, Digresionum in Epist. 1. ad Timotheum lib. Dr. Iohn Whies Way to the True Church; Dr. Field of the Church, Edit. ult. Dr. Craken∣thorps Vigilius Dormitans & Dr Twists An∣swer to Armi∣ius his Exa∣men: accor∣dingly. other Writers oft times doe, yea and the Fathers too, who have their digressions as well as others, in their Commentaries, Homilies, and morall Treatises; where they oft times lash out into collaterall Discourses against Stage-playes, Dancing, Drunken∣nesse, effeminacy, lascivious songs, fantastique costly apparell, Pagan Customes, and those other particulars which I have now discoursed against, as their passages here recited plentifully manifest. Their practise there∣fore may be my excuse. And so much the rather, because the particulars I have thus lightly glanced upon in the by, are universall overspreading still-increasing evills, which neede some present opposition, especially out of those pregnant venerable Authorities of Councels, Fathers and ancient Writers that are almost forgotten in the world, (whose memory I have here in part revived a farre as opportunity would permit:) which manifest to all mens judgements, See Act. 5. throughout, & Act. 7. Scene 3. Act. 8. Scene 3, 4. that effeminate mixt Dancing, Dicing, Stage-playes, lascivious Pictures, wanton Fa∣shions, Face-painting, Health-drinking, Of which Mr. Purchas in his Pilgrim. c. 51. pag. 490. writes thus. Long haire is an ornament to the female sex, a token of subiection, an ensigne of mo∣desty: but mo∣desty growes short in men as their haire growes long, and a neate perfumed, friz∣led, pouldred Bush, hangs but as a token Vini nn vendibilis, of much wine, little wit, of men weary of manhood, of civility, of Christianity, which would faine turne (at the least doe imitate) American Salvages, Infidels, Barbarians, or women at the least and best. Long haire,
See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Lovelockes, & here Act. 5. Scene 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Act. 7. Scene 3. & Act. 8. Scene 3. Love-lockes, Periwigs, womens curling, pouldring and cutting of their haire, Bone-fires, New-yeares-gifts, May-games, amorous Pastoralls, lascivious effe∣minate Musicke, excessive laughter, luxuriovs disor∣derly Christmas-keeping, Mummeries, with sundry such like vanities which the world now dotes on, as la∣dable, good, and Christian, are meere sinfull, wicked, un∣christian pastimes, vanities, cultures and disguises, which the primitive Church and Christians, together with the very best of Pagans quite abandoned, condem∣ned; however we admire, applaud them now to Gods dis∣honour and religions shame: My short Digressions there∣fore against these new-revived old-condemned spreading evills, which most men countenance, few can or dare op∣pose, may well be pardoned in this my HISTRIO-MASTIX, most of them being either concomitants or fruites of Stage-playes: by the present censures of which, the Reader shall be sure to reape, either fuller sa∣tisfaction, or greater variety of knowledge than else hee should have met with in this Treatise. The third, is the repetition of some quotations, some pas∣sages  of Fathers and others which are twice or thrice re∣cited in severall places of this Discourse, where the same things are oft debated. To which I answer: First, that though the same things in effect are oft times tou∣ched upon (especially See p. 9. to 26.523, 524, 731, 732. the idolatrous originall of Stage-playes, and See p. 42. to 61.522, to 525.561, to 567. that they are the very pompes of the Divell which Christians have renounced in their bap∣tisme) yet it is either to different purposes, or where they are amplified and confirmed by new-recited Athorities; which as I could not couple all together, so I was unwil∣ling to omit, for feare of doing prejudice to the cause. Se∣condly, though the same Authorities and qutations are oft reiteratd, yet it is onely in these two cases, where the words and ends for which I cite them are divers, or where one sentence, one discourse tending to severall pur∣poses, is so intire, that it could not be sundered into fra∣ctions
without perverting the sense, or blunting the life, the edge and vigour of it. Thirdly, what ever is oft re∣peated, is something or other worth remembring: if therefore Seneca speakes truth, Epistola 27. Nunquam nimis dicitur quod nunquam satis discitur; this fault may ea∣sily bee excused. The Scripture it selfe (wee know) Deut. 4.2. c. 12.32. Iosh. 1.7 Prov. 9.30 6. Rev. 22.18, 19. where there is no superfluity nor defect; hath oft times Isay 28.9, to 14. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Phil. 3.1. precept upon precept, line upon line, yea fre∣quent repetions of the selfesame things, (especially in the Bookes of Moses, the Bookes of the Kings and Chronicles, the Psalmes of David the Proverbs, the Prophets, the foure Evangelists, and St. Pauls Epistles) in such cases where men are either dull to learne, apt to forget, ow to beleeve, or when as the things re∣peatd are very observable. The like repetitions with little variation, we shall finde in divers Authors: and in most of those who write of the selfesame subject, (but prin∣cipally in Commentators ad the Schoolemen) wee finde the selfesame matter clothed in a different method or dresse of words; Eccles. 1.9, 10 there being no new thing uder the Sunne, Et nihil dictum quod non dictum prius: all be∣ing but reiterations of what hath beene written or spoken in former ages. This therefore may excuse my short rei∣erations of the selfesame passages against Stage-playes, with which men are so farre inamoured, that they neede many oft repeated arguments to divorce their affections from them. Having thus farre apologized for this Treatise, I shall here by way of advertisement for thy better satisfaction informe thee, Christian Reader, something concerning the Authorities quoted in it. As first, that I have cited the very Words of the Fathers themselves, for the most part, in the margent, which I have faithfully englished in the Discourse it selfe, and sometimes alledged them in the margent at large, when as I have but touched them in the page: whence I shall advise thee to reade the margent and the page together. Secondly, that I have oft times
onely quoted the names, the Workes of Fathers and other Authors for brevity sake, omitting their words, which the studious Reader may doe well to Nam a vitii redimitur ani∣mus, et suavi et mira quadam, etiam in adver∣sis cunditate reicitur, cum ad legendum vel scribendum tilia, menti intendit acu∣men Iannis Saresberiensis Prologus in lib. De Nugis Curia∣lium. peruse at leisure in their workes; whose severall passages had I tran∣scribed, I should have oft repeated the selfesame things, and augmented this Quarto Treatise into many Folio Volumes. Thirdly, I have faithfully recorded the Books, the Chapters, Columes and pages of those Authors here alledged, together with the Impressions which I follow; all which you shall finde expressed, Part. 1. Act. 7. Scen. 3, 4, 5, & 6. Which Editions if any Reader want, let him then onely examine the number of the Bookes, the Chap∣ters, Homilies or Sermons here quoted, in those Editions which he hath, omitting the pages, and he shall finde eve∣ry quotation true, save onely where the Editions varie. And if any shall here quarrell with me for the multitude of Authors and quotations: let him know, that I produ∣ced them Quicquid e∣nim omnes vel plures, uno eo∣dem{que} sensu, manifete, fre∣quenter, perse∣veranter, velut quodam sibi consentiento Magistroru Concilio, acci∣piendo, tenen∣do, tradendo firmaverint, id pro indubi∣tato, certo, ra∣toque habea∣tur. Vincentius Leenis conr. Haerses, cap. 39. Illud reprobū fuisse non am∣biges quod omnium docto∣rum turba con∣demat. Ionnis Sarisb. de Nugs Curiliū l. ..4. onely for the Readers better satisfaction, to evidence the damnable odiousnesse of Stageplayes in all ages, not out of any vaine-glorious ostentation, which I much abhorre. Which advertisements being thus premised, I shall now beseech thee, courteous Reader, in the feare of God, to peruse this HISTRIO-MASTIX with an impartiall eye, and even seriously to consider with an unprejudicated affection, what all the primitive Christians, what all the Councels, Fathers, Emperours, Magistrates, and Au∣thors here enumered have constantly thought of Stage-playes, and other particulars here recited: And then I doubt not but what a noble Earle of this Kingdome in his late dangerous sicknesse, professed publikely (even with detestation) of his effeminate fantastique Love-locke; that he sensibly perceived it to be but a cord of vanity, by which he had given the Divell holdfast to leade him captive at his pleasure; who would never let goe his holdfast of him as long as hee nourished this un∣lovely Bush: whereupon hee comanded his Barber to
cut it off: (a speech, a president well worthy those Qi virilem sexum mulie∣bri mollitie de∣honestant. Ioan. Saresbericusis de Nugis Curiali∣um, l. 1. c. 5. wo∣manish Ruffians consideration, who yet are peccant in this kinde:) the same wilt thou affirme of these lascivious En∣terludes; See here Act. 6. Scene 4, 5, 12, 18, 19, 20, accordingly. that they are the very Divels pompes and Retia sunt quaecunque vi∣des, hominem∣que ligatum, Ad miseram mortē per ma∣la quaeque tra∣hunt. Ioan. Sa∣resberienis Ad opus suum. Bhl. Patr. Tom. 15. p. 339, G. snares, by which he captivates and inthralls mens soules; who can never enfranchise themselves from his infernall vassalage, till they have cordially renoun∣ced these his sugered gins, which detaine them captive in his service, and binde them over to damnation: as the here recited Councels, Fathers and other Authours witnesse: whose workes if Play-haunters would but study, at those vacant times which they sinfully waste on Playes, on Play-bookes, and such like unprofitable pleasures of sinne, Rev. 18.7. Eccles. 11.9. Prov. 14.13. which will end in horrour at the last; they would speedily abandon all Enterludes, all Play-houses, as the most execrable pernicious corruptions, which now they so much dote on as their chiefe delights. The Lord therefore open all such blinde Stage-haunters eyes by these my poore endeavours, who are yet so besotted with ignorance and these enchanting Spectacles, that they can∣not discerne those infinite mischiefes that attend them, Quis vero eo indignior, qui sui ipsius con∣temnit habere noticiam? qui tempus quod parca manu datum est ad mensuram, et solum reparari non potest, usu∣raria quadam accssione et poenali repe∣tendum in vitae dispendia pro∣digit, et in con∣tumeliam auctoris effundit? Ioan. Sareberiensis De Nugis Curialium, l. 1. c. 1. wasting their precious time upon them even from day to day, and quarrelling with all such pious Chri∣stians as would reclaime them from them: Of whom I may fitly use St. Augustines memorable passage: August. Enar. in Psal. 39 Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 416. Quem itaque comprehendam istorum insanorum? Quis me audia? quem eorum nos non miseros dicat, quia cum eis non insanimus? Amisisse nos putant varias et magnas voluptates in quibus ipsi insaniunt, nec vident quia mendaces sunt. Quando illis ovum invito, vel ca∣licem salutarem porrigo saucio: et quomodo reficiam? Hortor ut reficiant, pugnas parant; saevire volunt in medicum. Et si percusserint, diligantur; et si injuriam fecerint non relinquantur; redituri sunt ad mentem, gra∣tias acturi. Oremus itaque pro ipsis fratres charissimi;
inde crescit numerus sanctorū, de numero qui erat impi∣orum. It was this Fathers speech of those Play-haunters whom he indeavoured to reclaime in his time; and it shall be mine of ours now; whose conversion I shall truly pray for, how evill soever they intreat mee or this worke of mine; which if it doe no good to others, or purchase nought but hatred, but contempt unto my selfe, yet Sym∣machus his speech shall be my comfort: Ambrose Ep. l. 2. Ep. 2. Tom. 5. p. 97. Saluti pub∣licae dicata industria, crescit meritò cùm caret praemio: or if not his, the Prophet Isaiah's: Isay 49.4. Then I said, I have laboured in vaine, I have spent my trength for nought and in vaine: yet surely my judgement is with the Lord, and my reward with my God: to whose onely blessing I shall now commend this Treatise, and thee true Christian Reader; whose spirituall good being the primum mouens, that set my thoughts upon this Sub∣ject; I hope it shall finde thy favourable acceptation: Ioannis Sa∣resberiensi Prologus in lib. de Nugis Curialium. Bibl. Pat. Tom. 15. p, 341. . Sciens, quia sicut non habet unde placeat ex venu∣state, sic ex devotione scribentis non potrit displicere. And so I rest, Thine in the LORD, WILLIAM PRYNNE.
Autor ad Opus suum. Ex Ioanne Sa∣resberiensi, ad Opus suum de Nugis Curiali∣um. Bibl. Parum Tom. 15. p. 339, 340.SI mihi credideris, linguam cohibebis, et aulae, Limina non intret pes tuus, esto domi. Aspectus hominum cautus vitare memento, Et tibi commissas claude libelle notas. Omnia sint suspecta tibi, quia publicus hostis Et maiestatis diceris esse reus. Ignis edax, gladius{que} ferox tibi forte parantur, Aut te polluta subruet hostis aqua. Cum tamen exieris faciem velabit amictus, Deforment{que} tuam pulvis et aura cutem. Sit gradus et cultus habitus peregrinus eunti, Non nisi barbariem barbara lingua sonet. De Pictavorum dices te gente creatum, Nam licet his lingua liberiori loqui. Nusquam divertas, ne quis te laedat cuntem, Nugarum{que} luat garrula lingua notas. Omnia si nescis, loca sunt plenissima nugis, Quarum tota cohors est inimica tibi. Ecclesia nugae regnant, et principis aula; In claustro regnant, Pontificis{que} domo. In nugis clerus, in nugis militis usus; In nugis ivenes, tota{que} turba senum. Rusticus in nugis; in nugis sexus uterque: Srvus et ingenuus, dives, egenus in his. Accelera gressus, cauto diplomate perges; Vt valeas, esto sobrius, esto gravis. Gens penetranda tibi perlarga, bibax{que} loquax{que}, Et cui ni morem gesseris, hostis eris. I cius atque redi; ne quorum carpere nugas Aususes, infligant tela, necemque parent. Hospitique fidem quaeres super, omnia, quo sii Tutus ab insidiis, quas tibi quisque parat. Stultos, prudentes nimium, pravosque caveis, Et quos insignes garrula lingua facit. Si quis amat verum, tibi sit gratissimus hospes, Et quem delectat gloria vana, cave. Iuie patronatus illum cole, qui velit esse, Et sciat, et possit tutor ubique, tuus. Sperne malos, venerare bonos, ignose volenti Laedere; nulla bonis ultio grata magis. Et nisi festinus fugeres, te plura monerem, Vix pateris dici pauca, vel ista tene.
ERRATAES. COurteous Reader, I shall desire thee ere thou read this Treatise to correct these several following Errataes which in my absence through the Correctors and Printers oversight have escaped the Presse. IN the Pages, Pag. 12, l. 24. for ready reade, readily. p. 76. l. 18. for Contr. r. ad. p. 77. l. 27. their: his. p. 92. l. 7. r. displaied. p. 142. l. 12. r. protervos. p. 145. l. 6. r, whence. p. 168 l. 6. for. p. r. &. p. 169. l. 24. r. inflections. p. 179. l. 3. r. Those p. 180. l. 29. f. ground, r. grand p. 182. l. 24. r. Euclid. p. 185. l. 15. r. Melania. p. 188. l. 19. r. perfumed. p. 223. l. 2. f. 20. r. 5, 6. p. 236. l. 27. r. Christians. p. 245. l. 25. f. two, r. rare. p. 267. l. 6. r. those. p. 281. l. 28. r. muliebribus. p. 310. l. 15. f. which, r. with. p. 320. l. 7. f. c. 141. r. c. 41. p. 325. l. 23. & p. 326, l. 11, r. Stage players. p. 328, l. 28, r. Maiors. p. 332, l. 14, r. avocated. p. 333 l. 29. f. or, r. of. p. 336, l. 10, f. done, r. not. p. 348, l. 28, r. those. p. 363, l. 19, r. Gosson. p. 385, l. 22, r. Chri∣stians. p. 398, l. 19, f. this, r. his. p. 417, l. 5, r. comforts. p. 425, l. 31, f. Christ, r. Christian. p. 426, l. 20, r. Catechumenist. p. 438, l. 25, r. defend. p. 453, l. 8, r. militibus. p. 464, l. 22, f. in, r. in three. & l. 33, r. displeased. p. 468, l. 14, f. and, r. but. p. 474. l. 2, r. chaire. p. 478, l. 23, r. persons. p. 488, l. 22, r. kinde. p. 495, l. 26, f. in, r. of. p. 500, l. 11, r. originally. fol. 549, l. 33, f. perfecting, r. protecting. fol. 550, l. 27, f. that, r. fit. fol. 551, l. 22, f. which, r. with. fol. 553, l. 30, r. returning. f. 555, b, l. 9, f. Polycarpus, r. Pollio. fol. 557, l. 31, f. Nisi∣na, r. Misnia. fol. 558, b, l. 1, f. and not, r. not. fol. 559, l. 30, f. washed, r. crushed. Ibid. b, l. 4, f. might, r. nigh. fol. 560, b, l. 7, f. their, r. our. fol. 561, l. 17, f. new, r. now. & b, l. 12, r. vitiated. f. 562, l. 32, f. & the, r. the. & b, l. 7, f. these, r. such. fol. 567, l. 32, f. them, r. men. p. 568, l. 12, r. inconsistent. p. 570, l. 23, f. 54, r. 55. p. 708, l. 34, r. procedente. p. 709, l. 28, r. intercidit p. 733, l. 8, f. it be, r. it. p. 756, l. 14, r. viz. of Altisiodorum. p. 786, l. 11, r. pre∣scription. p. 791, l. 19, r. praecolorant, & l. 33, r. Helleboro. p. 803, l. 11, f. And r. are. p. 814, l. 8, f. carnem{que} r. carmen{que}. p. 815, l. 30, f. malum, r. bonum. p. 823, l. 17, f. and teaching, r. teaching. l. 18, f. that, r. that they. p. 829, l. 34, 35. f. the sinne, r. your sin. p. 830, l. 13, f. the, r. your. In the margent, p. 1, l. 15, reade Gubernator. p. 27, l. 4, r. quod. p. 40, l. 39, for cap. r page. p. 66, l. 2, dele ad. p. 67, l. 43, r. Loci. p. 74, l. 2, r. Legatio. p. 65, l. 4, r. cap. 25. & l. 15, dele cap. p, 78, l. 5, r. numerantur. p 124, l. 24, & 26, r. liberioris & Fastorum. p. 133. l. 31, r. flagitiosissime. l. 39, r. inquietaret. l. 45, r. Aluarus. l. 47, r. Dierum. p. 134, l. 39, r. 38. p. 138, l. 2, r. 35, & l. 3, r. 4. p. 145, l. 22, r. Cassiodorus. l. 49, r. Rmed. p. 152, l. 4, r. rideat. p. 153, l. 40, r. Vnus. p. 152, l. 38, r. deteriora. l. 45.46, r. Vua, liuorem. p. 157, l. 41, r. from Playes. p. 165, l. 25, r. decipientes, & l. 31, propitios. p. 178, l. 14, r. inextinguibiles. p. 184, l. 10, r. tondeat quos. l. 36, r. Amatorius p. 186, l. 28, r. 1009. l. 40, r. submouens. p. 188, l. 35, r. perficiunt. p 189, l. 35, r. ultro. p. 199, l. 11, r. 122. p. 213, l. 17, r. 83. p. 214, l. 30, r. aperto, l. 35 r. Tim. 1. p. 224, l. 29, r. sempiternam. p. 230, l. 29, r. letali. p. 248, l. 28, r. rerum, l. 31, r. ad. p. 280, l. 15, r. quae∣so. p. 287, l. 18, r. Sic. p. 326, l. 29, r. c. 41, l. 31, r. minus. p. 336, l. 36, r. idoneus. p. 366, l. 21. r. igitur. p. 383, l. 39, r. contaminent. p. 389, l. 28, r. AElij, l. 43, r. sunt p. 390, l. 44, r. Babing∣tons. p. 394, l. 23, r, nobilium. p, 447, l, 5, 6, dele haeter. p, 455, l, 44, r, c, 6. p, 456, l, 41, r, , 4. p, 504, l, 35, r. Et. fol, 513, b, l, 37, r, iuvenes. f, 514, l, 35, r, seruitus. f, 551, b, l, 30, r, Callist: f, 559, l, 40, 1, Cornelius. b, l, 26, r, Musicae. f. 568, b, l, 13, r. fltibus. f, 565, l, 39, r, Tom. 12, pars 1. p, 568, l, 32, r, blasphematur. p, 636, l, 15, 16, r, Waldensia. p, 671, l: 37, r: tuenda. p: 765, l: 19, r: Vrbis. p: 790, l: 44, r: Setinum. p: 793, l: 2. r: Prouidentia. p: 795, l: 9, r: delinquunt. p. 798, l: 42, dele pro. p: 804, l: 21, r: adultis. l: 38, r. Nenea. p. 807, l. 40, r. Theodosius & l. 43, Prateus. p. 811, l. 38, r. aledicendi, dicam. l. 40, r. fol. 153. l. 43, r. oble∣ctare. p. 824, l. 34, r. l: 5, c: 1. p: 828, l: 44, r. Casares. p. 827, l. 12, r. hostes. p. 828, l. 9, r. l. 6.
HISTRIO-MASTIX; OR, THE ACTORS TRAGEDIE. THE PROLOGVE. SVch hath alwayes beene, and yet is, the peruerse, and wretched condition of sinfull man, Gen. 6.5. the cogi∣tations of whose heart are euill, and onely euill before God, and that continually: that it is farre more easie to estrange him from his best, and chiefest ioyes; then to diuorce him from his Nulla veri∣or est miseriae, quam falsa lae∣titia. Bernard. De Gratia. & lib. Arbitrio. Col. 909. B. truest misery, Hebr. 11.25. the pleasures of sinne, which are but for a season, Deliciae tem∣porariam ha∣bent voluptatim, poenam autem sempiternam. Chrysost. hom. 54. ad Pop. Antioch. yet set in endlesse griefe: Man alwayes hugges his pleasurable sinnes so fast, out of a preposterous, and misguided loue, Quod plers{que} inemendabiles facit omnium aliarum artium peccata, artificibus pudor sunt, offendantque: errantem in vita peccata delectant. Non gaudet nauigio gubernatur euerso, non gaudet aegro medicus elato: non gaudet Orator, si patron culp reus cecidit.  contra omnibus crimen suum voluptati est. Sen. Epist. 97. which makes
his reformation desperate:) that if any soule-compassiona∣ting Christians attempt to wrest them from him; hee forthwith takes vp armes against them; returning them no other answere, then that of Ruth to Naomie, in a farre better case: Ruth 1.17. The Lord doe so to mee, and more also, if ought but death part them and mee: where they dye, I will dye, and there will I bee buried and thus alas hee liues, Non prius est vt de vita homines quam de iniquitate discedant: Quis enim non cum iniquita∣tibus suis mori∣tur, & cum ipsis admodum atque in ipsis sceleribus sepe∣litur? Salu. De Gub. Dei. lib. 5. pag. 171. Clemens Alex∣and. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. nay, dies, and lies (as too too many dayly doe) intombed both with, and in, his darling crimes. How naturally prone men are to cleaue to worldly pleasures, and delights of sinne, in despite of all those powerfull attractiues, which might withdraw them from them; to omit all other particular instances: wee may behold a reall, and liuely experiment of it, in prophane, and poysonous STAGE-PLAYES; the common Idole, and preuailing euill of our dissolute, and degenerous Age: which though they had their rise from Hell; yea, their birth, and pedegree from the very Deuill himselfe, to whose honour, and seruice they were at first deuoted: though they haue beene oft condemned, and quite exploded by the whole Primitiue Church, both vnder the Law, and Gospel: by the vnanimous vote of all the Fathers, and sundry Coun∣cells from age to age: by Moderne Diuines, and Christi∣an Authours of all sorts: by diuers Heathen States, and Emperours; and by whole Grand iuries of prophane writers, as well Historians, and Poets, as Philosophers Tertul. De spectac. lib. Cyprian. De spectac & Ep. li. 2. Epist. 2. Salu de Gub. Dei. li. 6. Chrys. hom 6.7. & 38 in Mat. Ioannis Salisburiensis e Nugis Curi∣alium. l. 1. c. 8. Orosius hist. l. 3. c. 4. Bodinus de Republi. l. 6. cap. 1. Doct. Rinolds Ouerthrow of Stage-Playes accordingly. as the Incendiaries, and common Nurseris of all Villany, and Wickednesse; the bane, and ouerthrow of all Grace, and Goodnesse; the very poyson, and corruption of mens mindes, and manners; the very fatall plagues, and ouertures of those States, and Kingdomes where they are once tollerated, as I shall prooue anon: Yet wee, we miserable, and gracelesse wretches, after so many sentences of condemnation passed vpon them: after so many Iudgements already inflicted on, and yet threatned to vs, for them: after so many yeres, and Iubilies of the glorious Gospel-sun-shine: Tit. 2.11.22. which teacheth vs to deny vngodlinesse, and all worldly lusts, and to
liue soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the comming, and appearance of the great God, and our Sauiour Iesus Christ; yea, after our very vow, and sacred couenant in Baptisme, which bindes vs, Dionysius Areopagta. Eccles. Hierar. c. 2.3. Tertul. de Baptismo. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 5. Cyrillus Hier. slmitanus Catechesis: Mystag. 1. Hierom. Epist. 8. c. 5 Chrysost. hom. 6. in Colos. 2. Concil. Constantino. 6. in Trullo, Can. 96. to for∣sake the Deuill, and all his Workes, the Pomps, and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinfull lusts of the flesh, Tertul. de spectac cap. 24. August. de Symbolo. ad Catech. lib. 4. c. 1 Cyrillu. Hierusol. Cate∣chesis Mystag. 1 Salui. de Gub. De. lib. 6 pag. 190. to 197. Hookers Ec∣clesiasticall Policie. lib. 5. cap. 64. accordingly. of which these Stage-Playes are the chiefe: as if wee were quite degenerated, not onely from the grace, and holinesse of Christians; but euen from the naturall good∣nesse, and moralitie of Pagans in former Ages; doe now, euen now, in the middest of all our feares at home and the miserable desolations of Gods Church abroade; (the very thoughts of which should cause our hearts to bleed, and soules Iam. 4.9, 10. to mourne; much more our Hellish iollitie, and mirth to cease:) as if wee had made a couenant with Hell, and sworne alleageance to the Deuill himselfe; Ad mundana gaudia & corporalia bona multitudo procliuis est: Et quamuis incertum caucumque sit quod cupitur, libentius tamen suscipitur labor pro desiderio voluptati, quam pro amore vir∣tut. Ita cum innumeri sunt qui visibilia concupiscunt, vix inueniuntur qui tempo∣ralibus aeterna praeponant Leo de Quadrages Sermo. 11. cap. 1. inthrall, and sell our selues to these Diabolicall, and hel∣lish Enter-ludes, notwithstanding, all that God, or man haue said against them: and would rather part with Christ, Religion, God, or Heauen, then with them. Yea so farre are many mens affections wedded to these pro∣phane, and Heathenish vanities; that as it was in Saint Augustines time, euen so it is now: Populi laudant non consultoribus vtilitatum surum, sed largitoribus voluptatum. Opipera conuiuia frequententur, vbi cuique libuerit & pouerit, diu noctuque ludatur, bibatur, voma∣tur, dffatur: saltationes vndique concrepent: Theatra inhonest laetitia vocibus, atque omni genere siue crudelissimae, siue tursimae volupt ais exaesuent Ille est pub∣licus inimiciss cui haec flicits displict. Quisquis eam mutare vel auferre tentae∣rit, um liber multitudo auertit ab auribus, euertit e sedibus, aufert a viuentib. August. De Ci. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 20. whosoeuer is but displeased, and offended with them, is presently reputed for a common Enemie: he that speakes against them, or comes not at them, is forthwith branded for a Scismaticall, or
factious Puritan: and if any one assay to alter, or suppresse them, he becomes so odious vnto many; that did not the feare of punishment restraine their malice, they would not onely scorne, and disgrace; but euen stone, or rent him all to pieces, as a man vnworthy for to liue on earth: whereas such who further these delights of sinne, are highly magnified, as the chiefe contriuers of the publike happinesse. There was once a time, Nihil nobis dictu, visu, vel auditu cum insania Circi, um impudic∣tia Theatri, cum atrocitate Arena, cum Zysti vanita∣te: Spectacu∣lis non conue∣nimus. Tertul. Apolog. adu. Gentes. cap. 38.42. Clemens Alexand. Ora∣tio Exhort. ad Gentes. Tati∣anus Oratio aduers. Graecos Athenagoras pro Christia∣nis Legatio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2 p. 138.139. Theophy∣lus Antioche∣nus aduers. Autolichum l. 3. accordingly. if Tertullian, with some other ancient Fa∣thers, may bee credited:) when as it was the chiefest badge and character of a Christian, to refraine from Stage-Playes: yea, this Vos suspensi interim atque solliciti honestis voluptatibus abstinetis: non spectacula vi∣sitis: non pom∣pis interestis. Minutius Felix. Octauius. pag. 34.123. Virgil. was one great crime which the Pagans did obiect against the Christians in the Primitiue Church; that they came not to their Enterludes. But now, (as if Stage-Playes were our Creed, and Gospel, or the truest embleme of our Christian profession,) those are not worthy of the name of Christians; they must be Puritans, and Precisians; not Protestants, who dislike them. AEneidos lib. 2. Heu quantum mutatus ab illo? Alas, how arre are Christians now degenerated, from what they were in ancient times; when as that which was their badge and honour heretofore, is now become their brand and shame? Saluian. de Gub. Dei. lib. 4. pag. 110. Quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est, vbi religio ignobilem facit? How little doe we Christians honour Christ, when as the ancient character; and practicall power, of Religion, (I meane the abando∣ning, and renouncing of sinne-fomenting Stage-Playes) subiect men vnto the highest censure, and disgrace? Ouid de Ponto. lib. 4. El. 3. Conquerar? an taceam? This being the dissolute, and vnhappy constitution of our depraued times, it put mee at the first to this Dilem∣ma; whether to sit mute and silent still, and Iere. 13.17. mourne in secret for these Dan. 9.27. ouerspredding abominations, (which haue got such head of late among vs; that many who visit the Church scarce once a weeke, frequent the Play-house once a day:) or whether Isay 58.1. I should lift vp my voyce
like a trumpet, and crie against them, to my power? If I should bend my tongue, or pen against them, (as I haue done against some other sinfull, and Vnchristian vani∣ties,) my thoughts informed me; that I might with the vnfortunate Disciples, Luke 5.5. fish all night, and catch iust no∣thing at the last, but the reproach, and scorne of the Hi∣strionicall, and prophaner sort, Iam. 3.6. whose tongues are set on fire of Hell, against all such as dare affront their Hellish practises; and so my hopes and trauell would bee wreckt at once: If I should on the other side, neglect to doe my vttermost, to extirpate or withstand these dangerous spectacles, or to withdraw such persons from them, as my paines, and briefe collections in this subiect might reclaime, when God had put this oportunitie into my hand, and will into my heart, to doe it: my Conscience then perswaded me; that my negligence, and slackenesse in this kinde, Qui enim succurrere pe∣rituro potest, si non succurrit occidit. Lactan. de vero Culn. cap. 11. might make mee guiltie of the death of all such ignorant, and seduced Soles, which these my poore en∣deuours might rescue from these chaines of Hell, and cordes of sinne: and Qui cum possit malum non impedit, mali potius est auctor, quam qui id facit. Thucidide Histor. lib. 1. pag 50. interest me in all the euill which they might suppresse: Whereupon I resolued with my selfe at last, Hebr 12.2. Et gratias go Deo meo, quod dignus sum quem mundus oderit Hierom. Epist 99. to endure the crosse, and despise the hate, and shame, which the publishing of this HISTRIO-MASTIX might procure mee, and to Qua anti∣quorum mor∣borum difficilis ac arda cura∣tio est, tanto velocius adhi∣beantur reme∣dia, quanto recentior sunt vulnera. Leo. de Resur∣rect. Domini Sermo. 1. cap. 6. asswage (at least in my Est nobis veluisse Satis. Tibullus. lib. 4. ad Mes∣saliam pag. 99. Quod si deficiant vires, audacia certe Laus erit, in magnis & volu∣isse sat est. Properius Eleg lib. 2. Eleg. 10. ende∣uours, if not otherwise,) these inueterate, and festred vlcers, (which may endanger Church, and State at once,) by ap∣plying some speedy corrosiues, and emplaisters to them, and ripping vp their noxious, and infectious nature on the publike Theater, in these ensuing Acts, and Scoenes: which I thought good to stile, The Players, or Actors Tragoedie: not so much for the Stile, or Method of it, (for alas, here is neither Nihil hic Tragico, aut Sophocleo dig∣nm Cothurno: See Horace, De Arte Poetica. Iuuen. Satyr. 6.7.15. Clius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. lib. 21. cap. 20. Tragicke stile, nor Poeticall
straines, nor rare Inuention, nor Clowne, nor Actor in it, but onely bare, and naked Mana vis est veritatis, quae contra ho∣minum inge∣nia, callidita∣tem, solertiam, contra{que} fictas omnium insi∣dias facile se per seipsam de fendit. Ciro. pro M. Celio Orat. pag 577. Oratio verita∣tis simplex est, & non habet opus multis hinc inde in∣terpretationi∣bus, res enim ipsa pro se di∣cit: mala ver causa languens in sese, habet opus accuratis pharmacis: Euip. Phae∣nissae. pag. 193. Num. 47. Fides pura & aperta confes∣sio non quaerit strophas & ar∣gumenta ver∣borum. Quod simpliciter cre∣ditur, simplici∣ter coniten∣dum est. Hierom. Epist. 63. cap. 2. Trueth, which needes n Eloquence, nor straine of wit for to adorne, or pleade its cause:) as for the good effects I hope it may, and will produce, to the suppression, and extirpation; at least the restraint, and diminution both of Playes, and common Actors, and all those seuerall mischieuous, and pestiferous fruites of Hellish wickednesses that issue from them: which much desired successe, and reformation, if I could but liue to see; I should deeme my selfe an happy man, and thinke my labour richly recompenced. The Argument, Parts, and Method, of the ensuing TRAGAEDIE. BVt not to spend more time in Prologues; I shall now addresse my selfe vnto the Argument, or Subiect, of this Tragicall Discourse, which is no more in briefe, then this Conclusion. That all popular, and common Stage-Playes, whether Comicall, Tragicall, Satyricall, Mimicall, or mixt of either: (especially, as they are now compiled, and personated among vs,) are such sinfull, hurtfull, and pernitious Recreations, as are altogether vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians. A Paradoxicall, new, and strange Conclusion, or Pro∣bleme vnto many, and yet an ancient; and resolued trueth, acknowledged at first by Heathen Emperors, States, and Writers, yea, and Iewish Authors, both before, and after Christ; and since that, ratified by the concurrent voyce, and verdict of the whole Church of God, from age, to age, euen to this present day: as the venerable records of all the Fathers; the irrefragable Decrees of sundry Councells;
and the learned Treatises of diuers Moderne Christians, both Protestants, and Papists, doe at large declare; a cato∣logue of whose names, and workes shall bee presented to you in its proper Scaene. Not to enter into any curious diuision, or enumeration of such Playes, or Enterludes, as were vsuall among the Greekes, and Romans: such as were their Ludi Circen∣ses with Chariots: their Ludi Gladiatorij, or Sword-Playes: their Ludi Compitalitij, Florales, Gymnii, Lupercales, Megalenses, Cereales, Martiales, Appollinares, Consuales, Capitolini, Laquearij, Retiarij, Troiani, Plebeij, and the like: since Godwin. Roman Anti∣quities lib. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 1. to 14. Alex. ab Alexand. Gen. Dierum lib. 6. cap. 19. Coel. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. lib 8. c. 7.8. Lipsius de Gladiatoribus. Mr. North∣brooke against vaine Playes, & Enterludes. fol. 29. Polyd. Virgil. De In∣uent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 13.14. lib. 4. c. 14. diuers now of late, as well as heretofore, haue discribed them to the full, in sundry Treatises: nor yet to shew you the exact differences betweene Comicall, Tragicall, Satyricall, or Mimicall Enterludes, together with their seuerall circumstances, inuentions, parts, or properties, (delineated likewise by the marginall Au∣thors,) which differ more in substance, then in forme, or action, in which they neere accord: I shall onely informe you of one moderne distinction, which some haue plea∣sed for to make of Stage-Playes. Doct. Case. Ethic l 4. c. 8. pag 307. Polit. l. 5. c 8. p. 474.475. Doct. Gager in his Reply to Doct. Renolds. Doct. Gentilis in his 2. Ep. to Dr. Reinolds. Of Stage-Playes (say they) there are two sorts: The one popular, or publike, acted by hired, and professed Stage-Players: (the Playes wee haue now in hand,) and these they all confesse to be abominable, and vnlawfull Pas-times: The other Academicall, managed only by Schollers in priuate Schooles, and Colledges at some certaine seasons: and these they hold at least wise tollerable, if not lawfull, so as these sixe prouisoes be obserued: Mr. North∣brooke against vaine Playes, and Enter∣ludes. fol. 37. Bucer de reg∣no Christi. Sempiterno lib. 2. cap 54. First, that there bee no Obscenitie, Scurrilitie, Prophanenesse, A∣morous Loue-toyes, Wantonnesse, or Effeminacy mixed with these Playes: Secondly, that there bee no Womans part, no Dalliance, no Lustfull, nor Lasciuious Complements, Clip∣pings, or Embracements in them: Thirdly, that there be no mention, or Inuocation of Heathen Gods, or Goddesses in them: Fourthly, that there be no putting on of Womans apparell, or any sumptuous, or costly attire: Fiftly, that these Playes pro∣duce no prodigall, or vnnecessary expence, either of money, or
time: Sixtly, that they be not ordinarily, but very rare, and seldome Acted; and that for the most part in the Latine tongue, for vtterance, and learning sake alone; not for any gaine of money, or vaine-glory. If all, or any of these conditions faile (as what Acha∣demicall Enterludes faile not, either in all, or most?) these very scholasticall Spectacles, become vnlawfull, euen by the most moderate mens confession. For the lawfulnesse, or Illegitimacy of our Achademicall Stage-Playes, I shall discusse it in its proper place: in the meane time, I shall addresse my selfe vnto the probate, of my precedent Con∣clusion: by Reasons, by Authorities. Reasons a∣gainst Stage-Playes.My Reasons to euince the vnlawfulnesse of Stage-Playes, I shall branch into these sixe seuerall Acts. The first, is drawne from the Originall Authors, and  Inuentors of them: The second, from those Impious endes, to which they were destinaed, and ordained at  the first: The third, from their ordinary Stile, or sub∣iect matter, which no Christian can euer iustifie, or ex∣cuse:  The fourth, from the persons that Act, and parties  who frequent them: The fift, from the very forme, and manner of their Action, and those seuerall parts, and cir∣cumstances  which attend them: The sixt, from the per∣nitious effects, and sinfull fruites, which vsually, if not necessarily, and perpetually, issue from them. Authorities against Stage-Playes.My Authorities doe marshall themselues into seuen se∣uerall Squadrons: The first, consisting of Scriptures: The second, of the whole Primitiue Church, both vnder  the Law, and Gospel: The third, of Councells, and Ca∣nonicall,  or Papall Constitutions: The fourth, of the  ancient godly Fathers: The fift, of Moderne Christian  writers of all sorts, as well Diuines, as others: The sixt,  of Heathen Philosophers, Orators, Historians, and Poets:  The last, of the Acts, and Edicts of sundry Christian, and Heathen States, and Emperours. All which, accom∣panied with the irrefragable, and plaine defeates of those pretences, which giue any colourable iustification to these
Theatricall Enterludes; will giue no doubt a fatall, if not a finall ouerthrow, or Catastrophe to Playes, and Actors, whose dismall Tragoedie doeth now begin. ACTVS 1. SCAENA PRIMA. THat all popular, and common Stage-Playes,Argument. 1. whether Comicall, Tragicall, Satyricall, Mimicall, or mixt of either,Stage-Playes had their ori∣ginall from the Deuill himselfe, therefore they must needes be euill. (especially, as they are now composed, and personated,) are such sinfull, hurtfull, and pernicious Recreations, as are al∣together vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians: I shall first of all euidence, and prooue it, from their originall parents, and primary Inuentors: which were no other, but the very Deuill himselfe; or at leastwise, Idolatrous, and Voluptuous Pagans, impregnated with this infernall issue from Hell it selfe: from whence I argue in the first place, thus. That which had its birth, and primarie conception from the very Deuill himselfe, who is all, and onely euill; must needes be Sinfull, Pernicious, and alto∣gether vnseemely, yea, Vnlawfull vnto Christians. But Stage-Playes had their birth, and primary concep∣tion, from the very Deuill himselfe, who is all, and onely euill. Therefore they must needes bee Sinfull, Pernicious, and altogether vnseemely, yea, Vnlawfull vnto Christians. The Minor, (which is onely liable to exception,) I  shall easily make good: First, by the direct, and punctu∣all testimony of sundry Fathers. Clemens Alexandrinus, Oratio Exhortatoria, ad Gentes. fol. 8. Tertullian de Specta∣culis. cap. 5.7.10.24. Clemens Romanus, Constitutionum
Apostolorum. lib. 2. c. 65.66. S. Cyprian, De Spectaculis. l. & Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio, Arnobius Disputatio Aduers. Gentes. l. 7. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Cyrill of Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1. S. Chrysostome, Hom. 6.7. & 38. on Mat. S. Augustine, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32. l. 2. c. 6. to 23. Saluian. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 206.207. Tertullianus apud Latinos omnium facile princeps iudi∣candus: Quid enim hoc viro doctius? quid in diuinis at∣que humanis rebus exerci∣tatius? Nem∣pe omnem Phi∣losophiam & cunctas Philo∣sophorum se∣ctas, auctores, adsertoresque sectarum, om∣nesque orum disciplinas, om∣nem historia∣rum c studio∣rum varieta∣tem mir qu∣dam mentis ca∣pacitate com∣plexus est. Vincentis Leinensis, Contra. Hae∣reses. cap. 24. All ex∣cellently learned in all the learning of the Heathen, and there∣fore, best able to determine of the Originall of Stage-Playes, especially, since they liued so neere vnto their birth-day.) All these, I say, to whom I might adde: Pope Innocent the first, Epistolarum Decretalium. Epist. 2. ad Victricium. cap. 11. (which you shall finde in Surius, Con∣ciliorum. Tom. 1. pag. 529. and in Gratian. Distinctio. 51. cap. Praeterea, frequenter:) Ludouicus Vies, Comment. in Augustinum, De Ciu. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32. lib. 2. cap. 6. to 22. Coelius Rhodiginus Antiquarum Lectionum. lib. 8. cap. 7. A∣grippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 59. Ioannes Mariana, Doct. Reinolds, Gosson, with sundry others in their Bookes, and Treatises against Stage-Playes: doe expressely testifie: That all Theatricall Playes, or Enterludes, had their Origi∣nall birth from the very Deuill himselfe, who inuented them for his owne honour, and worship, to detaine men captiue by them, in his infernall snares: Whence they all condemne them, as sinfull, hurtfull, abominable, and vnlawfull plea∣sures: stiling all Play-houses: the Diabol Ecclesia: Offi∣cina scelerum; Cathedra pesti∣lentiarum, &c Tertul. Apolog. & De Spectac. lib. Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. Basil. Heaem. hom. 4 Temples, Chap∣pels, Chaires, Shops, and Schools of Satan: and Playes, the Deuils Spectacles, Lectures, Sacrifices, Recreations, and the like. If all these seuerall Witnesses then haue any cre∣dit: (as their testimony in our present case, was neuer contradicted to my knowledge, by any Christian, or Pa∣gan Author:) my Minor, (yea, my Maior likewise,) neede no farther proofe: But yet to satisfie vncredulous spirits in this point, I shall here in the second place, re∣cite some two, or three Histories of note, and credit,  which prooue my assumption to the full. Memorable to this purpose, is that story De Spectac. cap. 26. in Tertullian; who informes vs: that a Christian woman in his time, going to see a Stage-Play
acted, returned from it possessed with a Deuill: which Deuill being interrogated by the Exorcists, and Christians that came to dispossesse him, how he durst assault a beleeuing Christian in such a presumptuous manner? Returned them this answere, with much boldnesse: that he had done most iust∣ly in it, in meo enim eam inueni: for I found her in my owne Temple, negociated, and imployed in my seruice: Whence this acute, and learned Author doeth (as we also from it may) conclude: De Spectac. cap. 24. to 28. that Playes, and Play-houses came originally from the Deuill himselfe, because hee claimes both them, and those who doe frequent them for his owne.Valerius Maximus. l. 2. cap. 4. sect. 4. Polydor Virgil. De Inuent. Rerum l 4. c. 14. Adde wee to this, the storie of one Valesius a wealthy Roman: whose three children being desperately sicke of the Plague, and afterwards recouered by washing them in hote water, taken from the Altar of Proserpina: which remedy, was prescri∣bed vnto him by an immediate voyce from his Deuill-Gods, after his earnest prayer to them, to translate their sickenesses on himselfe: these infernall Spirits, in recompence of this their cure, appearing to those recouered Patients in a Dreame: com∣manded them to celebrate Playes vnto them; which Vale∣sius did accordingly: This story I shall couple with that of Dionysius Hallicarnasse∣us Aniq Rom. l. 7. c. 9. Cicero de Diuinatione lib. 1. Arnobius Disput. aduer∣sus Gentes. l. 7. Lactantius de Orig. Erroris. cap. 8. Minuti∣us Felix. Octauius. p. 19. Augustine De Ciui. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 26. Ludo. Vies Notae. in August. Ibid. Lie. Rom. Hist. lib. 2. Sect. 36. Relate this storie. Titus Latinus, as some; or Tiberius Attiius, as others stile him: to whom the great Deuill-God Iupiter Ca∣pitolinus, vnder the Consulship of Qu. Sulpitius Camerinus, & Sp. Largius Flauus, in a great mortality both of men, and beasts, appeared in a dreame: commanding him, to informe the Senate; that the cause of this fatalitie, was, their negli∣gence, in not prouiding him an expert, and eminent Presultor in their last Playes, that they celebrated to him: and withall, to enioyne them from him, to celebrate these Playes afresh vn∣to him, with greater care and cost, and then this Plague should cease: He supposing it to be a meere dreame, and fancy of his owne, neglects his arrant; vpon which this great Ma∣ster-Deuill appeares vnto him the second time, threatning to punish him for his precedent neglect, and charging him to di∣patch his former message to the Senate: Who neglecting it as before, as being ashamed, and with all affraide, to relate it to
the Senate, Quanquam hand sae liber erat religione animus: vere cundia tamen maiestaris Magstratuum timorem vict, ne in ore hominum pro ludibrio abiret. Liuie. Rom. Hist. l. 2. Sect. 36. left it should prooue nothing but his own priuate fancy some few dayes after, his Sonne was taken away from him by sodaine death, and a griping sickenesse seised vpon eue∣ry part, and member of his body, so that he could not so much as stirre one ioynt, without intollerable paine and torture. Where vpon, by the aduice of some of his friends, to whom he did impart these dreames, hee was carried vp out of the Coun∣trey in a litter, into the Senate house, where he deliuered his former message: no sooner had he ended his relation, but his sickenesse foorthwith leaues him; and rising out of his bed, he returnes vnto his house an healthie man: The Senate won∣dring at it, commanded these Playes to bee againe renewed, with double the former pompe and cost; and so the Pesti∣lence ceased. These two precedent parallell Histories, (the trueth of which the Fathers in the margent testifie, (doe insallibly demonstrate, the Deuill himslfe to be the Authour of these Stage-Playes, since he inioynes his Pagan worship∣pers to celebrate them to his honour, and takes such pleasure, and contentment in them. To these, I shal annexe one story more, which though most Protestants may chance to slight, as a fable; yet all our Roman Catho∣liques, (who are much deuoted to these. Theatricall Spe∣ctacles,) will ready subscribe vnto it, as an vndoubted trueth: and that as our rare Historian, Historia Angliae, Tiguri 1589. pag. 209.210. Mathew Paris at large relates it, is briefely this: Saint Dominicke, Saint Iulian, and one Thurcillus a plaine Husband-man, being in the Church of Saint Maries, about the middle of the world, where there were many Soules of Saints departed, in endlesse Blisse, others in Purgatory: on a Saturnday euening neere night: saw a Deuill towards the North part of the Church, riding post towards Hell on a blacke horse, with many damned Soules: Saint Dominicke chargeth this Deuill to come pre∣sently to him: who delaying to doe it, out of ioy for the great bootie of Soules which he had gotten, Saint Dominicke takes a rod, and whips him well, causing him to follow him to the North side of the Church, where Soules were vsually freed;
where the Deuill among other things informes him, that eue∣ry Lords day at night, (a time which some men consecrate and set apart for Stage-Playes, and such infernall Pas∣times, whereas Act. 20.7.9.11. Saint Paul did spend it all in preach∣ing:) the Deuils did vse to meete in Hell, and there did re∣create, and exhilarate themselues Ludis Thea∣tralibus. with Stage-Playes: Which Saint Dominicke, and the others hearing, they desi∣red the Deuill, that they might goe along with him to Hell, to see their Enterludes: who putting by Thurcillus, perit∣ted Saint Dominicke, and Saint Iulian to accompany him: the Deuill brings them into a large, but smokie house towards the North, enuironed with three wals; where they see an am∣ple Theater with seates round about it, where sundry Deuils sate in a row laughing, and making themselues merry with the torments, and sinnes of the Damned, whom the Prince of the Deuils commanded to bee brought vpon the Stage, and to Act their parts in order. And first of all, the Proud man is brought vpon the Theater: next an Animarum nec casu re∣putatur, nec salus. Male viuunt, & subicts male vire volunt. Bernard. ad Cleum Sermo Col. 1726. C.D idle Nonresident, who did not feede his Flocke, neither by Life, nor Doctrine: then a Souldier, who had liued by Murther, and Rapine: then an Oppressing, and Bribe-taking Lawyer, who was once an Officer in the Kings Exchequer, and did much oppresse the Subiects: next a Adulterer, and an Adulteresse: then a Sclanderer: next a Theife: and last of all, a Sacrilegious per∣son, who had violated Sanctuaries; all these comming in their seuerall garbes, and postures, did Act their proper parts, and had seuerall Tragicall tortures inflicted on them by the Deuils Ministers, who were likewise Spectators of-these Ludibrious Spectacles. If then the Deuils recreate themselues thus in Hell with Stage-Playes, as this Historian reports; if they thus Proiect, and Puruay for them; they may be well reputed the primary Authors, and Inuentors of them. Lastly, that which is vtterly displeasing vnto God, and  wholy fraught with Scurrility, Prophannesse, Sinne, and Wickednesse: that which was at first deoted to the Deuils immediate worship, and cannot any wayes bee deemed the inuention, or product, either of God himselfe,
Psal. 99.5. Hab. 1.13. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. who is infinitely holy, Nihil turpe ex honesto nasci potest. Lactant. de Falsa Sapi∣entia. cap. 11. and therefore, no Proiector of such vnholy pleasures:) or of Christians, or ciuill Pagans; Nihil Dia∣boli non est, quiquid Di non est, vel deo displicet. Ter∣tul. de Spectac. cap. 24 must of necessitie be fathered on the Deuill himselfe, who is the common seed-plot of all vncleannesse, and pro∣phannesse whatsoeuer: But such are Stage-Playes: as See Scaene 2. hereafter I shall prooue at large: Therefore they must of necessitie, call the Deuill Father, and be reputed as his of-spring so that the Assumption of my former argu∣ment is irrefragable. For the Maior: That things which had their birth, and primary conception from the Deuill himselfe, who is all, and onely euill, must needes bee sinfull, pernicious, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians: I presume, no Christian dares gaine-say it: For what honest, pro∣fitable, good, or lawfull thing, can flow, or issue from him, 1 Iohn 2.13, 14. Math. 5.37. who is wholy euill, 1 Pet. 5.8. Iob 1.7. c. 2.2. and walkes about in an in∣defatigable, and restlesse manner, like a roring Lyon, seeking whom he may deuoure? Iam 3.1, 12 Can a bitter Fountaine, send foorth sweete; and pleasant streames? Math. 7.17, 18.19. Or can a corrupt Tree bring foorth good, and holesome fruite? Iob 14 4. Who can bring a cleane thing out of filthinesse; or a good thing out of wickednesse? It is past the skill of any Chymicke, or artist to effect it. Certainely, Ezech. 16.44 such as the Mother is, such is the Daughter: Iohn 3.6. that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit: Now the Math. 101. chap. 12.43. Marke 3.30. 1 Ioh. 2.13, 14. Peter 5.8. Deuill, is an vncleane, a wicked, a sinfull, and pernicious Spirit: there is no good at all within him: his inuentions, workes, and of-spring, therefore must resemble him: Facit ad ori∣ginis maculam, e bonum ex∣istimes quod initium a ma∣lo accepit. Tertul. De Spectac. cap 8. they must be euill, vncleane, pernicious, and abominable, like himselfe: Math. 7.16. Luke 6.43. Iames 3.12. Men doe not, men cannot gather Grapes of Thornes, or Figges of Thistles: such as the stocke is, such must bee the fruite; as Scripture, Nature, Reason, and Experience teach vs. Since then the Deuill himselfe, is all, and onely euill, abominable, polluted, and pernici∣ous; I meane in his qualitie, as a Deuill, Diaboli natura non improba, sed opera iniqua. Ambr. Comment. lib. 5. in Luc. 4. Tom. 3. pag. 33. H. & 85. B. not in his
ntitie, as a creature: these Stage-Playes (which are his proper, and immediate issue) must bee so too: if not to Pagans, Ephes. 2.2. 2 Tim. 2.26. inthralled to his bondage, and captiuated at his pleasure in his snares: yet at least to such, as lay any title to the name of Christians: who haue vowed in their very Baptisme, and first admittance into the Church of Christ: Cyril. Hieru∣sol Catech. Mystag. 1. Concil Con∣stantinop. 6. in Trullo. Can. 96. to forsake the deuill, and all his workes: of which these Stage-Playes, are well-nigh the chiefe: Tertul. D Spectac. cap. 10. Oderis itaque Christiane, quorum Auctores non poteris non odisse: needes then must all Christians hate these Stage-Playes, whose Author they cannot chuse but hate: needes must they re∣pute them euill, abominable, and pernicious; Qud pessi∣mo initio niti∣tur, in nullo vnquam cen∣seri poterit bonum. Atha∣nasius contra Geniles. lib. yea, al∣together such; since the genitor, and parent of them, is wholly, onely, alwayes such. Iohn 1.46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? was a question, that sincere Nathaniel deman∣ded once of Philip, when hee brought tidings to him of Christ: Can any good thing come out of Hell? out of Satan; out of that wicked, and vncleane infernall Spirit, Diabolus omnem homi∣nem & omnem spiitum qui sub caelo est, subitò in cti oculi perderet, deleret, inter∣ficeret, si per∣mitteretur; & si iuxta vo∣luntatem ini∣quitatis suae potestatem ha∣beret. Origen. in Iob. lib. 1. Tom. 2. fol. 13, D. who plots the ruine of mens Soules, and nothing else? is the demand I make to such who are inamoured with these Stage-Playes. Alas, what Christian, or Pagan heart, can so much as once conceiue; Diabolus est humani gene∣ris inimicus. Greg. Mag. in 7. Psal. Paenitentiales. fol. 363. H. 1 Pet. 5.8. Mat. 13.39. Ambros. de Paradiso. c. 12. that the professed enemie of mankinde, of God, of goodnesse: the fountaine of all sinne, and wickednesse: the very sincke, and center of all vncleannesse, should be the Author, Propagator, or Con∣triuer of any reall good: of any thing that furthers the happinesse, or well-fare of the sonnes of men? Was it euer knowne since the world was framed; that this one∣ly Author of all euill, was the cause of any good? of any inuention that might benefit the Bodies, or Soules of men, or further their Temporall, or Eternall well-fare? Oh no: the experience of all ages, all men, all Christians prooues it: For though the Deuill may sometimes com∣mend some seeming good vnto vs: yet Virgil. Eclog. 3. pag. 9. latet anguis in herba: there is alwayes poyson, in his best, and sweetest
Potions: there is a Soule-intangling snare, in all his in∣uentions: a dangerous, and ineuitable hooke in all his baites: all his workes, contriuances, and delights,Immundi spiritus inn meris contra¦nos fraudibus accint, m suadere nobis iniqua neque∣unt, ea sub virtutum spe cie nostris ob∣tutibus expo∣nunt. Greg. Mag. Moral. lib. 39. cap. 28. what euer glittering out-side, or Honie tasts, they seeme to haue; are but so many Diabolus blanditur, vt fallat; ari∣det, vt noceat: illicit, vt occidat. Cypr. De Hab. Virginum. Diabolus non diligit flios suos, sed odit, quia non amat nisi vt perdat. Ambrose. Sermo. 44. trapps, and poysons, to captiuate, and in∣danger Soules: they are all abominable, and pernicious, like himselfe: and so are Stage-Playes too, as well as others: O then let this conuince them to bee vnlawfull, vnseemely, and pernicious vanities: (as the fore-quoted Fathers, and Authors in the Minor haue deemed them for this very reason;) and now at last perswade all Chri∣stians, all Pagans, (vnlesse they will sweare homage to the Deuill, and renounce the seruice, and protection of the Liuing, onely God;) for euer to abominate them, as the very product of Satan, and the broode of Hell. SCAENA SECVNDA. Argument 2. Stage-Playes were inuen∣ted, and pra∣ctised by In∣fidels, and Pa∣gans, who were the De∣uills instru∣ments: there∣foe they must needes bee sinfull, and abominable.BVt admit, that the Deuill himselfe were not the im∣mediate forger, and parent of these Theatricall En∣terludes, which no man can disprooue by any Orthodox recordes: yet this must needes be granted: that Idola∣trous Infidels, and the deboisest Pagans, were the first Actors, and Contriers of them, and that by the Pagan ista docente Di∣abolo adinuenerunt. Concil. Arltense. 3. Surius Conil. Tom. 3. pag. 727. Af∣fltu Diaoli tradunt ista quae mortem afferunt, idem euertunt, &c. Clemens Rom. Consit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 65. very Instinct, and Tutorship of the Deuill, whose instruments they were: and this alone doeth brand them for euill, and
vnlawfull pleasures, which Christians may not practise; as this second Argument will cleerely euidence. That which had its rise, its pedigree, and being from Idolatrous Infidels; and the Deboisest Pagans, (who were the Deuils agents in this seruice:) must needes bee sinfull, vnlawfull, vnseemely, and per∣nicious; at least wise vnto Christians. But Stage-Playes, if wee take them in their very best conception, had their rise, their pedigree, and being, from Idolatrous Infidels, and the Debois∣est Pagans, who were the Deuils Factors in this seruice. Therefore they must needes be sinfull, vnlawfull, and pernicious; at least wise vnto Christians. For the Maior, I shall clearely euidence it, by Authen∣tique Recordes; which though they somewhat vary in the particular persons, yet they all concurre in this: that Pagans, and Infidels, were the first contriuers of these Stage-Playes. Dipnos. l. 2. cap. 1. Horace de Arte Poe∣tica. l. Polyd. Virgil de In∣uent. Rerum. lib 1. cap. 10. Alex. Sardis. de Rerum In∣uentor. lib. 1. p. 41, 42. Thea∣trum Vitae hu∣manae. lib. 1. pag 75, 76. Ouid. Fasto∣rum. l. 3. c. 57. Lud. Viues Comment in Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 2. cap. . Athenaeus, with others, informes vs: that the Athenians were the primary composers of Comi∣call Enterludes, in imitation of those drunken Husband-men, who Sacrificed, and made Playes to Bacchus, the God of their Vineyards: De Homero. lib See Dio∣nys. Hallicar∣nas. Antiq. Romanorum. lib. 7. cap. 9. Plutarch relates, that Comedies, and Tragoedies, tooke their Originall from Homer: Stromatum. lib 1, fol 64. Clemens Alexan∣drinus records: that one Thespis: Instit. Orat. lib. 1. cap. 1. Quintilian, that AEschylus, was the first who brought Tragoedies to light. Who euer he was, that first inuented these Playes among the Graecians; yet all concurre, that the Romans (who as it seemes, Dionys. Hallicarnas. Antiq. Rom. lib. 7. cap. 9. Ludou. Viues Comment. in August. De Ciu. Dei l. 2. c. 8. Accordingly. deriued them from the Greekes,) did first imbrace them vpon this occasion. Liuie. Hist. lib. 7. Sect. 2. Plut Quest. Rom. lib. Quest. 107. Tertul. de Spectac. cap. 3. to 8. Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap. 4 Sect. 4. Macrobius Saturn. lib. 3. cap. 14 Bemus de Mr. Gentium. lib. 3. cap. 8. August. de Ciui Dei. lib. 2. cap. 8. & Ludou. Viues Ib. Orosius. Hist. lib. . cap. 4. Cael. Rhod. Antiq. Lect l. 8. c. 7. Polyd. Virgil. de Re. Inuent. lib 3. cap. 13. Alexander, Sardis, de Rerum, Inuent. lib. 1. Godwins Roman Antiquities. lib. 2. Sect. 3. cap 11. Alex. ab Alexand. Gen. Dierum. lib. 6. cap. 19. When as there was
a great Plague in Rome, which could not be aswaged by any Diuine, or humane helpes, the Romanes to appease the wrath of their enraged Deuill-gods, sent into Tuscanie for Stage-Players: among whom, one Hister, being more eminent, and expert then the rest, as most: or the AEtrurian word Hister, which signifieth a Play, as others: gaue the name of Histrio, which denominates an Actor, or Player, to all succeeding Stage-Players: How Stage-Playes, which were more rude, and plaine at first, came to be more refined, and in∣larged afterwards, I shall referre you, to these marginall Liuie Hist. Rom. lib. 7. Sect. 2. Alex. Sardis de re∣rum Inuent. lib. 1. pag. 41. to 46. Horat. de Art Poe∣tica. lib. God∣wins Roman Antiq. lib. 2. Sect. 3 c. 13.14. Authors, which will at large informe you: onely this I shall say in briefe; that both the inception, and grouth of Stage-Playes, by the consent of all Recordes, was from Idolatrous Infidels, and voluptuous Pagans, whose wayes, and workes, we Christians must not follow. For the Maior, I willingly acknowledge; that Tota pars humanarum institutionum quae ad vsum vitae necessari∣um proficiunt, nequaquam est fugienda Chri∣stiano, immo quantum satis est intuenda, memorique retinenda. Omnes verò artes huius∣modi vel nu∣gatoriae. vel noxiae supersti¦tionis, ex qua∣dam pestifera societate ho∣minum & da∣monum, quasi pacta infidelis & dolosae ami∣citiae consti∣tae, penitus sunt repudi∣andae Christi∣ano. August. De Doctr. Christiana. l. 2. cap. 23, 24, 25, 26. Tertul. de Corona Militis. cap. 6.7. Gossons Con∣futation of Playes. Act. 1. accordingly. those inuentions of Infidels, and Pagans, which may further Gods glory, or the good of men: as Musicke, Poetrie, Husbandry, Nauigation, Architecture, Letters, Writing, and the like: are lawfull vnto Christians; because they issue from those common gifts, which God himselfe implanted in them: but as for all their noxious, improfitable, and vaine productions, which dishonour God; which preiudice mens Soules, and were destinated at first to sinfull endes, (which is the case of Stage-Playes:) these Christians must auoyde: if for no other reason, yet for this one alone: that the Heathen Gentiles were the Authors, fomentors, and frequenters of them. Hence God himselfe doeth charge the Israe∣lites: Leuit. 18.30. Deut. 12.29, 30. That when they were possessed of the Land of Ca∣naan, they should beware, that they committed not any of those abominable customes, which were committed before them, by the Cananites: that they should not defile themselues therein, but take heede, lest they were taken in a snare after them, lest they should aske after their Gods, saying: how did those Na∣tions serue their Gods, that I might doe so likewise: Hence
Christ himselfe enioynes all Christians, Mat. 6.7, 8.31.32. not to vse vaine repetitions when they pray, as the Heathen doe, who thinke to be heard, for their much babling: be ye not therefore (saith hee) like vnto them: Not to take thought, what wee shall eate, or what we shall drinke, or wherewith we shall bee cloathed: and what is his reason? For after all these things doe the Gentiles seeke: Hence Saint Paul doeth exhort the Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 4.4. to possesse their vessels in holinesse, and honour; not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles doe: Hence Saint Peter informes vs: 1 Pet. 4.3. that the time past of our liues, may suffice vs to haue wrought the will of the Gen∣tiles: Hence Saint Paul exhorts the Ephesians, Ephes. 4.17, 18, 19. cap. 2.3. that they should not hencefoorth, walke as other Gentiles in the vanities of their mindes, in Lasciuiousnesse, and all Vncleane∣nesse: Hence the Prophet Ieremie, speakes thus vnto the house of Israel: Ier. 10.1, 2, 3 Thus saith the Lord, learne not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the signes of Heauen, marke his reason: for the Heathen are dismayed, at them. Hence God himselfe, doeth 2 Kings 17.15.  Chro. 33.2. Chap. 36 14 Psal. 106.35. Ezech. 11.12 Chp 20.32. Cha 3.30. Chap. 25.8. oft times in the Scriptures, reprooue, and blame the Israelites, Manasseh, and others, and likewise threaten Iudgements against them, for going after the Heathen, that were round about them: for running after their vanities, customes, fashions, and abominations, concrning whom the Lord had said, that they should not doe like them, nor learne their workes: Hence is it, 1 Sam. 8.5, 6, 7.20. Chap. 12.17, 18, 19. that God reputed the desire of a King, which in it selfe is lawfull, a hainous sinne in the Israelites, because it issued from an apish imitation of other people: that they also in this respect, might be like all other Nations: and hence, Zeph. 1.8. Isay 3.17. to 2. did hee threaten to visit, not onely the inferiour ranke of the Israelites; but euen the Children, and Courteours of their Kings, for wearing strange Apparell, and taking vp the garbes, and fashions, of those Pagans which bordered round about them. If then it bee vnlawfull to imitate, not onely the abominati∣ons, rites, and ceremonies: but euen the prayers, cares and feare: the gouernment, and strange Apparell, of In∣fidels, and Pagans, as all these Scriptures strongly eui∣dence:
much more must it bee vile, and sinfull, to trace their foote-steps, in practising, approouing, and frequen∣ting, their Histrionicall Stage-inuentions, which haue no good, nor profit in them. How chary, and fearefull the Saints of God in former ages were, of admitting the Festiuities, Customes, Ceremonies, Reliques, or In∣uentions of Idolatrous Pagans; how ready they were to disauow them; may appeare by sundry instances, that are Parallell with Stage-Playes. De Corona Militis. lib. cap. 6, 7, 8. Tertullian, condmnes the wearing of a Laurell Crowne, or flowrie Garland by way of Triumph, in a Christian Souldir; because those Crownes, and Garlands, were first inuented by the Deuill, and See Demost. Oratio De Corona. Oratio aduersus Midi∣am. Virgil. Copa p 510. worne by his Minions, to his honour. Surius. Tom 1. Con. p 577. The Councell of Africk, Canon 27. Prohibits Christians to make Feasts, or Morrice∣daunces, on the Birth-dayes of Martyres, because such Fea∣sting, and Dauncing, Qu ab er∣rore Gentilium attracta sunt. had their Originall from Gentilis∣me. Surius. Tom 1. pag. 299. The Councell of Ancyra, or Engury, Canon 21. exposeth all Christians to fiue yeeres penance, who shall obserue any Prophesies, Dreames, Diuinations, or Fortune-tellers, after the customes of the Gentiles, or should entertaine such Diuiners, or South-syers in their houses. Surius. Tom. 2. p. 647.715. The second Councell of Towers, Canon 23. The Councell of Antisyodo∣rum, Canon 1. Saint Augustine, De Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersationis. Tract. Tom. 9. pag. 1448. Tom. 5. pag. 8. B. Saint Am∣brose, Oration. 11. Gratian, Causa. 26. Qust. 7. condemne the obseruation of Newyeeres-day, and the sending of New-yeeres-gifts, as a sinne, threatning Excommunication, both from the Church, and Sacraments, to such who should obsrue it: because they were but the Reliques, and Obseruations of Pagans, See Ouid. Fastorum. l. 1. Caelis. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. lib. 23. cap. 11. Polyd. Virgil. De Inuent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 4. Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. cap. 9. Alx. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 8. who Consrated this day, to the honour of Ianus their Deuill-God, and sent reciprocall Newyeeres-gifts to their friends vpon it. Surius. Tom. 2. pag. 748. B. The first Councell of Braga, Ca∣non 29. Prohibits all such, who are ordained Readers in the Church, to sing in a Secular habit, or to giue ouer their degree, after the manner of the Gentiles: Surius. Tom 3. pag. 40. B. Gratian Cau. 26. Quaest. 5. & 7. The French Synod vnder Pope Zacharie, in the yeere 742. enioyned all Bishops, to giue all diligence to inhibit, and keepe backe Chri∣stians,
from all the Reliques of Paganisme, and Gntilisme: as Pageants, Southsayings, Diuinations, Lot-fortunes, Sacri∣fices to Saints, and Martyres, neere to Churches, after a Pagan manner; Sacrilgious fires, called Ndfire, or Bone∣fires, with all other Heathenish Obseruations, and Ceremo∣nies; because they are vnbeseeming Christians. Suius. Tom 2. pag. 757. B. Gratian Cau. 26. Quaest. 5. & 7. The Ca∣nons of the Greekes Synods, collected by Martin, Bishop of Braga, Can. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. Prohibit the entertainement of Southsayers, Fortune-tellers, and Diuiners, into Christians houses, after the custome of the Pagans, ither to expell some euill out of them, or to purge them by some Pagan Spelles, vnder fiue yeeres pennance. Yea, they say expressely: that it is vnlawfull for Christians, to retaine the traditions of the Gentiles, in See Ier. 10.1, 2, 3 Gratian. Causa. 26. Quaest. 5. Aug. De Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersat. Tract. Tom. 9. pag. 1447, 1448. Accordingly. obseruing the course of the Elements, Moon, or Starres, or the vaine fallacies of Signes; in building Houses, in sowing Corne, in planting Trees, or solemnizing Marriages: that it is vnlawfull to obsere Calends, or to ad∣dict themselues to Heathenish Feastiualls, and Delights; or to decke vp their Houses with Laurell, Hedera est gratissima. Baccho. Ouid. Fastorum. lib. 3. pag 7. Yuie, and greene boughes, (as we vse to doe in the Christmas season:) be∣cause all this obseruation is descended of Paganisme: and that Christians ay not obserue, or vse any Spelles, or Ceremonies, in gathering medicinall Hearbes, or in their lanifices; because the Heathens did obserue them. Surius Tom. 1. pag 513. B. Carranza. fol. 70. The fourth Councell of Carthage, Canon 16. together with Saint Hierom, Epist. 22. cap. 13. Prohibit Christian Bishops, to read the Bookes of the Gentiles. Surius. Tom 1. pag. 457.294, 295. The Councell of Laodicea, Canon 37.39. The Councell of Ancyra, Canon 5, 6, 7. Saint Ambrose Orat. 3. Tertullian De Spectaculis. lib. with sundry others informe vs: that it is a great sinne to obserue the Feastiualls, or Solemnities of Pagans; to be present with them at thir Feasts; to retaine their Feastiuall-gifts; or to communicate with them in their Ceremonies, which are not of God: whence they prohibit Christians from them, vnder paine of Excom∣munication, and two yeeres Penance. Surius. Tom 2. pag. 1053. A. 149. B. 1050. Se August. De Rect. Ca∣thol. Conuers. Tract. Tom. 9. part. 1. p. 1447, 1448. The sixt Councell of Constantinople, Canon 96. Excommunicates all such as
shall sweare the Oathes of the Gentiles: Yea, the same ge∣nerall Councell, Canon 62. disanulles, and condemnes the ob∣seruation of the See Alex. ab Alexandro. Genial. Die∣rum. lib. 3. cap 8. AElij. Lampridij. Seuerus pag 23 1. Ouid. Fastorum. lib. 1.2, 3.5. How the Pagans obser∣ued them. Calends, and Winter votes: all meetings, on the first of March; all publike Dauncing of Women: all Mummings, Dauncings, Sportes, and Ceremonies, which might prouoke Laughter, vnder the name of Bacchus, or any other, which was falsely named a God among the Graecians: inflicting Excommunication, and Deposition on those that shuld from thence obserue them, because they were the Im∣postures of Satan, and the Sportes, and Vanities of the Hea∣then: Yea, Canon 65. It prohibits the making of See August. De Rectitud. Cathol. Con∣uersat. Tract. Tom. 9. part. 1. pag. 1448. Accordingly. Bone∣fires on New-moones, before the Houses, or Shops of Christi∣ans; together with all skipping, iesting, and fooling about them, after the Ancient custome, vnder the foresaid penaltie; as being a Pagan practise, condemned in Manasseh: in the 2 Chro. 33.2.5, 6. And Can. 70. it informes vs: that Chri∣stians who are taught the Lawes of God, ought not to vse the manners, Tumblings, Playes, and Vestments of the Graecian Infidels. De Ebre∣tate & Luxu. Sermo. Saint Basil, and De Tem∣pore. Sermo. 132. See my Healthes Sickenesse. Argument. 14. Saint Augustine, con∣demne the Drinking, and Pledging of Healthes, from this very ground; that they were the inuention of the Deuill, and the obseruations, or reliques of Infidels, and Pagans: Cle∣mens Romanus, Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 66. Surius. Tom. 3. pg. 727. Gratian. Cau, 27. Quaest 1. The third Councell of Arles: The third Councell of Toledo, Canon 23. Nazienzen. Oratio. 48. p. 796, 797. Cyrillus. Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1. with sundry other Councells, and Fa∣thers, which I might enumerate, prohibit, and condemne all lasciuious Dauncing, all scurrilous Songs, and Iests, with sundry other Sportes and Merments, because they were the Recreations, Ceremonies, and Inuentions of Heathen men. The Councell of Eleberi, Canon 34.37. The second Councell of Arles, Canon 23. Tertullian in his Apologie against the Gentiles: and his Booke against Idolatrie. Lactantius De vero Culta. lib. 6. cap. 2. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus. Catech. Mystagogica 1. together with Ormerod in his Pagano-Pa∣pismus. Semblance 37.123, 124, 125. Condemne the bur∣ning
of Tapers in Church-yardes, or Churches, See Nazi∣enzn. Oratio. 48. pag. 796. Hierom. ad∣uers. Vigilan∣tium cap. 23. Nazienzen Oratio in Pascha. Rhe∣nanus in Ter∣ul Apolog. August. De Tempore. Srmo. 3. Ar∣tiles of Ire∣land. Art. 52. Queene Elia∣beth Iniunctions. Iniunct. 23 Doctr Reinolds Con∣rence with Hart ap. . Diuision 4. pag. 512, 513.492 494, 495. Homely against the perill of Idolatrie 3. part. pag. 75. Polyd. Virgil. De Inuent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 23. lib. 6. cap. 12. especially in the day-time, as the Papists doe) vpon the selfe-same reason: euen because the Pagans practised it: as i euident by Baruch 6.19. by Plinie. Nat. Hist. lib. 16. cap. 37. Suetonij Clig. cap. 13. Virgil. AEneid. lib. 11. p. 353. Copa. p. 510. & Tatianus Oratio aduers. Graecos. And yet the Papists are not ashamed for to vse them: Saint Hierome, and Theo∣doret, in their Commentaries, and Interpretations on Ezech. 44.20. which inioyne the Priests, not to shaue their heads, but onely to poll them; make the ground of this Iniunction, the practise of the Idolatrous Priests of Isis, and Serapis, Baruch 6.31. Apuleius Aurei. Asini. lib. 11. AElij Lamprid. Commodus pag. 8. AElij Spariani. Pscennius. pag. 137. Herodoti. Euterpe. Sect 45. pag. 102. Diodorus. Siculus. Bibl. Hist. Sect. 83, 84. Bomus De Moribus Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5. p. 34. Pluarch. De Iside & Osiride. lib. Mr. Tom. 2. pag. 131. Alex. ab Alex. Gen. Dierum. lib. 6 cap. 12. fol. 349. Polyd. Virgil De Inuent. Rerum. lib. 4. c. 8. Ormerod Pagan papismus Sem∣blance 99. Ainswort, on Luit. 19.27. and 21.5. Munster. Cosmog. lib. 3. cap. 38. pag. 1311. Accordingly. who did vse to shaue their crowne, and beards, and make bald their heads. Yet notwithstanding, this expresse command of God himselfe, which is likewise seconded by Luit. 19.27. and 21.5. Gotardus Histor. Indiae pag. 307. Guagninus Reum Polon. pag. 305. Erasmus Moriae Encomium. pag. 301. Polyd. Virgil. De Inuent. Rerm. lib. 4. cap. 8. All Popish Priests, and Friers, doe shaue their heads, and beards, in imitation of these, and other Idolatrous Busbequius. Epist. Eccles. Ep. 4. pag. 277. Bomus De Mor. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 6. pag. 3. Zenophon, Histor Graecae. lib. 1. pag. 449. Acosta. Indian. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 16. pag. 373. Orosius, Histor. lib. 4. cap 20. pag. 225. Guagninus, Rerum Polon. Tom. 3. pag. 444. Lerius, De Nauigat. in Brasil. cap. 8. Priests, and Nations; yea, they doe Concil Toletanum. 4. Canon. 40. Aquisgranense Concil. Sub. Lud. Pio. cap. 1. Concil Rom. Sub. Greg. 2. Can. 17. Lateran. Sub. Innocent. 3 part. 28. ca. 4 Agathense Can 20. Capit Graecar. Synod. Can. 66. Lateranense. Sub. Leone. 10. Sess. 9. Su Tom 4 pag. 633.6. Gratian. Distinc. 33. in∣ioyne this Tosure to them by sundry Councells, and Decrees: for which not onely BB. Babbingtons Notes on Leuit. 19. Sect. 14. D. Reinolds Conference with Hart. cap. 4. Diuis. 8. pag. 494, 495. Willts Synop. p. 353, 354. Ormerod. Pagano-Papis. Sembla 99. Ainsw. Cau Lauatr and most other Protestant Commentators on Leuit 19.27. cap. 2.5. & Eeze. 44.20. Protestants, but euen their owne
Iohn Vale∣rian. De Sa∣cerdotum Bar∣bis lib. Eas¦mus Moriae Encomium. pag. 301. Pold Virgil. De Inunt re∣rum lib. 4. cap. 8. Agrippa. De Van. Sci¦ent. cap. 62. Popish writers doe condemne them, as Heathenish, and absurd; Pope Anicetus was the first that made this innoua∣tion: as Gratian. Distinctio. 33. Polyd. Virgil. De Inuent. Rerum. lib. 4. cap. 8. and Lorinus on Leuit. 19.27. record: contrary to the expresse Word of God; and the fourth Councell of Carthage. Canon 44. which inioyneth Clerkes, or Clergie-men: neither to let thir haire grow long, nor yet to shaue their beards: which their Binius, Surius, Carranza, and Crabb, haue miserably corrupted: as Iohn Valerian in his Booke, De Sacerdotum barbis, witnesseth: rendring it in this manner. Clerici nec comam nutriant, nec barbam; shauing away this word radant, from the latter clause, as a superfluous excrement; because it expressely con∣demnes their See Clem. Alexa. Paedag. lib. 3. cap 3. & 11. Clem. Romanus Constit. Apost lib. 1. cap. 4. Lorinus Com. in Leuit. 19.27. who vtter∣ly condemne the shauing of mens beards Effeminate, Vnnaturall, Heathenish, and Popish shauing. If then these seuerall Fathers, and Councells haue vtterly condemned, these Morrice-daunces, Bone∣fires, Newyeeres-gifts, Newyeeres-dayes, Diuinations, Lot∣teries, Mummings, Dancings, Healthes, Tapers, See Concil. Eliberinum. Can 55. Shauen-crownd, and bare-chind Priests, together with all the other fore-recited Ceremonies, Customes, and Obseruations, (which are now too frequent among Christians,) as sin∣full and abominable, because they were in vse among the Gentiles, and had their rise, and birth from Pagans: then certainely, by the same analogie of reason; wee must needes reiect, and censure Stage-Playes, as pernicious, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians, because they had their birth, their authoritie, vse, and progresse from Idolatrous Heathens, and the deboisest Pagans. Vpon this very ground, among sundry others: Tertullian, and Cyprian, in their Bookes De Spectaculis. Clemens Roma∣nus Constit. Apost. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. Clemens Alexandri∣nus Oratio. Adhort. ad Gentes. fol. 8.9. Tatianus Oratio. ad∣uersus Grcos. Bibliotheca Patrum. Coloniae Agrip. 1616. Tom. 2. p. 180, 181. Athengoras, pro Christianis Legatio. Ib. pag. 138, 139. Theophilus Antiochenus Contr. Autolichum. lib. 3. Ib. pag. 170. Arnobius Disput. aduersus Gentes. lib. 7. pag. 230. to 242. Lactantius De vero Cultu. cap. 20. Diui∣narum
Instit. Epit. cap. 6. Cyrillus Hierusol. Catech. My∣stag. 1. Fol. 175. B. Minutius Foelix Octauius. pag. 34.101.123. Hierom. Epist. 18. cap. 1. Com. in Ezech. lib. 6. cap. 20. Tom. 4. pag. 389. H. Chrysostome, Hom. 6, 7. & 38. on Mat. Ambrose, Sermo. 11. & 81. Augustine De Ciu. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31, 32, 33. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 15. De Rectitu∣dine Cathol. Conuersationis Tractatus. De Doctrina Chri∣stiana. lib. 2. cap. 25. Saluian. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6. Ioannis Salisburiensis. De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 7, 8. Concil. Constantinop. 6. Can. 62. The Councell of Africke. Canon 26, 27. D. Rinolds, Gosson, and Northbroke, in their Bookes gainst Stage-Playes; together with sundry other Coun∣cells, and Authors, which I shall muster vp hereafter; condemne these Stage-Playes, as vnlawfull, and misbeseming Christians; euen because they were the Inuentions, Sportes, and Ceremonies of Gentiles, which Christians must not enter∣taine. Now there is in trueth great reason, why Christians should not imitate, nor imbrace the Pleasures, Sportes, and ceremonies of the Heathen, though many Libertines, and Non minu deecti qua elti animi est, voluntate vti, negligere rationem: & veluti ratio∣nis expertem, non pro ratione, sed pr libitu agere; nec iudicio vti, sed appetit. Bernard. De Consid. lib. 3. cap 4. Licentious Christians, who make their will, and lusts their law, may deeme it Puritanisme, or brand it for ouer∣strict precisenesse, in this dissolute, and vnruly age. For first, the Scriptures doe positiuely informe vs;  2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 10.21. that Righteousnesse hath no fellowship with Vnrighteous∣nesse; nor Light with Darkenesse: that Christ hath no co∣cord with Belial; that he that beleeueth, hath no part, nor portion with an Infidell: that the Temple of God hath no agreement wih Idles: and that we cannot drinke the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Deils, nor be partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of Deuils. If then Christ, if Christi∣ans, and Infidels haue no communion; great reason is it, Quis agis? Deum in te∣ipso gestas; & ad illos cur∣ris quibus cum Deo nihil com∣mune est? Haec cine veni digna unt? Chrysost. Hom. 13. in 2 Cor. 6. that they should not intercommon in these Heathenish Spectacles, and delights of sinne. Secondly, all Christians haue vowed in their Baptis∣me: to forsake the Deuill and all his workes, the Pompes, and Vanitis of this wicked world, and all the sinfull lustes of the  flesh: and haue they any reason then, to harbour, or re∣taine
the Ceremonies of Worldlings, or Enterludes of Pagans, which they haue thus seriously renounced? Thirdly, all true and reall Christians, are Redeemed by the red, and precious blood of Iesus Christ, from Col. 2.20, 21, 22. the or∣dinances, rudiments, and customes of the world: 1 Pet. 1.18. from their vaine conuersation receiued by tradition from their Fa∣thers: Ru. 14.3, 4. they are purchased from off the earth, and from a∣mong the sonnes of men: Iohn 15 19. Cap. 17 14. they are ransomed, and taken out of this World, and made mn of another world, that so Phil 3.20. they might haue their whole conuersation with God in Heauen; 1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Pt. 3.1. Luke 1.74, 75. and walke on in all holy conuersation, and godli∣nesse, seruing God in holinesse, and true Righteousnesse, all the dayes of their liues: Christ Iesus himselfe hath bought them at the dearest rate for this very end, Rom. 14.8. Cap. 12.2. Gal 2.1, 20. 1 Pet. 4.2. 2 Cor. 5.15. that they should no longer liue to the world, or to the will, and lusts of men, but vnto him alone: Ephe. 5.8.11 that they should cast off the workes of Darkenesse, and put on the armor of Light: Ephes. 4.17, 18, 19. Cap. 2.2.3. that they should not hencefoorth walke as other Gentiles, in the vanitie of their mindes, following the desires of the flesh, and of the minde, giuing themselues ouer to Lasciuiousnesse, and vncleannesse: 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. that the time past of their liues might suffice them to haue wrought the will of the Gentiles, when as they walked in Lasciuiousnesse, Lusts, Reuellings, Banquetings, and abominable idolatries: Tit. 2.12, 13, 14. that they should now denie vn∣godlinesse, and worldly lusts, and walke soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed com∣ming, and appearance of their Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ: Ephes. 2.2, 3. that they should not hencefoorth walke according to the course of this world, according to the power of the Prince of the ayre, which now worketh in the children of disobedience: Iam. 1.27. Actes 2.40. but that they should be pure, and vndefiled before God, keeping themselues vnspotted from the World: Since there∣fore Ieus Christ hah thus Redeemed all Christians from the World, and all is Pagan customes, pleasures, ceremonies, and delights of sinne, Ephes. 1.4. Col. 2 22. that so they might be holy, and blamelesse before him in loue, Titus 2.14.  Pet. 2.9. and become a peculiar people to him, Zealous of good workes: great rea∣son
is there, that they should abominate all Pagan pra∣ctises, Enterludes, and Ceremonies, as vnlawfull, and misbeseeming Christians: else they should but euacuate, and make voyde vnto themselues the death of Christ: Hbr. 10.29. yea trample vnder feete his precious blood, and put him vnto open shame: And would any Christian be so ingrate∣full, so dispitefull to his blessed Sauiour, (whose Clamat cla∣uus, clamat vulnus quid vere Dus sit in Christo mudum re∣cocilians sibi: Patent visce∣ra misericor∣diae, patet ar∣canum cordis per foramin corporis. Quid tam ad mor∣tem quod non Christi morte saluetur? Bernard. Super. Cant. Srm. 61. blee∣ding wounds doe preach Saluation to his fiercest enemies,) as thus to wrong, and shame him? Fourthly, mans nature is exceeding prone to Paganis∣me, and Heathenish superstition; as is euident, not one∣ly by the frequent Apostasies of the Israelites to grosse Ido∣latrie, recorded Se 2 Chro. 33 2. to 10.4. Ezech. 8.6. to 18. Psal. 106.33. to 40. Iere. 7.17, 8.31. Ezech 16.15. to 36. or all the rest. in the Scriptures; but likewise by that generall deluge of Heathenisme, Mahometisme, and hi∣deous Idolatrie, which now, and alwayes heretofore, hath ouerspred the greatest part of all the world: God See Hirom, and Theodo∣res Com. in Ezech. 44.5. Ambos. Serm. 11. Lorinus, BB. Babing∣ton, Caluin and Ains∣worth on Leuit. 19.27. Willets Sy∣nopsis Papismi. pag. 354, 355. Who giue this reason. therefore out of his Fatherly care, and compassin o his Children, to anticipate all occasions, which might withdraw them from him, to Idolatrie; doeth oft times prohibit them, to imitate the Fashions, Customes, Vanities, Habites, Rites, or Ceremonies of Infidels, and Heathen Gentiles; for feare lest one thing should draw on another by degrees, till they were quite Apstatized to Idolatrie, and seduced from the Faith. Whereupon, Ludos diabolicos, ve vacillationes, vel cantic gentilium fieri vette: nullus Christianus hoc exerceat, quia per hoc Paganus efficitur. De Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersationis. Tract. Tom. 9. pag. 1447, 1448. Saint Augustine exhrts all Christians, to prohibit the vse of all diabolicall Enterludes, Vacillations, and songs of the Gentiles: and that no Christian should ex∣ercise any of these, because by this he is made a Pagan. Since therefore the imitation of Pagan customes, pleasures, and delights, are but so many ingredients, and See Leuit. 18.30. Deut. 12.29, 30. allectiues to Paganisme, and grosse Idolatrie; and since they alienate, or at least in some degree, disioyne our affections from God, and heauenly things; there is ground, and cause enough, that Christians should reiect them, as sinfull, and perni∣cious.
So that vpon all these authorities, and reasons, (the force of which no pious heart is euer able to with∣stand:) I may safely conclude this second Scaene, with this short Corollary: That Stage-Playes are sinfull, vn∣seemely, pernicious, and vnlawfull, at least wise vnto Christians; because they were the inuentions, ceremo∣nies, and pastimes of Idolatrous Infidels, and the most Licentious Heathens, (who were no other but the Ipsi scilicet sibi procura∣uerunt Dae∣mones, per os in quibus esurierant an∣equam procu∣rauerunt. Ter∣tul. De Coron. Militis. cap. 6. Deuils Purueyers,) whom Christians must not imitate. ACTVS SECVNDVS. Argument 3. Stage-Playes were at first inuented, and destinated to Idolatrous, and sinfull ends there∣fore they must needes be sin∣full, and vn∣lawfull.SEcondly, as Stage-Playes are thus sinfull, vnseemely, pernicious, and vnlawfull vnto Christians, in regard of their originall, and primitiue Inuentors: so likewise are they such in respect of those Idolatrous, vnwarran∣table, and Vnchristian ends, to which they were desti∣nated, and designed at the first. The chiefe and primarie end of inuenting, instituting, or personating Stage-Playes; was the Dubium non est quod laedunt Deum vtpote Idolis consecra∣tae. Colitur namque & honoratur Minerua in gymnasiis, Ve∣nus in Thea∣tris, Neptunus in Circis, Mars in arenis, Mercurius in palestris, & ideo pro qualitate auctorum, cultus est superstitio∣num. Alibi est impudicitia, alibi lasciuia, alibi intemperantia, alibi isania; vbique dmon: imo per singula ludicrorum loca vniuersa daemonum monstra, Praesident enim sedibus suo cultu dedicatis. Salu. De. Gub. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 206. superstitious worship, or at least wise, the pacification, or at∣tonement, of Iupiter, Bacchus, Neptune, the Muses, Flora, Apollo, Diana, Venus, Victoria, or some such Deuill-gods, or Goddesses, which the Idolatrous Pagans did adore; to whose honour, names, and memories, these Playes (which were alwayes Acted, and celebrated heretofore, as the insu∣ing Authours testifie, on those Festiuall, and Solemne dayes, which were dedicated to the speciall seruice, and commemoration of these Idoles:) were at first deuoted. That Stage-Playes, (yea, and Theaters, or Play-houses too,) were primarily inuented for the honour, and Dedicated to the seruice (or at least-wise oft times Celebrated in times
of Pestilence, to appease the anger,) of these Idole-Gods, whose Images, and Pictures, were carried about, and repre∣sented in them: wee haue the expresse authorities, not onely of Plutarch, in the life O Romulus, and Romanae Quaest. Quaest. 107. of Dionysius Hallicarnasseus Antiq. Ro∣man. lib. 2. cap. 3.5. & lib. 7. cap. 9. Of Valerius Maxi∣mus. lib. 2. cap. 4. Of Thucidides. Hist. lib. 3. Of Liuie. Rom. Hist. lib. 2. Sect. 36. l. 1. Sect. 9.20. l. 7. Sect. 2.3. l. 26. Sect. 23. lib. 5. Sect. 1. lib. 42. Sect. 20. Of Demosthenes Orat. ad∣uersus Midim. Of Horace De Arte Poetica. lib. Of Athe∣naeus Dipnos. lib. 2. cap. 1. Diodorus Siculus. Histor. lib. 17. Sect. 16. with sundry Rusticus ad ludos populus ventebat in vrbem: Sed dis, non studi∣is ille dabatur onos: Luce sua ludos vuae Commentor haebat: Quos cum taedifera nunc habet ille Da Quid. Pastorum. l. 3. pag. 57. other Pagan Authors: but like∣wise of Tatianus. Oratio. aduersus Graecos. Of Theophilus Antiochens aduers. Autolicum. lib. 3. Of Clemens Alex∣andrinus. Oratio. Exhort. ad Gentes. fol. 8, 9. Of Tertullian. De Spectaculis. cap. 5, 6, 7. Of Cyprian. De Spectaculis. lib. Of Arnobis aduersus Gentes. lib. 7. Of Lactantius Diui∣narum. Instit. Epit. cap. 6. & De vero Cultu. cap. 20. Of Saint Chrysostome. Hom. 38. in Mat. & Hom. 3. De Dauide & Saul. Of Saint Hierom. Comment. in Ezech. lib. 6. cap. 20. Epist. 9. cap. 5. & 10. cap. 4. & 13. cap. 2. & 23. cap. 1. Of Saint Augustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32, 33. lib. 2. cap. 6.8.10, 11. lib. 4. cap. 1. Of Theodoret. Contr. Graecos Infideles. lib. 7. Of Saluian. lib. 6. De Gub. Dei. Of Oro∣sius. lib. 3. Historiae. cap. 4. Of Isiodor. Hisp. Etymolog. lib. 18. cap. 27. Of Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1. cap. vel. Epist. 27.30. lib. 3. cap. 51. lib. 7. cap. 10. with other Fathers: Of Iohn Mariana, Master Northbrooke: Doctor Reinolds, and Master Gosson, in their Bookes against Stage-Playes: Of Ludouicus Viues. Comment. in lib. 1. & 2. August. De Ciu. Dei. Of Alexander, ab Alexandro. Gen. Dierum. lib. 5. cap. 26. Of Polydor Virgil. De Inuentor. Rerum. lib. 1. cap. 10. Of Coelius Rhodiginus. Antiq. Lect. lib. 8. cap. 7. Of Alexander Sardi. De Inuent. Rerum. lib. 1. Of Master Godwins Roman Antiquities. lib. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 1. to 12. with many other Moderne writers; who all giue punctu∣all, vnanimous, and vncontrouleable testimonie: That
Stage-Playes were at first inuented, and celebrated to the ho∣nour: and for many hundred yeeres together appropriated to the solemne worship, and seruice of these Idole-Gods; who oft times called for them to attone their anger, diuert their iudgements, demerit their protection, or reward their fauours. The originall end, and primary vse of Stage-Playes then, was odious, and Idolatrous, as all these Authours testi∣fie: Therefore these Playes themselues, (as the recited Fathers, and Christian Writers doe from thence in∣ferre,) must needes be sinfull, and vtterly vnlawfull vn∣to Christians. I confesse, that since he natiuitie, and birth of Stage-Playes, they haue beene sometimes wrested by the Heathen, to some other distorted, and Vnchristian ends, besides the worship, or pacification of their Idole-Gods. Sometimes they haue beene instituted, and per∣formed, by way of Victory, and Triumph; and that com∣monly, in execution of a preuious solemne vow, made to some Deuil-God, by the victorious Generall, before the Battell ioyned: of which wee haue frequent examples in the Liuie. Rom. Hit. lib. 4. Sect. 12 27.35. lib. 5. Sect. 1. lib. 7. Sect. 15.11. lib. 26. Sect. 23. lib. 27. Sect. 25. lib. 22. Sect. 10. lib. 34. Sect. 43. Trebel Pollionis Gal∣lieni. pag. 309. Roman Histories: whose chiefe Commanders, did vsually vow some solemne Playes, and Sacrifices to their Gods, if they would be so propitious towards them, as to giue them the honour of the Field, and chasing of their Enemies: which vowes they did performe accordingly, vpon their wished suc∣cesse. Other times they haue beene purposely celebrated, to bee a kinde of Pander to mens lusts: Liuie. Rom. Hist. lib. 1. Sect. 9. Diony∣sius Hallicar. Antiq Rom. lib. 2. cap. 5. Plutarchi Ro∣mulus Macro∣bius. Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 9. Strabo. Geogr. lib. 5. pg. 460. Orosius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 4. Eutropius. Rerum. Rom. lib. 1. Romuli vita. Cyprian. De Specta. lib. August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 17. Opmeers Chronog. pag. 89 Alex. ab Alex. Gen. Dierum. lib. 5. cap. 26. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 54. lin. Nat. Hist. lib. 15. cap. 29. Petrarch. De Remed. Vtr. Fort. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Pri∣mus sollicitos fcisti Romule ludos. Cum iuuit viduos rapta Saina viros, Romule militibus scii dare commoda solus: Haec mihi si dederis commoda miles ero Scilicet ex illo solemnia more Theatra, Nunc quoque formosis insidiosa manent. Ouid. De Arte amandi. pag. 160.161. Witnesse the Playes that Romulus made, to betray the Sabine Virgines, to the Rape, and Lusts of his vnmarried Souldiers: (vpon whose Rauishment, there arose a bloody warre:) to which end, and vse, they serue as yet. Other times See Plato. Legum Dialogus. . and Coelius Rhod. Antiquarum. Lect. lib. 8. cap 7. Accordingly. they haue beene Acted
for Lasciuiousnesse, delight, and pleasure sake, (the onely vse which men pretend for Stage-Playes now:) Hence De Inuent∣toribus Rerum lib. 1. ap. 10. Polidor Virgil obserues; that Comedies tooke their deno∣mination from the Greeke words : which signifies, to play the Wanton, or Lasciuious person. Minshew Dictionarie. Numb 2719. Others deriue their name, from Comus; the God of wantonnesse, and riot: Ludo. Vues Com. in lib. 2. cap. 8. August. De Ciu. Dei. others from : because they were Lasciuiously Acted heretofore in wayes, being fraught with petulant, and wanton words: all of them concurring in this; Gossons Conutation of Playes. Act 3. Master Northbrooke, and Doct. Reinolds, in their book against Playes. Accordingly. that their end is nothing else, but Lasciuious, Carnall, and Vnchristian mirth; and therefore euill, and vnlawfull. If then this bee yeelded to mee, (as of necessitie it must be:) that Stage-Playes were originally, destinated, yea, appropriated, to the fore-recited Idolatrous, and vnlaw∣full ends, but more especially, to the honour, and seruice of abominable Idoles, to whose solemne worship they were actually deuoted, for many hundred yeeres to∣gether, and that by their owne speciall command, which makes them Porrò si quae alis idolis fa∣ciunt, ad dae∣mones perti∣nent; quantò magis quod ipsa sibi Idolae fecrunt cum adiuerent? Tertul. De Corona Mili∣tis. cap. 6. wholly theirs: I shall hence inferre a third argument. That inuention which was primarily ordained, yea, for many hundred yeeres together, appropriated, and deuoted, to the immediate worship, and so∣lemne gratification of Deuil-gods; Admisceri huic Christi∣anum homi∣nem supersti∣tions, genus est sacrilegii: quiae eorum cultibus communicat, quorum festiuitatibus delectatur. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 206. Se Gualthr. Hom. 13. in Hoseam. Accordingly. must of ne∣essitie be pernicious, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians, especially, if it be not necessary, or vse∣full vnto men. But Stage-Playes were primarily ordained, yea, for many hundred yeeres together, appropriated, and deuoted, to the immediate worship, and solemne gratification of Deuil-gods, and they are no wayes necessary, nor vsefull vnto mn. Therefore they must of necessitie be Pernicious, Vn∣seemely, and Vnlawfull vnto Christians. The Maior is euident by the cloud of witnsses, reci∣ted
in the premises; by those seuerall Historicall autho∣rities, recorded in the first Act, and Scaene of this Trage∣die, to prooue the Deuill, the Author of these Enterludes: and by the generall acknowledgement of all See Ouid. Fstorum. l 5. pag 88, 89 95. Learned writers: so that I may spare all further proofe. The Maior, no Christian can, or dares denie, vnlesse hee will turne professed Proctor for the Deuill: If any bee so Heathenish, or Atheisticall, as to gaine-say it, I shall easi∣ly euict the trueth of it, by these ensuing reasos. First, it must bee acknowledged, that those things, which euery Christian doeth solemnely renounce in his very Baptisme, must needs be pernicious, vnseemely, and vnlawfull, else why should he renounce them? But eue∣ry Christian doeth seriously abiure in his very Baptisme, all such Inuentions, which were See Cyril. Hierusolom. Caechisis. Mystag. 1. Accordingly. primarily ordained, and for many hundred yeeres together appropriated, to the solemne worship, and gratification of Deuil-gods, (as Stage-Playes were:) for hee couenants by his sure∣ties; to forsake the Deuill and all his workes: therefore the Maior must be yeelded. Secondly, that which God himselfe commanded in a more speciall manner, to be abolished and reiected; that must needes be pernicious, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vn∣to Christians. But God himselfe, hath in a speciall man∣ner, commanded all reliques, monuments, parts, and ap∣pendices of Idoles, (especially, such as were primarily consecrated, and wholly appropriated to their vse,) to bee vtterly abolished, and reiected. Hence hee enioynes the Israelites: Leuit. 18.30. Deut. 12.29, 30. not to follow the customes of the Cana∣anites, nor yet to inquire after them, saying: how did these Nations worship their Gods, that I might doe so likewise? Hence hee commanded them, Deut. 7.2, 3, 4.16.25, 26. Cap. 12.3. Cap. 20.16, 1, 18. Iosh. 7.12. Cap. 11.12. Iudges 2.2. Num. 33.2. See Hookers Ecclesiasticall Policie. lib. 5. cap. 17. to burne the Groues, the Images, with all the appurtenances of Idole-gods, with fire: to destroy their Altars, pull downe their Temples, cut off their Priests, and worshippers, abolish their memories, abandon their ceremonies, and not s much as o saue, or reserue any remnant of them, but vtterly to abhorre, and detest them, as
an accursed thing. Yea, hence hee obligeth them, Exod. 23.13 Deut. 6.13, 14. Cap. 12.3. Psal. 164. Hosea 2.17. Zech. 13.2 to destroy euen the very names of their Idoles: not to make men∣tion of the names of other Gods: not to suffer them to be heard out of their mouthes: nor yet so much, as to participate of any of their Sacrifices, Rites, or Ceremonies. Therefore since God hath giuen such speciall charge against the reliques, and monuments of Idolatrie heretofore: it cannot but be sinfull, vnseemely, and Vnchristian, for vs to foster, or admit of Varro non tantum in re∣bus humani sed in rebu diuinis ponit ludos scenicos e cum vtique si tantummodo boni & honesti homies in ciuitate essent nec in re∣bus humani ludi scenic esse debuissens. Quod profectò non autoritate sua fecit, sed quoniam es Romae natu & educat in diuinis re∣bus inuenit. August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 1. Stage-Playes, or any other Inuentions now, which were originally ordained, and for many hundred yeeres together appropriated, to the solemne worship, and gratifi∣cation of Idole-Deuill-Gods. Thirdly, the Scriptures doe peremptorily enioyne all Christians, Act. 15.20.29. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. Psal. 16.4 1 Cor. 8.1. to 11. to abstaine from things offered, or consecrated vnto Idoles: as these Stage-Playes were. First, 1 Cor. 10.20. Omni udio Gentilium fe∣iuitates & ferias decline∣mus, quia qui vult esse diuinorum particeps, non debet esse socius Idolorum. Ambrose, Sermo. 11. because the things which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Deuills, and not to God: therefore those that participate of them, must needes haue communion with the Deuill: and I would not (saith the Apostle) that ye should haue fellowship with Deuills. Secondly, 1 Cor. 10.21. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. because Christians cannot drinke the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Deuills: they cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Deuills: for what fellowship hath Righteousnesse, with Vnrighteosnesse? What communion hath Light with Darkenesse? What concorde hath Christ with Belial? what part hath hee that Beleeueth with an Infidell? or what agree∣ment hath the Temple of God with Idoles? God, and the Deuill, Christ, and Belial, are contrary, are inconsistent: therefore the seruice, and ceremonies of the one, are al∣together incompatible with the other. Thirdly, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. be∣cause Christians must not bee vnequally yoaked with vnbe∣leeuers, with whom they haue no part nor fellowship: now if they should communicate with the Gentiles in Stage-Playes, or things consecrated to their Idoles: they should bee then vnequally yoaked, they should haue part, and
fellowship with Infidels, in this respect: which God will not allow of. Fourthly, 1 Cor. 8.4. to 13. Rom. 14.15, 16.20.21. because the Consciences of the weaker brethren, should not be grieued, offended, defiled, or emboldened, by others participation of these Idolatrous Sa∣crifices; to their ruine, and the Gospels scandall: Fiftly, Leuit. 18.29, 30. Deut. 12.31. Cap. 20.18. Cap. 18.9, 10. Cap. 7.25, 26. because all the Sacrifices, reliques, and ceremonies of I∣doles, are an abomination to the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.22. Leuit. 18.28, 29. and therefore pro∣uoke him vnto wrath, to our destruction. Lastly, Deut. 7.25. Cap. 20.17.18. be∣cause they are a ready meanes to withdraw our hearts from God vnto Idolatrie: therefore 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Omnia per∣uersas pos∣sunt corrum∣pere mentes. Ouid. Trist lib. 2. pag. 155. wee must seperate from them, and not so much as touch them, else God will not reciue vs as his people. Since therefore God vpon all the former reasons doeth thus seriously, and frequently prohibit, such ceremonies, and inuentions, as were instituted, and destinated to the Deuills seruice at the first: My Maior is irrefragable, and my Conclusion true: That Stage-Playes are pernicious, vnseemely, and vnlawfulQuale igi∣tur haben∣dum est, a∣pud homi∣nes veri Dei, quod à cādid∣tis Diaboli in∣troductum, & ipsis a primor∣dio diatum est, quodque iam tunc idolo∣latriae inii∣batur ab Idolis, & i Idolis adhu viis? non quasi aliquid sit Idolum, sed quoniam quod Idolis ali faciunt, ad damones pertinent. Tertul. De Corona Militis. cap. 6. vnto Christi∣ans; because they were at first deuoted to the honour, and for many hundred yeeres together, designed to the worship of some Idole-Gods, by the very Deuils fauourites. All that can bee here replied to euade this Argument, is reducible to these two heads. First, that the Dedica∣tion of Stage-Playes to these Deuill-Gods, did onely Contract a Guilt, or Sinfulnesse vpon those particular Playes, that were really appropriated to their worship, and Celebrated to their honour: but Malum vi∣detur esse bonum illi, eui mentem deus impulit ad exitium. Sophocles. Antigone. pag. 353. Num. 620. not vpon all the kinde. Secondly, that though Pagans, or others haue abused Stage-Playes, to Idolatrous, and vnlawfull ends, yet this is Let these obiectors remember this: Difficilius est male percept dediscere, qum bene praecepta discere. Case. Polit lib. 4. cap. 1. pag. 313. no impediment, but that Christians may re∣duce them to a commendable, and lawfull vse, so that we cannot well conclude: That all popular Stage-Playes
are vnlawfull, because the first of them were inuen∣ted, and for a long tract of time deuoted, to the Deuills worship. To the first of these,Answer 1. I answere with De Corona Militis. cap. 6, 7, 8. Tertullian: that though the consecrating of any profitable, and vsefull Inuentions to Idole-Gods: See Polyd Virgil, and Alexander Sardis, De Re∣rum Inuento∣ribus Ouid. Metamorph. lib. 1.2. as of Letters, and Trade to Mercurie: of Musick, and Poetri to Apollo: of Physicke, to AEsculapius: of Ships, and Nauigation to Neptune, and Minerua: of Wins to Bacchus: of Corne, and Husbandrie to Ceres: of Fire, and Smitheri to Vulcan: and the like, by whom they were inuented, as Heathen Poets, and Histo∣rians faine: doeth no wayes vitiate, or defile them in the ge∣nerall, but that they are, and may be lawfull vnto Christians; because they are absolutely necessary, at leastise vsefull, vnto men: for whose benifit by Gods prouidence, they were at first inuented: Euen as the sacrificing of Tertul. De Corona Mi∣litis. cap. 7.8. Alexander. ab Alexandro. Gen. Dierum. lib 3. cap. 12. Ouid. Fasto∣um. lib. 1.2.5 Horace. Carm. lib. 1. Ode. 36. a Male-goate to Bacchus: of a Cocke to AEsculapius: of a Bull to Iupiter: of a Lambe, or She-goate vnto Iuno: of an Horse to Mars: of a Doue to Venus: of a Swine to Pan: of a Doe, or Heifer to Minerua: or of Myrre, and Frankincense to other Idoles, did stampe no Impresse of vnlawfulnesse, or vnholi∣nesse, on the whole kindes, or species of these seuerall creatures; (which did still retaine their entitie good∣nesse in them:) though it did Acts 15.2029. Psal 16.4. 1 Cor. 8.1. to 11. Cap. 10.20, 21. Tetul. De Corona Mili∣tis. cap 8. Carnes, & panes, & i∣us eiuscemodi pompae Satanae qui in Idolo∣rum solei∣tatibus suspendi solent, suapte quidem natura puri sunt, inuocatione tamen daem∣num impuri efficiuntur. Cyril. Hierusol. Catech. Mystag. 1. so defile ths indiuiduall, and particular creatures that were immediately offered vp in Sa∣crifice to them, that Christians might not lawfully eate of them. Though, I say, it bee alwayes true in case of pro∣fitable Inuentions, or Gods good creatures: that the per∣uerting of them to Idolatrous ends, doeth lay a blemish vpon the depraued Indiuidualls onely, not impose an vn∣lawfulnesse on the whole species, or other Indiuidualls of their kinde: Yet it is vndoubtedly true; Tertullian, De Co∣rona Militis. cap. 7, 8. August De Doctrina. Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 23. to 28. Gossons Consutation of Playes. Act. 1. Accordingly. that the de∣stinating, and deuoting of Vnprofitable, Pleasurable, Heathe∣nish,
Infamous, Scandalous, and vnnecessary Inuentions, which neither the Scriptures, nor Primitiue Church approoued, to Idolatrous, and Sinfull ends, (and that from their very first conception, which is the case of Stage-Playes,) doeth make not onely the deuoted Indiuidualls; but likewise the whole kinde it selfe, vnlawfull vnto Christians so that no particulars of this nature may be vsed. Hence Tertullian concludes; De Corona Militis. lib. cap. 7, 8, 9. that it is vtterly vnlawfull for Christians to weare a Laurell Crowne, or flowrie Garland in any case, though it be by way of Triumph: because these Crownes were first in∣uented for the honour, worne to the worship, and consecrated to the seruice of Mille venit variis florum Dea nexa co∣ronis. Ouid. Fastor. lib. 4. pag. 81. Bacchus a∣mat flores: Baccho pla∣cuisse coro∣am, ex Ariad∣naeo sidere nosse potes, &c. Ouid. Fastor. lib. 5. pag. 89. vid. Ib. &c. Pagan Deuill-gods: Hence the selfe∣same Father affirmes; De Idolatria lib. cap. 18. to 24. See Gratian Di∣stinctio. 86. Gregor. Mag. Epist. lib 9. cap. 48. that it is no wayes lawfull, for Christians to retaine the names of Iupiter, Bacchus, Apollo, or other Idole-gods, or to impose them on their children: be∣cause they were the names of Idoles at the first: therefore vn∣lawfull to bee vsed now: Hence See pag. 22. to 2. the Fathers, Councells, and fore-recited Protestant Authors, condemne all Diuinati∣ons, Morrice-dances, Bonefires, Newyeeres-gifts; the obserua∣tion of Newyeeres-day; or the Calends of Ianuary: Effeminate mixt Dauncing; Non oportet Christianos ad nuptias euntes vl balare, vel saltare, sed modestè conare & prandere, sicut competit Christianis. Concil. Laodice∣num. Can. 53. Concil. Ilerdense. Can. vlt. especially, at Weddings, where it is now most in vse: burning of Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque eda datur. Ouid. Fastorum. lib. 4. pag. 71. Tapers in Churches, especially in the day-time, as the Papists vse: shauing of Priests crownes, and beardes, &c. as vtterly vnlawfull vnto Christians now; Propterea Apstolus inclamat: Fugite Idololatriam: omnem vtique & otam. Recogita siluam, & quantae latitant spinae. Nihil dandum Idolo: sic nihil nec sumendum ab Idolo. Si in Idolio recumbere alie∣num est a fide, quid in Idoli habitu videri? Quae communio Christi & eliae? & ideo fugite. Longum enim diuortium mandat ab Idololatria, in nullo proxime agendum. Draco enim terrenu de longinquo, non minus spiritu absorbet alites. Ioannes filioli, inquit, custodite vos ab Idolis: non iam ab Idololatria quasi ab officio, sed ab Idolis, i est, ab ipsa effigie eorum, &c Tertul. De Corona Militis. cap. 8. because they were Reliques of Idolatrie; yea, Sa∣crifices, appendices, and deuoted ceremonies of Idoles here∣tofore: If then it bee true in all these cases; that the ap∣propriating of some particulars to Idolatrous vses, doeth
wholy vitiate, and defile, not onely the Indiuidualls thus deuoted, but likewise the whole Species of them, vnto Christians: then needes must it be true of Stage-Playes, (which bring no glory at all to God, nor good to Church, or State:) that the Idolatrous, and Vnchristian ends, to which they were first inuented, and for many hundred yeeres designed, must make them altogether vnlawfull, abominable, and vnseemely vnto all Gods Children. And good reason is there, that it should bee so: See pag. 14, 15. For where the Fountaine is polluted, the streames are al∣wayes filthy: where the roote is bitter, and corrupt, the fruite, and branches are so too: where the foundati∣on is decayed, the building must bee ruinous. If Adam be but once defiled by his fall, Psal. 51.5. Iob 14.4. Rom. 3.4. to 24. cap. 5.8. to the end. Ephes. 2 23. Psal. 14.2, 3. Genes 6.5.12, 13. all his posteritie must of necessitie be borne sinners. The first inuented Stage-Playes, were the Fountaine, the Roote, the Foundation, and common Father of all the rest: now these were wholy Idolatrous, and polluted: they had the Deuill, and his Instruments for their Fathers; the Deuills, honour, wor∣ship, adoration, and recreation, for their maine, and vtmost end: This all the Fathers, and Christian Au∣thors quoted. pag. 29 doe testifie in those their writings. Spectacula vi∣tanda sunt totaliter & cauend sapientius, quod ad celebrandos deorum hono∣res inuenta memorantur. Lactant. Diuinorum Instit. Epit. cap. 6. therefore all subsequent Playes which issue from their materialls, or example; must needes be detestable, vnseemely, pernicious, and vnlawfull vnto Christians, in de∣spight of this euasion, or all that any Libertines, or vo∣luptuous persons (who are but Sathans Proctors) can a∣leadge against it. To the second reply:Reply 2. That though Pagans did peruert these Stage-Playes to an Idolatrous, yet Christians may purge out their corruptions, and reduce them to a lawfull vse: Hookers, Ecclesiasticall Politie. lib. 4. Sect. 12. Since that which was ordained impiously at the first, may weare out that impietie in tract of time, and then the vse thereof may stand without offence. I answere,Answere 2. that though it may bee true in some parti∣cular cases; (as perchance See Hookers Ecclesiasticall Politie lib 4. cap. 12. lib. 5. cap. 11, 12.17. BB. Halls Apologie against Brownists. Sect. 45, 46. Accordingly. in case of needfull ceremonies; or of Temples built, and Dedicated to Idolatrie,) that their
impietie in tract of time may vanish, and then they may be Con∣secrated to Gods seruice, and reduced to a lawfull vse; as the Cathedrall Church of Pauls, afore-time the Temple of Diana, as Canei Briania. Middelsex. pag. 329, 330. Speedes Hi∣storie of Great Brittaine. lib. 7 cap. 8. fol. 234. in the lie of Sebrt. some record:) and most of all our English Churches, at irt deuoted vnto Masse, and Popish Idolatrie, are now designed to Gods publike worship; whence the Hookers Ecclesiastiall Politie. lib. 5 cap. 11.17. Brownists stile them, Idole Synagogues, Baals Temples, abominable sties, and would haue them rased to the ground; for which wee all condemne them: yet it cannot hold in case of Stage-Playes. First, because they are altogether vnnecessary vani∣ties, Vitiosum est vbique quod superslum est. Sneca. De Tranquil. Animi cap. 8. and superfluous pleasures, which may bee better spared, then retained. Secondly, because they haue beene, are, and alwayes will be, 1 Cor. 10.32.33. Phil. 4.8. Puta tibi non licere, (etsi a∣lias fortasse liceat,) quic∣quid male fu∣erit coloratum. Bernard. De Consid l. 3. c. 4. scandalous, offensiue, and of ill report among the Church, and Saints of God, who haue al∣wayes declaimed against them, yea, censured, and reiected them, from age, to age, as I shall prooue at large here∣after. Thirdly, because from their very first inuention, to this present, (which is at least Neque ve∣tustate minu∣untur mala. Cic. Tus. Quest. lib. 3. 2000. yeeres, or more,) they were neuer yet in any Age, or Countrie, that I can heare, or reade of; so regulated, or reformed by Lawes, or other wise; as to be thorowly defaecated, and purged from their filthinesse, or reduced to such honest, commendable, profitable, necessary, or Christian ends, as might iustly pleade in their defence. See 3. I∣cobi. cap. 21.1. Iacobi cap. 7 14. Eliz. cap. 5.33. Eliz cap. 7. Bodinus De Republica. l. 6. cap. 1. Marcus Aurelius. cap. 14. & Epist. 12 to Lambert. Cassiodorus Variarum lib. 1. Epist. 20. & 30. lib. 3. Epist 51. lib. 7. Epist. 10. Many are the Lawes which haue beene enacted; much the care that hath beene taken by sundry States, and Censors in all Ages to loppe off the enormities, allay the poyson, purge out the silth, and grosse corruptions of these Stage-Playes, and so to reduce them to a laudable, and inoffensiue vse: but yet these Ir. 13.23. AEthio∣pians, still retaine their blacke infernall hue: these Vipers keepe their Soule-deuouring poyson still: these Augaean stables, are as polluted Ego amplius dico; non solum agi nunc illas ludicrorum ifamium labs, quae prius actae sunt; ed criminosius mult agi quam prius actae sunt. Salu. De Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 201. yea, more defiled) now, as euer
heretofore: no Art, no Age, no Nation could euer yet a∣bridge, much lesse reforme, their exorbitant corrupti∣ons, and enormities: their hurt doeth farre transcend their good; their abuses ouerpoyse their vse: they are so Eccles. 1.15. crooked, and distorted in themselues, that no Art can make them straite: there is no other meanes left to re∣forme them, but vtterly to abolish them: It is AEger est re∣cursus ad ho∣nestatem his quae iam gra∣dum ex nequi∣tia protule∣runt: nihil sibi ipsis tecum putant com∣mune, quia nihil simile est Plinie. Paneg. August. Dictus. pag. 183. See Case. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 1. pag. 313. boote∣lesse, it is hopelesse therefore for any Christian to at∣tempt, or vndertake their reformation: and so this Re∣plication is but vaine. Fourthly, these Stage-Playes are very like to poyson: Chrysost. Hom. 12. in Ephes 4. vt laedant, nullo indigent; vt pro∣sint multis: they are Non est in s remetum Christii+, sed ve∣nem Dia∣boli August. De Recti. Cathol. Con∣uersat. Tract. Tom. 9. pag. 1448. poyson of themselues, but they must haue many ingredients to make them holesome: yea, the most accurate Chymist cannot so refine them, so compound them, but that they will bee more poysonous then hole∣some; more pernicious then vsefull, in their best condi∣tion: their vanitie, and frothie discourse: their lasciui∣ous complements, and wanton dalliance; their mispence of money, and that which farre transcends all treasures, Sumptuosis∣sima est iactu∣ra temporis. Lypsius. Epist. Cent. 1. Epist. 55. p. 69. of pretious, peerelesse time, (to omit all other circum∣stances;) will ouer-ballance all the good, that the most refined Stage-Playes can produce: It is then but Neque enim q sit, id quod ucun dum est, ei quod est  praetulerit. Clemens Alexand. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. folly, and madnesse, yea, sinne in Christians to retaine them; though they haue hopes for to reforme them, because Ex malis eligere minima oportet. Cicero. De Officijs. lib. 2. their euill would still exceede their good. Fiftly, it is but a meere Sophisticall, and deceitfull Apologie, to argue thus for Stage-Playes: A posse ad esse non valet argumentum Ro Keckerman: and other Logicians. They may be regulated, and re∣duced to good, and lawfull vses; therefore they are law∣full vnto Christians now: I take it for my owne part; that Christians should rather argue thus: They are one∣ly reduceable to good, and lawfull ends, but they are not yet reduced: their abuses may bee reformed, but as yet they are not corrected: therefore 1. Thes. 5.21. Ephes. 5.10, 11. wee must take them as we finde them now, vnpurged, vncorrected; and so we
must 1 Thes. 5.23. 1 Pet. 2.11. Iude 23. needes auoyde them, yea, condemne them. He that will pleade for Stage-Playes thus: let him first reforme them, then iustifie, and embrace them: else let him ioyne with vs in their deserued condemnation, till hee can eui∣dently Non satis est dicere sanan∣dum esse vul∣nus, nisi dica∣tur quo modo. Pachymerus. Hist. lib. 4. demonstrate to vs their actuall hopelesse reformati∣on. Sixtly, if Playes may bee reformed, and reduced to their lawfull ends; what parties are there, that should vndertake their cure? Good men will not: they rather Vtinam om∣nes dilueren∣tur. Chrys. Ho. 38. in Mat. wish their ruine, then their hopelesse, vselesse wel∣fare. Bad men will not, because they approoue them not, Nobis au∣tem ridere & gaudere non sufficit, nisi cum peccato atque insania gaudeamus: nisi risus noster impuritatibus, nisi flagitiū misceatur. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 192. but for their pleasing corruptions, which feede their carnall lusts: Yea, both of them together cannot cleanse them from those inueterate corruptions, and natiue obscenities, which adhere vnto them. For my owne part, I cannot possibly conceiue, how all our popular Stage-Playes should bee so refined, as that their vse, and practise should be euery way Christian, and Legitimate; because I see no meanes, no persons to effect it: there∣fore I cannot but conclude them, to bee desperate, hope∣lesse, Solae Thea∣trorum impu∣ritates sunt, quae honestè non possunt vel accusari, multò minus emendari. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. cap. 186. and incorrigible euils, vncapable of any cure, vn∣tractible by any Christian, vnsufferable in any Christian State. Seuenthly, admit they might bee reformed, and reduced vnto honest, necessary, and Christian vses; what ends, and vses should these bee? If carnall mirth, and riotous iollitie? (the onely vse that I know for them:) all Christians know, Iames 4.9. Chap. 5.5. Reuel. 18.7. Luke 6.25. Risus est corruptio disciplinae. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 192. that these are sinfull: But admit they were not: yet if all ribaldrie, wantonnesse, and scur∣rilitie, were exploded out of Stage-Playes; this mirth, and iollitie would quickly wither. Si dixerint enim, pro ludo aessumi spectacula ad recreandos animos: dicemus, non sapere ciuitates, quibus ludus pro re seria habetur. Clemens Alexandr. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. If honest recreation onely? what neede of any Stage-Playes for this purpose, since there is so great varietie of farre honester, cheaper, pleasanter, shorter, and more obuious recreations, which would more refresh vs then Stage-Playes would doe,
Infiuctuo∣sum putamus gaudiu sim∣plex, nec de∣lectat ridere sine crimine. Saluian. De Guber. Dei. lib. 5. pag. 192. if all their filthinesse, and vanitie were expunged? Since therefore Stage-Playes, can haue no such necessary, or vsefull ends, Melius est peccatum ca∣uere, quam emendae. Ambros. Serm. 11. but that they may bee better omitted, then retained: since they alway haue beene, are, and will bee scandalous, and offensiue to the Church, and Saints of God: since their reformation is hopelesse, their Facilius est excludere perniciosa, quam egere; & non admit∣tere, quam ad∣missa mode∣rari. Seneca. De ra. lib. 2. cap 7. Mulo diffici∣lius est depra∣uata corrige∣re, quam ora∣care; vel a fundamentis noua constr∣ere. Case. Polit. lib. 4. cap. 1 pag. 313. cure hard, and desperate, but their extirpation easie: since their refining cannot purge out all their drosse, but that they will bee more poysonous then holesome: alwayes euill, though Et omne malum etiam mediocre magnum est. Cicero. Tusul. Quast. lib. 3. lesse euill, but not intirely good: since their present condition makes them odious; and there is no Censor, no person likely to reforme them: (For priuate persons cannot effect it: and suppose the King, and State might doe it: Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui. Ex te pendentem sic cum circumspicis or∣bem Effugunt curas inferiora tuas. Non a te moles Romani nomini vrget: nque tuis humeris am leue fertur onus, Lusibus vt possis aduertere numen mepis. Ouid. Tristium. lib. 2. pag. 153. as it would take them off from more emi∣nent, and weightie affaires, to the publique preiudice; and Non est tam sordida Diuis Cura neque extrems iu est demittere in artes Sidera: subducto regnant sublimia ca lo, Illa neque artificum curant tractare labores Virgil. AEtna. pag. 471, 472. misbeseeme their grauities, to spend many serious, and tea∣dious consultations vpon such toyes as these: so the refor∣mation of them, (which would bee alwayes dubious,) would neuer counteruaile the care, the time, and cost that must be spent about it: Generis humani fragili∣as ronior dilabitur ad corrigenda, quam studeat conseruae correcta: Synodus Meldensis Praefatio. Suius. Concil. Tom. 3. pag. 453. and no sooner should their corruptions be exiled, but they would presently reuert againe, without redresse:) I may safely auerre; that they are irre∣ducible, vnconuertible to any lawfull, good, or Christi∣an purposes, which may benefit Church, or Common∣wealth, or the bodies, soules, estates, or names of men: and so conclude; that they Generaliter aduersu Deum sapit qicquid Diaboli est. Hirom. Epist. 1. cap. 4. are vtterly vnlawfull, vn∣seemely, and pernicious vnto Christians; because they had their Alpha, and Omega; their beginning, and end: their
birth, and vse from Hell; being not onely inuented by the Deuill himselfe: but likewise by his owne speciall com∣mand, and his greatest minions aduice, appropriated, and deoted to his peculiar honour, and immediate worship for many hundred yeeres. Stage-Playes they had their rise from Hell: wee Christians Iohn 1.12, 13. 1 Cor. 15.48, 49. our natiuitie, and de∣scent from Heauen: they were at first deuoted, (yea, yet continue destinated) vnto Satan: Rom. 6.4.13.19, 2. cap. 12 1 cap. 14.8. 1 Cor 6.15.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 3 27, 28, 29. we were at first Bap∣tized into, yea, consecrated wholy vnto Christ: they were, they are the Deuills; we were, Cant. 3.16. cap. 63. cap. 7.10. 1 Cor. 3.23. cap. 6.19 20. yet now we are not his, but Gods, but Christs alone: Quid tibi cum pompis Diaoli amator Christi? Renunciate non solum vocibus, sed etiam mori∣bus: non tantum sono lingae, sed & actu vitae: non tantum labiis sonantibus, sed & operibus pronunciantibus. August. De Symb. ad Catech. lib. 4. cap. 1. Tom 9. part. 1. pag. 1427, 1428. this must, this cannot there∣fore but perswade vs, to abominate them, to condemne them, both in words, and deedes, as sinfull, and vnlawfull. CHORVS. Argument 4.ANd here before I passe to the ensuing Act, I shall propound a fourth Argument against these Stage-Playes,Stage-Playes are those workes of Sa∣tan, those Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked world, which euery Christi∣an renounceth in his Baptis∣me: threfore they are vnlawfull. (which seuerall Fathers haue framed to my hands,) as a Chorus, or Corollarie to the premises. If Stage-Playes bee those Workes of Satan, those Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, See Concil. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 9 10. Surius. Concil. Tom. 3. pag. 366.367. and here pag. 3. in the margent (k) which euery Christian hath seriously renounced, and solemnely vowed against in his very Baptisme; they must then of necessitie be pernicious, abomi∣nable, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians.
But Stage-Playes are those workes of Satan, those Pompes, and vanities of this wicked world, which euery Christian hath seriusly renounced, and so∣lemnely vowed against in his very Baptme. Therefore they must of necessitie bee pernicious, a∣bominable, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Chri∣stians. For the former part of the assumption: That Stage-Playes are the workes, and Pompes of Satan; it is infalli∣bly euident: For first, Non enim Deus dat lude∣re, sed Diabo∣lus, Ille enim est qui etiam in artem iocos ludosque diges∣sit, vt per haec ad se traheret milites Christi, virtutisque orum neruos faceret molli∣res. Propterea in vrbibus etiam Theatr construxit, & illos rsuum ac turpium vo∣luptatum in∣centores pa∣rauit, & per illorum luem in vniuersam vrbem talem excitat pestem. Chrysost. Hom 6. in Matth. Ludi scaenici spectacula turpitudinum, & licentia vanitatum, non hominum vitiis, sed Decrum vesrorum iussis Romae instituti sunt. Augustine, De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32 Hoc dio, quod negantes conuincit Historia, ersdem illos ldos in quius regnant figmenta Poetarum, non per imperitum osquium obsequentium, sacris De∣orum suorum intulisse Romanos, sed ipsos Deos vt sibi solennitèr edeentur, & honori suo cosecrarentr, acerbè imperando, & quodamodo extorquendo fecisse Ib. lib 2 cap. 8 See Act 1, 2. they were inuented by him: Secondly, he did exact, and require them of, and extort them from his worshippers. Thirdly, they were consecrated to his honour, and appropriated to his seruice, by his owne speciall command: Fourthly, they were Ludorum celebrationes Deorum esta sunt; siqui∣dem ob natle orum, vel Temploru nourum dedicationes sunt constitut. Et pri∣mius qidem ventiones Saturno sunt atutae, ud sei Liber, Circenses Nep∣tuno: aulati vero & cateris Diis em honos trib caepit, singulique lud orum nominibu consecri snt, sicu  Cao in Lris Spectaculorum docet. Lactantis D veo Cultu cap. 20. vsually celebrated by his followers on the Feastiualls, and Birth-dayes, of; or at the solemne Dedication of some new erected Temples, to those dunghill Deuill-gods, which Pagans did adore: Fiftly, the See pag. 4. (p) (q) pag. 9, 10.24, 25. and Act. 2. Saene. 2. Primitie Church, and Christians, did not onely constant∣ly condemne, but likewise, vtterly reiect them, as the workes, and Pompes of the very Deuill: all which is irreragably confirmed in the premised Acts: Sixtly, they See Act. 1. Sa. 2. neuer issued from God, or from his Children; but from the Factors, and Minions of the Deuill, who onely did frequent, and Act them heretofore, and applaude, performe, and haunt them now: Seauenthly, God gaines no glory by them, men
no good; onely the Deuill workes his endes, fulfills his pleasure, both in vs, and of vs; and propagates his king∣dome by them, as I shall prooue anon. If wee will but seriously suruay the end, and fruite, or summe vp the losse, and gaine that comes by Stage-Playes, we shall finde that Quicquid enim illi ge∣ritur, non est oblectatio, sed pernicies, sed poena, sed sup∣plicium. Chv. Hom. 3. De Du. & Sul. Tom. 1. Col. 52. A. all are losers; none gainers by them, but the Deuill, whose endes they doe accomplish. See Chrs. Hom. 3. De Dau. & Saul. Hom. 7. and 38. in Mat. Accordingly. God the Father, he loseth his honour, his worship, his loue, his feare, his obedience, the fruite of all his ordinances, and the labour of his faithfull Ministers by their meanes. Christ Iesus, hee loseth his glory, his respect; the worth, and dignitie of his person, the eficacy, and merits of his blood: the honour, Suscepturi Nasalem Do∣mini, ab omni nos aelictorum faece purgemus Rex noster Christus non tam nitorem vestium, quam animarum requirit af∣fectum, &c. Ambr. Sem. 4. Tom. 5. pag. 5. and true solemnizing of his Natiuitie, his Cir∣cumcision, his Resurrection, and Ascention: which Stage-Playes Hebr. 10.29. Chrys. Hom. 3. De Duide & Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511. A. B. C. Accordingly. trample vnder feete, as despicable, and vn∣holy things, and cause men for to vilifie: yea, hee loseth the Nulla res enim aeque eloquia Dei in contemptum adducit, atque Spectaculorum quae illic propnuntur admiratio. Chrys. De verbis Esaia, &c. Hom. 1. Tom. 1. Cl. 1283. C. desired fruite of his Gospel, his Sacraments, his Ambassa∣dours, and of all his trauell, whereby hee doeth sollicite, and wooe vs to come in, and match our soules with him, who is happinesse, pleasure, comfort, and delight it selfe. The Holy Ghost by meanes of Playes, doeth oft times Ephes. 4.29.30.  Thes. 5.19. Hebr. 10.29. 1 Sam. 16.14. to his griefe, euen lose his blessed residence in, his heauenly influence into, his sweete regiment ouer, his flexanimous sollicitations to, those good perswasions, purposes, resolutions, and sparkes of grace, which hee hath kindled in, our hearts: The Angels they lose Luke 15.7.10. their ioy, in our conuersion; Psal. 3.7. and 91.10.11. Hebr. 1.14. their office, in our protection: Mat. 18.10. Luke 15.10. their happinesse in our Saluation: Luke 2.13. cap 30.36. Hebr. 12.22. their fellowship, in our associ∣ation: The Church shee loseth her outward beautie, and splendor, her honour, See Tertul. De Spectac. cap. 24.25. Puto ego, nec Miestati diuinae, nec Euangelicae disciplinae congruere, vt pdor & hoor Ecclesiae tam turpi & infami contagione Histrionum oedeur? Cyprian. Epict. lib. 1. Epist. 10. See Chrys. Hom. De Dau. & Saul. 3. Accordingly. her puritie, her ioy, her exter∣nall
tranquillitie, and prosperitie; her members, her fruit∣fulnesse, and fulnesse by them. The See Chrys. Hom. De Dau. & Saul. De verbis Isayae. vidi Domi∣num, &c. Hom. 1. Word, and Sacra∣ments, they lose their powerfull efficacy, their reuerend respect, their due esteeme, their spotlesse puritie, their fruitfulnesse, and their frequent resort. The Chrysost. Ibidem. Ministers, they lose their prayers, their preaching, their exhortations, and re∣proofes, their reuerend respect, and loue; their rewards, incouragements, and resort: together, 2 Iohn 4. 3 Iohn 4. Hebr. 12.13 Neque enim vlla res tan∣tum adfert gaudi vitae nostrae, quan∣tum hoc, quod ex ∣nimo gau∣detis in Ec∣clesia con∣gregati. Chrysostom. De verbis Esaia. vidi Dominum sedentem. Tom. 2. Col. 1280. C. with the ioy, and fruite of all their Labours: The Saints of God, they lose their kinred, their friends, their companions, their ioyes, their hopes, their prayers, their admonitions, their good names, yea, the glory of their Christian professi∣on, and the praise, and innocency of their holy conuersa∣tion, See Act. 3. Scaene. 5. which are oft times vilified, traduced, and derided on the Stage: The See Act. 6. Scaene. 1. to 8. and part. 4. Histriones non parua rerum publicarum pestis sunt. Nam & libidinum ministri sunt, & mores bonos corrumpunt, & Magistratum in contemptum adducunt: & opes ta publicas quam priuatas mxime attenuam, & quod in pauperum subuentionem impendi debat fere intercipiunt. Quamobrem vir graues omnibus seculis hoc hominum gens a republica sua exclusit, quod illos & mribus officer, & Deorum contempium inuehre intelligerent. Gualther in Na∣hum. 3. Hom. 11. See Bodinus, De Repub. lib. 6. cap. 1. Common-wealth is put to preiudice, by the generall corruption of mens mindes, and manners; the abundance of Idlnesse, Prodigalitie, Riot, Pride, effeminacy, Treachery, Cruelty, Whoredome, Adultery, Wickednesse, and Prophanenesse, which these Playes produce. The poore are spoiled of that almes, that succour, and reliefe which should refresh their bowls, and make glad their hearts. The mise∣rable Spectatours, and Frequenters of these Infernall pleasures, they See Act 6. caene. 3. to 19. lose their time, their modestie, their ho∣nestie, their credit, and respect with God, and all good men: yea their ciuilitie, their chastitie, their money, and estates some∣times and if all this be not enough, Qui Spectaculis & ludis Theatralibus oblectantur, non iunt i regnum & vitam citra laborem & pugnam, quoniam angusta vi est, & afflictionis plena. Macarius AEgypt. Hom. 27. pag. 212. their very soules, and bodies too, without repentance: too deere a price God∣wot, for such momentany shadowes, and delights of
sinne, Voluptas fragilis ac bre∣uis est, cuius necesse est aut poeniteat, aut pudeat. Sen De Benefic. lib. 7. cap 2. of which wee must of necessitie repent, or bee asha∣med, vnlesse wee will be damned. As for the profssed Actors of these Enterludes, they gaine perchance a little vaine applause vpon the Stage, which they put off with their Players robes: or at the most, See Part. 2. Act. 2. a little filthy gaine, or ill gotten Estate, (which they are bound in Conscience to restore, as I shall prooue anon,) and that Deut. 28.16. to 21. Prou. 3.33. Mal. 2.2. c. 3.9. Eccles. 5.13, 14. so blasted with the curse of God vpon it; that it either turnes Wormewood, Gall, or Poyson to the owners, Psal. 37.2.20.36. Prou. 28.22. or meltes away like Snow before the Sunne in their very life time: or else, Psal. 37.28. Psal. 109.10, 11, 12, 13. Eccles. 5.13, 14, 15. Prou. 12.7. cap. 14.11. Male partis vix gaudet tertius haeres. I. Sat. 6. it prooues Rottennesse, and consumes to Ashes in their next Heires hands: But alas, their losse transcends their gaines: Romani cum artem ludicram sce∣namque to∣tam probro ducunt, actores talium fabularum, non modo honore ciuium reliquorum carere, sed etiam tribu mo∣ueri notatione censoria voluerunt. Augustine, De Ciuitat. Dei lib 2. cap 13, 14. See Liuie. lib. 7. cap. 2.3. and Act. 7. Scaene. 6. they lose their credit, their respect, their good names, their time, their ciuilitie, their modestie, their chastitie; and all that was commenda∣ble in them heretofore: yea, they lose their God, their Heauen, their Sauiour, their Sanctifier, and Oh that I could not say their very Soules, and Bodies for all Eterni∣tie, vnlesse God miraculously call them Ne igitur desinatis super huiusmodi licentia gemere ac seius remorder. Hic enim dolor fiet vobis conuersionis ad meliora principium. Chrysostome, Hom 6. in Matth. to Repentance, and cause them to renounce their Vnchristian, and Infer∣nall profession. Thus all are losers by their Stage-Playes, none gainers by them, but the Deuill, and Hell: the one gaines vassals to ffect his will, and lusts here; and dam∣ned Soules, to associate him in his euerlasting torments hereafter: the other fewell to nourish those scorching, and Eternall flames, in which the Soules, and Bodies of all Fuge pesiferam il∣lam piscinam Theatri. Haec est enim, quae spectatores suos in flammcum illud plagus mergit, quaeque profundum illius ignis accndit. Chrysostome, Hm 7. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 60. B. im∣penitent Stage-frequenting Christians, shall haue thir portion. Since therefore, the Deuill is the onely gainer by these Stage-Playes; which Saint Hierome rightly stiles Daemonum cibus est carmina Poetrum. Hierom. Damaso. Epist. 146. Tom. 3. pag. 408. the Deuils
foode: Since Quis enim alius spiritus occulo in∣stinctu nequis∣simas agitat mentes, & instat facien∣dis adulteriis, & pascitur factis, nisi qui etiam sacris talius oblecta∣tur, constitu∣ens in templi simulachrae Daemonum, amans in ludis simulachrae vi∣tiorum: su∣surrans in oc∣culto verb iustitiae ad de∣cipiendos etiam paucos bonos; frequentans in aperto in∣uitamenta nequitiae, ad possidendos in∣numerabiles malos. August. De Ciuitat. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 26. hee is onely honoured, and enriched by them, serued in them, delighted with them, puruaying for them: we may safely, yea, infallibly conclude on all the premises; that they are his proper workes, and pompes. For the second branch of the Assumpsion: That Stage-Playes are the Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World; these impregnable reasons will euince it. First their very inchoation, and conception, as my first Act prooues, was meerely from the Deuill, 2 Cor. 44. Chap. 14.13. Iohn 12.31. Chap. 16.11 Ephes. 2.2. the God, and Prince of this World; rom nfides, and Idolaters, the Ephes. 2.2, 3. Chap 5.12. Iohn 8.22, 23. Chap. 15.18, 19. Chap. 17.14. 2 Peter 2.5. 1 Iohn 4.5. 1 Cor. 2.6.8. Chap. 5.10. 1 Tim. 6.17. Iames 4.4. naturall, and most genuine, if not the principall parts, and Agents of this world, Gal. 1.4. 1 Iohn 5.19. which lyes in wickednesse: Secondly, the common Actors, frequenters, and admi∣rers of them, both now, and heretoore, are no other but Psal. 17.14. the men of the world, who haue their portion onely in this life, 2 Tim. 3.4. being louers of pleasures, more then louers of God: Thirdly, their See Act. 3. subiect matter, their seuerall partes, and passages, as experience teacheth, doe sauour onely of worldly Pompe, and Vanitie, if not of sinne, and all prophanenesse: Fourthly, those Pompous, and state∣ly shewes, and Scenes; that effeminate, rich, and gorgi∣ous Attire: that glittering, and glorious Apparrell; those mimicall, antique, clownish, hellish, amourous, fil∣thy, foolish, ridiculous, obsceane, and wanton parts: those licencious complements, clippings, and embrace∣ments, withall those other See Act. 4.5. ceremonies, and circum∣stances, which attend our Stage-Playes; what are they but the chiefest Pompes, and Vanities which this world affordes? Fiftly, is not the very ground, and end of all Theatricall Spectacles, (especially, such as are acted in priuate houses, and societies,) a vaineglorious desire of some worldly Pompe, and State? or an oficious compli∣ancy to the course, and fashion of this wicked World? Why doe men send for Stage-Players to their houses;
why doe they flocke vnto their Theaters Maiorem obtinent insa∣na Spectacula frequentiam, quam beata Martyria. Leo. Sermo. in Octaua. Petri & Pauli. cap. 1. fol. 165. thicke, and threefold, on Feastiuall, and Solemne seasons, especially in the Christmas time? Is it not out of worldly Pompe, and State? out of a prodigall, and vaineglorious humour? a degenerous, and Vnchristian symbolization with this present World? a voluptuous, and base seruilitie to our filthie carnall lusts? or at least wise, out of an affected de∣sire, to post, and passe away our peerelesse time, (which Tempus vitae meae le∣uius cursori∣bus: vt enim illi priusquam bene stent, exiliunt: ita & hc euolt anequam ve∣niat. Chrys. ad Theodor. Epist 6. Tom. 5 Col 862. A. Quotidie mo∣rimur, quoti∣die commuta∣mur, & ta∣men aeternos nos esse credi∣mus: hoc ipsum quod dicto, quod scribitur, quod relego, quod emendo, de vita mea tol∣litur: quot puncta notarii, tot meorum damn funt temporum Hierom. Epist. 3. cap 10 flies too faest without these winges, and spurres to speed it:) to banish God, and Christ out of our Hearts; Grace out of our Soules; all thankefull remembrance of Gods fa∣uours to vs on such times as these, out of our mindes, and thoughts? and wholly to auocate, and estrange vs from all true Christian ioy, and heauenly solace? which expresseth it selfe, Ephes. 5.19. Col. 3 16. Iam. 5.13. Psal. 149 & 150. & 103. Ne que enim quicquam st quod in hac vita nos suuius & iu∣cundius afficere solat, atque ea, quae ex Ecclesia capitur, laetitia. In Ecclesia enim eo∣rum qui laetantur, laetitia conseruatur; in Ecclesia, dolentes ad animi tranquill ae deducuntur: in Ecclesia it quí dolore afficiuntur, gaudio delinuntur. Chrys. Orat. 7. Tom. 5. Col 1480, 1481. in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spiri∣tuall Songs; in diuine Meditations, and discourses of Gods mercie towards vs: in powring out heartie praises, prayers, and thankesgiuings vnto our Gracious, and euer blessed God, with inflamed, and inlarged spirits, for all his superabundant fauours, and compassions to vs: not in Hellish Playes, and carnall merriments, which Christ, and Christians doe abhorre: If this then bee the vse, the end, and ruite; these the appendices, and parts of Stage-Playes: needes must wee now subscribe: that they are, if not the grea∣test, and most assiduous; yet not the meanest Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, to whose vse, and ends they onely serue; as their Haywoods, Apologie fr Actors. owne professed Apolo∣gist doeth acknowledge. Now to prooue vnto you further; that Stage-Playes are the very workes, and Pompes of Satan; yea, the very selfe-same Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World,
which Christians haue renounced in their Baptisme: I shal vouch vnto you the expresse resolution of sundry Fa∣thers: Stage-Playes, (saith Hoc erit Di∣aboli Pompa aduers quam in signaculo fides eera∣mus. Cum a∣quam ingresi Christianam fidem ex legi sua verba pro∣fitemur, re∣nunciasse nos Diabolo, & Pompae, & Angelis eius ore nostro con∣testamur. Quid erit sum∣mum ac prae∣cipuum, in quo Diabolus, & Pompae, & Angeli cius censeantur, quam Idololatria? Igitur si ex Idololatria, vniuersam Spectaculorum paraturam constare constiterit, indubitate praeiudicatum erit, etiam ad Spectacula pertinere re∣nunciationis nostrae testimonium in lauacro, quae Diabolo, & Pompae, & Angelis eiu sint mncipata, &c. De Spectac. lib. cap. 4, 5, 6. & 24. See Hookers Eccles. Politie. lib. 5. c. 64. Tertullian,) are the Pompes of the Deuill, against which, we haue renounced in our Bap∣tisme; because their originall, and the materialls of which they are composed, consisteth wholy of Idolatrie: whence he stiles Play-houses, Diabol Ecclesia et Templum. Ib. cap. 7.25. the Deuills Church. Fugite Theatra & Graecorum ludos: vitate omnem Idolorum Pompam, speciem, denique omnia Daemo∣niaca Spectacula: Constit. Apost. lib. 2. cap. 6. Clemens Romanus, (if the worke bee his,) calls Stage-Playes; the Pompes of Idoles, and Spectacles of the Deuill; wishing all Christians to shunne, and auoyd them. The Deuills Pompe, (saith Renuncio Sathanae, & omni∣bus eius operibus. Poste dicis, & omni Pompae illius: Pompa Diaboli est, in Theatris Spectacula, in bippodromo cursus equorum, & venationes, & reliqua omnis eiuscemodi vanitas: a qua postulansliberari sanctus ille Dei; Auerte, inquit, oculos meos, ne videant vanitatem. Non ergo sis curiosus in frequentia Spectaculorum, vbi conspi∣cias mimorum petulantias, omni contumelia, & impudicitia refertas, & virorum effaeminatorum choreas secteris. Catech. Mystagogica. 1. Cyril of Hierusalem,) which wee renounce in our Baptisme; are those Spectacles, or Playes in Theaters, and all other vanities of this kinde: from which the holy Man of God desiring to bee freed, saith: Turne away mine eyes from be∣holding vanitie. Be not therefore diligent in the assemblies of Playes. Saint Augustine likewise stiles these Stage-Playes the Pompes of the Deuill, which we renounce in Baptisme. Depraehenderis enim & detegeris Christiane, quando aliud agis, & aliud profiteris: fidelis in nomine, aliud demonstrans in opere, non tenens professionis tuae fidem: modo ingrediens Ec∣clesiam orationes fundere; post modicum in Spectaculis cum histrionibus impudice clamare. Quid tibi cum Pompis Diaboli quibus renunciast? Huic vos renunciare professi estis: in qua professione non hominibus, sed Deo, & Angelis eius conscribenti∣bus dixstis, Reuncio, &c. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 4. cap. 1. Tom. 9. part. 1. pag. 1427. See Hom. 21. Tom. 10. pag. 592. Thou art apprehended, thou art detected Oh Christian, (saith he) when thou doest one thing, and professest another: when thou art faithfull in name, faithlesse in worke,
not keeping th faith of thy promise: going one while into the Church to pray; and a while after, running to the Play-house, to crie out impudently with Stage-Players. You haue professed to renounce the Deuill; in which profession, you haue said: I renounce: not onely men, but euen God, and his Angels subscribing together with you. What then hast thou to doe with these Pompes of the Deuill, which thou hast re∣nounce? Saint Chrysostome, who of all the Fathers is most Copious, most Zealous, and diuinely Rhetoricall, against all theatricall Enterludes, endeauoring out of an holy Zeale, to withdraw all Christians from them, vn∣to God: doeth oft times stile these Stage-Playes: Atque vbi spiritus insu∣su est vn∣guentum, eo Diabolicas Pompas im∣mittemus? eo fabulas Sa∣tanae, eo cantilenas mere∣triciae turpi∣tudinis plenas? Hom. De Dauide & Saule. Tom. 1. Col. 511. B. Proinde fre∣quenter vos hortatus sum, ne quis eorum qui horrendae, ae mysticae victimae participes sunt, ad illa iret Specta∣cula, non diuina cum Daemoniacis commisceret mysteria. De verbis Isaiae. vidi Do∣minum, &c. Hom. 1. Col. 1283. C. D. In Theatro omnia contraria, risus, tur∣pitudo, pompae Diabolica. Magna ili Diaboli Pompa, Cymbala, tibiae & cantica plena scortationum ac adulteriorum. In Act. Apost. Hom. 42. Tom. 3 Col 611. C. 612. A. Quo tempore, alii quidem cum nos haec ex hoc loco dissereem in Theatris otiose Diaboli Pompam Spectarunt: & impurissimis Diaboli escis ve∣scebantur. Oratio. 6. Tom. 5. Col. 1471. B. Considera ergo Theatrum illud, ac Diabolicos istos refuge conuentus. Si vero in eisdem perseueraueritis acutiore fer∣ro, & altiore incisione discindam: nec vnquam prorsus quiescam, quoadusque Dia∣bolicum illud dispergam Theatrum, vt mundus Ecclesiae caetus purusque reddatur. Ita enim & praesenti turpitudine liberabimur, & vitam acquiremus futuram, gratia & misericordia domini nostri Iesu Christi. Hom. 7. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 60. D. 61. B. C. the Deuills Pompes: the fables of Satan: Daemoniacall mysteries: the imure foode of the Deuill: and Play-houses: the Deuils conuenticles: And from hence hee doeth seriously, and frequently persuade all Christians to auoyde them. Yea, saith hee, (such was his implacable indignation, and holy detestation against Stage-Playes; not out of passion, or Puritanisme, but true Christian Zeale,) I will neuer giue ouer preaching, vntill I haue dissipated, and rent a sunder, that diuelish Theater; that so the assembly of the Church may bee made pure, and cleane; freed from its present filthi∣nesse, and enioy eternall Life hereafter, by the Grace, and Mercy of Iesus Christ their Lord: a memorable, and Christian re∣solution. That holy man of God, and professed enemie of
Stage-Playes, Saluian Bishop of Marcelles, is very Ele∣gant, and Copious in this Theame. In Specta∣culis enim quaedam A∣postasia fidei est, & a Symbolis ip∣sius, et a C∣lestibus Sa∣cramentis letalis pra∣aricatio. Quae est e∣nim in Bap∣tismo salu∣tari Christi∣anorum pri∣ma confes∣sio? quae sci∣lice, nisi v reuncare se Diabolo, et Pompis e∣ius aque Spectaculis et operibus protesten∣tur? Ergo Spectacula et Pompae, etiam iuxta nostram professionem opera sunt Diaboli. Quomodo, ô Christiane, Spe∣ctacula post Baptismum sequeris, quae opus esse Diaboli confiteris? Renunciasti semel Diabol, et Spectaculis eius, ac per hoc necesse est, prudens et sciens dum ad Spectacula remeas, ad Diabolum te redire cognoscas. Vtrique enim rei siml renunciasti, et vnum vtrumque esse dixisti. Si ad vnum reuerteris, ad vtrumque remeasti: ab∣renuntio enim, inquis, Diabolo, Pompis, Spectaculis, et operibus eius. Et quid postea? Credo, inquis, in Deum patrem omnipotentem, et in Iesum Christum filium eius Ergo primum renunciatur Diabolo, vt credatur Deo: quia qui non renunciat Diabolo, non credit Deo: et ideo qui reuertitur ad Diabolum, relinquit Deum. Diabolus autem in Spectaculis est et Pompis sis: ac per hoc cum redimus ad Spectaculm, relinquimus fidem Christi. Hoc itaque modo omnia Symboli Sacramenta soluutur, et totum quod in Symbolo sequitur, labefactatur et nutat. Nihil enim sequens at, si principale non steterit. Si cui itaque leue Spectaculorum crimen videtur, respici cuncta ista quae diximus, et videat in Spectaculis non voluptatem esse, sed mortem. De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 193, 194. In Stage-Playes, (writes hee) there is a certaine Apostasie from the Faith, and a deadly preuarication, both from the Symboles of it, and the heauenly Sacraments: For what is the first confession of Christians in their wholesome Baptisme: what else, bt that they protest they doe renounce, the Deuill, his Pompes, his Spectacles, and his workes? Therefore Playes, and Pompes according to our profession, are the workes of the Deuill. How then, Oh Christian, doest thou follow Stage-Playes, after Baptisme, which thou confessest to be the worke of the Deuill? Thou hast once renounced the Deuill, and his Spectacles, and by this thou must needes know, that thou doest returne to the Deuill, when thou doest wittingly, and knowingly returne to Stage-Playes: for thou hast renounced both of them together, and thou hast professed both of them to bee one. If then thou reuert to one, thou hast returned vnto both; for thou sayest, I renounce the Deuill, his Pompes, his Spectacles, and hi Workes. And what followes? I beleeue, sayest thou in God the Father Almighty, and in Iesus Christ his Sonne. There∣fore the Deuill is first renounced, that God may be beleeued in: because he, who doeth not renounce the Deuill, doeth not be∣leeue in God: and therefore hee who returnes to the Deuill, forsaketh God. Now the Deuill is in his Playes, and Pompes:
(yea the Play-house, the Temple of all Deuills, as Amphithea∣trum omnium Daemonum Templum est. Tot illicim∣mundi spiri∣tus considunt, quot homines capit. De Spectac. lib. Tom. 2. pag. 393. Tertul∣lian obserues, is alwayes full of Deuills:) and by these meanes, when we returne to Stage-Playes, wee rlinquish the Faith of Christ, and returne to the Deuill. By this meanes then, all the Sacraments of the Creed are abrogated, and all that which followes in the Creed is demolished. If then the crime of Stage-Playes seemes but small to any man, let him reflect on all this which we haue said, and hee may see, that there is no pleasure in Stage-Playes, but death: All which, if our Actors, Play-Poets, and Stage-haunters, would but a whiles con∣sider, it would make them for euer to abominate, and renounce all Stage-Playes, See Danaeus Ethicae Chri∣stianae. lib. 2. cap. 8. pag. 107. Accordingly. as they ought to doe, because they were consecrated to the Deuill, as his chiefest Pompes. You see now by all these concurrent Testimonies of the Fathers: that Stage-Playes are those very Workes, those Pompes, and Vanities of the Deuill, which euery Christian hath solemnely renounced, and seriously vowed against, in his Baptisme, in the very presence of God himselfe, and all his Angels. That they are likewise, those Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, which they haue then, and there renoun∣ced; the former reasons, together with the expresse, and punctuall suffrages of Saint Hilary, Saint Ambrose, Saint Chrysostome, and Saint Augustine in their Comments, and Expositions on the 118, alias the 119. Psalme, verse 37. Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanitie: (to whom I might adde, De Specta∣culis, & Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Saint Cyprian, De vero Cultu. cap. 20. Lactantius, Catechesis Mystagogica 1 Cyril of Hierusalem, Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. Clemens Alexandrinus, Oratio ad Mlites Tem∣pli. cap. 4. Saint Ber∣nard, Hom. 44. pag. 264. Macarius AEgyptius, Hexaeme∣ron. Hom. 4. De Legendis libris Genti∣lium Oratio. Saint Basil, Oratio. 48. & De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum. pag. 1063, 1064. Na∣zianzen, and De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. Saluian, omitting all those See Doctor Reinolds, Master Northbrooke, and Master Gossor, in their Treatises against Stage-Plays. Moderne writers, which are copious in this Theame,) doe abun∣dantly testifie: and indeed, what are, what should bee the Workes, and Pompes of Satan; the Spectacles, Plea∣sures, Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, which we renounce in Baptisme; if Stage-Playes are ex∣empted from that order?
If then this my Assumption be yeelded to me, as of ne∣cessitie it must, (for who can, or dares controle it, against such punctuall, and pregnant euidences?) my Sequell, and Conclusion must bee granted without any more di∣spute. For what man, who dares to stile himselfe a Chri∣stian, can bee so Diabolically absurd, so Audaciously im∣pious, or Desperately prophane, as to denie that Quod eni facto negams neque faco neque dicto, neque visu, neque prospectu partici∣pare debemus. Tertul. De Spectac. c. 24. to be abominable, pernicious, vndecent, and vnlawfull vnto Chri∣stians, which they haue all renounced, and abominated in their Baptisme? Doubtlesse, if there be any odious, hurt∣full, vnseemely, or illegitimate thing in all the world; if there bee any euills, any vanities, or delights of sinne that Christians must refraine; Si iura hu∣manae pactio∣nis firmiter conseruantur, fixius tamen atque feruen∣tius iura tanti pacti, quae cum Deo facta sunt, inuiol∣biliter sunt obseruanda. Concil Pai∣sinse. lib. 1. cap. 10. Suius. Tom. 3 p. 367. then certainely those which they haue vowed, sworne, and solemnely protested a∣gainst, in the very house, and presence of God himselfe, and that in the audience both of men, and Angels; those whom they haue euerlastingly abiured, in that initatory Sacrament of Baptisme, which giues them their primarie admission into the visible Church of Christ, must needes bee they; no Man, no Christian, no Deuill can gaine-say it. Since then I haue prooued by irrefragable Testimonies; that Stage-Playes, are those very workes, Pmpa Di∣aboli hoec est, qu et Pmpa mundi: id est, amitio, ar∣rogantia, vana gloria, omnis∣que uiuslibet rei superfluitas in humanis vstus. Concil. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 10. Ib. and Pompes of the Deuill; those very Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked world, which euery Christian, hath solemnely disclaimed, and seriously Pmpa Di∣aboli hoec est, qu et Pmpa mundi: id est, amitio, ar∣rogantia, vana gloria, omnis∣que uiuslibet rei superfluitas in humanis vstus. Concil. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 10. Ib. renounced in his Baptisme; who can, who dares stand out to iustifie them? who can, who dares denie them, to bee abominable, incompatible, and vtterly vnlawfull vnto Christians? God forbid, that any who haue beene dipped in the Sacred lauer of Regeneration; any who haue beene bathed, and purified in the Soule-cleansing, and Sinne-purging blood of the Lord Iesus Christ, any who haue pledged their Faith, and Troth to God in Bap∣tisme; any who haue beene Baptized with the name of Christians; any who haue either by themselues, or o∣thers, Abrenunciare enim Diabolo, est penitus um respuee, sper∣nere, reiicere, eique contradicere, seque, et vnumquemque ab eo alienare, siue aliud quid quod in hoc verbo et hoc sensis exprimi potest. Concil. Paris. lib. 1. cap. 10. Ib. renounced the Deuill, withall his Pompes, and
Workes: together with all the Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, 1 Peter. 1.14, 15, 18. Colos. 2.20, 21, 22. Reu 14.3, 4. from which Christ Iesus hath Re∣deemed them; should prooue such desperate, Diabolo seruientes Daemones sunt. Crysostome Oratio. 5. Col. 957. A. incarnate Deuills; such mosters of Impietie; such Atheisticall, Prodigious, and infernall Miscreants; such treacherous Iudasses to their Lord, and Master; such periured, and professed Rebells to their God; Magna quippe ex parte Christianorum decus vilescit, quando renati in Christo ea quibus in Bap∣tismate re∣nunciauerunt nec intelligere curant, nec ab his se, vt Christo polliciti sunt abstinere satagunt. Concil. Pari∣siense. lib. 1. cap. 10. such blemishes, and cut-throates to their Religion; such Apostates, and vn∣derminers to their Faith, and Baptisme: such vnnaturall, and deplored Enemies to their owne Saluation; or such will-full bloody Murtherers to their owne Soules; as to approoue, to iustifie, to practise, or frequent these Stage-Playes, which they haue thus abiured; or to deeme them tollerable, or lawfull vnto CHRISTIANS. Alas, Hosea 14.8. Quid nobis cum operibus Diaboli? Quid mihi & tibi est Belial? Ego Christi seruus sum, illius Redemp∣tus sanzuin, illi me totum mancipaui. Quid mihi & tibi est? Tanto magis nos oportet seperare a Diabolo, quanto ille se discernit a Christo. Ambrose De Elia, & Ieiun. cap. 20. what haue Christians any more to doe with Idoles? what will the Deuill? what with the Pompes, and workes of Satan? what with the shewes, the pleasures, and vanities of this wicked world? yea, what with Stage-Playes, which they haue abiured? Is there any late, or new agreement signed betweene Christ, and Belial? betweene Righte∣ousnesse, and Vnrighteousnesse? Beleeuers, and Infidels? Is there any peace, or contract newly made betweene God, and Satan? betweene Christians, and the Deuill? betweene Heauen, and Hell? betweene the Citizens of the new Hierusalem, and this present euill World, which Rom. 8.5.7. Galat. 5.17. 1 Corinth. 6.14, 15, 16. Genes. 3.15. Galat. 4.29. Diabolus semper Christi aduersarius est. Chrysostome. Hom. 42. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 887. A. are euerlasting enemies, vncapable of any truce, or mix∣ture? Or hath God dispensed with our vow in Baptis∣me? or haue we lately renounced our couenant with our God, and sworne alleageance to the World, the Flesh, and the Deuill; or else beene 1 Corinth. 1.13. Rebaptized in their names? If so, then let vs flocke, and runne to Stage-Playes, and take of them our fill, I will not interrupt, or
keepe backe any. But if the Deuill, the World, and God be as farre at varance now, as : 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Iames 4.4. is Righteousnesse, and Vnrighteousnesse; Christ, and Belial; Beleeuers, and In∣fidels; the Temple of God, and the Temple of Idoles; yea, the World, the Flesh, the Deuill, and Christians, bee yet at irre∣concilable, and euerlasting enmitie, as they are: If the anci∣ent contract betweene God, and vs in Baptisme, Rom. 6.3, 4. Hebr. 9.16, 17, 18. con∣firmed, and ratified in the precious blood of our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ,) stand good: and there bee no new league, nor couenant betweene the World, the Deuill, Hell, and vs: how can, how may wee then approoue of Stage-Playes? how can wee tolerate, act, admire, or frequent them, as alas we doe? What, shall we renounce the Deuill, and all his Workes? Nihil ad vos de Pompis saeculi attinet qui renunci∣auistis in Bap∣tismate, mun∣do, Diabolo & Pompis eorum, quod postmodum confirmastis sub pollicita∣tione iura∣menti. Hierom De Regula. Monachorum. cap. 30. Arenuncia∣sti mundo, abrenunciasti saeculo, esto sollicitus. Qui pecuniam de∣bet semper cautionem suam conside∣rat. Et tu qui fidem debes Christo, fidem serua, quae multo preciosior est quam pecunia. Ambrose De Sara∣mentis. lib. 1. cap. 2. Tom. 4. pag. 168. A. shall wee abiure the Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, (which serue onely to feed the sinfull lusts of the flesh;) and yet shall wee Pleade for them with our Tongues, Cherish them with our Purses, Runne to them with our Feete, Quale est illas manus quas ad domi∣num extuleris, postmodo laudando histrionem fatigare? Tertul. De Spectac. cap. 25. Applaud them with our Hands, Magnifie them in our Iudgements, Harbour them in our Houses, yea, Lodge them in our Hearts? Alas, poore sinfull wretches, who are thus grosely Deluded, thus miserably Periured; How, how shall we answere, how excuse, or iustifie this our notori∣ous, and will-full Periury to our great Creatour? how shall, how can we looke our God, our Iudge, our Sauiour, or any of the blessed Saints, and Angells in the face? Psa. 1.5. 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. Ir. 5.31. where can we appeare, how can wee stand in Iudgement, what shall we doe, or which way shall we turne our selues, when God himselfe shall challeng vs, when Christ Iesus shall arraigne vs, and hee Dan 7.10. Mat. 25.31. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Iude 14.15. together withall his holy Saints, and Angells, condemne vs, in that great, and terrible day of Iudgement, for breach of this our vow? O let vs now at last remember, that there is an Audit, a day of Iudge∣ment
comming, 2 Cor. 5.10. Rom. 14.11.1 Qua tre∣mendus est ille dies iudicii in q Dominus nosier Iesus Christus pro∣posuit venire cum flamma ignis quae con∣sumptura est aduersarios suos, & eos qui faciunt in∣iquitatem? &c. Ambrose. Sermo. 33. wherein we must all appeare, before the great Tribunall of the  Iesus Christ,  all the breaches of this our solemne couenant: and what will then be∣come of vs, if wee thus treacherously infringe it now, in frequenting Stage-Playes? Excuse our selues we cannot; Perish, perish we must, and that eternally without recoue∣ry; without all pittie. For is it not equall, that such who readily serue the Deuill, in practising all his workes, and resorting to his Pompes, which they haue couenanted to abiure, Mat. 25.41. should participate of his wages, and euerlasting tor∣ments? that such who follow the Pleasures, Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked world, 1 Cor. 11.32 Reuel. 18.4. Qui vult ga∣dere cum soe∣culo, non pos∣sit regnare cum Christ. Ambrose. Sermo. 11. should likewise be con∣demned with the world, and be partakers of its punishments? who can Commiserate, or Pittie such a one, or deeme him worthy of Saluation, who leaues his euer-blessed God, Rom. 14.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Luke 17.10. to whom hee owes himselfe, and all his seruice; to serue the Deuill whom hee hath defied? or willingly parts with Heauen, and Eternall glory, by departing from the Prou. 2 13. chap. 12.28. Matth. 7.14. wayes of Grace, which lead men to it, to embrace the very vainest vanities, and Enterludes of this wretched world, which hee hath thus abiured? Certainely such a mans Damnation is exceeding iust, and his Saluation, (without repentance) desperate: And is not this the case of all such persons, who resort to Stage-Playes after Bap∣tisme? O then good Christian Readers, in the name, and feare of God, and in tender compassion to your owne di∣stressed Soules, I beseech y, I intreate you, euen with sobs, and teares proceeding from a bleeding, and lamen∣ting spirit, anxious of nothing but your Eternall good; that you would now at last, consider seriously what you are, and what you haue done. Acts 11.26. Christiani a Christo nomen acceperunt, & opera pre∣cium est vt si∣cut sunt haeredes nominis ita sint imitatores sanctiatis. Bernardi. Sententi. Col. 996. L. You are all Christians in name; and it is my desire, my prayer, that you may bee such Esse Christianum grande est, non videri. Hierom. Tom. 1. Epist. 13. cap. 3. Tunc vera est Dei gratia si hoc rebus exhibeat, quod verbis sonat. August. Contr. Iulianum. lib. 4. cap. 7. in trueth. You haue all proclaimed a solemne defi∣ance
to the Deuill, and all his Workes, and openly re∣nounced the seuerall Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, of which Stage-Playes are the chiefe, and most assiduous: as being the Acts. 16.17. 1 Cor. 7.22, 23. 1 Pet. 2.16. Seruants, and Saints of God, the Rom. .17. Iames. 2.5. Galat 4.7. Heires of Heauen, the 1 Thes. 4.4. 2 Tim. 2.21. Vessels of Holinesse, the 1 Cor. 3.16. Chap. 6.9. Ephes. 2.22. liuing Temples of the holy Ghost, the Ephes. 2.19. Hebr. 12.22. fellow Citizens of the Saints in Glory, and the Inhabitants of a better World then this: Oh answere therefore your profession with a correspondent conuersation: If you are, or would be Chri∣stians, doe not you hencefoorth liue like Pagans: Non aga∣mus similem Infidelibus vi∣tam, sed a qui∣bus fide discer∣nimur, ab o∣rum studiis etiam & mo∣ribus diuida∣mur. Decla∣rat fidem tu∣am qutidian actio tua: con∣firmet tuam ad Christum charitatem, euidens a car∣nalibus con∣cupiscentiis discessio t. Chrys. De Mi∣litia Christ. Hom. Tom. 5. Col. 633. A. See my Healthes, Sickenesse. pag. 22.42.78. Edit 2. but as you differ from them in your Faith, be you likewise distingui∣shed from them by your Workes. If you haue renounced the Deuill, and all his Workes; O liue not any longer to them: If you haue abiured the Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World; O then returne not to them, as Dogges vnto their vomit: Inisti pactum cum aduersario tuo, diens e; Renuncio tii, Diabole, & saculo tuo, & Pompae tuae, & operibus tuis: serua fd quod pepigisti, &c. Hierom. Epist. 8. cap. 5. Tom. 1. pag. 22. why should you serue, why should you re-embrace, how can you tollerate, or approoue the things, which you haue thus abiured? God commands you, Ephes 4.37. Iames 47. 1 Peter 5.9. not to giue place to the Deuill, but to resist him stedfastly in the Faith, that so hee may flie from you how dare you then to entertaine him in these Enterludes, which are his chiefest Pompes, and Workes; against this Precept, and your Vow? God commands you, 1 Iohn 2.15. not to loue the World, nor the things of the World; Rom. 12.1, 2. Colos. 2.19, 20. Ephes. .2, 3. not to conforme your selues to the Course, the Fashions, Pompes, and Vanities of this present euill World, 1 Iohn 5.19. which lyes in wickednesse; Iames 1.27. but to keepe your selues vnspotted from it: Iames 4.4. 1 Iohn 2.15. because the friendship of the World, is enmitie to God, and the friends of this World, 1 Ioh 2.16. Seculum Dei est, secularia autem Diaboli. Tertul. De Spectaclis lib. which is not of God,) are professed enemies vnto God: How can you then admit, or harbour Stage-Playes, (the greatest
Pompes, and Vanities, that this World affords,) against these Precepts, and your Coenant, without the danger of Rebellion, and the highest Periury? Christ Iesus in∣formes you; Matth. 6.24. Luke 16.13. Iames 4.4. that you cannot serue two contrary Ma∣sters, as the Deuill, or the World, and him: and therefore you disclaime the one in Baptisme, that so you may ap∣propriate your selues, and seruice to the other. And can you then yoake, and serue them all together? Can you serue Christ Iesus, and the Deuill? Plus placent mundo qui Christo displi∣cnt Hierom. Epist 3. cap. 31. Christ, and the World? Christ, and Stage-Playes? Or can you be so be∣sotted by the Deuill, (as alas too many are,) as to thinke to please, to honour, court, and entertaine Christ Iesus, to welcome him into the World, or celebrate his Nati∣uitie, with infernall Stage-Playes, Ludi omnes Originem de Idololatria sumpserunt. Tertul. De Spctac. cap. 6. to 12. Idololatria ludorum om∣nium mater. Cyprian De Spectaculis. the very Monu∣ments, and Insignes, with which the Pagans did Gratifie, and See Cicero. De Arusp. Re∣spons. Orat. See Act. 2. & Tertul. De Spectaculis. cap. 6. to 22. & pag. 43. Accordingly. Court their Deuill-gods vpon their Feastiualls, and so∣lemne Birth-dayes:) as if Christ, and the Deuill, Christi∣ans, and Pagans were accorded? as if Stage-Playes, were the chiefest workes of the Lord Iesus Christ, (who was Luke 1.74, 75. 1 Iohn 3.8. borne of purpose to Redeeme vs from them, and to destroy out of vs these workes of the Deuill:) the principall recrea∣tions, and delights of Christians; not the Inuentions, Pompes, and Solemnities of Satan; not the remainders of Idolatrie; not the Ludi scenici animorum pestilentia. August De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap 32. Quippe nec ia Deûm tantum, nec tela, nec hostes; Quantum sola nocet animis illapsa voluptas. Silius Italicus. lib. 15. pag. 186. Soule-poysoning pleasures, shewes, and vanities of this sinfull World, which wee haue all Idolorum nec minus Templa, quam monument desumus: quia non possumus coenam Dei edere, & coenam Daemoniorum. Tertul. De Spectac lib. pag. 393, 394. renounced. Beloued Christians, consider I beseech you, that God himselfe commands you: 1 Iohn. 5.21. to keepe your selues from Idoles; 1 Cor. 10.14. Apostolus inclamat: Fugite Idololatriam: omnem vtique & totam. Terul. De Corona Militis. cap. 8. and to flee from all Idolatrie, as Principale crimen generis humani, summ seculi reatus, tota causa udicii, Idololatria. Tertul. De Idololatria. lib. cap. 1. being the most capitall, and dangerous sinne of all other:
and can you then embrace these Stage-Playes, (which were originally Ludiquibus Floralibus & Megalensibus nomen est, cae∣terique omnes al sacros esse voluistis, & religionum in¦ter officia, & res diuinas de∣putari. Arno∣bius Aduers. Gentes. lib. 7. pag. 232. August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 13.27, 29. lib. 4 cap. 1. consecrated vnto Idoles, as holy, and reli∣gious things; as parts, and ornaments of their Pompe, and Worship: and haue therefore beene condemned by the Tertul. De Spectac. lib. cap. 4. to 12. & 24, 25. Cprian De Specta lib. Lactantius De vro Cultu. cap. 20 See pag. 28, 29, 30. Fathers; as the Issues, Limbes, and Monuments of Idola∣trie, from whence they had their birth:) without any breach of these commands, or of your vow in Baptisme; where∣in you did renounce all Idoles, and Idolatrie, with all their Pompes, and Reliques? O therefore, as you are Christi∣ans; as you haue Soules to saue, or lose for euer; be you now at last entreated, to lay all these considerations close vnto your Soules; before it bee to late. The time will come ere long, (and who can tell how soone, since the Apostle hath long since forewarned vs; Phil. 4.5. Iames 5.8, 9. Iudicium Dei prae sortbus est. Chrys. Kalen∣dis Oratio. Tom. 5. Col. 800. C. that the Lord is at hand: that the comming of the Lord draweth nigh; and that the Iudge standeth before the doore;) when 1 Thes. 4.16.2 Cor. 6.10. that last, and dismall Trumpe, (which should be Semper ua illa terribili vstris perstrepet auribus: Surgte mortui, venite ad iudicium. Hierom. De Regula Monach. cap. 30. Tom. 9. pag. 268. D. Chrys. Hom. 71. ad Pop. Antioch. alwayes sounding this into your eares arise ye dead, and come to Iudgement,) shall summon you before Christs glorious Tribunall, Rom. 14.10.12. to ren∣der an account of your selues to him, how well you haue kept this vow, these Precepts, which now I presse vp∣on you: and then alas, what can you pleade, or answere for your selues? Can you replie, that you haue kept, or Acts 24.16. 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. Haud est nocen, qucunque non est sponte nocens. Seneca. Hr. ul. Otius. Act. 3. fol. 221. at leastwise endeauoured for to keepe, to the vtmost of your power, these seuerall Iniunctions, or your vow in Baptis∣me? that you haue renounced the World, the Flesh, the Deuill, or Idoles, and Idolatrie, with all their seuerall Vanities, Pompes, and Workes; whiles you thus iusti∣fie, magnifie, and harbour Stage-Playes, which not onely August De Ciu Dei. lib. 2. cap. 26. Arnob. Aduers. Gntes. lib. 7 See pag. 49, 50, 51. Fathers, but euen Pomp, Pompa ludorum: Pompa sacrorum: Derum Pompa. Dionys. Hallicarnas. Antiq Rom. lib. 7. cap. 9. Minutius Felix. Octauius pag. 34. Cicero. Epist. ad Atti. lib. 13. Eist. 28.43. Circus rit Pompa celeber, numeroque Dorum Ouid. Fastorum lib. 4. pag. 68. Godwin Roman Antiq. lib. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 2. pag. 85. Pagans themselues, repute, and
stile; the Worlds, and Deuills Pompes? Alas, Quomod, renunciaui∣mus Diabolo & Angelis eius, si eos fa∣cimus? Quod repudium dix∣imus his, non dico cum qui∣bus, sed de qui∣bus viuimus? Quam discor∣diam suscipi∣mus in eos, quibus exhibi∣tionis nostrae gratia obligai sumus? Potes lingua negsse, quod manu cnfiteris? Verbo distru∣ere, quod facto struis? Deum vnum praedi∣care qui tantos fficis? Deum verum praedi∣care qui falsos facis? Negas te quod facis colere? Tertul. De Idololatria lib. Tom. 2. pag. 448. how haue you renounced the Deuill, World, or Idoles, whiles you re∣taine their shewes, or doe their workes? What diuorce haue you giuen to all, or any of these, with which, by which you liue? What enmitie haue you taken vp against them, whiles you are thus obliged to them? Can you denie that (thinke you,) with your tongues, which you confesse with your hands? Or doe you destroy that in word, which you support in deed? O my beloued, how can you euer say, Qui Christi∣ani nominis opus non agit, Christianus non esse videatur. Saluian De Gb. Dei. lib. 4. pag. 94 that you haue liued like Christians, not like Pagans? that you Quid ergo illi cum terra qui possidet coelum? Quid illi cum umanis, qui adeptus est iam diuina? Chrysologus. Sermo. 25. Nunquam humana opera ad∣mirabitur, quisquis se cognouerit filium Dei. Cyprian. De Spectaculis. are the Saints of God, and Citizens of Heauen; not Satans Mini∣ons, or Burgers of this present wicked world? that you haue in trueth renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Deuill, with all their Pompes, and Workes; whiles you wast your time, and your affections, on those Heathenish, and Infernall Enterludes, and delights of sinne, which are the chiefest Workes, and Pompes of Satan; the eminen∣test Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World; to which Infidels, and worldlings haue beene most deuoted? Can you plead Not-guiltie of Periurie, and Rebellion in all these particulars vnto God hereafter, when as you can∣not plead thus, now to men, Se iudice nemo nocens absoluitur. Iuuenal Satyr. 13. pag. 117. Quod quisque fecit, patitur: autorem scelus repeti, suoque premitur exemplo nocens. Seneca. Hercules Furens. Act. 3. fol. 36. (b) or to your owne condemning Consciences? If you hope to prooue Not-guiltie then; why doe your Sunt vero nonnulli qui aeterna quae audiunt veraciter cre∣dunt, & tamen eidem quam tenent fidei morus contradicunt. Greg. Magn. Moral. lib. 29. cap. 3. Liues, your Workes, your Consciences crie Guiltie now? If you confesse your selues Guiltie now, how can you plead Guiltlesse, Rom. 2.3. or escape Christs doome, and iudgement then? Since therefore it is vndeniably ei∣dent by all the premises: that Stage-Playes are those Pomps, and Workes of the Deuill, and Idoles; those Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, and heathen Pagans, which
euery Christian hath euerlastingly renounced, and solemnely abiured in his Baptisme: Let this, yea this alone, perswade all such as are Baptized with the name of Christians, (vnlesse, Nonnulli etiam unc Christiani sse non appe∣tunt, sed vi∣deri. Gregor. Mag. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 11. they desire onely to seeme Christians, not to bee Christians, as many doe,) to See pag. 42. (z) In die Baptis∣matis omnibus os antiqui hostis operibus, aque omni∣bus Pompis cius renunci∣are promisi∣nius. Itaque vnusquisque ad considera∣tionem suae mentis oculo reduca; & sic seruat post Baptismum, quod ante Bap∣tismum spo spondi, Per praesentem ab∣renuntiatio∣nem expulsus est prior hospes; per confessionem creduliatis, intret secundus. Ama∣larius Fortunatus. De Ecclesiast. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 23. abominate, and condemne all Stage-Playes; not onely in iudgement, but in practise too; as Pericious, Vnchristian, and vnlawfull Pompes, and Vanities, See Act. 7. Scene. 2, 3, 4, 5. as the Church, and Saints of God haue al∣wayes done in former Ages. (And so much the rather; be∣cause Christians in the Primitiue Church, (how euer the times are changed now,) were Atque hin vel maxime intelligunt factum Christianum de repudio Spectaculo∣rum. Negt itaque manifeste qui per quod agnoscitur ollit. Tertul. De Spectaculis. cap. 24. See pag. 4. (p) (q) especially knowne, and discouered to bee Christians, by their abstinence, and diuorce from Stage-Playes.) Else if they approoue, applaude, and haunt these Stage-Playes still; let them know this to their endlesse terrour: that though they beare the name of Christians, or yeeld some superficiall worship vnto God; yet they doe in trueth renounce their Christianitie, Nonne eieramus & rescindimus signaculum, re∣scindendo testationem eius? Tertul. D Spectaculis. cap. 24. See pag. 49, 50, 51. annihi∣late their Baptisme, abiure their Religion; denie their Faith, their God, their Iesus: Multi sunt qui faciunt eleemosynas & tamen peccare non cessant. Isti quasi sua offerunt Deo, & seipss Diabolo. Ambrose. Serm. 12. See pag. 59, 51. and bequeath themselues wholly to the Deuill: yea, they forfait Heauen, and their owne Saluation, and wrecke their deare immortall Soules for all eternitie. And who is there that beleeues a God, a Heauen, a Hell, so desperately prodigall of his owne Sal∣uation, as to incurre all these, or to put himselfe to such a losse, to fauour Stage-Playes? but of this enough.
ACTVS 3. SCENA PRIMA. The stile and subiect mat∣tr of Stage-Playes, is vn∣lawull, there¦fore the Plays themslues.THirdly, as Stage-Playes are thus odious, vnseeme∣ly, pernicious, and vnlawfull vnto Christians in all the precedent respects: so likewise are they such in re∣gard of their ordinary stile, and subiect matter; which no Christian can, or dares to patronize: If we suray the stile, or subiect matter of all our popular Enterludes; we shall discouer them, to bee Ad malum malae res plu∣nimae se agglu∣tinant. Plauti. Aulularia. Act. 4. pag. 102 either Scurrilous, Amo∣rous, and Obscene: or Barbarous, Bloody, and Tyran∣nicall: or Heathenish, and Prophane: or Fabulous, and Fictitious: or Impious, and Blasphemous: or Satyri∣call, and Inuectiue: or at the best but Frothy, Vaine, and Friuolous: If then, Necesse est vt initia & exitus inter se congruant. Seneca. Epist. 9. the composure, and matter of our popular Stage-Playes, be but such as this, the Playes them∣selues must needes be euill, vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians. Not to insist vpon this Generall: that the subiect matter of most Comedies, and Tragedies is some vile, and odious sinne: Has ob res non chachin∣nis diffluere sedentes, sed lachrymis ge∣mere ac doler oportet. Chrys. Hom. 3. in Mat. Religiosa tri∣stitia, aut ali∣orum luget peccatum, aut proprium: Beti quorum lctus in haec intetione versatur. Bernardi. Serm. in Fsto. Mar. Magd. Col. 244. H. See De Modo bene viuendi. lib. Col. 1252. The stile, and subiect matter of Stage-Playes, is Amorous, and Obscene: therefore the Playes thmselues vnlawfull. which should bee rather a griefe, and abomination, then a recreation vnto Christians: I shall for the present confine my selfe to the particulars here specified. First, I say, that the stile, and subiect matter of most popular, (especially Comicall) Stage-Playes, is Amorous, Scurrilous, and Obscene, vnbeseeming all Chast, and Christian eares: from whence I raise this fift Argument.
That whose very stile, and subiect matter is Lasciui∣ous, Scurrilous, and filthy, See Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 6. B B. Babington. Mr. Perkins. Mr. Dod. Mr. Elton. Mr. Caluin. and others on the seauenth Commande∣ment. Accor∣dingly. must needes bee vn∣seemely, vnlawfull, and pernicious vnto Christians. But the very stile, and subiect matter of most, if not of all our popular Stage-Playes is such. Therefore they must needes be vnseemely, vnlawfull, and pernicious vnto Christians. For the Maior, I hope no Christian, no Pagan dares to question it. For God himselfe, hath laid this perempto∣rie Iniunction vpon men: Psal. 34.13. to keepe their tongues from euill, and their lips from speaking guile: yea, he hath giuen this in speciall charge to Christians. Colo. 4.6. Let your speach bee alwayes gracious, seasoned with salt: Ephes. 4.29, 30. cap. 5.3.4. See Ambrose, Hierome, Primasius, Theodoret, Chrysostome, and Theophy∣lact, on Ephes. 5.3.4. Accor∣dingly. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good for the vse of ediying, that it may minister grace to the hearers: Let all euill speaking be put away from you: and as for fornication, and vncleanenesse, (the common subiects, and principall ingredients of our Comedies,) neither foolish talking, nor iesting, which are not conuenient, let them not bee once named, (much lesse then acted, or applauded) among you, as becommeth Saints: Apud Chri∣stianos enim slcismus est magnus, est vi∣tium, turpe a∣liquid vel nar∣rare, vel fa∣cere. Hierom. Aduers Helui∣dium cap. 8. Tom. 2. pag. 139. It is a great solecisme, yea, a sinne among Christians, either to relate, or doe, (much more, to Personate, Penne, or Pleasingly to behold,) any obscene, or filthie thing: Christians they are, at leastwise should be, Rom. 1.7. Ephes. 1.1. 1 Thes. 4.7. Hebr. 3.1. Saints; yea, 1 Cor. 3.16. cap 6.17. 2 Cor. 11.2. 2 Tim. 2.21. Reu. 14.4. Chast, and holy Virgins, Temples, and Vessels for the Lord: 2 Cor. 7 1. cleansing themselues from all pollution, both of Flesh, and Spirit: Isay 33.15. stopping their eares from hearing blood, shtting their eyes from seeing euill: yea, not so much, Isay 2.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. as touching any vncleane thing: therefore they must abandon all Vnchast, all Scurrilous, and filthie things: their Eyes, teir Eares, their Hands, Nihil aliud nouerit linguae nisi Christum: nihil posset sonare nisi quod sanctum est. Hierom. Epist. 9. cap. 1. their Tongues, their Hearts, must know nothing but Christ, inter∣meddle with nothing but pure and holy things: Leit 11.44. cap. 19.2. 1 Pt 1.15. Their God
is holy: Luke 1.35. Acts. 4.27. their Sauiou Iesus Christ is holy: Psal. 51.11. 2 Pet. 1.21. Reuel. 4.7. their holy Ghost is holy: Iames 1.27. their Religion, Rom. 1.2. 2 Tim. 3.15. 2 Pet. 2.22. their Scriptures, 1 Cor. 11 27.29. Heb. 10.29. their Sacraments, Iude 20. their Companions, Ephes. 1.4. Hebr. 3.1. 1 Peter 2.9. their Faith, Reu 21.2.10. their Inheritance, and 1 Thes. 4 7. Hebr. 12.14. Profession holy, Chast, and Vndefiled: and so must 1 Pet. 1.15.16 2 Peter 3.11. they be too, in all manner of con∣ersation, at all times: therefore all Amorous, all Lasciui∣ous, filthie, and polluted things, which haue no analogie, nor proportion with them, must needes bee sinfull, hurt∣full, and vnseemely, yea, odious, and displeasing to them. Obscenitie, or rotten discourse: (which the Fathers in the margent who condemne it, define to be nothing else, Turpilqui∣um iure voca∣tur quae de vi∣tiosis factis habeturoratio; cuiusmodi est, si de adulterio, vel de puero∣rum Amore disseratur, &c. Clemens Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 6. See Chrys Hom. 17. in Ephes. 5. Hierome, Ambrose, Theodoret, Primasius, Theophylact, and Haymo, in Ephes. 5.3, 4. Accordingly, where they together with Saint Augustine. De Rect. Cathol. Conursationis. Tom. 9. part. 1. pag. 1447. and Saint Bernard. De Pass. Domini. Tract. cap. 27. condemne scurrilitie, and iesting. but a Narration of some Vitious, Amorous, Adulterous, and filthie action, to passe away the time, or to prouoke, and stirre vp laughter: of which sort, are all ribaldrie Songs, and Iests; all Theatricall, Complementall, Poeticall, or Table-di∣scourses of the Adulteries, Incests, Loues, and vile Obsenities of gracelesse wicked men, or Heathen-gods, Exprimunt adulterum ouem non tam rego suo quam vitiis praepotentem. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. who transcen∣ded others in their vices, as much as in their Deitie:) was alwayes detestable, and odious vnto Pagans: Hence Gel∣lius informes vs, Non in facta modo, sed etiam in voces petulantiores publice Romae vindicatum est. Noct. Att. lib. 10. cap. 6. that the Romans did publikely punish, not onely Obscene, and petulant deedes, but words: Hence Plutarchi, Romulus. Opmerus. Chronogr. pag. 90. Dionys. Hal. Antiq. Rom. lib. 2. Sect. 4. Romulus inacted this Law: Ne quis praesentibus foe∣minis obscaena verba facito: Let no man vse any obscene speach in the presence of any women: Hence Sophocles in∣formes vs, Non pulchrum est dicere ea qua factu turpia sunt. Oedip. Tyr. pag. 301. Theodoret, Chrysostome, Primasius, and Theophylact, in Ephes. 5.4, 5. Accordingly. that it is not seemely, nor honest, to speake such things, which are vnseemely to bee done: Hence was that ingenious checke which Diogenes gaue to a beauti∣full youth, when hee heard him vttering some obscenities:
Non erube∣scis; ait, ex eburnea vae∣gina plumbe∣um educens gladium. Diog. Laert. lib. 6. Diog. pag. 349. doest thou not blush, (saith hee) to draw a leaden Sword out of an Iuorie scabbard? Hence was that brand, which Seneca stamped vpon all scurrilous persons, which I would such Christians whose tongues are tipt, and hearts de∣lighted with Ribaldrous Songs, and Iests, would seriously apply vnto their Consciences: wheresoeuer (saith he) thou Vbiunque videris orati∣onem corrup∣tam, ibi quo∣que mores a recto desciuisse non erit dubi∣um. Epist. 114. Magna mala habitant in illa anima quae verba vsurpat malae & faceta. Chrys. Hom. 17. in Ephes. 5. meetest with corrupt discourse, there doubt not but the heart, and manners are depraued: and no wonder: for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh, and euill words corrupt good manners, Mat. 12.34. Luke 6.45. 1 Cor. 15.33. as the Scriptures teach vs Hence Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 9. pag. 60. Alaei. Carm. apud Pndaum. pag. 405. Aristotle magnifies the modestie of that ingenuous Pagan, who when he was about to vtter an vnchast obscenitie, was tongue-tied out of modest shame: Valerius Max lib. 2. cap. 6. ect. 7. the Citizens of Mar∣celles though Pagans, would admit no Stage-Playes into their Citie, least their filthinesse, and obsceniti should corrupt their youth: Yea, the very Nil dictu faedum visuque haec limina tangat Intra quae puer est: procul hinc, procul inde puellae Lenonum, & cantus pernoctantis parasiti. Maxima debetur pueris reuerentia. Iuuenal. Satyr. 14. pag. 126. Heathen Poet himselfe, would haue all scurrilitie, and ribaldrie, exiled from such places where Youthes, and Children were, for feare they should de∣praue their mindes, and manners. If then God himselfe, if the Fathers, yea, if all these Pagans haue vtterly con∣demed all filthie, Scurrilous, Vnchat, and Amorous speaches, Iests, and Poemes, as misbeseeming Chast, and Modest eyes, or Lips, or Eares; my Maior cannot but be granted: and so much the rather, Obscaenus srmo & scurrilitas vehiculum scorta∣tionis: Ne dixeris vrbana, scurrilia, nec turpia, nec feceris, & flamniam cupi∣ditatis extingues. Chrysostome. Hom. 17. in Ephes. 5. & Theophylact. Ib. because Vnchast, Obscene, and Amorous wordes, are but so many vehiculaes, to carrie mn on to Adulterous, and Sinfull deedes, both which, all Christians must abominate. For the Maior; that the Stile, and subiect Matter of most Comicae fabulae de stupris virginum loquuntur & amribus meretricum. Lactan∣tius, De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. Comicall, and Theatricall Enterludes, is Amorous, and Obscene; it is as euident, as the Morning Sunne: First, by the expresse, and punctuall testimonie of sundry
Fathers. Read but Bibliotheca Patrum. Co∣loniae Agrip. 1616. Tom. 2. pag. 180.181. Tatianus Oratio. Aduersus Graecos. Ib. pag. 170. G. H. Theophylus Antiochenus Contra Autolicum. lib. 3. Cle∣mens Romanus Constit. Apostolorum. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. Clemens Alexandrinus Oratio. Exhort. ad Gentes. fol. 8.9. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 6.7. & Quod enim turpe factum non ostenditur in Theatris? quod autem verbum impu∣dens non pro∣ferunt qui ri∣sum mouent scurr & histriones? Ib. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 10.17. to 28. Apologia aduersus Gentes. cap. 38. De Pudicitia. cap. 7. Minucius Felix Octauius. pag. 101. Philo Iudaeus De Agricultura. lib. pag. 271. De vita Mosis. pag. 932. De vita Contemplatiua. lib. pag. 1209. Cy∣prian Sed ad scenae inuerecundos ad sales iam transitum fa∣ciam; pudet referre quae di∣cuntur, pudet etiam accu∣sare quae fiunt. Agentium strophas, aul∣terorum falla∣cias, mulie∣rum impudi∣citias, scurri∣les iocs, pari∣sitos sordidos, ipso quoque patres familias regale, modo stupido, modo obscaenos, modo stotidos, certis nominibus iuuerem. Ib. De Spectac. lib. & Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2. Donato. Origen in Rom. 11. lib. 8. Tom. 3. pag. 203. Arnobius aduers-Gentes. lib. 3. pag. 114. lib. 4. pag. 149.150. lib. 5. pag. 182. & lib. 7. pag. 230. to 241. Lactantius De vero Cultu. cap. 20. Diuinarum Institutionum Quin scena? num sanctior? in qua Comoedia de stupris & amoribus; Traadia de incest & parricidiis, fabulatur. Ib. Epit. cap. 6. Basilius Magnus Hexaemeron. Hom. 4. De Legendis libris Gentilium Oratio. & Ascetica. Tom. 2. pag. 180.181. Gregorie Nzianzen Oratio. 48. pag. 796.797. ad Seleuchum De recta Educatione Epist. pag. 1063.1064. Gregorie Nyssen. Vitae Moseos Enar∣ratio. pag. 525. Ambrose De Paenitentia. lib. 2. cap. 6. & Enarratio in Plasm. 118. Octon. 5. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus Catechesis Mystagogica. 1. Hilarie Enarratio in Psal. 14. & in Psal. 118. He. Hierom Comment. in Ezech. lib. 6. cap. 20. Tom. 4. pag. 389. H. & Epist. 2. cap. 6. Chrysostome Hom. 3. De Dauide & Saul. Hom. in Psal. 140. Hom. 6.7. Cuncta enim simpliciter quae ibi fiunt turpissi∣m sunt: verba, vestitus, tonsura, incessus, voces, cantus, modulationes, oculorum euersiones, motus, tibiae, fistulae, & ipsa fabularum argumenta, omnia (inquam) turpi lasciu plena sunt: quae aures mentis solent magis quam quauis sordes obstuere: vel potiu non obstruunt tantum, sed etiam impurum faciunt, & immundum. Chrys Ib. & 38. in Mat. Hom. 62. in Acta. Apost. Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Hom. 17. in Ephes. 5. & Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antiochiae. Au∣gustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.33. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 15. cap. 26.29. De Consensu. Euangel. l. 1. cap. 33. Confessionum. lib. 3. cap. 1.2. Prosper Aquitanicus De Gloria Sanctorum Peroratio. pag. 73. Orosius Historiae. lib. 3. cap. 4. Isiodor Hi∣spalensis. Etimolog. lib. 18. cap. 41.42. Saluian De Gubernat.
Dei. Solae Thea∣trorum impu∣ritates tales sunt quae ho∣neste non pos∣sunt vel accu∣sari. Ib. p. 186. lib. 6. & 7. Bernard Oratio ad Milites Templ. cap. 4. Bibliotheca Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 348.463. D. 466. C. Ioannes Salisburiensis De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. & lib. 8. cap. 6.7. Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1. cap. 27. & lib. 7. cap. 10. To whom I may adde, Conci∣lium Parisiense sub Ludouico & Lothario. lib. 1. cap. 38. Concilium Agathense. Canon. 39. Synodus Turonica. 3. Canon. 7.8. Synodus Cabilonensis. 2. Canon. 9. Synodus Moguntina sub Rabano. Canon. 13. Concilium Coloniense. Anno. 1536. pars. 2. cap. 25. pars. 9. cap. 10. Concilium. Coloniense sub Adolpho. Anno. 1549. & Gratian. Distinctio. 33.48.86. Peruse, I say, these seuerall Fathers, and Coun∣cels; (whose words, if I should at large transcribe them, would amount vnto an ample volume:) and you shall finde them all concurre in this: Comoedia & Tragadiae in∣cestis gloria∣tur, quas vos libenter legitis & auditis. Minucius Felix Octa. pag. 101. that Stage-Playes are wholly composed of, or at leastwise fraught with Ribaldrie, Scurrilitie; Vnchast, and Amorous streines, and passages: Obscene, and filthie Iests, which inquinate the Mindes, cor∣rupt the Manners, and defile the Soules of men, Nonne erg fugies sedilia hostium Chri∣sti; illam ca∣thedram pesti∣lentiariam, ip∣sumque aerem quae desuper in∣cuba scelestis vocibus con∣stupratum. Tertul. De Spectac. c 27. yea pollute the very places, and common ayre, where they are but acted: Whence they all condemne, these Theatricall Enterludes, as vnseemely, pernicious, abominable, and vtterly vnlawfull vnto Christians: as exceeding odious, and displeasing vnto God; stiling them, Ludi scaenici spectacula turpitudinum, & Licentia vanitatum: peretuus morbus animarum; malae cupiditatis inductio, adulteri meditatio, turitudinis exhortatio. August. De Ciu. Dei. l. 1. c. 32. l 2. c. 8.9. Orosius Hist. l. 3 c. 4. Chrys. Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antiochiae & Hom. 42. in Act. the very sinckes of all vncleanenesse, the Lectures of Obscenitie, the Meditations of Adultery, the examples of dishonestie, the exhortations, and instructions of ilthinesse, and the like: and Play-houses, Sacrarium Veneris: Templum & Ecclesia Diaboli: Arx omnium turpitudinum: Consistorium impudicitiae: Cathedra Pestlenti∣aria: sedilia hostium Christi. Tertul De Spectac. c. 10.17.2. Cathera Pestientiarum. Clem. Alex Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. Pudoris pulici upaarium, & obscaeniatis magisterium. Cypr. De Spectac lb. Communis & publica offica sceerum. Basil. Hexaem. Hom. 4. Fornicationis gmnasium; ntemperantiae Schola. Chrys Hom. 62. ad. Pop. Aniohiae & Hom. 42. in Act. Lasciua faeditatis & impuritatis omnis officina. Nazianz ad Selu∣chum de Recta educatione. p. 1063. Loca & habitacula turpitudinum. Salu. De Gub. Dei l. 6. p. 198. Cauiae iurpitudinum. August. De Consnsu Euang. l. 1. c. 33. Anima∣rum labes & pestis: probitatis & honestatis eersio. August De Ciu. Dei l. 1. c 33. Vere fugalia, sed pudoris & honestatis. Ib. lib. 2. cap. 6. See Act. 6. Scene. 1, 2, 3. the Temples
of Venery; the Stwes of Modestie, the Schooles of Ribaldry, and Obscenitie: the Dennes of filthinesse: the Chaires of Pestilence, and corruption: the Seates, the Places, and Man∣sions of all filthinesses, and vnchastitie: and the common, and publike Shops of all wickednesses, and defilements whatsoeuer.  Adde wee to these in the second place, the expresse, and punctuall Testimonies of Pagan Authours, whom none dares taxe of Puritanisme, or precisenesse in this point. Suruay but Zenophon in his Conuiuium. Plato De Republ. lib. 8. & 10. Legu Dialogus. 7. Aristotle Politicorum. lib. 7. cap. 17. Diogenes Laertius. lib. 2. Socrates. Isocrates Oratio ad Nicoclem; & Oratio De Pace. Tullie Quoted by Augustine. De Ciuitate Di. lib. 2. cap. 9. De Re∣publica. lib. 4. Tus. Quaest. lib. 1. & 2. De Legibus. lib. 7. Ad Marium. Epist. 1. Seneca. Epist. 7.90. & 123. Plutarch De Audiendis Poetis. lib. De Gloria Atheninsium. lib. Symposiarum. lib. 7. Quaest. 8. Liuie Romane Hist. lib. 7. cap. 2.3. Dionysius. Hallicar. Rom. Antiq. lib. 2. Sect. 3. lib. 7. Sect. 9. Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap. 4. Cornelius Tacitus. Annal. lib. 14. Sect. 2.3. Lampridii Heliogobalus. Plinie. Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 20. Ouid De Arte Amandi. lib. 1. Tristium. lib. 2. & Fastorum. lib. 3. pag. 55. Horace De Arte Poetica. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. Iuuenal Satyr. 6.8.9. yea, Plautus himselfe, (as obscene as he is) Captiuei Pro∣logus. pag. 105. You shall finde all these See Ludou. Vies. De Caus. Corrupt. Artium. lib 2. Inde ioci ve∣teres, obscae∣naque verba canuntur: Ne res hc Veneri gra∣tior vlla fuit. Ouid. Fasto∣rum. lib. 3. pag. 55. acknowledging, yea, condemning the Amorousnesse, Scurrilitie, and lewdnesse of Stage-Playes, as I shall prooue See Act. 7. Scene. 6. anon. If any now reply, that the Playes of our age are defecatd from these grosse Obscenities, and purged from all Ribal∣drious, Amorous, Vnchast, and filthie passages: Let him then consider in the third place; that many Moderne Authors of all sorts, doe not onely indite our popular Enterludes of the self-same crimes, but likewise passe a fatall, and finall sentence of condemnation on them, for  this very cause: Cast but your eyes on learned, and la∣borious Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. 3. pag. 214.215 on Petrarch. De Remedio vtr. Fortunae. lib. 1. Dial. 30. on Bodinus De Republica. lib. 6. cap. 1. on Polydor Virgil De
Inuentoribus Rerum. lib. 1. cap. 11. on Alexander Sardis De Inuent. Rerum. lib. 1. pag. 43.44. on Ludo. Vines, De Caus Corrupt. Artim. lib. 2. on Iohannis Mariana, & Barnabas Bristochius, in thir bookes De Spectaculis on Doctor Rei∣nolds his Ouerthrow of Stage-Playes. on Master Northbrookes Treatise against vaine Playes, and Enterldes. pag. 57 to 77. on Master Gossons Confutation of Playes. Act. 4.5 on Master Stubs his Anatomy of Abses. Edit. 3. pag. 101. to 107. o I. G. in his Refutation of Haywoods Apologie for Actors. on Master Iohn Brinslies True watch. part. 1. Abomination. 19. pag. 227.228. on Bishop Babington. Master Perkins, Master Dod, and Master Elton, on the 7. Commandement. on Doctor Laytons Speclum belli sacri. cap. 45. on The Coeant be∣tweene God, and Man, by I. P. London. 1616. pag. 382, 383. on Master Iohn Downhams Guide to Godlinesse. lib. 3. cap. 21. Sect. 5. on Master Robert Bolton, in hi Discourse of True Happinesse. pag. 73.74. You shall see our Moderne Stage-Playes, euen copiously Anatomized, yea, condemned by them: as being fully fraught, and wholly composed, of Ribal∣drie, Obscenitie, Lasciuiousnesse, Vnchst, and lustfll parts, and passages, which misbeseeme all modest eyes to see, all Chri∣stian eares to heare, or tongues to vtter: Whence they stile all Playes, Vitiorum semina snt, slerum pa∣bula, mortis iter. Ioannes Salisburiensis. De Nugis C∣rialium. Poce. See Master Bolton Di∣scourse of True Happi∣nesse. p 7374. the grand empoysoers of Grace, Iugemioesse, and all manly resolution: the Lectures of obscenitie, the Seedes of vices, the Foode of wickednesse, yea the Plagues, and Poy∣son of mens Soules, and Manners: Theatra rectè definie possmus tur∣pitudinis viti∣orum que om∣nium sentinam ac scholam. Bodinus De Republia. lib. 6. cap. 1. Se Gualther Hom. 1. in Nahum. 3. Accordingly. and Theaters, the Ora∣tories of the Deuill the Synagogues of Satan; the Schooles of lewdnesse; and the very inckes of filthinesse, and all other vices which Christians should abhorre, yea feare, and flie, as much, nay more then any Pest-house: as these their writings, will at large demonstrate. If then these seue∣rall Fathers, Councells, Pagan Authours, and Moderne CHRISTIAN writers, (with sundry others, which I shall receit hereafter in their proper places:) con∣clude the very Structure, Stile, and Subiect Matter of popular Stage-Playes, to bee Amorous, Scurrilous, and Obscene; and thereupon passe this Iudgement on them:
Talia sunt quae illic tiunt, vt ea non so∣lum dicere, sed etiam recor∣dari aliquis sine pollutione non possit: In Theatris, & concupiscentiis animus, & au∣ditu aures, & aspectu oculi polluuntur. Quae quidem omnia tam fla∣gitiosa sunt, vt etiam expli∣care ea quispi∣am aut eloqui saluo pudore non valeat. Sal. De Gub. Dei. l 6. p. 186, 187. Mel meum, lu∣men meum, meum deside∣rium, omnes delicias & le∣pores, & visis dignas vrbae∣nitates, & cae∣teras ineptias amatorum, in comoediis eru∣bescimus, in saeculi hominibus detestamur: quanto magis in clericis, & in sanctis viris. Hierom. Epist. 2. cap. 6. that they are altogether vnfit for Chast, vnlawfull for Chri∣stian, vnseemely for Gracious, or modest Eares to heare, or Lips to vtter: I hope that none will bee so obstinately incre∣dulous, as not to beleeue them in the one: or so de∣sperately impious, as not to giue sentence with them; not to conforme their practise to them, in the other. But if all these seuerall Testimonies are not sufficient to conuince the most incredulous Play-haunters of the ob∣scenities of Stage-Playes; I appeale for finall proofe of my Assumption vnto euery mans experience. Not to re∣cord those seuerall prophane, and grosse Scurrilitas atque Lasciuia te praesente non habeant lo∣cum. Nunquam verbum inhonestum audias: aut, si audieris, ne inesceris. Hierom. Epist. 8. cap. 6. Obscenities, those Amorous streines, Lasciuious passages, and vnsauourie Iests, which are scattered in Aristophanes, Terrence, Plau∣tus, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, In his Amorum: De Arte Amandi: Pulex, &c. Ouid, and other ancient Comedians, and wanton Poets; which euery Chast, and Gracious Christian must condemne: I shall confine my selfe vnto the Comedies, and popular Enterludes of our present Age, Ego am∣plius dico: non solum agi nunc illas ludicrorum infamium labes quae prius acta sunt; sed criminosius multo agi quam prius actae sunt. Saluian. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 201. which farre exceede them in all these. Alas, what are the Maior part of all our Moderne Stage-Playes, but so many Lectures of Ribaldry; so many Abstracts, Compendiums, or Miscellaines of sublimated, Elegant, Wittie, or more Accurate, and choyce Obscenities? which Vocis dulcedines per aurem animam vulnerant; quae quanto licentius adeunt, tanto difficilius euitantur. Hierom. Epist. 12. cap. 3. the more refined, and accute they are, the more doe they empoyson, endanger, and depraue the Auditors: Doe not the ordinary Theames, and Subiects of our Mo∣derne Comedies, being nothing else but the Adulteries, Fornications, Rapes, Loue-passions, Meritricious, Vn∣chast, and Amorous practises, of Lasciuious Wicked men, See Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. August. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 15 26, 27, 28, 29. Arnobius Aduers. Gentes. lib. 7. Accordingly. See here Scene. 3. or Heathen Idole-gods; Ephes. 3.3, 4. which should not be so
much as named, (much lesse then acted) among Christians? doe not those Of which see Act. 5. Wanton, Whorish, lustfull Parts; those Ribaldrous Songs, and filthie Ditties: those Meretricious, and Vnchast Attires, Lookes, and Gestures: those Amorous, and lustfull Complements, Kissings, Clippings, and Embrace∣ments: those liuely, if not reall representations, or ocu∣lar demonstrations of the very acts of Whoredome, and Adulterie, which are vsually represented to vs on the Theater: together with all those Obscene, and filthie Iests; those Scurrilous, and beastly passages, those quaint, Subtile, Rhetoricall, and Flexanimous streines of con∣templatiue, Elegant, and wittie Obscenities, with which our Playes are fraught, and enterlaced: 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Ezech 9.4. Psalm. 119.136.158. See Chrysost. Hom 38. in Matth. Cyprian De Spectaculis. lib. Saluian. lib. 6. De Guber. Dei. Nonnullae pru∣dentiores, (speaking of Pagans,) auer∣tebant faciem ab impuris mo∣tibus foenico∣rum, & ar∣tem flagitii videre erube∣scentes, furti∣ua intentione discebant. August. De Ciu Dei. lib. 2. cap. 26. And should not Christians much more blush to see them? the very sight, and hearing of which, should cause all modest Eyes to Blush, and Weepe; all Christian Eares, to Glow, and Tingle; all Chast, and Gracious Hearts, to Mourne, and Bleede:) doe not all these (I say) proclaime and testifie to the world; that the Stile, and subiect Matter; yea, the very Action, Circumstances, and Appendices of our popular Stage-Playes, are Scurrilous, and Obscene? what need we then any further witnesses? Doubtlesse, the Obscenitie of our Playes is such, that if the very Stones, and Pillars, which support the Play-house; if the Seates, and Scaffoldes, which adorne it: or the very Theater, and Stage it selfe, had Tongues to speake; they would presently exclaime against it, and reprooue it. And dares any Christian then, be so audaciously absurde, as to gaine-say it? so wil-fully blinde, as not to see it? so desperately prophane, as not to loathe it? when as his owne experience must acknow∣ledge, and his very Coscience doeth, yea cannot, but con∣demne it? Since then the very Stile, and subiect Matter of our Playes are such; this must, this cannot but enforce vs to reiect them, as pernicious, vnseemely, yea, vtterly vnlawfull vnto Christians; yea, as Si proferas verbum spur∣cum, & Chri∣stiano ore in∣dignum, non hominem con∣tristasti sed Spiritum Dei, à quo beneficium accepisti; à quo sanctificatum est os tuum. Non pudet igitur nos illum contristare? Signatum est os tuum a Spiritu, vt nihil indignum ipso loquaris: ne dissoluas igitur sigillum. Theophylact. in Ephes. 4.30. grieuous, and offen∣siue
to Gods blessed Spirit, who hath Sanctified, and Sealed vp our Mouthes, and Eares from all Scurrilitie: as all the fore-recited Fathers, and Christian Authors haue already done, vpon the selfe-same grounds. SCENA SECVNDA. SEcondly, as the Stile, and subiect Matter of Stage-Playes is Scurrilous, and Obscene, so likewise it is Bloody, and Tyrannicall; breathing out Malice, See Seneca. Heul. Furens. & Medea. Fury, Anger, Murther, Crueltie, Tyrannie, Treacherie, Archilcum proprio rabies rmauit ambo Hor. De Arte Pot lib. Fren∣sie, Treason, and Reuenge, (the constant Theames, and chiefe Ingredients, of all our Tragedies,) which See Act. 6. Scene. 10. Argument. 6. The Stile, and subiect Matter of Stage Plaies is Bloody, and Tyrannicall: Therefore uil and vnlawfull vnto Christians Effe∣rate, and enrage the Hearts, nd Mindes, of Actors, and Spectators; yea, oft times animate, and excite them to An∣ger, Malice, Duels, Murthers, Reuenge, and more then Barbarous crueltie, to the gret disturbance of the publike Peace. From whence I frame this sixt Argument. That whose Stile, and subiect Matter is Bloody, and Tyrannicall, breathing out Malice, Anger, Fury, Crueltie, Tyrannie, Piercenesse, Treason, Rapine, Violence, Oppression, Murther, and Reuenge, must needes be Odious, Vnseemely, and Vnlawfull vnto Christians. But such is the Stile, and subiect Matter of most, (but especially of our Tragicall) Stage-Playes. Therefore they must needes be Odious, Vnseemely, and Vnlawfull vnto Christians. The Minor is euident: First, by Experience: Second∣ly, by Chrys Hom 38. in Matth. Lact. l. 6 c. 20. Cypr. & Tert. De Spectac. Polyd. Virg. De Inuent. Rrum l. 1. c. 10. Mr. Northbrookes Treatise a∣gainst vaine Playes, and Enteludes. f. 30.37. Mr. Stubs Anatmie of Abuss. p. 10, 105, 107 Mr. Gossons Plays Confuted. Act. 4, 5. Seneca. Epist 7. Read Sophocls, Euripides, and Seneca his Tragedies, with all our Moderne Tragedies, which confirme it. expresse Authorities; both which doe testifie:
that the Stile, and subiect Matter of our Tragedies are Bloody, and Tyrannicall; abounding with Enuie, Malice, Furie, Clamours, Wrath, Crueltie, Treacherie, Frensie, Murthers, Treasons, Villany, Vnplacablenesse, Discordes, Mutinies, Re∣bellions, Conspiracies, Rapes, Duells, and Reuenge, which prouoke, and whet on the Spectators to all these Barbarous, and inhumane Vices, which they should abhorre. The Maior is vncontrouleable: First, because the Scriptures doe expresly enioyne vs: Ephes. 4.26 27.31. Genes. 4.5, 6. Cap. 49.6.7. Iames 3.14, 15, 16. Psalm. 71.4. Psalm. 55.9, 10. Psalm. 86.14. Psalm. 140.11. Psalm. 27.12. Psalm. 74.20. Prou. 11 17. Cap. 12.10. Cap. 27.4. Actes 8.3. Rom. 1.29, 30, 31. 2 Tim. 3 2.3.4. to put away all Malice, Anger, Wrath, Contention, Sedition, Strife, Cruelty, Violence, Rapine, and Reuenge; together with all Ephes. 4.31. Psalm. 27.12. Actes 9.1. Psalm. 52.4. Psalm. 55.21. Psalm. 64.3. Prou. 12.6. Cap. 15.1. Rom. 1.29, 30, 31. Galat. 5.15. Rom. 3.14. Colos. 3.8. Cap. 4.6. Tru∣culent, Clamorous, Furious, Irefull, Tragicall, Bloody, Fierce, Malicious, and reuengefull speaches: and that for sundry reasons: First, because such words, and actions as these, Imes 3.6.14, 15, 16, 17. Galat 5.20, 21. Rom. 1.29, 30, 31. are Earthly, Carnall, Diuelish; proceeding from the World, the Flesh, and the Deuill, (who are fraught Gen. 49.6.7. 1 Peter 5.8. Prou. 12.10. with Rage, and Crueltie:) not from the wisedome of God from aboue, which is Pure, Peaceable, Gentle, easie to be intreated, full of Mercy, and good Fruites: Secondly, because such speaches as these, Prou. 15.1. Equus est vociferatio, ascensor autem ira, impedi equum, & subuertisti asensorem. Theophylact Enar. in Ephes. 4.31. are the Fomenters of Contention, yea, the Chariots of Anger, Crueltie, and Reuenge: Thirdly, because such Tragicall, Fell, and Bloody discourses as these, are altogether vnsuitable vnto Christians; who are, or should bee, Ephes. 4 31, 32, 33. Marke 9.50. 1 Cor. 14.33. 2 Cor. 13.11, 12. Ephes. 6.23. Galat. 6.1. Phil. 4.7. Col. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. Men of a Quiet, Peaceable, Gentle, Meeke, and tender-hearted Disposition, being Kinde, and Louing one towards another, and forgiuing one another, euen as God for Christs sake, hath forgiuen them. The God of Christians, Rom. 15.33. Cap. 16.20. 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 4.9. 1 Thes. 5.23. 2 Thes. 3.16. Heb. 13.20. is a God of Peace: the Head of Christians, Isay 9.6. Heb. 7.2. is a Prince of Peace: the Guide of Christians, Ephes. 4.3 is a Spirit of Peace, and Vnitie: the Rule of Christians, is a Eph. 6.15. Word, a Gospel of Peace, Luke 10.5. Cap. 19.42. Act. 20.36. which bringeth, and pro∣claimeth Peace to all, Rom. 12.18 Heb. 12.14. 1 Pet. 3.11. and perswadeth Peace with all Men:
the way of Christians, Luke 1.79. Rom. 3.17. is a way of Peace; yea, their 1 Cor. 7.15. Vocation, 2 Cor. 13.11. 2 Tim 2.22. 1 Tim. 2.2. Life, Psal. 37.37. 2 Pet. 3.14. and End, are Peace: therefore all Irefull, Truculent, ierce, and Tragicke Spectacles, or Poemes, which breathe out nothing but Crueltie, Blood, Vnmercifulnesse, Discorde, Vnplacablenesse, and Reuenge, must needes bee vnseemely, and vnlawfull to them; as being opposite, and Repugnat to their Peace∣able, Meeke, and Courteous constitution. Secondly, such Barbarous, Bloody, Tyrannicall, Fierce, and Cruell Spe∣ctacles, and Enterludes as these, where Tyrannie, Enuy, Malice, Murther, Furie, and Reuenge, are Acted, and Applauded to the Life, Luxuriosior redeo, immo vero crude∣lior & in hu∣manior, quiae inter homines in Spectaculis fui. Seneca. Epist. 7. vid. Ib. must needes Inrage, Imbitter, Exasperate the Spectators, and prouoke them to Crueltie, Passion, Rage, Reuenge, and Discontent, vpon very small occasion, as I shall prooue at large Act. 6. Scene. 10. anon: therefore they must needes bee Euill. Vpon this very ground, Aduers. Hae∣reses lib 1. cap. 1. pag. 23. Irenaeus, De Specta∣culis. lib. Tertullian, Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Cyprian, Pro Christi∣anis Lagatio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2. p. 139. Athenagoras, Contr. Au∣tolicum. lib. 3. Ib. pag 170. G. H. Theophylus Antiochenus Oatio. Contra. Grae∣cos. Ib. pag. 180. C. D. Tatianus, De Vero Cult. cap. 20. Diuinarum Instit. Epit cap 6. Lactantius, Oratio. 48. & De Recta Educatione ad Selcucum. pag. 1063, 1064 Nazianzen, Compend. De Doctr. & Fide Eccles. Catholic. pag. 922. Epiphanius, Hom. 38. in Matth. & Hom. 12. in Romans. Chrysostome, De Ciuitat. Dei. lib 2. cap. 25. lib. 4. cap. 5. Au∣gustine,Octaius. pag. 23, 124. Minucius Felix, De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. Saluian; together with all the Christians in the Primitiue Church, as these record, did vt∣terly condemne, and auoyde all Sword-Playes, Tragoedies, and bloody Spectacles of crueltie; as Fightings, and Combates of Men, with Men, or Men, and Beasts together, (which the Plutarch. Laconica Instituta. Lacedemonians, together with De Republica. lib. 8. Plato, and Epist. 7. Sene∣ca, though Pagans, did likewise censure, and reiect:) because See Ioannes Mariana De Spectaulis. lib. Lipsius De Gladiatoribus, Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 13. Peter Maryr Locorum Commun Classis. 4. cap. 18, Sect. 2, 3, 4. they did excite, and stirre men vp to Murther, Crueltie, and Reuenge; and make them guilty of the Wounds, and Blood of all those Combatants, and Sword-Players, which they did behold. And hence likewise was it, that the good
Emperour Eusebius De Vita Con∣stantini. lib. 4. cap. 1. Zozeman. Historiae. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 8. Nicephorus Calist. Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 46. Eutropius Rerum. Rom Hist. lib. 11. pag. 142. Constantine; together with Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. Im∣perium Neruae. fol. 101. Col. A. Nerua, Eutropius Rrum. Rom lib. 13. Arcadius & Honorius. pag. 174. See Doctor Hackwells Apologie. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 9. cap. 10.11. Arcadius, and Honorius; prohibited all Sword-Playes, Duels, and such like Cruell, and Bloody Spectacles; as mis∣beseeming Christian hands to act, or eyes to see; because they were but so many Incendiaries, and Fomentors of Crueltie, Quarrells, Murthers, and Reuenge. Since there∣fore the Stile, and subiect Mater of our Playes, together with the consequences of them, are such as these, wee must, wee cannot but reiect them, on the fore-said rea∣sons, as those fore-quoted Authors haue already done. SCENA TERTIA. THirdly, the Stile, and subiect Matter of most po∣pular Stage-Playes, is Heathenish, and Prophane, consisting of the Exprimunt impudicam Venerem, a∣dulterum Martem, lo∣uem illum suum, non magis regno quam vitiis prinipem, in terrnos a∣mores cum ipsis suis ful∣minibus arden∣tem, &c. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. The Stile, and Subiect Matter of Stage-Playes, is Heathenish, and Prophane: therefore vnlawfull. Actes, the Rites, the Ceremonies, Names, and Persons; yea, the very Rapes, Adulteries, Mur∣thers, Thefts, Deceites, Lasciuiousnesse, and other excrable Villanies of Dung-hill, Idole, Pagan-gods, and Goddesses, or wicked men which should be buried in euerlasting obliui∣on lest the memorie, and reuiuall of them should defile the light: From whence I raise this seauenth Argument. Those Stage-Playes, whose Stile, and Subiect Matter is Heathenish, and Prophane, consisting of the Parts, the Persons, Ceremonies, Rites, and Names; yea, the Imprecations, Inuocations, Adorations, and Applauses; together with the very Loue-pas∣sions,
Lusts, Adulteries, Incests, Rapes, Impo∣stures, Cheates, Conspiracies, Treacheries, Mur∣thers, Thefts, Debates, and other abominable vil∣lanies, and execrable practises, of Demoniacall, In∣cestuous, Adulterous, and Infernall Heathen-Gods, or Men whose very Names, and Practises should rot, and perish in obliuion; must needes be odious, vnseemely, yea, vtterly vnlawfull vnto Christians. But such is the Stile, and Subiect Matter of most The∣atricall Enterludes. Therefore they must needes bee odious, vnseemely, yea, vtterly vnlawfull vnto Christians. For the Minor; not onely our owne Experientia mortalium Index. Pin∣darus. Ode. 4. pag. 39. Quam mul∣ta homines experientia docet. Sopho∣cles Aiax Fla∣gellatus. Num. 1465. pag. 103. experience, which is a thousand Witnesses, and the truest Index; but euen sundry Fathers, and Moderne Authors: as Cle∣mens Alexandrinus Oratio Exhort. ad Gentes. Clemens Ro∣manus Constit. Aposto. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. Tatianus Oratio Aduers. Graecos. Theophylus Antiochenus Contr. Autoli∣cum. lib. 3. Tertullian De Spectac. lib. Cyprian De Spectac. lib. & Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Arnobius Aduers. Gent. lib. 3.4. & 7. pag. 230. to 242. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. Diuinarum Instit. Epit. cap. 6. Basil De Legendis libris Gentilium Oratio. Nazianzen Ad Seleuchum. Eusebius De Praeparatione Euangelii. lib. 4. Theodoret De Sacrificiis. lib. 7. Chrysostome Hom. 6, 7. & 38. in Matth. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31, 32. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 29. Sal∣uian De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. Minucius Felix Octauius. together with Doctor Reinolds, Master Northbrooke, Mr. Gosson, Iohn Mariana, in their Bookes against Stage-Playes: Ludouicus Viues De Causis Corruptionis Artium. lib. 2. & Comment. in lib. 2. Augustini De Ciuitate Dei. Master Stubs in his Anatomie of Abuses: with sundry others, doe expressely testifie: O impieta∣tem! scenam coelum fecistis, & Deus vobis factus est actus: & quod sanctum est, Daemoniorum personis ludi∣ficati estis, ve∣rum Dei cul∣tum ac reli∣gionem, D∣monum super∣stitione, libi∣dinose, & ob∣scaene inquinantes. Canunt Furtiuum pulchrae Venerisque & Martis amorem, &c. Clemens Alexand. Oratio. Exhortat ad Gentes. fol. 8. E. F. See Augustine De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 826. that Stage-Playes are fraught with the Genealogies, Ceremonies, Images, Reliques, Imprecati∣ons,
Inuocations, Names, Adulteries, Whoredomes, Incests, Rapes, Loue-prankes, Furies, Lusts, Lasciuiousnesse, Thefts, Murthers, Cheates, Persons parts, Histories, and abominable Villanies of Heathen Idole-gods: and for this very cause, they vtterly condemne them, as sinfull, and pernicious: And so much the rather: Immundissi∣mi Spiritus, malgnissimi & fallacissii Damones, vs{que} adeo aut veris, aut fictis, etiam suis tamen cri∣minius dele∣ctantur, quae si∣bi celebrari per sua festa volu∣erunt, vt a per∣petrandis dam∣nabilius factis humana reuo∣cari non possi infirmitas, dum ad haec imitan∣da velut diui∣na praebetur autoritas. Aug. De Ciu. Dei. l. 4. c. 1. Sec l. 2. cap. 10.25.27. Accordingly. because these Demonicall, and In∣fernall Deities, being delighted with these their true, or feined wickednesses; did purposely command them to bee Acted on their solemne Feastiualls; that so men might be encouraged to imitate them, and to proceede, yea perseuere without redresse, in these their Adulterous, Inhumane, and Infernall Vices, which were Countenanced, Authorized, yea Legitimated, and commended by their practicall, and Diuine examples. All Times, all Ages, yea all Ancient, and Moderne Stage-Playes, and Experience, Subscribe, and Suffragate with these our Authors to our Minor: therefore we must, we cannot but acknowledge it. For the Maior, it is cleerely euident by its owne light, and by the luster of the Scripture. For first of all; God himselfe, enioynes his People: Exod. 23.13. Iosh. 23.7. not to make mention of the names of other Gods, not to let them be heard out of their mouthes, Deut 12.3. Iudges 2.2. but to ouerthrow their Altars, breake their Pillars, burne their Groues, hew downe their grauen Images, and to destroy their very Names out of their places: Whence Dauid doeth solemnely professe: sal. 16.4. that hee will not offer the drinke Offerings of Idole-gods, nor yet take vp their names within their lippes. The very names of Pagan-gods are so odious, and displeasing vnto God, so vnsuiteable vnto Christian mouthes, and eares; that God himselfe protesteth; Zech. 13 2. he will cut off the named of Ioles out of the Land, and they shall be no more remembred: yea, Hosea 2.17. that he will take away the names of Baalim out of his peoples mouth, and they shall bee no more remembred by their name. Hence was it, Ad mortem vsque conten∣dunt Christiani ne Iouem De∣um appellent: neue hunc ip∣sum alia li∣gua denomi∣nent. Christi∣ani ea sunt erga Deum reuerentia & pitate, vt nil prorsus nominum quae poetarum fictionibus compraehenduntur rerum omnium conditori accommodent Origen Contr. Celsum. lib. 1. Tom. 4. fol. 5. . that the Christians in the Primitiue Church,
would rather die, then call Ioue a God; as hee is oft times stiled in our Stage-Playes: (and truely they Etiam ne habet hic ali∣quid numinis cuius plura munerantur Adulteria quam partus? Viderimus an maeximus, certe optimus non est. Lactanis De Falsa Relig lib. 1. cap. 16. & 10. Ath∣nasius Contra Gentil  lib. had little reason for to deeme him a God, whose Adulteries did exceede his issues in their number:) Yea, such was their reuerence, and Pietie towards God, that they would not so much as apply any Poeticall names vnto him; as we Christians to our shame, and his dishonour, oft times doe: Christians haue beene alwayes coy, and charie of the very naming of Heathen Idoles, vnlesse it were with detestation, and dislike. Absit vt de re Christiano sonet, Iupiter omnipotens, & me Her∣cule, me Ca∣stor, & caete∣ra magis por∣tenta quam numina. Epist. 146. Damaso Tom. 3. pag. 408. God forbid (saith Saint Hierome) that omnipotent Ioue, O my Hercules, my Castor, or other such monsters rather then Gods, should euer ound out of a Christian mouth. Christianus fidelis non car∣men ethnicum, neque canti∣lenam meri∣triciam canere debet, quoni∣am continget eum in cantione Daemoniacorum nominum idolorum mentionem facere, & in locum Spiritus Sancti inuadet in eum Spiritus malu. Constitut. Apostol. lib. 5. cap. 10. A faithfull Christian, writes Clement of Rome; ought not to sing any Heathen verse, or Meretricious song; because hee may chance in singing to make mention of the names of Diuelish Idoles; and so insteed of the holy Ghost, the euill Spirit may seise vpon him. De Legedis Libris Gentilium-Oratio. Saint Basil, and Ad Seleucum De Recta Educatione. pag. 1063. Nazianzen, per∣suade, and aduise all Christians; Haec omnia tanquam malorum geniorum Doctri∣nas, tum risu, tum lachrymis dignas, imo tanquam laqueos & decipula auersaere. Ib. to auoide all Heathen Poemes, and Writings, which treate of Heathen Gods; rela∣ting either their Genealogies, Histories, Adulteries, Loues, or Rapes; as being the Doctrine of Deuills, or so many Traps, and Snares, to endanger them. De Rectiud. Cathol. Conuersationis Tract. Tom. 9. pars. 1. pag. 1448. Saint Augustine, inhibites Christian women, so much as to name Minerua, or any such vnluckie persons, in their Spinning, Dying, or any other worke. Epist. lib. 9. Epist. 48. Saint Gregorie the great, and Distinctio. 86. cap. Cum multa. Gratian, informe vs: that the Praises, Histories, or mention of Ioue, doe not beseeme any Godly Lay-mans mouth, much lesse a Byshops: whence they blame Desiderius a Bishop of France, for teaching the Art of Grammer, in which he must discourse, both of the Names, and Praises of Heathen Gods: vpon which ground, the fourth Councell of Carthage. Canon 16.
together with Saint Hierome Epist. 22. cap. 13. Isiodor Pelusiota. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 63. Tertullian De Idololatria. lib. cap. 18. to 24. Isiodor Hispalensis De summo bon. lib. 3. cap. 13. & Gratian Distinctio. 37. Prohibit Bishops, and other Christians from reading the Bookes of the Gentiles; Non enim thura solum fferendo Dae∣monibus im∣molatur, sed etiam eorum dicta libenti capiendo. Isiodor, & Gratian. Ib. least by Applauding the Names, and Approouing the speaches of their Idole-gods, they should incurre Idolatrie. And good reason is there, that Christians should not ad∣mit of the Names, and Histories, (much lesse of the im∣precations, and abominable practises,) of Heathen Gods. First, because God himselfe, with all these Fathers, doe thus inhibit them. Secondly, because the Quo diserte cauetur, ne admittant sig∣menta fabu∣larum de De∣orm connu∣biis & nata∣libus, & qui hinc oriuntur variis casibrs. De Decalogo. lib. pag. 1037. second Com∣mandement, as Philo Iudaeus well obserues; doeth not one∣ly prohibit the Images, and Pictures, but euen the Histories, and Fables of the Marriages, Birthes, and casualties of Hea∣then Gods. Thirdly, because the recitall of their Names, and Histories, by way of approbation, or dlight, doeth Origen Contr. Celsum lib. 1. fol. 5. I. Tertullian De Idololatria. lib cap. 18. to 24. giue a tacite, or secret allowance of them to be Gods: where as in trueth, they are Deut. 32.17. Psal. 106.37. 1 Cor. 10.20. August. De Ci. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 3. to 29. but Deuills; Clemens Alexand. Orat: Exhort. ad Gentes. Tertullian Apologia. Arnobius Aduers. Gentes. Cyrian De Idolrum Va∣nitate. Lactantius De Falsa Religione cap. 4. to 23. or wicked Men; or rather as Saint Paul informes vs, 1 Cor. 10.19. Isay 41.24.29. nothing in the World. Fourthly, because Qudm plus meditari delectantur Gentilium dicta propter tmentem & orna∣tum sermoem, quam Scripturam Sanctam propter Eloquium humile. Sed quid pre∣dest in mundanis Doctrinis proficere, inanescere in Diuinis: cadua sequi figmenta, & Caelestia fasidire mysteria? Cauendi sunt igitur tales libri, & propter amorem sanctarum Scripturarum vitandi. Isiodor Hispalensis De Summo Bono lib 3. cap. 13. the Hearing, and Reading of such Histories, and Fables as these, which are oft times sugred, and guilded ouer with the very quintessence of Art, and Rhetoricke,) doeth alienate, and coole our loue vnto the Sacred, and Soule-sauing word of God, which runnes in a lesse Elegant, and more humble Stile. Fiftly, because the recitall, acting, and personating of their Names, their Histories, and notorious Villanies, doeth reuiue their names, and memories, which should rot, and perish in obliuion: It is the will, and pleasure of God: Prou. 10.7. Psal. 109.13. Psal. 9.5, 6. that the
Names of the wicked should rot: Isay 26.13, 14. Exod. 23.13. Psalm. 16.4 Deutr. 12.3. Iosh. 23.7. Hosea 2.17. Zech. 13.2 Zeph. 1.4, 5. that the Memories, Re∣liques, Ceremonies, Names, and Monuments of Idole-gods, should vtterly be abolished from of the Earth, and quite ex∣iled from the Tongues, and Pennes of Christians; as being the originall authors, and chiefe Fomentors of Idolatrie; See August. De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 10.25, 26, 27. lib. 4. cap. 1. the propagators of all sinne, and villany; and the very Isay 42.8. Exod. 20.23. Deutr. 12.2.30. Corriualls of God himselfe, whose Soueraigne Deiti they would, yea, did vsurpe: the reuiuall therefore of their Names, and Memories, the Varnishing of them with fresh, and liuely Colours in our Stage-Playes, with af∣fectation, and delight, must needes bee euill; because it thwartes the Lords good pleasure. Sixtly, because those Playes, and Poemes, which are fraught with the Gene∣alogies, Names, and Histories of Heathen Gods, are a meanes to reuiue that Heathenisme, and propagate that Idolatrie, which the light, and power of the Gospel, hath long since abolished: It is the vnanimous resolution of Minucus Felix Octauns. pag. 68, 69. Iustin Martyr Oratio. 1. Pro Christianis. Clemens Alex∣andr. Oratio. Exhort. ad Gentes, & Stromatum. lib. 1.2. Ter∣tullian Apo∣log. Aduers. Gentes. Tati∣anus Oratio Aduers. Graecos Arnobius. lib. 7. Aduers. Gentes. Cyprian De Idolorum Vanitate. Lactantius De Falsa Religione, & De Origine Erroris. lib. Epiphanius Aduers. Haereses. lib. 1. Tom. 2. Haeres. 26. Athanasius Contra. Gentiles. lib. 1. Eusebius De Praeparatione Euangelij. lib. 4. cap. 5. Basil De Legendis libis Gentisium Oratio. Nazianzen Oratio. 48. Chrysostome. Hom. 3. in Roman. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. & 2. Theodoret De Principijs. lib. 2. De Angelis, Dijs, ac Daemonibus Malis. lib. 3. Contra. Graecos Infideles. lib. 7. Ludouius Viues De Causis Corrupt. Atium lib. 2. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 4. & Cicero De Natura Deorum. lib. 1. Accordingly. sundrie Fathers: that these Comicall, Tragicall, and Theatricall Poemes, wherein the Genealogies, Marriages, Birthes, Ceremonies, Histories, and Lasciuious actions of Heathen Gods, were but finedly, and sportingly desciphered, were the chiefe, and primary cause of that Paganisme, Pro∣phanenesse, and Execrable, or Atheisticall Idolatrie, which did formerly ouerspred the World: which Poemes the Gentiles dis oft times embrace, for good Diuintie. If then these Playes, and Poemes haue hatched, haue propagated Ido∣latrie, and Paganisme heretofore; they may likewise resuscitate, and foment it now, vnlesse Gods grace with∣hold vs from it; since wee are See pag 27. Deut. 6.12. cap. 8.11. 1 Iohn 5.21. 1 Cor. 10.7.1. all by nature prone vnto
it, as the sundrie exhortations, and cauats to auoyde it te∣stifie: See Psa. 106.13.19, 20, 21.28 35 36, 37, 3 Iere. 5.23. Cap. 6.28. Cap. 3.6. to 15. Cap. 14.7. Hosea 11.7. No sinne more naturall, more pleasing, and agree∣able to man then this; 1 Iohn 5.19. 1 Peter 4.3. Isay 2.8 Cap. 10.10. no sinne so generally practised, 1 Iohn 5.21. 1 Cor 10.7.14. so hardly auoyded, so ensely entertined, as this one alone; which hath alwayes captiuated, the greatest portion of the World; and oft times conquered, and bewitched the very chosen people of the Lord himselfe, who Ps 106.36.38 Isay 57.5. Ezech. 20.8.16.18.24.32.39. Hosea .17. Car 13.2. Ierem. 5.23. oft reuolted to its loue, and seruice. It is dangerous, it is sinfull therefore to applaude such Playes, admit such Poemes, which may withdraw vs Christians from our God, to grosse Idola∣trie, as they haue oft seduced others, as able, Iosh. 24.15. to 28. Iudg 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. as resolute to withstand this insinuating, and bewitching sinne, as wee: these Authorities these Reasons then should cause, yea, force vs to condemne them. Secondly, the Scriptures doe expressely condemne all Imprecations, all Adiurations, all Admirations by, all Inuocations of, all Heathen Gods: God himselfe com∣mands vs: Genes. 21.23. Deut. 6.13.14. Cap. 10.20. Iosh. 2.12. 1 Sam. 30.15 2 Sam. 19.7. Isay 45.23. Ierem. 4.1. Cap. 12.16. Marke 5.7. Reuel. 11.6. to sweare by his owne Name: Iosh. 23.7. Ierem. 5.7. Cap. 12.16. Amos 8.14. Zeph. 1.5 Zech. 13.2. Hosea 217. not by the names of Idoles, Bal, or Malcham, Matth. 5.34, 35, 36. Cap. 23.16. to 23. Iames 5.12. or any creature whatsoeuer: He enioynes vs to Psalm. 50.15. Psalm. 32.6. Psalm. 56.2. Ierem. 29.7.12. Dan. 9.13. Isay 45.21, 2 Inuocate, Imprecate, and Admire none but himselfe alone; Isay 45.20, 21. not Pagan Idoles, not Colos. 2 18. Reuel. 19.10. Cap. 22.9. Isay 63.16. Saints, or Angels, who can neither heare, nor help vs at our needes. How then can it bee lawfull, to Inuocate, or Implore the alde, or helpe of Ioue, of Iuno, Apollo, Mi∣nerua, Neptune, Bacchus, or such like Heathen Idoles? How can See Clemens Romanus Constit. Apost lib. 5. cap. 11. we Sweare by Ioue, by Mars, by Venus, by Hercules, by the Celestiall Gods, or such like Pagan Oathes? How can we exclaime, (as oft we doe in Stage-Playes,) Absit vt de ore Christiano sonet Iupiter omnipotens, & me Hrcule, me C∣stor, &c. Hirom. Epist. 146. O Ioue! O Muses! O Cupid! O Venus! O Nep∣tune! O ye Gods! O Vulcan, Hercules, Mars, Apollo, Mi∣nerua, Castor, Pollux, Lucina, and the like; without a great offence? Certainely, if these infernall Deities may
Exod. 23.13. Psal. 16.4. not be named, much lesse may they bee Inuocated, Im∣precated, or Sworne by among Christians: their very names are odious, and worthy highest indignation; how then can we approoue their Oathes, and mprecations, their Praises, and Applauses, Prohibitum est iurare er Idola, & in ore habere illo∣rum abomina∣bilia nomin, vel ea colere vel imere ve∣lui Dos: non enim D sunt sed improbi Demones, & ridicula opera. Clemens Ro∣manus Constit Apost. lib. 5. cap. 11. which our God condemnes? How Execrable, and Vile these names haue beene to Christians in the Primitiue times, the former Section can informe you: and shall not then their Oathes, and Inuo∣cations, bee much more detestable, and loathsome vnto vs? The sixt Councell of Constantinople, Canon 94. Eos qui Gentilium iu∣ramenta iu∣rant Canon poenis subiit: & nos iis quo∣que segregati∣onem discer∣nimus. Surius Concil. Tom. 2. pag. 1053. subiects all such to the penaltie of Excommunication, who should sweare the Oathes of the Gentiles: and shall wee then approoue them in our Enterludes, as Elegant, and comely Orna∣ments? Certainely wee cannot doe it, without the perill of Idolatrie, or affronting God vnto his face. For first these Heathenish Oathes, and Imprecations, or Inuoca∣tions of Pagan Gods, Origen Contra. Cel∣su. lib 1. Isiodor Hispa∣ensis. De Summo bono. lib. 5. c. 33 Clem. Rom. Constit Apost. l 5. c. 11. doe giue a kinde of tacite, yea, attribute a manifest Diuinitie to these Idoles, since nothing is o bee Inuocated, or Sworne by, either in sport, or earnest, Ier. 5.7. Rom. 10.13, 14. but God alone. Now to attribute a Deitie to these Pagan Gods, Si quis orum qui dicuntur apud illos Di, actus inspiciat, eos non modo deos non esse, ve∣rum homines nquissimo, turpissimosque fuisse comper et. Omnibus post hac futuris cer∣tum ere argumentum liceat, eos non esse Deos, qui huiusmodi patrassent slera. A∣thanasius Contr Gent. s. p 17, 18.26. whose Villanie did manifest them to bee worse then men, Exo 20.3, 4, 5 23. and all Expsiors, and Commentators on it. is grosse Idolatrie. Certainely, if the reading of a Lecture of some Heathen God: If the stiling of an Idole by the name of God, without this addition Heathen Idole, or Dung-hill God: if the receite of a blessing from a Pagans mouth, Haereticorum benedictiones, sunt maledictiones potius, quam benedictiones. Cncil. Laodicenum. Can. 32. which, in trueth, is rather a cursing, then a blessing,) in the name of an Idole, without reiecting, or dis∣approouing it, bee flat Idolatrie, as De Idoloaria. lib. cap. 18 to 24. ertullian, with Isiodor Hisplensis De Summo bono. lib 3. cap. 13. Gregori. Mag. Epist. lib. 9. Epist 48. Gratian Distinctio. 86. others, hath affirmed; because it giues an approbation to
these Idoles, and ascribes a couert Diuinitie to them: then much more must the Admirations, the Inuocations, the Imprecations, and Exclamations in these Idoles names, which are frequent in our Stage-Playes, be palpable, and grosse Idolatrie; Idololatri perimpium & grauissimum delictum est. Ambr. Com. in Rom. 1. Tom. 3. pag. 117. E. which is the highest sinne, and iussells God out of his Throne. Secondly, these Oathes, and Im∣precations, as they are exceeding Heathenish, and Pro∣phane, vnbeseeming Christian mouthes, or eares; as they are Ridiculous, Vaine, and Foolish, and so within the verge, Matth. 12.36, 37. Ephes. 5 4. of vaine, and foolish words, which God condemnes, and will at last seuerely Iudge: so they are a direct breach of the third Commandement: Exod. 20.7. Leuit. 19.12. Deut. .12. thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine; in that they attribute the Name, and Prerogatiue of GOD to Deut. 32.21. 1 Kings 16.13. Psal. 31 6. Isay 41.29. Cap. 44 9. Ierm. 8.19. Cap. 10.8.15. Cap. 14.22. Cap. 18.15. Idoles, which are the greatest vanities of the World, yea Vanitie it selfe: and a manifest violation of these peremptory Iniuncti∣ons: Mat. 5.34, 35 Iames 5.12. Sweare not at all: and aboue all things my Brethren Sweare not: no, Exod 20 7. with all Ex∣positors on the third Com∣mandement. not by the Name of God, vnlesse wee are lawfully called to it: much lesse, by the names of Pagan Deuill-Idoles; which is Irem. 5.7. Clem. Rom. Constit. Apost. lib. 5. cap. . the worst, the vainest, and pro∣phanest Oath: therefore they must needes be odious, and abominable; yea, displeasing vnto God, and dangerous vnto vs. Thirdly, these Oathes, these Inuocations, and Imprecations, as they renew those Heathenish, and Infernall Deities, See p. 79.80. whose memories should for euer rot: so they doe likewise ingender Heathenisme, and Pro∣phanensse in mens liues, and speeches: See Chrys. Hom. De Dauide & Saule. Hom. De Verbis Isay Vidi dominum Sedentem Ho. 38 in Matth. Saluan li 6. De Gubernat Dei. See pag. 27. Accordingly. they alienate mens Hearts, and Thoughts from God, and heauenly things: they tip their Tongues with Vanitie, and Prophanenesse, which Ephs 4 29. Col 4.. should flow with Grace, and Holinesse: they stampe their liues, and actions with dissolutenesse, and graceles∣nesse: they cause them, Ephes. 2.12. Psal 10.4. to liue without God, in this World; and to admire, Plautus sumebatur in manus: si quando in memet ipsum reuer∣sus, Prophetas legere capissem, seme horrebat incultus, &c Hierom Epist 22. cap. 13. and relish Heathen Deities, and
Discourses, more then God, or his Soule-sauing Word: how may, how dare wee then approoue them? how can wee but condemne them? Yet loe the Impious, and strange Prophanensse, yea, the Impudent, and sottish Idolatrie of our sinfull Age, which not onely tolerates, and applaudes, but likewise iustifies, and defends the naming, and inuocating of; the Swearing, and Exclaiming by these Hellish, Heathe∣nish Deuill-Idoles, in despight of Gods Command, with these two Wittie, or rather Nulli pecca∣tori deest impu∣dens praetextus. Chrysost Hom in Psal. 14. Tom. 1. Col. 1110. C. Impudent pretences, and Euasions. Excus 1.First, that these Idoles are Inuocated, Adiured, Named, Imprecated, and sworne by, in sport, and merriment one∣ly; not seriously, or in earnest. Secondly, that they are vttered by way of Proxie, or representation onely; not as the Words, or Oathes of the Actors, but of some feined persons, whose Parts they represent: so that they are not with in the compasse of the Scriptures, and reasons fore-alleadged. Answ. 1.To the first of these I answere: First, that the Hea∣then Poets did Nominate, Inuocate, Adiure, Adore, and Supplicate these Idoles, and discourse of all their Gene∣alogies, Villanies, and Obscenities, Athanasius Contr. Gen∣tiles. lib. pag. 23.24, 2. Arnobius. lib. 3, 4. & 7. Contr. Gentes. Clemens Alex. Orat. Exhort. ad Gentes, & Strom. lib. 1. & 2. Tatianus Orat. Aduers. Graeos. Aug. lib. 2. De iuit. Dei. cap. 4. to 13.25. to 29. Ludouicus Viues De Causis Corrupt. Artium. lib. 2. pag. 78. to 83. Agrippa D Vaniate Sient. cap. 4. Lactantius De Falsa Relig. cap. 11, 12. but in a Fabulous, and sporting manner, and that in Theatricall Enterludes, and Poemes, as we now doe: yet this the fore-recited See pag. 80. Fa∣thers taxe in them, as grosse Idolatrie; as an abominable, and filthie crime. If then this were detestable, and Idolatrous in them who knew not God, must it not bee much more so in vs, who not onely know him, but professe him too? Certainely, if their fabulous, and iesting discourses of these Idoles, were a notorious crime, Nos qui Christiani catholici esse dicimur, si simile aliquid barbarorum impuritatibus facimus, grauius erramus. Atrocius ex sub sancti nominis professione peccamus. Salu. De Gub. Dei. lib. 4. pag. 12. ours cannot be lesse then an abominable, and transcendent wickednesse.
Secondly, the Scriptures know no such distinction be∣tweene iest, and earnest: they enioyne vs peremptorily: Exod. 23.13. not to make mention of the names of Idoles; Isay 44.9. to 21. Exod. 20.7. not to In∣uocate, or Adiure them; Iosh. 23.7. not to Sweare by them, Deut. 12.3. but vtterly to abolish both their memories, names, and reliques: which precepts being vniuersall Negatiues, admit of no euasion: If then we may not Name them, Implore them, or Sweare by them at all, Nihil ad Deum perti∣nens leue est ducendum: quia quod vi∣detur exiguum esse culpa, grande hoc fa∣cit deixitatis iniuria. Salu. De Gub. Dei. lib. 6. much lesse may wee doe it by way of Sport, or Merriment: since it is more tolerable, lesse hainous, to sinne in earnest vpon some pretended necessitie, Nulla est necesitas de∣linquendi qui∣us vna est ne∣cessitas non de∣linquendi. Tetul. De Corona Mili∣tis. cap. 11. though no necessitie can once authorize or force vs for to inne,) then thus to sinne in iest. Thirdly, if this distinction of breaking Gods Com∣mandements in iest, or earnest, should bee warrantable; then euery man Prou. 10.23. Chap. 13.9. as many doe,) would dayly violate them by way of sport, and merriment, not in earnest, and yet they should bee no sinners, because they sinne in iest: and so all Gods Lawes should bee euacuated, Religion vn∣dermined, and sinne made a iest. Fourthly, this Inuocating, Naming, and Swearing by these Heathen Gods in iest, is farre more odious, and sin∣full, then to doe it in good earnest, out of ignorant Super∣stition, or blinde Deuotion. He that sinnes thus in iest, and merriment, Et hoc De∣um maxime irritat quando conultò, & praemeditatò, & dedita ope∣ra ab improbis mala fiun. Chrys. Hom. in Psal. 108. Tom. 1. Col. 926. B. sinnes more wittingly, wilfully, contemptu∣ously, and presumptuously, then hee that sinnes in earnst; he contemnes, and slights both God, and these his pre∣cepts more; hee loues, and approoues sinne more, Neque enim peccantes it a aduersatur Deu, quam eos qui post peccata securi sunt. Crysost. Hom. 6. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 51.8. Graius est peccatum diligere quam perpetrare. Gregorie Magnus Mor. lib. 25. Cap. 16. hee feares, and hates it lesse; hee sinnes vpon fewer, and lesse weightie prouocations, then those who sinne in earnest: therefore his sinne is farre more hainous, and abomina∣ble then theirs is, or this his owne had beene, had hee committed it with greater seriousnesse, as the Pagans did. Fiftly, King Solomon informes vs: Prou. 10.23. Cap. 13.9. Stulus per rium operatur scelus. Salu. De Gub. Dei. pag. 205. that it is the
propertie of Fooles to make a mocke of sinne, and a pastime to doe wickedly: Pro. 26.18, 19 that hee who deceiueth his Neighbour, (much more then hee who Ephes. .6. 1 Cor. 6.9. Galat. 6.7. thinkes to deceiue God, yea deceiues himselfe,) and saith: Am I not in iest: is as a mad∣man who casteth abroade Fire-brandes, Arrowes, and Death. If then wee make a mocke, and sport of the Names, and Oathes of Idoles, wee prooue our selues Ludere in iis rebus in qui∣bus non st u∣dendum, in∣scitia et. Pachymerius. Histor. lib. 4. but fooles, and mad-men, and cast abroade Fire-brandes, Arrowes, and Death to our owne Eternall ruine. Sixtly, these Lusorie, and sporting Oathes, and Im∣precations by, or Discourses of these Idole-gods; may now as well ingender Heathenisme, and Idolatrie, or foment a secret Atheisme in mens Hearts, See pag. 80. as they did in former times; Yea, they doe as really reuiue the names, the reliques, and memories of cursed Idoles, (which hould putrifie, and perish in obliuions Lethe:) and as His, atque huiusmodi fig∣mentis, & mendaciis dul∣cioribus cor∣rumpunt inge∣nia puerorum: & in eisdem fabulis nhae rentibus, adus∣que summa atatis robur a∣dolscunt; & in eisdem opi∣nionius mise∣ri consene∣scunt: cum sit veritas buia, sed requiren∣tibus. Miucius Felix. Octu. pag. 70. effectually propagate all prophanenesse, as if they were vt∣tered in the most serious earnest. This iesting distinction therefore, of iest, and earnest, can neither palliate, nor salue this festered sore, nor iustifie these Pagan, and In∣fernall Oathes, and passages, which Christians must a∣bominate, vnlesse they meane to Deifie the Deuill, and a∣dore these Idoles. Lastly, the taking of Gods name in vaine, is simply euill; yea, so euill, Exod. 20.7. Leuit. 29.12. Deut. 5.11. See Cauin. Instit. lib 2. cap. 8. Sct. 25. that God will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his Name in vaine. But the attributing of a Di∣uinitie to these Idoles; the stiling of them Gods: the Supplicating, and Adiuring of them, together with the swearing by them, as God, with approbation, and delight; and that by way of Sport, and Merriment one∣ly, without any necessary, or vrgent cause, (which is frequent in our STAGE-PLAYES,) is the Vanum enim dicitur quod non haet bonum finem: quod ad nihil est vtile. Chrys. Hom. 12. in Ephes. 4. highest taking of Gods Name in Vaine; since both the Mrri∣ments, Passages, Idoles, Othes, Imprecations, yea, the
Auerte oculos a Ldum, & Theatro∣rum Specta∣culis, auerte ab omni secu∣lar. Pompa: Vanita est illa quam cernis. Pantomimum aspicis, vani∣tas est. Lucta∣tores aspicis, vanitas est, &c Ambrose Enarrat in Pal. 118. Octon 5. Tm. 2. pag 430. F. G. very Actors, Spectacles, and Enterludes themselues are wholly vaine; therefore it must needes be sinfull in de∣spite of this euasion. To the second, that they are vttered by way of Proxie, or Representation onely, not as the Words, the Oathes, and Imprecations of the Poets, or Actors, but of those feined persons, whose parts they represent: I answere: First, that Basil De Legendis Li∣bris Genti∣lium. Oratio. Nazianzn Ad Seluhum. pag. 163. Isiodor Pelu∣siora Epist lib. 1. Eist. 63. it is sinfull to vtter, yea, to heare, and read such Heathenish discourses, Oathes, and Imprecations as these, with Approbation, and Applause; because the fore-quoted Scriptures doe condemne them. Secondly, it is infallibly true, Ezech. 18.19, 2. Galat 6.5 that euery man shall beare his owne iniquitie, and answere for his sinne: it is likewise as vnquestionably true; Ioshua 2.7. Exod. 23 13. Psalm. 16.4. Irem 5.7. Dut. 12.3. that these Pagan Oathes, and Passages are sinnes; and that Isay 3.8, 9.11, 14 they shall be imputed as sinnes to some men, because no sinne can euer subsist without its proper subiect. If then all this bee granted: on whom shall all these Oathes, these Heathe∣nish discourses, and Imprecations light? on the persons whose parts they helpe to fill? Why these are eithr feined, or long since departed: or suppose they are aliue, 1 Tim. 5.22. Reuel. 18.4. Non peccatum in aiis sentiendo, sed ei con∣sentiendo peccamus. Prosper Aquit De vita Contepl lib. 3. ap. 2. yet they giue no allowance to them, therefore they cannot rest on them: neees then must they rest vpon the Poets, Actors, and Spectators heads, Rom. 2.6.8, 9. their Soules shall answere for them all at last, and then this vaine Euasion will not helpe them. Thirdly, this absurd Delusion, hath neither colour, ground, nor warrant in the Scripture; which giues com∣mission vnto none, to Act an othrs part, or prson on the Stage; Quid ergo ais, simulatio est illa, non crien? Et ropterea mille illi mor∣tibus digni sun, quoniam quae fgere cncts prorsus imperant leges, ea ii aud ve∣rentur imitari. Si eni Adlterium malum est, malum est sine dubo & eius imi∣tatio. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 52. C. much lesse, to personate anothers sinne, which is it selfe, an hainous sinne, well worthy of a thousand Deathes. Suppose that God should enter into Iudgement with any
Play-Poets, or Actors, for these Idolatrous Imprecations, Prophane, and Pagan Oathes, or Heathenish Stage-Plaies, Eccles. 12.14 2 Cor 5.10. as he will surely doe at last,) what answere could they make? Can they say, that all was done in sporting mirth, or in the part, and person of some other, who gaue no such commission to them? Alas, this Plea will not aaile them then, let it not therefore gll, and cheate them now: Questionlesse, all such incarnate Deuills, who dare to Countenance, Admit, Applaude, or Act these Idoles per∣sons, Parts, Names, or Oathes in iest, shall bee Damned for them, in good earnest: As it was wittily, and truely said of Nonresidents, and Pluralitie Ministers, who put ouer their Flocke to Hirelings: Qui gregem suum pascen∣dum vicario relinquit, in caelum it for∣asse per vica∣rium, in ge∣hennam per seipsum. See Aquisgran. Concil. Sub. Ludou. Pio. cap 9. to 37. that he who feedes his Flocke by Curate, shall perchance, goe to Heauen by his Vicar, but vndoubtedly to Hell by himselfe: so hee who personates these Heathen Gods, or Supplicates, or Sweares by any of their Names, by representation onely, in anothers per∣son, may chance to enter Heauen in that others person, but Hell vndoubtedly, in his owne: These euasions therefore are but vaine, and cannot iustifie that they pleade for. Thirdly, the Scriptures doe expresly prohibit, the Prou. 10 23. Cap. 13.19. Iude 23. Rom. 1.29.32. Rom. 3.8. personating of any sinne; much more then, the acting of Adulteries, Incests, Rapes, Murthers, Thefts, Loue-prankes, or leaude, and execrable Vanities of Iupiter, Bac∣chus, Cupid, Venus, and others of that Diuelish, and In∣fernall crew, which pester, and defile all Theaters; which Saint Chrysostome rightly stiles; Diabolicam hanc cnfoues officinam. Hom. 6. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 52. B. the Deuills shop. If wee did but suruay the Scriptures, as seriously, as fre∣quently, as wee behold these Hellish Enterludes, wee should there finde God himselfe commanding vs: to 1 Thes. 5.22. Iude 23. Col 2.20 23. 2 Cor. 6.17. absteine from all appearance of Euill, yea from the very resemblances, and shewes of sinne: and can wee then per∣sonate, or Act these grosse, and odious sinnes to the very life, (whose representations are at leastwise, the appea∣rances, and resemblances of sinne,) without offence? God himselfe enioynes vs, Exod. 20.4 Leuit. 26 1. Deut. 5.8. Psal. 97 7. not so much, as to make an Idole, or the likenesse of any thing that is in Heauen, or Earth:
And can we then lawfully take up, not onely the Exod 23.13 Sir Thomas Eliot o the Go∣vernor Book. 1. chap. 19. See here Act. 1.2.3. and page 77 accordingly. interdi∣cted names and rites, but even the very persons, images, ha∣bites, shapes, and representations of Dvill-Idols (expresly Iosephus An∣tiqu. Idorum l. 15. c. 11. Philo Ideus de Decalogo l. pag. 1037. Tertullian De Idololatria lib. Augustin, Calvin, Bishop Babington, B. Andrewes, M. Perkins, M. Dod Master Downham, M. Eln, Doct. Williams. with all othr an∣cint and mo∣derne Exposi∣tors, both Pro∣testants and Papists on the 2 Comman∣dment, and on Exod. 20. Levit. 26. and Deut. . prohibited by the second Commandment) that so we may the Miramini nolim vos, qua propter nunc Iupiter histriones curet. ne miremini, ipse hanc daurus est Iupiter Comaediam. Quid admirati estis? quasi vero novom nunc proferatur Iovem facere histrioniam, &c. hanc fabulam, inquam, hic Iupiter hode ipse agit, & ego una cum o &c. Operae prae∣tium hic spectantibus Iovem & Mercurium facee histrioniam. Plauti Amphitiuo, Pr∣logus. more liuly personate their most execrable wickednesses; when as not onely Nihil dandum Idolo, sic nihil sumendum ab Idolo Si in Idolio recumbere alienum est a ide, quid in Idolihabitu videri? Quae communio Christi & eliae? Ioan∣nes, Filioli, inquit, custodite vos ab Idolis: non iam ab Idolo atria quasi ab officio; sed ab Idoli, id est, ab effigi eorum. Indignum enim est vt imago Dei viui, imago Idoli & mortui fiat. De Corona Militis lib. cap. 8. Tertullian, and In cap. 14. Isaae tom. 3. Operum p. 469. St. Basil; but even an whole Qui se daemone correptos esse simulant, & moum improhitate eorum figuram & ha∣bitum simulatè prae se ferunt, visum est, omni modò puniri, & eiusmodi afflictionibus laboribusque subiici cos oporere, quibus ii qui verè a dmone correpti sunt. vt a daemo∣nis operatione liberentur, iure subiiciantur. Concilium Constantino p. 6. in Trullo Ca 60 S aenon. 62. accordingly. generall Councell, have both prohibited and condem∣ned all representations, either of Idols or Divels, under the sverest censures: because such representations, doe not onely cause men to frame the very images and portraitures of Pagan Deities, Exod. 20.4. Leuit. 26.1. Deut. 4.15.16, 17. c. 5.8. c. 16.22. Psal. 9.7.which is grosse Idolatry; but likewise transforme even men themselves, (the Gen. 1.26, 27. cap. 5. l. c. 9.6. most lively image of the living God) into the very portraiture of those Divell-Idols, whose parts they are to act: and so turne the expresse Image of God himselfe into the very image of the Devill; a sinne beyond expression:) and yet deeme our selves guiltlesse of the breach of this most sacred Precept? It is the Apostles pe∣remptorie command: Ephes. 5.3.4. Col. 3.8. But fornication and all uncleannsse, and filthinesse and foolish talking, let it not be once named among you as becommeth Saints: And can we then practise or approve, not onely the asiduous commemoration of the names, but likewise the artificiall, if not reall acting, not onely of the Parts, but also of the See Cyprian. Epist. lib. . Epist. . Donato. August. de Ciu. Deil. 2 cap. 4. to. 14. lib. 3. cap. 18 l 4. c. 3.10 36.27.28. incests, rapes, adulteries,
whoredomes, and such like execrable abominations of the beast∣liest Divell-gods, or infernall Men-monsters (which were Nihl. turpe ac flagitiosum spectandum iitandum∣que proponi∣tur, ubi veri Dei aut prae∣cepta insinuan∣tur, aut mira∣cula narran∣tur, aut bene∣ficia postulan∣tur, August. D Ciu. Dei lib. 2. cap 28. anciently exiled all such places where Christs Gospel came, as inconsistent with it,) and yet thinke to passe for pious Chri∣stians? It was Davids importunate prayer unto God; Psal. 119.37.Turne away my eyes from beholding vanity (which Hilarie Am∣brose, Augu∣stine, Chry∣sostome, Bru∣no and others, in Psal 118. He. see p. 52. the Fa∣thers generally apply to Stage-Playes) and quicken me in thy way: And can we, dare we then once turne our eyes, and eares (which Psal. 121.1. Psal. 123.1.2. Nihil aspectu gratum sit, nisi quod pi, quod iuste fieri vide∣as: nihil auditu suaue, nisi quod alit animam, melioremque  reddit. La∣ctantlus De vero Caelii lib. 6. cap. 21. should be alwayes centred upon God and hea∣venly objects, that might meliorate, nourish and refresh our soules,) unto those matchlesse obscenities of Pagan Idols that are daily acted on the Stage (the See August. De ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4. to. 15. lib. 4. c. 26.27.28. and lib. 6. c. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. accordingly. very filthinesse of which might cause even Divels themselves to blush and trem∣ble) and yet flatter our selves, that we are in Davids pious condition? Certainely, every true Christian indeed (if wee may beleve the Scripture) Eccles 9.2. 1 Sam. 24.5. 1 Thess. 5.22. Iude 23. Quid inter haec christianus fidelis fa∣cit cui vitia non licet cogitare? Cyprian De spectac. lib. doth feare and tremble, not onely at the act, but likewise at the very appearance and thought of sinne: yea, Isay 33.15. Vanus enim sermo cito polluit mentem, & facilè agitur quod libenter auditur. Bernard. De Itriori Domo cap. 43. he stoppeth his eares from bearing blood, and shtteth his eyes from seeing evill. And can wee then prove our selves to be Christians, either in Gods, or our owne consciences account, when as we are so fare from trem∣bling, that we doe Isay 3.9. Rom. 1.2. even rejoyce at the sight, the hearing of these lewd Theatricall Enterludes: being so farre from shut∣ting our eyes, or stopping up our eares against them, that we doe readily open them with greedinesse and delight to these infernall, diabolicall, prodigious Stage-abominations, which Quis talia fando Temperet a Lachrymis? Virgil AEneid. lib. . See Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Mat. Nazienzen ad Se∣ucum pag. 1063. accordingly. would pierce an heart of steele with grife, and dissolve even eyes of Adamant into brinish teares? It was David religious protestation, Psal. 101.3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes, I will not know a wicked person: And shall we Phil 3.17. Hebr. 6.12. cap 13.7.8. who
ought to follow Davids steps in this his pious practise, be never better recreated, more delighted, then when the laruated persons, parts and wickednesses of the very worst of men and Devils, (that are Deinde qua∣le illud est, vt cum in platea nudam foemi∣nam nolis as∣picere, imò ne∣que domi qui∣dem, sed s id tiam fortè contingat in iniuriam tui factum putes∣cum verò as∣cendis The∣trum vt vio∣les vtriusque sexus pudo∣rem, obtutus∣que proprios pariter incestes nihil bi inho∣nestum credat accidere? Si enim nihil in tali re esse o∣pinaris obscae∣num, qua gra∣tia cum id ip∣sum in plate videas a xp∣to reilis incessu, & inverecundiam severius exagitas? nisi fortè credis candem rem non similiter esse turpem cum seperati simus, & quum congregati omnes vna sede∣mus. Chrysostom. Hom. . in Matth. tom. 2. ol. 52. c. D. every where abominable in the eyes of all men, but onely on the Stage, Si quid horum quibus Cir∣cus furit aliubi competit sanctis, etiam in Circo licebit. Si verò nusquam ideo nec in Circo. Nusquam & nunquam licet, quod semper & vbique non licet. Tertul. de spectac. l. c. 16.20, 21. which hath n such sancti∣fying vertue in it, as to make ill things good, when once they are brought upon it,) are most emphatically represented to our eyes and eares at once? It is registred of righeeous Lot; 2 Pet. 2.7.8. See Beda and Oecumemus ibidem. that he dwelling among the wicked Sdomites, vexed his righteous soule from day to day, in seeing and hearing their un∣lawfull deeds: And can any Players or Play-haunters then perswade themselves, that they are in Lots condition, when as their unrighteous soules, are so farre from being vexed at the sight and hearing of those-more then Sodomiticall uncleannesses of Pagan Deities, which are acted on the Stage, Instructuosum putamus gaudium simplex, ne delectat ridere sine crimine, Salian de Gub. dei lib. 6. p 192. that they are more aboundantly recreated and deligh∣ted with them, then with all the soule-ravishing pleasures, of Gods house, or the most delightfull consolations of his Word and Spirit, Quam tu ergo satisfactionem parabis responde quaeso, qui ea quae nominari fa non et summo studio spectas: quae etiam memorare urpe est, ea cunctis honestis artibus sanctisque praeponis? Chrysost Hom. 7. in Mat. tom. 2. Col. 61. B. before which they oft preferre them? O the Converte hinc vultus ad divers spectaculi non minus paentenda contagia: in theatris quoqu conspicies, quod & dolori tibi sit & pudori, Aspicias ab impudicis geri, quod nec aspi∣cere possit fronspudica: videas, quod crimen sit & videre, &c. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2. Donat. horible incests, the execrable adulteries, rapes and whoredomes; the vnparalleld wickednesses, the infernall pra∣ctises of those lewd Pagan-Deities, and stupendiou Men-mon∣sters that are daily acted on our Theaters? What chaste, Qui nim integro veecundiae statu dicere que at illas rerum turpium imi∣tationes, illas uocum & verborum obscaenitates, illas motuum turpitudines, llas gestuum ditates? quae quanti int criminis hinc intelligi potest, quod & relationem sui inter∣dicunt; Saluian de Guber. Dei. lib. 6. p. 18. What
modest Christian heart can once recount, what tongue relate, what eye behold, what eare receive, what pen diseypher them (unlesse Quamvis animus memi∣nisse horret; luctuque refu∣git. Virgil. AEneid. lib. 2.necessiated to display their filthinesse) withot shame and horror, if not sinne it selfe? Are See Minucius Felix octavi∣tis: Arnobius adu: Gentes: lib. 7. Lactan∣tius de vero cultu cap. 20. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. & August. De Civit. Dei l 2. c. 4.6, 8, 9, 27. lib. 4. c. 1. 26, 27, 28 lib. . c. 6, 7. & Sal∣vian de Gub. Dei lib. 6. ac∣cordingly. not the very Master∣peeces, dregs and off-sceuring of all those horrid adulteries and transcendent wickednesses, that either the prauitie of man, or the wit of hll could hitherto invent, epitomized and diplayed on the Stage? Doe not Play-Poets and common Actors (th August. de Civ. Dei. lib. 2. c. 13, 14, 29. Chrysost. hom. 7. & 38. in Matth. Cy∣prian Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10 Tatianus O∣ratio advers. Graecos Na∣zianzen. ad Seleucum, p. 1063. Agrippa De Vanitate scientiarum, cap. 20.63, 64. and the third Blast of retrait from Playes and Theaters, p. 92. and 102 to 117. prove and stile them such. Divels chiefest Factors) rake earth and hell it selfe; doe not they travell over Sea and Land; over all Histories, poemes, countries, times and ages for unparalleld villanies, that so they may pollute the Theater withNihil potest confing vitiorum quod non in Thea repertatur. August. De Civit. Dei lib. 4. c. 27. all the hideous obscenities, with all the detestable matchlesse impieties, which hitherto mn or Divels have either actually perpetrated, or fabulousy divul∣ged? What shall I record the severall For which you may read, Clemens Alexandr Oratio Adhort ad Gentes, Tertullian. Apolog. advers. Gentes, aanus Oratio adver. Gre∣cos. Minucius Felix Octavius, Arnobius advers. Gntes lib. 7. Cyprian Epise lib. 2. Epist. 2. Lactantius De falsa religione, lib. 1. cap. 9. to 22. De vero culu. P. 6. c 2 A∣thanaus Contr. Gentes lib. Augustine lb. 1 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, De Civi. Dei. Naales omes, Diodorus Siculus, Livie, Ouid, Heiod, Homer, Macrobi Pltarch, Alexander ab Alexandro, Varro and other abominable adulte∣ries of Venus; the ifinit suparlative incests, rapes, fornications, love-prankes, Sodomies, murthers, cheats, with other such ex∣crable wickednesses of Iupiter, the very worst, though greatest of the Pagan Deities? What shall relate the several bastly flagi∣tious practises, ceremonies, obscenitis, of Iuno, Bacchus, Cupid. Piapus, Mars, Serapis, Atys, Flora, the Mother of the Gods, or of the rest of that infernal crew, which come so frequen on or Theaters? Is not their filhinesse, their lewdnesse so barba∣rously, so stupendiously impious, Talia sunt quae in Theatris frunt, vt ea non s∣lum dicere, sed etiam recordari aliquis sin pollutione non possit. Quae quidem omnia tam flagitiosa sunt, vt etiam expliare ea atque elo qui quisiam salo pudre non valeat. Saluian, de Gub Deil 6. p. 185.186. Seo  before. that it even strikes mens harts and tongues with horrour, forbidding them to relate it? And can any then behold, or act these grose abominations with delight, (the very relation of which is sufient to pol∣lute
the eares that heare them, the common aire that re∣ceives them, yea the breath that utters them) and yet be in∣nocent, be untainted by them? Alas, we cannot but with shame and griefe acknowledge, that our moderne Play-Po∣es doe not onely record and publish to posterity in their lascivious Enterludes, the execrable lewd examples of our present Age (which See D. Hack∣wel Apology, lib. 4. c. 12. sect. 1.2. parallell or surpasse all those of former times) but likewise Cothurnus est tragicus priscafacinora carmine recen∣sere, de parra∣cidis & ince∣stis horror an∣tiquus, expressa ad imaginem veritatis actio∣ne replicatur, ne soeculis transeuntibus exolescat quod aliquando factum est. Nunquam aeui senio delicta moriuntur; nunquam cri∣men tempo: i∣bus obruitur, nunquam see∣lus oblivione sepelitur, ex∣e pla fiunt quae iam esse facinora desti∣terunt. Quae tiam aetas ab∣sconderat, sub oulorum me∣moriam redu∣cuntur. Non est libidini sa∣tis malissuis vti presenti∣bus, nisi suum de sctaculis faciat, in quo etiam atas superior eravra. Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. l. De spectac. lib. dive into oblivions deepest Lethe, resusci∣tating those obsolete putred wickednesses of former ages, which Hell had long since buried in er lowest Cels, lest present and future times should be so happy as not to imitate them, or fi∣nally to forget them. And can we then act, or see the action of these moderne, these ancient, these motheaten filthy crimes, without a crime? No verily. O therefore let Stage-Players Pereant ista vnd vitiorum memoria menti renovatur. Tatianu Oratio advers. Graecos Bibl. Pastrum tm .2. p. 182. D.perish, yea, for ever perish, which thus revive the cursed memory of Pagan Idols, and their infernall wicked∣nesses, whose remembrance should for ever be forgotten lest we perish by them: O let those filthy Enterludes, those shamelesse Actors, who feare not to display those shame∣full workes of dakenesse in the sight of thousands on the open Theater, with more then Erubescunt videri etam qui pudorem vendiderunt. At istud publicum nostrum omnibus videntibus ge∣ritur, &c. Cyprian. De spectaculis lib. See Chrysostome, Homil. 6, 7, and 38. in Matth. blushlesse impudency, which their very Pagan, yea, infernall Authors did even blush, id tremble to commit in secet, where no eye was present to behold them, but their owne, and that Iob 42.2. 1 Iohn 3.20. Psal. 139.1.2. omniscients, who is Psal. 139.3. to .14. Prov. 15.3. Ier. 16.17. c. 3219. Prov. 5.21. Iob 34.21. c. 31.4. Heb. 4.13. omni∣praesent, beholding both the evill and the good; be ever execra∣ble to all pious Christians, Rom. 12.1.2. 1 Cor. 6.19.20.whose eyes and eares re for ever consecrated to that holy God, Hab. 1.13. Nos quomodo haec facimus qui odisse Deum nostrum haec certi s∣mus? Salviax. De Guber. Dei. l. 6. p. 88. who is prer of eyes then to be∣hold the least iniquity, then to i approve our filthy Stageplayes; which might cause even heaven, earth, nay, hell to blush for shame, and move the very Sunne it selfe to vaile his Cristall
beames for feare they should defile their light. The Numbers 33 52. Scrip∣tures, Clemens A∣lexandr. Ora∣tio Adhort. ad Gentes Fol. 8. f. & 9. A Gregory Nyssen. vitae Moseos Enar∣ratio, p. 503. Fathers, In Concil. Constanti∣nop. 6. in Trullo. Can. 100. Synod us Augustensis. Ano 1548. cap. 28. two famous Councels, with he third part of the Homilie a∣gainst the pe∣rill of Idola∣try, B. Babing∣ton, B. An∣drewes, M. Dod, M. El∣ton, Master Downham, and sundry others on the seenth Com∣mandement.sundry Prote∣stant Divines, have utterly condemned the making, the behol∣ding of all obscene lascivious pictures; as being a meane to en∣flame mens hearts with lusts, with filthy pleasures, and to draw them on to actuall uncleannesse. And shall not then those Saint Cy∣prian, De spe∣ctaculis lib. and Lactan∣tius De vro. cultu cap. 20. call theatricall representations. Simulachra libidinis: Salvian de Guber. Dei lib. 6. pag. 187. stiles them, Imagines fornicationum, & Plu∣tarch de gloria Athoniensium. lib. writes; that poesis est pictra lquens. lively, if not reall pictures and representations of the adulte∣ries, rapes, incests; Love-prankes, murthers reasons, and o∣ther such practises of Pagan Idols, which ar so artificially acted on the Stage, that a man can hardly difference the representations of them from the sinnes themselves, be much more liable to condemnation on the selfe-same grounds? Doubtlesse, if the substance be evill, the 1 Thess. 5.22.shadow of it cannot be good: if the person be odious, the picture will be such: if the thing acted be simply evill, the representati∣on of it will resemble it. Ezech. 36.31. Iob 42.6. Psal. 119.104. All sinnes (much more the Levit. 18.30. Deutr. 12.31. cap. 7.16.25, 26. Chrysost. Hom. 6. and 7. in Matth. Cyprian de spectac. lib. M. Perkins Cases of Conscience lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 4. accordingly. See Here: Scene 1. loath∣some facts of Devill-Idols) are detestably evill in themselves, stherefore the personating, the imitation of them on the Stage, the characterizing of them in their freshest colours in our The∣atricall Poems, must needs be sinfull, yea, abominable, unto all good Christians. The Non pulchrum est dicere ea quae factu turpia sunt. Sophocles Oedipus, Tyr. Num. 1400. Isocrates Oratio Demonicum.perpetrating of such sinnes is evill, therefore the personating. Tertullian de spectaculis, cap. 17.18. Quod in facto reijcitur, in dicto non est recipiendum. Since then wee cannot but abominate these odious transcendent sinnes themselves, which sunke their originall Authors, downe as low as the uery deepest depthes of hell it selfe, from whence there is no returne for ever, let us not justifie their representations, nor applaud
their action. And so much the rather, Malignispi∣ritus, quos isti Deos putant, etiam flagitia quae non ad∣mis runt de se dici volunt, vt humanas mentes his o∣pinionibus ulut retibus induant, & ad praedestina tum suppli∣cium securn trahant. Maec de numinibus fingi libenter accipiunt fal∣lacissimi spiri∣tus, vt ad scele∣stia & turpìa perpetranda, velut ab ipso coelo traduci in terra, satis idonea videa∣tur autoritas Quantum moliantur malignispiritus exemplo su, velut divinam autoritatem praebere sceleribus? hac astutia etiam ludos scenicos sibi dicari sacrari que iusserunt, vbi deorum tāta flagitia theatricis cāticis at{que} fabularū actionibus celebrata sunt, vt quisquis eos talia fecisse crederet, & quisquis non crederet, sed tamen illos libentissime sibi talia velle ex∣hiberi cerneret, securus imitaretur. August. De Cv. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 10. & 25. lib. 4. ca. 1. vid. 2. Hoec omnia in hoc prodita vt vitiis hominum quaedam autoritas parare∣tur. Isti enim spiritus post quam simplicitatem substantiae suae onusti immersi vitiis perdiderunt, ad solatium calamitatis suae non definunt perditi am, perdere, & depravati erorem pravitatis pravis religionibus a Deo segregare. Minuius Felix. Octa vius pag. 70. & 85. See Iulius Firmics de errore profanarum Religionum cap. 13. accordingly. because these filthy Divel-Idols, (as the Fathers testifie,) did heretofore, either re∣ally commit those beastly crimes that are acted in their persons on the Stage; or else purposely admit them to be Poetically forged of them, and then openly to be divulged to the people o the Theater in their names, that so they might give a kinde of di∣vine approbation or publicke allowance to these their notorious wickednesses by their owne personall examples, to animate and draw on the Spectators more securely, more boldly to commit the selfesame sinnes, to the eternall ruine of their soules. Whence Athanasius informes us from his owne experience, Hinc iam profecto hominibus mali multum adiectum est. Cum enim cernerent his Deos suos oblectari, continuo & ipsi sese ad imitandum os contulerunt, virtutis s in∣teresse arbitrantes, praestantiores vt ipsi putabant, imitari. Vnde homicidiis ac parricidiis omnibusque laseiviis dedere manus. Nam omnis fere civitas omnibus nequitiae sordibus plena est, dum student deorum suorum moribus similes fieri. Neque inter Idolorum cultores frugi aliqusac pudicus est. Isque solum laudatur, quiomnes impudicitiae suae testes habet. A love quidem stuprationes puero rum at que adulteria: à Venere autem fornicationem; a Rea impudicitiam, a Marte caedes, aliaque ab alijs didicerunt, quae pudicis omnibus in exceratione sunt. Athanasius Contra Gentiles lib. 1. pag. 36.37. See Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Iulius Fimicus de Error profanarum Religionum, cap. 13. and Augustine De Ciu. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 7.9.10 25. accor∣dingly. that the proclaiming of the vices of Pagan Idols on the Stage, did much increase the sinnes of men. For when as they perceived their Idol-gods to be delighted with such filthy sinnes, they pre∣sently fell to imitate them. Insomuch that almost euery Citie was fully fraught with all the filth and dregges of wickednesse, whiles they studied to conforme themselves to the sinnes and vi∣cs of their Idols: there being not one chaste or sober man among all the worshippers of such vitious Idol-gods (as there are now few such among Players and Play-haunters; those
onely being appladed by them, whose lewdnesse was most noto∣riously knowne unto all men. If then the personating of the wickednesses of Hathen Idols, be but a meere stratagem of Satan, to encourage, to precipitate and allure men to the selfesame sinnes: If it revives the execrable memory of those infernall crimes Zech. 13.2. Hosea 2.17. which should be buried in eternall oblivion: If it worke a loue, a liking, at lest-wise a slighting or lesse hating, of such hellish abominations in the hearts of men: If it be alwayes attended with the very lively 1 Thes. 5.22 appea∣rances, or, resemblances of evill, from which Christians should absteins. If it doth Non ad pl∣cendum homi∣nibus, sed ser∣viendum dae∣monibus adhi∣betur. August. Ep. 73. Possi∣donio Cyprian de spectaculis, and Chrysost. homil. 6.7.38. in Matth. &c. more advance the Divels service, (the originall Author of Stage-playes,See Tert. de spectac. c. 26. as himselfe, and See the Au∣thors quoted from p. 9. to 16. p. 43.49.50.51. & Ci∣cero de Au∣spicum Re∣sponsis Ora∣tio. Apulius De Mundo. l. p. 24. Peter Martyr Loco∣rum Com. classi 2. c. 12. sect. 15.19. Danaeus Ethi∣cae Christianae l. 2. c. 8. p. 107. M. Gatiker of the lawfull vse of Lots, p. 216. accor∣dingly. others te∣stifie,) then recreate the Spectators; which none can contra∣dict, since Satan gaines more soules, more service by them, then Play-frequenters pleasure: This must, this cannot but enforce all Christians for ever to abandon Stage-playes, be∣cause they are thus pestered with the very grossest impuri∣ties of Devill-Idols, and the wort of men,Ephe. 5.3.4. which should not once be named, (much lesse then acted) among Christi∣ans. Objection. But here our Actors and Play-haunters, Patrocinia turpitudini suae fingunt vt etiam honestè peccare vide∣antur Lactan∣ctiu De Falsa sapientia. l. 3. c. 15. that they may seeme in this case to sinne honestly, or rather not to sinne at all; frame these two justifications for the persona∣ting, the beholding of these their Stage-obscenities. First, that in the personating of the vices of Idol-gods and men, they alwayes introduce their virtues; to the end that their virtues may be imitated, and their innes eschewed. Secondly, that these their notorious wickednesses are thus personated, thus divulged on the Stage to this very purpose, that the beholding of their filthinesse might learne men to Teneros animos aliena approbria saep Abster∣rent vitijs. Horae sermonum. . 1. Satyr. 4. p. 177. detest them: therefore the acting of them in this nature must needs be commendable, not unlawfull. Answer. 1. To the former of these two allegations, I answer, First, that the virtues of Idol-gods, or wicked men, are seldome brought upon the Stage, but as they are vshered
in by their very grossest sins: for in all our tragicall, in most of our Comicall Enterludes, See p. 62. to 78. Iam non existime∣tur poema nisi de vitijs canat Ita in poesin tanquamin sentinam quā∣dam vitia om∣nia confluxe∣runt ac recep∣ta sunt. Lodo∣vicu Vives, De causis cor∣rupt. Artiu lib. 2. p. 81. sinne is the primary, adequate and most proper subiect of the Play, virtue, a Parenthesis onely in the by: Sinne is the Mistresse, Virtue but the Handmaid, which occasionally sometimes attends it. Vice hath the whole, at least the greatest share in all our Stageplaies; poore Virtue hardly findes a part in any, most parts in none. The virtues therefore that are acted in our Theaters, as they doe not ballance, so they cannot justifie nor excuse the vices. Secondly, Vice oft times acts it part alone upon the Stage with great applause, whereas Virtue seldome comes upon it but accompanied with a cloud of sundry spredding vices; which as Ad deteriot faciles sumus, quia nec dux potest, nc co∣mes deesse: e res etiam ipsa sine duc, sine comite proce∣dit. Non pro∣num tantum iter est ad vi∣tia sed etiam praceps, Sene∣ca Epist. 97. they sooner pierce the hearts, ad insinuate into the affections and liues of men then virtues; so they Nihil ae qu vt vitium cor∣rumpie, Chry∣sost. Hom. in Psal. 9. tom. 1. Col. 665. deprave their minds and manners more, then all the virtues of Heathen men or Idols can ever rectifie them, were they onely acted, al∣wayes magnified on the Stage. As therefore Eccles. 10.1. dead Flies corrupt the oyntment of the Apothecary, or as poyson vitiates holsome food; so the contempering of some inferior Vir∣tues with more transcendent Vices in our Stage-playes, doth either turne these Virtues into Quicquid facit seminarium voluptatis, venenum puta. Hieron. Ep. 10. c. 4. poyson, or else deprive them of their efficacie. Thirdly, the Vrtues magnified on the Theater, are onely those of Devill-gods, of gracelesse Pagans, or desperate wic∣ked men, who never had true virtue in thē. Absit vt sit in aliquo vera virtus, nisi fuerit iustus. Absit autem vt sit iustus verè nisi vivat ex fide: iustus enim ex fide vivir. Quis porro eorum qui se Christianos haberi volunt, nisi soli Pelagiani, aut in ipsis tu fortè solus, iustum dixerit infidelem, iutum dixerit impium, iustum dixerit diabolo mancipatum? sit licet ille Fabritius, sit licet Fabius, sit licet Scipio, sit licet Regulus. Porrò si veram iustitiam non habent impii, profectò nec alias virtutes comites eius, &c. Augstine Contr. Iulianum Pelag. l. 4. cap. 3. tom. 7. pars 2. p. 398. vid. ibidem.No men are truly virtuous, but those who are truly religious: others (as Scypio, Ca∣to, Fabriti{us}, Regulus, Fabius, Aristides, & the like) may hav the shadowes of virtue in thē, not the substance;Manifestissim patet, in impiorum animis nullam habitare virtutem, sed omnia opera eorum immunda esse atque polluta, habentia sapintiam non spiritualem, sed animalem, non coelestem sed teram, non Christianam sed diabolicam, non a patre luminum, sed a principe tenebrarum, dum pr ea ipsa quae non haberent nisi dante Deo, subduntur ei qui primus recessit a Deo. Prospr, Contr Collatorem. ib. c. 28. which growes not in a De∣vils,
an Idols, a Pagan, or wicked persons, but in a Verae virtu∣tes nisi in jis quibus vera inest pietas esse non pos∣sunt. August. De Ci. Dei. l. 19. . 4. reall Chri∣stians heart, wherein Christs Spirit dwels. It is the prperty of all true virtue, Virtus est vi∣tium fugere. Horace. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1. p. 236. Virtus malam vitam non admittit. Seneca de vita beaa. c 7. Quisquis vir∣tute aliqua plere credi∣tur, tunc vera∣citer pollet, cum vi jis ex aliqua parte non subiacet. Greg Mag. Moral l. 22. cap. 1. to conquer, to expell all Vice; not to cohabit with it, or submit unto it: so that there can be no true virue seated in such persons hearts, whose vertues are inferior to, or coexistent with teir vices. Nay, all the vertues of those Di∣vell-Idols, or Heroicke Pagans which Players use to act, Deformes multa bona vno vitio, & o t meritorū gra∣tiam vna ul∣pa, quā causa culpae est cor∣rumpas. Livius Rom histor. l. 30. sect. 14. were contaminated, deformed and controlled by their vices, to which they were inthralled; therefore they are not true, but onely Virtutes, sine fide, folia sunt: Videntur virere, sd prodesse non possunt. Agitantur vento, quia non habent fundamentum. Ambrose Enarrat. in Psalm. 1. Tom. 2. p. 14. G. bastard virtues, which have scarce the very huske of virtue in them. Since then their virtues, are in truth no vir∣tues, but meere empty Vmbrae & imagines virtutū. Lactantius De falsa Religione c. 20. shadowes of virtue, or rather glittering sinnes, as the Peccata, & splendida peccata Aug. Contr. ulianum lib. . cap 3. & Ennar. in Psalm. 1. Proser. sentent. ex Augu∣stin lib. sent. 106. Fathers, and Vossij Disputatio 35. De virtutibus Gentilium. D. Prideaux Lectura 8. De salute Ethnicorum. some others stile them; but their vices grosse and reall sinnes which plunge mens soules in endlesse misery the acting of these feigned virtues (which are as farre from reall virtues, as Players are from those whose parts they act) can never ballance, much lesse excuse, the personating of such execrable vices, which hel it selfe can hardly parallell. Fourthly, the mutilated outside virtues of Divell-gods, or gracelesse Pagans, Qui vmbras atque imagines virtutum conse∣ctantur, ea ipsa quae vera sunt tenere non possunt. Lactant. De fasa Religione. ap. 20. as they can never make their imitators, or Spectators truly verous; so they are no fit patternes for a Christian, who hath Christ himselfe, the Paragon of all vir∣tue, together with all those Saints and blessed Martyrs, who tread his footsteps, for his platforme. Christians, Plus debet Christi discipulus praestare quam mundi Philosphus. Hierom. Epist. 26. cap. 4 as they must excell all Pagans (much more then Divell-Idol) in their virtues; so they have farre more transcendent patternes of true virtue for to follow, then the best of Pagans are.
Christ Iesus is their Luke 1.79. guide, Iohn 14.6. their way, Iohn 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.21. their example: Matth. 19.21.28. Ephes. 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Ioh. 2.6. Etenim prote∣rea Christia∣nus es, ideò hoc nomen accepi∣sti, vt Chri∣stum imiteris, ejusquelegibus operum exhi∣bitione pareas. Chrysost. Adi: Iudos Oratio. 5. tom. 5. Col. 957. D. A Christo dicti estis Christia∣ni. Nn a via qa Chri∣stus ambula∣vit & vos de∣betis ambula∣re? Nonne si∣cut covesatur est, & vos vi∣catiis eius de∣betis conver∣sai? ta planò, nisi fortè do∣ctiores eo fue∣ritis, vel san∣ctiores. Bern. ad pastores ser∣mo. Co. 1732. G his virtues, his graces must they imitate; him onely must they fol∣low, and none else but him, or those Phil. 3.17. 2 Thess. 3.7.9 1 Cor. 4.16. and 11.1. Heb. 6.12. glorious Saints of his, who walke as he hath walked. The supremest virtues of the most renowned Pagans are to inferiour precedents for the mea∣nest Christians. The very worst of Christians who shall ever enter Heaven Gates, must transcend the virtues of the best of Pagans: for the Scripture is peremptory: Mat. 5.20. See Opus impefectum in Mat. hom. 11. That except our righteusnesse exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees (much more then the degenerate copper vir∣tues of Heathen Infidels) we shall in no case enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. How then can we take those Heathen virtues for our examples Nec vera virtus, quum semel ex∣cidit, curat reponi detrioribus. Hor. Carm. l. 3. Ode. 5. p. 76. which we must farre excell? The Copie must surpasse the Hand; the Sampler, the Needle∣worke which doth but imitate it. The rule must needs bee more exactly perfect, then that which is squared or directed by it; else all will bee erronious. For Christians then, who Isa. 40.31. c. 33.16. Col. 3.1.2. Phil. 3.20. should soare above all others, to stoope to Pagan virtues, or to allay their sublimer mettall to their Isa. 1.22. courser temper, is to degenerate into Pagans; to prove worse, yea, lesse then Christians. It is all one, as for an expert Artificer to lay aside his skill, to imitate a Bungler: or for a Schoole-master to give over teaching, and to subject himselfe to the Tutor∣ship of his rudest Scholler. Pagans and Devill-Idols (whose Parts come frequentest on the Stage,) Ephes. 2.1.2.3.13. c. 4.17.18.19. 1 Pet. 4.3.4. are the very worst of creatures; there is no such grace or virtue in them, as is ei∣ther seemely, necessary, or essentiall to a Christian. And shall Christians then resort to Play-houses, to learne true virtue from such sinkes of sinne; See August. contr. iulianum. Pelag. l. 4. c. 3. Prosper contr. Collatorem. c. 28. Lactantius d Falsa Relig. c 20. such Glowormes, shadowes or carcasses of virtue, as these Idols, these Pagans were, whose very virtues led them but to Hell? Doubtlesse it is but a very Heathenish, gracelesse, divellish practise; yea, a very shame and blemish to Religion thus to doe; as if
Christs own example, the examples of his saints, the precepts of his Word, were not Psa. 19.7. Psal. 119.9. 2 Tim. 3.16.17.sufficient to teach Christians virtue; but that they must resort to Divell-gods, to Infidels, to Stage-Playes for to learne it. The acting therefore of such counterfeit virtues, for the ends pretended, is no plea to ju∣stifie Stageplayes, much lesse the action of the forenamed Vices. Fiftly, if there be such Virtues taught and acted in our Playes, as is surmised, I wonder much why our See Nazian∣zen ad Selu∣chum de Re∣cta Educat. page 1063.1064. Chry∣sost hom. 38. in Mat. Gos∣son his Playes confuted. Action. 1.2. The third blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, p. 110. to 117. accordingly. eminentest Actors, our most assiduous Play-haunters, are more generally, more desperately vitious then most other mn, as I shall proove Act. 4. Scene 1.2. anon? Certainly, if there were any virtue to bee learnt from Stageplayes, or those Pagan virtues that are acted in them, our Players, our Play-hunters would have been good proficients, not retrogrades, in the schoole of Virtue, long ere this; whereas they are now nought else but Graduates, but chiefe Artists in the schoole of Vice. Either therefore there is no good, no virtue to be learnt from Stage-playes, (as in truth See Cyprian and Tertulli∣an, De specta. lib. Lactantius de vero cultu. c. 20. Chrys. hom. 6:7. and 38. in Matth. Salvian de Gubernatione Dei. Mr. Gos∣son, Master North-brook, M. Stubs, D. Reinolds in n their Trea∣ises against Playes. The third blast of Retrait from Playes, with sundry other Au∣thors quoted, Act. 6. throughout. there is not) or else their Vices are farre more active, more infectious then their virtues, or else the Actors, the Spectators of our Playes are past all grace, all virtue which our Playes can teach them, Diogenes muicos in iusvocabat, quod cum lyrae chordas congruè, aptarent, animi mores inconcinnos haberent. Diog. Laertius lib. 6. p. 330. I may aptly accomodate it to Players. since they learne it not. Sixtly, admit there be some Virtues acted in our Stage-playes, yet there are farre more Vices. Now as Proclivis est malorum aemulatio, & quorum virtutes assequi nequeas, cito imitaris vitia. Hierom. Epist. 7. c. 3. men by Nature are more propense to imitate mens vices then their vir∣tues; even so it fares with Stage-playes. All practise, all take up their vices, none their virtues: all prove the worser, none the better by them. The Foris po∣puus celeberimo strepitu impietas impura circumsonat, & intus paucis castitas simula∣ta vix sonat, praebentur propatula pudendis, & secreta laudandis. Decus late, & dede∣cus patet: quod malum geritur, omnes convocat spectatores: quod bonum dicitur, vi aliquos invenit auditores; tanquam honesta erubecenda sint, & inhonesta glori∣nda. August. De Civit. De lib. 2 cap. 26. hurt, the sinnes, the vices which they hatch and foster, are obvious unto all mens view; wee
see, we reade them both in the Actors and Spectators liues, who make a daily progrsse in the wayes of Vice: the good, the virtue which they teach is yet unknowne to the world; we heare, we see it not. Since then our Stage-playes are so bar∣ren in producing virtue, so strangely fruitfull in ingendring Vice; their goodnesse will not, cannot ballance, nor assoile their ill. Seventhly, suppose there are some reall virtues acted in our Enterludes; yet who can be so grosly stupid, as to thinke, to learne any grace or virtue from a Play-house? Who Non necesse habes aurum in luto quae∣rere. Hierom. Epist. 10. c. . ever sought for gold, for pearles in dirt? for a Quis in caeno fontem requi∣rat? Quis è turbida aqua potum petat? Itaque vbi in∣temprantia est, vbi luxu∣ria, vbi vitio∣rum olluvies, quis inde sibi hauriendum existimet? Ambros. De Of∣ficijs lib. 2. cap. 12. Chry∣stall spring in filthy mire; for holesome water in a noysome kennell? Who ever resorted to a Pest-house to looke for health, or drunke downe poyson to preserve his life? Who ever posted to a tippling Alehouse to seeke sobriety; or to a Stewes to learne true Chastity? Delubrum turpi ac flagi∣tioso Veneris Daemoni de∣dicatum: Era tanquam schola quae∣dam nequitiae ii qui erant libidini dediti qui que nimia licentia corpu labefactaue∣rant suum, corruperant que: scelerati praeterea & nefarij mulirum cngressus, clandestinae falsorum connubiorum corruptelae infanda acturpia facinora in co delubro vtpote in loco impu∣ro & faedo admissa rant. Eusebius de vita Constantini. lib. 3. cap. 53. Play-houses, (as the Fathers testifie,) are the very Nurseries, Schooles and Marts; the very shops and sinkes of all Vice and wickednesse whatsoever: they are the very Devils temples, Venus her Synagoges, Vices Oratories, Sinnes Pallaces, Hels Ware-houses, Pollutions throe, Religions slaughter-house, Virtues Pesthouse; and shall wee then flocke to them to learne true virtue? Can Gaull yeeld Hony, or a Flintstone Milke? can Sinne beare Virtue, or Prophanesse Grace? then Playes and Play-houses, (the very See here. pag. 69. grand empoysoners of all Grace, all Vertue, yea, the very Spectaula Diaboli retia. Chrysost. hom. 7. in Matth. Tom. 2. Collum. 59. C. Devils ets to catch mens soules) may make men truly virtuous. Let vs not therefore seeke for vertue in a Play-house where it growes not, as too many doe, for feare we fraught our selves with nothing but a load of Vice, which will sinke our soules for ever to the dephes of Hell. Lastly, the Church of God, not the Play-house, is the onely Schoole; the Scriptures, Sermons, devout and pious bookes; not Playes, not Play-books, are the onely Lectures,
the Ministers and Saints of God, or rather Mentes ho∣minum Deus omnipotens ad virtutes prouehit. Gregor. Mag. Moralium. 29. c. 23. In∣cassum pro∣inde quis la∣borat in ac∣quisitione virtutum si aliunde eas sperandas pu∣tat quàm a Domino vir∣tutum: cuius doctrina semi∣narium prudentiae; cuius miseri∣cordia opus iustitiae; cu∣ius vita specu∣lum temperan∣tiae; cuius mors insigne est fortitudi∣nis. Bernard super Cantica: Sermo. 22. fol. 130. L. God himselfe; not common Actors, not those Divell-Idols, Cyprian & Tertullian de spectac. lib. August. de Ciuit. Dei l. 2. c. 4. to. 29. l. 6. c. 6.7. Chrysost. hom. 6. and 7. in Matth. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei lib. 6. and Act. 1.2, 3. accordingly. who rule and worke in Stage-playes, the onely Tutors of true virtue: True E coelo descendit, : Iuv. Sat. 11. vir∣tue is a plant that comes from heaven, growing onely in the Churches, not the Stages garden. See Plutar Moral. to. 2. An virtus doceri possit? Virtu doceri non potest, neque hominibus per homines parari. Platonis Protagaras. p. 431. Philosophy and Phyloso∣phers could not teach it; and can Playes or Players doe it? O no: It is the prerogative royall of the King of heaven, 1 Thess. 4.9. Ier. 31.34. Iohn 5.45. 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Pet. 1 3. See z before. to teach men virtue; and that not by Stage-playes, or lascivious Poems, Gal. 5.22.22. 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. but by his Word and Spirit onely, which breathe not in our Theaters: It is then a Sacrilegij enim vel maximi instar est, humi quaerere, quod in sublimi debeas invenire. Miuius Felix. Octauius page 46. sacriledge, ye, a madnesse, to relinquish God, his Church, his Word, his Ordinances, his Saints (the onely fountaines of true virtue) as too many doe, to seeke out virtue in Playes, in Play-houses, which are no other but the sinkes of Vice. Answer. 2 To the second Objection; that Stage-playes doe not teach, Sir Thomas Eliots Booke of the Governor. cap. 13. and Haywoods Apologie for Actors, accordingly. but discover Vices, that so men may learne to hate them, not affect them: I answer first; that it is Psal. 51.10. Psal. 119.37. 2 Tim. 2.25. Converti ad Deum sine ipso non possumus. Est enim paenitentia vnum de perfectis dnis descendentibus a Patre luminum. Greg. Mag. in Psal. 7. poenitentiales. Fol. 364. Ambrose in Psal. 118. Octon. 5. ver 37. God onely by his Word and Spirit, who must teach vs to abhorre all Vice; not Stage-playes, the very Viti∣orum semina sunt, scelerum pabula, mortis iter. Iohannis. Salisburiensis de Nugis Curia∣lium prmio Agrippa de vanitate Scientiarum. c. 63.64. fuell of all sinne and lust. Secondly, if there were any such virtue in Stage-playes, as to alienate mens affections from the vices which they per∣sonate, they would then no doubt, not onely haue reclaimed the ancient Play-admiring Pagans and Comedians, but like∣wise our moderne Play-Poets, Players, and Play-haunters from all those lewd and filthy Vices which come most fre∣quently on the Stage. But I never yet could heare or reade
of any ancient or moderne Actor, Composer, or Spectator of any Theatricall Enterludes, whom Playes recalled from the love, the practise of any Vices, that were ever acted on the Stage, wheras they have drawne milions for to imitate them. Therefore there is no such Nunquam virtus quam∣vis obscura latet, sed mit∣tit signa. Quis∣quis dignus fuerit vestigiis illam colliget: Seneca de tranquil. Ani∣mi. cap. 3. hidden virtue in them. To cause men to abandon Vice: which if there were, it would have emptied our See pag. 68, 69, 70. vicious Play-houses long ere this, and have made our lascivious, adulterous, amorous Playes, so odious, that none durst approch them, for feare of being polluted by them. Thirdly, Stage-playes are so farre from working an ab∣horring, that they produce, not onely a loue and liking, but also a∣nimitation of those pernicious vices that are acted in them,Cyprian. and Tertulli∣an de spectac. lib. Clemens Alexandr. Pae dag. lib. 3. c. 11 Lactant. de vero cultu. c. 20. et Divina∣rum Instit. E∣pit. c. 6. Chry∣sost. Hom. 6.7. et 38. in Matth. Nazi∣anzen. Oratio 48. et de Recta Educat. ad Selucum. p. 1063. August. de Ciu. Dei lib. 2. c. 4. to. 17. Salvian de Guber. Dei. lib. 6 See Act. 6. throughout accordingly. which are commonly set forth with such flexanimous rheto∣ricall pleasing, (or Sub specie iu∣cunditatis venenum inundunt. Bernard de Ordine vitae. Col. 1118. A. rather poysoning) streines; with such pa∣theticall, liuely and sublime expressions, with such insinuating gestures; with such variety of wit, of art and eloquence, Quid illi qui vel suos vel alienos amores sunt prosecuti? quanta peste pueritiae atque adolescentiae animos consauciarunt? Quid enim aliud sunt cordi adolescentis amatoriae narratio∣nes, quàm flamma stupis proxima? ipsae perse attrahunt et incendunt; de quibus Me∣nander sentit, cuius versiculum Paulus Apostolus ore suo consecravit. Corrumpunt mores probos collocutiones improbae. Atqui omnia de libidine, de sauitie, de ininani gloria, de fraudibus non dicta sunt ruditer, atque impolitè, sed exculta, exornata, vt eti∣am absque omni rei ipsius oblectamento verba ipsa per se arriderent, atque adblandi∣rentur Quid verò in illis rebus, quas vltro malitia nostra expetit? quas audire, quas videre gestit; quas omnibus sensibus vsurpare, ad quas toto impetu fertur? Res sine verbis invitassent: verba sine rebus ad se pellexissent: dulci veneno, dulce additum est condimentum; vnde teneris animos et iniquiduis flexibiles rebus pessimis inficerunt. Ludou. viues. De causis corrupt Artium lib. . p 80.81. See Seneca. Epist. 6. Isiodor. hisp. E∣tymol, l. 18.  c. 27. accordingly. that if ever men did hate them from their hearts before, they cannot affect, at least approve, or but lesse detest them now: they being Nequitia facilè imitatores invenit. Philo Iudaeus de special. Legibus p. 053. Non egemus praeceptoribus, minis dociles mulorum sum∣mus. Petrarcha. de Remed. vtriusque Fortunae l. 1. Dialog. 68. prone enough by nature for to practise them, without any alle∣ctives to edge them on. This practise therefore of acting Vi∣ces, doth onely propagate them, not restraine them. Fourthly, if Stageplayes had beene fit Lectures, Play-houses
apt Schooles to instruct men to abandon Vice, the See Act. 6. Scene 1. to. 8. & Act. 7. throughout Primitive Church, together with sundry Councels, Fathers, and moderne Christian Writers of all sorts, would never have so frequently condemned, so constantly avoyded Stage-playes, as the fruitfull Nurseries of all sinne and wickednesse; Prophane and vitious persons would never flocke so fast unto them, as they use: yea, the very Devill himselfe, (whom Diabolum nimis astutum fecit tam na∣tura subtilis quàm longa exercitatio malitiae eius. Bernard n Quadragess. serm. Coll. 114 115. G. & Col. 379 D. not onely Nature, but likewise long experience hath made exceeding po∣litick) would never have bin so improvident as to See Act. 1.2. invent, to propagate, so inconsiderate as to multiply, to perpetuate Stage-playes to his owne great preiudice, were they such disswa∣siues from Vice, from wickednesse, such attractiues unto Vir∣tue, as these pleade they are, how truely let all men iudge. Fiftly, Stageplayes themselves, as the See Act. 6. throughout. sequell will at large demonstrate, are pernicious sin-producing, Vice-fomen∣ting pleasures, which all godly Christians have condemned: For any man then to vndertake to make men hate Vice by frequenting Stage-playes, is but Illivitium vitio, pecca∣tum peccato medicantur: nos amore vir∣tutum vitia supramus. Hieron. Epist. 14. Cauen∣dum est, ne malum malo cures Pachy∣mers histor. lib. 4. to cure one vice with ano∣ther, or to prevent a lesser mischiefe with a greater; yea, it is in truth nought else, but to make Vice a balme, an anti∣dote against it selfe; andAbsurdum est putare eum qui ab aliqui∣bus e bono malus fuerit factus, eun∣dem abillis iterum ex ma∣lo bonum fieri posse. Dionys. Hallicar. An∣tiq. Rom. l. 11. sect. 2. p. 1026. to make ill men good againe, with that selfe-same thing which made them evill at the first: a paradox beyond my stupid apprehension. Sixtly, the acting of forreine obsolete, and long-since for∣gotten Villanies on the Stage, is so farre from working a de∣testation of them in the Spectators mindes (who perchance were utterly ignorant of them, till they were acquainted with them at the Play-house, and so needed no dehortation from them;) that Semina paenè omnium scelerum a diis suis peccan∣tium turba collegit. Et vt perditus animus possit aliquid impunè committere ex prae∣cedentibus facinorum exemplis maiore se autoritate defendit, hominibus peccare cupien∣tibus facinorum via de Deorum monstratur exemplis. Iulius irmicu. De Origine pro∣anarum Religionum, c. 13. vid. Ibidem. it oft excites degenerous dunghill spirits, who haue nothing in them for to make them eminent, to reduce them into practice, of purpose to perpetuate their spurious ill-de∣serving memories to posteritie, at least-wise in some tra∣gicke
Enterlude. It is Solinus Po∣lyhistor. c. 54. Lucian de Morte Pere∣grini. Gellius Noctium A∣tic. l. 2. c. 6. Clemens A∣lexand. Oratio Exhortat. ad Gentes ol. 7. Hierom adver. Heluidiū c. 8 Strabo Geogr. l. 14. Munster Cosmogr. l. 5. cap. 5. Alexan∣der ab Alex∣andro Genia∣lium Dierum l. 3. c. 20. Pur∣chas Pilgri∣mage Booke. 3. cha. 17. ac∣cordingly. storied of Herostratus; that hee set the great and famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus on fire, for this very end; ut nomen memoria sceleris extenderet; that the very mmory of this his villanous exploit might eternize his base obscure name, and adde vnto his fame. Iuvenal. Sa∣tyr. 1. Salust de Bello Iu∣gurthino p. 7. Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris & carcere dignum Sivis esse aliquis: is the onely rode, the best, the speediest passage, that sordid desperate obscure spirits know or take to honour, wealth or fame, especially in declining,Libertas. scelerum est quae regna invisa tutur Sublatusque modus gladijs Lucan. l. 8. p. 141. viious, turbulent or disconten∣ted times. Wherefore since obsolete Quod later ignoum est ignoi nulla cupido. Ovid. de Arte Amandi l. 3. p. 202. unknowne sinnes, are alwayes freest from imitation, and more Iners malorum remedium ignorantia est. Seneca Oedipu. Actus . fol. 104. asily avoyded then sinnes divulged, though with shame, disdaine or punish∣ment; whencePlato Legum Dialogus 9. Seneca de Clementia lb. 1. cap. 23. wise Lawgivers, have rather chosen, to inact no publike Lawes against vnnaturall rare-committed crimes, then to prohibit them by publike Edicts, vnder the severest pu∣nishments, for feare the publike knowledge of them, by meanes of knowen Edicts, should make them moreMultò minus audebant liberi nea vltimum admittere, quandiu sine lege crimen fuit Summa enim prudentia altissimi viri, & rerum naturae peitissimi, ma∣luerunt velut incredibile sclus, & vltra audaciam positum, praeterire, quàm dum vindi∣cant, otendere posse fieri. Itaque parricidae cum lege caeperunt, illis facinus paena mon∣stravit. Seneca Ibidem. frequent in mens pra∣ctise; it wereSatius erat ista in oblivionem ire, quam ne quis postea potens disceret. Seneca De Brevit. vitae cap. 13. Iucundius interdum quaedam nesciri possunt, quàm sciri. Ptan Diatrib p. 10. Intervirtutes habebitural qua nescire. Quintil. stit. Oratoria. l. 1. c. 13. p. 65. farre more commodious, lesse dangerous, lesse pernitious, that those vnparalleld forgotten villanies, whose me∣mory is revived on the Stage, were for ever drowned in oblivion, then re-imprinted in mens mindes by Vice-perpeuating Stage-playes: See Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. ne exempla fiant quae iam esse facinora destiterunt; least our depraved times should make those moth-eaten wickednesses, the patternes of their imitation, which all-devouring antiquitie had expunged, out of the much enlar∣ged Catalogue of moderne sinnes.
Lastly, if Stage-playes doe onely discover Vices for to make them odious, then those lascivious Pagans who most delighted in them, should have beene meliorated and mora∣lized by them. But the See Act. 6. Sene. 5 ac∣cordingly. best Christian and Pagan Authors vnanimously agree: that Theatricall Playes and Poems were the chiefe corrupters of their mindes and manners, the most effectuall propagators of all kinde of vice, See Act. 4. Scene. 1.2. accordingly. there being none so vitious and lascivious, as those Pagan Greekes and Romans, who most frequented Stage-playes. Therefore the acting of such vices doth daily propagate and diffuse them, not de∣crease them. Since therefore the subiect matter of Stage-playes is thus heathenish, vitious and prophane, consisting of the fabulous histories, ceremonies, vices, names, and execrable wicked∣nesses of Pagan gods and men,Deutr. 12.30. Psal. 16.4. Ephes. 5.3. Sir Thomas Eliot, in his Governor. Booke 1. c. 19. D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stageplayes. p. 138. The third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters.which should not once be named among Christians; we may hence also conclude them to be sinfull, and utterly unlawfull unto Christians. SCENA QVARTA. FOurthly; the subject matter of our stage-Playes, is for the most part, false and Poeta cum primum ad scribendum appulit ani∣mum, Id sibi negoti credi∣dit solum dari, populo vt pla∣cerent quas fe∣cisse fabulas. Terentij An∣dria, Prologus. Argument 8. fabulous; consarcinated of sun∣dry merry, Iudicrous, officious artificiall lies, to delight the eares of carnall Auditors. From whence I forme this eight Argument. That whose subject matter consists of sundry forged Fables, of artificiall, merry affected lies, must needs be odious and unlawfull unto Christians, Omne genus endacij sum∣mo operefuge; Nec casu, nec studio loqua∣ris falsum; quia os quod mentitur oc∣cidit animam. Bernard. de In∣teriori Dom cap. 43. who must a∣bandon lies. But such is the subject matter of most Comicall, of ma∣ny Tragicall Enterludes. Therefore they must needs be odious and unlawfull un∣to Christians. The Minor is evident, not onely from experience, and the
concurrent suffrages of Fabulae. Mendacia: fabulosissima quae que in lu∣dos & actus redigerūt, &c. August. De Ciu. Dei. l. 1.3, 4. and 6. Clemens A∣lexand. Oratio Exhort. ad gentes fol. 8. Arnobius lib. 3 4. & 7. advers. Gentes: Iulis Firicus De Errore profa∣narum Religi∣onum. lib. with all the Fathers and Authors quo∣ted in pag. 76. sundry Fathers, and Isocrates O∣ratio ad Ni∣coclem. p. 46.47. Plutarchi Solon, and De Audiendis potis lib. Diogenes Laertius lib. 1. Solon. Dionysius. Halicar. Antiq. Rom. l. 2. sect. . Macrobius De Somno Scipionis lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 20. Horace de Arte Poetica. lib. Pagan Au∣thors, who stile Stage-playes, fabulous, artificiall, sporting lies, from whence they take occasion to condemne them: but like∣wise by the copious testimony of sundry ancient Fabulae, Figmenta, &c. Terentius. in Andriae, Enuchi, Adelphi, & Hecyrae Prelogo. Plautus, in Amphitru: & Captiuei Prologo. Euripides, in Hecubae, Orestis, Phaenissae, Argumento. Sophoclis Aiax flagellatus, Hecuba, &c. Argumentum. Horace de Art Poetica. pag. 307.308. accordingly.Play-Poets, who stile their Playes by the very name of Fables, Lies, and figments. The Maior needes no large dispute. For since every lye is diametrally contrary to Rom. 3.4. Iohn 1 14. cap. 3.33. cap. 14.1. the God of Truth: ince Iohn 8.44. Acts 5.3. it proceedes originally from the very Devill, who is a Lyer, and the Father of lies: since it is dirctly opposite to theIohn 15.26. cap. 16.13. Spirit and Iohn 17.17. 2 Cor. 6.7. Coloss. 1.5. Ephes. 1.13. 2 Tim. 2.15. Word of Truth, which enjoyneth every man, (especially the children of God): Levit. 19.11. Ephes. 4.25. Zech. 8.16. Zeph. 3.13. to speake no lies; to put away lying: 1 Tim. 4.7. 2 Tim. 2 16. Titus 3.9. to refuse prophane and Oldwives fables, with all idle fabulous tales and babblings: Psal. 31.6. Ephes. 4.25. to hate all such who delight in lying vani∣ties; and to speake nought else but truth; Reu. 21.8. cap. 22.15: Ier. 9.3.5. because whosoe∣ver loveth and maketh a lie, shall be excluded the new Ieru∣salem, and have his portion in that lake which burnet with fire and brimstone for ever: SinceAugustine De Mendacio ad Consenium: Quaestiones supr Leviticum l. . Quaest. 68. & Epistola 19. Ambrose sermo. 44. Basili∣us Regulae contract. Reg. 76 Hieron. Theodoret, Chrysostome, Remigius, Primasius, Theophylact, Haymo Beda, and Anselmus in Ephes. 4.25. Bernard. De Interiori Domo cap. 43. & de gratia & libero Arbitr. col. 9.16. sundry of the Fathers recorded in the margent, have abundantly condemned all sorts of lies; as well officious, fabulous and sporting, as pernicious: And since divers Fabulae quaum nomen indicat falsi professionem; aut tantum conciliandae auribus voluptatis auditum mulcent velut Co∣maediae; hoc totum fabularum genus quod solum aurium delicias prfitetur, esacrario suo in nutricum cunas sapientiae tractatus elimiat. Marobius De somno Scip. l. 2. c. 2. See Plutarchi Solon accordingly. Per se mendaciū malum est, & vituperandū. Aist. Ethic. l. . cap. 7. Plato egum. Dialo. . Mentire servile est, dignum{que} apud omnes hominesodio, ac ne mediocribus quidem seruis ignoscendum. Plutar. De Lbeorum Edcatione lib. Paga Authors haue positiely cnsured, all udicrous lies and poems composed onely for delight; we cannot but subscribe unto the Maior, as an undoubted truth, and so by con∣sequence
to the Conclusion too. Since therefore Stage-playes are Mendacium non possumus dicere tunc tantum modo ess, quando proximus lae∣ditur: cum enim falsum ab sciente dici∣tur, proculdu∣bio mendaci∣um est, siue illo quisquam, siue nemo laedatur. August. Quaest super Leuit. l. 3. quaest. 68. Tom. 4. par. 1. p. 296. but merry lies; and since Cavete fratres mendacium, quia omnes qui amant menda∣cium filij sunt Diaboli; qui non solum mendax est, sed etiam & Pater & inventor ipsi∣us mendacij: Ambros sermo. 44. Saint Ambrose in∣formes us; that all those who loue a lie, are the children of the Devill, the Father of lies; let this cause us to detest all fabu∣lous lying Stageplayes, as Quae autem Poetae de Dijs scripserunt, meras in∣signesque nugas continentia; verbi gratia, fabulas inhonestas ac faedas, malorum genio∣rum doctrinas, fabulas inquam, tum risu, tum lacrymis dignas: haec omnia tan quam laqueos & decipulas aversare. Nazienzen. ad Seecum. p. 1063. the very snares and traps of Satan, or feare we prove the Divels of-spring, who hath no inhe∣ritance but Hell to leave us. SCENA QVINTA. FIftly, the subject matter of Stage-playes is oftimes im∣pious, sacrilegious, blaspemou, and that in sundry re∣spects. First, in that the sacred names of God the Father, Sonn, and holy Ghost (which Deutr. 28.58. Psal. 89.7. Psal. 96.7.9. Apud enim homines offi∣ciosis religio∣nibus deditos, non ipsi Dij tantum verum etiam nomina debent esse Deorum vene∣randa: quan∣tumque est in ipsis qui cen∣sentur his no∣minibus, tan∣tum esse par est in eorum appellationi∣bus dignitatis. Arnoius ad∣vers Gentes. l. 5. p. 184. ought nt to be mentioned but with reverence and holy feare) are frequently recited on the Stage, (too prophane, too impious a place for such dreadfull holy names to come into) and that in a sacrilegious, blasphemous, ridiculous, impious sporting manner, to their great disho∣nour and Ier. 34.16. Isay 48.11. pollution. Hence was that passionate exclamation of Clemens Alexandrinus against the Gentiles: O impietas  scenam coelum fecistis, & Deus vobis factus est actus: & quod sanctum est Daemonorum personis in Comaedia ludificati estis: verum Dei cultum ac religionem Daemonum superstitione li∣bidinoè & obscaenè inquinantes. Orati Adhor, ad Gents fol. 8 E O impie∣tie: you have made the Theater heaven: you have made God himselfe an Act; that which is holy haue you also derided un∣der the person of Divels; you have lustfully and filiily polluted
Religion and the true worship of God, with the superstitions of Devils. Hence was it, that Tertullian in his booke, De spe∣ctaculis cap. 28. Chrysost. homilie 38. on Matthew: Salvian De Gubernatione Dei lib. 6. the Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 504. and Binius Tom. 1 pars 1. p. 575, 579. third Councell of Carthage, Canon 11. with sundry others, did long since stile all Stage-players, Blasphemi. Blasphemers: because they did not onely Quàlis hae religio, aut quanta maje∣stas putanda et, quae ado∣ratur in tem∣plis, illuditur in theatris? Et qui haec fe∣cerin, non poenas violati numinis pen∣dunt, sed ho∣noraietiam laudatione discedunt. Lactantius D Iustitia. lib. c. 21. Nec alij Dij rideantur in theatris, quam qui ado∣rantur in tem∣plis: nec alijs ludos exhiba∣tis, quam qui∣bus victimas immolatis. August. De Civ. Dei li. 6. c. 6. See lib 2. c. 3. to. 20. Iulius Firmicus De Errore profanarum Religio∣um. Tertullian and Cyprian De spectaculis. Clemens Alexandr. Orat. Adhort. ad Gentes. Arnobius Advers. Gentes lib. 3.4.7. Nazienzen ad Selucum. pag. 1063: Minucius Felix Octavius. Salvian De Guber. Dei l. 6. Plauti Amphitruo. Prologus. 1. See Scene 3. accordngly. deride, abuse, and personate their owne Idol-gods upon the Stage, for which the Christians taxed them: but likewise See Scene 6. accordingly. blasphemous∣ly prophane, satyrically traduce the very sacred names of God the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, in their publike Enterludes; whence the Fathers laid no lesse then blasphemy to their charge. A sinne to frequent in our moderne Stage-playes, where these dreadfull names (to our shame, Playes ruine be it written) are most desperately prophaned, most Atheitical∣ly blasphemed. Witnesse our owne late religious 3 Iacobi cap. 21. Sta∣tute, of tertio Iacobi chapter 21. Where our Soveraigne Lord the King, together with the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and Commons in that Parliament ssembled, for the preventing and auoyding f the great abuse of the holy name of God in Stage-playes and Enterludes, which then grew common, en∣acted this pious Law (which is Nec quisquam fuerat qui in ea sclera animadvetebat, propterea quod ex viris grauibus & honestis nemo illuc audbat accedere. Eusebius de vita Constantins, libr. 3. cap. 53. seldome or never put in ex∣ecution, because few else but such who delight in blasphemy, and therefore are unlikely to prove informers against it, resort to Stage-playes;) That if at any time or times after that Sessi∣on of Parliament determined, any person or persons in any Stage-play, Enterlude, May-game, or Pageant should jestingly or prophanely speake or use the holy Name of GOD, or of Christ Iesus, or of the holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, which are not to be spoken but with feare and reverence that for every such
offence by him or them committed, he or they should forfeit Cùm enim probrum iaci∣tur in princi∣pem patriae bonum atque vtilem, nonne tantò est in∣digius, quan∣tò a veritate remotius, & a vita illius alie∣us? Quae igitur suppli∣cia sufficiunt, cúm Deo fit ista tam nefa∣ria, tam insig∣nis iniuia? August. de Ci. Dei. l. 2. c. 9. ten pounds. The one moitie thereof to the Kings Majestie, his Heires and Successors: the other moitie thereof to him that will sue for the same in any Court of Record in Westminster, wher∣in no Essoigne or wager of Law shall be allowed. A sufficient evidence to testifie the execrable blasphemy of our dome∣sticke Enterludes; since, Corn. Taci∣tus Annal. l. 15 sect. 3. ex malis moribus optimae oriuntur le∣ges: & emendari quam peceare posterius est. Secondly, as these Sacred names, even so the Histories, Texts, and sacred passages of holy Scripture (which Psal. 50.16, 17. should not so much as come within the polluted lips of gracelesse Actors, especially M. Perkins Cases of Con∣science, lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 4. in sports, in placs of prophannesse) are oft-times most Atheistically, irreligiously, blasphemously acted, vtte∣red, prophaned, derided, mis-applied, jsted at, and sported with in Stage-playes. This M. North∣brooke Trea∣tise against vaine playes and enterludes p. 32. M. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p. 102. The 3. Blat of Re∣trait frō playes and theaters, p. 79.80.103 104. The Pre∣face to the Practise of Piety, accor∣dingly. Authors, this experience large∣ly testifie, to the griefe of all good Christians, and if this bee not sufficient, we haue the expresse Authority of an Act of Parliament, even 34. & 34. H. 8. c. 1. of 4 and 35 of Henry the 8. chapter 1. which irrefragably confirmes this truth. Now for Chri∣stians thus to abuse the Word of God, and Scripture Histo∣ries on the Stage, what is it but the very height of all impie∣tie, which well deserves Gods heaviest judgements: It is Aristeas, historia, 70. sacrae scripturae intepretum Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. p. 12. F.G.M. Stubs his Anatomie of Abuses. p. 102. M. North∣booke against vaine Playes and Enterludes. p. 32. storied, of Theopompus an historian, and of Theodects a Tra∣gaedian; Tha God strucke the one of them with madnesse, the other with blindnesse for a season: the one, for inserting a part of Moses sacred writing into his prophane story; the other of them for intermixing some passages and histories of the old Te∣stament with his lascivious Play-Poems; neither were they re∣stored to their sight, or senses, till they had particularly repented of this their wickednesse. If then these Pagans, for these their Scripture prophanations did undergoe so sharpe, so exem∣plary a judgement; what a severe punishment may those Christian Play-Poets, Actors and Spectators looke for, who wilfully prophane those sacred Scriptures on the Stage, by
which they must be Psal. 119.9. Iohn 17.17 Gal. 6.16. sanctified and directed now, and Iohn 12.48. Rom. 2.12.16 judged at the last? What a stupendious impietie, a desperate blas∣phemy and prophannesse is it, for mn, for Chritians, to turne the most serious Oracles of Gods sacred Word into a Play, a Iest, a Fable, a Sport, a May-game?Non haec io∣cosae conveni∣unt lyrae. Quo musa tendis? desine perui∣cax referre sermones De∣orum, & mag∣na modis tenuare paruis. Horace Car. l. 3. Ode. 3. p. 71. to temper the Psal. 19.8. Pal. 119.140 purest Scriptures with the most obscene lascivious Play-Poems, that filthinesse or prophannesse can invent? to pol∣lute those sacred histories on the Theater, See pa. 10. & 49. to. 53. the very house and Synagogue of the Devill, which the sanctifying Spirit of God hath for ever consecrated and 1 Tim. 3.15 Ephes. 3.10. bequeathed to the Church of God? to make the 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Sin-slaying, the Lust-mortifying, Psal. 19.7. Soule-converting Word of God, the 2 Pet. 1.4.19. Acts 26.6.7. Rom. 4.16. c. 9.8.9. onely evidence of our salvation; a meere Pander to mens beastly lusts, their ribaldrous mirth, their gracelesse wits, and carnall jollity; yea, a meere instru∣ment to the very Devill himselfe See here Act. 1. & p. 47. to. 54. In ludis theatralibus delectantur Daemones, & vt constat, vir perfectus non debet intende∣re ludicris in quibus Dae∣mones dele∣ctantur. Alex∣ander Fabri∣ciu Destructorium vicirum, par 4. cap. 29. B. 2., who rules in Stage-playes; and so an Prou. 13.13. Rom. 2.5.8.9. obsignation of their just damnation. Doubtlesse, as the damnablenesse of this most execrable impietie, (which is next of kinne to that Matth. 12.31.32. Marke 3.28, 29, 30. 1 Tim. 1 20. unpardonable sinne of Blasphemy a∣gainst the holy Ghost, the 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Author of the Scriptres) trans∣cends my narrow expressions; so the eternall tormens a∣lotted to it, doe surpasse mens largest thoughts. And yet it now acts it's Part so frequently, so plasibly on the Stage, that many cease, not onely to apprehend no sinfulnesse, no danger in it, but also deeme it worthy of their best applause. Alas, with what face or confidence; with what joy or hope can such heare or reade the Scriptures in the Church, who thus actually Et quoniam ridere nostram fidem consuevistis, atque ipsam credulitatem facetiis ioculari∣bus lancinare, dicite O festivi, & saturati potu, &c. Arnb. ad vr. Gentes. lib. 2. Bib. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 161. B.prophane them, or heare them thus prophaned in the Play-house? With what assurance can they call upon the Name of God, of Christ for mercy at th last, who de∣lightfully resort unto those Theaters, where they ar fre∣quently blasphemed and prophaned now? Can any thus abuse, pollute Gods holy Name, or Word; and yet hope for consolation, for absolution, for salvation from them at the
last? Can any thus blaspheme the Name of God, of Christ, or patiently indure the audience of such blaspemies as are belched out against them on the Stage; and yet dare to in∣vocate them in their greatest exigencies? Certainly, Gal. 6.7. God will not, Christ will not thu be mocked. Let not such blasphe∣mers then as these Iam. 17. Psal. 11.6. Rom. 2.8.9. expect any thing from Gods hands, but wrath, & vengeance, th onely portion of their Cup, unlesse they speedily repent of these their damnable, prophane, blasphe∣mous Stage-playes, which thus abuse the sacred Scriptures, in a transcendent manner. Thirdly, as the historicall passages of the Old Testament, so the historie of Christs death, and the celebration of his blessed Sacraments, are oft times prophaned in theatricall enterludes, especially by Popish Priests and Iesuites in for∣raigne parts: See Missale Romanum. Sacerdotale, Pontificiale & Ceremoniale Roma num. Their severall Bookes. De Missa, & Ri∣tibus Cele∣brandi Mis∣sam. D. Ri∣nolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes, p. 161. Doct. Beard of An∣tichrist, par. 3. cap. 8. sct. 4. B. Iewel, Mor∣ney, Sucliffe, Morton, White, and others, in their Treatises a∣gainst the Masse, accor∣dingly. Who, as they have turned the Sacrament of Christs body and blood into a Masse-play; so they have like∣wise trans-formed their Masse it-selfe, together with the whole story of Christs birth, his life, his Passion, and all other parts of their Ecclesiasticall service into Stage-playes. This, not one∣ly D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage playes. p 161. & De Idolol. Rom. Ecclesiael. 2. c. 3. sect. 29. p. 403. Doct. Beard of Antichrit, part. 3. cap. 8. sect. 4. and the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. c. 1Protestant Writers, but even their owne Records (where the Index Epurgatorius hath not clipt their tongues) doo largely testifie, to their shame. AEneas Silvius, surnamed See Plaina, Anatatius, Hopperus, Stella, Tritemius and Antoninus, in vita Pij secundi and AEneae Sylvii perfixed to his Workes. Pope Pius the second: as the Records of himselfe, Epistol. lib. 1. Epist. 15.23.45, 50. and 92. inter opera sua, Basileae 1551. that he was much given to Wine, to Venry, Belly-cheere and other beastly lusts,. Epist. lib. 1. Epist 15. pag. 510.511. and that he begot a Bastard sonne on the body of an Eglish woman, whose chastity he oft solicited before hee could prevaile; in which fact, which sonne of his, he much re∣joyced, as his owne Epistle witnesses: such was his Pius Papall chastitie. So he is not ashamed to publish to the world; that in his younger yeeres Epist 1. Epist. 97. p. 586 and Epist. 395. p. 869. he penned the wanton Co∣maedie of Crisid, with other amrous Poems: and in his elder
dayes in honour of Corpus Christi Feast, he caused a Shew or Stage-play to be acted, Commen∣tariorum de Rebus a se ge∣stis. lib. 8. Nonne in spe∣ctaculo, quo festum Cor∣poris Christi se honorasse gloriatur Pa∣pa Pius secun∣dus, aul regi lestis expres∣sa, memoratur, & sedens in maiestate De∣us Virgi∣nemque Ma∣trem è sepul∣chro assump∣am aeterno Patri Filius obtulisse dici∣tur? Ergo & histrio, perso∣nam ac ima∣ginem Dei Patris refe∣rens, Deus ae∣ternusque P∣ter appellatur stylo Papali D. Reinolds De Romanae Ec∣clesiae. Idolola∣tria lib. 2. c. 3. sect. 29. p. 403 wherein was represented the Court, of the King of Heaven, and God the Father sitting in Majestie: together with God the Sonne, (O blasphemie, O prophannesse beyond all expression) offering up the blessed Virgin his Mother, taken out of her sepulchre, unto his aeternall Father. What wickedness, what blasphemie like to this, as thus to Deifie a Player, and to bring the very Throne, the Majesty of God himselfe, yea, the persons of the eternall Father, Sonne, and God of glory on the Stage. But peace, it was an vn-erring Pope that did it, and so perchance it was Si Papa er∣raret praecipi∣endo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, tenetur Ecclesia credere vitia ess virtutes, & virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare. Bellar. l. 4. D Rom. Pontif. c. 5. Careri∣us De potest. Pont. l. 1. c. 23. numb. 16. More worke for a Masse-Priest. num. 1. pag. 14. no sinne at all in him. Honorius Augustodunensis, an Author of some credit among the Romanists, in his Booke, In Bibliotheca Patrum Coloniae, 1618. Tom. 12. pars 1. pag. 1028. De An∣tiquo Ritu Missarum. lib. 1. cap. 83. the title of which chap∣ter is, De Tragaedijs: to signifie to the world, that the Po∣pish Masse is now no other but a Tragicke Play, writes thus, Sciendum, quod hi qui Tragaedias in Theatris recitabant, actus pugnantium gestibus populo re∣praesentabant. Sic Tragicus noster pugnam Christi populo Christiano in Theatro Ecclesiae gestibus suis rpraesentat, eique victoriam redemptionis suae inculcat. Itaque cum Presbyter (Orate) dicit, Christum pro nobis in agonia positum exprimit, cm A∣postolos orare monuit. Persecretum silentium, significat Christum vlut agnum sine vo∣ce ad victimam ductum. Per manuum expansionem, deignat Christi in cruce extensio∣nē. Per cantū praefationis, exprimit clamorē Christi in cruce pendētis, &c. Idem Ibidem. Wee must know that those who rehearsed Tragedies on Theaters, did represent unto the people by their gestures, the acts of fighters. So our Tragedian (thus hath he stiled the Masse-Priest, how aptly the ensuing words enforme us) represents unto the Christian people by his gestures, the combate of Christ in the Theater of the Church, and inculcates into them the vi∣ctory of his Redemption. Therefore when the Presbyter saith, (Pray yee) he acteth or expresseth Christ, who was cast in∣to an agony for us, when he admonished his Apotles to pray. By his secret silence, he signifieth Christ led to the slaughter as a Lambe without a voyce. By the stretching out of his hands, he denotes the extension of Christ upon the Crosse. By th Song of the Prface, be expresseth the cry of Christ, hanging vpon
the Crosse, &c. Loe here a Roman Masse-priest becomes a Player, and in stead of preaching, of reading, acts Christs Passion in the Masse; which this Author stiles, a Tragedy. Lodovicus Vives complaines, Atqui mos nunc est, quo tempore sa∣cr clebra∣tur Christi morte sua ge∣nus humanum liberantis, lu∣dos nihil pro∣pe a scenicis illis veteribus differentes po∣pulo exibere: etiam si aliud non dixero sa∣tis turpe ex∣istimabit quis∣quis audiet, ludos fieri in re maxime se∣ria. Ibi ride∣tur Iudas quam potest ineptissima ja∣ctans, dum Christum prodit. Ibi Discipuli fu∣giunt militi∣bus perse quen∣tibu, nec fine cachinnis actorum & specta∣torum. Ibi Pe∣trus auriculam rescindit Malcho, applaudente pullata turba, ceu ita vindicetur Christi captivitas. Et post paulum, qui tàm strenuè modo dimicarat, rogationibus vnius an∣cillulae territus abnegat magistrum, ridente multitudine ancillam interrogantem, & exibilante Petrum negantem. Inter tot ludentes, iter tot cachinnos & ineptias so∣lus Christus est serius & severus: cum que affectus conatur maestos elicere, nescio quo pacto, non ibi tantum, sed etiam ad sacra frigisacit, magno scelere atque impietate, non tam eorum qui vel spectant vlagunt, qum sacerdotm qui eiusmodi ieri curant. Lodovicus Vives. Not in Augustinum De Civit. Dei. lib. 8. cap. 27. D See Francis De Croy his first Confirmity. chap. 19. pag. 48. and D. Reinolds overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 161 accordingly. that it was the custome of the Priests and Papists in his age, when as the solemnity of Christs death was celebrated, to exhibite Playes unto the people, not much different from those ancient Pagan Entrludes; of which practise (saith he) though I say no more, whosoever shall heare, he will repute it discommendable enough, even in this re∣gard, that Playes should be made in a thing most serious, There Iudas is derided, uttering the most foolish things he can devise, whiles he betrayeth Christ. There the Disciples flie, the soul∣diers pursuing them, and that not without the dirision and laughter, both of the Actors and Spectators. There Peter cus off the eare of Malchus, the ignorant multitude applauding him, as if by this meanes the captivity of Christ were sufficiently re∣venged. And a little after, he who had fought so valiantly, be∣ing affrighted with the questions of one little Girle, denies his Master, the multitude deriding in the meane time the Maide that questions him, and hissing a Peter who denies him. Among so many Players, among so many shoutes and ridiculous foole∣ries Christ onely is serious and grave: and when as hee endea∣vours to eliciate sorrowfull affections; I know not by what meanes, not there onely, but likewise at the Sacraments and holy Ordinances he waxeth cold, with the great wickednesse and im∣piety, not so much of those who behold or act these things, as of the Priests, who appoint these things to be done. Loe here their
owne Author declaiming against Popish Priests for their frequent acting of Christs Passion, in the very selfe-same manner, as the Pagans of Old did vse to act the lives and practises of their Devill-gods. A sufficient testimony, how little Papists really estimate the bitter Passion of our bles∣sed Saviour, since they make a common Play or pastime of it. This passage of Vives hath so offended the histrionicall Masse-Priests, that Eodem lib. in Scholiis cap. 27. Dele∣antur illa ver∣ba. Atqui mo nunc est, &c. vsque ad i∣nem Annota∣tionis. Index Librorum Ex∣purgat. 1601. fol. 4. Gaspar Quiroga in his Index Expurga∣torius, commands it to be expunged out of all new Impressions of Saint Augustine, and the Divines of Lovan, in their Im∣pression of Saint Augustines Workes, Antwerp 1575. and in other of their Editions since that time, have razed it out accordingly, that so they might still proceed to Act Chrits Passion without controll. To passe by De vita & honestate Ec∣clesiasticorum lib 2. cap. 22. Ioannes Langhecru∣cius, a Popish Author, who makes mention of this playing of Christs sufferings, and seemes for to approve it. As al∣so to pretermit the 1 Ed. 6. c. 1. Statute of primo Edw. 6. chap. 1. which informes us, That divers Papists ad then of late marvei∣louly abused, contemptuously depraved, despised and reviled, the most holy Sacrament of Christs body and blood, in sundry rimes, songs, Playes, and Iests; calling it by such vile and unseemely words as Christian eares doe much abhorre to heare rehearsed: an uparalleld blasphemy and prophannesse: The provinci∣all Popish Apud Surium Tom. 4. p. 83.854. Councell of Colen under Adolphus, in the yeere 1549. cap. 17. and 22. not onely impliedly allowes the acting of sacred histories, but likewise expresly Records; Nihil prope tam sanctum quod secula∣rium homi∣num vanitas non trahat in abusum. Ec∣clesia de the∣sauro corpo∣ris Christi qui dum quaereret salutem nostram in medio pouli versatus est, & vniversalem Iudaea circumambulavit, docens, & egrotos sanas, discipulis concomitantibus: quamobrem & sanctorum reliquias, & imaginies eorum qui vestigia ejus secuti sunt, simul circum∣ferimus, significantes illos nunc cum ipso regnare & triumphare in còlis. Quae me∣moria debet pijs esse jucunda & laeta. Verum huc saecularis hominum stultorum vani∣tas irrepsit, & adhibentur etiam ludi prophani & scurrils magno strepitu, ac quasi ad bellum procedendum esset, tympana pulsantur, & ociosa spectacula eduntur, rebus istis non cōgruentia: quibus populus delectatus, à rebus quae processione aguntur auocatur. Mandamusid circo, &c. Ibidem. That when as the Church carryed about the consecrated hoste of Christs body and blood in long processins (the reason of which processions are there at large expressed) the secular
vanity of worldly men did creepe into those processins; in so much, that they joyned with them prophane and scurrilous Playes with a great noyse; and as if they were going to Warre, Drummes and Fiffes were strucke up, and idle spectacles which suite not with these things were exhibited: with which the peo∣ple being delighted, they were wholly avocated from the things done in procession, Whence this Councell commands all Clergy men to absent themselves from such processions, which were turned into Playes. Yea, the Popish Apud Bo∣chellum Deer∣cla Ecclesiae. Gal. lib. 6. Tit. 19. cap. 20.21 23. p. 1028. Synodus Carnoten∣sis, an. 1526. & Synodus Turvinra. 1583. informes vs, That Catholicke Priests, in the dayes of the first Masses of their new Presbyters, after their merry Feasts, their great and unhallow∣ed banquets, did goe forth in publike to exhibite most grosse unchaste Comaedies to the people, and that in the Feast of Saint Nicholas, Inocents, and on other Festivals, they did put on Visars, and act some ridiculous or foolish thing, (and sometimes the Passion of our Saviour, or these of their Saits & Martyrs either in their Churches or some other place. It is true, that some few Italian Bishops, being ashamed of this diabolicall practise, of the See Orme∣rod his Paga∣no-Papismus and Polydor Virgil. De In∣ventor. Rerum lib. 5. cap. . accordingly. Paganizing Church of Rome, in acting Christs Passion, did in a Councell at Millaine, under their Archbishop Borrhomaeus, in the yeare of our Lord, 1566. de∣cree for their Province; Statuimus vt salvatois passio deinceps nec in sacro nec in pro fa∣no loco aga∣tur, &c. Con∣cil. Mediola∣nense: 1. Con∣stitu. par 1. cap. De Actio∣nibus & re∣prsentationi∣bus sacris quo∣ted by Iohan∣nes Langhe∣crucius. De vi∣ta et honestate Ecclesiastico∣rum l. 2. c. 22. p. 324. and by D. Reinolds, in his Over∣throw of Stage-playes p. 161. that the Passion of our Saviour should not be hereafter acted in any sacred or prophane place whatsoever, because of the scandall which it did occasion: But yet to qui the credit of their Church which might justly be taxed for approving this ungodly practise, Turpiora sunt vitia cum virtutum spe∣cie caelantur. Hieronym. Epist. 14. they put this faire glosse upon this so execrable villany; that the acting of Christs Passion, however it came to be abused, was a custome religiously practised and brought in at first:Pie introducta consuetudo repraesentandi populo veneran∣dam Christi domini passionem, &c. A most irreligious evasion of ambitious spirits, who would rather audaciously justifie their greatest errours to their greater infamy; Sed qui primas non potuit habere sapientiae, secundas habeat partes modestiae; ut qui non valuit omnia impaenitenda dicere, sal∣tem paeniteat quae cognoverit dicenda non fuisse. Augustini Prologus in Retract. libr. 9. then ingeniously acknowledge them to their praise.
But hath his provinciall Councell or Apud Bo∣chellum lib. 6 Tit. 19.19. c. 20, 21, 23: Synodis Carnotensis, 1526. and Synods Turonica, 1583. which are much to the like effect, abolished this abuse out of the Antichristian Church of Rome? No verily, for the Iesuites themselves are not ashamed to publish to the world, Epist. apa∣nic. 18. Ioan∣nis Firnandis Bongo. Doct. Reinolds O∣verthrow of Stage-playes: p. 161. and De Romanae Ec∣clesiae Idolola∣tria l. 2. c. 3. sect. 29 p. 403 that in stead of preaching the Word of God the fall of Adam and Eve, with their exile out of Paradise, and the history of our Saviour, they acted and played them among their Indian Proselites. A true Iesuiticall practise, beseeming well this histrionicall infer∣nall Society,Rom. 1.25. who have turned the very truth of God into a lie, and the Isti templ sua in theatr vertunt, & san∣ctum Dei ver∣bum in ludi∣cras fabulas transformant. D Reinolds. De Romanae Ecles. Idolo∣latria. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 29. p 403. whole service of God into an Enterlude. And no wonder is it that Papists and Iesuites thus turne Christs Pas∣sion into a meere ridiculous Stage-play, (a practise yet in use among them, especially on Witnesse the acting of Christs Passion at Elie house in Holborne when Gundemore lay there, on Good-Friday at night, at which there were thousands present. Good-Friday:) since Quantum nobis, ac no∣stro caetui pro∣fuerit a de Christo fabu∣la, satis est sae∣culis omnibus notum. They are the words of this blasphemous Pope: apud Balaeum. De scriptoribus Britt. Centuria 8. pag. 636. Pope Leo the tenth, (such was his unerring pious blasphemy) re∣puted the whole history of our Saviour, a meere cheating gaie∣full Fable; as we may justly seare these acting Priests and Iesuites doe, or else they durst not thus to play it, to abuse it as we see they doe. And as hey thus act the sacred Passi∣on of our blessed Saviour, even so (if Quoted in Iohn Sowes Survey of London, cap. 16. pag. 142. Fitz-stephen Solemus vel more priscorum spectaculum edere populo, recitare Comaedias, item in templis vita divorum ac marty∣ria repraesentare: in quibus ut cuntis par sit voluptas, qui recitant, verna culam tantum linguam vsurpant, &c. De Inventor. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2. pag. 386. See Francis de Croy, his first Conformitie. Cap. 19. pag. 48. & Bochellus Dcreta Eccles. Gal l, 6. Tit. 19. cap 20, 21, 23. Poly∣dor Virgil, Bochellus, or Francis de Croy, may be credited) they act the lives, the miracles, the martyrdomes torments and legions of their Saints upon their solemne Festivals, and that within their Churches in their Mother tongue; not out of any devotion, but for mirth anb recreation sake, after the manner of the ancient Pagans. Saint Augustine, writing of the ho∣nour (not of the adoration, a thing not then in vse) which the Christians gave the Martyrs in his age; in∣formes
us; Absit, ut eos quanuis De∣os habeant, sanctis Mar∣tyribus no∣stris, quos ta∣men Deos non habemus, vlla ex parte aude∣ant cōparare, Sic enim non constituimus sacerdotes, nec offerimus sa∣crificia mar∣tyribus nostris quia incon∣gruum, inde∣bitum, illici∣tum t, atque vni Deo tan∣tummodo de∣bitum: ut nec criminibus su∣is, nec ludis eos turpissi∣mis oblecta∣mus, vbi vel flagitia isti ce∣lebrant Deo∣rum suorum, si cum homi∣nes essent talia commise∣runt, vel consicta delectamenta daemonū noxiorū, si homines non fuerunt. Aug. De Civ. Dei l. 8. c. 27. that they did neither exhilerate them with their crimes; nor yet with filthy Playes, with which the Gentiles did vsually delight their Idol-gods. Yet our novellizing Roma∣nists, (who Antiquitatem jactatis, & de Die novè vivitis. Tert. Apol. Adv. Gentes. vaunt so much of antiquity, though their whole Religion, (wherein they varry from us) be but novelty) aban∣doning the pious practice of these Primitive Christians, (conscious to themselves no doubt, that many of their late Canonized Tiburne-Martyrs, were no other, no better then the devil-gods of Pagans, See Clemens Alexandr. Oratio Adhort. ad Gentes. Athanasius contr. Gentiles I. Ter∣tullian. Apologia advers. Gentes. Tacianus Oratio advers. Graecos. Arnobius Ad∣versus Gentes lib. Lactantius De Origine Erroris lib. Nazianzen. Oratio 47. and 48. Augustine De Civit. Di. lib. 1, 2, 3, and 4.6.7. and 8 accordingly. who were oft-times deified for their notorious villanies, as Popish Saints are for their matchlesse treasons;) have not onely See Officia bea∣tae Mariae & sanctorum, in all Popish Portuasses, Missals and Prayer bookes Bishop. Mortons Protestant Appeale. lib. 2. cha. 12. Iohn Whites Way to the true Church, sect. 39. adored them as gods, erecting temples to their names and worship: but likewise solemnized their anniversary commemorations, by personating in their severall Temples, the blasphemous ly∣ing Legends of their lives and miracles, (so fit for no place as the Stage it selfe) in some theatricall shewes; adoring and honouring them in no other manner, then the very Pa∣gans did their Devil-gods, with whō these ell-saints are most aptly See Omerod his Paganopapismus semblance 1. to. 51. Ludovicus Vives No∣tae in August. De Civit. Dei l. 8. c. 27. Iohn Bales Acts of English Votaries: in the Praeface, Doct. Iohn Whites Way to the true Church. sect. 39. Numb. 4. paralleld. Such honour, such worship give the Pa∣pists to our blessed Saviour, to these their idolized Saints, as thus to turne, not onely Ad thea∣trum potius templa tansfert, in scenis Religionum istarum secreta tradantur, & ut ni∣hil praetermittat improbtas, histriones facite sacerdotes. Iulius Firmicus De Errore Pro∣fanrum Religionum. c. 13. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 4. p. 112. See Doct. Reinolds De Romanae Eccle. Idololatria. l. 2. c. 3. sct. 29. p. 403. their Priests into Players, their Tem∣ples, into Theaters; but even their very miracles, lives, and sufferings into Playes. To leave the Papists and close up this Scene. It is Nicholaus Cabasila. De vita in Christo. lib. 2. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 14. p. 112 C.D.E.F recorded of one Porphry a Pagan Stage-player,
that he grew to such an height of impiety, as he adventu∣red to baptize himselfe in est upon the Stage, of purpose to make the people laugh at Christian Baptisme, and so to bring both it and Christianity into contempt: and for this purpose he plun∣ged himselfe into a vessell of water which he had placed on the Stage, calling aloud upon the Trinity: at which the Specta∣tors fell into a great laughter. But loe the goodnesse of God to this prophane miscreant; it pleased God to shew such a demon∣stration of his power and grace upon him, that this Post quam verò, id quo per ludum bap∣tizatus est, non Chistianus solum illico est redditus, sed ad ipsorum quo que mar∣tyrum socie∣tatem aggre∣gtus, &c. Idem Ibidem. sporting baptisme of his, became a serious lauer of regeneration to him: in so much that of a gracelesse Player, he became a gracious Christian, and not long after, a constant Martyr. The Nicholaus Cabasila. Ibi∣dem. like I find registred of one Ardalion, another Heathen Actor, who in derision of the holy Sacrament of Baptisme, baptized him∣selfe in jest vpon the Stage, and by that meanes became a Chri∣stian; Gods mercy turning this his wickednesse to his eternall good: not any wayes to justifie Playes or Players, or to coun∣tenance this his audacious prophannesse; but even miracu∣lously to publish to the world the power of his owne holy Ordi∣naces, wch by the co-operation of his Spirit, are even then able to regenerate those Psal. 68.18. Acts 2.13.37.38. Acts 9.1 to. 22. who most contemne them, when they are used but in scorne. These notable histories, with the premises, sufficiently evidence, the subject matter of Stage-playes to be oft-times impious, sacrilegious, blasphe∣mous: from whence I raise this ninth Argument. That whose subject matter is impious, sacrilegious, blas∣phemous, must needs be sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians. Witnesse Levit. 24.11. to 17.2 Kings 19.6.22. Isay 37.6.23. c. 52.5. Matth. 12.31. Luke 22.65. 1 Tim. 1.20, But such oft-times, is the subject matter of Stage-playes: witnesse the premises. Therfore they must needs be sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians.
SCENA SEXTA. SIxtly, Stage-playes are for the most part satyrically in∣vective against the persons, callings, offices and professi∣ons of men; but more especially against Religion and Servi Dei sunt quos Di∣abolus infe∣stat; Christi∣ani sunt, quos Antichristus impugnat. Neque enim quaerit illos quos jm suos fecit. Inimicus & hostis Ec∣clesiae, quos alienavit ab Ecclesia & Io∣ras duxit, vt captivos & victos con∣temnit: eos pergit lacesse∣e in quibus Christum cer∣nit habitare. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Re∣ligious Christians, the chiefest objects of the Divels malice. From whence I deduce this tenth Play-oppugning Argu∣ment. That whose stile, whose subject matter is ordinarily satyricall and invective, being fraught with bitter scoffes or jests against Religion, Virtue, and Religious Chri∣stians; against the persons, callings, offices, or honest professions of men; must needs be odious and unlaw∣full unto Christians. But such is the ordinary stile and subject matter of most popular Stage-playes. Therefore they must needs be odious and unlawfull unto Christians. The Major needeth little proofe, since God himselfe in∣joynes all Christians, Ephes. 4.31.32. to put away all bitternesse, anger, wrath, clamour, and evill speaking, with all maliciousnesse: to be courteous and tender-hearted one towards another; 1 Pet. 3.9. not rendring railing for railing; Col. 3.12, 3, 14. but forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any one hath any quarrell against ano∣ther, (much lesse then when as there are no personall vari∣ances betweene men) even as God for Christs sake hath for∣given them, The Scripture requires, Iam. 3.17.18. that Christians should be patient, peaceable, gentle, easie to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits without grudging or calumny, without hypo∣crysie or backbiting, 1 Cor. 5.11 c. 6.10. 2 Pet. 11 without rayling or slanders, especially against Isay 5.20. godly men, whose lives, whose persons, whose gra∣ces should no where be traduced, much lesse upon the Stage. Mens persons Gen. 1.26. c. 5.1. c. 9.6. are the worke and image of Gd him∣selfe;
their honest callings, offices and imployments, the very 1 Cor. 7.20. to 25. Rom. 13.1.2. Ordinances of God: their graces, their holinesse (to omit their credit and good names, Prou. 22.1. Eccles. 7.1. which are better then precious oyntment, yea, more desirable by farre than great riches) the very beames Iohn 1.16. Mal. 4.2. that flow from the Sunne of Righteousnesse: Wherefore, to personate, deride, revile, or scoffe at all, or any of these, upon the Theater, Prou. 14.11 must needs be sinfull; be∣cause it not onely brings them into contempt and scorne, but also offers open Prou. 17.5. indignitie to God himselfe, from whom they issue. The Minor is abundantly evident. First, by the expresse testimony of prophane Author: It is Plato in So∣cratis Apolo∣gia. Diogenes Lartius lib 2 Socrates AE∣lian Variae. Hist. lib. 2. c. 13. Theodo∣ret De Activ virtute. l. 12 p. 428. Plu∣tarchi Plato fol. 343. E. Ludovicus Vi∣ves. Notae in August. De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 9. storied of Aristopha∣nes, that scurrilous carping Comaedian, that he personally tra∣duced and abused virtuous Socrates on the Stage, by the insti∣gation of some lewde Athenians who maligned him for his re∣splendent vertues; accusing him both for a trifler, an Atheist, who did neither know nor reverence the gods; of purpose to bring him into derision with the people. Plutarchi Alcebiades. Horace Epist. l. 3. Epist. 1. p 282. Suidae Eupolis: Lu∣dovicus Vives Notae in Au August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 8. Eupolis the Comae∣dian, did the like to that famous Graecian Worthy, Alcebiades, for which he commanded him to be drowned in the Sea. Et quibus occupatio est in proximo∣rum peccata, vt subsanna∣toribus & Comicis: ma∣lediti enim quodammo∣do ipsi sunt, & procliues ad enunciandum, &c. Rhetoricae lib. 2. c. 6. p. 136. Ari∣stotle writes of Comaedians, that they are wholly occupied in surveying, in deriding the vices of other men, which they pro∣claime upon the Stage, whence he rankes them in the number of traducers, and evill speakers. Oratio de Pace. p. 21. & ad Nicoclem. p. 46.47. Isocrates blames the A∣thenians much, for preferring Comaedians who did nothing but carpe at them, and blaze abroad their vices to their infamy, before such who best deserved at their hands. Diogenianus in Symposia. l. 7. Quaest. 8. Plutarch, reputes it an unbefitting thing, to entertaine Play∣ers, or their Comedies at any solemne Feasts; because their vi∣rulent invectives, scoffes, and jests, would occasion sudry quar∣rels and debates. The Plutarchi Lacor∣nica Instita. Lacedamonians banished all Stage-playes, Players, and Play-Poets, out of their Territories; be∣cause they could not endure to heare their lawes carped at, or
spoken against in jest or earnest. Tacitus An∣nal. l. 1. cap. 14 l. 4. c. 3. Dion. Cassius Rm. histor. lb. 57. p. 798. Alex∣ander ab A∣lexandro. Gen. Dierum l 3 cap. 9. Marcus Aure∣lius cap. 14. Tiberius exiled all Stage-players out of Italy, by reason of those many commotions which their insolent personall invective Playes occasioned. To passe by that famous Plutarchi Pericles. Gracian Pricles, who was oft times perso∣nated and traduced on the Theater:Hiserias saltationes ri∣diculè suis ge∣stibus imita∣bantur. as per ludi∣brium depra∣vantes, vt spe∣ctatoribus ri∣sum moverent. Ex triumphis autem quia guntur satis liquet hos lusus cavillatorios & satyricos apud Romanos iàm indo a priscis saeculis re∣ceptos fuisse. Licet enim ijs qui triumphum prosequuntur iambos & dicteria ia cere in illustrissimos quosque viros, atque adeò in ipsos imporatores; quemadmodum Athe∣nis olim ijs qui plaustris vecti pompam prosequebantur obvios quosque scommatibus impetere licebat. Antiqu. Romanorum lib. 7. sect. 9. p. 713. See Bulingerus De Thea∣tro. lib. 1. cap. 9.10. &. 58. accordingly. Dionysius Haicarnasse∣us describing the ancient Enterludes of the Romans, records: that Cavillatorie and satyricall Playes were of old received among the Romans: in which Playes it was lawfull for the Actors to cast Iambickes, scoffes and floutes upon the most il∣lustrious persons, yea, upon the Emperors themselves: as it was lawfull heretofore among the Athenians, for those who accom∣panied their Triumphes and Shewes in Wagons, to scoffe at any they met withall, which liberty of cfing, (asQuaerere conabar quate lascivia major. Hisoret in udisliberior{que} Iocus. Sed mihi succurret numen non esse severū. Apta{que} de∣licijs munera ferre Deam, &c. Fastorum.  5. p. 89. Ovid testifies) was likewise vsed in the Floralian Stage-Playes. So that in∣vective Playes were common, both with the Romans and Athenians. Dipnosophorum l. . c. 5.6. Athenaeus Records: That Comaedians abound in personall scoffes, reproaches, taunts; which are frequent in the Comaedies of Aristophanes: Yea, Eu∣polis atque Cratinus, Aristophanes{que} Poetae, atque alij quorum Comaedia prisca viro∣rm est: Si quis erat dignus describi quod malus, aut fur; Quod maechus foret, siccari∣us, aut alio qui Famosus; multa cum libertate notabant. Omnes hi metuunt versus, odêre Poëtas, Faenum habet in cornu, longè fugit, dummodo risum Ex cutiat sibi, non hic cui∣quam parcet amico. Horace Sermonum. lib. 1. Sat. 4. Horace the Poet, is very copious in describing the personall invectives of Playes in for∣mer times, escennia per hunc inventa licentia morem. Versibus alternis approbria rustica Iudit: Librtasque recurrentes ac∣cepta per annos, Lusit amabiliter donec iam saeuus apertum In rabim veri caepit, iocus, & per honestas Ire domus impunè minax: doluêre cruento Dente laccessiti: fuit in∣ract is quoque circa Conditione super communi quinetiam lex, Paenaque lata; malo quae nollet, carmine quenquam Describi, vertêre modum formidine fstis Ad bene dicen∣dum, delectandum que reducti. Idem Epist. l. 2 Epst 1. p. 282. ut immunda crepent ig∣nominioaque dicta. Successit verus his Comaedia non sine multa Laud: sed in vitium libertas excidit, & vim Dignam lege regi: lex est accepta, chorusque Turpiter obtinuit sublato jure no cendi. Idem. De Arte Poetica p. 304.306. Bullingerus e Theatro. l. 1. c. 9. & 58. accordingly. especially the Fescennia, and the ancient Comedy,
which spared neither friends nor foes; whose personall inve∣ctives grew so excessive, so odious and intollerable, that the Ro∣mans inacted a Law against them, to suppresse their vile abuses n this kinde. This concurrent testimony then of Pagan Authors, is a sufficient justification of my Minors truth. Secondly, as these heathen Writers, even so the Fathers, with sundry ancient and moderne Authors doe positively affirme the truth of this assumption. Witnesse Philo Iudae∣us, his punctuall testimonie, De vit Contemplativa; page 1209. Clemens Alexandrinus Oratio Adhortatoria ad Gentes, fol. 8, 9. Tatianus Oratio adversus Graecos, Bibl. Pa∣trm Tom. 2. p. 180.181. Indo male∣dicta conuitia sine iustitia, odij etiam suffragia sine merito amoris. Quicquid op∣tant, quicquid abominantur extrancum ab illis est: ira & amor apud il∣lis ociosus, & odium iniu∣stum sine cau∣a. Deus cert cum causa prohibet odis∣se, qui inimi∣cos diligi iu∣bet. Deus eti∣am cum causa maledicere non sinit, qui maledicentes benedici prae∣cipit. Sed Cir∣co quid ama∣rius? vbi nec principibus quidem aut  vibus suis par∣cūt. Quicquid horum quibus circus furit nus quā compeit sāctis, ideo nec in Circo. Ibid. Tertullian De spectaculis cap. 15, 16. Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato, & de Spectaculis lib. Arnobius adversus Gentes. lib. 4. p. 149.150. & lib. 7. p. 230. to 242. Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 2. Ambrose De officijs, lib. 1. cap. 23. Chrysostome homil. 38. in Matth. Nazianzen. Oratio 48. p. 792. D. 797. D. Augustine De Civitate Dei lib. 2. cap. 4.5. and 9. and  Sancti Valeriani homilia 6. De oti∣osis verbis, Bibliotheca Patrum: Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 482.583. Ludovicus Vives, Notae in August. De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4.5.8.9. Bulligerus De Theatro lib. 1. cap. 9.10. and 58. Gosson in his Playes confuted, Action 2. The third Blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters, p. 116.117. Doctor Iohn Whites Sermon at Pauls Crosse, March 24. 1615. section 11. (to which I may add our owne Statutes of 1. Edw. 6. chap∣ter 1. of 2. and 3. Edw. 6. chaper 1. of 1. Eliz. chapter 2. which precisely prohibit the satyricall depravig, traducing, or derogation of the Common Prayer-Booke, and of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in any Enterludes, Playes or Rimes, (in which kinde Playes had beene formerly peccant) undr se∣vere penalties.) Cavendum est ergo dile∣ctissimi ne scenico ser∣mone alter al∣torum laedar, & theatrali∣bus verbis ve∣recundiā fra∣tri laesae aesti∣mationis in∣cutiat, &c. Ibidem. All these, I say, with sundry others which I pretermit, exprsly tax, yea, utterly condemne all Playes, in regard of these their personall invectives against particular persons, functions, offices, callings, and the like, concurring fully in my Minors truth. But to passe by Authorities, our owne particular expe∣rience, is a thouand witnesses to this Assumption. Survay
we all our moderne Stageplayes with an impartiall eye, Gosson, Plays confu∣ted Action . The third blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters. p. 116.117. accordingly There is hardly one of them among an hundred, wherein Re∣ligion or religious men, or som particular persons, officrs, cal∣lings, professions, are not notoriously, satyrically derided, persona∣ted, traduced, defamed, by such Tamdiu quisquis sua peccata igno∣rat quam diu curios aliena considerat. Qui semetip∣sum aspicit, non quaerit quid in alijs frequenter re∣prehendat, sed in semetipso quid lugeat. Bernard. De Interiori Do∣mo c. 42. who neither consider nor bewaile their owne iniquities, whiles they curiously survay, and mali∣ciously divulge the faults of others. Not to particularize those late new scandalous invective Playes, wherein Gundemore, the late Lord Admirall Lord Treas∣rer, and others. sundry per∣sons of place and eminence have beene particularly perso∣nated, jeared, abused in a grosse and scurrilous manner; the Scena joci mo rmberi∣oris habet. O∣vid. Fastorem l. 4. p. 81. Aut immunda cre∣pent ignomi∣niosaque dicta. Horace de Ar∣te Poetica p. 304. Nullum invenire Pro∣logum potuisset novus Quem di ceret, nii haberet cui malediceret. Terentij Phormio, Prologus. frequent scoffes, reproaches, scandals, Satyrs, and disgrace∣full passages that are darted out in Stageplayes, against Mini∣sters, Lawyers, Courteours, Phisitions, Marchants, Citizens, Tradesmen of all sorts; against Iudges, Iutices, Maiors, and such like Officers; but especially against all zealous practi∣call professors of Religion, Dat veniam couis vexat censura columbas. Iuvenal. Satyr. 2. who seldome scape the Players lash: (by meanes of which, both Governours, Govern∣ment, Religion, and Devotion are brought into contempt) doe abundantly confirme the Satyricall invectivenesse of Stageplayes. Which vitious quality is sufficient to make them odious unto Christians. Objection. If any here object in defence of Stage-playes; See Hay∣woods Apologie for Actors. The third blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, p. 116, 117. that they inveigh not against particular persons, officrs, or professions; but onely against their vices; which is not onely lawull, but usefull, but commendable. Answer. To this I answer. First, that the Objection it selfe is meerely false; since not onely Cum nulli hominum generi aut professioni ab improbis isto sermone par∣catur, ab mnibus tamen ad spectaculum convenitur. Cyprian de spectacuis lib. Cyprian, and the fore-quoted Authors, but even Players and Play-haunters them∣selves can testifie, that all sorts of persons, of professors are abusd often on the Stage: their virtues, their graces being there more frequently censured, derided, traduced, then their vices. Secondly, admit the Objection true; yet for
See Gosson Playes conu∣ted, Action 2. The third blast of R∣trait from Playes, p. 117. Doctor Iohn Whites Ser∣mon at Pals Cross March 24. An. 1615. sect. 11 accor∣dingly. Players to censure, to proclaime mens vices or abuses on the Theater, must needs be sinfull. First, because they have no au∣thenticke commission, either from God or man to doe it. For though Levit 19.17 Prov. 24.24.25. Matth. 18.15. Heb. 3.13 every private man may secretly admonish or re∣prove another for his sinnes, as opportunity shall require: yet Matth. 18.16.17. Rom. 13.3.4. Isay 58.1. Rom. 14 3.4.2 Tim. 4.2. 1 Tim. 5.20 none must publikely censure sinnes or sinners, but Magi∣strates, Ministers, and such like publike persons, who are depu∣ted by God himselfe to this very office; vpon which no com∣mon Players must encroach. Secondly, because Players are of all others, the unmeetest persns to reprove mens vices. Matth. 7.3.4, 5. Rom. 2.3, 21, 22, 23. Accusare viti oficium est bonorum ho∣minum & be∣nvolorum. Quod cum malefici a∣gunt, alienas partes agunt, &c. August. lib. 2. De Sermone Domini in monte, cap. 30. Non amplius possumus increpare cos quia nobis reguntur, cúm ips quoque adem Febre teneamur, & ipsi egemus medicina, quos Deus posuit ut alijs me∣deremur. Chrys. in Ephes. hom. 10. Tom. 4. Col. 95. C. Quomodo nos vitam corrigere va∣leamus alienam, qui negligimus nostram Gregor. Magn. homil. 17. in Evangelia. He, who will effectually rebuke the sinnes, the enormities of other men, must be ree from open crimes himselfe; else his reproofes will wat authority, and rather exasperate or en∣courage the reproved in their sinfull courses, then reclaime them from them. See Act. 4. Scene 1. Now Players are commonly the most criminous and enormious persons of all others, Damnant foris quod intus operantur, admittunt libenter quod cum admiserint, criminantur. Turpis turpes infamat, & evasisse se conscium credit, quai conscientia satis non sit. Idem in publi accusatores, in oculto rei, in semetipsos pariter censores & nocentes, Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. being for the most part deepely guilty of all those vices, those abuses which they condemne in any: Therefore their reproofes are vaine and fruitlesse. Thirdly, because Players are alwayes pec∣cant in the manner of their reproofes. He, who reprehends anothers faults in a lawfull Christian way, must be sure to observe these circumstances. First, he must doe it Gal. 6.1. 1 Tim. 5.1.2. 2 Thes. 3.15. with the spirit of mkenesse, of compassion, without wrath or passion. Secondly, Mat. 10.16. Ephes. 5.15. Col. 4.5. Prov. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. he must doe it with discretion, in a decent, and pru∣dent manner; having a due respect both to the person, time, and place, to the vice or fault reproved. Thirdly, he must doe it Levit. 19.17. Gal. 6.1. 1 Cor. 5 5. 2 Cor. 4.5.5. 2 Cor. 7.8, 9. 2 Tim. 3.16.17. Titus. 1.13. Prov. 25.12. c. 9.89. 2 Thess. 3.15. 2 Tim. 2 26, 27. out of conscience, loue, and friendship: with an unfai∣ned desire to reforme the persons, the vices reprehended;Levit. 19.17. Exod. 23.1, 2. Prov. 10.18. Nulli detrahas, nec in co tesanctum, putes si coeteros aceres, Hier. Ep. 4., 8. not to vent his owne private spleene, r to disgrace the party rebuked.
Fourthly, Matth. 18.15, 16, 17. Gal. 2.11, 14, 1 Tim. 5.20. Sime vis cor∣ripere delin∣quentem, aper∣te in crepa. Quid enim prodest si alijs mala referas mea? i me nesciente, pec∣catis meis, imò detractioni∣bus tuis alium vulneres, & cū certatim om∣nibus narres sic singulis loquaris, quasi nulli dixeris alteri? hoc est, non me emen∣dare, sed vitio tuo satisface∣re. Hierom. Epist. 4 c. 10. he must openly reprove the delinquents to their faces, that so they may take notice of their vices to reforme them: not covertly behinde their backes, for this is meere detraction, not reproofe: A publication of mens vices vnto others to their great disgrace; not a discouery of them to themselves for their amendment. Now our Vice-censuring, Sinne-pro∣claiming Actors, (who Dum alienos errores emen∣darc nituntur, ostendnt su∣os, Hierom. Epist. 28. commonly discover, but not correct their owne enormities, whiles they display and censure others, Vae illi, qui uam renit corrigere vi∣tam, & alie∣nam non desi∣nit detrahere. Bernard. De Interiri Do∣m. c. 42. Col. 1082. B. which makes them truely miserable) transgresse in all these circumstances. Their reproofes are alwayes satyricall, ed∣ged with private malice, or pointed with revenge: they are never serious, seasonable, private, discreet: Hi temere judicant de incerti, & facilè reprehendunt, magis amant vituperare & damnare, quam emendare atque corrigere: qd vitium vel superbiae est, vel impuden∣tie. August. lib. 2 de Sermone Dom. in monte cap. 30. their ayme is onely mens defamation, not their reformation: sine they pro∣claie mens vices unto others, not lay them open to them∣selves: they dare not looke the delinquets in the face, but are alwayes clamouring behind their backs: their re∣bukes proceed not from true Christian love, which delights to cover, not propalate and divulge menssinnes: therefore they must needs be evill. Fourthly, (as a Doct. Iohn Whies Sermon at Paules Crosse, March the 24. Anno 1615. sect. 11. reverend worthy of our Church observes) there is nothing more dangerous in a state, then for the Stage and Poet to deride sinne, which by the Bishops and Pastors of the Church is gravely and severely to be reprooved; because it causeth Magistrates, Ministers, and Statemen to lose their reputation, and sinne to be lesse fea∣red. Lastly, admit that Players had sufficient authority to censure the vices, the abuses of particular persons, oficers, and professions (which I cannot beleeve they have, till they can shew me an act of State, or a Commission for it in the Scripture,) yet this is infallible, Exod. 23.1. Psal. 15.3. that they ought not to re∣ceive or raise an ill report of any: Genes. 21.9. 2 sam. 6.16.20. Psal. 119 136. to deride or scoffe at any mans vices, and Prov. 14.9. cap. 10.23. so to make a mocke of sinne, Iames 4.11. or to speake evill of any one, as they doe: since God himselfe prohibites it,
since Iude 9. Michael the Archangel, (whose example all mut imitate) disputing with the Divell about the body of Moses, durst not bring any railing accusation against him, but said; The Lord rebuke thee: yet our desperate wicked Players (who Improbissi∣mi omnium, & maxima paena digni sunt, qui d ijs rebusalios ac∣usare audent quibus ipsi constricti te∣nentur. Isora∣tes, Oratio d Permutatione page 617. in this are worthy the severest penalty, that eing so super∣latively vitious thēselves, they dare presume to censure others) to testifie to the world, that they are within the number of these Iude 8.18. scoffers, and 2. Tim. 3.3. dispisers of those who are good, which are prophecied of in the latter times; dare open their blacke Iames 3.6. in∣fernall mouthes, in bitter invective Enterludes, against all grce and goodnesse; against the very profssion and pro∣fessors of Religion; against all qualities, callings and de∣grees f men, scarce glancing lightly at their vices. There∣fore their Playes must needes be inexcusably sinfull, even in this respect. SCENA SEPTIMA. LAstly, admit the stile or subject matter of Stage-playes be no wayes such, as I have erto demonstrated it to be; yet at the very best it is Ociosum verbum est, quod sine vti∣litate loquen∣tis dicitur, & audientis: ut si omissis seris de rebus frivo∣lis loquamur, & fabulas nar∣remus anti∣quas. Hierom. Co. in Matth. l. 2. cap. 12. v. 36.37. See Theophilact. Ibidem. but idle, frothy, superflu∣ous, unprofitable; as vaine, as epty, as vanity it selfe. From whence I raise this eleventh dispute. That whose stile and subject matter, in its very best ac∣ception, is but vaine, but frivolous, and ridiculous, bringing no glory at all to God, nor good to men; must needs be sinfull and unlawfull unto Chritians. But such is the stile and subject of most Stage-playes, as Hoec etiamsi non essent simulachris dicata, obeun∣da christianis fidelibus non essent, quae & si non haberent crimen, habent in se & maxi∣mam, & parum congruentm fidelibus, vanitatem, &c. Fugienda itaque sunt ista Chri∣stianis fidelibus, ut jàm frequenter diximus tàm vanatam pernitiosa sachtilega spectacu∣la; & oculi nostri sunt, & aures custodiendae. Cyprian. de spectac. lib. Saint Cyprian excellently writes.
Therefore they must needs be sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians. The Major is uncontroulable; since God himselfe inhi∣bits Christians, Iob 15.2.3. Reijce ver∣bum quod non aedificat audientes. Va∣nusenim ser∣mo citò pollu∣it mentem, & vanae con∣scientiae est index. Bernard de Ineriori Domo cap. 43. to utter vaine knowledge; to reason with un∣profitable talke, or with speeches which will doe no good, Ierem. 2.5.8. c. 16.19. to walke in vanity, or things that will not profit; and 1 Sam. 12.21. Nimirum sapere est ab∣iectis vtile nu∣gis. Horace, Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. p. 292. to follow after vaine things which will not profit, because they are but vaine. Christians Isay 55.2. must not lay out their money for that which is not bread, and their labour for that which satisfieth not, Eccles. 5.7. & 6.11.12. hey must not delight in vanitie, or in things that increase, vanity, and make not man the better; but they must pray with David; Psal. 119.37. Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanity: since the Scripture is expresse; Psal. 4.2. Psal. 10.7. Psal 12.2. Psal. 24.3.4. 2 Kings 17.15 that the speaking, loving, or lifting up of the soule to vanity, folly, and unprofitable things, is an Mores ho∣minis lingua pandit, & qualis sermo ostenditur, t∣lis animus comprobatur; quoniam ex abundantia cordis os loquitur. Bernard. de inte∣riori Domo. cap 43. Col. 1082. undoubted character of such wicked men, who shall not as∣cend into Gods holy hill; not any property of Gods children: Who as 1 Tim. 4.7. they must abandon all idle, fabulous, unprofitable dis∣courses; Mat. 2.36.37. Vnus sermo non eri absque iuditio, quia ab omni rectitudinis statu deperiunt qui per verba vana dilabuntur. Bernard De Interiori Domo c. 43. Because that for euery idle word that men shall speake they shall give account at the day of judgement: so they must likewise direct even all their actions, speeches, recreations 1 Cor. 10.31, 32, 33. to Gods glory; Col. 3.16.17. Iude 20. the edification of others, and Isay 55.2.3. 1 Sa. 12.21. 1 Tim. 6.18.19. their owne spiri∣tuall good; to which Stage-playes, no wayes tend. There∣fore the Major is vnquestinable. For the Minor; Th the stile and subject matter of Stage-playes is in its very best acception, but vaine, but fri∣volous and ridiculous, bringing no glory at all to God, nor good to men: is most apparant. First, by the concurring te∣stimony of sundry Fathers, and other learned Writers, Hence Hilarie, Ambrose, Chrysostome, Augustine, Bruno and others, in their Commentaries and expositions on the 118. alias the 119. Psalme verse 37. Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanity: together with Iohn Salisbury, lib. 1. De Nugis Curialium, cap. 8. Master Gosson, Doctor Rei∣nolds,
Master Northbrooke, and others in their Treatises against Stage-playes; interpret this Averte ocu∣los meos vi∣deant vanita∣tem: hic no∣tantur illi qui diversis spe∣ctaculis & u∣dis Theatrali∣bus occupan∣tur, &c. Hilari. vanity in the Psalmist. of Stage-playes, and such like spectacles, which they Vtinam hac interproetatio∣ne possimus revocare ad diversa Cir∣censium ludorum atque theatralium spectacula fe∣tinantes. Va∣nitas est illa quam cernis. Pantominum aspicis? vani∣tas est, &c. Ambros. Enar. in Psal. 118. Octon. 5. Tom. 2. p. 430. F. condeme as vanity. Hence Clemens Alexandrinus writes of playes; Spectacula verbis obscenis & vanis tem∣r prosusis plena sunt. Pdagogi l. 3. c. 11. that they are fraught with obscene and vaine speeches, rashly uttered: Hence Gregory Nazianzen stiles Playes; Vit vanita∣tes, voluptatum Hydra. Ad Se∣luchum Epist. p. 103. the va∣nities of life, and the hydra of pleasures. Hence Chrysostome writes of Playes: In Theatro isus, ineptitudo, verba multae fatuitatis ac stultitiae plena, &c. Homil. 2 in Acta Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 612. A. homil. 92. ad populum Antiochae. Tom. . Col. 37. A that they are fraught with laughter, wan∣tonnesse, and words ull of folly and vanitie. Hence Anasta∣tius Sianita writes of the Severiani: Vestra dogmata magis sunt ridicula quam quae in omnibus snicis Orchestris, & Thylemicis ludis aguntur. In his Viae duae. ibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 04. That their positions were more ridiculous, absurd and foolish, then those things that are acted in any Stage-playes. Hence Bernard writes, Mi∣mos, fabulatores, scurrilesque cantilenas, & udoum spectacula milites Christi, tanquam vanitates & insanias falsas respuunt & abominantur. Ad Milites Templi Sermo. Col. 82. L That the true souldiers of Christ, reject and abominate Players and Stage-playes, as vanities and false frenzies. Hence Iohn Sa∣lisbury stiles Playes, Spectacula & tyrocinia vanitatis. De Ngis Curialjum. l. 1. c. 7.8. the spectacles and rudiments of vanitie. Hence Cyprian, Lactantius, Cyril of Hierusalem, Augustine, Basil, Salvian, Macarius AEgyptius, and others, See 2. former∣ly quoted, have utterly condemned Stage-playes, as the very pompes and vanites of this wicked world, which Christians haue abjured in their Baptisme. If then we beleeve these severall Fathers, together with Asi∣naia. Prologus. Plautus, De somno Scipionis. l. 1. pag. 20. & Saurnal. lib. 2. cap. 7. Maecrobius, Floridorum lib. 4. A∣puleius, three Heathen Authors; or Master Gosson, Master Northbrooke, Master Stub, and Doctor Reinolds, in their bookes against Stage-playes: or the third Blast against Stage-playes and Theaters, together with Caesar Bulingerus De Theatro, lib. 1. cap. 11. de Ludis p. 141. We must needs acknowledge, both Playes themselves, together with their stile and subject matter, to be meere idle uselesse vanities; Since all these repute and stile them such. Secondly, our owne experience, will readily subscribe un∣to
it as an undoubted truth. For what are all our Stage-playes, but the frothy excrements of superfluous idle braines; which being impregnated with some 2 Pet. 2.18. Proijcit am∣pullas & ses∣quipedalia verba. Horace, De Arte Poet∣ca. p 300. swelling words, or high-towring conceited plots of vanitie, (which they secretly adore with highest admiration, as being worthy the most suparlative Stage-applause,) doe travell in paine un∣till they have brought forth their long-conceived issues on the Theater, wch prove but Quid dig∣num tanto fe∣rit hic promis∣sor hiatu? Parturiunt montes, nasci∣tur ridiculs mus. Horac De Ate Po∣tic. p. 300. ridiculously vaine at best? Wha are they, but meere miscelanies of over-studied, well-ex∣pressed vanities? Their subiect, their action, their circum∣stances; what else are they but vanitie of vanities, but ridi∣culous follies or frensies in the highest degree, unworthy of a Nunquid tibi videtur sapiens, qui o∣culos vel aures istis expandit? Ioannes Salis∣buriensis l. 1. De Nugis Cu∣rialium c. 8. wise-mans sight, much lesse his approbation? Their Actors, their ordinary Spectators, what are they but ridicu∣lous, foolish, vaine, fantasticke persons, who delight in no∣thing more then toyes and vanities? Their very fruits, their ends, what are they else, but either the nourishing, or the in∣crease of sinne and vanitie? If we survay the good, the profit which accrues from Stage-playes, we shall find, that they are good for naught; that they bring no glory at all to God, no benefit, no comfort unto men; Vaum enim est quod ad ni∣hil vtile est. Vana illa sunt omnia qua bo∣num nullum habent finem. Chrysost. Hom. 12. in Ephes. Tom. 4. Col. 963. D therefore they must needs be vaine. If we respect Gods glory; where shall we finde God more dishonoured, more provoked then in Stage-playes? which had the See Act. 1. accordingly. Divell himselfe for their author, subject, and composer, who proves sometimes their Actor too. Where are Gods Name, his Word, his Attributes, his Ministers, his Saints, his Substitutes, his Children, his Worhip, his Graces, more blasphemed, pro∣phaned, traduced, or derided, See the third Blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters. The Preface to the Practise of Piety; Salvian de Gubernatione Dei lib. 6. The Schoole of Abuses; and Scene 5. before. then in Stage-playes? Where is God more offended, more affronted with swarmes of crying sinnes, then in the Play-house? And how can it bee otherwise? We know it was the received opinion of the
ancient Pagans; that their Vos persua∣sum habetis Theatralibus ludis Deos de∣lectari & a∣fici, irasque aliquando conceptas o∣rum satisfacti∣one mollii. Honorantur his Dij, & si quas ab homi∣nibus coni∣nent offensio∣num memorias illatas, abijci∣unt, excludunt, redduntque s nobis redin∣tegrata famili∣aritate fauto∣rs, &c. Mi∣mis nimirum Dij gaudent, & illa vis prae∣stans, neque vllis hominum comprehensa natuis liben∣tissimè com∣modat audi∣endis his au∣res, quorum symplegmatibus plurimis intermixtos se esse derisionis in materiam nount? delectan∣turut res est salpictarum sonitu ac plausu factis & dictis turpibus, fascinorum ingenti∣um rubore. Iam verò si viderint in Foemineas mollitudines enervantes se viros, vocifera∣ri hos frustra, sine causa alios cursitare, amicitiarū fide salva contundere se alios, & cru∣ds mutilare se caestibus, certare hos spiritu, buccas vento distendere, votisque inanibus concrepare, manus ad coelum tollunt, rebu{us} admirabilibus moti prosiliunt, exclamant, in gratiam cum hominibus redeunt. Haec si dijs immortalibus oblivionem afferunt simulta∣tum; si ex Comaedijs, attellanis, mimis ducunt laetissimas voluptates, quid moramini, quid cesiatis, quin & ipsos dicatis Deos ludere, lascivire, saltare, obscaenas compingere cantio∣nes, & clunibus fluctuare crispatis? Quid enim differt, faciantue haec ipsi, an ab alijs firi in amoribus ac delicijs ducant? Arnobius adversus Gentes. l. 7. p. 232, 234, 236. Devill-Idols (to whose See Bullingerus De Theatro, lib. 1. c 17. so∣lemne honour and worship, all Stage-playes were at first devo∣ted) were so well pleased with these Theatricall Enterludes, that if they did but honour and adore them with them, they would forthwith pardon, yea, forget their sinnes against them, and of enemies, become propitious, kinde, and friendly to them. And can any Christian then conceive such base conceits of God, or Itane, istud non est Deorum imminuere dignita∣tem, dicae & consecrare turpissimas res ijs quas censor animus respuat, & quarum acto∣res inhonesto esse ius vestrum, & inter capita computai indicavit infamia? Arnobius Ibi∣dem. p. 233. so farre derogate from his Majestie, his purity, his Deitie, as to deeme him honoured or delighted, not grieved, not offended with such Stage-playes See Act 2, accordingly. wherewith Devill-Idols were attoned? Doubtlesse, that which the Devill himselfe hath invented, appropriated to his owne honour and advantage, See 1 Cor. 6.14.15. can ne∣ver bring any praise or glory unto God: therefore our Stage-playes cannot doe it. If we reflect upon the good they bring to men, alas, what is it? See here p 68, 69. and Act. 6. Scene 4, 5, 6. Bodinus de Republica l. 6. c 1. The third Blast of Retrait from Playes, and Master Boltons Discourse of true happinesse, p. 73, 74 accordingly. Where doe they sucke in more poyson, more corruption; where doe they mere blunt their virtues, or make greater shipwracke of all their Christian graces, then a Stage-playes, the grand-empoysoners of mens soules? I have knowne, heard, and read of thousands, who have wrackt their credits, their estates, their virtues, yea, their very bo∣dies and soules at Playes, at Play-houses: but never could I yet heare or read of any who have beene meliorated or re∣claimed by them. I have read of sundry pestiserous ffcts, and sinfull fruits of Stage-playes, of which you shall heare at large Act. 6 throughout. heereafter: but never could I finde in all the Fa∣thers,
in any modrne Writers, so much as any one necessary virtue, grace or reall benefit that hath resulted from them. I have read of See Act. 6. Sne 5. & 10 accordingly. divers Republicks, Emperours, Magistrates, and Authors of all sorts, who have suppressed Stage-playes, as intollerable evils in a Christian or well-ordered Common∣weale; they being the Seminaries of all kinde of vices; the chiefe corrupters of mens minds and manners: But never could I meet with any, who affirmed them to be good or useull in a State. Since therefore it is evidet by all the premises; that Stage-playes in their best condition, are but Hae Nugae sria ducunt in mala. Ho∣race de Arte Poetica p. 312. meere Nugatorie, ridiculous, superfuous van ties, which lead to seri∣ous evils; and bring no glory at all to God, nor good to men; we may conclude them to be not onely incongruous, but unlawfull unto Christians, Qui igitur in Chrito est, quomodo po∣tet vanitates aspicere, cum Christus in carne sua om∣nes mundi hu∣jus crucifixe∣rit vanitates? Ambros Enar. in Psal. 118. Octon. 5. Tom. 2. pag. 430. F. who must not cast their eyes upon the vanities of this wicked world, since Christ himselfe hath crucified them in his flesh, that we for ever might abandon them. You have seene now, Christian Readers, the common stile and subject matter of popular Stage-playes, and I dare con∣fidently averre, that there is scarce one Stage-play this day acted (our Libenter ve∣ters spectant fabulas, Nam nunc nove quae prodeunt Comaediae multò sunt ne∣quiores. Plauti Casina, Prolo∣gus. p. 166. moderne Playes being farre more lewd then those of former times.) whose subiect, parts and passges are not reducible to all, to some, or one at least of these recited par∣ticulars: therfore we must needs passe sentence of condemna∣tion against them, even in this respect. ACTVS 4. SCENA PRIMA. FOurthly, as Stage playes are sinfull, and utterly unlawfull unto Christians in regard of their stile and subiect mat∣ter, so likewise are they in respect both of their Actors and Spectators. If we seriously survay the lives, the practises, the conditi∣ons of our common Stage-players, we may truely write of
them, asEdricus, faex hominum; d∣decus Anglo∣rum, flagitio∣sus helluo, ver∣sutus nebulo, cui non nobi∣litas opes pe∣pererat, sd ingua & au∣dacia compa∣raverat. Hic dissimulare cautus, fugere paratus, con∣silia regis, ut fidelis, venaba∣tur, ut prodi∣tor, dissemi∣nabat. De gesti Regum Anglo∣rum. l. 2. c. 10. p. 6. William of Malmesbury doth of Edricke; that they are the very dregs of men; the shame, the blemish of our English Nation; ungracious helluoes; crafy shifting compa∣nions, who purchase money, not by their generositie, but by their tongues and impudency; they being wise to dissemble, apt to counterfeit, prone to dive into the secrets both of King & State, as faithfull subjects; and more ready to divulge them on the Stage as notorious-Traitors. What Quae quanta in vllo homine iuventuris il∣lecebra fuit, quanta in illo? qui & alias ipse amabat urpissimè; aliorum amori flagitiosisme serviebat: alijs fructus libidinum, alijs mortem parentum, non modo impellendo; verum etiam adiuuando pollicibatur. Oratio 2. in Ca∣tilinam. Tully records of Cati∣line; that there was never so great a faculty of corrupting youth in any man, as in him; he bearing a most lewd affection to other mens wives himselfe, and serving likewise as a most wicked Pandr to the unchaste desires of others; promising to some the fruite of their lusts, to others the death of their Parents, not onely by instigating, but likewise by assisting them. Or what a grave historian reports of Vortigernus Rex Brittanniae, nec manu promptus, nec consilio bonus; imò ad illecebrascarnis pronus, omniumque ferè vitiorum mancipium. Quippe quem sub jugaret avaritia, in qiuetaret superbia, in quinaret luxuria, &c. William Malmsbury, De Gestis Regum. Angl. lib 1. cap. 1. pag. 8. Vortiger a British King; that he was prone to the enticements of the flesh, and a bond-slave al∣most to every vice, &c. May be truely verefied of most com∣mon Actors; who are usually the very filth and off-scou∣ring, the very lewdest, basest, worst and most perniciouly vitious of the sonnes of men; as all times, all Authors have reputed them. The ancient Pagan Romans, (as Livie Histor. Romanae l. 7. sect. 3. Vale∣rius Maximus l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4. Cicero. Oratio pro P. Quintio. Gellius. Noct. Attic. l. 14. c. 17. Suetonij Tiberius, sect. 35. Tacitus Annalium l. 14. sect. 2.3. Macrobis Satunal l. 2. c. 7. AEmilius Probus. Excellentium Imperatorum vitae. Praefatio. histories, as Tertullian de. pectac. l. c. 22. Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Mat. Arnobius. Advers, Gentes l. 7. p. 233. August. De Civ. Deil. 2. c. 13.14.27.29. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 7. c. 10. Gratian Distinctio 33.48.86. & Causa 4. Quaestio 1. Ioannis Saresburiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 7.8. Ioannis de urgo Pupilla Oulipars 7. c. 5. O. Tostatus in Mat. Tom. 3. in Mat. 6. Quaest. 38. fol 40. E Angelus de Clavasio in Summa Angelica: Titulus. Histrio, & Inamia. Anselmus Tom 1. p. 356. C.D. Alvarez Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae l. 1. Art. 49. f. 28. l. 2. Art. 28. H. f. 134. Astexanus De Casibus. l. 4. Tit 7. Art. 4. Agrippa De va∣nitate scientiarū cap 20. Alexander ab Alexandro. Gen. Dirum. l. 3. c. 9. Caelius Rho∣diginus. Antiqu. Lectionum l. 1. c. 17. Photij Nomocanonis. Tiulus 13. c 21.22. & Theodori Balsami. Cōment. Ibid. Lod. Vives. Comment. in Aug. De Ciu. Deil. 2. c. 13 a. D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stageplayes. p. 60. to. 74. Barnabas Brionius, & Ioannis Mariana De sptaculis. l. with sundry others accordingly. Fathers both relate) accounted Stage-players such infamous,
vitious, base, vnworthy persons; as they did by publicke Edicts, not oely deprive them of all honour and preferment in the Com∣mon-weale; but likewise disfranchise and remove them from their tribe; as degenerating from that Roman stocke, and noble parentage from which they were descended. The ancient De agitato∣ibus, siue Theatricis, qui fideles sunt, placuit eo, quandiu agi∣tant, a com∣munione sepe∣rari. Concil. Arelatense 2. Ca. 20. Si Augur aut Pantomimi credere volue∣runt, placuit ut prius artibus suis renunci∣nt, et tunc demū suscipi∣antur, ita vt vlterius non revertantur. Quod si facere contrainter dictum tenta∣verint, roij∣ciantur ab Ecclesia. Con∣cil. Eliberi∣num. Can. 62. Constaninopo∣litanum. 6. in Trullo. Can. 51 62.71. Councels,Clemens Romanus Constit Apo∣stol. lib. 8. cap. 28. Cy∣prian Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Fucratio; Tertullian, de pudicitia. cap. 7. Chrysost Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule. Fathers and Christians in the Primitive Church, did ipso facto, excommunicate all Stage-players, till they had utterly renounced, relinquished their diabolicall profession: re∣puting them the very pollution shame, and blemish of the Church; The very depravers and destroyers of youth; the very instru∣ments of sinne and Satan; yea, such accursed miscreants, as were altogether unworthy, both of the Society of Christians, and of thse blessed Sacraments, those holy Ordinances of the Lord, which are not to be Matth. 7.6. given to such unholy dogs, nor cast before such filthy swine as they. Plato, Aristotle, the Massillienses, with sundry Christian, yea, Pagan States and Emperours, (as I shall prove Se Act. 6. Scne 5. & Act. 7. Scene. 6.7. accordingly. hereafter) exiled all professed Stage-players out of their Common-weales, as the Iewes and Primitive Christians excluded them from the Church. Needs therefore must they be extremely vitious, intollerably pernitious (and so by Quanta confessio est malae rei, cuius actores cum acceptissimi sint, sine nota non sunt? Tertulli∣an, De spectacuis cap. 22. conse∣quence their very Sage-playes to) whom Church and State have thus joyntly vomited out as putred, noysome and infectious members, vnfit to live in either; as Necesse erat histriones perditissimis fuisse moribus, & de∣ploratae neqitiae, cùm in ea civitate pro civibus non haberentur, cuius erant tàm multa millia hominum flagitiosorum, & facinerosorum cives. Ntae, in August. De Civi. De. lib. 2. c. 13. See Bullingerus de Theatro, l. 1. c. 50. De Scenae & Orchestrae obscenitate. &c. 51. De Infamia Theatri. Ludovieus Vives well concludes. What Polycarpe, once replyed to Marcion the H∣retique; Cognosco te primogenitū Satan. Irenaus. Contr. haere∣ses l. 3. c. 3. p. 254. Eusebius Ecclesiat. hit. l. 4. c. 14. I know thee to be the first-borne of Satan; may be fitly appliable to our Common-Actors; the Arch-agents, Intruments, and Apparitors of their origiall Founder and Ioh. 8.44. Eph. 2.2, 3. See Act. 1. & 2. Father, the Devill; their very profession being nothing else, as De Republica. l. 6. c. 1. Bodine well observes, but an apprentiship of sinne, a way or Trade of wickednesse, which leades downe to hell; and their
lives (a badge of their profession) much like the life of Vor∣iger, Eius vitae cursus saeuus in principio, miser in me∣dio, turpis in exitu, asseritu Will. Malmib. De Gesti Re∣gum Anglo∣rum. l. 2. c. 10. p. 62. which was tragically vitious in the beginning, miserable in the middest, filthy in the end. What the conditions, lives, and qualities of Stage-players have beene in former Ages, let Cyprian, Nazianzen, Chrysostome, Augustine, Nicholaus Cabasila, Cornelius Tacitus, Marcus Aurelius, with Ludovicus Vives, Notae in Augusti∣num De Ci∣vit. Dei. l 2. c. 13. a. others, testifie. The first of these informes us; Histrio qui apud vos con∣stitutus in eius∣dem adhuc artis suae de∣decore perse∣verat, & ma∣gister & do∣ctor non eru∣diendorum, sd perdendo∣rum puerorum id quod malè didicit, caete∣ris quo que in∣sinua; talis non debet no∣biscum com∣municare. Quod puto ego, nec maie∣stati divinae, nec evangelicae disciplinae conguere, ut pudor & honor ecclesiae tàm turpi & infami contagione faedetur, &c. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio. That Stageplay∣ers are the Masters, not of teaching, but of destroying youth, in∣sinating that wickednesss into others, which themselves have sinfully learned. Whence he writes to Eucratius, to excommu∣nicate a Player who trayned up youthes for the Stage; affirming, that it could neither stand with the Maiestie of God, nor the Discipline of the Gopel, that the chastity and honour of the Church should be defiled with so filthy, so infamous a contagion. The more than Sodomiticall uncleannesse of Players lives, he farther thus discyphers. O si possis in illa sublimi specula constitutus oculs tuos inserere secretis, recludere cubiculorum obdu∣ctas fores, & ad conscientiam luminum penitralia occulta reserare; aspicias ab impudi∣cis geri, quod nec aspicere possit frons pudica. Videas, quod crimen sit & videre: Vide∣as quod vitiorum furore gementes gessisse se negant, & gerere festinant: libidinibus insanis, in viros vri proruunt. Fiunt, quae nec ipsi, nec illis posunt placere, qui faciunt. Mentior nisi lios, qui talis est increpat, turpis turpes infamat, & evasisse se conscium credit, quasi conscientia satis non sit. idem in publico accusatores, in occulto rei, in se∣met ipsos censores paritr & nocentes. Damnant fori, quod intus operantur. Admitnt libenter, quod cùm admiserint, criminantur, &c Idem Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Doato. O (writes he) that thou couldest in that sublime watch-tower insinuate thine eyes into these Players secrets; or set open the closed dores of their bed-cham∣bers, and bring all their innermost hidden Cels unto the consci∣nce of thine eyes; Thou shouldest then see that which is even a very sinne to see: thou mightest behold that, which these groa∣ning under the burthen of their vices, deny that they have com∣mitted, and yet hasten to commit: men rush on men with out∣ragious lusts. They doe those things which can neither please those who behold them, nor yet themselves who act them. The same persons are acusers in publike, guilty in secret, being both censurers and nocents against themselves: They condemne that abroad, which they practise at home. They commit that wil∣lingly,
which when they have committed, 'they reprehend. I am verily a lyar, if those who are such abuse not others: one fil∣thy person defameth others like himselfe; thinking by this meanes to escape the eensure of those who are privy to his sinne, as if his owne conscience were not sufficient both to accuse him and condemne him. Thus farre Saint Cyprian, Nihil turpe ducunt praeter modestiam. Nam illorum alij quidem turpitudinis administri, artem hanc so∣lam tenent, ut ob varia petu∣lantiae genera magnopore semet efferant, mimi rerum ridicularū ad∣sueti colaphis & pugnis, qui novaculis pu∣dorem omnem ante ipsos cri∣nes resecue∣runt, lasciv faeditatis & ipuritatis omnis officina, qui omnium in oculis, tàm perpeti, quàm designare om∣nia, quae cun∣que nefanda sunt, artis loco ducunt, &c. Ad Seleucum de Recta Educatione. page 1062  Gregory Na∣zianzen records of Stage-players; that they repute nothing filthy or dishonest but modesty; that they are the servants, the furtherers of all lewdnesse; this being their onely Art and profession, exceedingly to magnifie themselves for severall kinds of wantonnesse; they being imitators and actors of ridiculous things, accustomed to blowes and buffets, who have shaven off as with a Razor, all their modestie, before ever they had cut their haire, in the wanton shop of all lewdnesse and impuritie; accounting it a kinde of Art, as well to uffer, as to personate, on the stage all horrible beastly wickednesses whatsoever, in the open view of all men. And so he proceedes against them Saint Chrysostome, as he writes of Stage-players; Histriones-fordidi, infames, &c. propterea mille illi mortibus digni sunt, quoniam quae fugere prorsus cunctae imperant leges, a illi non verentur imitari. Hom. 6, in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 52. C that they are infamous persons, &c. well worthy of a thousand deathes, be∣cause they personate those villanies, obscenities, aduleries, which all lawes command men to avoyd. So he informes vs like∣wise,Vnde cre∣dis nuptiarum insideatores proficissi? Nonne ab hujusmodi scenis? Vnde qui thalomos aliorum effodiunt? nonne ab Orchestrailla? hinc etiam seditiones exci∣tantur, hinc tumultus oriuntur. Qui enim his udis aluntur, quique vocem ventris causa vendunt, qui dicere, facere omnia promptissimi sunt atque in o suam operam collo∣cant, hi maximè solent populum rumoribus inflammare, & tumultum in civitates immit∣tre &c. Hom. 38. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 299. A.B. that the Players and Play-haunters of his time were most notorious adulterers, the authors of many tumults and se∣ditions, filling the peoples eares with idle rumors, and Cities with commotions: that they were ready both to speake, and act all wickednesses whatsoever, it being their whole profession thus to doe; and that they were farre more savage than the most cruell beasts. Saint Augustine, as he at large informes us;
Romani cum artem ludi∣cram scenam∣que totam probro duce∣rent, genus id hominum non modò honoro civium reli∣quorum care∣re, sed etiam tribu moveri notatione cen∣soria volue∣runt. Praeclara sané, & Roma∣nis laudibus, annumeranda prudentia. Ec∣ce enim rectè quisquis civi∣um Romano∣rum esse sceni∣cuseligisset, non solum ei nullus ad ho∣norem daba∣tur locus, ve∣rum etiam Censoris nota tribum tenere propriam mi∣nimè sieba∣tur. O ani∣mum civitatis laudis avidum, Germaneque Romanum, &c. Romani verò hominibus scenicis nec plebeam tribum, quantò minus se∣natoriam curiam deonestari sinunt. De Civit. De. lib. 2. cap. 13. See cap. 14 27. and 29. that the ancient Romans accounting the art of Stage-playing and the whole Scene infamous, ordained, that this sort of men should not onely want the honour of other Citizens, but also bee disfranchised and thrust ou of their Tribe, by a legall and dis∣gracefull censure, which the Censors were to execute: because they would not suffer their vulgar sort of people, much lesse their Senators to be defamed, disgraced or defiled with Stage-players: which act of theirs, he stiles; An excellent true Roman prudence to be enumerated among the Romans prayfes. So he likewise gives this ignominious epithite unto Players: Talia in publicum cantitabantur a nequissimis scenicis. De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4. Scenici ne∣quissii, most wicked Stage-players: intimating thereby, that Players commonly exceed all others in all kinds of wicked∣nesse. Nicholaus abasila hath published upon record. Nihil enim potest mimo inueniri sclestius. De vita in Christo lib. 2. Biblioth. Patrum Tom. 14 pag. 112. That nothing can be found more wicked, more detestable then a Stage-player. Varijs deinde & saepius inritis praetorum que∣stibus, postremo Cesar de immodestia histrionum retulit. Multa abijs in publicum se∣ditiosè, faeda per domos tentari. Oscum quendam ludicrum laevissimae apud vulgum ob∣lectationis, eo flagitiorum ac virium venisse, vt auctoritate Patrum coercendum sit. Pul∣fi tùm Italia histriones. Annali lib. . cap. 3. See lib. 1. cap. 14. Cornelius Tacitus relates: That in Tiberius his reigne, the Roman Actors grew so immodest, so exorbitant, that they attēpted many things seditiously in publike, many things dishonestly in private houses: & that they gre at last to such an height of wickednesse, as that after many complaints against them by the Pretors, they were by Tiberius and the whole Se∣nate exiled out of Italy. Marcus Au∣relius. lib. 1. cap. 14. and lib. 2. Epistle 12. to Lambert. Marcus Aurelius himselfe doth testifie, that the adulteries, rapes, murthers, tumults and other ot-rages which Stage-players did occasion and commit, were so excessive; and the mindes which they corrupted with their lewdnesse, sonumtrous; that he was enforced to banish them out of Italy into Hellespont, where he commanded Lambert his Deputie, to keepe them close at worke. We Marcus Aurelius. lib. 1. cap. 14. Suetonii. Nero sect. 16. Plinie panegyri. Traiano dictus p. 45. Alex∣ander ab Alexandro Genialium Dierum lib. 6. cap. 9. See Act. 6. Scene. 5. and Act. 7. Scene 7. reade likewise, that
Nero, Traian, with divers other Roman Emperours, did quite exile all Stage-players out of their Dominions, be∣cause their lives, their practises wire so vitious, so hurtfull and pernitious to the publike good. Such were the lives, the inso∣lencies, the exorbitances of Stage-players in former times. What the lives, the qualities of our owne domestique Actors are, or have beene heretofore; 14 Eliz cap. 5. and 35. Eliz. cap. 7. Two severall Acts of Parliament, which adjudge and stile them Rogues; toge∣ther with two penitent reclaimed Play-Poets of our owne, (who were thorowly acquainted with their practises and pesons too) will at large declare. The first of these two Play-Poets, who out of conscience renounced his profssi∣on, and then wrote against the abominations of our Stage-playes, writes thus of Stage-players: The third Blas of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters. London 1588. p. 110, to. 118. As I have had a say∣ing to these versifying Play-makers, so likewise must I deale with shamelesse inactors. When I see by them yong boyes, inclining of themselves to wickednesse, trained up in filthy speeches, unna∣turall and unseemely gestures, to be brought up by these School∣masters, in bawdry and in idlenesse, I cannot chuse but with teares and griefe of heart lament. O with what delight can the father behold his sonne bereft of shamefastnesse, and trained up to impudencie? How prone are they of themselves and apt to receive instruction of their lewd teachers, which are the Players the Schoolema∣sters in the Schoole of Abuse. School∣masters of sinne in the Schoole of abuse? what doe they teach them, I pray you, but to foster mischiefe in their youth that it may alwayes abide with them, and in their age bring them sooner un∣to hell? The dispo∣sition of lay∣ers for the most part. And as for these Stagers themselves, are they not commonly such kinde of men in their conversation, as they are in profession? are they not as variable in heart as they are in their parts? are they not as good practisers of badery, as inactors? Live they not in such sort thmselves, as they give precepts unto others? Doth not their Talis homi∣ni est oratio, qualis vita. Argumentum est luxuriae publicae orati∣onis lascivia. Non potest a∣lius esse inge∣io, alius ni∣mo color. Illo vitiato, hoc quo que affla∣tur. Seneca Epist. 114. talke on the Stage, Naturae se∣quitur smina quisque suae. declare the nature of their disposition? doth not every one take that part which is proper to his kinde? Doth not the Navita de ventis, de tau∣ris narrat ara∣tr, Enumerat miles vulnra Pastor ovs. Plough-mans tongue walke of his Plough: the Sea-faring mas of his Mast, Cable and Saile; the Souldiers of his Hanesse, Speare and Shield; and bawdy mates of bawdy matters? Aske them, if in the laying
out of their parts, they choose not those parts which are most agreeable to their inclination, and that they can best discharge? And looke what every of them doth most delight in, that he can best handle to the contentment of others. If it bee a roisting, bawdy, or lascivious part, wherein are unseemely speeches, and that they make choyse of them as best answering, and proper to their manner of play: may we not say, by how much the more he exceds in his gesture, he delights himselfe in his part? and by so mach it is pleasing to his disposition and nature? If (it be his nature) to be a bawdy Player, and he delight in such filthy and cursed actions,Obiect. shall we not thinke him in his life to be more disordered, and to abhorre virtue? But they perhaps will say; that such abuses as are handled on the Stage, others by their examples are warned to beware of such evils to amendment.Answ. In∣deed if their authority were greater then the words of the Scrip∣ture, or their zeale of more force than of the Preacher, I might easily be perswaded to thinke, that men by them might be called to good life. But when I see the Word of truth proceeding from the heart, and uttered by the mouth of the Reverend Teachers, to be received See Matth 13.1. to 20. of the most part into the eare, and but of a few rooted in the heart, I cannot by any meanes beleeve, that the words proceeding from a prophane Player, and uttered in scor∣ning sort, enterlaced with filthy, lewde, and ungodly speeches, have greater force to move men unto virtue, than the words of truth uttered by the godly Preacher, whose zeale is such as that of Moses, Exod. 3.32. who was contented to be rased out of the booke of life, and of Paul,Rom. 9.3. who wished to be separated from Christ for the welfare of his brethren. If the good life of a man be aFacere, ma∣iorem vim ha∣bet ad do cen∣dum quàm dicere. Chry∣sot. ho. 19. ad hebraos. Tom. 4. Col. 1608. better instruction to repentance than the tongue, or word, why doe not Players, I beseech you, leave examples of goodnesse to their po∣steritie? But which of them is so zealous, or so tendereth his saluation, that he doth amnd himselfe in those points; which as they say, others should take heed of? Are they not notoriously knowne to be those men in their life abroad, s they are on the Stage, Roisters, Brawlers, Ill-dealers, Bosters, Lovers, Rffi∣ans? So that they are alwayes exercised in playing their parts, and practising wickednesse, making that an Art, to the end they
might the better gesture it in their parts. For who can better play the Ruffian, than a very Ruffian? who better the Lve, than they who make it a common exercise? To conclude, the The chiefe end of Playes. principall end of all their Enterludes, is to feed the world with sights and fond pastimes; See Mar∣cus Aurelius Epistle 12. to Lambert, accordingly. to Iuggle in good earnest the money out of other mens purses into their owne hands. What shall I say? They are Players in∣famous per∣sons. infamous men, and in Players ba∣nished out of Rome, and kept from the Communion in the Primi∣tive Church. Rome were thought worthy to be expelled, allbeit there was libertie enough to take pleasure. In the Primitive Church they were kept out from the communion of Christians, and never remitted till they had per∣formed publike pennance. And thereupon Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Eu∣cratio. Saint Cyprian in a certaine Epistle counselleth a Bishop, not to receive a Player into the Pension of the Church, by which they were nourished, till there was an expresse act of penance, with protestation to re∣nounce an Art so infamous. Some have obiected;Obiect. that by these publike-Playes many forbeare to doe evill, for feare to be publikely reprehended; and for that cause they will say it was tollerated in Rome, wherein Emperours were touched, though they were present. But to such it may be answered;Answ. that in disguised Players, given over to all sorts of dissolutenesse, is not found so much as to will to doe good, seeing they care for nothing lesse than for virtue. And thus much for these Players. Thus this Play-Poet, and sometimes an Actor too. Master In his Playes confuted. Action 1. and 3. and in his Schoole of Abuses. Stephen Gosson, another reclaimed Play-Poet, writes thus of Stage-Players. That they are uncircumcised Philistims, who nourish a canker in their owne soules: ungodly Masters, whose example doth rather poyson then instruct men. Where∣fore (writes he) sithence you see by the example of the Romans, that Playes are Ras-bane to government of Common-weales, and that Players by the iudgement of them are infamous per∣sons, unworthy of the credit of honest Citizens, worthy to be re∣moved their Tribe; if not for Religion, yet for shame, that the Gentiles should iudge you at the last day, or that Publicans and Sinnes should presse into the Kingdome of Heaven before you; withdraw your feet from Theaters with noble Marius; set downe some punishment for Players with the Roman Cen∣sors; shew your selves to be Christians, and with wicked Spe∣ctators
be not puld from Discipline to libertie from virtue to pleasure, from God to Mammon: so shall you prevent the scourge by repentance, that is comming towards you, and fill up the gulfe, that the Divell by Playes hath digged to swallow you. Thus he. To him I will annex the testimonie of I. G. in his London 1615. p. 6465. Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. Therefore (writes he) let all Players and founders of Playes, as they ten∣der the salvation of their owne soules, and others, leave off tha cursed kinde of life, and betake themselves to such honest exer∣cises and godly mysteries as God hath commanded in his Word to get their living withall. For who will call him a wise man that playes the foole and the vice? Who can call him a good Christian that playeth the part of the Devill, the sworne enemy of Christ? Who can call him a iust man that playeth the dis∣sembling hypocrite? Who can call him a straight dealing man, that playeth a cosoners tricke? and so of all the rest. The wise man is ashamed to play the foole; but Players will seeme to be such in publike view to all the world: A good Christian hateth the Devill, but Players will become artificiall Divils, excel∣lently well. A iust man cannot endure hypocrisie, but all the acts of Players is dissimulation, and the proper name of Player (witnesse the Apologie it selfe) is hypocrite. A true dealing man cannot indure deceit, but Players get their living by craft and cosenage For what greater cheating can there be, then for mony, to render that which is not monies worth.Of what sort of men Play∣ers be. Then seeing they are fooles, artificiall Divels, hypocrites and coseners, most evi∣dent it is that their art is not for Christians to exercise, as being diabolicall, and themselves infamous: such indeed as the Lace∣daemonians had, & we also have great reason to extrude out of our Common-wealth: for they are idle, vitious, dishonest, ma∣licious, preiudiciall and unprofitable to the same. They are idle, for they can take no paines, they know not how to worke, nor in any lawfull calling to get their living: but to avoide labour and worke, like brave and noble beggers, they stand to take mo∣ney of every e that comes to see them loyter and play. Hence is it that they are vitious, for idlenesse is the mother of vice, and they cannot exercise their offices but in vices, and in treating of and with vitious men. They are dishonest, for they get not to
eate by doing good workes, but by speaking filthie, vile, and dis∣honest words: They are malicious, for they are accustomed, either for their friends or themselves, when they love not a man to speake evill of him; and colourably underhand to mocke and flout at any. They are preiudiciall and nprofitable to the Com∣mon-wealth, for they cosen and mocke vs with vaine words, and we pay them good money, &c. From all which ancient and moderne testimonies, I may not unfitly write of Stage-players, as Saint Bernard doth of the ancient Irish in Cone∣reth in Malachias his time. In vita San∣cti Malachiae. Nusquam adhuc tales expertus fuerat in quantacunque barbarie. Nusquam repererat si propteruos ad mores; sic ferales ad ritus; sic ad fidem impios; ad leges barbaros; cevicosos ad disciplinam; spurcos ad vi∣tam, Christiani nomine, re Pagani. And no wonder is it, that Players are so transcendently vitious and unchaste, since they are trained up from ther cradles, in the very Animus im∣butus malis artibus haud facile libidi∣nibus caret. Salustij. Bel∣lum Catlina∣rium p. 32. See Master Gossons Schoole of Abuses, ac∣cordingly. art, the Schoole of Venerie, lewdnesse and prophannesse; which quickly eates out Animo per libidines cor∣rupto nihl honesti inest. Tacius An∣nal. l. 1 sect. 9. all their honesty, their modestie, their virtues, and fraughts them full with vice. Since then it is abundantly evident by the premises, as also by experience; that common Actors are thus excessively vitious, unchaste, prophane, and His divino iudicio saepius contingit, ut per id quod nequiter vi∣uunt, & illud perdant quod salubriter cre∣dunt. Greg. Magnus. Mo∣ral. l. 25. c. 15. dis∣solute in their lives, which drawes them on to a dissolute Reli∣gion; the most of our present English Actors (as I am cre∣dibly informed) being professed Papists, as is the Founder of the late erected new Play-house: the Playes which issue from them must needs resemble these their Actors, Matth. 7.17, 18. the fruit being never better than the tree that beares it; the stream no purer than the Springs that feed it. From whence I deduce this twelfth Syllogisticall Argument against Stage-playes. That whose ordinary Actors and Composers, are for the most part dissolute, infamous, unchaste, prophane, de∣boyst, and vitious men, must needs be sinfull and un∣lawfull unto Christians, An tu quic∣quam in istis esse credis bo∣ni, quorum professores tupissimos omnium, ac flagitio sisi∣mos cernis? Non discere debemus ista, sed dedicisse. Seneca Ep. 88. Malorum magistrorum mala doctrina est; vel potius, malorum semium mala seges. Gregor. Nazianzen. Oratio. 38. p. 584. because no good thing can pro∣ceed
from such. Witnesse, Matth. 7.17, 18. Levit. 5.2.3. Iob. 14.4. Eccles. 9.18. But such are the ordinary Actors and Composers of Stage-playes: witnesse the premises. Therefore they must needs be sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians: even in this respect. SCENA SECVNDA. SEcondly, as the vitiousnesse of the Actors, even so the evilnesse of the most assiduous Spectators of Stage-playes, infallibly evidenceth them to be evill. If we looke backe to former Ages, we have the expresse testimony of sundry Tertul Apologia, c. 38.42. De specta∣culis. lib. Mi∣nutius Felix Octavius. p. 34.123. The∣ophilus Anti∣ochenus, ad Autolicum. lib. 3. Bibl. Parum. To. 2 p. 170. G.H. Tatia∣nus Oratio advers. Grae∣cos. Ibid. p. 180181. Athenagoras: pro Christia∣nis legatio. Ibid p. 138.139. Epiphanius. Compend. Doctrina &c p. 922. Fathers and Concilium Car∣thag. 3. Can. 11. Constantinop. 6. Can. 51.62. Arelatense 2. Can. 20. Elibertinum. Can. 62. Aphricanum. Can. 12. See Act 7. Scene 2, 3. Councels, that all the godly Christians in the Primitive Church, did wholly withdraw themselves from Stage-playes; that all those Pagans who either acted or frequented Playes, did immediately upon their conversion to the Christian faith, and their very first admittance into the Church of Christ, even publikely renounce all future acting, or resort to Plaies: and that none but Pagans, unchaste, pro∣phane, and gracelesse persons, Chrysost. Hom. 3. De Davi∣de & Saule. ertull De pudicitia. c. 7. Concil. Carthag 4. Can 88. who were cast out of the Church by publike Censures, did use to flocke unto them. Hence was it that Tertullian writes thus harshly: Amphithea∣trum omnium Daemonum templum est: tot illic immundi spiritus considunt, quot ho∣mines capit. De specta l. To. 2. Operum. p. 393. So many per∣sons as there are sitting in the Play-house, so many uncleane spirits are there present: intimating, that all the Play-hun∣ters of his Age, were little better than incarnate Devils; whence he seriously dehorts all Christians from Playes. Hence, not onely Oratio. Adhort. ad Gentes, & Paedag. l. 3. c. 1. Clemens Alexandrinus, De spectaculis l. Cyprian, De Vero Cult. c. 20. Lactantius,Oratio 48. & De Recta Educa∣tione ad Selucum. p. 1063.1064.
Nazianzen, Epistola. 18. c. 1. & Co∣ment in Eze∣kiel l. 6. c. 20. Hierom,Homil. 3. De Dauide & Saule, hom. 6.7. and 38, in Matth. Chrysostome; De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 3. to .14. De Consensu E∣vangelista∣rum. l. 1. c. 33. Confess. l. 3. c. 2.14. Augustine, De Guber∣natione Dei lib. 6. Salvian, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1 c. 7.8. Iohn Salisburie, the third Councell of Carthage, Canon 11.15. with divers other See Act. 6. Scene. 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7. Scene 3, 4, 5. ancient and The second and third blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, M. Gosson, M. North∣brooke, M. Stubs, D. Rei∣nolds, Ioannes Mariana, in their Treatises against Stage-playes, with sundry others. See Act. 6. Scene 16. moderne Christian Authors: but even Oratio pro Publ. Quinctio Epist. ad Marium lib. 7. Epist. 1. De Legibus l. 1. & 2. Tully, Epist. 7.90. & 123. Seneca, and the lascivious Poet Tristiū l. 2. & De Arte Amandi l. 1. Ovid, with sundry other Pagans; doe earnestly dis∣swade men from resorting unto Playes and Theaters, because none but infamous, vitious, dissolute, unchaste, prophane, and gracelesse persons (Iu∣nenal. Satyr. 6.8.15. See Act. 7. Scene 6.whose company was apt to poyson, to corrupt, all such who durst come nigh them) did frequent them. It is observed by Suetonij Tiberius, Claudius, Caligula, Ta∣citus, Annal l. 14. c. 2.3. Dion Cassius, Rom. Historiae l. 55. & 59. Herodian. l. 1. Iuve∣nal. Satyr. 8. Lampridij Heliogabalus p. 200.202. Iulij Capitolini Verus p. 67.69. Tre∣bellij Pollionis Gallieni Duo p. 309.310.314.315.319. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 446, 447, 449. sundry Historians, that Tiberius, Nero, Cali∣gula, Heliogabalus, Verus, Commodus, Gallienus, Carinus, (the most execrably vitious, and unchaste of all the Roman Em∣perours) delighted most in Playes and Actors; for which they deepely taxe them: whereas the Haec omnia (writing of Stage-playes) nescio quantum ad populum gratiae habent, nullius certè momenti sunt apud principes bonos, Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 449. better sort of Emperours were not addicted to them; See Marcus Aurelius Ep. 12. to. Lambert. & Act. 6 Scene 5. Act 7. Sc. 7. but did either banish them their dominions; or else See Act. 6. Sc 2. deminish or withdraw their publike sti∣pends. Suruay we all the Christian, all the Pagan Antiqui∣ties this day extant, we shall finde the See Act. 6. & 7. throughout. very best of Christi∣ans, Iewes and Pagans of all Ages, all places, not onely whol∣ly absteining from, but likewise censuring and condemning Stage-playes, the very worst, the dissolutest and unchastest onely of them resorting to them with delight. Vnde credis nuptiatum insidiatores proficissi? nonne ab huiusmodi scenis? Vnde illos qui thalamos aliorum effodiunt? non∣ne ab Orchestra illa. Nonne hinc complures adulteri? &c. Hom. 38. in Math. Tom. 2. Col. 299. Saint Chry∣sostome, Sed tu praecipuè curuis venare Theatris, Invenies illic quod ames, quod lu∣dere possis. Quod que semel tangas, quod que tenere veli. De Arte. Amandi l. 1. p. 160.161. Ovid, with sundry others informe us, That Adul∣terers, Whore-masters, Panders, Bawdes, Whores, and such like effeminate, idle, unchaste, lasciuious, gracelesse persons, were the most assiduous Play-haunters in their times, Whence
Idem Vero Theatrum, idem & pro∣stibulum; eo quod post lu∣dos exactos meritrices ibi prosternantur Originum l. 18. c. 42. p. 160. Isiodor Hispalensis, Enarratio. in Rom. 10. fol. 53: Primasius, Explanatio in Gal. 5. v. 19. Remigius, Exegesis in Ephes. 5. v. 3. Haymo, and Com. in E∣phes. 5. v. 3. Tom. 2. pag. 285. Se Casw∣darus. Variarum. l. 7. Epist. 10. & Eulengerus De Theatro. l 2. c. 50.51: accordingly. Anselme write, That the Play-house and the Stewes were one and the same in ancient times; because after the Playes were ended, the Whores who resorted to the Play-houses, or were har∣bored in them, did prostitute themselves upon the Theater, unto the lust of others, they when all derive the Word fornication; a fornicibus, seu locis theatralibus; from Brothels and Play-houses, where Whores were kept and prostituted after the Playes were acted. Such and no other were Play-houses is Stage-fre∣quenters in former Ages. And are they not now the same? If we seclude those children, those novices, whose ignorance, childishnesse, vanitie, folly, or injudiousnesse allure them to playes or such like Gugaes, Singula de nobis anni praedantur euntes: Eri∣puere jocos, Venerem, con∣vivia, ludos, Horace Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. p. 289. which men of riper yeares and iudgement doe contemne; together with some few sociable ingenuous dispositions, whom the Rogantibus postifera, lar∣giri, blande & affabile odi∣um est. Seneca De Benefe. l. 2. c. 1. pressing importunitie of carnall friends, or vehement sollicitations of lewde ac∣quaintance doe casually draw to Stage-playes, against the Et sic grandis in suos pietas, impietas in Deum est. Hierom Epist. 25. c. . secret reluctances of their owne gain-saying consciences;AEqualis habitus illic, similem que videbis Orchestram & populum. Iuuenal. Satyr. 3. p. 21. what else are the residue (at least the Maior part) of our assidu∣ous Play-haunters,See the third blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, and M. Northbrooke, M. Stubs, M Gosson, in their Treatises against Stage-playes. Petrarch. De Rened. Vtr. Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30. accordingly. but Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores, Bawdes, Panders, Ruffians, Roarers, Drun∣kards, Prodigals, Cheaters, idle, infamous; base, prophane, and godlesse persons, who See Act. 6. Scene 12.13. hate all grace, all goodnesse, and make a mocke of piety? What are they but the very filth, the drosse, the scumme, of the Societies and places where they live? the very See Act. 6. Scene. 6. Mothes, the Drones and Cankerwormes of the Common-weale? the Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Chrysost. Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule See Act. 6. Scene. 4.5. shame and blemish of Religion? the most putred, scandalous, noxious, and degenerate branches both of Church and State, which should be spued out, bee lopped off from both, had they their iust demerits? If any Play-haun∣ter deeme this censure over-harsh, his own conscience must
subscribe unto it, Praetr alia hoc summum ex more sui vitium in ani∣mo hominis existit, quod iustus sui ipsius & incorruptus iudex esse ne∣quit: aecus est enim rei a∣matae cognitor qui amat, nii quis assueverit, pulchra potuis in praetio ha∣bere atque se∣ctari, quàm cognata quae sint & dome∣stica. Plutarch. De Adulatione & Amicitia Disc. Tom. 1. p. 174. if selfe-love hath not blinded it; since hee can hardly cull out any who dis-ffect or come not vnto Stage-playes, so suparlatively vitious, or unchaste, as those who most frequent them. This, all the fore-quoted Au∣thors largely testifie in their Quotations in the Margent: to whom I shall onely adde the suffrage of I.G. in his Refu∣tation of the Apologie for Actors. p. 55.56. But now (saith he) to draw to the conclusion of my discourse, I will onely des∣cribe briefly, who for the most part they are who runne madding unto Playes. In generall the vulgar sort, in whom Cicero pro Planco, saith, there is no reason, counsell or discretion. But to particularize some onely among all. The prophane Gallant to feed his pleasure; the Citie Dames to laugh at their owne shames; the Countrey Clown, to tell wonders when hee comes home, of the vanitie he hath seene; the Bawdes to intice; the Whores and Curtezans to set themselves to sale; the Cut∣purse to steale; the Pick-pocket to filtch; the knave to bee instructed in cosening trickes; Youth to learne amorous con∣ceits; some for one wicked purpose, some for another; none to any good intent, but all fruitlessely to spend their time. But a∣mong any others, that goe to the Theaters, when shall you see an ancient Citizen, a chaste Maron, a modest Maid, a grave Senator, a wise Magistrate, a iust Iudge, a godly Preacher, a religious man not blinded in ignorance, but making conscience of his wayes. You shall never see any of those at Playes, for they count it shamefull and ignominious, even an Act of re∣proach that may redound unto them. I shall close up this with that of Petrarch, Theatro, quo quisquis malus irit, redibit pesi∣mus: Nam bo∣nis itur illud ignotum est: qui si casu ali∣quo ignai adeant, conta∣gio non car∣bunt. De Re∣medio vtr. fortunae . 1. Dialog. 30. The way to the Play-house is altogether un∣knowne to good men; to which when any ill man goeth, hee re∣turnes the worst of any: and if any good men goe thither igno∣rantly by accident, they shall not want contagion; So infecti∣ous, so vitious is the company that usually resorts to Plaies: the very best of them in their best condition, 2 Tim. 4.5. being for the most part, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God; having onely an outward forme of godlinesse (and most scace so much) but denying the power thereof. From all which premises, I shall derive two unanswerable arguments, o prove the unlawfulnesse of Stage-playes.
The first of them, being the thirteenth in number, may be cast into this forme. That which the very best, the holiest Christians, have al∣wayes constantly avoyded, condemned as evill; the very worst and most notoriously vitious only of Chri∣stians, of Pagans, of ancient and moderne times, affe∣cted, applauded, frequented with pleasure and delight; Quoniam quod apud malosdeprae∣henditur dici bonum non potest. Seneca de Vita Beata, c. 24. Etenim malorum ill geniorum ex∣ercitus non niside malis voluptatem capit. Nazi∣anzen. De Re∣cta Educatio∣ne ad Selu∣cum. . 1064. is certainely evill, and so unlawfull unto Christians. But such is the case of Stage-playes. Therefore they are certainely evill, and so unlawfull un∣to Christians. The Minor is evident by the premises, by experience, and by the seventh act ensuing. The Major is manifest by its owne ligh. For first the Primitive Christians and godly men, (whose Heb. 13.7. Phil. 3.17. steps we ought to follow) Psal. 97.10. Psal. 101.3. Psa. 119.104.128. Amos 5.15. Gal. 5.17. Prou. 29.27. 2 Tim. 2.22.23. abhorre, reject, con∣demne nought else but sinfull, scandalous prnicious pastimes, (not Christian, laudable or lawfull recreations) repugnant to the Scriptures, o the inward principles of grace implanted in their soules; or to the discipline, puritie and honour of the Church, the Saints of God who went before them; the onely rules by which their lives, their iudgements, their affections are directed. Secondly, unregenerate gracelesse persons,Argumen∣tum boni est malis displicee. Seneca de Vita Beata cap. 2. Nihil nisi grande aliquod bonum a Ne∣rone damnatum. Tertul. Apologia. advers Gentes. cap. 5. See Psal. 36.4. Psal. 34.21. 2 Chron. 19.2. Amos 5.10. Mich. 3.2. Prov. 29.27 accordingly. as they commonly hat nought else but goodnesse, so they Prov. 2.13, 14, 15. c. 10.2. c. 17.10. c. 21.10. Isay 5.18, 19. Ier. 4.22. Hosea 4.8 Mich. 7.3. Rom. 1.32. 2 Thess. .12. Titus 3.3. Hominis mali, malae sunt voluptates. Euripides. Ephige∣nia, p. 646. most really affect, admire, frequent the pleasures, the delights of sinne, which re most homogeneous to their lusts, most suitable to their sinfull dispositions. No man can finde ny true contentment or delight in any thing, imilia enim similibus gaudent. Macrobius Saturn. l 7 c. 7. p. 694. but that which is sutable to his nature; because Si∣mili amicum est siile Arist. Rhetor. l. 1. c. 11. p. 80. Magnam vim abet ad coniungendas amicitias studiorum ac naturae similitudo. Cicero pro Ant. Cluentio Oratio. p. 40. Ad connectendas amicitas vel tenacissimum vinculum, morum similitudo. Plin. Epist. lib. 14. Epst. 19. p. 78. Semper similem ducit Deus ad similem. Homers Odysseae. lib. 17. p 498. all pleasre, all com∣plecency
whatsoever, ariseth from similiude and proportion. Now nothing is so connaturall, so consonant to the cor∣ruptions of depraved Stage-haunters as sinfull, lustfull, or polluted objects. Therefore Theatricall Enterludes, which wicked men most delight in, and many of them so adore, as to make Theaters their Chappels, yea, Playes their weekely Sermons; must needs be sinfull and polluted, as their na∣tures are: else they could never flocke unto them daily with delight, to their no small expence. So that this first Argu∣ment is unanswerable. The second, (in course the fourteeenth) Argument a∣gainst Playes, from hence, is this. Those things to which lewde company, unchae, deboist prophane, and gracelesse persons, flocke by troopes, with greedinesse and delight, is undoubtedly sinfull, yea, utterly unlawfull unto Christians. But such company, such persons as these, (especially Strumpets, Pandors, Bawdes, Adulterers, Whorema∣sters, Drunkards, Prodigals,) doe flocke by troopes to Stage-playes, with greedinesse and delight. Therefore they are undoubtedly sinfull, yea, utterly un∣lawfull unto Christian: The Minor is suficiently confirmed by the premises; by the third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, pag. 66. and by the suffrage of Nazianzen; who stiles Stage-playes Misera ma∣lorum specta∣cula. De recta Educatione ad Selucum. p. 1063. the miserable Spectacles of wicked men. The Major is irre∣fragable. First, because the Scriptures enjoyned all Christians; 1 Cor. 5.9. 10, 11. Pro. 1.10. to 17. not to keepe company with wicked men; Prov. 28.7 Ephes. 5.11, 12. 2. Cor. 6.14, 15. not to have con∣cord, fellowship or communion with them, in wicked things espe∣cially: Psal. 1.1, 2. Pro. 4.14, 15. not to walke in the counsell of the ungodly, to stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornefull, 2 Tim. 3.4, 5. 2 Thess. 3.6. Prov. 5.3 8, 9. Ier. 9.2. Rev. 18.4. Tales habeto socios quor contubernio non infameris. Heirom. Epist. 2 c. 6. but wholly to withdraw and turne themselves from every one who walkes disorderly: ater the example of David; Psal 26.4, 5 who hated the assemblies of the ungodly: and Psal. 101.3, 4, 5, 7. would not know a wicked person; giving them this resolute farewell: Psal. 6.8. Psal. 119.115 Psal 129.19.Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord hath heard the voyce of my weeping.
Secondly, because Christians must Rom. 12.12, Col. 2.20. Iam. 4.9. not conforme them∣selves to the wicked of the world, much lesse comply with them in Heb. 11.4 25. their unlawfull pleasures of sinne, which are but for a season; since 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Christ hath suffered for them in the flesh to this very end, that they should no longer live the rest of their time to the Quant e∣nim homini∣bus placent, tant ò sunt Deo odibiles. Brnard. De Ordine Vitae, Col. 1126. luts of men, but to the will of God: the time past of their lives, being sufficient for them to have wrought the will of the Gentiles. Thirdly, because ill company, are not onely an evident 1 Thes. 5.22. appearance of evill, which Christians must avoyd; but like∣wise a mostProv. 1.10. to 16. c. 7.5. to the end. 2 Pet. 3.17. Inimica est multorum conversatione Nemo non aliquid nobis vitium aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut nescienti∣bus allinit. Vti que quo ma∣jor est popu∣lus cui com∣missemur, cò periculi plus est. Seneca E∣pist. 7. dangerous insinuating, bewitching temptation; a prevalent perswasive provocation unto evill; and so much the more dangerous; by how much the more numerous. Lewde companions (especially such as haunt our Theaters) are of a most Sodales ma∣li, lues & pestis animorum. Hysius Epist. Centur. 1. E∣pist. 78. & Cnt. 3. Epist. 63. Dedit haec contagio labem, & dabit in plures. Iuv. Satyr. 2. infectious, leprous, captivating esnaring qualitie: they are all ofOmnes quos lagitium, egestas, conscius animus exagitabat,, hi Catilinae proximi fa∣miliaresque erant: quod si quis eiam a culpa vacuus in amicitiam eus inciderat, quoti∣diano vsu atque illecebris, facile par, similisque caeteris efficiebatut alutij, Bellum Ca∣tilinarium. pag. 12. Catilines disposition, they will quickly corrupt all those who entertaine their friendship, or intrude into their fel∣lowship; making them as unchaste, deboyst, and vitious as them∣selves at last, though they were Saepè malorum consortia etiam bonos corrumpunt, quan magis eos quiad vitia proni sunt. Concilium Toleanum 4. Can. 61. vertuously disposed at the first; how much more then will they poyson and corrupt all such who are naturally inclined unto vice? To entercommon therefore with such contagious persons in their Play-house Conventicles, their Theatricall Enterludes must needes bee infull, because it is a strong allective, a vehement temptati∣on unto sinne. Object. If any here object, that many good Divines, ma∣ny gracious, prous Christians resort oft-times to Stage-playes, as well as vitious persons; with whom men may ac∣company without any danger: therefore there is no such hazzard, such pravity or infection in Play-haunters society as is suggested.
I Answer, First, that perchance some few exorbitant, scan∣dalou histrionicall, (but farre from good) Divines, at least∣wise from good Christians, may sometimes visit Theater and publike Enterludes, to the scandall of Religion, the ble∣mish of their function,Plrique Sa∣cerdotes & Clerici mal vivendo, for∣mā caeteris in malum xi∣stunt, qui in bonis esse ex∣emplum debu∣erunt. Isiodor hispalensis De summo. Bon lib. 3. cap. 38. and ill example of others; for which they should, they ought to receive an heavy censure, were Ecclesiasticall Discipline duly exercised. But I dare pre∣sume there is not one zealous, faithfull, concionable, painefull Miister this day living, who dares to grace a Play or Play-house with his presence: fince not onely See Act. 7. Scene 4. divers Fathers: but likewise Concil. La∣odicenum. Can. 54. Car∣thag. 3. Can. 11. Constan∣tinop. 6. in Trullo Can. 24. Veneti∣cū. Can. 11. A∣quisgranense sub. Lud pio. Can. 8.100.145. Mogun∣tinum, Can. 10. Agathen∣se. Can. 28.9 Tronicum 3. Can. 7.8. Ca∣bilonense 2. Can. 9. Rhemense. Can. 15. Moguntinum. sub Rabano. Arch. Can. 13. Pa∣riiense. sub. Lud. & Lothario. lib. 1. cap. 38. Coloniense. 1536. pars 2. cap. 25. Nice∣num. 2. Can. 22. Basilinse sub Eugenio. Surius. Tom 4 pag 223. Moguntinum sub Sebastiano. Anno 1549. cap. 74. Laterannse sub Innocentio 3. Can. 16. Capi∣tula Grcarum Synodorum. Surius Concil. Tom. 2. pag. 757. Can. 59. Concil. Lingonense 1404. Senonense 1525. Carnotense 1526. Burdigense 1582. Bituri∣ense 1584. Aquense 1588. Turonicum 1582. apud Bochellium. Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae. lib. 6. Titulus 19. twenty five severall Councels, besides Decreta Eusebij Papae Anno 309. cap. 4. Surius Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 312. Decreta Innocentij 1. Can 11. lb. p. 529. Reformatio Cleri Germaniae Ratisponae 1524. cap. 4. Surius Tom. 4. p. 713. Decreta Odonis Parisiensis, inter Communia praecepta, cap. 13. apud Carranzam Fol 356. Decreta Pauli quinti a∣pud Ioannem Langhecrucium. De vita & honestae Ecclesiasticorum l 2. c. 21 22. Iu∣stiniani Codex. l. 1. Tit. 4.5. sundry Canonicall Constitutions, have expresly inhi∣bited all sorts of Clergie-men whatsoever, under paine of suspen∣sion, and perpetuall deprivation, to be either Actors or Specta∣ctors of any publike Stage-play, or to countenance it by their presence: which I would all scandalous Vbinam hodiē est clericorum decor continentiae in ge∣stu victu, estitu, & risu? In convivijs, tabernis, ludis, & Theatris vbique vagantes cre∣brius reperiuntur, quam in locis Deo dicatis, Onus Ecclesiae c. 23. sect. 1. Play-haunting Ec∣clesiastickes (of which there are now too many) would cordially conider; that so they might reforme their errour, for feare of degradation, which they well demerit, and good Dioce∣sans may justly inflict for this their crime. Secondly, I answer; that perchance some puny new-converted Christian Novices, being altogether unacquain∣ted with the hurtfulnesse, the wickednesse of Stage-playes, may sometimes be occasionally drawne unto Stage-playes; partly to beare others company, whose displeasure they
might ele incurre: partly through the importunate, soli∣citations of lewde acquaintance; partly by the novalty or subject of the Play it selfe; partly to Intelligere malum lauda∣bile est, facere atem vitupe∣rabile. Nec qui intelligit malum ipseta∣cit malum, sed qui facit ma∣lum. Opus im∣perfectum in Matth. Hom. 24. Chrysost. Tom. 2. Col. 770 A acquaint themselves the better with the dangerous consequences and fruites of Play-houses, that so they may more iustly condemne them, more pe∣remptorily abandon them for future times; yet principally because they are not fully convinced of their sinfulnesse. But that many, that See Gosson, playes cōfuted The 3 Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, p. 51, 52. accordingly. any gracious, godly, growen, faithfull Christians, who are thorowly instructed in the wayes of godli∣nesse, or in the noxious qualities of Playes, doe constantly, doe frequently resort to Play-houses, to Stage-playes, (especially out of a loue or liking unto Playes themselves) I utterly deny. First, because 2 Pet. 2.8. Acts 17.16. Gal. 5.17: Psal. 119.37. See Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Mat, Gosson Playes confu∣ted. The third Blast of Re∣trait from Playes, Pe∣trarch. De Remedio Vtr. Fortunae l. 1 Dialog. 28 30. accor∣dingly. no truely sanctifyed Christian (who cannot possibly delight in any knowne evill) can ever patiently heae, or deghtfully behold, the severall grosse abominable wickednesses that are daily acted and committed on the Stage, but his very heart would forthwith boyle within him, yea, his eyes gush forth with teares, out of an holy indignation against them. Second∣ly because it is Hebr. 11.24, 25. Psal. 1.1, 2. Psal. 26.4, 5, 6. Amos 3.3. Quibus mala benè sapiunt, bona illis ignota sunt; & curis nobilioribus sunt insueti, qui vilibus delectan∣tur. Petrarch De Remedo Vtriusque Fortunae l. 1. Dialog. 28. impossible, that true godly Christians should take any reall pleasure in these Theatricall Enterludes which wicked men most affect: since the 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, Prov. 29.27. gracious, the gracelesse, are as contrary one to the other in their chiefe delights, as light and darkenesse; righteousnesse and unrighteousnesse; Christ and Belial; Beleevers and Infidels. Thirdly, because See Act. 7. Scene , 3, 4 5. all godly Christians in the Primitive Church, have wholly abandoned Stage-playes, as sinfull, as us christian pleasures; Therefore all pious Christians must needs abhorre them now; they being Ephes. .1. to 7, Phil, 3.16. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 8, 9, 11. 2 Cor. 4.13. guided by the selfe same Word and Spirit as the Pri∣mitive Christians were; so that they Rom. 15.5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11 Phil. 1.27. 2 Cor. 4.13. cannot chuse but have the very selfe-same judgement with them in all things, and so
in case of Stage-playes, as well as in other things. Thirdly, admit some godly Christians do commonly resort to Play-houses, (which I cannot beleeve) yet these are few in num∣ber; and those for the most part 1 Cor. 14.20. Has res homo sapiens videat, quae non alij vide∣antur conti∣nere aliquid gratiae, quàm infantibus paryulis, & populariter institutis Ar¦nobius advers. Gentes l. 7. p. 236. children, not onely in spirituall, but even in naturall understanding; being 1 Cor. 3.1. Hebr. 5.13. babes in yeares, as well as in grace: Yea, they are nought else but 2 Pet. 2.13.14. blemishes of Religion, and scandals to the Church, to all their fellow Seints, who See Tertul∣lian & Cypri∣an De Specta∣culis. Lactan∣tius De vero Cultu, cap. 20 Chry. Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule & Hom. 6, 7, & 38. in Matth. Salvian De Gubernatione Dei with all the other Fa∣thers and Au∣thors, in Act. 7 blame, who much condemne them for their Play haunting. The saints who flocke to Stage-playes (if there be any such) are but a despicable, undiscer∣nable company, unable to draw others unto goodnesse; where as the gracelesse wicked ones who daily visit them, are many in number, contagious in quality, more apt to poyson, to infect all those who dare approach them, than one who is full of running Plague-sores. Therefore it must of necessity beTolli Theatra iube, non tuta licentia Circi est. Ovid. Tristium. lib. 2. p. 135. dangerous to resort to Stage-playes. We all know by wofull experience,Ad peertior a faciles sumus, quia nec dux potest, nec comes desse; Non pronum iter tan∣tum est ad vitia, sed etiam praeceps. Seneca Epist. 97. That mans corrupt nature is farre more pendulously propense to vitious, than to good ex∣amples: and that evill things are farre more apt to defile that which is good, than good things to rectifie that which is evill. Whence it alwayes comes to passe (as Rerum natura sic est, ut quoties bonus malo conjugitur, non ex bono malus melioretur, sed ex malo bonus contaminetur: malum enim coinquinat bonum, bonum autem non coinquinat malum. Iunge Iutum fa∣rinae, non farina sordidat lutum, sed lutum farinam. Chrysost. Hom. 28. in Matth. Tom. . Col. 782. A Chrysostome well ob∣serves) that as oft as good and bad men associate themselves to∣gether, the ill are never meliorated by the good, but the good are alwayes contaminated, corrupted by the evill: even as when Clay and Meale are kneaded together, the Clay defiles the Meale, not the Meale refines the Clay. Saint Paul informes us; a that a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lumpe: King Solomon; b that one sinner destroyeth must good; and the sententious Satyrist; That one scabbed sheepe destroyes a whole flocke, one dandraffe Swine, the whole heard; one rotten
grape the whole cluster: Subducen∣dus est teer animus popu∣lo, & parum tenax recti. Facile trans∣situr ad plurs. Socrati, Oa∣toni, & illis excutere me∣tem suam dis∣similis multi∣tudo potisset a deò nemo nostrum, qui cum maximè concinnamus ingenium fer∣ro imptum vitiorum, tam magno comi∣tatu Venien∣tium potest. Vnum exem∣plū aut avari∣tiae aut luxuri∣ae multum ma∣li facit. Con∣victor delica∣tu paulatim enervat & e∣mollit. Vici∣nus dives cu∣piditatem irritat: malignus comes, quamvis candido & simplici, rabiginem suam af∣fricuit. Quid i accidere his credis in quos publice factus est impetus: Seneca Epist. 7. Malorum hominum consuetudo aliquid vitij pueris affricat Plutarch. de Educat. Pue∣rorum. Tom. 1. p. 21. Much more then will these troopes of wicked ones who meet at Theaters (which are able to cor∣rupt the strongest Christian) deprave those few unstable tender babes in Christ, who intrude into their company; as Seneca well argueth in our present case: It is a good observation of a grave Historian: Notum est illud pietati tuae, quod in Mario Maximo legisti; me∣liorem esse Rempublicam, & prope tutiorem, in qua priceps malus est, ea in qua sunt amici principis mali: si quidem vinus malus potest a pluribus bonis corrigi; multi autem mali non possunt ab vno, quamvis bono, vlla ratione superari, & id quidem ab Homulo ipsi Traiano dictum est, cùm ille diceret Domitianum pessimum fuisse, amicos autem bonos habuisse. AElij Lamprid Severus p. 249, 250.that is farre better for a Kingdome, to have a bad King and good Councellors to advise him, than a good King and bad Counsellors: his reason is (and it is Non tantum valeat in bonum, bonum vnum, quantum duo mala in malum. De praecepto & Dispensatione, c. 28. Col. 936 A. Saint Bernards too) because one bad man, may happily be reformed by many good; but many evill men can by no meanes be over-ru∣led, or rectified, by any one man be he never so good. I may apt∣ly accomodate this reason to our present purpose thus. Admit some few good Christians resort sometimes to Stage-playes; yet since they alwayes meet with farre more, farre greater troopes of lewde, deboist companios there, who (withou Gods preventing grace, which Play-haun∣ters cannot challenge) will certainely corrupt them in a Nullum tempus ad nocendum angustum est malis. Senecae Meaa, Act. 2. fol. 146. mo∣ment: it must needs be sinfull, be dangerous to resort unto them: since the fewer good ones, are Vnum verò est pro quo vitari malorum societas debeat, ne si fortasse corrigi non va∣lent, ad imitationem trahant: & cum ipsi a sua nequitia non mutentur, eos qui sibi con∣iunctos fuerint pervertunt. Corrumpunt enim bonos mores colloquia prava. Itaque in∣firmi quicunque societatem malorum declinare debent, ne mala quae frequenter aspici∣unt & corrigere non valent, delectentur imitari. Anselmus in 1 Cor. cap. 6. Tom. 2. pag. 202. C. more likely to be vi∣tiated, by the major multitude of wicked ones, whose wic∣kednesse exceeds their goodnesse; than the wicked ones to be reclaimed by their goodnesse, of which they are vncapa∣ble. Lastly, the presence of some godly men at Stage-playes, can never make Play-assemblies good, in God or mans
esteeme. When good and bad men ioyne together in Re∣ligious dutis; the goodnesse of Gal. 1.2. Isay 1 21. the lesser part denominates the whole, and makes it good in Gods, in mns account: be∣cause the end, the cause of this convention, is Gods glory. But when good and bad confederate themselues together in any delights of sinne, 2 Chron. 19  c. 20.35, 36, 37. Ezech. 18.24. Reu. 18.4. Psal. 106.39, 40. Isay 1.4.21. God lookes not on the goodnesse of the good, but upon the wickednesse of good and bad, condemning all for a Isay 1.4.10, 13, 14. c. 66.3.4. Ier. 7.11. Ezech. 14.13. to 22. Congregation of euill doers, because the obiect, the end of these their conventicles are unlawfull. When gra∣cious and gracelesse persons shall fit promiscuously toge∣ther in a Play-house, beholding some prophane lascivious Enterlude with delight; not onely God himselfe, but even Saints and Angels frowne upon them, as a fraternitie of evill doers; and a Satanicall unchristian assembly, (as the Qui congre∣gatuana cum ijs qui specta∣cula & thea∣tra cōveniunt, & cum diabo∣lo idem senti∣unt, vnus ex ipsis connume∣abitur, & vae habebit. Clem. Rom. Constit. Apost l. 2. c. 66 Omnes turpi∣tudine rerum vnum sunt, qui sibi rerum turpiū voluntate sociantur. Nam hoc ipso quod aliquis rem obsaenam cupit dum ad immunda properat immundus est. Salvian. de Gbern. Dei. l. 6. p. 187 201. O∣disse debemus iste conuntus & caetus Ethnicorum. Quid luci cum tenebri? quid vi∣tae & morti? Quid facies in illo suffragiorum impiorum aestuario depraehensus vbi ne∣mo te cognoscit Christianum? Recogita quid de te iat in caelo. Dubita enim ilo mo∣mento quo in Ecclesia Diaboli fueris, omnes Angelos prospicere de caeo, & fingulos de∣notare, quis blasphemias dixerit, quis audierit, quis linguā, quis aures Diabolo adversus Deum administraverit? Non ergo fugies sedilia hostium Christi, illam cathedram pe∣stilentiariam, &c. Tertullian. De Spectaculis. cap. 26, 27. Fathers testifie;) because the most of thē are such, & the end for wch they meet is such. Wherefore, since the whole Conventi∣cle of Play-haunters in Gods, in Angels, in holy mens esteeme, is alwayes evill, notwithstanding the presnce of some few godly ones; these Playes themselves must cer∣tainely be execrably odious to all good Christians, (who Psal. 26.4, 5 Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17. Vita malos, cave iniquos, fuge improbos, spern ingratos, a te fuga turbas hominum, maximè orum qui ad vitia proni sunt: periculosum est enim vitam cum ma∣lis ducere, & cum his qui pravè vivunt so ciari. Isiodor Hispal. De contempu mundi. lib. pag. 229 H. must abandon all lewde companions) even in this respect.
ACTVS 5. SCENA PRIMA. FIftly, Stage-playe must needs bee abominable, un∣lawfull unto Christians, both in regard of their manner of Action, and of all those severall parts, concomitants and circumstances that attend them. From whence I raise this fifteenth Argument.Argument. 15. That whose manner of action, parts, concomitants, and severall circumstances are sinfull; must certainly be Quod enim nec bonum est, nec ben fieri potest (which is the case of Stage-playes) purum proculdubio maum est. Bernard. E∣pist. 7. Col. 1395. L. a∣bominable and ulawfull unto Christians, 1 Thess. 5.22. But such are the manner of action, parts, concomitants, and severall circumstances of Stage-playes. Therefore they are certainly abominable and unlawull unto Christians. The Major needs no confirmation; because such as the forme, the parts and circumstances are, such questionlesse is the whole. The Minor I shall evidence by a particular discussion. First, of the very manner of acting Stage-playes: wherein I shall examine: First, the hypocrisie; Secondly, the obscenitie and lasciviousnesse; Thirdly, the grosse effe∣minacy; Fourthly, the extreame vanitie and follie, which necessarily attends the acting of Playes. Secondly, of the severall parts that are usually acted in  Stage-playes; which are as sinfull as various. Thirdly, of the ordinary apparell wherein Playes are  acted: which is, First of all, womanish, belonging o the fe∣male Sex: Secondly, costly, fantasticall, strange, lascivious, whorish, provoking unto lewdnesse. Fourthly, of the severall concomitants or circumstances  of Stage-playes: which I shall reduce to these foure Heads. Lascivious dacing. Amorous obscene songs: Effeminate lut-exciting Musicke. Proufe, inordinate lascivious laugh∣ter,
and vaine theatricall applauses: omitting all other ad∣juncts, shewes, and circumstances of Playes, which Indocti, sto∣lidique & de∣pugnare parati Si discor∣de, equos m∣dia inter car∣mina poscunt, At vrsum, aut pugiles: his nam plebecu∣la gaudet. Ve∣rum equitis quo que iam ingravit ab aure voluptas omnis ad in cer tos oculos, & gaudia yana. Quatuor aut plures alaea praemuntur in horas, Dum fugiunt equitū turmae, pdi∣tumque cater∣vae. Mox tra∣hitur manibus regum foruna retortis. Esse∣da festinant, pilenta, petor∣dita, naves: Captivum portatur ebur, captiva corinthus, &c. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. pag. 283, 284. See God∣wins Roman Antiquities, lib 2. Sect. 3. cap. 2. to 14. Ho∣race, and some others mention, as not so pertinent to our present purpose. To begin, with the first branch of the first particular, to wit, the hypocrisie, faining, or dissimulation that is exerci∣sed in acting Stage-playes. If we seriously consider the very forme of acting Playes, we must needes acknowledge it to be nought else but grosse hypocrisie. Tacianus Contr. Graecos Oratio. Cyprian. Epist. lib 2. Epist. 2. Clemens Alexand. Oratio Adhort. ad Gentes. fol. 8, 9. Arnobius. lib. 7. advers. Gentes pag. 230. to 242. Lactantius De vero cultu. cap. 20. Tertullian. De Spectac lib. Augustin. De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 3. to 16. De Sermone Domini in Monte. lib. 2. cap. 3. Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth. Salvian. De Gubern. Dei lib. 6. Gellius Noctium Atticarum. lib. 7. cap. 5. Gosson Playes confuted Action 2. Master Dilo of the Deceitfulnesse of the Heart. cap. 2. p. 21. I. G. in his Re∣futation of the Apologie for Actors, and sundry others accordingly. All things are counterfeited, feined, dissembled; nothing really or sincerely acted. Players are alwayes counterfiting, representing the persons, habits, offices, callings parts, conditions, speeches, acti∣ons, lives; the passions, the affections, the anger, hatred, cruel∣ty, love, revenge, dissentions; yea, the very See Act. 3. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4. vices, sinnes, and lusts; the adulteries, incests, rapes, murthers, tyrannies, thefis, and such like crimes of other men, of other sexes, of other crea∣ture; yea, oft-times of the See Act. 3. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4. Divell himselfe, and Pagan Divell∣gods. They are alwayes Grex agit in Scena mimum, pater illevocatur, ilius hic, nomen di∣vitis ille tenet. Mox vbi ridndas inclusit pagina partes. Vera rdit facies, dissimulata perit. Peroni Satyricon. p. 41. See Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 49. De Mimis. Vi∣distisaepe in Saena tragicos istos ctores qui vt res postulat ia Orontes sunt, Pri∣mi, aut Agamemnones idem paulo post Ceropem aut Eect eum agens, issu Poetae mendicus procedit. Fabula autem finita, exuta vst auro intexa, & persona deposita & cothurnis, pauper ac humilis errat, &c. Lucianu in Necromant. acting others, not themselves they vent notorious lying fables, as undoubted truthes: they put false glosses upon Histories, persons, virtues, vices, all things that they act, representing them in feined colours: the whole action of Playes is nought else but feining, but counterfeiting, but palpable hypocrisie and dissimulation which God, which men abhorr: thereore it must needs be sinfull.
If any here obiect:Object. That the acting of Playes is no hy∣pocrysie, no dissimulation, it being onely done in sport, in imitation, with no sinister intent at all, to hurt, to cheate, or circumvent men. I answer;Answ. First, that admit it be but a meere mitation of other mens persons, parts and vices, yet it must needs bee sinfull: because the very imitation of wicked men, of Pa∣gans, of Idols, of Idolaters, especially in their lewdest wic∣kednesses (the most vsuall subject of our Enterludes) is without all question evill, Exod. 23.2. Psal. 1.1. Pro. 1.15, 16 c. 5.8, 9. Rom. 1.32. 1 Thess. 5.22. Ier. 10.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.2.15.18. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. See Here. p. 18. to 28. as the Scriptures plainly teach us. Secondly, I answer, that by the eining used in our Stage-playes, many of our Spectators are deceived, all cheated. Deceived, with forged fabulous histories instead of truthes; with false represenations of true stories: Neque enim est apud eos virtutes coler sed vitia cole∣rare, quodam quasi virtu∣tum minio. Bernard super Cantica Ser∣mo 66. fol. 161. E. with palliated vices in lei of virtues: with virtues vizarded un∣der the names of vice; with bad Playes oft-times which all dislike, instead of good, as some in some respects account them. Cheated, with shadowes instead of substance: with sinfull, heathenish, unchristian spectacles, in place of honest recreations. These Stage-hypocrisies, which at the very best, are pure vanity, and so not valuable; doe cheate many of their honsty, their civility, their chastity, their estates, their reputation, their virtues, their salvation See Marcus Aurelius Epi∣stle 12. to Lambert. The third Blast of Retrait from Playes p. 115.116. and Act. 6. Scene 1.2. accordingly. most, of their money all, of their time: too deare a price for so fruit∣lesse, so wretchlesse a purchase. Besides, See Act. 6. Scene 17. they involve men in the guilt of sundry sinnes, which they little feared or sus∣pected, to the eternall hazzard o their soules, which is a great deceit. Yea, the very end why Players act their En∣terludes, is The third Blast of Re∣trait Playes and Theaters. p. 116. & Act 6. Scene 2. onely to cheate mens money out of their purses by dishonest meanes, not giving quid pro quo: The very ground-worke therefore of this objection, is but forged. Third∣ly, admit that no man were cheated, or prejudiced by that counterfeiting, which accompanies the acting of all Stage-playes; yet the meere acting of the persons, parts, ge∣stures, offices, actions, passions; especially of the Sexes, Vices, Anger, Furie, Love, Revenge and Villanies of other men, be it in sport, in representation onely, is hypocrii.
For what else is hypocrisie in the proper signification of the word, Hypocritae nomen trans∣latū est a specie erū qu Spe∣ctaculis tecta facie incdunt, &c utpopulū dum in dis agerent, fall∣rent, modo in specie viri, mo∣do in fomafaeminae et reliquis prestigi. Vnde et Mimus hypocrita dictus, quia imitator est & fimilator. Calepine, Suida, Cooper, Thomasius, Elio, Rder, Mishaw, and Holioke: in their Dictionaries in the words. Hypocrita & Hypocrisis. Calius Rhdig. Antiqu. Lect. l. 8. c. 8. p. 356. In Ecclesia. vel in omni vita humana, quisquis vult. videri qud non est, hypocrita est. Hypocritae sunt, qui egunt sub persona quod sunt, t ostentant in perso∣na quod non sunt. Hypocritarum ergo nomine simulatres acceperis August. De Serm. Dom. in Monte cap. 3. and 30. Tom. 4. pars 2. p. 637, 669. Hypocrita autem is est, qui aliam pro alia figuram induit: veluti si pauper quispiam principis sibi personam ascis∣cat, tandiu clarus apparens. quandiu theatrum asidi. Chrysost. in Matth. 6. Tom. 2. Col. 1185. A. Thephyla. Ear. in Matth. 6. Ambrose De Elia & ejunio. c. 10. Tom. 1. p. 254. H. Bernard. Super. Cantica. Serm. 33. Zacharias Chrysopolitanus. In Vnum ex quator. l. 1. . 34. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 12. pars 1. p. 45. E. Chrysologus. Sermo 172. accor∣dingly. but the acting of anothers part or person on the Stage: or what else is an hypocite, in his tru etimologie, but a Stage-player, or one who acts anothers part: as sundry Authors and Gramarians teach us. Hence that common epithite in our Latine Authors: Calvin. Iustit. l. 4. c. 19. sect. 18. Se Coopers Dictionarie. Histrionica hypocrisis: And hence is it, that not onely divers moderne Master Dike of the Deceifulnesse of mans Heart. The Rich Cabinet, London 1616. page 116, 117. English and La∣tine Writers, but likewise Haec vbique in theatris ab hypocritis splendissiis vocibus comaedisan∣tur. Irenaus. Co. Hareses lib. 2. cap. 19. Ne obscurs faciem tuam quemadmodum hypocritae faciun. Hypocrita, hoc est histrio, vocatur is, qui in Theatro alienam per∣sonam sumit. Vt ervs existens saepenumero domini, & privatus regis. Sic in ha vita ad suos ores orchestras atque theatrum execent ij, qui alia corde gerentes, alia extrin∣secus hominibus prae se frunt. Basil. De Iejuni erm. 2. Tom. 1. p. 322. Ideo dixit hypo∣critas, o quod simulationealienam personam induant, sicut in scena qui tragaedias agunt, pro corum dictis quorum personas gerunt motus suos exercitant vt aut irascantur, aut maereant, vl exultent. Amb. De Ela & Ieiun. c. 10. Tō. 1. p. 254. H. Chrys. Hom. 31. in Mat. ō. 2. Col. 170. Det Er in Mat. . Col. 1185. A. Sunt enim hypocritae simulatores, tanquam pronunciatores personarum alienarū sicut in theatriis fabulis. Non enim qui agit partes Agamemnonis in tragaedia, verbi gratia, five alicuius alterius, ad historiam vel abulam quae agitur pertinentis, verè ipse est, sed simulat eum, & hypocrita dicitur. Aug. e Serm. Dom. in Monte l. 2. c. 3. Tom. 4. pars 2. p. 637. Ergo hypocritarum nomen ex an∣tiquis theatralibus assuptum est disciplinis, quia erant imlatores (simulator quippe Graece hypocrita sonare probatur) qui tanquam oratores in concione fabulose agebant partes personarum in theatris; & omnia orum negotia tragica vel comica, ac si essent ipsi quorum personas gerebant, monstrabantur. Narrabant enim non suas sed corum hi∣storias & continentiam, motus quoque & voces eorum, & vultus, videntibus ob favorm vulgi vicissim repraesentabant. Ita sane & illi qui bona opera ficto laudis officio, non ad Dei, sed ad suam gloriam ostentan. Agunt enim partes justorum & personarum eorum, cum sint simulatores, ob favorem hominum assumant: non quod habeant jutitiae opera, sed quia simulant se habere. Alias autem si justa essent non ad se, imo ad Deum, cunta quae faciunt boni referrent Nunc autem quia vt minum secundum tragicam piatem in thericis, &c. Pasatiu Rtbertus in Mat. Evang. l. 4. Bibl. Parum Tm. 9. par 2. pag. 986. A.B. sundry Fathers here quoted in
the Margent, sile Stage-players hypocrites; Hypocrites, Stage-players, as being ne and the same in substance: there be∣ing nothing more familiar with them, then to describe an hy∣pocrite by a Stage-player; and a Stage-player by an hypocrite. If therefore we give any credit to the Fathers, or Authors here alleadged; we must needs acknowledge, the very acting of Stage-playes to be hypocrisie; and Histrio e∣nim aliter in animo sent, foris autem quod non est mentitur, Ta∣cian Oratio contr. Grace. Players themselves to be meere hypocrites, (their very profession being nothing else, but an artificiall hypocrisie,) and so an abomina∣ble, and unchristian exercise. For God, Iohn 3.33. c. 7.28. Rom. 3.4.who is truth it selfe,Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17. in whom there is no variablenesse, no shadow of change Numb. 23.19. Rom. 3.4. Titus 1.2. no feining, no hypocrisie; as he hath given a vniforme di∣stinct and proper being to every creature, Iob 14.5. c. 26.10. Psal. 104.5. to 25. the bounds of which may not be exceeded: so he requires that the actions of every creature should be Rom. 13.13. Phil. 1.8. c. 4.8. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Cor. 5.8. honest and sincere, Iam. 3.17. Luke 12.1. devoyde of all hypocrisie, as all his actions, and their naures are. Hence he enioyes all men at all times, Mat. 23.27.28. 2 Cor. 5.12. Rev. 3.15, 16, 17, 18. to be such in shew, as they are in truth: to seeme that otwardly which they are inwardly; to act themselves, not others: to Ephes. 6.6. Phil. 4.8, 9. 2 Thess. 3.4. Hebr. 10.30. Iam. 1.22, 25. 1 Pet. 3.11. c. 4.19. 1 Ioh. 3.22. imitate those men, those graces which his word prescribes them; not those accursd villanies, which wicked men (who are now in hell) haue left behinde them. Psal. 51.6. God requires truth in the inward parts; in the soule, the affections; yea, in the habit, speeches, ge∣stures, in the whole intie man. Now this counterfeiting of persons, affections, manners, vices, sexes, and the like, which is inseparably incident to the acting of Playes; as it transformes the Actors into what they are not; so it inuseth falshood into evry part of soule and body, as Omnis hy∣pocrisis men∣dacio plena est, & aliud quidem est, & aliud ingit. Christus autem cum sit veritas mendacio adversatur. Qui igitur Christum discunt, hypocrisin ugiunt. Theophylact. Enar. in Luc. 12. p. 158. C. all hypocrisie doth; in causing them to seeme that in outward ppearance which they ae not in truth: therefore it must needs be o∣dious to the God of truth; as well as the common ac∣cursed hellish art of face-painting, which te Clemens Alex∣andrinus. Paedagogi. l. 2. 10. Tertullian. De Cultu Faeminarum. c. 3. to 9. & de Velan∣dis virginibus. Tract. Ambrose Hexaemeron lib. 6. c. 8. De Virginitate lib. 1. Hieron. E∣pist. 7. c. 2.3. Epist. 8. c. 5. Epist 10. c. 2, 3. August. d Doctrina Christian l. 4. c. 21. See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes. pag. 2. Fathers, with
others much condemne, even from this very ground; be∣cause it sophisticates and pervers the workes of God, in put∣ping a false glosse upon his creatures. And this the persona∣ting of Stage-playes alwayes doth, as much, nay more then it. Neither will this qualifie the matter, that this Stage-hypocrisie is onely in merriment. For 1 Sam. 21.13, 14, 15. See D. Wille, Calvin, and others, Ibi∣dem. if Davids counter∣feiting of himselfe to be mad before Achish King of Gath, for the safe-gard of his life; or Gen. cap. 42 & 43. See the Commenta∣tors those chapters. Iosephes iesting dissimulation with his brethren, were sinfull, as good Divines repute it; Omnis simu∣latio & omnis duplicitas mendacium est. Ergo non solum in falsis verbis, sed eti∣am in simula∣tis operibus mendacium comprobatur. Ambrose Sermo 44. Tm. 5. p. 31. because there was a li involved in it. Much more must this wanton acting hypocrisie be abominably sinfull, because it is meerely voluntary, there being no impulsive cause to move men to it. If Rom. 3.8. the damnation of those who doe evill, that good may come of it, be iust: much more must their condemnation be righteous, their sinne exceeding great, who commit hypocrisie (a great, a Dupliciter autem damna∣tur hypocritae, pro occult i∣niquitate, pro aperta simula∣tione. Bernard De Ordine vi∣a. Col. 1226. A Se August. de Conflictu viti∣orum & vir∣tum. & Isiodor hisp l. Sentent. lib. 3. c. 24. p. 465. accor∣dingly. double iniquity) on the open Theater, to no other end, but to make others sinfull sport to passe away their precious time. Since then it is evident by the premises, that the very acting of Stage-playes is hypocrisie, as De Spectac. lib. c. 23. Tertullian and De Spectaculis lib. Cyprian, together with Irenaeus, Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostome, Ta∣tianus, Pascatius Ratbertus, and the other See 2. a, b, c. and d, before. fore-quoted Au∣thor largely teach us: we may hence conclude them to bee odious unto God. Wherefore I shall here close up this Scene, with this sixteenth Play-condemning Argument. That, whose very action is but meere hypocrisie but grosse dissimulation, must questionlesse bee execrable and unlawfull unto Christians; Witnesse, Matth. 23.13, 14, 15.23, 27, 28, 29. c. 24.51. Luke 12.1. Gal. 2.13. 1 Tim. 4.2. Iam. 3.17 and that excellent passage of of Iam vero ipsum opus personarum quro an Deo placeat, qui omnem similitudinem vetat fieri, quanto magis imaginis suae? Non amat falsum auctor veritatis; adultorium est apud cum omne quod fingitur Proinde vocem, sexus, aetates mentientem; amores, iras, gemitus, lachry∣mas adseverantem, non probabit qui omnem hypocriin damnat. De Spctaculis c. 23. Tertullian to our purpose, recited in the Margent.
But such and no other is the very action of Stage-playes: as the precedent Authors: together with the third blast of Retrait of from Stage-playes and Theaters, p. 110. to 117. exprely testifie. Therefore they must questionlesse be execrable and un∣lawfull unto Christians, even in this respect. SCENA SECVNDA. SEcondly, as the hypocrisie, even so the lasciviousnesse of acting Stage-playes, doth draw an inexpiable guilt upon them, as this seventeenth Argument will demonstrate.Argument. 17. That whose very action is Quid multa? authores om∣nes cum sacri tum profani spurcitiam scenae exagi∣tant; non mo∣do quod fabu∣lae obscenae in scena ageren∣tur, sed tiam quod motus gestus{que} essent impudici, at∣que ado pro∣stibula ipsa in scenam saepe venirent; & scena prosta∣rent. Vnde & obscaenum, ait Varro, quod non nisi in sce∣na palam dici∣tur. Buleng. Do Theatro l. 1. c. 50. p. 296. obscene, lascivious, amorous, and unchaste, must needs be hatefull and unlawfull unto Christians. But such is the very action of Stage-playes. Therefore they must needs be hatefull and unlawfull unto Christians. The Maior is without all controversie, since God himselfe enjoynes all Christians,Titus. 2.12.14. Ephes 4.17, 18, 19. Rom. 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1.14.15. c 4.2.3. c. 2.11.12. to live chastly, soberly, holily, and godly in this present world, as becommeth Saints; Rom. 13.13. Eph. 4.17.19 1 Pet. 4.3.2 Cor. 12.21. Titers 3.3. Iude 4.not walking in lasciviousnesse, lusts, or wantonnesse, as the Gentiles, or other carnall persons doe: but 1 Pet. 2.11.12. absteining from these and all other fleshly lusts which warre against the soule Gal. 5.19. Lasciviousnesse (together with all amourous wanton gestures, comple∣ments and imbracements which issue from it) is a fruit of the flesh; Mar. 7.20, 21, 22, 23. an evill that proceeds from within, and so defiles the heart of man from which it springs. It is a Iude 4. Iam 5.5. sinne of which God takes especiall notice, and will certainly charge it on mens consciences at the last. A2 Cor. 12.21. sinne to be seriously repnted of. A sinne to which the Ephes. 4.19. 1 Pet. 4.3. Iude 4. Gentiles and other wicked men were gi∣ven
over. A sine, Isay 3.16. to 26. for which God threatens to punish the daughters of Zion. A sinne which Gal. 5.19.21. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.27. disinherits and shuts men out of heaven. A sinne which sundry Clemens Alexand. Pae∣dagogi. l. 2. c. 1. to 10. l, 3. c. 3. Ambr. De officijs. l. 1. c. 8 & l. 3. c. 12. Basil. de Vera Virginitate lib. & Asceti∣ca cap. 13. Tertullian de Velandis Virginibus, De cultu Faemi∣narum, Cy∣prian. De a∣biu Virginum Hierom. Epist. 7, 8.16. & 23 Bernard, de Modo bene vivendi Sermo 9. Gratian dstinctio 41. Concilium Valentinum. Can. 15. Con∣cil Senonense Decreta Mo∣rum. Can. 25. Calvin, Hoo∣per, Babingeon, Perkins, Elton, Dod, Andrewes, Williams, Lake, and all other Exposi∣tors on the seventh Commandement. accordingly. Fathers have plenti∣fully condemned, as mis-beseeming Christians, whose very outward gestures and deportment ought to be modest, chaste, and holy, Ephes. 5.3.4. Phil. 1.27. 1 im. 2.10. Titus 2 3. 1 Pet 2.12. c. 31. to 7. Similiter impudcitiam mnem amoliri ju∣bemur: hocigitur modo etiam a Theatro seperamur; quod est privatum consistorium impudicitiae, vbi nihil probatur quam qod alibi non probatur. Ita summa gratia jus de spucitia plutimum concinata est, quam attellanus gesticulatur, quam mimus etiā, per mulieres repraesenat seum pdori exerminans, vt cilius domi quam in scn rubē∣cant. Quam denique Pantomimus a pueritia patitur in corpore ut artifex esse possit. Ip∣sa etiam prostibula publicae libidinis hostae in scena proferuntur, plus misera in pre∣sentia faeminaum, quibus solis latebant: perque omnis aetatis, omnis dignitatis or a transdcuntur, lous, stipes, elogium, etiam quibus opus non est, praedicatur. Ibid. as becommeth the Gospell of Christ. The Maior therefore is unquestionable. The Minor is abundantly ratified; First, by the concur∣rent testimony of sundry Fathers and moderne Authors, who from hence condemne all Stage-playes, because the acting of them is obscene, and amorous. Witnesse Tertul∣lian. Despectaculis lib. cap. 17. o We are commanded (writes he) to put away all wantonnesse and incontinency by this meanes therefore we are divorced from the Theater, the pri∣vate consistory of uncleannesse, where nothing is approved, but what in all other places is disapproved. Yea, its greatest praise is for the most part concinated of that lasciviousnesse, that fil∣thinesse which the Stage-player acteth; which the Actor like∣wise representeth by women, who have banished the modesty of their sex, that so they may more easily blush at home, than n the Stage. Which finally the Patomimus doth suffer in his body from his childhood, that so h may be expert in his profession. Yea, the very Stewes themselves, the sacrifices of publike lust, are brought forth upon the Stage, they being more miserable in the presence of women, from whom alone they were concealed; and before the eyes of every age, of every degree, the place, the hire, the testimoniall are represented, yea, published unto those
to whom there is no need Taceode re∣liquis, ea que in tenebris & speluncis suis delitescere de∣cebat, ne diem contamina∣rent. Erubes∣cat senatus, erubescant or∣dines omnes, Ipse ille pudo∣ris sui inte∣rempt Fices de gestibus suis ad lucem & po∣pulum expa∣ues centes seme anno erubes∣cunt. Quod si nobis omnis impudicitra execranda est, cur liceat au∣dire, quae lo∣qui non licet? Cum etiam scurtilitatem & omne va∣rum verbum judicatum à Deo sciamus, cur aeque lic∣at videre quod facere flagiti∣um est? Cur quae ore prolata communicant hominem, ea per oculos, & aures admissa non videantur hominem communicare: cum spiritui appareant aures & oculi, nec possit mundus prae∣stari, cuius apparitores inquinantur. Habes igitur & theatri interdictionem, de inter∣dictione impudicitiae. Ibidem Tom. 2. p. 395.396. I forbeare to mention more, it being meet they should lie obscured in darknesse, in their dungeons, lest they should defile the light. Let the Senate blush, let all de∣grees blush at this, since those very murtherers of their owne chastity, fearing their actions should be manifested to the people, blush once a yeere. Now if all unclearnesse must be execrable to us, why should it be lawfull to heare those things which it is unlawfull to speake? for since we may know that all scurrillity, and every vaine word is condemned by God, how can it be law∣full to heare those things which are a wickednesse to commit? Why should those things which defile a man being uttered onely with his mouth, not seeme to pollute him, when they passe through his eyes and eares by his consent? since the eyes and eares, lie open to the soule: neither can he be made or reputed, cleane, whose appariters are defiled. Thou hast therefore an interdiction of the Theater, from the interdiction of unclean∣nesse. Thus Tertullian. Paedagogi. l. 2. c. 10. l 3. c. 11. Clemens Alexandrinus, De spectaculis lib; & Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Cyprian, Adversus Gentes lib. 4. p. 149.150. lib. 7. p. 233. Arnobius, De Vero Cultu cap. 20. Divinar: Instit. Epitome c. 6. Lactantius, Ora∣tio adversus Graecos. Tatianus, Catechesis Mystagogica. 1. Cyril of Ierusalem, Hexam. Hom. 4. & De E∣brietate & luxu Oratio. Saint Basil,In dictum Evangelij. Quatenus fecistis, &c. Gregory Nyssen, declaime much against the lasciviousnesse, the lewdnesse which attends the acting of Playes; especially the Cele∣brantur ludi illi cum omni lascivia, convenientes memoriae meretricis. Nam praeter ver∣borum licentiam, quibus obscaenitas omnis effunditur, exuuntur etiam vestibus populo flagitante meretrices, quae tunc mimorum funguntur officio, & in conspectu populi vs∣que ad satietatem impudicorum luminum cumpudendis moribus detinentur. Lactantius De falsa Relig. l. 1. c. 20. p. 75. See August. de Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 8. & Ludovici Viver Nota Ibidem. . Floralian Enterludes, whose transcen∣dent filthinesse, was so execrably odious, as I dare not to relate it. Gregory Nazianzen, considering the filthinesse that accompanies Playes; doth from thence stile Play-houses, Lasciva faeditatis & impuritatis omnis officina. De Educatione ad Seleucum p. 1063. the lascivious shops of all filthinesse and impuritie PlayesMimorum petulantias omni impudicitia & contumelia refertas. Lascivorum hominum inhonestas disciplinas & indecoras, qui nihil urpe ducunt praeter modesti∣am. Ibid.; the petulancies of Players, fraught with all incontinency: the disho∣nest
and unseemely disciplines of lascivious men, who repute no∣thing filthy but modesty: and Players Turpitudi∣nis administri, &c. Ibid. the servants of fil∣thinesse, the counterfeiters of ridiculous things, who are ready in the open view of all men, to suffer or act all detestable things whatsoever. Ecclesiast. hist. l. 8. c. 24. Eusebius Pamphilus from the selfe-same ground, cals Stage-players, men of waton and lewde-gestures, who did wonderfully delight the Spectators, and made Maxi∣minus the tyrant sport. Saint Chrysostome writes, Cuncta enim quae ibi fiat turpissima sunt, verba, vestitus, ton∣sura, incessus, voces, cantus, modulationes, oculorum e∣versiones, ac motus, tibiae, fistulae, & ipsa fabularum ar∣gumenta: om∣nia (inquam) turpilascivia, plena sunt: Tantam lasci∣viam in audi∣entium atque videntium ani∣mos infun∣dunt, vt vno omnes animo radicitus e¦mentibus mo∣destiam cle∣re, & pernici∣osa voluptate cupiditates su∣as implere co∣nari videan∣tur. Hom. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 298. C.D.That all things which are acted on the Stage, are most filthy and lascivi∣ous: the words, the apparell, the gestures, the tonsure, the mu∣sicke, the glances of the eyes, the ditties, the pipes, the very ar∣guments of the Playes themselves; All things, I say, are full of filthy lasciviousnesse. Whence they infuse so great lascivious∣nesse into the hearers and spectators minds, that all of them may seeme to endevour, even with one consent to eradicate all mode∣stie out of their hearts, and to satisfie their lusts with pernici∣ous pleasure, Saint Augustine, as he much declaimes against the obscenity of acting of Playes, De Civit Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to c.  3. l. 4. c. 3.10, 26, 27, 28. l. 6. c. 6.7 l. 7. c. 26, 27. l 8. c. 5.13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 27. in sundry places; so hee informes us from his own experience; Veniebamus etiam nos aliquando adolescentes ad spectacula ludibria que sacrilegiorum: ludis turpissimis qui dijs deabusque exhibeban∣tur, oblectabamur. Caelesti virgini, & Berecynthiae matri Deorum omninum ante erus Iecticam die solemni lavationis eius, talia, per publicum cantitabantur a ne quissimis sce∣ticis, qualia non dico matrē deorū, sed matrē qualiumcun{que} senatorū, vel quorum libet honestorū virorum; imo vero qualia nec matrem ipsorū scenicorum deceretauire Illam enim turpitudinem obscaenorum dictorum atque factorum scenicos ipsos domi suae pro∣udendi causa coram matribus suis agere puderet, quam pet publicum agebant coram de∣orum omnium matre spectante & audiente vtriusque sexus frequentissima multitudine. Quae si illecta curiositate adesse potuit circumfusa; saltem offensa castitate debuit abire confusa, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 4.5. S l. 7. c. 26, 27. That on the solemne day of the lotion of Berecynthea, the mother of the Gods, such things were publikely chanted by most wicked Stage-players; as did not beseeme, I say not, the mother of the Gods to heare; but even the mother of any of the Senators, or of any honest men; yea, the mothers of the Stage-players themselves. For humane modestie hath such a respect towards parents which wicked∣nesse it selfe cannot wholly take away. The Players themselves might blush, to act in private at their owne houses for exercise sake before their owne mothers, that filthinesse of obscene words and deeds, which they did publikely act before the mother of the
gods, in the sight and hearing of a most numerous multitude of both sexes: which if he being inticed by curiosity could bee circumfusedly present at these Playes, she ought at last to de∣part ashamed from them, her chastity being offended with them. Quae sunt sa∣crilegia si illa erant sacra? aut quae in qui∣natio, si illa lavatio? Et hac fercula appellabantur convivium, quo velut suis epulis immun∣da daemonia pascerentur. Quis enim non sentiat cuus∣modi spiritus talibus obscae∣nitatibus de∣lectentur; nis vel nesciens vttum omnino sint vlli im∣mundi spiritus deorum nomi∣ne decipientos: vel talem a∣gens vitam, in qua istos po∣tius qm De∣um verum, & optet propitie & foridet iratos? Ibidem See Iulius Fir∣micus de Er∣rre profana∣rum Religio∣nm cap. 13. What things are sacrileges, if these were sacrifices? or what is pollution if this were lotion? And these were called dishes, as if some feast were celbrated, wherewith the uncleane Devils might be fed, as with their banquets. For who may not discrne what spirits they are which are delighted with such ob∣scenitis? unlesse e be ignorant whether there be at all any uncleane spirits deceiving men under the name of Gods, or unlesse e leade such a life, in which e may rather desire th favour and feare the wrath of these, than the true God. Thus he. That pious Father Taliasunt quae illic fiunt, vt a non so∣lum dicere, sed tiam recor∣dari aliquis sine pollutione non possit. Omnia quidem tam flagitiosa sunt, vt etiam explicar ea quispiam atque eloqui salvo pudore non valeat, &c De Gubernat. Dei l. 6. p 18, 186. Salvian, records the obscenity of acting Stage playes to be such, that no chaste, no modest face could once behold it, no gracious tongue relate it, without sin or shame. If then we will give any credit to these recited Fathers, with sundry other here recited in the ensuing Scene. Or to the third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters; to Master Northbrooke against vaine-Playes and Enerludes; To Master Gosson his Playes confuted, to Ma∣ster Stubs in his Anoomie of Abuses, p. 101. to 107. To Doctor Reinolds in his Overthrow of Stage-playes, to Barna∣bas Brissonius, Ioannis Mariana, or Bulengerus, De Spectacu∣lis & Ludis Scnicis l. 1. c. 50, 51, 52. or to Bishop Babing∣ton, Bishop Andrewes, Osmund Lak, Master Perkins, Ma∣ster Elton, Master Dod, Master Downham; with sundry others on the seventh Commandement, who concurre with the alleaged Fathers in the lacivious filthinesse of Play-acting; We must needs acknowledge the very acting of Stage-playes, to be necessarily obscene, and so unlawfull unto Christians, as they all conclude. Secondly, those se∣verall A mans saltatur Venus, & per affectus omnes meretriciae vilitatis impudica exprimitur, imitatione bac∣chari. Saltatur & magna sacris comptacu infulismater, & contra decus aetatis illa Pessi∣nuntia Dindymone in bubulci vnius flagitiosa amplexu fingitur appetitione gestire, &c. Arnobiu adves. Gentes l. 4. p. 149, 150. Sl 7. p. 230. to 242. eretricious amorous passages, ditties, parts, and com∣plements
which we meet with both in Aristopha∣nes, Plautus, Terence, Me∣nander, and others. ancient and moderne Play-poems, (which can neither be acted nor vttered with∣out much obscenity,) will evidently evince the very acting of Playes to be lascivious. And doth not daily experience testifie as much? Survay we but a whiles, those venemous unchaste, incestuos kisses, (as the Est autem aliud osculum incestum vene∣no plenum. Oscula mere∣tricia: oscula impudicitiae virus saepè im∣mittunt. Cle∣mens Alexan∣drinus, Pae∣gogi lib. 3. cap. 11. l 2. c. 16. Sunt tur∣pia & immun∣da oscula. Chrysost Hom in Psal. 140. Tom. 1. Col. 1109. B. Ob∣scaenè oscu∣lantur Hom. 13. n 2 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 832. D. Sum∣ma igitur cautione communicandum est osculum, vt non aliter quam pia salutatio, vel potius adoratio quaedam habeatur: quae i parum impura cogitatione inquinata fuerit a vita aeterna nos alienet. Athenagoras pro Christianis Legatio. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2 p. 139. A See Doctor Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes p. 12, to 18. Fathers tile them:) those wanton dalliances, those meretricious imbracements, complements; those enchanting, powerfull, overcomming sollicitations unto lewdnesse; Vanis gestibus ac nutibus mimus risum provocat. Minucius Felix. Octavius pag. 11.122. those immodest gestures, speeches, attires, which inseparably accompany the acting of our Stage-playes; especially where the Bawdes, the Panders, the Lovers, the Wooers, the Adulterers, the Wo∣mans, or Love-sicke persons parts are lively represented, (whose Timeo autem n fortè magnum hoc venenum totum revelom, velut cujusdam basilisci serpentis faciem, ad perniciem magis legentium, quam ad correctionem. Polluit enim revera au∣res magnae huus audaciae blasphema collectio, & haec turpitudinis coacervatio a enar∣ratio. Epiphaniu Contr. hreses lib. 1 Tom 2 Haereses 26. Col. 70. B. poysonous filthinesse, I dare not fully anatomize, for feare it should infect, not mend the Reader,) must needs at first acknowledge, the very action of our Stage-playes to be execrably obscene; to be such as none but persons des∣parately lewde, unchaste, immodest, can seriously affect, much lesse approve or act. Therefore Stage-playes them∣selves must questionlesse be abominable unto Christians, even in this regard:
SCENA TERTIA. THirdly, as the hypocrisie, and obscenity, even so the effminacy of acting Stage-playes, doth manifestly evince them to be evill; as this eighteenth Argument will demonstrate.Argument. 18. That whose very action is effeminate, must needs be un∣lawfull unto Christians. But the very action of Stage-playes i effeminate. Therefore, it musts needs be unlawfull unto Christians: The Major is evident, by the authority of 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5 19 21 Ephes. 4.19. Rom. 13.13. Isay 14.16, 17. Scriptures, Fathers,Clemens A∣lexand. Padag. l 1. c. 10. l 3. c. 2.3. Am∣brose Irenao. Epist. Tom. 1. p. 233. Sedu∣lius in 1 Cor. 6. with other Fathers here ensuing. and other Calvin, Ba∣bington, Per∣ins, Dod, Williams, Lake, An∣drewes, and others on the seventh Com∣mandement. See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Lovelockes, p. 21, 22.48, 49. Authors who condemne effeminacie, as an unnaturall, odious, shamefull sinne,Militem Chisti vrum nihil molle decet. Ambrose E∣r. i Psal. 38. Viris nihil magis pudori esse oportet, quam si mulibre aliquid in se ha∣bere videantur. Salvin De Guber. Dei l. 6. p. 264. which not onely mis-be∣seemes all Christians, all persons whatsoever, Nihil est ne quius aut tupius effae∣minato viro Cicero Tusc. Quaest. l. 5. Molliter vivi, hoc dicut, malus est. Seneca. Epist. 8. making them vile and detestable unto others, but 1 Cor. 69, 10. Gal. 5.19.21. likewise suts men out of heaven, and without repentance damnes their soules. The Minor is ratified by the concurrent suffrages of sundry Fathrs, who for this very cause among divers others, condemne all Stage-playes. Witnesse Clemens Alexandrinus, Padagogi lib. 2. cap. 10. Where he stiles Players Fracti, enervatique saltatores, &c. Ibid. effeminate enervated dancers, & Padagogi lib. 3. cap. 3. where he writes thus. Pu∣eri docti abnegare naturam mulieres simulant. O miserandum spectaculum O nefan∣dum studium! O quanta est hac iniquitas! See thanasius Contra Gentes. p. 10. A B. accordingly. Now verily the intemperanc of life is growne so excessive, inquity insulting and sporting it selfe, that whatsoever is lascivious and unchaste, is diffused into Cities. yes being taught to deny nature, doe counter∣feit the female Sex, &c. O miserable spectacle! O horrible wicked exercise! O how get is this iniquity! &c. Witnesse
Philo Iudaeu. De Vita Contemplativa, p. 1209, 1210. Those (writes he) who onely please with scurrilous jests to recreate mens mindes, Puro transferunt in amicarum ha∣bitum & or∣dinem, cu summa aeatis & sexus inju∣ria, &c. Ibid. transforme yothes into the very habit and or∣der of Strumpets, to the great injury and dishonour of their age and sexe: a thing which Moses doth much condemne. Wit∣nesse Tertullian De Spectaculis, lib. c. 10. p. 17. Together with Isiodor Hispalensis. Originum lib. 18. cap. 51. Est plane in artibus sceni∣ci Libei & Veneris patro∣cinium, que privata & propria sunt scenae, de gestu & corporis fluxu Nam mollitiem Ve∣neri & Libero immolantur, illi per sexum, illi per fluxum dissoluti, &c. Ibid. In all scenicall arts (say they) there is plainely the patronage of Bacchus and Venus which are peculiarly proper to the Stage. From the gesture and flexure of the body, they sacrifice effemi∣nacy to Venus and Bacchus; the one of them being effemi∣nate by her sexe, the other by his fnx, &c. Witnesse Saint Cyprian, De spectaculis lib. where he writes thus. Huic dede∣cori condig∣num dedeus suprinducitur Homo fractus omnibus mm∣bris, & vir vl∣tra muliebrem mollitiem dis∣solutus, cui ars sit verba ma∣nibus expedi∣re, & propter vnum nescio quem, nec virum, nec faeminam commovetur civitas tota, vt desaltentu fa∣bulosae antiquitatum libidines Ibidem. To this vile shamefull deed, another equall wickednesse is super-added. A man enfeebled in all his joynts, resolved into a more than womanish effeminacy, whose art it is to speake with his hands and gestures, comes forth upon the Stage: and for this one I know not whom, neiher man nor woman, the whole Citie flocke together, that so the fabulous lusts of antiquity may be acted. Yea, Evirantur mares, omnis honor & vigor sexus enervati corporis dedecore emollitur, pluque illic placet, quisquis virum magis in fae∣minam fregerit. In laudem crescit ex crimine, & co peritior quo turpior udicatur, &c. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. men (writes he in another place) are unman∣ned on the Stage: all the honour and vigour of their sex is effe∣minated with the shame, the dishonesty of an unsined body. He who is most womanish and best resembles the female sex, gives best content. The more criminous, the more applauded is he; and by how much the more obsene he is, the more skilfull is he accounted. What cannot he perswade who is such a one? &c. And in another Epistle of his, he writes to Eucratius, to Ex∣communicate a Player, Magiter & Doctor, non erudiendorum sed perdendorum liberorum, crudiens & docens eontra institutionem Dei quemadmodum masculus fran∣gatur in faeminam, & sexus arte mutetur, & diabolo divinum plasma maculanti, per cor∣rupti atque enervati corporis delicta, placeatur. Quod puto ego nec majestati divinae, nec evangelicae disciplinae congruere, vt pudor & honor eccleiae tamurpi et infami conta∣gione faedetur. Nam cum in lege prohibeantur viri induere vestem muliebrem & male∣dicti ejusmodi iudicentur; quanto majoris est criminis, non tantum muliebria vestimen∣ta induere, sed & gestus quo que turpes & molles & muliebres magisterio impudicae ar∣tis exprimere? Epist. l. 1. Epst. 10. who did traine up Boyes for the Stage,
for that he taught them against the expresse instruction of God himselfe, how a male might be effeminated into a female, how their sex might be changed by Art, that so the divell who de∣files Gods workemanship, might be pleased by the offences of ae depraved and effeminated body. I thinke it will not stand with the Majestie of God, nor the discipline of the Gospel, that the modestie and honour of the Church should be polluted with such a filthy and infamous contagion. For since men are pro∣hibited in the Law to put on a womans garment, and such who doe it are adjudged accursed. How much more greater a sinne is it, not onely to put on womans apparell, but likewise to ex∣presse obscene, effeminate womanish gestures, by the skill or tu∣torship of an unchaste Art? The most unchaste gestures and actions of Stage-players (writes Histrionum que qu impu∣dicissimi mo∣tus, quid aliud nisi libidines docent, & in∣stigant? quo∣rum enarvata corpora, & in muliebrem in∣cessum habi∣tum que molli∣ta, impudicas faeminas in ho∣nestis gestibus mentiuntur. De Vero Cult lib. 6. cap. 20. p. 506. Lactantius) what else doe they but teach and provoke lust? whose enervated bodies, effe∣minated into an womanish pace and habit, resemble unchaste women by their dishonest gestures, &c. One being a Youth (writesHomil. 38. in Matth. Col. 298. C. Alius cum sit adolescens, co∣mam pone re∣ductam habet, & nauram aspectu, vesti∣tu, caeterisque ejusmodi effae∣minando ad teneriusculae imaginem puellae, dedu∣cere contendit, &c. Saint Chrysostome) combes backe his haire, and effe∣minating nature with his visage, his apparell, his gesture, and the like, strives to represent the person of a tender virgin: which he condemnes as a most abominable effeminate act: There is another sort of Actors (writes Alia vero natio quaedam est his ipis infalicior, qui nimirum gloriam masculorum amittunt, & impudicis mem∣brorum inflexionibus naturam virilem frangunt, mulieres pariter ac mares effaeminai: imò nec viri nec faeminae si recte lo qui vellemus. Nam viri quidem haud manent: ut au∣tem faeminae fiunt non consequuntur. Quippe quod a natura sunt, id morum respectu non manent: quod vero improbe esse cupiunt, id natura non sunt, Quo fit, vt aenigma quoddā sint luxuriae, vitiorum{que} gryphus, inter faeminas viri, interviros faeminae, Num haec potius praedicationes, inspectiones, iucunditates, an lachrymas at{que} gemitus merentur? Ni∣mirum, in his risus regnat, natura vitiatur & adulterina fit, voluptatum flamma multiplex accenditur, &c. De Recta Educat. ad Selucum. p. 1061. Nazianzen) more unhappy then these, to wit, those who lose the glory of men, and by unchaste infections of their members effeminate their manly nature, being both effeminate men and women, yea, being nei∣ther men nor women, if we will speake truely. For they conti∣nue not men, and that they should become women, they attaine not. For what they are by nature, that they Ipsi sine virilibus membris vitam degunt, neque amplius viri esse potentes, neque mulieres facti. Epiphaniu Contr. Haerese, lib. 3. Tom. 2. Col. 910. C. Hic ita amputatur virilitas, vt nec convertatur in faeminam, nec vir relinquatur. Augustine De Civit. Dei l. 7. c 24. continue not, in
regard of manners: and that which they wickedly desire to be, that they are not by nature. By which it commeth to passe, that they are certaine riddles of luxurie, and intricacies of vices, be∣ing men among women, and women among men. Whether doe these things rather deserve applauses, aspections and mirth, or teares and sighes? Verily laughter raignes in these; Nature is vitiated and adulterated, and a various flame of pleasures is kindled. To these I might acumulate the parallell testimony ofViri quo que abdìcato sexu, nec se amplius mares esse fe∣rentes, mulie∣rum naturam affect averunt, tanquam ita honorifica grata que ma∣tri Deorum facturi essent. Omns autem in turpissimis vivunt, & cer∣tamen in se suscipere pra∣vitatis viden∣tur, &c. Ibidem. Athanasius Contra Gentes Oratio p. 10. A. B. of The∣ophylus Antiochenus ad Autolicum, lib. 3. of Tatianu Ora∣tio adversus Graecos. Of Minucius Felix. Octauius, p. 70. 101.223. Of Augustine De Civitate Dei lib. 2. cap. 3. to 14. and lib. 7. c. 24. Of Salvian. lib. 6. De Gubernatione Dei. Of Hierom. Epist 2. cap. 6.7.Non ambu∣let iuxta te ca∣lamistratus procurator, non histrio fractus in fae∣minam. Ibd. Epist. 9. cap. 5. Epist. 10. c. 4. Epist. 13. c. 2. Epist. 48. c. 2. Epist. 88. cap. 4. Of Eusebius apud Damascenum parallelorum lib. 3. cap. 47. Of Cassio∣dorus Variarum, lib. 1. cap. 27.30. lib. 3. cap. 51. and lib. 7. cap. 16. Of Damascen Parallelorum lib. 3. cap. 47. Of Iohn Salisbury, De Nugis Curialium lib. 1. cap. 8. together with the concurrent suffrages of Ludovicus Vives De Cau∣sis Corrupt Artium lib. 2. p. 82.83. & Notae in Augustinum De Civit. Dei. lib. 2 cap. 3. to 14. Of Radolphus Gualther Homilie 11. in Nahum. 3. p. 214.215. Of Francis Petrarcha De Remedio vtriusque fortunae lib. 1. Diologus 30. Of A∣grippa, de Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 20.5964.71. Of Peter Martyr, Locorum Communium Classis. 2. cap. 11. sect. 62.66. cap. 12. sct. 15.19. and Commentary on Iudges. page 310.311. Of Bodine, De Republica. lib. 6 cap. . Of Ioannis Mariana, Barnabas Brissonius, and Lib. 1, c. 50.51, 52. Bulengerus, De Tea∣tris, spectaculis & ludis scenicis; of the third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, page 110, 111, 112. of Master Northbrooke, Master Stubs, Master Gosson, and Doctor Rei∣nolds in their severall Treatises against Stage-playes. Of Bi∣shop Babington, Master Perkins, Master Dod, Legum Dia∣logus 7. Master Lakes, Master Downeham, and sundry other on the seventh Commandement. Yea, of Legum Dia∣logus 7. Plato,De Legibus lib. Epist. 2. Cicero, Epistola. 7. and 53. Senica, Annalium. l. 14. sect. 2. Taci∣tus,
An melior cum Thaida sustinet, aut cum Vxrm Comaedus a∣git, vel Dorida multo Cultam palliolo: mu∣lier nemp ip∣sa vidtur, Non person loqui, vacua & plana om∣nia dicas, In∣fra ventricu∣lum, & tenui, distantia ri∣mâ. Nec tamen Antiochus, nec rit mirabilis illic Aut Stra∣tocles, aut cum molli Dem∣trius haemo. Natio Co∣maeda est: ri∣des? Iuvenal. Satyr. 3. pag. 20. Iuvenall, Epist. 12. to Lambert. Marcus Aurelius Panegyr. Traiano Di∣ctus p 45. Plinie, and other Pa∣gan Authors; who all with one consent, not onely testifie, but likewise positively condemne the grosse, the execrable effeminacy which attends the acting of all Stageplayes; which the very Obscaenis partibus corporis oculis omnium eam ingerunt turpitudinem, quam rubescat videre vel Cynicus. Ioannes Saresburiensis. De Nugis Curialium, lib. 1. cap. 8. Cynicke himselfe would blush for to behold. And must not our owne experience beare witnesse of the invi∣rillity of Play-acting? May Sed & alius morbus petulanter erupit in civitates, orum qui patrant, & qui patiuntur muliebria, effaeminati corpore juxta atque animo ne scintillam quidem retinentes generis mascu∣li, propalam plectentes cincinnos ornantes{que} & cerussa uco{que} oblinentes faciem pingen∣tesque, vnguentis quoque fragrantes ex quisitissimis Nec pudet eos marem sexum data o∣pera mutare in faeminam. His parcendum non est, si audimus legem, quae jubet andro∣gynum & sexum suum adulterantem impune occidi, die ipsa ac hora qua depraehenditur: cum sit probrosus, & familiae suae patriaeque dedecus, atque adeo totius generis humani, &c. Philo Iudaes. De Stecialibas egibus. pag. 1059. we not daily see our Players me∣tamorphosed into women on the Stage, not only by putting on the female robes, but likewise the effeminate gestures, speeches, pace, behaviour, attire, delicacy, passions, manners, arts and wiles of the female sex, yea, of the most petulant, unchaste, insi∣nuating Strumpets, that either Italy or the world affords? What wantonnesse, what effeminacy parallell to that which our men-women actors, in all their feminine, (yea, some∣time in their masculine parts) expresse upon the Theater? was ever the invirility of Nero, Heliogabalus, or Sardanapa∣lus,Of which reade Suetonij, Nero sect 28 Iustin. Hist. l 1. Athenaeus Dipnos. lib 12. cap 12, 13. Diodorus Siculus. Bibli. hist. lib. 2. sect. 23. Orosius hist. lib. 1. cap 19. Invenal. Satyr. 8. & AElij Lampri∣dij Heliogabalus. those Monsters, if not shames of Men and Nature: was ever the effeminate lewdnesse of For which see August. De Civ. Dei. l 4. c 6. Lactantus. De falsa Relig. c. 20. Alexander al le. l. 6. c. 8. Plutarchi Alexander Calepini Floa. Flora or Thais, com∣parable unto that which our artificiall Stage-players (tray∣ned up to all lasciviousnesse from their Cradles) continually practise on the Stage, without blush of face, or sorrow of heart, not onely in the open view of men, but even of that Deus totus est visus. Pin. Nat. Hist. l. 1. c 7. all-eyed God, who will one day arraigne them for this their grosse effeminacie? And dare wee men, wee Christi∣ans yet applaud it? See Cyprian. Epist l. 1. Epist. 10. The third Blast of Retrait from layes p. 110, 111 Pitty is it to consider, how many inge∣nuous,
witty, comely youthes, devoted vnto God in baptisme, to whom they owe themselves, their service; are oft-times by their gracelesse Parents, even wholy consecrated to the Stage, (the See page 50 51, 52. Divels Chappell, as the Fathers phrase it) where they ae trained up in the See Master Gossons Schoole of Abuse with the Authors quoted. p. 50, 51, 52, 53. who thus stile it. Schoole of Vice, the Play-house, (as if their natures were not prone enough to sinne, unless they had the helpe of art to backe them) to the very excesse of all effeminacy, to act those womanish, whorish parts, which Pagans would even blush to personate. And is this a laudable, as many; a Populus A∣theniensis Al∣cibiadis vitijs semper levissi∣ma nomina imponeret lu∣dos & facili∣atem appel∣lans. Plutar∣chi Alcibiades. So we deale with this vice of Players. triviall, veniall, harmelesse thing, as most repute it? Is this a light, a despicable effeminacie, for men, for Christians, thus to adulterate, emasculate, meta∣morphose, and debase their noble sexe? thus purposely, yea, affectedly, to vnman, vnchristian, vncreate themselves, if I may so speake, and to make themselves, as it were, nei∣ther men nor women, but Monsters, (a sin as bad, nay worse than any Se esse adul∣terio libros exitiment qui naturam adul∣terant? Cle∣men Alexand. Paedagogi l. 3. cap. 3. adultery, offering a kinde of violnce to Gods owne worke,) and all to no other end but this;Manus Deo inferunt, quan∣do illud quod ipse formavit, reformare & transfigurare contendunt: quia opus Dei est omne quod nascitur; Dia∣boli quod cun quemutatur. Cyprian. De Habitu Virginum. lib. to exhilerate a confluence of unchaste, effeminate, vaine companions, or to become competent Actors on a Stage; See Augustine De Civit. Dei. l. 2. cap. 13.14.29. Macrobius Saturnal lib. 2. cap. 7. & Act. 7. Scene 7. ac∣cordingly. the greatest infamy that could befall an ancient Pagan Roman, or a Christian? Is this a meane, a pardonable wickednesse, to violate the Lawes of God, of Nature? to educate those in the very discipline and schoole of Satan, Ephes. 6.4 Gen. 18.19. Deut. 6.7. who should be trained vp in the admonition, feare, and nurture of the Lord? that so they may be more deepely 2 Tim. 2.26. Ephes. 2.2. Hebr. 215. enthralled to the Devils bondage all their dayes, (since Consuetudo est altera natura. Theodoret Sermo. 5. De Natura hominis Aristot. De memoria & Remine scentia lib. Claudian, De Consulatu Mal. Theod. Panygr. p. 162. Erasmus De Puerorum Educatione p. 12. Petrarch. De Remed. Viriusque Fortuna. lib. 1. Dialog. 24. Galataeus de Moribus lib. p. 21. Case Ethicorum lib. 2. cap. 1. accordigly. custome is another nature, Ierem. 13.23 it being as diffi∣cult a thing for such who are accustomed to evill, to doe good, as for an AEthiopian to change his skin, or a Leopard his spots,) and be made more sure partakers with him in his eternall torments at their deathes? O therefore let vs now at last
consider with our selves, the execrable effeminacy which attends the very acting of our Stage-playes; together with the danger accompanying this sinne, (which is no lesse, with∣out repentance, then the 1 Cor. 6.910. Gal. 5.19.20. eternall losse of heavens;) and then we shall, we cannot but abhorre all Stage-playes, even in this regard. SCENA QVARTA. FOurthly, as the grosse effeminacie,Argument. 19. even so the palpable vanitie, the ridiculous folly of acting Playes; doth ma∣nifest them to be evill; as this nineteenth Play-affronting Argument will evince. That whose very action, in its best acception, is but ridi∣culous folly and vanity, Rerum enim ridicularum vel ridendatū potius actio∣num imitato∣res exigendi sunt à nostra republica. Cum enim verba omnia à cogi∣tatione & moribus ema∣nent, fieri non potest, vt verba aliqua emit∣tantur ridicula quae non pro∣cedunt a mo∣ribus ridiculis. Sermo nim est fructus cogitationis. Si ergo qui risum movent exterminandi sunt a nostra republica, longè aest, vt nobis permittat risum movere. Aburdum enim esset quorum auditores esse prohibitum est, orum inveniri imitatores: multò autem esset ab∣surdius, studere vt ips sis ridiculus. Clemens Alexandr Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. must certainly be vnseemely, yea, unlawfull unto Christians. But such is the very action of Stage-playes. Therefore, they must certainly be unseemely, and un∣lawfull unto Christians. The Major is evident: First, because the Scriptures con∣demne See Act. 3. Scene 7. Iob 7.3. c. 31.5. Prov. 30.8. Eccles. 1.2. c. 7.15. c. 9.9. all vanity, and Iob 4.18. cap. 42.8. Psal. 38.5. Psal. 69.5. Prov. 5.23. c. 15.2.14. c 19.3. c. 24.9. Eccles. 1.17. c. 2.3.12 follie; together with Isay 9.17. Ier. 4.22. c. 5.4.21. Psal. 5.5. Psal. 74.18.22. Psal. 75.4. Psal. 26.4. Iudges 9.4. 2 Chron. 13.7. Prov. 12 11. c. 24.9. c. 2819. Ezech. 13.3. 2 Sam. 13.13. c. 24.10. Lam. 2.14. Mat. 12.36, 37. ph. 5.4. 2 Pet. 2.8. Titus 3.9. all vaine, all foolish actions, persons, speeches, words, gestures, as dangerous, and pernicious evils, Si vanitatis culpa nequa∣quam cautè compescitur, ab iniquitate protinus mens in cauta devoratur. Greg. Magn Moralium. l. 10. c. 13, 1, 15. & l 21 c. 6. vd. Ibid. which draw men by degrees to greater sinnes, Hae nugae seria ducun in mal Hrace de Arte Poetica l. p, 312. to serious mischiefes; commanding men with all Psal. 85.8. not to returne againe to folly, Eccles. 7.25.there being wickednesse and
madnesse in it,See m and n. to abandon-folly and vanities, which Vane occu∣paris in his ô cor sapiens, quae vanitaes vanitatum sunt; quia tu his neque ad beatitudinem indiges, nequ ad immortali∣tatem. Bernar De Interiori Domo cap. 25. promote not the eternall beatitude of their souls: Prou. 14.7. to depart from the presence of a foolish man, when as they perceive not in him the lips of knowledge. Secondly, because Vanitates vi∣tae mancipant vitijs: mate∣ria sunt dei∣ctorum, mini∣ster culparum, seminarium peccaorum. Chrysost. Quod Adam prlatus sit omni crea∣tu sermo. Tom. 1. Col. 444. C.D. vanitie and folly are the very matter, seminaries, and seeds of sinne, of wickednesse, there Nihil peius vanitate. A∣brose De A∣braham. lib. 2. cap. 10. being nothing worse then they. The Minor, as it is evident by the concurrent testimony of the fore-quoted Fathers, Acts 3. Scene 7. so it is such an experimentall knowne truth, that it were lost labour for to prove it. For what else is the personating of the Clownes, the Fooles, the Fantastickes, the Lovers, the Di∣stracted, discontented, lascivious, furious, angry persons part, but professed vanitie, or ridiculous affected folly? Yea, what else is the whole action of Playes, but well perso∣nated Pantomi∣um aspicis? vanitas est? &c. Ambrose Ear. in Psal. 118. Ocon. 5. He August. De Cvi. Dei. l. 1. c. 32. stiles Playes Licentia vanitatum. vanity, artificiall folly, or a lesse Bedlam frenzie? He who shall seriously survay Quorsum abeant sani? creta an carbone notandi? AEdificare casas, plostello adjungere mures, Ludere par impar, equitare aundine longa. Si qem delectat barbatum amentia verset. Si puerilius his, de∣lirus & amens, Dictatur meritò. Quid discrepat istis histrio? Horace Sermonum. lib 2 Satyr. 3. the ridiculous, childish, in∣confiderate, yea, mad and beastly actions, gestures, speeches, ha∣bits, prankes and fooleries of Actors on the Stage, (if he be not childish, foolish, or frentique himselfe) must needs deeme all Stage-players children, fooles, or Bedlams; since they act such parts, such pranks, yea, use such gestures, speeches, ray∣ment, complements, and behaviour in Iest, which none but children, fooles, or mad-men, doe act, or vse in earnest. There is Ille sinistrorsum, hic dexrorsum abit. Vnus vtrique error, sed varijs illu∣dit partibus; hoe to Crede modo insanum, nihilo vt sapientior ille qui deides. Ho∣ace, Ibidem. o difference at all betweene a fool, a fantastique, a Bedlam, a Whore, a Pander, a Cheater, a Tyrant, a Drun∣kard, a Murtherer, a Divell on the Stage (for his part is oft-times acted) and those who are such in truth, but that the former are farre worse, farre more inexcusable than the latter, because they wilfully make themselves that in sport, to foment Nunc tibicinibus, nunc est gauuisa Tragaedis, Nutrice pulla vlut fi¦luderet infans Horace Epist. l. 2. Epist. 1. p. 280. the more then childish folly, of some vaine
Spectators, which these others are, perchance from naturall necessity, or at least from colourable grounds? Bernard ad Gulielmum Abbatem A∣pollog. Flendas dixerim, an ridendas ineptias? The foolery, the ridiculous∣nesse of acting Playes is such, that I know not whether men should more bewaile it, or deride it. Sure I am, though ew Spectators can finde teares to deplore the sinulnesse, yet most of them can afford laughter to deride the vanity, the folly of acting Playes. Since therefore Stulta per se sunt ridicula: Ridiculum est etiam omne quòd apertè fingitur. Quntlian Instit. Orator. l. . . 4. p. 380. Quoniam lu∣dus est inter ucunda, & omnis remissio animi, & risus inter jucunda, necesse est eti∣am ridicula jucunda esse & homines, & orationes, & opera Aristot. Rhetr. l. 1. c. 11 p. 81. Democri∣tus omnes deridbat, quia dicebat omnes insaniri. AElian. Variae Histor. l. 4. c. 20. vanitie and folly are the genuine proper objects of derision, and mens voluptuous smiles; the laughter Playes occasion, (which is their chieest end,) is a sufficient evidence of their excessive folly; and so ground enough for Christians, for all men to condemne them as vanities, as fooleries, as Si enim ridiculam figuram suscipere, quemadmodum in pompis videntur nonnulli, in animum minim induxerims, quomodo internum hominem magis ridiculam sustinere iguram jure passi fuerimus? Et si personam nostram, non nostra quidem sponte, in ma∣gis ridiculosam vn quam converterimus, quomodo in verbis sluduerimus esse & videri ridiculi, id quod est omnium quae sunt in homine longe precio cissimum, nmpe rationem ac sermonem ludibrio habentes? Ridiculum est ergo haec execere, quando quidem nec huiusmodi ridiculorum hominum Oratio digna est quae audiatur, per haec nomina ad turpia facta assufaciens. Paedagog l. 2. c. 5. Clemens Alexandrinus, and other Fathers doe at large declare. And thus much for the first considerable thing in the manner of acting Stage-playes. SCENA QVINTA. THe second circumstance considerable in the forme of acting Playes, is the severall parts and persons sustai∣ned in them: which suggests this twentieth Play-oppug∣ning Argument.Argument. 20. Those Playes, whose very parts and persons are sinfull, yea, abominable, are certainly unseemely, unlawfull unto Christians.
But Iratus senex, edax Parasi∣tus, sycopan∣ta impuens, avarus leno assidu agendi sunt mihi, cla∣more summo, cum labore maxumo. Te∣entij Heuton∣timor, Prolo∣gus: p. 85. such are the parts, the persons most frequent in all Stage-playes. Therefore they are certainly unseemely, unlawfull uto Christians. The Maior is irrefragable, because Partes totum sum vt con∣stituunt, ita determinant. Kecker Sy∣stem. Log. l. 1. c. 22. p. 192. Partis & to∣tius eadem est ratio. Totum sapitnaturam suarum parti∣um. Bed; Ax∣iomata Philo∣sophica. Tom. 2. Col. 164. such as the parts are, such is the whole, which is composed of them: If the parts then be evill, the intiretie that springs out of them must bee such. The Minor I shall evidence by this Induction. In all our Stage-playes, we have most vsually the parts and persons of See Act. 3. Scene 1. &. 3. Cyprian. & Tertullian de Spectaculis. l. accordingly. Divel-gods and Goddesses; of Iupiter, Mars, Apollo, Ve∣nus, Vulcan, Saturne, Cupid, Neptune, Mercurie, Esculapius, Hercules, Pluto, Bacchus, Ceres, Minerva, Diana, Iuno, Pro∣serpina, Flora, Priapus, and others: yea, sometimes the very part and person of the See Ludovi∣cus Vives, No∣tae in August. De Ciuit. Dei. l. 12. c. 25. C. accordingly. Divell himselfe; whose workes, whose pompes and vanities all Christians have renounced in their Baptisme: Adde we to these, the parts and repre∣sentations of Saltantes Satyros imitabitur Alphesibaeus, Virgil. Eclog. 5. p. 14. Satyres, Silvanes, Muses, Nymphes, Fries, Hobgoblins, Fairies, Fates, with such other heathen vanities, which Christians should not name, much lesse resemble; To∣gether with the parts, the persons, Concil. Con∣stantinop. 6. Can. 62.65 70.6. & Act. 3. Scene 1. accordingly. of Whores, Whorema∣sters, Adulterers, Bawdes, Panders, Tyrants, Traitors, Theeves, Murtherers, Paricides, Drunkards, Parasites, Pro∣digals, Hypocrites, Fooles, Ruffians, Wooers, Epicures, Fanta∣stiques, Pennie-Fathers, Vsurers, Scolds, Drabbes, Ravishers, Wantons, Bedlams, Turkes, Infidels, and See the Printed Comaedies and Tragaedies of Aristophanes, Terence, Menander, Pauus, Euripides, So∣phocles, Seneca, and all our moderne Playes: Together with Master Stubs, Master Northbrooke, Master Gosson, and others in their Treatises against Playes accodingly. all other desperate wicked persons whatsoever.Vter est inanior hrm? Horace Serm. l. 2. Sat. 3. p. 207. There is scac one Divell in Hell, hardly a notorious sinne or Aspice, Plautus Quo pacto partes tutetur amantis Ephebi, Vt patris attenti, lenonis vt insidiosi? Quantus sit Dorse∣nus edacibu in Parasitis, Horace Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 283. sinner upon earth, either of moderne or ancient times, but hath some part or other in Stage-playes. And can they then be lawfull, be tollerable
unto Christians, being consarcinated of such polluted parts and persons as these? Doubtlesse, he who will but cordially, but Christianly survay those filthy Pagan Divel-gods and Goddesses; those outragious beastly lusts, un∣paralleld abominations, and execrable sinners, which have their Acts, their Scenes, their Parts, in Stage-playes; must necessarily abandon Playes, (as Nihil ex his quae spectacu∣lis dputantur placitum Do est, aut con∣gruens Dei servis: omnia propter Dia∣bolum institu∣ta sunt & ex Diaboli rebus instructa Ter∣tul. De spectac. c. 24. Merito malis volupta∣tibus vestrs & pompis absti∣nemus, quo∣rum & de sa∣cris oiginem novimus, & vt noxia blandi∣menta dam∣namus. Minu∣cius Felix. Octavius p. 123. Isiodor. hisp. Origi∣num l. 18. c. 51 accordingly. all ancient Christians did) as pastimes more fit for Devils than for Christians: else hee must needs justifie, not onely sinne and sinners, but even Hell it selfe which abounds not with Amphiea∣trum enim omnium Dae∣monum tem∣plum est: tot illic immundi spiritus consi∣dun, quot ho∣mines apit. Tertl. De Spectac. Tm. 2 p. 392. more polluted Deuils, and Devill-Idols; with more prodigious Monsters of im∣pietie, with more stupendious matchlesse villanies, than the Stage, whose wickednesse oft-times, transcends even that of the infernall Lake. For there, men onely suffer and bewaile with teares, the eternall tortures which their sinnes occasi∣on: Whereas men in Theaters, are so farre from sinne-lamenting sorrow, that they even delight themselves with the representations of those wickednesses, which the origi∣nall Authors of them now deplore in Hell. And is not this Prov. 10.23. c. 13.9. 2 Pet. 2.12. Supra omnm autem monstruosi piaculi execrati∣onem est, scelus smmum admiere, & pudorem scleris non habre. Savian. De Guber. Dei, l. 7. p. 263.a desperate matchlesse madnesse, for men, for Christians, to sport themselves with those individuall sinnes upon the Stage, which the parties acted in the very bitternesse of their soules, are condoling now in Hell? To make that their chiefest earthly pleasure, which is now the damned acted parties greatest paine, and without repentance may prove theirs too? To raise up damned soules or Devils out of Hell; with all those horrid sinnes that sunke them thither, to no other end but this, to play them on the Stage for laughter-sake: and yet never cordially to consider the dolefull See 2 Pet. 2.4. Iude 6. Isay 66.24. Matth. 25.41, 46. Revel. 2.10, 2 Thess 1.7, , 9. condition of the persons, nor seriously to lamen the damnablenesse, the eternall punishment of the sinnes thus acted in their sight? O that our Playes, our Play-haunters would now seriously consider, that the persons whose parts, whose sinnes they act and see, are even then yeing
in the ndesinenter mediand aeternae dam∣naionis sup∣plicium in quo quicquid pae∣narum excogi∣tari potest, qicquid etiā nn potest, sper adest: cuius vermis immortalis ignis extin∣gbilis, aetr intolrabilis est: cuius tor∣rentes in pi∣cem covertun∣tur, & humus in sulphur, ar∣debit que in sempiternum: cujus lacus faguine igne∣que permixtus est, & quos∣cu que sus∣pit demergit siul & exu∣rit. Ambrse Praecatio 2. Praetar. ad Missam. Tom. 5. p. 168 E. eternall flames of hell, for these particular sinnes of theirs, even then whiles they are playing of these sinnes, these parts of theirs on the Stage! O that they would now remember the sighes, the groanes, the teares, Rom. 2.5, 9. Mat. 13.42, 50. the anguish, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, the cryes, and shreekes, that these wickedneses cause in Hell, whiles they are acting, applau∣ding, committing and laughing at them in the Play-house! And this, if there be any Sparke of humanity, of Christiani∣tie; any feare of God, of Sinne, of Hell, remaining in them; would soone embitter the most Sugred Stage-playes to their soules, and engage them to detest them (unlesse they are marked ou for Hell) for such like torments as these now sustaine. Certainely, he can never have a share in Heaven, that makes a mocke, a Play, a Pastime of the Parts, the Sins of those Devils, Pagans, and flagitious persons who are now in Hell. He who can thus make Sinne, or Hell, or Devils, Qui vult reg∣nar cum Christo, non potest gaudere cum sae culo. Ambrose Sermo 11. his earthly solace here, shall undoubtedly enjoy no other Heaven but Hell hereafter. Let the consideration therefore of these parts, these persons sustained in our Stage-playes, perswade us to renounce them, as See Ioanes Langhecrucius, De Vita & honestate Ecclesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 21, 22. mis-beseeming Christi∣ans to sport themselves withall; From whose hearts they should rather draw mournfull teares, than foolish laugh∣ter. SCENA SEXTA. THe third thing considerable in the very action of Stage-playes, is the apparell in which they are acted, which is first of all womanish and effeminate, belonging properly to to the femall sex; therefore unlawfull, yea, abominable un∣to
men. From whence this twenty one Argument is dedu∣cible.Argument 21. These Playes wherein men act any womens parts in wo∣mans apparell, must needs be sinfull, yea, abominable unto Christians. But in all, or at least in most Stage-playes whatsoever, men act the parts of See Athaeneu Dipnosoph. lib. 14. cap. 7. women in womans apparell. Therefore they must needs be sinfull, yea, abominable vn∣to Christians. The Minor is a notorious experimentall truth which all Players, all Play-haunters must acknowledge: which Philo Iudaeus de Fortitudine. l. p. 1001.1002 Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 23. Cypri De Spect. lib & Epist. l. 1. Ep. 10. Lactan∣tius Div. Instit. Epi. ca. 6. Chry∣sostom. Hom. 38. in Matth. Augu∣stin. Soliloquiorū. l. 2. c. 6. Isior. Hispalnsis. Ori∣ginū. l. 18. c. 48. & Concilium Constantinop. 6. Com. 62. See Scene 3. be∣fore.sun∣dry Fathers, and approved Caluin, Iuni, Tostatus, Pellica∣n, Cornelius, à Lapide in Deut 22. v. 5. D. Rinolds Overthrovv of Stage-playes, p. 8. to 20. and 85. to 103. The 3. Blast of Retreit from Playes and Theaters. M. Nothbrooke, M Gosson, vvith others hereafter quoted in their Treatises against Stage-playes. moderne Authrs testifie. The Maior is undeniably confirmed by Deuteronomie 22. verse 5. The Woman shall not weare that which pertaineth nto a man, neither shall a man put on a womans garment; for all that doe so, are abomination to the Lord thy God. God himselfe doth here expresly inhibit men to put on womans apparell, because it is an abomination to him: there∣fore it must certainly be unlawfull, yea abominable for Players to put on such apparell to act a womans part. If any here obiect (as D. Gager in D. Rei∣nolds Overthrovv of Stage-playes, p. 9.15, 86, 91, 92. D. Gentiles in his Letter to D. Reinolds, Ibid. p. 167.169.170. and Haywood in his Apologie for Actors. some Play-patrons doe) that this Scripture extends to those alone, who usually clothe themselues in womans array from day to day; or to those Item feminae virlem habitum malo animo gestantes, quo perversam suam exple∣ant voluntatem à venerando hoc Sacramento arcendae sunt, donec id mali penitus correxerint & satisecerint, Synodus Augustensis 1548. Surius Com. 4. p. 807. who put it on with a lewde inten to circumvent or inamor others: or to satisfie their lusts: in which case the Synode of Augusta inhibits women, who put on mans apparell, from the Sacrament, till they have repented: not to such who only weare it now and then to act a womans part, or Aquinas prima secundae. Quaest. 102. Artic. 6.6. and secunda secundae. Quaest. 169. Artic. 2.3. in case of necessity to saue their liues, as some haue done.
Answer 1.To this I answer; First, that sundry common Actors doe usually once a day, at leastwise twice or thrice a weeke, attire themselues in womens array to act their female parts; yea, they make a daily practice of it to put on womens attire, it being inseparably incident to their lewde profession: therefore they are within the expresse condemnation of this Scripture, and their owne most fauourable glosse vpon it, as the obiection it selfe doth euidence. 2Secondly, the very putting on of womans apparell to act a Play, though it be but now and then for an houre or two, See D. Rinolds Ouerthrow of Stage-playes, p. 8. to 20. and 85. to 103, where this point is excel∣lently discus∣sed: with all the Fathers, Councels, and Authors quo∣ted in the 6. Answer fol∣lowing. is directly condemned by this Scripture: which prohibits, not onely the frequent wearing, but the ve∣ry putting on of womens apparell, for the words are not: A man shall not ordinarily or frequently put on a womans garment, nor yet weare it now and then to a lewde intent, as the Obiectors Hoc inter∣praetari est, an derstári? Au∣gust. De Civit. Dei. l. 7. c. 24. glosse it: but, Neither shall a man put on a wo∣mans garment. The originall word Iilbosch, which signi∣fieth to put on: is the very same (as D. Reinolds O∣verthrow of Stage-playes. p. 101.102. M. Dike of the Deeitfulnesse of mans heart. cp. 17. p. 186. two Worthies of our Church obserue) with that of the 1 Sam. 17.38, 39. where it is written; that SAVL clothed DAVID with his Armor, and put an Helmet of brasse upon his head, &c. If then Dauid in the Scripture phrase, were said to put on SAVLS Ar∣mor, though Ibidem v. 39. he put it off immediately, because he had it once upon him, though for a little space; then he who puts on a womans rayment but to act a part, though it be but once, is doubtlesse a putter on of womens apparell, within the very litterall meaning of this Scripture; and so a ground delinqvent against God: because the very putting on of a womans garment, not the fre∣quent or long wearing of it, is the thing this text con∣demnes, as the word put on imports. 3Thirdly, the very reason of this precept expressed in the text, will take off this evasion: The woman shall not weare that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a womans garment: marke the reason. For all that doe so, are abomination to the Lord thy God. That which
makes a man an abomination to the Lord his God, must be such a thing as is sinfull and abominable in its owne nature, not in its abuse or circumstances onely, as the See Deut. 7.25, 26. c. 11.31 c. 13.14. c. 19.9. c. 18.11, 12. c. 23.17, 18, c. 24.4. c. 27.15. Prov. 3.32. c. 6 16, 17, 18, 19. c. 11.1, 20. c. 12 22. c. 15.8, 9, 26. c. 16.5, 12. where nought but capital sins only are stiled abomination, and so in other Scriptures. Scriptures, and Abominatio in Scriptura non est nisi propter morta∣le peccatum. Summa Theolo∣giae, pars 2. Quaest. 135. Membr. 2. vid. Ibidem. Alexander Alesius testifie: If a mans putting on of wo∣mans apparell were not simply euill in it selfe, the fre∣quent wearing of it, or the putting of it on to a sinister intent, could not make him an abomination vnto God. For the vse Gen 3.7, 21. Math. 6.25, to 31. 1 Tim. 2.9. Revel. 3.18. Ezech. 16.10. of apparell being to clothe and adorne the body; if the putting on of it were not vnlawfull, the frequent putting on of it, being the true vse of it, could not bee sinfull, and so not abominable; there Heb. 1.13. Psal. 5.4, 5, 6. Omne quod turpe est, Deo displicet. Iustitia Dei odit & detestatur vita, docet virtutes Remigius Explanat. in Rm. 1.32 Bibl. Patum. Tm. 6. ars. 3. p. 813. G. being nothing odi∣ous vnto God but sinne, and sinfull things. Since then this putting on of womans apparell is an abomination to the Lord: not onely the frequent wearing of it, or the putting of it on to lewde intents, but euen the bare put∣ting of it on to act a vicious Play, Concedemus ne ergo hoc semel fieri? Ne quaquam. Quare? Quo∣niam etsi semel tantum fiat, malum est similiter. Quamobrem sic quidem oblectri, si est quidem malum, ne semel quidem fiat. Sin autem non est malum, semper fiat. Chrysost Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 357. B.C. though it be but once, must needs be within the verge of this sacred inhibi∣tion. Fourthly, this precept; Neither shall a man put on a womans garment, as it is a branch of the morall law, hauing a relation to the 7. See Calvin on the 7. Commande∣ment, and the Authors hereafter quoted. Commandement, and to seueral 1 Cor. 11.5. to 17. 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. Scriptures in the New Testament, concerning modesty and decency in apparell: as good Bp. Babington, M. Perkins, M. Dod, M. Brinsley, M. Downebam M. Elon, M Lake, and others on the 7. Commandement. D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes, p. 10. and others hereafter quoted, Answer 6. ensuing. Diuines obserue. So it is a vniuersall negatiue, which by the rules D. Perkins Cases of Conscience. lib. 2. c. 12. of Theologie bindes all men, in all cases, in all places, both Semper & ad Semper; alwayes, and at all times whatsoeuer: therefore a man putting on of womens apparell at any time vpon
any occasion (yea in case of sauing life, Augustinus So∣liloquiorum. l. 2. c. 16. D. Rei∣nolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes. p. 14. as some affirme) but especially to act a Bawdes, a Sorceresses, Whores, or any other lewde females part vpon the Stage; must vn∣doubtedly be within the expresse letter of this univer∣sall negative text; and so an abomination to the Lord. Neither will this Qid te ex∣empta invat pluris de spini∣bus un Ho∣race Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 2. p. 294. poore evasion of acting in womans ap∣parell but now and then, take off its guilt; For since mens putting on of such aray is here prohibited by a negative precept, which bindes at all times, as an abo∣mination to the Lord, and a thing that is sinfull in its owne nature; the Quod enim per se malum est, non quod frequentius factm sit, sed quod aliquan∣do factum est, vituperbile. Bernard De Mo∣do bn viven∣di. lib. rarity of it can no wayes expiate the sinfulnesse that is in it. Nusquam & nunquam ex∣custur quo Deus damnat. Nusquam & nunquam licet quod semper & ubique non li∣ce. Tertul. De Spectac. lib. c. 16. That which is sinfull in it selfe, is no where, no time lawfull vpon no occasion. It is Augustin. Quaest. super Levit. l. 3. c. 68 Tom. 4. pars 1. p. 296.297. accordingly. no iustification, no excuse at all for a Murtherer, an Adulterer, Swearer, Lier, Theefe, Drunkard, or the like, to pleade, that he commits these sinnes but seldome upon some special causes, because Gods precepts are so stict, that they 1 Iohn 2.1. Deut. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. Luk. 1.75. 1 Pet. 4.2. Acts 24.16. allow no place, no time for any sinne. The infrequency, the rarenesse then of wearing wo∣mans apparell (suppose it were as rare vpon the Stage as now it is common) addes nothing to its lawfulnesse, it still continues an abomination to the Lord. Fiftly, admit it were lawful for a man to put on womās apparell to saue his life, or to avoid some imminent dan∣ger, Statius Achilleid. l. 1. as Achilles, Gellius 5. Noct. Attic. lib. 6. cap. 10. Euclis, Matthew Paris. Hist. Angliae. pag. 160.161. Iohn Bale Acts of English Votaries, lib. 2. fol 107. William Bp. of Ely, with See D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 11.89, 90. some few others, Plu∣tarch. De vitutius mulierum. Mor. Tom. 1. p. 519.520. & The Tyrrheneans are recorded to haue done, though Soliloquiorum. lib. 2. cap. 2. S. Augustine himselfe makes a Quaere of its lawfulnesse euen in case of life, and Abros. Irenaeo. Tom. 1. pag. 233. D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 14. others determine it to be unlawfull, it be∣ing a negatiue morall precept which admits no qualifications; yet it followes not hence, that therefore it is lawfull for Mn-actors to put on womens aray to act a Play: For doubtlesse if it be abominable in any case, or in case of
daily use, as all acknowledge; it must necessarily bee so in case of acting Playes, which ee M. Gossons Schoole of A∣buses. are but a meere abuse. For first, Playes themselues, at leastwise the personating of the Bawdes, Adulteresses. Whores, or Sorceresses part, which sauour of nought else but lewdnesse and effeminacy, are euill: therefore the Nullus habi∣tus apud nos li∣cius est illicito actui ascriptus. Tertullian De Idololatria. l 18 Tom. 2. p. 462. very putting on of womans apparell to act such parts, cannot be good. Secondly, Playes, and female parts in Playes, admit they bee not simply euill, yet they See Scene 4. accordingly. are but meere superluous vanities; or Abuses, as some rightly stile them, there is no neces∣sary vse of Playes, of womens parts in Playes, or of acting female parts in womans apparell. For men there∣fore to put on womans attire contrary to this sacred precept, to act a lewde lasciuious womans part out of a meere effeminate, vaine, lasciuious humour, there being no urgent necessity, no warrantable occasion so to doe, Nemo im∣mundus mun∣dus videri po∣test. Tunicam si induas in∣quinatam per se, poteris or∣sitan illam nō inquinare per te, sed tu per illam mundus esse non pote∣ris. Terul. De Idololatria. lib. c. 18. p. 461. must needs be a great abomination, a most apparant viola∣tion of this ample precept; which being in it selfe Psal. 119.96. ex∣ceeding broad, as all Gods precepts are, must alwayes be ta∣ken in its utmost latitude, without any humane restricti∣ons of our owne; since God himselfe (who can onely make exceptions out of his owne generall rules) hath left us no evasion from it in his Word. Sixtly, the concurrent testimony of sundry Councels, Si enim di∣uinae authori∣tates nullum dant loum, frustra quaeri∣mus qua exoramus. Tenendum est enim omnino praeceptum Dei, & volunts Dei in ijs, quae tenendo praeceptum ejus passi fuerimus aequo animo sequenda. August. De Mendaio ad Cnsentium cap. 15. Fathers, & moderne Authors, do absolutely condemne mens putting on of womans apparell, (and so è conuerso) especially to act a part vpon the Stage, as an abomina∣ble, unnaturall, effeminate and dishonest thing. Hence the ancient Councell of Eliberis, Canon 57. decreed, Matronae vel earum mariti, vestimenta sua ad or∣nandam seculariter pompam non det. Et si ecerint, triennij tempore abstineant. Surius Concil. Tom. 1. p. 366.That Marons, or their Husbands should not lend their clothes to set forth any sicular Playes or Shewes; and if any did it, that they should be excommunicated for three yeeres space. If then
the very lending of womens apparell to act a Play in, were so great a crime as to demerit 3. yeeres excommunica∣tion, what doth a Players personating of a womans part in such aray deserue? The Councell of Gangra in the yeere of our Lord 324. Can. 13. & 17. decreed; Si qua mulier propter conti∣nentiam, que putatur, habi∣tum mutat, & pro solito m∣liebri amictum virilem sumit, vel cines at∣tondt, quod ei Deus in sub∣jectionis mate∣riam tribuit, tanquam prae∣ceptum dissol∣vens obedien∣tiae, anthema sit. Surius Concil. To. 1. p. 373. Sozmeni Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 13. Gratianus Di∣stinctione 30. & Summa Angelica. Tit. Faemia. That if any woman under pretence of chastity, or piety, as was suppo∣sed, should change her habit, and put on mans apparell; or clip and poll her haire (as our shorne English Viragoes doe of late) which God had giuen her as a badge of her subiection; she should be anahematized, as a dissolver of the prcept of o∣bedience: it being directly contrary to this text of Deuteronomy: The woman shall not weare that which per∣taineth to the man, &c. and to the 1 Cor. 10.6, 15. It is a shame for a woman to be shauen or shorne: but if she haue long haire, it is a glory unto her, for her haire is giuen her for a coue∣ring. Indeed I finde some precedents of women, who haue beene peccant in this kinde: As namely, Nonnullae autē mulieres pietatis simula∣tione caput tondere, & contra quàm deceret sexum muliebrem, virilem habitum induere adductae sunt: His de causis Episcopi finitimi Gangris in unum convenerunt, &c. Sozem. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 13. some seduced female disciples of Eustatius, who polled their heads, and clad themselues in mans apparell, under a pretext of piety; for the redresse of whose enormous mannish courses this very Councell was assembled. Ambros. De Virginibus, l. 2. Tom. 4. p. 223.224. See Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 15. c. 13. A Virgin, of whom S. Ambrose speakes, who clothed her selfe in mans array to save her chasti∣ty, and so escaped. Plutarchi Plato. p. 344. Marcilius Ficinus in vita Platonis, & D. Rinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 90.91. Laschonia and Axiothea, who resorted unto Plato his Schoole in mans attire. Plutarchi Amatruus, Tom. 3. Moral. p. 345.346. Si. Asterij Homilia. An liceat dimittere uxorem? Bib. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 707. G. Empona the renowned wife of Iulius Sabinus, who polled her haire, and disguised her selfe in mans apparell, and so went to Rome, the better to con∣ceale her Husband, whose life was then indangered. Simon Metaphrastes in vita Euphrosmes apud Surium. Probat. Sanct. Hist. Tom. 1. Antonini Chronicon. pars . Tit. 15. cap. 13. sect. 9. Euphro∣sina, a famous Virgin of Alexandria, who under a pretence of chastity, did cut her haire, and put on mans array, and so en∣tred into a Monastery, where she continued thus disguised for
38. yeeres space. The Mathw Pari Historiae An∣gliae p. 314. famous Maide of Burgundie, in the yeere 1225. who polling her head, and apparelling her selfe in masculine garments, of purpose to preserue her virginity, her Father being desirous to bestow her in mrriage, entred into religion in a Monastery of the Friers Minorities, where she lived thus metamorphosed into a Monke, for divers yeeres. Platina in vi∣ta Ioannis 8. Ioannis Vale∣rian. De Sacer∣dotum Barbis. See Alexander Cooke, his Pope Ione, & Balaeus De vitis Pon∣tificum. Pope Ione that masculine Roman Strumpet of knowne infa∣my, who transforming her selfe into the habit and tonure of a man, repaired in this her disguize unto the Vniversity, where she lived many yeeres; and at last she aspired into the very Popes unerring Throne, by this her masculine habit and ton∣sure, as a man; till her unexpected delivery of a base-borne issue in the very middest of her solemne procession, discried her to be a woman. Antoini Chro∣nicon, pars 2. Tit. 15. c. 13. sect. 4.5, 7, 9, 10. fol. 130.131 A notable Damsell of Corinth, together with Metania and Marina, who under pretext of vowing virginity, and preserving their chastity, disguised themselues in mans ap∣parell, and so entred into Monasteries, as professed Monkes, See Synodus Augustensis. An. 1548. Su∣rius Tom. 4. p. 807.the better to satisfie their lusts among those Gotish shavelings. Polychronicon. Book vlt. c. 18. fol. 325. Hol∣linshead. p. 604. Graftns Chro∣nicle. p. 534.547. Speeds Hi∣story of E∣glish Monr∣chy, p. 833.834, 835. Puell de Dieu, that notable French Virag, who arrayed her selfe like a man, and turned a great Commander in the Wars, till at last she was taken prisoner by the English in the field, attired and armed like a man; for which unnaturall act of hers, she was condemned and burnt at Roan. Iohn Ba his Declaration of Edmond Bonnrs Articles, Anno 1554. Artic. 4. fol. 2. The Whore apprehended in Suffolke, in King Henry the VIII. his Raigne, by M. Wharton, who being disguised in mans appa∣rell, was taken in the company of foure Popish shaveling Priests, good Curates; who one after another had bestowed their chastity upon her. All which for this their mannish immodest attyring themselues in mans accoutrements, incur the execration of this text and Councell. If then a womans putting on, or wearing of mans apparell, or the imitati∣on of his tonsure incurres an Anathema by this Coun∣cels doome, though chastity, learning, and devotion were pretended for it: doth not a mans attring him∣selfe in womans vestments, of purpose to act an ffemi∣nate lascivious, amorous Strumpets part upon the Stage, much more demerit it, since there can be no good pre∣text
at all for it? But to come punctually to our pur∣pose. The 6. generall Councell of Constantinople, Canon 62. Eas quae no∣mine orum, qui falsò a∣pud Graecos dij nominati sunt, vel no∣mine viro∣rum ac mu∣lierum fiunt saltationes ac mysteria more antiquo & à vita Chistia∣norum lieno, amandamus & xpellimus; statuentes ut nuslus vir de∣inceps mulie∣bri veste indu∣atur, vel muli∣er veste viro conveniente. Sed neque comicas, vel satyricas vel tragicas personas induant, &c. Surius Concil. Tom. 2. pag. 109. expresly prohibits and abandons all daunces and mysteries made in the names of those who were falsly stiled gods among the Graecians, or in the name of men or women, after the anci∣ent manner, farre differing from the life of Christians: ordai∣ning, that no man should from thence-forth put on a womans garment, nor no woman a mans apparell; and that o man should put on the person or visard of a Comedian, a Satyrist, or a Trgaedian, vnder paine of deposition, if a Clergie-man; of ex∣communication, if a Lacke. This is punctuall. Philo, a lear∣ned Iew, records; Tanta porro contentione lex studet exercere confirmare{que} animos ad fortitudinem, ut & de vestimentis qua∣libus utendum sit praecipiat; disertè interdicens, ne vir sumat muliebria, ne vel mbra aut vestigium effaeminationis sexui masculo inurat aliquam maculam. Sem∣per enim naturam sequendo observat, quid deceat etiam in rebus minimis, quae in∣fra curam legislatoris uideri poterant. Cum enim animdverteret deformia esse virorum mulierum{que} corpora, & utris{que} sua esse officia; alteris attributam esse cu∣ram rei domesticae, alteris publicae, & ab ipsa natura non ad eadem factos negotia, oportere{que} bonam mentem sequi naturae instituta, utile iudicavit de his quo{que} re∣bus decernere, scilicet de victu amictu{que} & huiusmodi caeteris; voluit enim virum his se ut virum decet gerere, praesertim in vestitu: quem cum die no∣tu{que} circumferat, talis esse debet, ut um semper decori honestatis{que} admoneat. Sic & mulierem ornans pro dignitate, vetat vestem virilem sumere, longè submonens tum effaeminatos viros, tum plus aequo viriles faeminas. Philo De Fortitudine. lib pag. 1001.1002. That the law doth study to exercise and confirme mens mindes to fortitude with so great earnestnesse, that it also giues precepts what garments must be used, expresly prohibiting, that the man should not take vnto him womans apparell, lest the shadow or footsteps of effeminacy, should stamp some blemish on the masculine sex. For by following nature, he doth alwayes obserue what is seemely euen in the smallest things, which might seeme to be below the care of a Law-giver. For when he considered that the bodies of men and women were deformed, and that both of them had their distinct offices; that to the one of them the care of domestique businesses was commit∣ted to the other the mannaging of publike affaires, and that by nature her selfe they were not both made for the same im∣ployments,
and that a good minde ought to follow the instructi∣ons of nature, he thought it fit to determine of these things also, to wit, of food and rayment, and other things of this nature: For he would that a man in these things should so demeane himselfe as a man ought to doe, especially in apparell; which since he carrieth it about with him night and day, it ought to be such as may alwayes admonish him both of comlinesse and honesty: S also adorning the woman according to her degree, he forbids her to weare a mans garment; remouing far both effeminate men, and women more manly then is fit. Clemens Alexandrinus, as O quanta est haec iniquitas, &c? Paedagg. lib. 3. c. 3. Se. here Scene 3. he condemnes the putting on of womans apparell as a great iniquity; Quamnam e∣nim habet ra∣tionem, quod lex viro prohi∣bet, ne vestem induat mulie∣brem? An non nos vult esse viros, & ne corpore, nec factis, nec mē∣te, nec verbis effaeminari? Vult enim eū esse masulum, qui veritati dat operam in fe∣rendis labori∣bus, & pepes∣sionibus, in vita & moribus, in sermone & exercitatione, noctu & interdi, & sicubi martyrio opus sit quod procedat per sanguinem. Stromat. l. 2. fol 8. D. See Gossa ordi∣naris & Lyra in Deut. 22. so he demands this question; Why the law in this very text of Deuteronomy did inhibit a man to put on a womans garment? and he resolves it thus; Because the law would have us to be men, and not to be effeminate neither in body, nor in deds, nor in minde, nor in words. Which reason doth more especially hold in case of Playes, where our Men-women Actors are most effeminate, both in apparell, body, words, and workes. Tertullian obserues: Nullū deni{que} cultum à Deo maledictū invenio, nisi mu∣liebrem in viro: Maledictus enim, inquit, omnis qui muliebribus induitur, &c. De Idolatria. lib. c. 16. that no kinde of rayment as he could finde was accursed of God, but womens apparell worne by men; for God saith, Cursed is every man who is clad in womans aray. Caeterum cum in lege praescribit, maledictū esse qui muliebri∣bus vestitur, quid de pantomimo iudicabit, qui etiam muliebribus curatur? Sane & ille artifex impunitus ibit? De Spectac. cap. 23. Therefore (writes hee) when as God prescribes in his law, that he is accursed who is clothed in womans apparell; what will he iudge of the Stage-player, Clowne or Foole in the Play, who is attired in womans apparell? Shall this Crafts-master, this cheating Companion, thinke you, goe unpunished? S. Cprian writes expresly in his Epistle to Everatius; Nam cum in lege prohibeantur viri induere muliebrem vestem, & maledicti eiusmodi iudicentur, quantò maioris est criminis, non tantum muliebria indumenta accipere, sed & gestus quo{que} turpes, & molles, & muliebres magisterio impudicae artis exprimere? Ibidem. That men in the law are prohibi∣ted
to put on a womans garment, and those who doe it are ad∣iudged accursed: how much greater a crime is it then, not onely to put on womans apparell, but likewise to expresse disho∣nest, effeminate, womanish gestures, by the tutorship or direction of an unchaste art? Which passage he particularly applies to Stage-playes.Histrionum quo{que} nerua∣ta corpora, & in muliebrem incessum habi∣tum{que} mollita, impudicas fae∣minas in hone∣stis gestibus mēiuntur, &c. De Vero Cultu. lib. 6. c. 20. & Divinarum In∣fit Epi cap. 6. Lactantius, among other things, taxeth Players, for putting on womanish gestures, and apparell, to act the parts of infamous females: hauing an eye, no question, to this text of Deutronomy. Epiphanius Contra Haereses. lib. 2. Tom. 2. Haeresis 66. Col. 543. B. informes us: Turpe equi∣dem est virum faeminam fieri, & in faeminae forma sse. Turpissimum autem rursus, mulieres viros fieri, & viri ha∣bitum gestare, Ibidem. That it is a shamefull and dishonest thing for a man to become a woman, and to appeare in the forme of a woman. And that it is againe a most abominable thing for women to become men, (as many of haire-clipping moderne impudent Viragoes doe) and to weare the apparell of a man. Whence he condemnes the Apud Seras quidē viri cri∣nes implicāt, & domi desident unguentis de∣libuti, & effae∣minati, ac ux∣oribus parati. Mulieres vero vice versa, capillum capitis tondent, virili cingulo se cingunt, & in agro omnia opera proficiunt. Ibid. lib. 3. Cont. Haereses. Tom. 2. Col. 910. A.B. Seres for Heretiques; among whom the men did vse to nourish and plaite their haire into knots like women, (as our moderne Love-locke wearers doe) sitting all the day idlely at home, perfumes with oyntments, effeminate, and prepared for their wiues; whereas their women on the other side, did cut the haire of their heads, (as our English Man-women mon∣sters doe of late) and gird themselues about with a mans gir∣dle: both which are condemned by this text of Deu∣teronomy: and by the 1 Cor. 11. v. 3. to 15. which I would our moderne Rufians, and Mad-dames would consider. Gregory Nazianzen, Oratio. 1. ad Eunomianos, together with Elias, Metropolitan of Crete, in his Commentary on that Oration; affirme, Intem∣pestiuum quiddam esse ducimus florem hyberno tempore, vel mulieres habitu vi∣rili, vel muliebri viros ornari. Ibidem. pag. 7. That it is an unnaturall and dis∣orderly thing to see flowers in winter, or women clothed in mans, or men attired in womens apparell. Praeter naturam putandum est esse, ideo{que} ab ordine alienum, florem hiberno tempore conspici, vel mulieres virilem cultum induere, vel viros muliebrem; quum primum ex his tempora perturbet, al∣terum naturae formam non convenientem tribuat, permutato viri faeminae{que} orna∣tu, & ordine quem ipsis natura praescripsit, confuso. Ibidem.For (as Elias comments)
the first of these disturbes the times; the other yeelds an incon∣venient forme to nature, the ornament both of the man and woman being changed, and the order which nature hath pre∣scribed to them, being confounded. Vpon which ground they both condemne the Cynicke Maximus, and his sect, Comas quas prius perverso quodam studio aluerant. So∣lebant enim Cynici studio∣se comam ale∣re, magnaque diligentia pr∣ficere, ut cam prolixam ha∣berēt. Ibid Ora∣tio 19. p. 344.345. for nourishing and wearing their haire long, out of a perverse affe∣ction: as being an effeminate, and unnaturall thing. S. Hierom writes expresly; Peribit qui in faemineo lan∣guore mollitus comam nurit, cutem polit, & ad speculum comitur, quae proprie passio & insania mu∣lierum est. Com∣ment. in Soph. c. 1 Tom. 5. p. 210. P. That he shall eternally perish, who being effeminated in womannish feeblenesse, doth nourish his haire, pollish his skin, and trim himselfe by the glasse, which is the proper passion and madnesse of women. S. Cyprian records, In domo regis Diaboli sunt, qui capillis mulebribus se in faeminas transfiguant, & dignitatem virilem non sine naturae iniuria dehonestant. De Ieiunio & Tentatione. Sermo. Tom. 2. p. 287. That they are in the Devils House and Palace, who with womanish haire transfigure themselues into women, and dis∣grace their masculine dignity, not without the iniurie of nature. Pulchritudinem tibi à natura, Deo authore collatam, noli adiecto cultu exornare, sed humiliter eam adversus homines ita cohibe, capillum comae non nutriens, sed potius illum detondens & adimens, ne tu pruritu vexatus, & caput lacerationis expers conservans, vel unguentis perfundens, inducas tibi mu∣lieres, quae hoc modo illaqueant, & illaqueantur. Fidelis enim cum sis & homo Dei, nou licet tibi nutrire capillum, & in unum complicare, quod est delicatum & molle, vel discerniculo discriminare, ne{que} utrò intortum calamistris crispare, vel flauum facere, quoniam quidem lex vetat in Deuteronomio, inquiens; Non facietis vobis rotunditatem ex coma capitis vestri, neque incisiones. Neque viro licet barbae pilos corrumpere, neque homines figuram praeter naturam mutare. Non incidetis (in∣quit lex) superficiem barbae vestrae. Hoc enim mulieribus decens creator Deus sta∣ruit, viris indecorum esse iudicavit. Tu verò haec facies, & ut tibi placeas, legem violans, in odio eris apud Deum, qui creavit te secundum imaginem suam. Ibid. Clemens Romanus, Constit. Apost. l. 1. c. 4. Clemens Alexan∣drinus, Paedag. l. 2. c. 10.3. & l. c. 2.3.11. Philo Iudaeus. De vita Contemplativa. pag. 1208. & De Specialibus Legibus. p. 1059. Origen in Iob. lib. 1. Tom. 2. Fol. 18. l. Epiphanius, Contra Haereses, lib. 3. Tom. 2. Haeresis 80. Col. 894.895. & 922. A. Iulius Firmicus, De Errore Profanarum Religionum. cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 108. Paulinus, Epistola 4. ad Seue∣rum. Augustin. De Opere Monachorum. lib. c. 31.32, 33. Tom. 3. p. 1067. B. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, De Spiritualibus Oblationibus. lib. 2. Tom. 2. p. 534. E. Isichius in Lovit. lib. 4.
cap. 13. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7 p 51. C. & lib. 6. c. 19. p. 85. E. Bernard. Oratio ad Milites Templi. cap. 2. & 4. Amalarius Fortunatus. De Ecclesiasticis Officijs, lib. 3. cap. 2. together with See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Love-lockes. p. 12, 13, 14. accordingly. Ambrose, Chrysostome, Sedulius, Primasius, Oecume∣nius, Beda, Anselme Remigius, Theophylact, in their Exposi∣tions and Commentaries on the 1 Cor. 11.14, 15. Doth not nature it selfe teach you, that if a man hath long haire (in which our Ruffians glory) it is a shame unto him? But if a woman haue long haire, (Of which See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Love-lockes. p. 45. to 49. our English Ladies, who haue cast off God and nature, shame and modesty, religion and subiection, are now ashamed, as being out of fashion) it is a glory to her; for her haire is giuen her for a covering:) doe See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Lovelockes thorowout. copiously censure and condemne the friz∣ling, nourishing, and wearing of long effeminate haire, as an unnaturall, womanish, irreligious, and unmanly practice con∣demned, not onely by the Hi comas muliebres pro∣ducunt. Opor∣tebat autē fili∣os sanctae Ca∣tholicae matris nostrae Ecclesiae esse reverendos in tonsura, at∣que honesto habitu propter extraneos. Ali∣enum enim est à catholica Ecclesia, & à praedicatione Apostolorū coma extensa. Vir enim, inquit, non debet nutrire comam, quum sit imago ac gloria Dei. Quid vero fit peus & con∣trarium? Hi barbam quidem formam viri resecant, capillos autem capitis saepe nu∣triunt. De barba quidem in constitutionibus Apostolorum dicit divina Scriptura ac doctrina; Ne corrumpas; hoc est, ne seces pilos baae, ne{que} meretricio more ob co∣mam efferaris. Decebat enim Nazeraeos hoc solum propter figuram, &c. Quare dicit Apostolus, Ipsa natura non docet vos, quod vir quidem si comam nutrit, igno∣minia ipsi est? Haec autem ignominia non laudabilis est, velut illa quae dicit, Tur∣pitudines & ignominias contempsi. Non enim propter Deum est virtus, etiamsi propter Deum assumpta fuerit, sed propter contentionē sunt hi mores. Dicunt enim, si quis videtur contentiosus esse, nos talem consuetudinem non habemus, neque Ec∣clesiae Dei. Reiecit igitur eos, qui talia operantur & faciunt, & in contentione sunt à statutis Apostolorum, & ab Ecclesia Dei. Epiphanius. Cont. Haereses. Haeresis 80. Cl. 894.895. Law of God and nature, in the 1 Cor. 11.14. Ezech. 44.20. Levit. 19.27. & 21.5. Dan. 4.33. Rev. 9.7, 8. 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. Isay 3.24 (which Scriptures I woud our overgrowne Lock-wearers, and frizle-pated men-women would well consider) But euen by this text of Deuteronomy, which inhibits men to put on a womans garment, or attire; of which long haire (the proper 1 Cor. 11.15. and the Fathers and Commentators on it. ornament of women) as well as womans rayment is a part. If then the very nourishing of long effeminate haire be a putting on of womans apparell within this Scriptures sence,
as the womans cutting of her haire (as Ambros. Ire∣naeo. Tom. 1. p. 233. Clemens Romanus, Con∣stit. Apost. l. 1. c. 4 Marlorat. in 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 14, 15. Osiander, Pellicanus, Cor∣nelius à Lapidē, Calvin, Iunius, Amsworth, on Deut. 22.5. with others hereafter quo∣ted. Hierom. E∣pist. 12. Conci∣lium. Gangr. Can. 17. & Gratian. Distin∣ctio 30. Do∣ctor Fulkes An∣notations on the Rhmish Tstament, on Thes. 2. cap. 3. sect. . D. Wllets Synopsis Pa∣pismi. p. 354.355. Sozomeni Historiae Ec∣clesiasticae, l. 3. c. 13. Bibl. Pa∣trum, Tom. 5. pars 2. p. 392. I. Rabanus Marus Glossa ordinaris, & Lyra in Deut. 22. Good Expositors te∣stifie) is a wearing of that which pertaineth to a man, to whom the clipping of haire is proper, he being in this distinguished from a woman: and so an abomination in Gods sight, though our men and women in these licentious times beleeue the contrary; Much more must a Players putting on of womens apparell, gesture, speech, and manners to act a Play, be a putting on of womans apparell, and so an abomination to the Lord our God, within the very litterall meaning of this text, if these fore-quoted Fathers may be iudged. S. Ambrose in his Operum, Tom. 1. p. 232.233. Annotations upon Deutero∣nomy. cap. 22. dedicated to Irenaeus: Wherein he examines at large the cause, why the law should prohibit women to weare a mans garment, and men to put on womans apparell; will make this point most cleare. I shall recite his words at large. Thou hast informed me (writes he) as a sonne, that some haue demanded of thee, what is the reason, that the law should so severely call them uncleane, who use the garments of another sex, be they men or women. For thus it is written, The apparell of the man shall not be put upon the wo∣man, nither shall a man be arrayed in a womans gar∣ment; because every one who shall doe these things, is an abomination to the Lord thy God. Et si vero discutias, incongruum est quod etiam ipsa abhorret natura. Cur enim homo non vis videri esse quod natus es? Cur alienam tibi asumis speciem? Cur mentiris feminam, vel tu faemina virum? Suis unum quemque sexum induit natura indu∣mentis. Demque diversus usus, diversus color, motus, incessus, diversae vires, diversa vox est in viro & faemina Sed etim in reliqui generis animantibus alia species leonis, alia leaenae, alia vis, alius sonus: alia tari, alia viulae, &c. Ibidm. See Rabanus Maurus, lib. 2. in Deut. 22.5. cap. 30. accordingly. And if thou maist truely discusse it; that is incongruous, which even na∣ture her selfe abhorreth. For why being a man, wilt thou not seeme to be that which thou art borne? Why dost thou take unto thy selfe a different forme? Why dost thou feine thy selfe a wo∣man, or thou woman thy selfe to be a man? Nature hath clo∣thed every sex with its owne garments. Finally, there is a di∣verse use, a different colour, motion, pae, an unequall strength,
a different voice in a man and in a woman. Yea likewise in li∣ving creatures of another kinde, there is one forme of a Lion, another of a Lionesse, yea another strength, another sound: one of a Bull, another of a Heifer. In Deere also, so much as the sex doth differ, so much doth the forme, so as thou maist distinguish them afar off. In Birds likewise there may be a proper compa∣rison, in regard of apparell betweene them and man. For in them the very induments themselues doe by nature distinguish the sex. The male Peacockes are beautifull; the females are not adorned with so various a beauty of feathers. The Phesants also haue a different colour, which may distinguish the difference of the sex. What difference is there in Poultry? How shrill is the crowing of the Cocke, a solemne gift to stir up and sing, in the severall watches of the night? Num quid il∣l mutant spe∣ciem suā? Cur nos mutare desideramus? Et quidem Graeco more influxit ut ae∣minae virilibus quasi succinc∣tioribus tuni∣cis utātur. Esto tamen ut illae imitari vide∣antur melioris sexus natu∣ram: Quid vi∣ri inferioris sexus mentiri speciem vo∣lunt? Menda∣cium & in ver∣bo turpe est; nedum in ha∣bitu. Denique in Templis, ubi mendacium fidei, ibi mendacium naturae. Illic assumere viros muliebrem vestem, gestumque faemineum, sacrum putatur. Vnde lex dicit: Quo∣niam immundus est Domino Deo tuo omnis qui faecerit haec: hoc est, vir qui stolam muliebrem induerit, &c. Doe these things change their shape or habit? Why then doe we desire to change? And ve∣rily the custome of the Grecians hath flowne in among vs, that women weare short coates, as being shorter then their owne. Well, be it so now, that these may seeme to imitate the nature of the better sex; why will men counterfeit the habit of the inferiour sex? A lie even in word is dishonest: much more in apparell. Finally, in Temples, where there is a counterfeiting of faith, there is a counterfeiting of nature: For men This was the practice then of Pagan Priests in their Idols Temples. there to take un∣to them womans apparell, and a womanish behaviour, is thought an holy thing. Whence the Law saith: Because every one, who shall doe these things, is an abomination to the Lord thy God: that is, a man who shall put on a womans garment. But I sup∣pose, that it speakes this, not so much of cloathes, as of manners, or of our customes and actions, wherein one act may become a man, another a woman. Whence also the Apostle saith, as an interpreter of the Law, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Let the woman keepe silence in the Church: For it is not permitted to them to speak, but to be in subiection, as the Gen. 316. Law saith. But if they
will learne any thing, they may aske their Husbands at home. And to Timothy, 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. Let the woman learne in si∣lence with all subjection: for I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to domineere over her Husband. Quam defor∣me autem ∣rum facere o∣pera mulie∣bria? Ergo & pariant, ergo parturiant qui crispant coro∣nam sicut fae∣minae. Et ta∣men illae ve∣lantur, isti bellantur. Ve∣rum habeant excusationem qui patrio usus sequun∣tur, sed ta∣men barbaros, ut Persae, ut Gothi, ut Ar∣menij. Maior quidm est natura quàm patria. Quid de alijs dici∣mus: qui hoc ad luxuriam derivandum putant, ut ca∣lamistratos & torquatos habent in ministerio: ipsi promissa barba, illos remissa coma? Meritò illic non servatur castimonia, ubi non tenetur sexus dictinctio. In quo evidentia naturae magisteria sunt, dicente Apostolo, Decet mulierem non velatam, &c. Haec sunt quae referas requirentibus. Vale. Ibidem. But how unseemely a thing is it for a man to doe womanish workes? Therefore also may they bring forth children, therefore may they ravell of child-birth, who See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, page 49.50. against this effeminate practice. crispe their haire like women. And yet those are veiled, these make war. But they may haue an excuse who follow the customes of their Country, which yet are barbarous, as the Persians, as the Goathes, as the Arme∣nians. Verily nature is greater then our Country. What doe we speake of others, who adde this to their luxury, that they keepe in their service men wearing frizled haire, and golden chaines, themselues having long beards, their servants long shag haire? Deservedly chastity is not there kept, where a di∣stinction of six is not observed. In which the euidences of nature, are so many tutorships; the Apostle himselfe saying: Is it a seemely thing, that a woman pray unto God un∣covered? Doth not nature it selfe teach you, that if a man have long haire, it is a shame unto him? But if a woman have long haire, it is a glory to her, for her haire is given her for a covering. These are the things which thou maist answer to those who inquire of thee. Farewell. Thus doth this Father descant on this Scripture. S. Au∣gustine resolves us; Ideò credo iure infames intestabilesque haberi, qui muliebri habitu se ostentant, quos nescio utrum falsas mulieres an falsos viros melius vocem. Veros tamen Hi∣striones, verosque infames sine dubitatione possumus vocare. Solilequiorum, lib. 2. cap. 16. Operum, Tom. 1. pag. 765. That those are rightly accounted in∣famous, and unable to beare witnesse, who shew themselves in womans apparell, whom I know not whether I should rather call, false women, or false men. Yet we may stile them true Stage-players, and true infamous persons without any doubt. And
withal he informes us,Et magna quaestio st, u∣trum patriae li∣berandae causa, muliebri tuni∣ca indutus de∣beat hostē de∣cipere, hoc ipso quod mulier facta sit, fortas∣sè verior, vir futurus. Et utrū sapiens qui ali∣quo modo cer∣tum habeat, necessariā fore vitam sum re∣bus humnis, mlt emori frigore, quàm faemineis ve∣stibus, si aliud no sit, amiciri. Sed de hoc, ut dictum est, li∣ás videbimus. Prosecto enim cernis, quantae inquisiionis indigeat, qu∣renus ist pro∣gredi dbeant, ne in quasdam inexcusabiles urpitudines decidatur, &c. Ibidm. that it is a great Questiō, whether a man may put on womans apparell, to deceive an enemy with it, for the delivery, or safety of his Country, because in this he be∣comes a woman, perchance to appeare a truer man. And whether a wise man, who hath some kinde of assurance that his life will be necessary for the good of men, would rather die with cold, then clothe himselfe in womans apparell, if he can ge no other. But of this (saith he) we shall consider more in another place. For verily thou seest how much examination it requires, to consider how far these things ought to be proceeded in, lest men fall into certaine unexcusable uncleannesses. And so he leaues the Question undecided. Iulius Firmicus Mater∣nus, De Errore Profanarum Religionum, lib. c. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 108.109. writing of the effeminate Sodomiti∣call Male-Priests of Venus, Purchas Pilg. Booke 1. chap. 15. who clad themselues in wo∣mans apparell, and were afterwards put to death by Constan∣tine the Great for their unnaturall lewdnesse, as Eusebius (De Vita Constantini, lib. 3. cap. 53. & lib. 4. cap. 25.) records: hath this notable passage. The Assyrians, who worship the Aire under the name of Venus, have verily effeminated this Element, being moved I know not with what Veneration. Whe∣ther because the Aire is interposed betweene the Sea and Hea∣ven, doe they worship it with the effeminate voyces of their Priests? Di mihi, hoccine est quod in viro faeminam quaerunt, cui aliter servire sacerdo∣tum suorum chorus non potest, nisi effeminent vultum, cutem poliant, & virilem sexum ornatu muliebri dedecorent, &c? Exornant muliebriter nutritos crines, & delicatis amicti vestibus vix caput lass cervice sustentant. Deinde cum sic se alie∣nos a viris secerint, adimpleti tibiarum cantu vocant Deam suam, &c. Ibidem. Tell me, is this the cause that they seeke a woman in a man, whom the Quire of their Priests cannot otherwise serve, vnlesse they effeminate their countenance, polish their skin, and disgrace their masculine sex with womanish attire, &c? They effeminately adorne their long nourished haire, and being clothed in delicate garments, they scarce support their head with their wearied necke. Afterwards, when they have thus estranged themselves from being men, ravished with the musicke of Pipes the call upon their Goddesse, &c.
Quod hoc monstrum est, quodve prodi∣gium? Negant se viros esse, & sunt: Mulieres se volunt credi sed aliud qua∣liscun{que} quali∣tas corporis cōfitetur. Con∣siderandum et etiam, quale si numē, quod si impuri corpori delectatur ho∣spitio, quod im∣pudicis adhae∣ret membris, quod pollua corporis cōta∣minatione pla∣catur. Erubes∣cite ô miseri, su∣pinitarē! alter vos Deus fecit. Cū cohors ve∣ster ad Tbu∣nal iudicantis Dei accesserit, nihil vobiscum afferetis, quod Deus, qui vos fecit, agnoscat. Abijcite hunc tantae calamitatis rrorē, & studia profanae mentis aliquādo deserite. Nolite corpus, quod Deus fcit, selerata Diaboli lege damnare. Ibid. What Monster, or what Prodigy is this? They deny themselves to be men, and yet are such: They would be reputed women, but the quality of their body con∣fesseth the contrary. Consider what deity it is which is thus de∣lighted with the entertainment of an impure body, which ad∣heres to unchaste members, which is attoned with the filthy pol∣lution of the body. Blush O ye wretches, at your sottishnesse: an∣other God hath made you! When your company shall appeare before the Tribunall of God who iudgeth, you shall bring nothing along with you, which God, who hath made you, may acknow∣ledge. Cast away this error of so great calamity, and now at last relinquish the practices of a prophane mind. Doe not ye damne that body which God hath given you, with the wicked law of the Devill. So pathetically inveighed he against mens putting on of womens apparell. S. Chrysostome, as hee Homil. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 298. C. See Scene 3. p. 169. expresly condemnes the putting on of womans array to act a Play; a thing too common in his dayes: So in his 26. Homil. in Epist. 1. ad Corinthios, cap. 11. Tom 4. Col. 453. B.C. (where he recites this Text of Deuteronomy, and notably censuresApostolus viro comā alere semper prohibet. Nam si comam nutriat igno∣minia est illi. Non dixit, Si operiatur, sed, Si comam nutriat, &c. Ibid. Col. 454 B. men for nourishing, & Turpe est muliri tonderi aut radi, &c. Ibidem. women for cutting, and lay∣ing out their haire;) he hath this excellent speech. Signa quidem data sunt & viro & mulieri, illi quidem imperij ac principatus; huic vero subiectionis: Cum his autem hoc quoque; quod hoc quidem operto sit capite, ille vero apertum cput hbeat & nudum. Si haec ergo sunt signa, ambo peccant, bonum ordinem consundentes, & Dei constitutionem, & suos limites transgredientes; ille quidem decidens ad huus humi∣litatem & deiectionem; haec verò in virum insurgens per habitū ac figurā. Si enim fas non est vestem mutare, & ne{que} huic quidē toga indu illi vero instita, & muliebri tegumento capitis. Non enim erit, inquit, viri ornatus super mulieē, ne{que} indutur vir veste muliebri: multi magis haec non sunt mutanda, &c. Ibidem. There are certaine signes given both to a man and woman; to him ve∣rily of command and principality; to her truly of subiection: and among these this also; that the woman should have her head covered; but the man his head uncovered and bare. If these
therefore are signes, both of them sinne, when as they confound this good order, and the constitution of God, and transgresse their limits; he, in falling downe to the humility and deiection of the woman; she, in rising up against the man, by her apparell and shape. For if it be not lawfull for them to interchange their garments, neither for a woman to bee clad in a mans Gowne; nor for a man to be attired in a womans Gowne, or Vaile; For he saith; Neither shall the ornament of the man be put upon the woman; neither shall the man be clad in womans apparell, Deut. 22.5. much more are not these things to be changed, &c. To passe by Damascen. Paralellorum. lib. 2. cap. 65. together with Beda Expositio in Deuteronom. c. 22. Operum. Tom. 4. p. 164 who condemne mens putting on of womens apparell from this Text, which they recite: that elegant Bishop of Marcelles, Sal∣vian, doth exceedingly tax the Romanes for permitting men to weare womans apparell, not onely in ordinary converse; but See lib. 6. De Gubernat. Dei throughout. even upon the Stage. Quis credere, aut etiam audi∣re possit, con∣vertisse in mu∣liebrem tole∣rantiam viros, non usum suū tantum atque naturam, sed etiam vultum, incessum, habi∣tum, & totum penitus, quicquid aut in seu est aut in su viri: adeo versum in di∣versum omnia erant ut cum viris nihil magis pudori esse oporteat, quā si muliebre aliquid in se habere videantur; illic nihil viris quibusdam turpius videretur, quàm  in aliquo viri viderentur. De Gubernat. Dei, lib. 7. p. 263.264. Who (writes he) could beleeve or heare, that men should have turned into a wo∣manish patience, not onely their use and nature; but even their countenance, pace, habit, and all whatsoever is in the sex, or in the use of a man: all things were so turned upside downe, that whereas nothing ought to be more shameful to men, then that they should seeme to have any womanish thing in them; there nothing did seeme more dishonest to certaine men, then that they should seeme to be men in any thing, &c Illud verò magis ingemiscendum at{que} Igendum est, quod tale hoc scelus crimen etiam totius reipub. videbatur. Et universa Romani nominis dignitas, facinoris prodigiosi inurebatur infamia Cum enim muliebrem habitum viri sumerent, & magis quam mulieres gr∣dum frangerent, cum indicia sibi quaedam monstruosae impuritatis innecterent, & faemineis tegminum illigamentis ut capita velarent, atque hoc publice in civitat Romana vrbe illic summa ac celeberima; quid aliud quam Romani Imperij dedecus rat, ut in medio Reipublicae sine execrandissimum nephas palam liceret admit∣, &c? Ibidem page 265.266. vid. 267.268. This therefore is more to
be lamented and pittied, that this so great a wickednesse did seeme the crime of the whole Common-wealth; and the whole dignity of the Roman name was branded with the infamy of this prodi∣gious wickednesse. For when men should clothe themselves in womans apparell, and become more effeminate then women, and cover their heads with feminine attires, and this publikely in a Roman City, yea, in the most famous and chiefe City there; what else was it, but the shame of the Roman Empire, that in the middest of the Commonweale this most execrable wicked∣nesse should be tolerated without controll? Asterius Bishop of Amasea, who flourished about the yeere of our Lord, 390. in his Homily, In Festum Kalendarum. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 4. p. 705. C.D. writes thus: Condiscun illiberales & inhonestas Scenicorum artes ac studia, unde mollities ac dissolutio morum. Non∣ne velato ore in faeminam degenerat ille fors, ille a∣nimo praestans, ille in armi suis admirabi∣lis, hostibus formidabilis? Tunicam ad tales demittit, Zonam pecto∣ri circum vol∣vit, calcea∣menta mulie∣bria sumit, &, more faemina∣rum capiti crobilum imponit, quin etiam cum lana colum circumfert, dextra{que} filū ducit, qua trophaeum ante tulit, spiritum{que} ac vocem in acutiorē ac muliebrem son̄ extenuat Hae telebritatis huius utilitates: haec hodierni festi publici commoda ac fructus, &c. O stultitiam! O caecitatem! Ibid. That in this feast, the people did learne the infamous and dishonest arts and studies of Stage-players, from whence effeminacy and dissolution of man∣ners did proceed. Doth not that valiant man, that man of cou∣rage, who is admirable in his armes, and formidable to his ene∣mies, degenerate into a woman with his vailed face? he lets his coate hang downe to his ankles, he twists a girdle about his brest, he puts on womens shoes, and after the manner of women, he puts a cawle upon his head; moreover, he carries about a distaffe with wooll, and drawes out a thred with his right hand, where∣with e hath formerly borne a trophie, and he extenuateth his spirit and voyce into a shriller and womanish sound. These are the profits of this solenmnity: these are the commodities and fruits of this dayes publike feast. O folly! O blindnesse! &c. So vehement is this godly Bishop against this unmanly practice, even in case of Stage-playes, which he much condemnes Our learned Country-man, Alebvinus, writing, of the practices of the Pagan Romanes on the Ka∣lends of Ianuary, now our New-yeeres day; informes us; that Quidam muabant se in species mon∣struosas, in ferarū{que} habitus transformabant. Alij in faemineo gestu mutati, virilem vultum effaeminabant. Nec immerito, &c. De Divinis Officijs. l. c. 4. Col. 1013.1014. divers of them did transforme themselves into monstrous
shapes, and into the habit of wilde beasts. Others (saith hee) changed in a feminine gesture, did effeminate their manly coun∣tenance: neither unworthly haue not they a manly forttude, who have changed themselves into a womans habit, or have put on a womans attire. Now because the whole world was repleni∣shed with these and other miseries, the whole universall Church hath appointed a publike fast to be kept on this day (which fast it seemes is now forgotten) in as much as the Author of life should put an end to hese calamities: so doth he stile these effeminate practices. To these recited Fathers and Councels I might adde Asteanus De Casibus, lib. 2. Tit∣lus 54. Aquinas prima secundae. Quaest. 102. Artic. 6. 6m. & secunda secundae. Quaest. 169. Artic. 2. 3m. Alexander Alensis. Theologiae summa. pars 2. Quaest. 135. Memb. 2. pag. 617.618. Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra, Tostatus, Pellicanus, Corne∣lius à Lapide, Rabanus Maurus, Calvin, Iunius, Dionysius, Carthusianus, Ferus, Osiander, & Ainsworth on Deut. 22. v. 5. Bishop Babington, M. Perkins, M. Dod, M. Downham, M Elton, Osmond Lake, M. Iohn Brinsly, Calvin, Bishop Chatechisti∣call Doctrine. An∣drewes, D. Griffith Williams, D. De Iure Con∣scientiae. lib. 5. cap. 39. p. 27. sect. 30. Ames, with sundry o∣thers upon the 7. Commandement. Peter Martyr, Loco∣rum Communium Classis. 2. cap. 11. sect. 68.79. Bullinger & Marlorat in 1 Cor. 11.6. Gulielmus Parisiensis, De Fide & Lgibus, cap. 13. Danaeus Ethicae Christianae l. 2. c. 14. Polanus Syntagma Theologiae. lib. 10. cap. 26. p. 665. The rich Cabinet, London 1616. p. 116.117, 118. Maphaeus Vegius Lau∣densis. De Educatione Liberorum. lib. 5. c. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 882. E. A short Treatise against Stage-playes by an Anonymous Author, tendred to the Parliament. Anno 1625. p. 17. W. T. In his Absoloms fall. fol. 9. Stephen Gosson his Playes confuted. Action 2. The third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters: M. Northbrook, his Treatise against Vaine Playes and Enterludes. fol. 36. and D. Reinolds, in his Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 8. to 20. & p. 85. to 103. where this point is largely and learnedly debated. All these, with infinite others in their Trea∣tises against Stage-playes, doe utterly condemne the
putting on of womans apparell, especially out of wan∣tonnesse to act a Play, as a violation of this text of Deutero∣nomy, and an abomination to the Lord our God: neither was there ever any one Divine that I haue met with, who did contradict this truth; therefore we need not doubt or question it, but submit unto it without any more dis∣putes. Lastly, the very reasons alleaged against the putting  on of womans apparell on men, will evidently evince it to be sinfull to put it on to act a Play. For first, the very  putting on of womans apparell (much more to act a lewde lascivious Enterlude) is an unnaturall, and so a de∣testable and shamefull act: as not onely Irenaeo. Tom. 1. p. 233. Ains∣worths Notes on Deut. 22.5. Ambrose, and the fore-quoted Christian Authors, but even Non viden∣tur tibi contra naturā vivere, qui cōmutant cum faeminis vestem Seneca Epist. 121. Seneca and O scelus! en luxae veniunt in pectora ve∣stes: scinde pu∣er, scinde, &c. Achill. id lib. 1. See D Reinolds. Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 12.13. Statius, with other Pagans testifie. For since nature hath made a difference, not onely betweene the sex, but See Ambrose Ienaeo, Purchas Pilgrimage, & Voyages, No∣vus Orbis, Munsters Cosmograph. eus. De Moribus Gentium, Strabo, Gotardies, Lrius, and all other Historians and Cosmographers. even betwixt the habit and apparell of men and women, as well among the most barbarous, as the civilest Nations, in so much that they are visibly distinguished by the diversity of their rayment one from the other: it must needs be a viola∣tion of the very dictates of nature, for a man to clothe himselfe in that apparel which nature and custome have prescribed to another sex, as mis-becomming his. As 1 Cor. 11.14. See Ambrose, Hirom, Primasius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Sedulius Remigius, Beda, Anselm, Occumenius, Haymo, Ibid. and my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, p. 8. to 16. nature it selfe doth teach men, that it is a shame for them to weare long haire (though our moderne Ruffians glory in it) because it 1 Cor. 11.15. See Glossa Ordi∣naris, Lyra, Bulinger, Calvin, Marlorat, and others on the 1 Cor. 11.6. accordingly. is naturally proper unto women, to whom it is given for a vaile, a covering: so much more doth it teach men, that it is a detestable, unnaturall, shamefull thing for them, to put on womans attire to act a Strumpets part. Hence men in womens, and women in mens ap∣parell have beene ever odious. Witnesse Lampridij Heliogabalus, Eutropius, Rerū, Rom. l. 10. fol. 124.125. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 106 & 107. Heliogabalus,
Suetonij Nero. ect. 26. Zonaras Annal. l. 2. f. 98 b. Eutropius, l. 9. f. 104. Nero. Sporus, Iustin Hist. l. 1. Athenaeus Dip. l. 12. c. 12.13. Diodorus Sicu∣lus. Bibl Hist. l. 2. sect. 23. Orosius Hist. l. 1. c. 19. Sleidan, de 4••. Imperijs. l. 1. p. 19. Sardanapalus, Sutonij Nero. sect. 28. Luvenal. Satyr. 8. Nero, Caligula, (Suetonij Calig. sect. 52.54. & others; together with the Eusebius De Vita Const. l. 3. c. 53. Iulius Firmicus, De Errore Prosa∣narum Religi∣onum. c. 4. Pur∣chas Pilgrim. Booke 4. ch. 7. Male-priests of Venus, Philo Iudaeus, De Specialibus Legibus. page 1059.1060. & De Vita Con∣templ. p. 1209.1210. the Roman Galli or Cinaedi, the passive Sodomites Purchas Pilg. Booke 8. c. 7. in Florida, Purchas Pilg. Book 9. c. 1. Gayra, and Purchas Pilg. book 9. c. 11. & Cieza. c. 64. Peru; who clothing themselves sometimes, not alwayes in womans apparell (as did also Mathew Paris, Hist. Angl. p. 160.161. See here p. 18.2. William Bishop of Ely to his shame,) are for this, recorded to posterity, as the very monsters of nature, and the shame, the scum of men. Wit∣nesse the Purchas Pilg. Book 6. c. 10. Inkeepers of ez at this day, who attyring them∣selves like women, shaving their beards, and becomming effe∣minate in their speech, are so odious to these very Infidels, (some base villaines onely excepted who resort vnto them,) that the better sort of people will not so much as speake to them, nei∣ther will they suffer them to come within their Temples. If men in womens apparel be thus execrable unto Pagans, how much more detestable should they bee to Christi∣ans, who are taught not onely by the light of nature, but of the 1 Cor. 11.14. Deut. 22.5. Zeph. 1.8. Rom. 1.27. Gospel too, to hate such beastly male-mon∣sters in the shapes of women? And as the verdict of human nature condemnes mens degenerating into wo∣men; so from the very selfesame grounds, it deepely cēsures the aspiring of women above the limits of their female sex, & their metamorphosis into the shapes of men, either in haire, or apparell. As nature dictates to men, 1 Cor. 11.14. that it is a shame for them to weare long haire, or wo∣mans rayment, so it instructeth women, that it is a shame, a sinne for them, to put on mans apparell, or to clip or cut their haire their feminine glory (as our Viragoes doe) because it is given them as a naturall covering to distinguish them from men: as the Apostle plainly teacheth, in the 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 15. the 1 Tim. 2.9. & Deut. 22.5. Hence the Councell of Gangra Si qua mulier propter diuinū cultū (ut aestimat, cri∣nes attondeat quos ei Deus ad subiectionis materiam tribuit, vel habitum mutat, & pro solito muliebri amictum virilem sumit, tanquam praeceptum dissolvens obe∣dientiae, anathema sit. Ibid. Canon. 13.17. Surius, Tom. 1. p. 373. Gratian Distin∣ctio 30. Sozomeni Hist. lib. 13. cap. 13. did anathematize those women, as infringers of the
law of nature, and of the precept of subiection, who did either cut their haire, or clothe themselves in mans apparell, though it were under preence of Religion, as Nicepherus, Eccl. Hist. l. 17. c. 5. Cent. Mag. Tom. 6. Col. 349. & 808. Theodora (who lived a penitentiary life in mans apparell for her adultery in a Mona∣stery for sundry yeeres together) is recorded to have done, and as some Hierom. E∣pist. 48. c. 3. So∣zomeni. Hist. Ec. l. 3. c. 13. Nice∣tas advers. Ar∣rianos. l. 5. Bib. Patrum. Tom. 12. pars 1. pag. 587. H. Baroni∣us & Spndanus, An. 57. sect. 27. Pamelius Notae in Cypriani Ep. 62. n. 9. p. 84. a. preposterous Nonnes in Egypt did: Hence Gratian Distinctio 30. Summa Angelic. Tit. Faemina. together with Calvin, Bullinger, Marlorat, Lyra, & Glossa Ordinaris, with sundry others on 1 Cor. 11.5, 6. & Deut. 22.5. & Synodus Turonica, Anno 1583. apud Bochellum. De∣creta. Ecclesiae. Gallicanae. lib. 6. Tit. 9. cap. 1. (whose word I would our man-women English Gal∣lants would consider) expresly teach us; Natura in∣quit, ipsa ab∣horret mulie∣rē rasam cer∣nere: faedum est aspectu, & monstri instar, &c. Calvin. I∣bidem. that even na∣ture herselfe abhors to see a woman shorne or polled; that a wo∣man with cut haire is a filthy spectacle, and much like a mon∣ster; and Vehemener absurdum apud omnes sset si muliet aton∣sa com pro∣dret in pub∣licum: id nim perinde esset ac si viri in se trnsumeret personam, &c. Bulingerus & Marlot. Ibidem. that all repute it a very great absurdity for a wo∣man to walke abrode with shorne haire; for this is all one as if she should take vpon her the forme or person of a man, to whom short cut haire is proper, it being naturall and comly to wo∣men to nourish their haire, which even God and nature have given them for a covering, a token of subiection, and a naturall badge to distinguish them from men. Yet notwithstanding, as our English Russians are metamorphosed into wo∣men in their deformed Which frizled haire is condemned by Con∣cil. Constantinop. 6. Can. 96. & Synodus Turonica. 1583. Concil. Bitu∣riense 1584. apud Bochellum. frizled lockes and haire, so our English Gentlewomen, (as if they all intended, to tune men outright and weare the Breeches, or to be∣come Popish Nonnes) are now growne so farre past shame, past modesty, grace and nature, as to clip their haire like men with lockes and foretops, and to mae this Whorish cut, the very guise and fashion of the times, to the eternall infamy of their sex, their Nation, and the great scandall of religion. Yea, the unnaturall shamelesse Papists, bidding as it were professed defi∣ance both to God, to nature, Moses, and S. Paul, haue
made this a Baronius & Spodanus. An∣nal. Eccl. Anno 57. sect. 27. Cent. Mgdeb. Cent. 11. Col. 333. l. 30. & Cent. 12. Col. 974 l. 50. Lyra in 1 Cor. 11.5, 6 Paulus Windeck, De Theologia Iurisconsulto∣rum. Locus 38. p. 107.08, 109. Summa Ange∣lic. Faemin. The Rhemists & D. Fulkes Notes on the Rhemish Te∣stament on the 2 Thes. c. . sect. . Pamelius. Notae in Epist. 62. Cyprian. n 9 p. 84. Historia Bambergensis. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. f. 141.155, 165 Lupoldus De Zelo Vet. Princ. Germanorū. c. 13. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 15. p. 741 b. Acosta Hist. Indiae. l. 5. c. 15. Purchas Pilg Book 8. c. 12. Masaeus Select. Epist ex India. l. 4 p. 170 Petrus luniacensis. Epist. l 3. ad Germanos. Fratres. Epist. 17 Francis De Croy his first Conformity. c. 11 p. 30 solemne Ceremony at the admission of all their Nonnes into their unholy orders, to poll their heads, and cut their haire, in token that they are now immediately espoused unto Christ, and so are freed from all subiection to men, or to their husbands, (as I presume those English women think they are, who cut their haire.) An unnaturall See D. Willets Synopsis Papismi p. 354.355. & D. Fulkes & M Carwrights Notes on 2 Thes 3. sect. 2 unchri∣stian shamefull practise, derived (as Baronius & Spondanus An. 57. sect. 27. aulus Windecke, Theologia Iurisconsultorū.  Locus 38. p. 108. themselves acknowledge) from the Pagan Roman Vestales (a fit patterne of imitation for all Popish Nonnes) who entring into that idolatrous order did use to Plin Nat Hist l. 5. c. 12. Baronius, Sondanus, Windeck, and others qua supra. Martial. Epig l 9. Ep. 18.27. poll their heads and consecrate their haire to the Goddesse Lucina, hanging it for a monument on a sacred Lote-tree. Well, let the Romanists and their Nonnes who give a reason for polling their religious Virgins that Lyra on 1 Cor. 11.6 Baronius, Spondanus, Windeck, qua supra. its a token of their freedome from all subiection to men, &c. (whereas they should rather plead they are men indeed, not women, and so are not bound to nourish their haire) much like the reason of those foolish Ruf∣fianly Friers, or Crinitifratres, whom S. Augustine re∣proving for wearing long haire against the Apostles precept.Iam illud si dici potest, quā luctuosè ridiculū est, quod rursus invenerūt ad defensionē crinium suorū Virū inquiunt, prohibuit Apostolus habere comā. Qui autem castraverūt seipsos propter regnū, caelorū iàm non sunt viri. O dementiā singularē, &c Aug. De Opere Monachorū. c. 32. Tom. 3. p. 1068. See the Rhemists, D. Fulke, & M. Cartwright, Notes on 2 Thes. 3. sect. 2. 1 Cor. 11.14. to the scandall of religion, replied, that the A∣postle prohibits men onely to weare long haire, and they were no men (as our effeminate hairy men-monsters hardly are) because they had made themselves Eunuches for the Kingdome of Heauen, and so were exempted from the Apostles text, as the Lyra, Baronius, Spondanus, Windecke, qua supra, & Summa Angelica. Faemina. Papists say these Nonnes of theirs are, though all other
women whasoever are included:) or let our English shorne Blowses, thinke what they will of this vile practise; yet sure I am that God, that Scripture, Nature, modesty, Religion and all ingenious persons, who have any sparkes of nature in them much condemne it, as an a∣bominable guise, unfit for any but lewd Adultersses and notorious Whores, (as many See Iohn Bas Acts of English Votaries, Cen∣turia. Magd. Cent. 12. Col. 107 & 12. Col 66. The Ana∣tomy of the English Non: at Lisborne. Onus Ecclesiae. c 22 sect 12. polled Nonnes and shorne-frizled English Maddames are.) Hence the Tacitus De Moribus Ger∣manorum. c. 6. Boemus De Mo∣ribus Gentiū. l. 3. c. 12. Mun∣sters Cosmog. l. 3. c. 13 Alexa∣der ab Alex l. 4. c. 1. Baronius & Spondanus. An. 57. sct 27. Ca∣pit Regū Fran∣corū l. 6. c 2. & inecke qua supra. p. 108.anci∣ent Germanes and Purchas Pilg. l 5. c. 5.9. & l. 9 c. 1. Alex ab lex l. 3. c. 5. Apuleius De sino auo l. 2. & Caelius Rhod Ant Lect. l. 29. c. 18. others, did use to shame and punish notori∣ous Adulteresses and Whores, by shauing off their haire, as the most ignominious punishment that could befall them. Iustinian. Codicis. l. 9. Tit 9. Lex 30. Sed. hodie, adultera tonsa, Mnastico habitu suscepto, &c Ambros. ad Virginē Lupsm. c. 8. Tom. 4. p. 216 B. Zonaras Annl. Tom 3. f. 14.1.155, 165 Nichr. Hist. Eccl. l 17. c 5. Cent. Mag. Tom. 6 Col. 349 & 808. Capitul Franc. l. 6 c. 2. & Windeck qua supra Hence the ancient Roman Emperours did usually punish Adulteresses by cutting their haire, and then thrusting them into a Monastery, to doe penance there, the true originall of this Popish custome. And hence the French Synode under Pope Zachery, in the yeere 742. decreed. Similiter velatae & sanctimoniales si in crimen fornicationis lapsae urnt, post tertiam verberationem in carcerem missae sequentem annum ibi paenientiam a∣gant, & radantur omnes capilli capitis carum Surius Concil. Tom. 3. p. 40. That if any Nonnes and holy Virgins did fall into adultery (as many did) they should be thrice whip∣ped, then cast into prison for an whole yeere, and have all the haire of their head shaven quite away; to make them odious for ever after, yet Romanists glory in this their femi∣nine tonsure of their Nonnes; Whereas the Councll of Nicetae Thesauri Orthodox l. 5. c 14. Bibl Patrum Tom. 12 pars 1. p. 587 B. Ariminum under Constantius (as if it had beene pur∣posely somoned to convict the Papists of heresie in this very Ceremony of installing Nonnes) together with the Councel of Can 13.17. Surius Tom 1. p 373. Nonnullae autem petatis simultione caput tondere & con∣tra quàm deceret sexum muliebrem virilem hbitum indure adductae sn. His de causis Episccpi finitimi Gngris in unum convenerunt, & istis Ecclesia ctholica interdicunt, &c Sozomeni. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 13. Gangra, condemned Eustatius for an heretique; Quod mulieres comam detondere monuisset: for that he had
perswaded women out of a pretext of holinesse, to cut their haire, against the very Lawes of God and nature. Now as womens clipping of their haire like men is thus execrable in it selfe, because unnaturall; so is their putting on of mans apparell, or men of theirs, especially for merriment. To passe by Baronius & Spondanus, An. 302. sect 5. Doma, who clad her selfe in mans apparell to avoyd the rage of the Tyrant Maximinian; together with that mirror of conjugall fidelity, Plutarchi Ama∣torius. Moral. Tom. 3. page 345.346. Asterij. Ho∣milia. Quod non licet de∣mittere uxorē, &c. Bibl. P.T. 4 p. 707. G. Pe∣trus Victorius l. 18. Var. Lect. c. 15. Empona, who cut her haire, and wore mans apparell lest she should betray her Hus∣band Iulius Sabinus, being discovered, with whom she lived 9 yeeres in a vault, as Hist. l. 4. c. 15. Tacitus relates; with some See p 184. & Isiodor Pe∣lusiotes. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 53. See my vnlovelines of Love-locks, p. 44. to 49 other women formerly mentioned, who have cut their haire and put on mans apparell for learning, danger, or religion sake, whose practise I cannot approve, since God and nature both condemne it: I shall onely remember two Stories more, very pertinent to this purpose. The first is of the Argiae, orPlutarchus De Virtutibus. Mulierū. Tom. 1. Moral. page 516.517. Graecian women of Argos, who driving Cleomenes King of Sparta from their besieged City under the conduct of Telesilla, the most of the Argivi being slaine before the siege; in remembrance of this their victory, ordained a feast on the se∣venth day of the fourth moneth, wherein they exercised their, Hibristica sacra, or contumelious solemnities, in which they clothed women in mans apparell, and men with womens haire-laces, veiles, and head attires: (inverting the very course of nature both in the male and female sex:) And with∣all that they might seeme to contemne and disgrace their Hus∣bands, they inacted this law (which our English shorne Vi∣ragoes might doe well to put in practice) that all married women should put on beards, when ever they should lie with their Husbands: which puts me in minde, not onely of Alexander ab Alexandro. l. 4. c. 13. fol. 213. Caeliu Rhodig. Antiqu. Lect. l. 29. c. 18. bear∣ded Venus (to whom men sacrificed in womens, and women in mens apparell, as Macrobius Sa∣turnaliū. lib. 3. cap. 8. Macrobius hath recorded) whom they pict∣ured like a man from the girdle upward, and like a woman onely from the girdle downwards, because they deemed her both a man and a woman: (a lively emblem of our halfe-men-wo∣men monsters:) but likewise of the Winnili or Lombards wives, Paulus Diaco∣nus, De Gestis Longobardo∣rum. lib. 1. c. 8. who going to Goddanus with their Husbands to desire
of him the victory against the Vandals with their haire hang∣ing loose below their cheekes in forme of a beard; Goddanus seeing them out of his window, and taking them to be men with very long beards, demanded Qui sunt isti Longobardi? from whence they were after called, Lombards, quasi Long-beards, as some, or as other Historians have recorded, because Munsteri Cos∣mograph. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 229.their Husbands to increase the number of their Army at their first eruption, that so they might be more terrible to their ene∣mies, did untie their wives long haire and fashion it to their fa∣ces like a beard, deceiving their enemies with this Stratagem. which if our English polled females (who may do well to make them beards of the haire they have shorne from their Lockes and Foretops) will but imitate, they may then seeme bearded men in earnest, and fall to wea∣ring breeches to, (as they have lately taken up mens Tonsure, Lockes and Dublets, Rom. 1.26. if not more:) and so bee like these mannish Argivae, ouer-ruling nature and their Husbands both at once. The second History is that of Plutarch De Virtutibus Mu∣lierum. Mor. Tom. 1. p. 544.545. Dyonisius. Hallicarnassaeus. Antiqu. Roma∣norū. lib. 7. c. 1 p. 633.634. Aristodemus the Tyrant, surnamed effeminate, because he wore long womanish haire, for which the very Barbarians did condemne him. This unnaturall Tyrant endevoring to effemi∣nate the Cumaeans, commanded and taught their Youths to The like we reade in Athe∣naeus. Dipn. l. 6 c. 6. p. 41. of nous the Ty∣rāt of Erythrae. nourish thei haire like women, to colour it yellow, to curle and embroyder it, and binde it up in phillets; and to weare painted and embroydered Gownes and garments untill they were past 20. yeeres of age. And withall he compelled their women to cut their haire round, and to put on mns apparell. Which in∣vertion of the course of nature in both sexes (condem∣ned by Iniurijs quas in muliees, & ingenuos pue∣ros exercebat, omnia sua su∣perant flagitia. Ibidem. Plutarch, as a tyranny beyond all his other wicked∣nesses) did make him so execrably odious to the Cumaeans, that they rose up with one accord against him and slew him, together with all his posterity, as detestable and worthy ruine both with God and man. It is evident then by all these premises: that the putting on of womans apparel, and so è converso; is Habet enim & sexus insti∣tutam speciem habitus, ut in. viris tonsi ca∣pilli, in mulie∣ribus edūdan∣tia criniū, quod maxime virgi∣nibus insigne est, qurū & or∣natus ips pro∣prie sic est ut concumulatus in verticem ipsum capitis suo arcem ambitu crinium contegat. Iside Hispalensis. Originum. l. 19. c. 23. an unnaturall, and so a See Purchas his Pilgrim. cap. 5. accordingly. shamefull, an abominable act:
therefore to put it on to act a Play, must needs bee such. Secondly, as it is an unnaturall, so likewise it is an effeminate act to put on womans apparell, especially to play a womans part. This all the fore-quoted Authors, together with Act 5. Scene 3. abundantly testifie: This Plutarch, and Dionysius Hallicarnasseus in the now recited History of Aristodemus the Cumaean Tyrant; together with Orosius, Suetonius, Effaeminati corpore at{que} a∣nimo ne scint∣llā quidē reti∣nent geneis masculi proti∣nus plectentes cincinnos or∣nantes{que}: nec pudet eos data opera marem sexū mutare in faeminā. Philo De Specialibus Legibus. p. 1059.1060. Philo Iudaevs, Diodorus, Siculus, Athenaeus, Iustin, Lampridius, Iuvenal, Eusebius, Purchas, and the See pag. 108. fore-quoted Historians, who condemne Sardanapo∣lus, Heliogabalus, Nero, Sporus, the Mle-priests of Venus, the Roman Galli, Cinaedi and others formerly mentioned for so many Monsters of unparalled effeminacy, for putting on womans attire, together with the very grounds of com∣mon reason, fully evidence. For what higher streine of invirility can any Christian name, then for a man to put on a womans rayment, gesture, countenance and beha∣viour, to act a Whores, a Bawdes, or some other lewd, lascivious females part? If this bee not effeminacy in the suparlative degree, I know not yet what effeminacy meanes. But if it be effeminate, as See Purchas his Pilg. c. 51. all must grant, then it must needs be sinfull, yea abominable, since 1 Cor. 6.9, 10 Gal. 5.19, 21. Eph. 4 19 Mi∣litum Christi verū, nihil mol∣le decet. mbros Enar. in Psal. 38 See Purchas his Pilg. cap. 51. effemina∣cy is both an odious and a condemning sinne, as both Scrip∣tures and Fathers doe proclaime it. Thirdly, a mans putting on of womans apparell,See Bulingerus De Theatro. l 1 c. 50.51, 52. be it to act a Play, Ambros Ire∣naeo, Calvin, Ba∣bington, on the 7. Commande∣ment, and all the fore-quoted Authors. p. is a dishonest, immodest, and unseemely thing, which becomes not Christians or religion: it is a thing of ill, not good report; a thing not honest, but vile and filthy in the sight of all men, as the fore-alleaged Au∣thors, and Act 5. Scene 3. together with every ingeni∣ous mans conscience and experience testifie. There∣fore it must needs be sinfull, as the recited Fathers, and 1 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. 1 Tim. 2.9, 10. Phil. 4.6. Eph. 4.17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 13.5. Tit. 2.1112. Rom. 1.28. c. 14.16, 19. Marginall Texts of Scripture will more fully evi∣dence.
Fourthly, a mans clothing himselfe in Maides at∣tire, is not onely an imitation of effeminate idolatrous Priests and Pagans, Macrobius Sa∣turnal. l 3. c. 8. Plutarch De Virtutibus Mu∣lierum. l. Iulius Firmicus, De O∣rigine profana∣rum. Relig. c. 4. Eusebius De Vita Constan∣tius. l. 3. c. 53. Purchas Pilg. l. 4. cap. 7. & his Pilg. chap. 8. who arrayed themselves in womans ap∣parell when they sacrificed to their Idols, and their Venus, and See Act. 1.2, 3 celebrated Playes unto them; which as In Deut. c. 22 Lyra, Prima secun∣dae. Quaest. 102. Arti. 6.6m se∣cunda secundae Quaest. 169. Artic. 2.3m. Aquinas, and Summa The∣ologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. Memb. 2. Alensis well observe, was one chiefe reason, why this Text of Deuteronomy prohibits, mens putting on of womens ap∣parell, as an abomination to the Lord: but a manifest ap∣probation and revivall of this their idolatrous practice. Therefore it must certainly See Act 2. thorowout. be abominable, and within the very scope and letter of this inviolable Scripture, even in this regard. Fiftly, this putting on of womans rayment, Et haec est tota ratio damnationis, perversa administratio conditionis à conditis. Tertul. De Spctac. Tom. 2. p. 384. is a meere abuse of it. The end why God ordained apparell at the first, was onely Gen. 3.21. Rev. 3.18. Prov. 17.26. 2 Chron. 28.15. Mat. 25.36, 43. 2 Cor. 5.2. to cover nakednesse; Iob. 31.19, 20. c. 24.7, 8. Hag 1.6. Mat. 6.25. to 32. to fence the body a∣gainst  cold, winde, raine, and other annoyances: to Rev. 3.17, 18. Ezech. 16.4. to 13, 39, 40. Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitio∣rum. pars 6. c. 2 Obsopaeus De Luxu Vestium. The Homily against Excesse in Appa∣rell. put men in minde of their penury, their mortality, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 5. Rom. 13.14. Rev. 3.18. c. 7.9. Gal. 3.27. Eph. 4.24. Col. 3.10. 1 Pet. 3.3. their spirituall clo∣thing from Heaven, and the like; and Deut. 22.5. 1 Pet. 3.3. 1 Tim. .9. 1 Cor. 11.9. to 16. and most Ex∣positors on it. Clemens Alexandrinus Paedag. l. 3. c. 3. Ambros. Irenaeo. Tom. 1. p. 33.24. H. 8. c. 13.1. & 2. Phil. & Mar. cap. 2. with all other Statutes of Apparell, and Authors who have written of Apparell. to distinguish one Sex, one Nation, Proprius habitus unicuique est, tam ad usum quotidianum quam ad honorem & dignitatem. Purpura praetexta & sto∣la, nativitatis insignia, non potestatis: generis, non honoris; ordinis; non super∣stitionis. Tertul. De Idololat. lib. cap. 16.17. See De Pallio. lib. one dignity, office, calling, profession from another. Now a mans attyring himselfe in womans array, as it serves for neither of these good ends for which gar∣ments were at first ordained; which proves it a meere abuse: so it perverts one principall use of gar∣ments, to difference men from women; by confounding, in∣terchanging, transforming these two sexes for the pre∣sent, as long as the Play or part doth last. If therefore
mens ordinary wearing of womens garments, if the puting of them on in any other place but in a Play-house, or the wearing of them in the streets for an houre or two, and that but seldome; be within he malediction of this text, or an unlawfull thing (as our very D. Gagr, & D. Gentilis in D. Renolds Over∣thow of Stage playes, p 9.15, 86, 91, 92, 167, 169 170. Antagonists in this case of Playes, con∣fesse) because it transformes the Ambros. Irenaeo. Tom. 1. p. 233. Quē si puellarū inseeris choro, Mire sgaces falleret hospi∣es Discrimen obscurū solutis crinibus, am∣biguo{que} vultu. Horace Carm. lib. 2. Ode 5. male in outward appea∣rance into the more ignoble female sex, and nullifies that exter∣nall difference betweene them, which it ought to make: Then questionlesse mens arraying themselves in womans vest∣ments to act a part in Masques, in Playes, or other Enter∣ludes, must needs be much more abominable, within the meaning of this Scripture: because it not onely inverts these Sexes which God and nature have distinguished: but also abuseth apparell, not to any good or necessary pur∣pose Rom. 3.8. which is evill; but to an unnecessary, lewde, lascivi∣ous end, from whence no good at all proceeds. Lastly, this putting on of womans array (especially to act a lascivious, amorous, whorish, Love-sicke Play upon the Stage, must needs be sinfull, yea abominable; because it not onely Merito illic non servatur castimonia, ubi nō servatur sex∣us distinctio. Ambros. Irenaeo. excites many adulterous filthy lusts, both in the Actors and Spectators; and drawes them on both to contemplative and actuall lewdnesse, (as the Aquinas pri∣ma secundae Quaest. 102. Artic. 6.6m. se∣cunda secundae Quaest. 169. Artic. 2.3m. Cal∣vin, Babington, Perkins, Downe∣ham, Dod, Elton, Lake, Williams, Ames, & al others on the 7. Cōmandement, & on Deut. 22.5. quoted before. Philo Iudaeus De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059.1060. De Vita Cō∣templ. p. 1209.1210. & D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes, p. 8. to 23. & 83. to 102 marginall Au∣thors testifie) which is evill; but likewise instigates them to Gen. 38.8. & Ro. 1.21 Deut. 23.10.11. selfe-pollution, (a sinne for which Onan was destroyed:) and to that unnaturall Sodomiticall sinne of uncleanesse, Rom. 1.24, 26, 27. to which the reprobate Gentiles were given over; (a sinne Eph. 5.3, 4. not once to be named, much lesse then practised among Christi∣ans;) which is worse, This the detestable examples of Lamprîdij Heliogabalus, Eutropius, Rerū. Rom. l. 10. f. 124.125. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 106.107. Grimstons Imperiall Hist. p. 157.159. Heliogabalus, Athnaeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 12, 13. Iustin. Hist. l. 1. Or∣sius Hist. l. 1. c. 19. Diodorus Siculus. Bibl. Hist. l. 2. sect. 23. Sleidā de 401. Imperijs, l. 1. p. 17. Sardanapalus, Suetonij Nero, sect. 28.29. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. f. 98. b. Eutropius l. 9. Rom. Hist. p. 104. Grimstons Imp. Hist. p. 79 Nero & Sporus,Iulius irmicus, De Errore Profa. Relig. c. 4 Eusebius De Vita Cōst. l. 3. c. 55. Macrobius Satur. l. 3. c. 8. Purchas Pilg. l. 4. c. 7. & his Pilg. c. 51. the
Male-Priests of Venus, with the Purchas Pilg. l. 8. c 7. passive beastly Sodomites in Florida, Purcha Pilg. l. 9. c. 1. Gayra, and Purchas Pilg. l. 9. c. 11. & Ci∣a. c. 64. Peru, evidence; who went clad in womans apparell, the better to elliciate, countenance, act, and colour their unnaturall execrable uncleanesse, which I abhor to thinke off. This the Isti pueros transferunt in amicarū habitū & ordinē cum summa aetatis iniuria, ut amatoribus quidem eorum melius consulent, &c. Philo De Vita Contempl. l. p. 1210. & De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059.1060. See Sutonij Nero, sect. 28. Ath∣naeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27. Sutonij Tiberius, sect. 43.44. Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Rom. l. 7. c. 1. usuall practise of other ancient Incubi, who clothed their Galli, Succubi Ganymedes and Cy∣nadi in womans attire, whose virilities they did oft-times Suetonij Nero, sect. 28. Herodoti Vrania. p. 482. Ivenal. Satyr. 6. p. 54.55. Am∣bros. Hexaem. l. 5. c. 3. Basilius Mag. De Vera Virginitate, Tom. 2. p. 167. to 173. August De Civ. Dei. l. 7. c. 24. Anastasius Siania, Quaest. 66. Bibl. P.T. 6. pars 1. p. 774.775. Philo De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059.1060. & De Vita Contempl. p. 1209.1210. Sedulius in 1 Cor. c. 6.dissect, to make them more effeminate, transforming them as neere as might be into women, both in apparell, gesture, speech, behauiour. And more especially Grandiores pueri, loti, nitidi, fucati{que} ac cincinnatuli, alut capillitium vel omnino intonsi, vel à fronte tantum praesectis in orbem crinibus. Nunc o gloriantur qui patrāt & qui patiuntur muliebria, effaeminai corpore iuxta at{que} animo, ne scintillam quidem retinentes generis masculi, propalam plectentes cincinnos ornantes{que}, &c. Phio De Vita Contempl. p. 1208. & De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059. See Ambrose Irnaeo, & Rabanus Maurus, in Deut. l. 2. c. 20. Nazienzen Oratio 27 p. 460. accordingly. Est apud eos consuetudo ut pueri us{que} admpberem aetatem purpuram, capillorum{que} nodos auro revinctos gestent. Atnaeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 6. See lib. 10. c. 6. & l 12. c. 19. Assistunt pueri coma nitentes ex gente barbarica ad hoc usus Electi. Amrose De Elia & Ieiuni. c. 13. Discant â te co-Episcopi tui, comatulos pueros & comptos adolescentes secum non habere. Bernard De Consideratione. l. 3 c. 6 Aristodemus iussit mares more virginum comam alere, eam{que} colore avo inficere, cincinnos{que} facere, & reticulis capillos religare & pictis at{que} talaribus togis indui, palliolis enuibus ac mollibus amiciri, & in umbra degere. Eos autem comitabatur ad ludum saltatorum & tibicinum, puerorum magistrae mulieres, & ipsae lavabant eos allatis ad balnea pectinibus & speculis. Tali educatione corrumpens pueros do∣nec annum aetatis vicesimum implevissent. Sed quum his alijs{que} multis modis cum contumelia illusisset Cumae is, & a nullo libidinis genere temporsse, &c. una cum tora stirpe excisus et. Dionys Hallicarn. Antiqu. Romanor. l. 7. c. 1. p. 634. & Plutarch De Virtuibus Mulirum Alor Tom. 1. p. 544.545. Nero insignes pinguissima coma ado∣lescentulos & excellētissimo cultu puos undi{que} elegit, qui divisi in factiones plu∣suum genera condiscerent, &c. Suetonij Nero st. 20. See 28. Cnidius{que} Gyges Quem si puellarum insereres choro, Mire sagces falleret hospites, Discrimen obscurum solutis crinibus, ambiguo{que} vultu Horace Carm. l. 2. Ode 5. Puer quis ex aula capillis. Ad cyathū statuetur unctis? Idē Carm. l. 1. Ode 29. I, pete unguentum puer & coronas. Dic & argutae properet Neae¦rae, Myrrheum nodo cohibe∣re crinē Carm. lib. 3. Ode 14. Spisa t mundum coma, &c. Sparsum adoratis humerū capillis. Ibid Ode 19.21. Et quae nunc humris involitant, deciderint comae. Carm. l. 4. Ode 10. Horret capillis, ut mrmus, speris chinus, au currēs aper. Idē. Epodon, l. Epod. 5. p. 137. Sed alius ardor aut peiae candide. Aut teretis pueri, longā renodantis comā Epod. 11. p. 146. Intōsum pueri dicite Cynthiū. Carm. l. 1 Ode 21. Intonsos{que} agitaret Apollinus aura capillos. Epod. l. Ep 15. p. 149. Quē tenues decuere togae nitidi{que} capilli. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 14. p. 260. Tondendū cunucho Bromium cōmittere noli. Iuvenal Satyr. 6. p. 55. See Farnaby. Ibid. Quid iuvat ornato procedere vita capillo? Aut quid Orantea crines perfundere myrra. Propertius Elegiarū. l. 1. Eleg. 2. Quid tibi nunc molles prodest coluise capillos? Saepe{que} mutatas disposuisse comas? Quid fuco splendente comas redimire? quid illas, Artificis docta subsecuisse manu? Tibullus Elig. l. 1. Eleg. 8. Vnus de toto peccaverat orbe, comarū Annulus, &c. Desine iam Lalage tristes ornare capillos, Tangat & insnū nulla puella caput, &c. Martial. Epig. l. 2. Epig 46. Tu iuvenile decus serva, ne pulerior ille In longa fuerit quam breviore comâ Hos tibi laudatos dominorū voce capillos. Ille tuus latia misit ab urbe puer: Addidit & nitidū sacratis crinibus orbē. Qo faelix facies indice tota fuit. Idm Epig. l. 9. Epig 14. Consiliū formae speculum, dulces{que} capillos Pergameo prosunt dona sacratadeo, Ille puer tanto Domino gratis∣simus aula, &c. Nec Gnymedeas mallet habere comas. Ibid. Epig. 13. Noluerā Po∣lytime tuos violare capillos, &c. positis{que} nitebat Crinibus Epig. l. 12. pig 68. See l. 14. Epig. 21.23, 24, 134 Exornant muliebriter nutritos crines, &c. Iulius Frmicus, D. Errore Profan. Relg c 4. Molles sunt, cum quibus virile perficitur scelus, & quorū vi∣rilia in puritia castrabantur, &c Eidē Matri magnae contra omnem virorum, mu∣lirū{que} verecundiā consecrati sunt, qui us{que} in extremū diem madidis capillis, & fa∣cie dealbata, incessu faemineo per plateas vicos{que} Carthaginis à populo, unde turpiter viverent exigebant, Sedulius Collect. in 1 Cor. 6. Bibl. P.T. 5. pars 1. p. 462. G. See Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l 15. c. 8.9. at large to this purpose, and my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, p. 5.6, 21, 22. Seneca. De Brev. Vitae. c. 12. & Controvers l. 1. Proaem. in long unshorne womannish, frizled, lust-provoking
haire and Love-lockes, (growne now too much in fashion with comly Pages, Youthes, and lewd effemi∣nate ruffianly persons; as they were with these unnatu∣rall Pagans, I dare not write, to amorous beastly pur∣poses, Veneris praesidio ferox, pectes caesariem, &c. tamen heu serus adulteros Crines pulvere collines. Horace. Carm. l. 1. Ode 15. Non sola comptos arsit adulteri crines. Hor. Carm l. 4 Ode 9. Cōventū ta∣men & pactū & sponsalia nostra Tēpestate paras, iam{que} à tonsore magistro pecte∣ris, &c. Iuvenal Satyr. 6. p. 42. Si nemo tribunal vendit acersecomes, si nullū in con∣iuge crimen, &c. Ib. Sat. 8. p 79. Sed vitare viros cultū formam{que} professos. Quique suas ponunt in statione comas. Ovid De Arte Amandi l. 3. Alter unguentis affuens, calmistata coma despiciens conscios stupratorū, &c. Cicero Oratio pro Sexto. p 547. b. Intonsum caput ambitionem perversa via sequitur &c. Seneca Epist 5. See Epist. 124. De Brev. Vitae. c. 12 & Contr. l. 1. Proem. See Tibullus. Elg. l. 1. Eleg. 8. Porprtius Eleg l 1. Eleg 2. Petronij Satyricō. p. 87 Stobaeus Serm. 6. Comae studiosius adulteri sunt. Homerus enim puellarū deceptoem comae nitidioris amantē facit, quasi ad mulierū corrupt∣lam coma exornaretur. Nullus coatus qui non etiam cinaedus & impudicus. Synsus Calvitij Encomium. to which they are strong allectives, of which they were
ancient Symptomes, as sundry profane and Caelus Rho∣dig Antiqu. Lectionum. lib. 15. c. 8. Co∣mas supervacu∣as curare vel in saelicium vel iniustorum est: nam quid in talibus expect∣endū aut suspi∣candum, nii ut lasciuus ille ornatus faemi∣nas praetereun∣tes inviet, aut alienis matri∣monijs insidie∣tur? Basil De Legendis libris Gentilium Orat. See Hierm. Ep. 8. c. 0. Ep. 19. c. 5. Ep. 21. c. 12. Ep 47. c. 3. Cle∣mens Rom Aost. Constit. l. 1. c. 9. Clem Alexand. Paedag l. 2 c. 10. l. 3 c. 2.3, 11. See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Love-lockes, p. 21.22, 29. to 3. Purchas his Pilg c. 51 Concil. Constantinop 6. Can 9. & 96. Con∣cil. Turonicū. 1585. & Bitu∣rinse. 1584. Bohllius. lib. 6. Tit. 9. Christian Writers testifie: Which should cause all chaste ingenious Chri∣stians for ever to detest them, the better to avoyd the sares, the badges, the suspicions of incontinency, and this most filthy sinne:) the more to extenuate this their unna∣turall wickednesse, or rather the more freely to embolden, to al∣lure and provoke them to the undaunted, ulamented practise of it, by reducing it as neere to naturall lewdnesse as they could devise: since few of them were so prodigiously impu∣dent, so unmeasurably outragious at the first, as despe∣rately to rush upon this unnaturall filthinesse in its su∣parlative native vilenesse, without some extenuating varnishes cast into it, to charme their consciences, and inflame their lusts. Yea this the execrable Precedents of ancient, of moderne Play-poets and Players witnesse, who have beene deepely plunged in this abominable wickednesse, which my Inke is not blacke enough to discypher. Witnesse the example of Sophocles, that fa∣mous Greeke Tragaedian, whom Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 13. cap. 27. Plutarch, in his Amatorius; Suidas in the word Sophocles; Caelius Rhodiginus, Antiqu. Lect. lib. 15 cap. 9.10. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. c. 63.64. have stigma∣tized for this sinne. Witnes Saint Cyprian, who writes thus of the womanish Pantomimes and Players in his times. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Libidinibus insanis in viros viri proruunt, &c. See Act 4. Scene 1. Witnes Saint Chrysost. Hom. 12. in Epist. 1. ad Corinth. Theatra congregant & meretricum choros illic inducentes, & pueros paticos qui in∣iuria ipsam naturam afficiunt. Quid ergo illos inducis cynaedos, & exoletos, &c. Yea witnes Caligua. Suetonij. Calig. sect. 55. with M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses p. 105. where he afirmes, hat Players and Play-haunters in their secret conclaves pla the Sodomites: together with This I have heard credibly reported of a Scholler of Bayliol Colledge, and I doubt not but it may be verified of divers others. some moderne examples of such, who have beene desperately enamored with Players Boyes thus clad in womans apparell, so farre as to sol∣licite
them by words, by Letters, even actually to abuse them. All which give dolefull testimony to this experimental reason, which should make this very putting on of wo∣mans apparell on Boyes, to act a Play, for ever execra∣ble to all chast Christian hearts. Hence is it, Calvin, Babing∣ton, erkins, Eltō, Brinsly, Dod, Downham, Lake, Ames, & others on the 7. Com∣mandement, D. Reinolds O∣verthrow, &c. p 4.10.11. that sundry learned Divines annex this text of Deuteronomy to the 7. Com∣mandement, as a morrall precept sounded upon the very Law of nature; because mens putting on of womans rayment is a temp∣tation, an inducement not onely to adultery, but to the beastly sinne of Sodome, which (saith Parum enim vidbatur si in expugnnda faeminrū pu∣dicitia maculo∣sus esset ac tur∣pis, nisi etiam sexui suo iniu∣riam faceret. Hoc est verum adulteriū quod fit contra natu∣ram. Haec qui fecit, viderimus an maximus, certè optimus non est De Fal∣sa. Relig lib. 1. cap. 10. pag. 36. Lactantius) is most properly called adultery, because it is Cogitandum est masculoū ad masculos, & faeminarum ad faeminas societatem praeter naturam esse, & facinus corum qui primi ab voluptatis incontinentiam id ausi fuerunt. Omnes equidem Cretensium de Gnymede fabulam damnamus, velut qui tlem rationem in a in. nuerint ut cū leges à Iove ipsis taditae, credantur hanc fabulā contra Iovem effinx∣erunt, quo sequētes Deum, etiam hac voluptate renerentur. Valeat igitur haec fa∣bula Plato Legum Dialog. 2 p. 791. See Rom. 1.26, 27. unnaturall. Yea hence (as Philo Iudaeus De Specialibus Legibus p. 1058.1059, 1060. D Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 11. some have truely observed) those women who put on mens, and men who put on womens apparel, are said in this text, not onely to be abominable, but even, to be an abomination, in the abstract, to the Lord their God; because it is an occasion off, a violent provocation to that monstrous unparalleld sinne of Sodomy, (Sedu∣lius in 1 Cor 6. Cuius defecit interpretatio erubuit ratio, conticuit oratio:) which the following Deut. 23.17, 18. chapter, with severall Levit. 18.22, 23, 24. 1 King. 14.24. Ezech. 16.50. o∣ther Scriptures, expresly stile; an abomination to the Lord our God. Since then it is abundantly evident by all these premises, (and I suppose by many Players and Play-haunters particular experience) that mens putting on of womans apparell (D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes, p. 10.11, &c. Gsson his Playes Confuted. Artion 2. especially to act a Whores, a Baudes, or Sweet-hearts womanish wanton part upon the Stage, where all the sollicitations, and inescating allectives to unclean∣nesse doe accompany it,) is a preparative, an incendiary, not only to sundry noysome lusts, to speculative, to practicall adultery, whoredome, and the like: but even to the most abominable un∣naturall
sinne of Sodom, Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. cap. 8.9. Athenaus Dip∣nosoph. lib 13. cap. 7.28. Plutarchi Ama∣torius. D. Rei∣nolds & Gossn, qua h. to which mens imbred corruption, (as good Authors testifie) is over-prone; as the detestable examples of the flagitious Gen 19.5. Ezech. 16.50. Iude 7. Sodomites, Levit. 18.22 24. Eph. 4.19. Canaanites, Deut. 23.17, 18. Iudg. 19.22, 24, 25. 1 King. 14.24. 2 King. 23.7. Iewes, Rom 1.24. 16, 27. Eph. 4 19. Gentiles, 1 Cor 6.9.10, 11. Corinthians, Alvarus Pelag. l. 2. Artic. 2 p. 89. Bp. Babington on the 7. Cōmandement Burtons Melancholy, pars 3. sect 2. p 408 Heylins Geog. p. 155. Italians, Lonrus Turc. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. Busbequis Ep 3 p. 134. to 140. Purchas Pilg l. 3. c. 10.13. Turkes, Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27.28. Caelius Rhod Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 9. Heredo, Clio, Purchas Pilg. l. 4. c. 7. Per∣ians, Plutarchi, Gryllus, & Amatorius, Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 9. Grecians, Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 5. c. 106. p. 1221. Purchas Pilg. l. 4. c. 13. Tartars, Purchas Pilg. l. 4 c. 19. Chinoyes, Plato Legum. Dial. 2. p. 791. Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27. Ari∣stot. Polit. l. 2. c. 8. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 9. Celae, Purchas Pilg. l. 5. c. 3. Peguans, Pur∣chas Pilg. l. 8. c. 7. Floridians, Philo Iudaeus, De Vita Cont. p. 1208. to 1211. Athenaeus Dipn. l. 13. cap. 27. Caelius Rhod. Ant. Lect. l. 15. c. 8.9. Burtons Melancholy, pars 3. sect. 2. p. 408. 409. ancient Romans, Purchas Pilg. l. 6. c. 11. Moores in Barbary, Purchas Pilg. l. 9. c. 1. Gayrians, Purchas Pilg. l. 9. c. 11. Peruians, Plato Legū. Dialog. 2. p. 791. Lactantius De falsa Relig. c. 10.11. Iulius Firmicus, De Errore Profan. Relig. c. 13. Iupiter and his Ganymedes, the Iulius Firmicus, Ib. c. 4. Sedulius in 1 Cor. 6. Eusebius De Vita Constant. l. 3. c. 53. Purchas Pilg. l. 4. c. 7. ancient Priests of Venus, Iustin Hist. l. 1. Athenaeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 1314. Orosius Hist. l. 1. c. 19. Sardanapalus, Suctonij Nero. sect. 26. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. ol. 98. b. Eutropius l. 9. fol. 104. Nero and his Sporus, Lampridij & Grimstons, Hliogabalus, Brtons Melancholy, pars 3. sect. 2. p. 408. Heogabalus, and See Athnaeus Dipn. l. 12. c. 5. l. 13. c. 27.28. Plutarchi, Gryllus & Amatorius, Suetonij Gala. sect. 22. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 8.9. Burtons Melancholy, pag. 408.409. many others: yea the frequent Sodomiticall wickednesses of sundry See Luitprandis Hist. l. 6. c. 6.7. Platina in Ionne 23. Guicciordins Hist l. 1 Fasciculus Temporū, Onus Ecclesiae. c. 20.21.23. Balaeus De Scriptor. Brit. Cn. 2. p. 605. Acts of English Votaries, l. 1. f. 8. 65, 7. l. 2. f. 6. 19, 58, 59 62, 17. His A∣pology fol. 5.6, 24. Agrip De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 63.64. Alvarus Pelagius, lib. 2. Artic. 2. f. 83. Iohn Whites Way b. sect. 59. numb. 9.10. & Defence of the Way. chap. 5. numb. 2.3. Bp. Mortons Protestants Appeale, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 36, &c. Ma∣ster Cookes More worke for a Masse-Priest. sect. 32. Burtons Melancholy, pg. 408.409. unholy-Popes, Cardinals, Popish Iohannes De Casa, Bishop of Beneventum wrote a Booke in defence of Sodomy, where he stiles it a sweet sinne, proclaiming withll, that hee never used any other of this nature, but this onely. Burtons Melancholy. page 408. See Alvarus Plagius De Planctu Ecclesiae, sect. 2. fol. 83. Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Friers, Monkes, (such are the unchast fruits of their vowed and much-admired
chastity:) together with the frequent inhibii∣ons, Lawes & Edicts against this prodigious villany in Levit. 18.22, 23, 24. Deut. 23 17, 18. Iudg. 19 22, to 27. 1 Kin. 14.4. 2 King. 23.7. Ezech. 16.5. Rom. 1 24, 26, 27.  Cor. 6.9, 11. Gl. 5.19. Eph. 23. c. 4 19. Iude 7. Col. 3 4.5. & M. Bysicl Expositiō. lb. Scrip∣tures, Clemens Rom. Constit. Apost. l. 7. c. 3. Concil. Eliberinū. Cā. 71, Concil. An∣cyranum. Can. 15. See Alva∣rus Plagius, De Panctu Ec∣clesae. l. 2. Ar∣tic. 2. fol. 83. Councels Athnaeus Dipn. l. 13. c. 27 28. Plutarchi Amatorus, Caeli∣s Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. l. 15. c. 89. Heathen States, and in our English 25. H. 8. c. 6.8. H. 8. c. 1. & 6.31. H. 8. c. 7.32 H. 8. c. 3.2. & 3. Ed. 6. c. 29.5. Eliz. c. 7. Statutes, (which have made it capitall, as a late example of a memorable act of iustice on an English Peere can witnes) doe more then testifie; it cannot but bee in∣excusably sinfull, both in the eyes of God, who litteral∣ly prohibits it; and in the sight of naturall, much more of Christian men, who cannot but detest it. And so by consequence the Playes themselves which are acted in such apparell (as all our Masques and Stage-playes for the most part are) must questionlesse bee sinnefull, yea abominable, as mens putting on of womans apparell is. Thus al the fore-alleaged Councels, Fathers, Authors, do from hence conclude, & so must I from all the premises. If any now object, that it is farre better, farre more commendable for Boyes to act in womans attire, then to bring women-Actors on the Stage to personate fe∣male parts; a practice much in use in former times a∣mong the Musieres autem nudo at{que} operto capite populū abs{que} rubore alloquūtur tanta{que} prae meditatione impudentiā asciscunt, tan∣tam{que} lasciviam in audientiū at{que} videntium animos infundunt, ut uno omnes ani∣mo radicius modestiā è mentibus evellere, dedecore muliebrem naturam afficere, perniciosa voluptate cupiditates suas implere conari videantur. Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Mat. Tom. 2. p. 298. C. Se Theophylact. & Occumenius in 1 Tim. 1.9. accordingly. & Chry∣sost. Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Greekes, and Summa grati cius de spurcitia concinnata est, quā mi∣mus etiam per mulieres repraesentat sexum pudoris exterminans, ut facilius domi quàm in sena erubesnt. Tertul. De Spectac. . 17. Romans; who had their Horace Serm. l. 1. Satyr. 2. p. 163. v. 2. Mimae, & quae ludibrio corporis sui quaestū faciunt, publicè habitu earū virgi∣uum quae Deo dicatae sunt, non utantur. Iustin. Cdicis. l. 1. Tit. 7. le. 5. See Iustiniani Novel. 104. & 98. & Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50.51. Mi∣mae, their Sceniae mulieres, or women-Actors (who were Chrysost. Hom. 12. in 1. Ep. ad Cor. Tertul. De Spectaculis. c. 17. Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50.51. Iustiniani No∣vel. 98. & 104. Cassiodorus variarū. l. 7. Epist. 10. all notorious impudent, prostituted Strumpets,) especi∣ally i their Ouid. Fastorum. lib. 5. pag. 189.190. Lactantius De Falsa. Relig. l. 1. c. 10 Iuvenal. Satyr. . Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. c. 50. Ludovicus Vives, Noae in August. De Civ. Dei lib 2 c 8 Floralian Enterludes; as they have now their
female-Players in Italy, and other forraigne parts, and as they had such French-women Actors, in a Play In Michael, Terme, 1629. not long since peronated in Blacke-friers Play-house, to which there was great resort. I anwer first, that the very ground of this objection is false, unlesse the objectors can manifest it to bee a greater abomination, a more detestable damning sinne, for a woman to act a females part upon the Stage, then for a Boy to put on a womans apparell, person and be∣haviour, to act a feminine part; which the Deut. 22.5. Scrpture expresly prohibits, as an abomination to the Lord our God: or unlesse they can prove an irritation, an inducement to Sodomy, to selfe-pollution (in thought at least if not in act,) a lesser sinne, a more tollerable evill, then Se D mes, De Iure Con∣sciētiae. l. 5. c. 39 set. 30. p. 171, mannish impudency, or a temptation to whoredome, and adultery: which none can evidence. Secondly, admit men-Actors in womens attire, are not altogether so bad, so discommendable as women Stage-players; yet since both of them are vill, yea extremely vitious, neither of them necessary, both superfluous as all Playes and Players ae; the superabundant sinfulnesse of the one, can neither iustifie t lawfulnesse, nor exte∣nuate the wickednesse of the other. It is no good argu∣ment to say, Adultery is worse then simple Fornication: Sodomy with such other unnaturall wickednesses are farre more abominable then adultery: therefore fornication and adultery are lawfull and may still be tol∣lerated, (as they are in bstly specaeus Cō∣ment. in Tit. 1. Agripa De Va∣nitate Scienti∣arū. l. c. 63.64. Adolescēibus impudice abus sunt. Heu, heu, intra snā Ec∣clesiā muli re∣ligiosi & clerici in suis ltebris & cōventiculis & lai im in plaeris{que} civita∣tibus maximè in Italia, publi∣ce quodā modo, netandū gym∣nasiū constitu∣unt, & palestrā; in illius lagitj abominatione se execētes, & optimi quique epheborum, in lupanari ponū∣tur. Alvares Pe∣lagiu De Planctu Ecclesiae l. 2. Ar∣tic. 2. ol. 8 vid. Ibid. See l. before. Rome, the very Sinke, the Stewes and Nursery of all such uncleannesse; which should cause all Christians to detest this Roma quasi gurges flagitiorū. Epis. Chmnnsis. Onus Ecclesiae. c. 19 sect. 8. & Carols Molinaeus Senatu-consulta Franciae contra absus Paparm. pag. 251. Whore,Rev. 17.1, 2. together with her head, her Pope, her Sed & recentioribus tēpobus Sixtus Pontiex Maximus Romae no∣bile admodū lupina exruxit, &c. In Italia etiā Romana scorta in sinulas hebdo∣mads iuiū pēdent ōtifici, qui cēsus annuus nonnūquā viinti millia ducaus exce∣dit ado{que} Ecclesiae procerū id munus cit ut una tiā cum Ecclesiarū prouētbus etiā lenociniorū numeēt mercedē, &c. Agrip De Van. Scient. c. 64. & Espencaeus in Tit. 1. p. 67 supreme Pander:) because the
transcendent badnesse of the one, doth neither expiate nor extenuate the sinfulnesse of the other. Yet this is the present objection in effect Female-Actors, are worse then male-Actors arrayed in womans apparell; therefore they are tolerable, if not lawfull. Whereas this should rather bee the conclusion (with which I will close up this Scene;) both of them are abominable both intollerable, neither of them laudable or necessary; therefore both of them to bee abandoned, neither of them to be henceforth tollerated among Christians. SCENA SEPTIMA. SEcondly, as Stage-playes are thus unlawfull, in re∣gard of the womannishnesse, so likewise are they in respect of the costly gawdinesse, the immodest lascivi∣ousnesse, the fantastiqu strangenesse, the meretricious, effeminate lust-provoking fashions of that apparell wherein they are commonly acted and frequented: from whence I shall deduce this 22. Argument against Stage-playes. Those Playes which are usually acted and frequented in over-costly effeminate,Argument. 22. strange, meretricious, lust-exciting apparell, are questionlesse unseemely, yea unlawfull unto Christians. But our ordinary Theatricall Enterludes, are for the most part acted and frequented in such apparell. Therefore they are questionlesse unseemely, yea un∣lawfull unto Christians. The Major is warranted not onely by Deut. 22.5. Isay 3.16. to 24. Zeph. 1.8. 2 King. 9.30. Prov. 7.10. Ier. 4.30. Ezech. 23.40, 41. Luk. 7.25. 1 Tim. 2.4, 10. 1 Pet. 3.3.
which condemne all such apparell, as unbeseeming Christians: But likewise by Tertullian, De Habitu Mu∣liebri, & De Cultu Faeminarum. lib. Philo Iudaeus, De Fortitu∣dine, lib. pag. 1005.1006. & De Mercede Meretricis non accipienda in acrarium. lib p. 1161.1162. By Clemens Alex∣andrinus Paedag. lib. 2. c. 10.12. & Non est mu∣lieris sed mere∣tricis illud ni∣mium sui or∣nandi studium. Ibid c. 2. Mulie∣rem minim deceat tortos habere cines, & pectus suum nudare ne sui decoris & offi∣cij oblita vi∣deatur, &c. Indignum est enim mulieres Christianas, quas decet cum verecundia & sobrietate or∣natus, pietatem per bona opera profiteri, mere∣tricio more in∣totis crinibus nudatis capii∣bus & pectore, se velu nundi∣naitias populo exponere. Ideo non tanū vir∣gines sed eiam mulieres intor∣tis crinibus, ac nisi velatis ca∣pitibus ac pe∣ctore (poissi∣mū in Eclesi) incedere pro∣hibemus, &c. Syndus Turnica. An 1583. Apud Bochllū. Decreta Eccle. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 9. c. 11. Vid. Concil Bitur. 1584. Ibid. c. 12. lib. 3. cap. 1. to 9.11. By Cyprian De Habitu Virginum. lib. By Ambros. De Instit. Virginis, & De Virginibus. lib. 3. By Basil. Ascetica. cap. 12. & Comment. in Esay. c. 3. By Nazienzen Oratio 27. p. 460. & Adversus Mulieres ambitiosius sese ornantes. p. 992, &c. which I would our plaistered pompous Iezebls would peruse. By Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Hesaiam. lib. 1. c. 3. By Hierom. Epist. 7. c. 3. Epist. 8. c. 5.10. Epist. 10. c. 2.3. Epist. 16. c. 2. Epist. 23. & Adversus Iovinianum. c 9. By Chryso∣stome Hom. 31. in Matth. & Hom. 8. in 1 Tim. 2. By Au∣gustine De Doctrina Christiana. l. 4. c. 21. & Epist. 73. By Ful∣gentius Epist. 3. ad Probam. By Bernard, De Modo Vivendi Sermo 9. By Primasius, Ambrose, Sedulius, Remigius, Theo∣doret, Deda, Haymo, Rabanus Maurus, Theophylact, Oecu∣menius, Anselme, Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra, Master Iohn Calvin, Marlorat, Aretius, Danaeus, Mayer, Byfield, and most o∣ther Commentators, on the 1 Tim. 2.9. and on the 1 Pet. 3.3. By Alexander Alensis, Theologiae Sūma, pars 4. Quaest. 11. Artic. 2. sect. 4. Alexander Fabritius Destructorium vitio∣rum pars 6. c. 2. P. Q. Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu Ecslesiae. lib. 2. Artic. 76. fol. 250. Lydij Waldensia, pars 2. pag. 358. AEneas Sylvius. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 166. Ioannes Fredericus, De Luxu Vestium. lib. By. Bishop Hooper, Bishop Babing∣ton Master Calvin, Perkins, Dod, Downbam, Brinsly, Lake, Elton, Williams, on the 7. Commandement, and sundry o∣ther Diuines in their Treatises of Apparell, Pride and Lux∣ury, and in their Expositions on Isay 3 and the fore-quoted Scriptures; who absolutely censure, the very se and wea∣ring of such apparell (much more the ordinary abuse of it in lasciuious Enterludes) as See My Vnlovelinesse of Love-locks. p. 49. to 58. being the incendiary of lust, the
fomentation of pride, the occasion of adultery, the Non de inte∣gra conscientia venit studium placēdi per de∣corē, quē natu∣raliter invita∣orē libidinis scimus. Textul. De Cultu Faemi∣narum. cap. 2. badge of in∣continency: concluding it, to be altogether unlawfull for chast, for sober Christians, and fit for none but Strumpets, Ornamētorū insignia & leno cinia fucorum, non nisi prosti∣tutis & impu∣dicis faeminis congruit; & nullarum ferè praeciosior cul∣tus est, quàam quarum pudor vilis est. Cypian De Habitu Vir∣ginum. lib. who are commonly most compt in their attires, most gawdy and new-fangled in their clothes. Whence they Laudo ego & admiror vete∣rum Lacedae∣moniorum ci∣vitatem, quae solis meretri∣cibus floridas vestes & aurū mundū gestare permisit, à probis mulieribus mundi studium auferens, quod solis meretricibus se ornare concederet. Clemens Alexandr. Paedag. l. 2. c. 10. See Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 12. cap. 6. applaud the Lacede∣monians law; that none but common prostituted Strumpets should weare any costly or glorious apparell; the better to deter all chaste and sober persons from it. A law which would well befit our Nation, our times, which See Purcha Pilgr. c. 26.27, 51. Proteus-like are alwayes changing shape and fashion, and like the Moone, appeare from day to day in different formes. The Minor is evident by experience; which findes an whole Wardrobe of all gawdy, pompous vestments; a confluence of all whorish, immodest, lust-provoking attires; a strange variety of all effeminate, lewde, fan∣tastique, outlandish apish fashions, (or disguises rather) at the Play-house; sufficient to excite a very hell of noy∣some lusts in the most mortified Actors and Spectators bowels: To this we may adde the verdict of the Fa∣thers, who censured the Playes in their times, even from the quality of the apparell in which they were acted. Witnes Clemens Alexandrinus; who as Paedag. l. 2. c. 10. & l. 3. c. 2.3.11. he reiects all costly immodest apparell, as fit for no place but the Stewes, or Sage: so he condemnes, not only Paedag. l. 2. c. 11. Playes themselves; but even the Fractis quidem & enervatis his saltatoribus, qui cynaedicam turpitudinē mutam in scenam transferunt, vestem cum tanto dedecore diffluentiū despicantibus, quibus exquisitae vestes, fimbriarū{que} dilationes, & curiosi figurarū numeri, illiberalē ac sor∣didā syrmatū mollitiem indicant. Vestes autem quae sunt floribus similes Bacchicis nugis, & initiorū mysterijs relinquendae sunt: deinde verò purpura & vasa argentea, sunt, ut dicit Comicus, Tragaedis, & non vitae utilia, &c. Paedag. l. 2. c. 10. delicacy, the effeminacy, the costlinesse and lustul∣nesse of that apparell wherein they were acted. Witnes Imo in omni spectaculo nullum magis scandalum occurret, quàm ipse ille virorum ac mulierum accuratior cultus, scintillas libidinum constabellans. De Specta∣culis cap. 5. Ter∣tullian, who writes; That in all Enterludes there is nothing
more scandalous, more pernicious, then the over-curious attire of men and women (both Actors and Spectators) which did blow up sparkes of lust. Witnes S. Chrysostome, who in∣formes vs, Cucta sim∣pliciter quae ibi fiunt turpissima sunt, verba, ve∣stitus, &c. om∣nia inquā turpi lascivia plena sunt. Hom. 38. in Math Tom. 2. ol. 298. C.D. That the apparell used in Play-houses is most lewde, lascivious, filthy; whence he stiles it, Vestitus Sata∣nius, Satanicall array. Witnes De Regno. l. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 1. pag. 49. F. Synesius who gives the title of Scenicus ornatus, to gawdie, new-fangled, swaggering apparell, because Players array was such. Witnes Theophilact, Oecumenius, Chrysostome, on the 1 Tim. 2.9. viz. In like manner also, that women adorne themselves in modest apparel; not with broidered haire, or gold, or costly attire; (a text which our English Ladies have long since forgotten, if not reiected, as savoring of Purita∣nisme and over-strict precisenesse;) where thus they write: That women must come to Church (and I would our frizled, pouldred, shorne, swaggering Lasses, Vt candidaae templa ubean dant operā di∣ligenter ema∣culatis amictae vestibus, men∣tem vero ma∣culosam in ipsa sacraria peni∣tissima inferre non verentur. Pilo Iudaus De Cherubin. p. 175. Prope periculosius est lascivis puellis, ad loca religionis, qum in publicum proce∣dere. Heirom Epist. 8. cap. 10. who are never gawdier or compter then in Churches, would remem∣ber it) Non intortis crinibus, &c. Venit enim ut oret, non ut tripudiet; Venisti petitura peccatorum remissionem, at tanquam scenam sis in∣gressura comica mulier, te exornas? Theophilact. Ibid. Non intortis crinibus. Non enim in Thearum, inquit, venisti, sed ut peccata tua defleres: non est autem pre∣ciositàs supplex habitus, ne{que} lugentis peccata, est ornamenti in te arrogantia. Quod si haec prohibuit quae divitias tantum ostendunt, multô magis curiosa ac perversa, veluti sunt insectiones genarum, picturae oculorū, perfractus incessus, mereicius tuniculae amictus, Zona curiosior, calcei distracti, sive disscissi. Nam haec omnia, in eo quod dixit, In amictu decenti. Ocumenius Ibid. Non in tortis crinibus, &c. Am∣puta omnem eusmodi simulationem, circumcide abs te omnem illum scenae atque histrionum gestum. Deus enim non irridetur. Ista mimis & saltatoribus, & his qui in scena vertantur, relinquenda sunt: sobriae atque ornatae mulieri, nihil tale con∣gruit. Chrysost. Hom. 8. in 1 Tim 2. Tom. 4. Col. 1348. A. vid. Ibidem. not with broidered haire, or gold, or costly attire; for they come there, to pray, not to dance. They come to crave the forgivenesse of their sinnes, and shall they then adorne themselves like comicall women, as if they were entring into a Play-house to act a part? Cut therefore from thee all this counterfeiting, circumcise from thee all this demeanour of the Stage and Players: for God is not mocked. These things are to be left to Players and Dancers, and to those who are conversant in the
Play-house: no such thing is sutable to a chaste and sober wo∣man. An unanswerable Argument, that lascivious dres∣ses, and rich immodest, new-fangled apparell misbe∣seeming Christians, were much in use in Playes and Play-houses. This Ecclesiast. Hist. l 2. c. 27. Tō. 2. p. 175. H. Theodoret, Fl. Vopisci. Carinus p. 449. Vopiscus, Spectatum ve∣niunt, veniunt ipectentur ut ipsae, &c. De Arte Amandi. lib. 1. Ovid, Mox traliitur manibus regum fortum retortis, Esseda festināt, pilenta, petorrita, naves; Captiuum portatur ebur, captiva Corinthus, Divitiae{que} pe∣regrinae Epist. l 2. Epist. 1. p. 284. Horace, AEqualis habitus illic, similemq, videbis, Orche∣stram & populū: Hic ultra vires habitus inter: hic aliquid plus quam satis est, &c. Satyr. 3. p. 23. Iuvenal, with Plutarchus De tarda Dei vindict. lib. Pollux, lib 4 cap. 18. Sidonius, lib. 2. Epist. 2, Bulingerus, De Theatro, lib. 1. cap. 56. D. Hackwels Apologie, lib. 4. c. 8. set. 34. sundry others testifie, of which you may reade more largely in the third and sixt Scene of this present Act. All which sufficiently evidence the truth of the Assumption; and so by consequence of the Conclusion too; which needs no further proofe to backe it. SCENA OCTAVA. THe fourth thing considerable in the manner of act∣ing Stage-playes, is the adjuncts, the Cōcomitants which usually attend it, the first whereof, is, lascivious mixt, effeminate Dancing on the Stage, not men with women onely, or rather with Whores or persons more infa∣mous, (for such are all those females in Nunc autem saltat virgo in cōmuni theatro iuvenum impu∣dicorū, & non tibi magis vide∣tur infamis quā Meretrix? Chry∣sost. Hom 12. in 1 Cor. 4. Tom. 4. Col. 358. C. Saint Chrysostomes iudgement, who dare dance publikely on a Theater;) but e∣ven men with boyes in womans attire, representing the persons of lewde notorious Strumpets: whence I as∣sume this 23. Argument against our publike Enter∣ludes.Argument 23. Those Playes which are commonly attended and set
forth with lascivious, mixt, effeminate, amorous dancing; either of men with women, or youthes in womens apparell, are undoubtedly sinfull, yea ut∣terly unlawfull unto Christians. But all our popular Stage-playes are commonly thus attended and set forth. Therefore they are undoubtedly sinfull, yea utterly unlawfull unto Christians. The Major is irrefragable, because all mixt effeminate, lascivious, amorous dancing, (See D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 12. to 16.136 accordingly. especially with beautifull women, or boyes most exquisitely adorned in an inescating wo∣manish Dresse on the open Stage, where are swarmes of lustfull Spectators, whose unchaste unruly lusts are apt to be enflamed with every wanton gesture, smile or pace, Si fortuiti occursus ijs qui obiter mulier∣culum inspexe∣runt tantum pariunt periculi, quāto magis fuerit cum de industria con∣grediuntur; cùm dedia o∣pera mulieres in ebrierate at∣que convivio, omni lascivo gestu, saltatio∣ne, cantu impu∣dico invenes effraenes invi∣tantes spectan∣tur? Basil. De E∣brietate & Luxu Sermo. Tom. 1 p. 336. An quid∣quam est tam pronum ad libidines quàm inconditis motibus ea quae vel natura abscondit, vel disciplina velavit, membrorum operta nudare, ludere oculis, rotare cervicem, comam spargere? Merito inde iniuriam divinitatis proceditur. Quid enim verecundiae ibi potest esse, ubi saltatur strepitur, concrepatur? Ambros. De Virginibus, l. 3. Tom. 4. p. 227. B. See Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth. & Hom. 12 in 1 Cor. 4. accordingly. much more with amorous daunces;) is utterly un∣lawfull unto Christians, to chaste and sober persons; as sundry Councels, Fathers, moderne Christian, with an∣cient Pagan Authors and Nations have resolved; though it bee now so much in use, in fashion and re∣quest among us, that many spend more houres (more dayes and nights) in dancing, then in praying, I might adde working too. If we survey the severall Councels of former ages, we shall finde, Concil. Laodicenum. Can. 53. Aphricanum. Can. 27. Agathense Can. 39. Arelatense 3. apud Surium. Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 727. Veneticum. cap. 11. Ilerdense Can. ult. Toletanum. 3. Can 23. Antisidorense. Can. 9.40. Cabilonense 1. Can. 19. Constantinopolitanum 6. in Trullo. Can. 51.62.65. Basiliense Sessio 21. Surius. Tom. 4. pag 62. & Appendix Concil. Basil. Ibid. pag. 223. Concil. Se∣nonense, cap. 25. Ibid. pag. 742.743. Coloniense. Anno Dom. 1535. pars 2. cap. 25. & pars 9. cap. 10. Ibid. pag. 786. Syno∣dus Moguntina. Anno Dom. 1540. cap. 60.61. Ibid. p. 870.
Concil. Bituriense, 1584. & Tronicum 1583. Synodus Car∣notensis 1526. & Lingonensis, 1404. Concilium Burdigense, 1582. Apud Bochellum. Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae. lib. 6. Tit. 19. & Titulus, 10. cap. 6.7. & 19. We shall finde, I say, these 19. Councels, expresly censuring under the penalty of ex∣communication, all mixt, effeminate, lascivious, amorous danc∣ing; See here pag. 22. & 36. accor∣dingly. especially at Mariages, (at which they are now most frequent, though not in former times, as Vidisti cum quāta olim ho∣nestate nuptias egerint? Audi∣te qui satanicas pompas admi∣ramini & sta∣tim ab initio nuptiarū hone∣statē dedecore afficitis Num tunc tibiae? nū tunc cymbala? nū uncchorcae Diabolicae? Quare enim dic mihi tantum damnū statim ab initio indu∣cis domū tuā, & eos qui in sce∣nis & orche∣stris operā lo∣cant vocas, ut cū intēpestivo sumptu virginis laedas cōtinen∣tiam, & iuvenē impudentiorē facias? Satis enim arduū erat abs{que} illis suiationibus illā aetatē posse ferre moderate tēpestatem affectionū: cum autē & haec accedūt, tam quae videntur, quam quae audiuntur, maius{que} accenditur incendiū, & fornax concupiscentiarū ma∣gis inflāmatur, quomodo non pessum it adolescētis anima? Hinc enim omnia perūt & corrūpuntur, quiaab initio castitas oppugnatur eorū qui inter se conventuri sunt, & saepe primo die iuvenis oculis videns incontinentibus, telo diabolico in animo vulneratur, & puella per ea quae audit & videt captiva fit: & ab eo die posteà crescūt vulnera, maius{que} it malū, &c. Hom. 56 in Gen. 29. Tom. 1. Col. 267. A.B. Chrysostome well observeth;) or on Lords-dayes, and Holy-dayes, especially in Church-yards streets, or publike places; (a daemnable custome taken from the Pagans, as Saint Ist omnes in∣faelices & miseri qui saltationes ante ipsas etiā sanctorū basilicas & in sanctoū ip∣sorū festivitatibus choros ducūt. Quare unde debuerunt Deum Laudare & mereri, inde sibi damnationē acquirū & sicuti Christiani ad Ecclesiā veniūt, ut Pagani ta∣men de Ecclesia revertātur. Sermo 33. T. 5. p. 23. D. Ambrose writes:) from the very beholding of which dancing all Clergie-men (who are now too frequent Spectators of, and sometimes Actors in such dances) are inhibited by these Councels under paine of suspention, lest they should pollute their eyes, and glut their soules with lust, and so unfit them for all holy duties. If wee peruse the Fathers, (who are all ranke Puritans in this point of Playes and Dancing;) we shall finde, not onely Philo Iudaeus, De Agricultura. lib. p. 271. & De Vita Con∣templativa. lib. p. 1215.1216. but likewise Ignatius, Epist. 6. ad Magnesianos. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. pag. 81. D. Iustin Martyr Explic. Qust. à Gentibus Christianis positarum. Quaest. 107. Clemens Alexandrinus Paedagogi. l. 2. c 4.5. & l. 3. c. 11. Tertullian De Spectaculis. lib. Tatianus Cont. Grae∣cos Oratio. Bibl, Patrum. Tom. 2. pag. 180. G. Cyprianus De Spectaculis. lib. Arnobius advers. Gentes. Idcirco animas misit, ut res sancti at{que} augustissimi nominis symphonicas agerent & fistulatorias hic artes, &c Ibid. lib. 2. p. 75. lib. 4.
p. 149.150. l. 7. p. 230. to 242. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 20. & Divnarum Instit. Epitome. c. 20. Basil. Hexaëmeron. Hom. 1. T. 1. p. 27. & Hom. 4. p. 45. De Ieiunio. Sermo. 2. p. 329. De Ebretate & Lux Sermo. p. 332.336. Comment. in Isaiam. cap. 5. Tom. 3. p. 419 420, 421. &, c. 14. p. 468.469. Nazienzen Oratio. 48. p. 796.797. Oratio. 38. p. 583. & Ni∣cet as Ibid. Oratio. adversus Mulieres. p. 994. & ad Selucum, De Recta Educatione. p. 1063. Ambrose De Paenitentia. lib. 2. c. 6. De Virginibus. lib. 3. Tom. 4. p. 226.227. De Elia & Ie∣iunio. Mulieres in plateis invere∣cundas sub conspetu ado∣lescentulorum intemperanti∣um choros du∣cunt, iactantes comam, tr∣hentes tunicas, scissae amictus, nudae laceros, plaudentes ma∣nibus, saltantes pedibus, perso∣nantes vocibus, irritantes in se iuvenum libi∣dines motu Histrionico, petulanti ocu∣lo, dedecoroso ludibrio. Spe∣ctat corona a∣dolescentulū, & sit miserabi∣le Theatrum. Inter saltan∣tium ruinas, & spectantium lapsus, caelum impuro contamintur aspectu, ter∣ra turpi saltatione polluitur, quae obscaenis cantibus verberatur. Quomodo patienter loquar, piè praeteriam, convenienter deleam? Ibidem. c. 18. Epistolarum, lib. 4. Epist. 30. Sermo 33. & Com∣ment. l. 6. in Luc. 7 v. 32. Tom. 3. p. 47. F. Cyrillus Hierusolo∣mitanus Chatechesis Mystagogica 1. Eusebius Pamphilus, De Praeparatione Evangel. l. 2. c. 2. p. 32. & apud Damascenum. Parallel. l. 3. c. 47. S. Asterij Oratio in Festum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 706. Hierom. Epist. 10.c. 4. & Com∣ment. l. 2. in Matth. 14. Tom. 6. p. 28 Epiphanius Contr. Hae∣reses. l. 3. Tom. 2. Compendiaria Doctrina: &c Ecclesiae Catho∣licae. Col. 922. E. Chrysostome Hom. 56. in Geneseos. c. 29. Tom. 1. Col. 367. A.B. Hom. in Psal. 41. Hom. 49. & 74. in Matth. Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. 4. Hom 42. in Acta. Hom. 10. in Coloss. Hom. 8. in 1 Tim. 2.9. & Hom. 62. ad Poplum An∣tiochiae. Augustine Enarratio in Psal. 32. De Rectitudine Ca∣tholicae Conversationis Tractatus, & Contra Parmenianum. Notum est omnibus nugaces & turpes saltationes ab Episcopis solere compsci. Quis un∣quam meminit ab hominibus, quosin auxilium Episcopi petierunt, cum Episco∣pis esse saltatum? Ibidem. lib. 3. c. 6. Tom. 7. pars 1. p. 88.89. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Hesaiam. l. 1. c. 4. Tom. 1. p. 134. D. & in Ioannis Evang. l. 8. c. 5. p. 595. A.B. Theodoret, Adversus Graecos Ifideles. lib. 7. Tom. 2. p. 382.383. Socrates Eccles. Historiae. l. 7. c. 13. Gau∣dentius Brixiae Episc. De Lection Evangelij. Sermo 8. Bibl. P. Tom. 4. p. 8.13. Remigius Explanatio in 1 Cor. 10.7. Bibl. P. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 833. C. Fulgentius, Super Audivit Herodes Tetrarcha, &c. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 148. Salvian
De Gubernatione Dei. l. 6. Olympiodorus Enar in Ecclesiast. c. 3. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. p. 401. Gregorius Magnus Mo∣ralium. l. 13. c. 18. fl. 78. D. Chrysologus Organa tra∣gaediā personāt seculē, intra besti, non pu∣ella, quaerit amputare, non saltare; discur∣rit fera, nō ae∣mina, sprgit ubas per cr∣vicem, non c∣pillos, &c Vū epuis nostri intersit Chri∣stus, in facie prandeatur au∣ctoris, honesta∣te convivij na∣tua ipsa, quae nos producit, honoretur, fa∣milia vestra in∣nocētiae tripu∣diet disciplina, luxus absistat, fugetur effusio; saltatricū pestis, lenocinia cantorū, voluptatū fomenta, naufragia mentī, cū Hero∣diadis convivijs abscindantur; ut praesens gaudiū vestrū, ad laetitiam perveniat sem∣piternū. Ibid. Sermo 127. Isio∣dor Hispalensis Originum. lib. 18. c. 48.50. Beda lib. 1. in Marci Evang. c. 25. Tom. 5. Col. 133.134. & lib. 2. in Lucae Evangelium. c. 7. Tom. 5. Col. 300. Damascen Paralellorum. lib. 1. c. 76. & lib. 3. c. 47. Christianus Druthmarus Expositio in Matthum. c. 35. Bibl. Patum. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 901. F. H. Theophylactus. Enarrat. in Matth. 14. pag 34. & in Marc. 6. pag. 89. Bernardus, Parabola de Nupijs Filij Regis. Col. 1725. A. Edmundus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis Speculum Ecclesiae, c. 11. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. p. 359. E. Hippolitus Martyr, De Consummtione Mundi & Anti-Christo O∣ratio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 3. pag. 17. A. B. Paschaetius Rter∣tus in Matthaei Evangelium. l. 7. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 9. pars 2. pag. 1070. C.D.G. Victor Antiochenus, in Evang. Marci. c. 6. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 308. E. Anselmus, Enarrat. in Matth. c. 14. Tom. 1. p. 67 H. Rabans Maurus, Exposit. in Matth. l. 5. c. 14. Operum. Tom. 5. p. 87. F. H. We shall finde, I say, these 40. Fathers, and ancient Writers, in these their severall Workes, inhibiting, condemning, all amorous, mixt, effeminate, lascivious lust-exciting Dancing, be it of men, or women, either on the Stage or elsewhere; as a Caue solū, ut non derelinquas fidem, ut à fornicationibus fugias, jam fidelis effectus. Hoc autē custodire ita demū poteris, si ebrietatē devitetis & convi∣via inhonesta, ubi turpiū faeminarū colubrini gestus concupiscentiam movent illi∣citā, ubi lyra sonat & tibia, ubi omnia postremò genera musicorū inter cymbala sal∣tantiū concrepant. Infaelices illae domus sunt, quae nihil discrepant à Theatris. Au∣ferantur quaeso universa ista de medio: sit domus baptizati & Christiani hominis immunis à choro Diaboli, sit plane humana, sit hospitalis, orationibus sanctificetur assiduis; Psalmis, hymnis, canticis{que} spiritualibus frequentetur, &c. Gaudentius. Brix. qua supra. Bibli. P. Tom. 4. p. 813. Chorus petulans, insanae saltationes. Faeminae lascivae Dei timoris oblitae, ignis aeterni minas nihil pendentes, abjecto servituris Christi iugo, pedibus gestientes, ac oculo petulco, risu ascivo, ad saltationē insanientes, iu∣ventutis intēperantiam in se provocantes; in locis sacris pro maenibus civitatis cho∣ros constituentes, ea profanaverunt ac omnium probriorum officinas reddiderunt. AErem insuper meretriceis cantibus, terram verò lascivè saltando contaminavêre, instar theatri cuiusdam a∣dolescentium catervas sibi circumsisten∣tes, &c. E talibus itaque malis viri ac faeminae com∣munes con∣stituntes cho∣ros maloque Daeoni mi∣seras traen∣tes animas, sese invicm libidinum te∣lis confodiun atque lacerant. Risus inter se histrionicos, cantus probrosos, meretricios gestus ad libidinem invitantes exercent Rides, di mihi, & gaudes inepta stolida{que} laetitia, cum lachrymas fundere ac dolere, ob ea quae admisisti fas est? Moves pedes, & insans saltas? Choreas duces impru∣dens cum genua ad Dei & Domini nostri Iesu Christi culum flectere oportear? Quas ego fleam? puellasne coniugij expertes, an viis coniunctas? Hae quidē amissa virginitate reversae sunt, illae vero pudicitiam viris minime servaverunt, &c. Pro∣saltatione ita{que} genu Deo flectatur, pro tripudio pectus pulsetur. Basil De Ebritate & Luxu Sermo Tom. 1. p. 327.332, 336. dangerous in∣ceiary
of lust; an ordinary occasion off, a preparative to much  me, adultery, wantones, and such effeminate lewdnesse: a Diabolicall, at least a Pagan practice, misbeseeming all chaste, all sober Christians, especially in their Christian Festivals and Solemnities; from which the Primitive Christians (as Nec domus limina sertis coronemus, nec ocu∣lum pascamus, nec aurem cantu demulceamus nec choreas agiemus, &c. Verū haec prophanis, at{que} ethnicis festis, solennitatibus{que} relinquimus. Oratio 38. p. 583.584, 585. vide Ibid. Ac primum quidem fratres laetemur, non corporis splendore, non vestium permutationibus at magnificentijs, non commessationibus & ebrietatibus, quarum fructum impudicitias & cubilia, esse di licistis; nec floribus plateas corone∣mus, nec vnguentorum turpitudine mensas, nec vestibula ornemus, nec visibili lu∣mine splendescnt domus, nec tibicinum concentu plausibus{que} personent; hic enim Gentilitiae festorum celebrationis mos est. Nos vero ne his rebus Deum honore∣mus, hymnos pro tympanis assumamus; psalmodim pro turpibus & flagitiosis can∣tibus, plausum graiarum actionis, ac canorā manuum ctionem pro plausibus thea∣tricis, gravitatem pro risu, prudentem sermonem pro ebrietate, decus & honestarem pro delicijs. Quod s etiam te ut festum animo laeto celebrantem tripudiare con∣venit, tripudia u quidem, sed non obscenae Herodiadis tripudium, ex quo Baptistae mors secuta est; verum Davidis ob arcae requietem saltitantis: quo quidem itineris sancti, ac Deo granti agilitatem, volubilitatemque mistice designari existimo. Nazien∣zen Orotio 48. pag. 796.797. vid. Ibidem. Gre∣gory Nazienzen at large informes vs) did wholy abandon, not onely Drunkennesse, Luxury, Playes, and ribaldry Songs; but even Fidlers and Dancing too; as being fit for none but Ethnicke Festivals, and Herodian Banqets: which I would our English Nation would now at last consider: who for the most part spend the Christmas season, with o∣ther solemne Festivals, in amorous, mixt, voluptuous, un∣christian, that I say not, See Calvin, Marlorat, Aquias, & Lyra in 1 Cor. 10.7. Pagan dancing, to Gods to Christs dishonour, Religions scandall, Chastities ship∣wracke, Sinnes advantage, and the eternall ruine of ma∣ny pretious soules, who like those wicked ones, Iob 21.11,
12, 13. doe spend their daies in pleasure, musicke, mirt, and dancing, and in a moment goe downe to Hell, to dance with Deuils, with infernall frisking Saltantes Sa∣tyros imitabi∣tur Alphisebae∣us. Virgil. Eloga . pag. 14. Satyrs, in eternall flames. If we will once againe turne over the Divines and Chri∣stian Authors of pier times, we shall discover Alex∣ander Alensis, Summa Theologiae. pars 4. Quaest. 11. Memb. 2. Artic. 11. sect 4. Quaest. 8. pag. 392.393. Ioaennis De Bur∣go, Pupilla Oculi. pars 10. c. 5. X. Alexander Fabritius, De∣structorium Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. Angelus De Clavasio, Summa Angelica. fol. 44. b. Tit. Chorea-Bonaventure, in lib. 4. Sentent. Distinctio 16. N. 13. Astexanus De Casibus, lib. 2. Tit. 53. Ioannis Langhecrucius De Vita & Honestate Cle∣ricorum lib. 2. c. 21.22. Maffaeus Vegius, Saltationes nullo modo probamus, quod multorū malorū fomes & origo sint proterviores{que} efficiant ado∣lescētes, & cor∣ruptiores. Ibid. De Educatione Liberorum. l. 1. c. 14. & l. 3. c. 7.12. Petrarcha De Remedio utriusque Fortunae. l. 1 Dialog. 24. Ludovicus Vives, De Eru∣ditione Christianae Mulieris. c. 13.14. Erasmus, De Contemptu Mundi. lib. c. 7. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. c. 18.63, 64, 71. Polidor Virgil. De Inventoribus Rerum. lib. 5. c. 2. AEneas Syluius. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 166. p. 727. M. Calvin. Ser∣mo 70.79, & 80. in Iob. Peter Martyr, Locorum Commu∣nium Classis. 2. c. 11. sect. 63. to 68. & Comment. in Iudicum. lib. c. 21. Flaccus Illyricus, with the other Century Writers. Centuria 5. Col. 724. M. Gualther in Marc 6. Homil. 51. fol. 74.75. & Hom. 186. in Math fol. 349.350. Martin Bucer, De Regno Christi Sempiterno. l. 2 c. 54. Bda, Victor Antio∣chenus, Glossa Ordinaris, Lyra, Calvin, Pellicanus, Bullinger, Musculus & Marlorat. Exposit. in Matth. c. 11. ver. 17. &, c. 14. v 6.7 & on Marc. 6. v. 22. Hiperius De Ferijs Bacchana∣libus, Aretius Problematum. Theolog. Tom. 1. Locus. 14. Pute∣ani Comus, Piscator in Matth. 11. Observatio 20. pag. 120. Polanus Syntagma Theologiae Genevae. 1617. l. 10. c. 25.26. p. 665. & l. 9. c. 35. pag. 646. Simlerus in Exodus. lib. cap. 2. The Waldenses and Albigenses in France, Hungary, and Bo∣hemia, whose censure of dancing is recorded in Lydij Walden∣sia. pars 2. Amores prae∣tereainhonesti, choreae, impu∣dici & libid no∣si tactus & am∣plexus, udi e∣tiam cartarum, taxilorum, & id genus alia, un∣de infinita ac horrenda mala peccata{que} iam in Deum, iam etiā in proxi∣mu prosiiunt, prohibēur sed & vestium illa multiformis ac monstosa va∣rietas, non ad∣mititur. Ibid. p. 358. and in the History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, London 1624. part 3. Booke 2. chap. 9. p. 63.64, 65, 66. To whom I shall adde these ensuing English Au∣thors.
Sebastian Brant, his Fol. 114 115 Navis Stultifer, or Ship of Fooles. Christopher Fetherston, his Dialogue against light, lewde, and lascivious Dancing. printed by Thomas Dawson 1582. An Anonymous Treatise of Dances, printed 1581. shewing that they are as it were accessories or appendaxis, or things annexed unto whoredome. Thomas Lovell, his Dialogue betweene Custome and Verity, concering the use and Abuse of Dancing, in verse. The Church of evill men and women whereof Lucifer is the head, printed by Richard Pinso. M. Iohn Northbrooke, his Treatise against Vaine-playes, Enter∣ludes, and Danceing. fol. 55. to 72. M. Stephen Gosson, his School of Abuses, M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses pag. 133. to 138. (in all which, the unlawfulnesse of Danc∣ing is both copiously, learnedly, and purposely debated; which Treatises our English Dancers may doe well to reade, for their fuller satisfaction in this point.) D. Hum∣fryes in his 2. Booke of Nobility, against excesse and overmuch magnificence. D. Reinolds, his Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 13.14 17, 130. to 139. Reverend Bishop Babington, M. Perkins, M. Elton, M. Dod, M. Downham, M. Osmund Lake, M. Brinsly, Bishop Andrewes, D. Griffith VVilliams, and others on the 7. Commandement. M. Iohn Downe∣ham, his Christian VVarfare, l. 3. c. 21. sect. 5. and on the 7. Commandement, in his Summe of Divinity; D. Ames, De Iure Consciet. l. 5. c. 39. p. 270.271. All these, with Robertus Flol∣kt, Letio 17. fol. 133. Nico∣laus De Cle∣mangis. D Novis Celebri∣tatibus non In∣stituendis, pag. 145. 146, &c. M. Dik of the Deceitfulnesse of the heart, c. 16. p. 183. M. Tmas Bard in his Theatre o Gods Iudge∣ments. Book 2. c. 36. M. Robrt Bolton, in his Directions or our Comforta∣ble Wlking with God. pag. 200. Onus Ec∣clesiae. c. 7. sect. 16.17. &c. 28. sect. 6. Philippus Gluverius, Germaniae Antiquae. Lugd. Bat. 166. lib. 1. cap. 0 p. 181.182. Antonini Chrocon. pars. 3. Tit. 18. cap. 5. sect. 4. M. Samuel Byrd, his Treatise of the use of the pleasures of this present life. cap. 4. ol. 38.39. Thomas Beacon, his Ca∣techism. fol. 341. sundry others, unanimously condemne all mixt, effeminate, lascvious, amorous dancing, (the epidemicall pastime of our danc∣ing, loytring age) as sinfull, hurtfull, unlawfull to all chaste, all sober Christians, as the reasons they alleage a∣gainst it will more plainely evidence. For first, (say Calvin, Martyr, Gualter, Norhbrooke, Stubs, with others in their fore quoted places. they) as there is no allowance, no approved example of any such dancing in the Scriptures, the Primitive
Church, the Fathers, or in the lives and practice of the Saints of God in former ages, (who as appeares by the fore-quoted Councels and Fathers have alwayes cen∣sured and exploded Dancing:) so the 7. Commandement (as all the now recited Expositors of it ioyntly suffra∣gate) together with Exod. 32.18, 19. Iudg. 21.21, 23. 1 Sam. 30.16. Iob. 21.11, 12. &c. 31. Isa. 3.16. c. 5.12. c. 13.21. Ier. 31.13. Zeph. 1.9. Eccles. 9.4, 8, 9. Math. 14.6.7. Mark 6.12. Rom. 13.12, 13. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10 11. c. 10.7, 3, 32. Gal. 5.19, 21. Ephes. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19. c. 5.3, 4, 11. Phil 4.5, 8. Hebr. 11.24, 25. Iam. 1.13, 14, 15, 27. c. 4.9. c. 5.13 Col. 2.20, 21, 22. &c. 3.5, 6, 17. 1 Thes. 5.15, 22, 23. 1 Tim. 2.9 c. 56, 13 2 Tim. 3.5, 6. Tit. 2.4, 5, 6. c. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. c. 2.9, 11, 12. c. 3.16. c. 4.2, 3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.13, 14, 18, 19. 1 Ioh. 2.6, 15, 16, 17. Iude 3.7, 12, 13, 16, 23. & Revel. 18.7. doe either absolutely in ex∣presse tearmes, or else by way of necessary consequence, condemne such dancing as Idolatrous, Heathenish, carnall, worldy, sensuall, and misbeseeming Christians. Secondly, the very Devill himselfe (write they) who danced in the Daugh∣ter of Herodias. Math. 14.6.7 (as O cōvivium Diabolicū! ô Satanae Specta∣culū! ô iniquū tripudium! in Herodiadis fi∣lia Diabolus tripudiavit: ille enim effecit ut ipsa saltans pla∣ceret. Hom. 49. in Matth. Chrysostome, Diabolo pro∣curante ludens caepit delectari puella, ad hoc solum ut possit occidere pro∣phetā, &c Sur audivit Herodes Tetrarcha, &c. Sermo. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom 6. pars 1. pag 148 D. Fulgen∣tius,altat per pu∣ellā Diabolus. Enar. in Marc. 6. pag. 89. Theophylact. and others write) was the Nullus ibi Diabolica ca∣mina praesumat cātare, nec loca, nec saltationes facere; quae Pagani docente Diabolo ad invenerunt. Concil Arelatense 3. Surius. Tom. 1. p. 727. See Chrysost. Hom. 6 & 49. in Matth. Sebastianus Brat, his Navis Stultifera. Agripa De Vanitate Scient c. 18. M. Northbrooke against Vaine-playes & Dancing fol. 56. with sundry others. originall Au∣thor of this dancing, Vbi saltus lasciuus, ibi Diabolus cerrè ad est. His tripudijs Diabolus saltat, his a Dremonum ministris homines decipiuntur, &c. Chrysost. Hom. 49. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 356. C. 358. C. Qui mimos & saltatores, & mulie∣res meretrices introducunt in convivia, Daemones & Diabolum illic vocant, & do∣mos suos implent bellis innumerabilibus. Chrysost. Hom. in Psal. 4. Tom. 1. Col. 735 C. Whence Hom. 56. in Gen. Tom. 1. Col. 367. . & Hom. 9 in Colos. Tom. 4. Col. 11 91. he stiles Dances, Choreae Diabolicae; Sattanicae saltationes. the onely instrument who excites men to it; the onely person that is present at it, that is honored, plea∣sed, and delighted with it; (he being ever-more present and president where such dancing is) as Chrysostome, Comment. in Isaiam. cap. 14. Basil, with the other Marginall Authors have plentifully recorded. The Waldenses and Albigenses in their In the History of the Waldenses & Albigenses. part 3. Book. . c. 9. p 63. to 68. Censure of Danc∣ing,
have unanimosly professed and published this truth to all the World; whose words because they are notable and punctuall to this purpose, I shall here tran∣scribe at large, quoting some sayings of the Fathers in the Margent, to backe and evidence what they write. A Dance (as I finde their words in their Treatise against Dancing) is the Devils procession, and be that entreth into a Dance, entreth into his possession. The Vbi saltaio, ibi Diabolus. Holk. Lect. 17 in Lib. Sapient. vid. Ibidem. Devill is the guide, the middle, and end of the Dance. As many paces as a man ma∣keth in Dancing, so many paces doth he make to Hell. A man sinneth in Dancing divers wayes; as in his pace, for all his steps are numbred: in his touch, in his ornaments, in his hea∣ring, sight, speech, and other vanities. And therefore we will prove, first, by the Scripture, and afterwards by divers other Reasons, how wicked a thing it is to Dance. The first testimony we will produce, is that we reade in the Gospell, Marke 6. Paratum est convivale thea∣trū: producitur lasciva carnifex faemina, quae prophetam non gladio, sed sal∣tatione proster∣nat. Molli pu∣ella gressu pro∣cedit in medū, homici diū peti∣tura, ut adule∣o placitura: a∣linū in pedr∣bus portās san∣guinē, & scele∣ris postulatura mercedem. Sic salat t place∣at sic placet ut occidat Prône∣fas! ut luxir corporis sui mulier peric∣lum petar, capi∣tis alieni. Ful∣gentius  qua. It pleased Herod so well, that it cost Iohn Baptist his life.Supra. Bibl. P. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 148. D. See Chry∣sologus. Ser. 127. The second is in Exodus 32. When Moses comming neere to the Congregation saw the Calfe, he cast the Tables from him, and brake them at the foote of the Mountaine, and afterwards it cost three and twenty thousand their lives. Besides, the orna∣ments which women weare, are as crownes for many victories which the Devill hath gotten against the Children of God. For the Devill hath not onely one sword in the Dance, but as many as there are Forma castis dāno moribus ess solet. Mul∣tos forma fecit adulteros, cast̄ nullū. Petrarch. De Remed. utrius{que} Fortun l. 1. Dial. 2. & 65. l. 2. Dial. 1. See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-locks. p. 56, 57beautifull and well-adorned persons in the Dance. For the words of a woman are a glittering sword. And there∣fore that place is much to be feared, wherein the enemy hath so many swords, since that one onely sword of his may be feared. Againe, the Devill in this place strikes with a sharpned sword: for the women come not willingly to the Dance, if they be not painted and adorned: the which painting and ornament, is as a Grindstone upon which the Devill sharpneth his sword.See Tertullian, De Cultu Faeminaru & Cyprian De habitu Virginū, & My Love-lockes. p. 56 57. &c. They that decke and adorne their Daughters, are like those who put dry wood to the fire, to the end it may burne the better: for such
women kindle the fire of luxury in the hearts of men: as Sam∣sons Foxes fired the Philistins corne; so these Si tu te sump∣tuosius comes, & per publicū notabiliter in∣cedas oculos in te iuventutis i∣licias, suspiria adolescentum post te trahas, concupiscendi libidinē nutri∣as, peccandi fo∣menta, succen∣das, ut & ipsa non pereas, ali∣os tamē perdas, & velut gladiū te & venenū vi∣dentibus prae∣beas: excusari nō potes quasi mente casta sis ac pudica. Cypr. De Habitu Vir∣ginū. Ipse enim vel aspectus mulieris totum est veneno le∣rati litum. Vt primū vulnus affixit animae, ac miserae sauciavit impressione sagittae, quanto diuturniorē conficit moram, tanto periculosiorem putrilaginem in ea operatur, &c. S. Antiochus. Homil. 17. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7 p. 167. See Hom 18.19 & 20. accordingly. women have fire in their faces, in their gestures and actions, their glances and wanton words, by which they consume the goods of men. Againe, the Devill in the Dance useth the strongest armor that he hath, for his Haec est mulieris Antiqua ma∣litia, quae icit Adam de Paradisi delicijs: haec coelestes homines fecit esse terrenos: haec humanum genus misit in infernum. Haec vitam abstulit mundo propter unius arboris pomum: hoc malū homines ducit ad mortem. Hoc malum fugit Elias Pro∣pheta: Haec occidit Ioannem Baptistā: deijcit pueritiam, perdit inuentutem, illicet & inquietat emortuam enecturem. Chrysologus Sermo 127. O malum summum & acuti simū Diaboli telum, mulier! Per mulierem Adam in Paradiso prostravit, &c. Chrysos Hom. 15. & 17. ex varijs Matthiae locis Tom. 2. Col. 1003.1009. See there excel∣lently to this purpose. & Anciochi. Hom. 17.18, 19, 20 Bibl Patr. Tom. 7. p. 167.168, 169. most powerfull armes are women; which is made plaine unto us, in that the Devill made choyce of the wo∣man to decve the first man. So did Balaam that the Children of Israel might be reiected. By a woman he made Samson, David and Salomon to sinne. The Devill tempteth men by women three manner of wayes; that is to say, by the touch, by the eye, by the eare. By these three meanes, he temp∣teth foolish men to Dancings, by touching their hands, behold∣ing their beauty, hearing their songs and musicke. Againe, they that dance, breake that promise and agreement, which they have made to God in Baptisme, when their God-fathers promise for them, that they shall renounce the Devill and all his pompe; for Diaboli pompa cymbala, tibiae, choreae & cantica plena scortationum, & adulte∣riorum. Chrysost. Hom. 42. in Acta Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 6 11. C. dancing is the pompe of the Devill, and he that danceth, maintaineth his pompe, and singeth his Masse. For the woman that singeth in the dance is the Prioresse of the Devill, and those that aswer are Clerkes, and the beholders are the Parishioners, and the musicke are the Bells, and the Fidlers, the Ministers of the Devill. For as when Hogs are strayed, if the Hog heard call one, all assemble themselves toge∣ther. So the Devill causeth one woman to sing in the dance, or to play on some instrument, and presently all the Dancers ga∣ther
together. Againe, in a dance a man breakes the ten Commandemens of God. As first, tho shalt have to other gods but me, &c. For in dancing a man serves that person whom he most dsires to serve; and therefore saith S. Hierom, Pro Deo ha∣bet quisque quod colit. Comment. l. 3. in Oscae c. 14. Every mans god is that he serves and loves best. He sinnes against the second Commandement, when he make an Idoll of that he loves. Against the third, in that oathes are frequent amongst Dancers. Against the fourth, Sextum malū ludos praedict∣os cōcomitans, est violatio Sabbti: namin dominicis die∣bus & caeteris solemnitatibus praecipue huius∣modi lusores cōmittant prae∣dicta peccata & mult li. Alexander Fari∣tius. Destructoriū Vitierum. pars 4. cap. 23. Observa diem Sabbati, non carnaliter non Iudaicis delicijs qui o∣cio abutuntur ad nequitiam. Melius enim uti{que} tota die foderent quàm tota die sal∣trent. August. En in Psal. 3.2. Ser. 1. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 242. De Deem Chord. lib. c. 3 Tom. 9 pars 1. p. 1149. Sed unuquis{que} nostrum Sabbatizet spiritualiter, meditatione legis gaudeus non corpois refocil∣latione & remissione, opificium Dei admirans, non saltationibus plavsibus{que} stupidis gaudens. Ignatius. Epist. 6. ad Magnesianos. for by dancing the Sabbath day is prophaned. Against the fift, for in the dance, the Parents are oft-times dishoored, when many bargaines are made without their counsell. Against h ixt. A man kils in dancing; for every one that standeth to please another, he kils the soule as oft as he perswadeth unto lust. Against the Placuit & saltarix. Sed quid mirum sin∣ter dapes largas & poculorum frequentes procellas puella lasciviens mulceat sensus, inclinet affectus? Vinum & saltatio duplex incendium voluptatis. Fulgentius. Super Audivit Herodes Tetrarcha. Semo Bi Patrum Tom. 6. par 1. p. 148. seventh, for the party that danceth, be he male or female committeth adultery with the party they lust after; Math. 5.28 For he that looketh on a woman, and lusteth after her, hath already committed adultery in his heart. Against the eight Comman∣dement, a man sinnes in dancing, when he with-draweth the heart of another from God. Against the ninth, whn in dancing he speakes falsly against the truth Against the tenth, when women affect the ornaments of others, and men covet the wives, daughters, and servants of their neighbours. Againe, a man may prove how great an evill dancing is, by the multitude of sinnes that accompany those that dance for they dance with∣out measure or number. And therefore faith S. Augustine, the miserable Dancer knowes not, that as many paces as hee makes in dancing, so many leapes he makes to Hell. They sinne in their oraments after a five-fold manner. First, Fa∣stus inest pulchris, sequitur{que} superbi formam. Ovid Fastorm l. 1. Nil non permit∣tit mulier ibi, turpe putat nil, Cum virides gemmas collo circumdedit, & cum Auri∣bus extensis magnos commisit Elenchos. Iuvenal. Sayr. 6 p. 58. in being
proud thereof. Secondly, by iflaming the hearts of those who behold them. Thirdly, when they make those ashamed tha have not the like ornaments giving them occasion to cov the like. Fourthly, by making women importunate, in demanding the like ornaments of their Husbands. And fiftly, wh they cannot obtaine them of their Husbands, they seeke to get them elsewhere by sinne. They sinne by singing and playing o instru∣ments, for their See Antiochus. Hom. 17. Bibl. P. Tom. 7. p 167. accordingly. songs bewitch the hearts of those that heare them, with temporall delight; forgetting God, uttering nothing in their songs but lye and vanities. And the very motion of the body which is used in dancing, gves testimony eough of evill. Thus you see, that dancing is the Devils procession, and he that entreth into a dance, entreth into the Devils possession. Of dancing the Devill is the guide, the middle, the end, and he that entreth a good and wise man into the dance, commeth forth a corrupt and wicked man. Sarah, that holy woman was none of these. Thus farre the Waldenses and Albigenses, whose words I would the dancing, wanton, (that I say Colores vero paietibus re∣linquamus i{que} mulierculis quae aeno suo iuvenes inrabi∣em agunt. Illae sane & impudē∣ter saltant & rideant. Greg. Nazienzn Ad∣versus Mulieres, &c. p. 994. C. Est mēretticia haec professio at{que} extremae abo∣minationis ar∣gumentū. Nam ubipedum stre∣pitus cum car∣minibus nu∣merosis cōsen∣tit, ibi videlicet omnino & ma∣̄ ipsarum plausus resonat, & omne genus faeditatis, & invitantur spectatores ad turpitudinē: Cyrillus Alexand in Hesaiam l. 1. c. 3. Tom. 1. p. 134. D. not whorish) Herodiasses, the effeminate sinqua-pace Caranto-frisquing Gallants of our age, together with our rustique hobling Satyrs, Nymphes, and dancing Fairies, who spend their strength, Iob 21.12, 13. their time, (especially, the Easter, Whitson, Midsommer, and Christmas season) in lewde lascivious dancing, would now seriously consi∣der. And this would teach them, not onely to abandon all such dancing themselves, but likewise to withdraw their children, especially their daughters, from the Dancing-schoole, (as S. Quid dicitis vos sanctae faeminae videtis quid docere, quid etiam dedocere filias debeatis? Salter, sed adulterae filia Quae vero pudica, quae casta est, filias suas religionem doce∣at, non saltationē. Ibi enim intuta verecundia, illecebra suspecta est, ubi comes deli∣ciarū est extrema saltatio. Ab hac virgines Dei procul esse desidero. Nemo enim ut dixit quidam seculariū doctor saltat sobrius nisi insaniat. Quod si iuxta sapientiam seculrem, saltationis aut temulentia auctor est, aut dementia; quid divinarū Scrp∣turarum cautum puamus exemplis, cum Ioannis praenuncius Christi saltatricis optione iugulatus, exemplo sit, plus nocuisse saltationis illecebram, qùam sacrilegi fuoris amentiā. Ambros. De Virginibus. lib. 3. Tom. 4. p. 226.227. Ambrose long since advised all holy women, all godly
Parents for to doe; admonishing them, to teach their daughters religion, not dancing, (as now Hodie autem virgines non in virtutibus do∣centur, sed im∣buūtur super∣bire, choreas ducere, inter lscivos mascu∣los conversare, à quibus palpa∣ri & amplecti non verecun∣dantur, &c. Episcopus Chem∣ensis Onus Ecclesia, c. 27. sect. 16. alas too many doe) that so they might keep them chaste and honest; leaving See Ecclus. 9.4 8, 9. Feminae in plateis sub con∣spectu adolescenulorum intemperantium choros inverecundos ducunt, iactantes comam, trahentes tunicas, plaudentes manibus, saltantes pedibus, personantes voci∣bus, irritantes inse iuvenum libidines motu histrionico, petulanti oculo, dedecoroso ludibrio. Spectat corona adolescentulum, & fit miserabile theatrum, &c. Ambrose De lia & eiunio c. 18. lust-pro∣voking dancing unto Adulteresses and their Daughters onely, as well beseeming none but such: in whose roundes the Devill for the most part leades, continues, ends the Dance, as the Waldenses, and fore-quoted Fathers large∣ly write. Thirdly, they condemne all dancing, as be∣ing, not onely a common recreation of lascivious drunken Pa∣gans & Idolaters, in their Festivals and times of publike mirth, as Et ducunt posito duras cratere choreas. Culta{que} diffusis saltat amica comis. Fastorum. l. 3. p. 51. Faemineos thyrso concitat ille choros Ib. p. 57. Ebrius incinctis philyra conuiua capillis salat. Ebrius ad durum formosae limen a∣micae Cantat, habens untae molli serta comae. Idem Fastorū. l. 5. p. 89. Hiludunt, hos somnus habet, pars brachia nectit, & viridem celeri ter pede pulsat humum. Fastorū. l. 6. p. 106. Ovid,Nec dulces amores sperne puer, neque tu choreas. Carm. l. 1. Ode 9. Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero pulsanda tellus. Ode 37. p. 39. Cressa ne careat pulchra dies nota: Neu morem in Salium fit requies pedum. Ibid. Ode 36. Quam nec ferre pedem dedecuit choris. Carm. l. 2. Ode 12. Illic bis pueri di Numen cum teneris virginibus tuum laudantes, pede candido. In morem Salium, ter quatiens humum. Carm. l. 4. Ode 1. p. 08. Nec meretrix tibicina, cuius Ad strepitum salias terrae. Epist. l. 1 Epist. 4. p. 260. Et fstis matrona moveri iussa diebus De Arte Pot. p. 304. Horace, For∣sitan expectes ut Gaditana canro Incipiat prurire choro, &c. Satyr. 11. p. 110. Inde virorum saltatus nigro tibicine. Satyr. 15. p. 138. Iuvenall, Te lustrare choro sacrum tibi pas∣cere crinem. AEdos. l. 7. p. 57. Letiti ludis{que} viae, plausu{que} fremebant. Omnibus in templis matrū chorus, omnibus arae Idem l 8. p. 292. Vobis picta croco, & fulgentī muice vestes. Desidiae cordi: iuvat indulgere choreis. Idem l. 9. p. 312. Et pedibus plaudunt choreas & carmina ducunt. Ibid. lib. 6. See Bulingerus, D Theatro. l. . c. 52. Virgll, Vbi cymbalûm sonat vox, ubi tympana reboant. Tibicen ubi canit Pryx curvo grave calamo. Vbi capita Maenades, ubi iaiunt haedarierae. Vbi facra sancta acu∣tis ululatibus agitant. Vbi suevi illa divae volitare vaga cohors. Quo nos decet ci∣tatis celerare tripudijs. Simul haec comitibus Atys cecinit nova mulier. Leve tym∣panum remugit, cava cymbala recrepant, viridem citus adit Idam properante pede chorus, &c. l. 1. Carm. 63. p. 34.35. Catullus, Agricola assiduo primū satiatus aratro, Canavit certo rusta verba pede. Agricola & nimio suusus Baccho rubēti Primus inexperta duxit ab arte choros. Vos celebē cantate Deum; nā turba iocosa Obsrepit, & Phry∣gio tibia curva sono Luditeam no iungit equos, &c. Eleg. l. 2. Eleg. 1. p. 83.84. Tibul∣los,
Nec minus assiduis Edonis fessa choreis, &c. Eleg. lib. 1. Eleg. 3. p. 115. Propertius, Homer, Odysseae. lib. 1. pag. 8. lib. 8. p. 214. Iliados. l. 18. p. 694.700. Dionys. Hlliar. Antiqu. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. & others cited by Bulingerus, De Theatro l. 1. c. 52. together with Heiodi Ascraei, Scutum. pag. 62.64. Arno∣bius adversus Gentes. lib. 2. pag. 75. & l. 4. p. 147 Chrysostome, Hom. 6.49. & 74. in Matth. Concilium Arelatense. 3. Surius. Tom. 1. p 727. Concil. Aphricanum, Canon 27. Concil. Con∣stantinop. 6. Can. 62.65. Isiodor. Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 50. Polydor Virgil. De Inventoribus rerum. l. 5. c. 2. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum, c. 18. and infinite See Mat. 14.6 Mark. 6.22. others testifie: but likewise a part of that solemne worship wherewith they courted and honored their Devill-Idols, whose Festivals and Solemnities, were for the most part spent in Playes and Dan∣cing, as our See Concil. Toletanum 3. Can. 23. & Ca∣bilonense 1. Can. 19 Agrippa De Van. Scien. c. 54. De festis. & Polidor, Vir∣gil, De Invent. rerum. l. 5. c. 2. accordingly. Christian Holy-dayes ot-times are. Witnesse, Exod. 32.6.19. 1 Sam. 30.16. Iob 21.11. Isay 13.21. Mat. 14.6. Mar. 6.22. Concil. Aphricanum. Can. 27. Concil. Are∣latense 3. Surius Tom. 1. p. 727. Concil. Constant. 6. Can. 62. 65. Augustine, De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 20. Theophylact. Enar∣rat. in Marc. 6. Christianus Grammaticus Expositio in Matth. c. 35. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 9. pars 1. pag. 901. F.G.H. Sebastianus Brant, in his Navis Stutifera, Calvin and Marlorat, in 1 Cor. 10. v. 7. together with Horace, Iuvenal, Ovid, Ver∣gil, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Bulinger, Arnobius, Chryso∣stome, Polydor Virgil, Agrippa, with others, in their for-named places, and Archadae Philoxeni & Timothaei dis∣ciplina instru∣cti, cū cantibus & choreis an∣nuos ludos Li∣bero patri faci∣unt; pueri qui∣dem quos pu∣riles vocant: iuvenes, quos viriles. Omnis deni{que} eorū vi∣ta in huiusmo∣di cantionibus versatur. Postre∣mo spectacula ac udos in the∣atris cū cātibus & choreis singulis quibus{que} annis publicis sumptibus adolescentes civibus praebent. Ibidem. Polybius, Historiae. l. 4. p. 340. Homer Odysseae, l. 8. p. 214. who all testifie as much. Witnesse their Plutarchi, Numa, Dionysius, Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Rom. lib. 2. sect. 8. & lib. 7. sect. 9. Athaeneus Dipnos. l. 14. c. 11.12. Livie, Hist. Rom. l. 1. sect. 10. Virgil. AEneid. l. 4. p. 173.174. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 5, c. 3. Alexander ab Alex. Genial. Dierum. l. 4. c. 17. Agrippa De Vanit. Scient. c. 12. Plato Legum. Dial. 7. p. 881. Euripedes, Bacchae, Strabo Geogr. l. 10. Bemus, De Moribus Genium. l. 3. c. 18. l. 6. c. 27. Godwins Roman Antiquities. lib 2. sect. 2. c. 10.14. Corybantes, Curetes, Salij, and such like dancing Priests, who on the solemne festivall dayes of Cybele, Bacchus, Mars, and other Pagan-deities, danced about the streets and Markt place with Cymbales in their hands, in nature of our Morric-dances, (which were derived from them) th
whole multitude accompanying them in these their dancing Morrices, with which they honoured these their Devill-Idols. Yea, witnesse the common practise of most Idolatrous Pagans, who never honoured, saluted, or offred any publike sacrifice to their Idols but with musicke, songs, and dances; dancing about their Temples and Altars, to their honour; as Omnis quám chorus & socij comitētur ovā∣tes. Et Cererem clamoe vocent in ecta: neque ante Falcē ma∣turìs quisquam supponat ari∣stis, Quam Cereri torta redimitus tempora quercu Det motus incōpositos, & car∣mina dicat. lib 1. Georg. p. 39.40. Nec non Ausonij Troi agns missa coloni, Versi∣bus incomptis ludunt risu{que} soluto, Ora{que} corticibus sumunt horrenda cavatis. Et te Bacche vocant per carmina laeta tibique Oscilla ex alta suspendunt mollia pinu. Georg. l. 2. p. 56.57. Aut ante or Deûm pingues spaciatur ad Aras, Instaurat{que} diem donis. AEneidos. l. 4 p. 170. Instaurat{que} choros misti{que} Altaria circum Cretes{que}, Dry∣opes{que} fremunt, picti{que} Agathyrsi. Ibid. p. 177. Euae Bacche fremens, solum te virgi∣ne dignum Vociferans; etenim molles tibi sumere thyrsos, Te Iustrare choro. AEneid l. 7. p. 257. Pandite nunc Helicona deae, cantus{que} movete. Ibid. p. 65. Dona ferunt, cumulant{que} oneratis lancibus Aras. Tum Salij ad cantus, incensa Altaria cir∣cum Populcis adsunt incincti tempora ramis. Hic iuvenum chorus, ille senum, qui carmine laudes Herculeas, & facta ferunt. AEneid. l. 8. p. 280. Laetitia, Iudis{que} viae, plau∣su{que} fremebant. Omnibus in templis matrum chorus; omnibus Arae. Ante Aras terram caesi stravêre iuvenci. Ibid p. 292. See l before. Virgil, Ardua iam dudum rosonat tinnitibus Ida, &c. Hoc Curetes habent, hoc Corybantes opus. Cymbala progaleis, pro scutis tympana pulsant. Tibia dat Phrygios ut dedit ante modos. Fastorum l. 4. p. 64. Nos quo{que} tangit honos; festis gaudemus & aris. Turba{que} caelestes ambitiosa sumus. Ebrius incinctis philyra conviva capillis saltat, &c. Fastorum. lib. 5. p. 88.89. Cantabat fanis, cantabat tibia udis, &c. Quaeritur in scena cava tibia; quaeritur a∣ris. Fastorum. l. 6. p. 114. See p. 207. See h before. Ovid, Omnis saltatio, & omnes con∣sentus consecrentur constitutis primum festivitatibus, supputatione facta in annum quod singulis temporibus & singulis Dijs ac ipsorum filijs & daemonibus fieri con∣venit. Posteà verò constituatur, qum cantilenam in singulis Deorum sacrificijs ca∣nere oporteat, & quibus choreis sacrificium quod tunc fit, honorare. Et primū qui∣dem aliquas constituere oportet: quae vero constituta fuerint, parcis & alijs omni∣bus dijs sacrificio fcto, in communi omnes cives libando consecrare singulas canti∣lenas singulis dijs & alijs. Si vero prater has ipsas, quis alos Deorum Hymnos aut choreas adducat, sacerdotes utrius{que} sexus, una cum legum custodibus, sanctè & se∣cundum legem cohibent, &c. In nostris locis & ferè in omnibus, ut in summa di∣cam civitatibus, hoc firi solet. Quum enim Magistratus aliquis publicè sacrificat, postea choreis non unus, sed chororum multitudo venit, & non procul ab Aris, sed aliqundo iuxta ipsas, omnibus convitijs sacra perfundun, & verbis, & rythmis, & luctuosissimis harmonijs, audientium animos exasperantes: & qui civitatm quae sacrificavit ad lachrymas maxim concitare potest is victoriae praemia fert. Legum. Dial. 7. p. 874.875. vid. Ibid. Plato, Geogr. l 10. Tom. 2. p. 19. & p. 48. to 62.74, 75, 76. Strabo, De Expeditione Cyri Hist. l. 6. p. 370.371. Zenophon, Carm. l. 1 Ode 57. & l. 4. Ode 1. p. 108. See i before. Horace, Satyr. 6. p. 63. to 67. & Satyr. 15. p. 138. Iuvenal, Lib. 1. Carm. Nuptiale. 63. p. 34.35. Catul∣lus,
Elgiarum. l. 2. Eleg. 1. p. 82.83. bullus, Politicorū l. 7. c. 17. p 501.502 & l. 8. c. 6.7. Aristotle, Dipnosoph. l. 14 c. 11.12. Athnaeus, Alexander ab Alex∣andro. Genialium. Dierum. l. 4. c. 13. Caelius Rhodiginus An¦tiqu Lectionum l. 5. c. 3. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 18. Purchas Pilgr. Booke 5. chap. 1. Bulingerus De Thea∣tro. lib. 1. cap. 52. Euripidis Bacchae, thorowout, and sun∣dry others testifie: from which practice, See Concil. A∣rlatense 3. Su∣rius Tom. 1. pag. 727. Concil. A∣phircanum. Can. 25.27. Toltanū 3. Can. 23. Cabi∣lonense 1. Can. 19. Constantinop. 6. Can. 62 65. ac∣cordingly. our dancing at Wakes, (a name, an abuse derived from the ancient Vigils) or Church-aes, and our late crouching and ducking unto new-erected Altars (a Ceremony much in use with Idola∣trous Ipse tibi ad tu templa fe∣ram solennia dona, Et statu∣am ante Aras aurata frōte iu∣vencū Cden∣tem, &c. Virgil. AEneid. l. 9. pag. 313. Praesenti tibi maturos largimur hono∣res, Iurandas{que} tuū per nomen ponimus aas. Horace Epist l. 2. Epist. 1. p. 278. See Iuvenl Sa∣tyr. 12.13. p. 115.119, 12. Alex∣ander ab Alexan. l. 4. c. 17. Strabo Geogr l. 10. See My Appendix to Lame Giles his Haultings p. 15.16. Pagans heretofor) have beene originally deri∣ved. Since therefore its evident by all these testimonies, that dancing had its oiginall from dolatry, and Idola∣trous drunken Pagans, who consecrated dances to their Idols, and went dancing to their Temples, their Altars, when they sacrificed to them in their solemne Festivals and dayes of mirth, they hence conclude them, to be unlawfull unto Christians; who must not imitate them in their Idolatrous Pagan customes, as I have here largely proved, in the first and second Act, on which you may reflect. Fourthly, dancing, write they, (yea even in Regina saltat; & quanò pulchrius saltvit, tanto pejus Turpè enim est Reginae aliquid indecorum dextrè facere. Theophylact. Enar.  Matth. 14 p. 34. See Chrysostom. Hom. 49. in Matth. Queenes themselves, and the very greatest persons, who are commonly most devoted to it) hath beene alwayes scanda∣lous and of ill report, among the Saints of God; as the fore-going Councels, Fathers, and Authors plentifully evi∣dence; who have condemned dancing, See here reason 1.2. & 3. as a pompe, a va∣nity of this wicked world; an invention, yea, a worke of Satan; which Christian have renounced in their baptismes a recreation more fit fo agans, Whores, and Drunkards, then for Chri∣stians: therefore, a Christian, (who is onely Phil. 4.8. to follow things of good report, and to Rom. 12.17. c. 13.13. 1 Cor. 7.35. 2 Cor. 8.21. 1 Thes. 4.12. 1 Pet. 2.12. provide things honest in the sight of all men; 1 Cor. 10.32, 33. not giving any offence or scandall to Gods Church or people;) may not practise it. Fifly, dancing, say they,
is not onely an Enrvant a∣nimos cytharae, cātus{que} lyrae{que}. Et vox, & nu∣meris Brachia mota suis. Ovid Rmeio Amoris. l. 2. p. 230. Vo∣bis picta croco, & fulgēes mu∣rice vestes: De∣sidiae cordi; iu∣vat indulgere choreis. Et tu∣nica manicas, & habent redimi∣cula mitrae. O verè Phygiae (neque enim Phryges) ite per ala Dyndi∣ma, ubi assuetis bifarem dat ti∣bia cantum. Tympana vos buxus{que} vocat. Berecynthia matris Idaeae; sinite arma vi∣ris, & cedite ferro. Virgil l 9. AEneid. p. 313.313 effeminate recreation, eneebling the mindes, yea, depraving the lives and maners of men, a suficient ar∣gument of its unlawfulnesse: but it likewise irritates and ingenders noysome lusts, it occasions much dal∣liance, chambering, wantonnesse, whoredome and adultery, boh in the Dancers and Spectators. This daily experience; this all the fore-quoted Authors wit∣nesse, ad among the rest, De Remedio urus{que} Fortu∣nae. l. 1. Dial. 24 Petrarcha, and De Vanitate Scientiarū. c. 18 See M North-brookes Treatise against Vaine-Plyes, & Dancing. f. 65.66, 67. Agrippa have most lively expressed it. To musicke (write they) belongs the art of Dancing, very acceptable to Maidens and Lovers, which they learne with great care, and without tedious∣nesse doe prolog it untill mid-night, and with great diligence they devise to dance with fained gestures, and with measurable pacs to the sound of the Cymball, Harpe, or Flute, and doe as they thinke very wisely and subtilly, he fondst thing of all o∣ther, & but little differing from madnesse; which except it were tempered with the sound of instruments, and as it is said, if va∣nity did not commend vanity, there should be no sight more ri∣diculous, nor yet more out of order thn dancing; Haec laxamen petulantiae, amica sceleris, incitamen libidinis, hostis pudicitiae, ac ludus probis omnibus indignus Saep ibi matrona, ut ait Petrarcha, diu servatū decus per∣didit, saepe infaelix virguncul ibi didicit, quod melius ignorasset, multarū ibi fa peijt pudor{que}. Multae inde doū impudcae, plures ambiguae redier, castior autem nulla: pudicitiā choreis saepe stratā, semper{que} impulsm oppgnatam{que} videmus &c. Arippa. Ibid. See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 4. & 5. this is a liberty to wantonnesse, a friend to wickednesse, and a provoca∣tion to leshly lust, an enemy to chastiy, and a pastime unworthy of all honest persons. There oftentimes a Matron hath lost her long-preserved honour: oftentimes the unhappy Maiden hath there learned that, whereof she had beene bette to be ignorant: there the fame and honesty of infinite women is lost. Infinite from thence have returned home unchste, many with a doubt∣full minde, but none chaste in thought and deed. And we have seene that woman-like honesty in dancing hath beene throwne downe to the ground, and alwayes vehemently provoked and assaulted. See Macrobs Satur. l. 3 c. 14. accordingly. The ancient Romanes, grave men, by reason of their wisedome and uthority, did refuse all dancing, and no honest
Matrone was commended among them for dancing. Itaque sal∣tationem ne∣cesse est om∣nium vitiorum esse postremū: ne{que} enim fa∣cil dictu quae mala pariant colloquia & ta∣ctus. Saltatur inconditis ge∣stibus, & mon∣stroso pedum strepitu, ad molles pulsati∣ones, ad lasci∣vas cantilenas, ad obscaena carmina, con∣trectantur ma∣tronae & puel∣ae impudicis manibus & ba∣sijs, meretri∣cijs{que} cōplexi∣bus; & quae abscondit na∣tura, velavit modestia, ipsa lascivia tunc saepènudantur, ludi tegmine obducitur sce∣lus. Exercitium profectò, non à caelis exortum, sed à malis Daemonibus excogitatum in inivriam Divinitatis. A∣grippa. Ibidem. Dan∣cing is the vilest vice of all, and truely it cannot easily be said, what mischiefes the sight and hearing doe receive thereby, which afterwards be the causes of communication & embracing. They dance with disordinate gestures, with monstrous thmping of the feete, to pleasant sounds, to wanton songs, to dishonest verses; Maydens and Matrons are there groped with un∣chaste hands; yea, kissed and dishonestly embraced: the things which nature hath hidden, and modesty covered, are there oftentimes by meanes of lasciviousnesse made naked, and ribauldry under the colour of Pastime is dissembled. An exer∣cise doubtlesse, not discended from Heaven (I may adde, not leading to Heaven, into which we must passe thorow -2 Tim. 3.11, 12. Acts 14.22. 1 Thes. 34. 2 Thes. 1.4. Revel. 1.7. cap. 7.14. Acts 20.19, 31. 2 Cor 2.4. cap. 6.6. v. 11.27. many afflictions, tribulations, prayers, teares, fastings; thorow a Matth. 7.13, 14. straite, a narrow, not broad or pleasant way, as Dan∣cing, Stage-playes, and such Pastimes are:) but by the Devils of Hell devised, to the iniury of the Divinity, when the people of Israel erected a Calfe, in the Desert, who after they had done sacrifice, begun to eate and drinke, and afterwards rose up to sport themselves, and singing, danced in around. Thus they:See Reason 3. & Calvin, Marlorat, & Lyra, in 1 Cor. 10.7. accordingly. thus all the other fore-quoted Authors. Hence Alexander Fabritius, an ancient English Writer, stiles Dancing, Ludus lascivae vanitatis & voluptatis cuiusmodi sunt choreae, tripudia, interludia, &c. Destructoriū Vitiorum. pars 4. cap. 23. B. A pastime of lascivious vanity and volup∣tuousnesse. And Iohn de Burgo, Chancellor of Cambridge in King Henry the VI. his Raigne, in his Pupilla Oculi. Par∣tis vltimae. cap. vlt. De Peccatis mortalibus. X. De Ducenti∣bus choreis. writes, Quod si hoc facint causa incitandi ipsosmet, vel alios ad libidinem, peccant mortaliter: & etiam si hoc faciant ex consuetudine, sed non corrupta intention, non audeo eos excusre à peccato mortali cùm, immergant se periculo alios provocandi ad libidinem, & ipso facto videntur choreas approbare, & suo exemplo alijs authoritatem dare similia faciendi. Ibidem. That those who dance to incite them∣selves or others unto lust, yea those likewise who dance out of custome, sin mortally, though they do it not with a corrupt intent.
Neither dare I (saith he) to excuse these from a mortall sinne, since by dancing they plung themselves into this anger, of pro∣voking others unto lust, and ipso facto seeme to approve of dancing, and by their example give authority to others to doe the like. Vpon this very reason our moderne Writers on the Commandement, See Bp. Ba∣bington, Perkins, Dd, Downeham, Lake, Elton, Brin∣sly, Williams, An∣drewes, & Ames, on the 7. Com∣mandement, accordingly. make dancing a sinne against the 7. Commandement, because it is a common occasion both of actuall and mentall adultery; as their fore-men∣tioned Authorities at large declare, Therefore it must needs be unlawfull unto Christians, Ephes. 5.3, 4. among whom adulte∣ry, fornication and uncleanesse are not so much as to be named, much lesse the manifest occasions of them entertained. Fiftly, dancing See D. Ames, De Iure Con∣scientiae. l. 5. c. 39. p. 270.271. write they, is altogether incompatible with that universall 1 Pet 1.14, 15, 16. 2 Pet. 3.11. holinesse, Eph. 5.3.4. 1 Tim. 2.9, 15. c. 3.2 Phil. 4.5. modesty, 1 Tim. 3.8. Tit. 2.2, 7. gravity, 1 Thes. 5.6.8 1 Tim. 2.9, 15. c. 3.2 Tit. 2.2, 6.12. 1 Pet. 1.13. c. 4.7. c. 58 tem∣perance, and sobriety, which God requires in all chaste, all gracious Christians; it being a recreation, (as Nemo fere saltat sobrius nisi forte insanit, ne{que} in solitudine ne{que} in convivio honesto & moderato: intempestivi convivij, amaeni loci, multarum deliciarum comes est extrema saltatio: quod necesse est omnium viciorum esse postremū. Oratio pro Muraena Operum. Tom. 1. pag. 459. Cicero, Ebrius incinctis philyra conviva capillis, Sal∣tat, & imprudens utitur arte meri. Fastorum. lib. 5. pag. 89. Et iactant faciles ad sua verba manus. Et ducunt posito duras cratere choreas, Culta{que} diffusa saltat amica coma. Cum redeunt, titubant, & sunt spectacula vulgi. Fastorum. l. 3. pag. 51. Ovid, Ebria famosa saltat lasciva taberna, Ad cubitum, raucos excutiens calamos. Copa. p. 509. Virgil, together with De Elia & Ienio. cap 18. De Virginibus l. 3. Tom. 4. p. 226.227. Ambrose, De Ebrietate & Luxu Sermo. Basil, Hom. 49 in Matth. Chry∣sostome, De Remed. utrius{que} ortunae. lib. 1. Dial. 24. Petrarcha,De Vanit. Scientiarum, cap 18. Agrippa, Locorum Com. Classis. 2. cap. 11. sect. 63. to 68. & Comment. in Iudicum. lib. c. 21. Peter Martyr, Treatise against Vaine-Playes and Dancing. fol. 67. M. North∣brooke, Anatomy of Abuses. pag 125. M. Stubs, and (See Ludovicus Vives, De Eruditione Mulieris Christianae. l. 1. c. 14 & Sebastianus Brant, Navis Stutifera. sundry others fore-quoted) testifie which none but Redlams, Drunkards, Fooles, or infamous per∣sons use, in their riotous, unseasonable voluptuous feasts and meetings; which proves it the very worst and last of all vices; it being quite excluded from all private, honest, civill ban∣quets; yea, wholy abandoned by all temperate, chaste, and so∣ber persons. Therefore it must needs be unseemely, un∣lawfull
unto Christians. Sixtly, Dancing, (say they) as now it is used, See Peter Mar∣yr, Gualtber, Calvin, Agrippa, Vives, Erasmus, Petrarcha, The Waldenses, Brant, Fetherstone, Lo∣ve, Norhbrooke, & Stbs, in their places fore∣quoted. p 226.227. is an occasion of much wantonnesse, lewdnesse, and lasciviousnesse; of much riot, epicurisme, effeminacy, vo∣luptuousnesse; of much prodigall expence, much losse of time, much superfluity, costlinesse, and new-fanglednesse in apparell, much pride and haughtinesse, much impudency and immodesty, especially in the female sex; whom dancing doth of all others least beseeme. Besides, it with-drawes young Gentlemen from their Studies to the Dancing-Schoole, which ingrosseth all their time; it avocates young Gentlewomen from their Needles, and such like honest imployments, and for the most part makes them idle Huswives, Hinc itaque apparet qualis fuerit aulae Herodis disci∣plina nam etsi pleri{que} saltádi licetiam tunc ibi permitte∣rant, meretri∣ciae tamen las∣civiae turpis nota fuit nubi∣lis puellae sal∣tatio. Certe quicun{que} ha∣buerunt curam honestae gravi∣tatis, damna∣rūt saltationes praesertim in puella. Verum impura Hero∣dias Solomen filiam, ne sibi dedecori esset, ad mores suos īta formaverat. Hoc igitur cō∣veniebat scor∣ti filiae. Calvin & Marlorat. in Matth. 14 v. 6. Whores, or Spend-thrifts ever after: It drawes men on, and traines them up to nought but idlenesse, the nursery of all other vices: it glues mens hearts to carnall plea∣sures and delights of sinne, and makes them carelesse of Gods service, unmindefull of their own salvation, or of the day of death and iudgment, which should be alwayes fixed in their most serious meditations. See Here, Act. 6. Scene 13. thorowout accordingly. & pag. 231. More-over, it quite unfits men, and oft with-drawes them from the religious performance of holy duties, many Lords-dayes, most other Holy-dayes, (set a∣part for Gods peculiar worship) being oft-times grosly propha∣ned, if not wholy spent on lewde lascivious dancing, and such Heathenish pastimes: as the Councell of Affricke, Can. 18. the 4. Councell of Carthage, Can. 88. the 3. Councell of To∣ledo, Canon 23. The 6. Councell of Constantinople, Canon 66. The Provinciall Councell of Colen. Anno Dom. 1536. pars 9. cap. 9.10. The Provinciall Councell of Mez. Anno Dom. 1549. cap. 61. Lib. 6. Capit. Caroli Magni. apud Bochelium. Decrta. Eccles. Gal. lib. 4. Tit. 10. cap. 6. Iustinian. Codic. l. 3. Tit. 12. De Ferijs, Lex. 10. De Fest. Ignatius Ep. 6. ad Magne∣sianos. Clemens Romanus. Apost. Constit. l. 2. c. 64.65. Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. Augustine Enarrat in Psal. 32. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, in Ioannis Evangelium. l. 8. c. 5. p. 595. S. Asterius in Festum Kalendarum. Oratio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705.706. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. p. 195.196. Leo. 1. Sermo in Octava Petri & Pauli.
cap. 5. fol. 165. Eusebius, apud Damascenum Parallelorum. l. 3, c. 47. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientarum. c. 59. De Festis. Polidor Virgil De Inventoribus rerum. l. 5. c. 2. pag. 385.386. Episcopus Chemnensis, Ous Ecclesiae. c. 28. sect. 6. Bonaven∣ture in lib. 4. Sententiarum. Distinctio 16. Numb. 13. and sundry other of the Schoolemen tere. Alexander Fabritius Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 3. c. 10. & 4. c. 23. The Waldenes. History of the Waldenses & Albigenses. pars 3. l. 2. c. 9. p. 64. 65, 66. Bp. Latymer in his Sermons. fol. 13. The 3. Blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 62. to 68. M. Brinsly in his 3. part of the true Watch. chap. 11. Abomination 30. pag. 302. Astexanus De Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53. Alexander Alensis. Sum∣ma Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 11. M. 2. Artic. 11. sect. 4. Quaest. 8. pag. 392.393. with sundry others complaine: who doe like∣wise all of them unanimously condemne dancing, as an unlawfull exercise and pastime, especially on M. North∣brookes Trea∣tise against Playes & Dan∣cing. fol. 68. Thomas Lovel, his Dialogue against Dan∣cing. See Iohn Field his Declaratiō of Gods Iudg∣ment at Paris Garden. The Treatise a∣gainst the use and abuse of Dancing. Anno 1581. to this purpose. Thomas Beacon, in his Catechisme. fol. 341. Lords-dayes, and Holy-dayes; which circumstance of time, (as they all con∣clude) makes dancing unavoydably sinfull and abominable. Which I observe the rather, to confute the grose mi∣stake of some licentious Libertines; who hold dancing on Lords-dayes, to be no Giles Widdowes, in his Sermon at Carfolkes in Oxford, Iuly the 5. 1631. on Psal. 68. v. 25. wherein he o∣penly & pur∣posely iustified the lawfulnesse of mixt dan∣cing at Church∣ales and May∣poles, even up∣on the Lords-day, in the Pul∣pit, and then confirmed his doctrine by his practice. unlawfull exercise, sport, or pa∣stime, within the pious Statute of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. within which there is no question, but dancing is included; it being an exercise which all the fore-quoted Councels, Fathers, and Christian Authors, have unanimously con∣demned, as unlawfull, especially on the Sabbath, or Lords-day, as we stile it; which our owne Of the Time and place of Prayer. part 1. p. 124.15. Homelies, Queene Eliz. Iniunctions. Iniunct. 20. & Canon 13. and Canons enioyne us to spend, in hearing the Word of God read and taught; in private and publike prayers; in acknowledging our offences to God, and amendment of the same; in reconciling our selves charitably to our neighbours where displeasure hath beene, in oftentimes receiving the Communion of the Body and Blood of Chrit; in visiting of the poore and sicke, using all godly and sober conversation: informing us withall; The 1. part of the Serm of the Time and place of Prayer. p. 125.126. That God hath
given expresse charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath day, they should cease from all weekely and worke day labour, to the in∣tent, that like as God himselfe wrought sixe dayes, and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quietnesse and rest from labour; even so Gods obedient people should use the Sunday holylie, and rest from their common and daily businesse, and also give themselves WHOLLY to heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and service. But alas (quoth the Homely) all these notwithstanding, it is lamen∣table to see the wicked boldnes of those that will be counted Gods people, who passe nothing at all of keeping and hallowing the Sunday. And these people are of two sorts. See Concili∣um Laodicenū Can. 29. Tar∣raconēse. Can. 4.7. Aurelia∣nense 3. Can. 27. Matisco∣nense 2. Can. 1. Antisiodoren∣se. Can. 16. Ca∣bilonense 1. Can. 18. Con∣stātinopolitanū 6. Can. 8. & Canones in Trullo. 89.90 Conciliū apud Palatium Ver∣nis. Can. 14. Foro-Iuliense. Can. 13. Arela∣tense 4. Can. 16. Turonense 3. Can. 40. Moguntinum. Anno. 813. Can. 25.37. Synodus Rhemensis. An. 813. Can. 35. Concil. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 50. lib. 3. cap. 5. & 19. Synodus Aquis∣granensis sub, Lud. Pio. Can. 17.21. Concil. Triburiense. Can. 35. Basiliense Sess. 19. Surius Concil. Tom. 4. pag. 57. Refomatio Cleri Germaniae. cap. 20. Ibid. p. 714. Synodus Augustensis. An. 1548. Ibid. p. 808. Synodus Moguntina. Anno. 1549. cap. 98. Ibid. p. 879 together with Capitula Caroli Magni, Synodus Andagau. Sy∣nodus Galonis & Simonis Legator. Concilium Bituriense. An. 1584. & Synodus Paris. 1557. quoted by Bochellus. Decretorum, Ecclesiae Gallic. lib. 4. Tit. 10. p. 592. to 599. which inhibit all workes of Tillage, Husbandry, all Faires, Markets, Pleas, and other kinde of labour, together with all sports and pastimes on the Lords-day. The one sort, if there be businesse to doe, though there be no extreme need, they must not spare the Sunday: they must ride and iourny on the Sunday, &c. they must keepe Markets and Faires on the Sun∣day; finally, they use all dayes alike, Working-dayes and Holy-dayes are all one. The other sort is worse: For although they will not travell nor labour on the Sunday as they doe on the weeke day, yet they will not rest in holinesse, as God comman∣deth: but they rest in ungodlinesse and filthinesse, prancing in thir pride; pranking and pricking, pointing and painting them∣selves to be gorgeous and gay; they rest in excesse and superfluity, in gluttony and drunkennesse like Rats and Swine: they rest in brawling and rayling, in quarrelling and fighting: they rest Vnder which Dancing is included: or if not, yet at least it is as unlawfull as it, or any of the particulars here specified; and therefore as much con∣demned by this Homely as they. in wantonnesse, in toyish talking, in filthy fleshlinesse, so that it doth too evidently appeare, that God is more dishonoured, and
the Devill better served on the Sunday, then upon all the daies in the weeke besides, And I assure you the beasts which are commanded to rest on the Sunday, honour God better then this kinde of people: For they offend not God, they breake not their holy-dayes. Wherefore O ye people of God, lay your hands upon your hearts, repent and amend this grievous and dangerous wickednesse, stand in awe of the Commandement of God him∣selfe, be not disobedient to the godly order of Christs Church, used and kept from the Apostles time untill this day. Feare the displeasure and iust plagues of Almighty God if ye be negligent. Dancing therefore on the Lords-day (which no godly Christians in the Primitive Church did once use for ought we read,) is an unlawfull exercise, if our Homelies or Canons may be iudges; therefore an unlawfull pastime punishable by the Statute of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. which inten∣ded to suppresse dancing on the Lords-day, as well as Beare-bayting, Bull-bayting, Enterludes, and Common Playes; which were not so rife, so common as dancing, when this law was first inacted. Finally, this dancing as the See hore pag. 231. Waldenses teach, doth lead men on to the breach of all the ten Commandements, and to sundry inevitable sinnes and mischiefes: In all these respects therefore, they con∣clude it to bee evill, and unbeseeming Christians. Seventhly, Dancing (as Peter Martyr, Vies, Agrippa, Erasmus, Brant, Lovell, Northbrooke, Stubs, Gualther, and others in their fore-alleaged places testifie) is for the most part attended with many amorous smiles, lascivious ge∣stures, wanton complements, lustfull embracements, loose be∣haviour, In est & in osculis inani∣bus dulcis vo∣luptas. Theocrit Caprarius. Apud Poetas mino∣res. p. 22. See Pauli Wan. Ser∣mo 10. unchaste kisses, meretricious scurrilous Songs and Sonnets, effeminate musicke, lust-provoking attire, obscene dis∣courses, ridiculous Love-prankes, lewde companions; all which are as so many severall strong solicitations to whoredome and uncleanesse, and 1 Cor 0.7.8 1 Pet. 2.11. Tit. 3.3. Ephes. 4.17.19. savour onely of sensuallity of raging fleshly lusts, which warre against the soule. Therefore its 1 Pet. 2.11. Ephes. 5.11. 1 Thes. 5.23. wholly to be abandoned of all good Christians. Eightly, this See Petrarcha, Calvin, Martyr, Gualther, Eras∣mus, Vives, Brant, Lovell, Stubs, & North∣brooke, in their fore-quoted places. Dancing serves to no necessary use, no profitable, laudable, or pious end at all; it neither glorifies God, nor benefits men in
soule, in body, in estate, or reputation: it issues onely from the imbred pravity, vanity, wantonnesse, incontinency, pride, pro∣phanesse, or madnesse of mens depraved natures; and it serves onely Rom. 13.14. to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; whereas Gal. 5.24. c. 6.14. Col. 3.5. all those who are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: Therefore it must needs be unlawfull unto Christians. Ninthly, this kinde of dancing, as it was never in use among the Pi∣mitiue Christians, Phil. 3.17, 18. 1 Cor. 4.16. c. 11.1. 1 Thes. 2 14. 2 Thes. 3.7 9. Heb. 6.12. whose footsteps we should tread in: so it is quite out of the road of Christianity, and salvation. Wee never reade of any Christians that went dancing into Heaven; though we read of Iob 21.11, 12, 13 Isay 5.12, 13, 14. Amos 6.1. to 12. See D. Beards Theatre of Gods Iudg∣ments. part 2. c. 36. Edit. vlt. p. 431, to 436. & Froyssards Chro∣nicle. vol. 4. ch. 193.194. sundry wicked ones who have gone dancing downe to Hell. The way to Heaven is too steepe, too narrow for men to dance in, and keepe revell rout: No way is large or smooth enough for ca∣pering Roisters, for iumping, skipping, dancing Dames, but that Matth. 7.13. broad beaten pleasant road that leades to Hell. The gate of Heaven is to matth. 7.13. Luk. 13.24. strait, the way to blisse to narrow, for whole roundes, whole troopes of Dancers to march in together: Men never went as yet by multitudes, much lesse by Morrice-dancing troopes to Heaven: Alas there are Matth. 7.14. but few who finde that narrow way; they scarce goe two together: and those few what are they? Not dancers, but Isay 49.11. c. 61.2, 3. Zech 12 10, 11, 12. Ioel 2.12. Amos 8.10. mourners: not laughers, but Ier. 31.9, 15. Numb. 25.6. 2 Sam. 15.30. Iob 16.16. Psal. 6.8. Psal. 102.9. Ioel. 2.12. Ezra 3.12. c. 10.1. Isay 2.13. Ier. 9.1. c. 13.7. weepers; whose tune is Iob 16.20. Psal. 6.6. & 39.12. & 80.5. & 126.5. Isay 25.8. Ier. 9.1, 18. Lam. 2.11, 18. Luk. 7.33, 44. Acts 20.19, 31. 2 Cor. 2.4. 2 Tim. 1.4. Lachrymae, whose musicke, Rom. 8.23, 26. 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. Lam. 1.22. sighes for sinne; who know no other Cinqua-pace but this to Hea∣ven, Iob 30.28. Psal. 38.6. Psal. 42.9. & 43.2. & 44.22. to goe mourning all the day long for their iniquities; to Isay 38.14. Psal. 119.136. Ezech. 9.4. mourne in secrt like Doves, to chatter like Cranes for their owne and others sinnes. See Rom. 8.35, 36. Matth. 5.10, 11, 12. Acts 14.22. 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.  Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. Fasting, prayers, mourning, teares, tri∣bulations, martyrdome were the onely rounds that led all the Saints to Heaven; no other dance but these sad tunes
will bring men to the place of endlesse ioy. These other dances oft-times end in sinne, in hell, in horror, in Hea∣ven never; therefore all Christians shoud doe well Iam. 3.9, 10. Amos 8.10. to turne this dancing into mourning, this ioy and carnall laughter into spirituall heavinesse, as S. Iames commands them, that so Psal. 126.5.6. sowing thus in teares, they may reape an harvest of eternall ioy. Lastly, Pagans themselves have abundantly con∣demned  all mixt, lascivious, accurate, amorous dancing, as misbeseeming civill, chaste, or sober persons: and shall Christians iustifie or practise that which the very Heathen censure and cry shame on? Saturnalium. lib. 3. cap. 14. Macrobius, Epaminōdas. AEmi∣lius Probus, Oratio pro Muraena; pro C Plancio, & pro Rege De∣orato. Cicero, De Bello Catil. p. 22.23. Salust, together with Genial. Die∣rum. l. 2. c. 25. Alexander ab Alexandro: Antiqu Lect. l. 5. cap. 4.5. Caelius Rhodiginus, De Vanit. Scient. cap. 18. Agrippa, Locorū Com∣muniū Classis. 2. c. 11. sect. 66.67, 68. Peter Martyr, Hom. 51. in Mark, & Hom. 186. in Matth. Gualther, Treatise a∣gainst Dan∣cing pag. 67. Northbrooke, and Anatomy of Abuses. p. 15.126. Master Stubs in∣forme us: that it was an infamous, a dishonourable thing for men or women, among the ancient Pagan Romanes, to have skill in dancing, or to dance in any feast or publike meeting. And yet many Christians now a-dayes repute this their glory; that they are accurate expert Dancers, which these ingenuous Pagans deemed their shame. Salust, a grave Roman Historian, layes this as a brand of infamy on Sempronia, Sempronia docta fuit psallere, saltare elgantius quam necesse est probae; quae instrumenta luxuriae sunt. Ei cariora semper omnia quam decus atque pudiciia fuit: lubidine sicaccensa, ut saepius peteret viros quàm peteretur. Bellum Catil. pag. 22.23. that she was taught to sing and dance more elegantly, then became an honest woman: which singing and dancing (saith he) are the instruments of luxury. And what did these two two qualities (which we now so much admire) worke in this curious, wel-educated Roman Dame? the Historian tels us: All things were alwayes dearer to her then reputation and chastity: and she was so en∣flamed with lust, that she would otner seeke after men, then they after her. Saturnalium. lib. 3. cap. 14. pag. 458.459. Macrobius informes us: that not onely Skill in dancing was reputed infaemous and a badge of dishonesty among the Romanes: but that notwithstanding it Nobilium vero filios, & (quod dictu nefas est) filias quoque virgines, inter studiosa numerasse saltandi meditationem, testis est Scipio Africanus. &c. Ibidem. the Sonnes
of Noble-men, and (which is a shame to utter) their very Daughters also being yet Virgins, did reckon dancing among their other serious studies. Scipio Affricanus AEmilianus, is a witnesse of this, who in his Oration against the iudiciary law of Tiberius Graccus saith thus: Docētur prae∣stigias in hone∣stas: cum cinae∣dulis & sambu∣ca psalterioque eunt in. laudem histrionū: dis∣cunt cantare: quae maiores nostri ingenuis probro ducier voluerūt. Eunt, inquam, in lu∣dum saltatoriū inter cinaedos, virgines pueri∣que ingenui. Haec cum mihi quisquam nar∣rabat, non po∣teram animum inducere, ea liberos suos no∣biles homines docere: sed cum ductus sum in udum saltato∣rium, plus me∣dius fidius in eo Iudo vidi pueris virgini∣busque quin gentis. In his unum (quo me reipub. maxime misertum est) puerum bulla∣tū, petitoris fi∣liū, non minorē annis duodecim, cum crotalis saltare: quam sastationem impudicus servulus honeste saltare non posset. Vides quemad modū ingemuit Africanus, quod vidisset cum cro∣tlis saltantem petitoris filium, &c. Ibidem. they are taught dishonest iuggling: they goe with pretty impudent Dancers, with a dul∣cimer and psaltery to the praise of Stage-players: they learne to sing, which our Ancestors wished should be reputed a disgrace in Gentlemen. There goe, I say, into the Dancing-Schoole a∣mong Dancers, both Noble Girles and Youthes. When one re∣lated these things to me, I could not perswade my selfe, that Noble persons would teach their Children these things: but when I was brought into the Dancing-Schoole, I saw in good earnest in tha Schoole above five hundred Boyes and Girles. Among those (wherein I most of all pittied the Common-weale) I saw one garnished proud Boy, the Sonne of one that sued for a great Office, no lesse then tweelve yeeres old, dancing with rattles, which kind of dance a lewde foolish serving-boy could not honestly dance. Thou seest (saith he) how Africa∣nus mourned, that he had seene the Sonne of one who sued for an Office, which the hope and reason of obtaining a Magistra∣cy (at which time he ought to vindicate himselfe and his from all reproachfull acts) could not then restraine from doing that, which could not be reputed but dishonet: And before he com∣plains that most of the Nobility did exercise this dishonesty. Thus Scipio Africanus and Macrobius iudge of dancing. Cicero, that unparalleld Roman Orator; as he by way of scorne stiles Gabinius, Catilines Consul, a Saltator illic Catilinae Consul. Oratio pro C. Plancio. Dancer: and withall accuseth Verres for his intimate acquaintance with Apronius a dissolute adulterous, lascivious Pot-companion; In convivio saltabas nudus. In Verrem. lib. 3. who danced naked at a drunken feast: which crime of dancing naked he obiects to Cū collegae tui domus, cātu & cymbalis personaret, cum{que} ipse nudus in convivio saltaret in quo ne tū qui∣dē cū illū saltatoriū suū versaret orbē fortunae rotā pertimescebat. Oratio in L. Pisonem. L. Piso. So in his egant Oratiō for Murae∣na,
he censures Saltatorē ap. pellat. L. Mu, raenam Cato maledictū est si vere obijci∣tur, vehementis accusatoris: sin falsò, meledici conviciatoris. Quare cum ista sis auctoritate, non debes. M. Cato, arripere maledictum ex trivijs aut ex scurrarum ali∣quo convitio; neque temere consulem po∣puli Romani saltatorem vo∣care: sed conspi∣cere quibus praeterea vitijs affectum esse necesse sit eum, cui vere illud obijci potest. Nemo enim ferè saltat so∣brius, nisi for∣tè insanit, &c. Ibidem. p. 459. Cato, for stiling L. Muraena a Dancer: which if it be truely obiected (saith he) it is a reproach of a most vehement accuser: if falsly, of an ill-tongued rayler. For since thou art o so great authrity, thou oughtest not, O Mar∣cus Cato, to take up a slander out of the stret, or from the re∣proach of any Riler, neither yet rashly to call the Consul of the Roman Nation, a Dancer, but to consider with what other vi∣ces he must necessarily be affected, to whom this may truely be obiected. For no man almost doth dance sober, unlesse perad∣venture he be mad, neither being alone, neither yet at a mode∣rate and honest banquet: extreame dancing is alwayes the com∣panion of a disorderly feast, a pleasant place, and of many vo∣luptuous delights. Thou alleagest this against me, which must needs be the exreme or utmost of all vices; thou omittest those things, which being removed, this vice can never be at all: no dishonest banquet, no love, no revellings, no lust, no prodigall expence is shewed: and when these things are not to be found, which have the name of voluptuousnes and which are vitious: in whom thou canst not finde luxury it selfe; in him doest thou thinke to finde the shadow of luxury? And in his Oration, Pro Deiorato Rege, he thus labours to excuse him from the infa∣my of dancing. Quid deni{que}? furcifer quo progreditur? ait, hac laetitia Deiorarū ela∣tum, vino se obruisse, in cō∣vivio{que} nudum saltavisse. Quae crux huic fugitivo potest satis supplicij afferre? Deioratum saltantem quisquam aut ebrium vidit un quam? omnes sunt in illo regiae virtutes, &c. vide Ibidem. What finally? whether doth this Gallowes-bird proceed? he saith that Deioratus was so transported with mirth, and overcome with wine, that he danced naked in a feast. What Gallowes is sufficient to punish this fugitive? Who ever saw Deioratus dancing or drunken? all royall vertues are in him, &c. he therefore who whiles he was yet a childe, was so emi∣nently glorious, that he never did any thing but most severely and gravely, hath he in this repute and age of his, thinke you, danced? Thou oughtest rather to have imitated the mannrs and disciplin of thy Grandfather Castor, then to slander a good and famous man, with the tongue of a fugitive. But if thou hadest had a Dancer to thy Grandfather, and not that man from whom patternes of modesty and chastity might be ta∣ken, yet this reproach would not at all be convenient against that
age, which from its youth hath fensed it selfe with the study, not of dancing, but of well-managing armes and Horses, which severall passages, together with that in the third Booke of his Offices: At dares hanc vim M Crasso, ut digitorum percussione, heres posset scriptus esse, qui revera non esset heres; in foo (mihi cre∣de) saltaret. At homo iustus, & quem sentimus virum bonum, nihil cuiquam quod in se transferat, de∣trahet, &c. Ibid. That a iust or honest man, would not dance in publike, though he might be heire to M. Crassus, though per∣chance a dishonest man would doe it: sufficiently testifie, that dancing was an infamous thing in men of place and note, among the Romanes: that it was a notorious reproach among them to be stiled, much more to bee a Dancer, and that no sober men, but vitious, riotous Whore-masters and Drunkards onely used it, in their Cups and ebrious Feasts. It is Seneca his lamentable complaint of his times, and we may iustly take up the same of ours, Torpent ecce ingenia desidi∣osae iuventutis, nec in ullius honestae rei la∣bore vigilatur. Somnus lan∣guor{que} ac som∣no a languore turpior, mala∣rum verum in∣dustria, invasit animos. Can∣tandi saltādi{que} nunc obscaena studia effaemi∣natos tenent: & capillū fran∣gere, &c. nostrorum adolescentium specimen est. Emollit enerues{que} quod nati sunt inuiti manent; expugnatores alienae pudicitiae, negligentes suae. Controvers. lib. 1. Proaemio. pag. 967. that the wits of slothfull youth were growne lazie, neither were they industrious in the study of any honest thing. Sleepe, and sloath, and that which was worse then ei∣ther sleepe or lazinesse, the diligent pursuite of evill things, hath invaded their mindes. The obscene stdies of singing and dan∣cing (pray marke his epithite) doe possesse the effeminate: and to frounce and curle the haire, to become effeminate in speech and body, is the very patterne of our youth. And now observe what followed here upon:) they are conquerers of others chastity, negligent of their owne. (Againe, in his Naturall Questions. lib. 7. cap. 32. he complaines; Stat per successores Pyladis & Batilli domus, harum artium multi discipuli sunt multi{que} doctores Privatim urbe tota sonat pulpitum: In hoc viri, in hoc faeminae tripudiant. Mares inter se uxoresque contendunt, uterdet latus illis. Deinde sub persona, cum diu trita frons est, transitur at ganeam. Ibid. p. 453. that the house of Pyladis and Batillus (two Dancing-masters and Stage-players) had successors to continue it: that there were many Schollers and many Masters of these arts: These Masters teach privately, (or there is a private Dancing-Schoole) thorowout the City; where both men and women dance: Me and their wives strive betweene themselves, which of them shall first turne the side to the Dancing-master. After∣wards,
when as their modesty, and all their shame is worne quite away, they passe disguised to a Brothel-house. Loe here the end, the fruits of dancing, which this Heathen Philo∣sopher much deplores. To passe by Instrumenta luxuriae, ym∣pana at{que} tri∣pudia. Historiae. l. 30. pag 254. Iustin; who stiles musicke and dances, the instruments of Luxury: together with Fastorum. l.  p. 51. l. 5. p. 89. De Remedio Amoris. lib 2. pag. 230. Ovid, AEneid. l. 9. p. 312.313. & Copa. p. 509. Virgil, Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 14. p. 260. Tibullus, and f Horace; who cen∣sure dancing, as an effeminate practice of drunken, lewde, adulterous men and women, in their luxurious easts and mee∣tings; and withall to omit the Story, of Zenoph. Cō∣vivium. p. 893. to 900. Zenophons dancing Trull, who enamored Socrates and the other Spe∣ctators, with her dancing and Player-like action: The Poet Cum tibia lumbos Incitat & cornu pari∣ter, vino{que} fe∣runtur Attoni∣tae, crinē{que} ro∣tant vlulante Priapo Maena∣des: ô quantus tunc illis men∣tibus ardor Concubitus? quae vox sal∣tante libidin, &c. Nil ibi per ludum simula∣bitur, omnia fient Ad verū; quibus incendi iam frigidus aevo Laomedontiades, & Nestoris hernia possit. Satyr. 6 p. 53. vid Ibid. Forsitan expectes ut Gaditana canoro Incipit prurire choro, plausu{que} probatae Ad terrā temulo descendant clune puel∣lae. Spectant hoc nuptae iuxta recumbante marito, Quod pudeat narrase aliquem praesentius ipsis. Irritamentū veneris languentis, & acres Divitis uricae, major tamen ista vouptas Alterius sexus, magis ille extenditur, & mox Auribs at{que} ocu∣lis concepta urina movetur, &c. Satyr. 11. p. 110. vid. Ibid. Iuvenal makes dancing, the very badge of an adulteresse, the fuell of lust, the cause of adultery and much prodigall expence; reputing him an unhappy Husband, who hath a dancing Dame to his wife. And if this be true, how many happy Hus∣bands are there now, when there are so few un-dancing wives? Suetonij Caligula sect. 45. Sutonius records this, among other of Caligula his vices, that he was a Singer and a Dancer: that he was so transported with the pleasure of dancing and singing, that hee could not so much as refraine in publike Enterludes, but he must sing together with the Tragaedian that acted; and openly imitate the gesture of the Stage-player, either as it were pray∣sing or correcting it. He did likewise dance (saith he) in the night sometimes: and upon a time, sending for three grave men who had beene Consuls, into his Palace, in the second watch of the night, he placed them being in a very great feare, upon a Scaffold: and then he leaped out suddenly with a great noyse of Pipes and Fidlers clad in a womans Gowne, and a long coate, and having danced out a dance, he departed. Histor. lib. 26. quoted by Athenaeus. Polibius and Dipnosoph. lib. 10. cap. 12. p. 694.695. Athenaeus, doe both much condemne Antiochus sur∣named
the Illustrious, yet stiled, the mad, by them: for that in his riotous drunken Feasts, he would sometimes play together with the Actors: and once being vailed quite over, he was brought in upon the Stage by Players, and laid upon the ground, as if he were one of them: Afterwards oportunity calling him forth, he did caper, he did dance and iest with the Players, so that all there present were ashamed: To such miserable things as these, doth that stupidity induce men, which is ingendred of drunkennesse. The same Dipnos. l. 12. c. 13. p. 841. Athenaeus, out of Theopompus, doth cenure Strabo King of the Sydonians, who exceeded all men in the study of pleasure and delights; for that he made assmblies of Fidlers, Dancing-women, Lutanists, and sent for many. Leamons, Whores, or Mistresses out of Pelleponnesus, for many singing women out of onia, and for many amorous Girles out of all Greece, some of which he tendred to those that danced, others of them he usually offred to his friends that sung as a reward of their combate, &c. which verefies the for∣mer position, that dancing is the occasion of much lewdenesse; and that Dancers for the most part are a∣dulterous, lecherous people, given up to sensuality, and all kinde of vice. Which is further verified in his Dipnos. l. 4. c. 6. l. 8. c. 12.13. l. 10. c. 9.12. l. 12. c. 6.10.13. l. Amicas salta∣trices vobis ex∣posui. Formo∣ss primū nunc nobis dicere non est Florē∣tes saltatrices, quae genua re∣cdūt Mercedi, ac rapiunt one∣ra portantibus illam. Ibidem 13. c. 6.10.31. & l. 14. c. 3.5.11.12. where he shewes, that all com∣mon prostituted whores were expert Dancers; and all Dancers whores, adulterers, or lascivious, deboist Quis tumul∣tus hic? quid hae saltationes? quae petulantia in Dionysiadē irrupit tumul∣tuosa scenae? bid. p. 984. vid. l. 4. c. 3.17, 33, 34. l. 5. c. 3.4. l. 6. c. 6. l. 10. c. 9.11, 12. l. 11. c. 1.3, 16. l. 12. c. 2.4, 10, 15, 18. l. 13. c. 17. l. 15. cap. 1.8. Bacchanalian persons, and that so they were reputed among Pagans. Homer, Odysseae. lib. 14 p. 418. and out of him Stoaeus, Sermo. 18. fol. 126. enumerate this among other effects of Wine and drun∣kennesse, Vinum etiam impellit sapien∣tem valdè cantare, & leniter ridere, & sltare impellit. Ibid. Inest vino sacra pars con∣vivij, & splendoris. Inest etiam pars saltationis. Vinū tantae est potentiae, ut ad cho∣reas vel senes ipsos trahet. Panyasides, & Eriphus Apud Poet. Minores. pars vlt. p. 78.264. that they make a wise man to sing and dance. Which proves, that wise men anciently never danced but when they were drunken, or frantique; which Euripides his Tragedie stiled Bacchae, and Strabo his Geo∣graph. lib. 10. pag. 48. to 55. will most See likewise Plato. Legum. Dialog. 7. pag. 881. plentifully evi∣dence,
to those who have leisure to peruse them. True it is that Lgum Dia∣log. 6. p. 860.861, & Dialog. 7. p, 880.881, 882, 872, 873, 874. Plato and Politic. l. 7. c. 17 sect 77. & l. 8. c. 5.6, 7. Aristotle approve of dancing in the Festivities and Solemnities of their Idol-Gods, in which they were most in use: which dances as they were very rare, perchance Cum cantibus & horis an∣nuos ludos Li∣beo patri fa∣ciunt, &c. Poli∣ius Hist lib 4. pag 340. once or twice a yeere; so they were likewise lato Legum. Dial. l. 6. p. 860 & Dialog 7. p. 874.881, 882. certaine, appointed by their idolatrous Priests or by the Over∣seers of their dances, which dances might not be altered but by publike authority by the Priests and Magistates speciall di∣rection. Neither were they such dances as Christians can approve.Huiusmodi igiur studij gratia etiā lu∣sus & choreas adolescentū & puellarum con∣stituere opor∣tet, ut & nudi nudas spectent, & spectenturab illis, cū ratione & aetate qudā suos praetextus habente, usq ad moderatum singulorum pudorem. Legum Dial. 6. p. 860. For Plato even in these sacred dances dedica∣ted to Idol-Gods, would have Youthes and Girles to dance to∣gether naked, that so they might the better discee one ano∣thers beaty or deformity, and so miht o be deceived in their matches and marriages: Which custome of dancing naked, as it seemes by In Verrem. l. 3. Oratio in L. Pisonem & Pro Rege Deiorato. Tully, Dipnos. l. 14. c. 12. Athenaeus, De Ebri. & Luxu. er. Basil, In his Bcchae. Euripedes, and others, was much in use in former times in drunken Feasts; in which Athenaeus Dip l. 2. c. 5.7, 13. Suctonij Tibri. sect. 42.43. naked whores or women oft-times attended, the more to enrage the naked Dancers and the Spectators lusts, to which they were prostitued a their pleasure. Such lascivious, beastly dances as these did these lewde Phi∣losophers, and the See AEmilij Probi Epammond s. Polibius. Hist. l. 4. p. 340. Homeri Iliad. l. 18 p. 694 700. Eui∣pidi Bacchae. Dyonys. Hllicr. Antiqu Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. Srabo Geogr. l. 10. Athe∣naeus Dipnos. l. 14. c 12. druken Greekes allow, in the Festivals of their filthy Idols. But for all othr private dances (such onely excepted as were stiled Plto. Legum. Dialog. 7. pag. 880.881, 882. Zenophn. De Expedit. Cyri Hist. lib. 6 pag. 370.71. Strabo Geogr. lib. 10. Athenaeus Dip∣nosoph lib. 14. c. 12. Plutrchi Symposiacum. 9 Quaest. 15. Alex. ab Alexandro l. 6, c. 19. Caelius Rhodig. Antqu. Lect l. 5. c. 4. & l 18. c. 26. See Bulengrus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 52. Pirricall, wherein men vaul∣ted, and danced in thir Armor to ew their activity and strength;) they were evermore infamous among Pa∣gans, as the precedent Authors and Doctor See his Overthrow of Stage-playes. passim. Reinolds witnesse: therefore they should be much more abomi∣nable to all chaste, all modest Christians.
Obiect. 1.If any here obiect in defence of amorous mixt lasci∣vious dancing, (I speake not of grave single, chaste, and sober measures men with men) which is now so much  in use and high esteeme. First, that there are many lau∣dable examples of dancing in the Scripture: as Exo. 15.20, 21. that of Miriam and the Isralitish women after the drowning of the Egyptians, and their miraculous deliverance from them: that of Iudg. 11.39. Iepthaes Daughters 1 Sam. 18.6, 7. of the Isralitish women after the slaughter of Goliah and the Philistins: and that 2 Sam. 6.16. 1 Chron. 15.29. of David, who danced before the Arke with all his might. Secondly, that God commandes us, Psal. 149.3. Psal. 150.4. to praise him with cymbals and dances: That Salomon writes; Eccles. 3.4. there is a time to dance; and that Psal. 30.11. Ier. 31.4, 13. Lam. 5.15. Matth. 11.17. other Scriptures seeme to allow of dancing as law∣full. Therefore it cannot be unlawfull. Answer 1.To these, I answer first; that these Scriptures and examples warrant that kinde of dancing onely which is specified, and commended by them; not our thea∣tricall, our moderne common dancing, which See Pter Mar∣tyr, Gualther, Northbrooke, Stubs, & Lovell, in their fore∣quoted places, where these Scriptures and objections are more fully an∣swered. differs from it in many materiall circumstances, well worth the observation. For first, these dances which we read of in the Scrip∣ture, See Exod. 15.20, 21. Iudg. 11.34. c. 21.21, 23. 1 Sam. 18.6.7. 2 Sam. 6.16. Ier. 31.4. Iudith 15.12, 13. Mat. 14.6, 7. Mar. 6.22. were all single, consisting altogether of men, or of wo∣men onely: (which kinde of single measures were anciently in use among Zenophon, De Expedit. Cyri. l. 6. p. 370.371. Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 14. c. 12. the Persians and Greecians, & are yet retained a∣mong the Lerius De Navigatione in Brasiliam. c. 9. Purchas Pilgr. l. 1. c. 1. l. 6. c. 15. l. 8. c. 14. lib. 9. cap. 2. Brasilians and others.) Whereas our moderne dances are for the most part mixt, both men and wo∣men dancing promiscuously together by selected cou∣ples. Secondly, these dances were no artificiall curious Galliards, ligs, or Carontoes, learned with much paines and practise at a Dancing-Schoole, as ours are: See Gualther. Hom. 51. in Marc. & Hom. 186. in Matth. Peter Martyr, Locorū Com. Classis. 2. c. 11. sect. 63. to 68. M. Northbrooke & Stubs, qua supra. M. Iohn Downams Christian Warfare. l. 3. c. 21. sect. 5. See Horace De Arte Poëtica p. 303. Tibullus Eleg. lib. 2. Eleg. 1, & Virgil Georg, lib 2 pag. 40. but simple, plaine, unartificiall sober motions. Thirdly, these dan∣ces were no ordinary daily recreations, practised at every feast
or meeting, upon every Lords-day, Holi-day, or va∣cant time; and that upon no other occasion, but for mirth or laughter sake, to passe away the time, or to sa∣tiate mens unruly lusts, (the Tolle libidi∣nem sustuleris & choreā. Pe∣trarcha. De Re∣mediotr Fortu∣nae. l. 1. Dial. 24. onely props of dancing;) as all our moderne dances are. But they were See Exod. 15.20, 21. Iudg. 11 34. c. 21.19, 21, 23, 24. 1 Sam 18 6, 7. 2 Sam. 6.16. Iudith 15.12, 13. publike ex∣traordinary speciall dances, taken up by pious Christians to praise the Lord withall, after some extraordinary great delive∣rances from, or victories over their enemies, which scarce hapned twice in divers ages: Whereas our dances are not such. Fourthly, these dances were not made in any private House, or Hall; in any Ale-house, Taverne, or Bower neere adjoyning; much lesse at any See Polydor. Virgil. De Iu∣vent. Rerū. l 5. c. 2. M Stubs A∣natomy of A∣buses. p. 109. to 114. against these May-poles and Wakes which some be∣gin to preach for even in opē Pulpit. May-pole, Wake, or Church-ale; at any Play-house, Wedding, or Dancing-Schoole, as ours are: but in the open Exod. 15.20, 21. Iudg. 11.34. 1 Sm. 18.6, 7. Iudith 15.12, 13 field, where the victorious Generall and his Army were to passe; whom they went out to meet and welcome home with these their dances, Exod. 15.20, 21. Iudges 5. thorowout. 1 Sam. 18.6.7. 2 Sm. 2. tho∣rowout. Iudith c. 15. & 16. which sounded forth his praises in those Psalmes and heavenly Songs, which the Scripture hath recorded. Fiftly, they danced not by couples or in measure as we use to doe, Exod. 15.20, 21. 1 Sam. 18.6, 7. Iudith 15.12, 13. compared together. but in one intire traine or round. Sixtly, they did not wantonly leape, caper, fling or skip about like Does or Bedlams; nor Isay. 3.16. mincingly trip it, as our lascivious amorous Dancers doe: but they used a Exod 15.20. 1 Sam. 18.6.7. Iudith 15.1, 13. &c. 1. modest grave and sober motion, much like to It was like our Lincolnes Inne singing of Mirth and Solace. walking or the grave old measures; having timbrels and cymbals in their hands, and Exod. 5.20, 21. Iudg. 5. 1 Sam. 22. Iudith 16. compared with Ephes 5.1920. Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. Ier. 31.4, 13. Psalmes (not scurrilous amorous Pastorals) in their mouthes, wherewith they did unfainedly blesse and praise the Lord for their obtained victories and deliverances, and 1 Sam 18.6, 7. sound forth the Victors praises. Seventhly, These dances were free from all lascivious dalliances, from all amorous ge∣stures, gropings, kisses, complements, love-trickes, and wanton embracements; which abound in all our moderne Dances. Lastly, See a before: & Psal 149.3. Ps. 150.4. Ps. 30.11. These dances were like the singing of Te Deum Laudamus, after victo∣ries, of which we have sundry presidents in our English Chronicles. these dances were wholy devoted
to Gods praise and glory; See Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 22. & Cent. 4 Col. 412. they were a holy religious service done to God, proceeding from the thankefulnesse of such hearts, as were ravished with Gods more speciall mcies: Our moderne wanton dances have no such pious ends and circum∣stances, they proceed not from such hearts, such occasi∣ons, such extraordinary favours of God as these: they differ from them in all thse severall circūstances: there∣fore these dances, these examples doe no wayes iusti∣fie, but condene all ours, which have no affinity nor cognation with them. Answer 2.To the second Objetion; that Salomon saith, Eccles. 3.4. there  is a time to dance. I answer first, that by dancing in this, and the other See Psal. 30.11. Psal. 149.3. Psal. 150.4. Ier. 31.4, 13. Lam. 5.15 Mat. 11 17. Luk. 7.31. See Ambrose, Augu∣stine, Hierom. Beda, Calvin, Ly∣ra, Marlrat, Guather, Raa∣nus Maurus, Osi∣andr, Tostatus, & other Com∣mentators on these texts ac∣cordingly. obiected Sciptures, is not meant any cor∣porall dancing, or artificiall moving of the feet in mea∣sure: but either an inward cheerefulnesse of heart, and readines of spirit in Gods service: or else a spirituall exultation of the soule in the apprehension of some speciall favour of God unto it, expressed in an abundant praysing of God in psalmes, in hymnes and spirituall songs. This and no other is the dancing in∣tended by Salomon, and commanded in the Scripture, as In Eccles. 3. Olympidorus, Hom. 3. & 49. in Matth. Chrysostome, De Paeniten∣tia. l 2. c. 6. Ep. l. 4. Epist. 30. Comment l. 6. in Luc. 7. Tom. 3 pag. 47. Ambrose, In Psal. 149. & 150. Glossa Ordina∣ris, Lyra, In Ps. 30. v. 11. Calvin, and Peter Martyr Gualther, Northbrooke, Stubs, Lovel, Downham, & others, qua supra sundry others teach us. Se∣condly, admit this text be meant of corporall dancing, yet it intends no other but religious holy dances, in which either men or women Ephes. 5.19, 0 Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. Psal. 30.11. Psal. 149.3. Psal. 150.4. compared with this text of Salomon. praise the Lord, with Hymnes and godly Psalmes, singing with a grace in their hearts to him, who hath given them so great an occasion of much holy ioy: it allowes no other dances but such, in which the heart is more active then the feet; in which Gods glory (not carnall iollity) is the utmost end. It gives no tolleration therefore for our common dances, which have neither holinesse for their quallity, nor piety for their end. Lastly, Salomon saith onely, that there is a time to dance: and this time, I am sure, is neither See p. 231.240 to 244. Lords-dayes,
nor any other solemne estivals devoted to Gods ser∣vice, as the fore-quoted Councels, Fathers, and mo∣derne Authors testifie: these are not times of dancing, but of See p. 241.242, 243. praying, hearing, reading, meditating, and such like holy duties. All dancing therefore on such times as these (which are now made the chiefest dancing sea∣sons) are out of Salomons dispensation. Againe, the time of working, of following our vocations, of perfor∣ming private familie duties of religion; the times of sleepe and rest (I meane the night,See Senca, E∣pist. 122. & the∣naeus Dip. l. 12. cap 6. l. 8. c. 1. & lib. 15. cap. 1. which is more often spent in dancing then in praying, or any pious duty) is none of Salomons times for dancing: it being altoge∣ther untimely at these seasons; Therefore those who spend their working, praying, reading, studying time (Ephes. 5.16. Col. 4.5. See Act. 6. Scene 1. which God commandes them to rdeeme) in dancing, (which too many make their worke, their life, their trade) dance out of Salomons time and measure; who gives no allowance to their untimely Rounds. Againe, dan∣cing after a man is tyred out with honest labour, is al∣together unseasonable: Eccles 5.12. slepe and quiet rest, are a wea∣ried mans best, his fittest recreations: They that worke hard all day, had more need to rest, then dance, all night. And yet how many are there, who after an hard iourny or a toylsome dayes worke, will take more paines at night in dancing, then they did in labouring all the day time? & because they are quite tyred out with working, they will yet tire themselves once againe in dancing; and so disable themselves the more for the workes and duties of the ensuing day; whereas every See M. Wheat∣lies Sermon of Times redemp∣tion, with all those who write of Re∣creation.recreation should helpe, not hinder men in their callings. Hard workers there∣fore have little time, at least but little need or reason to turne Dancers. For others, who can finde either little, or no time at all to worke, (which is the epidemicall deplorable gentile fashion Much like to that of Sodom. Ezech. 16.49. or that in the 1 Cor. 10.7. Isay 5.11, 12. & Amos 6.1. to 7. See Iohn Sars∣burie, De Nugis Curial. lib. 1. cap. 1.4, 5. of our lazy age,) I am sure Sa∣lomon hath bounded them out no time to dance: Eccles. 3. hath set downe 24. severall times at least, for severall workes, and but one (if that) for dancing. Those therefore
who exempt themselves from these times of working, can make no title to this dancing season. He that will not labour, See 2 Thes. 3.8, 10, 11, 12. See all our English Statutes of La∣bourers, and a∣gainst Rogues & Vagabonds: accordingly. tis unfit he should play. He that hath no wor∣king time, tis equall he should have no dancing time. And yet how many are there now a-dayes who will needs intitle themselves to this time to dance, though they professedly disclaime all times to mourne or worke? How many are there that worke till they freeze, and yet dance till they sweat? that cannot worke or pray one houre in a day for sloath, and yet can dance nimbly day and night all the weeke long? that See Ludovicus Vives, De Eru∣dit. Mulieris Christianae. l. 1 c. 13.14. Ma∣ster Northbrooks Treatise a∣gainst Dancing f 64. b. & Chry∣sost. Hom. 7. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 59. A. ac∣cordingly. cannot walke twenty yards to Church on foot without the helpe of a Coach; and yet will dance 40. Galliards or Carantoes five hundred paces long? These indefatigable dancers, who would rather die then worke; and not live then live well: need onely a time to worke (which I wish they may find:) not a time to dance, (which they will be sure to gaine) since they dance and play away all their time: Wherefore since neither Labourers nor Loyterers have any need of dancing, they have certainly no title, to Sa∣lomons time of dancing: and so both their dancing and arguments are out of season. Since therefore it is in∣fallibly evident by all these premises, that our theatri∣call amorous mixt lascivious dancing, is sinfull and un∣christian at the least, if So Hirom. Eusebius, Da∣mascene, Fulgen∣tius, Theophyact, Vives, Calvin, Gualther, Mar∣lorat, Musculu, Erasmus, Agrip∣pa, Brant, North∣brooke, Stubs, & others stile it, together with the Waldenses, in their fore-quoted places. not Heathenish and Diabolicall; The Major of my precedent Syllogisme must be grāted: which I shal here close up with that notable passage of Alexander Fabritius, an ancient English though somewhat Popish Author, who writes thus of Dan∣cing. Chorearum processionibus ingressus ab ingressu caelestis processionis impediat, & nimirū nam, in diebus festis choreas ducentes faciunt contra omnia sacramenta Ecclesiae. Primò contra Baptis∣mum, in hoc quia frangunt pactum quod inierunt cum Deo in baptismo, ubi promi∣serunt se abrenunciare Satanae & omnibus pompis cius: sed pomposam processionē Diaboli intrant cum choreas ducunt. Nam processio Diaboli dicitur chorea, ut dicit, Guielmus Parsiensis. Alexand. Fabritius. Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 3 c. 10. D. See Hol∣ot, Lect. 173. in lib. Sapientiae. cap. 15. fol. 133. accordingly. The entring into the processions of dances, hinders men from ingresse into the heavenly procession, and those who
dance (especially upon Holy-dayes) offend against all the Sa∣craments of the Church. First, against Baptisme, in this, that they breake the Covenant which they have entred into with God in baptisme, where they have promised, that they would renounce the Devill and all his Pompes; but they enter into the pompous procession of the Devill when they dance. For See here pag. 229.230, 232. & Chrysostom. Hom. 15.17, 18 & 23. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 2. de Verbis I∣saiae. & Hom. in S. Iulianum. Tom. 1. Edit. Parisijs 1621. per Fronto Du∣caeum. p. 613. a.b. Augustine, Epist. 202. ac∣cordingly. a dance as Gu∣lielmus Parisiensis saith, is the Devils procession. Secondly, dances offend against the Sacrament of Order; For Clergie men who have received holy Orders, take those orders that they may conveniently celebrate divine services in the Church of God: but these vanities make divine Service to be contemned and neglected; for those who ought to be present at Mattens and Vespers, are oft-times present at these dances. Thirdly, they offend against the Sacrament of Matrimony; for oft-times in dnces, by signes of wantonnesse, vaine songs, and un∣lawfull confabulations, the faith of Matrimony is violated ei∣ther in consent or worke. Fourthly, they sinne against the Sa∣crament of Confirmation: for in the Sacrament of confirma∣tion the signe of the Crosse is imprinted on their foreheads, as being bought with the passion of Christ: but in such dances the signe of the Crosse being cast away, they place the signe of the Devill on their heads. Fiftly, they doe against the Sacrament of Pennance: For in the Sacrament of repentance by which they were reconciled unto God, they promised that they would never hereafter offend in the like kinde: but in such vanities they plainely doe the contrary. Sixtly, they offend against the Sacrament of the Altar, For on Easter-day they receive the Sacrament of the Altar, And doe not our Bacchana∣lian Christ∣mas-keepers, who spend that sacred time in revel-rout doe the like? but immediately after they are like to Iudas the Traytor: who when he had eaten at the Lords Table, out of his owne Dish, he went out presently after, and tooke a band of Soldiers from the High-Priests and Pha∣rises, and came against Iesus, as appeareth Iohn the 18. So these transgressing in the foresaid manner, come directly a∣gainst Iesus: for when they are in a dance the procession of the Devill, they are not with Iesus, as himselfe saith, Luke 11. he that is not with me is against me. As Kings in Antumne and Summer are wont to goe forth to the Warres, that they may
take that from thir enemies which they have gained by their labour in Winter: so the Devill the enemy of mankinde after Easter; yea, on Easter-day it selfe (we may more truely af∣firme it on our Christmas and Whitson Holy-dayes) ga∣thers together an army of Dancers, that he may take from the Sonnes and Servants of Christ who are his enemies, their spi∣rituall fruits, which they have gathered together in the Lent-time. Seventhly, they offend against the Sacrament of ex∣treme Vnction by which those who are sicke receive spirituall health: but these wretches in their playes and dances doe often lose the healh both of their bodies and their soules. After this, he compares all women-dancers, (especially such as are gorge∣ously attired and set out with costly array, with painted faces, with false haire, shaven off from some dead womans scull; with bead-tires of Gold, of silver, Pearles, and precious Stones, contrary to the Apostles precept, er hoc enim quod dicit super capita eorū tan∣quam coronae similes auro, intelligitur vanus ornatus auri & argenti & preciosorum lapidū quibus uuntur salta∣trices in capiti∣bus suis sunt tanquam coro∣nae quas Dia∣bolus posuit su∣pra capita illa∣rum pro multi∣plici triumpho quem habuit ipse Diabolus per eas de filijs Dei. Vnde sicut strenui milites in torneamentis solent in capitibus equorum suorum in signum victoriae coronas de floribus ponere: sic Diabolus equitans super tales mulieres in signum victoriae quod per eas habet contra filios Dei supra capita illarum tales vanitatis coronas imponit. Ibidem. See Pauli Wan. Sermo 10. de Custodia Tactus accordingly. which the Devill who rides upon such women hath set upon their heads, as so many crownes of vaniy for those many triumphes over the Sonnes of God which he hath gained by them,) to those locusts and tat smoke which ascended out of the bottomlesse pit, Apocalipse the 9. Advising all men out of Ecclesiasticus the 9. not to keepe company with a woman that is a Dancer, not yet to hearken to her voyce, lest they chance to perish by her snares: and wishing all Christians to renounce all dancing, as being thus opposite to all the Sacraments. Thus much concerning dancing, in probat of my Major, in which I have the more inlarged my discourse, both in respect of the neere affinity that is betweene Playes and Dancing; and in regard of the universality of this lewde infamous exercise, which overspreds our owne and other Nations, whose com∣monnesse hath purchased it: such credit such applause in this effeminate, unchaste lascivious dissolute age where∣in we live; that most repute it a necessary ornament, an
essentiall commendable quality or vertue, to make vp a Gentleman, a Gentlewoman, who are deemed in∣compleate, at leastwise rude without it: when as all the fore-quoted Councels, Fathers, Pagans, and moderne Christian Authors, with See Samuel Byrd, his Trea∣tise of the Pleasures of this present life. London 1580. c. 4. f. 34.35. Pauli Wan. Sermo. 5. & 7. De Custodia qui{que} sensuum. A French Trea∣tise against Dancing, Dedi∣cated by the French Mini∣sters of the Re∣formed Chur∣ches to the King of Navar. Richad Price, his destruction of small vices. London 1581. Gulielmus Pari∣siensis De Vitijs & Virtutibus. infinite others, have thus branded, censured it (especially in the female sex who are now most devoted to it) as Vbi saltatio, ibi Diabolus: in salationi∣bus exultant Daemones & laetantur Ministri Daemonum. Chrysost. Hom 49. & 74 in Math. & Holkot in lib. Sapi∣entiae. Lectio 172. a Diabolicall, infernall, effeminate, unchristian, wicked, unchaste, immodest heathenish pastime, contrary to all Gods Commande∣ments and Sacraments: and as the very pomps of Sa∣tan which wee renounce in Baptisme: which mee thinkes should now at last rectifie our depraved iudge∣ments in this point of Dancing, and reforme our lives. For the Minor, that Stage-playes are commonly at∣tended with mixt effeminate amorous dancing; it is most apparant; not onely by our owne moderne expe∣rience, but likewise by the copious testimony of sun∣dry Pagan and Christian Writers of all sorts: as namely, of Spectacula ac ludos in theatris, cum cantibus & horeis, singulis quibus{que} annis civibus praebent. Ibid. Polibius. Historiae. lib. 4. pag. 340.Etenim saltatio adscira ad sodalitatem vul∣gari quadā Poetica, societate caelestis illius poeseos amissa, in stultis & attonitis theatris obtinet tanquā tyrannus subiugata sibi quadā exili musica: omnem auem apud prudentes & divinos viros perdidit revera honorem. Ibid. Of Livy. Rom. Hist. lib. 7. sect. 3. Of Dionysius Hallicarnasseus. Antiqu. Lect. l. 7. sect. 9. Of Plutarch. Symposiacon. lib 9. Quaest. 15. pag. 315.316, 317. Of Athenaeus Dipnosophorum. lib. 8. c. 12. p. 695. lib. 14. c. 3 p. 980.981. c. 7. p. 990. Nam embatria cum tibijs ordine{que} exercētes, saltationibus{que} studentes, cū publica & cura & sumptu singulis annis in theatris conspiciuntur, &c. Ibid. c. 11. p. 999. &c. 12. pag. Sunt autē tres saltationes poësis scenicae, Tragica, Comica, Satyrica, &c. Ibid. 1005. Of Macrobius Saturnalium. lib. 2. c. 7. Of Horace Saltaret ut Cyclopa rogatet, &c. Ibid. Sermonum. l. 1. Satyr. 5. p. 180. & De Arte Poe∣tica lib. p. 303.306. Of Euripides, in his Bacchae Of Ovid, De At tanti tibi sit non indulgere Theatris. Illic assiduè ficti saltantur amores, &c. Ibidem. Remedio Amoris. l. 2. p. 230. Of Plato. Legum. Dial. 7.
Aristotle Poetic. l. 1. c. 1. Suetonij Caligula. c. 54.55. Clau∣dian in Eutropium. lib. 2. Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 2. cap 4. fol.Ne fractis quidem & ener∣vatis his salta∣toribus, qui Cynaedicā tur∣pitudinem mu∣tam in scenam transferūt. Ibid. 50. & lib. 3. c. 11. Tertullian & Commovetur civitas toa ut desaltentur fa∣bulosae antiqui∣tatum lubidi∣nes. Ibidem. Cyprian De Spectac. lib. Arnobius Advers. Gentes. l. 2. p. 75. & l. 4. Amans salta∣tur Venus, & per affectus omnes mere∣triciae vilitatis impudica ex∣primitur imi∣tatione baccha∣ri. Saltatur & magna sacris compta cum infulis ma∣ter, &c. Ibid. p. 149.150. & l. 7. pag. 230. to 240. Lactantius Histrionici e∣tiam impudici gestus, libidi∣nes quas saltando exprimunt docent. Ibid. Divinorum Instit. Epit. c. 6. Ambrose, De Paenitentia. lib. 2. cap. 6. Basil Hexam. Hom. 4. pag. 45. Nazienzen ad Selucum De Recta Educatione. p. 1063.1064. Chrysostome. Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Matth. Quid sunt ad hoc malū Mercurij furta, veneris lascivia, stupra, & turpitudines caeterorum, quae proferremus de libris, nisi quotidie cantarentur & saltarentur in theatris. Ibid Augustine, De Civit. Dei. lib. 7. c. 26. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 20. Salvian De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. Isio∣dor. Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 48.50. The 6. Councell of Con∣stantinople. Canon 51. (which Omnino prohibet haec sancta & universalis Synodus eos qui dicuntr mimos, & corum spectacla, eas{que} quae in scena fiunt saltationes, &c. Surius. Concil. Tom. 2. pag. 1048. inhibits all Players, Playes, and Dancing on the Stage, under paine of excommunication:) & Eusebius apud Damascenum. Parallelorum. lib. 3. c. 47. where thus he writes. Quid autem cernit qui ad theatra currit? Diabolicos cantus; mulierculas saltitantes, vel ut rectius loquar, Daemonis intemperijs agitatas. Quid enim saltatrix facit? Caput quod Paulus per∣petuò tegi vult impudenter aperit; collum invertit; comam huc at{que} illuc expandit. Haec porrò etiam ab ea fiunt quam Daemon obsessam tenet. Tale nimirū Herodis quo{que} convivlum erat. Herodiadis filia ingressa tripudiavit, ac Ioannis Baptistae caput amputavit, & subterranea inferni loca haereditatis loco consecuta est. Quocirca qui choreas & saltationes amant, cum ea portionem habent. Ibidem. But what doth he behold who runnes to Theaters? Diabolicall Songs; dancing Girles; or that I may speake more truely, Girles stirred hither and thi∣ther with the furies of the Devill. For what doth a Danceresse doe? She impudently uncovers her head, which Paul hath commanded to be continually vailed: she inverts her necke; she tosseth about her haire this way and that way; Even these things are likewise done by her who is possessed by the Devill. Such likewise was the feast of Herod: the Daughter of Hero∣dias entring in, danced, and cut of the head of Iohn the Bap∣tist; and so she obtained the subterraneous places of Hell in¦stead of an inheritance. Wherefore, those who love rounds and
dances,See Augustin. De Tempore. Sermo. 215. Epist. 202. & De Genesi. ad Litteram. l. 12. c. 22. against Dancers. have certainely a portion with her in Hell. A terri∣ble sentence sufficient to startle all our dancing Dames, and frisquing effeminate Gallants; who make dancing their onely excellency, and supreme delight. To these I could accumulate, Polydor Virgil. De Inventoribus rerum. l. 3. c. 13. Alexander Sardis, De Inventoribus rerum. l. 1. p. 42. Caelius Rhodiginus. Antiqu. Lect. l. 5. c. 4.5. M. Gualther, Hom. 52. in Marc. Alexander ab Alexandro. Gen. Dierum. l. 6. c. 19. Agrippa De Vanit. Scient. c. 20. M. Gosson, his Playes Confu∣ted. Action 2. D. Reinolds his Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 12. to 19. & 130. to 139. Godwin, his Roman Antiquities. l. 2. sect. 3. c. 11 Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 52. with Oratio Ed∣gari Regis. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. p. 153.154. Haec mimi cantant & sal∣tant, &c. sun∣dry other Authors which Blenger there recites. All which expresly informe us;See M. North∣brooke, & Mr. Stubs qua supra. Lucian, De Sal∣tatione accor∣dingly. that dancing was alwayes heretofore, and yet continues an unseperable concomitant, if not a necessary part of Stage-playes. The premises therefore being thus confirmed, my conclusion from them a∣gainst Stage-playes must be granted SCENA NONA. THe second unlawfull Concomitant of Stage-playes, is amorous, obscene, lascivious lust-provoking Songs and Poems, which were once so odious in our Church; that in the Articles to be inquired of in Visitations, set forth in the first yeere of Queene ELIZABETHS Raigne, Article 54. Church-wardens were enioyned to in∣quire; whether any Minstrels, or any other persons did use to sing or say any Songs or Ditties that be vile and uncleane; which suggests this 24. Play-oppugning Argument to me.Argument 24.
Those Playes which are usually accompaned with amorous Pastoralls, lascivious ribaldrous Songs and Ditties, Aiunt Philo∣sophi, nihil po∣tentius esse ad enevandum animum qum lenocinium melodiae. In huius reive∣rum argu∣mentumaccipe, quod difficile invenitur ali∣quis levis vocis & gravis vitae vidi infinitos tam vios quā faeminas tantò pejoris vitae qunto mlio∣ris vocis. An∣tonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 18. c. 5. sect. 10. must needs be unlawfull, yea abominable unto Christians. But Stage-playes are usually accompanied with such Pastorals, Songs, and Ditties as these. Therefore they must needs be unlawfull, yea abomi∣nable unto Christians. The Minor is most aparant. First, by our owne mo∣derne experience, there being nothing more frequent, in all our Stage-playes (as all our Play-haunters can abundantly testifie;) then amorous Pastorals, or obscene lascivious Love-songs, most melodiously chāted out up∣on the Stage betweene each seueral Action; both to sup∣ply that Chasme or vacant Interim which the Tyring-house takes up, in changing the Actors robes, to fit them for some other part in the ensuing Scene: (a thing in use in Ancient times, as Nunc tibici∣nibus, nunc est gauvisa Tra∣gaedis. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. p. 280. Actoris partes chorus officiū∣que virile De∣fendat: neu quid medios intercinatactus, Quod non proposito conducat & haereat aptè. De Arte Poët. pag. 302. Horace, Historiae. Rom. l 7. sect. 3. Livy, and Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiq. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 8 c. 8. Polydor Virgil, De Inventor. rerum. l. 3. cap. 13. Alexander Sardis, De Rerum Inventor. l. 1. p. 43.44. Bulengerus, De Theatro. l. 1. . 52. & l 2. c. 1.9. &c. Godwins Roman Antiqu. l. 2. sect. 3. c. 11. sundry others have recorded;) as likewise to please the itching eares, if not to inflame the outragious lusts of lewde Specta∣tors, who are oft-times ravished with these ribaldrous pleasing Ditties, and transported by them into a Turci ventris venereas{que} voluptates in paradiso somniant. Vxores aiunt fore selectissimas, &c. Philip. Lonicerus. Tur. Hist. l 2. c. 22. Bellonius Observationum. l. 3. c. 8. Purchas Pilgr. Booke 3. chap. 4. & 5. Ma∣hometan Paradise, or extasie of uncleanesse. Secondly, as experience, so sundry ancient and moderne Authors fully suffragate to my Minors truth. Spectacu∣lis corrupti cantus nimiam in animis ingenerant libidinem Meretricij enim cantus, auditorum animis insidentes, nil aliud efficiunt, quam ut turpitudinem omnibus persuadeant. Hexameron. Hom. 4. p. 45. In Stage-playes (writes S. Basil) corrupt Songs ingenerate too much lust in the mindes of men. These Whorish Songs residing in the mindes of the hearers, doe nought else but perswade filthinesse
to all that heare them. Illos Poëta contumeliosos non laudamus, qui in canticis obscaenis faeli∣citatem ponūt. D Legendis li∣bris Gentilium. Oratio. Wherefore wee commend not those contumelious Poets who place felicity in obscene Sngs. In Stage-playes (writes Ibi verba fra∣cta lasciva{que}: ibi cantiones meritriciae: ibi voces vehemen∣ter ad volupta∣tem incitantes, &c. Chrysostome. Hom. 3. De Davi∣de & Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 510. D. See Hom. 38. in Matth. accor∣dingly. Chrysostom,) are broken effeminate lascivious words, meretricious songs, and voyces provoking ve∣hemently to voluptuousnesse; and polluting mens eares farre more then any dirt or filth. What (write Quid autem cernit qui ad Theatra urrit? Diabolicos cantus; lascivas quasdam ac prorsus corrup∣tas cantilenas, quae{que} multam libidinem in animis pariant, &c. Eusebius a∣pud Damascnum Parallelorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. Eusebius and Damascen) doth he perceive who runs to Theaters? Diaboli∣call Songs; certaine lascivious and altogether corrupt Ditties, which ingenerate much lust in the mindes of the earers, &c. To these I might adde S. Augustine. De Civit. Dei. l. 6. c. 6.7 & 26. & l. 12. c. 25. Lactanius, De Vero Cultu, c. 21. Nazi∣enzen ad Selucum, De recta Educatione. p. 1063. And Oratio 28. p. 471 where he writes thus of his Father. Nec aurem & lingua res divinas partim accipientē partim pronun∣ciantē ethnicis narrationibus theatricis{que} cantilenis conspurcari siverit; nihil enim prophani sacrosanctis hominibus convenire putabat. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. l. 6. Ioannis Salis∣buriensis; De Nugis Cuialium. l. 1. c. 8. Concilium Parisiense. l. 1. c. 38. together with Athenaeus Dipnosophorum. l. 13. c. 27 The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 100. Caesar Bulengrus, De Theatro. l. 2. c. 9. De Cantu in Scena; where there are sundry Authors quoted to this pur∣pose, which you may peruse at leisure. Iuvenal. Satyr 6. p. 53. to 57. & Satyr. 11. p. 109.110. Petronius. Satyricon. p. 23.24. Mariana & Brissonius, in their Bookes, De Spe∣ctaculis. M. Northbrooke, D. Reinolds, M. Gosson, and M. Stubs, in their fore-quoted Treatises against Stage-playes: and others already mentioned in See here pag. 63. to 71. Act 3. Scene 1. Who all unanimously testifie; That Stage-playes are alwayes fraught with adulterous, obscene, lascivious Songs, and wanton Pastorals, which adde strength and fuell to mens lusts. My Minor therefore must be granted. The Major is unquestionable; because all ribaldrous, amorous Songs: (which now are too to rise, not onely in Stage-playes, but ever at private Christians Feasts, and other Taverne-meetings, from which Theodosius ministeria la∣civa psaltrias{que} commesiatio∣nibus adhibere lege prohibuit. Etropius. Rom. Hist. l. 13. p. 173. Aurelius Victor & Grim∣ston in Theodosio. Codex Theodoij. Tit. De Scencis l. 10. & Bulengrus De Theatro l. 2. c. 9. Theodosius,
Nullo citha∣rae cōvivia can∣tu, Non pueri∣lasva sonant. Claudian De Lau∣dibus Stiliconis. lib. 2. p. 185. Stilico, and others excluded all Songs and singing-women; (the very ornaments and delights of lascivious banquets, as Cantus salta∣tatio{que} haec enim sunt or∣namenta con∣vivij. Odysseae l. 1. pag. 8. Homer, Halyattes rex terrae Lydiae more at{que} luxu barbarico prae∣ditus cumbellū Milesijs face∣ret, concinen∣tes fistulatores & tibicines at{que} faeminas etiam tibicinas in ex∣ercitu at{que} in procinctu ha∣buit, lascivien∣tium delicias conviviorum. Noctium Attic. l. 1. c. 11. p. 26. & Herodoti Clio. sect. 3. Gellius, and Omne convivium obscaenis can∣ticis strepit, pudenda dicta spectantur. Lib. 1. c. 3. See Bulengerus, De Theatro l. 2. c. 9. p. 350 351. accordingly. Quintilian stile them:) are a∣bundantly condemned as abominable, sinfull pastimes misbeseeming godly Christians. First, by the expresse verdict of the Scripture; which as it Iam. 5.13 Eph. 5.4, 19 20. Col. 3.16, 17. Heb. 13.15. Isay 38.20 c. 49.13. Ps. 21.13. Ps. 33., 3. Ps. 66.2, 4. Ps. 684. Ps. 96.1. Ps. 95.1. Exod. 15.1, 21. 1 Chron. 16.9. inioynes all Christi∣ans in their Feasts, their mirth, and private meetings, to sing Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs, of prayer, of praise to God with a grace and melody in their hearts: a practise, which all the Primitive hristians (as the marginall Philo Iudaeus, De Vita Contempl. lib. p 1211. to 1217 Clemens A∣lexandrinus Paedg. l. 2. c. 4. Tertulliani, Apollogia. c. 39. Dionysius Areopagita Ecclesiast. Heirarch. lib. c. 3. Nazienzen, Oratio 37.38, 39, 40. Gregorie Nissen, De Vita beati Gre∣gorij Oratio. Chrysostom. Hom in Psal. 41. Tom. 1. Col. 735. Theodoret, De Evangel. Veritatis Cognitione. l. 8. & De Martyribus. l. p. 390. F. Tom. 2. Pliny Epist. l. 10. Ep. 97. Au∣thors witnesse) observed in their Love-feasts, in all their pri∣vate and publike meetings: and I would, those moderne Christians, who banish these things from their Feasts and Merriments, as altogether unseasonable, exhilera∣ting themselves Quis rogo hic error est, quae stultitia? Nunquid laetari assiduè & ridere non possumus, nisi risum nostrum atque laetitiam scelus esse faciamus, &c? Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 192. with nought but scurrilous beastly Songs, lascivious musicke, wanton dancing, and such unchristian mirth; would now againe reviue it. So it expresly pro∣hibits Ephes. 4.29, 31, cap. 5.4. 1 Cor. 15.33. See Act. 3. Scene 1. pag. 63. to 66 all filthy, corrupt, unedifying communication: Ephes. 5.3. all fornication and uncleanesse which are not so much as once to be named among Christians: together with Ephes. 5.4. all foolish talking and iesting; all ribaldry and scurrility, either in songs or iests (which Omnibus enim suffragijs haec lex vincit, ut & in cantilenis bonis verbis utamur, & ut cantilenae genus undi∣qua{que} ex gratiosis verbis constet. Plato Legum, Dialog. 7. pag. 874. Plato, and the Athenians, though Pagans, did prohibite by an unanimous law,) as odious unto God, pernicious to the manners, mindes, and soules of men, and misbeseeming
Christians, Col. 4.6. Ephes. 4.29. whose words should be alwayes gracious, seasoned with salt, that so they might administer grace, not poyson or corruption, to the heaerers. Ribaldrous amorous Songs, are so unsutable for the mouthes, the eares of Christi∣ans; that Qui Satanicas cantilenas con∣cinunt, spiritu immundo im∣buuntur. Enar. in Ephs. 5. pag. 510. D. Theophylact plainly tells us, that those who sing such Songs, are posessed with an uncleane spirit: and S. Qui enim iocis & seculi cantionibus delectatur, in tentorio Dia∣boli est. De Nuptijs filij Re∣gis. Col. 1725. A. Ber∣nard, that he who is delighted with obscene Iests, and secular Ditties, (as alas too many are) is in the very pavilion or possession of the Devill. No wonder therefore if the Scrip∣ture condemnes such songs as these, as unbefitting Chri∣stians. Secondly, as the Scripture, so sundry ancient and moderne Councels expresly censure,Mors intrat per aures audi∣endo libenter cantus & in∣strumenta mu∣sica ad lasciviā provocātia: per ist nim valdè emollitur ani∣mus, & praeci∣puè per cantus mulierū. Cum enim blanda vox quaeritur sobria vita de∣seritur Cantus dissolutus mē∣tem virisē vul∣nerat & emol∣lit Et ex hoc cōmuniter can∣tatrices & can∣tores sunt instabiles & malorū morū, &c. Ecce hominem vocis blandissimae & vitae pessimae. Pauli Wan Sermo 7. de Custodia Auditus. such Poems, Songs, and Ditties; as abominable and polluted in themselves, defiling the mouthes, the eares, of those who chaunt, or heare them chaunted: as allectives unto lewdnesse, incentives unto lust, Ephe. 4.29, 30. See Ambrose, Chry∣sostome, Hierom, Theodoret, Sedulius, Primasius, Remigius, Anselme, Beda, Ocumenius, Haymo, Theophylact, Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat, Lyra, & Gorhan, Ibid. accordingly. which grieve the holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed up to the day of redemption, and wholy effeminate the mindes of men. Witnesse Concilium Arelatense. 3. apud Surium. Con∣cil. Tom. 1. pag. 727. Concil. Agathense, Can. 39. Veneticum, Can. 11. Toletanum. 3. Can. 23. Altisiodorense. Can. 9. & 40. Cabilonense. 1. Can. 19. Senonense. Cap. 25. Surius. Tom. 4. p. 742.743. Cabilonense. 2. Can. 9. Moguntinum sub Carolo Magno. cap. 10. & 14. Rhemense. cap. 17. Parisiense. lib. 1. cap. 38. Moguntinum sub Raebano. Archiepiscopo. cap. 13. Turonense. 3. cap. 7.8. Coloniense 1536. pars 2. cap. 25. & pars 9. c. 10 Apud Bochellum. Decreta Ecclesiae. Gal. lib. 6. Tit. 19. cap. 4.16.19. See Act 7. Scene 3 Synodus Carnotensis. Anno 1526. Concilium Burdigense. Anno 1582. & Synodus Turonica 1583. which 17 severall Councels, inhibite all Christians, especially Clergy∣men, both from the use, the hearing, and singing of such Songs as these, for the precedent reasons. A sufficient inducement to cause all godly Christians to abandon them, together with all those Playes, those Play-houses and places
where they are in use. Thirdly, as these Scriptures and Councels; so likewise the Fathers are very copious in censuring such ribaldrous lascivious songs as these, which if we beleeve Arem insu∣per meretricijs cantibus, & ter∣ram contami∣navêre, &c. De Elia & Iiunio. c. 18 & Basil De Ebrietate & Luxu. Sermo. S. Ambrose or S. Basil, defile the very earth and aire where they are breathed out. Survey we but Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l. 2. c. 4 & 6. & Foris autem impijs modis & amatorijs canticis se ob∣lectant, tibiarū cantu, plausu, temulentia, & quovis caeno ac sorde opple∣ti. Hoc autem dum cantant & recantant, ij qui immortalitatē anteà celebra∣bant, tandē per∣niciosissimam mali malè ca∣nunt palinodi∣am; Comeda∣mus & biba∣mus cras enim morimur. Ij autem non cras verè sed iam Deo morui sunt, sepeliētes mortuos suos, hoc est seipsos in mortem in∣fodientes. Ibid. l. 3. c. 11. Tertullian & Cyprian, in their Bookes De Spectaculis. Ar∣nobius advers. Gentes. lib. 4. & 7. Ttianus, Oratio adversus Graecos. Lactantius de Ver Cultu l. 6. c. 21. Basil. Hexaëme∣ron. Hom. 4. De Ebrietate & Luxu. Sermo 2. & De Legendis libris Gentiliū Oratio. Nazienzen Oratio 28.37, 38. & 48. & Ad Selucum De Recta Educatione. p. 1063. Hierom Epist. 2. c. 6. Ep. 9. c. 5. Ep. 10 c. 4. & Adversus ovinianum. l. 2. c. 7 Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus Chatechesis Mystagogica. 1 (who makes such See here pag. 9. to 53. songs, the very workes and pompes of the De∣vill, which we renounce in baptisme:) Eusebius apud Damasce∣num. Parallelorum. l. 3. c. 47. Ambrose, De Elia & Ieiunio. c. 18 & Sermo 33. Sti. Asterij Homilia in Festum Kalenda∣rum. Oratio. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 4. p. 706. Augustine De Civit. Dei. lib. 6. c. 6.7. De Rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis Tractatus. & De Decem Chordis. cap. 4. Tom 9. De Tempore Sermo 225. De Verbis Apostol. Sermo 17. Hippolitus Mar∣tyr, De Consummatione mundi & Antichristo Oratio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 3. p. 16. H. & 17. A.B. Gaudentius Brixiae. E∣pisc. De Lctione Evangelij. Sermo 8. Bib. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 813. C. D. Primasius, Oecumenius, Theodoret, Sedulius, Remigius, Anselmus, Hamo, Rabanus Maurus, & Theophy∣lact, on Ephes. 4.29, 30. & on cap. 5.3, 4. Salvianus De Gu∣bernatione Dei. l. 6. Fulgentius super Audivit Herodes Te∣trarcha, &c. Sermo. Chrysologus Sermo 128. Olympiodorus in Ecclesiast. Enarrat, c. 12. Casiodorus Vriarum. lib. 2. Epist. 40. Bernardus, Scurriles cantilenas tanquam vanitates & insanias falsas respuunt & abominantur. Ibidem. Oratio ad Milites Templi. cap. 4. Col. 832. L. & De Nuptijs Filij Regis. Col. 1725. A. Ioannis Salisbu∣riensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 6. & 8. Ptrus Blesensis, Ep. 76. Maphaeus Vegius, De Educat. Lib. l. 3. c. 10.12. Paulus
Wan. Sermo 7. Espencaeus in Tim. 1. Digressionum. l. 1. c. 11. p. 212. & Gratian De Consecratione Distinctio. 3. we shall finde such Songs, such Poems as these abundantly con∣demned, as Quare ambu∣laremus delect∣ati canticis va∣nis nulli rei profututis, ad tempus dulci∣bus, in poste: ū amaris? Tali∣bus enim tur∣pitudinibus cantionū ani∣mi humani il∣lecti enervan∣tur, & decidūt, à virtute, de∣fluentes in tur∣pitudinem: & propter ipsas turpitudines posteà sentiunt dolores, & cum magna amari∣tudine digerūt, quod cum dul∣cedine tempo∣rali bibêrunt. August De De∣cem Chordis. c. 4. Tom 9. pars 1. pag. 1152. filthy and unchristian defilements, which con∣taminate the soules, effeminate the mindes, deprave the man∣ners, of these that heare or sing them, exciting, enticeing them to lust; to whoredome, adultery, prophanes, wantonnesse, scur∣rility, luxury, drunkennesse, excesse; alienating their mindes from God, from grace and heavenly things: and Syren-like, with their sweet enchantments entrap, ensnare, destroy mens soules, proving bitter potions to them at the last, though they seeme sweet and pleasant for the present. Let S. Chrysostome, that Totum aurū indicant haec verba Chrysostomū, cuius è labris doctrinae sermones melle dulciores emanarūt, quos qui gustant multa myrrha implētur, id est, laboribus mortificant membra sua super terram. Theodoret Interp in Cantica Cantic. Tom. 1. pag. 252. all-golden Father, as Theodoret stiles him, whose lips did drop with Myrre and Hony, speake here for all the rest, who is somewhat copious in this theame. Quemadmodū ubi quidē est caenū eò porci concurrūt, ubi autem sunt arōmata & suffitus illic apes habitant: ita, ubi sunt quidē meretricia cantica, illic congregantur Daemones: ubi autem cantica spiritualia, illuc advolat gratia spiritus, & os sanctificat animā &c. Quemadmodū enim qui mimos & saltatores & mulieres meretrices in∣troducūt in convivia, Daemones & diabolū illuc vocantutà qui vocant David eū cy∣thara, intus Christū per ipsum vocant. Illi domū suā faciunt Theatrū, tu Ecclesiam factuam domūculam Hom, in Psal 41. Tom. 1. Col. 735 Like as Swine (writes he) runne thither where there is mire, and as Bees doe live where there are spices and perfumes: so where there are whorish Songs, there are the Devils gathered together: but where there are spirituall Songs, thither the grace of the holy Ghost doth flie, and the mouth sanctifieth the heart. And as those who bring in Stage-players, and Harlots into their Feasts (I would those whose practise it is now, would marke his words) doe call in Devils thither, so they who call in David with his Harpe (he meanes his Psalmes of which he speakes) doe call in Christ by him. They make their house a Theater, doe thou make thy Cottage a Church. Hoc est mihi in quit perpetuū canticū, &c. Hoc est mihi perpetuū munus, Deum laudare, Audiant, qui Satanicis canticis remollescunt & putrefiunt. Quod non supplicium subibunt, &c? Hom. in Psal. 117. Tom. 1. Col. 984. D. See Hom. 6. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 62. C. D. This, saith
David, is my perpetuall Song, this my constant worke and office, to prayse the Lord. Let them give eare, who effeminate and putrifie themselves with satanicall Songs. What punish∣ment shall not they undergoe; or what dispensation may be given them, when as he being alwayes imployed in praysing his Savi∣our, they are perpetually wallowing themselves in these filthy Duties? By Qu docemur, quāto supplicio obnoxij sint qui libidinosas & obscaenas cantilenas pro∣ferunt; qui co∣micas nugas pronunciant, qui mendacia & clamores in Circēsibus lu∣dis edunt. Hom. in Psal. 118. v. 170.171. Tom. 1. Col. 1025. D. this are we taught, to what great punishment they are obnoxious, who utter libidinous and obscene songs, who pro∣nounce comicall toyes, who vent lyes and clamours in Cirques, &c. Si Theatrali∣bus ludis spre∣tis atque neg∣lectis ecclesiam peteris, claudi∣canti pedi inco∣lumitatem red∣didisti. Si Di∣abolicos can∣tus despexeris & eorum loco spiritales didi∣ceris iā loque∣ris, cùm anteà mutus esses. Hom. 33. in Mat. Tō 2 Col. 262. B. If then, contemning and forsaking Stageplayes, thou shalt hereafter frequent the Church, thou hast then restored health to thy haulting feet: If thou shalt despise diabolicall songs, and in stead of them shalt learne spirituall Psalmes, thou mayest now speake, whereas before thou wast but mute. And in another Homely he writes thus: Nam quemadmodū limus & sordes aures corporis obstruere solent, sic meretricij cantus aures mentis solent magis quàm quaevis sordes obstruere. Vel potius non obstruūt tantū, verū etiam impurū faciūt & immundū: quasi enim stercus immittunt auribus vestris huiusmodi colloquia. Quod barbarus ille minabatur, dicens; Come∣detis stercus vestrū, id etiàm multi non verbo, sed re vobis faciunt, imò verò multò pejus ac faedius. Nam Fornicatorij cantus multò magis quam stercora sunt abomi∣nabiles. Quod{que} aegrius ferendū; non solū nullā talia audientes molestiā capitis, verū etiā ridetis at{que} laetamini. Cū{que} vitare ista, abominari{que} deberetis; suscipitis at{que} lau∣datis. Hom 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 297. C. See Hom. 2. De Verbis Isaiae. Tom. 1. Col. 1288. A. As slime and dirt are wont to stop the eares of the body, so meretricious songs do use to stop the eares of the minde, more then any filth: or rather, they doe not onely stop, but likewise contaminate and defile them: for such songs doe as it were cast dirt into the eares. What that Barbarian threatned, say∣ing; you shall eate your owne dung: that verily doe many to you now, not in word, but in deed: yea, that which is farre worse and filthier: For adulterous songs are much more abominable then any dung. And that which is farre worse to be endured. (though it bee the very humour and practise of our lascivious times) you are not onely not offended nor grieved at the hearing of such songs, but you laugh and reioyce: and whereas you ought to avoyd and abominate them, you entertaine and applaud them. To conclude: Choreae, cymbala, tibiae, cantica turpia plena scortationū ac adulteriorū, Diaboli pompa, &c. Hom. 42. in Acta. Tom. 3. Col. 611. C. & Hom. 12 in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 357. A. Dancing, musicke, adul∣terous
ribaldry songs (saith this Father) which are so rife and frequent in our marriages (and yet not so frequent then, as they are now in ours:) are the very Devils pompe and hotch-potch, &c. Quid dixeris de ipsis canticis quae sunt plena omni impudi∣citia, & amores pravos, & con∣cubitus illigi∣timos ac nefa∣rios, & domo∣rum eversiones & tragaedias, inducunt innu∣merabiles, & frequens habēt nomen amici & amantis, & amicae & ile∣ctae: & quod et omniū gravissimum, eis ad∣sunt virgines, omni exuto pu∣dore, & ad spō∣sae honorē vel potius ignomi∣niam; & inter impudicos a∣dolescentes, in∣compositis las∣civientes & in∣docore se ge∣rentes cantile∣nis, verbis{que} turpibus, & Satanica consonantia. Et adhuc me rogas, unde matrimo∣niorum corruptores Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 358. C. See Hom. 21. ad Pop Antioh. Tom 5. Col. 162. C.D. What wilt thou say of their songs which are fraught with all incontinency? which bring in dishonest loves, un∣lawfull, nay wicked copulations, the eversions of houses and i∣numerable Tragedies, and have oft-times in them the name of a Mistris, and a Lover, a Sweet-heart and a Beloved. And that which is worst of all, there are Virgins present at them, who laying aside all shame, doe in the middest of unchaste Yong∣sters (a practice too common with our chaunting, dan∣cing blushlesse females now) demeane themselves lascivi∣ously and unseemely: sporting themselves with disorderly songs, obscene discourses, satanicall musicke, in honour, or rather to the dishonour of the new married Spouse. And dost thou yet inquire of me, whence adulterers, whence whoredomes, whence corruptions of marriages should proceed? Lo here the effects of such scurrilous songs and dances. To which I shall here adde the saying of S. Valerian concerning such songs as these, in his 6. Homely, De Otiosis verbis Bibliotheca Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 3. pag. 482.483. Quotiescunque dulci voce mulcetur auditus, ad turpe facinus invitatur aspectus. Nemo insidiosis cantibus credat, nec ad illa libidinosae vois inci¦tamenta respiciat; quae cum oblectant, sae viunt; cum blandiuntur, occidunt. Ibidem. As oft (writes he) as the hearing is soothed with the pleasant voyce, so often the sight is invited to a filthy deed. Let no man trust these tre∣cherous songs, nor looke backe to those incitations of a lustfull voyce; which rage whiles they delight, and kill when they flatter. Sic frequēter vidimus blandis sibilis aves decipi, & hebetes feras in laqueum mor∣tis dulcedine vocis impeli. Similis et dilectissimi, causa mortalium, quos dulcisoni cantus cura sollicitat. In ho autem proficiunt varietates vocum, & producta sin syllabis verba, ut homo aut capiatur, aut capiat. Explicari non potest, dilectissimi, quam periculosos laqueos exhibeant mimicae tudia voluptatis, &c. Ibdem. Thus we often see Birds to be deceived with flattering whistels, and sottish wild beasts to be drawen into a snare of death by the sweetnesse of the voyce. Such, my beloved, is the case of mor∣tall
men, whom the care of pleasant songs sollicites. In this onely the varieties of voyces profit, and words drawen out at length by warblings without syllables, that a man may be either taken, or may take. It cannot be expressed, my beloued, what dangerous snares the studies of mimicall pleasure exhibite. For if any man could search out the secrets of mens brest, he should finde the hearts of unhappy men to sigh againe at every sound of the Flute. Vnderstand therefore what over-familiar and secret speech may doe betweene men and women, what neere neighbour∣hood, what conferences mixed with iests, what a pallate invited with delight, what the desire of gold exposed to every wicked∣nesse of prostitution, if even the inticements of a dumbe voyce may charme the fury of another. Refugiendus est igitur error iste, vocis so∣nus, qui huma∣nis pectoribus dulcedine sua amaritudinem fecit, & persua∣sione quadam melliflui can∣tus frequenter mortifera ae∣gris venena commiscuit. In quo loco pri∣mū obturendae aures sunt, op∣ponentes scu∣tum fidei, quo facilius omnis lenocinantis vocis excludatur aditus. Adhibenda etiam disciplina, quae oculorum desideria repellat, & tabescentis cordis incitamenta compescat. Ibidem. This error therefore of the sound of the voyce is to be avoyded, which hath wrought bitter∣nes in the hearts of men by its sweetnesse, & by a certaine perswa∣sion of a mellifluous song, hath oft-times ministred deadly poysons to the sicke. In which place the eares are first to be See Thomas Beacon his Catechisme. fol. 355 accordingly. stopped, by opposing the Buckler of Faith, whereby the hearing of every voyce enticing unto lewdnesse may more easily be excluded. And discipline also is to be administred, which may repell the desires of the eyes, and may bridle the incitations of a consuming heart. To all which passages, I may ioyne that of S. Augustine, De Tempore Sermo. 215. Ante omnia ubicun{que} fueritis, sive in domo, &c. verba turpia & luxuriosa nolite ex ore vestro proferre; sed magis vicinos & proximos vestros iugiter admonere, ut semper quod bonum est & honestum loqui studeant, ne forte mal loquendo & in sanctis festivitatibus choros ducendo, cantica luxuriosa & verba proferendo de lingua sua, unde debuerant Deum laudare, inde sibi vulnera videantur infligere. Isti enim infae∣lices & miseri homines qui balationes & saltationes ante ipsas basilicas sanctorum exercere nec metuūt nec erubescunt, etsi Christiani ad Ecclesiam venerint, Pagani de Ecclesia revertuntur; quia ista consuetudo balandi de Paganorum observatione remansit. Et iam videte qualis est ille Christianus qui ad Ecclesiam venit orare, & neglecta oratione, sacrilega verba Paganorum non erubescit ex ore proferre: videte tamen fratres charissimi, si iustum est, ut ex ore Christianorum ubi corpus Christi ingreditur, luxuriosum canticum quasi venenum Diaboli proferatur? Ibid. Tom. 9. pars 2. pag. 631. See Ambros. Sermo. 33. Tom. 5. pag. 23. Before all things, wheresoever you
are, whether in a house, or in a iourny, or in a feast, or in a publike assembly, utter not yee out of your mouthes any scurrilous or voluptuous words; but rather cōtinually, admonish your neigh∣bours and friends, that they alwayes study to speake that which is honest and good, lest perchance by evill speaking, by dancing upon holy Festivals, and by singing luxurious ribaldry songs, they may seeme to inflict wounds upon themselves, even from whence they ought to have praysed God. For these unhappy and miserable men, who neither feare nor blush to exercise lascivi∣ous songs and dances before the very Temples of the Saints, al∣though they should come Christians to the Church, yet they returne Pagans from the Church, because this custome of sing∣ing and dancing is but a relique of the observation of Pagans. And now behold what a Christian he is, who comes unto the Church to pray, and neglecting prayer, is not ashamed to utter the sacrilegious words of Pagans. Consider deare brethren, whether it be iust, that out of that mouth of Christians where the body of Christ doth enter in, a deboist song should be brought forth, as the very poyson of the Devill? Quare ambu∣laremus dele∣ctati vanis an∣ticis, nulli rei profuturis, ad tempus dulci∣bus, in posterū amaris? Tali∣bus enim tur∣pitudinibus cantionū ani∣mi humani il∣lecti nervan∣tur, & decidant virtute, defluē∣tes in turpitu∣dinem & prop∣ter ipsas turp∣tudines posteà sentiunt dolores, & cum magna amaritudine digerunt, quod cū temporasi dulcedine iberunt. De Decem Chordis. cap. 4. Tom. 9. pars 1. pag. 1152.Wherefore (writeth he in another place) should we then walke delighted with vaine songs, that are profitable for nothing, being sweet onely for a time, but bitter afterwards? For with such scurrilities of songs the intised mindes of men are effaeminated, and fall away from vertue, flowing downe into filthinesse, and for these very filthi∣nesses they afterwards fele paines, and vomit up that againe with great bitternesse which they have drunke downe with temporall pleasure, &c. To which I may annex that Apud Henrici Spelmanni Glossarium. p. 66. Ballare, & Binius Conciliorum. Tom. 3. Canon of the Roman Synode under Lotharius and Lodovicke: Let the Priests admonish men and women who meet together at Church on Holy-dayes, that they sing no filthy songs, nor lead nor keepe any dances: And that Constitution of Charles and Lodo∣vicke: Capitular. Caroli & Ludou. l. 6. Can. 191. & Spelmanni Glossarium. p. 67. Ballare. Let no man dance any filthy Dances or Carantoes, nor sing any dishonest riotous songs, nor use any such Diabolicall
sports, either in the streets or in their houses. By all which you may easily discerne, what the Fathers iudged of amo∣rous ribaldrous songs; which should cause all Christi∣ans, at leastwise to condemne them in their iudgements; as all these Fathers doe; if not to Quare? quia infixa nobis e∣ius rei aversa∣tio est, quā na∣tura damnavit. Seneca. Epist. 79.  Legum Dialog 7. pag. 874. abandon them in their practice. To these Testimonies of the Fathers I might accumulate, not onely Quid illi, qui in audiendis, visendis, com∣ponendis can∣ticis occupati sunt; dū vocem cuius rectum cursum natura & optimū & simplicissimum fecit, inexu modulationis ineptissime torquent? Quo∣rum digiti ai∣quod inter se carmen meti∣entes semper sonant: quorū cùm ad res serias, etiam saepè tristes, ad hibiti sunt, exauditur tacita modulatio? Non habent isti otium, sed iners negotiū. De Brevit. Vitae. c. 12. Plato, Enervant animos cytha∣rae, cantus{que}, lyrae{que}. Et vox, &c. De Remedio Amoris. l. 2. p. 230. Seneca, Grata{que} faeminis, Im∣belli cythara carmina dividis. Carmin. l. 1. Od. 15. p. 18. See l. 3. Ode. 11. p. 83. & Ode. 15. p. 88. l. 4. Ode. 11 p. 124. Epist. l. 1 Epist. 2. p. 240. Ovid, See Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 54.55, 56. & Satyr. 10. p. 99. Horace, and other Pagan Authors, who condemne all amorous wan∣ton Pastorals, as fit for none but Strumpets, and lewde lasci∣vious effeminate persons: but likewise whole Volumes of moderne Authors; there being few Commentators on the Psalmes, upon See Lyra, Gorrhan, Tostatus, Cornelius à Lapide, Estius, Osander, Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat, Zanchius, Arctius, Bullenger, Melangton, and others. Ibid. Ephes. 4.29, 30. &c. 5.3.4. or upon Colls 4.6. Few Expositors on the 7. See Hooper, Bacon, Babington, Dod, lton, Perkins, Lake, Williams, mes, and others. Commandement: few See Peter Martyr, Trelcatius, Mercer, Polanus, and others, and Maheus Vegius, De Liberorū Edu∣cat. l. 3. c. 7. & 12. Common-place Compilers; in their places or Titles, of Singing, Psalmes, Musicke, Iests, Scurrility, Modesty, Chastity, and the like: Few Writers, The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. p. 100. to∣gether with Reinolds, Gosson, Stubs, Bulenger, Brissonius, Mariana, and others. against Stage-playes; but have particularly condemned these lascivious, amorous, ri∣baldrous Songs, (which are now too much in use) Aures ve∣stras condidi, ut audiretis Scripturas, at vos parastis ea ad cantica Daemonum, cytha∣ras & ridicula, &c. Hippolitus Martyr. De Consum Mundi Oratio. Bibl. Patrū. Tom 3. p. 16.17. as Diabolicall, unchristian lust-exciting, vice-fomenting, soule-impoysoning pleasures, which all Christians should eternally abominate, as the very snares of Hell, Turpes & effaeminati cantus prius rempublicam universam pestifera tabe infici∣unt, quam malum quod afferunt ratione praecaveri potest. Osorius De Regum. Instit. lib. 4. fol, 123.124. the very plagues of that Common-weale wherein they are tol∣lerated, and the very baites of Satan to draw men on to
sinne, and so to endlesse destruction. Since therefore Stage-playes are evermore accompanied, adorned with such execrable unchristian Patorals, Songs and Poems as these, (which I would wish all Christians, especially such as are most devoted to them, as they tender the everlasting welfare of their soules, even now for to a∣bandon, See Rev. 18.7 Iob 21.12, 13. Isay 5 11, 12. Amos 61, 5, 7. Iam. 5.1, 5. Luke 16.25. Temporariam habent volup∣tatem, paenam autē sempiter∣nam. Chrysost. Hom. 54. ad Pp. Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 315. . Si luxuriosam egeris vitam hanc, aeternis incendijs tor∣queberis in alia, O quam momentania est carnis delectatio? quàm labilis voluptatis hora qua perditur vita aeterna! Quod rogo, emolumentum affert corpori, quodve tribuit luchrum, id quod tàm citò animam ducit ad tartarum? Ambros. De Vitiorum, Virtutum{que} Conflictu. Tom. 5. p. 249. B. for feare these momentary fading pleasures plunge them into many endlesse torments.) I must thereupon now conclude, as all the fore-going Fathers and Authors in the Major doe; that they must needs be sinfull, and al∣together unlawfull unto Christians, as these their atten∣dants are; which need no other aggravations to con∣demne them but themselves alone. See Carmina Proverbialia. Noscitur ex comite qui non cognoscitur ex se, was the ancient Proverbe. You may therefore iudge of Stage-playes, by these filthy Songs and Sonnets that accompany them; which Songs the very Title to our English singing Psalmes, commands all Christians to lay a part, as tending onely to the nourishing of vice, and corrupting of youth, with which I shall close this Scene. SCENA DECIMA. THe third unlawfull Concomitant of Stage-playes, is  effeminate, delicate, lust-provoking Musicke, as S. Oportet nec oculos specta∣culis, nec vanis praestigiatorū ostētationibus tradere, nec per aures animarū corrup∣tricē melodiā haurire. Hoc enim musicae genus libidinū stimulos acuere solet. Tana sanè melodiae rectae à turpi at{que} obscaena differentia est, ut eam quae nunc in usu est non minus fugere debeatis, quā rem aliquā turpissimam. De Legendis libris Gentilī. Oratio. Tom. 1. pag. 412. Basil
phraseth it, which Christians ought to flie as a most filthy thing; both because it workes upon their mindes, to corrupt them, upon their lusts, to provoke them to all voluptu∣ousnesse and uncleanesse whatsoever. From whence this 25. Argument may be formed.Argument 25. That which is alwaies accompanied with effeminate lust-provoking Musicke, is doubtlesse inexpedient and unlawfull unto Christians. But Stage-playes are alwayes accompanied with such Musicke. Therefore they are doubtlesse inexpedient and un∣lawfull unto Christians. The Major is easily confirmed, by prooving effemi∣nate lust-enflaming Musicke, unlawfull. That Musicke of it selfe is lawfull, usefull, and commendable; no man, no Christian dares denie, since the Exod. 15.1, &c. Numb. 21.17. Iudges 5.3. 2 Sam. 19.35. 1 Chron. 6.32. c. 13.8. c. 159, 27. c 16.42. 2 Chron. 5.13. c. 9.11. c. 20.21, 22. c 23.13. c. 29 28. c. 35.15. Nehem. 7.1. c. 10.39. c. 11.22, 23. c. 12.45, 46, 47. Psal. 149. & 150. Eccles. 2.8. Ephes. 5.19. Col. 3.19. Scriptures, Clemens Alexand Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. Iustin Martyr, Explic. Quaest. à Gentibus positarum. Quaest. 107. Augustinus, Musicae. l. 6. Beda. De Musica Theo∣rica. lib. & De Musica Quadata. lib. Hierom, Ambrose, Chrysostom. Basil. Theodoret, Sedulius, Remigius, Rabanus Maurus, Oecumenus, Theophylact, on Ephes. 5. & Col. 3. & in lib, Psal∣morum. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 2. Epist. 40. Ioannis Sarisburiensis, De Nugis Cu∣rialium. l. 1. c. 6. Fathers, and generally Platonis Crito. & Legum Dial. 3. p. 591. to 599. Aristot. Polit. l. 8. c. 3 4, 5, 6, 7. Ovid Fastorum. l. 6. p. 114. & Tristium. l. 4. Polybius. Historae. l. 4. p. 339.340, 341. Strabo Geogr. l. 10. p. 48.49. Plutarchi Laconica Instituta. Athenaeus Dipnos. l 14. c. 10.11. Gellius, Noctium Attic. l. 1. c. 11. Quintil. Instit. Oratoriae. l. 1. c. 16. Macrobius De Somno Scipionis. l. 2. c. 3. Dioginis Laertij Socrates. AElian, variae Historiae. l. 2. c. 39. with sundry others. all Christian, Caelius Rhodiginus Antiqu. Lect. l. 9. c. 1. to 10. Alexander ab Alexandro. l. 2. c. 25. Polydor Virgil, De Invent. rerum. l. 1. cap. 14.15. Osorius De Instit. Regum. l. 4 fol. 122. Clerke, De Aulico. lib 1. pag. 62.63, 64. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 17. Case Polit. lib. 7. cap. 3.5, 6, 7. with others. all Pagan Authors extant, doe with one consent averre it. But that lascivious, amorous, effeminate, voluptuous Musicke, (which I onely here incounter,) should be either expedient, or lawfull unto Christians, there is none so audacious as to iustifie it, since both Scripture, Fathers, moderne Christian Wri∣ters; yea and Heathen Nations, States and Authors,
have past a doome upon it. If we revolue the Fathers, we shall finde Paedagogi. lib. 2. cap. 4. Clemens Alexandrinus declaiming thus against it. Those who are seriously occupied in musicke, songs and dances, and such like dissolute recreations, become immo∣dest, insolent, and very farre estranged from good discipline, as those about whom cymbals and dulcimers are sounding, and the instruments of fraud making a noyse. But it mainly be∣hoveth us to cut off every filthy spectacle, every dishonest sound, and to use but a word, every dishonest sence of intemperance, (which is verily a true privation of sence) that doth tickle or effeminate our eyes or eares, bewaring pleasure: For Fractorū can∣tū & flebiliū Caricae Mu∣sae modorū va∣ria veneficia intemperanti & pravo Musicae artificio mores corrumpunt, ad cōmessationis affectionē tra∣hentes, &c. A forti ita{que} & nervosa cogita∣tione nostra verè molles & enervatae har∣moniae aman∣dandae sunt quam longissi∣mè, quae im∣probe flexuum vocis artificio utentes, ad de∣licatā & igna∣vam vitae agen∣dae rationem deducunt, &c. Ibidem. the va∣rious sorceries of effeminate songs, and of the mournfull mea∣sures of the Caricke Muse, corrupt the manners, with in∣temperate and wicked musicke, drawing men to the affection of riotous feasting. The Pipe therefore, the Flute and such like instruments are to be abandoned from a sober feast, which are more fit for beasts then men, and for those people who are most estranged from reason. But modest and chaste harmonies are to be admitted, by removing as farre as may be all sot effemi∣nate musicke from our strong and valiant cogitation, which u∣sing a dishonst art of warbling the voyce, doe leade to a delicate and slothfll kinde of life. Therefore Chromaticall harmonies are to be left to impudent malapartnesse in wine, to whrish mu∣sicke crowned with flowers, Explicatio Quaestionum à Gēribus Chri∣stianis posita∣rū. Quaest. 107. Iustin Martyr, (if the Booke be his) writes thus to the selfesame purpose. It is not unlawfull, nor yet altogether unseemely for Boyes to sing; but to sing with innimate instruments; to sing with dancing and cymbals; the use of which kinde of instruments, with others fit onely for Children, are exploded out of our Churches, where Therefore they had no o∣ther Church-musicke but singing in his time. Quod nota. nothing is retained but singing onely. S. Hierm in his 10. Epistle to Furia. c. 4. writes thus. Comatulos, comptos, at{que} lascivos, domus tuae tecta non videant. Cantor pellatur ut noxius. Fidicinas & Psaltrias, & istiusmodi chorum Diaboli quasi mortifera Syrenarū carmina, proturba ex aedibus tuis. Ibidem. Let the Singer be thrust out of thine house as noxious: expell out of thy doores all Fid∣lers, Singing-women, with all this quire of the Devill, as the deadly songs of Syrens. And in his Commentary upon the
Ephes. lib. 3. cap. 2. Tom. 6. pag. 188. A. Audiant haec adolescentuli; audiant hi qui∣bus psallendi in ecclesia offi∣cium est; Deo non voce sed corde cantan∣dum: nec in Tragaedorum more guttur & fauces dulci medicamine colliniendas; ut in Ecclesia theatrales mo∣duli audiantur & cātica: sed in timore in ope∣re in scientia scripturarū. Sic cantet servus Christi, ut non vox canentis, sed verba pla∣ceant quae le∣guntur: ut spi∣ritus malus quae erat in Saule, eijciatur ab his, qui si∣militèr ab eò possidentur, & non introdu∣catur in eos, qui de Dei domo scenam fecêre populorum. Ibidem. Let Youthes heare these things; let those whose office it is to sing in the Church heare these things; that we must sing to God with the heart, not with the voyce; neither after the manner of Tragedians are the throate and chops to be anoynted with some pleasant oyntment, that theatrical songs & measures may be heard in the Church; but we must sing in feare, in worke, in the knowledge of the Scriptures. So let the Servāt of Christ sing, that not the voyc of the Singer, but the words that are read may please: that the evill spirit which was in Saul may be cast out of those, who are possessed by him in the same manner, and that he may not be brought into those, who have made a Play-house of the House of God. And in his Commentary upon the 6. of Amos. Tom. 5. p. 114. A. he writes thus. Quibus non sufficit libido gutturis, &c. nisi & tibiarum & psalterij, & lyrae canticis, aures vestras mulceatis: & quod David fecit ad cultum Dei, levitarum ordines, & organorum reperiens varietates; vos ad voluptatem & luxuriam conferatis. Ibidem. The lust of the pallate, and all variety of dainty meates is not sufficient, for you soothe your eares with the songs of the Pipe, the Psaltery, and the Harpe: and that which David hath made for the worship of God, find∣ing out variety of Organs, and musicall instruments, you trans∣fer to pleasure and luxury. S. Valerian in his 6. Homely, De Otiosis Verbis. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 3. pag. 482.483. writes thus. Invenimus igitur frequenter, ità impudicitiae viam muniri atque ex hoc fomenta adulterijs ministrari, cum hic agili plectro tinnientis citharae sonos expedit, ille docili digito laborantis organi blandimenta componit. Isti sunt laquei, quibus famulantibus, inter caetera vulnera Diabolus hominum mortes operatur, &c. Ibidem. We therefore oft-times finde a way to be fenced to incontinency, and fomentations to adulteries to be from hence administred, whiles this man playes on the sounding Ci∣theren with a nimble quill, and another with a skilfull finger composeth the melodious inticements of the roaring Organs. Thse are the snares, by whose assistance, among other wounds the Devill workes the deathes of men, &c. S. Basil in his Commentary upon Esay 5. Tom. 3. p. 419.420. hath these ensuing passages, against Musicians, Songs, and Dances.
Tibicinae & fidicinae quae tempus floridae aettis per fla∣gitia traducūt: chori insuper & cantilenae in commune de∣promptae per improbos viri∣litatem corpo∣rum suis ener∣vāt lenocinijs, animos{que} deli∣nientes illo publico con∣cenu perfrin∣gunt, & ad cō∣plexū obscenae omnis & illigi∣timae volupta∣tis ebrios exti∣mulant. Aures capiuntur me∣lico concentu, sed qui ad fla∣gitiosam lubri∣citatem exi∣mulet, &c. Ibid. Fidlers and Musicians, who passe the time of their flourishing age in villanies, together with Dances and songs drawne forth in publike by wicked persons, enervate the virility of mens bo∣dies with their lewde inticements, and soothing their soules with that publike consort, doe breake thorow them, and stirre up Drunkards to the embracing of all filthy and unlawfull plea∣sure. Their eares are taken with the sweet harmony, but such as may pricke them on to a flagitious lubricity, &c. What a miserable Spectacle is it to chaste and wel-mannered eyes, to see  woman, not to follow her needle or disaffe, but to sing to a Lute?Castis & benè moratis oculis, quā miserabile spectaculū, u∣lierem non te∣lā ordiri, aut deducere pensum, sed cantillare ad lyrā? non à proprio viro cognosci, sed ab alijs publicā inspectari meritricē: non modulari Psalmū confessionis, sed can∣tica concinnere ad libidinē prolicientia: non supplicare Deo, sed ultrò properare ad gehennā: non ad Ecclesiā Dei studiose contendere, sed & secū alios inde avocare. Ibid. not to be knowne by her owne husband, but to be often veiwed by others as a publike whore: not to modulate or sing a Psalme of confession, but to sing songs inticing unto lust: not to suppli∣cate to God, but willingly to hasten unto Hell: not to goe dili∣gently to the Church of God, but to with-draw others with her selfe from thence, &c. Atqui apud te acet lyra auro dente{que} elephantino interstinct & variegata; affixa vlut sublimi cuipiā altari, statua & Idolū Daemoniacū. Et mulier quidē misera, &c. edocta abs te est, forte à mercenario, forsan ab co qui eam lenae cuipiā muliri aut prostitutae tradiderit: mox ubi in proprio corpore omnē explevit libidinē, praesidet adolescentulis similium doctrix operum. Quamobrem die iudicij, paena duplex tibi occurret, nimirum ob ea quae flagitia committis, propter item doctrinam improbm quâ à Deo abalienasti animam infaelicem, &c. Ibidem. With thee there lyeth a Lute interlaced and adorned with Gold or Elephants tooth, a Demoniacall Sta∣tue and Idoll, fastned at it were to some high; Altar and a certaine miserable woman, who by reason of the necessity of her servile condition, should apply her selfe to her distaffe, is taught of thee, perchance an hireling, perchance of one who shall deli∣ve her over to some Bawde or prostituted Whore; afterwards when she hath satisfied all the lust in her owne body, she is set over other yong Girles, as a Mistris of the like actions. Wherefore in the day of iudgement; a double punishment shall seise upon thee; both for those wickednesses thou committest when thou art drunke, and likewise for thy wicked doctrine whereby thou hast quite alienated an unhappy soule from God,
&c. Earū autem rū quae pen∣dent à studio vnit is, cu sūt citharistica, saltatoria, ars inflandi tibias, & aliae ejusmo∣di, mox ut de∣sijt actio ipsum se declarat o∣pus, id{que} pror∣sus iuxta Apo∣stolicàm sen∣tentiam; quorū finis, inteitus & perditio. Haec sanè dicta sunto adversum eos qui per im∣modicam mol∣liciem, totos se dedunt delicijs, praeter ientacu∣lum prandium & caenam sive continuê: aut certè in eos qui diebus hilari∣taris & laetitiae, puta nuptiarū aut conviviorū accuratius con∣quirunt & ad∣hibent tibias, citharas & tripudia saltationes{que}, quando nihil horū à nobis requisitū est: quippe qui divina nos docente Scriptura didicimus indignationē promotam esse adversus istiusmodi studia & vitae conversationē. Timore igitur impendentiū malo∣rū flagitiosam hanc vitae vestrae consuetudinem deinceps permutate in melius. Ibid. Of those arts which depend vpon the studi of vanity, whether it be the art of Musicke, of Dancing, of sounding ipes, or such like, as soone as the action it selfe hath ceased, the worke it selfe declareth it selfe, and that altogether according to the Apostles sentence; whose end is destruction and perdition: Let these things suffice to be spoken against those who thorow overmuch effeminacy give themselves wholy over to delights, and that continually; Or else against those who in the dayes of mirth or gladnesse suppose of marriages or feasts, doe more di∣ligently procure Waites, Musicke, rounds and dancing, whn as none of these is required of us: who have learned by the tea∣ching of the Scripture, that the wrath of God is bent against all such studies and conversation of life. Therefore for feare of imminent evill from hence-forth amend this wicked custome of your life. Thus farre this Father, who in his Sermon, De Legendis Libris Gentilium, & De Ebrietate & Luxu, & Hexaëmeron, Hom. 4. hath other passages to this pur∣pose. To passe by Chrysostome, who writes; Cymbala, tibiae, & cantica turpia Diaboli pompa & farrago, &c. Hom 42. in Acta. Tom. 3. Col. 611. C. & Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom 4. Col. 357. A that Cym∣bals, Pipes, and filthy Songs are the very pomps and hodgpotch of the Devill, together with our ancient learned Coun∣try-man Achuvinus; who reckons up Pompae illius sunt canora musica, in quibus saepè solvitur & mollitur Christianus vigor. De Caeremonijs Baptismi Epist. Col. 1158. B. shrill, wanton a∣morous musicke, which doth oft-times mollifie and effeminate the vigor of Christians, among those pomps of the Devill, which Christians in their Baptisme doe renounce. S. Cyrill of Alex∣andria afirmes; Vbi nam{que} citharae sonus est & tympanorum pulsus, ac tibi∣cinum concentus cum numerorū concinnitate & plausibus, ibi omninò est & omne genus faeditatis, ea{que} fiunt clm ab illis, quae turpè est vel dicere. In Hesaiam. lib. 1. cap. 5. Tom. 1. pag. 141. A. That where there is the sound of the Harpe, the beating of Cymbals, the consort of Fidlers, with the concin∣nity of numbers and applauses, there also is all kinde of filthi∣nesse;
and those things are done of these in private, which is even unseemely for to utter. Oratio. 48 pag. 796.797 Nec vestibula nostra tibici∣num concentu plausibusque personant, &c. vid. Ibidem. Gregory Nazienzen records, that the Christians in his time had no dancing, no idle Songs, or wanton Musicke in their publike feasts and solemnities; but onely Psalmes and spirituall Songs with which they praysed God. And Epiphanius in his Compendiaria Doctrina, De fide Catholicae & Apostolicae Ecclesiae; ascertaines us; that the whole Catholicke and Apostolicke Church, Prohibe Theatra & Iu∣dos equestres, & venationem, musicos item, &c. Ibidem. Col. 922. E. condemned Theaters, Playes and Musicians. Eusebius and Damascen, as they declaime against wanton Musicke, songs, and dancing; so they pronounce an Vae his qui Dominico die cithara ludunt. Citharae dus autem, tan∣quam Daemon, cum ligno con∣flictatur. Da∣mascen. Paral∣lelorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. & Eu∣sebius quoted, Ibidem. woe against all such who play upon the Harpe or Citharen on the Lords-day; comparing a Fidler that playes to Dancers, to a Devill. A harsh comparison, enough to scare such from their ungodly trade. Saint Augustine in his first Booke, De Musica. from c. 1. to 8. declaimes against all wanton, effeminate, amorous, Stage-mu∣sicke: which was much in use with Playrs, who were com∣monly bad, not good, Musicians in his age: and that Musicke he most discommends which wa accompanied with Playes Si quis sua∣vissimè ca∣nens, & pul∣chrè saltans, velit eo ipso lascivire, cum res severita∣tem desiderat, non benè uti∣que numerosa modusatione utitur, idest, ea motione quae lam bona, ex eo quia numerosa est, dici potest malè ille, id est incongruenter utitur. Ibidm. cap. 3. Tom 1. ag. 445. or lascivious dancing. The 3. Synode of Turvy under Charles the Great. Canon 7. condemnes effeminate Musicke in these termes: Ab omnibus quae∣cunque ad aurium & ad oculorum pertinent illecebras, unde vigor animi emolliri posse credatur (quod de aliquibus generibus musicorum sentiri potest) Dei sace∣dotes abstinere debent Surius. Tom. 3. pag. 274. The Ministers of God ought to abstaine from all things which pertaine to the enticements of the eares or eyes, from whence the vigor of the minde may be thought to be effe∣minated: which may be imagined of certaine kindes of Mu∣sicke, &c. Which severall Authorities are a sufficient testimony of the unlawfulnesse of effeminate, amorous, wanton Musicke. Which as it is discommendable in Feasts and merry meetings, so much more in Churches. Hence is that notable passage of AElredus, Abbot of Rivaulx in Yorke-shire, about the yeere 1160. in his Speculum Charitatis. lib. 2. cap. 23. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13.
pag. 111. De his nunc sermo sit, qui sub specie re∣ligionis ne∣gocium vo∣luptatis ob∣palliant: qui ea quae antiqui ptres in typis ruturorum sa∣lubriter exer∣cebant, in u∣sum suae vani∣tatis usurpant. Vnde quasi, cessantibus iam typys & figùris, unde Ecclesia tot Organa, tot Cymbala? Ad quid rogo ter∣ribilis ille fol∣lium flatus, to∣nitrui potius fragorē quàm vocis expri∣mens suavita∣tem? Ad quid illa vocis con∣tractio & in∣fractio? Hic succinit, ille discinit, alter supercinit, alter medias quasdam notas dividit & incidit. Nunc vox strin∣gitur, nunc frangitur, nunc impingitur, nunc diffusiori sono dilatatur. Aliquando, quod pudet dicere, in equinos hinnitus cogitur, aliquandò virili vigore deposito in faeminiae vocis gracilitate acuitur: non nunquàm artificiosa quadam circūvolutione torquetur & retorquetur. Videas aliquando hominem aperto ore, quasi intercluso halitu expirare, non cantare, acridiculosa quadam vocis interceptione, quasi mini∣tari silentium, nunc agones morientium, vel extasim patientium imitari. Interim histrionicis quibusdam gestibus totum corpus agitatur; torquentur labia, rotant oculi, ludunt humeri, & singulas quasque notas digitorum flexus respondet. Et haec ridiculosa disolutio vocatur religio; & ubi haec frequentius agitantur, ibi Deus honorabilius serviri clamatur Ibidem. Let me speake now (saith he) of those, who un∣der the shew of religion doe obpalliate the businesse of pleasure: which usurpe those things for the service of their vanity, which the ancient Fathers did profitably exercise, in their types of fu∣ture things. Whence then I pray, all types and figures now cea∣sing, whence hath the Church so many Organs and Musicall Instruments? To what purpose, I demand, is that terrible blowing of Belloes, expressing rather the crackes of Thunder, then the sweetnesse of a voyce? To what purpose serves that contraction and inflection of the voyce? This man sings a base, this a small meane, another a treble, a fourth divides and cuts assunder, as it were, certaine middle notes. One while the voyce is strained, anon it is remitted, now againe it is dashed, and then againe it is inlarged with a lowder sound. Sometimes, which is a shame to speake, it is enforced into an horses neighings; sometimes, the masculine vigor being laid aside, it is sharpned into the shrilnesse of a womans voyce: now and then it is wrethed, and retorted with a certaine artificiall circumvolution. Some∣times thou mayest see a man with an open mouth, not to sing; but as it were to breath out his last gaspe, by shutting in his breath, and by a certaine ridiculous interception of his voyce, as it were to threaten silence, and now againe to imitate the a∣gonies of a dying man, or the extasies of such as suffer. In the meane time the whole body is stirred up and downe with certaine histrionical gestures: the lips are wreathed; the eyes turne round, the shoulders play; and the bending of the fingers doth answer every note. And this ridiculous dissolution is called religion; and where these things are most frequently done, it is proclaimed
abroad that God is there more honourably served. Stans interea vulgus sonitū follū, crepitū Cymbalorum, harmoniā fistu∣larum, tremens attonitus{que} mi∣ratur: sed lasci∣vas cantantium gesticulationes meretricias vo∣cum alternati∣ones & infra∣ctiones non si∣ne cachinno risu{que} intuetur; ut eos non ad oratoriū sed ad theatrū, nec ad orandū sed ad spectandū aesti∣mes cōvenisse: nec timetur il∣la tremeda ma∣iestas cui assi∣stitur, &c. Sic quod sancti. Patres institu∣erūt ut infirmi excitarentur ad affectum pieta∣tis, in usum as∣sumitur illici∣tae voluptatis, &c. Ibidem. In the meane time the common people standing by, trembling and asto∣nished, admire the sound of the Organs, the noyse of the Cym∣bals and musicall instruments, the harmony of the Pipes and Cornets: but yet looke upon the lascivious gesticulations of the Singers, the meretricious alternations, interchanges, and in∣fractions of the voyces, not without dirision and laughter: so that a man may think that they came, not to an Oratory, or house of prayer, but to a Theater; not to pray, but to gaze a∣bout them: neither is that dreadull maiesty feared before whom they stand, &c. Thus this Church-singing, which the holy Fa∣thers have ordained that the weake might be stirred up to piety, is perverted to the use of unlawfull pleasure, &c. Thus this ancient English Abbot, whom Iohn Saresbury another ancient English Writer, about the yeere of our Lord 1140. doth second in these words, in his Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 347. First Booke, De Nugis Curialium. cap. 6. Hic est enim usus Musicae aut solus, aut praecipuus. Phrygius vero modus, & caetera corrup∣tionis lenocinia sanae institutionis non habent usum, sed pro∣dunt malitiam abutentis. Dolet igitur & ingemescit species laudabilis disciplinae, se ab alieno vitio deformari, & quod fa∣cies meritricis facta est ei, quae viriles quoque animos accendere consueverat ad virtutem. Amatoria bucolicorum apud viros graves esse, fuerat criminis. Nunc vero laudi ducitur, si vi∣deas graviores amatoria, quae ab ipsis dicuntur elegantius, stul∣ticinia, personare. Ipsum quo{que} cultum religionis incestat, quod ante conspectum domini, in ipsis penetralibus sanctuarij, lascivientis vocis luxu, quadam ostentatione sui, muliribus modis notularum articulorum{que} caesuris, stupentes animulas emollire nituntur; Cum praecinentium, & succinentium, canen∣tium, & decinentium, intercinentium & occinentium, praemol∣les modulationes audieris, Syrenarum concentus credas esse, non hominum, & de vocum facilitate miraberis, quibus Philo∣mena vel Psitacus, aut i quid sonorius est, modos suos neque∣unt coaequare. Ea siquidem est ascendendi, descendendi{que} faci∣litas, ea sectio vel geminatio notularum, ea replicatio articulo∣rum, singulorum{que} consolidatio, sic acuta vel acutissima, gravi∣bus
& subgravibus temperantur, ut auribus sui iudicij fere subtrahatur autoritas & animus quem tantae suavitatis de∣mulsit gratia, auditorum merita examinare non sufficit, See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 7. Alex. Fabricius. De∣structoriū Vi∣tiorum. pars 3. cap. 10. accor∣dingly. Cum hc quidem modum excesserunt, lumborum pruriginem, quam devotionem mentis, poterunt ciius excitare. Si vero modera∣tionis ormula limitantur, animum à curis redimunt, extermi∣nant temporalium solicitudinem, & quadam participatione lae∣titiae, & quietis, & amica exultatione in Deum, mentes huma∣nas traijciunt ad societatem angelorum. Sed unde hanc mo∣derationis formulam tenes? Laudate eum in tympano & choro & Or∣gano & chor∣dis, at Psalmi∣sta: non aeri tin∣nienti ad mul∣cendos ac de∣liniendos ani∣mos accommo∣datis divinos cantus commit∣tens, verū nos admonens, ut excarne nostra tympanū effici∣amus, sic nem∣pè ut nullum paeposteri af∣fectus motum habeat, verum terrenis mem∣bris mortua & xtincta sit. Per chorū autem, concordiam Ecclesiae concentū postulat: Per chordas item sensus nostros intelligit, quorum opera linguae plectrū pulsatur. Deni{que} Organū quivis nostrū est, cùm Deo mores suos ac vitam probat at{que} hominū commodis aptus est. Isiodor. Pelusiota. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 364. Bibl. Patrū. Tom 5 pars 2. p. 510. Exultabunt, inquit, cumcantave∣ro tibi, labia mea. Si ergo ex abundantia cordis os tuum lau∣dem Domini moduletur, si spiritu psallis & mente, psallis de∣ni{que} sapienter, etiam citra articulatae vocis intelligentiam, re∣ctissimam modestiae regulam tenes, & non tam vocis, quam mentis iubilo aures mulces altissimi, & indignationem eius pru∣denter avertis. Qui autem voluptatis aut vanitatis affectus exprimit, qui vocis gratiam prostiuit concupiscentijs suit, qui lenociniorum clientulam musicam facit, ignorat quidem canti∣cum Domini, modis Babilonijs festivus in terra aliena. Qui nescio quo pacto plus placeant, nisi quia Nitimur in vetitum Semper, cupimus{que} negata. & aquae furtivae dulciores, & panis absconditus suavior est. Et quidem Phrygius modus, decreto Philosophorum, ab aula Grae∣ciae iampridem missus est, & caeteri quibus descensus fit in lasci∣viam & corruptionm. Thus far Iohn Saresbury. Our learned Country-man Printed at London by Iohn Day, 1563. Cum Privilegio Regiae Majestatis per septennium. Thomas Beacon, in his authorized Reliques of Rome. cap. 37.38. Of Plain-song, Prick-song, Descant, and Singing in the Church, Writes thus: That See Iohn Bales Declaration of Bonners Articles. Artic. 18. fol. 63.64. ccordingly. Platina, Bale, & Barns in his life. Volateranus in his Cronicle, & Polydor Virgil De Inventor. Rerum. l. 6. c. 2. See Tho∣mas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit 2. c. 18.19, 20. fol. 40. to 45. of singing in Churches, what it ought to be, and how it came in. Claudius Espencaeus, Digressionum. in Tim. lib. 1. cap. 10. pag. 218.219. Walafridus Strabo, De Rebus Ecclesiasticis. lib. c. 25. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 9. pars 1. pag. 962.963. Pope Vitalian
being a lusty Singer, and fresh couragious Musician himselfe, was the first that brought Prick-song, Descant, and all kinde of pleasant melody into the Church; in the yeere 653. And because nothing should want to delight the vaine foolish and idle eares of fond fantasticall men, he ioyned the Organs to the curious Musicke. Thus was Pauls preaching, and Peters praying, turned into vaine singing, and childish playing, unto the great losse of time, and unto the utter undooing of Christian mens soules, which live not by singing and piping, but by every Word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Franciscus Petrarcha, in his Lib. 1. Dialo∣gus. 23. See much more a∣gainst wanton, effeminate, a∣morous mu∣sicke Ibid. & in Espencaeus Di∣gres. in Tim. l.  cap 10. accor∣dingly. Booke, De Remedijs utriusque For∣tunae (saith he) declareth: that S. Athanasius did utterly forbid singing to be used in the Church at Service time, because he would put away all lightnesse and vanity, which by the rea∣son of singing doth oftentimes arise in the mindes, both of the Singers and of the Hearers. S. Hierom, reproved not onely the lewde fashion of the singing men in his time, but also their manner of singing: when notwithstanding if the singing used in his time were compared with that minsed musicke which now beareth chiefe rule in Churches, it might seeme very grave, modest, and tolerable; and ours so light, vaine, madde, fond, foolish and fantasticall, that Hickscorner himselfe could not devise a more wanton pastime. Then he recites some passages out of In Epistola ad Epheios. c. 5 Hierom, In Oratione Dominica. Cyprian, Lib. de Cain & Abel. Ambrose, De Catechis. Rudibus. lib. & Confessionū l. b. 10. cap. 33. Augustine, In Registro. pars 5. c. 44. & Moral. lib. 22. cap. 18. Gregory, Hom. 44. de Ioan. & Pauli Festo. Chrysostome, and In Constitut. Authent. 123. Iustinian, against such curious Prick-song, and melodious singing in Churches, in which plaine inging only, which every man may understand, and which is in a manner nothing else but plaine reading, ought to be used. And then hee concludes the Chapter with these Authorities. Ratio∣nal. Divin. Offic Gulielmus Durandus saith, that the use of singing was ordained for carnall and fleshly men, and not for spirituall and godly minded men. De Inventor. Rerum. lib. 6. cap. 2. Polidorus Vergilius writeth on this manner. How greatly that ordinance of singing brought into the Church by Pope Damasus and See Queene Eliza∣beths Iniunctions. Iniunction 49. accordingly. S. Ambrose
began even in those dayes to be profitable, S. Austen declareth evidently in the Booke o his Confessions: where he asketh forgivenesse of God because he had given more heed, and better eare to the singing, then to the weighty matter of the holy Words. But nw adayes, saith Polydor, it appeareth evident∣ly, that it is much lesse profitable for our Common-wealth, see∣ing our Singers mak such a chattering charme in the Temples, that nothing can be heard but the voyce: and they that are present (they are present so many as are in the City) being con∣tent with such a noyse as delights their eares, care nothing at all for the vertue, pith, or strength of the words: Vnde eò ven∣tum est, ut apud vulgus, omnis ferè divini cul∣tus ratio in istis cantoribus sita ess videaur; quos bona pars populi ut audi∣at in sacras ae∣des velut in the∣atrū concurrit, os praetio con∣ducet, eos fo∣vet, eos deni{que} solos domui Dei ornamēto esse existimat, &c. Ibidem. so that now it is come to this point, that with the common sort of people all the worshipping of God seemeth to be set in these singsters, al∣though there is generally no kinde of people more light nor more lewde. And yet the greater part of the people for to heare them, boing, bleating and yelling, flocke into the Churches as into a common Game-place. They hire them with money, they cherish and feed them; yea, to be short, thy thinke them alone to be the precious Iewels and Ornamnts of Gods house, &c. Wherefore without doubt, it were better for Religion to cast out of the Churches such chattering and iangling ayes, or else so to appoint them, that when they sing, they should rather re∣hearse the songs after the manner of such as reade, then follow the fashion of chattering Charmers: which thing S. Austen in his foresaid Booke doth witnesse, that S. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, did in his Diocesse, and he commendeth him greatly for it. De Vanitate Scientiarū c. 17. Cornelius Agrippa writeth of singing in Churches in this manner, Athanasius did forbid singing in his Churches because of the vanity thereof: but Ambrose as one more desirous of Ceremonies and pompe, ordained the use of singing and making melody in Churches. Austen as a man in∣different betwixt both, in his Booke De Confessionibus, gran∣teth that by this meanes he was in a great perplexity and doubt concerning this matter. Hodiè verò in Ecclesijs tanta musicae licentia est, ut etiā una cū Misae ipsius canone obscae∣nae quae{que} can∣tiunculae, inte∣rim in Organis pares vices ha∣beant, ipsa{que} di∣vina officia, sa∣crae & orationū praeces condu∣ctis magno aere lascivis musicis, nō ad audientiū intelligentiam, non ad spiritus elevationē, sed ad fornicariam pruriginē; nō humanis vocibus, sed belluinis strepitibus, cātillant, dū hinniant discā∣tū pueri, mugiunt alij tenorē, alij latrnt contra punctū, alij boant altū, alij frendēt bassam, faciunt{que} ut sonorū quidē plurimū audiatur, verborū & orationis intelliga∣tur nihil, sed auribus pariter & animo iudicij subtraitur authoritas. Ibidem. But now a-dayes Musicke is growne
to such and so great licentiousnesse, that even at the ministration of the holy Sacrament, all kinde of wanton and lewde trifing Songs, with piping of Organs have their place and course. As for the Divine Service and Common prayer, it is so chaun∣ted and minsed, and mangled, of our costly hired, curious, and nice Musitions (not to instruct the audience withall, nor to stirre up mens minds unto devotion, but with a whorish harmony to tickle their eares:) that it may iustly seeme, not to be a noyse made of men, but rather a bleating of bruite beasts; whiles the Coristers ney descant as it were a sort of Colts; others bellowe a tenour, as it were a company of Oxen: others barke a coun∣ter-point, as it were a Waldenses cantum Eccle∣siasticum & ho∣rarum canoni∣carum Dicunt sse latratus canum. Item aedificia altariū & Organorum reprobant In∣dx Errorū qui∣bus Waldenses in∣fcti sunt Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. pag. 340. cap. 4. kennell of Dogs: others rore out a tre∣ble like a sort of Buls: thers grunt out a base as it were a number of Hogs; so that a foule evill favoured noyse is made, but as for the words and sentences, and the very matter it selfe is othing understanded at all; but the authority and power of iudgement is taken away, both from the minde and from the ares utterly. Anno. in 1 Corinth. cap. 14.Erasmus Roterodamus expresseth his minde concerning the curious manner of singing used in Churches, on this wise, and saith, Why doth the Church doubt to follow so worthy an Author (Paul?) yea, how dare it be bold to dissent from him. What other thing is hard in Monasteries, in Col∣ledges, in Temples almost generally, then a confused noyse of voyces? But in the time of Paul, there was no singing but say∣ing onely. Singing was with great difficulty received of them of the latter time; and yet such singing as was none other thing, then a distinct and plaine pronunciation, even such as we have yet among us, when we sound the Lords prayer in the holy Ca∣non, and the tongue wherein those things were sung, the com∣mon people did then understand, and answered, Amen. But now, what other thing doth the common people heare than voy∣ces signifying othing? And such for the most part is the pro∣nunciation, that not so much as the words or voyces are heard: onely the sound beateth the eares. Thus farre this worthy ancient English Professor, Thomas Beacon, and his allea∣ged Authors: to which I shall adde that notable passage to the like purpose, in the Page 131.second part of the Homely of
the Place and time of Prayer. Finally Gods vengeance hath beene and is daily provked, because much wicked people passe nothing to resort to the Church; either for that they are so sore blinded, that they understand nothing of God or godlinesse, or else for that they see the Church altogether scoured of all such gazing sights as their phantasie was greatly delighted with &c. which seemes an unsavoury thing to their unsavoury taste, as may appeare by this, that a woman said to her neigh∣bour. Alas Gossip, what shall we now doe at Church, since all the Saints are takn away; since all the goodly sights we were wont to have, are gone; since we cannot heare the like piping, singing, chaunting, and playing on the Organs (Pope Agatho was the first tht brought singing & Or∣gan-playing in∣to the Church of England, in the yeere of our Lord 679. See Iohn Bale, his Declaratiō of Bonners Arti∣cles. Artic. 18. fol. 63.64. Bed, De Gestis An∣glorū. l. 4. c. 1. & Gratian Di∣stinctio 19. ac∣cordingly. brought first into England by Pope Agatho, about the yeere 679.) that we could before. But (dearely beloved) we ought greatly to reioyce, & give God thankes, that our Churches are delivered out of all these things which displeased God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy House and his place of Prayer, for the which he hath iustly destroyed many Nations, &c. Effe∣minate wanton accurate musicke then, by the verdict of these several Authors and of our owne Homelies, is altogether dispeasing unto God, corrupts his worship, and filthi∣ly defiles his holy House, &c. therefore it must needs bee evill. Whereupon Synodus Carnotensis An. 1526. See Surius Conciliorum. Tom. 4. p. 740. Concili∣um Senonense. 1528. Can. 17. Concilium Burdigense. 1582. Concilium Rhemense. 1583. Concilium Bituriense. 1584. Apud Bochellum. Decret. Ecclesiae. Gal. lib. 1. Tit. 7. cap. 23.24.26.27.28.30. and the Councell of Trent it selfe,Surius. Tom. 4. pag. 962. Sessio. 22. Decretum, De observanis & evitandis in celebratione Missae; decreed, Praecipimus, ut in Ecclesijs sint musici can∣tus distincti, & discreti, movē∣tes cor ad de∣votionē com∣punctionem{que}, porrò in Ecclesijs praetextu musici cantus, non sunt audiendae publicae cantilenae ac lascivae. Ne{que} enim in tragaedioū modū (inquit Hieronimus) guttur & fauces medica∣mine sunt leniendae; ne dū blāda vox quaeritur, congrua vita negligatur. Nā ut can∣tor minister Deum moribus stimulat, cū populū vocibus delecta: ita lasciuus ani∣mus, dū lascivioribus delectatur modis, eos saepè audiensemollitur & frangitur Curēt ergò Sacerdotes & Clerici sic suos cantus instituere, ut modesta honesta{que} psallendi gravitate, placida{que} & grata moduatione, sic audientiū aures delineāt, ut provocnt excitent{que} ad devotionē, compunctionē que; non ad lasciviā, cordisue aut animi titil∣lationē. Nolumus ita{que}, quod Organicis instrumentis resonet in Ecclesia, impudica aut lasciva melodia, sed sonus omnino dulcis, qui nihil praeter Hymnos divinos, & Cantica spiritualia repraesentet. Concil. Senonense Can. 17. that all impure, lascivious, amorous, se∣cular
Songs and Organorum melodia in Tē∣plis sic adhibe∣bitur ne lasci∣viam magis quam devotio∣nē excitet, &c. Concil. Coloniense. Anno 1536. pas 2. cap. 15. Musicke sauouring of levity and folly, should be excluded the Church, because thy did effeminate the lasci∣vious mindes of the people, and provoke them unto lust; not excite or stirre them up to devotion and compnction, as all Church Musicke, (See Concil. Constant. 6. Canon. 75.which should be grave, and serious) ought to doe. If therefore we give any credit to these recited Authorities; to Osorius, De Regum Institutione. lib. 4. fol. 120 to 126. who largely declaimes against amorous de∣licios Songs and Musicke as so many enchaunting Syrens; which draw men on to idlenesse, effeminacy, luxury, and a kind of wanton dissolutenesse, to the corruption of their manners, of their mindes, and the perdition of their soules: Or to sundry See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 7. Summa Ange∣lica Cantus. other Christian Authors which I spare to mention, in their Expositions and Commentaries on the 7. Comman∣dement: on Esay 5.11.12. & 24.9. Amos 6.1. to 8. Iob 21.12.13. Exod. 32.18.19. and the Booke of Psalms; my Major must be granted. But I passe from these to Pa∣gans. It is storied of the Diodorus. See Bibl. Hist. l. 1. sect. 81. Polydor Virgil De In∣vent. rerum. l 1. c. 19. Agrippa, De Vanit. Sci∣ent. c. 17. Alex∣ander ab Alex. l. 2..35. Bomus De Mor. Gen∣tium. l. 1. c. 5. p. 46.47. Clius Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. l. 6. c. 1. ancient AEgyptians; that they condemned Msicke, not onely as unprofitable, but as noious too, because they were perswaded, it would enervae the vigor of mens mindes: which caused them to enact a kinde of law; that their Children should for this cause learne no Musicke. Not to record the singular opinion of Polybus Hist. l. 4. p. 339.30. Athnaeus, Dip∣nos. l. 14. c. 11. Agrip. De Van. Scient. cap 17. Poydor Virgil. De Invent. l. 1. c. 14. Alexander ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25. Ephorus; who writes; that Musicke was invented onely to deceive men; It is registred ofPlutarchi Alcibiades. Alexander ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25. . 103. b. Alcibiades, that he reiected delicious Mu∣sicke as nworhy any ingenuous person: Of Plutarchi Apothog. Tom. 1. mor. pag. 397. Caelius Rhodig. Antiqu Lect. lib. 9. cap. 1. Clerke, de Auico. lib. 1. & 2. vid. Ibidem. Ateas, a Scy∣thian King; that when he heard Ismenia an accurate Mu∣sician, playing with great applause and admiration of others; e replyd, that the neighing of an Horse was much more plea∣sing and delightfull to him: And of Diog. Laert. lib. 6. pag. 353. Diogenes Cinnicus, that he neglected Musicke as an unprofitable, needlesse, uselesse thing. But these perchance are over-rigorous, and lesse proper for our present purpose; I therefore passe to
more punctuall witnsses. It is storied of the Plutarchi La∣conica Institu∣ta. pag. 504. Lacede∣monians, that though they approved of plaine, of grave and modest; yet they utterly exploded all effminate, light, new∣fangled harmonies; for the practise of which Terpander and Timotheus, were fined and censured by their Ephori. Hist. l. 1. p. 342. Poli∣bius a grave Historian; condemnes all amorous, lascivious harmonies, together with the use of musicke for effeminate or voluptuous ends. De Republica Dial. 3. p. 591.597. Legum Dial. 2. p. 800.801, 802. Plato, though he approves of Musicke, yet he exiles all loose unmanly, voluptuous wanton Lydian or Ionicke Harmonies and Musicions; together with all musicall Instruments of many strings; as being a meanes to effeminate mens mindes, corrupt their manners, abate their courage, con∣sume their time; and to draw them on to idlenesse and voluptu∣ous living; with whom Polit. l. 8. . 6. p. 527. &c. 7. p. 533.534, 536. Aristotle and Socrates concurre upon the selfe-sam grounds. Instrumenta luxuriae tympa∣na at{que} tripu∣dia. Salust. De Bello Cat. pag 22. Iustin. Hist. l. 30. pag. 254. Salust and Iustin, have both long since condemned lascivious Musicke and Dancing, as the instruments of luxury. Enervant a∣nimos cytha∣rae, cantusque Lyrae que, Et vox, & nume∣ris brachia mo∣ta suis, &c. De Remedio Amoris. lib. 2. Ovid and Pro humani∣tate, molliciē; pro tēperantia, intemperantiā; animi{que} disso∣lutionem ope∣rantur. Dipnos. l. 14. c. 13. p. 1010. See Chrys. Hom. 15. & 23. ad Pop. Antiochiae, &c. Athenaeus, two great Patriots of Musicke, have notwithstanding censured effeminate accurate Songs and Harmonies, as emasculating the virility, and unbending the sinewes of mens mindes, making them of Courteous, effeminate; of temperate, intemperate; of valiant, unmanly persons: whence they advise men to aban∣don them.Herodoti. Clio. sect. 28. p. 63. Iustin. Hist. l. 1. p. 10.11. When the Lydians had revolted from Cyrus, and taken up Armes against him, King Cresus advised him this course, to keepe them in subiection for future times: viz. To prohibit them the use of Armes; to cause them to traine up their Children to effeminate Songs and Musicke: and then, O King, saith he, their men will soone degenerate into women, so that thou needest not then to feare any rebellion; which fell out accordingly. For when as Cyrus had conquered them, he put this counsell into execution; Et sic gens industria quondam potens, & manu strenua, efaeminata mollitie luxuriaque virtutem pristinam perdidit. Et quos ane Cyrum invictos bella praestiterant, in luxuriam lapsos, otium ac desidia superavit. Iustin. Ibidem. by meanes of which, this industrious mighty warlike Nation, became effeminate and riotous, and so quite degenerated from their former valour.
By which experimentall example, and the fore-al∣leadged testimonies, it is most apparent; that effemi∣nate accurate lust-provoking Musicke, (especially in publike meetings, feasts and Enterludes, where other con∣current circumstances confederate with it, to poast men on to sinfull actions; in which cases the Isay 5.11.12. Iob 21.12, 13. Amos 6.1. to 8. Isay 24.9. Dan. 3.5, 7, 15. Iam. 4.9, 10. c 5.1, 5. 1 Thes. 5.22. Vbi sunt laeta convivia quid frustra inten∣dunt vocem? praesens enim praebet volup∣tatē per se con∣vivij abūdantia mortalibus. Eu∣ripidis Medea. pag 274. Scriptures most condemne it:) must undoubtedly bee utterly unlawfull unto Christians, in regard of the fore-named lewde effects which issue from it: and so by consequence must Playes be too, which are either compounded of it, or attended with it. For the Minor, that Stage-playes (which have all other inescating lust-inflaming sollicitations accompa∣nying them, that either human pravity, or Satans pol∣licy can invent) are attended with such lascivious amo∣rous Musicke, which is apt to Musica incor∣poream animā corporaliter mulcet, & solo auditu ad quod vult deducit: quū tenere non praevalet verbo tacito, manibus clamat, sine ore loquitur, & per insensibilium obsequiū prae∣valesensuum exercere domi∣natum. Cassioderus Variarū. l 2 c. 40. captivate mens chastity, and foment their lusts; it is more then evident; not onely by moderne experience, (our Play-houses resounding alwayes with such voluptuous Melody;) but likewise by the suffrage of sundry Paga and Christian Authors, both ancient and moderne. Witnesse Plato, Legum Di∣alogus 3. pag. 822. Aristotle Politic. l. 8. c. 7. p. 532.533. Livy, Rom. Hist. lib. 7. sect. 2. Polybius Hist. lib. 4. p. 340. Dionsius Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. Ovid, De Re∣medio Amoris. lib. 2. & Cantabat fanis, cantabat tibia ludis Ibidem. Pastorum. lib. 3 4.5. Horace, De Arte Poëtica. lib. p. Tibia non, ut nunc, aurichalco vincta tubae{que} AEmula, sed enus simplex foramine pauco Adspirare & ad esse choris erat utilis, at{que}. Nondū spissa nimis complere sedi∣lia flatu, &c. vid. Ibid. 302.303. Athenaeus Dipnosoph. l. 14. c. 3.5. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. sect. 3. Suetonij Caligula. sect. 54. & Nero. sect. 20.21.23.25.32. Plutarchus De Musica. Macrobius Saturnalium. l. 2. c. 7. & l. 3. c. 14. Tertullian, De Spectaculis, lib. Arnobius adversus Gentes. lib. 4. & 7. Basil Hexaëmer. Hom. 4. Nazienzen ad Selucum. pag. 1063. Clemens Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. & l. 3. c. 11. Cūcta enim quae ibi fiunt turpissima snt; verba, voces, cātus, modulationes, tibiae, fistulae, &c. omnia (inquam) turpi lasciva plena sunt. Ibidem. Tom. 2. Col. 298. D. Chrysost.
Hom. 38. & 89. in Matth. Hom. 15.21.22.23. Ad Pop. Antioch. Augustine, De Musica. l. 1. c. 2. to 8. Hierom. Com∣ment. in Ephes. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 6. p. 188. A. Isidor. Hispalnsis Originum. l. 18. c. 47. Damascen, Paralellorum. l. 3. cap. 47. with sundry other Fathers and Councels quoted in the precedent Scene. Alexander ab Alexandro. l. 2. c. 25. Ma∣riana & Brissonius de Spectaculis. Stephen Gosson, his Schoole of Abuses, and Playes confuted. Action 2. Godwins Roman Antiquities. Booke 2. sect. 3. chap. 11. p. 108.109. Bodinus, De Republica. l. 6. c. 3. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 17. & 20. and above all, Caesar Bulengerus, De Thea∣tro. lib. 2. cap. 1. to 47. All which, with Se Scene 9. before. infinite others, largely ratifie the truth of this Assumption; that Playes are alwayes accompanied with most In spectaculis modulatissimi tibiarum con∣centus mere∣triciae{que} canti∣ones audienti∣um animis insidentes, nihil aliud afferunt, quàm u omnibus turpitèr & obscaenè se gerere persuadeant, citharaedorum scilicet, aut tibicinum pulsus imitantes. Basil. Hexaëm. Hom. 4. & Damascen. Paral. lib. 3. cap. 47. effeminate, amorous, lust-provoking Musicke, which depraves mens mindes and manners: therefore both it and the Conclusion resul∣ting from it, must be granted. SCENA VNDECIMA. THe last unlawfull Concomitant of Stage-playes, is, profuse lascivious laughter, accompanied with an immoderate applause of those scurrilous Playes and Actors, which Christians should rather abominate, then admire. From whence this 26. Argument against Stage-playes,Argument 26. may be framed. That which is alwaies accompanied with Repraehensi∣bilis risus est, si immodicus, si pueriliter effusus, si muliebriter fractus. Odibilem quo{que} hominē facit risus, aut superbus, aut clarus, aut malignus & furtivus, aut alienis malis evocatus. Martinus Episc. Duminsis, De 4or. Virtutibus lib. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 2. p. 239. A. profuse
lascivious laughter, with immoderate sinfull ap∣plauses of Playes and infamous Actors, which Christians should abhorre, must certainely be un∣lawfull unto Christians. But Stage-playes are alwayes accompanied with such laughter and applauses. Therefore they must certainely bee unlawfull unto Christians. The Major I shall evidence, by proving such laugh∣ter, such applauses to be sinfull. That pofuse lascivi∣ous laughter, especially such as is occasioned by Stage-playes, is evill, it is most apparant. First, in regard of the originall efficient cause of it, which is commonly some Oportet autē ipsum quoque subrisū doceri & castigari: & si de rebus qui∣dem turpibus fuerit, rubes∣cere potius vi∣deri, quàm sub∣ridere, ne vide∣amur per con∣sensum collaeta∣ri. Clemens Alex. Paedag. l. 2 c. 5. obscene, lascivious, sinfull passage, gesture, speech, or iest, (the Nobis autem gaudere & ri∣dere non suffi∣cit, nisi cū pec∣cato at{que} insa∣nia gaudeamus: nisi risus noster impuritatibus at{que} flagitijs misceatur. An fortè infructuosum putemus gaudiū sim∣plex, nec delectat ridere sin crimine? Quod rogo hoc malū, aut quis furor? Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. p. 192. Sine amore iocis{que} nil est iucundū. Horace. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 6. common obiect of mens hellish mirth) which should ra∣ther provoke the Actors, the Spectators to penitent sobs, then wanton smiles; to brinish teares, then carnall solace, which suite not with such sinfull obiects; as Nū haec potius praedicationes, inspectiones, iucunditates, an lachrymas at{que} g∣mitus merentur, &c Nazienzen ad Selucum. p. 1063. Nazienzen, Quod{que} aegrius ferendū est, non solū nullā talia audientes molestiā capitis, verū etiā ridetis at{que} laetamini. Cum{que} vitari ista abominari{que} deberetis, suscipitis at{que} laudatis. Quas ob res non cachinnis difflure sedentes, sed lachrymis gemere at{que} dolere oportet. Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 299. Ne igitur desinatis super huusmodi spectacula gemere, ac saepius remorderi. Hom. 6. in Mat. Col. 53. A. Chry∣sostome, and De Risu lib. p. 135. to 145. Marp. 1606. Antonius Laurentius well observe. It is recorded of Lot, 1 Pet. 2.6, 7. that he vexed his righteous soule from day to day, in seeing and hearing the unlawfull filthy deeds and conversation of the wicked Sodomites. Of David; Psal. 119.136, 158. that ri∣vers of teares ran downe his eyes, because men kept not Gods Law. Of Ieremiah, Ier. 13.17. that his heart did bleed in secret, his eyes weepe sore and trickle downe with teares, for the iniquities of his people. Of Paul; 2 Cor. 12.21. that he seriously bewayled the un∣lamented, unrepented sinne of the incestuos Corinthian. Of
Ezra, Ezra. cap. 9. thorowout, & cap. 10.1, 2. that he humbled himselfe, and rent his cloathes, and mourned and wept exceedingly for the Israelites sine in mar∣rying with Idolaters. And of Ezech. 9.4. Propterea par est, ut animo cōtrahātur lu∣geāt, contabes∣cant, tū qui de∣linquūt, tū qui non delinquūt. Illi quidē prop∣ter admissa fa∣cinera; hi verò quia fratres vi∣derunt fuisse immodestos. Chysostom. Ka∣lendis. Oratio. Tō. 5 Col. 799. A. all the faithfull of Ierusalem, that they sighed and cryed for all the abominations that were committed in the middest thereof. Yea, God himselfe en∣ioynes his servants, Luk. 19.41. cap. 23.27, 28. Rom. 12.15. 1 Cor. 5.2. c. 13.6. 2 Cor. 7.6. to 12. Phil. 3 18. to mourne for others sinnes: Iam. 4.9. to turne their sinfull laughter into heavinesse;Isay 5.20. Hab. 2.15.16. Zeph. 3.11. Prov. 24.16, 17.18. Luk. 6.25. and their carnall ioy (a∣rising from lascivious objects) into mourning: effulmina∣ting an everlasting woe, a Gen. 19.22, 25. dismall curse against all such gracelesse fooles, who Prov. 14.9. make a mocke of sinne, or recreate themselves with the iniquities of other men. That Play-house laughter then which ariseth from such filthy scurrilous objects, must needs be evill, Improbū risus ostendit. Seneca. Epist. 52. & Chrys. Hom. 6. in Matth. discovering nothing but a gracelesse heart; delighting onely in ribaldry, in uncleanesse; whereas all Christians, Quādo enim mimi illi at{que} ridiculi blasphemiā ac turpè quid dixerūt, tunc potissi∣mū qui{que} stolidiores solvuntur in risum: indè applaudentes magis, unde etiā illos la∣pidibus exagitare debuerāt; qui fornacē ignis horribilis ex hujusmodi voluptate in suū ipsorū caput succendūt. Chrys. Hom. 6. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col 52. A must reioyce in God alone, Phil. 4.5. Isay 29.19. c. 41.16. Ioel 2.23. Ps. 97.12. Nonne audistis Paulū dicentē; Gaudete in Domino. In Domino dixit, non in Diabolo. Chrys. Hom. 38. in Mat. Tō. 2. Col. 298. B. not in the Devill, not in sinfull pleasures, Heb. 11.25. which are but for a sea∣son. Secondly, it mut needs Quin etiam ipse risus est cōpremendus ei{que} modus & conveniens tēpus adhibendū est. Nā ipse quo{que} si quo modo oportet proferatur, praese fert decorem & honestatē: in aliter prodeat, indicat intēperantiam. Ita{que} tanquā animalia ratione praedita o∣portet nos tēperatè componere studij nostri acrimoniam, & nimiū intensam velie∣mentiam moderat remittentes, non autē inconcinnè dissolventes. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. Non malū est risus, sed malū est id quod est praeter modū, id quod est intēpe∣stivū. Animo nostro insitus est risus, ut aliquando relaxetur animus, non ut diffuda∣tur. Chrys. Hom. 15. in Heb. Tō. 4. Col. 1593. C.D. Hom. 15.21. & 23. ad Pop. Antioch. Tō. 5. Col. 522. A.B. See Nazienzen. Sententiae p. 997. be sinfull in regard of its ex∣cesse, it being altogether boundlesse beyond the rules of modesty, temperance, christianity, sobriety, by which it should be regula∣ted.Nazienzen. ad Selucū p. 1063 Chrys. Hom. 6. & 38. in Matth. & 42. in Acta. Apost. Salvian, De Gubernat Dei. l. 6. accordingly. Theatricall laughter knowes neither bounds, nor mea∣sure; men wholly resigne and let loose the reines of their hearts unto it, glutting, nay tyring their sides and spirits with it: the
Temperandū ab immodera∣to & solutiore risu. Ridere enim solutius, neutiquam ijs permissum qui sunt germanè Christini. S. Antiohus. Hom. 95. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7. p. 209. vid. Ibidem. dissolute profusenesse of it therefore mkes it evill. Thirdly, the Chrys. Ho. 6. & 38. in Mr. Salvian, de Gu∣bernt. Dei. l. 6. Antoniu Laurn∣tiu, De Risu. s. accordingly. end of Play-house laughr, is onely to satiate mens flsh∣ly lusts with secular iollity and delights of sinne: t pamper, to arme the rebellious flesh against the Spirit: to quench those heauenly ioyes, and spirituall comforts which should ravish Christian soules: to Iam. 4.9, 10. c. 5.5. Rev. 18.7 Amos 6.1. to 9. Nullū habe∣bit accesū cor∣dis compūctio, ubi fuerit im∣modertus ri∣sus ac iocus Basil. Com. in Esaiā. c. 5. Bedae. Scincillae, Tom. 7 p. 337. exile all true repentance, all godly sorrow and sound humiliation for sinne, which are altoge∣ther incompatible with these lascivious smiles: Amos 6.3, 4, 5. Mat. 24.38, 39. Luk. 21.34, 35. to put the evill day farre off from men, by stupifying their selfe-condemning consciences, and lulling them fast a sleepe in a most despe∣rate carnall security. Such is the use, the fruite of this Stage-laughter: it cannot therefor but be evill. Fourth∣ly, this Ridere & rideri secularibus derelin{que} gravitas tuā per∣sonā decet. Hierom. Epist. 8 c. 7. Prudentibus viris isus risu dignus est omnis, maxime meritricius. Praestat tristē moribus esse quā lascivū. Greg. Nazienzen Sententiae. p 1168. laughter is altogether unseemely, unseasonable unto Christians. Vnseemely, because immoderate: profuse ex∣cessive laughter, (especially at the sight or hearing of a ribaldrous Stage-play,) is altogether Non est nostrū ergo assidue ridere, resolvi cachinis, molliri delicijs, sed orū po∣tius & earū uae spectantur in theatris quae in lupanaribus inquinantur. Non est in∣quā hoc eorū qui ad aeternū regnū vocati sunt; non est spiritualia arma gestntium, quod propriū est Diabolo militantiū. Chrysst. Hom. 6. in Matth. inconsistent with the gravity, modesty, and sobriety of a Christian, whose affctions should be more sublime, more serious and composed, then to be immoderately tickled with meere lascivious vani∣ties, Clem. Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. or to lash out into excessive cachinnations in the publike view of dissolute gracelesse persons, who will be hardned and encouraged in their lascivious courses, by their ill example. Vnseasonable; because Frtres, non est in hoc mundo tempus ridendi: Beatitudo enim hic praep∣rari potest, possideri non potest. Ambros. Sermo. 17. Quādiu sumus in hoc saeulo non∣dū est ridendū, ne postea ploremus. August. Enar. in Psal. 51. Tom 8. pars 1. p 605. Nul∣lū locū hic habere potet tempus risus; hoc enim est tempus mundi. Audi Christum dicentē; Mundus gaudeit, vos autem contristabimini. Tu auē ridis & ludis? Non est praesens tempus diffusae laetitiae, sed luctus, aflictionū & ciulatus. Tu autem in dictis urbanis & facetis tempus teris? Est tēpus belli: & tu ea tractas quae sunt orū qui ducūt choros? Ludis deliciaris, faceta{que} & urbana dicis, & risū moves, rem{que} ni∣hil existimas? Chrys. Hō. 17. in Ehes. T. 4. Col 987. See Hō 1. in Heb. Col. 1993. accordingly. this is no place, no time, no world
for Christians to laugh or to be merry in: but to bewaile their owne and others sinnes, that so they may escape the eternall tor∣ments of them at the last. Our Saviour, whose doctrine no Christian dares controll, hath denounced an Lu 6.25 Isay 5.9, 10. Amos 6.1. to 8. Iam. 5.1.5. Rev. 18.6.7, 8.woe, to all those that laugh, that live in ease, iollity, and carnall plea∣sures now, because they shall certainely mourne, and suffer eter∣nall toments for it hereafter; informing all his Children (whose Ps. 16.11.  Cor. 2 9 1 Pet 1.45. ioyes are treasured up in heaven against another day) Iohn 16.33. 2 Tim 3.12. that in this world they shall be sure to suffer persecution and affliction, Iohn 16 20. to weepe, lament, and be sorrowfull: and that this world onely (who Psal. 17.14. have their portion in this life) shall now re∣ioyce; that is, in a carnall worldly manner: whereupon he adviseth all his followers, Iam. 4.9, 10. to turne their secular laughter into mourning, their carnall iollity into weeping and heavinesse; For Christians therefore to make this world a paradice of all earthly pleasures, to spend their dayes in Epicurisme, mirth and iollity, glutting them∣selves with sinfull Spectacles and mirth-provoking En∣terludes, as alas two many doe: to be like Perpetuo risu pulmonē agita∣re solebat De∣mocritus. Iuve∣nal. Satyr. 10. p. 92. AElian Va∣riae Hist l. 4. cap. 30. Seneca. De Tranquil. Animi. cap. 15. Democritus, alwayes laughing, never weeping, unlesse it be sometimes against their wils, and then not for their sinnes: to be most unlike their blessed Savior, Ita{que} flentem quidem Chri∣stum frequen∣ter invenas, nunquā verò ridentē, sed nec leviter saltem subridēdo gau∣dentem. Chrys. Hom. 6. in Mat. T. 2. Col. 50. B.C. Hom. 15. in Heb. Tō. 4. Col. 1593. who was oft-times wee∣ping, never smiling that we read of. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. Quem flevisse legimus ri∣sisse non legimus: how can it but be sinfull, yea abomina∣ble? Christ Iesus our 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Ioh. 2.6. patterne, our example, whose steps we all must follow, if ever we expect salvation from him; Isay 53.3.4. Ps. 38.6. Lam. 1.12. Lu. 19.41 Ioh. 11.35. was alwayes mourning, never laughing; (I am sure not at a Stage-play, which hee and his condemne, as worthy teares, not smiles,) and Christus in crucem actus est propter tua mala: tu autem rides? Impactae sunt illi alapae, & colaphi & tam multa pas∣sus est propter tuam calamitatem, & quae te comprehenderat tempestatem, tu autem degis in delicijs? Chrysost. Hom 17. in Ephes. Tom. 4. Col. 987.shall we doe nothing but reioyce? The Apostles and Math. 5.3, 4. Luk. 6.21. Iohn 16.20. Acts 20.37 Phil. 3.18. Rom. 12.15. Eccles. 7.2, 4. Psal. 137.1. Lam. 1. & 2. Christians in the Primitive Church, yea all the Saints of God who went before us, were for the most part
weepers, not laughers; deploring among sundry other evils, See Nazienzn ad Selucum. p. 1063. Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. August. Confes. l. 3. c. 1.2. Cyrian. Epist. l. 2. Epist 2. Do∣nto those execrable abominations which Stage-playes did produce. And shall we be alwaies laughing nay laugh∣ing at these filthy Enterludes which they so much be∣wailed? Is this to 1 Cor. 11. 1. Phil. 3.17. imitate Christ or his Apostles: to live like Saints, like Christians, Iohn 15.19. Rev 14.3, 4.like men redeemed from the world? Is this to 2 Cor. 1 5, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 4 13.participate with Christ in his afflictions; or to trace the Mat. 7.11, 14.narrow uncouth way that leades to endlsse ioyes? O no! this carnall life of iollity, prognosticks nothing but a voluptuous heart, a Iam 5.5 See. Chrysost. Hom. 6 & 38. in Mat. Hom. 17. in E∣phes. Hom 15. in Hebraeos. accordingly. Godlesse, Christlesse conversation, which leades men downe to Isay 5 9, 10 Rev. 18.6, 7, 8. Hell: needs there∣fore must it be Quid nobis cum fabulis, ri∣su & ioco? Nā licet interdum honst ioca suavia sint, tamen ab Ecclesiastica aberrant regula: quoniam quae in Scripturis sanctis non reperimus, quomodo usupare possumus? Bernard. De Ordine Vitae. Col 1117. unlawfull unto Christians. Fiftly, this pro∣fuse Theatricall laughter Probant{que} illa dum rident. Lactant. De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 20. Nec solum iubes, sed eiā exultatione, risu, plausu adiuvas quae geruntur, omnibus{que} modis hanc Diabolicam confoves officinam. Chrysost. Hom. 6. in Mattb. Col. 52. B. doth give a publike approbation to all the ribaldry and prophanesse that is either personated r perpetrated on the Stage, and so makes these laughers deepely guilty of it. Sixtly, it produceth sundry sinfull conequents: as Chrysost Hom 6. in Matth. & Hom 62 ad Pop. Antiochiae. S. Antiochus. Hom. 95. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7. pag. 209. cachinnations, clamors, impudency, Risus frequens corrumpit mores, relaxat quo{que} nervos rigoris astrictos. August. De Temp Sermo. 97. Tom. 9. pars 2 p. 306. Bernard De Ordine Vitae Col. 1117. A. effe∣minacy, incivility, Risus cor∣ruptio disciplinae, &c. & maxima quis peccata viderit à nimijs gaudijs provenisse. Chrysost. Hom. 42. in Acta. Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 611. B. voluptuousnesse, loosenesse and lightnesse of spirit, impenitency, carnall security, indisposition to every holy duty, especially to godly sorrow for sinne: therefore it cannot but be evill. Peruse we but the Scriptures; we shall finde See Gen. 18.13, 15. 2 King. 19.21. 2 Chron. 30.10. Neh. 2.9. Iob 12.4. Prov. 14.13. Eccles. 2.2. c. 73.6. Iam 4.9, 10. Luk. 6.25. Iam. 5.1, 5. Isay 5.9, 10. Amos 6.1. to 7. Ioh. 16.20. Rev. 18.6, 7, 8.them much condemning this excessive carnall laughter, (especially at vaine, at sinfull objects) as misbe∣seeming Christians. Survey wee the Fathers, they are exceeding copious in this subject. Witnesse Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l. 2. c. 5.6. & l 3. c. 11. Arnobius, Ad∣vers. Gentes. l. 4, pag. 149.150.151, l. 7. pag. 230. to 242.
Basil. De Ebrietate & Luxu Sermo. p. 329.332, 236. Nazi∣anzen ad Selucum. p. 1063.1064. Sententiae. p. 1168. & 997. Ambros. Sermo. 17. S. Asterij. Homil. in Festum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom 4. p. 706. Hierom. Epist. 8. c. 7. August. De Verbis Apostoli. Sermo. 9. Tom. 10. p. 376. Confessionū. l. 2. cap. 9. Enar. in Psal. 51. Tom. 8. pars 1. pag. 605.606. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. & 7. Theophlact. Enar. in Luk. 6. p. 135. Ioannis Climachus, De Discretione Gradus. c. 31. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 2. p. 280. G. Bedae Scintillae. Tom. 7. Col. 335. Risus. Antiochus. Hom. 95. Quod tempe∣randum sit à solutiore & immoderato Risu. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 7. p. 209. Bernard in Caena Domini. Sermo. 9. De Gradibus Humilitatis. Col. 961. A. De Ordine Vitae. Col. 1117. A.B. Olympiodorus. Enar. in Ecclesiasten. cap. 2. & 7. and above all, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 6.38. & 69. in Matth. Hom. 17. in Ephesios. & 15. in Hebraeos. & Sit aliquis valdè gaudens, & laetus & effu∣sus, quid turpi∣us? quid hoc stolidius? Ibid. 54.14.15. & 62. ad Pop. Antiochiae. To which I might adde, Robertus Holkot. in Lib. Sapientiae. Lectio. 172. fol. 133. Revelationes Sanctae Brigitae. l. 2. c. 29. Nicolaus de Clemangis De Novis Cele∣britatibus non instituendis. p. 143. to 150. Thomas Gualesius. Lect. 77 in Proverb. Solomonis. fol. 97. Edit. Ascentijs. 1510. (a notable place) Antonius Laurentius, De Risu. l. 2. Sum∣ma Angelica. Tit. Risus. Rabanus Maurus. Com. in Regu∣lam. S. Benedicti. Oper. Tom. 6. p. 278. E.F. 283. E. 292. d. Alexander Alensis, Summa Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 133. thorowout. & 134. with sundry others which I preter∣mit: who all passe sentence against profuse immoderate laughter (especially such as Stage-playes doe occasion) as misbeseeming Christians. If any censure these as more then puritanically rigid in this point of laughter, let them hearken what some Pagan Authors have re∣solved of it, whom none dare tax of Puritanisme. Atqui nec ri∣sus studio tene∣ri oportet. Fer∣m enim ffusi risus studm, vehementem etiam mutatio∣nem quaerit. Ne{que} ergo si quis viros me∣morabiles risu diffluere faciat admittendum est: multò verò minus si Deos. De Republ. Dialog. 3. p. 586. & Dialog. 10.696. No man (writes Plato) ought to be affected with the desire of laughter. For the affectation of profuse laughter seekes a very vehement change. Neither is it to be endured, that any one should make memorable men to exceed in laughter, much lesse
the Gods. Ne{que} petulā∣tem risum ama, ne{que} audacem orationē pro∣ba: Nam alterū stultitiae st, al∣terum insaniae. Assuefac te ut sis vultu non orvo, sd sev∣ro: Nam illud insolentiae, hoc prudentiae at∣tribuitur. Oratio ad Demoniū p 9 Isocrates adviseth Demonicus; neither to love petulant laughter, neither to approve of insolent speech; because the one savour of folly, the other of madnesse: to carry a grave, not an austere countenance; because the one is attributed to insolency, the other to prudence. Improbū ri∣sus demōstrat. Epist. 53. Seneca, makes immodest laughter, an undoubted character of a wicked man. Renidere, us∣quequaque te nollem: Nm risu inepto res ineptior nulla est. Ad Cornelī Nptem. lib. Carmen. 40. p. 1. Catullus, as wanton a Poet as any, records; That there is nothing more unseemely then wanton foolish laughter. Ammianus Marcellinus. l. 23. c. 12. Purcas Pilgr. Bo. 4. c. 7. Among the ancient Persians it was utterly unlawfull to laugh openly in a loude or dissolute manner. And ifVariae. Histo∣riae. l. 3. c. 35. AElian may be credi∣ted; in the Vniversity of Athens it was unlawfull for any to laugh, especially in a profuse ridiculous immodest fashion. The very Heathens then as is evident by these and See Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 14. c. 2.3. Thmas Gualesius. Lect. 77. in Proverb. Salomonis Stobaeus. Sermo. 5. fol. 51.59. & Ser. 74. f. 332. sundry other testimonies, condemned loude excessive laughter. If such laughter then as this, was altogether unseemely for modest Pagans, must not our Sed ne{que} apud quoibet ridendū est, ne{que} in omni loco, sed neque propter omnia. Clem. Alxand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. In risu & iocis spectari debet tempus breve, nam longius nocet: locus honestus, nam suspectus inficit: modus iustus, nam profusus laedit: licitum genus, nam iniqum vulnerat: utilis finis, nam ma∣lus pervrtit omnia. Case Ethic. lib. 4 cap. 6. pag 288. publike infamous Play-house cachinnations, be much more unsuitable for sober Chri∣stians? No Christian I presume dares once deny it. Our Stage-playes therefore which Qui risum moveant longe ex∣terminandi sunt à nostra republica: longè abest ut nobis permittat risum movere. Clem. Alex Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. occasion, which pro∣voke such profuse lascivious laughter, must questionlesse be evill: as Ephes. 5.3.4. with all ancient and moderne Commen∣tators on it will more largely testifie. Secondly, as the laughter, so the publike Theatricall Applauses which attend these Enterludes, are evill. First, because they give a publike iustification, not onely to Stage-playes and Actors, exploded by the Church of God from age to age; but Tertul. De Spectac. c. 25. Cyprian De Spectac. lib. Arnebius. Advers. Gentes. l. 7 p. 230. to 242. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu c. 20. August. De Civit Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to 15. Chrys. Hom. 6. & 38. in Mat. Salvian. De Gub. Dei. l. 6. accordingly. even to all the wickednesse, the lasci∣viousnesse that attends them, to all the villany and lewdnesse
that is produced by them. He who upon a Players or Play-Poets Plaudie, gives any publike acclamation, any ap∣plause unto the Play, or Actors, 2 Ioh. 10.11. 1 Tim. 5.22. Rom. 1.32. See Ambrose, Hierom, Seduius, Chryso∣stome, Theodoret, Primasius, Beda, Haymo, Rabanus Maurus, Rmi∣gus, Ocumeni∣us, Theophylact, Anselme, & Ly∣ra, Ibidem. approves both Play and Players, with all their sinfull passages speeches, gestures, and pernicious consequents, and saith Amen unto them: A Quum ergo indicium hoc corruptae men∣tis sit, animae{que} immedicabili∣tèr ae grotantis, non immeritò qui peccatum collaudat, lon∣gè iniquior iu∣dicatus est eo qui delinquit. Oecumenius in Rom 1.32. Isiodor Hisp. De Summo bono l. 2. c 17.21. dan∣grous fearefull sinne, which makes men Isay 5.23. Prov. 17.15. c. 24.24. an abomination to the Lord, and drawes downe a dismall woe upon their heads: because it iustifieth the wickednesse of the wicked, calling evill good, and darknesse light; putting bitter for sweet, and vice for vertue, as all Theatricall Applauses doe. Secondly, they Peccatū alterius tuū fit, cū illi consentis. August. Enar. in Psal 129. Solae spectaculorū impuritates sunt quae unū admodū faciunt & aspicientiū & agentiū crimen. Nā dum spectantes hoc cōprobant & libenter vident, omnes ea risu at{que} assensu agunt; ut verè in eos Apostolicū illud peculiariter cadat: quia digni sunt morte non solū qui faciūt a, sed etiam qui consentiunt facientibus Salvian De Guber. Dei. l. 6. p. 187. interest men in the guilt and punishment of all those ini∣quities, that are either acted or committed in, or occasioned by these Stage-playes, by giving publike and reall approba∣tion to them. Thirdly, they Chrysost. Hom. 6. & 38. in Matth. Tertullian & Cyprian, De Spectac. August. De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to 15. Salvian, De Guber. Dei. l. 6. Alexander Alensis, Summa Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 133. accordingly. harden, they animate both Play-poets, Players, and Play-haunters in their ungodly cour∣ses, which perchance they would relinquish were they not encou∣raged in them by these vaine Applauses. Fourthly, if we believe Quale est, illas manus quas ad Dominū extuleris postmodo lau∣dando histrionem fatigare, &c? De Spectac. c. 25. Chrysost. Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule, Hom. vlt. in Psal. 118. accordingly. Tertullian, these Applauses so pollute mens hands, that they can neither lift them up to God in prayer, nor yet stretch them out to receive the Sacrament in an holy manner. God requires Christians, 1 Tim. 2 8. to lift up holy hands to him in prayer: to bring Iam. 4.8. Iob 17.9. Ps. 24.4. Ps. 73.1. Isay 1.16, 17. c. 52.11. cleansed, washed, pure hands and hearts unto his Sacraments, not tainted with the filth of any sinne. Now Stage-applauses defile mens hands and hearts, ma∣king them so polluted, that they can neither lift them up in holy prayers to their Levit. 21.8. 1. Pet. 1.16. Hab. 1.13. holy God (who can endure no iniquity, nor the Isay 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. touch of any thing that is uncleane;) nor yet
extend them to embrace Christs sacred Body and Blood, without defilement. These Stage-applauses therefore must needs be sinfull in all these respects, as De Spectac. cap. 25. Tertllian, De Spectac. lb. Cyprian, Ad Selucum. pag. 1063. Nazienzen, Ne{que} enim theatrali plau∣su duci debent. De Praeparat. E∣vang. l. 12 c. 15. Eusebius, Hom. 6. & 38. in Matth. Chryso∣stome, De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to 17. Augustine, De Gub Dei. lib. 6. p. 192. Salvian, with Gosson, North∣rooke, Reinold, and others, qua supra, in the Minor. sundry moderne Chri∣stian Authors, have already doomed them to our hands. For the Minor; that Stageplayes are alwayes atten∣ded with such laughter and applauses, it is most appa∣rant. First, by experience, which infallibly informes men, that Stage-playes have evermore Nā quae per∣vincere voces Evaluêre sonū reerūt quem nostra theatra? Garganū mugire putes nemus, aut mare Tuscū, Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectantut. Horat. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 284. Populus frequens laetū Theatris, ter crepuit sonū. Idem Carm. l. 2. Ode. 17. Datus in Theatro cum tibi plausus. Idem Carm l. 1. Ode. 20. See Caesar Bulengerus. De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60.61. superabounded with obstreperous wanton cachinnations, acclamations, applauses, misbeseeming modest persons, much more religious Christians. Secondly, by the very end of mens preten∣ded resort to Stage-playes: For what other use doe our most rigid Play-patrons ascribe to Stage-playes, Ergo non satis est risu diducere ritū Audito∣ris, & est quaedam tamen hic quo{que} virtus, &c. Horat. Srmo l. 1. Satyr. 10. p. 192. See Ep. l. 2. Ep. 1. & de Arte Poet. p 198.202, 203, 204. petatū admissi risū teneatis amici? Ibid. p. 295. Inest lepos ludus{que} in hac Comaedia: Ridicula res est, dae benignè operā mihi. Plauti. A sinaria Prologus. Aures, oculi, animus, ampliter ient saturi. Vbi lepos, oci risus, hilarias at{que} delectatio, &c. Plauti Psudolus. Prologus See Haywoods Apologie for Actors. & here p. 30.31. but to exhilerate the Spectators, by provoking them to laughter. Or what other pretnce have Play-haunters for their re∣sort to Play-houses; (though Illic ab impijs & facinerosis magistris melius mens perdita & mulebris docetur facinus. Iulius Firmicus De rrore Profan. Rlg c. 13. many of them ayme at far more sinester respects) but to passe away the time in mirth? to laugh till their sides doe ake againe, at the Clownes behaviour, or some other merry iests and passages;Quod est mulò deteimū, & favor, & clamor, & plausus adhibetur & risus, cum in cōmu∣nem perniciem adulteriū tam turpe commitritur in theatris, &c rysst Hom. 6. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 52. B. or to applaud the Playes, the parts, the Actors which af∣fect them? Thirdly, by the Plaudite, which is com∣monly affixed as a period to See Plauti Amphitruo, Terentij Andria, Eunuchu, & their other Comedies, which conclude thus. Plaudite. Clare plaudite. Plausum date, or the like. Donc Cantor vos Plaudie dicat. Horat. De Arte Poët. lib. See Bulngerus de Thea. l. 1. c. 6061. most ancient and moderne
Playes: at the pronunciation of which, the people, i they like the Play, are wont to Quae{que} sonár pleno voces{que} mnus{que} thea∣tro. Plausum{que} Theatris. Mar∣tial. Epigr. Apud Bulengerum, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60. vid. Ibid. an whole chapter to this purpose. clap their hands, and give a publike acclamation, or Amen, as the practice of former and present times doth manifest. Lastly, by the concurring testimo∣ny of Pagans, Fathers, and moderne Christian Authors; who all afirme, that Stage-playes not onely occasion, but are likewise attended with profuse exorbitant laughter, acclamations and Bulengerus, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60. Theatra plaudunt. Au∣gust D Civ. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 8. applauses; In which re∣gard, the See August. De Civ. Di. lib. 7. cap. 1.6, 7. Fathers and moderne Christian Authors much condemne them. For Pagan Authorities; if you peruse but Athenaeus. Dipnos. lib. 6. cap. 6. who there in∣formes us out of Theophrastus, that the Terynthians, who were very studious of iesting Comedies, were so accustomed to laugh at Playes, that they could not forbeare laughter in their solemne sacrifices, nor their most serious affaires. Or Plato, De Republ. Dialog. 3. pag. 586. Aristotle, Politicorum. lib. 8. cap. 7. pag. 533.534. Ovid, Fastorum. l. 3. & 5. & De Arte Amandi. l. 1. Horace, De Arte Poëtica. lib. p. 298.302.303. 304. Epist l. 2. Epist. 2. Livy, Rom. Hist. l. 7. sect. 2.3. Diony∣sius Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. Marcus Aurelius. Epist. 12. to Lambert, Plautus, Asinaria & Amphitruo, Prolo∣gus, & Epilogus. Terentij. Andria & Heutontimorum. Pro∣logus & Epilog. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. sect. 2.3. Macrobius Saturnalium. l. 2. c. 7. with sundry other quoted by Bulen∣gerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60.61. you shall finde them copi∣ous in this theame. For Fathers I shall referre you to Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedag. l. 2. c. 5. & Quod autem verbum impu∣dens non pro∣frūt, qui risum movent scurrae & histriones? Ibidm. lib. 3. c. 11. Ter∣tullian, De Spectac. c. 25. Cyprian, De Spectaculis, & Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Arnobius, Advers. Gentes. l. 4. p. 149. Vt spectatori∣bus vacuis risus possit at{que} hila∣itas excitari, ioculatoribus feriuntur cavi∣lationibus nu∣mina, concla∣mant & assur∣gunt theatra, caveae omnes concrepant fra∣goribus at{que} plausibus. Ibid. 150.151. & l. 7. p. 230. to 240. Bail. De Ebrietate & Luxu. Sermo. p. 329.332.338. Comment in Isaiam. c. 5. p. 419.420. Lactan∣tius, De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Nazienzen ad Selucum, p. 1063.1064. Chrysostome, Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule. Hom. In Theatro risus movetur, & indecentibus achinnis resolvimut. Domino irascēte tu ides, nec vides quod amplius hinc enim cōmoveras. Non est nostrum ergo assiduè ridere, esolvi cachinnis, molleri delicijs; sed eorum potius & earum quae spectantur in Theatris, &c. Nec solum iubes, sed etiam exulta∣tione, risu, plausu adjuvas quae geruntur. Ibid. Tom. 2. Col. 51.52. 6.
38. & 69. in Matth. Hom. 42. in Acta Apost. Hom. 15.62. ad Pop. Antiochi. Hom. 17. in Epheios. & 15. in Hebraeos. Au∣gustine, De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 4. to 15. & 26. to 30. Quod cum fit à facientibus mimis, dignè ridentur in Theatro: cum verò à nescien∣tibus stultis dignius irri∣dentur in mun∣do. Ibidem. l. 6. c. 1.6. 7.10. l. 8. c. 10. l. 11. c. 8. Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. & 7. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 27 l. 3. Epist. 51. Ioannis Sa∣lisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. & lib. 8. cap. 6.7. Sanctus Asterius. Hom. in estum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705.706. with others which I pretermit, who fully suffragate to my Minors truth. For moderne Christian Authors, Thomas Gualsius. Hom. 77. in Pro∣verb. Solomonis. pag. 97. who is copious to this purpose. M. Northbroke, M. Gosson, M. Subs, D. Reinolds; Brisso∣nius and Mariana, in their Bookes and severall fore-named Treatises against Stage-playes: The 2. & 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. Bulengerus, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 60. & 61. De Plausu, Sibilo, Clamoribus & acclamationibus Theatri: with sundry others formerly quoted to this purpose. pag. 30.31. will sufficiently satisfie any that doubt of my Assumpsions truth. Since then it is evi∣dent by all these testimonies, that Stage-playes do occa∣sion,In Theatro omnia contra∣ria; risus, tur∣pitudo, &c. Oc∣casio risus, tur∣pitudinis ex∣empla. Illic risus incomposi∣tus, gestus stultitiam & insipientiam prae se ferentes omnia illic risum & ridicula. Insanit tunc natura, praesentes pro hominibus bruta fiunt: & alij quidem ut equi hinniunt, alij vero ut asini calcitrant magna diffusio, magna dissolutio, nihil maturum, nihil generosum, &c. Chrysostom. Hom. 42. in Acta. Tom. 3. Col. 611. B. C. 612. A. doe abound with such laughter, such applauses, as I have here evinced to be evill and misbeseeming Saints, I may well conclude; that Stage-playes even in this regard, and in respect of all the fore-going particulars, in the precedent Act, are utterly unlawfull unto Christians; which should cause them wholy to abandon them.
ACTVS 6 SCENA PRIMA. FIftly, as Stage-playes are sinfull and so unlawfull un∣to Christians in all the fore-mentioned regards, so likewise are they in respect of severall Hae nugae seria ducunt in mala. Horat. De Arte Poet. p. 312.pernicious effects, and dangerous fruits, which usually, if not necessarily and perpetually issue from them; the chiefest of which I shall here enumerate in their order; that so you may more evidently Mat. 7.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Thes. 5.22. discerne the badnesse of them, by the sundry evils they occasion. The first of these, is the prodigall mispence of much precious time, which Ephes. 5.16. Tunc verè tempus redimi∣mus quando anteactam vitā quàm lascivi∣endo perdidi∣mus, flendo re∣paramus Ansel∣mus in Ephes. 5. Tom. 2. p. 288. Christians should husband and re∣deeme to better purposes: From whence this 27. Argu∣ment against Stage-playes may be composed. That which doth alwaies unavoydably produce an intollerable mispence of much peerelesse time, Cum majus periculum sit malè vivendi quàm citò mo∣riendi, stultus est qui non ex∣igui temporis mercede mag∣nae rei aleam redimi. Seneca. Epist. 49. which should be carefully improved and redeemed, must certainely be sinfull, and so unlawfull unto Chri∣stians. But this doe See Ovid Tritū. l. 2. f. 160. Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. c. 8.10, 13, 15. Ammianus Marcellinus. l. 28 c. 10. Basilij Hexaëm. Hom. 4. accordingly. Stage-playes; as I shall fully manifest. Therefore they must certainely be sinful, and so un∣lawfull unto Christians. The Major all men must subscribe to; because God himselfe commands us, not prodigally to waste, but Ephes. 5.16. Col 4.5. See Ambrse, Hierom, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Sedulius, Primasius, Remigius, Beda, Rabanus Maurus, Oecumenius, Anselme, Theophylact, Lyra, Musculus, Calvin, Aretius, Marlorat Ibid. & Master Wheatlies Sermon of Times Redemption, accordingly. wisely to redeeme the time, and so much the rather, because the dayes are evill. Our time, Iob 7.1, 2, 3. Psal. 89, 47. Eccles. 3.1. to 18. Luk. 1.75. Acts 13.36. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. it is our richest treasure; it is that peerelesse portion which God himselfe hath put into our
hands; that we might improve it to his glory, to our owne and others good; not sinfully Ezech. 16.49. Iob 21.12, 13. Isay 5, 11, 12. Amos 6.1. to 9 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4 Iam. 4.9, 10. 2 Tim. 3.4. A∣moto quaera∣mus seria udo. Horat. Sermo. l. 1. Satyr. 1. consme it upon lascivious childish Enterludes, vanities, or delights of sinne; which bring no∣thing but Iam. 5.1, 5. Rev. 18.7. eternall horror to mens soules at last. For men, for Christians then, to cast this unvaluable Pearle of preci∣ous time Mat. 7.6. to Swine; to Isay 55.2. disburse this treasure for that which is not bread, this money for that which satisfieth not: to Luk. 15.13, 14. waste this royall patrimony upon voluptuous spectacles, or lewde ridiculous Pastimes: to trifle it quite away upon the very vainest vanities (as alas Magna pars vitae elabitur malè agētibus, maxima nihil agentibus. Quē mihi dabis qui aliquod praetiū tempori ponat? qui diem aesti∣mer? qui intel∣ligat se quoti∣die mori? Ne∣mo se iudicet quicquā debere qui tempus ac∣cepit, cùm inte∣rim hoc unum est, quod ne gratas quidem poest reddere. Seneca Epist. 1. too many doe, who Rom. 2.5. to 10. Rev. 18.6, 7. treasure up nothing but eternall wrath and horror to their soules, against the day of wrath,) how can it but be sinfull? Iob. 1.1, 2. Luk. 1.75 Rom. 14.7, 8. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Acts 13, 6. Phil. 1.21 Gal 2.20. Our dayes, yea every houre and minute of our lives, are Gods, not ours: they are those Mat. 25.15. to 28. Prov. 17.16. precious talents which God hath put into our hands to occupy with them till he come: to him Rom. 14.4, 7, 8, 12, 13. Rev. 2.21, 22. must we give up our account for the imployment of them at the last. And can we then take Gods time, Gods treasure (allowed 1 Pet 4.2, 3, 4. 1 Tim. 6.11, 12. Quo te caelestis sapientia duceret ires. Hoc opus, hoc studiū purvi properemus & ampli. Si patriae volumus, si nobis vivere cari. Horat. Eist l. 1. Eist. 3. ag. 243. onely to us for his use, his service, which is abundantly sufficient to engrosse even al our dayes,Luk. 1.75. c. 2 37. 1 Thes. 5.16, 17. Psal. 145.1, 2.) and spend it wholly upon sinne? upon Satan? upon our owne Festinat enim decurrere velox Flosculus angustae miserae{que} brevissima vitae Portio, dum bibimus, dum serta, unguenta, puellas Posimus, obrepit non intellecta senectus. Iuv. Sat. 9. p. 89. carnall lusts and pleasures? upon lascivious Stage-playes, Games, and Sports? up∣n Dicing, Carding, Dancing, Drinking, Whoring, Qui∣bus in solo vivendi causa palato est. Iuv. Satyr. 11. p. 104. Nulli rei nisi vino & libi∣dini vacant. Senca De Brev. Vitae. cap. 6 Feasting? upon idle Visits, Complements and Discour∣ses? upon Meretricious Paintings, Frizlings, Poul∣drings, Attyrings, and the like, (in which many squon∣der away their very choicest morning houres, more fit for study & devotion then such unchristian practises,) as if we had no God to serve, no callings to follow, no
soules to save, Heu vivunt homines tan∣quá mors nul∣la sequatur. Et vlut infernus fabula vana fo∣ret. no Hell to feare, no Heaven to seeke, no Iudge to censure us, no day of Iudgement to account in, how we have spent our time? and yet Gloriari otio iners ambitio est. Senec. Ep. 68. flatter our selves so grosly, as to presume we have done Alea turpis, Turpe & adul∣terium medio∣cribus, haec ta∣men illi Om∣nia cū faciant, Hilares nitidi∣que vocantur. Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. p. 110. full well, at least-wise not offended, in this profuse mispending of our Masters stocke of time? Alas, how many millions of pounds; how many myriades of Kingdomes, nay of Worlds (were they but Masters of them) would many thousand damned spirits, now in torments, or voluptuous di∣stressed persons now lying on their death-beds, ready to breathe out their soules at every breath into the Isay 30.33. in∣fernall Tophet, give, for the moitie, the tythe, yea the ve∣ry smallest quantity of that unvaluable Praecipitat quis{que} vitā su∣am, & futuri de∣siderio laborat, praesentiū tae∣dio. Seneca De Brev. Vitae. c. 7. time which they have irrecoverably spent on Playes, and such like sinfull Pa∣stimes; that so they might in time bewaile with bri∣nish teares, with dolorous pangs, and deepest sighes, the Natura hu∣manis ingenijs mlè consulu∣it, quae plae∣rumque non futura sed transacta perpendimus. Qu. Curtiu. lib. . sect. 2. pag. 341. Deteriori luto pravus quos edidit auctor, Et nihil aetherij sparlit pr membra vi∣goris. Hi pecudum ritu non impendetia vitant, Nec res ante vident, accepta clade quaeruntur, Et serò transacta gemunt. Claudian in Eutropium lib 2. pag. 88. losse of all those houres which they have prodigally spent in Play-houses, Tavernes, and such life-devouring places, to prevent or else extenuate the intollerable horror of their eternall paines? And shall wee then squander a∣way, we care not how, those pretious houres, which these, which wee our selves perchance hereafter (though now we Re omnîum praeciosissima luditur. Quia sub oculis non venit, ideo vilissima aestimatur, imò vero nullum praetium ejus est. Annua congiaria homines clarissi∣mi accipiunt, & his aut laborm, aut operam, aut diligentiam suam locant. Ne∣mo aestimat tempus; utuntur illo laxius quasi gratuitò. At eosdem aegros vide, si mortis periculum admotum est propius, medicorum genua tangentes: si metuunt capitale supplicium, omnia sua, ut vivant paratos impendere. Tanta in illis discordia asfectuum est. Senec. De Brev. Vitae. cap. 8. value them at so low a price, as to play them quite away for nought) would willingly repurchase at the dearest rate, on vaine lascivious Stage-playes, toyes, and childish vanities, as if we were created only
to play and follow sports (which Ne{que} enim ita à natura ge¦neratī sumus ut ad ludum & iocum facti esse videamur, sed ad severitatem potius, & ad quaedā studia graviora atque majora. De Offi∣cij l. 1. Op. Tom 2. p. 618. See Se∣nica, De Brev. Vi∣tae. & Epist. 1.49.58. Tully and other Pa∣gans quite deny) and yet thinke to scape unpunished? Those Playes and Pastimes therefore, which miserably waste and eate out all our dayes, which rob us of our pretious time (our chiefe, our Omnia, mi Lucili, aliena sunt; tempus tantum nostrū est: In hujus rei unius fuga∣cis ac lubricae possessionē na∣tura nos misit, ex qua expellit quicun{que} vult. Ita fac, mi Lu∣cili, vindica te tibi, & tempus quod adhuc aut auferebatur aut surripiebatur, aut excidebat, collige & serva. Seneca Epist. 1. onely treasure,) which we should carefully husband to our good: Which sacrilegiously defraud our God, our Country, our Soules, our Callings of sundry vacant houres which should be spent upon them, must needs be evill and unlawfull unto Christi∣ans even in this respect. For the Minor, See D. Reinolds Overthrow of Stage-playes p. 20, to 24. The 3. Blast of Retait from Playes & Theaters. p. 66.67. & the othe Fathers, Councels, & Authors hereafter quoted that Stage-playes unavoydably produce an intollerable mispence of much pretious time, &c. it is most apparant, if we will but summe up all those dayes, those houres which are vainely spent in the composing, con∣ning, practising, acting, beholding of every publike, or private Stage-play. How many golden Nil intentatū nostri liquêre Poetae: Nec minimū mervêre decus, &c. Si nō offenderet unūquem{que} Poetarū limae labor, & mora: Vos ô Pōpilius sanguis, carmen rpraehēdite quod non Multa dies & multa litura coercuit at{que} Perfectū decies nō castigavit ad unguē. Bona pars non un∣gues ponere curat, Non barbā: secreta petit loca; balnea vitat. Nāsciscetur enim prae∣tiū nomē{que} Poetae, Si tribus Anticyris caput insanabile nunquā Tōsori Licino com∣miserit, &c Horat. De Arte Poet p. 306. dayes and houres, I might say weekes, nay months, and I had almost said whole yeeres, doe most Play-poets spend in contriving, pen∣ning, polishing their new-invented Playes, before they ripen them for the Stage? When these their Playes are brought unto maturity, how many houres, evenings, halfe-dayes, dayes, and sometimes weekes, are spent by all the Actors (especially in solemne academicall Enterludes) in coppy∣ing, See Seneca, De Brev. Vitae. c. 12. Non habent isti otiū sed iners negotiū, Nam de illis nemo dubitabit, quin operosè nihil agnt, qui literarū inutiliū studijs detinētur. Ibid. c. 13. in conning, in practising their parts, before they are ripe for publike action? When this is finished, how many men are vainely occupied for sundry dayes (yea sometimes See Pliny, Nat. Hist. l. 36. c. 15. Tertul. De Spectac. c, 9.10, 11. Livy, Hist Rom. l. 48. Tacitus, Annal. l. 14. Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 5. c. 16. D. Hackwels Apologie. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 2.3, 4. accordingly. yeeres) together, in building Theaters, Stages,
Scenes and Scaffolds; in making theatricall Pageants, Apparitions, Attires, Visars, Garments, with such-like Stage-appurtenances, for the more commodious pom∣pous acting and adorning of these vaine-glorious En∣terludes? When all things requisite for the publike personating of these Playes are thus exactly accommo∣dated, and the day or nigh approcheth when these are to be acted, how many hundreds of Nubilis haec Virgo, matro∣na{que}, vir{que} pu∣erque, Spectat, & ex magna parte Senatus adest. Ovid Tri∣stium. l. 2. p. 160. all sorts, vainely, if not Si foret in terris rideret Democritus. Spectaret popu∣lū Iudis fre∣quentius ipsis; Vt sibi praeben∣tem mimo spe∣ctacula plura. Horat. Epist l. 2. Epist. 1. p. 284. ridiculously spend whole dayes, whole afternoones and nights oft-times, in Sic ruit ad ce∣lebres cultissi∣ma faemina lu∣dos: Copia iu∣dicium saepe morata meum est. Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae. Ovid, De Arte Amandi. l. 1. p. 160. See Tertullian, De Spectaculis. & Act 5. Scene 7. before. attyring themselves in their richest robes; in providing seates to heare, Nemo in spectaculo ineundo prius cogitat, nisi videre & videri. Tertullian, De Spectaculis cap. 25. to see, and to be seene of others; or in hearing, in beholding these vain lasci∣vious Stage-playes, (which last some Quatuor aut plures aulaea praemuntur in horas, &c. Horat. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. pag. 284. three or foure houres at the least, yea sometimes whole See Livy, Rom. Hist. lib. 42. sect. 20. Ludi per de∣cem dies Iovi optimo. Max. facti. lib. 31. sect. 51. lib. 39. sect. 46. lib. 23. sect. 30. lib. 25. sect. 2. lib. 40. sect. 52. Suetonij Iulius. sect. 29. dayes and weekes together, as did some Roman Playes, and yet seeme to short to many, to whom a Lecture, a Sermon, a Prayer, not halfe so long, is over-tedious:) who thinke themselves Horū non ociosa vita dicenda est, sed desidiosa occupatio. Seneca, De Brevitate Vita. cap. 11. well im∣ployed all the while they are thus wasting this their pretious time (which they scarce know how to spend) upon these idle Spectacles. Nostra aetas prolapsa ad fabulas & quaevis inania, non modo autes & cor prostituit vanitati sed oculorum & aurium voluptate suam mulcet desidiam, luxuriam accendit con∣quircs undi{que} fomenta vitiorum. Ioannes Saresburienses, De Nugis Curialium lib 1. cap. 8. Adde we to this, that all our common Actors consume not onely weekes and yeeres, but even Histriones totam suam vitam ordinant ad ludendum. Aquinas, secunda secundae, Quest. 168. Art. 3. their whole lives, in learning, practising, or acting Playes, which besides nights and other seasons, engrosse every afternoone almost thorowout the yeere, to their pecu∣liar service; as wee see by daily experience here in
See Stephen Gossons Schoole of Abuses. The 3. Blast of Re∣trait from Playes. I.G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, & Iohn Field, his Declaration of Gods Iudge∣ment at Paris Garden, &c. London; where thousands spend the moitie of the day, the weeke, the yeere in Play-houses, at least-wise far more houres, then they imploy in holy duties, or in their lawfull callings. If we annex to this, the time that divers waste in reading Play-bookes, which some make their chiefest study, preferring them before the Bible, or all pious Bookes, on which they seldome se∣riously cast their eyes; together with the mispent time which the discourses of Playes, either seene or read, oc∣casion: and then summe up all this lost, this mispent time together; we shall soone discerne, we must needs acknowledge,Nemo inve∣nitur qui pecu∣niam suam di∣videre velit, vi∣tā unusquis{que} quàm multis distribuit. A∣stricti sunt in continendo patrimonio, si∣mul ad tempo∣ris jacturā ven∣tum est, prosu∣sissimi in eo cujus unius ho∣nesta avaritia est. Seneca, De Brevit. Vitae c. 3. that there are no such Helluoes, such Canker-wormes, such theevish Devourers of mens most sacred (yet Quid necesse habes amittere tempora tanta, perdere tanta lucra? nihil praeciosius tempore, sed heu nihil hodie vilius aestimatur. Transeunt dies salutis & nemo recogitat, nemo sibi non reditura momenta perijsse causatur. Bernardi. Declamationes. Col. 1011. L.M. undervalued) time, as Stage-playes. Hence Concilium Carthagiense. 4 Can. 88. Concil. Aphrica∣num. Can. 28. Concil. Constantinopolitanum. Can. 66. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian & Cyprian, De Spectac. lib. Arnobius. l. 4. & 7. advers. Gentes. with sundry other Councels, Fathers, Authors See Scene 12. & Act 7. Scene 3. where their words are recited. hereafter quoted, complaine, that many Lords-dayes, Holy-dayes, and sacred Festivals which ought to have beene spent in holy exer∣cises of Religion, and Gods more speciall service, together with much other precious time which mens particular callings did require, was spent in acting and beholding Stage-playes: Hence Philo Iudaeus, De Agricultura. lib. pag. 271.272. with much griefe laments: Quid enim aliud credimus quotidi per totum orbem, tot millia spectatorum in Theatris contrahere. Homines enim victi spectaculorum & fabularum cupidine infrenes tum oculis, tum auribus consectantur cytharistas cy∣tharaedosque. Praeterea saltatoribus caeterisque mimis inhiant propter gestus mo∣tus{que} effaeminatos: at{que} ita factiones Theatricas instaurant, securi caeterarum rerū privatarum publicarumque, totam vitam in huiusmodi spectaculis conterentes miseri. Ibidem. That many thousands of people thorowout the world, be sotted with the delight of Stage-playes, did with greedy eyes and eares flocke together to Theaters, to behold the effeminate gestures and motions of Stage-players; neglecting in
the meane time the publike welfare, and their owne private estates, and miserably wasting their lives in these vaine Specta∣cles. Hence Basil, Hexaëmeron. Hom. 4. informes us: Sunt Civita∣tes non nullae quae multis va∣rijsque praesti∣giatorum spe∣ctculis inde à primo diluculo ad ipsum usque caelū advespe∣rascens suos pascunt adspe∣ctus, frctosque quosdm om∣nino & corrup∣tos cantus n∣miam in ani∣mis generantes libidinem fre∣quentissimè audientes, non satiantur. At{que} tales populos compures per∣beatos esse di∣cunt, proptereà quod foro, mer∣catura, artibus, caeterisque ne∣gotijs omninò comparandi vi∣ctus causa sub∣eundis negle∣ctis atque post∣habitis, summo cum orio vo∣luptate{que} vitae tempus institutum sibi perducunt, &c. Basil. Hexaëm. Hom. 4. Damascen. Parallel lib. 3. cap. 47. That there are certaine Citties, which feed their eyes and eares from morning to night, with many various Spectacles, and with effe∣minate amorcus lascivious Songs and Enterludes, engendring an excesse of lusts within their soules, in hearing of which their eares are never satisfied. And such people as these (writes he) many call exceeding happy, because neglecting and setting aside the care of government, merchandize, their trades, and all other imployments whereby they may get their living; they spend the time of life alotted to them with exceeding idle∣nesse and pleasure. Hence Nazienzen, De Recta Educatione ad Selucum. pag. 1063.1064. & Chrysostome. Hom. 15.21.23. & 62. Ad Populum Antioch. Hom. 6.7.38. & 69. in Matth. & Hom. 42. in Acta Apostolorum; relate, In Theatro omnia contraria: temporis impendiū, superflua dierum consumptio, &c. Chrysost. Hom. 42. in Acta Apost. & Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. Tom. 3. Col. 612. A. & Tom. 5. Col. 347. A. hat in the Play-house there is a losse of time, a superfluous consump∣tion of dayes; Totm prorsus diem in tam ridicula at{que} eti∣am perniciosa voluptate consumitis. &c. Hom. 6 in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 52. A. where men waste whole dayes in ridiculous and prnicious pleasures. And withall Chrysot. Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule. Hom. 6. in Matth. & Hō. 15. & 23. ad Populū Antioch. See here Scene 4. & 12. they much complaine; that many people leaving the Church did flocke by troopes to Play-houses, bestowing that time upon the Devill, which they should have dedicated unto God; Hence Augustine, Vacare volunt ad ugas at{que} luxurias suas. Melius enim saceret Iudaeus in agro suo aliquid utile, quā tota die in Theatro seditiosus existeret. Ibid. De Decem Chordis. lib. c. 3. & De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 4. to 23. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Ioannis Evangelium. li. 8. c. 5. Leo. 1. Sermo in Octava Pauli & Petri. cap. 1. fol. 165. S. Asterius, Homilia. in Fe∣stum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 705.706. Damascen Parallelorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. Ioannis Saresburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 7.8. with other Fathers, passe sentence against Stage-playes, as chiefe consumers of
Octavius Spe∣ctaculo pluri∣mas horas, ali∣quando totos dies aderat. Suetonij Octavi∣us. sct. 45. much pretious time, which should be expended upon bet∣ter things, as their words hereafter quoted. Scene 3.4.5. & 12. more fully evidence. Hence divers Pagan Authors; as Cicero, ro L. Muraena, & pro Sexto Oratio. Epist. lib. 7. ad Marium Epist. 10. & De Legibus l. 1. & 2. Seneca, De Brev. Vitae. cap. 12.13. Epist. 7. & 75. & Quis Philo∣sophiā aut ullū liberale respi∣cit studium, nisi cum ludi inter∣calantur, cum aliquis pluius intervenit dies quem perdere licer, &c. Ibid. Naturalium. Quaest. lib. 7. c. 32. Cornelius Tacitus, Populus si consederet the∣atro totos dies ignaviâ conti∣nuaret, &c. Ibid Annalium. lib. 14. sect. 3. Suetonij Nero. sect. 23. & Caligula. sect. 18. Marcus Au∣relius. Epist. 12. to Lambert. Ammianus Marcellinus. lib. 28. cap. 10. Horace, De Arte Poetica. lib. together with Augustine, De Civit. Dei. l. . c. 31.32. Livy, Rom. Hist. lib. 48. Epit Vale∣rius Maximus. l. 2. c. 6. Eutro∣pius. Rerum. Rom. l. 4. p. 43 Scipio Nasica, that famous Roman, have much condem∣ned Stage-playes, because they waste many pretious houres which should be improved to more weighty uses.Histriones vero locustis consert pro∣pheta, non mo∣do propter multitudinem, sed potius propter ignavū otium, & quod fruges consu∣mere nati, ni∣hil interea facint quod honestum sit, vel ad publicam utilitatem aliquid confe∣rat, &c. Ibidem. And for this very reason among sundry others, Petrarcha De Re∣medio Vtr. Fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Polydor Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. c. 2. Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 59. M. Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. Carolus Sigonius De Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. p. 32. Ioannis Langhecrucius, De Vita & Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 11.12.21. M. Northrooke, M. Gosson, M. Stubs, D. Reinolds, Mariana & Brissonius, in their Bookes and Treatises against Stage-playes. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 66.67. Iohn Field in his Declaration of Gods Iudgement at Pa∣ris Garden. George Whetston, in his Mirror for Magistrates of Citties. pag. 24. Bulengerus, De Circo, &c. pag. 81. to 88. & 167.168. I. G. in his Refutation of the Aologie for A∣ctors. A short Treaise against Stage-playes. Anno 1625. M. Bolton in his Discourse of true Happinesse. pag. 74.75. To omit all others which I shall name See Scene 12. & Act 7. Scene 4.5, 6. hereafter, have cen∣sured and rejected Stage-playes, (in the hearing, rea∣ding, and beholding of which, many spend whole dayes, whole weekes, whole yeeres) as the over-prodigall devourers of much peerelesse time, which they most iniuriously steale from God, from men, and from the Common-weale.
Since therefore our lives are Psal. 39.5, 11. Psal. 102.11. 1 Cor. 7.29. Iam. 4.14. Cir∣cumcisa & bre∣vis hominis vita longissima Pliny, Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 7. Vitae hujus principi∣um mortis ex∣ordium est, nec prius incipit augeri aetas quam minui. Cui si aliquid adijcitur spacij temporalis, non ad hoc ac∣cedit ut mane∣at, sed ad hoc transit ut pere∣at. Prosper. Aquit. De Vocat Gentium. lib. . cap. 21 exceeding short and momenta∣ry, posting away with winged speed; our time so Nihil praetiosius tempore. Ber∣nardi. Declamat. Col. 1011. L. M. pretious; the duties of our generall, our particular callings (which may Facito aliquid operis ut semper te Diabolus inveniat occupatum. Operis labor suscipiatur, non tàm propter victus necessita∣tem, quam propter animae salutem. Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 5. not be omitted for feare the Devill finde us idle, and so tempt us unto sinne) almost infinite, well able to engrosse even all our vacant houres; the mispence, the losse of time so Non exiguum de∣trimentum est vel horae unius. Et una hora totius vitae portio est. Ambros. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 25. dangerous, so pernicious: the grand account we 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. 2 Thes. 1.7, 8, 9. must shortly render of all the ill-spent minutes of our lives before the Barre of Gods Tribunall, so certaine, so terrible and inevitable, these time-devouring Stage-playes, which Inde fit ut rarò qui se vixisse beatum Dicat, & exacto contentus tempore vitae Cedat, uti conviva satur, reperire queamus. Horat. Sermo. lib. 1. Satyr 1. incroach so farre, so desperately, so universally upon the lives of many (especially in this our great Metrapolis where they are daily acted and frequented,) must certainely be execra∣ble, sinfull, and pernicious unto Christians, (who should Tempus quippe redimimus quandò ante∣actam vitam quam lasciviendo perdidimus, flendo reparamus. Greg. Mag. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 28. redeeme their fore-past time which teares, which they have spent in lascivious carnall iollity) even in regard of this most vile effect, which issues alwayes from them. SCENA SECVNDA. THe second consequent or effect of Stage-playes; is  a prodigall, sinfull, vaine expence of money, which should be more profitably, more charitably disbursed, then in supporting Playes or Players. From whence I
argue in the 28. place; thus. That which alwayes necessarily occasions a prodi∣gall vaine expence of mony or estate, which should be well imployed, is certainely sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians. But this doe Stage-playes, and Satiat praete∣rea & inebria histriones mi∣mos, turpissi∣mos{que} & vanis∣simos ioculato∣res tū pauperes Ecclesiae fame discruciati in∣tereant. Agobar∣dus, De Dispensa∣tione & ordine totius rei Ecclsi∣ast. Bib. at. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 603. H common Actors. Therefore they are certainely sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians. The Major cannot be gainsaid, because prodigally and idle expence of mony, is a sinne, as the say 55.2, Prov. 21.20. c. 29.3. c. 18.9. c. 19.26. c. 23.10 21. c. 27.7. Lu. 15.13, 14, 19. Rom. 13.13 14. Gal. 5.21. Ezech. 16.49. Ephes. 5.18. Phil. 3.18, 19. Iam. 5.5. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.13. Iude 4.12.13. Rev. 18.6, 9. Scriptures, Clemens Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 12. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. c. 17. Ambros. De Officijs. l. 2. c. 2. Basil. Sermo. 2. in Divites & Avaros. Nazienzn. Cyg∣naeorum. Carm. lib. p. 1056. Theophylact & Beda, in Luc. 15. Fathers, with sundry Plato De Repub. Dialog. 8. p. 665. Aristot. Ethic. l. 4. c. 1. Cicero, De Officijs lib 2. Plutarch, De Vitando. AEre alieno. lib. Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. AEneae Gazaei. Theophrastus apud Philonem Iudaeum. pag. 1470. Pagan Authors have determined: and that in two respects. First, because it abuseth, it perverteth Gods good creatures to an unlawfull end, by Iam. 4.2, 3. Luk. 15.13, 14, 19. mispend∣ing them upon carnall pleasures, lusts, and vaine fantastique humours; when as they should be imployed to Prov. 3 9. Gods glo∣ry, our owne and Eccles. 11.1. Luk. 19.8. 1 Tim 6.17, 18, 19. Psal. 41 1. Prov. 19.17. Heb. 13.16. Luk. 12.33. others good. Secondly, because it Quid peculator? Ille qui aufert aliena Non tupeculator, cum ea quae ad dispensandum distribuendum{que} reciperis, tibi propria facis? Num qui vestem diripuerit spoliator nominabitur, qui autem nudum non texerit, modo possit, alterius cujusdam nominis appellatione dignus erit? Basil, in Divites & Avaros. Sermo. 1. robs the poore of that bountifull charitable reliefe, which else they should receive from that superfluity of wealth which Prodigals consume: The Deut. 15.7. to 19. Iob 31.16. to 23. 1 Tim. 6.17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 9.1. to 14. Acts 11.29, 30. Cur tu dives, ille pau∣per? Profectò non ob aliam causam, nisi ut tu benignitatis ac fidelis administrati∣onis praemium accipias, ille verò patientiae maximae mercede honoretur. Esurientis est panis quem tu retines; nudi est vestis quam tu arca custodis; discalceati calceus qui apud te marcessit; egentis argenū quod tu in terram desodis. Deni{que} tot affers hominibus iniurias, quot deseris cum uvare possis. Dei minister facts es, tuorum dispensator conservorum. Nec puta omnia tuo ventri praeparari: quae in manibus habes ut aliena existima. Bail. Mag. in Divites & Avars Sermo. 1. vid. Ibidem. maine end why God bestowes abundance of earthly riches upon some men, more then others, being onely this;
that their super-abundant plenty, might supply the wants of o∣thers: not feed their owne excessive lusts, as Play-haunters for the most part doe. The Minor (that Stage-playes alwayes necessarily oc∣casion much prodigall expence, which might be better imployed;) is most apparant, not onely by that of Ovid, Tristium. lib. 2. pag. 160. Inspice ludorum sumptus Auguste tuorum; Empta tibi magno talia malta leges. Quod{que} minus prodest paena est lucrosa Poëtae, Tantaque non parvo crimina praetor emit; but likewise by the Records and Histories of former ages. It is storied of the Livy, Rom. Hist. l. 40. sct. 44.45. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 36. c. 15. August. De Civ. Dei. l 3. c. 19. l. 5 c. 12. & De Cō∣sensu Evang. l. 1 c. 33. Salvian, De Guber. Dei. l. 6. Tacitus, Annal. l. 14. sect 3. Su∣tonij Tiberius. sect. 35.47. Cali∣gula, sect. 18.21. Nero. sect. 11.12, 20. to 26. & 30 Vspatianus. sect. 19. Petrarch. De Remed. Vtr. Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 30. Opme∣eri. Chronogr. p 186. D. Hack∣wels Apologie. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 3.4. Romans; that the summes of mony they disbursed in erecting Theaters, in setting forth Stage-playes, and such like publike Spectacles, did annually amount to more then their ex∣pences on their Warres, or Fortifications: in so much that the charge of them at last grew altogether intollerable, not onely to Rome it selfe, but to all her Confederates, and forraigne Tribu∣tary Provinces; who were much oppressed, much impoverished by reason of the excessive charge of Playes, and publike Shewes, Livy. Rom. Hist. l. 5. sect. 1. l. 7. sect. 2.3. l. 10 sect. 23. l. 40. sect. 24.25. Salvian. De Gub. Dei l. 6 p. 198.199. towards which they were Contributors. It is registred of the Plu∣tarch. De Gloria Atheniensiū. lib. Thucides. Hist. l. 5. p. 477. Iustin. Hist. l. 6. Caelius. Rhod. Antiqu. Lect. l. 8. c. 9. Athenians, that their very publike Stage-playes, (main∣tained at the republikes cost) did so exhaust their common trea∣sure, that at last they left no mony in their Exchequer to rigge their Ships, to set forth their Navy, or to defend their Coun∣try: in so much that their enemies laying hold on this their pe∣nury, prevailed much against them. Whence they wre not un∣iustly taxed by a Lacedemonian, for Res serias in ludū impendentes, & magnarum classium & exercituū cōmeatum in Theatrū prodigentes. Plutarch. De Gloria Atheniensiū. lib. wasting serious things on sports, and lavishing out the provision, the supplies of great Na∣vies and Armies, upon Playes and Theaters. It is recorded of divers Roman Emperours, (as See Suetonij Caligula. sect. 18 21. Nero. sect. 11.12, 20 to 26. & 30. Vespatianus. sect. 19. Domi∣tianus. sect. 4 Herodian. Hist. l. 1. Iulij Capitolini Antonius pius. p. 38. Ejusdem Verus. p. 67.68, 69. & Maximinus & Balbinus. p. 301. Trebellij Pollionis Galieniduo. p. 306.309, 310, 316. Idem. De Ingenuo p. 327. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 447.449. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 3. Epist. 50. Ioannis Salisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. & l. 8. c. 7. Caligula, Claudius, Nero,
Verus, Maximinus, Balbinus, Carinus, and others) who are therefore censured by their owne Historians; that they spent a great part of their Revenues upon Playes and common A∣ctors, who received annuall Pensions from them, besides other Boones and Gratuities: which publike Stipends and Dona∣tions, Suonij Tibe∣rius. sect 35. & 47. Iulij Capit∣lini, Mar. Antoni∣us Philosophus p. 48.57. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. p. 449. AElij L̄∣pridij Sverus. p. 228. Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 86.187. Buen∣gerus, De Thea∣tro. l. 1. cap. 30. Tiberius, Marcus Antonius the Philosopher, Dio∣clesian, Alexander Severus, with other Roman Emperours did curtale, or totally withdraw, as over-chargeable to their Exchequers, which they did much exhaust. Not to relate the prodigall expences of the Roman State in generall, or of See Cicero, O∣ratio, De Aru∣spicū responsis. p. 524.526, 527 In Pisonem. O∣ratio. p. 600.602. Pro Sextio Cratio. p. 558.559, 560, 561, 562. Pro L. Mu∣raena. Oratio. p. 463. In Catilinam. Oratio. 3. p. 452. Philip. Oratio  p. 638. De Divinatione. l. 3. pag. 557. Livy, Rom. Hist. l. 2. sect. 36. Donysius, Hallicarnas. Antiq. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. See  before, & Ambrose, Ser. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. Bulngerus, De Circis Romanis. & cap. l. 1. c. 41.42. p. 163.164, 165. & De Theatro. l. 1. c. 11. p. 242.243. some of their Magistrates, or Editors of Playes in particular, who prodigally spent their whole estate in celebrating Playes to the honour of their Idols, or to gaine the acclamati∣ons of the vulgar crew, who were much delighted with theatri∣call and gladiatory Enterludes; of which there are sundry pre∣cedents, wherein I might expatiate: I shall relate the summe of all in the words of S. Augustine, who com∣plaines; Eos modo vix feramus, quā∣do pro superflua voluptate plura donātur histrionibus, quàm tunc legionibus pro ex∣trema salute collata sunt. De Civ. Dei. l. 3 c. 19 that even in his time, and before, more was given to Stage-players, for superfluous pleasure, then was disbursed in the second Punicke warre upon the Roman Legions for the pub∣like safety, which was then indangered: with which the pa∣theticall speech of Salvian, to this purpose, well accords. Tunc enim integra Romani orbis mē∣bra florebant, agusta esse horrea publica opes fecerant, cunctarū urbiū cives divitijs ac delicijs afflebant. Vix poterat religionis auctoritas inter tanta rerū exuberantiā morū enere mensurā. Pascebantur tunc quidē passim in locis plurimis auctores tur∣piū voluptatū, sed plena ac referta erāt omnia. Nemo reipu sumptus cogitabat, nemo dispendia, quia non sentiebantur expensa. Quaerbat quodāmodo ipsa Respublica ubi perderet; quod penitus posset vix recipere; & ideo cumulus divitiarū, qui iam fere modū excesserat, etiā in res nugatorias redūdabar. Nunc autem quid dici potest? Recesserunt à nobis copiae veteres, recesserunt priorum temporum facultates. Miseri iàm sumus, & nec dum nugaces esse cessamus Salvian De Gub Dei. l. 6. p. 201.202. In former time (saith he) when every Part of the Roman Empire flourished, the Common-weale after a sort, did seeke
where and how to waste her wealth, having almost no place to keepe it. And therefore heapes of treasure, wel-nigh above mea∣sure, were consumed upon vaine Enterludes. But now what can be said? Our old abundance is departed from us gone is the wealth of former times; poore are we now, and yet we cease not to be vaine. Loca enim & habita cula tur∣pitudinum id∣circò adhuc sunt, quia illic impura omnia prius acta sunt: nunc autem lu∣dira ipsa adeò non aguntur, quia agi iàm prae miseria tmporis at{que} egestate non possunt. Et ideò quo prius actū est, vitiositatis fuit; quod nunc non agitur, ne∣cessitatis. Cala∣mitas enim fisci, & mendi∣citas Romani aerarij nō sinit, ut ubi{que} in res nugatorias per∣ditae profun∣dātur expensae. Pereant adhuc quālibet mul∣ta, & quasi in caenum proijci∣antur, sed tamē perire iam tanta non queunt, quia non sunt tanta quae pereant. Ibidem. p. 198. Play-houses, the places and habitations of fil∣thinesse, are yet standing, because in them all impure things were formerly acted: but yet now in many places Playes them∣selves are not so frequently acted because the misery, the pover∣ty of the time will not permit it. So that it was from mens im∣piety that Playes were acted in times past; and it is onely from their necessity that they are not acted now. For the pverty of the Exchequer, and the beggerlinesse of the Roman Treasury permit not now, that any prodigall expenses should be every where lavished out upon such ngatory trifles. Althought as yet much is still lost, and cast as it were into the dirt; yet no∣thing so much can be now consumed, because there is not much to spend. Nam quantum ad votum nostrae libidinis atque impurissimae voluptatis, optaremus pro∣fectò vel ad hoc tantum modo plus habere, ut possemus in hoc turpitudinis lutum plura convertere. Et res probat quanta prodigere vellemus, si opulenti essemus ac splendidi, cum prodigamus tanta mendici. Ea est enim labes praesentium morum atque perditio, ut cum iam non habeat paupetas quod possit perdere, adhuc tamen elit vitiositas plus perire. Ibidem, pag. 198.199. And yet such is our unsatiable desire of most filthy pleasure, that verily, we could wish that we had more, for this onely purpose, that we might convert more into this mire of fil∣thinesse. Yea, the very thing it selfe shewes how much we would prodigally consume on Stage-playes if we were rich, when as we waste so much upon them being poore. For this is the blemish and misery of our present condition, that although through our poverty we cannot, notwithstanding through our vitiousnesse, we would yet spend more. Which may as truely be predicated of the English Play-haunters now, as of the Romans then. By all these testimonies wee may evidently discerne, how prodigally expensive these Playes and Players were unto the ancient Romans, both in their wealth and poverty. The expences in setting forth pub∣ke
Playes and Enterludes being so excessive, that they could hardly be undergone by any but the Emperour, as De Theatro. l. 1. c. 11. p. 242. Caesar Bu∣lengerus testifieth. And if they were such to the very rich∣est Common-weales and Monarches, how much more intollerably expensive, thinke you, were they to pri∣vate persons? Legat hūc lo∣cū Iulius Mes∣salla, quem ego libere culpare audeo: ille e∣nim patrimo∣niū suū scenicis dedit, haeredi∣bus abnegavit: matris tunicam dedit mimae, lacernā patris, mimo. Flau. Vo∣pisci, Carinus. p. 449 See p 450. Flavius Vopiscus reports, of Iulius Mes∣salla; that he spent his whole Patrimony upon Stage-players, leaving nought unto his Heires: and that he gave his Mothers Coate unto a Woman-Actor, and his Fathers Cloke to a Player, for which he liberally taxeth him. Historiarum. lib. 27. Nicolaus and Dipnos. lib. 6. cap. 6. Athenaeus record of Sylla, the Roman Captaine, that he was so adicted to Playes, (he being much enamored with ludi∣crous sports,) that he gave them many acres of ground, out of the Republikes revenues. To which I may adde that of Circà aios om∣nes parcissimus uit, quod lx∣uriae sumptibus aerariū minu∣rat Circensos multos addidit ex ibidine po∣tius quam reli∣gione, & ut do∣mins factionū ditaret. Cōmodu Antoninus. p. 93. AElius Lampridius, who writes of Commodus Antoninus; that he deminished his Treasury by prodigall expenses upon Stage-playes; and that he added many Cirque playes rather out of lust, then out of religion, that so he might enrich the Masters of those factions. Gregory Nazienzen informes us; Quapropter manifestò patet, scenicorū & equestriū certaminū spectaculū merā a∣nimorū esse perniciem, corporū pugnā, ac praeter haec certissimū facultatum detriē∣tum. Quot enim familias subitò prostravit? Quot homines opulentos coegit bum mendicare? Quot urbes prius summa inter se amicitia conjunctos, funditus evertît? Ad Selucū. De Recta Educat. p. 1063.1064. that Stage-playes and Horse-races doe manifestly im∣poverish mens estates. How many Families (writes he) have they sodainely over-turned? how many rich men have they en∣forced to begge their bread? how many Citties living peaceably among themselves, have they uterly overthrowne? Nonne vides quosdam in Theatris in pancratiastas & mimos, quos spectare quis abominetur, pro brevis temporis honore ac populi plausu pecuniam prodigentes, &c? In Divites & Avaros, Srmo. 1. pag. 305. Seest thou not some men (writes S. Basil) prodigally consuming their mo∣ny in Play-houses upon Tumblers and Stage-players, which every one should abhor to behold, to gaine some momentany ho∣nour, and a little popular applause? It is (quoth Et quod nullis possit satisfactionibus expiari, histrionibus, Pantomimis, exoletis at{que} irrisoribus numinum dona instituuntur, & munera; ab officijs ocium publicis immunitas & vacatio cum coronis. Advrs. Gente. lib. 4. ag. 150. Arnobius) an inexpiable sinne, that gifts and stipends are alowed and ap∣pointed
unto Stage-players, and worne-out Pantomimes, the deriders of the gods; that they are exempted from publike Oices and imployments, and crowned with Garlands. Saint Quid ergo il∣los inducis ci∣naedos & exo∣letos? Ne{que} so∣lum inducis, sed etiam in∣numerabilibus & ineffabilibus honoras mu∣neribus: alibi os qui talia ∣gunt puiens, hic autem tan∣quā de repub∣lica bene meri∣tis, & peunias insumis, & pub∣licis impensis os alis. At sunt, inquit, in∣fames. Cur er∣go in eos tam multa impen∣dis? Nā si sunt infames, opor∣et os expelli, &c. Hom 13. in 1 Cor. 4. Tom. 4. Col. 356. C.D. See Hom. 42. in Act. Apost. Hom. 62 ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 17. in Ephes. & Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Matth. accordingly. Chrysostome oft complaines; that Stage-playes are the occasions of many prodigall vaine expenses: that men did bestow innumerable, yea, unspeakeable gifts, and consume much mony upon Stage-players: that they cherished them at their owne private houses, bestowing that food, that cost upon them, which should be spent upon Christs poore members: and that they maintained them likewise out of the publike Treasury, as if they had well deserved of the Common-weale, which had disfran∣chised and made them infamous. Saint Prodigum est popularis favoris gratia, exinanire proprias opes. Quod faciunt qui ludis Circēsibus, vel etiam theatralibus, & muneri∣bus gladiatorijs patrimonium dilapidant suū ut vincant superiorū celebritates; cùm toum illum sit inane quod agunt. De Officijs. l. 2. c. 21. & Ser. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. E. Ambrose makes mention of some, whom he censureth for prodigals, who spent their Patrimonies upon Stage-playes, Cirques, and Sword-playes, out of a vaine-glorious humour, to surpasse the solemnities of for∣mer times, when as all they did was but vanity. S. Augustine complaines, Et per illas moribus corrumpendis, rapiendo miseris civibus, largiendo scenicis turpibus. Quis ferret istos, quando pro superflua voluptate plura donātur histrionibus, quàm tunc legionibus pro extrema salute collata sunt? De Civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 12. & l. 3. c. 19. See l. 2. c. 5. to 15. that the Roman Magistrates, did corrupt the publike manners, by spoyling the miserable Citizens, and by giving unto filthy Stage-players; who received more gifts for their superfluous Playes, then the ancient Roman Legions had bestowed on them for their Warres. Pope Leo the first, makes this complaint, of the age wherein he lived. Pudet dicere, sed necesse est non tacere. Plus impenditur Daemonijs quam Apostolis, &c. In Octavo Petri & Pauli. Sermo c. 1 f 165. I am a∣shamed (saith he) to speake, and yet there is a necessity that I should not be silent: there is more now spent upon the Devill at Play-houses, then there is bestowed on Christ, or his Apostles. Asterius in his Homely against the feast of the Kalends, in∣formes us, Egregium hoc festum is alieni causa ac faenoris, paupertatis occasio, misriarium initium. Si pauxillum aliquid domi conditum in alimenta conjugis at{que} misrorū liberûm, promitur id ac proijcitur, ac edet ille cum suis per festum hoc praelarum esuriens atque omniū indigus. Bonorū jatu∣rā saciunt, tax∣ationis{que} & vul∣nerum merce∣dem, annonam ac cibariā pro∣munt ac prodi∣gunt, cum graui morū discipli∣nae{que} damno. Consules etiā ipsi fama incly∣ti ad fastigium rerū humanarū evecti per va∣nitatem opes exhauriunt, nō modo sine fru∣ct, sed etiā cū peccto; dici{que} verè potest, quàm sublimis corū thronus, tàm insignem esse dementiā. Cūenim capes∣cere permul∣tos solent ho∣nores, &c. nunc autē praesident. aurū{que} conge∣stū intra breve tēpus in aurigas, tibicines, mimos, saltatores, spadones distribūnt, &c. Ibid. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 4. p. 704. That Playes are the cause of Debt and Vsury;
the ocasion of Poverty, the beginning of Beggery. If one hath but a small stocke of mony layd up at home for the sustentation of his Wife and miserable Children, it is here drawne out and cast away; and he and his sit all this eminent feast, hungry, and indigent of all things. Men now make havocke of their goods, and prodigally spend them with the great losse both of manners and discipline. Yea, the very Consuls themselves, being men of renowne, advanced to the very top of humane honours, ex∣haust their wealth through vanity, not onely without fruit, but likewise with sinne; and it may be truely said; that as sublime as their throne is, so eminent is their folly. For whereas they are wont to accept of many dignities, and to obtaine most ample royall Leiftenantships; they study to rake as much wealth out of each of them as they can. Some of them convert the millitary stipends to their owne private lure: others of them sell iustice and truth for mony: other of them poll the Kings Treasures and revenues, laying up all they can scrape together on every side, to the offence of God, pretermitting no uniust, no inamous or dishonest gaine: And now when as they beare rule, in a very short space they spend the Gold they have thus hourded, upon Fdlers, Stageplayers, Dancers and Eunuches. And a little after. But At in loculos evacuas in turpē animi relaxationē, in risum indecorū & inconditü, ne{que} cōsideras quam multas pauperū lachrymas dones, per quas opes illae tuae cōflatae; quam multi in vincula coniecti verberati{que} furint, aut ad laqueū accesserint; ut tibi suppetat quod scenicis hodierno die lagiris, &c. Ibid. thou (saith he) dost See Bulengerus, De Theatro lib. 1 cap. 11 pag. 242. empty thy Bagges, upon the dishonest recreation of thy minde, upon unseemely and dis∣orderly laughter, never considering how many teares of poore men thou mightest relieve, by which thy wealth hath beene scraped together; how many have beene cast into prison? how many have beene whipt and brought to the Gallowes, that thou mightest have sufficient to give to Stage-players on this day? To passe by the testimony of Paedagogi. lib. 2. cap. 12. lib. 3. cap 11. Clemens Alexandrinus, De Spectaculis. lib. Tertullian, and Cyprian in this nature, with sundry Cassiodorus Variarum lib. 5. Epist. 42. & lib. 1. Epist. 30. o∣ther
Fathers; I shall close up this with that of Iohn Sa∣lisbury, our owne ancient Country-man; Hist ionibus ac mimis pecu∣nias, infinitas erogare non gravabatur, &c. Gratiam suam histrionibus & mimis multi prostituunt, & in exhibenda malitia corum caeca quadā & contemptibili magnificentia, non tàm mira∣biles, quàm mi∣serabiles faciūt sumptus. De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c 7.8. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 48. A.B. Many (writes he) out of a blinde contemptible magnificence, care not to la∣vish out infinite summes of mony to Stage-players and Actors. Many there are who prostitute their grace and favour unto Players, and in setting forward their lewdesse, out of a blinde dishonourable bounty, put themselves not so much to wonderfull, as to miserable expenses: and among others, be sharpely taxth Nero the Emperour for this very crime. To these I shall adde the concurrent testimony of some few Pagan Au∣thors. See Marcus Aurelius, prin∣ted at London 1586. towards the end. Marcus Aurelius, that worthy Roman Em∣perour, in his 12. Epistle to Lambert, hath this notable passage, concerning Players and mens expences on them. Sith fatall destinies have brought me into this world, I have seene nothing more See Scene 5. ensuing. unprofitable to the Common∣wealth, nor greater folly in them that be light of conditions, nor a worse invention of Vagabonds, nor a more cold revocation of mortall folke, then to learne of these Players, triflers and such other Iuglers. What thing is more See Ioannis Saresburiensis. De Nugis Cu∣rialium. l. 1. c. 8. & Act 5. Scene 11. ac∣cordingly. monstrous, then to see wisemen reioyce at the pastime of these vaine trilers? What greater mockery can there be in the Capitoll, then the foolish saying of a lester to be praysed with great laughter of wise men? What greater slander can be to Princes Houses, then to have their Gates alwayes open to these fooles, and never open to wise folkes? What greater cruelty can there be in any person, then to give more in one day to a foole, then to his servants in a yeere, or to his kinne all his life? What greater inconstancy can there be then to want men to furnish the Garrisons and Frontiers of Illirico, and these trewands to abide at Rome? What like shame can there be to Rome,Regis enim curiam sequun∣tur assidue hi∣striones, alea∣tores, mimi, balatrones, id genus omne. Petrus Blesensis. Epist. 14. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 714. B. Ioannis Saresburiensis De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. Gualther. Hom. 11 in Nahum. AEneas Sylvius. Epist. 105. p. 604. & pist. 166. p. 721. accordingly. then that the memory shall be left in Italy of the Tumblers, Trewands, Pipers, Sin∣gers of Iests, Taberers, Crowders, Dancers, Mummers, Ie∣sters, and Iuglers, rather then the renowne of Captaines, with their Triumphes and Armes? And when these Captaines
wandred all about Rome in safety, sounding their lewdnesse and gathering of mony, the Noble Barons and Captaines went from Realme to Realme, wsting their mony, adventuring their lives, and shedding their blood. In the uttermost parts of Spaine, when Warre began betweene the Liberiens and Gaditaines, and they of Liberie lacked mony, These ensu∣ing Histories of the excessive wealth of Play∣ers, together with that of AEsop, his wealth & luxu∣ry in Pliny. Nat. Hist. l. 9. c 35. lib. 10. c. 51. & l. 35 c. 12. are an un∣answerable Ar∣gument of mens great ex∣penses at Playes which thus enrich the Players. two Iuglers and Taberers offred to maintaine the Warre an whole yeere. And it follow∣ed, that with the goods of two fooles many wise men were slaine and overcome. In Ephesus a Citty of Asia, the famous Tem∣ple of Diana was edified with the confiscation of the goods of such a truant and foole. When Cadmus edefied the Citty of Thbes in Egypt with 50. Gates, the Minstrels gave him more towards it then all his friends. If the History be true, when Augustus edefied the walls of Rome, he had more of the tre∣wands that were drowned in Tiber, thn of the common Trea∣sure. The first King of Corinth arose by such villanies. And as I say of this small number, I might say of many other. One thing is come to my mind of the chance of these Trewaends, and that is, Whiles they be in presence, they make every man laugh at the follies they doe and say, and when they be gone, every man is sorry for his mony that they bare away. And of truth it is a iust sentence of the gods, that such as have taken vaine pleasure together, when they are departed to Sprne vo∣luptates; nocet empta dolore voluptas Horat. Epist l. 1. Epist. 2. pag. 241. weepe for their losses. Thus he. The Poet Ivenal reports; làm adem summis pariter minimis{que} li∣bido est, Vtspe∣ctet ludos cōduci Ogulnia vestem. Conducit comites, cellā, cervical, amicas, Nutri∣cem & flavem cui det mandata puellā. Haec tamēargenti superest quodcun{que} paterni Levibus athletis, ac vasa novissima donat, &c Prodiga non sentit pereuntem aemina censum; At velut exhausta redivivus pullulat arca, Nummus & è pleno semper tol∣latur acervo, Non unquā reptant quantū sibi gaudia constant, &c. Satyr 6. p. 54.55. that many wo∣men by frequenting Stage-Playes had beggered their Husbands and spent their whole estates: and Nam codice saevo Haeredes vetat esse suos, bona tota feruntur Ad Phialem, tantū artificis valet halitus oris. Saty. 10. p. 99. that divers had disinherited their Heires, and either spent or given away all their goods and lands to Players: which is seconded by Flavius Vopiscus, in the life of Carinus. pag. 449 450. The Poet Horace makes mention of one Vt quondam Marsaeus amator Originis ille, Qui patriam mimae donat, fundum{que} larem{que} Sermo. l. 1. Satyr. 2. p. 165. See p. 163. Marsaeus, who gave all his Lands, his Pa∣trimony
and Houshold-stuffe to a Woman-Actor: informing us withall; In cicere at{que} faba bona tu perdas{que} lupi∣nis, Latus ut in Circo spatiere, aut aeneus ut stes, Nudus a∣gris, nudus nummis, insa∣ne paternis? Sermo. l. 2. Satyr 3. pag. 210. that there were divers who had spent both their lands and mony upon Stage-playes, and donations to the people in Floralian Enterludes. To these I might accumulate the severall suffrages of moderne Christian Authors; as namely, of Vincentius, in his Speculum Historiale. lib. 29. c. 141. fol. 367. a pregnant place; of Francis Petrarcha. De Remedio Vtrius{que} Fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Of Nico∣laus De Clemangis, De Novis celebritatibus non instituendis. pag. 143. to 160. Of Bodinus, De Republica. lib. 6. c. 1. Of Master Northbroke, against Vaine Playes and Enterludes. fol. 28.29. Of Stephen Gosson, in his Schoole of Abuses, and Playes Confuted. Action 3. The 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. Bishop Babingtons Exposition up∣on the 8. Commandement. Iohn Field, his Declaration of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden. 1583. A short Treatise against Stage-playes. Anno 1625. D. Reinolds, his Over∣throw of Stage-playes. pag. 143. to 149. Caesar Bulengerus, De Circis Romanis ludis{que} Circensibus. lib. cap. 41.42. & De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 11. pag. 242.243. with infinite others which I pretermit, who all condemne and censure Stage-playes, in regard of the immoderate sinfull vaine expenses which they occasion, to Gods dishonour, the publike preiudice, and poore mens detriment. But for brevity sake, I shall close up all these evidences, with that of learned and labori∣ous Gualther, who affirmes; Sunt hujus∣modi homines, non parva re∣rumpublicarū pestis. Nam & opes publicas quàm privatas quàm maximè attenuant, & quod in paupe∣rum subventio∣nem impendi debeat, ipsi suis artibus paenè intercipere consueverunt. Hom. 11. in Nahum. vid. Ibidem. See Vincentij Speculum Historiale. l. 29. cap. 141. fol. 367. to the same purpose. that Stage-playes are no small plagues of Common-weales: For they exceedingly demi∣nish (among other mischiefes which hee there enume∣rates) as well the publike, as mens private wealth and they al∣most wholy intercept by their arts and sleights, that which ought to be bestowed for the poores reliefe. Neither need I seeke for further testimonies in so cleare a case, since our owne domestique experienc (especially in the Raigne of See Halls Chronicle. part 2. fol. 2. to 11. & 68. to 89. & 155.156, 157. & 212. to 218. King Henry the VIII. who spent infinite summes of mony
upon Stage-playes, Masques, and such like prodigall Shewes and Pageants) is a sufficient confirmation of my Minors truth. Not to mention the over-prodigall disburse∣ments upon Playes, and Masques of late Miseri iam sumus, & nec∣dū nugaces esse cessamus. Cū{que} etiam pupillis vel prodigis so∣leat subvenire paupertas, si∣mu{que} ut desti∣terint esse divi∣tes, desinunt esse vitio: nos tantū novum genus pupillo∣rum ac perdito∣rum sumus, in quibus opulen∣tia esse desij, sed nequitia perdurat: adeò nos non ut alij homines causas corruptlarū in illecebris sed in cordibus habe∣mu, & vitiosi∣as nostra, mens nostra est, & ad emē∣dandos nos, nō facultaū abla∣tione, sed mala∣rū rerū amore peccemus Salv. De Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 262. penurious times, which have beene wel-nigh as expensive as the Wars, and I dare say more chargable to many then their soules, on which the most of us bestow least cost, least time and care. How many hundreds, if not thousands, are there now among us, (to their condemnation, if not their reformation be it spoken,) who spend more, daily, weekely, monethly, if not yeerely at a Play-house to maintaine the Devils service and his instruments; then they disburse in pious uses, in reliefe of Ministers, Schollers, poore godly Christians, or maintenance of Gods service, all their life? How many assiduous Play-haunters are there who contribute more liberally, more frequently to Play-houses, then to Churches; See Iohn Fields Declaration of Gods Iudge∣ment at Paris Garden, accordingly. to Stage-playes, then to Lectures to Players, then to Preachers; to A∣ctors, then to Stius est auē prodesse etiā malis propter bo∣nos, quàm bonis decsse propter malos. Senec. De Beneficijs. l. 4 c. 28. poore mens Boxes? being at far greater cost to promote their owne and others iust damnation; then themselves or others are to advance their owne or o∣thers salvation. How many are there, who can bee at cost to hire a Quē tulit ad sce∣nm ventoso gloria curru Horat. Epist l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 283. Coach, a Boate, a Barge, to carry them to a Play house every day, where they must pay deare for their admission, Seates and Boxes; who will hardly be at any cost to convey themselves to a Sermon once a weeke, a moneth, a yeere, (especially on a weeke day) at a Verū quid ego de spatio lo∣quar itineris lōgioris, cū plurimaefaeminarū tanta im animi mollitudineresolvātur, ut nisi advectae mulis, quālibet exiguo spacio à domibus suis venre nequeant ad vi∣dendū Dominū in praesepi spiritali? Sed ex his qui cerè ambulandi laboē ferūt, alij theatrales turbas sanctis caetibus anteponunt. t barbari quidē illi priusquā Christū viderunt, tam longā propter ipsum viam exuperaverunt: tu verò nec posteaquā vi∣deris, illos probaris imitari. Nam & cum eum videris, ita eum relinquis, ut post eum curras ad Theatra, ac mimū potius audire ac videre desideres. At{que} ut eadem rursus attingam quae antea sum insectatus: Christum quide in spiritali sum praesepo derelinquis, properas verò acētem, videre in scena mere∣tricem. Hoc au∣tem quibus tan∣dem putamus dignū esse sup∣plicijs? Chrysost. Hom, 7. in Mat. Tō. 2. Col. 59. A. Church far
nearer to them then the Play-house; where they may have Seates, have entrance, (yea Prov. 9.2, 3, 5. Cant. 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. spirituall Cordials, and cele∣stiall Dainties to refresh their soules) without Isay 55.1, 2. Rev. 22.17. any money or expence? How many are there, who according to their severall qualities See Bulengers De Theatro. l. 1. cap. 30. spend 2. d. 3. d. 4. d. 6. d. 12. d. 18. d. 2. s. and sometimes 4. or 5. shillings at a Play-house, day by day, if Coach-hire, Boate-hire, Tobacco, Wine, Beere, and such like vaine expences which Playes doe usully occasion, be cast into the reckoning; and that in these penurious times, who can hardly spare, who can never honestly get by their lawfull callings, halfe so much? How many prodigally consume, not onely their charity, apparell, diet, bookes, and other necessaries; but even their annuall Pensions, Revenues and Estates at Picke-purse Stage-playes; Parum enim est luxuriae quod naturae satis est. Seneca. De Vita Beata. cap. 13. which are more expensive to them, then all their necessary disbursements? If we summe up all the prodigall vaine expenses which Play-houses and Playes occasion every way, we shall finde them al∣most infinite, wel-nigh incredible, See Scene 5. afterward. altogether intollera∣ble in any Christian frugall state; which must needs aban∣don Stage-playes as the See Scene 5. & Act 7. Scene 7. Athenians and Romans did at last, even in this regad, Qui enim vo∣luptaé sequi∣tur omnia post∣ponit, nec vo∣luptates sibi emit, sed se vo∣luptatibus ven∣dit. Seneca, De Vita Beata. c. 14. that they impoverish and quite ruine many; as the fore-quoted testimonies, with many dome∣stique experiments daily testifie. Flavij Vo∣pisci Carinus. pag. 450. Et haec quidem idcirco ego in literas retuli (as Vopiscus writes of Iulius Messalla) quo futuros editores pudor tangeret, ne patrimonia sua, proscriptis legitimis haeredibus, mimis & balatronibus deputarent. If any here reply, that they spend not much at Playes, and that their Play-house expences are farre from pro∣digality, what ever some men deeme them. I answer first; that there are few ordinary Stage-haunters of any generous quality, See Ambrose, Augustine, Basil, Nazienzen, Asterius, Salvian, Chrysostome, Iohn Saresbury, and others in their fore-quoted places. but spend excessively at Playes: some waste their Codex Theodosij. l. 15. Tit. 5. & 9. accordingly. Patrimonies at Play-houses, others the pensions which their friends alot them; o∣thers the money which should satisfie their Creditors,
and Cur eget in∣dignus quisquā te divite? quare Templa ruunt antiqua Deum? &c Horat. Sermo l. 2. Sat. 2. p. 202. relieve their needy Brethren; or else maintaine their Families. Most of them mispend more there, then they can well spare; all of them more then is well or lawfully spent. Secondly, he that spends least of all at Playes and Play-houses, is Vnus utri{que} Error sed varijs ludit partibus. Horat. Sermon. lib. 2. Satyr. 3. as really guilty of prodigality, though not in the same degree, as he that lavisheth out most of any, be∣cause the very giving of money to Players as Players; that is, for the exercising of their lewde lascivious art, is prodigality. Witnesse Tully himselfe, Prodigi sunt qui ludor ap∣paratu pecuni∣as fundunt. Ci∣cero, De Officijs. l. 2. about the middest. who defineth Prodigals, to be such who spend their money in setting forth Stage-playes, with which definition, De Remed. Vtri. Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30. Petrarch doth ac∣cord. Witnesse Clemens Alexandrinus, who resolves; that money spent on Playes and such like vanities, is Interitus nō sumptus locum obtinet. Paedag. l. 2. c. 12. & l. 3. c. 11. fol. 53. A. wastfull prodigality, not honest expence. Witnesse Saint Ambrose, who describes prodigality, Prodigū est popularis favo∣ris gratia exi∣nanire propri∣as opes. Quod faciunt qui lu∣dis Circibus, vel etiam thea∣tralibus patri∣moniū dilapidant suum, ut vincant superiorū celebritates; cùm totum illud sit inane quod agunt. De Offiijs. l. 2. c. 21. & Sermo. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. E. to be a wsting of wealth upon Plyers and Playes for popular applause: whence he reputes those Prodigals who doe so: informing us, withall, Ibi histriones accipi∣unt & gladiatores, & perit omne quod perditis datur. Ambrs. Sermo. in Dminica 8. post Pentecostn. Tom. 5. pag. 44. E. G. Sermo. 8. in the old, and 64. in the new Impressions of Saint Ambrose Workes.that whatsoever is given to Stage-players, Sword-players, and such like cast-awayes, is utterly lost, so that men ca reape no com∣fort from it. And yet, saith he, Magistratus in Theatris, mimis, athletis & gladiatoribus, alisque hujusmodi generibus hominum totum paenè patmonium suum largitur, ac prodigit, ut unius horae fvorem vulgi nimirum adquirat, nihil sibi ulterius profutuum. Ibidem. Tom. . p. 44. E. divers Magistrates have prodigally given and consumed almost their whole Patrimony in Theaters, upon Players, Wrestlers, Fencers, and such kinde of men, that they might purchase to themselves the peoples fa∣vor but for one houre, without any further advantage. To passe by Tertullians verdict; His itque infructuosos esse magnus est fructus. Apologia, Advers. Gentes. Tom. 2. pag. 706. that to be unfruitfull unto Players, and such unusefull persons, is great frugality: and so by consquence, that to part with money to them is prodigality: as Saint Basil, Naziazen, Leo, Chrysostome, Asterius, Salvian, Iohn Sarisbury, Petrarch, Bodinus, North∣brooke,
Gualther, Gosson, Doctor Reinolds, and others, in their fore-going passages testifie. Incognitus in Psal. 149. and our owne famous English Apostle, Dial. l. 3. c. 1. fol. 45. a. b. Iohn Wickleff, expresly teach us; that to give to Stage-players is prodiga∣lity: and therefore Wicklef instructs us: Veruntamen magnificus de∣bet secundum prudentiā pro talibus casibus suā largitionē providè men∣surare, speciali∣ter non dando histrionibus, vel mēdicis va∣lidis, pro vano nomine acqui∣rendo. Dial l. 3. c 1. fol. 45. a. that a magnifi∣cent man ought carefully to measure out his bounty in many cases according to prudence, especially in not giving to Stage-players, or sturdie Beggers to purcase a vaine-glorious name, as the custome of many was to doe. S. Augustine is yet more strict; resolving us; Donare res su∣as histrionibus vitiū est imma∣ne, non virtus. Exposit in Ioan. Tract 100. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 608. that for a man to bestow his goods or mony upon Stage-players, is not onely prodigality and no vertue, but a great hainous vice. Which assertion of his is both recited and approved by Distinct. 86. fol. 139. Gratian, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap 8. Iohn Sarisbury, Secunda secundae. Quaest. 168. Artic. 2.3m. A∣quinas, Sūma Theologiae pars 2. Quaest. 133. memb. 4. Alexander de Hales, Exposit. in l. 4 Regū. Tō. 7. p. 100. C.D. Tostatus, In Psal. 149. Incognitus, De. Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53. A∣stexanus,Exposit. on the 8. Cōmandement Bishop Babington, Treatise against Vaine Playes & Enter∣ludes. f. 28.29. Master Norhbrooke, Playes Confuted. Act. 2. Stephen Gosson, and Mariana & Brissonius, De Spectaculis. lib. Sūma Rosella. Tit. Histrio. others, upon these ensuing reasons. First, because the donation of money unto Stage-players Exanimat lentus spectator. sedulus inflat. Horat. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 283 doth animate, yea maintaine them in their diabolicall lewde unhri∣stian profession, and makes their Vbi enim malos praemia sequūtur, haud facile quisquā gratuito bo∣nus est. Salustij. Histor. l. 1. p. 200. reformation desperate. Se∣condly, because it supports the Synagogues, Lectures, and lewde instruments of Satan, (the Seminaries of all wickednesse) which else would fall to ruine, there be∣ing no contributing Spectators to suport them. If there were no Play-haunters to behold and cherish Stage-playes, there would then (as Non ita ille, qui hoc fingit, est delinquens, ut tu qui haec iubes fieri: ne{que} iubes solū, sed studes & laetaris & laudas quae fiunt, & omninò applaudis tali ergasterio daemoniorū. Principiū & radix talis iniquitatis vos estis, maximè qui tribuitis, qui diem universam in his consumitis. Si enim nullus esset tlium spectator ac fautor, nec essent quidē qui dicere illa aut agere curarent. Quan∣do verò vos cernunt & artes proprias, & ipsa exercendi quotidiani operis loca, & ipsum quem ex his paratis quaestum & prorsus omnia simul vanissimi illius specta∣culi amore deserere, avidiori & illi intentione ad haec rapiuntur, studiū{que} his magis impendunt. Chrys. Hom. 6. in Mat Tom. 2. Col. 51.52. & Alex Alensis. Sūma Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 133. Memb. 4. Chrysostome truely writes) be no
Play-poets, no Players for to pen or act them: But when Actors see men leave heir owne callings, trades, and daily imployments, together with the gaine arising thence, and all thing else to run to Stage-playes; this makes them more earnestly to addict themselves to their trade of acting, and to bestow more diligence in playing: The multitude of prodigall Spectators, is that which makes so many Play-houses, Playes, and Actors, which else would quickly vanish: Play-aunters there∣fore, (if we believe Saint See n & z be∣fore. Chrysostome and Alexander A∣lensis) are the chiefe originall delinquents in the case of Playes, because their presence at them, their contribution towards them and their Actors, is the rise from whence they spring. Third∣ly, because it maintaines Players in a constant course of theft: For the very profession of a Stage-player See Act 7. Scene 2.3. & Part 2. Act 2. thorowout. being unlawfull (as Divines agree:) the mony they receive for acting (as In 4. Regum. Tom. 7. p. 100. C. D. Tostatus, De Ludo A∣leae. lib. Danaeus, In their seve∣rall Expositi∣ons and Trea∣tises on the 8. Cōmandemēt. Bishop Babington, Master Per∣kins, Elton, Dod, Downham, Lake, and Williams, with sun∣dry others have resolved) must certainely be theft, because not gotten by any lawfull meanes. Fourthly, because it Basil. Hom. 1. in Divites & Avaros. Gual∣ther. om. 11. & Ambros. Sermo. 64. Tom. 5. p. 44. E G accor∣dingly. extenuates, or intercepts mens charity to the poore, who like See Ambros. Sermo. 64. & Basil. Hom. 1. in Divites & Avaros, accordingly.empty Bagges, are best capable to receive the superfluity of rich mens plenty, which Players for the most part now engrosse. Fiftly, ui hi∣strionibus donant, dicant mihi, quare donant? hoc in illis amant in quo nequissimi sunt: hoc in illis pascunt, hoc in illis vestiunt, ipsam nequitiam publicam spectaculis homin. Qui donant aliquid histrionibus, quare donant? nūquid non & ipsa homi∣nibus donantur? Non tam naturam ibi attendunt operis Dei, sed nequitiam opris humani. Qui histrionibus donant, non hominibus donant, sed arti nequissimae. Nam si homo tantum esset, & histrio non esset, non e donares. Honoras in o vitium, non naturam. August. Enar. in Psal. 102. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 336. See Gratian, Distinct. 88. & Ioa. Saresburiensis. De Nugis Curialiū. l 1. c. 8. accordingly. because those who give their money to Stage-playes, bestow it on them onely for the exercise of their unchristian art; for their Playes and Action, not their poverty or desert: they are bountifull to them as Players onely, not as men, as Christi∣ans, whose very penury begges an almes. Our Players, though they are 14. Eliz c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4 & 1. Iac. c. 7. Rogues and Sturdy-beggers by Statute, are yet so haughty in their mindes, See Gosson, his Schoole of Abuses accordingly. so gorgeously glittering in their
hired Brokers Robes; and sometimes so well lined in the Purse, that they disdaine the name of Beggers, though in truth they are no other, then The 3. Blast of Rerait from Playes & Thea∣ters. p. 75.76. accordingly. arrogant saucy Vagrants, who rather challenge as a due, then begge the almes of Play-haunters: Hence all the coyne they get by Playing, is stiled by themselves, not Almes, but Wages: not Charity, but Desert; not bounty, but reward: and those who part with it deeme it so; who gratifie them onely for their Playing, not pitty them for their poverty; as Au∣gustine, with others well observe: Now thus to remu∣nerate Stage-playes, pro exercitio sui vitij, as the Histrionibus dare causa va∣nae gloriae, vel pro exercitio vitij sui, imma∣ne peccatū est. Aquinas, secūda secundae. Quaest. 168. Art. 2.3m. Alexander Alen∣ss, Summa Theo∣logiae. pars 2. Quaest. 133. Memb. 4. Astexa∣nus, De Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53. Gra∣tian. Distinct. 86. fol. 139. August. Tractat 100. in Ioan. Summa Ro∣sella. Histrio. Al∣varus Pelagius, De Plancts Ec∣clsiae. lib. 2. Artic. 46. fol. 150. Schoole∣men speake; that is, for the very exercise of their unlawfull art, is a vast notorious sinne: (Vincentij Speculum Historiale. lib. 29. cap. 341. fol. 367. Quoniaem histrionibus dare, est Daemonibus imolare:) which as it Qui donant histrionibus, quare donant? hoc utique in illis fovent in quo nequissimi sunt. Nempè qui nequitiam fovet, estne bonus? unde quid faut o∣ribus eorum immineat colligis; si facientes & consentientes pari paena recolis esse plectendos. Ioannis Saresburiensis. De Nugis Curialium. lib 1. cap. 8. makes those who are guilty of it, wicked men; so it bindes them over to eternall punish∣ments without repentance, as all the Marginall Authors doe define. Lastly, because mens contribution to Playes and Players (whose Nihil demen∣ius quàm de improbo homine benè mereri. Quisquis enim id facit, suo officio suo∣que sumptu hostem sibi facit eum, quem ne{que} amicum, ne{que} inimicū habere liuit. Erasmus. De Rat. Consr. Epist. pag. 182. approbation or applause, no good men should demerit by their bounty to them) involues them both in the guilt and punishment of all those sinnes that are occasi∣oned or committed by them: as Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Matth. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. Augustine. Enr. in Psal. 102. with all the other fore-quoted Au∣thors largely testifie. What threfor Seneca writes in a paralell case: Pecuniam non dabo quam numeraturam adulterae sciam; ne in societatem turpis facti, aut cōsilij veniam Si potero, revocabo; sin mimus non adjuvabo scelus. De Beneficijs. lib. 2. cap. 14. I will not give money unto him, whom I know will part with it to an A dulteresse, lest I should participate of his filthy fact or counsell: If I can, I will recall him; if not, I will not further him in his wickednesse: The same should bee
every true Christians resolution in this case of Stage-players: hee should not give his money unto Players; lest he participate both in the guilt and punishment of their sinnes; he should doe his best to hinder; at least∣wise he should never foster Playes or Players, by con∣tributing to their Boxes, or resorting to their Theaters, for the fore-named reasons. Since therefore it is abunndantly evident by the pre∣mises; that Stage-playes are the occasions of much Turpissimū genus damni est inconsulta donatio. Senca. De Benficijs. lib. 4. ap. 10. vaine, much sinfull prodigall expence: and that the very contributing to Players Boxes (of which every com∣mon Spectator must be alwayes culpable) is not onely apparant prodigality, but a Immane pec∣catum. See l before. Giant-like sinne, which brings much danger to mens soules: It must needs cause us to abominate, to abandon Stage-playes, even for this effect, which alwayes necessarily attends them. SCENA TERTIA. THe third effect or fruit of Stage-playes, is the irri∣tation, the inflamation, the fomentation of divers sinfull lusts, of many lewde, unchaste adulterous affecti∣ons, both in the Actors and Spectators hearts: From whence this 29. Play-oppugning Argument will ebul∣liate.Argument 29. That which doth ordinarily, if not alwayes defile the eyes, the eares and soules both of the Actors and Spectators, by ingendring, by exciting mere∣tricious lustfull, lewde, adulterous desires and af∣fections in their hearts; or by instigating, by pre∣paring, by inducing them to actuall uncleanesse; See Mat. 5.29. 1 Thes. 5.22. Iude 23. must needs be abominable and unlawfull unto Christi∣ans.
But this doe Stage-playes, as I shall here make ma∣nifest. Therefore they must needs bee abominable and un∣lawfull unto Christians. The Major is irrfragable; because all polluting ob∣jects, all unchaste affections, and unruly Concupiscen∣ti enim carnis foentū pecca∣ti, ena vitioū:  lagrātior est, gravus que praecipitat & inflāmat. Ambr. l. 4. in Lucae E∣vang. Tom. 3. p. 34. B. C. Cupi∣ditas fomes & velut quoddam incentivū viti∣orum. Bernard. Sermo 1. In Caena Dom. Col. 145. C. carnall lusts, (which are Mat. 5.27, 28. Rom. 7.7. Eph. 5.3. 2 Pet. 2.14. no lesse then adultery, then uncleanesse it selfe in Gods account,) doe not onely Ier. 4.14. Mat. 5.27, 28. c. 15.18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 2.11. Tit. 1.15. contaminate, and war against mens soules; but likewise Rom. 1.18. deprive them of Gods favour, Psal. 66.18. Isay 1.11 to 19. disable them to every holy duty, Ephes. 2.23. 2 Tim. 2.26. inthrall them unto Satan; Rev. 21.27. Gal. 5.19, 21. exclude them out of Heaven; and without repentance 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 6.8. Rev. 21.9. c. 22 15. plunge them into Hell for all eternity. Since therefore the Scripture calls upon us; 1 Cor. 7.1. to cleanse our selves from all pol∣lution of flesh and spirit; Col. 3.5. Rom. 8.10, 11. to morifie our carnall lusts and earthly members: to Gal. 5.24. crucifie the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof; the Rom. 6.21, 23 &c. 8.6, 13. fruit of which is eternall death: 1 Pet. 2.11. to ab∣staine from fleshly lusts which war against the soule; and to Rom. 13.14. make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: Since it expresly informes us; Ephes. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4. Rom. 1.24. to 29. that none but Idolarous Heathen Gentiles, in whom the Devill raignes; Rom. 8.5 to 14. 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. Tit. 3.3. Iude 8. Amos 6.1. to 7. none but unregenerate, carnall, gracelesse persons, who have no part in Christ, doe wallow with delight; doe foster, harbour, or take pleasure in such lusts as these. And that Gal. 5.24. Rom. 8.1, 4, 9, 10. all who are Christs, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: Rom. 8.7, 8. because the carnall minde is enmity against God, neither is it, nor can it be subiect to his law: There are none but Whores and Panders, or foule incarnate Devils, who dare con∣troll my Minors truth; which all Christians must sub∣scribe to; Rom. 8.12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. because they are no longer debtors to the flesh, to live after the flesh; but Rom. 14.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 3.23 c. 6.19.20. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 2.20. sworne Servants and Spouses unto Christ alone, Rom. 6.13, 19. c. 21.1. Nupsisti Christo, illi tradidisti carnem tuā, illi sponsasti maturitatem tuam. Incede secundum sponsi tui voluntatem. Tertul. De Velandis Virginibus cap. 13. to whom they have resigned both their soules
and bodies, to be at none but his disposall. The Minor is notoriously evident, not onely by ex∣perience; but likewise by the concurring suffrages of sundry Fathers, Councels, and Authors of all sorts: Who as they stile, See p. 66 67, 68, 69. with the Fathers & Au∣thors there al∣leaged; who give these Epi∣thites or Stiles to Playes and Play-houes. See the 2. & 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes & Theaters. D. Sparkes, his Re∣hearsal Sermon at Paus Crosse, Aprill 29. 1579. A Trea∣tise of Dancs, Anno 1581. Stephen Gossn, his Schoole of Abuses, accor∣dingly. Play-houses; The Temples of Venery; the Schooles of Bawdry; the Des of Lewdnesse; the Sikes of Filthinesse: and Stage-playes; the Lectures of Ribaldry; the Meditations of Adultery; the Nurseries of Vncleanesse: the Fomentations of Lechery: the Fuell, the Incendiaries of lust: and the very Devils Forge or Bellowes, to excite and blow up flames of carnall Concupicence, both in the Actors and Spectators hearts: a suficient ratification of our present Assumpti∣on. So they likewise positively afirme, and copiously testifie the truth of this proposition in expresse words: Witnesse Clemens Alexandrinus; who informes us; Quod sanctū est Daemonioū personis in Co∣maedi ludifica∣ti estis. Desine canticū ô Homere, non est pulchrum, docet adulterium. Nos autem ne aures quidē tupris & fornicationibus inquinare volumus, &c Horum non solum usus, sed etiā aspectus & auditus deponendam esse memoriam vobis annuntiamus: scortatae sunt aures vestrae, fornicati sunt ocui, & quod est magis novum, ante complexum vestri adulteriū admiserunt aspectus. Oratio. Adhortatoria ad Gentes. p. 8. E.F. & 9. A. that Comedies and amorous moderne Poems teach men adultery: that they defile mens eares with incests, and fornications: therefore he tells the Gentiles, that not onely the use, the sight and hearing, but likewise the very memory of Stage-playes, yea of the fabu∣lous Poems, pictures, and representations of their unchate, li∣bidinous Idol-gods, ought utterly to be abolished; because their eares had committed whoredome, their eyes had played the harlots with them: and which is more strange, that their very sight had committed adultery before any actuall embracement, by reason of these obscene Pictures and filthy Enterludes. Hence he instructeth Christians; Non ducet ergò nos Paedagogus ad spectacula: nec inconcinne stadia & Theatra pestilen∣iae cathedram quis voaverit. Magna enim conusione & iniquitate hi caeus plaeni sunt, & occasio conventus causa est turpitudinis, cū viri & faeminae permixtim conve∣niant alter ad alterius spectculū. Hic quo{que} slestū est consiliū, quemdmodū ad∣versus iustū. Dum enim lasciviunt oculi, calescunt appetitiones, & oculi proximos impudentius respicere assue facti, quòd concessum ociū habeant, intendunt cupidita∣tes. Prohibeantur ergo spectacula & acromata, quae nequitia verbisque obscaenis & vanis, temere profusis, plena sunt, &c. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. that his Paedagoge must not
lead them unto Playes or Theaters, which may not be unfitly called, the Chaire of Pestilence: because these Conventicles where men and women meete promisuously together to behold one another, are the occasion of lewdnesse: here they give, or plot wicked counsell: For while their eyes are lasciviously occupied, their lusts waxe warme, and their eyes being accustomed to glance more impudently on those who sit next them, having li∣berty and leisure granted to them, intend their lusts. These Spectacles therefore (saith he) which are fraught with wicked∣nesse, with obscene, and vaine speeches; with the representations of filthy deeds; with impudent and unchaste discourses which provoke laughter, the Idaeaes of which men carry away with them to their houses, & there more deepely imprint them in their mindes; are utterly to he prohibited. Witnesse Tertullian; who records; Tragaediae & Comaediae sce∣lerum & libi∣dinū auctrices, cruentae & las∣ciae, impiae & prodigae. De Spectae. cap. 18. that Tragedies and Comedies, are the aug∣menters of villanies and lusts; being both cruell and lascivious, impious and prodigall. Oculos & au∣res communi∣cant, &c. Ibid. cap. 17. That they defile mens eyes and eares with uncleanesse: Scintillas libi∣dinum confla∣bellant. Ibid. cap. 25. and blow up the sparkles of their Lusts. Hence he stiles the Play-house: Sacrarium Ve∣neris: Veneris domus. Ibid. cap. 10. the Chappell of Venery: the House of Lechery: the Consistoriū impudicitiae, ubi nihil probatur quā quod alibi non probatur. Ibid. c. 17. Consistory of Incontinency: Hence he informes us; Nihil nobis cum impudicitia Theatri. Apologia Advers. Gentes. c. 38. Non scenae tur∣petudinibus Christianū affici oportet. De habitu Mulir. c. 5. that all the Christians in the Primitive Church, had utterly relinquished the uncleanesse of the Theater. Hence he comforts the close imprisoned Martyrs of his time with this consideration; Non in loca libidinum publicarū oculi tuiimpingunt: non clamoribus spectaculorū vel impudicitia celebrā∣tium caederis. Ad Martyres. lib. c. 2. Scenia Faeditas. De Pudicitia. lib. cap. 7. that by meanes of their imprisonment; their eyes were kept from the sight of Theaters, the places of publike lust, and lechery. Neither were their eares ofended with the clamors or uncleanesse of Stage-players. And hence hee doubles this Assertion. Similiter impudicitiam omnem amoliri iubemut; hoc igitur modo etiam à Theatro sepera∣mr, quod est privatum consistorium impudicitiae, &c. Habes igitur & Theatri in∣terdictionem, de interdictione impudicitiae. De Spectaculis. cap. 17. That Stage-playes are absolutely prohibited, by the inhibition of in∣continency. Witnesse Origen; who instructeth us: that
Christians must not lift up their eyes to Spectacula Circi vel The∣atri sordidarū spectacula visi∣onum, quibus libidinem, vel alia quae{que} vitia amans, inflam∣metur. In Epist. Ad Rom. c 11. l. 8. Tom 3. f. 103. A. Stage-playes, the plea∣surable delights of polluted eyes (as he there stiles them) lest their lusts should be inflamed by them. What then (writes he in Nam de ijs quid dicmus qui cum Gen∣tilium turbis ad spectacula maurant, & cōspectus suos at{que} auditus impudicis ver∣bis & actibus faedant? Non est nostrū pro∣nunciare de ta∣libus. Ipsi enim sentire & vide∣re possunt quā sibi deligerint partē. Tu ergo qui haec audis, &c. Sancti esto∣e quia & ego sanctus sum Dominus Deus veter; Sapien∣ter intellige quae dicuntur. Vt sis beatus cū feceris a. Sepera te  terrenis atibus, sepa te à con∣cupiscentia mundi: Sepera te & remove ab omni pollutione peccati. Hm 11. Super Lviticum. Tom. 1 ol. 84. B.C. another place) shall we say of these who with the troopes of the Gentiles make haste to Stage-playes, and defile their eyes and eares with unchaste words and motions? It is not our part o passe sentence upon such, for they themselves may perceive and see what part they have chosen to themselves. Thou there∣fore who hearest these things. Be ye holy, for I am holy: Wisely understand what is spoken: seperate thy selfe from ter∣rene actions; seperate thy selfe from the lusts of the world, and from the contagion of every sinne. Witnesse Saint Cyprian, who stiles Theaters b The Stewes of publike chastity, and Ma∣stership of obscaenity: which teach those sinnes in publike, that men may more usually commit them in private. Quid intr haec Christianus fidelis facit, cu vitia non licet nec cogitare? quid oblectatur simulachris libidinis, ut in ipsis deposita vere∣cundia audacior fiat ad crimina? Discit facere dum assuesit vide. Illas tamen qus infaelicitas sua in servitutem prostituit libidinis publicae, occultent locus, & dedecus suum de latebris consolantur: erubescunt videri etiam qui pudorem vendierunt. A istud publicum nostrum omnibus videntibus geritur, & prstiutrum transitur obscaenitas. Quaesitum est quomodo adulterium ex oculis admittetur. Cyprian D Se∣ctaculis. lib. What doth a faithfull Christian (writes he) doe amidest these things, who may not so much as thinke upon any vice? Why is he delighted with these Images of lusts; that so having deposited his mode∣sty in them, he may be made more bold to commit the crimes themselves? He learnes to commit, who accustometh himselfe to behold the Theatricall representations of uncleanesse. Those common whores whose misfortune hath prostituted them to the slavery of the publike Stewes, conceale the place where their fil∣thinesse is committed, taking comfort in their disgrace from the secrecy of their Cells: Those Adulterers also who have sold their chastity, are ashamed to be seene in publike: But this our publike lewdnesse is acted in the open viewe of all men: the ob∣saenity of common Whores is surpassed, and men have found out how they may commit adultery beore the eyes of others.
Ita amatur, quicquid nō li∣cet, &c. Non li∣cet inquā adesse Christianis fi∣delibus, non li∣cet omnino, nec illis quos ad oblectamenta auiū ad omnes ubi{que} Gaecia instructos suis artibus vanis mitit, &c. Fugi∣enda sunt ista Christianis fi∣delibus, ut iam frequēter dixi∣mus, tam vana, tam perniciosa, tam sacrilega spectacul, & o∣culi nostri fūt, & aures custodi∣ndae; cito e∣nim in hoc as∣suescimus quod audimus scele∣re. Nam cum mens hominis ad vitia ipsa du∣catur, sibi quid faciet si habue∣rit exemplan∣turae, corporis lubricae? quae sponte coruit, quid faciet si fuerit impulsa? Avocandus est igitur animus ab istis. Cyrian. Ibid. Thus whatsoever is prohibited, is affected. Now I say, (I pray observe it well good Reader,) it is NOT LAVVFVLL FOR FAITHFVLL CHRISTIANS, yea, IT IS ALTOGETHER VNLAVVFVLL FOR THEM TO BE PRESENT AT THESE PLAYES. These so vaine, so pernicious, so sachrile∣gious Stage-playes, AS I HAVE NOVV OFTEN AFFIR∣MED, ARE VVHOLLY TO BEE AVOYDED BY ALL FAITHFVLL CHRISTIANS; because we soone accustome our selves to the practise of that wickednesse, which we heare and see: For since the minde of man is easily led on to these vices of it selfe; what will it doe when it is presented with unchaste examples both of body and nature? she who thus falls of her owne accord, what will she doe if she be precipitated? The minde therefore is wholly to be avotated from these lascivious Enterludes. Adde we to this another speech of his to the same purpose. Converte hinc vultus ad diversi spectaculi nō minus paenitēda contagia; in Theatris quo{que} inspicies quod tibi & dolori sit & pudo∣ri. Cothurnus est tragicus prisca facinora carmine recensere, de paracidis & incestis horror antiquus, expressa ad imaginē veritaris actione replicatur, ne seculis trāseun∣tibus exolecat, quod aliquando cōmissum est: Admonetur omnis aetas auditu fieri posse, quod aliquādo factū est, &c. Cyprian Ep. l. 2. Ep. 2. Donato. See here Act 5. Scene 3. Turne (saith he) thine eyes to the no-lesse sinfull contagions of a different shew: thou maist also behold in Theaters, that which my affect thee both with griefe and shame. It is a Tragedians part, to relae ancient wickednesses in verse: the ancient horror of Paricides and Incestuou per∣sons is represented by him to the life; lest those wickednesses which were committed in former ages, should grow obsolete in aftertimes. Every age is admonished, that what-ever villany was actually committed in former times, may be committed still. Those things are now made examples, which have ceased to be sines. Then you may please to know from Stage-players, what filthinesse any man hath committed in secret, or to heare what he might have done. Adulteriū discitur dū videtur; & lenocināte ad vitia publicae authoritatis malo, quae pudica forrasse ad spectaculū matrona processerat, revertitur impudica. Adhuc deinde morū quanta labes, quae probrorum fomēnta, quae alimenta vitiorum, histrionibus gestibus inquinri? videre contra faedus ius{que} nascendi patientiam incestae turpitu∣dinis elaboratam, &c. Ibidem. Thus is adultery learned whiles it is
beheld, and the evill of publike authority playing the Pander to these vices, she who at first came perchance a chaste Matron to the Play, returnes a Strumpet from the Play-house. More∣over, what a great corruption of mens manners, what fomen∣tations of reproachfull actions, what a fuell of vices is it, to be polluted with histrionicall gestures, to see filthy Incest elaborate∣ly acted, against the very covenant and right of mans nativity? See Act 5. Scene 3. p. 168. where the La∣tine is recited. Men are emasculated; all the honour and vigor of their Sex is abated by the filthinesse of an effeminated body; and he there gives best consent, who doth most dissolve himselfe into a woman: his sinne addes to his applause, and he is reputed the more skilfull, by how much the more filthy he is. What then cannot be perswade who is such a one? he moves the sences, he soothes the affections, he expugnes the stronger conscience of an upright heart; neither wants there the authority of flattering reproach, that so destruction may creepe upon men by a more delicate hearing. See Act 3. Scene 3. p. 75. They represent unchaste Venus, adulte∣rous Mars, yea, their great love, not more a Prince in domi∣nion, then in vices; burning with his very Thunderbolts into terrene loves; See Lactantius De falsa Reli∣gione. l. 1 c. 11. Tatianus, & Cle∣mens Alexandr. Oratio. Ad∣hor. ad Gen∣tes. Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 9. c. 18. Ovid Meta∣morph. lib. 10.sometimes waxing white in the feathers of a Swan; Lactantius, De falsa Relig. c. 11. Arnobius, Ad∣vers. Gentes. lib. 4. Ovid Metamorph. l. 10. Terentij Eunuhus. August De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 7. otherwhiles descending in a golden shoure; Lactantius De falsa Relig. c. 11. Ovid Metamorph. l. 10. Iulius Firmicus, De Errore Profanarum Re∣lig. cap. 13. anon comming forth attended with Birds to ravish and snach away yong Youthes, Quaere iam-nunc an possit esse qui spectat, integer vel pudicus, cum Deos suos quos venerantur imitantur? O si & possis in illa sublim specula con∣stitutus oculos tuos inserere secretis, recludere cubiculorū obductos fores, & ad con∣scientiā luminis penetralia occulta reserare, aspicias ab impudicis geri, quod nec aspi∣cere possit frons padica, &c. Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. See Act 5. Scene 3. p. 168.169. Examine now whether those who behold these Spectacles can be sincere or chaste, whiles they imitate the gods they worship? Even sinnes themselves are made religious to these wretches: O if thou couldest standing in that sublime watch-towre insert thine eyes into their secrets, open the closed doores of their bed-chambers, and bring all their hidden inmost roomes unto the conscience or the light, thou mightest see that done by these unchaste persons, which is a sinne to see: thou mightest see that, which they sighing under the fury of their vices
deny themselves to have done, and yet they hasten for to doe it. See Act 3. Scene 3 p. 92. and Act 4. Scene 3. p 135.136. & 211. Men rush upon men with mad unruly lusts, &c. A sufficient adequate testimony of my Minors truth. Adde wee to these irrefragable Witnesses some others of no lesse va∣lidity: Tatianus, stiles Stage-players, Adulterij pro∣moor, cinae do∣rum doctor, cōdemnando∣rum author. Obscaen verba naso resonante effutiunt, & motus, indecen∣tes moventur, & adulteriorū in scena Magi∣stros siliae & si∣lij vestri spe∣ctant. Omnes nequitiae no∣cturnae, & quid obscaenè dictū demulcere po∣test auditores, ala voce pro∣mulgantur. O∣ratio Contra Grae∣cos Bibl. Patrum. Tō. 2. p. 180. B.C. the Promoters of A∣dultery the Tutors of effeminate Dancers, and Sodomites; the authors of damnable practises; the teachers of adultery, who utter obscene words with a loud voyee, and use lascivious moti∣ons promulgating all nocturnall abominations, and uttering all obscenities that might delight the Auditors. Nec caetera spectacula spe∣ctare audemus, ne oculi nostri inquinentur, & aures nostrae hauriant prophana, quae ibi decantantur, carmina. Nec phas est nobis audire adulteria Deorum hominú{que}, &c. Ad Autolycum. l. 3. Bib Patr. Tom. 2. p 170. G.H Theophylus An∣tiochenus, writes: That the Christians in his time durst not be∣hold Stage-playes, lest their eyes should be defiled with the adul∣teries of those Devill-gods and men, that were there persona∣ted; and lest their eares should sucke in those prophane verses that were there recited. To passe by Advers. Gentes. l. 4. p. 249.250, 251. l. 7. p. 231.232, 233. Arnobius, who de∣claimes much against the obscenity of Stage-playes, which did adulterate the mindes, inflame the lusts of the Spectators, by reason of those lewde adulterous villanies of Idol-gods that were represented in them, which he at larges discyphers: Lactanti∣us, his Scholler, writes thus of Stage-playes. In scenis nelcio an sit corruptela vitiosior. Nam & Comicae fabulae de stupris virginum loquuntur aut a∣moribus meretricum: & quo magis sunt eloquētes, qui flagitia illa finxerunt, eò ma∣gis sententiarum elegantia persuadent, & facilius inhaerent audientium memoriae versus numerosi & ornati. Item Tragicae historiae subijciunt oculis parricidia & in∣cesta Regum malorum & cothurnata scelera demonstrant. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. lib. 6. cap. 20. In Stage-playes also, I know not whether there be a more dangerous cor∣ruption. For Comicall fables treat of the rapes of Virgins, or of the loves of Harlots, and by how much the more eloquent the Poets are who have feined these wickednesses, by so much the more doe they perswade by their elegant sentences, and the more easily doe their wel-composed and adorned verses sticke in the memory of the Hearers. Likewise Trapicall Histories present unto mens eyes the Paricides, the Incests of evill Kings, and they demonstrate tragicall wickednesses. Histrionum quo{que} impudicissimi motus, quid aliud, nisi libidines do∣cent, & insti∣gant? quorum enervata cor∣pora, & in mu∣liebrē incessum habitū{que} mol∣lita, impudicas faeminas inho∣nestis gestibus mentiuntur. Quid de mimis loquor corrup∣telarū praefe∣rentibus disci∣plinam? qui docent adulte∣ria, dū fingunt, & simulatis erudiunt ad ve∣ra? Ibidem. The most unchaste
motions likewise of Stage-players, what else doe they but teach and prouoke lusts? whose enervated bodies dissolved into a wo∣mans pace and habit, personate unchaste women with dishonest gestures. What shall I speake of mimicall Actors, who carry along with them even in outward shew, the discipline of depra∣ving corruptions? who teach adulteries whiles they feine them, and by counterfeit representations instruct men how to commit even reall uncleanesses. Quid iuvenes, aut virgines fa∣ciant, quū haec & fieri sine pu∣dore, & spect∣ri libenter ab omnibus cer∣nunt? Admonē∣tur uti{que} quid facere posn, & inflāmantur libidie, quae aspectu maxi∣me concitatur: ac se quis{que} pro sexu in illis imaginibus praefigurat: probantqu illa dum rident, & ad haerentibus vitijs corruptiores ad cubiula revertuntur. Ibidem. What may yong Men, or Virgins doe, when as they perceive these things to be acted without shame, and willingly to be beheld of all? Verily they are admonished what they may doe, and they are inflamed with lust, which is most of all excited by the sight: and every one according to his Sex doth prefigure himselfe in these Images; yea, they approve them whiles they laugh at them, and they returne more corrupt to their Chambers by reason of the vices which adhere unto them. Nec puei mo∣do, quos praematuris vitijs imb non opotet, sed etiam senes quos pecce iam non decet in talem vitiorum semitam dilabuntur. Vitanda ergo spectacula om∣nia, non solum ne quid vitiorum pectoribus insideat, quae sedata & paciica esse debent, sed ne cujus nos voluptatis consuetudo delinia, & à Deo atque à bo∣nis operibus avertat. Ibidem. And not onely Children who ought not to be seasoned with premature vices, but even old men, for whom it is un∣seemely now to sinne, stray aside into this path of vices. THEREFORE ALL SPECTACLES AND STAGE-PLAYES (I pray observe it well) ARE VVHOLY TO BE AVOYDED, not only lest any vices should harbour in our hearts, which ought to be calme and quiet; but likewise lest the custome of any pleasure should delight us, and so TVRNE VS FROM GOD AND FROM GOOD VVORKES. His spectaculis & delectantur, & libenter in∣tersunt. Quae, quoniam maxima sunt irritmnta vitiorum, & ad corrumpen∣dos animos potissime valent, tollenda sunt nobis: quia non modo ad vitam beatam nihil conferunt, sed etiam noent plurimu. Ibidem. Yea these Enterludes with which men are delighted, and at which they are willingly present; because they are THE GREATEST INSTIGATIONS VNTO VICE, (pray marke it) AND THE MOST POVVERFVLL INSTRVMENTS TO COR∣RVPT
MENS MINDES, ARE VVHOLY TO BE ABOLI∣SHED FROM AMONG VS; Since they doe not onely, not con∣tribute any thing to an happy life, but likewise doe much hurt. In another worke of his he writes thus. Quid scena? num sanctio? in qua Cōme∣dia de stupris & amoribus; Tra∣gaedia de ince∣stis & parrici∣dijs fabulatur. Histrionici etiā impudici ge∣stus, quibus in∣fames faeminas imitantur, libi∣dines, quas sal∣tndo expri∣munt, docent: An nō mimu corruptela dis∣ciplinarū est? in quo iunt per imaginem, quae non sunt, ut fi∣ant sine pudo∣re, quae vera sunt. Spectant haec adolescen∣tes: quorum lu∣brica aetas, quae fraenari, ac regi debet, ad vitia & peccaa his imginibus ruditur. Fugiend igitur omnia spectacula ut tranqull mentis statum tenere possimus. Renunciandum noxijs voluptaibus, ne deliniti sua∣vitate pestifera, in mortis laqueos incidamus. Placet sola virtus, cujus merces im∣mortalis est, quum vicerit voluptatem. Lactantius, Divinarum. Instit. Epitome cap. 6. What is the Play-house? is it more holy then these Swrd-playes? in which a Comedy treates of Rapes, and Loves a Tragedy of Incests, and Murthers. Moreover unchaste Histrionicall gestures, with which they imitate infamous Women, doe teach those lusts which they expresse by dancing: And is not then a Player the corruption of dscipline, in whom those things that are done are acted by representation, that so thse things which are truely reall, may be perpetrated without any shame. Yong men behold these things, whose slippery age, which should be brideled and governed, is instructed to commit sinnes and vices by these re∣presentations. THEREFORE ALL PLAYES ARE TO BEE AVOYDED, THAT VVE MAY enioy a serene state of minde. THESE NOXIOVS PLEASVRES ARE TO BE RENOVN∣CED, lest we being delighted with their pestiferous sweetnesse, should fall into the snares of death. Vertue alone, whose reward is immortall, will then content us, when she hath overcome these pleasures. Thus farre Lactantius, most elegantly, most truely. Adde wee to him Minucius Felix, that emi∣nent Christian Lawyer, whom Minucius Felix non ignobilis inter causidicos loci fuit. Hujs liber, cu Octavio titulus est, declarat, quam idonus assertor veritatis ee potuisset, si se totum ad id stu∣dium contulisset. De Iustitia lib. 5. cap 1. Lactantius himselfe com∣mends: who writes thus of Stage-playes. Comaediae & Tragaediae vestrae incestis gloriantur, quas vos libentr & legitis, & auditis: & sic Deos colitis ince∣stos, cum mtre, cum fiiâ, cum sorore conjunctos: meritò igitur incestum penes vos saepe depraehenditur semper admittiur. Minucius Felix. Octavius. pag. 101. Your Come∣dies and Tragedies glory in incestuous persons, and yet you willingly both read and heare them: and so you worship Instuous gods, who have coupled with their owne Mothers, Daughters,
Sistrs: Worthily therefore (such was the fruit of these their Stage-playes) is Incest oft-times deprehended among you, alwayes is it tollerated and committed. Nos igitur qui moribus & pudore cense∣mur meritò malis volupta∣tibus, & pom∣pis vestris, & spectaculis ab∣stinemus: quo∣rum & de sacris originem novi∣mus, & ut noxia blandimenta damnamus. Nā in ludis curuli∣bus, quis non horreat populi in se rixantis insaniam? in gladiatorijs ho∣micidij discipli∣nam? in scenicis etiam non mi∣nor furor, tur∣pitudo prolixi∣or. Nunc enim mimus, vel ex∣ponitadulteria, vel monstrat. Nunc enervis histrio amorem dū fingit, infligit. Idē Deos vestros, induendo stupra, suspiria, odia, dedecorat. Idem simulatis doloribus lacrymas vestras vanis gestibus & utibus provocat. Sic homicidiū in vero flagitatis, in mendacio fletis, Ibid. p. 123.124. We therefore who are valued according to our maners and modesty, deserved∣ly absteine from your evill pleasures, your shewes, and Stage-playes, whom we know to have taken their originall from your Idol-worship, and whose noxious flattering enticements we con∣demne. For in your Chariot-playes, who would not abhorre the madnesse of th people brawling among themselves? the disci∣pline or art of murther in Sword-playes? in Stage-playes like∣wise there is no lesse fury, more prolix obscenity: For one while the testing Actor, doth either expound adulteries, or personate them. Another while, THE EFFEMINATE STAGE-PLAYER VVHILES HE FEINES LOVE, DOTH VIO∣LENTLY INFLICT IT. The same by personating whre∣domes, sighes, hatreds, disgraceth your gods: The same wh feined griefes provokes your teares with his vaine gestures and nods. Thus you desire true murther, you bewaile feined, &c. Thus hee. Saint Basil the Great, informes us: Spectacula & corrupti canus nimiam in animis ingenerātes libidinē, &c. Nscij sane ludos spectaculis abundantes lascivis, cōmunem ac publicam officinam scelerum esse: modulationes at{que} concentus meretricios{que} cantus, auditorum animis insi∣dentes, nil alid efficere, quam ut turpitudinem omnibus persuadeant, citharae do∣rum sonitus imitantes. Hxaemeron. Hom. 4. Tom. 1. pag. 45. See De Legendis libris Gentilium, Oratio. pag. 408.412. accordingly. That the very beholding and hearing of Stage-playes ingenders over∣much lust in the mindes of men; That Stage-playes abounding with lascivious Spectacles are the common Shops of all wicked∣nesse: that they sticke fast in the mindes of the Auditors: and serve to no other purpose but to perswade all men unto filthinesse. Gregory Nyssen records; Sordida & luxuriosa Spectacula, & in muris, & in aulis diversae ad luxuriam animae picturae, & in vasis sculpturae impressae nequitiam praedicant, quibus cogitatio ad cupiditates suas revocatur, vitu∣perosi spectaculi visione, ad animam usque passionum affectu perveniente, ne scilicet cupiditatum ardore extinguatur, aut retundaur. Vitae Moseos Enarratio. pag. 503. See 502. That lascivious Spectacles; and
filthy Pictures engraven or painted either in Walls, in Halls, or Plate, (to satisfie the luxury of the minde) doe proclaime lewdnesse: the thoughs are recalled to their lusts, by the sight of these blame-worthy Spectacles, whose inflammation pierceth even to the affections, lest verily the heat of mens lusts should be quenched. Quod si re∣condita, abdita∣que hujusmodi, non dico vascu∣la & capsulas (multisenim ea patent, nec ali∣na sunt a tur∣pitudine vitae) sed occulta mē∣tis & animi perspicere po∣teris, iam verò accumulatrū anarū putredi∣nem reperies faetidam. At modesti homi∣nis oculus etiā mundus est, & haec quae ad luxuriam inci∣tant, spectacula despicit. Ibidem. If that thou couldest dive, I say, not into the Vessels and Caskets (for they are manifest unto many, neither are they different from their filthinesse of life) but into the retyred hidden secrets of the minde and soule of a man delighted with these Spectacles, thou shouldest verily there finde a stiking rottennesse of many accumulated Frogges; that is (as hee there ex∣presseth himselfe in a former passage) of filthy lusts and vices. But even the eye of a chaste man is cleane, and refuseth these Spectacles which incite men unto luxury, or carnall plea∣sure. Our common Play-haunters and lascivious Pi∣cture-masters therefore, by this Fathers verdict, (what∣ever they may deeme themselves,) are no chaste, no modest persons; Qui naturam respicit, homi∣nes: qui vitam considerat, non homines, sed ex brutorum genere eos esse putabit: cujus quidem bruti signa tam in universa domo, quam in singulis invenias partibus. Ibidem yea rather beasts, then men; as he there tearmes them. Gregory Nazienzen, stiles Stage-players; Turpitudinis administri. Ad Seleucum, De Recta Educatione. pag 1063. the servants of lewdnesse: Play-houses, Lasciva faeditatis, & impuritatis omnis officina. Ibidem. the lascivious shops of all filthinesse and impurity: Stage-playes: Lascivorum hominum inhonestae & inde∣corae disciplinae, qui nihil turpe ducunt, praeter modestiam. Nimirum in his natura vitiatur & adulterina it, voluptatumque flamma multiplex accenditur. Ibidem. the dishonest unseemely instructions of lascivious men, who repute nothing filthy, but modesty; by which nature is vitiated, and made adulterous, and severall flames of different lusts are kindled. Etiam spurcissimus rebus Theatra conduntur, ut ne hi morbi clam turpitudinem suam exerceant. Sed disciplinis improbis & sceleratis praemia pro∣posita sint. Tu autem mihi velim haec execreris. Noli pupulas uas polluere, sed omnes oculorum corruptelas vitato, t pupulae tuae mihi. Virgines cura tua mane∣ant. Ibidem. Theaters likewise are seasoned with most filthy things; lest that these diseases should practise their lewdnesse onely in se∣cret; Rewards are promised to these dishonest, and wicked in∣structions:
But doe thou have these things in execration: Suf∣fer not thy female pupils to be defiled with them; but cause them to avoyd all corruptions of their eyes, that so they may con∣tine Virgins to me, by thy care: Intimating hereby, that resort to Stage-playes, would soone defloure their Vir∣ginity, and make them Strumpets. Saint Hilary in∣formes us, Immacula∣tus sit, ac niti∣dus: itque i non corpus stupris conta∣minatum, non oculi spectacu∣lis theatralibus sordidati, &c. Enarrat in Psal. 14. pag. 202. G. That he who will ascend up ino the Hill of the Lord must keepe himselfe unspotted from corruption; his body must not be defiled with whoredome; his eyes must not be pollu∣ted with Stage-playes: which hee there couples with whordome, because they ingender unchaste affections in mens hearts, and oft-times allure them to actuall lewdnesse. Therefore in his Commentary on the 118. alias the 119. Psalme, verse 37. (Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanity) he paraphraseth thus: Orat autem & animi & corporis ocu∣los; os scili∣cet, qui in the∣atralibus lu∣dis captivi in∣cubant, & ob∣scaenis illis spe∣ctaculorum fa∣bulis, &c. vani∣tatibus avert. Ibidem. pag. 258. E. F.That the Pro∣phet prayes to have bot the eys of his body and minde turned away from Stage-playes, and the obscene fables of dishonest En∣terludes; which did formerly occupy and defile them. Cyrill of Hierusalem affirmes; Pompa Dia∣boli, est in Theatris spe∣ctacula, &c. Ne ergo sis curiosus in frequentia spectaculorum, ubi conspicias mimorum peu∣lantias, omni contumelia & impudicitia referas, &c. Catechesis Mystagogic cap. 1. fol. 175. B. That Play-house meetings, and Playes, which are the Devils Pompes, were fraught with all lewdnesse, contumely, and incontinency; Whence he perswades all Christians to avoyd them. Saint Ambrose stiles Stage-playes Diabolus tibi effundat spectacula vanitatum; incentiva inserat volup∣atum: pete ut dominus avertat oculos tuos. Avertamus igitur oculos à vanitati∣bus, atque ludorum theatralium spectaculis, ne quod oculos viderit, animus con∣cupiscat. In hoc navigio corporis tui movetur aestus cùpiditatum; & non avertis oculus animae tuae ne videant sentinam libidinum, ne aspiciant mundi hujus ster∣cora. Ambros Enarrat. in Psal. 118 Octon. 5. Tom. 2. pag. 430. F. 431. B.D. Spectacles of Vanities, by which the Devill convayes incentives of pleasures into mens hearts. Let us therefore (saith he) turne away our eyes from these vanities, and Stage-playes, lest our minds should affect that which our eyes behold, & let us come to God that he would doe it for us. In the sip of thy body there is a tempest of lusts raysed, and yet thou turnest not away the eyes of thy soule that they should not see the sinke of lusts, nor behold the filth of this world: Such are Stage-playes
in this Fathers repute. S. Hierom in his Epistle to Salvina, writes thus unto her. Tenera res in faeminis fama pudicitiae est, quasi flos pul∣cherrimus ctò ad levem mar∣cessit auram, levi{que} flatu cor∣rūpitur; maxi∣me ubi aetas consentit ad vi∣tium, & mari∣talis deest au∣ctoritas, cujus umbra tutamen uxoris est. Epist. 9. c. 5. Tō. 1. p. 28. The fame of chastity in women is a tender thing; like a most beautifull flower it is quickly blasted with a small winde, and corrupted with an easie breath: especially where both age consents to vice, and the au∣thority of an Husband is wanting, whose shadow is the shelter of the Wife. Non ambulet iuxta te cala∣mistratus pro∣curator, non histrio fractus in faeminam, non cantoris Diabolici ve∣nenata dulce∣do, non iuvenis cultus & niti∣dus. Nihil artiū scenicarum ibi iungatur, &c. eò quod incen∣tiva vitiorum omniū titilant animos, & qui∣busdam illecebris ad mortiferas animam voluptates trahunt, &c. Ibidem. See Epist. 10. cap 4. & Epist. 18. accordingly. Wherefore let no frizeld-pated Steward, no effe∣minate Stage-player accompany thee; let not the venomous sweetnesse of a Diabolicall Singer come neere thee, nor a compt and beautifull Youth. Hae thou nothing to doe with Stage-playes: because they are the pleasing incendiaries of mens lusts and vices: because they draw mens soules by their flattering entisements to deadly pleasures, (which Christians should ex∣tinguish with the love of Christ, and curbe with fasting:) and cause them to violate the vow and bond of Chastity, of Widdow∣hood, of Virginity. So in his Commentary on Ezechiel. lib. 6. cap 20. he certifieth us. Sed & nobis quando exitur de AEgypto, iubetur ut offensiones oculorum nostrorū abjciamus, ne scilicet his delectemur, quibus anteà delectabamur in saeculo: ne simulachris AEgypti polluamur, adinventionibus scilicet Philosophorum, at{que} Haereticorū, quae recte Idola nominantur. A spectaculis quo{que}, imò offensionibus AEgypti removeamus oculos, arenae, circi, Theatrorum, & omni∣bus, quae animae contaminant puritatem, & per sensus ingrediuntur ad mentem: im∣pleturque quod scriptum est: Mors intravit per fenestras vestras. Ibidem. Tom. 4. pag. 39. A. That we also when as we depart out of AEgypt, are commanded to cast away all those things which offend our eyes, that so we may not be delighted with those things with which we were formerly affected in the world; to wit, with the inventions of Philosophers and Heretiques, which are rightly stiled Idols. We must likewise remove our eyes from all the Spectacles, yea rather, the offences of AEgypt, as Sword-playes, Cirque-playes, and Stage-playes; which defile the pu∣rity of the soule; and by the sences gaine entrance to the minde: and so that is fulfilled, which is written; Death hath entred by your windowes: By this grave learned Fathers verdict then, it is most evident; that Stage-playes devirginate unmarried persons, especially beautifull tender Vir∣gins
who resort unto them, (which I would our fe∣male Play-haunters; and See Augustin Hom. 21. om. 10. pag. 592. their Parents would consider:) that they defile their soules with impure carnall lusts; and so let in eternall death upon them. Saint Augustine brands all Stage-playes with this stigmaticall Impresse. That they are Ludi scenici Spectacula tur∣pitudinum. De Civit. Dei. lib 1. cap. 32. the Spctacles of filthinesse: Probitatis & honestatis e∣versio. Ibid. c. 33. The overturners of goodnesse and honesty: Vere Fugalia, sed pudoris & honestatis. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 6. The chasers away of all modesty and chastity: Meretriciam pompam hinc celebrari, &c. Avertebant fa∣ciem ab impu∣rs motibus scenicorum, ar∣tem flagitij vi∣dere erubescen∣tes, ne auderent impudicos ge∣stus ore libero cernere, &c. Frequentans in aperto invi∣tamenta ne∣quitiae, ad pos∣sidendos innu∣merabiles malos. Ibidem l. 2. c. 26. Meretricious shewes. The unchaste, the filthy ge∣stures of Actors: The art of mischievous villanies, which even modest Pagans did blush to behold: The invitations to lewd∣nesse, by which the Devill useth to gaine innumerable compa∣nies of evill men unto himsefe. Hence hee stiles Theaters; Theatra, Caveae turpitudinum; & professiones publicae flagitiosorū. De Consensu Evan. l. 1. c. 33. Tom. 4. pars 1. p. 530. The Cages of uncleanesse, the publike professions of wicked∣nesse, of wicked men: and Stage-playes; Hanc talium numinum placationem petulntissimam, impurissimam, impudentissimam, nequissi∣mam, immundissimam, cujus actores laudanda Romanae virtutis indoles honore privavit, tribu movit, agnovit turpes, fecit infames. Hanc inquam pudendam, verae{que} religion adversandam & detestandam numinum placationem; has fabulas in Deos illecebrosas atque criminosas, haec ignominiosa Deorum facta scelerate turpiter{que} conficta, vel sceleratius turpiusque commiss, oculis & auribus publicis civitas toa discebat, haec commissa numinibus placere cernebat, & ideo non solum illis exhi∣benda, sed sibi quoque imitanda credebat. Idem. De Civit Dei. lib. 2. cap. 27. The most petu∣lant, the most impure, impudent, wicked, uncleane; the most shamefull and detestable attonements of filthy Devil-gods; which to true Religion are most excrable: whose Actors the laudable towardnes of Roman vertue had deprivd of all honour, disfranchised their tribe, acknowledged as filthy, made infa∣mous: because the people were instructed, incouraged by the sight and hearing of Stge-playes, to imitate, to practise those alluring criminous fictions; those ignominious facts of Pagan-gods, that were either wickedly and filthily forged of them, or more wickedly and filthily committed by them. Hence is it that this godly Father, doth Qua su∣pra. De Doctrina Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 25. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 4 cap. 1. Confessionum. lib. 6. cap. 7.8 & Epist. 202. oft dissuade all Christians from acting, seeing, or frequenting Stage-playes, and Cirque-playes, because they are but Pnders, but allectives to uncleanesse, incen∣diaries
and fomentations unto carnall lusts. Hence he speakes thus to Christian Parents (which I would to God those gracelesse Parents who either accompany, send, encou∣rage, or else permit their Children to runne to filthy, lewde, lascivious Stage-playes, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorē testa diu. Horace Epist. l. 1. Epist. 2. pag. 24. which vitiate, which de∣prave them ever after, would seriously consider:) Quotiescú{que} fratres charissi∣mi aliquos ex filijs vestris ad spectacula vel furiosa, vel cru∣enta, vel turpia, quasi ad ali∣quod bonum opus currere vana persuasio∣ne & pestifero amore cognos∣citis, vos qui jam Deo pro∣picio ista, non solū luxuriosa, sed etiam cru∣delia oblecta∣menta despici∣tis, castigare eos, & abun∣dantius pro eis domino suppli∣care debetis, quia illos cognoscitis ire in vanitatem, & inanias mendaces, & negli∣gere quò vocati sunt. August. Hom. 21. Tom. 10. pag. 592. As oft, deare Breathren, as you know that any of your Children resor either to furious, bloody, or filthy Enterludes, with a vaine per∣swation, and pestiferous love as if it were to some good worke, you who now by the grace of God contemne, not onely these luxu∣rious, but also cruell recreations, and disports, ought diligently to chastise them, and to pray more abundantly to the Lord for them, because you know that they run unto vanity, and lying follies, neglecting that place to which they are called. Qui si forte in ipso Circo aliqua ex causa expavescant, continuò se signant, & stant illic portantes in fronte, unde abscederent si hoc portarent in corde. Omnis enim qui ad aliquod opus ma∣lum currit, si fortè pedem impegerit, signat os suum, & nscit quod includit potius Dae∣monem quam excludit. Tunc enim bene se signaret, & Diabolum de corde suo re∣pelleret, si se ab illo opere nefario revocaret. Vnde iterum atque iterum rogo vos fratres charissimi, ut pro eis totis viribus supplicetis quatenus ad ista damnanda intellectum accipere mereantur, & affectum ad fugienda, & misericordiam ad ag∣noscendum. Ibidem. These if they chance to be affrighted in the Play-house by any sudden accident, (I would our Popish Stage-haunters, who thinke to scare away the Devill from them by their crossings, would well consider it,) doe presently crosse themselves, and they stand there carrying that in their fore∣heds, from whence they would depart if they carried it in their hearts. For every one who runnes to any evill worke, if he chance but to stumble, doth forth-with crosse his face, and knoweth not, that he doth rather include, then exclude the De∣vill. For then should he crosse himselfe well, and repell the De∣vill out of his heart, if he recalled himsefe from that wicked worke. Wherefore I intreat you, deare Brethren, agaie and againe, that you would supplicate for them with all your might, that so they may receive understanding to condemne these dam∣nable
things; desire, to avoyd them; mercy, to acknowledge them. Loquemur tamen & ad il∣los, quos fre∣quentèr ab Ec∣clesiae conven∣tu spectacula voluptuosa subducant. Ro∣go vos fratres charissimi, ut quotiescunque eos tale aliquid facere videri∣tis, ad vicem nostram seve∣rissime castige∣tis. Sit ad eos vox nostra, me∣moria vestra: corrigite ar∣guendo, conso∣lamini allo∣quendo, exem∣plum praebete vivendo. Ade∣rit illis qui af∣fuit vobis. Ibid. We may likewise speake unto those whom voluptuous Stage-playes oft-times draw from the assemblies of the Church. Notwithstanding I intreat you, deare Brethren, that as often as you shall see them to doe any such thing, you would in our stead most severely correct them: Let them heare our voyce, your remembrance: correct them by reproving them, comfort them by conferring with them, give them an ensample by living well: Then he will be present with them, who hath beene present with you. Thus Saint Augustine, by whose words you may easily discover, not onely the truth of our present As∣sumption: but likewise the sinfulnesse, the unlawfulnesse of Playes themselves, Ambae tupes, ambae{que} dam∣nabiles. Illa e∣nim de Dijs turpia fingenda seminat, haec favendo metit. Illa mendacia spargit, haec colligit. Facinora & flagitia numinū illa cantat, haec amat. Illa prodit aut fingit; haec autem attestatur veris, aut oble statur & falsis. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 6. c. 6. as also of acting, hearing, seeing and frequenting Stage-playes: Which hee likewise seconds in some other passages: as namely in his 2. Booke, De Moribus Manichaeorum, where hee writes thus against them. Postremò in Theatris electos & aetate, & ut videbantur, moribus graves, cum sene presbytero saepissimè invenimus. Omitto invenes, quos etiam rixantes pro scenicis & aurigis depraehendere soleba∣mus; quae rès mediocri argumento est, quo modo se possint continere ab occul∣tis, cum eam cupiditatm superare non possint, quae illos auditorum suorum oculis sustentat, & prodit erubescentes, at{que} fugitantes. Ibid. cap. 19. Tom. 1. p. 1129. Finally, we have oft-times found in Theaters divers of their choyce men, who were grave both in age, and as they seemed, even in manners too, with an old Presbyter. I omit yong men whom we were likewise wont to finde brawling for Stage-players and Wagoners: which thing is no small argu∣ment after what manner they can containe themselves from se∣cret adulteries, and villanies, since they cannot overcome that lust, which may uphold them in the eyes of their Auditors, and makes them even to blush and runne away for shame. In his Booke, De Catechizandis Rudibus. cap. 16. Hee informes us: Sunt etiam homines qui nec divites esse quaerunt, nec ad vanas honorum pompas ambi∣unt pervenire, sed gaudere & requiescere volunt in popinis, & in fornicationibus & in Theatris at{que} spectaculis nugacitatis, quae in magnis civitatibus gratis habentur. Sed sic etiam ipsi aut consumunt per luxuriam paupertatem suam, & ab egestate po∣steâ in furta & effracturas & aliquando etiā in latrocinia prosiliunt, & subitò multis & magnis timo∣ribus implen∣tur: & qui in popina paul antè cātabant, iàm planctus carceris somni∣ant. Studiis au∣tem spectacu∣lorum fiunt Daemonibus similes, &c. Ibidem Tom. 4. pag. 340. That there are certaine men who seeke not to be rich, nor
yet to aspire to the vaine pompes of honors, but desire onely to be merry and to rest quietly in Ale-houses, in Brothel-houses, in Theaters, and in the spectacles of vanity, which are had gratis in great Citties. But these through their luxury consume their meane estate, and from poverty they fall to Burglaries, Thefts, and Robberies, and are suddenly filled with many and great feares: and these who a little before did sing in an Ale-house, now dreame of the mourning of a prison. But by the study and sight of Stage-playes they are made like to Devils, &c. To passe by his sundry notable passages against Players and Stage-playes, in his 1.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8. Bookes, De Civitate Dei, which I shall touch upon in some other Scenes: in his 17. Sermon De Verbis Apostoli. Tom. 10. pag. 442. he writes. That of those things which delight the sences of the body, some are lawfull; others unlawfull. Delectant e∣nim ut dixi, o∣culos & specta∣cula ista magna naturae, sed de∣lectant etiam & oculos specta∣cula Theatro∣rum. Haec lici∣ta, illa illicita. Psalmus sacer suaviter canta∣tus delectat au∣ditum, sed delectant auditum etiam cantica histrionum. Hoc licitè, illud illicitè. Ibidem. For these great spectacles of nature, as I have said, delight the eyes; and the spectacles of Play-houses delight the eyes likewise: these are lawfull, those unlawfull. An holy Psalme sung sweetly delights the hearing, and so doe the songs of Stage-players delight the hearing too: This lawfully, the other unlawfully. So that if this Father may be Iudge: the very seeing and hearing of Stage-playes is unlawfull. Heare him but once more for all: De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 2. cap. 1.2. Tom. 9. pars 1. pag. 1393.1394, 1395. There are two sorts of Wea∣pons with which the Devill fights against mens soules; plea∣sures, and feare. Plures tamen noveritis dilectissimi capere adversarium per voluptatem, quàm pe morem. Nam quare quotidie muscipulam spectaculorum, insaniam stu∣diorum ac turpium voluptatum proponit, nisi ut his delectationibus capiat, quos amiserat, ac laetetur denuo se invenisse quod perdiderat? Quid nobis opus est ire per multa? Breviter admonendi estis quid spernere & quid diligere debeatis. Fugie dilectissimi spectacula, fugite caveas turpissimas Diaboli, ne vos vincula teneant maligni. Sed si oblectandus est animus & spectare delectat, exhibet nobis sancta mater Ecclesia veneranda, haec salubria spectacula, quae & men∣tes vestras oblectent sua delectatione, & in vobis non corrumpant sed custodiant fidem, &c. Ibidem. Yet beloved, you must know, that the Devill takes more by pleasures, then by feare. For why doth he daily
set the Mouse-trap of Stage-playes, the madnesse of filthy stu∣dies and pleasures, but that he might take those whom he hath lost with these delights, and reioyce that he hath found that a∣gaine which he had lost? What need we runne thorow many things? You are breefly to be admonished, what you ought to reiect, and what to love. Flie Stage-playes, my best beloved, lie (Play-houses) the most filthy Dens of the Devill, lest the Chaines of that wicked one hold you captive. But if the minde be to be exhilerated, and delights to behold, the holy Mother the Church will exhibit you those venerable and wholesome spe∣ctacles, which will delight your mindes with their pleasure, and will not corrupt but keepe faith in you. Is any of you a lover of the Cirque? What doth e delight in in the Circus? To see the Coachmen striving, the people breathing out frantique furies, every swift one going before breaking the horse of his Adver∣sary. This is all the pleasure to shout, because he hath overcome whom the Devill hath overcome: to reioyce and insult, that the adverse part hath lost an horse, when as he who is delighted with such a spectacle, hath already lost his soule. See on the other side our holy, hlesome, and most sweet spectacles. Be∣hold in the Booke of the Acts 3. Acts of the Apostles, a lame man never walking from his birth, whom Peter hath made running: see one suddenly whole, whom before thou didest behold infirme: and if there be any soundnesse of minde in thee, if the reason of equity, and the pleasure of salvation shine forth in thee; see what thou oughtest to behold, consider where thou oughtest to shout: there, where sound horses are broken in pieces, or here where bruised men are made whole? But if that pompe; that coulor of the horses, that composition of the Chariots, those orna∣ments of the Coachman standing above governing the horses, and desiring to overcome; if this pompe, as I have said, delight thee; neither hath he denied this to thee, who hath commanded thee, to renounce the pompes of the Devill: we also have our spirituall Horseman the holy Prophet Elijas, who 2 Kings 2. being set upon a fiery Chariot, hath runne so much, that he hath taken the very limits, (or won the goale) of Heaven. And if thou desirest to see the adversaries, which even true vertue hath o∣vercome
and whom he by ring hath ut-gon, and from whose victory he hath received the reward of supernall greatnesse; he hath cast the Exod. 15. Chariots of Pharoh and al his strength into the Sea: Alius fortas∣is Theatri a∣matr admonē∣dus sit, quid fu∣giat, & quo de∣lectetur, ac sic voluptatem spe∣ctandi non per∣dat sed mutet. n Theatris labes morum, discere turpi, audie inhone∣sta videre per∣niciosa. Sed ad∣iuvāte domino a fortiter re∣pelamus, sin∣gula singuis comparemus. Illic intuentur spectatores propositū nes∣cio quem o∣fictum dem Iovem, & dul∣terantem & to∣ntem:  respiie n e∣rum Deu Christum, cstitatem docentem, immundiciam destruentem, salubria praedicantem. Illi fingitu quod idem Iovis unonem habeat sororem & conjugem: hi praedica∣mus snctam Mariam  simul ac Virginem: Illic stupor ingeritur visui, ex usu hominem in fune ambulantem: hic magnum miraclum, Petrum mare pedibus transeuntem. Illic per inimicam (mimcan) turpitudinem castitas vioatur: hic per castam Ssanam castumque Ioseph libido omprimitur, mors contemnitur, Deus amatur, castitas exaltatur. Chorus illic & cantio Pantomimi illicit auditum, sed ex∣pugnat saum affectum: & quid tale nostro cantico comparandum sit, in quo diit qui ama & canta, Narraverunt mihi peccatores delectationes suas, sed non ita ut ex ta domine, Omnia mandta tua veritas? Nam illic universa fingit vanitas, &c. Ibidem. Another, perchance a lover of the Theater, is to be admonished, what he must avoyd and with what he may be de∣lighted, and so may not lose the desire of beholding, but change it. In Play-house there is a contagion of manners, where peo∣ple use to learne filthy things, to heare dishonest things, to se pernicious things? But the Lord assisting we may strongly re∣pell these things out of our hearts, if we compare one thing with another. There the Spectators behold I know not what propounded counterfeit god Iove, both committing adultery, and thundring: here, we may againe behold the true God Christ, teaching chastity, destroying ilthinesse, preaching holesome things. There, it is feined, that the same Iove may have Iuno both for his sister and wie: here, we preach holy Mary a Virgin and a Mother together. There, amazement is strucke into the sight, that a man through use should walke upon a rope: here, a great miracle, Peter passing over the Sea on his feet. There, chastity is violated throuh mimicall filhinesse; here by chaste Susanna, and chaste Ioseph, lust is suppressed, death dispised, God loved chastity exalted. There the quier and sing∣ing of the Stage-player allureth the hearing, but conquereth the wholesome affection: and what such thing may be compared to our song, in which he who loveth and singeth, saith, Psal. 119. Sinners have relaed unto me their delights, but not so as thy Law O Lord all thy Commandements are truth? For there vanity
feineth all things. Doth any one perchance admire the skill of Climebers or Vaulters, to see little Children playing in th ayre, expressing divers Histories? but looke upon the playes of our Infants; In the Gen. 25. wombe of Rebecca two Infaunts srive, the elder comming forth, the oote of the other is seised upon by the hand of the yonger thrust forth of the wombe. In quorū cer∣amine mgn sacrmenti i∣gura monstrt st, ut minor supplntaret majorem, esq postmodū pri∣maū at{que} be∣nedictionē u∣ferret. In quib{us} parvuis quasi ludentibus & sacramentū u dixi, magnum exhibentibus, & reprobi in Esau demon∣strantur Iudaei, & praedestinati in Iacob app∣rent Christia∣ni. Ille enim Iacob unus paruulus sic garrens, mul∣os in se praede∣stinaos etiam parvulos deē∣strabat Infan∣tes; qui ex te∣ro mtris susi∣piuntur mani∣bus fidelium; n eos sic ex∣cutiunt, ut in aëre pendent, sed u renat in caelo vivan His igitur oblectamentis mens delecttur, pasatur anima Christiana han sorie∣tatem retinens mentis, fugiat ebritatem Diaboli, &c. Ibidem. In whose combate the figure of a great mystery is declared, that the on∣ger should supplant the elder, and should afterwards take away the birth-right and blessing from him. In which little ones as it were playing, and exhibiting a great sacrament, as I have said, both the reprbate Iewes are demonstrated in Esau, and the predestinated Christians appeare in Iacob. For that Iacob one little one so pratling, did also manifest, that many little Infants likewise were predestinated in himselfe; who are receved out of the Mothers wombe, with the hands of the faithfull; neither doe they so shake them off, that they may hang in the ayre, but that being regenerated they may live in Heaven. The minde therefore may be recreated, and the Christian soule fed with these delights, and keeping this sobriety, it may avoyd the drunknnesse of the Devill. Neither may the combates of the amphitheater seduce or draw any Christians to them, unto which verily men runne so much the more greedily, by how much the more slowly they are exhibited. But even there what not dangerous, what not bloody thing is not iniected into mens eyes? where, as most blessed S. Cypian saith, a noxious will condmnes men to wilde beasts, without an offence.De Spectaculis. lib. & Epist. lib. . Epist. 2. Donato. Therefore my beloved, that cruell spectacle may not invite you to behold two Hunters contending with nine eaes, but let it delight you to see our one Daniel by prayer overcom∣ming seven Lyons.Daniel. 6. Distinguish combates spirituall lover; see two guilty in will, looke upon one innocent, and full of aith: behold thse for an earthly reward to have offred their soules to beasts; behold this man crying in prayer, Psal. 74. Deliver not to beasts the soules that confesse to thee. In that spectacle, he who
sets it forth is sorrowfull if the Hunter escape without harme who hath slaine him many wilde beasts; but in this our com∣bate, there is a fight without Iron, neither is Daniel hurt, nor the wilde beast slaine, and yet he is so overcome, that the King won∣ders and is changed, and the people feare, and the enemies di∣spaire. O admirable spectacle of ours, truely admirable! in which God assists, faith impetrates strength, innocency fights, holinesse overcome, and such a reward is obteined, that both thou and he who shall overcome may receive it, and he who shall give it loseth nothing. Desire these spirituall gifts, come toge∣ther cheerefully to the Church to behold these things, and to waite for them with all security: recall the purpose of your heart from all carnall lust, commit all your care to be governed by God, that the adversary may feare, finding nothing of his owne in you; and you reiecting him and renouncing his Pompes, after that your liberty shall be rescued from his snares and waylay∣ings, lest that wicked one should finde you empty, whom we have knowne desirous to hold those fast who are not his owne; believe faithfully in God the Father Almighty, &c. By which ex∣cellent passage of this iudicious Father, (parallel to which he hath another of the same nature, in his Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 416.417, 418. Ear∣ration on the 39. Psalme, where hee seriously bewailes the vanity and madnesse of those who delight in Stage-playes and such like Spectacles, Quem itaque compraehendā istorū insano∣rū? Bonus Deus omnia potest. Oremus pro ipsis fratres charissimi, inde crescit nume∣rus sanctorum, de numero qui erat impiorum. Ibidem. desiring all Christians to pitty their condition and to pray earnestly to God for their conversion, that so they might see the vanity, and sinfulnesse of this world, and Quid ergo facimus fratres? Demissuri eum sumus? sine spectaculo morietur, non subsistet, non vos sequetur. Quid ergo faciemus? demus pro spectaculis spectacula. Et quae spectacula datuti sumus Christiano homini quem volumus ab illis spectaculis revocare, &c? vid. Ibidem. behold the excellency of these many heavenly Spectacles which he there musters up at large, on which Christiās should fix their eyes and hearts;) it is most apparent, that Stage-playes in his iudgement, are very dangerous, obscene, perni∣cious Spectacles, See Augustin. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 5.9, 22, 26, 27. lib. 4. cap. 10.26, 27, 28. lib. 6. cap. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 21, 24, 26, 27, 33. lib. 8. cap. 14.18, 20, 21, 26, 27. where hee lively sets out the obscenity of Stage-playes. invented by the Devill to conquer and en∣rap
mens soules; and that no Christians ought for to be∣hold them, since they have so many other heavenly Spectacles to contemplate. Which me thinkes should cause all Christians to renounce them. Not to remem∣ber Nilus an ancient Abbot, about the yeere of our Lord 410. who informes us. Oratio. . de Luxuria. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 2. pag. 969. G. That he who is conversant in a multitude (especially at Stage-playes) is affected with daily wounds; for the countenance of women is a Dart anoynted with poyson, which wounds the soule and sends in venome, and by how much the longer it continueth by so much the more the wound doth putrifie. Qui vitare cu∣pit jusmodi vulnera is a publicis Spe∣ctaculis abi∣nebit, Ne{que} in celebritatibus versabitur: Sa∣tius est enim, ut domi mane∣as, qum dum putas te cele∣britates vene∣rari in manus inimicorum incidere. Ibid. He wo desires to avoyd these wounds (pray marke it well) will absteine from publike Playes and Specta∣cles, neither will he be conversant in such Assemblies. For it i better that thou abide at home, then that thou fall into the hands of the enemy, whiles thou thinkest to honor such Solem∣nities. Which comes punctuall to our purpose. Nor yet to mention, either Primasius in Romanos. cap. 10. fol. 53. Or Remigius, Explanatio in Galat. 5.19. Or Macrius AEgytius, Homil. 27. pag. 212. Or Isiodor Hispalensis. O∣riginum. lib. 18. cap. 27.42. to 69. & De Ecclesiasticis Offi∣cijs. lib. 2. cap. 2. Or Haymo & Anselme. Exegsis in Ephe∣ios 5.3. who ranke Players with Whores, and couple Play-houses, and Brothel-houses together: (whose words I shall at large recite in the ensuing Scene.) Which proves, that Playes, and Play-houses in their opinion are but Pan∣ders to mens lusts, yea, the beaten rodes to Fornicentur in Spectaculis, &c. Aselme. In Phil. 4. Tom. 2. pag. 306. A. whoredome, adultery, and unchafte desires. Nor yet to remember Pro∣sper his verdict, who stiles Stage-playes, Mimicae tur∣pitudines. De Gloria Sanctor Peroratio. fol. 73. mimicall un∣cleanesses; not onely in regard of their matter, or man∣ner of action, but likewise of their lewde unchaste ef∣fects: Or Damascen, or Eusebius; who call the Stage, Ignorantes, orchstram im∣pudicis specta∣culis affluen∣tem, commu∣nem ac publi∣cam libidinis scholam ijs esse; Meretricias{que} ibidem cantiones nihil aliud affere, quam ut omnibus turpiter se gerere & obscaenè persuadeant. Damascen. Paralellorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. See Eusebius Ibidem. & Ecclesiast. Histor lib. 8. cap. 24. the publike Schoole of lust; and Playes the instruments which per∣swade men to nothing else, but lewde behaviour, &c. a preg∣nant testimony for our present purpose. Not to record
S. Bernard; who calls Non est hic ludus purilis, non et de the∣atro qui faemi∣neis faedis{que} an∣fractibus pro∣vocet libidinē; actus sordidos repaesētet, &c. Epistola. 87. Co 1477. A. Stage-playes, childish sports, provoking lusts with their feminine and filthy turnings, and representing sordid actions: a punctuall evidence for us: Or Cassiodo∣rus; who stiles Stage-playes, Spectaculum xpllans gra∣vssimos mo∣res, vacuator honestatis, &c. Variarum. lib. 3. ca. 51. the expellers of gravity; the exhausters of honesty, &c. Nor yet to register our own lear∣ned Country-man Iohn Saresbury, flourishing about the yeere of our Lord 1140. who informes us; That Fomenta vi∣tirum, tyroci∣nia vanitatis, Spetacula. De Nugis Curialiū. l. 1. c 8. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 15. pag. 348. Stage-playes are he fomentations of vices, the apprentiships of vanity. Hinc mimi & tota ioculatorū scena procedit. Quorum adeò error invaluit, ut  praeclaris domibus non arceantur etiam illi qui obscaenis partibus corporis, o∣culis omnium eam ingerunt turpitudinē, quod erubescat videre vel Cynicus. Quod{que} magis mirere, nec tunc eiciuntur, quando tumultuantes inferius crebro onitu aërē faedant, & turpiter inclusum, turpius produnt. Ibidem That Stage-players, (whose error had then so prevayled, that they could not be expelled great mns houses) did with their obscene actions, infuse such filthinesse into the eyes of all men, as the Cynicke himselfe might blush to see. And that which was more wonderfull, neither were they then cast out, when as the people making a tumult below, defiled the ayre with their frequent noyse, which being filthily shut in, they more filthily uttered. After which he breakes out into these passa∣ges. Nunquid tibi videtur sapi∣ens qui oculos, vel aures istis expandit? Iocundum quidem est, & ab honesto non recedit, virum probum quandoque modesta hilaritate mulceri: sed ignominiosum est, gravitatem hujuscemodi lascivia frequenter resolvi. Ab istis quoque spectacu∣lis, & maximè ab obscaenis, honesti viri arcendus est oculus, ne incontinentia ejus, mentis quoque impudicitiam fateatur. Ibidem. Can he seeme to thee to be a wise man, who opens either his eyes, or eares to these things? It is verily a pleasant thing, and not dishonest, for an honest man to be sometimes delighted with honest modest myrth; but it is an ignominious thing, for gravity to be often recreated with such wantonnesse. From these Spectacles therefore, but especially from obscene ones, the eye of an honest man is to be kept backe, lest the incontinency of it, be∣wray likewise the uncleanes of his minde. Egregiè siquidem Sophoclem Praetorem Collega Parides arguens, ait: Decet Praetorem Sophoclem, non modò manus, sed & oculos habere continentes. Averte, inquit, homo, cui de regni maiestate multa licebant, oculos meos, ne videant vanitatem: sciens utique verum esse quod alius ingemescit: quia oculus meus depraedatus est ani∣mam meam. Ibidem. Parides the Colleage of Sophocles the Pretor reproving him, saith very excellently;
(I would to God all Nobles and Magistrates would remember it) It becomes Pretor Sophocles, not onely to have chaste hands, but eyes. Yea, a man, to whom much might be lawfull in regard of the great Maiesty of his Kingdome, saith; Psal. 119.37. Turne away mine eyes lest they behold vanity; knowing that to be true which another lamenteth: because mine eye hath preyed upon my soule. To passe by (I say) these ancient Writers which are punctuall; I shall onely remember two Fa∣thers more with whom I will conclude. The first of them, is Golden-tongued Saint Chrysostome, who writes thus of In theatro, malae cupidita∣tis inductio, a∣dulterij medi∣tatio, fornicati∣onis gymnasiū, turpitudinis exhortatio, in∣honestatis ex∣empla; verba multae fatui∣tais ac stul∣tiiae plena, &c. Hoil 42. in Acta. Tom. 3. Col. 611. Hom. 62. ad Popu∣lum Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 347, &c. See Homil. 3. De Davide & Sa∣de. Homil. in Psal. 140. Homil. 6.7 & 38. in Matth. & Homil. 13. in 1 Corinth 4. accordingly. Stage-playes: that they are the introduction of sinfull lust; the Meditation of Adultery; the Schoole of Fornication; the Exhortation of Vncleanesse; the Examples of Dishonesty; the Incendiarus of men lustfull Affections; the polluters of their eyes, their eares, their soules: yea the very originall causes of much actuall whoredome, filthinesse, and adultery; as I shall more largely prove in the See Scene 4. ensuing Scene out of his owne Records, which I shall there re∣cite at large. The second, is vice-rebuking Salvian, Bi∣shop of Massilia, who thus discyphers Stage-playes: De solis circorum ac Theatrorum impuritatibus dico. Talia sunt quae illic fiunt, ut ea non solum dicere, sed etiam recordari aliquis sine polluione non possit. Alia quippe crimina singulas sibi fermè in nobis vendicant portiones; ut cogitationes sordidae, animum; ut impudici aspectus, oculos; ut auditus improbi, aures; ut cum ex his unum aliquod erraverit, reliqu possint carere pecatis. In Theatris verò nihil horum reatu vacat; quia & concupiscentijs animus, & auditu aures, & aspectu oculi polluuntur. Quae quidem omnia tam flagiosa sunt, ut etiam explicare ea quispiam atque eloqui salvo pudore non valeat. De Gubrnatine Dei. lib. 6. pag. 185.186. Such things are committed at Playes and Theaters, as can∣not be thought upon, much lesse uttered without sinne. For o∣ther vices challenge their severall portions within us: as filthy cogitations, the minde; unchaste aspects, the eyes: wicked speeches, the eares; so that when one of these doth offend, the other may be without fault. But at Theaters, not one of these but sinneth: for bth the minde with lust; and the eyes with shewes, and the eares with hearing are there polluted: all which are so bad,
that no man can well report or declare them with honesty. Quis enim integro vere∣cundiae statu dicere queat illas rerum tur∣pium imitatio∣nes, illas vocū ac verborum obscenitates, illas motuum turpitudines, illas gestuum faeditates? quae quāti criminis sint vel hinc intelligi potest, quod & relati∣onem sui inter∣dicunt. Non-nulla quippe etiam maxima selera incolu∣mi honestate referētis & no∣minari & argi possunt, ut ho∣micidiū, latro∣cinium, adulte∣rium, sacrilegi∣um, caeteraque in hunc modū. Solae impuritates theatrorū sunt, quae honestè non possunt vel accusari: ita nova in coarguenda harum turpitudinū probrositate res evenit arguenti; ut cum abs{que} du∣bio honestus sit qui ea accusare velit, honestate tamen integra ea loqui & accusare non possit. Ibid. For who without passing the bounds of modesty, can utter those imita∣tions of dishonest things; those filthy spectacles, those lewde mo∣tions; those obscene gestures that are used there? the extraor∣dinary sinfulnesse of which may be gathered even from this, that it is unlawfull for to name them. For sme sinnes, though most hainous, may well and honestly both be named, and blamed too; as murther, theft, adultery, sacriledge, and such like: onely the impurities of Theaters are such, as may not honestly be, no not so much as blamed. Such new matter ariseth against the reprover in finding fault with their most horrible filthinesse; that albeit he be a most perfect honest man that would speake a∣gainst it, yet can he not so doe, and keepe his honesty Alia quo{que} omnia mala agentes pollt, non vidētes, vel audientes. Siqnidem etsi blasphemū quempiā audias, sachrilegio non pollueris, quia mente dis∣sentis. Et si intervenias latrocinio, nō inquinari actu, qui abhorris animo. Solae spe∣ctaculorū impuritates sunt, quae unū admodū faciunt, & agentiū, & spectantiū crimē. Nam cū spectantes haec comprobant & libentèr vident, omnes ea visu at{que} assensu agunt, ut verè in eos Apostolicū illud peculiariter caedat: quia digni sunt morte non solum qui faciunt a, sed etiam qui consentiunt facientibus. Ibid. Againe, all other evils pollute the doers onely, not the beholders or the hearers: for a man may heare a blasphemer and not be partaker of his sacriledge, in as much as be dissenteth from him in minde. And if one come while a robbery is doing, he is not actually guil∣ty of it, because he abhors the fact. Onely the filthinesse of Playes and Spectacles is such, as makes the Actors and Specta∣tors guilty alike. For whiles they gladly looke on, and so ap∣prove them by beholding them, they all become Actors of them by sight and assent: so as that of the Apostle may be properly applyed to them. How that not onely those who commit such things, are worthy of death, but they also who favor those that doe them. Ita{que} in illis ima∣ginibus fornicationum omnis omnino plebs animo fornicatur. Et qui fortè ad spe∣ctaculum puri venerant, de theatro adulteri revertuntur. Non enim tunc tantūmodo quando redeunt, sed etiam quando veniunt, fornicantur. Nam hoc ipso quod aliquis rem obscaenam cupit dum ad immunda properat, immundus est, &c. Ibid. p. 187. So that in these representations of whoredome, all the
people, doe altogether in minde play the Harlots. And such as happily come chaste to Stage-playes, returne adulterers from the Theater: For they play the fornicators not then onely when they goe away, but also when they come to Playes. For as soone as one lusteth after a filthy thing, whiles he hasteneth to that which is uncleane, he becommeth uncleane. And so hee proceeds. It is therefore abundantly evident by the concurrent punctuall testimonies of these 30. Fathers, whose words I have here transcribed; to whom I might have added, Constit. Apo∣stol. l. 2. c. 65.66. l. 3. c. 38. Clemens Romanus, Contra Hae∣reses. l. 1. c. 1. p. 23. l. 2. c. 19. p. 155. Irenaeus, Contra Hae∣reses. Tom. 3. lib. 2. Compen∣diaria & vera Doctrina de fi∣de Catholicae & Apostolicae Ecclesiae. Col. 922. E. Epiphanius, De Agricul∣tura. lib. p. 271. De Vita Mosis. p. 932. De Vita Contempl. pag. 1209.1210. Philo Iudaeus, In Hesaiam. l. 1. c. 3. Tom. 1. pag. 134. in Io∣hannis Evangelium. lib. 8. cap. 5. pag. 595. Cyrillus Alexandrius, De Activa virtute lib. 12. Tom. 2. pag. 48. D.E. De Martyribus. lib. 8. pag. 390. E.F. Theodoret, In Lucae Evangelium. cap. 7. lib. 2. Tom. 5. Col. 300. Beda, De Ceremonijs Baptismi. Col. 1158. Al∣chuvinus, Pro Christianis Legatio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2. pag. 138.139. Anexagoras, In Ecclesiasten Enarratio. cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 11. pag. 405. E. Olympiodorus, Historiae. lib. 3. cap. 4. Orosius, De Errore Profa∣narum Religionum. cap. 13. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 111 112. Iulius Firmicus, Distinctio. 33.48. & 86. & Causa. 4. Quaest. 1. Grattan, with Sancti Aterij Homilia. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 706. See Act 7. Scene 4. others, whom I shall quote hereafter in their more proper Scenes; That Stage-playes pollute the eyes, the eares, the mindes, both of their Actors and Spectators, by ingendring unchaste, adulterous lewde affections in their hearts, Vanus sermo citò polluit mentem, & facile agi∣tur quod libentèr auditur. Bernard. De Interiori Dom. Tract. cap. 43. by their ob∣scene words, and lascivious gestures. That they irritate, in∣flame, foment those beastly carnall lusts, which draw them on to actuall uncleanesse, to their eternall ruine: and so by necessary consequence, that they are utterly unlawfull for Christians, to act, to see, to heare, or resort to even in this regard, as they all from hence conclude. And dare any Play-patron then reject these grave Authori∣ties, in iustifying, in frequenting Stage-playes, as in∣noxious, honest, chaste, or usefull recreations, after all these Fathers censures? If any Stage-frequenting Play-adoring Christian bee so incredulous, as not to give credit to these alleaged Fathers: let him then listen to
some Councels, some moderne Christian Authors; some ancient Pagans, who averre the selfesame truth, whose ioynt concurrent Authorities he cannot deny. If wee cast our eyes upon Councels; we shall finde, these se∣verall Councels in severall Countries and ages; to wit, The words & Canons of which Coun∣cels are here at large recited, in Act 7. Scene 3. Concilium Laodicenum. Can. 54. Eliberinum. Can. 62.67. Arelatense. 1. Can. 4.5 & 2. Can. 20. Carthaginense. 3. Can. 11. & 35. Carthaginense. 4. Can. 86. & 88. Aphricanum. Can. 27.28, 30. Agathense. Can. 39. in Srius, but 28. in Carranza. Veneicm. Can. 11. Constantinopolitanum. 6. in Trullo. Can. 24 51, 62.66. & 71. Turonense. 3. Can. 7.8. Cabilonense. 2. Can. 9. Moguntinum. Anno Dom. 813. Can. 10.14. Rhemense. Anno. 813. Can. 17. Surius Con∣cil. Tō. 3. p. 40. Synodus Francica sub Zacharia Papa. Anno Dom. 742. Aquisgranense Concili∣um. sub Ludovico Pio. Canon. 83.100, 145. Concil. Parisi∣ense 1. Can. 28. Moguntinum sub Rabano Archiepiscopo. Can. 13. Synodus 8. Oecumenica. Can. 16. Surius. Tom. 2. pag. 757. Capitula Grae∣carum Synodorum. Can. 59. Concilium Lateranense. 1. Can. 16. Surius. Tom. 4. p. 6. & 223. Concil. Basiliense. Sessio. 21. & Appendix usde Con∣cilij. Concil. Senonense. Can. 25. Nicaenum. 2. Can. 22. Medio∣lanense. 1. De Mimis & Circulatoribus. cap. Concil. Carolo Magnum. Can. 5. Coloniense. Anno. 1536. pars 2. cap. 25. pars 3. cap. 26. pars 9. cap. 10. Synodus Augustensis. Can. 19. Concil. Coloniense. sub Adolpho. Anno. 1549. Can. 17. Syno∣dus Moguntina. Anno. 1549. sub Sebastiano. cap. 61. & 75. together with All these are quoted by Bo∣chellus, in his Decreta Eccle∣siae Gallicanae. lib. 6. Tit. 19. cap. 11. & are not registred in the Councels at large. Concilium Lingonense. Anno. 1404. Seno∣nense. Anno. 1524. Carnotense. Anno. 1526. Burdigense. 1582. Bituriense. 1584. Turonicum. 1583. cap. 23. Seno∣nense. 1585. cap. 13. wee shall finde, I say, these 37. severall Councels, together with Decreta Eusebij Papae. Anno. 309. Cap. 4. Surius Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 312. Decreta Innocentij Papae. 1. Can. 11. Ibidem. pag. 529 Reformatio Cleri Germaniae Ratisboni. Anno Dom. 1524. cap. 4. Apud Surium. Tom. 4. pag. 713. Statuta Synodalia Odonis Parisiensis. inter Communia Precepta. cap. 13. apud Carranzam. Epit. Concil. fol. 356. sundry other Canonicall Constitutions; prohibiting not onely Players, under the penalty of excommunication, from acting; but even all other
Christian (especially Clergy-men) under the selfesame penalty from hearing, seeing, and frequenting Stage-playes; as for sundry other reasons, so especially for this; because Stage-playes, would contaminate their eyes, their eares, their mindes, their hearts; effeminate, yea deprave their spirits; exasperate and foment their lusts; indispose them, disable them to the religious performance of every holy duty, and usher in by their eyes, and eares, the whole troope of vices, into their soules. An irrefragable confirmation of our present Assumption. If we survey againe those moderne Christian Authors, who have written against Stage-playes, we shall finde them all concurring with us in this truth I shall onely recite some few of them, by which you may easily con∣jecture of the rest Delector va∣rijs spectaculis: Ra. Circo for∣san, & Theatro: quae duo loca bonis sempr adversa mori∣bus fuisse no∣tissimum; quò, quisquis malus ierit, redibit pessimus. Nam bonis iter ilud ignotum est: qui, sasu ali∣quo igari ade∣ant, contagio non carebunt. De Rmed. Vtri∣us Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30. Cirques and Theaters (writes Francis Petrarcha) are the two places which have beene knowne to be alwayes most opposite to good manners, whether if any bad man goe; he will returne much worse: For this iourny (pray ob∣serve it) is altogether unknowne to good men; who if they ignorantly chance to goe unto them by any accident, are sure not to want defilement. Libentèr ludos scenicos specto. Ra. Rem, quae nec honeste geritur, nec honestè cernitur; nec facile dictu, an usor infamior, an spectator; & an sena tupior, an or∣chestra; nisi quod in illam saepe paupertas, in hanc verò semper vanitas trhit. Ibidem. Stage-playes which thou willingly be∣holdest, are such things, as can neither be honestly acted, nor honestly seene; neither is it easie to tell, whether the Actor or the Spectator be more infamous; or whether the Stage be more filthy then the Scaffold; unlesse it be, that poverty oft times drawes mn into the one but vaity alwayes into the other. Neque enim patrimoniorum actura gravior quam morum; ubi libido discitur, humanitas dedicitur. Promde quid de spectaculis speraretis, iam inde ab exordio, primus Regum vetrorum Romulus omen fuit, qui in his igidam tetricam{que} illam Sabinarum pudicitiam circumvenit, etsi utun{que} matrimonij honor texi injuriam. At quàm multis hoc postmodū, non ad conjugium, sed ad tuprm vagam{que} licen∣tiam fuit via? Ad summam enim oc teneas velim, pudicitiam spectaculis saepè stra∣tam, semper impulsam. Er ut sileam viros quibus id scelerum furor est, ut pene iam adulterio glorientur, multarum ibi fama perijt, pudorque: multae inde domum im∣pudicae, plures ambiguae redire; catior atem nulla Hi spectaculorū fructus, hi sunt exitus. Ibidem. Nither is there a greater cosumption of Patrimonies at
Stage-playes, then of manners; where lust is learned, huma∣nity forgotten. What you might expect from Stage-playes, even from the very beginning, the first of your Kings, Romulus, may give you a guesse, who by these circumvented that riged, rough unpleasant chastity of the Sabin Virgins; albeit the honor of matrimony, hath in some sort covered that offence. But to how many since this have Stage-playes beene the way, not to wed∣locke, but to whoredome, and disorderly liberty? I will that thou remember this as the summe of all; that chastity hath beene oft-times overthrowne by Stage-playes, alwayes assaulted. And that I may not speake of men, the ury of whose wicked∣nesse is such, that they doe now welnigh even glory in adultery: the good name, and chastity of many women hath there perished: many have thence returned home unchaste, more ambiguous, but not one more honest: These are the events, these the fruits of Stage-playes: (And are they then desirable, or true Christian pleasures?) Quis ferro iugulum laetus exciperit? Quis fervido vulnere plus cruoris effuderit? Quis minus conspe∣cta morte pal∣luerit? Quid crudelitatis ad scholam ire iu∣vat? Non egetis praeceptoribus; nimis dociles malorum estis. Plura per vos domi discitis, quā necesse est. Quid si tam promptis inge∣nijs artifices scelerū, ac ma∣gistra erroum, plebs accesserit. Multos, quos mites natura fecerat, saevitiā spectacula docuêre. Mens hominis in vitiū pron, non urgenda uti{que} sed frenenda est; si sibi linquitur, aegrè stabit; si impellitur, praeceps ruet? Ibidem. Now who would willingly stretch out his throat to receive the sword that cuts it? who will poure out more blood out of his bleeding wound? who will become lesse fearefull at the sight of death? What doth it availe you to run to the Schoole of lust and cruelty? You need no Masters; you are naturally too docible of evill things. You learne more at home by your selves, then is needfull: What will you learne if these Artificers of wickednesse, and the Mistresse of errors, the multitude, should be added to such ready wits? Many, whom nature had made meeke, and chaste, have Stage-playes taught cruelty, and incontinency. The minde of man which is natu∣rally prone to vices is not therefore to be instigated, but brideled: if it be left to it selfe, it will hardly stand; if it be violently dri∣ven forward, it will fall downe hedlong. Multùm mali auribus invehitur, sed multò plus oculis: illis, quasi enestris bipatentibus, in animam mors rumpit. Nil potentius in memoriam descendit quam quod visu subit: facile audita praeervolant: conspectarum imagines rerum haerent etiam invitis: nec tamen nisi volentibus ingerunt, nisi, perrarò & ocyus abiturae. Quo pergis igitur? Quis te rapit impetus? ut ad horam gaudeas, und sem∣per doleas; ut vieas semel, quod vidisse millies paeniteat, &c. Ibidem. Much evill is
conveyed into us by the eares, but much more by the eyes: by them, as by two open windowes doth death breake in upon the soule: Nothing more powerfully sinkes into the memory, then that which is apprehended by the eye: things that are onely heard doe easily passe away; the images of the things we see sticke fast in our mindes even against our wills: yet notwith∣standing, they doe not offer themselves undesired, but to such who willingly behold them, unlesse it be very seldome, and that in  transitory manner to passe soone away. Whether goest thou therefore? what impetus or gust doth violently dragge thee? that thou shouldest reioyce but for an houre, in that which thou maist chance eternally to lament: that thou shouldest run to see that once, the very sight of which thou maist a thousand times repent off. Nescio quid hic dulce, sen non quid poti∣us amarum, aut triste sentitis: nec ullum in vobis majas insaniae argu∣mentū video, quā quod quo∣tidic vos ad mortē miseris delinimentis illectos, & ve∣lut stygio sopo∣re demersos, dulcedo ama∣ra, & delectatio inamaena prae∣cipitat. Vna est enim vobis lex rerum fermè omnium, quic∣quid cupitis, quicquid moli∣mini contra vos est. Ibidem. I know not what pleasant, or rather what not bitter, or sorrowfull thing, you perceive in Stage-playes: neither doe I discerne any other greater argument of madnesse in you, then that I see you daily allured unto death by miserable entisements, and as if you were drowned in an infernall slumber, a bitter sweetnesse, and an unpleasant pleasure, precipitates you. For there is one rule almost of all things to you; Whatever you de∣sire, whatever you endeaver, whatever you doe, is against your selves. Thus Petrarcha, most elegantly, most divinely. To him I might adde the concurrent suffrages of Alex∣ander Fabritius, in his Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4. cap. 23. B. Spectacula dulcissima sunt irritamenta omnis non tam libidinis, quam inhu∣manitatis. Ibidm. Mapheus Vegius, De Educatione Liberorum. lib. 1. cap. 14. & lib. 3. cap. 7. & 12. Ludovicus Vives in Augu∣stinum De Civitate De. lib. 1. cap. 31.32, 33. & lib. 2. cap. 3. to 15, cap. 26.27, 28, 29. & De Causis Corrupt. Artium. lib. 2. pag. 81.83. Agippa De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 20.59, 64 71. Peter Martyr Locorum Communium Classis. 2. cap. 12. sect. 62.66. cap. 12. sect. 15.19. & Commentary upon Iudges p. 220 221. Master Gualther. Hom. 11 in Nahum. 3. Bodinus De Republica. lib. 6. cap. 1. Iohannes De Burgo. Pu∣pilla Oculi. pars 10. cap. 5. V. Danaeus Ethicae Christianae. lib. 2. cap. 8. Polydor Virgil, De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Franciscus Zphyrus. Comment in Tertislliani Apologiam. advers Gentes, Pter De Primaday, in his French Achademy. c. 20. pag. 205. A stexanus De Casibus. lib. 2. Titulus 5 lib. 4. Titulus 7 Artic. 4. Theodorus Balsamon in Phocij Nom∣canonis. Titulus 13. cap. 21. Bochellus, Decreta Ecclesia Gal∣licanae. lib. 6. Titulus 19. c. 11. Ioannes Mariana, & Bar∣nabas Brissonius, in their Bookes, De Spectaculis. together with Bulngerus, De Theatro. lib. 1. c. 50.51. Quid multa? Auctore om∣nes cum Sacri¦tum proni spurcitiam Se∣n exagitant, nō modo quod fabulae obscenae in Scena age∣rentur, sed etiā quod motus gestus{que} essent impudici, at{que} adeò prostibula ipsa in Snm saepe venirent, & sub Scena prostarent. Vn∣de & obscaenū it Vano, quod non nisi in Sena palm dicitur, &c. vid. Ibidem. lib. 1. De Theatro. cap. 56. pag. 296. where he con∣fesseth, that all Authors, both sacred and prophane, have de∣claimed against the filthinesse and lewdnesse of the Stage, not onely because of the obscenity of their Playes, but likewise be∣cause their motions and gestures also are unchaste, in so much that the very Stewes themselves were oft-times brought upon the Stage, and prostiuted under it. Whence Varro writes, that that is obscene which is not spoken openly but onely on the Stage &c. Doctor Reinolds, in his Preface to his 6. The∣ses, and in his Overthrow of Stage-playes thorow∣out. Printed 1599. and now reprinted, 1629. Do∣ctor Sparkes, in his Rhearsall Sermon at Pauls Crosse, Aprill 29, 1579. Master Perkins, in his Treatise of Consci∣ence. c. 3. and on the 7. Commandement. Maer Stubs, in his Anatomy of Abuses pag. 101. to 107. Master North∣brooke, in his Treatise against Vaine Playes and Enterludes. pag. 57. to 77. A Booke intituled, The Church of evill Men and Women, whereof Lucifer is the head and the members, are all dissolute Players, and Sinners. Printed by Richard Pinson in 8o. A Treatise of Dances, printed in 8o. 1581. wherein it is shewed, that Dances are as it were accssaries, or depen∣dants, or things annexed unto whoredome: where also by the way is proved; that Playes are ioyned and kit together in a ranke with them. The second and third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 1.2, 3, 4, 43, 44, 53, 54, 55, 56, 89, 92, 96 98, to 103. (all pregnant places to our pur∣pose) printed by Authority. London, 1580. Mastr Gosson, in his Schoole of Abuse. Two Bookes, the one iniuled, The Myrror for Magistrates of Cties; the other, The Coun∣ter-blast to Stage-playes, by an uncertaine Author Iohn Field,
in his Declaration of Gods Iudgement shewed at Paris Gar∣den. Ianuary the 13. 1587. Printed by Henry Carre, 1588. I. G. in his Refutation of Haywoods Apologie for Actors. Master Thomas Beard, in his Theater of Gods Iudgements. cap. 34. Master Elton, and Master Dod, on the 7. Comman∣dement. Bishop Baly, in his Preface to the Practise of Piety. Bishop Hall, in his Epistles. Decad. 6. Epist. 6. I. P. Minister of Feversha, in his Booke intituled, The Covenant betweene God and man. Exposition on the 7. Commandement. Doctor Layton, in his Speculum Bellisacr. cap. 45. Master Brinsl, in his True Watch. part 3. Abomination 19. p. 73.74. Master Iohn Downham, i his Guide to Godlinesse. lib. 3. cap. 21. sect. 5. and in his Summe of Divinity. lib. 1. cap. 11. pag. 203. and Richard Rawledge, in his Scourging of Tiplers. pag. 2.3.4. who See Scene 5. & Act 7. Scene 7. all with one unanimous Vote con∣demne all Stage-playes, as altogether abominable unto Christians, from this very reason among sundry others; that they irritate and foment mens carnall lusts: pollute their soules with adulterous affections, defile their eyes, their eares, their hearts with filthinesse; and allure, ye precipitate both their Actors and Spectators to all actuall lewdnesse, and execrable un∣cleanesses; being as so many Panders, Bellowes, and Firebrands to their vile luscivious desires. But passing by all these with a briefe quotation of their names and workes, to which you may resort, as being too tedious to recite at large; I shall onely relate unto you what 4. other Authors of our owne have written, concerning the lewde effects of Stage-playes. The first of them is reverend Bishop Ba∣bington, who writes thus of Playes. Exposition upon the Com∣mandements. Com. 7. In his Workes at large, pinted at London 1622. the last part. p. 60. & 67. These prophane and wanton Stage-playes or Enterludes, what an occasion they are of adultery and uncleanesse by gesture, by speech, by convay∣ances, by devices to attaine to so ungodly desires, the world knoweth by too much hurt, by long experience. Vanities they are if we make the best of them, and the Prophet prayeth Psal. 119 37. to have his eyes turned away by the Lord from beholding such matter. 1 Cor. 15. Evill words corrupt good manners, & they have abundance. There is in them, ever many dangerous ights,
and 1 Thes. 5.22. we must abstaine from all appearance of evill. They corrupt the eyes with alluring gestures; the eyes, the heart; and the heart the body, till all be horrible before the Lord. Histrionicis Gestibus inquinantur omnia (saith Chrysostome.) These Players behaviour polluteth all things: And of their Playes he saith; they are the feasts of Satan, the inventions of the Devill, &c. Councels have de∣creed very sharpely against them, and polluted bodies by these filthy occasions have on their death-beds confessed the danger of them, lamented their owne foule and grievous faults, and left their warning for ever with us to beware of them. But I referre you to them, that upon good knowledge of the abominati∣ons of them, have written largely and well against them.Note this well, O yee lascivious per∣sons, who har∣bour Players in your private houses. If they be dangerous in the day time, more dangerous are they in the night certainely: if on a Stage, and in open Courts, much more in Chambers and private houses. For there are many roomes besides that where the Play is; and peradventure the strangenesse of the place, and lacke of light to guide them, cau∣seth error in their way, more then good Christians should in their houses suffer. Thus this right godly Prelate of our Church, who makes Stage-playes a breach of the 7. Com∣mandement, because they are the frequent occasions both of contemplative, and actuall fornication, and the inducements to it. The second, is one Master Stephen Gosson, (once a professed Play-poet; yea a great Patron, and admirer of Playes and Players, In his Ana∣tomy of Abu∣ses; In his Epi∣stles prefixed to his Playes confuted in five Actions, & so thorowout these Bookes of his. as himselfe confesseth, till God had called him to repentance, and opened his eyes to see their abominablenesse:) who among other things, wri∣teth thus of Stage-playes. Playes confu∣ted. Action 5. As I have already discovered the corruption of Playes, by the corruption of their causes; the Efficient, the Matter, the Forme, the End; so will I conclude the effects, that this poyson workes among us. The Devill is not ignorant how mightily these outward Spectacles effeminate and soften the hearts of men; vice is learned with beholding; sinne is tickled, desire pricked, and those impressions of minde are secretly conveyed over to the gazers, which the Players counterfeit on the Stage. As long as we know our selves to be
flesh beholding those examples in Theaters that are incident to flesh, we are taught by other mens examples how to fall. And they that come honest to a Ply, may part infected. Lib. 6. cap. 0. Lactan∣tius doubeth, whether any corruption can be greater, thn that which is daily bred by Playes, because th exprssig of vice by imiatien, brings us by he shadow, to the substance of the same. Whereupon he affirmeth tm necessary to be bani∣shed, les wickednesse be learned, or with the custome of plea∣sure by little and little we forget God. What force thre s in the gestures of Players, may be gathered by the tale of Bacchus and Ariadne, which Convivium apd Xeno∣phois pra. rancourti. Graecolat. 1594. pag. 893. to 900. Xenophon reporteth to be layed at a banquet, by a Syracusian, his Boy, and his dancing Tru. In came the Syracusian, not unlike to the Prologue o our Playes, discoursing the argument of the fable: then ntred Ariadn, gorgeously attired like a bride, and sate in the prsence of them all: ta tiā B∣cho prodnte, tibi numerus bacchius ca∣eaur. Xeno∣phon. Ibim. pag. 900. B. after came Bacchus, dancing to the Pipe: Ariadne prceiving him, Ac obviam illa quidem nō processt, nc aduext, prae se serebt tamē quod vox con∣q est. Ibid. though she neither rose to meet him, nor stir∣red from the place to welcome him, yet she shewed by her gesture that she sate upon thres. Poqu verò Bacchus a vidisset, had ∣liter saltans quamfieri amicissime posset, in genibus consedebat. Quum{que} complexus m fuisser, osculatus est. Ea verò tametsi pudore quodam affectae similis sser, ami∣c amen illum viciffim amplectebaur. Ibid. When Bacchus beheld her, ex∣pressing in his dance the passions of love, he placed himslfe somewhat neere to her, and embraced her: she with an amo∣rous kinde of feare and strangenesse, as though she would thrst him away with the little finger, and pull him againe with boh r hands, somewhat trously and doubtfully entertained him. Quod cùm convivae cernrent, passim plausum excitabant-partim rursus exclamabant. Quum autem Bacchus surgens A∣riadnam secum erxisset, osculantium iam & complectentiū sese gestus erat spctre. Illi quu ever Bacchum formosum sse crnerent, & Ariadnam formosam, eos{que} non per iocū, sed vere se admotis oribus osculari, omnes rectis animis spectabnt. Audiebant enim Bacchum interrogntem ipsm, num se amrt, at{que} lla hoc ia conrmantem jrjurndo ut non modo Bacchus, sed omnes iam qui derat, iu∣rssent, rever esse mutuum inter puerum & pullm amorem. Ert cim similes qui gestus hos non docti ssent, sed facere cuperent id, quod iamdudū expevissent. Tandem quum convivae illos sese compleos cnerent, qusi{que} ad ubile rendentes; quotquot uxores nec dum duxerant, ducturs se jurabant, mariti vero cnscenss ∣quis ad uxores suas avehebantur, ut js potirentur. Xenophon. Ibidem. At this the beholders began to shout, when Bacchus
rose up, tenderl liting Ariadne from her seate; no small store of curtesie passing betweene them, the beholders rose up, every man stood on tiptoe, and seemed to hver over the prey: when they sware, the company sware: when they departed to bed, the company presently was set on fire: they that were married po∣sted home to their wives: those that were single vowed solemnly to be wedded. (A very notable History for our present purpose, especially as Xenophon hath related it:) As the stinge of Phalangion spredeth her poyson thorow every vaine, when no hurt is seene, so amorous gesture stickes to the heart when no kin is raced. Therefore Cupid is painted wih Bow and Arrowes, because it is the property of lust to wound aloffe, which being well weighed; Epist. lib. 2. E∣pist. 2. ad Do∣natum. Saint Cyprian had very good cause to complaine; that Players are spots to our manners, nourishers of vice, and corrupters of all things by their gestures. The godly Father, knowing the practice of Playing to be so evill, and the inconveniences so monstrous that grew thereby; Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. ad Eucraium. thinkes the Maiesty o God to be stained, the honor of his Church defaced, when Players are admitted to the Table of the Lord. Nether was this the opinion of Saint Cyprian alone, but of the whole assembly of godly Fathers in the Concil. Are∣latense. 2. Ca∣non 10. Councell held under Constantius the Emperour. Great then is the hard∣nesse of our hearts when neither Fathers, nor Councels nor God himselfe strikes us with any shame of that, which every good man is ashamed to remember. Mine eyes throughly beheld the manner of Theaters when I wrote Playes my selfe, Note this: & note it so as to believe it, be∣cause the Au∣thor restiieth it from his owne experi∣ence. and found them to be THE VERY MARKETS OF BAVVDERY; where choyce without shame hath beene as free, as it is for your money in the Royall Exchange, to take a short stocke or a long; a faling Band, or a French Ruffe. The first building of Thea∣ters was to ravish the Sabines, and that they were continued in whoredome ever after, Ovid conesseth in these words: De Arte A∣mandi. lib. 1. Scilicet ex islo solennia more Theatra, Nunc quoque formois insidiosa manent. As at the first, so now; Theaters are snares to faire women. And as I old you long agoe in my Schoole of abuses; Quod nota. our Theaters and Play-houses in London are as full of scret adul∣tery
as they were in Rome. In Rome it was the fashion of wan∣ton yong men, to place themselves as nigh as they could to the Curtesans, to present them Pome-granates, to play with their garments, and waite on them home when the sport was done. Loe the cha∣stiy, he mode∣sty, and Chri∣stianity of Play-haunters, which they boast off. Se the Schoole of Abuses. In the Play-houses at London, it is the fashion of Youthes to goe first into the Yard, and to carry their eye thorow every Gal∣lery, then like unto Ravens, where they spy the Carrion thither they fly, and presse as neere to the fairest as they can. In stead of Pome-granats they give them Now they offer them the Tobacco-pipe which was then unknowne. Pippins, they dally with their Garments to passe the time, Nil opus est digitis per quos arcana loqua∣ris; Nec tibi pr nutus acci∣pienda not est. Proximus à do∣mina nulla pro∣hibente sdeto, Iunge tuum la∣teri, quam po∣tes, us{que} latus. Hic tibi quae∣raur socij ser∣monis origio; Et moveant primos publica verbasons, &c Ovid, De Ate Amand. lib. 1. they minister talke upon all occasi∣ons, & either bring them home to their houses on small acquain∣tance, or slip into Tavernes when the Playes are done. He thinketh best of his painted Sheath, and taketh himself for a olly fellow, that is noted of most to be busiest with women in all such places. This open corruption is a pricke in the eyes of them that see it, and a thorne in the sides of the godly when they heare it. This is a poyson to te beholdrs, and a Nursery of idlenesse to the Players. Thus far Master Gossr, who in his Schoole of Abuse, hath much more to this purpose. The third of them is Master Iohn Brinsly, an eminent worthy Di∣vine: who writes thus of Stage-playes. The 3. Part of the Te Wtch. Edit. 2. London. 1623. chap. 11. Abomination. 30. pag. 302. But to passe over these also, with all other unlawfull flockings and lewde sports upon the Sabbath, by euery of which the worke of the Lord is hindred, as every one must needs acknowledge. What defence can we make for that concourse that is ordinary to those wanton Playes in such places, even upon that day? In which are the continuall sowings of all Athisme, and throwing the very firebrads of all filthy and noysome lusts into the hearts of poore simple soules the stirring up and blowing the oales of con∣cupiscence to kindle and increase the fire thereof, to breake out into an ideou flme untill it Concourse to Playes, and the vilenesse of them. burne downe to Hell. Aske but your owne hearts as in the presence of the Lord, and you will need no further witnesse. And how can it be otherwise? how can you take these firebands of Hell into your bosomes, and not be burnt?The inevitable danger of frequenters of Playes. Is not every filthy speech, euery whorish gesture,
such a firebrand cast by Satan into the heart of every wanton beholder, as a brand cast into a bundle of Tow, or into a barrell of Gun-powder, to set all on fire of a sudden? Such are from under Gods protection. Thy proection is gone whosoever thou art, that adventurest hither, for thou art out of thy wayes. These are not the wayes of the Lord, and much lesse upon his Sabbath, when thou shouldest be amongst his people, and doing his worke, where his Angels waite for thee, his owne presence expects thee. They cannot think to scape. How then shouldest thou pos∣sibly escape when tho wilt offer thy heart naked unto these fiery darts of Satan? how canst thou thinke to be delivered from that flame in thy soule; that fire in the infernall lake, that river of brimstone that shall never be consumed nor quenced, when thou wilt desperately cast thy selfe headlong into the middest thereof? how can it be but that such must needs bring fagots and fire∣brands to set in the Gates of our Hierusalem? The fourth of them is M. Robert Bolton, a reverend learned Minister of our Church, now living; who writes thus of Stage-playes. A Discourse of True Happi∣nsse. p. 73.74. Lastly, let those examine themselves at this marke, who offer themselves to these sinfull occasions, breeders of many strange and fearefull mischifes, I meane prophane and obscene Playes. Pardon me, beloved, I cannot passe by these abomina∣ble Spectacles without particular indignation. For I have ever esteemed them (since I had any understanding in the wayes of God) the Grand mpoysoners of Grace, ingenuousnesse, and all manly resolution; Greater plagues and infections to your soules, then the contagious pestilence to your bodies: The inexpiable staine and dishonor to this famous City. The noysome Wormes tht canker and blast the generous and noble Buds of this Land: and doe by a slie and bewitching insinuation, so empoyson all Seeds of Vertue, and so weaken and emasculate all the operati∣ons of the soule, with a prophane, if not an unnaturall dissolute∣nesse; Let Innes of Court Gentle∣men observe this. that whereas they are planted in these worthy houses of Law, to be fitted and enabled for great and honourable actions, for the publike good, and th continuance of the glory and hap∣pinesse of this Kingdome; they licentiously dissolve into wicked vanities and pleasures: and all hope of ever doing good either unto God, the Church, their Country, or owne soules, melteth as
the Winter Ice, and floweth away as unprofiable waters. These infamous Spectacles are condemned by all kinde of sound lear∣ning, both divine and humane. Distinctions devised for their upholding and defence, may gve some shallow and weake con∣tentment to partiall, and sensuall affections, possest with preui∣dice: but how shall they be able to satisie a conscience sensible of all appearance of evill? How can they preserve the inclina∣blenesse of our corrupt nature from the inection of these SCHOOLES OF LEVVDNESSE, AND SINCKS OF ALL SINNE, as, (to omit Divines, Councels, Fathers, Moralists, because the point is not directly incident) even a Theatra dfi∣nir possimius; turpitudinis vi∣tiorum{que} om∣nium sninm ac Schlam. Bdin. De Re∣pub. lib. 6. cap. 1. Politician calls them. Alas, are not our wretched corruptions raging and fiery enough, being left to themselves dispersed at their naturall liberty; but they must be united at these accursed Theaters, as in a hollow glasse, to set on fire the whole body of our naturall viciousnesse at once, and to crage it further with lust, fiercenesse, and effeminatenesse, beyond the compasse of nature? Marke this O Play hun∣trs, and thn iudge your selves. Doth a∣ny man thinke it possible that the power of saving Grace, or the pure Spirit of God can reside in his heart, that willingly and with full consent feeds his inward concupiscence, with such va∣riety of sinfull vanities, and lewd occasions, which the Lord himselfe hath pronounced to be, Deut. 22.5. an abomination unto him? how can any man, that ever felt in his heart the love or feare of so dreadfull a Maiesty, as the Lord of Heaven and Earth, e∣dure to be present, especially with delight and contentment, at Oathes, Blasthemies, Obscenities, and the abusing sometimes of the most precious things in the Booke of God, (whereat we should tremble) to most base and scurrill ests? Certainely e∣very Child of God, is of a most noble and heroicke spirit, and therefore is most impatient of hering any wrong, indignity, or dishonor offered to the Word, Name, or Glory of his Almighty Father, &c. Thus this grave reverend Divine; in proofe of my Assumption. If any man deeme all these or any of the foe-quoted Fathers and Councels over-patiall, in the case of Playes, let him then attend unto some Pagan Authors, who concurre in iudgement with them. Not to recite the fore-mentioned Story of the
Syracusian with his Boy and Trull, who acting Bacchus and Ariadne, (as Convivium. pag. 900. See here a, b, c, d, e, in the mar∣gent. Xenophon relates it) enflamed the fleshly lusts of all the Spectators in a strange excessive measure: (a suffi∣cient expriment to confirme my Minors ruth:) Ari∣stotle himselfe records it: Qui in Iudis & scenis hi∣srionum mo∣tus & actus spctant, qum∣vis numeris ipsis subltis at{que} canibus tamen perinde ut res aguntur, ita moventur & affiiuntur. Ar. Politic lib. 8. c 5. Numb. 21. That those who behold the mo∣tions, and actions of Players in Stage-playes, although there b neither verse, nor singing in them, are yet notwithstanding so moved, and affected as the things are acted in them: so that if the things they act, be filthy or lascivious, the affecti∣ons, the actions, the desires of the Spectators must bee such: Laudandum igitut etiam il∣lud, ut à rerum sordidarum & servilium, non solum auditu sed aspectu te∣nelus adhuc animus averta∣tur. Quare Le∣gisltor, u si quid aliud; verborū certè obscaenitatē de civitate penitus exterminabit. Nam turpitèr & obscaenè loquendi licentiae, turpiter quo{que} & obscaenè faciendi li∣centia proxima est, sed imprimis à tenellis animis, ut ejusmoi nhil ne{que} dicāt, ne{que} audint. Quod si quis eorū quae vetita fuerint, quicquā vel dicer, vl facer deprae∣hendacur, is{que} ingenuus, ne{que} dū in sodlitijs accubationis honorē meritus, affi∣ciendus erit ignomini & virgs caedendus. Sin aetsijs castigationibus major fuerit servili ignominia, servilis hujus peccati causa notandus erit. Polit. l. 7.6.17. Numb. 76. This therefore (writes he) is to be commended, that the tender mindes of Children be with-drawen, not onely from the hearing, but likewise from the fight of filthy servile things. Therefore the Lawgiver, if he doth any other thing, ought ve∣rily, even utterly to banish all obscenity of speech out of the City. For the liberty of doing filthily and obscenely, is next to the li∣berty of speaking filthily and obscenely: therefore obscenities are especially to be exterminated from yong tender mindes, that they neither heare nor speake any such thing. But if ay one shall be deprehended either to speake or doe any of the things prohibited, if h be a Free-man, and so yng as to be liable to correction, he shall be shamed, and beaten with Rods: But if he be too old to be thus chastised, he shall be branded with sme srvile disgrace for this his flavish offence. Et quoniam ejusmodi quicquam dicere prohibemus, certè etiam spectacula & tabu∣larū & fabularū impudicarū prohibemus. Quare Magistratibus adhibenda cura erit, ut ne{que} signis ne{que} fabulis obscaenitas ull aut faeditas ostendatur. Nisi fortè apud illos deos, quibus etiam per leges lascivia illa coneditur, & apud quos sacra facere aetate quidē provectioribus pro se, pro liberis & conjugibus permittitur. Adolescen∣tulos autem & Iamborum, & Comaediarum spectatores sse lex prohibeat, priusquā aetatem attigerint, in qua & cū caeteris accubare iam licuerit & ab omnibus vel ebrie∣tatis vel aliarū inde nascentiū rerū incōmodis disciplina liberos efficiat. Ib. Num 77. And because
we prohibit the speech of any such thing, we doe likewise verily inhibit the Spectacles both of unchaste Pictures and Fables. Therefore Magistrates must take care that no filthiness or obscenity be shewed neither in Shewes, nor Pictures; Vnlesse it be where there are such gods (and I am sure our holy God, Haback. 1.13. who is purer of eyes then to behold iniquity, is not such a one) to whom such lasciviousnesse is granted by the Lawes, nd among whom those who are of riper yeeres are permitted to offer sacrifices, or to performe religious worship for themselves, their Chidren and Wives. But the Law must prohibite yong men to be Spectators, boh of Iambickes, and Comeies, before they come to their full age, when as education or discipline shall have made them free, from all the inconveniences both of drun∣kennesse it selfe, and of all other thngs that issue from it. Neque verò fortassis Theo∣dorus tragae∣dus in hoc er∣rabat, quod nollet quen∣quam vel levis∣simum actorem ante se agere, qusi magis his rebus, quas primas audie∣rint, spectato∣res capi & ob∣lectari sole∣rent. Hoc enim ipsum idem in hominum & rerum ipsrum naturā, usm{que} cadit, ut prma quaeque gratis∣sima accidant. Qupropter mala omnia à pueris amovenda sunt, sed imprimis nequitia omnis, atque lsivia. Ibidm. Num. 78. Nei∣ther verily did Theodorus the Tragedian perchance cre in this, that he would not permit any, no not the slightest Actor, to act before him, because the Spectators are wont most common∣ly to be more taken and delighted with those things which they first heare. For this very thing is incident both to the nature and use of things themselves, that the first things are most ac∣ceptable and dilightfull. Wherefore all evill things are to be removed from Children, but especilly all lewdnesse and lascivi∣ousnesse; which is most rife in Stage-playes. Thus Ari∣stotle, whose words I would our Magistrates, our Pa∣rents would consider. Xenophon, inormes us: Ita de venereis etiam rebus ad valde iuvenes verba non faci∣mus, ne accidente ad vehementem in eis libidinem levitate, immodicè huic libi∣dinisuae indulgeant De Institutione Cyr Historia. lib. 1. p. 34. D. that the Persians did never so much as speake of any amorous things to Youhs, lest levity oyning it selfe to that vehement iust which was in them, they should immoderaly addict themslves to those their lusts: intimating thereby; that amorous obscene words; (much See Xenophontis. Convivium. pag. 900. accordingly. more then lewde lascivious, ribaldrous Stage-playes, in which filthy speeches, verses, ditties, gestures, shewes, and actions are united) are as fire and
fewell to mens lusts; as himselfe recordeth in his fore∣mentioned Story. Plato relates, De Republi∣ca. Dilog 2. p. 570.581. Dlog 10. p 6.69.  D Natua p. 70. Lgum. Di∣log. 2 p. 80. that Comicall and Tra∣gicall Poems and Poets, effeminate mens mindes, corrupt thei iudgements, provoke laughter, treat of lecherous things, no  wter mens sinfull lusts, which should be dried up; givig tem a cōmanding power over men, when as they should be sub∣ict to them: and for these and such like reasons he eclus  Pots, and Stage-playes out of his Common-welth, as in∣chauating and bewitching mischiees, that foent and stirre u those corruptions which every man should labour to the utmos to avoyd. Cornelius Tacitus rankes Theaters and Stwe together: assuring us from his owne experience; Ine Glsre  & nf∣m, nec culla moribus cor∣upi  pls libidinum cirmddit, qum ill col∣us Vix ar∣ius honestis pdor rtine∣tur, nedum inter ertami∣na vicorum, pudicitia, aut odsa, ut quic quam pro∣bi mois reer∣aretur. Annl∣vim. l. 14. sct. 2. that all kindes of wckednesses and infamy did issue from them in an apparant manr; and that no ilth did yeeld more plenty of lusts to corrupt manners, then Playes. Quippe erant qui Cn. quo{que} Pompium incusatū  senioribus frrent, quod man∣suā Thetri sedm pouisst ubi populus des totos ignavia continuaret, &c. Ib. sect 3. Therefore divers of the Senators and people exclaimed against Pompie, for build∣ing Gallries about the Stage, wherein the people might sit the greater part of the day beholding Stage-playes, which did by little and ltle corrupt, yea utterly abolish and sbvt their Country manners, inducing thm to exercise dishonest loves, and drawing them on to commit that lewdnesse in the night, which they lustully behld and desired in the day time. This was the fruit of Stage-playes then, which made this Author to condmne them, and many grave Senators to dclaime against them.Ceteùm abolitos platim patrios mores fundtos verti per ccitam lsciviam, t quod usquam corrumpi & corrumpere quet, in urbe visatur, dgenerent{que} stdijs x∣terni juvetus gymnasia, & otia, & turpes amores exercēdo, &c. Procrs Romani spcie orationum & caminū, scena polluntur, &c. Noct quo{que} dedeori adjctas, e quid tempus pudori relinquatur sed caetu promiscuo quod prditissimus qisque per diem conupiverit, per tenebras audeat. Ibidem. Seneca the Philosopher informes us: Tunc enim per voluptatem fcilus viia surrepunt, &c. Epist. 7. That in Stage-playes vices de game a more easie passage ito our hearts. In hoc mares, in hoc faeminae tripudiant. De∣inde sub persona c diù trita frons est, transitur ad ganam; Philosophiae nulla cura est. Natural Quaest. lib. 7. cap. 32. And that those men nd women wh harden their
for-heads by frequenting Stage-playes, doe wholy neglect Phi∣losophy, and passe over to the Stewes or Brthel hse at last; a thing he much lament, as being the common practise of his age: Wherefore he Subducendus est popuo te∣ner animus, & parum tenax recti. Facile transitur ad plures. Socrati, Catoni & Lae∣lio excutere metem sum dissimilis mul∣titudo pouis∣set: adeò nemo nostrum, qui cum maxime concinnamus ingenium rre impetum vitio∣rum am mag∣no comitatu venientium po∣test. Epist. 7. adviseth Lucilius to avoyd all Playes, together wh the ill company that frequented them; who were able to corrupt even Socrates, Cato, and Laelius themselves; much more then those o meaner vertue; who are never able to withstand the violence of these vices (which are accompanied and backed by the mulitud,) even then when they doe most arme themselves against them; much lesse, when as they are not fited to resist them. To passe by the 12. Epistle of Marcus Aurelius to Lamert, which I shall quote here∣after; even Sed u prae∣cipuè urvis ve∣nare Theatris, Haec loca sunt votis faciliora tuis. Illic inve∣nies quod a∣mes, quod ludere possis Quod{que} smel tangas, quod{que} tenere vlis, &c. Sic ruit ad clebres cultissima saemina Iudos, Copia iudicium saepe moraa meum est. Spcta∣tum veniut, veniunt spectātur ut ipsae, Ille locus casti damna pudoris habet. Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule ludos, Cum iuvit viduos rapta Sabina vios. Romule mi∣litibus scisti dar commoda solus. Haec mihi s dederis commoda miles cro. Scili∣cet ex illo solennia more Theatra, Nunc quoqu formosis insidiosa manent. D Arte Amndi. lib. 1. Ovid himselfe acknowledgeth; that Stage-playes are meer Bawdes and Pandrs to mens lusts; that they were the causes of much wheredome, lewdnesse and adultery, even from their very first invention, to the times in which h lived; Therefore in his Art of Loving, he advisth all amo∣rous, unchaste, lascivious persons to haunt Theaters, as being the places that were most suitable, most advantagious to their uchaste desires, where they should seldome misse thir prey: And aftr, in his Penetentiary Elegies, for these wanton ookes of Love, See Tristium. lib. 1.2, 3, 4. De Poto libri. Aldus Pius Ovidij Vita. for which he was exiled: e informes Au∣gustus; Ludi quoque semina praebnt Nequitiae; tolli tota Theatra jube Pc∣candi causam quam multis saepe dederunt, Martia cum durum sternit arena solum Tollatur Circus; non tuta licentia Ciri est. Hi sed ignoto iuncta puella vio. Cum quaedam sptiantur in haec, ut amator odem Convnia: quare portius ulla patet? Tristim. lib. 2. ag. 155. that Playes are the Seminaries of lewdnesse, the causes of much sinne, much whordome, and adultery in many; whreor he adviseth him to demosh all Theaters, to aban∣don all Cirques, and blocke up all pssages to them both, as be∣ng the publik Marts where Adulterers and Adulteresses
commonly met without controll, to conclude their adulterous bargaines, and make up their unchaste eetricious matches. Pirmm est genus probati∣onis, quod etiā ab adersario sumtur, ut ve∣ritas etiam ab ipsis inimicis veritatis probe∣tur. Tertul. De Trinitate. lib. Tom. 2. p. 262. A most pregnant ratification of our present Assumption; and a passage worth the noting, because a most lascivious Poet, (who was as farre from Puritanisme or over-strict Precisenesse, as he was from Christianity) hath registred it to Posterity, as an experimentall truth: The Poet Ho∣race Vt quoidam Marsaeus ama∣tor Origenis illi, Qui patriā mimae donat, fundm{que} la∣rem{que} Nil uit mi (inqui) cū uxorib{us} unquā alienis. Verum est cum mimis, et cum mere∣tricibus; unde Fama malm gavius, &c. Sermo. l. 1. Satyr. 2. p. 165. doth couple Whores and Stage-haunters together, as being equally adulterous, and unchaste: Moreover hee stiles Stage-playes, An tua demens Vilibus in udis dictari carmina malis? Ibid. Satyr. 10. p. 195. base Playes; Quid censes munera terrae? Ludicra quid, plausus, & a∣mici dona Quiritis? Q. 10 spectanda modo &c. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 6. p. 246. which men ought not to esteeme; Spisis indigna Theatris Sripta pudet recitare, & nugis addere pondus. Ibid. Epist. 19. p. 274. but to account as toyes Hae nugae seria ducent in mala. De Arte Poet. p. 312. and trifles, which yet notwithstan∣ding bring men into serious evills, and Non satis est pulchra esse Poëma∣t dulcia sunto, Et quocun{que} volent, animū auditoris agunto. De Arte Poëtica. p. 298. by their pleasantnesse impell the mindes of the Auditors to what-ever they please. The Poet Iuvenal tells us in plaine temes. Cuneis an habent spectacula totis Quod securus ames, quod{que} inde expetere possis? Chironomon Laedam nulli sltante Batillo Turcia vesicae non imperat: Appua gannit Sicu in amplexu: subitum & miserabile, longū Attendit Thymel, Thymile tunc rustica discit, &c. Hispula tragaedo Gaudet, an expectat ut Quintilianus ametur? Accipis uxorem de qua cithaaedus Echion, Aut Glaphyrus fiat pater, Ambrosius{que} choraules. Longa per angustos figamus pulpita viros. Nupa Senatori comitata est hyppia ludū. Ad Pharū,  Nilum, famosa{que} maenia Lagi, Prodigia & mores urbes damnante Canopo, &c. Famā contēpserat olim, Cujus apud molleis nimia est jactu∣ra cathedras. Fortem animā praestant rebus quas turpiter audent. Sat. 6 p. 43 44, 45. Tat a man in his time could not picke forth one chaste woman, which he ight safely love as his wife, out of the whole Play-houe: That all wmen (let such who have beautifull gadding Play-haunting Wives, and Daughters marke it,) who frequent Stage-playes, or love lascivious mixt dancing, are inconent, unchaste, and infamous persons, who have foraited their good names, and beare ou their dishonest actions with their audaci∣ous cariage. O quantus tunc illis mentibus ardor Concubitus? quae vox saltante libidine, quan∣us, llic meri veteris per crura madenta torrens? Lenonum ancillas posita Laufella corona Provocat, & tollit pendentis praemia copae. Ipsa Medullinae frictū crisantis adorat. Palmā inter dominas virtus natali∣bus aeqvat. Nil ibi per ludum simulabitur, omnia fient Ad verum; quibus incendi jm igidus aevo Laomedontia∣des, & Nestoris hermia possi. Tunc prurigo morae impari∣ens, tunc faemi∣na mplex. Iā as est, admitte viros, dormitat adulter? Illa ju∣bet supto iu∣venem prope∣rare ncullo: Si nihil est servis ni curritur: ab∣stuleris spem Servorum? ∣niet conducus aquarius, &c. Ibidem. pag. 53.54, 56, 59. That they are such who burne in unchaste, in
filthy luts, and commit adltery in arest, (as they did in their solemne feasts of Priapus,) not in sport or representation onely: in so uch that they would prostitute themselves to servants, to hired Watr-bearers, and the very basest persons for want of o∣thers, rathr then not satisfie their beastly raging lusts: Such were the Play-haunting females in this Poets age; and I feare that ours are but little better now, as I shall ex∣presly prove in the next ensuing Scene. You see then, how all the fore-recited Fathers, Councels, moderne Christian Writers, and ancient Pa∣gan Authors give punctuall tstimony to my Minors truth, which no one Athor to my knowledge whe∣ther ancint or moderne, Christian or Pagan, did ever yet gainsay: therefore we may resolve upon it without any further scruple; and thereupon reject, renonce all Stage-playes, as the defilements of mens eyes, mens eares, Hoc maximè hominis inte∣riora corrum∣pa, quod exte∣riora delectat: Leo, De Ieiunio Pentecostes. Se. 1. cap. 1. fol. 158. mens soules: the incendiaries, the fomenters of filthy lusts: the very Pandrs allurements, and provocations to contemplative, to actuall uncleanesse, whoredome, adultery, and the like, which bring destruction to mes soules. And indeed, how can they choose but irritate mens lusts and draw them on to lewde unchaste affecti∣ons, and meretricious filthy practises. For Adulteriū discitur, dum videtur Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Dnato. Discit facee, dum assuscit videre Idem. De Spectaclis lib. when a man shall delightfully behold adulteries, whoredomes, incests, toge∣ther with all other obscene abominations, even lively persona∣ted, emphatically expressed before his face; Vocis dulcedines per aurem animam vulnerant: quae quantò licentius adeunt, tanto difficilius evitantur. Hirom. Tom. 1. Epist. 12 c. 3. Corpoe licet virgo ac mente prmnet, oculis, uribus, lingua minuit illa quae habbat. Non Decet, non licet praesens sse inter verba turpia, qui∣bus libidinum fomes accenditur, ponsa and piiam stupri, ad audaciam sponsus animatur. Cyprian. De Habitu Virginum pag. 2. When e shall heare these beastly sinnes appladed, varnished and set ot to sale with the most elegant expressions; the most rhetoricall, patheticall, flexanimous, encomiums: the most insinuating Love-complments, and amorous streines of wit, of eloquence, that either the oratory of Hll, or lust can reach to:
when he shall seriously conmplate those Nm ubi pe∣dum strepitus cū carminibus numerosis con∣sentit, ibi vide∣licet omninò & manuū ipsarū plausus rsonat, & omne geus faeditatis, & in∣vitanur specta∣tores ad turpi∣tudinem. Cyril. Alexandrinus. in Hesaam. lib. 1. cap. 3. Tom. 1. pag. 134. D. Histriones li∣bidines quas saltando expri∣munt docent, & faciūt per im∣ginem quae nō sunt, ut fiant si∣ne pudore quae vera sunt. La∣ctatius Divna∣rum. Instit. Epit. cap. 6. See Act 3. Scene 1. lascivious ge∣stures, dances, complements, embracements: those meretrici∣ous kisses, claspings and da es: those wanton smiles, those petulant nods, thse unchaste sgnes, those lust-irritating moti∣ons which passe betweene amorous Love-sicke Actors. When he shall heare such See Act 5. Scene 9.10. accordingly. scurrilous Pastorals, such ribaldrous Ditties, such inescating Love-sonnets; such effeminate, over∣comming, heart-resolving Musicke, which prepare the Audi∣tors to uncleanesse, & subiect them as so many Captives to their enraged lusts. When both Oculi, sunt in amore duces. Qui videt is peccat, qui non te viderit ergo Non cupiet, facti crimina lumen habet. Propertius Elegiarum. lib. 2. Eleg. 15. & 31. his eyes, his eares, affections, heart, and all his senses shal be wholy taken up, with such amorous, Maximinus Iunior tantae pulchritudinis fuit ut passim amatus sit à procacoribus saeminis, nonnullae etiam optaverunt de eo conci∣pere. Iulij Capitolini Maximinus Iunior. pag. 267. beautifull lust-provoking obiects as are able to reviue the most mortified carnall affections; Carpi enim vires paulatim uritque videndo Femina, nec nemorum patiur meminisse nec herbae. Virgil. Georg. lib. 3. pag. 68. to fire, the most frozen benummed lusts; to overcome the most chaste and continent heart; (all which concurre at once in Stage-playes:) how can it but ingender, not onely a sparke or two, Quum tu Lydia Telaphi cervicem roseam, cèrea Telaphi Laudas brachia, vae, mum Frvens difficili bile tumet icur. Tunc nec mens mihi nec co∣lor Certa sede maner, humor & in gens surtim bitur arguens. Quam lentis pe∣nitus macerer ignibus. Vror, &c. Horace. Carm. lib. 1. Ode. 13. but an whole flme, an Hell of filthy lusts within his soule; and carry him on to all unclea∣nesse even with a full carere? We all know by wofull ex∣perience, that all men (but Non enim adul∣teria & fornicationes aliunde proveut quam ex nimia inventutis licentià. Chry∣sostom. in Matth. 18. Homil. 60. Tom. 2. Col. 430. A. especially yong men and women, who are the most assiduous Play-haunters) are excee∣ding prone by nature to unchaste adulterous desires, to 1 Pet. 2.11. fleshly lusts which warre against their soules: no sinnes Castitas igi∣tur (quia uterque sexus vitio libidinis aegrotat) nisi aliarum virtutum ope fulciatur facile labitur. Bernard De Ordine Vitae. Col. 1120. M. so consonant to their depraved natures as these. Hence is it,
See Bernard. Meditationes. c. 12.14. O quo∣ties ego ipse in ermo consti∣tus & in illa vasta soliudi∣n, quae exsta solis ardoribus horridum Mo∣nachis paebe∣b habitaculū, putabā me Ro∣manis interesse delicijs. Sedbā solus quia ama∣ritudine reple∣ts eam: hr∣rebant sacco membra dsor∣mia & squalida cutis si A∣thiop caris obduxerat: quotidie lacry∣mae, quotidie gemitus: & si qundo repug∣nantē somnus imminens op∣pressisset, nuda humo vix ossa haerentia collidebam: de cibis verò & potu taceo, cū etiam langetes Monachi aqua frigida utantur; & coctum aliquid accipisse luxuia sit. Ille igiur ego, qui ob gehennae meum ali me carcere ipse damnaverā scorpiorū tantū socius & ferarū, saep chos intererā pullarum: pallebant ora jejunijs, & mens desiderijs aestuabat in frigido cor∣pore & nte hominem sua iam carne praemortuū sla libidinū incendia bullieban. Si autem hoc sustinnt illi qui exeso corpore, solis cogitationibus oppugnantur; quid patitur puella quae delicijs fruitur? nempe illud Apostoli: vivens mortua est. Hierm. Epist. 22. c. 3. that those who live the mst retired lives; who keepe the most constant watch over their owne deceitfull hearts: who most mortifie and keepe under their rebellious carnall lusts by prayer and fasting; by substracting all that ewell, that pro∣vision which should nourish them: who abstaine from all appea∣rance of evill; from all those lascivious lust-enflaming obiects, which might either steine their soules with unchaste desires, or defile their bodies with adulterous copulaetions, are oft-tim vexed and assaulted; yea sometimes vanquished, and foyled  their carnall lusts: as the examples of Gen. 19.30. to 38. Lot, 2 Sam 3.2.10 18. David, Rom 7.23, 24, 25. 1 Cor. .27. 2 Cor. 12.7. Saint Paul, See  Saint Hierom, and some others estifie. And if Qui sponte corrut, uid saciet si impulsus? Cyprian De Spe∣ctaculis. lib. these men oft-times fall into these lustfull passions of their owne accord, even then when as they have kept watch and ward against them, by avoyding all occasi∣ons which might provoke them to them: how much more then must our common Actors and Play-haunters, who adde fire, spurres, and fewell to their enraged, unbride∣led lusts in Stage-playes, be much more conquered and subdued by them. Si vix qui longe ab hujusmodi cntibus & spectaculis remoa est anima castimoniae honstatem amplectitur, quomodo continenter vivere poteit, qui in his vivit? Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth Tom. 2. Col. 29. S. A. If he who keepes the farthest distance from lascivious lust-enraging Stage-playes, can hadly keepe his affections, his body within the bounds of chastity; how then can they be chaste in minde, in body, who live and wallow in them with delight. Alas, how can the weakst stand, when the strongest fall? How can the carelesse be se∣cure, where the most vigilant are surprised? Hw can unmortified gracelesse Satis enim ardum era, absque illis sutationibus illū aetatem posse ferre moderatè tempstaem affectionum quum autem & haec accedunt, tm qe videntur, quam quae au∣dtur, majus∣que accenditur incendium, & fonx concu∣pi centiarum is insam∣r, quomo∣d nō pessum it adolescētis, ani∣ma hinc enim omnia pereut & corrumpun∣tur. Chrys. Hom. 56. in Genes. 29. Tō. 1. Col. 367. B. Yongsters continue chaste, untain∣ted,
unpolluted, either in thought, in soule, in body, in the very middest of all the temptations, the defilements of lust-irritating polluted obiects; in the very Stewes and Brothel-house of lust; the very Schoole and Shop of Venery, Lechery, and Lewdnesse; (for See p. 67.68, 69 so some stile the Play-house) when as the Terra enim carnis nostrae nisi assiduis fuerit subacta culturis, citò de segni otio spi∣nas tribūlos{que} producit, & par∣tu degeneri da∣bit fructum, nō horreis infe∣rendum. sed ig∣nibus concre∣mandum. Custodienda igitur nobis omnium germinum seminumque generositas, quam ex summi agricolae plantatione concepimus, & vigili solitudine providendum, ne Dei numera aliqua invidentis inimici fraude violentur, & in Paradiso virtutum concrescat sylva vitiorum. Leo De Ieiunio Pentecost. Sermo. 4. cap. 3. fol. 161. most mortified gracious Christians, who have retired themselves wholy from all carnall obiects; who have with-drawne their eyes, their eares, their thoughts from all lust-fo∣menting pleasures of sinne, have yet beene desteined with uncleane affections, in the very middest of holy duties in their private Closets? Since therefore the very dearest of Gods Saints, Gal. 5.16, 17. Rom. 8.12, 13, 14. who alwayes warre against their lusts, are Vincit sanctos dira libido. Senecae Hyppolitus. Act. 3. Cho∣rus. fol. 87. oft-times foyled, vexed, or disturbed by them, even then when as there are no externall objects to tempt them: much more then must common Actors and Play-haun∣ters, Rom. 6.12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 20. Ephes. 2.2, 3. cap. 4.18, 19. Titus. 3.3. who yeeld themselves over as slaves, as vassalls to their untamed carnall lusts, be steined, conquered, and control∣led by them. And here I appeale unto the consciences of Players, of Play-haunters for proofe of this effect. Doe not your owne hearts experimentally informe you, that there are many sinfull swarmes In omnibus seculis pauciores reperti sunt qui suas cupiditates, quam qui hostum copias vincerent. Cicero. Epist. lib. 13. and flames of lust,Succensas agit libido mentes. Senicae Hyppo∣litus. Act. 2. fol. 78. many lewde unchaste affections oft kindled in your brests Si mobilitate histrionum quispiam delectetur, per oculorum fenestras animae capta libertas est, & mors intrat per has fenestras. Hierom. advers. Iovinianum. lib. 2. cap. 7. by the very acting, sight, and hearing of lascivious Stage-playes? Doe not the wanton gestures; the amo∣rous kisses, complements, and salutes; the meretricious songs and speeches; the lascivious whorish Actions; the beautifull faces; the ravishing Musicke, the flexani∣mous
enticements, the witty obscenities, the rhetoricall passages, the adulterous representations, with al the other fomentations of uncleanesse in the Play-house, (Haec sunt Di∣aboli ignita a∣cula, quae simul & vulnerant, & inflammant. Heirom. Epist. 8. ca. 16. which are as so many fiery darts of Satan to wound our soules with lust; as so many Turpi loquen∣tia & facetiae fornicationis vehiculū. Theo∣phylact. Enarrat. in Ephes. 5. See Chrysostome, Am∣brose, Anselme, Primasius, Oce∣menius, Ibidem. & Bishop Ba∣bington, Calvin, Perkins, Hooper, Dod, & Elton, on the 7 Com∣mandement, accordingly. Conduict-pipes, or Chariots to usher concu∣piscence into our hearts, Vitijs nostris in animum per oculos via est. Oculi tota no∣stra luxuia: hi nos in omnia vitia quotidiè praecipitant; mirantur, adamant, concupis∣cunt. Quintilian. Declamatio. 1. & 2. Pro. Caeco. p. 6. & 23. Omnis sceleris officin oculus est. Hic ignis, incus, mallei, & affectus velut Cyclopes: nulla corporis parte facilius pecamus. Quid? ipsi oculi cupidines sunt, animum{que} torrent sauciant, cruciant. Plaei∣que oculis mali mortales sumus. Putan. Consolatio Caecitatis. p. 721. to 736. Se Basil. De Vera Virginitate. Clem. Alexandr. Paedag. l. 2. c. 8. Greg Nyssen, De Oratione. Greg. Magnus. Rom. 5. in Evangelia accordingly. thorow the doores, the portals of our eyes and eares;) even raise a tempest of unchaste affecti∣ons; yea kindle a very hell of lusts within your soules? Do not they strongly Quid hoc est inquam aliud, quam irritare cupidi∣tates hominum per se incitatas? Seneca Epist. 110. instigate & inrage your carnll mindes adding much fewell unto your lewde desires? Doe not they fraught 2 Pet. 2.13. your eyes, your eares, your hearts with filthy ob∣iects, so that they cannot cease from sinne? Have they not casd you to looke upon Whores and Strumpets, upon bautifull comely women with a lustfull eye, Mth. 5.28. c. 15.19. Mark. 7.21, 22, 23. Quotis concupisimus, toties fornicamur. Hirom, Epist. 4. c. 3. and so to commit, if not actuall, yet contemplative adultery with thm in your hearts, either more or lesse? If you deny all this, your owne consciences, together with all the fore-recited Fathers, Councels, Christian and Pagan Au∣thors will presently convince you of a lie. If you ac∣knowledge it; as needs you must; since your owne consciences, with all the premises Confessio conscientiae vox est. Senca Controvers. lib. 8. Controv. 4. will force you to confesse it; you must certainely ioyne hands, ioyne hearts, and iudgements with me in censuring, in condemning Stage-playes, because they contaminate and defile both their Actors, their Spectators soules and bodies; because they thus instigate, nourish, and enflame their inseperable 1 Pet. 2.11. Hic hostis nobiscum inclusus est: Qocunque pergimus, nobiscum portamus ini∣micum. Quid ergò oleum flammae adijimus? quid ardenti corpusculo, fomenta ignium ministramus? Hierom. Epist. 12. cap. 4. sin∣full
fleshly lusts which war against their soules; Rom. 8.13. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.5. which should be mortefied, and subdued; Rom. 13.14. not fostered, not fomented, as they are. SCENA QVARTA. THe fourth effect or fruit of Stage-playes, is actuall adultery, whoredome, and uncleanesse, which are no wayes tolerable among Christians: From whence this 30. Argument doth arise. Argument 30.That which is an immediate occasion, furtherance, or fomentation of much actuall adultery, fornica∣tion, whoredome, and uncleanesse, must needs be abominable, and utterly unlawfull unto Christi∣ans, But such are Stage-playes, as I shall cleerely mani∣fest. Therefore they must needs be abominable, and utter∣ly unlawfull unto Christians. My Minor must bee yeelded, Adulterio pecatum nullū majus. Chrysost Hom. 7. D Paeni∣tentia. Tō. 5. Col. 5. p. 743. D. because adultery, forni∣cation, whoredome, with all other actuall uncleanesse, (how e∣ver men may chance to light them as meere triviall, ve∣niall sins) are most damnable soule-murthering abominations. which God, which Christian men abhorre. The sinful∣nesse, the damnablenesse, of these foule crying sinnes, (which, alas; are now so frequent in the world, Levit. 19.29. Pudorem rei rollit multitu∣do peccantium, & desinit esse probri loco commune maldictū. Nunquid jam ullus adulterij pudor est, postquam eò ventum est, ut nulla adulterum habeat, nisi ut adul∣terum irritet? Tandiu istud timebatur, quamdiu rarum erat. Nunc argumentū est de∣formitatis pudicitia. Quam invenies tam miseram, tam sordidam, ut illi satis sit unum adultetorum par? nisi singulis divisit horas, & non sufficit dies omnibus? nisi ad a∣lium gestata est, apud alium mansit? Infrunita & antiqua est, quae nescit, matrimo∣nium vocari, unius adulterium. Horum delictorum jam evanuit pudor, postquam res latius evagata est. Senca, De Beneficijs. lib. 3. cap. 16. that the
commonnesse of them hath made them tollerable, if not com∣mendable and lawfull in the eyes of many, who are so farre from being ashamed of, that they even boast and glory in thse lascivious wickednesses;) will easily appeare by these par∣ticulars: First, they are sinnes against the expresse letter of the 7. Commandement. Exod. 20.14. Deut. 5.18. Mat. 5.27, 28. Thou shalt not commit adultery: as all ancient, and moderne Expositors of this Commandement testifie. Secondly, they are sinnes, Levit. 20.10. Psal. 50.18. Prov. 6.32. Ier. 7.9. c. 23.14. Ezech. 16.32 Hosea. 4.2, 13, 14. Mat. 5.28.29 Ephes. 5.3, 5. Gal. 5.19, 21. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Hebr. 13.4. Rev. 21.8. abundantly condemned thorowout the Old and New Testa∣ment, as abominable and highly displeasing unto God; whose wrath none can stand under. Thirdly, they are the very Gal. 5.19. workes and products of the flesh; Mat. 15.19. Mark. 7.21, 22, 23. issuing alwayes from a polluted heart devoyd of grace. Fourthly, Rom. 1.24. to 30. Ephes. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19, 22. 1 Thes. 4.4, 5. 1 Cor. 5.1. they are those execrable sinnes, those abominable pollutions wherein the Idola∣trous Pagan Gentiles lived, whose lewdnesse Christians must not imitate. Fiftly, Iob 24.15, 16, 17. Prov. 7.9. to 24. Ephes. 5.11, 12, 13. Iob 20.26, 27. they are those shamefull,Pudet autem non solum eorum, quae, dicta sunt, pudendorum, sed etiam signorū, ut non solū cum in re venerea versantur, sed etiam cum adsunt signa ejus rei, & non so∣lum cum faciunt turpia, sed etiam cum dicunt. Aristot. Rhetor lib. 2. c. 6. p. 137. desperate filthy workes of darknesse which the most audacious miscreants are afraide, yea utterly ashamed to commit in the day-time, in the face and view of others, out of a selfe-guiltinesse, an inward consciousnesse of their vilenesse; Iob 24.17. Ianua frangatur, latret canis, undique magno Pulsa domus strepitu resonet: vel pallida lecto Desiliat mulier: miseram se conscia clamet: Cruribus haec metuat, doti deprensa, egomet mi. Discincta tunica fugiendum est ac pede nudo: Ne nummi pere∣ant, aut pyga, aut deni{que} fama. Deprendi miserum est. Horace Srmonum lib 1. Satyr. 2. p. 167. See p. 164. in the act of which if any are deprehended, they are in the very terrors of the shadow of death; like men distracted they know not what to doe, nor whether to flie, the very foulenesse of the fact amazing them, and the least noyse affrighting them. Sixtly, Mat. 15.19, 20. 1 Thes. 4.4, 5. Rom. 1.24 to 30. Rev. 21 8, 17. Gen. 49.4. they are sinnes which most abominably pollute the bodies and soules of men, making them dious both in the eyes of God, and men. Seventhly, Gen. 49.4. Prov. 5.9. cap. 6.31, 33.  Sam. 12. 11, 12. Levit. 21.9. Hosea 1.2. Iohn 8.41. they are sinnes which bring abundance of shame, of dishonour upon the persons, families, and posterities of those who are guilty of them,
and even quite deprive them of their glory: a wound, a disho∣nour shall they get, and their reproach shall not be wiped away; as the very wisest of men informes us. Sixtly, they are sinnes Hosea 4.11. which wholy infatuate and steale away mens hearts; so Prov. 7.7.21.22, 23. c. 5.6. that they are as an Oxe that goeth to the slaugh∣ter; or as a foole who is led to the correction of the stockes; till a dart shrike thorow their liver; or as a Bird that hastneth to the snare, not knowing that it is for his life. Yea these sinnes doe so besot men, that they can neither consider the danger of them; nor yet use meanes for to escape them. Ninthly, Prov. 5.9, 10, 11. c. 6. 25, 26. Iob 31.9, 10, 11, 12. they consume, they putrifie, not onely the soules, the spirits, but the very bodies, and estates of men, bringing them even to a morselt of bread. Tenthly, they ingenerate many filthy Prov. 5.3, 4, 12. Iob 31.12. Prov. 12.4. loathsome diseases, which oft-times so pu∣trifie the bodies of lewde adulterous persons, that they even stinke above ground, becoming odious, yea intolle∣rable to themselves and others: which made S. Chry∣sostome to affirme, Adulter etiā vel anre gehen∣nam est omniū miserimus, om∣nia suspicans, vel ad umbram contrm scens, ad nullum li∣beris respiciens oculis, sed om∣nes pertimescēs, & qui siunt, & qui nesiun, ∣ros videns gladios, impen∣dentes lictors, iudicia, &c. Ho∣mil in Psal. 7. Tom 1. Col 645. B. that an adulterer even in this life, be∣fore he goes to Hell, is the most miserable, the most wreched of all men. Eleventhly, they are such sinnes, Ephes. 5.3.4. as are not so much as once to be named (much lesse then practised) among Christians, whom they doe not become; those there∣fore are no true Christians who take pleasure in them. Twefely, they are such sinnes, as 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11, 13. exclude men, both from the society of Gods Children here, who are not so much as to converse, or eate with fornicators, or adulterers: and likewise 1 Cor. 5.1. to the end. 2 Cor. 2.1. to 13. c. 7.8. to 14. Per hoc quo{que} exemplum ab Ecclesia maxime expellit um qui est fornicatus. Chrysost. Hom. 15. in 1 Cor. 5. See Ambrose, Hirom, Theodret, Primass, Rhemigius, Theophylact, & Haymo, Ibidem. from the Word, the Sacraments, the publike Assemblies of the Saints; from which all Fornicators, Adulterers, Strum∣pets, and unchaste persons are ipso facto by the very Law of God, and Concil. Ancyranum. Can. 15. & 20. Capit. Graecarum Synodorum. Can. 76.77.81. Wormatense Concil. Can. 44. Nannetense. Can. 12.13, 14. with sundry others. man, to be excommunicated; that so they may be delivered up to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, till they shall give some outward actuall testimony of their sincere re∣pentance
for these sin. Thirteenthly, they are such sins, as make a man exceeding guilty in Gods sight. Prov. 627, 28, 29. A man may as well take fire in his bosome, and his clathes not be burnt; or goe upon coles, and his feet not be scorched, as goe into his neigh∣bours wife, and yet be innocent: Whence Salomon informes us; Prov. 23.28. that a strange woman increaseth transgressions amongst men. Fourteenthly, they are sinnes which oft times shorten and cut off the lives of men: Adulterij co∣mes & fructu caedes. Chrysost. in Psal. 50. Tom. 1. Col. 823. A. and draw on mur∣ther after them: For Prov. 6.26. as the Aditresse will hunt for the precious life of a man: Prov. 6.33, 34, 35. so iealousie is the rage of a man; thereore he will not spare in the day of vengeance: he will not regard an ransome, neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifes. These sinnes were Genesis 34. thorowout. the cause that the Sonnes of Iacob slew the Sechemites and spoiled their City, for ravishing and using their Sister Dinah as an Whore. These Numb. 26.1 4, 5, 7, 8. were the death of all those Israelites who committed whore∣dome with the Daughters of Moab, whom God himselfe com∣manded te be slaine. Iudg. 19.25. to the end, and cap. 20. & 21. thorowout. Dux malorum faemina, & sc∣lerum artifex obsedit ani∣mos, cujus i∣cestae stupris fumant tot ur∣bes, bella tot gentes gerunt, & versa ab imo regna tot po∣pulos prae∣munt. Senecae Hypolyu. Act. 2. fol. 78. These occasioned the warre betweene the Bexiamites and the other Tribes of the Children of Israell, in which there were threescore and five thousand men and up∣wards slaine; yea, the whole Tribe of Benjamin where the Le∣vites Concubine was ravished, (which occasioned this warre,) were almost utterly destroyed, there being 600. men of them onely left alive by meanes of these men-slaying sins. These sins 2 Sam. 11.2. to 22. 1 Chron. 20.1. Psal. 51. caused David, to destroy Vriah: 2 Sam. 13. thorowout. Absalom to murther his Brother Ammon for ravishing his Sister Tamar. These have See Tacitus Annaium. lib. 11 12, 13. Iohn Bale, his Acts of English Votaries, with the Apologie for the same thorowout. beene alwayes accompanied with much murther and bloodshed in all ages: these have caused the Husband, to murther his Wife; the Wife, to poyson her Husband: one Whore-master to murther his Corrivals to the selfe-same Strumpet: yea these have caused unnaturall Mothers to murther their owne spurius Issues, to conceale their lwdnesse; as Authors, as our owne 21. Iacobi. cap. 27. accordingly. Statutes, and ex∣perience teach us: therefore they must needs be crying
because they are bloody sinnes. Fiftenthly, they are such sinnes which offer an high indignity to the whole Trinity. First, to God the Father, 1 Cor. 6.13. 20. Rom. 6.13.19, 20. not onely in taking those bodies that are his, which were made for himselfe alone, not for fornication; and giving them up as profssed instruments of sinne, to lust, to lewdnesse, to Satan, to all uncleanesse: but likewise in contaminating, oblitterating, and cast∣ing dirt, yea sinne, upon his 1 Ephes. 4.24. most holy Image stamped on them. Secondly, to Iesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17, 20. in taking those bodies which are his members, purchased with his most precious blood, that they might be preserved pure and chaste to him; and making them the members of an Harlot. Thirdly, to God the holy Ghost; 1 Cor. 6.19. cap. 3.16, 17. in defiling those bodies, which are the Temples of the holy Ghost, which is in us; who cannot indure any pollution, especially in his Temples, which should be alwayes holy, as he is holy.Quomodo enim post con∣suetudinem cū scortis in Ec∣clesiam venire poteris? quo∣modo manus quibus scortū contrectasti in caelum exten∣dere audebis, &c? Chrysostom De Libello repu∣dij. Sermo. Tom. 4 Col. 594 D. And who is there so desperate∣ly wicked, that dares thus affront the whole Trinity it selfe by these cursed filthy sinnes? Sixteenthly, they are sinnes of which men very seldome repent. Prov. 22.14. cap. 23.27. A Whore (saith Salo∣mon) is a deepe Ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow Pit; (out of which men can hardly recover themselves:) Prov. 2.19. Fornicatio dif∣ficulter elui potest. Chrysost. Hom. 5. i 1 Thes. cap. 4. Tom. 4. Col. 1239. None that goe into her returne againe, neither take they hold of the pathes of Life: And who then would ingage his soule upon such irrecoverable irrepenitable sins as these? Seventeenthly, Prov. 7.27. these sinnes are the very high-way to Hell, the beaten rode to eternall death: Prov. 5.4. the end of them is bitter as wormwood, sharpe as a two-edged sword. Where∣fore Salomon exhorts his Sonne; Prov. 5.7, 8, 9. to remove his way farre from a strange woman, and not to come nigh the doore of her house; (a place well worthy their observation, who feare not for to run to Whore-houses,, or to cast them∣selves upon the temptations, the enticements of Strum∣pets, as too many doe,) Prov. 2.18, 19. cap. 5.5. cap. 7.27. Fornicatio est via quae ducit ad Diabolum. Chrysostom. Homilia. 41. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 882. B For her house inclineth unto death, and her pathes unto the dead: her feet goe downe to
death, her steps take hold of hell: her house is the way to hell, going downe to the chambers of death: None that goe into her returne againe, neither take they hold of the path of Life. Eigh∣teenthly, they are sinnes against the very bodies and soules of men. Against the bodies of men; as the Apo∣stle witnesseth. 1 Cor. 6.18. See Ambrose, Chrysostome, Hie∣rom, Theodoret, Primasius, Re∣migius, Beda, An∣selme, Haym, Ocumenius, The∣ophylact, Seduli∣us, and other of the Fathers on this whole chapter. Flee fornication; every sinne that a man doth is without the body, but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his owne body: that is, Fornicatio totum corpus sceleratum & execrandum facit. Chsost. Homil. 18. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 393. B. See Ambros. Enar. in Psal. 37. Tom. 2. p. 341. 342. in defiling it; in dishonouring it; in impayring it; in destroying it. Against the soules of men, as Salomon testifieth: Prov. 6.32. Adulter exiti∣um animae suae conciliat. Chry∣sost. Hom. 3. De Verbis Esaiae. vidi Dominum sedentem. Tō. 1. Col. 1294. Who so (saith he) committeth adultery with an woman lacketh un∣derstanding; he that doeth it, destroyeth his owne soule. And who would be so inhumanely, so atheistically desperate, as to destroy both soule and body for ever, to enjoy the momentany bitter-sweetnesse of these filthy sinnes? Nineteenthly; they are sinnes, Ps. 50.16, 18. which disable men to per∣forme any holy duty acceptable to God. Sinnes, Prov. 22.14. Rom. .24 to 30. into which few fall, but such as are abhorred of the Lord, and given up to a reprobate sence, to worke all wickednesse even with gredinesse. Sinnes, Iob 31.11, 12. which devoure to destruction, and roote out all a mans increase. Sinnes, Iob 24.15, 17. & cap. 20.26. which cause the earth to rise up against men, and the fire not blowne to devore them. Sinnes, Ephes. 5.3, 4 5, 6. which draw downe the temporall, the eternall wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Gen. 6.1. to 14. Math. 24.38. 2 Pet. 2.5, 10. Libidines di∣luvium induxerunt. Berosus. Frag. lib. 3. pag. 25. Chrysostom. Homil. 22. in Geneses. These were the sinnes that destroyed the old worldwith water: Gen. 19.5, 8, 13, 14. Ezech 16.49, 50. 2 Pet. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Iude 7.8. which consumed the Citties of So∣dom and Gomorrah with fire from Heaven; Which 1 Cor. 10.8. Numb. 25.9. caused three and twenty thousand of the Isralites to fall in one day. These were the sinnes, Beyerlinke. Opus Chronographicum Orbis Vniversi. pag. 110. D. that caused God, in the yeere of our Lord, 1583. even in our Citty of London; to destroy with ire from Heaven two Cittizens, the one leaving his Wife, the other her owne Husband, whiles they were in the very act of
adultery on the Lords day; their bodies being left dead, and halfe burnt up, for a Spectacle of Gods avenging Iustice unto others. These are the sinnes (but adultery and incest mor especially) Levit. 20.10, 11, 12. to 20. Deut. 22.21, 2 Iohn 8.4, 5. which God himselfe hath commanded to be punished with death, yea with stoning to death; the most vile and shamefulest death of all others: Yea these are such sinnes, that Iosephus An∣tiqu. Iudaeorū. lib. 3. cap. 20. Philo Iudaeus, De Specialibus Legibus. lib. 2. pag. 1053. Boe∣mus, De Mor. Gentium. lib. 2 cap. 4. Munster. Cosmog. l. 5. cap. 33. Purchas Pilgr. l. 2. c. 19. not onely the Iewes in ancient times; but even meere Pagans from the very light of nature, did punish with death it selfe. Hence Boemus. lib. 3. cap. 2. Drac enacted; that the adulterer taken in adultery, might without any danger to the party, be lawfully killed. Alex. ab A∣lexandro lib. 4. c. 1. Plato Le∣gum. Dialog. 6. The selfe-same Law was en∣acted by Solon and Plato. Hence Opmeerus Chronogr. pag. 92. Boemus. l. 3. c. 18 Annota∣tiones Gode∣levaei. in lib. 10. Livij Histor. Iustiniani. Co∣dex. l. 9. Tit. 9. Romulus, among those lawes which he wrote in brasse and placed in the Capitol, enacted; That the convicted adulteresse should be put to death according as her husband, or his friends should thinke meete. Which act was afterwards confirmed by the Iulian Law. Hence, Zenophon, De Instit. Cyri. lib. 3. Plutarchi Solon & Laconica. Instituta. Munster. Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 42. a∣mong the Lacedemonians, it was lawfull for a man to kill him, who was taken in adultery with his wife. Hence Heraclitus, De Polit. the Corin∣thians used to drowne those who prostituted themselves to the lust of others. The Plutarchi Numa. Livy Histor. lib. 2. sect 42. Dionys. Hallicarnas. Antiqu. Rom. lib. 2. c. 8. Eutropius Romnae. Hist. lib. 1 & 2. Dion Cassius. Histor. l. 50. Vestel Virgins among the Romans bing convicted of fornication were buried alive. Boemus. lib. 2. cap. 11. Munster Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 79. In ancient Ties among the Turkes, the adulterer and adulteresse were both sto∣ned to death: and Lonicerus. Turc. Histor. lib. 2. c. 17. lib. 3. c. 8. Busbequius Epist 3. Purchas Pilgr. lib. 3. cap. 10. at this day they are both most ignominiously punished. Boemus. lib. 1. cap 11. Alexand ab Alexandro. lib. 4 cap. 1. Purchas Pilgr. lib. 3. c. 10. The Arabians, and Tenedians punish adultery with death, reputing it a farre greater crime, then periury, or sacriledge; and therefore worthy of a severer punishment. The Caelius Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. lib. 18 cp. 15. Boemus. lib. 2. cap. 6. Purchas Pilgr. lib. 7. cap. 7. AEthiopians account adultery treason, and therefore they make it capitall. Acosta. Indian Hist. lib. 6. cap. 18. In Peru whoredome is punished with the death of both parties. Lerius, De Navigat. in Brasil. cap. 17. The Brasilians prosecute adultery with
capitall hatred, in so much that he whose wife is taken in adul∣tery may lawfully kill her, if he please. Purchas Pilg. lib. 5. cap. 9. The Indian Bra∣manes may lawfully poyson their uncaste wives. Op merus. Chronogr. lib. 6. pag. 345. In old Sax∣ony, women who were convicted of adultery, and ravishers of maides were first hanged, and then burned. Purchas Pilg lib. 5. cap. 2. In Sa adul∣tery is death, the Fathers of the Malefactors, or the next Kins∣men being the Executioners. Peter Matyr, Indian Histor. Decad. 4. cap 4. In Palmaria adulterous Priests are punished with cruell death. Peter Martyr Indian Histor. Decad. 7. c. 10. In Hispaniola unchaste Priests are either drowned, or burnt. Peter Martyr, Indian Histor. Decad. 5. c. 17 Purchas Pilgr. lib. 8. cap. 12. lib. 9. cap 3. I Bantam, Mexico, and China adultery is punished with death. Boemus. lib. 2 cap. 10. The Tartars ta∣ken in adultery are put to present death, for feare of which they live very chaste. If then the very judiciall Law of Mo∣ses, together with these Heathens and Pagan Nations have deemed these sinnes capitall: Qui in uxores alioru, inter∣dum & amico∣rum insaniunt, & in dmnum proximorum vivendo fami∣lias numerosas adulterare co∣nntur, conju∣gliaque vota irrita facere & spem posterita∣tis abrumpere, abrant insa∣nabili morbo animae, capite plectendi, ut publici hostes humani generis, ne impunè plures domos contaminant, neve alijs exemplum fiant nequitiae, quae facile imitatores invenit. Philo, De Specialibus Lgibus. lib. 2. pag. 1053. punishing adulterers and adulteresses with death, as being the publike enemies of mankinde: needs must these sinnes bee execrable, yea dangerous unto Christians. Twentiethly, these sinnes are prejudiciall both to the Church and State, in defile∣ing, polluting, dishonouring, and troubling them with an uncleane, degenerated, spurious, if not accursed of∣spring, who are no other but the very Zech. 9.6. blemishes, shames, and infamy of Church, of State, of nature: which all Lawes disinherit: Deut. 23.2. who were not to enter into the Con∣gregation of the Lord, even to their tenth generation. Lastly, these sinnes exclude men out of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 21. Ephes. 5.3, 4, 5. Rev. 21.27. none that die in the guilt of them shall ever inherite the Kingdome of God or of Christ: They cause God to iudge men in a more speciall manner: Hebr. 13.4. Whoe-mongers and Adulterer God will iudge: They binde men over to the great Assises at the last day: 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. ornicationes & adulteria non vertuntur in cinerem, sed conscribuntur in judicium futurum. Chrysostom. Hom. 77. in Matth. om. 2. Col. 534. C. The Lord knoweth how to reserve the uniust unto the day of iudgement to be punished: but chiely them, that walke after
the flesh in the lust of uncleanesse: And if all this bee not enough: they plunge mens soules deepe in Hell for all eternity. Rev. 21.8. For∣nicatio inijcit in gehennam. Chrysost. Hom 18. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 393. C. For the abominable, and Whore-mngers, and all uncleane persons, shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone for ever; which is the second death. Iude 7. E∣ven as Sodome and Gomorra, and the Citties about them, in like manner giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffring the vengeance of eternall fire, for these sinnes of theirs. Psal. 50.18, 22. O then consider this all yee incontinent, uncleane, adulterous persons, who forget God; Prov. 2.13. who leave the pathes of uprightnesse, to walk in the wayes of darkenesse; lest he teare you in pieces; lest he Isay 33.14. Isay 66.24. eternally condemne you to the endlesse flames of Hell for these your flames of lust; and there be none to deliver you. Since then it is evident by all these premises to the hearts, the consciences of all men, that adultery, fornication, un∣cleanesse, are such abominable, capitall, Quis claret me Tanais? aut quae Barbaris Maeotis undis pontico incum∣bens mari? Non ipse toto magnus Ocea∣no pater, tan∣tum expiarit sceleris. Senecae Hippolytus. Act. 2 fol. 81. deepe-dyed per∣nitious sinnes; those Stage-playes which instigate, or en∣tise men to them, foment men in them, must needs bee execrably sinfull; yea utterly unlawfull unto Christians: so that my Major needs no further proofe. For the Minor; that Stage-playes are the immediate occasions, the fomentations of much actuall adultery, whoredome, and unclenesse; it is most apparantly evi∣dent: First, from their subject matter: which being for the most part amorous, scurrilous, or obscene, con∣sisting of adulteries, rapes, incests, whoredomes, love-prankes, sollicitations to incontinency, meretricious ribaldrous songs and iests, (as I have Act 3. Scene 1. p. 62. to 72. & Act 5. Scene 9. already proved;) must needs inflame mens lusts, and draw them on to actuall uncleanesse: Since evill word,1 Cor. 15.33. See here p. 50. accordingly. which corrupt good manners,Verba ad ope∣ra viam prae∣bēt. Theophylact. Enarratio in Ephes. 5. are but a way, a passage unto evill deeds; Ne nominentur quidem, scortatio, obscaenitas, aut immundities: novit enim qui de his rebus fiunt sermones fomitem & exhortationem fieri ad opera. Vrbanitas, obscae∣nitas, & stultiloquium omes sunt ad scortationem. Oecumenius. in Ephes. 5.3.4. Ob∣scaenus sermo & scurrilitas vehiculum fornicationum, &c. Chrysostome. Hom. 17. in Ephes. See Ambrose, Hierom, Primasius, Theodoret, Rhemigius, Sedulius, Anselme, & Haymo, in Ephes. cap. 5.34. accordingly. a fire, a
fewell to adulterous lusts; yea, the very Chariot of whoredome, of uncleanesse; as the Fathers stile them. Hence is it, that De Vanitate Scientiarum. c. 63. & 64. See Athenaeu Dip∣nos. l. 13. cap. 8. 25.27. accor∣dingly. Agrippa reputeth amorous Poets, lascivious Histori∣ans, the chiefest Panders in the world; yea the very originall Fathers, Tutors, and chiefe Promoters of baudery, and whore∣dome; because their ribaldrous Poems; their true, their fa∣bulous Histories of the adulteries, loves, and beastly lewdnesses of Idol-gods, or lustfull men, are but as so many Lectures to in∣struct; so many allurements to entice; so many guides to lead, so many argmets to perswade men to lechery, and all actuall uncleanesse whatsoever. Hence August. De Decē. Chordis Philo Iudaeus, De Decalogo & De Speciali∣bus Legibus. l. 2. Calvin, Bea∣cn, Hooper, Ba∣binton, Perkins, Vrsine, Hyperius, Knwbs, Bun∣ny, Solme, Simle∣rus, Dod, Brinsly, Elton, Downham, Williams, Flower, Andrews, Lake and sundry o∣thers. all ancient, all moderne Expositors on the Commandements that ever I have leene, have reduced scurrility, ribaldry; together with all amorous lascivious Poems, speeches, iests, Histories, Bookes, and Stage-playes, to the 7. Commandement, as being the fire, fewell, f∣mentations, occasions of whoredome and adultery. Yea hence is it, that God himselfe prohibits, Ephes. 4.22. c. 5.3, 4, 5, 11, 12. See Ambrose, Chrysostome, The∣odoret, Hierom, Rhemigius, Pri∣masius, Haymo, Beda, Anselme, Oecumenius, & Sedulius, together with Calvin, Musculus, Melancton, Areius, Marlorat, and all other moderne Commentators, Ibidem. accordingly & Act 3. Scene 2 & 3. all lthy communications, all corrupt speeches; all foolish talking and iesting, which are not convenient, together with the very na∣ming of fornication and all uncleanesse; as unbecomming Saints; because they draw men on to these shamefull workes of darkenesse, with which Christian are to have no fellowship. If then obscene, adulterous Poems, fables, Histories, Dit∣ties, iests, or speeches have such an attractive, such a depraving power in them to draw men on to actuall lewdnesse, See the places of Chrysostome quoted in the ensuing pages, accordingly. much more must Stage-playes, (wherein the quintessence, the confluence of all obscenity is pithily contracted, emphatically expressed, elegantly adorned, rhetorically pronounced) be more prevalently power∣full to draw men on to these grosse lecherous sinnes. Whence Qui autem in multitudine versatur, assiduis vulneribus afficitur Mulierum enim aspectus sagitta veneno illita, quae ferit animum & venenum immittet & quo diutius manet, eò magis vulnus computrescit. Qui vitare cupit ejusmodi vulnera, is à publicis Spectacu∣lis abstinebit, neque in celebritatibus versabitur. Satius est enim, ut domi maneas, qum um pu∣tas te celebri∣ates venerari, in manus ini∣micorum in∣cidere. S. Nili Abbais. Orat. 2. De Luxuria. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 2. p. 969. G. Nilus an ancient Abbot, adviseth all such who
would avoyd the wounds of lust, to abstaine from publike Stage-playes, and to keepe themselves from them, lest they should fall into their enemies hands, and be drawne n to actuall lewdnesse. Secondly, my Minors truth is most evident, from the very manner of acting Stage-playes, and those whore∣domes, those adulteries personated in them. Hee who shall but seriously consider those amorous smiles, and wanton gestures; See here Act 5. Scene 2.3. those lascivious complements, those lewde adulterous kisses and enbracements; those lust∣full dalliances; those impudent, immodest, panderly passages; those effeminate, whorish, lust-inflaming sol∣licitations; those severall concurrences, combinations, conspirations, of artificiall, studied, and more then Bro∣thel-house obscenities: Adulterium discitur dū vi∣detur. Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Hi∣striones docent aduleria dum ingunt, & si∣ulatis erudi∣unt ad vera. Fa∣unt per ima∣ginem quae nō sunt, ut fiant sin pudore qua vera sunt Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. . 20. Div Instit. Epit. c. 6. Vtinā sola risu, ac non etiā imitatione digna viderentur. Augu. De Civ. Dei. l. 2. c. 9. those reall lively representations of the acts of venery, which attend and set out Stage-playes; must needs acknowledge; that they are the very See here, p. 67.68. Schools of bauder; the Tutors, the occasions of reall whoredomes, incests, adulteries, &c. whence they Theatrū proprie sacrariū Veneris est. Ita{que} Pompeus magnus solo Theatro minor, cū illum arcē omniū turpitudinū extruxisset, veritus quādo{que} memoriae suae censoriam anim∣adversionem, Veneris aedem superposuit, & ad dedicationem edicto populū vocans, nō Theatrū, sed veneris templū nuncupavit; ci subijciemus, inquit, gradus spectaculorū, Ita damnatū & damnandū opus templi titulo praetexuit, & disciplinā superstitione de lusit, sed Veneri & Libero convenit. Ita{que} Theatrū Veneris domus est. Terul. De Spectas c. 10. were at the first onsecrated to Venus (the Goddesse of whoredome and adultery) the very Roman Theater being stiled, THE TEMPLE OF VENVS, as Tertullian writes: Delubrū turpi & flagitioso Veneris Daemoni dedicatum, erat tanquam schola nequitiae ijs qui erant libidini dediti, qui{que} nimia licentia corpus labefactave∣ran suum, corruperant{que} Nam quidam molles & effaeminati viri, non viri revera, pudore prorsus exuto instar mulierū turpissima contagione se ipsi inficientes, Dae∣monem placabant Scelerati praeterea & nefarij mulierū congressus, clandestinae fal∣sorū connubiorū corrupteae, infanda & turpia facinora in o delubro, utpote in loco impuro & faedo, admia erant. Nec quisquam fuit, qui in haec scelera animadver∣teret, propterea quod ex viris gravibus & honestis nemo illuc audebat accedere. Eusebius, De Vita Constantini lib. 3. cap. 53. See Hedi. Cli. sect. 36. Strab. Geogr. lib. 8. pag. 750. Athenus Dipnos. lib. 13. cap. 9. Munst. Cosmgr. lib. 4. cap. 39. in which whoredome and adultery were freely practi∣sed
without controll. Corporis sen∣sus sua facile in animam effun∣dunt. Picturas ergò quae ocu∣los praestrin∣gunt, & mentē corrumpunt, & ad turpium vo∣luptatum mo∣vent incendia, nullo modo deinceps im∣primi jubemus, &c. Concil. Con∣stantinop 6. Can. 100. Surius. Tom. 2. p. 1053. The 6. Councell of Constantinople, Can. 100. the Syod of Augusta, Anno 1548. cap. 28. together with Clemens Alexandrinus. Oratio Adhort. ad Gentes. fol. 8.9. Gregory Nyssen, in his Vitae Moseos Earratio. p. 503. Theodoret, Contra Graecos Infideles. lib. 3. De Angelis De{que} Dijs, ac Daemonibus malis. Tom. 2. pag. 362.363. Mapheus Vegius, De Liberorum Educatione. lib. 1. cap. 15. with sun∣dry moderne Divines in their Expositions on the 7. Com∣mandement; condemne all amorous wanton pictures, of Cour∣tesans, and others, (which now are too to common) as incendiaries to mens unruly lusts, which draw them on to actu∣all lewdnesse. Certainely, if these livelesse pictures See Suetonij Tiberius. sect. 43. are so apt to ingenerate unchaste affections, or to pricke men o to whoredome and adltery: much more will these amorous actions, complements, kisses, and embracements; these lively pictures, these reall representations of adultery and uncleanesse in our Stage-playes, doe it. It is storied ofSuetonij Ti∣berius. sect. 43. See 44.45. Tiberius, (a monster of more then beastly obscenity,) that as he adorned his houses with lascivius pictures, the better to excite his lsts; (a practice much in use with many incontinent persons now of late;) so he O nullo se∣lus credibile in aevo, quod{que} po∣steritas neget. Snecae. Thyestes. Act. 4 fol. 45. caused others to defile one another before his face; ut adspectu deficientes libidines excitaret; that by this lewde beastly sight he might stirre up his owne decayed lusts. The like I finde recorded of Aiunt Temi∣rem libidine reliquos mor∣tales longè su∣perase. Nam ∣dolescentes in conspectu suo mulieres con∣stuptare jube∣ba, sic provocans naturam, ut & ipsa deinde coire poset ai Caldyl. De Rebus Turcicis. lib. 3 fol. 84. B. Tamerlan the great Scythian Warrier. It is registred likewise of that man-monster, Mimicis adulteris ea quae solent simulatò fieri, effici ad verum jussit. AElij Lampridij Heliogabalus. pag. 202. Nefas quod non ulla tellus bar∣bara commisitunquam, non vagus campis Geta, nec inhospitalis. Taurus aut sparsus Scythes. Senec Hippolytus. Act. 1. fol. 70. Heliogabalus; that he commanded Stage-players to commit those adulteries upon the Stage in truth, which they formerly personated but in shew; to quicken up his lusts to whoredome. If then the ve∣ry beholding of lewde adulterous acts, were the onely incentives these prodigious Whore-masters used to enrage their wearied, spent, allayed lusts; and to enable
them to the actuall committing of these beastly sinnes; we cannot but from hence conclude; that the persona∣ting of incests, rapes, adulteries, whoredomes, and the like upon the Stage, set out with all the art that either bawdery, or lechery have as yet atchieved. should Oblectantur simulachris li∣bidinum, ut in ipsis deposita verecundia au∣daciores siant ad crimina. Cy∣prian, De Specta∣culi. lib. much more instigate if not precipitate men to the selfe-same wicked∣nesses, to which their owne depraved natures are too prone. Thirdly, my Minors truth is fully evident, by the qua∣lities of the Penners, the Actors, the Spectators of these Stage-playes; who have for the most part, beene no∣toriously unchaste in all ages: Such were the Play-pots, such the Actors, the Stage-haunters, in See D  Amandi. li. 1. Ovids, Dpnosoph. l. 1. c. 2, 27. Athenaeus, Tcitus An∣nalium. l. 4. c. 3. Dion Cassius Romanae Hi∣storiae. lib. 57. Suetonij Tibe∣ius. Alexand. ab Alexandro. l. 3. c. 9. See Act 4. Scene 1.2. accordingly. Tiberius, Clemen Alexandrinus, Tertullians, Cyprians, Lactantius, Basils, Nazienzens, Hieroms, Augu∣stins, Chrysostomes, Salvians, Isiodores, Damascens, Ber∣nards, Aquinas, Fabricius, Petrarkes, Polydor Virgils, A∣grippaes, Gualters dayes, and other times, as their fore-quoted testimonies, with sundry others in the See Act 4. Scene 1.2. & Act 6. Scene 3. thorowout ac∣cordingly. precedent Acts abundantly testifie. Such were they not long since among us, as Master Treatise a∣gainst vaine Playes & En∣terludes. Northbrooke, Schoole of Abuses; and Playes Confuted. Gosson, Exposition on the 7. Commande∣ment. BB. Babington, Anatomy of Abuses. pag. 101. to 107. Master Stubs, with See their places quoted in the precedent Scene. others of our owne domestique moderne Authors write; and such are they still. What our common Play-poets and Actors chasti∣ty and demeanor is; what modst Credis aliquis est ex me pius? Senecae Thebais. Act 1. fol. 54. mortified persons they are, is so well knowne to all who are acquainted with their persons or Playes, that I need not defile my paper to proclaime it. What the most of our assiduous Play-haunters are; how chaste their lives, their carria∣ges, are, Qualem quis{que} conscientiam tulerit, talem & judicem habebit. Isiodor. Hisp. Senten∣tiarum. lib. 3. cap. 30. their owne consciences can best inorme themselves; experience and Famae rerum standum est, ubi certam derogat vetustas fidem. Livy Histori lib. 7. pag. 258. publike fame best testifie unto others: Sure I am, there is little chastity or modesty in their
cloathes and gestures, Oratio vul∣tus animi est. Talis homini est oratio qua∣lis vita. Seneca. Epist. 114.115. lesse in their speeches, least in their lives, if publike fame or common experience prove but true. It is too well knowne to divers Stage-customers; See the third Blast of Retreit from Stage-playes. Master Gosson, his Schoole of A∣buses: and here Act 4. Scene 2. accordingly. that the most notorious Panders, Bawdes, and Strum∣pets, (the Len pernicis communis ado∣lescentulum Terentij Adelphi. Act 2 Scene 1. p. 129 Vitae se tradidit qui le∣nones, tanquā leones vitavit. Cicero ad Heren∣nium. lib. 4.sect. 30. ae of many a Yongsters body, soule, estate, credit:) the most branded Adulteresses, Adulte∣rers, Whore-masters, Brothel-house-haunters, and the like, are the chiefest Admirers, Patrons, Spectators, Supporters of; the most beneficiall Customers and Contributors to our Stage-playes. It is storied of Alij Lampri∣dij Hliogaba∣lus. p. 02. See Eutropius, & Zonaras, in vita Heliogab. Heliogabalus, that when he erected a publike Stewes, he sent to the Cirqus and Theaters (the common Isiodor. Hisp. Originū. l. 18. c. 4. See 1. k & l. Marts or Re∣ceptacles in those dayes for whores) to stocke and furnish i. Certainely, if such a common Brothell or Nunnery of adulterous lecherous persons were now to bee ere∣cted, (which God forbid:) the best Storehouse to fur∣nish it, were our Play-houses, where such See Iustinia∣ni Novella 98. & 105. & Codex. Theodosij lib. 15. cap. 7. Huc intrant faciles emi puellae. Statius Sylvarum. l. 1. & Bulengerus De Theatro l. 1. c. 50. p. 296.297. Transacta fa∣bula, argent si quis dederit, ut ego suspicor, ultrò ibit nuptū, non manebit auspices. Plautus Cassinae Prolugus. pag. 168. Scortum exoletum ne quis in proscenio sedet, &c. Plauti Paenuls Prolog p. 501. Theatra congregant & meretricū choros istic inducen∣tes & pueros pathicos, &c. Chrysost Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 356. lewde crea∣tures harbour, and have most resort, as Iustinian, Chryso∣stome, Statius, Plautus, & Bulengerus witness. Since there∣fore Play-poets, Actors, Stage-haunters, are See Act 4. Scene 1.2. accordingly. thus gene∣rally adulterous and unchaste; yea commonly more excessive in these sinnes then others: Since Adulterers, Whore-masters, Whores, &c. are the greatest Patriots, applauders, fre∣quenters, upholders of these lascivious Stage-playes; needs must they pamper and promote their filthy sinnes and lusts; if not Scilicet ex illo so∣lemnia more Theatra. Nunc quo{que} formosis insidiosa manent. Ovid, De Arte Amandi. l.  p. 161.162. ingender adultery, and lewdnesse in their hearts: since such creatures live not, delight not, but in elements, in pleasure like themselves; Sed tu praecipue curvis venare theatris; Haec loca sut votis faciliora tuis. Illic invenies quod ames quod ludere possis. Quod{que} seml tangas, quod{que} tenere ve∣lis. Ovid. Ibidem. nor yet spread
their nts, their baies, but in such filthy troubled streames, where they are Ad multas lupa tēdit oves praedatur ut un un Et Iovis in multas devo∣lat ales aves. Se quo{que} det po∣pulo mulier formosa viden∣dā: Quem tra∣hat  multis forsitan unus erit. Omnibus illa locis ma∣neat studiosa placendi. Et cu∣ram tota men∣te decoris agat. Casus ubique valet: smper tibi pendeatha∣mus. Quo mi∣nime credis gurgite piscis crit. Ovid. De Arte Amandi l. 3. p. 203. alwayes sure for to catch their prey, which they seldome misse at Stage-playes; where See M. Gosson Playes Confu∣ted, Action 3. and the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes, accordingly. many adul∣terous maches, many Panderly Whorish Brothel-house bar∣gaines are concluded: the common rode from the Play-house, being either with an adulteresse to a Taverne; or with a Whore to a Bawdy-house; where many young Gallants, to Gods dishonour, and their Parents griefe; doe even spend their Patrimonies, wast their bodies, damne their soules Math. 16.16. being farre more pretious then the world it self. It Idem ver Theatrum, idem & prostibutum, eo quod post ludos exactos meretrices ibi proster∣nantur. Isiodor Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 41. H. Rabanus Maurus, De Vniverso. l. 20. c. 36. Vin∣centius Speculum Doctrinale. l. 11 c. 94. Tertullian De Spectac. c. 10. Chrysost. Hom. 7. in Matth. Tom. 2 Col. 59. B C. & Hom. 8. De Paenit. Tom. 5. Col. 750751. Alexandr Fabritius Destruct. Vtior part 4. c. 23. Anselmus & Haymo. Enar. in Ephes. 5. v. 3 Bulegerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50 p. 296.297. Codex Thodosij. l. 15. Tit. 5.7. was the use of ancient times among the Grekes and Romans, after their Playes were ended, for whores to prostitute themselves to the lusts of others, either on, or un∣der the Theaters where their Playes were acted; the same place being both a Play-house, and a Stewes: Isiodor. Hisp. Originū l. 18. c. 42. Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50. p. 296.297. Primasius in Rom. c. 10. f. 53. Remigius Explanatio in Gal. 5.19. Haymo & Anselme, in Ephes. c. 5. v. 3. accordingly. whence both the Bro∣thel-house and h word Fornication, derive their etimology and originall from the Play-house, where Whores Isiodor. Hisp. Orig. l. 18. c. 42. Iustiniani. Novella 98. & 105. AElij Lampridij Heliogabalus. p. 202. Blen∣gerus, De Theatro. l. c. 1.50. p. 296297, 298. Codex Theodosij. l. 15. Tit. 5.7. were harboured and trained up at first, till they were confined to the Stewes. How farre this usage yet continues I cannot positively determine; yet this I have heard by good intelligence; that our common Strumpets and Adulteresses after our Stage-playes ended, See the 3. Blast of Retrait from Stage-playes, & BB. Babingions Exposition on the 7. Com∣mandement, accordingly. are oft-times prostituted neere our Play-houses, if not in them: that our Theaters if they are not Bawdy-houses (as they may easily be, since many Players, M. Gosson, in his Schoole of Abuses, & Playes Confuted: and the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes, write thus. See Act 4. Scene 1. if reports be true, are common Panders,) yet they
are Cosin-germanes, at Ejusmodi ita∣que patronos habet ars Le∣nonia, qui{que} tueantur artem meretriciam, cui in hūc us{que} diem pro do∣lor in Christi∣ana republica locus est, & in Civitatibus publica Thea∣tra, immunita∣tes & stipendia concessa sunt, &c. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scint. cap. 64. leastwise neighbours to them: Witnesse the Cock-pit, and Drury-lane: Black-friers Play-house, and Duke-humfries; the Red-bull, and Turnball∣street: the Globe, and Bank-side Brothel-houses, with o∣thers of this nature: Such is the vertue of our Playes, our Play-houses, not See Tertul. De Spectac. c. 10. Isiodor Hisp Originū. l. 18. c. 42. Lampridij Heliogabalus. pag. 202. A∣grippa De Va∣nitate Scienti∣arum. cap. 63. & 64 accor∣dingly. onely to instruct, and make, but likewise to draw Panders, Bawdes, Whores, and Whore-masters to them, supplying them both with Castos se qui∣tur mala pau∣pertas; vitio{que} potens regnat adulter. Seneca Hyppolitus. Act. 3. Chorus. fol. 87. custome and revenue, as la∣mentable experience too evidently informes us. There∣fore we need not doubt my Minors truth. Fourthly, if there be any yet uncredulous of this ve∣rity, that memorable act of Pub. Sempronius Sophus, conjugem repudij nota affecit, nihil aliud quàm quod se ignorante ludos ausam spectare. Ergo dum sic olim faeminis occurritur, mens earum a delictis aberat. Valerius Maximus. lib. 6. cap. 3. sect. 12. pag. 237. Alexander ab Alexandro. Gen Dirum. lib. 3 cap. 7. Caelius Rhodig. Antiqu. Lect. lib. 28. cap. 16. P. Sempronius Sophus, a wor∣thy Roman; who gave his wife a Bill of Divorce, for no other cause at all, but that she frequented Stage-playes without his privity, the very sight of which might make her an adulteresse and cause her to defile his bed: which Divorce of his the whole Roman Senate did approve, (though it were the very first that hapned in the Roman State,) as being a meanes to keepe women chaste: Together with the Constitution of Iustinian, groun∣ded upon this precedent example: Vir dimittere ux∣orem potest si praeter voluntatem suam Circenses & Theatricas voluptates captat, ubi scenicae voluptates sunt, aut ubi ferae cū hominibus pugnant. Iustiniani Novelo. 22. & Novella 117. Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 50. pag. 297. That a man may lawfully put away his wife if she resort to Cirques, to Play hou∣ses, or Stage-playes without his privity and consent, because she cannot be temperate or chaste at home, who desires to be incon∣tinent, unchaste, and to take pleasure in Play-houses abroad: wil put this out of question. For if it be lawful for a man to put away his wife for resorting unto Stage-playes; because it is a ready way to make her an adulteresse, if not a probable Argument that she is such a one already, since she dares resort to such lewde suspitious places: (which I would those who have Play-haunting Wives or Daughters would consider:) then Stage-playes are
doubtlesse an apparant cause of actual adultery, and such like filthy sinnes. But if any man bee yet unsatisfied with these evidences, let him reflect on all the severall Fathers, Councels, Authors in the former Scene, and withall cast his eyes upon some pregnāt witnesses which I shall here produce; and then he cannot but subscribe unto it even with full consent. To passe by S. Cyprians testimony, who informes us; Theatra sunt faediora quo convenis; vere∣cundia illic omnis exuitur, simul cum ami∣ctu vestis ho∣nor corporis ac pudor ponitur, denotanda ac contrectanda virginitas reve∣latur. Sic ergo Ecclesia fre∣quenter virgi∣nes suas plan∣git, sic ad infa∣mes carum & destandas fa∣bulas ingemis∣cet: sic flos vir∣ginum extin∣guitur, honor continentiae ac pudor ponitur, gloria omnis ac dignitas profa∣natur: sic se ex∣pugnatus ini∣micus per artes suas inserit, ic insidijs per occulta fallentibus Diabolus obrepit: sic dum ornari cultius, dum libentius evagari virgines volunt, virgines esse desinunt, furtivo dedecore corruptae, viduae antequam nuptae, non mariti sed Christi adulterae. Cyprian, De Habitu Virginum lib. pag. 242. that many Virgins by fre∣quenting Play-houses, did blast the flower of their virginity, make shipwracke of their chastity, and degenerate into common Strumpets, being Widdowes before they were Wives, and Mo∣thers before they had Husbands; whose miserable fals the Church did much lament. An experimentall evidence of this most knowne truth. My first witnesse to testifie these adulterous lewde effects of Stage-playes, is Saint Chrysostome, who is exceeding copious in this Theame: his words and elegant passages against Playes, (which being dismembred into fractions will lose much of their elegance, vigor, and perswasive power,) I shall here faithfully transcribe at large, as being very pertinent to this particular Scene & purpose, though most pregnant against Stage-playes in the grosse, to which wee will here apply them likewise. In his Tom. 1. Operum Parisijs. 1588. Col. 510.511, 512. 3. Homily of David and Saul; the Title of which runs thus. Peri∣culosum esse adire spectacula, quod{que} eares adulteros perfectos facit, & hinc socordia, bellumque nascatur, &c. That it is dan∣gerous to goe to Stage-playes, and that it makes men compleat adulterers, &c. he writes thus of Stage-playes. I verily be∣lieve that many of those who left us yesterday, and departed to the Spectacles of iniquity, are this day present. I could wish I might apparantly know who they are, that so I might Play-haunters, and Stage-players were alwayes excom∣municated, and kept from the Church, the Word, and Sacraments in the Primitive Church. Well were it for us if this ancient Discipline were revived now. excom∣municate them the Church; not that they should alwaies con∣tinue
without, but that being chastised, they might returne a∣gaine. For as much as Fathers also oft-times turne their offen∣ding children out of doores, and remove them from their table, not that they might be alwayes exiled thence, but that being meliorated by this chastisement, they may returne againe into their Fathers house with due prayse. The same truely doe Pa∣stors likewise whiles they seperate the scabbed sheepe from the whole, that being eased of their wretched disease, they may a∣gaine returne safely to the whole, rather then the sicke should fill the whole flocke with that their disease. For these reasons we did desire to know those men: but albeit we are not abl to discrie them with our eyes, yet the Word, the Sonne of God will know them thorowly, and their consciences being checked, he will easily perswade them to returne willingly of their owne accord; teaching them that he onely is within the Church, who brings a mind worthy this exercise: as on the contrary, he who living cor∣rup i a partaker of this congregation, although he stand here in pesn,  yet cast out, Play-haun∣ters and wick∣ed men are in truth excom∣municated per∣sons, and no members, no branches of the Church, though they live within the Church. and is mor truely excluded, then those who are so shut out, that it is not lawfull for them to be patakers of the Sacrae mensae; so was it stiled in S Chrysostoms time: not the holy Altar. holy Table. For they being expelled accor∣ding to Gods Lawes, and continuing without, are yet of good hope, if so be they will amend their faults. They are cast out by the Church, that they may returne againe with a pure conscience. But those who defile themselves, and being admonished not to enter in before they shall have purged away the spot contracted by their nnes, are afterwards ashamed to repent, and so make the wound of ther minde, both sharper and greater. For it is not so hainous a thing to offend, as after an offence to be ashamed of the remedy, and not to obey the Ministers who enioyne such things. But what so great wickednesse is there here committed, say they, that men should be driven from these holy limits? Yea what Irreverent re∣ceiving of the Sacrament, a great, a dange∣rous sinne. offence canst thou finde greater then this? when as they have manifestly defiled themselves with adultery, impudently, after the manner of mad Dogs, they rush in to this holy Table. If so be you desire to know the kinde of the Adultery oc∣casioned by seeing Stage-playes. adultery, I will not rehearse my owne words to you, but his who is to iudge of the whole life of man: that man saith he, Mat. 5 28 who shall
looke upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery in his heart. Quod si mu∣lier spont ac fortè in foro obvia, & neglectius culta s∣penumero intu∣ntem curiosi∣us caepit ipso vultus spectu: isti qui non simplcite ne∣que fortuitò, sed studio & tanto studio, ut ecclesiam quo∣que contem∣nant, & hac gratia pergunt illu, ac totum ibi desidentes diem, in facies faeminarū illa∣rum nobiscum defixos habent oculos, qua fronte poterint dicere, quod as non vide∣rint ad concu∣piscendum? ubi verba quoque accedunt fracta lasciva{que}, ubi cantioes meritriciae: ubi voces vehementer ad voluptatem excitantes; ubi stibio picti oculi, ubi coloribus tinctae genae, ubi totius corporis habitus fucorum impostura ple∣nus est, alia{que} insuper multa lenocinia ad fallendos inescandos{que} homines intuentes instructa, &c. Ibidem. If thon a woman met casually in the street, being but carelesly attyred, hath oft-times taken him who hath more curiously beheld her with the very aspect of her countenance: with what face can those, who not simply, nor ca∣sually, but purposely, (yea with so great affection and desire, that they likewise forsake the Church, and runne to the Play-house for this very end, and sit there an whole day together idle, ha∣ving their eyes fixed on the faces of those noble women,) say, that they have not looked upon them to lust after them? where effeminate and lascivious words are likewise added; where there are whorish songs; where there are voyces vehemently exciting unto pleasure, where are painted eyes, where are colou∣red cheekes; where the attire of the whole body, is full of de∣ceitfull dies and painting, besides many other garnished entice∣ments to deceive and inescate the beholders: where is the idlenesse of the Spectators, very great confusion, with the exhortation to lasciviousnesse, arising from thence, both from those who were present at the Playes, as also from those who afterward relate to others what things they have seene in Stage-playes. To these are added the allurements of Flutes and Pipes, and such like musicke inticing to deceit, effeminating the fortitude of the minde, preparing the mindes of those that it there with delight for the traps of Harlots, and causing them to be more easily en∣snared. Eenim si hic ubi Psalmi, ubi divinrum verborum enarra∣tio, ubi Dei metus, multaque reverentia, frequenter seu latro quispiam versutus clam obrepit concupiscentia; quomodo qui desident in Theatro, qui nihil sani neque au∣diunt neque vident, qui undique obsidionem patiuntur per aures, per oculos, possint illam superare concupiscentiam? Rursum si non possunt, quomodo poterunt un∣quam ab adulterij crimine absolvi? Tum qui non liberi sunt ab adulterij crimine, quomodo poterunt absque paenitentia ad haec sacra vestibula accedere, hujusque prae∣clari conventus esse participes, &c. Ibidem. For if here were there are Psames, where there is preaching of Gods Word, where there is the feare of God, and much reverence, concupiscence doth oft-times creepe in privily
like a crafty theefe; Note this well. how can those who sit idle in the Play-house; who neither see, nor heare any goodnesse, whose eares and eyes are bese on every side, overcome this concupiscence? Againe, if they cannot overcome it, how can they ever be absol∣ved from the crime of adultery? Then how can those who are not yet free from the sinne of adultery, come to these sacred Temples without repentance, and be partakers of this excellent Assembly? Wherefore I doe earnestly exhort and entreat them, that they would first cleanse themselves by confession, repen∣tanc, and all other remedies, from the sinne they have contr∣cted from Stage-playes, and so they may heare Gods Word. Neither doe we here commit a small sinne, as any one may easi∣ly discerne by examples. O that our Players and Play-haunters would consider this discourse when they come unto the Sacrament, or the Church. For if a servant should put his ser∣vile apparell, that is fraught with filth and many lice, into a cabinet where his Masters rich, his golden robes and garments are layd up; I pray tell me, wouldest thou easily roke such a contempt? But what if one should cast dung and drt into a golden vessell in which pretious oyntments have beene alwayes usually kept; wouldest thou not cudgle him who committed this notorious villany? O that our Players and Play-haunters, and all who come irreve∣rently to the Sacrament, would carry this ingraven in their minds. And after all this shall we be so carefully sollicitous of our caskets, and vessels, of our clothes and un∣guents, and yet estimate our soules more base then any of these? Shall we there where the spirit is an oynment powred out, cast in the Devils pomps? Shall we there lay up the fables of Sa∣tan, or songs that are full of whorish filthinesse? Agedum, di mihi, quo a∣nimo ista fe∣ret Des? Atqui, non tantum est discrimen inter unguentum & caenum; inter vestes heriles & serviles, quantum est inter spiritus gratiam, & istam perver∣sam actionem. Non metuis, non expavescis, dum oculis quibus illic lectum, qui est in orchestra spectas, ubi detestandae adulterij fabulae praguntur, ijsdem hanc sacram mensam intueris, ubi tremenda peraguntur mysteria? dum ijsdem auribus audis, & scortum obscaenè loquens, & Prophetam Apostolumque ad arcana Scrip∣turae introducentem? dum eodem corde & lethalia sumis venena, & hanc hostiam sacram, ac tremendam, &c. Ibidem. Goe too, tell me with what minde can God indure this? Dubtlesse there is not so great a difference betweene oyntment and dirt, betweene the Masters and the Servants clothes, as there is betweene the grace of the Spirit, and this perverse action. Doest thou not feare, doest thou not tremble, whiles thou beholdest this holy
Table where dreadfull mysteries are administred, with the selfe∣same eyes that thou diddest behold the bed on the Stage; where the detestable fables of adultery are acted? whiles with the same eares thou hearest an adulterer speaking obscenely, and a Pro∣phet and an Apostle leading thee into the mysteries of the Scrip∣ture? whiles with the same heart thou receivest deadly poyson, and this holy and dreadfull Sacrament? Are not these Playes the subversion of life, the corruption, the destruction of marria∣ges, the cause of warres, of fightings, and brawles in houses? For when thou Lo here the adulterous cur∣sed fruits of hearing Stage-playes. shalt returne home from these Stage-playes more dissolute, effeminate and wanton, being made an enemy of all chastity, the sight of thy wife will be lesse pleasing to thee, let her be what she will. For being inflamed with that concupiscence which thou hast drunke in at Stage-playes, and being taken with that new sight which hath besotted thee, thou despisest thy sober modest wife, who is contented with ordinary diet, and upbraidest her with innumerable reproches; not because thou findest any thing blame-worthy in her, but because thou blushest to confesse thy disease, because thou art ashamed to discover that wound, with which thou hast returned home maimed from Stage-playes: Thou framest other excuses, seeking uniust oc∣casions of displeasure, loathing all those things that are to be done at home, gaping after that wicked and uncleane concu∣piscence from which thou hast received an wounde: and whiles thou carriest in thine eares a ringing sound of a voyce, and with these, the face, the motion, briefly all those images of whorish lust, thou beholdest nothing of that thou hast at ome with plea∣sure. And what doe I speake of a wife or family, when as af∣terwards, thou wilt be lesse willing to visit the very Church it selfe, when as thou wilt heare a Sermon of chastity, and of mo∣desty with irkesomnesse? Neither are these things which are now spoken to thee, for instruction, but for accusation; and they will bring thee by little and little to despaire; yea at last thou wilt suddenly sever thy selfe from the discipline administred for the publike good of all. Qua propter rogo vos om∣nes, ut & ipsi pravas in spe∣ctaculis, cōme∣morationes, vi∣tetis, & alios, ab his deductos re∣trahatis. Quic∣quid enim illic geritur, non est oblectatio, sed pernicies, sed paena, sed sup∣plicium. Quid prodest illa temporaria vo∣luptas, dū hinc perpetu{us} nasci∣tur dolor, dū{que} nocte pariter ac die à concupis∣centia stimula∣tus, omnibs molestus es & invisus? Excute igitur teipsum, reputans qualis fias ab Ecclesia rediens, rursus qulis à specta∣culis, at{que} hos dies cum illis conferas: id si feceris nihil opus erit meo sermone: Satis enim fuerit, hunc diem cū illo cōparasse ad ostendendū & quam magna sit hinc utilitas, & quanta sit illinc noxa, &c. Ibidem. Wherefore I intreat you all, that you
would avoyd the wicked commemorations in Stage-playes your selves, and likewise draw backe others from them, who have beene led unto them. Nota. For what-ever is there done, is not de∣light or recreation, but destruction, but torment, but punishment. What good doth this temporary pleasure doe, whiles everlasting torment issus from it, and whiles being pricked night and day with concupiscence, thou art troublesome and hatefull unto all? Wherefore rouse up thy selfe, and consider what a one thou art made returning from the Church: againe, what a one thou art, comming from Stage-playes, and compare these dayes with those: if thou wilt doe thus, there will be no need of my speech. For it will be sufficient to have compared this day with that, to shew what great profit comes from the one side, and how great hurt from he other. These things I thought good to speake to your charity at this time, neither will I ever cease to speake. For so we shall both admonish those who are obnoxious to this disease; and we shall confirme those who are now whole: for this oration will be profitable to both; to the one that they may desist; to the other, that they may not fall into it. So in his Tom 1. Col. 821. C. D. first Homily upon the 50. Psalme, he is very punctuall to our purpose. David (writes he) as he was walking up∣on the top of his Palace after dinner, saw a woman washing her selfe, and the woman was very faire and beautifull to looke upon. Vidit inquā, at{que} oculo vul∣neratus est a telum excepit. Audiāt curiosī, qui alienas or∣mas contem∣plantur. Audi∣ant qui insano spectaculorum studio tenen∣tur. Qui dicunt; Spectamu qui∣dem; sed sine detrimento. Quid audio? David laesus est; & tu non laederis? Ille laesus est; & ego tuae virtuti confidere quaeam? Is qui tantam Spiritus gratiam habebat spiculum excepit, & tu sauciari te negas? Ibidem. He saw her, I say, and he is wounded in his eye, and receiveth a dart. Let curious persons heare this who contem∣plate the beauty of others. Let those heare this, who are pos∣sessed with the unruly delight or desire of Stage-playes. Who say: we doe in truth behold them; but without detriment. What heare I? David is hurt? and art not thou hurt? He is wounded; and can I trust to th strength? He who had so great a measure of the spirit received a dart; and doest thou deny that thou art pierced? Atqui ille scortam non vidit, sed honestam & pudi∣cam faeminam; id{que} non in Theatro, sed domitu verò in Theatro cernis, ubi etiam locus ipse animam supplicij ream efficit: nec tantu cernis sed etiam audis improba verba, & meretricias at{que} obscaenas cantiones, omnique ex parte feritur mens ua: per aspectum nempe, ob ea quae vides per aurem, ob ea quae audis: per obfactum, ob ea quae oderaris. Et cum totprae∣cipitia sint, tot corruptelae, qui credere queam te à ferarum morsibus im∣munem esse? Num tu saxum es? num ferrū? Homo es, com∣muni naturae imbecillitati obnoxius. Ignē cernis, nec ure∣ris? An hoc istud rationi consentaneum est? Lucernam in faenum po∣ne; ac tum aude negare, quod faenum exura∣tur. Quod por∣rò faenum est, hoc etiam na∣tura nostra est. Ibidem. And yet he beheld not an
harlot, but an honest, chaste woman; and that not in the Theater, but at home: but thou beholdest an harlot in the Play-house, where even the very place it selfe, makes the soule liable to punishment: neither doest thou onely see, but thou likewise hearest dishonest words, and meritricious obscene songs, and thy minde is wounded on every side: to wit, by the sight, with those things which thou seest; by the eare, with those things which thou hearest: by the smell, with those things which thou smllest. And when as there are so many precipices, so many corruptions, how can I believe thee to be free from the biting of wild beasts? Art thou a stone? art thou iron? Thou art a man subiect to the common fralty of nature. Doest thou be∣hold the fire, and yet art not burned? Whether is this agree∣able to reason? Put a candle into straw, and then dare thou to deny that the straw will be burnt. That verily which stubble is, even that is our nature. Let our Play-haunters then consider this, and give this godly Father an answer to these his pithy interrogations. The like passage wee finde in Tom. 2. Col. 144. A. Audiant ista qui saepius ad Theatrum festinant, seque ibi penè quoti∣die adulterij obscaenitate cōmaculant, &c this 17. Homely upon the 5. of Mathew: upon these words, If thy right eye offend thee plucke it out, &c. Let those (writes he) heare these words who so often hasten to the Theater, and doe there almost daily defile themselves with the filthinesse of adultery. For if the Law command even him who is bound unto thee by familiarity, if he scandalize thee, to be cut off and cast away; with what satisfaction now at last can they be defended, who by their conversation and stay at Play-houses, doe daily get the acquaintance of those lewde ones who were not formerly knowne to them; & also administer a thousand occasions of destruction to themselves.Tom. 1. Col. 1030.1031. Againe, in his Homily upon the 118. alias the 119. Psalme. vers. 151.152. hee writes thus. Let none account his life vile, let none cleave fast to vanity. Math. 624. We cannot serve two Masters; he serves two masters, who goes to Church one day, and to Stage-playes another day. Such a one hath two coates; he is farre from that Coate which cannot be devided, far from the Wedding garment; because, that is a Wedding garment which hath no spot. For he who goes one day to the Church, another day to Playes, weares
a defiled garment. Every Servant standing with a blemish at his Masters Table, is cast out, and chastised with stripes: keepe your garment pure as you received it in baptisme. Let no man defile i with his manners, let no man rend so beautifull a vestment with the wickednesse of his heart. You have received such a Garment in baptisme as the Angels had who attended the Lord in his Sepulcher, whose rament was as white as snow; Ad you have received such a gift of grace keepe that you have received. He that defiles this garment, O that our Actors and Play-haunters would follow this advice. let him wash it with teares, let him seperate himselfe from the wicked, let him confesse his sinnes to God, and having reformed his life, let him not returne as a Dog to his vomit. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What fellowship hath light with darknesse, or what part hath he that belie∣veth with an Infidell. You who are the Sonnes of the Church ought not to be depraved in the vanities of Stage-playes. The O that our Church would say, would doe thus too. Church will not indure you stinke, she cannot be defiled with your entrance; she mounes and sighes to God because she seeth her Sonnes to be such. Psal. 2.11, 12. Tremble every day, lest God wax angry, and so you perish from the right way. Acknow∣ledge the very signes of his displeasure, because the Heaven is made Brasse, and the Earth Iron; The very Elements pro∣claime the wrath of God. Psal. 4.2. O yee Sonnes of Men how long will you be slow of heart? why doe you love va∣nity in Stage-playes, and seek after leasing in Stage-players? Know ye that the Lord hath made admirable the soule of all such who depart not out of the Church. The soule is heard when she cryes unto God, whiles she departs not from God. Be not ye luke-warme lest ye be spued out of the heart of God. He him∣selfe hath spoken by his Prophet: Rev. 3.15, 16. Because thou art neither cold, nor hot, and I would thou wert either cold or hot; but because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. We performe our duty who speake true things of the truth. You if you have entred into the Phy∣sicians house, that you might cure your wounds, lament your wounds. The medicines being layd on, let the corruptions be purged out; let halth increase, that so the Church seeing your mendment, may reioyce o her Sonnes; becaus where sinne
hath abounded, grace hath superabounded. In his Tom. 1. Col. 1111. B.C. Homily upon the 140. Psalme; (an excellent disswasive from ill company who keepe men from repentance, and harden them in their sinnes) he hath this passage. Multi capti sunt à fornica∣tione, & ignem voluptatis ac∣cenderunt, dū secuti sunt con∣vivia, & Thea∣tra habentia multū iniqui∣tatis. Ibidem. Many are captivated of fornication, and have kindled a fire of lust, whiles they have followed feasts, and Theaters, having much iniquity in them: A pregnant evidence for our present purpose. In his Tom. 1. Col. 1281. B.C.D. & 1283. C.D. 1284. A.B. first Homily on Esay 6.1. I saw also the Lord sit∣ting upon a Throne high and lifted up, &c. he descants thus of Play-haunters, and the fruits of Stage-playes, which I would our Players, and Play-frequenters would consider. There are among those here present, whom I thinke are not unknowne to your charity, who contemning God, and accounting the oracles of the Spirit as vulgar and prophane, ut∣ter confused word, and carry themselves no better then mad men, keeping a stir, and turning about with their whole body, demeaning themselves so, as misbeseemes a Spirituall meeting. O miserable and unhappy wretch! Thou oughtest to sing the Angelicall glorification or Hymne with trembling and reve∣rence, and to confesse to the Creator with feare, and by this to crave pardon of thy sinnes. Tu vero mi∣morum & sal∣tatorum mores huc inducis, &c But thou (here comes the fruit of Stage-playes in,) bringest in hither the manners of Players and Dancers; whiles thus evidently throwest about thine hands, skippests about with thy feet, and whirlests about with thy whole body. And how comes it to passe that thou fearest, that thou tremblest not whiles thou darest doe thus, a∣gainst such sacred oracles? O that men would consider this when they enter into the Church, or come unto the Word or Sa∣craments. Doest not thou thinke that the Lord himselfe is here invisibly present, who measureth every ones motion, and takes an account of his conscience? Doest thou not thinke that, the Angels stand round about his dreadfull Table, and compasse it about with rverence? Verum tu ista non cogi∣tas, quoniam ea quae in Thea∣tris audiuntur, quaeque spectantur mentemtuam obscurarunt, & ideo quae illic gerun∣tur in Ecclesiae ritus inducis, &c. Ibidem. But thou thinkest not of these things. and why? pray marke it: because those things which thou hast heard and seene at Stage-playes have clouded thy minde: and therefore those things which are done there, thou bringest in among the rites of the
Church; therefore thou doest utter thy incomposed minde in insignificant clamors. How then wilt thou aske pardon for thy sinnes? how wilt thou receive the Lord into thy house, when as thou prayest to him so contemptuously? Thou sayest, God have mercy upon me; and yet thou declarest such manners as are con∣trary to mercy. Thou cryest, save me; and yet expressest such a gesture, as is a stranger to salvation. Why doest thou stretch out thine hands to pray, which are alwayes tossed up on high, which are wheeled up and downe unseemely, and make a confu∣sed noyse with their vehment clapping and beating? Are not these things verily, partly the practises of common Bawdes and Strumpets; partly the examples of those who cry out aloud in Play-houses? How then dost thou dare to mix the sports of Devils, with the Hymnes of Angels praysing God? Yea why dost thou not feare this speech which there thou utterest, saying Psal. 2.11. Serve the Lord with feare, and rejoyce unto him with trembling. Is this to serve with feare, to be so loud and cla∣morous, that thou thy selfe knowest not what thou speakest with the confused bellowing of thy voyce? This verily savors of con∣tempt, not of feare: of arrogancy, not of modesty: this is ra∣ther a part of such who are playing then confessing, &c. The Prophet saith, Psal. 66.1. Rejoyce in the Lord all the earth; make a joyfull noyse unto God all yee lands. Neither doe we pro∣hibit the voyce of prayse; but the voyce of absurdity, and confu∣sion, the vaine and rash lifting up of the hands into the ayre, the tinckling of the feet, unseemely and effeminate songs, which are the proper sports of those who sit idle in Play-houses, The fruits of Stage-playes. From thence these pernicious ensamples are brought in among us; from thence are irreligious and vulgar voyces, from thence the absurdity of the hands, contentious combates, disorderly man∣ners. Nota bene. For nothing doth bring the oracles of God into so great contempt, as the admiration of those Stage-playes and Specta∣cles which are there proposed. Those there∣fore who re∣sort to Stage-playes, are un∣fit to come to any of Gods holy ordinan∣ces. Wherefore I have oft ex∣horted you, that not one of those who come hither, and enioy the divine doctrine, and are likewise partakers of the dreadfull and mysticall Sacrament, should goe unto these Stage-playes, nor yet entermixt these divine mysteries with demoniacall. Not∣withstanding
some have growne so mad, that even then when they carry about a shew of Religion, and are growne very white with extreame old age, they runne to them notwithstanding, neither regarding our words, nor respecting their owne outward shew. But as oft as we inculcate this speech unto them, and ex∣hort them to respect their old age and religion, how great then is their coldnesse? how ridiculous their speech? They say, that these things are an example of the victory and crownes which shall be in the world to come, and This is the pretence of Play-haunters now. But mark what answer this Father gives them here. we reape much profit from thence. What sayest thou man? This is a rotten speech, and full of deceit. From whence canst thou reape any profit thence? From innumerable contentions? from the rash oathes of evill speakers? Or from te abuses, the revilings, the scoffes with which the Spectators besprincle one another? But from these there is no good reaped; therefore thou altogether reapest benefit from confused voyces, insignificant clamors, as well from him who is cast downe upon the arena, as from those who cast him downe, who offer vioence, who are mad or foolish and dissemble before women. But here verily all the Prophets and teachers doe shew the very Lord of Angels upon an high and elevated Throne, and distribute to those who are worthy, rewards and crownes, but to the unworthy they assigne Hell: and even the Lord himselfe doth ratifie this. Besides thou doest verily con∣temne these things, in which there is likewise terror of consci∣ence, redargution of thy deeds, feare of punishments and accu∣sations, and inevitable torments. But yet that thou maist finde a certaine excuse of thy Stage-playes on which thou earnestly gazest, thou sayest, thou reapost profit from them by whom thou sufferest irrecoverable losse. I intreate, and beseech againe and againe, that we excuse not our excuses in sinnes: for these are but pretences and deceites by which we procure damage to our selves. In his Tom. 2. Col. 50.51, 52, 53. 6. Homily upon Mathew, he writes thus of laughter and Stage-playes. If thou therefore power out such teares thou becommest a follower of thy Lord: for he Iohn 11.35. wept when he raysed up Lazarus, and Luke 19.41. when he looked backe upon Hierusalem that was to be sacked. He was likewise Luke 22.48. troubled with the treason and destruction of Iudas. So verily
thou maist oft-times finde him weeping, but never laughing, no nor yet so much as slightly reioycing with a smile. Truely no Evangelist hath made mention of any such thing. That Acts 20.97. Phil. 3.18. Paul likewise wept night and day for 3. yeeres together, both others testifie of him, and he likewise of himselfe: but tha he ever laughed, neither doth he himselfe shew any where nor any other for him. Yea not one of all the Saints hath ever signified any such thing either of himselfe or of any other. We read of none Gen. 18.17. cap. 19.12, 13. but Sarah onely in the Scripture that laughed, (yea she is presently reproved by the voyce of God) and of the Gen. 9.21. to 27. Sonne of Noah: but for that laughter, of a Free-man he was made a slave. And this I speake not to take away laughter altogether, but that I might quite extingush all dissolutenesse of life. Our Christ therefore speakes many things to us concerning mourning Luk. 6.21, 2. both by blessing those that mourne, and by pronouncing those miserable that laugh. For we doe not come into a Play-house, that is, where laughter may be moved; neither doe we there∣fore oft-times meet together, that we should recreate our selves, with undecent cachinnations; but rather that we might mourne, and by it inherit a Kingdome to come. For thou verily if thou standest but in the presence of an earthly King, wilt not dare so much as to smile. But yet when thou hast the Lord of Angels himselfe present every where, thou standest not before him with trembling and greatest reverence; but even when he is angry thou laughst, neither dost thou consider, that by this thou dost more offend him, then thou didest displease him with thy sinne. Neither doth God so much detest sinners, as those who are secure after their sinnes commited. And are not all our Play-haunters such? And yet there are some so utterly insensible, and iron-like, that after all these words they will say: verily I would to God that I might never chance to weepe, but God grant me, that I may rather alwayes play and be merry. What, I pray, can be found more childish then such a minde? For God never taught or granted men to play; but the Devill. Heare therefore what Players have heretofore suffered. Exod. 32.6. 1 Cor. 10.7. The people, saith he, sate downe to eate and drinke, and rose up to play. Such were there heretofore in Sodom: such likewise were there at the time of
the Flood: for the Lord saith of them, Ezech. 16.49. That they aboun∣ded with pride, with fulnesse of bread, and with riches. Those likewise in the time of Noe, 1 Pet. 3.20. When they saw the Arke building for so many yeeres together, did shun all the dolor of compunction, and did onely civilly serve their flat∣tering Math. 24.38, 39. mirth, being nothing carefull of things to come; and therefore the sudden punishment of the Flood did drowne them all, and there was made a common shipwracke of the whole world. Wherefore crave not thou that from God which thou receivest from the Devill. For it is Gods use to give an hum∣bled, trembling, broken, chaste, penitent, and wounded soule. These verily are the guifts of God, because we likewise stand most in nee of such. For a great combate hangs over our heads: and we must fight Ephes. 6.11.against invisible powers, against spi∣rituall wickednesses; and against such like Principalities, and Powers; and it is well with us, if giving all diligence, and watching with all, we may be able to endure their fierce assaults. But if we laugh and play, fostering with all perpetuall idlenese, we shall be most easily overcome of our owne idlensse also, even before the fight. Wherefore it is not our parts to laugh conti∣nually, to let our selves loose to cachinnations and derisions, to effeminate our selves with delight, but rather of those men and women Actors who are beheld in Play-houses, who are defiled in Brothel-houses; of Parasites and flatterers who are made for this very purpose. This is not, I say, the part of those, who are called to an eternall Kingdome, and are likewise registred in that celestial Kingdome: this is not the part of those who carry spirituall armor, which verily is proper onely to the Soldiers of the Devill: The Devill then is the Au∣thor & Father of Playes and Theaters; and dares then any child of God; any one who ither hates or feares the De∣vill resort unto them? For he it is who hath digested iests and playes into an art, that by these he might draw the Soldiers of Christ unto himselfe, and might weaken the nerves of their vertue. Wherefore he hath likewise erected Theaters in Citties, and hath prepared these incentives of laughter and filthy pleasure: and by their pestilence, he rayseth up the like plague upon the whole Citty. Which things S. Paul commands us to fle, ex∣horting, Ephes. 5.3. that we should put farre from us all foolish speaking & surrility; then which laughter is far more perni∣cious,
and are worse. For when those Stage-players and ridi∣culous persons, have uttered any blasphemous and filthy thing, then especially all the simpler sort are most excessive in their laughter; applauding them most in that, for which verily they ought to have cast stones at them, who kindle a furnace of dreadfull fire upon their owne heads by this kinde of pleasure. Let Play-haunters pon∣der & remem∣ber this. For those who applaud the utterers of these things, perswade them for to act them; and therefore for this they deserve rather to undergoe the punishment which is appointed for these things. For if there were no spectator, nor maintainer of such things, there would certainely be none who would care to act them. But when they see you to forsake your owne callings, yea the very places of your daily worke, and the gaine you reape from thence, and all things else, for love of this vaine spectacle, they are then carried to these things with a more earnest intention, and bestow more study in them. And this I speake, not to excuse their fault, but that you may learne, that you especially are the spring and head of this iniquity, who spend the whole day in such ridiculous, in such pernicious pleasures, proclai∣ming abrode the honest name of Wedlocke, and the reverend busi∣nesse in it. For he who personates these things doth not sinne so much as thou who commandest them to be done. Neither dost thou onely command and call for, but thou dost likewise fur∣ther the things that are acted, by thy exultation, laughter, ap∣plause; and by all manner of meanes thou maintainest this Diabolicall Shop. Nota bene. With what eyes then canst thou now behold thy wife, which thou hast there seene prostrated to so great in∣iury in the person of another? How canst thou refraine from blushing, as oft as thou remembrest thy wife, when thou shalt there see the same sex so filthily made common? Neither maist thou reply unto me now, that whatsoever is there done is but a fiction or fained argument, but not the truth of things. Etenim si∣mulatio ista plurimos adul∣tetos fecit, & mulcas domos subvertit, &c. For this very eining (which comes home to our pur∣pose) hath made very many adulterers, and overthroweth many houses. And therefore it grieves me most, that this so great an evill, is not believed to be an evi; but that which is farre the worst of all, both avour, and clamor, and applause, and
laughter are expressed, when so beastly adultery is committed to the publike hurt. What then sayest thou, is this onely feining not a crime? Well therefore are these worthy of a thousand deaths, because what all lawes command men to shun, those things are these not afraid to imitate. For if adultery it selfe be evill, doubtlesse the imitation of it must be evill. Et nondum dico quantos adulteros faci∣ant, qui hujus∣modi adulteria histrionica si∣mulatione re∣praesentant; quemadmodū eiam impu∣dentes houm spectatores effi∣ciant. Nihil quippe obscae∣nius illo oculo, nihilque lasi∣vius qui specta∣re talia patien∣ter potest, ne dicam liben∣ter, &c. Ibidem. And I doe not yet report how many and great adulterers they may make who perso∣nate such adulteries in an histrionicall fiction, and how impudent likewise they make their spectators. For there is nothing more filthy, nothing more lascivious then that eye, that can patiently, that I say not willingly, behold such things. Moreover what a thing is this, that when as thou wilt not so much as looke upon a naked woman in the street, yea nor yet at home, but if such a thing fall out by accident thou thinkest it done to iniure thee; that yet when as thou goest up to the Play-house, that thou maist violate the chastity of both Sexes, and maist likewise incestuously defile thine owne eyes, thou believest that no dishonest thing befalls thee? For thou canst not say thus, that she is an harlot that is thus uncovered; because it is nature it selfe, and there is the same body of an whore, and of a free woman. For if thou thinkest that there is no obscenity in such a fight, for what cause when as thou shalt see the same thing in the street, doest thou step backe againe from thy intended walke, and most se∣verely rebuke that immodesty? unlesse perchance thou believest, the same thing not to be alike filthy when we are severed, and when we sit all together. But this is meerely derision and shame, and words altogether of extreme folly; and it is better for one to besmeare his whole face with clay and dirt, then with a spe∣ctacle of so great filthinesse. For dirt is not so noxious to the eyes, as that unchaste spectacle, and the sight of a naked Harlot. Heare therefore what nakednesse brought upon man∣kinde even from the beginning, and even by this meanes feare that filthinesse. What then hath made men naked? Gen. 3.6, 7. disobe∣dience and the counsell of the Devill, so much hath this alwayes pleased him from the beginning. But they verily when they were naked, were yet ashamed; you repute the same thing wor∣thy prayse, according to that of the Apostle, Rom. 1.32. Phil. 3.19. glorying in your
shame. Quonam ig∣tur e pacto de∣inceps aspiciet uxor a tali con∣tumelia rede∣untem? qum∣admodū susci∣piet & alloque∣tur tam indig∣ne naturae muliebris con∣ditionem sex∣umque faedan∣tem, atque a ta∣li spectaculo captivum ser∣vumque rede∣untem muieris fornicātis, &c? After what manner therefore can thy wie from henceforth behold thee returning from such a contumely? how can she entertaine or speake to one so unworthily defiling the condition and sex of womans nature; yea and returning a cap∣tive, a servant of an whorish woman from such a spectacle. If then you grieve when you heare these things, I confesse that I give you, and owe you the greatest thankes. For who is he that doth comfort me, but he who is made sorrowfull by me? Wherefor cease not to mourne for this licentiousnesse, and oft to be grieved for it. For this griee will be made unto you a be∣ginning of conversion unto better things. Wherefore I have more earnestly pressed my speech, that I might free you by a more deepe incision from their corruption by whom you are in∣toxicated, and might revoke you to pure holinesse of mind: which verily, together with the promised rewards of piety, we may all happen to enioy by the grace and mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be glory for ever and ever, Amen. In Tom. 2. Col. 59.60, 61. his 7. Homely upon Ma∣thew; he proceeds thus against Playes, and Play-haun∣ters. But what doe I speake of the space of the long iourney of the wise men to see Christ, when And is it not so with many now who must be coached to the Church be it neer so neere them? as many women are now growne to such an height of effeminacy of minde, that they can∣not so much as come a very little distance from their houses to see the Lord in a spirituall manger, unlesse they be carried up∣on Mules? But of those also who verily can indure the paine of walking, some preferre the tumult of worldly businesse, others Theatricall routs, or Play-house meetings, before holy Assem∣blies. Verly these Barbarians before they had seene Christ, overcame so great a iourney for him; thou verily, no not after thou hast seene him, dost like to imitate him. O that our Play-hunters would but con∣sider this! me thinkes it should even melt their hearts with shame and griefe, and cause them to renounce these Playes, to follow and embrace their blessed Saviour. For even when thou hast seene him, thou so relinqushest him, that after him thou runnest to Play-houses, and dost rather desire both to heare and to see a Stage-player, then him: And that I may touch the same things againe that I followed before, thou verily leavest Christ placed in a Spirituall Manger, but thou hastest to see a
Strumpet lying on the Stage. But of what punishments now at last doe we thinke this worthy? Answer I beseech you; if any one should promise he would bring thee unto the King, and would shew thee him glittering on every side, and sitting amidest the severall ornaments of hs pompe and state; dost thou thinke thou shouldest prefer a Stage-play, before this courtly dignity, though thou expectedst no benefit to accrue unto thee by it? Verily out of this Table there flowes a fountaine of spirituall good things, and this thou presently leaving, runnest to the Theater, that thou maist see a swimming woman, and thou beholdest that sex exposed to the publike view: I say, that thou maist see this, thou leavest Christ sitting by the fountaine of heavenly gifts. For even now he sits not onely upon Ioh. 4.6, &c. that one Samaritan Well, but speaketh to the whole Citty. But perchance even now he speakes onely to the Samaritan woman: for even now no man stands by him; save onely that some perchance are present onely with their bodies, but others truely not so much as with their bodies. Notwithstanding be departs not, but staies, and de∣mandeth drinke of us, not water, but holinesse: For Christ de∣sributeth holy things to holy men. For he doth not give us wa∣ter out of this Well, but living Blood, which albeit it be received to testifie the Lords death, yet to us it is made a cause of life. But thou leavest the fountaine of his blood, and this dreadfull cup, and runnest hastily to that diabolicall well that thou maist behold It seemes by this, that the Graecian A∣ctors, did now and then to re∣fresh and exhi∣lerate their lascivious Spe∣ctators, bring a kinde of Ci∣sterne upon the Stage, wherein naked Whores did swim, and bathe themselves betweene their Acts and Scenes: which wicked, impudent, execrable pratice, this holy Father doth here sharpely and excellently declaime against. a swimming whore, and suffer a shipwracke of thy soule. For that water is a certaine vast sea of luxury, in which bodies are not drowned, but soules suffer shipwracke. For she verily being naked sports her selfe with swimming in the midest of the waters, but thou looking on her from an high scaffold art plun∣ged into the depths of lust. For these nets of the Devill, doe not so much catch those who descend into that water, and there roll themselves, as those who sit above. For these are drowned farre more cruelly, Exod. 14. then that Pharaoh heretofore who was overwhel∣med with his Chariots & Horsemen. Now if were possible by any
meanes for me to shew unto you the soules swimming upon these waters, truly they would appeare no otherwise, then those AEgyptian bodies that were tossed in those floods. But this ve∣rily s far more dangerous, that this so great destruction they call pleasure, and this filthy sea of perdition, they stile the Euri∣pus of delight; when as verily one may more easily and safely passe over the AEgaean, and Tyrrhenian sea, then the horrible dangers of this spectacle. For first of all the Devill doth sol∣licite the hearts of such all night long with an over-anxious expectation, afterwards be represents that which hath beene so greedily, beheld, where with he doth presently binde and lead them captive. Neither mayest thou thinke thy selfe free from sinnes, if thou doest not couple with an harlot, when as thou dost commit all this with thy will. For if thou art possessed by this concupiscence, thou art verily burned with a greater flame. Let this be well observed of the best of Play-haunters But if by beholding these things thou suffrest nothing, not∣withstanding, thou art guilty, in being a scandall unto others; and by thy encouragement of such pleasures thou thy selfe confoundest both thine owne face, and with thy face thy soule. But that we may not seeme to deale onely by way of reproofe, we will now propound the meanes of reformation. What then is this meanes of amendment? I deliver you to your owne wives to be instructed, when certainely you ought rather according to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.3. cap. 14 35. to be instructors of your wives. But because by sinne the order is inverted, and the body is made the superior, the head the inferior, let it not grieve you to returne to honest things by this way. But if thou art ashamed of the tutorship of a woman; avoyd sinne, and thou maist quickly ascend into the chaire of a Doctor, which is ordained for thee by God. But as long as thou shalt sinne, the Scripture doth send thee not onely to an woman, but even to irrationall and the basest creatures. Neither doth a creature endued with the honor of reason blush to become a Scholler of the Bee and the Ant: neither is this the fault of the Scripture, but of those who have lost their owne noblenesse. Therefore we also will have a care to doe thus. And now verily we assigne thee to a woman to be taught: but if thou shalt contemne her admonitions, we will even send thee to
the tutorship of unreasonable creatures. For we will shew thee, how many birds and fishes, yea how many kindes of beasts and creeping things outstrip thee in honesty and chastity. But if thou art ashamed to be compared to such creatures, returne to the ensigne of thy owne noblenesse, and remembring that vast Sea of Hell, and fiery River, avoyd this pestiferous Fish-pond of the Play-house. Note this well. For this is it which doth drowne its Spe∣ctators in that fiery Sea, and which doth kindle the very bot∣tome of that fire. For if he who without these provocations seeth a woman, is yet notwithstanding drawne sometimes to lust af∣ter her, and commits adultery onely by lusting; he who not one∣ly seth, but likewise earnestly beholds a naked and lascivious women with his whole minde, how is he not a thousand times made the captive of lust? That great Flood under Noah did not so extinguish mankinde, as these swimmers doe altogether suffocate all their spectators even with much disgrace. For that flood although it brought in the death of bodies, yet it blot∣ted out the vices of soules, But this water doth the contrary; it workes the destruction of soules, the bodies still continuing in life: Let the Ro∣manists ob∣serve this, who claime the selfesame supe∣riority because of Peters chaire which they falsly challēge, when s Peter was first, yea the first Bishop of Antioch. You verily if that any contention about honor ariseth, contend with all ambition, that you ought to have preheminence of the whole world; flattering your selves with this priviledge; Acts. 11.26. Esbius. Eccl. Him. l. 2. c. 4. The Disciples were first cal∣led Christians at Anich. that this Citty did first give the name of Christians to the faithfull: but when you should contend about honesty and chastit, are you not ashamed lest you should be overcome of the very basest villages? Yes, sayest thou. But what then doe you command us to doe? To goe into desert Mountaines, and to become Monkes? And what else doe I lament, but that thou thinkest an honest and pure life belongs onely to them? Verily Christ hath given common precepts unto all men. For where he saith, Math. 5.28. If any man looke upon a woman to lust after her, hee hath already committed adultery with her in his heart: it is not onely spoken to a Monke, but likewise to an Husband. For that Mountaine in which Christ taught these things was then filled almost only with such. Consi∣der therefore that Theater, and avoyd their Diabolicall Assem∣blies, and doe not as it were blame my more troublesome speech.
For I prohibit not marriages, nor honest pleasure; but I would have it to be done with honesty, not with obscenity or sinne. I doe not therefore bid the goe into Mountaines and Deserts, but to be bountifull, and likewise honest and modest, even while thou livest in the midest of the City. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 7.2930.31 The time is short, it remaines therefore that those who have wives bee as if they had none; for the fashi∣on of this world passeth away. As if he should say, I bid you not to dwell in the tops of Mountaines, although I desire that likewise, because Citties imitate the abominations commit∣ted in Sodom; but yet I doe by no meanes force you to it. Con∣tiue having an house, wife, children, onely doe not make them Spectators of incestuous pleasures, doe not thou introduce the plague of the Theater into thine house. Doest thou not heare Paul saying; 1 Cor. 7.4. The man hath not the power of his bo∣dy but the woman? Therefore he hath also given common precepts to him. Thou verily if thy wife frequent the Church becommest a most grievous accuser of her: but thou thy selfe spending the whole day in Play-houses dost not believe thy selfe to be worthy of accusation: but when as thou art so vigilant over thy wivs chasty, that thou art not ashamed to be exces∣sive and immoderate, keeping her oft-times from necessary iourneyes, yet thou thinkest that all things are very lawfull to thy selfe. But Paul doth not permit this to thee, who likewise giveth the same power to the woman. 1 Co. 7.3. Let the man, saith he, give unto the wife due benevolence. How then is thy wise honored by thee who is vexed with such an undeserved iniury, when as thou doest ioyne thy body which is in her power, to harlots? For thy body is thy wives. What honor I say dost thou give unto her, when as thou bringest in tumults and con∣tentions into thine owne house, when as thou utterst such things in the market place, that whiles thou relatest them at home, thou disgracest thy wife that heares, and makest thy daughter that is present to blush, and besides others thy owne selfe? For it were much better to keepe silence, then to utter such obscene things, which if thy servants should but speake of, it were iust for thee to cudgle them. Let our Play-haunters con∣sider of this Quaere. Answer I pray, what satisfaction canst
thou give, who beholdest these things with great delight which are not lawfull to be named? and preferrest those things which are dishonest for to name before all honest and holy Arts? Lest therefore I should seeme more troublesome, I will here end my speech: But if you persevere in these things, I will launch with a sharper rasor, and make a more deep incision; neither wil I ever rest untill I breake in pieces that Diabolicall Theater, that the Assembly of the Chuch may be made cleane and pure: So shall we be freed from the present turpitude, and acquire life to come by the grace and mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ; to whom be glory and dominion with the Father and the holy Ghost for ever and ever. Amen. In his Tom. 2. Col. 297.298, 299, 300. 38. Homily upon Mathew, upon these words; It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomor∣rah in the day of Iudgement then for thee: hee falls into this excllent discourse against Stage-playes and their concomitances. The Sodomites though they lived most wickedly, yet they sinned before the Law and Grace: but what pardon are we worthy of, who commit such sinnes after so dili∣gent a care both of the Law and Grace? We shut ur gates, and stop our eares to the poore; what say I to the poore, when as we doe the same to the Apostles themselves? Yea therefore to the poore, because we doe it to the Apostles. For when as Paul is read publikely and thou dost not regard: when as Iohn thunders and thou dost not heare; wilt thou heare a poore man who dost not heare an Apostle? That our houses therefore may be open to the poore, and our eares to the Apostles, all filthi∣nesse is to be purged out of the eares of the minde. For as filth and dirt are wont to stop the eares of the body; so whorish songs, the fables of this world, the burthen of Debtors, the accounts of Creditors and usury, are wont to stop the eares of the minde more then any filth Or rather, they doe not onely stop them, but also make them impure and filthy, For such speeches de as it were cast dirt into our eares. That which that Barbarian did threaten, saying; 2 King. 8.27 You shall eate your owne dung; even that doe many now unto you, not in word onely, but in deed; yea verily even far worse and filthier: (For whorish songs are much more abominable then dung.) And that which is worse
to be indured, you doe not onely not grieve whn as you heare such things, but you likewise laugh and reioyce. And when as you ought to avoyd and abominate these things, you entertaine and applaud them. Therefore if these things be not abominable, doe thou thy selfe likewise descend upon the Stage, and imitate that thou praysest, have society and commerce with those who move such laughter: but if thou wilt not be coupled in that fel∣lowship, why dost thou give so great honor to it? The very lawes of the Gentiles make them to be Players infa∣mous. infamous: but thou to∣gether with the whole Citty being all called together, runnest out to them as to Ambassadors, or Generals of the Warre; that thou together with all the rest maist put dung into thine eares: and thou who beatest thy servant, if he utter any filthy thing in thy presence, who permittest not thy Sonne to doe it; who dost not suffer these things to be done at thine owne house as being an undoubted filthinesse; when as certaine servile abiect persons who deserve the Whipping-post shall call thee to heare these things, dost not onely not take it ill, but even reioycest, yea applaudest, and givest thankes. And what madnesse could ever be found greater then this?Objection. But sayest thou, I never spake nor sung these obscene things, these incentives of pleasure.Answer. But what profit is it, if when thou dost not utter them, yet thou hearest them willingly? Yea how wlt thou make this evident that thou dost not utter them, when as thou dost willingly hear them with laughter, and runnest to receive them? Tell me I pray hee, when as thou hearest Blasphemers dost thou reioyce and triumph, or rather, dost thou tremble and stop thine eares? I doubt not but thou tremblest; Wherefore? because thou never art wont to blaspeme. Wherefore doo so likewise in filthy speech, if thou wilt thorowly perswade us, that thou dost not utter fil∣thy words, then truely will we believe thee when as we shall see thee not to heare them. For how dost thou respect vertue, who art nourished by hearing these things? how canst thou undergoe the difficult labours of chastity, who aboundest with laughter, and art insnared with a whorish song: For if the soule which is farre remote from these songs, doth scarce retaine th honesty of chastity, how can he live chastly who liveth in them? Are
you ignorant that we are more prone to vices? When therefore we run unto these things with hast and earnestnesse, how shall we avoyd the furnace of eternall fire? Have you not heard Paul saying: Phil. 4.4. Rejoyce in the Lord. He hath said, in the Lord, not in the Devill. How therefore canst thou heare Paul, when thou shalt perceive that thou hast sinned, when as thou art alwayes as it were made dranke with these ridiculous Spe∣ctacles? For that thou camest hither now, I wonder not; yea verily I wonder greatly. For thou camest hither as it were simply and perfunctorily: but thou rushe thither daily with all earnestnesse of minde, with speed, with alacrity: which ap∣peares by this; because that most filthy sinne, which by your ight and hearing hath beene infused into your soule, you carry along with you from the Theaters to your houses; yea verily you take it, and lay it up in your mindes and thoughts: and those things which are not worthy detetation thou disdainest, but abominable things thou admirest and lovest. For many retur∣ning from the office of burying, have presently gone into the bath; but those who come from Marke this O Play haunters. Play-houses have neither mourned, nor powred out fountaines of teares. Yet truely a carcase hath no uncleanesse; but sinne doth so defile men, that no fountaines, no rivers, but onely teares and confession can wash it away. But there is no man who discernes how great the steines of sinne are. For because we feare not things that are to be feared, therefore we feare those things which have no cause of fear in them. But what is this so great noys of Theater men? what these Diabolicall clamors? what this Sa∣tanicall apparell? One being a yong man hath his haire combed backward, and effeminating nature in his countenance, appa∣rell, pace, and such like, strives to deduce it to the similitude of a tender Virgin. Another on the other side being an old man, having his haire and all modesty shaven off with a rasor, stand∣ing by girt, is ready to speake and to act all things. They had in those dayes some few wo∣men Actors: which in his 10. Homily up∣on Mathew, he stiles Faminae Theatrales: The∣atricall wo∣men: In imitation of these some French-wome, or Monsters raher on Michael∣mas Terme 1629. attempted to act a French Play, at the Play-house in Black-friers: an impudent, shamefull, unwomanish, gracelesse, if not more then whorish attempt. Women
also with a naked and uncovered head speake to the people with∣out shame, and usurpe impudency to themselves with so great premeditation, and infuse so great lasciviousnesse into the mindes of the Hearers and Spectators, that all may seeme even with one consent to extirpate all modesty out of their mindes, to disgrace the female nature, and to satiate their lusts wih pernicious pleasure. For all things that are done there are abso∣lutely most obscene, the words, the apparell, the onsure, the pace, the speeches, the songs, the ditties, the turnings and glances of the eyes, the pipes, the flutes, and the very argument of the Playes, all things (I say) are full of filthy wantonnesse. Say therefore, when wilt thou withdraw thy selfe from so great an uncleane desire of fornication which the Devill hath infused into thee, and repent. Those there∣fore that would have their wives, their daughters, their husbands, heir children chast, let them keepe them from the Play-house. For we are not ignorant how many whoredomes are there committed, how many marriages are there defiled with adulteries; how many men are there most unnaturally abused; how many yong men are there strangely effeminated; all things there are full of the high∣est iniquity, all full of prodigies, all full of impudency. For which things we ought not to sit laughing excessively, but ra∣ther to mourne and grieve even with teares. What therefore will you, maist thou say; shall we shut up all the Play-house doores, and obeying thee, overturne all things? Loe here the lewde, the per∣nicious effects and fruits of Stage-playes. What hast thou said, shall we overturne? Are not all things now over∣turned? For whence dost thou believe that the unchaste attemp∣ters of marriages proceed? Come they not from these Play-houses? Whence are those who invade the marriage beds of others? Are they not from the Stage? Is it not from hence that many men become most troublesome to their wives, and that women are despised of their husbands? Are not very ma∣ny adulterers from hence? Therefore he seemes to me to over∣turne all things who runnes to Play-houses, who brings in a most cruell tyranny?Objection. Thou wilt say, no; to seperate wives from their husbands, to ravish children, to overturne houses: all these are the acts of Tyrants who have seised upon th Castle, and oppresse the Citty by force: but the things we doe are So sa our Players  Ply ut  ap∣proved by the lawes, and these Stage-playes have never givn
occasion to adulteries.Answer. Yea verily, who is not already made an adulterer? For if I could call all by name I would quickly shew it thee. How many have harlots led away as captives from thence? How many have they either withdrawne from their wives, or have not at all permitted them to come to their lawfull bed?Objection. What therefore,Answer. sayest thou, shall we overturne all the lawes by which these things are established. The best way therefore to suppresse a∣dultery, whore∣dome, sedition, tumults, & all the mischiefes of the Cōmon wealth, is to suppresse Play-houses and Stage-playes. Yea verily, these Stage-playes being overturned, you shall overthrow, not the lawes, but iniquity, and you shall quite extinguish all the plagues and mischiefes of the Citty. For from hence are seditions raysed, from hence tumults doe arise. For those who are nourished with these Playes, (who sell their voyces for their bellies sake, who are most ready to speake, to doe all things, and spend all their paines and industry in this,) these are most of all wont to inflame the people with rumors, and to rayse tumults in Citties. For the idle youth educated in these evils, is more cruell then the very fiercest beast. Are not many evill doers made and confirmed by these Stage-playes? For that they may instigate all the people to these things, that they may obtaine their danc∣ing pleasures, that they may corrupt modst women mixed with strumpets they come to such a height of wickednesse, that they doe not so much as absteine from the bones of dead men. What shall I say, that many spend infinite summes of mony at these Diabolicall societies? What shall I say of lasci∣viousnesse? What of other evils? Let our Play-Patrons and Play-haunters remember this. Objection. Answer. Consider then that thou art he who dost overthrow the whole life of man, when as thou drawest others to these things; not I, who thinke, that all these Playes are to be given over. Thou wilt say; shall we then pull down all the Play-houses? Would to God they were now pul∣led downe, albeit, that as farre as it appertaeines to us, they long since lie desolate. Notwithstanding I command you to doe none of these things; since the magnificence of the houses may stand, and the Playes and Dancing altogether cease; which will be more prayse to you then if you should quite overturne all Take at least an example to your selves from the Barbarians, who want the filthinesse of all these Stage-playes. O let all Christians who resort to Stage-playes remem∣ber this for feare Turkes and other Infi∣dels who want, who uttely reject all Stage-playes should rise up in judgement against them at the last. What ex∣cuse
then can you bring for your selves, if you who are now re∣gistred in Heaven, you who are the companions and coheires of Angels and Arch-Angels, should be found farre worse then the Barbarians in this thing? especially when as thou maist else where procure to thy selfe many better comfort. For when thou wilt refresh thy minde, thou maist goe into Gardens, behold running Rivers, contemplate great Lakes, looke upon pleasant Places, heare singing Grashoppers, be conversant in the Tem∣ples of Martyrs; from whence thou shalt receive best health for thy body, and excellent profit may accrue unto thy soule, from whence thou maist reape singular pleasure, because no lesse, no griefe, no sorrow followes; thou hast a wife, thou dost not want children, thou aboundest in friends, all which are wont sometimes to afford honest delight and profit. For what is more sweet then children? What more pleasant then a chaste wife to a moderate and chaste Husband? Verily the Barbari∣ans themselves, when as they had heard of these Stage-playes, and the unseasonable delight of fables, are reported to have ut∣tered words most worthy all the instructions of Philosophie. For they said, that the Romanes, as if they had wanted wives and children, had devised such pleasures as these to themselves. In which words they did shew, that nothing could be more sweet, more pleasant to him who would live honestly, then a modest wife and children?Objection. But thou wilt say, I can shew that these Playes hve done no hurt to many.Answer. Yes verily they doe very great hurt in that thou spendest thy time idlely and to no purpose, and in that thou offrest a scandall unto others. Let the best of our Play-haunters who thinke they receive no hurt at all from Stage-playes, remember this. For although thou by a certaine fortitude of a sublime minde hast contracted no evill from thence, yet because thou hast made others who are weaker stu∣dious of Stage playes by thy example, how hast thou not con∣tracted evill to thy selfe, who hast given occasion to others of committing evill? For those who are there corrupted, as well men as women, will all transferre the crimes and cause of their corruption upon thy head. For like as if there had not beene spectators, there had not beene any to have acted; so because both are the cause of the sinnes that are committed, they shall both suffer th fire. Wherefore all be it by the modesty of thy
minde thou hast effected, that no hurt should come unto thee thence, Nota. which I doe not thinke can be: yet because others have committed many sinnes by reason of Playes, thou shalt undergoe grievous punishments for this; albeit thou hadst beene much more modest and temperate, if by no meanes thou hadst gone thiher. Let us not therefore contend unprofitably, nor devise vaine excuses, when as one excuse may suffice us, to flie far from this Babilonish Stewes, to keep far off from this AEgyp∣tian Harlot, and if need be, to escape naked out of her hands: so shall we receive great pleasure, when as we are not at all pricked with the stings of conscience. So shall we both live so∣berly in this life, and obtaine future good things, by the grace and mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ. In his 74. Homily on Mathew, hee hath this notable passage to our purpose. Tom. 2. Col. 514.515. Many come into the Church to behold more curiously the beauty of women, and the fairenesse of yong men: O that the Gallants of our times, who are deepely guilty of this sinae, would but con∣sider this Fa∣thers words. dost thou not theresore wonder that Thunderbolts are not sent forth on every side, and that all things are not utterly subverted? For these things are most worthy, not onely of Thunderbolts, but also of the punishment of Hell. But God since he is long-suffring and mercifull, doth in the meane time keepe in his anger tht he may leade thee to repentance. What dost thou O man, thou more diligently seekest after the beauty of women in the Church, and doest thou not tremble abusing the Temple of God with so great an indignity? For in the market place thou blush∣est, yea thou fearest left any one should see thee following a wo∣man: but in the Church of God, when as God himselfe speakes unto thee, and dters the from these things, thou most of all practisest ornication and adultery in that very time, when as it is thundred out unto thee with a loud voyce, that th should∣est flie from these things, neither dost thou tremble, nor stad amazed. Verum haec ab impudicissi∣mo Theatro didicistis, haec vl illa conta∣gosa pstis do∣cuit: virus istud pstiferum, in∣evitabilis neg∣ligentium la∣queus, inonti∣nentium vo∣luptuosa prdi∣tio. Ibidem. Col. 515. A. But these things thou hast learned (I pray ob∣serve it well) from the most unchaste Theater; that most contagious plague, (so stiles he the Play-house) that pestife∣rous poyson, that unevitable snare of idle careles persons, that vo∣luptuous perdition of incontinent people, hath taught you these things. Such is the accursed fruit of Stage-playes, not
only to make the Play-house, but even the very Church of God a kinde of Brothell, as he there more largely proves. Tom. 2. Col. 487.488, 489. In his 69 Homily upon Mathew: I finde this notable discourse. When you are in feare and troubles you call those ex animo happy, who live a single life in Mountaines and Caves; as I am not ignorant that those have so stiled thse sometimes, who living in idlensse spend both day and night in Theaters and Play-houses. For albeit these may seeme to a∣bound with a thousand pleasures, albeit rivers of pleasure might be thought to be present with them, yet they lie for the most part pierced thorow with many most bitter darts from thence. For if any man shall be taken with the love of any Nota. Woman-dancer, verily he shall undergoe a torment harder then any Warfare, more troublesome then any Pilgrimage, and he shall pase thorow more miserable dayes then any besieged Citty, &c. Vbi nunc sunt, qui Dia∣boli choreis & perditis canti∣bus dediti in scaena quotidie sedent? Pudet me certè verba de illis facere, veruntamen neesse mihi st propter in∣firmitatem ve∣stram, &c. Ibid. Where now are those who sit daily in the Play-house addicted to the Dances of the Devill, and to pernicious Songs? Verily I am altogether ashamed to speake of them, but yet I must needs doe it by reason of your infirmity. For even Paul himselfe saith, Rom. 6. As you have heretofore given up your members to serve uncleanesse, even so now give up your members as servants of righteous∣nesse unto holinesse. Wherefore we will now also make diligent search into the lives of These and no other are the most constant Play-haunters. Harlots & corrupt yong Men who sit together in the Play-house, and we will compare them with the life of these blessed ones, as farre as it concernes a plea∣sant life. Iucundè nam∣que vivendi gratia negli∣gentiores ju∣venes scenae laquijs capiuntur: tantam enim si pependimus, differentiam invenie∣mus, quantum si quis canentes Angelos modulationem divinam audiret, & porcos stercore defossos ac grunnientes. Ore namque illorum Christus, istorum verò Dia∣bolus loquitur, &c. Ibidem. For the more negligent yong Men, that they may live merrily, are taken with the snares of the Play-house: yet if we consider well, we shall finde as great a difference betweene the one and the other, as if a man should heare Angels singing an heavenly Song, and Swine buried in the dirt, grunting. For in their moth, Christ, but in these mens mouthes, the De∣vill speaketh. The Pipes with puffed up cheekes and a defor∣med
face send forth an uncertaine and unarticulate voyce to these: but by their mouthes the Grace of the Holy Spirit, in stead of a Pipe, a Harpe, and a Flute, soundeth so sweetly, that it is impossible for those who are fastned to clay and earthly things, to set so great pleasure before their eyes. Wherefore I wish that some one of those who are mad about these things, could be but brought to this Quire of Saints, and then I needed not to use any more words. And although we relate these things to earthly men, yet we will somewhat endevor to pull them out of the filth and dregs. From these songs of Harlots a very flme of lust doth presently set the Auditors on fire, and as if the sight and face of a woman were not sufficient to inflam the minde, they have found out the plague of the voyce too. Bt by the singing of our holy mn, if any such disease doth vex th minde, it is presently extinguished. And not onely the voyce and face of a woman, but the The ill ruits of costly and gawdy appa∣rell; especially in Play houses Which I woud our stunting Gallants would consi∣der. apparell doth much more trou∣ble the Spectators; so that if any more rude or abiect poore man beholds it, he may be too much grieved at it and oft-times say thus unto himselfe, Verily a Whore and a Whore-master, the children of Cookes and Taylors, and oft-times of Servants, live in so great pleasures: but I a free-man, and borne of free Parents, who live by honest labour cannot truely so much as dreaming be delighted thus; and so he departs disquieted with griee. Which thing hapens not from the sight of Monkes, yea the very contrary alwayes useth to fall out. The good that comes by wearing meane and plaine ap∣parell. For if he shall behold the sonnes of rich men, and the Nephewes of famous Ancestors to weare those meane garments, which those who are oppressed with extreame poverty would not vochsafe to eare, and shall know that they reioyce in this very thing; con∣sider with how great comfort he departs, if he be poore, being thus confirmed: and if e be rich, he is easly made more mo∣derate and better by it. And verily in the Nota. Theater when a most crafty Harlot walketh about with golden ornaments, the poore are wasted with griefe, that their wives have no such thing: and the rich being troubled with this sight, when they shall see the habit, the countenance, the voyce, the gesture, and other things full of lust, and shall returne home to their houses
burning with such dishonest fire, despise their wives as more deformed: These are o∣ther fruit of Play-haunting. Hence chiings and brawles, hence discords and warres arise, hence death also oft-times followes. For those who are taken with this kinde of lust, a life with their wife and children seemes bitter to them: thus all things in their houses are disturbed. No such thing is ever wrought by the quire of Monkes, the wife may receive her husband returning milde from thence, and vord of all aburd pleasure so that he may seeme more alme and quiet to her. Ita thearalis hic chorus ma∣lorum omniū, ille vero mon∣chorum, bono∣rum fons & o∣rigo est. Alter ex ovibus lupos facit, alter è lu∣pis in agnos convertit, &c. Ibidem. So that this Play-house quire (pray marke it) is the Fountaine, and originall of all evils, but that of Monkes of all good things. One of them maketh Wolves of Sheepe; the other converteth Wolves into Lambes. But perchance we may seeme as yet to have spoken nothing of pleasure. What therefore is more pleasant then to live in tranquility of minde, lamenting nothing, grieving for nothing, and bewailing-nothing? Notwithstanding let us pro∣ceed on further, and let us seach out the pleasure of both these harmonies and sights, and we shall finde the one remaining one∣ly till the evening, so long as the Spectator sitteth in the Play-house, but afterwards pricking him worse then any sting; but the other alwayes flourishing in the mindes of the Spectators, &c. A suficient testimony of the accursed bitter sin∣full fruits of Stage-playes. In his 89. Homily upon Ma∣thew, he hath this short passage. Tom. 2. Col. 601. B. All those who ascend to Stage-playes or to Harlots houses, are spiritually lame: how then shall these be able to stand in battle, and not to be cast downe with the crimes of incontinency? In his 2. Homily against the Iewes, he writes thus. Operū. Tom. 1. Editione. Fronto. Ducaei. Parisij. 621. Tom. 1. pag. 463. C. D. If thou hast a servant if a wife; thou maist keepe them at home with great authority. For if thou permittest them not to goe into the Play-house, how much more are they to be driven from the Synagogue of the Iewes? Here is greater wickednesse then there. Pray marke it well. That which is done there, is sinne; that which is done here, impiety. I speake not these things to this end that you should suffer them to goe into the Play-house; for even this is evill: but that driving them from Playes, you should even much more prohibit them from this. Goe too, tell me what th runnest to see
there? Whether men playing on the Trumpet? But thou oughtest itting at home, to poure out sighes and teares for them, in that they rebell against the command of God; and in that they have the Devill dancing in the middest of them. In his Ibid. Tom. 1. p. 893.894. See Homil. De Sta. Phoca. Ibidem. p. 88. A. B. & Hom. in S. Iuli∣anum. Ibidem. pag 613. A B. to the ame purpose. Homily of Saint Barlaam. Doe ye not (quoth hee) see those who descend from Play-houses made more effeminate? this verily is the cause, that they diligently attend to the things here done. For when as they shall fix in their mindes the in∣vertions of the eyes, the wreathings of the hands, th turnings of the feet, and the images of all those shapes which appeare in the distortion of the circumagitated body, they depart from thence. Is it not therefore an unworthy and shamefull thing, that these should take so much care in procuring the destruction of their soules, and keepe a perpetuall memory of the things that are there acted; and that we whom the imitation of these things shall make equall to Angels, should not bestow an in∣devor equall unto theirs, to preserve those things that are spo∣ken? A good item unto all such Play-haunters,Playrs and Play-haunters then in Saint Chrysostomes judgement, are more dili∣gent and care∣full to destroy their soules, then others are to save them. and Christians, who can remember much of a Stage-play, but very little or nothing of a godly Sermon, which concernes their soules; of which there are now too ma∣ny. In his 15. Homily to the people of Antich; he rheto∣rizeth thus. Oprum. Pa∣risijs. 1588. Tom. 5. Col. 118. C. 121.122. How many Sermons have we bestowed, admo∣nishing many stupid ones that they would utterly relinquish and abandon Theaters, and the lascivious things proceeding from thence? and they did not absteine, but alwayes even unto this day runne to the unlawfull spectacles of Playes and Dances, and set up a Diabolicall assembly against the fulnesse of the Church of God, and their clamors brought from thence with much vehemency, did desturbe the singing of this place. But behold now we being silent, and speaking nothing of this, they have of their owne accord stopped up the Play-house, and the Circus is made unaccessible. And before this many of ours did runne unto them: but now all have fled together from thence unto the Church, and praysed our God. Seest thou how much gaine is made out of feare? For from whence the Devill hoped to have overthrowne our Citty, (to wit, by the
abusing and overturning of Theodosius his Statue, the oc∣casion of this and the ensuing See Hom. 10. ad Pop. Antio∣chiae. to Ho∣mil. 25. Homilies) from thence hath he restored and reformed it, &c. Let us therefore ac∣knowledge the snares, and depart farre from them. Let us take notice of the precipices and not come neere them. Observe well this ensuing discourse. This will be an occasion to you of greatest security, not to avoyd sinnes onely, but even those things also, which may seeme to be but indifferent, but yet may drive us unto sinnes; as to laugh and to use iesting speeches, seemeth truely not to be an apparant sinne, but yet it leads men into manifest sin: for oft-times filthy words arise from laughter, and filthier actions from filthy speeches. Oft-times from filthy speeches and laughter, raylings and re∣proches arise; from rayling and reproches, blowes and wounds; and from strokes and wounds, murthers and manslaughters. If therefore thou wilt consult well for thy selfe, thou wilt not onely avoyd dishonest words and deeds, and strokes and wounds, and manslaughters, but even unseasonable laughter it selfe, and scurrilous words, because such things are wont to be the roote of these that ensue. Ia Theatra rursum ascen∣dere, & equo∣rum cert. ina spectara, & ale∣as tractare, non videtur multis peccatum esse manistū, sed infinita vitae mal solet in∣ferre. Etenim in Theatris immorai for∣nicationem, pe∣tulantiam & omem incon∣tinentiam pe∣perit: & cir∣censium spectatio pugnas, convitia, flagella, contumelias, iuges inimicities, adduxit: & circa aleas studium, blasphemias, jacturas, iras, convitia, infinitaque alia his graviora saepe produxit, &c. Ibidem. Col. 122 . Againe, to ascend up into Theaters, and to behold the combates of Horses, and to play at Dice, seeme not to many to be an apparant sinne, but yet they are wont to bring in infinite evils of life. Loe here the fruits of Playes and Dicing. For the abode in Play-houses hath brought forth fornication, wantonnesse, and all inconti∣nency: (a full evidence of my Minors truth:) and the beholding of the sights of Cirque-playes, hath brought with it reproches, blowes, affronts, and perpetuall enmities: and the study about Dice, hath produced blaspemies, losses, anger, revi∣lings, and infinite other things worse then these. Let us not therefore onely avoyd sinnes, but even those things that seeme to be indifferent, but yet draw us by little and little into these sins. For as he that goes by a precipice, although he falls not, yet he trembles, and oft-times he tumbles downe being overturned by the very trembling: so he who avoyds not sinnes a far off, but
walkes by them, lives with feare & oft-times falls into them. For he who curiously beholds the beauties of others, although he com∣mits not adultery, yet he hath lusted, and according to Math. 5. Christs sentence, he is made an adulterer: and oft-times from concupiscence it selfe, he is really carried into the very sinne. Let us therefore withdraw our selves farre from sinnes. Wilt thou be modest? not onely shun thou adultery, but even a wanton looke. Wilt thou be farre from filthy words? thou must not onely avoyd dishonest speeches, but even dissolute laughter and all concupiscence, &c. Much more then wan∣ton Playes, and wicked Play-houses. In his Ibid. Tom. 5. Col. 135. C.D. & 137. C. See Ibid. 136. .B. An excellent pssage against Romes supre∣macy and of Antioches pri∣macy. 17. Homily to the people of Antioch, hee thus discourseth. But doe those things which the King hath done make thee sorrowfull? Verily neither are those things grievous, but they have even brought much profit. For tell me what troublesome thing is done, that he hath stopped the Play-house? that he hath made the Circus inaccessible? that he hath excluded and overturned those fountaines of wickednesse. Would to God it might not be granted, that these should be ever opened againe. O that our Magistrates would consi∣der this! it would cause them then to suppresse all Play-houses. as this good Emperor Theo∣dosius did. Hence the workes of wickednesse have budded forth in the Citty: hence are those who carry a crime in their very manners, selling their voyces unto Dancers, betraying their owne salvation for three farthings, and confounding all things, &c. But now our Citty seemes to be like a beautifull, a faire and modest woman. Feare makes her more meeke and honest, and hath freed her from those wicked ones, who have adventured to commit these horrible wickednesses. Let us not therefore lament with wo∣mannish sorrow, for I have heard many saying in the Mar∣ket place. Woe unto thee Antioch; what is done unto thee? How art thou deprived of honor? And when I had heard it, I derided the childish minde of those who spake such things. For we ought not to say these things now; but when thou shalt see Dancers, Players, Drinkers, Blaspemers, Swearers, For∣swearers, Lyers, then use these words. Woe unto thee Citty, what is done unto thee. It appeares then by this excellent dis∣course, that Play-houses are the Seminaries of all vice and mischiefe; and that those Citties are truely mise∣rable
wherein they are but tolerated. To passe by his Ibid. Tom. 5. Col. 145. D. 149. A.B.C. 19. Homily to the people of Antioch, where he commends the condition of the Country husband-men, because they had no spectacles of iniquity, no Horse-combates, nor whorish women, &c. where he withall describes the paines which Tum∣blers, Players, and Dancers upon the Rope did take to make themselves expert in their professions; with halfe which la∣bour men might overcome their customary sinne of swearing. In his Ibid. Tom . Col. 162. C.D. & 167. A. 21. Homily to the same people of Antioch: How absurd a thing is it (writes hee) after that mysticall voyce brought downe out of Heaven by a Cherubin; to defile the eares with whorish songs, and effeminate melodies? Yea how is it not worthy of extreame punishment to behold Harlots, and to practice adultery with the same eyes, with which thou beholdest the secret and dreadfull mysteries? and to returne againe to those pompes of the Devill which thou hast renounced in thy baptisme? Now these pompes of Satan which thou renouncest, are Theaters, and Cirque-playes. And in his Ibid. Tom. 5. Col. 183.184. 23. Homily to the Antiochians, he hath this excellent discourse wor∣thy of most serious observation. Beloved, externall dig∣nities are fitly manifested by extrinsecall signes that are put about them, but oures oft to be knowne by the soule. For a Christian ought not to be seene onely by his office, but likewise by his newnesse of life. It is fit a believer should shine forth, not onely by those things which he hath received from God. but also by those things which he himselfe performes, and to be mani∣fested on all hands by his gesture, by his countenance, by his habit, by his voyce. Now I have spoken these things, not that we should dispose of our selves to ostentation, but to the profit of the beholders. And may we not truely put this question to many Chri∣stians of our times; to whom all the ensuing discourse may most fitly be applied. But now from whence shall I know thee to be a Christ? I finde thee on every side conspicuous by the contraries. For if I would learne who thou art, either from the place; I see thee abiding in Crques, in Theaters, and in iniquities: in the councels of wicked ones, and in the conven∣ticles of desperate hopelesse men. Or from the forme of thy countenance; I see thee alwayes laughing excessively, and dissolute like a reclus Harlot, and vile withall: Or from
thy clothes; I see thee no better apparelled, then those who are conversant in the Play-house; Or from thy followers; thou leadest about Parasites and Flatterers: Or from thy words; I heare thee speaking nothing that is savory, or necessary, or conferring to a Christian life: Or from thy table; hence a greater accusation will appeare. From whence then I pray, shall I know thee to be a Christian, all thy words and deeds professing the contrary? O that this elegant rhto∣ricall streine of this zealous flexanimous Father were but a little considered of the vitious Christians of our times! But why doe I say a Christian? For thou art not so much as a man, if I can plainely discerne. For when as tho kickest like an Asse, and playest the wanton as a Bull, and neighest after Women like an Horse, and pamperest thy belly like a Beare, and fattest thy flesh as a Mule, and retainest evill in thy memory like a Camell, and moreover ravenest as a Wolfe, and art angry as a Serpent, and smitest like a Scorpion, and art crafty like a Fox, and keepest the poyson of wickednesse as an Aspe or Viper; and impugnest thy Brethren as that wicked Devill: How shall I be able to number thee among men, when I shall behold in thee the signes of such a nature? For seeking after the difference of a Catechumenish, and a Be∣liever, I am afraid that I shall not finde the difference no not of a man and a beast. For what shall I call thee? Wicked men are farre worse hn beasts or evils. A beast? but beasts are held onely with one of these vices; but thou carrying about all of them together, proceedest on to a greater beastli∣nesse then they. Or shall I stile thee a Devill? but the Devill serves not the tyranny of the belly, neither doth he love mony. Since then thou hast greater imperfctions then Men and De∣vils; how shall we call thee a man? But and if it be not law∣full to call thee a man, how I pray shall we salute thee as a Be∣liever? And that which is worse, neither being so evilly dispo∣sed, doest thou thinke of the deformity of thy soule, nor yet consi∣der its filthinesse: but sitting in a Barbers shop, And i not his the vanity and practice of our effeminate ag. and triming thy haire; taking a glasse, thou diligently examinest the com∣position of every haire, and advisest with those that stand by, and with the Barber himselfe, whether he hath ordered those haires well that are about thy forehead. And when as thou art for the most part an old ma, thou art not ahamed to wax ad with youthfull vanities. But we behold not, not onely the
deformity of our soules; but we doe not so much as any whit at all consider that beastly shape, that Sylla, or Chymaera, according to the Poets Fables, which we haue put on: By all which it is evident, that they who resort to Playes or Play-houses, have not so much as the least Symptomes of any Christianity in them; that they are worse then men, then beasts, then Devils: and carefull onely to adorne their haire, their bodies, but altogether care∣lesse to correct the grosse deformities and pollutions of their soules. In his Tom. 5. Col. 785. A. Sermon, De Eleëmosyna & Hospita∣litate; hee acquaints us: That lascivious and gawdy appa∣rell, which all godly Christians should leave to Danceresses, and lewde Singing-women; together with filthy and unseemely pleasure, are reputed comely in Theaters and Stage-playes. A suficient evidence of their lewdnesse. In his Tom. 3. Col. 611.612. 42. Ho∣mily on the Acts, and in his Tom. 5. Col. 347.348. 62. Homily to the people of Antioch, hee writes thus of Playes. But what? Wilt thou that we compare the Prison and the Play-house together? That verily is a place of affliction, but this of pleasure. Goe to therefore, let us see what things doe happen unto both. There, is much Philosophy: For where there is sadnesse, there also is Philosophy. He who before did gape after riches, who was greatly puffed up, and would scarce suffer an ordinary man to speake unto him; he is then made humble, feare and sorrow being fallen upon his soule like a certaine fire, and softning its hardnesse; then he is made sorrowfull, then he feeleth a world∣ly change, then he is made strong to all things. Play-houses herefoe in S. Chrysostomes judgment are far worse then Prisons, and Play-haunters more misera∣ble, more un∣happy then Pi∣soners. But in the Play-house all things are contrary; laughter, wantonesse, uncleanesse, Diabolicall pompe and pride, prodigality, expence of time, and unprofitable wasting of dayes, the preparation and induction of absrd and filthy lust, the meditation or plotting of adultery, th Schoole of fornication and intemperance, the ex∣hortation of filhiness, the occasion and matter of laughter, the examples of lewdnesse. But it is not so in a prison, where is hu∣mility of minde, exhortaion and excitation to Philsophy, the contempt of worldly things, all things troden under foot and despised: Yea feare sits by as a Schoolemaster fitting him for
all things that he ought to doe. But if thou wilt we will againe inquire into these places after another manner, I would have thee meet with one man comming from a Play-house, and with another going out of a Prison: Nota. thou shouldest behold his soule loathsome, distempered, and truely fettered: but this mans loosed, prompt, and almost winged. For he returnes from the Play-house bound with the eyes of the women that are there, car∣rying bonds heavier then any iron; to wit, the places, words, and habits that are there. But he who goeth from the Prison being freed by all, wil not now thinke that he suffers any grieuous thing, comparing his case with other mens; he now gives thankes that he is not bound, he contemnes human things, see∣ing many rich men in troubles, and great men there imprisoned for many and great things, yea he will suffer any uniust thing, so valiant is he. Moreover many examples of that place will lead him to thinke of the iudgement to come, and he will dread those places seeing them there already. For as he who is there imprisoned, is meeke to all; so he also before the iudgement, before the day to come will be more favourable to his wife, his children, his servants. But men returne not so from the Thea∣ter; for the husband will behold the wife more unpleasantly, h will be more cruell to his servants, he will be more shape to his children. If Magistrats, i Statesmen did but well consider this, tey would never tollrate thm in a Common∣welth. Play-houses cause great evils in Citios, great ones, and neither doe we know by this, how grea. In his Tom. 4. Col. 356. C.D. 12. Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians; hee con∣demnes the Heathen Lawgivers for countenancing and recting Play-houses, in these ensuing words. They assemble company to Theaters, bringing in thiher Meretricum choros, illic in∣dcentes & pueros pthi∣os qui injuria ipsam naturam afficiunt, &c. Such are our common Play-haunters. Whole quers and troope of Harlots, of lecherous Boyes, or Gani∣medes, who abuse even nature it selfe; and they make all the people to sit in a lostir place. Thus they recreate the Citty: thus they crowne great Kings whom they alwayes admire for their Trophies and Victories. O that Kings and Great Men would consider this! they would not then so highly esteeme these base, and infamous Actors. But what is more trifling thn this honor? What is more unpleasant then this pleasure? Doest
thou seeke then applauders of thy actions out of these? and wilt thou, I pray tell me, be commended with Dancers, effeminate persons, Stage-players, and Whores? And how can this be but extreame madnesse? For These are the fruits of Stage-playes. I would willingly demand of them; Is it an hainous and unseemely thing to overturne the lawes of nature, and to introduce unlawfull and wicked copulations? All will say it is a grievous and unworthy act: Yea they seeme verily to punish likewise this hainous offence. Why then dost thou bring in those Cynaedi, & exolete persons? Neither dost thou only bring them in, but thou lkewise honorest them with innumerable and unspeakable gifts; And where as thou punishest those who at∣tempt such things in another place, yet here thou spendest mony upon them, and maintainest them at the publike charge, as men deserving well of the Common-walth.Objection. But, saist thou, they are infamous.Answer. Why then dost thou traine them up? Why dost thou honour Kings by infamous persons? Why dost thou kill Citties? Yea why also dost thou bestow so much upon them? For if they are infamous, infamous persons ought to be banished. For why hast thou made them infamous? Whether as one hat prayst them, or as one who condemnest them? Verily as one who condemnst them. Moreover, thou makest them infa∣mous as one who condemnest them: but yet thou runnest to see them, yea and admirest laudest and applaudest them, as those who are of honest fame, and good repute. In his Tom. 5. Col. 799. A. B. 802. C. Oration of the Kalends, hee writes thus. There is now a war proclai∣med against us, not the Aalekies invading us, or other Barbarians making incursions upon u, as then they did, but Devils leading their pompe in the Market place. For those Diabolicall pernoctaions which are this day practised, those scoffes and revilings in Playes, those nocturall Dances, and those Comdies which should be hissd out, doe vanquish our Citty worse then any enemy: and therefore it is meet, that both those that thus offend, and those who offend not should be deicted, mourne, and be ashamed; these verily for the wicked∣nesses they have committed; but those because they have seene their Brethren to have beene immodest. For although you your slves doe not these things (and O that our Christian Ma∣gistrates
who connive at Stage-playes would consider it) yet it is altogether unworthy of our religion, if you suffer even others for to doe them, whether they be your ser∣vants, your friends, or your neighbours. Whom God doth hate, doe not thou commend; but he hates every one who liveth in iniquity though he abound in wealth. It is lawfull for thee to reprove and correct them for the glory of God. But how is it lawfull to chide for God? O that wee had zeale and grace to doe thus nw, then sinne, then sin∣ners would not be so common, so audacious and shamelesse as they are. If thou shalt see a drunkard, or a theefe, or a servant, or a friend, or any other that is thy neigh∣bour, either running into a Play-house, or betraying his owne soule, or swearing, for swearing, or lying, be angry with him, punish him, reclaime him, correct him; and thou hast done all this for God. In his Tom 5. Col. 147. B. 6. Oration. That all vices arise from sloath: hee writes thus of Play-haunters. Before the last day, our speech to your charity was purposely and wholy of the Devill. At which time, some verily, when as we were dis∣coursing of these things out of this place, did then idlely behold the pompe of the Devill in Play-houses, and did then heare whorish songs; but you did give your mindes to the most plea∣sant spirituall Doctrine. Who then hath made them thus to erre? Who hath avocated them from the holy Sheepefold? Let Play-haunters then consider this. Verily the Devill hath deceived them, but he hath not decei∣ved you. Those therefore who runne to Play-houses are deceived and led thither by the Devill, if this holy Father may be credited. And in his Tom. 5. Col. 750.751. 8. Homily of Re∣pentance, with which I will conclude: hee hath this memorable passage against Stage-playes and Play-houses, which should make all Players and Play-haun∣ters for to tremble; which passage likewise fully proves the Minor of my former Syllogisme. We may undergoe the paines of a fast, and yet not obtaine the fruit of a fast. But how? To wit, when we absteine from meate, but not from sinne; when we fast the whole day in want, and then spend what we have saved in unchaste Play-houses. Stageplayes depriue men of the benefit of all their fasting and prayers. Loe the paines of a fast, the fruit of a fast, (much more then of prayer, of hearing, reading, receiving the Sacrament, and all other holy duties, which I beseech all Play-haunters
to consider) is wholy lost, when as we ascend the Play-house of iniquity. My speech is not directed unto you, for I know that you are free from this accusation. But it is the cu∣stome of those who are loden with griefe, when as those are not present who give the occasion of griefe, to rush upon those who are present. For what gaine is it to goe up to the Play-houses of wickednesse, to enter into the common shop of luxury, and the publike Schoole of incontinency; or to sit in the chaire of pe∣stilence? Loe here an exact character & description of a Play-house, how can you then but loath it, when you read this of it? or if any one shall call the Play-house, the chaire of pestilence, the Schoole of incontinence, the shop of luxury, and the Scaffold of all uncleanesse, he should not offend: that most wicked place being a Babionish Brothell full of many diseases: when thou art driven unto a Play-house, thou entrest into a di∣rect Stewes. The Devill thus furnishing the Citty with infer∣nall flames, doth not now put under stalkes of hempe besmeared with Brimstone, nor Marle, nor Flax, nor Pitch, as that Bar∣barian did; but things farre worse then these; leacherous sights, filthy words, anointed members, and songs full of all lewdnesse. That Whre-house then, barbarous hands have bur∣ned; but this Whore-house cogitations more foolish then Barba∣rians have kindled: this being worse then that, since the fire is worse, which doth not waste the nature of the body, but the good state and disposition of the minde. And that which is worse, neither those who are burned doe perceive it. For if they did feele it, they would not now send forth such an ffuse laughter in Play-houses. This is the present condi∣tion of Play∣ers and Play-haunters who are altogether sencelesse of their disese, their sinne. Therefore this is the very worst evill, when as one is wekned, and yet knoweth not this, that he is diseased: and burning miserably and loathsomely, doth not feele the bur∣ning. What profit, tell me, is there then of fasting, when as thou drivest thy body from lawfull nutriment, but yet bringest in wicked nourishment to thy soule? when as thou spendest the day sitting in the Theater beholding common nature deturpated, de∣formed, and unchaste women condemned to adultery, collecting there the evils of every house? For liberty is there given both to see fornications, and to heare blasphemies, whereby both by the eyes, and by the eare, a disease may proceed to the very soule it selfe: they imitate the calamities and mischances of o∣thers
from whence the contagion of filthinesse gets into ur selves. Tell me therefore, what profit there is of fasting, the soule being fed with such meates? With what eyes wilt thou behold thy wife from these Theaters? with what eyes wilt thou looke upon thy sonne, thy servant, thy friend? Verily it must needs be that be that speaketh there, or he that holds his peace, should be confunded with shame at the filthinesse that is acted. But thou departest not so from hence: for it is It was there∣fore the use of Christians in S. Chrysostomes time to repeate the Sermons they heard in the Church in their owne Fa∣milies at home, neither was it deemed an offence or con∣vēticle as some prophane ones would make it now. (See Cae∣sarius reatnsis Hom 20. Bibl. Patrū Tom. 5. prs 3. p. 766. F.G.H. an ex∣cellent place for repetition of Sermons.) lawfull for thee with much conidence to It was there∣fore the use of Christians in S. Chrysostomes time to repeate the Sermons they heard in the Church in their owne Fa∣milies at home, neither was it deemed an offence or con∣vēticle as some prophane ones would make it now. (See Cae∣sarius reatnsis Hom 20. Bibl. Patrū Tom. 5. prs 3. p. 766. F.G.H. an ex∣cellent place for repetition of Sermons.) repeate all things at home, Pro∣phticall speeches, Apostolicall precepts, Divine lawes; to fur∣nish or set to every table of vertue, and to make thy wife more chaste, thy sonne more dutfull, thy servant more deare with the same repetitions; yea and thou shalt perswade thy very ene∣my to lay aside his hatred. Dost thou see how these precepts verily are every where holsome, but those sound filthily in every place? What profit therefore of fasting, when as thou fastest with thy body, but committest adultery with thine eyes? Adultery is not onely that conglutination of body to body, but even an un∣chaste looke. What benefit is there then when as thou goest to the Play-house from hence? He therefore that resorts to Stage-playes can never reape any benfit from the Mi∣nistry of Gods word: O there∣fore that men would but con∣sider this! I correct, the Player corrupts: I administer salves to thy disease, he ministers the cause of the dis∣ease: I extingush the flame of nature, he kindles the flame of lust. What profit is there, tell me? one edifying, and another pulling downe, what have they profited themselves by their la∣bour? Therefore let us not be occupied here in vaine, but pro∣fitably, whereby we may fruitfully, whereby we may lesse in vaine, whereby we may not unprofitably and to condemnation meete here, one building, and the other pulling downe; le the multitude of builders bee overcome with the easinesse of the pulling downe. No. Truely it is a part of great uncleanesse both for yong men and old men to hasten to the Play-house. But would to God the evill did extend no further. For this perchance see∣meth intollerable to an ingenuous man, and worthy to be pu∣nished with the greatest losse, with reproofe and shame: but verily this correction is not at al inflicted so far as to shame. But yet torments and punishments hang over Play-haunters heads: for it must needs be that those who sit there should swim in the
sinne of adultery, not because they are coupled to women, out because they behold them with unchaste eyes. For with these it must of necessity be, that every one is surprised in adultery. Neither will I speake my owne word to you whereby you may lesse regard it, but I will explicate the Divine Law, where there is no place for neglect. What therefore saith the Divine Law? Mat. 5.27, 27 You have heard that it hath beene said of old; Exod. .. Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, that whosoever shall looke upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart; Hast thou seene adultery commtted? hast thou seen sinne finished And that which is worst in adulteries, thou hast seene him that is taken in adultery to be guilty of adultery, not under any humane, but under a Devine Sentence; hence deadly punishments: For whosoever shall looke upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery al∣ready with her in his heart. He doth not onely xtirpate the disease, but likewise the roote of the disease: for unchaste con∣cupiscence i the roote of adultery, So likewise doe Phisicians: they looke diligently not onely to diseases, but likewise to the taking away of their causes: although they see the eye diseased, yet they represse the evill rewme that is above in the temples. Thus Christ also doeth. Adultery is an evill blindnesse, it is a disease of the eyes, not of the body onely, but first of the soule: Therefore he stops the reme of uncleanesse from thence by the feare of the law. Wherefore he not onely punisheth adul∣tery, but avengeth concupiscence likewise. He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart. These bare words repeated are sufficient to purge away all the disease of sinne. But pardon us, we cleanse wounds, and he who purgeth wounds must apply bitter medicines. But by how much the more they shall indure my words, by so much the more shall the poyson be purged out. By all these faithfully recited passages of holy Which ī have thus quoted at large, because most men want his Workes, Chryso∣stome, which I would Players and Play-haunters would seriously, would frequently read over; it is most appa∣rant; that Stage-playes are the immediate common
occasions of much actuall lewdnesse, adultery, and o∣ther grosse uncleanesse: which should cause all Christi∣ans to abominate them, and to keepe their wives and children from them, as C. Tacitus, De Moribus Germanorum. c. 6 Philippus Gluverius, An∣tiquae Germa∣niae. l. 1. cap. 20. pag. 181.182. th ancient Pagan Germans did, for feare they should corrupt their chastity and draw them on to publike lewdnesse. To passe by the concurrent testimonies of Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Basil, Nazienzen, Origen, Hierom, Hilary, Augustine, Cyril, Salvin, and all the other Fathers, Counces, and Authors quoted in the precedent Scene, who give punctuall testimony of this truth, as their words there cited will suficiently manifest; I shall confine my selfe onely to foure of our owne English Authors for finall confirmation of my Minors verity. The first of them is Who flouri∣shed about the yeere of our Lord 1429. Balaeus Scrip∣torū Brittaniae Centuria. 7. p. 566. in the raige of King Henry the 6. Alexander Fabritius, in his Destructorium Vitio∣rum. pars 4. cap. 23. De Ludis inhonestis, or dishonest Playes. The second kind (writes he) of unlawfull Playes, is the Play of lascivious vanity; such as are Dancing, Enter∣ludes, and other Theatricall Playes; which are called Playes, from the Theater or Play-house which is a publike place, where the people hath accustomed to meet together o Play; be∣cause after such Playes ended Whores are oft times prostitu∣ted in such Playes. Et sic tales ludi fornicati∣onis meritricij & adulterij multoiens sunt in causa, & ideo in talibus ludis delectan∣tur Daemones; & ut constat vir perfectus non debet in∣teresse ludicris in quibus Dae∣mones delect∣antur, &c. Ibid. See Pauli Wan. Sermo. 7. & 10. accordingly. And so such Playes are very often the cause of fornication, whoredome and adultery; and therefore the Devill is delighted in such Playes: and as it appeareth, a perfect man ought not to give his minde to such sports with which the Devill is delighted. And therefore worthily sath Saint Augustine: Let him wildraw himselfe from the Spe∣ctacles of the world who will obtaine the perfect grce of remiss∣on. For Dyna the Daughter of Iacob; of whom it is writtn in th 34. of Genesis: when Iocob came into the Land of Ca∣naan, Dinah his Daughter S. Paul, Titus 2.5. Enioynes women to be chaste kepers at hom intimating, that such women that gad abrode, especially to Play-ouss and such like places, can never be chste Solomon upbraiding an Harlot: Prov. 7 1, 12. tells us That her feete abide not in her house nw shi wihout, now in the streets, and lyeth in waite at every corner. Which Ovid, De Arte Amandi. l. . p. 203 doth second, Vns es vos fmosae cra puellae. Saep. vagos exta limina ferre pedes, &c. So that gdding women, an who wo∣men are reciprocall walked abroad, to wit to the
spectacles of the world, that she might see the women of that Country; whom Sychim the Sonne of the King of that Coun∣try seeing, he was inamored with her, tooke her and ravished her perforce. But as Saint Augustine sith, if she ad conti∣ed at home among her owne she had not beene defloard by a forraigne ravisher. Therefore the soule ought by so much the more to beware and to restraine it selfe, because she is not once, but oft-times rvished and defloured; let her feare now having had experiment of that which she as ignorant of being yet a Vrgin. Adde wee to him the testimony of Master Philip Stubs in his London 1595 pag. 105.106. Anatomy of Abuses. Doe not Playes (writes he) maintaine Bawdry, insinuate foolery and renew the remembrance of heaen Idolatry?The fruits of Theaters and Playes. Doe they not ince to whoedome and uncleansse? Nay, are they not rather plaine devorers of Madenly virginity and chastity? For proofe whereof but marke the flocking and running to Theaters and Curtens, daily and hourely, night and day, time and tide, to see Playes and Enterludes, where such waton gestures, such bawdy speeches, such laughing and eeing, such kissing and bussing, such clipping and culling such wking and glancing of wanton eyes and the like is used, as is wonderfull to behold. Then these goodly Pageants being ended, every mate sorts to his mate every one brings another homeward on the way very friendly, and in their secret conclaves (covertly) they play the Sodomites, or worse. And these be the fruits of Playes and Enterludes for the most part.The godly Examples of Playes and Enterludes. And whereas you say there are good examples to be learned in them: truely so there are: If you will learne to play the vice,What things are to be lear∣ned at Playes. to teare, sweare, and blaspame boh Heaven and Earth: if you will learne to become a Bawde, to be uncleane, to devirginate Maides, to defoure onest Wives, &c. If you will learne to sing and take of bawdy love and venery, &c. If you will learne to play the Whore-master, the Glutton, Drun∣kard, or Incestuous person: and finally, of you will learne to contemne God and all his Lawes, to care neither for Heaven nor Hell, and to commit all kinde of sinne and mischiefe) you need goe to no other Schools; for all these good Exampls you may see painted before your ees in Enterludes and Playes.
Wherefore, that man who giveth money for the maintenance of them, must needs incurre the inevitable sentence of eternall damnation, unlesse he repent. Thus hee. Stephen Gosson a penitent reclaimed Play-poet (See his Schoole of A∣buse. Epistle to the Reader, ac∣cordingly. whose eyes did shed ma∣ny teares of sorrow, whose heart sweat many drops of blood, when he remembred Stage-playes to which he was once addict∣ed) writes much to this effect. In his Schoole of A∣buse. Vid. Ibid. and his Playes Confuted: See here before, pag. 360.361, 362, 363. I will shew you (writes hee) what I see, and informe you what I read of Playes. Ovid said, that Romulus built his Theater as a Horse-faire for Whores, made Triumphes and set up Playes to gather the faire women together, that every one of his Souldiers might take where he liked a snatch for his share, &c. It should seeme that the abuse of such places was so great, that for any chaste Liver to haunt them was a blacke Swan and a white Crow: Dion so straitly forbiddeth the ancient Families of Rome and Gentle∣women that tender their name and honour to come to Theaters, and rebukes them so sharpely when he takes them napping, that if they be but once seene there, he iudgeth it sufficient cause to speake ill of them, and thinke worse. The shaddow of a knave hurts an honest man; the sent of a Stewes an honest Matron, and the shew of Theaters a simple gazer, &c. Cookes doe ne∣ver shew more craft in their iunkets to vanquish the taste, nor Painters in shadowes to allure the eye, then Poets in Theaters to wound the conscience. There set they abroach strange con∣sorts of melody to tickle the eare; costly apparell to flatter the sight; effeminate gesture, to ravish the sence; and wanton speech, to whet desire to inordinate lust. These by the privy entries of the eare slip downe into the heart, and with gunshot of affection gaule the minde where reason and affection should rule the roste, Domitian suffred playing and dancing so long in Theaters, that Paris led the shaking of the sheets with Domitia, and Monster the Trenchmoore with Messalina, &c. In Rome De Arte A∣mandi. l. 1. & 2. Ovid chargeth his Pilgrims to creepe close to the Saints whome they serve, and shew their double diligence to lift the Gentlewomans robes from the ground, or soyling in the dust: to sweepe moaes from their kirtles, to keepe their fingers in ue, to lay their hands at their backes for an easie stay; to
looke upon those, whom they beheld; to prayse that, which they commend; to like every thing that pleaseth them: to present them Pomegranets to picke as they sit; and when all is done to wait on them mannerly to their houses. Loe here the Panderly pra∣ctises of our Play-houses. In our Assemblies at Playes in London, you shall see such heaving and shoving, such itching and shouldring, to sit by women: such care for their garments, that they be not trod on: such eyes to their laps that no chips light in them: such pillowes to their backes, that they take no hurt: such making in their eares I know not what: such giving them Pippins to passe the time: such playing at foote Saunt without Cards: such ticking, such toying, such smiling, such winking, and such manning them home when the sports are ended, that it is a right Comedy, to marke their be∣haviour, to watch their conceits, as the Cat the Mouse, and  good as a course at the Game it selfe, to dogge them a little or follow alooe by the print of their feet, and so discover by slot where the Deare taketh oyle. If this were as well noted, as ill seene; or as openly punished, as secretly practised; I have no doubt but the cause would be eared to drie up the effect, and these pretty Rabbets very cunningly ferreted from their bur∣owe. Pray marke this well. For they that lacke customers all the weeke, either because their haunt is unknowne, or the Constables and Officers of their Parish watch them so narrowly, that they dare not queach to celebrate the Sabbath flocke to Theaters and there keepe a generall Market of Bawdry. Not that any filthinesse indeed is committed within the compasse of that ground, as was done in Rome, but that every Wanton and his Paramour, every Man and his Mistris, every Iohn and his Ioane, every Kav and his Queane, are there first acquainted and Play-houses then are the cōmon Marts of Bawdery. chea∣pen the merchandise in that place which they pay for else-where as they can agree. I intend not to shew you all that I see, nor halfe that I heare of these abuses, lest you iudge me more wil∣full to teach, then willing to forbid them. Thus farre this pe∣nitent Play-poet from his owne experience. The last of these witnesses with whom I will conclude, is the Anonymous Author of the Booke intituled, Printed by Authority. 1580. The third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters; Ibid. pag. 48.49, 50, 51, 52. Penned by a
Play-poet, and common Play-haunter, who had good experience of the lewde effects of Stage-playes, which made him to abhorre them, and to renounce his wicked profession, as being incompa∣tible with Christian Religion or his owne salvation, as him∣selfe professeth in that Treatise, where he writes thus as followes. Ibid. pg. 43.44, 45, 56, 57. O tht our Magistrates and Statesmen would but con∣sider this. Such doubtlesse is mine opinion of common Playes, that in a Christian Common-weale they are not sufferable. My reason is, bcause they are publike enemies to nature and reli∣gion; allurements unto sinne; corrutes of good manners; the cause of security and carelesnesse meere Brothel-houses of Bawdery; and bring both the Gospell into slander, the Sabbath into contempt, mens soules into danger; and finally the whole Common-weale into disorder. Great and hanous speches, no doubt, yet not so hainous, as the exercise of them is odious: bi∣ting words; yet not so bitter as the cause requireth. It were ill painting the Devill like an Angell; he must be portraied as he is, that he may the better be knowne, Sinne hath alway a fair cloake to cover his filthy body. And therefore he is to be tur∣ned out of his case into his naked skinne, that his nasty filthy body, and stinking corruption being percived; he might come into the hatred and horror of men. For as we are naturally of our selves evill and corrupt; so are we naturally giuen to love our selves, and to be blinded with our owne affctions insomch that what we know to be evill, we are not ashamed either openly to detend, or slily to cloake. The excuse of wickednsse is but the encrease of punishment, and an ill cause defended by autho∣rity, and maintained by learning brings Magistrates into slander, and learning into contempt. Page 52.53, 54, 55, 56, 57. Therefore to the end that others should not be deceived with tha wherewith my selfe was overtaken, I thought it my part to lay open to all mens eyes the horrible abuse as well of Playes, as of the Inactors, and the disorder of their auditory; that the bse being percived, every man might reforme himselfe, and be weaned from their wickednesse: or otherwise, that the Magistrates being infomed might take such good waye, that the intollerable exercise of Playes might be utterly put downe. For I am verily prswadd, that if they may be permitted still to make sale of sinne, we shall
pull on ur hads Gods vengeance, and to our Realme bring an tter confusion. What I shall speake of Playes of my owne knowledge, I know ma be affimed by hundreds, to whom those mtters are as well knowne as to my selfe. Fruits of Playes for the Devils owne mouth. Some Cit∣tizens Wives (and I would to God our married Citti∣zens would well consider it because it concernes them neerely) upon whom the Lord for ensample to others hath lyd his hands, have evn on their death-bds with teares con∣fessed, that they have recived at these Spectacles such filthy inections, as have turned thir mindes from chaste cogitations, and O hat those husbands who either accom∣pany, or send their wives, their daugh∣trs unto Stge-plyes, and yet desire for to keepe them haste, would remem∣ber his. made them of honest women light huswives: (which very thing is likewise testified by reverend Bishop Babingto, in his Exposition on the 7. Commande∣ment; and by Doctor Layton, in his Speculum belli Sacri. cp 45. and therefore worthy credit under the hands of these three witnesses:) by them they have 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. disho∣noured the Vssls of Holinesse, and have brought their Husbands ino contempt, their Children into question, their bodies into sicknesse, and their soules into the assault of a dangerous state. Such is the nature and inclination of us al, that we runne whether affection leads us, and are withdrawne by company. And therefore as David saith 2 Sam. 22. ver. 26.27 Psal. 18.25, 26. With the gdly thou wilt shew thy selfe godly, with the upright: man thou wilt shw thy selfe upright, with the pure thou wilt shew thy selfe pure, and with the froward thou wilt shew thy selfe froward. He that tou∣cheth Pitch will be dfiled The repaire of them that are honest to those places of evill resrt, make their owne good life to be doubtd of for that the place beeds suspition as well of good as of bad. For who can see man or woman rsor to an house which is no∣toriousl wicked but will iudge them to be of the crew of he wicked and ungodly? Avoyd suspe∣ctd plces. The most honest wie, is the soonest assaulted, and hath such snares lid to enrap her, as, if God ssst hr not, she msteds be ken. When I gave my slfe fist to  the abuse o common layes,  found my heart so  smitten with srrw (The best soonst tmp∣ed. sinne d there so abound,Horrible sinnes openly committed at Theaters. and was so oply commited, that I loked whn God in iustice would have presently in his wrath hve confounded the beholders.)
Marke this O ye favorers, frequenters, and upholders of Playes. The Theater I found to be an appointed place of Bawdery mine owne eares have heard honest women allured with abomi∣nable speeches. Sometime I have seene two knaves at once importunate upon one light huswife, wherby much quarrell hath growne to the disquieting of many. The servants as it is manifestly to be proved, have consented to rob their Mastes to supply the want of their Harlots: there is the practising of married wies to traine them from their husbands, and places appointed for meeting and conference. When Who can fa∣vour Playes, when the Au∣thors them∣selves con∣demne them? I had taken notice of these abuses, and saw that the Theater was beome the Consultory-house of Satan, I concluded with my selfe, never to imply my pen to so vile a purpose, nor to be an instrument of gathering the wicked together. It may seeme I am overlavish of speeh, and that which I have publikely expressed of others by mine owne knowledge might have beene dissembled. But I have learned, that he who dissembles the evill that he knowes in other men, is as guilty before God of the offence, as the offenders themselves. And the Lord hath expresly commanded in Exod. 23. v. 2. Exodus, that, wee should not follow a multitude to doe evill, neither agree in a controversie to decline after many, and overthrow the truth. I cannot therefore but rsist such wickednesses, lest I might seeme to maintaine them. For he that dissembles ungodlinesse is a traytor to God. Since therefore that the cause is Gods, I dare prsse forth my selfe to be an Advocate against Satan unto the rooting ut of sinne. Pag 64. Every member of man defiled at Playes. Are not our eyes at Playes, carryed away with the pride of vanity? our ars abused with amorous, that is, lecherous, abominable and filthy speech? Is not our tonge (which is given us onely to glorifie God withall) there imployed to the blaspheming of Gods holy Name, or the commendation of that is wicked? Are not our heart through the pleasure of the flsh, the delight of the eye, and the fond motions of the minde withdrawne from the service of the Lord, and the medi∣tation of his goodnesse? Page 89.90. to 103. No zealous heart but mst needs bleed to see how many Christian soules are there swallwed up in the whirlpoole of Devillish impudency. Whosoever shall visit the Theaters the Chappels of atan. Chappell of Satan, I meane the Theater, shall finds there
no want of young Ruffians, not lacke of Harlots utterly past all shame, who presse to the forefront of the Scaffold, to the end to shew their impudency, and to be as an obiect to all mens eyes. Yea, such is their open shamelesse beaviour, as every man may perceive by their wanton gestures wherunto they are given: yea they seeme there to be like Brothels of the Stewes. The open wickednsse of Harlots at Playes. For often without respect of the place and company which behold them, they commit that filthinesse openly, which is horrible to be done in secret, as if whatsoever they did were warranted: for neither reverence, iustice, nor any thing beside can governe them. Alas that Youth should become so devillish and voyd of the feare of God. An admoni∣tion to Magi∣strates. Let Magistrates assure themselves, that without speedy redresse all things will grow so farre out of order, that they will be past remedy. Shamefulnesse and mo∣desty is quite banished from yong men: they are utterly shame∣lesse, stubbon, and impudent. It was well said of Calvin, that a man setled in evill will make but a mocke of Religion. He preacheth in vaine that preacheth unto the deafe. Tell many of these men of the Scripture, they will scoffe and turne it into a iest. Rebuke them for breaking the Sabbath day, they will say you are a man of the Sabbath, you are very precise, you will allow us nothing: you will have nothing but the Word of God; you will permit us no recreation, but have men like Asses, who never rest but when they are eating. Seeke to withdraw these fellowes from the Theater unto a Sermon, they will say, By the Preacher they may be edified, but by the Player both edified and delighted. So that in them the saying of Saint Paul is rified, where he saith, Rom. 8.7 That the wisedome of the flesh is nothing but enmity against God. How small heed take they of themselves, which suffer their owne wicked affections to withdraw them from God and his Word. We need not volun∣tarily seek our owne destruction. For he that is vertuously di∣sposed shall finde lewde persons enow to withdraw him from well-doing by the promise of pleasure and delightfull pastime, whereunto we are naturally inclined unto the Theaters the Schooles of Satan, and Chappels of ill counsell. Schoole-house of Satan, and Chappell of ill counsell, where he shall see so much iniquity and loosenesse, and so grat outrage and scope of sinne,
that it is a wonder if he returne not either wounded in consci∣ence, or changed in life. Counsell to Masters. I would wish therefore all Masters not onely to withdraw themselves, but their Servants also from such wicked assembls For it is alwayes wisedome to shunne the occasions of evill. Youth will be withdrawne by company, if they be not restrained of their liberty. They need not seeke out for Schoole-masters, they can learne evill too fast of them∣selves, and are pregnant enough at home to learne unhappinesse. Quantum à proposito suo virgo deficit, quando pudica quae venerat, impudicior dis∣cedit? Cyprian, De Habitu Vir∣ginum. p. 241. Many of nature honest and tractable, have beene altered by these shwes and spectacles, and become monsterous. Mans minde which of it selfe is proe unto vice, is not to be pricked forward unto vice, but brideled: if it be left unto it selfe, it hardly standeth; if it be driven forth, it runneth headlong. Flee farre from Babylon, yee that carry the Lords Vessels. Rom. 6.3. Forsomuch as you are baptised into Christ, it standeth you upon to be holy both of body and minde, and to dedicate your selves to his service, which ye shall never doe, unlesse you withdraw your selves from the inticements of vanity, and eschue the occasions of evill; which that ye may the better doe, you are to fasten your eyes upon God, by whom ye are sanctified. Ill examples to be shuned. Let not the examples of the wicked be a president unto us, neither let us be drawne away to evill with the multitude. Custome shall but make us bold in sinne, and the company of scorners make us more impudent of life. It is not enough for us to excuse our selves by the doings of other men; it will not be taken for an excuse, although we could alleage; that every man doth as we doe. For it is no meanes to acquite us before God, to say that others be no better then our selves. I would rather wish that the evill conversation of others might be an occasion to draw us backe, lest perhaps we be wrapped in the vices that raigne in all the wicked, and so be partakers of the punishment due to them. For we are not to walke as men that looke onely upon the creatures, but our part is, to se God before our yes, whose presence we cannot possibly escape. Motion of the body. It is mar∣velous to consider how the gesturing of a Player, which Tully trmeth, the eloquence of the body, is of force to move, and prepare a man to that which is ill. For such things are disclosed
to the eye and to the eare, as might a great deale better be kept close. Whereby a double offence is committed; First, by these dissolute Players, which without regard of honesty are not asha∣med to exhibite the filthiest matters they can devise to the sight of men: Secondly, by the beholders, which vouchsafe to heare and behold such filhy things, to the great losse both of them∣selves and the time. There commeth much evill in at the eares, but more at the eyes, by these two open windowes death break∣eth into the soule. Nothing entreth in more effectually into the memory, thin that which commeth by seeing: things heard doe lightly passe away, but the tokens of that we have seene, saith Petrarch, stickes fast in us whether we will or no. Many Snares of Playes. have beene entangled with the webs of these Spiders, who would gladly have beene at liberty when they could not. The webs are so subtily spun, that there is no man that is once within them, that can avoyd them without danger. None can come within these snares that may escape untaken, be she Maide, Matron, or whatsoever such sorce have their enchantments of pleasure to draw the affections of the minde. This inward fight (let married men consider it) hath vanquished the chastity of many women; Loe these are the things, the lessons that men learne at Stage-playes. some by taking pitty of the deceitfull teares of the Stage-lover have beene moved by their complaint to rue on their secret friends, whom they have thought to have tasted the like torment: some having noted the ensamples how Maydens restrained from the marriage of those whom their friends have misliked, have there learned a pollicy to prevēt their parents, by stealing them away: some seeing by the ensample of the Stage-player one carryed with two much liking of another mans wife, having noted by what practise she hath beene assailed and overtaken, have not failed to put the like in effect in earnest, that was afore showne in iest. The wilinesse and craft of the Stage is not yet so great, as is that without on the Scaffolds; for that they which are evill disposed no sooner heare any thing spoken that may serve their turne, but they apply it to themselves. Alassay they to their familiar by them, Gentlewoman, is it not pitty this passioned Lover should be so martyred? And if he finde her inclined to foolish pitty, as commonly such women are,
then e applies the matter to himselfe, and saith, that he is likewise carried away with the liking of her: craving that pitty to be extended upon him, as she seemed to shew toward the affli∣cted amorous Stager. These running headed Lovers are growne so perfect Schollers by long continuance at this Schoole, that there is almost no word spoken, but they can make matter of it to serve their turne. They can so surely discover the con∣ceits of the minde, and so cunningly handle themselves, and are growne so subtile in working their matters, that neither the iealousie of Iuno, who suspecteth all things; nor the Quid faciet custos cum sint tot in urbe Theatra? Ovid De Arte Aman∣di. lib. 3. p. 208. strait keeping of Danaes may debar; nor the watchulnesse of Argos with his hundred eyes espy. Credit me, Flie Thea∣ters you that would be ho∣nest. there can be found no stronger engine to batter the honesty as well of wedded Wives, as the chastity of Sic dum or∣nari cultius, dum liberius evagari virgi∣nes volunt, vir∣gines esse desi∣nunt. Cyprian, De Habitu Vir∣ginum. Tractatus. pag. 242. unmarried Maides and Widdowes, then are the hearing of common Playes. There, wanton Wives Fables, and Pastorall songs of love, which they use in their Comicall discorses (all which are taken out of the secret Amory of Venus, and practising bawdery,) turne all chastity upside downe, and corrupt the good disposition and manners of youth, insomuch that it is a miracle, if there be found either any Woman or Maide which with these spectacles of strange lust, is not oftentimes inflamed even unto fury. The nature of their Comedies are, for the most part after one manner of nature, like the tragicall Comedy of Calistus, where the Bawdresse Scelestina, inflamed the Mayden Melibeia with her Sorceries. Doe we not use in these discourses to counterfeit Witchcraft, charmed drinkes, and amorous potions, thereby to draw the affections of men, and to stirre them up unto lust, to like even those whom of themselves they abhorre? The ensamples where∣of stirre up the ignorant multitude to seeke by such unlawfull meanes the love and good will of others. I can tell you of a A strange Example. Story of like practice used of late by a iealous Wife to her Husband, whose heart being, as she thought estranged, other∣wise then of custome, did practise with a Sorceresse to have some powder, which might have force to renew her Husbands won∣ted good will towards her: but it had such a vertue in the ope∣ration, that it weligh brought him his bane, for his memory
thereby was gone, so that if God had not dealt miraculously with him by reveiling it, it had cost him his life. The like we read of Lucullus and Lucretius, who by drinking such amo∣rous confections lost first their wits, and afterwards their lives. The device of carrying and recarrying letters by Landresses, practising with Pedlers to transport their tokens by colourable meanes to sell their Merchandices, and other kinde of pollicies to beguile Fathers of their Children, Husbands of their Wives, Gardians of their Wards, and Masters of their Servants, i it not aptly taught in the He meaneth Playes who are not unfitly so called. Schoole of abuse? But hush, no more. I am sorry this Schoole is not pluckt downe, and the Schoole-masters banished this London. Citty. Thus much I will tell them, if they suffer these Brothel-houses to continue, or doe in any wise allow them, the Lord will say unto them as the Psalmist saith. Psal. 50.18, 21. If thou sawest a Theefe thou wentest with him, and haddest thy part with adulterers: thou hast done these things, and because I held my peace, thou hast beleeved; wicked man, that I am like unto thee: but I will accuse thee, &c. Thus farre our owne Play-poet from his owne experience. By these three severall witnesses, to which I might accumulate See Bishop Babingon, Ma∣ster Perkins, Master Dod, Master Elton, Master Brinsly, and most o∣ther Exposi∣tors on the 7. Commande∣ment, accor∣dingly. infinite others, it is most apparant, that Stage-playes are the ordinary occasions of much actuall whoredome, adultery, and such like beastly lewdnesse; that they are the common Nurseries, Schooles, and Seminaries of Adulterers, Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores, and such polluted creatures. This therefore should cause all chaste, all sober Christi∣ans to abominate them; all Protestant States and Churches to abandon them. Balaeus Scrip∣torum. Brit∣taniae. Cent∣turia. 8. pag. 624. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 64. Espenaeus, De Continentia. lib. 3. cap. 4 Bishop Morton, in his Protestants Appeale. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 36. & lib. 5. cap. 9. sect. 5. where many of their owne Authors are brought in condemning them. We all condemne Pope Sixtus the IV. with the unholy holy Church of Rome, for erecting and allowing publike Stewes, which yeeld above twenty thousand Duckats of annuall revenue to the Pope his filthi∣nesse, (for holinesse in this respect I cannot stile it,) which summe is cast up among the constant annuall revenue of the
Church; whereas God himselfe Deut. 23.18. Mich. 1.7. forbids the hire of an Whore to be cast into the Treasury of his Sanctuary. If then we all censure the Papists, and that deservedly, for tollera∣ting, for erecting Stewes, where their Priests, their Monkes, and Friers, who have vowed perpetuall chastity (such is their hypocriticall holinesse) may recreate themselves at pleasure without any breach of vow, their owne Bishops enioyning every of them to pay an annuall pension for their Concubines, whe∣ther they use or use them not, because they may use them if they will:Sed & recen∣tioribus tem∣poribus Sixtus Pontifex maxi∣mus Romae nobile admodū lupanar ex∣truxit. In Italia Romana scorta in singulas hebdomadas julium pendet Pontifici, qui census annuus nonnunquam viginti millia Ducatos exce∣dit, adeo{que} Ec∣clesiae procerū id munus est, ut una cum Ec∣clesiarum pro∣ventibus etiam lenociniorum numerent mercedem. Sic enim ego illos supputantes aliquando audivi. Habet inquientes, ille duo beneficia, unum curanum aureorum viginti, alterum prioratum ducatorum quadraginta, & tres putanas in Burdello, quae reddunt singulis hebdomadibus julios viginti. Iam vero nihilominus lenones sunt Episcopi illi & officiales, qui censum pro Concubinatu à Sacerdoribus quotannis ex∣torquent, id{que} tam palàm, ut apud plebem ipsam in proverbium abirer, illa orum Concubinaria exactio sive lenocinium quo dicunt: habeat vel non habeat, aureum solvet pro Concubina, & habeat si velit. Sed in regno avaritiae nihil turpitudini adscribitur quod lucrum pareat. Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum. cap. 4. Espencus in Titum. cap. 1. pag. 67.68. & De Continentia. lib. 3. cap. 4. shall we our selves erect or tollerate Play-houses, which are no other Theatrum pudoris publici lu∣panarium. Cyprian, De Spectaculis. lib. Theatrum proprie Veneris domus & sacra∣rium. Tertullian, De Spectaculis. cap. 9.10. &c. Idem vero Theatrum, idem & prosti∣bulum, eo quod post ludos exactos meretrices ibi prosternantur. Isidr Hisp. Ori∣ginum. lib. 18. cap. 42. Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. See p. 390. Theatrum publicum incontinentiae gymnasium: Babilonica fornax, &c. Chrysost. De Paenitentia Homilia. 8. Tom. 5. Col. 750. C. but a publike Stwes, a professed Bro∣thel-house, as the recited Authors, and the Fathers stile them? God forbid. Our Religion, our God enjoyne us not to doe it, in that they command us: Exod. 20.14. Math. 5.27, 28. not to com∣mit adultery: 1 Cor. 6.18. to flee fornication, and uncleanesse; yea, Ephes. 5.3, 4. not so much as once to name them (much lesse to act, to coun∣tenance, or propagate them) as becommeth Saints. Our Stage-playes therefore must certainely be sinnefull, and abominable even in this respect.
SCENA QVINTA. THe fift effect of Stage-playes, is the generall depra∣vation  of the mindes, the manners, both of their Actors and Spectators; which administreth the 31. Ar∣gument against them.Argument 31. That which ordinarily corrupts the mindes, and vitiates the manners, both of the Actors and Spe∣ctators, must doubtlesse be unlawfull, yea abomi∣nable unto Christians, if not intollerable in any Christian wel-ordered Common-weale. But Stage-playes Scilcet ex∣pectes ut ra∣dat mater ho∣ter honestos, Aut alios mo∣res quàm quos habet? Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 50. ordinarily corrupt the mindes, and vitiate the manners, both of their Actors and Spectators. Therefore, they must doubtlesse bee unlawfull, yea abominable unto Christians, intollerable in any Christian wel-ordered Common-weale. The Major is most apparantly evident: First, from the very principals of reason: Quic quid e∣nim efficit tale, est magis tale. Aristot. Poster. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 14. Keckerman. System. Logic. lib. 1. cap. 19. For what-ever vitiates another thing (especially mens mindes and manners) must needs be corrupt it selfe, the depravation of the one, Gal. 6.8. Ephes. 4.22, 29. 1 Tim. 6.5. 2 Pet. 1.4. Rev. 19.2. arising merely from the pravity of the other: If Stage-playes therefore corrupt the manners, the mindes of others, they cannot but be ill themselves. Secondly, from the grounds of Theology: which as they enjoyne men 2 Pet. 1.4. to avoyd the corruptions that are in the world through lust: 1 Thes. 5.22. to eschue all occasions of evill, Isay 52.11. . Cor. 6.14. to 18. Ephes. 4.29. cap. 5.3, 4, 11. all scurrilous idle speeches, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. Psal. 6.7. Prov. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. all wicked places, all lewde companions which may defile their soules, their manners; and Iam. 1.27. to keepe themselves
unspotted of the world: So they condemne 1 Thes. 5.22. Rev. 19.2. Mat. 6.13. c. 12.33, 35. c. 15.18, 19, 20. all occaions of evill, all dishonest contaminating pleasures of sinne which filthily disteine mens soules. Thirdly from the rudiments of civill policy. For as Plin. Pane∣gyr. Trajano dictus. Zeno∣phon. De Instit. Cyri. Hist. l. 1.2 Osorius De Regum Iustit. lib. 1. Aristot. Polit. lib. 7. Chrysost. Hō. 17. Ad Popu∣lū Antiochiae. vid. Ibidem. the happinesse, honor, life and safety of every Common-weale consists n the ingenuity, temperance, and true vertuous disposition of the peo∣ples mindes and manners; so the Nulla pestis est ajor in Civitate quam morū licentia: nulla lues te∣trior quam im∣probitas. Nam ut delicate vi∣ventium corpo∣ra laxatis & dissolutis ner∣vis languida redduntur, dis∣cordi{que} elementorum corrumpuntur; ita malis civium moribus inermes iunt Civi∣tates, eorum{que} perfidia magna vastantur imperia. Case. Polit. l. 1. p. 1. distemperature, malady, and confusion of it alwayes isse, from the exorbitant obliquity, the uncontroled dissolutenesse, and degeneracy of their vitious lives, See Osorius, De Regum Instit. l. 8. f. 254.255. which bring certaine ruine. Whence the most prudent Princes, and Republiques in all ages, have See Zenophon. De Instit. Cyri Hist. l 1.2. Plato, De Repub. Dialog 4. & Lgum Dial. 7. Aristot. Polit. l. 7. c. 15.17. & l. 8. c. 1. to 5. Plutar∣chi. Laconica Instit. & De Educat. Puerorum. Bodinus, De Repub. l. 6. c. 1. Erasmus, De Educatione Puerorum. AEneas Sylvius, De Liberorum Educatione. Maphaeus Vegius, De Educatione Puerorum. l. 1.2. constantly suppressed all such pleasures, as might either empoyson the yonger peoples man∣ners, or pervert their mindes. The Major therefore is irre∣fragable. The Minor, is an avowed truth, not onely ratified by experience, but by the concurrent testimony of sun∣dry States and Writers in all ages, both Pagan and Christian. To begin with Pagan Authors, States, and Magistrates. The unparalleld Philosopher Plato, as his De Repub. Dialog. 8. & 10. p. 696.697 Legum Dialog. 2. p. 580.581. owne Workes, with Cicero. Tuscul. Quaest. l. 2. p. 449. Plutarchi Plato &. De Audiendis Poetis. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 18. l. 8. c. 13.14,18,21. & Ludov. Vives Notae Ibidem. Franciscus Zepherus. Epist. Nuncupat. in Apologet. Tertulliani. Agrippa, De Vanit. Scient. c. 4. Caelius Rhodig. Ant. Lect. l. 7. c. 2. Rodolphus Gual∣ther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. M. Northbrooke M. Stubs, D. Reinolds, Gosson, and others in their Treatises against Stage-playes, &c. sundry others testifie, banished all Stage-players, Play-poets, and Play-poems out of his Common-weale, as being the chiefe instruments to effeminate the mindes, to vi∣tiate the manners of the people, (especially the yonger sort) and to withdraw them from the study of vertue to the love of vice. Politic. lib. 7. cap. 17. & l. 8. cap. 3.5, 6, 7. See Act. 7. Scee 6. and here page 366. Aristotle, the Oracle of all humane literature,
excludes these Stage-playes out of his Republicke; debarring youthes and children from them, as being apt to poyson both their mindes and manners, with their grosse scurrility and lasci∣vious shewes. Plutarchi So∣lon. p. 31. Diog Laertij. l. 1. So∣lon. p. 46. Solon, the wisest of the ancient Grecian Lawgivers, reiected Stage-playes; not onely as lying, but deceitfull fictions; which would quickly teach men both to cheat, to steale, to play the hypocrites and dissemblers, and to circum∣vent men in their dealings, to the publike preiudice: whence he deemed them unsufferable mischiefes in a Citty. Tuscul. Quaest lib. 4. neere the end. De Legi∣bus. l. 1. neere the end. & l. 2. neere the mid∣dest. Tully, declaimes against all pleasurable effeminate amorous Playes and Poets, as the contagions of mens mindes and manners, through their excessive delicacy: whence he adviseth the Ro∣mans to abandon them, lest they should effeminate and corrupt them as they had done the Grecians, and so subvert their Em∣pire.See Plutarch. De Gloria. A∣theniensium. lib. Thucidides Hist. l. 5. p. 477 Iustin. Hist. l. 6. Seneca informes us, Nihil verò, tam damnosum bonis moribus, quàm in aliquo spetaculo de∣sidere: Tunc enim per vo∣luptatem faci∣lius viti surre∣punt. Seneca E∣pist. 7. that there is nothing so perni∣cious to good manners, as to sit idlely at Stage-playes: for then vices easily creepe upon us through pleasure: And there∣fore Epist. 90.122, 123 Nat. Quaest. lib. 7. cap. 31.32. & Controvers. lib. 1. Proaemio. See August. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 9.13. he much bewailes the frequent concourse of the Roman Youth to Playes and Theaters, as an undoubted symptome of a degerated declining State, then neere to ruine, Plu∣tarchi Solon. Laconica Instituta. De Gloria Atheniensium. De Audiendis Poetis. lib. & Symposi. lib. 7. Quaest. 8. Plutarch, an eminent Moralit and Historian, disapproves all Stage-playes; not onely as lascivious vanities, occasioning much pro∣digall vaine expence to the Republikes dammage; but as con∣tagious evils which blast the vertues, marre the ingenuous edu∣cation, corrupt the lives and manners of all those who frequent them, and with all he reports of De Audiendis Poetis. pag. 26. Gorgias, that he reputed Tragedies and Stage-playes, meere impostures. Inter aliarum parva principia rerum, ludorum quoque prima origo ponenda visa est, ur apparere. quàm absano initio res in hanc opulentis regnis vix tolerabilem insaniā venerit, &c. Nec tamen ludorum primum initium procurandis religionibus datum aut religioe animos, aut corpora morbis levavit, &c. Iaque cum piaculorum magis conquisitio animos quàm corpora morbi afficerent, &c. Livy Hist. Rom. lib. 7. sect. 3.4. ran∣furti. 1609. pag. 255.256. Livy the gravest Roman Historian, writes of Playes: That they are scarce a tollerable folly or mdnesse in wealthy Kingdomes:
affirming withall that these Stage-playes which were brought into Rome at first with an intent to asswage the Plague, and t attone their enaged Devill gods; did farre more infect the mindes of the Romans, then the Pestiloce did their bodies. Theatra ex∣cogitata cultus Deorum, & hominum de∣lectationis cau∣sa, non sin ali∣quo pacis ru∣bore volupta∣tem & religio∣nem civili san∣guine scenico∣rum porten∣torum gratia macularunt. l. 2 cap. 4. De Spe∣ctaculis. sect. 1. Raphelengij. 1612. pag. 56. Valerius Maximus relating the manner and cause of introducing Stage-playes among the Romans, records; that they were brought in, and devised onely for the worship of their Devill-Idols and the delight of men; and that not with∣out the blush or shame of peace; the Romanes having steined both their pleasures and religion with civill blood, by meanes of scenicall Prodigies. So that he reputed the tollerating of Playes, a blemish to the Roman State, which he there concludes, to be intollerable mischiefes in a Republike, and grand empoysoners of mens manners, from the Massilienses example, which he there applaudes. Plato. Socra∣tis Apolog. p. 12 Diog. Lartij. lib. 2. Socrates. Socrates, the very wisest Graecian, by the expresse resolution of the Delphian Oracle, Plato & Dio∣gines Lart. I∣bid & AElian. Variae Hist. lib. 2. cap. 13. condemned all Comedies as pernicious, lascivious, scurrilous, and unseemely pastimes, to which he refused to resort; which caused Aristophanes, that carping Comedian, to traduce him on the Stage. Oratio Ad Nicoclem. pag. 46 47. & De Pace Oratio p. 321. Edit. 1613. Isocrates, that grave Graecia Orator, de∣claimes against all Playes and Actors as pernicious scurrilous, fabulous, ridiculous, invective, and expensive, not tollerable in a Citty. That valiant Roman Neque Hi∣strionem vllū, neque pluris pretij coquum, quàm villicum habeo, quae mihi lubet confiteri, &c. Apud Sallusti. Bellum Iugurthi∣num. pag. 158.160. Coloniae. 1615. Marius, in his Oration to the Roman Senate and people; produceth this as an argument both of his wisedome, temperance, valour and vertue, which some obiected to him as a disparagement, that he kept never a Stage-player, nor costly Cooke about him, as other voluptuous, effminate dissolute Romans did, whom he stiles, most fil∣thy men. Caius Plinius Secundus in his Idem ergo populus ille aliquando scenici imperatoris spectator & applausor, nuc in Pantomimos quoque adversatur & dam∣at efeminatas artes, & indecora seculo studia. Ibidem. pag. 38. See pag. 45. Pauegyricke to the Emperour Traian, stiles Stage-playes; effeminate arts and studies, altogther unbeseeming the world; whence he highly applaudes this Emperour for banishing them the Roman Empire, whose honor they had blemished, whose vertues they
had cankered, and in his Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 22. Epistles likewise, he declaimes against them, as intollerable mischiefes in a Common-weale, for the precedent reasons. Cornelius Tacits, an Historian of no small repute, informes us, Caeterū abo∣litos paulatim patrios mores, funditus evrti per accitā lasci∣viam, ut quod usquam cor∣rūpi & corrum∣pere queat, in urbe visatur, degeneresque studijs exter∣nis iuventus, gymnasia & o∣tia & turpes a∣mores exrcen∣do, principe & Senatu aucto∣ribus, qui non modo viijs li∣centiam permi∣serint, sed vim adhibeant, &c. Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. vid. Ibidem. that the hereditary an∣cient manners of the Romanes were y little and little corrupted and abolished, and their publike discipline subverted by Stage-playes; whence he delaimes against them as the very plagues, and verthrow of the Roman State: Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. & lib. 16. cap. 1.2. vid. Ibidem. inveighing much a∣gainst that Monster Nero, who corrupted the Roman Nation, and drew them on to all kinde of vice of luxury and lewdnesse, by these accursed Stage-playes, to the publike ruine. And not onely he, but likewise Historie. l. 5. Edit. Basillae. 1557. p. 444. Polibius, Rom. Hist. l. 57. p. 798. & l. 59. p. 827.828. Dion Cassius, Historiae. l. 6. p. 79. Iustin, Suet. No. sect. 11.12, 21, 22, 26. Tiberius. sect. 47. Caligula. sect. 18.21, 54, 55. Cludu. sect. 6.7, 2134. Suetonius, De Gloria Atheniensum. lib. Plutarch, Histo∣riae. l 1. Herodian, Ejusdem. Verus p 67.68, 69. & Maximinus & Balbinus. p. 301. Iulius Capitolinus, Ejusdem. Gallieni duo p. 305.306, 309, 310, 314 315, 319. Trebellius Pollio, Ejus Carinus. p. 447.449, 450. Flavius Vopiscus, and Iuvenal. Styr. 8. Iuvenal. (to passe by Rerum Rom. l. 9 & 10. Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Hliogabalus, &c. Etropius, Histor. l. 7. c. 7.16. & 37. Orosius, Annal. Tom. 2. in the lives of Nero, Caligula, and these other Emperors. Zonaras, Imperll History, in the lives of these Emperors. Grimston, Chro∣nogr. in these Emperors lives. Op∣meerus, with other Christian Historians) condemne and censure,Sudae Historic. Cligula & Ardaburius. Ioannis Sariberienis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. See I.G. his refutation of the Apolo∣gie for Actors. p 12.13. Nero, Claudius, Tiberius, Commodus, Helio∣gabalus, Verus, Balbinus, Maximinus, Gallienus, Solo∣nius, Carinus, Carinus homo omnium contaminatissimus, adulter, si∣quens corruptor inventutis, enormibus se vitijs & ingenti faeditate maculait. Amicos optimos quos{que} religavit: pessimum quem{que} elegit aut tenuit. Mimis, meretricibus, pantomimis, cantoribus at{que} lenonibus, palatium implevit, &c. Flav Vopisci Carinus. pag. 446.447. and other dissolute Roman Emperours; for act∣ing, countenancing and frequenting Playes; and harbouring Stage-players, (with whom they sometimes fraught their Courts) which did not only exhaust their treasures, and impoverish their subiects, but even corrupt their discipline, and strangely vitiate and deprave not onely their owne, but the very peoples mindes and manners, by drawing them on to all licentious dissolutenesse,
and excess of vice, to the very utter subversion of their States, See August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 33. & lib. 2. cap. 2. as these Authors ioyntly testifie, whose walls could not se∣cure them when as their vertues, their manners were gone quite to ruine. See Serm. l. 1. Satyr. 10. p. 192 193, 195. Epist. l. 1. Epist 6 p. 246. Epist. 19 p. 274. Epist. l. 2 Ep. 1. p. 278. to 285. De Arte Poetic. lib. pag. 298. 299, 302. to 306. Horace and Iuvenal. in their severall Sa∣tyricall Poems, together with Gellius Noctium Aticarū. lib. 20. cap. 4. inveigh against these Stage-playes, Players, and Stage-houses, as the occaions of much villany and lewdnesse; the corrupters of youth; especially of the female sex, who were made Strumpets by them; and as the shames, the blemishes of the Citties where they were permitted. The wanton Poet Ovid; who was farre enough, I am sure, from all Puritanicall precisenesse, as men now stile it, is even a rancke Puritan in this case of Stage-playes, For after he had informed his bawdy leacherous com∣panions;Cuneis an habent specta∣cula totis Quod securus ames, quod{que} inde excerpere pos∣sis? Iuvenal. Sa∣tyr. 6. p. 43.44. See p. 45.53, 54 55, 56, 58. Po∣puli frons. du∣rior hujus, Qui sedet & spectat triscurria Pa∣triciorum. Res haud mira ta∣men citharaedo principe mi∣mus Nobilis: haec ultra quid crit nisi ludu; & illic dedecus urbis habes, &c. Ibidem. Satyr. 8. pag. 82. See Sa∣tyr. 10. p. 94 99 Satyr. 11. p. 106. 110, 111. Satyr. 14. p. 193. Edit. Londini. 1615. that Playes and Play-houses were the best places of Mart of unchaste bargaines; the most commodious haunts for amorous Lovers, and Whore-masters; the most dangerous snares to entrap all beautifull persons, and the onely places for Panders, Whore-masters, Whores and such like beastly Men∣monsters to catch their desired prey; in these lascivious disikes; which notably discry the intollerable mischiefes both of Playes and Theaters: Ovid, De Arte Amandi. lib. 1. pag. 160.161. Edit. Operum ius in 16. Raphelengij. 1611. pars 3. Sed tu praecipu curvis venare Theatris. Haec loca sunt votis fertiliora tuis. Illic iuvenies quod ames, quod ludere possis; Quod{que} semel tangas, quod{que} tenere velis. Vt redit it{que} frequens longum formica per agmen Granifero solitum dum vehit ore cibum, &c. Sic ruit ad celebres cultissima faemina ludos: Copia iudicium saepe morata meum est. Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae: Ille locus casti damna pudoris habet. Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule ludos. Cum iuvit viduos rapta Sabina viros, &c. In gradibus sedit populus de cespite factis.
Qualibet hirsutas fronde tegente comas. Respiciunt oculis{que} notant sibi quis{que} puellam, Quam velit: & tacito pectore multa movent Dum{que} rudem praebente modum tibicine Thusco, Lydius aequat am ter pede pulsat humum, &c. Protenus exiliunt, animum clamore fatentes, Virginibus cupidas inijciunt{que} manus, &c. Romule militibu scisti dare commoda solis, Haec mihi si dederi commoda, miles er. Scilicet ex illo solemnia more Theatra, Nunc quo{que} formosis insidiosa manent. When he had thus, I say, discovered the lewdnesse of these Stage-playes, though to a lewde intent, and with∣all informed Lovers, that it was impossible for Parents, for Husbands, with all their care and industry to keepe their Wives or Children chaste, as long as there are so many Play-houses suffered in the Citty, in these foure verses: De Arte A∣mandi lib. 3. pag. 208. Quid faciet ustos? cum sint tot in urbe Theatra: Cum spectet iunctos illa libenter equos: Cum sedeat Phariae sacris operata iuvencae: Quo{que} sui comites ire vetantur eat. (A good caveat for Husbands, for Parents, to keepe their Wives, their Daughters from all Playes and Play-houses) In his Booke De Remedio Amoris: he adviseth all those who would live chastly, and keepe under their unchaste desires; to withdraw themselves from Stage-playes: to cast away all Play-bookes, Playes, and amo∣rous Poems, especially Tibullus, and his owne wanton Verses; in these ensuing lines. De Remedio Amoris. lib. 2. pag. 230. At tanti tibi sit non indulgere Theatris, Dum bene de vacuo pectore cedat amor: Enervant animos cytharae, cantus{que} lyrae{que}: Et vox & numeris brachia mta suis, Illic assidue ficti saltanur amantes. Quid caveas, actor, quid iuvet arte docet. Eloquar invitus: teneros ne tange Poëtas:
Summoneo dotes impias esse mea. Callimachum fugito; non est inimisus amori: Et cum Callimacho tu quoabque; e noces. Carmina quis potnit tutò legisse Tibulli? Vel tua cuius opus Cynthea sola fuit? Quis potuit lecto urus discedere Gallo? Et mea nescio quid carmina tale sonant, &c. And to shew his utter detestation of Playes and Play-houses, Quid fi scrip∣sissem mimos obscena iocan∣tes? Qui sem∣per iuncti cri∣men amoris habent. In qui∣bus assiduè cul∣tus procedit a∣dulter, Verba{que} dat stulto calli∣da nupta viro. Nec satis ince∣stis temerari vocibus aures. Assuescunt o∣culi multa pu∣dena pati. Cum{que} fefellit amans aliqua novitate mari∣tum, Plauditur & magno pal∣ma favore da∣tur. Haec tu spctasti, spe∣ctanda{que} saepe dedisti; Scenica vidisti laetus a∣dulteria. Tristi∣um. l. 2. p. 160. whose amorous lewdnesse he at large disciphers: he informes Augustus, that they are the Seminaries of all wickednesse: the frequent occasions of much sinne, much lewd∣nesse and adultery unto very many; the places of many adulte∣rous meetings, and whorish contracts: whereupon he perswades Augustus, utterly to demolish all Play-houses and Theaters; to danme up all the portls and passages to them; and to sup∣presse all Stage-playes; that so these their pernicious frits might be prevented. All which hee thus elegantly ex∣presseth. Tristium. l. 2. pag. 155.Vt tamen ho fateor: ludi quo{que} semina praebent Neqitiae; tolli tota Theatra iube Peccandi causam quàm multis saepè dederun: Matia cum durum sternit arena solum? Tollaur Circu, no tuta licentia Circi est: Hîc sedet ignoto iunct puella viro. Cum quaedam spatintur in hac ut amator eodem Conveniat: quare porticus ulla patet? Omnia perversas pssunt corrumpere mentes. What could any Puritan (as our prophane Play-haun∣ters stile them) have said mre against Playes then this? and what can any Christian speake lese against hem, when as a prophane lascivious Heathen Poet hath writ∣ten so much? If therefore we are loath to passe a cens∣ure upon Stage-playes, or to abandon Play-houses for feare we should be as good a Puritans; yt lt us now at ast renounce them, out of hame, lest we prove farre worse then Pagans, lest Horace, lest Iuvenal, and these
fore-named Heathen Authors: lest wanton Ovid: or obscene Porpertius (who thus cryes out of Theaters: Elegiarum. l. 2. Eleg. 22. Ra∣phelengij. 1613. p. 148. O nimis exito nata Theatra meo!) should bee more gracious, holy and precise then wee; whose holinesse Mat. 5.20. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. should exceed even that of Scribes and Pha∣resies, Ephes. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17. to 32. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. much more then this of wanton Pagan Poets, See before, p. 97.98. Ge∣rardi Vossij Disputat. 35. De Virtutibus Gentilium. Dr. Prideaux Le∣ctura. 8. De Sa∣lute Ethnico∣rum. & Beda. See BB. Vshers Gorteschalci Historia. p. 4. Marke 16.16. Iohn 3.18, 36. Rom. 14.23. Rev. 20.6, 15. c. 21.27. cap. 22.14, 15. which carried them no farther then to Hell; what ever some old, some new Pelagians have dreamed to the contrary. To passe from Pagan Authors, to Heathen Magistrates, States and Emperors. The Plutarchi La∣conica Institu∣ta. Platonis Laches. p. 390. Dionysius Hallicarnas. Antiq. Rom. l. 7. c. 9. p. 709. ancient Lacedemonians, ex∣cluded all Stage-playes out of Sparta, permitting neither Comi∣dies nor Tragedies to be acted in it, lest their youth should be corrupted, their Lawes derided and brought into contempt. And when as an Embassadr of Rhodes demanded o a Lace∣demonian, what was the occasion of their lawes against Players and Iesters, since they shewed pleasure to the people, and the peo∣ple lost nothing by it, but laughed at their folly. Plutarchi A∣pothegmata. Dial of Princes. l.3 c. 44. & I. G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. p. 30. The Lace∣demonian replied, that Lycurgus saw, herd or read of some great damage that Plaers and Iesters might do in the Common-weale, since he had established so strait a Law against them. But this I know, that we Greekes are btter weeping with our Sages, then the Romans laughing at their Fooles. The Athenians, though Platonis Laches. p 390. AEmilij Probi Praefatio. August. De Civit. Di. l. 2. c. 10.11, 12, 13, 14. & l. 4. c. 28. they much hnoured Actors, Players, and Play-poets at the first; yet growing wiser by deare-bought experience at the last, Plutarch De Gloria Atheniensium. lib. Thucidides Histor. l. 5. p. 477. Iustin. Histor. l. 6. p 69. when hey had effeminated their mindes, exhausted their treasure, the sinnes of their Wars, and brought upon them sundry mischiefes; they abandoned all comicall Stage-playes as pernicious evils, Plutarch De Gloria Atheniensium. lib. Volte∣ranus. Commn. l 29. pag. 323. enacting this pub∣like law against them, that no man should from thence forth presume to pen or act  Comedy; and Chrysostom. Hom. 13 in 1 Cor. . Tom. 4. Col. 356. making common Actors thence-forth infamous. The very Heathens Valerius Maximus. l. 2 c. 4. sect. 7. Alexander ab Alexand. Genalium Dierum l. 6. c. 20. Agrippa, De Vani. Scient. c. 20. Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. Thomas Guale∣sius. Lect. 77. in Proverb. Salomonis. Massilienses,
were so Puritanically rigid in this case, that they would upon no tearmes, no intreaties whatsoever, permit any Stage-playes to be acted within their Citty or Territories; for this very reason; lest the beholding of them should corrupt the mindes and man∣ners of their Youth; and draw them on to commit those vices in earnest, which were acted before them but in iest. The ancient Pagan Romans, as they reputed all common Actors infamous (as the Livy, Rom. Hist. l. 7. sect. 2.3. Valerius Maximus. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4. AE∣milij Probi Praefatio. Pla∣to Legum Dia∣log. 7. Cicero Oratio pro Publio Quin∣ctio. Gellius Noctium Attic. l. 20. c. 4. Ma∣crobius Satur∣nal. l. 2 c. 7. Ta∣citus Annal. l. 14. cap. 2.3. Au∣gust. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 10. to 1529. & l. 4. c. 28. with sun∣dry others fore-quoted. p. 133.134. Summa Angelica. Tit. Infamia. Photij Nomocanonis. Tit. 13. c. 21.22. Theod. Bal∣somon. Comment. Ibid. Gratian. Distinctio. 33.48, 86. & Causa. 4. Quaest. 6. Tostatus. Tom. 3. in Matth. 6. Quaest. 38. & 67. fol. 40. E. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi. pars . c. 5.4. Alvarus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae. l. 1. Artic. 49. A. & l. 2. Artic. 28. Dige∣storum. l. 3. Tit. 2. De his qui notantur infamia. Corpus Iuris Civilis. Tom. 1. p. 342. & Budaeus & Gothofredus Ibidem. See p. 133. before & Buengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 51. De Infamia Theatri. Civilians and our owne 14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4. Statutes now esteeme them,) disfranchising them their tribe as unworthy persons; and disabling them to inherite lands, to give any publike testi∣mony betweene man and man, or to beare any honor, office or dignity in the Common-weale, (Quanta confessio est ma∣lae rei cujus auctores cum acceptissimi sint sine nota non sunt? Tertul. De Spectac. c. 22. a very great evidence and acknowledgement of the evilnesse of Stage-playes, as Tertullian and others descant on it; since Players were thus branded with the note of infamy, even then when Playes themselves were in their first and best request;) even so Priscae Romanorum leges Theatrae stuprandis moribus orientia statim destruebant. Tertul. Apologia Advers. Gentes. cap. 6. Tom. 2. pag. 589. upon which Franciscus Zephy∣rus thus paraphraseth. Prisci Romani lasciviam Theatralem ex lege maxima cura comprimebant, gnari quantùm moribus civium obesset publica illa spectaculorum immodesta licentia. Ibidem. pag. 591. Guevara, his Dial of Princes. lib. 3. cap. 44. Au∣gustinus De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31.32, 33. & lib. 2. cap. 12.13. & Suetonij Octa∣vius. sect. 5. they demolished all their Theaters, together with the Galleries built about them by a publike edict, lest the mindes and mannrs of the people should be effeminated and defloured by them, to the publike preiudice. Ioannes Antonius Campanus, De Gerendo Magistratu. lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 15. pag. 819. Ioan. Srisberiensis, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. Ibidem. pag. 345. & Plutarchi Themistocles. Themistocles the famous Athenian Generall, enacted a Law, that no Magistrates should resort to Stage-playes, let the Common-wealth it selfe should seeme to loyter and play in
them, (Et utinam audiretur à nostris (writes De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 4. p. 345. G. Iohn Saris∣bury) ut saltem in provectiori aetate nugis suis republicae seria anteferrent:) and even before this law of his, it was an ancient custome in Athens, which was long observed, that not the leas admittance into the Theater should be given unto any but such who should sing and utter honest things; lest the Magistrates and people there present should be made spectators of dishonest asties, which might draw them on to vice. Not to speake of the Gothes and other Chyrsostom. Homil. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 299.300. Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei lib. 6. pag. 195. Barbarians, who censured and condemned Stage-playes as effeminate and ridiculous superfluities. Antiqu. Ger∣maniae. l. 1. c. 20 Lugduni Bat. 1616. pag. 181.182. Philippus Glverius informes us out of Tacitus, (who writes thus of the German women. De Moribus Germanorum. sect. 6.7. See 8. Ergo sepâ pudicitiâ agunt, nullis spectaculorum illecebris, cor∣rupta:) that the ancient Pagan Germanes knowing with what things the chastity of women was most corrupted among other Nations, did wholy abandon Stage-playes, with which they were unacquainted: of the corruption of which spectacles Seneca hath spoken most truely, That there is nothing so pre∣iudiciall to good manners as to sit idly at a Play for then vi∣ce creepe more easily upon us through pleasure. O vocem fatidicam at{que} Divinam, tan∣toque sapienī ad doctore dig∣nissimam. Ho ille homo Gen∣tilis divinoum praeceptorum quae per Moy∣sen olim alios∣que Propheras Deus aeternus populo suo tra∣didit, planè iu∣dis. Nos igitur nunc, qui Christianae disciplinae militiae que dedimus nomina, quâ fronte ludorum spectacu∣la, non solum excusamus, sed laudamus etiam atque ultrò instituimus, quae san eò inus erant toleranda quo magis veteris illius gentilisque modestiae modum exce∣dunt, &c. Ibidem. O Pro∣pheticall and Divine speech most worthy so great a Teacher of Wisedome! This verily writes this Heathen man, who was al∣ogether ignorant of those divine Precepts which God by Moses and other Prophets hath delivered to his people. We therefore who have now given up our names to Christs discipline and warfare, with what face doe we now not onely excuse our Stage-playes, but likeise applaude, and voluntarily institte them? which verily are so much the lesse to be tollerated, by how much the more they exceed the measure of that old Heathenish mo∣desty. For now vices doe not onely steale upon us through the pleasure of beholding: but they are as it were by force thrust into sincere and pur mindes, by examples, by voyce, by hand and action: so that I verily believe, there were never any
inventors and Actors of Playes more corruptly licentious then ours now. But these things are rather forraigne, then our owne, for even now the Germanes wives are lesse solicited with Stage-playes then the wives of other Nations. The an∣cient and moderne Germanes then, by this Authors te∣stimony, abandoned Stage-playes, as the very Seminaries of lewdnesse, the occasion of adultery, and the grand empoysoners, especially of all womens manners; which I would wish all husbands to observe. Scipio Nasica, that unparalleld Roman Generall, as Livy, Rom. Hist. Epit. l. 48. Augustin. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32, 33. & l. 2. c. 12.13, 27. Cicero De Re∣pub. l 4. Valeri∣us Maximus. l. 2. c. 4. Velleius Paterculus. Hist. l. 1. p. 16. Appianus. Hist. lib. 1. Eutropius Rerum Roma∣norum. Hist. l. 4. fol. 43. Poly∣chronicon. l. 3. c. 34. fol. 131. Genebrandi Chronicon. l. 2. p 302. Bulen∣gerus De The∣atro. l. 1. c. 13. M. Stubs, his Anatomy of A∣buss. p. 103. Tertullian, De Spectaculis. cap. 10. & Apologia Advers. Gentes. cap. 6. cum multis alijs, who write against Stage-playes. sundry Authors testifie, did by a publike decree of the whole Senate demolish the Roman Theaters, and interdict their Stage-playes, as the very bane and ruine of the Romans manners, vertues, valour, and the like: as the Seminaries of all lewdnesse, effeminacy, idlenesse, vice and wickednesse; and the very overtures of the Common∣weale: whose welfare was altogether inconsistent with lascivi∣ous Playes. Which worthy act of his, is much appla∣ded by Livy, Tully, S. Augustine, and others here quoted in the margent. Pliny, Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 22. vid. Argumentum Epistolae praefixum. Trebonius Rufinus, banished all Iusts and Stage-playes out of Vienna, over which he was Governour, as infectious to their manners: for which when as he was accu∣sed before the Romane Senate by some dissolute Male-contents, because he did it of his owne head, without any direction from the Senate; Iunius Mauricus, a grave Roman Senator tke part with him, and iustified this act of his, which he not onely much applauded, but wished openly withall, that Placuit agona tolli qui mores Viennensium infecerat, ut noster hic omnium. Nam Viennenum vitia inter ipsos residunt, nostra late va∣gantur. Vtque in corporibus sic in imperio, gravissimus est morbus qui à capite diffunditur. Ibidem. all Stage-playes were likewise expelled out of Rome, as well as out of Vienna; For the vices of the Viennians (saith he) reside one∣ly among themselves, but the Romanes wander farre abroad; and as in bodies, so in Empires, that disease is most grievous which is diffsed from the head to the inferior members.
Marcus Au∣telius. cap. 14. & Guevara. l. 3 cap. 44. Octavius the Nephew of Iulius Caesar, as Marcus Aure∣lius informes us, drove away all Stage-players and Iesters out of Rome, as insufferable mischiefes in the State. I read in∣deed in Suetonij O∣ctaviu. sect. 43.44, 45. Suetonius, and Rom. Hist. l. 51. pag. 606.607. & Grim∣ton. pag. 37. Dion Cassius, that Octavius (whom we usually call Augutus Caesar) was at first very much delighted with Stage-playes, (the meanes perchāce of ma∣king him an Suetonij O∣ctavius. sect. 69. See Scene 3. & 4. before. adulterer) in the beholding of which he spent much time, and now and then whole dayes together. I reade like∣wise, Coercionem in Histriones. Magistratibus in omni tem∣pore & loco le∣ge vetere per∣missam, ade∣mit, praeter∣quam ludos & scenam. Suctonij Octavius. sect. 45. that he tooke away the power of punishing and suppres∣sing Stage-players permitted to the Roman Magistrates at all times and places by the ancient law, (an infallible evidence that the ancient Roman lawes condemned Stage-playes and Actors;) yet so, as that he reserved the power of punishing Players, and reforming Stage-playes to himselfe; by vertue of which power; he first of all Dion Cassi∣us. Rom. Hist. lib. 54. p. 682 See Act 7. Scene 6. inhibited all Roman Knights, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen from acting or dancing on the Stage, prohibited likewise by a former law: Secondly, he commanded one Stephanio, (some call him Epiphanius,) an excellent Player and Iester (who upon a Holy∣day to shew this Emperour some pleasure, and hoping to receive a good reward, went thrice unto his Palace: one time in the at∣tire of a Page, and another time in the habite of a Romane Matron, and so truely counterfeited every thing, that it seemed not to be him, but the selfesame person he represented;) t be whipped publikly three severall times one after another about the Theater, and then to be banished for this fact of his. And when he complained that the Emperour commanded Vaga∣bonds to be whipped but once, and he thrice:Suetonij O∣ctavius sect. 4 Guevara, his Dial of Prin∣ces. lib. 3. cap. 44. pag. 512. I.G. his Reu∣tation of the Apologie or Actors. p. 36.3 Augustus replyed: Once they shall whip thee for the iniury thou diddest to the Ro∣man Matron whom thou representedst: The scond time they shall whip thee for the presumption thou hadst, to act it in my presence. The third, for the time thou hast made divers lose for beholding and hearing thee. For Isters and Players de∣serve not so much punishment for their Iests and Playes, as for the time which they lose, and cause others to lose. Thirdly, Suetonij O∣ctavius. sct. . he commanded Hylas an eminent Stage-player, upon a com∣plaint of the Pretr against him, to be publikely whipped in the
Court of his Palace. Fourthly, , Ibid. Guevra, his Dial of Princes. lib. 3. c. 44. pag. 512. I.G. his Refu∣tation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 36.37. he banished Pilades (some write him Pilas) another Actor out of Rome and Italy, after he had tasted of the Whipping-post, for pointing at a Spe∣ctator with his finger, who had hissed at him; and so had made him notorious. Which Pilas, being very popular, and making many friends to Augustus, that he might not be exiled, Augustus notwithstanding gave sentence of banishment a∣gainst him, saying: That Rome hath beene mighty and puis∣sant enough to make her enemies stoope, and now she is not able to banish Iesters and Fooles; and that which is worst of all, they have presumption to vex us, and we have not courage to reprve them. Lastly, he Marcus Au∣relius. cap. 14. Guevara, Dil of Princes. l. 3. cap. 44. p. 512. Suetonius. sect. 45. banished all the Players and Iesters out of Rome for those intolerable mischiefes they did occasion. And when as the people earnestly besought him to recall Pilas from his exile: Dial of Prin∣ces. Ibid. See Dion. Cassius. Rom. Hist. l. 54 pag. 696. & Xiphilinus, in Vita Augusti. he condiscended to their request with much adoe, upon this condition; that they should give a Master and Tutor to Pilas, that should chastise and correct him as a Foole: saying, That since Sages take Fooles to be their Masters, that Fooles also should have Sages or their Masters. All which is a sufficient evidence, that Augustus deemed Playes and Players, whom hee thus whipped and exiled, intolerable mischiefes in a State. Tacitus An∣nal. l. 1. c. 14. & lib. 4. c. 3. Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. l. 57. pag. 798. Marcus Aurelius. c. 14. Pliny Panegyr. Trajano dictus p. 38. Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 3 c. 9. Genebrar∣di Chronicon. pag 212. Tiberius, none of the best Emperours, though he much delighted in Playes at first; yet at last by reason of those grea mischiefes, outrages, misdemeanors, tumuts, quarrels, mur∣thers, seditions, that Playes and Players did occasion, after many ioynt complaints preferred against them both by the Se∣nate and the Common-people; he was enforced to condemne all Players to the Whipping-post, (a punishment sutable to such unruly Rogues) and then, to banish them and their Stage-playes out of Italy, as insufferable evils in a Kingdome. Nero that vitious Roman Emperour, Suetonij Nero. sect. 23.24, 25. Eutropius Rerum. Rom. lib. 9. Nero. Grimstons Nero. and others. who was so much besotted with Stage-playes, as sometimes to play the Actor, to his eternall infamy: Suetonij Nero. sect. 16. Marcus Aurelius. c. 14. Plinius Secundus Panegyr. Trajno dictus. pag. 38. Alexander ab Alexandro. lib. 3. cap. 9. was at last enforced to expell all Stage-players
out of Rome and Italy together with their Theatricall Enterludes, for those many unsufferable villanies and uprores that they did produce. Alexand. ab Alexandro. lib. 3. cap. 9. Domitian also did the like upon the same occasion. Yea Iulian himselfe, that Atheisticall Antichristian Apostate, as impious as he was, had thus much goodnesse in him, as to prohibite Stage-playes: and Sozomen, Eccles. Hitor. l. 5. c. 17. Nice∣phorus Cali∣stus. Eccles. Hi∣storiae. l. 10. cap. 22. p. 581. Eu∣tropus Rerum Romanorum. Hist. l. 11. Iuli∣ans Apostaa. p. 150. Centu∣riae Magd. Tō. 4. Col. 458. Baronius & Spondanus. Annal. Eccles. Anno 362. ect. 60. therefore in an Epistle to Arsatius, the Pagan High priest of Galatia, he commands him to exhort all the Idol-priests un∣der his Iurisdiction, that they should not be seene in Play-houses, nor resort to Teaters; endeavouring to draw the Pagans to imitate the very discipline and manners of the Christians; See Act 7. Scene 2.3, 4. & Act 4. Scene 2. Iustinian. Co∣dicis. l. 1. Tit. 3 De Episcopis & Clericis. Lex. 17.18. Corpus Iuis Civilis. Tom. 4. Col. 77. & Tit. 4. De E∣piscopali Au∣dientia. Lex. 40.41. Ibi∣dem. Col. 156.157. who inhibited both Ministers and people to resort to Playes; though now both Ministers and people flocke unto them, as if they were worse then Pagans. And if these very worst and dissolutest Heathen Roman Emperours exiled Playes and Players, as intolerable mischiefes and corruptions, what thinke yee did their better Pagan Successors doe? You shall heare a true relation what they did. The Roman Princes that were good (as Dial of Princes. lib. 3. cap 43. to 48. & I. G. Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 36, 37. Gue∣vara, and others witnesse;) did alwayes cast out Playes and Stage-players, and those onely that were evill called them in. So that one of the tokens to know a vertuous or vitious Prince in Rome, write Guvara and I. G. (how much more then to know a religious vertuous Christian Prince and Magistrate?) was to see, whether he maintained Play∣ers, Iesters, and Iuglers among the people, yea or no; which did so effeminate, vitiate and deboist both Ma∣gistrates, Prince and people too, as to precipitate them into all kindes of lewdnesse, sinne and wickednesse, and to prepare them both for invasions and destruction, as Ammianus Marcellinus. lib. 28. c. 9.10. Augustin. De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. c. 31.32, 33. lib. 2. c. 3. to 17. Gue∣vera, Dial of Princes. lib. 3. c. 43.44, 45, 46, 47. & Ca∣rolus Sigonius, De Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. pag. 32. most plentifully testifie. Hence that worthy Emperour
Plinius Se∣cundus Pane∣gyr. Trajano dictus. p. 38.45. Mrcus Aure∣lius. c. 14. Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 3. c. 9. Traian, though a Pagan, (who Dio in Vita Trajani. Gue∣vara. l. 3. c. 44. p. 552. I.G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 45. when he was intreated by his Courtiers to heare an active Player, made this most worthy reply, worthy all Christian Princes imitation: It is not for the Maiesty of a grave and vertuous Prince that in his presence any such vaine thing should be shewed; for in such a case himselfe should be no lesse noted of lightnesse, then the other of folly; and that before Princes no man should be so hardy as to utter dishonest words, or to act any light representations, and that those who move Princes to behold such. Enterludes deserve as great a punishment as those that act them, since none ought to present before Princes things that may move them to vice, but such things as might move them to amendment:) partly out of his owne voluntary disposition, and partly upon the peoples owne request, abandoned all Stage-playes out of Rome, as effe∣minate arts, and unbeseeming exercises, which did much disho∣nour and corrupt the Romane State: which memorable act of his is thus emblazoned by C. Plinius Secundus, being then the Roman Consul, in his elegant Panegyricall Oration to him in the Senate House, in the name of al the Senators. Ibid. pag. 38. Edit. Coloniae All obr. 1610. Perge modo Caesar, & vim effectum{que} censurae tuum propositum, tui actus obtinebnt, &c. Et quis terror va∣luisset efficere quod reverentia tua effecit? Obtinuit aliquis ut spectaculum Pantomimorum populi Romani tolli pateretur; sed non obtinuit ut vellet: rogatus es tu quod rogebat alius, caepit{que} esse beneficium quod necessitas suerat. Ne{que} enim à te minore concentu ut tolleres Pantomimos, quàm à patre tuo, ut resti∣tueret, exactum est. Vtrum{que} rectè: nàm & restitui oportebat, quod sustulerat malus princeps, & tolli restitutos. In his enim qu à malis benefiunt, hic tenendus est modus, ut apareat, au∣torem displicuisse, non factum. Idem ergo populus ille aliquan∣do He meanes Nero. See p. 44.45. Qui ad po∣stremum tanto se dedecore prostituit, ut omnia paene Italiae ac Gre∣ciae Theatra perlustrans as∣sumpto etiam varij vestius dedecore, cantaret, saltaret in scena citharae dico habitu vel tragae dico. Eutropius. Rerū Rom. l. 9. p. 104. Or if not him, Caligula, of whom Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. l. 59. p. 829. writes thus. Caius ab aurigis gladiatoribus{que} regebatur; servus histrionū & scenicorū hominū, &c. Principio ipse Spectatorem tantū se ac auditorem tantū praebuit: proce∣dente tempore multos imitatus est varijs in rebus, cum multis certavit: nam & auri∣gavit, & pugnavit & saltavit, & Tragaediā egit, semper haec tractans. Semel noctu pri∣moribus patrū quasi ad necessariam deliberationem vocatis, coràm faltavit, &c. scenici Imperatoris Spectator & applauser, nunc in Pan∣tomimis
quo{que} adversatur, & damnat effaeminata artes, & indecora seculo studia. Ex quo manifestum est, principum disci∣plinam capere etiam vlgus; quum rem, si ab uno fiat, severissi∣mam fecerint omnes. Macte hac gravitatis gloria Caesar, qua consecutus e, ut quod antea vis & Imperium, nunc mores vo∣carentur. Castigaverunt vitia sua ipsi qui castigari mereban∣tur, ijdem{que} emendatores qui emendandi fuerunt. And a little after. Pe 45. Et quis iàm locus miserae adulationis manebat (spea∣king of Nero his times) quùm laudes Imperatorum ludis etiam & commessationibus celebrarentur saltarentur{que}, at{que} in omne ludibrium effaeminatis vocibus, modis, gestibus frange∣rentur? Sed illud indignum, quod odem tempore in senatu & in scena ab histrione & à Consule ladabantur: Nota. tu procul à tui cultu ludicras artes removisti. Seria ergo te carmina ho∣nor{que} aetern annalium, non haec brevis & pudenda praedicatio colit: quinetiam tanto maiore consensu in venerationem tui He meanes such Theaters where Orati∣ons were made, and the Sena∣tors and people met in Coun∣cell, not such where Playes were acted. See Bulengerus, De Theatro, lib. 1. cap. 32. & here, Act 8. Scene 1. Theatr ipsa consurgent, quanto magis de te scenae silebunt. A pregnant evidence how much this Emperour and the whole Roman Senate distasted Playes and Actors, as the very bane and ruine of the Common-weale. These Stage-playes creeping into Rome againe after this good Emperours decease, in the raigne of Antoninus Pius, qui amavit hisrionum artes, as In his Anto∣ninus Pius. pag. 37.38. Iulius Capitolinus writes; Iulij Capito∣lini. M. Anton. Philosophus. pag. 57.59. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, who succeeded him; that he might reduce the people to Philosophie and civi∣lity, tooke away the Gladiators and Players with him into the Warres, inhibiting all publike Playes and meetings under a severe edict both at Rome and Antioch: Which Edict of his taking no such good successe as he expected: hee Marcus Au∣relius. cap. 14. & Epistle 12. to Lambert. Guevara, his Dial of Princes, lib. 3. cap. 44 45, 46, 47. thereupon banished all Stage-players, Tumblers and Iesters out of Italy, and sent three Ships lading of them to Lambert Governour of Hellespont; commanding him in his Letter directed to him, to keepe these lasie Loyterers hard at worke, that they might no longer minde or practise their foolish Sports: certifying him withall in this his Letter; that the cause he had banished these Trewants and loytering Players from Rome,
was not for the blood they had shed (for they had Marcus Au∣relius. cap. 14. occasioned divers tumults in which many were slaine;) but for the hearts they had perverted: not for the occasion of any who were dead, but because they were Masters of ollies to the living. For without comparision (writes he to Lambert) it is a Artificum enim scenicorū amorem{que} in∣honestum & probrosum esse Taurus Philo∣sophus docet. A. Gellius Nocti∣um. Attic. l. 20. c. 4. vid. Ibid. greater offence to the gods, and more damage to the Common-weale for these Trewants to take away the wits from the wise folke, then for Murtherers to take away mens lives. Yea there is nothing that our Fore-fathers did, which displeaseth me so much as the sufferance of these nthrifty Trewants. In the yeere 264. of the foundation of Rome, in a time of an horrible pesti∣lence in Italy, to reioyce the people was first found out the inven∣tion of Theaters by the advice of these Trewants. It is a shamefull thing to heare, that the pestilence dured but two yeeres, and the rage and folly of these nthrifts dureth foure hundred yeeres. Would to the immortall gods that the plague had ended these few which remaine, before this cursed generation had brought such abominable customes into Rome; for much bet∣ter had it bene for our Mother Rome that she had wanted Inha∣bitants, then such Rascals should have come and dwelt therein. These Master-fooles have beene so wily to teach folly, and the Romane youth so apt to learne, Loe here the spreding lepro∣sie of contami∣nating Stage-playes. that though they be put in Barkes, their disciples would lade 3000. Carrackts. Rome was never overcome by those who were valiant and vertuous, yet that day we saw it overgone & troden under foo by those ooles: the walls of Rome, that were never touched by the Paenians had that day their lowpes full of armed Trewants. Rome that triumphed over all Realmes, was triumphed upon that day with Players and Iuglers. I am so abashed in this case, that I know not what to say or write. Yet one thing comforteth me, that sithe Rome and Romanes uniustly doe reioyce with these fooles, he and the famous Wisemen iustly shall be chastised for their fooles. And in this the gods shall not be dispeased; that sithe Rome laughed at these Trewands and mockeries, one day she shall weepe with these Tumblers and Iuglers, &c. Thus farre this Heathen Emperour, who bot by his deeds and words, exterminated Playes and Players out of the
Roman Territories, as the greatest contagions and cor∣ruptions of his Empire. Quippe erant qui Gn. quo{que} Pompeum in∣cusatū à senio∣ribus ferunt, quod mansur Theatri sedem posuisset. Nam antea subita∣rijs gradibus & scenâ in tem∣pus structâ, lu∣dos edi solitos vel si veusti∣ora repetas, stantem popu∣lū spectavisse si consideret Theatro dies totos ignaviâ cōtinuaret, &c. Caeterum abo∣litos paulatim patrios mores, funditus evert per accitam las∣civiam, &c. An∣nalium. l. 14. c. 3. vid. Ibidem. See The Dial of Princes. lib. 3. c. 43.4, 47. Cornelius Tacius records: That when as Pompie erected his standing Theater at Rome, he was accused and blamed for it by the Senators; because it would be a meanes to make the people sit whl dayes together idle in the Theater beholding Playes; and utterly overthrow their hereditary manners and discipline by new acquired lasci∣viousnesse So that the whole Romane Senate then repu∣ted Stage-playes pernicious to their State and manners. And for a conclusion of this tragicke Scene, Martianus, Heraclianus, & Claudius, Gallienum hu∣jusmodi insi∣dijs appetend esse dixerunt, ut labem im∣probissimam malis fessa Republica, à gubernaculis humani generis dimoverent: ne diutius Thea∣tro & Circo addicta Republica per voluptatum deperirer illecebras. Trebel. Pollioi Gallieni D. p. 310. Trebellius Pollio relates: that Martianus, Heraclianus, and Claudius, three worthy Romanes, conspired together to murther Gallie∣nus the Emperour, (a Idem Ibid. p. 309.310, 315, 316. man much besotted and taken up with playes, to which he likewise drew the Magistrates and people by his lewde example,) as Tacitus. Annal. l. 5. sect. 9.10. Flavius and others conspired Nero his murther too for the selfesame cause, lest the Cōmon-weale being longer addicted to the Cirque and Theater, should utterly perish through the allurements of pleasures: which murther they ac∣complished. All these recited Authorities of Pagan Writers, Emperours, States and Magistrates, together with Hist. l. 28. c. 10. Ammianus Marcellinus, a famous Heathen Hi∣storian; who reckons up the unworthy approbation of Cirque-playes, and Stage-playes, in which the people spent their lives and time, as the very greatest corruption of the Roman State, and the chiefest character of their depraved manners: against which Playes, and their Spectators, he hath much inveighed: (which me thinkes should for ever shame and silence all such gracelesse Christians, who dare to plead for Stage-playes, giving out, that none but some few foo∣lish Puritans did ever yet condemne them:) infallibly evidence unto all mens consciences; that Stage-playes desperately vitiate and deprave mens mindes and man∣ners, precipitating them into all vice, all wickednesse and lewdnesse whatsoever; and that they are unsuffera∣ble
contaminating pernicious plagues in any Well-or∣dered State; which caused these very Pagan Emperors, States and Magistrates thus solemnely to exile them; and these their Authors to declaime against them. To passe from these to Christians; wee shall finde both Christian Princes, Republikes, Authors, of anci∣ent and moderne times, concurring with these former Pagans in these their doomes of Playes and Actors. It is storied by Antiq. Iudae∣orum. l. 15. c. 11 pag. 415.416. Iosephus; that when as King Herod would have brought Stage-playes, Cirque-playes, and other Specta∣cles into Hierusalem, where he had erected a beautifull Thea∣ther, and Amphitheater, adorned with Caesars Titles and In∣scriptions; Haec peregri∣nis quidem spectatoribus plurimum ad∣mirationis si∣mul atq. dele∣ctationis affe∣rebant, indige∣nis verò pror∣us ad dissolu∣tionem patriae disciplinae ten∣dere videban∣tur, &c. Itaque veriti ne ex hac mutatione sequeretur magnum ali∣quod reipubli∣cae detrimenū; putaverunt su officij labanti disciplinae pub∣licae vel capitis periculo suc∣currere, nec pa∣ti Herodem quicquam contra receptos mores inducere, & pro rege hostem agere, &c. Ibidem. the whole Nation of the lewes, (though For∣raigne Spectators much admired and delighted in his specta∣cles) perceiving that these Playes did wholy tend to the dissolu∣tion of their ancient received Country discipline; and fearing that some great inconvenienc to their Common-wealth would follow upon this alteration; thought it their duty to maintaine their publike discipline which was now declining, though it were with the hazard of their lives; and not to suffer Herod to proceed with these his Spectacles, shutting up their Citty Gates against them. Which when Herod perceived, he began to pacifi and perswade them with good words, to admit of these his Playes; which prevayling nothing with many, he endea∣voured to introduce these Playes among them perforce: where∣upon ten of the Iewes conspired together to murther him whiles he was sitting in the Theater beholding these his Enterludes; which they had certainely effected, had not this their conspiracy beene casually detected: Of which Herod taking advantage, accomplished his desire, and so brought these his Theatricall Enterludes into Hierusalem: by meanes whereof, saith Iosephus (pray marke the dangerous consequence) Quo factum est ut magis & magis discederet à patrijs ritibus, & peregrinis studijs veterûm instituta corrumperet inviolabilia: quorum tempore permagna facta est bo∣norum morum in deterius inclinatio, labante disciplina qua ant hac populus solebar contineri in officio, &c. Ibidem. the Iewes de∣parted
more and more from their Country rites, and corrupted the inviolable Institutions of their Ancestors with forraign inventions and delights; so that there was a very great decli∣ning and degenerating of their good manners into worse: the discipline decaying whereby the people were won before this time to be kept in order. Such vigorous venome was there in these Stage-playes, both to subvert their State, and discipline, and corrupt their manners; the whole Nation of the Iewes being thus both reall witnesses and examples to confirme my Minors truth, whom I have here ranked among Christians, as being then opposite unto Pagans: I now come to reall Christians. It is storied of Constantine the Great, that Sulpitius Se∣verus. Sacrae Historiae. lib. . Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 1. p. 305. H. Be∣rengosus Ab∣bas, De Inven∣tione & laude S. Crucis. l. 2. c. 11. Bibl. Patrū Tō 7. p. 288. B. very first and most famous Christian Romane Emperour, (whose name we English men have speciall cause to honour, he being See Ioannis Sarisberiensis Prologus. in l. De Nugis Cu∣rialium. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pag. 341. D. Liberavit ille Brittannias servitute, tu etiam nobiles illi oriendo fecisti. Pangyr. Constantino dictus. p. 86. See Eutropius. Rerum Rom. l. 11. p. 135. Centuriae Magdeburg. Tom. 4. Col 61. Baronius & Spondanus. Annal. Eccl. Anno 306. sect. 5.7. Iohn Bale Centuria 1. Script. Brit. c. 36. p. 32. Mathew West. Anno 307. p. 130. Polychronicon. l. 4. c. 25.26. Galfredus Monumetensis. Hist. Regum Bit. l. 5. c. 6.8. Ponticus Verun∣nius. Hist. Brit. l. 5. p. 108. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Speedes Chronicle. lib. 6. cap. 46 p. 153. Socrates, Eccles. Hist lib. 1. cap 2. Caxtons Chron. Chronicon Chronicorū Anno 344. fol. 145. bore, bred, and first crowned King and Emperour here in England, his Mother Helena being a Brittish woman to:) Zosimus Historiae. lib. 2. Baronius & Spondanus Anno 303. sect. 3. That he wholy with-drew himselfe from the Secular Stage-playes of the Gentiles made in the third yeere of his Consulship, o drive away plagues and diseases: contemning and reiecting these their Eterludes; at which these Pagan Gentiles grieved much: After which being established in his Empire, he did by publike Edicts Eusebius, De Vita Constantini. lib. 3. cap. 52.56. & lib. 4 cap. 23.24, 25. Sozomen. Historiae Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 8. Nicephorus Calist. Hi∣storiae Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 46. Eutropius Rerum Romanorum. lib. 11. pag. 142. Centuriae Magd. Tom. 4. Col. 76 Baronius & Spondanus. Anno 32. sect. 5. Socrates Historiae Eccles. lib. 1. c. 14. Codicis Theodosij. lib. 15. Tit. 5. to 12. De Gladiatoribus. Bulengerus De Circo, &c. pag. 87.88. abolish all the ceremonies, rites, lascivi∣ous customes aud obscenities of the Gentiles, and interdicted all gladiatory Playes and Enterludes, as intolerable pernicious
evils. Not to speake of Zonaras An∣nal. Tom. 2. fol. 101. à, Nerva Nerva, Baronius & Spondanus. Anno 357. sect. 23. lib. 15. Co∣dic. Theodosij Tit. De Gla∣diatoribus. Constantius, Lib. 8. Codic. Theodosij. Tit. De Paen. Ba∣ronius & Spon∣danus. Anno 365. sect. 5. Valen∣tinian, Eutropius Rerum Rom. l. 13. p. 174 Ba∣ronius & Spon∣danus. Anno 404. sect. 174. Honorius, Eutropius Rerum Rom. l. 13. pag. 174. Arcadius, and See Centur. Magdeburg. Tom. 4. Col. 1528.1530. & Codex. Theodosij lib. 15. Tit. De Gladiatoribus. others, who banished and prohibited all Sword playes against which See before, p. 74.75. Cassiodor. Variarum. l. 5. c. 42. divers Fa∣thers did declaime as barbarous and unchristian Spectacles, not tolerable in any civil State with which our tumultuous bloody Tragedies have too neere afinity; I finde Theo∣dosius the Great, (who Theodosius rescriptum dedit adver∣sus psaltrias & fidicenas mulieres Civitatum pestes. Eutropius Rerum Rom. Hist. l. 13. pag. 173. Baronius & Spondanus. Anno 385. sect 9. See Iustiniani Codex. l. 1. Tit. 7. Lex. 5. Bulengerus De Circo, &c. pag 87.88. banished all Women-dancers, Play∣ers, and Singers by a publike Edic, as the plagues of those places and Citties where they were tolerated:) not onely sup∣pressing and inhibiting all Stage-playes and Cirque-playes a Antioch, and stopping up all Cirques and Theaters, as the fountaines of all wickednesse, and the Nurseries of all those mischiefes that sprung up in Citties, as Sed à Rege profecta con∣tristant? Sed nec illa profecto gravia, verum & ipsa multum attulerunt emolumenti. Quid enim molesti (dic mihi) factum est, quod orchestram obstruxit, quod Cir∣cum inaccessibilem fecit, quod nequitiae fones exclusit & subvertit? Vtinam nec daretur unquam hos aperiri. Hinc nequitiae radices in Civitate germinaverunt, hinc sunt qui moribus ipsis crimen afferunt, &c. Propterea tristaris chrissime? Imò & propterea gaudere & laetari oporteat & gratias regi agere, &c. Homil 17. Ad Populum Antiochiae. Tom 5. Col. 135. C. D. Bulengerus De Circo. pag. 81.82. See here, pag. 422.423, 424. Chrysostome at large relates: and I likewise finde both him, Valentini∣an and Gratian, together with Valens the Emperour, enacting these publike lawes against Stage-playes and common Actors, well worthy observation: Codex Theodosij. lib. 15. Tit. 5. De Spectaculis. Lex. 2.4. pag. 471.472. & Tit 7. De Scenicis. Lex. 1. pag. 473. Spondanus Epit. Baronij Anno. 371. sect. 10. That no Stage-playes should be acted on the Lords-day; that Stage-players and Women-actrs should be quite debarred from the Sacraments as long as they continued in their playing, and that the Sacra∣ment should not be administred to them in their extremity, when as they lay upon their death-beds, though they deired it, un∣lesse the did first renounce their wicked lewde profession, and protest solemnely that they would not returne unto it againe in
case they should recover. Such was their detestation a∣gainst common Actors, and so by consequence against Playes themselves, which made their Actors so base, so execrable, to these Christian Emperours. See here Act 7. Scene 3. pag. 647.648. Iu∣stiniani Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 6. De Epis. & Clericis. Lex. 17.18, 33, 34. Corpus Iuris Civilis. Tom. 4. Col. 161. Ipsi praedicant ut abrenunci∣ent adversarij Daemonis cul∣tui, & omnibus pompis ejus, quarum non minima pars, talia spectacula iunt. Ibidem. Lex. 34. pag. 42. to 61. Iustinian the Emperour, promulgated this pious Edict; That all sorts of Clergie men, together with all other Christians, should re∣fraine, not onely from Die play, and Dicers company, but likewise from the very acting and beholding of Stage playes and Theatricall Spectacles, because they are not the least part of those pompes of the Devil which Christians solemnely renounce when they are baptized. Leo and Anthemius, two worthy Christian Emperours, made this most pious Edict. Dies festos Majestati atis∣simae dicatos nullis volumus voluptatibus occupari, nec ullis exactionū vexationib{us} profanari. Do∣minicū ita{que} im ita semper honorablē decernim{us} & venerandū, ut à cunctis execu∣tionibus excusetur, nulla quemquam urgeat admonitio, nulla fidejussionis flagitetur exactio, aceat apparitio, advocatio delitescat, sit ille dies à cognitionibus alienus, praeconis horria vox silscat, respent à controversijs litigantes, & habeant saederis intervallum, ad sese simul veniant adversarij non timentes, subeat animos vicaria paenitudo, pacta conferant, transactiones loquantur. Nec hujus tamen religiosi diei ocia relaxantes ob caenis quenquam patimur voluptatibus detineri. Nihil eodem die sibi vendicet scena Theatralis, aut Circense certamen, aut ferarum lachrymosa spectacula: esi in nostrum ortum aut natalem celebranda solenitas inciderit, die∣ratur. Amissionem militiae, proscriptionem patrimonij sustinebit, si quis unquam hoc die festo spectaculis interesse, vel cujuscunque judicis apparitor praetextu nego∣cij publici, seu privai, haec, quae hac lege atuta sunt, crediderit temeranda. Datum. Idibus Decemb. Constantinop. Zenone & Martiano Cos. Iustinian, Codicis. lib. 3. Tit. 12. De Ferijs. Lex. 10. Edit. Parisijs 1537. pag. 124. All Feat-dayes, or Holy dayes dedicated to the most high God, shall not be taken up or solemnized with any pastimes or excursions. We therefore decree the Lords-day to be alwayes so honourable and venerable, that it shall be exempted from all Executions, Admonitions, Bayles, Appearances, Arrests, Law∣suites, and Controversies, which shall all thn cease; Let all Advocates and Criers then be silent, let there be then a kinde of trce for a space, that so Adversaries may safely meete to∣gether upon it, without feare, and reconcile themselves one to the other, &c. Neither releasing the imployments of this re∣ligious Day doe we permit any one to be occupied in obscene plea∣sures. Let not the Theatricall Scene, nor the Cirque Com∣bate,
or the dolfull Spectacles of wilde Beasts, claime any li∣berty to themselves on this day: and if any solemnity to be ce∣lebrated, either in respect of our coronation or nativity, shall chance to happen upon it, let it be put off to some other time. If any person shall ever hereafter presume to be present at Stage-playes on Viz. on the Lords-day. this Holy-day; or if the Apparitor of any Iudge un∣der pretext of any publike or private businesse shall violate those things which are decreed by this law, he shall undergoe the losse of his office, and the sequestration of his Patrimony. O that this godly Law were now in force with Christians! then Playes and Pastimes on Lords-day evenings, would not be so frequent; then those who had served God at Prayers, and Sermons in the day time, would not so se∣riously serve the world, the flesh, the Devill, in Dan∣cing, Dicing, Masques, and Stage-playes in the night, beginning perchance the Lords-day (like the Gal. 3.1, 3. foolish Ga∣lathians) in the spirit, but ending it in the flesh, as alas too many carnall Christians doe. Theodoricus, a Christian King of Italy, (whose prayses In his Pane∣gyricus Thea∣dorico dictus. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 6. pars 1. pag. 243. Enodius Ticinensis, hath proclaimed to the world) in his Epistle to Faustus, trans∣mitted to posterity, by Variarum. l. 3. Epist. 51. Marcus Aurelius Cassiodorus, hath-passed this Censure upon Stage-playes, and Cirque-playes: Spectaculum expellens gra∣vissimos mo∣res, invitans levissimas con∣tentiones, eva∣cuator hone∣statis, fons ir∣riguus iurgio∣rum: quod ve∣tustas quidem habuit sacrum, sed contensiosa posteritas fecit esse ludibrium. Ibidem. that they expell the gravest manners, invite the most triviall contentions; that they are the exhausters of honesty, the ever-running fountaine of brawles and quarrels; which anti∣quity verily reputed sacred, but contentious posterity hath made them a meere ludibrium. Which passage he thus seconds in his Epistle to Speciosius. Mores autem graves in spectaculis quis requirat? In Circum nesciunt convenire Catones. Quicquid illic gaudenti popu∣lo dicitur injuria non putatur. Locus est qui defendit excessum. Cassiodorus Varia∣rum. lib. 1. Epist. 27. Who can expect grave manners in Stage-playes? Catoes know not how to meete together at Play-houses. Whatsoever is there spoken to the reioycing people is not deemed an iniury. It is a place which defends excesse. In another Epistle of his to the Roman Senate, he thus informes them, what great mischiefes these Stage-playes
had procured to the people, who were brought into extreme dangers by thm. Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 30. Animum nostrum, Patres Conscripti, Rei∣pub. curis calentem, pulsavit saepius querela populorum, orta quidem ex causis levibus, sed graves eructavit excessus. De∣plorat enim pro spectaculorum voluptate ad discrimina se ulti∣ma pervenisse, &c. And in his Cassiodorus. Variarum. l. 5. Epist. 42. Epistle to Maximus, of the divers sorts of Spectacles, which the Consuls exhibited to the people out of a preposterous custome, to their great expence; (against Sed hic apte iungendumest, quod ait de In∣feris Mantua∣nus; Quis sce∣lerū compren∣dere formas possit, &c? Ibid. the severall wickednesses of which Enterludes hee there much declaimes) he closeth up that Epistle with this patheticall Epilogue. Heu mundi error olendus: si esset ullus aequitatis intuitus, tantae divitiae pro vita mortalium deberent dari, quantae in mortes hominum videntur effundi. Such was his Royall Censure of these pestiferous Stage-playes, which bred so many mischiefes and discords in the world. It it Rodolphus Gualther. Hō. 11. in Nahum. fol. 214.215. Theodou Zuinger. The∣atrum Vitae Humanae. Vol. 12. l. 5. p. 1834.1835. Chroni∣con Chronico∣rum Augusta. 1497. AEtas 6. fol. 21 . a. registred of Henry, the third Emperour of that name, whom they stiled blacke and godly; that when as a great company of Stage-players and Actors flocked together to Ingelheim to his marriage, about the yeere 1044. he thrust them all out of the Court and Citty; and commnded that the money which should have beene spent in maintaining, rewar∣ding, and adorning them, should be distributed among the poore: An example (writes Master Gualther, who relates it) truely worthy of eternall prayse; which if Princes and Magi∣strates of Common-weales would this day imitate, there would be lesse place left to filthy and sloathfull idlenesse, then which there is nothing more powerfull to corrupt mens manners: yea wise and prudent men would be then in greater request, and the poore would be better provided for, who now wander about in every corner to the great scandall of Christianity: It is storied of The Gene∣rall History of France. Lon∣don 1624. pag. 114.123. Bodi∣nus De Repub lib. 6. cap. 1. Philip Augustus, the 42. King of France; that he being an enemy to publike dissolutions, and a friend to good order and Iustice, enacted publike lawes against Players, Iuglers, Playes, and Dcing-houses, which he wholy suppressed, as pornicious to his Kingdome; banishing all Stage-players out of France by a publike Edict: the true grounds of which worthy act of his Vincentius in his Lib. 29. c. 41. Edit. Coloniae. Agrip. 1494. Olaus Magnus Historiae. l. 15. cap. 31.32. Speculum Historiale, doth
thus expresse. Cum antem in Curijs regum vel principu frequens histrionum turba convenire solebat, ut ab eis aurum & argentum, & equos seu vestes, quas saepe principes mutare solent verba ioculatoria varij adulationibus plena proferendo ab eis extorqueant: vides Rex Philippus haec esse vana, & ani∣mae saluti contraria, mente promptissima Deo promisit; quod omnes vestes suas quamdiu viveret intuitu Dei pauperibus ero∣garet; malens nudum Christum in pauperibus vestire; quàm adulatoribus vestes dando peccatum incurrere; See here, p. 324. Iuonis Decreta. pars 11. c. 84. Olaus Magnus. Hist. l. 15. c. 31.32. Ioan. Berto∣chinus. Reper∣toriū. pars 2. p. 664. Histrio. Guillermus Altissiodoren∣sis Summa Au∣rea. in l. 3. Sen∣tent. Tract. 7. Quaest. 3. f. 163. & Stephanus Cost de Ludo sect. 2. numb. 7. Tractat. Tra∣ctatuum. Tom. 1. p. 157.158. accordingly. quoniam hi∣strionibus dare (and I would those who spend their mo∣ney at Play-houses would well consider it) est Daemonibus imolare. Hoc si quotidie principes attenderent, nequaquam tot leccatores per mundum discurrerent. Vidimus autem prin∣cipes quosdam vestes diu excogitatas, & varijs florum pictura∣tionibus artificiosissime elaboratas vix evolutis septem dibus, proh dolor, histrionibus, scilicet, Diaboli ministris (so hee stiles them) ad primam vocem dedisse, pro quibus forsan .20. aut 30. vel 40. marcas argenti impenderent, de quo nimirum preci totidem pauperes per totum annum victus necessaria per∣cipere potuissent. By all these severall Acts and Testimo∣nies of these worthy Christian Princes, it is most appa∣rant; that Stage-playes insufferably corrupt mens mindes and manners, and that they are no wayes tole∣rable in a Christian State. The selfesame verity wee shall finde confirmed by the Fathers. Hence Nec incon∣cinnè stadia & Theatra pesti∣lentiae Cathe∣dram quis vo∣caverit, &c. Pae∣dagogi. l. 3. c. 11. See Gentianus Harvetus. Ibi∣dem. Clemens Alexandrinus, stiles Playes and Play-houss; the very Chaire of Pestilence, which corrupts mens mindes. Hence Tertullian records; Censores saepius renas∣centia cùm maxime Thatra destruebant, moribus consulentes, quorum periculum ingns de lascivia praevidebant, &c. De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 10. that the Roman Censors oft-times de∣molish their re-erected Theaters to prevent the corruption of the peoples manners, which they fore-saw would be much indange∣red and corrupted by the lasciviousnesse of Stage-playes; the lewde effects of which hee at large discovers, stiling the Stage, the very Chaire of Pestilence, and the Gallerie of the enemies of Christ. Hence De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 16.27. See here, pag. 154. in the margent. Cyprian phraseth Stage-playes;
Magister & Doctor non e∣rudiendorum, sed perdendo∣rum liberorū, &c. Epst. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Eucra∣tio. the Masters not of teaching but of corrpting, of destroy∣ing Yoh: and Play-houses, the very Brothels of publike cha∣stity; where all vices ar oth taught and learned; all mode∣sty exiled, all continy wreckd, mens soules and manners most incurably corrupted to Gods dishonor ad th Churchs shame.Pudoris pub∣lici lupanaiū, &c. De Spectac. lb & Epist. lib. 2 Epist. 2. Donato. See Scene 3. & 4. where his words are quo∣te at large. p. 331. to 334. Hence De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 20. Divinarum In∣stit. Epist. c. 5. See Scene 3. & 4. before. pag. 334.335, 336. Lactantius informes us; that the vry hearing and beholding of Stage-playes exceedingly corrupt all Youth; by depraving their manners, enraging their unruly lusts, and teching them to commit adulteri, whiles they be∣hold them acted: Whereupon he peremptorily concludes; that all Stage-playes are wholy to be abanded, that so not onely no vices might harbour in our brests, but that the custom of no pleasure might ever overcome us, and so turne us away from God and from good workes. Hence Gregory Nazianzen avers; Spectculum illud nihil ali∣ud putari de∣bet, quàm pe∣stis at{que} mor∣bus animorum. Nm urbes di∣strahit, &c Qua∣propter mani∣stòpater, illud spectaculū me∣rumaimorum ess perniciem. Ad Sluum De Recta Educat. p. 1063.1064. vid. Ibidem. tht Stage-playes ought to be reputed nothing else but the very plague and sicknesse of mens mindes; the severall ill effcts of which he there reckons up at large, and there∣upon he thus concludes; Wherefore it evidently appeares, that these Stage-playes are nought else but th very destruction of mens soules: which Censure of his is fully ratified by the concurrent suffrages of See hir words quoted befre, Sene 3. & 4. Tatianus, Oratio Advers. Graecos. Bibl. Patrum, Tom. 2. pag. 180.181. Of Theophi∣lus Antiochenus, Ad Autolichum. lib. 3. Ibidem. pag. 170. G. H. Of Minucius Felix. Octavius. pag. 101.121. Of Arnobius Advers. Gentes. lib. 4. pag. 149.150, 151. & lib. 7. pag. 230. to 242. Of Basil. Hxaëmeron. Hom. 4. Tom. 1. pag. 45. & De Legendis Libris Gentilium. Oratio. pag. 308.312. Of S. Asterius, in Festum Kalendarum. Hom. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4 pag. 706. Of Gaudentius Brixiae. Episcopus, De Lectione Evangelij. Sermo 8. Ibidem. p. 812. G. Of S. Hierom. Comment. in Ezechiel. lib. 6. cap 20. Tom. 4. pag. 389. A. Of Eusebius & Damascen, Para∣lellorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. with undry others hereaftr quoted, who all passe the very selfesame doome upon them. Saint Chrysostome is exceeding copious in this Theame, as is evident by all his transcribed passages in the precding Scene. (See here, page 401.402.404
405.406.415.416.424.431. whence hee stiles the Theatru Ca∣thedra Pesti∣lentiae, incon∣tinentiae gym∣nasiū; officina luxuriae, impu∣dicitiae orche∣stra; pessius locus, plurimo∣rum{que} morbo∣rum plena Ba∣bilonica for∣nax, quae non corporis natu∣ram, sed bonā animae depopu∣latur habitudi∣nem, &c. Hom. 8. De Paenitentia. om. 5. Col 750. C.D. vid. Ibidem. Play-house; the Caire of Pestilence; the Shop of Luxury the Scaffold of Incontinency; the publike Schoole of Lwdnesse: a Babilonish Brothell full of many filthy noysome diseases, which depraves, depopulates, not the nature of the body, but the good habitude of the soule, Ibid. & Hom. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 299. A. B. which over-turnes all lawes, all modesty, vertue, discipline, Magna Civi∣tatibus mala ferunt Thea∣tra magna, nec hoc videmus quàm magna. Hom. 15. & 62. Ad. Pop. Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 347. and brings many great mischiefes unto Citties: Whereupon he thus concludes; His Theatra∣libus ludis eversis, non leges sed iniquitatem evertetis, & omnem Civitatis pestem extinguetis. Homil. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 299. B. & Homil. 69. that Magistrates by overthrowing Play-houses shall overturne all iniquity, and utterly extinguish all the plagues, the mischiefes of the State and Citty. Saint Augustine, as he informes us in expresse tearmes: Si tantum∣modo boni & honesti homines in Civitate essent, nec in rebus humanis ludi se∣nici esse debuissent. De Civitate Dei. lib. 4. cap. 1. That if there had beene none but good and honest men in the Citty of Rome, that they would never have admitted Stage-playes to have any existence among humane things, much lesse in Divine affaires: so De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 31.32, 33. lib. 2. c. 2. to 15.22, 27. l. 5. c. 12. l. 8. c. 13.14. & Epist. 202. e proves at large out of Heathen Authors, that Stage-playes are most unsufferable contgions and mischiefes in a State, vitiating the mindes, sub∣verting the manners, th discipline of those places where they are but tolerated. Among other passages to this purpose, he affirmes: Illas Theatricas artes diu virtus Romana non noverat: quae etsi ad oblectamentum voluptatis humanae quaererentur, & vitio morum irreperent humanorum, diamen as sibi exhiberi petiverunt. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 13. See Ibid. c. 5. to 12. That the Roman vertue was altogether un∣acquainted with these Theatricall arts almost 400. yeeres: which albeit they were sought after to delight the voluptuousnesse of mens lusts, and crept in onely by reason of the corruption of mens manners, yet the Idol Heathen gods desired that they might be dedicated unto them. And then speaking of the first occasion of bringing Stage-playes into Rome, to asswage the pestilence which afflicted their bodies, they brought in (saith he) another farre more grievous and perptuall pesti∣lence of their mindes, which he thus elegantly expresseth.
De Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 32.33. See Polychronicō. l. 3. c. 34. . 131. & Thomas Bradwardin, De Cau∣sa. Dei. lib. 1. pag. 14. Dij propter sedandam corporis pestilentiam ludos sibi scenicos exhiberi iubebant, pontifex autem vester (Scipio) propter ani∣morum cavendam pestilentiam, ipsam scenam construi prohi∣ebat. Si aliqu lue mentis animum corpori praeponitis, eligere qum olatis? Ne{que} enim & illa corporum pestilentia ideo con∣quievit, quia populo bellico, & solis antea ludis Circensibus assueto, luderum scenicorum delicata subitravit insania: sed astutia spirituum nefandorum praevidens illam pestilentiam iàm ne deito cessatram, aliam longè graviorem, qua plurimum gaudet, ex hac occasione, non corporibus, sed moribus curav immittere: quae animos miserorum tantis occaecavit tenebris, tata deformitate faedavit, ut etiam modò quod incredibile for∣itan erit, si à nostris posteris audietur, Romana urbe vastaa, quos pestilentia ista possedit, at{que} inde fugientes, Carthaginem pervenire potuerunt, in Theatris quoidie certatim pro histrio∣nibus insanirent. A metes, amentes, quis est hic tant, non error, sed fror, ut exitium vestrum plangentibus Orientali∣bus populis, & maximis Civitatibus in remotissimis terris pub∣licum luctum maerorem{que} ducentibus, vos Theatra quareretis, intraretis, ipleretis, & multò insaniora quàm fuerant antea faceretis. In Theatri labes morum, discere turpia, audire inhone∣sta, videre per∣niciosa. August. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. l. 2. c. 2. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 1394. Hanc animarum labem ac pestem, hanc probita∣tis & honestatis eversionem (so he truely stiles the Theater) Scipio ille metuebat, quandò consirui Theatra prohibebat, &c. ne{que} enim censebat ille faelicem esse rempub. stantibus maenibus, ruentibus moribus: sed in vobis plus valuit quod impij Daemo∣nes seduxerunt, quàm quod homines providi praecaverunt, &c. It is evident then by Saint Augustines resolution: that Stage-playes incurably vitiate and desperately corrupt, if not subvert mens manners; and so bring ruine to that State that suffers them, Secundisque rebus (& spe∣ctaculis) ea mala oriantur in moribus, qùae saevienti∣bus pejora sin hostibus. De Ci∣vit. Dei. l. 1 c. 30. vid. Ibid. the evils which they ingenerate in the peoples manners, being farre worse then the cruellest ene∣mies. Hence he informes us Romam quippe curâ partam veterū auctamque laboribus, faediorem stan∣tm fecerant qum runtem: quandoquidem in ruina ejus, laides & ligna, in istorum autem vita omnia, non murorum, sed morum menumenta are; ornamen∣ta ceciderunt, cùm funestioribus eorum corda cupiditatibus, quàm ignibus tecta lius urbis arderent. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 2. vid. cap. 5. to 15. that Stage-playes had made
Rome, which was gotten with the care, and augmented by the industry of their Ancestrs, more filthy whiles it was standing, then when it was falling unto ruine: since in its ruine, onely the stones and timber, but in the lives of Play-haunters, all the monuments and ornaments not of walls, but of manners were fallen to the ground; since their hearts burned with more la∣mentable polluting lusts, then the houses of the Citty did with flames. Yea hence he De Civ. Dei. l. 1. c. 30. to 34. l. . thorowout. l. 3. c. 18. lib. 4. c. 1.10, 26, 27, 8, 31. l. 6. c. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 6 27, 33. l. ..5. 13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 26, 7. & Epist. 202. this being the very end and drift of all these places. concludes and provs, the Pagan Deities of the Romanes to be no gods, but beastly Devils, and uncleane infernall spirits; who were no friends, no advancers, no protectors of the Romanes or of their Common-weale, but professed enmies, plagues, and traitors to them both, because they invented, exacted, countenanced, and delighted in those obscene, lascivious, vitious Stage-playes, which defiled the mindes, corrupted the lives, ruinated the manners, and eter∣nally destroyed the soules of men, by precipitating them into all vice and lewdnesse whatsoever: which Playes both Plato, Scipio, Cicero, and the ancient Romanes quite abandoned, as the very Pests, the Cankers, ban and overthrow of the Common-weale. Such they, such he reputed them and from thence he Qui sunt er∣go illi qui lu∣dos scenicos a∣mant, eos{que} di∣vinis rebus ad∣jungi, & suis honoribus ef∣flagitant exhi∣beri, quorū vis non eos indicat nullos, sed iste affectus nimi∣rum indicat malos? August. De Civitate Dei lib. 8. c. 13. vid. Ibidem. perswades the Romanes to dicarde them, together with all their Devill-Idols who tooke such pleasure in them. Paulus Orosius, Saint Augusines intire friend and Coetanean, in his excellent History (dedicated to this learned Father,) relating the originall introduction of Stage-playes among the Romanes, to asswage the plague; thus discants on that passage. Historiae, lib. 3. cap. 4. Edit. Coloniae. 1532. pag. 120. Atores suare pontifices, ut ludi scenicidijs expetentibus adereur: & ita pro depellenda temporali peste corporum, accersitus est perpetu∣us morbus animarum: these Stage-playes being no other in his opinion, but a prpetuall sicknesse of mens soules, far worse then any pstilence that could ffct their bodies: What State, what person then would foment such fatall plagues? De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. thorowout, wll worth the reading, to which I shall referre you. Salvian, Bishop of Massilia in France, most elegantly inveigheth against the horrid obscnity of Stage-playes,
informing the ancient Romanes and others, Se Scene 3. & 4. before, where most of his words are transcribed. & Scne 12. & 19. that Stage-playes were those insufferable impurities which polluted their soules, depraved their manners, provoked the Maiesty of their God to wrath, offended their blessed Saviour, dishonoured their Christian profession, and drew downe Gods Iudgements on their State, which was then miserablie wasted by the Goathes and Vandals: and threupon he adviseth them, eternally to aban∣don Playes and Theaters (according to their vow in baptisme) as the most pernicious evils, which would bring their soules, their bodies, their Church and State to utter ruine. Isiodor Pelusota, who flourished about the yeere of our Lord 440. in his Epistle to Hir, who then swayed the Common-wealth under Theodosius the Yonger, writes thus of Scenicis, vir optime, sum∣mū hoc studiū est, non ut per ipsorū cavillas multi meliores reddantur; (quemadmodū ipse dixisti, te∣ipsu & eos, qui te udiunt, decipiens;) ve∣rum ut multi peccēt. Etenim in specttorum improbiate faelicitatem s∣am cōstitutam habent. Ita t, ut, si illi meli∣res efficianur, sua his ars prtura sit. Qum brem, nec unquam eos qui delinquunt corrigre in  induxert, nec si velt,  ossnt. Mimica enim eor ars n∣tura ttummodò ad nocendum compraa est. Epist. l. 3 Epist. 336. Bibl Parum. Tom. 5. pars 2 613 A. Stage-players; that this is their chiefe end and study, not that many should be made better by their scoffes, (as some have said, deceiving both themselves, and those that heare them,) but that many might be drawen to sinne. For their felicity is wholy placed in the lewdnesse of their Spectators. For so it is, that if their Spectators should be made better, their ve∣ry occupation would goe to wracke: wherefore they never so much as thinke of reforming any who ofend, neither if they wil∣led it, could they effect it. For their mimicall art of its owne nature is onely itted for to hurt men. A passage, which not onely answers that vaine See this Objection fomerly anwered p 02. to 106. Obiection of Play-patrons (which you see was ancient) that Stage-playes reforme men by reprehending vice: but likewise manests them to be intolerable mischiefes in any Christian State, since their very end and nature is onely to corrupt and make men worse. Quam vis art lricae honestis moribus int rmotae & Histrionum vita vaga, videatur effe∣ri psse lic i, tame oderatix  vidi tiquits, ut in totum non uerent, cum & isae jucem sust. Adinistra enim t sub quadm disciplina exhi∣bitio vol . Tenet  us, vel umbrailis ordo judicij. Tempe∣rentur & haec legum qualitte gci, quasi honsts imparet inhonestis, & quibus∣dam regulis vivant, qui viā rectae conver∣sationis igno∣rant. Student enim illi non tantū jucundi∣tati suae, quan∣tum alienae le∣itiae: & condi∣tione perversa cum dominatū suis corporibus tradunt, servire potius animas compulerunt. Dignū fuit er∣go moderatorē suscipere, qui se nesciunt juri∣dica moderati∣one tractare. Locus quippe tuus his gregi∣bus hominum veluti quidam tutor est posi∣tus. Nam sicut illi aetates te∣neras adhibita cautela custo∣diunt, sic  te voluptates fer∣vidae impensa maturitate fre∣nandae sunt. Age bon in∣stitutis quod nimia pruden∣tia constat in∣venisse Majores. Leve desideriū, esi veecundia non cohibet, districtio praedicta mo∣dificet, &c. Variarum. l. 7. c. 10. Aurelius Cassiodous, describn the office of the Ro∣mane
Censor, or Surveyer of sports, records; that the disso∣lute lives, and light arts of Stage-players are remote from honest manners; and that therefore antiquity becomming a Mode∣rator, did take care to suppresse their insolencies by appointing Censors to correct and punish them, that so they might not who∣ly lash out, when as they should undergoe the censure of a Iudge. For the very exhibition of pleasures is to be administred under a certaine discipline. If not a true, yet at leastwise let a shadow∣ed order of iustice keepe Stage-playes with in compasse. Let even these businesses be tempered with the qualification of lawes, that so honesty may rule over dishonest persons, and they may live under certaine rules, who know not the way of a right con∣versation: For these Players seeke not so much their owne pleasure as other mens myrth, and by a perverse condition, when as they deliver the dominion to their bodies, they have compel∣led their soules to serve. It is fit therefore that those should re∣ceive a Moderator, who know not to carry themselves with a legall moderation. For the office of a Censor is set up as a Tutor over these heards of men. For as Tutors keepe children of tender yeeres with diligent care, so vehement pleasures are to be curbed by the Censor, with great grauity, &c. Which passage, as it proves Stage-playes, intolerable mischiefes; and Players, disorderly dissolute wicked person, whose ex∣cesses need to be suppressed, even by the opinion of the ancient Pagan Romanes, See Bulengerus De Theatro. l. 1. c. 53. who appointed Censors of pur∣pose to correct their grosse abuses, See here, p. 37.38, 39, 40, 41. which yet could never be redressed: so it condemnes the excessive lewdnesse of our moderne Playes and Actors which have no such Survey∣ers to curbe, to censure their abuses; & withall acquaints us, how pernicious Stage-playes are, both to mens manners & the publike weale: and what reason Christi∣ans have for ever to abandon them; since the very worst of Pagans, See August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32, 33. l. 2. c. 13.22, 27. l. 3. c. 18 l. 4. c. 1.10, 26, 27, 28. l. 6. c. 5.6, 7, 9, 10, 26, 27, 33. l. 8. c. 5.13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 26, 27. Bo∣dinus De Repub. l. 6 c. 1. Polychronicon. l. 1. c. 34. fol. 171. accordingly. had long since wholy discarded them, for their
unsufferable corruptions and abuses, but to please their Idols, to whom they wer devoted; which reason holds not with us Christians, but ingageth us most against them. To passe by De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. & lib. 8. cap. 6.7. Iohn Saresbury, Destructoriū Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. & pars 3. cap. 10. Alexander Fabritius, Lectio. 172. in lib Sapien∣tiae. Holkot, Serm. 5. & 7. De Custodia 5. Sensuum & Auditus. aulus Wan, De Educat. Liberorum, l. 1. c. 14. & l. 3. c. 7.12. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 15. p. 837 M. 838. A. 847. F. 848. C.D 864 E.F. 865. A. Mapheus Vegius, De Novis Celebritatibus non Instituen∣dis. p. 143. to 150. Nicolaus De Cleman∣gis, De Causa Dei. l. 1. c. 1. Corol. 20. p. 14.15. Thomas Bradwardine, De Remedio Vtrius{que} Fortu. l. 1. Dialog. 30. Petrarcha, and See Act 7. Scene 5. other more ancient Writers, who censure Stage-playes; as the intolerable depravers of mens mindes and manners; the Seminaries of all wickednesse, vice, and lewdnesse; the corrupters of Youth, the subverters of all good discipline; the enemies of all vertu∣ous education; and insufferable mischiefes in a State, which thorow the eyes and eares usher eternall death into mens soules: To whom I might accumulate; De Causis Corruptionis Artium. l. 2. p. 81.82, 83. & Comment. in August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32, 33. & l. 2. c. 2. to 16. Ludovicus Vives, De Casibus. l. 2. Tit. 53. & l. 4. Tit. 17. sect. 4. A∣stexanus, De Vanit. Scientiarum. c. 20.59, 64, 71. Cornelius Agrippa, French Achademy. c. 20. p. 205. Peter Primauday, Ethicae Christianae. l. 2. c. 8. p. 107. Danaeus, Locorum Cōmunium Classis. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 62.66. c. 12. sect. 15.19. & Comment. on Iudges. c. 21. Peter Martyr, De Vita & Ho∣nestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 20.21. Ioannes Langhecrucius, Decreta Ecclesiae Gal. l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 11, &c. Bochellus, De Spectaculis. lib. Io∣annes Mariana, De Spectaculis. lib. Barnabas Brissonius, De Theatro. l. 1. c. 50.51, 52. Caesar Bulengerus, An∣nal. Eccles. Anno 404. sect. 1.2, 3. Anno 206. sct. 2. Anno 399. sect. 5. Anno 469. sect. 2 Baronius, Epit. Baronij Annis eisdem. Spondanus, Centuriae Magd Tom. 3. Col. 141.142. Tom. 4. Col. 458. Tom. 5. Col. 721. Tom. 6. Col. 159. The Centuriators, with See Act 7. Scene 5. sundry other Forraigne Authors hereafter quoted; who fully suffra∣gate to this their Censure. I shall onely recite the words of 4 other moderne Outlandish Authors against the intolerable abuses of Stage-playes, and then passe un∣to our English Writers: The first of these, is Master Ralph Gualther, a reverend orthodox Divine, whose la∣borious learned Workes all Protestant Churches high∣ly honor: who acquaints us: Sunt ejusmodi homines non parva rerum publ. pestis. Nam libidinum ministri sunt, & bonos mores corrumpunt, &c. Gualther Homil. 11. in Nabum. fol. 214.215. That Stage-players, the artificers, the ministers of unlawfull pleasures, who are wont to
frequent the Courts of great Princes, and the eminentest richest Citties where there is most hope of gaine propounded to them, are not a small plague of Common-weales: for they are the servitors of lust, they corrupt good manners, they bring all religion into contempt: they greatly exhaust both the publike and mns private treasure, and that which ought to be distribu∣ted for the poores reliefe, they by their arts have almost inter∣cepted. These the Prophet compares to Locusts, not onely for their multitude but rather for See Guvara, his Dial of Princes. l. 3. c. 43. to 47. their idle sloathfulnesse, and be∣cause being borne onely for to eate and drinke, they doe nothing in the meane time that is honest, or which may any way advance the publike good. Wherefore grave men in all ages have thought fit to exclude this sort of men from the Common-wealth. This See here pag. Plato a man of most acute iudgement percei∣ved when as he banished all Poets out of his Common-wealth, because he knew they would both corrupt mens manners, and bring the god, into contempt. Neither undeservedly is the old discipline of the See here pag. 455.456. & Valerius Maxi∣mus. lib. 2. c. 6. sect. 7. Massilienses applaude, who would ad∣mit no Stage-players into their Citty, or any person but such who were skilfull in some art or other, wherby they might honest∣ly maintaine themselves To which this also may be added, that the ancient Divines most sharpely condemne both Stage-playes and Spectacles: having a respect to that of the Apostle, Ephes. 5.3, 4. who would not have fornication, filthy discourse, scurrility or any uncleanesse, so much as to be once named among Christians: commanding all the followers of Christ, not to absteine from evill onely, but likewise 1 Thes. 5.22. from all appearance of it. It is therfore a great signe of corrupt and perverted discipline, that thse effeminate persons and furtherers of most ishonest plea∣sures, are in great esteeme both in the Courts of Princes & in rich Citties, whiles grave men who excell in councell and experience are in the meane time excluded and contemned, and the poore neglected, &c. Then he recites the examples of See Eutropi∣us Rerum Ro∣manoru. l. 11. p. 140. & Caeli∣us Rhodig. An∣tiqu. Lect. l. 14. cap. 19. Licinius, and See here pag. 471. Henry the 3. Emperor of that name, who cast all Stage-players out of their Courts and Citties, as the very Rats and Moathes of the Court and Common-weale. Examples (writes he) worthy of eternall prayse, which if Princes and Magistrates
of the Common-weale would imitate at this day, there would be lesse rome left for filthy sloathfull idlenesse, then which there is nothing more powerfull to corrupt mens manners: yea wise and prudent men would be in more esteeme, and the poore would be better provided for, who now wander up and downe in every corner, to the great scandall of Christianity. But because all here neglect their duty, God himselfe will at one time or other finde out a meanes whereby he will cast out these plagues (so stiles he Playes and Players) not without some publike cala∣mity, as the Prophet here threatens to the Ninivites. Thus hee. The second is Opus Chro∣nagraphicum, Orbis Vniver∣si. Antwerpia. 1611. pag. 186.187. Petrus Opmrus, a grave Histori∣an, who writes thus of Playes. The ancient Romanes did waste too much upon Pleasures and Spectacles, of which they had foure sorts: Stage-playes which served to delight their eares: Cirque-playes, Gladiators, and Huntings, which ser∣ved for their eyes: From the first of these, they learned filthi∣nesse and lewdnesse: from the latter, cruelty and inhumanity. Neither did any one bring backe those manners from these Spe∣ctacles that he brought thither; for a certaine rust and canker did spread it selfe over them at unawares. Neither doe vices more easily or speedily corrupt mens mindes then by these plea∣sures. The third is In tertiam partē divi Tho∣mae Salaman∣cae. 1589. pag. 545.546. Didacus de Tapia, a famous Spanish Hermite; who discussing this question; Whether the Sacrament might be given to Stage-players? writes thus. Tam acriter Patres antiqui in perniciosum hoc hominum genus inve∣huntur, & ain fevere sacri Canones in il∣los animadver∣tunt censuris Ecclesiasticis, vehementer ut suspicor, turpiora esse quae olim in Thea∣tris agebantur, quam quae his temporibus. Quicquid vero de hoc sit, lasciva sunt quae modo aguntur, turpia & obscaena, atque religioni christianae valde perniciosa Ac proinde quicunque aliquid sapit in Domino eos tenetur arbitrari publicos pec¦catores, reique publicae pestem tanto graviorem, quantò gravius est animae vlnu quam corporis, &c. Ibidem. The ancient Fathers inveigh so bitterly against this pernicious kinde of men, and the holy Canons punish them so severely by Ecclesiasticall censures, that I suspect that those things which were acted in Theaters heretofore, were filthier then those things that are acted now. But let this be as it will, yet the things that are played now are lascivious, filthy, and obscene, and very pernicious to Christian Religion. And therefore whosoever
asts any sweetnesse in the Lord, or is any whit wise towards God, is bound to repute them publike sinners, and so much the more grivous plague of the Common-weale, by how much the wound of the soule is greater then that of the body. The Coun∣cell of Carthage, Saint Cyprian, Chrysostome, and Augu∣stine (whose words he there recites at large) excommu∣nicate them both from the Society of the Faithfull, and the Sa∣craments, as the very infamy, plagues, and blemish of the Church, which could not tolerate them without much infamy and dishonour; since the very Pagan Romans disfranchised them their tribes, and made them infamous. Quod si ho∣mines scenici apud Ethnicos habentur infa∣mes, & omni honore priva∣bantur, ut ve∣rissie affir∣mat divs Au∣gustinus, quid nos tandem Christianos facere oportet? Certè fugere ac damnare debemus in Iudo ac joco, qucquid pro∣fusum, quic∣quid immode∣stum, quicquid illiberase, quicquid petulans, quicquid flagitiosum: quae omnia in Officijs Tullius ipse damnabat. Inveniuntur autem haec in Theatris. Quod si homines scenici face∣tijs & acumine dictorum, & cantus suavitate delectant, & sententijs gravioribus ad∣monent & erudiunt, & repraesentatione antiquarum rerum atque affectibus recre∣ant, utinam nunquam ista bona Comaedijs miscuissent. Hoc enim ideò accidit, quod malum tam per se sit debile ac miserum, ut seipsum tueri non possit nisi juvetur a bono. Malum enim i perfectum fuerit destruit seipsum, ut ait Aristotelis; ac pro∣inde occultatur sub specie boni, ut detineat ac fallat homines incautos: Sumus enim natura vehementer propensi ad honestatem. Quamvis autem aliqua bona misceantur in his ludis, deberemus autem prae oculis semper habere illa praeclara verba Hironomi ad Letam. Nemo ad lupanar mittit virginem suam quamvis qaedam ibi reperiri possit de turpi corruptione lugentes: nemo haeredem suum latronum turbae committit, ut discat audatiam: nemo in perforatam intrat cym∣bam ut disct vitare naufragium. Nemo ergo ad Theatri locum impurum & infa∣mem, & contrarium religioni, & modestiae & sobrietati Christianae (locus scilicet ille Daemonibus familiaris, invisus Deo) debet procedere, ut discat aut gustet quae ibi dicuntur, sunt enim mixta veneno. Ibidem. And if these Stage-players are reputed infamous among Heathens, and de∣prived of all honour, as Saint Augustine most truely affirmeth. De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. cap. 31. what ought we Christians now to doe? Verily we ought to eschue and condemne both in Playes and sports, what ever is profuse, what ever is imm∣dest, what ever is unseemely, what ever is wanton, what ever is wicked; all which even Tully himselfe condemned n his Offi∣ces. But all these things are found in Play-houses: But if that Stage-players delight men with their pleasures, iests, and wily speaches, and with the sweetnesse of their songs, and mu∣sicke; or if they adorne and instruct men with their grave
Sentences, and please them with the representation of anciet things, or with their passions; (A common objection in the behalfe of Stage-playes;) would to God they had never mixed these good things with their Comdies: For this onely happens because evill is so weake and miserable by it selfe, that it cannot defend and helpe it selfe, unlesse it be holpen and assisted by good: For evill, if it be perfect, detroyeth it selfe, as Ari∣stotle saith; and therefore it is hid under the shew of good, that it may deteine and deceive incautelous men: for by nature we are vehemently prone to honesty. But albeit some good things are mingled in these Playes, yet we alwayes ought to have these excellent words of Hierom before our eyes, in his Epistle to Laeta. No Man (saith he) sendeth his Daughter to the Stewes, although some Women may there be found beway∣ling their filthy corruption: no man commits his Heire to a company of Theeves, that he may learne audacity; no man enters into a Boate that is full of holes, that he may learne to avoyd shipwracke. Nota bene. No man therefore ought to goe to the im∣pure and infamous place of the Theater which is contrary to religion, to modesty and sobriety, (a place so familiar to Devils, and so odous to God,) that he may learne or tast the things there acted: for they are intermixed with poyson. Such is the venome, the contagion of Players and Play-haunters, in this Popish Hermites judgement, whose words of Pa∣pist (and I presume no Protestant) dares to question. The fourth is Iohn Bodine, an eminent Polititian, and re∣nowned Statesman, who hath passed this verdict upon Stage-playes. Bodine his Common-wealth. Lōdon 1606. Booke 6. chap. 1. pag. 645.646. I will (writes he) passe over in silence the abuses which are committed in suffring of Comedies and En∣terludes, the which (pray marke it) is a most pernicious plague to a Common-weale: for there is nothing doth more corrupt the Citizens good manners, simplicity and natu∣rall bounty then Spectacula enim dulcissi∣ma sunt irrita∣menta omnis, non tàm libi∣dinis quàm in∣humanitatis. Mapheus Vgi, De Educatione Puerorum. lib. 1. cap. 14. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 15. pag. 88. D Stage-playes: the which have the more power and effect, for that their words, accents, gesture, mo∣tions and actions, governed with all the art that may be, and of a most filthy and dishonest subiect, leaves a lively impression in their soules who apply thereunto even all their sences. To con∣clude,
we may well say, that the Comedians Stage is an appren∣tiship of all impudency, loosenesse, whoredome, cozening, deceit and wickednesse. And therefore Politicorum. lib. 7. cap. 17. Aristotle doth not with out cause say, That they must have a care lest the subiects went to Comedies: O that our Magistrates would consi∣der it. he had said better, that they should have pulled downe their Theaters, and shut the Comedians out of the Citty gaes. For saith Epistola 7. Seneca. there is nothing more contrary to good manners, then to haunt Playes. And therefore See the Ge∣nerall History of France. pag. 114. accor∣dingly. Philip Augustus King of France, did by a publike Edict, banish all Players out of his Realme. If any one will say, that both Greekes and Romanes did allow of Playes: I answer, that it was for a superstition they had unto their gods: but the wi∣sest have alwayes blamed them. For although a Tragedy hath something in it more stately and heroike, and which doth make the hearts of men lesse effeminate: yet Plutarchi Solon. Solon having seene the Tragedy of Thespis played, did much mislike it; and whereas Thespis excusing himselfe, said, it was but a Play: No (re∣plyed Solon) but this Play turnes to earnest. Much more had he blamed Comedies, which were then unknowne: and now alwayes they put at the end of every Tragedy (as poyson into meate) a Comedy or Iigge. And although that Comedies were more tolerable among those that dwell in the Southerne parts, being more heavy and melancholy by nature, and for their naturall constancy lesse subiect to change, yet should they be utterly denyed to those that live toward the North, being of a sanguine complexion, light and inconstant; having in a man∣ner all the force of their soule in the common and brutall sence: But there is Nullam ha∣bet spe salutis aeger, quem ad intemperantiā medicus hor∣tatur. Seneca E∣pist. 129. no hope to se Playes forbidden by the Magi∣strates, for commonly they are the first at them. Thus farre these Forraigners. To passe by Cantores au∣tem & scenicos artisies tanto in pretio habu∣erunt ut ejus∣modi acrooma∣ atque ocij liberalis oble∣ctamēta pluris quàm doctos atque disertos homines face∣rent. Ex ple∣be autem alij in tabernis vinarijs pernoctabant, nonnulli velabris umbraculorum Theatralium seabdebant,, quidem aleis pugnanter contendebant, omnes ferme totos dies in Thea∣tris ac Circis ludis muneribus{que} dediti traducebant, otium ipsum Imperatori solertia comperatum ad voluptatem, non ad virtutem incitamenta praebentes. At{que} hi quidem mores licet posteriores aliquot Imperatores emendare conati sunt, tamen in dies cor∣ruptiores deterīores{que} effecti sunt quous{que} tota Italia, quae marcescente ac diuturno prope languore torpente, barbari Imperium ex omni parte debile invaserunt, & sevis∣sime distraxerunt. D Occidentali Imperio. lib. 1. fol. 32. Carolus Sigonius, who
enumerates the frequenting, tolerating, and countenancing of Stage-playes both by Prince and people, as the inevitable fore∣runner, and chiefe occasion both of th destruction and over∣throw of the Roman Empire, by the Gothes and Vandals: and Who is very copious to our present pur∣pose. uevara, his Dial of Princes. l. 3. c. 43. to 48. I come now to our own domestique Playes, to see what our Writers, our Divines, in their daily Sermons; what our Vniversi∣ties, Magistrates, and our whole State have determined of them, in confirmation of my Minors truth. For our Writers. To passe by those of more ancient times, as Beda, Anselme, Alexander Fabritius, Hlkot, Bradwardi, Ioannis de Burgo, Alexander de Ales, Edmun∣dus Cantuariensis, Ioannis Saresberiensis, Petrus Blesensis Mathw Paris, Polychronicon, Ludovicus Vives, Thomas Waldensis, and Act 7. Scene 5. others hereafter quoted, who all con∣demne these Stage-playes as intolerable corruptions. Master Northbroke, an eminent learned Divine, in his excellent Treatise against Vaine Playes and Enterludes, Im∣printed by Authority, London 1579 writes thus of Stage-playes. Fol. 28. vid. Ibidem. To speake my minde and conscience plainely and in the feare of God, I say, that Players and Playes are not tolerable nor sufferable in any Common-weale, especially where he Gospell is preached; (which he there proves at large by sundry testimonies of Fathers, Councels, mo∣derne Divines, and others; and by many argu∣ments,) because they are the occasions of much sinne and wickednesse, corrupting both the mindes and manners of their Actors and Spectators. The Author of the third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, (once The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 49.50, 51. a Playerly Play-poet himselfe, till being pricked in conscience for it, he renounced his profession) dlivers his experimentall resolution of Stage-playes in these very tearmes. Ibidem. pag 43.44. Such doubtlesse is mine opinion of common Playes, that in a Common-weale they are not sufferable. My reason is, because they are publike enemies to vertue and religion, allurements to sinne, corrupters of good manners, meere Brothel houses of Bawdery, and bring both the Gospell into slander, the Sabbath into contempt, mens
soules into dager, and finally the whole Common-weale into disorder: all which particulars hee there confirmes at large. The title of which Booke is very observable: viz. A second and third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters: the one whereof was sounded by a reverend Bishop, dead long since; the other by a worshipfull and zealous Gen∣tleman now alive: one shewing the filthinesse of Playes in times past; the other the abomination of Theaters in the time present: both expresly proving, that that Common-weale is nigh unto the curse of God, wherein either Players be made of or Theaters maintained: Set forth and allowed by Authority. Anno 1580. A pregnant Authorized evidence of my Minors truth. Master Stephen Gosson, another great Play-poet before his conversion, (for See his Schoole of A∣buse, the Epi∣stle to the Rea∣der, according∣ly. which he after∣wrds shed many a bitter teare;) in his This is the Title of the Booke. Schoole of Abuse; containing a pleasant invective against Poets, Pipers, Players, Iesters, and such like Caterpillers of a Common-wealth, setting up a lagge of Defiance against their mischeivous exercise, and overthrowing their Bulwarkes by Prophane Writers, Naturll Reason, and Common Experience; printed by Allowance, and Dedicated to Sir Philip Sidney. Anno 1578. And in his Playes Confuted, Dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham; which Booke is thus intituled: Playes Confuted in five Actions: Proving that they are not to be suffred in a Chri∣stian Common-weale, &c. Imprinted at London, about the yeere 1581. doth positively affirme, and copiously demonstrate upon unanswerable grounds; That Stage-playes and common Actors are no wayes tolerable in any Christian, or Well-governed Common-weale; because they occasion much wickednesse, lewdnesse, and disorder, and exce∣dingly corrupt the mindes, the manners both of their Auditors and Spectators: as the Perusers of these Tractates shall more at large discerne. The selfe-same Assertion and Conclusion we shall finde, in Master Edition 4. London 1595. p. 101. to 107. Stubs, his Anatom of Abuses: in reverend In his Works. 1622. London. pars 3. p. 60. B B. Babington, his Exposition up∣on the 7. Commandement; in Master Iohn Field, his De∣claration of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden; published by
Authority. Anno 1583. In a Book intituled, The Church of evill mn and women, &c. printed by Richard Pinson. Anno 1580. In Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, De An∣tiqu. Ecclesiae Brittanicae. Lodini 1572. fol. ult. In M. George Whetston, his Mirror for Magistrates of Citties. London 1586. fol. 24. In Holling shead, his Chronicle. Anno 1549. pag. 1028. Numb. 25.30. Col. 2. Anno 1559. Col. 1184. Anno 1576. Col. 1209. In Doctor Iohn Case, Ethicorum. lib. 4. cap. 8. pag. 307.308. & Politicorum. lib. 5. cap. 8. pag. 474.475, 476. where he condemnes all Popular, though he allowes of Academicall Stage-playes, as Doctor Gager, and Doctor Gentiles likewise doe. In reverend B B. Halls Epistles, Dead. 6. Epist. 6. In the Rich Cabinet. London 1616. pag. 116.117, 118. In Master Samuel Purchas, his Pilgrim. cap. 51. pag. 490. In M. Doctor See the Epi∣tle to the 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait to Playes and Theaters. Sparkes, his Rehearsall Sermon at Pauls Crosse, the 29. of Aprill. Anno 1579. In the Anonymous Treatise of Dances. London 1581. shewing, that they are dependents or things annexed unto whoredome; wherin it is also proved by the way, that Playes are ioyned and knit together in a ranke with them. In incomparable Doctor Reinolds, his Overthrow of Stage-playes, printed 1597. and reprinted at Oxford, 1629. and in his Preface to the Vniversity of Oxford before his 6. Theses. pag. 45.46. London 1612. In Doctor Iohn White, his Sermon at Pauls Crosse, March 24. 1615. sect. 11. In Dr. Bond of the Sabbath. London 1595. p. 134.135.136.137.138. In I. G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. London 1615. pag 13. & 48. to 60. In Master Iohn Brinsly his 3. part of the True Watch chapter 11. Abomination 30. pag. 302. In Master Osmund Lake, his Probe Theologicall upon the Commadements. London 1612. pag 167. to 272. In Master William Perkins, his Exposition upon the 7. Com∣mandement, in his Workes. vol. 1. p. 60. D. In his Trea∣tise of Conscience. cap. 3. Tom. 1. pag. 538. In his Cases of Conscience. Booke 3. chap. 4. sect. 4. Question 2. vol. 2. pag. 140.141. and in his Commentary on Galathians 3. vol. 2. pag. 239. In I. P. his Covenant betweene God and man:
Exposition on the 7. Commandement. In B B. Baily, his Pre∣face to the Practise of Piety. In Master Dod, Master Cleavr, M. Elon. and B B. Andrewes, on the 7. Commandement. In Master Thomas Gatiker, of the Lawfull use of Lots. pag. 216. In Doctor Layton, his Speculum Bei Sacri. cap. 45. In Ma∣ster Iohn Downhm, his Summe of Divinity. Booke 1. chap. 11. pag. 203. and in his Guide to Godlinesse. lib. 3. chap. 21. sect. 5. In Master Rebert Bolton, his Discourse of True Happinesse. pag. 3.34. In a Short Treatise against Stage-playes Dedicated to the Parliament. Anno 1625. In Richard Rawlidge, his Monster lately found out, &c. London 1628. pag. 2.3.4. In Doctor Ames, De Iure Conscientiae. lib. 5. p. 34. pag. 271. In Master Richard Brathwait, his En∣glish Gentlewoman. London 1631. pag. 53.54. In Doctor Thomas Beard, his Theater of Gods Iudgements. Edition 2. London 1631. Booke 2. chap. 36. pag. 435.436. who in these their severall Writings, unanimously condemne all Stage-playes, as unsufferable pernicious abominations and corruptios in a Christian State, which desperately deprave mens mindes and manners, by drawing them on to idlenesse, wantonnesse, prophanesse, whoredome, dissolutensse, effemiacy, and all kinke of vice and wickednesse whatsoever; as these their Writings, with See D. Featlies Hand-mayd of Devotiō. Edit. 2. pag. 408. Mr. Samuel Ward, his Balme from Gilead. pag. 82. My Perpetuity, &c. p. 586.587. My Censure of M. Cosens, his Co∣zening Devo∣tions. pag. 90. Lame Giles, his Haulting. p. 1. & The Histo∣ricall Narrati∣on, annexed to it. pag. 14. sundry others will more largely te∣stifie; which fully suffragate to my present Assumption. That our godly Divines in their zealous daily Ser∣mons, have likewise declaimed against Stage-playes, both in former and latter times, as these our Writers doe, it is evident, not onely by our owne daily experi∣ence; (there being not one godly faithfull Minister where these Play-houses, Playes and Players are admit∣ted, but hath oft cyred out against them in the Pulpit, as the See the Pre∣face to the 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. very Schooles, the Tutors of Bawdery and Abuse; The nests of the Devill; the chaire of pestilence, the sinkes of all sin, the pompes and soveraigne places of Satan; the poyson of mens soules and manners, the plagues and overtures of the Common∣wealth, &c.) but by the testimony of the Prefacer to the 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. Anno
1580. who inormes us; that in his time many godly Preachers day by day, in all places of greatest resort, did de∣nonce the vengeance of God to those, be thy high or low, that favoured Playes, Theaters, or Players. That in all ages th most excellent men for learning have condemned them by th force of eloquence and power of Gods Word: and that many in the principall places of this Land have, and daily, yea openl doe speake against Playes, Players, and Theaters; as neither warranted by Gods Word, nor liked of Christians, but disallowed utterly, See here A 7. thorowout. by Scriptre, by reason, by Doctors, by Bishops, by their very Authors themselves, yea and by all other good men, as the enemies to godlinesse, the corruption of the wel-disposed: and so consequently a speiall engine to subvert all religion, and to overthrow the good State of that Common-weale wherein they are tolerated. By the suffrage of Master Playes Con∣futed. Action 4. at the close of it. Stephen Gosso. Anno 1581. who acquaints us That it is a shame to fre∣quent Playes, impudency to defend them: it is sinne in the Gentiles to set ot Playes, in Christians it is a presumptuous sinne; because we see better wayes and yet take the worse: we know their corruptions and allow them. All this hath beene sufficiently proved by ancient Writers, and daily revealed by learned Preachers; yet will nt my Country-men leave their Playes, because Playes are the nourishers of delight. By the expresse averment of M. In his Mirror for Magi∣strates. fol. 2. George Whetston. An. 1586. who records: That godly Divines, in pblike Sermons, and others in printed Bookes, have (of late) very sharpely invayed a∣gainst Stage-playes (unproperly called Tragedies, Comedies and Morals) as the springs of many vices, and the stumbling-blockes of godlinesse and vertue. Truely, the use of them on the Sabbath day, and the abuse of them at all times, with scurrility and unchast convaiance, ministers matter sufficient for them to blame, and the Magistrate to reforme. To which I might adde D. Rainolds, Overthrow of Stage-playes. Epistle to the Reader, & pag. 93.94. I. G. his Apologie for Actors, with sundry others who concurre in this. That our two famous Our Vniver∣sities cōdemne Stage-playes. Vniversities have passed the selfe same doome of condemnation against Stage-playes;
is most apparant; both by the testimony of M. Stephen Gosso. Anno 1581. who upon his owne knowledge afirmes: Playes Con∣futed. Action 5. at the begin∣ning. That many famous men in his time in both our Vniversities, had made open out-cries of the inconveniences bred by Playes; and that they held this opinion; That Playes are not to be suffred in a Christian Common-weale: but (saith he) they doe not thorowly prosecute the same, by printing any full discovery against them, because that inding the eares of the hearers stopt with the deafe Adder, they begin to shak the dust of their shooes against them; and follow the Counsell of God himselfe; Math. 7.6. Which biddeth them, throw no Pearles to Swine. By the testimony of learned D.Overthrow of Stage-playes p. 151.152, 153. Rainolds, who afirmes; that the best and gravest Dvines in the Vniversity of Oxford,Cited by Dr. Rainolds, in his Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 151.152. con∣demned Stage-playes by an expresse Statute made in a full Con∣vocation of the whole Vniversity, in the yeere of our Lord 1584. whereby the use of all common Playes was expresly prohibited in the Vniversity, lest the Pejora enim uvenes facile praecepta audi∣unt. Seneca Thy∣estes. Act. 2. fol. 36 Parebit pravi docilis Roman juven∣tus. Horat. Serm. l. 2. Satyr 2. pag. 201. Inde tra∣hunt juvenilia pectora pestem Mortiferam fiunt{que} ipsae si∣ne fronte puel∣lae. Mant. Fast. l. 2. & Dr. Rai∣nolds Epistle De∣dicatory to his 6. Theses. p. 45.56. yonger sort (who are prone to imitate all kind of vice) being spectators of so many lewde & evill sports as in them are practised, should be corrupted by them: answerable to which the Vniversity of Cambridge (as I have beene cre∣dibly informed) enacted a publike Statute; that no com∣mon Actors should be suffred to play within the Precincts of the Vniversities Iurisdiction, for feare they should deprave the Schollers manners. Which Statutes though perchance they are not alwayes so strictly observed as they ought, yet they are oft-times put in execution, by such Vice-chancelers, and Proctors as are most conscionably vigi∣lant and carefull in their places. All which being put together, sufficiently discovers our Vniuersities judge∣ment of common Players and Actors, what unsuffera∣ble mischiefes and corruptions they are. If any here Object; That our Vniversities approve of private Stage-playes acted by Schollers in private Colledges: therefore these Playes are not so intolerably evill in their opinions. I answer; See D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 151.152, 153.that our Vniversities though they to∣lerate and connive at, yet they give no publike approbation to these private Entrluds, which are not generally received
into all Colledges, but onely practised in some private houses, (perchance once in three or foure yeeres;) and that by the particular Statutes of those houses made in times of Popery, which require some Latine Comedies, for learning-sake onely, to bee acted now and then: Which Playes, as they are composed I.G. his Refu∣tation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 17 whose words I here recite. for the most part by idle braines, who affect not btter studies; and acted (as I. G.) informes us, by Gentle-bloods, and lusty Swash-bucklers, who preferre an ounce of vaine-glory, oftentatin and strtting on the Stage, before a pound of learning; See BB. Hall Epistles. De∣cad. 6. Epist. 6. and his Qu Vadis sect. 3.4 10, 11. or by such who are sent to the Vniversity, not so much to obtaine knowledge, as to keepe them from the common ryot of Gentlemen in these dayes; like little Children whom their Parents send to Schoole, the rather to keepe them from under feet in the streets, which care∣full Mothers greatly feare: their spectators for the most part being such as both Poets and Actors are; even such as reckon no more of their studies, then spend-all Gentlemen of their cast-suites: D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playes, p. 151.152, 153, 154. See Lang∣becrucius, De Vita & Hone∣state Ecclesia∣sticorum. l. 2. c. 2.22. accor∣dingly. So the graver, better, and more studious sort (especially Divines, who by sundry See here, pg. 149.150. and Act 7. Scene 3. thorowout. Councels are prohibited from acting or beholding any publike or private Stage-playes, and therefore dare not to a approach them) condemne them, censure them, come not a them, (especially when they transgresse the rules of modesty and decency as ought times they doe:) Neither are these Playes so frequent now as they have beene in former times, by reason of those mischiefes, D. Ranolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 24.25. those expences of time and mony which they occasion, and that affinity they have with common Stage-playes, which all ages, all Christian, all prophane Authors of note, and these our Vniversities have solemnely con∣demned. Descend we from our Vniversities to our Magistrates. The Magistrates of the Citty of London, as His Declara∣tion of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden. M. Iohn Field records, obteined from Queene Elizabeth, of famous memory, about the yeere 1580. that all Heathe∣nish Playes and Enterludes should be banished upon Sabbath dayes: and not long after Richard Raw∣lidge, in his Monster lately found out and discovered, or the Scourging of Tiplers. London 162. pag. 2.3, 4. where this is verbatim related. many godly Cittizens, and
wel-disposed Gentlemen of London, considering that Play-houses and See M. George Whetston, his Myrror for Magistrates of Citties tho∣rowout, to this purose. Dicing-houses, were traps for yong Gentlemen and others; and perceiving the many inconveniences, and great damage that would ensue upon the long suffring of the same, not onely to particular persons, but to the whole Citty; and that it would also be a great disparagement unto the Governours, and a dishonour to the government of this honourable Citty, if they should any longer continue; acquainted some pious Magistrates therewith, desiring them to take some speedy course for the sup∣pression of common Play-houses and Dicing-houses within the Citty of London and Liberties thereof. Who thereupon made humble suite to Queene Elizabeth and her Privy Councell, and obtained leave from her Maiesty to thrust the Players out of the Citty, and to pull downe all Play-houses and Dicing-houses within their Liberties: which accordingly was effected: and the Play-houses in Gracious-street, Bishops-gate-street, that nih Pauls, that on Ludgate-hill, and the White-Friers, were quite put downe and suppressed by the care of these religious Se∣nators. And surely (writes my Author) had all their Suc∣cessors followed their worthy steps, sinne would not at this day have beene so powerfull and raigning as it is. This memora∣ble Act of suppressing Play-houses by our London Ma∣gistrates, by Authority from our vertuous Queene Eliza∣beth, and her most Sage Privy Counsell, as intolerable grie∣vances and annoyances to our chiefe Christian Metro∣polis, is an infallible argument, that they Ne{que} enim censebant isti faelicem esse rempublicam stantibus mae∣nibus, ruenti∣bus moribus. Ea enim mala quae oriuntur in morbus, sae∣vientibus pe∣jora sunt hosti∣bus. August. De Civit Dei. lib. 1. cap. 30.33. all reputed them, unsufferable corruptions in a Christian State. Now as these pious Magistrates demolished Play-houses, and thrust out all Players from within their Liberties, which now have taken sanctuary in some priviledged places, without their Iurisdiction; so divers sage and pi∣ous Iustices of Peace, and Magistrates in sundry Citties and Counties of our Realme, have from time to time, punished all wandring Stage-players By Vertue of the Statutes of 14. Eliz. c. 5. & 39. Eliz. cap. 4. & 1. Iac. cap. 7. as Rogues, not∣withstanding the Master of the Revels, or other mens allow∣ance, who have no For 14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4 & 1. Iacob. c. 7. give them no authority at all to license any, and this their license is voyd, by the expresse words of 1. Ia∣coi. cap. 7. legall authority to license vagrant Players: and in cases where they have had Commissions to act,
they have oft denyed them liberty so to doe, within their Iuris∣dictions, lest their lascivious, prophane, and filthy Playes, should corrupt the people, and draw them on to vice. All which suf∣ficiently demonstrates what our Magistrates thinke of Players and Stage-playes, which our whole State and Kingdome have condemned, as I shall now make evi∣dent, by some Acts of Parliament. In 4. Henry 4. cap. 27. 4. of Henry the IV. cap. 27. I finde this Act of Parliament made. Item, to eschew many diseases and mischiefes, which hath hapned be∣fore this time in the Land of Wales, by many Wasters, Rimours, Minstrels, and other Vacabonds; It is ordained and stablished, that no Master-rimour, Minstrill nor Vacabond be in any wise sustained in the Land of Wales to make commothes nor gathering upon the people there. Loe here an ancient Sta∣tute banishing all Players, Rimours, and Minstrels out of Wales, as the Authors of many commotions, disorders, and mischiefes. 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. In 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. there was this Law enacted against Mummers. For as much as lately within this Realme, divers persons have disguised and apparel∣led themselves, and covered their faces with Visours or other things, in such manner as they should not be knowne: and di∣vers of them in a company together, naming themselves Mum∣mers, have come to the dwelling place of divers men of honour, and substantiall persons, and so departed unknowne; whereupon murthers, felony, rape, and other great hurts and inconveni∣ences have afore-time growne, and hereafter be like to come by the colour thereof, if the said disorder should continue not refor∣med. Wherefore be it enacted by the King our Soveraigne Lord, &c. that if any persons hereafter disguise or apparell them with Visours or otherwise upon their faces, and so disguised or apparelled as Mummers or persons unknowne, by reason of their apparell, associate or accompany them together or apart, and attempt to enter into the house of any person or persons, or assault or affrayes make upon any person or persons in the Kings high-way, or any other place in forme afore disguised, that then the said Mummers, or disguised persons, and every of them shall be arrested by any of the Kings leige people as suspects or
Vacabonds, and be committed to the Kings Gaole, there to be imprisoned by the space of 3. monethes without bayle or main∣prise, and then to make fine to the King by the discretion of the Iustices, by whom they shall be delivered out of prison. And al∣so it is ordained and enacted by the said Authority, that if any person or persons sell or keepe any Visours or Visour in his house, or in any other place within this Realme afer the feast of Easter next comming, and after this Act proclaimed, that the said person (that keepeth the said Visour or Visours) shall forfeit to the King our Soveraigne Lord for every Visour 22. s. And further shall suffer imprisonment, and make fine after the dis∣cretion of the Iustices afore whom he is thereof convicted by examination or by inquisition, after the course of the Common∣law. Vpon the consideration of which Statute, Vna omnium regionum An∣glia ejusmodi personatas bel∣luas hactenus non vidit, nec∣quidem vult videre; quando apud Anglos, in re hac prae alijs sapientio∣res, lex est, ut capitale sit, si quis personas induerit. De In∣ventor. rerum. . 5 cap. 2. p. 388. Polydor Virgil writing of Stage-playes and Mummers, records: That onely England of all other Countries did not as yet behold these personated beasts: neither truely will she see them: since among the English, who in this thing are farre wiser then o∣thers; there is this law, that it shall be caitall for any person to put on a Visour or Players habit: Which Statute, as may be collected from Polydor, (who This Booke of his was pub∣lished, Anno 1499. as ap∣peares by the Epistle Dedi∣catory. wrote about some 10. yeeres after it) extends as well to Players as Mummes. In 2. & 3. Philip and Mary. c. 19. 2. & 3. of Philip and Mary. cap. 9. intituled; An Act to avoyd divers licenses of houses wherein unlawfull games be used: upon the humble Petition of the Commons to the Queene in Parliament, it was inacted; That whereas by reason of sundry Licences heretofore granted to divers persons, as well within the Citty of London and the Suburbs of the same, as also in di∣vers other places of the Realme, for the having, maintaining, and keeping of Houses, Gardens, & places for Bowling, Tennise, and Dicing (a game prohibited as unlawfull by sundry other of our Statutes: viz. By 12. Richard 2. c. 6.11. Henry 4. cap. 4. 17. Edward 4. cap. 3.11. Henry 7. cap. 2.19. Henry 7. cap. 12. & 33. Henry 8. cap. 9. where Dice-play is stiled an un∣lawfull, unprofitable, ungracious, and incommendable game, whereby divers are utterly undone and impoverished of their goods, and by meanes whereof divers and many murthers, rob∣beries,
and other hainous felonies were oftentimes committed in divers parts of the Realme. See 17. Edw. 4. c. 3. and thereupon it is severely condemned under great mulcts and punishments; the Dice-players being to forfeit ten pound a peece, and to suffer two yeeres imprisonment, and such as keepe any Dicing-houses to forfeit twenty pound a peece, and to suffer 3. yeeres impri∣sonment, &c.) for white and blacke, making and marring, and other unlawfull games prohibited by the Lawes and Sta∣tutes of this Realme, divers and many unlawfull assemblies, conventicles, seditions and conspiracies had beene daily and se∣cretly practised by idle and misruly persons repairing to such places, of the which robberies and divers misdemeanours had ensued; that for remedy thereof, all Licences, placards or grants made to any person or persons for the keeping of any Bowling∣allies, Dicing-houses, or other unlawfull games (in the which number Stage-playes were included) should be utterly voyd, and of none effect. By the 34. & 35. Henry 8. cap. 1. 2. & 3. Edward 6. cap. 1.1. Eliz. cap. 2. & 3. Ia∣cobi. cap. 21. Statutes of 34. & 35. Henry 8. cap. 1. of 2. & 3. Edward 6. cap. 1.1. Eliz. cap. 2. and of 3. Iacobi. cap. 21. we have severall mulcts and penalties in∣flicted upon such, who should recite or interpret Scripture, or revile the Sacrament or Booke of Common Prayer, or any part thereof; or iestingly and prophanely speake or use the Name of God the Faether, or of Christ Iesus, or of the holy Ghost, or of the Trinity, in any Enterludes, Stage-playes, Rymes or Page∣ants. And lest any one should hence inferre, that these Statutes (which are principally intended in private Playes and Enterludes, since they condemne and sup∣presse all publike,) seeme to allow of popular Stage-playes, because they suppresse not Playes themselves, but onely these their abuses; the 14. Eliz. c. 5.39 Eliz. cap. 4.1. Iacobi. cap. 7. & 1. Caroli. c. 1. Statutes of 14. Eliz. cap. 5.39. Eliz. cap. 4.1. Iacobi. cap. 7. & 1. Caroli. cap. 1/ doe in expresse words, condemne all Stage-playes, and common Enterludes, as unlawfull exercises and pastimes; occasioning many great inconveniences, quarrels, blood-sheds, and disor∣ders, to Gods dishonour, and the publike preiudice: For the better suppression of which, the 14. Eliz. c. 5. & 39. Eliz. c. 4. Statutes of 14. Eliz. cap. 5. & 39. Eliz. cap. 4. have branded, have adiudged all
common Players of Enterludes, all idle persons using any un∣lawfull games, all Players and wandring Minstrels, for Rogues, for Vacabonds and Sturdy Beggers; subiecting them to such paines and punishments as other wandring Rogues and Vaca∣bonds are to undergoe; unlesse they should belong to some Baron or other honourable person of greater degree, and be authorized by them to play under their hand and Seale of Armes: which license of theirs exempted them onely from the pu∣nishment, not from the infamy, or stile of Rogues and Vaca∣bonds: which Statutes, not so effectually suppressing these Playes and Enterludes as was expected, by rea∣son of the liberty that Barons and other Noblemen had to license Players of Enterludes belonging to them to act their Playes, the 1. Iacobi. c. 7. Statute of 1. Iacobi. c. 7. to remedy this mischiefe, hath declared and enacted: that from thence∣forth no authority given or to be given or made by any Baron of this Realme, or any other honourable Personage of greater de∣gree unto any Enterlude Players, Minstrels, Iuglers, Bear∣ward, or any other idle person or persons whatsoever, using any unlawfull games or Playes, to play or act, should be available to free or discharge the said persons or any of them, from the paines and punishments of Rogues, of Vacabonds and Sturdy-beggers in the said Statutes (viz. 14. Eliz. cap. 5. & 39. Eliz. cap. 4.) mentioned; but that they shall be taken within the offence and punishments of the same Statutes, and of this Sta∣tute of 1. Iacobi. cap. 7. So that now at this day, by these severall Acts of Parliament yet in force, (resolved and concluded upon after long mature deliberation by our whole State and Kingdome,) all common Stage-playes, are solemnely adiudged to be unlawfull and pernicious Exercises, not sufferable in our State: and all common Stage-players, by whomsoever licensed; to be but Vacabonds, Rogues, and Sturdy-beggers; who ought to suffer Viz. They may be sent to the house of Correction; imprisoned, set in Stockes and whipped, &c. and if they stil persist in Play∣ing after these corrections; they may bee burned with an hot burning I∣ron of the bredth of an English shil∣ling, with a great Roman R. in the left shoulder, which letter shall there remaine as a perpetuall marke of a Rogue, &c. as these severall Statutes more largely shew: and if this will not reforme them; they may be banished, and after that if they returne againe and persist incorrigible, be executed as Felons. such paines and punish∣ments
in every degree, as are appointed to be inflicted upon all other Vacabonds, Rogues, and Sturdy-beggers, by the fore∣named Statutes. So that all Magistrates may now justly punish them as Rogues and Vacabonds, where-ever they goe, (yea they ought both in law and conscience for to doe it, since these severall Statutes thus inforce them to it) notwithstanding any License which they can procure, since the expresse words of the Statute of 1. Iacobi. cap. 7. hath made all Licenses unavaylable to free them from such punishments. It is most apparantly evident then by all these promises; that not onely Pagan Wri∣ters, Emperours, States, and Magistrates; together with the Primitive Christians, Fathers, and Christian Wri∣ters of Forraigne parts; but even our owne domestique Writers, Preachers, Vniversities, Magistrates, and our whole State it selfe in open Parliament, both in ancient, moderne, and present times, have abandoned, censured, condemned Stage-playes and common Actors, as the Spectacula quoniam maxi∣ma sunt irrita∣menta vitio∣rum, & ad cor∣rumpendos a∣nimos poten∣tissimè valent, tollenda sunt nobis, &c. La∣ctantius De Vero Cultu cap. 20. very pests, the corruptions of mens mindes and manners; the Seminaries of all vice, all lewdnesse, wickednesse, and disorder: and intolerable mischiefes in any civill or well-disciplined Com∣mon-weale: therefore my Minors truth is past all doubt, we cannot but readily subscribe unto it; and so by con∣sequence to the conclusion too, without any more di∣spute. How then can we tolerate, or connive at, much lesse applaude, frequent, or iustifie these pernicious de∣praving Enterludes, which we have all thus condem∣ned as intolerable evils? Our owne Writers, Preachers, Vniversities, Magistrates; yea, our whole Realme and State in Parliament (to whose Chescun ho∣me est partie al Act de Parliament. 39. Edward 3.7. Br. Parlia∣mēt. 26.4. Hen∣ry 7.10. b. 21. Henry 7, 1. b. 3. Edward 4.2 a. 21. Edw. 4.45. Plowdon. f. 59. a. & 396. b. cum pluri∣bus alijs. Acts we all are parties, as our Law-bookes teach us) have thus publikely branded, censuraed them, as extreamely evill how can, how dare we then foment them, pleade for them or resort unto them, as exceeding good? Let us, O let us not be worser then these Heathen, nor wiser then these Chri∣stian fore-recited forraigne, and domstique Authors, Fathers, Ministers, Magistrates, Princes, Emperours,
States and Kingdomes, who have thus abandoned, sup∣pressed Playes and Players for the forenamed mischiefes which they did occasion: but as we cannot but approve, applaud their censure in our judgemēts, so let us submit unto them in our practise; renouncing, abominating all filthy Stage-playes from henceforth and for ever, as the very poyson, the corruption of our mindes and manners, which they will strangely vitiate, as all these conclude, and the examples both of the ancient Greekes and Ro∣manes witnesse. And no wonder is it, that Stage-playes should thus deprave the Actors, the Spectators mindes and manners Pejora juve∣nes facile prae∣cepta audiunt. Senec. Thyestes. Act 2. fol. 36. a Citò flores pe∣riunt; citò vio∣ls & ilium & crocū pestilens aura corrūpit. Hierom Epist 7. c. 5. Imberbis invenis tandem custode remo∣o, Gaudet e∣quis, canibus∣que, & aprici gramine cam∣pi; Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper; Vtilium tardus provisor, prodigus aeris: Sublimis, cupidus{que}, & amata relinquere pernix Horace De Are Poet. p. 301. especially those of the yonger sort, who in regard both of their tender yeeres, their wat of iudgemēt, of experience; the strength, the vigor of their lusts, and their naturall incli∣nation unto evill, are more easily crrupted. For if 1 Cor. 15.33. Scabe animus laborat, plenus{que} est malorum suc∣corū ex pravis colloquijs. Iustin Martyr, ad Zenam & Screnum Epistola. Verba enim ad opera viam praebent. Theophylact & Chrysostome in Ephes. 5.3, 4. evill words corrupt good manners, as the Apostle teacheth: there is plenty of these in all our Stage-playes, See Act 3. Scene 1. accordingly. which are little btter then meere bwdry and scrrility: If sinfull, lewde companions: if the society of Adulterers, Adulte∣resses, Whore-masters, Whores, Ruians, Panders, Bawdes or such like leprous creatures, can deprave men, See Act 4. Scene 1.2. accordingly. as all professe they will; At{que} horu vitiorum spectators se∣deat homines impij at{que} mali. Nazianzen ad Seluchum. p. 1063. B. & here Act 4. Scene 1.2. accordingly. what others shall we meete at Theaters, but such lewde filth persons? If pestilen, wicked, vitious Loca non contaminant perse, sed quae in locis iunt, a quibus loca ipsa cotaminari altercati sumus. Tertul. D Spectac. lib. cap 8. places will infect mens mindes or manners; What place so dangerous, so leprous, so contagios, as the Play-house? which the Fathers stile, Thearum Pstleae Cathedra Clemens Alexand. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 11. Chrysost. Hom. 8. De Paenitentia. Tom. 5. Sl. 750. C. D. See here, pag, 67.68. a Chaire of Pe∣stilence. If adulterous, lascvious Spectacles re apt to poyson, to contaminate the eyes, the soules, the lve, the manners of the
Spectator, Iob 31.1, 7 Prov. 23.33. Isay 33.15. See Act 3 Scene 1. Act 6. Scene .4. accordingly. as they are: what Shewes, what Spectacles so lewde, so obscene, as those that are daily represented on the Stage? If any, if every of these will severally corrupt men, in company, in places where there is little danger, as too oft they doe; much more will they de∣prave men Et si non pro∣sint singula, juncta juvant. when they are all combined, as they are in Stage-playes; Habent sce∣lerum quicquid possedimus omnes. Claudia in Rufinum. l. 1. pag. 414. See here, p. 67 68, 69. according∣ly. where all the severall scattered corruptions that usually adulterate mens mindes and manners of themselves alone, unite their forces; their contagios into one. But what need I presse any further reasons to prove this cursed effect of Stage-playes, when as our own visible experience abundantly confirmes it? For alas, whence is all that prodigious desperate dissolutenesse, prophanesse, wickednesse, drunkennesse, impudence, lewdnesse, and disorder that grosse uncleanesse, that exorbitant obliquity, that stupendious degeneracy in life, apparel, speech, gesture,See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Lovelockes. & Act. 5. Scene 6. haire, complements, and the intire man? Whence all those severall armies of corrup∣tions, of vices, which infect our Nation? Whence all those severall beastly, diabolicall, audacious, crying, da∣ring sinnes of our Nunc eò glo∣riantur & qui patrant, & qui patiuntur mu∣liebria, effae mi∣nati corpore juxtà at{que} ani∣mo, ne scintil∣lam quidem retinent gene∣ris masculini, protinus plectentes cincinnos ornantesque, & cerussa fucoque oblinentes faciem pingentesque, unguentis quo{que} fragrantes exquisitissimis, Nam & hac utuntur illecebra, exercitati omnibus formae lenocinijs, nec pudet eos marem data opera mutare in faeminam. His parcendum non est, si audimus legem, quae ju∣bet androginum & sexum suum adulteratem impun occdi die ipsa ac hora qu deprae henditur, cum sit probrosus, patriae{que} suae & familiae dedecus, atque adeo to∣tius humanae generis. Philo Iudus, De Specialibu Legibus. pag. 1059.1060. femalized gotish males, or Quem praestare potest mulier galeata (deonsa) pud'orem Quae ugit à sexu? vires amat haec tamen ipsa vir nollet fieri: nam quantula nostra voluptas, &c Iuvnal Sayr. 6. pag. 50.51. See 56. mannish females, who out-stare the very Lawes of God, of Man, of Nature, and send up daily challenges for vengeance to the God of Heaven; Whence all those common Adul∣terers, Adulteresses, Whore-masters, Whores, Bawdes, Panders, Ruians, Rorers, Swearers, Duellers, Cheaters, Fashion-mongers, Fantastiques, Libertines, Scoffers, Rom. 1.30. haters of God, of grace, of holinesse; 2 Tim. 3.3. Despisers and slan∣derers
of all religious men; the Enemies of all modesty and common civility; with such other lawlesse, godlesse persons, who now swarme so thicke of late in the streets of our Metropolis; professing themselves open∣ly to be the very Thus Polycar∣pus said to Mar∣cion the Here∣tique. Agnosco te primogenitū Satanae. Eusebi∣us Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 4. Irenaeus Con∣tra Haereses. l. 3. c. 3. p. 254. first-borne of Satan, the very factors, and heires apparant of Hell; in that Isay 3.9. they proclaime their sinne as Sodom in the open view of all men, without the smal∣lest blush, and glory in those infernall filthy practises which should even Psal 119.28. Nahum. 2.10. melt their soules with sorrow, and Isay 1.29. c. 31.19. Psal. 44.15. Ier. 3.25. c. 31.19. Ezech. 16.54, 63. c. 36.32. Dan. 9.7, 8. confound their Faces with the deepest shame; See Chry∣sostom. Hoil. 38. in Matth. accordingly. Are not they all originall from Playes? From Play-houses? have they not all their birth, their growth, their aliment, their com∣plement, their intention, their support from these? Are not these the Nurseries, the Fountaines whence they spring? the food by which they live, they grow, and multiply? the meanes by which they roote and spred themselves? Certainely he is starke blinde that cannot; he most perversly wilfull that will not see it; so apparant is it to the eyes, the consciences of all men who pri in∣to the caues of these grosse disoders. Since therefore the dangerous leprosie, the See August. De Ciit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.33. & lib. 2. cap. 4. to 14. & cap. 27.29. pstiferous contagio of mind-corrupting, manner-depraving Stage-playes is so irrefraga∣bly confirmed by reason by experience, by all the fore-quoted Auhoriis, both Pagan and Christian forraigne and domestique; I may safely, I may confidently con∣clude on all the premiss, (and I hope ere long, to see Animum no∣strum, Patres conscripti, Rei∣pub. curis calentem, pulsavit saepius querela populorum, orta quiem x causis le∣vibus, sed graves eructavit excessus. Deplorat enim pro spectaculum volup ate ad discriminis se ultima pervenisse: ut legum ratione calcata, desprte prsquereur innoios servilis furor armatus: & quodillis humanitas ostra leae casa prsti∣tit, in tristitiam audacia nec plectenda convertit. Quod nos clementiae nostrae solita provisione compriminus, ne paulatim inendo graviorem vidicar cogaur offen∣sam. Benigni quippe principis est, non tam delicta vele punire quam tolere: ne ut acriter vindicando aestimetur nimius, at leviter agendo putetu improvidus. Theo∣doricus Rex. apud Casstodorum Variarum. lib. 1. Epist. 30. our Gracious Soveraigne, or Church, our State, our Prliament, our Counsell; yea all our Magistrates Ministers, People, even really concurring with me in this right Christian Asser∣tion;)
That Stage-playes deprave the mindes, adulte∣rate the manners both of their Actors and Spectators; and that therefore they are altogether unlawfull, abo∣minable unto Christians; Semper enim scelera dum non resecan∣tur, incres∣cunt, & in aug∣mentum faci∣norum prosili∣tur, quoties secur impuni∣tate peccatur. Chrysostom. De Absolon perse∣quente Patrm David Sermo. Tom. 1. not tolerable in any Christian well-ordered Common-weale: Which should cause us all in generall, each of us in particular, as wee either tender the publike or our owne private welfare, for ever to abandon, suppresse, renounce all Stage-playes. Hierom. E∣pist. 4. cap. 3. Crudelitas ista, petas est: This cruelty will be at least our piety, if not our safety, in these dangerous wicked times, that cry for nought but wrath and vengeance, which are likely 1 Thes. 2.16. for to come upon us to the uttermost, (as they did of old upon the See Scene 19. Iewes, the Greekes and Romanes,) for our resort to Stage-playes and our other sinnes, unlesse our speedy repentance, & Gods great mercy ward them off. SCENA SEXTA. THe sixt pestiferous effect of Stage-playes, is sloth  and idlenesse: Vitanda est improba Syren Desidia. Horace Sermo l. . Satyr. 3. pag. 204. two dangerous inchanting Syrens: From whence this 32. Argument will arise. That which is the constant cause the common spring and nursery of much sloth and idlenesse must needs be sinfull and pernitious unto Christians intolera∣ble in any Common-weale. See 1. Edward 6 cap. .3. Edw. 6. cap. 16.5. Edw. 6. c. 2. and all our Statutes against Rgues and Vacabonds, accordingly. But Stage playes are the constant occasions, the com∣mon springs and nurseries of much sloth and idle∣nesse; witnesse the Torpent eccè ingenia desidi∣osae iuventutis, nec in ullius rei honestae labore vigia∣tur. Somnas lnguo{que}, c somno & ln∣guoe turpir, malaum rerum industria, inusit animos. Cantandi saltandi{que} obscae∣na studia nunc efeminaros tenent; & capillum frngere, & ad muliebres blndas vocē extenuae, molltie corporis certatecum faeminis, & immundissimis se excolere munditijs, nostrorū dolescentiū pecimen est. Quisaequalium vstrorum quid dicam, satis ingeniosus, satis studiosus, immo quis satis vi est? Sne Cont. l.  oaemio. p. 967. present condiion of our English
Youth, who flocke to Theaters, whom Seneca hath long since discyphered in the Romanes. Therefore they must needs be sinfull and pernitious unto Christians, intolerable in any Common-weale. The Major verily must be granted to me: First, be∣cause sloth and idlenesse are sinnes against the Gen 3.19. Exod. 20.9 c. 23.12. Deut. 5.13. Psal. 128.2. Prov. 10.16. c. 19.15. c. 31.27. Eccles. 10.18. Exech. 16.49. Prov. 21.25. 2. Thes. 3.8. to 13. Mat. 20.3, 6. 1 Tim. 5.13. expresse command of God. Secondly, because Mollit viros otium & rubiginem obducit. Seneca Controvers. l. 2. Contr. 2. p. 1032. Na∣turae bonitatem socordia corrumpit. Plutarch De Liberorum Instit. p. 3. Vita in otio de∣posita non corpora modo sed & animos labefacit; ac ut aquae latentes sub umbra a non fluentes putrescunt: it in vita motuum expertes facultates hominibus insitae consenescunt & preunt. Plutarch De Occulte Viuendo Tom. 2. p. 117.118. Vt enim ferrū usu ac exercitatione splendescit, diuturno autem siusqualet & rubigine paulatim exe∣ditur at{que} conficitur: similiter humana mens officijs viro dignis acuitur, otio autem hebescit, & quasi squalore obducto corrumpitur. Est enim otium, entitudo & inertia tacitum quoddam venenum quo paulatim omnes virtutes infectae languescunt, lau∣des intereunt, & artes omnes praeclarae in oblivionem adducuntur. Osorius De Re∣gum Instit. fol. 11. & 110. Adde quod ingenium longo rubigine laesum Torpe, & est multo quam fuit ante minus. Fertilis assiduo si non renovetur aratro, Nil nisi cum spinis gramen habebit ager. Cernis ut ignavum corrumpunt otia corpus? Vt capiant vitium ni moveantur aquae? Ovid Tristium. l. 5. Elg. 12. p. 212. & De Ponto. l. 1. Eleg. 6. ag. 227. they are the very rust and canker of mens mides, mens parts, mens bodies, men soules. Thirdly, because Otium continet omnium flagitiorum seminarium. Mentem enim hebetat, animum corrumpit, hominis praestantiam labefactat, rationem de sttu deijcit, & li∣bidinem in animi dominatu constituit. Otio & securitate frangtur vires, languescit industria, hebescit ingenium, vitia crescunt, scelera prorumpunt, animi status opprimi∣tur, flagitiorum omnium bellum inexpiabile concilatur. Osorius, De Regum Instit. fol. 213.232. they are the occasion, the foun∣taine of most other sinnes; as Fac monitis fugias otia prima meis. Haec, ut ames, faciunt: haec, ut fecêre tuentur: haec sunt iucundi causa cibus{que} mali. Otia si toslas periêre Cupidinis arcus, Contēptae{que} jacent & sine luce faces. Quam platanus ivo gaudet, quám populus un∣a. Et quàm limosa canna palustris humo. Tam Venus otia amat: qui finem quaeris amoris, Cedit amor rebus: res age, tutus eris. Languor & immodici sub nullo vindice somni, Alea{que} & multo tempora quassa mero, Eripiant omnes animo sine vulnere vires. Affuit incauis desidiosus amor. Desidiam puer ille sequi solet; odit agentes, D vacuae menti, quo teneatur, opus. Quaeritur AEgistus quare sit factus adulter; In promptu causa est; desidiosus erat. Ovid. De Remedio Amoris. lib. 1. p. 215.216. Est enim meretric us animus instabilis semper ac fluctuat multum{que} ocio diffluit, unde major existit ad voluptates propensio. Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Hesaiam. lib. 1. cap. 9. Tom. 1. pag. 134. C. adultery, whoredome, drunken∣nesse,
theft, voluptuousnesse, pride in apparell, lasciviousnesse, vaine discourse, and a world of other sinnes which would never be committed; to which the In delitijs est omnis otiosus. Facito aliquid operis ut sem∣per te Diabo∣lus inveniat oc∣cupatum Ope∣ris labor susci∣piatur, nō tam propter victus necessitatem, quam propter animae salutē. Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 3. Devill could not tempt men, were they imployed in their lawfull callings. Fourthly, be∣cause the Ezech. 16.49, 50.very curse and wrath of God; togetherwith Prov. 10.4. c. 19.15. c. 20.13. Eccles. 10.18. penury, vanity, misery, and destruction attend these sinnes. Fiftly, because these sinnes See Euphor∣mi Satyricon. p. 308.309.310 Osorius De Regum Instit. fol. 11.15100, 167, 168, 213, 234, 236, 248. Aristot. Polit. l. 8. c. 3. p 508.509. Zenophon, De Instit. Cyri Historia p 30. Plutarch. De Occulte Vivendo. lib. accordngly are most dangerous, most pernitious, preiudiciall and destructive to a State, of all others; both be∣cause they indispose men too, and keepe them off from their honest callings, from all publike imployments and services for the publike good: because they occasion dearth and poverty, robbing the Common-wealth of the benefit of mens industry, and painefull labour and likewise because they are the Seminaries, Nurseries, and fewell of all other vices and corruptions, that either weaken, trouble, disorder, or Otm simul artes beatas & reges perdidit. Ctullus. p. 25 Galli olim in bllis floruerunt, mox sgniti cum otio intrans virtutem pariter ac liberatem amiserunt. Cor. Tacitus uij Agric. Vita sect. 4. p. 637. Nihil est quod facilius posset rempublim ever ee qu noblum  Persaru imperium armis prtum long  delevi Romanum impeium quo nullum unquam in terris majus extiit,  securitas verti. Regnum Hispaniae floren∣tissimu oum olim or  & dissip. Osrius, De Regum Insit lib. 7. c. 8. p. 234.248 subvert a Republike, (as idlenesse and luxury have subverted many,) as all Politi∣tians doe affirme: who censure and exclude all idle persons, as the Negligens ac  delicijs vi us ignvis maximè similis est. Plato Legum Dialog. 10. pap 9 6. pes fucos arent quod ne{que} ceras aciunt nec cellas extrudunt nec melle complnt, sed ipsum mel apium labore & sedulitte collectum intemperanter bsumunt. Sic omnes desides & ignavi, qui tanquā fuci nullam eipub. operam navant omes tamen repub. opes liguriunt, è regni fnibus eliminandi sunt. Osorius De Regum Instit. l 6 fol 167.168. very Caterpillers, Drones, and Canker-wormes of the Common-weales wherein they live; inacting sundry Lawes against them, as the lawes of Osorius, De Regum Instit. l 7. fol. 233. Draco, (who made idlensse a capitall crime:) togther with the lawes of the Oso∣rius. Ibid. AEgypti∣ans, of Plutarchi & Diogenis Lartij, Solon. p. 43. Solon, AElian Variae Hist. l. 4. c. 1. of Sardoa, and AElian. lib. 9. cap. 25. Pesistratus doe abundant∣ly
testifie. The causes therefore of such pernicious State-subverting sinnes as these, which have brought destruction to sundry great Republikes, as they Ezech. 16.49, 50. long since drew downe fire and brimstone from Heaven upon Sodom; must needs be as dangerous, as intolerable as these sins themselves: and so my Major (if either Divinity or Po∣licy may be credited) must be intirely condiscended to. For the Minor; That Stage-playes are the constant occasions, the common Seminaries and Nurseries of much lasinesse, and idlenesse; (as our reverend Arch∣bishop Ludis mimis ac jocis quibus molliores ani∣mi à rebus ge∣rendis abdu∣cuntur ne juve∣nis quidem se recreai permi∣sit. De Antiqui∣tate Ecclesiae Brittanicae. fol. 445. Matthew Parker witnesseth,) it is most appa∣rant. First, by their ordinary Actors and Frequenters; Chrysostom. Homil. 38. in Matth. Clemēs Alexandrinus. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertul∣lian, & Cypri∣an, De Specta∣culis. libri. Gualther. Hō. 11. in Nahum. M. Northbrooke, M. Gosson, Ma∣ster Stubs, and the third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, accordingly. who are commonly such idle Drones, as live either altogether without any honest calling; their whole life being but an Apprentiship of idlenesse, or a continued Play; (as if they were borne for no other purpose Nos nume∣rus sumus, & fruges consumere nati Horace. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 2. pag. 240. but to eate, to drinke, to sleepe, to play, and waste their time:) or else such who are altogether negligent, slothfull, indiligent in their callings: BB. Hall. Epist. Decad. 6. Epist. 6. such who make Pauls their Westminster; a Play-house, an ordinary or Dancing-schoole, their Study:  Play-booke their Littleton, their Bible: and loytering, Ludis mimis ac jocis quibus molliores ani∣mi à rebus ge∣rendis abdu∣cuntur ne juve∣nis quidem se recreai permi∣sit. De Antiqui∣tate Ecclesiae Brittanicae. fol. 445. if not the courting of some Whore or Mistris, the greatest part of their profession; as too too many doe in this voluptu∣ous age: wherein divers of our male, more of our female sex, BB. Hall Ibidem. Tibi plectra moventur: Te tenet in tepido mollis amica sinu. Et si quis quaerat, quare pugnare recusas; Pugna no∣cet; citharae, noxque, venusque juvant. Tutius est jacuisse toro, tenuisse puellam; Theiciam digitis increpuisse lyram. Quam manibus clypeos & acutae cuspidis ha∣stam, Er gaseam pressa sustinuiss coma Ovid. Epist. 3. pag. 12. repte it a blemish to their honour, a disparagement to their gentility to be honesty imployed in any lawfull vocation that might either benefit themselves or others, or advance the publike good. Secondly, by the very end and use of Stage-playes, to which men seldome resort, but to passe away their idle houres, which they know not how to spend for want of other imployments. Alas say our idle
Drones one to another, (as if they had no God to serve, no Bibles to read, no Sermons to heare, no Churches, no Studies, no Closets to resort to, no graces to pur∣chase, no lusts to conquer, Vbicumque fueris intra temetipsum ora: si longè fueris ab oratorio, noli quaerere locum, quoni∣am tu ipse lo∣cus es. Si fueris in lecto aut in alio loco, ora, & ibi est tem∣plum. Frequen∣ter orandum, & flexo corpore mens est eri∣genda ad Deū. Sicut enim nullum est mo∣mentum quo homo non uta∣tur vel fua∣tur Dei boni∣tate & miseri∣cordia: sic nul∣lum debet esse momentum, quo eum prae∣sentem non habeat in me∣moria. Ome tempus in quo de Deo noncogitas hoc te computes perdidisse. Benardi Meditationes c. 6. Col. 1056. no Prayers to make, no spiri∣tuall instructions to learne, no holy duties to performe, no workes of grace to finish, no degrees of grace to ac∣quire, no friends to admonish, no families to instruct, no sicke to visite, no dejected spirits to comfort, no gracelesse persons to reprove, no heavenly misteries to contemplate, no spirituall doubts to satisfie, no callings to follow, no Heaven to desire, no Hell to feare,) wee know not how to spend or passe away these after∣noones, we have nothing at all to doe; come therefore let us goe to such or such a Play-house, Iocosi fermè ac ridiculi sunt plaeri{que} omnes mortaliū, ne{que} illis est cordi studiosum vitae genus in∣tensae{que} gravitatis, sed fluxum potius ac remissium. Ex quo fit ut perquam faciledo∣minetur eis malignissimus Daemon. Theodoret. De Sacrificijs l. 7. Tom. 2. p. 382. vid. Ibid. and there we will merrily passe the time, feeding our eyes, our eares with those Stage-delights which shall there present themselves unto us. Stage-playes serve for nothing else, but either to draw men on by degrees to idlenesse, or to foster, to foment them in it: Wherefore they are rightly called Playes, from playing; because they teach men onely to play a∣way their time with-drawing them from their Studies, their Vocations, unto idlenesse, and a kinde of lasie life. Thirdly, by daily experience: For what persons are there more slothfull, idle, unprofitable, unserviceable to themselves or others; lesse studious, lesse diligent and laborious in their lawfull callings, then common Actors and At{que} duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem & Circenses. Iuvenal. Satyr. 10. pag. 94 Play-haunters? who have many of them no other imployment at all, but onely this, to Act, or see a Stage-play; or to dice, to card, to dance, to adorne and paint themselves, oft-times Ornamentorum insignia & lenocinia fucorum, on nisi prostitutis & impudicis fae∣minis congruit, & nullarū faere praeciosior cultus est, quàm quarum pudo vilis est. Cyprin, De Habitu Virginum. Non est mulieris sed meretricis illud nimium sui ornandi studium Clemens Alexandrinus. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 2. for publike if not for private
sale. Stage-playes either Cyprian, De Spectaculis. lib. See Sene 3.4. & 5. before. finde or make men idle: they either occasion, or foment their sloth: they either cause people to live without callings; or at least with∣draw them from them, to give their after-noones at∣tendance on themselves. Hence is it, Ab omnibus ad Spectaculū convenitur. Propter unum nescio qem, vel virum, vel faeminam com∣movetur tota Civitas, ut de∣salentur fabu∣losae antiquita∣um libidines. Cyprian, De Spe∣taculis. lib. See Basil. Hexaem. Hom. 4. Tom 1. p. 45. Chrysost. Homil. 38 in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 297. er∣tul. De Spectac. c. 21.22. Lact∣antius, De Ve∣ro Cultu. c. 20. Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. l. 6. Nazianzen De Recta Edu∣catione ad Se∣lucum. p. 1063.1064. The 3. Blst of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 56.76.77. M. Gosson, M. Stubs, M. Northbroke, in their Bookes against Stage-playes, accor∣dingly. that the Schol∣ler is oft with-drawne from his Schoole, the Student from his Study; the Mechanicke from his Trade; the Master from his Famly; the Lady and Gentlewoman from her Closet or Needle; the Mistris from her house; the Husband from his Wife; the Wife from her Husband; the Servant from his Masters busi∣nesse; the Apprentice from his Shop; the Courtier from his attendance: the Officer from his Office; Yea sometime, the very See here Act 4. Scene 2. & p. 484. Magistrate from his Goverment, the Minister from his Pulpit; See here Act 6. Scene 12. the Parishioner from his Church, his Lecture; the whole Citty from their callings, to a Play-house, to act, to see or heare a lewde lascivious Enterlude; the very best part whereof, Avere oculos meos ne videant vanitatem. Rogat propheta ne oculis vagatur per Theatra ni∣mirum & chorearum spectacula, quae quidem vanitatē redolent, ac fructu & utilitate carent. Chrysostom Hom. 11. in Psal. 118. Tom. 1. Col. 998. A. is pure vanity, if not sinfull folly. Satyr. 11. p. 111. Totam odie Romaem Circus capit; was the Poet Iuvenals com∣plaint of old; and I feare it might be ours now: Such prevalency is there in these bewitching Stage-playes to draw men on to sloth, to idlenesse; Hu∣manus animus otio languescens facillime corrumpitur. Clerke De Auito. lib 4 p. 227. Ignavia magnorum saepe ingeniorum pestis. Vt lignum occulta teredo consumit, sic animum paulatim delinit & exdit ignavus hic affectus. Lipsius. Epist. Cnturia. 2. Epist. 34. pag. 152. the very bane, the poy∣son, and destruction of mens peerelesse soules: which the very Philip. Lonicerus. Historiae Turcicae. l. 2. c. 20. p. 54. Turkes enumerate among the number of their seven deadly sinnes. Lastly, my Minors truth, as it is evident by experience, so likewise is it ratified by the concur∣rent suffrage of sundry Fathers and moderne Authors, and by our See 14. Eliz. cap. 5.39. Eliz. cap. 4.1. Iacobi. cap. 7. & 1. Caroli. cap. 1. owne Acts of Parliament, who for this very
cause among sundry other condemne, reject and cen∣sure Stage-playes as unlawfull pastimes, because they are the ccasions, the fomentations of much sloth and idlenesse. Hence Philo Iudaeus, De Vita Moses. pag 932. & De Agricultura. lib. pag. 271. Clemens Romanus. Apost. Co∣stit. lib. 2. cap. 65 66. Clemens Alexandrinus Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian & Cyprian, in their severall Bookes, De Spectaculis. Arnobius Adversus Gentes. lib. 5. p. 149.150. lib. 6. & 7. p 230. to 242. Lactantius. lib. 6. De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. Tatiani Assyrij Contra Graeos Oratio. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 2. pag. 180. Basil. Hexaëmeron. Sunt civi∣tes nonnullae, quae multis varijsque prae∣stigiatorum spectaculis, in∣de à primo di∣luculo ad ip∣sum usque cae∣lum advespe∣rascens, suos pascunt aspe∣ctus, fractos{que} quosdam om∣nino & cor∣ruptos cantus frequentissimè audientes non satiantur: at tals populos complures bea∣tos esse diunt, proprea quod foro merura, a∣tibus, catris{que} ngojs com∣parandi victus causa subeundis, neglectis atque posthabitis, summo cum ocio vo∣luptateque vitae tempus institutum sibi perducunt, &c. Ibidem. Hom. 4. Tom. 1. pag. 45. Gregory Nazianzen, De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum. pag. 1063.1064. S. Asterij Homilia in Pestum Kalendarum. Bibl. Patrm. Tom. 4. pag. 706. Chrysost. Hom. . De Da∣vide & Saul. Hom. 6.7.38. & 69. in Matth. & Hom. 8. De Paenitentia. Augustin. De Civitate Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32. lib. 2. cap. 4. to 15. Salvianus. l. 6. De Gubernatione Dei. Damascen. Paralellorum. lib. 3. cap. 47. Cassiodorus Variarum. lib. 1. Epist. 27. & 30. Ioannes Saresberinsis, Nostra aets prolapsa ad fabulas & quaevis inania, non modo cor et aures prostitit vanitati, sd oculorum & aurium voluptate, suam mulcet desidiam, luxuriam accendit, conqui∣rens undique fomenta vitiorum, &c. Vitanda est, inquit, Ethnicus, mprob Syr desidia. At eam nostris prorogant histriones. Ibidem. De Nugis Curia∣hum. lib. 1. cap. 8. Petrarcha De Remedio Vtrius{que} Fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. Rodolphus Gualther. Homil. 11. in Nahum. Bodin his Common-wealth. l 6. cap. 1. Ioannes Mariana, & Barnabas Brissonius, in their Bookes, De Spectaculis. Bulengerus, De Circo. cap. 47. De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 50.51. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 56.76. & 77. Master Gosson, in his Schoole of Abuses, and in his Playes Conuted. Master Stubs, in his Anatomy of Abuses. pag. 104. to 107. Master Northbroke, in his Treatise a∣gainst Vaine Playes and Enterludes. f. 28. to 38. D. Raeiolds, in his Overthrow of Stage-playes. Master Robert Bolton, in his Discourse of True Happinesse. pag. 73.74. I. G. in his
Refutation of Haywoods Apologie for Actors: (to omit all other Christian and Ovid, De Ar∣te Amandi. lib. 1. pag. 160.161. & De Re∣medio Amoris. lib. 1. pag. 215.216. Non ta∣men otium ta∣le quaerendum est, quale in lusionibus consumitur, sic enim vitae nostrae ludus finis esset necessario, quod falsum & absurdum est, &c. Aristot. Poli. lib. 8. cap. 3. pag. 508. See lib. 7. cap. 17. and Marcus Aureli. Epistle 12. to Lambert, who are very copiou in this point. Seneca. Controvers. lib. 1. Proaemio. pag. 967. Tacitus Annalium. l. 14. c. 2.3. & l. 16. c. 1. Valerius Maximus. l. 2. c 6. s. 7. Bulengerus De Circo Romano. Ludisque Circensibus. cap. 44. Heathen Authors, which I might here enumerate:) doe all concurre in censuring Stage-playes in regard of this effect. Since therefore the Ma∣jor, and Minor are thus apparantly true, the Conclusion from them must be granted, by all who either regard the publike, or their owne private good. SCENA SEPTIMA. THe 7. consequent or effect of Stage-playes, is lux∣ury, drunkennesse, and excesse: From whence this 33, Argument may be raysed.Argument 33. That which is an immediate occasion of, an ordina∣ry temptation unto luxury, drunkennesse, and ex∣cesse, is utterly unlawfull unto Christians: into∣lerable in any Common-weale. But such are Stage-playes: as Quis enim non luxurio∣sum ac nequam putet eum, qui scenicas artes domi habeat? Atqui nihil refert, utrumne luxuriam solus domi, an cum populo exerceas in Theatro. Lactanius, De Vero Cultu. cap. 21. pag. 508. Lactantius,Hinc enim erat, & ex hac providentissima patriae charitate veniebat, quod idem ipse vester Ponti∣fex Maximus Nasica, à Senatu temporis illius quod saepe dicendum est electus, sine ulla Sententiarum discrepantia vir optimus, caveam Theatri Senatum construere molientem, ab hac dispositione & cupiditate compescuit: persuasitque oratione gra∣vissima ne Graecam luxuriam viribus patriae moribus paterentur obrepere, & ad vir∣tutem labefactandā, enervandā{que} Romaam peregrinae consentire nequitiae: tantū{que} authoritate valuit, ut ejus verbis commota senatoria providenia etiam subsellia qui∣bus, ad horam congestis in ludorum spectaculo jam uti Civitas caeperat, deinceps proibere apponi. August. D Civit. Dei. lib. 1. . 31. See c. 32.33. Augustine, Scipio Nasica, and the ensuing Authors testifie.
Therefore they are utterly unlawfull unto Christians, intolerable in any Common-weale. The Major is evident by the 1 Pet. 4.3.4. which in∣formes us, That the time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasci∣viousnesse, lusts, excesse of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abo∣minable idolatries; wherein they thinke it strange that you run not with thm into the same excesse of riot, speaking evill of you: who shall giue an account to him who is ready to iudge both quicke and dead. By Titus 2.11.12. The grace of God which bringeth salvation, hath appeared unto all men; teaching us, that denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, we should live sober∣ly, rightously, and godly in this present world. By Ephes. 5.18. And be not drunke with wine wherein is excesse. By Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overchrged with surfetting ad drunkennesse, and cares of this world, and that day come upon you at unawares: by sundry such like Scriptures to this purpose which I have for∣merly quoted in Healthes Sicknesse. another Treatise: And likewise by the Nihil est tam mortiferum in∣genij quam luxuria: Luxu∣riosus adoles∣cens peccat, luxuriosus se∣nex insanit. Seneca. Contro∣vers. l 1. Pro. p. 967. & lib. 2. Conr. 4. p. 1054. dangerous quality of these effeminating soule-destroying sinnes, Saevior armis Luxuria incū∣bit victumque ulciscitur or∣bem. Iuvenal. Satyr. 6. p. 52. which are more pernicious to a Common-weale, then pestilence or warre it selfe; Luxuries perdulce malum quae dedita semper Crporis arbitrijs hebetat caligin sensus, Membraque Circaeis effaeminat acrius herbis. Blanda quidem vultu, sed qua non tetrior ulla Interius; fucata genas & amicta dolosis Illecebris, torvos auro circumlinit Hydros. Illa voluptatum multos innexuit hamis. Claudian De Laudib Stiliconis. lib. 2 pag. 185. here pag. 167. mre fatall to mens soules and bo∣dies, then any Circean charme. The Minor is most apparant: First, from the origi∣nall invention, and dedication of Stage-playes; which were first of all devised by a company of drunken Grecians in honor of their Devil-Idoll Bacchus (the God of wine, of drun∣kennesse, and all excesse;) to whom Playes, and Play-houses were consecrated at the first; as Athenaeus Dipnosoph. lib. 2. cap. 1. Plutarchi Romanae Quaest. Quaest. 107. Tertullian De Spectaculis. cap. 10. Cyprian De Spe∣ctaculis Lactantius De Vero Cultu. l. 6. c. 0. Eusebius, De Praep. Evang. l. 2. c. 11. Po∣lydor Virgil. De Inventoribus Rerum. l. 1. c. 10. AEneae Silvij Historia. De Asia Mi∣nori. c. 7. p. 371 See Bulengrus De Theatro. l. 1. c 1. Historians and Fathers cer∣tifie
us: Whence Tertullian stiles the Theater, Ita{que} Thea∣tru Veneris, Liberi quo{que} domus et. Nā & alios luos scencos Libe∣rali proprie vocbant, prae∣ter qu Li∣bero devotos, quod sunt Di∣onysia penes Graecos, etiàm à Libero insti∣tutos. Nihil jam de usa vocabuli: quum rei causa idolo∣latria sit. Nam & cum promis∣cuè Ludi Libe∣ralia vocaren∣tur honorem Liberi patris manifestè sonabant. Libero enim à rusticis primò iebant ob beneficium quod ei adscribunt pro demonstrata gratia vini. Et est plane in artibus scenicis Libri & Veneris patrociniū, quae privata & propria sunt scenae. De gestu & corporis flexu, mollitiem Veneri & Libero immolant: illi per sexum, illi per fluxum, disolutis. Tertul. De Spectac c. 5. to 11. Isiodorus Originum lib. 1 cap 51. vid. Ibidem. the house or temple of Bacchus; because Stage-playes (which were formerly stiled Liberalia) were as Non∣nulli praeere Satyros Baccho ajungunt, qui in saltationibus, & ludis tragicis risus, jocique oblectamenta Deo. cean. Dnique ut Musae liberalis disciplinae bonis illum juvant & demulcent, ita Satyri udicris, & ad risum compositis gestibus & actionibus, vitam Dionysio beatam Gratijsque delibutam reddant Quin thymelicos etiam lu∣dos hic instituit, Theatra exhibuit, & Musicorum acroamatum Scholas instituit. Diodorus Siculus. Bibl Hist. l. 4. sect. 5. pag. 203.204. Isiodor Hisp. Orig. l. 18. c. 51. Diodorus Siculus, Isiodor Hispalensis, and others record, instituted by, & consecrated unto Bacchus, the Idol, the author of all intemperance. If therefore their very inception were thus from drunkennesse, and excesse; their progresse questionlesse must bee such. Secondly, it is euident from the testimony, the experi∣ence of former ages; who not onely Livy Rom Hist. l. 7. sect. 3.4. Valerius Mximus. l. 2. c. 4. Plutarch. De Gloria Atheniensium lib. Cicero De Republica. l. 4. Cornlius Tacitus. Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. Marcus Aurelius. Epist. 12. to Lambert. Elij Lampridj Heliogobalus. Tertul. & Cyprian. De Spectac. l. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. Arnobius Advers. Gentes. l. 7. p. 230. to 242. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Basil. Hexaëm. l. 4. Nazianzen. ad Seleucū. p. 1063.1064. Chry∣sost. Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Matth. Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. August. De Civit. Dei.  1. c. 32.33. l. 2. c. 3. to 30. Salvian. l. 6. De Guber. Dei. S. Asterij. Homilia in Fest. Kalen∣daru. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4 p. 706. Ioannes Saresberiensis. De Nugis Curialium. l. 1. c. 7.8. D Hackwell, in his Apologie. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 2.3, 4. enumerate Stage-playes among the excsses, the luxury both of the Greckes and Romanes, as the Fathers and Authors in the margent te∣stifie but likewise make them the chiefe occasions of it. Hence Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. & Hom. 42. in Acta. Chrysostome and Ad Seleucū De Recta Educat. p. 1063.1064. Nazianzen stile the Play-house; The Schoole of intemperance, deboistnesse, luxury, and excesse. Hence De Guber. Dei. l. 6. Salvian ioynes the Stage-playes, epicurime and drunkennesse of the Romanes, and those of Trevers, both together; making one the effect, the companion of the other. It is noted by Suetonij Caligula & Nero Lampridij Heliogabalus. Trebellij Polionis Gallieni Duo Tacitus Annal. l. 14. c. 3. Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. l. 59. Herodian Hist. l. 1. See here Scene 5. & Act 7. Scene 6. & Zonaras, Eutropius, and the Imperiall History in these Emperos lives. Historians, that Caligula, Heliogo∣balus,
Nero, Commodus, Gallienus, and other Roman Empe∣rours who delighted most in Stage-playes, were the most deboist, luxurious, dissolute, ebrious, of all others: an in∣fallible demonstration; that Stage-playes are the occa∣sion, fewell, and attendants of these sinnes. Plutarch. De Gloria Athe∣niensium. lib. & Sympos. l. 7. Quaest. 8. Basil De Ebrietate & Luxu Sermo. It was the custome of the Pagan Greekes and Romanes, in all their drun∣ken riotous Feasts, (as it is now the usage of too many Christians) to exhilerate themselves with Stage-playes, of purpose to draw men on to drunkennesse, luxury, and more grosse intemperance: Whence the Bnius Con∣cil. Tom. 1. pars 1. p. 232. Surius Concil. Tom 1. p. 458. & Gra∣tiau Dstnct. 5. Councell of Laodicea. Can. 53.54. and the Councell of Aquisgrane under Lewes the godly, prohibited Stage-playes at Christians marriage-Feasts; and enioyned all Ministers not to be present at them, but to arise and depart from such feasts before the Players entred; that so they might prevent that riot, that excesse which these theatricall Enterludes might occasion. All which, toge∣ther with that of Plutarch, who relates, Scenici arti∣sices Bccho Sacri. Romanae Quaest Quaest. 107. p. 600. that all Stage-players were consecrated unto Bacchus as well as these their Stage-playes, is a plenary ratification of my Minors truth, to which our owne experience must subscribe. See he third Blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters, ac∣cordingly. For who more luxuious, ebrious, riotous or deboist, then our assiduous Actors and Play-haunters? Who greater Taverne, Ale-house, Tobacco-shop, Hot-water house haunters, &c? who greater, stouter drinkers, health-quaffers, Epicures, or good-fellowes, then they? What walke more usuall then from a Play-house to a Taverne, to an Ale-house, a Tobacco-shop, or Hot-water Brothel-house; or from these unto a Play-house? where the Pot, the Can, the Tobacco-pipe are alwayes walking till the Play be ended; from whence they returne to these their former haunts. Many are the These are the vulgar, these the sublimer meetings of the more gen∣tile ranke. Ale-house, more the Bac∣chanalian Taverne-meetings that are appointed, conclu∣ded at the Play-house, from which much drunkennese, and excesse arise: yea the Play-house is the common Randevouze where most such riotous Taverne conven∣ticles are either motioned, plotted, or resolved on, as our Play-haunters themselves confesse. And is there
not reason, why it should be so? Are not drunkennesse, ioviality, epicurisme, luxury, and profusenesse, most rhetorically applauded, most elegantly adorned in our Stage-playes with the sublimest Encomiums, the most insinuating Panegyrickes, the most amiable Titles that either art or eloquence can invent? and doth not this adde spurs and fewell to many Yongsters lusts? who to purchase the empty title. Haec tame illi Omnia cum faciant hi∣lares nitidique vocantur. Iuv∣nl. Satyr. 11. Habebitur ali∣quando ebrie∣ati honos & plurimum vi∣ni cepisse, vir∣tus erit. Senec De Beneficijs. l. 1. cap. 10. of brave, generous, liberall, and right ioviall Sparkes, whom Players most applaud, doe prodigally Divitiarum & pecuniae fructu non alium putat quam profusionem. Sordidos & deparcos ipsi putant quibus ratio impensarum constaret. Suetonij Nero. sect. 30. consume their Patrimonies, their Pensions, their time in Tavernes, Ordinaries, Tobacco-shops, &c. in ebri∣ous luxurious meetings, to their owne undoing, their friends and Parents griefe. Alas, the pittifull complaints of sundry parents, together with the testimony of our owne grave English BB. Hall Epist. Decad. 6. Epist. 6. Master Bolton in his Discourse of True Happi∣nesse. p. 73.74. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. I.G. in his Refuta∣tion of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 39. & D. Rinold Overthrow of Stage-playes. Authors, prove this to be too true: Therefore we must needs abominate and reject all po∣pular Stage-playes, in respect of these their cursed fruits. SCENA OCTAVA. THe eight effect of Stage-playes, is impudency, im∣modesty, and shamelesnesse, yea even in sinfull things: Whence this 34. Argument may be deduced.Argument 34. That which banisheth all modesty, al shamefacenesse, and makes both Actors & Spectators impudently shamelesse in committing sinne, is questionlesse
abominable and unlawfull unto Christians. But this doe Stage-playes, and Ille locus ca∣sti damna pu∣doris hbet. Ovid, De Art Amandi. lib. 1. pag 160. Play-houses. Therefore they are questionlesse abominable and un∣lawfull unto Christians. My Major is irrefragable: First, because See Lockma. Sermo. 56. Z. modesty and shamefastnesse are such graces, such vertues, 1 Tim. 2.9, 15 c. 3.2. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5. 2 Thes. 3.14. 1 Pet. 3.10. Psal. 44.15. Psal. 69.7. Ezra 7.6. as God him∣selfe requires of us in his Word; and which the very Platonis Protagoras. p. 438. Epist. lib. pag. 990. Lace∣daemonij vere∣cundiam esse Deum quendā volunt. Zeno∣phontis Convivi∣um. p. 898. D. Modestiae fa∣ma neque sum∣mis mortaliū spernenda st, & à dijs aesti∣matur. Tacitus Annal. l. 15. c. 1. p. 301. Hea∣then much extoll. They are the Pudor est quasi vitij purpurcus splendor & co∣lor virtutis. Case. Polit. l. 5. c. 9. p. 710. chiefest ornaments, virtues, guides, supports, and stay of Youth; the Mothers,Modestia reliquarum virtutū parns est & ipsa proles: radix & altrix virtutis est, & verae famae. Lipsius. Epist. Cent 3. Epist. 10. Cent 1. ad Belgas. Epist. 4. Cent. Miscel. Epist. 17. the conser∣vers of all other Christian, or morrall vertues; the Pudor & justitia ornamenta & vincula Ci∣vitatum. Platonis Protagoras pag. 438. Pudor satis validum vinculum legis. Livy. Rom. Hist. lib. 25. onely curbs that restraine men from all sinne, all lewdnesse and dishonest whatsoever: where these are once removed, Amisso pudore totum dignitatis studium & honestatis extinguitur. Osorius, De Regum Instit lib. 4. fol. 111. the whole practise of honesty and vertue will be quite extinguished. Hee who hath lost these vertues, Ego illum perijsse puto cui perijt pudo. Putean. De Laconismo. Diatriba. p. 423. is no better then a cast-away: He who is past all shame, is certainely past all grace, past all recovery, all amendment. That therefore which banisheth these two Chrysost. Hom. 33. in Haebraeos. Tom. 4. Col. 1676. C. Pudor bonus magister officij. Qui metuit, reprimitur, non emendatur: quem pudet facere in naturam vertit Ambros. Com. lib. 7. in Evang Lucae c. 17. Tom. 3. p. 84. D. restrayning, vice-suppressing vertues, in which not onely Magna sanctis cura est verecūdiae. Ambros. Com. l. 2. in Luc. Tom. 3. p. 8. D. Christianity, but even Vbi non est pudor, nec cua juris, anctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum est. Senecae Thyestes. Act 2. fol. 34. all common honesty, civility, and the publike safety doe subsist, must needs bee abominable. Secondly, because impudency and shamelesnesse, especially in committing sinne, is almost Ier. 3.3. cap. 6.15. cap. 8.12. Prov. 7.13. Ezech. 2.4. cap. 3.7. Ier. .12. & cap. 5.3. the very highest degree of sinne; yea they provoke God more to anger, and draw a deeper guilt, a more multiplied condemnati∣on upon men, then the sinne it selfe which they thus perpetrate. They are infallible symptomes of a cauterized consci∣ence,
an obdurate heart, Impudentia & frontositas cum obdurve∣rit, ut non pa∣eat, non hor∣rat, non con∣tremiscat, ea am demum desperatio est. Brnardi Decla∣mationes. Col. 1002. D. a reprobate sence; of a man gi∣ven wholy over unto sinne and Satan: yea they are very dangerous presages of a man bound over to eternall de∣struction. My Major therefore must be granted. The Minor is as evident as the morning Sunne. First, by the concurrent testimony of sundry Fathers, and mo∣derne Christian Authors. De Spectacu∣lis. lib. cap. 17. Tertullian reputes Stage-playes, the banishers, the murtherers of all modesty and shame∣fastnesse: S. Cyprian informes us; Theatra sunt faediora quo convenis: Ve∣recundia illic omnis exuitur: simul cum a∣mictu vestis honor corpo∣ris ac pudor ponitur. De Ha∣bitu Virginum. pag. 242. that all modesty is put off at Theaters; which he stiles, Pudoris pub∣lici lupanariū, De Spectac. lib. the very Brothell of pub∣like modesty: in which the most shamefull representati∣ons of lust are acted; ut in ipsis deposita verecundia, audacio∣res fiant ad crimina. iunt per i∣maginem quae non sunt, ut fiant sine pu∣dore quae vera sunt. Divinarum Instit. Epit c. 6. Lactantius records; that those things are acted in Stage-playes by representation which are not; that so the very things themselves may be committed by the Specta∣tors without any shame. Quid juvene∣nes aut virgines faciant quū haec & fieri sine pudore, & spectari libenter ab omnibus cernunt? De Vero Cultu. c. 20. What (saith he) will Youthes and Virgins doe when they shall see these things acted, and willingly beheld of all without any blush? doubtlesse they will grow ex∣ceeding impudent and shamelesse in committing the very sinnes there acted. De Recta Educat. ad Seleucum. p. 1063. Gregory Nazianzen and Homil. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 298. C.D Chry∣sostome, write, That all Stage-players are impudent shame∣lesse persons; who as they repute nothing vile but modesty; so they utterly extirpate all shamefastnesse, all modesty out of the mindes and foreheads of the Spectators. S. Augustin, in his Booke See lib. 1. c. 31.33. l. 2. cap. 6. to 10. c. 25. to 29. De Civitate Dei, afirmes the very selfesame thing; whence he stiles these Stage-playes: Animorum labes ac pestis: probitatis & honestatis eversio. De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. cap. 33. The very pestilence and contagion of mens mindes; the overthrow of vertue and honesty: Verè Fugalia, sed pudoris & honestatis. De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 6. the true Fugalia of shamefastnesse and modesty: Damascen in his Parallels informes us out of Nazianzen; Fluxam atque caducam formae venustatem is relinquebat quae Theatra & tri∣via consectantur, quibus pudori & probro est rubescere. Parallel. lib. 2. cap. 65. pag. 145. that Play-haunters, and women who resort to
Theaters, account it a reprach unto them, to blush: so impu∣dently brawny arae their faces. The same doe other Fathers; together with De Remedi Vtrius{que} For∣tunae. l. 1. Dial. 30. Petrarcha, Fastorum. lib. 2. cap. De Carnispriu, &c Manta, De Vanitate Scient. cap. 20.59, 64, 71. Agrippa, Comment. in August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.3, 33. & l. 2. c. 4. to 29. Lo∣dovicus Vives, Schoole of Abuse, and Playes Confu∣ted. M. Gosson, Against vaine Playes and Enterludes. Anatomy of Abuses. M. Northbrooke, r M. Stubs; The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, Praefatio ad 6. Theses. D. Rai∣nolds, with sundry others affirme: therefore wee need not doubt its verity. Secondly, our owne present ex∣perience will evidently manifest the Minors truth. For who are there more impudently audacious; more shamelesly wicked; more ready to heare, to see, to speake, to act, to execute the most execrable obsceni∣ties, the most grosse impieties without any blush, Apud hos tota impudici∣tia vocatur ur∣banitas: libidi∣noso ore in gunibus inhae∣rescunt: homines malae linguae etiamsi tacerent; quos prius taedescit impudicitiae suae, quam pudescit. Pro nefas, id in se pessimi facinoris admittunt quod nec aetas potest pati mollior, nec cogi servius durior. Haec & hujusmodi propudia nobis non licet nec audire: etiam pluribus turpe defendere est. Ea enim de castis fingitis & pudiis quae fieri non crederimus, nisi de vobis probatetis Minut. Felix. Octavis. pag. 94.95. then our common Actors and Play-haunters? What Spectacles, what places doe more steele the faces, or crust the fore∣heads both of men and women, then Playes and Play-houses? Those who at first, could neither see, nor heare, (much lesse utter or act) any obscene or vitious thing without some shame of face, or checke of conscience, before their resort to Playes and Theaters; become so strangely impudent, so brazen-faced in a very little space by frequenting Stage-playes, that they cannot onely con∣fidently behold and heare, but likewise utter and com∣mit any filthinesse, or wickednesse whatsoever, in the very open view of men, without any blush at all; even as Pelulantiam, libidinm, luxuriam sensim quidem primò & occulte, ve∣lut inveili errore exercuit: sed ut tunc quoque dubium nemini foret; naturae illa vitia non aetatis esse. Sutnij Nero. sect. 26. Nero did. The stupendious whorish unparalleld impudency of our present age; Of our effeminate Cujus manantia sleu Orà puel∣lares faciunt incerta capilli. Iuvenal. Satyr. 15. pag. 140. over∣growne Yongsters, and blasphemous Ruffians, See Master Adams, his White Devill, and Blacke Saint. who breath out nothing but oathes, obscenities, and desperate execrations
against the God of Heaven, rending the very flesh and bones, piercing the very heart and soule, blasphming the very Name and Blood of our Lord Iesus Christ, at every word they utter: Of our impudent, brazen-faced See Hic Mu∣lier, and My Vnloveliesse of Love lockes. Mn-woman Monsters, who have banished all shewes of modesty, of shamefastnesse from their sex; carrying the very characters of impudency, not onely in their blushlesse lookes; but likewise in their lascivious ge∣stures, their audatious deportment, their obscene dis∣courses, their whorish attires, their immodest fashions and complements, their painted faces; their Non sunt delicta sed monstra. Tertul. De Pudicitia. lib. p. 471. prodigious shorne, frizled lockes and foretops, which outstare the very 1 Cor. 11.5. to 16. 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pt. 3.4, 5. Lawes of God, of Man, of Nature, (so unnaturely, and more then Prov. 7.13. Ier 3.3. c. 6.15. Impudentia ef∣ficit meretri∣ces. Chrysostom. Homilia 15. in Hebraos. Tom. 4. Col. 1592. C. whorishly impudent, are many of our females lately growne;) Whence is it, comes it but from Playes and Theaters? which have diffused this cursed disease of shamelesse impudency, well-nigh thorowout the Kingdome: Nam quis peccandi finem posuit sibi, quando recepit Ejectum semel attrita de fron∣te ruborem? Iuvenal. Satyr. 13. pag. 124. And hence is it, that we are all lately growne so immoderately excessive in committing sinne, because Playes and Play-haunters have scrued us up to such a pitch of impudency, that we are quite past all shame. Neither is it strange, that Playes and Play-houses should make the modestest and most ingenious Spectators shamelesse, if not sencelesse of any sinne. For first the Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 17. Cyprian, De Specta. lib. & Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Chrysostome Homilia 38. in Matth. & Nazianzen, De Recta Educatione ad Seleucum. pag. 1063. accordingly. Actors of them re certainely past all shame, if not all grace. Secondly, See Act 4. Scene 1.. accordingly. See Iuvenal Satyr. 6. pag. 54. Iamque eadem fummis pariter mi∣nimisque libido est, &c. & Satyra 11. pag. 110. the greater part of common Play-haunters are adacious Panders, Whores, Adulterers, Whore-masters, and the like, who are as blushlesse as Frier Bacons Brazen-head, or as he who acts the Devill in the Play. Thirdly, the very words, the parts, the speeches, gestures, complements, and representions in Stage-playes, See Act 3. Scene 1. & 3. are so obscene, lascivi∣ous, lewde, and beastly, that the very hearing and behold∣ing of them were enough to banish all modesty out of
the hearts and countenances of the most ingenious Spe∣ctators, or at least to drive them from the Play-house: For as Aristotle well observes; Pudet non solum eorum quae dicta sunt pudndorum, sed etiam sig∣noum: & non solum cùm in re venerea ver∣santur, sed etiā cum adsunt sig∣na ejus rei, & non solum cum faciunt urpia, sed etiam cum dicunt. Aristot. Rhtr. lib. 2 cap. 6 pag 137. Men are not onely ashamed of those shamefull things that are so called, but likewise of the signes of them: not onely when they are conversant in any lecherous thing, but likewise when the representations of that thing are present: and not onely when as they doe filthy things, but likewise when they speake them: So that modesty and shamefacenesse doe not onely retraine men from speaking and doing; but likewise from hearing and beholding any scurrilous or immodest thing. Alae Car∣mina apud Pindarum. pag. 405. Aristot. Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 9. pag. 60. Alcus a modest Heathen, being about to utter some obscenity, was so overcome of modesty, that he brake out into these memorable words Volo aliquid dicere sed me prohibet pu∣dor. I would have spoken some thing, but modesty prohi∣bites me.AElian Variae Historiae. lib. 14. cap. 18. It is storied of Archyas And shal not these two Pa∣gans rise up in judgement a∣gainst scurri∣lous Christi∣ans and con∣demne them? another Pagan, that is modesty was such, as e would not so much as utter a scur∣rilous word; and being upon an occasion necessitated to speake some unbeseeming thing, he could not be induced to relate it upon any tearmes, but wrote it on the wall, and then pointed to others to read it. Yea Natural. Hist. l. 8. c. 5. Pliny records, that the bashfulnesse and modesty of brute Elephants is such: Vt pudore nun∣quam nisi in abdito count: that they never couple but in some scret place not obvious to mns view. Certainely, if modesty had such prevalency in these bruites and Pa∣gans, to deterre them both from obscene discourses, and venereous actions, especially in publike: our Stage-playes which are fraught with many ribaldrous passa∣ges, many witty obscenities, many filthy gestures, ma∣ny feined, Heliogabalus mimicis histrionibus ea quae solent simulate fieri effici ad verum jussit. Lampridij Heliogabalus. pag. 202. if not reall representations of Incests, Rapes, Adulteries, and the like, must either utterly abolish all modesty out of the Actors and Spectators eyes and eares; or else quite chase them from the Play-house; whose lewdnesse and unchastity is such, See Tertullian De Spectaculis. cap. 17. Cyprian De Spetaculis. lib. and the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Enterludes. that it is capa∣ble
of none but shamelesse and immodest Customers. So that I may well conclude with Tacitus;Annalium. lib. 14. cap. 2. That shamefastnesse, cha∣stity, or any other honest quality, which are hardly retained in honest arts, can never possibly be preserved amids so many con∣fluences and combates of vices as accompany Playes and Thea∣ters. Suetonius De Claris Rhe∣toribus. lib. Cicero De O∣ratore. lib. 3. & Genebrardi Chron. lib. 2. pag. 314.And hereupon L. Crassus, and Cn. Domitius prohibited Playes and Play-houses, by a publike Edict, quod his corro∣boraretur impudentia, because they made their Spectators more impudent. The propositions therefore being thus infallibly confirmed by the premises, the Conclusion from them must be granted, SCENA NONA. THe 9. consequent or fruit of Stage-playes, is coze∣nage, fraud, and theft: which are oft-times occasio∣ned and taught by Stage-playes. Play-houses are the Schooles, Playes the Lectures which Docent dum fingunt, & si∣mulatis erudi∣unt ad vera. Lactan. D Vero Cultu. cap. 20. teach men how to cheate, to steale; to plot and execute any villany: how to conceale it, to evade it being executed; men learning, yea practising that in earnest, which they act or see acted but in sport. De Instit. Cyri. Histor. lib. 1. pag. 34. & Master Gsson, in his Playes confuted. Act 2. Zenophon makes mention of a Persian Schoole-master, who instructed his Schollers both to do iustice and iniustice; not to lie, and to lie: not to deceive and to deceive: not to ca∣luminate and calumniate, not to forestall any benefit that might accrue to others, and to forestall it: He did likewise distinguish which of these ought to be practised upon enemies, which upon friends: And then proceeding further, he taught that it was iust to deceive their friends if it were for their good; and to steale the goods of their friends if it were for their good: This Schoole-master likewise exercised his Schollers to practise these instructions in iest among themselves: by which meanes it came
to passe, that some of his Schollers who had a naturall ingenuity wittily to deceive, to cheate and steale from others; began at last not onely to cozen and steale from strangers, but likewise to cheate and rb their friends. Whereupon the Persians were enforced to make a law to prevent this mischife (which law is yet in use) that Children should ever after be taught plainely, and to speake and deale truely, as men teach their Servants: and not to steale, to lie, or use deceits. As it fared with this Per∣sian Schoole-master, and his Schollers; so it fares with Players and their lewde Spectators: those cheates, those fallacies, thefts and robberies, those rapes of Wards, of Virgins from their Gardians, their Parents, which they act in sport upon the Stage, the Spectators oft-times practise in earnest upon others off the Thea∣ter. Cyrian De Sectaculis. lib. Discunt facere dum assuescunt videre. This Solon knew full well, Plutarchi & Diogenis La∣ertij Solon. See Bodine De Republ. lib. 6. cap. 1. who when he beheld Thespis acting a Tragedy, wherein there were many lies and cheates: he de∣manded of him after the Tragedy ended; whether he were not ashamed to lie and cheate so egregiously before so great a multi∣tude? To which Thespis replyed; that there was no hurt in it, for all he had uttered or acted was but a Play, it was all in sport, nothing in earnest: which answer Solon hearing, stroke his staffe upon the ground with indignation, making this reply: If we commend or approve this Play of yours, we shall shortly finde it in our bargaines: intimating that this his lying and cozenage which hee acted in jest, would quickly turne to earnest: so prone, so docible are men to learne any evill that Players act. Saint Augustine had a hint of this: whence he stiles Stage-playes, Probitatis & honestatis e∣versio. De Civ. Dei. l. 2 cap. 33. See lib. 2. c. 6. the very overthrow of honesty and upright dealing. For the theft that Playes occasion, I shall give but two or three instances. It is storied by Suetonius in the life of Sect. 16. Nero; that he put downe Chariot-playes and Stage-playes, in which men by an inveterate liberty did use to cheate and steale in iest, because this iesting turned to earnest at the last. Tacitus. An∣nal. l. 4. cap. 3. Marcus Aure∣lius. c. 14. Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. l. 57. & A∣lexander ab Alexandro. Genialiū Die∣rum. l. 3. c. 9. Tiberius did the lik, banishing all Players out of Italy upon the selfe same ground. Vpon this very reason was our owne Statute of 3. Henry 8. cap. 9.
against Mummers, made; because those thefts and robbe∣ries which they acted in sport, proved robberies and felonies in good earnest at the last, and were the occasions of much mis∣chiefe. The Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters informes us. Pag. 56.97, 102. That many servants have learnt at Stage-playes (as it may be manifestly proved) to rob and cheate their Masters, to supply the wants of their Harlots. That many have there learned a pollicy to prevent Parents of the not marrying of their Daughters to such whom they have disliked, by stealing them away. And that men are taught pollicies in this Schoole of Abuse, how to beguile Parents of their Children, Husbands of their Wives, Gardians of their Wards, and Masters of their Servants: To which Schoole of Abuses, and Playes Confu∣ted. Action 2. Ma∣ster Gosson and Master Stubs, Master North∣brooke, Doctor Rainolds, and I. G. in their Bookes against Stage-playes. others doe subscribe. Wherefore from all these premises I may now safely frame this 35. Ar∣gument against Stage-playes, with which I shall con∣clude this Scene. That which occasions much theft, much treachery, cozenage and deceit, must needs be unlawfull un∣to Christians, unsufferable in a Common-weale. Witnesse Ephes. 4.25.28. 1 Thes. 4.6. & Case Ethi∣corum. lib. 4. cap. 7. But all these doe Stage-playes occasion, as is evident by the premises. See Act 3.4.5. Therefore they must needs be unlawfull unto Chri∣stians, unsufferable in a Common-weale. SCENA DECIMA. THe 10. effect or product of Stage-playes, is cruelty, fiernesse, brawles, seditions, Theatris con∣venit tumultu. Chrysosom. Hom. 3. ad Pop. Anioch. Tom. 5. Col. 245. B. tumults, murthers,
and the like; as is evident by sundry testimonies and examples. Hence was it, Ignoscent nobis Tragici poetae, ignos∣cent, etiam il∣lis qui prope∣modum ut nos rempublicam gerunt, quod ipsos in rem∣pub. non ad∣mittimus, ut∣potè tyrannidis laudatores A∣lias nam{que} Ci∣vitates circum∣vagantes & tur∣bas colligen∣tes, & pulchras & magnas, & veresimiles vo∣ces mercede conducentes, respublicas ad tyrannides & populares prin∣cipatus trahent. De Republ. Dial. 8. pag. 672.673. that Plato banished all Trage∣dies out of his Common-weale, because they would draw men on to tyranny and cruelty, by acting, by applauding them, and breed quarrels and commotions among the people. Hence Epist. 7. ad Lucilium. Se∣neca and Sympos. l. 7. Quaest. 8. Plutarch, dislike of Stage-playes, because they enrage the mindes of the Spectators, breeding oft-times many tumuls, quarrels and contentions among them. Hence Horace writes expresly: Ludus enim genuit trepidum cer∣tamen & iram: Ira truces inimicitias, & funebre bellum. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 19. p. 275. that Playes engender contention and anger; anger cruell enmity and dolefull warre. Hence we finde it recor∣ded of AE∣lian Variae Historiae. l. 13. c. 18. Dionysius, Suetonij & Eutropii Claudius, & Caligula. Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. l. 57. & 59. Tacitus Annal. l. 14. c. 2.3. Nero, Caligula, and other bloody tyrants; that they delighted much in Tragedies and Stage-playes; as being suitable to their tyrannicall dispositions. Hence Tragaediae & Comaediae scelerū & libidinū auctrices, cruentae & lascivae, impiae & prodigae. De Spectac. c. 17.18. Tertullian; De Spectac. lib. & Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Cyprian and Paedagogi. l. 3. c. 11. Clemens Alexandrinus; de∣claime against Tragedies and Comedies as the augmentors of wickednes and lust; as bloody wanton, impious and prodigall pastimes which occasion sundry tumults and seditions. Gre∣gory Nazianzen informes us: Spectaculum illud urbes distrahit, plebem ad seditiones concitat; pugnas docet, linguam maledicā acuit, amo∣rem civium dissecat, familias inter se cōmittit, in furorem adigit juvenes, inimicitias accendit, &c. Quot enim familias subito prostravit? Quot urbes prius summa inter se benevolentia conjunctas, funditus evertit? Nimirū seditio quasi pubescens plebis man{us} potentū caedib{us} inquiavit, gladio viduavit urbes, extinctis viris, ign ferro{que} Civitates absūpsit, caedib{us} caedes coercens at{que} puniens, & mactationes mctationib{us}. Quis igitur haec intueri sustineat si sapiat? cum mera sit heic praestigiarum concertatio, seditio cae∣dem pariens, & Civitatum morbus. De Recta Educatione ad Selucum. pag. 1063.1064. That Playes and Enterludes disturbe Citties, rayse up sedition among the people, teach men how to quarrell, sharpen ill-speaking tongues, cut asunder the love of the Cittizens, set families at variance betweene them∣selves, drive yong men into fury, kindle quarrels and conten∣tions, &c. Whence hee stiles them; A sedition produ∣cing murther, and a disease of Cittis. Hom. 3.6, 7. & 8. in Matth. Hom. 3. de Davide & Saule. Hom. 42. in Acta. Hom. 62. ad Pop. Antioch. & Oratio 7. See here, p. 415.416, 396, 397, & 421. Saint Chrysostome
records from his owne experience. That Players and Play-haunters were the onely men who did fill the Citty with contentions, quarrels, seditions, tumults: that Playes did breed debate betweene man and wife; and that Players and Play-haunters by acting and seeing Playes became more barbarous then the most savage beasts, insomuch that they spared not the bones of the dead. Theodoricus King of Italy, stiles Stage-playes, Invitatio con∣tentionum, & fons irriguus iurgiorum. Cas∣siodrus Variarū. l. 3. Epist. 51. The invitation of contentions, the perennious foun∣taine of brawles and quarrels,Variarum. l. . Epist. 32. and the frequent occasion of se∣ditions and tumults. Such Authors of misrule, quarrels, se∣ditions and contentions were Playes in ancient times, of which there are divers pregnant examples. Wee all know, Plutarchi Romulus. Livy Rom. Hist. l. 1. sect. 9, l. 2. sect. 37. and the Authors for∣merly quoted in pag. 30. r. that the rape of the Sabine Virgins was occasioed by a Play; which produced a long and bloody warre betweene the Romanes and Sabines. Livy Rom. Hist. lib. 2. sect. 37.38, 39. The fierce and cruell warre be∣tweene the Volsci and the Romanes was likewise occasioned by a Play; the Consuls upon the speech of Attius Tullus, excluding the Volsci from their Playes, and commanding them to depart their Citty, for feare of some sodaine tumult that might arise betweene the Romanes and them, or some unexpected surprisall of their Citty whiles th whole Citty were buied about their Playes. Tacitus An∣nal. lib. 1. c. 14. lib. 4 cap. 3. In Tiberius his Raigne, there were so many tu∣muls, murthers, uprores, quarrels, and open insolences com∣mitted at Play-houses, occasioned by Playes, and Actors; (One Centurian, with divers Soldiers and common people being slaine; and a Captaine of the Pretorean band with sundry others being likewise wounded at a Play) that Tiberius was enforced to ba∣nish all Stage-players out of Italy: In the time of Suetonij Ne∣ro. sect. 16. & 26. Nero, there were so many seditions, quarrels, commotions, and mis∣demeanors in the Roman Theater, that Nero himselfe (who had oft an hand in them) suppressed all Playes, all Stage players by a solemne Edict, though he much delighted in them. In the Raigne of Marcus Au∣relius. cap. 14. & Epistle 12. to Lambert. Marcus Aurelius, there was a very great tu∣mult and sedition occasioned by Stage-playes, in which much blood was shed, there being many slaine and wounded: upon which occasion this Heathen Emperour, banished all Stage-players for ever from Rome, and sent them into Hellispot to
Lambert the Governour, with a command to compell them to labour, to chastice them if they were idle, and not to suffer them to use their accustomed toyes. De Circo Ro∣mano. & Ludis Circensibus. cap. 47. De Fa∣ctionibus. Caesar Bulengerus informes us; that under Hypatius and Bellisarius, there were at least 35. thousand men slaine in a commotion and tumult raysed at a Cirque-play. In the time of Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 1. Epist. 20. & 30. l. 3. Epist. 51. & l. 7. Epist. 10. Theodoricus King of Italy, there were so many tumults, quarrels, and commotions raysed at Stage-playes; that he was enforced upon the complaint of the people, to write to the Senate, and other of his Officers, to sup∣presse their insolencies, and to punish the mutinies, the commo∣tions caused by them: At last being not able to reforme their disorders, he gave order wholy to suppresse them. And from these severall disorders and quarrels came these common phrases; See Philo Iu∣daeus, De Agri∣cultura. lib. p. 271. Suetonij Nero. sect. 16. & 26. Iosephus Antiq. Iudaeo∣rum. l. 19. c 3. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 3. Epist. 51. Bu∣lengerus De Circo, &c. cap. 47. & De The∣atro. l. 1. c. 33. & Lipsius De Amphitheatro. cap. 3.4. Seditiones & factiones Pantomimorum, & seditiones theatri, bella Theatricorum, &c. which we read of in sundry Au∣thors; and in Saint Augustine, De Catechizandis Rudibus. lib. Tom. 4. pars 2. pag. 340.341. & HRabanus Maurus, De Sacris Ordinibus. lib. 1. Tom. 6. pag. 63. A. B. where the sundry tumults, quarrels, and other mischiefes that Stage-playes and Cirque-playes occasion, are pithily discribed. But these are all ancient forraigne testimo∣nies and examples, may some say: are there any such moderne domestique presidents to be found? Yes vrily. Witnesse the Statute of 4. Henry 4. cap. 27. in the Sta∣tutes at large, and Rastall Wales. sect. 30. 4. Henry 4. cap. 27. which re∣cites; that divers diseases and mischiefes (to wit commoti∣ons, murthers, and rebellions) had hapned before this time in the Land of Wales, by many Wasters, Who were then the Play∣ers and Actors that wādred a∣bout the Coun∣try. Rimours, Minstrels, and other Vacabonds: for the eschewing of which; it was or∣dained and established by this Statute; That no Master Ri∣mour, Minstrell, nor Vacabond, should be in any wise sustained in the Land of Wales, to make commothes or gathering upon the people there. Witnesse the 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. Statute of 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. against Mummers, (all one with Stage-players:) which recites. That lately within this Realme, divers per∣sons had disguised and apparelled them, and covered their faces with Visours or other things in such manner as they should not be knowne, and that divers of them in a company together, naming
themslves Mummers had come in to the dwelling place of divers men of honour, and other substantiall persons, and so de∣parted unknowne, whereupon murthers, fellonies, rapes, and o∣ther great hurts and inconveniences had aforetime growne, and hereafter were like to come by the colour thereof, if the said disorder should continue not reformed; for the prevention of which mischiefe, it was enacted; that all Mummers or persons, that should hereafter thus apparell or disguise them∣selves, or weare, or sell, or keepe any visor in their houses should be imprisoned for 3. moneths space, without bayle or mainprise, and make a fine and ransome to the King. Yea witnesse the great rebellion of Robert Ket, in 3. of Edward the 6. which as Alexander Ne∣vill his History of Kets stirs. Hollingshead. p. 1028. Numb. 0. & 30. b. See Iohn Stow, his Survey of Lon∣don. cap. 16. where there is mention of sundry tumults occasioned by Playes & such like pastimes. & Centuriae Magdeburg. Cent. 13. Col. 772 where you shall see divers tumults raysed, and much blood shed, by reason of Playes and Dances. Hollingshead with others record; was plotted and contrived at, and partly occasioned by a meeting at a Stage-play, at Wimonham, to which the Country people resorting, they were by the instigation of one Iohn Flowerdew, first incoura∣ged to pull downe the Inclosures, and then to rebell. The Statutes of 14. Eliz. cap. 5. of 39. Eliz. c. 4. & 1. Iacobi. cap. 7. which make common Players of Enterludes, Rogues and Vacabonds, subiecting them to a severe punishment for their lawde manner of life; doe likewise recite: 14. Eliz. c. 5. That by meanes of these common Enterlude Players, and such other Rogues, Vacabonds, and Sturdy-beggers, there daily hapned in the Realme of England and Wales, many horrible murthers, thefts, and other great outrages, to the high displeasure of Al∣mighty God, and to the great anoy of the Common-weale: which these Statutes endeavour to suppresse. Not to mention either Petrarch. De Remedio Vtrius{que} Fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 30. or the Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, who informes us; Pag. 57. That he hath sometimes seene two Knaves at once importunate upon one light Huswife, whereby much quarrell hath growne to the dis∣quieting of many: Nor yet to recite the late Statute of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. which informes us: that many quarrels, blood-sheds, and other great inconveniences have growne by the resort and concourse of people going out of their owne parishes to Beare-bayting, Bull-bayting, Enterludes, Common-playes,
and such disordered and unlawfull exercises and pastimes: (a sufficient confirmation of my Minors truth.) Our owne experience can sufficiently informe us; that Playes and Play-houses are the frequent causes of many murthers, duels, quarrels, debates, occasioned, sometimes by rea∣son of some difference about a box, a seate, or place up∣on the Stage: sometimes, by intruding to boldly into some females company: sometimes, by reason of some amorous, scurrilous or disgracefull words that are utte∣red of, or to some female Spectators; sometimes, by rea∣son of some speeches or passages of the Play particular∣ly applyed to some persons present or absent: sometimes, by reason of some Husbands, Whore-masters, or cor∣rivals Caecus est ignis stimula∣tus ra, nec re∣gi curat, pati∣turve fraenos, haud timet mortem, cupit in ipsos ire ob∣vios enses. Se∣neca Medea. Act. 3. Chorus. fol. 152. . iealousie, or affront, whose Wife, whose Whore, or Mistris being there in person, is perchance sollicited, abused, or jeared at in his presence: sometimes by rea∣son of the Apprentises resort to Play-houses, especially on Shrove-tuesday; sometimes by meanes of other acci∣dents and occasions. Many have beene the murthers, more the quarrels, the duels that have growne from our Stage-playes, whose large encomiums of rash va∣lour, duels, fortitude, generosity, impaciency, homicides, tyranny and revenge, doe so exasperate mens raging passions, and make them so impatient of the very smal∣lest injury, that nothing can satisfie, can expiate it but the offenders blood. Hence is it that some Players, some Play-haunters now living, not satified with the mur∣ther of one, have embrued their barbarous unchristian hands Madet orbis mutuo sangui∣ne, & homici∣dium cum ad∣mittunt singu∣li, crimen est, virtus vocatur m publice geritur. Impunitatem sceleribus acquirit non innocentiae ratio, sed saevitiae magnitudo. Vt quis potest occidere peritia est, ars est, usus est. Scelus non tantum geritur, sed docetur. Quid potest inhumanius, quid acerbius dici? disci∣plina est, ut perimere quis possit; & gloria est, quod peremit. Cyprian. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. See Onus Ecclesiae. c. 28. sect. 7.8. which we may well apply to our imes. in the blood of two, of three, if not of foure severall men; and so farre are they from ruing the odiousnesse of these their bloody deeds, that they glory in the number of their murthers as the very trophies of their valour. Pitty is it,
that such savage homicides who rest not with the first mans death, Quid putas futuram animā homicidae? ali∣quod credo pe∣cus lanienae & macello desti∣natum, ut per∣inde juguletur, quia & ipsa ju∣gulaverit; Tan∣ta est apud ho∣mines homici∣dij vindicta, quāta ipsa quae vindicatur na∣tura: Quis non praeferat saecu∣li junstitiā, quam & Apostolus nō frustra gla∣dio armatam cōtestatur, quae pro homine sae∣viendo religio∣sa est. Tertul. De Anima. advers. Pyhag. cap. pag. 350. should ever live to slay a second, much lesse a third: Yea pitty is it that such Playes, such Spectacles should be suffred, whih thus animate men on to quar∣rels, duels, contentions, injuries, impaciency, blood∣shed, and most unchristian revenge. As therefore See here, Act 3. Scene 2. pag. 74.75. where the Fathers & Authors to this purpose are quoted, to which I may adde Pruden∣tius. Contra Symmachum. lib. 1. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 612. B.C. & l. 2. p. 923. F.G & Hymnus 6. p. 880. Cassiodorus Variarum. l. 5. Epist. 42. Seneca. De Brev. Vitae. c. 13.14. Isiodor Hisp. Originum. l. 18. c. 27.41. Opcerus. Chronog. p. 186. Baroni∣us & Spondanus. Annal. Ecclesiast. Anno 59. sect. 8. Anno 325. sect. 52. Anno 365. sect. 5. & Anno 404. sect. 2. Gotfridus Viterbiensis. Chron. pars 16. Anno Dom. 390. See Bulengerus De Circo. lib. the Fathers, Christians, with some Pagan Authors, did generally condemne; and good Christian Emperours utterly take away all bloody Sword-playes, Cirque-playes, Chariot-playes, and such like barbarous inhumane Spectacles; by reason of the murthers, blood-shed, quarrels, contentions, tumults, debates, and such like savage unchristian effects which they occasioned; so likewise may we now suppresse, condemne, and quite abolish Stage-playes upon the selfesame grounds, as the fore∣quoted Authors and Pagan Emperours have done be∣fore us. Wherefore I shall briefely close up this Scene with this 36. Play-confounding Argument. That which is an ordinary occasion of much cruelty, quarrelsomenesse, impaciency, fiercenesse, impla∣cablenesse, and revenge: of many tumults, sediti∣ons, quarrels, murthers, injuries, brawles, and such like barbarous unchristian effects, See Act. 3. Scee 2. p. 72.73, 74. where this pro∣position is fully proved. must needs be sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians, (who should be men of peace, of meekenesse, willing to suffer, to passe by, if not to pardon wrongs:) intolerable in any Christian or peaceable Common-weale. But such are Stage-playes, as is manifest by the pre∣mises. Therefore they must needs be sinfull, unlawfull unto Christians; intolerable in any Christian or peace∣able Common-weale.
SCENA VNDECIMA. THe 11. fruit of popular Stage-playes, is this; that  they fill mens mouthes with idle, frothie, scurri∣lous, lewde, prophane discourses, complements, Histo∣ries, Songs, Iests, Ephes. 4.29. cap. 5.3.4. Psal. 45.2. which are odious unto God, yea execrable to all chaste, all modest Christians. Stage-playes See Act 3. Scene 1. & Act 7. Scene 3.4. are the Lectures, the Marts, the common treasuries of all ribal∣dry, scurrility, prophanesse; which furnish their Actors, their Auditors with such plentifull variety of corrupt, irreligious, atheisticall, unchristian and gracelesse dis∣courses, which they communicate to others upon all oc∣casions, that they scarce ever speake of holy things. This Ovid himselfe confesseth; informing us; Illic & can∣rant quicquid dedicêre thea∣tris. Inde joci veteres obscae∣naque verba canuntur. Nec res hac Veneri gratior ulla fuit. Ovid Fasto∣rum. l. 3 p 51.55 that men sing those ribaldrous songs, and utter those amorous verses, discourses at home, which they have learned at the Play-house. What Se∣neca writes of the words of flatterers and lewde compa∣nions, I may well apply to Actors. Horū sermo multum nocet. Nam etiam si non statim of∣sicit, semina in animo relinquit, sequitur{que} nos etiam cum ab illis discesserimus, resurrecturū postea malū. Quemadmodū qui audierunt symphoniam ferunt secum in auribus modulati∣onem, ac dulcedinem cantus, quae cogitationes impedit, nec ad seria patitur intendi: sed adulatorum & prava laudantium sermo diutius haeret quàm auditur: nec facile est, nimo dulem sonū excutere, prosequitur & durat, & ex interuallo recurrit. Ideo claudendae sunt aures malis vocibus, & quidem primis; nam cum initium secerunt, admissae{que} sunt, plus audent. Seneca Epist. 123. Their speeches doe much hurt. For if they doe men no present harme, yet they leave the seeds of evill in their mindes, and an evill afterwards to a∣rise, followes them even then when as they are departed from them. For as those who heare some pleasant consort carry away with them the sweetnesse of the song in their eares, which hin∣ders their thoughts, and suffers them not to be intent upon seri∣ous
things: so the obscenities of Stage-players (Discit enim citius, memi∣nit{que} libenti∣us illud Quod quis deridet, quā quod pro∣bat & venere∣tur. Horace. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 286. See here, pag. 424. which men are aptest to remember, as most agreeable to their lusts, where as they are extraordinary forgetfull of all the good they heare) sticke longer by men then whiles they heare them. Neither is it an easie matter to shake their pleasant sound out of their mindes: for it followes them, it stayes with them, and recoiles backe againe into their mindes and tongues after some little space. Therefore the eares are to be kept shut against such evill speeches, and that verily against the very first: for when they have made a beginning and gotten entrance, they will make a further attempt. De Vero Cultu. c. 20.21. Lactantius, Homil. De David. & Saule Tom. 1. Col. 510. D. See here p. 424. Chrysostome, Paedagogi. lib 3. cap. 11. Clemens A∣lexandrinus, and Exposition on the 7. Com∣mandement. pag. 67. BB. Babington informe us; That Play-haunters carry away with them the Idaeaes and similitudes of the lewde representations they behold in Stage-playes, which sinke deepe into their mindes; that they sucke in the venome of Stage-playes with great delight, & practise the speeches, the con∣vayances of love, which there they see and learne: And having once polluted their speech with the language of the Theater; (for I will never, writes BB. Babington, call it polishing,) they are never better then when they have company to bestow their tales, and Stage-greetings upon: And for this reason among others, they dislike of Stage-playes. As these recited Authors, so our owne experience can suffragate to the truth of this effect: For who so vaine, so frothie, so prophane, so atheisticall, blasphemous, lascivious, scurrilous; who lesse holy, gracious, or edifying in their ordinary discourses, then Players and Play-haunters? See The 3. Blast of Re∣trait from Playes & The∣aters; and Ma∣ster Gosson, his Schoole of A∣buses, & Playes Confuted: to this purpose. whose tongues are tipt with oathes, execrations, ri∣baldry, lascivious tales, amorous songs, wanton histo∣ries, unseemely jests, adulterous insinuations, invective taunts and scoffes against holinesse, sobriety, chastity, modesty, grace, and goodnesse; with the very language of the Stewes, of Atheists, of Pagans, not of Christians. Seldome shall you heare from such mens mouthes any religious discourses, any conference of God, of Christ, of the Scriptures, of grace, of glory, of practical divinity, of sin, of faith, of repentance, of the meanes or signes of
grace and salvation, any praysing or blessing of God for his mercy to us in his Sonne; any bewayling of their owne sinfull conditions, or of thei slavery under sinne: any exhortation unto goodnesse; any dissuations from any sinne; or the like; Deut. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Psal. 71.24 Psal. 77.11, 12. Psal. 105.1, 2. Psal. 119.13, 16.27. Psal. 145.10, 11, 12. Psal. 9.11. Psal. 22.22, 31. Psal. 66.16, 17. Psal. 2.7. the principall things that Christi∣ans should conferre off: Their tongues are so accustomed to the theames, the flattering Eloquence, and phrases of the Theater; so taken up with the relations of the things they heare or see at Stage-playes; that they cannot relish the Isay 19.18. language of Canaan, the dialect of Heaven, Assueti enim dulcibus & po∣litis, siv orati∣onibus, sive carminibus divinarum lit∣terarum sim∣plicem com∣munemque sermonem pro sordido, asper∣nantur. Id e∣nim quaerunt quod sensum demulceat. La∣ctantius De Ve∣ro Cultu. cap. 21. Ita{que}, miser ego lecturus Tullium, jeju∣nabam, post noctium cre∣bras vigilias, post lchrymas, quas mihi praeteritorum recordatio peccatorum ex imis visceribus eruebat; Plautus sumebatur in manus, si quando in memetipsum reversus, Prophetas legere caepissem, sermo horrebat incultus. Hirom. Epist. 22. cap. 13. nor brooke the Scripture phrase, (whose plainesse they deride and scorne:) much lesse can they spare any vacant time to habituate their unholy lips, to season their Ier. 9.25, 26. uncircumci∣sed hearts and eares, with holy conference. It is Gods owne command to Christians: Ephes. 4.29, 31. That they should put a∣way all vaine, all evill speaking: that no corrupt communicati∣on should proceed out of their mouthes, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may administer grace to the hea∣rers: Ephes. 5.3, 4. That fornication and all uncleanesse should not be so much as once named among them, as becommeth Saints: Nei∣ther filthinesse, nor foolish talking, nor iesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thankes. Col. 4.6. That their speech should be alwayes gracious seasoned with salt: Deut. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. c. 11.18, 19.20. And that his Words and his Commandements should be alwayes in their hearts; to teach them diligently unto their Children: to talke of them (not of Play-house passages, or such vaine fruit∣lesse trifles) when they sit in their houses, and when they walke by the way, and when they lie downe, and when they rise up: that they should binde them for a signe upon their hands, and that they should be as frontlets betweene their eyes: and that they should write them upon the posts of their house, and upon their gates; that so they might Psal. 1.1, . meditate and discourse of them day and night upon all occasions. But alas our Stage-playes
incorporate themselves so firmely, Persuadet enim quicquid suave et, & a∣nimo penitus dum delectat, infidet. Lactan∣tius, De Vero Cultu. cap. 21. and sinke so deepe into our Actors and Play-hnters mindes, that they quite invert these sacred precepts; suppressing those hea∣venly Christian conferences which they command; reviving and advancing those vaine lascivious discour∣ses which they prohibite. This the fore-quoted Au∣thors; this present experience testifie. Wherefore I shall end this Scene with this short Syllogisme, being a 37. Argument against Stage-playes.Argument 37. Those things which banish all holy conferences, all pious discourses out of their Actors and Specta∣tors mouthes, and furnish them with all variety of idle, vaine, unprofitable, lascivious, scurrilous, pro∣phane, atheisticall, irreligious phrases, Play-house conferences, and Stage-discourses, must question∣lesse bee unlawfull, yea abominable unto Christi∣ans: as the alleadged Scriptures testifie. But this doe Stage-playes; as the premises and ex∣perience manifest. Therefore they must questionlesse bee unlawfull, yea abominable unto Christians. SCENA DVODECIMA. THe twelfe effect of Stage-playes is this: That they wholy indispose their Actors and Spectators to all religious duties: that they withdraw and keepe them from Gods service: that they bring the See Molanus Hist. S. Imagi∣um. l. 4. c. 18. Word, the worship, yea all the ordinances of God into contempt; making them vaine and ineffectuall to their soules. First, I say, that Stage-playes inispose men to the acceptable performance of every religious duty; be it
prayer, Dum enim auditum ad in∣debitos sermo∣nes effundun aures intenta non porrigun ad divina. Con∣cil. Lateranens sub. Innocentio 3. cap. 17. hearing, and reading of Gods Word, receiving the Sacraments, and the like. This sundry Fathers fully te∣stifie: and I would to God all Christians would well weigh their words which much concerne their soules in the very maine of Christianity, to wit, Gods wor∣ship, and their vow in baptisme. Tertullian informes us; De Spectac∣lis. c. 17. & pag. 396.397, 398. That Stage-playes defile the eyes, the ares, the soule of the Spectators, and make them to appeare polluted in Gods sight. That none of the things deputed unto Stage-playes are pleasing unto God, or beseeming the servants of God, because they were all instituted for the Dvill, and furnished out of the Deils treasury for every thing that is not of God, or displeasing un∣to God is of the Devill: Quot adhuc modis perora∣bimus, nihil ex his quae spe∣ctaculis depu∣tantur, placitū Deo esse aut congruens Dei servis, quod Domino placi∣tum non sit, i omnia propter Diabolum in∣stituta, & ex Diaboli rebus instructa mon∣strabimus: ni∣hil enim no Diaboli est, quicquid Dei non est vel Deo displicet: hoc erit pompa Diaboli adversus quā in signaculo fidei ejeramus. Quod au∣tem ejeramus ne{que} facto, ne{que} dicto, ne{que} visu, ne{que} aspectu participare debeus. Cae∣terū nonne ejeramus & rescindimus signaclū, rescindendo testationem ejus? Nun∣quid ergo superest u ab ipsis Ethnicis resposum flagitemus, an liceat Christianis spectaculo uti? Atquin hinc vel maximè intelligunt factum Christianum, de repudio spectaculorum Ita{que} negat manifestè qui per quod agnoscitur, tollit. Quid autem spi superest in hujusmodi homine? nemo in castra hostium transit, nisi projectis armis suis, nisi destitutis signis & Sacramentis principis sui, nii pactus simul perire? Ibid. c. 24. Stage-playes they are the pompe of the Devill, against which we have protested in the seale of our faith: That therefore which we renounce, we ought not to participate of neither in deed, nor word, nor sight, now view. And doe we not then renonce and teare off the seale againe, in cutting off the testimoniall of it? Shall we then desire an answer from the very Heathens themselves? Shall they resolve us, whether it be law∣full for Christians to use Stage-playes? But verily they most of all discerne a man to be a Christian, even from this renouncing of Stage-playes: he therefore doth manifestly deny himselfe to be a Christian, who takes away this badge by which he should be knowne to be a Christian. Now what hope is there remai∣ning in such a one? No man hath revolted unto the enemies Tents, unlesse he first cast away his armes, unlesse he hath first forsaken the colours and allegeance of his Princ, unlesse he hath covenanted to perish together with them. An ille recogitabit eo tempore de Deo, positus illic ubi nihil est de Deo? pu∣dicitiam ediscet, attonitus in mimos? Sed tragaed o vociferante, exlamationes ille alicuj{us} prophetae retractait? Inter effaeminationis modos psalmū secū cōminiscetur? & cū athletae agent, ille dictu∣rus est, reper∣cutiendum non efse? poterit & de misericor∣dia moveri de∣fixus in mor∣sus ursorum & spongias retia∣tiorum? Avr∣tat Deus à suis tantam volup∣tatis exitiosae cupiditatem. Ibidem. cap. 25. Will e thinke ear∣nestly
of God at that time, who is placed where there is nothing at all of God? will he thorowly learne chastity who admires Stage-playes? will he call to minde the exclamations of some prophet, whiles the Tragedians are crying out? will he mditate of a Psalme, who its amidest effeminating measures? or can he be moved with compassion, who is wholy intent upon the biting of Beares, and the spunges of retiaries? God turne away from all his so great a desire of pernicious pleasure. Quale est e∣nim de ecclesia Dei ad Diaboli Ecclesiam ten∣dere? de caelo (quod aiunt) in caenum? illas manus quas ad dominum ex∣tuleris, postmo∣dum laudando histrionem fa∣tigare? ex ore quo Amen in sanctum protu∣leris, gladiato∣ri testimonium reddere?  alij omnino dicere nisi Deo Christo? Cur igi∣tur non ejusmodi etiam Daemonijs penetrabiles fiant? Nemo enim potest duobus dominis servire. Quid luci cum tenebris? quid vitae & morti? Ibidem. cap. 26. For what a desperate wicked thing is it, for a man to goe out of the Church of God, into the Chappell of the Devill? out of Heaven (as they say) into the mire and clay? those hands which thou hast lifted up unto the Lord in prayer, to weary afterwards in applauding a Stage-player? out out of the same mouth with which thou hast uttered Amen, to the holy one, to give testimony to a Sword-player? or to say, (,) for ever and ever, to any one but to God Christ? Why then may not such become liable to the possession of Dvils, &c? For no man can serve two Maisters. What hath light to doe with darkenesse? What relation hath life to death? Odisse debemus istos conventus & caetus Ethnicoum, vel quod illic nomen Dei blasph∣matur, inde tentationes emittantur. Quid facies in illo suffragiorum impiorum aestu∣ario depraehensus, non quasi aliquid illic pati possis ab hominib{us}, nemo te cognoscit Chritianum, sed recogita quid de te fiat in caelo. Dubitas enim illo momento quo in Diaboli ecclesia ueris, omnes Angelos prospicere d caelo, & singulos deuotare, quis blasphemiam dixeit, quis audierit, quis linguam, quis aures Diabolo adversus Deum administraverit? Non ergo sugies sedilia hostim Christi, illam cathedram petilentiariam, ipsum que aërem qui desuper incubat, scelestis vocibus contupra∣um? Ibidem. cap. 27. we ought to hate these assemblies of Pagans, even because the Name of God is there blaphemed, and because di∣vers temptations are sent out from thence. How wilt thou doe being deprehended at unawares in that over-flowing of impious suffrages; not as though thou shouldest there suffer any thing from men; for no man knoweth thee to be a Christian; but consider seriously, what may be done concerning thee in Heaven. For dot thou dobt but that in the very moment when as thou
art in the church of the Devill, all the Angels looke downe from Heaven, and take speciall notice of every one there present; ob∣serving who he is that speakes blasphemy, who that heares i, who it is that lends his tongue, his eares to the Devill, against God? Wilt thou not therefore flie these seates o the enemies of Chrit, this pestilentiall chaire, and that very aire which hangs over it, adulterated with wicked words and sounds, &c? Thus he: whose words sufficiently testifie, that Stage-playes indispose men to all religious duties; because they de∣file their eyes, their eares, their hands, their soules, they being the See here, pag. 42. to 61. & 561. to 567. pompes, the inventions of the Devill which are incompatible with Christianity: because they teare of the very seale and cognisance of their Christianity: and wholy inthrall them to the Devils vassalage. Saint Cyprian writes thus of Stage-playes to the selfesame purpose. Quid Scrip∣tura interdixit? Prohibuit e∣nim spectari, quod prohibet geri. Omnia inquā, ista spe∣ctaculorum ge∣nera damnavit, quandò idolo∣latriam sustulit ludorū omniū matrem; unde haec vanitatis & levitatis mon∣ra venerunt. Quod enim spectaculum sinc idolo? quis ludus sine sacrificio? quod certamen non consecratū mortuo? Quid inter haec Christianus fidelis facit? si ido∣lolatriam fugit, quid loqitur? Qui jam sanctus sit, de rebus criminosis voluptatem capit? Quid contra Deum superstitiones probat, quas amat, dum spectat? Caeterum sciat haec omnia daemoniorum inventa esse, non Dei. Cyprian De Spectaulis. lib. Edit. Pamelij. pag. 243.244. What hath the Scripture interdicted? Vrily it hath prohibited that to be behold, which it inhibiteth to be acted. I say, it hath condemned all these kindes of spectacles when as it hath taken away Idolatry the mother of all Playes, from whence these Monsters of vanity and leity have proceeded. For what spectacle is there without an Idoll? what Play without a sacrifice, &c? What doth a faithful Christian make among these? if he flieth Idolatry, why doth he speake it? he who is now holy, can he rp pleasure from criminous things? Why approves he superttions against God, which he affecteth whiles that he beholds them? But let him know, that all these are the inventions of Devils, not of God. Impudenter in Ecclesia Daemonia exorcizat, quorum volup∣tates in spectaculis laudat: & cum semel illi renunciando, recisa sit res omnis in Baptismate, dum post Christum ad Diaboli spectaculum vadit, Christo tanquam Diabolorenunciat. Idololatria, ut jam dixi, ludorum omnium mater est; quae ut ad se Christianos fideles veniant, blanditur illis per oculorum & aurium volup∣tatem, &c. Ibidem. He impudently exorcizeth Devils in
the Church, whose pleasures e applaudes in Stage-playes: and when as by renouncing him once, every thing of his was pared off in Baptisme; whiles that after Christ (I pray observe it all you Christians who resort to Stage-playes) he resorteth to the spectacles of the Devill, he renounceth Christ as if he were a Devill. Idolatry, as I have already said, is the Mother of all Playes, which that it may allure faithfull Christians to it, flatters them with the pleasure of the eyes and eares. Romulus did first of all consecrate Cirque-playes to Consus, as to the God of Counsell, for the Sabines that were to be ravished. But other Stage-playes were procured at the intreati of the people, when as a famine and pestilence had seised upon the Citty, and these were afterwards dedicated to Ceres, to Bacchus, and to other Idols and dead men. Thse Grecian combates, either in songs, in musicall Instruments, in voyces, or in strength, Praesides su∣os habent varia Daemonia. Et quicquid est a∣liud quod spe∣ctantium aut oculos movet, aut delinit au∣res; si cum ori∣gine sua, & in∣stitione quae∣ratur, causam praefert aut I∣dolum, aut Dae∣monium, aut mortuum. Ita Diabolus artifex, quia Idololatriam per se nudam sciebat horreri, spectaculis miscu∣it, ut per voluptatem posset amari. Ibidem. have divers Devils for their Presi∣dents: and what ever else there is, which either affects the eyes, or pleaseth the eares of the beholders, if its orignall or instituters be sought after, hath either a Idoll, a Devill, or a dead man for the Father of it. Thus the cnning Devill, bcause he knew that naked Idolatry by it selfe would be aborred, hath mixed it with Stage-playes and spectacles, that so thorow pleasure it might be beloved. What need I prosecute this any further? Partes Christiani si perroges, nesit; aut infaelicior si scit: quem si rursum perrogem, quo ad illud spectaculum itinere pervenerit; confitebitur per lupanarium, per prostitutarm nuda corpora, per publi∣cam libidinem, per pblicum dedecus; per vulgarem lasciviam, per communem om∣nium contumeliam. Cui ut non obijciam quod fortasse commisit, vidit tamen quod committendum non fuit, & oculos ad Idololatriae spectaculum per libidinem duxit: ausus secum Spiritum sanctum in lupanarium ducere si potuisset: qui festinans ad spectaculum, dimissus, & adhuc gerens secum ut assolet, Eucharistiam, inter corpora obscaena meretricum tulit, plus damnationis meritus de spectaculi voluptate. Fu∣gienda sunt ista Christianis fidelibus, ut jàm frequenter diximus, tam vana, tam per∣niciosa, tam sacrilega spectacula: & oculi nostri sunt & aures custodiendae, &c. Ibid. If thou aske a Play-haunter, what are the parts of a Christi∣an, he knoweth not, or else he is so much the more unhappy, that he knoweth: If I should againe demand of him, by what way he came to that spectacle; he will confesse through the Brothel-house,
through the naked bodies of prostituted Harlts,For Play-houses ancient∣ly were com∣mon Brohels, or else they had the Stewes adjoyning to them. See here pag. 390. through the common Stewes, through publike shame, through vulgar lasciviosnesse, through the commo reproach of all. To whom that I may not obiect, that which perchance he hath committed, yet he hath seene that which was not to be committed, and hath led his eyes thogh lust to the spectacles of Idolatry: daring, if he had beee able, to carry the Holy Ghost along with him into a Brothel-house; who hastning to a Stage-play, as soone as he is dismissed the Church, and whiles he carrieth the Eucharist about him, as he hath wont to do; hath brought it among the obscene bodies of Whores; deserving more damnation from the pleasure of the spectacle. These so vaine, so pernicious, so sa∣crilegious Playes and spectacles are to be avoyded of all Chri∣stians, as we have already oft-times said; and both our eyes and eares are to be kept from them, &c. If then the Scripture prohibites the acting, the seeing of Stage-playes; as be∣ing the invention of the Devill; the parts, the issues of Idolatry: If those who resort to Playes renounce Christ Iesus himselfe, as if he were a Devill; if they doe as much as in them lies, even carry the holy Ghost him∣selfe; and the very Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood into a Play-house; and so prophane them in the highest manner, as this Father testifies: no wonder is it, if Playes unqualifie men for holy duties. Isiodor Hi∣palensis, and HRabanus Maurus, discoursing of Cirques, of Theaters, of Cirque-playes, and Stage-playes, write thus of them: Vnde ani∣madvertere de∣bes Christiane, quod Circum numina im∣munda posside∣ant. Quaprop∣ter alienus erit ibi locus quē plurimi Sathanae spiritus occupaverunt. Totum enim illius Diabolus & angeli ejus replent. Isiodor Hisp. Originum lib. 18. c. 41. that uncleane Deities possesse them. There∣fore O Christian, let this be a strange place to thee, which many spirits of Satan have taken possession of. For the Devill and his Angels have filled it all up. Haec quippè spectacula cru¦delitatis & inspectio vanitatum, non solum hominu vitijs, sed Daemonu jussis in∣stituta sunt. Proindè nihil esse debet Christiano cum Circensi insania, cum impu∣dicitia Theatri, cum atrocitate arenae, cum luxuria ludi. Deum enim nega, qui talia praesumit; fidei Christianae praevaricator effectus, qui id denuò appetit quod in la∣vachro jampridem renunciavit, id est Diabolo, pompis, & operibus ejus. Ibid. c. 59. &. HRabanus Maurus De Vniverso. lib. 20. cap. 38. Operum. Tom. 1. pag. 251. A. For the spectacles of cruelty,
and the inspection of vanity were not ordained onely by the vices of men, but likewise by the commands of Devils. Therefore  Christian ought to have nothing to doe with the madnesse of the Circus, with the uncleanesse of the Theater, with the cruelty of the Amphitheater, with the barbarousnesse of the Arena, with the luxury of the Play. For he denieth God (a terrible sen∣tence worthy all Players, all Play-haunters saddest con∣siderations) who presumeth to act or see such things: being made a Prevaricator of the Christian faith, who againe desires that which he hath long since renounced in his baptisme; tha is, the Devill, his pompes, and workes. And is such a de∣sperate Play-haunter, thinke you, fit or able to serve, to please the Lord, or to performe any holy duty to him in a holy manner? Olympiodorus in his Enarration upon the 4. of Ecclesiastes, Keepe thy feete when as thou entrest into the house of God, is pregnant to our purpose. Keepe thy fete, &c. That is, saith he; Ne instru∣mentis eisdem quibus in bo∣no utimur, a∣butamur in malo: quasi di∣cat: Ne quaeso pedibus eisdem quibus templū Dei frequen∣tas, theatrales adito udos, & obscaena spe∣ctacula. De a∣liis quo{que} hu∣mani corporis membris idem intellige faci∣endum. Et pro∣fectò qui im∣polluto pede subcunt Ecclesiam Dei, debent ab impijs ocis & profanis se penitus, ut Deo contra∣rjs, continere. Olympidorus, Enar. in Eccles. cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 11. pag. 405. E. Let us not abuse to evill, those very instruments which we use in good: as if he should say; Doe not, I beseech thee, goe to Stage-playes and obscene Spectacles with the same feete wherewith thou frequentest the Temple of God. Vnderstand that the same likewise is to be done of the other members of the body. And truely those who will goe to the Church of God with an undefiled foote, ought altoge∣ther to with-hold themselves from wicked and prophane places, as being contrary unto God. Therefore those who fre∣quent Play-houses can never serve God as they ought if this Father may be credited. S. Augustine writing a∣gainst Stage-playes, and those Devill-Idols that were both honoured and delighted with them, informes us: that Christians in his time, had utterly abandoned all Stage-playes; Nihil enim eis turpe ac flagitiosum spectandum imitandumque proponitur, ubi veri Dei aut praecepta insinuantur, at miracula narrantur, aut doa laudatur, aut bneficia postulantur. De Civi Di. lib. 2. cap. 28. and that no filthy, no wicked thing was propounded to be sene or imitated, where either the precepts of the true
God were insinuated, or his miracles declared, or his gifts pray∣sed, or his benefits craved. Nisi fortè hinc sint tem∣pora mala qui per omnes pe∣nè Civitates cadunt Thea∣tra, caveae tur∣pitudinum, & publicae pro∣fessiones lagi∣tiosorū. Vnde enim cadunt nisi inopia re∣rum, quarum lascivo & sa∣crilego usu constructa sunt. Nonn Cicero orum cum Roscium quendam lau∣daret histrio∣nem ita peri∣tum dixit, ut solus esset dig∣nus qui in sce∣nam deberet intrare: ita vi∣rum bonum, ut solus esset dig∣nus, qui eò non deberet ac∣cedere? quid aliud apertis∣mè stendens nisiillam se∣nam esse tam turpem, ut ta∣to minus ibi esse homo debeat, quantò fuerit majus vir bonus: & tamen dij eorum tali dedecore placabntur, quale à viris bonis removendum esse censebat. Augustin. De Consensu Evangelistarum lib. 1. cap. 33. Tom. 4.530531. That when Christianity cam up, the Play-houses almost thorow all Citties fell downe; they being the very dens of filthinesse, and the publike professions of wicked persons: whereupon the Pagans complained, that the Christian times were evill times: And whence is it, (writes he) that the Play-houses fall downe, but through want o those things by whose lascivious and sacrilegious use they are sup∣ported? Did not their Cicero when as he commended one Roscius a Stage-player, say, that he was so skilfull, that he onely was worthy to come upon the Stage: that he was so good a man, that he onely was worthy not to come upon it? shewing most plainely nothing else; but that the Stage is so filthy, that by so much the lesse a man ought to be there, by how much the more he is a good man: and yet their gods were attoned with such dishonesty as he thought ought fit to be removed from good en. But most punctuall is that in his lib. 4. De Symbolo ad Cate∣chumenos. cap. 1. Tom. 9. pars 1. pag. 1427.1428. where he writes thus. See here, pag. 49.50. in the margent. Thou art deprehended and detected O Chri∣stian when as thou doest one thing, and proessest another: being faithfull in name, and shewing the contrary in deed; not kee∣ping the faith of thy promise: one whiles entring into the Church to poure out prayers, and a very little while after comming into a Play-house to cry out dishonestly with Staye-players. What hast thou to doe with the pompes of the Devill which thou hast renounced? Why doe you halt with both oofs? If God be God, follow him: if the world be God, follow it. If God be chosen, let him be served according to his will: if the world be chosen, to what end is the heart feined, as it were fitted for God? Quid tibi cum pompis Diaboli amator Christi? Noli te allere, vidit enim tales Deus, nec inter suos deputat professores quos cernit viae suae desertores. Ibidem. What ast thou to doe with the pompes of the Devill, who professest thy selfe a lover of Christ? Doe not deceive thy selfe, for God hates such persons, neither doth he repute those among his pro∣fessors,
whom he seeth to be the forsakers of his way. All which is a sufficient evidence, that Stage-playes wholy in∣dispose men to the true worship of God. Salvian Bi∣shop of Marselles, is very copious in this theame. De Guberna∣tione Dei. l. 6. Edit. Parifijs. 1598. pag 187, &c. his words are very em∣phaticall in Latine; which because the Booke it selfe is common, I will forbeare to transcribe. We say (writes he) God hath forsaken us, when in very deed we forsake God. For, suppose we, that the Lord will respect us, not deserving his favour? let us see if he can. Loe infinite thousands of Christians daily abide at the shewes of unseemely things. Can God then favour such kinde of persons? Can God cast his gracious countenance upon such as rage in Cirques, and commit adultery in Theaters? Or is this our meaning, or de we thinke it meete, that for as much as God seeth us in Cirques and Theaters, that what things we see he beholdeth; and what filthinesse we behold, he seeth it also for company? For one of these must needs be: for if he vouchsafe to looke upon us, it followes, that he must behold all these things where we are: or if, which is most true, he turne away his eyes from these things, O that our Play-haunters would consi∣der this. he must likewise turne away his countenance from us who are there. And the case standing thus, yet neverthelesse, we doe these things which I have said, and that without caing. Or thinke we that God hath his Theaters and Cirques, as had the gods of the Gentiles. For thus did they in old teme, because they were perswaded that their Idols delighted in them: but how is it that we doe so, who are And if our God detest them, why hould we thn affect them, who professe our selves to be his Chil∣dren? certaine that our God detesteth them? Or verily if we know that these abominations doe please God, I will not gainsay but we may resort unto them continually. But if it be in our conscience, that God abhorreth, that he de∣testeth; that God is offeded as the Devill is fed by Theaters; Marke this O Ply-haunters. how say we that we worship God in the Church, who alwayes serve the Devill in the obscenity of Playes, and that wittingly and willingly, out of deliberation and set purpose? And what hope I pray you, shall we have with God, who not ignorantly, or at unawares offend him; but after the example of those Giants heretofore, whom we read to have attempted Heaven with their mad endeavours, and as it were to have marched forwards a∣gainst the clouds? So we through the iniuries which all the world over we continually commit, doe as it were appugne Hea∣ven
with a common consent. Let those then who cele∣brate Christs Nativity, Re∣surrection or Ascention with Stage-playes, & such like Enterludes remēber this, and confesse their Error. To Christ therefore, O mon∣strous madnesse! even to Christ doe we offer Cirques and Stage-playes; yea and even then especially when as we receive any goodnesse from his hands, when any prosperity is bestowed upon us by him, or when as God hath given us any victory over our enemies? And what else by this doe we shew our selves to doe, but even to be like the man who is iniurious to the person who hath done him good; who rayles upon him that speakes him faire, or strikes him over the face with a sword that kisseth him. For I aske the great and rich men of this world, of what offence is that servant guilty which wisheth ill to a good and gracious Master; which rayleth on him that deserveth well, and ren∣dreth dispitefull words for his good received? without contro∣versie all men will iudge him a most hainous offender, who ren∣dreth evill for good to him, to whom indeed he might not ren∣der evill for evill. O let us then remember this, and be both grieved at it and ashamed of it. Thus verily doe even we who are cal∣led Christians, we stirre up a mercifull God against us by our uncleanesse; we offend a gracious God by our filthinesse, and we wound a loving God by our wickednesse. To Christ there∣fore, O monstrous madnesse! even to Christ doe we offer Cir∣quers and Stage-players; to Christ doe we render for his bene∣fits the filthinesse of Thters; even to Christ doe we sacrifice the oblation of most base sports. As though our Saviour, who for us became man, had taught us thus to doe: As though he had preached this either by himselfe, or by his Apostles: As though that for this end he had taken upon him the shame of mans nativity, and the contumelious beginnings of an earthly generation: As though for this end he had layen in a manger, at what time notwithstanding the very Angels ministred unto him: As if for this purpose he would be swadled in ragges of cloth, who did governe Heaven in his cloutes: As though for this end he had hung upon the Crosse, at whose hanging the whole world was astonished: 2 Cor. .9. Who for your sakes (saith the Apostle) when he was rich, became poore, that yee through his poverty might be made rich. Phil. 2.6. And be∣ing (saith he) in the forme of God hee humbled him∣selfe to the death, even the death of the Crosse. Even
this did Christ teach us when he suffred these things for our sakes. Well doe we requite his passion, who receiving through his death redemption, leade a most filthy life. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared unto all men, saith blessed Paul, and teacheth us, that we should deny ungodlinesse, and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the mighty God and of our Saviour Iesus Christ; who gave himselfe for us that he might redeeme us from all iniquity, and purifie us a peculiar people to himselfe zealous of good workes. Where be they who doe these things, for which the Apostle saith, that Christ came? where be they who flie desires of this world? where be they which live godly and righteously, that looke for this blessed hope by well doing; and leading a pure life; shewing thereby that they looke and long for the Kingdome of God: where be such? Tit. 2.14. Our Lord Iesus Christ came (saith he) that he might purifie us a pecular people to himselfe, zealous of good workes. Where is that pure people? that peculiar people; that good peo∣ple; that people of holinesse? 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ (saith the Scripture) suffred for us, leaving us an ensample, that wee should follow his steps: And we follow the steps of our Saviour in Cirques, and in Theaters; as if our Saviour had left us such an example, whom we read to have wept, but that he laughed we never read. And both these for our sakes: because weeping is a pricking of the heart, laughter a corruption of manners. Therefore saith he; Lk. 6.25, 21. Woe to you that laugh, for yee shall waile and weepe. And, blessed are yee that weepe now, for yee shall laugh. Let our iovi∣all Roarers, Epicures and Christmas-keepers consi∣der this. But it is not enough for us to laugh and be merry, unlesse we reioyce with sinne and madnesse, unlesse our laughter be tempered with filthinesse, and mixed with impiety. What error I say is this, or what folly? Can∣not we daily be merry and laugh, unlesse we make our laughter and mirth to be wickednesse? Or else thinke we simple mirth to be nothing worth? and can we not laugh except we sinne? What a mischiefe is this, or what furie? Let us laugh I pray
you and be merry so we sinne not. What foolishnesse, nay mad∣nesse is it, to thinke mirth and ioy nothing worth, unlesse God be iniured thereby? yea iniured, and that most hainously. O that all Players and Play-haunters would consider this. For in Stage-playes there is a certaine Apostasie from the faith, and a deadly declining from our beliefe and the heavenly Sacra∣ments, &c. as in pag. 51.52. before. And what else is it but to fall into destruction, to foregoe the beginning of life? For where the foundation of the Creed is overthrowne, life it selfe is destroyed. Then againe we must needs returne unto that which we have often said: What such thing is there among theBarbarians and Turkes delight not in these accursed Stage-playes, why then should. Chri∣tians doe it? Barbari∣ans? Where be any Stages or Theaters among them? where is the wickednesse of diverse impurities, to wit, the destruction of our hope and salvation? Which Playes notwithstanding if they being Pagans did use, they should erre with lesse offence to God: because albeit such doing were a defiling of the sight, yet were it not a violation of the Sacrament. But now what can we say for our selves? we hold the Creed, and yet overturne it: we confesse the duty of salvation, and yet deny it too. And therefore where is our Christianity? who as it seemeth have received the Sacrament of salvation to no other purpose, but that afterwards we might more hainously offend. We preferre pastimes before the Church: we despise the Lords Table and honour Theaters: in a word, we love all things, reverence all things, God alone seemeth vile unto us in comparison of all other things, &c. By which large discourse of this pious Father, it is most apparant: That Stage-playes overturne mens faith and religion; annihilate their baptisme; estrange their hearts and affections from Gods service, and wholy in∣dispose them to his worship. Gregory Nyssen informes us: De Oratio∣ne. lib. pag 9. That God neither heares nor regards the prayers of those qui in Theatris faustas acclamationes affectant, &c. who affect applauses in Theaters, and delight in Stage-playes. Gre∣gory Nazianzen, demanding this question, Ad quos en∣tem de divinis rebus agendum fit? nimirumad os, quibus res cordi est, & qui cam non nugatoriè velut quiddam de multis, voluptis & corum quae infra ventrem sunt occupationes, tractant. Oratio. 1. ad Eunomianos pag. 6. unto what
manner of persons he should discourse of divine things? makes this reply; that it must be to those who would lay them seriosly to heart; and not to such who handle them slightly, as one thing onely of many for pleasure and contentment ske, after irque-plaes, after Stage-playes, after songs, ater gluttony and car∣nall copulation: Intimating unto us; that those who de∣light in Stage-playes and such like Spectacles are alto∣gether unfit to heare Gods Word, or seriously to per∣forme any holy duty; their mindes being so preposessed with Playes and thoughts of vanity, after their returne from Play-houses, that they can never bend them to pious exercises in that diligent manner as they ought. And therefore he records of the Citizens of Constantino∣ple, who delighted much in Stage-playes: dqe in ea Civitate, quàm vix etiam mul∣ta virtutis ex∣empla servare possint: ut quae sicut cicos & Theatra, ita di∣vina quoque mysteria pro ludo habeat. Oratio. 31. in Laudem Athe∣naij pag. 525. That as they reputed Cirques and Stage-playes, so they likewise esteemed the divine misteries themselves, to be but a pastime. Saint Chry∣sostome in his forequoted Hom. 3. De Davide & Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511.512. Hom. in Psal. 118. D. 150.151. Ibid. Tom. 1. Col. 1030.1031. Hom. 1. De Verbis Isaiae. Vide dominū sedentem, &c. Ibidem. Col. 1281.1283, 1284. Hom. 38. in Matth. Tom. 297.298. Homilies, is exceeding copi∣ous in this theame; where he informes us; that Stage-playes so pollute the eyes, the eares, the hearts of the Actors and Spectators, that they make them altogether unfit to approach in∣to Gods holy presence, or to tread within the porch, the doores of his holy Temple, much more unfit to participate of his most sacred Body and Blood, (which must not be lodged in a polluted soule) or to heare his pure Word; which eares defiled, or rather putrified and stopped up with filthy Stage-playes, can never seri∣ously attend too. His See here, Scene 4. fore-alleadged words to this purpose, are so emphaticall and flexanimous, that they might even move an heart of Adamant, and cause the most ob∣durat Stage-haunters for to tremble. If wee adde to this, See here, Act 4. Scene 1. pag. 134. & Act 7. Scene 2.3. where I have quoted severall Councels and Fathers to prove it. See Gratian De Conse∣cratione. Distinct. 2. neere the end. the constant practise of the Primitive Church, who ex∣communicated all Stage-players and Play-haunters both from the Word, the Sacraments and all Christian society as altoge∣ther unworthy to participate of either; refusing to admit of any
Actors or others into the Church till they quite abandoned, not onely the acting, but the very sight and hearing of Stage-playes, and openly promised and professed, never to returne unto them more: Or if wee againe consider; See Aposto∣lorum Cano∣nes. Can. 17.18. Gratian. Distinctio. 33.34, 48. Ioan∣nes De Burgo Pupilla Oculi pars 7. c. 5. D. Alvarus Pela∣gius. De Plan∣ctu Ecclesiae. l. 2. Artic. 28. H. fol. 134. Ansl∣mus in 1. Tim. c. 3. Tom. 2. p. 356. C.D. that Stage-players, with those who married Woman-actors were utterly ncapable of any Ecclesiasticall Orders, and perpetually disabled to admi∣nister either the Word or Sacraments to Gods people, by reason of that inexpiable steine which the very acting of Stage-playes had engrained on them: Wee must needs acknowledge, that the acting and beholding of Stage-playes indi∣spose men to Gods service, and unfit them for his holy ordinances: else why should the Church excommuni∣cate or exclude these persons, or thus disable them in so strict a manner? Moreover those See here, Act 4. Scene 2. pag. 150. & Act 7. Scene 3. tho∣rowout. sundry Councels and Authors, See here, Scene 17.18. & 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Ni∣hil turpius aut deformius ani∣ma vitijs ob∣noxia. Chrysost. Hom. 22 ad Pop. Atioch. Tom. 5. Col. 108. C. which debar all Clergie men from the acting and beholding of Stage-playes, either in publike or private, lest their eyes, their eares and hearts, set apart, and consecrated to Gods holy mysteries, should be defiled by them, and so indispose them to discharge their ministeriall function; are a most pregnant evidence of this irrfragable truth; that Stage-playes disable men from the right performance of all holy du∣ties. And no wonder. For first they disteine the soule with the fh, and involue it in the guilt of divers sins; which makes it odious in the eyes of God; Hab 1.13. Who as he can in∣dure no iniquity; so he Psal 66.18. Iohn 9.31. Isay 1.4. to 26. regards no worship, no duties of piety, no prayers that proceed from polluted hearts. God will be wor∣shipped onely in the Psal. 96.9. beauties of holinesse; with 1 Tim. 2.8. Heb. 10.22. cleane hands and pure hearts: Whence hee commands all his, 2 Cor. 7.1. to cleanse themselves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, perfect∣ing holinesse in his feare: Ier. 4.14 Isay 1.16. to wash their heart from wickednesse that they may be saved: Isay 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. and not so much as to touch any un∣cleane thing, that so he may receive them. God will be Levit. 10.3. sancti∣fied of all those that come neere him; he will have them 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Levit 11.44. to be holy in all manner of conversation, even as he is holy, that so they 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. may be a holy Priest-hood, to offer up spirituall sacrifices
of prayer and praise, acceptable unto him through Iesus Christ; whose 1 Ioh. 1.7.9. Rev. 1.5, 6. Heb. 9.14. blood doth cleanse them from all their sinnes, Ephes. 5.26.27. Col. 1.14, 21, 22. present∣ing them pure and holy in his Fathers sight without spot or blee∣mish. Now Stage-playes, See Scene 3.4. thorowout. Act 3. Scene 1.2, 3. & Act 7. Scene 2.3. as I have formerly proved, See Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei lib. 6. here, Scene 3.4. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide & Saul. & Hom. 38. & 69. in Matth. universally defile the very bodies and soules of men, overspred∣ding them with a leprosie of sundry sinnes, (which they either ingenerate or infuse into their soules, (which Isay 59.2, 3. Lam. 3.43, 44. ecclipse Gods grace and favour from them, Isay 1.15. Prov. 1.28. Ier. 14.12. stopping up his eares a∣gainst all their prayers, and Isay 1.11, 12, 13. Prov. 15.8. c. 21.27. c. 28.9. sending up an unsavory stinke in∣to his sacred nostrels: therefore they must of necessity dis∣able them to all holy duties. Secondly, it is impossible for Matth. 6.24. Im. 1.4. 1 Ioh. 2.15, 16. Rom. 8.5, 6, 7, 8. any man to serve two different Masters both together, to serve God and Mammon, Christ and the Devill: God in the Church, the Devill in the Play-house: Christ in the morning, the Devill in the evening. He who serves Satan all the weeke in the Stage or Play-house, can ne∣ver worship Christ upon the Lords day in the Temple. Alas, there was never yet such 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. O seculū nequam, quod solos tuos sic soles beare amicos ut Dei facias inimicos. Bernard E∣pist. 107. fellowship betweene Christ and Beliall, betweene the renounced pompes and vanities of Sa∣tan, and the humility of our super-celestiall Saviour, that men might serve and follow them both together. Now See Act 2. Chorus. pag. 42. to 60. here, fol. 522.523. & Act 7. Scene 2. Stage-playes are the very Devils owne peculiar pompes, Play-houses his Synagogues; Players, his professed Masse-riests and Choristers; Play-haunters his devoted servants, as Tertullian De Spectac. cap. 24.25. See here, pag. 10.11. him∣selfe professeth, and Nam de ijs quid dicamus, qui cum gentilium turbis ad spectacula maturant, & conspectus suos a{que} auditus impudicis & verbis & actibus faedant: non est nostrum pronunciare de talibus. Ipsi enim sentire & videre possunt quam sibi delegerint partem. Hom. 11. Super. Levit. Tom. 1. fol. 83. B. Et revera si vincamur & post haec verba peccamus, si post Ecclesiam rur∣sum in Circum, & ad equorum cursus, & ad conventus Gentilium eamus, quid aliud fit, quam superatos nos possider. Idem. Hom. 8. In Isaiam. Tom. 2. fol. 108. H. Origen, with others, largely prove: Those therefore who thus serve the Devill in Playes and Play-houses; its impossible for them to serve the Lord sincerely in prayers and Churches. Thirdly, 1 Cor. 10.21 No
man can drinke the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; nor yet partake of the Lords Table, and of the table of Devils: But Stage-playes, See Act 1.2. accordingly. are the cup and table of Devils; the very Devils meate; his drinke; Et haec fercu∣la apellabantur quasi celebra∣retur conviviū, quo velut suis epulis immun∣da Daemonia pascerentur. August. De Civ. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 4. See here, pag. 46.47 & The∣ophylact in Act. c. 17 p. 804 those dishes and repasts wherewith he was solemnely feasted by his idolatrous worshippers, in his owne Idoll-temples. It is not possible therefore for any Chri∣stian to feed his eyes, his eares with these diabolicall banqvets, and yet worthily to participate of Christs Body and Blood, the spirituall Sweet-meates of a Chri∣stian soule. Fourthly, the very acting and beholding of Stage-playes drawes downe a selfe-condemning guilti∣nesse, and so by consequent Chrysostom. Hom in Psal. 118. & Hom. 1. De Verbis I∣saiae. vidi Do∣minum seden∣tem, &c. here, Scene 4. a certaine secret terror of ap∣pearing in Gods presence on mens soules. There is scarce a man of any grace or ingenuity, but would even blush and feare to be derehended by any good man at a Play-house: Yea the very Plutarchi Cato. Seneca. Epist. 97. Vale∣rius Maximus. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 2. Ludov. Vives Notae. in Au∣gust. De Civit. Dei. l 2. c. 8. Heathen Romanes stood so much in awe of Cato his vice-condemning presence: that they durst not call for their loralian Enterludes whiles he was neere the Theater. And will not the consideration of Gods all-seeing presence, thinke yee, strike much more feare into the See Tertul. De Spectaculis c. 7. & here, fol. 524. b. hearts and consciences of such who are deprehended by him at lewde lascivious Stage-playes, then any Christians, any Catoes eye or face, could strike into these Heathen Ro∣mans; which have no such soule-confounding Majestie in them as is in the very smallest frowne of God? If there∣fore those who resort to Stage-playes by reason of their selfe-convincing consciences, Heb. 4.16. can never approach with boldnesse to Gods Throne of Grace; its certaine they cannot serve or worship him as they ought. Fiftly, hee who perjures himselfe in the highest degree, breaking that very origall covenant which he made to God at firt in Baptisme, and afterward ratified at every receiving of the Sacrament, can See Act 2. Chorus p. 42. to 61. & Act 7. Scene 2. never questionlesse serve the Lord in any acceptable pious manner: the performance of this vow and covenant (at least-wise in the desire the endeavour of his soule) being that alone which makes him a Chri∣stian; and so a man capable of serving God. See Ibid. pag. 42. to 61. & Act 7. Scene 2. pag. 561, &c. But
he who acts or resorts to Stage-playes, violates that very origi∣nall covenant which he made to God at first in baptisme, and aterwards reconfirmed at every receiving of the Sacra∣ment; as I have else-where largely proved: therefore he can never serve the Lord in any acceptable or graci∣ous manner, according to his will. And alas what Christian is there, who would frequent or harbour any such sinfull pleasures, as will quite disable him to serve his God, to please his blessed Saviour, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Christi san∣guis terrarum orbis est prae∣tium; Christus emit ecclesiam, hoc eam om∣nem adornavit. Chrysostom Hom. 60. ad Pop. Anti∣och. Tom. 5. Col. 341. D. who hath bought him even at the dearest rate? What contentment can a man take in any thing; in all the riches, honours, pleasures, contentments of this world, whiles Quicquid no∣bis adest prae∣ter Deum no∣strum non est dulce. Nolum{us} omnia quae de∣dit, si non dat seipsum qui omnia dedit. August. in Psal. 85. pag. 66. his soule can draw no comfort, no heavenly refreshment from his God? Better can the inferiour world subsist without the light and influence of the Sunne, or the body of a man without the heart, then the soule of any Christian without the satisfactory Animae vita, Dei cultus, ac vita eo cultu digna. Chrysost. De Orando Deo. lib. 1. Tom. 5. Col. 592. A. soule-inlivening presence of his God, his Saviour, which is never found but in Isay 57.15. Non enim te∣merè in stero∣re Deus habi∣tat, sed in cae∣naculo scopis mundato. Chry¦sost Hom. 22. ad Pop. Anoch. Tom. 5. Col. 170. C. those broken humble spirits, who seve him in syncerity, and tremble at his Word. As therefore we ever desire to please, to serve our blessed God according to his will; or to en∣joy the heart-ravishing consolations of his most blis∣full presence; let us presently abandon Stage-playes; which as they hinder us in the service, so they utterly deprive us of the face and favour of our God, which are Psal. 4.6, 7. Psal. 65.4. Psal. 6.3, 4. able to make us more then happy in the middest of all our deepest miseries. The pleasures, the refreshments that men reape from Stage-playes, as they shut out better contents, so they Heb. 11.25. abide no longer then the Playes are acting, (and sometimes scarce so long) and then they oft-times leave a sting behinde them, which gaules and prickes the soule for ever after. If then that love of Christ which 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. constrained holy Paul, to bid adue to all carnall pleasures, will not enforce us to say thus to Stage-playes: as Da∣vid sometimes did to his lewde companions; Psal. 6.8. & Psal. 119.115. Depart from me yee wicked, yee workers (yee producers) of iniquity,
for I will keepe the Cōmandements of my God; yet let the com∣fort that Gods service wil bring unto our soules, and this consideration joyned with it; that we Anima nisi prius dedicerit terrena con∣temnere, caele∣stia mirari non poterit: & eco∣tra, donec re∣rena miratur necessriò cae∣lestia spernit ac despicit. Chrys. De Compunctione Cordis. lib. 2. Col. 501. B. cannot serve God with any sncerity of heart, as long as we delight in cursed Stage-playes, now at last enforce us to bid this farewell to them, that so we may be enabled to please that holy blessed God, who created, redeemed us at first, and hath ever∣more preserved us since, Luk. 1.74, 75. Rom. 14.7, 8. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15. that we might doe him service. Secondly, as Stage-playes indispose men to, so they likewise withdraw and keep them from Gods service, See Nicho∣laus De Cle∣mangijs. De Novis Cele∣britatibus non Instituendis. l. p. 143. to 160. & Ioannis Lang. hecrucius De Vita & Hone∣state Ecclesia∣sticorum. lib. 2. cap. 11.12. especially on Lords-dayes, Holy-dayes, and solemne Festivals; which should be wholy and onely consecrated to his more speciall worship; and spent in duties of devotion, in lawding and bles∣sing him for his more speciall favour. And doth not our owne experience beare witnesse to this truth? Are not our Play-houses oft-times more crowded, more coach∣ed and frequented then many of our Churches? and are they not full oft-times, when our Churches are but empty? Are there not many hundreds serving the De∣vill daily in our Theaters, even then when as they should be serving God in his Temples? Doe not more commonly resort to Playes, then Lectures, which is ill? yea doe not too too many neglect to come to Sermons, that they may runne to Stage-playes, which is worse?See 5. & 6. Edward 6. c. 3. Indeed our See the Ex∣hortation in the Booke of Common-prayer, as the end of publike and privte baptisme. See Canon 45. which enjoyneth every benefced Minister that is a Prea∣cher to preach once a Sunday at least, either in his owne or some other adjoy∣ning parish. Church of England (out of the great respect it yeelds to Preaching, and the absolute necessity of it to salvation) enioynes God-fathers and God-mothers, to call upon their God-children, to heare Sermons; (which some pro∣phane ones now begin to loath and speake against, as if we had too much preaching:) that so they may the better forsake the Devill and all his workes, mortifie all their unholy corrupt affections, and daily proceed in all vertue and god∣linesse of living. Yea the Saints of God in ancient times, were quickning and calling upon one another in this
manner: al. 95.1, 2, 6. O coe let us sing unto the Lord, let us make a ioyfull noyse unto the Rock of our Salvation. Let us come b∣fore his presence with Thankesgiving, and make a ioyfull noyse unto him with Psalmes, &c. O come let us worship and fall downe and kneele before the Lord our maker? Psal. 96.1, 2, 3, 8, 9. See Psal. 97.1. Psal 99.9. Psal. 100.1, 2. O sing unto the Lord a new Song, sing unto the Lord all the earth. Sing unto the Lord; blesse his Name; shew forth his salvation from day to day. Declare his goodnesse among the Heathen, his won∣ders among all people. Give unto the Lord (O yee Kindreds of the people;) give unto the Lord glory and strength. Give un∣to the Lord the glory due unto his Name; bring an Offring and come into his Courts. O worship the Lord in the beauty of holi∣nesse, feare before him all the earth: Isay 2.3, 5. Psal. 122.1. Come yee, and let us goe up to the Mountaine of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Iacob, and he will teach us of his wayes, and we will walke in his pathes, &c. But now alas in stead of calling upon one another to heare Sermons, and of these encourage∣ments to goe up to the house of the Lord to blesse and prayse his Name (which is now no better then a brand of Puriranisme) we heare nought else among many who professe themselves Christians; but, come let us goe and see a Stage-play: let us heare such or such an Actor; or resort o such and such a Play-house: (and I would I might not say unto such a Whore or Whore-house;) where we will laugh and be merry, and passe away the afternoone: As for any resort to such or such a Lecture, Church, or pious Preacher; its a thing they seldome thinke, much lsse discourse of. Alas, that any who prosesse themselves Christians should be thus strangly, (that I say not athei∣stically) infatuated, as to forsake the most sacred Ora∣cles, the soule-saving Word, the most blessed Sacra∣ments, house and presence of their God; to runne to Playes and Play-houses, the abominable See Act 1.2. & p. 10.52, 67, 68 Spectacles, Lect∣ures, Pompes, and Syngogues of the Devill: as thus Prov. 2.13, 14. to leave the pather of uprightnesse, to walke in the wayes of dark∣nesse; reioycing to doe evill, and delighting in the frowardnesse of the wicked; even then when as they should solace their
very soules in God. Yet this is the most desperate deplo∣rable condition of many hundred prophane ones in this age of light; who admire who respect the very basest Stage-players, more then the devoutest gravest Preach∣ers; and would rather heare the most lascivious Come∣dy, then the best soule-searching Sermon: their very practise proclaiming as much unto the world (if not their words;) they being oftner weekely in the Play-house then in the Church; reading over three Play-bookes at the least, for every Sermon, for every Booke or Chapter in the Bible. O that the execrable sinfulnesse of this prodigious profanesse would now at last awake us! then those who thinke a Stage-play once a day (at leastwise three aweeke) too little, a Sermon once or twice a weeke, a moneth, too much; would change their tune for shame; thinking one Play a yeere to much, See Refor∣matio Legum Ecclesiastica∣rum ex autho∣ritate Regis. Henrici 8. & Edwardi 6. Londini 1571. Tit. De Divi∣nis Officijs c. 46, 9, 10, 12. fol. 43.44, 45. which ap∣points two Sermons a day in Citties on Lordsdayes & Holi-dayes. See Canons 1604. Canon 45. which en∣joynes all li∣censed Preachers to preach one Sermon every Sunday at the least. one Sermon a weeke, a moneth to little for Christians, concluding in the words of that blessed Martyr of our Church, Iohn Hooper Bishop of Glocester (who constantly Master Fox, Booke of Martyrs. Edit. 1610. pag. 1366. Col. 11. Line 77.78. preached in his O that our Bishops and Ministers would doe thus now. Dioces most times twice, or at leastwise once every day thorowout the weeke without faile) in the Imprinted by Iohn Day Anno 1550. Confession and protestation of his Faith, Dedicated to King Edward the sixt, and the whole House of Parliament, in the yeere of our Lord, 1550. where we writes thus. What Realme soever will avoyd the evill of Sedition and contempt of Godly Lawes, let them provide the Word of God, to be diligently and truely preached and taught unto the Subjects and Members thereof. Let such now who cry downe preaching, Lectures and Lecturers, as the cause of Sediti∣on, consider his. The lacke of it is the cause of sedition and trouble, as Salo∣mon saith; Prov. 29.18. Where Prophecy wanteth, the people are dissipa∣ted. Wherefore I cannot a little wonder at the opinion and do∣ctrine of such, as say, a Sermon Let asie Ministers, & carelesse Christians, who cry downe Lecture, and cry up Stage-playes, note this well. ONCE IN A VVEEKE, IN A MONETH, OR IN A QVARTER OF A YEERE, is suf∣ficient
for the people. Truely it is injuriously and evill spoken against the glory of God and the salvation of the people. But seng they will not be in the whole as good unto God as before they have beene unto the Devill, neither so glad to remove false doctrine from the people, and to continue them in the true; where as they did before occupie the most part of the forenoone, the most part of the afternoone, yea and a great part of the night, to keepe the estimation and continuance of dangerous and vaine superstitions, were it much now to occupie ONE HOVRE IN THE MORNING, AND AN OTHER HOVRE TOVVARDS NIGHT, to occupie the people with true and earnest prayer un∣to God in Christs Blood, and in preaching the true Doctrine of Christ, that they might know and continue in the true Religion, and faithfull confidence of Christ Iesu? Fifteene Masses in a Church daily were not too many for the Priests of Baal; and SHOVLD ONE SERMON EVERY DAY BE Let all our Prelates and Ministers con∣sider well of this. TOO MVCH FOR A GODLY BISHOP, AND EVANGELICALL PREACHER? I wonder how it can be too much opened unto the people? If any man say, labour is lost, and mens businesse lyeth undone by that meanes. Surely it is ungodly spoken: for those that beare the people in hand of such a thing, knoweth right well, that there was neither labours, cares, needs, necessity, nor any things else, that heretofore could keepe them from hearing of Masse, though it had beene said at 4. a clocke in the morning. Therefore as farre as I see, people were content to lose more la∣bour, and spent more time then to goe to the Devill, then now to come to God: (as our common Players and Play-haunters doe.) But my faith is, that both Master and Servant shall fin gaine thereby at the yeeres end; THOVGH THEY HEARE MORNING SERMON, AND MORNING PRAYERS EVE∣RY DAY OF THE VVEEKE. Thus farre this reverend Bi∣shop, whose words and practise I would the See the Hi∣storicall Nar∣ratiō, &c. prin∣ted. An. 1631. The Copy of an answer to a Letter, &c. Imprinted by stealth in the beginning of Queene Eliza∣beths Raigne: without any Authors or Printers name unto it; was answered ver∣batim by Robert Crowly, and printed by Au∣thority. Anno 1566. which shewes the shamelesnesse of him who durst now lately in his new Narration to publish it as the received Opinion of the Church of England: it being penned by one Champeis, who if Iohn Veron may be credited, in his Apologie in Defence of his Treatise of Predestination, was both a Papist and a Pelagian too. grosse and shamelesse perverters of his doctrine in the points now controverted,
(he being a professed Anti-Arminian, and Anti-Pela∣gian, and that in terminis, as his See his Con∣fession and Protestation of the Christi∣an Faith, De∣dicated to Ed∣ward the 6. & the whole Par∣liament. Anno 1550. His Com∣fortable Expo∣sition upō cer∣taine Psalmes. London 1580. fol. 22.23, 24, 29, 46, 55, 56 57, 60, 63, 64, 65, 78 105. and his Articles upō the Creed. London 1581. Article 3. to 15, 17, 20, 21, 25, 29, 30, 33, 36, 38, 39, 40, 42. to 52, 55, 62, 67, 78, 91, 93, 94, 97, 98. where he con∣cludes point-blanke against the Arminian Tenets which some men cast upon him. printed Workes most posi∣tively demonstrate, however some pervert them:) together with our constant Play-haunters would now seriously consider: especially in these our dayes; wherein Stage-playes almost cry down Sermons, and Play-books finde so quicke a sale, that (if Stationers doe not misin∣forme me) there are at least a dozen Play-bookes vented for one printed Sermon: so that I may safely affirme, that Stage-playes exceedingly withdraw and keepe men from Gods service: especially on Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, and solemne Festivals, Hanc ob rem maximus ille Moses aequum cnsuit ut omnes ascripti ejus Civitati, jus naturae sequentes celebrarent hunc diem (Sabbatum) otio festis{que} hilaritatibus, intermissis laboribus & opificijs quaesturijs negois{que} victū paranub{us} ablegata etiā tantisper ceu per inducias solicitudine anxia, ut vacarent non ludicris (sicut quidam) ridendisque spectaculis mimorum saltatoru{que}, quae insanum vulgus amat perdite, &c. sed soli philosophiae verae, &c Philo Iudaeus. l. 3. De Vita Moss p. 932. set apart for better purpo∣ses: which experimentall truth is so visible to the eyes, the consciences of all men, that it needs no further proofe. If any man be so uncredulous as not to believe experience, let him then attend to sundry Councels, Fathers, and other moderne Authors, who affirme: that Stage-playes withdraw men from the Church, and keepe them from Gods service, especially on Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, and solemne Festivals which were set apart for pious exercises. For Councels, See the 4. Councell of Carthage, Canon 88. with sundry others here recited. Act 7. Scene 3. For Fathers, Clemens Romanus, in the 2. Booke of Apostolicall Constitutions. cap. 64.65. complaines; Tu verò relicto fidelium caetu, Dei Ecclesia ac legibus ad Grae∣corum ludos curris, & ad Theatra properas; expetens unus ex venientibus eò nume∣rari, & partieps fieri audiionum turpium, ne dicam abominabilium: nec audisti Hieremiam dicentem. Domine, non sedi in concilio ludentium, sed timui a conspectu manus tuae neque Iob, dicentem similia. Ibid. Surius Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 68. That many leaving the Con∣gregation of the Faithfull, with the Church and Lawes of God, did runne to the Playes of the Grecians, and hasten unto Thea∣ters,
desiring to be numbred among those who resorted thither and to be made partakers of filthy, that I say not abominable words and spectacles: neither doe they heare the Prophet Iere∣my, saying: Ier 15.17. Lord I have not sate in the assembly of Players or Mockers, but I was afraid at the sight of thy hand: nor Iob 31.1, 5, 7. an excellent place. Iob, who speakes the like words, &c. Clemens Alexandrinus, in his 3. Booke of the Paedagge. cap. 11. fol. 52.53. complaines; That divers after they are departed from the Church, laying aside that divine inspiration which was in it, assimulate themselves to the company in which they are; or rather laying aside the false and counterfeit visour of gravi∣ty, they are found to be such, as they were before unknowne to be: and when as they have reverenced that Word which was spoken of God, they leave it where they heard it, running unto Play-houses, the chaire of pestilence; and delighting themselves abroade with wicked measures and amorous songs; being filled with the noyse of pipes, with clapping of hands, with drunken∣nesse, with all kinde of filth and dirt. Hoc autem dum cantant & recantantij qui immortalita∣tem anteà cele∣brabant, tan∣dem pernicio∣sissimam mali malè canunt plinodiam; Comedamus, & bibamus, cras enim mo∣rimur. Ii au∣tem, non cras verè, sed jam Deo mortui sunt, sepelien∣tes suos mortu∣os, hoc est, se∣ipsos in mor∣tem infodien∣tes, &c. Ibidem. But whiles they chaunt and rechaunt this; those who before did celebrate and extoll immortality, doe at last wickedly sing, that most pernicious pa∣linody; Let us eate and drindke, for to morrow we shall die. But they not to morrow, but even now already are truely dead to God, burying their dead, that is, interring themselves in death, &c. A dreadfull speech, which I would our Dan∣cers, Play-haunters, and voluptuous persons would lay neere their hearts. Saint Augustine informes us; Loqumur tamen & ad illos, quos frequenter ab Ecclesiae conventu spectacula voluptuosa sub∣ducunt, &c. August. Hom. 21. Tom. 10. p. 592. See Enar. in Psal. 80. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 3.4, 8, 13, 18. That voluptuous Playes and Spectacles oft-times withdraw men from the Assemblies of the Church: and Hanc, inquam, pudendam, verae{que} religioni adversandam & detestandam talium numinum placationem, has fabulas in Deos illecebrosas atque criminosas, haec ignominiosa Deorum facta sceleratè turpiter{que} conficta, sed sceleratius turpius{que} com∣missa oculis & uribus publicis Civitas tota disceat, &c. De Civitate Dei. l. 2. c. 27. that the whole Citty of Rome did with publike eyes and eares, learn those alluring criminous fables, and those ignominious deeds which were wickedly and filthily fained of their Idol-gods, and more filthily, more wickedly committed by them, neglecting in the meane time
better things. Saint Chrysostome in Hom. 3. De Davide & Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511.512. Hom. De Verbis I∣saiae. Vidi Do∣minum seden∣tem, &c. Tom. 1. Col. 1281. to 1284. Hom. in Psal. 118. v. 151.152. Tom. 1. Col. 1030.1931. & Hom. 7. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 58.59. & Hom 15. & 21. Ad Pop. Antioch. sundry of his Homi∣lies complaines: That men did oft-time leave the Church and runne to Playes; preferring Stage-play-meetings be∣fore the Church Assemblies, and chusing rather to see an Harlot or Player in the Theater, then the Body and Blood of Christ himselfe in the Church. Pope Leo the first la∣ments. Majorem ob∣tinent insana spectacula fre∣quentiam, quā beaa martyria. Sermo in Octav Petri & Pali. cap. 5. fol. 165. That Stage-playes, and unruly Spectacles were more frequented then the blessed solemnities of the Martyrs. Saint Asterius, in his Homily against the Feast of the Kalends, complaines: Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. p. 705. D. E. That many preferring their vaine Stage-playes, pleasures, and imployments, absented them∣selves from the Church, and holy Sermons on Festivals and Holi-dayes, and on the Feast of Kalends. Sed proh dolor, quamplurimi inter Christianos hanc Iudaeorum amentiam & im∣probitatem imitantur, qui diebus festis, aut ludis illiberalibus, crapula, choreis, aut alijs mundi vanitatibus dediti, quum Deo diligentius obsequium exhibere, quum templa Dei frequentare, orationibus insistere, atque Ecclesiastico interesse officio de∣berent, tunc maxime Deum suis dissolutissimis moribus irritant. Idnè est ô Christi∣ani, celebrare diem festum, indulgere ventri, & inconcessis voluptatibus habenas laxare? Si prohibetur die festo opus, quod manu exerceatur ad vitae necessitatem, ut integrius divinis rebus vacare possitis, nonne potiori jure prohibita sunt ea, quae non nisi cum peccato committi pount, & gravi offensione Dei? Diebus ad exercenda opera servilia concessis, unusquisque suo intentus est operi, & abstinet à crapu∣la, ludis & vanitatibus. Diebus autem festis passim currunt ad cauponā, d ludos spe∣ctacula & choreas, in irrisionem divini nominis, & diei praevaricationem: quum ta∣men eo gravius sit peccatum, quo sanctiori tempore committatur: Resipiscant igitur & id zianium, quod inimicus homo superseminavit in agro Domini prorsus extirpa∣re & a se evellere laborent. Cyril. Alex. in Ioan. Evang. l. . c. 5 p. 595. Alas for griefe (writes Cyril Arch-bishop of Alexandria) very many among us Christians imitate this madnesse and dishonesty of the Iewes: who upon Holi-dayes and solemne Festivals gi∣ving themselves over to dishonest Playes, to drunkennesse, to dancing, or other vanities of the world; when as they ought to serve God more diligently, to frequent the Churches of God more earnestly, to be instant in prayers, and to be pre∣sent at Ecclesiasticall duties, doe then most of all provoke God with their most dissolute manners. Is this O Christians to celebrate an holy day, to pamper the belly, and to let loose the reines to unlawfull pleasures? If worke bee prohibited
on Holi-days, which must be used for the necessary sustenance of life; that so you may the more intirely devote your selves to heavenly things; are not those things then much more forbidden which cannot bee committed without sinne and great offene to God? On dayes that are allowed for servile worke, every one is intent upon his owne businesse; and hee abstaines from drunkennesse, pastimes, and vanities. But on Holi-dayes (loe here the true genious picture of our present age) men every where runne to the Ale-house, to Playes, to Enterludes, and dances, to the very derision of Gods Name, and the prevarication of the day: where as in truth the sinne is so much the more hainous, by how much the more holy the time is in which it is committed. Let them therefore repent, and labour utterly to extirpate and pull up this tare, which the envious man hath sowne in the Field of the Lord. Iohn Damascen out of Eusebius informes us. Qui Domini metu praediti sun, dominicū diem expectāt, u Deo praeces adhibeant, c copore & san∣guine Domini fruantur. Iner∣tes autem & socordes Do∣minicum diem xpectant, ut ab opere feria∣ti, vitijs operā¦dent. Quod au∣tem non men∣tiar, res ipae fi∣dem faciant. Alio die in mediū prodi & neminem invenies. Die Dominico egredere, at{que} alios cithara canentes, alios applaudentes & altantes, alios sedentes, ac proxi∣mos maledictis insectantes, alios deni{que} luctantes reperies. Praeco ad Ecclesiam vo∣cat? & omnes segnitie torpent, ac moras nectunt. Cithara aut tuba personuit? & omnes tanquam alis instruti currunt. Damascen. Parallelorum. l. 3. c. 47 p. 208. That those who are endued with the feare of God, long for the Lords day, that so they may pray unto God, and be made partakers of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But sluggish lasie persons looke for the Lords day, for no other end but that being loosed from their worke, they may give themselves o∣ver to their vices. Now that I lie not, the very things them∣selves doe make it credulous. Walke forth upon any other day, and thou shalt finde no man idle or playing. Goe forth upon the Lords day, and thou mait finde, some playing upon and singing to the Harpe: others shouting and dancing; o∣thers sitting, and reviling their neighbours, others wrestling. Doth the Preacher call to the Church? all of them grow lasie, and make delayes. Doe the Harpe or Trumpet sound? all of them presently runne as if they were winged. Eccle∣siae spectacula cernimus, Dominum Christum in mens recumbentem prospicimus, Seraphinos te sanctum Hymnum canentes, Evangelicas voces, Spirius sancti prae∣sentiam, Prophetas resonantes, Angelorum Hymnum, Alleluia, omnia spirituala omnia salute digna, omnia caeleste regnū conciliantia. Quid autem cernit qui a heatra cur∣rit? Diabolicos cantus, mulier∣las saltitan∣tes, vel, ut recti∣us loquar, Dae∣monis intem∣perijs agitats. Quid enim sal∣tatriae facit? Caput, quod Paulus perpe∣tuò tegi jussi, impudenter a∣perit: collum invertit: comā huc at{que} illuc expandit. Haec porrò etiàm ab ea iunt, quam Daemon obses∣sam tenet. Ci∣tharaedus autē tanquam Dae∣mon, cū ligno conflictatur. Tale nimirum Herodis quo{que} convivium erat. Herodiadis filia ingressa, tripudiavit, ac Ioannis Bap∣tistae caput amputavit, & subterranea inferni loca haereditatis loco cōsecuta est. Quo∣circa qui choreas & saltationes amant, cum ea portionem habent. Vae his qui Domi∣nico di cythara ludunt, aut operantur. Ad mercenariorū & servorum requietem hic dies concessus est. Haec enim Dies, inquit ille, quam fecit Dominus: exultemus & lae∣temur in ea, &c. Idem. Ibidem. We be∣hold
the Spectacles of the Church; we see the Lord Christ lying on the Table, the Ceraphyns singing a thrice holy song, the words of the Gospell; the presence of the holy Ghost, the Prophets ecchoing, the Angels singing, Alleluia, all things spirituall, all things worthy salvation, all things procuring the Kingdome of Heaven. These things heares he that en∣ters into the Church. But what seeth he who runnes to Play-houses? Diabolicall songs, dancing Wenches, or that I may speake more truely, Girles tossed up and downe with the furies of the Devill: (A good discription of our dancing fe∣males.) For what doth this Dancersse? She most impu∣dently uncovers her head, which Paul hath commanded to be alwayes covered: Shee turnes about her necke the wrong way; She througheth about her haire hither and thither; Even these things verily are done by her whom the Devill hath possessed. But the Fidler, like a Devill, conflicteth with woodden instruments. Such verily was the feast of Herod. The Daughter of Herodias entred in and danced, and cut of the head of Iohn Baptist, and obtained the subterraneous places of Hell for her inheritance. Therefore those who love Charantoes and Dances, have their portion with her. Woe un∣to those who play upon the Harpe on the Lords day, or doe any servile worke. This day was allotted for the rest of ser∣vants and hirelings: For this saith he, is the day of the Lord, let us reioyce and be glad therein, &c. Salvian is yet more punctuall to our purpose: heare but his words for all the other Fathers, Nos Ecclesijs Dei ludira anteponimus; nos Altaria spernimus, & Theatra honoramus. Omnia deni{que} amamus, omnia colimus, solus no∣bis in comparatione omnium Deus vilis est Deni{que} praeteralia quaeid probant, indi∣cat hoc etiam haec res ipsa quā dico. Si quando enim venerit, quod scilicet saepè eve∣nit, t eodem die, & festivitas ecclesiastica, & ludi publici agantur, quaero b omnium conscientia, quis locus majores Christianorum virorum copias habet? caveanè ludi publici, an Atrium Dei? & Templum magis omnes sectentur, an Theatrum? Dicta Evangeliorum magis diigant, an thymelico∣um: verba vi∣tae, an verba mortis? Verba Christi, an ver∣ba mimi? Non st dubium quin illud n∣gis amemus, quod antepo∣nimus. Omni onim ferarium ludicrorū die, si quae libet Ec∣clesiae festa fu∣erint, non solū ad Ecclesiam non veniunt, qui Christia∣nos se esse di∣cunt: ed si qui nescij fortè ve∣nerint, dum in ipsa Ecclesia∣sunt, si ludos a∣gi audiunt, Ec∣clesiam ere∣linquunt. Sper∣nitur Dei tem∣plum ut con∣curratur ad Theatrum; Ec∣clesia vacuatur, Circs imple∣tur. Christū in Altario demit∣timus, ut adulterantes viu impurissimo oculos ludicrorum turpium fornicatione pascamus Salvian De Guber. Dei. l. 6. p. 195.196. We preferre (saith he) pastimes
before the Curch of God: We despise the Lords Table, and honour Theaters. Finally, besides other things which prove the same, this which I now say manifests it to be true. For if it fall out (as often it doth,) that at one and the same time an Holi-day be kept, and common Playes proclaimed; I demand of every mans conscience, which place hath greater troopes of Christians? whether the Yard of the publike Play-house, or the Court of Gods house; and whether men flocke to most; to the Temple, or to the Theater? Whether doe they most affect, the sayings of the Evangelists, or of Stage-play∣ers? the words of life, or the words of death? the words of Christ, or the words of a foole in a Play? Doubtlesse wee love that most which we preferre. For if the Church keepe any feast on that day when there are solemne Playes; those, who say they are Christians, doe not onely not come to the Church, but if any not thinking of the Playes come casually thither, if they heare whiles they are in the very Church, that there are Playes acting abrod, they leave the Church, and repaire to them. The Temple of God is dispised to runne unto Theaters: the Church is emptied, the Play-house fil∣led: We leave Christ upon the Table, to feed our adulte∣rous eyes with the impure and unchaste sight of most filthy Enterludes. Deni{que} cujusibet civitatis incolae Ravennam aut Romam venerint, pars sunt Romanae plebis in Circo, pars sunt Ra∣vennatis in Theatro. Ac per hoc nemo se loco aut absentia excusatum putet. Omnes turpitudine rerum unum sunt, qui sibi rerum turpium voluntate sociantur. Et blan∣dimur tamen nobis de probitate morum, blandimur nobis de turpitudinum raritate. Ibid. p. 201. What stranger soever either commeth to Ravenna, or to Rome; shall finde a part of the Romanes at Stage-playes, and a part of the Ravenians at Theatrs. And although any be either absent or distant by place, yet is he not excused thereby: for as many as are ioyned toge∣ther in likenesse of affection, are guilty alike of the same wickednesse that either doth commit. Yet for all this, wee flatter our selves of our good behaviour, and of the rarenesse of our impurity, &c. Thus farre these Fathers De Inventoribus Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2. pag. 384.385. Polydor
Virgil complaines. That in his time holy dayes were most acceptable to youth for no other reason, but that they had then leasure to lead about dances; especially among the Ita∣lians, who after the custome of the ancient Pagans, did usu∣ally exhibite Spectacles and Playes unto the people; reci∣ting Comedies, and personating the lives and martyrdomes of the Saints in Churches; in which that all might receive equall delight, they acted them in their Mother-tongue. Thus was it heretofore among the ancient Romanes, who on their solemne Festivals recited the Poems of Poets in o∣pen Theaters, and made divers Spectacles of beasts and Sword-players in Amphitheaters; with sundry other Playes thorowout the Citty, with which the people were delighted. De Vanitate Scientiarum. c. 59. De Festis. Agrippa complaines, and so likewise doth In his Ser∣mons. fol. 1. BB. La∣timer our renowned Martyr, and Onus Eccle∣siae. c. 28. sect. 6. In festis pro divino cultu in∣stitutis visita∣mus taberna & choreas seu tri∣pudia, spectacu∣la & aliter cir∣ca illicita oc∣cupamur, exer∣citia spiritualia penitus dete∣stantes, &c. Ibidem. See cap. 27. sect. 7. & 17. Episcopus Chemnensis: That that waster of equity, that subverter of all order and decency, that author of all evill things, the Devill, endevou∣ring daily to pull downe what ever the holy Ghost doth build up, hath alwayes quite demolished this fortification: The greatest part of Christian people so spending the holy rest of Holy-dayes, not in meeting together to pray, or heare Gods Word, nor yet to performe those other duties for which they were first ordained; but wasting it in all kinde of corruptions of good manners, and of Christian doctrine, in Dances, in Comedies, in Stage-playes, in ribaldrous Songs, in sports, in drunken meetings, in spectacles, in all kinde of worldly and carnall workes contrary to the Spirit and holinesse: And as Tertullian saith of the solemnity of the Caesars or Romane Emperours; they are wont then to performe a notable piece of service, to make Bonefires and Dances in the streets, to feast from house to house, to turne the whole Citty into the forme of a Taverne, to force wine downe their throates, to runne earnestly to misdemeanors, to impudencies, to irritati∣ons, and enticements of lust: thus is the publike ioy expressed by a publike shame: so may it be said of our Festivals. Are we not threfore worthily to bee condemned who thus cele∣brate the solemnities of Christ and of his Saints? Not to
remember the Statute of 17 Edward 4. cap. 3. which informes us, that the Holi-dayes and Sudayes were spent in Dice-play, Kayles, Bowles, and such other unlawfull ungra∣cious and incommendable Games. Nor to recite the words of the authorized Part. 2. Booke of Homilies. pag. 126. Homily of the time and place of Pray∣er: which complaines: That it too evidently appeares that God is more dishonoured, and the Devill better served on the Sunday, then upon all the dayes of the weeke besides. Nor yet to recite the lamentable complaint of De Vita & Honestte Ec∣clesiasticorum lib. 2. cap. 11. thorowout. Ioannis Langhecrucius: That Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes in his time were for the most part spent in drunkennesse, dancing, wantonnesse, Stage-playes, and the like: in so much that the very Singing-men and Choristers of the Church (such was their blindnesse and madnesse) did spend and honor the sacred feast-day of the Virgin Martyr Caecilia, not in sackcloth and fastings; but in gluttony, in drunkennesse, in dancing, in lascivious and unchaste songs; being then more prone to all lascvious wickednesse, then to the reformation of their lusts, or to fasting and prayer: At{que} hunc fe∣rè in modum omnes artifices ac opifices ali∣quem sanctorū in patronū sibi deligerunt co∣lendum. Ita ut hujusmodi cul∣tu ac ritu ad ethnicismū seu atheismū rela∣bi videamur. Ibidem. p. 252. And that almost all Artifi∣cers and Tades-men had chosen some one Saint or other to be a Patron to them, which Saints they worshipped in a de∣boist Bacchanalian manner: so that by this kinde of worship and custome, men seemed to have relapsed to Heathennisme or Atheisme. I shall truely transcribe a notable passage out of Nicholaus de Clemangis to the like effect; in his Treatise: In his Works. Lugduni Bat. 1613. p. 143. to 150. De Novis celebritatibus non instituendis: where he writes thus: Every one may perceive with what devotion Christian people doe at this day celebrate their Festivals and Holi-dayes. They seldome come to Church, they most seldome heare the Masse, and that for the most part but by piece-meale, &c. Yea they leave the Church, and runne away. One goeth to a Farme, another to his world∣ly affaires: a great companie resorts to faires, which now are never kept in a publike and solemne manner but on the most eminent Festivals: Quosdam hi∣strio delectat, nonnullos Theatra occupan, plurimos pila tenet, permultos alea, &c. Ibidem. pag. 143. the Stage-player delighteth some,
Play-houses take up others; Tennis-courts many, Dice very many. Festivals are celebrated by the richer sort with great gawdinesse of apparell; and provision of banquets: but be∣tweene rich cloathes and pompous feasts, the conscience lies unadorned in uncleanesse. The outward house is cleansed with beasoms, the floores are swept, greene boughes are pla∣ced at the doore, the ground is strowed with hearbes and flowers, Omnia ni∣tent exteriora, sed miser inte∣rior homo il∣lius minime particeps exul∣tationis, in suis interim spurci∣tijs contabescit, quanto{que} inter vana gaudia ef∣fusior est laeti∣tía, tanto in∣gentioribus ur∣getur aerumnis, majoribusque peccatorū san∣ciatur aculeis. Ibidem. all outward things are cleane and trim: but the miserable inward man not partaking of this exultation, pines away in the meane time in his filthinesses, and by how much more excessive the laughter is in the middest of vaine de∣lights, by so much the more is it afflicted with greater sor∣rowes, and wounded with sharper prickes of sinnes. But to omit these: let us see what the prophane vulgar doth in the meane time, and the youth in our times corrupted with lux∣ury. I have fitly said, the prophane vulgar, according to the thing which is done; because then doublesse they are farre from the Temple; and as they ar farre from the Temple, so likewise farre from home And are not our Holi-daies spent thus too? For Holi-dayes are not celebrated by them in the Temple, nor in their houses; all the solemnities of their celebration are in Tavernes and Ale-houses, They resort thither almost at Sunne-rising, and oft-times they abide there untill midnight; they sweare, forsweare, blaspheme God, and curse all his Saints, they roare, they wrestle, they wrangle: they sing, they rage, they shrecke, they make a tumult, and seeme to be as mad as Bed∣lams. They strive who shall overcome one another in drink∣ing: they drinke merrily one to other; they earnestly pro∣voke and stirre up one another to drinke: And when as they have glutted themselves, and are drunke, then they rise up to play, &c. What shall I relate the vanities of publike Playes and spectacles upon Holi-dayes: The crosse-wayes sound againe with dances? the Vilages and streets, yea the whole Citty rebound with the voyces of Singers, the shoutes, the clamours of Dancers, the confused sound of the Harpe, the Tabre, the Psaltery, and all other musicall Harmonies. There mind being moved with the flaeries of laughter, the
thumping of the feet, the glances of the eye, the gropings of the hands, and with the alluring sweetnesse of Verses and Harpes, These are the fuits of Playes and dancing. Wax effeminate, become vaine, and grow hot to luxury and incontinency. There the consultations of whore∣domes and adulteries are handled; oportunities are taken, places, times, and conditions are appointed. And because the day is not sufficient for their lewdnesse, Girles and espou∣sed Women are there oft-times voluntarily or against their wils ravished in the darknesse of the night. I know places, yea famous Citties, in which on Holi-dayes and Lords-daies it is lawfull for Maides in a publike manner to runne abrode to their Lovers, yea to their Panders, which promised liber∣ty they diligently study to preserve without controll, and spee∣dily as soone as ever the houre of dinner is past, they earnest∣ly call themselves together, and march in troopes to their cor∣rupters with incredible wantonnesse and malepartnesse. We see in Wakes or Festivities of Country Villages,Loe here the effects of Re∣vels, Wakes, Morrices, Whitson-ales, & May-poles, which some so much approve and plead for. how Harlots come from all quarters out of the neighbour Townes and Cit∣ties, and Country Youthes flocking thither by troopes, who perhaps were free from such uncleanesse all the yeere, casting away the bridle of modesty in the solemnity of their Patron (the Saint to whose honour their Church is dedicated) publikely commit adultery. There Youth hath first cast off its Chastity; there yong men are polluted, there Children are corrupted, and they learne the experiment of a most im∣pure contagion. There they continually provoke and invite one another to that most filthy pleasure, and he that will not follow the rest to destruction is accounted a But we stile such a one a Puritan. wretch, a slug∣gard, an unprofitable person, good for nothing. And would they not think so of our Bac∣chanalian rio∣tous Grand-Christmasses too? to which all these passa∣ges may be wel applyed. What Hea∣then skilfull of sacrilegious Feastivals (if he should happen to be present) would not rather beleeve that the Floralia of Venus, or the feasts of Bacchus were kept, then the solemni∣ties of any Saint; when as he should there behold such un∣cleanesses as were wont to be acted in the Festivals of those Idols. Neither doth the filthy obscenity onely of Bacchus and Venus seeme to bee exercised there, but likewise of Mars and Bellona too. For it is w a common fame, that
it is an unseemely Holi-day which is not sprinkled with fighting and effusion of blood. Neither is it strange if that Mars be made a companion of Bacchus and Venus. For mindes provoked with wine and lust are wont to be easily pro∣voked to fight; Whence Venus Martia was fained by the Poets to be coupled with a cunning and insoluble knot.And may we not apply this to our disor∣derly Christ∣masses? What, is the Patron of the Village to be worshipped by the Inhabi∣tants on his birth-day in such a manner, that so he might be propitious to them all the yeere? What Noble or great man would not be displeased that his birth-day should be defiled with such a pollution? Who may not see, how much honester, how much better it were to observe no Holi-dayes, then to keepe them in this manner? Whose heart is so estranged from reason, so devious from the truth through perverse error, that he may not understand it to be lesse evill to goe to plow, or to digge, to sow, or doe other Country workes on the solemnities of the Saints, then not to honour, but to prophane their solemne Festivals with such horrible obscenities? And yet if any one oppressed with never so great penury of necessaries for his fa∣mily be found to have done any thing in his Field or Vine∣yard, he is cited, severely punished, reprehended, condemned as guilty of violating an Holi-day. But he who shall com∣mit these worser things condemned by the Lawes and Com∣mandements of God, shall want both punishment, and an ac∣cuser. And why is this, but because there is no man who will take revenge on those who transgresse the Precepts of the Lord? They have their Officials (whose office Officialis E∣piscopi, mini∣sterium dam∣natissimae vil∣licationis. Credo huiusmodi Officiales non ab officio, nomine, sed ab officio verbo, mutasse vocabulum: nam genus hoc hominum, quod dicunt offici perdi. Tota Offi∣cialis intentio est, ut ad opus Episcopi suae jurisdictioni commissas miserimas oves quasi vice illius tondeat, emungat, excoriet. Isti enim sunt Episcoporū sanguisugae evomentes alienum sanguinem quam biberunt. Quia testimonio Scripturae, divitias quas congregavit impius evomet: & de faucibus illius extrahet eas Deus. Isti sunt quasi songia in manu prementis, quasi quae dam colatoria divitias suis dominis in∣fluentes, & execrandis acquisitionibus nihil sibi praeter peccati sordem & faeculenti∣am retinentes, Quod enim aggregant per oppressionē pauperum, Episcopis quidem ad delicias cedit, Officialibus ad tormentum. Sic vos non vobis, mellisiatis apes. Sic vos non vobis accumulatis opes. Iti sunt secretiora illa ostiola, per quae ministri Belis sacrificia quae super mensam ponebantur à Rege, clanculum asportabant. Sic Episcopus quasi longa manu bona aliena de∣ripit, & notam criminis à se removens, suis Officialibus culpae & infa∣miae discrimen impingit. Ideo quasi sub um∣bra Episcopi, & obtētu justitiae palliatae subdi∣tos exprimunt, Ecclesias gra∣vant redditus alienos violen∣ter invadunt, oculos habent ad munera, pu∣pillae & viduae non intendunt, &c. Officium Officialium, hodie est, jura confundere, suscitare lites, transactiones rescindere, innectere dilationes, supprimere veritatem, fovere menda∣cium, quaestum sequi, aequitatem vendere, inhare exactionibus, versutias concinnare. Isti sunt, qui hospites suos gravant superflua evectione, & multitudine clientelae. Qaerunt dlicatos & superfluos cibos cum scriptum sit, comedentes & bibentes quae apud illos sunt. De alieno enim prodigi, de proprio sunt avari, verborum insidiatores & aucupes syllabarum tendunt laqueos & pedicas in capturam pecuniae, jura intr∣praetantur ad libitum, & ea pro voluntate sua, nunc abdicunt, nunc admittunt: bene dicta depravant, prudenter allegata pervertunt, rumpunt faedera, nutriunt dissimulati∣ones, fornicationes dissimulant, matrimonia distrahunt, adulteria fovent, penetrant domus, & mulieres oneratas peccatis captivas ducunt; diffamant innoxios, & nocen∣es absoluunt. Et ut multa sub verborum paucitate concludam, dum omnia venaliter agunt filij avaritiae, servi mammonae, se Diabolo venales exponunt. Si mihi credis, imò si credis in Deum, relinque maturius Officialis officium, ministerium damna∣ionis, rotam malorum, & spiritum vertiginis, qui te ad inania circumvoluit. Mi∣serere animae tuae placens Deo, cui placere non potes cum isto perditionis officio Petrus Blesensis. Epist. 25. ad Offiialem Episcopi Canotensis. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 12. pars 2. pag. 724.725, vid. Ibidem. Petrus
Blesensis hath excellently characterized) they have Arch∣deacons, they have Promoters, they have Apparitors, who enforce their Episcopall Edicts to be kept with most grievous penalties. They runne thorow the Dioces, they craftily examine and enquire, if any Vine-dresser or Husbandman hath wrought or carried any thing upon an Holi-day: an if it shall appeare that hee hath done any such thing, he is accused and punished, not so often according to the quality of the offence, as at the will of the Iudge. But yet Christ hath none or very few Proctors who cause his Commande∣ments to bee kept, &c. Enarratio in Psal. 3. Saint Augustine saith; that hee would rather goe to Plow on the Lords-day, then Dance: not that it is lawfull then to goe to Plow, or that hee that goeth to Plow should be pardoned, but because hee who danceth offends more grievously: because dancing it selfe is oft-times a sinne, and oft-times enforceth men to occasions of worser sinnes. Consider what hee would have said of those other things, which now are commonly done up∣on our Holi-dayes. And yet notwithstanding, if any one goeth to Plow on the Lords-day, hee is not onely most severely pu∣nished, but he is welnigh reputed an Infidell: but hee who danceth excellently, not onely hath no reproofe, but he is like∣wise
plausibly received with applause and gratulation even by the Censors themselves, &c. Now what a thing is it for men to intangle themselves in greater villanies, on those dayes that are appointed for reconciliation and remission of sinnes, and on which men wholy cease from terrene actions, that they may give themselves to the contemplation of Hea∣venly things with a pure heart? What confidence can such have of the suffrage of the Saints, who defile their Holi∣dayes with most foolish vanities, most impure pollutions most wicked debacchations, and sacrilegious execrations? Verily they deserve to have them, not most pious furtherers, but most deadly accusers. O that Chri∣stians would consider this, especially those who abuse the Feast of our Saviours Na∣tivity. For what greater iniury can bee done to a Saint, then to dishonor his birth-day, wherein he was carried into Heaven and Paradice, with such uncleanesses? and with every such sacrilegious custome wherewith Devils were wont to be attoned by their superstitious worshippers? What doe we thinke the ancient holy Fathers would say, who appointed the solemnities of the Saints to be observed in the Church for the foresaid ends, if they were now alive, and should see those vanities and counterfeit fooleries that are done upon them? I doubt not but they would take care of the soules that are like to perish, neither would they suffer such things on the holy dayes of the Saints as were not per∣mitted to be done in the Bacchanalia themselves. Either therefore, they would recall the people by the censure of dis∣cipline from such most unworthy obscenities, or would compell them to celebrate Festivals with due honesty; or if they could not breake the force of pernicious custome, they would rather abolish the feasts themselves, lest they should bee an occasion of so great wickednesses; which as it seemes to agree with the safety of soules, according to the variety of manners and times, are either to be discharged from observance, or else more stricktly to be tied to an honest observance, lest they should doe farre more hurt by being ill observed, then well omitted, &c. By all which dicourse of this learned Author, (who hath much more to the selfesame pur∣pose, which suites punctually with the practise of our
present times) wee may easily discerne, how Stage-playes and dancing avocate and with-hold men from Gods worship, especially on Lords-dayes, and the most solemne Christian Festivals, which of all other times are most abused, to the eternall ruine of many thousand Christians soules. To passe by Bucer in Psal. 92. Master Gualther. Hom. 88. in Acta Apostolorum. cap. 13. Master Iohn Calvin, on Deut. 5. Sermo. 34. Doctor Bownde, of th Sabbath. London 1595. p. 135.136, 283, 284. Master Beacon, Hooper, Babington, Brinsly, Perkins, Dod, Lake, Downham, Andrewes, Williams, Ames, and most other Writers upon the 4. Commandement, and the Sabbath: who make the selfesame complaint, that the Lords-day, and Holi-dayes are prophaned and oft-times spent in Stage-playes, Dancing, Drinking, Masques, and Pastimes. Which complaint I finde likewise seconded by learned De Praeceptis Decalogi. c 7. Operum Pari∣sijs. 1606. pars 2. Col. 264. & Sermo. Domin. 3. Adventus. pars 4. Col 332.333, 334. Iohn Gerson, Speculū Mo∣rale. lib. 3. Di∣stinct. 6. pars 9. fol. 251.252. Vincentius Bellovecensis, and Concio. 6. De Dominic. 3. Adventus & Concio. 19. De Dominica. 1. Quinquages. Operum. Co∣loniae Agrip. 1617. Tom. 6. Col. 60.61, 204, 205. Cardinall Bellarmine himselfe; who as they condemne all Stage-playes, Enterludes, Masques, with all mixt lascivious amorous dancing, (against which Vincentius and Bellar∣mine have largely written) at all times, so especially on Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, and solemne Festivals, on which they are most execrable. The Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters is very copious in this point. Pag. 62. to 78. God (writes he) hath given us an expresse Exod. 20.8, 9, 10, 11. Workes which God requireth on the Sabbath. Commandement, that we should not violate the Sabbath day, and prescribed an order how it should bee sanctified, namely in holinesse, by calling into minde the spirituall rest, hearing the Word of God, and ceasing from worldly businesse. Whereupon Isaiah the Prophet, shewing how the Sabbath should be observed, saith, Isay 58.13, 14. Dominico die à labore terreno cessandum est, atque omnimodo orationibus insistendum, ut si quid negligentiae per sex dies agiur, per diem resurrectionis Dominicae praecibus expie∣r. Greg. Magnu. Epist. lib. 11. Indict. 6. cap. 3. fol. 452 F. If thou tune away thy foote from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine Holy-day,
and call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord: and shalt honour him not doing thing owne wayes, not seeking thine owne will, nor speaking a vaine word; then shalt thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount upon the high pla∣ces of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Ia∣cob thy Father, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoen it. How the Sabbath day it consumed. Here we see how the Lord requireth that this day should be observed, and what rest hee looketh for at our hands. But, alas, how doe wee follow the order which the Lord hath set downe? See here, pag. 242. Is not the Sabbath of all other dayes most abused? which of us on that day is not carried whether his affections leades him, unto all dssolutenesse of life? How often doe we use on that day unreverend speech? which of us hath his heart occupied in the feare of God? who is not led away to the beholding of those Spectacles, the sight wherof can bring but conusion to our bodies and soules? Are not our eyes (At Playe every member of man is def∣led. there) carried away with the pride of vanity? our eares abused with amorous, that is, lecherous, filthy, and abomi∣nable speech? Is not our tongue which was given us onely to glorifie God with all, there imployed to the blaseming of Gods holy Name, or the commendation of that is wicked? Are not our hearts through the pleasure of the flesh, the de∣light of the eye, and the fond motions of the minde, with∣drawne from the service of the Lord, and meditation of his goodnesse? So that albeit it is a shame to say it, yet dovbt∣lesse whosoever will marke with what multitudes these idle plces are replenished, and how empty the Lords Sanctuary is of his people, may well perceive what devotion wee have. We may well sy we are the servants of the Lord, but the slender service wee doe him, and the small regard we have of his Commandements, declares our want of love towards him. Iohn 14.5. For if yee love mee (saith Christ) keepe my Commandements. Wee may well bee Hirlngs, but wee are none of his Houshold Wherefore abuse not the Sabbath day, my Brethren: leave not the Temple of the Lord: sit not still in the quagmre of your owne lusts: but put to your
strength to helpe your selves before your owne waight sincke you downe to Hell. Ephes. 5.16. Redeeme the time for the dayes are evill. Alas what folly is it in you, to purchase with a penny damnation to your selves? why seeke you after sinne as after a banket? None delight in common Spectacles but such as would be Spectacles. None delight in those Spectacles, but such as would bee made Spectacles. Account not of their drosse: their treasures are too base to be laid up in the rich Coafers of your minde. Repentance is farthest from you when you are nea∣rest to such May-games. All of you for the most part doe lose your time, or rather wilfully cast the same away, contem∣ning that as nothing which is so precious as your lives cannot redeeme. Time would not bee lost. I would to God you would bestow the time you consume in these vanities, in seeking after vertue and glory. For to speake truely, whatsoever is not converted to the use wherefore it was ordained, may be said to bee lost. End of mans creation. For to this end was man borne, and had the benefit of time given him, that hee might honour, serve, and love his Creator, and thinke upon his goodnesse. For whatsoever is done without this, is doubtlesse cast away. Oh, how can you then excuse your selves for the losse of time! doe you imagine that your carelesse life shall never bee brought into question? Thinke yee the words of Saint Paul the Apostle were spoken in vaine, when hee saith, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appeare before the Iudge∣ment Seate of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done in his body, whether it be good or evill. When that account shall bee taken, I feare me your reckoning will bee to seeke, &c, Pag. 76.77, 78 By such infamous persons as Players much time is lost, and many dayes of honest travell are turned into vaine exercises; Youth corrupted, the Sab∣bath prophaned, &c. Why the Em∣perour Traian ordaind but 22. Holi dayes thorowout the yeere. It was ordained in Rome by the Emperour Trajan, that the Romanes should observe but 22 Holi-dayes thorowout the whole yeere. For hee thought without doubt, that the gods were more served on such dayes as the Romans did labour, then on such dayes as they rested; because the vices were more then which they did commit, then the sacrifices they did offer. God worst served on the Sabbath dayes. And trust mee I am of that opinion, that the Lord is never so ill served as on the
Holi-dayes. For then Hell breakes loose. Then wee per∣mit Youth to have their swinge; and when they are out of the sight of their Masters, such government have they of themselves, that what by ill company they meete withall, and ill examples they learne at Playes, I feare me, I feare me their hearts are more allienated from virtue in two houres, then againe may well be amended in a whole yeere. Thus hee; yea and thus M. In his Schoole of Abuses: and Playes Conu∣ted. Gosson, M. Treatise a∣gainst Vaine Playes and Enterludes. Northbrooke, M. Anatomy of Abuses. p. 101. to 107. Stubs, M. Third part of the True Watch. cap. 11. Abomination. 30. p. 302. Brinsly, and others too tedious to tran∣scribe, together with the expresse words of the Statute of 1. Caroli. cap. 1. which informes us; That the holy keeping of the Lords-day in very many places of this Realme hath beene and now is prophaned and neglected, by a disor∣derly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting Beare-bayting, Bul-bayting, Enterludes, common Playes, and o∣ther unlawfull exercises and pastimes, neglecting Divine Service both in their owne Parishes, and elsewhere. All which concurrent testimonies are a suficient confirma∣tion of this experimentall truth; that Stage-playes a∣vocate, with-hold, and keepe men from Gods worship, house & ordinances, especially on Festivals, Holi-dayes, and those solemne times which should bee more pecu∣liarly devoted to his service. And no wonder that it should be so: First, because the vulgar people, (who are commonly inamored with childish pleasures, and pom∣pous vanities,) are exceedingly delighted with En∣terludes and Stage-playes; as Populus ac vulgus imperi∣torum ludis magnopere de∣lectantur; sunt enim populi ac multitudinis comitia. Populo ludorum magnificentia voluptati est, Ludis delectamur & capimur. Lex haec quae ad ludos pertinet est omniū gratissima. Delectant homines mihi crede ludi. Id autem spectaculi genus erat, quod omni fre∣quentia, at{que} omni genere hominum celebratur; quo multitudo maximè delectatur. Oratio pro Muraena. p. 463. B.C. & Oratio pro . Sextio. p. 561. A. Tully, Vt primum positis nu∣gari Graecia bellis Caepit, & in vitium fortuna labier aequa, Nunc athletarum studijs mire arsit aequorum. Nunc tibicinibus, nunc est gavisa tragaedis, Sub nutrice puella velut si luderet infans. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 1. pag. 280. His nam plebecula gaudet. Verum equitis quo{que} jam migravit ab aure voluptas Omnis ad incertos oculos & gaudia vana, &c. Nam quae pervincere voces Evaluere sonum referunt quem nostra Theatra? Garganum mugire putes nemus, aut mare Tuscum, Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectan∣tur. Ibidem. pag. 283.284. Horace,
Nam qui da∣bat olim Im∣perium, fasces, egiones, om∣nia, nunc se Contint, at{que} duas tantū res anxius opta, Panem, & Cir∣censes. Iuvenal. Satyr. 10 p. 94. Maestita est, carvisse anno Circensibus uno. Satyr. 11. pag. 106. Ac mihi pace Im∣mēsae nimiae{que} licet si dicere plebis, Totam hodie Romm Circus capit, & fragor auem Porcutit. Ibi∣dem. pag 111.Iuvenal,Ppulo votū est talia conve∣nire. Cassiodo∣rus Variarum. lib. 1. Epist. 51. Theodoricus,De Arte A∣mandi. lib. 1. Ovid, with Terentij Eu∣nuchus. Marcus Aurelius. Epi∣stle 12. to Lam∣bert August. De Ci. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32. l. 2. c. 4. to 29. M. Northbrooke, and M. Stubs, qua supra. sundry others testi∣fie: they are, as the Apostle speakes; 2 Tim. 3.4. Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God: Gods presence, Sacraments, Tem∣ple, Word, and service are not so gratefull, so delightfull to them, as these: No wonder therefore if they neglect the one, (which are but a Mat. 11.29.30. yoke, a Mal. 1.13. wearisomnesse, a 1 Ioh. 5.3.paine, a burthen to them,) to enjoy the sinfull pleaures of the other, which are suitable to their vaine voluptu∣ous humour. Secondly, because these Stage-play pleasures are the very chiefest baites, the strongest, the most prevai∣ling Engins which the Devill hath, to with-draw mens hearts from God: They were so in former ages, as De Spectac. lib. Tertullian, De Spectac lib. Cyprian, Hom. 6. & 7. in Matth. Chrysostome, De Vero Cultu. c. 20.21. Lactantius, De Civit. Dei. l.  c. 32. l. 2. c. 3. to 19. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos l. 2. c. 1. Augustine, and De Gu∣bernat. Dei. lib. 6. Salvian teach us; no wonder therefore if they bee so now. Thirdly, as Stage-playes thus with-draw men from Gods-service; so they bring the Word, the ordinances, the worship, Ministers, and sincere service of God into contempt and scorne. Witnesse Saint Chrysostome, who expresly avers it. Nulla res enim aequè eloquia Dei in contemptum adducit, ut spectaculorum quae in Theatris proponuntur, admiratio. Hmil. De Verbis Isaiae. Vidi Dominum. Tom. 1. Col. 1283. C. vid. Ibidem. & Oratio. 7. Tom. 5. Col. 1484. B. That nothing brings the Oracles and Ordinances of God into so great contempt, as the admirati∣on and beholding of Stage-playes. Hence De Vero Cultu. c. 21. Lactantius, and Epist. 22. c. 3. See Scene 3. & 11. Hierom informe us; That those who are accustomed to rhetoricall Stage-playes, to sweet polished Orations and Poems, despise the plaine common phrase and humble stile of the Sriptures, as base and sordid; seeking after that which may delight their senses. Hence Gregory Nazian∣zen informes us; Oratio. 39. p. 605. Quoniam au∣tem sermone Theatrum repurgavimus, &c. That Stage-playes make men unfit to heare Gods Word, and cause them to contemne it. And
Sicut Circos & Theatra, ita divina quoque mysteria pro ludo habent. Oratio. 31. I Laudem Atha∣nasij. pag. 525. that the Inhabitants of Constantinople who delighted much in Stage-playes; accounted the Divine Mysteries and Oracles of God, but a meere sport, as they reputed their Stage-playes and Cirque-playes: implying thereby that Play-haunters for the most part, contemne Gods Word, his ordinances, and all spirituall things; as meere toyes and trifles. This truth is likewise confirmed, by Confessioni. lib. 3. cap. 1.2. Saint Augustine, De Guber∣natione Dei. l. 6. qua Supra. Salvian, with other Fathers and Councels, in the two precedent clauses: by Rodolphus Gualther, one of the eminentest Divines that the reformed Churches have bred, who records: Omnem re∣ligionem in contemptum adducunt. Homilia 11. in Nhum. That Stage-playes, and common Actors bring all Religion into contempt; and that Plato banished them out of his Common-weale for this reason among others; because they would breed a contempt of the Gods. By the Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters; by M. Gosson, Master North∣brooke, and M. Stubs, in their Treatises against Playes; by Master Brinsly, in the third part of his True Watch. cap. 11. Abomination 30 pag. 302. and D. Iohn White, in his Sermon at Pauls Crosse 1615. sect. 11. by sundry others too tedious to recite. And doth not our owne experi∣ence suffragate to this truth? Alas who more vilifie Gods ordinances; or more slight his Word, his Mini∣sters, his Servants, See Act 4. Scene 12. then Players and Play-haunters? who so atheistically irreligious, so gracelesse, so godlesse, so negligent of all holy duties, so little acquainted or inamored with Gods Word, his worship, his service; as they? Whence is it, that men and women are lately growne so cold, so heartlesse in religion; so remisse, so carelesse in all religious duties; so regardlesse of Gods Word, his Sacraments, his service: so lukewarme, yea so frozen in their love to God, his Saints, his Ordinn∣ces? it is not from their late extraordinary resort to Playes and Play-houses, which is now more frequent then in former times? For my owne part I can impute it originally to nought else but it. Sure I am that religi∣on is no where more scorned and jested at, that religi∣ous men are never more traduced, then on the am etiam ad scenā us{que} pro dijmus, quod propemodū ∣chrymis refero, & cum perdi∣tissimis obscae∣nissunis{que} ride∣mur, nec ullū tam jcundum est spectacuū, quam Christi∣anus comicis cavillis suggil∣latus. Nazianzen Oratio 21. p. 412. Stage:
that there are no such Seminaries of See M. Brinsl his true Watch. part 3. chap. 11. Abomination 30. pag. 302. atheisme, irreligi∣ousnesse, blasphemy, idolatry, Heathenisme and pro∣phanesse, as Playes and Play-houses: This the Authors in the See Act 3. Scene 3. & 5. accordingly. precedent Acts doe fully testifie: It is more then probable therefore, that they are the primary funda∣mentall causes of this most desperate lewde effect. Lastly, Stage-playes make all the meanes of grace and salvation, all the ordinances of God ineffectuall to mens soules. Men heare, men read, pray, receive the Sacraments, and come to Church in vaine, as long as they continue Actors or Spectators of Stage-playes. This all the Fathers, Councels, moderne Christian Au∣thors, with the severall reasons alleaged in the three precedent particulars, abundantly evidence; revolue them, and you shall finde it true. Saint Chrysostome is punctuall to this purpose: Ecce jejunij labor & jejunij fructus nusquā est, cum iniqui∣tatis Theatra conscendimus, &c. Quae utili∣tas cum illuc hinc abis? ego corrigo, ille corrumpit: ego medicinas mor∣bo adhibeo, il∣le cauam mor∣bi ministrat: ego naturae flamam extin∣guo, ille libidi∣nis flammam accendit. Quae utilitas, dic mi∣hi? unus aedifi∣cans, & unus destruens quid sibi labore proficernt? De Paenitentia. Hom. 8. Tom. 5. Col. 750.751. Wee lose (saith hee) all the labour, all the fruit of our fasting whiles wee resort to Stage-playes: yea wee reape no benefit at all from the Word of God. What profit reape you whiles you goe from hence to the Theater? I reprove you; the Player corrupts you: I apply medicines to your disease; hee ministers the fewell and occasion of the disease I extinguish the fire of nature; hee kindles a flame of lust: I build up, and hee puls downe: Yea hee plainely informes us, Hom. 3 De Davide & Saule Hom. De Verbis Isaiae. Vidi Dominum, &c. & Hom. 38. in Matth. that neither the Sacrament, nor any other of Gods ordinances will doe men any good, so long as they resort to Stage-playes. Saint Augustine in∣formes us of himselfe: Con∣fessionum. l. 3. c. 1.2. That as long as hee delighted in Stage-playes (which did nourish irritate and foment his lusts) Talis vita mea, nunquid vita rat Deus meus? Ibid. God was not then his life, and that his life was not a life, but a death. Nam quare quotidie muscipulam spectaculorum, insaniam stadiorum ac turpiū voluptatum proponit, nisi ut his delectationibus capiat, quos amiserat, ac laetetur denuò se inve∣nisse quod perdiderat? Fugite dilectissimi spectacula, fugite caveas turpissimas Dia∣boli, ne vos vincula teneant maligni. August De Symbolo ad Catechum. lib. 2. cap. 1. Tom. 9. pars 1. pag. 1393.1394. vid. Ibidem.For Stage-playes (writes hee) are the
very baites, the snares, the dens, and chaines of the Devill, wherewith he takes and reintraps the soules of those whom he hath formerly left. Flie therefore Stage-playes, O beloved, the filthiest dens of the Devill, lest the bands of that malig∣nant one hold you captive. Cohibeat se à spectaculis mundi qui perfectam vult consequi grati∣am remissionis. De Vera & falsa Paeniten∣tia. lib. c. 25. Whosoever hee bee that will obtaine perfect remission of his sinnes, let him keepe and with∣draw himselfe from these spectacles of the world: which lst sentence of his is approved both by Secunda se∣cundae. Quaest. 108. Artic. 2. & 3. Aquinas himselfe, and by Destructoriū Vitiorum. pars 4. c. 23. sect. 2. Alexander Fabricius, for good Di∣vinity: If then Players and Play-haunters bee thus spi∣ritually dead; if they are in the very chaines of the De∣vill; and uncapable of the full remission of their sinnes, as long as they delight in Stage-playes, or resort unto them, as this Father writes; needs must Gods holy Or∣dinances bee altogether unprofiable to their soules whiles they resort to Playes. A plaister never heales, as long as there is an Arrowes head, or poyson in the wound: Stage-playes are an Arrowes head, See p. 39. y. accordingly. a veno∣mous poyson to the soules of men; they are cankers to their graces, See Act 3. Scene 1. tho∣rowout. & Act 7. Scene .4. meere fire and fewell to their lusts: no wonder then if Gods Ordinances never cure their soues, whiles they resort to Stage-playes. It was the Theodoret Contra Grae∣cos Infideles. De Martyribus lib. 8. Tom. 2. p. 390. Concil. Arelatense 1. Can. 4.5. & A∣relatense 2. Can. 20. Eli∣bertinum. Can. 62. Constanti∣nopol. 6. Can. 62. Primasius. Comment. in Romanos. f. 53. Antonini Chronicon. pars 2. Tit. 15. c. 10. sect. 13. fol. 32. use of Players and Play-haunting Pagans in the Primitive Church, as soone as ever they were converted to the Christian Faith; to renounce and utterly abandon Stage-playes; as altogether incompatible with their Christian profession; and making all the meanes of grace ineffectuall to their soules. Doubt∣lesse the very efesame course must be taken now. Hee that would thrive in grace and holinesse; hee that would have the Word, the Sacraments, fasting, prayer, or any other of Gods ordinances effectuall to his soule, must bid an eternall farewell unto Stage-playes. Thus did M. Stephen osson, & the Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. two eminent Play-poets and Play-haunters of our owne; upon their very first conversion unto God, as Master Gosson, in his Schoole of Abuses, and in his Playes Confuted: The Epistles to it, and Action 1. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 49. to 54. them∣selves
record; they abandoned Playes and Play-making, as inconsistent with salvation, with Christianity, with the grace, the service, the ordinances of God: resolving never to returne unto them more; but to their powers to oppugne them, as for∣merly they had admired, composed & frequented them, which they did accordingly in The Schoole of Abuse. Playes Confu¦ted in 5. Acti∣ons. The 3. Blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters.severall printed Bookes: Wherefore from all these severall premises thus confirmed by rea∣son, by authority, I may safely frame this 38. Syllo∣gisme against Stage-playes. That which unfits and indisposeth men to the accep∣table holy performance of all religious duties: that which either with-drawes, or keepes men from Gods service at times of greatest holinesse and devotion, and brings the Word, the worship, with all the ordinances of God into contempt; making them vaine and ineffectuall to mens soules; must needs bee sinfull, and utterly unlaw∣full unto Christians. See Hebr. 12.1. Iam. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. accordingly. But Neque enim offerri poterit. Deo oculus scortationi ser∣viens, nec pe∣des Theatra visitantes, &c. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Rom. 12. v. 1. Tom. 4. Col. 195. C. Heri in amphithea∣tro, hodie in Ecclesia: Vespere in Circo, mane in altario; dudum fautor histrionum, nunc virginum consecrator. Hierom. Epist. 83. Ocano. c. 4. p. 208. this doe Stage-playes, as is evident by the pre∣mises. Therefore they must needs bee sinfull and utterly un∣lawfull unto Christians. SCENA DECIMA-TERTIA. THe 13. effect of Stage-playes is, that they breed in the hearts of their Actors and Spectators an inward disesteeme, a violent antipathy, an inplacable enmity a∣gainst
the practicall power of grace and holinesse; a∣gainst all pious and religious men. This De Vero Cul∣tu. c. 20. & 21. Lactantius, this Hom. 38. in Matth. & Hom. De Verbis I∣siae. Vidi Do∣minum, &c. Chrysostome, De Civ. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 20. Augustine, De Guber∣natione Dei. lib. 6. pag. 195.196. Salvian, Homilia 11. in Nahum. M. Gual∣ther, The Ibidem. Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, Treatise a∣gainst Vaine Playes and En∣terludes. M. Northbrooke, Anatomy of Abuses. p. 101. to 107. M. Stubs, with sun∣dry M. Gosson, his Schoole of A∣buses, & Playes Confuted. A Mirror for Ma∣gistrates of Citties. See here, Act 3. Scene 6. thorowout accordingly. others expresly testifie. Yea this our owne expe∣rience must subscribe too. For who more bitter, more virulent, more implacable adversaries to the power of godlinesse, to those who excell in grace, in piety: who such deriders, haters, Vt improbos metuunt quos optimos sentire potuerunt. Minucius Felix. Octav. p. 39. slanderers, despisers of purity, of sincerity, of devout and holy Christians, as Nam tibicinae, mimi, praestigiatores, balatrones jocis tantum placent scurrilibus ad exhilerandos animos. Philo Iudaeus, D Vita Contempl. p. 1209. Players and Play-haunters? None abhorre, revile, traduce, deride or scorne them more then they. And no wonder: for Saint Paul foretold it long agoe; 2 Tim. 3.3, 4, 5. That such who are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God (as Players and Play-patrons for the most part are) are alwayes despisers of those that are good, having onely a forme of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof. Lactantius hath given the true reason of it. Veritas ideò semper in∣visa est, quòd is qui peccat, vult habere liberum peccandi locum, nec aliter se putat malefactorum voluptate securius persrui posse, quam si nemo sit cui delicta non pla∣ceant. Ergò tanquam scelerum & malitiae suae testes extirpare funditus nituntur ac tollere, gravesque sibi putant, tanquam vita eorum coarguatur. Cur enim sunt aliqui intempestive boni, qui corruptis moribus publicis convicium benè viven∣do faciant? Cur non omnes sunt aequè mali, rapaces, impudici, adulteri, periuri, cupidi, fraudulenti? quin potius auferantur, quibus coram malè vivere pudet, qui peccantinm frontem, etsi non verbis, quia tacent, tamen ipso vitae genere dissimili feriunt & verberant. Castigate enim videtur quicunque dissentit. Lactantius. De Iusti∣tia. lib. 5. cap. 9. pag. 382. Everyone (saith he) that sinnes desire elbow roome, he would have free liberty to sinne without controll; neither can hee take any full delight in evill, unlesse there be none to disapprove his wicked courses. Therefore hee desires to roote out all good men, who are offensive and displeasing to him, because they are not onely witnesses of his evill deeds, but likewise reprove and shame them by their different holy
lives, though they never speake of them with their tongues Their very holy lives are a reproach, a scandall to their dis∣solute manners: therefore they slander and abhor them. S. Au∣gustine oft-times informes us; Non adias degeneres tuos Christo Chri∣stianis{que} detra∣hentes, & ac∣cusantes velut tempora mala; cùm quaerant tempora in quibus non sit quieta vita, sed secura nequitia. August. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 29. De Consensu Evan∣gelist l. 1. c. 33. That the degenerous vo∣luptuous Pagans, did detract from Christ and Christians, ac∣cusing, yea declaiming against the Christian times, as evill; because they sought not after such times in which their lives might bee quiet, but rather in which their wickednesse might bee secure; in which they might securely enioy their wicked Stage-playes, their sinfull lusts, and worldly pleasures, with∣out any reprehension or restraint. This doe our Pagani∣zing Actors and Play-haunters now; they hate, revile and slander, all zealous, practicall Christians, underSincerum cu∣pimus vas in∣crustare. Pro∣bus quis nobis∣cum vivit? mul∣tum est dimis∣sus homo; Illi tardo cognomē pinguis damus. Hic fugit om∣nes insidias, nulli{que} malo latus obdit a∣pertum? (Quū genus hoc inter vitae versetur ubi acris Invi. dia atque vigent ubi crimina) pro bene sano, Ac non incauto, fictum astutum{que} vo∣camus. Simplicior si quis, ut forte legentem, Aut tacitum impellat, quovis sermone molestus: Communi sensu planè caret, inquimus, &c. Horace. Sermo. lib. 1. Sayr. 3. pag. 169.170. the Tearmes of Puritanes, Prescitians, Novellers, Factionists, Hebr. 3.2. Holy-breathren, Men of the Spirit, Bible-beares, Ser∣mon-haunters, Hypocrites, Holy-sisters, and a world of such like ignominious, disgracefull tearmes, (though some of them in themselves are honourable, having the holy Ghost himselfe for their Author, how ever prophane Atheisticall persons turne them into very mottoes of disgrace:) They abhor the very appearances of all grace and holinesse, as diametrally opposite to their ungodly courses, to their prophane, lascivious, ribaldrous Enter∣ludes, which all the Saints of God have evermore con∣demned. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. They thinke it strange that holy men run not with them into the same excesse of riot, into the selfesame pleasures and delights of sinne, in which they plunge themselves: therefore speake they evill of them; Expedit enim vobis neminem videri bonum, quasi aliena virtus exprobratio delictorum vestrorum sit. Inviti splendida cum sordibus uestris confertis, nec intelligitis quanto id vestro detrimento audeatis. Nam si illi qui virtutem sequuntur, amari, libidinosi, ambitiosique sunt; quid vos estis, quibus ipsum omen virtutis odio est, &c? Senca De Vita Bata. cap. 19. there∣fore they reproach, traduce, contemne, detest, oppugne them with the very height of spleene, of malice; as being an eye∣sore,
yea a life-sore to them, as present experience can informe us. Hence therefore I argue in the 39. place.Argument 39. That which ingenders in the hearts of its Actors and Spectators, an inward hatred, an undervaluing disesteeme, a violent antipathy, a virulent enmity, against the practicall power of grace and holi∣nesse; against all holy, gracious, godly Christians; must needs be sinfull and abominable unto Chri∣stians. Witnesse the 1 Iohn 3.10. to 20. Phil. 4.8, 9. and infinite other Scriptures. But this doe See Philo Iudaeus in Flaccum. lib. p. 1305 1306. Quasi in The∣atro exsibila∣bamur, subsannabamur, & irridebamur supra modum. Philo De egatione ad Caiu pag. 1399. See here, pag. 541. Stage-playes, as is evident by the pre∣mises, by experience, and by Act 8. Scene 7. Therefore they must needs be sinfull and abominable unto Christians. SCENA DECIMA-QVARTA. THe 14. fruit of Stage-playes is this: That they in∣amor  men with the love of sinne and vanity, which is ill: yea harden them in their sinne and indispose them to repentance, which is farre worse. The more a man resorts to Stage-playes, Voluptas e∣nim insatiabilis est, & utentibus majorem famē creat. Hirom. Commnt. lib. 1. in Osee. the more hee delights in sinne, in vanity, scurrility, lewdnesse; in Pagan Rites and Ceremonies; the more is hee obdurated and confirmed in his vitious wicked courses; the more is hee indispo∣sed to repentance: Playes are the Gluten est delictorum, & viscus toxicatū quo Diabolus aucupatur. Cyprian De Singularitate Clericorū. Tom. 2. p. 209. Birdlime, the en∣chaunting 2 Tim. 2.26. snares of Satan, with which he Voluptas esca malorum, quia homines ea tanquam pisces hamo-capiuntur: Ratio∣ni inimica est, prstringit mentis oculos, nec ullum habet cum virtute commercium. Cicro De Senectute. lib. pag. 652. captivates
and intangles soules through pleasure and delight: they are his chiefest instruments to expell all godly sorrow from mens hearts, to stupifie, to cauterize their consci∣ences; to banish the very feare and thoughts of sinne out of their mindes; to remove the sence, the sting of conscience & iniquity far from their soules: to lull their hearts asleepe in deepe security; See Isay 5.11.12. Ezech. 12.27. Amo 6.1. to 9. to chase away farre from them all thoughts of Hell, of death, of damnation, of the day of iudgement; to forestall all helpes, all preparatives, all meanes, all motives to repentance, and to with-hold men from it. Alas, how can he loath sinne in the street, Nisi oderi∣mus malum bonum amare non possumus. Hierom. Epist. 4. cap. 6. who delights in it in the Play-house? How can hee mourne for it in his Closet; who sports himselfe with it in the Theater? How can hee weepe for it in secret, See Chyso∣stome Hom. 6. in Matth. ex∣cellently to this purpose. Here, pag. 402.403, 404. who thus laughes at it in publike? How can he looke upon it with detestation in himselfe, who makes it his recreation when it is acted by others? How can he re∣nounce, abhorre, condemne it at home; who thus applaudes, affects, admires it abrode? Certainely, hee can never make sinne his greatest griefe, who makes the rpresentations of it his chiefest mirth: He can ne∣ver make ribaldry, adultery, whoredome, incest, and the like, the everlasting objects of his hatred, who makes the hearing, the seeing, the acting, the lively represen∣tations and pictures of them, the daily objects of his chiefe delight. Every true penitent must be sensible of sinne; Psal. 38.3, 4, 5. Matth. 11.9, 31. Ier. 2 19. Rom. 7.21, 23, 24. he m feele the sting, the venom of it, Iob 40.4. c. 42 6. Isay 6.5. cap. 64.6. see the filth of it, Ezra. 9., 7. c. 10.1. Psal. 38.18. Ezech. 7 16. Rom. 7.24. bewayle the guilt of it, 1 Thes. 5.2. Iude 23. hate the very appearan∣ces and resemblances of it; flie Matth. 6.13. Prov. 5.7, 8, 9. all the occasions of it, all the allurements to it, yea Iob. 31.1, 7. Isay 33.15. 2 Pet. 2.8. utterly abhorre the very sight and hearing of it, as a most execrable, horrid, and accursed thing. And can Players, can Play-haunters then, Iob 21.11, 12, 13. Iam. 5.5. who spend their dayes in myrth, in carnall iollity, in laughing, in re∣joycing, in ribaldrous songs, in scurrilous jests, in amo∣rous Poems, in wanton Comedies; in lewde discourses,
in adulterous representations, wallowing in the very mire of sensuality, voluptuousnesse, and such like beast∣ly sinnes, without the least remorse, be neere to true re∣pentance, or to the wayes, the preparatives that lead and bring men to it? O no! A penitent heart, an hum∣bled soule, a circumcised eare, an eye that weepes in truth for sinne, Isay 33.15. 2 Pet. 2.8. Psal. 101.3. Psal. 15.4. Videas quod nec aspicere possit fronspu∣dica. Cyrian. E∣pist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. is altogether impatient of such obiects, such Enterludes, and delights as these. Witnesse the pactise of the Pagan converts in the Primitive times, Theodoret. Contra Grae∣cos Infideles. De Martyribus l. 8. Tom. 2. p. 390. Concil. Arlatense. 1. Can. 4.5. & 2. Can. 20. Eliber∣tinum. Can. 62. & Constant. 6. Can. 62.who immediately upon their baptisme, and syncere repentance did utterly renounce all Stage-playes as accursed Pleasures, not daring to returne unto them againe: Witnesse all Chri∣stian converts of latter times, who have done the like. Thus did Saint Augustine heretofore, as Confessionū. l. 3. c. 1.2. & l. 4. c. 1. & 14. himselfe con∣fesseth; thus did Anatomy of Abuses, and Playes Confu∣ed: according∣ly. M. Gosson and the Ibdem. pag. 49. to 54. Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Stage-playes of late; as themselves record: before their repentance and conversion they compo∣sed, they admired Stage-playes; immediately vpon their repentance and reformation they utterly abandoned them, and wrote against them: Thus likewise did Confessionū. lib. 6. cap. 78. Alipius, Saint Augustines convert, as himselfe relates: See Chyso∣stom. Hom. 38. in Matth. Ter∣tullian, De Spectaculis. c. 24. See here, Act 8. Scene 2.3, 4. accordingly. thus all that heartily and sincerely turne to God have ever done: their repentance drew them first from Playes & Play-houses, and then bent their hearts, their judgements, their tongues, if not their pens against them: Thus was it with the wanton Poet Ovid; Toll Thea∣tra jube, non tuta licentia Circi est, &c. Tristium. lib. 2. compared with his 1. Booke, De Arte Amandi. his very morall Heathenish repentance, made him to detest and write aganst those Playes and Play-houses, which formerly hee commended: And will not then true Christian Evangelicall repentance much more reclaime men from, embitter their hearts, their tongues, and pens against these Heathenish, Hel∣lish, and polluted pleasures? undoubedly it will, as ap∣peares by all the Play contemning Councels, Fathers, and other Christian Authors here recited, and See Act. 7. Scene 2.3, 4. & 5. by the
concurrent suffrage of the devoutest Christians in all ages, who have constantly condemned and declaimed against Stage-playes, as the very See Act 6. Scene 5. tho∣rowout. greatest corruptions that can befall a Church or Christian State. The farther men are from Playes and Play-houses, the neerer are they (saith an The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. pag. 66. Author) to true repentance: the neerer to them, the further are they from this soule-saving grace. Hereupon some Fathers well observe, Et necesse e∣rat primum ut domus in cele∣bri esset urbis loco, ad quem facile conveni∣retur: deinde ab omni im∣portunitate va∣cua esset, ac ampla, quae plurimos cape∣ret audentiū; nec proxima spectaculorum locis, ne turpi vicina detesta∣bilis Anseme in Epist. ad Pile∣monem. vers. 22. Tom 2. p. 396. B. Et quia ubi∣cunque Apo∣stolserat mul∣titudo ad um confluebat, ne∣cesse erat ut magnam domū haberet, & quae remota esset à Circo, à Theatr, & à Spectaculo, ubi lascivi discurren∣tes, turpia quae{que} sectabantur. Haymo Exegesis ad Philemonem & Remigij Episcopi Rhemensis Explanatio in Epist. ad Philemonem. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 992. C. that Saint Paul writing to Philemon to provide an house or lodging for him, (Phile∣mon, vers. 22.) would have such an house as was not neere the Theater or place of publike Enterludes, whither lasci∣vious persons running did follow all filthy things, lest its fil∣thy vicinage should make it detestable. Certainely if it were not meete for an eminent Apostle to dwell neere to Playes or Play-houses, for feare their lewde vicinity should make his habitation detestable to Christian Au∣ditors who resorted to it: much more unseemely is it for a penitent Christian (who must abstaine not onely from evill it selfe, 1 Thes. 5.22. but likewise from all the appearancies of it) to resort to Playes and Play-houses themselves, which are farre more noxious, more contagious then the houses neere adjacent to them. As hee therefore, who would obtaine the perfect grace of remission, must with∣draw himselfe from the Spectacles and Enterludes of the world; if Saint De Vera & falsa Paenitentia. lib. cap. 15. Augustine, Secunda secundae. Quaest. 108. Artic. 2.3. Aquinas, or our owne Country-man Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 4 c. 23. sect. 2. Alexander Fabricius write true Doctrine; so hee that would attaine the grace of true repentance must wholy See Isay 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. sequester himselfe from Playes and Play-houses, which are altogether incompatible with true repentance, and both hindring men from it, and indispo∣sing them to it, to the eternall losse, the irrecoverable perdition of their dearst soules. Wherefore I shall
epitomize this Scene into this 39. Play-refuting Argu∣ment.Argument 39. That which inamors men with sinne and vanity; which hardens them in their sinnes, detaines them in their wicked courses, and indisposeth them to true repentance; must needs be utterly unlawfull, and execrable unto Christians: Witnesse, Psal. 101.3. Psal. 119.37. Rom. 24.5. But this doe Stage-playes, as the premises demon∣strate. Therefore they must needs bee utterly unlawfull, and execrable unto Christians. SCENA DECIMA-QVINTA. THe 15. consequent or effect of Stage-playes is; that  they effeminate their Actors and Spectators; ma∣king them mimicall, histrionicall, lascivious, apish, amo∣rous, and unmanly, both in their habites, gestures, speeches, complements, and their whole deportment: Cantus & carmina Poe∣tarū, & comae∣dorum, mimo∣rumque urba∣nitates & stro∣phae per aures introientes, vi∣rilitatem men∣tis effaeminant. Hierom. Advers. Iovinianum. lib. 2. cap. 7. Carmina Poetarum, Comaediarum & Tragaediarum actus, mimorum urbanitates & strophas & quicquid hujusmodi per aurem incedit, virilitatem mentis effaeminant. Ioannis Salisburiensis. De Nugis Curialium. lib. 8. cap. 6. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 463. D.enervating and resolving the virility and vigor of their mindes, to their owne private and the publike preju∣dice. This Plato De Republica Dialog. 3. pag. 597. Cle∣mens Alexandrinus Paedagogi. lib, 2. cap. 4. lib. 3. cap. 11. Tertullian De Spectaculis. cap. 17. Cyprian De Spectaculis. lib. & Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu cap. 20. & Divinarum Instit. Epist. cap. 6. Hierom. Adversus Iovinianum. lib. 2. cap. 7. Nazianzen. De Recta
Educatione ad Selucum. pag. 1063. See Scene 4. before. Chrysostome Homil. 6. & 38. in Matth. & Oratio 7. formerly quoted. Augus∣tine De Civitate Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32.33. Salvian. De Gu∣bernatione Dei. lib. 6. Ioannes Salisburiensis, De Nugis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. & lib. 8. cap. 6. Saxo-Grammati∣cus. Danicae Hist. lib. 6. pag. 103. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Enterludes. M. Gualther. Hom. 11. in Na∣hum. Bodinus De Republica. lib. 6. c. 1, Ludovicus Vives, De Causis Corruptionis Artium. l. 2. c. 81.82, 83. M. Robert Boulton, in his Discourse of True Happinesse. pag. 73.74. with sundry Authors formerly quoted in the 5. Scene of this preseent Act: & Act 5. Scene 3.6. expresly testifie. See Ammia∣nus Marcelli∣nus. Hit. l. 28. cap. 9.10. Sigo∣nius. De Occi∣dentali Impe∣rio. lib. 1. pag. 32. & Act 6. Scene 5. tho∣rowout. These effeminated the Grecians, the Romanes heretofore, resolving their valour into sloath and lazinesse, and so ma∣king them a booty to their enemies, which made the Mas∣silienses and Scipio Africanus to suppresse them. And if this evidence is not sufficient, our owne experi∣ence can sufficiently manifest this truth. For whence is it that many of our Gentry are lately Converte∣rant in mulie∣brem tolran∣iam viri, non usum tantum atque naturam, sed etiam vul∣tum, incessum, habitum, & totum penitus quicquid aut in exu est; aut in usu viri: a∣deò versa sunt in diversum omnia, ut cum viris nihil ma∣gis pudori esse oporteat, quàm si muliebre aliquid in se habere videantur, nunc nihil turpius viris quibusdam videtur, quam si in aliquo viri viderentur. Salvin. De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 7. pag. 263.264. degenerated into a more then Sardanapalian effeminacy; that they are now so fantastique in their apparell, so womannish in their frizled Periwigs, Love-lockes, and long effeminate poul∣dred pounced haire; so mimicall in their gestures; so effeminate in their lives; so Player-like in their deport∣ment; so amorous in their speeches; so lascivious in their embracements; so unmanly, degenerous and un-English (if I may so speake) in their whole conversati∣on; is it not principally from their resort to Playes, to Masques, and such like antique, apish Pastimes, the ve∣ry Schooles to traine them up in all effeminacy, and fan∣tastique folly? undoubtedly it is. Wherefore I shall briefely conclude this Scene with this 40. Play-oppug∣ning Syllogisme. That which effeminates mens mindes, mens man∣ners,
and makes them womannish both in their mindes, their bodies, speeches, habites, and their whole deportment: must needs bee abominable unto Christians, intolerable in a Common-weale. Witnesse Act 5. Scene 3. & Act 7. Scene 5. before. But this doe Nonne illos qui à Theatris descendunt, vi∣detis molliores effectos? id vero in causa est, quòd is, quae ibi fiunt studiosè attendnt. Chrysostom. Hom. De S. Barlaam. Tom. 1. Edit. Pariss. 621. pag. 893. D. Stage-playes; as is evident by the premises; and by Act 5. Scene 3. & Act 6. Scene 5. Therefore they must needs be abominable unto Chri∣stians, intolerable in a Common-weale. SCENA DECIMA-SEXTA. THe 16. pernicious fruit of Stage-playes is, the incor∣porating  of men into lewde, deboist, ungodly com∣pany, Grex totus in agris Vnius scabie adi, &c. Iuvenal. Satyr. 2. Nl tam noce homini quam ma societas. Eusebius, De Mrte Hieron. ad Damasum ∣pistola. This Mahomet him∣selfe knew: Therefore in his Alcaron, Azoara. 21. p. 76. he writes thus: Nolite vos male geremibus associare, &. which oft-times proves the utter ruine of their soules, their bodies, credits and estates. How many Gentle∣men are there now living, who by frequenting Stage-playes, have got such intimate See Act 4. Scene 1.2. acquaintance with Adul∣terers, Whore-masters, Adulteresses, Panders, Whores, Bawdes, Parasites, Rookes, Cheaters, Drunkards, Ruf∣fians, Rorers, Duellers, Quarrellers, Fantastiques, Idle-bees, Fashion-mungers, Stage-players, Pursers, and the like pernicious creatures, that they have never beene a∣ble to shake them off againe, till they have beene plunged over head and eares in sinne and villany, till they have wasted their bodies, their estates, their credits, and lost themselves past all recovery? How many are there now in England that even in this respect have cause Quis te rpit impetus? ut ad horam gaudeas unde semper doleas; ut videas semel, quod vidisse millies paenitat. Petrarch. De Remedio Vtrius{que} Fortunae. lib. 1. Dial. 30. to rue
the day that ever they beheld a Stage-play? How many tender carefull Parents are there who may with watry eyes and bleeding hearts cry out, that Stage-playes have beene the utter overthrow of their beloved Children, by ensnaring them in the bonds of dissolute, gracelesse, prodigall, unchaste companions, the chiefest instruments to make men wicked; and irrecoverably deboist? Quaeritur quidem quae res malos prin∣cipes facit. Iam primum nimia licentia, deinde rerum copia; amici praeerea improbi, satel∣lites detestādi, eunuchi avaris∣simi, aulici vel stulti vel dete∣stabiles, & (quod negari non poest) e∣rum publicarū ignorantia. Ni∣hil est difficili∣us quam benè imperare. Col∣ligunt enim se quatuor vel quinque atque unum consiliū ad decipiendū imperatorem capiunt; dicunt quid probandum sit. Imperator qui domi clausus est, vera non novit; cogitur hoc tan∣tum scire quod illi loquuntur; facit judices quos fieri non oportet, amovet à republi∣ca quos debeat obtinere. Quid multa? ut Diocletianus ipse dicebat, Bonus, cautus, optimus venditur: Imperator. Vopiscus. Ibidem. pag. 392. Fla∣vius Vopiscus, in the life of Divus Aurelianus, inquiring into the severall causes that make Princes evill; reckons wicked friends, and detestable or foolish Courtiers and com∣panions as the chiefe of all the rest: intimating, that no∣thing is more contagious, more pernicious then evill company: of whom we may truely say as Seneca doth of an over-indulgent friend. De Beneficijs. lib. 2. c. 14. Ille amando me occidit; that they kill men whiles they love them. It is storied of Carinus homo omnium contaminatissimus; amicos optimos quosque religavit; pessimum quemque elegit aut tenuit. Mimis, meretricibus, pantomimis, cantoribus, atque lenonibus, palatium implevit. Hominibus improbis plurimum detulit, osque ad convivium semper vocavit. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. pag. 446.447. Carinus the most defiled of men; that when hee came to the Empire hee abandoned all his best friends, retaining and choosing none but the very worst of all for his companions: Whereupon hee filled his Court with Stage-players, Harlots, Iesters, Singers, Bawdes; and committed most of his af∣faires to wickedmen, whom hee alwayes invited to his Feasts. This and no other doe our common Play-haunters; they abandon all religious, modest, sober, chaste, and studi∣ous acquaintance: they fill their houses, their cham∣bers with Poets, Stage-players, Whore-masters, Panders, Iesters, Drunkards, Whores, Bawdes, Rookes, Syco∣phants, who hang like Burres, like Dum juvat & vultu ridet fortuna sereno, Indelibatas cuncta sequuntur pes: At simul into∣nuit fugiunt, nec noscitur ulli Agminibus comitum qui modo tectus erat. Ovid. Tristiū. lib. 1. Eleg. 4. pag. 140. Horsleeches upon them, till thy have suckt them drie, and then they vanish.
These are their onely counsellers, companions, guests, and bosome friends, who prove at last their deadliest enemies. This therefore should lesson all good Christi∣ans to refraine from Stage-playes, for feare they incor∣porate them into evill company, who will draw them by degrees to any wickednesse. Confessionū. lib. 6. cap. 8. Se cap. 7. S. Augustine relates a memorable Story of one Alipius, a deare friend and con∣vert of his, whom he himselfe had disswaded from frequent∣ing Theaters and Cirque-playes; who. Cum enim aversaretur, & detestaretur ta∣lia; quidam e∣jus amici & condiscipuli, cùm fortè de prandio rede∣untibus obvius esset, recusantē vehementer & resistentem fa∣miliari violen∣tia duxerunt in Amphithea∣trum crudeliū & funestorum ludorum di∣bus, haec dicen∣tem: Si corpus meum in illum locum trahitis, nunquid & a∣nimum & ocu∣los meos in il∣la spectacula potestis intendere? Adero ita{que} ut absens, ac sic, & vos & illa superabo. Quibus au∣ditis, illi nihilo secius eum adduxerunt secum id ipsum fortè explorae cuientes, u∣trum posset efficere. Quo ubi ventum est, & sedibus quibus pouerunt, locati sunt, ser∣vebant omnia immanissimis voluptatibus. Ille clausis foribus oculorum, interdixit animo ne in tanta mala procederet at{que} utinam & aures obturaviset. Ibidm being sollicited by his friends and fellow Schollers, who met him as they retur∣ned from dinner, to goe along with them to a Sword-play, did at first earnestly refuse and withstand them; and being at last drawne along by them to the Amphitheater with a fa∣miliar violence, hee told them by the way, that though they should drag his body to that place, and set it there, yet they should never seriously fix his minde or eyes upon these Specta∣cles; I therefore (said hee) will bee absent whiles I am pre∣sent, and so I will overcome both you and them. Notwith∣standing these words they drew him along with them to the Amphitheater, perchance to try him, whether hee could doe as hee hath said. Where when they were come, and every man had placed himselfe in such a seate as hee could get, all things growing hot with most cruell pleasures; Alipius shut∣ting his eye-lids, forbade his minde, that it should not proceed on into so great evills: and I would to God (writes Saint Augustine) hee had likewise stopped his eares. For when as a great shout of all the people, occasioned by some Nam quodam pugnae casu, cum clamo ingens totius populi vehementer cum pulsasset, curiositate victus, & quasi paratus, quicquid illud esset, etiam visum contemnere & vincere, aperuit oculos, & prcssus est graviori vulnere in aima, quàm ille in cor∣pore, quem cernre concupivit, ceciditque miserabilius quàm ille, quo cadente factus est clamor; qui per ejus aures inravit, & reseravit ejus lumina ut esset qua feriretur & deijeretur, adax adhuc potius, quàm fortis animus, & eò infirmior quo de se prae∣sumpserat, qui debuit de e Ibidem. accident
of the fight had vehemently beaten his eares, being overcome with curiosity, and withall being as it were prepared to con∣temne and overcome the sight what-ever it were, hee opened his eyes; and forth-with hee was smitten with a more grie∣vous wound in his soule, then hee whom hee desired to see was in his body, and hee fell more miserably then hee, whose fall occasioned the shout, which entred thorow his eares, and o∣pened his eyes, that so there might bee some thing whereby his bold, rather then as yet valiant minde (and so much the more weake, by how much hee had the more presumed of him∣selfe, who ought to have relied on God,) might bee smitten and cast downe. Vt enim vi∣dit illum san∣guinem, imm∣nitatem simul ebibit, & non se avertit, sed fixit aspctum, & hauriebat furias, & nesci∣ebat, & delecta∣batur selee certaminis & cruenta volup∣tate inebrieba∣tur. Et non erat jam ille qui ve∣nerat, sed unus de turba ad quam venerat, & vers eorum socius à quibus adductus era. Quid plura? Spectavit, cla∣mavit, exarsit, abstulit inde secū insaniam, qua stimulare∣tur redire, non tantum cum il∣lis à quibus prius abstractus est, sed etiam prae illis, & alios trahens. Et inde tamen manu validissima & misericordissima eruisti eum tu, & docuisti non sui habere, sed tui fiduciam, sed longe postea. Ibidem. For as soone as he saw that blood, he dranke in cruelty together with it, and did not turne away himselfe, but fixed his eyes, and drew in fury; hee knew not the danger, and yet was delighted with the wickednesse of the combate, and was drunken with the bloody pleasure. And now hee was not the same man that hee came thither, but one of the company to which hee was come, and a true companion of thers by whom hee was brought thither. What shall I say more? Hee beheld, hee shouted, hee grew outragious, he car∣ried away madnesse with him rom thence, whereby hee was excited to rturne thither againe, not onely with those by whom hee was first drawne away, but likewise before them, and drawing along others with him. And yet thou O Lord hast pluckt him hence with a most powerfull and mercifull hand, and hast taught him not to have any confidence in him∣selfe, but in thee; but this a long time after. From this ex∣perimentall Story thus related by S. Augustine, which comes punctually to our purpose, wee may learne many good instructions: First, that lewde companions are very importunate sollicitors to draw others to Playes, and Play-houses, (as Panders, Whore-masters, and Yongsters now are, to draw yong Gentlewomen and o∣thers whom they would make their prey) that so they
may corrupt and lead them on to greater evils with more facility. Secondly, that the best remedy to avoyd their importunate sollicitations, Facilius est initia illorum prohibere quā impetum rege∣re. Senea. Epist. 85. vid. Ibidem. is peremptorily to with∣stand them, and not to yeeld one inch unto them. Thirdly, that it is Quis unqua mortaliū juxta viperā securos somnos capit? quae etsi non percutiat, certè sollicitar. Secu∣rius est perire non posse, quā juxta periculū non perisse. Hierom. Epist. 47. cap. 1.2. exceeding dangerous for good Christians, espe∣cially for new converted Novices, to be drawne by any importunities or perswasions of friends or lewde com∣panions, to a Play-house, though it be against their wills and judgements, though they goe thither with a preju∣dicate opinion against Playes, & with a peremptory re∣solution not to minde them, much lesse to be overcome or tempted by them, as this Alipius did. Fourthly, that the beholding of one lascivious Stage-play, though with prejudice, disaffection, and an absolute resolution against it, is able to corrupt and vitiate the very best spectators that resort unto it: how much more then will it deprave those lewde Play-haunters who flocke unto it with delight, and are almost daily in the Play-house? Fiftly, that the sight of one onely Stage-play, though with a prepossessed opinion against it, Quippe ex voluntae per∣versa facta est libido, & dum servitur libidi∣ni facta est con∣suetudo, & dum consuetudni non resistitur facta est neces∣sitas. Augustin. Confes. l. 8. c. 5.will draw men onto frequent, applaud, and admire others. Sixtly, that those who are once corrupted by seeing Stage-playes, Iti igitur po∣steaquam sim∣plicitatem sub∣stantiae suae onusti & im∣mersi vitijs perdiderunt, ad solatium calamitatis suae, non desinunt perditi jam perdere, & de∣pravati errorem pravitatis intundere. Minucius Felix. Octavius. p. 85. are industrious to seduce, and draw others to them; Quanto au∣tem non nasci melius uit, quàm numerari inter publico malo natos? Seneca De Cl∣menti. lib. 1. cap. 18. where∣as it were farre better for such men not to have beene borne, then to be thus enrolled among the number of those, who are borne for the publike hurt of others. Seventhly, that those who are misled by Stage-playes, though they be civill, or religious men, Facilis descensus averni, Sed revocare gradum superas{que} evadere ad auras, Hoc opus, hic labor est. Virgil. lib. 6. AEidos. pag. 222. are seldome speedily reclaimed from them; and that onely by the strong arme and powerfull hand of God, not by any strength or goodnesse of their owne. Lastly, Master Brinsly, in his True Watch part. 3. cap. 11. Abomination 30. pag. 302. accordingly. that God commonly with-drawes his preventing and perfecting grace, from such who runne
to Stage-playes, so that sinne and Satan may easily sur∣prise them. All which are naturally deduced from this History of Alipius; and should teach yong Gentlemen and others, as they tender their owne safety, and the eternall welfare of their owne and others soules; Moses senio∣ri opulo por∣cis vesci prohi∣buit; signifi∣cans, non o∣portere eos qui Deum in∣vocant, cum impuris versa∣ri hominibus, qui porcorum instar corpora∣libus volupta∣tibus, obscae∣nisque cibis, & impudicis titil∣lationibus prurientes, damnosa Ve∣neris voluptate perfunduntur. Clemens Alexan∣drinus. Paedago∣gi. lib. 3. cap. 11. to avoyd the company o Play-haunters, yea peremptorily to withstand the very temptations and allurements unto Stage-playes, and never to come neere a Play-house, though it be with strongest prejudice, vigilancy & reso∣lution against the corruptions, vices, abominations that attend it. How dangerous ill company are, especially a Play-houses where the most are such; how apt they are to insinuate into others by this vice of Stage-playes, I have at large declared in a former Scene, (viz. Act. 4. Scene 1.2. I shall therefore close this Scene with this 41. Playencountring Argument. That which intangles men in, incorporates them in∣to the company, the acquaintance, of dissolute, le∣cherous, deboist, prophane, ungodly, vitious per∣sons, who leade them to destruction, Malus enim pessimum prae omnibus malis homo. Vna∣quae que bestia habet propri∣um malum; homo autem in se malus, omnia habet in se mala: sic pejor est Diabolo. Chrysostom. Homil. 43. in Matth. & Aexandr Fabritius. Destructorium Vitiorum. pars 5. cap. 19. must needs be sinfull, unlawfull, abominable unto Christians, in∣tolerable in any Christian State. Witnesse, Act. 4. Scene. 2. But this doe Stage-playes; as the premises, S. Chry∣sostome. Hom. 7.17. & 38. in Matth. & Act. 4. Scene 1.2. doe largely testifie. Therefore they must needs be sinfull, unlawfull, abo∣minable unto Christians, intolerable in any Chri∣stian State.
SCENA DECIMA-SEPTIMA. THe 17. effect of Stage-playes is, that they draw men on to See here, pag. 27. & Act 3. Scene 3. p. 75. to 84. Atheisme, Heathenisme, and grosse Ido∣latry  and prophanesse. This is evident by Clemens Roma∣nus. Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 65.66. By Tertullian De Spectaculis ap. 22. where hee affirmes, That many by communicating with the Devill in Stage-playes, hav falne quite away from God. Lactantius, De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. & 21. & Cyprian & Tertullian. De Spectaculis. lib. By Augustine De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 6. to 29. De Recti∣tudine Catholicae Conversationis. Tract. Tom 9. pars 1. pag. 1447.1448. By Minucius Felix. Octavius. pag. 70. By Chrysost. Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Matth. Salvian. De Guber∣natione Dei. lib. 6. By Master Brinsly, in his True Watch. cap. 11. Abomination 30. pag. 302. where hee writes; that Stage-playes sow the seeds of Atheisme in mens hearts: and that Stage-players are the Trumpeters of Satan, who call men from God and his House unto the Theaters, from his heavenly Maiesty, to his sworne enemy, and by sundry others, who expresly testifie; that Stage-playes, (which See here, Act. 3. Scene 3. ac∣cordingly. are commonly stuffed with the names, the histories, persons, fables, rites, ceremonies, villanies, incests, rapes, applauses, oathes, imprecations, and invocations of Pagan Idols; See here, Act. 3. Scene. with atheisticall blasphemous, prophane, and wicked scoffes and iests; with abuses of Scripture phrases, and bitter invectives against piety, and religion; that matter to ingender athe∣ime, Idolatry, and Heathenisme both in the Actors, Auditors, and Spectators of them) are a ready way to draw men on to Atheisme, Paganisme, Idolatry, and all pro∣phanesse, which are there acted and applauded. Yea Diabolus enim est ille, qui etiā in ar∣tem jocos lu∣dos{que} digessit, ut per haec ad se traheret mi∣lites Christi virtutis{que} orum nervos faeret molliores, &c. Hom. 6. in Matth Tom. 2. Col. 51. D. Chry∣sostome,
Diabolus ar∣tifex quia ido∣lolatriam per se nudam sci∣bat horreri, spectaculis mis∣cuit ut per vo∣luptatem posset amari, &c. De Spectaculis. lib. Cyprian, Lactanius, Tertullian, and Augustine, in their forequoted places affirme: That the Devill him∣selfe invented Stage-playes for this very end, that he might withdraw men from God unto Idolatry: and by these plea∣sures writes ocosi ferme ac ridiculi sunt plaeri{que} morta∣lium, ne{que} illis est cord studi∣osum vitae ge∣nus, sed fluxum pous ac re∣missum. Ex quo it, ut perquam facile illis do∣minetur malig∣nissimus Dae∣mon, neque e∣nim eos horta∣atur ad rectam illam viam au∣gustamque ca∣pessendā, salebrosam, difficilem & acclivem; sed ad alteram quae prona, inclinata, levis at{que} expedita est; haud enim illis unquā temperantiae, justitiae{que} ullam habere ratio∣nem praecepit, sed confidenter at{que} impun cunctis flagitijs libidinibus{que} incumbere, omne demū scelus impudenter audere permisit. Hinc haud difficulter quam plurimos in servitutem adduxit, fugientes enim laboriosam virtutem, legis{que} divinae difficulta∣tem evitantes ad eum scilicet transfugerunt, qui factu facilia eadem{que} jucundissima imperavit, &c. De Sacrificijs. l. 7. Tom. 2. p. 382. C. Theodoret, which suite well with the pleasu∣rable, sloathfull, and voluptuous disposition of men, who are most of them addicted to pastimes, to a remisse and idle life, the most malignant Devill very easily domineeres over men, and hath drawne very many into bondage; who flying labo∣rious virtue, and avoyding the difficulty of Gods Law, have revolted unto him, who hath commanded things easie and most pleasant to be done. Stage-playes and Play-poems as the See here, p. 80. l. & August. De Civit. Dei. l. 1.2, 3, 4 & 6. thorowout. Fathers joyntly testifie; were the chiefe occasioners, propagators and fomenters of Atheisme, Heathenisme, Idolatry, and all dissolute prophanesse heretofore: See Act 2. thorowout, with the severall Authors there recorded & Cicero De Aruspicum Responsis Oratio. p. 524. to 528. In Catili∣nam. Oratio 3 p. 452. accordingly. they being wholy consecrated to Idols, and celebrated to their ho∣nour in their solemne Festivals, and anniversary commemo∣rations, as the very principall part of their irreligious worship, and idolatrous adoration. And doe they not produce the selfesame dangerous effects and issues still? Alas whence is all that practicall Sunt qui fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt, Et nullo credunt mundum rectore moveri, Natura voluente vicis & lucis, & anni. At{que} ideo intrepido quaecun{que} altaria tangant. Tam facile & pronū est superos contēdere testes, Si mortalis idē nemo sciat Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. p. 119. Atheisme, Paganisme, and pro∣phanesse; whence all those Heathenish vanities, cu∣stomes, ceremonies, habits, speeches, blasphemies, Per solis radios, Tarpeia{que} fulmina juvat, Et Martis framiā, & Cirrhae spicula vatis. Per calamos venatricis hretramque puellae, Perque tuum pater AEgaei Neptune tridentem: Addit & Herculos arcus, hastamque Minervae, Quicquid habent telorum armamentaria coeli. Iuvnal. Ibidem. exe∣crations,
Idolatries, superstitions, and the like; whence that open Mal. 1.6, 7. Solus Deus in comparatione omnium nobis vilis est. Salvian De Guber. Dei. lib. 6. pag. 195. neglect and contempt, that Titus 1.16. 2 Pet. 2.1.denying of God in workes, in actions; that ordinary Ephes. 2.12.living without God in the world; those secret whisperings in many Players, and Play-haunters Psal. 10.4. Psal. 14.1. Psal. 53.7. hearts, that there is no God at all, at least Psal. 73.11. no God to take notice, or vengeance of their sinnes; whence all the reall atheisme and prophanesse that wee see in Players and Play-haunters lives: is it not principally from Playes and Enterludes; wherein, not onely Nunquid Priapo mimi, non etiam Sa∣cerdotes enor∣mia pudenda fecerunt? An aliter stat ado∣randus in locis sacris, quàm procedit riden∣dus in Thea∣tris? Num Sa∣turnus senex, Apollo ephe∣us, ita perso∣na sunt histrio∣num, ut non sint statuae de∣lubrorum, &c? Agust. De Ci∣vitae Di. lib. . cap. 7. See lib. 2. cap. 3. to 29. lib. 4. cap. 7.28. the Pagan Deities, but likewise the very God of Heaven and Earth, together with his Word, his Saints, his service are See Act 3. Scene 5. & I. . his Refuation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 28.54, 55. derided? Vndoubtedly it is. Never is there grea∣ter Atheisme, or more open desperate prophanesse, more notorious contempt of God, his Word, his worship, his feare, his service, then in such places, such times, wherein Stage-playes most abound. In Stage-playes (as Master Brinsly well observes) there is a continuall sowing of all Atheisme in the hearts of poore simle soules; they are the very Nurseries of Atheisme, of Paganisme, of Idolatry and prophanesse, as the experience of all ages testifies: Wherefore I shall conclude against them which this 42. Syllogisme. That which ingenders Atheisme, Paganisme, Idola∣try, and all prophanesse in Actors and Spectators, must of necessity bee altogether abominable and unlawfull unto Christians. But this doe Stage-playes; witnesse the premises, and premised Authors. Therefore they must of necessity bee altogether abo∣minable and unlawfull unto Christians.True Watch 3. part. cap. 11. Abomination 30. pag. 392.
SCENA DECIMA-OCTAVA. THe 18. effect of Stage-playes is this; that they cause an apparant breach of all Gods Commande∣ments: Of the first Commandement, See here, Act 2. & Act. 3. Scene 3. tho∣rowout, accor∣dingly. & Au∣gustine Epist. 202. in honouring, ap∣plauding, invocating, naming, representing, adjuring, and extolling Pagan Idol-gods, and Goddesses, by the name of God, and in reviving their infernall ceremo∣nies, rites and worship: and in propagating Atheisme and Idolatry. Of the second Commandement, See here, Act 1. Scene 1. Act 2. & Act 3. Scene 3. Iose∣phus Iudaeorū Antiqu. l. 15. c. 11. Philo Iudae∣us, Decalogo. lib. Cyprian & Tertullian De Spectaculis. Augustin. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 4 to 13. l. 6. c. 7. Bullingerus De Circo. lib. cap. 38 p. 153. accordingly in ma∣king the Images, pictures, shapes and statues; in repre∣senting the persons, vices, ceremonies and customes of those Pagan Deities: and in relating their histories, pede∣grees, acts and monuments. Of the third Commande∣ment, See 3. acobi. cap. 21 & Act 3. Scene 5. accor∣dingly. in prophaning and blaspheming the Name of God by cursed oathes and horrid execrations, which are fre∣quent in our Enterludes; by traducing and prophaning the holy Name and Word of God, by inserting them into Stage-playes, and making them no better then a sport or May-game: See Act 3. Scene 3. p. 77. to 87. by swearing by the names of Idol-gods whereas Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. Nicephorus Epist. Eccls. Hist. l. 3. c. 35. Polycarpus would not so much as sweare by the fortune of Caesar, though by doing it hee might have saved his life; by deriding the sincere worship and ser∣vice of God, and by taking all Gods Names, his attri∣butes, his Ordinances in vaine. Of the fourth Com∣mandement, See 1. Caroli. cap. 1. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters. M. Brinsl, 3. part of the True Watch. c. 11. Abomination 30. pag. 392. & Act 7. Scene 12. accordingly. in prophaning the Lords-day in a notorious manner, See Act 7. Scene 1.5. & 6 accordingly. and in drawing men on to idlenesse on those other
dayes in which God commands them for to labour. Of the fift Commandement, Act 3. Scene accordingly. In dishonouring, reproaching, controlling and traducing Princes, Magistrates, Iudges, Ministers, and others, who are the Fathers, the Mothers of Church and Common-weale. Of the sixt Comman∣dement, Act 7. Scene 10. Act 3. Scene 2. &c. accordingly. in occasioning and commending murthers, quar∣rels, duels; tyranny, cruelty: in murthering the good names of other men; in teaching plots to poyson, murther, be∣tray, and ruine others: and in murthering infinite soules of men and women whom Stage-playes cause to perish. Of the seventh Commandement: See Act 3. Scene 7. Act 7. Scene 3.4. & Act 5. Scene accordingly. in ingendring, fomen∣ting, exciting unchaste affections in the Actors and Spe∣ctators, in drawing them on to fornication, whoredome, adultery, and all other actuall unclaesse which Christi∣ans should abhorre to name or thinke of: and in making them ribaldrous, effeminate, wanton, lascivious in ap∣parell, speech, gesture, haire, &c. and fit for any filthinesse or lewdnesse whatsoever. Of the eight Commandement, Act 7. Scene 9. accordingly. in teaching men how to cheate and cozen others: how to steale away Wards from their Gardians, and Daughters from their Parents: In picking other mens purses, by recei∣ving mony for the exercise of these unlawfull, these ungodly Playes, which God never authorized as a meanes to procure gaine withall; the taking of which money is plaine theft, as Augustinus. Tract. 100. in Ion. Gratian. Distinct. 86. Tostatus in 4. Rgū. Tom. 7. pag. 100. C.D. B B. Babington, M. Dod, and o∣thers on the 8. Commande∣ment. Alvarez Pelagius De Planctu Eccle∣siae. l. 2. Artic. 40. A.B.C. 150. Divines expresly teach: Act 7. Scene 2. accordingly. & Iosephus Antiqu Iu∣daeorum. l. 16. c. 9. and in occasi∣oning much prodigall and vaine expence. Of the ninth Commandement, Act 3. Scene accordingly. in slandering, misreporting, and perso∣nally traducing particular persons and professions on the Stage; and in laying false aspersions, with tearmes of ig∣nominy and scorne upon the Saints and service of God. Of the tenth Commandemen; In causing Children and yong Prodigals to desire the death of their more rigid Parents, that so they might enjoy, and prodigally waste their Patrimonies, and Portions, on their lusts and plea∣sures: and in causing men to cove the Pomp, the State,
the posessions, Act 3. Scene 1. & Act 7. Scene 3.4 according∣ly. the wives, the servants, the goods of o∣ther men, as Players, Whores, and others who resort to Stage-playes learne to doe. Stage-playes in these and sundry other regards forementioned by S. Chrysostome, and others in the precedent Scene occasion the breach of all the ten Commandements, and so plunge their Com∣posers, Actors, Spectators over head and eares in sinne, involving them in the guilt of all the evils that are occa∣sioned and produced by them. This D. L. Spe∣culum Belli Sacri cap. 45. The Mirror for Magistrates of Cities. The 3. Blast of Re∣trait from Playes and Theaters. See here, pag. 231.232. Authors, this the premises and experience testifie: Wherefore I shall hence deduce this 43. invincible Argument against Stage-playes. That which commonly occasions an apparent viola∣tion of all the ten Commandements, Deut. 6.1. to 20. c. 27.1.26. Matth 5.18. to 42. Ioh. 14.15, 21. Iam. 2.9, 10, 11. must needs be sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians, intolera∣ble in any wel-ordered Common-weale: No Chri∣stian can deny it. But this doe Stage-playes: witnesse the premises. See pag. 231.232. before. Therefore they must needs bee sinfull and utterly un∣lawfull unto Christians intolerable in any wel-or∣dered Common-weale. SCENA DECIMA-NONA. THe 19. fruit of Stage-playes is this; that they draw downe Gods fearefull judgements both upon their Composers, Actors, Spectators, and those Republikes that tolerate or approve them as these ensuing exam∣ples evidence. It is storied of Pliny. Nat. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 3. Opmrus Chronogr. pag. 121. Calepini AEschylus. AEschylus, (the first inven∣tor
of Tragedies, as Post hunc personae pallae∣que repertor honestae AEs∣chylus, & mo∣dicis instravit pulpita tignis Et docui mag∣num{que} loqui, niti{que} cothur∣no. De Arte Poe∣tica. p. 305.306 Horace, Instit. Ora∣tor. lib. 1. cap. 1. Quintilian, Tertullian, and Opmeeri Chronogr. pag. 131. others write:) that his braines were dashed out with the fall of a Torteis, which an Eagle soaring over him let fall upon his bald-pate, while hee was sitting meditating on his Playes in the open ayre; a sudden unparalleld & right tra∣gicall judgement, upon the very first inventor of tragick Enterludes. Gellius No∣ctiū Attic. l. 15. cap. 20. Suidae Euripides. Op∣meeri Chro∣nogr. p. 125. Ca∣lepine &. Ho∣lioke. Euripi∣des. Euripides, the famous Greeke Tragedian, as hee was returning in the night time from Archelaus his Palace, where hee supped, to his owne lodging, was torne in pieces by Dogs, (some write, by women) set on, as was sup∣posed, by Arridaeus a Poet, who maligned him: A fearefull death: Pausanias in Attic. l. 1. Ter∣tullian De A∣nim. l. 1. Op∣meeri Chro∣nogr. pag. 125. Chronicon Chron. AEtas 5. fol. 78. Sophocles, the very Prince of tragicke Poets, being pronounced victor by one casting voyce in a poeticall combate betweene him and others; died suddenly on the Stage of o∣vermuch ioy; his victory proving no other but his owne fatall Tragaedy: the like wee read of Gellius. Noct. Artic. l. 3. cap. 15. Philippides ano∣ther famous Greeke Comedian, who died suddenly in the selfesame manner, upon the same occasion. Iosephus An∣tiqu. Iudaeorū. l. 12. c. 2. Aristeas. Hist. 70. Scripturae sacrae Interpretum. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 1. p. 12. Eusebius De Praeparatione Evang. l. 8. c. 1. M. Northbrocke against Vaine Playes and Enterludes. f. 32. & M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses. p. 102. Coc. Sabelli∣cus. AEnead. 4.5.8 p 641. George Alley, his Poore Mans Library. part 1. Theodectes a Play-poet, was smitten of God with blindnesse for inserting some passages of the Old Testament into one of his Tragedies. Menander, an ancient Greeke Comedian, Suidae Menan∣der. & insanus mu∣lierum amator, as Suidas stiles him, Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 133. was suddenly drow∣ned, whiles hee was swimming in the Pyraeean Haven. Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 145. Terence the eminentest Latine Comedian, was drowned and swallowed up of the Sea, about the 35. yeere of his age, as hee was returning out of Greece with 108. of Menandrs Comedies which he had translated. Chronicon Chro∣nicorum. AEtas. 5. fol. 93. Plautus, an elegant comicall Latine Poet, when as hee had scraped together a great masse of money by his Stage-playes, lost all of it by mer∣chandise; and then returned backe to Rome, he was enfor∣ced to grinde at a Bakers Mill to get his living, and so died miserably. Suidae Antiphanes. Antiphanes the composer of 355. Comedies,
died suddenly, being casually strucke with a Peare. Plutarchi Alcibiades. Horace. Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 1. Ludovicus Vi∣ves. Notae in l. 2. c. 8. August. De Civit. Dei. See here, pag. 121. Eupolis the Poet, for inveighing against Acibiades in his Comedy, called Baptis, was apprehended by him, and then drowned in the Sea: Such were the sudden and untimely ends of all these ancient Play-poets, which should serve as a caveat to our moderne (of which some have likewise come to desperate ends) to deterre them from their ungodly profession. But I passe from these to Stage-playes: And here I finde Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 2. c. 27. See D. Rainolds Conference with Hart. c. 8. Divis. 4. p. 515. Theodoret relating a notable Story of a common Actor; who comming to play a part upon the Thea∣ter, in a vestment of cloth of gold, given by Constantine the Emperour to Macarius Bishop of Hierusalem, to weare at times of baptisme, (which vestment this Player had purcha∣sed of Cyril who succeeded Macarius;) hee fell downe sud∣denly on the Stage as hee was acting in it, and died.Witnesse Sherly, slaine suddenly by Sir Edward Bi∣shop, whiles hee was drunke; as most report. I read likewise in Natur. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 33. Pliny, of one M. Ofilius Hilarus, an emi∣nent Actor of Comedies, that after hee had acted his part with great applause upon his birth-day, and was vaunting and discoursing of this his acting at supper, hee fell downe suddenly dead at the table, whiles he was thus boasting and looking on that vizard and person which he had then sustai∣ned. De Gestis Regum Anglo∣rum. l. . p. 67. William of Malmesbury a grave English Histori∣an, upon the concurrent testimonies of Pope Leo, Petrus Damianus, and Aquitanicus, relates this memorable History; That a certaine Stage-player who got his living by acting, lodging about the yeere of our Lord. 1012. in the house of two old women who were Witches, situated by the high-way neere to Rome, was by their Sorceries metamor∣phosed into the shape of an Asse; and being thus transfor∣med, he became so tractable that (like another Bankes his dancing Horse, or the Sybaritae in tantum delitia∣rum studium devenerunt ut equos etiam ad ibam in sym∣posijs tripudi∣are aneecerint. Sic Cardiani equos in Symposijs ad tibias saltare docuerunt, &c. Atheus Dipnos. lib. 12. cap. 6. vid. Ibidem. dancing Horses of the Sybarites and Cardians) he would readily turne and move which way soever these Witches commanded him; which being bruited abrode he became very gainefull to these his Hoastesses, the people flocking by troopes from all places neere adioyning,
to behold the rare feates of this Mimicall Asse, who strucke the Spectators with great admiration of his strange gestures. The fame of this Asses rare qualities being thus bruited abroad, induced a rich man who dwelt nigh to purchase this Asse at a great price of these two Witches; who informed their Chapman, that if he would have his Asse to practise his histrionicall trickes at all times, he must be sure to keepe him from water; which he did for a long space, exhilarating both himselfe and his guests with this playing Asse: who after a while being not so stricktly looked to as at first brake loose at last, and running to a pond of water that was next, bathed and tumbled himselfe therein for a while, till at length hee came to his humane shape. The Asse-keeper in the meane time missing the Asse, runnes forth to seeke him, and meeting him in his humane forme, inquires of him whether hee saw the Asse? to which he replyed, that hee was the Asse, and with all related to him the whole Story of this his metamor∣phosis: the Asse-keeper wondring at it reports it to his Ma∣ster; and he declares it to Pope Leo; who conventing the two old women for it, they both acknowledged the premises to be true which I here submit to the Readers faith. If this bee but an Ovids Metamorphosis, or an Apuleius his Golden Asse; we may laugh at the conceit, and so passe it by: but if it bee a truth, as the Historian confi∣dently affirmes it, wee may deeme it a just judgement of God upon this Actor, who for his acting of other mens parts in jest, was thus enforced to play the Asses part in earnest. Notae in Au∣gust. De Civit. De. lib. 12. cap. 25. C. Ludovicus Vives reports from men of credit, that in a certaine City of Brabant, where they used to make annual Playes to their Saints, upon the day that their great Church was founded, as they doe in other places of that Country; some taking then upon them the vizars and persons of Saints, others of Devils for to act these Playes; oe of these Actors who played the Devils part being enamored with a Girle which he espied at the Play, went dancing to his house, and there taking his wife as hee was in his Players robes and vizard, he cast her upon a bed, saying, that he would beget a
Devill of her; and so hee lay with her: his wife upon this conceived, and the infant which she brought forth, as soone as ever it was borne, began to dance up and downe, being shaped as men use to paint the Devill. Loe the justice of God upon this person, that he who acted the Devils part should thus beget a Devill. Of Gods judgements upon Play-haunters, wee have sundry precedents, worthy our most serious observation; some of particular persons onely, others of whole multi∣tudes together. For Gods judgements on particular persons onely. We read of Diodorus Si∣culus. Bibl. Hist. l. 16. sect. 93.94, 95. pag. 806. to 810. Supplementū Qu. Curtius. l 1. p. 17. Iustin. Hist. l 9. p. 99. Oosius. Hist. l. 3. c. 14. Vin∣centius Spec. Hist. l. 3. c. 18.19. Antonini Chron. Tit. 4. c. p. 2. sect. 2.3. cū multis alijs, & Sir Walter Rawleighes Hi∣story of the World. lib. 4. pars 1. sect. 8. p. 138. Philip King of Macedonia, Father to Alexander the Great; that as hee delighted much in Stage-playes, so he was slaine by Pausanias as hee was sitting in the Theater at a Play; The like wee finde Iosephus An∣tiqu. Iudaeorū. l. 19. c. 1. Suet∣nij Caligula. . 8. Suidae Historica. Cai∣us Caligula. Zonaras Annalium. Tom. 2. fol. 96. Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. lib. 59. pag. 854. recorded of Caius Caligula; who being much devoted to Stage-playes, (which hee would sometimes act himselfe in womans apparell to his inexpiable shame) was murthered by Cherea, whiles he was beholding the Noble-mens Children which he sent for out of Asia, acting a Play upon the Stage. A just judgement of God upon these two dissolute Princes, who made these wicked Playes their chiefe de∣light. It is storied of Iosephus Antiquitatum Idaeorum. lib. 19. cap. 7. Eusebius Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 9. but 10. in the English. Nicephorus Ecclesiasticae Historiae. lib. 2. cap. 13. Opeerus Chronogr. pag. 209. Baronius & Spondanus. Anno 46. sect. 2. & Acts .20. to 24. Herod Agrippa, that in the third yeere of his Lieutenantship hee went to Caesarea Stratonis where he published Spectacles and Stage-playes in the ho∣nour of Caesar, and ordained a solemne Feast-day for his prosperous affaires, unto which all the chiefe men of worth and great Officers of that Province resorted: on the second day of these Playes and Spectacles, he came to the Theater in a silver robe wonderfully wrought, which by the reflection of the Sunbeames yelded so gorgeous a glistering to the eye, that the shining thereof seemed terrible and intolerable to the beholders; whereupon some flatterers (it is likeliest that
some Players or Play-poets were the chiefe of them) deifying him as a God, and hee rebuking them not; a little after looking about him, he beheld an Iosephus writes it was an Owle. Angell, hanging o∣ver his head, who smote him with an extreame paine in his bowels whiles he was thus sitting in the Theater, so that he was carried desperately sicke to his Palace, where being tor∣mented for the space of fiue dayes with bitter gnawing of his bowels, he ended his life most miserably, being eaten up of wormes. Which divine judgement, though it miraculous∣ly seised on him for his ambition, in that hee rebuked not these latterers, and gave not God the glory; yet since this Tyrant, (Chronicon Chron. AEtas. 6. fol. 107. A∣grippa Magnus who had built a Theater and Amphitheater in Hierusalem after the Roman manner, to advance Idolatry and Paganisme, and suppresse Religion;) was thus smit∣ten by Gods Angell in the Theater it selfe, where hee sate beholding these Playes and Spectacles which hee had then provided for Caesars honour, and the peoples recreation, whose deifying acclamations were the cause of this his fearefull death; and since these Stage-playes were the chiefe occasion of drawing both himselfe and the peo∣ple into the Theater; wee may justly behold him as a ad fatall Spectacle of Gods avenging judgement, as wel for his instituting and beholding Stage-playes, and erecting publike Theaters, as for his proude ambition. Not to speake of Iosephus An∣qu. Iudaeorū. lib. 15. cap. 11. here, p. 466. Herod the great, whom the Iewes con∣spired to murther in the Theater which hee had built at Hierusalem whiles he was beholding Stage-playes, for that hee had brought in Stage-playes into Hierusalem contrary to Moses Law and the discipline of the Iewish Nation. Nor yet to mention the Emperour Nero, whose acting and be∣holding of Playes was one chiefe occasion that stirred up Qui interro∣gaus à Nero∣ne, quibus cau∣sis ad oblivio∣nem sacramen∣ti processiset: Oderamte, inquit, nec quisqum tibi militum fidelior fuit dum amari meruisti, odisse caepi post quam parricida matris & uxoris, auriga, histrio & incendi∣arius extitisti. Tacitus. Annal lib. 15. sect. 10. pag. 360. Subrius Flavius, with others, to conspire his death. Historiae. lib. 1. pag. 31. & 51. to 67. He∣rodian informes us, that Commodus his excessive delight
in Actors, Gladiators, Playes and Enterludes, and his un∣worthy comming on the Stage in person to play the Actor and Gladiator before the people, (from which base shamefull act his friends, together with Martia his best beloved Con∣cubine, did earnestly disswade him, ne Romanum Impe∣rium contumelia aticeret, &c.) was the originall ground of his untimely death; hee being poysoned by his Martia, whom he resolved to murther, for this her good advice: and See his Gal∣lieni duo. pag. 316. & here, pag. 485. Trebellius Pollicarpus records, that Gallienus the Emperour, was murthered by Martianus, Heraclianus, and Claudius, for this very cause, lest by his lewde example in frequenting Stage-playes, and favouring Stage-players, with which hee had fild his Palace, hee should bring both himselfe and the Republike unto utter ruine: These seve∣rall Kings and Emperours Stage-delights being thus the iust oecasions of their untimely deathes. A sufficient Item for all Christian Princes for ever to abandon Playes and Actors as fatall and pernicious evils both to their owne persons, and their subjects too. To passe from Kings and Emperours to some of meaner quality, De Spectacu∣lis. lib. cap. 26. Tertullian, a Father of good credit among Schollers, informes us; That a certaine Christian woman in his time going to a Play-house to see a Stage-play, returned thence possessed with a Devill (as too too many now a dayes doe; at leastwise in a spirituall sence,) which uncleane spirit be∣ing afterwards rebuked in an exorcisme, that he durst assaul a Christian woman; replyed, that hee had done constantly and most iustly in meo enim eam inveni, for I have found her in my owne Iurisdiction. If therefore you will neither believe the Act 1. Scene 1. & Act 2. Chorus. forequoted Fathers and Authors, that the Play-house is the Devils Chappell; yet now believe the very Devill himselfe who claimes it for his owne, to∣gether with all such persons who frequent it. The same De Spectacu∣lis. lib. cap. 26. Father relates; that another Christian woman who went to see a Tragedy, had the very same night a linnen sheet presented to her in a dreame; the Tragedian himselfe being likewise named to her, with an exprobration for this
act of hers; after which she lived not above fiue dayes: To which two examples (writes he) Quo uti{que} & ali documen∣ta cesserunt do his, qui cum Diabolo apud Spectacula cōmunicando à Domino ex∣ciderunt. Ibid. I might adde some feare∣full precedents of others, who by communicating with the Devill at Stage-playes, have fallen quite away from God. A dreadfull Apostasie and judgement indeed. To these two former precedents, I shall annex the parallel exam∣ple of a See M. Brath∣wait, his En∣glish Gentle∣woman. Lon∣don 1631 pag. 53.54. this Author being then present at her departure. late English Gentlewoman of good ranke; who daily bestowing the expence of her best houres upon the Stage, and at last falling into a dangerous sicknesse of which she died, her friends in her extremiy sent for a Minister to comfort, counsell, and prepare her for her end, who com∣ming to instruct her, and advising her to repent, and call up∣on God for mercy, she made him no reply at all; but cryed out Hieronimo, Hieronimo; O let mee see Hieronimo acted; (calling out for a Play, in stead of crying unto God for mercy,) and Percussus quis{que} ante ra∣pitur, quàm ad lamenta paeni∣tentiae conver∣tatur. Pensate ergo, qualis ad conspectum di∣stricti judicis perveni, i non vacat flere quod ecit. Greg. Mag. Epist. lb. 11 cap. 3. ol. 452. b. so closed her dying eyes. O tragicall, O fearefull death! answerable to her former wicked life? Not to relate the various tragicall ends of many, who in my remembrance at London, have beene slaine in Play-houses, or upon quarrels there commenced: Nor yet to recite the sudden fearefull burning even to the ground, both of the Globe and Fortune Play-houses, no man per∣ceiving how these fires came: together with the visi∣ble apparition of th Devill on the Stage at the Belsavage Play-house, in Queene Elizabeths dayes, (to the great a∣mazement both of the Actors and Spectators) whiles they were there prophanely playing the History of Faustus (the truth of which I have heard from many now alive, who well remember it,) there being some distracted with that fearefull sight; I shall confine my selfe onely to such prin∣ted examples of Gods judgements upon many Players and Play-haunters together, which I finde scattered here and there in sundry Authors. To begin first at home. I read in Anno 8. Eliz. 1567. pag. 1209. b. Hollingshead, that in the eighth yeere of Queene Elizabeths Raigne, there were three Schollers at Oxford slaine outright, and divers others hurt and mained, with the unexpected fall of a wall, whiles hey were behold∣ing
a Stage-play: M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses. p. 135. I.G. his Refu∣tation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 43.44. About the yeere 1582. many people being assembled together at the Theaters in London to see the bawdy Enterludes and other fooleries there practised, God caused the earth on a sudden mightily to shake and trem∣ble, as though all would have fallen to the ground: where at the people sore amazed, many of them leapt downe from the top of the Turrets, Pinacles and Towers, where they stood, to the ground, whereby some had their legges broken, some their armes, some their backes, some were hurt one where some another where, and many sore crusht and bruised; but not any but they went away sore afraid, & wounded in conscience. And yet (writes my Author) can neither the one nor the other, fray men from these devillish exercises, untill the Lord cōsume them all in his wrath: The Lord of his mercy open the eyes of the Magistrates to plucke downe these places of abuse that God may be honoured, and their consciences discharged. M. Ioh Field, his Declarati∣on of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden London 1583. Henry Cave, his Narration of the fall of Pa∣ris Garden. London 1588. M. Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses. p. 134.135. D. Beard, his Theater of Gods Iudge∣ments. Edit. 3. London 1631. l. 1. c. 35. p. 212. & the Preface to the Practice of Pity. I. G. his Refutation of the Apolo∣gie for Actors. pag 43. Vpon the 13. of Ianuary, Anno 1583. being the Lords-day, an infinite number of people, men, women, and children, resor∣ted unto Paris Garden to see Beare-bayting, Playes, and o∣ther pastimes, and being alltogether mounted aloft upon their Scaffolds and Galleries, and in the middest of all their iollity and pastime, all the whole building (not one sticke so much as standing) fell downe miraculously to the ground with much horror and confusion: In the fall of it fiue men and two women were slaine outright, and above one hundred and fifty persons more, sore wounded & bruised, whereof many died shortly after; some of them having their braines dashed out, some their heads all to quasht, some their legges broken, some their armes, some their backes, some one hurt, some an∣other; there being nothing heard there but wofull shreekes and cryes which did even pierce the skies; children beway∣ling there the death and hurts of their Parents, Parents of their Children; Wives of their Husbands, and Husbands of their Wives; so that every way from foure of the clocke in the afternoone till nine at night, especially over London∣bridge, many were carried in chaires, and led betwixt their friends, and so brought home to their houses with sorrowfull
heavy hearts, like lame Cripples. A just, though terrible judgement of God upon these Play-haunters and pro∣phaners of his holy day: the M. Iohn Field in his Decla∣ration of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden. originall relator of which, doth thus conclude: And therefore for a conclusion, I be∣seech all Magistrates by the mercies of God in Iesus Christ, that by this occasion and example, they take good heed to looke to the people committed to their charge, that they take order, especially on the Sabbath dayes, that no Citizen or Citizens servants have liberty to repaire to any of those a∣bused places, and that they keepe their stragling wantons in, that they may be better occupied. And as they have with good commendation so farre prevailed, that upon Sabbath dayes these Heathenish Enterludes and Playes are ba∣nished, so it will please them to follow the matter still, that they may be utterly rid and taken away, For surely it is to be feared, besides the destruction of body and soule that ma∣ny are brought unto by frequenting the Theater and Curtin that one day these places will likewise bee cast downe by God himselfe, and draw with them an huge heape of such con∣temners and prophane persons to be killed and spoyled in their bodies. Neither was he a false prophet altogether. D. Beard, his Theater of Gods Iudge∣ments. l. . cap. 35. pag. 212. For in the yeere of our Lord, 1607. at a Towne in Bedford-shire called Risley, the flore of a chamber wherein many were ga∣thered together to see a Stage-play on the Sabbath day, fell downe; by meanes whereof divers were sore hurt, and some killed. If these domestique examples, together with that of Diogenes Laertius. lib. 1. pag. 33. Thales the Philosopher, who was smothered and pressed to death at a Play will not move us; let us cast our eyes upon some forraigne Tragedies of this nature. I read in Lib. 3. c. 4.44. pag. 889. Munster his Cosmography, that about the yeere of our Lord, 1380. Lodovicke a Marquis of Nisina, a man not very religious, was made Arch-bishop of Magde∣burge; who thereupon invited many Gentlemen, and others, together with their Wives and Daughters into a Towne cal∣led Calven, to feast and make merry with him; who came accordingly: The Bishop for their better entertainement provided the Towne-hall for them to dance in (they being
much addicted to dancing and singing) and to act other va∣nities: and whiles they were busily turning, dancing, and playing, and every one danced merrily at the hands of their Ladies, the house being oppressed with the great weight, be∣gan to sinke, giving a great cracke before. The Arch-bishop taking the Lady who stood next him by the hand, hastned to goe downe the staires with the first: and as soone as he begun to goe downe, the stony staires being loose before fell downe, and miserably crusht to death the Arch-bishop and his con∣sort, with divers others. It is storied by Booke 4. chap. 192.193. fol. 243.244, See the Generall History of France. p. 231. and D. Beard, his Theater of Gods Iudge∣ments. lib. 2. c. 37. pag. 435.436. accor∣dingly. Froyssart in his Chronicle, and by some others since, that in the Raigne of Charles the sixt, in the yeere of our Lord; 1392. at a mar∣riage made in the Kings Court at the hostle of Saint Pauls in Paris, betweene Sir Yvan of Foiz, Bastard Sonne to the Earle of Foiz, and one of the Queene of Erance her Gentle∣women, the Tuesday before Candlemas day: A Squire of Normandy called Hogrymen of Gensay, provided for a Play or Mummery against night for which purpose he had devi∣sed 6. Coates made of Linnen cloth covered with Pitch, and thereon cloth and flax like haire, and had them ready in a Chamber: The King himselfe put on one of these Coates; the Earle of Iovy, a yong lusty Knight, another; Sir Charles of Poytiers, the third; Sir Yvan of Foiz another; the Son of the Lord Lanthorillet had on the fift, and the Squire him∣selfe put on the sixt. Being thus apparelled and sowed fast on these Coates, which made them soone like wilde wode-houses; the King upon the advice of Sir Yvan of Foiz, commanded an Vsher of his Chamber to enioyne all the Torch-bearers in the Hall where the Ladies were dancing to stand close to the wall, and not to come neere the wode-houses for feare of set∣ting them on fire, which he did accordingly. Soone after the Duke of Orleance, who knew nothing of the Mummery or the Kings command, entred into the Hall with foure Knights and sixe Torches, to behold the dancing, and begun himselfe to dance. Therewith the King and the fiue other Masquers came in, in these their disguises, fiue of them being fastned one to the other, the King onely being loose, who went before
and led the device. When they entred the Hall, every one tooke so great heed to them that they forgate the Torches. The King departing from his company went to the Ladies to sport with them, as youth required, and came to the Dutches of Berry who tooke hold of him to know what hee was, but he would not shew his name. The Duke of Orle∣ance running to the other fiue to dscover who they were, put one of the Torches his servants held so neere the flax, that he set one of the Coates on fire, and so each of them set fire on the other, so that they were all in a bright flame; the fire taking hold of the living Coates & their shirts began to scorch their bodies so that they began to bren and to cry out for helpe. The fire was so great that none durst come neere them, and those that did, brent their hands by reason of the heate of the pitch. One of them called Manthorillet fled into the Botry and cast himselfe into a vessell of water where they rynsed pots, and so saved his life by quenching the fire, but yet hee was sore hurt. The Countesse o Berry with her long loose Gowne co∣vered the King and so saved him from the fire: two of the other were burnt to death in the place: the Bastard of Foiz and the Earle of Iovy were carried to their lodgings, and there died within two dayes after in great paine and misery. Thus was this Comedy turned into a dolefull Tragedy.The French History. p. 231 The King though he escaped was much distracted in minde (and his servants distressed with griefe) at this unhappy acci∣dent, so that he could not sleepe quiet that night. Froyssarts Chronicle. Booke 4. chap. 192.193. fol. 244. The next day these newes being spred abroad in the City, and every man marveling at it: some said, how God had sent that to∣ken for an ensample, and that it was wisedome for the King to regard it, and to withdraw himselfe from such yong idle wantonnesse which he had used overmuch being a King. All Lords and Ladies thorow the Realme of France and elsewhere, that heard of this chance had great marvaie thereof. Pope Boniface being at Rome with his Cardinals reioyced at it, and said, that it was a token sent from God to to the Realme of France, which had taken part against him. Sure I am it was a just judgement of God, to teach Kings
and great men, and not to bee Actors or Spectators of vanity, but wholy to lay aside such foolish Masques and Enterludes. I.G. his Re∣futation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 38. A short Trea∣tise against Stage-playes, printed, 1625. and Dedicated to the Parlia∣ment. pag. 28. At Lions in France, in the moneth of Au∣gust, in the yeere 1607. whiles the Iesuites were acting a prophane Play of Christs comming to Iudgement at the last day, to the disgrace of true Religion, the Lord from Heaven continued thunder and lightnings for two houres space toge∣ther, slew twelue of the Actors and Spectators presently, and amazed all the rest with great terror and feare. To passe from France to Rome, Suetonius records, that in Iulius Caesar his time, there resorted such a multitude of people to Rome to behold his Stage-playes and Spectacles, that most of the strangers were forced to lodge in the Villages adioy∣ning in Tents: there was oft-times very many people trod and crushed to death at these Playes by reason of the multi∣tude, and among them two Senators: so tragicall and fatall were these Enterludes. Rom. Histor. lib. 37. p. 101. Dion Cassius records; that in Pompey his time. a Theater in Rome built for the acting of Syrian Enterludes was overturned with a sudden tempest, to the death and destruction of many persons. To passe by the memorable example of Gods avenging Iustice upon the See Iudg. 16.23. to 31. & A∣rias Montanus. Comment. in lib. Iudicum. c. 16. Antwerpia 1592. p. 568. to 580. See Lyra, Tostatus, Peter Matyr. Ibidem. Philistines and their Lords, many thousands of them being crushed to death with the fall of their Dagons Temple, which Samson pulled downe upon their heads whiles they were there feasting, dancing, and acting Playes before their Idoll Dagon, and beholding Samson playing, dancing, and making sport before them like a Clowne in a Play, they cal∣ling him out of the prison to that purpose. From whence Ibidem. pag. 570.571, 572. Arias Montanus well observes, that it was the cu∣stome of the Philistines and other Idolaters, to court their Idols with dances and Stage-playes on their solmne Festi∣vals; their temples being built in such a manner, that peo∣ple might conveniently behold the dances and Stage-playes that were acted in them: and thereupon hee iustly taxeth Vulgo ut gra∣tificentur prin∣cipes varia ac plerū{que} huma∣nitati dissentanea, vel ednt ipsi, vel edenda permittunt spectacula. Hinc olim Thea∣tra caedibus ac sanguine plena; hinc nostro tempore nostrisque moribus impura, & ab omni arte semota, scena∣rum & comae∣diarū licentia, & gladiatorum caede funestio∣ra crudeliora{que} taurorum ac belluarum mu∣nera quae dat retinentibus ac detestatis supe∣rorum animis dicata conse∣crataque ver∣santur. vid. Ibid.Christian Princes, for exhibiting Playes and such like im∣pure,
unchristian spectacles to the people, and tolerating them in their Kingdomes, they being unsuitable and pernicious unto Christian manners, and altogether unlawfull unto Christians as originally consecrated unto Idols; the very acting and beholding of them being odious unto God, as this his iudgement on the Philistines proves. Annalium. l. 4. c. 10. p. 165.166. Cornelius Taci∣tus, and Historiae. lib. 7. cap. 4. Paulus Orosius, (and out of them Eutropius Rrum Rom. l. 7. Tiberius. Petrarch. De Remed. Vtri∣us{que} Fortunae. l. 1. Dialog. 30. Bodinus Me∣thodo Histo∣riae. c. 7. The 3. Blast of Re∣trait from Playes, &c. pag. 124. D. Hack∣wels Apologie l. 4. c. 4. sect. 9. Edit. 1. p. 320. A short Treatise against Stage-playes pag. 26. with sundry others. Coc. Sabellicus. Ennead. 7. lib. 1. pag. 191. sundry o∣thers) relate; that about the eighth yeere of Tiberius his Raigne, there were by the iust iudgement of God, at least Sonorites Tacitus, others onely above 20000. which may both stand well together, since 50000. is above 20000. fifty thousand persons slaine and pressed to death at once, with the fall of a Theater at Fidena in Italy, (which Thea∣ter was built by one Atilius,) whiles they were there be∣holding Sword-playes, and such like Theatricall Enterludes; the dolefulnesse of which bloody Tragedy and judge∣ment (seconded with a devouring fire, which almost burnt up that City) is at large described by Tacitus. Ioannes Aventinus in his excellent Annals, hath registred two memorable Examples for our present purpose. Aventinus An∣nalium Bojorum. lib. 7. pag. 530. The first of them hapned at Pisonium, a City of Bavaria; about the yeere of our Lord, 1200. where divers people assembling together from all quarters to behold Enterludes and Cirque-playes, above three hundred of them were there slame out∣right with thunder and hayle from Heaven: The latter of them Idem Annal. Bojorum. lib. 7. pag. 668. & 581. Romae quintadecimo Cal. Octobris pons Tiberinus corruit aquis, obrui interire quingenti sexaginta homines, qui eò secularibus ludis, quos Nicolaus contra decret Constantiensis Snatus aperuerat, confluxerant. fell out in Rome it selfe upon the 15. day of October, in the yeere of our Lord 1450 when Pope Nicholas the first, solemnized his famous Iubily with secular Playes: at which time, fiue hundred and fifty persons comming to Rome to see these secular Enterludes, which this Pope brought in contrary to the decrees of the Councell of Con∣stance, were drowned & washed to death in the River Tiber, the Bridge upon which they were being overturned with the
waters, To these I shall adde one Tragicall Story more which In Vita Beati Gregorij. pag. 312.313. Edit. Basilae. 1571. Gregory Nyssen, in the life of Gregory the wor∣ker of miracles, hath registred to posterity. The Citizens of Caesarea, and well might all the people of that Province accustomed to meet together at Caesarea once a yeere, upon a publike solemne Festivall which they dedicated to a certaine Devill-Idol, which that Country worshipped; at which feast they See Act 1. Scene 1.2. & Act 2 Est enim ludus turpis & inhonestus qui in se deformi∣tatem impor∣tat, & tales fe∣cerunt Genti∣les coram dijs suis in Thea∣tris & templis: & illa est sim∣pliciter inhibi∣tus Christia∣nis. Holkot. Lectio. 173. in lib. Sapientiae. fol. 133. alwayes celebrated some publike Stage-playes to the honour of this their Idoll, and to delight the people: It fortuned that the whole Country and City assembled thus together after their wonted manner, when Saint Gregory was newly made Minister of that City: and being thus assembled they presently flocked to the Theater; Eorum qui concurrerant Theatrum plenum rat, & eorum qui postremo af∣fluxerant mul∣titudo subsel∣ijs undique superfndebatur, atque omnibus ad spectacula atque acroamata orchestram intueri cupientibus: plena cena tumulus & trepidationis, irrita praestigiatoribus, mirabi∣lumque spectaculorum artificibus osteatio erat, tumultu sese mutuo constipantium non modo oblectationem sunsicae impediente, sed ne circulatoribus quidem & prae∣stigiatoribus suas artes ostentanti tempus erat, &c. Greg. Nyssen. Ibidem. which be∣ing filled with those who first hasted thither, those who came after climbed up by troopes upon the Scaffolds that were built about it. At last the crowde of the people; who were very desirous to behold these Enterludes, grew so great, that they left no roome at all upon the Stage, either for the Play∣ers or Musicians to act their parts; whereupon the whole multitude cryed out to that Devill whose festivall they then solemnized, with one united voyce; O Iupiter make us roome; Which Saint Gregory over-hearing, hee presently sends one who stood by to the Theater, to tell the people that that they should forth-with have more roome and ease then they desired. Hac autem ab eo voce tanquam tristi quadam sententia prolata pestilenia frequentem ferias agentium, & ludos celebrantium conventum excipit, ac staim tripudiantium choris lamentatio miscebatur adeo ut in luctus & calamitates eis voluptates con∣verterentur, quum pro plausibus & cantu tibiarum, aliae super alias naeniae cantus∣que lugubres urbem passim invasissent, &c. Ibidem. No sooner was this message delivered to them, lke a dolefull sentence passed against them, but a de∣vouring pestilence suddenly seised upon that great assembly, which were there sporting and beholding Playes, and pre∣sently
a lamentation was mingled with their dancing, in so much that their pleasures were turned into sorrowes and ca∣lamities; and funerall dolefull Elegies one upon another were heard thorowot the City in stead of acclamations and mu∣sicke: Cum enim semel morbus homines inva∣sisset, opinione citius propaga∣batur atque serpbat, ignis in modum do∣mos depascens, adeo ut aedes quidem sacrae, quae spe sanati∣onis atque re∣medj confugi∣ebant, ijs, qui morbo peri∣bant repletae: fontes verò, aquae ductus, saturigines{que} ac pue orū, quos atrcitate morbi sitis exurebat, refer∣ti essent, &c. multi item ul∣trò transirent ad sepulchra eò quod super∣stites spln∣dis moruis non amplius sufficeent. Ibidem. For as soone this pestilent disease had seised upon men, opinion and conceit did propagate it the faster, it consu∣ming whole houses at once, like a fire: in so much that fly∣ing from their houses to their Temples for succour and reco∣very, their very temples were even filled up with the carcases of such who there fell downe dead of this disease: whose ex∣tremity was such, that all the Cisternes, Fountaines and pits of water neere the City were covered with the dead corps of such who resorted to them for to quench their thirst; in so much that many went voluntarily to their graves to die there, because the living were not sufficient to bury the dead. Neither did this pestilence surprise men suddenly, but a certaine Ghost or Spirit came first unto these houses over which destruction hovered, and then certaine perdition fol∣lowed after. At last when the people came to know the cause of this their sicknesse, they renounced their former Idolatrous sacrifices, rites and Enterludes, and resorting with their whole families to Saint Gregory, they intreated him both to instruct them and to pray unto God for them, that so they might escape this pestilence. By which meanes they all a∣bandoning their Idol-worship were drawne to the profession of Christs Name: part of them being led as it were by the hand unto the truth by the disease that was then upon them; others of them embracing the faith of Christ, as a defensa∣tive to secure them from the plague; Adeò illis hominibus sa∣nitate morbus validior erat. Qui enim in sanitate ad approbationem mysterij rationibus infirmi essent, corporali morbo ad fidem convaluerunt. Ibidem. their sicknesse being more effectuall to convert them then their health. For those who were so weake in their health that they could not bee wonne by reasons to approve the truth, were made whole in faith, by this their corporall disease. Loe here a man-eating pestilence sent by God from Heaven upon these Pagan Play-haunters; Answerable to which I finde another
Story in Plutarch, who relates; Pestis Roma grassata omnes ad unum sce∣nae administros extinxit. Plu∣tarchi. Questio∣ns Romanae. Quaest 107. pag. 600. that in the Consulship of Caius Sulpitius, and Licinius Solon, the great plague then raigning in Rome, devoured not onely sundry Play-haunters, but even all the Stage-players then in Rome, so that there was not so much as one of them left alive: A just judgement of God upon these pestiferous miscreants. And may we not then suspect, that their toleration of, and our great resort to Stage-playes, hath beene a great occasion of those devouring Plagues, which formerly and now of late have seised, not onely upon London and her Suburbs, (where divers publike standing Play-hou∣ses are every day frequented,) but on other Townes and Cities too, where stragling wandring Players (though 14 Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. cap 4. Rogues by Statute) doe oft-times act their parts? Sure I am that Saint De Civ. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32. Augustine, Historiae. lib. 3. cap 4. Orosius, and Gualther. Hom. 11. in Nahum. and o∣thers forequo∣ted. at p. 67.68. & Act 6. Scene 5. Hermannus Schedell. Chronicon Chronicorum. AEtas 5. fol. 83. others truely stile Stage-playes; the very plague and pestilence of mens mindes and manners; and that Paedagogi. lib 3. cap. 11. Clemens Alexandrinus, De Spectacu∣lis. lib. c. 27. Tertullian, and S. Hom. 8. de Paenitentia. & Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Matth. See before p. 67.68. & Act 6. Scene 5. Chrysostome, call the Play-house; the ery seae and chaire of pestilence; no wonder therefore if they produce a plague in those Kingdomes, & the Cities which permit them. Indeed the See before, p. 17.18. ancient Pagan Ro∣manes when as Rome was exceedingly pestred with the plague; sent into Tuscany for Stage-players, to asswage its rage: but both Nec tamen ludorum primum initium procurandis religionibus datū, aut religione animos, aut corpora morbis levavit, &c. Livy. Hist. l. 7. sect. 2.3. Livy, Dij propter sedandam corporum pestilentia ludos sibi sceni∣cos exhiberi jubebant. Pontife autem vester Scipio propter onimorum cavendam pe∣stilentiā, ipsam scenam constri prohibebat. Ne{que} enim & illa corporum pestilentia ideo conquievit, quia poplo bellicoso, & slis anteà ludis Circensibus assueto, ludorū scenicorum delicata subintravit insania, sed astutia spirituū nefandorū praevidens illā pestileniam jàm ine debito cessaturam, aliam longè graviorem qua plurimū gaude, ex hac occasione, non corporius sed moribus curavit immittere: quae animos misero∣rum tantis occae avit tenebris, anta deformitate faedavit, ut etiam modo, quod incre∣dible forsitan erit, si a nostris posteris audietur, Romana urbe vastata quos pestilētia ista possedit, a{que} inde fugientes, Carthaginem pervenire potuerunt, in Theatris quo∣tidie pro histrionibus insanint. De Civit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 33. Augustine, and Histor. lib. 3. cap 4. Se here, Act 6. Scene 5. Orosius assure
us; that they were so farre from mitigating this plague which eised on mens bodies, which they did rather aggra∣vat; that in stead of it, they brought in among them, a far more pernicious and perpetuall pestilence of their soules and manners (to wit, their wicked pestiferous Stage-playes) which they could not shake off. In the first yeere of Queene Elizabeths Raigne, Hollinshead Anno 1559. p. 1184. n. 50. all Stage-plages were prohibited by publike proclamation from the 7. of Aprill till Allhallon∣tide, of purpose to cease that plague which was then begun; and so in all great sicknesses since that time, all publike Enterludes have beene suppressed for the selfesame rea∣son. If then the inhibiting of publike Stage-playes hath beene such a common anidote to asswage those feare∣full Plagues, which God in justice hath inflicted on us; we may then conclude from the rule of contraries, that our resort to ribaldry Stage-playes (which God with∣out all question, as appeares by all the new recited judgements, See Salvian De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. ac∣cordingly. & Chrysostom. Hom. 3. De Davide & Saul. & Hom. 6. & 38. in Matth. cannot but abhorre,) is a grand occasion both of the engendring and propagating these late, these present plagues which yet wee feele, and suffer. As therefore we would flie and feare this dreadfull fatall sicknesse, which hath a long time hovered over our heads, and hath almost quite depopulated some par∣ticular places of this Kingdome (and God knoweth how soone, how fast it may increase to sweepe us all a∣way) let us henceforth cast out these our lewde pestife∣rous Enterludes, and rase downe these our Leprous Play-houses, which may involue us in the selfesame mi∣series, that these Caesarians here sustained, to our utter ruine. But if all these former examples will not deterre us from these Spectacles, let us consider what generall Nationall judgements they have oft procured. To passe by Gods judgements upon Theatra, Et Circum cum plebe sua ma∣didasque popinas. Quicquid agunt homines Sodomorum, incendia justis Ignibus involuunt & Christo judice damnant. Haec fugisse semel satis est, non respicit ultra Lot noster, &c. Prudentius. Hamertigenia. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 4. pag. 907. D. Sodom for her Cirques and Theaters, as Prudentius poetically expresseth it; who af∣firmes
with all that Christians after their conversion, returne backe no more to Playes and Theaters. The excessive expences of the Athenians on their Stage-playes (if De Gloria Atheniensium. lib. & Iustin. Hist. lib. 6. pag. 79. Plutarch or Iu∣stin may be credited,) was the very overthrow and destru∣ction of their State, and the occasion of their bondage to the Macedonians. Necsatis haec culpa est, tiam mimis & scurri∣libus ludicris sanctissimorū personae inter∣ponuntur Deo∣rum. Et ut spe∣ctatoribus va∣cuis risus pos∣sit at{que} hilari∣tas excitari, jo∣culatoribus feriuntur cavil∣lationibus nu∣mina, concla∣mant & assur∣gunt. Theatra, caveae omnes concrepant fra∣goribus atque plausibus, &c. Et audetis post ista mirari, unde oriantur haec mala, quibus inundatur & premitur sine ulla intermis∣sione mortalitas? Advers. Gentes. l. 4. p. 150. vid. Ibid. Arnobius informes the Gentiles, against whom he wrote; that all the evils, the miseries with which mortality was overwhelmed and oppressed from day to day, without intermission, originally sprang from Stage-playes, with which these Heathen Gentiles were besotted. Saint Augustine De Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 31.32.33. & l. 2. c. 4. to the end of that Booke. at large demonstrates; that the bring∣ing in, and tolerating of Stage-playes, which vitiates the mindes and manners of the Romanes, was the principall cause of the very ruine of their Common-weale and of all those fat all miseries which befell them. Whereupon hee breakes out into this patheticall exclamation. Amentes, amentes, quis est hic tantus non error, sd furor, ut exitium vestrum, sicut audivimus, plangentibus Orientalibus populis, & maximis Civitatibus in remotissimis terris, publicum ctū maerorem{que} ducentibus, vo Theatra quaereretis, intraretis, impleretis, & multò insaniora quàm fuerant anteà faceretis? hanc animorum labem ac pestem, hanc probitatis & honestatis eversionem vobis Scipio ille metuebat, quando constitui Theatra prohibebat, &c. neque enim censebat ille faelicē esse rem pub. stantibus, maenibus, ruentibus moribus: Sed in vobis vluit quod Daemones impij seduxerunt quàm quod homines providi praecaverunt. Hinc est, quod mala quae facitis, vobis imputari non vultis; mala verò quae pati∣mini, Christianis temporibus imputatis. Neque enim in vestra securitate pacatam rempub. sed luxuriam quaeritis impunitam; qui depravati rebus prosperis, nec cor∣rigi potuistis adversis. De Civit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 33. O fooles! O mad men! what is this your extreame I say not error, but frensie, that when as all the Easterne Nations, as wee have heard, and the very greatest Cities in the remotest Countries doe publikely grieve and sorrow for your destruction; that you should runne after Theaters enter into them, fill them, and make them much more unruly and outragious then be∣fore? This plague and pestilence of mens mindes; this over∣throw of honesty and goodnesse did worthy Scipio feare would befall you, when he prohibited Theaters to be erected; when
he discerned that you might be easily corrupted and over∣turned with prosperity; when as hee would not have you se∣cure from feare of enemies: neither did he thinke the Com∣mon-weale could be happy, when as the walls of it onely stood, but the manners fell to ruine. But in you that hath more prevailed which wicked Devils have seducingly suggested, then that which provident men have laboured to prevent. Hence is it, that the evils, which you doe, you will not have them to be imputed to you; and the evils, which you suffer, you impute onely to the Christian times. Neither in your se∣curity doe you seeke for a peaceable Common-wealth, but an unpunished luxury, who being depraved with prosperity, can∣not yet be amended by adversity. Saint Chrysostome, as hee records; Magna Civi∣taibus mala ferunt Theatra magna. Hom. 62. ad Pop. An∣tioch. Tom. 5. Col. 347. B. that Stage-playes had brought great mischiefes upon Cities, both in respect of sinne and punishment; so hee with all relates: Vel ipsa sig∣na agnoscite, quia aereum fa∣ctum est cae∣lum, & terra ferrea. Iracun∣diam Dei ipsa elementa lo∣quuntur. Fil hominum quousque gra∣ves corde? ut quid deligitis vanitatem in spectaculis, & quaeritis men∣dacium in hi∣strionibus. Hmilia ult. in Psal. 118. Tom. 1. Col. 1031. A. That the very Heavens were made. Brasse, and the earth Iron; that the very elements them∣selves did proclaime Gods wrath against men for their Stage-playes. How long therefore O sonnes of men will yee be slow of heart? Why (writes he) doe yee love vanity in Enterludes, and seeke after lies in Stage-players? Holy Salvian writes expresly; That the very sacking of Rome, the destruction of all Italy, the spoyling of Ravenna, Tre∣vers, Marseilles, Agrippina, Moguntia, and a great part of France and Spaine by the Goathes and Vandals, was but a iust iudgement of God inlicted on them for their frequenting and maintaining Playes and Theaters; whose execrable filthinesse, whose inconsistency with Christianity, and whose odiousnesse in Gods eye-sight, hee most eligantly discyphers. If wee observe all the passages of the Roman History,De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. & 7. tho∣rowout. we shall easily discover that the Roman Common-weale had never so bad Emperours and Magistrates, and the greatest plagues that can befall a people, that it was never so ill governed, never so much disordered and corrupted: and
that the See for this purpose: Arno∣bius Contra Gentes. l 4. & 7. August. De Civit. Dei. lib. 1.2. & 4. Salvian, De Gub. Dei. l. 6.7. Orosius. Hist. l. 7. c. 5.6, 7, 8. Tacitus Annal. lib. 14. c. 1.2, 3. Hero∣dian Historia. l. 1. Suetonij. Tiberius, Cali∣gula, Claudius, & Nero. AElij Lampridij H∣ligabasus & Commodus. Flavij Vopisci Carinus. Eu∣tropius Rerum Rom. lib. 8.9. Dion Cassius. Rom. Hist. lib. 57.59, 60. Grimstons Imperiall Hi∣story. Tiberi∣us, Caligula, Claudius, Ne∣ro, Heliogaba∣lus, Comodus, & Carinus. Zo∣naras Annaliū. Tom. 2. with sundry others Romanes themselves and their Allies were never so strangely oppressed, afflicted, dissipated and consumed, with all kinde of plagues and iudgements; with pestilences, civill dissentions, tyranny, forraigne invasions, exactions, mundations, earthquakes, fires, and the like, as in the raignes of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Heliogabalus, Commodus, Carinus, and these other flagitious Histrioni∣call Emperours in whose raignes both Playes and Players were in most request, as well with Prince as people, whose sinnes were nourished and intended by them; and so by conse∣quence Gods iudgements on them too. When ever their Playes and Theaters went up, their manners, vertues, prosperity and Common-wealth went downe, and all Gods iudgements fell upon them, as their Historians de∣clare at large. When See Iosephus Antiq. Iudaeorum. l. 15. c. 11.12, 13. & l. 16. c. 9. Herod brought in Playes among the Iewes, then went their manners, their State, their whole Nation unto wrecke, and See 2. Maccabees. c. 4. v. 9.10.18. Gods iudgements seised on them more fatally then before. To come neerer to our times: De Remed. Vtrius{que} Fortunae. l. 1. Dial. 30. Franciscus Petrarcha, Against Vaine Playes and Euterludes. fol. 32.36. M. Northbrooke, Anatomy of Abuses. p. 102.106, 107 M. Stubs, and Master Gosson, his Schoole of Abuses. I. G his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. A short Treatise against Stage-playes. pag. 26.27, 28. with sundry others. Gualther Hom. 11. in Nahum. others certifie us: That Stage-playes draw downe Gods vengeance not onely on their Actors and Spectators (for which they recite some precedents;) but likewise on those States and Cities which allow them. Master Brinsly, a reverend Divine, informes us: The True Watch. part 3. chap. 11. Abominaion 30. pag. 302 That such who frequent Play-houses, must needs bring faggots and firebrands to set in the gates of our Hierusalem. The very Title of the se∣cond and third Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, published by Authority in the yeere of our Lord, 180.) instructs us; That that Common-weale is nigh unto the curse of God, wherein either Players be made of, or Thea∣ters maintained: And the Author of the third of these
Blasts, being once a Play-poet, writes; Ibidem. pag. 55.56. That sinne did so abound at Stage-playes, and was there so openly commit∣ted, that when he gave himselfe first to observe the abuse of common Playes, he looked, whe God in iustice should pre∣sently in his wrath have confounded the beholders. Ibidem. p. 53. So writes Ma∣ster Gualther too, in his 11. Homily upon Nahum. And I am verily perswaded (saith hee) that if Players may bee still permitted to make sale of sinne, wee shall pull on our heads Gods vengeance, and to our Realme bring an utter confusion. And no wonder that it should bee so: For Deus etsi quaedam lon∣ganimiter to∣lerat, quaedam tamn etiam in hac vita fla∣gellat: & hic nonnunquam ferire inchoat, quos aeterna damnatione consmmat. Gregor. Magnus. Moral. lib. 36. cap. 18. where ever sinne goes before, Gods wrath and vengeance will certainely follow after; where all wickednesse and prophanesse super-abound, 2 Chron. 36.15, 16. Ier. 7.20. Ezech. 21.30.31, 32. Gods Iudgements cannot but abound at last. Now Playes and Play-houses, (as the precedent Scenes doe manifest,) are the fruitfull nurse∣ries, and fomenters of all wickednesse, all lewdnesse whatsoever: they likewise Hebr. 3.13. See Act 7. Scene 14.harden mens hearts thorow the deceitfulnesse of sinne, and undispose them to repentance; they so ripen and prepare men for Gods judgements, Sopor quip∣pe insunditur ut perditio sub∣sequatur. Cum enim comple∣tis iniquitati∣bus suis quis meretur ut pe∣reat, providentia ab eo tollitur ne periturus evadat. Salvian, De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. pag. 234. that they have neither providence to foresee, nor any spiri∣tuall wisedome to prevent them: no wonder therefore if Gods judgements seise upon them to their just destru∣ction, Matth. 24.38, 39, 49, 50, 51. 1 Thes 5.2, 3, 4. Luke 12.19, 20. Dan. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Amos 6.1. to 9. even in the ruffe of all their carnall iolity and feare∣lesse security. You have now seene a short survay of Gods tragicall judgements upon Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters, and those States and Cities wherein they are tolerated and approved, together with the reason of it, which must needs stand firme, as long as God is just to punish sinne. These few examples therefore of Gods iudge∣ments (which 1 Cor. 10.5, to 12. Praebentur cunctis exempla cum fuerint quibusdam irrogata supplicia. Cyprian De Sing. Clricorum Tom. 2. pag. 202. should be warnings unto all) should lesson all Play-poets, to give over their composing; all com∣mon Actors, to renounce the acting; all voluptuous Play-haunters, to abandon the sight and hearing, of all Theatricall Enterludes; all Christian Princes, Cities,
States and Magistrates (Potestas quippe maxi∣ma & potentis∣sima quae inhi∣bere maximum scelus potest, quasi probat debere fieri, si sciens patitur perpetrari: In cujus enim manu est ut prohibeat, ju∣ber agi si non prohibe ad∣mitti. Salvian. De ubernatione Dei. l. 7. p. 266. Facientis cul∣pam proculdu∣bio habet, qui quod potest corrigere, neg∣ligitemendae: Et negligere cum possis per∣urbare per∣versos, nihil est aliud quam fo∣vere. Gratian. Distinctio 86. whose connivency at any evils that they might suppresse, doth make them deepely guilty of them) for ever to exile all Playes, and demolish all Play-houses whatsoever; for feare they pull Gods judge∣ments downe upon them, as they have done on others. Alas, why should any Christian Play-poet, Player, or Spectator; any Christian State or City where Playes have publike countenance, be so desperately secure, as to conceit; that though Playes have brought Gods judgements upon others, Vt sit magna, tamen certe lenta ira Deorū est. Si curant igitur cunctos punire nocen∣tes, Quando ad me venient? sed & exorabile numen Fortasse experior, solet his ig∣nosere: multi Cōmittunt eadem diverso crimina fato. Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, Hic diadema. Sic animum dirae trepidum formidine culpae Confirmant. Iuvinal. Satyr. 13. p. 120. yet they shall scape unpunished, his wrath shall never seise on them: what ground, what warrant is there for any such unchristian surmise? Is not Gods avenging justice towards sinne and sinners, still the same? and are not Stage-playes, Play-poets, Actors, Play-haunters, and those places where they are tolerated, as execrably vitious, as sinfull, as odious now to God as ever? Is Oportet ut una paena teneat obnoxios quos similis error invenerit implicatos. Concil. Toltanum. 4. Ca 74. not the selfesame punishment alwayes due unto the selfesame sinnes and sinners? and is not the selfesame sinne as sinfull, as peccable; Criminosior enim culpa est ubi honestior sta∣tus: si honorosior est persona peccantis, peccati quo{que} major invidia. Itaque nos qui Christiani catholici esse dicimur, si simile aliquid Barbarorū impunitatibus facimus gravius erramus. Atrocius enim sub sancti nominis professione peccam{us}: ubi sublimior est praerogativa major est culpa. Salvian. De Guber. Dei. l. 4. p. 125.126, 130. yea more execra∣ble, more damnable in Christians, then in Pagans? God hath most severely punished Pagan, yea and Christian Play-poets, Stage-players, Play-haunters, and such States as tolerated them, for Stage-playes heretofore, as the forequoted examples testifie; and shall hee not much more avenge himselfe on such like Christians for their Stage-playes now? And yet alas, Haec semper est incredulitas humanae duritiae, ut non solū audiendo sed etiam videndo non credat alteros interijsse, nisi & seipsam viderit interire: nec sociorū mortibus quatitur, dum illos immeritos aut invalidos opinatur, &c. Cyprian. D Singlar. Clericorū. Tom. 2. p. 202. such is the infidelity
such the security of mens obdurate hearts, that not onely when they heare, but likewise when they visibly behold Gods vengeance seising upon others, for composing, acting, fre∣quenting, countenancing these vaine delights of sinne; yet they really believe not, either that these have perished, or that themselves shall perish for the selfesame things, unlesse they likewise see themselves destroyed too: neither are they any whit affected with the sudden fearefull deaths of others, till such a death hath seised on themselves. O therefore now at last (as wee tender our owne private or the pub∣like safety,) Aliorum vul∣nus nostra sit cautio. Hierom. Epist. 10. cap 4. let other mens wounds bee our cautions; let these mens deaths, prove our life; let their judge∣ments be our medicines. Metuite quantum poe∣stis ejusmodi casus exi; & in ista subver∣sione labentiū vos experimen∣ta perterreant. Nimium prae∣ceps est qui transire con∣tendit, ubi aliū conspexerit cecidisse: & vehementer infrenis est, cui non incutitur timor alio pe∣reunte. Ama∣tor ver est sa∣lutis suae, qui evita alienae mortis incur∣sum: Et ipse est providus, qui solicitus fit cladibs caeterorum: sicut Solomon approbat, dicens; Astutus videns malum puniri, vehementer erudietur: Et terum: Cadentibus impijs justi vehemen∣ter terrebuntur. Cyprian. De Singularitate Clericorum. Tom. 2. pag. 199. Hee (saith Saint Cyprian) is too audacious, who strives to passe over there, where he hath seene another to have fallen: he is outragiously unruly who is not strucke with feare when he sees another perish in that course which he is running. He onely is a lover of his owne safety, who takes warning by anothers death: And he onely is a provident man, who is made solicitous by the ruines of other men: which Solomon approveth, saying, The pru∣dent seeing the evill man punished, is greatly instructed: And againe, When wicked men fall, the iust will bee much affrighted. Adversa est con∣fidentia, quae periculis vitam suam, pro certo commendat. Et lubrica spes est quae inter fomenta peccati salvari se spetat. Incerta victoria est, inter hostilia arma pug∣nare. Et impossiblis liberatio est, flammis circundari, nec ardere, &c. Cyprian. Ibid. It is an adverse hurtfull confidence, which certainely commits its life to dangers, as to a certaine thing And that is but a slippery hope, which presumes it shall be safe amids the fomentations of sinne. It is an uncertaine vi∣ctory to fight amidest the enemies weapons; and it is an im∣possible deliverance to be compassed about with flames, and not to burne. Wherefore let not a peradventure, that we may escape Gods judgements, though we still resort to Stage-playes; overpoyse, a peradventure, that they may seise upon us, as they have done on others. Neither let
Gods long-suffring towards Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters, and such Republikes as approve them, (Rom. 2.4. which in truth should lead them to repentance;) make all or any of them or us secure against the feare of his avenging hand. Divina seve∣ritas ò niquū acrius punit, quo diutius pertulit. Grg. Magnus. Moral. lib. 25. cap. 1. Non contem∣nas, quod jm non odie in opera peccan∣tium vindicat Christus. Quā∣ta enim ptien∣tia sustnet, tanta severitte restituet. Chry∣sstom. De Militia Christiana Hl. Tom. 5. Col. 633. C. For the longer Gods iudgements are de∣layed, the greater will they be at last. Mjor  e∣nim paena di∣lata qum subi∣ta: molestius supplicium quod praemisso terrore differ∣tur: gravior pae∣n, quae ad hoc trdat, ut diu∣tius feriat. Su∣bita enim citò percutiunt, dilata faeneraam paenam restituunt. Chrysost. ex Varijs in Matth. locis. Hom. 24. Tom 2. Col. 1040. C. That punishment is most troublesome, which is deferred with a foregoing terror: that torment is more grievous, more intolerable which is de∣layed for this onely purpose, that it may strike the longer, the deeper: For sudden evils quickly strike us thorow; where∣as delayed iudgements bring a multiplyed, and usurious pu∣nishment with them. Wherefore the Quantò tardaverit Dominus, tantò sit solicitior servus. Quantò diutius supervenit Christus, tanto sit paratior Christianus. Non est providus servus, quem imparatū invenerit Dominus. Chrysost. Ibid. longer the Lord hath deferred to punish, by so much the more solicitous let the ser∣vant be: by how much the longer Christ is ere he come, the more prepared let a Christian be. He is no provident servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall finde unprepared. God hath a long time spared many Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters, States and Cities where Playes are harbored, though some of these have smarted for them: he hath mercifully forborne many such of us at home; and though he hath a long time Hebr. 12.5. to 12. chastised us as a Father, yet he hath not as yet wholy consumed us, as an avenging Iudge; but how soone he is likely to doe it, if wee re∣pent not speedily, wee may all conjecture: O therefore let not the long suffring of our gracious God, Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13. harden any of us in the love, the exercise or approbation of these ungodly Enterludes, or of any other Hebr. 11.25. Deliciae temporariam habent voluptatem, paenam autem sem∣piternam. Chrysostom. Hom. 54. ad Pop. Antioch. pleasures of sinne which are but for a season: But let these judgements of God, which Playes have brought on Pagans, on Chri∣stians heretofore, and for ought Par paena perditionis constringat, quo in pernitie prava societas copulat. Concilium Toletanum. 4. Can. 74. Surius. Tom. 2. Can. 737. we know upon our selves,
be now at last a warning-peale to us, with speed, with care and conscience to abandon them: and thus to syl∣logize against them in the 44. place,Argument 44. with which I shall close up this Scene. That which drawes downe Gods judgements, wrath and vengeance, both upon the Composers, Actors, and Spectators of it; and likewise upon those Ma∣gistrates, States, and Cities, which foster and ap∣prove it: must needs be sinfull, (Isay 1.2. to 9. cap. 3.1. to 12. cap. 5.24. to 30. cap. 9.18, 19. Ier. 2.13. to 20. cap. 4.17, 18. Isay 50.1. Psal. 107.17. Lam. 3.33, 34, 39. since God never inflicts his iudgements but for sin) yea altogether to be avoyded of all good Christians, and not tolera∣ble in any Christian Common-weale. But this doe Stage-playes; as the premises demon∣strate. Therefore they must needs be sinfull, yea altogether to be avoyded of all good Christians; and intole∣rable in any Christian Common-weale. SCENA VICESSIMA. THe last effect of Stage-playes, which ariseth as a  necessary consequent from all the former, is this; That without sincere repentance Quomodo enim cū Chri∣sto & Angelis ejus regnabunt in caelis, qui cum Diabolo & ministris ejus societatem habent in terris? Quomodo gaudebunt in convivio perenni sancto∣rum, qui non respuunt convivia nefanda Paganorum? Aut quomodo in luce per∣petua possunt laudes Deo dicere cum Angelis, qui hic Diabolo exhibent funestos ludos in idolis? HRabanus Maurus. Homil. Contra Paganicos Errores. Tom. 5. they eternally damne mens soules. A fruit, a consequent with a witnesse, which should cause all Players, all Play-poets, all Play-haunters to looke about them. And this must needs be so: Rom. 6.23. For, if the wages of sinne be death; Hebr. 2.2. Eccles. 12.14. Matth. 12.36, 37. and if every unrepented, un∣lamented,
idle, vaine, or sinfull action, word and thought, shall recive a iust recompence of reward: If 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal 5.19, 20, 21. Ephes. 5.4, 5, 6. the unrighte∣ous, the adulterous and unchaste, shall not inherite the King∣dome of God and of Christ: If Psal. 9.17. the wicked shall be turned into Hell and all the people that forget God, then crtainely the wages of Stage-playes, (which See Act 3. thorowout. abound with many idle sinfull speeches, actions, and representations, directly sin∣full in sundry different respects, as I have manifsted by the premises; and therefore cannot but exclude their un∣righteous, adulterous, unchast Actors and Spectators out of Heaven, and tumble them headlong into Hell for all eternity, unlsse they prevent this danger by sincere re∣pentance) must be eternall death. Stage-playes, (as not onely the best, Ovid. Tristi∣um. l. 1. and the Pagan Empe∣rours, States & Authors quo∣ted here, in Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, & 6. but even the worst of men confesse,) are the See here, Act 3. Scene 1. & Act 6. Scene 5. accordingly. very sinkes, the seminaries, food, and treasures of all wickednesse and lewdnesse whatsoever: they are the very Chrysostom. Hom. 6. & 7. in Matth. See here, Act. 1.2. & Chorus: & Act 6. Scene 12. accordingly. baites, the snares, the engines, the sweet Syrenean enchantments of the Devill, with which he sweetly allures men to destruction; by which he insinuates all kinde of vice∣ousnesse into their soules; and steales away their hearts from God and heavenly things: See Act 6. Scene 3, 4, 5, 6, 12. & 19. accor∣dingly. they are the principall instru∣ments to intice, to enthrall men unto sinne, to enamor men with sinne; to detaine men under the commanding power of sinne; and to keepe em off from all true contrition for sinne: Needs therefore must they drowne their Actors, their Composers and Spectators in everlasting perditi∣on both of soule and body, if they repent not of, and utterly renounce them as they have vowed in their bap∣tisme. Hence is that memorable passage of Hippolitus an ancient Martyr, in his Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 3. pag. 16.17. Oration, De Consummatione mundi & Antichristo, about the yeere of our Lord, 220. where he informes us; that Christ shall say thus to Play-haunters and wicked men, at the last day: Depart from me yee workers of iniquity, I know you not: you are be∣come the workemen of another Master, that is, of the De∣vill. Possesse with him darknesse and fire, which is not put out, and the worme that sleepeth not, and gnashing of teeth, &c.
Aures ve∣stras condidi ut audiretis Scrip∣uras; at vos pa∣rastis eas a cantica Daemo∣num, cytharas & ridicula. O∣culos vestros creavi, ut pro∣spiceretis lu∣men praecepto∣rum meorum, ea{que} exequere∣mini: at vos exercistuis stu∣pra & impudi∣citias, & ad re∣liquam im∣mundiciam istos aperuistis. Os vestrum composui ad glorificandum & laudandum Deum, & Psal∣mos cantiones∣que spiritales pronunciandas lectionisque continuam meditationem, &c. Pedes ve∣stros ordinavi ut ambularetis in praeparatio∣ne Evangelij pacis, tum in Ecclesijs, tum in domibus sanctorū meormat vos docuists currere ad adulteria, stupra, spectacula, saltationes in sublime jactationes. Iam solutus conventus publius, spectaculū desijt mundi hujus, praeterij species & deceptio illius. Discedite a me, &c. Ibidem. For I have made your eares that you should heare the Scriptures; but you have prepared them for the songs of Devils, for harpes and ridiculous things. I have created your eyes that you might behold the light of my precepts and thorowly performe thm; but you have called for whore∣domes and uncleanesses, and have opened them to all other filthinesse: I have made your mouthes to glorifie and praise the Lord, to sing Psalmes and spirituall Songs, and to utter the continuall meditation of what you read: but you have applyed it to rayling, to swearing, to blaspemies, whiles you did sit and backbite your neighbours. I have formed your hands that you should stretch them out to prayers and sup∣plications; but you have reached them forth to rapines, mur∣thers, and mutuall slaughters. I have ordaind your feet, that you should walke in the preparation of the Gospell of peace, both in Churches and in the houses of my Saints; but you have taught them to runne to adulteries, whoredomes, Stage-playes, dances, vaultings. Now the publike assembly is dissolved; the spectacle of this world is ended; the fashi∣on and deceit of it is passed away, &c. Depart therefore in∣to everlasting fire prepared for the Devill and his Angels. And then alas poore wretches, what will become of them when as Christ shal thus upbraide and charge them with their resort to Playes and Play-houses, and their imploying both of their eyes, their eares, their hands, their feet, their mindes and times about them, at the last? Perish they must, and that irrecoverably, for all eternity. This sundry Fathers testifie. Pro∣fessio Iudorum, altera via est mundi, quae ducit ad Diabolum, generalem viam per∣ditionis. Chrysostm Hom 41. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 882 B. The profession and following of Stage-playes (writes Chrysostom) is a way of the world which leads un∣to the Devill, the generall way of perdition: Therefore he exhorts his Hom. 7. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 60. B. See here, pag 46. H. Auditors, to avoyd the pestiferous Fish-pond
of the Theater; for this is that, which drownes its Specta∣tors in the fiery Sea of Hell, and kindles the very bottome of its fire. Hom. 27. pag. 212. See here, pag. 45. Z. Macarius AEgyptius writes expresly: that those who are delighted with Spectacles and Stage-playes, shall never enter into Heaven without repentance, paine, and fighting, because the way to Heaven is narrow and full of affliction. Saint Cyprian, and Tertullian in their Bookes, De Spectaculis. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. c. 20. Clemens Romanus Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. cap. 66. Augustine De Civitate Dei. lib. 2. cap. 29. & Plcene tandem vitam aeternam peti aut sperari à dijs poeticis, Theatricis, lu∣dicris, scenicis? Absit; imò a∣vertat Deus verus tam im∣manem sacri∣legamque de∣métiam. Nun∣quid ab ijs Dijs quibus haec placent, & quos haec placant, cum eorum il∣lic crimina frequentantur vita aeterna poscenda est? Nemo, ut arbi∣tror, usque ad tantum praeci∣pitium furio∣ssimae impie∣tatis insanit. Nec fabulosa igitur nec civili theologia sempiternam unquam adipiscitur vitam: Il∣la enim de dijs turpia ngedo festinat, haec favendo metit, &c. Ambae turpes, am∣baeque damnabiles. Hincinè vita aeterna sperabitur unde ista brevis temporalisque polsuitur? An vero vitam polluit consortium nefariorum hominum si se inserunt affectionibus & assentionibus nostris, & vitam non polluit scietas Daemonum qui coluntur criminibus suis? Si veris, quam mala si falsis, quam male. Ibidem. lib. 6. cap. 6. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos. lib. 2. cap. 1.2. & l. 4. cap. 1. Confessionum. lib. 3. cap. 1.2. & lib. 6. cap. 7.8. Salvian. De Gubernatione Dei. lib. 6. write as much: Yea Se Act 7. Scene 2 all those Fathers and Councels which excommunicated Players and Play-haun∣ters from the Church, till they had repented, renounced the acting, the beholding of all Theatricall Enterludes, affirme the same, since those can never be deemed wor∣thy the society of the Saints in Heaven, who are not fit to communicate with the Saints on earth. Certainely Matth 16.19. Ioh. 20.23. that which the Church doth lawfully binde on earth is bound in Heaven; those therefore who are justly excluded out of, cōdemned by the militant Church, See Act 7. Scene 2. as Players and Play-haunters ought to be, are excluded likewise out of Heaven, are condemned in Heaven, unlesse they doe re∣pent. This all the moderne Christian Authors, together with M. Gosson, and the Author of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes.two penitent relenting Play-poets of our owne who have See here, Act 7. Scene 5. written against Stage-playes, doe likewise joynt∣ly testifie: And indeed they should all have written in vaine against these Enterludes, did they not bring per∣dition to mens soules. There are but three things that
have moved all the Fathers, Councels, and Christian Authors which I shall here recite, to write against Stage-playes so frequently, so abundantly as they have done. See Act 1.2. & Chorus. Act 3. Scene. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 12, 14, 17, 18. The first is the dishonour, the injury that Stage-playes doe to God: See Act 6. Scene 5.6. The second the prejudices, mischiefes, and inconveniences they bring upon the Church and State: See Act 6. Scene 3.4, 17, 18, 19. The third, the guilt, the sinnes, the damnation they procure to mens soules: the last of which is a ne∣cessary consequence from the former, which are meere∣ly false, if this be not true. Since therefore it is evident by the Confession of all these Fathers, Counsels and Christian Writers, who have censured Stage-playes: See Act 6. Scene 12. & Act 7. Scene 2. by excommunicating Players and Play-haunters in the Primitive Church till their sincere repentance; by all the foregoing Acts and Scenes; and by the practise of Play∣ers, Play-poets, Play-haunters of ancient, of moderne times, (Act 6. Scene 12. & 14. accor∣dingly. who alwayes upon their true coversion and re∣pentance have utterly discarded, and renounced Playes and Play-houses) that Stage-playes without sincere repen∣tance damne mens soules: Let this Act 7. Scene 2. teach all Players, Play-poets, and Play-haunters whatsoever, as they ten∣der the eternall welfare of their soules and bodies; as they desire to avoyd Isay 33.14. Psal. 16. Psal. 90.11. Isay 2.20, 21. Ioel 2.11. Mal. 3.2. the unsupportable wrath of God, the Habet nunc consilium om∣nis iniquus praesentia ap∣petere, aeterna deserere, inju∣sta agere, justa deridere: sed cum judex justorum injustorumque venerit, suo unusquisque impius consilio praeci∣pitatur, quia per hoc quod hic appetere pravis cogitationbus elegit, in aeterni sup∣plicj tenebras mergitur. Greg. agnus. Moral. lib. 4. cap. 4. everlasting torments of Hell; and to participate of the eternall joyes of Heaven, even seriously to Vnusquisque ergo no∣strum ad paenitentiae lamenta confugiat, dum fere ante prcussionem vacat Revo∣mus ante oculos mentis quicquid errando ommisimus, & quod nequiter gimus, eno puniamus, Greg Mag. Epistolarum. lib. 11. cap. 2. fol. 452. B. bewayle, and cordially to repent their former penning, acting, and beholding of all forepast Stage playes and for ever to a∣bandon all such Enterludes for time to come, as the cer∣taine contrivers, the infallible consummators of their just damnation, unlesse they seriously repent. Yea let this lesson all them when ever they are tempted to Playes or Play-houses by any lewde companions, by
Satan, or by they owne sinfull lusts, to answer these temptations, with this 45. Play-confounding Argument,Argument 45. from which there is no evasion. Those things which without sincere repentance bring eternall destruction and damnation on mens soules and bodies, must needs be sinfull, abomina∣ble, and eternally execrable unto Christians. But this doe Stage-playes; as all the premises testifie. Therefore they must needs be sinfull, abominable, and eternally execrable unto Christians. Damnation, Rom. 6.23. Iohn 3 18. Marke 16.16. 2 Thes. 2.12. Matth. 25.41, 42, 43. as it is a frut of sinne, so it is that which every man should labour to avoyd, though it were with the losse of his very dearest members, much more of his unprofitable and sinfull pleasures, Iam. 5.1, 5. Rev. 18.6, 7. Prov. 14.12, 13. Luke 6.25. Qui nunc ma∣lè se in volup∣tatibus dilatat, eum post in supplicijs paena congustt. Qui hic in vo∣lupate laetatus est, illic perpe∣tua ultine lae∣ttur. Gregor. Magnus. Moal. lib. 14. cap. 4 which alwayes end in griefe. Our Saviour Christ himselfe hath given us this advice, Matth. 5.29, 30. cap. 18.8. Mark. 9.47.48 See Chrysost. Hom. 17. in Matth. & Opus imperfectum in Mtth. Homil. 12. that if our right hand, or our right eye offend us, we should cut off the one, and plucke out the other: for it is pro∣fitable for us, that one of our members should perish, rathe then that our whole bodies and soules should be cast into Hell; where the worme dyeth not, and the fire is not quenched: If a man to avoyd damnation must thus offer Mortem morte dissolvere, occisione occisionem dispargere, tormentis tormenta distutere, supplicijs supplicia evaporare, vitam auferendo conferre; carnem saedendo juvare, animam eripiendo servare; perversitas quam putas ratio est, quod saevitiam existimas gratia est. Errorem operis fructus excusat. Tertul. Adversus Gnosticos. Tom. 2. pag. 425.426. violence to, and even with indignation cut off, pull out, and cast away, his right hand, his right eye, the usefullest, the profita∣blest, the dearest, bet-beloved of all his other mem∣bers; should he not much more abandon, abominate these unprofitable, expensive, and pernicious Stage-playes, that so he might escape it? Alas, who would be so desperately prodigall of his owne salvation; who would so vilifie, so undervalue Heaven, or his owne im∣mortall Soule, (Matth. 16.26. See Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matth. the losse of which cannot be recompenced with the gaine of all the world,) as to set to hazard, to for∣feit them for a Stage-play? and yet how many thou∣sands
daily doe it? O that such men would consider but a while, See Gregor. Mag. Moral. li 15. cap. 14 Mtth. 25.41. what damnation, what eternall, eternall dam∣nation, accompaniedDn. 12.2. Matth. 18.8. cap. 25.41, 46. Mak. 9.48. Ioh. 3.36. c. 5.29. Isay 66.24. with the everlasting wrath and ven∣geance of an Almighty provoked Isay 13.11. Exod. 3.4.7. Nahum. 1.3. sinne-revenging God, is! this certainely would caue them, as it hould cause us all, for ever to detest these sugered soppes of Satan, which without sincere repentance prove nought else but eternall Prov 5 4. Ier. 2.19. 2 Sam 2.26. Dulcia se in bilem verunt, &c bitternesse both to soule and body. Mark. 16 16. Iohn 3.18, 36. Propterea de gehenna jugi∣ter audiamus, ut ex huius minis & tumo∣re multum e∣molumenti ca∣piamus Nam si Deus peccan∣tes in eam de∣jecturas hujus mins non praemisisset, in eam multi cecidisnt. Si nunc enim timo∣re animas nostras concutiente sunt aliqui tam facile peccantes, taquam nec ips sit: si nihil horum dictum fuisset, neque intentatum quid mali non fecissemus? rsst. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 55. Tom. 5 Col. 318. A Dam∣nation is in truth the onely argument to rouse voluptuous and secure persons, who lie rotting in the dregges of sinfull pleasures: O that the terror, and alarum of it would now at last awaken those miserable gracelesse Play-poets, Actors, Play-hauntrs, who lie sleeping in the very brinke of Hell, without any suspition or feare of danger; that so it might cause them with care ad conscience perptually to divorce themelves from Stage-playes; which as See Act 1. 2. & Chous. they had their originall begin∣ning, growth, and progresse from the Devill; so they Iob 1.11, 1, 13. Isay 5.11, 12, 13. Iam 5.1, 5. Rev. 18.7. Chrysost. Hom. 6. & 7. in Matth. al∣wayes have their end in Hell, damnation, and eternall tor∣ments with the Devill, unlesse Gods infinite mercy, and mens true repentance interpose. A suficient motive to withdraw all men, all Christians from them: and with that holy Father Saint Augustine in his most pious Con∣fessions (where he Confessionum. lib. 3. c. 1.2. & 14. l. 4. c. 1.2. l. 6. c. 7.8. oft bewailes with teares his running un∣to Stage-playes before his true conversion) for ever to re∣nounce them. CHORVS. YOu have seene now Christian Readers, the severall bitter fruits, and pernicious effects of Stage-playes,
most copiously anatomized in the precedent Act: and certainely Matth 7.16.17, 18, 19, 20.if ever any tree were discovered to be evill by its evill fruits, then Stage-playes, (whose variety of evill products surmounts all others) must be as bad, if not farre worse, then any. The fruits of Stage-playes (as is evident by the premises) are bad in respect of God, whom they sundry wayes dishonour: bad, in re∣gard of Church and State, whom they exceedingly pre∣judice and corrupt; See Act 6. thorowout. bad in regard of the Composers. Actors, Spectators, and upholders of them, whose sinnes they multiply, whose manners they corrupt, whose time they wast, whose mindes they effeminate and de∣prave, whose hearts they harden, whose soules they contaminate, whose repentance they anticipate or de∣ferre, whose lusts they foster, whose damnation they hasten, whose everlasting torments they accumulate, and without repentance really procure. As therefore we tender the honour, love, and worship of our graci∣ous God; the happinesse, the welfare of our Church and State, the purity, tranqnility, salvation of our owne poore soules, of the soules of our brethren, our posterity which succeede us: Let us henceforth passe in irrepea∣lable sentence of condemnation against all popular Stage-playes, and bid an everlasting farewell to them; Citius ad precem judex flectitur, si à pravitate sua petitor corri∣gatur. Immi∣nente ergo tntae animad∣versionis gladio nos importunis flectibus insitamus. Qui simul omnes peccavimus, simul omnes mala quae fecimus, deploremus; ut districtus Iudex dum culpas nostras nos punire considerat, ipse à sententiae propositae damnationis parcat. Greg. Magnus. Epist ex Registro. lib. 11. cap. 3. Indict. 6. fol. 252. C.D. that so wee may avoyd these severall cursed fruits, and dangerous conequences which they alwayes constant∣ly produce, together with all these imminent plagues and judgements which now without your speedy re∣pentance they are likely to pull downe on us, both to our temporall and eternall ruine.
ACTVS 7. SCENA PRIMA. HAving thus at large related the various  grounds and reasons of the unlawfulnesse of Stage-playes in such a perspicuous manner,The Canoni∣call and Apo∣cryphall Scrip∣ture condemns Stage-playes. as I hope will satisfie the judgement, the con∣science of every impartiall Reader; I come now to a particular summary enumeration of those Authorities, that concurre together with me in condemning Playes and Enterludes, which I shall marshall into seven di∣stinct Squadrons. The first Squadron consists of such texts of holy Scripture, as are produced by the Fathers and latter Writers against Stage-playes: some of them oppug∣ning them in one kinde, some in another. If we survey the originall Authours, Patriots, Frequenters, Actors; together with the primary use of these theatricall En∣terludes; See Act. 1, 2 and 3. Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. which were at first invented, acted, fostered, frequented by Divel-Idols, Pagans, Idolaters, lascivious dissolute gracelesse persons; and devoted wholly to Ido∣latry, Idols, Divels, and the lusts of carnall wicked worldly men: wee shall finde these severall Scriptures that oppugne them, condemne them:See Act. 1, 2, 3. Where these Scriptures are quoted and applied at large. viz. Levit: 18.30. Deutr: 7.2.3, 4, 16, 25, 26. c: 12.3, 29, 30. c: 20.16, 17, 18. Iosh: 7.12. c: 11.12. Iudges 2.2. Numb: 33.52. Psal: 16.4. Ier: 10 1, 2, 3. Acts 15.20.29. Rom: 12.2. c: 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor: 8.1. to 11. c: 10.7, 20, 21. 2 Cor: 6.14, 15, 16. Ephes: 2.2, 3. c: 4.17. to 25. c: 5.3, 4, 11. Col: 2, 8, 20, 21, 22. Titus 2.13, 14. c: 3.3. 1 Pet: 4.2, 3. & 1.14, 15, 18. Iam: 1.21, 26, 27. c: 4.7, 8 9, 10. c: 5.1, 5. 2 Pet: 2.7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 19, 20, 22. 1 Ioh: 2.15, 16. c: 3.8. c: 5.21. Iude 4.7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 18, 23. Rev: 2.20. c: 21.8, 27, c: 22.11.15. All which, though they condemne not Stage-plaes in precise tearmes, Plane nus∣quam inveni∣mus ita aperte prohibitum in sacris Scriptu∣ris; non in Cir∣cum ibis, non in Theatrum quemadmo∣dum non oc∣cides, non mae∣chaberis, atta∣men occulte prohibentur: in Ps: 1. v. 1, &c nam specialiter quaedam pro∣lata generaliter sapiunt. Tertul: De Spectaculi lib: cap: 3, 4: Vide ibidem. (which no Canonicall Scripture
doth:) yet they positively prohibit and censure them under the names, of Idolatry: things consecrated unto Idols: the Cup and Table of Divels: the monuments, reliques, ceremonies, customes, rites, delights, of Idols and Idolaters: the way and fashion of the Heathen: the will of the Gentiles: the things, the course, and custome of the world: carnall worldly lusts and pleasures: the lusts of our former ignorance, and our vaine conversation received by tradition from our Fathers: revellings, banquettings, and abominable idolatries: the rudiments, traditions, or∣dinances, sports and customes of the world, of worldly sen∣suall men: the workes, the will, the lusts of the Divell, &c. See Tertul. de Spectac c 3. to 25. Cyprian de Spectaculis ib. Chrysost. H 6, 7, 38, & 69, in Matth. With the mo∣derne Writers, Act. 1, 2, 3. & Act. 6. Scene 5. under which these Stage-playes are as really, as absolutely comprised as any part is under the whole, or any Species under its proper Genus. Hence Saint Cyprian peremptorily concludes, Scriptura, inquam, om∣nia ista specta∣culorum gene∣ra damnavit, quando idolo∣latriam sustulit ludorum om∣nium matrem unde haec va∣nitatis et levi∣tatis monstra venerunt. Cy∣prian. De Spe∣ctacuis lib: Edit, Pamelij Coloni Agrip. 1617, p. 243, 244. Vide Ibid. That the Scrip∣ture hath everlastingly condemned all sorts of Spectacles and Stage-playes, even then when it tooke away Idolatry the Mother of all playes, from whence all these monsters of vanity, of lewdnesse have proceeded. Which assertion of his is seconded by De Specta∣culis lib. c. 3. to 1.2. De Corona militis lib. & de Idololatria lib. Tertullian, De Vero Cultu l. 6, c 20. Lactantius, Catechesis Mytagogica 1. Cyrill of Ierusalem, Hom. 6, 7, 38, & 69 in Matth. Hom. 15, 21, & 62, ad Pop: Antiochiae; & Hom. 8 de Poenitentia. Chrysostome, De Civit. Dei, l. 2, c. 3 to 5, 28, 29. De Symbolo ad Cate∣chumenos, l. 2, c. 1, 2. & l. 4, c. 1. Augustine, De Gubernatione Dei lib. 6. Salvian, with See Act. 1, 2, 3, & Chorus. others of ancient and moderne times, who doome all Stage-playes from these very Scriptures. If wee consider the nature, the materialls, the circumstances, the concomitants, the effects, the fruites and ends of Stage-playes; together with the man∣ner, the circumstances of their Action; the quality of the persons that act, or else frequent them: all which I have at large displayed in the See Act. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, throughout. foregoing Acts: (where See Act. 3, 5, and 6. their obscenity, vanity, effeminacy, lasciviousnesse, prodigality and lewd pernicious consequences are laid open to the full:) wee shall soone discover, that not onely
the seventh comandement, (as Bp. Babing∣ton, Perkins, Dod, Elton, Downham, Brinsly, Lake, Williams, Bp. Andrewes, and others, quoted Act, 6, Scene 3 4 & 5. most moderne Expo∣sitors of it witnesse;) but even, Exod. 32.6.19. c. 23.13. Deutr. 22.5. Iosh. 23.7. Iob 21.11, 12, 13. Numb. 15.39. Psal. 16.4. Psal. 101.3. to the end. Psal. 1.1. Psal. 24.3, 4. Isay 3.16, 17. cap. 5.12. cap. 33.15, 16. cap. 55.2, 7. cap. 58.3. Hosea 2.17. Ecclesiastes 2.2. cap. 7.4, 5, 6. c. 11.9. Prov. 12.11. c. 14.9 c. 21.17. Amos 6.1. to 11. Zech. 13.2. Matth. 12.36, 37. Rom. 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 5.7. to 12. c. 6.8, 9. Gal. 5.16. to 26. Ephes. 2.2, 3, 4. c. 4.29, 31. c. 5.1. to 18. Luke 1.74, 75. 2 Cor. 12.21. Phil. 3.17, 18, 19, 20. Col. 3.1. to 11. c. 4.5, 6. 1 Thes. 5.15. to 24. 2 Thes. 3.6, 11, 14. 1 Tim. 4.7. c. 5.6. 2 Tim. 3.4. Hebr. 11.25. 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 18. c. 2.11, 12. Gal. 6.8.14. 1 Ioh. 2.5, 15, 16, 17: with infinite other Scriptures, condemne all Stage-playes in regard of their subject matter, circumstances, fruites and manner of Action, &c. as I have more particularly demonstrated in the precedent Scenes. Hence Tertullian positively informes us, Similiter impudicitiam omnem amo∣liri iubemur: hoc etiam mo∣do a Theatro seperamur, quod est pri∣vatum consi∣storium impu∣dicitiae, &c. Habes igitur et Theatri in∣terdictionem de interdicti∣one impudici∣tiae. De Spectac. lib. cap. 17. That the Scripture hath interdicted all Playes and Enterludes under the prohibitions of lewdnesse and lasciviousnesse: and that De Specta∣culis lib. cap. 3 4, 14.17, & 23. those texts of Scripture which condemne all worldly concupiscence, all idle words, all scurrility, all foolish filthy talking and jecting: all stan∣ding in the way of sinners, and sitting in the seate of the scornefull: See here, Act. 5, Scene 1, p. 160. together with hypocrisie and dissimulation; the making of any Idols image or likenesse, and See Act. 5, Scene 6, p. 187. the putting on of womens apparell by men: doe expresly in∣hibit and condemne both Playes themselves, resort to Play-houses, and the very acting and beholding of all theatri∣call Enterludes. If we peruse In their E∣narrations and Commentaries on Psal. 118. Octona 5, v. 37, & Cyrillus Hierusol. Ca∣techesis Mystagogica 1. See Act 3, Scene 7, p. 128, 129. St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, Chrysostome, Cyril of Ierusalem, St Augustine, and o∣thers, wee shall finde them encountring Stage-playes with that of Psalme 119. v. 7. Turne away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in thy word. If we reflect on See Act 6, Scene 3, 4, 5 where their words are quoted: & Act 7, Scene 4, . Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius,
Nazianzen, Basil, Hierom, Salvian, Lectio. 77. in Proverb. Salo∣monis. Thomas Gua∣lesius, Gualther, Petrarcha, Lectio 172. in Lib. Sapien∣tiae. Holkot, Bishop Babing∣ton, Mr. Northbrooke, Dr. Reinolds, Mr. Stubs, and all the rest which I have formerly quoted in the 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Scenes of the foregoing Act; we shall see them battering downe Playes and Play-houses, with the se∣venth commandement: Ephes. 5.3, 4. Deutr. 22.5. Prov. 14.9. c. 21.17. Eccles. 2.2. c. 7 3, 4, 5. Rom. 13.13, 14, 15. 1 Thes. 5.22. 1 Ioh. 2.14, 15: and all the forequoted Scriptures: which (if all their judgements may be cre∣dited) doe either directly, or by way of consequence, conclude all Stage-playes to be sinfull, yea utterly un∣lawfull unto Christians. If we adde Apochryphall Scrip∣tures unto these Canonicall, we shall finde such expresse authoritie against Stage-playes, as must needes put all their Patriots, their Actors and Spectators to eternall silence: For in the See Rabanus Maurus & Ly∣ra on this chapter; and Iosephus An∣tiqu. Iudaeo∣rum l. 12. c. 6. first Booke of the Maccabees, c. 1. v. 11, 12, 13, 14: we reade thus: That in the dayes of Anti∣ochus Epiphanes there went out of Israel wicked men, who perswaded many, saying; Let us goe and make a covenant with the Heathen that are round about us, for See Ier. 44.17.25. since we departed from them we have had much sorrow: so this device pleased them well. Then certaine of the people were so forward therein, that they went to the King, who gave them licence to doe after the Which was prohibited ex∣presly, by Deut. 12.30, 31, 32. & condemned, by 2 Kings 17.15. to 20. 2 Chron. 32.2. & 36.14. Psal. 106.35. Ier. 10.2. Ezek. 11.12. c. 23.30, 31. c. 25.8. ordinances of the Heathen: Whereupon they built a place of exercise at Ierusalem, ac∣cording to the customes of the Heathen, and made them∣selves uncircumcised, and frsooke the holy covenant, and joyned themselves to the Heathen, and were solde to doe mischiefe. Which storie is thus further See likewise the 2. of Mac∣cabees, c. 6. v. 7, 8, . amplified, and more particularly related in the 2. of the Maccabees. cap. 4. v. 7. to 18. Where we reade; That Iesus who stiled himselfe Iason, and symoniacally purchased the High-priesthood of Antiochus Epiphanes, promised to assigne this wicked King 150 talents of silver, if he might haue licence to set him up a place of Exercise, Antiq. Iudae. orum l. 11. c. 6. Iosephus stiles it, , and the Latine translations render it Gymna∣sium,
which as In their Dctionaries, Gymnasium, & Gymnica ars. Calepine, Holioke, and before them both, Originum l. 18. c. 16. to 25. & l. 15. cap. 2. Isiodor Hilpalensis, witnesse; signifieth, a pub∣like place, where vaulting, wrestling, running, dancing, throwing of the stone, and all kinde of See Clemens Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 65, 66. Cyprian de Spectaulis lib. Chrysost. Hom. 6, 7, 38, & 69. in Matth. & Hom. 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 62. ad Pop. Antio∣chiae accor∣dingly. Playes and En∣terludes were practised:) for the training up of the Iew∣ish youth in the fashions of the Heathen, Which when the King had granted, and hee had gotten into his hand the rule, he forthwith brought his owne Nation to the Gree∣kish fashion: and putting downe the governments that were according to the Law, hee brought up new customes against the Law: For hee built gladly a place of Exer∣cise (in See e, and f, before. nature of a Theatre, where Playes and sports were acted) under the Tower it selfe; and brought the young men under his subjection. Now such was the height of Greeke fashions and increase of heathenish manners through the exceeding profanesse of Iesus, that ungodly wretch; that the Priests had no more courage to serve any more at the Altar, but despising the Temple, and neglecting the sacrifices, hastned to be partakers of the unlawfull allowance in the place of Exercise, after the game of Discus called them forth: See Isiodor. Hilpalensis O∣riginum, l. 18. cap. 16. to 25. Caelius Rhodi∣ginus Antiq. Lectionum l. 13. c. 17. Alex∣ander ab Alex∣andro lib. 3. c. 21. Adrianus Turnebus Ad∣versariorum l. 7. c. 9. (which one kinde of Exercise is put for all the Graecian Playes and Pastimes) not setting up the honours of their Fathers, but liking the glory of the Graecians (who See Plutarch De Gloria Atheniensium. Cyprian de Spectaculis. Tatianus Oratio adversus Grae∣cos. August. De Civit. Dei lib. 2. cap. 10, 11, 13, 14. & lib. 4. cap. 28. were much devoted unto Stage-playes) best of all. By reason whereof sore cala∣mitie came upon them; for they had them to be their ene∣mies and avengers, whose customes they followed so ear∣nestly, and unto whom they desired to be like in all things: for it is not a light thing to doe wickedly against the Law of God: Which Apochryphall passage, Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. l. 1. p. 22. to 34. Andradius de Libris Canonicis lib. 3. the Papists allowing to be Canonicall Scripture, and Dr. Reinolds, Whitaker, Danaeus, Willet and others, De Libris Apochryphis et Canone Script. Controversiae. Bp. Mortons Protestants Appeale lib. 3. cap. 2. Dr. Field Of the Church, Booke 4. cap. 22, 23, 24. Protestants
approving to be an undoubted storie, though not canonicall Text, infallibly assures us;See Act. 1. Scene 2. p. 17. Horace de Arte Poetica. Dio∣nysius Halli∣carn. Antiqu. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. & 2 Mac. 67, 8, 9. First, that these Playes and Enterludes had their originall from the Idolatrous disso∣lute Pagan Greekes; and that they were the exercises, ordinances and customes of the Heathen. Secondly, that they were never in use among the Iewes till this wicked Iasons time, See Iosephus Antiqu. Iudae∣orum lib. 12. cap. 6. who is the first wee reade of that erected a Theatre or place of exercise for these and such like pastimes in Ierusalem, about 174 yeares before our Saviours Nativitie; where Iosephus An∣tiqu. Iudaeo∣rum l. 15. c. 11. See cap. 13. & lib. 16. cap. 9. Herod likewise set up a Theatre and Amphitheatre for stage-playes, sword-playes, cirque-playes, and such other Roman sports, about some 25 yeares before our Saviours birth; till which times the Iewes were utterly unacquainted with these heathenish spectacles. Thirdly, that those who brought in these Playes among the Iewes, were 1 Mac. 1.11, 15. desperate wicked men, who made themselves uncircumcised, forsooke the holy covenant, and joyned themselves to the Heathen, being solde to doe mischiefe. Fourthly, that the 2 Mac. 4.8.10. to 16. bringing in of these Playes withdrew the Iewes from God, and from his Law, to open, yea, professed Paganisme and Idolatry: Fifthly, that these Playes are 1 Mac. 1.15. & 2 Mac. 4.11, 14, 17. directly against the ho∣ly covenant, and good Law of God, and that those who practise or approve them doe wickedly against Gods Law. Lastly, that 2 Mac. 4.15, 16, 17. & 1 Mac. 1, 2, 20, to 64. the introducing of Stage-playes was the cause of Gods bringing in of sore calamity upon the Iewes, and of those sundry judgements and afflictions which they suffered. If we adde to this the apocryphall Constit. Apo∣stol. l. 2. c. 65, 66 & l. 8. c. 38. Constitu∣tions of the Apostles, recorded by Clemens Romanus; we shall finde them expresly condemning and prohibiting Stage-playes, with all those Graecian Enterludes which Iason introduced; commanding all Christians to withdraw themselves from them yea wholly to renounce them as the very inventions and pompes of the Divel: nay we shall see Clemens Ro∣manus Con∣stitutionum Apostolica∣rum lib. 8. cap. 38. apud Suri∣um Concil. Tom. . p. 120. the Title of which 38 chapter is this; Canones Varij Pauli Apostoli. See Scene 3. towards the end. St. Paul himselfe, expresly excommunicating and
casting out of the Church, all Stage-players, and Play-haunters, whether male or female, till they shall utterly renounce their profession, and take their everlasting fare∣well of Stage-playes. It is evident then by all these Ca∣nonicall and Apochryphal Scriptures, & by the Apostles constitutions; that Stage-playes are directly contrary to, and condemned by the very sacred aw and word of God; which administers unto us this 46. Play-condemning argument, against which there can be no averment, from which there can be no evasion. That which is fully and really condemned by sundry sa∣cred texts both of canonicall and apochryphall Scripture, Deut. 27.26 2 Kings 17.15. Deutr. 12.30, 31, 32. Rom 14 23. must certainly be sinfull, and al∣together unlawfull unto Christians, who Exod. 15.26. Gen. 39.9. Levit. 18.5. Deutr. .6.4. c. 5.1. c. 6.2. c. 7.12. Dan. 3.12. to 19. Iosh. 24.15. must never allow, or practise that which the very word of God condemnes. Bvt Stage-playes are fully and really condemned by sundry sacred texts both of canonicall and apo∣chryphall Scripture; as is undeniably evident by the premises. Therefore they must certainly be sinfull, and altoge∣ther unlawfull unto Christians: Who if for no other reason, yet for this alone, should now at last De quibus a∣pertissime di∣vina Scriptura sanxit, non dif∣ferenda senten∣tia est, sed po∣tius exequen∣da. Concil. A∣quisgraense sub udo vico Pi Can. 61. without more delayes, renounce, suppresse all Stage-playes, which the sacred Scripture (the very Rom. 10.8.17. Luke 24.25. ground and object of our faith, the Psal. 119.9. Gal. 6.16. very rule, the square both of our lives and thoughts) hath thus con∣demned. SCENA SECVNDA. THe second Squadron of Play-oppugning Authori∣ties, is the venerable hoary resolution of the whole
primitive Church both under (if not before) the Law and Gospell; which hath passed such an irrepealable sentence of condemnation against all Stage-playes,The whole primitiue Church both before and un∣der the Law and Gospell condemned Stage-playes. Players, and Play-haunters, as no true member of the holy Catholicke Church shall be ever able to gainsay. That the whole Church of God under the Law (consist∣ing Deut: 14.2. c. 16.18. Psal: 147.19, 20. Rom. 3 1.2. onely of Iewes and Iewish Proselites) abominated and rejected Stage-playes, it is most apparant by these ensuing reasons. First, because we finde no mention at all of any such Playes or Enterludes in any canonicall Scripture, or ancient Iewish Authours, nor any inti∣mation that the Iewes approved them. Secondly, be∣cause Stage-playes (as Antiq. Iu∣daeorum l. 12, c. 6, l. 15, c. 11, 13, & l. 16, c. 9. Iosephus, and the 1 Mac. 1. v. 12, 13, 14. 2 Mac. 4. v. 7. to 18. Bookes of Maccabees informe us; were most directly oppo∣site both to the Iewish lawes, their government, manners, rites and customes: For first the Iewes (and so all Chri∣stians) were expresly enjoyned by Gods Law, Exod. 20.. Levit. 26.1. Deut. 4.15. to 26. c. 5.8. c. 16.22. Psal. 7.7. 1 Ioh. 5.21. See the Homelies against the pe∣ril of Idolatry. to make no image, likenesse or representation of any Idol, nor Exod. 2.13. See Act. 3. Scene 3. p. 77, 78. yet to make mention of any Idols name.See Ter∣tullian and Cy∣prian de Spe∣ctaculis. Dio∣dorus Siculus Bibl. Hist. l. 16. s. 93. Iosephus Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 15. c. 11. & Bulengerus de Circo, &c. cap. 8. Now Stage-playes were alwayes fraught with the pictures, images, representations, and names of Pagan idols, which the See Exod. 23.24. c. 34. . Levit. 26.30. Deut. 7.5. 2 Kings 10.26, 27. c. 11.18. c. 18.4. c. 23.14, 24. 2 Chron. .1. c. 33.22. c. 34.3. to 8. Iewes could never brooke: and thereupon they Iosephus Antiqu. udaeorum l. 15. c 11. with∣stood Herod when he would have brought his Stage-playes into Ierusalem, because of the images, visours and pi∣ctures that attended them. Secondly, the See Act. 1. Scene 1, 2. Ier. 10.1, 2, 3. & the Scriptures quoted pag. 18, 19. Iewes were commanded to abandon all monuments, rites and reliques of Idols and Idolatry: all customes, fashions, vanities, exer∣cises and pastimes of the Heathen round about them; whose wayes and customes they were not for to learne, much lesse to practise. Now See Act. 1, 2. Stage-playes were the very monuments, rites and reliques of Idolatry, of Pa∣gan Divell-Idols: the customes, fashions, vanities, exer∣cises,
wayes and pastimes of the Heathen Greekes and Romanes, who bordered on them, and subdued them; as Antiq. Iudae∣orum l. 12. c. 6. & l. 15. c. 11. 13. Iosephus, De Agricul∣tura lib. Philo Iudaeus the 2 Mac. 4. v. 7. to 16. Bookes of Mac∣cabees, and others witnesse: therefore the Iewish Church must of necessitie condemn them, never practise them. Thirdly, because the Authour of the See 1 Mac. 1. & 2 Mac. c. 4. & 6. Bookes of Macabees informes us; that wicked Iason, and his profane confederates were the first that brought in these Playes and Grecian Exercises among the Iewes, who never pra∣ctised them before; which Playes though divers of the Priests and people embraced, apostatizing wholly from their religion and Gods worship; yet the Iewish Church, with all those Iewes who clave close to their religion did vtterly abandon and condemne them, as directly contrary to the holy covenant and Law of God. Fourthly, Iosephus, that famous Iewish Historian, as Antiqu. Iu∣daeorum l. 12. cap. 6. hee condemneth Iason for this fact of his: so hee informes us likewise, Antiqu. Iu∣daeorum l. 15. c. 1. See Act. 6. Sne 5. that when as Herod would have introduced Stage-playes, Sword-playes and such like Roman Spectacles in∣to Ierusalem, where he had built a stately Theatre and Amphithatre for the exercise of those theatricall Enter∣ludes; of purpose (as it seemed) to draw the Iewes to Pa∣ganisme, and overturne their ancient discipline; to which end he likewise erected another Theatre at Antiqu. Iu∣daeoum l. 15. c. 13. & l. 16. cap. 9. Caesarea Stratonis: the whole Iewish Nation, and the gravest wi∣sest men among them, were much offended with it; and thereupon withstood these Playes of his, as See Antiqu. Iudaeorum l. 15. c. 11. being con∣trary to their lawes, their received discipline and customes; pernicious to their manners, prejudicial to their Republike, opposite to their Religion, and offensive to thei God: Which Playes when Herod resolved to bring in by force whether the Iewes would or no, there were ceraine Iewes confederated together to murther him in the Theatre it selfe, out of the detestation which they bure to Playes, of purpose to prevent those mischievous consequncies which these Stae-playes would occasion both to their religion, discipline, state, and Country manners, which they were
bound in honour, yea in conscience to maintaine, though it were with the hazard of their lives. Fifthly, Philo, a very learned Iew, who flourished in the Apostles times, under Caius the Emperour, (a man whom Antiq. Iudae. orum lib. 18. cap. 18. Iosephus, Ecclesiasticae Hist. l. 2. c. 4, 5. Eusebius, De Scripto∣ribus. Ecclesia∣sticis lib. Philo. Hierom, Contra Fau∣stum Manichae∣um l. 12. c. 2. Augustine, and Trithemius, Possevine, & others. others highlie magnifie:) as he expresly De Agricul∣tura lib. Opera. Basileae 1558. Tom. 1. p. 271, 272. & de Iu∣dice lib. Tom. 2 p. 976. See Act. 6. Scene 1. & 3 condemnes Stage-playes, as voluptuous, petulant, nugatory, vaine and hurt∣full Pastimes, in which many thousands of wretched peo∣ple did miserably spend their time nay waste their lives, neglecting in the meane while both the publike and their owne private affaires: So he records withall, Hanc ob rem ille maximus Moses equum censuit, ut om∣nes ascripti e∣ius civitati ius naturae sequen∣tes, celebrarent hunc diem mundi nata∣lem, otio, fe∣stis{que} hilarita tibus, intermis∣sis laboribus et opificiis quaestuariis, negotiis{que} victum comparantibus, ablegata etiam tantisper, seu per in∣ducias solitudine anxia; ut vacarent, non ludicris (sicut quidam) ridendis{que} spectacu∣lis mimorum, saltatorumque, quae insanus vulgus amat perdite, et per praecipuos sen∣sus, visum auditumque captivat animam suapte ingenio liberam ac dominamised soli verae philosophiae, quae constat ex his tribus, consiliis, dictis, factisque in unam spe∣ciem coaptatis, ut quaesita fruantur faelicitate. De Vitae Mosis Enarratio. lib. 3. Tom. 2 p. 932. That Moses thought it meete, that all his Citizens, following the law of nature, should celebrate the seventh day (being the birth-day of the, world) in rest, and festivall recreati∣ons; laying aside all workes, all gainfull callings and se∣cular imployments, that so they might wholly apply them∣selves, not to sports and pleasures, (as some doe) nor yet t the ridiculous sights of Stage-playes and dances, which the unruly vulgar loves excessively, captivating their very soule by the two chiefest sences, sight and hearing which of it selfe is free and soveraigne: but that they might solely addict themselves to true phylosophy, and to Gods worship and service. And withall he certifieth us, De Vita Contemplativa lib. Tom. 2. pag. 1208. to 1226. That the Iewes in their solemne feasts and meetings a∣bandoned all drunkennesse, voluptuousnesse, effeminacy and excesse; together with all Stage-players, Fidlers Tumblers, Iesters, (which the Graecians used in their festivals:) who did onely exhilerate mens mindes with scurrilous sports and iests: using no other mirth or mu∣sicke, but Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall songs, where∣in
they sounded out Gods praises. All which sufficiently manifests, that the whole Church of the Iewes condem∣ned Stage-playes. Sixthly, St. Chrysostome in his 56. Homily upon Genesis, discoursing of the marriage of Ia∣cob to Labans daughter, (even being before the Law was given) informes us: Vidisti cum quanta olim honestate nup∣tias egerint? Audite qui Sa∣tanicas pom∣pas admirami∣ni, et statim ab initio nuptia∣rum honestatē dedecore affi∣citis. Num tunc tibiae? num tunc cymbala? num tunc choreae diabolicae? Quare enim (dic mihi) tan∣tum statim ab initio damnum inducis in do∣mum tuam, et eos qui in sce∣nis et orche∣stris operam locant, vocas, ut cum intem∣pestivo sumptu virginis laedas continentiam, et iuvenem impudentio∣rem facias, &c. Tom. 1. Col. 367. B. Vid. Ibid. That the Saints of God in those times had no Musitians, no diabolicall dancing at their marriages; that they sent for no Players from the Play-house to their houses, to corrupt the chastity of the married Virgin with their unseasonable expence, and to make her more impudent and incontinent ever after: a cu∣stome too frequent in his and our times, which this godly Father much condemnes. Seventhly, Origen, (who Homil. 11. in Levit. Hom. 8. in Isaiam, & Hom. 2. in Hieremiam. See Act. 6. Seene 3. Siquidem Moyses illa universa sustulerit, quae hominum generi nihil conducerent: Susceperit vero duntaxat et foverit, quae utilia sorent et omnibus profitura; ita ut nec certamina essent apud Iudaeos hos instituta qualia apud Gentiles, in quibus nudi homines decertarent, vel ex equis contenderent, prostituerentur{que} omnium libidini∣bus faeminae, ut per impudicitiam naturae illuderetur. Sed illud profecto erat apud Iu∣daeos praecipuum, ut vel a teneris unguibus excedere naturam omnem, et superare sen∣sibilem discertat, et nulla eius in parte residere Deum existimare, ut quem in supernis et extra corpora conquirebant, &c. Orien cntra Celsum . 5. Tom. 1. sol. 67. C. Vid. Ibid. much inveighes against Playes, against Players and Play-haunters, as the very broode and bondslaves of the Divell, who have no part at all in Christ or in his Church) records: That Moes tooke away all such things as con∣duced not to the benefit of mankinde; embracing and che∣rishing those things onely which might be vsefull and pro∣fitable unto all men: whence he permitted and instituted no such Playes and gymnicall Exercises as the Gentiles used, in which naked men wrestled together, or contended with one another on horsebacke, or in which women were prostituted to the lusts of all men, that so they might de∣lude nature by their lewdnesse. But this verily was princi∣pally intended among the Iewes, that from their very cra∣dles they might learne to transcend all nature, to over∣come what ever was sensible, and to beleeve, that God re∣sided not in any part of sensible nature, whom they did seeke
onely in things above, and without all bodies. Lastly, Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bathe, about the yeare of our Lord, 1160. speaking of that holy man Iob; in∣formes us: Porro beatus ille Iob plenis∣sime nomen et officium libe∣ralitatis imple∣bat, qui nihil indulgens ebri∣etati et crapu∣lae, nec sequens huius vitae va∣nitates et in∣sanias falsas, se totum paupe∣rum necessita∣tibus impen∣debt. Non alebat leo∣nes, ursos, aut simias; non confluebant ad em histriones, dulcorarii, fa∣bularum aut nugarum ina∣nium concen∣tores, sed ex pura liberali∣tatis consien∣tia, dicebat; humerus meus a iunctura sua cadat, et bra∣chium meum cum ossibus avellatur, si negavi paupe∣ribus quod volebant, si oculos viduae expectare feci, &c. O quam melioret per om∣nia commendabiliorest, maesta, honesta et sobria haec liberalitas, quae ad vitam aeter∣nam fructificat, quam illa quae subvertit animam, rationem hebetat, corpus destruit, & aedificatad gehennam. Petrus Blesensit Epist. 85. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 769. That he nourished no lyons, beares or apes; that no Stage-players, no singers of fables and vaine idle toyes resorted to him; that he gave not himselfe to the pleasures and vanities of this life, upon which many spend their estates; but that hee bestowed his revenues in the charitable relieving of the poore. All which being laid together, is an undeniable proofe; that the whole pri∣mitive Church and Saints of God both before and under the Law, did utterly abandon and condemne all Stage-playes, Players, and such other Spectacles as sinfull and pernicious; not giving the least allowance to them. And shall we Christians under the Gospell, be worse than these were under the Law, and so make our Hebr. 2.2, 3. &c. 10.28, 29. condem∣nation farre more terrible, our sinne more out of measure sinfull? God forbid. That the whole primitive Church under the Gospell hath reprobated, abandoned and condemned Stage-playes, is more than evident. First, by the expresse te∣stimonie of Epiphanius, Bishop of Constans, in Cyprus, a learned ancient Father: who in his Compendiary Summe of the faith and doctrine of the Catholike and Apostolike Church, informes us, in positive termes: Haec sancta Catholica et Apostolica Ecclesia reprobat omnes scortationes, et adulteria, et petulantiam. et idololatriam, et caedem, et omnem iniquitatem, &c. Prohibet theatra et ludos equestres, venationem, musicos item, &c. Contra Hreses l. 3. Tom. 2. neare the end. Edi. Luterie Paris. 1612. Col. 922, 923. That the Catholike and Apostolicall Church doth reprobate and forbid all Theatres, Stage-playes, Cirque-playes, and such like heathenish spectacles: An evidence so full, so preg∣nant, that we need no other. Secondly, by the suffrage
of Tertullian who in his Apologie for the Christians against the Gentiles; writes thus in the name and person of all the primitive Christians of his age: AEque Spe∣ctaculis vestris in tantum re∣nunciamus in quantum ori∣ginibus corum, quas scimus de superstitione conceptas. Ni∣hil nobis dictu, visu, auditu cum innia Circi, cum im∣pudicitia thea∣tri, cum Xy∣sti vanitate; Spectaculis non conveni∣mus. Apologia Advers. Gentes c. 38. & 42. Operum. Tom. 2. Parisiis 1566. p. 690, 704 Wee re∣nounce your Spectacles and Stage-playes, as farre forth as we reject their originalls; which we know to have had their conception from superstition. We have nothing at all to doe with the furie of the Circus: with the dishonesty or lewdnes of the Theatre, with the cruelty of the Arena: with the vanity of the Xystus or Wrestling place, wee come not at all unto your Playes. Loe here a professed publike Protestation of all the primitive Christians, against these Playes and Spectacles which we so much admire; whose detestation of Playes was so notoriously knowne to the Pagans, that Tertullian in his Booke, De Spectaculis, affirmes: Numquid er∣go superest ut ab ipsis ethni∣cis responsum flagitemus? Illi iam nobis re∣nuncient, an liceat Christia∣nis spectaculo uti? Atquin hinc vel maxi∣me intelligunt factum Chri∣stianum, de re∣pudio spectaculorum. Itaque negat manifeste qui per quod cognoscitur tollit. De Spe∣ctac. cap: 24. Tom. 2. p. 400. That the Heathen Gentiles did most of all discerne men to be Christians by this, that they abandoned and renounced Stage-playes. And shall this which was the eminentest badge of a Christian, heretofore, be no∣thing else but the ignominious brand of a Puritan, now? Certainly its a strong argument, that those whom the world now brands for Puritans, are in truth no other but the sincerest Christians; and that those who stile them so (especially for condemning or renouncing Stage-playes) are little better, (I had almost said as bad, nay worse) than Pagans: since he manifestly denies him∣selfe to be a Christian, who takes away this speciall marke by which hee is knowne to be a Christian; as the same Tertullian there inferres. Thirdly, this truth is evident by Theophilus Patriarke of Antiochia about the yeare of our Lord 170: Who in the person of all the Christi∣ans of that age, writes thus unto Autolycus: Monomachias nobis spectare interdictum est, ne videlicet participes huiusmodi caedium reddamur. Nec caetera spectacula spectare audemus, ne oculi nostri inquinentur, et aures nostrae hauriant profana, quae ibi decantantur car∣mina. Neque dum Thyestis tragica facinora commemorat &c. Nec fas nobis est au∣dire adulteria Deorum hominumque, quae suavi verborum modulantur mercede, &c. Theophilus Antiochenu ad Autolicum l. 3. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. p. 170. G.H. Wee
are all prohibited to behold sword-playes, lest we should be made partakers of such murthers. Neither dare wee be∣holde those other Playes and Spectacles, lest our eyes should be defiled, and our eares should draw in those prophane ver∣ses that are there uttered: neither dare wee so much as to heare Thyestis whiles hee commemorates tragicall villa∣nies, &c. Neither is it lawfull for us to heare the adul∣teries of the Gods and men, which they modulate with a sweete straine of words, being allured unto it by rewards. Farre be it, farre be it, I say, from Christians, with whom temperance and modesty flourish, and chastity beares sway, that wee should so much as thinke, much lesse behold or act such villanies as these. What fuller, what plainer de∣claration against Stage-playes can we desire than this? Fourthly, Athenagoras, the famous Christian Philo∣sopher, in his Apologie or Embassie for the Christians, to M. Aurelius Antoninus, and Aurelius Commodus, two Roman Emperours, about the yeare of our Lord 180; writes thus in the behalfe of the Christians of that age: Alieno ab his Spectaculis a∣nimo sumus. Atenagras, pro Chstianis Legatio. Bibl. Parum. Tom. 2. p. 170. G. H.We utterly disaffect and condemne your gladiatory Spe∣ctacles, Playes and Enterludes. Fifthly, Minutius Fe∣lix, that famous Christian Lawyer, who flourished a∣bout 200 yeares after Christ, in his incomparable Dia∣logue, stiled Ostavius, in the defence of the Christians; brings in Vos vero sus∣pēsi interim ac solliciti hone∣stis voluptati∣bus abstinetis, non Spectacula isitis, non pompis intere∣stis. Minucius Felix Octavius Oxoniae 1627. p. 34. Caelicius a Pagan, taxing the Christians, for that they resorted not to Stage-playes, neither were they present at publike shewes: to which Octavius, in the be∣halfe of all the Christians gives this reply: Nos igitur qui moribus et pudor cen∣semur, merito malis volup a∣tibus vestris et pompis vestris et spectaculis abstinemus, quorum et de sacris originem novimu, et noxia bland∣menta damna∣mus. Iiem. . 123. Vid. Ibid. We there∣fore who are valued by our manners and chastity, deserved∣ly withdraw our selves from your evill pleasures, Playes and spectacles, whose originall we know to have proceeded from idolatry, and which we condemne as pernicious allure∣ments unto sinne. Sixthly, St. Cyprian, that godly Mar∣tyr, Bishop of Carthage, about the yeare of our Lord 250. informes Episolarum lib. 1. Epist. 10: Edit. Erasmi Antwerpiae 1541. Tom. 1. pag. 56, 57. See Act. 5. Scene 3. pag. 168, 169. Wher his words are quoted at large. Gucratius, in an Epistle purposely written to him to this end; that it would not stand with
the Majesty of God, nor the discipline of the Gospell, that the chastity and honour of the Church shold be contami∣nated with so filthy a contagion, as to permit a Stage-play∣er, either to act his Playes, or to traine up others for the Stage, though he had given over acting himselfe. A preg∣nant evidence, in what tearmes of opposition the pri∣mitive Church and Christians stood wih Stage-play∣ers, and their filthy Enterludes, which they could up∣on no tearmes brooke. Seventhly, Hoc etiam placuit, ut filii Episcoporum vel Cierico∣rum, spectacu∣la secularia non exhibeant, sed nec spe∣ctent, quan∣doquidm ab spectaculo et omnes Laici prohibeantur. Semer enim Chstianis omnibus hoc interdctum est, ut ubi blas∣phemi sunt non accedant. Concl. Carthag. 3. Can. 11 pud Suri Concil. Tom. 1. p. 504. Cintur. Magd. Tom. 4. cap. 6. Col. 458. the 3. Councell of Carthage, about the yeare of our Lord 394. Can. 11. which prohibits the sonnes of Bishops and Clergie men from exhibiting and beholding Stage-playes; informes us; that all Christians had beene alwayes inhibited from re∣sorting to such places where Players and blasphemers came. If all Christians then have alwayes beene pro∣hibited from resoring unto Stage-playes, as this anci∣ent Councell affirmes; it is ceraine, the primitive Church and Christians did evermore condemne them: and can we yet approve, applaud, frequent them now? Eighthly, St. Chrysostome, about 400 yeares after Christ, in his 15. Homely to the people of Antioch; and in his 38. Homely upon Matthew, writes: Sed nunc ta∣cntibus nobis, et nihil de hoc dicentibus, sponte Orche∣stram obstrux∣erunt, et Circu inaccessibils factus est. Et ante hac no∣strorum multi ad ilos cur∣rebant: nunc autem illinc omnes ad Ecclesiam confugerunt, et nostrum laudant Deum. Homil. 15 a P. Atioch. Tom. 5. Col. 118. C. That all the Christians of Antioch in the time of their feare and danger, had of their owne accord shut up the Play-house doores, and stopped up all passages to the Circus run∣ning hastily with zeale and earnestnesse to the Church to praise the Lord, in stead of resorting to the Thea∣ters; Diruemus igtur omnium loca ludorum  inquis, Vtinam iam diruta essent, quamvis quantum ad nos at∣tinet, iampridem desolata iacent. Chrysostom. Homil. 38. in Matt. Tom. 2. Col. 299. C. which as to us, and all good Christians, (in whose person hee speakes) lie desolate and ruina∣ted long agoe. Ninthly, Saint Augustine about the yeare of our Lord 410. records: That when the
Deinde quod de faelicitatis rerum huma∣narum dmi∣nutione per Christiana tempora con∣queruntur, si libro Philoso∣phorum le∣gant, ea repre∣hendentium quae nunc eis etiam recusan∣tibus et mur∣murantibus subtrahuntur, tum vero mag∣nam laudem reperient tem∣porum Christi∣anorum. Quid enim eis minu∣itur faelicitatis, nisi quod pes∣sime luxuriose∣{que} abuteban∣turin magnam Creatoris in∣iuriam? Nisi forte hinc sint tempora, mala, quia per omnes paen Civitates cadunt theatra, cavcae rptu∣dinum et pub∣licae professiones flagitiosoū &c De Consenl Evangelistris l. 1 c. 3 To  pars. 1. p 530. Gospell was spread abroad in the world, Stage-playes and Play-houses, the very caves of filthinesse, and profes∣sions of wicked persons, went to ruine almost in every Cit∣ty, as inconsistent with it; whence the Gentiles complained of the times of Christianity, as evill and unhappy seasons. An apparant demonstration, that the truth and power of Religion, the true Church and servants of Christ were as opposite to Stage-playes, to Theatres in the primitive times, as the 1. Sam. 5.2, 34. Arke to Dagon, 2 Cor. 6.15 Christ to Blial: and shall we now yoake them both together? Lastly, St. Bernard, about the yeare of our Lord 1130. instructs us: Milites Christi scacos eraeas detestanur, abhorrent venationem. nec ludricra illa avium rapina (ut assolt) delectantur. Mimos et Magos, et fahulaores, scurriles{que} canūlenas, aut ludorum spectacula, tanquam vaniales et i∣sani as falas respuunt et abominantur. Capilo ondent, scientes uxta Apostolum, ig∣miniam esse viro si comam nutriet. Berard. ad Mies Templ Sermo. ap. 4. Opera Anwer 616. Co 832. LM. That all the faithfull souldiers of Iesus Christ abominate and reject all dicing, all stage-players, south-sayers, tellers of fables, all scurrilous songs and stage-playes, as vanities, and false frensies. Neither de∣light they in the ravenous sport of hauking. They cut their haire and weare it short, knowing according to the Apostle, that it is a shame for a man to nourish his haire. All which concurring testimonies infallibly cleare this undoubted truth: That the whole primitive Church and all godly Christians that lived in it, have unanimously, constantly and professedly with greatest detestation, abomi∣nated, renounced and condemned Stage-playes. For the further manifestation of which; I shall desire you to con∣sider but these particulars more. First, that the Scrip∣tures both Canonicall and Apochryphall, together with the Apostles, the Whole Nation of the Iewes, the Sains and Church of God both before and under the Law, re∣jected and abandoned Stage-playes, as I have largely proved in the precedent Scene: therefore the primitive
Church and Christians under the Gospell, could not but censure and oppugne them too. Secondly, the most, the chiefest Fathers and Councels in the primitive Church have abundantly, unanimously, professedly condemned Stage-playes, in the highest straine of opposition; as the premises, and two next ensuing Scenes will manifest: the primitive Church and Christians therefore did undoub∣tedly condemne, reject them; whose judgement re∣maines upon record to all posterity in the laborious writings of these Fathers, and in the Canons of these most famous Councels. Thirdly, the primitive Church under the Gospell, as sundry Concilium Eliberinum Can. 62. Are∣latense 1. Can. 4. and 5. Arela∣tense 2. Can. 20. Constanti∣nop. 6. Ca. 62. Carthaginen∣se 4. Can. 88. Councels, Clemens Ro∣manus Con∣sti. Apostolic. l. 8. c. 38. Ter∣tul. De Pudici∣tia cap. 7. Cy∣prian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Eu∣cratio: Chry∣sost: Hom. 3. De David. et Saule Fathers, and Ioannis Saris∣beriensis De Nugis Curia∣lium l. 1. c. 8. Gratian. Di∣stinctio 33. & 48. & de Con∣secratione Di∣stinctio . A∣lexander De Hales Summa Theologiae, pars 4. Quaest. 17. Artic. 2. sect. 4. p 394. Aluarus Pelagius, de Planctu Eccles. lib. 1. Artic. 49. Astexanus d Casibus l. 4. Tit. 7. Artic. 4. Ioannis de Burgo Pupilla Oculi pars 4. c. 8. I. Phocius Monocanonis Tit. 1. c. 11, 22. Summa Angelica Histrio. Tostatusin Matth. Tom. 3. fol. 40. E. Centur. Magd. Tom. . Col. 142. Baronius & Spondanus Anno Christi 206. sect. 2. & 371. sect. 10. Dr. Reinolds, Mr. Northbrook, & Mr. Gosson in their Treatises against Stage-playes. Bulngerus de Theatro l. 1. c. 51. The 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theatres p. 116. with sundry others. Se Act. 4. Scen. 1. p. 133, 134. others testifie, excommunicated all Stage-players, all Play-haunters; thrusting them out both from the Church, the Sacraments, and all Christians society, as oysome, putred, contagious, unworthy gracelesse persons, till they had utterly abjured Stage-playes, and solemnly protested to returne unto them no more: this therefore is infallible, that they rejected Stage-playes. Fourthly, If any Pagan who was a professed Stage-player or Play-haunter, desired to turne Christian, he was first to renounce his art of Stage-playing, and to abandon all resort to Playes, before hee could be baptised or admitted into the Church, as the Concil Eliberinum Can. 62. Theodoret Contra Gaeco Infideles lib. 8. De Martyribus Tom. 2. p. 390. Pri∣masius Comment in Epist. ad Rom. c. 10. fol. 53. Antomni Chronicon. pars 2. Tit. 15. c. 10. sect. 13. fol. 132. Baronius & Spondanus Anno Christi 371. sect. 10. Codex Theodo∣i l. 15. Tit. 7. Lex. . See here Act. 6. Scene 12. & 14. marginall authorities fully evidence: This therefore is an unfallible evidence, that the prim∣tive Church and Christians abominated Stage-playes. Lastly, every Christian that was baptized in the primi∣tive
Church, did solemnly renounce See Baronius & Spondanus Annal. Eccles. Anno Christi 206. sect. 2.4. all Stage-playes, dancing, with such like sports and spectacles, as the very workes and pompes of the Divell, under which all Stage-playes, Spectacles and dancing are included, as Clemens Romanus, Tertullian, Cyrill of Hierusalem, St. Augu∣stine, Chrysostome, Salvian, Isiodor Hilpalensis, HRaba∣nus Maurus, and other Fathers expresly testifie, in their Act. 2. Cho∣rus: page 49. to 57. & Act. 6. Scene 12.forequoted places: to which I shall here annexe some other testimonies to make the point more plaine; that Stage-playes, and dancing are those very pompes of the Divell, which Christians in the primitive Church, (and Wee now as well as they) renounce in baptisme, however we most perjuriously reassume them, against our sacred vowes. St. Cyprian in his Booke De Spe∣ctaculis, is most punctuall to this purpose; where thus he writes:Impudenter in Ecclesia dae∣monia exorci∣zat, quorum voluptates in Spectaculis laudat: et cum emel illi re∣nuncians, re∣cisa sit res om∣nis in baptis∣mate; dum post Christum ad Diaboli Spe∣ctaculum va∣dit, Christo tanquam dia∣bolo renunciat. De Spectaculis lib. Edit. Pame∣lij Coloniae A∣grip. 1617. p. 244. He impudently exorciseth the Divel in the Church, whose pleasures hee commends in Stage-playes; and when as by renouncing him once in baptisme, all his pompe and furniture is lopped off; whiles that after this profession of Christ he goeth to the spectacles of the Divel, he renounceth even Christ himselfe as a Divell. Which dreadfull sentence, together with that of Originum l. 18. c. 41. See Act. 6. Scene 12 Isiodor Hispalensis formerly quoted: (That he who after baptisme agreeth either to act or see a Stage-play, denieth God, and becomes a praevaricator of the Christian faith; since hee againe desires that which hee had long since renounced in his baptisme; to wit, the Divell, his Pompes and Workes: which is likewise seconded by HRabanus Maurus de Vniverso l. 20. c. 38) me thinkes should shake the very heart and reines of every Play-haunter, and make his ve∣ry soule to weepe even teares of blood. Iustinian, that godly Christian Emperour, Episcopi et Clerici vel hi qui modo re∣cens initiati sunt et adoran∣dis mysteriis dignati, praedi∣cant, ut renuncient adversarii daemonis cultui et omnibus pompis eius, quarum non minima pars Spectacula sunt: Corpus Iuris Civilis. Lugduni 1604. Tom. 4. fol. 162. Vid. Ibidem. Codicis lib. 1. Tit. 4. De Episcopali Audientia, Lex 35. expresly informes us: That Stage-playes, Cirque-playes, Dicing, and such like
Spectacles are not the least part of that worship, of those pompes of the Divell which Christians renounce in bap∣tisme, when they are first initiated and admitted to the sa∣cred Mysteries: whence he prohibits all Christians, espe∣cially all Clergy men, either to act, or beholde such Enter∣ldes and Spectacles as these, or Polluere etiā suas manus, et oculos, et aures sic damnatis et prohbiti ludi &c Ibidem. to pollute their hands, their eyes and eares with such damned and prohibited Playes. St. Chrysostome, as in sundry places before quo∣ted; so in his 21. Homely to the people of Antioch, and his 69. Homely upon Matthew, he stiles stage-playes, cirque-playes, and dancing, the Divels Pompes and Lectures: his words in the first of these places are remarkable. Vocis illius recorderis, quam dum sacris initiare∣ris, emisisti Abrenuncio ti∣bi Satanae, & Pompae tue, & cultui-tuo: Circa Margari, tarum enim cultum insa∣nia, est Pompa Satanica. A∣rum enim c∣pisti, non ut corpus vincias, sd ut pauperes solvas, etenu∣trias. Dic igitur continue, Ab∣renuncio tibi Satana. Nihil hac tutius vo∣ce, si ipsam per opera exhibea∣mus. Haec enim vox confaedera∣tio cum Domi∣no est. Et sicut nos servos ementes, ipsos qui venduntur, primo inerrogamus, an nobis servire velint: ita facit et Christus. quando debet te in servitutem capere, prius interrogat an velis illum crudelem tyrannum dimittere, et immitem, et ad foedera suscipit: non enim coactum est ipsius imperium, &c. Homil. 21. ad Populum Anti∣och. Tom. 5. Col. 166. C. D. Re∣member (saith hee) this speech which thou hast uttered when as thou wast baptised, I renounce thee Satan, thy Pompes, and thy service: say alwayes, I renounce thee Satan. Nothing will be safer than this speech, if wee ex∣presse it by our workes. For this speech is a confederation with the Lord. And as we when we buy servants, demand of them first, whether they will serve us yea or no: even so doth Christ, when as he ought to receive thy service, he first demands of thee, whether thou wilt first forsake that mer∣cilesse and cruell tyrant, and then he receives thee into co∣venant: for his dominion is not forced. And though hee hath redeemed us wretched and ungratefull servants with such a price, the greatnesse whereof the reason and minde of man is not able to comprehend; even with his owne most precious blood: Et post haec omnia, non testes a nobis, non chiro∣grapha exigit, sed sola contentus est voce: et si dicas ex corde, Abrenuncio tibi Sa∣tana, et pompae tuae, totum recepit. Hoc igitur dicamus, Abrenuncio tibi Satana, tanquam in illa die huius vocis rationem reddituri, et ipsam custodiamus, ut salvum tunc reddamus depositum. Pompa vero Satanica sunt, theatra, circenses, et omne peccatum, et dierum observatio, et praesagia, et omina &c. Ibidem Col. 167. yet after all this he exacts no witnes∣ses nor writings from us, but is contended with a word a∣lone:
and if thou saist from thy heart; I renounce thee Satan, and thy pompe, he hath received all he doth require. Let us say this, I renounce thee Satan: and let us keepe this promise, as those who are to give an account of it at the last day, that we may then restore the pledge safe. Now the Divels pompe, are theatres, stage-playes, cirque-playes, costly and gorgeous apparell, praesages, omens, and every sinne. To preserve thee therefore from these pompes, and every other sinne: Sine verbo hoc nunquam in forum pro∣deas, sed cum es ianuae vesti∣bula transgres∣surus, hoc prius loquere verbū, Abrenuncio ti∣bi Satana, et coniungor tibi Christe. Ne un∣quam absque hac voce exeas; haec erit tibi bacculus, haec armtura, haec turris inexpug∣nabilis; sic ut non tantum homo occur∣rens, uerum nec ipse Diabolus te quicquam laedere poterit, cum his te cer∣nens armis u∣bique apparen∣tem. Ibidem Col. 167 D. 168. A. when thou art going out of thy doore, utter this speech first; I renounce thee Satan, and I am united to thee ô Christ: Never goe thou abroad without this speech: this will be a staffe, this will be armour and an impregnable tower to thee, so that neither man nor Di∣vell shall be able to hurt thee, when they shall see thee ap∣pearing every where furnished with these weapons. St. Au∣gustine, as in his Act. 2. Chorus p. 9, 50. fore-alledged place, so in his second Booke De Symbolo ad Catechumenos, cap. 1 & 2. He in∣formes us: Si te pompa illa, figura ea equorum, com∣positio orna∣tus et aurigae superstantis, equos regentis, vincere cupientis &c. Si haec te, ut dixi, pompa dele∣ctat, nec hanc tibi denegavit, qui pompis Diaboli renunciae praecepit; habemus et nos spiritualem nostiam aurigam &c. Fugite dilectissimi Spectacula, fugite caveas urpissimas Diaboli ne vos vincula teneant mligni. Ibid. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 139, 1394. That stage-playes, cirque-playes, and such like spectacles, are the pompes of the Divell, which God hath enjoyned us to renounce: Flie stage-playes there∣fore (saith he) ô my beloved, avoid these most filthy dens of the Divell, lest the snares of the wicked one holde you cap∣tive. Alchuvinus, a famous English Divine, flourishing about the yeare of our Lord 790. in his Epistle, De Cae∣remonijs Baptismi, writing of that renouncing which we make in baptisme; wherein we renounce the Divell with all his workes and all his pompes; informes us: Novissime, et omnibus pompis eus. Quae sunt, inanis iactantia, canora musica, in quibus saepe solvitur et mollitur Christianus vigor, spectacula turpia, vel super∣ua et reliqua. Ibidem, Opera Lutia. Paris. 1617. Col. 1558. That these pompes of the Divell, are vaine boasting, loud-soun∣ding Musicke, in which Christian vigour is ofttimes re∣mitted and effeminated, filthy Stage-playes, with all super∣fluous
things. De Sacra∣mentalibus praecibus et Ritibus Bap∣tismi, Tit. 5. cap. 49. sect. 7. Operum. Tom. 3. Venetiis 1571. fol. 94. vid. ibid. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Thomas Waldensis, a famous Popish English Writer, assures us: that the pompes of the Divel which we renounce in baptisme, before we are united to the fabricke of the Church, are unlawfull desires, which defile, but not adorne the soule; as the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, with the ambition or ostentation of the world, be∣longing to the lust of the eyes; as vaine Stage-playes, foolish pride, and the pleasures of this evill world. To these I might adde Quoted by Alexander Fa∣britius De∣struct. vitiorum pars 3. c. 10. Gulielmus Parisiensis, Destruct. vi∣tiorum pars 3. c. 10. See Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 256, 257. Alexander Fabritius, the History of the Waldenses, p. 2. cap. 9. p. 25. See Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 230. Waldenses, Pompis Dia∣boli renunci∣ant, quae sunt spectacula, lu∣di, choreae, or∣natus vestium vel aliarum re∣rum, et quae{que} superflua. De Antiquo Ri∣tu Missarum l. 3 c. 58. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 2. pars 3. p. 1069. E. Honorius Augusto∣dunensis, with See Act. 6. Scene 12. sundry other moderne Authours, who make Stage-playes, dancing, and such other spectacles, to be the chiefest pompes of the Divell which wee renounce in baptisme: but I shall conclude with that of Baronius and Spondanus his Epitomizer, who informe us: Quin etiam in solenni illo tempore baptismi solita ab omnibus fie renunciatione, Spectaculis quoque abrenunciare fideles moris fuisse in Ecclesia Gallicana, Salvianus testatur; et alibi sub Pompis Diaboli quibus renun∣ciari mos est, inclusa censita fuisse Spectacula, Cyrillus docet, et OMNES ALII in∣terpraetantur. Baronius & Spondanus: Annal. Ecles. Anno Christi 206. ect. 2. & 4. That among the primitive Christians in the solemne time of baptisme, when as they all made publike renuncia∣tions; it was the custome of the French Church, for Chri∣stians particularly to renounce all Stageplayes, as Salvian testifieth: and under the pompes of the Divell, which it was then (and now) the custome for Christians at their baptisme to renounce; St. Cyrill teacheth us in another place, that all Stage-playes were esteemed to be comprised, and so ALL OTHERS DOE INTERPRET. So that by the resolution both of the primitive Church & Fathers, and of ALL OTHER INTERPRETERS SINCE, if Ba∣ronius or Spondanus may be credited: Stage-playes are the very Pompes of the Divell which wee most solemnly abjure and protest against in our baptisme, upon our very first admittance into the Church of Christ. And certainly they must needes be so. For if Pompa, in its genuine in∣terpretation, signifie nought else (as In their Dictionaries, in the Word, Pompa. Calepine, Eliot,
Holioke, and other Distionaries teach us) but Spectacu∣lum, to wit, a Spectacle, Stage-play, or glorious gaudy shew; in which sence this word is oft times used, both by Paedagog. l. 2. c. 10. & l. 3. c. 11 Clemens Alexandrinus, De Spectacu∣lib. Cyprian, Advers. Gentes lib. 7. Ar∣nobius, De Corona Militis c. 3. & 11. & de Spe∣ctaculis lib. Lactantius, De Recta E∣ducatione ad Seleucum. Mnucius Felix, De Corona Militis c. 3. & 11. & de Spe∣ctaculis lib. Ter∣tullian, De Recta E∣ducatione ad Seleucum. Nazienzen, Hom. 3. de Da∣vide et Saule. Hom. 7.38, & 69. in Matth. Hom. 42. in Acta Hom. 15.21. ad Pop. An∣tioch. & Ora∣tio 6. Tom. 5. Col. 1471. B. Chrysostome, De Symbolo ad. Catechu∣menos, l. 2. c. 2. & l. 4. c. 1. Augu∣stine, De Guber∣nat. Dei. l. 6. Salvian, De Aureo A∣sino l. 10. p. 282. Apuleius, Contra Sym∣machū l. 1. & 2. Prudentius, and Isiodor. Hisp. Originum l. 18. c. 41. Minutius Felix Octavius p. 34. 123. other ancient Christian Writers; and likewise by De re Equestri lib. Zenophon, Epist. In Verrem l. 3. Ad Atticum l. 13. Ep. 28. 43. Cicero, Controvers. l. 1. Praefatio. Seneca, Hist. Rom. l. 22. 30. Livie, Antiqu. Rom. l. . & l. 7. sect. 9. Dionysius Hallicarnasseus, Fastorum l. 4. p. 64. & Amorum l. 3. Eleg. 2. Ovid, De Gloria Atheniensium lib. Plutarch, Iulius s. 37 Suetonius, Miles Gloriosus et Mostellaria. Plautus, Dip∣nosoph. l. 5. c. 4. & 11. Athenaeus, Bibl. Hist l. 16. Diodorus Siculus, Saturnalium l. 1. c. 6. Macrobius, Historiae l. 1. & 3. Herodian, with divers o∣ther Lu∣can Pharsal. lib. 1. Heathen Authours, to which many See Bulengerus De Triumphis lib. c. 24, 25, 26. De Ludis Circen∣sibus, cap. 39. Gdwins Roman Antiquities, l. 2. sect. 3. ap 2. p. 85. See Iosephus An∣tiqu Iudaeorum l. 7. c. 16. & here page 89. Concilium Eliberinum Can. 57. moderne Writers might be added: who comprehend all Playes and Spectacles, under the name of Pompes: And if Stage-playes were originally invented by, and consecrated unto Divels, on whose festivalls they were alwayes solemnly acted in greatest pompe and state; as all these Authours, and the Act. 1 2. & Chorus Ibidem. premises largely testifie: then questionlesse the very Pompes of the Divell which we renounce in baptisme, can be no other but Stage-playes, with such other Spectacles, Shewes and Pastimes, which the ido∣latrous Pagans used in the solemnities and worship of their Divell Gods: and so the primitive Church and Christians alwayes tooke them. If then the primitive Church, and Saints of God, (who to shew their greater detestation to Stage-playes, Apostolorum Canones, Can. 17. Surius Concil. Tom. 1. p. 3. Gratian Distinctio. 34. See here Scene 3. towards the end. disabled all those who did but marrie women-Actors or Play-haunters, from
taking holy Orders, or any Ecclesiasticall preferments whatsoever) thus solemnly abominated and renounced Stage-playes in their Baptisme, as the Saltantium virorum choris Diabolus adest in medio; adest enim a mere∣triciis cantile∣nis, a verbis obscaenis, a dia∣bolica pompa vocatus. At tu omni huius∣modi pompae nuntium remi∣sisti, te{que} Chri∣sti cultui man∣cipasti die illo quo sacris my∣steriis dignus habitus es. Re∣cordare itaque verborum illo∣rum pacti con∣venti, et ne il∣lud violes, cave. Chrysost. Hom. in S. Iulianum, Tom 1. Edit. Front. Ducai, Parisii 1621. p. 613. very Pompes and pastimes of the Divell; it is most undeniably cer∣taine, that they reprobated and condemned Stage-playes in the very highest degree. And to put this out of all further question; we have the Centuriae Magd. Cent. 3. cap. 6. De Dis∣ciplina et mo∣ribus, Col. 141, 142. Cent. 4. cap. 6. Col. 458. & cap. 9. Col. 837. Cent. 5. c. 6. Col. 721. & Cent. 6. c. 6. Col. 359. Century-Writers, in the behalfe of Protestants, and Annal. Ecclesiast. Anno Christi 206. sect. 2.4. Anno 399. sect. 5. Anno 469. sect. 2. & Anno 371. sect. 10. Cardinall Baronius and Spondanus, in the behoofe of the Papists, upon the serious perusal of all the severall records, and Writers of the primitive Church, proclaiming this as an indubita∣ble truth; That all the Christians, Fathers and Councels in the primitive Church, have wholly abandoned, yea ut∣terly condemned Stage-playes, as diabolicall, heathenish. unchristian Spectacles; excommunicating all Players, all Play-haunters both from the Church, the Sacraments, and the society of Christians, till they had abjured, renounced these lewd accursed Enterludes, which they did most de∣test. And shall we then who A Christo Christiani sunt cognominati. Non se autem glorietur Christianum, quī nomen habet, et facta non habet. Vbi autem nomen sequutum fuerit opus, certisime ille est Christianus, quia se factis ostendit Christianum, ambulans sicut et ipse ambula∣vit, a quo et nomen traxit. Isiodor Hispal. Originum l. 7. c. 14. professe our selves the undoubted progenie, followers, successours of the primi∣tive Churches, Saints and Christians, so farre degene∣rate from their piety, purity, zeale and Christian disci∣pline; as not onely to tollerate, but even patronize, admire, honour Players, Play-Poets, Theaters, Stage-playes which they so severely censured, so diligently suppressed? and which is worse, to hate, abominate, re∣vile, condemne, and ignominiously traduce all such for See the 3. Epistle to my Perpetuity, The Epistle to the Reader before Healths Sicknesse; and Healths Sicknesse, Edit. 2. p. 79, 80. Puritans, Praecisians, Humorists, Cynnicks, Novellers, Factionists, & I know not what besides; Nihil nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum est. Et ar∣gumentum recti est malis displicere. Seneca, De Via beata, cap. 24. (an apparant
argument of their grace and goodnesse when such vi∣tious persons thus revile them) who either write or speake against them, or out of piety and conscience re∣sort not daily to them? Alas, where is our Christiani∣ty, our piety, our godly discipline; where is our claime, our title, our conformity to the primitive Church: where our affinity, our cognation to the primitive Christians, whose children, successours and disciples we professe our selves, whiles that we thus tollerate, harbour, justifie these Diabolicall Pompes and Specta∣cles, which they so seriously renounced as extremely opposite to, as inconsisted with the very practise and profession of a Christian, and thus Nonnulli pes∣sime loquuntur de optime me∣ritis. Seneca De Befiijs lib. 2. cap. 24. causlesly revile all those who speake or write against them? When we shal all appeare before the dreadful tribunal of our most holy Saviour, as 2 Cor. 5.10. Iam. 5.8, 9. Iude 14, 15. we shall doe re long: and when we shall there behold those blessed Patriarkes, Apostles, Fathers, Bishops, Saints and holy Martyrs in the pri∣mtive Church, who have so zealously anathematized, renounced Stage-playes, as the very Pompes of the Di∣vell, which they and we have solemnly abjured in our baptisme; passing an eternall doome of condemnation on us for our perfidious resort unto them, against our sacred vow; alas, See Hyppo∣litus De Con∣summatione mundi Oratio. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 3. f. 17. A. D. what can we pleade to justifie, to extenuate this our fact, or to intitle our selves to the triumphant Church in heaven, whose discipline wee thus reject on earth? Can wee alledge for our selves, that we are pious Christians, when as our daily Play-house-haunting Christiani esse dicuntur, et non sunt, qui per flagi∣tia et turpitu∣dines suas no men religionis infamant, qui, ut scriptum est, ore fatentur se nosse Dum, factis autem negnt; per quos, ut legi∣mus, via veri∣tatis blasphe∣tur, et sacro∣sanctum Do∣mini Dei no∣men sacrilego∣rum hominum maledictione violatur. Et ideo hoc ipso Christiani de∣teriores sunt, qui meliores esse deberent. Non enim probant quod fatentur, et im∣pugnant professionem suam moribus suis; magis enim damnabilis est malitia, quam titulus bonitatis accusat; et reaus est impii pium nomen. Salvian De Gubern. Dei, lib. 3. p. 139, 140, 142. proclaimes us worse than Pagans? or can we pleade we are members of the holy Catho∣licke Church of Christ, when as our frequent presence at Playes, at Play-houses, and the diametrall contrariety of our lives, our actions to all the primitive Christians,
proves us the very limbes, the bondslaves of the Divell? Certainly we must needes stand silenced, amazed, con∣founded, condemned then, for justifying, for frequen∣ting Stage-playes now, against the unanimous execra∣tion, vote and sentence of the whole primitive Church and Saints of God, both under the Law and Gospell: who as they Cor. 6.2, 3. Iude 14.15. shall judge and doome us at the last, so they must needes abominate and condemne us now. O there∣fore let no Christian now be so impiously shamelesse, so peevishly absurd, as to apologize for Playes or Play∣ers, (by pen, by tongue or practise,) as tollerable, as use∣full among Christians; or ignorantly, much lesse Malitia ita infecit corda multorum, ut cum superatos damnatosque se esse sentiant, tamen venen mentium non amittant, et quod solum possunt nos o∣derint, per quos putant se libertatem haereseos do∣cendi perdi∣disse. Hierom. Epist. 79. ma∣liciously (out of an implacable detestation to all grace, all goodnesse) to condemne all such for At nos virtu∣tes ipsas inver∣timus atque sincerum cupi∣mus as incru∣stare: Probus quis nobiscum vivit? multum est dimissus homo, &c. Ho∣race Serm. l. 1. Satyr. . p. 169, 170. Puritans, Novellers, or factious Male-contents; the common voice and clamour of our dissolute gracelesse times, wherein many turne professed Atheists, or incarnate Divels, to avoid the jealousie of Expedit vo∣bis neminem videri bonum quasi alina virtus expro∣batio delicto∣rum vestrorum sit. Iviti splen∣dida cum sor∣dibus vestris conferis, nec intelligitis quanto id vestro detrimento audeatis. Nam i illi qui virtutem sequuntur, avari, libidinosi, ambitiosi{que} sunt, quid vos estis, quibu ipsum nome virtutis odio est? Seneca De Vita beaa cap. 24. being reputed Pu∣ritans: But since the whole Catholicke Church both before and under the Law and Gospell, with all the pri∣mitive Christians, Fathers, Councels, of all Nations, all places, have thus unanimously proclaimed an everla∣sting professed hostility, and passed such a finall doome and execration against Players and Stage-playes; let this eternally convince our conscience, close up our mouths, alter our resolutions, reforme our Play-haunting lives, & cause us readily to subscribe to this 47. Play-confoun∣ding Argument, against which there can be no resi∣stance, with which I shall conclude this Scene. That which the whole Church of God, both before and under the Law and Gospell, together with all the Iewes and faithfull Saints before, and primitive Christians in & since our Saviours time, have pro∣fessedly abominated, rejected, condemned in the very
highest degree, even as the very workes and Pomps of the Divell, must undovbtedly be extremely sin∣full and utterly unlawfull unto Christians: as is evident by 1 Cor. 10.32. Phil. 4.8. om. 12.16, 17. 1 Cor. 1.10. cap. 14.23, 24, 25, 32: with sun∣dry other Scriptures. But the whole primitive Ea Ecclesijs displicent, quae omnibus bonis non placent. Hierom. Epist. . cap. 2. Church of God, both before and under the Law and Gospell, together with all the Iewes and faithfull Saints before, and primitive Christians in and since our Saviours time, have professedly abominated, rejected, con∣demned Stage-playes in the very highest degree, even as the very workes and pompes of the Divel; as is evident by the premises. Therefore they must undoubtedly be extremely sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians. Let us therefore henceforth Prov. 2.20. Hebr. 6.12. walke in the way of these good men, and keepe the pathes of the righteous: becom∣ming followers of these blessed primitive Christians, as well in renouncing Stage-playes as in points of faith. SCENA TERTIA. THe third Squadron of Authorities, is made up of 54 ancient and moderne,54 Councels & Synods, toge∣the with sun∣dry Canonicall Constitutions against Play∣ers, Playhaunters and Stage-playes generall, nationall, pro¦vinciall Councels and Synodes, both of the West and Easterne Churches: of divers Ecclesiasticall and impe∣riall Constitutions, which either expresly or by way of necessary consequence prohibit Stage-playes; excom∣municating and censuring all Stage-plaers, all Play-haunters; and inhibiting all manner of Christians, (es∣pecially Clergy men) to act any theatricall Enterludes, or to be present at them, under severe penalties. To begin
with Councels and Synods; I shall here enumerate them in their Order, according to their severall antiquities, without any variation from their Latine names, which I shall still retaine for greater certainty, since I finde them variously englished: setting downe their severall Canons both in Latine & English for the Readers better satisfaction; inserting likewise here and there some other Canons not altogether impertinent to this Discourse. The first Councell against Stage-playes, Players and  Play-haunters, is, Concilium Eliberinum in Spaine, a∣bout the yeare of our Lord 305, consisting of 19. Bi∣shops: Where I finde these three subsequent Canons most pertinent to our purpose: viz Canon: 57.62.67. Apud Lau∣rentium Suri∣um. Concil. Tom. 1. Co∣loniae Agrip. 1567. p. 366, 367. Binius Concil. Tom. 1. Ncolinus Con∣cil. Tom 1. Pe∣trus Crab. Con∣cil. Tom. 1. Co∣loniae Agrip. 1551. p. 285. & Crranza Sū∣ma Concil. Pa∣risis 1624. fol. 37, 38. Centu∣riae Mag. Cet. 4. cap. 9. Col. 700. Canon: 57. Matro∣nae, vel earum mariti, ve∣stimenta sua ad ornandam seculariter pompam non dent. Et si fecerint, triennij tempore abstineant. Canon: 62. Si Augur aut Pantomimi credere volue∣runt, placuit, ut prius arti∣bus suis renuncient, et tunc demum suscipiantur, ita ut ulterius non revertantur. Quod si facere contra in∣terdictum tentaverint, pro∣jiciantur ab Ecclesia. Canon: 67. Prohiben∣dum, ne qua idelis vel ca∣techumena, aut Comicos, aut viros scenicos habeat; quaecumque haec fecerit, à communione aceatur. Can: 57. Matrons, or their husbands may not give (or lend) their garments, to a∣dorne any secular Playes or shewes: If they doe, let thē be excōmunicated for 3 yeares. Can: 62. If any Southsay∣er or Stage-player will be∣leeve, we ordaine, that they first renounce their Arts, & then after a while they may be received, so that they re∣turne unto them no more. But if they shall attempt to doe contrary to this injun∣ction, let them be cast out by the Church. Can: 67. We prohibit, that no beleeving woman or cate∣chumenist entertain or mar∣ry any Comedians or stage-players; who ever shal doe it, let her be excommunicated. A sufficient evidence, how execrably detestable all
Stage-players and Play-patrons, together with their Stage-playes were unto the primitive Church and Chri∣stians, who would neither admit them into the Church, nor permit them to continue in the Church being ad∣mitted, till they had utterly renounced Stage-playes; the very lending of clohes to act Stage-playes in, and the very marrying with, or harbouring of a Stage-play∣er incurring three yeares excommunication both from the Church, the Sacraments, and the very society of Christians. The second Councell, is Concilium Arelatense 1. held under Constantine the Great, in the Citty of Narbo in France, about the yeare of Christ 314, consisting of 600 Bishops, as Eodem{que} tē∣pore et illud sa∣cratissimum Concilium a∣pud Areleten, sexcentorum Episcoporum colligitur. A∣donis Chronicon. AEtas. 6. Bibl. Par. Tom. 9. pars 2. p. 280. G. See Baronius & Spondanus Ann Cristi 314. sect. 5. Ado Viennensis informes us: where I finde this Canon against Stage-players, intituled De his qui conveniunt in Theatris: and so by consequence a∣gainst Stage-playes too. Surius Concil. Tom. 1. p. 368. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 28.1 Crranza fol. 39. Centur. Magd. 4 Col. 70. Canon: 5. De Thea tricis, et ipsos placuit, qumdiu agunt, a com∣munione separari. Can: 5. Concerning stage-players, we have thought meet to excommunicate them, as long as they continue to act. The third, is, Concilium Arelatense 2. about the yeare of our Lord 325. at which there were present some See Surius . 1. p. 375, 376. 38 Bishops, and some 50 Elders and Deacons: where this Canon was promulgated. Surius Tom. 1 p. 375, 377. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 94. Caan∣za. fol. 44. Cent. Mgd. 4. Col. 705. Biniu Concil. Tom. . pars 1. p. 565. Canon: 20. De a∣gitatoribus sive theatri∣cis, qui fideles sunt, pla∣cuit, eos, quàmdiu agut, a communione separari. Can: 20. Concerning Actors or Stage-players, who are Christians, we decree them to be excommunicated as long as they persevere to Play. The fourth, is, Concilium Laodicenum, in Phrygia  Pacatiana, about the yeare of our See Centur. Magd. Tom. 4. Col. 933. Baro∣nius & Spondanus Anno Christi 314. sect. 12, 13. Lord 364. as some airme, others placing it sooner, others later; at which most of the Bishops in Asia were present: where I
meete with these two Canons, against Dancing and Stage-playes. Surius Tom. 1. p. 458. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 380 Binius Tom. 1. pars 1. p. 247. Carranza. fol. 5 Centur. Magd. 4. Col. 87. Gratian. De Consrati∣one Distinctio 5. Can: 53. Non opor∣tet Christianos ad nupti∣as euntes vel balare vel saltare; sed castè caeare vel prandere, sicut com∣petit Christianis. Can: 53. Christians going to weddings ought neithe wantonly to sing, nor yet to dance; but to suppe or dine soberly as becommeth Chri∣stians. Which Canon extending principally to dancing, is ratified and revived by Suriu Concil. Tom. . p. 358. Concilium Ilerdense Can. ult: which hath this title: Vt in Christianorum nuptijs non saltetur. Canon: 54. Non opor∣tet Ministros Altaris, vel quoslibet Clericos spe∣ctaculis aliquibus quae aut in nuptijs, aut in sce∣nis exhibentur, interesse: sed antequam thylemici ingrediantur, surgere e∣os, et de convivio abire. Can: 54. Ministers of the Altar, or any other Clergy men, ought not to bee present at any stage-playes that are acted either at marriages or in play-houses: but before the Players or Fdlers enter, they ought to arise, and depart from the feast. Which latter Canon though it extends onely to Clergy men in words, yet the equity of it reacheth in∣differently to all Christians, as the former Canon doth in positive tearmes. The fifth, is, Concilium Hipponense, Anno 393. where∣there  were divers Bishops: in which there were See Surius Tom. 1. p. 510. & Centuri Magd. 4. Col. 871, 872. two Canons made against Stage-playes and Actors; to wit, Canon: 13. & 35. being the very same with the 11. & 35. Canons of the 3. Councell of Carthage next ensu∣ing, to which I shall refer you: wherein all the Canons of this Councell of Hippo were abbreviated and confir∣med. The sixth is, Concilium Carthaginense in Africa, about the yeare of our Centuriae Magd. 4. Col. 866. Baronius et Spondanus Anno Christi 397. sect. 14, 15. Prosperi Chronicon An∣no 399. Lord 397, or 399: consisting of
44 Bishops, of which St. Augustine, then Bishop of Hip∣po, was one: where these two Canons were composed out of the 13. and 35. Canons of the forementioned Councel of Hippo. Suius Tom. 1. p. 504, 505. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 428, 429. Bi∣nius Tom. 1. pars 1. p. 575. Carranza. fol. 66. Centut. Magd. 4. Col. 867, 869. Gra∣tian. De Con∣secrat. Distinct. 2. Canon 11. Vt fi∣lij Episcoporum vel Cle∣ricorum, spectacula se∣cularia non exhibeant, sed nec spectent, quan∣do quidem ab spectaculo et omnes Laici prohi∣hibeantur. Semper enim Christianis omnibus hoc interdictum est, ut ubi blasphemi sunt, non ac∣cedant. See Codex Theodosiil. 15. Tit. 7. Lex. 1.Canon: 35. Vt scenicis atque histrionibus, caete∣risque huiusmodi perso∣nis vel apostaticis, con∣versis vel reversis ad Dominum gratia vel re∣conciliatio non negetur. Can: 11. That the sonnes of Bishops and Clergy men shall neither exhibit, nor yet so much as beholde any secu∣lar Enterludes, since that e∣ven all Lay-men are prohibi∣ted from stage-playes. For this hath alwayes beene strait∣ly forbidden all Christians, that they come not where blas∣phemers are. Can: 35. That grace or re∣conciliation shall not be deni∣ed to Stage-players and A∣ctors, and such like persons, or to apostates, who shall con∣vert, and returne againe to the Lord. Which Canon admits Stage-players into the Church upon their conversion and renouncing of their ungodly profession, but not before. The seventh, is, Concilium Carthaginense 4. Centur. Mg.  Col. 873. Anno Christi 41 at which 214 Bishops were present: Which as it makes all flattering, all scurrilous Clergy men, who delight in filthy jests, or sing or dance publikely at any feasts, liable to a finall degradation: (See Can: 56.60 62,); So it provides thus against Playes, and Play-haunting. Surius Tom. 1. p. 15. Petr. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 44. Carranza fol. 73. Grati∣an. De Conse∣crat. Dist. 5. & De Consecrat. Dist. 1. Centur Magd. 4. Col. 878.Canon: 86. Neo∣phyti à autioribus epu∣lis et spectaculis abstine∣ant.
Canon: 88. Qui die so∣lenni, praetermisso olen∣ni Ecclesiae conventu, ad spectacula vadit, excom∣municetur. Can: 86. Those who are new∣ly baptized or converted to the faith ought to abstaine from costlier feasts and stage-plaies.
Can: 88. Hee who upon any solemne feast-day, omitting the solemne assembly of the Church, resorts to stage-playes, let him be excommuni∣cated. Stage-playes then in this Councels judgement are no meet pastimes for any solemne Christian festivals. The eighth, is, Concilium Africanum, Anno Christi 408: to which 238 Surius Tom. 1 p. 587, 588. Bishops subscribed their names, St. Augustine being one of that great number: where I finde these severall Canons to our purpose. Surius Tom. 1. p. 574, 577, 587. Gratian. De Consecrat. Dist. 2. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 503, 506, 507.Can: 12. Vt Scenicis atque Histrionibus (id est conversis vel eversis ad Dominum) caeteris{que} hu∣jusmodi personis, recon∣ciliatio non-negetur. Canon: 27. llud etiam petendum, ut quae contra praecepta divina convi∣via multis in locis exer∣centur quae ab errore gentili attracta sunt, ve∣tari talia jubeant, et de civitatibus, et de posses∣sionibus, imposita paena, prohiberi: maximè, cùm etiam in natalibus beatis∣simorum martyrum per nonnullas civitates, et in ipsis locis sacris talia cō∣mittere non reformi∣dent. Quibus diebus e∣tiam (quod pudoris est dicere) saltationes scele∣ratissimas per vicos at∣que
plateas exercent, ut matronalis honor et in∣merabilium faeminatū pudor, devotè venienti∣um ad sacratissimum di∣em, injurijs lascivieti∣bus appetatur, ut etiàm ipsius sanctae religionis penè fugiatur accessus. Canon: 28. Necnon et illud petendum, ut spe∣ctacula theatrorum cae∣terorum{que} ludorum die Dominico, vel Therefore they are no fit Christmas pa∣stimes. caeteris Christianae religionis di∣ebus celeberrimis amo∣veantur; maximè quia sancti Paschae octavarum die,Nota. populi ad Circum magis quàm ad Ecclesiā conveniunt; et debere transferri devotionis eo∣rum dies si quandò oc∣current: nec oportere e∣tiam quenquam Christi∣anorum, cogi ad haec spe∣ctacula: maximè, quia in his exercendis QVAE CONTRA PRAECEPTA DEI SVNT, nulla perse∣cutionis necessitas à quo∣quam adhibenda est: sed (uti oportet) homo in li∣bera voluntate subsistat sibi concessa. Cooperato∣rum enim maximè peri∣culum considerandū est,
QVI CONTRA PRAE∣CEPTA DEI MAGNO TERRORE COGVN∣TVR AD HAEC SPE∣CTACVLA CONVE∣NIRE. Can: 12. That reconciliati∣ation shall not bee denied to Stage-players and common Actours, and such like persons; in case they repent and aban∣don their former professions. Can: 27. That also is to be desired, that those feasts which are used in many places con∣trary to Gods precepts, which were drawne from the errour of the Gentiles, should be pro∣hihited by command, and ex∣cluded out of citties and villa∣ges: especially, since in some citties men feare not to keepe them even on the birth-dayes of the most blessed Martyrs, and that in the very Chur∣ches. On which dayes also (which is a shame to speake) they use most wicked dances through the villages and streetes, so that the matro∣nall honour, and the chasti∣ty,
the modesty of innumerable women devoutly comming to the most holy day, is assaulted with lascivious injuries in such manner, that even th very accesse to the holy exer∣cises of religion is almost discontinued and chased a∣way. Can: 28. And this also is to be requested, that Stage-playes and such other Playes and Spe∣ctacles should be wholly aban∣doned and laid aside on the LORDS day, and other solemne Christian festivalls, especially because on the Easter holy-dayes people runne more to the Cirque or Theatre, than to the Church; laying aside all their holy-day devotion, when these Spectacles come in their way: Neither ought any Christian to be compelled to these Enter∣ludes or Stage-playes: chief∣ly, because in practising these things Nota. WHICH ARE AGAINST THE COM∣MANDEMENTS OF GOD, no necessity of persecution or violence ought to be used by any man: but every man (as hee ought) may abide in that freedome of will which is granted to him. For the dan∣ger of the co-actours ought principally to be considered,
WHO AGAINST THE PRECEPTS OF GOD ARE COMPELLED TO COME VNTO THESE STAGE-PLAYES. Stage-playes therefore by this whole Councels reso∣lution, are no fit sports for Lords-dayes and holy-dayes: yea they, and the reort unto them, re directly contrary to the commandements of God, and exceeding dangerous to those mens soules, who allure or enforce any others to them. Canon: 30. Et de his etiam petendum, ut si quis ex qualibet ludicra arte ad Christianitatis gratiam venire voluerit, ac liber ab illa Which ma∣nifests the lewdnesse of their profes∣sion. macula permanere, See Codex Theodos l. 15. Tit. 7. non eum li∣ceat à quoquam iterum ad eadem exercenda re∣duci vel cogi. Canon: 96. Item pla∣cuit, ut omnes Which shewes the infamy and basenesse of Stage-players. infamiae maculis adspersi, id est, histriones ac turpitudi∣nibus subjecti personae, ad accusationem non ad∣mittantur, nisi in propri∣is causis. Can: 30. And this also is to be desired, that if any man of any ludicrous are whatsoe∣ver will come and turne a Christian, and continue free from that pollution; that hee ought not to bee reduced or compelled by any man to pra∣ctise the same arts againe. Can: 96. Also, it is de∣creed, that all infamous per∣sons, that is to say, Stage-play∣ers & persons inthralled to fil∣thinesse or lewdnesse, shall not be admitted to accuse any per∣son, but in their proper cau∣ses. The ninth, is Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 570. Grantian. Causa . Quaest 1. &c. 6. rab. Tom. 1. p. 499. Concilium Carthaginense 7 of 38 Bi∣shops, about the yeare of our Lord 419. Canon 2. where∣by all Stage-players are declared to be infamous persons, and unable to beare any testimony. Which Canon is ver∣batim the same with the 96 Canon of the Councel of A∣fricke here recited, to which shall here referre you. The tenth, is, Concilium Agathense, in France,
Baronius & Spondanus Anno 506. sect. 1.Anno Domini 506. there being 35 Bishops present at it: where this Canon was promulgated. Surius Tom. 1. p. 713. Gra∣tian. Distinct. 34. Centur. Magd. 5. Col. 929. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 617, 618. Canon: 39. Pres∣byteri, Diacones, Sub∣diacones, etiam aliena∣rum nuptiarum evitent convivia: Ne his caeti∣bus immisceantur ubi a∣matoria cantantur et tur∣pia, aut obscaeni motus corporum choreis et sal∣tationibus efferuntur, ne auditus et obtutus sacris mysterijs deputati, tur∣pium spectaculorum at{que} verborū contagione pol∣luantur. Can: 39. Presbyters, Dea∣cons and Subdeacons, ought to avoid the marriage feasts of other persons: Neither may they be present in these assem∣blies where amorous and fil∣thy things are sung, or where obscene motions of the body are expressed in rounds or dan∣ces: lest the hearing and sight deputed unto the holy myste∣ries should be defiled with the contagion of filthy Specta∣cles (or Stage-playes,) and words. Which Councell as it prohibits Clergy men from be∣holding Playes or dancing: so it also inhibits See Can. 41.55.70. them from drunkennesse: from keeping either haukes or hounds: and from all scurrilous mirth or jesting, under paine of ex∣communication and suspension. The eleventh, is, Concilium Arelatense 3. in the yeare of our Saviour 524. subscribed by 15 Bishops; where Ludi funebres, or funerall Playes (which Livie Rom. Hist. l. 21. sect. 21. Tertullian de Spectac. lib. Bulengerus de Venatione Gir∣i lib. cap. 6. p. 401. were fre∣quent among the ancient Romanes) are thus condemned; the reason of which condemnation trencheth upon Stage-playes. Tom. . p. 727. Crab. Tom. 1 p. 632.Laici, qui excubi∣as funeris observant, cum timore et tremore, et re∣verentia hoc faciant. See Concil. Toletanum 3. Canon 22. Su∣rius Tom. 2. p. 675. to the same purpos. Nullus ibi diabolica car∣mina presumat cantare, nec joca, nec saltationes facere, quae Pagani do∣cente Diabolo adinvene∣runt.
Quis enim nesciat diabolicum esse, et non solùm a Christiana reli∣gione alienum, sed etiam humanae naturae esse con∣trarium, ibi laetari, can∣tare, inebriari, et cachin∣nis ora dissolvi, et omni pietate et affectu chari∣tatis postposito, quasi de fraterna morte exultare, ubi luctus et planctus sle∣bilibus vocibus debuerat resonare, pro amissione chari fratris, &c. Ideo ta∣lis inepta laetitia, et pe∣stifera cantica ex autho∣ritate interdicta sunt. Si quis autem cantare de∣siderat, Kyrie eleison cantet: si autem aliter, omnino taceat. Si autem tacere non vult, in crasti∣no à Presbytero taliter coërceatur, ut alij time∣ant. Lay men who observe fu∣nerall watches, let them doe it with feare and trembling, and reverence. Let no man pre∣sume to sing there any diabo∣licall songs, nor to make any Pastimes, Playes or dances, which the Pagans have inven∣ted by the Divels tutorship.
For who knoweth not that it is diabolicall, and not onely farre from Christian religion, but even contrary to humane na∣ture, to rejoyce, to sing, to be drunke, and to laugh ex∣cessively there, and laying a∣side all piety, and affection of love, as it were to be glad of his brothers death, even there where as sorrow and mourning with dolefull sounds ought to be heard for the losse of a deare brother, &c. There∣fore such foolish mirth, and pestiferous songs ought to be prohibited by authority. And if any man desire to sing, let him sing, Lord have mercy upon mee: but if hee would sing otherwise, let him holde his peace. But if hee will not be silent, let him the next day bee so chastised by the Presbyter, that others may feare. The twelfth is, Concilium Veneticum, about the yeare  of our Lord 526. consisting of 8 Bishops,Crab. Tom. 1. p. 948. Suius Tom. 2. p. 277. Centur. Magd. 5. Col. 93. wherein the forementioned 39 Canon of Concilium Agathense, (see pag. 578.) is verbatim recited, and ratified, as the 11. Canon of this Councell. The thirteenth, is, Concilium Toletanum 3. in Spaine, Anno 617. subscribed by 72 Bishops, where I finde this Canon registred, which though it principally aimes at dancing and filthy ribldry songs, yet it necessarily condemneth Stage-playes too, which consist of scurri∣lous songs and dancing, as I have See Act. 5. Scene 8, 9. largely proved in the premises.
Surius Tom. 2. p. 676. Cen∣tur. Magd. 6. Col 604.Canon: 23. Extermi∣nanda omninò est irreli∣giosa consuetudo, quam vulgus per sactorum so∣lennitates agere consue∣vit. Populi, qui debent officia divina attendere, saltationibus et turpious invigilant canicis, non solum sibi nocentes, sed et religiosorum ossicijs. Hoc etenim ut ab omni Hispania depellatur, sa∣cerdotum et judicum à concilio sancto curae cō∣mittitur.
Can: 23. That irreligious custome is altogether to be a∣bandoned, which the common people have used upon the fe∣stivals of the Saints: The people who ought to attend di∣vine offices, addict themselves wholly to dancing and filthy songs, not onely doing hurt to themselves, but to the offices of religious persons. That this custome may be driven out of all Spaine, it is committed to the care of the Ministers and Iudges by this sacred Councell. Which Surius Tom. 2 p. 676. Centur. Magd. 6. Col. 604, 605. Canon was ratified by the publike Edict of King Reccaredus, who punished the breach of it in rich men, with the lsse of the moity of their estates; and the violation of it in the paorer sort, with perpetuall exile. The fourteenth, is, Concilium Antisiodorense, in France, Anno 614. subscribed by 45 Bishops, Abbots and Presbyters: wherein there are these severall Ca∣nons applicable to our present theame: the first of which expresly condemnes the Pagan oiginall of Playes; the second the acting of them in Churches, See Polydor Virgil de In∣vent. Rerum l. 5 c. 2. & Act. 3. Scene 5. Bochellus De∣creta Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 45. which the Papists used: the third, the acting or beholding of them by Clrgie men. Surius Tom. 2. p. 715, 716. Carranza. fol. 150, 151, 152. Canon: 1. Non li∣cet Kalendis Ianuarij ve∣cola aut See Synodus Turonica 2. a∣pud Bochellum vide August. de Homil. in Festū Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 7. & 8. cervolo facere, vel Fortasse Cervula. De quo Tempore Serm. 215. & H. Spelmanni Glossarium Ceruula. See Asterii Kalenarum. & Alchuvinus De Divinis Officiis l. . Here. p. 197, 198. strenas diabolicas observare: sed in ipsa die sic omnia officia tri∣buantur,
sicut et reliquis diebus. Canon: 9. Non licet in Ecclesia choros seculari∣um vel puellarum cantica exercere, nec convivia praeparare; quia scriptum est, Domus mea domus o∣rationis vocabitur. Carranza makes it Ca∣non 38.Canon: 40. Non li∣cet Presbytero inter epu∣las cantare vel saltare. Can: 1. It is not lawfull in the Kalends of Ianuary to make any bonefires or filthy Playes; or to observe any dia∣bolical New-yeares gifts: but let all offices be so performed
on this day, as they are upon other dayes. Can. 9. It is not lawfull for Quires of secular men or girles, to sing songs, or pro∣vide banquets in the Church: for it is written, My house shall bee called an house of prayer. Can. 40. It is not lawfull for an Elder to sing or dance at feasts. The fifteenth, is, Surius Tom. 2. p. 756, 757. Capitula Graecarum Synodorum, collected by Martin Bishop of Bracara, Anno Dom: 610. in which we have these two Canons. Canon: 59. Non licet sacerdotibus vel clericis aliqua spectacula in nup∣tijs, vel in covivijs spe∣ctare, sed oporteat ante∣quam ingrediuntur ipsa spectacula surgere et re∣dire inde. Canon: 73. Non liceat iniquas observationes a∣gere Kalendarum, et ocijs vacare gentilibus neque Atenim Chri∣stianus nec ia∣nuam suam laureis infama∣bit si norit etiā quantos deos e∣tiam ostiis dia∣bolus affinxe∣rit. Ianum a ianua &c. Ter∣tul. de Corona m∣litis l. 11, 12. Tom. 1. p 759. Gratian Causa 26. Quaest. 7. & August. De Rectit. Cathol. Tract. accor∣dingly. & here Act. 8. Scene 3. lauro aut viriditate arborum cingere domos: Omnis enim haec obser∣vatio Paganismi est. Can. 59. It is not lawfull for Ministers or Clergy men to beholde any Stage-playes at marriages or feasts, but they ought to rise and returne from thence before the Stage-playes enter. Can. 73. It is not lawfull to keepe the wicked observati∣ons of Kalends, nor to observe the festivals of the Gentiles; nor yet to begirt or adorne houses with laurel or greene oughes: For all this practise savours of Paganisme. Which latter Canon comes home to Stage-playes, who had their originall from Paganisme, as I have Act. 1. & 2. largely proved, as well as this condemned custome. The sixteenth Play-condemning Councell, is, the sixth  Councell of Constantinople, Baronius & Spondanus Anno Christi 680. sect. 4. Anno Domini 680. which Councell consisting of 289 Bishops, is confessed both by
Centur. Mag. 7. Col. 414. Dr. Crakenthorp his Vigilius Dormitans. London 1631. cap. 19. sect. 19. p. 305. Protestants, and Baronius & Spondanus Anno Christi 680. sect. 1. See Surius, Binius, Crab, Niccoli∣nus, Carranza, & Merlin ac∣cordingly in their Collecti∣ons of Coun∣cels. Papists to be oecumenicall; and so the Canons of it (especially in point of discipline) oblige all Christians to renounce all Stage-playes, all Stage-players, which they have much condemned, as these ensuing Canons witnesse. Surius Tom. 2 p. 1044. Car∣ranza fol. 191. Canon: 24. Ne cui liceat eorum, qui in sa∣cerdoali ordine enume∣rantur, vel monachorum, in equorū curriculis sub∣sistere, vel scenicos ludos sustinere. Sed etsi quis Clericus ad nuptias vo∣cetur, quando ad decep∣tionē comparata ludicra ingressa fuerint, surgat et discedat, Patrum nostro∣rum sic jubente doctri∣na. Si quis autem ejus rei convictus fuerit, vel ces∣set, vel deponatur. Surius Tom. 4 p. 1048. Car∣ranza fol. 194. Can: 51. is most ex∣presse in point. Nota bene. Omninò prohibet haec sancta, et universalis Synodus eos qui dicuntur Mimos et eorum spectacula: deinde venationum quoque spe∣ctationes, eas{que} quae iunt in scena, saltationes per∣fici. Si quis autem prae∣sentem Canonem con∣tempserit, et se alicui eo∣rum quae sunt vetita de∣derit; si sit quidem Cleri∣cus, deponatur; si verò Laicus, segregetu.
Surius Tom. 4. p. 1049. Carranza. fol. 195. Canon: 61. Eos quoque sexennij canoni subjici oportet, qui ur∣sos, vel ejusmodi anima∣lia ad ludum et simplici∣orum noxum circumfe∣runt; ac fortunam, ac fa∣tū, et genealogiā, et quo∣rundam ejusmodi verbo∣rum multitudinem ex fallaciae imposturae{que} nu∣gis proferunt; eos{que} qui impraecatores, remedio∣rumque amuletorumque praebitores et vates ap∣pellantur. Eos autem qui in ijs persistunt, et non ab ejusmodi perniciosis gentilibus{que} studijs aver∣santur et aufugiunt, Ec∣clesia omnino exturban∣dos decrevimus, sicut et acri Canones dicunt. 2 Cor. 6. Quae enim est luci cum tenebris communica∣tio, ut ait Apostolus? vel quae templ Dei cum Ido∣lis consentio? vel quae fide∣li cū infideli pars est? quae autē Christo cum Belial concordia et consentio? Surius Tom. 2. p. 1049. Car∣ranza fol. 195. Canon: 62. Kalen∣das quae dicuntur, et vot brumalia quae vocantur, et qui in primo Martij mensis die fitconventus, ex fidelium civitate om∣nino
tolli volumus: sed et publicas mulierū salta∣tiones, multam noxam, exitium{que} afferentes: quin etiàm eas, quae nomine eorum qui falso apud Graecos dij nominati sunt, vel nomine virorū ac mulierum fiunt saltati∣ones ac mysteria more antiquo et à vita Christi∣anorum alieno, amanda∣mus et expellimus: statu∣entes ut Deut. 22.5. Se here Act. 5. Scene 6. throughout. Hin haron∣das etiam le∣gem posuit, contra signo∣rum ordinum∣que in bellis desertores, aut arma pro pa∣triae tutela om∣ino deectan∣tes: ut id genus viri muliebri vestitu amicti triduum in fo∣ro desiderent: quae contitu∣tio cum leges alibi sancitas humanitate praestat, tum dissimulaner probri magni∣tudine eusmo∣di ingenio prae∣ditos ab effae∣minata molli∣tie deterret. Si∣quidem mortē expetere longe praestat, quam tantum igno∣miniae dedecus in patria expe∣riri. Diodru Siculu Bibl. Hist l. 12. sect. 15. p. 420. Which shewes how execrably infa∣mous mens wearing of womens apparell was among the very heathen, & shall it not be much more odi∣ous among Christians? nullus dein∣ceps muliebi veste in∣datur, vel mulier veste viro conveniente. Sed neque comicas, vel saty∣ricas vel tragicas perso∣nas induat, neque exe∣crandi Bacchi nomen, u∣vam in torcularibus ex∣primentes, invocent; ne∣que vinum in dolijs ef∣fundentes, risum move∣ant, ignorantia vel vani∣tate ea quae à daemonis impostura procedunt ex∣ercentes. Eos ergo qui deinceps aliquid eorum, quae scripta sunt, aggre∣dietur, uti ad horū cogni∣tionē pervenerint, si sint quidem Clerici, deponi jubemus; si vero Laici, segregari.
Surius Tom. 2 p. 1049. See be∣fore p. 22. Car∣ranza fol. 96. Canon: 65. Qui in Novlunijs à quibusdam ante suas oficinas et do∣mos accenduntur rogos, supra quos etiam antiqua quadam conuetudine a∣lire ineptè et delirè so∣lent, jubemus deinceps cessare. Quisquis ergo tale quid fecerit; si sit Clericus, deponatur; sin autem Laicus, segrege∣tur. In 4 Kings 21.5, 6, &c. on∣fires therfre had their ori∣ginall from this idolatrou custome as this generall Coun∣cell hath defi∣ned; therefore all Christians should avoid them. quarto enim Libro Regū scriptū est, Et edificavit Manasses altare universae militiae caeli in duobus trijs do∣mus Dei, et filios suos traduxit per ignem, &c. et ambulavit in eo ut fa∣ceret malum coram Do∣mino, ut eum ad iram pro∣vocaet. Canon: 66. A sancta Christi Dei nostri resur∣rectionis die usque ad novum Dominicum, tota septimana in Ecclesijs vacae fideles iugiter o∣portet psalmis et hymnis et spiritualibus canticis in Christo gaudentes, fe∣stum{que} celebrantes Lay men therfore ought to read the scrip¦tures by this general Coun∣cels resolution. See Canon 68.95. & Aposto∣lorum Canones Cn. 84. Cle∣mens Constit. Apostol. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, 8.2. c. 61. Concil. La∣odicenum Can 10, 59. Car∣thag. . Can. 47 & 4. Can. 98, 99. Arausica∣num 1. Can. 18. Tarraconense Can. 13. Valen∣tinum Can. 1. Nicenū 2. Can. 2.10. Cabilo∣nense . Can. 54 59, 66, 67. A∣quigranense Can. 123. Toletanū 3. Can. 7. & Leo Epist. Decret. Ep. 10. c. 1. accordingly. et divinarum Scripturarum lectioni mentem adhi∣bentes, et sanctis myste∣rijs
jucundè et lautè fru∣entes. Sic enim cū Chri∣sto exaltabimur, et unà resurgemus. Nequaquam ergo praedictis diebus, equorum cursus, vel ali∣quod publicū fiat specta∣culū. Which if this Coun∣cel may be credited, are no fit sports for holy times. Canon: 71. Eos qui do∣centur leges civiles Grae∣cis moribus uti non o∣portet; et neque in thea∣trum induci, nec eas quae dicuntur cylistras pera∣gere &c. Si quis autem deinceps hoc facere ausus fuerit, segregetur. Surius Tom. 2 p. 053. Car∣ranza fol. 196.Canon: 100. Prov. 4. O∣culi tui recta aspiciant, et omni custodia serva cor tuum, jubet sapientia. Corporis enim senss sua facile in animam effun∣dunt. See Synodus Augustenfis Anno 1548. cap. 28. the 2. part of the ho∣mely against the Perill of I∣dolatry, p. 72, 73. Bernard. ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apo∣logia. AElredus Speculum cha∣ritais c. 52. Bibl. Patr. Tom 13. p. 84. & Speculum cha∣ritatis l. 2. c. 24. Ibid. p. 111. Mapheus Ve∣gius De Edu∣catione libeo∣rum lib. 1. c. 14. Picturas er∣go quae oculos praestrin∣gunt, et mentem corrum∣punt, et ad turpium vo∣luptatum movent incen∣dia, nullo modo deinceps imprimi jubemus. Si quis autem hoc facere aggres∣sus fuerit, deponatur. Can. 24. It shall not bee lawfull for any who are in the order of Priests or Monkes, to bee present at horse-races, or to act, or see a part in Stage-plaies. But if any Clergy man be called to marriages, when these deceitfull sports shall en∣ter, let him arise and depart, the doctrine of our Fathers so commanding. If any bee con∣victed of this thing, either let him give over, or let him be deposed. See pag. 575, 576, 578, 581, accordingly. Can. 51. is most punctuall. This sacred and universall Synode doth utterly prohibit those who are called Stage-players and their Enterludes; together with the Spectacles of huntings, and those dan∣ces that are made upon the Stage. And if any shall con∣temne this present Canon, and shall give himselfe to any of these things that are prohibi∣ted; if hee be a Clergy man, let him be deposed; but if a Lay-man, let him bee excom∣municated.
Can. 61. Those also ought to be subject to sixe yeares ex∣communication, who carry a∣bout See Iohn Fields Decla∣ration of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden: & Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses pag. 133, 134, 135. against Beare-baiting.beares or such like crea∣tures for sport, to the hurt of simple people; or tell fortunes or fates, and genealogies, and utter a multitude of such like words out of the toyes of fal∣lacy and imposture: and those also who are stiled charmers, givers of remedies and amu∣lets, and prophets. And those who persist in these things, and are not turned from such per∣nicious and heathenish practi∣ses, or doe not shunne them; wee decree, that they shall wholly bee thrust out of the Church, even as the holy Ca∣nons affirme. For what com∣munion hath light with dark∣nesse, as the Apostle saith? or what agreement hath the temple of God with Idols? or what part hath a beleever with an infidel? or what con∣cord or agreement is there betweene Christ and Be∣lial? Can. 62. Those things that are called Kalends, and those that are named winter wishes, and that meeting which is made upon the first day of March, wee will shall bee
wholly taken away out of the Citty of the faithfull: as al∣so we wholly forbid and expell the publike dancing of women bringing much hurt and de∣struction: and likewise those dances and mysteries that are made in the name of those, who are falsly named Gods among the Graecians, or in the name of men and women, after the ancient manner, farre differing from the life of Christians: ordaining that no man shall henceforth bee clothed in wo∣mans apparell, nor no woman in mans aray. Neither may any one put on comicall satyri∣call or tragicall vizards in En∣terludes, neither may thy in∣vocate the name of execrable Bacchus, when as they presse their grapes in winepresses; neither pouring out wine in tubbes, may they provoke laughter, exercising those things through ignorance or vanity which proceed from the imposture of the Divel. Those therefore who hereafter shall attempt any of these things that are written, after they shall come to the knowledge of them; if they be Clergy men, we command them to be depo∣sed; and if Lay men, to bee excommunicated.
Can. 65. Those bonefires that are kindled by certaine people on New moones before their shops and houses, over which also they use ridicu∣lously and foolishly to leape by a certaine ancient custome, we command them from hence∣forth to cease. Whoever there∣fore shall doe any such thing; if he be a Clergy man, let him be deposed if a Lay man, let him be excommunicated. For in the fourth Booke of the Kings, it is thus written, And Manasses built an altar to all the hoast of heaven, in the two courts of the Lords house, and made his children to passe through the fire, &c. and walked in it that he might doe evill in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to wrath. Can 66. From the holy day of Christ our God his resurre∣ction to the new Lords day, the faithfull (or Christians) ought to spend the whole weeke in their Churches, rejoycing with∣out intermission in Christ, in celebrating that feast with psalmes and hymnes and spiri∣tuall songs (not with dancing, stage-playes, dice, tables, or such like revel-rout) addi∣cting their mindes to the Lay men therfore ought to read the scrip¦tures by this general Coun∣cels resolution. See Canon 68.95. & Aposto∣lorum Canones Cn. 84. Cle∣mens Constit. Aposol. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7, 8.2. c. 61. Concil. La∣odicenum Can 10, 59. Car∣thag. . Can. 47 & 4. Can. 98, 99. Arausica∣num 1. Can. 18. Tarraconense Can. 13. Valen∣tinum Can. 1. Nicenū 2. Can. 2.10. Cabilo∣nese . Can. 54 59, 66, 67. A∣quigranense Can. 123. Toletanū 3. Can. 7. & Leo Epist. Decret. Ep. 10. c. 1. accordingly.
reading of the holy Scriptures, and chearfully and richly en∣joying the holy Sacraments. For thus wee shall bee exalted with Christ, and rise toge∣ther with him. By no meanes therefore on the foresaid dayes let there be any horse-race, or any publike shewe or stage-playe made. Can: 71. Those who are taught civill lawes, ought not to use Greeke manners or cu∣stomes; neither ought they to be brought into the theatre, or to practise any playes called Cylistrae. If any man shall pre∣sume to doe the contrary, let him be excommunicated. Can: 100. Let thine eyes behold right things, and keep thine heart with diligence, is the command of wisdome. For the senses of the body doe easily infuse their objects into the soule. Therefore wee com∣mand, that such pictures as dazell the eyes, corrupt the minde, and stirre up flames of filthy lusts, be not henceforth made or printed upon any tearmes. And if any shall at∣tempt to doe it, let him be de∣posed. Some of these recited Canons, as Canon 61, 65 & 100. condemne all Bearehards, Bearebaiting, Bonefires, and filthy pictures, (which Talia etiam Spectacula et tabularum et fabularum pro∣hibemus. Qua∣re Magistrati∣bus adhibenda cura est ut ne que signis ne{que} tabulis obscae∣nitas ulla aut faeditas oten∣atur. Polis. l. 7. . 17. Aristotle himselfe con∣demnes:)
yet withall they oppugne Stage-playes, ex obli∣quo, there being betweene them and Playes so great ana∣logie, that the censure of one is the condemnation of the other. But the other Canons are so punctuall, so expresse against them, that there can be no evasion from them. The seventeenth Synodicall authority against Stage-playes, is, Synodus Francica, under Pope Zachary Ann Dom. 742. which runnes thus. Surius Tom. 3. p. 40. See Io∣annis Sarisbe∣rienfis De Nu∣gis Curialium lib. 1. cap. 4. a∣gainst hunting and hauking. Ambrose Ser. 41. Tom. 5. p. 29. in Psal. 118. Octon. 8. Tom. 2. p. 446. a. b. Bonifacii Epist. 105. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 8. p. 111. Petrus Blesen∣sis Epist. 56. & 61. Gratian. Distinctio 2. HRabanus Maurus Tom. 5. p. 605. Illas venationes et silvaticas vagationes cū canibus omnibus servis Dei (speaking of Clergie men) interdicimus. Simi∣liter ut accipitres vel fal∣cones non habeant. De∣crevimus quo{que} ut secun∣dum Canones unusquis{que} Episcopus in sua paro∣chia solicitudinem adhi∣beat, adjuvante Graphi∣one, qui defensor Eccle∣siae est, ut populus Dei Carranza. fol. 204. b. Can. 5. reades it Pagi∣nas, but cor∣ruptly; which Synodus Sus∣sionensis thus expounds; Po∣pulus Christi∣anus Paganismum non fa∣ciat. Paganias non faciat, sed ut omnes spurcitīas gentilitatis abjiciat et re∣spuat, sive prophana sa∣crificia mortuorum, sive sortilegos vel divinos, &c. sive hostias immola∣titias, quas stulti homi∣nes juxta Ecclesias ritu paganico faciunt, sub no∣mine sanctorum marty∣rum vel confessorū, Deū et suos sanctos ad ira∣cundiam et vindictae gra∣vitatē provocantes. Sive
illos sacrilegos ignes quos Nedfri vocant, sive omnes quaecumque sunt Paganorū observationes, diligenter prohibeant. We prohibit those huntings and silvaticall wandrings a∣broad with bounds to all the servants of God, and likewise that they keepe neither haues nor falcons. Wee decree also that according to the Canons. every Bishop in his parish shall take care; the Graphio or Cu∣rate, who is defender of the Church, assisting him, that the people of God make no Pagan feasts or Enterludes, but that they reject and abominate all the uncleannesses of gentilisme, whether prophane sacrifices of the dead, or fortune-tellers, or diviners, &c. or immolated sacrifices, which foolish men make near unto Churches, after the Pagan manner, provoking God and his Saints to wrath, and vengeance. And that they diligently inhibit those sacri∣legious fires which they call Nefri (or boneires) and all other observations of the Pagans whatsoever. Which Canon is likewise ratified
in Surius Tom. 3. p. 41. Synodo Suessionensi, sub Childerico Rege, about the selfe same yeare wherein this Synode was held. The eighteenth Play-oppugning Councell, is, Syno∣dus Nicaena 2. Anno Dom. 785. or 787. in which there were Surius Tom. 3 Concil. p. 48, 49. Baronius & Spondanus Anno Christ 787. sect. 1. present 350. or 377. Bishops as some record: which Councell (commonly reputed the 7. oecumenicall or universall Councell) determines thus of Stage-playes. Surius Tom. 3. p. 196. Car∣ranza. fol. 54. Can. 5. Canon: 22. Deo quidem universum dedi∣care et non proprijs vo∣luntatibus servire res magna est. 1 Cor. 10.31. Sive enim editis, sive bibi∣tis, inquit divinus Apo∣stolus, omnia in Dei glo∣riam facite &c. Cuvis ergo homini necesse est comedere u vivat, et quibus est vita quidem matrimonij, e liberorū, et laici constitutionis, im∣mixtim comedere viros et mulieres est ab omni reprehensione alienum, si∣modo ei qui dat nutri∣mentū gratias agunt; non cū scenicis quibusdā stu∣dijs, sive sataicis canti∣cis et citharaedicis ac meretricijs vocibus, quos prophetica execra∣tio prosequitur sic dicēs: Esay 5.11, 12 Vae qui cū cythara et psalterio vinū bibunt, Do∣mini
autē oper non respi∣ciunt, et opera manui ejus non consideran. Et sicubi tales fuerint inter Chri∣stianos, corrigantur. Can: 22. Verily to dedicate all to God, and not to serve our owne wills, is a great mat∣ter: For whether ye eate or drinke (saith the divine A∣postle) or whatsoever ye doe, doe all to the praise and glo∣ry of God, &c. It is necessary therefore for every man to eate that he may live; and those who live a married life, and have children, and are of a lay-con∣dition, for them to eate men and women together is farre from all reproofe, if so be they give thankes to him who gi∣veth foode; not with Stage-playes, or certaine theatricall practises, or with satanicall songs, or citheredicall and meretricious tunes which the propheticall execration pursu∣eth in these words: Woe unto them who drinke wine with the harpe and viol, but they regard not the worke of the Lord, & the operation of his
hands they consider not. And if there be any such as these among Christians, let them be severely punished. Which Canon teacheth us, First, that Stage-playes and ribaldry songs or musick, are no fit pastimes for Christi∣ans to praise the Lord withall on festivall and solemne seasons. Which condemnes the atheisticall, if not dia∣bolicall practise of those heathen Christians, who use them most at such times as these. Secondly, that they are directly contrary to the Scripture, and utterly un∣lawfull, not onely to Ministers, but to lay men too. Thirdly, that those Christians who frequent or use them, ought to be everely punished, by the expresse re∣solution of this whole generall Councell, in which all Christian Churches, were present by their Delegates. The nineteenth is, Synodus Turonensis 3. under Charles the Great, Anno Christi 813. which determines thus of Stage-players and their Enterludes, that all Christians should avoid them, as the ensuing Canons testifie. Surius Tom. 3. p. 274. See Capit. Caroli Magni Apud Bochellum De∣creta Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 39. p. 549. & Tit. 10. c. 6. p. 593. where hee prohibits all enterludes, dan∣cing, filthy and debolst songs, and diabolicall Playes in the streetes, in hou∣ses, or in any other places un∣der paine of ex∣communicati∣on, because they were but reliques of Pa∣ganisme. Canon: 7. Ab om∣nibus quaecūq: ad auriū et ad oculo pertinent illicebras, unde vigor a∣nimi emolliri posse cre∣datur (quod de aliquibus generibus musicorum, a∣liis{que} nonnullis rebus sen∣tiri potes) Dei sacerdo∣tes abstinere debent: quia per auriū oculorū{que} illi∣cebras vitiorū turba ad animā ingred solet. Hi∣strionum quo{que} turpiū, et obscaenorum insolen∣tias jocorum, et ipsi om∣nino
effugere, caeterisque effugienda praedicare de∣bent. Canon: 8. See Concil. Wormatiense, Anno 868. Can. 17. Surius Tom. 3. p. 523. accordingly. Where this pe∣nalty is added. Quod si quis harum perso∣narum hac fue∣it voluptate detentus, Epis∣copus tribus mensibus se a communione suspendat, presbyter duobus mensibus, dia∣conus uno mense ab omni officio et communione abstineat. Sacerdoti∣bus non expedit, secula∣ribus et turpibus quibus∣libet interesse jocis: ve∣nationes quoque ferarum vel avium minime se∣ctentur. Can: 7. The Ministers of God ought to abstaine from all allurements whatsoever, be∣longing either to the eares or eyes, from whence the vigour of the minde may be thought to be effeminated, (which may be conceived of certaine kindes of musicke, and some other things:) because through the intisements of the eyes and eares, the troope of vices is wont to enter into the soule. They ought likewise wholly to eschew the insolencies of filthy Stage-players, and of obscene
jests, and also to preach to o∣thers, that they ought to be avoided. Can: 8. It is not expedient that Ministers should be pre∣sent at any secular and disho∣nest Playes or sports; neither may they follow the hunting either of wilde beasts or birds. The twentieth, is, Synodus Cabilonensis 2. under Charles the Great, Anno Christi 813. which defines thus of Players and Stage-playes; that not onely Clergy men, but even all manner of Christians ought wholly to a∣bandon them: Witnesse this Canon which is almost the same with the last recited. Surius Tom. 3. p. 279. Can: 9. Ab omnibus oculorum aurium{que} ille∣cebris sacerdotes absti∣nere debent, et See Concil. Matisconense 2. Anno 588. Agathense An∣no 420. Nane∣tense 1264. An∣degauēse 1265. Lingonense 1404. Carno∣tense 156. Se∣nonense 1524. & Aquense 1585. Apud Bochellum De∣cret. Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 18. De Clerico Vena∣tore p. 1024, 1025, accor∣dingly. canum, accipitrum, falconū, vel caeterarū hujusmodi rerū curam parvi pendere; et histrionum sive scurro∣num, et turpium, seu ob∣scaenorum jocorum inso∣lentiam, non solum ipsi respuant, verum etiàm fidelibus respuenda per∣censeant. Can: 9. Ministers ought to abstaine from all wanton en∣tisements of the eyes and eares, and to neglect or disregard the care of dogges, haukes, fal∣cons, and such other things: and not onely they themselves ought to contemne the insolen∣cy of Stage-players, Iesters, and of filthy or obscene jests and pastimes, but likewise to beleeve and teach, that they ought to bee rejected of all faithfull Christians. The 21. is, Concilium Moguntiacum under the same Emperour Anno 813. where I finde this Canon. Surius Tom. 3. p. 287, 288.Canon: 14. Ministri autem Altaris Domini,
vel monachi, nobis pla∣cuit ut à negotijs secula∣ribus omnino abstineant. Multa snt secularia ne∣gotia &c. videlicet, con∣ductores aut procurato∣res esse secularium rerū: turpis verbi vel facti Such are all the Fooles or Clownes in Stage-playes. joculatorem esse, vel jo∣cum seculare diligere, a∣leas amare, See Concil. Coloniense Anno 1536. pars 1. cap. 26. ornamen∣tū inconveniens propo∣sito suo quaerere, in deli∣cijs vivere velle, gulam et ebrietatē sequi; canes et aves sequi ad venan∣dum. Ecce talia et his si∣milia (under which all Stage playes are included) ministris altaris Domini, et monachis omnino cō∣tradicimus, de quibus di∣cit Apostolus. Nemo mi∣litans Deo, implicat se negotijs secularibus. Can: 14. We decree that the Ministers of the Lords Al∣tar
& Monkes shall altogether abstaine from secular affaires. Now there are many secular businesses; as to be hirers or sollicitors of secular affaires; to be a jester or actour of filthy words or deedes; or to love a secularjest; to affect dicing; to seeke after such attire or or∣naments which are inconveni∣ent for his degree, to desire to live in pleasures, to follow hounds and haukes a hunting. Loe these and such like things (which include all Stage-playes, dancing, and scurri∣lous songs and musicke) wee altogether forbid the Mini∣sters of the Lords Altar, and Monkes: of whom the Apostle saith thus. 2 Tim. 2.. No man that warreth to the Lord intan∣gleth himselfe in secular af∣faires. The 22. is Synodus Rhemensis, under the same Empe∣rour  Anno Christi 813. concurring with the former. Surius Tom. 3 p. 292. Canon: 17. Vt Epi∣scopi et Abbates ante se joca turpia facere non permittant, sed Luke 14.12, 13, 14, 21. 1 Cor. 13.3. Iob 29.12, 16. c. 3116. to 20. pau∣peres et indigentes ad mensam secum habeant (which many of them now Iam. 2.2, 3, 5, 6.disdaine to speak to, much lesse to eate with, though Christ Luke 14.12, 13, 14, 21. 1 Cor. 13.3. Iob 29.12, 16. c. 3116. to 20. commands it)
et lectio divina ibi perso∣net, et sumant cibū cū be∣nedictione et laude Do∣mini secundùm Aposto∣lum; 1 Cor. 10.31. Sive manduca∣tis, sive bibitis omnia in laudem Dei facit. Can: 17. Wee decree, that Bishops and Abbots permit no secular Playes or jests to bee made before them; but let them have the poore and nee∣dy with them at their tables: (which some now scorne as a disparagement to their greatnesse:) let the reading of the Scripture sound forth
there, and let them eate their meate blessing and lauding the Lord, according to the A∣postles rule; Whether yee eate or drinke, doe all to the praise and glory of God. The 23. is, Concilium Aquisgranense, under Lewis the godly, Anno Christi 816. which concludes thus of Playes, and prohibits all Clergy men especially, from re∣sorting to them. Surius Tom. 3. p. 327. Canon: 83. Quod non oporteat Sacerdotes aut Clericos quibuscun{que} spectaculis in scenis aut in nuptijs interesse: sed antequā thylemici ingre∣diantur, exurgere eos cō∣venit, aut inde discedere. Canon: 100. Isiodorus de Officiis l. 2. . 2. Surius Ibid. p. 333. Cleri∣cis igitur lege patrū ca∣vetur, ut à vulgari vita seclusi, à mundans vo∣luptatibus sese abstine∣ant. Non spectaculis, non pompis intersint. Surius Tom. 3 p. 357. Canon: 145. Clerici contubernia faeminarum nullatenus appetant; non vanis oculis, aut petulan∣ti tumido{que} gestu, ac dis∣solutis renibus incedant: non spectaculis, nō pompis secularibus intersint: non aleae, non quibuslibet venationibus inserviant: See Concil. Coloniense Anno 1536. pars 1. cap. 26. Concil. Medio∣lanense 1. apud Binium Tom. 4. Concil. p. 891, 892. & those other Councels quo∣ted in my An∣swer to Mr. Co∣zens his Coze¦ning Devoti∣ons: p. 71, 72. against the ex∣cesse and pride of Clergy men in their apparel. See Synodus Mogunt. c. 24. nequaquam praeciosis
delectentur vestibus &c. and yet few now so richly, so sprucely apparelled as these, who should be pat∣ternes of humility and sobriety to others. Can: 86. Ministers and Clergie men ought not to bee present at any Spectacles or Stage-playes either in Play-houses or at marriages: but before the Fidlers or Players enter, they ought to rise up and depart thence. Can: 100. It is provided for Clergy men by the law of the Fathers, that being secluded from a vulgar life, they with∣draw themselves from worldly pleasures. They may not be pre∣sent at Stage-playes or shewes. Can: 145. Clergy men may by no meanes desire the com∣pany of women; they may not walke with vaine eyes, or with a wanton or proud gesture, or dissolute reines: they may not be present at worldly Specta∣cles or Enterludes: they may not give themselves to dice, or any kinde of hunting: they ought not to delight in costly
apparell &c. as now too ma∣ny of them doe, who are more like to Courtiers or Knights in their beavers, sat∣tins, silkes or velvets, then to Ministers. The 24. is, Concilium Parisiense, under Lewis and  Lothorius, Anno 829. to the like effect as the former. Surius Tom. 3. p. 380. Canon: 38. Cùm ab omnibus Christianis, juxta Apostoli documen∣tum, Ephes. 5. stultiloquium et scurrilitas sit cavenda, multo magis à sacerdo∣tibus Domini, qui alijs exemplum et condimen∣tum salutis esse debent, caveri oportet. Haec quippe à sanctis viris pe∣nitus sunt propellenda, quibus magis convenit lugere, quàm ad scurrili∣tates et stultiloquia, et histrionum obscaenas jo∣cationes et caeteras vani∣tates, quae animam Chri∣stianam a rigore suae re∣ctitudinis emollire so∣lent, in cachinnos ora dissolvere. Neque enim decet aut fas est oculos sacerdotum Domini spe∣ctaculis faedari, aut men∣tem quibuslibet scurrili∣tatibus, aut turpiloquijs ad inania rapi. Ait quip∣pe Dominus in Evan∣gelio:
Omne verbum oci∣osum, quod loquuti fue∣rint homines, reddent de eo rationem in die judicij. Paulus ad Ephesos, Ephes. 4. Omnis, inquit, sermo ma∣lus ex ore vestro non pro∣cedat, sed si quis, bonus ad aedificationem fidei, ut det gratiam audientibus, et nolite contristare Spi∣ritum sanctum, in quo sig∣nati estis in die redemptio∣nis. Et non post multa, Ephes. 5. Fornicatio autem, in∣quit, et omnis immundi∣tia, aut avaritia, nec no∣minetur in vobis, sicut de∣cet sanctis; aut turpitu∣do, aut stultiloquium, aut scurrilitas, quae ad rem non pertinent; sed magis gratiarum actio. Et E∣saias: Esay. 5.12. Cyhara et ly∣ra, et tympanum, et tibia, et vinum in convivijs ve∣stris, et opus Domini non respicitis, nec opera ma∣nuum ejus consideratis. Sunt et alia hujusce rei innumera exempla, quae prospecta et diligenter animadversa, non solum sacerdotibus, verum etiā caeteris fidelibus magno terrore sint necesse est; ne dum his contra fas se
subdūt, animae suae salutē negligant. Proinde nobis omnibus in cōmune visū fuit, ut si qui sacerdotum hactenus his vanitatibus usi fuerint, ab his dein∣ceps Domino adjuvante, prorsus se cavere debere meminerint. Can. 38. Since that foolish talking and scurrility, accor∣ding to the Apostles instructi∣on, ought to be avoided of all Christians, much more ought it to be eschued by the Mini∣sters of the Lord, who ought to be an example, and condi∣ment of salvation unto others. For these things are utterly to bee abandoned by holy men, whom it better becomes to mourne, than to laugh immo∣derately at scurrilities and foolish speeches, and at the ob∣scene jests of Stage-players and other vanities, which are wont to soften a Christian soule from the rigour of its rectitude and uprightnesse. Neither is it seemely or lawfull, that the eyes of the Lords Ministers should bee defiled with Stage-playes, or their mindes carried away with any scurrilities or filthy speeches. For the Lord aith in the Gospell: Matth. 12. Every idle word that men shall speake, they shall give an ac∣count
of it in the day of judgement. Paul to the E∣phesians, saith: Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the edifica∣tion of faith, that it may ad∣minister grace to the hearers, and grieve not the holy Spi∣rit by which ye are sealed to the day of redemption. And not much after, he saith: But fornication and all unclean∣nesse, or covetousnesse, let it not be named among you, as becommeth Saints; neither filthinesse, nor foolish talk∣ing, or scurrility, which are not convenient; but rather giving of thankes. And E∣say: The harpe, and the violl, and the tabret and pipe, and wine are in their feasts, but they regard not the worke of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands. There are other innumera∣ble examples of this matter, which being seene and dili∣gently considered, must needes bring great terrour, not one∣ly to Ministers, but also to other Christians; lest whiles they subject themselves to these things against right, they neglect the salvation of their soules. Wherefore it
hath seemed good to us all in common, that if any Ministers have hitherto u∣sd any of these vanities, that from henceforth they re∣member, that they ought whol∣ly to abstaine from these things. So that not onely Clergie men, but even all Christians are prohibited from Stage-playes, under perill of the losse and hazard of their soules, by this Councell, which hath doomed Stage-playes to be scurrilous, filthy and unlaw∣full pleasures, contrary to Gods word, which defile both the eyes, the eares and soules of the spectators. The 25. is Synodus Moguntina, sub Rabano Archi∣episcopo, Anno 847. where I finde this Canon against Clergy mens resort to Playes. Surius Tom. 3 p. 425. Canon: 13. Provi∣dendum necessariò est, ut Clerici à See Linwood Prov. Constit. lib. 3. Tit. De Immunitate Ecclesiae, f. 194, 195. Ioannis de Atō. Othobonī Constitutiones Ne Clerici Iu∣risdictionem exerceant; fol. 69, 70, 71. secularibus negotijs omnino abstine∣ant &c. Multa autem sunt secularia negotia: turpis verbi vel facti joculatorē esse, vel jocum seculare diligere, aleas amare &c. (as before in Concil: Mo∣gunt: can. 21.) Quae om∣nia Ministris Altaris in∣terdicimus; hortantes eos ante se joca secularia vel turpia fieri non permit∣tere &c. Can: 13. It is necessarily to be provided, that Clergy men wholly abstaine from secular affaires &c. But there are many secular businesses: as to be a jester or actor of any filthy word or deed (as is the Clown in Stage-playes) to love a se∣cular jest, to affect dice-play &c. All which wee interdict to Ministers of the Altar; ex∣horting them not to suffer any worldly or filthy jests or playes to be made before them &c. as in Synodo Rhemensi be∣fore Can. 22. The 26. is Surius Tom. 3. p. 529. Baro∣nius Anno 869 sect. 11. Synodus Constantipolitana 8. Anno  Christi 867, or 870 as others place it, consisting of 373 Bishops; which is commonly stiled, the 8 generall
Councell; wherein the personating of a Bishop (and so by consequence of other persons) is thus severely pro∣hibited. Surius Tom. 3. p. 56. See Concil. Basili∣ense here, num. 32. Canon: 16. Colli∣gere licet, solenne fuisse in aulis principum statis quibusdam diebus, com∣ponere aliquē laicum in∣signibus Episcopalibus, qui et tonsura et caeteris ornamentis See Guagni∣nus, Rerum Polonicarum, To. 2. p. 263, 264. personatū Episcopū ageret; et cre∣âsse etiā ridiculū Patriar∣chā, quo se oblectarent. Quae omnia ut in dede∣cus Ecclesiae accersita, prohibentur sub gravi∣bus censuris. Can: 16. Wee may collect, that it hath beene a solemne custome in Princes Courts on some set daye, to attire some Lay man in Episcopall robes, who both in tonsure and other ornaments should act a Bi∣shops part; and likewise to cre∣ate a ridiculous Patriarke, with whom they might sport themselves. All which things as brought in to the dis∣grace of the Church, are pro∣hibited under grievous cen∣sures. The 27. is Concilium Nanetense, about the yeare 890: where I finde this Canon. Gratian. Di∣stinctio 44. Nullus Presbytero∣rum quando ad anniversa∣rium diem 30. aut 7. vel 3. alicujus defuncti aut qua∣cun{que} vocatione ad colle∣ctam convenerit se inebri∣are nullatenus presuma; nec praecatus That is, by the love of any Saint whose health was drunke at such feasts and mee∣ting. See Aug. De Tempore Sermo 231, 232 Ioannis de Atō Constitutiones Concilii Oxo∣niensis Anno 1212. & Ed∣mundi Cant. Archiepicopi bound up at the end of Lin∣wood, fol. 124, 143. Ioannes Langhecrucius De Vita & HonestEccleiast. l. 2. c. 11. p. 250. Ioannes Fredericus de Ritu Bibendi ad Snitatem. l. 1. c. 7. & my Healths Sicknes, p. 32, 36, 37. See here Concil. 28. & 38. amore sanctorum vel ipsius ani∣mae bibere, aut alios ad bibendum cogere, vel se aliena praecatione ingurgi∣tare, nec plausus et risus inconditos et fabulas ina∣nes ibi referre aut cantare
praesumat; aut turpia joca vel urso, vel tornatricibus ante se fieri patiatur: nec larvas daemonum ante se fieri consentiat: quia hoc diabolicum est, et sa∣cris Canonibus prohibi∣tum. No Minister when he shall come to the 30. or 7. or 3. an∣niversary day of any dead person, or bee invited to a gathering, may by no meanes presume to make himselfe drunke; neither may hee presume being intreated by the love of the Saints, or of his owne soule, to drinke, or to cause others to drinke, or to glut himselfe upon any others request, nor yet to use applauses or rude laughter. or there to relate or sing any
vaine fables; neither may he suffer foolish Playes or pa∣stimes to be made before him with beares or tumblers: nei∣ther may he agree, that any vizards or shapes of Divels be carried before him: be∣cause this is diabolicall, and prohibited by sacred Canons. The whole scope of which Canon, is onely to inhi∣bit Clergy men from drinking, pledging or enforcing Healthes, upon any occasion or intreaty whatsoever; and to debarre them from beholding Playes and Enterludes, especially such where any Divels had their parts or re∣presentations. The 28. is Concilium Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. Anno Christi 1215. Surius Tom. 3. p. 734. Car∣ranza fol. 238. consisting of 2 Patriarkes, 70 Arch-bishops, 412 Bishops, 800 Abbots and Priors; where these ensuing Canons were promulgated, which I wish all Clergy men would remember. Surius Tom. 3. p. 742 Car∣ranza fol. 241. Ioannis de Bur∣go Pupilla O∣culi pars 7. c. 10 C.D.Canon: 15, 16. A cra∣pula et ebrietate omnes Clerici diligenter abstine∣ant, unde vinum sibi tem∣perent, et se vino; nec ad bibendum quispiam inci∣tetur, cum ebrietas et mentis inducat exilium, et libidinis provocet incen∣tivum. Vnde illum abusum decrevimus penitus abo∣lendum, quo in quibusdam partibus ad This drink∣ing of Halthes i likewise con∣demned by St. Edmond Arch∣bishop of Can∣terbury, Anno Dom. 1240. in these very very tearmes. See Ioannis de Aton Constitutiones Provinciales, bound up at the end of Lindwood fol. 143. accor∣dingly. See Concil. Oxon. Anno 1212. cap. ne fiant scotteli sie potationes communes. Ibid. f. 124. b. Ioannes Langhecrucius de Vita et Honest. Ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 11. p. 25 c. & My Healthes Sicknesse; together with Concilium Coloniense 1536. pars 2. cap. 24. & pars 5. c. 6. Surius Tom. 4. p. 761, 771, accordingly. potus aequa∣les
suo modo se obligant potatores, et ille judicio talium plus laudatur, qui plures inebriat et calices faecundiores exhaurit. Si quis autem super his cul∣pabilem se exhibuerit, nisi à superiore commonitus satisfecerit competenter, à beneficio vel officio sus∣pendatur. Venationem et aucupationem universis Clericis interdicimus, un∣de nec canes nec aves ad aucupandum habere prae∣sumant. Clerici officia vel commercia secularia non exerceant, maximè in ho∣nesta. Mimis, joculatori∣bus, et histrionibus non intendant, et tabernas prorsus evitent, nisi fortè causa necessitatis in itinere constituti. Ad aleas vel taxillos non ludant, nec hujusmodi ludis intersint. This Councell and Canon was received in England. Can: 15, 16. Let all Clergy men diligently abstaine from surfeiting and drunkennesse; to which end let them keepe wine from themselves, and themselves from wine; neither let any one bee provoked to drinke, since drunkennesse banisheth wit, and provokes lust: whence we decree that abuse to be utterly abolished. whereby drinkers in certaine parts doe binde one another
to drinke healthes (or equall cuppes) after their manner, and hee in the judgement of such is most applauded, who makes most drunke, and quaffes off most cups. And if any offend in these things, unlesse hee shall give compe∣tent satisfaction being ad∣monished by his superiour, let him be suspended from his benefice or office. We prohibit hunting and hauking to all Clergy men, whence they may not presume to keepe either dogs or hawks to hawk with. Clergy men may not manage secular offices or affaires, es∣pecially such as are dishonest. Let them not addict them∣selves to tumblers, jesters, & Stage-players, and let them wholly avoid tavernes, unles perchance in case of necessity, when they are in a journey. Let them not play at dice or tables, nor yet be present at such Playes. The 29. is, Concilium apud Castrum Gonterij Anno 1231. which decreeth in this manner. Bochellus Decreta Eccle∣siae Gallicanae lib. 8. Tit. 70. c. 6. & Henrici Spelmanni Glossarium Goliardus. See the same Canon in effect made by Willielmus Parisiensis, apud Bochellum Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 14. c. 22. & in Sexti Decretalia l. 3. Tit. De Vita et Honest Clericorum. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi pars 7. c. 10 P. Statuimus, quod Clerici ribaldi, maximè qui Goliardi vulgo dicun∣tur et nuncupantur, per
Episcopos et alios Eccle∣siae Praelatos praecipiantur tondi, vel etiam radi, ità quod non remaneat in eis clericalis tonsura: ità tamē, quod ista sine scandalo et periculo fiant. A just cen∣sure upon such disorderly Clergy men, who were not ashamed to turne Rimers, Iesters and common Actors or Tumblers, as many of the Popish Clergie did. We decree, that scurrilous or riming Clergy men, espe∣cially those who are usually called Goliardi (that is je∣sters
and Stage-players, as the marginall Authours ex∣pound it) may by Bishops and other Prelates of the Church, bee commanded to bee polled, and likewise sha∣ven, so that their clericall tonsure may not remaine upon them: provided not∣withstanding, that these things be done without scan∣dall or danger. To passe by Synodus Pictaviensis, Anno 1377. whichSee Bochellus Decreta ccles. Gall. lib. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 49. p. 551 condemnes the dancing of young men and maides together, as the occasion of much luxury, wantonnesse, fornication, lewdnesse, and sundry other misdemeanours: The 30. Councell against the acting and beholding of Stage-playes, is Synodus Lingonensis Anno 1404. Where I meete with this Canon. Bochellus De∣creta Ecclesiae Gall. l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 1. p. 1025. Prohibemus cleri∣cis et viris ecclesiasticis, potissimè in sacris ordi∣nibus constitutis, et max∣imè sacerdotibus et cu∣ratis, ne omnino ludant ad taxillos, ad aleas, ne∣que ad chartas, neque ad stophum, neque ad luctā, neque ad jactum lapidis, ad saltum, ad choreas, ne∣que ad clipum, neque cum fistula, vel alijs musi∣calibus instrumentis, qui∣bus cum ore seu bucha luditur. Non ludant eti∣am ad bolas, ad cursum
vel currendum in campo pro lucro, vel pro vino, ad jaculandum, vel gladi∣andum, neque ludant ad quillas, vel torneamenta, seujostas. Summopere ca∣veant, ne intersint neque ludant in ludo quod dici∣tur A Play in nature of a Mummerie Maque or Stage-play. chareuari, in quo u∣tuntur larvis in figura dae∣monum, et horrenda ibi∣dem committuntur: quem ludum non solū Clericis, sed generaliter omnibus subditis prohibemus sub excommunicationis paena, et decem librarum nobis applicandarum: neque etiā in ludis illis inhonestis quae solent fieri in aliqui∣bus Ecclesijs in festo Which wee call Innocents day. Fa∣tuorum, quod faciunt in Our mo∣derne Christ∣mas Playes and Pastimes sprung from these Popish Enterludes and disorder. festivitatibus Natalis Domini. Non ludant etiā ad ludum scatorū, nisi for∣san rarò: quia quamvis sit ludus honestus, et prove∣niat ex subtilitate ingenij, tamen magnam et inutilē requirit occupationem, et prolixitatem temporis. Wee prohibit Clergy men and Ecclesiasticall persons, especially those in holy or∣ders, and most of all Priests and Curates, that they play not at all at tables, at dice, nor at cards, neither at whir∣ling, nor at wrestling, nor at throwing of the stone, at lea∣ping, at dancing, neither at the buckler, neither with a pipe or other musicall instru∣ments, which are played up∣on with the mouth or cheeks. Likewise they may not play at bowles, at running in the field for money or wine, at
darting, or sword-playing, neither may they play at quintins, at torneies, or justs. Let them diligently beware, that they be not present at, nor yet play in the play that is called Chareari, in which they use vizards in the shape of divels, and horrible things are there committed: which Play wee prohibit not onely Clergy men, but general∣ly all our subjects under paine of excommunication, and of ten pounds to be paid unto our use: nor yet in those dishonest Playes which are wont to be made in some Churches in the Feast of Innocents, which they make in the Festivalls of our Sa∣viours Nativity. Moreo∣ver they may not play at Chesse, unlesse it bee very rarely: for albeit it bee an honest play, and proceedes from the subtilty of wit, yet it requires great and unpro∣fitable studie, and much pro∣lixity of time. Which Canon regulates the sports and pastimes of irregular Clergy men, prohibiting them from Stage-playes, among other Playes. The 31. is, Synodus Trecensis, sub Ioanne Lesguisier Episcopo, Anno 1427.
Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 122. p. 562. Curati et Ecclesia∣rum rectores prohibeant suis parochiauis ex parte nostri, ne in suis Ecclesijs, vel earum cimiterijs, lu∣dos publicos, choreas vel alia hujusmodi de caetero exerceant &c.
Let Curates and rectours of Churches prohibit their Parishioners on our behalfe, that they suffer no publike Enterludes, dances, or such like things, to be henceforth exercised or acted in their Churches or Church-yards. The 32. is, Concilium Basiliense, Anno 1431. Sessio 21. Cap. De Spectaculis in Ecclesia non faciendis: which decrees thus. Surius Tom. 4. p. 62. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 63. Carranza fol. 255, 256. Turpem illum abu∣sum in quibusdam fre∣quentatum Ecclesijs, quo See Polydor Virgil. De In∣vent. rerum l. 5. c. 2. according∣ly.certis anni celebritati∣bus nonnulli cum mitra, baculo et vestibus ponti∣ficalibus, more Episcopo∣rum benedicunt: alij ut reges, ac duces induti, quod festum fatuorum, vel innocentium seu puerorū in quibusdam regionibus nuncupatur: alij larvales vel theatrales jocos: alij choros et tripudia marum ac mulierum facientes, ho∣mines ad spectacula et ca∣chinnationesmovent: haec sancta Synodus detestans, statuit ac jubet tàm ordi∣narijs, quàm Ecclesiarum decanis et rectoribus, sub poena suspensionis omni∣um proventuum Ecclesi∣asticorum trium mensium spatio, ne haec et similia
ludibria in Ecclesia, quae domus orationis esse de∣bet, ac etiam in camiterio exerceri amplius permit∣tant, transgresso res{que} per censuram Ecclesiasticam, alia{que} juris remedia puni∣re non negligant. This sacred Synode dete∣sting that foule abuse fre∣quent in certaine Churches, in which on certaine festi∣vals of the yeare, certaine persons with a miter, staffe, and pontificall robes, blesse men after the manner of Bi∣shops: others being clothed like Kings and Dukes, which is called the feast of fooles, of innocents, or of children in certaine Countries: others practising vizarded and the∣atricall sports; others making traines and dances of men and women, move men to spe∣ctacles and cachinnations: hath appointed and comman∣ded as well ordinaries, as deanes and rectors of Chur∣ches, under paine of suspen∣sion of all their Ecclesiasticall revenues for three moneths space, that they suffer not these and such like Playes
and pastimes to be any more exercised in the Church, which ought to be the house of prayer, nor yet in the Church-yard, and that they neglect not to punish the of∣fenders by Ecclesiasticall censures, and other remedies of law. And in the Appendix of the same Councell I find this Constitution. Surius Tom. 4. p. 223. & Crab. Tom. 3. p. 226, 227. In via quilibet ince∣dens pudicis oculis, cum modestia et gravitate, ad loca minus honesta non vadat, nec ad spectacula publica, choreas, ludos, hastiludia, torneamenta, et alia hujusmodi. Nemo lu∣dat, aut familiares suos ad taxillos, vel alios ludos in∣honestos ludere patiatur. Every one walking in the way with chast eyes, with modesty and gravity may not goe to dishonest places, nor yet to publike spectacles, dan∣ces, Playes, tiltings, jests, and such like sports. Let none play, nor yet suffer his fa∣miliars to play at dice, or tables, or other dishonest games. The 33. is, Concilium Toletanum, sub Sixto quarto, Anno 1473. where I finde these Constitutions. Binius Con∣cil. Tom. 4. p. 521, 522. Quia tempore quo sacrorum Canonum decre∣tis nuptiarum celebratio interdicitur et carnalis copula prohibetur; non∣nullos laicos nubere et carnaliter commisceri, ac proinde convivia publica, strepitus, ac choreas face∣re; (a thing much in use a∣mong the Russians, who at their weddings spend almost the whole night in
Convivae u∣trius{que} sexus saltando et lu∣dendo, claman∣do et ridendo bonam noctis obscurae par∣tem consumūt &c. Vulgus in∣terim ducendis choreis occu∣patur &c. In nuptiis et aliis solennitatibus persaepe ad manuum com∣plosarum fra∣gorem choreas duunt. Guag∣ninus Rerum Pollonicarum Tom. 2. . 400.408. dancing, which practise the See here p. 22, 38, 22. Church of God hath alwayes disallowed:) et cū histrionibus ac joculatori∣bus solenniter celebrare, et ad Ecclesias sic incedere plerun{que} contingit. Nos perniciosā hujusmodi cō∣suetudinē divellere cupi∣entes, sacro approbante Concilio, commixtiones hujusmodi, strepitus, cho∣reas, joculationes &c. fieri de caetero prohibemus &c. Ab Ecclesia &c. turpitu∣do quae{que} merito est abo∣lenda. Quia verò quaedam tàm in Metropolitanis quā in Cathedralibus et alijs Ecclesijs nostrae provin∣ciae consuetudo inolevit, ut videlicet in festis Here we may see whence our disorderly Christmas kee∣ping had its derivation. Na∣tivitatis Domini nostri Ie∣su Christi, et sanctorum Stephani, Ioannis, Inno∣centium, alijs{que} certis die∣bus festivis, etiàm in so∣lennitatibus Missarum no∣varum dum divina agun∣tur, ludi theatrales, larvae, monstra, spectacula, necnō quàmplurima inhonesta et diversa figmenta in Eccle∣sijs introducuntur, tumul∣tuationes quo{que} et turpia carmina, et derisorij ser∣mones dicuntur, adeo
quod divinum officiū im∣pediunt, et populum red∣dunt indevotū. Nos hanc corruptelam sacro appro∣bante Concilio, revocan∣tes, hujusmodi larvas, lu∣dos, monstra, spectacula, figmenta, et tumultuatio∣nes fieri; carmina quoque turpia et sermones illicitos dici tam in Metropolita∣nis quā in Cathedralibus, caeteris{que} nostrae provin∣ciae Ecclesijs, dum divina celebrantur, praesentiū se∣rie omnino prohibemus: tatuentes nihilominus ut Clerici qui praemissa ludi∣bria, et inhonesta figmenta officijs divinis immiscue∣rint, aut immisceri permi∣serint, si in praefatis Me∣tropolitanis seu Cathedra∣libus Ecclesijs beneficiati extiterint, eo ipso per mensm porionibus suis mulctentur: si verò in pa∣rochialibus fuerint bene∣ficiati, triginta; et si benefi∣ciati non fuerint, quindecē regaliū poenam incurrant, fabricis Ecclesiarū et testi Synodali aequaliter appli∣candam. Per hoc tamen honestas repraesentationes et devotas quae populum ad devotionē movent, tàm
in praefatis diebus, quā in alijs non intendimus pro∣hibere. Because in the time where∣in by the Decrees of holy Canons, the solemnizing of marriages and carnall copu∣lation are prohibited; it falls out for the most part that some lay men marrie, and use carnall copulation, and thereupon make publicke feasts, tumults, and dances; (prohibited at marriages by sundry forerecited Coū∣cels:) and solemnly cele∣brate
their nuptialls with Stage-players, and so for the most part walke unto the Churches. Wee desiring to abolish this pernicious cu∣stome, the holy Councell ap∣proving it, prohibit such commixtures, tumults, dan∣ces, Playes &c. to be hereaf∣ter made &c. So that Stage-plaies, Masques, Mummeries and dances, are altogether unlawfull at Mariages, by this Councels verdict. All filthinesse is worthily to bee abandoned from the Church. But because as well in Metropolitan as in Ca∣thedrall and other Churches of our Diocesse there hath a custome growne, that even in the feasts of our Lord Ie∣sus Christs Nativity, and of St. Stephen, Iohn, Innocents, and other certain holy dayes, yea in the solemnities of new Masses whiles divine things are doing, Stageplayes, mum∣meries, monsters, spectacles, as also very many disho∣nest and various fictions are brought into the Churches, as also tumults, and filthy songs, and scoffing speeches are uttered, so that they hinder divine service, and make the people undevout.
Wee repealing this corrupti∣on by the approbation of this holy Councell, doe by the contents of these presents, utterly prohibit these disgui∣sed Playes, monsters, spe∣ctacles, fictions, and tu∣mults to be made, and like∣wise all filthy verses and unlawfull speeches to be ut∣tered, as well in Metropo∣litan as in Cathedrall and other Churches of our pro∣vince, whiles divine things are celebrating: ordaining neverthelesse that Clergie men who shall intermixe the foresaid Playes and disho∣nest figments with divine offices, or suffer them to be intermixed, if they shall be beneficed in the said Me∣tropolitane or Collegiate Churches, shall for this cause and this offence forfeit their pentions for a moneth: but if they are beneficed in Parish Churches, they shall incurre the penalty of thirty; and if they are not beneficed, of fifteene royalls, to be equally bestowed upon the fabrickes of Churches and the Chapter house. But yet by this wee intend not to prohibit honest and devout representations which stirre up the people
to devotion either on the foresaid dayes or others. Which last clause extends not to authorize any pub∣like or private Stage-playes, either on the stage or else where, but onely to those representations of our Savi∣ours passion, or the Legends and Martyrdomes of such Saints as the Priests did use to personate in their Chur∣ches on festivall and solemne dayes: Which shewes and representations were afterwards particularly prohibi∣ted, condemned by the Councels of Millaine, Mo∣gunce, and others, before and after recorded, though the See Ioannis Moanus Hi∣storia SS. Ima∣ginum l. 4. c. 18 p. 424, 425. & Act. 3. Scene 5. p. 112. t 11. Polydor Vigil. De Inven. e∣rum l. . c. . & Lud. Vives No∣tae in August. De Cii. il. 8. c. 27. d. Papists still retaine them, to their eternall inamie. The 34. is, Synodus Senonensis, Anno 1524. in which  these Canons were enacted. Bochllus De crta cls. Gall. l. 4. Tit. . cap. 41, 42. p. 584, 585. Quoniam refriges∣cente nunc Christicolarum devotione, intelleximus ex nimia festorum multipli∣catione populum ocio et vaniloquio illis diebus de∣ditum, ebrietatibus, com∣messationibus ludis et las∣civijs, mags quàm rei di∣vinae, orationibus et con∣templationibus vacare &c. Moneant itaque Ecclesia∣rum rectores suos paro∣chianos, ut illis diebus e∣asdem Ecclesias frquen∣tent, orationibus insistant, Deum et Sanctos quo∣um solennia aguntur, pia mente et devoto affectu venerentur et colant: ver∣bum Domini, seu Nota. praedi∣cationes vigilanter et at∣tentè
audiant. Cessent his diebus, ludi, choreae, commessationes, ebrieta∣tes, vaniloquia, lasciviae, ab omni vitio abstineatur, &c. Which are no fit holy∣day exercises, and recreati∣ons, if this Councel erre not Bochellus De∣creta Ecclesiae Gall. l. 6. Tit. 29. c. 2. p. 1025. Non solum omnem alearum, taxillorum et sor∣tis ludum, aut interesse di∣ctis, interdictum Clericis esse constitutionis Conci∣lij generalis denunciamus, prout eisdem autoritate dicti Concilij interdici∣mus, sed et turpes plau∣sus, cachinnos, risus in∣conditos, larvales et thea∣trales jocos, et tripudia, et his similia ludibria, nec non omnem alium ludum per quem Ecclesiae hone∣stas inquinari potest prae∣dictis Clericis prohibe∣mus. Non immisceantur caetibus ubi amatoria can∣tantur et turpia; ubi obscaeni motus corporis cho∣reis et saltibus efferuntur: ne Clerici qui sacris my∣sterijs deputati sunt, tur∣pium spectaculorum atque verborum contagione pol∣luantur. Because the devotion of Christians now waxing cold, we have understood through the multiplication of holy∣dayes, that the people given to idlenesse and vaine dis∣course doe in these dayes ad∣dict themselves more to drunkennesse, surfetting, Playes and wantonnesse, than to divine things, pray∣ers, and contmplations, &c. Therfore let the rectors of Churches admonish their Parishioners, that on those dayes they frequent their Churches, and be instant in prayers: that they reverence and worship God, and the Saints, whose solmnities are observed, with a pious minde, and devout affection: that
they vigilantly and atten∣tively heare the word of the Lord, and preaching. Let Playes, dances, surfetting, drunkennes, idle discourses, lasciviousnesse cease on these dayes, and let there be an ab∣stinence from all vice &c. We denounce not onely all Playes of dice, tables, and lot, or to be present at them, to be inhibited Clergy men by the constitution of a generall Councell, as we forbid them by the authority of the said Councell; but wee likewise prohibit the aforesaid Cler∣gy men all unseemely applau∣ses, cachinnations, uncivill laughter, disguised and the∣atricall Playes, and dances, with all such ridiculous En∣terludes, and likewise all o∣ther Pastimes by which the honestie of the Church may be defiled. They may not mix themselves with such assem∣blies where amorous and fil∣thy things are sung: where obscene motions of the body are expressed in dances and galliards: lest Clergy men who are devoted to holy my∣steries, should bee polluted with the contagion of filthy Spectacles and words. Which reason extends as well to the Laity as the
Clergie: since filthy Spectacles and words are as apt to pollute the one as the other. And dare any Clergy men then after such expresse inhibitions resort to Play-hou∣ses, or behold or practise any of these interdicted games and sports? The 35. is Synodus Ratisponae Anno 1524. intituled, Reformatio Cleri Germaniae: where we reade thus. Surius Tom. 4 p. 713. Canon: 4. Insuper tabernas publicas Cleri e∣vitent, nisi eas peregrè proficiscentes ingredi o∣porteat, (which our En∣glish Queene Eli∣liz. Iniunctions Iniunct. 7. Ca∣nons. 1603. Can. 75. See my Healhes Sick∣nesse, p. 33. Canons have se∣conded:) et tàm in ibi, quàm domo et alibi à cra∣pula et ebrietate, omni{que} ludo à jure prohibito, blasphemijs, rixis ac alijs quibuscun{que} excessibus et offensionibus penitus ab∣stineant. Choreas, Spe∣ctacula et convivia publi∣ca evitent, ne ob luxum petulantiam{que} eorum no∣men Ecclesiasticum malè audiat. Can: 4. Moreover Cler∣gy men must avoid all pub∣like tavernes, (which too many of them now fre∣quent) unlesse they are en∣forced to enter them when they travell: and as well there, as at home and else∣where they ought wholly to abstaine from surfetting and drunkennesse, and from every Play prohibited by law, from blasphemies, brawles, and all other excesses and offences whatsoever. Let them shunne dances, Stage-playes & pub∣like feasts, lest for their lux∣ury and wantonnesse the Ec∣clesiasticall name be ill re∣ported of. The 36. is, Synodus Carnotensis, Anno 1526. Where  these subsquent Constitutions were compiled. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 4 Tit. 7. c. 43, 44, 46. p. 586. Cesent diebus fe∣stis, judicia, causarum cog∣nitiones, venditiones, mer∣catus, commessationes, e∣brietates, ludi, et nundinae. Contra facientes, citen∣tur coram nobis aut Offi∣ciali nostro &c. In festo
Sancti Nicholai, Catheri∣nae, innocentium, aut alio quovis die praeextu re∣creationis, ne Scholastici, Clerici, Sacerdotesve stul∣tum aliquid aut ridiculum faciant in Ecclesia, aut ab alijs fieri permittant. De∣nique ab Ecclesia ejician∣tur vestes fatuorum perso∣nas scenicas agentium. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 6. Tit. 10. cap. 6, 7. p. 975. Quia solent in ple∣risque locis nostrae Diae∣cesis deferri baculi ipsa∣rum confratriarum, prae∣cedentibus mimis et lu∣soribus cum tympanis, quod maximè dedecet ho∣norem Dei et Sanctorum: non enim debent ante eo∣rum imagines baculis con∣fratriarum infixas praece∣dere instrumenta illa mu∣sica ad choream et tripu∣dia potius quàm ad devo∣tionem audientes excitan∣tia. Idcirco prohibemus districtè, ne posthac ta∣les baculi deferantur pub∣licè per vicos histrionico ritu, et modulatione mu∣sica choreis accommoda∣ta &c. Quoniam in confratrijs primum recte constitutis, et postea in detrius pro∣lapsis, multa conspiciun∣tur
committi, ab honesta∣te et Christianae mentis religione penitus aliena; ut illis congruum adhibe∣amus remedium, imprimis ordinamus; Ne in ipsa∣rum confratiarum con∣gregationibus fiant disso∣luta convivia, compotati∣ones ad ebrietatem indu∣centes, choreae, tripudia, et caetera id genus, ad Bac∣chanalia magis quàm ad Christianam religionem spectantia. Quod nota. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 3, 4, 20, 21. Interdicimus, ne Clerici publice aut in pri∣vato exerceat ludos tur∣pes aut ludibriosos unde scandalū oriri, et ministe∣riū ecclesiasticum vitupe∣rari possit, pro loco et tempore, caua et personis quibus, propter quam, et cum quibus hujusmodi ludos exerceri continge∣ret. A ludo autem alea∣rum, taxillorum, et simi∣lium quae in sorte pendent sic abstineant, ut neque e∣tiam alijs ludentibus fau∣tores aut testes sint, inter∣sint. Districtè prohibemus, ne sacerdotes choreis pub∣licis, trpudiationibus, sal∣tationibuve sese commis∣ceant;
ne turpes, amato∣rias aut lascivas decantent cantilenas, aut cantanti∣bus faveant aut intersint. 1 Cor. 15.33. Corrumpunt siquidem bonos mores colloquia pra∣va. Denique non sint va∣gi oculis, non dicaces, non joculatores, non hi∣striones; ea enim omnia indecora, ijs praecipuè quibus animarum cura cō∣missa est. Sacerdotes qui in die∣bus primarum Missarum novorum Presbyterorum, post festivas epulas et grandia convivia commes∣sationes{que} Such was the prophanes and irregulari∣ty of the Ro∣man Clergie. exeunt in pub∣licum ad exhibendas po∣pulo et plebeculae comae∣dias, maximè crassas et impudicas, et choreas in plateis, committunt sine dubio in legem Ecclesiae et Apostolorum dogma. Quare qui tales fuerunt, si perseveraverint, sciant se condignam punitionem et correctionem non evasu∣ros. Item prohibemus sa∣cerdotibus ne in festo Sancti Nicholai, Innocen∣tium, aut alio quovis die stultum aliquod aut ridi∣culum in Ecclesijs aut alio quocunque loco publico
faciant fierive permittant, larvati aut quocun{que} tem∣pore, aut quovis in loco incedant. On holy dayes let matters of judicature, hearing of cau∣ses, sales, merchandice, lux∣ry, drunkennesse, Playes, and faires cease. Those who doe contrarie, let them be cited before us or our officiall &c. In the feast of St Nicholas,
Katherine, Innocents, or any other day, let not Schollers, Clergy me, or Priests, under pretence of recreation, act a∣ny foolish or ridiculous thing in the Church, or permit o∣thers to doe it. Finally let the clothes of those who act the scenicall persons of Innocents or fooles, be cast out of the Church. Because the staves of the fraternities themselves are wont to be carried about in most places of our Diocesse with Stage-players, Fidlers and tymbrels going before them, which doth most of all unbeseeme the honour of God and the Saints: for those mu∣sicall instruments stirring up the auditors rather to Ca∣rantoes and dancing than to devotion, ought not to precede their images fastned in the staves of the fraternities. Therefore wee strictly prohi∣bit, that after this such staves be not carried about publikely through villages after an histrinical manner, or with musicall melody fit∣ted to dances &c. Because in fraternities rightly ordained at the first, and afterwards declining un∣to worse, many things are
seene to be committed altoge∣ther different from honesty, and the religion of a Christi∣an minde: that we may apply a fitting remedy to them, wee first of all ordaine; That in the assemblies of the fraterni∣ties themselves, no dissolute feasts be made, no compoati∣ons (or Healthes) conducing to drunkennes, no dances, gal∣liards and other things of this nature, belonging rather to the feasts of Bacchs, than to Christian religion. We prohibit, that Clergie men use no dishonest nor ludi∣cros Playes either in pub∣like or private whence scan∣dall may arise, and the eccle∣siasticall ministery be disgra∣ced, according to the place and time, the occasion and persons, in which, for which, and with which such Playes shall happen to be used. Let them so abstaine from the play of dice, of tables, and the like which depend on chance, that they bee not so much as present among the that play, either as countenancers, or witnesses. Wee strictly forbid, that Ministers intermixe not themselves in publike morri∣ces, dances or carantoes: that
they sing no ribaldry, amo∣rous or lascivious songs, nor yet fauour, or keepe company with those that sing them: For evill communications corrupt good manners. Fi∣nally, let them not be roving with their eyes, no talkers, no jesters, no stage-players, for all these things are unseemely especially to those to whom the cure of soules is commit∣ted. Priests who in the dayes of the first Masses of new Pres∣byters, after merry banquets and great feasts and enter∣tainments goe forth in pub∣like to exhibit most grosse and unchast Comaedies and dances in the streetes to the common people, offend with∣out doubt against the law of the Church, and the Apo∣stolicall decree. Wherefore those who have beene such, if they shall prsevere, let them know, that they shall not escape condigne punish∣ment and correction. Also we inhibit Ministers, that they neither act nor suffer to be acted any foolish or ridicu∣lous thing, either on the feasts of St. Nicholas, Inno∣cents, or on any other day, neither in Churches, nor in
any other publike place: and that they disguise not them∣selves at any time in any publike or private place. The 37. is, Concilium Sennense, Anno 1528. where  Inter Decreta morum, we have these two Canons. Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 4. p. 740, 742, 743. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 757, 760. Binius Tom. . p. 681, 683.Canon: 16. Cum autē deceat domum Dei sancti∣tudo &c. Prohibemus id∣circo, ne histriones aut mimi intrent Ecclesiam, ad pulsandum tympana, cythara, aut alio quovis instrumento musicali: ne{que} in Ecclesia aut juxta Ec∣clesiam suis pulent instru∣mentis: prohibemus insu∣per, ne fiat deinceps festū fatuorum aut innocentiū, neque erigatur decanatus patellae. Canon: 25. Clerici neque in publico ludant pylâ, aut alijs ludis, maximè cum laicis. A ludo alarum ali∣is{que} qui à sorte pendent abstineant, neque luden∣tium fautores, spectatores aut testes existant. Non se admisceant choreis pub∣licis, tripudiationibus aut saltationibus: non turpes amatorias aut lascivas de∣promnt cantilenas, seu cantantibus faveant aut adsint. Nec in scenam ve∣lut histriones prodeant,
non comaedias vernaculas agant, non spectaculum corporis sui faciant in publico privatove loco. Quae omnia, cùm omni∣bus sacerdotibus sunt in∣decora, et ordini cleri∣cali multum detrahentia, tùm illis praecipuè quibus animarum cura est com∣missa. Can: 16. And since ho∣linesse becommeth the house of God: therefore we prohi∣bit, that no stage-players or tumblers shall enter into the Church to strike up any ta∣bret, harpe or other musicall instrument; neither shall they play upon their instruments in or neare the Church: moreover wee prohibit that the feat of fools or Innocents be not from henceforth obser∣ved, neither may the deanery of the platter be erected. Can. 25. Clergy men may not play publikely at ball or other playes, especially with lay men: they shall abstaine from dice-play, and all other games that depend on chance; neither may they bee cheri∣shers, witnesses or spectators of such as play: They shall not intermixe themselves in publike morrices, galliards and dances: they shall not sing any filthy amorous or lascivious songs, nor yet fa∣vour or b preset with those that sing them. They may not
Therefore they may not act academicall Enterludes in Colledges.come forth upon th stage as Actors, nor act Comaedies in their mother tongue: they shall make no spectacle of their body in any publike or private place. All which, as they are unseemely to all Ministers, and much dero∣gatory from the clericall or∣der, so especially to those to whom the cure of soules is committed. The 38. is, Concilium Coloniense, Anno 1536. where we have these canonicall Injunctions following. Surius Tom. 4. p. 761. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 780. Pars 2. cap. 25, 26. Vivere quidem de Altario sacerdoti licet, luxuriari non permittitur. A cra∣pula itaque et ebrietate, à See Concil. 27, & 28 be∣fore. compotationibus illis ad haustus aequales, à luxu, ab alea, ab immo∣deratis sumptibus et com∣messationibus, Concilium generale Clericos revocat universos, sequutum ve∣teris testamenti institu∣tum, quo Levit. 10.9.ministri tem∣pli vino et cicera prohibe∣bantur, ne ebrietate gra∣varentur corda eorum, et ut sensus eorum semper vigeret et esset tenuis. Et Apostolus ait:Ephes. 5.1. Nolite inebriari vino in quo est luxuria, sed impleamini spiritu sancto. Et iterum:
Rom. 13.13. Non in commesatio∣nibus et ebrietatibus &c. Oim tanta honestas desi∣derabatur in Clerico, ut ne See Concil. 4; 5, 6, 10, 15 16, before ac∣cordingly. nuptialibus qui∣dem convivijs ipsis inter∣esse liceret, non immisceri spectaculis ac caetibus ubi amatoria cantantur, aut obscaeni motus corporis, cho∣reis aut saltationibus effe∣runtur; ne auditus et in∣tuitus sacris mysterijs de∣putatus, turpium specta∣culorum atque verborum contagione pollueretur. Quid si videret Ecclesia illa prisca Clericos nostri temporis tabernariosDolentes re∣ferimus quod non olum qui∣dam minores Clerici, verum etiam aliqui cclesiarum Praelati, circa commessatio∣nes superfluas et confabula∣tiones illicitas ut deinceps ta∣ceamus, fere medium noctis expendunt et somno residu∣um relinquen∣tes, vix ad di∣vinum concen∣tum auium ex∣citantur, trans∣currendo undi∣que continata syncopa matu∣tinū &c. Concil. Lateran. sub In∣nocentio 3. cap. 17. Surius Tom. 3. p. 742. tabernis{que} (quasi domos non haberent) noctu diu∣que alligatos? quàm ex∣ecraretur hoc facinus? Posthac ergo non solum nullus ex clero sordidissi∣mum cauponem aut taber∣narium agat, sed See Concili∣um Laodicenū Can. 24. Aphri∣canum Can. 7. Agathense Can. 1. Vene∣ticum Can. 13. Turonense 1. Can. 2. Constantinop. 6. Can. 9. Turonicum 3. Can. 21.46. Cabilonense 2. Can. 10.44. Moguntinum Can. 46. Rhemense Can. 18.26. accordingly; besides others here quoted. See Ioannes Langhecrucius, De Vita et Honest. Clericorum l. 2. c. 6. to 20. ne in tabernas quidem, nisi necessitatis causâ divertat: alioquin poenae canonicae imminent illi qui ordini suo hanc ignominiosam notam inurere tentave∣rit.
Crab. Tom. 3. p. 785. Surius Tom. 4. p. 786.Pars 3. c. 26. which hath this title, Theatrales ludos non inferendos tēplis. Olim theatrales quo{que} lu∣di et larvarum ludibria in∣ferebantur See Concil. 31, 32, 33, 36, 7 before. templis, pessi∣mo quidem exemplo, adeo ut provisione canonica, qua hic deterrimus abusus aboleretur, opus fuerit: quem ex nostris diaecesi∣bus jam, ut speramus, eje∣ctum gaudemus. Surius Tom. 4. p. 771. Pars 5. cap. 6. Deni∣que procul absint parochi ab omni luxu: 1 Tim. .2, 3 Sobrium enim vult parochum Pau∣lus, nec multo vino dedi∣tum, ac vino potius ad ne∣cessitatem, quàm ad vo∣luptatem utentem. Nesciat ergo parochi domus com∣messationes crapulosas; execretur See Concil. 27, & 28 be∣fore. cōpotationes illas, ad aequales haustus obligatorias, (which our owne Prohibitio∣nem scotallia∣rum, seu sco∣tallarum, eta. liarum potati∣onum convivii pro salute ani∣marum et cor∣porum, intro∣ductam provi∣da approbatio. ne prosequen∣tes, rectoribus, vicariis et ca∣pellanis paro∣chialibu prae∣cipimus sub o∣bedientiae de∣bito firmier iungendo, quod parochia∣nis crebra exhortatione, di∣ligenter indicant, ne prohibitionis huius temorarii violatores. Alioquin quos in hac parte culpabiles invenerint ab ingressu Ecclesiae et Sacramenti in communicatione amdiu supensos esse denuncient donec aliis cessantibus ad penitentiarium nostrum accesserint &c. Communes autem potaiones declaramus, quoties virorum multitudo quae numerum denarium excesserit, eisdm domiciliis potationis gratia immoratur. Communes potationes quas scotallas mutato nomine charitatis appellant, detestantes huiusmodi potationum auhores, et publice convenientes ad easdē ecōmunicatos per∣cipimus publice et solenniter denunciari, donc super hoc saisfecerint competenter, et absolutionis beneficium meruerint obtinere. Ioannis de Aton Consit. Provinciales Coni Oxoniensis Ano 1222 bound up at the end of Linwood, fol. 124. h. English Councel at Oxford Anno 1222. doth
solemnly censure and con∣demne, under paine of ex∣communication.) Turpissi∣mum putet nisi causa ne∣cessitatis intrare taber∣nam, quasi domum non habeat ad ededum et bi∣bendum. Breviter, vitet omnia quae pastoralem au∣thoritatem aut dedeco∣rant, aut imminuunt, &c. Crab. Tom. 3. p. 806. Surius Tom. 4. p. 786.Pars 9. c. 9, 10. Dili∣genter quo{que} populus ad∣monendus est cur feriae, et potissimum dies Domini∣cus, qui à temporibus A∣postolorum in Ecclesia semper celebris fuit, in∣stituta sint: nempe, ut in unum omnes pariter con∣venirent, ad audiendum verbum Domini, ad audi∣endum quoque sacrum et communicandum. Brevi∣ter, ad vacandum Deo so∣li; ut dies illa tantùm o∣rationibus, hymnis, psal∣mis, et canticis spirituali∣bus transigatur. Hoccine est sanctificare Sabbatum. Quamobrem cupimus his∣ce diebus prohiberi nun∣dinas, claudi cauponas, vi∣tari commessationes, ebri∣etates, lusus improbos, choreas plenas insanijs, colloquia prava, cantilenas
turpes: breviter, omnem luxū. Nā hisce, et (quae haec ferè semper consequun∣tur) blasphemijs et perju∣rijs, nomen Domini pro∣fanatur, et sabbatum (quod nos admonet, ut quiesca∣mus perversè agere, et be∣nefacere discamus) conta∣minatur. Part. 2. cap. 25, 26. It is lawfull for a Priest to live of the Altar, but to be rio∣tous is not permitted. There∣fore a generall Councell re∣calls all Clergy men from surfetting and drunkennesse, & from drinking of healths, from riot, from dice, from immoderate expences and feasts, following the institu∣tion of the olde Testament, wherein the Ministers of the temple were prohibited wine and strong drinke, lest their hearts should be over∣come with drunkennesse, that so their sence might be al∣wayes vigorous and thinne. And the Apostle saith: Be ye not drunken with wine wherin is excesse, but be ye filled with the holy Ghost.
And againe: Not in rioting and drunkennesse &c. Here∣tofore so great honesty was required in the Clergy, that it was not lawfull for them to bee present at marriage-feasts, nor to intermixe them∣selves in Stage-playes and assemblies where amorous po∣ems were sung, or obscene motions of the body expressed either in dances or galliards; lest the hearing and sight de∣puted to sacred mysteries should be polluted with the contagion of filthy spectacles and words. What if that an∣cient Church should behold the taverne-haunting Clergy men of our times; who (as if they had no houses) are tyed to Tavernes both night and day? how would she detest this wickednes? From henceforth therefore, let no Clergy man not onely keepe no taverne or base victualling house, but let him not so much as turne aside into tavernes but in case of necessity: otherwise ca∣nonicall punishments hang o∣ver his head who shal attempt to stampe such a brand of in∣famie upon his order.
Part 3. c. 26. That Stage-playes are not to bee brought into the Church. Heretofore Stage-playes and Mummeries were brought into Churches by a most lewd example, so that there nee∣ded a canonicall provision, by which this most vile abuse might bee abolished; which wee rejoyce, that now, as wee hope, it is cast out of our dioces. Part 5. cap. 6. Finally let parish priests be farre from all luxurie: For Paul will have a parish priest to be sober, not given to much wine, and using wine rather for necessity than for plea∣sure. Let a Bishops or Mi∣nisters house therefore know no riotous feasts; let it abomi∣nate all drinking of Healths, binding men to pledge them by equall cuppes, (which healthes an ancient English Councell at Oxford, Anno
1222. hath long since so∣lemnly condemned under paine of excommunication) Let him repute it a most dis∣honest thing to enter into a taverne, unles it be in case of necessity; as if he had no house to eate and drinke in. Briefly, let him avoid all things which either disgrace or di∣minish his pastoral authority. Part 9. c. 9, 10. The peo∣ple also is diligently to be ad∣monished, why holy dayes, and especially the Lords day, which hath beene alwayes fa∣mous in the Church from the Apostles times, were insti∣tuted: to wit, that all might equally come together to heare the word of the Lord, and likewise to heare and re∣ceive the holy Sacrament. Briefly, that they might ap∣ply their mindes to God a∣lone; and tht they might be spent only in prayers, hymnes, psalmes, and spirituall songs. For this is to sanctifie the Sabboth. Wherefore wee de∣sire, that on these dayes all Playes should be prohibited, all victualling houses shut up, all riot, drunkennesse, dis∣honest Playes, dances fraught with frensies, wicked discour∣ses, filthy songs: briefly, all
luxurie to be avoided. For by these things, and that (which for the most part fol∣lowes them) by blasphemies and perjuries, the name of the Lord is profaned, and the Sabbath (which admonisheth us that wee should cease to doe ill, and learne to do good) is polluted. So that if we beleeve this Councell, Stage-playes, dan∣cing, feasting, and drinking, are See Ioannes Langhecrucius De Vita et Ho∣nest. Ecclesia∣sticorum l. 2. c. 11. & 12. accor∣dingly. no fit holy-day or Lords-day exercises, which should be wholly consecrated to Gods service. The 39. is, Synodus Heidelsheimensis, Anno 1539. which doth thus expresse its resolution in our case. Crab. Concil. Tom. 3. p. 832. Canon: 14. Item ut Clericorum, maximè be∣neficiatorum, vita sit ex∣emplaris et accepta, uni∣versis Clericis beneficia∣tis in sacris, et nostra diae∣cesi constitutis, constitu∣tione praesenti districtius inhibemus, ne ludis taxil∣lorum aut alijs levitatibus, ac choreis, hastiludijs, tor∣neamentis, et alijs specta∣culis publicis et prohibitis intersint, aut talia exerce∣ant prout poenas condig∣nas in contra facientes fa∣cti exigente qualitate, au∣thoritate nostra infligen∣das, voluerint evitare &c. Vid. Ibidem. Can: 14. Moreover that the life of Clergy men, especi∣ally of such who are benefi∣ced, may be exemplary and acceptable: we strictly inhi∣bit all beneficed Clergy men, which are in orders with∣in our diocesse, by this present Canon, that they be not pre∣sent at any games at tables, or at any other vanities, dan∣ces, tiltings, torneies, or o∣ther publike prohibited spe∣ctacles, and that they pra∣ctise not any of these them∣selves, as they will avoid con∣digne punishments against the offenders, the quality of the fact requiring it, to be in∣flicted by our authority. The 40. is, Concilium Treverense, Anno 1549. which
in Cap: De Moderandis Ferijs, decrees as followeth. Surius Tom. 4. p. 886. See Bochelus De∣crea Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 4. Tit. 7. & 11. throughout to the same pur∣pose. Et si quis sive Cle∣ricus, sive laicus in prae∣nominatis celebribus fe∣stis, compotationibus, cho∣reis, ludis, aut id genus lascivijs et levitatibus, te∣merè aut contumaciter se∣se dederit aut immiscuerit, ab Officialibus nostris ar∣bitrariò pro modo delicti, etiam brachij secularis auxilio (si opus erit) in∣vocato, puniri manda∣mus. And if any whether a Clerk or lay man in the forenamed eminent festivalls shall rashly or contemptuously give him∣selfe to drunkennesse, dances, Playes, or such like lascivi∣ousnesse and lightnesse, or shall intermixe himselfe with them, we command that he be punished by our Officials as they shall thinke fit, according to the measure of his offence, calling in likewise (if neede be) the assistance of the se∣cular power. Which shewes how unseasonable Dancing, Stage-playes, and such other sports and pastimes are, on Lords-dayes, holy-dayes, and other Christian festivals, set a∣part onely and wholly for Gods worship and service, not for such vanities and Playes as these; as our owne 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3.27. H. 6. cap. 5. 1. Car. cap. 1. See her p. 241, 242, 243. Sta∣tutes, as well as these recited Councels teach us. The 41. is Synodus Augustensis, Anno 1549. which  excludes all Stage-players and Dice-players from the Sacrament. Surius Tom. 4 p. 807. Cap. 19. Item ne hoc praecellens Sacra∣mentum aliqua afficia∣tur injuria et contemp∣tu, ex sanctorum Patrum decreto et institutione etiam infames omnes ab ejus perceptione pro∣hibendi sunt. Praestigiato∣res, incantatores, publicè rei, et scurrae, et qui ludis vacāt jure pontificio pro∣hibitis:
itidem{que} scortae et enones, ij, inquam, omnes ab Altaris Sacramento re∣movendi sunt, donec vita sua improba penitus abdi∣cata irrogatam sibi poeni∣tentiae mulctam persolve∣rint. Item ijs annumeran∣di sunt, qui alearum lusui perpetuo vacant, See Ioannis Sarisberiensis De Nugis Cu∣rialium lib. 1. cap. 5. Gratian. Distinctio 35. Alexander A∣lnsis pars 4. Quaest. 11. Memb. 2. Artic. 2. sect. 4. p. 391, 392. Mr. North∣brooks Treatise against Dice-play.quibus non est porrigendum ve∣nerabile sacramentum, do∣nec inde abstineant. Which accords well with Surius Tom. 1. p. 367. Crab. Tom. 1. p. 286. Carranza fol. 39. Con∣cilium Eliberinum, Canon 79. Si quis fidelis alea, id est, tabula luserit, placuit, eum abstinere: et si emen∣datus cessaverit, post an∣num poterit communione reconciliari. And with the 6. generall, Councell of Con∣stantinople, 1 Can. 50. Surius Tom. 2. p. 1048. Car∣raza fol. 194. Nullum omniū sive Cleri∣cum, sive, Laicum, ab hoc deinceps tempore alea lu∣dere decrevimus. Si quis autem hoc deinceps facere ab hoc tempore aggressus fuerit, si sit quidem Cleri∣cus, deponatur, si Laicus, segregetur. Cap. 13. Also lest this most excellent Sacrament should suffer any injurie or contempt, even by the decree and ordinance of the holy Fathers, all infamous per∣sons are prohibited from re∣ceiving it. Iuglers, inchan∣ters, publike offenders, je∣sters, and those who addict themselves to Playes prohi∣bited by the Canon Law (as
Stage-playes are) as also whores and panders, all these are to be put from the Sa∣crament of the Altar, untill their wicked life being wholly abandoned they shall have sa∣tisfied that mulct of penance that is imposed on them. To these also are those to be ad∣ded who perpetually give thē∣selves to Dice-play, to whom the venerable sacrament is not to be administred untill they abstaine from dicing. Which accords well with the Councell of Eliberis: Canon 79. If any beleever (or Christian) shall play at dice, or tables, wee ordaine, that hee shall be excommu∣nicated: and if being refor∣med, he shall give it over, af∣ter a yeares space, he may be reconciled and admitted to the Sacrament. And with the 6. Councell of Constantino∣ple Can. 50. We decree, that none of all the Clergy or Lai∣ty; shall from this time for∣wards play at dice. And if a∣ny one from henceforth shall hereafter attempt to doe it; if he be a Clergy man, let him be deposed; if a Lay man, let him be excommunicated. Which Councells I would our common Dice-play∣ers and gamesters would seriously consider.
The 42. is, Concilium Coloniense, Anno. 1549. where  I finde this notable Canon to our present purpose. Cap: 17. Percepimus Comaediarū actores quos∣dam, non scena et thea∣tris contentos transire e∣tiam ad monasteria moni∣alium, ubi gestibus pro∣phanis, amatoribus et se∣cularijs commoveant vir∣ginibus voluptatem. Quae spectacula, etiamsi de re∣bus sacris et pijs exhibe∣rentur, parum tamen boni, mali vero plurimum re∣linquere in sanctimonia∣lium mentibus possunt, gestus externos spectanti∣bus et mirantibus, caete∣rum verba non intelligen∣tibus. Ideo prohibemus et vetamus posthac, vel comaedias admitti in vir∣ginum monasteria, vel vir∣gines comaedias spectare. Cap. 17.Surius Tom. 4. p. 852. Binius Tom. 4. p. 765. We have under∣stood that certaine Actors of Comedies not contented with the stage and theatres, have entred into Nonneries, where they make the Nons merry with their prophane, amorous and secular gestures. Which Stage-playes, Nota. although they consisted of sacred and pious subjects, can yet notwithstan∣ding leave little good, but much hurt in the mindes of holy virgins who behold and admire the externall gestures onely, but understand not the words. Therefore we prohi∣bit and forbid, that from henceforth no comaedies shall be admitted into the Mo∣nasteries of Nonnes, nei∣ther shall Virgins be specta∣tors of comedies. An unanswerable evidence of the desperate venemous corruption of Stageplayes. For if comaedies even of re∣ligious and holy subjects, void of all scurrility, would with their very gestures and action contaminate the mindes, and enflame the lusts of So the Papists repute them, though many of them have beene and yet are notorious strumpets. See Bales, Acts of English Vota∣ries. Onus Ec∣clesiae, cap. 22. sect. 12. & the Anatomy of the English Nonnery at Lisborne, ac∣cordingly. devoted mortified Nons themselves, and the most chast virgin spectators, much more will amarous wanton Comedies corrupt all other actors and spectators, and kindle a very flame of noy∣some lusts within their breasts. The 43. is, Synodus Moguntina, Anno 1549. which  decreeth thus against Stage-playes, dancing, and the like.
Surius Tom. 4. p. 870, 874.Cap. 60, 61. Dum à no∣vitijs sacerdotibus hujus sacri primitiae celebrantur, serio mandamus, choreas et seculares pompas omit∣tendas &c. Sed et sancto∣rum celebritates in di∣em dominicam incidentes censemus submovendas, et in feriam aliquam prae∣cedentem vel subsequen∣tem transferendas, quô sanctorum omnium Do∣mino sua conservetur so∣lennitas &c. Et quo Dei gloria in observatione di∣vini cultus magis illustre∣tur, et fidelium devotio minus impediatur; diebus dominicis et festivatatibus celebrioribus, mercimo∣nia, tripudia, saltationes, quas damnat Concilium See Concil. 13, 33, here. Toletanum, et prophana spectacula, decernimus non permittenda: simul etiam ludicra quaedam à pietate aliena, et theatris, quàm Templis aptiora, censemus in Ecclesijs non admittenda. Cap. 74. Clerici insuper tabernas publicas evitent nisi cas peregre proficis∣centes ingredi oporteat et tàm inibi quàm domi et alibi à crapula et ebrie∣tatibus
omnique ludo à ju∣re prohibito, blasphemi∣is, rixis, et alijs quibus∣cunque excessibus et of∣fensionibus, penitus ab∣stineant. Choreas, spe∣ctacula{que} et convivia pub∣lica vitent, ne ob luxùm petulantiam{que} eorum no∣men Ecclesiasticum malè audiat.
Cap: 60, 61. We seriously command, that whiles the first fruites of this sacrifice are celebrated by new-ordai∣ned Priests, dances and all secular shewes be wholly o∣mitted &c. Wee likewise de∣cree, that those solemnities of the Saints which happen upon the Lords day, shall be remo∣ved and transferred to some precedent or subsequent holy day, whereby due solemnity may be preseved to the Lord of all Saints &c. And that the glory of God may be more illustrated in the observatiō of divine worship, and the de∣votion of the faithfull may be lesse hindred; wee decree that on Lords-dayes & more eminent festivals, merchan∣dises, dances, morrices and prophane dances, which the Councel of Toledo condemns, are not to be tolerated: and we likewise resolve, that cer∣taine Playes that are farre frō piety, & more fit for The∣atres than Temples, are not to be admitted in Churches. Cap. 74. Moreover Clergy men must avoid all publike tavernes, unles it be upon oc∣casion whiles they are travel∣ling; and as well there as at home and elsewhere they must
wholly abstaine from surfet∣ting and drunkennesse, and e∣very Play prohibited by law (as all Stage-playes are) from blasphemies, brawles, and all other excesses and offences whatsoever. They must shun dances, stage-playes, and pub∣like feasts, lest the Ecclesia∣sticall name be ill reported of for their luxury & wantōnes The former part of which Canon prohibits Clergy men from wearing costly apparell, silkes and velvets, which sundry other See Concil. Carthag. 4. Cā. 15.45. Aquis∣granense Can. 45. Matisco∣nense . Can. 5. & 2. Can. 13.15. Constanti∣nop. 6. Can. 27. Foroiuliense Can. 6, 7. Tu∣ronense 3. Can. 4, 5, 7, 8. Late∣ranense sub In∣nocentio 3. Can. 16, 17, 19. & sub Le∣one 10. Sss. 9. De Cardinali∣bus. Londnen∣se apud Matth. Paris. Hist. p. 457. Mediolanense 1. apud Binium, Tom. 4. p. 891, 892. Nicaenum 2. Can. 16. Valenti∣num Can. 13. Cabilonense 2. Can. 4. Tridentinum Sess. 22. Decretum De Reformatio∣ne cap. Concilii Basiliens. Appendix. Surius Tom. 4. p. 222, 223. See Ioannis Langhe∣crucius De Vita et Honestate Clericorum lib. 2. c. 2, 3,. & Bochellus Decretorum Ec∣clesiae Gallicanae lib. 6. Tit. 17. De Vestibus et Ornatu Clericorum p. 1016. &c. where sundry other Councels are cited to this purpose. Councels have condemned in Bishops, Ministers, and all other Clergy men, who should be pat∣ternes of humility and frugality, not of luxury, pride, and worldly pompe to others, as many silken and satyn Divines now are. The 44. is, Concilium Parisiense, Anno 1557. where I  finde these Constitutions. Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Galli∣canae l. 4. Tit. 7. cap. 33, 36. p. 583. See HRa∣banus Mau∣rus Homilia In Domiici diebus, Ope∣rum Tom. 5. p. 604, 605, ac∣cordingly. Caeteros dies festos Dominicis Ecclesia addi∣dit, ut beneficiorum à Deo et sanctis ejus nobis colla∣torum memores essemus, sanctorum exempla secta∣remur &c. orationi vaca∣remus, non autem ocio et ludis &c. Moneant autem Ecclesiarum Rectores sub∣ditos suos ut praedictis di∣ebus festis in templum
conveniant, illud{que} fre∣quentent pièac religiose audituri quae in ijs sacra aguntur.Nota. Conciones at∣tentè audiant, Deum pia mente et religioso affectu venerentur et colant. His autem diebus, ut dictum est, cessent ludi, choreae, ebrietates, vaniloquia, et quaecunque divinam possunt offendere maje∣statem &c. Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Galli∣canae l. 6. Tit. 10 c. . p. 974. See Concil. 36. be∣fore. Fraternitates eas quae ad commessationes et ebrietates ut pluimum fiunt, reprobamus. Insu∣per baculorum cum ima∣ginibus conductum ad domos lacorum, cum tur∣ba sacerdotum, mulie∣rum, et mimorum, di∣strictè sub poena excom∣municationis, et emendae arbitrariae inhibemus, et praecipuè clericis, ne ta∣libus sese immisceant, aut asiensum quovis modo praestent. The Church hath added other holy-dayes to Lords-dayes, that wee might be mindefull of the benefits be∣stowed upon us by God and his Saints, that wee might follow the examples of the Saints, that wee might de∣vote our selves to prayer, not to idlenes and Playes. Ther∣fore let Rectors of Churches admonish their Parishioners,
that on the foresaid feast dayes they come together into the Church, and that they fre∣quent it piously and religious∣ly, to heare those holy things that are done in them. Let thē attentively heare sermons, let them reverence and worship God with a pious minde and religious affection. And on these dayes, as it is said, let playes, dances, drunkēnes, vain discourses, and what ever may offend Gods majesty, cease &c. We reject those fraternities which are for the most part made for rioting and drun∣kennesse. Moreover we strict∣ly inhibit under paine of ex∣communication, and an arbi∣trary mulct, the carrying a∣bout of staves with images to the houses of lay men with a company of Priests, of women and Stage-players: and spe∣cially wee prohibtt Clergy men, that they joyne not them∣selves with such assemblies, nor yet assent unto them by a∣ny meanes. The 45. is, Concilium Tridentinum, which the See Surius, Binius, & Car∣ranza, Andra∣dius Defen. Concilii Tridentini, & Bellarm. De Concilis. Papists boast to be oecumenicall, though See Bishop Iewels Epistle concer∣ning the Councell of Trent, History of the Councell of Trent, Edit. 2. p. 811. &c. Dr. Crakenthop His Vigilius Dormitans, c. 19. sect. 32. to 40. Protestants gainsay it. Which Councell, Sessio 24. Anno Dom: 1563. Decretū de Reformatione Can. 12. decreeth as followeth.
Concilium Tridentinum Sessio 24. Sui∣us Tom. . pag. 979. Omnes vero Cle∣rici per se, et non per sub∣stitutos compellantur ob∣ire oficia &c. Ab illici∣tisque venationibus, au∣cupijs, choreis, tabernis, lusibusque abstineant, at∣que ea, morum integrita∣te polleant, ut merito Ec∣clesiae Senatus dici possint.
Let all Clergy men be com∣pelled to discharge their du∣ties or cures by themselves, not by their substitutes. Let them abstaine from hunting, haking, dances, tavernes and Playes; and let them excell in that integrity of maners, that they may be deservedly called, the Senate of the Church. So much pretended goodnesse at least was there in this Trent Councell, as to prohibit all Clergy mens re∣sor to tavernes, dances, Playes, and such like sports: and to enjoyne them even in proper person for to feede their flockes, and not by proxie; Non-residence being such a odious crime in those Bishops, Pastors and Ministers who have the cure of soules; that this very See Sessio 6. De Reformati∣one Can. 1, 2. Sessi 7. De Reformat. c. 2, 3. Sessio 14. De Reformat. Can. 8, 9. & Sessio 23. De Refor∣mat. Can. 1. & 16. Trent Concell, together with some Concilium Nicaenum 1. Can. 15, 16. Eliberinum Can. 19. Arela∣tense 1. Can. 2.22. & 2. Can. Can. 13. Antiochenum Can. 3, 17, 21, 22, Sardicense Can. 1, 2, 3, 15, 20. Constantipoli∣tanum 1. Can. 2. & 6. Can. 8. Carthaginense 3. Can. 37, 38, & 4. Can. 14, 20, 27. & 5. Can. 5. &. 6. Can. 15, 16. Aphricanum Can. 38. Agatense Can. 64. Chalcedonense Can. 3, 10, 20, 23, 25. Surius Tom. 2. p. 198, 201, 204, 205. & Actio 10. p. 177. Veneticum Can. 14. Ibid. p. 277. Tarraconense Can. 7. Ibid. p. 291. Londinensesub Ottone, Matth. Paris. Hist. Angliae p. 436. Turonense 1. Can. 11. & 3. Can. 4. Toletanum 2. Can. 2. & 11. Can. 2. Aurlianense 2. Can. 1. & 3. Can. 11. Bracarense 3. Can. 8. Apud Palatium Vernis Can. . Nicaenum 2. Can. 10, 15. Arlatense 4. Can. 3, 10. Cabilonense 2. Can. 52, 54. Aquisgraense Anno 816. Can. 45, 50, 71, 87. & Sub Ludovico Pio Anno 833. Can. 11, 16. Parisiense l. 1. . 21, 36. Meldense Cap. 28, 29, 36, 50. Valentinū Cap. 14, 16. Capit. Graecarum Synodorum Cap. 1. Can. 5, 6, 11, 12, & 34. Surius Tom. 2. p. 753, 754, 756. Concilium Arimnese Cap. 40. Surius Tom. 1. p. 437. a. Mediolanense apud Bi∣nium Tom. 4. p. 84. Synodus Heldesheimensis Anno 1539. apud Crab. Tom. 3. p. 833. Concil. Lingonene Anno 1404. Nanetense Ano 1264. Apud Salmurum 1278. Pi∣ctaviense 1387. Lingonense Anno 1431, & 1455, &. 1537. Andegavense 1269. Car∣notense 1536. Pariiense 1557. Ebroicense 1576. Burdigense 1582. Rhemense 1583. Turonense 1583. Aquense 1585. & Tholosanum 1590. Apud Bochellum Decret. Ec∣clesiae Gall. lib. 5. Tit. 10. De Pastorum Residentia. Vid. Ibidem. 54 others, and sundry Apostolorum Cano∣nes Can. 13, 14, 15, 37, 57. Epist. Damasi Papae 1. Apud Surium Tom. 1. p. 466, 467. Lo Epist. Decretalium, Epist.  2. c. 8. Decreta Hilarij Papae, c. 2, 3, 5. Surius Tom. 2. p. 283, 284. Decreta Ioannis 3. cap. 3. Ibid. p. 656, 657. Decreta Pelagii 2. Ibid. p. 663, 664.21. Capit. Adrianae Papae. Surius Tom. 3. p. 256. Decreta Eugenii-Papae cap. 11. Ibid. p. 358. Nicholai 1 Re∣scripta, Tit. 10. cap. 5, 6, 7. Lin∣wood Constit. Provinc. l. 3. Tit. de Clericis Nonresidentibus, fol. 96, 97. Othoboni Con∣stitutiones Apud Ioan. de Aton De Residentia Vicariorum, fol. 74. De Residentia Ar∣chiepis. et Episc. fol. 92. & de Institutionibus fol 98. to 113. Summa Angelica: Clericus: sect. 7. Summa Rosella Tit. Residentia. Ioannis de Burgo Pupilla Oculi, pars 9. c. 4. cum infinitis aliis Cano∣nicall
Constitutions, have solemnly condemned it, as our owne Canons and Writers doe. The 46. is, Concilium Mediolanense 1. Anno 1560. where I finde these following Constitutions. Binius Tom. 4 p. 883. Langhe∣rucius de Vita t Honestate Clericorum l. 2. c. 22. p. 322, 323. Et quoniam piè introducta consuetudo re∣praesentandi populo vene∣randam Christi Domini passioném, et gloriosa martyrum certamina, ali∣orumque sanctorum res gestas, hominum perver∣sitate eo deducta est, ut multis offensioni, multis etiam risui et despectui sit; ideo statuimus, ut de∣inceps Salvatoris passio nec in sacro, nec in pro∣phano loco agatur, sed doctè et graviter eatenus à concionatoribus expo∣natur, ut qui sunt uberes concionum fructus, pie∣tatem et lachrymas com∣moveant auditoribus, quod adjuvabit proposita crucifixi Salvatoris ima∣go, caeteri{que} pij actus ex∣terni quos Ecclesiae pro∣batos esse Episcopus ju∣dicabit. Item sanctorum martyria et actiones, ne
ne agantur, sed ità piè narrentur, ut audito∣res ad eorum imitatio∣nem, venerationem et invocationem exciten∣tur. Binius Tom. 4. p. 884. Cap. De Festorum dierū cultu. Ijs etiā die∣bus studebunt Episcopi, ne personati homines in∣cedant; ne ludi equestres, certamina, aut alia ludi∣cra aut inania spectacu∣la adhibeantur. Choreae, saltationes in urbibus, suburbijs, opidis, vicis, aut usquam omnino ne patiantur. Binius Ibid. p. 893. Cap. De armis, lu∣dis, spectaculis, et ejusmo∣di à Clerico vitandis. Clerici personati non incedant: choreas pub∣licas vel privatas non a∣gant. A venatione absti∣nebunt, fabulis, comaedi∣is, hastiludijs alijs{que} pro∣phanis et inanibus spe∣ctaculis non intererunt; ne aures et oculi sacris officijs addicti, ludicris et impuris actionibus sermombusque distracti polluantur. Clericalis or∣dinis hominibus omni genere saltationis et ludi praesertim veò aleae t
tesserarum ac talorum in∣terdicimus. Nec solum ludere vetamus, sed eos ludorum spectatores esse noluimus, aut quenquam ludentem in aedibus suis permittere. Binius Ibid. p. 906, 907. Cap De Histrio∣nibus et Aleatoribus. De his etiam Principes et Magistratus commonen∣dos esse duximus, ut hi∣striones et mimos, caete∣ros{que} circulatores et ejus generis perditos homi∣nes è suis finibus ejici∣ant, et in caupones et a∣lios quicunque eos rece∣perint acriter animad∣vertant. Et quoniam usu
compertum est, ex aleae ludo saepe furta, rapinae, fraudes, blasphemias, a∣lia{que} id generis flagitia proficisci, prohibeāt tax∣ilis aut alea ludi, et gra∣viter in publicos aleato∣res, et in eos qui hujus∣modi ludis intersint, qui∣ve domum ad recipien∣dos udentes expoitam habent animadvertant. Maximè vero efficiant, ut bonis artibus institu∣endis vel renovandis, o∣tia, quantū fieri poterit, è civitatibus tollantur. And because the piously introduced custome of repre∣senting to the people the vene∣rable passion of Christ the Lord, and the glorious com∣bates of martyrs and acts of other Saints, is brought to such a passe by the perverse∣nesse of men, that it is an of∣fence to many, and likewise a matter of much No. derision and contempt to many: we there∣fore decree, that from hence∣forth the passion of our Savi∣our be no more acted neither in any sacred or profane place, but that it be learnedly and gravely declared by the prea∣chers in such sort, as that they may stirre up piety and teares in the auditors, (which are the most profitable fruites of sermons) which the picture of our crucified Saviour set be∣fore them, and other externall pious actions which the Bi∣shop shall judge to be appro∣ved by the Church, will helpe
to further. Likewise let not the martyrdomes & actions of the Saints be played, but so piously related, that the auditors may bee excited to their imitati∣on, veneration, and invocation. Cap. Of the observation of holy-dayes. On these dayes the Bishops shall endeavour, that no man goe disguised; that no Cirque-playes, combates, or other pastimes or vaine spe∣ctacles be exhibited. Let no morrice-dances be suffered in Citties, suburbes, townes, villages, or in any other place whatsoever. Cap. Of weapons, playes, spectacles, and such like to be shunned by Clergy men. Clergy men may not disguize themselves, or put on a vizard; they may not lead any publike or private dances. They shall abstaine from hunting, tables, comaedies, and tiltings, neither shall they be present at other profane or ridiculous specta∣cles; lest the eyes and eares de∣voted to sacred offices being di∣stracted, should be polluted with impure actions and spee∣ches. We prohibit Clergy men all kinde of dancing, and of play, but especially of dice and tables. Neither doe we onely
forbid them to play, but wee will not so much as have them spectators of plaies, or to admit any one to play in their houses. And were not these ranke Puritans thinke ye? Chapter. Of Stage-players and Dicers. Of these also wee have thought good to admo∣nish Princes and Magistrates, that they banish out o their territories all Stage-players, tumblers, juglers, jesters, and other castawayes of this kinde, and that they severely punish victuallers and all others whatsoever who shall receive them. And because it is found by experience, that See St. Cy∣prian de Ludo Aleae, Paris de Puteo de Ludo. Baptista Cacci∣lialupus de Lu∣do. Stephanus Costa de Ludo in Tractat. Tra∣ctatuum. Lug∣duni Anno 1543. p. 157. to 170. Ioannis Sarisberiensis De Nugis Cu∣rialium l. 1. c. 5. Lyrae Praecep∣torium in octa∣vo Praecepto. Alexander Fa∣bricius Destru∣ctorium Vitio∣rum pars 4. c. 23 Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. Artic. 28. fol. 133. B. Danaeus De Ludo Aleae, lib. Alexander Alensis Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 11. Memb. 2. sect. 4. p. 39, 392. Mapheus Vegius de Educatione Liberorum l. 3. c. 7. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 864. F.G. & l. 1. c. 14. p. 848. C. Roger Hutchinson his Image of God and man. Epistle Dedicatory. Sir Thomas Eliot: Governour. l. 1. c. 26. Agrippa de Vanitate Scintiarum, Cap. 14. Mr. George Whetston his Enemie of Vnthriftinesse or mirrour for all Magistrates, fol. 23. to 30. Media Villa pars 4. In Sentent. Distinctio 15. Artic. 57. Quaest. 8. fol. 225, 226. M. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, pag. 129. to 134. Mr. Northbrooke his Treatie against dice-play. Mr. Samuel Byrd his Treatise of the plea∣sues of this present life. Epistle to the Reader. & cap. 1, 2, 3. Richard Rice his destructi∣on of small Vices Ioannis Langhecrucius de Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 19. & l. 3. c. . Summa Angelica, & Summa Rosella. Tit. Ludus et Alea. Bp. Babing∣ton, Beacon, Perkins, Lake, Dod, Elton, Downham, Williams, Ames, and others upon the 8. Commandement Dr Humphrey of Nobiliy lib. 3. Mr. Thomas Gataker of the Right ue of Lots, and his defence of that Treatie, . Rawlidge his scourging of typ∣lers, p. 1. to 6. Tostatus Tom. 10. in part 3. Math 6. Quaes. 51. to 57. and 67. Olaus Magnu Htoriae l. . c. 12, 1. p 572, 573. Marianus Socinus Senensis super part. . lib. 5. Decretalium de Excessibus Praelatorum cap 11. . 73. to 80. Lessius de Iusitia et urel. 2 c. 26. p. 313. to 318. with infinite others who have written against dice-play. Vincentius Speculum doctrinale l 11. c. 97. robbe∣ries,
thefts, fraudes, blasphe∣mies, and other wickednesses of this kinde, doe oft proceede from dice-play,See Consti∣tutiones Caro∣linae Rubr. 30, 31. Andreas Fricius de Re∣publica Emen∣denda. l. 1. c. 17. p. 62, 63, accor∣dingly. let them for∣bid all playing at tables and dice, and severely punish all common dicers, and those who are present at such games, or keepe houses to re∣ceive such gamesters. But let them chiefly endeavour to effect, that idlenesse may as much as may bee quite bani∣shed out of Citties by institu∣ting or renewing good arts. If therefore all Stage-players, tumblers, and common dicers are thus to be banished and cast out of the com∣mon wealth, and all those to be severely punished who entertaine or harbour them, their Playes must certainly be execrable, intollerable, which make their persons such. The 47. is Synodus Ebroicensis Anno 1576. where  I finde these following Canons. Bochellus decreorum Ecclesiae Gal∣licanae l. . Tit. 7. c. 52. p. 587, 588. Dies festos secun∣dum Scripturas instituit Deus in monumentū ac memoriā suorū benefici∣orū, ut ea homo agnos∣ceret, et de ipsis gratias ageret, &c. quonim festa à creatione mundi fue∣runt introducta, ut ani∣mus cum corpore cessa∣ret à saeculo, et avocare∣tur à solicitudinibus et
laboribus hujus mundi, occuparetur vero in Dei obsequio, recognoscen∣dis ejus beneficijs et gra∣tijs referendis. Arbira∣mur vero nulo secuo gravius nec frequentius peccari contra festorum sanctā et legitimā obser∣vationē quam in nostro; quandoquidē plures ipsa insumūt voluptatibus hu∣ju seculi sectandis, in ta∣bernis, ganeis, lusibus il∣liciris, ac alijs vanis at{que} etiam viciosis actionibus &c. Bochellus i∣bid. Tit. 1. cap 4. p. 545. Ecclesiae hostiarij ergo diebus festis obser∣vēt et notēt, qui de pres∣byteris et parochiais ab∣fuerint ab Ecclesijs; et in∣quirant, qua de causa de∣fecerint; an interea cau∣ponis et sibus tempus insumant &c. God according to the Scrip∣tures hath appointed holy-dayes for a monument and re∣membrance of his benefits, that men might acknowledge them, and give thankes for them, &c. because feasts were in∣troduced from the beginning of the world, that the minde with the body might cease from the world, and might be avo∣cated from the cares and la∣bours
of this world, but yet occupied in the service of God, in recognizing his benefits, and rendring thankes. But wee thinke verily, that in no age men offended more grievously and frequently against the ho∣ly and lawfull observation of festivalls, than in ours; since many consume them in follow∣ing the pleasures of this world, in tavernes, in brothels, in unlawfull Playes, and in o∣ther vaine, yea, and vitious a∣ctions, &c. Let therefore the doore-keepers of the Church upon holy-dayes observe and note which of the Presbyters and Parishioners shall be ab∣sent from the Churches Offi∣ces, and inquire for what cause they were absent; whe∣ther they spend the time in Ale-houses or in Playes &c. The 48. is, Synodus Rothomagi, Anno 1581. which decreeth thus as followeth. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 6. p. 544.Curatis Ecclesiaū praecipimus, ne sinant in Caemeterijs choreas du∣ci, aut alios lusus et infa∣nias fieri, sed potius ea quae luctus et mortis me∣moriam inducunt. Bochellus Ibid. Tit. 7. cap. 26, 27, 30. p. 581, 582.Novimus et expe∣rimur atutias Diaboli ad derogandum cultui Dei,
et ad suū substituendū in illius locum. In nostris e∣nim diaecesibus per om∣nia festa solennia Apo∣stolorum et aliorum san∣ctorū, ad augendū sacri∣legiū, impudica at{que} ob∣scaena ludicra in his ad∣miscet, ut totū hominm perdat in sabbatho ibi{que} subjiciat. Dies vero Do∣minicos videbatur à nū∣dinis eximere, sed eos nō dissimili ratione foedavit ac prophanavit, &c. Elee∣mosynam enim vertit in crapulas, orationem in choreas, et concionem in scurrilitatē. Ad has festo∣rū prophanationes mun∣dandas &c. praecipimus Curatis ut paratū habeāt concionatoré, qui verbū Dei praedicet bis in die (pray marke it) i fieri possit, ut contineatur po∣pulus in pitate, mane scilicet et à prandio. Cō∣messationes, ebrietates, sumptus, lites, lusus im∣probos et inhonestos, choreas plenas insanijs, cantilenas turpes; brevi∣ter omnē luxū et lasciviā atque omnē festorū pro∣phanationem damnamus et reprobamus. Wee command the Curates of Churches, that they suffer no dances, or other Playes or fooleries to be made in Church yards, but those things ra∣ther which may put men in minde of sorrow and death. We have knowne and tried the subtleties of the Divell to derogate from Gods worship,
and to substitute his owne in its roome. For in our Diocesse through all solemne feasts of the Apostles and other Saints, to augment sacriledge, he ad∣mixeth unchast and obscene Playes in these, that hee may destroy the whole man upon the Sabbath, and subject him to himself. But he thought good to exempt Lords-dayes from faires, yet he hath defiled and prophaned them with a like sacriledge: for hee turneth almes into riot, prayer into dances, and Sermons into scur∣rility. To cleanse these pro∣phanations of holy dayes &c. wee command Curates that they provide a Preacher, which may preach the word of God If then Pa∣pists thus po∣vide for two Sermons every Lords day and holy-day to keepe the peo∣ple from Playes and sinull Pa∣stmes: shall Protestants thinke one ser∣mon every Lords-day e∣nough? Cer∣tainly Mr. Bu∣cer was of ano∣ther minde for, saith he, Domi∣nicis dibus in singulis paro∣chi ad mini∣mum duae, si non tres haben∣tur conciones. Bucer in Math. 12.8.11. & Dr. Bnd of the Sab∣bath p. 68. See Bp. Hooper passage to this purpose, Act. 6. Scene 12. twice in a day (pray marke it) if it be possible, that the people may be kept exercised in piety both morning and e∣vening, even from dinner. Wee condemne and reprobate rio∣ting, drunkennesse, prodigali∣ty, contentions, wicked and dishonest plaies, dances fraught with fooleries, filthy songs; briefly all luxurie, lascivious∣nesse, and all prophanation of holy-dayes, under paine of ex∣communication. Vide Ibi∣dem.
So abominable, so unlawfull are dances, Playes and amorous Pastorals on Lords-dayes, holy-dayes and all solemne festivals devoted to Gods service. The 49. is, Concilium Burdigense, Anno 1582. Which as it complaines that Lords-dayes and holy-dayes were much prophaned with Playes, Pastimes, drunkennesse and other villanies in these words. Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 21. p. 580, 581. Tamersi Dominici festi{que} dies ad hoc unum instituti sunt, ut fideles Christiani ab Dominicus dies ideo Do∣minicus appel∣latur, ut in eo a terrenis ope∣ribus, vel mun∣di illicebris abstinentes, tan∣tum divinis cultibus ser∣viamus. Alchu∣vinu de Divi∣nis Officijs cap. 27. Col. 1072. externis operibus abstinentes, li∣berius et majori cum pie∣tate divino cultui vaca∣rent &c. Nihilominus no∣stris temporibus praepo∣sterè fieri solet, ut tàm solennes et religiosi dies non solum in illicitis et secularibus negotijs pro∣curandis, verum etiam in luxu, lascivia, jocis et lu∣dis vetitis, compotatio∣nibus caeteris{que} flagitijs exercendis toti transigan∣tur. Which abuses it en∣joynes Magistrates & Of∣ficials to suppresse: So it decreeth thus. Bochellus Decretoram Ecclesiae Gl∣licanae l. 6. Tit. 19. c. 7. p. 1026. Clerici nunquam personati ince∣dant, ne{que} comaedias, fa∣bulas, choreas, vel aliquid aliud ludicrum ex ijs quae ab histrionibus exhiben∣tur, agant vel spectent, ne visus et obtutus sacris mysterijs dicati turpium
spectaculorum contagio∣ne polluantur. Ab alea, tesseris, chartis, et quovis alio vetito et indecoro lu∣do cū privatim, tū publi∣cè penitus abstineant. Cō∣messationibus et minus honestis convivijs nun∣quā intersint. Forum, mercatus andronas fug āt; nec tabernas et diversoria nisi longioris itineris necessi∣tate unquam ingredian∣tur &c. Although Lords-dayes and holy-dayes were instituted for this onely purpose, that faith∣full Christians abstaining from externall workes, might more freely and with greater piety addict themselves to Gods worship &c. Notwith∣standing it is preposterously usuall in our times, that even religious dayes are wholly spent not onely in following unlawfull and secular af∣faires, but even in riot, las∣civiousnes, prohibited sports and playes, compotations and other execrable wickednesses. Which abuses it enjoynes Magistrates and Officials to censure and prohibit: So it decrees thus. Clergy men may never put on vizards or goe disguized, neither may they act or behold comedies, fables, dances, or any other of those Playes that are ex∣hibited by Stage-players, lest the sight and hearing dedica∣ted to sacred mysteries should be polluted with the conta∣gion
of filthy spectacles. Let them wholly abstaine as well in private as in publike from dice, tables, cards, or every o∣ther prohibited and unseeme∣ly play. Let them be never present at riotous and disho∣nest feasts: let them avoid places of judicature, markets, and places of resort; neither let them ever enter into ta∣vernes and innes, but being necessitated by some long jour∣ney. The 50. is, Concilium Rhemense, Anno 1583. Which  condemnes the use of Stage-playes and dancing, especi∣ally on Lord-dayes, holy-dayes, and the Christmas sea∣son, when they are most in use, under paine of excom∣munication. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 28, 29. p. 582. Diebus Dominicis et Festis in suas Paraeseas populus conveniat, et Missae, concioni, et vespe∣rijs intersit. Ijsdem die∣bus nemo lusibus aut cho∣reis det operam, maximè dum divinum celebratur officiū, monebitur{que} ab Ordinario vel paraeco Ma∣gistratus ut id nequaquā fieri permittat. Ludos the∣atrales etiam praetextu consuetudinis exhiberi so∣litos, et puerilia caetera∣que ludicra, quibus Ec∣clesiae inquinatur hone∣tas et sanctitas in Our Christ∣mas Enterludes and Pastimes then had their originall from these Popish Enterludes. Chri∣sti
et Sanctorum festivi∣tatibus omnino prohibe∣mus; contra nitentes au∣tem poenis coerceri vo∣lumus à superioribus. Let the people meete toge∣ther in their parish Churches on Lords dayes and holy dayes, and let them be present at Masse, at Sermon and Vespers. Let no man give him selfe on these dayes to Playes or dances, especially whiles divine service is celebrating, and the Magistrate shall be admonished by the Ordinary or Parish Priest, that hee by no meanes suffer these things to be done. Wee utterly prohi∣bit Stage-playes and other childish pastimes accustomed to be presented under pretext of custome, with which the
honesty and sanctity of the Church is defiled in the fe∣stivalls of Christ, and of the Saints: those that doe contra∣ry, wee will shall be punished by their superiours. The 51. is, Synodus Turonensis, Anno 1583. which is somewhat observable. Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Galli∣canae l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 40. p. 548. Cùm juxta divi Pauli praeceptum, qui Christi funt sobrietatem semper sectari debeant, diebus Dominicis praeser∣tim et alijs festis, com∣messationes, convivia publica, tripudia, saltatio∣nes, strepitus et choreas fieri, vaenatu et aucupatu tempus terere, in hospi∣tijs seu cauponis alijs quā peregrinis cibaria et vi∣num ministrari, ludos pal∣marios et alios (maximè dum sacra conficiantur, laudes{que} Deo decantantur) aperiri: comaedias, ludos scenicos vel theatrales, et alia ejus generis irre∣ligiosa spectacula agi, sub anathematis poena prohi∣bet haec Synodus: prae∣cipitqu omnibus et sin∣gulis Paraeciarum rectori∣bus eos apud Episcopum deferre, qui huic decre∣to non pauerint, ut il∣lius ordinatione nomina∣tim
excommunicati de∣nuncientur et publicentur: * valdè etenim est absurdū fideles, ijs diebus qui pro∣pitiando Deo sunt desti∣nati, fallacibus illis Satha∣nae blanditijs illectos à di∣vinis officijs, religiosis supplicationibus concio∣nibus{que} sacris abduci. Since according to the pre∣cept of St. Paul, those who are Christs ought alwayes to follow sobriety, especially on Lords dayes and other festi∣valls: this Synode prohibits under paine of excommunica∣tion (on the foresaid dayes especially) all roting, pub∣like feasts, galliards, dances, clamours and Morrices to be made, to spend time in hunting and hauking; to serve wine or victualls in Innes or victualling houses to any but to strangers; any prizes or o∣ther playes to be shewed, (es∣pecially whiles divine things are performed, and praises sung to God:) any come∣dies, Stage-playes, and other irreligious spectacles of this kinde (so it stiles them) to be acted: and it enjoyneth all and singular Rectors of pa∣rishes to cite those before the Bishop who shall not obey this decree, that in his name they may be denounced and pro∣claimed
excommunicated: for it is very absurd, that Christians, on those dayes that are destinated to appease Gods anger, allured with those deceitfull inticements of Satan, should bee drawne away from divine Offices, re∣ligious supplications, and ho∣ly Sermons. So that by this Synodes expresse resolution, Stage-playes are irreligious spectacles, and the deceitfull intice∣ments of Satan, to withdraw mens hearts from God, and from his service; which should cause all Christians to a∣bominate them. The 52. is, Concilium Bituriense, Anno 1584. where  these constitutions were compiled. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 10. c. 19. p. 977. Probetur popu∣lus prophana sodalitia et commessationes, choreas, tripudia, larvas et thea∣trales ludos diebus Do∣minicis et festis exercere; pompas instrumentorum musicorum et tympano∣rum in gestationibus i∣maginū per vias et com∣pita exhibere; à caupona abstineant, et nihil nisi quod pietatē redoleat ex∣erceant. Imitentur Chri∣stiani totis hisce diebus sanctos illos quorum me∣moriam colant per opera charitatis. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 6. Ti. 19 c. 8. & 24 p 1026, 1028. Clerici nunquam personati sint: a comae∣dijs,
Mimis, chorcis, et saltationibus agendis at{que} spectandis abstineant. A∣leas, tesseras, chartas, om∣nes ludos vetitos, cōmes∣sationes, ac inverecunda convivia, mercatus et nundinationes, tabernas ac diversoria praeterquā in itinere devitent &c. Hortatur etiam haec Sy∣nodus Christianos omnes ut pro Christiani nomi∣nis honore et dignitate se gerant, tripudia et saltati∣ones, publicos ludos, mi∣mos, larvas, et aleas, quā∣tū fieri poterit, devitent. The people are prohibited to exercise prophane assem∣blies, and riotous feasts, dan∣ces, morrices, disguises and Stage-playes on Lords dayes and holy dayes: to exhibit shewes or pompes of musicall instruments and tabers in the processions of images through the streetes and crosse wayes: let them abstaine from the Ale-house, and practise no∣thing but that which may sa∣vour of piety. Let Christi∣ans all these dayes imitate by the workes of charitie, those Saints whose memorie they observe. Let Clergy men never put on vizards: let them abstaine
from acting and beholding co∣maedies, Stage-playes, morri∣ces and dances. Let them shun dice, tables, cards, all prohi∣bited Playes, riotous and im∣modest feasts, markets, faires, tavernes and Innes, but onely when they travell. This Synode doth likewise exhort all Chri∣stians, that they carry them∣selves for the honour and cre∣dit of Christianity, and that they avoid and shun Masques and dances, publike Playes, Iesters, Stage-players, vizards and dice, as much as may be. Which stands not with the honour of Christianity. Which Councel extending unto all Christians as well as to Clergy men, and exhorting them as much as may be, to abstaine from all dancing, dicing, Stage-playes, Mummeries, Stage-players and the like, even for the honour of religion, is an unanswerable evidence, that these sports, these Enterludes are altogether unseemely and unlawfull unto Christians. The 53. is, Synodus Aquensis, Anno 1585. which decreeth thus. Bochellus Decretorum Ecclesiae Galli∣canae l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 45. p. 586. Cessent in die san∣ctorum Innocentium lu∣dibria omnia et pueriles ac theatrales lusus. Bochellus i∣bid. Tit. 1. c. 3. p. 563. See Codex Theodosii l. 15. Tit. 7. Nullus etiam vesti∣bus religiosorum hominū aut mulierum utatur ad larvas, vel scurrilia, sub poena excōmunicationis ipso facto incurrenda.
Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gall. l. 6. Tit. 19. cap 6. & 13. p. 1026, 1027. Sacerdotes ne pa∣gellis, aut alea, aliove hu∣jusmodi ludo ludant, aut udentes spectent. Ne personati unquam ince∣dant, neve comaediarum aut chorearum aut pro∣fani ullius spectaculi acto∣res sint vel spectatores. Tabernas ne frequentent adeantve nisi itineris cau∣sa. A comessationibus aut minus honestis convivijs abstineant omninò: nec dicterijs aut mordacibus utantur salibus, neve sa∣crae Scripturae verbis ad profanos sermones abu∣tantur. Let all pastimes, all chil∣dish and theatricall Enter∣ludes on the day of the holy Innocents, cease. Let none likewise use the garments of religious men or women for Masques and scur∣rilous Playes, under paine of excommunication to bee ipso facto incurred.
Ministers may not play at cards or dice, or any other such like play, or look upō those that play. They may not walke disguized, neither may they be actours or spectatours of comaedies or dances, or of any prophane Play. Let them not frequent or goe to tavernes, but by reason of travell. Let them wholly abstaine from rio∣tous and dishonest feasts: nei∣ther let them use scoffes or bi∣ting jests, nor yet abuse the words of holy Scripture to pro∣phane discourses. A good pi∣ous Canon, which I wish all Ministers would ob∣serve. The 54. and last printed Councell with which I will  conclude, is Concilium Tholosanum, Anno 1590. which concludes in this manner. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. Tit. 1 cap. 98. p. 560. Ludis, spectaculis, histrionum{que} circulatio∣nibus, Ecclesiam caemite∣riumque deinceps patere prohibemus. Ibid. lib. 5. Tit. 1. cap. 47. p. 812. Et quoniā Sacerdo∣tū vitia ut apparere max∣imè et primo conspectu occurrere, majori deni{que} dedecore haberi, imò et quae in alijs levia, in illis gravissima censeri consu∣everunt, ijs tripudia, lu∣dos publicos, alia{que} om∣nia, quibus reliquos ho∣mines
damnoso aliquo scandalo offendere pos∣sent, omnino interdici∣mus et prohibemus. Wee prohibit the Church and Churchyard from hence∣forth to stand open to Playes, to Spectacles, and the jests of Stage-players. And because the vices of Mi∣nisters are wont most of all to appear & to come in ure at the first sight, and to be accounted more shamefull, yea and those things that are reputed slight things in others, are deemed most hainous in them; wee wholly interdict and prohibit them dances, publike Playes,
and all other things, by which they may offend any o∣ther men by any hurtfull scan∣dall. To these I shall adde as a Corollary, the Nationall Protestant Synode at Rochell, Anno Dom. 1571. Where these two Canons were unanimously composed by all the Protestants in France. These Ca∣nons I have in a French Manuscript, in∣tituled; Le Dis∣cipline Ecclesi∣astique Des Egglises refor∣mees du Roi aume de France All Congregations shall be admonished by their Mi∣nisters seriously to reprhend and suppresse all Dances, Mummeries and Enterludes. And it shall not be lawfull for any Christians to act, or to be present at any Come∣dies, Tragedies, Playes, Enterludes, or any other such sports, either in publike, or in private chambers. Conside∣ring, THAT THEY HAVE ALVVAYES BEENE OPPOSED, CONDEMNED AND SVPPRES∣SED IN AND BY THE CHVRCH. AS BRING∣ING ALONG WITH THEM THE CORRVPTION OF GOOD MANNERS, especially when as the holy Scripture is prophaned; which is not delivered to be acted or played, but onely to be preached. Dancing-masters, or those who make any dancing-mee∣tings, after they have been often admonished to desist, ought to be excommunicated for this their pertinacy and re∣bellion. By which it is most apparant; that Stage-playes, Dan∣es and Mummeries, have beene evermore condemned in and by the Church of God, as the corruptions of mens manners, and unlawfull Pastimes. Whence the See Andreas Fricus De Re∣pub. Emendan∣da l. 1. c. 23. p. 90. Lydii Wal∣densis pars 2. p. 358. here p. 226, 228, to 233, accor∣dingly. French Protestants (as I am informed by those who have lived among them) doe wholly abandon Stage-playes and Dancing, as Antea nam{que} et Reginae in conviviis viro∣rum saltabant, sicut filiam He∣rodiadis fecisse legimus, nunc vero vix fa∣mula dignatur hoc facere. Chrysost. Hom. de Spir Tom. 3. l. 77. A. unchristian & sinfull pastimes; neither will they suffer their sonnes or daughters to dance, or to resort unto a dancing-schoole, as the French Papists doe, who delight and glory in nothing more than dancing, to which they are naturally addicted; whereas effemi∣nate, amorous dancing either of men or women toge∣ther,
or of men in the presence of women, or of women in the sight of men, hath beene alwayes an allurement to lewdnesse, a grand occasion of much whoredome and uncleannesse, a recreation fit for none but whores adul∣teresses, &c. as Aspectibus meretriciis, & verborum lno∣cinio, altatio∣nibus etiam ac lascivis gesti∣bus, uvenum partem non contemnen∣dam pellciunt, perrahunque in stupri oci∣tatem &c. De Frdine lib. p. 1006. Philo Iudaeus, Hom. 56. in Genesis & Hom. 12. in 1 Cor. c. 4. Chrysostome, Colos vero parietibus re∣linquamus, is∣que muleuli quae caeno suo uvenes in ra∣biemagunt. l∣lae sane et im∣pudenter sal∣tent et rideant. Adverus Muli∣ees . 994. Nazienzen, De rietate et luxu Sermo. See here p. 224, 225. Basil, Speculum Morale cap. 3. Distictio 6. pars 9. p. 251, 252. Vincentius, In Matth. c. 14. Hugo Car∣dinalis, and Concio 6. & 19. Operum Tom. 6. Coloniae Agrippinae 1617. Col. 60, 61, 204, 205. Bellarmine himselfe, with sundry other Fathers and Authors formerly quoted Act. 5. Scene 8. most plentifully testifie. By all these 55 severall Councels and Synodes, in di∣vers ages and Countries (3 or 4 of which are confssed to be Viz. Concilium Constantipolitanum 6. Synodus Nicaena 2. Concil. Constantinop. 8. Concil. Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. oecumenicall and universall, to which all the Christian Churches in these knowne parts of the world subscribed by their selected Bishops and proxies,) it is most apparant, (to passe by dicing, carding, dancing, health-drinking, bonefires, New-yeares gifts, scurrilous songs, and other recited particulars concerning Clergy men, which they have condemned:) First, that the profession of a Stage-player is altogether unchristian, abominable and unlawfull: and that all common Actors and Stage-play∣ers ought to stand excommunicated ipso facto, both from the Church, the Sacraments and all Christian society, till they have utterly renounced, and quite given over their infamous, execrable lewd profession, which is no wayes tolerable among Christians. And if the very profession of a Stage-player bee so execrable by these Councels resolution, much more abominably execrable must Stage-playes be, which make it so. Secondly, that all Christian Princes and Magistrates ought to suppresse all Stage-playes, all common Actors, and to banish them their territories and dominions; severely punishing all such persons who dare to harbour or protect them. Thirdly, that Stage-playes are diabolicall, heathenish, unchristian polluted spectacles, which defile the eyes,
the eares, the soules; corrupt the manners, enflame the lusts of those who act, who see or heare them acted, dis∣abling them likewise to,See Act. 6. Scene 12. and withdrawing them from  Gods holy worship and service. Fourthly, that Stage-playes even in private houses, at marriages or feasts, are unlawfull, and misbeseeming Christians; as well as in  publike Theatres. Fifthly, that the acting of Stage-playes whether publike or private, by common Actors or others, especially in Churches and Church-yards, is altogether abominable and unlawfull; though it be still permitted in some places, among the Papists in forraigne  parts. Sixthly, that the acting of our Saviours passion, or of any other sacred history, either in the Church, or on the Stage, (a See Act. 3. Scen. 5. & Ioan∣nis Molanus Hist. SS. Imagi∣num l. 4. c. 18. practise yet in use among the pro∣phane sacrilegious Papists and Iesuites,) is altogether to be abandoned, and condemned. Seventhly, that dancing,  dicing, carding, and Stage-playes, are unlawfull and a∣bominable, as at all other times, so chiefly upon Lords dayes, holy dayes, and solemne Christian festivalls, (es∣pecially on Easter Whitsontide and Christtide, set apart and consecrated to Gods peculiar and more speciall worship;) when they are now most in use. If any here demand of me, how the beginning and ending of Lords dayes and holy dayes (on which these Stage-Playes and Pastimes are more specially prohibited) should be accounted? I answer; that the Lords day (not∣withstanding some Wolphius Chronol. . 2. c. 1 Dr. Bond Of the Sabbath, . 2. p. 46. and o∣thers who have since followed their mistake. late reverend opinions to the con∣trary) hath alwayes anciently beene reputed to begin at saturday evening, (not at midnight, or daybreaking, as some now teach,) and so to continue to the evening following. At the time of the creation, it is most apparant, that the day began at evening: For, the Gen. 1.5, 8, 17 19, 23, 31. In Genesi nox nō praecedentis di∣i est, sed subse∣quentis; id est, principium fu∣turi, non finis praeteriti. Hie∣rom. in Ionm cp. 2. Tom. 5. p. 17. G. evening and the mor∣ning were the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, (and so by consequent the seventh) day: in ratification of which originall law of nature for the beginning and en∣ding of dayes, the Lord himselfe above two thousand yeares after, commanded the Israelites to celebrate their
Sabbath from evening to evening. Levit. 23.32. From even to even shall you celebrate your Sabbath. By vertue of which precept, the See Exodus 16.2, 23, to 30. &c. 27.10, 11. Iosephus Con∣tra Appionem l. 1. p. 833. Chrysost. Hom. 4. in Genes. Tom. 1. Col. 26. B. & Hom. 82. in Matth. Im. 2. Col. 559. B. Hierom Com. in Ionam cap. 2 Tom. 5. p. 137 G. Iosephus Scager de E∣mendatioe Temporum l. 2. De Anno lu∣daeorum novi∣tio, p. 119. & l. 6. p. 32, 533. Godwin his Iewish Anti∣quities, l. 3. c. 3. p. 121. & Ainsworth hi Annotations on Genesis c. 1. v. 5. Iewes did alwayes begin and keepe their Sabbaths, and solemne festivalls from evening to evening, till our Saviours passion, and this present day. Neither did our Saviours resurrection on the first day of the weeke, alter the beginning and end of that day, nor yet of the Sabbath, which we now keepe upon it: For if the first day on which our Saviour rose a∣gaine tooke its beginning onely from the time of his re∣surrection (as some affirme;) then our Saviour could not possibly be Math. 12.40. c. 16.21. Luke 24.6. Acts 10.40. 1 Cor. 15.4. & our Creed. three dayes in the grave, nor yet be truly said, to rise againe the third day according to the Scrip∣tures: the night in which our Saviour rose, being ac∣cording to this computation, a part of the seventh day, and no part of the first, of which the Hierom. Cō in Ionam c. 2. Tom. 5. p. 137. G. & Com. in Math. 1. v. 46. Augustin. Quaest. Super Evangelia l. 1. Quaest. 6. & 7. Gregory Nyssen De Resurrect. Christi Oratio 1. p. 145. Theophilus Antiochenus Com. in Mtth. l. 1. Bib. Patrum Tom. 2. p. 152. Anastatius Sianita Quaest. 152, 153. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 794, 795. Theophylact. Com. in Matth. c. 12. v. 40. See Mar∣lorat Musculus, Lyra, Gorran, Calvin, Bucer, Arctius, and others in Matth. 12. v. 40 & 16. v. 21. accordingly. Fathers and all other Expositors have alwayes made it parcell, to justifie the truth of our Saviours resurrection on the third day. And whereas some object, that it is absurd, that our Christian sabbath should begin before the houre of our Saviours resurrection, which is the ground of it; for ths were to put the effect before the cause, and to make the sabbath precede Christs resurrection, which was the cause of its commencement. I answer first; that Christs resurrection did not sanctifie onely the first houre, but the first day on which he rose: therefore the antecedent part of the first day, (which was past before his resurre∣ction) as well as the subsequent: For as Christians cele∣brate the day of our Saviours passion, even from the very morning, though our Saviour suffered not till to∣wards evening: and as the Israelites by Gods owne appointment, were to begin their Passeover, Exod. 12.6. the eve∣ning
of the foureteenth day, not at midnight; though the Angell slew not the first-borne of Egypt, nor yet passed o∣ver the Israelites till Exod. 12.29. midnight: And as all Christians keepe holy the mornings of those dayes wherein they receive any publike deliverances, as well as the evening, though the deliverances perchance were not till noone, or after. And as if our Saviour should have risen at two of the clocke in the afternoone, (about which Luke 24.13, 29. &c. compa∣ed together. time he first shewed himselfe to his Disciples) yet no man would have argued; that therefore the sabbath must not begin before that houre, (& so be kept from noone to noone) because we observe not the houre, but the intire day: So our Christian sabbath by the selfsame reason, must be still kept from evening to evening, though our Saviour rose not till the morning; because we observe not the houre, the minute, but the intire day whereon he rose againe,  which then began at evening. Secondly, I would de∣mand, on what day our Saviour rose? on the seventh, or on the first day of the weeke? If on the seventh, then he was not three dayes in the grave; and then we have no ground for sanctifying the first day: If on the first day of the weeke, then the day was begun before he rose: for if the day began not till he was risen; then he rose not on it, but before it. If he rose after the day began (as it is certaine he did, Matth. 16.21. compared with cap. 28.1.6. Mark 16.1, 2. Iohn 20.1. Luk 24.1.6. Acts 10.49. 1 Cor. 15.4. by severall Scriptures,) then his re∣surrection did not change the beginning of the day, it being begun befoe: (else this day should have two be∣ginnings, and so it was begun before it began, and after it began, which is a contradiction:) and if it altered not the beginning of the first day, then by what authority is it changed now? Neither can it be here replied, that the first day hath one beginning, and the Sabbath or Lords day another: for as it is said of the seventh day: Exod. 16.25, 26. c. 20.8, 10, 12. Deut. 5.12, 14. that the seventh day is the sabbath, and the sabbath the seventh day: so it may be truly said; that the 1 Cor. 16.2 Rev. 1.6. com∣pared with Matth. 28.1 Marke 16.1. Luke 24.1. Ioh. 20.1. Lords day is the first day of the weeke, and the first day of the weeke the Lords day, they having both the selfe-same limits.
Thirdly, no Scripture informes us, that our Saviours  resurrection changed the beginning or end of the sab∣bath, that it should now begin at midnight, or mor∣ning, not at evening; therefore it kepes the selfsame beginning and end it had before. Neither doth the ob∣jected reason, (viz: that the cause should precede the effect, warranted by no Scripture,) prove any thing at all. Indeed if any had celebrated the first day as a sab∣bath, before our Saviour had risen, the reason had beene good: but since our Saviour was risen againe before the first day was ever kept holy; and since his resurrection on it was the See Iustin Martyr, Apolo∣gia 2. pro Chri∣stianis. Aug∣stine de Tem∣pore p. 251. Dr. Bond Of the Sabbath, and all Com∣mentaries on the 4. Com∣mandement, & others who have written of the Sabbath, accordingly. cause why Christians subsequently obser∣ved the whole day, not the very minute or houre on which he rose, or that part onely of the day which re∣mained after he was risen; the reason is of no weight at all: For if our Saviours resurrection should not ex∣tend to consecrate that part of the first day which pre∣ceded it, because the effect should not goe before the cause: a man might by the selfesame reason argue; that our Saviours passion did not relate à parte ante, to save those beleevers who died before, but only à parte post, to redeeme such onely who departed after his incarnation: which were blasphemy for to thinke; since our Saviour was virtually and in destination (though not actually) Rev. 13.8. a lambe slaine from the beginning of the world. Now that the Christian sabbath or Lords day begins at even, and so ought to be sanctified from even to even, not from morning to morning, or from midnight to midnight; (which ecclesiasticall beginning of dayes we never find in Scripture, or in any Ecclesiasticall Writers;) it is most apparant: First, because we reade of no other beginning  or end of the sabbath in Scripture but this: and to make it begin from the very houre or minute of our Saviours resurrection, is to make it arbitrary and altogether un∣certaine, because the very houre and minute of his re∣surrection is not, neither can it certainly be knowne. Secondly, because the sabbath being nothing else in pro∣per
speach, but a day of rest, it is most naturall and pro∣per it should then begin when as God and man begin their rest; and leave off their labour; not when as they begin their worke: Gen. 2.1, 2, 3 Exod. 20.8. to 13. but God began his rest at the end of the sixth day, not on the morning or midnight of the se∣venth day: and men begin their Noctem e∣nim ad quietem corporis datam esse cognosci∣mus, non ad muneris alicu∣ius vel operis functionem, quae somno et oblivione trās∣curritur. Am∣brosi Hexeni. l. 1. c. 10. rest at evening, not at midnight or morning: Witnesse Psal. 104.22, 23. The Sunne ariseth, and man goeth forth to his worke and to his labour unto the evening: and Iohn 9.4. I must worke the workes of him that sent me whiles it is called to day: the night commeth when no man can worke: therefore it is most consonant to reason and nature that it should begin at evening. Thirdly, this beginning of the  Lords day on saturday at even doth best prepare Chri∣stians for the sanctification and duties of the Lords day: For it makes them put a period to their labours in due time, it disburdens them the sooner of their weekday imployments; it causeth them to goe to bed sooner, to rise earlier, and to prepare themselves the better for the duties of the ensuing morning; and upon this ground did the Church appoint Concilium Constantinop. 6. Can. 90. & Aquisgranense sub Ludovico Pio Can. 130. Polydor Virgil. De Inventori∣bus rerum l. 6. c. 4. Ioannes Langhecrueius De Vita et Ho∣nestate Eccle∣siasticorum l. 2. c. 11.14. Vigils and Evening Satur∣day service in ancient times, that Christians laying a∣side all secular imployments, and resorting then unto Gods publike worship, might (after the manner of the Iews, who Luke 23.54. Iohn 19.42. had their preparatiō of the sabbath) the better prepare themselves for the sacred duties of the Lords day. And hence perchance it is that we have seldome a∣ny Playes or Masques at Court upon saturday nights.  Lastly, it is infallibly evident by the constant practise of the primitive Church, who kept the Lords day onely frō evening to evening, not from morning to morning; as is evidenced (not onely by the assemblies of the primitive Christians, who met togetherChristiani solti rant ta∣to die ante lu∣cem convenire, carmen{que} Chri∣sto, quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Pliniu Secundu Epist. l. 10. Epist. 97. Which meetings Tertullian stiles, Nocturnae con∣vocationes. Ad Vorem l. 2. c. 3. And others. Anelcani cau. before day-breake upon the Lords day to praise their Lord and Saviour Christ,) but by sundry Councels, Fathers, and Imperiall Constitutions.
To begin with Councels. Survey we Concilium Tarra∣conense Can. 7. Surius Concil. Tom. 2. p. 292. Matisco∣nense 2. Can. 2. Ib. p. 683. Toletanum 4. Can. 8. Ib. p. 729. Constantinop. 6. Can. 90. Ib. p. 1052. Foro-juliense Can. 13. Surius Tom. 3. p. 266. Turonicum 3. sub Carolo Magno Can. 40. Ib. p. 272. And Apud Radulphum Tungrensem De Canonum Observantia Propositio 15. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 11. p. 44. F. G. & Tom 14. p. 242. Concilium apud Compendium, A∣pud Alexandr: Alesium, Summa Theolog. pars 3. Quaest 32. Artic. 2. p. 245. Apud Alchu∣vini Opera Col. 1893. Synodus Francfordiana Anno Dom. 793. cap. 22. Apud Bochel∣lum Decret. Ec∣clesiae Gallica∣nae l. 4. Tit. 7. cap. 14. p. 578. & it 10. c. 12. p. 595. See cap. 6. Ibid. Concilium Moguntinum Anno 813. apud Iuonis Decreta, pars 4. c. 16. Synodus Galonis et Simonis Legatoris An. 1212. & Synodus Andegavensis An. 1282. All these expresly decree. Vt dies Dominicus à vespera usque ad vesperam servetur. Omnesdies Domi∣nicos à vespera in vesperam omni veneratione decernimus observari, et ab omni illicto opere abstinere. Nec aliquis à vespera dici Sabbathi, usque ad vesperā diei Dominicae ad molendina aquar, nec ad aliqua alia molere audeat &c. So that by the expresse resolution of all these severall Coun∣cels, whereof one is oecumenicall: the Lords day ought to be kept onely from evening to evening; and so to begin and end at evening. If we peruse the Fathers; we shall finde Observemus ergo diem do∣minicam fra∣tres, & sanctificemus illam si∣cut antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbato, di∣cente Legisla∣tore; A vespere usque ad vespe∣ram celebrabi∣tis Sabbata ve∣stra. Videamus ne otium no∣strum vanum sit, sed a vespe∣ra dici Sabbati usque in vespe∣ram dici doi∣nicae seque∣stratia rurali opere et ab omni negotio, solo divino cultui vacemus. De Tempore Serm 251. See Quaestiones super Evangelia, l. 1. Quaest. 6, 7. St. Augustine, enjoyning Christians to celebrate the Lords day from evening to evening, as the Iewes did celebrate their sabbath. And that the Lords day and our Christian sabbath begins at evening, not at morning or midnight, it is the direct and punctuall verdict of Dio∣nysius Alexandrinus Epist. 1. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 3. p. 81. A. to H. Of Theophilus Antiochenus Comment. in Evan∣gelia, l. 1. Bib. Patr. Tom. 2. p. 153. C, D. Of Gregory Nyssē Oratio 1. & 2. De Resurrect. Christi p. 145, 146, 151 152. Of Hierō. Com. in Ionā c. 2. Tō. 5. p. 137. E. & Cō. in Mat. 12. v. 40. Tō. 6. p. 22, 23. of Leo Epist. Decret. Epist. 81. c. 1. HRabanus Maurus Homil. De Dominicis Diebus: Ope∣rum Tom. 5. p. 605. Chrysost. Hom. 5. in Genes: Tom. 1. Col: 26 B. & Hom: 82. in Matth: Tom: 2. Col: 559. B. The∣ophylus
Alexandrinus Epist: Paschalis 3. Bibl: Patrum Tom: 4. p: 723. G. Cassianus de Incarnatione Domini lib: 5 Bibl: Patr: Tom: 5. pars 2. p: 81. F, G. Anastatius Sianita Propterea e∣nim Scriptura tenebras ponit ante lucem, quoniam prius eramus in erro∣re, deinde trās∣ivimus ad lu∣cem. Propterea prior est vespe∣ra, deinde dies. Hinc lege est constitutum, ut inciperetur a uespera, domi∣nica; quoniam a morte obscu∣ra processimus ad lucem resur∣rectionis. Ibid. Anagogicarum Contemplationum Hexaëm. l. 2. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 6 pars 1 p. 634. E. Nos domini∣cam a vespera Sabbati auspi∣camur. Ibid. Quaestionum lib: Quaest: 87. Ibid: p: 778. Quaest: Quemlibet diem a vespera computare, et cum praeceden∣te nocte, ceu u∣um copuare solemus. Sic e∣im et Moyses &c. vacatio∣nem a labori∣bus in Sabbato ita descripsit, ut et praeceden∣e nocte et se∣quenti die oti∣um agerent. Testes do Iudaeos qui usque in hodiernum diem id observant; quippe qui non illam no∣ctem, quae Sabbatum subsequitur, sed illam quae antegreditur cessatione ab operibus quiete colurit. Et nos in observatione diei dominici, praecedentem noctem, tanquam cum die copula tam, et non sequentem noctem veneramu. Ibid. A most full testimony. 152, 153. Ibid: p: 794, 795. Theophylact. in Matth: 12. v: 40. & 28. v. 1. Anselmus in Matth: 12. Tom. 1. p: 60, 61. & in cap: 28.1. p: 116. Eusebius Gallicanus de Symbolo Hom: 2. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 5. pars 1. p: 554. G, H. Paschatius Rhadbertus in Matth: l: 12. Bib. Pat: Tom: 9. pars 2. p: 1230. Haymo Halberstat∣tensis Homil. in Die Paschatis, p. 7, 8. Radulphus Tun∣grensis De Canonum observantia lib: Propositio 23. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 11. p: 455. F, G. & Propositio 15. Ibid: p: 445. F, G. & Tom: 14. p: 242. B. C. Amalarius Fortunatus De Ecclesiasticis Officijs l: 1. c: 11. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 9. pars 1. p: 311. F. Honorius Augustodunensis De Imagine Mun∣di lib. 1. cap: 27. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 12. pars 1. p: 947. H. & De Antiquo ritu Miss: lib: 1. c: 191. p: 1047. F. Chri∣stianus Grammaticus Expositio in Matth: Bibl: Patr: Tom: 9. pars 1. p: 941. D, E. Zacharias Chrysopolitanus in unum ex quatuor lib. 4. c. 173. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 12. pars 1. p: 203, 204. To which I may adde Gregorius 9. Decretal. l. 2. Tit. 9. De Ferijs cap. 2. p. 595. Summa An∣gelica. Tit. Dies. sect. 1. & Constitutiones Symonis Islepe Archiepisc. Cantuariensis, apud Gulielmum Lindwood. Constit. Provinciales l. 2. Tit. de Ferijs fol. 74. B. & Ioan. Aton. fol 148. a. where he decreeth thus. In primis sacrū diem dominicum ab hora diei Sabbati vespertina incho∣andum &c. to which the forequoted Authours suffra∣gate. Lastly, Booke of Martyrs, Edit. 1610. p. 715. King Edgar and Canutus enacted by their Lawes, That the Sunday should be kept holy from
saturday at noone till monday in the morning. And Charles the Great, Capit. lib. 6. enacted: A vespera us{que} ad vespeam dies Domini∣cs servetur. hellu De∣cre. Ecl. Gal. l. . Ti.  c. 59. p. 589. A vpe∣ra diei Sbbai usque ad vespe∣ram diei dmi∣nici equestrati a rurali opere, et omi nego∣tio, soo divino cultui vacemus HRanus Maurus Homiliae in Dominicis di∣bu. opeum Tom. 5. p. 605. A. that the Lords day should be kept holy from evening to evening. By all which testimonies and reasons it is most apparant, that Lords dayes and holy dayes begin at evening, and so ought to be celebrated and kept holy from evening to evening. Therfore all dancing, dicing, carding, masques, stageplaies, (together with all ordinary imployments of mens cal∣lings) upon saturday nights, are altogether unlawfull by the verdict of the forequoted Councels; because the Lords day (as all these ancient Authorities and reasons, against all new opinions prove,) is even then begun. Neither will it hereupon follow, that we may dance, dice, see Masques or Playes on Lords-day nights (as too many doe,) because the Lords day is then ended; since these Councels prohibit them altogether at all times whatsoe∣ver. But put case they were lawfull at other times, yet it were unseasonable to practise thē on Lords day nights: For this were but to Gal. 3.32. begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh; to conclude holy daies & duties with prophane ex∣ercises; and See Tertulli∣an De Specta∣culis c. 25, 26. & Here Act. 6. Scene 12. ac∣cordingly. immediately after the service of God to serve the Divell, and to commit our selves to his prote∣ction. Wee must therefore know, that though the Lords day end at evening, yet there are then evening-duties still remaining, answerable to the workes of the precedent day: as the Psal. , 1, 2. Deut. 6.4, 5, 6. Acts 17.11. 1 Iohn 4.1. repetition, meditation, and try∣all of those heavenly instructions which we have heard or read in the day-time; Ephes. 3.14. to 21. Phil. 1.9, 10. 1 Tim. 2.1.8. prayer to God for a blessing up∣on all those holy ordinances of which wee have beene made partakers: Hebr. 12.15. thanksgiving to him for his manifold mer∣cies: Eph. 5.19, 20. Col 3.15. singing of psalmes and hymnes and spirituall songs: Col. 3.15. Deut 6.5, 6, 7. Ephes. 5.4. instruction and examination of our children, servants and families: Psal. 4.4. Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5. examination of our owne hearts, estates, and wayes by the touch-stone of Gods word: together with a Psal. 48. Psal. 31.5. Luk. 23.46. 1 Pet. 4.19. serious commendation of our soules and bodies into the hands of God by prayer and well-doing, when as we are lying downe to our rest. All which most serious necessary duties, with which wee should
close up every day and night, Quis scit an adiiciant hodi. ernae crastina summae Tem∣pora dii superi? Hora. Carm. l. 4. Ode 9. Nemo in crastinum sui certus. Seneca Epist. 92. Nemo tam divos ha∣buit faventes crastinum ut possit sibi pol¦liceri. Seneca, Thyestes Act. 3.(it being for ought we know the utmost period of our lives,) will out all dan∣cing, dicing, Masques and Stage-playes, which are in∣compatible with these holy duties, and altogether un∣seasonable for the night, which God made for Psal. 104.23. Psal. 127.2. Prov. 3.24. 2 Thes. 5.8. See Chrysost. Ora∣tio habita Ka∣lendis.sleepe and rest; not for these dishonest workes of darknesse in which too many spend whole nights, who never im∣ployed one halfe night (or day) in prayer, as their Luke 6.12. Saviour, and Psal. 6.6. Ps. 16.7. Ps. 2.8. Ps. 776. Ps. 91.1 Ps. 119.62. King David did. Since therefore we never reade of any faithfull Saints of God in former times who practised dancing, dicing, Masques or Enter∣ludes on Lords day nights, (no See Act. 5. Scene 8. nor yet on any other dayes or nights for ought appeares by any Author,) though they have oft times spent whole dayes and nights in prayer: let us not take up this godlesse practise now, which will keepe us off from God and better things. But let us rather follow See pag. 644. Edgars and Canutus Lawes, keeping the Sunday holy from saturday evening, till mon∣day morning; spending the See Psal. 92.1, 2. Isay 58.13. See here page 242. & 5. & 6. Ed. 6..3. whole day and night in See Psal. 92 1, 2. Ps. 134.1, 2. prayer and praises unto God, and in such holy actions, as we would be content, that Matth. 24.46. Christ and death should finde us doing. No man I am sure would be willing, that Christ, that death, or the day of judgement should de∣prehend him See Matth. 24 38, 39. 1 Sam. 3.16, 17. Ioh. 21.11, 12, 13. whiles he is dancing, drinking, gaming, Masquing, acting, or beholding Stage-playes: yea who would not tremble to be taken away sodainly at such sports as these, especially on a Sunday night, when e∣very mans conscience secretly informes him that they are unexpedient, unseasonable, if not unlawful too? Let us therfore alwaies end the Lords day, yea every weekday too with such holy exercises, in which we would Pulhra res est consummare vitam ante mortem, deinde expectare securus reli∣quam temporis sui partem. Seneca Epist. 22. wil∣lingly end our dayes: then neede we not be ashamed for to live nor feare to die. Lastly it is evidently resolved by the foregoing Councels that the very beholding and acting of Stage-playes either in publike or private, is al∣together
unlawfull unto Christians, and more especially to Clergy men, (who now are not ashamed to Yea some∣times to act them too in our Viversities. frequent them, against the expresse resolution of all these Coun∣cels:) who are neither to behold nor countenance any dancing, dicing, carding, table-playing, much lesse any publike or Therefore no Academicall Stage-playes. private Stage-playes; the very acting or beholding of which subjects them both to suspension and degradation; as the recited Canons witnesse to the full: which I wish all Ministers would now at last re∣member. If any man here object:Object. that many of the alledged Councels prohibit Clergy men onely from acting and beholding Stage-playes; therefore Lay men may safely personate and frequent them still. To this I answer.Answ. First that most of these Councels expresly inhibit as well Lay men as Clergy men both from acting and beholding Stage-playes: therefore the objection is but idle. Secondly, the very reason alled∣ged by these Councels, why Clergy men should abstaine from Stage-plays: to wit; lest their eyes and eares de∣puted unto holy mysteries should be defiled by them &c. See Chrysost. Hom. 2. in Mat. Tom. 2. Col. 15. D. & Hom. 7. in Mat. here, p. 410 411, where hee proves that Lay¦men as well as Monkes & Mi∣nisters ought to abstain from Stage playes. extends as well to the Laity as the Clergie; since eve∣ry Lay Christian is as apt to be defiled by Playes, and 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Pet. .11. ought to be as holy in all manner of conversation, as Clergy men. Every Lay Christian is, or ought to be a 1 Pet. .5, 9. Rev. 1.6. Hebr. 13.15, 16. Exo. 19.6. Isay 61.6. & 65.21. Non∣ne et Laici Sacerdotes su∣mus? Scriptum est, Nos Sacerdotes Deo et Patri suo fecit. Differentiam inter Ordi∣nem et plebem constituit Ecclesiae authoritas. Sed et ubi tres, Ecclesia est, licet Laici Trtullian. Exhoratio ad Castitatem cap. 5. spirituall Priest, to offer up spirituall sacrifices of prayer and praise to God both morning and evening, and at all other seasons: whence God himselfe enjoynes e∣ven Lay men as well as others; 2 Cor. 7.1. to cleanse themselve from all pollution of flesh and spirit perfecting holinesse in the feare of God; Iam. 1.27. to keepe themselves unspotted of the world; 1 Pet. 2.11. to abstaine from fleshly lusts which warre a∣gainst the soule; and Levit. 11.44. c. 9.2. c. 20.7. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. to be holy even as God is holy.
There is the selfesame holinesse required both of the Laity and Clergy; both of them ought to be alike spiri∣tuall Priests to God (at leastwise in respect of Gen. 18.19. Deut. 6.6, 7. 1 Tim. 2.8. Hebr. 3.13. Col. 3.16, 17. Ephes. 4.29, c. 5.17, 19, 20. &c. 6.4. family-duties, and private exercises of piety and devotions:) if ther∣fore Stage-playes unsanctifie or pollute the one, and in∣dispose them to Gods service, needes must they See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4. & 12 accordingly. defile the other too: and so they are equally unlawfull to both by these Councels verdict. Lastly, though many of these Councels prohibit only Clergie men frō acting or behol∣ding Stage-plaies; partly because their See The Dif∣ference be∣tweene the Ec∣clesiastical Po∣wer and Regall Englished by Henry Lord Stafford; and dedicated to the Duke of Sommerset; printed cum Privilegio; & Dr. Craken∣thorp Of the Popes Tempo∣rall Monarchy accordingly. Canons bound none but Clergy men, not the Laity, untill they were recei∣ved: and partlie, because the reformation of the Clergie (whose See Concil. 54. resort to Stage-playes did seduce the Laity,) was the peediest meanes to reclaime all Laicks: yet they intended not to give anie libertie to Lay men, to haunt Plaies or theatres; for as they inhibit Ministers them∣selves from Plaies, so they See Concil. 19.23, 31, 34, 36, 38, 44, 47, 50, & 55, ac∣cordingly. charge them likewise both by preaching, by ecclesiasticall censures, & all other meanes, to withdraw their parishioner and all others from them. So that the objection is meerelie frivolous; and I may safelie conclude, that these 55 recited Councels have censured and condemned all kinde of Stage-plaies, together with their Actors and spectatours. And dare then anie Cler∣gie man, anie Lay man or Christian whatsoever after all these pious Constitutions, these deliberate resolutions of above a double Grand-Iurie of oecumenicall, nationall, provinciall Synodes and Councels, of all times, all ages of the Church; after the solemne verdict of above 5000 reverend Bishops and Prelates, (who were present at these Councels, and subscribed them with their hands,) once open his eyes to see, his eares to heare, his purse to cheerish, his mouth to justifie Plaies or Plaiers? I hope there is none will be so desperately shamelesse, so grace∣lesse as to doe it now, though they did it out of igno∣rance heretofore. To these forenamed Councels I shall accumulate some Canonicall Play-condemning Constitutions to the same
effect, according to their severall antiquities. The first of them (if we beleeve Clemens Romanus) are the very Canons and Constitutions of the Apostles themselves, who decree thus. Apostolorum Canones apud Srium Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 23. Gratian. Di∣stinctio 34. Carranza fol. 2. Can. 18. See Binius & Crab Tom. 1. Conci∣liorum, Aposto∣lorum Cano∣nes, Can. 17.Can. 17. Qui accepit meretricem, vel mimam seu scenicam, non potest esse Presbyter, vel Episco∣pus, vel Diaconus, vel om∣nino in numero sacerdotali Hee who hath married a strumpet, or a woman-actor or stageresse, cannot be an El∣der. a Bishop, or Deacon, nor yet in the number of the Clergy. If then the marrying with a woman-actor or Stage-hauntresse (who were commonly See here Act. 5. Scen. 6. p. 214 215. Act. 6. Scene 3, 4. Dr. Reinolds O∣verthrow of Stage-playes, p. 70. & Codex Theodos lib. 15. Tit. 7. ac∣cordingly. Whence Sceni∣ca mulier, or mima, is used for a whore. See Nazienzen O∣ratio 28. p. 472. Chrysost. Hom. 10. in Matth. 12. Col. 79. D. notorious prostituted strumpets in ancient times,) disables men from bearing a∣ny ecclesiastical function, by the Apostles owne verdict; how execrable must Stage-plaies themselves and Plaiers be? The same Apostles in their Constitutions (recorded by the selfesame Clemens,) will informe us: where thus they write. Constitutionum Apostol. l. 2. c. 65. apud Surium Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 68, 69. David dixit, Psal. 26.5. Odi Ecclesiam malignan∣tium, et cum iniqua ge∣rentibus non ingrediare. Et rursus. Psal. 1.1, 2. Beatus vir qui non ambulavit in con∣silio impiorum, et in via peccatorum non sterit, et in cathedra pestilentium non sedit, sed in lege Domini voluntas ejus, et in lege ejus meditatibur die ac nocte. Tu vero relicto fi∣delium caetu, Dei Ecclesijs ac legibus, respicis spe∣luncas latronum, sancta ducens quae nefaria esse voluit: non solum{que} id facis, sed eiam ad Grae∣corum
ludos curris, et ad Theatra properas, expe∣tens unus ex venientibus eo numerari, et particeps fieri auditionum turpium, ne dicam abominabilium: nec audisti Hieremiam di∣centem:Ier. 15.17. Domine, non se∣di in consilio ludentium, sed timui à conspectu ma∣nûs tuae: neque Iob di∣centem similia: Iob 31. Si ve∣rò et cum risoribus am∣bulavi aliquando, appen∣dor enim in statera justa. Quid verò cupis Graecos sermones percipere ho∣minum mortuorum, af∣fatu Diaboli tradentium a, quae mortem afferunt, fidem evertunt, ad deo∣rum multitudinem cre∣dendam inducunt eos, qui ad illos attentionem adhi∣bent? Vos ergo divinis legibus invigilantes, vitae hujus necessitatibus pu∣tate eas praestantiores, majorem{que} ijs honorem deferentes, convenite ad Ecclesiam Domini, Acts 24. quam acquisivit sangine Christi dilecti, Col. 1. primo∣geniti omnis creaturae. Ea est enim altissimi filia, quae parturit nos per ver∣bum gratiae, et Col. 1. forma∣vit
in nobis Christum, cu∣jus participes facti, Ephes. 5. sacra membra existitis et dilecta, non abentia ma∣culam neque rugam, neque aliquid hujusmodi sed tan∣quam sancti et irrepraeben∣sibiles in fide, perfecti estis in ipso, secundum imagi∣nem ejus qui creavit vos. Cavete igitur, ne conven∣tus celebretis cum ijs qui pereunt, quae est Synago∣ga Gentium ad deceptio∣nē et interitum. 2 Cor. 6. Nul∣la est enim Dei ocieta cum Diabolo: Nam qui congregatur una cum ijs, qui cum Diabolo idem sentiunt, unus ex ipsis conn merabitur, evae ha∣bebi. Fugite quoque in∣decora spectacula, thea∣tra (inquam) et Graeco∣rum ludos &c. Propterea enim oportet fidelem fu∣gere impiorum caetus, Graecorum et ludaeorum, ne ubi unà cum ijs degi∣mus, animis nostris la∣queos paremus: et ne ubi in eorum festis versamur, quae in honorem daemo∣num celebrantur, cum ijs habeamus societatē impi∣etatis. Vitandi quo{que} sunt illorum mercatus, et qui
in ijs fiunt ludi. Vitate igitur omnem idolorum pompam, speciem, mer∣catum, convivia, gladia∣tores, denique omnia dae∣moniaca spectacula. David hath said, I have hated the congregation of evil doers, and have not kept companie with those who doe wicked things. And a∣gaine. Blessed is the man, who hath not walked in the counsell of the wicked, and hath not stood in the way of sinners, and hath not sate in the seat of contagious per∣sons, but his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law will he meditate day and night. But thou leaving the assembly of the faithfull, the Church and lawes of God, re∣gardest the dens of theeves, accounting those things holy,
which he reputeth wicked: and thou doest not that onely, but thou runnest likewise to the Graecian Playes, & hastests to theaters, desiring to be reputed among those who resort thi∣ther, & to be made a partaker of filthy, that I say not abo∣minable hearings: neither has thou heard Ieremie saying: O Lord, I have not sate in the assembly of Players, but I have feared because of thy hand: nor yet Iob, uttering the like: And if I have at any time walked with scoffers, for I am weighed in a jus ballance. But why desirest tho to heare the Greeke speeches of dead men, delivering those things by the instinct of the Divell which bring in death, overturne faith, induce those to beleeve a multitude of gods, who give attention to those things? But you waiting upon the divine lawes, esteeme them more excellent than the ne∣cessaries of this life, and gi∣ving them greater honour, come together to the Church of the Lord, which he hath purchsed with the blood of his beloved Christ, the first-borne of every creature. For she is th daughter of the most high, who hath begotten s by
the word of grace, and hath formed Christ in us, of whom being made partakers, you become holie and beloved members, not having spot or wrinkle, or anie such thing, but as holie and unblameable in faith, you are perfect in him, according to the image of him who hath created you. Beware therefore that you celebrate no meetings with those that perish, which is the Synagogue of the Gentiles, to deceit and destruction. For God hath no fellowshippe with the Divell; for hee who is assembled together with those, who thinke the same with the Divell, shall bee ac∣counted one of them, and shall have woe. Fly likewise (I say) the unseemely Spectacles and Theatres of the Grcians. For therefore ought a Christian to shun the assemblies of wic∣ked men, of Greeks and Iewes, lest where wee live together with them, wee provide snares for our soules, and lest whiles wee are conversant in their feasts, which are celebrated to the honour of Divels, wee become partakers with them of impiety. Their markets likewise are to be eschued, and the Playes that are made
in them. Shunne therefore all the pompe, the shew, the mar∣ket, the feasts, the Gladia∣tors of Idolls, and finally all daemoniacall Playes and Spe∣ctacles. Than which Apostolicall Constitutions, there can be nothing more expresse and punctuall against Stage-playes. To these Play-censuring Canons of all the Apostles together, I shall adde these Constitutions of St. Paul in particular, registred by the selfesame Clement of Rome, in these very words. Clemens Ro∣manus Constit. Apost. l, 8 c. 38. Canones Vari Pauli Apostoli, p. 120.Scenicus si accedat, sive vir sit sive mulier, auriga, gladiator, cursor stadij, ludius, Olympius choraules, cytharedus, ly∣ristes, saltator, caupo, vel desistar, vel rejciatur. Which Canon extends to Actors onely, not to Spe∣ctators. Theatralibus ludis qui dat operā, venationibus, equorum cursibus, ac cer∣taminibus; vel desistat, vel rejiciatur. Graecos mores qui sequitur, vel mutet se vel rejiciatur. If a Stage-player, be it man or woman, a Chariotor, gladiator, race-runner, a fen∣cer, a practiser of the Olym∣pian games, a flute-player, a fidler, a harper, a dancer an alehouse-keeper, come to turne Christian; either et him ive over these professions, or else be rejected. He who gives himselfe to Stageplaies,He meanes hunting of and combating with wilde beasts in Am∣phitheaters, which was stiled, Venatio. See Tertullian. De Spectac. lib. & Lypsius de Amphitheatro, & Bulengerus De Venatione Circi lib. accor∣dingly. huntings, horse-races, or prizes; either let him desist, or let him be cast out of the Church. He who followeth Greeke fashions, let him re∣forme himselfe, or be rejected. Which extends to Actors and Spectators too. So that if the very Apostles themselves, or St. Paul may be um∣pires; the very acting and beholding of Stage-playes is unlawfull unto Christians of all sorts; as these their Canons and Constitutions largely prove. The 2. Constitution which I shall here remember, is that of Pope Eusebius, about the yeare of our Lord 369.
Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 312. Iuo De∣creorum pars 13. c. 75. Buchards l. 14 Decretorum cap. 7. Ioannes Langhecrucius de Vita t Ho∣nestate Ecclesi∣asticorum l. 2. c. 16. p. 284. Oportet Episco∣pū moderatis epulis con∣tentum esse, suos{que} con∣vivas ad comedendum et bibendum non urgere, quin potius sobrieatis praebere exemplum. Re∣moveantur ab ejus con∣vivio cuncta turpitudinis augmenta, non ludicra spectacula, non acroama∣tum vaniloquia, non fatu∣orum stultiloquia, non scurrilium admittantur praestigia: (A full clause against these stageplayes:) Adsint peregrini et pau∣peres et debiles, qui de sacerdotali mensa Chri∣stum benedicentes, bene∣dictionem percipiant. Re∣citetur sacra lectio, subse∣quatur vivae vocis exhor∣tatio, ut non tantum cor∣porali cibo, immo verbi spiritualis alimento, con∣vivantes se refectos gra∣tulentur, ut in omnibus honorificetur Deus per Iesum Christum.
A Bishop ought to be con∣tent with moderate feasts, and not to urge his guests to eate or drinke, but rather to give them an example of sobriety Let all dugmentations of fil∣thinesse be removed from his feast and let no ludicrous Stage-playes, no vaine reci∣all of comicall verses, no foo∣lish speeches of fooles, nor le∣gerdemaines of jesters be ad∣mitted. Let strangers, let poore and feeble persons be pre∣sent, who blessing Christ for the sacerdotall table, may re∣ceive a blessing. Let the Scrip∣ture be there recited, and let the exhortation of the living voice follow it, that the guests may rejoyce that they are fed not onely with corporall food, but likewise with the foode of the spirituall word, that God in all things may bee glorified through Iesus Christ our Lord. Such should Bishops, such Ministers feasts and en∣tertainments be, though now grown out of use with many. The 3. is the Decree of Pope Innocent the first, Anno  Christi 408. Capit. 1. sect. 11. Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 1. p. 529. & Gra∣tian. Distinctio 51.Praeterea, frequenter quidam ex fratribus no∣stris, curiales, vel quibus∣libet publicis functioni∣bus occupatos, clericos
facere contendunt, quibus postea major tristitia &c. Constat enim eos in ipsis munijs etiam voluptates exhibere, quas à diabolo inventas esse non est du∣biū; et ludorū vel Stageplayes and such like spectacles were stiled Munera, because they were freely be∣stowed by the Magistrates on the people as a boone or gift. See Codex Theodosii l. 15. Tit. 5, 6, 7. munerū apparatibus aut praeesse, aut interesse &c. Moreover certaine of our brethren strive to make Cour∣tiers, or those who are imploy∣ed in certaine publike functi∣ons, Clergy men, from whom
greater sorrow ariseth after∣wards. For it appeares that in their very offices them∣selves they exhibit pleasures, which without doubt were in∣vented by the Divell, and are either chiefe overseers or spe∣ctators of Playes and publike spectacles. Stage-playes therefore by this Popes verdict (for of them he speakes) are the very inventions of the Divell. The 4. is the Dcretall of Pope Sextus, where we reade as followeth. Ioannis de Wankel. Brevi. arium Sexti. l. 3. Tit. 1. De Vita et Honestate Clericorum fol. 88. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi, pars 7. c. 10. P. Clerici qui non mo∣dicum dignitati clericalis ordinis detrahunt, et se joculatores seu Goliardos aut buffones faciunt, si per annum ignominiosam ar∣tem illam exercuerint, ip∣so jure, si minori tempo∣re, et non desistunt post tertiam monitionem, ca∣rent omni privilegio cle∣ricali. Clergy men who doe not a little detract from the digni∣tie of the clericall order, and make themselves jesters, So Wankel, Spelman, and others interpret the word Goli∣ardos: so doth Gulielmus Pa∣risiensis De Vi∣tiis et Virti∣bus c. 6. p. 262. Stage-players or Buffones, if they shall exercise that ig∣nominious art for a yeares space, or for a lesser time, if they desist not after the third admonition, are ipso jure de∣prived of all clericall privi∣ledge. The 5 is the Constitution of Pope Clement the 5. An. 1310, which as itIoannis De Wankel Cle∣mentinarum Conclusiones, Tit. De Statu Monachorum fol. 60, 61, 62. prohibits Clergy men and Monkes  to hunt or hauke; so it likewise decreeth: Ibidem.Ne moniales aut co∣matis aut cornutis utan∣tur crinibus, aut choreis, ludis, aut secularibus in∣nersint festis. That Nonnes shall not use broydered or horned haire, nor yet be present at dances, Playes, or secular feasts. The 6. is the Synodall Decrees of Odo Parisiensis, about the yeare of our Lord 1200. which ordaine; Carranz fol.  Eccl. Ti. 19. c. 517, 18. Ne sacerdotes in
uis domibus habeant sca∣chos, et aleas, omnino prohibetur. Prohibetur penitus uni∣versis sacerdotibus ludere cū decijs, et interesse spe∣ctaculis, vel See Ioannis Nyder. Expo∣sitio Praecepto. ru Declogi, Praeceptum 6. cap. 3. fol. 124. chreis assi∣stere, et intrae tabernas, causa potandi, aut discur∣rere per vicos aut plateas, et ne habeant vestes inor∣dinaas ōnino prohibetur It is wholly prohibited Cler∣gie
men, tha they keep no checker-men, or tables and dice in their hoses. All Clergy men are t∣terly prohibited to play a dice, to be present at Stage-playes, or stand by dancers, or to enter into  to drinke, or to runne through villages or streetes, or to  weare disorderly apparell. The 7. is the Constitution of Pope Pis the 5. Anno Dom. 1566. which runnes thus. Pi 5. Con∣stitut. An. 1566 & Ioan. Lang∣hecrucius De Vita et Honest. Ecclesiastic. l. 2. c. 21. p. 318. Vt Clericiquos prop∣ter Christum spectaculū fieri oporteat mundo, An∣gelis, et hominibus max∣imè debeant ab ijs specta∣culis, quae Christum non apiunt, abstinere; et ne comaedias, fabulas, cho∣reas, hastiludia, aut ludi∣crum, et profanum ullum spectaculi genus agant vel spectent. Ne talis, tef∣eris, pagellis pictis, e omnino alea, aut ullo prae∣terea vetito at indecoro ludi genere ludant, neve hujusmodi ludi spectato∣res sint. Ne comessaio∣nibus aut minus honestis convivijs intersint, cau∣ponasque aut tabernas ne ingrediantur, nii longio∣ris itineris causa ne cui∣quam
propinent, aut pro∣vocati ad bibendum re∣spondeant, sed sobrie et castè ex doctrina Apo∣stol vivant. Which Con∣stitution was framed out of the Here p. 623. fore-recited Decree of the Councell of Trent, of which this Pope (writes Langhecrucius,) was a most diligent observer and practiser. That Clergy men who ought to bee made a spectacle to the world, to Angels and to men Christ, ought chie∣fly to abstaine from those spe∣ctacles, which savour not of Christ; neither may they act or behold Comedies, Playes, dances, usts, or any prophane sport or spectacle. Let them not play at tables, dice, cards, or any game at dice: (which games even Schiscitanti∣bus deschachis talis et aleis, et huiusmodi, dic peccatum max∣imum esse hu∣iusmodi ludum Mahumetis Al∣coran, prined 1550. Azoara. 3. p. 17. Viri boni, aleas vel eacos, cum nō sint res liiae, sed Diboli ma∣china, per quae inter homine inimicitiam et abhorritionem iniicere, et os ab orationibus et invocatione Dei retrahere maxime niti∣tur, praetermit∣tite. Ibid. Aza. 3. p. 43. Mahomet him selfe hath condemned and prohibited his followers in his Alcoran, as the greatest sinnes, and the Divell en∣gine, to breed discords a∣mong men, and to withdraw them from prayer and Gods service:) nor at any other prohibited or unseemely kinde of play; nihr may they bee
spectators of such playes or games. They may not be pre∣sent at riotous or dishonest feasts, neither shall they enter into any avernes or alehouses unles it be by reason of some long journey. Let them not drinke (or begin an health) to any one; nor yet pledge others when they are provoked to drinke; but let them live so∣berly and chastly according to the Apostles doctrine. And is it not then a shame for Protestant Ministers to frequent, to use these Playes, these games and sports, or to practise these abuses, which Popes, and Papists thus condemne, at leastwise by their publike Decrees, though they still approve them by their practise? To these Canonicall, I shall here annexe these Im∣periall Constitutions following; which inhibit all Cler∣gy men under severe penalties, yea and other Christians too, from dancing, dicing, acting or beholding Stage-playes, and such like Spectacles as these. The first is the Decree of Iustinian himselfe, directed to Epiphanius the Patriarke in these words. Iustinian. Co∣dicis lib. 1. Tit. 6. De Episcopis et Clericis. Le. 34. Corpus Iu∣ris Civilis Tom. 4. Col. 161, 162. Vehementer credi∣mus quod Sacerdotū pu∣ritas et decus, et ad Domi∣nū Deū et Salvatorē no∣strum Iesum Christum fervor, et ab ipsis missae perpetuae praeces, multam propitiationē nostrae rei∣pub: et incrementū prae∣bent, per quas datur no∣bis et barbaros subjuga∣re, et dominum fieri eo∣rum
quae anteà non obti∣nuimus; et quantò plus re∣bus illorum accedit hone∣statis et decoris, tantò ma∣gis et nostram remp. au∣geri credimus. Si enim hi praetulerint vitam hone∣stam et undique irrepre∣hensibilem, et reliquum populum instruerint, ut is ad honestatem illorum respiciens multis peccatis abstineat, planè est, quod inde et animae omnibus mliores erunt, et facilè nobis tribuetur à maximo Deo et Salvatore nostro Iesu Christo clementia conveniens. Haec igitur nobis speculantibus, nun∣ciatum est, praeter com∣munem rerum fidē, quos∣dam ex reverendissimis diaconis item{que} presbyte∣ris, (nam eo amplius dice∣re erubescimus, Deo aman∣tissimos nempe Episco∣pos,) quosdam, inquam, ex his non vereri, alios qui∣dem per se, aleas seu tesse∣ras contrectare, et adeò pudicum, ATQVE ETIAM IDIOTIS A NOBIS FREQVENTER INTER∣DICTVM SPECTACV∣LVM participare: alios ve∣rò talem ludum non accu∣sare,
sed vel communicare facientibus, au sedere spe∣ctatores actus indecori, et spectare quidem cum avi∣ditate omnimoda, res om∣nium rerum importunissi∣mas, ermones vero audi∣re blasphemos, quos in ta∣libus necesse est fieri, pol∣luere etiam suas manus, et oculos, et aures SIC DAMNATIS ET PROHI∣BITIS LVDIS; alios ve∣ro neque obscurè et laten∣ter, aut equorum certami∣nibus se immiscere, aut e∣tiam invitare aliquos super equorū profligatione aut victoria, vel per seipsos vel per alios quosdam Et quia nō decēter talia ludāt, aut SCENICORVM aut thylemicorū SPECTATO∣RES FIVNT LVDORVM, aut earum quae in theatris certantium ferarum pug∣nae fiunt, quemadmodum ipsi vel his qui modo et recens initiati sunt, et ado∣randis mysterijs dignati ipsi praedicant, ut ABR∣NVNCIENT ADVERSA∣RII DAEMONIS CVL∣TVI, ET OMNIBVSPOM∣PIS EIVS, QVARVM NON MINIMA PARS TALIA SPECTACVLA
SVNT. Saepè quidem istis talia custodiri praedica∣mus: videntes autem de his factam nobis relationē in necessitatem incidimus ad praesentem veniendi le∣gem, tum propter nostrum super religione studium, tum etiam propter sacer∣dotij ipsius simul et com∣munis reipub: utilitatem. Et sancimus, neminem ne∣que diaconum, neque pres∣byterum, et multo magis neque Episcopum, (quod quidem et incredibile for∣tè videri possit,) ut quorū in ordinationibus praeces ad Dominum mittuntur Christum Deum nostrum, et invocatio sancti et ado∣randi sit Spiritus, et eorum capitibus aut manibus im∣ponuntur sanctissima eo∣rum quae apud nos sunt mysteriorum, ut scilicet ipsis omnia sensoria instru∣menta pura fiant et conse∣crentur Deo. Neminem i∣gitur horum audere de cae∣tero et post divinam no∣stram legem aut cubicare, (id est tesseris seu aleis lu∣dere,) quocunque aleae ge∣nere aut ludo, aut ita lu∣dentibus communicare aut conversari, aut recreari, aut
unà cum ijs agere, aut eis testimoniū perhibere, aut interesse PLEBEIS HV∣IVSMODI SPECTACV∣LIS quae prius diximus, aut quid eorum quae in his prohibētur facere, sed OM∣NI AD LLA PARTI∣CIPIO IN POSTERVM ABSTINERE &c. Si vero quis de caetero tale quid faciens deprehensus fue∣rit &c. et convictus feurit diaconus et presbyter vel aleator esse, vel aleaorum particeps, aut talibus assi∣dens vanitatibus, vel prae∣dictis interesse spectaculis; aut etiā fortè aliquis Deo amabilium Episcoporum (quod quidē neque even∣turum esse confidimus,) prorsus tales cujusdā par∣ticipes esse spectaculi, aut cum aleatoribus unà sede∣re, et disponere, aut pacis∣ci, aut sponsiones acere, de caetero ausus fuerit, And was not this Emperour a rank Puritan thinke you, for making such a severe Law as this against these scanda∣lous irregular Clergy men.eum à sacra eperari liturgia ju∣bemus, ac imponi ipsi ca∣nonicā poenam, et definiri tempus infra quod conve∣niat metrapolitanū suū je∣jijs et supplicationibus utentem magnum propiti∣ari Deum super tali trans∣gressione: et si per definitū
tempus maneat lachrymis et poenitentia et jejunio et ad Dominum Deum ora∣tione, remissionem delicti exorans, conestim ei cui subjectum est hoc diligen∣ter cognito, et sollicitè requisito, communē qui∣dem pro ipso orationem fieri curabit, et cum omi diligentia injunget ipsi ut posteà à tali sacerdotij d∣decoratione abstinear; e si putaverit ipsum sufficien∣te ad poenietiam venis∣se, tum sacerdotali eum re∣stituere dignetur clemen∣tiae. Si vero et post ex∣communicationē inventus fucrit, ne{que} vera poeniten∣tia usus, et aliàs etiam as∣pernatus am rem et ma∣nifestè ab adversario (dia∣bolo) mente ineatus, ip∣sum quidem sacerdos sub quo degit, sacris eximat catalogis, omnino eum deponens: ille autem non amplius ullo modo licen∣tiam habeat ad sacerdota∣lem venire gradum &c. We verily beleeve that the puritie and honour of Mini∣sters, and their zeale to our Lord God and Saviour Iesus Christ, and their perpetuall prayers, afford much reconci∣liation and increase to our Republike; by which there is power given to us, both to sub∣due the barbarians, and to be made Lord of those things which before we have not ob∣tained,
and by how much the more honesty and comelinesse accrues to their affaires, we beleeve that our common∣weale shall bee so much the more increased. For if these shall live an honest, and eve∣ry way unblameable life, and shall instruct the residue of the people, that they behol∣ding their honesty may ab∣staine from many sinnes, it is manifest, that frō thence even all mens soules will be the better, and convenient mercy shall be easily granted to us by our great God and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ. We ther∣fore contemplating these things, it is tolde us, beyond the common truth of things, that certaine of the most re∣verend Deacons and Pres∣byters, (for wee are more a∣shamed to say, that even Bi∣shops who are best beloved of God,) I say, that some of these, are not afraid, some of them by themselves, to play at tables or dice, and to participate of so shamefull a SPECTACLE, WHICH WEE HAVE OFT PRO∣HIBITED EVEN LAY∣MEN THEMSELVES: that others verily blame not this play, but either communicate
with those who use it, or si spectators of this unseemely act, beholding even with all greedinesse the most inconve∣nient foolish thing of any, and hearing blasphemous spee∣ches which must necessarily be uttered in such sports, Stage-playes therefore and the heholding of Dicers, and Dice-play pol∣lute mens eyes, their eares, their hands and oules. polluting even their hands, their eyes & eares with such CONDEMNED AND PRO∣HIBITED PLAYES: that others trully, not obscurely and covertly, intermingle themselves in Cirque-playes and horse-races, or else bett with others upon the discom∣fiting and victorie of horses, either bythemselves or some others. And because they can∣not conveniently use such Playes, they become SPEC∣TATORS OF STAGE-PLAYES and Enterludes, or of those combates of wilde beasts that are made in thea∣ters; albeit they thēselves doe preach even to those that are even now but newly admitted to and made partakers of th sacred mysteries,Stage-playes therefore are the very pomps of the Divell, which wee re∣nounce n bap∣tisme. that they should RENOVNCE THE WORSHIP OF THE DIVEL THEIR ADVER∣SARY, AND ALL HIS POMPES, OF WHICH SVCH SPECTACLES OR
STAGEPLAYES ARE NOT THE LEAST PART. Truly we have ofttimes proclaimed that such things should bee observed by them: but seeing there is a relation of these things made unto us, we are fallen into a necessity of com∣ming to the present law, both in respect of our care for re∣ligion, as also for the publike benefit of the ministry it self, and of the Republike. And we decree, that no Deacon nor Presbyter, and much more no Bishop, (which tru∣ly may chance to seeme in∣credible,) as in whose ordi∣nations praiers are sent up to our Lord God Iesus Christ, and the holy and adored Spi∣rit is invocated, and the most holy mysteries that are a∣mong us are imposed on their heads or hāds, that so al their sensitive instruments may be made pure and consecra∣ted unto God. Let Clergy men mark this well. Let none of them therefore hereafter pre∣sume after our divine law, either to play at tables or dice, or at any kinde of dice-play, or game, or to commu∣nicate or converse, or to be recreated with those who play thus, or to play together with them, or to beare witnesse to
them, or to be present at such PLEBEIAN SPECTACLES AND STAGE-PLAYES which wee have spoken of be∣fore, or to doe any of those things that are here prohibi∣ted, but to ABSTAINE HEREAFTER FROM ALL PARTICIPATION WITH THEM. And if any one shall henceforth bee deprehended doing any such thing, and if any Deacon or Presbyter shal bee convicted to bee either a dicer, or a partner with di∣cers, or one that sitteth by such vanities, or to be pre∣sent at the foresaid Enter∣ludes: or if perchance any one of the Bishops beloved of God (which Yet some per∣chance there are who have Stage-playes acted before them now and then to their hame, and the ill example of others, & that on Lords-day nighs too. truly we trust will never happen,) shall hence∣forth presume to be a parta∣ker of any spectacle or play, or to sit together with di∣cers, and to direct, or bar∣gaine, or ett, wee command him to be sequestred from the sacred liturgie, and canoni∣call punishment to be inflicted on him, and a convenient time to bee appointed within which hee may resort to his Metropolitan with fasting and supplications, to appease the great God for this his of∣fence: and if during the ap∣pointed
time he shall continue imploring the remission of his fault with The solemn∣nesse and seriousnesse of this repentance before his readmission into the Ministerie, shewes the hai∣nousnesse of that Ministers or Bishops of∣fence, who ei∣ther playes or betts at dice, or lookes on di∣cers, or resorts to Stageplayes. teares, re∣pentance, and fasting, and prayer to his God; this being speedily made knowne to whō he is subject, and diligently examined by him, hee shall provide a common prayer to be made for him, and with all diligence shall enjoyne him, that he shall afterwards ab∣staine from such a disgrace of the ministry; and if he shall thinke that hee hath suffici∣ently repented, let him vouchsafe to restore him to his ministeriall function. But if even after his excommu∣nication he shall be found not to have truly repented, and contemptuously to returne to the same thing againe being manifestly seduced in his mind by the Divell; let the Bishop or Minister under whom he lives strike him out of the sacred catalogues, and altogether depose him & let him by no means obtaine any future licence to come into the Ministeriall order. Which Constitution shewes how execrable a thing it is, for Clergy men especially, to resort to Stageplayes. To this worthy Constitution or Law of his, I shall annexe two others, worthy our observation. Iustinian Co∣dicis l. 5. Tit. 17 De Repudiis &c. Lex. 8. f. 169 a. Lypsius De Amphitheatro, c. 3. p. 17. Virnullo modoux∣orem
expellat, nisi adul∣teram &c. nisi circensibus vel theatralibus ludis, vel arenarum spectaculis, in ipsis locis in quibus haec adsolent celebrari, se pro∣hibente gaudentem. Iustiniani Novella 22. & 117, Bulenge∣rus, De Thea∣tro l. 1. c. 50. p. 297. here p. 391 Vir dimittere uxo∣rem potest, si raeter vo∣luntatem suam circenses et theatricas voluptates captet, ubi scenici ludi sunt, aut ubi ferae cum ho∣minibus pugnant. A man may by no meanes
put away his wife, unlesse she be an adulteresse, &c. or unles she resort to Cirque-playes, or Stage-plaies, or Sword-plaies, in those very places where they are wont to be celebra∣ted, contrary to his command. A man may put away his wife, if without his leave shee runne to Cirque-playes, and theatrical Enterludes, to play-houses, (or places where are Stage-plaies,) or where beasts fight with men. Which lawes of his, authorizing men to put away their wives, (as See here p. 391. Sempronius Sophus did) if they resort to Playes, to Play-houses, or other spectacles without their li∣cence,Bulengerus de Theatro l. 1. c. 5. p. 297. & here p. 389, 390, 391.(because it is an apparant evidence of their lewd∣nesse, and a meanes to make them common prostituted whores, few else resorting unto Playes but such;) is an im∣pregnable evidence of the lewdnesse, the unlawfulnesse, the infamy of acting and frequenting Stage-playes, and of the intollerable mischievous qualities of Plaies them∣selves which thus strangely vitiate their Spectators: and withall should cause all husbands, all parents, to keep their wives and daughters from Playes and Theaters, (theAgrippa De Vanitate Scien∣tiarum cap. 63, 64. & here pag. 435. to 444, 452, 453. accor∣dingly.very marts, the instructions of baudery and adulte∣ry), if they would preserve them chast; to which Adulte∣rers, Woers and others oft entice them, that so they may more easily overcome their chastity, and make them pliable to their lusts, See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. accordingly. which they are alwayes sure to accomplish, if they can once but draw them to resort  to Playes; as ancient, that I say not moderne experience, can too well witnesse. The second, are the imperial Constitutions of Honorius and Theodosius, which runne thus. Iustinian. Co∣dicis lib. 1. Tit. 6. De Episcopis et Clericis Lex. 17. Edi. Parisii 1537. fol. 16. Placuit nostrae cle∣mentiae
ut nihil conjuncti Clerici cum publicis acti∣onibus vel ad Curiam per∣tinentibus habeant. Prae∣terea ijs qui Parabolani vocantur, neque ad quod∣libet publicum spectaculū, neque ad Curiae locum, ne∣que ad judicium acceden∣di licentiam permittimus &c. Interdicimus sanctis∣simis Episcopis et pres∣byteris, diaconis et subdi∣aconis, et lectoribus, et omnibus alijs cujuslibet ordinis venerabilis colle∣gij aut schematis consti∣tutis, ad tabulas ludere aut alijs ludentibus participes esse, aut inspectores fieri, aut ad quodlibet spectacu∣lū spectandi gratia venire. Si quis autē ex his in hoc deliquerit, jubemus hunc tribus annis a venerabili ministerio prohiberi, et in monasteriū redigi: sed in medio tempore si se poeni∣tentē ostenderit, liceat sa∣cerdoti sub quo constitu∣tus est tempus minuere, et hunc priori rursus mini∣sterio reddere. It pleaseth our grace that
Clergy men intermeddle not with publicke actions or things belonging to the Court. Besides, wee permit not those who are calledThat is, such Ministers as were appointed to cure the bo∣dies of those who were weake and sicke. See Iu∣stinian. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 6. Lex. 18. according∣ly. Pa∣rabolani, to have leave to come to any publike Specta∣cle or Stageplay, nor yet to the Court, or place of judge∣ment. Wee prohibit the most sacred Bishops, and Presby∣ters, Deacons and Subdea∣cons, and all others of the venerable colledge, or livery, to play at tables, or to bee partners with others that play, or spectators of them, or to come to any spectacle or stageplay of purpose o be∣hold it. If any of these shall offend in this, we command him to be suspended the ve∣nerable ministrie for three yeares, and to be thrust into a Monastery: But if in the middle of this time hee shall shew himselfe penitent, it shal be lawfull for the Minister under whom hee is placed to shorten the time, & to restore him to his former ministe∣ry. To which I may adde these ensuing Imperiall Con∣stitutions of Gratianus, Valentinianus, and Theodosius. Codicis The∣odosiani lib. 15 Tit. 5. De Spe∣ctaculis, Lex 2. Parisiis 1598. p. 471.Nullus solis die po∣pulo spectaculum praebe∣at,
nec divinam venerati∣onem confecta solennitate confundat. Ibidem Lex. 5 p. 432. See Va∣lentinianus, Theodoius, & Arcadius. Iusti∣nian. Codicis lib. 3. Tit. 12. De eriis Lex. 7. accordingly. Dominico quae est septimanae totius primus dies et natale, atque E∣piphaniorum Christi, Pas∣chae etiam atque quinqua∣gesimae diebus omni The∣atrorum atque Circensium voluptate per universas urbes earundem populis denegata, totae Christiano∣rum ac fidelium mentes Dei cultibus occupantur. Si qui etiam nunc vel lu∣daei impietatis amentia, vel stolidae paganitatis er∣rore atque insania detinen∣tur, aliud esse supplicatio∣num noverint tempus, a∣liud voluptatis. Acne quis existimet in honorem nu∣minis nostri veluti majo ri quadam imperialis offi∣cij necessitate compelli, et nisi divina religione con∣tempta spectaculis operā daret, subeundum forsitan fibi nostrae serennitatis of∣fensam, si minus circa nos devotionis ostenderit quat quā solebat, nemo ambigat, Kings then are most ho∣noured, when as God is best served by their subiects and Courtiers. quod tunc maxime man∣suetudini nostrae ab huma∣no genere defertur, cum virtutibus Dei omnipo∣tentis
potentis ac meritis universis obsequi∣um orbis impen∣ditur.
Let no man exhibit any Stage-play or Spectacle to
the people on the Sunday, nor confound Gods worship with any acted Enterlude. On the Lords day which is the first day and birth∣day of the whole week, and on the feast-dayes of the Epi∣phany of Christ, of Easter al∣so and of Whitsontide, all the pleasure of Stage-playes and Cirque-playes, being denied the people throughout all their Citties, the whole minds of Christians & belee∣vers shalbe busied in the wor∣ship of God. And if any now are deceived either with the folly of Iewish impiety, or with the errour and frenzie of foolish paganisme; let them know, Therefore Lords day nights are no fit times for Masques or Stage-playes. that there is one time of supplications, another of pleasures. And lst any one should thinke himselfe as it wre compelled out of honour to our Majesty with a cer∣taine greater necessitie of im∣periall duty, and that per∣chance he shall undergoe the displeasure of our grace, un∣lesse contemning divine reli∣gion, he shall addict himselfe to Stage-playes, or if hee shall shew lesse devotion to∣wards us in this kinde than hee was wont: let no man doubt, that then most of all
is attributed to our clemencie by mankind, when as the obedience and service of the world is bestowed on the vertues and universall merits of the omnipotent God. The last is that of Iulian the Apostata, who in his  Letter to Arsacius, the Arch-Pagan Priest of Galatia, writes thus by way of injunction, of purpose to draw the Pagans to the discipline of the Christians. Zozomeni Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 17. Nice∣phorus Callisius Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c. 22. Eutropius Rerum Rom. Histor l. 11. p. 150. Centur. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. Col. 458. Baronius & Spondanus Annal. Eccles. Anno 362. sect. 60. Deinde sacerdotem quem{que} cohortare, ne in theatro conspiciatur; ne a∣pud caupones potet; neve arti cuiquam aut operae pudendae aut ignominiosae praesit. Et morem quidem gerentes persequere, re∣belles vero à te repelle. Moreover exhort every Priest that hee be not seene in the theatre; that he drinke not at ale-houses; and that hee practise or survey no ig∣nominious, no shameful art or worke. And honour those who are obedient, but repell the rebellious from thee. So much shew of ingenuity was there even in this grand Apostate, as to doome Stage-playes unfit Specta∣cles, Playhouses & Alehouses undecent places for Pagan Priests, how much more then for Christian Ministers. To all which Councels and Constitutions of this na∣ture, I shall adde Gratian: Distinctio 33, 48. & Causa 21. Quaest. 3, 4. Ionis Decreta pars 5. cap: 373. & pars 11. c: 76.78, 79. Panormitan: Tit: De Vita et Honestate Cle∣ricrum, & De Clerici Officio. Alvarus Pelagius De Planctu Ecclesiae, lib: 2. Artic: 28. fol: 133. Isiodor Hispa∣lensis De Officijs Ecclesiasticis l: 2. c: 2. HRabanus Mau∣rus De Sacris Ordinibus lib: 1. Operum Tom: 6. p: 63. A, B Alexander Fabricius Destructorium Vitiorum l: pars 4. c: 23. Ioannis De Wankel Glossa in Breviarium Sexti lib: 3. Tit: 1. De Vita et Honestate Clericorum. Operum Tom. 2. pag. 717. Inno∣centius 3. Decretalium Constit: lib: 3. Tit: 1. De Vita et Honestate Clericorum. Episcopus Chemnensis, Onus Ec∣clesiae, cap: 23. sect: 1, &c. Ioannis de Athon, Othoboni Con∣stitutiones, fol: 78, 79, 80. & Constitutiones Concilij Ox∣oniensis,
fol: 122, 123, 124. Lindwood Provincialium Constitutionum, l: 3. Tit: De Vita et Honestate Clericorum fol: 87, 88. Summa Rosella, Tit: Clericus, sect: 2. & Chorea Summa Angelica, Tit: Chorea: & Clericus, sect, 4, 9, 11. Claudius Espencaeus Digressionum in Epist: ad Timothaeum lib 2. cap: 14, 15. Ioannis De Burgo Pupilla Oculi, pars 7. c: 10 Buchardus Decretorum l: 14. c: 7. Dionysius Riche∣lius De Vita Canon: et Ecclesiast: Artic: 9. Clichthouius, De Vita et Moribus Sacerdotum, cap: 17. Bochellus D∣cretorum Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib: 6. Tit: 18, & 19. Ioannis Langhecrucius, De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, l: 2. cap: 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22. & l: 3. c. 3, 4. With sundry other Canonists and Casuists in their Trea∣tises, De Ecclesiasticis Officijs, & De Vita & Honestate Clericorum: who all unanimously conclude, (as the fore-quoted Councels and Constitutions doe;) That it is ut∣terly unlawfull for any Clergy men whatsoever, (who should be 1 Tim. 4.12. See Ambrose, Remigius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, Anselme, Beda, HRabanus Maurus, Pri∣masius, Haymo Sedulius, Lyra, Calvin, Mar∣lorat, Aretius, with others I∣bidem, accor∣dingly; & Con∣cilium Medio∣lanense, apud Binium, Tom. 4. p. 891, 892. patternes of piety, temperance and humility to others:) not onely to hunt, to hauke, to drinke or pledge any healthes; to make any riotous feasts, to weare any See my Sur∣vey of Mr. Co∣zens his coze∣ning Devoti∣ns, p. 72. & the Epistle Dedica∣tory to the Archbishops & Bishops &c. be∣fore my Anti-Arminianisme. velvets, silkes, or costly apparell, to intermeddle with secular affaires &c. to dance, to play at dice or tables, or at any unlawfull games, or to looke upon any others who are dancing or playing: but likewise to be actors, hearers, or spectators of any Enterludes, Stage-playes, or other such Spectacles whatsoever either in publike or private; for the premised reasons. All which concurring Authorities, (seconded by the Canons and Constitutions of our owne Church of England; Witnesse, Reformatio Legum Ec∣clesiasticarum, ex Authoritate Regis Henrici 8. et Edo∣vardi 6. Londini 1571. Tit. De Ecclesiastica, et ministris ejus, cap. 4 f. 48. Where we thus reade. Presbyteri non sint compoores, non aleatores, non aucupes, non venatores, non sycophanti, non otiosi, &c. & Ibid: fol 48. cap. 13. f. 50. Ca∣veat Episcopus ne otiosos, vanos, impudicos aut aleatores nutriat, &c. Together with Queene Elizabeths Injun∣ctions, Injunct: 7. Canons Anno 1571. fol: 4.8.13. & Ca∣nons
1603. Can: 73, 74. Which thus decree: I would all inconformable Ministers in manners would remember it. That Mi∣nisters shall not give themselves to drinking or riot, spen∣ding their time idly by day or by night, playing at cards, or tables, or any other unlawfull game; but at all times con∣venient they shall heare or reade somewhat out of the holy Scriptures, or shall occupie themselves with some other ho∣nest studie or exercise, alwayes doing the things which shall appertaine to honestie, and endeavouring to profit the Church of God, having alwayes in minde, that they ought to excell all others in purity of life, and should b examples to the people to live well and christianly; under paine of ec∣clesiasticall censures to be inflicted on them with severity, according to the qualities of their offences:) should now at last persuade all Christians, (especially all Clergy men, for whom there is no evasion,) for ever to renounce, not onely the acting, the composing, but likewise the very sight and hearing of all publike and private Stageplayes, which so many Councels, Canonical and Imperiall Con∣stitutions, have thus unanimously censured, even from age to age. Wherefore I shall here close up this Scene (and I hope the mouthes of all Play-patrons whatsoe∣ver) with this 48. Play-confounding Argument, unca∣pable (I suppose) of any answer. That which 55 severall Oecumenicall, Nationall,Argum. 48. Pro∣vinciall Synodes and Councels in severall succes∣sive ages of the Church: together with sundry A∣postolicall, Canonicall, and Imperiall Constituti∣ons, have severely inhibited, suppressed, anathema∣tized, condemned under paine of excommunication, and the like; must undoubtedly be execrable, un∣seemely, unlawfull unto Chritians, unsufferable in any Christian Church or State. But 55 sverall Oecumenicall, Nationall, and Pro∣vinciall Synodes and Councels, in severall succes∣sive ages of the Church; together with sundry Apo∣stolicall, Canonicall and Imperiall, Constitutions,
have severely inhibited, suppressed, anathematized, condemned Stageplayes, together with their Actors and Spectators, under paine of excommunication, and the like: as all the premises witnesse. Therefore they must undoubtedly be execrable, unseeme∣ly, unlawfull unto Christians, unsufferable in any Christian Church and State. The premises no Christian can or dares controll, a∣gainst so many apparant evidences: the Conclusion therefore must stand inviolable, maugre all that Players or Play-haunters can object against it. SCENA QVARTA. THe fourth Squadron of Authorities, is the veera∣ble troope of 70 severall renowned ancient Fa∣thers and Writers of the Church,The ancient Fathers of the Church a∣gainst Stage-playes. from our Saviours time till the yeare 1200, who have professedly encoun∣tred, censured, condemned Stage-playes, in their incom∣parably excellent writings, a Catalogue of whose names and workes I shall here present you withall, together with a note of those impressions which I follow; omit∣ting the recitall of their words at large; partly to avoid prolixity; partly, because I have already recorded their most eminent passages against Stage-playes and Players in severall See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5, 12. Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 5. Scene 1. to 12. precedent Acts and Scenes, on which you may cast your eyes. To begin with these ancient Fathers and Authours according to their severall Anti∣quities, which I would wish the learned to peruse, for their owne better satisfaction in this point. The 1.Philo Iudaeus Hec flourish Anno Chti 50. of them, is Philo Iudaeus, an eminent learned Iew, if not a Christian whom St. Hirom highly applaudes, inserting him into is Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall Writers. De
Agricultura lib: in his workes Basiliae 1558. p. 271, 272. De Vita Mosis lib: 3. p: 932. De Fortitudine lib: p: 1001, 1002, 1005, 1006. De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1059, 1060. De Monarchia lib: p: 1099. De Vita Con∣templativa, p: 1205, to 1216. In Flaccum l: p: 1305, 1306. De Legatione ad Caium, p: 1342. to 1354, & 1399. De Decalogo, p: 1037. & De Iudice, p: 967. The 2.Clemens Ro∣manus, Anno Christi 70. is, Clemens Romanus, Constitutionum Apostolicarum lib: 2. cap: 64, 65, 66. & lib: 8. c: 38. Apud Laur: Surium Conciliorum Tom: 1. Coloniae Agrip. 1567. p. 68, 69, & 120. The 3.Iosephus Anno 90. is that famou Iewish Historian Flavius Iosephus, whom St. Hierom inserts into his Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall Writers. Antiquitatum Iudaeorum lib: 15. c: 11. l: 16. c: 9. & l: 1. c. 7. in his workes in Latine, Francofurti 1617. p. 415, 416, 434. The 4.Athenagoas Anno 150. is Athenagoras, that eminent Christian Philosopher, Pro Christianis Legatio, Bibl. Patrum. Coloniae Agrip. 1618. Tom. 2. p. 139. A, B, C, D. The 5.Theophilus Antiochenus, Anno 175. is Theophilus Antiochenus, Patriarke of the fa∣mous Citty of Antioch, Ad Autolicum, lib: 3. Bibl: Patr: Tom: 2. p: 170. G, H. The 6.Tatianus, Anno 180. is Tatianus Assyrius, Contra Graecos Oratio: Bibl: Patr: Tom: 2. p: 180, 181. The 7.Irenaeus Lugd. Anno 180. is Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons, Contra Haereses lib: 1. cap: 1. & lib: 2. cap: 19. in his workes; Basiliae 1571. p. 23, & 155. The 8.Clemens A∣lexandrinus, Anno 200. is Clemens Alexandrinus, Oratio Adhortatoria ad Graecos, in his Latine workes; Basiliae 1556. fol. 8, 9. Paedagogi, l: 2. c: 5, 6, 7, 10. lib. 3. c. 2, 3, 11. fol. 52, 53. & Stromatum lib: 7. fol: 153. The 9.Tertullian, Anno 200. is Tertullian, who hath professdly written an whole Booke against Stage-playes, viz: De Spectaculis lib: in his Workes; Pa∣risijs 1566. Tom: 2. p: 382, to 404. Adversus Gentes Apologia, cap: See Edit. Iunii Franech. 1597. where the chap∣ters are thus distinguished. 6, 38, & 42. Ibid: p: 589, 591, 626, 627, 682, 704 706. Ad Martyres l: cap: 2. Ibid: p: 17. De Ido∣lolatria lib: c: 5. & 18. a booke worke the reading. De Pudiciti, lib: c: 7. & De Corona Militis lib: c: 5. to 13. Tom: 1. p: 750. to 760. The 10.Hyppolytu Anno 220. is Hyppolitus, an eminent Martyr, De Consummatione Mundi et Antichristi Ora∣tio Bibl. Patrum Tom. 3. p. 16, 17. The 11.Origen, Anno 230. is Origen,
Super Leviticum, Homil: 11. in his workes, Parisijs in aedibus Ascentianis, Anno 1519. Tom. 1. fol. 83. B, C. In Esaiam, Hom: 8. Tom. 2. fol. 108. H. In Hieremiam, Hom: 2. Ibid. fol. 112. I. In Epist: ad Romanos, l: 8. Tom. 3. fol. 203. & Contra Celsum, l: 5. Tom. 4 fol. 67. C. The 12.Minutius Felix, Anno 230. is Minutius Felix, a famous Christian Lawyer, in his Octa∣vius, Oxoniae 1627. p. 34, 70, 100, 101, 123, 124. The 13.Cyprian, Anno 250. is St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, Epistolarum l. 1. E∣pist. 10. Eucratio. & lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. Edit. Erasmi, Antwerpiae, 1541. Tom. 1. p. 56, 57, 72, 73. De Habitu Virginum p. 242. & De Spectaculis lib. professedly writ∣ten against Stageplayes. Edit. Pamelij Coloniae Agrip. 1617. Tom. 3. p. 243, 244, 245. The 14.Zeno Veronensis, Anno 260. is Zeno Vero∣nensis Episcopus, De Iejunio Sermo. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 127. C. & De Spiritu et Corpore Sermo, Ibid. p. 128. D. The 15.Arnobius, Anno 290. is Arnobius Disputat. adversus Gntes, lib. 2. Antwerpiae 1582. p. 75. l. 3. p. 114. l. 4. p. 149, 150, 151. l. 5. p. 182. & l. 7. p. 230, to 242. The 16.Lactantius, Anno 300. is Lactantius Firmilianus, lib. 6. De Vero Cultu cap. 20, 21. in his Workes Lugduni 1615. p. 502. to 509. Divinarum In∣stitutionum, Epitome, cap. 6, p. 737, 738. See De Iustitia, l, 5. c. 21. p. 422, 423. &c. 10. p. 388. & De Falsa Religi∣one, l. 1. c. 20. p. 75. The 17.Eusebius Caesariensis, Anno 330. is Eusebius, Bishop of Cae∣sarea, De Praeparatione Evangelica, l. 2. c. 2. p. 33. l. 4. c. 11. Operū Parisijs 1582. Tom. 1. p. 85, 86. De Demonstratione Evangelica lib. 5. p. 382. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 1. c. 9. l. 7. c. 24. Tom. 2. p. 153, 154. & l. 8. c. 16. p. 169. & Apud Damas∣cenum Parallelorum, l. 3. c. 47. p. 208. The 18.Iulius Fir∣micus, Anno 350. is Iulius Firmicus Maternus, De errore Profanarum Religio∣num lib. cap. 13. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 111, 112. The 19.Hilaius Pictviensis, Anno 360. is Hilary, Bishop of Poiters, Enarratio in Psalm. 19. in his Workes, Coloniae. Agrip. 1617. p. 202. G. & in Psal. 118. lib. Ibid. p. 258, E, F. The 20.Macarius Egyptius, Anno 370. is Macarius AEgyptius, Homilia 27. in his Workes, Parisijs 1559. p. 212. & Ho∣mil. 40. p. 264. The 21.Cyrillus Hierosolomy∣tanus, An. 370. is Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, Arch-Bishop of Hierusalem, Catechesis Mystagogica 1. Parisijs 1564. fol. 175, 176. The 22.Asterius, Anno 370. is Asterius, Bishop
of Amasia, Oratio in Festum Kalendarum, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 705, 706. The 23.St. Ambrose Anno 370. is St. Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, De Officijs l. 1. c. 23. & l. 2. c. 21. Operum Co∣loniae Agrip. 1616. Tom. 4. p. 9. A, B. 28. F. De Poeniten∣tia, l. 2. c. 6. Ibid. p. 193. F. De Elia et Iejunio, cap. 18. Tom. 1. p. 257, 258. &c. 21. p. 259. C, D. Enarratio in Psal. 118. Octon. 5. Tom. 2. p. 430, 431. Annotationes in Deut. 22. Irenaeo, Tom. 1. p. 232, 233. Sermo 11. Tom. 5. p. 8. & Sermo 64. p. 44. A, E, G. The 24.St. Basil, Anno 370. is St. Basil the Great, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, the native Countrey of George the Arrian, Bishop of Alexandria; who was borne in Cappadocia, as is most apparant: First, by Ariani Gre∣gorium utpote in sua ipsorum doctrina stabi∣lienda tardum et negligentem &c. inde trans∣tulerunt, in∣que eius locum substituerunt (Georgios os o men genos en Kappadokes:) Which Ioan. Christophorso∣nus renders, Georgium ge∣nere Cappado∣cem,) qui ab il∣lis maxime ae∣stimabatur, tum quod in rebus agendis promptus ac di∣ligens, tum quod eiusdem cum ipsis opinionis perstudiosus esset. Eccles. Hist. l 3. c. 6. Zozo∣men, (Georgion vs ek Kappadokas ormato &c.) Which Christophorsonus, and Suffradus Pe∣trus render, Georgium itaque accerserunt, qui et ex Cappadocia oriundus; (& Meri∣dith Hanmer in his English translation out of the Greek Copy, reads, Georgius borne in Cappadocia;) et opinione et religione quam illi tuebantur imbutus suit. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 10. Socrates Scholasticus, Interea Aiani Gregorium &c. Episcopatu movent: et Georgium quendam Cappadocem genere, (as Ioannis Langus translates it) qui circa panem vi∣liorem et furfur aetatem egerat succiduae{que} adeo suillae promus condus fuerat, quod in religione tuendo industrius esset pro eo in Alexandrino sede collocarun. Eccles. Hist. l. 9. c. 7. & Nicephorus Calli∣stus, who all expresly testifie in positive termes, (as their words in the margent evidence,) that George the Arrian was a Cappadocian borne. Secondly, by the testi∣mony of Athanasius, Contra Arianos Oratio, where (as Nannius translates it,) he writes thus. Edit. Lat. Petri Nannii. Parisis 1608. p. 57. D. Edit. Graec. Lat. 1611. Tom. 1. p. 117. Ea{que} de causa (,) Georgiū Cappa∣docem quendam redimerunt: (which referres onely to his Country;) Sed nec ille aliquo in numero aut praecio habendus est. Dico enim eum istis in locis, non ut Christi∣anum se, sed ut idololatram gessisse eundem{que} moribus et instituto carnificem esse: which relates to his lewd con∣ditions. Againe in his Epistle, Ad solitariam vitam agentes; hee hath this passage. Pag. 238. A. Lat Gr. & Lat. Tom. 1. p. 666. Nunc autem denuò , Georgium quen∣dam
Cappadocem, (an apparant designation of his Coun∣try,) aerarij Constantinopoli questorem et depeculatorem omnium, atque ex crimine profugum Alexandriam specie militari et authoritate ducis in Episcopatum immittit. And in his Epistle, Ad ubique Orthodoxos, , &c. Which Petrus Nannius renders thus: Page 170. b. Lat. Edit. Gr. Lat. p. 727. D. Quibus declarabat Georgium Cappa∣docem natione, successorem mihi datum, satellitium stipato∣ribus{que} Comitis in cathedram inducendum: and that pro∣perly enough. So that if Athanastus (who had cause to know the birth and life of this Arrian George, who both persecuted and deposed him) may be judge, this George, without question, was a Cappadocian borne. Thirdly, it is evident by the unavoidable suffrage of Gregory Nazi∣anzen, the Countrey-man, if not the coaetanian of this Arrian George: who in his Oratio 31. in laudem Atha∣nasij, writes thus. , &c. which not only Bilius, but Edit. Basiliae 1571. p. 527, 528. Io∣annes Lewenclavius too, (who well understood the sig∣nification of the word ) Latine thus. Mon∣strosus quidā Cappadox ex ultimis terrae nostrae finibus o∣riundus, malus genere, animo pejor, &c, Which words, monstrosus quidā Cappadox, ex ultimis terrae nostrae finibus oriundus: Gregorius Presbyter De Vita Gregorii Nazianzeni Oratio. Grego∣rii Nazianz. Monodia in Basilii Magni Vitam. Isiodor. Pelusiota l. 1. Epist. 158. Munster Cos∣mogr. l. 5. c. 14. Purchas Pil∣gr. l. 3. c. 15. Vincentius Speculm Hist. l. 14. c. 88. Op∣meeri Chro∣nog. p. 288. (Gregory Nazianzen being a Cappadocian borne;) coupled with this foregoing passage: Atque hic mihi charissimum solum, patriam, inquam, meam omni crimine solutam velim; Non enim patriae, sed ijs qui li∣bera animi voluntate eum (viz. George the Arrian) ele∣gerint improbitas assignanda est. Illa enim sacra, et apud omnes pietatis laude clara et illustris; at hi Ecclesia paren∣te indigna. Porro in vinca quoque spinam nasci audistis, &c. (Wherein he excuseth his native Country, Cappa∣docia, from all blame; that George the Arrian was borne & made a Bishop in it; since thornes may grow in vine∣yards,
and those who chose him for their Bishop, not his native Countrey were to blame:) and seconded with this ensuing gradation; malus genere, (which referres to his parentage, hee being a Cappadocian borne, whose wickednesse and lewdnesse, as is confessed, grew into a proverbe:) animo pejor, which relates to his conditions: are an unanswerable evidence, that George the Arrian was a Cappadocian borne. Hence See Nazianz. Opera Lat. Ba∣siliae 1571. p. 535. Scholia 13. Billius in his Scholia upon this Oration, long before Dr. Rainolds wrote any thing of this subject, concludes peremptorily; That George the Arrian was a Cappadocian borne; Cap∣padox enim erat (saith hee) Georgius Arrianus infestissi∣mus Athanasij hostis. Quatenus autem Cappadox erat, inquit Theologus, videam mihi, et patriam communem cum eo habere, nonnihil etiam ad insidias adversus Atha∣nasium structas conferre. Hence Flaccus Illyricus, Iohan∣nes Wigandus, Matthaeus Iudex, and Basilius Faber, in their Famous Magdeburgian Ecclesiasticall Centuries, (For the 4. Century was published, An∣no 1560. & Dr. Rainolds de I∣dololatria &c. Anno 1596. 36 yeares before Dr. Rainolds,) relating the life and death of George the Arrian, expresly affirme from this of Nazianzen, That George the Arrian was a Cappa∣docian borne. For thus they write: Centur. 4. Col. 1358. Georgius natione Cappadox, ex sordido et vili vitae genere, ad Episcopatum, seu tyrannidem potius, Alexandriam pervenit. Yea both Annal. Eccles. Anno 341. sect. 5. & 356. sect. 10, 11. Spondanus sect. 3. Baronius and Spondanus from this passage of Nazi∣anzen, and those of Athanasius, affirme; That this Arrian George was a Cappadocian borne, and the Countrey-man of Nazianzen: For writing of Gregory, and this Ar∣rian George: Concordant vero (say they) omnino pa∣tria, cum utrumque fuisse Cappadocem veteres scripto∣res tradant, quoting Nazianzen and Athanasius in the margent. Whence they stile this George, Georgius Cap∣padox, quem quidem malum genere, animo pejorem, mori∣bus pessimum fuisse, Gregorius Nazianzenus ipsius Gen∣tilis docet, dum ejus scelera recenset. If then we beleeve either the forenamed Historians, or Athanasius, Nazi∣anzen, Billius, the Century-writers, Baronius or Spon∣danus,
who are most expresse in point, this George the Arrian was undoubtedly a native Cappadocian. Lastly, that passage of Cassiodorus in his Lib. 4. cap. 14. Tri∣partita Historia, where he stiles this George, Cappado∣cem hominem Arianae vesaniae: that more punctuall te∣stimony of Chronolog. Biblioth. Pa∣trum Coloniae Agrip. 1618. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 15. H. Nicephorus Constantinopolitanus, who reckoning up the names of the Bishops of Alexandria, whereof he makes this George the 22. stiles him, Geor∣gius Cappadox: (by which title hee distinguisheth him, not onely from Athanasii Apologia, se∣cunda: p. 203.207. Socrates Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 24. & l. 2. c. 26 Centur. Magd. 4. Col. 708, 750 758, 819. The History of St. George, p. 110, 111, 115. George the Arrian Bishop of Laodi∣cea, but from Nicephorus Constant. Chron. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 9. pars 1. p. 16. George the 50 Bishop of Alexandria, who succeeded him: perchance the same George whom Photius mentions,Biblioth. cap. 96. The History of St. George, p. 113. as the authour of a booke concerning Chrysostome:) together with Edit. Athana∣sii, Lat. Parisiis 1608. p. 161. & 238. in the margent. Nannius, Edit. Nazian∣zeni 1571. p. 528, 535. Billius, the Centur. Mag. 4. Col. 104, 55, 1050. Centuriators, Annal. Eccle∣siast. Anno 356. sect. 3. Baronius, Spondanus, Praefatio in Sancti Hilarii Fragmenta, in Hilarii Oper. Coloniae Agrip. 1617. p. 121. Nicolaus Faber, and the severall Index-compilers of A∣thanasius, Nazianzen, Nicephorus, Zozomen, Socrates Scholasticus, the Centuries, Baronius, Spondanus, Biblio∣theca Patrum, and others, who all stile him, Georgius Cappadox, as being a Cappadocian borne; yeeld us an in∣fallible testimonie in Dr. Rainolds his behalfe; that George the Arrian Bishop (a thing not questioned heretofore by any,) was by birth a Cappadocian. Neither will those two objections to the contrary, so much as once eclipse this shining truth: To wit, History of St. George, p. 103, 104, 105. that Homo, or Mon∣strum Cappadox, is a proverbiall speech, denoting, not the Country, but the lewd conditions of this Arrian George, and that Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived about those times, affirmes for certaine in expresse termes, that George of Alexandria was borne at Epiphania in the Pro∣vince of Cilicia. For first, though Homo Cappadox be sometimes a proverbiall speech, being applied to a no∣torious wicked wretch, who is no Cappadocian borne, (where it must of necessity be proverbial, because it can∣not be litterall); yet it is never so, when as it is spoken
of any native Cappadocian, where it may have a proper litterall construction: which is the case of George the Arrian, whom all Writers hitherto, till some of late, haue conceived to be a Cappadocian borne. But admit, that Homo, or Monstrum Cappadox, were a meere A∣dagie, or a periphrasis of a desperate gracelesse wicked miscreant; (which is unlikely in our case, since Patria mea (Cappadocia) sacra est, et a∣pud omnes pi∣etatis laude clara et illu∣stris. Oratio 31. in laudem Atha∣nasii p. 527. Per∣multaministrat veneranda haec patria mea Cappadocla, non minus bo∣na iuvenum ntrix quam equorum. Ora∣tio 31. in Laud Bailii p. 494. Na∣zianzen, & Altera ur∣um Cappado∣cum pars est quam optima, ex qua illi ex∣titerunt qui vitae suae ac praeceptionum luce orbis ter∣rae inibus prae∣luxerut. Epist. Lib. . Epist. 158. Priso Cappadoc. Bbl. Ptr. Tom. 5 pars 2. p. 493. Isiodor Pelusiota informe us; that about this George his time the ancient infamie of the Cappadocians lewdnesse was quite abolished, Cappadocia being then be∣come not onely sacred, but even famous and illustrious both for piety, learning, education of youth and learned pious men, who were as so many lights of holy life and doctrine unto all the world:) Yet no one testimony can be pro∣duced by the objectors, to prove, that Georgius Cappa∣dox, or Cappadox coupled with any other proper name, is used onely proverbially, for a man of wicked, lewd or vile conditions; not for a Cappadocian borne. For as Anglicus, Scotus, Brito, Iudaeus, and such like nationall stiles, annexed unto proper names, (as Thomas An∣glicus, Ioannes Duns Scotus, Herveus Brito, Philo Iu∣daeus, &c.) denominate onely the native Countrey, not the morall conditions, vertues or vices of men: so Cap∣padox, united to Georgius, or any other proper name, de∣monstrates onely the native soile, not the notorious wic∣kednesse of the person: else Philagrius, whom Oratio 31. p. 531. Na∣zianzen stiles, Philagrius Cappadox clarus et illustris; (which were an apparant contradiction if Cappadox were nothing but a lewd companion;) else all the pious Cappadocian Bishops in the first Nicene Councels, who are stiled Centur. Mag. 4. Col. 618. l. 5. See Acts 2. v. 9. Eusebius De Vita Constan∣tinil. 3. c. 8. Cappadoces; else Opmeeri Chronogr. p. 28. Eustochius Cappa∣dox, as I finde him named; else Whom Vincentius Lenensis cap. 41. and Opmeers, Chronogr. pag. 288. stile, illa, or, duo Cappadociae lumina. St. Basil, and famous Gregory Nazianzen, who are called Cassiodorus, Histor. Tripartita, lib. 6. cap. 37. Nicephorus Callitus, Hit. Eccles. lib. 10. cap. . Cappadoces,
Socrates Scholast. Ec∣cles. Hist. l. 4. c. 18. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 2. p. 314. Sponda∣nus Epit. Baro∣nii Anno 354. sect. 5. Basilius Cappadox, and Nicephorus & Cassiodor qua (i) supra. See Centur. Mgd. 4. passim Gregorius Cappadox: yea and Georgius Cappadox, the See Vincen∣tius Speculum Hist. l. 12. c. 131 The History of St. George, & Mr Seldens Titles of Honor, part 2. c 5. p. 794, to 819. Sainted Martyr too, (whom Purchas Pilgrimage l. 3. c. 13. Dr. Featly his Handmaid of Devotion, p. 413. with sundry others quoted in the History of St. George, part 1. c. 3, 4. some make the same with George the Ar∣rian; See Ibid. others, and among them Chronogr p. 309. Opmeerus, De Retione Studii Theologiae, l. 3. c. 7. Hy∣perius, Quoted by Molanus, Hist. SS. Imaginum. Antwerpiae 1617. l. 3. c. 14. p. 277, 278. Georgius Stigelius, and Ioannes AEmilius, In his Pilgrimage l. 3. c. 13. Mr. Samuel Purchas, In his Hymne of St. George, on St. George his day. Mr. George Withers, and famous In his Postils, set out by Dr. Christopher Pezelius, intituled; Philippi Melancthonis viri summi et incompara∣bilis, et totius Germaniae olim praeceptoris, explicationum in Academia Witember∣gensi traditarum super textus Evangeliorum Dominicalium &c. pars 3. printed Hano∣uiae apud Antonium &c. Explicatio in Evangelium in Festo Sanctae Margaretae, (supposed to be rescued from the Dragon by St. George;) pag. 417. the Gospell on that day, (2. Iulii) being Matth. 13. Regnum coelorum similis est Margaritae &c. where he discourseth thus. Hac septimana fuit usitatum celebrari festum diem Margaretae. Non volo recitare fabulas quae sunt notae, undecun{que} sunt ortae, sive ab Appollinari, sive ab aliis. Apollinaris composuit huiusmodi poemata, id est Comaedias et Tragaedias, tunc, cū Iulianus prohibuit doceri Christianorū liberos in scholis ethnicis, nolebat enim os eloquentia et litteris instrui, ut Christiana doctrina facilius opprimeretur, &c. (Which declares the originall of the fable of St. George: and then he propounds this question; Quid significat Georgos? which he thus resolves, (there being this direction in the margent, Fabula Georgii allegorica, to ascertaine the reader that he reputes it but an allegoricall fable:) Significat agricolā colentem terram, et est imago boni et sapientis Princip. Cultura terrae est conservatio disciplinae &c. Scribitur Georgius defendisse Margaritam, id est, Ecclesiam, ve Iustitiam, pulchram puellam, quam voluit devorare Draco, id est Diabolus et tyranni, ut nunc etiam fieri videtis. In Anglia exercetur ho∣ribilis saevitia contra homines pios. Vinam Deus excitet Georgios, qui defendant il∣los contra Dracones. Postea obversis nona eulis includitur in dolium, et sic inclusus de∣iicitur ex ardua monte; id est, necesse est illum Principem, qui curam Ecclesiae susci∣pit et tuetur iustitiam multa pati, venire in pericula et odia. Sed prorepit incolumis, id est, custodi divinitus, &c. Vid. Ibidem. Philip Melancthon too, what ever some aver against it, as his words I have quoted in the margent witnes:) a meere symbolical or allegoricall fiction; either of pious Magistrates, the Princes of Gods husbandry, who fight against the Dragon, rescuing the Virgin the Church from his assaults, or defending and maintaining discipline and justice, against all tyrants and oppressours: or, of our
Lord and Saviour Christ, the true Iohn 15.1. Isay 5.1. to 8. Matth. 12.33, 34. 1 Cor. 3.9.  of his Church, who hath long since Gen. 3.15. bruised the head, Isay 51.9. woun∣ded the body, and Rev. 12.7. to 12. vanquished the power of the great Serpent the Divell, (whom the Scripture stiles Psal. 91.13. Psal. 74.13. Isay 51.9. Rev. 12.3, 4, 7, 9, 13, cap. 13.2, 4, 11. c. 16.13. c. 20.2. the Dragon,) and Psal. 91.13. Rom. 16.20. Pal. 110.1, 2. Col. 2.14, 15. Hebr. 2.7, 8, 14. Ephes. 1.21, 22. trampled him under his feete, like a vi∣ctorious conquerour; rescuing the Rev. 12.1. to 16. 2 Tim. 2.26. Hebr. 2.14, 15. Woman, his beloved Church, (whom he stiles his Margarit Mal. 3.17. Rev. 21.10. to 22. his ewell) from his infernall power, as he Scriptures plainly teach us; all which the emblematicall picture of S. George doth lively represent:) must all be now unsaincted, and stig∣matized for nought else, but desperae notorious cast∣awayes, as this their proverbiall appellation of Cappa∣dox proclaimes them, if the objection prove once true; since this title (Cappadox) is appropiated to them all, yea even to Who is stiled Georgius Cappadox, by Vin∣centius Specu∣lum Historiale, l. 12. c. 131. f. 157. Chronicō Chronicorum AEtas 6. f. 140. Opmeeri Chro∣nogr. p. 309. The History of St. George p. 183. to 190, 284, 287, 312. George the Saint, as well as to George the Arri; he being principally knowne and conceived to be a Cappadocian borne, by this addition, Cappadox: which if it be meerely nationall in George the Martyr, and others fore-recited, must necessarily be so in George the Arrian; there being no reason to make it proverbi∣all in the one, and literall or nationall onely in the other. Secondly, for the objected authority of Lib. 22. cap. 11. not cap. 27. Ammianus Marcellinus, which is misquoted in the chapter: I an∣swer, first, that he was onely an heathen Writer, and not so well acquainted either with the birth or life of George the Arrian, as Athanasius his competitor, as Nazian∣zen his Countreyman, and the forequoted Ecclesiasticall historians were; who all affirme him to be a Cappado∣cian borne: his single testimony then ought not to be preferred before all theirs; no more than the testimony of See the History of St. George, pag. 133, 134 Frier Anselme, or Sir Walter Raleigh, who re∣cord, that George the Martyr, was borne in Syria, (not in Cappadocia,) in St. George his castle five miles from Ptolemais; is to be credited before theirs, who afirme him born in Cappadocia. Secondly, his witnes is not cer∣taine, but dubious, grounded onely upon a flying report
of others, not upon his owne knowledge. It is but, In Fulloni, in Fullio, or infulio (no man knowes which)  VT FREATV, apud Epiphaniam Cilici op∣pidum: And shall we beleeve a FEREBATVR, a meere uncertaine rumour, taken up by an Heathen, before th expresse Authorities of sundry eminent Christians. Thirdly, admit the most that may be, that this George was borne in Cili; yet it no ore followes from thence, that George the Arria was no a Cappadocian borne; than that one borne in St. George his Parish in Burford in the County of Glocester, is no English-man borne. For as Glocester-shire is a County of England, and so hee that is borne in it, may be truly called an English-man borne; so this Cilicia in which George the Arrian was reported to be borne, was, for ought it appeares, a Prae∣fecture or Province of Cappadocia; and therefore tugh he had there his birth, yet we may truly stile him a ap∣padocian borne. That this Cilicia wa but a Province of Cappadocia, it is somewhat probable by the testimo∣ny of Strabo, no infamous Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 5. c. 14. & Pur∣chas Pilgr. l. 3. c. 15. Cappadocian: of AEnea Sylvis, and Volatrnus, who informe us: Strabo Geog. l. 12. Tom. 2. Lugduni 1559. p. 166, 167, 168. & AEneas Sylvius, Histor. De Asia Mino∣ri cap. 43, 46, 49. in his Workes, Basi∣leae 151 pag. 325, 327. Vo∣lateanus Geo∣gr. l. 10 f. 102. See Mercator and Ptolomy accordingly. That Cappadocia was divided by the Persians into two King∣domes, viz: Cappadocia Mjor, towards Taurus, which they properly stiled Cappadocia; and Pontus, which some have called Cappadocia too: and That this Caeppadocia Major undr King Archelaus and his predecessors, was parted into 10 Praefectures, 5 of them scituated towards the hill Taurus; to wit, Praetura Melitina, Cataonia, CILI∣CIA, (which Cap. 6. p. 327. AEneas Sylvius stiles, Cilicia Strate∣gia) Tyanensis & Isauriensis; the other 5 intituled, La∣vinasena, Sargasena, Sarauna, Chamanena, and Rhim∣nena: to which the Romans added an eleventh Praefecture out of Cilici, namely the region of Castabalis and Cydrista nto Derba, the seate of Antipater the pirate, the eleventh Praefeture before Archelaus, who annexed likewise Cilici Trchea, and the whole country that pra∣ctised piracie unto Cappadocia. If then Cilicia were but
a Province of Cappadocia, and an eleventh Province out of Cilicia, together with Cilicia Trachea were added unto Cappadocia by the Romans and Archelaus: we may as safely conclude, that George the Arrian was a Cappadocian though borne in Cilicia, a part or Pro∣vince of Cappadocia, as that St. George his Advocate is an English-man, though born in Glocester shire. But ad∣mit Cilicia, where this George was borne, were no part of Cappadocia, because it may be objected, that See Polo∣mie and Mer∣cator. Epipha∣nia, and Pliny Hist. l. 5. c. 27. Epi∣phania was scituated in the Province of Cilicia, and not in this Cilicia: to which I may reply out of Volateran, Geogr: l: 11. f: 110. that there were three Citties of that name, and one of them perchance in this Cilicia; yet the Country of Cilicia it selfe (admitting he had his nativi∣ty there,) Strabo Geo∣gr. lib. 12. p. 166 Plini Nat. Hist. l. 5. c 24, 25. & l. 6. c. 8. AEneas Sylvius Hist. De Asia Minori c. 40, 41. &c. Pu∣chas Pilgr. l. 3. c. 15. borders on the south of Cappadocia. As therefore History of St. George, p. 150, 151, 152. some affirme, that St. George may without any contradiction be said to have both Lydda and Rama for the Stage of his suffering, because they are both conter∣minous and adjacent, by which devise they have Ibid. page 150, 151, 152. & the like is used in the fa∣ble of Dacia∣nus, p. 175. to 179. en∣deavoured to reconcile some jarring Authours: So by the selfesame reason, George the Arrian might be re∣ported, to be borne in Cilicia, as Ammianus writes, though in truth he were borne in Cappadocia, as the precedent Authours witnesse; by reason of the neere vi∣cinity of these two Countries. All which being laid to∣gether, will sufficiently justifie the true, though late op∣pugned position of our deceased famous Dr. Rainolds, (whose Printed 1599 & since reprin∣ted, 1629. Overthrow of Stage-playes, hath thus occa∣sioned me even here to quit his credit in this case of George the Arrian, which might else be questioned in the case of Stage-playes:) De Idololatria Rom. Eccl. l. . c. . sect. 22. That George the Arrian was a Cappadocian borne, as Nazianzen, Oratio 30. p. 494. was the Mother of St. Basil: to whose Play-condemning passages I now pro∣ceed: as namely his Quoted also by Damascen Paralellorum l. 3. c. 47. Hexaemeron Hom: 4. Operum Basileae 1565. Tom: 1. p: 45. Hom: in Psal: 1. p 218. Sermo 1. in Divites et Avaros, p: 305. De Ebritate et Luxu Sermo, p: 329, 333, 336. De Legendi Libris Gentilium
Oratio, p: 408, 412. Ascetica. Tom 2 p 180. & Comment: in cap: 14. Esaiae, Tom: 3, p: 469. The 25.Gregory Nazianzen, Anno 370. is Gregory Na∣zianzen, that eloquent and famous Cappadocian, Bishop of Constantinople, Gregorius et Basilius nisi u∣na anima in duobus corpo∣ribus. Greg. Nazianz. Oratio 30. p. 499. St. Basils most intire friend, Ora∣tio 1. in his Workes, Basiliae 1571. p. 6. Oratio 28. De. Fu∣nere Patris, p: 472. Oratio 31 p 525. B. Oratio 38, p 583, 584, 585. Oratio 47, p. 772. Oratio 48, p. 796, 797. Ad∣versus Mulieres ambitiosius sese ornantes, p: 994. Ad Se∣leucum, De Recta Educatione, p: 1062, 1063, 1064. a no∣table place. & Sententiae, p: 1168. The 26.Gregory Nyssen Anno 380. is Gregory Nys∣sen, De Oratione lib: Opera, Basileae, 1571; p: 9. De Resur∣rectione Christi, Oratio 3, p: 160. De Vita Beat Gregori Miraculorum Opificis, p: 312, 313. & Vitae Moseos E∣narratio, p: 502, 503, 525. The 27.Prudentius, Anno 380. is Aurelius Pruden∣tius, that eminent Christian Poet, who much declaimes against Stage-playes, Cirque-playes, Sword-playes, and dancing: in his Psychomachia: Bibl: Patr: Tom 4, p: 851, F. Hymnus 6, p: 880. & Hamartigeneia, p: 904, A, B, D, G, E, p: 907, D. Contra Symmachum, lib: 1, p: 910, D, E 912, B, C, & l: 2, p: 922, E, F, G. The 28.Gaudentius Brixius, Anno 386. is Gaudentius, Bishop of Brixia, De Lectione Evangelij Sermo 8. Bibl. Patrum Tom: 4, p. 813, C. The 29.Epiphanius Anno 390. is Epiphanius Bishop of Constans, in his Compendiaria vera Doctrina, de fide Catholicae et Apostolicae Ecclesiae: in his works, Lute∣tiae Paris. 1612. Col: 922, E. The 30.St. Hierom, Anno 390. is that learned Father St. Hierom, Epistola 2. ad Nepotianum cap: 6, 7. Operū Antwerpiae 1579, Tom:  p: 5. Epist: 9, ad Salvinam, cap: 5, p: 28, Epist: 10, ad Furiam, cap: 4 p: 31. Epist: 13, ad Pau∣linum, cap: 2, p: 39. Epist: 18, ad Marcellam, cap: 1, p: 53. Epist: 48, cap: 2. p: 102. Epist: 88, Tom: 2, p: 314. Adversus Iovinianum, lib: 2, cap: 7, Tom: 2, p: 167. Commentariorum in Ezechiel: lib: 6, cap: 20 Tom: 4, p: 389, H. The 31.Sedulius, Anno 396. is Caelius Sedulius, Collectanea in Epist: ad Ephesios, cap: 5. Bibl. Patrum Tom: 5, pars 1, p: 506, E. The 32.St Chrysostome, Anno 400. is Gol∣den-tongued St. Chrysostome, Bishop of Constantino∣ple, who is most abundant and divinely rhetoricall See here p. 392. to 433. where his words are reci∣ted at large. a∣gainst Stage-playes, Play-haunting, Players, and dan∣cing:
Homilia 2. Adversus Iudaeos: Edit: Fronto Ducaei Parisis 1621, Tom. 1. p. 463. C, D. Homil: in S. Iulianum,See here p. 392 to 433. Ibid. p. 615, A, B. Homil. de S. Phoca, p. 878, A, B. Hom. De S. Martyre Barlaam, p. 893, D, 894, A. Homil. 56, in Geneseos 29, Tom. 1. Edit. Lat. Parisijs 1588, Col. 367, 368. Hom. 3. De Davide et Saule, Col. 510, 511, 512. Ho∣mil. in Psal. 41, Col. 734, 735. Hom. in Psal. 46, Col. 777, B. Homil. in Psal. 50, Col. 821, C, D. Homil. in Psal. 118, v. 37; 151, & 152, Col. 998, a, 1030, 1031. Hom: in Psal: 140, Col: 1110, 1111. Hom: 1, de Verbis Esai, Vidi Do∣minum sedentem &c. Col. 1281, 1282, 1283, 1284. & Hom. 2, Col. 1287, 1288. Hom. 2, 6, 7, 10, 17, 21, 38, 49, 69, 74, & 89, in Mat: Tom. 2, Col. 15, 16, 50, 51, 52, 53, 58, 59 60, 79, B, D, 144, A, 175, A, 297, 298, 299, 300, 356, 358, 359 360, 487, 488, 489, 514, 515, 601. Hō. 31, in Ioā: Evang. Tom. 3. Col. 130, Hō. 29, & 42, in Acta Apost. Col. 544, A, 611, 612. Hō. 12, in 1 Ep. ad Cor. Tom. 4. Col. 356, 357, 358, 359. Hom. 17, in Ephes. 5, Col. 986, 987, 988. Hō. 9, in Epist. ad Coloss. Col. 1191. Hom. 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 38, 39, 54, 62, & 66. Ad Populum Antiochiae, Tom. 5, Col. 118, C, 122, B, C. 135, C, D. 137, B, C. 144, D. 145, A, D. 146, A. 149, A, B, C. 166, 167, 168, 183, 184, 186, 245, B. 250, D. 311, 312, 343, 346, 361, D. Ad Neophi∣tos Homilia, Col. 619, B, C. De Poenitentia Hom: 8, Col. 750, 751. De Elemosyna et Hospitalitate Sermo, Col. 785, A. Kalendis habita Oratio, Col. 799, 800. Oratio sexta, 1471, 1472. Oratio 7, Col. 1481, 1482. Oratio 5 in Salta∣tionem Herodiadis, Col. 1815, 1816; and in sundry other forequoted places: See Act: 6, Scene 4, p. 392. &c. The 33.St. Augu∣gustine, Anno 410. is St. Augustine, that famous Bishop of Hippo: Confessio∣num l. 1, c. 10, Operum Lugduni 1563, Tom. 1, p. 99, l. 3, c. 1, 2, p. 116, 117. l. 4, c. 1, 2. p. 128, 129. l. 6, c, 7, 8, p. 165, to 169.See here pag. 341. to 349. Musicae, lib. 1, c. 2, 3, 5, 6. p. 443, 445, 451, 452. De Moribus Manichaeorum, l. 2, c. 19. p. 1129, 1130. Epi∣stola 202, Tom. 2, p. 953, 954. De Doctrina Christiana, l. 1, c. 25, Tom. 3, p. 41. De Consensu Evangelistarum, l. 1, c. 33, Tom. 4, pars 1, p. 530, 531. De Chatechizandis rudi∣bus
lib. c. 16, Tom. 4, pars 2, p. 340, 341. De vera et falsa Poenitentia, lib. c. 15, p. 520. De Civitate Dei Tom: 5, lib. 1, c. 30, 31, 32, 33. l: 2, c. 2, to 15, 26, 27, 29. l. 3, c. 18, 19. l. 4, c. 1, 10, 26, 27, 28, 31. l. 5, c. 12, l. 6, c. 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 21, 24, 26, 27, 33, l. 8, c. 5, 13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 26, 27, l. 12, c. 25. Enarratio in Psal. 39, Tom. 8 pars 1, p. 416, to 420. in Psal. 102, pars 2. p. 336. Tractatus 100. in Evang. Ioannis, Tom. 9. pars 1, p. 608. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos, l. 2, c. 11, p. 1393, 1394, & l, 4, c. 1, p. 1427, 1428. De Verbis Apo∣stoli, Sermo 17, Tom. 10, p. 442, 443, & Homilia 21, p. 592 593. with other forecited places, Act. 6, Scene 3, p. 341, &c. The 34.Nilus Abbas, Anno 410. is Nilus Abbas, Oratio 2, de Luxu∣ria, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, pars 2, p. 969, G. The 35.Orosius, Anno 410. is Paulus Orosius, a Spanish Presbyter, Historiarum lib. 3, c. 4, Coloniae 1542, p. 120. The 36.Synesius, Anno 410. is Synesius, Bishop of Cyrene, De Regno lib. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5. pars 1, p. 51, G. The 37.Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Anno 430. is Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, In Hesai∣am l. 1, cap. 4 Operum Parisijs 1605, Tom. 1, p. 134, D. in Ioannis Evangelium, lib. 8, c. 5, p 595, A, B. The 38.Theodoret, Anno 430. is Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, De Sacrificijs, l. 7. Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1617, Tom. 2, p. 382. De Martyribus lib. 8, p. 390, E, F. De Activa Virtute, p. 408, D. The 39.Prosper A∣quit. Anno 440. is Prosper Aquitanicus, Bishop of Rhegium, De Gloria Sanctorum Peroratio, Opera Daci 1577, fol. 73. The 40.Sozomenus Anno 440. is Hermias Sozomenus Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 5, cap. 15, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, pars 2 p. 420, E. The 41.Isiodor Pe∣lusiota, Anno 440. is Isiodor Pelu∣sioa, Epist. l. 1, Epist. 62, 63, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, pars 2, p. 483, F, & l. 3, Epist. 336, pag: 613, A. The 42.Primasius, Anno 450. is Pri∣masius, Bishop of Vtica, Comment. in Epist. ad Romanos, c. 10, Parisijs 1543, fol. 53. The 43.Leo 1. Anno 450. is Pope Leo the first, In Octava Petri et Pauli Sermo, Opera Antwerpiae 1583 fol. 165. The 44.Slvian, Anno 460. is Salvian, the famous vice-tormenting Bishop of Massilia or Marcelles, in France, De Guberna∣tione Dei, lib 6, Opera Parisijs 1608, p. 182, to 224. The 45.Olympio∣dorus, Anno 500. is Olympiodorus, Enarratio in Ecclesiasten, cap. 4. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 11, p. 405, E. The 46.Cassiodo∣us Anno 50. is Aurelius Cassio∣dorus, Variarum, lib. 1, Epist. 27, 30, 32, in his workes
Aureliae Alobragum, 1609, p. 55, 58, lib. 3, Epist. 51, p. 221 222, 224, lib 5, Epist: 42, p. 369, 370, 371, 372, lib. 7, E∣pist. 10, p. 458, 459. The 47.Fulgentius, Anno 520. is Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspens in Africa, Mythologiarum, lib. 1, Opera Basi∣leae, 1617, p. 820, l. 2, p. 861. & Super audivit Herodes Tetrarcha &c. Sermo, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6, pars 1, p. 148. D, E, F. The 48.Gregorius 1 Anno 590. is Pope Gregory the first, Moralium l. 15, c. 18. Opera Parisijs 1533, fol. 89, E. l. 13, c. 18. fol. 78, D. l. 21, c. 2, f. 124, I, K. & Epist: l. 9, Epist. 48, fol. 443, K. The 49.Isiodor Hispalensis, Anno 630. is Isiodor, Bishop of Hispalis, Originum lib. 18, cap. 16, to 60 Opera, Coloniae Agrip. 1617, p. 158, 159, 160, 165 de Officijs Ecclesiasticis, l. 1, cap. 40, & l. 2, c. 2, p. 400, C. & 401, D, E. The 50.Anasasius Sianita, Anno 640. is Anastasius Sianita, Patriarke of Antioch, in his Viae duae, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 6, pars 1, p. 604, B. The 51.Valerian, Anno 650. is Valerian, Bishop of Ceme∣la, Homil. 1, de Bono Disciplinae, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, pars 3, p. 477, C, D. Homil. 6, de Otiosis verbis, p. 482, G, H. 483, A. Hom. 10 de Parasitis, p. 487, F, G. The 52.Beda, Anno 720. is our Venerable Beda, In Lucae Evangelium, c. 7, l. 2, Ope∣rum Coloniae Agrip. 1612, Tom. 5, Col. 300. The 53.Damascen, Anno 740. is Ioannis Damascenus, Parallelorum, lib. 1, cap. 76, Opera Parisijs 1619, p 63, 64. & lib. 3, cap. 47, p. 208. The 54.Alchuvinus Anno 790. is our famous Countrey-man Alchuvinus, Tutor to CHARLES the Great: de Caeremonijs Baptismi Epistola in his Workes, Lutetiae Paris. 1617, Col: 1158, B. & de Divinis Officijs lib: cap: 4, Col: 1013, 1014. The 55.Agobardus Anno 840. is A∣gobardus, Bishop of Lyons: De Dispensatione, Mini∣sterio, &c. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 9, pars 1, p. 603, H. 604, A. The 56.Paschatius Rabertus, is Paschatius Ratbertus, in Matth: Evangelium l. 4, Bibl: Patrum Tom. 9, pars 2, p. 986, A B. The 57.HRabanus Maurus, Anno 840. is HRabanus Maurus: De sacri Ordinibus lib: 1, Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1626, Tom. 6, p. 63, A, B, C. De Vniverso lib: 20, cap: 16, to 38, Tom: 1. p: 248, to 252. in Detero∣nomium l: 2, c: 29, Tom: 2, p: 437. The 58.Haymo, Anno 840. is Haymo, Bishop of Halberstat, Comment: in Isaiam, cap: 56, Coloniae 1531 pag 473. & Comment: in Ephes: 5, v: 3. The 59.Remigius, Anno 850. is Remigi∣us, Bishop of Rheemes, Explanatio in Epist: ad Galatas,
c. 5, v: 19, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 5, p. 756, G: & in Ephes: 5, v. 3, p: 970, A, B. The 60.Bruno, Anno 1040. is Bruno, Bishop of Herbipolis, Expositio in Psal: 118, v: 37. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 11, p. 221, B. The 61.Theophy∣lact, Anno 1070. is Theophylact, Archbishop of the Bul∣garians, Enarrat: in Marc: cap: 6, in his Workes Basiliae 1570, p: 89. Enar: in Ephes: c: 5, p. 509, in 1 Tim: 2, p: 573, 584. The 62.uo Car∣notensis, Anno 1100. is Iuo Carnotensis Episcopus, Decreta Lo∣vanij 1561, pars 1, c: 207, pars 2, c: 31, pars , c: 77, pars 4, cap: 8, 162, 166, 167. pars 5, cap: 370. pars 7, cap: 110. pars 11, cap: 7, 16, 64, 76, to 85. The 63.Anselme, Anno 1110. is Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury, Comment: in Epist: ad Ephe∣os, l. 5, v: 3 Tom: 2. Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1612, p: 285, C, D. in Epist: ad Philip: c. 4, p: 306, A. in 1 Tim: c: 3 p: 356, C. The 64.Honorius Augusto u∣nensis, Anno 1120. is Honorius Augustodunensis, De Antiquo ritu Missarum, lib: 3, cap: 58. Bibl. Patrum Tom: 12, pars 1, p: 1069, E. where he stiles dancing and Stage-playes, the very pompes of the Divell which we renounce in Baptisme. The 65.Bernard, Anno 1130. is elegant St. Bernard, Abbot of Clarevale, Oratio ad Milites Templi, cap: 4. Opera Antwerpiae, 1616, Col: 832, L, M. & Epist: 87, Col: 1477, A. The 66.Ranulphus Cirstrensis, An. 1140. is Ranulphus Cirstrensis, in his Polychronicon, London, 1527. Booke 3, cap: 34, fol: 131. The 67.Ioannes Sa∣resberiensis Anno 1140. is our famous Countrey-man Iohn Saresbery, Episcopus Carnotensis in France: De Nugis Curialiū, l. 1, c. 4, 5, 7, 8. & l. 8, c: 6, 7. Bibl. Patr. Tō. 15, p. 358, 463, 466. The 68.Petrus Ble∣sensis, Anno 1160. is Petrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Bathe, Ep: 14. Bibl. Patr. Tom 12. pars 2, p: 714, B. Epist: 76, p: 761, E. Epist: 85, p: 769, E. The 69.Alredus, Anno 1160. is AElredus, Abbot of Rivaulx, in Yorkeshire, Anno 1160. in his Speculum Charitatis, lib: 1, cap: 26, p: 95, G. lib. 2, c. 23, p: 111, G, H. l: 3, c: 12, p: 118, A. and his Fragmentum, conteining the memorable exhortation of King Edgar to his Bishops and Abbots, Ibidem p. 144, A. The 70.Gratian, Anno 1170. is Gratian. Distinctio 33, 34, 48 & 86. Edit Parisijs 1531, fol 56, 58, 78, 130, 139, 140. & Causa 4, Quaest: 1, f. 260. & de Consecratione Distinctio 2, fol: 663. The 71.Innocentius, 3. Anno 1200. is Pope Innocent the 3. Decretal: Constitutionum, lib. 3,
Tit. 1, Constit. 3. Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1606, Tom. 2, p: 713, 714. These 7 eminent ancient Fathers and Writers in these their recited works, to which I might adde Iustinian that famous Christian Emperour, in his See Act. 7, Scene 3. p. 656, to 662. forequoted awes and workes, have constantly even from our Saviours death till the yeare 1200. abundantly oppugned, censured and condemned, not onely Sword-playes, Cirque-playes, and Amphitheatricall bloudy Spe∣ctacles; but even See Act. 6, Scene 3, 4, 5, 12. Stage-playes themselves, as diabo∣licall, heathenish, sinfull, lewd, ungodly Spectacles, See Act. 6, Scene 5. not sufferable among Christians; condemning withall, not onely the acting, but even the beholding of such lasci∣vious, filthy and contagious Enterludes, the seminaries of all those prodigious execrable wicked effects, which I have more fully anatomized in the See Act. 3, 4, 4, 5, 6, through out. pecedent Acts. And if all these worthy ancient Fathers did thus abominate, op∣pugne the Stag-playes, Actors and Play-haunters of their times; ô how would they censure and abhorre the scurrilous, obscene, blasphemous, impious Playes and Players of our age, See Act. 6. Scene 7. p. 132. & pag. 38. which are farre more execrable, prophane and lewd than the very worst in former dayes? From these authorities therefore thus recited, I shall frame this 49. invincible Argument against Stage playes. That which 71 severall Fathers and eminent ancient Writers of the Church have constantly,Argum. 49. professedly condemned, as sinfull, and abominable in these their recited workes; Quicquid e∣nim omnes, vel plures, uno o∣dem{que} sensu, manifeste, fre∣quenter, perseveranter, velut quodam sibi consentiente Magistrorum Concilio acci∣piendo, tenen∣do tradendo firmaverint, id pro indubitato, certo, ratoque habeatur. Vencentius Lerinenis con∣ra Hreses, cap. 39. must certainly be desperately sinfull, unseemely unlawfull unto Christians, in∣tollerable in any Christian Commonweale. But these 71 severall Fathers and eminent ancient Wri∣ters of the Church, have thus constantly professed∣ly condemned Stage-playes and Stage-Players, in these their recited workes. Therefore they must certainly be desperately sinfull,
unseemely, unlawfull unto Christians, intollerable in any Christian Commonweale. The Minor is evident by the premises: the Major I dare challenge the most impudent Player, or Play-pa∣tron to denie. For what man, what Christian is there so peremptorily audacious, so unchristianly immodest, so Errat enim is qui a via quam Patrum electio monstravit ab∣errat. Hosmisdae Papae Epist. ad Possssorem. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6. pars 1. p. 375. erroniously schismaticall, as to controll, and quite re∣ject, the unanimous resolutions of so many reverend, pious, incomparably learned Fathers? whose Play-con∣demning censures, seconded by the definitive sen∣tence of the whole primitive Church both under the Law and Gospell; not onely challenge our reverend re∣spect, See Deut. 4.32. c. 32.7. Iob 8.8, 9, 10. c. 15. 17, 18. cr. .16. Ezra 4.15. Psal. 44.1. Ps. 78.. Prov. 1.8, 9. c. 4.1, 2. c. 13.1. c. 22.28 c. 23.22. c. 2.20. 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. Heb. 12.1. 1 Thess. 2.14. Heb. 6.12. See Iohn Whites Way to the true Church. Digress. 47. sect. 4. to 9.but our subscription too. We are all exceeding ready in matters of faith, to give credit to Councels, to the renowned Fathers, and ancient Writers, especially where all, or many of them concurre: and shall we then reject and undervalue them here in the case of Stage-playes, in which they all accord, without the least dis∣sent? Never (I dare positively affirme it) did Fathers, Councels, and Writers of all sorts, all ages, more plenti∣fully, more unanimously accord in passing sentence a∣gainst any abuse or wickednesse whatsoever, then in censuring, in condemning Stage-playes, as the precedent and subsequent Scenes will evidence: and shall we then desert them where they all concord? Could Players, Play-haunters or lewd lascivious persons, finde out but one Councell, one Father or two, to countenance Stage-playes, dancing, dicing, Health-quaffing, face-painting, Love-lockes, or their strange fantastique habits and dis∣guises; they would so Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile crdunt. Sneca. Hercules Furens Act. 2. hugge it, so adore it, that nei∣ther the lawes of God or man, the authorities of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, the concurring resolutions of all other Fathers, Councels or Writers to the contrary should be able to convince them that these things are evill: Est et haec pervetas ho∣minum, sala∣taria excuere, exitiosa suscipere, periculosa quaeque medi∣camenta vitare, mori denique citius quam curari desiderant. Tertull. adversus Gnosticos Tom. 2 . 425. Isti nec rationibus convincuntur, quia nō intelligunt, nec authoritatibus corriguntur, quia non ecipiunt nec flectent suasionibus quia subversi unt, probatum est, mori magis ligunt quam converti. Ben. Super Cantica Sermo 66. fol. 160. C. so
pertinaciously doe men adhere not onely to their opinions, but their errors too, who justifie or foment their vices in the least degree. And shall not then the uncontrolled authority of all the precedent Christian Councels and Fathers, be much more prevalent to withdraw them from pernicious Stage-playes, with other oft condem∣ned vanities, which have not so much as one Father, one Councell to defend them? shall men beleeve, (yea sometimes preferre) the Fathers before the Scriptures, where they seeme to give any countenance to their er∣rours or superstitions; and yet reject them, where they all unanimously condemne their sinfull pleasures? O let us not so farre undervalue these their pious judicious, unanimous resolutions against Stageplayes and Actors, as still to magnifie, frequent, or patronize them in de∣spite of all these their determinations; Phil. 3.16. Rom. 15.5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.16. 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 1.27. c. 2.2. 1 Pet. 3, 8 but let us joyne hearts, and hands, and pens, and judgements, yea and our practise with them; passing the very selfesame doome on Players, on Stage-playes, as they all have done before us; for feare their pious resolutions prove so many un∣avoidable endictments of condemnation against us at the last. We all professe our selves inheritors of these Fathers faith; let us not then be ashamed to inherit the purity, piety, discipline, and devotion of their lives. See Act. 7. Scene 2. It was one great part of their discipline, to censure; one badge of their Christianity, their piety, to a∣bandon Stage-playes, Players and Play-haunters; let it be one peece of our Ecclesiastical, if not civil discipline, and devotion, to doe the like. And Hebr. 12.1. since we are compas∣sed about with so great a cloud of Play-condemning Au∣thorities, let us now at last resolve, to lay away every weight, and the sin, (these sinful stigmatized Stage-playes) which doe so easily beset us; Prov. 4.1. & 13.1. Let us hearken to the in∣struction of these pious Fathers, and attend unto their do∣ctrine: not Prov. 22.28. removing those Play-exiling Land-markes which they have set us: that so imitating them in their piety, wee may at last participate with them in their glory.
SCENA QVINTA. THE fifth Squadron of Play-oppugning Authorities,  is the resolution of sundry Chritian Authours,150 Moderne Christian Wri∣ters have con∣demned Stage-playes. as well Papists as Protestants, from the yeare of our Lord 1200, to this present time, a Catalogue of whose names and workes I shall here present unto you, according to their severall antiquities, together with the Impressions which I follow. The 1.Guillermus, Altisiodorensis Anno Dom. 1206. of them is Guillermus Altisio∣dorensis; Summa Aurea in lib. Sententiarum, Parisijs 1500, 1: 3, Tractat: 7, Quaest: 3, fol: 163. where he con∣cludes thus. Qui dat histrionibus immolat daemonibus &c. The 2.Saxo Gram∣matius, Anno 1220. is Saxo Grammaticus, Historiae Danicae l. 6. Francofurti 1576, p. 103. The 3.Will. Mal∣mesburiensis, 1230. is Willielmus Malmes∣buriensis, De Gestis Regum Anglorum, l. 2, c. 10, Fran∣cofurti 161, p. 67, 68. The 4.Gulielmus Parisiensis, Anno 1240. is Gulielmus Parisiensis, De Legibus, c. 13, Opera Venetijs 1591, p. 42, 43. & De Vitijs et Virtutibus, lib. c. 6, p. 262. The 5.Alexander Alensis, Anno 1240. is Alexan∣der Alensis, the famous English Schooleman, Summa Theologiae, Coloniae Agrip. 1622, pars 4, Quaest. 11, Ar∣tic. 2, sect. 4, p. 391, 392, 393. The 6.Edmundus Cantuariensis, Anno 1240. is Edmundus Can∣tuariensis, Archbishop of Canterbury, Speculum Ec∣clesiae, cap. 11. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 13, p. 359, E. The 7.Vincentius Beluacensis, Anno 1250. is Vincentius Beluacensis, Speculum Doctrinale, Venetijs 1591, lib. 11, c. 93, to 98, fol. 194 &c. Speculum Morale l. 3, pars 8, Distinctio 4, & pars 9, Distinctio 6, fol. 244, 251, 252, & Speculum Historiale Venetijs 1494, l. 29, c. 41, fol. 367, where he hath excellent large Discourses, both against dicing, dancing, Cirque-playes and Stage-playes, well worth the Readers observation. The 8.Matthaeus Parisiensis, Anno 1250. is Matthaeus Parisiensis, our famous English Historian, Hist. Angliae, Tiguri 1589, p. 209, 210, 803, 823. The 9.Aquinas, Anno 1260.
is Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, Duaci 1614, 2a 2ae. Quaest: 168, Artic: 2, 3, Quaest: 169, Artic: 2, 3m, & 1a 2ae Quaest: 102, Artic: 6, 6m, pag: 288, 289, 291. The 10.Bonaventu∣ra, Anno 1262. is Bonaventura, that famous popish Cardinall, In Sententias lib: 4, Distinct: 16, Dub: 13: Operum Mo∣guntiae, 1609 Tom: 5, p: 196. The 11.Suidas, Anno 1270. is Suidas, Histo∣rica, Basiliae 1581, p: 127. Ardaburius Caius, sec p: 193. The 12.Ricardus, de Media Villa, Anno 1290. is Ricardus de Media Villa, Super lib. 4, Sen∣tentiarum Brixiae 1591. Distinctio 16, Artic: 3, Quaest: 1, p: 232. The 13.Nic. De Ly∣ra, Auno 1320. is Nicolaus de Lyra, in Deut: 22, v: 5, Duaci 1617, Tom: 1, p: 1595. in Amos 6, Tom: 4, p: 1879 in 1 Tim: c 2, Tom: 6, p: 698. See him on cap: 16, Iudi∣cum, & in cap: 14, Matth: & c: 6, Marc. The 14.Alvarus Pe∣lagius, Anno 1330. is Al∣varus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae, Lugduni 1517, l: 1, Artic: 49, f: 28, lib 2, Artic: 28, fol. 134, & Artic. 46, fol. 150 The 15.Thomas Gualensis, Anno 1330. is Thomas Gualensis, alias Wallis, a lear∣ned English Writer, Lectio 77, in Proverb. Solomonis, AEdibus Ascentianis, 1510, fol: 97: an excellent full place against Stage-playes: & Summa Collationum ad omne genus hominum, pars 1, Distinctio 14, cap 7. quoted by Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum lib: pars 4, c. 23. The 16.Astexanus, Anno 1330. is Astexanus, De Casibus &c. Nu∣rembergae 1482, lib. 2, Tit. 53. & l. 4, Tit. 17. Artic. 4. The 17.Thomas Bradwardin, Anno 1340. is that profound English Doctor, Thomas Bradwardin, Archbishop of Canterbury, De Causa Dei, lib. 1 cap. 1, Corolla 20, Opera Londini 1618, p. 14, 15. The 18.Robertus Holkot, Anno 1350. is Robertus Holkot, a famous English Schooleman, Lectio 172, super lib. Sapientiae, Basileae 1506, fol. 132.133. The 19.Franciscus Petrarcha, Anno 1370. is Franciscus Petrarcha, De Remedio utriusque Fortunae, lib. 1, Dialogus 24, 25, to 31, printed 1613. p. 95, to 130. where wee have an excellent Discourse against dicing, dancing and Stage-playes. The 20.Ioannis Wickliffe An. 1380. is Ioannis Wickliffe, our famous English Apostle, Dialogorum l. 3, c. 1, fol: 45, Edit. 1545. The 21.Ioannnis de Burgo, An. 1390. is Ioannis de Burgo, Chancellour of the Vniversity of Cambridge; Ppilla Oculi, Parisijs 1521, pars 4, cap. 8, 1. pars 7, cap. 5, O. & pars 10, cap. 5, V.X.
The 22.Nicolaus Cabasila, Anno 1400. is Nicolaus Cabasila, De Vita in Christo l. 2, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 14, p. 114, C, D, E, F. The 23.Ioannis Gerson, Anno 1410. is Io∣annis Gerson, the learned Chancellour of Paris, De Prae∣ceptis Decalogi, cap. 7, Operum Parisijs 1606, pars 2, Col. 264, & Sermo Dominicae 3, Adventus; Operum pars 4, Col: 332, 333, 334. The 24.Alexander Fabritius, An. 1426. is Alexander Fa∣britius, a learned English-man, Destructorium Vitio∣rum, Lutetiae 1516, pars 3, c. 10, C, D. pars 4, cap: 23. De Ludis inhonestis; an excellent place against Dancing, Dicing and Stage-playes; where he quotes one Wale∣rannus and Walensis against these pastimes, whose workes there cited are not at this day extant. The 25.Thomas Waldensis, Anno 1430. is Thomas Waldensis, a learned English Writer, Iohn Wickliffes professed Antagonist, Tit. 5, De Baptismi Sacrament. c. 49, sect. 7, Operum Venetijs, 1571, Tom. 3, p. 96, B, See here Act. 7, Scene 2. The 26.Totatus Abulenis, Anno 1430. is Tostatus A∣bulensis, that Voluminous Writer, Comment. in Deut. 22, Quaestio 2, Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1613, Tom. 3, pars 2, p. 199, B, C. In lib. 4. Regum, Quaestio 44, Tom. 7, pars 2, f 100, C, D. & in Matth. cap. 6, Quaestio 38, & 67, Tom. 10, pars 3, fol. 40, E, &c. The 27.Ricardus Panpolitanus, Anno 1430. is Ricardus Panpolitanus, a famous English Hermite, In Verba Sa∣lomonis; Adolescentulae dilexerunt te nimis &c. Bibl. Patrum Tom: 15, p. 838, A, where he thus writes; Sed quidem ut pueri vadunt ad ludos, ad spectacula, ad mul∣tas alias vanitates: quamvis tamen Deum semper prae∣ponunt, quasi Deum amare nescirent: where hee stiles Stage-playes, vanities, those who resort unto them, chil∣dish persons, who know not how to love God as they ought. The 28.Niolaus De Clemangis, Anno 1230. is Nicolaus de Clemangis, De Novis Celebrita∣tibus non instituendis, Tract. Oper Lugduni Batt. 1613, p. 143, to 160. De Lapsu et Reparatione Iustitiae, cap. 15, p. 54. & Epist. 28, 54, p 102, 103, 104, 148, 149. where he excellently declaimes against Dancing, Stage-playes, and other wanton effeminate exercises and disorders in his time; & De Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu, c. 2, sect. 3, p. 5, c. 4, p. 7, c. 15, sect. 3, p. 15, c. 18, sect. 1, p. 18, where he
censures the luxurie and exorbitances of the Clergy, especially for their dancing, dicing, resort to Payes, and their esteeme of Players. The 29.Panormita∣nus, Ano 140. is Panormitanus, that industrious Abbot, 5. Decretalium, De Clerico Vena∣tore, Tit-24, Lugduni 1580, fol, 187; and in sundry o∣ther places. The 30.Antoninu Anno 1444. is Antoninus, Archbishop of Flo∣rence, Chronicorum, pars 2, Tit. 15; c. 10. sect. 13, Edit. Lugduni 1543, fol. 132; & pars 3, Tit. 18, c. 5, sect. 4, fol. 19. The 31.AEneas Syl∣vius, Anno 1450. is AEneas Sylvis, afterwards Pope Pius the 2, Epist. l. 1, Epist. 166, Opera Basileae 1551, p. 721, 722, 723. & De Liberorum Educatione, p. 968. The 32.Mapheus Vegius, Anno 1450. is Mapheus Vegius, De Educatione Liberorum l. 1 c 14, & l. 3, c. 7, 12, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 15, p. 835, E, F, 865, H 847, F, &. 848 C, D. The 33.Ioannis An∣tonius, Anno 1540.is Ioannis Antonius, Bishop of Champaigne, De Gerendo Magistratu, lib. Bibl. Pa∣trum Tom. 15, p. 809, B, C. The 34.Paulus Wan, Anno 1460. is Paulus Wan, Quadragesimale, Hagenau, 1501, Sermo 5, De Custo∣dia quinque Sensuum, Sermo 7, De Custodia Auditus; & Sermo 10, De Custodia Tactus. The 35.Michael Lochmair, Anno 1470. is Michael Lochmair, Sermo 21 Hagenaw 1550, Y, Z; Sermo 33, F, G, H; Sermo 38, K; Sermo 62, L; Sermo 65, Z; & 106, F The 36.Anglus De Clavasio, Anno 1480. is Angelus De Clavasio, Summa Angelica, Nu∣rembergae 1498, Tit. Chorea, Histrio, Infamia, Ludus. The 37.Baptista Troomala, Anno 1490. is Baptista Trouomala, Summa Rosella, Vene∣tijs 1495, Tit. Chorea & Histrio. The 38.Raphael Volateranus, Anno 1500. is Raphael Vo∣lateranus, Commentariorum lib. 29, cap: De Celebri∣tate Conviviorum et Ludorum, Edit: Parisijs 1511, p: 312, 313. The 39.Ioannis de Wankel, Anno 1506. is Ioannis De Wankel, Glossa in Bre∣viarum Sexti, lib 3, Tit: 1, De Vita et Honestate Cleri∣corum, Parisis 1509. fol: 88. The 40.Ioannis Nyder, Anno 1506. is Ioannis Nyder, Expositio super Praecepta Decalogi, Parisiiis 1507, Prae∣ceptum 6 cap: 2, 3, fol: 123, 124. The 41.Alexander ab Alexandro, Anno 1510. is Alexander ab Alexandro, Genialium Dierum lib: 3, c: 9, Hanouiae 1610, fol: 135, 136, & l: 5, c: 8, fol. 280, 281. The 42.Lodovicu Vives, Anno 1510. is Lodovicus Vives, Notae in Augustinum, De Civitate Dei l. 1, c. 30, to 34, & l. 2, c. 2, to 16, &c. l. 8, c. 37; & De Cau∣sis Corruptionis Artium, lib. 2, Edit: 1612, p. 81, 83.
The 43.Polydor Virgil, Anno 1510. is Polydorus Virgilius, De Inventoribus Rerū, 1604, l. 5, c. 1, 2, p. 380, to 389. & l. 3, c. 13, p. 251, 257. The 44.Ioannis Aventinus, Anno 1520. is Ioannis Aventinus, Annalium Boiorum, Ba∣sileae 1590, lib 7, pag. 536, & 668. The 45.Episcopus Chemnensis, Anno 1530. is Episcopus Chemnensis, Onus Ecclesiae, 1531, c. 23, sect. 1, fol. 43, cap. 27, sect. 15, 16, 17, 18, fol. 53, & cap. 28, sect. 6, fol. 54. The 46.Coccius Sabellicus, Anno 1538. is Marc: Antonius Coccius Sabellicus AE∣neadis 2, l. 9, Basileae 1538, p. 299, l. 4, p. 200. AEneadis 4, l. 1, p. 482, l. 3, p. 508. AEneadis 5, lib. 4, p. 730, 748, lib. 7, p. 799. AEneadis 7, l. 2, p. 201, 203, lib. 1, p. 191: where he shewes at large, how Stage-playes were originally devoted to the Roman Idol-Gods, who exacted them at their hands to their great expence. The 47.Stephanus Costa, Anno 1540. is Stepha∣nus Costa, De Ludo Tractatus, num. 3, 4, 9, 12, 14, to 25. in Tractat. Tractatuum, Parisijs 1545, pars 1, f. 156, 157, 158, 159, 160. The 48.Nicolaus Ploue, Anno 1540. is Nicolaus Ploue, De Sacra∣mentis, Ibid. Tractat. Tractatuum, pars 8, p. 51, sect. 3. The 49.Mr. Iohn Calvin, Anno 1540. is reverend Mr. Iohn Calvin, Sermo 126, in Deut. 22, 5. Epistola Facillo, Operum Genevae 1607 Tom. 6, pars 2, Col. 93, 94. See Sermo 70, 79, & 80, in lib. Iob. The 50.Cornelius Agrippa, Anno 1546. is Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, De Vanitate Scientiarum, cap. 20, 59, 63, 64, & 71. Coloniae 1581. The 51.Radulphus Gualther, Anno 1548. is learned and laborius Radolphus Gualter, Hō. 11. in Nahum 3. f. 214, 215. See Hō. 186. in Mat. fol. 349, 350. & Hō. 51, in Marci Evangeliū, fol. 74, 75. The 52.Martin Bu∣cer, Anno 1550 is judicious Martin Bucer, De Regno Christi Sempi∣terno, lib. 2. cap. 54. where he condemnes all popular Stage-playes, though he seemes to allow of academicall with some restrictions. The 53.Peter Mar∣tyr, Anno 1550 is acute and learned Peter Martyr, Locorum Communium, Classis 2, cap. 11, sect. 62, 66 c. 12, sect 15, 19 & Commentary upon Iudges in the English translation, p. 214, 215. The 54.Olaus Magnus, Anno 1550. is Olaus Magnus, Archbishop of Vpsalis, Historia, Basileae 1567, lib. 15, c. 10, 11, 12, 13, 31, to 35: which he notably censures all amoous lascivious ribaldry dan∣ces, pictures, songs and musicke, together with Stage-playes and common Actors; taxing all such Princes and Great ones, who harbour these lewd Players in their
Courts or territories, or tollerate their Enterludes a∣mong the vulgar. The 55.Petrus Crab, Anno 1550. is Petrus Crab, in his seve∣rall forealledged Councels: See Scene 3, in the margent. The 56.Franciscus Ioverius, Anno 1554. is Frranciscus Ioverius, Sanctiones Ecclesiasti∣cae tam Synodicae quam Pontificiae, Parisijs 1555, Clas∣sis 1 fol: 611: 156, Classis 2, fol. 5, 6, & 27. The 57.Henry Stal∣bridge, Anno 1556. is Henry Stalbridge: his Exhortatory Epistle to his deare∣ly beloved Country of Englnd, against the pompous Popish Bishops thereof: as yet the true members of their filthy Father, the great Antichrist of Rome: prin∣ted at Basil 1556, fol. 18, where he writes thus. So long as minstrels and Players of Enterludes played lies, and sung bawdy songs, blasphemed God, and corrupted mens consciences, the Popish Prelates never blamed them, but were well content, &c. The 58.Andreas Frisius, Anno 1558. is Andreas Frisius, De Republica Emendanda, Basileae 1559, l. 1, c. 6, p. 23, cap. 17, p. 62, 63, cap. 7, p. 25, 26, cap, 23, p. 90, & lib. 2, cap. 11, p. 132: where he condemnes all Stage-playes, dan∣cing, dicing, and scurrilous songs and Enterludes as un∣sufferable evils in any Christian well-ordered Common∣weale. The 59.Matthew Parker, Anno 1560. is reverend Matthew Parker, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, De Antiquitate Ecclesiae Britta∣nicae, 1572, pag. 445. The 60.Thomas Beacon, Anno 1560. is pious and learned Tho∣mas Beacon, his Catechisme, in his Workes, London 1564, part 10, fol. 341, 355, 361, 366, 400, 486. where he condemnes, not onely as Dicers, Card-players and Gamesters, but even Stage-playes too, as theeves; se∣verely censuring Dancing Stage-playes, Enterludes, scurrilous songs and Play-bookes, as the fomentations of lewdnesse, the occasions of adultery, and things alto∣gether misbeseeming Christians, especially on the Lords day, which they most execrably prophane. The 61.Theodorus Balsamon, Anno 1560. is Theodorus Balsamon, Canones Apostolorum et Conci∣liorum, Paris: 1620, p. 217, to 224 284, to 288, 422, 423 658, 659. The 62.Claudius Espencaeus, Anno 1560. is Claudius Espencaeus, in Epist: 1, ad Timotheum, Lutetiae 1561, c. 2, p. 44, H: c. 4, p. 88, G: c. 5, p. 101, A: & Digressionum l. 2, c. 14, p. 202, 203. The
63.Bartholme∣us Carranza, Anno 1560. is Bartholmeus Carranza, Summa Conciliorum, Parisijs 1624, in the places forequoted, Scene 3. The 64.Franciscus Zephyrus, Anno 1561. is Franciscus Zephyrus, Epistola Nuncupatoria in Apolog. Tertulliani adversus Gentes, apud Tertulliani Opera 1566, Tom. 2, p. 550, to 555: and Commentar: in Tertul: Apologiam, Ibid: p. 591, 626, 627. The 65.George Alley, An. 1562 is learned George Alley, Bishop of Exeter, and Divinity Lecturer at Paules, in the second yeare of Queene ELI∣ZABETHS raigne, In his Poore Mans Library, London 1571, part 1, fol. 13, 39, & fol. 46, 47: where he notably declaimes against Play-bookes, and Stage-playes, as the fomentation, the fire and fewell of mens lusts, the occasion of adultery, & other intollerable evils among Christians or Pagans. The 66.Laurentius Surius, Anno 1566. is Laurentius Surius, in his forequoted Councels Coloniae Agrip. 1567. See Scene 3. The 67.Caelius Rhodiginus, Anno 1566. is Caelius Rhodiginus, Antiquarum Lectionum, 1599, l. 8, c. 7, 8. Col. 353, 354. The 68.Iohn Bo∣dine, An. 1566. is Iohn Bodine, his Com∣mon-weale, l. 6, c. 1, London 1606, p. 644, 645. See here p 483 484. The 69,Flacius Il. lyricus, Anno 1566. 70,Ioannis Wigandus. 71,Matthaeus Iudex. 72,Basilius Faber. are Flacius Illyricus, Ioannis Wigandus, Mattheus Iudex, and Basilius Faber: in their Centuriae Ecclesiasticae, 1564, &c. Centuria , Col. 266, 279, 280. Centur. 3, Col. 141, 142. Cent. 4, Col. 458, 857. Cent. 5, Col. 721, 1509, & Cent. 9, Col. 259, 260. The 73.Theodorus Zuinger, Anno 1570. is Theodorus Zuinger. Theatrum vitae hu∣manae, Basileae 1570, vol. 12, l. 5, p. 1834, 1835. The 74.Ioannis Bertochinus, Anno 1574. is Ioannis Bertochinus, Repertorium Basileae 1574, pars 2, pag. 669. Histrio. The 75.Petrus de Primaudaye, Anno 1576. is Petrus de Primaudaye, in his French Academy, London 1618, cap. 20, p. 205, where hee censures Stage-playes as unsufferable mis∣chiefes. The 76.Antonius de Brutio, Anno 1558. is Antonius de Brutio, Super lib. 3, Decretalium, Venetijs 1578, Tom. 5, cap. 12. De Vita et Honestate Clericorum, fol. 4, 8. The 77.osias Sim∣lerus, An. 1580. is Ioanni Simlerus, in Exodum, cap. 32, Tiguri 1584, p. 156. The 78.Andreas Hy∣perius, An. 1580 is Andreas Hyperius, De Ferijs Bacchanalibus. Basi∣leae 1580. The 79.Gilbertus Genebrardus, 1580. is Guilbertus Genebrardus, Chroni∣con, Lugduni 1609, lib. 2, p. 212, & 314. The 80.Paulo Lan∣celetto, Anno 1580. is Pau∣lo Lanceletto, Institutiones Iuris Canonici, lib. 2, Tit. De
Eucharistia, Lovanij 1578. p. 269, 270. The 81.Petrus Berchorius, Anno 1583. is Petrus Berchorius, Dictionarij sive Repertorij Moralis, Vene∣tijs 1583, pars 2, Tit. Ludere, p. 428: & De Episcopis in Tractatu Tractatuum, pars 4, fol. 25, num. 101. The 82.Lambertus Danaeus, Anno 1583. is Lambertus Danaeus, De Ludo Aleas, cap. 5, et E∣thicae Christianae, l. 2, c. 8, in his Opusc. Theolog. Gene∣vae 1583, p. 107. The 83.Ioannes Langhecrucius Anno 1588. is Ioannes Langhecrucius, De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum, Duaci 1588, lib. 2, c. 11, 12, 20, 21. where he copiously censures Playes and Play-haunters out of Lactantius, Cyprian with other Fathers and Councels. The 84.Didacus De Tapia, Anno 1589. is Didacus De Tapia, in Tertiam partem divi Thomae, Salamancae. 1589, p. 545, 546. See here p. 483, 484. The 85.Petrus Op∣meerus, Anno 1590. is Petrus Op∣meerus, Opus Chronographicum Orbis Vniversi, Ant∣werpiae 1611, p. 186, 185. See here p. 481. The 86.Barnabas Brissonius, Anno 1590. is, Barnabas Brissonius, Commentarius De Spectaculis in Cod. Theodosij, Honoviae 1600, p. 208, to 210, where he largely discourseth against Stage-playes, producing sundry passages out of Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Chrysostome, and other Fathers, to testifie their unlaw∣fulnesse, and lewd mischievous effects. The 87.Ioannes Mariana, An 1590. is Io∣annis Mariana, Tractatus 7, Coloniae Agrip. 1609. Tra∣ctatus de Spectaculis, professedly written against Stage-playes, where he proves their unsufferable naughtinesse, and unlawfulnesse both by Councels, Fathers, and Hea∣then Authours. The 88.Petrus Fa∣ber, An. 1590. is Petrus Faber, Agonistarum lib. Lugd. 1590, where he professedly censures Stage-playes, and such like Enterludes. The 89.Greg. Tho∣losanus, Anno 1590 is Petrus Gregorius Thosolanus, Syntagma Iuris Vniversi, Franec. 1599, lib. 39, cap. 5. The 90.Arias Mon∣tanus, 1590. is learned Arias Monta∣nus, De Varia Republica, Sive Commentaria in lib. Iu∣dicum, Antwerpiae 1592, cap. 16, p. 568, to 575. The 91.Iustus Lip∣sius, An. 1590. is Iustus Lipsius, De Gladiatoribus lib: & De Amphi∣theatro lib: Antwerpiae 1584. where he not onely de∣scribes at large the formes and severall fabrickes of The∣atres, Scenes and Amphitheaters, together with the de∣testablenesse of Sword-playes and such like Amphithe∣atricall
spectacles, but likewise inveigheth against stage-playes too. The 92.Rodolphus Hospinianus, Anno 1593. is Rodolphus Hospinianus, De Ori∣gine Festorum, Tiguri 1593, cap: 22. fol. 118, 119, 151, 152, 153. The 93.Carolus Si∣gonius, Anno 1593. is Carolus Sigonius, Historia de Oc∣cidentali Imperio, France 1593. lib. 1, p. 32. See here p. 482. The 94.Erasmus Marbachius, 1597. is Erasmus Marbachius, Comment. in Deutr. 22. v. 5. Argentorati 1597. p. 217, 218. The 95.Laurentius Bochellus, An. 1598. is Laurentius Bochellus, Decreta Ecclesiae Gallicanae, Pa∣risijs 1599. lib. 6. tit. 19. and in sundry other places al∣ready quoted. Scene 3. in the margent. The 96.Ant. Gue∣vara, An. 1600. is Don Antonio de Guevara, his Diall of Princes, Booke 3. cap. 43. to 48. London 1616. p. 509. to 522. where the in∣tollerale mischiefes that Players and Playes occasion are anatomized to the full, and their unlawfulnesse ma∣nifested by the testimony of heathen Authours. The 97.Baronius, Anno 1600. is that laborius Roman Historian Cardenall Baronius, Annales Ecclesiasticae, Coloniae Agrip. 1609. Anno 120. sect. 30. Anno 179. sect. 47. Anno 201. sect. 34. Anno 206. sect. 4. and in sundry other places. The 98.Bellarmine, Anno 1600. is that famous Popish Cardinall Robertus Bellarminus, Con∣cio 6. De Dominica 3. Adventus, et Concio 9. de Do∣minica Quinquagesimae, Operum Coloniae Agrip. 1617. tom. 6. Col. 60, 61, 204, 205. where he censures stage-playes and dancing as unlawfull unchristian Pastimes, es∣pecially on Lords-dayes and holy-dayes. The 99.Thomas Zerula, Anno 1600 is Thomas Zerula, Bishop of Beneventum, Praxis Epis∣copalis. Venetijs 1599. pars 1. tit. Ludus fol. 141. The 100Onuphri∣us, Anno 1600. is Onuphrius Paniunius Veronensis, De Ludis Cir∣censibus. Venetijs 1600. lib. 1. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4. et lib. 2. p. 120. to 136. where he at large relates the idolatrous hea∣thenish Originall of Cirque-playes and Stage-playes, which he there professedly condemnes, quoting St. Cy∣prian, and Tertullian, De Spectaculis, against them, which bookes are there verbatim transcribed. The 101.Paulus Windecke, Anno 1604. is Paulus Windecke, Theologia Iurisconsultorum, lib. 1. Locus 38. Coloniae Agrip. 1604. p. 110, 111. The 102.Bulenge∣rus, An. 1606. is Iulius Caesar Bulengerus, De Cuco et Ludis Circensi∣bus,
De Venatione Circi, & de Theatro &c. Opusculo∣rum Tom. 2. Lugduni 1621. p: 71. to 90. De Theatro lib. 1. throughout, especially cap. 50, & 51, De Scenae et Or∣chestrae obscenitate, & de Infamia Theatri: in which bookes, he not onely at large relates the Originall of Cirque-playes, Sword-playes and Stage-playes, toge∣ther with the severall formes and parts of Theatres, Scenes and Stage-playes, with the severall sorts of A∣ctors, and all other Stage-appurtenances, it being the best discourse in this nature that I have hitherto seene; but he likewise peremptorily censures Stage-playes (a∣gainst which he produceth sundry Fathers, Councels and Authorities) as intollerable polluted Spectacles, which misbeseeme all Christians. The 103.Francis de Croy, Anno 1606. is Francis De Croy, his First Conformity, printed in English, Lon∣don 1620, cap: 19, 20. The 104.Severinus Binius, Anno 1606. is Severinus Binius, in his forealledged Councels. See Scene 3. in the margent. The 105.Gentia∣nus Hervetus, Anno 1610. is Gentianus Hervetus, Comment. in Clement. Alexandrini lib. 3, Paedagogi cap: 11. Parisijs 1612. The 106.Amandus Polanus, Anno 161. is Amandus Polanus, Syntagma Theologiae, Ge∣nevae 1617, l: 10, c: 25, 26. & lib. 9, c. 35, p. 665, 666. The 107.Henricus Spondanus, Anno 1614. is Henricus Spondanus, Epitome Baronij, Mo∣guntiae 1614, Anno Christi 206, sect. 2, p: 194, Anno 371, sect. 10, p: 393, Anno 399. sect. 5, 9, p. 445, Anno 469. sect: 2 p: 549, Anno 404. sect. 1, 2, p. 458. See Anno 59. sect: 8 p. 108, Anno 325. sect: 52, p: 296, Anno 327, sect: 23, p: 351, & Anno 365, sect. 5, p: 383. where hee proves that Stage-playes were evermore condemned by the Fathers and primitive Christians, as the very Di∣vels Pompes. The 108.Philippus Gluverius, An. 1616. is Philippus Gluverius, Germa∣niae Antiquae, Lugduni Batt. 1616. lib 1, c: 20, p: 181, 182. See here pag: 457, 458 The 109.Dr. Ames, Anno 1630. is Gulielmus Amius, de ure Conscientiae, 1630, lib. 5 c. 34. p. 271. The 110.Dr. Tho∣mas Beard, An. 1631. is Dr. Thomas Beard, his Theatre of Gods Iudgements, Edition 2, London 1631. Booke 2, c: 36, p: 435 46. These 110.Dr. Tho∣mas Beard, An. 1631. forraigne and domestique u∣thours of all sorts, as well Papists as Protestats. Histo∣rians,
Statists, Civilians, Morralists, Canonists, as Di∣vines. To which I might adde Mr. Iohn Northbrooke, his English Treatise against Playes and Enterludes, Lon∣don 1579. Mr. Stephen Gosson, his Schoole of Abuses, London 1578. and his Playes confuted in five Actions, London 1580. The 2. and 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters, London 1580. the latter of them penned by a penitent reclaimed Play-Poet. The Church of evill men and women, whereof Lucifer is the head, and Players & Playhaunters the members, &c. written by a nameles Authour, & printed by Richard Pinson. Mr. Iohn Field HIS DECLARATION OF GODS IVDGEMENT AT PARIS GARDEN, Ianuary 13. 1583, London 1588. Mr. Philip Stubs, his Anatomy of Abuses, Edition 4. Lon∣don 1595, p. 101, to 107. Dr. Iohn Rainolds, his Over∣throw of Stage-playes, printed 1599, and reimprinted, Oxford 1629. I. G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, London 1615. A short Treatise against Stage-playes, printed 1625. and dedicated to the Parliament: (all English Treatises professedly written against Stage-playes by English men, and published by authority, which I would desire our Players, our Play-haunters to peruse at leisure:) Mr. Osmund Lake, his Probe Theo∣logicall upon the Commandements, London 1612, p. 167, to 272. and those 30 other forequoted English Writers, (pag. 485, 486, 487, 488.) whose names and workes I pretermit: all which being put together, a∣mount to 150 in the totall summe. These 150 moderne Christian famous Writers, I say, with See Herman∣nus Schedell Chronicon Chron. AEtas 5, fol. 83. Iaco∣bus Spielegius Lexicon Iuris Civiis, & Io∣annis Calvini, Lexicon Iuridi∣cum: Tit. Histri∣ones & Ludus, Pardulphus Prateus Lexi∣con Iuris Civi∣lis et Canonici, et Hieronimus Verrutius, Lex∣icon Vtriusque Iuris. Tit. Lu∣dus, & Mai∣ma: who there condemne both Stage-players and Stage-playes. With Budaeus, Gothefredus, & others here∣after quoted, Part. 2. Act. 2. sundry others whō I pretermit; have in their recited works, by a con∣stant uninterrupted succession from the yeare of our Lord 1200, to this present, unanimously oppugned and condemned Stage-playes, (together with all See Act. 5. Scene 8. & Act. 6. Scene 3, 4. mixt effe∣minate, lascivious, amorous Dancing, the epedemicall cor∣ruption of our present age,) as most pernicious, execrable, lewd, unchristian, heathenish Spetacles, not sufferable in any Christian Church or State; branding all See Act. 4. Sene 1. Act. 6. Scene 12, 20. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3. Stage-players
for gracelesse, lewd infamous miscreants, who ought to be excommunicated ipso facto both from the Church, the Sacraments, and all Christian society, till they have whol∣ly renounced their diabolicall vile profession, and given publike testimony to the world, both of their reformation and sincere repentance. And as all these recited Witers, even so our owne Magistrates, our Vniversities, and all our faithfull Ministers, both in their publike Sermons, and private discourses, together with all godly zealous Christians from age to age, have passed the very selfe-same doome and verdict against Playes and Players, as I have Act. 6. Scene  p. 489, to 498. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 7. See the E∣pistle before D. Rainolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes, and I. G. his Resu∣tation of the Apology for Actors accor∣dingly. elsewhere largely proved, and our owne experience can suficiently testifie. If then all these Pro∣testant and Popish Authours, Magistrates, Ministers and godly Christians, both at home and abroad, have suc∣cessively from age to age, from yeare to yeare, thus pub∣likely, thus professedly condemned Stage-playes, both by their words and writings, as most pernicious evills; and that not coldly or slightly, but with the very height of zeale and earnestnesse; dare any Christian now be so perversely obstinate, so singularly wilfull, so desperately audacious, as still to magnifie, frequent, or patronize them? Never, I dare confidently averre, was any one thing whatsoever (except onely some grosse notorious sinne against the expresse law of God and nature) so u∣niversally, abundantly, professedly condemned by Coun∣cels, Fathers, Christian and prophane Emperours, Princes, Magistrates, States, and Writers of all sorts, all ages, all places whatsoever, as Stage-playes, against which the See Cyprian & Tertullian, De Spectacu∣lis lib. Salvian de Gberna. Dei lib. 6. Au∣gustine De Ci∣vit. Dei lib. 1, 2. and others in their forequo∣ted places. Fathers of olde, and many Christians of late have written whole Treatises, Bookes and Volumes with such affection and acumen, that wee shall never finde them more sharpe and piercing more vehement, elegant, and divinely rhetoricall, than in their Impressi∣ons against Stage-playes, wherein they farre transcend themselves. Yea such hath beene the harmonious una∣nimity of Writers in condemning Stage-playes, and
Actors, that I never met with any Christian or Hea∣then Authour (Lodge onely and Haywood, two Eglish Players excepted) that durst publikely pleade in any printed worke for popular Playes and Actors. It is true, that these two Players Lodge & Haywood, the first of them in his Play of Playes, the latter in his Apologie for Actors, thrust out in print by stealth, perceiving Play-houses, Playes and Actors to grow into disgrace by reason of sundry pious Bookes that had beene writ∣ten against them, by Mr. Northbrooke, Mr. Gosson, Mr. Stubs, Dr. Rainolds, and others forerecited; un∣dertooke the patronage of Playes and Players (as Acts 19.24, 25, &c. Demetrius and his silver-smithes did the defence of their great Diana and her silver shrines) for their owne pri∣vate ends, it being the craft by which they got their wealth and living. But their ridiculous Player-like Pleas, avouring of nought but paganisme, ignorance and folly, were no sooner published by connivance, but they were presently so soledly refuted, (the first of them, by Mr. Stephen Gosson, a penitent Play-Poet, in his Playes con∣futed in 5 Actions; the latter by I: G: in his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, London 1615. both pub∣lished by authoritie:) that they durst not, yea they could not since replie unto them, there being so much against Playes and Players in all writers, all ages, so lit∣tle (and that little as good as nothing) for them, that it is not onely bootelesse, but impious and absurd, for any to indeavour their defence, which See Dr. Rai∣nolds his O∣verthrow of Stage playes, whee his words are ci∣ed and an∣swered. Dr. Gager, In his two Epistles to Dr. Rainolds O∣verthrow of Stage-playes, p. 264. &c. Dr. Gentiles, and Ethicorum, l. 2. c. 8. & Po∣lit. l. 5. cap. 8. Dr. Case, who writ some∣thing in behalfe of academicall Stage-playes onely, (in which argument they were likewise so utterly foyled and overthrowne by that ornament of our Church and Nation, In his Over∣throw of stage-playes. Dr. Rainolds, as they were glad to yeeld the wasters to him, to See the Epi∣stle before Dr. Rainolds his Overthrow of Stage-playes accordingly. change their opinions, & set downe with losse;) durst never undertake; they all condemning popular Plaies and Plaiers, even in their Apologies for private academicall Enterludes. Let therefore the nu∣merous
concurring resolutions of all these learned emi∣nent approved Authors, whose single opinions wee highly estimate in most other things, Homini men∣te praedito pau∣ci sapientes, multis insipi∣entibus magis sunt veredi. Platonis Symposium, p. 291. overballance the prejudicate erronious inconsiderate private and subi∣tane Opinions of all ignorant novices, or lascivious in∣judicious Players or Play-haunters whatsoever, who are so prepossessed, so besotted with the love of these most sinfull pleasures, that they are altogether unable to judge rightlie of them: And let us chuse rather to judge aright of Plaies and Plaiers, with all these worthie Sa∣ges, than to erre with novices, children, fooles, or lewd ones, who for want of grace and rectified judgements, are Hebr. 5.14. unable to discerne betweene good and evill; contra∣cting the summe of all our present Resolues into this 50 Play-refelling Syllogisme. That which above 50 moderne Protestant and Popish Writers of all sorts, of our owne and other Nations;Argum. 50. together with many learned godly Ministers and private Christians have professedly written, prea∣ched, declaimed against from time to time, with an unanimous consent, without any publike oppositi∣on or controll; must certainely bee execrable, un∣seemely, unlawfull unto Christians Witnesse, Mat∣thew 23.2, 3. Luke 10.16. 1 Corinth. 10.32, 33. Hebr. 13.17. 2 Cor. 7.15. c. 9.13. Ephes. 5. 21. cap. 6.1, 2. 1 Pet. 5.5. But above 150 moderne Protestant and Popish Writers of all sorts as well domestique as forraigne, together with many learned godly Ministers and private Christians, have professedly written, preached, de∣claimed against Stage-playes from time to time, (even from Anno 1200, till now;) and that with a most unanimous consent, without any publike op∣position or controll: Witnesse the premises. Therefore, they must certainly be execrable, useemely, unlawfull unto Christians.
SCENA SEXTA. BVt it may be some rash Play-house censurers, out of their grosse prophanesse,Heathen Writers and Philosophers against Stage-playes and Actors. will be ready to cen∣sure all the fore-alledged Fathers and moderne Christi∣stian Authours, for Insani sapi∣ens, nomen fert aequus ini∣qui, ultra quā satis est virtu∣tem si petat ip∣sam. Horatius Epist. l. 1. Epist. 6 Puritans or Precisians, and so blow away all these their authorities at one breath, the very title of a Puritan (as of olde the Non ideo bo∣nus Caius et prudens Luci∣us quia Chri∣stianus: Vt quisque no∣mine Christi∣ani emendatur offendit. Ter∣tulliani Apologia advers. Gentes cap. 2, 3. name of a Chri∣stian) being sufficient to dash, to blast them all. I shall therefore in the next place controll the 1 Pet. 2.16. madnesse of these Antipuritan Play-proctors with a squadron of such Play-condemning Pagan Philosophers, Orators, Histo∣rians and Poets, as the very Divell himselfe dares not brand for Puritans, though perchance some desperate Players or Play-haunters will, against all sence and rea∣son, because they are better than themselves. I shall be∣gin with Heathen Philosophers, Orators, Morralists, and then proceed to Historians and Poets, whose names and workes I shall onely quote for the most part, with those Editions which I follow; because I have recited most of their words at large, Act. 6. Scene 3. & 5. p. 365. to 371. & 440. to 450. & Act. 5. Scen. 8. p. 245. to 252. on which you may cast backe your eyes. The first Play-condemning Heathen Philosopher is Socrates, the very wisest Heathen, by the expresse verdict of the Delphian Oracle, (witnesse Plato his Socratis Apologia,Socrates, Anno Mundi, 3590. aut eo circiter. p. 12. & Diogenis Laertij, Socrates:) who condemned Comedies and Stage-playes, as pernicious, lascivious vanities; refu∣sing to resort to Aristophanes his Comedies; & persuading the Athenians with all the Graecians to abandon Comicall Play-Poets, which they did accordingly: for which see, Plato his Socratis Apologia, p. 22. Diogenis Laertij So∣crates:
AElian Variae Historiae, l. 2, c. 13. Volateranus Commentariorum lib: 29. fol: 113. & Plutarch: De Glo∣ria Atheniensium, lib: p: 514. The 2.Isocrates, Anno 3630. is Isocrates, that famous Oratour, Oratio ad Nicoclem, Editione Cris∣pini 1613. p. 45, 46, 47. & Oratio De Pace, p. 321. The 3.Plato, Anno 3632. is that incomparable Philosopher Plato, who banished all Players and Play-Poets with their Stage-playes out of his Commonweale. De Republica, Dialog. 2. Opera Lat. Basileae 1561. p. 580, 581. Dialog. 3. p. 585, 586, &c. Dialog. 10. p. 696, 697. Legum: Dialog. 2. p. 800, 801, 802. Dialog. 3. p. 822. Dialog. 7. p. 870, to 877. See Au∣gustine De Civit. Dei, l: 2, c: 14, l: 8, c: 13: 14. Cicero Tusc Quaest: l: 2, p: 449: and here p: 448, accordingly. The 4.Aristotle, 3640. is Aristotle, the most eminent of all Plato his schollers, and the Coryphaeus of all Heathen Phylosophers: Politi∣corum lib: 7, c: 7, & l: 8, c: 3, 5, 6, and 7. Francofurti 1601. Rhetoricae l: 2, c: 6, p: 136, 137. Hanouiae 1606: & Pro∣blematum l: 3, quoted by Gellius, Noctium Attic: l: 20, c: 4. The 5.Gorgias, An. 3660. is Gorgias, whose censure of Playes and Tragedies for meere impostures &c. is recorded by Plu∣tarch, De Audiendis Poetis lib: p: 26. The 6.Cicero, An. 3904. is M: Tullius Cicero, the Prince of Roman Orators, Oratio pro Pub: Quinctio, in his workes Aureliae Alobrogum, 1608, tom: 1, p: 225. Epist: lib: 7, ad Marium. Epist. 1, tom. 2, p: 53. Tusculanarum Quaest: l: 2, pag: 449, & lib: 4, pag. 472, 473. De Legibus lib. 1. pag. 593. & lib. 2. p. 598. B, C. & De Republica lib. 4. quoted by St. Augu∣stine De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 9. The 7.Seneca, An. 4020. is Lu: Annaeus Seneca, the divinest and most absolute heathen Morralist, Epist. 7.90, 122, 123. Opera Coloniae Alobr. 1614. p. 154, 155, 377, &c. 505. & Naturalium Quaest. l. 7. c. 31, 32. p. 952, 953. De Vita Beata, c. 12, 13, 14. p. 636, 637. De Bre∣vitate Vitae c. 12. p. 707, 708. & Controversiarum l. 1. Proaemium p. 966, 967. The 8.Aulus Gelli∣us, An. 4050. is Aulus Gellius, No∣ctium Atticarum l. 20. c. 4. Edit. 1592. p. 644, 645. The 9.Plinius Se∣cundus, An. 4070. is C. Plinius Secundus, Naturalis Historiae l. 36. c. 15. Coloniae Alobr. 1616. p. 404. & l. 10. c. 51. p. 500. Episto∣larum
lib. 4. Epistola 22. Coloniae Alobr. 1610. p. 185, 186, 187. & Panegyric: Trajano dictus, p. 38, 45. See here pag. 462, 463. The 10.Macrobius, An. 4100. is Macrobius Ambro∣sius Aurelianus, De Somno Scipionis, lib. 1. Edit. 1607. p. 20. Saturnaliorum l. 2. c. 1. & 7. p. 386, 387, 408. to 412, & l. 3. cap. 14. p. 456. to 460. The 11.M. Aurelius An. 4150. is Mar∣cus Aurelius Antonius, that worthy Roman Emperor and Philosopher, in his Epistle to Lambert: Epist. 12. in the Booke intituled M: Aurelius; where it is recor∣ded: and in Guevara his Diall of Princes, l. 3. c. 45, 46, 47. See here p. 318, 319, 463, 464. The 12.Athenaeus, An. 4150. is Athe∣naeus, Dipnosophistarum l. 2. c. 1. Edit. Basileae, 1556. p. p. 67. l. 6. c. 1. p. 364. l. 4. c. 17. p. 249, 250. l. 5. c. 4. p. 314, to 319. l. 11. c. 3. p. 734. See l. 12. c. 7, 8, 9, 10. &c. 13. p. 841. &c. 18, 19, 20. l. 13. c. 27. & l. 14. c. 7. to 14. The 13.Diodorus Siculus, An. 3902. is Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae Historiae, l. 4. sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Hanoviae 1611. p. 202. to 206. The 14.Dionysius Hallicarnasseus An. 3904. is Di∣onysius Hallicarnasseus, Antiqu. Romanorum l. 2. sect. 3. Edit. 1590. p. 137, 138. c. 5. p. 151, 152. & l. 7. sect. 1. p. 634. See lib. 2. c. 8. p. 195, 196, 197. & l. 7. sect. 9. p. 700. to 707. where he describes at large, how the Romans and Graecians spent their holy-dayes in dances and Stage-playes, which they dedicated to their Idols, as a speciall part of their worship and service; which Idols had their Salij, Curetes, Ludiones, Histriones, their dancing Stage-playing Priests devoted to their service: their Cir∣censes and THEATRALES POMPAE et Spectacula (Ib. p. 197, 709, 712, 714, 715.) as this Authour oft times stiles them; an infallible evidence, that Stage-playes are the very See here p. 42 to 61, & 561, to 568. Pomps of the Divel: which Playes saith this Authour (p. 709) were antiquated and abolished by the Lacedemonians, though some other Greekes and the anci∣ent Romans out of a superstition to their Idols who exa∣cted them at their hands, did still retaine them. The 15.Salustius, An. 3906. is C. Crisius Salustius, an ancient Roman Historian, In his Bellum Cailinarium, Opera: Coloniae Agrip. 1615. p. 22, 23. & Bellum Iugurthinum, p. 159. The 16.Valerius Maximus, An. 3990. is Valerius
Maximus, lib. 2. cap. 4. & cap. 6. sect. 7. Raphelengij 1612. p. 56, 57, 58, 59, 60. & l. 6. c. 3. sect. 12. p. 237. The 17.Titus Livi∣us, An. 4020. is Titus Livius Patavinus, that excelent Roman Historian, Historiae l. 7. sect. 2, 3. Francofurti 1600. p. 255, 256. The 18.Corn. Taci∣tus, An. 4070. is Cornelius Tacitus, Annalium l. 1. sect. 14. Edit. 1614. p. 44, 45. l. 4. sect. 3. p. 139, 140. l. 14. sect. 2, 3. p, 301. to 305. l. 15. sect 11. p. 360. l. 16. sect. 1. p. 366, 367. Historiae l. 2. sect. 22. p. 481, 482. De Mori∣bus Germanorum, l. sect. 6. p. 615. & De Oratoribus Di∣alogus, sect. 14, 15, 16. p 679, 681, 682. which Dialogue though fathered upon him by some, is yet attributed and that truly to Quintilian, (a 19.Quinctili∣an, 4050. Heathen Authour) by most: where, as he complaines of the effeminacie and lasciviousnesse of Orators language in these words. (Neque nim oratorius, immo hercule ne virilis quidem cultus est quo plerique temporum nostrorum actores ita utuntur ut lasciviâ verborum, et leviate sententiarum, et licentiâ compositionis, histrionales modo exprimant, quodque vix auditu fas esse debeat, laudis et gloriae et in∣genij loco plerique jactani, cantari saltarique commenta∣rios suos. Vnde oritur illa faeda et praepostera, sed tamen frequens quibusdam exclamatio, ut oratores nostri te∣mere dicere, histriones diserte saltare dicuntur, &c.) So he informes us whence this evill and the decay of elo∣quence & all other arts did spring; & that was from the ill education, the idlenesse of youth, and their resort to Stage-playes: which he thus notably expresseth. Quis enim ignorat et eloquentiam et caeteras artes descivisse ab istâ veteri gloriâ, non inopia hominum, sed desidiâ ju∣ventutis, et negligentiâ parentum, et inscientiâ praecipi∣entium, et oblivione moris antiqui? quae mala primum in urbe nata, mox per Italiam fusa, jam in provincias ma∣nant &c. Iam primum suus cuique filius ex castâ parente natus, non in cellâ emptae nutricis, sed gremio ac sinu See Gen. 21. Exod. 2.8, 9. 1 Sam. 1.23. 1 Kings 3.21. Isay 49.15. am. 4.3, 4. 1 Tim. 5.10. Luke 11.27. Plutarch De Puerorum E∣ducatine l. p. 4, 5. Gellius Noctium Atticarū, l. 12, c. 1, p. 368, &c. Ma∣crobius Satur∣nalior. l. 5, c. 11, p. 545. Aristotle Polit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 44. Henricus Stephanus Ho∣rodoti Apolo∣gia p. 46. Case Polit. l. 7. c. 17. p. 689. to 696. with infinite others, that all women who have milke ought to nurse their owne children; because God hath given them breasts for that purpose; because all other creatures that have milke give sucke unto their owne: be∣cause it is a signe of unna∣turalnesse and want of love to their children, not to doe it; because many children mis∣carry by reason of nurses negli∣gence; because else they are apt to degene∣rate, and to sa∣vour of the qualities they sucke in with their milke, be∣cause they are a part of them∣selves which they nourish in their womb, therefore they should nourish it out of it too. matris educabatur, cujus praecipua laus er at, tueri do∣mum
et inservire liberis. Eligebatur autem aliqua ma∣jor natu propinqua cujus probatis spectatisque moribus omnes cujusquam familiae soboles committeretur, coram quâ noque dicere fas erat quod turpe dictu, neque facere quod inhonestum fctu videretur. Ac non studia, modo curas{que} sed remissiones etiam lusus{que} puerorum, sanctitate quadam ac verecundi temperabat &c. At nunc natus infans delegatur Graeculae alicui ancillae, cui adjungitur u∣nus aut alter ex omnibus servis plerum{que} vilissimus, nec cuiqam serio ministerio accomodatus, horum fabulis et erroribus teneri statim et rudes animi imbuuntur. Nec quisquam in totâ domo pensi habet quid coram infanti do∣mino, aut dicat aut faciat; quando etiam ipsi parentes nec probitati neque modestiae parvulos assuefaciant, sed lasci∣viae et libertati per quae paulatim impudentia irrepit, et sui alieni{que} contemptus. Iam vero propria et peculiaria hujus urbis vitia paene in utero matris concipi mihi viden∣tur; HISTRIONALIS FAVOR, et gladiatorum e∣qorumque studia; quibus occupatus et obsessus animus QVANTVLVM LOCI BONIS ARTIBVS RELIN∣QVIT! quotum quemque inveneris qui domi quicquam aliud loquatur? quos alios adolescentulorum sermones excipimus, si quando auditoria intravimus? &c. A pas∣sage very applicable to our present times. So that Stage-playes and such like sports in Quintilians judgement, are the depravers of youth, the ingenderers of vice and idlenesse; the overthrow of all good arts; they so prepos∣sessing mens mindes and tongues, that their thoughts and speeches are of nought but Playes and Enterludes. The 20.Plutarchus, n. 4070. is Plutarchus Chaeronensis, that eminent Philo∣sopher and Historian, De Audiendis Poetis, lib. Moral. Tom. 1. Basileae 1572. p. 26. Laconica Apothegmata, p. 461, 462, 475, 486, 487. Laconica Instituta, p. 504, 505, 506. Romanae Quaestiones, Quaest. 98, 107. p. 593, 600. De Homero lib. p. 151. De Gloria Atheniensium lib. p. 514, 515, 516. Symposiacon l. 7 Quaest. 8. p. 262, 263. & Plutarchi Romulus, Francofurti 1580. p. 29. Pericles
p. 51. & Solon. p. 31. The 21.Emiliu Probus, An. 4072. is AEmilius Probus, Excel∣lentium Imperatorum Vitae, Praefatio, bound up with Plutarches Lives, p. 356. where he affirmeth, that the acting of Playes was ever reputed infamous, base, disho∣nest among the Romans.. The 22.Suetonius, An. 4080. is C. Suetonius Tran∣quillus. See his ulius, sect 39. Octavius, sect. 44, 45.68. 71, Tiberius sect 43, 44, 47. Caligula, sect. 18, 19, 20, 21, 52, 54, 55, 57, 58. Claudius, sect. 6, 12, 21, 28, 34. Nero, sect. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 32, 54. Vas∣patianus, sect. 19. & Titus, sect. 7, 8, 9. where he declares his dislike of Stage-playes, taxing those vitious Empe∣rours who either actd, frequented, or supported them, and applauding such who did suppresse them. The 23.Diogenes Laertius, An. 4100. is Diogines Laertius, De Vita Philosophorum, lib. 1. Solon. p. 46. The 24.AElianus, An. 4100. is AElianus, Variae Historiae, l. 2. c. 13. Edit. 1599. p. 33. to 39. where hee brings in Socra∣tes declaiming against Comedians, as satyricall, inve∣ctive, injurous persons, who savour of nought that is good or profitable. The 25.Dion Cas∣sius, An. 4200. is Dion Cassius, Romanae Histo∣riae, Lugduni 1559. l. 42. p. 312.313, 325. l. 49. p. 553. l. 50. p. 558.560. & p. 575, 576. where hee objects this to Antony, Quod Cleopatra ludos cum eo curabat: and withall hee brings in Caesar, incouraging his soldiers thus against him, even from his dancing and effemina∣cie. Nemo Antonium Consulem aut Imperatorem fuisse, sed Gymnasiarcham existimet. Neque metuere quisquam debet. ne is aliquod momentum bello sit alla∣turus, &c. Fieri enim non potest ut is qui regio luxui molliiei{que} muliebri indulget viro aliquid dignum vey con∣sulat vel agat. Est enim necesse omnino ut quibus unus∣quisque vitae raionibus utitur, earum similis reddatur. Etenim si quis vestrum Dancing therefore, es∣pcially the learning to dance, was re∣puted an effe∣minate, igno∣minious and sordid thing among the ancient Ro∣mans, and all dancers were esteemed effe∣minate amo∣rous persons. See Herodian Hist. l. 5. p. 267. to 275. & here p. 245. to 250. RIDICVLE SALTARE, ac choream Bacchi ducere opus habeat, omnino is ab Anto∣nio superabiur ea in re: NAM SALTARE HIC DI∣DICIT: sin pugna et armis opus est, quid tandem in eo timendum est? So lib. 51. p. 606, 607. lib. 54. p. 682. hee whers;tt; us of Augustus: Ac quoniam equites et faminae
illustres adhuc in Orchestra saltabant, prohibuit ne non modo patriciorum liberi (id enim jam ante cautum erat) sed etiam nepotes eorum, quique equestris essent ordinis, amplius id facerent A manifest proofe, how ignominious a thing it was reputed among the auncient Romans, for men or women of quality to masque or dance in publike or to act a masque or play upon a Stage. See p. 696, 697, 703, 704, 710. & lib. 57. p. 798. where he records this to Tiberius his honour, that he banished Stage-players out of Rome: Histriones Tiberius Roma exturbavit, The unlaw∣fullnes and a∣buses of Plaies and Actors AR∣TEQVE EA INTERDIXIT, quod et mulieres ignominia af∣ficerent, et turbas darent. Lib. 59. p. 827. he writes thus in disparagement of Caligula. Nunc statim revocatis histri∣onibus (whom Tiberius had banished & suppressed) equis gladiatoribus{que} et alijs huiusmodi rebus, The prodiga∣lity & expence of Playes. immodice pe∣cuniam impendens, et thesauros maximos brevissimo tempo∣re exhausit (a notable president of the prodigality and ex∣pence of Stage-playes) et demonstravit priora quoque ista non judicio sed prodigalitate à se facta fuisse, &c. and pag. 629, 630. hee thus branded Caligula for favouring Players, and acting Playes and Masques himselfe. Caius ab aurigis gladiatoribus{que} regebatur, servus hi∣strionum et scenicorum hominum. Tragaedorum eâ aetate principem, semper et in publico secum habuit, de∣inde seorim ipse, seorsim histriones, omnia ea quae hu∣jusmodi homines potentiam nacti agere ausint, perege∣runt: quae ad eam rem pertinebant, ipse perniciosissime quacunque occasione suppeditavit ac constituit, coegitque etiam praetores ac Consules ut ea pararent: itaque Playes there¦fore were not e¦very day acted in Rome in this most vlci∣ous Princes dayes, as they are of later times. fe∣re quotidie fabula aliqua acta fuit. Principio ipse specta∣torem tantum se, ac auditorem praebuit, ac studio suo qua∣si unus è turba hominum, aut favit cuidam, aut rsttit, ita ut aliquando adversarijs iratus ad spectaculum non venerit. Procedente tempore multos imitatus est varijs in rebus, cum multis certavit; nam et aurigavit, et pug∣navit et It is infa∣mous in this Authors iudge∣ment for Em¦peors or per¦sons of quality to dance vpon a Stage or Act a Play. saltavit, et Tragaediam egit, semper haec tra∣ctans: semel noctu primoribus patrum quasi ad necessariā
deliberationem vocatis, coram saltavit. Which Sueto∣nius thus expresseth. Caligula, sect. 54, 55. Sed & aliorum generum artes studiosissime & diversissime exercuit. Thrax & auriga, idem cantor atque saltator. Batuebat pugnatorijs armis; aurigabat extructo plurifariam Circo. Cantandi ac sal∣tandi voluptate ita efferebatur, ut neque publicis quidem spectaculis temperaret, quo minus & pronuncianti tra∣gaedo concineret, et gestum histrionis quasi laudans vel cor∣rigens palameffingeret: nec alia de causa videtur ea die quâ pertij, pervigilium indixisse, quam ut initium in sce∣nam prodeundi licentia temporis auspicaretur. Saltabat autem nonnunquam etiam noctis; & quondam tres consu∣lares secunda vigilia in palatium accitos, multa{que} & ex∣trema metuentes super pulpitum collocavit, deinde repente magno tibiarum & scabellorum crepitu, cum palla tunica∣que talari prosiluit, ac desaltato cantico abijt. Quorum vero studio teneretur, omnibus ad insaniam favit. Mne∣sterem pantomimum etiam inter spectacula osculabatur, et si quis saltante eo leviter obstreperet, detrahi jussum manu sua flagellabat, &c. A good caveat for all Pagan, all Christian Princes and Magistrates, to beware of being besotted with Playes, or Actors, as this prodigious Pa∣gan Emperour &Nero, Anti∣gonus, Com∣modus, with others. others were to their eternall infamy. The 26.Iustin, An. 4110. is Iustin. Hstoriae lib. 6. Spirae 1610. pag. 79. who writs thus of the miserable effects of Stage-playes among the Athenians after Epaminondas his decease. Hujus morte etiam Atheniensium virtus intercidit. Si∣quidem amisso, quem aemulari consueverant, in segnitiem torporemque resoluti, non ut olim in classem, exercitusque, sed in dies festos, The prodiga∣lity of Stage-playes. APPARATVSQVE LUDORVM redditus publicos effundunt: & cum actoribus nobilissi∣mis, poetisque theatra celebrant, frequentius scenam quâm castra visentes. Versificatores oratoresque meliores quàm duces laudentes. QVIBVS REBVS EFFECTVM EST (pray marke the fatall consequence) ut inter otia Grae∣corum sordidum & obscurum antea Macedonum nomen emergeret: Et Philippus obses triennio Thebis habitus E∣paminondae & Pelopidarum virtutibus eruditus, regnum
Macedoniae, Greciae & Asiae cervicibus, veluti jugum servitutis imponeret. So that the Athenians and Grae∣cians Stage-expences, and their delight in Stage-playes, Play-poets and Actors, corrupted their manners, emas∣culated their prowesse, and so brought them into sub∣jection unto those, who formerly had beene captives unto them; as it brought the Romans into bondage to the Gothes and Vandals: a Salvian De Gubernation Dei, l. 6. and Carolus Sigonius, De occidentali Imperio, l. 1. f. 32. informe us. SeeAtque ita om∣nia magnitudi∣ne nominis ac maiestatis ob∣lius nocte in stupris, dies in convivijs con∣sumit. Addun∣tur instrumen∣ta luxuriaetym∣pna, & tripu∣dia: nec iam spectator, Rex sed magister nequitiae, ner∣vorum oblecta∣menta modu∣tur. Iustin, lib. 30. p. 254 to te same purpose, where he taxeth Ptolomie for dancing, singing, and playing. The 27.Herodian, An. 4230. is Herodianus, Historiae lib. 1. Ingolstadij 1608. p. 29.31.55. to 74. & l. 5. p. 267. to 282. Where he exceedingly censureth Commodus & Antoninus the first, for delighting in Stage-playes, Sword-playes, Actors, Gladiators, and playing the Gladi∣ator himselfe, to his perpetuall infamy and the peoples griefe, contrary to his imperiall dignity, and the earnest in∣treaty of his friends which by consequence proved the occasion of his untimely death: the latter for his dancing & delight in Stage-playes. The 28,Iulius Ca∣pitolinns, An. 4300. 29,Trebellius Pollio, Ann. 4300. 30,AElius Lampridius, An. 4300. 31.Flavius Vo∣piscus, An. 4300. are Iulius Capitolinus, Trebellius Pollio, AElius Lam∣pridius, and Flavius Vopiscus; in their fore-quoted pla∣ces: Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 451. in the margent; where they condemne Heliogabalus, Commodus, Verus, Cari∣nus, the Galieni, and other Roman Emperors, for fostering Playes and Players, on whom they spent much treasure & time; whereby they corrupted their owne, and likewise the peoples mindes and manners to their eternall infamy. The 32.Ammianus Marcellinus, An. 4370. is Amianus Marcellinus, Hist. l. 28. c. 9, 10. Lon∣don 1609. p. 340, 341, 342. Where he first declaimes against the Senators and Roman Gentry, for their play-haunting & dice-play; then against the sloath, the vanity & lewde behaviour of the commō people, who flocked thick and threefold to the base sports of the Theatre, where the Actors were sure to be hissed by them off the stage if they had not with some money bought the favour of the abject multitude; which there did nought but clamour, shout,
and raise up tumults. The 33,Ovid, An. 3950. 34,Horace, An. 3950. 35,Iuvenal, An. 4020. 36,Propertius, An. 4024. are Ovid, Ho∣race, Iuvenal, and Propertius: 4 famous Heathen Poets, who in their severall forequoted places, Act. 6. Scene 3. & 5. p. 369, 370.371, 452, 453, 454. condemne all Stage-playes and Actors, as intollerable mischiefes in a state: and as the occasions of much adultery, villany, lewdnesse, prodigality, and the like; as their forequoted testimo∣nies more largely prove, to which I shall referre you. To these I might adde C. Velleius Paterculus,Paterculus. Hist. l. 1. Francofurti, 1602. p. 16. Taurus,Taurus. the Philosopher, apud Gellium, Noctium Attic. l. 20. c. 4. who there labours to withdraw his scholler from Stagelayes, with a speech of A∣ristotle. Together with Macro the Philosopher,Macro. tutor to Caius Caligula; whom he dissuaded from Playes and Players: as Philo Iudaeus, De Legatione ad Caium, p. 1342. records: and that passage of Plautus,Plautus. in his Captivei Prologus, Raphelengij 1609. p. 105. where he writes thus. Profecto expedit fabulae huic operam dare: Non pertractate facta est, neque idem ut caeterae: Nequ spurcidici in sunt versus immemorabiles. Hîc neque per∣iurus leno est, nec meretrix mala &c. An infallible evi∣dence that most Stage-playes are fraught with ribaldry; with bawdes, with whores and panders parts; and that such Playes are lewd and vile, not fit for Pagan (much lesse for Christian) Auditors, as this passage intimates. If then all these 40 several Pagan Writers, Philosophers, Historians, Poets of chiefest note, (which none but Atheists, or men more desperately wicked, dare taxe for Puritans) have thus censured Playes and Players, as in∣tollerable mischievous evils, even in a heathen Com∣monweale; taxing all such for vitious unworthy per∣sons, who countenance or applaud them; can any Chri∣stian be so far past shame, past grace, or hopes of good∣nesse, as once to patronize them? Alas, with what countenance or forehead can any Christian pleade for Playes or Actors as tollerable among Christians, which not onely Plato, Seneca and Tully, but even Ovid and
Propertius too have long since doomed, as unfit for Pa∣gans? With what assurance can any one stile himselfe a Plus enim ebet Christi discipulus prae∣stare, quam mundi philo∣sophus. Hierom. Epist. 26. c. 4. Christian, who in this case of Playes, of Actors, and such like branded evills, comes short of all these Pagans? If therefore there bee any sparkes of inge∣nuity, modesty, grace or goodnesse remaining yet in Christians, whereby they may manifest to themselves and others, that they are, if not farre better, yet at least as good as all these Pagans: let them now at last declare it in abandoning, in suppressing Playes and Actors, which they have long since stigmatized as lewd perni∣cious evils. Alas what an intollerable eclipse and ble∣mish will it be to the honour, purity, power and holines of Christian religion? Et putamus nos salvos esse, quando omne impuritatis sce∣lus, omnis im∣pudicitiae tur∣pitudo, a Chri∣stianis admit∣titur a barba∣ris vindicatur? hic nunc illos quaero qui me∣liores nos pu∣tant esse quam barbaros, im∣pudicitiam nos diligimus, Eth∣nici execran∣tur: puritatem nos fugimus, illi amant: for∣nicatio apud illos crimen at∣que discrimen est, apud nos decus. Et pu∣tamus nos ante Deum posse consistere? Sal∣vian. De Guber. Dei l. 6. p. 237. what a desperate hazard un∣to all our soules, Si non praestat fides quod exhibuit infi∣delitas? If Christians should fall short of Pagans in con∣demning Playes and Actors, and prove Hierom. Ep. 3. c. 4. farre worse than they, as too too many doe? As therefore we desire to satisfie our owne consciences and others, or to secure our soules, that we are reall Christians as well in truth as appellation, let us now at leastwise equall, if not tran∣scend these Pagans in anathematizing and renouncing Stage-playes, according to our vow in baptisme, which Pagans never made, who have no such strong professed solemne engagements against Playes, as we, See here p. 41. to 61. & 561. to 567. who have our baptismall covenant to binde us, the concurring ex∣amples of all the Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, before. forementioned primitive Christians, Fathers, Councels, and moderne Christian Writers, to induce us to it. And if any out of ignorance, perverse∣nesse or prophanesse, have deemed it overmuch prae∣cisenesse heretofore, to imitate the piety of the fore∣quoted primitive or moderne Christians from age to age, in censuring, in renouncing Stage-playes, as exe∣crable, lewd, infamous spectacles, unfit for Christians: let them not now degenerate so farre beneath them∣selves, as to prove worse than Pagans in this case of Playes, Professio e∣nim religionis non aufert de∣bitum, sed au∣ge: quia adsumptio religiosi nominis, sponsio est devotionis: ac per hoc tanto plus quispiam debet opere, quanto plus promiserit professione. Salian. ad Ecclam Catho∣licam l. 2. p. 382. whom they should farre excell: but rather
subscribe to this 51 Play-refelling Argument; which will certainly condemne and shame them, if it convince them not; with which I shall close up this Scene. That which 40 Heathen Writers, Philosophers,Argum. 51. Histo∣rians, Orators and Poets of chiefest note, have u∣nanimously censured, condemned from the very principles and remainders of corrupt nature, and their owne experimentall knowledge of its lewd pernicious effects; must doubtlesse be sinfull and al∣togethr abominable unto Christians: Witnesse, Rom. 2.14, 15, to 29. Ier. 2.10 11. c. 18.13, 14. But these 40 recited Heathen Writers, Philosophers, Historians, Orators, and Poets of chiefest note, have unanimously censured and condemned Stage-playes, from the very principles and remainders of corrupt nature, and their owne experimentall know∣ledge of their many lewd pernicious effects: Witnes the premises, and Act. 6. Scene 3. & 5. Therefore they must doubtlesse be sinfull, and altogether abominable unto Christians. SCENA SEPTIMA. THe seventh Squadron is composed of sundry Pagan  and Christian States, Nations, Magistrates, Empe∣rors, Princes, who have excluded, censured, banished, suppressed Playes & Actors as the greatest mischiefes. If we look upon Heathen States or Nations, we shall find the See Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 455. to 458 & the Authours there quoted. ancient Lacedemonians, Athenians, Grecians, Romanes, Germanes, Massilienses, Goathes and Vandals:
If upon Heathen Magistrates, Emperours, or Princes, we shall see See Act. 6. Scene 5 p. 448, 449, 458, to 466. Licurgus, Solon, Plato, Socrates, The∣mistocles, Scipio Nassica, Trebonius Rufinus, Iunins Mauricus, together with Augustus Caesar, Tiberius, Ne∣ro, Trajan, Marcus Aurelius, Domitiā, Iuliā, & the whole Roman Senate, excluding, suppressing, condemning Playes and Actors, as the occasions of much vic and lewdnesse; the fomenters of whoredome, effeminacie, idlenesse, &c. the corrupters of the peoples mindes and manners; the authors of many tumults, discords, disorders; the causes of much prodigality, of many intollerable mischiefes in a state: as I have more largly manifested, Act. 6. Scen. 3.4, 5. to 20. on which you may reflect. If we looke on Christian States or Nations, wee shall discere the See Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 467. & Act. 7. Scene 2. p. 552. to 557 whole State and Nation of the Iewes both before and since Christs time, together with See Act. 7. Scene 2. p. 552. to 574. all the primitive Christians, the See here Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 220.228. to 232. & Act 7. Scene 3. p. 636. & Andreas Fricius De Re∣publica Emen∣danda, lib. 1. c. 17. & 21. p. 90. Waldenses, Albigenses, and French Protestants; the Cities of Geneva, Tigure, Basil, and the See Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 485. to 498. whole State of England in sundry Acts of Parliament, condemning, suppressing Playes and Players, as most prophane unchri∣stian Spectacles, not tollerable in any Christian Republike: Witnesse Act. 6. Scene 3 4, 5, 12. & Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5. on which you may cast your eyes. If we desire any precedents of Christian Emperors, Princes, Magistrates; we have not only the examples of Noah, Melchizedeck, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, Moses, Ioshuah, David, So∣lomon, Hezekiah, Iosiah, with other godly Patriarkes, Kings and Princes, recorded in the Scriptures for our Christian imitation; who were so farre from chrish∣ing from approving Enterludes, Mummeries, Masques or Stage-playes, either in their Pallaces, Courts or King∣domes (as too many Princes since have done) that we never read in Scripture, nor in any other Story whatsoe∣ver, that they were so much as once experimentally ac∣quainted with them; See here p 466, 467. & 552. to 557. accordingly.the whole Iewish Nation (some few Apostates onely excepted) oppugning them from time to time (and so by consequence thse Patriarkes, Magi∣strates
and Princes too.) as opposite to their religion, man∣ners, lawes and government, as I have elsewhere largely proved: (Which me thinks should somewhat move all Christian Princes & Governors to abandon Stagepaies now, since they can finde no King, no pious person in all the Bible, that ever harboured or beheld them here∣tofore:) But likewise the patterns of See Act. 6. Scene 5 p. 468. to 472. & Act. 7. Scene 3. p. 656. to 664. Constantine, The∣odosius, Leo, Anthemius, Iustinian, Valentinian, Valens, Gratian, See Bochellus Decreta Eccle∣siae Gll. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 39. & Tit. 10 c. 6. p. 549, 593. Charles the Great, Theodoricus, Henry, the 3. Emperour of that name, Philip Augustus King of France; our famous See Act. 6. Scene 5. p. 489. to 493. Queen Elizabeth, & her Counsel, with our London Magistrates, and Vniversities in her raigne, who all suppressed, inhibited Stage-playes, Sword-playes, and Actors, as unsufferable mischiefes in any Christian State or City. To these I might adde Fredericus Lindebrogus, Codex Legum Antiquarum p. 1163. Lodo∣vicus the Emperour, who by his publike Edicts (a∣greeing verbatim with the the 7. & 8. forequoted Canons of Synodus Turonnsis 3. p. 589, 590.) inhibited all Mi∣nisters all Clergy men from Stage-playes, hunting, hau∣king &c. Together with See Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gall. l. 7. cap. 22, 25. p. 581.Charles the 9. and Henry 3. of France, (who by their solemne Lawes and Edicts pro∣hibited all Stage-playes, all dancing on Lords-dayes, or o∣ther solemne annuall festivals, nder paine of imprisonment, and other penalties to be inflicted by the Magi∣strates;) and our owne most gracious Soveraigne Lord, King CHARLES; who together with the whole Court of Parliament, in the first yeare of his Hignesse Raigne, enacted this most pious Play-condemning Law, (intitu∣led, 1 Car. cap. 1. An Act for publishing of divers abuses committed on the Lords day, called Sunday.) Forasmuch as there is no∣thing more acceptable to God, than the true and sincere worship of him, according to his holy will, and that the See 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. Which enioyns men to spend the Lords day onely & whol∣ly in hearing and reading of Gods word, in prayer and praises unto God, and such other religious duties. ho∣ly keeping of the Lords day, is a principall part of the true service of God, which in very many places of this Realme hath beene, and now is profaned and neglected by a disor∣derly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting Beare∣baiting, Bull-baiting, ENTERLVDES, COMMON
PLAYES, and Which in∣cludes Dan∣cing, Dicing, Bowling, Cards, and all other games and sports, which are un∣lawfull on this day. See all the forequoted Councels, Ca∣nons, and Im∣periall Consti∣stutions, Act. 7. Scene 3. & Act. 5. Scene 8. p. 240. to 244. & Dr. Featly his Handmaid of Devotion Edit. 2. p. 498. accor∣dingly. other unlawfull exercises and pastimes, upon the Lords day. And for that many quarrells, blood∣sheds, and other great inconveniences have growne by the resort and concourse of people going out of their owne pa∣rishes to such disordered and unlawfull exercises and pas∣times, neglecting Devine service both in their owne pa∣rishes and elsewhere. Be it enacted by the Kings most ex∣cellent Majesty, the Lords spirituall and temporall, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That from and after 40 dayes next after the end of this Session of Parliament assembled, there shall be no meetings, assemblies or concourse of people out of This clause extends to all who goe out of their parishes to unlawfull sports or pas∣times. their owne parishes on the Lords day within this Realme of England, or any the Dominions thereof for a∣ny sports or pastimes whatsoever: nor any Bull-baiting, Beare-baiting, ENTERLVDES, COMMON PLAYES, or other unlawfull exercises or pastimes used by any person or persons This clause extends to all who use any unlawfull sports or pas∣times within their owne pa∣rishes. within their owne parishes: and that every per∣son or persons offending in any the premises shall forfeit for every offence 3 shillings 4 pence: the same to be employ∣ed and converted to the use of the poore of the Parish where such offences shall be committed. And that any one Iustice of the peace of the County or the chiefe Officer or Officers of any Citie, Borough or Towne Corporate where such of∣fence shall be comitted, upon his or their view, or confession of the partie, or proofe of any one or more witnesse by oath, which the said Iustice or chiefe Officer or Officers by ver∣tue of this act shall hav authority to minister, shall finde any person offending in the premises; the said Iustice or chiefe Officer or Officers, shall give warrant under his or their hand and seale to the Constables or Church∣wardens of the Parish or Parishes where such offence shall bee committed, to levie the said penalty so to bee assessed, by way of distresse and sale of the goods of every such offendor, rendring to the said offendors the o∣verplus of the monie raised of the said goods so to be solde. And in default of such distresse, that the party offending
be se publikely in the stockes by the space of three houres. Which Act, being to continue unto the end of the first Session of the next Parliamēt, only: was since recontinued by the Statute of 3. Caroli cap. 4. and so it remaineth still in force: So that if it were as diligently executed, as it was piously enacted, it would suppresse many great abuses (both within the letter and intent, which is very large) that are yet continuing among us to Gods disho∣nour, and good Christians griefe in too many places of our Kingdome; which our Iustices, our inferiour Magi∣strates might soone reforme, would they but set them∣selves seriously about it, as some here and there have done. If then all these Pagan, these Christian Nations, Republickes, Emperors, Princes, Magistrates, have thus abandoned, censured, suppressed Playes and Players, from time to time, as most intollerable pernicious evis in any State or City, how can, how dare we now to justify thē, as harmelesse, cōmendable, or usefull recreations? What, are we wiser, are we better than all these Pagan Sages; than all these judicious Christian Worthies, who have thus abandoned, suppressed Playes and Actors, out of a long experimentall knowledge of their many vitious lewd effects? Or are we ashamed to be like our ance∣stors in judgement, in opinion, as wee are in tonsure, complement, habit and attire in this age of Novelties, which Omnia debi∣tum ordinem deserunt, hoc est luxuriae pro∣prium, gadere perversis, nec tantum disce∣dere a recto sed quam longissi∣me abire. Res sordida est, trita ac vulgari via viver. Talis ho∣rum contraria omnibus non regio sed vita est. Causa ta∣men praecipua mihi videtur huius morbi vitae communis fastidiū. Quo∣modo cultu se a caeteris di∣stinguunt, quomodo ele∣gantia caenarū, mundiciis ve∣hiculorum, sic volunt etiam seperare tem∣porum disposi∣tione: nolunt solita pecare, quibus peccan∣di praemium infamia est. Seneca Epist. 122. likes of nothing that is old or common, (though Illud melius et verius quod antiquius. Ter∣tullian De Prae∣script: adversu Hareicos lib. et Vincentius Lerinnsis adversus prophnas Hreticorum noitates. such things commonly are the best of all,) that wee thus undervalue the resolutions of all former ages in this cae of Playes and Players, preferring our owne wits and lusts before them O let us ashamed now at last to countenance, to pleade for that, which the ve∣ry best, the wisest Heathen, yea Christian Nations, States and Magistrates of all sorts, have thus branded and cast out as lewd, as vitious, as abominable in the very highest degree; & let us now submit our judgments, our practise, lusts and foolish fansies to their deliberate ma∣ture
experimentall censures, abominating, condemning Playes and Players, if not exiling them our Cities coasts and Countrey, as all these have done: arming our selves with peremptory resolutions against all future Stage-playes, with this 52 Play-oppugning Syllogisme, with which I shall terminate this Scene. Argum. 52.That which the ancient Lacedemonians, Athenians, Graecians, Romans, Germanes, Massilienses, Bar∣barians, Gothes and Vandals the whole Iewish Nation of old; divers Christian Countries, and Cit∣ties since: together with many Pagan, many Chri∣stian Republickes, Magistrates, Emperours, Prin∣ces in severall ages and places, have censured, a∣bandoned, rejected, suppressed, as a most pernicious evill, as a very seminary of all vice and wickednesse; must certainly be sinfull, execrable, and altogether unlawfull unto Christians: Witnesse, Rom. 13.6. c. 13.1. to 8. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. But such is the case and condition of Stage-playes: as the premises, and Act. 6. Scene 5. &c. most plenti∣fully evidence. Therefore they must certainly be sinfull, execrable, and altogether unlawfull unto Christians. CHORVS. YOV have seene now Courteous Readers 7 severall Squadrons of unanswerable Authorities encounte∣ring Stage-playes and Actors, and giving them such an onset, as I hope will put them with their Patrons quite to route, so that they shall never be able to make head againe; their forces being so weake, so few, that they
cannot bring one Councell, one Father, one ancient, one moderne Christian or Pagan Writer of any note into the field, to maintaine their cause, against this army-royall of Play-condemning Authorities, which I have here mustered up against them. It is not their long since conquered and confuted His Play of Playes. Lodge or His Apology for Actors. Hay∣wood (two scribling hackney Players, their onely profes∣sed printed Play-Champions that I know of,) who can withstand their all-conquering troopes; which either severall, or united, are impregnable; able to over-po∣wer to vanquish all the forces, that the whole world can raise agaist them. Let it therefore be your wisdome now at last to take the best, the strongest side, not onely in quality, but in number too. Stage-playes and Actors, (as the foregoing Scenes declare;) have bin oppugned, condemned in all ages, all places, by all sorts of men; Iewes and Gentiles, Greekes and Barbarians, Christians and Pagans; Emperours, Magistrates, people, Writers of all sorts, have bent, not onely their hearts and judge∣ments, but their very hands, their tongues, their pens and power against them: Yea those who are dead and rotten long agoe, still fight against them in their survi∣ving workes: Philippus Lo∣nicerus, Turci∣cae Historiae, l. 1. f. 34. b. (Licet ossa jacent, calamus bella ge∣rit:) and they will one day rise up in judgement (as they doe now in armes) against us, if we submit not to them. Let us, O let us not therefore be any longer beso e, befooled with these lewd stigmatized Playes or Actors, as we have beene in former times; but since all Ages, all Nations, (yea those who loved them best and most at first, to wit, theSee Act. 6. Scene 5. Greeks and Romans) together with all primitive and moderne pious Christians, Fathers, Councels, Writers, have thus unanimously, successive∣ly condemned, renounced them, let us abominate and reject them too. It was the branded infamie of the Iewes, 1 Thess. 2.15. that they pleased not God, and were contrary to all men: and will it not be ours too, if all these Au∣thorities will not sway us? If Scriptures, Councels,
Fathers; if Christian, if Pagan Writers, Nations, Cit∣ties, Republickes, Emperours, Magistrates, Kings, and Edicts thus severed, thus united, will not stir, nor draw us from our Stage-playes, Play-houses and Actors, what then can we conclude of our selves but this; Rom. 1.24. to 29.2. Thess. 2.11, 12. that God hath given us over to an impenitent heart, a reprobate sence, a cauterized conscience, if not to strong delusions, to beleeve, to affect these lying Playes and Fables; that we all might be damned, who will not beleeve the truth, which all these Witnesses have confirmed; but take pleasure in unrighteousnesse, in ungodly Playes and Actors, See Act. 6. Scene 19, 20.which leade their followers to destruction, and without repentance plunge them into hell for ever, amids those filthy Divels, whose disavowed pompes and workes, they deeme their chiefest pleasures. Let us therefore earnestly pray to God, to open our eares, that we may heare: to incline our hearts that we may beleeve, what all these testifie and averre of Stage-playes; that so now at last we may take our finall farewell of them, See Act. 6. Scene 12. & 20. as all true penitent Christians have done before us, and never returne unto them more, to Gods dishonour, the Re∣publickes dammage, or our owne eternall ruine; con∣cluding from henceforth of all Stage-playes, all amphi∣theatricall Spectacles, as Prudentius, that worthy Chri∣stian Poet, did many hundred yeares agoe: Prudentius Contra Sym∣machum l. 1. Bib. Pat. Tom. 4. p. 612. B. & Lipsius de Am∣phitheatro lib. c. 20. Heu! quid vesani sibi vult ars impia ludi? Hae sunt deliciae IOVIS INFERNALIS; in istis Arbiter obscuri placidus requiescit Averni. And then we neede no more, no other arguments to disswade us from resort to Stage-playes, when we shall thus adjudge them, the chiefest delights of the infernall Divel Iove, who rests well pleased, well delighted with them, as too many carnall Christians doe; who will one day rue it, when it is too late, if they now repent it not in time.
ACTVS 8. SCENA PRIMA. HAving thus at large evinced the unlawfulnesse of Stage-playes by Reasons, by Authorities; I come now to refute those miserable Apolo∣gies, those vaine pretences, or Ad excusan∣das excusatio∣nes in peccatis ista praetendūt. Christus autem non arte illu∣ditur. Hierom. Epist. 4. c. 9. excuses ra∣ther, which their Advocates oppose in their defence; the most of which are already answered to my hands. Apologies for Stage-playes are of great antiquity. Ter∣tullian in his booke De Spectaculis, cap. 1, 2, 3. & 8. brings in the Pagan Romans, (whose Tanta est e∣nim vis volup∣tatum, ut et ig∣norantiam pro∣telet in occasi∣onem, et con∣scientiam cor∣rumpat in dif∣fimulationem, aut utrumque. Tertull. De Spe∣ctac. c. 1. consciences the pleasures of these enchanting Enterludes had bribed) apo∣logizing for their Playes with great Quam sapi∣ens argumen∣tatrix sibi vid∣tur ignorantia humana, prae∣sertim cum ali∣quid eiusmodi de gaudiis et de fructibus sae∣culi metuet a∣mittere. Tertul. Ibid. acutenesse; the feare of losing these their secular pleasures adding a kinde of sharpnesse to their wits. I finde St. Cyprian complai∣ning, Nam et eousque enervatus est Ecclesiasticae disciplinae vigor, et ita omni languore vitiorum, praecipitatur in peius, ut iam non vitiis excusatio sed au∣thoritas detur: quoniā non desunt vitiorum assertores blandi et indulgentes patroni qui praestant vitiis authoritatem; et quod est deterius, censuram Scripturarum coelestium in advocationem criminum et spectaculorum convertunt &c. Cyprian de Spectac. lib. that the vigour of Ecclesiasticall discipline was so farre enervated in his age, and so precipitated into worse in all dissolutenesse of vice; that vices were not onely excused, but authorized; there wanting not such flatte∣ring Advocates and indulgent Patrons of naughtinesse who gave authority unto vices; and which was worse, converted the very censure of the heavenly Scriptures into a justification of crimes and Stage-playes; producing some texts of Scripture in defence of Playes, as well as rea∣sons; which this Father at large refells. The like Play-apologies of voluptuous Pagans, I reade recorded in
Advers. Gen∣tes l. 7. p. 232. to 240. Arnobius, Hom. 38. in Matth. & Hom. 3. De Davide et Saule. Chrysostome, De Consensu Evangelistarū, l. 1. c. 23. De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 29. & l. 6. c. 5, 6, 7, 8. Augustine, and De Guberna∣tione Dei l. 6. Salvian; who answer them to the full. And as these Pagans of olde, so some who would be deemed Chri∣stians now, (as namely one Thomas Lodge, a Play-poet, in his Play of Playes, and one Thomas Haywood a Play∣er, i his Apology for Actors,) have lately pleaded as hard for Stage-playes, as ever Acts 19.24. to 29. Demetrius did for his great Diana:) whose severall allegations in the behalfe of Playes are soledly refelled; by Mr. Stephen Gosson, in his Playes confuted: by the Authour of the 3. Blast of Retrait from Playes and Theaters; by Mr. Iohn Northbrooke, in his Treatise against vaine Playes and Enterludes; by Dr. Rainolds, in his Overthrow of Stage-playes: by I: G: in his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, (which you may peruse at leisure) and by sundry others See Act 7. Scene 5. forerecited, whom I spare to men∣tion. The Players, the Play-patrons of our present age, as their cause is worse, so Nulli enim peccatori de est impuens prae∣textus &c. Sed hi quidem sunt praetextu qui nihil habnt rationis, nc se ilo iure pos∣sunt defendere. Chrysost. Hom in Psal. 140. Tm 1. Col. 1110. C D. their Pleas for Playes are no other, no better than those of former times, which neede no other replies then what these Fathers, these Authours have returned: yet since their answeres are now growne obsolete, and our Quid dicam de iis nescio, qui cum semel aberraverint constanter in stulitia perseverant, et vanis vana defendunt; nisi quod eos interdum puto aut ioci causa philosophari aut prudentes et scios mnacia defenden∣da suscipere, quasi ut ingenia sua in malis rebus exerceant vel ostendet. Lactantius De Falsa Sapientia. l. 3. . 24. Play-Advocates persevering in their former folly, proceede to justifie one vanitie, one falshood with another, disputing much for the lawfull use of Stage-playes (perchance to exercise or de∣clare their witts in the unhappy patronage of evill things:) I shall therefore addresse my selfe to give a satisfactory answer to all their chiefe Play-propugning Objections, that so I may pu them to perpetuall silence. Objection 1.The first, if not the best Argument in defence of Stage-playes, may be cast into this forme. That which is not prohibited, but rather approved and
commended by the Scripture, cannot be sinfull nor unlawfull unto Christians. But Stage-playes are not prohibited, but rather appro∣ved and commended by the Scripture. Therefore they cannot bee sinfull nor unlawfull unto Christins. The Major being unquestionable, the Minor may be thus confirmed. Acts 19.29, 31. there is mention made of the Theatre at Ephesus, Theatrum est locus semicir∣culi figuram habes, in quo stantes populi ludos scenicos intus inspicie∣bant, unde a Spectaculo Graece Theatri nomen acce∣pit. Bed in Acta Apost. c. 19. Tō. 5 Col. 658. & De Nominibus loco∣rum in Actis A∣post. Ibid. Col. 672. a place wherein Playes were acted: and in the 1 Cor. 4.9. St. Paul writes of himselfe and of the other Christians in this age: We are made a Theatre or Spectacle unto the world, unto Angels, and to men. To which may be added the 1 Kings 13.8. 2 Kings 16.14.15 17. &c. 2.11, 12. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. & See Ambrose, Hierom, Chry∣sostome, Theo∣doret, Primasi∣us, Sedulius, Remigius, Be∣da, Haymo, An∣selme, Oecumenius, Theophylact, HRabanus Maurus, Lyra, Tostatus, Gorrhan, Aretius, Musculus, Calvin, Marlorat, and others Ibidem, some of which take it litte∣rally, that St. Paul did actually fight with beasts in the Theatre at Ephesus.15.22. Eph. 6.11, 12, 13, 14. which mentiō horses, chari∣ots, races, duels, combates: alluding to the Olympian games, the Roman Circus, Sword-playes, and other amphitheatri∣call Spectacles, which these Scriptures seeme to justifie; and so by consequence Stage-playes too, which are in the selfesame predicament. To this I answer first;Answ. 1. though Stage-playes are not expresly condemned in the Scripture by name, yet they are in other generall tearmes (as well as Apostasie, A∣theisme, poysoning, Incest and such other sinnes whose names we finde not in the text) as I have Act. 7. Scen. 1. already proved: So that both the Major and Minor are false. Secondly, I answer, that the reason why Stage-playes are not by name condemned in the Scripture is, because the penmen of it being Iewes, were unacquainted with Stage-playes, Iosephus An∣tiqu. Iudaeou l. 15. c. 11. See Act. 7. Scene 2. p. 548. to 558. which the Iewes would not admit, as being opposite to their religion, and pernicious to their State: wherefore they condemne them onely under those generall termes, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. Eph. 2.2, 3. c. 4 17. to 25. 1 Cor 10.20, 21, 22. Tit. .3. Rom. 12.. c. 13.12, 13, 14. 1 Iohn 2.15, 16. See Act. 7. Scene 1 of Idolatry, sacrifices of Idols, vanities of the Gentiles, rudiments and customes of the
world, &c. under which they are fully comprized. Thirdly, though the Scriptures inhibit not Stage-playes by name, yet St. Paul himselfe in his Constitutions, (if Clemens Romanus may be credited) hath condemned Playes and Players in expresse tearmes, Ego Paulus minimus Apo∣stolorum haec dispono vobis Episcopis et Presbyteris. Scenicus si ac∣cedat sive vir sit sive mulier, auriga, gladia∣tor, cursor sta∣dii, ludius, O∣lympius, cho∣raules, cytha∣raedus, lyristes, faltator, caupo, desistat vel re∣iiciatur. Thea∣tralibus ludis qui dat ope∣ram, vel desi∣stat, vel reiicia∣tur. Clemens Rom. Constit. A∣post. l. 8. c. 38. decreeing, that all Players and Play-haunters should desist from Stage-playes, or else be cast out of the Church; and the Constit. Apo. stol. l. 2. c. 65, 66 other Apostles also decreed the like: yea the See Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5. whole primitive Church in severall generall and Nationall Councels, the ancient Fathers in their renowned writings, and the holiest Christians Si ad boni incitamentum divina praecep∣ta deessent, pro¦lege nobis san∣ctorum exem∣pla sufficerent. Isidor. Hispal. De Summo bono l 7. c. 11. from age to age, have gi∣ven sentence against them as unlawfull Spectacles, which the word of God inhibits as misbeseeming Christians: this therefore is sufficient to disprove the Minor. Fourthly, the Scriptures here produced as approving Stageplayes, doe no wayes countenance, but oppugne them. For first, that Theatre mentioned Acts 19.29.31. was not a Theatre on which Playes were acted, but a Se Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 13. Philo Iudaeus in Flac∣cum lib. p. 1305, 1306, 1312. Coc. Sabellicus, AEnead. 4. lib. 8. pag. 636. C. accordingly. place of publike meeting, where malefactors were punished, Orati∣ons made to the people, and the Magistrates and people usually met together to consult of publike affaires: A place much like the Praetorium, into which our Savi∣our was brought, Matth: 27.27. or like to Areopagus or Mrs hill in Ahens, where Paul made an Oration to the Athenians: Acts 17.19, 22. That this was such a Theatre, is evident: First, because such places of pub∣like concourse and consultation, where speeches were made, and malefactors sometimes executed, were stiled Thea∣tres: witnesse Et Atticis quo que Quibus theatrum curiae praebet vicem, Vna est Athenis atque i omni Graecia, ad consulendum publici sedes loci.  Saintum p. 86. Ausonius, Florido. um l. 1. p. 302. Apuleius, Pro Flacco Oratio. Cicero, Tunc Antiochensiu Theatro ingressus, ubi illis consultare mos est. Historiae, l. 24. sect. p. 474. Tacitus, Pars maxima super Theatrum ira{que}, assueti et ante spectaculis concionum consistunt. Rom. Hist. l. 24. sect. 39. v. 542. Livie, Apud Nonnim: & apud Bulengerum, De Theatro l. 1. c. 32. Philostatus,Ibidem. Varro, Ibidem. Phi∣lo,
Oratio 32. Chrysostome, Dion, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 1. p. 60. D. Synesius, Iuvenal, Appianus, & Bulengerus De Theatro, l. 1. c. 32. where this very text is quoted. Hence Eccles. Histor. l. 8. c. 24. Eusebius and Eccles. Hist. l. 3 c. 19. Nicephorus, write, that Ignatius with other Martyrs were tortured and put to death in the Theatre: yea hence Historiae l. 7. c. 30. Orosius, (and out of him Annales Ec∣cles. Anno 363. sect. 4. Baronius and Spondanus) record; that Iuian the Apostate, commanded a Theatre to be built of the materialls that were brought to redisie the temple at Hierusalem, in which Theatre after his returne from Persia he intended to cast the Bishops, Monkes; and other Christian inhabitants of that place to beasts which should teare them in peeces; ut scilicet ibi esset Christianorum carnificina, unde eorū religio videretur esse progressa. Se∣condly, the very words and circumstances of the text a∣ure  us, that this was such a Theatre: For first, it is said, that all the people rushed with one accord into the Theatre, v. 29. as into a place of common counsell. Secondly, that  the cause of this their concourse was, to prevent the decay of their craft of making silver shrines, and to maintaine the honour of their great Goddesse Diana: v. 27. Thirdly, that Paul would have entred into the Theatre to have made an Oration unto the people, from which his friends disswaded him: v. 30, 31. Fourthly, that the assembly there  ws confused, some crying one thing, some another, and that the most part knew not why they were come together: verse 32. Fifthly, that they caught Gais and Arisarchus, and drew them as malefactors into the Theatre: verse 29. Sixthly, that they drew Alexander out of the mul∣titude, who there beckened to them with his hand, and would there have made his defence to the people: v. 37. Se∣venthly, that the Town-clerke made there a solemn speech to the people, admonishing them to be quiet, and to doe no∣thing rashly against Paules companions, whom they had brought into the Theatre, since they were neither robbers of Churches, nor yet blasphemers of their Goddesse: infor∣ming Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen, that if they had a matter against any man, the Court-dayes were kept, and
there were deputies before whom they might implead one another: and if they inquired any thing concerning other matters, it should be determined in a lawfull assembly: v, 35. to 41. All which concurring particulars infallibly prove, that this Theatre See Theophy∣lact, Lyra, and others Ibidem, & Socrates Scholasticus Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 13. Habanus Maurus, De V∣niverso l. 20 c. 16. & 36. Tom. 1. p. 248, 250. was onely a place of publike counsell, justice and execution; not a Theatre whereon Playes were acted: therefore it gives no colour of ap∣probation to Playes or Play-houses, no more than the Courts of Iustice at Westminster argue, that the Playes and Play-houses about London are lawfull. But admit this Theatre were a place for Stage-playes, yet it affords no justification at all to Playes or Play-houses. For the assembly in the Theatre, which this Scripture mentions, was Acts 19.29. to 41. but a tumultuous concourse of Idolaters, without any lawfull authority: and that not to act or see a Stage-play, but to defend their Goddesse Diana, and their idola∣trous trade of making her silver shrines, by which they got their living: to persecute St. Paul and his companions, whom they accused as malefactors, and to withstand the preaching of the Gospell, which would suppresse their trade and their Diana both together. This unlawfull assembly therefore, which both the Scripture, their owne Acts 19.35. to 41. Towne-clerke, and themselves condemned, is no justifi∣cation  of, but a strong evidence against our Play-assem∣blies, which are commonly as tumultuous, as opposite to Christs word, his Saints, his kingdome, as this Ephe∣sian conventicle. Secondly, that text of 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made , which the Fathers and most Latine Authors render, Spe∣ctaculum; and our English Translations, a Spectacle, or gazing-stocke: makes nought for Stage-playes. For what if the Apostles were made a Theatre or Spectacle to the world, to Angels and to men: (that is, as Ambrose, Hierom, Sedu∣lius, Chryso∣stome, Theo∣doret, Prima∣sius, Occume∣nius, Beda, Theophylact, in 1 Cor. 4.9. & Chrysost. Hom. ad Neo∣phyos, Tom. 5. Col. 619. C, D. some Fathers interpret it; The whole world of men and An∣gels good and bad, beheld the miseries, the afflictions they endured for Christ and his Gospell, not onely in one corner, but in all the quarters of the world. Or as Ambrose, Re∣migius, Beda, Anselme in 1 Cor. 4.9. others of
them paraphrase it: They were made a wonderment, a laughing-stocke to uncleane spirits, and to the wicked of the world, who rejoyced at their miseries, their torments, being glad to see them drawne to the place of execution called [Theatrum] a Theatre, where the innocent Martyrs for the most part suffered in the view of all the people, as our Traytors usually suffer on a Stage or scaffold, erected for that purpose: both which expositions Beda, An∣selme, HRaba∣nus Maurus, Lyra, and o∣thers, in 1 Cor. 4.9. some good Interpreters have conjoyned:) yet this no wayes justi∣fies but oppugnes our Stage-playes. For first, the Apo∣stles did not make themselves a voluntary Spectacle, as all Players doe; but they were made Spectacles by others. Secondly, they were no Spectacles of lascivi∣ousnesse, vanitie, follie, mirth, or wickednesse, as Plaies and Plaiers are; but of grace, of faith, of pietie, Hebr. 11. v. 7. to the end, &c. 12.1, 2, 3. pati∣ence, constancy, martyrdome, and the like, which Plaies and Plaiers are not. Thirdly, they were Spectacles of Gods owne institution, they being 1 Cor. 4.19. Acts 4.27, 28. Phil. 1.29. appointed, called, destinated to their sufferings by God himselfe; whereas Plaies and Actors are Spectacles not of Gods, but of the very See Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. & Chorus. Divels owne invention and appointment. Fourth∣ly, they were memorable publike Spectacles of admi∣ration, of Acts 13.7. 1 Cor. 11.1. 1 Pet. 2.20, 21. imitation, both to the world, to Angels, and to men: Playes, Players and Play-haunters were yet never such. Fifthly, they were reall, not hypocriticall, histrionicall personated Spectacles, consisting of repre∣sentations onely, as all Playes and Actors are. Sixthly, they were Spectacles 1 Cor. 4.9. Rom. 8.36. Psal. 44.22. See Chrysost. ad Neophytos, Tom. 5. Col. 619, B, C. appointed onely unto death, not to laughter: Spectacles of passion, of compassion, not of mirth and pleasure: Spectacles onely at a stake, appoin∣ted unto martyrdome; not on a stage, to stir up laughter: Spectacles they were, which the very See Tertulli∣an, Exhortatio ad Martyres, & Cyprian de Duplici Marty∣rio. Angels and Saints applauded, not condemned; which Divels and wic∣ked men derided, persecuted, not applauded: Spectacles, which were Cyprian E∣pist. l. 1. Epist. 3, 4. l. 2. Epist. 6. l. 3. Epist. 5. & 25. & l. 4. Ep. 2. & 6. the crowne, the honour, not the reproach, and Cyprian Ep. l. 1. Ep. 10. Eu∣cratio. infamy of Christianity, as Playes and Players are: therefore they give no colour, no approbation to
our Play-house Spectacles with which they have no A∣nalogie, but this alone; that as the chiefe agents in the Apostles and Martyrs tortures, were desperate wicked men, envenomed, enraged with bitter rancor against all grace, all goodnesse; even See Act. 4. Scene 1. throughout. such are the common A∣ctors and Abetters of our theatricall Enterludes. All the argument then that our Play-patrons can collect from hence, is from the allusion which the Apostle hath to Theatres, to Spectacles; which being an allusion onely to the spectacle of a Martyr, at the stake; or of a malefa∣ctor at the place of execution, as all Expositors accord; not to a Play or Enterlude on a Stage, subverts their ve∣ry foundation, and takes them off from this their hold, in which they had most repose. But admit, it were an allusion to a Play-house Theatre, yet as theeves can ne∣ver justifie their stealing, nor uurers their usurie to be lawfull, because the Scripture saith, Matth. 24.43 44. 1 Thess. 5.2 2 Pet. 3.10. Rev. 3.3. & 16.15. that Christ, that the day of the Lord shall come as a theefe in the night: and Matth. 25.27 that he will require his owne with usurie: no more can our Play-champions conclude from hence, that Stage-playes are warrantable or lawfull among Christi∣ans, because St. Paul by way of similitude, writes thus of himselfe and his fellow-Apostles: Wee are made a Theatre or Spectacle to the world, unto Angels, and to men. These two maine Scriptures being thus fully vin∣dicated from our Play-proctors wrestings, the other will fall away of themselves: there being no analogie at all betweene a race and a Stage-play: an horse or chariot for warre, and a Comedie for sport. I shall therefore answer them all together in St. Cyprians words. Hoc in loco dixeim, longe melius fuisse istis nullas lite∣ras nosse, quam sic literas lege∣re. Verba enim et exempla quae ad exhortatio∣nem Evangeli∣cae virtutis po∣sita sunt, ad vi∣tiorum patro∣cinia transfe∣runtur, quoni∣am non ut spe∣ctarentur ista scripta sunt, sed ut animis nostris instantia maior exci∣taretur in rebus profuturis, dū tanta est apud Ethnicos in r∣bus nōprofutu∣ris. Argumentū est ergo excitandae virtuis, non permissio sive libertas spectandi Gen∣tilis erroris; ut per hanc animus plus accendatur ad evangelicam virtutem propter divina praemia, cum per omnium laborum et dolorum calamitatem concedatur pervenire ad terrena compendia. Cyprian de Spectaculis lib. In this place I may say, that it had beene better for these Ob∣jectors never to have knowne the Scriptures, than thus to reade and wrest them. For these words and examples which are laid downe as exhortations to evangelicall ver∣tue,
are translated into apologies for vice; For these things are written, not that they should be gazed upon, but that a more earnest vehemency should be stirred up in our minds in profitable things, whiles there is so great a diligence in Ethnickes in unprofitable things. It is an argument there∣fore of exciting vertue, not a permission or libertie of be∣holding the Gentiles error; that by this the minde may be more enflamed to evangelicall vertue by divine rewards, when as men must passe through the miserie of all toyles and griefes, before they can come to terrene emoluments. Nam quod Elias auriga est Israelis, non pa∣trocinatur spe∣ctandi Circen∣sibus, in nullo enim is Circo cucurrit. Et quod David in conspectu Dei choros egit, ni∣hil adiuvat in Theatro seden∣tes Christianos fideles. Nulla enim obscaenis motibus mem∣bra distor∣quens, desulta∣vit Graecae li∣bidinis fabu∣lā: aera, cythara t ybiae Deum cecinerunt, non Idolum. Non igitur praescri∣bitur ut spe∣ctentur illcita: diabolo artifi∣ce ex sanctis in illicita mutata sunt. Praescribat igiur istis pu∣dor, etiamsi non possunt sacrae literae. Non pudet, non pudet in∣quam, fideles homines, et Christiani sibi nominis auctoriaem vendicantes, superstitiones vanas Gentilium cum spectaculis mixtas de scripturis coelestibus vindicare, et auctoritatē idololatriae conferre? Nā quan∣do id quod in honore alicuius idoli ab Ethnicis agitur, a fidelibus Christianis in spe∣ctaculo frequentatur, et idololatria gentilis asseritur, et in contumeliam Dei religio vera calcatur. Ibidem. That Elias is the horseman or charioter of Israel, it yeelds no patronage to the beholding of Cirque-playes, for he never ranne in any Circus: That David danced in the sight of God, it no wayes availes nor justifieth the sitting of faithfull Christians in the Theatre: for by distorting none of his members with obscene motions, hee hath ended the dance, and put a period to the Play of Graecian lust. His Lute, his trumpets, flutes and harpes have resounded Gods praises, not an Idols. It is not therefore hence determined, that unlawfull things may be looked on: those lawfull things by the Divels cunning being now changed from ho∣ly into unholy things. Let shame therefore instruct or re∣straine these men, although the holy Scriptures cannot doe it. For is it not a shame, is it not a shame I say, for faith∣full men, who challenge to themselves the name of Chri∣stians, to justifie the vaine superstitions of the Gentiles in∣termixed with their Stage-playes, out of the sacred Scrip∣tures, and to give authority to Idolatry? For when that which is done by Ethnickes to the honour of any Idol is fre∣quented by Christians in a Stage-play, both heathen idola∣try is maintained, and in contumely of God, true religion is trod under foote. This is St. Cyprians answer to the ob∣jected Scriptures, and with it I rest.
SCENA SECVNDA. Objection 2.THe second Objection in defence of Playes is this: See Hay∣woods Apolo∣gie for Actors.That they are innoxious, pleasant, honest & lau∣dable recreations, which the ancient Greekes and Romans not onely tollerated but applauded: therefore they are tollerable among Christians. Not no answer this objection with that exclamation ofCommenta∣riorum lib. 29. fol. 113. Volateranus in this very case of Playes: Sed quid nunc de faece hujus saeculi dicam? quum virtutem ac gloriam veterum imitari nullo pacto valeamus, vitia ta∣men omni studio imitamur. Iam scena ubique renovata est, ubique comdias specta uterque sexus, quodque longe impudentius, ipsi Sacerdotes et praesules, quorum erat of∣ficium omnino prohibere. Multo igitur severiores in hac parte Graeci, qui omnes suos comicos jamdiu abolue∣runt, propter unum Aristophanem, quamvis moribus miime officeret. I answer first;Answer 1. that Playes are no harme∣lesse, honest or laudable recreations, as all the premised Authorities, and this whole treatise prove at large: this objection therefore is but a begging of the cause in que∣stion.  Secondly, I answer, that although some Pagan Greekes and Romanes approved Stage-playes at the first in lewd and dissolute times; yet See Act. 6. Scene 5. & Act. 7. Scen. 6, 7. Bodinus De Repub. l. 6. c. 1. & Guevara his Diall of Princes, l. 3. c. 43. to 48.at last after long experience of those intollerable mischiefes which they oc∣casioned, enforced by deare bought repentance, they banished them their Commonweales and Territories by publike solemne Edicts, as inconsistent with their safety. And al∣though some vitious histrionicall Roman Emperours, as Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Commodus, and others, reduced Plaies & Plaiers, yet the gravest Romā Emperors, Senators, Philosophers did still oppose and reexile them
as the seminaries of all vice and lewdnesse, and intollrable mischiefes in the Commonweale: as I have See Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, 5, 6. & Act. 7. Scen. 6, 7. largely proved. Wherefore wee should rather imitate the best, the wisest Pagan Greekes and Romans in abandoning, than the worst or lewdest in retaining Stage-playes. Se∣condly, the reason why the ancient Pagans, Graecians and Romans tollerated Plaies and Plaiers (as De Repub. l. 6. cap. 1. Gue∣vara, Diall of Princes, l. 3. c. 43. p. 509. Heo∣dian Hist. l. 1. p. 29, 31. Bodine and Guevara observe) was not for any good or laudable quality in them, but onely out of superstition and idola∣trous devotion to their Idol-gods, See Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. & Godwins Roman Anti∣quities, l. 2. sect. 3. c. 1. to 11. who exacted solemne Stage-playes from them as the most pompous if not seri∣ous part of their idolatrous worship: which Playes (saith Guevara) were dedicated to them by the divine sufferance of the living God, who would that their Idol-gods being but laughing-stockes should be served, honoured and fea∣sted by jeastures, mockes and Playes. The truth of this is evident, not onely by that of Politicorum lib. 7. c. 17. sect. 77. p. 501, 502. Aristotle; who pro∣hibiting the sight of all unchast fabulous Playes or pi∣ctures, and advising the Magistrates to suppresse them; comes in with this exception: Nisi forte apud illos Deos, quibus etiam per leges lascivia illa conceditur, et apud quos sacra facere aetate quidem provectioribus pro se, pro liberis et conjugibus permittitur: by Dionysius Hallicar∣nasseus, Antiqu. Rom. l. 2. c. 5. & 7. c. 9. by Ciero in Verr̄, Act. 6. Oratio de Aruspicum Responsis, p. 524, 526, 527. Oratio 3. in Catilinam, p. 452. b. Where he informes us, that Stage-playes were exacted by, and dedicated to the Roman Gods, who were honoured and attoned by them: by Thucidides Historiae, lib. 3. p. 291. Polybius Historiae l 4, p. 340. C. and Diodorus Siculus Bibl. Hist. l. 4. sect. 56, 7. p. 202. to 206. with sundry other Pagans: and by Act. 1. Scen. 1, 2, 3. See. Hero∣dian Hist. l. 1. p. 29, 31, 55, to 74. & l. 5. p. 267 to 282. St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei lib. 2. c. 4. to 15. & l. 4. c. 20 27. HRabans Maurus l. 2. c. 10. with others Act. 1. Scen. 1, 2, 3. See. Hero∣dian Hist. l. 1. p. 29, 31, 55, to 74. & l. 5. p. 267 to 282. formerly quoted; but by that also which Historiae Rom. l. 9. sect. 30. & lib. 7. s 2, 3. Valerius Max. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 4. Livy and Fastorum l. 6 p. 114. Ovid have recorded of the Romanes: who when as all the Fidlers and Players departed from Rome to Ti∣bur in one discontented company, because the Censors pro∣hibited
them to eate in the Temple of Iove, as they had accustomed: the Senate out of their care to religion (there being no man left in Rome to sing and play before their sacrifices) sent embassadours after them to Tibur, reque∣sting the Tiburtines to doe their best endeavour to per∣swade them to returne to Rome: upon which embassie the Tiburtines sent for these companions into their Senate house, where they first perswaded them to goe backe to Rome; but their intreaties not prevailing, they concluded to make them drunke with wine, Vino (cuius avidum ferme genus est) sopi∣unt &c. Lvie Ibidem. (of which they were very greedy) and then to put them into carts being drunke, and so to carry them backe to Rome; which they did ac∣cordingly. Where upon their returne, the Senate to ob∣taine their good will, restored them to their former pri∣viledges, and withall autorized them to goe freely about the Citty, and to act their solemne Stage-playes every yeare. Vpon which See Polychro∣nicon, l. 3. c. 34. fol. 131. Vola∣teranus, Co∣ment. l. 29. f. 312 313. I. G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, p. 21, 22. Pru∣dentius Contra Symmachum l. 1.2. & Bib. Patr. Tom. 4. p. 910. &c. Valerius Maximus descants thus: Personarum usus pudorem circumventae temulen∣tiae causam habet. Idolatrie therefore, and the L. 2. c. 5. sec. 4. pleasing of Idol-Gods being the chiefe, if not the onely cause why these Pagan Greeks and Romans allowed Playes or Play∣ers; their example grounded on this reason, See 1 Cor. 8. c. 10, 20. to 32. 2 Cor. 6.14. to 18. 1 Ioh. 5.21. See Act. 1. Scen. 1, 2, 3. should rather engage all Christians eternally to detest them, than any wayes to approve them. Thirdly, admit that Stage-plaies were in high estimation among these lasci∣vious vitious Pagans, yet they were See Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. evermore exe∣crable among Christians, who have constantly abandoned them from age to age. It is therefore a great dishonour, a shame, if not a sinne for Christians (who 1 Ioh. 2.6. Rev. 14.4. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Phil. 3.17. Heb. 13.7 1 Cor. 11.1. should follow the footsteps of their blessed Saviour onely, and those who walke as he hath walked; Levit. 18.13. Deur. 12.29, 30. Matth. 6, 7, 8, 31, 32. Eph. 2.2, 3. c. 4.17, 18, 19. Col. 2.20. 1 Pet. 41, 2, 3. 1 Thess. 4.4, 5 See Act. 1. Scene . abandoning all the fashions, wayes and customes of lewd idolatrous Pa∣gans:) to swerve from Christ and primitive Christians as not worthy the following, in this case of Plaies; and to make the worst the most lascivious heathens, the quides and patternes of their actions. Alas, where is our Christianitie, our pietie, our obedience or our love
to Christ, if we chuse rather to imitate the very vices of the lewdest Pagans than the graces, the holinesse of the best Christians? It was the brand, the infamie of the Iewish Nation; Psal. 106.35. 2 Chron. 36.14. that they were mingled among the heathen, and learned their workes: and shall it not be much more ignoble and sinfull for us Christians, to ju∣stifie the lawfulnesse of Stage-playes from the bare ex∣amples of these wicked Pagans? O let it be Mich. 1.10. 2 Sam. 1.20. never be heard in Gath, nor published in Askelon, that any Chri∣stians should grow so atheistically prophane, so stupen∣diously impious, as to preferre the lewd examples of the deboisest heathens, before the unparalleld patternes of their most holy Saviour, and the best of Christians: (alas, what need we run to such precedents of impiety, when as we have better examples nearer hand?) but since all Christian, yea See Act. 6. Scen. 5. & Act. 7. Scene 6, 7 the very best of Pagan Greeks and Romanes have utterly condemned and exploded Stage-playes, the very See Act. 4. Scene 1, 2, 3.worst of Greekes and Romanes onely approving them by their practise, and that to sini∣ster ends: let us rather imitate the best, the wisest of them in abandoning, than the very worst of them in pa∣tronizing, in applauding Stage-playes; for feare we renounce our Christianity, and prove farre worse than the very worst of Pagans ever were. SCENA TERTIA. THe third Objection in the behalfe of Playes is this;Objection 3. See Hay∣woods Apolo∣gie for Actors, where this Ob∣iection is made. that they are not onely commendable but ne∣cessary in a Commonweale; and that in three respects: First, for the solemne entertainment and recreation of forraigne Embassadours, States and Princes: Secondly,
for the solemnizing of festivals and triumphes: Third∣ly for the exhileration and necessary recreation of the people. Therefore they ought to be countenanced, con∣tinued, not suppressed. Answ. 1.To this I shall first reply; that Stage-playes are so far from being commendable or necessary in a Cōmon∣weale, that they are the very greatest mischiefes which can befall it: See Act. 6. Scene 5. & Act. 7. Scene 6, 7. whence the wisest States and Magi∣strates have beene so farre from tollerating, that they have quite discarded them as inconsistent with the publike welfare. So that the very ground of this objection failes, and then the particulars cannot stand, which I shall now examine. For the first of them; that Stage-playes are necessary for the solemne entertainment of Embassa∣dours, and forraigne States; though I will not take up∣on me to define what entertainment will befit such per∣sonages; yet with all humble submission to better judg∣ments, I conceive, that common Stage-playes (to which every cobler, tinker, whore, and base mechanicke may resort from day to day,See Act. 4. Scene 2. as many of them doe) are no meete sports or entertainments for Non adem vulgusque de∣cent et lumina rerum. Ouid, ad Liiam pars 1. p. 323. Christian Princes, States, and Potentates; whose pietie, majestie, gravitie are so transcendent, that they cannot but disdaine the sight, the presence of such ridiculous, infamous, scurri∣lous, childish Spectacles, as common Stage-playes are, which savour neither of state, nor royaltie, but of most abject basenesse, though too many great ones (I know not out of what repects) have vouchsafed to honour them (or Iohn Saris∣bury, De Nu∣gis Curialium, l. 1. c. 7, 8. Bodi∣nus De Repub. l. 6. c. 1. Chry∣sost. Hom. 13. in 1 Cor. Tom. 4. p. 356. accor∣dingly. rather dishonoured themselves) with their presence. For my owne part it is beyond my Creed to beleeve, that Christian Monarches, Peeres, or forraigne Embassadours, who are (at leastwise should be) men of Rom. 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. highest dignity, of Princeps par omnibus, sed in caeteris ma∣ior quo meli∣or. Plin. sec. Pa∣egr. Traiano dictus, p. 18. eminentest piety, severest gravity, deepest wisdome, sublimest spirit, and most so∣ber, Facere recte cives suos prin∣ceps optimus faciendo do∣cet, et cum im∣perio maximus sit, exemplo maior est. Vlleius Pater. Rom. Hist. l.  p. 134. Vita Princis censura est, ea{que} perpeua: ad hanc dirigimur, ad hanc convertimur: nec tam imperio nobis opus est quam exem∣plo, quippe in∣fidelis recti magister est metu. Melius homines ex∣emplis docen∣tur; quae in primis hoc in se boni habent, quod appro∣bant quae prae∣cipiunt fieri posse. Plin. Pa∣negyr. Traiano dict. p. 38. exemplary conversation, without any mixture of
levitie, vanitie, or childish folly, (the least tincture of which in men of supreme ranke, (though it be but in their Nihil est in Rege ferendum ne ludo quidē quod non ap∣tum atque de∣corum sit. Oso∣rius De Regum Instit. lib. 2. f. 35. sports) is Alia est con∣ditio orum qui in turba quam non ex∣cedunt latent: quorum et vir∣tutes ut appa∣reant diu lu∣ctantur, et vi∣tia tenebras habent: vestra facta dictaque rumor excipit, et ideo nulli magis timendum est qualem famam habe∣ant, quam qui qualemcunque habueint magnam habituri sint. Senca de Clemential. 1, c. 8. See Plin. Paneg. Traiano dict. p. 72. no small deformity, no meane ec∣clipse unto their fame) should so farre degenerate, or Summae enim magnitudinis servits est non posse fieri minorem. Seneca De Clementia l. 1. c. 8. descend below themselves, as to admit of common Plaies or Actors, (the See Act. 4. Scene 1. & Act. 6. & 7. throughout.most infamous, scurrilous, igno∣ble pleasures and persons that the world affords) into their royal presence. We know that See Act. 7, Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. many Christian, many Pagan States and Emperours, have long since sen∣tenced, exiled Playes and Players, and that the whole Church of God, with all faithfull Christians from age to age have execrated and cast them out, as the very grea∣test grievances, shames and cankerwormes both of Church and State: We know, that 4 H. 4, c. 27. 3 H. 8, c. 9, 34, & 35 H. 8, c. 2. 1 Ed. 6, c. 1.14 Eliz. c. 5.39 Eliz. c. 4.3 Iacobi c. 21. & 1 Caroli c. 1. many publike Acts of Parliaments, even of this our Realme, have branded Players with the very name, the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and condemned Stage-playes as unlawfull Pastimes. And can any one then be so brainsicke, so shamelesse to affirme, that these anathematized hea∣thenish Spectacles, these stigmatized varlets, (which all times, all Christians, all men of gravity and wis∣dome have disdained as the most lewd infamous per∣sons, are fit to entertaine the noblest Princes, or to ap∣peare before them in their royall Pallaces, at times of greatest state? Certainly as A∣quila magnas praedas, non muscas; leo lupos, non mures capit. Case Polit. l. 2. c. 5. p. 136. Eagles scorne to stoope at flies, or as magnanimous lions disdaine to chace a mouse; even so those generous Christian Monarches, who have cast out Playes and Actors as intollerable mischiefes in their meanest Citties; will AEquum quidem est ut quam quis in alios legem statuit, andem etiam ipse non gra∣vatim subat. Diodorus Sic. Bibl. Hist. l. 13. sect. 30, page 494. never so farre grace them,
as to deeme them worthy to approach their Courts, as necessary ornaments and attendants, on dayes of most solemnitie. It was King Davids godly protestation; Psal. 101.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. that he would set no wicked thing before his eyes; that the worke of those who turned aside should not cleave unto him: That a froward heart should depart from him, and that he would not know a wicked person: who so privi∣ly slandereth his neighbour, him (saith he) will I cut off: him that hath an high looke and a proud heart, I will not suffer: he that worketh deceit shall not dwell in my house; he that telleth lies shall not tarrie in my sight, &c. Cer∣tainlie, there is never a true Christian Prince or Poten∣tate this day living, but is, but must, or ought to be of Davids mind, 1 Sam 13, 14. Acts 13, 22. he being a man after Gods owne heart: therefore hee can never suffer Stage-plaies, which are wicked, lewd and heathenish Pastimes; or common Actors, (who are See Act. 4, Scene 1, 2. perverse, yea froward, wicked, proud, deceitfull, slanderous, lying persons in the highest degree) to come into his presence, or harbour in his pallace. Prov. 20.8, 26 See Rom. 13.3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. A King that sitteth in the throne of judge∣ment (saith the wisest King) scattereth all evill with his eyes: yea,See Gual∣ther, Hom. 11, in Nahum, p. 214, 215. A wise King scattereth the wicked, and bring∣eth the wheele over them, Prov. 20.8, & 26. Needs there∣fore must a just, a prudent Christian Prince, abandon Playes and Players from before his eyes, the one being the Act 6, Scene 5. greatest evills to a State: the other, the See Act. 4 Scene 1. very worst and most infamous men. It is true indeed,See Suetonii Caligula, sect. 18, 19, 20, 52, 54, 55. Nero, sect. 12, 13, 20, 23, 25, 26, 30, 32. Philo Iu∣daeus De Lega∣tione ad Caiū, p. 1342, o 1351 & the Authors forequoted, p. 144. that some dissolute Roman Emperors, as be∣fore: and those other quoted in the margent, p. 144, letter . See Plinius Secundus Panegyr. Traia∣no dict. p. 38, & 45. where he much inveighes against them. Caligula, Nero, He∣liogabalus, Carinus, and others, have beene much ena∣moured with Playes and Actors: but this was onely the blot, the infamie of these shames of Monarchy, as De Legatione ad Caium, pag. 1342, to 1358. Philo Iudaeus, Epistle 12, to Lambert. Marcus Aurelius, Satyr. 8. Iuvenal, De Nugis Curialium l. 1, c. 7, 8. Iohn Sarisbery, and their Suetonius qua owne Historians witnesse: who have recorded it onelie for their greater shame: Iuvenal. Satyr. 8. Iohn Sarisbury De Nugis Curialium, l. 1, c. 7. Polychronicon l. 4, c. 9. Res
haud mira tamen cytharaedo Principe mimus, Nobilis &c. being the sole encomium, that they have lest behind them for it. Their examples therefore can be no good argument to second this objection, especially since See Act. 6. Scene 5. & Act. 7. Scene 7. & Pin. Panegyr. Traiano dict. p. 38, 45. the best Roman Senators, Monarches, both Pagan and Christian have exiled Stage-players, and suppressed Playes, as even Nero himselfe (who See Iohan. Saisbur. De Nugis Curia∣lium l. 1. c. 7. & Suetonii Nero, sect. 20. to 31. was most devo∣ted to them, and most honoured Players) was Suetoni Ne∣ro, sect. 16. Mar∣cus Aurelius cap. 14. Plinius Secundus, Pa∣negyr. Traiano dict. p. 38, 45. Alexander ab Alexandro l. 6. c. 9. at last enforced to doe, by reason of those intollerable oft-complai∣ned mischiefes which they did occasion. I confesse, that many Christian Writers both of ancient and moderne times, and among sundry others whom I spare to men∣tion, See-Vincentius Speculum Historiale l. 29. c. 41. See here p. 471, 472. Vincentius, Historiae lib. 15. cap. 31, 34. Olaus Magnus, Hinc enim mimi, salii, balatones, ae∣miliani, gladiatores, palestritae, gignadii, praestigiatores, malefici quoque multi, et tota ioculatorum scena procedit. Quorum adeo error invaluit, ut a praeclaris domibus non arceantur, etiam illi qui obscaenis partibus corporis, oculis mnium eam ingerunt turpitudinem, quam rubescat videre vel Cynicus. Quodque magis mirere, nec tunc eiiciuntur, quando tumultuantes inferius crebro sonitu aerem faedant, et turpiter in∣clusum, turpius produnt. Nun quid tibi videtur sapiens qui oculos vel aures istis ex∣pandit? De Nugis Curialium, l. 1. c. 8. se. 4. & 7. Iohn Sarisbe∣ry, and Regis ncuriam sequuntur assidue, hi∣striones candidatrices, aleatores, dulcoraii, caupones, nebulatores, mimi, balatrones, id genus omne. Epist. 14. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 714. B. See Epist. 85. p. 769. E. Peter de Bloyes, rchdeacon of Bath (two an∣cient English Writers; Magna peccandi facultas sequitur principatum: adest irritamentum gulae, copia vi∣ni, et lautae gloria mensae; assunt corruptores, adulatores, ioculatores, histriones, qui acem adolescentiae undique nituntur expugnare. Quod si tempus disserendi daretur, monstrarem, omnes homines stultos esse qui vitam habentes aliam in qua possint ho∣neste vivere, in curis principum se praecipitant. Ideo vos tantum moneo, ut agrum hunc histriones et adulatores, ac alios nebulones metere sinatis, quinigrum in candida vertunt; nullus enim viis bonis apud principes locu, nulla emolumenta labo∣rum &c. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 105. p. 604. & Epist. 166. p. 711. See p. 723, 726, 727. AEnaeas Sylvius (afterwards Pope Pius the 2) and Mr. Com∣prehenduntur ergo hoc titulo molles et delicatuli, omnes{que} voluptarum illicitarum ministri sive artifices, quales sunt mimi, ludiones, circulatores, cantores, cytharaedi, parasiti, lenones, et his omnibus deterioribus eunuchi, spardones, atque cynaedi. Solent tales regum magnorum aulas, et urbes celebriores frequentare, eo quod in illis quae∣stum uber im sibi propositum videant &c. Hom. 11. in Nahum pag. 214, 21. See here pag. 479, 480, 481. Radolphus Gualther,
have publikely complained and bewailed in their wri∣tings; that Stage-players, Tomblers, Fidlers, Singers, Iesters, and such like idle persons, have followed Princes Courts, and haunted great mens houses; that they have there found accesse and harbour, when as experienced, ver∣tuous, well-deserving men, have beene excluded, contem∣ned, and sent away without reward; these caterpillars and pests of the commonweale, not onely anticipating in the meane while their charity to the poore, their bounty to men to best desert, but even exhausting their treasures, depra∣ving their manners, fomenting their uices to the publike prejudice, and their owne eternall perdition: But this they censure as their shame, their folly and oversight, not their praise; as did St. Chrysostome long agoe, whose words I would these Objectors would observe: Vis enim alia audire quae eo∣rum ostendant dementiam? Quaenam au∣tem sunt illa? Theatra con∣gregant, et me∣retrcum cho∣ros illic indu∣centes, et pue∣ros scortantes, et qui iniuria ipsam afficiunt naturam; to∣tum populum in loco superio∣re faciunt con sidere. Sic civi∣tatem recrean∣tes; sic magnos reges, quos semper propter trophaea et vi∣ctorias admirantur, coro∣nantes. Atqui quid est hoc honore frigi∣dius? Quid vo∣luptate illa in∣iucundius? Ex his ergo quaeris factorum tuo∣rum ladato∣res? et cum sal∣tatoribus, mol∣libu et mimis, et meretrici∣bus, vis dic quaeso, lauda∣i? Et quomodo haec non fuerint extremae dementiae? At sunt, inquis, infames. Cur ergo per infames reges honoras? Cur civitates enecas? Cur autem in eos tam multa im∣pendis? Nam si sunt infames, infames oportet expelli: nā cur eos fecisti infames? &c. Hom. 13. in 1 Cor. 4. Tom. 4. Col. 356. B, C, D. Wilt thou heare againe (saith he) some other things which shew the folly and madnesse of these wise Law-gi∣vers? They gather together Players & Theatres, & bring in thither troopes of harlots, of adulterous youthes &c. making all the people to sit on scaffolds over them: Thus recreate they the Citty; thus doe they crowne great Kings, whose victorious trophees they admire. But alas what is more cold than this honour? What more unplea∣sant than this pleasure? Doest thou then seeke applauders of thy actions among these? Tell me, I pray thee, wilt thou be praised with dancers, with effeminate persons, Stage-players, whores? And how can this be but the very ex∣tremity of folly and frenzie? But thou wilt say, these are infamous persons. Why then doest thou honour Kings, why doest thou murther Citties by such who are infa∣mous? Why doest thou bestow so much upon them? For if they are infamous, they ought to be cast out, &c. It is therefore no lesse then madnesse, then extremest folly in
St. Chrysostomes judgement, to honour, to Court Kings or great ones with Playes or common Actors: and a farre greater frenzie is it for such to foster, to applaud them, and to be praised by them;Praetereo Hi∣striones aque ioculatores, et totius vulgi laudes, quas vr prudens pro nihilo reputa∣bit: quia nulla est vera laus, nisi a veris pro∣veniat lauda∣tis. AEneas Syl∣uius Epist. l. 1 Epist. 166. pag. 723. See Plin. Paneger. Traiano dictus p. 45. because no true praise can proceed from any, but such who really deserve applause themselves. Adde we to him the verdict of laborious Gualther, Magnum er∣go corruptae et eversae disci∣plinae argu∣mentum est, quod hodie in regum auli et civitatibus opulentis, mi∣mi, udiones, molliculi, et voluptatum in∣honestissima∣rum ministri summo in pre∣tio habentur, exclusis inte∣rim et con∣temptis viris gravibus, qui consilio valent, et qui muti∣plici rerum ex∣perientia in∣structi sunt; ut interim de pauperibus et egenis nihil dicam quibus principum aulas ne inspicere quiem licet, et quibus per urbes opulentiores vix transitus conceditur. Hom. 11. in Nahm p. 224, 225. who reputes it an argument of corrupted, of everted discipline, that at this day Players, Iesters, effeminate persons, and furtherers of most dishonest plea∣sures are in great request in Princes Courts and in great cities, &c. which he there proves at large. To him I shal annex that notable passage of Olaus Magnus to the like purpose, well worth all Princes, all Players and Play-haunters most serious consideration: in his Historiae l. 15. c. 31. De Histrionibus et Mimis. Where he writes thus.So stiles he the profession of a Stage-player. Nemo miretur quod hac etiam pessima occupatione replt sit haec chartula pusilla, nempe talibus hominum generibus, quorum numeus est infinitus, et tantae repu∣tationis in curijs et mensis sublimium Dominorum, ut fere vel nullum vel exiguum credatur adesse solatium praeter unicum hoc quod emanat ab infamibus his Proto∣mimis. Refert Trebellius, Ga∣lienm. See here p. 465. Galerum in tantum dilexisse scurras et parasitos, et id genus infamiae hominum, ut po∣neret eos in secunda sua mensa. Si consilium Suetonii Octavius, sect. 45. See here p. 459, 460. Suetonij locus habuisset, tales mimi publico spectaculo virgis et flagris caesi, remotiusque effugati fuissent: quod et Vincen∣tius in speculo. Historiae lib. 29. c. 41. de rege Galliae Phi∣lippo attestatur; quem asserit dixisse, Histrionibus da∣re est daemonibus immolari, &c. And cap. 34. De abjecta commendatione Mimorum, et utili laude prudentium: where he thus expresseth himselfe. Sed nec ignotum u∣niversis relinquitur, QVANTA IGNOMINIA PRIN∣CIPIEVS SIT, aut laudis cupidis à talibus commenda∣ri,
The professi¦on and end of Stage-players, what it is. quorum praecipua professio est infamibus colludere, turpibusque colloquijs bonos mores corrumpere, eos{que} effae∣minatos efficere, a libidinosos reddere et luxuriosos; prae∣terea comaediarum more adulteria et stupra representare vel concinnere, unde spectandi enascatar voluptas et con∣suetudo, ac turpissima quaeque faciendi licentia perniciosa, et denique ad omnium virorum gravium obmutescere rationem et censuram. Cujus rei testis est illa Plutarchi Cato. Mas∣siliensis meretrix, quae in actu publico prostans vestem{que} deducens, gravi Catone vis descendere in Spectaculum, à gestu se statim continuit, et alijs mirantibus, ait, seve∣rum virum adesse: qua quidem voce ostendit, longe pluris esse Aliquis vir bonus nobis eligendus est, ac semper ante oculos haben∣dus, ut sic tan∣quam illo spe∣ctante viva∣mus, et omnia tanquam illo vidente facia∣mus: nec imme∣rito. Magna e∣nim pars pec∣catorum tolli∣tur, si peccatu∣ris testis assi∣stat. Senec E∣pis. 11. Vid. Ibid. gravissimi viri aspectum, quàm totius populi applausum. Quocircà, etsi cuncti, maxime principes lau∣dari appetant, TAMEN INTIME CAVEANT, ne id pro∣curant vel admittant fieri AB HISTRIONIBVS ET PROTOMIMIS NISI SIMILES ILLIS AESTIMA∣RI ET FORSAN ESSE VOLVNT. Vera enim laus ha∣beri debet, quae à laudato viro proficiscitur, quia à tali viro emanat qui virtute praeditus cum laude venit. Sed haec peramplius verior esse judicatur, quae ex rectè factis et justis meritis, multitudinis etiam laude oncurrente pro∣cedit: alioquin nihil aliud nisi popularem auram aut scurrarum fucum captant: quo nihil instabilius aut de∣testabilius inveniri potest. Igitur attendendum erit uni∣cuique, Nota bene. MAXIME PRINCIPI in sublimiori dignitate constituto, ne sic scurrarum, mimorum, histrionum, pro∣tomimorum brevi tempore delectetur spectaculis, uti im∣memor salutis, perdito tempore, honore, laude, et bone no∣mine in uno momento rapiatur ad aeterna tormenta, quae ab immundis spiritibus forsitan in umbra et forma histri∣onum apparentebus et flagellantibus importunius sustine∣bit; sentietque perpetuo flendum esse cum diabolis, sicuti in momentanea vita inconsideratè risit cum stultis. Ex∣clamandum hîc merito foret contra quosdam alti nominis viros, in sublimitate constitos, qui pro summa voluptate ducunt, scurras videre et adire, nudas mulierum See here p. 387. pi∣cturas
intueri, et ijs delectari, atque alijs praebere viden∣das; quasi propria caro, mundus, et daemonia non suffice∣rent ad infatuandum hominem, creatum ad imaginem Dei, ni et studiose in suam irreparabilem damnationem excitarent tot importunatissimos hostes, ignorantes ver∣bum beati Gregorij, dicentis; Talem te ostendis in corde diligere, qualem imaginem ante te geris in oculis, &c. All which recited premises, together with that memora∣ble See here p. 462. fore-mentioned worthy speech of the Emperor Trajan to a Courtier, who intreated him to heare an active Player: and that private advice of Macro, unto Caius the Emperour; Philo Iudae∣us, De Legati∣one ad Caiū, p. 1341, 1342, 1343. insane spectantem saltatores ità ut unà gesticularetur, aut ad mimorum scurrilia di∣cteria non subridentem, sed cachinnantem pueriliter &c. who whispered thus into his eare, ne quis audiret ali∣us, blandè admonens: Non decet te alijs audiendo spe∣ctandoque et usu caeterorum sensuum esse similem, sed tantum debes in ratione vivendi excellere, quantò emi∣nentiorem te fortuna constituit: absurdum enim fuerit terrae marisque principem, cantibus, cavillis, et hujusmodi ludis succumbere: oportet illum semper et ubique memi∣nisse majestatis imperatoriae, tanquam pastorem gregi prae∣positum, et undicunque dictis factisque in melius proficis∣cere: (a good lesson for this scandalous, ignoble, disso∣lute Emperour, who was not onely a spectator, an ap∣plauder, but sometimes Dion Cas∣sius, Rom. Hist. l. 59. p. 829. & here p. 462. an actor too of Masques and Stage-playes to his eternall shame:) are sufficient to disprove this crack-brain'd frentique Objection of an infamous Player; That Stage-playes are necessary pa∣stimes for the recreation, the solemne entertainment of Christian Princes, States, Embassadours, Nobles; whose majesty, whose greatnes cannot but disdain such base infamous spectacles, which make their See Act. 4. Scene 1. & Act. 7. Scene 3. Actors and Spectators infamous. Certainly he who shall reade the Marcus Au∣relius Epist. 12. Guevara, Diall of Princes, l. 3. c. 45. to 48. Epistle of Marcus Aurelius, unto Lambert; the Pag 38.45. here p. 462, 463 Panegyricke of C. Plinius Secundus, to the m∣peror Trajan: the answer of Plutarchi La∣con. Apotheg∣mata p. 462. Agesilaus, to Calli∣pides
the expert tragicke Player; (who saluting this royall King, and thrusting himselfe into his presence, expecting and hoping that this noble Prince would have taken some speciall notice of him, and spoken kindly to him; and then perceiving that he slighted him, demanded of him; Doest thou not know me ô King, and hast thou not heard whom I am? who looking upon him, returned him no other reply but this, Art not thou Callipides the Player? intima∣ting, that Kings should wholly contemne such lewd infa∣mous persons as not worthy their least respect:) or Guevara his Diall of Princes, lib. 3. c. 43. to 48. & Act. 6. Scene 5. Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 6. will presently adjudge all Stage-playes, all Actors, unworthy a Pagan, how much more then a Christian Emperours, Kings or Princes royall presence; who have farre more honourable, maje∣stique, heroicke sports and exercises to refresh them∣selves withall: as tilting Barriers, Iusts, and such like martiall feates, (the See Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 453. Halls Chronicle, part 2. fol. 5, 6, 7, 155, 156. & 75. to 85. ancient solemne festivall enter∣tainments of Kings and Nobles, wherein our warlike Matthew Pa∣ris, p. 802, 819. Thomas Wal∣fingam, Hist. Angl. p. 112. Halls Chroni∣cle, part 2. f. 76. to 85. English Nation have farre excelled others;) with an hundred such like laudable exercises, avouring both of royalty, valour, and activity; which if they were now revived insteed of effeminate, amorous, wanton See Act. 5. Scene 8. dan∣ces, Enterludes, Masques and Stage-playes, See Act. 6. throughout. effemi∣nacy, idlenesse, adultery, whoredome, ribaldry and such other lewdnesse would not be so frequent in the world as now they are. But admit this idle surmise as true as it is fabulous, it then administers a pregnant argument a∣gainst all common Stage-playes: for if Stage-playes be meet ornaments for Princes pallaces at times of greatest state and royallest entertainment, great reason is there to suppresse their daily acting, and to appropriate them to such times, such places, such purposes as these, Vsu enim prae∣ciosa degene∣rant, quorum autem difficilis possessio, eo∣rum grata per∣functio. Ambr. De Elia et Ieiu∣nio, c 9 Natura∣le est potius no∣va quam mag∣na mirari. Ita enim composi∣ti sumus, ut nos quotidiana si admiratione digna sunt, transeant; con∣tra minimarum quoque rerum si insolitae pro∣dieunt specta∣culum dulce fiat. Seneca Naturalium Qust. l. 7. c. 1. for feare their assiduity, their cōmonnes should make the Ne Numidiae quidem reges vituperandi, qui more gentis suae nulli mortalium osculum ferebant. Quicquid enim in excelso fastigio positū est, humili t trita consuetudine quo it venerabilius, vacuū esse convenit. Valer. Max. l. 2. c. 6. s. 17. de∣spitably
base and altogether unmeet for such sublime occa∣sions. Extraordinary royall occasions, persons, enter∣tainments will not suite with common prostituted En∣terludes, which every tinker, cobler, foot-boy, whore or rascall may resort to at their pleasure, as they doe unto our Stage-playes; which as they are every mans for his penny, so they are every dayes Pastime too, at every roguish Play-house. And are such common hacknie Enterludes, thinke you, fit for high-dayes, for Princes Courts and presence? If therefore you will exalt these sordid Stage-playes to such sublime imployments as you here pretend, you must now shut up our standing Play-houses, and sequester all Stage-playes from the vul∣gar crew, appropriating them onely to some certaine so∣lemne publike festivities, and times of royall entertain∣ment, (as the See Act. 2. Dionys. Halli∣carnass. Antiq. Rom. l. 7. sect. 9. Dion Cassius, Rom. Hist. l. 59. p. 829. Polybi∣us Hist. lib. 4. p. 340. Guevara, Diall of Prin∣ces, l. 3. c. 43, 44 Arias Monta∣nus in Iudicum l. c. 16. p. 567. to 575. ancient Greekes and Romans did; who had no constant (much lesse any private) Enterludes acted day by day, but onely publike Stage-playes, at times of publike triumph, or on the great solemne Feast-dayes of their Idol-gods, to whom they were devoted:) that so their Omne rarum praecio∣sum: gaudeo i∣taque de illis posse esse, qui quanto rario∣res, tanto appa∣rebunt esse glo∣riosiores. Bern. Ep. 1. f. 178. A. Ardentiu appetitur quic∣quid est rarius. Hierom. advers. Vigilantium cap. 4. Volup∣tates commen∣dat rarior usus. Iuvenal Satyr. 11. p. 111. raritie may ennoble them to such royall services as are pretended, when as their Hoc stabunt, hoc sunt imi∣tandi quos n∣que pulcher Hermogenes unquam legit, neque Simius iste. Nil prae∣ter Calvum, et doctus cantare Catullum. Haec ego ludo, Quae neque in aede sonant, certantia iudice Tarpa, Nec redeant erum atque iterum spectanda theatris. Horat. Ser. l. . Sat. 10. p. 19. assiduous commonnesse hath now made thē & their Actors base; too base (I dare say) for any Princes presence, when as they deeme them∣selves highly honoured, with the very meanest varlets. To the second clause of this Objection, That Stage-playes are necessary for the true solemnizing of our Sa∣viours Nativitie, and other such solemne Christian Fe∣stivalls; it is so diametrally opposite unto truth, above 40 severall Councels, besides Fathers and other Chri∣stian Writers professedly contradicting it, (See Act. 6. Scene 12. & Act. 7. Scene 3.) that I cannot so much as name it but with highest indignation. Alas into what atheisticall heathenish times are we now relapsed, into
what a stupendious height of more than Pagan impiety are we now degenerated, when as Stage-playes (the very See Act 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. & Chorus. chiefest pompes and ornaments of the most exe∣crable pagan Idols festivities) are thought the necessary appendants of our most Qualis haec religio, aut quanta maie∣stas putanda est, quae ado∣ratur in tem∣plis, illuditur in theatris? Et qui haec fece∣rint, non pae∣nas violati numinispendunt, sed honorati etiam laudati∣que discedunt. Lactan. De Iu∣sitia l. 5. c. 16. holy Christian solemnities? when as we cannot sanctifie a Lords-day, observe a fift of November, or any other day of publike thanksgi∣ving to our gracious God, nor yet celebrate an Easter, a Pentecost, or such like solemne Feasts, (much lesse a Christmasse, as we phrase it) in a plausible pious sort, (as too many Non imitan∣di nobis sunt qui sub Chri∣stiano nomine Gentilem vitā agunt, et aliud professione, a∣liud conversa∣tione testantur. Hierom. Epist. 14. c. 2. paganizing Christians now conceit) without drinking, roaring, healthing, dicing, carding, dancing, Masques and Stage-playes? which better be∣come the sacrifices of Bacchus, than the resurrection, the incarnation of our most blessed Saviour, Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p. 130. Mr. Samuel Bird his Dia∣logue, of the use of the plea∣sures of this present life. London 1580. p. 15. to 31. & Nicolaus de Clemangis, De Novis celebritatibus non instituendis, p. 143 o 154. which are most execrably prophaned, most unchristianly disho∣noured with these Bacchanalian pastimes. What pious Christian heart bleedes not with teares of blood, when he beholds the sacred Nativitie of his spotlesse Saviour, transformed into a festivitie of the foulest Divels? when he shall see his blessed Iesus, Matth. 9.13. Tit. 2 14. who came to redeeme, to call men from their sinnes, and Hebr. 10.29. c. .6. Re. 1.7. to purifie unto him∣selfe a peculiar people zealous of good workes; entertai∣ned, honoured, courted, served like a Divell, yea rather Hebr. 10.29. c. .6. Re. 1.7. crucified and nailed to his crosse againe, with nought else but desperate notorious sinnes by an unchristian crew of Christians, (I might say Nomine Christiani re Pagani. Bernard in Vita Sancti Malachia. Pagans, o Iohn 8 44. Ephes. 2.2.1 ohn 3.8. in∣carnate Divels) who during all the sacred time of his Nativity, when they should be most holy, are more especially and that professedly too a most impure peo∣ple, zeaous of nothing but of Stage-playes, dicing, dan∣cing healthing, riotng, and such evill workes, as would make the very See Salvian De Gubern. Dei, l. 4. p. 136, 137, 138. & my Healths Sicknesse, p. 21. lewdest Pagans to blush for shame.
Propterea i∣gitur publici hostes Chrii∣ani quia impe∣ratoribus ne{que} vanos, neque mentientes, ne∣que emearios honores di∣cāt, qui a verae religionis ho∣mines etiam solennia o∣rum conscien∣tia potius quā lascivia cele∣brant. Grande scilicet offici∣um socos et thoros in pub∣licum educere, vicatim epula∣ri, civitatem tabernae habitu oboleacere, vino lutum co∣gere, aterva∣tim cursitare ad iniurias, ad impudentias, ad libidinis illecebras? Siccine exprimitur publicum gadium per publicum dedecus? Haeccine so∣lennes diesprincipum decent, quae alios dies non decent? Qui observant disciplinam de Caesaris respectu, ii eam propter Caesarem deserunt, et malorum licentia pietas erit; occasio luxuriae religio deputabitur? O nos merito damnandos! cur enim vota et gaudia Caesarum expungimus? ur dielaeto nos laureis postes adumbramus? nec lu∣cernis dim infringimus? Honesta res est solennitate publica exigente inducere do∣mui tuae habitum alicuius novi lupanaris. Tertul. Apologia adversus Gents, cap. 30, 31. Tom. 2. pag. 682. Which may be most aptly applied to our Christmase. Is this the honour, the entertainment, the gratitude, the holy service, the welcome we render to our Savi∣our, for his Nativity, his incarnation or his passion, to court him thus with heathenish Playes or hellish pa∣stimes, as if he were no other, no better than a Pagan Idol or infernall Divel, who were alwayes wrshipped, courted with such solemne Enterludes? Are 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. Christ and Belial (thinke we) reconciled? or is there no diffe∣rence betweene our Saviours Nativity, and a Divel-I∣dols birth-day, that we thus commemorate them in the selfesame manner? For how did the See here Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. & Act. 5. Scene 8. & Holkot Lectio 172. in Lib. Sapientiae, fol. 133. idoltrous Gentiles honour, or please their Iupiter, Venus, Flora, Apollo, Berecynthea, Bachus, and such like Divel-gods upon their gaudiest feast-dayes, but with healthing, dan∣cing, Masques and Stage-playes; the very workes and pompes of Satan, invented for, appropriated to these I∣dols service, as I have largely proved? and how doe we Christians spend or celebrate for the most part, the Nativity of our Saviour, but with such heathenish sports as these, which Turkes and Infidels would ab∣horre to practise? Quis unquam crederet uque in hanc contumeliam Dei pro∣gressuram esse humanae bupiditais audaciam, ut id ipsum in quo Christo inuiam faciunt, dicunt e ob Christi nomen esse facturos. O inaestimabile sacinus et prodi∣gioum Salvian De Gubern. Dei l. 4. p. 134.O wickednes, O prophanesse beyond all expression! even thus to abuse our Saviours solemne birth-time, as to make it a patronage for all kinde of sinne! Were wee to celebrate the very foulest Idol-Divels birth-day (as Iohn 8.44. Ephes. 2.. many wretches doe in deedes, whiles
they solemnize Christs in shew) how could we please or honour him more, than to court him with lascivious Masques or Stage-playes, (an See Act. 1. Scene 1, 2, 3. invention of and for himselfe, which he hath oft exacted from his worshippers upon his solemne festivals:) or to give him the very selfesame welcome that most men give to Christ, in the feast of his Nativity; when the Divell hath commonly more professed publike service done him, than all the yeare beside? For may I not truly write of our English Citties, and Country villages in the Christmas season, as Salvian did of Rome: De Gubern Dei l. 7. p. 258, 259. Video quasi scaturientem vitijs civitatem; video urbem omnium iniquitatum generi servi∣entem, plenam quidem turbis, sed magis turpitudini∣bus: plenam divitijs, sed magis vitijs: vincentes se in∣vicem homines nequitia flagitiorum suorum, alios im∣puritate certantes, alios vino languidos, alios cruditate distentos, hos sertis redimitos, illos unguento oblitos, cun∣ctos vano luxus marcore perditos, sed penè omnes una er∣rorum morte prostratos: non omnes quidem vinolentia temulentos, sed omnes tamen peccatis ebrios. Populos putares non sani status, non sui sensus, non animo incolu∣mes, non gradu, quasi in morem baccharum crapulae catervatim inservientes &c. Those who are tempe∣rate and abstemious at all other times, prove Epi∣cures and drunkards then. Those who make con∣science to Ephes. 5.16. redeeme all other seasons, deeme it a Fiunt etiam nunc et delicta religiosa. Cy∣prian Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2. Donato. point of Christianity to mispend all this, Exod. 326. 1 Cor. 10.7. eating, drinking, and rising up to play, whole dayes and nights together. Those who are civill at other seasons, will be now deboist; and such who were but soberly dissolute before (if I may so speak) will be now stark mad, forget∣ting not onely their Saviour but themselves. Those who repute it a shame to be unruly disorderly any other part of the yeare; thinke it an honour to be outragiously dis∣ordered and distempered now, Detrimen∣tum iam dies senti. Sunt qui officia lu∣cis noctis{que} pervertunt, nec ante diducunt oculos hester∣na graves cra∣pula, quam ap¦petere nox cae∣pit. Qualis il∣lorum conditio dicitur, quo natura (ut ait Virgiius) pedi∣bus nostris sub∣ditos e contra∣rio posuit, Nos∣que ubi primus equis oriens, afflavit anhe∣lis, Illis sera rubens accen∣dit lumina ves∣per. Tais ho∣rum contraria omnibus non regio sed vita est. Sunt qui∣dam in eadem urbe Antipodes, qui nec orientem solem unquam viderunt, nec occi∣dentem. Hos u exisimas scire quemad modum vivendum est, qui nesciunt quando? Et hi mortem timent, in quā se vivi condide∣runt? tam iu∣fausti ominis quam noctur∣nae cives sunt. Licet in vino unguentoque tenebras suas exigant, licet epulis, et in multa quidem fercula disten∣tis, totum per∣versae vigiliae tempus didu∣cant, non con∣vivantur, sed iusta sibi faci∣unt. Mortuis certe interdiu parentantur, &c. Seneca Ep. 122. Vid. Ibi∣dem. turning day into
night, and night into day, against the course of nature, like Seneca his Antipodes, setting no bounds to any lust. That which is not tollerable at other times seemes laudable unto most men now: that which were it done at any other season could not but be condemned as an execrable sinne, becomes now a vertue, at least a veni∣all crime. In a word, those who make a kinde of con∣science of drinking, amarous dancing, healthing, dicing, idlenesse, Stage-playes, and of every sinne at other times Nunc facili∣us invenias re∣os malorm omnium, quam non omnium: facilius maio∣rum criminum quam mino∣rum: id est, fa∣cilius qui et maiora crimi∣na cum mino∣ribus, quam qui minora tantum sine maioribus per∣petrant. In hanc enim morum probrositatem prope omnis Ecclesiastica plebs redacta est; ut in cuncto populo Christiano genus quodammodo sanctitatis sit, minus esse vitiosum &c. Salvian De Gue. Dei l. 3. p. 86. deeme it a part of their piety to make no bones of these, of any deboistnesse or prophanesse now: those who are constant in religious familie-duties, now dis∣continue them; those who remembred their Saviour and sinnes before, now quie forget them: those who seemed Saints before, turne Divels incarnate now: those who were reasonable men before, are metamorphosed into beasts or monsters now: those who were former∣ly good at least in outward shew, doe now turne bad; and all who were bad before, prove now tentimes worse; & all under this pretence of solemnizing Christs Nativitie, as if he were delighted onely with their sins. Thus doe we even crucifie our blessed Saviour in his very cradle, and like that [v] Tyrant Herod, seeke to take away his life, as soone as he is born, whiles we thus impi∣ously celebrate & prophane his birth, & evē pierce him through with these grosse disorders which are now too frequent among many Christians. Should Turkes & In∣dels behold our Bacchanaliā Christmas extravagancies, would they not thinke our Saviour to be a glutton, an Epicure, a wine-bibber, a Divell, a friend of publicanes and sinners, as the Luke 7.34. Matth. 9.3, 4. Iohn 7.20. Iewes once stiled him; yea a very Bacchus a God of all dissolutenesse, drunkennesse and disorder, since his Nativitie is thus solemnized by his followers, who are never so dissolutely, so exorbitantly deboist in all kindes, as in this his festivall? Would they
not take up that speech in Salvian. De Guberna∣tione Dei l. 4. p. 137, 138. Ecce quales sunt qui Christum colunt? falsum plane illud est quod ai∣unt se bona discere, quod jactant se sanctae legis praecepta retinere. Si enim bona discerent, boni essent. Talis pro∣fecto secta est, quales et sectatores: hoc sunt absque dubio quod docentur. Apparet itaque Prophetas quos habent impuritatem docere, et Apostolos quos legunt nefaria sensisse, et Evangelia quibus imbuuntur haec quae ipsi faci∣unt praedicare. Postremo sancta à Christianis fierent, si Christus sancta docuisset. AEstimari itaque de cultoribus suis potest ille qui colitur. Quomodo enim bonus magister est, cujus tam malos videmus esse discipulos? Ex ipso e∣nim Christiani sunt, ipsum audiunt, ipsum legunt: promptum est omnibus Christi intelligere doctrinam. Vide Christianos quid agant, et evidenter potest de ipso Christo sciri quid doceat. Would they not condemne our God, our Saviour, our religion, and loath both thm, and us? qui ita agimus ac vivimus, ut hoc ipsum quod Christianus populus esse dicitur, opprobrium Chri∣sti esse videatur;Salvian Ibi∣dem p. 136, 137, 134. as the same Father speakes. O inaesti∣mabile facinus et prodigiosum! Quid non ausae sint im∣probae mentes, in the Christmas season? Armant se ad peccandum per Christi nomen; auctorem quodammodo sui sceleis Deum faciunt: et cum interdictor ac vindex malorum omnium Christus sit, dicunt se scelus quod agunt agere pro Christo. Such are our gracelesse unchristian Christmas lives: who when as our Saviour daily cries unto us: Matth. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven: we on the contrary live so in the Christ∣mas season, (that I speake not of other times) that the sonnes of men, that Infidels and Pagans may openly be∣hold our evill workes, and blasphem ou Father our most blessed Saviour, who is now grieving in heaven, whiles we are thus dishonouring his Nativitie here on earth. And should not our hearts then smie us, should not shame confound us all for this our heinous sinne?
for this our indignity to our blessed Lord and Saviour, who never findes worse entertainmen in the world than in the feast of his Nativity, when he expects the best? O let us now at length remember, that our holy Saviour was borne into the world for this very pur∣pose, Matth. 9.13. Titus 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. to redeeme and call us from (not to) those sinnes and sinfull pleasures; 1 Iohn 3.5, 8.to destroy out of us (not to erect within us) those very workes and pompes of Satan, which now we more especially practise at his sacred birth∣tide: as if he were borne to no other purpose, but to set hell loose, to give a liberty to all kinde of wicked∣nesse, and to prove a meere broker (for such a one men then make him) to the very Divell. Did we but seri∣ously consider and beleeve, that our Saviour Christ was for this end borne into the world; Tit. 2.14. 1 Iohn 1.7.9. Rev. 1.5. Heb. 9.14. that hee might purifie and wash s both from the guilt, and power of all our sinnes in his most precious blood: Ephes. 5.26, 27. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. that hee might sanctifie and cleanse us with the washing of water by the word from all iniquitie, and present us to himselfe a glorious Church without any spot or wrinkle: Tit. 2.12, 13. that he might teach us to deny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present evill world, expecting every day his second comming: Tit. 2.14. 1 Iohn 3.8.that he might quite destroy out of us the workes of the Divell, purge us from all iniquitie, and purifie us unto himselfe a peculiar people zealous of good workes: Luk. 1.74, 75. that wee being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without feare in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the dayes of our lives, Phil. 2.15. shining as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation: 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. that we should henceforth cease from sinne, and no longer live the rest of our time in the lusts of the flesh to the will of men, but to the will of God: 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. that we might be holy in all manner of conversation and godlinesse, even as hee is holy, especially at holy sasons: 2 Cor. 5.15. that wee should not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him who died for us and rose againe: Rom. 14.7, 8. that whether we live we might
live unto him, or whether we die we might die unto him, and that living and dying we might be his; 1 Cor. 6.20. glorify∣ing him both in our soules and bodies which are his. And did we withall remember, that this our blessed Saviour 1 Thess. 4.7. & Rom. 1.7. hath called us, not to uncleannesse, but unto holinesse: that he hath likewise enjoyned us, Rom. 13.12, 13. to cast off all the workes of darknesse, and to put on the armour of light: to walke honestly as in the day; not in chambering and wan∣tonnesse, not in rioting and drunkennesse, Titus 3.3. not in di∣vers lusts and pleasures, Ephes. 2.2, 3. &c. 4.16, 17, 18. according to the course of this wicked world, according to the power of the Prince of the ayre, which now worketh in the children of disobedi∣ence. That he hath seriously charged us, Ephes. 4.17. to 30. That wee walke not from henceforth as other Gentiles walke, in the vanity of their mindes, who having their understandings darkned, and being alienated from the life of God, and past all feeling, have given themselves over unto all lascivi∣ousnesse to worke all uncleannesse with greedinesse. That wee put off concerning our former conversation the olde man which is corrupt according to the deceitfull lusts; and that we put on the new man which after God is created in holinesse and true righteousnesse. Luke 21.34. That we take heed unto our selves, lest at any time (how much more at times of greatest devotion) our hearts be overcome with surfetting and drunkennesse, and that day come upon us at unawares. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.5. 1 Pet. 2.11. That we crucifie the flesh with the affe∣ctions and lusts thereof, and abstaine from fleshly lusts which warre against our soules, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. since the time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles; when as we walked in lasciviousnesse, lusts, ex∣cesse of wine, revellings, banquettings, and abominabl idolatries: Rom. 12.1, 2. That we give up our soules and bodies as an holy and living sacrifice unto God; not fashioning our selves to the course of this present evill world, Iam. 1 27.but kee∣ping our selves unspotted from it: Eph. 5.15, 16. Rom. 13.14. walking circum∣spectly as in the day, not as fooles, but as wise, redeeming the time because the dayes are evill; and making no provi∣sion
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Did we (I say) but seriously ponder and unfainedly beleeve all this, it would soone Iam. 4 9. & 5.1, 5. turne our dissolute Christmas laugh∣ing, into mourning; our bacchanalian jollities into sin∣lamenting Elegies; our riotous grand-Christmasses into such pious Christian duties, as would both honour our Saviours birth-day, and make it welcome to our soules. Let us therefore cordially meditate on all these sacred Scriptures, on the ends of our Saviours blessed incarnation, (which was, Titus 2.12, 13. Eph. 5.26, 27. 1 Pet. 1.15.18. 1 Iohn 3.8, 9. to redeeme us from all these our sinnes and sinfull pleasures; to crucifie our lusts, to re∣generate and sanctifie our depraved natures, to make us holy even as he is holy, and to conforme us to himselfe in all things:) and then this inveterate heathenish Pudorem rei tollit multitu∣do peccantium, et desinet esse probri loco commune ma∣ledictum. Senc. De Beneficijs l. 3. c. 16. Consen∣sere iura pec∣catis et caepit esse licitum quod publicū est. Cyprian. E∣pist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. common custome of prophaning Christs Nativitie with all kinde of lasciviousnesse, wickednesse and delights of sinne, (which should be pent in honouring, blessing and praising of our gracious God for all his mercies to us in his Sonne: in Psalmes, in hymnes and spirituall songs; in holy and heavenly contemplations of all the benefits we receive by our Saviours blessed incarnation, in cha∣ritable relieving of Christs poore members, and mutu∣all amity one towards another:) will become most ex∣ecrable to your pious soules. The damnablenesse of which much applauded unruly Christmas keeping that you may more evidently discerne, I shall for learning and religions sake discover whence it sprang; and that was, originally from the Pagan Saturnalia, from whence Popery hath borrowed and transmitted it unto us at the second hand. The ancient Pagan Romans, upon the Seneca Epist. 18. Horatius Serm. l. 2. Satyr. 7. pag. 226. & Bond Ibidem. Polydor Vir∣gil de Inven∣toribus Rerum, lib. 2. c. 14. See Lypsius De Amphithearo, Saturnalibus &c. Dion Cas∣sius Rom. Hist. lib. 59 pag. 830 Herodian, Hi∣storiae lib. 1. pag. 59. Ides of December, Macrobius Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7. pag. 273.consecrated to Saturne, and their Goddesse Vesta, (not in the Moneth of Ianuary, as Saturnalium, lib. 1. cap. 10.Macrobi∣us misreports) accustomed to keepe their Saturnalia, or annuall Feast of Saturne for 7 dayes together, which they spent in feasting, drinking, dancing, Playes and Enterludes:
at the end of which they celebrated their Ovid. Fasto∣rum lib. 1. p. 2. to 10. Suetonii Tiberius sect 34. Asterius Homil. in Fe∣stum Kalenda∣rum. Alexan∣der ab Alexan∣dro lib. 3. cap. 16. Festum Ka∣lendarum, on the first of Ianuary, (now our New-yeares day) to the honour of their Idol Ianus, which they like∣wise solemnized with Stageplayes, Mummeries, Masques, dancing, feasting, drinking, and in sending mutuall New-yeares gifts one to another, for divers dayes together.See Suetonii Octavius sect. 71.75. In these their Saturnalia and feasts of Ianus, all servants were set at lihertie, and became checke-mates with their masters, with whom they sate at table:Macrobius Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7. & 10. Polydor Virgil. De Invent. Re∣rum lib. 5. cap. 2 & the ensuing Authors Hol∣kot, Lectio 166 167. in lib. Sa∣pientiae. Hos∣pinian De O∣rigine Festo∣rum lib. Fran∣cis De Croy his first Con∣formity, cap. 19. every man then wandred about without controll, and tooke his fill of plea∣sure, giving himselfe over to all kinde of luxurie, epicu∣risme, deboistnesse, disorder, pride and wantonnesse; to pastimes, Enterludes, Mummeries, Stage-playes, dan-cing, drunkennesse, and those very disorders that accom∣pany our grand unruly Christmasses: which Saturnalia and Festivalls the ensuing Authors thus describe. Servi¦cum Saturnalia caenant (writes Non posse suaviter vivi secundum Epi∣curi decreta. Commentar. Moral. Tom. 2. p. 202. Plutarch) aut Li∣beralia, in agro vagantes celebrant, ululatio eorum et tu∣multus ferre non possis prae gaudio et imperitia rerum pulcrarum, talia agentium et loquenum: Quid desides? quin bibimus et capimus cibos? Sunt haec miselle, in promptu: cur tibiinvides? Vocem statim hi dedêre: tum Bacchi liquor Infunditur; et corona aliqui ornat caput. Laurique pulcram ad frondem turpiter canit, Inducia Phaebo, januam{que} alius domus: Pulsam operiens, excludit caram conjugem, &c. Saturnalibus tota servis licentia permittitur: ludi per urbem in compitis agitantur (writes Saturnalium l. 1. cap. 7. Macrobius:) Maxima pars Graim Saturno, et maxima Athenae Conficiunt sacra, quae Cronia esse iterantur ab illis. Cumque diem celebrant, per agros urbesque ferè omnes Exercent Epulis laeti, famulosque procuraut Quisque suos nostrique itidem, et mos traditur illinc Iste, ut cum dominis famuli epulentur ibedeus, &c. Parallell to which is of Epistola 18. Seneca: Decembr est mensis quo maximè Civitas desudat: jus luuriae publicè
datum est: ingenti apparatu sonant omnia, tanquam quicquam inter Saturnalia nunc intersit, et dies rerum agendarum. Adeo nihil interest, ut non videatur mihi errâsse qui dixit, olim mensem Decembrem esse, nunc annum, &c. And that of Horace: Sermonum l. 2. Satyr. 7. p. 227. Age libertate Decembri— (Quando ita majores voluerunt) utere: narra, &c. Carminum, l. 1. Ode 37. Nunc est bibendū, nunc pede libero pulsanda tellus; Nunc saliaribus ornare pulvinar Deorum, tempus &c. That the ancient Romanes (yea and the Graecians too) in times of Paganisme) did spend their Saturnalia,See Hspi∣nian De Ori∣gine Festorum; and the Au∣thors here quo∣ted in the mar∣gent, pag. 225, 226, 233, 234, 235, 236. Robertus Holkot Lectio 166, 167, in lib. Sapientiae. Fe∣riae, and other solemne Festivals in dancing, drinking, feasting Mummeries, Masques and Enterludes, the Po∣et Virgil, Ovid, Tibullus, Philo Iudaeus, with Fuitautem priscis tempo∣ribus in Delo frequens Ionū ac accolarum in insulis cir∣cumiacentibus habitantium conventus; nam cum uxo∣ribus et liberis ad spectacula conveniebant, ut nunc Iones ad ludos in Dianae Ephe∣siae honorem institutos con∣fluere solent. Et civitates o saltatorū cho∣ros mittebant, &c. Thucidides Historiae lib. 3. pag. 291. Vid. Ibidem. sundry others, will plentifully informes us. The first of these describes it thus. Virgil. Georgicorum lib. 2. pag. 56, 57. Veteres ineunt proscenia ludi Praemia{que} ingentes pagos et compita cirum Thesai posuêre, eatque inter pocula laeti, Mollibus in pratis unctos saliêre per utres. Necnon Ausonij Troia gens missa coloni Versibus incompts ludunt, risuque soluto; Oraque corticibus sumunt horrenda cavatis, Et te Bacche vocant per carmina laeti, tibique Oscilla ex altâ suspendunt mollia pinu. The second, thus. Ovid Fastorum lib 3. p. 51. See here pag. 225, 226, 234, 235, in the margent. Plebs venit ac virides passim disjecta per herbas Potat, et accumbat cum pare quisque sua. Sub jove pars durat: pauci tentoria ponunt, Sunt quibus è ramis frondea facta casa est. Sole tamen vinoque calent; annosque praecantur Quot sumunt cyathos, ad numerumque bibunt. Invenies illic qui Nestoris ebibat annos; Quae sit per calices facta Sibylla suos. Illic et cantant quiquid dedicere theatris,
Et jactant faciles ad sua verba manus. Et ducunt posito duras cratere choreas, Cultaque diffuss saltat amica comis. Cum redeunt, titubant, et sunt spectacula vulgi Et fortunatos obvia turba vocat, &c. Fastorum, l. 3 p. 57. Rusticus ad ludos populus veniebat in urbem Sed dîs, non studijs, ille dabatur honos. Luce sua ludos unvae commentor habebat Quos cum taedifera nunc habet ille dea, &c. Fastorum, l. 4. p. 64. Ibunt semi-mares, et inania tympana tundent AEraque tinnitus are repulsa dabunt. Scena sonat, ludique vocant, spectate Quirites Et fora marte suo litigiosa vacent. Annuimus votis; Consul nunc consule ludos, &c. Tristium l. 2. p. 159. Talia luduntur fumoso mense Decembri Quae jam non ulli composuisse nocet. The third, thus. Tibullus, lib. 2. Eleg. 1. p. 82. Nunc mihi nunc fumo veteris proferre falernum Consulis et Chio solvere vincla cado. Vina diem celebrent, non fesa luce madere Est rubor; errantes et malè ferre pedes. Sed bene Messallam sua quisque ad pocula dicat; Numen et absentis singula verba sonant, &c. Agricola assiduo primùm satiatus aratro Cantavit certo rustica verba pede. Agricola et nimio suffusus Baccho rubenti Primus inexperto duxit ab arte choros &c. Whom De Cherubin. lib sol. 174, 175. Philo Iudaeus (writing of the Romans festi∣vals) doth second in this manner. In omni festo nostro e celebritate quae miramur, sunt haec: securitas, remissio, e∣brietas, potatio, ōmessationes, deliciae, oblectamenta, paten∣tes januae, pernoctationes, indecentes voluptates, insolentiae, exercitiū intēperantiae, insipientiae meditatio, studia tur∣pitudinis, honestatis pernicies, Gentiles i∣dololatrici, in∣aniae plenas vigilias habe∣bant. Sic in sa∣crificiis Bacchi et Cybeles ma∣tris Deorum festivitatibus, lusibus et lux∣uriis vacantes totam noctem turpitertransi∣bant quos ar∣guit Apostolus ad Ephesios 5. Nolite com∣unicare ope∣ribus infructuosis tenebraum, sed magisedarguit. Quae autem i occulto fiunt ab ipsis turpe est dicere. Prop∣ter huiusmodi faedtates sub∣traxit Ecclesia mulas vigilias quae solebant ab omnibus populis celebrari de nocte et solennitatibus sanctorum: Holcot. Lectio in 166. in ap. 14. Sapienti, fol. 152. See Augustin. nar. in Psal. 80. nocturnae excitationes ad cupiditates inexplebils; somnus diurnus quando vigilan∣di
tempus est, naturae ordinis perversio; tunc virtus ride∣tur ut noxia, vitium tanqam utile rapitur: tunc in con∣temptu sunt quae oportet facere, quae vero non oportet in precio. Tunc philosophia, et omnis eruditio, divinae ani∣mae divina revera simulachra, tenent silentium: ac istae artes quae suis lenocinijs ventri, et his quae sub ventre sunt, voluptatem conciliant, ostendunt suam facundiam. Haec sunt festa istorum qui se faelices dicunt: quorum ur∣pitudo quamdiu inter privatos parietes locaque prophana continetur, minus peccare mihi videntur: ubi verò tor∣rentis in morem populans omnia, vel in sacratissima tem∣pla irrumpit, quicquid in his sanctum est sternit continuò, facies prophana sacrificia, victimas absque litatione, praeces irritas, prophana enim mysteria simul et orgya, pie∣tatem sanctitatemque fucatam et adulterinam, castitatem impuram, veritatem falsatam, cultum Dei superstitio∣sum. Ad haec quidem corpora abluuntur lavacris et pu∣rificationibus, affectiones verò animae quibus vita sordi∣datur, nec volunt, nec curant eluere. Et ut candidati tem∣pla subant dant operam, diligenter emaculatis vestibus amicti; mentem verò maculosissiam in ipsa sacraria pe∣nitissima inferre non verentur. A most accurate Chara∣cter, both of our unruly Christmasses, and such Christ∣mas-men. If wee now parallell our grand disorderly Christmasses, with these Roman Saturnals and heathen Festivals; or our New-yeares day (a chiefe part of Christmas) with their Festivity of Ianus, Herodian Hi∣storiae l. 1. p. 59. Asterius Hom. in Fesum Ka∣lendaum. O∣vid Fastorum lib. 1. Lockmai Sermo 21. Hol∣cot Lectio 167 in lib. Sapien∣iae. Alcuinus, De Divinis Of∣ficis lib. cap. 4. which was spent in Mummeries, Stage-playes, dancing, and such like Enterludes, Idibus Ianu∣ariis tibicines festum diem a∣gere multa li∣centia et lasi∣via, mulirique habitu per ur∣bem vadere so∣lebant. Alexan∣der ab Alexan∣dro l. 3. c. 18. fol. 154. See here p. 197, 198, ac∣cordingly. wherein Fidlers and others acted lascivi∣ous effeminate parts, and went about their Towns and Cities in womens apparrell: whence Hae Kalendae Ianuarii secun∣dum Oentili∣um dementi∣am, potius di∣cendae sunt ca∣vendae, quam Kalendae. Nam imperiti homi∣nes velut De∣um colentes, diem ipsum multis spurcitiis sacraverunt. Quidam mutabant se in specis monstrosas, in ferarumque habitus transformabant. Al in faemineo gestu mutai, virilem vliu effaeminabant aliqui fanaticis anguriis profanabantur, perstrepeban salando pedi∣bus, tripudiando plausibus: et quod his turpius est nefas, nexis inter se utrius{que} sexus chori, inops anmi, fuens vino turba misctur. Diabolicas etiam strenas, et ab aliis acci∣piebant, et ipsi aliis tradebāt. Necnō etiā mensulas plenas ad manducandum tota nocte paratos habbt, credētes quod Kalndae Ianuarii pr totum annum praestare possēt. Et quia his atque aliis miseriis mundus universus epletus erat, statuit universalis Ecclesia iiunium pub∣licum in isto die fieri, qua∣tenus istis cala∣mitatibus au∣ctor vitae finem imponeret, &c Alhuus D Diuiis Officijs cap. 4. Col. 1013 1014. sodor Hisp. De Officijs Ecclesiasticis l. 1. c. 40. p. 400. C. onnis aghe∣crucius De Vita et Honestate Ec∣clesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 13. Am∣brose Sermo 11. the whole
Catholicke Church (as Alchuvinus, with others write) appointed a solemne publike fast upon this our New-yeares day, (which fast it seemes is now forgotten) to bewaile those heathenish Enterludes, sports, and lewd idolatrous practises which had beene used on it: prohibiting all Chri∣stians under paine of excommunication, from observing the Kalends or first of Ianuary (which wee now call New-yeares day) as holy, and from sending abroad New-yeares gifts upon it, (a custome now too frequent;) it be∣ing a meere relique of Paganisme and idolatry, derived from the heathen Romans feast of two-faced Ianus; and a practise so execrable unto Christians, that not onely the whole Catholike Church; but even the 4 famous Councels, Concil. Alti∣fiod. Can. 1. Su∣rius Tom. 2. p. 715. Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 8. See here p. 580, 581. Altisiodorum, viz. Quoniam cognovimus nonnullos inve∣niri sequipedes erroris antiqui, qui Kalendas Ianuarii colunt, cum Ianus homo Gen∣tilis fuerit rex quidem, sed Deus esse non potuit. Quisquis ergo unum Deum Patrem regnantem cum ilio suo et Spiritu Sancto credit certe hic non potest integer Chri∣stianus dci qui aliquid de Gentilitate custodit. Contestamur illam solicitudinem tam pastores quam presbyteros gerere, ut quoscum que in hac fatuitare viderint, eos ab Ec∣clesia sancta auctoritate repellant, nec participare sancto Altario permittant qui Gen∣tilium observationes custodiunt: Quid enim daemonibus cum Christo commune, cum magis sumendo iudicium delicta videatur addere quam purgare? Synodus Turonica 2. Can. 23. Surius Concil. Tom. 2 p. 647. Bochellus Decreta Eccl. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 7. cap. 7. & Tit 12. c. 6. Towres; Capit. Graecarum Synodorum, here p. 581. & Concil. Con∣stantinop: 6. here p. 583. together with Sermo 11. St. Ambrose De Rectitudine Catholicae conversationis, Tom. 9. p. 1448. Augustine, Homil in stum Kalendarum. See here p. 197, 316, 317. Astrius, De Officiis Eccl. lib. 15. c. 60. HRabanus Mau∣rus, De Officus Ecclesiast. cap. 4. See Y before. Alchuvinus, Causa 26. Quaest: 27. Gratian, Decretalium, pars 11. cap. 16, 17. Iuo Carnotensis De Ecclesiast. Officiis l. 1. c. 40. See Y before. Isiodor Hispalensis, Si quis Kalendas Ianuarii ritu Paganorum colere, vel aliquid plus novi facere propter novum annum, aut mensas cum lampadibus el epulis in domibus praeparare, et per vicos et plateas antores et choros ducere praesumpserit, anathema sit. Gratian Causa 26. Quaest. 27. Pope achary, Non licet ini∣quas observationes agere Kalendarum et ociis vacare: neque lauro au viditate ar∣borum cingere domos. Omnis enim haec observatio Paganorum est. Ibi. Pope Martin, Oratio in Fe∣tum Kalend. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. Col. 798, 799. Saint Chrysostome, Sermo 21. Y, Z. Michael Lochmair,
De Vita et Honestate Ec∣clesiasticorum l. 2. c. 13. Ioannes Langhecrucius, Decreta Ec∣clesiae Gall. lib. 4. Tit. 7. c. 7, 8. & Tit. 12. c. 6. Bochellus, De Ludo Tra∣ctatus. In Tra∣ctatu Tracta∣tuum, Paiiis 1545. Tom. 1. fol. 157, 158. Ste∣phanus Costa, His first Con∣formity cap. 20. Francis de Croy, De Invento∣ribus Rerum, l. 5. c. 2. Polydor Virgil, Rationale Divinorum Officiorum l. 6. c. 15. Durandus, with See here pag. 24. sundry other, have positively prohibited the solemnization of New-yeares day, and and the sending abroad of New-yeares gifts, under an a∣nathema & excommunication, as unbeseeming Christians, who shovld eternally abolish, not propagate, revive, or re∣continue this pagan festivall, and heathenish ceremonie, which our God abhors. If wee compare (I say) our Bac∣chanalian Christmasses & New-yeares tides, with these Saturnalia and feasts of Ianus, we shall finde such neare affinitie betweene them both in regard of time, (they being both in the end of December, and on the first of Ianuary:) and in their manner of solemnizing; (both of them being spent in revelling, epicurisme, wantonnesse, idlenesse, dancing, drinking, Stage-playes, Masques, and carnall pompe and jollity:) that wee must needes con∣clude the one to be but the very Paria sunt u∣nius sementis germina, et quod latebat in radicibus manifestatur in fructibus. Prosper-Contra Collatorem, c. 41. ape or issue of the o∣ther. Hence De Invento∣ribus Rerum, l. 5. c. 2. Polydor Virgil afirmes in expresse tearmes; that our Christmas Lords of misrule, (which custome, saith he, is chiefly observed in England,) toge∣ther with dancing, Masques, Mummeries, Stage-playes, and such other Christmas disorders now in use with Chri∣stians, were derived from these Roman Saturnalia, and Bacchanalian festivals; which should cause all pious Christians eternally to abominate them. If any here demaund, by whom these Saturnalia, these disorderly Christmasses & Stageplayes were first brought in amōg the Christians? I answer, that the paganizing Priests and Monkes of popish (the See Ormerod his Paganopapismus, & Francis de Croy his first Conformity. same with heathen Rome) were the chiefe Agents in this worke: who as they borrowed their Feast of Durandus, Ratio∣nale, Divin: Offic. l. 7. c. 34. Beda Ecclesiast. Histor. l. 2. c. 4. Plaina, Onuphrius, Luit∣prandius, Fasciculus Temporum, Balaeus et Barns in vita Bonifacii quari; Thomas Beacons Reliques of Rome, cap. 59. Polydor Virgil, De Inventoribus Rerum, lib. 6. cap. 8. Petrus, de Natal. l. to. c. 1. Francis de Croy his first Conformity chap. 19. Vola∣teranus Comment. l. 12. f. 127. accordingly. All-Saints, from the hea∣then
festivall Pantheon; and the feast of the Michaelis Lochmair Ser∣mo 32. Tho∣mas Beacon his Romes Re∣liques, cap. 48, 59. Equidem quod negari non potest, ce∣remoniae ar∣dentium cereo∣rum quos ho∣die Christiani eo die qui puri∣ficatae Mariae dicatus est, ex more circum∣ferimus, a Fe∣brualibus Ro∣manorum sa∣cris originem sumpsere. Per∣tinaci paganis∣mo imitatione subventum est, quem rei in totum sublatio potius irritasset. Rhenanus Annot. in lib. 5. Tertul. adversus Marcion. p. 478. Francis de Croy his first Conformity, cap. 17, 25. Po∣lydor Virgil. de Invent. Rerum, l. 5. c. 1. Iacobus de Voragine Sermo 82. De Sactis; Innocentius, 3. Sermo in Feso Purificationis. Baronius Martyriologium in Febr. 2. Purifi∣cation of the Virgin Mary, (which they have christned with the name of Candlemasse) from the festivall of the Goddesse Februa, the mother of Mars;Polydor Virgil de Invent. Rerum, lib. 5. cap. 1. to whom the Pagan Romans offered burning tapers, as the Papists in imitation of them now offer to the Virgin Mary on this day at evening: (answerable to which, are their ordinary Aras Saturnias non mactando vi∣ros sed accensis luminibus excolunt. Inde mos per Saturnalia missitandis Cereis caepit. Macro. Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 7. pag. 276. burning Tapers on their idolized Altars, borrowed frō See here pag. 22, 23. Illic accendunt geminas pro lampade pinus, Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque taeda datur. Ouid Fast. lib. 4. pag. 71. Accipiunt fragili simulachra nitentia cera, Et matutinis operatur festa lucernis. Iuuenal. Satyr. 12. pag. 115. Tunc Salii ad cantus incensa altaria cir∣cum &c. Virgil. AEnid. lib. 8. pag. 230. See Francis de Croy his first Conformitie, cap. 25. & Ormerod his Pagano-papismus. Sature and those other Idol-Gods whose Accendunt lumina velut in tenebris agenti. Lactanius, De Vero Culu, cap. 2. blindnes stood in need of those burning torches which the Pagans placed on their Altars; they Psal. 105.5. & 135.16. having eyes and yet not seeing: though our Saviour Christ (the Mal. 4.2. Sunne of righteousnesse, Luke 2.78, 79. Iohn 1.8, 9. the light that lightens every one that commeth into the world, Iames 1.17. Ephes. 1.18. the Father and author of all light, Revel. 21.23. cap. 22.5. the light of the heavenly Hierusalem it selfe, which needes neither Sunne nor Moone, because he is the light thereof, and the 1 Iohn 1.5, 6, 7. light it selfe wherein is no dark∣nesse,) needes no such Tapers, asVel si coeleste lumen quod dicimus solem, con∣templari velint, iam sentient quod non indigeat lucernis eorum Deus, qui ipse in usum hominis tam candidam lucem dedit. Num igitur mentis suae compos putandus est, qui auctori et datori luminis candelarum aut cerarum lumen offet pro munere? De Vro Cultu lib. 6. cap. 2. Lactantius tells us) So they have deduced (not the celebration of our Savi∣ours Nativity in a Christian manner, which was anci∣ent)
but the riotous solemnizing of this sacred festivall, from these Pagan Saturnalia; which having Cum scrip∣tum sit, Non nominabis no∣men Domini Dei tui in vanū in reverentia Christi deci∣dit, ut inter caeteras seculi vanitates nihil iam paene va∣nius quam Christi nomen esse videtur. Denique ad hoc res ce∣cidit, ut cum per Christi no∣mē iuraverint, puant se sce∣lera etiam reli∣giose esse fa∣cturos. Saluian. De Guber. Dei l. 4. p. 131, 132. bapti∣zed or new guilded over with this glorious pompous title, of CHRIST-MASSE, (a name I am sure of their owne imposing, not knowne to the ancient Fathers, as the MASSE therein imports:) they transmitted it as a most sacred Relique or Tradition to dissolute posteritie: who are so farre besotted with its bacchanalian pastimes, En∣terludes, and other heathenish disorders, that they have both lost their Saviour and themselves, whiles they thus celebrate his Nativitie; which in regard of those See Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p. 130. Mr. Sa∣muel Byrd his use of the plea∣sures of this present life, p. 15. to 31. infernall prophanesses, of that licentious libertie of sin∣ning which men now take unto themselves more than at other seasons, may more truly bee stiled DIVELS-MASSE, or SATVRNES-MASSE (for such Guagninus Rerum Poloni∣carum, Tom. 2. pag. 171. too many make it) than Christ-masse; there being farre more affinitie betweene the Divell, Saturne, Masse, and riotous Christmas-keeping, than betweene Christ and them: who as he See Morney Sutcliffe and others of the Masse: & Bishop Morton his In∣stitution of the Sacrament, l. 7, 8. never approved idolatrous sacri∣legious pompous Masses, which rob him of his honour, worship, and all-sufficient sacrifice once for all: so he cannot but abhor these bachananaliā pagā Christmasses, which deprive him of his service, praises, love, and proclaime him an open patron of those notorious sinfull Christ∣mas practises which hee doth most abhorre. When these disorderly extravagant kinde of Christmasses crept first into the Church, I cannot certainly deter∣mine, yet this I doe conjecture. After that PopeSee Beda Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 2. c. 4. with the Authors at b. before. Bo∣niface, and Gregorius Mag Epistolarum ex Registro lib. 9. Epist. 71. Pope Gregory the first, under pretence of drawing men from Paganisme to Christianity, had chan∣ged divers of the See Du∣randus Rational. Divin. Offic. l. 7. c. 34. Polydor Virgil. de Inventoribus reum l. 5. c. 1, 2. Thomas Beacon his Romes Reliques, cap. 59. Francis de Croy his first Conformity, c. 19, 20, 25, 26. Hospinian de Origine Festorum, Ormerod his Pagano-papismus, um pluribus aliis. Pagan Festivalls into Christian: as
Pantheon into All Saints; Februalia, Lupercalia, Pro∣serpinalia and Palilia, into the Feast of Candlemasse; Quirinalia, into Innocents; the Feast of the Kalends of Ia∣nuary, into our Saviours Circumcision or New-yeares day; these Saturnalia into our Saviours Nativitie; and the like: (contrary to the judgement ofSermo 11. St. Am∣brose, De Civit. Dei l. 8. cap. 27. & Confessionum l. 6. c. 2. St. Augustine, the Canon 27.28. See here p. 18. to 25. Beat Rhenanus, An∣not. in l. 5. Ter∣tul. contr. Mar∣cionem p. 478. Polydor Virgil de Invent Re¦rum l. 5. c. 1, 2. whole Councell of Af∣fricke, and Rhenanus & Polydor Virgil Ibidem. Fran¦cis de Croy his first Confor∣mity, cap. 19, 20, to 28. & Ormerod his Pagano-papi∣mus. others, who wished all Pagan Festivals not changed into Christian, but quite abolished, the better to avoid all heathenish customes:) it came to passe, that the observation of these Pagan Festivalls, (whose names they onely changed) Hospinian, Francis de Croy, Orme∣rod, Rhenanus, with others qua b. brought in all Pagan rites and cere∣monies that the idolatrous heathens used, (as drunkennes, health-quaffing, wantonnesse, luxurie, dancing dicing, Stage-playes, Masques with all other Ethnicke sports) in∣to the Church of God; (she being never defiled with these prophane abominations, till these Pagan holy-dayes were metamorphosed into Christian;) which by reason of mens naturall pronesse unto evill, did soone transform all Christian Festiualls into Pagan, as good Authors witnesse: partly through the See Exod. 32. 6. 1 Cor. 10.7. See here page 77. to 82. Po∣lydor Virgil. de Inventoribus Rerum lib. 5. cap. 1. 2. Nicolaus de Clemangis, D Novis Celebri∣tibus non instituendis ractatus, page 143. to 159. accordingly.poples strong propensity to carnall pleasures, to heathenish rites and ceremonies to which they naturally adhere; but princi∣pally through the See Francis de Croy his first Conformity, cap. 19.20. Turco-papismus, Londini 1604. lib. 1. cap. 17. Episcopus Chemnenfis, Onus Ecclesiae, cap. 20, 21, 22, 23. Geffry Chaucher his Plow-mans Tale, Peirce Plowman his Creed, Bernardi ad Gulielmu Abbatem Apologia, & Concio ad Clrum in Concilio Rhemens. Ioannis Wickliffe Dialogo∣gorum lib. 4. cap. 3. to 39. Ioannes Aventinus Annalium Boiorum lib. 6 & 7. Iohn Bale his Acts of English Votaries & Clemangis de Corrupto Ecclesiae statu, Tract. intllerable luxurie and voluptu∣ousnesse of the Popish Clergie; whose excessive ndow∣ments power, pride and lordly pompe drew them on by little and little to that stupendios Epicurisme and dissolutenesse of life, that to stop the peoples mouthes, and to palliate, if not authorize these their luxurious
courses, they not onely stuffed their See Calenda∣rium et Marty∣riologium Ro∣manum, HRa∣bani Mauri et Baronii Marty∣riologia, Nico∣laus Cleman∣gis de Novis Celebritatibus non instituen∣dis according∣ly. Kalenders with new-invented Festivals and Saints dayes; but likewise See Act. 7. Scene 3. Nicolaus Cle∣mangis De Novis Cele¦britatibus non instituendis, Polydor Virgil de Invent. rerum l. 5. c. 2. Lodovicus Vive Commen. in August. De Civit. Dei lib. 8. c. 27.countenanced all Pagan sports and customes on them, exhibiting publike banquets, Enterludes, Mummeries, Dances, and merriments to the people; who being bribed with their belly-cheare, and soothed with their plea∣pleasures, Populi plaudunt non consultoribus utilitatum suarum, sed largitoribus voluptatum. August. De Civi. Dei lib. 2. cap. 20. applauded them for the present, and then fell to Cum enim maiores ipsi voluptati deserviunt, minoribus lasciviae fraena laxantur. Quis enim sub disciplinae se constrictione contineat, quando et ipsi qui ius constrictionis accipiunt sese voluptatibus relaxant? Greg. Magnus Moral. lib. 2. cap. 16. imitate them for the future; till at last Pernicio∣sius de Republica merentur vitiosi rectores, quod non solum vitia concipiunt ipsi, sed ea infundunt i civitatem: neque solum obsunt, quod illi ipsi corrumpunt, ed ei∣am quod corrumpuntur, plusque exemplo quam peccato nocent. Cicero De Legibus lib. 3. all Christendome was over-runne, yea all life, all power of Christianitie quite eaten out with these Pagan Christ∣mas pastimes and delights of sin. That the Popish Clergy (whose extravagancies and most intollerable luxurie in this kinde, Synodus Turonensis sub Car. Mag. Can. 5. to 10. Surius Tom. 3. pag. 274. Synod. Cabilonense 2. Can. 9, 10. Ibid. p. 279. Moguntina Anno 813. cap. 10. & 36. pag. 289, 290. Concil. Aquisranense Can. 100. p. 333. Parisiense l. . c. 19, 21, 37, 38, 46. & lib. . cap. 18. Rhemense Anno 813. cap. 17, 18. Moguntinum sub HRa∣bano cap. 13. Lateranense sub Innocentio 3. cap. 15, 17. Coloniense sub Radolpho cap. 17. with sndry others. See Act. 7. Scene 3. many Councels and Bernard ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apologia, De Consideratione lib. 3, 4. Ad Clerum et ad Pastores Sermo, Col. 276. &c. In Cantica Sermo 77. Declamationes, et Epist. 42.78. Gregorius Magnus Hom. 17. in Evangelia, & Pastoralium lib. Guildas in Ecclesiasticum ordinem acris Correp∣tio. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 682, &c. Petrus Blesensis Epist. 7, 18, 23, 42, 56, 61, 76, 85, 102, 152. & Compendium in Iob c. 1. Alredus Sermo 1. & 12. in cap. 13. Isaiae. S. Brigittae Revelationes l. 4. c. 132. to 136. l. 6. c. 15, 17, 19. Alvarus Pelagius De Plan∣ctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. Artic. 2. & 28. Robertus Holkot Lect. 182. super Lib. Sapientiae. E. fol. 167. Episcopus Chemnensis Onus Ecclesiae lib. cap. 21, 22, 23. Nicolaus Cleman∣gis, Epist. 23, 15, 28, 75, 77, 85, 102, 133. & De Corrupto Ecclesiae statu lib. through∣out. Espencaeus in 1 Tim. 2, 3. in Titum cap. 1, 2. & De Continentia l. 3. c. 4. Ioannes Aventinus Annalium Boiorum l. 7. & 8. Guicciardine Histor. l. , 11, 12, 21, 22, 3. Fabian Histor. part 6. cap. 170. Iohn Bale his Acts of English Votaries: Turco-papis∣mus l. 1. c. 17. Platina de Vita Pontificum, Matthew Paris, Theodoicus a Niem: cum infinitis aliis. Authors have
declaimed against at larg) were the chiefest instruments of ushering in these Pagan Christmasses, together with Stage-playes, dances, and such like bacchanalian pra∣ctises into the Church of Christ, it is most apparant, not onely by those See Act. 7. Scene 3. Councels and Authors which crie out against them, for their strange unparalleld excesses in all these kindes; and by that elegant oration of King Edgar to our English Praelates, worthy to be registred in golden Characters, where he thus displayes the Epi∣curian lives of the Clergy in his raigne: Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 13. p. 153, 154. Mr. Fox Booke of Martyrs, E∣dit. 1610. pag. 153. Henry Lord Stafford, in his Booke of the true diffe∣rence betweene regall power and Ecclesia∣sticall, London 1550. fol. 84, 85, 86. where it is englished; & Mr. Selden in his Eadmeri spicilegium p. 161. Taceo, quod Clericis nec est corona patens, nec tonsura conveni∣ens; quod in veste lascivia, insolentia in gestu, in verbis turpitudo, interioris hominis loquuntur insaniam. Prae∣terà in divinis officijs quanta negligentia, cum sacris vi∣gilijs vix interesse dignentur, cum ad sacra Missarum solennia ad ludendum vel ad ridendum magis quàm ad psallendum congregari videantur. Dicam, dicam quod boni lugent, mali rident, dicam dolens (si tamen dici potest) quomodo diffluant in commessationibus, in e∣brietatibus, in cubilibus, in impudicitijs, ut jam domus Clericorum putentur prostibula meretrium, et conci∣liabula histrionum. Ibi alea, ibi saltus et cantus, ibi us∣que in medium noctis spatium protractae in clamore et hor∣rore vigiliae: (the chiefe ingredients of our exorbitant Christmasses.) Sic, sic patromonia regum, eleemosynae pauperum, imo (quod magis est) illius pretiosi sanguinis pretium profligatur. Ad hoc igitur exhauserunt the∣sauros suos patres nostri, ad hoc fiscus Regius, distractis redditibus multis, detumuit, ad hoc Ecclesijs Christi a∣gros et possessiones Regalis munificentia contulit, ut deli∣cijs Clericorum meretrices ornantur, luxuriosa convi∣via praeparentur, canes et aves et talia ludicra comparen∣tur? Hoc milites clamant, plebs submurmurat, mimi cantant et saltant, et vos negligitis! vos parcitis! vos dissimulatis! &c. But likewise by sundry See Act. 7. Scene 3. throughout.forequoted Councels, and canonicall Constitutions; by which it ap∣peares most evidently; that divers of the Popish Clergie
were common Iesters, Actors, Dicers, Dancers, Epi∣cures, Drunkards, Health-quaffers; that they both acted & caused Playes and Enterludes to be personated both in Churches & elswhere, especially on the feasts of Innocent, New-yeares day, and the Christmas holy-dayes; the commonnesse of which abuses, was the onely cause of those severall Canons and Constitutions to suppresse them, on which you may reflect. Hence Avenine records Annalium Boiorum l. 7. p. 582. of Pope Boniface the 8. that he made and brought in secular sports and Enterludes, endeavouring to reduce the gol∣den age: and of Ibidem p. 668. Pope Nicholas the 5. that he insti∣tuted secular Playes at Rome, contrary to the Councell of Constans; and that 560 persons were crushed to death, and drowned with the fall of the Tiberine bridge, who flocked to Rome to behold those Enterludes. Hence De Invento∣ribus Rerum l. 5. c. 2. Poly∣dor Virgil, Notae in Au∣gustinum De Civit. Dei l. 8. c. 27. Lodovicus Vives, De Vita et Honestate Ec∣clesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 11, 12, 20, 21, 22. Ioannes Langhe∣crucius, and De Vita et Honestate Ec∣clesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 11, 12, 20, 21, 22. Didacus de Tapia, cry out against the popish Clergie, for acting and representing to the people, the passion of our Saviour, the Histories of Iob, Mary Magdalen, Iohn the Baptist, and other sacred Stories; together with the lives and legions of their Saints; and for erecting Theaters for this purpose in their Churches, on which their Priests and Monkes, together with com∣mon Enterlude-Players, and other Laickes did personate these their Playes. Which grosse prophanesse though thus In tertiam partem Divi Thomae Sala∣mancae 1589. Artic. 8. p 546. See here Act. 3. Scene 5, 6. declaimed against by many of their own Authors, & condemned by their Conncels,See Act. . Scene 5. & Act. 7. Scene 3. throughout. is yet still in use among them, as not onely Qua (x)Didacus de Tapia, and others who much lament it, but even daily experience, & the Iesuites practise, together with Iohn Molanus, Divinity-pro∣fessor of Lovan, witnesse: who in his Historia SS. I∣maginum & Picturarum Antwerpiae 1617. lib. 4. cap. 18. De Ludis qui speciem quandam Imaginum haben, in quibusdam anni solennitatibus, p. 424, 425, 426, 427. out ofLib. de Ima∣ginibus c. 17. Conradus Bruno, and Wilhlmus Lindanus In Apologeico ad Germanos Tom. 3. cap. 55. Lindanus, writes thus in justification of these their Enterludes. Now e∣ven Stage-playes have a certaine shape of Images, and oft
times move the pious affections of Christians, more than prayer it selfe. And after this manner truly Stage playes and shewes are wont to be exhibited on certaine times of the yeare, the certaine pictures of certaine Evangelicall histories being annexed to them. Of which sort is this, that on Palm-sunday children having brought in the picture of our Saviour, sitting upon an Asse, sing praise to the Lord, cast bowes of trees on the ground, and spread their gar∣ments on the way. And that likewise upon Easter Eve, when as the presbyter after midnight receiving the image of the crucifixe out of the sepulcher, goeth round about the Church, and beates the doores of it that are shut, saying, Psal. 24.7, 9, 10. Lift up your gates yee princes, and bee yee lifted up yee everlasting gates, that the King of glory may come in: and he who watcheth in the gates demanding, Who is this King of glory? the Presbyter answers againe, The Lord strong and mighty in battaile; the Lord of hoasts he is the King of glory. Likewise, that on the day of the resurrection of our Lord in the morning after mor∣ning prayers, Angels in white garments, sitting upon te sepulcher, aske the women comming thither and weeping, saying; Whom seeke ye women in this tumlt, weeping?Luke 24.4, 5, , 7. he is not here whom ye seeke: but goe ye quickly, and tell his Disciples; Come and see the place where the Lord lay. And that on the same day the image of our Lord, bearing an ensigne of Victorie, is carried about in publike proces∣sion, and placed upon the altar to be gazed upon by the people. Likewise that of Ascention day in the sight of all the people, the Image of the Lord is pulled up in the midst of the Church, and shewed to be taken up into hea∣ven. In the meane time about the Image are little win∣ged images of Angels, carrying burning tapers in their hands, and fluttering up and downe, and a Prest singing; Iohn 20.17. I ascend unto my Father and your Father; and the Clergy singing after him, and unto my God and your God: with this solemne hymne, Now is a solemne &c. and this Responsory: Mark 16.15, 16. Goe ye into the world &c. And that upon White sunday, the image of a dove is let
downe from aboue in the midst of the Church, and pre∣sently a fire falls downe together with it with some sound, much like the noyse of guns, the Priest singing, Iohn 20.22. Re∣ceive ye the holy Ghost &c. and the Clergy rechanting; Acts. 2.1. There appeared cloven tongues to the Apostles, &c. By all which and other such like spectacles, and those especially which represent the passion of our Lord, nothing else is done, but that the sacred histories may be repre∣sented by these exhibited Spectacles and Enterludes to those who by reason of their ignorance cannot reade them. And these things hiherto out of Conradus Bruno in his Booke of Images, cap. 17. Thou hast the like defence of these shewes and Enterludes in Tom. 3. cap. 55. William Lindane the reverend Bishop of Rremond in his Apologie to the Ger∣mans, where among other things he saith: For what other are these Spectacles and Playes than the living histories of Lay-men? with which the humane affection is much more efficaciously moved, than if they should reade the same in private, or heare thē publikely read by others &c. Thus he. O the desperate madnesse, the unparalleld pro∣fanes of these audacious Popish Priests & Papists, who dare turne the whole history of our Saviours life, death, Nativitie, Passion, Resurrection, Ascention, and the very gif of the holy Ghost descending in cloven tongues, into a meere prophane ridiculous Stage-play; (as even their owne See here page 122, 123. impious Pope Pius the 2. most prophanely did) contrary to the See Act. 3. Scene 5. throughout; & Act. 7. Scene 3. Yea contrary to the Decree of Theodosius the Emperor, who made this Edict. Nullus penitus opor∣tet Spectacula solennia orbis aeternae populo exhibere. Coex Theodosij lib. 15. Ti. 5. Lex. 4. How much lesse then of our Saviour Christ? forequoted resolu∣tions of sundry Councels and Fathers, who would have these things onely preached to the people, not acted, not re∣presented in a shew or Stage-play. No wonder then if such turne the sacred solemnity of our Saviours Incarna∣tion into a Pagan Saturnal, or Bacchanalian feast; who thus transforme his humiliation, his exaltation, yea his whole worke of our redemption into a childish Play. But let these Playerlike Priests and Friers, who justifie this prophanesse, which every Christian heart that hath any sparke of grace must needes abominate, attend
unto their learned Spanish Hermite, Didacus de Tapia, who reades this Lecture both to them and us. Iam vero il∣lud ut in scenis vita Iob, Fran∣cisci, conversio Magdalenae, &c. represen∣tantur, omino est intollerabi∣le Cum enim theatrou mo prophanus sit, minus ma∣lum est (ut sife∣rendus est,) re∣praesentarentur prophana, san∣cta vero non nisi sancte tra∣ctanda sunt &c. am vero ut theatrum, locus scilicet ille daemonibus fa∣miliaris, invi∣sus Deo, in medio ipso corpo∣re Ecclesiae co∣ram altari ma∣iori et sanctis∣simo sacramen∣to statuatur, il∣le solus ferat, qui ob peccata sua nondum cernit ac sentit, quam haec ad∣versa et pug∣nantia sint cū Dei sanctitate. In tertiam parte diui Thom, Artic. 8. Qustio. Vtrum Sacramentum davi possit histrionibu? pag. 546. Vid Ibidem. That this verily is altogether intollerable, that the life of Iob, of St. Francis, of Mary Magdalen, (how much more then of Christ himselfe) should be acted on the Stage. For since the very manner and custome of Play-houses is pro∣phane, it is lesse evill (if it were tollerable) that prophane things onely should be acted, and that holy things be han∣dled onely in a holy manner &c. But now that a Theatre, A PLACE SO FAMILIAR TO DIVELS, AND SO ODIOVS VNTO GOD (pray marke it) should be set up in the very middest of the body of the Church, before the high Altar and the most holy Sacrament, for Playes to be acted on it, he onely can brooke it, who by reason of his sins hath not yet knowne or felt, HOVV CROSSE AND OPPOSITE THESE THINGS ARE TO THE HO∣LINES OF GOD. It is evident then by all these pre∣mises, that our riotous, ludicrous & voluptuous Christ∣masses, (together with Stage-playes, dancing, Masques and such like Pagan sports) See Polydor Virgil De Invent. Rerum lib. 5. cap. 1, 2. Francis De Croy his first Conformity, cap. 19, 20, 60, 62. Mr. Sa∣muel Byrd his Dialogue of the use of the pleasures of this present life, pag. 15. to 33. Nicolaus emagis De Novis Celebritatibus non Instituendis; & Hospinian De Origine Festorum accordingly.had their originall from Pagan, their revivall and continuance from Popish Rome, who long since transmitted them over into England: For if Angliae Historia, Basileae 1570 p. 215. Polydor Virgil may be credited, even in the 13. yeare of Henry the second, Anno Dom. 1270. it was the custome of the English to spend their Christmas time in Playes, in Masques, in most magnificent and pompous Spectacles, and to addict themselves to pleasures, dancing, dicing, and other unlawfull prohibited games, which See 13. H. 7. c. 2.19. H. 7. c. 12.33. H. 8. c. 11. then were tolerated and permitted; contrary to the usage of most other Nations, who used such Playes and wanton pastimes not in the Christmas season, but a little before
their Lent, about the time of Shrovetide. What therefore Salvian writes of Sodomie and publike stewes, (from See Taxa Ca∣merae, Agrippa De Vanitate Scientiarum, cap. 64. Espen∣caeus De Con∣tinentia lib. 3. c. 4. & in Ti∣tum cap. 1. p. 67, 68, 69. which the Popes Exchequer receives no small reve∣nue) De Gubern. Dei l. . p. 268. Haec ergo impuritas in Romanis et ante Christi Evangelium esse caepit: et quod est gravius, nec post E∣vangelium cessavit: the same may I say of Stage-playes and unruly Christmas-keeping: they had their first o∣riginall from heathen Rome (I meane from their Satur∣nalia, Bacchanalia, Floralia &c.) before the Gospell preached to her; and they See Ioannis Langhecrucius De Vita et Honestate Ec∣lesiasticorum, l. 2. c. 7. to 25. accordingly. have beene since revived, continued, propagated by Antichristian Rome, even since the Gospell preached: which should cause all pious Pro∣testant Christians eternally to abandon them, confor∣ming themselves to the most ancient practise of the primitive Christians, who celebrated this festivall of our Saviours Nativitie in a farre different manner. For when as the Luke 2.8, 9, 10 11. Angel of the Lord appeared to the shep∣heards, abiding in the fields, (not feasting and playing in their houses) and keeping Vigilent ita∣que nato Do∣mino Pastores supra gregem ovium uaum, significent eius dipensatione mnifesta vigi∣laturos in Ecclesia Pastores animarum ca∣starum: quibus dicatur; Pacite qui in vobis est gregem Dei. ene autem vi∣gilantibus pa∣storibus Ange∣lus apparet, osque Dei claritas circumfulget, quia illi prae caeteris videre sublimia merentur, qui fidelibus gregibus praeesse sciunt; dumque ipsi pie super gregem vigi∣lant, divina supereos gratia largius coruscat. Beda Expost in Luc. c. 2. See Ambrose Ser∣mo 7. Tom. 5. p. 5. F. watch over their flockes (not dancing, dicing, carding, drinking or keeping Christmas rout) by night; and said unto them; feare not: for behold I bring unto you tidings of great joy which shall be to all people: for to you is borne this day in the Ci∣ty of David, a Saviour which is Christ the Lord: What Christmas mirth and solace was there made, but this which St. Luke hath recorded for our everlasting imi∣tation? Luke 2. v. 13, 14. Digna plane ac iusta sententia quae in Naivi∣tate Christi, et Deo honorem repraesentat in caelis, et hominibus pacem praeentat interris. Ambrose Sio 9. p. 6. F. Sodainly (saith hee) there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly hoast praising God and saying; Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will towards men. This is the onely Christmas so∣lemnity which the holie Ghost, which Christ himselfe, the whole multitude of the heavenly hoast, and the ve∣ry
best of Christians have commended to us from hea∣ven; this I am sure is the Ita ex ipso or∣dine manife∣statur, id esse dominicum et verum quod sit prius tradi∣tum; id autem extranum et falsum quod sit posterius im∣missum. Terul. De Praescript. ad. rs. Haericos, c. 11 p. 178. Po∣tiora sunt ad instruendam animam priora quam postera. Teri. de Testi∣monio Anim, c. 5. ancientest and the best patterne of Christmas-keeping, that we reade of; why then should we be unwilling or ashamed for to imitate it? When our Saviour was borne into the world at first, we heare of no feasting, drinking, healthing, roa∣roaring, carding, dicing, Stage-playes, Mummeries, Masques or heathenish Christmas pastimes; alas these precise puritanicall Angels, Saints and shepheards (as some I feare account them) knew no such pompous pagan Christmas Courtships or solemnities, which the Divell and his accursed instruments have since appro∣priated to his most blessed Nativitie. See Ambrose Sermo 7. & 9. Here we have nothing but Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will towards men: this is the Angels, the shepheards only Christmas Caroll: which the Virgin Mary in the for∣mer chapter, hath prefaced with this celestiall hymne of prayse. Luk. 1.46, 47. My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour: and Zacha∣rias seconded with this heavenly sonnet: Luk. 1.68, 69 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redee∣med his people: And hath raised up an horne of salvation for us in the house of his servant David. This was the only sport and meriment, these the soule-ravishing Ditties, with which men and Angels celebrated the very first Christmas that was kept on earth; yea this is the Rev. 4.8 9, 10, 11. c. .12, 13, 14. c. 7 9, to 13. onely Christmas solemnity that the blessed Saints and Angels now obserue in heaven: why then should we so earnestly contend for any other? If we reflect up∣on the Christians in Apologia ad∣vers. Gentes, c. 39, 40. Tertullians, Paedagogil. 2 c 3, 4, 5. Clemens A∣lexandrinus, De Vita Contemplaiva lib. pag. 1210. to 1215. Philo Iudaeus, Octavius p. 102. Minucius Felix, Epist. l. 10. e. 97. Plinie the seconds, Contra Gentiles Tm. 5. Col 877. Chrysostomes, and De Martyribus l. 8. Tom. 2. p 390. . Theo∣dorets times: wee shall finde them See my Healthes Sicknes, Edit 2. p. 5 9, 22. & Ioanni Langhecrucius De Vita et Honestate Ecclesiasticorum l. 2. c. 7 to 25. Ioannes Federicus De Ritu bibendi ad Sanittem lib. 1. cap. 2, 3. banishing all glut∣tony,
drunkennesse, health-quaffing, intemperance, dan∣cing, dicing, Stage-playes, fidlers, jesters, baudie songs and lewd discourses from their feasts, and Christian Fe∣stivals; which they celebrated in this manner. Coimus in caetum et con∣gregationē, ut Deum quasi manu facta praecationibus ambiamus o∣rantes. Haec vis Deo grata est. Coimus ad divinaum litterarum cō∣memorationē, si quid praesen∣tium temporū qualitas aut praemonere co∣git, aut recog∣noscere. Certe fidem sanctis vocibus pasci∣mus, spem eri∣gimus, fiduci∣am figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus inculcationi∣bus densamus; ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, et censura divina: nam et iudicaur magno cum pondere, etapud certos de Dei conspectu: summumq, futuri iudicii praeiudicium est si quis ita deliquerit; ut a communione orationis, et convenus, et omnis sancti commercii relegetur. Apolog. advers. Gent. cap. 38, 39. pag. 692. First of all they assembled themselves together into one compa∣nie, that so they might as it were assault and besiege God with their united prayers: Caena nostra de nomine rationem suam ostendit, vocatur enim Agape, id quod penes Graecos di∣lectio est, &c. Nihil vilitatis, nihil immodestiae admittitur: non prius discumbi∣tur quam oratio ad Deum praegusteur: editur quantum esurientes caplunt, bbitur quantum pudicis est utile: ita saturantur ut qui meminerint etiam per noctem a∣dorandum Deum sibi esse: ita fabulantur, ut qui sciant Dominum audire. Post a∣quam manualem ac lumina ut quisque de Scripuris sanctis vel de proprio ingenio po∣test, provocaturin medium Deo canere: hinc probaur quomodo biberit. AEque ora∣tio convivium dirimit; inde disceditur non in catervas caesionum, neque in classes discursationum, nec in eruptiones lascivarum, sed ad eandem curam modestiae et pudicitae, ut qui non tam caenam caenaverint quam disciplinam. Ibidem cap. 39. ag. 696. after that they did feed their faith, erect their hope, settle their confidence, inculcate their discipline with the Scriptures and holy conferences, and with the often inculcations of divine precepts, using withall exhortations, corrections and ecclesiasticall cen∣sures: after which they kept their Agape, or feasts of Love, wherein no immodesty was admitted; at which feasts they never sate downe to eate, till they had first praemised a solemne prayer unto God: and then falling to their meat, they did eate no more than would satisfie their hunger, and drinke no more than was fit for chast persons: satiating themselves so, as that they remembred they were to wor∣ship God in the night: discoursing like such as those who knew that God overheard them. After the bason and ewer and lights are brought in, every one as he was able, was provoked to sing a psalme unto God out of the holy Scriptures, or out of his owne invention: and by this it was manifested how he had drunke. And as prayer be∣gan,
so it likewise concluded their feasts; after which e∣very one departed, not into the routs of roaring swash∣bucklers, nor et into the company of riotous ramblers, nor into the lashings out of lascivious persons; but to the same care of modesty and chastitie, like those who had not so much repasted a supper as discipline. Yea such was the puritanicall rigidnesse of the primitive Christians on the solemne birth-dayes and Inaugurations of the Roman Emperors, when as other men kept revel-rout, feasting and drinking from parish to parish, making the whole Cittie to smell like a taverne, kindling bonefires in every street, and running by troopes to Playes, to impu∣dent prankes, to the enticements of lust &c. accounting their licentious deboistnesse at such seasons their chiefest piety and devotion, (as our Grand Christmas keepers now doe:) that they would neither shadow nor adorne their doores with laurell; nor diminish the day-light with bonefires and torches, nor yet drinke, nor dance, nor runne to Play-houses, which they wholly abandoned; but kept themselves temperate, sober, chast and pious; Propterea i∣gitur publici hostes Christi∣ani, quia Im∣peratoribus ne∣que vanos ne∣que mentien∣tes, neque te∣merarios honores dicant; quia verae re∣ligionis homi∣nes solennita∣tes eorum con∣scientia potius quam lascivia celebraut. O nos merito damnandos! Cur enim vota et gaudia Cae∣sarum casi et sobrii et probi expungimus? cur die laeto non laureis po∣stes adumbra∣mus nec lucer∣nis diem in∣ringimus? Ho∣nesta res est so∣lennitae pub∣lica exigente, inducere do∣mui uae habi∣tum alicuius novi lupanaris &c. Ibidem p. 68. cele∣brating their solemnities, rather with conscience and de∣votion than lasciviousnesse; whence they were reputed publike enemies, as Tertullian, De Vita Contemplativa p. 111. &c. Philo Iudaeus, and Paedagogi l. 2. c. 4. Clemens Alexandrinus most plentifully informe us. Hence Theodoret writes, Pro Pandiis etiam Diasiisque ac Dionysiis hoc est Iovis Liberi{que} patris so∣lennitatibus, Petro, Paulo, Thomae, Sergio, Macello, Leontio, Antonino, Mauri∣tio, aliis{que} sanctis Marribus solennitates populari epulo peraguntur. Proque ila ve∣tei Pompa, pro turpi obscaenitate atque impudentia fiunt modestae, castae, ac tempe∣aniae plenae fesiuitates, non illae quidem mero delibutae, non commessationibus le∣ves, non cachinnis solutae; sed divinis canticis personantes, sacris{que} sermonibus audi∣end is intentae. In quibus ad Deum praeces non sine sanctis lachrymis ac suspiriis Deo summittuntur. Thedoe de Martyribus, l. 8. Tom. 2. p. 390. F. That the Christians of his time, in stead of solemnizing the festivals of love and Bacchus, did celebrate the festivities of Peter, Paul, Thmas, Sergius, Marcellus, Leontius, Antoninus, and other holy Martyrs; and that in stead of that ancient
pompe, that filthy obscenity and impudency that the Pa∣gans used on their festivals, the Christians instituted ho∣ly-dayes full of modesty, chastity and temperance: not such as were moistned with wine, lascivious with riotous feasts, dissolute with shoutes and laughter; but such as resounded with divine songs, as were spent in hearing holy Sermons, on which prayers were humbly powred out to God not without teares and sighs. Thus did the primitive Chri∣stians spend their solemne holy-dayes; and so should we doe too, as our owne Statute of 5. & 6. Ed. 6. c. 3. ex∣presly enjoynes us. How the primitive Christians cele∣brated the Nativitie of our Saviour in particular, and in what manner we also ought to solemnize it, let Gregory Nazianzen in his 38 Oration upon our Saviours Na∣tivity, now at last informe us; where thus hee writes: Page 58, 584, 585. Na∣talis Chriti dies quomodo celebrandus. Vide Nicetae Comment. Ibidem. Hoc festum nostrum est, (treating of our Saviours Nativitie) Hoc hodierno die celebramus, Dei nimirum ad homines accessum, ut ad Deum proficiscamur, aut, ut aptiori verbo ut r, revertamur, abjecto{que} veteri homine novum induamus; et quemadmodum in veteri Adamo mortui sumus, ita in Christo vivamus, unà cum eo nas∣centes, unà crucifixi, unà sepulti, unà resurgentes. Prae∣clara enim vicissitudo atque conversio mihi sentiena est, ut quemadmodum ex secundioribus rebus adversae na∣tae sunt, sic contra ex adversis ad laeta prospera{que} redeam. Vbi enim abundavit peccatum, superabundavit gratia: et si gustus condemnavit, quantò magis Christi passio ju∣stificavit? Quocirca non ostentoriè, sed divinè; non mun∣di ritu, sed supra mundi ritum; non res nostras sed nostri, vel ut rectius loquar, Domini; non ea quae infirmitatis sunt, sed quae curationis; non ea quae creationis, sed ea quae recreationis instaurationisque celebremus. Id autem hac demum ratione consequemur, si nec domus limina sertis coronemus, Yet how da∣metrally oppo∣site is our practise now to this advice. nec choreas agetemus, nec vicos ornemus, nec oculum pascamus, nec aurem cantu demulceaus, nec lenocinijs gustum titillemus, nec olfactum effaeminemus, nec tactui obsequamur, promptis inquam illis ad vitium
vijs, peccatique januis, nec teneris et circumfluentibus ve∣stibus emolliamur, quarum ut quaeque pulcherrima, ita maximè inutilis jacet, nec gemmarum splendoris nec auri fulgoribus, nec colorum artificijs nativam pulchri∣tudinem ementientibus, atque adversus imaginem divinam excogitatis, Rom. 13. nec commessationibus et ebrie∣tatibus, quas cubilia et lasciviae comitantur, quandoqui∣dem malorum magistrorum mala doctrina est, vel potius malorum seminum mala seges. Nec thoros altos serva∣mus, ventri delicias sternentes: nec vina generosa, co∣quorum lenocinia, liquorum profusas magnificentias in precio habeamus. Nec terra et mare charum nobis ac pre∣ciosum stercus offerant: hoc enim nomine deliias ornare soleo. Nec alius alium intemperantia superare conten∣damus. Mihi enim intemperantia est quicquid super∣fluum est, usibusque necessarijs superest, idque esurienti∣bus alijs atque inopia laborantibus; ijs inquam, qui ex eodem luto et temperatione creati sunt. Verum haec pro∣phanis atque ethnico fastui solennitatibusque relinqua∣mus: qui cùm ijs deorum nomen tribuant, qui sacrificio∣rum nidore oblectantur, congruentur profectò eos helluan∣do colunt, mali utique mlorum daemonum et fictores et sacerdotes et cultores. At nos à quibus Verbum adora∣tur, verborum delicijs (si quid tamen delicijs dandum est) indulgeamus, atque ex lege divina et narrationibus, cùm alijs, tum ijs praesertim, quibus praesentis festi mysteria explicantur, voluptatem capiamus. Ita enim commodae, minimaeque ab eo, à quo convocati sumus, alienae deliciae nostrae fuerint. Which thus he seconds, in his 48 Oration against Iulian. Pag. 796, 797 & Vincenti Speculum Hi∣storiale l. 1. cap. 94. Festa Christianorū quomodo ce∣lebranda. Ac primum quidem fratres laete∣mur non corporis splendore, non vestium permutationibus et magnificentijs, non Rom. 13. commessationibs et ebrietati∣bus, quarum fructum cubilia et impudicitias esse didici∣stis: nec floribus plateas coronemus, nec unguentorum turpitudine mensas, nec vestibula ornemus, nec visibili lumine splendescat domus, nec tibicinum concentu plausi∣busque personent: hic enim Gentilitiae festorum celebrati∣onis
mos est. Nos vero ne his rebus Deum honoremus, ne praesens tempus indignis rebus attollamus; verum ani∣mae puritate, et mentis bilaritate, et lucernis totum Ec∣clesiae corpus illustrantibus, hoc est divinis speculationibus t sententijs super sacrosanctum candelabrum erectis, et excitatis, orbique universo praelucentibus. Parvum meo quidem judicio ac tenuè, si cum hoc comparetur, lumen illud omne est, quod homines festos dies celebrantes pri∣vatim publicèque accendunt, &c. Hymnos pro tympans assumamus, psalmodiam pro turpibus et flagitiosis canti∣bus, plausum gratiarum actionis et canoram manuum actionem pro plausibus theatricis, gravitatem pro risu, prudentē sermonem pro ebrietate, decus et honestatem pro delicijs. Quod si etiam te ut festum laeto animo celebran∣tem, tripudiare convenit; tripudia tu quidem, sed non ob∣scenae Matth. 14. Herodiadis tripudium, ex quo Baptistae ca∣put secuta est, verum 2 Regum 6. Davidis ob arcae requietem saltitantis, quo quidem itineris sancti ac Deo grati a∣gilitatem volubilitatemque mysticè designari existimo. These are the Christmas exercises, this the only Christ∣mas-keeping, that the primitive Christians used, all and this godly Bishop calls for. To passe by that excel∣lent passage of Salvian, against our Christmas Enter∣ludes, which fully meetes with the Objectors frenzie: * Christo ergo ô amentia monstruosa, Christo Circenses offerimus et Mimos, tunc et hoc maximè, cum ab eo aliquid boni capimus, cum prosperitatis aliquid ab eo attribuitur, aut victoria de hostibus à divinitate donatur? Et quid aliud hac re facere videmur, quam si quis homini beneficium largienti injuriosus sit, aut blandientem convi∣tijs caedat, aut osculantis vultum mucrone transigat, &c. which I have formerly englished. As also to pretermit De Nativitate Christi Ser∣mo, Tom. 2. p. 250. St. Cyprian, De Tempore Sermo 1. to 36. St. Augustine, De Nativita∣te Domini Ser∣mones 10. O∣perum fol. 28. to 53. Leo, In Natali Domini Serm. Col. 62, 63, to 66. Ber∣nard, with Chrysostome De Beato Phi∣logonio Ora∣tio Tom. 2. Col. 834, 835, 836 Bda Homiliae Hyemales In Naali. Domini Tom. 7. Col. 298. to 310. HRabanus Homil. 1, 2, 4, 5. Operum Tom. 5. p. 581, 582, 583. De Insti∣tutione Cleri∣corum l. 2. c. 31. Tom. 6. p. 21. with divers o∣thers. sundry other Fathers, who have written of our Saviours Nativitie, how it ought to be celebra∣ted with the greatest holinesse, sobriety, and chiefest devotion; I shall relate the summe of all their Mindes
in the words of St. Ambrose, who is somewhat copi∣ous in this theame Sermo 2. Dominica 1. Adventus, he writes thus. Operū Tom. 5. p. 2. Hoc tempus, fratres charissimi, non immerito Domini adventus vocatur, nec sine causa sancti Patrs adventum Domini celebrare caeperunt, et sermo∣nes de his diebus ad populum habuerunt, id namque ideo instituerunt, ut se unusquisque fidelis praepararet et emen∣daret, quo dignè Dei ac Domini sui Telesphorus Papa apud Ro∣manos natalis Domini cele∣brationis pri∣mus author le∣gitur extitisse. HRabanus Marus De In∣stitut. Clerico∣rum l. 2. c. 31. Operum Tom. 6. p. 21. . Nativitatem ce∣lebrare valeret. Nam si aliquis vestrum seniorem suum in ejus domum suscepturus, ab omnibus sordibus et im∣mundis rebus ipsam domum mundaret, et quaeque honesta et necessaria essent, secundum suam possibilitatem praepa∣raret; et hoc facit mortalis suscepturus mortalem; quanto magis se mundare debet creatura, ut suo creatori appa∣renti in carne non displiceat: Ille justus venit ad nos peccatores, ut ex peccatoribus faceret justos: pius venit ad impios, ut nos faceret pios: humilis venit ad superbos, ut ex superbis faceret humiles. Quid plura? ille natura bonus venit ad homines qui erant pleni omnibus malis. Quapropter hortamur vos, ut his dibus abundantius e∣leêmosynas faciatis; ad Ecclesiam frequentius conveniatis, confessionem pecatorum vestrorum purissimè faciatis, et ab omni immunditia vos studiosissimè contineatis. Odium nihilominus, iram, et indignationem, clamorem et blas∣phemiam, superbiam atque jactantiam cum omni carnali delectatione procul a vobis repellatis: ut cùm dies Do∣minicae Nativitatis advenerit, salubriter ipsum celebrare possitis. Et sicut multi sunt soliciti de carnalibus divitijs, et de preciosis vestimentis, ut honorabiliores caeteris vide∣antur in illa die; ita vos solicitiores estote de spirituali∣bus divitijs et vestimentis: quia sicut anima melior est carne, ita deliciae spiritales meliores sunt quàm carnales. Et multò melius est animam ornare virtutibus, quàm corpus preciosis induere vestibus. Haec admonitio Fratres, idcirco ad vos facta est, ut qui boni sunt per hanc sint me∣liores; et qui malos se esse recolunt, certissime convertan∣tur; ut pariter in die Dominicae Nativitatis laetari spiri∣taliter
mereātur. Which he thus prosecuts in his 4. Ser. Dominica 2. Adventus. Oprum Tō. 5. p. 3. A, B. Which Homily I finde veba∣tim i HRa∣banus Maurus his Workes, Homilia 1. ante Natalem Do∣mini Operum Colon. Agrip. 1626. Tom. 5. p. 580, 581. Laetitia quanta sit, quan∣tus{que} concursus, cum Imperatoris mundi istius natalis celebrandus est, bene nostis quemadmodum duces eius et principes omnes militantes accurate sericis vestibus ac∣cincti, operosis cingulis auro fulgente pretiosis ambiant solito nitidius in conspectu regis incedere. Credunt enim maius esse Imperatoris gaudium, si viderit majorem suae apparationis ornatum; tantoque illum laetum futurum, quanto ipsi fuerint in ejus festivitate devoti; ut quia Im∣perator tanquam homo corda non conspicit, affectum eo∣rum circa se probet vel habitum contuendo, ita fit ut splen∣didius se accuret quisquis regem fidelius diligit. Deinde quia in die Natalis sui sciunt eum largum futurum ac donaturum plura vel ministris suis, vel ijs qui in domo ejus abjecti putantur et viles, tanta prius thesauros ejus replere divitiarum varietate festinant, ut in quantum prorogare voluerit, in tantum prorogatio copiosa non de∣sit, et ante voluntas donandi deficiat, quàm substantia largiendi. Haec autem ideo solicite faciunt, quia majo∣rem sibi remunerationem pro hac solicitudine sperant futuram. Si ergo fratres saeculi istius homines propter praesentis honoris gloriam terreni regis sui natalem diem tanta apparitione suscipiunt, qua nos accuratione aeterni regis nostri Iesu Christi Natalem suscipere debemus? qui pro devotione nostra non nobis temporalem largietur gloriam, sed aeternam; nec terreni honoris administra∣tionem dabit quae successore finitur, sed caelestis imperij dignitat̄, quae non habet successorē. Qualis autē nostra re∣muneratio sit futura, dicit Propheta. Isay 66. 1 Cor. 2. Quae oculus non vidit, nec auris audivit, ne in cor hominis ascendit, quae praeparavit Deus diligentibus e. Quibus indu∣mentis nos exornari oportet? Quod autem diximus nos, hoc est animas nostras: quia rex noster Christus non tam itorem vestium, quam animarum requirit affectum, nec inspicit ornamenta corporum, sed considerat corda me∣ritorum: nec fragilis cinguli praecingentis lumbos opero∣sitatem
miratur, sed fortis castimoniae restringentis libi∣dinem ad pudicitiaem plus miratur. Ambiamus ergo in∣veniri apud ipsum probati fide, compti misericordia, mori∣bus accurati; et qui fidelius Christum diligit, nitidius se mandatorum ejus observatione componat: ut verè nos in se credere videat, cùm ita in ejus solennitate fulgemus, et magis laetus sit, quo nos perspexerit puriores. Atque ideo ante complures dies castificemus corda nostra, mun∣demus conscientiam, purificemus spiritum, et nitidi ac sine macula immaculati Domini suscipiamus adventum: ut cujus nativitas per immaculatam virginem constitit, ejus Natalis per immaculatos servulos procuretur. Quisquis enim in illo die sordidus fuerit ac pollutus, Natalem Chri∣sti ortum{que} non curat: intersit licet Dominicae festivitati corpore, mente tamen longiùs à Servatore separatur. Nec societatem habere poterunt immundus et sanctus, avarus et misericors, corruptus ac virgo; nisi quod magis ingeren∣do se indignus offensionē contrahit cū minimè se cognoscit. Dum enim vult officiosus esse, injuriosus existit: sicut ille in Matth. 22. Evangelio, qui in caetu sanctorū invitaus ad nup∣tias venire ausus est vestem non habens nuptialem: et cùm alius niteret justitia, alius luceret fide, alius casti∣tate fulgeret, ille solus conscientiae faeditate pollutus, cunctis splendentibus deformi horrore sordebat. Et quantò plus simul discumbentium beatorum candeb at sanctitas, tantò magis peccatorum illius apparebat improbitas, qui poterat minus displicuisse forsitan, si in consortium justorm mini∣me se dedisset. Igitur fratres suscepturi Natalem Do∣mini, ab omni nos delictorum faece purgemus, repleamus thesrum ejus diversorum numerum donis, ut in die sancta sit unde peregrini accipiant, reficiatur viduae, pau∣peres vestiantur, &c. Sermo 5. D∣minica 3. Ad∣ventus, p. 3. G. Supervenientem festivitatem ejus omni ambitione retinere debemus: Retinere, inquam, ut si dies solennitatis transeat, apud nos sanctificationis e∣jus beatitudo permaneat. Haec enim gratia Natalis est Domini Salvatoris, ut in futurū ad Nota. praedestinatos trans∣eat, in praeteritum remaneat ad devotos. Oportet ergo esse
nos sanctitate purs, mundos pudicitia, itidos honestate, ut quò diem fest advenire propinquius cernimus, e accura∣tius icedamus. Si enim mulierculae solent aliquas ferias suscepturae, maculas vestium suaru aqua diluere: cur non magis nos accepturi Naalem Domini, maulas nimar nostrarum fletibus ablamus? Sermo 7. in Die Natalis Domini p. 5. H. . A. Vnusquis{que} ergo quic∣quid in se reprehensibile recognoscit, in hac die in qa Fi∣lius Dei nascitur, corrigat: id est, qui fuit adulter, vo∣veat Deo castitatem: qui avarus, largitatem: qui ebrio∣sus, sobrietatem; qui superbus, humilitatem: qui de∣tractor, charitatem voveat et reddat: secundum illu Psalmi versiculum: Psal. 75. Vovete, et redite Domino Deo vestro. Nos fideliter voveams, ille dabit possibili∣tatem solvendi. Valde quippe onestum est fratres, ut nullus sit qui non odiè domino aliquid offerat. Regibus vel amicis susceptis munera damus, et creatori omnium ad nos venienti nihil dabimus? Nihil enim à nobis ma∣gis requirit, quàm nosmetipsos. Offeramus igitur i nos ipsos, quatenus et à praesentibus malis, et ab aeternis cru∣ciatibus, ipsius ineffabili pietate liberati, in caelestis regn beatitudine suscepti perpetuò valeamus gaudere. And Sermo 6. Dominica quarta Adventus: he proceedes thus. Pag. 4. E, F,  Propria divinitate fratres dilectissimi, jam adveniunt dies, in quibus Natalem Domini Servatoris cum gaudio desideramus celebrare, et ideo rogo et admoneo, ut quan∣tum possumus cum Dei adjutorio laboremus, quatenus in illo die cum sincera et pura conscientia, et mundo corde et casto corpore, ad altare Domini possimus accedere, et corpus, vel etiam sanguinem ejus non ad judicium, sed ad remedium animae nostrae mereamur accipere. In Christi enim corpore vita nostra consistit, sicut et ipse Dominus noster dixit Ioan. 6. Nisi manducaveritis carnē Filii hominis et biberitis ejus sanguinem, non habetis vitam in vobis. Mutet ergo vitā, qui vult accipere vitā. Nā si non mutat vita, ad judicium accipiet vitam, et magi ex ipsa cor∣rumpitur, quam sanetur; magis occiditur, quàm vivifice∣tur. Sic eim dixit Apostolus: 1. Cor. 11. Qui manducat
corpus Domini, et bibit sanguinem ejus indignè, judi∣cium sibi manducat et bibit. Et ideo licet omni tempore bonis operibus ornatos ac splendidos esse conveniat, praeci∣pu tamen in die Natalis Domini, sicut in Evangelio ipse dixit, Matth. 5. ut lucere debeant opera nostra coram homi∣nibus. Considerate quaeso fratres, quando aliquis homo potens aut nobilis ntalem aut suum aut filij sui celebrare desiderat, quanto studio ante plures dies quicquid in domo suo sordidum viderit ordinat emundare, quicquid ineptum et incongruum projicit, quicquid utile et necessarium prae∣cipit exhibere: domus etiam si obscura fuerit, dealbatur, et diversis respersa floribus adornatur: pavimenta autem à scopis mundantur, quicquid etiam ad laetitiam animi, et corporis delicias pertinet omni sollicitudine providetur. Vt quid ista fratres charissimi nisi ut dies natalicius cum gau∣dio celebretur hominis morituri? Si ergo tanta praeparas in natalicio tuo, aut filij tui; quanta praeparare debes sus∣cepturus Natalem Domini tui? Si talia praeparas mori∣turo, qualia praeparare debes aeterno? Quicquid ergo non vis inveniri in domo tua, quantum potes labora ut non in∣veniat Deus in anima tua. Certè si Rex terrenus aut quivis potens paterfamilias ad suum natalicium te invi∣tasset, qualibus vestimentis studeres ornatus incedere? quàm novis vel nitidis, quàm splendidis, quo nec vetustas, nec vilitas, nec aliqua faeditas oculos invitantis offende∣ret? Tali ergò studio, in quantum praevales Christo aux∣iliante contende, ut diversis virtutum ornamentis animam tuam compositam, simplicitatis gemmis, et sobrietatis flo∣ribus adornatam, ad solennitatem regis aeterni, id est, ad Natalem Domini Salvatoris, cum secura conscientia pro∣cedas, castitate nitida, charitate splendida, eleëmosynis candida. Christus enim Dominus noster si te ita compo∣situm ejus natalitium celebrare cognoverit, ipse per se ve∣nire, et animam tuam non solùm visitare, sed etiam in ea requiescere, et in perpetuum in illa dignabitur habitare, sicut scriptum est: 2 Cor. 6. Et inhabitabo in illis et inambu∣labo inter eos: Et iterum, Apoc. 3. Ecce sto ad ostium et
pulso; si quis surrexerit et aperuerit mihi, intrabo ad il∣lum, et caenabo cum illo, et ille mecum. Qum faelix est illa anima qui vitam suam ita Deo auxiliante studuerit gubernare, ut Christum hospitem inabiatorem merca∣tur excipere. Sicut è contrario quàm infaelix est illa con∣scientia, toto lachrymarum fonte lugenda, quae se ia malis operibus cruntavit, ut in a non Christus requiescere, sed diabolus incipiat dominari. Talis enim anima si medica∣mentum paenitentiae non citò subvenerit, à luce relinque∣tur, à tenebris occupabitur, vacuabitur dulcedine, reple∣bitur amartudine; à morte invadetur, à vitae repudiabi∣tur. Ideo etiam ab omni inquinamento ante Christi Na∣tlem mults diebus abstinere debemus. Quotiescunque Fratres aut Natalem Domini, aut reliquas solennitates celebrare disponitis,Let our Christmas health quaf∣fers consider this. ebrietatem ant omnia fugite, ira∣cundiae quasi bestiae crudelissimae repugnate, odium velut venenum mortiferum de corde vestro repllite, et tanta in vobis sit charitas, quae non solùm ad amicos, sed etiam us∣que ad ipsos perveniat inimicos, &c. And in is Sermo 11. in Die Circumcisionis Domini nostri Iesu Christi; as if he had purposely written against our moderne Christ∣mas disorders; he concludes thus. Page 7 H. & . A, . Est mihi adver∣sus plerosque vestrum fratres, querela non modica, de his loquor, quinobiscum Natalem Domini celebrantes, Gen∣tilium se ferijs dediderunt, et post illud caeleste conviviū superstitionis sibi prandium paraverunt; ut qui ante lae∣te laetificati fuerant sanctitate, inebriarentur postea vani∣tate; ignorantes, quod qui vult regnare cum Christo, no possit gaudere cum saeculo: et qui vult invenire justiti∣am, debet declinare luxuriam. Alia est enim ratio vitae aeternae, alia desperatio lasciviae temporalis. Ad illam virtute ascenditur, ad istam perditione descenditur. At∣que ideo qui vult esse divinorum particeps, non debet esse socius idolorū. Note this well. Idoli enim portio est inebriare vino men∣tem, ventrem cibo distendere, saltationibus membra tor∣quere, et ita pravis actionibus occupari, ut cogaris igno∣rare quod Deus est. Vnde sanctus Apostolus haec prae∣videns
dicit: 2 Cor. 6. Quae portio justitiae cum iniquitate? aut quae societas luci cum tenebris? aut quae pars fidelis cum infideli? qui autem consensus templo Dei cum ido∣lis? Ergo si nos sumus templum Dei, cur in templo Dei colitur festivitas idolorum? Cur ubi Christus habitat, qui est abstinentia, temperantia, castitas, inducitur commessa∣tio, ebrietas atque lascivia? Dicit Salvator, Matth. 6. Nemo potest duobus Dominis servire; hoc est, Deo et Mam∣monae. Quomodo igitur potestis religiose Epiphaniam Do∣mini procurare, qui jam Kalendas quantum in vobis est, devotissime celebrastis? Ianus enim homo fuit unius con∣ditor civitatis, quae Ianiculum nuncupatur, in cujus hono∣rem à gentibus Kalendae sunt Ianuariae nuncupatae: unde qui Kalendas Ianuarias colit, peccat, quoniam homini mortuo defert divinitatis obsequium. Inde est quod ait Apostolus: Gal. 4. Dies observatis, et menses, et tempo∣ra, et annos, timeo ne sine causa laboravero in vobis. Observavit enim diem et mensem qui his diebus aut jeju∣navit, aut ad Ecclesiam non processit. Observavit diem qui hesterno die non processit ad Ecclesiam, processit ad campum. Ergo Fratres omni studio Gentilium festivita∣tem et frias declinemus, ut quando illi epulantur et laet sunt, tunc nos simus sobrij aque jejuni, quo intelligant lae∣titiam suam nostra abstinentia condemnari. Augustine Ena. in Psal. 81. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 18. Illi habeant mare in theatro nos habeamus portum in Christo. If then our Saviours Nativitie ought thus to be celebrated by us; if all Nullus ve∣strum se ine∣brit, quia e∣brius insano fimilimus est. Nolite in nominibus biben∣do nomina ve∣stra delere de coelo: sunt quidem multi, quod peius est, qui non solum seipsos inebi∣nt, sed etiam alios cogunt, et adiurant, ut amplius quam expedit bibant, &c. Ille Christianus qualis est, qui etsi lo∣cum invenerit ad vomitum usque bibet et posteaquam se inbriaverit, furget velut phreneticus et insanus, diabo∣lico more ba∣lare et saltare, verba turpia et amatoria, vel luxutiosa can∣are, &c. HRbanus Maurus, Homilia in Dominicis Dibus. & De Bonorum Christianorum t Malorum Moribus. Operum Tom. 5. . 605. D. 607. . drunkennesse, epicurisme, health-quaffing, dancing, dicing, Enterludes, Playes, lasciviosnesse, pride and pagan customes must now be laid aside; if all kinde of sinne and wickednesse whatsoever must now be ba∣nished our bodies, soules, and houses; if our soules must now especially be cleansed by repentance from all their spirituall filhinesse, adorned, beautified with every Christian grace, and made such holy spirituall Temples, that Psal. 24.7, 8, 9, 10. Christ the King of glory may come and dwell
within them: if nought but 1 Pet. 1.14, 15 16. 2 Pet. 3.3. holinesse, temperance, sobriety and devotion must now be found within us, yea, if fasting and abstinence must now be practised, as all these Fathers teach us, let us now at last for very shame abandon all those bacchanalian infernall Christ∣mas disorders, Enterludes, sports and pastimes which now overspread the world, as See Mr. Sa∣muel Bird his Dialogue of the use of the pleasures of this present life, p. 15. to 31. diametrally contrary not onely to Christians, but to our Saviours Nativitie, which they most desperately dishonour and prophane. And if there be any such deboist ones left among us (as alas there are too too many every where) who will still support and pleade for these abominable Christmas ex∣cesses, not onely in despite of God, of Christ, of An∣gels, Fathers,See Act. 7. Scene 3. Councels, and godly Christians who condemne thē, but even of our owne pious Statute, viz. 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. Which expresly enjoynes menAll Stage-playes and dancing ther∣fore, together with carding and dicing are unlawfull sports and pa∣stimes by thi very Statute, and so punish∣able by the Statute of 1 Car. cap. 1. See here p. 240. to 244. accor∣dingly. even in the Christmas holy-dayes, as well as others; to cease from all other kinde of labour, and to apply themselves Ambrose Ser. 11.ONELY AND WHOLLY to lad and praise the Lord, to resort and heare Gods word, to come to the holy Com∣munion, to heare, to learne and to remember almighty Gods great benefits, his manifold mereies, his inestimable gracious goodnesse so plentifully powred upon all his crea∣tures, and that of his infinite and unspeakable goodnesse, without any mans desert: and in remembrance hereof to render him most high and hearty thankes, with prayers and supplications, for the reliefe of all their daily necessi∣ties; because these holy-dayes are separated from all pro∣phane uses, and sanctified and hallowed, dedicated and ap∣pointed no to any Saint or creature, but onely unto God and his true worship. (Which Statute excludes all Stage-plaies Masques, See the Sta∣tute of 21 Ia∣cobi, for the keeping of the Lords day; Which names dancing, and passed the Lower house. dancing, dicing, and such other Christ∣mas outrages from this sacred festivall; it being separa∣ted from all prophane uses, and onely and wholly devoted to Gods worship, and the forenamed duties of religion, which are inconsistent with them:) If there be any such, I say, as these within our Church, I only wish them
banished into Nelewki in Moscovia, every Christmas; where if we beleeve In Nelewki oppido, quod cognomen ab infundendis poculis habet, omnibus ex∣traneis militi∣bus et advenis satellibusque principis, ine∣briandi vario potus genere, facultas concs∣a est, quod Moschovitis gravi sub poena prohibetur; ex∣ceptis aliquot diebus in an∣no, videlicet tempore Nati∣vitatis et resur∣rectionis Do∣minicae, pro festo Peteco∣stes, et in qui∣busdam solen∣nioribus fetis divorum, prae∣cipue vero Ni∣colai, quem divino fere cultu prosequuntur, et beatae virgi∣nis Mariae, Pe∣tri et Iohannis festis: interea vero velut vin∣culis emissi, Bacchum et non festum illius divi (cuius diem tunc temporis celebrant) advenisse gratulantur, et sacris nondum peractis, vel ut sues vario potus genere obruti, temulen∣ti, brii{que} identidem vociferantes, seque velut obsessi, muuo caedendes, et contumeliis varis afficientes vaganur. Si autem huic genti quotidie, inebriandi facultas concessa esse ese mtuis caedibus funditus exterminarent &c. Guagninus, Rerum Polonicarum Tom. 2. f. 171. Guagninus, all Moschovites are prohibited to health, to be drunke, or to keepe revel∣rout, except onely in the Christmas, Easter, Whitsontide, and certaine other solemne feasts of Saints, especially of St. Nicholas their Patron, and the festivities of the Vir∣gin Mary, Peter and Iohn; on which like men let out of prison, they honour Bacchus more than God, or these their Saints; healthing and quaffing downe sundry sorts of liquors so long, till they are as drunke as swine, and then they fall to roaring, shouting, quarrelling, abusing, and from thence to wounding, stabbing and murthering one another; Insomuch that if this drunkennesse and disorder were permitted every day, they would utterly destroy one another with mutuall slaughters. This is the Moscho∣vites Christmas-keeping, who have liberty granted them to be drunke all Christmas, yea these are their drunken fatall ends, which if our Christmas roaring boyes affect, they may doe well to keepe their Christ∣mas commons with these beastly drunken swine, where strangers have libertie to be drunke, to carouze & health even all Christmas, & at all times else. But let all who have any sparkes of sobriety, temperance or grace within them, abominate these unchristian Christmas extravagancies; 1 Pet. 1.17. passing all the time of their sojour∣ning here in feare, concluding with that speech of holy Peter; 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4 The time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, and to have walked in lasciviousnesse, lusts, excesse of wine and riot, revellings, banquettings, abominable idolatries; bacchanalian Christ∣mas pastime and disorders: And thereupon resolving, 1 Cor. 5.7. to purge out all this old leaven, (of dancing, dicing,
healthing, Playes and riot) that so they may be a new lumpe, because Christ their Passeover is now sacrificed for them: casting away all these workes of darknesse, and putting on the armour of light: walking honestly as in the day, (especially in the dayes of Christs Nativitie) Rom. 13.12, 13, 14. not in rioting and drunkennesse, not in chambering and wantonnes, strife and envying, (no nor See Ambrose, Sermo 11. & here Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. yet in dancing, di∣cing, carding, Stageplayes, Mūmeries, Masques, and such like heathenish practises, which are altogether unsuitable for Christians, especially at such sacred times as these, as sundry See Act. 7. Scene 3. forequoted Councels have resolved:) but put∣ting on the Lord Iesus Christ, (who about this time put on our nature, as wee must now put on his grace, his holinesse) and making no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: So shall wee celebrate our Saviours Nativity, and all other Christian Festivals, with which Stage-playes are altogether inconsistent, both to our Saviours honour, our owne present comfort, and our eternall future joy. For the third part of the Objection: that Stage-playes  are necessary to recreate and delight the people. I answer first;Answ. 1. that there are many other farre better, easier and cheaper recreations void of all offence, with which the people may seasonably delight themselves: therefore they neede not these lewd superfluous costly Enterludes to sport themselves withall. Secondly, wee  see that people live best of all without them. There are See Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth. here p. 416.417. Phi∣lippus Gluve∣rius Antiquae Germaniae, l. 1. c. 20. pag. 181, 182. & here p. 552, 553. ac∣cordingly. many Nations in the world, who never knew what Stage-playes meant; yea there are sundry shires and Citties in our Kingdome, where Players (who for the most part harbour about London, where they have on∣ly constant standing Play-houses) never come to make them sport; and yet they never complaine for want of pleasures, or these unnecessary Stage-delights: The most, the best of men live happily, live comfortably without them; yea See here Act. 6. Scene 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, & 19. accordingly. farre more pleasantly than those who most frequent them. Therefore they are no
such necessary pastimes, but that they may well be spa∣red.  Thirdly, there are none so much addicted to Stage-playes, but when they goe unto places where they can∣not have them, or when as they are suppressed by pub∣like authority, (as in See here Act. 6. Scene 19.times of pestilence, and in Lent till now of late) can well subsist without them, finding out far better recreations to solace themselves withall, and to passe away their idle houres: therefore they are  meere superfluous pleasures which may be better spa∣red than enjoyed. Fourthly, what people should these delight? Good people? Alas, See Act. 4. Scene 2. Act. 5. Scene 11. pag. 291. & Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. they hate them, abhorre them, they see nought else in Playes but filthi∣nesse, wickednesse, and that which grieves their righteous soules: therefore their soules can take no pleasure in them. Lewd people? Alas, their Magistratus enim non tan∣tum id agere debet ut ipse bonus sit, sed et hoc efficere ut alii mali esse desistant. Sl∣vian De Gubr. Dei l. 7. p. 269. lewdnesse should be crossed, checked, suppressed, not countenanced, not fo∣mented with this foode of vice: yea these should ra∣ther be afflicted, nay terrified with Gods judgements, hell, and the serious contemplation of their owne for∣lorne sinfull estates, which might leade them on to sin-lamenting sorrow and sincere repentance; then soo∣thed, then delighted with these momentany pleasures of sinne, which doe but Hebr. 3.13. crust their consciences, obdu∣rate their impenitent hearts, and Iob 21.11, 12 13. Amos 6.1. to 9. Iam. 5.5. post them on to hell with more security and greater speed. Good men neede not these infernall delights to make them worse; ill men neede to want them that they may grow better; See Chryso∣stome Hom. 8. De Poeniten∣tia, here p. 431, 432. & Act. 6. Scen. 12. & 20. for whiles they diligently frequent them, they are altogether hopelesse of becomming good: therefore it is necessary onely that all should want them, but no necessitie at all  that any should enjoy them. Lastly, See Act. 6. Scene 5. & Act . Scene 6, 7. all the wisest Heathen Emperours, States, Philosophers, have deemed them so unnecessary, so intollerably pernicious, that they have wholly abandoned them as good for nothing but to corrupt the peoples mindes and manners:See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, accordingly. yea all the pri∣mitive Christians, the primitive Church both under the Law and Gospell; together with sundry Councels, Fathers,
Christian Emperors, Kings and Writers have excluded them Church and State as unlawfull, unsufferable to re∣maine in either, as recreations no wayes fit for Christians, especially on festivals and holy seasons; on which no man ever thought them usefull but Haywood the Player, in his Apologie for Actors, the onely booke I know in de∣fence of Popu∣lar Stage-playes, and that God wot a poore one, which is very well refuted by I.G. in his reply unto it. one poore scribling hackney Stage-player, for his owne advantage, who was likely to be undone if Playes should once miscarry. Wherefore I may safely conclude with the unanimous suffrage of all the forequoted Authorities: that Stage-playes are no whit usefull or necessary to recreate or delight the people, who may live well without them; but cannot live well with them, as I have more largely proved Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & 19, 20. on which you may reflect. SCENA QVARTA. THE fourth Objection for the lawfulnesse of Playes is this: See Hay∣woods Apo∣logie for A∣ctors. That they are ancient,Object. 4. and of long continuance, that they are tollerated still among us; that many, yea most frequent them, approve them in their judgements; therefore they are certainly law∣full. To this I answer first;Answ. 1. That the long continuance and antiquitie of Stageplayes is no good argument of their goodnesse. The Rev. 12.9. 1 Iohn 3.8. Divell and Rom. 5.12, 13, 14. sin are of greater anti∣quitie and continuance than Stage-playes; yet their an∣tiquity makes neither of them good: yea both of them are therefore the 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Rev. 12.9. worse, because they are so ancient; and so are Playes. Ill things the elder they are the worse. Secondly, though Playes are ancient, yet their
Daemonum sunt, non ho∣minum secula∣ria spectacula. Chrysost. Hom. 31. in Ioan. Tom. 3. Col. 130. D. See Act. 1, 2. & Chorus. Poly∣chronicon l. 3. chap. 34. I. G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 19, 20, 21, 22. Peter Martyr, Locorum Com∣munium Clas∣sis 2. c. 12. sect. 15, 19. anaeus Ethicae Chri∣stianae l. 2. c. 8. p. 107. Mr. Gataker of the Lawfull use of Lots, p. 216. HRabanus Maurus De Vni∣verso l. 0. c. 16. to 39. Isiodor Hispalensis Originum l. 18. c. 16. to 60. Vincentius Spe∣ulum Doctrinale, l. 11. c. 93, 94, 95, 96. with sundry other forequoted Authors, accor∣dingly. originall is knowne what it was, it was from their Father the Divell, and idolatrous Pagans: and that which had so bad a beginning, will hardly contract any reall goodnesse by any effluxe of time. Third∣ly, though they were ancient and of long continuance among heathen Greekes and Romans, yet they are but of punic standing among Christians, See Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5. & Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. the primitive Church and Christians wholly abandoning and never ad∣mitting them, as I have largely proved. Fourthly, though they have long continued, yet their perscipti∣on hath beene oft interrupted, and themselves suppressed as well by Pagans as Christians: yea See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7. throughout. the very best and chiefest of Pagans, of Christians have alwayes con∣stantly oppugned them from their very infancy till this present, as most pernicious evills, as I have largely pro∣ved. Their antiquitie therefore is onely an argument of their long-continued, long-oppugned lewdnesse, no proofe at all of their present goodnesse. Answ. 2.Secondly I answer. That their tolleration is a strong evidence of their mischievous naughtinesse: since good and profitable things are alwayes approved, established, and nought but See Rom. 9.22. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Pet. 3.20. Luk. 13.7, 8. ill things tollerated or connived at, which are to be removed: But admit they are thus tol∣lerated, yet their tolleration makes them not good or lawfull in themselves. We know, that See Stat. De Merton, c. 5.11 H. 7. cap. 8.37 H. 8. c. 9.5 & 6 Ed. 6. c. 20.13 Eliz. cap 8.21 Iac. cap. 7. usury is per∣mitted by the lawes and State; yet See Bp. Dow∣nams Lectures on the 15. Psalme. Bishop Iewell in his Exposition upon 1 Thess. 4. v. 6. p. 110, to 146. with infinite others who have written of Vsurie. it remaines a sinne still: We know, that many wicked men and notorious malefactors are tollerated for a time; and that not one∣ly by men, but Rom. 9.22. 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Pet. 3.10. Ezech. 20. throughout. even by God himselfe, who is patient
and long-suffering towards sinners: and yet they are not therefore good, but bad men still; and Rom. 2.4, 5. Eccl. 8 9, 10, 11. so much the worse, by how much the longer they are forborne. The tolleration therefore of Stage-playes will not evince their goodnesse: the rather, because though they are connived at de facto, yet Se Act. 6. Scene 5, 3, 4. & Act. 7 Scen. 5.7 they are long since condemned de jure by our Lawes, our Statutes, our Magistrates, and Writers, as unlawfull pastimes: their tolleration therefore is no better an evidence of their lawfulnesse, than a reprive or pardon of a condemned traytors inno∣cency: which are onely arguments of a Princes lnity, but infallible testimonies of the traytors guilt. That Playes, that Players are suffered still, (as too many other condemned sins & mischiefes are) it is onely the See M. North∣brookes Trea∣tise against vaine Playes & Enterludes, fol. 36. M. Iohn Field his Decla∣ration of Gods Iudgement at Paris Garden: & I.G. his Re∣futation of the Apologie for Actors. Bodi∣nus De Repub∣lica lib. 6. cap. 1. Gualther Hom. 11. in Nahum accordingly. fault of Magistrates, who may, who should suppresse them, not of our Lawes, which are most severe against them. Thirdly, for the Multitudo peccantium, peccandi licen∣tiam submini∣strat. Hirom Epist. 12. . 3. multitude of Play-haunters, and Play-approvers, I answer; first, that it is no argument of their goodnesse, but of their badnesse rather; since Vulgus enim ex veritate pau∣ca, ex opinione multa iudicat; et omnium o∣pinlonum er∣rore duci sole-Cicero pro Qu. Roscio Oratio, p. 245. & Consola¦ti p. 542. multitude, for the most part is an infallible signe of the worser, not of the better part; of the Matth. 7..13, 14. See Hierom Epist. 14. cap. 2, 3. broad way  which leades to destruction, where the passengers are al∣wayes many; not of the narrow way that leades to eter∣nall life, which few ever finde, and fewer walke in. If multitude were an argument of goodnesse, See my Ani Arminianisme, Edition 2. pag. 12, 129, 130, 131. then Pa∣gans and Mahometans should be as good, nay better than Christians; Papists, better than Protestants drunkards and wicked men, better than sober and good men, because they are more in number than they: yea then the world the flesh and the Divell should be good, yea as good or bet∣ter than God himselfe, because more follow them, serve them, than ther follow God. The multitude therefore of Play-haunters, of Play-patrons is no convincing evi∣dence of their goodnesse. Secondly, we must not judge of the lawfulnesse of unlawful things by the most, but
by the Prov. 2.20. c. 4.1, 2, 4. Exo. 23.2. Non tur∣bam sequantur errantem qui se dicipulos veritatis confi∣tentur. Hierom. Epist. 14. c. 2.best of men: now the best, the wisest of men, as I See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7. Scene 1. to 7. have largely proved, have alwayes condemned Stage-playes, no matter therefore what the multitudes judgement or practise is, Exod. 23.2. Inter causas e∣nim malorum nostrorum est, quod vivimus ad exempla, nec ratione com∣ponimur, sed consuetudine abducimur Quod si pau∣ci fecerint, nolemus imi∣ari; cum plu∣re facere cae∣perint, quasi honestius sit quia frequen∣tius sequimur: et recti apud ns locum te∣net error ubi publicus factus st. Senca Epist. 123. whom we must not follow to doe evill. Thirdly, Christians are not to walke or judge by examples, but by precepts; the Psal. 119.9. Gal. 6.16. 2 Pet. 1.19. word of God, not the actions or lives of men, must be the onely rule both of their practise and their judgements too. Now the Scripture, (yea the See Act. 7. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. whole Church of God from age to age) have passed sentence against Stage-playes, as unlawfull pastimes: no matter therefore what the world esteemes them. Fourthly, for those who approve of Stage-playes or resort unto them, what are they? Children, youngsters, ignorant injudicious persons who know not how to distinguish betweene good and evill, judge∣ing onely of the goodnesse of things by sence, by pleasure, See Act 4. Scene 2. accordingly. by the opinion and practise of others,See (y) before. or as they are swayed by their uruly lusts, not by right reason or the word of God: or else they are gracelesse, dissolute, pro∣phane, lascivious, godlesse persons, (asSee Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. most Players, Play-haunters, and Play-proctors are) who Isay 5.20. call good evill, and evill good: who Isay 3.9. Phil. .19 See my Healths Sicknesse, Edition 2. Epistle to the Reader; and pag. 79, 80, 81, 82. accordingly. count sinne their honour, sobriety, modesty, and true piety, their shame: See Rom. 1.21. to 32. Acts 24.13. c. 28.22. 1 Cor. .14. cap. 4.13. 2 Thess 2.11, 12. 2 Tim. 3., 3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.12, 13, 17, 18. Rom. 3.10. to 19. Isay 5.20. jud∣ging amisse of God, of grace, of holinesse, of all kinde of goodnesse and good men: no matter therefore, what these judge of Stage-playes, who thus misjudge of all things. Let us therefore judge of Stage-playes Iohn 7.24. with righteous judgement, as God, as Christians, as the pri∣mtive Church as Councels, Fathers, and the best, the wisest of Christian, of Pagan Emperours, Magistrates, Republickes, Philosophers, and Writers of all sorts
have See Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7. through∣out. already determined of them to our hands; and then we must certainly condemne them, as most intol∣lerable and unchristian pleasures; as all these have done. SCENA QVINTA. THE fifth Allegation in the behalfe of Stage-playes is this:Object. 5. That there is much good history, many grave sentences, much good councell; much poetry, eloquence, oratory, invention, wit, and learning in them. Therefore they must certainly be very good and com∣mendable recreations. To this I answer first:Answ. 1. that it is true, there is in ma∣ny Stage-playes many commendable parts of history, poetry, invention, rhetoricke, art, wit, learning; toge∣ther with much good language, and some sage Counsell too, all which are good and usefull in themselves; See Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Donato; & De Spectaculis lib. Tertullian. De Spectac. lib. c. 27. & here Act. 3. Scene 1. accordingly. but yet there is so much obscenity, scurrility and lewdnesse mixed with them, like deadly poyson in a sugred potion, that these See Didacus de Tapia in ter∣tiam partem divi Thomae, Artic. 8. p. 546. accordingly. very good things make the Playes farre worse. The stronger the wine, the better, the sweeter the conserves wherewith poyson is contemperated, the more deadly, the more dangerously it workes; the dee∣per it sinkes into the veines, and the more greedily and Animae pestes anto periculo∣sius laedunt quanto subti∣lius serpunt. Concil. Cabilonen∣se 2. Can. 32. insensibly it is swallowed downe. So the more See Tapia qua (h) & Mr. Gosson his Schoole of Abuses, and Playes con∣futed; I.G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, accordingly.wit∣ty, the more eloquent and rhetoricall the Playes, the more imperceptibly, the more perniciously & abundantly diffuse they their vices, their obscenities, & poysonful corruptions into the eares and hearts of the Spectators. It is a true
saying of judicious Augustine, Valde noxia sunt prava di∣serta. De Anim et eius Origine, li. 2. That evill things ele∣gantly expressed are most pernicious: whence Nam et in hoc et Philoso¦phi, et oratores, et poetae perni∣ciosi sunt, quod incautos ani∣mos facile irre∣tire possunt suavitate ser∣monis et car∣minum dulci modulatione currentium. Mella sunt ve∣nenum egen∣tia. De Iustitia l. 5. c. 1. La∣ctantius affirmes; that the heathen Philosophers, Orators and Poets were most hurtfull in this, that they did easily intangle unwary mindes with the sweetnes of their words, and the harmony of their smooth-running verses, which were but as honey covering poyson. The more elegant and witty therefore the Playes, the more dangerous and destructive are they, as the Fathers teach us; there being nothing else but Venenum sub melle late. Hiron. Epist. 57. Damaso, Tom. 2. p. 195. poyson under the honey of art and eloquence. Secondly, the reason why there is so much history, poetry, sweetnesse, wit and curious lan∣guage in our Stage-playes, is See Tertull. De Spectaculis c. 27. & Dida∣cus de Tapia in tertiam partem Thomae, Artic. 8. p. 546. accor∣dingly; Venena enim non dan∣tur nisi melle circumlita. Hiron. Epist. 7. ad Laetam, c. 4. onely to conceale their venome, their contagion, that so the auditors, the specta∣tors may swallow it downe with greater greedinesse, and lesse suspition. Iuvenal. Sa∣tyr. 10. p. 92. Nulla aconita bibuntur fictilibus: the Divell and his accursed instruments know full well, that poysoned potions must be infused Nulla acconita bibuntur Fictilibus; tunc illa time cum pocula sumis Gemmata, et ato Getinum ardebit in auro. Iuvenal. Ibidem. not into earthen, but into golden Cuppes; that venemous pills must not be tempered with gall or colloquint, but with honey, sweet-meates, or the most luscious conserves, else none will swallow or quaffe them downe: wherefore they temper, they guild over their venemous obscenities and Stage-corruptions (which See Didacus de Tapia accor∣dingly. if they came naked on the Stage without these trappings, would be so bitter, so foule and desperately obscene that few Christians could digest them) with these specious outsides, these lusci∣ous conserves of wit, of eloquence, invention, learning, history, and the like, that so they may the better coun∣tenance, shrowd and vent them to the hurt of others. What Gregory the Great writes of Heretiques: Gregor. Mag. Moral. l. 5. c. 11. Ha∣bent hoc haeretici proprium, ut malis bona permiscant, quatenus facile sensus audientis illudant. Si enim sem∣per prava discerent citius in sua pravitate cogniti, quod
vellent, minimè persuaderent. Ita permiscent recta per∣versis, ut ostendendo bona auditores ad se trahant; et ex∣hibendo mala, latenti eos peste corrumpant. Or what De Libero Arbitrio l. 1. c. 4. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 505. F, G. Faustus Rhegiensis writes of the Divell and malici∣ous poysoners. Diabolus calliditate veteris artificij ac multiformis ingenij, condit blandimenta peccandi. Sic e∣tiam malefici facere solent qui mortiferos herbarum tem∣perant succos in condito aut aliquo dulci poculo nescienti∣bus propinaturi, gustum mentita suavitate componunt, virus amaritudinis obscurant fraude dulcedinis. Provocat primus odor poculi, sed praefocat inclusus sapor veneni. Mel est quod ascendit in labia, fel est quod descendit in viscera. Or what Advers. Hae∣reses cap. 35. Vincentius Lerinensis writes of Heretiques: Faciunt quod hi solent qui parvulis austera quaedam temperaturi pocula, prius ora melle circumli∣unt; ut incauta aetas cum dulcedinem praesenserit, ama∣ritudinem non reformidet: Quod etiam ijs curae est, qui mala gramina, et noxios succos, medicaminum vo∣cabulis praecolerant, ut nemo ferè ubi supra-scriptum le∣gerit remedium, suspicetur venenum. The same may I truly write of Play-poets and Actors. They cover and sweeten over their poyson, their corruption with eloquence, art and witty inventions, that so they may have the freer vent; and temper their evill with some shewes of good, that so it may more easily circumvent the Auditors, and find freer entrance into their soules. This De Spectac. lib. & Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2. Cyprian, this De Spectac. c. 27. Tertullian, De Gubern. Deil. 6. Salvian, with other Chrysost. Hom. 6, 7, & 38. in Matth. See Act. 6. Scen 3, 4, 5, 12. Fathers, together with In 3. partem Thomae Artic. 8. p. 546. Didacus de Tapia, and sundry Bishop Ba∣bingtō, North∣brook, Gosson, Stubs, Dr. Rei∣nolds, and o∣thers in their forequoted workes. moderne Authors testifie: heare but Tertullian for them all, who writes thus of the pleasure, the eloquence and good ingredients that are oft in Playes. De Specta. lib. cap. 27. Nemo venenum temper at felle et helle∣bora, sed conditis pulmentis et bene saporatis, et plurimum dulcibus id mali injicit. Ita diabolus letale quo conficit, rebus Dei gratissimis ac acceptissimis imbuit. Omnia itaque illic (speaking of the Theatre) seu fortia, seu ho∣nesta, seu sonora, seu canora, seu subtilia proinde habe ac
si stillicidia mellis de libalunulo venenato; nec tanti gu∣lam facias voluptatis, quanti periculum. All the elo∣quence and sweetnesse therefore that is in Stage-playes, is but like the drops of honey out of a poysoned limbecke, which please the pallate onely, but destroy the man that tastes them. So that I may well compare our Stage-playes to Apothecaries Gallie-pots: Lactantius De Falsa Sapi∣entia, lib. 3. c. 15. Quorum ti∣tuli habent remedia, pyxides venena: which have glo∣rious soothing titles without, but poysons onely with∣in. Thirdly, though all these good things are in Stage-playes now and then, yet they are there onely as good things perverted, which prove Matth. 5.13. Luke 14.34, 35. worst of any. No∣thing is there so pernicious Vincentius Lerinensis Ad∣vers. Haeres, c. 23, 24. as good parts, or a good wit abused: as wit, art, eloquence and learning cast a∣way upon an amorous, prophane, obscene lascivious subject; on which whiles many out of a vaine-glori∣ous humour have spent the very creame and flower of their admired parts, I may truly affirme with Salvian, Praefatio in lib. 1. de Gu∣bern. Dei p. 2. Non tam illustrasse mihi ipsa ingenia, quàm dam∣nasse videantur: they seeme to me not so much to have illustrated as damned their much applauded wits and parts, in being acutely elegant in such unworthy sor∣did theames, which modest ees would blush to reade, and chast tender consciences bleede to thine of. As therefore Ovids transcendent poetry, Martials pro∣phane and scurrilous pandely wit, Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius their eloquence, made their obscene las∣civious poëms farre more pernicious, not more chast and commendable; so the elegancy, invention, stile and phrase of Stage-playes, is onely an argument of their greater lewdnesse, not any probate of their reall good∣nesse. What therefore Adversus Hae∣reses lib. c 23, 24. Vincentius Lerinensis writes of Origen and Tertullian, that their transcendent abili∣ties of eloquence, learning and acutenesse, made their er∣ronious Tenents farre more dangerous: the same wee may conclude of Playes and Poets; the more witty and sublime their stile or matter, the more pernicious their fruites: for then,
Prospe De Prudentia lib. Viperium obducto potmus melle venenum. We drinke downe deadly poyson in a honey potion; which proves honey onely in the pallate, but gall in the bowells, death in the heart; as the most delightfull amo∣rous Stage-playes alwayes doe. SCENA SEXTA. THE 6. Objection in the defence of Stage-playes is this;Object. 6. which is as See Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, p. 104. & I.G. his Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 60, 61. common as it is prophane: That Stage-playes are as good as Sermons; and that many learne as much good at a Play as at a Sermon: therefore they cannot be ill. To this I shall answer first in the words of Mr. Phi∣lip Stubs,Answ. 1. and of I. G. in his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, p. 61. Oh blasphemy intollerable! Are ob∣scene Playes and filthy Enterludes comparable to the word of God the foode of life, and life it selfe? It is all one as if they had said; Baudry, Heathenry, Paganisme, Scurri∣litie and Divelry it selfe is equall with Gods word: or that Sathan is equipollent with the Lord. God hath ordained his word, and made it the ordinary meanes of our salvati∣on: the Divell hath inferred the other as the ordinary meanes of our destruction. God hath set his holy word and Ministers to instruct us in the way of life; the Divell instituted Playes and Actors to seduce us into the way of death. And will they yet compare the one with the other? If he be accursed, Isay 5.20. that calleth light dark∣nesse and darknesse light; truth falshood, and falshood truth; then à fortiori is hee accursed that saith, Playes and Enterludes are equivalent with Sermons, or compa∣reth
Comedies & Tragedies with the word of God; where∣as there is no mischiefe, almost, which they maintaine not. Thus they. But if Stage-playes be as good as Sermons (as many prophane ones, who heare and reade more Playes than Sermons, deeme them;) then Players cer∣tainly by the selfesame argument, are as good as Preach∣ers: and if this be so, what difference betweene Christ and Belial, Play-houses and Churches, Ministers and Actors? yea why then doe we not erect new Theaters in every Parish, or turne our Churches into Play-houses, our Preachers into Actors, since they are thus paral∣lels in their goodnesse? But what prodigious and more than stygean profanesse is there in this comparison? Who ever paralleld hell with heaven, vice with vertue, darknesse with light, Divels with Angels, dirt with gold? yet there is as great a disparity in goodnesse be∣tweene Playes and Sermons, as there is in these; the one being evermore reputed the Rom. 15.29. Luke 2.10, 11 chiefest happinesse, the other the See Act. 6. Scene 5. greatest mischiefe in any Christian State. But this part of the objection is too grosse to confute, since the very naming of it is a sufficient refutation. I come therefore to the second clause: That many learne as much good at Playes, as at Sermons. And I beleeve it too; for had they ever learn'd any good at Sermons, (which would be altogether needles, if so much good∣nesse as is objected might be learn'd from Playes) they would certainly have learned this among the rest, never to resort to Stage-playes. The truth then is this; most Play-haunters learne no good at all at Sermons; not because Sermons have no goodnesse for to teach them, but because they are unapt to learne it: partly, See Act. 6. Scene 12. & 20 throughout. be∣cause they seldome frequent Sermons, at leastwise not so oft as Playes: partly, because their eares are so dull of hearing, and their mindes so taken up with Play-house contemplations whiles they are at Church, that they mind not seriously what they heare: partly because the evill which they learne at Playes, overcomes the good they
learne at Sermons, and will not suffer it to take root with∣in them: and partly, because Playes and Sermons are so incompatible, that it is almost impossible for any man to receive any good at all from Sermons, whiles hee is a re∣sorter unto Stageplayes: Well therefore may they learne as much goodnesse from Playes as Sermons, because they never learned ought from either, but much hurt from both,Luke 2.34. Rom. 9.32, 33. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16, Heb. 6.7, 8. the very word of God being a stumbling blocke, a meanes of greater condemnation, yea a savour of death unto death to such unprofitable hearers who reape no grace nor goodnesse from it. But to passe by this, if there be so much goodnesse learn'd from Playes, I pray informe me who doe learne it. If any, then either the Actors or Spectators: For the Actors, their goodnesse verily is so See Act. 4. Scene 1. little, that it is altogether to be learnt as yet; and if ever they chance to attaine the smallest dram of grace (as they are never like to doe whiles they con∣tinue Players) it must be then from Sermons onely, not from Playes, which make them every day worse and worse, but cannot possibly make them better. For the Spectators, they can learne no good at all from Playes, because (as Scenici nec unquam eos qui delinquant corigere in a∣nimum indu∣cunt, ne si ve∣lint, id possint. Mimica enim eorum ars na∣tura tantum∣modo ad no∣cendum com∣parata est. Epist. l. 3. Ep. 336. Bibl. Par. Tom. 5. pars 2 p. 613. A Isiodor Pelusiota long since resolved it) Players and Stageplayes can teach thē none. Never heard or read I yet of any whom Stage-playes meliorated or taught any good: all they can teach them, all they learne from thm is but some scurrill jests, some witty obsce∣nities, some ribaldry ditties, some amorous wanton complements, some fantastique fashions, some brothel-house Courtshippe to wooe a strumpet, or to court a whore: these are the best lessons these schooles of vice and lewdnesse teach, or these their schollers learne: I shall therefore close up this objection with that of Anatomy of Abuses, p. 104, 10. Mr. Stubs and Refutation of the Apology for Actors, p. 60, 61, 62. I. G. in their forequoted places. If you will learne to doe any evill, skilfully, cunningly, covert∣ly or artificially, you neede goe no other where than to the Theatre. If you will learne falshood, cosenage, indirect dealing if you will learne to deceive, to play the hypo∣crite,
sycophant, parasite and flatterer: if you will learne to cogge, lie and falsifie; to jest, laugh, and fleere; to grin, nodde, and mow; to play the vice, to curse, sweare, teare, and blaspheme both heaven and earth in all kindes and di∣versities of oathes: if you will learne to play the bawd or curtesan; to pollute your selfe, to devirginate maides, to deflowre wives, or to ravish widdowes by enticing them to lust: if you will learne to drabbe and stabbe, to murther, kill and slay; to picke, steale, rob and rove: if you will learne to rebell against Princes, closely to carry treasons, to consume treasures, to practise idlenesse, to sing and talke of filthy love and venery; to deride, quippe, scorne, scoffe, mocke and floate; to flatter and smooth: to play the Divel, the swaggerer, the whoremaster, the glutton, the drun∣kard, the injurious or incestuous person; if you will learne to become proud, haughty and arrogant: Finally, if you will learne to contemne God and all his lawes, to care nei∣ther for heaven nor hell, and to commit all kinde of sinne and mischiefe with secrecie and art, you neede not goe to any other schooles: for all these good examples may you see painted before your eyes in Enterludes aud Playes. These, and these onelie are the great good instructions that either Actours or Spectatours learne from Stage-plaies; which make them fit schollers only for the Di∣vel, and traine them up for hell, See Act. 6. Scen. 12. & 20. where all Play-house goodnesse (unlesse God grants mercie and sincere repen∣tance) ever ends. SCENA SEPTIMA. Object. 7.TO passe by other Objections in the defence of Stage-playes; as namelie, that they reprehend sinne
and vice;See Dr. Rai∣nolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes. that they inveigh against the corruptions and corrupt ones of the times; that they remunerate and applaud vertue, and sharply censure vice: that their a∣buses, their exceses may be regulated, and themselves reduced to a good decorum: therefore they are law∣full: which Objections I have answered by the way before: viz. at pag. 34. to 42. p. 96. to 106. & p. 124. to 127. The grand Objection of our present dissolute times for the justification of these Playes is this; This Obie∣ction as I have heard was much urged in a most scurri∣lous and pro∣phane manner in the first Play that was acted in the New-e∣rected Play-house: a fit consecration Sermon for that Divels Chappell. That none but a companie of Puritans and Precisians speake against them; all else applaud and eke frequent them; therefore cetainly they are very good recreations, since none but Puritans disaffect them. To this I answer,Answ. 1. that the objection is as false as fri∣volous: For first, I have already fully manifested, that See Act. 6. Scen. 5. & Act. 7. Scen. 6, 7.many Heathen States and Emperors, and among the rest, Tiberius, Nero, and Iulian the Apostate, (who were as farre from Puritanisme, as the deboisest Anti-puritans, the most dissolute Players or Play-patrons this day living) have condemned, suppressed Playes and Players: Besides, I have largely proved, that See Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, & 5. not onely Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, and other heathen Philosophers; but even Horace, Iuvenal, nay Ovid and Propertius, (the most lascivious heathen Poets, who were as farre from Puritans, as they were from Christians) have declaimed against Stage-plaies. And is not this then a notorious falshood? that none but Puritans condemne Stage-plaies. Were Tiberius, Ne∣ro, Iulian, Aristotle, Tibullus, Ovid, (thinke you) Pu∣ritans? Were all those See At. 6. Scen. 5. fore-quoted Pagans, who censured and suppressed Stage plaies Puritans? If these be now turn'd Puritans in the Objectors phrase, I pray what manner of Christians (I dare not say incarnate Di∣vels) are those persons, who thus taxe these dissolute Pagans for puritanicalll Precisians? certainlie if they are somewhat better than infernall Fiends, yet they are
by Quantum ad legem divinam perinet, dico nos sine com∣paratione Bar∣baris esse me∣liores, quantū autem ad vi∣tam, ac actus, doleo et plan∣go esse peiors. Hoc est autem deteriorem es∣se, magis rum esse. Iascens fortasse qui hec legis, et condemnas in∣super quae le∣gis. Non refu∣gio censuram tuam; condem∣na si mentior, condemna si non probave∣ro: condemna si id quod asse∣ro, non etiam Scripturas sa∣cas dixisse monstravero, &c. Salvian De Gubern. Dei, l. 3. p. 127, 128. &c. Vid. Ibidem, where he ex∣cellently proves this his assertion. many degrees worse than the very worst of all these Pagans; who by their owne confessions, are In hanc enim morum pro. probrositaem prope omnis Ecclesiastica plebs redacta est; ut in cuncto populo Chri∣stiano genus quodammodo sanctitatis sit, minus esse vitiosum. Salvian D Guber∣natione Dei lib. 3. pag. 86. Saints, are Puritans in respect of them. O then the stupendi∣ous wickednesse! the unparalleld prophanesse of our gracelesse times! when Christians are not afraid, asha∣med to professe themselves more desperately vitious, lascivious, and deboist, than the very worst of Pagans, whom they thus honour with the stile of Puritans be∣cause they are more vertuous, lesse vitious than them∣selves! Certainly if atheisticall prophanesse, and infer∣nall lewdnesse increase but a little more among us, as it is very like if Stage-playes still continue, I am afraid these Ojectors will grow to that excesse of wickednes ere long that the Divell himselfe, (nay,Matth. 12.24. Beelzebub the very Prince of Divels) shall be canonized by them for a Puritan, because he equalls them not in wickednesse. Let these Play-patrons therefore, either waive this false Objection, or else confesse these very heathen Puri∣tans (as they deeme them) to be much better, much worthier of the name of Christians, than themselves. Secondly, I have infallibly manifested; See Act. 7. Scen. 2, 3, 4. & Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, 5, 12. That the whole primitive Church both under the Law and Gospell, together with all the primitive Christians, Fathers and Councels have most abundantly censured and condemned Playes and Players in the very highest degree of oppo∣sition. And were the primitive Church and Christians, the Fathers, or Bishops who were present at these Councels, Puritans? If not: then the objection is false. If Puritans; then Puritans are no such Novellers, or new upstart humorists as the world reputes them: yea then they are in truth no other, but the true Saints of God, the undoubted successors of the primitive Church and Christians, whose doctrine, discipline graces, man∣ners
they onely practise and maintaine. And indeede if the truth of things bee well examined, wee may easily prove Nos itaque paratiores su∣mus cum istis viris, et cum Ecclesia Chri∣sti in huius fi∣dei antiquitate firmata, quaeli∣bet maledicta et contumelias perpeti, quam Pelagiani cu∣iuslibet eloquii praedicatione laudari. Aug. De Nuijs et Concupiscentia, lib. 2. cap. 29. the Fathers, the primitive Church and Christians, (yea Christ himselfe, his Prophets and Apo∣stles) Puritans, if that which brands men now for Pu∣ritans in prophane ones censures, may descide this Con∣troversie. To instance in some few particulars. One grand badge of a Puritan is (as the objection testifieth) to condemne Stage-playes, Players and Play-haunters, and wholly to renounce these Pompes of the Divell: But this See Act. 7. Scene 1, 2, 3, 4. & Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, 5, 12. the Apostles, the Fathers, the primitive Councels, Church and Christians did, as I have plenti∣fully manifested, See here p. 57. this being the most notorious cha∣racter of a faithfull Christian, to abstaine from Stage-playes. By this badge therefore they are arrant Puri∣tans. To condemne Se here Act. 5. Scene 8. & Act. 7. Scene 3. effeminate mixt dancing, lascivi∣ousnesse, and See here Act. 7. Scene 3. diceplay; together with See here Act. 7. Scene . & my Healths Sicknesse. health-drinking, drunkennesse, deboistnesse, roaring, whoring, See here Act. 3. Scene 1. & Act. 5. Scene 9. ribaldry, obscene or amorous songs and jests, and na∣ked filthy lust provoking pictures, are now See Dr. Bur∣gesses his Re∣ioynder, An∣swer to the Preface, p. 6, 7. published by his Maiesties speciall command accordingly. chiefe Symp∣tomes of a notorious Puritan: but See here Act. 3. Scene 1. Act. 5. Scen. 8, 9, 10, 11. & Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4, 5, 12. & Act. 7. Scene 1. to 6. Christ, his Pro∣phets and Apostles, together with all the primitive Chur∣ches, Christians, Fathers, Councels have condemned all and each of these with an unanimous consent: therefore they are arrant Puritans. To speake or write against See my Vnlovelinesse of Love-lockes, Arch-bishop Abbots Lecture 28. on Ionas, sect. 11. p. 570, 571. and here Act. 5. Scene 6, 7. & Act. 6. Scene 3, 4. mens wearing of perewigges, Love-locks, and long haire, together with the effeminate frizling, pouldring, and accurate nice composing of it: to declaime against our whorish females frizling, broydring, pouldring, dying, plaiting, with their late impudent mannish, that I say not monstrous cutting and shearing of their haire; and their false borrowed excrements: to declaime against face-painting, vaine wanton complements, strange fashions,
tyrs, newfangled or overcostly apparell, are eminent cha∣racters of a branded Puritan: But See here Act. 5. Scen. 1, 6, 7. & Act. 6. Scen. 3, 4. & Act. 7. Scene 3. and My Vnloveli∣nesse of Love∣lockes accor∣dingly. Christ Iesus him∣selfe, his Prophets and Apostles, with all the primitive Churches, Councels, Fathers, Chritians, have earnestly spoken, written, declaimed against all & each of these lewd sinfull practises. Therefore they are Puritans. To 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. 2 Pet. 3.11.be holy in all manner of conversation even as God and Christ are holy: Titus 2.12.to live rightously, soberly and godly in this present evill world, Gal. 5.24. Iam. 1.27. Psal. 97.10 Psal. 119 104, 128. crucifying the flesh with the af∣fections and lusts thereof; avoiding, detesting all sinne and wickednesse whatsoever in ones selfe and others; and Phil. 2.15, 16. shining as lights and patternes of holinesse in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation to be Deut. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Psal. 1.2. frequent in hearing, reading, preaching, or meditating and discour∣sing of Gods word: to repeate Sermons, (a duty warran∣ted by Acts 13.42. Mark 4.34. Matth. 13.10. to 53. Deut. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Mal. 3.16. Ephes. 5.19, 20. c. 4.29. Col. 3.16. Hebr 8.11 c. 10.24, 25. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 15. Phil. 3.1. c. 416. Luke 28.18. to 36. Isay 28.9, 10, 13. Scripture, and much pressed by Rogo vos fratres charissimi, semper recolite, semper reti∣nete quod vobis pro animae vestrae salute suggerimus: nolite hoc ransitorie acci∣pere. Debet enim sermo noster in corde vestro radices figere, ut in tempore retribu∣tionis possit aeternae vitae fructus soeliciter exhibere. Qui potest totum retinere quod dicimus, Deo gratias agat; et aliis quod retinet, semper ostendat. Qui totum non po∣test retinere, vel partem aliquam recordetur. Et si totum non potestis, singuli ternas vel qaternas sententias retinete. Et dum unus alteri insinuat quod audivit, totum vobis invicem referendo non solum memoriter retinere, sed etiam in bonis operibus Christo adivante poteritis implere. Dicat unus alteri; Ego audivi Episcopum meum de astitate dicentem: Alius dicat; Ego in mente habeo illum de elemosynis prae∣dicasse; Alius dicat, Remansit in memoria mea quod dixit; ut sic colamus animam nostram, quomodo colimus terram nostram. Alius referat; Ego retineo dixisse Epi∣scopum meum, ut qui novit litteras scripturam divinam studeat lgere; qui vero non ovit, quaerat sibi et roget qui illi debeat Dei praeepta relegere, et quod legerit, Deo adiuvante, implere. Dicat etiam allus; Ego audivi Episcopum meum dicentem, quod qomodo negotiatores qui non noverunt litteras, conducunt sibi mercenarios litte∣ratos, ut acquitant pecuniam; sic Chistiani debent sibi requirere, et rogare, et (si necesse est) etiam mercedem dare ut illis debeat aliquis Scripturam diviam relegere: ut quomodo negotiator alio legente acquirit pecuniam; sic illi acquiran vitam ae∣ternam. Haec si agitis, si vos invicem admonetis; et in hoc saeculo fideliter potestis vivere, et postea ad aeternae vitae batitudinem pervenre. Nam si statim ubi de Ec∣clsia discesseit stotum quod ab Episcopo auisti oblitus fueris, sin fructu venisti ad cclesiam, sine fructu inans redisad domū tuam. Sed absit hoc a vobs fratres, &c. Csarius Arelatens Episc Homil. 20. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 766. F, G, H. Caesarius
Arelatensis, an ancient Father; to pray constantly Psal. 5.3. Psal. 55.17. Psal. 65.8. morning and evening with ones family;Prov. 1.15, 16. See Act. 4. Scene 2. to abandon Hebr. 11.25. all lewd places and companions, See Act. 2. all pleasures and de∣lights of sinne, all Christmas excesses and disorders, all Pagan rites and heathenish customes; and to Psal. 16.3. make the holiest Sints his best, his sole familiar friends, the Ier. 15.16. word & service of God his chiefe delight: to Acts 21.13, 14 Gal. 2.11. stand for God and for his truth in evill times when they are most opposed; to live civilly and piosly in the Phil. 2.15, 16. middest of wicked men, and 1 Pet. 4.34. not to joyne with them in the same excesse of sinne and riot of dissolutenesse and deboistnesse that they runne into: to 1 Iohn 3.20. c. 7.7. Prov. 15.12. reprove or crosse men in their sinfull fashions, customes, disorders, lusts or courses: with sundry other particulars which I pretermit; are now See my Per∣petuity of a Regenerate mans estate, Epistle 3. infallible arguments and symptomes of a ranke Puritan. But this did Christ, his Prophets and Apo∣stles, together with all the primitive Churches, Coun∣cels, Fathers and pious Christians, as those whom the world stiles Puritans doe now: therefore without all doubt they are Puritans (as Puritans are now reputed) even in the very highest degree. Yea, were our Saviour Christ, St. Paul, St. Iohn, together with all those holy Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Fathers, and other primitive Saints which we reade of in the Scrip∣tures, or Ecclesiasticall Writers, now living here among us, I doubt not but they would all be 1 Cor. 4.10, to 14. Acts 17.3 to 15. c. 21.27, 28. c. 24.5, 6. Isay 8.38. Psal. 22.6. See my Perpetuity, Epistle 3. pointed at, his∣sed, reviled, hated, scorned, if not persecuted, as the very Archest Puritans, for their transcendent holinesse, and rebukes of sin & sinners: since those poore Saints of God, Matth. 10.24, 25. Iohn 15.18, 19, 20.who have not attained to the moity of their transcen∣dent grace and purity, are now stiled, & pointed at for Pu∣ritans, even for that little purity and holinesse which is discovered in their lives. If therefore Christ himselfe, his Prophets and Apostles, together with all the primi∣tive Churches, Fathers, Councels, and Christians were Puritans, in that very sence, & on the selfesame grounds that those whom the world stiles Puritans are so named
now, as I have fully manifested by the premises; and dare make good in all particulars against any Anti-pu∣ritans whatsoever; the objectors must now either dis∣claime their Atecedent, (that none but Puritans con∣demne Stage-playes:) or in case they grant all these to be Puritans, they must now invert their rash conclu∣sion: that Stage-playes certainely are evill, because Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, the whole primitive Church, the Fathers, Councels, and primitive Christi∣ans, (all ranke Puritans) have out of their very puritie and holinesse condemned them long agoe, and none but the very shame, the scumme of Christians, or men un∣worthy that worthy title did anciently approve them, as I have largely evidenced, Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. & Act. 7. Scene 1. to 7. Thirdly, I have manifested, that many See Act. 7. Scene 5. & Act. 6. Scene 3, 4, 5. moderne Christians, not onely Protestants, but Papists too, have utterly condemned Stage-playes. And I hope all Pa∣pists (the originall inventors of this stile of Puritans, which they have cast See a Popish Pamphlet late∣ly divulged; That Protesta∣nisme is no∣thing else but a Puritan con∣ceit. on orthodox Protestants as a very Motto or by-word of disgrace,) are exempted from this number of Puritans intended in the Obje∣ction. Either Papists therefore must be Puritans, for condemning Playes, which many of the chiefe Obje∣ctors being Papists (as are most of all our Players) will hardly grant; or else the Objection must be false. Fourthly, admit that none but Puritans condemne or censure Stage-playes; consider then, I pray you, with an impartiall eye, what kinde of persons these Play-ab∣horring conformable Puritans and Precisians are: See my Per∣petuity, Epistle 3. Mr. Boltons Discourse of true happines, p 190. to 196. Dr. Burgesse his Reioynder, the Anwer to the Preface, publi∣shed by speci∣all command from his Maie∣sty, and my Healths Sick∣nesse, p. 79, to 89 according∣ly. Are they not the holiest, the devoutest, the eminentest and most religious gracious Sints, who leade the strictest, purest, heavenliest, godliest lives, outstripping all others both in the outward practise, and inward power of grace? Are they not such whose piety, whose universall holi∣nesse in all companies, times and places, are an See Prov. 29.27. Iohn 3.19, 20. Psal. 35.15, 16. Rom. 1.29, 0. Wid. 2.12, to 2 eye-sore, a life-sore, an heart-sore, yea a shame and censure unto
others? Are they not such as De Iustitia l. 5. c. 9. Lactantius writes of? Sunt aliqui ntempestivè boni, qui corruptis moribus pub∣licis convicium benè vivendo faciunt. Ergo tanquam scelerum et malitiae suae testes extirpare funditus ni∣tur et tollere; gravesque sibi putant tanquam eorum vita coarguatur. Idcirco auferantur, quibus coram vi∣vere pudet; qui peccantium frontem etsi non verbis, qui tacent, tamen ipso vitae genere dissimili feriunt et verbe∣rant: Catigare enim videtur quicunque dissenti. (The case of the primitive, pious Christians, amongst the dissolute vitious Getiles.) And they not such who are Iosh. 24.16, 18, 21. peremptory in the coscionable performance of every holy duty; resolute in the Psal. 119.104, 128. hatred of every customary sinne, 1 Pet. 3, 4. refusing to runne into the same excesse of wic∣kednesse, into the grosse corruptions of the Rom. 12.1, . times, into which most men rush Ier. 8.6. with greedinesse, as the horse into the battell? Doubtlesse, what ever the malice of others may conceive of them, yet they are no other but such as these, as the very fiercest Anti-puritans con∣sciences whisper to them; Minucius Felix Octavius, p 39. qui suspectis omnibus ut improbos metuunt, etiam quos optimos sentire potue∣runt. If any man doubt of this, these few experimen∣tall arguments may convince him. For first, there is ne∣ver a sincere, deout or pious Christian this day living in England, who Psal. 16.3. excells in holinesse of life, in inte∣grity of conersation, 2 Pet. 1.4. Gal. 5.24. avoiding all the corruptions that are in the world through lust; and Titus 2.13, 14. living righ∣teously, soberly and godly in this present evill world; refu∣sing to Rom. 12.2. 1 Iohn 2.14, 1 Pet. 1.14. conforme himselfe to the fashions, vanities, pleasures, sinnes, and wicked humours of the times, (which perchance he hath too much followed heretofore be∣fore his true conversion,) but is See Mr. Bol∣tons Discourse of true happi∣nesse, p 19. to 197. accor∣dingly. commonly reputed, and oft times stiled, a Puritan, a Precisian, and the like, be his place or condition what it will. Hee who hath more grace and goodnesse, more chastity, modesty, tem∣perance or sobriety, more love and dread of God, more hatred of sin and wickednes; lesse tincture of atheisme,
impiety, voluptuousnesse and prophanesse, than others among whom he lives, let him be never so just in his dealings towards men, never so Nunc autē novum poeni∣tentiae genus; oderunt nos, quasi hostes, quorum fidem publice negare non audent. Quid maledi∣ctorum pannos hinc inde con suitis, ut corum carpitis vitam, quorum fidei resistere non valetis? Hierom. Epist. 72. Pam∣macheo. conformable to the do∣ctrine and ceremonies of the Church, is forthwith bran∣ded for a notorious Puritan and Precisian all England o∣ver; and Sicut cantha∣rides maxime adultos frugi∣bus et rosis flo∣rentibus in∣cumbunt; ita invidia maxi∣me adoritur bonos et ad virtutem et gloriam pro∣ficiscentes. Plu∣tarch. De Invi∣dia t Odio, lib. Vid. Ibid. Perse∣quitur probos semper invidia, et cum deterio∣ribus non con∣tendit. Pindari Nomen Ode 8. p. 293. the more eminent his graces and holinesse are in the view of others, the more is he maligned, envi∣ed, hated, and the greater Puritan is he accounted, as every mans owne experience can informe him These Puritans and Precisians therefore are the best of Chri∣stians. Secondly, those who are most violently inve∣ctive, and maliciously despitefull against Puritans and Precisians, both in their words and actions, are such who are unsound or popishly affected in their religion, or prophane and dissolute in their lives. The most Ro∣manized Protestants, the Plane confitebor qui conqueruntur de sterili∣tate Christianorum: primi sunt lenones, perductores, aquarioli, tum siccarii, venena∣ii, magi: item a rioli, auspices mathematici: his infructuosos esse magnus est fructus. Terul. Apologia advers. Gentes p. 706. deboisest drunkards, the ef∣feminatest Rufians, the most fantasticke apish Fashion-mongers; the lewdest whoremasters, Panders, Strum∣pets; the prophanest Roarers, Players, Play-haunters, and Brothel-hunters; the most prodigious Swearers, Epicures, and Health-quaffers; the most gracelesse viti∣ous persons of all rankes and professions; (especially temporizing, sloathfull, unorthodox, epicurean, Ale∣house haunting, dissolute Clergy men, the See Ier. 26.7, 8, 11. Ezech. 22.25, 26. c. 13.22. Ier. 23.14, 15. Amos 7.10. to 15. Matth. 27.1, 20. greatest enemies of all others, to true grace and piety, as all ages witnesse;) are alwayes the greatest railers, the Qales ergo leges istae quas ad∣versus nos soli exercent impii, iniusti, turpes, truces, vani, ementes? Tertul. Apolog. ad∣versus Gente c. 5. fier∣cest enemies against Puritans and Precisians as the world now stiles them: therefore they are certainly the very best and holiest Christians, because the very worst of men (who like Nihil nisi grande aliquod bonuma Nerone damnatum. Seneca De Vita Beata c. 24. & Tertulliani Apologia c. 5. vitious Nero, never heartily con∣demne
ought else, but some great good or other) detest, revile them most. Seneca de Vita Beata c. 24. Et argumentum recti est, malis displicere, as not onely Seneca, but the 2 Tim. 3.3. Rom. 1.29, 30. Psal. 38.19, 20. Prov. 29.37. Scripture tea∣cheth us. Thirdly, there is no man ever stiled a Puritan or Precisian by another in scorne or contempt, as these names are now commonly used; but it is either for some evill or other that he hates, which he who stiles him so, affects; or for some grace or goodnesse, or some Omne id quod commu∣nem sortem ex∣cellit invidiae aliorum ob∣noxium est: hinc illud eo∣rum quorum conditio in∣ferior est con∣tra se superio∣res bellum ex∣ist it. Dion Cas∣sius Hist. l. 38. p. 134, 135. transcendent degree of holinesse that is in him, which the other wants. To instance in some particulars. Let a man make conscience See my Healths Sick∣nesse, Epistle to the Reader, & p. 79. to 89. of drunkennesse, of drinking and pledging healthes, of frequenting Ale-houses, Tavernes, and Tobacco-shops; and presently he is cried out upon and censured for a Puritan by all the Pot-companions, and Drunkards with whom he shall converse. Let any one refuse to follow the guise and dissolute effeminate fashi∣ons of the times; let him crie out against See my Vn∣lovelinesse of Love-lockes, and here Act. 5. Scene 6. Absoloms Fall, or the Ruine of Roisters. Wherein every Christian may as in a mirror behold, the vile and abominable abuse of curled long haire, so much now used in this our Realme. f. 5, 6, 8, 9, 10. Love-locks and ruffianly long haire; against false haire and perewigs which our men and women now generally take up, as if they were quite ashamed of that head which God hath gi∣ven them, and proud of the tire-womans which they have dearely bought: Let any Gentlewoman of quality now refuse to cut, to A∣gainst which see Cyprian de Habitu Virginum Tertullian De Cultu Muliebri, & De Habitu Faeminarum. Clemens Alexandrinus, Paedag. l. 2. c. 10, 12. l. 3. c. 1. to. 5. Philo Iudaeus Legis Allegoria l. 2. p. 100, 101. De Fortitudine l. p. 106. De Specialibus Legibus, p. 1019. & De Mercede Mereticis p &c. 1161, 1162. Zeno Veronensis Sermo de Pudicitia. Ser. de Continentia, Ser. de spiritu et corpore. Ser. 2. de Avaritia. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 3. p. 122, 124, 128, 130. Isiodor Pelusiota lib. 2. Epist. 53. Nazianzen ad versus Mulieres ambitiosius sese ornantes. August. Epist. 73. Gratian de Consecratione Distinctio . Alexander Alesius Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 11. Mmb. 2. Art. 2. sect. 4. Quaest. 9. Alexander Fabritius, Destructorium Vitiorum pars 3. c. 10. & pars 6. c. 2. & 69. Peter Martyr Locorū communium Classis 2. c. 11. sect 71 to 83 Innocentius 3. De Contemptu mudil. 2. c. 40. Thomas Lake his Discourse against Painting; with all those other Authors and Fathers here quoted Act. 5. Scene 7. & in my Vnlov of Love lockes, p. 1, 2, 16, to 21, 30, 49.50. poulder, frizell, and set out her haire
like a lascivious courtezan, or to paint her face like some common prostituted harlot; or to follow any other amorous complements and disguises of the times, 1 Tim. 3.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.2. to 6. See Cal∣vin, Musculus, Aretius, Gual∣ther, Dancus, Estius, Hyperi∣us, Marlorat, Goran, Hugo Cardinalis, Ly∣ra, Tostatus, Anselme, HRa∣banus Maurus, Ocumenius, Haymo, Theo∣phylact, Sedu∣lius, Primasius, Theodoret, Re∣migius, Chry∣sostome, Hie∣rom and Am∣brose, Ibidem. adorning her selfe onely in modest apparell, with shamefastnesse, sobriety and good workes, as becomes a woman professing godli∣nesse; the onely feminine ornaments that St. Paul com∣mends: and what else shall they heare from all the Ruf∣fians, fantastiques, and Frenchefied wanton Dames that live about them, but this opprobrious censure, that they are become professed Puritans. If any make conscience of frequenting Play-houses, Dice-houses, Whore-hou∣ses; of See here Act. 5. Scene 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. & Act. 7. Scene 3, 5, 6, 7. lascivious mixt dancing, lascivious ribaldry songs and discourses, inordinate gaming, and such other sinfull pleasures which the most delight in; refusing to beare men company in these delights of sinne: our Play-haunters, Dicers, Gamesters, Whoremasters, and such voluptuous persons, will presently voyce them up for Puritans. Yea such is the desperate wickednesse of the times, that let a man be vitious in one kinde, and yet temperate in another; as let him be a Play-haunter, a gamester, and not a drunkard; a drunkard, and yet no swearer, no whoremaster, no ruffian, or the like; or let a man be vitious in diverse kindes, and yet not so bad as others of his companions, and he shall be sometimes reproached for a Puritan, because he is not so univer∣sally, so extremely wicked and deboist, as those of his companions who are farre worse than he. Whence we oft times finde, that such who are reputed no better than prophane ones, when they are in company some∣what better than themselves; are censured for Puritans among prophane ones, Genus quod∣dam sanctitatis sit minus esse vitiosum. Salvian de Guber. Dei l. 3. because they are not so un∣measurably wicked as the worst of them. And as those who are not so desperately outragious in their extrava∣gant sinfull courses as others, are thus houted at for Pu∣ritans and Precisians, by such as are lewder than them∣selves: so those who outstrip all others in holinesse, pietie and vertue, are reputed Puritans too, because
they excell in goodnesse. For let a man be a diligent hearer and repeater of Sermons and Lectures; a con∣stant See my Per∣petuity, p. 612. to 614. & Mr. Boltons Di∣course of True Happinesse, p. 190. to 198. Deut. 6.2. to 10 Psal. 1.1, 2. reader and discourser of Gods word; a strict ob∣server of the Lords day; a lover, and Psal. 119.63. Tit. .8. companion of the holiest men; a man that is 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. Ephes. 4 29 Col. 4.6. holy and gracious in his speeches in all companies and places, desirous to sow some seedes of grace, and to plant religion where ever he comes: let him be Psal. 69.9, 10 11. much in prayer, in meditati∣on, in fasting and humiliation, Psal. 50.1, to 12. much grieving for his sinnes, and complaining of his corruptions; let him be al∣wayes Mat. 5.6. hungring and thirsting after grace, and using all those meanes with conscionable care which may bring him safe to heaven, Psal. 4.14. Psal. .8. Ps. 37.27. Ps. 119.115. Hebr. 11.25. abandoning all those sins, those pleasures and companies which may hinder him in his progresse towards heaven: Let a man be a diligent powerfull soule-searching Amos 5.8. sinne-reproving Minister, residing constantly upon his benefice, and See here p. 531, 532, 629. Mr. Boltons Discourse of true Happines, p. 193. preaching every Lords-day twice: or let him be a diligent upright Magistrate, See 21. Iaco∣bi cap. 7. punishing drunkennesse, drunkards, swea∣rers, suppressing Ale-houses, Derived from the ancient Pa∣gan feasts and pastims on the first of May, which feasts they sti∣led Maiuma, which Arcadius and Theodoret long since suppressed by this Edict. Illud veo quod sibi nomen procax licentia vindicabit Maiumm faedum atque indecorum spectaculū denegamus. Coex Theodosii l. 15. Tit. 6. Lex. 2. See Calvini Lexicon uridicum, & Iaco∣bus Spielegius, Pandulphus Proteus, & Heronimus Verrutius, Lexicon Iuris, Tit. Ma∣iuma: & Suidas Maimas, & Spondanus An. 399. sect. 5. My-games, Revels, See 1 Car. c. 1. dancing, and other unlawfull pastimes on the Lords day, according to his oath and duty; Let any of any profession be but a little holier or sticter than the Major part of men; and this his holines, his forwardnes in reli∣ligion, is suficient warrant for all prophane ones, for all who fall short of this his practicall power of grace to brand and hate him for a Puritan, as every mans conscience cannot but informe him. It is manifest then by all these particular experimentall instances; that those whom the world stiles Puritans and Precisians, are the very best and holiest Christians, and that they are thus ignominiously intituled, yea Malitia semper contra virtutem insanit. Chrysost. Hom. 23. in Gen. Tom. 1. Col. 142. A. hated and ma∣ligned,
because they are lesse vitious, more pious, strict and vertuous in their lives than such who call them so. Fourthly, there is no man so fierce an Antipuritan in his health and life,See Mr. Bol∣tons Discourse of true Happi∣nesse, p. 192, to 197. according∣ly, an excellent place to this purpose, well worth the rea∣ding, and all Antipuritans most serious consideration. but desires to turne Puritan and Pre∣cisian in the extremity of his sicknesse and the day of death. When God sends his judgements, crosses, or tormen∣ting mortall diseases upon such who were most bitter Satyrists against Puritans all their lives before; or when hee awakens such mens consciences to see the gastly horrour of their notorious sinnes, when they are lying perplexed on their death-beds with the feare of dam∣nation ready to breath out their soules into hell at every gaspe, they will then turne Puritans in very good ear∣nest, desiring to die such as they would never live: yea then in such extremities as these they send for those ve∣ry Puritan Ministers, whom they before abhorred to instruct, to comfort them, to pray with them, for them, and to advise them what to doe that they may be saved: & however they reputed thē no better than hypocrites, So were the Saints and ser∣vants of God reputed in for∣mer times. See 1 Cor. 1.18, 21, 23, 25, 27. c. 2.14. c. 3.18. c. 4.10. 2 Cor. 11.16, 17, 19, 23. Lactantius de Iustitia, l. 5. c. 16. Timor Do∣mini simplici∣tas reputatur, ne dicam fatu∣itas. Virum cir∣cumspectum et amicum pro∣priae conscien∣tiae calumnian∣tur hypocritā. Berard. De Consideratione l. 4. c. 2. Col. 885. C. fooles, or So were the Saints of olde accounted, 1 Sam. 21.13, 14, 15. 1 Kings 9.11. Hosea 9.7. Isay 59.15. Ier. 29.26. Acts 26.24, 25. Mar. 3 21. Iohn 10.10. 1 Cor. 14, 23. 2 Cor. 5, 13. distracted furious mad ones before, yet they would willingly change lives, change soules and consciences with them then, wishing with many teares and sighes that they were but such as they. This every dayes experience almost testifies; therefore Puritans and Precisians even in the true internall conscientiall judgement of every Anti-puritan are the most godly men. Fifthly, let a drunkard, a whoremaster, a swearer, a ruffian, or any other prophane notorious wicked per∣son be truly converted from these their sinnes, and un∣fainedly devoted and united to the Lord so as Psal. 85.8. never to returne unto them more, Deut. 11.22. c. 10.20. Iosh. 22.5. c. 23.8. cleaving unseparably unto him both in their hearts and lives; or let God worke any such visible notorious happy change in men, as to Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 2.9. Col. 1.13. call them out of darknesse into his marvelous light,
and to translate them from under the power of Satan into the kingdome of his deare Sonne; and no sooner shall they be thus strangely Vt quisque nomine Chri∣stiani (I may now say, Puri∣tani) emenda∣tur offendit. Tertul. Apologia c. 2, 3. altered from bad to good, or from good to better, but presently they are christened, as it were, with these two proverbs or reproach, and pointed at for Vnum no∣men est perse∣cutionis, sed non una est causa certami∣nis. Leo De Qu. dr. Sermo 9. f. 89 Puritans and Precisians, as if they were now unworthy for to live because they are thus conver∣ted to the Lord. Before people turne religious and gra∣cious, they are never pestered with these disdainfull tearmes: but See Tertulli∣an de Pallio lib. & Mr. Bol∣tons Discourse of true Happi∣nesse, p. 190. to 192. And my Perpetuity, E∣pistle 3. no sooner can they begin to looke to∣wards heaven, to change their vitious courses and amend their lives, but these Mottoes of contempt are cast upon them, even because they are growne better than they were before. Thus was it long agoe even in Salvian his dayes, who thus complaines. De Gubern. Dei l. 4. p. 110, 111. And ad Ecclesiam Ca∣tholicam lib. 3. pag. 408. hee writes thus. At vero nunc di∣versissime et impiissime nul∣lis omnino a suis minus re∣linquitur, qu quibus ob Dei reverentiam plus debetur: nullos pietas minus respicit, quam quos praecipue religio commen∣dat: Denique si qui a parentibus filii offeruntur Deo, omnibus filiis postpo∣nuntur oblati; indigni iudicantur haereditate, qui digni fuerint consecratione: ac per hoc una tantum re parentibus viles fiunt, quia caeperint Deo esse pre∣ciosi. Statim ut quis melior esse tentaverit deterioris abjectione calcatur. Si fuerit sublimis, fit despicabilis; si fuerit splendidissimus, fit vilissimus: fi fuerit totus honoris, fit totus injuriae: ubi enim quis mutaverit vestem, mutavit protinus dignita∣tem. Perversa enim sum et in diversum cuncta mu∣tata. Si bonus est quispiam, quasi malus spernitur: si malus est, quasi bonus honoratur. Si honoratior quispiam se religioni applicuerit, illico honoratus esse desistit, ac per hoc omnes quodammodo mali esse coguntur ne viles habe∣antur. Et ideo non sine causa Apostolus clamat: Secu∣lum totum in malo positum est: et verum est  merito enim totum in malo esse dicitur, ubi boni locum habere non possunt: siquidem ita totum iniquitatibus plenum est, at ut mali sint, qui sunt; aut qui boni sunt malorum persecutione crucientur. And thus is it now in our dayes. Therefore Puritans and Precisians are undoub∣tedly the very primest Christians, because they are ne∣ver
honoured with these titles till they Multi, quod dolendu est, proectibus u∣runtur alienis; et qui se virtu∣tibus vacuos despici nove∣runt, armntur in orum odi∣um quorum non sequuntur exemplum. Leo De Quadragesi∣ma Sermo 10. f. 91. turne better than they were at first, yea better than all those that re∣proach them by these names of sorne. And here we may observe a difference betweene eminency in religion, and excellency in all other things besides. For let a man be exquisite in any other art or profession whatsoever, be it in Phisicke, Musicke, Law, Philosophy, or any li∣berall science, or mechanicke trade; yea let a man be a zealous forward Papist, Iesuite, Priest or Votary; the more eminent they are in all or any of these, the more honoured, reverenced, frequented, admired, and belo∣ved are they of all sorts of men; because they are but naturall humane excellencies, to which corrupt nature and the Divell have no antipathy at all. But let any man become a In bono pro∣posito constitu∣tis, inimicitiae dissimilium di abolo instigan∣te non desunt, et facile in odia prorumpunt, quorum im∣probi mores detestabiliores fiunt compara∣tionerectorum. Iniquitas cum iustitia non habet pacem, temperantiam odit ebrietas, falsitati nulla est cum verita∣te concordia: non aat su∣perbia mansue∣tudinem, peu∣lantia verecundiam, avaritia largitatem, et tam pertinaces habet diversitas isa con∣flictus, ut etiam si exterius conquiescat, ipsa tamen piorum cordium penetralia in∣quietare non desinat, ut verum sit quod voluerunt in Christo pie vivere, persecu∣tionē patientur, &c. Leo De Quadr. Ser. 9. f. 89. conscionable, zealous, sincere and forward professor of true religion, transcending others in the pra∣cticall power of grace, or in the inward beauty of holinesse; and the more perspicuously eminent he growes in these, the more is he commonly hated, slaundered, persecuted, reviled by the tongues of wicked men, and the greater Puritan doe they account him; because Gal. 5.17. 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. there is grace within him, that is diametrally contrary to their corruptions. Neither neede we wonder at it: for ever since God at first put Gen. 3.15. enmity betweene the seede of the woman and the seede of the serpent, Gal. 4.29. 1 Io 3.12, 13. those who have beene borne after the flesh, have persecuted, slandered, abhorred those who have beene borne after the spirit; and Ioh. 15.19, 20. those who who are of this world, have hated such who are redeemed out of the world; there 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. being never as yet in any age, any concord or truce betweene Christ and Belial, light and darknesse, righteousnesse and unrighteousnesse, Beleevers and Infidels; Prov. 29.27. those who are upright in the way, being
alwayes an abomination to the wicked, for these very rea∣sons onely, and no other; Psal. 38.19, 20. because they follow the thing that good is, and 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. runne not with them into the same excesse of riot; 1 Ioh. 3.12, 13. because their works are good, and theirs who thus revile and hate them, evill:Wild. 2.15, 16. &c. because their lives are not like other men, and their wayes are of ano∣ther fashion: because they are not for wicked mens turnes, and they are cleane contrary to their doings, upbraiding them with their offending the Law, objecting to their in¦famy the transgressions of their education, and abstai∣ning from their wayes as from filthinesse, Iohn 7.7. See my Perpetuity, Epistle 3. Ma∣lignorum spi∣rituum adver∣sus sanctos in∣sidiae non qui∣escunt, et sive occulto dolo, sive aperto praelio, in om∣nibus fidelibus propositum bo∣nae voluntatis infestant. Ini∣micum autem illis est omne quod rectum, omne quod ca∣stum. Leo de Passione Domni Serm 19. f. 140. testifying unto them by their holy lives, that the workes they doe are evill. These and no other were the true originall causes of mens hatred & reproach against Maledictione autem et ama∣titudine repleri¦os, valde mul∣orum est. Quis enim ita emen∣dati cris est, quem non ma∣ledicenti consueudo sollicitet? non dicat adversus eos qui maledicto digni sunt, sed etiam adversus eos quos Dominus non maledixit; id est, iustos et innocentes viros. Ori∣gen lib. 3. in Epist. ad Rom. c. 3. Tom. 3. fol. 154. C. Vid. Ibid. Christians, against Christ and his Apostles heretofore; and of mens inve∣terate rancor and malicious calumnies against Puritans now, what ever mens pretences are against it, as I have more largely manifested in a In my Perpetuity Epist. 3. & Healths Sicknesse, p. 79. to 89. precedent Treatise. If any thinke this strange, that men should be thus perse∣cuted, hated, reviled, nicknamed, slandered and con∣temned even for their grace, their holinesse, and the ve∣ry practicall sincere profession of religion: let them con∣sider but these few particulars which will give them ample satisfaction in the point. First, those frequent pre∣dictions or premonitions of our Saviour to all the pro∣fessors of his name: Mat. 10.16. to 36. c. 24.9. Ioh. 15.19, 20. c. 16.2, 33. c. 17.14. That they shall be hated, perse∣cuted, reviled of all men & Nations for his sake: Mat. 5.11, 12. Luk. 6.22, 23. that they shall seperate them from their company, cast out their names as evill, & say all maner of evill against thē Maioris contumeliae res est, falsis quenquam notare et insignite crimimbus quam vera ingerere at{que} oblectare delicta. Quod enim sese dici, et quod esse te senties, morsum habet minorem testimonio tacitae recogniti∣onis infractum. Illud vero acrbissime vulnerat quod innoxios et quod decus nominis er aestimationis infamat. Arnobius adversus Gentes l. 4. p. 147. falsly
for his names sake: Iohn 16.33. that in the world they shall have tribulation, andIohn 16.2. that whosoever killeth them shall think he doth God good service. Secondly, that memorable position of St. Paul, 1 Tim. 3.11, 12. Yea, and Omnes dixit, excepit nullū. Quis enim ex∣ceptus potest esse, cum ipse Dominus per∣secutionum tentamenta to∣leraverit? Ambr. Enar. in Psal. 118. Octon. 20. Tom. 2. p. 501. G. See Ambrose, Chrysost. The∣odoret, Theo∣phylact, Remi∣gius, Beda, An∣selme, Primasi∣us, Haymo, HRabanus Maurus, and all other Fa∣thers and Ex∣positors on this text. all that will live godly in Christ Iesus shall suffer persecution: Acts 14.22. 1 Thess. 3.4. for through many tribulations and afflictions we must enter into the Kingdome of heaven. Thirdly, the exam∣ples of Gods Saints in all ages even from Adam to this present. If we looke upon Cain and Abel, the two first-borne of the world, wee shall beholde gracelesse 1 Iohn 3.12, 13. Cain, who was of that wicked one, slaying his righteous brother Abel: & wherfore slew he him? S. Iohn resolves the question in these very termes, because his owne workes were evill and his brothers righteous: and there∣upon he grounds this inference; Marvell not, my bre∣thren, if the world hate you. De Guberna∣tione Dei l. 1. p. 22. Non enim mirum est, (writes Salvian) nunc sanctos homines quaedam aspera pati, cum videamus quod Deus etiam per maximum ne∣fas, primum sanctorum sivit occidi. Looke we upon ho∣ly King David, we shall finde him thus complaining: Psal. 38.19, 20. They that hate me wrongfully are multi∣plied, they also that render me evill for good are my ad∣versaries, (pray marke the onely reason) because I fol∣low the thing that good is. The Prophet Isay complai∣neth thus of his times: Isay 59.14, 15. Iudgement is turned away backward and justice standeth afarre off; for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter: yea truth faileth, and hee that departeth from evill maketh himselfe a prey, or is accounted mad: yea hee brings in Christ himselfe prophetically speaking in this manner: Isay 8.18. Behold I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signes and wonders even in Israel. The Pro∣phet Amos writes thus of his age: Amos 5.8. They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and abhorre him that speaketh uprightly: and the Prophet Zech. 3.8. See Psal. 102.6. Ier. 12.9. Psal. 71.7. Zechariah in∣formes us, that Ioshua the high Priest, and his followers that sate before him (to wit, Christ and all his followers)
were men wondred at in the world, as if they were some monstrous creatures, or men besides themselves. The Prophet Daniel we know, was so Dan. 5.3, to 12. unblameable in his life and actions, that his very enemies could not finde any errour, fault, or occasion against him, except it were concerning the law of his God, and that hee made prayers and supplications before the Lord his God three times a day: and for this his piety onely they procured him to be cast into the Lions den. I could instance in See my Per∣petuity Epistle 3. divers others of Gods dearest Saints who were thus persecuted and maligned for their graces before our Saviours time, but that Tertullian hath long since forestalled mee; whose memorable passage to this purpose I wish all Antipuritans to consider.Adversus Gnosticos lib. p. 430, 431. Aprimordio justitia vim pa∣titur: statim ut oli Deus caepit invidiam religio sortia est. Qui Deo plauerat occiditur, et quidem à fratre, quo procliviùs impietas alieum sanguinem sectaretur, à suo auspicata insectata est. Denique non modo justorum, ve∣rum etiam et Prophetarum: David exagitatur, Elias fu∣gatur, Hieremias lapidatur, Esaias secatur, Zacharias inter altare et dem trucidatur; perennes cruoris sui ma∣culas silicibus adsignans. Ipse clausula legis et Prophe∣tarum, nec prophetes sed Angelus dictus, contumeliosa caede truncatur in puellae salticae lucar. Et utique qui spi∣ritu Dei agebntur, ab ipso in martyria dirigebantur, etiam patiendo quae praedicasent, &c. Talia à primordio et praecepta et exempla debitricem martyrij fidem osten∣dunt. If wee looke upon See my Per∣petuity, Epistle 3. at large. Christ and his Apostles, we shall finde them hated, persecuted, slandered, reviled with opprobrious names and obloquies, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10. being made as the very filth of the world, and as the offscouring of all things unto this day; yea wee shall see them martyred and put to death for no other cause at all, See Iustin Martyr, Apo∣logia 2. pro Christianis. Tertulliani A∣pologia, La∣ctantius De Iu∣stitia l. 5. c. 1, 5, 9. but onely for their grace, their holinesse, their transcendent good∣nesse, and their opposition to the sinnes and errours of the times: as I have In my Per∣petuity, Epist. 3 elsewhere amply discoursed. If we behold the primitive Christians but a while, we shall
discover no other cause of their hatred and persecutions against them, but onely this, that they were Christians, that they were better than they were before, and more ho∣ly than their neighbours. This Epist. l. 10. Epist. 97. Pliny himsefe af∣firmes in his Epistle to the Emperour Trajan. Affir∣mabant autem hanc fuisse summam vel culpae Christia∣norum, vel erroris; quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire, carnemque Christo quasi De dicere secum in∣vicem: seque sacramento non in scelus aliquod obstrin∣gere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committe∣rent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati dnegarent: Ad yet for this alone were they persecuted and put to death. Hence was it that Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus in the behalfe of Christians: Stromatum l. 4. f. 104. F. Nos ergo pro∣sequuntur, non ut qui nos esse injustos depraehenderent, sed quod nos vitae humanae injuriam facere existiment e quod simus Christiani, et ipsos inquam, qui sic vitam institui∣mus, et alios adortamur ut vitam degant similem. Hence is that excelent discourse of Tertullian to the like pur∣pose: Apologia ad∣versus Gentes, c. 2, 3. Ecce autem et odio habemur ab omnibus ho∣minibus nominis causa. Non scelus aliquod in causa est, sed nomen: et solius nominis crimen est. Non ideo bonus Caius, et prudens Lucius, quia Christianus. Vt quisquis nomine Christiani (I may now say Puritani) emendatur offendit. Oditur in hominibus innocuis, nomen innocuum. Nomen detinetur, nomen expugnatur, et ignotam sectam, ignotum et auctorem vox sola praedamnat, quia nominatur non quia convincitur. Which I may as justly apply to Puritas and Precisians, as ever he did unto Christians who are persecuted and hated onely for their graces, their surpassing goodnesse, under the vizard of these odious names, Nam et hoc quoque genus invenitur qui meliores obtre∣ctare malint quam imiai, et quorum si∣mliudinem deperent, eo∣rum affectant simultatem; slicet, ui qui suo nomine obscuri sunt, alieno innotes∣cant. Apliu Floridorum l. 1. p. 05 by such who would rather slaunder, than imitate their holinesse. Hence Gregory Nazianzen also thus complained of the usage of the pious Christians of his age: Oratio 21. p. 412. Spectaculum uovum facti sumus non An∣gelis et hominibus, sed omnibus fermè improbis et flagiti∣osis, et quovis tempore et loco, in foro, in compoationibu,
in voluptatibus, in luctibus: Iàm etiam ad scenam usque prodijmus (quod propemodum lachrymis refero) et cum perditissimis obscaenissimisque ridemur; nec ullum tam ju∣cundum est spectaculum, quàm Christianus comicis ca∣villis suggillatus. And is it not as true of Who are oft tradced on the Stge: See Sir Thomas Overburie his Chaacter of an excellent Actor and here Act. 3. Scene . accor∣dingl. Puritans and Precisians now, as it was then of Christians? Hence also was the complaint of holy St. Augustine. narratio in Pal. 90. Tom. 8 pars 2. p 145, 146. See nar. in Psal. 128. p. 750, 751. In∣sultatur homini quia Christianus est: insultatur etiam homini qui inter multos Christianos melius vivit, et ti∣mens aspera verba insultatorum incidit in laqueos diabo∣li. Enarratio in Psal. 30. Tom. 8 pars 2. p. 209, 210. See Ibid. p. 190. to 208. accoringy: & e Civit. Dei l. 1. c. 1, 2. Tibi pro convicio objicitur quod Christianus es. Cur autem modo objicitur quod Christianus est? Tam pauci non Christiani remansrunt, ut ijs magis objiciatur, quia Christiani non sunt, quàm ipsi audeant aliquibus objicere quia Christiani sunt. Tamen dico vobis fratres mei, incipe quicunque me audis vivere auomodo Christia∣nus, et vide si non tibi objiciatur et à Christianis, sed no∣mine, non vita, non moribus. Nemo sentit nisi qui expertus est. And is not this the case of Puritans among titular Christians now? Survey we all the other Iustin Mr∣tyr, Apolgia 1, . Aaxago∣ras pro Christi∣anis Legato, Crian Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Do∣nato. Basil. E∣pist. 80. usta∣thio Medico, Lactantius de Iustitia l 5. c. 1, 9. Leo de Qudragesima Sermo 9. & A∣thanasius Ep ad Solitariam vitam agentes. See Eusebius, Socrates Scholasticus, Theodoret, Sozo∣men, Cassiodorus, Nicephorus Callistus, The English and French Booke of Mar∣tyrs, the Centuries and Baronius, passim accordingly. Fathers and Ecclesiasticall Historians, we shall finde them very copious in this theame that the best Christians have beene evermore hated, persecuted and reviled by carnall men, and that onely for their grace and goodnes: Witnesse the expresse resolution of St. Chrysostome: Opus imperfectū in Matth. Hom. 24. Tom. 2. Col. 772. B. Chri∣stianorum genus, non quia est odibile, sed quia est divi∣num, odiunt carnales: Which St. Augustine thus se∣conds. Invidentiae illius diabolicae qua invident bonis ma∣li, nulla alia causa est, nisi quia illi boni sunt, illi mali. De Civit. Dei l. 15. c. 5. & Enar. in Psal. 128. p. 751. Omnis enim malus ideo persequitur malum, quia illi non consentit ad malum. And this onely is the cause why Puritans and Precisians are thus maligned and despited now.
If any here object, that they condemne not Puritans for their goodnesse, but because they are hypocrites and dissemblers; or because they are seditious factious per∣sons, & enemies to the state and government; the crimes wherewith the world now charge them, Qui odio nostri non se∣cus atque rei honestae stu∣dent turpe for∣san putantes si absque ratione nos odio per∣sequi videan∣tur, causas odii contra nos et crimina fin∣gunt. Nihil autem eorum quae contra nos feruntur con∣stanter tuen∣tur, sed nunc hanc, paulo post aliam, et rursus quoque aliam inimici∣tiae causam contra nos as∣signant: atque ita nulla in re malitia orum consistit, sed mox atque ab hac intentata culpa resiliunt, alii incumbunt et rursus illa neglecta aliam apprehendunt: et si omnia de quibus nos ac∣cusant dilueri∣mus, ab odio tamen non re∣cedunt. Basil. E∣pist. 80. Eutatio Medico, Tom. 2 p. 74. Vid. Ibidem. whose accu∣sations are still as various, flitting and uncertaine a∣gainst Puritans, as they were of old against the Chri∣stians. To this I answer first: That it is no wonder for Pu∣ritans to be reputed hypocrites and impostors now: For even our Saviour Christ himselfe was not onely counted, but Mat. 27.63. Ioh. 7.12, 47. called a Deceiver, and one who did but cheate the people; though we all know and beleeve that there was no guile at all within him: Yea all the A∣postles and Saints of God were accounted Deceivers, and yet they were true, 2 Cor. 6.8. And Epist. 10. ad Furiam c. 1. See Spondanus Epit. Baronii Anno 56. sect. 3. St. Hierom in∣formes us, that Christians were thus stiled even in his age. Vbicun{que} viderint Christianum, statim illud è trivio ; vocant Impostorem et detrahunt. Hi rumores turpissimos serunt, et quod ab ipsis egressum est, id ab alijs audisse se simulant; ijdem auctores et exagge∣ratores: as our Antipuritans are now. Secondly, admit that Puritans were but hypocrites & Impostors (which is impossible for any particular men to judge, since they are unacquainted with the secrets of their hearts,Ier. 17.9 10. Acts 1.24. 1 Chron. 22.9. 1 Cor. 2.11. which God alone can onely search, which me thinkes should stop these objectors mouths) yet none exclaime against them as Puritans and Precisians for these vices onely; but for that very profession of religion which they make. For let a man be never so treacherous or deceit∣full in his dealing, yet if he make no forward professi∣on of religion, he may passe very well Dat veniam corvis vexat censura co∣lumbas. Iuveal. Satyr. 2. for a politique, crafty, provident man; he shall then be no Puritan: but
let him professe religion, be he never so honest in his dealings, yet he s certainly be branded for a Puritan: It is not therefore mens hypocrisie, but their profession of religion that makes them Puritans: which if it be but meerely counterfeit, why doe not our Antipuritans make that profession of religion in truth, the very shew o which they so much hate, even for the substance sake? Thirdly, admit some Puritans or Precisians are meere Impostors, making Fideles se spondent ut oportunius fidentibus no∣ceant. Bernard. De Considerati∣one l. 9. c. 2. Col. 884. M. religion a very vaile to cloake their treachery, and circumvent their brethren; as there are now too many such: yet malice it selfe must needs acknowledge that the Major part of them are most just and upright in all their dealings towards men; witnesse experience, and the common speech; that such and such are very honest and upright in their trades, or they are worthy Gentlemen which men may safely trust, but yet they are Puritans; as if their piety were a disparage∣ment to their honesty: and yet men hate and slander them all alike for the hypocrisie onely of some few; as they did the Christians in St. Augustines dayes. August. Enar. in Pal. 30. p. 201, 02. Quanta mala (saith he) dicunt in malos Christianos quae maledicta perveniunt ad omnes Christianos? Nunquid enim dicit qui maledicit, aut qui reprehendit Christia∣nos, ecce quid faciunt non boni Christiani? Sed ecce quae faciunt Christiani; non seperat, non discernit. Thus doe men deale with Puritans now; they hate, revile and persecute them in the lumpe without distinction; they deeme them hypocrites and deceivers all alike, when as the most of them are not such; (as if their very pro∣fession of religionChristianus si sit improbus, ne accuses pro∣fessionem, sed re bona uten∣tem male. Non enim oportet damnare re, sed eum quire bona male u∣titur. Quando∣quidē et Iudas proditor fuit: verum ob id non accusatur ordo Apostoli∣cus, sed illius animus, nec crimen est sa∣cerdotii, sed malum animi. Chrysost. Hō. 4. de Veris Esaiae, Tom. 1. Col. 1302 Vid. Ibidem. made them hypocrites, which men are apt to believe:) therefore they detest them not for their hypocrisie which reacheth onely to some few, but for the strict holinesse and precisenesse of their lives alone, wherein they all accord. Fourthly, the reason why men thus uncharitablie forejudge all Puritans for hypocrites, though they neither know their hearts nor persons, is onely this; because they Caecitatis duae pecies fa∣cile concurrunt ut qui non vi∣dent quae sunt, videre videan∣tur quae non sunt. Tertul. A∣pol. adv. Ge c. 1. see that
holinesse, grace and goodnesse in them,See Wisdom. 2.12, to 20. &c. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. which they finde not in themselves or others: and threupon to satisfie their owne selfe-condemning consciences, they censure all excesse of grace and holinesse as meere hypocrisie, for feare themselves should be reputed but prophane in wanting all those graces, those eminent degrees of holinesse wherein they excell. It was a true speech of an heathen Orator: Cicero Tus∣cul. Quaest. l. 5. Seneca Conso∣latio. An non hoc ita fit in omni po∣pulo? nonne omnem exuperantiam virtutis oderunt? Quid? Aristides nonne ob eam ipsam causam patria pulsus est quod praeter modum justus esset? Certainly if the exuberancy of morall vertues have made heathens Natura invi∣diosi erant A∣thenienses et ad optimis qui∣busque detre∣ctandum pro∣clives, non so∣lum iis qui in administratio∣ne reipubl. et magistratu ex∣cellerent, verū etiam qui vel doctrina litera∣rum vel vitae gravitate prae∣fulgerunt. AE∣han Van his. l. 2. c. 13. odious unto vitious Pagans, no wonder if the tran∣scendent eminency of Puritans graces procure the ma∣lice, the reproaches of all carnall Christians, who being 1 Cor. 2.6. to 16. unacquainted with the power of saving grace them∣selves, are apt to censure it as folly, hypocrisie or mad∣nesse in all others: but yet this may be their comfort; Tertul. Apo∣log. adversus Gentes c. 50. Cùm damnamur à vobis, à Deo absolvimur. If any now reply, that Puritans live not as they speake and teach; therefore the world condemnes them for hypocrites and dissemblers: let Seneca give them a satisfactory answer. Seneca de Vita eata c. 19, 20, 21. Aliter, inquit, loqueris; ali∣ter vivis. Hoc per malignissima capita, et optimo cuique inimicissima This there∣fore was an ancient com∣mon obiectiou against the best heathen Philosophers, who were ma∣ligned for their vertues. Platoni objectum est, objectum Epi∣curo, objectum Zenoni, Omnes enim isti dicebant non quemadmodum ipsi viverent, sed quemadmodum viven∣dum esset. De virtute, non de me loquor. Et cum vitijs convicium facio, in primis meis facio: cum potuero, vivam quomodo oportet. Nec malignitas me ista multo veneno tincta deterrebit ab optimis. Ne virus quidem istud, quo alios spargitis, vos necatis, ne impediet, quo minus per∣severem laudare vitam, non quam ago, sed quam agendam scio, quo minus virtutem adorem, et ex intervallo ingenti reptabundus equar. Expectabo scilicet, ut quicquam ma∣livolentiae inolatum sit cui sacer nec Rutilius fuit nec Cato, &c. De alterius vita, de alterius morte disputatis;
et ad nomen magnorum ob aliquam eximiam laudem vi∣rorum, sicut adoccursum ignotorum hominum minuti ca∣nes, latratis. This then is the cause why men so hate and slan∣der Puritans, because their goodnesse shames other mens badnes. Expedit enim vobis neminem videri bo∣num; quasi aliena virtus exprobratio delictorum vestro∣rum sit. Inviti splendida cum sordibus vestris confertis, nec intelligitis quanto id vestro detrimento audeatis. Nam si illi qui virtutem sequuntur avari, libidinosi, ambitiosi{que} sunt; quid vos estis quibus ipsum nomen virtutis odio est? Negatis quenquam praestare quae loquitur, nec ad exem∣plar orationis suae vivere. Quid mirum? cum loquantur fortia ingentia, omnes humanas tempestates evadentia: cum refigere se crucibus conentur, in quas unusquisque ve∣strum clavos suos ipse adjicit. Non praestant Philosophi quae loquuntur, multa tamen praestant quod loquuntur, quod honeta mente concipiunt. Nam si et paria dictis a∣gerent, quid esset illis beatius? Interim non est quod con∣temnas bona verba, et bonis cògitationibus plena praecor∣dia studiorum salutarium, etiam citra affectum, laudanda tractatio est. Quid mirum si non ascendunt in altum? Arduos aggressus virtutis suscipe: etiam si decidunt mag∣na conantur. Generosa res est, respicientem non ad suas, sed ad naturae suae vires, conari alta, tentare, et mente majora concipere, quam quae etiam ingenti animo ador∣natis effici possint. Qui hoc facere proponet, volet, tenta∣bit, ad deos iter faciet; ne ille, etiamsi non tenuerit, mag∣nis tamen excidet ausis.Note this Vos quidem qui virtutem culto∣rem{que} ejus odistis, nihil novi facitis. Nam et solem lu∣mina aegra formidant, et aversantur diem plendidum no∣cturna animalia, qui ad primum ejus ortum stupent; et la∣tibula sua passim petunt, abduntur in aliquas rimas, ti∣mida lucis. Gemite, et infaelicem linguam bonorum exer∣cete convicio. Instate, commordete, citius multo frange∣tis dentes quam imprimetis. It is true that the best of all 2 Chron. 6.36 Prov. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. Iames 3.2. 1 Iohn 1.8. Acts 14.17. Gods children have their weaknesses, their passions and infirmities, which they cannot wholly conquer whiles they continue here; they have Rom. 7.14 to 25. Gal. 5.16, 17. flesh in them as well as spirit, which sometimes shewes it selfe; they
have Rom. 7.24, 25.a dying body of sinne within them, which though it Rom. 6.12, 13, 14. raignes not in them as a King, yet sometimes it overmasters them in some particular actions as a ty∣rant; Gal. 5.17. Rom. 7.15 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. insomuch as they cannot doe the good they would, and the evill that they would not that they doe But yet this frees them from hypocrisie. First, that they unfainedly Rom. 7.16. to the end. desire and endeavour to mortifie all their sinnes and lusts, and to be freed from them. Se∣condly, they utterlyRom. 7.16. to the end. c. 8.13. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.4, 5, 6. abominate and detest their sinnes, continually watching, fighting, praying against them, and labouring to destroy them. Thirdly, when they fall in∣to any sinne of infirmity out of humane frailty, 1 Cor. 11.31. Psal. 32.3, 5. Psal. 51.1, to 14. Psal. 38.6. they condemne and judge themselves for it; it is their greatest griefe and shame, and they goe mourning for it all their dayes,Iob 42.6. Ezech. 16.61, 63. loathing and abhorring themselves because they have thus offended. Fourthly, they become more Psal. 39.1 Psal. 141.3. Iob 11.1. Mat. 26.41. 2 Cor. 7.11.vi∣gilant against their sins and frailties for the time to come, binding Iob 31.1. Ps. 61.8. Eccles. 5.4, 5. themselves by solemne vowes and covenants never to relapse into them more, Ezra 9.5. to 5. Dan. 9.4. to 20. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. crying mightily unto God for strength to resist and power to subdue them. Fifthly, they Rom. 7.15, 16. Psal. 139.23, 24. Ps. 119.104.allow not themselves in one knowne sinne whatsoever; they sinne not so frequently, in that manner as others doe, Psal. 19.13. keeping themselves innocent for the most part from great offences, and notorious sinnes, in which those who most condemne them wallow. Last∣ly, they leade farre 1 Pet. 1.12. to 16. holier and stricter lives than other men, they serve and honour God more than they; they Psal. 119.20, 47, 48, 55, 57, 72, 97, 113. Psal. 1.1, 2. love and feare God more than others, being farre more frequent, more constant in hearing, reading, prayer, meditation, fasting, and all holy duties, than those who declaime against them most; and yet Ps. 119.5, 10, 33, 34. Phil. 3.3, 14. they desire, they endeavour to be better and holier every day. Therefore they are no hypocrites, as all Antipuritans for the most part are; who professe themselves Christians as well as Puritans, and yet live like Pagans, like Infidels in grosse notorious sinnes, without any shame or sor∣row for them, or any warre against them, endeavou∣ring
not to Exigo a me, non ut opimis par sim, sed ut malis melior. Senca De Vita Beata cap. 16. grow better than they are. For the second part of the Objection; that Puritans and Precisians are seditious, factious, troublesome, re∣belious persons and enemies both to state and govern∣ment: and that this onely is the cause why they are so much hated, persecuted, reviled. I answer, that this is an ancient scandall which hath beene alwayes laid up∣on the choycest Saints of God from age to age; whe∣fore we may the lesse wonder at it now. For did not See Exod. 5.4, 5. & 108. Pharaoh long agoe, thus censure Moses and Aaron, and thereupon drove them out of his presence as factions persons who did let the people from their worke, and stirre them up to mutinie? Did not 1 King. 18.17, 18.King Ahab accuse the holy Prophet Eliijah as a troubler of Israel, when as it was onely himselfe and his fathers house that did disquie it? and 1 Kings 22.8, 24, to 29.did he not hate and imprison the good Prophet Micaiah as an enemie to him and his proceedings, be∣cause he alwayes prophecied truth unto him, and would not flatter him in his ungodly courses and humours? Did not that wicked Ester 3.8, 9, to the end. favourite Haman, accuse the whole Nation of the Iewes to King Ahasuerus, that their lawes were diverse from all people, that they kept not the Kings lawes, and that it was not for the Kings profit to suffer them; and thereupon procure the Kings Letters to the Lieutenants and Governours of the people, that they might be destroyed? Did not Ezra 4.10 to 17. Rehum and Shmshai write letters to King Axtaxerxes against Hierusalem of purpose to hinder the building of it ou of their malice o the pious Iewes: that it was a rebellious and a bad Ci∣tie, and hurtfull unto Kings and provinces, and that they had moved sedition of old time in the middest thereof, for which cause it was destroyed: informing the King withall, that if the walls thereof were set up againe, they would not then pay toll, tribute and custome, and so the Kings revenue should be endammaged? and did notNehem. 6.5, 6. Sn∣ballat send his servant to Nehemiah with an open letter in his hand, wherein it was written; it is reported among
the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the Iewes thinke to rebell, for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou maist be their King? &c. Was not the Prophet Ier. 15.10. c. 20.1, 2, 3. c. 32.1. to 6. c. 38.1. to 14. Ieremy persecuted and imprisoned by the high Priest, the Prines and all the people, for a man of strife and con∣tention to the whole earth; as a professed enemie both to the King, the State, and all the people, for no other cause but this, that he faithfully delivered those displeasing mes∣sages which God enjoyned him to proclaime against them for their sinnes? Did not Amos 7.10. to 15. Amaziah the Priest of Bethel accuse the Prophet Amos to King Ieroboam, for conspiring against him in the middest of the house of Isra∣el, and that the land was not able to beare his words? Which scandalons accusation not succeding, did hee not thereupon advise him, to flee into the land of Iudah, and to eate bread and prophecie there; charging him like an Episcopall controller, not to prophecie any more at Bethel, for it was the Kings Chappell, and the Kings Court, where he would have no faithfull Prophets, no truth-telling sinne-rebuking Caplaines come who knew not how to flatter. Did not Dan. 6.12. to 17. the governours who con∣spired together against the Prophet Daniel, put in this information against him to King Darius, that he neither regarded him nor his decree which hee had signed; accu∣sing him of disobedience faction and opposition to his lawes and royall authority? Yea was not our blessed Sa∣viour himselfe, though he Matth. 17.24 25, 26, 27. payed tribute to Caesar, in∣joyning all his followers,Matth. 22.21. to give unto Caesar the things that were Caesars; being as free from all sedition or re∣bellion against Princes as from all other sinnes; accused, condemned as a seditious Anti-monarchicall person? Did not the Luk. 23.1, 2, 10. & Iohn 19.12. whole multitude of the people with the chiefe Priests and Scribes accuse him before Pilate, say∣ing; We found this fellow perverting the Nation, and for∣bidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himselfe was Christ a King? and did not they thereupon cry out against Ptate when as he sought to have released him,
saying, if thou let this man goe, thou art not Caesars friend, for he speaketh against Caesar? And if our most innocent Saviour were burthened with these most false and scan∣dalous reproaches of sedition, faction, treason and rebel∣lion against Caesar; no wonder ifFundendo sanguinem et patiendo magis quam faci∣endo contume∣lias Christi fundata est Ec∣clesia: pesecu∣tionibus crevit, martyriis coro∣nata est &c. nos solos ex∣pellee cupi∣unt: nos soli qui Ecclesiae communica∣mus, Ecclesiam findere dici∣mur. Hierom. Ept. 63. Cap. 4. . 226, 227. none of all his follow∣ers can be exempted from these calumnies: Matth. 10.24, 25, 26. Iohn 13.16. & 15.20. For if they have thus falsely called the Master of the house Bel∣zebub, how much more will they stile those of his houshold so? the Disciple not being above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord; as himselfe doth argue in this very case. To confirme this further by some other pregnant examples. Was not Acts 16.20, 21. c. 17.5, 6, 7, 8. St. Paul himselfe, together with all the Disciples and beleeving Christians both at Philippi and Thessalonica, accused by the Iewes and other lewd companions, as men who did exceedingly trouble the Citty, and teaching new customes which it was not lawfull for men either to receive or observe? that did all contrary to the decrees of Caesar, and that they had tur∣ned the whole world upside-downe, insomuch that Acts 28.21. their sect was every where spoken against? Did not the Iewes cry out against this most laborious Apostle St. Paul, say∣ing, Acts 21.28. &c. Men and brethren helpe; this is the man that teacheth all men every where against the people and the law and this place, and hath likewise defiled this holy place; and did not all the people thereupon lay violent hands upon him, intending to put him to death, as a most seditious factious person. Yea did not Acts 24.5. & 25.2. Tertullus the Iewish Orator, accuse him before Felix, and the high Priests & Pharisees traduce him before Festus, for a pesti∣lent fellow, a mover of sedition among all the Iews through∣out the world, & a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens? And yet who so free from sedition, fation, rebellion or discord, as this most blessed Apostle; who commandeth Rom. 13.1, 2, &c. every soule to be subject to the higher powers: Heb. 13.17. to obey those who have the rule over them, and to submit unto them even out of conscience sake? 1 Tim. 2.1, 2. who exhorts all men to make supplications, prayers, intercessions and
thanksgivings for Kings and all that are in authority: to Ephes. 4.3. keepe the unity of the spirit in the boud of peace: to Rm. 16.17. marke those who cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine they had received, and to avoid them: 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. blaming the Corinthians for their dissentions. Besides this, doth not St. Peter informe us, 1 Pet. 2.12. to 18. &c. 3.16, 17 compa∣red together. that albeit the Christians in his time had their conversation honest a∣mong the Gentiles, submitting themselves to their Go∣vernours, Kings and lawfull ordinances for the Lords sake; yet the Gentiles were alwayes speaking against them as evill doers, and falsly accusing their good conversation in Christ, as if they were nought but seditious factious people, and rebels or enemies to Governours and govern∣ment? To passe by See 1 Cor. 4.9. to 15. 2 Cor. 4.8. to 12. c. 6.. to 11. 2 Tim. 3.3, 4. 2 Pe 2.10, 11, 22 Hebr. 11, 36 37, 38. Iude 15. Rev 12.10. many notable texts of Scripture which ratifie this notorious truth; Doe not Ventum est igiur ad secundum titulum Iaesae augustio∣ris mietatis, &c. Propterea iitur publici hotes Chisti∣ani quia impe∣ratoribus ne{que} vanos, neque mentientes, neque tenira∣rios honores dicunt, &c. Apologi ad. Gentes, Tom. 2. p. 673. to 685. Tertul∣lian, Advers. Gentes l. 1, 2, 3. Arnobius, De Iustitia l 1. & 9. Lactantius,Apologia 1. & 2. pro Christianis. Iustin Martyr, Octavius, passim. Minutius Felix, Hom. 23. in cap. 13. ad Romano Tom.  Col. 213 A. St. Chrysostome, with Euebius Eccle. Hist. l. 7 c. 10.14 Nicephorus Callistus, Ecclesiast. Hist. l. . c. 3. to 8. Centuriae Magd. 2. Col. 419, 420. Centuria 4. Col. 10, 11, 121, 314. Baronius and Spondanus, Annales Eccles. Anno Christi 9. sect. 2, 14. An. 56. s. 2. An. 66 . 3. An. 94. s. . An. 98. s. 1. An. 100. s. 2. An. 200. s. 2. An. 202. . 2, 3. An. 203 s. 3. An. 273. .1, 2. An. 253 s. 15. An. 38. s. 3. An 286. s. 4. Mr. Fox Booke of Martyr, 1610 p. 42, 48, 50. Antonini Chron. pars 1. Tit. 4, 6, 7. See Hierom. Epist. 63. cap. 3 4. all Ecclesiasticall Historians, both ancient and moderne, ex∣presly informe us, that the primitive Christians (who were oft nicknamed by the ignominious titles of Nicephorus Callistus Eccl. Hist. l 10. cap 4. pag 558, & cap. 20. pag 571. Origen contra Celsum lib. 5. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 1. p. 188. H. Tertullian. Apologia advers. Gentes c. 50 Hierom. Epist. 10. ad Furiam, c. 1. Arnobius lib. 1. contra Gentes, and Baronis and Sponanus qua l. Ga∣lilaans, Sibyllists, Impostors, Greekes, Sarmentisij, Se∣massij, Biothonati, Magitians, Socrates Scholast. l. 6. c. 4, 5, 16. To which I might adde the name of Lollard Ioannites, and the like, as they are now derided under the names of Puritans and Precisians) though they were neve detected of any treson, rebellion, mutinie, or sedition whatsoever (the case of those whom men stile Puritans and Precisian
now:) yet they were alwayes slandered, accused, traduced, persecuted as refractory, seditious, factious, mutineers; as enemies and rebels to the Emperours and Governours under which they lived, and as the authors of all the mis∣chiefes and troubles that hapned in the world; by which false pestilent suggestions in the eares of Princes, continu∣all bloody persecutions were raised up against these inno∣cent lambes, who had no other offensive or defensive armes, but prayers and teares: and doe not the Century-Au∣thors thence conclude evē for our present times; Centur. Mag 2. Col. 420. So∣lenne est ut Christianis crimina seditionis, blasphemiae, et lesae majestati à persecutoribus affingantur, quibus ta∣men non sun obnoxij? Doe we not likewise reade, that Socrates Ec∣cles. Hist. l. 1. c. 20. l. 2. c 22, 23 Theodoret Ec∣cl. Hist. l. 1. c. o Sozomen Ec∣cles. Hist. l. 2. c. 21. Baronius & Spondanus Anno 29. s. 1. Anno 362. s. 18. Athanasius, as. Epist. 63. Spondanus An. 362. s. 18. Basil, See Oratio de Vita Gre∣gorii Nazianzeni prefixed to his workes. Nazianzen, Socrates Ec∣cles. Hist l. 6. c. 4, 5, 16. Sozo∣men l. 8. c. 20. Spondanus, An. 398. sect. 19. An. 404. s. 3 Chry∣sostome, with sundry other ancient sinne-reproving, error-confuting Bishops were accused of faction and sedition for pposing the sinnes and vices of the times? and was not our owne worthy See Bp. Lati∣mers 2.3. & 4. Sermon before King Edward, and his 4. Ser∣mon on the Lords prayer accordingly. And Bishop Hoopers Apo∣logie to Qu. Mary. Bishop Latimer, with other pi∣ous Martyrs, accused, slandered as raisers of sedition, as factious, turbulent, and seditious persons, by those whose sinnes and errours they reproved, and that even in good King Edward the 6 his dayes? Survey wee all the Fathers, all Ecclesiasticall Stories, we shall finde poore innocent peaceable harmelesse conscionable Christians in all times and places, maliciously slaundered with the crimes of sedition, faction, rebellion, disobedience to Princes and their lawe, of purpose to make them odi∣ous both to Prince and people, even without a cause; Luke 10.. they being but as lambes in the very midst of wolves. And is it any wonder then that Puritans and Precisians should suffer the very selfesame calumnies now? Alas what powder treasons, Incestu sum, cur non requirant? in Deos et Caesaris aliquid committo, ur non habo quo purger? Tertull. advers. Gents c. 4. what conspiracies have these poore Play-condemning Puritans and Precisians hatched against King or State? what rebellions have they raised? what publike upores have they ever cau∣sed
from the beginning of reformation till this present? what treacheries, what mutinies are they guilty of, that they are thus condemned, as if they were as bad or worse than Papists, Priests or Iesuites, (for so some afirme;) whose See the pray∣er upon the fifth of No∣vember, Mr. Iohn White his Sermon at Paules Crosse, March 24 1625. His de∣fence of the Way, cap. 6 & Dr. Craken∣thorpe his De∣fence of Con∣stantine, and his Treatise of the Popes Tem∣porall Monar∣chy acordingly. very faith is faction, whose doctrine rebellion, and their practise Treason? Certainly were these whom the dissolutenesse of the times now brand for Puritans and Precisians, though every way confor∣mable to our Churches discipline, such rebels, facti∣onists, mutineers, disobedient antimonarchicall persons as the world conceives them, as Papists, Priests, Iesu∣ites, prophane & dissolue companions proclaim thē for to be, we should have seene some fruits, experiments and Si semper la∣temus, quomo∣do proditum est quod admit∣timus? Fama tandiu sola conscia est sce∣leum Christi∣anorum, hanc idicem adver sus nos profer∣tis, quae quod aliquando ia∣ctavit, tanto{que} spacio in opi∣nionem corro∣boravit, usque adhuc probare non vauit. Ter∣. Apologia, cap. 7. vid. Ibid. detections of it ere this. But blessed be God, we have heard of no Puritan treasons, insurrections or rebellions in our age; and experience (in despite of scandall and all lying rumours) hath manifested, that these Puritans and Precisians are such persons as both 1 Pet. 2.17. feare God and honour the King, though they oppugne the corrup∣tions, sinnes, profanesse, and Popish and Pelagian Er∣rors of the times, with all such factious Innovators, who either broach new heresies and superstitions, or revive olde. As for their loyalty to their Prince, his power and prerogative, it is so apparant, that howe∣ver Papists and persons popishly affected,Ea enim de castis, probis et pudicis fin∣gitis quae fieri non crederimus, nisi devobis probaretis. Minucius Felix Octauius p. 95. Voce negnt quod literis confitentur. Hierom Epist. 78. p. 303. now slan∣der them as enemies to Monarchie and Princes Preroga∣tives in words, (to Isti ut convicia in silentim mitterent sua vitam infamare conati sunt alienm. Et cum possent ipsi ab innocentibus argui, innocentes arguere studuerunt, mittentes ubique literas livore dictante consipta. Optat aduersu Parmin. lib. 1. pag. 23. take off this merited imputation from themselves) yet they bame them even under the very name of Puritans, as over-great advancers and chiefest patriots and propugners of Monarchy, of Princes supre∣macy, in their See the Answer to Des & Rex. printed workes; none going so farre
in suppressing the Popes usurped Authority, or elar∣ging the Kings and temporal Magistrates preroga∣tives and supremacy as they, as even the Iesuite in his Answer to Deus et Rex, hath proclaimed uto all the world. Let therefore the Moguntine Iesuites Contzen disciples, (following the desperate plot of their Master, to cheat a Protestant Church of her religion and to scrue in Popery into it by degrees without noyse o tumult, by raising slaunders upon the Doctrines and per∣sons of the most zealous Protestant Ministers and Pro∣testants, to bring them into the Princes, Poliicoru l. . c. 17 18, 19. and peoples hatred, and thrust them out of office) accuse Puritans of faction, sedition and rebellion now, Quis inson erit si accusa∣tori crimine non probato fides habeatur? Zonaras, Anual. Tom. 2. f. 118. without any ground or proofe at all as the Pagans did the Christians long agoe: or let the Epicures and prophane ones of our voluptuous times repute them such, because they Christiani, non generis humani hostis sed erroris. Tertul. Apologi c. 37. wage warre against their sinnes and sinfull pleasures: yet now upon the serious consideration of all these pre∣mises, I hope their consciences will acquit them of these malicious slaunders, and readily subscribe to this apparant truth, that they are the holiest, meekest, and most zealous Christians, and that they are onely hated and reviled for their goodnesse.See Lipsius Oratio de Ca∣lumnia. Insani sapiens, nomen fert aequus ini∣qui: Vltra quā satis est virtu∣tem si petat ipsam. Horace Epist. l. 1. Ep. . Since therefore these Play-censuring conformable Puritans and Precisians in their proper colours (uncased of these odious persecu∣ted termes of scandall, which represent them to mens fan∣sies in a most ugly forme; Mr. Bolton Discourse of true happines, p. 193. there being never poore perse∣cuted word, since malice against God first seized upon the damned Angels, and the graces of heaven dwelt in the heart of man, that passed through the mouthes of all sorts of unregenerate men with more distastfulnesse and gnash∣ing of teeth, than the name of PVRITAN doth at this day: which notwithstanding as it is now commonly meant, and ordinarily proceedes from the spleene and spirit of pro∣phanesse and good fellowshippe, is an honourable nicke∣name of Christianity and grace; as a worthy reve∣rend Divine observes:) are the very eminentest, choi∣cest,
and most gracious forward Christians, let us not thinke the better, Praestat enim paucis bonis adversus malos omnes, quam cum multis malis adversus paucos pugna∣re. Diogenes L∣ert. p. 6. Antisti∣nes p. 322. but farre worse of Stage-playes, because they all abominate, condemne them, as all good Christians have done before them: and if any have thus persecuted, hated, or reviled them out of ignorance or malice heretofore, let them heartily bewaile it, and give over now, Sacrilegii quippe genus est, Dei odisse cultores. Sicut enim si servos nostros quispi∣am caedat, nos in servorum no strorum caedit iniuriam: et si a quoquam fi∣lius verbereturalienus, in supplicio filii pietas paterna torquetur: ita et cum servus Dei a quoquam laeditur, maiestas divina violatur, dicente idipsum Apostolis suis Do∣mino: Qui vos recipit, me recipit; et qui vos spernit, me spernit. Benignissimus scilicet ac pssimus Dominus communem sibi cum servis suis et honorem simul et contume∣liam facit, ne quis cum laederet Dei servum, hominem tantum a se laedi arbitraretur: um absque dubio iniuriis servorum dominicorum Dei admisceretur iniuria, testante id suis Deo affectu indulgentissimo, in hunc modum Quoniam qui vos tangit, quasi qui tangit pupillam oculi mei. Ad exprimendam teneritudinis pietatis suae, tenerrimam partem humani corporis nominavit, ut apertiflime intelligeremus, Deum tam parva sanctorum suorum contumelia laedi, quam parvi verberis tactus humani visus aces laederetur. Salian. De Gubern. Dei l. 8. p. 286. because it is not onely a kinde of sacriledge, but even an high indignity and affront to God himselfe, to hate, to slaunder, persecute or wrong his servants, espe∣cially for controlling us in our delights of sinne, of which these constantly condemned Stage-playes are the chiefe. And for a close of this Objection, and Scene together, let us all remember that worthy sentence of St. Hie∣rom: Epist. 77. p. 302. Apud Christianos, ut ait quidam, non qui pa∣titur, sed qui facit contumeliam, miser est: and then these maliciou calumnies against Puritans and Precisi∣ans will quickly vanish. CHORVS. YOV have seene now Christian Readers, the severall arguments and Authorities against Stage-playes, together with the lender Apologies for them, which
how poore, how illiterate and weake they are, the ve∣ry meanest capacity may at first discerne. Rom. 12.1. I beseech you therefore by the very mercies of God, as you tender the glorie of Almighty God; the honour and credit of religion; the happinesse and safety both of Church and State; the serious covenant you have made to God in baptisme; Se here p. . & 42. to 62. & 561. to 566. ac∣cordingly. to forsake the Divell and all his workes, the pompes and vanities of this wicked world, with all the sin∣full lusts of the flesh; whereof Stage-playes certainly are not the least: as you regard that solemne Confession you have publikely made to God, and ratified in the very sacred blood of the Lord Iesus Christ, at every recei∣ving of the Sacrament; Se the Con∣esion in our Common Prayer-Booke before the Communion. that you doe earnestly re∣pent, and are heartily sorrie for all your misdoings; that the remembrance of them is grievous unto you; the bur∣then of them intollerable; and that you will ever here∣after serve and please God in newnesse of life, to the ho∣nour and glory of his name: Rom. 12.1, 2. & the Thanks∣giving after the Communion. offering and presenting unto the Lord your selves, your soules and bodies to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto him: or as you respect your owne, or others soules, whom See Chrysost. Homil. 7. in Matth. here p. 409. & Hom. 38. in Matth. here p. 417. your evill examples may leade downe to hell: that upon the serious perusall of all the premises, you would now at last abominate and utterly abandon Stage-playes, as the very fatall pests both of your mindes and manners, and the most desperate soothing enemies of your soules, See Act. 6. Scene 5. & Act. 7. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.as all ages, all places have found thē by experience. It may be some of you through 1 Pet. 1.14. 1 Tim. 1.13. Act. 3.17. ignorance and incogi∣tancy have formerly had good opinions and high thoughts of Playes and Players, (as being altogether un∣acquainted with their infernall originall and most lewd effects, which Act. 1, 2, & 6. I have here displayed to the full, and that made you so diligently to frequent them:) Let not this then which was only the in of ignorance, of weak∣nesse heretofore, become the Incidere in falsae opinio∣nis errorem priusquam ve∣ra cognoscas, imperiti est a∣nimi et simpli∣cis; perseverare vero in eo post∣quam agnove∣ris, conuma∣ciae. Salviani Epistola Afro et Vero, p. 316. sinne of wilfulnesse, or presumption now: but as God by these my poore en∣deavours hath opened your eyes to see, so doe you pray
unto him for strength and grace, to reorme your anci∣ent errour in this case of Playes. Act. 8.22. 2 Cor. 7.8, 9, 10. Repent therefor with teares of griefe, for what is past; and then speedily divorce your selves from Playes and Theaters for time to come; that as your consciences upon the serious per∣usall of all the premises, cannot but now subscribe to this strange Paradox, (as some may deeme it) which I have here made good: See here p. 6. That all popular and com∣mon Stage-playes, whether Comicall, Tragicall, Satyri∣call, Mimicall, or mixt of either: (especially as they are now compiled and personated among us) are such sinfull hurtfull, pernicious recreations, as are altogether un∣seemely, yea unlawfull unto Christians: so the lives and practise likewise may say Amen unto it. So shall you then obtaine the intended benefit, and I my selfe enjoy the much desired end of these my weake Endea∣vours, which was, which is no other, but Gods owne glory, your temporall and eternall happi∣nesse, and the Republickes welfare: For which as I have hitherto laboured, so I shall now by Gods assistance proceede to endeavour it in the ensuing part of this Play-scourging Dis∣course; wch now craves your fa∣vour and at∣tention too.
THE SECOND PART. ACTVS PRIMVS. IF then all popular Stage-playes, bee thus sinfull hurtfull, execrable, unseemly, unlawfull unto Christians, as I have at large evinced in the prece∣dent part of this my Histrio-mastix, I shall thence inferre these 3. ensuing Corollaries which necessarily issue from it. First, That the profession of a Play-poet, or the compo∣sing  of Comedies, Tragedies on such like Playes for pub∣like Players or Play-houses, is altogether infamous and unlawfull. Secondly, That the very profession of a Stage-player, together with the acting of Playes and enterludes, either in publike theaters or private houses; is infamous, Scan∣dalous, and no wayes lawfull unto Christians. Thirdly That it is an infamous shamefull, and unlaw∣full  practise for Christians to be either spectators or fre∣quenters of Playes or Play-houses. In briefe; the very penning, acting and beholding of Stage-playes, are infamous, unseemly, unlawfull unto Christians, since Playes themselves are so. To begin with the first of these I shall for the better
clearing of its truth and the avoyding of all mistakes, most willingly acknowledge. First, that as Poetrey it selfe is an excellent endowmēt, pculier unto some by Sponte sua carmen nue∣ros venbat ad apto, Et quod tentabam scri∣bere versus erat Ouid. Tristium, l. 4. Eleg. 10.a kind of naturall Genius; so it is likewise lawfull, yea Carmine dli superi placan∣tur, carmine manes Hora. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 1. p. 282. Gaudet e∣nim virtus te∣stes sibi innge∣re Musas, Car∣en amat, quis quis carmine digna gerit. Claudian prsat. in Lib. 3. de Lau∣dibus Stiiconis p. 193. see Ouid. de ponto lib. 4. Eleg. Plutarch de Audiendis poetis lib. Plnie epist, l 7. epist. 9 Hora carm. l. 4. Ode. 8. usefull and commendable a∣mong Christians, if righly used: as not onely the divine hymmes recorded in Scripture, together with the fa∣mous ancient Poëms of Tertullian, Arator, Apollina∣ris, Nazianzen, Prudentius, Prosper, and other Christi∣an worthies, with the moderne Distiques of Dubaras, Beza, Scaliger, Bucanon, Heinsius, Withars, Hall, Quarles, our late Soveraige King Iames, with infinite others; but likewise the much applauded verses of Ho∣mer, Pindarus, Virgil, Statius, Silius Italicus, Lucan, Claudian, Horace, Iuuenall, and some parts of Ovid, where he is not obscene, most plentifully evidence; whose Poëms are both approved, read, & highly mag∣nified of all learned Christiās, who both allow & teach them in their publike Schooles. Yea, were not Poetrie and Poets Lawfull, we must then rase out of our Bibles. Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33. Titus 1.12, 13. where the sentences of Menander, Epimenides, and Aratus, three heathen Poets are not only recited but Canonized too. If any desire any further satisfaction in this point which is so cleare, I shall onely referre them to Ter∣tullian ad Vxorem lib. 1. to St. Basil, de legendis libris Gentilium Oratio: to Nicephorus Callistus Ecclea∣sticae Historae. l. 10. c, 26. to the ancient & moderne Com∣mētators on these texts; to Georg Alley Bishop of Exeter,See B. Alley his poore man Librarie part 1. fol. 105.106. his poore mans Librarie part 1. Misellanea Praelectio∣nis 4. pag. 165.166. & D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stagplayes p. 21, 22. who will abundantly satisfie them in this poynt. Secondly, that it is lawfull to compile: a Poeme in nature of a Tragedie, or poeticall Dialogue, with seve∣rall acts and parts, to adde life and luster to it, especi∣ally, in case of necessitie when as truth should else be
suffocated. Hence Edidit quo∣que Euipidem aemlatus, Trago actus Pinari etiam liram attigit, et comica argu¦menta ad Me∣nandri exem∣pum tractavit, vniuscuinsque carminis legi∣bus rite serva∣tis, atque ut se∣mel dicā sump∣ta ex diinis li∣teris materia, agumentis eis tractandis, li∣brisque com∣ponendis, nu∣merum veli∣carum discipli∣narum aequa∣vit. &c. Nice∣phorus Callist Ecclesiast. ist. l. 10. c. 25. & Cas∣siodorus. Tripar∣tita hist. l. 6. ca. 37. vid, ibid. Nicephorus and Cassiodor re∣cord of Apolinaris the Elder, that being inhibited by Iulian the Apostate to Preach or teach the Gospell, or to traine the christians children to learning and poetrie, he thereupon translated divers Bookes of Scripture into verse, and composed divers Tragedies in imitation of Eu∣ripides, and sundry Comedies and lyricke verses in imita∣tion of Menander and Pindarus, consisting only of divine arguments and Scripture stories; by which he instructed those to whom he could have no liberty to Preach: the like did Gregory Nazianzen and others in the Primi∣tive Church, upon the same occasion, having no other meanes to defend See 34. & 35. H. 8. c. 1. M. Fox his Booke of Martyrs, 1610. pag, 1281. & Hen. Stabridge his exhortato∣rie epistle a∣gainst the pompous Popish Bishops of England. p. 18. or propagate religion with appro∣bation or connivance but by such Poëms as these. Hence divers pious Christians likewise in King Henry the 8. and Queene Maries bloudy raigne, being restrai∣ned by Superiour Popish-powers to oppose received errors or propagate the truth and Doctrine of the Gospell in pub∣like Sermons, or polemicall positiue treatises, did covert∣ly ven and publish sundry truthes, yea censure sundry Errors, and interpret divers scriptures in Rimes, in Come∣dies, Tragaedies, & Poems like to Playes under the names, the persons of others, whom they brought in discoursing of sundry points of true religion, which could not else bee Preached but by such Poems as these, which the people gladly heard and read, and the Magistrates and popish Priestes conived at at first; till at last King Henry the 8. by the statute of 34. & 35. H. 8. c. 1. M. Fox his bo. of Martyrs, p. 1281. and Queene Marie by her expresse Proclamation in the first yeare of her raigne (which the popish Prelates did most strictly execute) Prohibited the setting forth or penning of any songs, Playes, Rimes, or Enterludes, which medled with interpretations of Scripture, contrary to the doctrine esta∣blished in their raignes.Se Hen. Stalbridge his epist p. 18. accordingly. Wherefore I shall here ap∣prove
& not condemn, the ancient Tragedy stiled, Chri∣stus passus Se Lewenlvii censura huius operis, in Nazi∣anzens works. edit 1571. pa. 69. & Coci Censura. p. 125. accordingly. falsly attributed to Nazianzen) where∣in Christs passion is elegantly descphered, together with Bernardinus Ochin his Tragedy of Freewil, Plessie Morney his Tragedie of Ieptha his daughter, See Balaeus de Scriptoribus Briti. contur 8. cap. 66.6.82.99.100. Edward the 6. his Comedie de meretrice Babilonica, Iohn Bale his Comedies de Christo & de Lazare, Skeltons Comedies, de Virtute, de Magnificentia, & de bono Ordine, Nich∣laus Grimoaldus, de Archiprophetae Tragedia, &c. which like Geffry Chaucers & Pierce the Plowmans tales and Dialogues, were penned only to be See Basil. De Legendislibris Gentilium o∣raio. & Nice∣phorus: Eccles. hist. l. 10. c. 25.26. read, not acted,  their subiects being al serious, sacred, divine, not scurri∣lous wanton or prophan, as al modern Play poëms are. Thirdly, as it is lawfull to pen, so likewise to recite, to read such tragicall or comicall poëms as these, compo∣sed onely to be read, not acted on the Stage. And in truth the Tragedies, Comedies and Play-poëms of anci∣ent times, as those of Sophocles, Euripedes, AEschylus, Me∣nander, Seneca, and others, were onely read or recited by the Poets themselves, or some others of their ap∣pointment before the people, not acted on the Stage by Players, as now they are; it being a great disparagement to Poets to have their Poëms acted, as An tu de∣mens, Vilibus in ludis dictari armina malis? Serm l. 1. sect. 10. see here p. 37. Horace Bibl. hist l. 14. s. 110. pag 649.650. & l. 15. sect. 7. pa. 663. Diodors Siculus and De Ora∣toribus Dialog. sect. 14. Quintilian testifie. That these ancient Comedies and Tragedies were thus read or re∣cited onely, not played or acted on the Stage, is evi∣dent by the expresse testimonies of Horace: Sermo: l. 1. Satyr. 4. & 10, Epist. l. 2. Epist. 1. & de Arte Potica lib. of Iuuenall, Satyr. 1.4. & 8. of Diodorus Siculus. Bibl. hist l. 14. sect. 110. p. 649, 650. of Plutarch, de Audien∣dis Poetis lib. of Plinie: Epist: l. 1. Epist: 13. Epist: l. 2. Epist. 10. l, 3. Epist: 15.18. l. 5. Epist. 3. l. 7. Epist. 17. l. 8. Epist. 21. l. 9. Epist. 27. Of Suetonius in his Octauius sect. 89. Of Quintilian de Oratoribus Dialogus: 1.6.14. of Polydor Virgil, de Invent. rerum, l. 3. c. 13. of Scaliger Poeticis l. 1. c. 7. of Dr. Reinolds, in his Overthrow of Stageplayes p. 22. of Bulngerus de Theatro. l. 2. c. 1. p.
339. A.B. with sundry others, who all give testimony to this truth. Which takes of one grand obiection that Players, and Play-poets make to iustifie the Acting, and penning of Stage-playes; that many good men have compiled Playes and Tragedies in former times, of purpose that they might be acted on the Theatre; when as in truth these Playes of theirs were never acted but recited onely, they being composed for Readers, not Spectators, for private studies, not publike Play houses, as our present Stageplayes are. The sole controversie then is this; Not whether it bee simply unlawfull to penne a Poëm in nature of a Trage∣die or Comedie, which may be done without offence, in case it be pious, serious, good and profitable; not wanton amorous, obscene, Prophane, or heathenish, as most Playes are now: but, whether the profession of a Playhouse-Poet, or the penning of Playes for pub∣like or private Theaters, be warrantable or lawfull? And for my owne particular opinion, I hold it altogether un∣lawfull, for these ensuing reasons. First, to be an inventer, a contriver of evill, scanda∣lous, unprofitable or noxious things, is certainely un∣lawfull unto Christians: witnesse Rom. 1.30, 31. Psal. 31.6. Eccles: 7.29. Prov. 14.22. c. 24.8. and Isay. 55.2. But Stage-playes (as I have See part 1. Act 6. scene 1. to 20. & Act 7. scene 2.3.4.5. already manifested at larg) are evil, scandalous, unprofitable, noxious pastimes yea intolerable mischeifes both in a Church or State. Therefore the inventing and contriving of them must certainely be unlawfull. Secondly, to be a compiler, an Author of the cer∣taine, the common occasions of much wickednesse, sin and lewdnesse, can be no wayes warrantable or lawfull: as is evident by by the 1 Thes. 5.22. 2 Sam. 12.14. and Rom. 1.30. But Stage-playes (as the See part 1. Act. . scene 1. to 20. premises testifie) are the certaine, the common occasions of much wick∣ednesse, vice and lewdnesse: Yea Play-poets and Play-poëms if De vanitate scientiarum. ca. 64. Cornelius Agrippa may be credited, are
the very greatest entisements to all lecherie, bauderie, vice, and lewdnesse: Vnde Poetae inter lenones principatum fa∣cile obtinuerunt, quo suis lasciuis rithmis alijs{que} fabulis ac amatorijs bucolicis, praeceptiunculis, comaedijsque ex peni∣tissimis Veneris armarijs depromptis laesciuis carminibus, lenocinio functa, pudicitiam omnem subuertit, ac adole∣scentiae bonam indolem, moresque corrumpit. Therefore to be an Author, a compiler of Stageplayes, can bee no wayes warrantable or lawfull unto Christians. Thirdly; To foment men in their sinnes and sinfull courses, to uphold them in their ungodly professions, is without all scruple sinfull and unlawfull: witnesse 1 Tim. 5.22. Hab. 1.15, 16. Ezech. 13.18, 19, 20. But the penning of Playes for Play-houses, foments men in their sinnes & sinfull courses: See part. 1. Act. 6. Scene 2. 2, 3,4.5. &c. It fostereth the specta∣tors in their idlenesse, vanity, wantonesse, ribaldry, prodigality, lewdnesse, and the like; it drawes them on to many other sinnes, which else they might eschewe: It supports all publike Actors in their graceles, infa∣mous, ungodly, lewd profession of Acting, and others in their sinfull practise of beholding Stage-playes: if there were no new Playes to act or see, all Players, all Play-haunters would quickly vanish, the Play-poet be∣ing the Se Gossen his Playes confut∣ed Artic. 1. & 4. & Chrysost. Ho. 6. in Math. prime mover in this infernal sphere of lewd∣nesse. Therefore the penning of Playes for Play-houses,  is without all question very unlawfull. Fourthly to be a professed factor for the Devill and his instruments; to maintaine his See part. 1. p. 55. to 62. pomps & vanities which we have all renounced in Baptisme, is sinfull and abominable: as the 1 Pet. 5.8, 10. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Ephes. 2. 1, 2. c. 5.11. & Ioh. 8.44. infalliblie evidence. But Stage-poets are professed factors for the Devill and his instru∣ments See part. 1. Act. 1.2. & 4. who are most honoured & delighted with them, now as well as heretofore) and they maintaine (yea forge and pen) the very pompes and workes of the Divell which we have all renoūced in Baptisme; for I have in∣falliblie proved See part 1. p. 42. to 62. act. 6 scene 12. & act 7. scene 2. pa 561 to 568. accordingly, & Bulengerus de Circo Roma  cap. 46. p. 172. E.Stageplays (which they so seriously
compile) to be the Devills pomps which wee protest a∣gainst in Baptisme: Therefore the profession of a Play-poet even in this respect, is sinfull and abominable. Fifly for men to wast their wits, their parts and  precious time (with which they might and ought to doe God and men good service) on amorous, filthy, wanton, ridiculous, vaine, prophane, unproitable, subiects, which tend not to Gods glorie, to the good of men, or the peace and comfort of their owne soules at last; is altogether unlawfull, see Isay. 55.2. Psal. 7.6. Psal. 4.2. 1 Sam. 12.21. 2 Cor. 5.15. Rom. 12.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.20. & 10.31, 32, 33. Eccles. 5.16. Luk. 1.74, 75. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. for proofe of this proposition.) But those who penne Playes for the Stage; doe wast their wits, their parts and precious time, (with which they ought to do God & men good service) on See part 1. act. 3. throughout. amarous, filthy, wanton, ridiculous, vaine, prophane, unprofitable, (yea sometimes on atheisticall, blasphemous, sacrilegi∣ous, diabolicall, detestable) subiects, (for such for the most part, are all our moderne Playes) which tend not to Gods honor Se part 1. act. 3. scene 7. but to his great dishonour, and the De∣vils advantage: which bring no good at all, but exceeding much hurt and mischeife unto others: and no comfort, no peace, but horror and vexation onely to the soules of their composers, who have oft beene so terrified with the sad consideration of those infinite horid sinnes which their Stage-playes have produced both in them∣selves and others, that it hath almost driven them to de∣spair, and drenched their soules in stoods of brinish teares to wash away their guilt of Play-making: as the me∣morable example of See part 1. act. 6. scene 12.19, 20. Steven Gosson, and the Author of the third Blast, of retrait from Playes and Theaters, besides a more bloody fresh example, most fully testifie. Therefore the penning of Playes for the Stage is altoge∣ther unlawfull. Sixtly; for men Ierm. 9.3. to bend their wits like bows for lyes, and lying fables to corrupt and misrepresent true histo∣ries,
and to make their braine a very forge for lying va∣nities, and old-wives fables; is certainly unlawfull a∣mong Christians, who must put away lying fables, and speake nought but truth: See Ephes. 4.25, 29. c. 5.3, 4. 1 Tim. 4.2, 7. and part 1. Act 3. Scene 4. p. 106, 107. accordingly. But Play-poets thus racke and bend their wits like bowes for lyes and lying fables; they corrupt and misrepresent true histories, and make their braines a very forge for lying vanities and old wives Fables: witnes Act 3. Scene 4. p. 106, 107. with the Authors there quoted: witnesse the common prouerbiall speech Plutarh de Audendis Poetis lib. Tom, 1. pa. 28.29 Permulta canunt mendacia vates, that Play-poets broach verie many lies, that being no Poëm in Ibid. So∣crates his iudgement, à qua abesset mendacium, in which there i not some lye or other couched: witnes Dio∣genis Latii Solon: p. 46. & Plutarchi So¦lon. Solon who prohibited Thespis either to act or teach Tragedies, inutilem eas falsi loquentiam vocans) because they were but unprofitabl lyes or vaine common thrid∣bare fabulous figments of Stage-poets extolling vaine & idle things, with many words, as Excludant vanas vulgo protritas dam∣natas{que} fabu∣las figmento∣rum potico∣rum scenico∣rum{que} res nihi∣li multis verbis exaggeranti∣um. De Iudice. lib. p. 976. Philo Iudaeus phraseth them. witnesse the 3. Blast of Retrait from stage-playes, p. 104. which informes us: That the no∣tablest liar is becom the best Poet: nd that he who can make the most notorious lye, and disguise falshood in such sn, that it may passe unperceived, is hold the best writer, for the strangest Comedie brings greatest delecta∣tion and pleasure. Yea witnesse our own experience, our moderne Playes being nought but amorous ridiculous figments, lies & vanities, or sophisticated stories. The pen∣ning therfore of such stories as these must needs be ill. Seventhly: that profession, or action, which hath no good warrant either from the practise of the Saints; or from the word of God, the square of all our lives and waies, and in the prosecution of which a man cannot proceed with faith, or comfort, nor yet eriously pray for, or expect a blessing from God must questionles be unwarantabl unlawfull for a Christian:
witnesse, Gal. 5.16, 17, 18. c. 6.15. Psal. 119.9.104, 105. Rom. 14.23. 1 Cor. 11.1. Ehes. 5.1, 5. Psal. 129.7, 8.9. Phil. 4.6, 7, 8. But the profession of a Play-poet, and the composing of Playes for Theaters, hath no warant at all either from the practise of the Saints of God See part 1. Act 6. Scene. 12, 14, 20. & Act. 7. throughout. a∣mong whom we read of no professed Play poets or Players of ancient or moderne times, but such onely who upon their true conversion & repentence renounced this their hellish lewd profession: nor yet from the sacred word of God, the square of all our lives and wayes; in which I can∣not so much as find one title, one syllable to iustifie ei∣ther the penning or acting of a Stage-play: so that a man cannot proceed on in them either with faith or comfort, nor yet expect or pray for Gods blessing or as∣sistance on his Playes or Studies, which serve onely to advance the Divills service, and See part 1. Act 6. Scene 2, 4, 5. &c. foment mens lusts and vices. Therefore the very profession of a Play-po∣et, and the compiling of Playes for Theaters, must que∣stionlesse be unwarrantable, unlawfull for a Christian. Lastly, that very profession & function which Chri∣stians, which heathens, which even relenting Play-po∣ets themselves have censured, renounced, condem∣ned, as sinfull and abominable; must undoubtedly bee unlawfull for a Christian: But Christians, heathens, yea and Play-poets themselves have thus censured, renoun∣ced, condemned the profession of a Play poet, and the making of Playes to furnish Play-houses. Witnesse all the fore-quoted Fathers Councels and Christian Writers, who in condemning Playes, have censured their composers, not onely by consequence, but in Cyprian & Tertulliande Spectac. Chry∣sost Hom. 6. & 7. in Matth. Philo. Iudaeus. De Monarchia p. 1099. & in Flacu. l. p. 1305. Theophi∣lu Antoche∣nus. here p. 557, 558. Minucius Felix Octavius p. 69, 70. Euse∣bius de praepa∣rat. Evang. l. 4. c. 5. See p. 80. l. expresse termes too. Witnesse the See here p. 445 730. Athenians, and See here p. 449.484.51 Solon, who inhibited the penning of Comedies and Tragedies: together with See here p. 368 448. Plato & See here p. 449. Tullie, who banished all Playpoets out of their Republikes, as the effe∣minaters, the corrupters of mens minds and manners, lea∣ding them on to a dissolute, sloathfull, vitious, voluptuous life: Witnesse the p. 121, 12.455, 456.920, 92. Lacedemonians, & Massilienses, who
would never admit the penning or acting of Comedies or Tragedies; together with See here pag. 449.703. Gorgias See here p. 370.1. l. Horace and Satyr 8. here p. 844. Iuuenall, who condemne the composing of Playes for the Stage, as a base unworthy thing, unfit for eminent Po∣ets: Yea witnesse the constant practise of all Players and Play-poets in the See here p. 561, 567, 571, 572, 574, 575, 577, 582, 617, 626, 652. primitive Church, who upon their true conversion to the faith, renounced these their lewde ungodly professions, and never returned to them more: together with the moderne examples of See his Epistola 97. & 395. See here p. 917, 918. ac∣cordingly. AEnaeas Sylvius, and See Theod. Bezae amatoria ab Ipso adolescen∣te edita et ab ipso post dam∣nata. Lut. 1548. Theodorus Beza, who publike∣ly renounced, censured, and bewailed in their riper yeares those wanton amorous playes and poems which they had compiled in their youth of See here part 1. Act. 6. Scene. 14.20. p. 485, 486. fol. 566 & 910. M. Stephen Gosson, & the Authour of the 3. Blast of retrait from playes and Theaters; two Eminent English Playpoets Who being deepely wounded in consciece for those Playes they had penned for the Stage, thereupon abandoned this their hellish trade of Play-penning, as incompatible with Christianity or salvation, and by way of holy recompence and revenge, compiled Ste∣phen Gosson hs schoole of Abuse & Plaies confuted in 5. Actions. & the 3. Blast of re∣trait from Playes & The∣aters p. 41. to 57. three me∣morable printed Treatises against penning, acting and frequenting Stage-playes, which now are extant to their eternall praise, and to the just condemnation of all those Play poets which persevere in their relen∣ted and reclaimed steps. The penning therefore of Stage-playes for the Theater (which hath no precept, no example for to warrant it in the Scripture or in the Primitive Church) must certainely be sinfull and un∣lawfull unto Chrstians. All which I would wish our moderne Play-poets to consider. Who being oft times men of eminent parts, and choysest wits, able pithily to expresse what ever they undertake: I shall onely say of them and their poëms as Instit. Orat. l. 10. c. 1 p. 570. Quintilian doth of Se∣neca & his books, Multae in eo clarae{que} sententiae, multa etiam Elocutionis gratia legenda; sed in eloquendo cor∣rupta plaera{que}, at{que} adeo perniciosissima, quod abundant vitijs. Velles enim suo ingenio dixisse, alieno iudicio, &c. Digna fuit illa naturae quae meliora vellet, quae quod volu∣it fecit. And thus much for the first conclusion.
ACTVS 2. SCENA PRIMA. I proceed now to the second Corollary,The infamie of Stageplayers That the ve∣ry profeiō of a Stageplayer, & the acting of Stageplays is base and infamous, yea sinfull and unlawfull among Christians. First, for the infamie of Stage-players and play-acting, it may be evidenced by these examples. First, they were infamous even among Pagans and In∣fidells: Witnesse the ancient pagan Romanes, who ad∣iudged all Actors, all Stage-players infamous persons; & thereupon excluded thē their temples, disfranchised them their tribs, as unworthy of their stock or kinred; disabling them both to inherit lands as heires to their parents, or to beare any publike office in the commonwealth: as Rom. Hist. lib. 7. sect. .3. Livie O∣ratio pro P. Quintio. Cicero, l. 2. c. 4. Valerius Maximus, Excellen∣tium Imperatorum vitae, prae∣facio. p. 256. AEmili∣us Probus Annall. l. 14 s. 2.3. Tacitus, Satur∣nal. l. 2 c. 7. Macrobius Tiberius. Sect. 35. Suetonius, Noct. A∣tic. lib. 20. c. 4. Gellius, 6. Satyr. . Iuvenall, De spectac. c. 22. Tertullian, Adversus Gen∣tes. l. 7. p. 233. Arnobius, De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 10 to 15.29. l. 4. c. 28. Augustine Variarum. l. 7. c. 10. Cassiodorus, Tom. 10. pars 3. in Matt. c. 6. Quaest. 38. f. 40. E. Tostatus, De vnitate scien∣tiarum. c. 20. Agrippa, Genialium Dirum. l 3. c. 9. Alexander ab Alexandro, Comment in Corpus iuris ci∣uilis Tom. 1. p. 342.338 Gothofrede, Comment in lib. Iudicum. c. 16. p. 570. to 575. Arius Montanus, An∣iqu. Lect. l. 14. c. 17. Caelius Rhodiginus, De spectac. in codice Theodosij Comment. p. 268. Barnabas Bris∣sonius, An∣not: in pandect. Budaeus, Overthrow of Stage-players p. 4. to 10. & 29. to 82. where this point is largely debated. Dr. Rainols, See here p. 133. & 456. in the margent. and infi∣nite others testifie. Hence Vlpianus l. 6. paragr. 5. Digest vet. l. 3. Tit, 2. Corpus iuris Ciuilis. Tom. 1. p. 342. Nerva & Pegasus pronoun∣ce all such infamous, qui quaestus causa in certamina discendunt, et propter praemium in Scenam prodeunt: Hence also ibidem p. 338 Tit. de his qui notantur infamia. Praetoris verba dicunt: infamia nota∣tur qui artis Ludicrae pronunciandiue causa in Scenam prodierit. Infames sunt qui comicam artem exercent: which extends as well to voluntary as hired actors. And hence even by the Municipall Lawes of the anci∣ent
heathen Romans as qua  Corpus Iuris Civils: Tom. 1. p. 38.342. & Gotho∣fed Ibidem. & D. Rainolds. qua y before Ioanni Maria∣na. De Spectac. lib. De Rege et Regum Instit. l. 3. c. 16. & Pe∣trus Faber. Ago¦nistico l. 1. c. 3. p. 9. Vlpian & other Civillians in∣forme us, all stageplayers and Actors were infamous per∣sons; and so disabled to beare testimony, to inherit lands, or to receive any publicke place of honour in the Com∣mon-weale. And as these Romans, even so the Pagan Grecians too (who AEmilij Probi Praefatio. Au∣gust. De Civit. Dei l. 2 c. 10, 11, 13, 14. l. 4. c. 28. honored Stage-players at the first) reputed thē infamous at the last, as Homil. 38 in Matth. & Ho∣mil. 13. in 1 Cor 4. here p. 738. Chrysosto Comment. l. 29. f. 113. Volatranus, together with Le∣gum Dialogus. 7. Plato & See Gellius Noct Atic. l. o. c. 4. Aristotle informe us, and Plutarchi Laconica Apo∣theg. p. 462. here p. 741, 742. Agesilaus his answer to Callipedes implies. Secōdly, as they were thus See ulengerus De Theatro lib. 1. c. 51. De infamia Theatri & Olaus Magnus Hist. l. 15. c. 31.34. infamous among Pagans, so much more are they among Christians, as both See Concilium Eliberinum Can. 62. & those other councels quoted. p 133134.561. in the Margent, and here p. 844. Councels Tertul. De spectac. c 22. Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. & Arnobius, Clemens Ro∣manus, Augustine Cassiodorus qua supra. l. m. n. & infra. p. 844. Fathers, See . u. x. . b. c be∣fore & Bulengerus de Theatro l. . c. 51. & Codex heodosi l. 15. Tit. 7. de Scenicis Civilians, See Gratian Distinctio 33.48. & De Consecratione distinct. 2. Paulo Lancelet∣to Institutiones Iuris Canonici: l. 2. Ti. de Eucharistia: p. 269. Ioannis Caluini, & Iacobi Spielegii Lexicon Iuridicum Tit. histrione: Aluarus Pelagius de planctu Ecclesiae. l. 1 Are 49. with sundry others here quoted p. 844. &c. Cano∣nists, Astexanus deca∣sibus l. 4. Tit. 7. Artic. 4. summa Roela, & summa Angelica. Tit. histrio. Adulaio, & Infamia: with others p. 845. Casuists, Alexander lensis summa Theologiae pars 4. Quaest. 17. Artic. 2 p. 394. Aquinas 32. pars Quaest. 8. Artic. 6. Didacus de Tapia in 3 am. partem diui Thomae Artic. 8. p. 545, 546. Schoolmen, Olaus Magnus Hist. l. 15. cap. 31 34. Bulengerus de Theatro. l. 1. c. 51. Historians D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage playes p. 4. to 10. & 29. to 82. See here p. 561. s & p. Di∣vines, vnanimously testifie: Heare bu Comment in li. Iudicum. c. 16. p. 570, 571. Arias Mon∣tanus for all the rest, who informes us in expresse termes, that publicke dauncing or acting of playes for money or sport, is condemned as base infamous, and unworthy any ingenuous person, not only by Scripture & reason, but almost by all humane laws. Et vocari fecerunt (saith he) Simsonem ex domo vinctorū &c. nec ad digni∣orem et honestiorem agendam rem, quam ad ridiculum atque turpe de se spectaculum saltandrop aebendum in∣imicis,
principilius, ac populo. Qui legit intelligat; publice saltantes; et huiusmodi spectaculorum perso∣nas, urpitudinis atque infamiae nota inustas, et ratio ip∣sa, et antiqua jura Nota. fere omnia volunt, divina vero lex minimè admittenda, sensuit, in vulgaribus etiam ac vi∣libus capitibus nedum in honestioris ordinis atque cen∣sus viris nequ vero tantum vlo non quaerenda & op∣tanda, sed nec si inuiis fuerin illata, ferenda esse censet &c. Certe qui de virtute vera, leque corruptis ho∣minum moribu prudenter locuti sunt, hujus generis acti∣ones ingenuo homine iudignissimas duxerunt, vt ille de Neroe. Iuvenal Sa∣tyr. 8. In Scena nunquam cantavit Orestes, Haec opera, atque hae sunt generosi principis artes, Gaudentis patrio peregrina aut pulpita salu Prostitu, Graiaeque apium meruisse coronae? Which passage of his extends as well to Masquers, or Academical voluntary Actors, as o common stage-players, they being both alike inamou in this Au∣thors judgement. How great this infamy of Actors was among Christians in the primitive Church, and yet is, or at leastwise ought to be, with modern Chri∣stians, will appeare by these pariculars. First, it See here p. 133.134.161. excluded them from the Church, the Sacraments, & all Christian society making them ipso facto excom∣municated so long as they continued players, neither were they readmitted to the Church, til they had wholy relin∣quished & given over acting Witnes the severe impe∣riall Edicts of Valentinian Valens and Gracian, against Male and Female Actors. See Codex Theodosii. l. 15. Tit. 7. l ex. 1. Ba∣ronius & Spon∣danus. Anno. 371. sect 10. See here p. 68.469. Scenici & Scenicae qui in ultimo vitae necessitate cogente interitus imminentis ad Dei summi sacramenta properarunt, si fortassis evase∣rint, nulla posthac in Theatralis spectaculi conventione revocentur: Ante omnia tamen diligenti observatione tueri sanctione jubemus, ut verè et in extremo periculo Constituti, id pro salute poscenes (si tamen antistites probant) beneficij consequantur. Quod vt fideliter fiat,
statim eorum ad judices si in presenti sunt, vel curato∣res Vrbium singularum desiderium perferatur, Quod & inspectatoribus misis sedula exploratione quaeratur, an indulgeri his necessitas posat extrema suffragia: which Edicts, exclude all Stage-players from the Sacrament, even when they lay vpon their death-beds, vnlesse they earnestly desred it, and manifested such sincere repen∣tance for their play-acting, as might in the Magistrats or Ministers judgement prepare and fit them to re∣ceive it. Hence, See here p. 571, 572, 57, 574, 582, 583, 586, 517. Concilium Eliberinum. Can. 62. Concilium Arelatense 1. Can 4, 5. & 2. Can. 20. Con∣cil. Carthag. 4. Can. 88. Concil. Constantinopolitanum 6. Can. 24.51. Concil. Hipponense. Can, 35. Concil. Car∣thaginense. 3. Can. 35. Concilium Africanum. Can. 12.28. & Synodus Augustensis 1549. Can. 19. expres∣sly decreed; that all Stage-players shall be excomunica∣ted, and debarred from the sacrament till they gave over their profession, & that upon their repentance they should be admitted to the sacrament & reconciled to the Church. Hence See here p. 652. Clemens Romanus. Constit. Apostol. l. 8. c. 38. Tertullian de Pudicita. c. 7. Cyprian Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Chrysostome Hom. 3. De Davide & Saule, Theodoret de Martyribus. lib. Tom. 2. p. 390. Gratian Distinctio. 33. & 48. & de Consecratione Distinctio. 2. expresly teach, that Sage-players are to continue excomunicated and excluded from the Eucharist, & all Christian society, till they abandon playes and acting. And hence Indubi∣tanter turpe est esse histrionem. Sacram quidem communionem histrionibus et mimis dum in malitia perseve rant ex auctori∣ate patrū non ambigisesseprae clusam. &c. Ibid Io∣annes. Sarisberiensis De Nugis Curialium l. 1. c. 8. A∣lexander, Alensis Summa Theologiae pars 4. Quest. 17. Artic. 2. Sect. 4. p. 394. Aluarus Pelagius de Planctu, Ecclesiae l. 1. Artic. 49. f. 28. Astexanus de Casibus. l. 4. Tit. 7. Artic. 4. Tostatus in Math. c. 6. Quaest. 38. Item histrio∣nibus scenicis et aliis infami∣bus notoriis et manifestis non est Eucharistia conferenda, quia tales vitam ducunt illici∣tam sic dicit Cy∣prianus; nec pu∣o Maiestati di∣vinae, nec Eccle∣siasticae discipli∣nae congruere ut pudor et ho∣nor Ecclesiae tam turpi atque infami contagi∣one faedetur; et loquitur ibi de quodam qui fuit histrio, qui publice artem suam ex∣ercuit, et inde Doctor puerorum perdendorum suit. Posset ergo illud decretum in∣telligi de quolibet simili histrione notorio: Glossa dicit, quod hec tali nec cuicun que infami notorio est Eucharistia impertienda. Si tamen tales revertantur ad deum ex gratia vel reconciliatione, eis deneganda non est. Non statim tamen debe∣dari talibus hostia seu Eucharistia, nisi vsqe ad peracm paenitentiam, proptet reverentm Sa∣cramenti, vt probetureorum conversio non ficta, nisi ali∣qis articulus necessitatis seu Pietatis aliter fieri suaderet, secudum Ri∣chard. Distin∣cio. 9 Ibidem.
Ioannis de Burgo, Pupilla oculi pars 4, cap. 8. l: Photi∣us Monocanonis. Tit. 13. ca. 21.22. Ioannis Bertochi∣nus de Episcopis, Tractaus Tract. part 4. f. 25. . 101. Nicholus Ploe, de Sacrmenti. Ibid. pars. 8. f. 51. n. 3. Stephanus Costa. de Ludo. Tract. Tract. part. 1. f. 157.158.159, 160. Angelus de Clavasio, summa Angelica Histrio. & Infamia. Baptista Trmala summa Rosel∣la Tit. Adulatio. Ioannis Bangheucius de vita & hone∣state Ecclesiasticorum lib. 2. ca. 22. See here p. 48.482. Scenici atque histrionibus cae¦terisque perso∣nis huiusmodi, quamdiu tam detestandas ar∣tes exercuerin, non est danda eucharistia. nec enim Evan∣gelicae Discipli∣nae congruit vt pudor et honor ecclesiae tam turpi et infami contagione fae∣deur Ibidem. Didacus de Tapia in teriam partem divi Thom Atic. 8. Qaest, vtrum sacramentum dari potest histrionibus. p. 545.546. (e) Paulo Lanceletto, Institutiones juris Canonici lib. 2. it. de Eucharistia. p. 269.270. Ivo Carnotesis, pars 11. Decret. c. 83. & pars 2. c. 35. Aquin. tertia parte, qu. 8. Art. 6. Iosephus Angles Flores Theolog. qu. in. l. 4 sent. pars 1. quaest. de suscipientibus Eucharistiam. art, 4. con∣clus. 1. p. 101.102. Iacobus Spielegius Lexicon juris civilis, & Iohannis Calvini Lexicon juridicium, histrio Centuriae. Magd: cent: 3. col. 142. Barius & Spon∣danus Annal. Eccl. An. 206. sect. 2, & 371. Sect. 10. Bulengerus de Theatro lib. 1. ca. 51. the 3 Blast of Retrait from playes & Theaters. pa. 116. Doct Rai∣nolds, M Northbrook & M. Gosson in their Treati∣ses against Stagplayes, Ioannis Mariana de spectacu∣lis lib. with See hee p. 133, 14.561. & Act. 7 Scene 5. Summula Raymundi fol. 97. sundry other schoolemen, Canonists, and divines, expresly determine, that the Eucharist or Sacra∣ment of our Saviours body and blood, ought not to be ad∣ministred to Stageplayers as long as they vse their de∣testable infamous vchristian art of acting playes, which excludes them from the Sacrament, not only of the Lords Supper, but of Baptisme too no See here p. 561. to 568.571. to 580. Players, no play-haunters being received into the Primitiue Church or admitted to the Sacrament of Baptisme, till they had renounced their acting & beholding of stageplayes, as the very pompes and inventions of the Devill, as I haue elsewhere largely manifested. Such was, such is the noto∣rious infamie of acting playes, as thus to exile men frō
the Church, the Sacraments and all Christian society, and to make them Excommunicate ipso facto; An in∣fallible evidence of its great vnlawfullnes. Secondly, the acting of Playes, disables Players to receive any Sacred Orders, or Ecclesiasticall prefer∣ments whatsoever; no player being capable of any Mi∣nisteriall, or Epicopall function; hence Augustine de Ecclesiasticis Regulis cap. 20. & out of him, Decretal. pars 8. c. 295. Io Car∣notensis & Distinctio. 33. Gratian, conclude; Clericum non ordinandū qui aliquādo in scena lusisse probatur: hence Hierom Epi. 83. Oceano, ca. 4. & Anselme in Epist. 1 ad Timotheum. c. 3. tom. 2. p. 356. write thus See Gratian distinctio 48. c. Prohibentur accordingly. Non congruit, vt here in Amphitheatro, hodie in Ecclesia; vespere in circo ma∣ne in altario: dudum fautor histrionum, nunc consecrator virginum. Hence Pope Gregorie the first, determines thus of Stageplayers Gratian Di∣stinctio 33. cap. Marium. f. 55. Illos qui in Scena lusisse nos∣cuntur non ordinandos censemus: all which extend to vo∣luntary, as well as hired Actors. Hence Tostatus Abu∣lensis informes vs, In Matth. 6. Quaest. 38. f. 40. Histriones & qui adhaerent ijs sunt infames, nec possunt promoveri ad sacros Ordines. Hence In c. cum deco∣rum, de vita et honest Clerico∣rum. & summa Angelica. Hi∣strio. Panormitan affirmes, Histriones non possunt promoveri ad clericatum etiam peracta paenitentia, dum∣modo exercuerunt artem suam causa quaestus. Hence Tracta¦tus Tract. Tom. . p. 157. to 161. Stephanus de Costa, writes. Histriones infames sunt, nec possunt ad ordines promoveri. Hence Repertorii Moralis. pars. 2 Histrio. p. 669. Ioannes Bertochinus propounds this question. Quaero an hi∣strio possit elegi Episcopus? & he resolves it thus: Respon∣deo quod non, neque post peractam paenitentiam. Quini∣mo histrio non potest corpus Christi accipere, ratio est quia est infamis notorie. Hence Super. l. 3. De∣cretalium. De vita et honesta-Cericorum. c. 12. Tom. 5. f. 4. Antonius de Bru∣tio avers: Histriones non possunt promover post paeni∣tentiam, quia infames, nisi Papa dispensarit: and he quotes Gratian distinctio. 51. & causa 4. Quaest. 1. to warrant it. All which Pupilla Ocu∣li. pars 7. c. 5. l. Ionnis de Burgo our Coun∣trey-man, thus seconds. Item mimi, histriones & hu∣jsmodi non sunt ad ordines promovendi, nisi ex dispen∣satione Papae, quia sunt infames. Hoc intellige de his
qui publice coram Populo faciunt aspectum sive Ludi∣brium sui corporis exercendo opus illud. Si autem in occulto aliquis saltaret, vel huiusmodi opus facere pos∣set, nihil ominus post peractam paenitentiam potest ordi∣nari. Vilitas enim personae est causa quare tales ab ordi∣nibus repelluntur: for which he quotes Extrauag. de vita est honestate Clericorum: cum decorum in glos. See here p. 653, 654. Inno: &c. So that no academicall or private voluntary Actors by the cannon Law ought to be admitted to orders, before they have publikely repented and done some open penance for this their private acting. The same we shall finde affirmed by Aluarus Pelagius: De Planctu Ecclesiae. l. 2. Artic. 28. H. histriones (writes he) non promoventur ad clericatū: & in Summula Raymundi f. 93 94. Summa An∣gelica. Tit. Hi∣strio. Summa Rosella Adula∣tio. Bulengerus de Theatro. l. 1. c. 50, 51. sundry other Ca∣nonists: Yea the Canon Law is so strict in this, See Apostolo∣rum Canones Can. 17. Grati∣an Distinct. 34. here p. 649. that if any one married a woman actor, he could not be promo∣ted to any ecclesiasticall living, or take orders upon him. Thirdly, the acting of Playes made Players so infa∣mous, that they could give no publike Testimony between man & man witnesse Concil. Africanum Canon. 96. &  Concil. Carthaginense. 7. Can. 2. here p. 577. Ioānes Ber∣tachinus Repertorij Moralis. pars. 2. p. 669 Tit. histrio; Angelus De Clauasio, Summa Angelica. Tit. Infamia. Adulatio, Histrio, & Testis: with Caluini Lexi∣con Iuridicum, and most other Canonists in their Titles Hi∣strio, Infamia Testis, &c. divers others. Fourthly, it made Players so execrablie infamous, that for a Christian woman to marrie a Stageplayer, was Excommunication ipso facto: witnes, Concilium Eliberinum, can. 67. here p. 571. Fiftly, the infamie of players was such, that they might lawfully be disinherited by their parents, and so might Play-haunters too; histriones enim sunt infames &c. et qui adhaerent mimis et histrionibus possunt exhe∣redari  &c. as Tostatus informes us.In Matth. c. 6. Quaest. 38. f. 40 Lastly, Such is the infamie of Play-acting, that our owne 22. H 8. c. 12.14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4.1. Ia∣cob. c. 7. See here p. 495, 496. Statutes have branded Players with the stile of Rogues and vagabonds, making them liable to the stocks, the whipping post, and all other punishments to which Rogues are subiect: Which Statutes if any
Actors thinke over rigorous; let them remember that both See here p. 459, 460. ac∣cordingly. Augustus Caesar, and Tacitus. An∣nal. l. 1. c. 14. & l. 4. c. 3. See here p. 460. Tiberius, two hea∣then Roman Emperours, made Stage-players liable to the lash, or Bedles whip, (a punishment suitable to such base idle Rogues as they) When as it was altogether un∣lawfull for any ingenuous Roman to be scourged Act. 16.37, 38. & 22.24. to 30. By all which Testimonies together with that passage of Tully concerning Roscius the eminent Roman Actor, to whom Oratio pro. P Quintio. p. 225. Syla gave an An∣nual Pension and a ring of gold; Etenim, cum artifex e∣jusmodi est, ut solus dignus videatur esse, qui in scena spe∣ctetur; tum vir ejusmodi est, ut solus dignus videatur qui eo non accedat: quid aliud apertissime ostendens, (as Macobius Saturnal. l. 3. c. 14. St. August: descants on it) nisi illam scenam esse tam turpē, ut tāto minus ibi esse homo debeat, quāto fuerit magis vir bo∣nus: it is abundandly evident, That Stageplayers are most De con∣sensu Euange∣listarum. l. 1. c. 33. infamous persons, and their very prfession most base and execrable both among Pagans and Christians.Sic ita∣que et circa vo∣luptates specta∣culorum infa∣mata conditio est. Tertullian de Corona m∣litis. c. 5. p. 7. Neither is the art or publike profession of acting Stage-playes vile and execrable onely when it is pra∣ctised for lucre sake, but likewise the voluntary per∣sonating of them too for recreation or entertainement, especially in persons of ranke and quality. To instance in some particulars. First, it hath beene alwayes reputed dishonorable, shamefull, infamous, for Emperors, Kings, or Princes to come upon a Theatre to dance, to masque, or act a part in any publike or private Enterludes to deligh themselves or others: Hence Rom. hist. l. 59 p. 830. Dion Cassius Su∣etonii Caius Sect. 18.35.52, 53, 54, 55. Sue∣tonius, De Legatione ad Caium li. Philo Iudaeus with sundrie Zo∣naras, Eutropi∣us, Sallicus An∣tonnus, Grimstō in his life, and Vincntius Spe∣culum hist. l. 7. c 19. other wri∣ters impue this as an inexpiable infamie to that mon∣ster and shame of Monarches, Caius Caligula,Quen∣dam equorūsuorū Incitatum nomine, ad cae∣nam quo{que} ad hibebat, et ei in auro hordeum appoeat et poculis aureis vinum prpi nabat, salutem eius ac forunam urans; Consule se em creaturam policibaur, facturus si duts vixisset Dion Cassius l. 59. p. 83. (who ws so farre besoed, as not onely to drinke his horses Incitatus health. &c. and to spend whole nights in be∣holding masques and Stage-playes, turning night as it were into day; but likewise by a publike edict to compell all the people to be present at his enterludes
at his unseasonable houres, and to chop off the heads of such as either came not to them, or departed from them ere they were ended:) Quod procedente tempore et aurigauit et pugnauit, et saltavit, et Tragaediam e∣git, semper haec tractans: et quod semel noctu primoribus Patrum quasi ad necessariam deliberationem vocatis, coram saltav, ac desaltato cantico abijt: which cau∣sed Chaerea to conspire his death, and to murther him as he was coming out of the Theater: which Lib. 59. p. 854. & Sutonii Caius sect. 56.58. Dion Cassius thus relaeth. Postquam vero saltare etiam et fabulam agere Caius instituit, Chaerea cum suis rem extraendam porro non rati, observarunt Noctem quo{que} in diem velut mar in terram convertere vo∣lebat: nam lo∣co in Lunae for∣mam curuato, vndique ignis quasi in thea∣tro qudam vi∣debatur, ita vt omnem tene∣brarum sensum eriperet. Ac ne qua vlli excusa∣tio esset non ve∣niendi in thea∣trum (nam e∣gerrime id fere∣bat si quis abes∣se, aut specta∣culo nondum finito discede∣ret) iustitium indixit. Inter∣dixitetiam id vt obvii in viis Imperatorem salutarent, quo inmirum faci∣lius ad thea∣trum iri posset. Multos interspectandum ar∣reptos multos a theatro domum revertentes apprehendens obtruncaret. Causa irae poissima fuit, quod negligentius ad spectacula conveniebant, scilicet vexati o, quod alias alio tempore quam edixisset, ac saepe noctu etiam eo veniret, et quia non semper osdem, quos ipse probabant, nonnunquam etiam inuisi, &c. Dion Cassius l. 59. p 831.837.842. Theatro ex∣euntem, ut pueros spectaret, deprehensumque in angi∣portu obtruncarnt. An end most sutable to his viti∣ous tyrannicall play-adoring life, which had quite ex∣hausted the Romane treasurie. We find this recorded to Nero his perpetuall shame. Tacitus. An∣nal. l. 14. c. 2. l. 15 c. 4, 5.6 Sabellicus Eneid 7. l. 2 p. 201. Eutropius rerum Ro. l. 9. p. 204. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. fol. 98. Quod postremo ipse scenam inscendit, multa cura tentans cytharam et praeme∣ditans, assistentibus familiaribus Quod faeminarum illu∣strium senatorumque plures per arenam faedasset, et acriore in dies cupidine adigebatur promiscuas scenas frequentandi. Nam adhuc per domum aut hortos ceci∣nerat iuenalibus ludis, quos vt parum celebres et tan∣tae voci angustos spernebat. Non tamen Romae incipe∣re scenas ausus, Neapolim quasi Graecam vrbem dile∣git: inde initium fore vt transgressus in Achaiam in∣signesque et antiquitus sacras coronas adeptus maiore fama studia ciuium eliceret, &c.Suetonii Nero Sect 12, 13, 20. to 25. et Sect. 42. he writes thus, Quinimo cum prosperi quiddam ex provinciis nunciatum esset, su∣perabundantissimam canā iocularia in defectionis duces carmina, lasciue{que} modula∣ta, quae vulgo innouerunt, etiam gesticulatus est; ac spectaculis theatri clam illatus, uidam Scenico placenti nuncium misit, abuti cum occupationibus suis, & sec. 54. Sub exitu quidem vitae palam voverat, si sibi incolumis status permansisset, proditu∣rum se partae victoriae ludis, etiam hidraulam et choraulam, et vtricularium, ac no∣ssimo die hi-strionem, saltaturum{que} Virgilii Turnum. &c. Ibidem saepius per com∣plures
cantauit dies. Neque eo segnius adolecentulos e∣questris ordinis et quinque amplius millia è plebe robu∣stissimae iuentutis vndique elegit, qui divisi in factiones plausuum genera condiscerent, operamque nauarent cantanti sibi insignes pinguissima coma, et excellentissi∣mo cultu pueri, nec sine annulo laeues: quorum duces qua∣dragena millia H S. merebant. Etiam Romae Neroneum agens ante praestitutum diem reuocauit: Nomen suum in albo profitentium citharaedorum iussit ad scribi sor∣ticulaque in vrnam cum caeteris demissa, intrauit ordine suo simulque Praefecti praetorij citharam sustinentes, post tribum militum, juxtaque amicorum intimi. Vtque constitit peracto principio, Nioben se cantaturum per Cluvium Rufum consularem pronuntiavit, et in horam fere decimam perseveravit coronamque eam, & reliquā certaminis partem in annum sequentem distulit, ut saepe canendi occasio esset. Quod cum tardum videretur, non cessauit identidem se publicare. Non dubitauit etiam priuatis spectaculis operā inter scenicos dare, quodā prae∣torum H S. decies offerente Eutroplus Re∣rum Rom. l. 9. f. 104. writes thus of him: Ad postremum Nero tanto se dedecore pro∣stituit, vt omnia pene Italiae ac Graeciae the∣tra perlustra∣tus, assumpto e∣tia vaii vesti∣tus dedecore saltaret, canta∣ret, in Scena ci∣tharedico habi∣u el tragaedi∣. See Grim∣ston in the life of Nero. Vin∣centii Specu∣lam histor. l 9. c. 6. Freculphi Chronicon. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 16. &c. Tragaedias quoque can∣tauit personatus heroum Deorumque, item heroidum, a Dearum personis effictis ad similitudinem oris sui, et fae∣minae, prout quamque diligeret: inter caetera cantaui Canacen parturientem, Orestem matricidam, Oedipodem excaecatum, Herculem insanum. In quaefabula fama est tyrunculum militē positum ad custodiam aditus, cum eum ornari ac vinciri catenis, sicut argumentū postulabat, vid rt, accurisse ferendae opis gratia. Mox ipse aurigare at{que} etiam spectari saepius voluit, positoque in hortis inter ser∣vitia et sordidam plebem rudimento, vniversorum se oculis in Circo maximo praebuit, certamina deinceps o∣bijt omnia. Cantante eo, ne necessaria quidem causa ex∣cedere Theatro licitum erat. Itaque & enixae quaedam in spectaculis dicntur, et multi taedio audiendi audandi∣que, clausis oppidorum portis, aut furtim dissiluisse de muro, aut morte simulata funere elati. Tacitus Annal l. 16. sect. 1. Constitit ple∣rosque equitum dum per angustias aditus & ingruentem
multitudinem enituntur obtritos, et alios dum Diem noc∣temque sedilibus continuant, morbo exitiabili correp∣tos; quippe gravior inerat metus si spectaculo defuissent, multis palam et pluribus occultis, vt nomina ac vltus, alacritatem, tristitiamque coeuntium scrutarentur. Vn∣de tenioribs sttim irrogata supplicia, aduersus illu∣stres dissimulatum ad presens, et mox redditum odium. Interea Senatus propiquo iam lustrali certamine, ut de∣decus averterit, offert Imperatori victoriam cantus, adij∣cit facundiae coronam, qua ludicra deformitas velaretur. Sed Nero nihil ambitu nec potestate Senatus opus esse dictitans, se aequum adversus aemulos et religione indi∣cum meritam laudem assecuturum, Nero publice citara ceci∣nit; in circo aurigauit. Tra∣iecit in Graeci∣am, non ut ma∣iores sui sed sal∣tandi, citharae Pulsandae, prae∣conii faciendi agendae que tra¦gediae causa. Nec  i Ro∣ma satis ampla erat, sed expe∣diione erat o∣pus vt Periodo∣nices, id est, pa∣sim victor, vt abat, euade∣ret. Sed qui singula ius sa∣cta enumeret? Nam vno ver∣bo, quicquid viles histriones representant ea omnia ipse di∣cebat et facie∣bat, et tolera∣bat, nisi quod aureis catenis viniebatur, nam ferreae Romanorum Imperatorem haud decuissent. Aiquando igitur Miles vin∣ctum conspicatus prae indignatione accurrit, cumque soluit. Zonaras Annal. Tom. 2. s. 98. primo carmen in Scena recitat: mox flagitante vulgo vt omnia studia sua publicaret (hac enim verba dixre) ingreditur theatrum, cunctis citharae legibus obtemperans: ne fessus resideret, ne sudorem nisi ea quam indutus gerebat veste deterge∣ret; vt nulla oris vel narium excrementa viserentur. Postremo flexus genu, et caetum illum manu veneratus sententias iudicum opperiebatur ficto pauore. Et plebs quo∣que vrbis histrionum quoque gestus inuare solita perso∣nabat certis modis, plasuque composito, Crderes lae∣tari, ac fortasse laetabantur per iniuriam Omnia in Neone probri et ignominiae plena. Omni pudore abiecto Romae cantu in theatro certavit, vbi insanum Herculem acturus, cum de more vin∣culis ornaretur, qui praesidi causa in proximo sterit, catenas intuitus, ratusque vim illi intendi, consternatus animo, co occurrit opem principi laturus. Nec satis fui∣per haec indelebilē Romano Populo notam ab eo inustam, in Graeciam cantandi stu∣dio navigavit omnibusque eius getis spectaculis, cantu, aurigatione, praeconio cer∣tavit. Indereversus curru quo olim Augustus triumphans vrbem ingressus est, prae∣miorum pompa titulisque singulorum certaminum longo ordine praemissis. Sabellicius AEnid. 7 l. 2. p. 201. publici fla∣gitij: so he stiles it. Sed qui remotis èmunicipijs, seueram∣que adhuc, et antiqui moris retinentes Italiam, quique per longas prouincias lasciuiae inexperti, officio legationum, aut priuata vilitate advenerant: neque aspectum illum
tolerare, neque labori inhonesto sufficere, cum manibus nescijs fatiscerent, turbaret gnaro, ac saepe a militibus verberarentur, qui per cuneos stabant, ne quod tempo∣ris momentum impari clamore, aut silentio segni praete∣riret, &c. Such was the Playerlike citharedicall life of this lewd vitious Emperour: which made him so ex∣ecrable to some noble Romanes, who affected him at first, before he fell to these infamous practises; that to vindicate the honour of the Romane Empire, which was thus basely prostituted, they conspired his destru∣ction: which conspirarie being detected, Subrius Fla∣vius a chiefe captain, one of the conspirators, being de∣maunded of Nero, for what reason he had thus con∣spired against him? returned this answereTacitus An∣nal. l. 15. cap. 10 . 306. Oderam te inquit, nec quisquam tibi fidelior militum fuit dum amari meristi; odisse caepi postquam parricida matris et vxoris, auriga, Histrio, et incendiarius extitisti. And Sulpitius Asper, a Centurian, being demanded the like question, made this reply; Non aliter tot flagitijs eius subueniri posse. And when as some of these Conspira∣tors would have had Piso to succeed Nero in case their treachery had succeeded, Flavius made them this an∣swere Tacius Annal. l. 15. ect. 9. p. 359. Non referre dedecori, si citharaedus dimoue∣retur et Tragaedus succederet: quia vt Nero ithara, ita Piso tragico ornatu canebat. All which, together with the Satyricall invectiues of Res haud mia tamen cithaaedo Principe imus Nobilis &c. In Scena nunquam can∣avit Orestes: haec opera at{que} hae sunt gene∣osi Principis tes, Gauden∣isfaedo pere∣grina ad pulpi∣ta saltu Prosti∣tui, Graiaeque apium meruisse coronae Iuuenal Satyr. 8. p. 2, 83. Inuenall and Eutropi∣s, Zonaras, Sabellicus, & Grimston in his life. Arius Montanus in lib. Iudicum c. 16. p. 590. 571. Dr. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playes p. 1. to 10. & 29.  82. others against this infamous Playerlie Emperor, are a sufficent evidence, what an ignoble shamefull thing it is for any Prince or Emperour to sing, to dance, or act upon a Stage. Hence Pag. 10, 91. AElius Lampridius, and Eu∣tropius in their Commodus Antoninus, and Herodian historiae l. 1. & 2. p. 57. to 73. severely censure this dissolute Emperour Commodus whom they and the people stiled, a Gladiator, an Actor on the stage: Quod nudus ingressus amphitheatrum est, sumptisque armis numeros gladiatorios implebat &c. Triste vero (writes Histoae. l. 1. p. 57.59.. Herodia) Romano populo spectaculum id visum,
nobilissimum Imperatorem, post tam multos parentis sui maiorumque triumphos, non quidem adversus Barbaros arma capere militaria, vel Romanorum Imperio con∣gruentia, se amplissimam dignitatem, turpissimo fae∣dissimoque cultu contaminare; eoque tandem vesaniae pro∣vectus est, ut deserere principalem aulam atque in do∣micilium gladiatorium migrare institueret. Neque se amplius Herculem appellari patiebatur, adoptato nobi∣lissimi gladiatoris nomine, qui jam vita excessisset: at∣que in basi simulachri Colossei solis effigiem gerentis subscripsit, non quos consuesset imperatorios Paternos∣que titulos, sed pro Germanico, mille gladiatoru vict∣rem: To such prodigious degrees of basenesse of dege∣neracy doe dissolute Princes come to by degrees, when as they once addict themselves to such infamous de∣lights. These actions of his were so execrable to the Senate, the common people, and to all his freinds; that when as on the feast of Ianus,Herodian. Hi∣stor. l. 1. p. 59 61.63. See Eu∣tropius, Zona∣res, Cocius Sabellicus, Elius Lampridlus, Grimston, and others in his life accordingly. Statuisset non quidem ex imperatorijs (ut mos erat) aedibus, sed ex ipso gladiatorio prodire in publicum, deducente gladiatorum agmine in conspectu Populi Romani &c. Martia his best belo∣ved Concubine, Intellecto tam absurdo turpi{que} Consilio, primū orare multis lachrymis, supplexque ad genua acci∣dere, ne aut Romanum imperium contumelia afficeret, aut ipse vitam suā perditis ac deploratis hominibus tam peri∣culose cōmitteret. Sed cum diu supplicando nihil proficis∣se, lachrymans discessit. Ille Praefectum exercitibus Lae∣tum nomine et Electum cubiculi custodem, ad se accitis, parare iubet in ludo ipso gladiatorio, quo se dormitum re∣cipiat, vt illic ad sacrificandum mane procederet, ac se ar∣matum Romano Populo ostentaret. Illi supplicabant et persuadere tentaant, ne quid imperio indignum faceret. But loe the desperate obstinacie of this wicked Empe∣rour; ommodus id aegre ferens, eos quidem amandauit: reversus autem in cubiculum ad capiendum somnum (nam meridie id facere moris habebat) sumpto in manus libello, conscribit in eo quoscunque illa nocte interficere
destinaverat. Ex quibus prima erat Martia, mox Laetus atque Electus: post hos ingens eorum numerus qui pluri∣mum authoritatis in senatu obtinebant. Note here the condition of wicked Prin∣ces and great persons; they desire not to have any good men near them to censure or beare witnes of their shamefull actions. Siquidem se∣nes vniversos, & reliquos patris amicos tollere è medio (quod graves turpium factorum inspectores habere pu∣deret) bonaque ipsa divitum dlargiri partim militibus, partim gladiatoribus decreverat, vt alteri se defende∣rent, alteri oblectarent. Which booke comming to Martia her hands, shee and Electus with others, con∣spired to poyson him: which when they had effected; all the people rejoyced, & ra to their Temples, to giue publick thanks Herodian l. 2. p. 73. Eli Lam∣pridii Commo∣dus p. 94, 95, 96. Eutropius, Zonaras, Sa∣belicus & Grimston in his life. vocerebant urque quidam, jacere ty∣rannum, pars gladiatorem, qui faelicitatem suam alijs in rebus studijs faedissimis contaminasset. Which severall passages, are a most pregnant testimony, how infa∣mous, how disgraceful a thing it is, for Kings or Empe∣rours to turne Actors, Masquers, or Gladiators on a Stage, even in the very judgement of heathens, much more of Christians. It is storied of Antoninus the Emperour to his deserved infamie; Herodian l. 5. p. 267.269.271.279.281. Quod è Syriae profectus, statim debacchari supra modum caepit, cultum patrij numinis, cui dicatus fuerat, celebrare supernacuis saltationibus, vestitum vsurpans luxuriosum: ad tibiarum et tympanarum sonum in publicum prodibat orgya numinis celebrans &c. From which Maesa ear∣nestly deswaded him; ne spectantium oculos offenderet. Ipse ver identidem aurigans aut saltans conspiciebatur: quippe ne latere quidem sua patiebatur flagitia, procedens etiam in publicum Let our effe∣minate men women who are guilty of the selfesame womanish fol∣ly consider this. pictis oculis genisquepurpurissatis, faciemque suapte natura for mosam, indecoris coloribus inficiens. Quod ammaduertens Maesa, ac suspectans mi∣litum ob talem Imperatoris vitam indignationem: per∣suadet leui alioqui stolidoque adolescenti, vt sibi conso∣brinum suum Alexandrum adoptaret, et Caesarem de∣clararet, &c. Postea igitur quam Alexander Caesar est appellatus volebat eum statim Antoninus suis illis insti∣tutis imbuere, ut scilicet choros agitans saltansque, ve∣stitu
eodem atque artibus vteretur; quem tamen mater Mammaea a Dancing therefore, toge∣ther with act∣ing, masquing were infamous among the Ro∣mans. See Gu∣lelmus Stuc∣kius Antiqui tatum Conviu: l. 3. c. 21. accor∣dingly. faedis illis et quae Imperatores dedecebant actionibus avrtebat: atque omnium disciplinarum do∣ctores clam accersebat; modestiamque edocens, ac Palae∣stra virilibusque gymnasijs insuefaciens, graecisque eum pariter ac lainis literis instituens. Quibus iratus An∣toninus magnopere indignabatur. Quapropter omnes illius Doctores aula exegit. Quosdamque illustriores par∣tim morte, partim exilio affecit; ridiculas allegans cau∣sas, The same do some obiect against such tu∣tors, friends, Masters, pa∣rents, who keep their scholars, servants and children from these lewde pra∣ctises and ex∣cesses now, which say they doe quite cor∣rupt and make them Puritans. Quod filium ipsius corrumperent, eum neque a∣gitare choros, neque ebacchari permittendo, sed ad mo∣destiam componendo, et virilia officia edocendo. Eoue vecordiae provectus est ut omnes scenicos artifices ac thea∣tricos ad maximas imperij dignitates promoveret. Quip∣pe exercitibus saltatorem quendam praefecit, qui olim iuenis publice in theatro operas dederat. Alium item è scena, iuuentuti, alium senatui, alium etiam equestri ordini praeposuit. Aurigis item et comaedis mimorumque histrionibus maximae imperij munia demandabat: seruis∣que suis aut libertis vt quisque turpitudine reliquos an∣eibat, procurationes tradebat prouinciarum. Ita rebus omnibus per omnem contumeliam et temulentiam debac∣chantibus, An evident and remarka∣ble testimony how execrable, this Emperours dancing and effeminacy was to all the Ro∣mans, though most of them were then meer Pagans. cum caeteri omnes, tum imprimis Romani milites indignabantur; abominabanturque eum, vtpote vultum componentem legantius quam faeminam pro∣bam deceret: insuper aureis monilibus, mollissimoque vestitu badquaquam viriliter ornatum,, saltantem∣que in conspectu omnium. Quare propensires animos in Alexandrum habebant, spemque meliorem in puero mo∣deste et continentere ducato, &c. Quae intelligens Anto∣ninus nihil non insidiarum Alexandro matrique intende∣bat, &c. Quod milites aegre ferentes, imperatoem e me∣dio tollere turpiter se gerentem vellent; quapropter ip∣sum Antoninum et matrem Soaemidem interficiunt, cum∣que ijs seruos ministrosque omnes scelerum. So execra∣ble did his dancing, acting, effeminacy, & love of Stage-players make him to all the Senate, soldiers and people,
that they thought him unworthy for to raigne or live, and at last dragged his carcase through the Citty and cast it into the common Iakes. It is registred among other of Heliogabalus his lewd effeminate unworthy actions AElii Lampri∣dii Heliogaba∣lus p. 189, 190.207. See here p. 208. Quod agebat domi fabulam Paridis, ipse Veneris personam subiens, ita vt subito vestes ad pedes defluerent, nudusque vna manu ad mammam, altera pu∣dendis adhibita, ingenicularet, posterioribus eminenti∣bus in subactorem reiectis et oppositis. Vultum praeterea eodem quo Venus pingitur schemate figurabat, corpore toto expolitus; ipse cantavit, saltavit, ad tibias dixit, tuba cecinit, pandurizavit, organo modulatus est. Fertur et vna die ad omnes Circi et theatri meretrices (a good e∣vidence that all whores, and few women else frequent these Play-houses) tectus cuculione mulionico, ne agnos∣ceretur, ingressus &c. An aparant proofe, that an Em∣perour dancing or acting a part in Playes or Masques even in his own private pallace is infamous, and his re∣sort to playhouses more abominable. To passe by the censure of Histor. l 6. Philarcus & Dipnosoph. l. 14. c. 3. p. 980. Athenaeus, upon Lysimachus, who bring in Demetrius thus usually speaking of his Court. Aulam Lysimachi nihil differre a Scena Comica: to whom Lysimachus replied: ego igitur meretricem exeuntem ex Scena tragica non vidi. It is recorded to the shame of Vitellius; Cornelius Ta∣citus hist. l. 2. c. 2. r. p. 478. &c. 6, 17. p 469. Vitellio cogniti scurrae quibus ille amicitiarum dehonestamentis mire gaudebat. Quanto∣que magis appropinquabat vrbi, tanto corruptius iter, mixtis histrionibus & spadonum gregibus, et caetero Neronianae aulae ingenio. Namque et Neronem ipsum Vitellius admiratione celebrabat sectari cantantem soli∣tus non necessitate, qua honestissimus qisque, sed luxu et sagina mancipatus emptusque. The like is storied to the infamie of Trebellii Po∣lionis Gallieni duo. p. 315, 316. See p. 306.309. Gallienus the elder, qui natus abdomini et voluptatibus. Quod saepe ad tibicinem processit, ad orga∣num se recepit, cum processui et recessui cani iuberet: et quod mensam secundam scurrarum et mimorum sem∣per prope habuit. To which I may add that of Saloninus
Gallienus; Idem p. 319. Quod plura quae ad dedecus pertinebant ab eo gesta sunt: nam noctibus popina dicitur frequentasse, et cum lenonibus, mimis, scurrisque vixisse: And that of the Emperour Carinus too, Flauii Vopis∣ci Carinus p. 449. Quod mimos vndique advocavit. Exhibuit et ludum Sarmeticum quo dulcius nihil est: Donatum est et graecis artificibus, et gymnicis, et histrionibus, et musicis aurum et argentum: donata et vestis serica. Sed haec omnia, nescio quantum ad popu∣lum (writes Vopiscus) gratiae habeant, nullius certe sunt momenti apud principes bonos. Dioclesiani denique di∣ctum fertur, cumei quidam largitionalis suus editionem Cari laudaret, dicens; multum placuisse principibu illos, causa ludorum theatralium, ludorumque Circensium; er∣go (inquit) bene risus est imperio suo Carus. All which is a convincing proofe, how absurd a thing it is for Prin∣ces to Hence also Duidas in his historica Col. 127. thus tax∣eth Ardaburius Quod sedeflex∣it ad muliebres delicias. Gau∣debat enim Mi∣nis, et praestigi∣atoribus, et om∣nibus scenicis ludicris; et hu∣iusmody inep∣tiis totos dies exigens, gloiae insignia pror∣sas negligebat. delight in playes or Actors, much more to Act Enterludes or Masques themselves, Theopompus Histo∣riarium lib. 28 & Athenaeus Dipnosph. lib. 6. c. 6. pa. 422. condemne King Philip, qui cum Thessalos pro∣digos esse cognovisset, atque omnino intemperantes, arti∣bus omnibus illis placere studuit: nam et tripudiabat, et lasciviebat, omnia{que} praeter modestia patiebatur. Erat enim natura scurra, singulisque diebus ebrius &c. Polybius hist l. 31. & Athe∣naeus Dipnos. l. 10. c. 12. p. 694.695. See here p. 249, 250. Polybius & Athenaeus, severely censure Antiochus the illustrious, whō they phrase the mad: Quod vna cū re∣citatoribus ludebat, totus{que} velatus inferebatur a mimis, atque in trram deponebatur quasi vnus esset ex mimis. Concinnitate deinde evocante, rex exiliebat, tripudiabat∣que et iocabatur cum mimis, ita vt omnes verecundia ca∣perentur. Ad res huiusmodi misoras inducit stupor is, qui ex ebrietate ascitur. Yea Dipnosoph l. 12. c. 13 p. 841. Athenaeus taxeth Stra∣ton King of Sidonia for this very thing Quod conventus cum tibicinis, saltatricibus ac cytharistis faciebat; mul∣tasque amicas ex Peloponeso accersebat, compluresque cantatrices ex Ionia, atque ex vniersa Graecia amicas puellas, quarū alias quidē saltantibus, alias canētibus a∣micis praemium certaminis proponere solebat, quibuscum
etiam coire saepius delectabatur: cum vitae huiusmodi in∣stitutionem complecteretur, ipsa natura seruus erat volu∣ptatum. By all which severall recited examples (well worthy all Christian Princes consideration and detesta∣tion too; De quibus nescio an decuerit memoriae prodi, as Rorum Roma norum l. 7. p. 101. Eutropius writes of Caligula his vices, nisi fort quia iuvat de Principibus nosse omnia, vt improbi saltem famae metu declinent talia:) it is most evident: that it hath beene alwayes a most infamous thing for Kings, and Emperours to act Playes or Masques either in private or publike; or to sing, or dance upon a Stage or theatre; or to delight in Playes and Actors. Which assertion is likewise confirmed by Plinius secundus Panegyr: Traiano dictus p. 32.45.110. here p. 462, 463. Froysart his Chronicle Booke 4. cap. 192. fol. 243.244. The generall history of France p. 231. Gueuara his Dial of Princes l. 3. c. 43. to 47. D. Rainolds his O∣verthrow of Stage-playes p. 6. to 10. & 63. to 76. Arius Montanus in lib. Iudicum c. 16. p. 470.571. & Iu∣uenal Satyr 8. by Tacitus, Herodian, Suetonius Polybi∣us, Athenaeus, Flauius Vopiscus, AElius Lampridius, Trebellius Pollio, Eutropius, Corceius Sabellicus, An∣toninus, Grimston, in the lives of these fore-named Em∣perours, and in the places quoted in the margent with See Com∣ment: & Notae Lubini, Ioan∣nis Brittanici, P. Pithaei, Cae∣lii Secundi, Cu∣rionis, Theodor Pulmanni, et Thomae Parna∣bii in Iuvenal Satyr. 8. Iustin. Hist l. 30. p. 254. & Suida Histo∣ica. Ardaburi∣us. sundry others whom I pretermit. See here p. 462, 463, 557, 558, 734. to 743. & p. 710. the example of Ptolomie, accordingly. Secondly as it is absurd & most infamous for Princes, so also is it for any Magistrates, Nobles, Gentlemen, or persons of ranke or quality, to act a part in pub∣licke or private on the Stage. Hence Annal. l. 14. c 2.3. p. 301, 32, 303. Cornelius Ta∣citus writes thus of Nero his times. Sed faeminarum illustrium Senatorumque plures per arenam faedati sunt. Ratusque dedecus amoliri si plures faedasset, nobilium fa∣miliarum posteros egestate enales in Scenam deduxit, quos fato perfnctos, ne nominatim traedam, maioribs eorum tribuendum uto. Nam et eis flagitium est
qui pocuniam ob delicta potius dedit, quam ne delinque∣rent. Notos quoque equites Romanos operas renae pro∣mitter subegit, donis ingentibus, nisi quod merces ab eo quii ubere potest, im necessitatis affert. Ne tamn adhuc publico theatro dehonestareur, instituit ludos Iuinali∣um vocabulo in quos passim nomina data non nobillitas cuiquam non aetas aut acti honores impedimento, quo mi∣nus Graeci Latiniue histrionis artem exercerent vsque ad gestus, motusque haut viriles &c. Whereupon divers of the Senators and people complained and cried out, Proceres Romani specie orationum et carminum Sce∣na polluantur, quid superesse, nisi vt corpora quo{que} nu∣dent, et caestu aessumant, eas{que} pugnas pro militia et armis meditentur &c. vid Ibidē: Which infamous act Sect. 11.12. See Lypsius de Saturn. et Sa∣bellicus, Eutro∣pius Zonaras & Grimston in Nero his life. Sue∣tonius thus expresseth, Spectaculorum plurima et varia genera edidit, Invenales, Circences, Scenicos Ludos, gla∣diatorum munus: Iuvenalibus senes quoque Consulares anusque matronas recepit ad lusum. Ludos quos proaeter∣nitate imperij susceptos appellari maximos voluit, ex v∣troque ordine et sexu plerique ludicras partes sustinue∣runt. Exhibuit autem ad ferrum etiam quadringentos Senatores, sexcentosque equites Romanos et quosdam for∣tunae atque eflimationis integrae ex ijdem ordinibus, confectoresque ferarum et ad varia arenae ministeria, &c. Which ignoblflagitious bae practise of his & others, the Poet Iuvenal doth thus notably inveigh against. Iuvenal Sa∣tyr 8. p. 81, 82. At vos Troiugenae vobis ignoscitis, & quae Turpia Cerdoni. Volesos, Bruósque decebunt. Quid si nunquam adeò foedis, adeóque pudendis Vtimur exemplis, vt non peiora supersint? Consumptis opibus vocem Damasippe locasti Sippaerio, lamosum ageres vt Phasma Catulli. Laureolum vlox etiam bene Lentulus egit, Iudiceme, Nota. dignus vera cruce: nec tamen ipsi. Ignoscas populo: populi frons durior huius, Qui sedet, & spectat triscrria patriciorum: Planipedes audit Fabios ridere potest qui
Mamercorum alaps, quanti sua funera venant, Quid refert? vendunt nullo cogente Nerone, Ne dubitant celsi Praetoris vendere ludis. Nota. Finge tamen gladios inde, atque hinc pulpita pon, Quid satius? mortem sic quisquam exhorruit, vt sit Zelotypus Thymeles, stupidi collega Corinthi? Res haud mira tamen, citharoedo Principe mimus Nobilis, haec vltra quid erit nisi ludus? & illic Dedecus urbis habes, nec Mirmillonis in armi, Nec clypeo Gracchum pugnantem, aut falce supina. (Damnat enim tales habitus, & damnat & odit.) Nec galea frontem abscondit, movet ecce tridentem, Postquam vibrata pendentia retia dextra Nequicquam effudit, nudum ad spectacula vultum Erigit, & tota fugit agnoscendus arena. Ergo ignominiam graviorem pertulit omni Vulnere, cum Gracco iussus pugnare secutor. &c. An elegant description & demonstratiō of the infamie of such mensacting playes: Which Laberius an anciēt Roman Knight, drawne upō the Stage to act a part by the hire & cōmād of Nero, doth excellently descypher in this expression of his owne dishonor. Macrobius Saturn l. 2. c. 7. p. 408.409. Laberiū asperae libertatis equitem Romanum (writes Macro∣bius) Caesar quingentis millibus invitavit, ut prodiret in scenam, es ipse ageret mimos quos scriptitabat. Sed po∣testas non solum si iuitat, sed etiam si supplicet, cogit. Vnde se et Laberius a Caesare coactum in Prologo testatur his versibus. Necessitas, cuius cursus aversi impetum Voluerunt multi effugere, pauci poterunt. Quo me de∣trusit pene extremis sensibus? Quem nulla ambitio, nul∣la unquam largitio, Nullus timor, vis nulla, nulla aucto∣itas Movere potuit in iuenta de statu; Ecce in se∣necta vt facile labefecit loco viri excellentis mente cle∣mente edito, Submissa placidè blandiloquens oratio. E∣tenim ipse dij negare cui nihil potuerunt Hominem me denegare quis posset pati? Ego bis tricenis annis actis, sine nota, Eques Romanus lare egressus meo, Domum re∣vertar
mimus. Nota. Nimirum hoc die Vno plus vixi mihi quam vivendum fuit. Fortuna immoderata in bono atque in malo, Si tibi erat libitum literarū ladibus Floris ca∣cumen nostrae famae frangere, Cur cum vigebam membris praeuiridantibus, Satisfacere Populo, et tali cum poteram viro, Non flexibilem me concuruasti, vt caperes? Nunc me quo dijcis? quid a scena affere? Decorem formae, an dignitatem corporis? Animi virtutem, an vocis io∣cundae sonum? Vt haedera serpens vires arboreas ncat; ta me vetustas amplexu annorum necaet; Sepulchris si∣milis, nil nisi nomē retineo. In ipsa quo{que} actione subinde se qua poterat vlciscebatur, inducto habitu Syri, qui velut flagris caesus, praeripienti{que} se similis, exclamabat. Porro, Quirites libertatem-perdimus Et paulo post adiecit; necesse est mults timeat quem multi timent: quo dicto vniversitas populi ad solum Caesarem oculos et ora con∣vertit; notantes eius impotentiam hac dicacitate lapida∣tam. A most pregnant evidence of the point in que∣stion. Among the ancient Romans as Macrobius, Ci∣cero, Seneca and others in their See here p. 245. to 251. forequoted passages witnes, it was an infamous thing for Senators, Knights, for men or women of quallity, or their Children, to dance either in a publicke Theatre, or at any private feasts: Hence Seneca thus complaines Contro. l. 1: proaemio p. 967 See here p. 248. Cantandi saltandique obsaena studia effaeminatos tenent: Seneca Epist. 90 p. 377, 379. hinc molles corporis motus docentium, mollesque cantus et in∣fractos: Sapientia vero animorum magistra, non inde∣coros corporis motus, ne varios per tubam et tibiam can∣tus efficit, &c. Hence Dion Cassius Hist. l. 54. p. 682. Augustus Caesar, quoniam Equites et feminae illustres adhuc in Orchestra saltaban, prohibuit ne non modo Patriciorum liberi (id enim antea cantum erat) sed etiam nepotes eorum, quique equestris rant ordinis, amplius id facerent. In his actionibus Le∣gisatoris Augustus et Imperatoris speciem nomenque ostendit. Hence this is laid as a tax upon Caligula, that in his presence, Dion Cassius hist l. 59. p. 831. Patricij pueri Troiam lserunt. And herupon Dion Cassiu hist l. 60. p. 891 Claudius his successor, to draw men
from this infamie; In Orchestram introduxit inter alios viros etiam equites ac mulieres, quales Caij principatu saltare solebant; non quod ijs delectaretur, sed vt praeterita argeret. Nam posthac certe nemo eorum in scena visus est dum Claudius viveret? Pueri quoque quos ad Pyr∣ricam saltationem Cains evocaverat, semel duntaxa a saltata civitate donati, ac ablegati sunt, Alij deinde ex famulis Claudij saltarunt: haec in theatro. Yea such was the infamie of acting playes among the ancient Pagan Romans; that even lewde Corn. Taci∣tus Histor. l. 2. c. 15. p. 465. Vitellius inacted this law: Cautum severe ne equites Romani Ludo et arenâ pollu∣rentur And Plinius Secundus in his Panegyricall oration to Traian, in the name of the whole Roman Senate & people, stiles the acting of Playes; Page 38. & 45. See here p. 462, 463. Effaemi∣ntas artes, et indora seculo studia: which the whole Roman Nation did condemne. See here p. 462, 463. accordingly. To these severall recited Pagan testimo∣nies, I might accumulate, the forequoted evidences of the See here page 843, 844, 845, 846, 847 &c. Praetor, Budaeus, Arius Montanus, Vlpin, AE∣milius Probus, Dio, See D. Rai∣nolds his over∣throw of Stage playes, p. 8. Xiphilinus, Dionyssius Gothofre∣dus, Ioanns d Burgo &c. together with the concur∣rent suffrages of Lipsius Saturnal. l. 2. c. 1. and of Lubine Caelius secundus, Farnaby, and others in their Com∣mentaries and notes upon Ivenal, Satyr 8. who all af∣firme, the voluntarie descending of any persons of qua∣lity or ranke upon the Stage (See D. Rai∣nolds his over∣throw of Stage playes, p. 8. etiam t sine praemio) to act a part even without reward or hire, to be infamous and absurd: but our learned Dr. Rainolds in his Over∣throw of Stage-playes p. 4. to 11. & 63. to 77. and in other pages of that discourse, hath proved this point so fully, that I will here proceede no further in it. Thirdly, it is altogether infamous, yea unlawfull, for any Clergie-men whatsoever or their Children, and for any who intend to enter into orders, either volun∣tarily or compulsorily, for reward or without reward, to act a part upon the Stage, either in any publicke or private Enterludes. Hence the See here p. 574. Councel of Carthage,
Anno. Dom. 397. Can. 11. Decrees: That sonnes of Bi∣shops and Cleargie men (much lesse then they them∣selves) should neither exhibit, act or behold any secular Enterludes: Hence also the 4. Councell of Carthage: Can. 56.60.62. The 7. Coun. ofhere 578, 582, 584, 595. &c. See Gulielmus Stuckius Anti∣quitaum Con∣vivialium l 3. c. 21.22. accor∣dingly. Carthage, can: 70. the 6. Coun. of Constantinople, can. 24.51.62. the 3. Synod of Towers, can. 7.8. the 2. Synod of Cabilon, ca 9. the coun, of Mentz An. 813. can. 14. the Coun. of Pa∣ris, An. 829. can. 38. the Synod of Mentz under Ra∣banus: can. 13. the Coun. of Nants, quoted by Grati∣an: distinct. 44 her. p. 599. The Coun. of Gants, An. 1231. here. p. 598. The Synod of Lingres, An. 1404. her. p. 599.600. The Councel of Toledo, An. 1473. here. p, 603.604. The Synod of Seine, An. 1524. here. p. 606. The Synod of Chartres, An. 1526. here p. 609.610. The Coun. of Seine, An. 1528. can. 25. here p. 611. The Sy∣nod of Heidelsheim An. 1539. can. 14. here p. 616. The Councel of Triers An. 1549. here p. 617. The Synod of Mentz, An. 1549. can. 74. here p. 620.621. The Coun. of Paris: 1557. here p. 622. The Councell of Trent. Sess. 24. De Reformatione Can. 12. here p. 623. The Councel of Millaine 1560. here p. 625. The Councel of Burdeaux An. 1582. here p. 630.631. The Councel of Biturium An. 1584 here p. 633, 634. The Synod of Aquin. An. 1585. here p. 635. The Councell of Tho∣loose: An. 1590. and sundry other forementioned Councells Act. 7. Scene 3. together with here p. 54, 655, 656. And yet Ipsi autem Episco∣pi redditus Ec∣clesiarum, non in pias causas, sed consangui∣neis, histrioni∣bus, adulatori∣bus, Venatori∣bus Scortis et similibus per∣sonis friuole ex∣pendunt, et ma∣gis attendunt nequitiam ho∣minum quam necessitatem naturae, contra Canonum de∣decreta. Episco∣pus chemnensis Onus Ecclesiae cap 20. sect. 10. Sextus, Odo Parisiensis, and Pope Pius the 5. Ivo Carnotensis Decret. pars 6. cap. 208, 209.349. pars 11. cap. 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81. Hostiensis Summa l. 5. Tit. de Clerico Ve∣natore fol. 455. Summa Angelica Ludus, have possitiue∣ly prohibited all sorts of Clergie-men whatsoever * from dancing from acting (and which is farre more strict, e∣ven from * beholding) Stage-playes or any such ioculato∣rie Enterludes, either in publicke or private; which re∣solutions and decrees of theirs, are abundantly ratified by the concurrent suffrage of all the Hre p. 665, 666. & p. 843. to 848. Summu¦la Raymundi f. 92, 9.forequoted Ca∣nonists
and Civilians on which you may reflect. Yea such is the rigidnesse of the Canon-law in this particu∣lar; than it makes not onely all professed Stageplayers, but likewise all Schollers and others who have volunta∣rily acted any part in publicke or private Enterludes, un∣capable of any Ecclesiasticall Orders or preferments, till they have done publicke pennance, and openly manifested their serious repentance for the same; as our owne fa∣mous English Canonist Pupilla Oculi pars 7. c. 5. I. See here p. 846. Ioannis de Burgo, Chan∣celler of the Vniversitie of Cambridge in Henry the 6. his raigne (the onely ancient extant writer of that V∣niversity before Henry the 7. his dayes, which I have hitherto met with) Se Ivo Carnoten∣sis Decret. pars 6 c. 349. & pars 8. c. 295. accor∣dingly. with others, expresly testifie in their forementioned passages. And hereupon Ioannis Langhecrucius a famous popish Canonist and Divine, in his Treatise De vita et honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. after he had largely proved in the 20. & 21. Chapters of that Booke, that Clergie men ought not to act or see any Stage-playes or Enterludes; in the 22. Chapter he propounds this question (which naturally comes here to be discussed from the premises;) Whether Schoole∣masters or their Schollers may at this day act any Cōe∣dies, Tragaedies or other Stagplayes?Vtrum scola∣res corumque Magistri, vel Ludimagistri orumc disci∣puli (as the text & the margent propounde it) comaedias et tragaedias alio∣sue ludos sceni∣cos nunc agere possint? And he resolves it negatively that they may not doe it, whether these Ma¦sters or scholers are such as are already admitted, or as yet not entred into clericall Orders: Ibidem p. 318, 319, 320. &c. Verū si quis in terroget (writ he) anne ludimagistri possint per discipu∣los suos cōaedias et tragaedias aliosue ludos scenicos agere? Respōdendū videtur, quod si praedicti ludimagistri, eorūve discipuliclericali tōsura insigniti sint, eos non posse, vt per supradicta pat et. Quia jure canonico expresse cautū est, vt clerici mimis ioculatoribus et histrionibus non inten∣dant. Verum si discipuli non sint tonsurati, nec illis qui∣dem permittendum hoc videtur, (pray marke it) prae∣sertimsi lascivi vel prorsus profani sint, cū ab illis Pray note this reason well. Chri∣stiana religio eos prohibeat. Nam cum paruuli qui suc∣crescentes in maiorum suorum locum in reipublicae tam
ecclesiasticae quam secularis administratione succedant, Nota.consequēs sit, ab ipsis prane ac nequiter institutis reipb: perniciē imminere; idcirco summopere refert, vt pueritia, quae seminarium est omnium rerum publicarū in timore Domini, verecundia, pudicitia, et bonis disciplinis edoce∣atur, prout supra ex SS. Conilio Tridentino demonstra∣tum fuit. Epist. l. 1. E∣pist. 10. ucrati. Divus enim Cyprianus, consultus quid sibi videretur de histrione quodam, an talis deberet communicare cum catholicis, qui adhuc in in eiusdem artis suae dedecore perseuerabat; respondit his verbis: Puto ego nec maiestati divinae, nec evangelicae disciplinae congruere, vt pudor t honor ecclesiae, tam turpi et infa∣mi contagione faedetur, &c. Nec excusetse quispiam, si à theatro ipse cessaverit cum tamen hoc caeteris doceat. Non potest enim uideri cessasse, qui vicarios substituit, et qui pro se vno plures succedaneos suggerit, contra institu∣tionem Dei, erudiens et docens quem admodum mascu∣lus frangatur in faeminam, et sexus arte mutetur, et di∣abolo divinum plasma maculanti, per corrupti at que ener nati corporis delicta placatur, &c.See here p. 584. Then he quotes the forementioned passage of St. Cyprian to Donatus Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. to iustifie this his answer: After which he thus proceeds. Deinde in aecumenica Synodo sexta, quae fuit Constantinopolitana 3. Canon 62. statu∣tum est: vt nullus vir muliebri veste induatur, nec mu∣lier veste viro conveniente; sed nec Comicas, nec Tragicas nec Satyricas personas induant. Qui secus fecerit, si cle∣rici sint, deponantur; si Laici, segregentur à communione: (which Canon prohibites all manner of persons what∣soever, whether laymen or Clergiemen, from acting any sort of Enterludes, be they Comedies, Tragaedies or Satyrs) Quare piè et rectè a provinciali Synodo Mech∣liniensi statutum fuit; vt illi auctores, qui per gentilita∣tē aut turpes amores iuuenum mores Let those who now erect Crucifixes and Images in our Churches con∣trary to our Ar∣ticles, Iniuncti∣ons, homilies, Conons, Sta∣tutes, & writers yea contrarie to their owne subscription, consider this: and those also who use any heathenish Ce∣remonies and representations in their Enter∣ludes. corrumpere possent à scholis arceantur? Et vt non solum è templis et locis sacris, verum etiam è domibus et hortis ecclesiasticorum tollantur imagines, sculpturae, aulaea, quae gentilitatem,
aut mendaces ethnicorum fabulas, Satyrorum, faunorum Syenarum, terminorum ac Nympharum, ac id genus a∣lia repraesentat: (which are the commonnest repre∣sentations in all Masques and Stage-playes:) Similiter quaecunque figurae lasciu, procaces, et ob pudendam nudi∣tatem vel alias tam obscenae, vt pios mentes offendant, et superstitiosae, qui fidelium mentes à religione et devotione distrahunt et saepius graviter offendunt. Then hee quo∣tes the See here page 601, 603, 604, 608, 611, 631, 634. forementioned Canos, prohibiting childrens acting of Playes in Churches upon Innocents day: toge∣ther with the Canons of the Councell of Millaine;See here page 624, 625. from all which he truely and positively concludes: That it is unlawfull for Schoolemasters or their Schollers, to act any Comedies, Tragedies or other stageplayes. And shall Protestants then allow of that which the very Papists condemne? God forbid. From all which premises thus layd together, wee may quickly leare what to judge, not onely of the persoating of all private and publick Masques and Mummeries, which are now to frequent, but likewise of the acting of Academicall Enterludes and the acting of them infamous See Gullelmus Stuckius Anti. qui. Conviv. l. 3. c. 21, 22. Academicall Enterludes, by Vndergraduates, Graduates, Deacons, and some∣times young Divines; which Playes are commonly as scurrilous, as prophane as scandalous, as invectiue against religion and the professors of it, as experience witnesseth, as any that are acted in our standing Play-huses. Certainly whatever the Error, the corruption of the times may judge; yet the fore-aleaged See p. 573. to 668.843 to 850. & 933, 934, 940. Coun∣cels, Fathers, Authors doome the acting, (yea the ve∣ry beholding of such academicall Eterludes, especi∣ally by Clergie-men, who are now to forward to pen, to act and see them whereas See Act. 7. Scene. 3. above 40. severall Councels have possitively decreed, that they ought not to be present at any such Playes or Eterludes) to bee both scandalous and infamous, not onely in the repute of Christians, but of Pagans too, especi∣ally of the anciant Pagan Romans; In scenam enim prdire et populo esse spectaculo That is, s first. nemini in Graecis genti∣bus
fuit turpitudini: quae omnia apud Romanos, partim infamia, partim humilia, atque ab honestate remot ponuntur, as In his Excel∣lentium Impera¦torum vitae: Pfatio p. 356. AEmilius Probus writes. And ca a∣ny gentlemen or schollers whatsoever, thinke this an honor to them, to be excellent Actors, Masquers or dancers, in any Academicall Enterludes, which the ve∣ry heathe (besides, Councels, Fathers, and Christian authors) haue long since sentenced as their shame? Doubtles no ingenuous christian ought to be so stupid so prophane or gracelesse, as to harbour any such con∣ceit within their breasts. And here that I may not to farre digresse into a large discourse against Academi∣call or private Enterludes since I have beene so over∣eedious against popular, I shall onely commend these three considerations to the Readers, ad all Academi∣call Actors consciences. First, that the Fathers, the Primitiue Christians, the fore-recited Councels, and Pagan authors, never made, nor knew of any such novell distinction as his, of Popular & Academicull Enterluds, but condemned all playes alike, as well those in See here page 573.581. private houses, as in pub∣like Theators, as well those that were acted by Volun∣tary as by hired and professed Actors, both which they reputed infamous, as I haue here largely manifested. Secondly that all, at leastwise most of all the argu∣ments, the authorities here produced against popular stage-players, stand firme against Academicall too, there being no other difference betweene them that I know, but this; that the one re mre frequent, mre publike then the other: their materials, circumstan∣ce, concomitants, and manner of acting. being Paria sunt v∣nis sementis germina. Pro∣sper Aquit. Contr. Collato∣rem c. 41. for the most part both alike, and their original too. Thirdly, that Academicall Enterludes are in this re∣gard farre worse then popular, in that they give a kind of authoritie, and justification to publike Enterludes  Actors, and Play-haunters, or common Players and Playhaunters alleaging the exampls of our vniversity
Enterludes as their cheifest Agument, their best apolo∣gie both for the vse and lawfullnesse of publicke Stage-playes, as present experience manifess: and in that their Velocius enim et citius nos corrumpunt vitiorum dome∣stica exempla subeunt ani∣mos magnis auctoribus. Iu∣venal Satyr 14 p. 126. Exem∣pla tantum conspectiora sunt, et efficaci∣us movent, quanto illustri∣ores sunt perso∣ae aquibus de∣signantur Dio∣dorus Sic. Bibl. hist. Epist. Dedi∣ct. example, their scandall is farr worse then that of popular stage-playes, and so apt to doe more harme, by increasing the number both of popular players and Actors, and hardning them in the love, the practise of acting and frequenting Playes; because the persons who commonly Act, behold and pen them being schollers and divines (who should be 1 Tim. 3.2. to 14. c. 4 12. patternes of piety, gravity, sobriety and right christian conversation unto others) are of farre better education ranke and quality, in re∣gard of their professions, and of the Vniversities thē∣selves in which they live, (they being the very eyes and Lampes, the Seminaries and Nurseries of our I∣land, where youth are vsually either made or marde for ever, to the great publike good or hurt) then either the penners, or actors, of our common Enterludes, who are See here Act. 4. Scene 1, 2. ordinarily men of meanest quallity & lew∣dest conditions, even such as our 22 H. 8. c. 12.14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4.1. Iac. c. 7. owne statutes brand for Rogues. Which three Considerations added to all the premises, to page 489.490.491. & to Doct. Reynolds his learned Over-throw of Stageplayes, (where he hath professedly proved, Academicall stageplayes as wll as popular, to be unlawfull, mauger all Doct. Gagers, or Doctor Gentiles their slener cavils and objections to the contrary, which are there so solidly answered, that they were inforced to yeeld their cause See the Epi∣stle to the Rea∣der before Dr. Rainolds his O∣verthrow of Stage playes, accordingly. Doct Ga∣ger subscribing at last unto D. Reynolds his judgement;) will be a sufficient evidence, to convince the vnlawful∣nes of Academicall Enterludes, and the See I. G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors, here p. 490 491. infamie of such as shall presume to act thē; Al voluntary, hyred, or professed Actors of Academicall, of common Stageplayes being infamous persons, as the foregoing Authorities, largely testifie I shal therfore here cōclude this Scene,De Vanitate Scient. c. 20. See cap. 19. with that excellent passage of Cornelius Agrippa, of the infamie of acting & frequenting stagplayes, Proinde
exercere histrinicā, non solū turpis et scelesta occupatio est, sed etiā conspicere et dilectari flagitiosum: siquidem et lasciuientis animi oblectatio cadit in crimen. Nullū de∣ni{que} nomen olim fuit infamius, quam histrionum, et legi∣bus ipsis arcebantur ab honoribus, quicun{que} fabulam sal∣tassent in Theatro. And thus much for the infamie of Acting Stageplayes: a good Prologue or introducti∣on to the unlawfulnes both of the Profession of stage-players and of acting Playes, which I shal next discusse. SCENA SECVNDA. IN the handling of which subiect,The unlawful∣nesse of a Play∣ers profesion and of acting I shall first of all briefly evidence, that the profession of a Player, and the acting of Stage-playes are unlawfull. Secondly, I shall lay downe the Severall groundes and reasons of their unlawfullnesse. For the first of these, I shall need to vrge no more but these ten Arguments First.Argument 1. That which hath ever been infamous, scandalous and of ill report, both among Christians and Pagans to, must questionlesse be sinfull, unlawfull unto Christians, who are to follow things only of good re∣port, and to provide things honest in the sight of all men, giving no offence, either to Iew or Gentile, or to the Church of God. 1. Tim. 3, 7. 1. Pet. 2.11.12.15. c, 3.15.16. Phil. 4, 5.8.9. Rom. 13, 13. c. 14.13.19. cap. 15.2. cap. 12.17. 1. Cor. 10.31, 32, 33. Ephes. 4.2. But the professiō of Stagplayers, & the acting of playes either in publike or private, have been ever infa∣mous, scandalous, and of ill report, both among
Christians and Pagans, as the foregoing Scene demonstrates. Therefore it must questionlesse bee sinfull, unlawfull unto Christians. Argument, 2.Secondly. If those who have acted Stage-Playes, have all wayes beene banished, excluded and cast out of the common weale, and made uncapable of any honor, or promotion, by Christian by Pagan Re∣publiques, Emperors, Kings, Magistrats, If they have bin excommunicated both from the word, the Sacraments, the societie of Christians, & disa∣bled to give any testimony, or to take any Ecclesi∣asticall Orders or promotions upon them, by the solemne resolutions, constitutions and Decrees, of Councels, Fathers, and the whole Primitiue Church, even for their very Play-acting; which thus debarred them from all the priviledges both of Church and common weale, then certaiely the profession of a stage-player, together with the acting of playes, is unbeseeming and unlawfull unto Christians, See p. 133, 134. But those who acted playes, have alwayes thus beene handled: as being altogether unworthy of any pri∣vileges of Church or cōmon weale; witnes the ex∣amples of Plato, Aristotle, the Massilienses, Lacae∣demonians, Iewes, auncient Germaines, Tiberius, Augustus, Nero, Traian, Marcus Aurelius, Con∣stantine, Trebonius Rufins Henry the third, Philip Augustus, and others forecited; who excluded Players and Play-poets out of their Republikes, and banished them their Dominions: (to which I might adde The Generall history of France p. 138. Lewis the 9. surnamed the godly, who made divers good Laws against Dice-houses, Players, playes and other enrmities) Witnesse the forealeaged Councels, Fathers and Primi∣tive Church, & Christians who excommunicated al Stage-play∣ers
& Actors from the word, the Sacraments and all Christian society; disabling them to give any publike testimony, or to take any ecclesiasticall or∣ders and preferments &c. even for their very acting of Stage-playes: See part 1. Act. 4. Scene 1. Act 6. Scene 5. Act. 7. Scene 2.3, 7. and the next fore going Scene, where all this is largely manifested. Therefore the profession of a Stage-player, together with the acting of stage-playes, is unbeseeming and unlawfull unto Christians. Thirdly:Argument. 3. he profession, the action of any unlawfull scandalous or dishonest sports, cannot but bee unlawfull, especially unto Christians, who must absteine, not onely from all evill things, but like∣wise from all appearance of evill: 1 Thes. 5.22. See here Part 1. Act. 3. Scene 3. Act. 5. Scene 1, 2, 3. & Act. 6. Scene 4. accordingly. But Stageplayes as the Premises prove at large, are unlawfull, scandalous and dishonest sports. Therefore their action cannot but be unlawfull, espe∣cially unto Christians. Fourthly.Argument. 4. That profession which hath neither Gods word for its rule, nor his glorie for its end, must certaine∣ly be unlawfull unto Christians; witnesse, Psal. 119.9.10. Gal. 6.16. 1 Cor. 10.31. c. 6.20. 1 Pet. 4.11. which informe us, that Gods people must make his word the square, his glory the cheife and onely end of all their actions. But the proession or art of acting Playes, hath nei∣ther the word of God for its rule (there being nei∣ther precept nor example in all the scripture for to warrant it, but many texts against it: See here p. 547. to 551. & 723. to 730;) nor yet the glory of God for its end, as I have here largely manife∣sted, p. 127. to 133. & f. 50. to 570.
Therefore it must certainely bee unlawfull unto Christians. Argument. 5.Fiftly, That art or trade of life, in which men cannot pro∣ceed with faith or comfort, & on which men can∣not pray for or expect a blessing from God, must questionlesse be unlawfull unto Christians: wit∣nesse, Rom. 14.23. Psal. 129.7, 8. Phil. 4.6.8.9. 1 Iohn 5.16. Neh. 1.11. c. 2.20. Psal. 90.17. But in this art or trade of acting Playes, men cannot proceed with faith or comfort, because it hath no warrant from the word, the Gal. 5.16. 2 Pet. 1.19. rule of faith; nor from the Spirit, the efficient cause of faith; nor from the Church or Saints of God, Gal. 5.22. the houshold of faith: neither can men pray for or expect a bles∣sing from God upon their Playacting;Gal. 6.10. it being a calling of the very See here p. 10. to 40.404. See the Table. Title Devil and Players. Divels institution, not of Gods appointment; a calling not authorized by the word of God, and therefore no wayes intitled to the blessing of God: A profession I dare say, on which the very professors themselves, could ne∣ver heartily pray as yet for a blessing; Neither doe or can those pious Christians which go by whiles they are acting, say, Psal. 129 8. The blessing of the Lord be upon you, wee blesse you in the name of the Lord. A profession which hath oft times drawne downe the very vengeance and curse of God on many who have practised or beheld it, See here f. 552. to 568. Therefore, it must questionlesse bee unlawfull unto Christians. Argument. 6.Sixtly. That calling or profession in which a man cannot attribute his gaines to the blessing and favour of God; so as to say, it is God that hath blessed mee in this my honest vocation and made me rich; and for his gaines and thriving in which hee cannot
render any thanks & prayse to God; must doutb∣lesse be an ungodly calling and profession, not law∣full among Christians: witnes Prov: 10.22. Gen. 33.5.11. 2 Chron. 1.12. Eccles. 5.19. Matth. 11.6.33. Psal. 145.1, 2.15, 16. Acts 2.46, 47. 1 Tim. 4.3, 4. & Phil. 4.6. But Players cannot attribute or ascribe their gaines to the blessing and favour of God; it being but See here p. 905, 906. turpe lucrum, dishonest filthy gaine, much like the Deutr. 22.18. Mich. 1.7. hire of an harlot: neither can they render true praise or thankes to God for what they gaine by acting, because they have no assurace that it proceedes from his good blessing, on this their lewde profession. Therefore it must doutlesse bee an ungodly calling and profession, not lawfull among Christians. Seventhly.Argument. 7. That profession towards the maintenance of which, a man cannot contribute without sinne, and sacri∣ficing to the Devill himselfe, must questionlesse bee unlawfull unto Christians; See 1 Cor. 10.21, 22, 23. Rom. 1.30, 32. 2 Iohn 10, 11. But no man can contribute towards the maintenance of Stage-players, as Stageplayers, with out sinne, without acrificing to the very Devill himselfe: For histrionibus dare imman peccatum est: & hi∣strionibus dare, est daemonibus immolare; as St Tract. 10. in Ioan. here p 324. Au¦gustine, Summula Raymundi fol. 107. Raymundus, and sundrie others testifie: See here p. 324, 325, 326.905.906. & 688. Therefore it must questionlesse bee unlawfull unto Christians. Eightly.Argument. 8. That calling or profession which altogether indispo∣seth and unfits men for Gods worship & service, and for all religious duties, must necessarily bee sinfull and unsuable unto Christians: See Luke 1. 74, 75. Hebr. 12.1. & Matt. 5.29, 30. Act. 19.18, 19. Iam. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.
But the profession of Playacting doth altogether in∣dispose, and unfit men for Gods worship, his ser∣vice, for the hearing of his word, the receiving of his Sacraments, (from which all Players were excomunicated) & from all other religious duties: See here p. 393. to 420. & fol. 522. to 542. & p. 561. to 573. Therfore it must necessarily be unlawfull unto Chri∣stians. Argument. 9.Ninthly. That profession which is pernicious and hurtful both to the manners mindes and soules of men, and preiudiciall to the Church, the State that suffers it must certainely bee unlawfull, intolerable among Christians: See here p. 447, 448. & Ioh. 10.10. But the profession of acting Playes is pernicious both to the manners mindes and soules of men, of a∣ctors & spectators, & preiudicial to the Churches and States that suffer them: witnesse: page 302. to 568. Therefore it must certainely be unlawfull, intollera∣ble among Christians. Argument. 10.Lastly. That calling which the very professors of it upō their conversion & repentance have vtterly renounced with shame, and highest detestation, as altoge∣ther incompatible with Christianity, piety or sal∣vation must certainely be sinfull and utterly un∣lawfull unto Christians: See Rom. 6.20, 21. But sundry professed Actors and Stage-players both in the Primitive Church and since, upon their true conversion and repentance, have vtterly re∣nounced and given over their profession of acting Playes, with soule confounding shame and highest detestation, as altogether incompatible with Chri∣stianity, piety, or salvation: See here p. 134. fol. 542.545.566.568. p. 561. to 573.840. & 910.
Therefore it must certainely be sinfull and altogether unlawfull unto Christians. And that upon these severall grounds which is the second thing. First, in regard of the parts & persons that are most usually acted on the Stage: which are for the most part See part 1. Act 3. Scene , 2, 3, 4, 5. & Act 5. Scene 3. to 6. Mr. Stubs Ana∣tomy of Abuses p. 103, 104. I. G. his reutati∣on of Apologie for Actors p. 56 57.61. accor∣dingly. Devills, heaten Idoll Gods and Goddesses, Satyrs, Syluanes, Furies, Fayries, Fates, Nymphes, Muses, & such like ethnicke idolatrous figments, which Christians should not name or represent: Or else Adulterers, Whore∣masters, Adulteresses, Whores, Bawdes, Panders, Ince∣stuous persons, Sodomites, Parricides, Tyrants, Traitors, Blasphemers, Cheaters, Drunkards, Parasites, Prodi∣gals, Fantastiques, Ruffians, and all kinde of vitious godlesse persons; whose very wickednesses are the cōmon Subiect of those Stageplayes which men so much applaud: And if the persons of any Magistrates Ministers or Professors of Religion are brought upon the Stage (as now too oft they are) it is See Part 1. Act 3. Scene 6. & p. 814, 815. onely to deride and jeere them, for that which most commends them to God and all good men. The parts and persons therefore of Stage-playes being such, the represention of thē on the Stage must needs be ill, as I have largely proved: pag. 88, 89, 94.175. to 178. &c. Secondly, in respect of the subiect matter of Stage-playes See Part 1. Act 3.5, 6. & 7. ac∣cordingly which is either prophane or heathenish, fraught with the names, the histories, ceremonies, applauses, acts and villanies of Pagan Idols: or ribaldrous, wicked, & ob∣scene, consisting of Adulteries, Whoredomes, Rapes In∣cests, Treasons, Murthers, sollicitations to lewdnesse, ri∣baldrie, bawdrie, treacherie, prodigious periuries, blas∣phemies, oathes, execrations, and all kindes of wicked∣nes: Or impious and blasphemous, abusing Scripture, God, Religion, Grace, and Goodnesse: Or Satyricall, slande∣rous, and defamatorie; or vaine and frothy at the best, full of amorous, effeminate wanton dalliances, passages pastorals, or of idle words & actions. All which can nei∣ther be uttered nor acted, without sinne and shame, as
I have more largely proved, Act. 3. & 5. throughout; and as De spectacu∣lis. c. 15. to 22. Tertullian Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Math. See here p 405.406. Chrysostome De Spe∣ctaculis l. Epist. li. 1 Epist 10. & l. 2. Epist. 2. Cyprian De vero Cultu c. 20. Lactantius,De Gu∣bern. dei. l. 6. Saluian, his Treatise a∣gainst Playes. Northbrooke, Playes con∣futed Action 1.2.3. Gosson, Anatomy of Abuses p 103 104. Stubs, Over∣throw of Stage playes p. 22, 23. &c. Doct. Reynolds, and I. G. Re∣futation of the Apologie for Actors p. 56.57.61. others witnes; because such things as these, Ephes. 5.3.4. ought not to be named, much lesse then Personated, among Christians: they are evill in their owne nature, their representations therefore, being the 1 Thes. 5.22. appearances of evill, which Christians must abstaine from, cannot be good. Thirdly, in regard of the very manner of acting Playes, consisting of sundry particular branches, which I have at large discussed Act. 5. Scene. 1.2.3.4.5, 6.7. &c. on which you may reflect, and therefore shall passe more breifly over them now, reciting only some passages, some authorities that I there omitted. The first considerable particular in personating of Stage-playes, is the hypocrisie of it, in counterfeiting not onely the habits, gestures, offices, vices, words, actions, persons, but even the gestures and passions of others, whose parts are represented; which I have pro∣ved hypocrisie, Act. 5. Scene 1. p. 156. to 161 HenceDe Coronati one Principis p. 987. Philo Iudaeus compares hypocrites and secret enemies unto Stage-players: tanquam in theatro personatos sub alieno habitu tegentes veram faciem: Hence Histrionum igitur Epicriti∣anorum ex Mi∣letianistransu. gatorumscopus talis est, talis{que} perfidia in mo∣ribus. Epist: ad Solitariam vi∣tam agentes. p. 239. B. Atha∣nasius stiles the hypocriticall Epicritian heretiques, who covered their foule heresy with a faire outside, Stageplay∣ers. Hence also is that passage of Sermo de Ie∣lunio. Bibl. Pa∣trum Tom. 3 p. 127. G Zeno Veronensis an ancient Father. Denique hypocrita ille dicitur, qui in theatro persona vultui superimposita, cum lius sit, a∣lius esse simulatur; verbi causa, interdum regis persona vtitur, cum sit ipse plebeius, aut etiam Domini cum for∣te ipse sit servus. Ita ergo in hac vita complurimi homi∣num tanquam theatro simulatis personis vtuntur et fictis, (as too many likewise doe in this our age) et cum sunt extrinsecus aliud, aliud se esse hominibus ostendunt. Pa∣rallel to which is that of In Mathae. Evang: l. 4. Bibl. Patrum Tom. 9. pars 2.986. B. See here p. 158. in the margent. Paschatius Ratbertus: Nunc autem quia hypocritae vt Mimisecundum tragi∣cam pietatem in theatricis Ludorum, coram hominibus
Diabolo astipulante permulcent se, et cupiunt iusti vide∣ri, cum rex militum venerit, invenient non se fuisse quo∣rum partes agebant in superficie, sed scenicorum imitato∣res quorum speciem tenebant in corde. Which being added to that of learned and laborious Mr. Fox, who stiles hypocrites and false teachers, In Apocalyps c. 2. & 3. p 25. histriones pieta∣tis, (as De vita et mor. te Iuelli: p. 71.77.Dr. Humphries and others call the Masse Hi∣strionicam fabulam, et theatricum Papismi Spectacu∣lum) is a sufficient evidence, that Stage-players are hy∣pocrites, and the acting of Playes hypocrisie, therefore unlawfull unto Christians. The second unlawfull circumstance in the acting of Playes; is the grosse obscenity, amorousnesse, wanton∣nesse, and effeminacie that attends it, which hee I shall but name because I have at large debated it. Act 5. Scene 2, 3, 4, 5. to which I shall referre you. The third, is the apparent vanity, follie, and fanta∣stique lightnesse which appeares in those See Act. 5. Scene 4. & Act 3. Scene 7. ridiculous antique, mimicall, foolish gestures, complements, embrace∣ments smiles, nods, motions of the eyes, head, feete, hands, & whole intire body which Players vse, of purpose to pro∣vok their Spectators to profuse inordinate laughter, which absurd irrationall, unchristian if not inhumane gestures and actions, more fit for skittish goates then men, or so∣ber Christians, f grave men, if reason or religion may be judges, are intruth naught else but the very See 1. Sam. 21.13, 14, 15 Prov. 26 18, 19. Eccles. 2.2.12. c. 7.25. c. 9.3. c. 10 12, 13. extre∣mitie of folly, of vanity, if not of Bedlam frenzy. For what greater evidences can there be of vanity, folly. or fren∣zy,See Mr Stubs his Anatomie of abuses p. 105. I. G. his refutation of Apolo∣gi for Actors, p. 56.57. Dr. Raynolds Over throw of Stage playes p. 17.10 & 40.36.37. then to see a wise man act the fooles or clownes; a sober man the drunkards, bedlams, wantons, fanta∣stiques a patient man, the furies, murtherers, tyrants &c. a chast man the Sodomites, whoremasters, adulterer, a∣dultresses, whores bauds or Panders; an honest man the theefs or cheaters; yea a reasonable man the horses, Beares, Apes, Lyons, &c. or a male the womans part? What more absurd, then to behold a base notorious Rogue representing not only the person of a Maiestrate minister, Peere, Knight, &c. but even the Maiestie,
Pompe State, office, of the greatest Monarch; the vanity that Salomon reprehended long agoe: when he Eccle. 10.6, 7. Prov. 30.22. & 19.10. saw folly set in great dignity; When he beheld Servants to ride on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the earth. Or what can be more impious or prophane, then to be hold a Christian who beares the image of God, of Christ ingraven on his Soule, cuius ignum se in fronte portar asserit, et de corde perdidit as Enarratio: in Psal. 85. Tom. 8 pars 2.68. St. Augustine speakes) to act the part, the person, to put on the habit, the Image of a pagan, an Idol, See here p. 77.88.89. Tertull. De Idololatria lib. Philo Iudaeus de Decalogo l. and all co∣mentators on the second com∣mandement ac∣cordingly, with our owne ho∣milies against the perill of I∣dolatry. yea a heathen-God and Goddesse on the Stage, the very recitall of whose names, whose rites, the very making of whose images, is grosse I∣dolatry, condemned by the expresse letter of the second commandement, and See Exod. 23.24. Deutr 7.5. 2 King. 10.26. c. 11.18. c. 18.4. c. 23.14. 2 Chron. 34.3, 4, 7. 1 Iohn 5 2. infinite other Scripture, as all Christian writers iointly witnesse. Certainely if the Scriptures be so rigid, as to prohibit, Matth. 12.36.37. Ephes. 5.2.3.4. all idle wanton foolish words; all unseemely gestures, and lasciuious mo∣tions of the body: Isay 3.9. Pal. 10.. Iob 34.. Psal. 9 37. Mat. 5.28, 29. 2 Pet. 2.14. Prov. 6.12.13. as the pride the loftines of the coun∣tenance, the Isay 3.16. Prov. 6.12.13. c. 7.10. to 14. amorous glances of the eye, the walking with stretched out neckes and wanton eyes, the mincing, and tinckling of the feete &c. commanding Christians Psal. 4.2. Psal. 119 37. Eccles 9.9. c. 10.10. c. 1.17. c. 10.1 Psal. 75.4. & 85 phes. 5.3. c. 9.1. 1 Cor. 11.13, 14. c. 13.5. to put away vanitie, folly and madnes, with all (a) un∣seemely things; and confineing them Tit. 2.3.22. 1 Tim. 2.9. to. Phil. 4.8. Eph 4.1. Eph. 5.7.5.17. Rom. 16. 2 Ph. 1.27. to gravitie, mo∣destie, comlines and sobrietie, both in their actions 1 Tim. 2.9.10. Isay 3.18. to 29. Deut. 22.5. Zeph. 1.8. 1 Pet. 3.3 4. ge∣stures, apparell 1 Cor. 11.4. to 16. 1 Tim. 2.9.  Pet. 3.3. See my unlovelines of Lovelocks. haire Eph. 4.29.31. c. 5.3, 4. P. 39.1. Ps. 9.14 words, thoughts, Gen. 6.5. Prov. 12, 5. c. 15.26. Ier. 4.1. & things of smallest moment, the Here p. 294.402.403. gravitie of Christ & Chri∣stians being such in former time that they were never seen to laugh seldome to smile, much lesse to use any light dis∣honest gestures, or play any wanton Childish pranks, as a∣ctors doe:) we cannot but from thence conclude, that it condemns these wanton postures, Complements, dalli∣ances, motions, & representations, that alwayes attend the acting of Playes; which in their very best acception Here p. 127. to 132. are vanity & the appearance of evill, if not impiety and sinne it selfe; & so vnlawfull unto Christians.
The fourth is the apparell wherein Playes are acted;  in which two things are considerable, which make the acting of Playes unlawfull: First, the abuse; Secondly, the excessive gawdinesse, amorousnesse, and fantastique strangenesse of theatricall apparell. For the first of these; not to insist upon this particu∣lar, that infamous sordid Actors oft usurpe the habits of See hre, pag. 596.634. two ouncels a∣gainst acting a part in Bi∣shops, Mini∣sters, or Reli∣gious persons garments, & Ioannis Lang∣crucim, De Vit & Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. l. 2. c. 22. p. 323. Ministers, Magistrates, Gentlemen, Citizens, and o∣thers; yea, th robes of Emperours, Princes, Nobles, Bishops, Iudges, and those whose parts they act, which are no waies suitable to their condition or profession; I shall onely pitch upon this one particular abuse, of mens acting female parts in womens apparell and haire in Enterludes; Vbi alius soccis obauratis, indutus se∣rica veste, mundo{que} pretioso, & adtextis capite crinibus, incessu perfluo faeminam mentitur; as Metamor∣phoseos. lib. 11. pag. 282. Apuleius expres∣seth it. Which practise is diametrally contrary to Deut. 22.5. The woman shall not weare that which pertai∣neth to a man, neither shall a man put on a womans garment; for all that doe so, are n abomination to the Lord thy God. Which Scripture, as it condemnes womens cutting of their haire like men (as HRabanus Maurus, Nicholaus de Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis, Iunius, and sundry other Act 5. Scene 6. forequoted Expositors on this text affirme, who couple it with the 1 Cor. 11.4, to 16.) together with their cloathing of themselves in mans array: (a mannish who∣rish practise, of which Marianus Scotus. l. 3, AE∣tas. 6. An 854. Col. 152. Mar∣tini. Poloni Supputationes. An. 855. Col. 152. Papa. 109. Polychroni∣con. l. 5. c. 30. fol. 224. Caxtons Chronicle. part 5. Anno 885. Volaeranus Commentar. lib. 22. fol. 228. Balaeus De Romanorum Pontificum Actis. lib. 4. pag. 125. with others here quoted. pag. 185. Pope Ione, a notable strumpet; Nicephorus Callistus Ecclesiastic. Histor. lib. 17. cap. 5. Centuriae Magdeburg. 6. Col. 349.808. Theodora, Suetonij Octavius. sect. 41. a Roman Matron, who waited on Stephanio the Player, in cut haire, and mans apparell, as his Page; Vin∣centij Speculum Historiale. lib. 9. cap. 48. Antonini Chronicon. pars 1. Tit. 6. cap. 28. sect 5. fol. 137. Tecla, a famous Virgin, Quae pro Paulo quaerendo tonsu∣ram & virilem habitum suscepit; (even against S. Pauls
professed doctrine, 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 15.) and so repaired thus disguised to his lodging, to bee instructed by him. Vincentij Speculum. Hi∣stor. l. 10. cap. 115.116. fol. 129. Eugenia a female Romish Saint, who did cut her haire, and cloath her selfe in mans apparell, and so went disguized to the Monastery of Saint Helenus the Bishop, whether no woman might have excesse, where shee entred into Reli∣gion, and lived many yeeres in mans apparell like a Monke, and was at last elected Abbot of that Monastery, which office she managed with great humility like a man, as all re∣puted her. Vincentij Speculm. Hi∣stor. l, 15. c. 74.75, 76, 77, 78. See lib. 17. cap. 89. the like example of Melania. Marina, and Eufrosina, who polled their heads, and put on mans apparell, and then entred into Monasteries, where they lived and died professed monkish Votaries, (or rather disguised prostituted Strumpets to their chast fellow Monkes) as See here, pag. 185.202, 203, 204. & Agrip∣pa de Vanitate Scientiarum. cap 63. sundry others have done of latter times. Vincentij Spelum. Hi∣stor. lib. 21. cap. 44. Gundo, an infamous Virago, Quae comam capitis in∣scidit, & contra Dei iura virilia sumpsit indumenta; armis{que} accincta, baculo{que} innixa: and thus attyred, resorted to the Monastery of S. Karilephus, who avoyded the sight of all wo∣men; But no sooner was she entred into the inward parts of the Abbathie, but she was presently strucke blinde in both her eyes, and possessed with a Devill, vomiting up blood in a hor∣rid manner, for this her unnaturall bold attempt: with di∣vers other Romish See Vincen∣tij Speculum Historiale. lib. 15, cap 74. to 80. Socrates Scholast. Ec∣clesiast. Histor. l. 3. c. 43. Grati∣an Causa 32. Quaest. 1. f. 540 b. & here, p. 184 185, 203, 204, 205, 206. female Votaries, who have polled their heads, and entred into Monasteries as professed Monkes, in mans apparell, the better to satiate their owne and other un∣chaste Monkes lusts, have beene notoriously guilty. Witnesse Cornelius Agrippa, who writes thus of these chaste Virgin Nonnes and Monkes: De Vanit. Scient. c. 63. Quin & plurimae monialium & vestarum & beguinarum domus Restant nunc solae moniales, &c. De his autē plura dicere (& si plura, quae dici possint suppeebant) verecundia prohibet, ne non de caetu virgi∣num Deo dicatarū sed magis de lupanaribus, de dolis & procacia mertricum, de stu∣pris & incestuosis operibus dandum sermonem, prolixè trahamus. Nam quid obse∣cro, aliud sunt hoc tempore puellarū monasteria, nisi quaedam non dico Dei sanctua∣ria, sed veneris execranda prostibula? Sed lascivorū & impudicorum juvenū ad li∣bidines explendas receptacula, ut idem hodie sit puellam velare, quod & publice ad cortandum exponere, &c. Niolus De Clangis, De Crrupt Ecclesiae Sat. lib. cap. 23. See cap. 15.privatae
quaedam meretriculorum fornices sunt, quas etiam monachs & religiosos (ne diffametur eorum castitas) nonnunquam sub monachali cuculla, ac virili veste in monasterijs aluisse scimus, &c. Habent enim sacerdotes, monachi, fraterculi, moniales, & quas vocant sorores specialem lenociniorum praerogativam, quum illis religionis praetextu liberum sit quocunque pervolare, & quibuscunque quantum & quoties libet, subspecie visitationis & consolationis, aut confessionis secreto sine testibus loqui, tam pie personata sunt eorum le∣nocinia & sunt ex illis quibus pecuniam tetgisse piaculum est, & nihilillos movent verba Pauli dicentis; Bonum est mulierem non tangere; quas illi non rarò impudicis con∣trectant manibus & clanculum consuunt ad lupanaria, stu∣prant virgines sacras, vitiant viduas, & hospitum suorum adulterantes uxores, nonnunquam etiam, quod ego scio & vidi, Iliaci instar praedonis abducunt, & Platonica lege, cum popularibus suis communes prostituunt, & quarum ani∣mas lucraridebent Deo, illarum corpora sacrificant Diabo∣lo; aliaque his multo sceleratiora, & Adolescenti∣bus impudice abusi sunt. heu heu, intra san∣ctam ecclesiam multi religiosi & Clerici in suis latebris & conventiculis maximè in I∣talia, publice quodammodo nefandū gym∣nasium consti∣tuunt & palestram, in illius flagitij abominatione se exercentes, & optimi quique epheborum in lupanari ponuntur. Contra sanctam castitatem quam Do nino pro∣miserant sic offendunt continue etiam pulicè, praeter ea nefanda quae in occultis perpetrant, quod nec chartae reciperent, nec posset calamus exarare. Alvarus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae. l. 2. Artic. 2. fol. 83. & Artic. 28. fol. 134. Onus Ecclesiae. cap. 21.22, 23. & here p. 213.445. quae nefas est eloqui, insana libidine perpetrant: interim castitatis voto abunde satisfacientes, si libidinem, si luxuriam, si fornicationem, si adulteria, si incestum verbis acerrime incessent detesten∣turque & de virtute locuti clunes agitent. Sed & flagitio∣issimi lenones scelestissimaeque lenae saepe sub illis religionum pellibus delitescunt. Tales habent aulicae dominae plerum{que} sacrorum suorum mystas, & aulicarum nuptiarum scortati∣onumque consultores. Which passage seconded by Episcopi vero & Sacerdotes hujus temporis castitats sancti∣moniam (sine qua nemo videbit Deum) tam in corde quam in corpore quomodo student observate? qui traditi in reprobum sensum faciunt quae non conveniunt. Quae enim in occulto fiunt ab Episcopis turpe est dicere. Melius ita{que} arbitror super hoc dissimulare & supersedere, quam aliquid, unde scandalisentur innocentes & in∣experti dicere Sed ego cur verecundor dicere, quod ipsi non verecundantur facere? imo quod A∣postolus non verecundatur scribere & prae∣dicare. Dicit autem egregius predicator: Sic masculi in mas∣culos turpitu∣dinem operan∣tes, & mercedē surroris re∣cipintes. Fra∣tres, factus sum insipiens; vos me coegistis. Bernard. Sermo. ad Pastores in Sy∣nodo Rhemensi. fol. 317. di∣vers
other Popish and Protestant Authors, I wish our Romish Catholikes, who glory of the chastity of these their goatish Votaries, would consider.) So it likewise reprehends mens nourishing of their haire like wo∣men, and their putting on of womens attire, (though it be but now and then,) as an abomination to the Lord: And no wonder, that he putting on of womans appa∣rell, and the wearing of long haire should make men abominable unto God himselfe, since it was an abomi∣nation even among Heathen men: Witnesse, not onely the See pag. 199.200, 208, 209, 210. forequoted examples of Heliogabalus, Sardanapalus, Nero, Sporus, See Suidae Caius, p. 193. Quinetiam ne∣fario furore correptus ve∣stes muliebres induebat Cai∣us, & comam plicis quibus∣dam ornando, & faeminas imitando, & omnia flagitia perpetrando. Caius Caligula, and others: together with AElij Lam∣pridij. Com∣modus. pag 89.91. Commodus and Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. c. 13. p. 848. Annarus the effeminate governor of Babilon, (all great Sodomites and Adulterers:) whose going clad sometimes in womans apparell (for none of them went constantly in that array, some of them one∣ly once or twice) hath made them for ever execrable to all posterity: insomuch that Commodus Antoninus. p. 89.91. AElius Lampridius writes of Commodus, (qui clava non solum leones in veste mu∣liebri, sed etiam multos homines afflixit) Quod tantae im∣pudentiae fuit, ut cum muliebri veste in Amphitheatro & Theatro sedens publicè saepissime biberit. And what ac∣cursed fruits this effeminacy of his produced, the same Author witnesseth;Pag. 86. Nec irruentium in se iuvenum care∣bat infamia, omni parte corporis atque ore in sexum utrum∣que pollutus. It is storied of Athenaeus Dipnos. lib 6 cap 6. pag. 421.422. Ortyges the Tyrant of Ery∣thre and his companions, Qui legibus solutis res administra∣bant civitatis; that they grew to that height of effe∣minacy: Quod per hyemem muliebribus calceis induti ambulabant, comas nutriebant, nodique capillorum erant studiosi, (let our Ruffianly Love-locke wearers marke it:) caput purpureis cotoneisque diadematibus convolven∣tes. Habebant etiam mundum muliebrem totum aureum, sicut habere faeminae consueverunt; which made them so abominable to the people, that Hippotes the brother of
Cnopus invaded them with an army, and slue them. The Dipnosoph. l. 12. c. 9. p. 832. Samians are taxed for effeminacy by Duris and Athenae∣us, Quod circa brachia ornatum muliebrem gestare consue∣verant, atque cum Iunonium celebrarent comas pexas ha∣bentes, atque in tergum reiectas incedebant. Sic illi pexi Iu∣nonis templa petebant Aurea Caesarèam contortam vincula nectunt: and the Sybarites are taxed for the selfesame crime; Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. 12. cap. 6. p. 821. Quod est etiam apud cos consuetudo, ut pueri ad impuberem usque etatem purpuram, capillorumque no∣dos auro revinctos gestant. Pausaniae Arcadica. l. 8. p. 214. Alebat adolescens Al∣pheo comam, eam ille cum, quo virgines more solent religasset, in muliebri veste ad Daphnen venit, filiam se Oenomai si∣mulans. Cum ita{que} virgo esse ex corporis ha∣itu facile cre∣deretur, &c. miro sibi Daphnen a∣more devinxit &c. Pausanias writes of Leusippus, who went clad in womans apparell, and wore long effemi∣nate haire like a woman, consecrated to Alpheus, the bet∣ter to circumvent the chastity of a Virgin whom he loved; that he was slaine by Daphne and her Nymphes, who disco∣vered him to be a male in womans attire, as he was bathing among them: so detestable was this his lewdnes to them. Yea, such was the detestation of this effeminate unnatu∣rall odious practise of mens putting on womens appa∣rell, even among Ethnickes; that the Valerius Maximus. lib. 2. cap. 6. sect. 13. pag. 66.Lycians when they chanced to mourne, did usually put on a womans garment, (ut deformitate cultus commot, maturius stultum proijcere maerorem velint, that the very deformity and infamy of that array might move them the sooner to cast of their foo∣lish sorrow: and Charondas the famous Lawgiver, as Bibl. Histor. lib. 12. sect. 16. pag. 420. See here, p. 584. Diodorus Siculus informes us; is much applaudd for enacting this law among the Thurians, that whereas o∣ther Lawmakers made it capitall for any man to forsake his colours in the warres, or to refuse to beare armes for the defence of his Country, he conraiwise eacted; that such men as these, should sit three dayes togeher in the market place, clothed in womans apparell. Which Constitution (saith Diodorus) as it exceeds the lawes of other places in mildnesse; so it doth secretly deterre such cowardly per∣sons from their effeminate cwardce, (probri magnitudi∣ne) with the greatnesse of the reproachfull shame. Siqui∣dem mortm oppetere longè praestat, quàm tantum igno∣miniae dedecus in patriâ experiri: For it is farre better
for a man to be slaine, then to undergoe so great an ignominy and shame in his owne Country. The wearing of wo∣mans apparell, even for a little space in these Pagans judgements being so shameful, so execrable a thing, that a man were better to bee put to death, then to pt on such array; with which Ascanius doth thus upbraide the Troianes. Virgil. AE∣neidos. lib. 9. pag. 313. Vobis picta croco, & fulgenti murice vestes: Desidiae cordi: iuvat indulgere choreis: Et tunicae manicas, & habent ridimicula mitrae. O verè Phrygiae (ne{que} enim Phryges) ite per alta Dyndama, ubi assuetis biforum dat tibia cantum, Tympana vos buxus{que} vocat Berecynthia matris Ideae: sinite arma viris & cedite ferro. Nothing being more abominable even among Hea∣thens then effeminacy in Sint procul à verbis juvenes ut faemina compti. Quique uas ponunt in statione comas. Ovid De Arte Amandi. l. 3. pag. 203. long, compt, frizled haire, and womanish apparell, as these examples, and Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. p. 881.882, 883. Maf∣faeus Vegius, De Educatione Puerorum. lib. 5. cap. 4. and Act 5. Scene 6. abundantly testifie: on which you may reflect. If then the putting on of womans apparell were so abominable to Pagans, no marvell is it if this text of Deuteronomy stiles it an abomination to the Lord our God; the grounds and reasons of which, as I have at Act 5. Scene 6. pag. 192. to 214. large insisted on before, so I shall briefly touch upon them now in De Legibus. lib. c. 13. pag. 42.43. Gulielmus Parisiensis his words. Causae vero prohibitionis, ne vir utatur veste faeminea, vel è con∣verso, multae fuere. Primò, fuit congruentia ipsius naturae, videlicet, ut quod natura sexu discreverat, discerneret & vestitus. Secundo ut oportunitas auferretur-turpitudinum latibulis; posset e See Agrippa De Vanitate Scient. cap. 63.64. Tertullian De Pallio. c. 5. Summa Ange∣lica. Tit. Ornatus. sect. 5. Summa Rosella. Tit. Faemina. accordingly. & here, pag. 208. to 214. intrare vir ad mulierem sub habitu muliebri, & è converso mulier sub habitu virili, (as the examples of Statius Achilleid. l. 1. & D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playcs. p. 13. to 87. Achilles, who by putting on womans appa∣rell desured Deidamia King Lycomedes Daughter; of Suetonij Iulius. sect. 74. Clodius, who by this wile abused Pompeia, Iulius Cae∣sars
wife; and ofPausaniae Arcadica. l. 8 p. 214. Leucippus, who by this stratagem sought to ravish Daphne, with See here, pag. 184.185. toge∣ther with the examples of Sardanapalus, Nero, Helioga∣balus, Commodus, Caligula, Anna∣rus, and others forequoted, who acted their Sodomies, whoredomes and adulteries, being thus at∣tired in wo∣mans apparell. other examples of women clad in mans apparell to satiate the lusts of others, witnesse:) Ab∣lata est igitur per hanc discretionem vestitus, multa oppor∣tunitas slagity. Terio, exterminatio sacrorum. See here, pag. 207. accor∣dingly. Martis & Veneris: in sacris n. Martis, non solum virili vestitu vestiebantur mulieres, sed etiam armabantur, ut in ipsis ve∣stimentis bllicis, id est armis, ipsum tanquam Deum belli & victoriae datorem colerent. Et Cocogrecus in libro maledicto quem scripsit de stationibus ad cultum Veneris, inter alia sacrilega & Deo odibilia praecepit, ut qui nefandum illum ritum exercct, coronam faemineam habeat in capite suo. Eo∣dem modo in sacris Veneris viri effaeminabantur, videl cet in vestibus muliebribus sacra Veneris exercentes, propter huiusmodi sacrilegos ritus Veneri se placere credentes at{que} quaerentes. Quarta causa est, See here, pag. 208.209, 210. & D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p 11. to 15.32. & 92. to 100. accordingly. ut occasio magna provoca∣tioni libidinis auferretur: magna enim est provocatio libi∣dinis viris vestitus muliebris, & è converso: (how much more then when amorous wanton parts are acted in it?) & hoc est quoniam vestis muliebris viro circundata, vehementerrefricat memoriam, & commovet imaginatio∣nem mulieris, & è converso: alibi autem didicistis, quia imaginatio rei desiderabilis commovet desiderium. Quinta causa, See p. 208. to 214. & D. Rai∣nolds Over∣throw of Stage-playe. p. 8. to 23.32, 34, 35. ut auferretur occasio maleficij quibus gentes illae refertissimae erant, & in ijs nutritae. Consueverant n. ma∣lefici & maleficae in vestibus aut de vestibus libidinis, ma∣leficia exercere, & hoc nos in eorum libris saepe legimus. Vt ergo occasio huiusmodi tolleretur, iàm voluit Deus hanc confutationem vestitus esse in viris & mulieribus. Sexta causa, ut tolleretur error periculosus & superstitiosa credu∣litas, quâ trahi possent ad idololatriam, quibus credebant decepti applicatione vestium muliebrium, maxime in sacris Veneris, coniungi sibi ac conciliari amore fortissimo corda mulierum, propter quas hoc facerent, vel quae postea huius∣modi vestibus uterentur: similiter & deceptae mulieres id∣ipsum credebant de viris, & virilibus vestimentis. Voluit ergo Deus hunc superstitiosum errorem auferri de cordibus
eorum per ablationem abusionis istius, ne per illum tandem traherentur ad cultum Veneris. Vpon all which severall reasons, but especially the 1.2, 4. & 5. Iuo Carnotensis. Decret. pars 11. cap. 64.83. & pars 7. cap. 78.80, 81. Ru∣pertus in Deut. lib. 1. c. 13. fol. 221. Ioannis Wolphius in Deut. lib. 3. Sermo. 52. fol. 114. Dionysius Carthusianus in Deut. 22. fol. 479. Hugo Cardinalis in Deut. 22. Pe∣trus Bertorius. Tropologiarum. lib. 5. in Deut. cap. 22. fol. 47. Conradus Pellicanus in Deut. 22. v. 5. Lucas Osian∣der in Deut. 22. vers. 5. Tostatus Abulensis in Deut. 22. Quaest. 2. Tom. 3. pars 2. p. 199. B.C. Procopius, Leonar∣dus Marius, & Cornelius à Lapide in Deut. 22. vers. 5. Erasmus Marbachius. Comment. in Deut. 22. pag. 217.218 Ioannis Mariana, Scholia in Deut. 22. vers. 5. p. 99. Paulus Fagius Annotationes Paraph. Onkeli Chald. in Deut. Franciscus Iunius Analysis in Deut. 22. v. 5. Ope∣rum Genevae. 1613. Tom. 5. Col. 572.573. (who makes this text of Deuteronomy, a Est praeceptū honestatis non in ceremonia, non in civili jure seu politi∣co, sed in natu∣ra ipsa funda∣a. Ibidem. Col. 572. See here, pag. 211.212. & Doctor Rainolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes. pag. 9.10, 13, 14, 82, 83. ac∣cordingly. Precept of honesty, not foun∣ded in the Ceremoniall or Politicall law, but in the very law of nature, as doe all other Orthodox Writers:) toge∣ther with Maphaeus Vegius, De Educatione Puerorum. lib. 5. c. 4. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 882. Angelus De Clavasio, Summa Angelica. Tit. Ornatus. sect. 5. Iaco∣bus De Graffijs Descitionum Aurearum. pars 2. l. 3. c. 26. sect. 5. Hyperius De Ferijs Bacchanalibus. lib. Ioannis Langhecrucius, De Vita & Honestate Ecclesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 21.22. pag. 319.321. I. G. his Refutation of the Apologie for Actors. pag. 16. with sundry See here, Act 5. Scene 6. other forequoted Fathers, Councels, and other Authors, have absolutely condemned, even from this very text, not onely mens constant wearing, but likewise their very putting on of womans apparell (especially to act an effeminate amo∣rous womans part upon the Stage) as an abominable, unna∣turall, shamefull, dishonest, unchaste, unmanly wicked act, which God and nature both detest, for the precedent reasons. Yea, so universally exeorable hath this pra∣ctise beene in all ages, that the . Councell of Bracara,
Anno Dom. 610. (as Decret. pars 11. cap. 64. See cap. 83. & pars 7. c. 78.80, 81. to the like pur∣pose. Iuo Carnotensis informes us) en∣acted this particular Canon against mens acting of Playes in womens, or womens acting or masquing in mens apparell: Si quis balationes ante Ecclesias sancto∣rum, seu qui faciem suam transmutaverit in habitu mulie∣bri, & mulier in habitu viri, emendatione pollicita, tribu annis paeniteat: and Baptista Trovomala, discussing this very question; Quaeritur an faemina causa ludi vel oci u∣tens vete viri∣li, vel vir vete mliebri pecce mortaliter, &c Summa Rosella. Tit. Faemina. fol. 214.215. Whether it be a mortall sinne for a woman to put on mans, or for a man to weare womans apparell to act a Masque or Play? maketh this reply. Respondent om∣nes praedicatores & totus mundus quod sic: all Preachers, and the whole world doe answer that it is: and for this (saith he) they alleage Gratian Distinctio. 30. cap. Si qua mulier: and Deut. 22.5. The reason why it is a mortall sinne is rendred by Tertium quod requiri∣tur in ornatu est convenien∣tia personae. Itaque mulier quae utitur ve∣ste virili, vel è contrario, pec∣cat mortaliter, quia facit con∣tra praeceptum Deut. 22. Sum∣ma Angelica. Tit Ornatus. sect. 5. & Tit. Habi∣tus sect. 7. Angelus De Clavasio, because it is contrary to this text of Deut. 22.5. and inconvenient for the persons who put it on: and by Summa The∣ologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. m. 2. pag. 617.618. Alexander Alen∣sis, and Prima secun∣dae. Quaest. 102 Artic 6.6 m. & secunda secundae. Quaest. 169. Artic. 2.3. Aquinas: because it is directly contrary to the decency and virility of nature, and likewise to this text of Deuteronomy; Nec pertinet ad honestatem viri veste mu∣liebri indui: utrique enim sexui diversa indumenta natu∣ra dedit. Isiodor Hispalensis. Originum. lib. 19. cap. 23. Habet enim & sexus institutam speciem habi∣tus (writes Isiodor Hispalensis) ut in viris tonsi capilli, in mulieribus redundantia crinium; quod maxime virginibus insigne est, quarum & ornatus ipse proprie sic est, ut concu∣mulatus in verticem ipsam capitis sui arcem ambitu criniū contegat. If then all these severall Authors, and Coun∣cels, together with Vincentius Belsensis Speculum Hi∣storiale. lib. 11. cap. 73. & lib. 21. cap. 44. with Act 5. Scene 6. pag. 176. to 16. others fore-alleaged; if all Preachers, and the whole world it selfe; or if our owne worthy Doctor Rainolds (who hath largely and learnedly debated this particular point in his Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 9. to 15. & 82. to 106. &c.) may be judges, the very putting on of womans appa∣rell by Players or their Boyes to act a Play, and so è con∣verso,
is a most execrable abomination to the Lord our God, prohibited by this text of Deuteronomy. Neither will the shortnesse of the time excuse the fact: For as Nero was truely said to weare his suits, and to put on his appa∣rell, though he never more one garment twice, changing his raiment every day, as Suetonij Ne∣ro. sect. 3. Coc. Sabellicus. AE∣neid. 8. lib. 11. p. 203. Euro∣pius, Grim∣ston, & Zona∣ras, in the life of Nero. Historians relate; so he See D. Rai∣nolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes. p. 101.102. & here, p. 179. to 196. who puts on a womans attyre for a day, an houre or two, or any lesser space to act a womans part, be it but once in all his life, is a putter on of womans apparell within the very words and meaning of this text which principally provides as the fore-alleaged reasons, Authors, and examples witnesse, against such temporary occasionall wearing and pu∣ting on of womans apparell, which Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt leges aptantur. See Sir Edward Cooke, his Flowres. oft-times happens, rather then against the daily constant wearing of it, which few have beene so unnaturall as to use. What De Pallio. c. 5 p. 228. Tertullian therefore writes of Hercules, attyred by his Mother in womans apparell, to satiate his lusts. (Naturam ita{que} concussit Larissaeus heros in virginem mu∣tando, &c. Feras in puero matris sollicitudinem patiens certe iam ustriculas: certe virum alicuius clanculo functus adhuc sustinet, stolam fundere, comam struere, cutem fin∣gere, speculum consulere, collum demulcere, aurem quoque foratu effaeminatus. Ecce itaque mutatio, monstrum equi∣dem geminum, de viro faemina, mox de faemina vir, quan∣do neque veritas negari debuisset, neque fallacia confiteri. Vterque habitus mutandi malus, alter adversus natu∣ram, alter contra salutem. Turpius adhuc libido virum cultu transfiguravit, quàm aliqua maternaformido; tam∣et si adoratur à vobis qui erubescendus est Scytalo sagitti∣pelliger ille, qui totam epitheti sui sortem cum muliebri cultu compensavit. Tantum Lydiae clanculariae licuit, ut Hercules in Omphale, & Omphale in Hercule prostituere∣tur, &c. The same may I say of women who impu∣dently cut their haire, or put on mens, or men who effe∣minately See Archbi∣shop Abbot, his 28. Lecture upon Ionah. sect. 11. pag. 570.571. against long womanish haire. nourish their haire, or put on womans appa∣rell to act any mummery, Masque, or Stage-play, or for
any such like ends; Debet enim habitus con∣gruere qualita∣ti & conditioni personae & exus. Iacobus De Graffijs. De∣cisionum Aura∣rum. pars 2. lib. 3 cap 26. sct. 5. that they sinne against nature, their sex, their owne salvation, making themselves not onely double monsters, but even an abomination to the Lord their God, as all the premises witnesse. And what Christian, what Mummer, Masquer, or Actor is there so desperately prodigall of his owne salvation, as thus to become an 1 Cor. 16.22.Anathema Maranatha, a perpetuall unsuf∣ferable abomination to his God, by putting on such ap∣parell for an houre, to act a Matrons, perchance a Strum∣pes part, which may make him miserable for all eter∣nity? As therefore this putting on of womans appa∣rell is an abomination unto God, so let it be an execra∣ble and accursed thing to us; and since there i so much ingenuity left in most men, rather to goe could and naked, yea to expose their lives to hazard, then thus unnaturally to cloath their nakednesse, or to walke a∣broad in womans vestments; let there not bee hence∣forth so much impudency in any Actors, Mummers, Masquers, as to appeare publikely in feminine habits, or attires on the Stage, rather then to foregoe their las∣civious sinfull Playes and Enterludes, which (if Enarratio in Psal. 39. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 414.415. S. Au∣gustine, or D. Chewin, in his Straite gate and nar∣row way. cap. 7 pag. 70. others may be credited,) are the very broad way, which leades men downe to Hell and endlesse death, in which many multitudes daily walke and sport themselves. I shall therefore close up this particular (which Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 9. to 15. & 82. to 168.D. Rai∣nolds hath at large discussed, and I Act 5. Scene 6. pag. 178. to 216. my selfe more copiously insisted on in the foregoing part) with the Commentary of Argentorti. 1597. p. 217.218. Erasmus Marbachius on this text of Deuteronomy. Distinxit Deus in creatione virum à muliere, ut forma cor∣poris, ita quo{que} officio: See RHabanus Maurus in Deut. lib. 2. cap. 29. Tom. 2. Operum. pag. 437. Alexander Alensis Summa Theologiae. pars 2 Quaest. 135. memb. 2. pag. 617.618. & Mapheus Vegius, De Educatione Puero∣rum. lib. 5. cap. 4. accordingly. hanc distinctionem vult Deus conservari, & neutrum sexum habitu & vestitu in alium se transformare, nec quae alterius sunt usurpare. Mulieris est suo vestitu indui, & colum ac lanam tractare, domesti∣cquerei
curam ager. Viri est, suis quo{que} vestibus indui, & quae foris & reipub. curare, &c. Prohibentur ita{que} hac lege larvae, quibus se homines transformant ut agnosci ne∣queant, quae res occasionem praebet multorum gravissimo∣rum scelerum. Praetereà turpis & inhonestus vestitus, qui nec virilem, nec muliebrem sexum decet; ipsa etiam vesti∣tus novitas, quae animi levis & inconstantis, & vani indi∣cium est: the next particular, which I shall briefly touch. The second unlawfull Circumstance of Actors appa∣rell, is its overcostly gawdinesse, amorousnesse, fanta∣stiquenesse, and disguizednesse. For the gaudinesse, lasci∣viousnesse, and newfanglednesse of Players attire, it hath beene long since discovered and censured by the Fathers. Hence De Mercede Meretricis, &c. p. 1164. Philo Iudaeus discribing a lascivious painted frizled accurately attyred Strumpet, stiles her; Praestigiatrix splendidè ac scenicè ornata. Hence Oratio ad∣versus Mulie∣res ambitiosius sese ornantes. p. 991, aec. Gregory Nazianzen stiles all women, who paint their faces, em∣broyder or frizle their haire, and weare lascious gaw∣dy apparell; Theatricè comptae & ornatae, ob venustatem invenustae; as Levenclavius translates it: recording this as none of his Mothers meanest vertues: Oratio. 28. De Funere Patris. p. 472.476. quod pictum & arte quaesitum ornatum, ad eas, quae theatris delectantur ablegabat; who were all notorious prostituted Strum∣pets. Hence Hom. 10. in Matth. Tom 2. Col. 250. D. Chrysostome, declaiming against the compt, glittering, painted, amorous females of his age, writes, that they were nihil à theatralibus faeminis dis∣crepantes: and to beat downe all fantastique pride and gawdinesse in apparell, he reasons thus: Homil. 39 ad Pop Antioch. Tom. 5. Col. 250. D. Sed ornaris & comeris? Verum & equos comptos videre licet, homi∣nes vero scenicos omnes. Hence Sermo ad Clerum, in Concilio Rhe∣mensi fol. 317. S. Bernard taxing the pride of Prelates and Popish Priests in his time pro∣ceeds thus. Vnde hinc est eis quem quotidie idemus m∣retricius nitor, histrionicus habitus? Hence De Nugis Curialium. l. 3. c. 13. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 15. p. 384. E. Iohn Sa∣risbery our Countri-man useth this expression in cen∣suring the effeminate compt fantastique Gallants of his age; interim invident meretrici histrionis habitum. And
hence our learned Contra Hieronymū Oso∣rium. lib. 3. pag 285. Walter Haddon, phraseth Masse-at∣tire, gawdy Copes, and such like vestments, Histrionicus vestitus: Which severall phrases and expressions, with sundry others to the like purpose are frequent in most Greeke and Latine Authors. All which being coupled with 22. Henry 8. c. 13. (which speakes of the costli∣nesse of Players Robes) and with Act 5. Scene 7. pag. 216. to 220. where I have more largely demonstrated this particular, will bee a sufficient evidence, of the gawdinesse, lasciviousnesse, and newfanglednesse of Stage apparell, and so by consequence of See Act 5. Scene 7. accor∣dingly. Summa Angelica, & Summa Rosel∣la. Tit. Orna∣tus. its unlawful∣nesse too. For the strange disguisednesse of threatricall attires, it is most apparant: For doe not all Actors, Mummers, Masquers uually put on the See Act 3. Scene 3. & Act 5. Scene 3.4. Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Tertullian. De Spectac. Iose∣phus Antiqu. Iudaeorum. lib. 15. cap. 11. Vizards, shapes and habits of Iupiter, Mars, Apollo, Mrcury, Bacchus, Vulcan, Saturne, Venus, Diana, Nepune, Pan, Ceres, Iuno, and such like Pagan Idol-gods and Goddesses: the persons, the representations of Devils, Satyrs, Nymphes, Sylvanes, Fayries, Fates, Furies, Hobgoblin, Muses, Syrens, Cen∣taures, and such other Pagan Fictions? yea, the porrai∣tures and formes of Lyons, Beares, Apes, Asses, Horses, Fishes, Foules, which in outwar appearance metamorphose them into Idols, Devils Monsters, Beasts, whose parts they repreent? and can these disguises bee lawfull, be tolerable among Christians? No verily. For first, the former sort of them, as Antiq. Iudae. l. 15. c. 11. Iosephus, De Decalog. lib. pag. 1037. Philo Iudaeus, De Spectac. lib. cap. 22 De Coron Mli∣tis. cap. 8. & De Idololatria. lib. Tertullian, See here, pag. 89.90. with all ancient and moderne Expositors on the 2. Commandement witnesse, are meerely idolatrous; the very See Act 2. & Act 3. Scene 3. pag. 77. mentioning of these Idols names, much more then the representation of their parts, the making and Exod. 23.4. cap. 23.24. cap 34.13. Levit. 26.1, 30. Deut. 7.5. cap. 16.22. 2 Kings 10.26. cap. 17.10. cap 1 4. cap. 23.14, 24. 2 Chron. 31.1. cap. 34.3, 4, 7. Ier. 43.13. cap. 50.2 Ezek. 6 4, 6. 1 Ioh. 5.21. wearing of their Vizards, shapes, and Images being wholy condemned by the Scripture; which commands Christians
to 1 Cor. 10.7, 14. Propterea cl∣mat Apostolus, Fugie idolola∣triam, omnem uti{que} & totam, &c. Longum enim divortiū mandat ab ido∣loltria, in nul∣lo proximè a∣gendum. Draco enim terrenus de longinquo non minus spi∣ritu absorbet a∣lites. Ioannes, Filioli, inquit, custodite vos ab Idolis: non jam ab idolo∣latria quasi ab officio, sed ab idolis, id est ab effigie eorum. Tertul. De Coro∣na militis c. 8. flie all Idolatry, and not to come neere it, lest it should infect them. Secondly, there is no warrant at all in Scrip∣ture for any such Stag-disguises, but very good ground against them. For first it Deut. 22.5. 1 Cor. 11.3. to 16. See Act 5. Scene 6. & here pag. 879, &c. condemnes mens disguising of themselves like women, and womens metamorphosing them∣selves into men either in haire, apparell, offices, or conditi∣ons: how much more then mens transfiguring of them∣selves into the shapes of Idols, Devils, Monsters, Beasts, &c. betweene which and man there is no Analogie or proportion, as is betweene men and women. Secondly, it njoynes men and women, 1 Tim. 2 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5. to attire themselves in modest, decent, and honest apparell, suitable to their sexes and degrees, as bcommeth those who professe godlinesse: But sch Vizards and disguises as these, are neither modest, decent, honest, nor yet suitable to their hu∣man nature. Thirdly, it requires them, Deut. 22.5. Isay 3.18, 19, 20. Zeph. 1.8. Prov. 7.10. See Act 5. Scene 7. to abandon all wanton, strange, lascivious, vaine, fantastique dresses, fashi∣ons, vestments: much more then such habits, such dis∣guises as these, which are both inhuman, bestiall, and Diabolicall. Fourthly, it commands men, Psal. 32.9. not to bee like to Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: therefore not to act their parts, or to put on their skins or likenesse. It was Gods heavy Iudgement upon King Dan. 4.33. Nebuchadnezar, that he was driven from men, and did eate grasse as Oxen, and that his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his haires were growne like Eagles fea∣thers, and his nailes like Birds clawes: yea, it is mans greatest misery, Psal. 9.12, 20. that being in honour he became like to the beasts that perish: And must it not then bee mans sinne and shame to act a Beast, or beare his image, Prona{que} cum spectant animalia caetera terram: Os homini sub∣lime dedit, caelum{que} videre jussit, & erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. Ovid. Metamorp. lib. 1. Cicero De Natura. Deorum. lib. 2.3. with which he hath no proportion? What is this but to obliterate that most Gen. 1.26, 27. cap. 5.1. cap. 9. glorious Image which God himselfe hath stamped on us, to strip our selves of all our excellency, and to prove worse then bruits? Certaine∣ly,
that God who Deut. 4.10, 17, 18. c. 5.8. prohibits, the making of the likenesse of any beast, or fish, or fowle, or creeping thing, whether male or female, to expresse or represent his owne like∣nesse; condemning the idolatrous Gentiles, Rom. 1.23. Psal. 106.20. for changing the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and foure footed beasts, and creepng things; Isay 40.18. Acts 17.29. with which he hath no similitude or proportion; must certainely condemne the putting on of such bruitish Vizards, the changing of the glory, the shape of reasonable men, into the likenesse of unreaso∣nable beasts and creatures, to act a beastiall part in a las∣civious Enterlude. Fiftly, it enjoynes men, Eccles. 3.14. c. 7.13. Matth. 5.36. c. 6.26. Pro. 22.28. not to alter that forme which God hath given them by adding or de∣tracting from his worke; not to remove the bounds that he hath set them; but to 1 Cor. 7.24. c. 11.3. to 16. abide in that condition wherein he hath placed them: Vpon which grounds, as the Cyprian, De Habitu Virgi∣num. Tertul. De Cultu Fae∣minarum. Cle∣mens Alexand. Paedag. l. 3. c. 2.3, 11. Nazian∣zen adversus Mulieres am∣bitiosius sese Ornantes O∣ratio. Alexan∣der Alensis. Summa Theo∣logiae. pars 4. Qaest. 11. Ar∣tic. 2. Summa Angelica & Summa Rosel∣la. Tir. Orna∣tus: See my Vnloveliness of Lovelockes. pag. 2, &c. and here, Act 5. Scene 3.6, 7. Fa∣thers and others aptly censure face-painting, Perewigs, vaine fashions, disguises and attires, together with the en∣chroachments of one sex upon the habits, offices, or duties of the other; so I may likewise condemne these Play-houe Vizards, vestments, images and disguises, which du∣ring their usage in outward appearance offer a kinde of violence to Gods owne Image and mens humane shapes, metamorphosing them into those idolatrous, those bruitish formes, in which God never made them. Sixtly, it censures mens degenerating into beasts, or Devils, either in their mindes or manners, be it but for a season; as the Psal. 32.9. Psal. 49.12, 20. 2 Pet. 2.22. Rev. 22.19. Psal. 92.6. Psal. 94.8 Psal. 73.22. marginall Scriptures witnesse; there∣fore it cannot approve of these theatricall, bestiall, and diabolicall See Dan. 4.33. Rom. 9.7, 8, 9. transfigurations of their bodies; which are inconsistent with the Psal. 4.8. 1 Tim. 2.9, 10. Titus 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12 1 Cor. 11.13. rules of piety, gravity, honesty, modesty, civility, right reason, and expedience, by which all Christians actions should be regulated. Seventhly, it in∣formes
us, that even 1 Sam. 21.13 14, 15. Achish King of Gath, a meere Pa∣gan Idolater, when he saw David acting the madman be∣fore him, and feining himselfe distracted, scrabling on the doores of the gate, and letting the spittle fall downe upon his beard; said thus unto his servants; Loe you see the man is mad: wherefore then have yee brought him to mee? Have I need of mad-men, that yee have brought this fel∣low to play the mad-man in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house? If then this Heathen King was so impatient to see David act the Bedlam in his presence, even in his ordinary apparell, that he would not suffer him to stay within his Palace; how much more impa∣tient should all Christian Princes and Magistrates be of beholding Christians acting, not onely Mad-mens, but eve Devils, Idols, Furies, Monsters, beasts, and sence∣lesse creatures parts upon the Stage in such prodigious deformed habits and disguises, as are unsuitable to their humanity, their Christianity, gravity, sobriety; be∣wraying nought else but the very vanity, folly, and bruitish frensie of ther distempered mindes? Certaine∣ly those who readily censure and detest such habits, such representations in all other places must needs con∣demne them in the Play-house, whose See Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5. & Bullengerus, De Theatro. lib. 1. c. 50.51. execrable infa∣mous lewdnesse may happily make them more unlaw∣full, never commendable or fit for Christians. Lastly, these theatricall habits, vizards, and disguises have beene evermore abominated, condemned by the Church and Saints of God: as namely, by the Iewish Church and Nation: who, as they never admitted nor erected any Images of Pictures of God, of Christ, or Saints within their Temple, as Est autem in media Hieru∣solyma quadroporticus, &c. Simulachrum vero aut aliquod anathema ibi nequa∣quam est. Apud Iosephum. Contra Apionem. lib. 1. pag. 833. Hecataeus Abderita, AEgyptij plaeraque animalia effigiesque compositas venerantur. Iudaei mente sola unumque numen intelligunt. Profanos qui nideûm imagines mortalibus materijs in species homi∣num effingant. Summum illud atque aeternum, neque mutabile, neque interiturum. Igitur nulla simulachra urbibus suis, neque templis. Non regibus haec adulatio, non Caesaribus honor. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 1. pag. 592. Cornelius Tacitus,
Iudaei diver∣sum à reliquis-hominibus ob tinent, cū alijs in rebus usu{que} vitae quotidia∣no, tū eo prae∣sertim quod nullū ex caete∣ris Dijs colunt: unū autē quen∣dā summo stu∣dio venerātur, Tum quo{que} temporis nullum Hierosolymis simulacrum extabat; nimirum suum il∣lum Deum ineffabilem, invisibilem{que} existimantes. Rom. Hist. l. 37 fol 76. Dion Cassius, Hactenus pro patria deprae catus postremas pro Templo preces adhibeo. Hoc Templum Cai Domine, jam inde ab initio nullam unquam admisit manufactam effigiem cum sit Deo domicilium: pictorum enim & statuariorum opera sunt sensibilium Deorum imagines: illum autem invisibilom pingere aut fingere nefas duxerunt nostri majo∣res. Non Graecus, non Barbarus, non Rex Satrapave ullus vel infensissimus; non seditio, non bellum, non captivitas, non vastatio, non alia res ulla unquam tantam cladem intulit, ut contra veterem morem effigies manufacta in id importaretur. De Legatione ad Caium. pag. 1386 vid. 1389, &c. See De Monarchi. lib. fol. 1037.1038, 1039. Philo Iudaeus, and Graecis ita{que} & alijs quibusdam bonum esse creditur imagines instituere. Deni{que} & patrum, & uxorum filrorum{que} iguras depingentes exultant; quidam vero etiam nihil sibi competentium sumunt imagines, &c. Porro autem legislator, non quasi prophetans Romanorum potentiam non honorandam, sed tanquam causam ne{que} Deo ne{que} hominibus utilem despiciens, & quoniam totius animati, multò ma∣gis Dei inanimati, probatur hoc inferius, interdixit imagines fabricari: to which Sigismundus Silenius affixeth this marginall note. Iudaei prorsus nullas imagines fe∣runt. Contra Apionem. lib. 2. pag. 846. Iosephus witnesse: accounting it a hainous sinne Exod. 20.4. Levit. 26., 30. Deut. 4.15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 25. c. 5.8. c. 16.21, 22. contrary to the expresse words of the second Commandement, to paint or make any Picture, any Image of God; because the Iohn 1.18. c. 5.37. Rom. 1.23. Col. 1.15. 1 Tim. 1.17. c. 6.16. Heb. 11.1. 1 Ioh 4.20. Deut. 4.15. Deus inter omnia operibus quidem & muneribus clarus, & omni re manifestior, forma vero & magnitudine nobis ine∣narrabilis. Omnis namque materies comparata ad hujus imaginem, licet sit pre∣ciosa, tamen pro nullo est; cunctaque ars ad illius imitationis inventum, extra ar∣tem esse cognoscitur: nihil simile neque videmus, neque possumus suspicari neque conijcere, illeinvisibilis sola mente percipitur. Iosephus Contra Apionem. lib. 2. pag. 854. Philo Iudaeus de Monarchia. lib. pag. 1097, &c. invisible incor∣poriall God, (whom no man hath seene at any time, nor can see; betweene whom and any Image, Picture, or creature there is Isay 40.12. to 27. Acts 17.29. Rom. 1.23. no similitude, no proportion,) cannot be expressed by any visible shape or likenesse whatsoever, (his Image be∣ing onely spirituall and Col. 1.15. Iohn 15.37. Deut. 4.15. Heb. 2.3. 1 Tim. 6.16. Philo Iudaeus, De Mundi Opificio. pag. 8.9. Origen Contr. Celsium. lib. 7. fol. 72. & lib. 7. fol. 97. invisible like himselfe,) as not onely the Act 17.29. Isay 40.18, 15. Scripture, but even Exurge modo, & re quoque dignum inge Deo, finges autem non auro, non argento: Non potest ex hac materia, imago Dei exprimi similis. Epist. 30. pag. 207. Seneca and De Natura Deo∣rum. lib. 1.2. Tully in∣forme
us: Vpon which grounds the Primitive Chri∣stians (who had no Images, no Pictures, no Altars in their Churches, as In hoc n. consuestis par∣te crimen nobis maximum im∣pietatis affige∣re, quod non Deorum alicujus simulacrū constituamus, non Altaria fabricemus, non Aras. Advers. Gentes l. 6. p. 185. Arnobius, Non n. Christiani patiuntur vel Templa, vel aras, vel simulacra, & statuas intueri: simulacra aperte vituperant, &c. Christiani vero & item Iudaei, cum audiunt, Dominum Deum tuum timebis, & illi soli servies; nec tibi feceris idolum, nec rei ullius similitudinem, quae cum{que} in caelo sunt & in terra deor∣sum, &c. & ob alia plera{que} non his dissimilia: non modo Deorum templa & Aras & simulachra haec aversantur, sed vel ad mortem si fuerit necesse promptius veniunt, ne ex aliquo recessu & impietate prorsus inquinent, quod de De omnium conditore optime sentiunt, &c. Celsus igitur haud quaquam pro dijs simulacra haberi affirmat, sed dijs dicata: cum plane perspicuū sit hujusmodi facere & affirmare, hominum esse circa divinitatem errantium. Sed ne divinae quidem imaginis simulacra haec esse duxe∣rimus, quippe qui Dei ut invisibilis ita & incorporei formam nullam effigiamus, &c. Cont. Celsum. l. 7. f 96.97. See 91.92. Celsus & Aras & simulacra & delubra nos ait de∣fugere quo minus fundentur. Sunt nobis vero simulacra non per impuros opifices a∣liquos fabricata, sed per Dei verbum in nobis edita & formata; virtutes scilicet pri∣mogeniti omnis creaturae imitatrices, &c. in quibus par esse crediderim, ei honorem deferri, qui omnium sit simulacrorum exemplar, imago scilicet invisibilis Dei, uni∣genitus Deus, &c. Contr. Celsum l. 8. fol 100. vid. Ibid. & lib. 4 fol. 46.47. Origen, Putatis nos oc∣cultare quod colimus si delubra & Aras non habemus: quod enim simulacrum Deo fingam, cum si recte existimes sit Dei homo ipse simulacrum. Octavius pag. 104. Minu∣cius Felix, and De Origine Erroris. l. 2. c. 2.3, 4, 5, 7, 17, 18, 19. Lactantius testifie, for which the Pa∣gans blamed them:) as also Sed nec eos qui hostijs multis coronis{que} ex floribus contextis colantur, homines qui eorum statuas efficta in Templis statue∣runt, Deos appelaverunt, quandoquidem haec inania & mortua esse scimus, Dei{que} formam e figuram non habere. Ne{que} tam Dei figuram esse arbitramur, quam qui∣dam honoris causa ad imitationem effictam esse confirmant: sed illorum malorū ge∣niorum habere & nomina & figuras. Quid enim attinet vobis qui scitis, exponere e quae artifices disposita materia secando, dividendo, conflando, percutiendo, & ex vasis ignominiosis saepe artificio mutata solum forma & figura alia inducta, Deorum no∣mine appellant? quod quidē non solum stultū esse, sed etiam cóntumeliae Dei causa fieri judicamus: qui cum gloriam formam{que} exprimi quae non potest habeat, earum rerum quae intereunt, ura{que} egent, appelatur nomine. Quinetiam harū rerum arti∣fices lascivi sunt, omni{que} malicia & improbitate praediti, &c. Apologia. 2. pro Christianis. p. 16. B.C. Iustin Martyr, Adversus Haereses. l. 1. c. 23.24. p. 88 92. & l. 2. c. 6. p. 134.135. Irenaeus, Deus, qui solus verè est Deus intelligentia percipitur, non sensu. Antisthenes Socratis fa∣miliaris, dixit, Deum nulli esse similem, quare nemo illum potest discere ex imagine. Xenophon autem Atheniensis ipse aperte scribit: Qui omnia movet & quieta efficit, magnus quidem est & aperte potens, sed cujusmodi sit forma non apparet, &c. Oratio adhort. ad Gentes. fol. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. vid. Ibid. an excellent discourse against Images: Significat autē columna ig∣nis, Dei non posse effingi imaginem, &c. Stromatum. l. 1. f. 73. B. l. 5 f. 122. D.E. Nobis autem nullum est simulacrū in mundo; quoniam in rebus genitis nihil potest Dei referre imaginē. Praeterea oportet Graecos doceri per legem & Prophetas, quod nec eorum quos co∣lunt simulacra sunt imagines: ne{que} enim fugura tale est genus animarum, cujusmodi fingunt Graeci statuas. Non cadunt n. animae sub aspectum, non solū quae sunt com∣potes rationis, sed etiam animae aliorum animantium; quanto minus Dei invisibilis imago. Strom. l. 6. f. 143. C. Moses praecipit hominibus nullam facere imaginem quae Deum arte repraesentat. Paedag. l. 3 c 2. f. 46. A. Cle∣mens
Alexandrinus, Deus omnē similitudinem vetat ieri, quanto magis imaginis suae, &c. De Spectac. c. 23. De Corona Militis. c. 8. & De Idolo∣latria. lib. & Apologia Advers. Gentes: where Franciscus Zephyrus. p. 675. Comments thus. Perpetuo illud teneamus, Christianos tunc temporis odisse maxime statuas cum suis ornamentis. Tertullian, Contra Celsum. l. 7. f. 96.97. & l. 8. f. 100. Origen, Octavius. p. 75.76, 77, 104. Mi∣nius Felix, Contra Demetrianum. lib p. 221.223. & De Idolorū Vanitate. p. 264, &c. Cyprian, Ne{que} nobis in aedibus sacris effigies pro dijs, & illa simulachra velitis ostendere, quae intelligitis vos quo{que} & renuitis confiteri, vilissimi esse formas luti & fabrorū figmenta puerilia, &c. Nunc ad speciem veniamus & formas quibus esse descriptos su∣peros Deos creditis, quib{us} imo formatis & templorū amplissimis collacatis in sedib{us}. Nostra de hoc sententia talis est; Naturā omnem divinā, quae ne{que} esse caeperit ali∣quando ne{que} vitalem ad terminū sit aliquando ventura, linimentis carere corporeis, ne{que} ullas formarū effigies possidere, quib{us} etiam circūscriptio membrorū solet coag∣mentata finire. Quicquid enim tale est mortale esse arbitramur & labile: nec obtinere perpetuā posse credim{us} aevitatem, quod extremis coercitū finib{us} necessaria circūcludit extremitas, &c. Si verā vultis audire sententiā, aut nullā habet Deus formā; aut si in∣format{us} est aliqua ea quae fit, profecto nescim{us}. Ne{que} n. quod videm{us} nunquā, nescire esse ducimus turpe, &c. Advers. Gentes. l. 3. p. 162. to 112. See l. 6. p. 185.191. to 206. l. 7. p. 133.134, 135. Arnobius, De Origine Erroris. l. 2. c. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 11, 17, 18, 19. Quae igitur amentia est, aut ea fingere, quae ipsi postmodum timeant, aut timere quae finxerunt. Non ipsa, inquiunt, timemus, sed eos ad quorum imagines ficta; & quorū nominibus consecrata sunt. Nempe ideo timetis, quod eos in caelo esse arbitramini: ne{que} n. si dij sunt aliter fieri potest. Cur igitur oculos in caelum non tollitis, & advocatis eorum nominibus in aperto sacrificia celebratis? Cur ad parietes & ligna & lapides potissi∣mū, quàm illò spectatis, ubi eos esse creditis? Quid sibi templa? quid arae volunt, quid deni{que} ipsa simulachra? quae aut mortuorum aut absentium sunt monimenta. Nam omnium fingendarum similitudinū ratio idirco ab hominibus inventa est, ut posset eorum memoria retineri, qui vel morte substracti, vel absentia fuerant separati. Deo igitur in quorum numero reponemus? Si in mortuorum? quis tam stultus ut colat? Si in absentū, colendi ergo non sunt, si nec vident quae facimus, nec etiā audiunt quae precamur. Si autem dij absentes esse non possent, qui, quoniā divini sunt, in quacun{que} mundi parte fuerint, vident & audiunt universa: supervacua ergo sunt simulacra, illis ubi{que} presentibus, quum stis sit audientium nomina precibus advocare. At enim non nisi praesentes ad imagines suas adsunt, &c. Sed tamen post quā praesto esse Deus ille caepit, jam simulachro ejus opus non est. Quaero enim, si quis imaginem hominis peregre consti∣tuti contemple∣tur saepius, & ex e solatium capiat absentis; num idem sanus esse videatur si eo re∣verso at{que} praesente, in contemplanda imagine perseveret, ea{que} potius quàm ipsius ho∣minis aspectu, frui velit? Minime profecto. Etenim hominis imago necessaria tum vi∣detur quum procul abest, supervacua futura quū praesto est. Dei autem cujus spiritus ac numen ubi{que} diffusum, abesse nun quā pot st, semper uti{que} imago supervacua est. Sed verentur ne omnis eorum religio manis sit & vana, si nihil in praesenti videant quod adorent, & ideo simulacra constituunt, quae quia mortuorū sunt imagines, simi∣lia mortuis sunt, omni enim sensu carent: Dei autem in aeternū viventis vivū & sen∣sibile debet esse simulacrum: quod si a similitudine id nomen accepit, quî possunt ista simulacra Deo similia judicari; quae nec sentiunt, nec moventur? Ita{que} simulachrum Dei non illud est quod digitis hominis ex lapide aut aere, aliave materia fabricatur, sed ipse homo; quoniā & sentit & movetur, & multas magnas{que} actiones habet, &c. Quisquāne igitur tam inept{us} est, ut putet aliquid esse in simulacro Dei, in quo ne ho∣minis quidē quicquā est praeter umbram? Ltant. De Orig. Erroris c. 2. Daemones sunt qui fingere imagines & simulacra docuerunt ut hominū mentes à cultu veri Dei a∣verterent. Ibid c. 17. Quare non est dubium quin religio nulla sit, ubicun{que} simul crū est. Nam si religio ex divinis rebus est, divini autem nihil est nisi in caelestibus rebus: carēt ergo religione simulacra, quia nihil potest esse caeleste in ea re quae fit ex terra, quod quidē de nomine ipso sapienti apparere potest. Quicquid n. simulatur id falsum sit necesse est, nec potest unquam veri nomen accipere quod veritatem uco & imi∣tatione mentitur. Si autem omnis imitatio, non res potissimum seria, sed quasi ludus ac jocus est, non religio in simulacris, sed mimus religionis est. Ibid c. 19. Lactantius,
Simula∣crorū odium commune est omnium qui fidei participes sunt; sed ejus praecipuū quod Arianam infidelitatem similiter at{que} simulachrorū cultum abominabatur. Nam eos qui in creatura numen divinum esse existimarēt, nihilo minora colere at{que} venerati putabat quam qui ex materia simulachra efficiunt, & rectè ac pie ita judicabat. Nam qui creaturam adoat etiami in nomine Christi id facit, simulachrorum cultor est, Christi nomē simulachro imponens. Oratio Funebris de Placilla p. 290.291. See Expla∣natio in Cant. Cantic. p. 359. Gregory Nyssen, Gentiles lignum adorant, quia Dei imaginē putant, sed invisibilis Dei imago non in eo est quod videtur, sed in eo uti{que} quod non vide∣tur. Enar. in Psal. 118. Octon. 10. Tom. 2. p 454. B. Ecclesiae inanes ideas & varias nescit simulacrorū figuras, sed veram novit Trinitatis substantiam. De Fuga Seculi. cap. 5. See Epist. 31. Ambrose, In primo praecepto prohibetur coli aliqua in figmentis hominum Dei si∣militudo; non qua non habet imaginem Deus, sed quia nulla imago e colliebat, nisi illa quae hoc esset quod ipse, nec ipsa pro illo sed cum illo Epist. 2. De Celebratione Paschae. Tom. 9. p. 100. B. Imago autem & similitudo Dei, non est corporis forma sed mentis, descripta ad similitudinem verae imaginis Christi, qui est imago Dei invisi∣bilis. Nos unam veneramu imaginem, quae est imago invisibilis & omnipotentis Dei. Comment in Ezech. l. 1. c. 1 Tom. 4. p. 331. H. & l. 4. c. 16. p. 372. D See Comment. in Esay. cap. 40. Hierom, August. Epist. 119. Enar in Psal. 113. Conio. 2. Credimus etiam quod e∣det ad dextram Dei patris: Necideo tamen quasi humana forma circumscriptum esse Deum patrem arbitrandū est, ut de illo cogitantibus dextrum aut sinistrū latus nimo occurrat; aut id ipsum quod sedere pater dicitur, flexis poplitib{us} fieri putandū est, ne in illud incidamus sa∣crilegium, quo execratur Apostolus eos qui communicaverunt gloriam incorrup∣tibilis Dei in similitudinem corruptibilis hominis. Tale n. simulacrum Deo ne∣fas est Christiano in Templo collocare, multo magis in corde nefarium est, ubi verè est Templum Dei. Augustin. De Fide & Symbolo cap. 7. Tom. 3. pag. 19. See De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae. cap. 24. Augustine
Quod enim corpus intellectui divino simil∣tudinem habebit, cum nec mentis humanae imaginem habere posse cognoscatur? humana n. mens incorporea est atque simplex, corpus autem omne corrup∣tibile atquecompositum. Quare jure, rationalis atque immortalis anima & intel∣lectus ejus imaginem & similitudinem Dei habere dicitur, Immaterialis enim & incorporea, intellectualis, rationalisque per essentiam est, virtutis & sapientiae capax. Quod si humnae animae atque mentis formam & effigiem fingere impossi∣bile est, quoniam nec sensu percipitur: quis adeò stultus erit, ut ligneum simula∣chrum ac effigiem Dei creatoris omnium, similitudinem Dei habere arbitraretur? Natura n. divina omnem materiam & omnia quae percepimus excedit, mente so∣lummodo & sanctis animis intellecta. Figura vero Iovis quae in simulachro con∣spicitur, mortalis viri effigies est, non quae totum hominem, sed pejorem ejus par∣tem imitata, expressit, nullum n. vitae atque animae, vestigium ostendit. Quomo∣do igitur universi Deus, mens{que} omnium creatrix ipse Iupiter rit, qui aut in aer, aut in mortuo bore cernitur? De Praeparatione Evangelij. lib 3. cap. 3. pag. 53. See Ecclesiast. Histor. lib. 7. cap. 18.Eusebius, Inveniigitur velum pendens in foribus ejusdem Ecclesiae tinctum atque depictum, & habens imaginem quasi Christi, vel sancti cujusam, non enim sats memini, cujus imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi contra auctoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, sdi illud, & majus dedi consilium custodibus ejusdem loci, ut pauperem mortuum eo obvolverent & eferrent. Deinceps praecipere, in Ecclesia Christi istiusmodi vel, quae contra religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi. Eiphanius Epist. ad Ioanem Hiersol apud Hieron. Epist. 60: cap. 5 Tom. 1. pag. 211. See Bishop Vshers Answer to the Iesuits challenge. pag. 507. Epiphanius,Cui similitudini similem fecistis Deum? Quid n. erit ei simile & equipollens se aturae, seu ponderis, seu nobi∣litatis ratione? Num enim arte fabri & lignarij, num auri fusorum peritia for∣matus est in imaginem alicujus creaturae? An inquit effictus est, humana imago? Minimè. Nihil enim ei quicquam aequari potest. Deus n. cùm sit, natura & ex se, quia aliud non exiti, omnibus omnino superior est. Cum itaque supra omne est quod factum est, & quod genitum est, deride idolorum effictionem, &c. Cyrillus Alexandr. in Hsaiam. lib. 7. Tom. 1. pag. 276.277. and in Ioan. Evang. lib. 3. cap. 11. pag. 478. Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Adhaec quisnam est, qui invisibilis & corpore vacantis ac cir∣cumscriptionis & figurae expertis Dei simulachrum effingere quat? Extreme itaque dementiae & impietatis fuerit divinum numen fingere ac figurare. At∣qui hinc est quod in veteri estamento mimine tritus ac pervulgatus imaginum usus fuerit: Orthodoxae Fidei. lib. 4. cap. 17. pag. 477. & lib. 1. cap. 4. pag. 251. vid. Ibidem. Dama∣scen,
and See Hilar. De Trinit l. 1. p. 3. & l. 2. p. 7. G. Psal. in Nar. 129 8. p. 303. B. De Trinit. I. 6. pag. 31. Specie & figura caret Deus. Non so∣lum autem sculpturae artis Deus non est similis, sed ne{que} alteri cuiquam humanae cogitatione subijcitur. Theophylact. Enar. in Ioannem. c. 5. p. 248. Chrysost. Hom. 38 in Act. Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 587. C. Athanaius, Contra Gentes Oratio. p. 7. & 10. Contra Sabellij Graegales. p. 48.49. & Quaest. 50. p. 400. Theodoret in Deut Quaest. 4. Nicephorus. Ecclesi. Hist. l. 18. c. 53. See Sedulius, Primasius, Theodoret, Remigius, Beda, Haymo, HRabanus Maurus, Occumenius, Ambrose, Chrysostome, & Alselmus. Com. in Rom. 1.23. & 1 Tim. 6.16. Serenus Marsiliensis apud Greg. Mag. Epist. l. 7. Epist. 109. & l. 9 Epist. 9. Claudius Taurinensis Contra Imagines. l. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 4. pars 1 p. 91. to 118. Amphilochius; in BB. Vshers answer to the Iesuits challenge. p. 506. Centur. Magd. 8. Col. 559.564. & D. Rainolds, De Idololatria. Rom. Ecclesiae. l. 2. c. 2. sect 9. accordingly. other Fathers; together with Quod potest intelligentia solum perspici & conprehendi mente, nec appetit formam quâ cognoscatur, nec figuram admittit, ut imaginem & effigiem Oa∣tio. ad Sanctorum caetum. c 4. apud Eusebium. Tom. 2. p. 300. Constantine the Great, See the Homily against the perill of Idolatry pars 2.3. Centur. 6 Col. 329.375, 707. Centur. 8. Col. 3.12, 41, 33, 37, 531, 535, 558, 559, 560, 561, 665, 544, 545, 622, 623, 377, 274. Cent. 9. Col. 19.22, 24, 351, 352, 353. Constantinus Caballinus, Nicephorus, Stauratius, Philippicus, Anthemius, Theodosius the second, Leo Armenus, Valence, Theodosius the third, Michael Balbus, Theophilus, Charles the Great, with other Emperours; the Councels of Placuit, picturas in Ecclesiâ esse non debere; ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur. Concil. Elib. Can 36. Surius. Tom. 1. p. 365. Eliberis, See the Homily against the perill of Idolatry. part 2.3. BB. Vshers Answer to the Iesuits Challenge. pag. 511. to 514. Carolus Magnus. l. 4. Contra Imagines. Constantinople, Toledo, and Frankford; with sundry Ergo ô stultae Gentiles, cui simile fecistis Deum? Curauro & argento aut rei ali∣cui insensatae? Aut quam imaginem ponetis ei qui illum aliquo modo exprimat qui spiritus est, &c? Cum igiturse incomprehensibilis & immensus sit, dicit san∣ctus, Cui me assimulastis? cur homini, cur volucri, cur serpenti? Et cui me adae∣quastis? cur auro, cur argento? cur alicui creaturae? Haymo Comment. in Isaiam. c. 40. fol. 331.335. See Agabardus de Picturis & Imaginibus. lib. & Lucas Tudensis. l. 2. Adversus Albigenses c. 3. & 20. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 13. pag. 260.272, 273. an excellent discourse against the Images & Pictures of God or the Trinity, where he thus con∣cludes. Imag Deicae Trinitatis, ab hominibus nec debeat, nec possit depingi. See D. Rainolds de Idololatria Rom. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. Popish and Peter Martyr, In Epist. ad Rom. c. 1. p. 54. to 73. Calvin, Instit. l. 1. c. 11. & Com. in Rom. 1.23. & Act. 17.29. See Musculus, Marlorat, Bucer, Bulinger, Aretius, and others Ibid. & in 1 Tim. 6.16. Doctor Wille; Com. on Rom. 1. Contr. 22. p. 95.96. Hexapla in Exod. c. 20. Cōmandement 2. Contr. 4. M. Cartwright on the Rhemish Test. on Act. 17. sect. 4. Heb. 9. s. 4. 1 Ioh. 5. s. 5. Rev. 13. sect. 7. & Mat. 9. s. 9. D. Boyes his Postils. p. 49. Thomas Wilson, his Com. on Rom. 1. Dial. 13. v. 22.23, 24 with others hereafter quoted p. 844.895. Protestant Writers
since, our late renowned His Premo∣nition to all Christian Princes p. 354. Soveraigne King Iames, and our owne Homilies, against the perill of Idolatry, (esta∣blished by 13. Eliz. c. 12. Artic. 35. Act of Parliament, and confirmed by our Ar∣ticles and Canons, as the undoubted Doctrine of our Church, to which all our Clergie subscribe:) doe abso∣lutely condemne,Artic. 35. Ca∣nons 1603. Can. 82.85. as sinfull, idolatrous, and abominable the making of any Image or Picture of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, or of the sacred Trinity, & the erecting of them, of Crucifixes, or such like Pictures in Churches, which like the Alexander Sver{us} Christo Templ facere voluit, umque inter Deos re∣cipere; quod & Hadrianus co∣gitasse fertur, qui Templa in omnibus civi∣taibus sine si∣mulacrs jusse∣rat fieri. AElij Lampridij Seve∣rus. p. 236. Emperor Adrians Temples built for Christ, should be without all Images, or Saints Pictures. So they likewise cōdemned the very See Philo Iudaeus, De Monarchia. l. 1. p. 1099. Iose∣phus Contra Apionem l. 1 p. 858. Clemens Alex. Oratio Adhort. ad Gentes. Cypri∣an, De Idolorū Vanit. p. 264. Tertul. De I∣dololatria. lib. art of making Pictures and Images, as the occasion of Idolatry, together with all Stage-portraitures, Images, Vizards, or representati∣ons of Heathen Idols, &c. as grosse Idolatry, as Antiq. Iudae∣orū. lib. 15. cap. 11. pag. 413. Iose∣phus witnesseth: The selfesame censure is passed against these theatricall Pictures, Vizards, Images, and dis∣guises, by Philo Iudaeus, De Decalogo. lib. pag. 1037. By Tertul De Spectaculis. lib. cap. 23. De Corona Militis. lib. cap. 8.9. & De Idololatria. lib. By Cyprian Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. & lib. 1. Epist. 10. & De Spectac. lib. By Arnobius Ad∣versus Gentes. lib. 7. By Lactantius De Vero Cultu lib. 6. cap. 20. By Augustine, De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 5. to 14. By the 6. Councell of Constantinople. Can. 60.62. (See here pag. 88.69, 583, 584,) By the Synode of Lingres. her, pag. 600. By the Councell of Basil, here pag 601. By the Councell of Toledo, here pag. 603.604. by sundry o∣other for-quoted Councels and Synods. here pag. 606.625, 633, 635, &c. By our owne Statute of 3. Henry 8. cap. 9. against Mummers and Vizards. here pag. 493, 494. By Tostatus in Deut. 22. Quaest. 2. Tom. 2. pars 3. p. 119. B.C. By Polidor Virgil, De Inventoribus Rerum. lib. 5. c. 2. By Ioannis Langhecrucius, De Vita & Honestate Ec∣clesiasticorum. lib. 2. cap. 22. pag. 321.322, 323. By Do∣ctor Rainolds, in his Overthrow of Stage-playes, and by most others who have written either against Stage-playes, vaine fashions, and apparell, or face-painting. Where∣fore
they are certainely unlawfull, as I have formerly proved at large. Act 3. Scene 3. & Act 5. Scene 1.2, 3, 5, 6, 7. on which you may reflect. I shall therefore close this point with that speech of Col. 991.994. recited likewise by Vincentius Spe∣culum. Histor. lib. 28. cap. 96.97. Saint Bernard, in his Apologie to William the Abbot, in his passage against the Omitto ora∣toriorū immē∣as altitdines, immoderatas longitudines, supervacuas latitudines, sumptuosas depolitiones, curio∣sas depictiones; quae dum orantiū in se retorquent aspectum, impediunt & affectū, &c. Quem inquam ex his fructum requirimus? stultorum admirationem an sim∣plicium oblectationem? An quoniam commixti sumus inter Gentes, forte didici∣mus opera eorum, & servimus adhuc sculptilibus eorum? Et ut aperte loquar, an non hoc totum facit avaritia, quae est idolorum servitus, & non requirimus frutum sed datum? Si quaeris, quomodo? miro, inquam modo. Tali quadam arte spargitur oes, ut multiplicetur: expenditur ut augeatur, & effusio copiam parit. Ipso quippe visu sumptuosaru sed mirandarum vanitatum accenduntur homines magis ad offe∣rendum quàm ad adorandum. Sic opes opibus hauriuntur, sic pecunia pecuniam trahit, quia nescio quo pacto, ubi amplius divitiarum cernitur, ibi offertur liben∣tius. Auro tectis reliquijs signantur oculi, & loculi aperiuntur. Ostenditur pulche∣rima forma sancti vel sanctae alicujus, & eo creditur sanctior quo coloratior. Currūt homines ad osculandum, invitantur ad donandum, & magis mirantur pulchra quam venerantur sacra, &c. Quid putas in his omnibus quaeritur, paenitentium com∣punctio, an intuentium admiratio? O vanitas vanitatum! sed non vanior quam insanior. Fulget ecclesia in parietibus, & in pauperibus eget. Suos lapides induit au∣ro, & suos filios nudos deserit. De sumptibus egenorum servitur oculis divitum. In∣veniunt curiosi, quo delectentur, & non inveniunt miseri quo sustententur. Bernard. Ibid. See the Homily against the Perill of Idolatry, and of Adorning and keeping cleane of Churches, accordingly. overcostly building and adorning of Temples, and the setting up of vaine Images and Pictures in Churches, (a thing much condemned by See the Homily against the Perill of Idolatry, accordingly. sundry Fathers, Councels, and Imperiall Christian Constitutions; by all Reformed Churches, and orthodox See Thomas Rogers, his Exposition on the 22. Article. Proposition 3. p. 125.126. accordingly. Protestant Writens, and by 3. Edw. 6. c. 10. 13. Eliz. c. 12.3. Iac. c. 5. the Statutes, Queene Eliz. Injunctions. Injunct. 2.3, 23, 25. and Articles to be inquired of in Visitations. Artic. 2. & 45. Iniunctions, Homilies against the perill of Idolatry. The Homilies of the Right use of the Church, part 2. Homily of the place and time of Prayer. part 2. Homilies, Can. 82. Canons, Archbishop Cranmer who penned the Homilies against the perill of Idolatry. BB. Hooper on the 2. Commandement; and in the Confession of his Faith upon the Creed. Artic. 78. & 87. BB. Latimers Sermon, ad Clerum. fol. 3.11. and his Sermon in the Shrowdes at Pauls. f. 18.21. BB. Ridley, his Treatise in the name of the whole Clergy of England, to King Edward the VI. concerning Images not to be set up, or worshipped in Churches. Mr. Fox his Book of Martyrs. London 1610. p. 1927.1928, 1929, 1930, (See there pag. 116.433, 468, 492, 518, 521, 793, 796, 848, 1000, 1014, 1015, 1181, 1183, & 1940 where we shall see Commissi∣ons both from H. 8. & E. 6. for pulling downe Images out of Churches: which Images were destroyed both at Zuricke & Basil, & condemned by the Martyrs that suffred:) Iohn Bale Cent. Script. Brit. p. 38.79, 80, 566, 648, 55. BB. Alley his Poore mans Library. pars 1. f. 79.80. to which I might adde BB. Iewell, BB. Bison, BB. Abbot, BB. Babington, on the 2. Comandement. BB. Morton, BB. White, BB. Davnate, & others. ancient
and moderne Bishops, & authorized M. Tindall in his Answer to Sir Thomas More p. 270. to 275. and in his Answer to M. Moores 4. Booke. p. 325. D. Barnes his Treatise, that it is against the holy Scripture to honor I∣mages p 339, &c. Iohn Wragton, in his Course and Hunting of the Romish Fox, &c. Iohn Vern his strong battery of the Invocation of Saints. Thomas Beacon his Cate∣chisme. p. 37. to 336. & his Romes Reliques. c. 25 26. D. Cafehils answer to Iohn Mar∣shials Treatise of the Crosse, The Preface. fol. . to 19. & Artc. 3.9, 10. f. 81. to 86. & 164. to 186. being an excellent Treatise against setting up Images in Churches. Dr. Humfries De Vita & morte Iuelli. p. 33. Gualterus Haddon Contra Osorium. l. 1. f. 33. to 37. l. 3. f. 254, 271, 272, 273, 286, 297, 332. D. Sparkes against Albins Epistle to the Reader D Rainolds De Idololatria Rom. Ecclesiae: to whom I might adde D. Fulkes Answer to the Rhemish Testament Act. 17 sect. 5. p. 400.401. 1 Ioh. c. 5. sect. 5. pag. 839. Answer to Martin. c. 3.4. D. Field, D. Crakenthrpe, D. Willet, D. Iohn White, with all our Writers upon the 2. Commandement, who all concur in this; tht Images ought not to be suffered or set up in Churches; to which Assertion every Bishop and Mini∣ster of the Church of England doth subscribe in subscribing to our Articles & Ho∣milies, which affirme the same in positive tearmes: those therefore who defend, or erect Images revolt from their owne subscription, and so ought to be deprived, by the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap. 12. who caused Images to bee taken out of Churches in the first and second yeeres of her Raigne, as Haddon Contra Osor. l. 3. f. 171. & Dr. Fulke in his Answer to Martin. c. 3. sect. 3. p. 36. expresly testifie. Writers of the Church and State of England, who teach, that all Images and Pi∣ctures, especially Crucifixes, with the Images, the Pictures of God the Father, and the sacred Trinity, which to make is grosse Idolatry and superstition, ought wholy to be abolished and cast out of Churches, in which some of late erect thē:) where thus he writes. Caeterum in claustris (I may ay in Spectaculis & theatris) corā legentibus fratribus quid facit illa ridicula monstruositas, mira deformis formositas, ac for∣mosa deformitas? quid ibi immundae simiae, quid feri leones? quid monstruosi Centauri? quid semi-homines? quid maculosae tigrides? quid milites pugnantes? quid venatores tubicinātes? Videas sub uno capite multa corpora, & in uno corpore capita multa. Cernitur hinc in quadrupede cauda serpentis, illinc in pisce caput quadrupedis. bibstia praefert equum, capram trahens retro dimidiam, hic cornutum animal equum gerit posterius. Tam multa deni{que} tam{que} mira diversarum for∣marum ubi{que} varietas apparet, ut magis legere libeat in
marmoribus quam in codicibus, totum{que} diem occupare sin∣gula ista mirando, quam in Dei lege meditando. O vanitas vanitatum! sed non vanior quam insanior. Pro Deo si non pudet ineptiarum; cur vel non piget expensarum. And thus much for the manner of acting Stage-playes. THe 5. thing which makes the profession of a Player and the very acting of Playes unlawfull, is the end for which they are acted, which is double; profit, or pleasure; the first, the end of all common Players: Seneca The∣bais. Act 3. fol. 66. qui praemium incertum petunt certum scelus: the second onely of Academicall and private Actors. To begin with the first. I say it is altogether unlawfull for any to act Playes for gaine or profit sake, or to make a trade  or living of it. First, because the profession of a Player is no lawfull warantable trade of life, but a most infa∣mous lewde ungodly profession, condemned by Pagans, by Christians in all ages, as the See Act 6. Scene 5 p 448. to 500. examples of Plato, Aristotle, the Lacedemonians, Massilienses, and others, who excluded Stage-players their Republikes, and of the See Act 4. Scene 1. Act 6. Scene 5.12, 20 & Act 7. Scene 2.3. Primitive Church and Christians who excommunica∣ted and banishd them the Chuch, together with our owne 22 Henry 8. c. 12 14 Eliz c. 5.39. liz . 4.1. Iac. cap. 7 Statutes, who brand them all for Vagrant Rogues and sturdy Beggers, most plentifully evidence. That therfore which all ages have thus solemnely censured as infamous, xecrable and unchristian, can be no lawfull calling for men to live or gaine by. Besides, the professiō of a Stage-player, See Act 1 2. & Act 8. Scene 7. & Act 8. Scene 2. had its original institution from Pagan Idols and Idolaters: it was originally devoted to Idolatry, to Bacchus, and Heathen Devill-gods: it tends onely to See Act 6. thorowout. Tacit. Annal. l. 14. cap. 2.3. dis∣solutensse and prophanenesse, to nourish idlenesse, vice, and all kinde of wickednesse both in the Actors and Spectators: yea, it makes men professed vassals to the Devill, to maintaine his very works and See here, pag. 42. to 61.561. to 568.Pompes which they have utterly renounced in their baptisme: it tends neither to Gods glory, nor the good of men: needs therefore must it be unlawfull; and so likewise to get money by it. Se∣condly,
Stage-playes in their very best acception are  but See Act 3. Scene 7. & Act 5. Scene 4. vanities or idle recreations, which have no price, no worth or value in them: they cannot therefore bee vendible because they are not valuable. In every law∣full way of gaine or trade, there ought to be Hotoman De Vsuris, c. 2. M Northbrooke against Vaine Playes. p. 44.45. Summa Angelica. Tit. Ludus. BB. Ba∣bington, Beacon, Dod, Perkins, and others on the 8. Com∣mandement. quid pro quo, some worth or other in the thing that is sold, equi∣valent to the price the vendees pay, or else the gaine is fraudulent and sinfull; but there is no value at all in Stage-playes or their action, which are but empty worthlesse vanities; therefore no price ought to bee taken for them. Thirdly, See Act 6. Scene 5. & Act 7. Scene 2.3, 7. See Hostiensis, Summa Ange∣lica. Iacobus De Graffijs. De Ludo & Alea: & Danae∣us de Ludo Aleae. lib. & Alexander A∣lensis. Summa Theologiae. pars 4. Quaest. 24. Artic. 3. sect. 6. neither the Word or Church of God, nor the Lawes and Statutes of any Christian Kingdom (which for the most part condemne al Actors and their lewde profession,) did ever authorize the act∣ing of Playes (no nor yet the Playing at Cards or Dice, or Bowles,) as a lawfull trade and meanes for men to live and gaine by. Yea, the acting of Stage-playes can never be made a lawfull profession, because Playes themselves are but recreations, which must not be turned into professions; recreations being onely to bee used Voluptates cōmendat rari∣or usus. Iuvenal Satyr. 11 p 111. See M. Northbrooke against Vaine Playes & Enterludes, & M. Wheatly his Redemption of time accordingly. rarely, when men are tyred out with honest Studies, callings, and imployments; (as Stage-playes ought to be were they lawfull,) but professions, Gen. 3.17, 19. Exod. 20.9. constantly from day to day. Therefore men cannot act them, to gaine a living by them. Vpon these grounds the See here, p. 32.326. Fathers, Schooolemen, and Canonists teach us; that for men to give their money to Stage-players for their playing, is a very great sinne: Yea, Summa Aurea in lib. 3. Senten. Tract. 7. Quaest. 3. fol. 163. Guillermus Altissiodorensis, Apud Iuonis Decret. pars 11. c. 84. Hierom, Iuo, Speculum Historiale l. 29. c. 41. Vincentius Bellovicensis, Historiae. l. 15. c. 31.32. Olaus Magnus, Repertorij. pars 2. p. 664. Tit. Histrio. Ioannis Bertachinus, De Ludo. Tract. sect. 2. n. 17. in Tractat. Tractar. Tom. 1. fol. 157.158. Stephanus Costa, and Summa Summarum. Tit. Histrio. Iacobus De Graffijs. Decs. Aurearum. lib. 2. cap. 121. divers other certifie us; that, Histrionibus dare est Daemonibus immolare, to give to
Stage-players, is nought else but to sacrifice unto De∣vils: because their profession is unlawfull & Diabolicall too: it being both a sinne for Play-haunters to give, or Players to take any money for their Playes and action. Hence is it that In their Ex∣positions on the 8. Comman∣dement, and in their dis∣courses: De Ludo, & Re∣stitutione, & Satisfactione. most Divines and Casuists informe us, that money gotten by Dice, by Cards, by acting Playes, or any unlawfull profession whatsoever, is plaine theft, and that Dicers and Players are bound to restore their gaines in case they are able, or else to distribute it to the poore. Hence Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 10. Saint Cyprian (and out of him De Vita & Honestate Ec∣clesiast. lib. 2. cap. 22. Ioannes Langhecru∣cius, and Decretalium. pars 11. cap. 83. Iuo Carnotensis) informes us, that Players gaines doe but seperate them from the Society of the Saints in Heaven, and fat them up for Hell: for thus he writes of a Player who pretended poverty and necessity to continue in his acting; Quod si penuriam talis & ne∣cessitatem paupertatis obtendit, potest inter caeteros qui ali∣mentis Ecclesiae sustinentur, huius quo{que} necessit as adjuvari, si tamen contentus sit frugalioribus & innocentibus cibis. Nec putet salario se esse redimendum ut à peccatis cesset, quando hoc non nobis sed sibi praestet. Caeterum quando vult inde quaerat. Nota. Qualis quaestus est qui de convivio Abrahae, Isaac, & Iacob & homines rapuit, & male ac perniciose in seculo saginatos ad aeternae famis ac sitis supplicia deducit? Et ideo quantum potes, eum à pravitate ac dedecore, ad vitam innocentia, at{que} ad spem vitae suae revoca, ut sit con∣tentus ecclesiae sumptibus parcioribus quidem, sed salutari∣bus. Quod si illic ecclesia non sufficit ut labor antibus prae∣stentur alimenta, poterit se ad nos transferre, & hic quod sibi ad victum at{que} vestitum necessarium fuerit, accipere, nec alios extra eoclesiam mortalia docere, sed ipse in ecclesia salutaria discere. The acting therefore of Playes for hire, gaine, or profit sake (which ought not to bee the end of any mans lawfull calling, but 1 Cor. 10.31. Iohn 17.4. onely Gods glory and the good of men, which Playes and Actors never aime at:) must certainely bee unlawfull; Which I would wish our Players and Play-haunters to consider. Se∣condly, as it is unlawfull to act Playes for profit, so like∣wise
for pleasure sake, See Act 5. Scene 11. because this life is no life of car∣nall joy and jollity, but of weeping and mourning for our owne and other sinnes, and because carnall pleasures dampe, or quite extinguish all spirituall heavenly joyes, obdurate mens hearts, stupifie their consciences, withdraw their mindes and thoughts from God and better things, Matth. 24.38 39. Luk. 21.34. 1 Thes. 5.3. lullmen fast a sleepe in dangerous security, so that they never seri∣ously thinke either of their sinnes or latter ends, as is evident by many Players and Play-haunters lives, who are so in∣toxicated, so stupified with these Syrenian Enterludes, that they never seriously thinke of sinne, of God, of Heaven, or Hell, or of the meanes of grace. But be∣cause I have beene more copious in this theame before, I shall here briefely passe it over now, referring you to Part 1. Act 2. & Act 5. Scene 11. for fuller satisaction. THe 6. and last ground of the unlawfulnesse of acting  Playes is the evil fruits that issue from it, both to the Spectators (of which I have at large discoursed, Part 1. Act 6. thorowout,) and likewise to the Actors, which I shal here onely name. As first, it makes the Actors guilty of many sinnes; to wit, of vaine, idle, ribaldrous, and blasphemous words; of light, lascivious, wanton gestures and actions; losse of time, hypocrisie, effeminacy im∣pdency, theft, lust, with sundry other sinnes, which they cannot avoyd: Secondly, it ingenerates in them a perpetual habit of vanity, effeminacy, idlenesse, whore∣dome adultery, and those other vices which they daily act: Lactantius De Vero Cul∣tu. c. 20. & Cy∣prian De Spe∣ctac. lib. Discunt enim facere dum assuescunt agere, & simula∣tis erudiuntur ad vera, as Lactantius and Cyprian truely write. Whence we see for the most part in all our com∣mon Actors the reall practise of all those sinnes, and villanies which they act in sport; they being (as Noae in Au∣gust. De Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 13. Lu∣dovicus Vives, Lexicon Iu∣ridicum. Tit. Histrio. Iohn Calvin the Civilian, and Lexicon Iu∣ris Civilis. Tit. Histrio. Iaco∣bus Spielegius write) Perditissimis moribus, & deploratae nequitiei; men of most lewde, most dissolute behaviour, and most deplorable desperate wickednesse, as I have
See here, Act 4. Scene 1. elsewhere largely proved. And how can it bee other∣wise? Horat. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 2. pag. 243. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu, being as true as it is ancient. When Children acile inge∣nia adolescen∣tium à recta honestaque via ad luxum at{que} voluptates di∣labuntur. Hero∣dian Hist. lib. 1. pag. 4. Youthes and others, shall be trained up either in Vni∣versities, Schooles, or Play-houses, to Play effeminate a∣morous wanton Strumpets parts; to act the parts of Wooers, Lovers, Bawdes, Panders, Whore-masters, Incestuous persons, Sodomites, Adulterers, Cheaters, Roarers, Blaspemers, Paricides, and the like: when they shall be instructed. Cypian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Magisterio impudicae artis ge∣stus quo{que}, turpes & molles & muliebres exponere, as Saint Cyprian phraseth it, to expresse effeminate, womanish, wanton, dishonest mimicall gestures, by the tutorship of an unchast art; to court Whores and Strumpets, to sol∣licit the chastity and circumvent the modesty of others; to contrive, to plot and execute any villany with grea∣test secrecy and security; to act any sinnes or wicked∣nesse to the life, as if they were really performed; when they shall have their mindes, their memories, and mouthes full fraught with Nil dictu fae∣dum visu{que} haec limina tangat. Intra quae pr est. Iuvenal. Sa∣tyr. 14 p. 126. amorous ribaldrous pander∣ly Histories, Pastorals, Iests, discourses, and witty, though filthy obscenities from day to day; (the case of all our common Actors; especially those who have beene trained up to acting from their youth;) no wonder if we discover a Act 4. Scene 1. His enim at{que} hujusmo∣di figmentis, & mendacijs dul∣cioribus cor∣rumpuntur in∣genia puerorū; & eisdem fabu∣lis inhaerenti∣b{us}, adus{que} sum∣mae aetatis ro∣buradolescunt, & miseri con∣senescūt. Min. Felix. Octa. p. 70 whole grove of all these notorious acted sinnes and villanies budding forth continually in their un∣godly lives; insomuch that those who in their yonger dayes represented other mens vices onely, fall shortly after to act their owne, the better to inable them to personate other mens of the selfesame kinde; he being best able to play the sinnes of others, who hath oft∣times perpetrated the very selfesame crimes himselfe. Whnce commonly it comes to passe, that the eminen∣est Actors are the most lewde companions. Ioannis Sa∣resberiensis De Nugis Curia∣lium. l. 1. c. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 346. B. Et nonne satis improbata est cujus{que} artis exercitatio, quâ quanto quis{que} doctior tanto nequior? Thirdly, it makes men vaine, lascivious, prophane and scurrilous in their dis∣courses;
fantasticall and new-fangled in their haire and apparell; mimicall, antique, histrionicall in their gate, their gestures, complements and behaviours: prodigall in their expences, impudent and shamelesse in their carriage; false and trecherous in their dea∣lings; malicious, bloody and revengefull in their mides; atheisticall, gracelesse, unchaste, deboist and dissolute in their lives; and for the most part impeni∣tent and desperate in their deathes; according to that true rule of the famous Roman Orator; Cicero Ora∣tio: pro P. Quinctio. pag. 224. B. Mors honesta saepe vitam quo{que} turpem exornat; vita turpis ne morti quidem honestae locum relinquit. These and many such like evils are the fruits of Play-acting as too many an∣cient and moderne visible examples witnesse. Fourthly, it nourisheth men up in vanity and idlenesse, in which they See Act 6. Scene 1. waste their precious time which should be husban∣ded, redeemed to farre better purposes. For though our common Players be ever acting, yet they are alwayes idle and make thousands idle to besides themselves; Horum enim non otiosa vita est dicenda, sed desidiosa occu∣patio Nam de illis nemo dubitabit, quin operose nihil agant: as De Brevitate Vitae. c. 11.12, 13. Seneca wittily decants. And so great is our popu∣lar Stage-players (that I say not our ordinary Play-haunters) idlenesse; quod totam vitam ordinant adlu∣dendum, as Secunda se∣cundae. Quaest. 168. Artic. 3. Aquinas writes of them: they even spend thir whole lives in playing: whence Epistle 12. to Lambert. Marcus Aurelius long agone, and our owne 22. Henry 8. c. 12.14. Eliz. c. 5.39. Eliz. c. 4.1. Iac. c. 7. Statutes since, have ranked Players among the number of idle vagrant Truants, Rogues, and Vgabonds, which ought severely to be punished and then set to some honest worke, o get their livings; their acting being nought else but idlenesse in Gods, in mens account. And alas what a poore reward must they expect from God at last, when Psal. 62.12. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 22.12. he shall remunerate every man according to his workes, who have never wrought, but oney loytered and played all their dayes? Lastly, the acting of Stage-playes See Cyprian de hbitu Vir∣ginum, & Ter∣tullian de Cul∣tu Faeminarū. accordingly. inthrals the Actors both in the guilt, the punishment of all those sinnes which their Playes or
action occasion in the Spectators. Which being so many in number, so great in quality as experience manifests them to bee, what Actors conscience is able to stand under their guilt, their curse and condemnation, either in this life or in the day of judgement, when they shall all be charged on his soule? Lastly, the acting of Stage-playes, as it See Act 4. Scene 1. & here part 2. Act 2. Scene 1. of right excludes all Actors, both from the priviledges of the Common-weale, from the Church, the Sacraments, and society of the faithfull here, and drawes a perpetuall infamy upon their persons; o it certainely See Act 6. Scene 12.19, 20. de∣bars them from entring into Heaven, and brings downe an eternall condemnation on their soules and bodies hereafter, if they repent not in time, those being bound over to the judgement of the great generall Assises and eternall tor∣ments even in Heaven who are thus Iohn 20.23. Matth. 16.19. bound and justly cen∣sured by the Lawes and Edicts of the Church or State on earth. Hence was it, See Act 6. Scene 20. & Act 7. Scene 2.3. that divers Players and Play-poets in the Primitive Church, and since, renounced their profes∣sions, as altogether incompatible either with Christianity or salvation; yea hence a late English Player some two yeeres since, falling mortally sicke at the City of Bathe, whether he came o act; being deepely wounded in conscience, and almost driven to despaire with the sad and serious consideration of his lewde infernall pro∣fession, lying upon his death-bed ready to breath out his soule; adjured his sonne whom hee had trained up to Play-acting, with many bitterteares and imprecations, as he tendred the everlasting happinesse of his soule, to abjure and forsake his ungodly profession, which would but inthrall him to the Devils vassalage for the present, and plunge him deeper into Hell at last. Such are the dismall execrable soule-condemning fruits of Play-acting; the profession therefore of a common Player, and the personating of theatricall Enterludes, must needs be unlawfull even in this respect. And thus much for the second Corolary; That the profession of a Stage-player, and the acting of Stage-playes is infamous, yea sinfull and unlawfull unto Christians.
ACTVS 3. I Now proceed to the 3. Consectary; That it is a sin∣full, shamefull,That it is un∣lawfull to be a Spectator of Stage-playes. and unlawfull thing for any Christi∣ans to be Spectators, frequenters of Playes or Play-hou∣ses. In which I shall be very compendious, because I have so largely manifested it in the first part of this dis∣course. Now the reasons of the unlawfulnesse of be∣holding Stage-playes, are briefely these. First, because  Playes themselves are evill, and the appearances, the occasions of evill; See 1 Thes. 5.22. Rom. 1.32. & 12.9. therefore the beholding of them must bee such: Secondly, See Rom. 12.17. 1 Cor. 10.31, 32. Phil. 4.8 & Act 7. tho∣rowout. because it hath alwayes beene a scandalous, infamous and dishonest thing both among Christians and Pagans to resort to Stage-playes, and a thing of ill report: Thirdly, because it is See here, pag. 42. to 61.522. to 525.561. to 567. contrary to our Christian vow in baptisme, to forsake the Devill and all his workes, the pompes and vanities of this wicked world and all the sinfull lusts of the flesh, of which Stage-playes are not the meanest: Fourthly, because See here pag. 409.417, 418. it gives ill ex∣ample to others, and maintaines, and hardens Stage-players in their ungodly profession, which else they would give over, were there no Spectators to encourage or reward them. Fiftly, because it is an apparant occasion of many great sinnes and mischiefes; as See Part 1. Act 6. thorow∣out. losse of time, prodigality, effe∣minacy, whoredome, adultery, unchaste desires, lustfull speculations, luxury, drunkennesse, prophanenesse, hea∣thenisme, atheisme, blaspemy, scurrility, theft, murther, duels, fantastiquenesse, cheating, idle discourses, wanton ge∣stures and complements, vaine fashions, hatred of grace, of holinesse, and all holy men, acquaintance with lewde companions, the greatest enemies to mens salvation; and a
world of such like sinnes and mischiefes, as I have formerly  proved at large, Act 6. thorowout. Sixtly, because it See Act 6. Scene 12. with-drawes mens mindes and thoughts from God and from his service unto vanity; and indisposeth them to all holy duties, making all Gods holy ordinances ineffectuall to  their soules. Sevethly, because it See Act 6. Scene 3 4, 5. tends onely to satisfie mens leshly lusts which warre against their soles; men be∣ing carried alwayes to the Play-house by the sifull carnall suggestions of the flesh; or by the ollicitations of lewde companions; but never by the Dictate, the guidance of Gods holy Spirit or Word, Psal 119.9. Psal. 73.24. Rom 8.1, 14, 15. Gal 5.16, 18, 25. c. 6.16. by which all Christians must be wholy guided, even in all their actions. Eightly, because all Christians ought to turne away their eyes from beholding vanity. Psal. 119.37. (a text See here, pag. 52.547, 548. applyed by the Fathers unto Stage-playes:) and what greater, what worser vanities can men behold, then th cting of las∣civious  Enterludes? Ninthly, because Stage-playes are See part 1. Act 1.2. but Pagan Heathenish pastimes, yea the ordinary recrea∣tions of Devill-Idols, of Idolatrous voluptuous Pagans, whose pleasures and sports no Christians ought to pra∣ctise.  Lastly, because the Act 7. Scene 1. to 7. & Act 6. Scene 1. to 20. Primitive Church and Saints of God, together with the very best of Christians, of Pagans in all places, all ages, have constantly abandoned the be∣holding of Stage-playes themselves, and condemned it in o∣thers, the very worst of Pagans onely, or men unworthy the name of Christians, and few or none but such alone affoord∣ing them their presence, as the fore-quoted Authorities plentifully evidence. Act 4. Scene 1.2. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5. & Act 7. Scene 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Which severall reasons with all the rest that I have formerly produced against Stage-playes in the first part of this Play-con∣demning Treatise, will be a suficient conviction of the unlawfulnesse of beholding, of frequenting Stage-playes, Nusquam enim & nun∣quā excusatur quod Deus damnat, nus∣qum & nun∣quam licet, quod semper & ubi{que} non li∣cet. Tertul. De Specta c. 20. as well in private houses, as in publike Theaters: Which should cause all Christians, all Play-haunters to abandon Stage-playes, as all the fore-alleaged Fathers, Councels, and Authors doe advise them; and that espe∣cially
upon Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes, on which Stage-playes and dancing are especially prohibited by this pious Decree of Pope Iuo Carno∣tensis. Decret. pars 11. c. 77. fol. 162. & pars 4. cap. 13. pag. 117. Eugenius c. 35. with which I shall cloze up this Act. Ne mulieres festis diebus vanis ludis vacent. Sunt quidem & maxime mulieres, quifestis ac sacris diebus, at{que} sanctorum natalicijs, quibus debent Deo vacare, non delectantur ad ecclesiam venire, sed balando ac verba turpia deantando, ac choreas ducendo, similitudinem Paganorū peragendo advenire procurant. Tales enim si cum minoribus veniunt ad ecclesiam, cum majoribus peccatis re∣vertuntur. In tali enim facto debet unusquis{que} Sacrdos diligentissime populum admonere, ut pro sola oratione his die∣bus ad ecclesiam recurrant, quia ipsi qui talia agunt, non so∣lum se perdunt, sed etiam alios dperire attendunt.Nota. Die au∣tem Dominica nihil aliud àgendum est, nisi Deo vacandum: nulla operatio in die illa honesta comperiatur, nisi tantum hymnis & psalmis, & canticis spiritualibus dies illa transeatur. Which I would wish all grosse prophaners of this sacred Day now seriously to consider. ACTVS 4. SCENA PRIMA. HAving thus run over these three Corollaries of the unlawfulnesse of penning, acting and behold∣ing Stage-playes; I come now to answer such Objecti∣ons as may bee made against them; especially against the unlawfulnesse of acting & beholding Stage-playes. The arguments (or pretences rather) for the acting of Stage-playes (which I shall first reply to) are these: First, it is lawfull to read a Play; therefore to pen,Object 1. to act, or see it acted. To this I answer first;Answ. 1. that the obscenity, ribaldry, amorousnesse, heathenishnesse, and prophanesse of most Play-bookes, Arcadiaes, and fained Histories that are
now so much in admiration, is such, that it is not law∣full for any (especially for Children, Youthes, or those of the female ex, who take most pleasure in them) so much as once to read them, for feare they should in∣flame their lusts, and draw them on to actuall lewd∣nesse, and prophanesse. Hence Homil. in Cantit. Cant. apud Hieroni∣mi opera. Tom. 8. pag. 122. and in his owne Workes. Tom. 2. fol. 68. Origen, Proaemium in Ezechiel. Tom. 4. p. 330. D. Hierom and Theodoret Interp. in Can∣ticum. Cantic. Tom. 1. p. 215. Philonis Car∣pathiorum E∣piscopi in Can∣tica. Cant. In∣terpr. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 4. p. 559. E. Pro∣sper Aquit. l. 3. De Vita Con∣templ. c. 6. Ma∣phaeus Vegius, De Perseve∣rantia Religio∣nis. lib. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 929. G. See HRabanus Maurus, Lyra, Tostatus, Hugo Cardinalis, Os∣ander, and others, who have written upon the Canticles, accordingly. others informe us, that in ancient times Children and Youthes among the Iewes were not permitted to read the Booke of Canticles before they came to the age of 30. yeeres, for feare they should draw those spirituall love passages to a carnall sence, and make them instruments to inflame their lusts. Vpon which ground Homil. 1. in Cant. Cantic. See Philo Carpath. Episco. in Cant Cantic. accordingly. Origen adviseth all carnall persons, and those who are prone to lust, to forbeare the reading of this heavenly Song of Songs. Si enim aliquis ac∣cesserit, qui secundum carnem tantummodo vir est, huic tali non parum ex hac Scriptura discriminis periculi{que} nascetur. Audire enim purè & castis auribus amoris nomina nesci∣es, ab interiori homine ad exteriorem & carnalem virum, omnem deflectat auditum, & à spiritu convertetur ad car∣nem: nutriet{que} in semetipso concupiscentias carnales, & c∣casione divinae Scripturae commoveri, & incitari videbitur ad libidinem carnis. Ob hoc ergo mneo & consilium do, omni qui nondum carnis & sanguinis molestijs caret, ne{que} ab affectu naturae materialis abscedit, ut à lectione libelli hujus, eorum{que} quae in eo dicentur, penitus temperet. Aiunt enim observari etiā apud Hebraeos, quod nisi quis ad aetatem perfectam maturam{que} pervenerit, libellum hunc ne quidem in manibus tenere permittatur. If Children, yong men, and carnall persons then upon this ground, are thus ad∣vised to refraine the reading of this sacred canonicall Booke of Spirituall love expressions betweene Christ and his beloved Church: Ma∣peus Vegius, De Perseverant. Relig. lib. 5. pag. 927. Ne sub recordatione sancta∣rum faeminarum, &c. qu ibi nominantur, noxiae titulatio∣nis stimulus excitaretur, &c. How much more then ought
they to forbeare the reading of lascivious amorous scurrilous Play-bookes, Histories, and Arcadiaes; there being no women, no youthes so exactly chaste, which may not easily be corrupted by them, and even inflamed unto fury with strange and monstrous lusts; Neque vero machina quae∣vis ad oppug∣nandum, cùm matronarum pudicitiā, um virginum ac viduarum casti∣moniam validi∣or, quam lectio lascivae histo∣riae & Poesis: nulla tàm bo∣nae indolis fae∣mina, quae ha ipsa non cor∣rumpatur, mi∣rum{que} putarem si aliqua reperi∣atur, aut virgo aut mulier, tam exactae castita∣ti sive pudici∣ti, quae ejus∣modi lectioni∣bus & historijs peregrina libi∣dine non sape ad furorem us{que} accena∣tur. De Vanit. Scient. cap. 64. since there is no stronger engine to assault and vanquish the chastity of ny Maetron, Girle or Widdow, of any male or female what∣soever, then these amoos Play-poets Poems and Histo∣ries, as Agrippa in his discourse of Bawdery, hath truely informed us. At{que} tamen (writes hee) quae in his libris plurimum edocta puella est, quae{que} horum sit jacere dicteria, & ex horum disciplina cum procis in multas horas facunde confabulari, haec demum est probè aulica. Hence Clemens Romanus Constit. Apostol lib. 1. cap. 8. & Carolus Bovius in his Scholia upon the same place. Ib. p. 125. Nazianzen de Recta Educatione ad Selucum. pag. 1063. Basil, de Le∣gendis libris Gentilium Oratio. Tertullian De Idololatria. lib. cap. 18. to 20. Ambrose in Evangelium Lucae. lib. 1. vers. 1. Hierom. Epist. 22. cap 13. & Epist. 146. to Dama∣sus. Lactantius de Falsa Religioue. cap. 12.15. Augustine De Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 1.8. & Confessionum. lib. 1. cap. 15.16. Isiodor Hispalensis De Summo bono. lib. 3. cap. 13. Prosper Aquittanicus, De Vita Contemplativa. c. 6. Theo∣doret in Cant. Cantic. Tom. 1. pag 215. Isiodor Pelusiota. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 62.63. Gregory the first. Epist. l. 9. Epist. 48. Iuo Carnotensis. Decret. pars 4. cap. 160. to 169. Gra∣tian Distintio. 86. The 4. Councell of Carthage. Cn. 16. The Councell of Colen under Adolphus. Anno 1549. Sy∣nodus Mechlinienses apud Ioannem Langhecrucium, De Vita & Honestate Ecclesiast lib. 2. cap. 22. pag. 321. De Institutione. Iuventutis. Can. 3. The Councell of Triers. Anno 1540. Cap. De Scolis. Surius. Tom. 4. Concil. pag. 838.890. Apud Bo∣chllum De∣crta Eccles. Gal. lib. 1. Tt. 10. cap. 3.4.5. pag. 95. The Synod of Towres. Anno 1583. The Councell of Burdeaux. 1582. The Synod of Rothomagium. An. 1581. Franciscus Zphyrus in his Epistle to Simon and Nicholas prefixed to Tertullians Apologie. Gorgius Fabritius, his Epistle to the Duke of Saxony. Agrippa De
Vanitate Scientiarum. lib. cap. 64. & 71. Lodovicus Vives, De Tradendis Disciplinis. lib. 3. pag. 288.289. Episcopus Chemnensis, Onus Ecclesiae. cap. 18. sect. 8.9, 10, 11. Osorius De Sunt enim quidē poëtae pe∣tulātes, obscae∣ni, molles, effae∣minati lascivis & impuris car∣minib{us} animos à in∣dustria, ad libi∣dinem & igna∣viā turpiter a∣vocantes, qui quidē quo dul∣ciores sunt, eò pej{us} nocent, & tanquā Syrenes quaedā omnib{us}, qui aures illis praebent, perni∣ciem & interitū moliuntur. In rebus enim tur∣pibus ille capi∣talior est qui majus ingeniū adhibet, quod in poetis valde perspicitur: concinnū enim & eligans car∣men libenter legim{us} & edis∣cim{us}. Facilime igitur lascivi carminis vene∣nū in animos influit, & eligantiae suavitate conditum, prius interitum dignitati affert, quàm ali∣quod remedium adhiberi possit, &c. Omnes igitur Poetae qui non honestatem, sed turpitudinem mollibus & lascivis carminibus exprimunt, non ab aula tantum regia, sed à totius patriae finibus exterminandi & eijciendi sunt, &c. Ibidem. Regum Instit. lib. 4. pag. 120.121 Ma∣pheus Vegius De Educatione Liberorum. lib. 2. cap. 18. lib. 3 cap. 1.2. & De Perseverantia Religionis. lib. 5. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 15. pag. 929.930. D. Humphries of true Nobility. Booke 2. D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 122.123. Thomas Beacon, BB. Babington, BB. Hooper, Ioannis Nyder, M. Perkins, Dod, Elton, Lake, Downeham, Williams, and all other Expositors on the 7. Comman∣dement, together with most Commentators on Ephes. 5.2, 3, 4. have expresly condemned and prohibited Christians to pen, to print, to sell, to read, or Schoole-masters and others to teach any amorous wanton Play-bookes, Histories, or Heathen Authors, especially Ovids wanton Epistles and Bookes of love; Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Martiall, the Comedies of Plautus, Terence, and other such amorous Bookes savoring either of Pagan Gods, of ethnicke rites and ceremonies, or of scurrility, amorousnesse & prophanesse; as their alleaged places will most amply testifie to such who shall peruse them at their leisure: the reason of which is thus expressed by Isiodor Hispalensis, Iuo Carnotensis, & Gratian, Ideo prohibetur Christianis legere figmenta poetarum, quia per oblectamenta fabularum mentem nimis excitent ad incentiva libidinum. Non enim thura solum offerendo daemonibus immolatur, sed etiam eorum dicta li∣bentius capiendo. The penning and reading of all amo∣rous Bookes was so execrable in the Primitive times, how ever they are much admired now, that Nicephorus Callistus. Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 12. cap. 34. Col. 757. Helido∣rus Bishop of Trica was deprived of his Bishopricke by a Provinciall Synod, for those wanton amorous Bookes he had
written in his youth, his bookes being likewis awarded to the fire to be burnt (though they are yet applauded and read by many amorous persons) quia lectione eorum juvenes multi in periculū conijcerentur: because divers yong men by reading of them might bee corrupted and entised unto lewdnesse; answerable to which memorable pious act are these Constitutions of the Councell of Burdeaux. An. 1582. and of the Synod of Towres. Anno 1583. well worth our observation. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. lib. 1. Tit. 10. cap 3.4, 5.Quia multi à vera fide aber∣rantes contra professionem, etiam consultò gravius peccant, &c. Prohibet haec Synodus, ne libri magicae artis, vel ad Nota. lasciviam & luxum provocantes imprimantur, vendantur, legantur, aut retineantur omnino; jubet{que} sicut repertifu∣rint comburantur, sub ejusdem Anathematis paena quam ipso facto incurrunt, qui minime paruerint. Moneantur e∣tiam saepissime fideles Christiani à suis Parochis & confessa∣rijs ut fugiant, tanquam virus mortiferum, lectionem libro∣rum quorumcum{que}, qui vel ad artes magicas pertinent, vel obscaenas & impias narrationes continent: eos{que} ut olim tem∣pore Acts 19.19. Apostolorum factum legimus, comburant. Yea, Maffaeus in Vita Ignatij. lib. 4. cap. 8. pag. 432. Ignatius Loyola, the Father of the Iesuits, was so precise in this particular; That hee forbade the reading of Terence in Schooles to Children and Youthes, before his obscenities were expunged, lest he should more corrupt their manners by his wantonnesse, then by his Latine helpe their wits. And AEneas Sylvius, afterwards Pope Pius the second, in his Opera. Basi∣leae. 1551. pag. 984. Tractat, De Liberorum Educatione, Dedicated to Ldislaus King of Hungary and Bohemia; discoursing what Authors and Poets are to be red to Children; resolves it thus. Ovidius ubi{que} tristis, ubi{que} dulcis est, in pleris{que} tamen locis nimium lascivus. Horatius sive fuit multae eloquentiae, &c. sunt tamen in eo quaedam quae tibi nec legere voluerim nec interpraetari. Martialis perniciosus, quamvis floridus & ornatus, ita ta∣men spinis densus est, ut legi rosas abs{que} punctione non sinat. Elegiam qui scribunt omnes puero negari debent; nimium enim sunt molles Tibullus, Propertius, Caullus, & quae
translata est apud nos, Sapho, raro nam{que} non amatoria scri∣bunt, desertos{que} conqueruntur amores. Amoveantur igitur, &c. Animadvertere etiam praeceptorem oprtet dum tibi comaedos tragaedos{que} legit, ne quid vitij persuadere videatur. And in his 359. Epitle pag. 869.870, Where hee re∣pents him seriously of that amorous Treatise which he had penned in his youth, he writes thus to our present purpose. Tractatum de amore olim sensu pariter{que} aetate juvenes cum nos scripsisse recolimus, paenitentia immodica pudor{que} ac maeror animum nostrum vehementer excruciant: quippe qui sciamus qui{que} protestati expresse fuimus, duo contineri in eo libello, pertam videlicet, sed heu lasciviam nimis prurientem{que} amoris historiam, & morale quod eam consequitur, edificans dogma. Quorum primum fatuos at{que} errantes video sectari Nota. quam plurimos, Alterum heu dolor, pene nullos. Ita impravatum est at{que} obfuscatum infaelix mortalium genus. De amore igitur quae scripsimus olim juvenes, contemnite ô mortales at{que} respuite; sequimini quae nunc dicimus, & seni magi quam juven credite. Nec privatum hominem plures facite quàm Pontificem: AE∣neam reijcite, Pium suscipite, &c. A passage which plainely informes us, that amorous Playes and Poems though intermixed with grave Sentences and Morals, are dangerous to be read or penned, because more will be corrupted by their amorousnesse, then instructed or edified by their Morals, as daily experience too well proves. If these authorities of Christians will not suf∣ficiently convince us of the danger, te unlawfulnesse of reading amorous Bookes and Playes, the most assidu∣ous studies of this our idle wanton age; consider then that See here, pag. 448. Plato, a Heathen Philosopher, banished all Play-poets, and their Poems out of his Common-wealth; that See here, pag. 455.456 457. the Lacedemonians, Massilienses, and at last the Athe∣nians to, prohibited and suppressed all Playes and Play-poems, not suffring them to bee read or acted: See here, pag. 448.449, 450. that Ari∣stotle, Plutarch, and Quintilian expresly condemned the rea∣ding of wanton, amorous, fabulous, obscene lascivious Poems
and Writers; that Ovid Tristiū. l. 1.2. Manutius in Vita Ovidij See Sabellicus, Zonaras, Op∣meerus Chro∣nicon Chronic. in Vita Ovidij & Augusti. accordingly. Augustus banished Ovid for his obscene, and pnderly Bookes of love; and that See here, pag. 452.453, 454. Ovid himselfe disswaded men very seriously from reding his owne or other mens wanton Bookes and Poems, as being apt to inflame mens lusts, and to draw them on to whoredome, adultery, effemi∣nacy, scurrility, and all kinde of beastly lewdnesse. And can Christians then approve or justifie the delightfull reading and revolving (that I say not the penning, stu∣dying, Ovids Art of Love, and Ari∣stotles Pro∣blems are tran∣slated into En∣glish, & a new impression of them vented almost every yeere. printing and venting) of such lewde amorous Bookes and Playes, which these very Heathen Authors have condemned, and so prove farre worse then Pa∣gans? I shall therefore cloze up this first Reply to this Objection with the words of learned reverend George Alley, (Bishop of Exeter, in the second yeere of Queene Elizabeths Raigne,) against the reading, writing, and Printing of wanton Bookes and Playes. In his Poore mans Library, London 1571. Cum gratia & privilegio re∣giae Majesta∣tis. part 1. Mis∣cellanea. 6. Praelectio se∣cunda. fol. 46.47, 48. It is to be lamented, that not onely in the time of the idolatrous and superstitious Church, but even in this time also lascivious impur, wanton Bookes, pearce into many mens houses and hands. Alas what doth such kinde of Bookes worke and bring with them? Forsooth nothing else but fire, even the burning flames of an unchaste minde, the brands of pleasure, the coles of filthinesse; the fire I say, that doth consume, devoure, and roote out all the nourishments of vertue, the fire I say, which is a proeme and entrance into the eternall fire of Hell. What is so expedient unto a Common-wealth as not to suffer witches to live? for so the Lord comman∣ded by his servant Exod. 22.18 Moses. And (I pray you) be not they worse then an hundred Witches, which take mens senses from them? not with magicall delusions, but with the en∣chantments of dame Venus, and as it were to give them Circes cup to drinke of, and so of men to make them beasts. What punishment deserve they as either I would our Play-poets and Play-printers would consi∣der this. make or print such unsavory Bookes; truely I would wish them the same re∣ward wherewith AElij Lampridij, Alexander Severus. pag. 230. See Eutropius and Grimston in his life. Alexander Severus recompenced his
very familiar Vetronius Turinus, ut fumo videlicet pe∣reant qui fumum vendunt, that they perish with smoke who sell smoke. And what other things doe these set forth to sale, but smoke, ready to breake out into flame? For, that certaine persons bequeath themselves wholy to the reading of such lascivious and wanton Bookes, who knoweth not, that thereof commeth the first preparative of the minde, that when any one sparke of fire (be it never so little) falls into the tinder of Lady Venus, suddenly it is set on fire as towe or flaxe. Many doe read the verses which Lycoris the Strumpet, the Paramour of Gallus the Poet did read, and the verses which Corynna mentioned in Ovid, and which Neaera did read.Objection. It will perchance be replyed, that they doe read them, either for the increase of knowledge, or to drive away idlenesse. I answer,Answer. If any doe salute Venus, but a limine, as they say, that is, a farre off, as it wer in the en∣trie, what kindling and flames, I pray you, will ensue there∣of when the coles bee once stirred? Note this well. It is to be feared that no small number of them who professe Christianity, be in this respect a great deale worse then the Heathen. The people called See here, pag. 455.456. Massilienses, before they knew Christ, yea, or heard whether there were a Christ, but were very Pagans, and sacrificers to Idols, yet were knowne to all the world to be of such pure and uncrrupt manners, that the manners of the Massilienses (as Plautus testifieth) are commonly counted the best and most approoved manners of all others. These among many other good orders of their well nurtu∣red City made a severe law, that there should be no Comedy played within their City, for the argument for the most part of such Playes, did containe the acts of dissolute and wan∣ton love. They had also within their City (about 613. yeeres before the birth of Christ) a Sword of execution wherewith the guilty and offenders should be slaine; but the uprightnesse of their living was such, that the Sword not being used was eaten with rust, and nothing meet to serve that turne: And alas are not almost all places in these dayes replenished with Iuglers,, Scoffers, Iesters, Players,
which may say and doe what they lust be it never so fleshly and filthy? and yet suffred with laughing and clapping of hands? Plutarchi A∣pothegmata. Hiero. Tom. 1. pag. 398. Hiero Syracusanus, did punish Epicharmus the Poet, because he rehearsed certaine wanton verses in the pre∣sence of his wife, for hee would that in his house not onely other parts of the body should be chaste, but the eares also, which be unto other members of the body instead of a tun∣nell, to be kept, sartas tectas, that is, defended and covered, as the proverbe saith, and to be shut from all uncomely and ribaldry talke. Vnto which fact of Hiero, the worthy sen∣tence of Ioan. Sarsbe∣riensis. de Nu∣gis Curialium. lib. 1. cap. 8. Pericles is much consonant and agreeable. So∣phocles, who was joynt fellow with Pericles in the Prtor∣ship, beholding and greatly praysing the well favored beau∣ty of a certaine Boy passing by him, was rebuked of Pericles his companion after this sort: Not onely the hands of him that is a Pretor ought to refraine from lucre of money, but also th eyes to bee continent from wanton lookes. The Plutarchus, De Gloria A∣theniensium. lib. Volatera∣nus Comment. l. 29. fol. 323. See here, pag. 455. Athenians provided very well for the integrity of their Iudges, that it should not be lawfull for any of the Areo∣pagites to write any Comedy or Play: and Epicharmus suffred punishment at the hands of Hiero for the rehear∣sall of certaine unchaste verses. But I speake it with sor∣row of heart; to our vicious Ballad-makers, and indictors of lewde Songs and Playes, no revengment, but rewards are largely payd and given: See Plutarchi Laconica A∣pothegmata: & Laconica In∣stitut. accor∣dingly. Gerardas a very ancient man of Lacedemonia, being demanded of his Hoste, what paine adulterers suffred at Sparta, made this answer: O mine Hoste, there is no adulterer among us neither can there be: (prey marke the reason:) For this was the manner a∣mong them, that they were never present t any Comedy, nor any other Playes, fearing lest they should heare and see those things which were repugnant to their lawes. But to revert to our purpose: Wanton Bookes, can bee no other thing but the fruits of wanton men, who although they write any one good sentence in their Workes, yet for the unworhi∣nesse of the person the sentence is rejected. The Plutarchi A∣pothegmta Laconica. pag. 496. Sente of Lacedemonia would have refused a very worthy and apt
saying of one Demosthenes, for the unworthinesse of the Author, if certaine men of authority called among them Ephori, had not come betweene, and caused another of the Senators to have pronounced the sentence againe, as his owne saying. Plutarch writeth, that there was a law a∣mong the Grecians, that even the good Bookes of ill men should be destroyed, that the memory of the Authors also, should thereby utterly be blotted out and cleane put away, Let all Play-poets, and Au∣thors, yea Printers and venters of lasci∣vious amorous Bookes consi∣der this. Gerson; sometimes Chancellor of Paris, speaking of a certaine Booke made by Ioannes Meldinensis, the title whereof is the Romant of the Rose, writeth of that Booke two things. First, he saith, if I had the Romant of the Rose, and that there were but one of them to bee had, and might have for it 500. Crownes, I would rather burne it then sell it. Againe, saith he, if I did understand that Ioannes Meldinensis did not repent with true sorrow of minde, for the Peccant enim omnes artifices qui talia quae ad lasciviam pertinent com∣ponunt. Alexan∣der Alensis. Sum∣ma Theologiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. m. 5. p. 619 making and setting forth of this Booke, I would pray no more for him, then I would for Iudas Is∣cariot, of whose damnation I am most certaine. And they also which reading this Booke, doe apply it unto wicked and wanton manners, are the Authors of his great paine and punishment. The like Ioannes Raulius said of the Booke and Fables of one Operius Danus, that hee was a most damned man, unlesse he repented and acknowledged his fault, for the setting forth of that Booke. I would God they heard these things whom it delighteth to write or read such shame∣lesse and lascivious workes. Let them remember the saying of Saint Paul; Gal. 6.7, 8. A man shall reape that which hee hath sowen. Oratio enco∣miastica in Pe∣trum & Pau∣lum. Chrysostome, a great enhaunser of Pauls pray∣ses, writeth; that so long shall the rewards of Paul rise more and more, how long there shall remaine such, which shall either by his life or doctrine be bronght unto the Lord God. The same may we say of all such, who while they lived have sowne ill seed, either by doing, saying, writing, or reading, that unlesse they repented, the more persons that are made ill by them, the more sharpe and greater growth their paine, as Saint Augustine wrote of Arrius. God save every Chri∣stian
heart, from either the delighting or reading of such miserable monuments. Thus concludes this reverend Bi∣shop, and so shall I this first reply. Secondly, admit it  be lawfull to read Playes or Comedies now and then for recreation sake, yet the frequent constant reading of Play-bookes, of other prophane lascivious amorous Poems, Histories, and discourses, (which many now make their daily study;) to read more Playes then Ser∣mons, then Bookes of piety and devotion, then Bookes or Chapters of the Bible, then Authors that should en∣able men in their callings, or fit them for the publike good, must needs be sinfull, as all the forequoted autho∣rities witnesse, because it avocates mens mindes from better and more sacred studies, on which they should spend their time, and fraughts them onely with empty words and vanities, which 1 Cor. 15.33. corrupt them for the present, and binde them over to damnation for the future. The Scripture we know commands men, Psal. 4.2. Psal 119.37. Col. 2.8, 20, 21, 22. 1 Tim. 6.4, 5. 2 Tim. 2.16, 23. Acts 19.19. not to delight in vanity, in old wives tales, in fabulous poeticall discourses, or other empty studies which tend not to our spirituall goo Isay 55.1, 2. Not to lay out our money for that which is not bread, and our labour for that which satisfieth not: Ephes. 5.16. Col. 4.5. but to redeeme the time, because the dayes are evill. Yea, it commands men to Col. 1.10. Iam. 3.17. Ioh. 15.2. to 8. be fruitfull and abundant in all good workes 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. to be holy in all manner of conversation; 1 Cor. 15.58. Ioh. 15 2. to 8. 2 Tim. 4.7. 2 Pet. 3.18. to be alwayes doing and receiving good, and finishing that worke which God hath given them to doe, growing every day more and more in grace, and in the knowledge of God and Christ, 1 Tim. 6.19. laying up a good foundation against the time to come, 2 Cor. 7.1. and per∣fecting holinesse in the feare of God, 2 Pet. 1.10. giving all diligence to mak their calling and election sure: 1 Cor. 10.30, 31. doing all they doe to the praise and glory of God. Now the ordinary reading of Comedies, Tragedies, Arcadiaes, Amorous Histories, Poets, and other prophane Discourses, is altogether in∣consistent with all and every of these sacred Precepts, therefore it cannot bee lawfull. Besides the Scripture commands men even Matth 12.36. Ephes. 5.3, 4, 5. Ier. 4.14. wholy to abandon all idle words,
all vaine unprofitable discourses, thought and actions. If then it gives us no liberty so much as to thinke a vaine thought, or to utter an idle word, certainely it alots us no vacant time for the reading of such vaine wanton Playes or Bookes. Againe, God enjoynes us, Ephes. 4.19, 31. Col. 4.6. Iude 20. that our speech should be always profitable and gracious, seasoned with salt, that so it may administer grace to the hearers, and build them up in their most holy faith: Therefore our writings, our studies, our reading must not be unedify∣ing, amorous and prophane, which ought to be as holy as serious, and profitable as our discorses. Moreover, it is the expresse precept of the Apostle Paul, (whom many prophane ones will here taxe of Puritanisme) Eph. 4.29. &c. 5.3, 4. But fornication and all uncleanesse, or covetousnesse, let it not be once named among you as becom∣meth Saints: neither filtinesse, nor foolish talking nor je∣sting, which are not convenient, &c. Let no corrupt communi∣cation proceed out of your mouthes but that which is good to So the Mar∣gent of our New transla∣tion renders it. edifie profitably, that it may miniter grace to the hearers, &c. And may wee then read or write these sinnes and vices which we ought not to name? or study or per∣use such wanton Playes and Pamplets, which can admi∣nister nought but gracelesnesse, lust, prophanesse to the Readers? Lastly, wee are commanded to Iohn 5.34 c. 7.5. Acts 17.11. Deut. 6.5. to 10. cap. 17.19. Col. 3.16. Psal. 1.2. Cant. 3.1. search the Scriptures daily: to meditate in the Law of God day and night, and to read therein all the dayes of our lives, that we may learne to feare the Lord, and to keepe and doe all the workes and Statutes of his Law; which was Psal. 119.97. Psal. 16.7. Psal. 119.57. King Davids study all the day long, yea, in the night season to: And because no time should bee left for any vaine stu∣dies or discourses; we are further enjoyned, Deut. 6.5. to 10. to have the Word of God alwayes in our hearts; to teach it dili∣gently to our children, and to talke of it when we are sit∣ting in our houses, and when wee are walking by the way, when we lye downe, and when we rise up: Which for any man now conscionably to performe, is no lesse then arrant Puritanisme, in the worlds account. If then we
believe these sacred precepts (to which I might adde two more; 1 Thes. 5.15, 16. Phil. 4.4. Pray continually. Rejoyce in the Lord alwayes, and againe I say rejoyce) to bee the Word of God, and so to binde us to obedience; there are cer∣tainely no vacant times alotted unto Christians, to read any idle Books or Play-house Pamphlets, which are al∣together incompatible with these precepts, and the se∣rious pious study of the sacred Scripture, as S. Epist. 22. ad Eutochium. cap. 13. Tom. 1 pag. 62 See Iuo Carnoten∣sis. quarta pars. Decret. cap. 162.163, 164, 165, 166. Gra∣tian Distinctio. 37. according∣ly. Hierom writes. Quae enim (quoth he) cōmunicatio luci ad tenebras? ui consensus Christo cum Belial? quid facit cum Psalterio Horatius? cum Evangelijs Maro? cum Apostolis Cicero? Et licet omnia munda mundis & nihil reijciendm quod cum graiarum actione percipitur; tamen simul non debe∣mus bibere calicem Christi, & calicem Daemoniorum; as he there proves by his owne example, which I would wish all such as make prophane Playes and hu∣man Authors their chiefest studies, even seriously to consider; For saith he, when ever I fell to read the Pro∣phets after I had beene reading Tully and Plautus, Sermo horrebat incultus, their uncompt stile became irkesome to me; & quia lumen caecis oculis non videbam, non ocu∣lorum putabam culpam ese, sed solis. Whiles the old Ser∣pent did thus delude me, a strong feaver shed into my bones, invaded my weake body, and brought me even to deaths doore: at which time I was suddenly rapt in pirit unto the Tribunall of a Iudge, where there was such a great and glorious light as cast me downe upon my face, that I durst not looke up. And being then demanded what I was, I answered, I am a Christian: whereupon the Iudge reply∣ed, thou lyest: Ciceronianus es, non Christianus: thou art a Ciceronian, not a Christian: for where thy treasure is, there also is thy heart; whereupon I grew speechlesse, and being beaten by the Iudges command, and tortured with the fire of conscience; I began to cry out and say, Lord have mercy upon me. Whereupon those who stood by falling down at the Iudges feet, intreated that he would give pardon to my youth, and give place of repentance to my error: ex∣actrus
deinde cruciatum si gentilium litterarum librs a∣liqando legissm. I being then in so great a strait, that I could be content to promise greater things, began to sweare and protest by his Name, saying, Domine si unquam ha∣buero odices seculares, si legero, te negavi. And being dismissed upon this my oath I returned to my selfe againe, and opened my eyes, drenched with such a showre of teares, that the very extremity of my griefe would even cause the incredulous to believe this trnce, which was no slumbe or vaine dreame, but a thing really acted my very shoulders being blacke and blue with stripes, the paine of which re∣mained after I awaked. Since which time saith he; Fateor me tanto dehinc studio divina legisse, quanto non ante mortalia legram. And from hence this Father exhorts all Christians to give over the reading of all prophane Bookes, all wanton Poems, which in his 146. Epistle to Damasus, hee most aptly compares to the Huskes with which the Prodigall in the Gospell was fed; where hee writes thus fitly to our purpose. Tom. 3. pag. 408. Possumus & aliter sili∣quas interpraetari. Daemonum cibus est carmina poetarum, saecularis sapientia, rhetoricorum pompa verborum. Haec sua omnes suavitate delectant, & dum aures versibus dulci mo∣dulatione currentibus capiuntur, animam quo{que} penetrant, & pectoris interna devinciunt. Verum, ubi cum summo studio furint, & labore perlect, nihil aliud nisi inanem so∣num, & sermonum strepitum suis lectoribus tribuunt, nulla ibi saturitas veritatis, nulla reectio justitiae reperitur: studiosi arum in fame veri, in virtutum penuria perseve∣rant. Vnde & Apostolus prohibet; 1 Cor. 8. ne in Idolio quis re∣cumbat, &c. Nonne tibi videtur sub alijs verbis diere, ne legas Philosopos, Oratoes, Poetas, nec in illorum leti∣one requiescas? Nec nobis blandiamur, si in eis, quae sunt scripta, non credimus, cum aliorum conscientia vulneretur, & putemur probare, quae dum legimus, non reprbamus. Ab∣sit ut de ore Christiano sonet, Iuppiter omnipoten, & me Hercule, & me Castor, & caetera magis portenta quam nu∣mina. At nunc etiam Sacerdotes Dei (and is not as tre
of our times?) omissis Evangelijs & Prophetis, videmus Comaedias legere, amatoria Bucolicorum versum verba canere, tenre Virgilium, & id, quod in pueris necessitatis est, crimen in se faere voluptatis. Cavendum igitur si capti∣vam velimus habere uxorem, ne in idolio recumbamus: aut si certè fuerimus ejus amore decepti, mundemus eam, & omni sordium errore purgemus, ne scandalum patiatur fra∣ter pro quo Christus mortuus, cum in ore Christiani carmi∣na, in idolorum laudem composita, audierit personare. Since therefore all these idle Play-bookes and such like amo∣rous Pastorals are but empty huskes, Inquinant non alunt. Se∣neca. Epist. 2. See Augustin. Confes. lib. 1. cap. 16.17. ac∣cordingly. which yeeld no nourishment but to Swine, or such as wallow in their beastly lusts and carnall pleasures; since they are incom∣patible with the pious study and diligent reading of Gods sacred Word, (Psal. 19.10. Psal. 119.103. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. Cant. 5.1. Psal. 63.5, 6. the gold, the hony, the milke, the marrow, the heavenly Manna, feast and sweatest nourish∣ment of our soules,) with the serious hearing, reading, meditation, thoughts and study whereof we should al∣wayes constantly feed, refresh, rejoyce, and feast our spirits, which commonly starve and pine away whiles we are too much taken up with other studies or imployments, especially with Playes and idle amorous Pamphlets: (the very reading of which Confes. lib. 1. cap. 15.16, 17. S. Augustine, repented and con∣demned:) let us hencefore lay aside such unprofitable, un∣christian studies, betaking our selves wholly at leastwise principally to Gods sacred Word, which is 2 Tim. 3.15. onely able to make us wise unto salvation, and to nourish our soules unto e∣ternall life: & since Christianity is our general profession, let not Paganisme, scurrility, prophanes, wantonnes, amo∣rousnesse, Playes, or lewde Poeticall Figments or Histo∣ries, but Gods Word alone, which as Omnem sci∣entiam & do∣ctrinam sacra Scriptura trans∣cndit, verum praedicat & ad caelestem patri∣am invitat. f. 1. Sūmula Raymundi saith, transcends all other Bookes & Sciences; be our chief∣est study, at all such vacant times as are not occupied in our lawfull callings, or other pious duties. I shal therfore cloze up this 2. reply, with that Apostolicall Constitution recorded by Constit. Apo∣stol. lib. 1. cap. 6 7. Apud Suriū, Concil. Tom. 1. pag. 45. Clemens Romanus, (if the Booke bee his) which I would wish al Papists who deny the reading of
the Scripture unto Lay-men, to whō this good precept is directed as the very Catholica doctrina de Laicis. Ibid. pag. 43. Title and first Chapter proves, e∣ven seriously to consider. Sed sive ad fideles & ejusdem se∣ntentiae homines accedis, conferens cum ijs vitali verba lo∣quere: sin minus accedis, intus sedens percurre legem, Reges, Prophetas: Psalle hymnos David,Nota. See Hierom. Epist. 7. c. 3, 5. Epi. 9. c. 5. Ep. 10. c. 4.5. Ep. 16. c. 3.4. Epist. 18. neere the end. Ep. 22. c. 6.15, 16. Epi 23. Epi. 25. c. 1. Ambrose, Chry∣sostome, Primasi∣us, Sedulius, The∣odoret, Beda, &c. on Ephes. 5. & Col. 3. to the like purpose. lege diligenter Evange∣lium, quod est horū complementū. Abstine ab omnibus Gen∣tiliū libris. Quid enim tibi cum externis libris, vel legibus, vel Prophetis? quae quidem leves à fide abducunt. Nam quid tibi deest in lege Dei, ut ad illâs gentium fabulas confugias? Nam si historica percurrere cupis, habes Reges: si sophi∣stica & Prophetica, habes Prophetas, & Iob, & Proverbio∣rum authorem, in quibus omnis poeticae, & sapientiae accu∣ratam rationem invenies; quoniam Domini Dei, qui solus est sapiens, voces sunt. Quod si cantilenas cupis, habes Psalmos: si rerum origines nosse desideras, habes Genesim: si leges & praecepta, gloriosam Dei legem. Ab omnibus igitur exteris & diabolicis libris vehementer te contine Bernard Su∣per Cantica. Sermo. 86. fol. 176. C. quoniam in ipso verbo sunt omnia. Ibi remedium vulne∣rum, ibi subsidia necessitatum, ibi resarcitus defectuum, ibi profectuum copiae, ibi deni{que} quicquid accipere vel habere hominibus expedit, quicquid decet, quicquid oportet. Sine causa ergo aliud à verbo petitur, cum ipsum sit omnia. Thirdly, admit a man may lawfully read a Play-book, yet it See D. Rai∣nolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes, pag. 21.22. accordingly. will not follow, that therefore he may pen, or act a Play, or see it acted. For first, a man may lawfully read such things, as hee cannot pen, or act, or behold without offending God. A man perchance may lawfully read a Masse-booke, but yet he cannot write a Masse-booke, nor yet act, or say, or see a Masse without committing sinne. Some men may lawfully read an See Th. Bibli∣andri Apologia pro Editione Alcorani: & Nicolai de Cu∣sa Cribratio Alcorani.Alcoran, or any hereticall Booke,Ambros. Com. in Luc. l. 1. c. 1. Tom. 3. p. 3. C. ut magis judicent quàm sequantur; ra∣ther to confute then follow it; but no man can pen, or print, or publish it with delight, (no nor yet read it out of love and liking, as men read Play-bookes) but he must transgresse. A man may safely read the stories of Gen. 1820, 21. cap. 19.4, 5. Ezech. 16.49. 2 Pet. 2.6, 8, Iude 7. the Sodomites sinnes, of the Canaanites and Israelites
Idolatries; but yet to act, or see them acted cannot bee lesse then sinfull. A man may and must Deut. 6.5, 6, 7. Psal. 1.2. Acts 17.11. daily read the sacred Scriptures, the Passion of our Saviour, the Histories of Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, Solomon, Iob, and others recited in the Bible; yet none See p. 108. to 126, 636, 763. to 767. may Play or see them Played without sinne, yea highest blasphemie and pro∣phanesse; though some gracelesse wretches as well in private as in popular Stage-playes much prophane them, bringing not onely Ministers, preaching and praying, but even the very sacred Bible and the stories in it on the Stage, One Atkinson a Minister in Bedford the last Christtide, in the Com∣missaries house there, acted a private Enter∣lude, where he made a prayer on the Stage, and chose a Text. viz. Acts 10.14. on which he most prophanely preached and jested, to the very shame & griefe of most that heard him. as some late notorious damnable (if not damned) prece∣dents witnesse; when as not onely our owne pious Sta∣tute ofSee pag. 109.110. 3. Iacobi. cap. 21. but likewise Bochellus Decreta Ec∣cles. Gal. lib. 1. Tit. 10. c. 12. pag. 96. Concilium Rhe∣mense, Anno 1583. which decrees thus: Vt ea vitent fideles quibus cultus divinus impediri potest, statuimus, ne quis Scripturae sacrae verba ad scurriliae, detrectationes, su∣perstitiones, incantationes, sortes, libellos famosos audeat usurpare. Si quis contra fecerit, juris & arbitrij paenis coerceatur: And Ibid. c. 13. Concilium Bituriense. Anno 1554. which thus ordaines. Non liceat cuiquam verba & sen∣tentias sacrae Scripturae ad scurrilia, fabulosa, vana, adu∣lationes, detractiones, superstitiones, & diabolicas incan∣tationes, divinationes, sortes, libellos famosos, & alias ejus∣modi impietates usurpare: Qui in eo peccaverint, ab Episcopis legitimis paenis coercētur: together with the Synod of Ro∣chell. An. 1571. (here p. 636.) & See William Wraghton his Rescuer of the Romish Fox. fol. 97. BB. Gardener have long since prohibited and condemned this atheisticall horrid prophanesse, which no Christian can so much as thinke off, but with highest detestation. Since therefore many things may be lawfully read, which cannot honestly be penned, acted, heard or seene, the argument is but a meere inconsequent. Secondly, though a man perchance may in some cases lawfully read a Play-booke, See William Wraghton his Rescuer of the Romish Fox. fol. 97. yet it will not follow, that he may compose, or act, or see a Stage-play: For first, a man may read a Play with de∣testation both of its vanity, ribaldry and prophanesse; but he can neither pen, nor play, nor yet very willing∣ly
behold it, as all Play-haunters doe, without ap∣probation  and delight. Secondly, a man may read a Play without any prodigall vaine expence of money, or over-great losse of time: but none can compile, or act, or see a Stage-play See Act 6. Scene 1.2. without losse of time, of money, which  should bee better imployed: Thirdly, Stage-playes may be privately read over without any danger of in∣fection by ill company, without any publike infamy or scandall, without giving any ill example, without any incouraging or maintaining of Players in their un∣godly profession, or without participating with them in their sinnes; See Act 6. Scene 3. to 18. but they can neither be compiled, beheld, or acted, without these severall unlawfull circumstan∣ces which cannot be avoyded. Fourthly, Stageplayes may be read without using or beholding any effeminate amorous, lustfull gestures, complements, kisses, dalliances, or embracements; any whorish, immodest, fantastique, womanish appa∣rell, Vizards, disguises; any lively representations of Venery, whoredome, adultery, and the like, which are apt to enrage mens lusts: without hypocrisie, fei∣ning, cheats, lascivious tunes and dances, with such other unlawfull Stage ingredients or concomitants: See Part 1. Act 5. thorow∣out, & Part 2. Act 2. thorow∣out. but they can neither be seene nor acted, without all, or most of these. Fiftly, he that reades a Stage-play may passe by all obscene or amorous passages, all prophane or  scurrill Iests, all heathenish oathes and execrations even with detestation; but he who makes, who acts, who heares, or viewes a Stage-play acted, hath no such liberty left him, but hee must act, recite, behold and heare them all. Yea sometimes such who act the Clowne or amorous person, adde many obscene lasci∣vious jests and passages of their owne, by way of ap∣pendix, to delight the auditors, which were not in  their parts before. Lastly, when a man reads a Play, he ever wants that viva vox, that flexanimous rhe∣toricall Stage-elocution, that lively action and repre∣sentation
of the Players themselves which put life and vigor into these their Enterludes, and make them pierce more deepely into the Spectators eyes, their eares and lewde affections, precipitating them on to lust: yea, the eyes, the eares of Play-readers want all those lust-enraging objects, which Actors and Specta∣tors meet with in the Play-house: Therefore though the reading of Stage-playes may be lawfull, yet the compo∣sing, acting, or seeing of them in all these several regards, cannot be so. So that this first Objection is both false and frivolous. The second Objection for the composing and acting of Playes is this.Object. 2. Se Haywards Apologie for Actors: and Doctor Gagers Reply to Do∣ctor Rainolds, p. 119.120. Au∣gustin. Confes. lib. 1. cap. 16. accordingly. The penning and acting of Playes doth whet & exercise mens wits and poetry, embolden youth, confirme their voyces, helpe their memories, action and elocution; and make them perfect Ora∣tors. Therefore it is both lawfull, yea and usefull to. To this I answer first:Answ. 1. that this Objection makes onely for academicall and private, but nought for po∣pular Enterludes. Secondly, academicall Stage-playes are seldome acted or penned for any of the ends, the uses here recorded, but onely for entertainement, for mirth and pleasure sake. Thirdly, Rom. 3.8. Ephes. 5.3 4, 5. men must not doe  evill that good may come of it: therefore they may not  exercise their wits, their inventions about lascivious amorous Play-house Poems; they may not strengthen or stuffe their memories with such vaine lewde empty froth as Playes now are; nor embolden themselves by acting effeminate, scurrile, whorish, impudent, or immodes parts: nor yet helpe their action, their elo∣cution by uttering, by personating any unlawfull things, which may either draw or tempt them unto lewd∣nesse. We know that frequenting of Tavernes and Brothels; courting of impudent Strumpets, keeping of deboist company, reading of amorous Bookes and Pastorals, adde spirit and boldnesse unto men, yea oft improve their elocution, carriage, and amorous fond
discourse, as much or more then Playes, See here. pag. 483. & August. Confes. lib. 1. cap. 15.16, 17. yet none may use these wicked courses to obtaine these petty benefits; no more then he may oppresse, or steale, or cheate, or perjure himselfe to augment his wealth, or  use charmes and sorceries to recover health. Fourthly, Hierom. E∣pist. 22. c. 13. Melius est aliquid nescire, quàm cum periculo discere. The hurt, the danger that accrues to men by penning, by acting Playes, is evermore See August. Confes. lib. 1. cap. 16.17. ac∣cordingly. farre greater then the good, the benefits here alleaged: the evill is certaine, the good, uncertaine: it is no wisedome, no safety there∣fore to plung men into sundry great and certaine evils,  to atchieve some probable meane emoluments. Fiftly, the good that comes by penning or acting Playes, is onely temporall; the hurt, the mischiefe is eternall; the good extends no further then mens bodies; the See Act 6. thorowout. damage reacheth to their soules, yea oft unto their bodies, goods and names: it is no discretion then for men to hazard the losse, the damage of their soules, for  such petty improvements of their bodies. Sixtly, there is little or no analogie betweene the action, the elocution of Players, of Orators and Divines: The prin∣cipall prayse of Actors is a lively counterfeiting and re∣presentation of the parts, the persons they sustaine, by corporall gestures rather then by words: the chiefest prayse of Orators is to Orator est vir bonus, di∣cendi peritus. Cicero. De Oratore. lib. 1. Quintilian In∣stit. Orat. l. 12. cap. 1. accor∣dingly. expresse, to describe the things they speake of in an elegant flexanimous phrase, and grave elocu∣tion: the duty of the one being to represent things to the eye, whereas the other speaks onely to the eare. Which diversity is warranted both by the story of Cicero the Orator, and Roscius the Actor, who, as Saturnal. lib. 3. cap. 14. pag. 459. Macrobius writes, did use to contend together; Vtrum ille spius andem en∣tentiā varijs gestibus efficeret, an ipse pr eloquentiae copiam sermone divers pronunciaret: by the very stiles of Actor, and Oratoris o∣pus oratio. Quintil. Instit. l. 12. c. 10. pag. 703. Orator, the first, importing onely corporall gestures, and representations; the other, verball expressions and by the usuall phrases of seeing a Stage-play, and hea∣ring an Oration. Now what proportion is there be∣tweene
gestures and words? betweene Horū omniū dissimilis at{que} diversa inter se ratio est. Id ita∣que vitandū in quo magna pars errat, ne in ora∣tione Poëtas nobis & Histo∣ricos, Oratores aut declamato∣res imitandos putemus. Sua cui{que} proposita lex, suus decor est, &c. Quintil. Instit. l. 10 c 2. pag. 375. acting and speaking well, that one should be such a helpe or fur∣therance to the other? Alas what profit, what advan∣tage can an Orator gaine by acting an amorous females, a Bawdes, a Panders, a Ruians, Drunkards, Murtherers, Lovers, Soldiers, Kings, Tyrants, Fayries, Furies, De∣vils or Pagan Idols part with suitable gestures and spee∣ches? tell me I beseech you, what furtherances these are to make a perfect Orator, who though hee may plead or speake for others, must act no other man but himselfe alone, whereas Players must never act them∣selves but other parts? Certainely if wee believe Instit. Orat. lib. 1. cap. 19. & l. 11. c. 3. pag. 645.636, 648. Quintilian, or a D. Rainolds Overthrow of Stage-playes. p. 119 to 126. late famous Orator of our owne, the acting of Playes, which is full of wantonnesse, of light, of lewde, of foolish gestures and speeches, is the next way to marre an Orator, whose speech, action and de∣portment mut be grave and serious. Hence Instit. Orat. l. 1. c. 18.19. p. 79. l. 10. c. 2. p. 755. & lib. 11. cap. 3. pag. 645.648, 677. Quinti∣lian (as eminent an Orator as most now extant) in his directions how an Orator should frame his speech, his voyce and gesture, expresly forbids him to imitate the voyce Orator utatur laterum incli∣natione forti ac virili, non à scena & histri∣onibus, sed ab a mis, &c. Non enim comae∣dum esse sed oratorem volo. Quare nec in gestu persequemur omnis argutias, nec in oquendo distinctionibus, temporibus, effictionibus moleste sequemur, ut si in scena sit dicendum, &c. or gestures of Players, or to expresse or act the slaves, the drunkards, lovers, penni-fathers, cowards, or any such Play-house part, because as they were no wayes necessary for an Orator, so they will rather corrupt his minde and manners, then any wayes helpe his elocution or action. The acting therefore of Playes is no wayes necessary or use∣full for an Orator, it being no furtherance but an appa∣rant obstacle to true oratory, action, elocution; there being no analogie betweene the wanton amorous ge∣stures, speeches, Pastorals, jests, and florishes of a Poet, an Actor; and the sad, grave, serious elocution or action of an Orator. And as Play-acting is no wayes usefull for an Orator, so much lesse See M. Berard his Faithfull Shepheard. cap. 13. pag. 89. accordingly. for a Minister, or
Divine, there being no Analogie betweene Preachers and Players, Sermons and Playes, Theaters and Churches, betweene the sacred, sober, chaste, and modest ge∣stures, the soule-saving speeches of the one, and the lascivious, scurrill, prophane, ungodly action and dis∣courses of the other. Hence the Act 7. Scene 3. & Part 2. Act 2. Scene 1. forementioned Coun∣cels, Fathers and Canonists, together with Item placuit, ut eas prorsus mundanas dig∣nitates, quas se∣culares viri vel principes terrae exercere solent in venationib{us} scilicet, vel canticis secula∣ribus, aut in resoluta & im∣moderata laeti∣tia, in lyris & tibijs & his similibus usi∣bus, nullus sub ecclesiastico ca∣none constitu∣us ob inanis Iaetitiae fluxū, audeat, fastu superbiae tumi∣dus, quandoque praesumendo abuti, &c. Suri∣us. Tom. 3. pag. 264. Concilium Foro-juliense, Can. 6. which I before omitted, have inhi∣bited Ministers and Clergie men from penning, acting and beholding Stage-playes, as being no wayes suitable, but altogether incompatible with their most holy and grave profession: Hence also they excluded all common Actors, (and likewise academicall to, till they had done publike penance) from the Ministeriall function; the acting of Playes being so far from making men fit for the ministry, that it made them both unfit, and likewise uncapable to re∣ceive it. What therefore Plutarchi Laconica. Agis junior. p. 468. Agis junior replyed to a wicked fellow who oft demanded of him, Quis essèt Spartanorum optimus? Quitui est dissimilimus; the same may I say of Ministers; that hee is the best Minister who is most unlike a Player both in his gesture, habit, speech and elocution. Hence De Officijs. lib. 1. cap. 18. Tom. 4. p. 6.7. Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, refused to give Ecclesiasticall Orders to one who sued for them, and likewise deprived another (who after∣wards fell to the Arian heresie) Quia lucebat in eorum incessu species quaedam scurrarum percursantium: con∣demning not onely all those Clergie men, but also Lay∣men to, who used Playerly gestures, qui sensim ambu∣lando imitantur histrionicos gestus, & quasi quaedam fer∣cula pomparum, & statuarum motus nutantium, ut quo∣tiescun{que} gradum transferunt modulos quosdam servare vi∣deantur: avice too common in this our antique wanton age. We that know that 1 Tim. 3.8. Ambros. De Officijs. lib. 1. c. 18. Galataeus De Moribus. all Christians, and more especi∣ally Ministers, ought to be sober, modest, grave, chaste, both in their gesture and deportment; Hence Surius Con∣cil. Tom. 4. pag. 742.743. Concilium Seno∣nense. An. 1528. Decreta Morum. cap. 25. decrees thus. Clerici in incessu quo{que} honestatem exhibeant, ut gravitate
itineris, mentis maturitatem ostendant. Incompositio enim corporis, risus dissolutus, indeces culorum vagatio, inae∣qualitatem indicant mentis. And then it proceeds thus. Non in scenam velut histriones prodeant, non comaedias ver∣naculas agant; non spectaculum corporis sui faciant in publi∣co privatove loco (pray marke it:) Quae omnia cum om∣nibus sacerdotibus sunt indecra, & ordini clericali mul∣tum detrahentia, tum illis praecipue, quibus animarum cura est commissa. An infallible evidence that histrionicall gestures, and te acting of Stage-playes either in pub∣like or private, are no wise usefull, but altogether scandalous, and unseemely for a Minister; and that the acting, the beholding of Playes, will make men See Act 5. Scene 1.2, 3, 4. & Act 6. Scene 3. to 17. accor∣dingly. amorous, wanton, light and Playerlike in their gestures, as Hom. 1. De Verbis Isaiae. Tom. 1. Col. Col. 1281.1283, 1284. & Orat. 7. Tom. 5. Col. 1484.1485. See here pag. 400.401. Saint Chrysostome with others largely testiie. And as Thea∣tricall gestures are altogether unseemely in a Minister, (whence Protestants condemne See Act 3. Scene 5. See D. Rainolds, Bi∣shop Bale, Bi∣shop Mrtn, D. Sutcliffe, D. Beard, and o∣thers of the Masse: & Had∣don Contr. O∣sorium. lib. 3. fol. 263. all Masse-priests ge∣stures, crouchings and noddings in the celebrating or acting of their Masses, which they compare to Playes,) So like∣wie are all poeticall Play-house phrases, Clinches, and strong lines, as now some stile them; (too frequent in our Sermons; which in respect of their I have heard some stile their texts a Land∣scrip or Pi∣cture: others a Play or Spe∣ctacle, dividing their texts into Actors, Spectators, Scenes, &c. as if they were acting of a Play, not preaching of Gods Word. Divisions, language, action, stile, and subject matter, consisting either of wanton flashes of luxurious wits, or meere quotations of humane Authors, Poets, Orators, Histories, Philoso∣phers, and Popish Schoole-men; or sesquipedalia verba, great empty swelling words of vanity and estimation more fitter for the Stage, from whence they are oft∣times borrowed, (then the Pulpet,) unsutable for Mini∣ters Prosper De Vita Contempt. lib. 3. cap. 6. fol. 105. qui dum indecēter elegantes videre volunt, passim jam turpibus verbis impudeer insaniunt. Ministers are Gods 2 Cor. 5.20. Ambassadors, therefore they Numb. 22.35, 28. Ier. 26.2. 1 Cor. 1.17. cap. 2.1, 4. must speake nothing in the Pulpit but those words which God shall put into their mouthes; they must deliver Gods message in his owne dialect;
not in the Col. 2.8. language of Poets, and other humane Au∣thors, in which Gods spirit never breathes. They are Christs Vnder-shepheards, Ioh. 10.3, 4, 5, 8, 16. therefore they must speake unto their Flockes in Christs owne voyce, which they must onely know and heare, and follow, not in the voyce of strangers, whose voyce they will not, yea they must not heare: They are the Col. 1.25, 26, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 4, 13. 2 Pet. 1.16. Ministers, the mouth of Christ, therefoe they must one∣ly preach and speake his language: They have no other Commission, Matth. 28.19, 20. Mark. 16.15, 16. Ephes. 3.8, 9. Col. 1.25. to 29. but to goe and preach the Gospell, (not Histories and Poets) unto men: They are the 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 1 Pet. 4.10 1. Luke 12.42. Stewards of the misteries, and manifold graces of the Gospell, of the milke and bread of Gods holy Word; and these alone they must dispence: They are sent out by God for no other pur∣pose, but onely Acts 26.18.to open mens eyes, and to turne them from darkenesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgivenesse of sins, and inheritance a∣mong them that are sanctified through faith that is in Christ Iesus: therefore they must come unto them, not with the dimme lights of human learning, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. but with the light, the brightnesse of the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ: 1 Cor. 2.1, 4. not with entising words of mans wisedome (which never yet converted or saved any one soule,) but in demonstra∣tion of the spirit and of power: 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. not with the wisedome of this world, which human Authors teach, but with the wise∣dome of God in a mistery, which the holy Ghost teacheth: Col. 2.8. not with philosophie and vaine deceit after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: but with the Word and Gospell of Christ, the Rom. 1.16. Iam. 1.21. mighty power of God unto salvation, which is able (yea onely able) to save mens soules. Hence Epist. 2. c. 10. See cap. 4. & Epist. 22. c. 15. Saint Hierom writes thu to Nepotianus, Docente te in Ecclesia non clamor populi, sed gemitus suscitetur. Lachrymae auditorū laudes tuae sint. Sermo Presbyteri Scripturarum lectione conditus sit. Nolo te declamatorem esse & rabulam, garru∣lum{que} sine ratione, sed mysteriorum peritum, & sacramen∣torum Dei tui peritissimum. Verba voluere, & celeritate dicendi apud imperitum vulgus admirationem facere, in∣doctorum
hominum est, &c. Hence De Vita Con∣templ. lib. 1. cap. 23.24, 25. See Hierom, Ambrose Theodoret, Theo∣phylact, eda, Haymo Occue∣nius, Anselme, Remigius, Pri∣masius, and o∣thers, in 1 Cor. 2.1. to 7. accor∣dingly. Prosper Aquitanicus positively affirmes, Quod non se debeat Ecclesiae doctor de accurai sermonis ostentatione jactare, ne videatur Ec∣clesiam Deinon velle aedificare, sed magis se quantae sit eru∣ditionis ostendere. Non igitur in verborum splendore, sed in operum virtute totam praedicandi fiduciam ponat: non vocibus delectetur populi acclamantis sibi, sed fletibus, nec plausum à populo studeat expectare sed gemitum. Hoc spe∣cialiter doctor Ecclesiasticus elaboret, quò fiunt qui audiunt um sanis disputationibus meliores, nn vana assentatione fautores. Lachrymas quas vult à suis auditoribus fundi, ipse primitus fundat, & sic es compunctione sui cordis ac∣cendat. Tam simplex & apertus, etiam si minus Latinus, disciplinatus tamen & gravis sermo debet esse Pontificis ut ab intelligentia sui nullos, quamvis imperitos, excludat: sed in omnium audientium pectus cum quadam delectatione descendat. Dei{que} alia est ratio declamatorum, & alia de∣bet esse doctorum. Illi elucubratae declamationis pompam totis facundiae suae viribus concupiscunt: isti sobrio usitato{que} sermone Christi gloriam quaerunt. Illi rebus inanibus pre∣tiosa verborum induunt ornamenta, isti veracibus sententijs orant, & commendant verba simplicia. Illi affectant suo∣rum sensuum deformitatem tanquam velamine quodam phaleràti sermonis abscondere; isti eloquiorum suorum ru∣sticitatem student pretiosis sensibus venustare. Illi totam laudem suam infavore vulgi, isti in virtute Dei constituunt. Illi plausibiliter dicunt, & nihil auditoribus suis decla∣mando proficiunt: isti usitatis sermonibus docent, & imi∣tatores svos instituunt; quia rationem suam nulla fucatae compositionis affectatione corrumpunt. Isti sunt ministri verbi, adjutores Dei, oraculum Spiritus sancti. Per tales Deus placatur populo, populus instruitur Deo. Hence Epist. lib. 1. Epist 62.63. Bibl Patrum. Tom. 5. pars 2. pag. 483. See Iuo Carnoten∣sis. Decret pars 4. cap. 160. to 168. Isiodor Pelusiota writes thus sharply to Theopompus and Talelaeus two preaching Monkes. Quis te comicis salibus non perstringat? Quis te non commiseretur, qui cum in hilosophiae discipulorum Domini tranquillitate sedeas, Gentilium historicorum & poetarum tumultum at{que} aestum
tecum trahas? Quid enim dic quaeso, apud illos est, quod religioni nostrae sit praeferendum? Quid non mendacio ac risu scatet ex ijs quae magno studio consectantur? An non divinitates ex viiosis affectionibus? An non fortia faci∣nora pro vitiosis affectionibus? An non certamina pro vi∣tiosis affectionibus? Quamobrem ipsam quo{que} faeditatis & obscaenitatis lectionem fuge (nam & a miram ad aperienda vulnera jam cicatrice obducta vim habet:) ne alioqui vehementiori cum impetu spiritus improbus revertatur, ac deteriorem ac perniciosiorem tibi priore ignorantia aut neg∣ligentia cladm inferat. Sermo, qui ad audientium utilita∣tem habetur, potens sermo est, qui{que} optimo jure sermo appel∣letur, imitationem{que} ad Deum habeat. At qui voluptate sola ac plausu terminatur, aeris sonitus est, magno strepitu aurem personans. Quare aut sermonem tuam gravitate moderare, ac sermonis fastui ac pompae mediocritatem an∣tepone, aut te cymbalum theatrorum scenae accomodum esse scito. And hence is that lamentable complaint of Onus Eccle∣siae. cap. 18. sect. 8.9, 10. Episcopus Chemnensis: Modernis autem temporibus in academijs publicis scientia duntaxit munana invaluit, scientia Dei non est in terra. Sacrarum literarum doctrina ubi{que} prorsus perijt, doctores scientia inslati docent suum chere, circumferuntur omni vnto doctrinae. Sicut gentes, ambulant in vanitate sensus sui, tenebris haebentes obscura∣tum intellectum, propter caecitatem cordis ipsorum. Caeci speculatores educunt discipulos caecos in viam quam nesci∣unt, ponunt tenebras in lucem, & prava in recta, & nox nocti indicat scientiam. Et sic ubi{que} suos seducunt oratores. Extollunt doctrinam Aristotelis, Averrois, & aliorum Gentilium Scribarum, ad excogitandum profunda & vora∣ginosa dogmata, obscurantia solem sapientiae Christianae ac Evangelicae vitae, ac purum aerem religiosi status suis fa∣stuosis verbis, acutis{que} disputationibus, ac sophisticis gar∣rulitatibus maculantia. Modo equidem cernimus omnia fere gymnasia ubi olim tradebatur theologica doctrina, poe∣ticis figmentis, vanis nugis, ac fabulosis portentis esse im∣pleta. Vbi est literatus? Vbi legis verba ponderans? ubi
est doctor parvulorum? videbis populum alti sermonis, ita ut non possis intelligere disertitudinem linguae ejus, in qu nulla est spientia. Atqui praedicatores concionary student, non ut syncero affectu, sed gratia propriae laudis & verbis ornatis & politis aures auditorum demulceant. Meliores autem snt sermones veriores quàm disertiores. De talibus doctoribus disertis inquit Salvator. Matth. 15.9. In vanm m colunt, docentes doctrinas & praecepta hominum: relinquentes enim mandta Dei, tenetis traditiones hominum. All which recited passages, are sufficient testimonies, that poeti∣call streines of wit and Playerly eloquence are no wayes tolerable, much lesse then commendable in a preaching Minister. Therefore the acting, the penning of Playes, is no wayes necessary or usefull for Clergie men to fur∣ther them in their ministry. All the benefit that Schol∣lers reape by acting Playes, is this; that it makes See M. Ber∣nard his Faith∣full Shepheard. cap. 13. p. 89. & D. Rainods O∣verthrow of Stage-playes. p. 119. to 127. them histrionicall, antique, unprofitable verball, Preachers, more fit for a Play-house then a Pulpit. The acting and penning therefore of Stage-playes is no wayes helpefull either for an Orator or a Preacher, as the Ob∣jectors dreame, Lastly, men may learne boldnesse, elo∣quence, action, elocution by farre readier, easier, and and more laudable meanes then the penning or acting Playes; as by frequent Declamations, and often repetiti∣ons of eloquent Orations, and the like; the onely meanes Instit. Ora∣tor. lib. 2. cap. 8. Quintilian prescribes, and the ordinary method that all Schoole-masters & Tutors use, to make men perfect O∣rators: no need therefore of penning, of acting Playes, for these pretended ends, which it cannot effect. We never read that the Apostles, Prophets, and elegant Fathers of old, (as Cyprian, Basil, Nazianzen, Chrysostome, Ambrose, Hierom, Augustine, Leo, Gregory the Great, Chrysologus, Bernard, and such other unparaleld Christian Preach∣ers; that Demosthenes, Cicero, or Quintilian, the most accomplished Heathen Orators for action, phrase, and elocution that the world hath knowne,) did ever at∣taine to their perfectiō of Oratory by acting Playes: nei∣ther
have we heard of any Orators of latter times who hve trod this unknowne path to elocution, to perfect rhetoricke by acting Playes; yea I have not read to my remembrance of any one common Actor or Play-poet, that was an exquisite Orator: The acting therefore of Playes is but a preposterous Spurious course, to traine up youthes to an oratoricall grave comely action or elocution, who should rather be Ephes. 6.4. Gen. 18.19. Deut. 6.7.educated in the feare and nurture of the Lord, in the Grounds and Principles of Religion, in the knowledge and study of the Scriptures; in honest callings, Sciences, Arts, imployments, which might benefit themselves and others, then in penning or acting Stage-playes, which hath alwayes beene con∣demned as infamous, both by Christians and Pagans too. Object. 3. The 3. Objection for the composing and acting of Playes, is this: See Thomas Lodge, his Play of Playes; and Haywoods Apo∣logy for Actors accordingly. That they dilucidate and well explaine many darke obscure Histories, imprinting them in mens mindes in such indelible Characters, that they can hardly bee oblitterated: Therefore they are use∣full and commendable. Answ. 1.To this I answer first, that this Objection extends not unto feined Comedies or Tragedies, which are now most in use, but unto such reall tragicall Histories onely as are brought upon the Stage, which Play-poets and Players mangle, falsifie, if not obscure with many additionall circumstances and poeticall fictions; they doe See M. Gosson his Playes con∣futed. Action 2. & I.G. his Re∣futation of the Apologie for Actors, accor∣dingly. not therefore explaine, but sophisticate, and deforme good Histories, with many false varnishes and Play-house fooleries. Secondly, these Histories are more fully, more truely expressed, more readily and acurately lear∣ned in the originall Authors who record them, then in derivative Play-house Pamphlets, which corrupt them; all circumstances both of the persons, time, occasion, place, cause, manner, end, &c. being commonly truely registred in the story, which are either See Gosson his Playes confu∣ted. Action 2.altered or omitted in the Play. Thirdly, if this Objection be true, Histori∣ans
which we so much magnifie would be of little use or worth; we might then make waste paper of their voluminous workes, and turne all the applauded Hi∣stories both of former and future ages into Playes, which better expresse them then our stories, and more deepely imprint them in mens mindes. Lastly, admit the Objection rue; yet the Histories Playes explaine would not doe the Actors or Spectators halfe the good, nor yet sticke by them halfe so long, as theNon omnino per hanc turpi∣tudinem verba ista cōmodius discuntur, sed per haec verba turpitudo ista confidentius perpetratur. August Confes. lib. 1. cap. 16. cor∣ruptions that accompany them; that being a true rule of Noctium Attic. l. 12. c. 2.Aulus Gellius. Adolescentium indolem non tam juvant quae benè dicta sunt, quàm inficiunt quae pessime. Since then the good they bring to men is no way equivalent to the hurt, as Confes. l. 1. cap. 16.17. S. Augustine himselfe long since afirmed, the penning and acting of them cannot be lawfull. Aristotle Topic. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 1. Id enim magis est eligendum, cui majus bonum, vel minus malum est consequens, as a very Heathen hath truely taught us. The 4. Objection for the penning and acting of Playes is this:Object. 4. That both our Vniversities, and long continued custome approve them: therefore they are good. To this I answer first;Answ. 1. that the Objection it selfe is false, since D. Gager in D. Rainolds his Overthrow of Stage-playes. pag. 151.152. both our Vniversities condemne all popular Enterludes, and the best, the gravest in our Vniversities, all academicall Stage-playes too: as I have already prooved: Act 6. Scene 5. pag. 489.490, 491. Secondly, though the dissoluter & yonger sort in our Vniversities, (being See here, pag. 491. but Youthes or Children, who are apt to dote on spectacles of vanity, and unable to judge of good or e∣vil) approve perchance of Stage-plaies in their practise; yet the holiest, the gravest in our Vniversities con∣demne them in their judgements, if not their practise to. And here by the way, in case of examples, we must ever learne to judge of the lawfulnesse or unlawfulnesse of things, not so much by the actions, as by the judgements and selfe-condemning Rom. 2.1, 214, 15, 21, 22, 23, 27, 29. Magna vis est conscientae. Cicero Orat. 3. in Catilinam. Quos diri conscia fa∣cti Mens ha∣bet attonitos & surdo verbere caedit, Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum? Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. Hi sunt qui trepidant, & ad omnia verbera pallent. Iuvenal. Satyr. 13. pag. 123. consciences of men, by which they
shall at last bee judged. There is never a Drunkard, Whore-maste, Lyer, Hypocrite, Thiefe, that lives or wallowes in these sinnes approving them as lawfull by his continuall practise, but doth secretly passe sentence against them in his conscience; As therefore we must not argue, that drunkennes, whoredome, adultery, lying, hypocrisie and theft are lawfull, because they are com∣monly committed, & sometimes applauded, since the ve∣ry committers do condemne them, no more may we ar∣gue, that the acting or beholding of Stage-playes is law∣ful, because Schollers and Vniversity men do sometimes act and see them; since if they will but seriously examine their checking consciences, they shal inde them passing a secret doome of cōdemnation against them, what ever  their practise be. Thirdly, See Doctor Rainolds Over∣throw of Stage-playes. pag. 91. Christians must not live by ex∣amples, but by precepts: if therefore the rules of Religion and Christianity allow them not, no matter though the whole world approve them; they will be evill & unlawfull still, and so much the worse because so many justifie them. Lastly, admit the Objection true; yet Hierom. E∣pist. 85. Tom. 2. pag. 311. Si au∣ctoritas quaeritur, orbis major est urbe: The authority of the See Part. 1. Act 7. thorow∣out. whole Church of God from age to age, of 71. Fathers, 55. Councels, above 150. moderne Christian Au∣thors, of diuers Christian & Heathen Nations, Magistrates, Emperours, States, &c. of 40. Heathen Writers, and of our owne Church and State, See her, pag. 483. to 497.714. to 717. accordingly. who condemne the penning, acting, and seeing of Stage-playes, is far greater then the custome or exemplary Authority (not the sad and serious resolu∣tion after full debate, which Stageplayes never had as yet) of both our Vniversities: This Objection therefore is too light to sway the ballance of this present contro∣versie; Quintilian Instit. l. 1. c 11. pag. 56. Consuetudo enim si ex eo quod plures faciunt no∣men accipiat, periculosum dabit exemplū, non orationi modò, sed (quod majus est) vita. Ergo consuetudinem vivendi vo∣cabo consensum bonorum, sicut sermonis, consensum erudito∣rum. And thus much for the chiefe Objections, both for the compiling and acting of Stage-playes.
SCENA SECVNDA. I now come to answer the Objections, the pretences for seeing and frequenting Stage-playes.Object. 1. The first of them is this. Wee goe to Play-houses (say all our Play-haunters) with no evill intent at all: for recrea∣tion sake alone, and for no sinister purpose: therefore our resort to Playes cannot be evill, because our in∣tentions, our purposes are not so.Answ. 1. To this I might here reply as De Habitu Virginum. pag. 242. Saint Cyprian did to those lascivious Virgins who ran to wanton Bathes, as some doe to our Bathes, to see & to be seene, or to bathe with naked men; and made this very objection. Vi∣deris, inquis, qua illuc mente quis veniat, mihi tantum re∣ficiendi corpusculi cura est & lavandi: To which hee gives this answer: Non te purgat ista defensio, nec las∣civiae & petulantiae crimen excusat. Sordidat lavatio ista, non abluit, nec emundat membra sed maculat. Impudice tu neminem conspicis, sed ipsa conspiceris impudice. Oculos tuos turpi oblectatione non polluis, sed dum oblectas alios pollueris. Spectaculum de lavacro facis, &c. Theatra sunt faediora quo convenis, verecundia illic omnis exuitur, &c. but I answer, first; that men cannot run to Playes and Play-houses with any good intent: For every intenti∣on is regulated by its object, and if that be ill, the in∣tention it selfe cannot bee good. If a man intend to murther another for any good or publike end, the in∣tent cannot be good because the thing intended, to wit the murther, is evill. 2 Sam. 6.7. Vzza no doubt had a good intent (far better then any Play-haunters have in flock∣ing to Playes or Play-houses) when as hee put forth his
hand to stay the Arke, which was shaken and like to fall: and yet God presently ew him for it, because God had forbidden any to touch it but the Numb. 3.31. Deut. 10.8. Iosh 3.3, 4, 6, 9, 13, 15. Priests. The 1 Sam. 6.14. to 21. Beth∣sheemites had questionlesse a good intention, when they tooke downe the Arke and pried into it upon its unexpected returne from the Philistins: and yet God slew fifty thou∣sand threescore and ten men for it; because he had prohi∣bited all but the Priests and Levites to looke into it. Rom. 3.8. Men must not doe evill that good may come of it: there∣fore they must not, they cannot goe to Stage-playes, (whose sinfulnesse and unlawfulnesse I have sufficiently discovered) with any good intent; These Playes themselves being ill their good intentions cannot make either them, or your resort unto them, good & lawfull.  Secondly, I answer, that the intētions, the aymes of most who resort to Playes, are meerely ill. For to what end doe our See Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5. Common Strumpets, Bawdes, Panders, Adulte∣resses, Adulterers, Whore-masters, &c. frequent either Playes or Play-houses, but for lewde and sinister purposes; to con∣clude of times, of places for their shamefull workes of dark∣nesse, to draw others on to sinne, and to saiate their owne ungodly lusts? And why doe most other Spectators flocke unto them; but See August. Enar. in Psal. 80. Tom. 8. pars 1. p. 8. & Confes. l. 6. c. 7 8. See Act 6. Scene 16. ac∣cordingly. either to gratifie such lewde com∣panions who intice them thither or to spend and passe their time which might bee better imployed: Spectatum veniunt, veni∣unt Spectentur ut ipsae. Ovid d Arte Amandi. l. 1. p. 170. Cle∣mens Alexand. Paedag. l 3. c. 11. & Tertul. De Spectac. lib. to see and to be seene: to learne some apish fashions, or antique complements: to behold such or such an obscene or Sa∣tyricall Comedie acted: See Part 1. Act 2. & Act 5. Scene 11. to laugh excessively in a profuse unchristian childish manner; to satisfie some secret carnall lust or other, which prickes them on to Stage-playes; or some strange fantastique humor of novalty, vanity, ridiculous mirth and jollity; and the like? These I dareboldly say are the chiefe, if not the onely ends why men repaire to Stage-playes; and these all are sinfull: therefore their intention in resorting unto Stage-playes is not good. Thirdly, no man when he goes to see a Stage-play, pro∣pounds Gods glory (which 1 Cor. 10.31. See Act 3. Scene 7. ough to be the utmost end of
all mens actions) for his end; nor yet the good, the peace, the comfort of his own and others soules: his in∣tentions therefore cannot be warrantable. Fourthly, admit the Objection true; that your meanings and mindes are good when you run to Playes; yet Bonus animus in malare dimidium est mali; as even Pseudolus. pag. 471. Plautus the Comedian writes: your good intentions make your ill actions far the worse, because you commit them with greater greedinesse, and lesse remorse, as if they were truely good, at least not ill. Fiftly, admit  that you goe to Stage-playes onely for recreation sake: yet it will not follow, that your resort to Playes is lawfull, because Playes themselves are no lawfull re∣creations. And if the consequent of this Objection bee now admitted: then men might by the selfesame reason run to Brothels, Whore-houses, Dice-houses, Tavernes, Alehouses, to whore, to drab, to drink them∣selves drunke, and cast away all their estates at one desperate throw, as too many doe, without offence, un∣der pretence of recreation. The Scripture therefore is expresse, Prov. 14.9. cap. 24.17. that we must not make a sport or mocke of sinne, it being the object 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Psal. 119.136, 139. onely of our godly sorrow, and deep∣est griefe, not of our carnall joy: that we may not re∣create our selves Ephes. 5.3, 4, 5. See Act 3. Scene 1.2. with scurrility, ribaldry, lascivious, prophane or amorous Enterludes, but onely with good and lawfull things, which are no 1 Cor. 10.32, 33. Rom. 12.17.wayes scandalous, or of ill report: therefore we may not make Playes the object of our Recreation, which were ever See Act 6. Scene 2.3, 4, 5, 6. infamous and un∣lawfull too. Sixtly, I answer, that mens pretence of go∣ing to Stage-playes meerely for their honest recreation, is but a false surmise, which will be most apparant, if we shall truely weight, what it is to doe a thing, onely for honest Recreation, and what necessary ingredients and circumstances all lawfull recreations must have, Aquinas se∣cunda secundae Quaest. 168. M. Perkins his Cases of Con∣science. l. 3. c 4. sect. 9. Vol. 2. pag. 140.141. M. Northbrooke his Treatise of Vaine Playes and Enterludes. M. Samuel Bird, his Vse of the Pleasures of this present life, and others who write of Recreations. Every honest lawfull Recreation must have these condi∣tions:
First the object, the subject of it must be lawfull, Christian, and commendable,Prov. 14.9. not sinfull, not infamous, or prohibited by the Magistrate. Secondly, it must be boun∣ded with due circumstances of Rom. 12.17. 1 Cor. 10 32. Prov. 1.15. c. 2.19, 20. c. 4.14, 15. place and persons, both of them must be honest, & of good report: in which all Stage-playes (especially in Play-houses,) are defective. Thirdly, it must have all these circumstances of time: First, It Isay 58.3, 13. c. 22.12, 13, 14. Exod. 20.8, 9. Ephes. 5.16. See here Act 6. Scene 12. & Act 7. Scene 3. Summa Ange∣lica. Tit. Lu∣dus, with all Expositors on the 4. Com∣mandement. must not bee on Lords-dayes, on times devoted to Gods more speciall service, on times either of publike or private fasting and solemne humiliations: nor yet in times designed for our honest studies, callings, or any necessary publike in∣ployments: Secondly, it must not be in the See here, pag. 646.746, 747, 754, 75. & 360. accor∣dingly. & Se∣neca Epist. 122. night season when men by Gods appointment, and the ordinary course of nature ought to take their rest, to enable them the better to the duties of the ensuing day: and so much the rather because such Ephes. 5.11, 12, 13. Rom. 13.12, 13. 1 Thes. 5.7. Prov. 7.9, 10. See here, pag. 360. night-recreations are occasions, if not pro∣vocations unto workes of darkenesse. Thirdly, it must be onely at such times when we stand in need of recrea∣tions to refresh our bodies or spirits: It must bee al∣wayes either after sicknesses, or naturall infirmities, or distempers of body or minde, to recover strength, health and vigor: or else after In oportuni & temporis & usus occasione veluti laboris quae dam mdi∣cina ita ludus adhibendus est. Aristot. olit. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 7. See M Wheatly his Times Redemption: and all others who write of Recreations. honest labours, studies, and imployments, in our lawfull callings, to repaire the de∣cayes, to refresh the wearinesse of our bodies, or to whet the blunted edge of our over-wearied mindes: Fourthly, It must bee Eccles. 3.1, 4. Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Iuvenal. Satyr. 11. p. 111. rare and seldome, not quotidian. Fiftly, the recreation must Nec Iusisse pudet, sed non incidere ludum. Horat. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 14 p. 260. See M. Wheatly his Times Redemption. & her p. 254.255, 258. & Act 6. Scene 1. not be overlong, not time-consuming; it must be onely as a baite to a traviler, a whetting to a Mower or Carpenter, or as an howres sleepe in the day time to a wearied man; we must Iob 21.11, 12, 13. Amos 6.1 to 9. Isay 5.11. Iam. 5.5. Mat. 24.18, 20. c. 20.6. Isay 16 12. Exod. 20.9. not spend whole weekes, whole dayes, halfe dayes or nights on recreations, as now
too many doe, Ezech. 16.49, 51. abundance of idlenesse in this kinde, being one of Sodomes hainous sinnes: Fourthly, they must See here Act 6. Scene 2. ac∣cordingly. & Mr. Botons Walking with God. p. 154. to 181. not be over-costly or expensive; but cheape and obvious, with as little expence as may bee. Fiftly, they See Summa Angelica. Tit. Ludus. & here Act 7. Scene 3. accordingly. must bee such as are suitable to mens callings, ages, places, sexes, con∣ditions, tempers of body, &c. that being not lawfull or conve∣nient in these regards to one, which yet are and may bee commendable in, or suitable to another. The recreations of Princes being not meet for Peasants; and so  con∣verso; nor all the pastimes of the Laitie agreeable to the Clergie. Sixtly, they must be all directed to a lawfull end, See M. Wheatly his Times Re∣demption, Dr. Rainod Over∣throw of Stage-playes: & others. See Act 3. Scene 7. even to the strengthning, quickning and refreshing both of our bodies and spirits, that so we may goe on with greater cheerefulnesse in the duties of our callings, and in the worship and service of God, whose 1 Cor. 10.30, 31. glory must bee the utmost ayme of all our recreations. If our recreations faile in all or any of these circumstances, or if wee use prophane Playes or sports in See here Act 7. Scene 3. tho∣rowout. Sum∣ma Angelica. Tit. Ludus: and our owne Ca∣nons. 1603. Can. 88. which prohibit Playes in Churches.Churches, in other sacred places devoted to Gods service, they presently cease to be lawfull or honest, and so prove sinfull pleasures. Now Stage-playes, & those who resort unto them under the pretence of recreation, are defective or peccant in all or many of these partiulars. Therefore they are not used, not frequented onely for honest recreation ake. Lastly, admit men goe to Stage-playes onely to recreate their mindes, and to refresh their spirits; I an∣swer, that this is so farre frow justifying or extenua∣ting, that it doth highly aggravate the execrable viti∣ousnesse of this their action, and proclaime them sin∣ners in an high degree. For what men or women are there who can make a play, a sport, a recreation of sinne and sinfull things; of ribaldry, prophane and scurrill Iests, Adulteries, Rapes, Incests, Blasphemies, and such other notorious abominations, that are usually acted on the Stage, (2 Pet. 1.7, 8. Se he Act 5. Scene 11. & Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in Matth. acco∣digly. which vex every righteous soule from day to day, and grieves it to the heart,) but such who are voyd of grace, of sin-abhorring, vice-lamenting repen∣tance,
and wholy enthralled to the love, the service of these sinfull lusts and pleasures, which will plunge them over head and eares into eternall torments at the lat; this being one of the highest degrees of lewdnesse, Isay 3.9. Phil. 3.19. for men to take joy and pleasure even in sinfull things. Reply.If any here reply in the second place, that they de∣light not in the scurrilous sinfull passages, speeches, ge∣stures, representations or parts in Stage-playes, which they altogether abhor, but only in the action, & in those honest Spectacles and discourses, which no man can condemne. Answer 1.To this I answer first, That commonly the more See Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. & here Act 3 Scene 1. & 3. Act 5. Scene 1. to 5. accor∣dingly. obscene and scurrilous the Play, the more lascivious the Players action is, the more it exhilerates, and delights the Auditors, the Spectators; no Playes, no Actors giving lesse content, then those that are most free from lasci∣vious, amorous, prophane, effeminate jests, and gestures, as experience and the premises witnesse. This very  suggestion therefore is untrue. Secondly, See Cyprian Epist. l. 2. Epist. 2. Chrysost. Hom. 6.7. & 38. in Matth. Tertullian De Spectaculis. Lactantius De Vero Cultu. cap. 20. accor∣dingly. those wh delight in the appearances of evill, in the lively representa∣tions of sinne, or sinfull things, can never cordially abhorre the evils, the sinnes themselves: for he that truly loathes a Man, a Toade, a Devill, a Serpent, (and so by conse∣quent, a sinne, will abhorre their very pictures, and resemblances. Hence is it that a Christian who detests all sinne, hates 1 Thes. 5.22. Iude 23. Psal. 119.113. the very thoughts and imaginations, and ab∣steines from all the appearances of it too. Since therefore Play-haunters delight thus in the representations of whoredome, adultery, and such like execrable crimes, needs must they take pleasure in the sinnes themselves. For, if men did cordially detest these sinnes as they pre∣tend, the nearer the representations came unto the sinnes (as they oft-times come too neere in Stage-playes, See Lampri∣dij Heliogaba∣lus. pag. 212. Mimicis adulteris ea quae solent simulatò fieri, effici ad verum jussit, &c. See Au∣lus Gellius. Noct. Attic. lib. 7. cap. 5. the story of Polus. even to the actuall commission of the very abominations acted:) the more they would abhorre them, by rea∣son
of that neere similitude they beare unto the sinnes: but the more lively the resemblances of these Stage-lewdnesses are, the greater vicinity they have unto the sins themselves, the more they are applauded, admired Cyprian E∣pist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. & actor o peritior quo turpior judicatur: therefore they doe not hate, but love these sins themselves, what ever they pretend. Thirdly, that which most Play-haunters deeme nothing else but the representation of sinne in the acting of Playes, is even the sin it selfe in Gods repute: the acting of an effeminate whorish part upon the Stage in womans apparell, with amorous, womanish speches, gestures, kisses, cōplements, dalliances & imbracements, with wanton, unchaste, lascivious glances, nods, and sollicitations unto lewdnesse, yea the very expressions of the acts of Venery on the Stage, are See Act 3. & 5. thorowout, accordingly. nought else but effeminacy, scurrility, wantonnesse, whoredome and adulte∣ry it selfe in Gods esteeme: the personating of a fooles part in jest, Prov. 13.16. c. 14.24. c. 15.21. Eccles. 2.3, 12, 13. c. 10.1, 6. is folly and vanity in good earnest: the See Act 3. Scene 1.3, 5, 7. accordingly. speaking of vaine words, the swearing by the names of Pagan Idols, and the very uttering of their names, much more the acting of their parts: the very naming of forni∣cation and adultery, together with foolish talking and jesting on the Stage, are nought else but actuall sinnes in Gods ac∣count, not onely in the Actors, but the Rom. 1.30. 2 Iohn 11. Spectators too; who give consent unto them: Those therefore who take pleasure in all or any of these, delight not in the repre∣sentations onely of sinne, but even in sinne it selfe, which should be their greatest sorrow. Fiftly, these  Play-house shdowes, and counterfeit resemblances of evill, are a ready meanes to enamour men with, to in∣scare them in the very sinnes themselves, See Act 3. Scene 1.2, 3, 7. & Act 6. tho∣rowout. as the Fa∣thers and premises witnesse: If then Play-haunters detest these sinnes, why doe they not likewise 1 Thes. 5.22. Matth. 6, 13. c. 5.28, 29.30. hate the very represntations of them, which are a beaten rode, a strong allrement to these sinnes themselves? Certainely, their little care to avoyd the one, bewrayes their love, their little detestation of the other. Sixtly, whereas
some object, that they hate all scurrilous, filthy, amo∣rous parts, discourses, passages, Pastorals, jests, and ge∣stures in the Playes they goe to, approving none but chaste, but modest representations, passages, speeches: To this I answer That as few Play-haunters, I dare say, can speake this seriously from his hearts: so it is but an  idle false surmise. For first, every man who resorts to Playes, comes with a resolution to heare and see the whole Play acted, not one particular Scene or Act: he resolves, not this before hand with himselfe, I will one∣ly see and heate this Act, this Scene, this Part; but I will debarre mine eares, mine eyes from all the rest, because I deest their lewdnesse: no man goes thus pre-resolved to a Play; he comes not therefore with an intention to abhor its lewdnesse, but to approve the  whole. Secondly, few Play-haunters (that I say not any, I meane in point of conscience, though many doe it out of lasciviousnesse and lust) inquire before hand of the Play, whether it be scurrilous or obscene? whe∣ther there be any prophanesse, any lewde parts or passa∣ges in it? whether it bee such a one as they may be∣hold with a safe conscience? whether there bee any lewde ungodly persons who resort unto it, &c. but they run head-long to it without these premised Que∣ries: Those therefore who make no such conscionable inquiries of the unlawfull parts and passages of Playes before they resort unto them, can See here, fol. 548. hardly detest them  when they come. Thirdly, he who truely abhors the lewde scurrill parts and sinfull passages of Playes, will chuse rather to Se Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Isay 52.11. avoyd the whole Play for the evill parts and particles which defile the whole; (as every man is apt to flie those Cities that are but in part in∣fected with the plague, and to eschue those sweet con∣serves and wholsome potions that are contempered with a little poyson,) then to behold the evill parts though with detestation, that he may injoy the plea∣sure of the good; there being more danger of inne, of
corruption by the one, then hope of any reall benefit or contentment from the other. Lastly, every Play-haunters  See Chryso∣stom. Hom. 6. & 38. in Matth. accordingly. presence at the whole entire Play, and his con∣tribution to the Actors for playing of the whole, is a no∣torious approbation of, an unavoydable assent unto the whole, in Gods, if not in mens esteeme, who will thence conclude that they consented to and tooke pleasure in the whole. Let no Play-haunters therefore any longer cheat thēselves or others with these dilusory false pre∣tences, which have neither truth nor substance in them: but quite abandon Playes and Play-houses, notwithstan∣ding these evasions which wil not help them in the day of Iudgement. And thus much for the first Objection. The 2. Objection or pretence for seeing Stage-playes is this:Object. 2. That it serves to pase away mens idle time, which would else perchance be worse imployed. To this I answer first;Answ. 1. That See Act 6. Scen 1. therefore it is evill be∣cause it thus consumes mens pretious time which should bee better imployed, either in publike or private duties of piety and devotion, or else in some honest studies, callings, or im∣ployments for the publike good. Secondly, there is no man  who hath so much vacant time, that he needs to run to Playes, to Play-houses, to waste, to poast away his idle houres. Alas, we all complaine with De Brevitate Vitae. cap. 1. Seneca and others, Ars longa, vita brevis; that our studies, our professions are long, our lives exceeding short and swift; and shall wee then adde wings, adde spurs of life-consuming pleasures of sin to our few winged dayes, to make them flie away with greatest haste and worser speed, as if we had too much life? Iob. 7 6. c. 16.22. Psal. 30.6. Psal. 103.15. Psal. 144.4. Isay 406. Iam. 4.14. See Act 6 Scene 1. Our time is too too swift already; it runnes whiles wee sit still; it is alwayes flying more swift then any poast, whiles we are eating, drinking, sleeping, playing, and thinke not of its haste: yea so swift winged is it Seneca De Brevit. Vitae. lib. c. 1.2, 11, 12. ubi per luxum ac negligentiam defuit, ubi nullae rei bon impenditur, ut quod ire non intelleximus praeterijsse sentimus; that whiles we waste it thus on Playes and sports, it is past and gone before we discerne it move.
And shall we then bee so desperately prodigall of our lives, our rich and peerelesse houres, as to plot, to study how to passe them quie away with moe celerity, and farre lesser fruit? Certainely if we would but seriously consider and peruse that elegant Treatise of an Senec De Brevitate Vitae. Heathen, Of the shortnesse of life, or this memorable speech of his Seneca Epist. 24. Quotidie morimur, quotidie enim demitu aliqua pars vitae, & tunc quo{que} cum escimus vita decrescit. Infanti∣am amisimus, deinde pueritiam deinde adolescentiam, us{que} ad hesternum quicquid transijt temporis perit. Hunc ipsum quem agimus diem, etiam cum morte dividimus, &c. If we would with all remember the end for which God made us; to wit, Prov. 16.4. Rev. 4.11. to doe his service; Iohn 17.4. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. to finish the worke which he hath given us to doe; 1 Pet. 1.17. and to passe the time of our pilgrimage here in his feare: Or the cause for which our blessed Saviour redeemed us, Luk. 1.74, 75. That we might serve him in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the dayes of our lives: Rom. 14.7, 8. that we should no longer live to our selves but unto him alone, and that living and dying we might e hi. If we wuld further seriouly ponder how many holy du∣ties we have every day to performe towards God; how many graces, and degrees of grace we want; how ma∣ny daily sinnes and lusts we have to lament and mortifie; See D. Gough, his Family du∣ties, & Thomas Beacon, his Ca∣techisme part 6. fol. 487. to 558. how many offices of piety, of charity, of courtesie, duty and civility wee have to exercise towards our selves, our friends, our neighbours, our families, our ene∣mies, as we are men, or Christians, in all those severall relations wherein wee stand to others: considering withall what time we ought to spend upon our lawfull callings, upon the care and culture of our soules An illa inge∣miscit & plan∣git, cui vacat cultum praeci∣osae vestis in∣duere, nec in∣dumentum Chriti quod erdidit cogitare? accipere preciosa ornamenta & monilia elabo∣rata, nec divini & caelestis ornatus damna deflere? Cyprian De Lapsis. pag. 343. See Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in 1 Tim. accordingly. which are then most neglected, when as our bodies are most pampe∣red, most adorned; all which are suficient to mono∣polize even all our idle dayes & more. And if we would adde to this; these strict commands of God: Exod.
20.9. Sixe dayes Which pre∣cept is not a meere permis∣sion to labour, as some ex∣plaine it, but an absolute peremptory command. See Thomas Beacon, his Cate∣chisme. fol. 343 344, 345. Ny∣der super Prae∣ceptū tertium. cap. 14. Gorran, Lyra, RHabanus Maurus, BB. Ba∣bington, M. Per∣kins, Downeham, Dod, Lake, and others on the 4. Commande∣ment. shalt thou labour and doe all thy worke; Gen. 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eate bread till thou returne unto the ground: (a curse, a precept layd on all mankinde.) Ephes. 5.15, 16. See that yee walke circum∣spectly, not as fooles but as wise, redeeming the time, because the dayes are evill: 2. Thes. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. For even when we were with you this we commanded you, that if any would not worke, neither should he eate. For we heare there are some (and O that we did not now heare of many uch among us) which walke among you disorderly, not working at all, but are buste-bodies. Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Iesus, that with quienesse they worke and eate their owne bread, not being weary in well doing. And if any obey not our Word by this Epistle note that man, and have no communion with him, that he may be ashamed, Did we, I say, consider all this, or did we remember, Arcta & an∣gusta est via, quae ducit ad vitam; durus & ardus li∣mes qui tendit ad gloriam. Non est ad magna facilis ascensus. Quem udorem per∣petimur, quem laborem; cum conamur ascen∣dere colles & vertices mon∣tim, quid ut ascendamus ad caelum? Cyprian De Habit. Virg pag. 124. how narrow, steepe, and dif∣ficult the way is unto Heaven, and what paines all those must take who meane to climbe up thither; We should then speedily discover, how little cause men have to run to Stage-playes to passe away their idle houres, which flie away so speedily of themselves. But sup∣pose there are any such (as alas our idle age hath too too many,) who though they are loath to die, (as all men should be Ioh. 17.5, 6. Act. 13.36. Luk. 2.6, 27, 28, 29, 30. 2. Tim. 4.6, 7, 8. willing to depart who have finished or sur∣vived their worke, or else want good imployments,) yet See Seneca De Brevitae. Vitae. cap. 1.2, 9. to 12. they have so much idle time, that they know not how to spend, standing all the day idle, like those lazy Loyterers, Matth. 20.1. to 8. even for want of worke; or loytring abroad like our common Vagrant Sturdy-beggers, not so much because they cannot, but because they will not worke; let all such idle Bees know, that Christ Iesus their Lord and Master hath a Vineyard in which they may and ought to spend their time; he hath store of imploy∣ments for them though themselves have none, even
enough to take up all the vacant houres of their lives. When therefore any Play-haunters or others have so much idle time that they know not how to bestow it, let them presently step into the Lords Vineyard; let them repaire to Sermons, and such other publike exercises of Religion; calling upon one another and saying, Isay 2 3, 5. Come and let us goe up to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iacob, and hee will teach us his wayes, and we will walke in his pathes: or else betake themselves to their owne private prayers and devotions: Let them Deut. 6.5. to 8. cap. 17.19. Iohn 5.39. Acts 17.11. read the Scriptures, or some other pious Bookes, which may instruct them in the wayes of godlinesse: Ephes. 5.19, 20. Col. 3.16. or sing Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs to God let them seriously Lament. 3.40. 1 Cor. 11.28. examine their owne consciences, hearts and lives, by the sacred Touch-stone of Gods Word; let them Ier. 31.9, 18, 19. Zach. 12.10, 11. Rom. 7.24. bewayle their owne originall corruption, with all their actuall transgressions, and sue earnestly to God for pardon for them; let them labour 2 Pet. 1.5 to 10. cap. 3.18. after all the graces and degrees of grace which yet they want, and bee ever adding to those graces which they have: let them Ier. 50.4, 5. Psal. 61.8. Mal. 3.16. Psal. 73.28. re∣new their vowes and covenants with God, and walke more closely, more exactly with him every day: let them muse Gen. 24 63. Psal. 1.2. Ps. 8. thorowout. Ps. 63.6. Psal. 77.12. Psal. 119.15 23, 48, 78. Psal. 143.5. and meditate on God, on all his great and glorious workes and attributes; on Christ and all his suffrings; on the holy Ghost and all his graces; on the Word of God and all its precepts, promises, threatnings; on Heaven and ever∣lasting happinesse: on Hell and all its torments; on sinne and all the miseries that attend it: Deut. 32.29. on their owne frailty and mortality; on the See Eccles. 1.1, 2, &c. vanity of all earthly things; on the day of death and 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. judgement, which should be alwayes in their thoughts; and on a thousand such like particu∣lars, on which they should imploy their mindes and vacant houres. If men will but thus improve their idle time which now they waste on Playes and such like vanities (which Rom. 2.5. Se Part 1. Act 6. Scene 19.20. onely treasure up wrath unto their soules against the day of wrath, and plunge them deeper into Hell at last,) what benefit, what comfort might
they reape? their idle vacant seasons would then prove the comfortablest, the profitablest of all others, and bring them in a large returne of grace here, of glory hereafter. Let us therefore henceforth labour to im∣prove our cast, our leisure times to our eternall advan∣tage; Seneca De Brev. Vitae cap. 1415. & ab hoc exiguo & caduco temporis transitu, in illa nos toto demus animo, quae immensa quae aeterna sunt, quae cum melioribus communia: Haec nobis dabunt ad aeterni∣tatem iter, & nos in illum locum ex quo nemo eijciet, suble∣nabunt: haec una ratio est extendendae mortalitatis, imo, in immortalitatem vertendae: and then we need not run to Masques, to Playes, or Play-houses to passe away our time. Lastly, I answer, That men cannot be worse im∣ployed then in hearing or beholding Stage-playes, Ni∣hil enim tam damnosum bonis moribus, quàm in aliquo Spectaculo desidere: tunc enim per voluptatem facilius vi∣tia surrepunt. It was Seneca Epist. 7. Sec. Act 6. Scene. 5. pag. 449.484. Seneca his resolution to his friend Lucilius, when he requested his advice, what thing hee would have him principally to avoyd; and it may be a sa∣tisfactory answer to this Objection. For how can men be worse imployed, then in hearing, seeing, learning all kinde of vice, of villany, and lewdnesse whatsoever? then in depraving both their mindes and manners, and treasuring up damnation to their soules? See Part 1. Act 6. tho∣rowout. This is the onely good imployment, that our Play-haunters have at Playes, which is the worst of any. This Objection therefore is but idle. The 3. Objection which Play-frequenters make for the seeing of Playes,Object. 3. is this. That the frequenting of Stage-playes (as their owne experience witnesseth,) doth men no hurt at all: it neither indisposeth them to holy duties, nor inticeth them to lust or lewdnesse: therefore it is not ill. An Objection made in Verum ut absurdam in∣venias tuorum spectaculorum quibus suspen∣sus inhia excusationem, dicis te utilitatem capere ex his ex quibus jacturam pateris irrecuperabilem. Hom. 1. De Verbis Isa. Tom. 1. Col. 1284. A. Chryso∣stomes time, as well as now. To this I answer first; that Play-haunters are no
meete judges in this case, because most of them being yet Eph. 2.1, 2, 3. See Part 1. Act 4. in the state of sinne and death, are altogether sence∣lesse of the growth and progresse of their corruptions, of which they take no notice. Excellent to this purpose is that speech of Epist. 54. pag. 241. Seneca Quare vitia sua nemo confite∣tur? Quia etiam nunc in illis est. Somnium narrare, vigi∣lantis est; & vitia sua confireri, sanitatis indicium est Expergiscamur ergo, ut errores nostros coarguere possimus. Stage-haunters are for the most part lulled asleepe in the Dalilaes lappe of these sinfull pleasures, yea they are quite dead in sinnes and trespasses; their 2 Cor. 4.4. Heb. 3.13. eyes are so blinded that they will not see, their hearts so hardned that they cannot discerne, their consciences so cauterized that they never seriously behold nor yet examine the execrable filthinesse, greatnesse, multitude, growth, or daily increase of their beloved sinnes and lusts; no mar∣vaile therefore if they affirme this falsehood; that  they receive no hurt at all from Stage-playes. Second∣ly, every man (especially those who were never tho∣rowly humbled for their sinnes, as few Play-frequen∣ters are,) is a Male verum examinat om∣nis corruptus Iudex. Horat. Serm. l. 2. Satyr. 2. pag. 199. corrupt, a partiall, and so an unfitting udge, in his owne cause. As therefore men in ordinary differences, referre the censure and determination of their owne causes to indifferent Arbitrators who are no wayes ingaged in their suits, declining their owne particular discitions to avoyd all partiality; it being a∣gainst reason (as Sect. 212.12. H. 4.8. Br. Leete 12.9. H. 6.10. a. 7. H. 6.13. a. 1. E. 3.13. a. 23. a. 8. . 3.2. a. Mr. Littleton and our Law-bookes teach us,) that any man should be the Iudge of his owne cause. Or as Polit. lib. 3. cap. 12. Aristotle writes of Physicians, that they use the helpe of other Physicians in their owne sicknesse, be∣cause they cannot discerne the true touch of their owne diseases by reason of their distemper: the same should our Play-haunters doe in this particular; referre the examination of the hurt they receive from Playes and Play-houses unto others, who are impartiall judges; but not unto themselves, whom selfe-love makes too  partiall. Thirdly, I answer with S. Hierom; Epist. 1. c. 3.5. Tunc
maxime oppugnaris, si te oppugnari nescis. Adversarius no∣ster, tanquam leo rugiens, aliquem devorare quaerens cir∣cumit; & tu pacem putas? Sedet in insidijs; insidiatur in occulto; & tu frondosae arboris tectus umbraoulo, molles somnos futurus praeda, carpis? Inde me persequitur luxuria, inde compellit libido, ut habitantem in me Spiritum sanctum fugem, ut templum ejus violem: persequitur, inquam, me hostis, cui nomina mille, mille nocendi artes & ego infaelix victorem me putabo, dum capior? In illo aestu Charybdis luxuriae salutem vorat. Ibi ore virgineo ad pudicitiae per∣petranda naufragia, Scylla seu renidens, libido blanditur. Hic barbarum litus, hic Diabolus pyrata cum socijs portat vincula capiendis. Nolite credere, nolite esse securi. Licet in modum stagni fusum aequor arrideat; licet vix summa ja∣centis elementi spiritu terga crispentur: magnos hic cam∣pus montes habet; intus inclusum est periculum, intus est hostis, expedite rudentes, vela suspendite; tranquillitas ista tempesta est. Stage-players and Play-haunters are com∣monly most dangerously corrupted by the Playes they act and see, when as they are least sensible of their hurt; yea their oft resort to Playes and Play-houses which perchance did somewhat gall their consciences at the first, hath made them sencelesse of their mischiefe at the last. Bernard. De Consideratio∣ne. lib. 1. c. 2.Vulnere vetusto & neglecto callus obducitur, & eo insanabile quo insensibile fit. Solum est cordurum quod semetipsum non exhorret quia nec sentit. I shall there∣fore shut up this reply with that of De Conside∣ratione. l. 2. c. 1. Bernard, which I would wish all unlamenting Play-haunters & sinners to consider. Scio, longius à salute absistere membrum quod ob∣stupuit, & aegrum sese non sentientem, periculosius laborare. Fourthly, the hurt men receive from Stage-playes, is  like the growth of their bodies, it increaseth by cer∣taine insensible degrees, so that it is hardly discerned whiles it is growing, till time hath brought it to matu∣rity. Iuvenal. Sa∣tyr 2. pag. 12. Nemo repente fit tu pissimus: is as true as ancient. No man becomes extreamely vitious on a sudden, but by unsensible gradations, and so doe Play-haunters too,
even by those seeds of vice which Stage-playes sow and nourish in them. What Epist. 123. See Osorius de Regum Instit. lib. 4. here, p. 916. in the margent, accor∣dingly. Seneca writes of the discourses of lewde companions; Horum sermo mul∣tum nocet; Nametiam si non statim officit, semina in ani∣mo relinquit; sequitur{que} nos etiam cum ab illis discesseri∣mus resurrecturum posteà malum. The same may I truely write of Playes; whose evill fruits, like Matth. 13.25, 26, &c. tares that are buried under ground, are oft concealed for a time, till at last they bud forth by degrees, and come to perfect ripenesse; and then they are abvious unto all mens view. No wonder therefore if Play-haunters disco∣ver not the hurt they receive from Playes, because it creepes thus on them by imperceptible gradations, though faster upon some then others. But albeit Play-haunters feele no hurt at first, (no more then those who drinke downe poyson in a sugered cup, which yet proves fatall to rhem at the last, though it were sweet and luscious for the present,) yet when terrors of con∣science, death, and judgements, when crosses and affli∣ctions shall thorowly awaken them; when God shall set all their sinnes in order before them, or bring them by his grace and mercy to sincere repentance, then they shall finde and know it to their griefe (as sundry See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 12.14, 18, 19, 20. & pag. 910. penitent Players and Play-haunters have done before them,) that Stage-playes have done them hurt indeed. Fiftly,  Stage-playes have exceedingly See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 18, 19, 20. depraved, corrupted many Spectators from time to time, and drawne them on to divers sinnes, which have even sunke their soules to Hell; as the premises largely testifie: And can any then think to escape all danger, even where they have seene so ma∣ny perish? Can any man rest secure where multitudes have miscarried? What De Singulari∣tate Clerico∣rum. Tract. Tom. 2. p. 199.200. S. Cyprian therefore writes in a like case, that shall I here commend to Stage-haun∣ters. Ad vos nunc mea exhortatio convertitur, quos no∣lumus experiri talia praecipitia ruinarum. Metuite quan∣tum potestis ejusmodi casus exitia. Et in ista subversione labentium vos experimenta perterreant. Nimium praeceps
est quitransire contendit, ubi alium conspexerit cecidisse, & vehementer infrenis est cui non incutitur timor alio pe∣reunte. Amator vero est salutis suae qui evitat alienae mortis incursum, & ipse est providus qui solicitus fit cladi∣bus caeterorum. Adversa est confidentia quae periculis vi∣tam suam pro certo commendat; & lubrica spes est quae in∣ter fomena peccati salvari se sperat. Incerta victoria est, inter hostilia arma pugnare; & impossibilis liberatio est lammis circundari, nec ardere; quod Prov. 6. Solomon non negat, dicens. Quis alligabit in sinu suo ignem, vestimenta autem sua non comburet? Credite quaeso vos, credite divinae fidei quinimo plu quàm nostrae. Difficile quis venenum bibet & vivet: verendum est dormienti in ripa, ne cadat, cum dicat Apostolus, 1 Cor. 10. Qui se putat stare videat ne cadat. In hc parte expedit plus bene timere, quàm male fidere. Et uti∣lius est infirmum se homo cognoscat, ut fortis existat; quàm fortis videri velit, ut infirmus emergat. Sixtly, all Play-haunters receive much hurt from Stage-playes Iactant & gestiunt se ob∣tinuisse tutores quos magis ul∣tores sensuisse debuerant. Bernard. Epist. 178. fol. 212. what ever they pretend: For first, these Playes enflame their lusts, ingender unchast affections in their soules; mispend their mony and time, indispose them to Gods service & sincere repentance, by inthralling them in the guilt of sundry other mischiefes, as I have Act 6. tho∣rowout. elsewhere largely prooved. Secondly, it makes them guilty of all the sinnes that are either acted or committed at the Play-house; of all the Play-poets, all the Actors wicked∣nesse which they maintaine and cherish both with their purses and presence. A fearefull mischiefe. De Guberna∣tione Di l. 4. pag. 141. See here pag. 417. Nam qui alios peccare fecerit, multos secum praecipitat in mortem, & necesse est ut sit pro tantis reus, quantos secum traxerit in ruinam; as Salvian well observes. Thirdly, your very contribution unto Players for their Playes and action if Saint See Act 6. Scene 2. pag. 324.325, 326, 472, 688, 904. to 907. Augustine and others may be cre∣dited, is a very great and hainous sinne; of which every Play-haunter is guilty And is it not the greatest hurt that can be, to be guilty of an hainous sinne, which sub∣jects men to Gods curse and vengeance here, and to
eternall torments hereafter? Fourthly, your very ex∣ample in frequenting Playes and Play-houses, as it is Prorsus dis∣plicet in pul∣cherrimo cor∣pore non solū morbus sed & naevus. Bernard. Epist. 249. fol. 225. D. scandalous and offensive to Gods Church, Gods Saints, Decet Chri∣stianum non solum habere vitae sanitatem, sed & famae de∣corem. Bernard. Epist. 127. fol. 206. B. and ubeseeming the Gospell of Christ, so it is a meanes to harden vitious Play-haunters, to encourage and draw on many Spectators unto Stage-playes, who are pol∣luted, vitiated, and made worse by them: whose ins shall certainely be put on your, as well as on their scores at last, whose lewde example was the originall occasion both of their sinne and hurt. I shall therefore cloze up this reply with that of Homil. 38. in Matth. Tom. 2. Col. 300. A.B. Chrysostome, to those who made this very objection. Sed ego, inquies, ostendm, nihil multis hujsmodi ludos obuisse: imò veroid maxi∣mè nocet, quod frustrae & incassu temps consumi, & scandalum alijs offers. Nàm ets tu quodm excelsi animi robore, nihil inde tibi li contraxisti: tmen quniam alios imbecillies exemplo tui spectaculorum studioss fe∣cisti, quomodo non ipse malum tibi contraxisti, qui causam mali committendi alijs praebuisti? Qui enim  corrum∣puntur tam viri quàm mulieres, omnes corruptionis crimi & causam in caput tuum transferunt. Nam quemadmo∣dum si non esseu qui spectarent, nec essent etiam qui lude∣rent: sic quoniam uter{que} sunt causa peccatorum quae com∣mittuntur, ignem etiam patientur. Quare quamvis nimi tui odestia effcist, ut nihil tibi inde obfuerit, quod ego fieri posse non arbitror: quoniam tamen alij causa ludorum multa peccarut, grves propter hoc paenas lues, quamvis etiam multô modestior & temperantior esses, si nullo modo e per∣geres. Which passage (formerly Here, pag. 417.48. Englished) I would  wish all Play-haunters seriously to consider. Lastly, admit that many Spectators eceive no hurt from Stage-playes; yet certainely they are very dangerous temptations unto evill; and it is Gods preventing grace alone, of which no Play-haunter can pre∣sume, that preserves men from their grosse corrup∣tions. Why then shall wee runne our selves into such temptations, such infectious, insinuating, i not ensna∣ring
pleasures of sinne, which wee may avoyd with safety, but not resort to without feare of danger? Hierom. E∣pist. 47. cap. 1. Quid tibi necesse est in ea versari domo in qu necesse ha∣bea aut perire, aut vincere? Quis unquam mortalium juxta viperam securos somnos cepit? quae et si non perculia, certè sollicitat. Securius est perire non posse, qum juxta periculum nonprisse. O therefore let us flie these pe∣stiferous Enterludes which will endanger hurting us, if that they harme us not.Rply. If any here reply, as some did to Sed Sol, imò ipse Deus ista de caelo spe∣ctat, nec conta∣minatur. Plane Sol & in cloa∣cam radios su∣os defert, nec contaminatur. Tertul. De Spe∣ctac. c. 20. pag. 397. Tertullian in this very case: That the Sunne shines on a dung-hill, and yet its beames are not defiled by it: so men may looke n Stage-playes and yet not be polluted; Titus 1.15. for unto the pure all things are pure: And admit there be some obscenity in Stage-playes, yet chaste hearts and eares will not be tainted with it. Prosper. De Vita Con∣templ. l. 1. c. 6. Auribus enim castis obscan sermones cum sono deficit, nec secretum pudici cordis irrmpunt: nec rum∣pit serm turpis ex mente nisi se voluntarie mens autè cor∣rumpat, quàm recipiat aliquid unde corrumpatur, aut pro∣ferat. Turpia quo{que} verba per aures ingressa, quid praeva∣lent, si non fuerint arbitrio mentis admissa? Quando au∣tem praevalent, non ipsam corrumpunt mentem, sed jam corruptam spone reperiunt. Pulchrorum quo{que} corporum formae per oculos irrepentes, animum non movent incorrup∣tum; & quandò corruptibiliter movent, non corrumpun sarum, sed ostendunt propria voluntate corruptum; as Pro∣sper Aquitanicus writes. To this I answer first,Answer. that the Sunne is of a pure and celestiall nature, uncapable of any defilement whatso∣ever; its shining therefore on a dunghill can no wayes maculate its pure rayes, which oft-times make the dung-heape stinke the more. But mans nature as it was capable of pollution at the first, before Adams fall, so it is Psal. 14.2, 3. Psal. 51.5. Iob 14.4. cap. 15.14. Rom. 3.9. to 19. cap. 7.12.0, 3, 24. Gen. 6.11, 12. Isay 60.26. altogether ilthy, stinking, and corrupted since, more apt to be inflamed with any lascivious amorous spee∣ches, gestures, Playes and Enterludes, then Tinder, Gun-powder, Flax, or Charcole are with the least
sparkes of fire. Pal. 51.5. Iob 14.4. Rom. 5.12. to 20. See Augustine ad Valerium De Nuptijs & Concupiscen∣tia and all who have written of originall sinne, and its nature. Every Sonne of Lapsed Adam is borne into the world a sinfull, uncleane, depraved creature, over∣spred with a universall leprosie of corruption: Gen. 6.5, 11, 12. all the ima∣ginations of his heart are evill, yea onely evill, and that continually: Isay 64.6. yea all his righteousnesse is but as menstruous rags, and Rom. 7.18. in him there dwells nothing that is good: his very 2 Pet. 2.14. eyes being full of adultery, so that they cannot cease from sinne; and his Ier. 17.9. heart most desperately wicked and de∣ceitfull above all things, as both Scripture and experi∣ence teach us: No wonder then if Stage-playes (which if we believe Hom. 38. in Matth. here, p. 412.413. S. Chrysostome, are farre more contagious & filthy thn any dung,) defile mens vitious natures, though no stinking dung heape can pollute the shining Sunne. We see that Gen. 3.6. the very sight of the forbidden fruit was sufficient to tempt Adam and Eve to sinne even before their Natures were depraved: and we know 2 Sam. 11.2. to 6. that the casuall sight of Bathsheba was sufficient to provoke even regenerate David to an adulterous act: And will not then the pre∣meditated voluntary delightfull beholding of an un∣chast adulterous Play, much more contaminate a vo∣luptuous, carnall, gracelesse Play-haunter, who lies rot∣ting in the sinke of his most beastly lusts? A very Hea∣then could informe us thus much: Seneca. Epist. 97. Ad deteriora non tantum pronum iter est, sed etiam praeceps; that mans nature is not onely prone, but precipitate unto evill things: and shall Christians then thinke themselves, as uncapable of contagion as the shining Sunne? God forbid: we may perchance bee such in Heaven hereafter, as neither August. De Corrpt. & Gratia. cap. 11.12. vèlle, ne posse peccare; but here we cannot be such; For what man among us can say, Prov, 20.9. that he hath made hi heart cleane, and that he is pure from his sinne? Certaine∣ly if any dare say so, (as some Papists write of their u∣per-errogating super-arrogant Saints,) 1 Iohn 1.8. St. Iohn will tell him that he is a lyer, and there is no truth in him. And although Tit. 1.15. See Ambrose, Hierom Theodoret, Pri∣sius, Sduls, Remigius, Beda, Anselme, Haymo, RHabanus Maurus, Ocumenius, Lyra, An∣selme, Tostatus, Calvin, Marlorat, and others. Ibidem. unto the pure all things (that is all good, all
lawful, all indifferent things, all meates and drinkes, for of them the Apostle speakes) are pure, yet unto the impure (and such Se Part 1. Act 4. Scene 1.2. for the most part are all Play-haunters) all things (that is all good, all indifferent things, all meates, all drinkes and recrtions) are uncleane; and so by con∣sequence Stage-playes too; because their very conscience is defiled. Secondly, whereas it is objected, that evill  things corrupt not chaste or honest eyes, or eares, or hearts. I answer, that it is true indeed in these three particular cases: First, when as the evils which men  see or heare are meerely casuall, not run unto of set purpose upon deliberation. Secondly, when men are  necessitated to heare and see them, even against their wills: and yet in these two cases they prove See here, fol. 548. oft-times contagious. Thirdly, when as men see or heare them  Peccata prae∣terita non no∣cent quando non placent. Hierom. Com. in Marc. 16. with highest detestation of their lewdnesse, and strong re∣solves against them: not with delight or approbation. But thus men see and heare not Stage-playes, to which they purposely and willingly resort, in which they place their pleasure and delight. Therefore they can∣not but corrupt, yea dangerously defile them, because they doe not loath but love them over-much. And what so apt to contaminate and deprave men, as that which they best affect? The last Objection for the seeing of Playes is this:Object. 4. If you debarre us from beholding Stage-playes (say some) you will then deprive us of all our mirth, our pleasures, and cause us for to live a melancholy, sad, dumpish lif, the which we cannot brooke: therefore you must still permit us to resort to Playes. To this I answer first:Answ. 1. that it is the condition of all voluptuous carnall persons, to deeme themselves much restrained, when as they are inhibited from any one sin∣full pleasure in which they take delight; as if Nun perie∣runt omnia: nam volupta∣tes cum perdi∣dit homo, non statuo eum vivere. Sophoclis Antigon. pag. 389. all their comforts, their contentments, yea their life it selfe, were utterly lost and gone. Let a Drunkard be but restrained
from his Cups and Pot-companions; an Whore-ma∣ster from his Queanes and Whoredomes, a common Dicer from his unlawfull gaming, or a Play-haunter from his Stage-playes, which delight and feed his lusts; Luxurioso frugalitas pae∣na est: pigrō supplicij loco labor est, desi∣dioso studere torqueri est. Non ista diffi∣cilia sunt na∣tura, sed nos fluidi & ener∣ves. Seneca. E∣pist. 71. they presantly thinke themselves undoe, yea quite be∣reaved of all their pleasures: and all because they place their happinesse, their chiefe delights in these their carnall contentments, which alwayes end in horror. But alas what Si dicis, du∣rus est hic ser∣mo, non pos∣sum mundum spernere, & carnem meam odio habere: dic mihi, ubi sunt amatores mundi qui an∣te pauc tem∣pora nobiscum erant? Nihil ex ijs reman∣sit, nisi cineres & vermes. At∣tende diligen∣ter quid sunt, vel quid fue∣runt. Homines fuerunt sicut tu, comede∣runt, bibe∣runt, riseruut, duerum in bonis dies suos, & in  ad infer desedert. H caro corum vermibus, & illic anima ignibus deputatur, donec rursus infelici collegio colligati sempiternis involuantur incendijs qui socij fuerunt in vitijs. Bnard Meditatio∣nes. cap. 2. hard inurious restaine is this, to inhibit them from sinne and sinfull things, which would certainely plung them into eternall misery, from which the very Lawes of God, of nature, of Nations have long since de∣bard them, under the severest penalties? What, are Chri∣stians growne now such carnall Epicures, as to thinke there is no pleasure, mirth or solace but in sinne alone, in amorous Pastorals, obscene lascivious speeches, jests, and Enterludes, or such lewde notorious abominations as should even pierce all Christian hearts with griefe? See Salvian, De Gubernat. Dei. lib. 6. & here, Act 5. Scene 11. what, is there no pleasure thinke we but in that which God prohibits? in that which he and all good men abhorre? in that which shuts men out of Heaven, and poasts them on to Hell? Good God, if these be the chiefe delights of Christians now, which was the vice, the shame of Pagans, of Christians heretofore, why doe any such vo∣luptuous carnall Christians hope for Heaven? Are there any lascivious Stage-playes, Spectacles, Songs, or such like sinfull vanities there? are there any such lust-fomenting, sin-engendring sports or pastimes in Hea∣ven, as carnalists delight in here on earth? O no, Rev. 21.27. cap. 22.15.there is no uncleanesse, vanity or lasciviousnesse in that holy place If men therefore thinke themselves miserable when they are deprived of these pleasures here, what happi∣nesse
can they hope to finde in Heaven hereafter, where there are no such Enterludes, such carnall content∣ments as they delight in now? If then wee may bee happy, yea eternally happy in the highest degree with∣out these lust-enraging Enterludes hereafter, why should wee deeme our selves unfortunate in being re∣strained from them now? especially since Christ himselfe informes us, Luk. 9.23. Gal. 5.24. that if any man will come after him, he must deny himselfe in all his sinfull pleasures, and crucifie his flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. The Saints and Angels now in Heaven; the Primitive Church and Christians, yea and many Pagans, whiles they were on earth, accounted their lives most comfortable, though they wanted Stage-playes, See Act 6. Scene 5. & Act 7. Scene 2.3. yea, this was one of their greatest contentments, that they had quite abandoned them: Nay those very Saints of God on earth, who now lead the most comfortable, joyfull, happy lives of all men in the world, are such who never come at Stage-playes and many carnall men there are who live full mery, full jolly lives without them. This Objection there∣fore is but frivolous. Secondly, though men are de∣prived  of Stage-playes, of all other unlawfull pleasures whatsoever; yet they have choyce enough of sundry lawfull recreations, and earthly solaces with which to exhilerate their mindes; and sences: See Cyprian de Spectaculis, & Chrysost. Hom. 38. in Matth accor∣dingly. & Psa. 8.1. to 9. They have the seuerall prospects of the Sunne, the Moone, the Planets, the Stars, the water, the earth, with all the infinite Psal. 43.5. Psal. 8.3. to the en. Isay 1.6. Psal. 104.2. to 35. variety of Creatures, of Fishes, Birds, Fowles, Beasts, creping things, Trees, Herbes, Plants, Rootes, Stones, and Mettals that are in them, to delight their eyes: They have Psal. 104.16. Eccles. 12.4. Cant. 2.12. the Musicke of all Birds and singing creatures to please their eares; the incomperably delicate Gen. 27.27. Canti. 1.12. cap. 2.3. cap. 4.10, 11. c. 7.8, 13. Hosea 14.6. doriferous sents and perfumes of all Harbes, all Flowers, Fruits, &c. to refresh their noses the Gen. 27.4. to 14.28, 39. Psal. 63.5. Isay 25.6. savory tastes of all edible creatures to con∣tent their pallats, so farre as the rules of sobriety and
temperance will permit: the pleasures Eccles. 2.5. Gen. 2.8. to 17. cap. 3.1. to 12. 2 Kings 21.18. Esther 1.5. c. 7.7, 8. Ier. 39.4. c. 52.7. Cant. 5.1. cap. 6.2.11. Iohn 18.1, 2. that Orchards, Rivers, Gardens, Ponds, Woods, or any such earthly Paradices can affoord them: the Gen. 33.5. Psal. 17.4. Psal. 113.9. Ps. 127.3, 4. Ps. 128.3.4. Eccles 2.3. to 12. Marke 10.29, 30. See Chrysostom. 38. in Matth. accordingly. comfort of Friends, Kindred, Wives, Children, Possessions, wealth, and all other externall blessings that God hath bestowed upon them. And what want of pleasures, of contentments can they complaine of, who have all these for to delight them, the very meanest whereof are farre more pleasant, then the very best of Enterludes, then all our Stage-playes put together? Besides, though men are debard from Stage-playes, Dicing, or mix lascivious Dancing, or any other unlawfull sports, they have store of honest, of healthfull recreations still remaining, with which to refresh themselves; as walking, riding, fishing, fowling, hawking, hunting, ringing, leaping, vauting, wrestling, running, shooting, Eccles 2.8. 1 Sam. 18.6. 1 Chron. 23.5. 2 Chron. 5.13. Psal. 68.25. Psal. 86.7. Psal. 127.1, 7. Psal. 149.1, 2, 3. Psal. 150.3, 4, 5, 6. Eph. 5.19. Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. singing of Psalmes and pious Ditties; playing upon musicall Instruments, casting of the Barre, tossing the Pike, riding of the great Horse, (an exercise fit for men of quality) running at the ring, with a world of such like lawdable, cheape, and harmlesse exercises; which being used in due season, with moderation, tem∣perance, and all lawfull circumstances, will prove more wholsome to their bodies, more profitable & Tempora quae Spectacu∣lis, campo, tes∣seris, ociosis deni{que} sermo∣nibus, ne di∣cam somno & conviviorum mora conte∣runt, Geome∣triae potius, ac Musicae impen∣dant, quantò plus delectationis ex his habituri, quam ex illis ineruditis voluptati∣bus? Quintil. Instit. lib. 1 cap. 19 pag. 83. delight∣full to their soules, then all the Enterludes, the unlaw∣full Pastimes in the world. Men need not therefore complaine for want of recreations in case they are de∣prived of Playes, when they have such plenty of farre better sports. Thirdly, admit the objection true, that you shall be stript of all your earthly pleasures in case you are kept from Playes, yet what prejudice should your soules or bodies suffer by it? Carnall worldly pleasures, you know, are no part, no particle of a Chri∣stians comfort, hee can live a most happy joyfull life without them; yea he can hardly live happily or safely with them. Worldly pleasures are full of dangerous
soule-entangling snares, which are apt to endanger the very best of Christians. Hence was it, Heb 11.25. that holy Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season. Hence our Luke 6.25. Sa∣viour pronounceth an woe unto them that laugh now, for they shall weepe and lament hereafter; Hence Iam. 4.9, 10. S. Iames adviseth men, to turne their laughter into mourning, and their joy into heavinesse: And Eccles. 7.3, 4, 5. Solomon hereupon in∣structs men; that it is better to goe to the house of mour∣ning, then to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart. That sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadnesse of the countenance the heart is made better: And that the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart onely of fooles in the house of mirth: there being nothing more dangerous to mens soules, Virtuti ini∣mica voluptas. Silius Italicus. Punic. Bel. lib. 15 fol. 185. more opposite to their vertues, then carnall pleasures. This Heathen men long since acknowledged. Voluptas esca malorum quâ nulla capitalior pestis homini∣bus à natura datur, Nihil altum, nihil magnificum & di∣vinum suscipere possunt, qui suas omnes cogitationes abje∣cerunt in rem tàm humilem at{que} contemptam: writes De Senectute pag. 652. De A∣mictia. p. 661. Cicero. Respuendae sunt voluptates, enervant & effaeminant. Voluptati indulgere initium omnium malorum est. Indu∣randus ita{que} est animus & blandimentis voluptatum procul abstrahendus. Vna Hannibalem hyberna soluerunt, & in∣domitum illum nivibus at{que} Alpibus virum enervave∣runt fomenta Campaniae. Armis vicit, vitijs victus est, &c. Debellandae ita{que} sunt imprimis voluptates; is the advice ofEpist. 51.104.110. Seneca. And good reason is there for it. Quippe nec ira Deûm tantum, nec tela, nec hostes, Quantum sola noces animis illapsa voluptas, as Punicorum Bel. lib. 15. fol. 186. Silius Italicus affirmed long agoe: answerable to which is that of Livi. Hist. Rom. lib. 30. pag. 749. Scipio, appliable to our present times. Non est tantum ab hostibus armatis aetati nostrae pericul, quantum à circumfusis undi{que} voluptatibus: qui eas sua temperantia frenavit ac domuit, multo majus decus majo∣rem{que} victoriam sibi peperit quàm nos Syphace victo habe∣mus.
And is it then any such tedious irkesome matter for Christians out of their love to Christ, (for whom they should part with Luk. 14.33. all things) to part with these their worldly pleasures, so dangerous to their soules, when as Pagans have thus censured, abandoned them long a∣goe? Let us therefore contemne the losse of these our worthlesse, vaine and sinfull Enterludes, Non tanti∣gulam facias voluptatis quanti pericu∣lum. Tertul. De Spectac. c. 27. whose danger farre exceeds their pleasure, and since we shall not enjoy them hereafter in Heaven, let us not desire them whiles we are on earth. Fourthly, this world, this life is See Act 6. Scene 11. pag. 293.294. no time, no place for pleasure, mirth or carnall jollity, it being onely a vale of misery, a place of sorrow, griefe and labour to all the Saints of God. Bernard. De eo quod Scrip∣tum est. Beatus homo, &c. Ser∣mo. fol. 84. a. Cum enim legatur Adam in loco voluptatis ab initio positus ut operaretur, quis sanum sapiens, filios ejus in loco afflictionis ad feriandum positos arbitre∣tur? Every man is Natura ho∣minem tantum nudum, & in nuda humo, natali die abijcit ad va∣gitus statim & ploratum, nul∣lum{que} tot ani∣malium aliud ad lachrymas, & has protenus vitae princi∣pio. At her∣cule risus praecox ille & celerimus ante quadragesimum diem nulli datur. Ab hoc lucis rudi∣mento quae ne feras quidem inter nos genitas, vincula excipiunt, & omnis membro∣rum nexus. At homo infeliciter natus jacet, manibus pedibus{que} devinctis, fens, ani∣mal caeteris imperaturum, & à supplicijs vitam auspicatur, unam tantum ob culpam, quia natum est. Heu dementiam ab ijs initijs existimantium ad superbiam se genitos, &c. Plinius. ad l. 7. Nat Hist. Proaemium. p. 289.290. borne into this world weeping, to signi∣fie that it is a place of teares, not of laughter; a prison, not a Paradice; and shall we then thinke to make it onely a Theater of jollity and delights? Fiftly, let no men so far deceive themselves, as to expect an Ne{que} enim ad hoc nos de Para∣diso voluptatis animadversio divina eijcisse videtur, ut alterum sibi hic Paradisum adinventio humana prepararet. Bernardi Declamat. fol. 569. F. earthly Paradice and an heavenly too; as to enjoy the pleasures of earth and Heaven both. Hirom. Epist. 1. c. 9. Delicatus es frater si & hic vis gaudere cum saeculo, & posteà regnare cum Christo, writes Saint Hierom. Alas, those who receive their pleasure in this life, must not looke for any comfort, but torments one∣ly in the life to come, Rev. 18.7. and so much pleasure as they have enjoyed here, so much torment shall they susteine hereafter Psal. 126.5, 6. None reape injoy hereafter, but those who sow in teares of godly sorrow now. 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light afflictions (not our carnall
pleasures) which are but for a moment, are the onely in∣struments that purchase for us a farre more exceeding and eternall weight of glory. Act. 14.22. Through many afflictions (not through the pleasant way of worldly pleasures and Spe∣ctacles which are quite out of the rode to Heaven) we must all enter into the Kingdome of Heaven, Isay 25.8. Rev. 7.17. cap. 21.4. Faelices lachrymae quas benigna man{us} conditoris ab∣sterget. Bernardi Declamationes. fol. 270. D. where all teares shall be wiped from our eyes, which here must ever flow with teares of sorrow for our owne and others sinnes. Me∣morable is that speech of Abraham to the rich man. See Bernardi Declamat. fol. 179. & Cypri∣an. De Caena Domini. Serm. pag. 299. Luke 16.25. Sonne, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy pleasure, (as some Translations render it) and Lazarus paine; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Lo here, a voluptuous life, ending in torments; and a sorrowfull life terminating in eternall blisse. It is recorded of the wicked, Iob 21.12, 13. That they take the Timbrel and Harpe, and rejoyce at the sound of the Organ: they spend their dayes in wealth and in a moment goe downe to Hell. And Solomon, Eccles. 11.8, 9. speakes thus unto all voluptuous persons who delight in worldly jollity: If a man live many yeeres, and rejoyce in them all, yet let him remember the dayes of darkenesse for they are many. All that commeth is vanity: Rejoyce, O Young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheere thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walke in the wayes of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee to Iudgement. Which two remarkable places coupled with Revel. 18.7. How much she hath glorified herselfe and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: are sufficient evidences that all worldly pleasures without Gods merci and repentance bring men onely to Ille maeret & deet, cui bene non potest esse post seulum, cuju; vivendi fructus omnis hic capiu; cujus hic ola∣tium omne finitur, cujus caduca ac brevis vita hic aliquam dulcedinem coputt voluptatum; cum istinc recesserit, paena jam alia superest ad doloem. Cyprian. Contra Demetr. pag. 225. Hell, to torments at the last. It will be therefore your happines, your Si aliqua amisistis Vitae gaudia, negotatio est aliquid amittere ut majoa lucrris. Tertlian ad Maryres. cap. 2. eternall ad∣vātage, not your prejudice, to foregoe all your sinfull pleasures
now, that so ye may gaine far greater, far better in Heaven  hereafter. Sixtly, those Enterludes and carnall pastime wherein the world takes so much solace, can bring no true joy to a Christians heart, who tramples upon them as not worthy the enjoying. It is an excellent saying of Epist. 111. fol. 203. A. & Epist. 114. h. Hanc Dei gra∣tiam recolens, qui de sacro calice bibit amplius sitit, & ad Deum vi∣vum erigens desiderium, ita singulari fame illo uno appe∣titu tenetur, ut deinceps fellca peccatorū hor∣reat pocula, & omnis sapor delectamento∣rum carnaliū, sit ei quasi ran∣cidum ro∣dens{que} pallatū acutae morda∣citatis acetum. Cyprian. De Cae∣na Domini Serm. pag. 301. Bernard: Gustato spiritu, necesse est desipere carnem: affectanti caelestia, terrena non sapiunt: aeternis inhanti, fa∣stidio sunt transitoria. Revera illud verum & solum est gau∣dium, quod non de creatura sed de creatore concipitur, & quod cum possideris nemo tollet à te. Cui comparata omnis aliunde jocunditas, maeror est; omnis suavitas, dolor est; omne dulce, amarum; omne decorum, faedum; omne po∣stremò quodcun{que} aliud delectari possit, molestum. Every pious Christian hath the 2 Cor. 1 3, 4. Quicquid no∣bis adest prae∣ter Deum no∣strum, non est dulce. Noli∣mus omnia quae dedit, si non dat seipsum qui omnia dedit. Augustin. Enarratio in Psal. 85. Tom. 8. pars 2. pag. 66. See Iob 15.11. God of all comfort and consola∣tion, (without whom nothing is pleasant,) with all his great and glorious attributes: the mercies of God the Father; the merits and soule-saving passion of God the Sonne; the consolations, joyes and graces of God the holy Ghost; the wisedome, power, goodnesse, eter∣nity, omnipotency, mercy, truth and alsufficiency of the sacred Trinity, Nimium ad imaginem Dei facta anima rationalis, caeteris omnibus occupari potest, repleri omnino non potest. Capacem Dei, quicquid Deo minus est, non implebt. Bernardi Declamationes. fol. 169. F. which are onely able for to fill the soule: the word, the promises of the God of truth; the eternall joyes of Heaven; the fellowship of the blessed Saints and Angels, to ravish, solace, and rejoyce his soule upon all occasions: on these he may cast the eyes, yea fix the very intentions and desires of his heart: in thee his affections may even satiate themselves, and take their full contentment, without any subsequent re∣pentance, sinne, or sorrow of heart: Those then who cannot satisfie their soules with these celestiall Specta∣cles, and soule-ravishing delights, in which all Chisti∣ans place their complacency and supreme felicity, it is
a sure character, that they have yet no share in Christ, no acquaintance with the least degrees of grace, no in∣terest in Gods favour, no true desire of grace, of Hea∣ven, and everlasting life, which would soone embitter and debase al worldly pleasures, which are but cyphers in respect of these. Lastly, if any Play-haunter bee yet  so devoted to his Play-house Spectacles that he will not part with them upon any tearmes: let him then behold farre better, farre sublimer Spectacles then these with which to delight himselfe; which I shal commend unto him in S. Augustines words: Quid ergo facimus fratres? writes Enar. in Psal. 39. Tom. 8. pars 2. p. 417.418. he in our very case. Dimissuri eum sumus? sine spectaculo morietur, non subsistet, non nos sequetur. Quid ergo faciemus? Demus pro spectaculis spectàcula. Et quae spe∣ctacula daturi sumus Christiano homini, quem volumus ab illis spectaculis revocare? Gratias ago Domino Deo no∣stro, sequente versu ostendit nobis quae spectatoribus spectare volentibus spectacula praeberemus, & ostendere debeamus. Ecce aversus fuerit à Circo, à Theatro, ab Amphitheatro, quaerat quod spectet, prorsus quaerat; non eum relinquimus sine spectaculo. Quid pro illis dabimus? Audi quid se∣quitur. Multa fecisti tu Domine Deus meus mira∣bilia tua. Miracula hominum intuebatur, inten∣dat mirabilia Dei. Multa fecit Dominus mirabilia sua, haec respiciat. Quare illi viluerunt? Aurigam laudas regentem quatuor equos, & sine lapsu at{que} offensione curren∣tes. Forte talia miracula spiritalia non fecit Dominus. Regat luxuriam, regat injustitiam, regat imprudentiam: motus istos qui nimium lapsi haec vitia faciunt, regat & subdat sibi & teneat habena & non rapiatur: ducat quo vult, non rahatur quò non vult: aurigam laudabat, auri∣gam laudabit. Clamabat, ut auriga veste cooperiretur, im∣mortalitate vestietur. Haec munera, haec spectacula dedit Deus; clamat de caelo, Specto vos: luctamini, adjuvabo: vincite, coronabo, &c. Nunc specta histrionem. Didicit enim homo magno studio in fune ambulare, & pendens te suspendit. Illum attende aeditorem majorum Spectaculorum.
Didicit iste in fune ambulare, nunquid fecit in mare am∣bulare? Obliviscere Theatrum tuum, attende Petrum no∣strum, non in fune ambulantem, sed ut ita dicam, in mari ambulantem, &c, See here, pag. 345. to 349. to the same purpose. Christians then in this Fathers judgement have farre greater, farre better Spectacles then all the Play-houses in the world can yeeld them: They have See the 2. E∣pistle Dedica∣tory, accor∣dingly. many heavenly, sweet and spirituall Spectacles on which to cast their eyes and thoughts; these they must alwayes contemplate; not these base filthy Enterludes. I shall therefore cloze up this objection with that excellent passage of Tertullian, which answers it to the full. Nostrae caenae, nostrae nuptiae nondum sunt: non possum cum illis (Spectatoribus) discumbere, quia nec illi nobiscum. Vi∣cibus disposita res est. De Spectacu∣lis. lib. cap. 27.28, 29. Tom. 2. pag. 401.402, 403. Nunc illi letantur, nos conlicta∣mur. Iohn 16.20, 21, 22. Seculum (inquit) gaudebit, vos trites eritis. Lu∣geamus ergo dum Ethnici gaudent, ut cum lugere caepe∣rint, gaudeamus; ne pariter nunc gaudentes, tunc quo{que} pariter lugeamus. Delicatus es Christiane, si & in seculo voluptatem concupiscis, im nimium stultus si hoc existimas voluptatem. Philosophi quidem hoc nomen quieti & tranquillitati dederunt, in ea gaudent, in ea avo∣cantur, in ea etiam gloriantur. Tu mihi metas & scenas & pulverem, & harenas suspiras. Dicas velim, non possu∣mus vivere sine voluptate, qui mori cum voluptate debebi∣mus? Nam quod est aliud votum nostrum, quàm quod & Apostoli; Phil. 1.23. exire de seculo & recipi apud Dominum. Haec voluptas, ubi & votum. Iam nunc si putas delectamentis exigere spacium hoc, cur tàm ingratus es, ut tot, & tales voluptates à Deo contributas tibi satis non habeas, ne{que} recognoscas? Quid enim jocundius quàm Dei Patris & Domini reconciliatio, quàm veritatis revelatio, quàm er∣rorum recognitio, quàm tantorum retrò criminum venia? quae major voluptas, Nota. quàm fastidium ipsius voluptatis, quàm seculi totius contemptus, quam vera libertas, quàm conscientia integra, quam vita sufficiens, quàm mortis timor nullus, quod calcas Deos Nationum, quod Daemonia
expellis, quod medicinas facis, quod revelationes pe is, quod Deo vivis? Hae voluptates, haec spectacula Christianorum, sancta, perpetua, gratuita; in his tibi ludos circenses inter∣praetare; cursus seculi intuere, tempora labentia dinumera, metas consummationis expecta, societates ecclesiarum de∣fende, ad signum Dei suscitare, ad tubam Angeli erigere, ad martyrij palmas gloriare. Nota. Si scenicae doctrinae delectant, satis nobis literarum est, satis versuum est, satis sententia∣rum, satis etiam canticorum, satis vocum, nec fabulae, sed veritates, nec strophae, sed simplicitates. Vis & pugillatus & luctatus? praesto sunt, non parva sed multa. Aspice impudicitiam dejectam à castitate, perfidiam caesam à fide, saevitiam à misericordia contusam, petulantiam à modestia adumbratam, & tales apud nos sunt agones, in quibus ipsi coronamur. Vis autem & sanguinis aliquid? habes Chri∣sti. Quale autem spectaculum in proximo est, adventus Domini jam indubitati, jam superbi, jam triumphantis? Quae illa exultatio Angelorum, quae gloria resurgentium sanctorum? quale regnum exinde justorum? qualis civitas nova Hierusalem? At enim supersunt alia spectacula, ille ultimus & perpetuus judicij dies, ille nationibus insperatus, ille derisus, cum tanta seculi vetustas, & tot ejus nativitates 2 Pet. 3.7, 9. uno igni haurientur. Quae tunc spectaculi latitudo? quid admirer? quid rideam? ubi gaudiam, ubi exultem spectans tot ac tantos reges, qui in caelum recepti nuntiabantur cum ipso Iove, & ipsis suis testibus inimis tenebris congemiscen∣tes? item praesids persecutores dominici nominis saevioribus quàm ipsi flammis saevierunt insultantibus contra Christia∣nos, liquescentes: quos praeterea sapientes illos philosophos coram discipulis suis una conflagrantibus rubescentes, qui∣bus nihil ad Deum pertinere suadebant, quibus animas aut nullas, aut non in pristina corpora redituras adfirmabant; etiam poeas, non ad Rhodamanti nec ad Minois, sed ad in∣opinati Christi tribunal palpitantes. Tunc magis Let our Tragedians and Actors observe this passage. Tragaedi audiendi, magis scilicet vocales in sua propria calamitate. Tunc histriones cognoscendi solutiores multò per ignem: tunc spectandus auriga in flammea rota totus rubens: tunc
Xystici contemplandi, non in gymnasijs, sed in igne jau∣lati, nisi quod nec tunc quidem illos velim visos, ut qui ma∣lim ad eos potius conspectum insatiabilem conferre qui in dominum desaevierunt. Hic est ille (dicam) Matth. 13.55. Mark. 6.3. fabri aut quaestuariae filius, Iohn 5.16. Sabbati destructor, Iohn 8.48. Samarites & Dae∣monium habens. Matth. 26.14, 15, 67, 68. c. 27.29, 30, 31, 34. Hic est quem à Iuda redimistis, hic est ille arundinis & colaphis diverberatus, sputametis dede∣coratus, felle & aceto potatus. Hic est quem Matth. 28.11. to 16. clam discen∣tes subripuerunt, u resurrexisse dicatur, vel hortulanus de∣traxit ne lactucae suae frequentia comeantium laederentur. Vt talia spectes, ut talibus exultes, quis tibi praetor, aut consul, aut quaestor, aut sacerdos de sua liberalitate praestabit? & tamen haec jam quodammodo per fidem habemus spiritu imaginante repraesentata. Caeterm qualia illa sunt, 1 Cor. 2.9. Isay 64.4. quae nec oculus vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascende∣runt? credo Circo, & utra{que} cauca & omni stadio gratiora. ACTVS QVINTVS. THe unlawfulnesse of penning, acting, and behold∣ing Stage-playes, being thus at large evinced, and those Objections answered, which are most usually op∣posed in their unjust defence, there is nothing now re∣maining, but that I should cloze up this whole Trea∣tise with a few words of exhortation to Play-poets, Players, and Play-haunters, whom the love of Stage-playes hath Abstrahunt  recto quae opi∣nione nostrâ cara sunt, pretio uo vi∣lia. Nescimus aestimare res, de quibus non cum fama, sed cum rerum natura deliberandum. Nihil habet ista magnificum, quo mentes in se nostras traant, praeter hoc, quod mira∣ri illa consuescimus. Non enim quia concupiscenda sunt laudantur; sed concupis∣cuntur quia laudata sunt; & cum singulorum error publicum fecerit, singulorum erroem facit publicus. Seneca. Epist. 81. pag. 331. seduced, to their eternall prejudice. And here I shall first of all beseech all Play-poets, to ponder with themselves; that they are the primary
causes of all the sinnes which Players, Playes or Play-houses doe occasion: not any one sinne is there that any Actors, Auditors, or Spectators commit by meanes of acting or beholding these their Stage-playes, but flowes originally from them, and 1 Tim. 5.22. See my Healthes Sick∣nesse pag. 52.shall at last be set on their account: for if there were no Play-house-poets there could be no Playes to see or act, and so by conse∣quence no such accursed Qui semen praebuit is ena∣tae segitis ma∣lorum est au∣ctor. Demosthe∣nes Oratio De Corona. fruits of Stage-playes as now are too too frequent in the world, both to the publike and mens private hurt. Now tell mee I beseech you, what man, what Christian is there who in Gods, in mens account would thus be branded Rom. 1.30.for an inventor of evill things; a publike nursery of all sin and wicked∣nesse; a man borne onely for the common hurt both of himselfe and others, yea an instrument raysed up from Hell it selfe to draw on thousands to that horrid place of their eternall woe. Seneca De Clementia. lib. 1. cap. 18. Quanto autem non nasci melius fuit, quā sic numerari inter publico malo natos? Matth. 26.24.Bet∣ter had it beene for you never to have had a being, to Iob 3.11, 16. Eccles. 6.3. Psal 58.8. have perished in the wombe like an untimely birth: yea happier were it that a Matth. 18.6. Marke 9.42. Luke 17.1, 2. milstone had beene fastned about your neckes and you so drowned in the very depth of the Sea, then that you should thus pull downe damnation, eternall damnation on your owne and infinite others heads by these your prophane ungodly Enterludes, which will See here, pag. 916. to 924 ac∣cordingly. prove no other at the last but the evidences of your vanity, folly, sinne and shame, and without repentance your owne and others destruction. O therefore deare Christian Brethren, as you tender your owne, the States, the Churches welfare; as you feare, that dreadfullRom. 14.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5.10. reckning which you must shortly make before the Iudgement Seate of Christ, when Matth. 12.36. Eccles. 12.14. Rom. 2.16. Iude 14.15. Rev. 20.12, 1. all your idle, wanton, amorous, prophane, ungodly, scurrilous Playes and words, with all the sinnes they have produced, shall be charged on your soules; let me now perswade you with many a Zach. 12.10. Ierem. 6.26. cap. 31.15. Isay 22.4. cap. 33.7. bitter sigh and teare, to lament your former, and seriously to renounce your fu∣ture
Play-making, as See here, pag. 360.436, 437, 438, 486. fol. 542.545, 566, 568. pag. 841.842, 910, 918, 922. many tre penitent Play-poets have done before you, endeavouring to consecrate your much applauded wits, your parts and industry to Gods glory, the Churches, the Republikes benefit, your owne and others spirituall good, which you have formerly devo∣ted to the See pag. 10. to 62. Devils pompes and service, See pag. 302. to fol. 56. ac∣cordingly. the Republikes prejudice, sinnes advantage, Religions infamy, and mens common hurt. O consider, consider I beseech you, that as long as you continue Play-poets, you are but the See here, pag. 42. to 62.92, 133. to 143. professed agents of the world, the flesh, the Devill, whose pompes, whose lusts and vanities you have long since re∣nounced; that you doe but sacrifice your wits, your parts, your studies, your inventions, your lives to these accursed Masters, who can gratifie you with no other Rom. 6.23. Psal. 9.17. Matth. 25.41. wages at the last, but Hell and endlesse torments; a poore reward for so hard a service. Doe not, O doe not then devote your pretious time, your flourishing parts of Poetry, Eloquence, Art and Learning to these usurping hellish tyrants, which you should Rom. 12.1. 1 Cor. 6.20. Rom. 6.13. whly dedicate to your God, 1 Cor. 619, 20. to whom they are onely due: but since you are Rom. 8.12. no longer debtors to the flesh to live after the flesh, nor yet to the Rom. 6.16, 17, 18, 11, 12. Iam. 4.4. Rom. 12.2. 1 Iohn 2.15, 16. world, the Devill, or sinne to doe them servic, let God alone henceforth enjoy them, Rom. 11.36. Rev. 4.11. Prv. 16.4. from whom, for whom you did at first receive them. Alas my Brethren when you shall come to die, when Isay 33.18. Iob 6.4. c. 18.11. cap. 27.20. Psal. 55.4. Psal. 73.19. Psal. 88.15, 16. terrors of conscience shall seize upon your soules, or when as Dan. 7.9, 10. Matth. 25.31, 2. Christ himselfe shall sit upon his Throne of Glory for to Iudge you, what good, what comfort, (yea what Rom. 6.21. Ier. 3.25. cap. 51.51. Ezech 16.52, 54, 63. shame and Psal. 55.5. Psal. 19.53. Ezech. 7.8 horror) will all your Play-poems bring to your amazed spirits? then will you wish in earnest, O that we had beene so happy as never to have pend, or seene a Stage-play; yea woe be to us that we were ever o ill imployed as to cast away our time, our parts, our studies, our lear∣ning upon such heathenish, foolish and unchristian va∣nities. Alas, Psal. 84.10. one day, one houre in Gods Courts, Gods
service, had Eccles. 6.12. beene farre better to us; then all te yeeres of our vaine uselesse lives, which wee have spent on Playes and Theaters, which now bring nothing else but a more multiplied treasure of endlesse miseries and con∣demnation on our owne and others soules, which these our Enterludes have drawne on to sundry sinnes. Iob 3.3, 11, 13. O that the day had perished wherein we were borne, and the night wherein it was said, there is a man-childe conceived! Why dyed we not from the wombe, why did we not give up the ghost when we came out of the belly, before ever we had learnt the art of making Playes? for then should wee have lien still and beene at rest; then had we beene free from all those Play-house sinnes and tortures which now urcharge our soules, then had wee never drawne such Qui enim a∣lios peccare fe∣cerit, multos secum praeci∣pitat in mor∣tem, & necesse est ut sit pro tantis reus, quantos secum traxerit in rui∣nam. Salvian. De Gubernat. Dei. l. 4. p. 141. troopes of Players, of Play-haunters after us into Hell, whose company cannot mitigate, but infinitely enlarge our endlesse torments. And then all this over-late repentance will be to little purpose. O then be truely penitent and wise Iob 8.5. beimes, before these dayes of horror and amaze∣ment over-whelme you, that so you may have Psal. 37.37. Prov. 19.21. peace and comfort in your latter ends, in that Ioel 2.1, 2. Great, that terrible Day of the Lord Iesus, when all impenitent Play-poets, Players, and Play-haunters Ioel 2.6. Nahum 2.10. Isay 13.6, 7, 8, 9. faces shall gather blacknesse, their hearts faint, their spirits languish, their joynts trem∣ble, their knees smite one against the other, and their mouthes shreeke out unto the Luke 23.30. Rev. 6.16.17. Mountaines to fall upon them, and unto the Rockes to cover them, for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he shall come in laming fire to render Rom. 2.8, 9. Iude 14.15. 2 Thes. 1.8. indignation and wrath, tribula∣tion and anguish to every soule of man that doth evill, whe∣ther he be Iew or Gentile. Certainely the time will Rev. 12.20. Iam. 5.8, 9. Heb. 10.37. 2 Pet. 3.16. Iude 14. come ere long, when the Rev. 6.12. to 17. Isay 34.4. cap. 13.9, 10, 11. Luke 23.36. 2 Pet. 3.7, 1012. Sunne shall become blacke as sackcloth, and the Moone a blood: when the Starres of Heaven shall fall unto the earth even as a Figtree casteth her untimely fruit when shee is shaken with a mighty winde; when th
Heaves shall depart as a scrowle when it is rolled toge∣ther, and the Elements melt with fervent heat; when eve∣ry Mountaine and I sland shall be moved out of their pla∣ces, yea the earth also and the workes that are therein shall be burnt up with fire: when the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chiefe Captaines, and the mighty men, (who now wallow securely in their sinfull lusts and pleasures without feare of God or man) and every Bond-man and every Free-man (who lives and dyes in sinne and vaine delights) shall hide them∣selves in the Dennes and Rockes of the Mountaines; yea say to the Mountaines and Rockes, fall on us, and cover us from the face of him that sitteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe: for the Great Day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? And then what Iob 33.27. Rom. 6.21. 1 Sam. 12.21. Isay 55.2. good, what profit will all the Stage-playes you have penned, seene, or acted, doe you? will they appease that sin-revenging Iudge, before whose Tribunall you shall then bee dragged? Will they any way comfort or support your drooping trembling soules? or any whit asswage your endlesse, easelesse torments? O no! Wisd. 5.1. 1 Iohn 4.17. Phil. 3.9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.1. to 21. no∣thing but Christ, nothing but grace and holinesse, (which the Wisd. 5.3, 4. See here, pag. 120. to 128. 814.815. ac∣cordingly. world, which Playes and Play-poets now deride and laugh at) will then stand you instead, and sheild of all the terrors of that dismall Day. 2 Pet. 3.1, 14. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16, 17. Wherefore (beloved) seeing that all these dreadfull Spectacles, and this day of horror draw so nigh, be diligent that yee may be found of God in peace, without spot and blamelesse; abandoning Play-making, with all such fruitlesse studies, passing all the time of your sojourning here in feare, endevouring to be holy in all manner of conversation, even as God is holy; 2 Pet. 3.18. and growing up daily more and more in grace, and in the know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, 1 Tim. 6.19. Heb. 9.28. laying up in store for your selves a good foundation against the time to come; that so you may lay hold on eternall life, and re∣ceive that Crowne of righteousnesse which the Lord the righteous Iudge shall give at that Day to all those who
love, and wait for his appearing. Secondly, I shall here beseech all voluntary Actors, of academicall or private Enterludes, in the name and feare of God, as they tender the glory of their Creator and Redeemer, the peace of their owne consciences, the eternall welfare of their soules, or their owne cre∣dit and repute with men, now seriously to consider the intolerable infamy, sinfulnesse, shame, and vanity of acting Playes, which not only See here, pag. 841. to 866.the Primitive Christians, ad Protestants, but even Pagans and Papists have con∣demned. Alas how can you justifie or excuse your selves in the sight of God for this your action, when as you are thus condemned in the eyes of men? or how can you appeare before God with comfort in the Day of Iudgement, when as you are unable to stand in∣nocent before mans tribunall in these dayes of grace? Certainely, if Matth. 1.36 37. Isay 3.16. for every idle word that men shall speake, (yea and for every idle part or gesture to, which they shall act or use) they must give an account at the day of Iudge∣ment; what a dreadfull reckning must you then expect for all those idle wanton words and gestures which have passed from you whiles you have acted Playes? Repent therefore, repent I say with floods of brinish teares for wha is past, and never adventure the acting of any academicall Enterlude for time to come. And if any Clergie-men, who have taken ministeriall Or∣ders upon them, are guilty of this infamy, this impiety of prophaning, of polluting their high & heavenly pro∣fession by acting or dancing on any publike or private Stage; becomming thereby the worlds, the Devils pro∣fessed Ministers instead of Christs, to the intolerable scandall of Religion, the ill example of the Laity, (See Bernard. Concio ad Clerum. & O∣ratio ad Pa∣stores. accor∣dingly. who are apt to imitate them in their Ideoque ti∣mendum est, ne quos duces hujus recti itineris habere nos credimus, os comites habeamus erroris. Hirom. Epist. 14. cap. 3. pag. 43. lewdnesse) and their own deserved infamy; Let such disorderly histrionicall Di∣vines, consider that of Epist. 127. fol. 186. Bernard, Si quis de populo de∣viat
solus perit, Verum Pastoris error multos involuit, & tantis ob est quantis praeest ipse. Epist. 42. fol. 186. Verum tu Sacerdos Dei altissimi, cui ex his placere gestis, mundo an Deo? Si mundo, cur Sacerdos? Si Deo, cur qualis populus talis & Sacerdos? Nam si placere vis mundo, quid tibi prodest Sa∣cerdotium? Volens ita{que} placere hominibus, Deo non places. Si non places, non placas. Alas how can any commit the custody of their soules to such who are altogether neg∣ligent of their owne. Bernard. Ser. 11. in Psal. Qui habitat. f. 748. Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? Epist. 146. fol. 200. Placet vobis ut illi homini credam animam meam qui perdidit suam? was S. Bernards question to Pope Inno∣cent; it may be mine to Patrons and Ordinaries who present or admit such Play-acting or other scandalous Ministers to the cure of soules, which ought to be de∣prived of all sacred Orders and preferments, as the See here, pag. 150.469, 512. & 573. to 668.841. to 868. & Summula Raymundi. f. 91.92, 93, 94. Summa Ho∣stiensis. lib. 3. De Vita & ho∣nestate Cleri∣corum. fol. 237. & l. 5. De Cle∣rico Venatore. fol. 455. Edit. Lugduni 1517. Innocentius 3. Operum. Tom. 1. pag. 471. ac∣cordingly. pre∣cedent Councels and Canonists witnesse. But how ever such Actors chance to escape all humane penalties here, let them remember that they shall surely undergoe the everlasting censure of the 1 Pet. 5.4. Great Shepheard of the Sheep, Christ Iesus, hereafter: and let this for ever disswade them from this ungodly practise of personating Stage-playes, which hath beene most execrably infamous in all former ages. As for all professed common Actors, I shall here adjure them by the very hopes and joyes of Heaven, and the eternall torments of Hell, to abomi∣nate, to renounce all future acting, and this their See here, Act 4. Scene 1. Act 6. Scene 20. & Act 7. Scene 2.3. hel∣lish profession, which makes them the very instruments, the arch-agents, the professed bondslaves of the Devill, the pub∣like enemies both of Church and State, the authors of their owne and others just damnation; excommunicating them both from the Church, the Sacraments, and society of the faithfull in this life, and everlastingly excluding them from Gods blessed presence in the life to come. You then who are but newly entred into this infernall unchristian course of Play-acting, consider I beseech you, that this your in∣famous profession is the broad beaten rode to all kinde of vice, of wickednesse & prophanesse; the readiest pas∣sage
unto Hell it selfe, in which you cannot finally pro∣ceed without the assured losse of Heaven; & a professed apprentiship to the very Devill, whose pompes, whose service you have long since renounced in your bap∣tisme; and therefore cannot now embrace without the highest perjury. O then take pitty on your owne poore soules before it be too late; before Stage-playes, sinne, and Satan have Qui blandi∣endo dulce nu∣trivit malum serò recusat ferre quod sub∣ijt jugum. Se∣neca Hypolitus. Act 1. Facile est tenero ad∣huc animos componere. Difficulter re∣ciduntur vitia quae nobiscum creverunt. Se∣neca. De Ira. lib. 2. cap. 18. gotten such absolute full possession of you, as utterly to disable you to cast off their yoake: And now I pray say thus unto your soules; Bernardi Meditationes. cap. 2. fol. 280. A. & Epist. 19. fol. 199. B. Cur ergo tan∣topere vitam istam desideramus, in qua quanto amplius vi∣vimus tanto plus peccamus? Quanto est vita longior, tanto culpa numerosior. Quotidie nam{que} crescunt mala & sub∣trahuntur bona. Miime pro certo est bonus qui melior esse non vult: & ubi incipis nolle fieri melior, ibi etiam desinis esse bonus. Alas why will you die, why will you voluntari∣ly cast away your soules for ever by this trade of acting Playes, when as you need not hazard them if you will now renounce it? What, is there any profit or plea∣sure in your owne damnation? is there any advantage to be gotten by the Devils service? is there any safe living in the very mouth of Hell it selfe? Why then should you proceed on in this Diabolicall trade? Doe your Friends or gracelesse Parens presse, or else induce you to it, even against your wills? O give them that pa∣thetical resolute answer which Helyas the Monke once gave unto his Parents. Bernard. E∣pist. 111. fol. 202 G. Sime vere ut boni, ut pij Paren∣tes diligitis; si veram si fidelem erga filium pietatem habe∣tis, quid me patri omnium Deo placere satagentem inquie∣tatis, & ab ejus servitio cujus servire regnare est, retrahere attentatis? Vere nunc cognosco, Mich. 7. quod inimici hominis do∣mestici ejus. In hoc vobis obedire non debeo, in hoc vos non agnosco parentes sed hostes. Si diligeretis me gauderetis uti{que} quiavado admeum at{que} vestrum, immo universorum patrem. Alioquin quid mihi & vobis? Secundum exteriorem ho∣minem de pa∣rentibus illis venio, qui me ante fecerunt damnatū, qum natum. Pecca∣tores peccatorem in peccato suo genuerunt, & de pccato nutriverunt. Nihil ex eis habeo nisi miseriam & peccatū, & corruptibile hoc corp{us} quod gesto. Quid sum ego? Homo de hu∣more liquido. Fui enim in momento con∣ceptionisde hu∣mano semine conceptus, &c. Deinde spuma illa coagulata modicum cres∣cendo caro fa∣cta est. Poste plorans & eju∣lans traditus sum hujus mundi exilio, & ecce jàm morior plenus iniquitatibus & abominatio∣nibus. Iamjam presentabor ante districtum judicem, de o∣peribus meis rationem red∣diturus, &c. Bernardi Medi∣cationes cap. 2. ol. 280. Quid à vobis
habeo nisi peccatum & miseriam? hoc solum quod gesto corruptibile corpus de vestro me habere fateor & agnosco. Non sufficit vobis quod me in hanc seculi miseriam miserum miseri induxistis, quod in peccato vestro peccatores pecca∣torem genuistis; quod in peccato natum de peccato nutri∣stis, nisi etiam invidendo mihi misericordiam quam conse∣cutus sum ab eo qui non vult mortem peccatoris, filium in∣super gehennae faciatis? O durum patrem! ô saevam ma∣trem! ô parentes crudeles & impios! imo non parentes sed peremptores, quorum dolor salus pignoris, quorum consola∣tio mors filij est. Qui me malunt perire cum ijs, quâm reg∣nare sine eis. Qui me rursus ad naufragium unde tandem nudus evasi, rursus ad ignem, unde vix semiustus exivi, rursus adlatrones à quibus semivivus relictus sum, sed mi∣serante Samaritano jàm aliquantulum convalui, revocare conantur, & militem Christi prope jam rapto caelo trium∣phantem, ab ipso jam introitu gloriae, tanquam canem ad vomitum, tanquam suem ad lutum, ad seculum reducere moliuntur. Mira abusio. Domus ardet; ignis instat à tergo, & fugienti prohibetur egredi, evadenti suadetur re∣gredi? & haec ab his qui in incendio positi sunt & obstina∣tissima dementia, ac dementissima obstinatione fugere peri∣culum nolunt? Proh furor! Si vos contemnitis mortem ve∣stram, cur etiam appetitis meam? Si inquam negligitis sa∣lutem vestram, quid juvat etiam persequi meam? Quare vos non potius sequimini me fugientem, ut non ardeatis? An hoc est vestri cruciatus levamen, si me etiam perima∣tis, & hoc solumtimetis, ne soli pereatis? Ardens ardenti∣bus quod solatium praestare poterit? Quae inquam consola∣tio damnatis socios habere suae damnationis, &c? Desinite igitur parentes mei, desinite, & vos frustra plorando affli∣gere, & me gratis revocando inquietere. Doth the love of gaine or pleasure allure you to it? Alas, Matth. 16.26. what will it profit you to win the whole world (much lesse a little fil∣thy gaine, or foolish carnall momentany delight) and then to lose your soules? Eccles. 12.1. Remember therefore your Crea∣tor in the dayes of your youth, by abjuring the Devils ser∣vice,
and betaking your selves to Gods, lest the Devill being your lord and master in your youth, prove your tormentor onely in your age. Eusebius Gallicanus Sermo. exhort. contra diversa vitia. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 5. pars 1. pag. 594. H. Recedat ita{que} peccandi amor, succedat judicij timor. Nam quamdiu in vobis car∣nalium reum vixerit appetitus, spiritalium à vobis sensu∣um elongabit affectus. Nemo in vas aliquo faetore corrup∣tum balsama pretiosa transfundit; & sicut dixit Dominus: Nemo mittit vinum novum in utres veteres. Difficile est ut assurgere ad bonum possis, nisi à malo ante diverteris: quamdiu nova delicta adijciuntur, vetera non curantur. Prorsus peccata non redimet, qui peccare non desinit: quia nemo potest duobus dominis servire. In uno animae domicilio iniquitas at{que} justitia, castitas at{que} luxuria simul habitare non possunt. Interdicatur igitur accessus voluptati, at{que} li∣bidini, ut domus munda pateat castitati: excludatur Dia∣bolus cum militia vitiorum, ut Christus cum choro possit intrate virtutum. You who have beene ancient Stage-players, and have served many Apprentiships to the Devill in this your infernall profession, O consider, con∣sider seriously I beseech you, the wretched condition wherein now you stand: your parts are almost acted, your last dying Scenes draw on apace, and it will not be long ere you goe off the Theater of this world Acts 1.25. unto your proper place; and then how miserable will your condition be? You have beene the Devils professed agents, his meniall hired servants all your lives, and must you not then expect his wages at your deathes? You have treasured up nought but wrath unto your selves against the day of wrath, whiles you lived here,Rom. 2.5. to 12. precipita∣ting both your selves and others to destruction; and can you reape ought but wrath and vengeance hereafter if you repent not now? Your very See Act 4. Scene 1. & 7. Scene 2.3. & Part 2. p. 843.844, 845.profession hath excommuni∣cated you the Church, the Sacraments, the society of the Saints on earth; and will it not then much more exclude you out of Heaven? Hierom. E∣pist. 3. cap. 6. O miserabilis humana conditio, & sine Christo vanum omne quod vivimus! was S. Hieroms patheticall ejaculation: and may it not be much more
yours, who have Ephes. 2.12. lived without Christ in the world, who have renounced his service, and betaken your selves to the Devils workes and pompes against your baptimall vow, as if you had covenanted by your selves and others to serve the Devill, and performe his workes, even then when you did at first abjure them: O then bewaile with many a bitter teare, with many an heart-piercing sigh; with much shame, much hor∣ror, griefe and indignation, the losse of all that precious time which you have already consumed in the Devils vassalage and since God hath forborne you for so many yeeres, out of his tender mercy, O now at last thinke it enough, yea too too much that you have spent your best, your chiefest dayes in this unchristian diabolicall lewde profession; professing publikely in 1 Pet. 4.2, 3, 4. S. Peters words; The time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, and of the Devill to, we will henceforth live to God alone: If you will now cast of your former hellish trade of life, with shame and de∣testaion; if you will prove new men, new creatures for the time to come; Christs armes, Christs wounds, yea and the Church her bosome stand open to receive you, notwithstanding all the 1 Pet. 1.11, 12, 13. lusts and sinnes of your for∣mer ignorance. But if you will yet stop your eares, and harden your hearts against all advice proceeding on stil in this your ungodly trade of life, Quid autem eo infaelicius cui jam esse malum necesse est. Seneca. De Ira. lib. 1. c. 13. in which you cannot but be wicked, then know you are such as are marked out for Hell; 2 Thes. 2.10, 11, 12. such who are given up to a reprobate sence to worke all uncleanesse even with greedinesse, that you all may be damned in the Day of Iudgement, for taking pleasure in unrighteousnesse, and disobeying the truth. As therefore you expect to enter Heaven Gates, or to escape eternall damnation in that great dreadfull Day, 2 Cor. 5.10. Matth. 12.36. Rom. 14.10. when you must all appeare before the Iudgement Seate of Christ, to give a particular account of all those idle, vaine and sinfull actions gestures, words and thoughts, which have proceeded from you, or beene occasioned in others by you all your dayes; be
sure to give over this wicked trade of Play-acting without any more delayes, which will certainely bring you to destruction, if you renounce it not, See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 14.0. & here p. 910. as all true penitent Players have done before you. For if the righte∣ous shall scarcely be saved in the Day of Iudgement, where shall such ungodly sinners, as you appeare?1 Pet. 4.17.18. Certainely, Psal. 1.5, 6.you shall not be able to stand in Iudgement, or to justifie your selves in this your profession in that sinne-confounding soule-appaling Day: but 2 Thes. 1.8, 9.you shall then be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, & from the glory of his power, if the very riches of his grace and mercy will not perswade you to renounce this calling now; Bernardi Me∣ditationes. c. 2. fol. 280. Quanto{que} diutius Deus vos expectavit vt emendetis, tanto districtius judicabit si neglexeritis: by how much the longer God hath forborne you here expecting your repētance, the more severely shal he then condemne you. If any Stage-players here object,Objection. that they know not how to live or maintaine themselves if they should give over acting. To this I answer first,Answ. 1. that as it is no good argument for Bawdes, Panders, Whores, Theeves, Sorcerers, Witches, Cheaters, to persevere in these their wicked courses, because they cannot else maintaine themselves; so it is no good Plea for Players. See Tertul. de Idololatria. lib. Chrysost. Hom. 50. in Matth. & Alex∣ander Alensis. Summa Theo∣logiae. pars 2. Quaest. 135. memb. 5. No man must live by any sinfull profession; nor yet doe evill that good may come of it: therefore you must not maintaine your selves by acting Playes, it being a lewde unchristian infamous occupation. Secondly, there are divers lawfull callings and imployments by which Players might live in bet∣ter credit, in a farre happier condition then now they doe, would they but bee industrious: See Marcus Aurelius, Epi∣stle 12. to Lam∣bert, according∣ly & Part 1. Act 6. Scene 5. It is therefore Players idlenesse, their love of vanity & sinfull pleasures, not want of other callings, that is the ground of this objection. Thirdly, admit there were no other course of life but this for Players; I dare boldly averre that the charity of Christians is such, as that they would readily sup∣ply the wants of all such indigent impotent aged
Actors (unable to get their livelihood by any other lawfull trade) who out of conscience shall give over Playing. Certainely, the charity of Christians was such in Epist lib. 1. Epist. 10. See here p. 906. Cyprians dayes, that they would rather maintaine poore penitent Actors with their publike almes, then suffer them to perish, or continue acting; and I doubt not but their charity will be now as large in this particular as it was then. Lastly, admit the objection true; yet it were farre better for you to die, to starve, then any wayes to live by sinne or sinfull courses. There is Nulla est ne∣cessitas delin∣quendi quibus una est necessi∣tas non delin∣quendi. Trtul. e Corona Mili∣tis. cap. 7. no absolute ne∣cessity at all that men should live; but there is this necessity lies on all men, not to sinne yea every pious Christian as is evident by the concurrent examples of all the Mar∣tyrs, should rather chuse to die the cruellest death, then to commit one act of sinne. Better therefore is it for Players to part with their profession for Christs sake even with the very losse of their lives and goods, (which Matth. 10.37, 38. they must willingly lose for Christ, or else they are not worthy of him,) then to retaine their Play-acting, and so lose their Saviour, themselves, their very bodies and soules for all eternity, as all unreclaimed, unrepenting Players in all probability ever doe. Let Players there∣fore if they will be mercifull to themselves, shew mer∣cy rather to their soules, then to their bodies or estates. Bernard, ad Gulielmum Abbatem A∣pologia. Col. 988 I.Talis enim misericordia crudelitate plena est, qua vide∣lcet ita corpori servitur, ut anima juguletur. Quae enim charitas est, carnem diligere, & spiritum negligere? i tàm solli∣citus es, si nec minima sper∣nis, si tàm pru∣denter servas paleas tuas, eti∣am hotreum tuum servare memento & custodire. Imo vero non exponas thesaurum tuum qui sic incubas sterquilinio tuo. Bernard. Sermo. 7. in Psal. Qui habitat. fol. 70. H. Quaeve discretio, totum dare corpori & animae nihil? Qualis vero misicordia ancillam reficere & dominam interficere? Ne∣mo pro hujusmodi misericordia sperat se consequi misericor∣diam sed certissime potius paenam expectet. Yea let them re∣nounce their Play-acting though they perish here, rather then perish eternally hereafter to live by it now. Lastly, I shall here exhort all Play-haunters, all Spe∣ctators of any publike or private Enterludes, to ponder
all the premised reasons and Authorities against Stage-playes, together with those See Part 1. Act 6. thorow∣out. severall soule-condemning wickednesses, sinnes, yea fearefull judgements, in which they frequently involue their Actors and Spectators: to re∣member, that they are the very See here, pag. 42. to 62.129, 231, 236, 257, 405, 430. fol. 522, 524, 528, pag. 561. to 567.658. Devils snares, his workes, his pompes, which they most solemnely renounced in their baptisme: that they are Part 1. Act 6. Scene 1. to 20. accordingly. the greatest, the most pernicious corruptions both of their Actors, their Spectators mindes and manners; the onely Canker-wormes of their graces, their vertues; the chiefest incendiaries of their car∣nall lusts the common occasions of much actuall lewdnesse, sinne and wickednesse; the principall obstacles of their sin∣cere repentance; the grand empoysoners of their soules; and if we believe Ecce qua vo∣lebs ire, ecce turba viae la∣tae, non frustra ipsa ducit ad Amphithea∣trum, non fru∣stra ipsa ducit ad mortem. Via mortifera est, latitudo e∣jus delectat ad tempus, finis ejus angustus in aeternum. Sed turbae strepunt, turbae festinant, tur∣bae colluctan∣tur, turbae con∣currunt. Noli imitari, noli a∣verti: vanitates sun & insaniae mondaces. Noli numerare turbas hominum incedentes latas vias, implentes crastinum Cir∣cum; civitatis natalē clamando celebrantes, civitatem ipsam malè vivendo turbantes. Noli ergò illos attendere, multi sunt. Et quis numerat? Pauci autem per viam an∣gustam. Enar. in Psal. 39. Tom 8. pars. 1. p. 414.415. vid. p. 416.417, 418. S. Augustine, the mortiferous broad bea∣ten way to Hell it selfe, and everlasting death, in which whole troopes of men run daily on unto destruction. O then let all these, all other fore-alleaged flexanimous conside∣rations divorce you now from Stage-playes, from Theaters, which else will seperate you from your God; and so engage your hearts, your judgements, your con∣sciences against them, as never to frequent them more upon any occasion or perswasion whatsoever. You have heard and seene at large what Censures, what Verdicts the See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 12. & Act 7. Scene 1. to 7. Primitive Church, both before and under the Law and Gospell; the ancientest Christians, Councels, Fathers; the best Chistian, the best Pagan Nations, Emperours, Princes, States, Magistrates, Writers, both ancient and moderne, have constantly, have unanimously passed upon Stage-playes, Theaters, Players, Play-haunters, against whom Ter∣tullian, Cyprian, Chrysostome, Augustine, Salvian, and o∣ther Fathers, with sundry moderne Authors, have pro∣fessedly written ample Volumes: You have seene all
ages, all places, all qualities and degrees of men, See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 3.4, 5, 12. & Act 7. Scene 2. to 7. Iewes and Gentiles, Greekes and Barbarians, Christians and Pa∣gans, Protestants and Papists, yea Popes and Iesuits to, concurring in their just damnation. Be not, O be not yee therefore Nun quid pa∣tribus doctio∣res aut devoti∣ores sumus? Periculose praesumimus quicquid ipso∣rum in talibus prudentia pre∣terivit. Bernard. Epist. 174. fol. 111. wiser, nay worser, then all, then any of these Play-condemning Worthies who have gone before you; (whose harmonious Play-confounding resolutions agree∣able with the Scripture, if Saint Obedientia quae majoribus praebetur Deo exhibetur. Quamobrem quicquid vice Dei praecipit homo, quod non sit tamen certum displi∣cere Deo, haud secus omnino accipiendm est, quam si paecipiat Deus. Quid e∣nim interest utrum per se an per suos ministros sive homines sive Angelos ho∣minibus innotescat suum placitum Deus? Sive enim Deus, sive homo vicarius Dei mandatum quodcun{que} tradiderit, pari profectò obsequendum est cura, pari reveren∣tia deferendum, bi tamen Deo contraria non praecipit homo. De Praecepto & Di∣spensatione. fol. 250. H.K. Bernard may be cre∣dited, must binde you to renounce all Stage-playes, in the very selfesame manner as if God himselfe had expresly commanded you to abandon them:) frequent not Playes which they abominated; pleade not for Enterludes which they so seriously, so abundantly condemned: Let not that censure of holy Iam religionis antiquae non solum virtutem amisimus, ed nec speciem retinemus. Ad Gulielmum Abbatem Apologia. fol. 260. D. Bernard be verified of you; that you have now not onely lost the power of the ancient Christian Religion, but even the very shew and outside to: but as you are Christians in name, in profession, so bee you such in truth, in practise. And since it was the Se here, p. 4.61, 557. accordingly. most notorious character of Christians heretofore, to abo∣minate, to abandon Players, Playes and Play-houses; let it bee your honour, your piety, your practicall badge of Christianity to forsake them now: that so imitating the Primitive Play-renouncing Christians in their holinesse, you may at last participate with them in their eternall blisse. And so much the rather let me admonish you to withdraw your selves from Playes and Play-houses, because no ordinance of God can doe you any good, or clense you from your sinnes, whiles you resort to Theaters, as I have See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 12. & p. 392. to 406.436, 433. largely proved: heare but Saint Chrysostome once more to this purpose, where spea∣king against mens and womens parling, laughing, and ga∣zing
about in Churches (which See Chrysost. Homil. 24 in Acta Apost. Tom. 3. Col. 519520. Hom. 36. in 1 Cor 14. Tom. 4. Col. 535536. & Homil. 89. in 1 Tim. accor∣dingly. hee severely censures) he writes thus. Homil. 24. in Acta Apost. Tom. . Col. 520. B.C. See here p. 432. to the like pur∣pose Nunquid theatrica sunt haec quae hîc geruntur? opinor autem quod id Theatris debeamus. Ino∣bedientes enim multos nobis constituunt & ineptos: quae enim hîc extruuntur, illic subvertuntur: & non hoc solum, sed & alias immunditias necesse est Theatri studiosis ad∣haerere. Et perinde fit ac si quis campum velit purgare, in quem fons lut fluens, insuat; quantum enim purgaris, tantum influit. Hoc & hîc fit, quando enim purgamus à Theatro huc venientes, & immundiciam afferentes, dum illuc iterum abeunt, majorem contrahunt immundiciam, quasi dedita opera sic vivant ut nobis negocium faciant, & iterum veniunt multo luto sordidati, in moribus, in gesti∣bus, in verbis, in risu, i desidia. Deinde iterum nos fodi∣mus, quasi dedita opera in hoc fodientes, ut puros illos di∣missos iterum videamus luto ac caeno inquinari. You then who have beene constant Play-haunters besmeared with their filth and dung for divers yeeres together, you who have spent your youth your manhood, your best and chiefest dayes Eccles. 12.1. Luke 1.74, 75. Rom. 12.1, 2. Eph. 5.16, 17. which you should have dedica∣ted to God, your honest callings, and farre better things; on Playes, on Play-houses, and such lascivious sports, you who have cast away your money, your estates on Players, Playes & Play-houses, (the See here, pag. 10.11, 49, 50, 52, 67, 68, 69, 101, 102, 329, 330, 341, 374, 386, 418, 431, 446, 472, 474, 488, 510, 560. very factors, pompes and synagogues of the Devill) 1 Tim. 6.17, 18, 19. Heb. 13.16. Prov. 19 17. 1 Iohn. 3.17. See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 2. wherewith you should have cherished Christs poore needy members; You who have beene ancient Patriots, Supporters of Actors or their Enterludes either by your purses, or your presence, drawing thereby upon your soules the guilt of many a fearefull unlamented sinne; remember, O remember that it is now Rom. 13.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. more then time for you to clense your selves from these Augaean Stables; with which you have beene too long defiled: to renounce these cursed pompes of Satan, which you have too long served; Ephes. 5.15, 16. Col. 4.5. to redeeme the short remainder of that most sacred time which you have too prodigally, too sinfully consumed; to take some speedy serious course for the Col. 3.5, 6, 7. Rom. 13.13. 1 Pet. 2.11. Gal. 5.24. mortifying of
those soule-slaying leshly lusts which you have over-long fomented; for the Psal. 149.4. Isay 1.16. Rom. 13 14. Rev. .18. Va∣nus error ho∣minis, & ina∣nis cultus dig∣nitatis, fulgere purpurâ, mente sordescere. Mi∣nucius Felix. Octavius p. 122. adorning, the saving of those immor∣tall soules, which you have over-much neglected; for the 2 Cor. 5.20. Rom. 5.1. attoning of that holy God, that blessed Saviour that sanctifying Spirit of grace, which you have too highly, too long Isay 3.8. Ier. 41.8. Psal. 106.7, 33.43. provoked, Heb. 6.6. crucified, Eph. 4.29, 30. Heb. 10.29. grieved; which you See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 12. & 20. can never doe whiles you resort to Stage-playes. And since the world, the flesh, the Devill have had your youth and strength, let God be sure to enjoy your age, whom you have Deo dicata membra nulla tibi temeritate usurpes; sciens, quod pietati sanctificatanon abs{que} gravi sa∣crilegio in usus vanitatis, vo∣luptatis, aut e∣jusmodi secu∣lario operis assumantur. Bernard. in Psal. Qui Habitat. Serm 8. fol. 71. sacrilegiously robbed of all the rest. Alas, all the time that you have already past in Play-haun∣ting, and such delights of sinne, hath beene but a time of spirituall death, wherein you have beene worse then nought in Gods account: Epist. 3. c. 5. Ephes. 2.1, 2, 3. Ab eo enim tempore cense∣mur ex quo in Christo renascimur, as Saint Hierom truely writes: and what other profit have you reaped from Playes or Play-houses, Hierom. Epist. 3. c. 7. Nisi quod senes magis onusti peccatorum fasce proficiscimini, as the same Father speaks? O therefore now at last before it be too Matth. 25.10. to 14. late, before death hath wounded you, Heaven excluded you, Hell devoured you, repent of all your former Play-haunting with many a sob and teare, abandoning all Playes, all Play-houses for the future; Cyprian. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 5. p. 37. ut sic correcti at{que} in meliu reformati, qui admirati fuerant prius in Spectaculis insani∣am, nunc admirentur in moribus disciplinam. You who are but young and newly entred into this dangerous course of Play-haunting; you of whom I may say as Seneca. Epist. 47. pag. 229. Seneca once did of the Roman gentry; Ostendam nobi∣lissimos juvenes mancipia pantomimorum, remember that holy covenant which you not long since made to God in baptisme, See here, pag. 3. & 42. to 62. to forsake the Devill and all his workes, the pompes, the vanities of this wicked world, with all the sin∣full lusts of the flesh, of which Stage-playes (as the See here, pag. 3.42. to 62.561. to 567.230, 236, 257, 425, 430, 522, 524, 528, 658. Fathers
teach you) are the chiefe; O perjure, perjure not your selves, renounce not your christianity, your faith, your vow, your baptisme (by frequenting Playes) in your youth, your child-hood; Tu si templū spiritus sancti violas, si intra te sacrarium Dei deturbas & faedas, si cum calic Christi, de calice Dae∣moniorum communicas, contumelia est, non religio: injuria, non devotio: Idolo∣rum servitus & horrenda abo∣minatio, velle simul Baal fa∣mulari & Christo. Cyprian De Caena Dom. Serm. p. 299. bequeath not your selves so soone unto the Devill, after your solemne consecration unto God in Christ; let not him gaine possession of your persons, your service in your youth, that so hee may command, and challenge them in your age; Seneca Epist. 116. Non enim obtinbis ut desinat si incipere permiseris: ergo intranti resistamus, &c. But as Rom. 12.1, 2. cap. 6.3. to 14. Luk. 1.74, 75. you have given up your soules and bodies as an holy living sacrifice unto God in baptisme, to serve him with them in holinesse and righteousnesse before him all the dayes of your lives; so be yee sure to make good your promise, by Eccles. 12.1. remembring, by serving your Creator in the dayes of your youth, your strength, your health and life, who will Rom. 2.10. 2 Tim. 4.8. Hebr. 2.7, 9. then crowne you with glory and immortality at your death. Pitty it is to see how many ingenious Youthes and Girles; how many young (that I say not old) Gentlemen and Gentlewomen of birth and quality, (as if they were borne for no other purpose but to consume their youth, their lives in lascivious dallian∣ces, Playes and pastimes, or in pampering, in To whom I may use S. Cyprians words in the like case. Tu licet indumenta pere∣grina & vestes sericas indues, nuda es: Auro te licet & margaritis gemmis{que} conde∣cores, sine Christi decore deformis es. Si quem de tuis charis mortalibus exitu per∣didisses, ingemiscers dolenter & fleres, facie inculta, veste mutata neglecto capillo, vultu nubilo, ore dejecto jndicia maeroris ostenderes. Animam tuam misera perdi∣disti, spiritualiter mortua supervivere hic tibi, & ipsa ambulans funus tuum portare caepisti, & non acriter plangis, non jugiter ingemiscis? Non te vel pudore crimi∣nis, vel continuatione lamentationis obscondis? Ecce pejora ad huc pecandi vulne∣ra, ecce majora delicta; peccasse, nec satisfacere; deliquisse, nec delicta delere. Cy∣prian. De Lapsis Sermo. Tom. 2. pag. 347. adorning those idolized living carcases of theirs, which will turne to earth, to dung, to rottennesse and wormes-meat ere be long, and to condemne, their poore neglected soules) casting by all honest studies, callings, imploy∣ments, all care of Heaven, of salvation, of their owne immortall soules, of that God who made them, that
Saviour who redeemed them, that Spirit who should sanctifie them, and that Common-weale that fosters them; doe in this idle age of ours, like those Isay 5.11, 12. c. 22.12, 13. cap. 56.12. Amos 6.1. to 8. Dan. 5.1.2, 3, 4. Iam. 5.5. & Iob 21.11. to 16. Epicures of old most prodigally, most sinfully riot away the very creame and flower of their yeeres, their dayes in Play-houses, in Dancing-schooles, Tavernes, Ale-houses, Dice-houses, Tobacco-shops, Bowling-allies, and such infamous places, upon those life-devouring, time-ex∣hausting Playes and pastimes, (that I say not sinnes be∣side,) as is a shame for Pagans, much more for Christians to approve. O that men endued with reason, ennobled with religion; with immortall soules, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. Phil. 4.8, 9. Isay 43.21. Rom. 14.7, 8. fit onely for the noblest, heavenliest, sublimest and divinest actions, should ever bee so desperately besotted as to wast their pre∣cious time upon such vaine, such childish, base igno∣ble pleasures, which can Eccles. 2.1. to 12.16.11. 1 Sam. 12.21. Isay 55.2. Iob 15.31. Hosea 8.7. Rom. 6.21. no way profit soule or body, Church or State; nor yet advance their temporall, much lesse their spirituall and eternall good, which they should ever seeke. You therefore deare Christian Brethren, who are, who have beene peccant in this kinde, for Gods sake, for Christs sake, for the holy Ghosts sake, for Religions sake, (which now extremely Rom. 2.24. Isay 52.5. Ezech. 36.20, 23. suffers by this your folly;) for the Church and Com∣mon-weales sake, for your owne soules sake, which you so much neglect, repent of what is past recalling, and for the future time resolve through Gods assistance, never to cast away your time, your money, your estates, your good names, your lives, your salvation, upon these unprofitable spectacles of vanity, lewdnesse, lasci∣viousnesse, or these delights of sinne, of which you must necessarily repent and be Rom. 6.21. Ezra 9.6. Isay 1.29. c. 26.11. Ezech. 16.61, 63. ashamed, or else be condemned for them at the last; 1 Pet. 1.17. passing all the time of your pilgri∣mage here in feare, and imploying all the remainder of your short inconstant lives, in those honest studies, cal∣lings and pious Christian duties,Rom. 6.22. which have their fruit unto holinesse, and the end everlasting life. And because we have now many wanton females of all sorts resort∣ing
daily by troopes unto our Playes, our Play-houses, to see and to be seene, as they did in See here, pag. 452. Ovids age; I shall only desire them (if not their Parents and Husbands, to con∣sider; See Part 1. Act 6. Scene 2.4, 5. & p. 144.145, 146, 331, 332, 333, 349, 270, 389, 390, 391, 419, 430, to 442 452, 498, 662. ac∣cordingly. that it hath evermore beene the notorious badge of prostituted Strumpets and the lewdest Harlots, to ram∣ble abroad to Playes, to Play-houses; whether no honest, chast or sober Girles or Women, but only branded Whores, & infamous Adulteresses did usually resort in ancient times: the Adulterijs impudicitijs, puerorum vio∣lationibus om∣nia fervent, pernoctationes execrandae ie∣bant mulieres∣que ad ea spe∣ctacula voca∣banturi: ô scele∣stum illud no∣cturnū funestū∣que spectaculū! in Theatro fiebat ea per∣noctatio; & virgo inter a∣dolescentes in∣sanos atque ebriam turbam sedere cogeba∣tur, &c. Chrysost. Hom. 5. in Tit. 1. Tom. 4. Col. 1484. B. Theater being then made a common Brothell: And that all ages, all places have constantly suspected the chasti∣ty, yea branded the honesty of those females who have beene so immodest as to resort to Theaters, to Stage-playes, which either finde or make them Harlots; See pag. 333.356, 439, 443, 444. accordingly. inhibiting all married Wives and Virgins to resort to Playes and Theaters,See Thomas Beacon his Catechisme. fol. 515. & 536. Women ought not to resort to Playes or Enterludes. as I have here amply proved Since therefore Saint Paul ex∣presly enjoynes all women (especially those of the younger sort) to be Tit. 2.4, 5. sober, chaste, keepers at home, (yea See here pag. 434.435. & Doctor Taylor his Commentary upon Titus 3. vers. 5. pag. 389.390. Thomas Beacon his Cate∣chisme. fol. 515.536. and in his 3. Booke of Matrimony. fol. 675. therefore keepers at home, that they may be chaste and sober, as anci∣ent and moderne Commentators glosse it;) that the Word of God be not blasphemed: (where as the dissolutenesse of our lascivious, impudent, rattle-pated gadding females now is such, that as if they had purposely studied to ap∣propriate to themselves King Solomons memorable cha∣racter of an whorish woman, Prov. 7.10, 11, 12, 13. See Lyra, Cartwright, Dod, nd Holcot on this place. with an impudent face, a sub∣tile heart and the attire of an Harlot; they are lowde and stubborne; their feet abide not in their houses; now they are without, now in the streets, and lie in wait at every corner; being never well pleased nor contented, but when they are wandring abroad to Playes, to Play-houses, Dancing-matches, Masques, and publike Shewes; from which nature it selfe (if we believe S. Nam quoniam à scena & ijs quae illic sunt turpia & indcora ipsa natura abduxit mulieres, Diabolus quae sunt The∣atri abduxit in gynecaeum, molles inquā, seu pathicos & meretrices. Hom. 12. in Col. 4 Tom. 4. Col. 1210 Bid. Ibidem. Chrysostome
hath sequestred all women; (or to such suspicious places under pretence of businesse or some idle visits, where they oft-times leave their modesty, their chastity be∣hinde them, to their eternall infamy:) Let me now be∣seech all female Play-haunters, as they regard this Apo∣stolicall precept, which enjoynes them, to be sober, chast, keepers at home (or good carefull House-wives, as See Coverdals and Tindals Translations; and the Fa∣thers, who render it for the most part. Dous curam habentes. som have rendred it:) 1 Tim. 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 15. Isay 3.16. to 25. Prov. 7.10. 2 King 9.30. See Gu∣lielmus Peral∣dus. Summae Virtutum ac vitiorum. Tom. 2. Tit. De Superbia. cap. 10. to 15. adorning themselves in modest appa∣rell, with shamefastnesse and sobriety: (which now are out of fashion) not with broidered cut or borrowed plaited haire, or gold, or pearles, or costly array, (the onely fashi∣ons of our age;) but (which becommeth women professing godlinesse) with good workes: As they tender their owne honesty, fame or reputation both with God and men; the honour of their sex; the prayse of that Christian Religion, which they professe, the glory of their God, their Saviour, and their Cum enim judicium carnis ex anima pendeat, carni nihil potest utilius quam salus animae provideri. Bernardi De∣clamationes. fol. 170. B. soules salvation, to abandon Playes and Play-houses, as most pernicious Pests; where See Part 1. Act 6. Scen 3.4, 5, 20. & pag. 333.356, 439, 443, 444. all females, wrecke their credits; most, their chastity; some, their fortunes; not a few, their soules: and to say unto them as the Philosopher did unto his wealth which he cast into the Sea, Hierom. Epist. 34. cap. 3. pag. 90. Abite in profundum malae cupiditates; ego vos mergam ne ipse mergar à vobis. CATASTROPHE. I Have now deare Christian Readers, through Gods assistance, compleatly finished this my Histrio-Mastix,
wherein I have represented both to your view and In hoc enim Tractatu, non solum pium Lectorem sed etiam liberum correctorem desidero. Ve∣runtamen sicut lectorem me∣um nolo mihi esse deditum, ita correctore nolo sibi. Ille me non amet amplius quàm catholicam i∣dem; iste se non amt am∣plius quàm ca∣tholicam veri∣tatem. Augusti∣nus. lib. 3. De Trinitate. Pro∣mio. & Petrus Lombardus. in lib. 4. Setentia∣rum. Prlogus. censures to, (as well as my poore ability, and other interloping Imployments would permit,) the unlaw∣fulnesse, the mischievous qualities and effects of Stage-playes themselves, and of their penning, acting, and fre∣quenting; endeavoring (out of a Rom. 10.1. cordiall desire of your eternall welfare) as much as in mee lieth, to perswade you to abandon them; by ripping up the severall mis∣chiefes and dangers that attend them. If any there∣fore henceforth perish by frequenting Stage-playes, after this large discovery of their sin-engendring soule-condemning qualities, their sinne, Ezech. 34.. Acts 20.26. their blood shall light upon their owne heads, not an mine, who have taken all this paines to doe them good. All then I shall desire of you in recompence of my labour, is but this; that as I have acted my part in oppugning, so you would now play your parts to in abominating, in abandoning, Stage-playes, without which this Play-refuting Trea∣tise, will doe no good, but hurt unto your soules, by turning your sinnes of ignorance, into sinnes of know∣ledge and rebellion. The labour of it hath beene mine alone; my desire, my prayer is and shall bee, that the benefit, the comfort of it may be yours, the Republikes, and the glory, Gods; the Vbi Deus Magister est quàm citò dis∣citur quod do∣cetur. Le. 1. De Pentecoste. Serm. 1. cap. 1. convincing concurrence of whose ever-blessed Spirit, so blesse, so prosper it to your everlasting weale, that 1 Thes. 5.23. your whole spirits, soules and bo∣dies, may be henceforth preserved blamelesse, from all fu∣ture soule-defiling Enterludes and delights of sinne, unto the comming of our Lord Iesui Christ (2 Cor. 5.10. Rom. 14.10, 11. before whose dreadful Tribunall we must al ere long be summoned, to give an account of all our actions:) & that you may so judge of Stage-playes now, as you will determine of them in that great dreadfull Day of Iudgement, and in the day of death, when you shall not judge amisse. And because no dissolute Libertines, or licentious Readers through Satans or the worlds delusions, should cheat their oules of the benefit intended to them by this worke,
out of a prejudicate opinion, that it is overstrict, and more then puritanically invective against Players, Playes and Theaters; to prevent this fond evasion, and to put all Nunquam n. sine querela aegra tangun∣tur. Seneca De Ira. lib. 3. cap. 10. exclaiming Play-patriots to perpetuall silence, pretermitting the memorable omitted authorities of Gulielmus Stuckius, Antiquitatum Convivalium. lib. 3. cap, 2021, 22, &c Tiguri. 1597. and of Gulielmus Peral∣dus, Summae Virtutum ac Vitiorum. Tom. 2. Lugduni. 1585. Tit. De Luxuria. c. 3. p. 68. to 77. two excellent learned Discourses against Stage-playes, health-drinking, and Against which See Ro∣bertus Massonius his Treatise of Dancing & Part 1. Act 5. Scene 8.9. with the Author there quoted; and those o∣ther Writers in the Table. mixt lascivious dancing, which I shall commend unto your reading; with Quando po∣pulus ad eccle∣siam venerit tàm per dies Dominicos, quàm & per so∣lemnitates sanctorum, a∣liud ibi non agat, nisi quod ad Dei perti∣net servitium. Illas vero ba∣lationes & sal∣tationes, can∣ticaque turpia, & luxuriosa, & illa lusa Diabolica non faciat, nec in plateis, nec in domibus, neque in ullo loco, quia haec de Paganorum consuetudine reman∣serunt. Et qui ipsa fecerit canonicam sententiam accipiat. Bohellus Decret. Ec∣clesiae Gallicanae. lib. 4. Tit. 1. cap. 39. pag. 549, &c. See Tit. 10. cap. 2. to 19. where there are divers Constitutions to the same purpose. the Imperiall Edicts of Charles the Great, against Stage-playes and Dancing on Lords-dayes, and Holy-dayes, and all fore-cited Play-condemning Authorities:) I shall here by way of Con∣clusion, cloze up this whole Discourse, with the words of Ioannis Mariana, a famous Spanish Iesuit; who be∣sides his large and learned Booke, De Spectaculis, pro∣fessedly oppugning Stage-playes, hath since the publi∣cation of that Treatise, in his 3. Booke and 16. Chapter De Rege & Regum Institutione. pag. 341. to 352. (de∣dicated to King Philip the 3. of Spaine, and published in the yeere 1598. Cum Privilegio Caesareae Majestatis & permissu Superiorum, with the speciall prefixed approba∣tions of Stephanus Hoieda, Visitor, and Petrus De Onna, Master Provinciall of the Iesuits of the Province of Toledo, in Spaine,) delivered his positive and deliberate resolu∣tion against Players, Playes, and Play-houses in these en∣suing termes, which is every way as harsh, as rigid and precise as any verdict, that either I my selfe, or any other fore-quoted Authors have here past against them. His words well worthy all Players and Play-haunters consi∣deration are these.
De Rege & Regum Instit. lib. 3. cap. 16. p. 341. to 352. Edit. Webelij. 1611. Publicam ludorum insaniam, quae spectacula nomi∣nantur, In his Books De Spectaculis. Coloniae. Agrip. 1609. See here pag. 695. seperata disputatione pro virili parte castiga∣vimus, multis{que} Argumentis & majorum testimonijs con∣firmavimus, theatri licentiam, de qua potissimum laboran∣dum est, nihil esse aliud; Nota. quam oficinam impudicitiae & improbitatis, ubi omnis aetatis, sexus & conditionis ho∣mines depravantur: simulatis{que} & ludicris actionibus ad vitia vera informantur. Admonentur enim quid facere possint, & inflammantur libidine, quae aspectu maxime & auribus concitatur: puellae presertim, & juvenes, quos in∣tempestive voluptatibus infici grave est, Nota bene. at{que} reipublicae Christianae exitiale malum. Quid enim continet scena, nisi virginum Hence Saint Hierom writes thus: Repertum est facinus quod nec mimus finge∣re, nec scurra lu∣dere, nec Atella∣us possit effari. Epist. 48. cap. 3. pag. 103. be∣cause Players usually acted most wicked things. stupra, & mores prostituti pudoris fae∣minarum, lenonum artes, at{que} lenarum, ancillarum & servorum fraudes, versibus numerosis & ornatis expli∣cata, sententiarum luminibus distincta, eo{que} tenacius memoriae adhaerentia, quarum rerum ignoratio multò commodir est? Histrionum impudici motus & gestus, fractae{que} in faeminarum modum voces, quibus impudi∣cas mulieres imitantur, quid aliud nisi ad libidinem in∣lammant, per se ad vitia satis proclives? An major ulla corruptela morum excogitari possit? Quae enim in scena per imaginem aguntur, peracta fabula cum risu commemorantur, sine pudore deinde fiunt, voluptatis cupi∣ditate animum titillante: qui sunt veluti gradus ad susci∣piendam pravitatem, cum sit facilie à jocis ad seria tran∣situs. Rectè enim & sapienter Solomon, Quasi per risum, inquit, stultus operatur Scelus; turpia enim, at{que} inhone∣sta factu dictu{que} dum ridemus, approbamus: suo{que} pon∣dere pravitas identidem inpejus trahit: Nota. Censeo ergo, moribus Christianis certissimā pestem afferre theatri licen∣tiam, nomini Christiano gravissimam ignominiam. Censeo Principi eam rem vel maxime curae fore, ne aut ipse suo ex∣emplo authoritatem conciliet arti vanissimae, si frequenter intersit spectaculis, audiat{que} libenter fabulas, praesertim quae ab histrionibus venalibus exhibentur: & quoad fieri pote∣rit, de tota provincia exturbet eam pravitatem. Ne{que} con∣cedat
mores suorum ea turpitudine depravari. Nota. Hoc no∣strum votum est destinata{que} sententia. Verum populi levitas & peccantium multitudo, quasi moles quaedam opponitur; tum auctoritas eorum qui communi Errori patrocinantur. Et est excusatio furoris multitudo insa∣norum, hoc quo{que} nomine prava nostra natura, quod vi∣tijs suis & cupiditatibus favet, ne{que} facile avelli se sinit ab ijs quae cum voluptate suscipiuntur; cujus sumus na∣tura cupidissimi. Vsque adeo ut si quis vanitati resi∣stat, ei vehementer irascatur populi multitudo. See here, pag. 3.4. Ille si publicus inimicus, Augustinus ait, cui haec faelicitas displi∣cet, quisquis eam auferre vel mutare tentaverit, eum libera multitudo, avertat ab auribus, evertat à sedibus, auferat à viventibus. Excaecat nimirum prava consuetudo ani∣mos, & quae passim fieri videmus, defendere conantur quidem Let our Play-patrons well observe this Epithite. licentiae patroni, magni scilicet Theologi, quasi juri & aequitati consona, otio & literis abuentes: quos redarguere facile erit testimonio & authoritate veterum Theologorum, in hac re non discrepantium; à quibus dis∣cedere nostrae aetatis Theologos velle non putamus. Has omnes simulatae veritatis praestigias retegere non erit difficile, multitudinem à furore retinere difficilius erit: nisi publica accesserit authoritas, quorum interest magistratuum. Profecto curandum est, ut ea opinio publice suscipiatur, Let Play-haunters note this well. Theatra sane, quibus obscaena ar∣gumenta tractantur; officinam universae improbitatis esse, qui concurrunt eò non secus facere, quam qui ad ganeas, ad furta, ad caedes, ad lupanaria: qui suscepti laboris fructus erit multò maximus. Erunt enim qui pravitate cognita desinant peccare, salutem{que} suam turpi voluptate potio∣rem habeant, ne{que} prudenter & scientes in mortem feran∣tur furentes, rapidi, & miserabiles. Illud certe omni cura prestandum, ut haecLet Players marke this stile and title. natio perditorum hominum, penitus à templis exturbetr: quod Romanorum tempore fuisse aliquando factum, Tacitus, Libro quartodecimo his verbis indicat. Ac ne modica quidem studia plebis exar∣sere, quia redditi quanquam scaenae pantomimi,And if Pa∣gans prohibi∣ted Players to come unto their Idols So∣lemnities, shall Christians ad∣mit them to the Church or Sacraments? certamnibus
sacris prohibeantur. Stage-playes then are no fit Ornaments for Christian Feastivals and Solemnities, this very Iesuit being Iudge. Qua ergo fronte histriones de foro raptos é publicis diversorijs in Templu Christiani indu∣cent, ut per eos sacra festorum laetitia augeatur? Aut quî conveniat, uti Augustinus contra Romanos antiquos ait; histriones ignominia notare, at{que} in infamiûm numero ponere, per quos divinus cultus honestatur? cur à sacris or∣dinibus repellantur, quod ecclesiasticae leges sanciunt, quorum opera dies festi & caelestium celebritates illu∣strantur? Sed obijcis fortasse, eos in templis non in tur∣pibus argumentis versari, sed sacras historias referre; quod utinam verum esset, & non potius ad movendum populi risum, obscaenissima quo{que} actitarent. Et est a∣cerbum negare non posse, quod sit turpe confiteri. Such is th holinesse of our Popish Playes. Simus spe in sanctissimis templis inter fabuli actus, chri adinstar adulterorum furta, amores tupes recitari, ut ho∣nestissimus quis{que} ea spectacula vitare debeat, si decori, & pudori consultum velit. Nota bene. Et putabimus tamen quae à mode∣stis hominibus fugiuntur, ea caelestibus esse grata? Ego crediderim potius quasi sordes & religionis ludibria, hos omnes ludos à sanctissimistemplis esse exterminandos, ac im∣primis publicos histriones, qui cum turpi vita sint, religio∣nem faedare potius sua ipsorum ignominia videntur; & assueti turpibus, in sanctissimis locis odorem, quo imbuti sunt, ore, oculis, & toto corpore exhalant: ac nescio an aliquando fabulam agant, quin verba turpia, vel impru∣dentibus saepe excidant: & hos tamen contendemus divi∣nis celebritatibus adhibere? Sed fac, (quod nunquam acci∣disse probabis) histriones severa aliqua lege constrictos, intra modestiae fines contineri posse, ac sacras tantum historias cum dignitate referre; Sacred stories therefore in this Iesuits judgement ought not to be acted on the Stage, no nor yet in Church∣: which con∣trols the pra∣ctise of his fellow Priests and Iesuits. contendo, non minus eum morem cum religionis sanctitate pugnare, ne{que} minus dedecus reipub. afferre: Quî enim conveniat ab hominibus turpibus Divorum res gestas referri, eos{que} Francisci, Do∣minici, Magdalenae, Apostolorum, ipsius etiam Quanto res sacratior tanto abusus jus damna∣bilior. Concil. Coloniense 1536. pars 9. cap 16. Surius. Tom. 4 pag. 787. Christi personas repraesentare? An non id sit Caelum terrae, aut caeno
potius, sacra profanis miscere? Imagines in templis magna honestate depingi cavetur, & impudicam faeminam Mariae aut Catharinae, probosum hominem Augustini, aut Antonij personam sustinere patiamur? Quod Arnobius certe, & antiquior Tertullianus ab antiquis factitatum accusant: ignominiosos homines in scenam sanctissimorum Deorum personas inducere. Nonne violatur Majestas. (Tertullianus ait) & divinitas constupratur, laudantibus vobis? Quae verba ad nostros mores transferas licet, at{que} in antiquis interpreteris nostrorum licentiam & turpitudinem ac∣cusari. Nota. Ita{que} si duorum optio danda esset, mallem ab hi∣strionibus profanas fabulas agi, quam sacras historias: quo∣iam cum decore & honestate eos facere non posse persuasum plane habeo, tum ob eorum vilitatem & dedecus, tum ob faedissimos mores, parem{que} actionum levitatem & turpitudi∣nem. Et ipse cogitabam in templis festis{que} Divorum omnia ad pietatera & modestiara comparanda esse, quibus rebus animus excitatur ad religionem & ad rerum divinarum contemplationem, ijs{que} communiter & privatim vacandum esse. Risus, plausus, clamores an id praestens, per se quis{que} considerabit. Sequitur pravitas alia, ne{que} minor superiori, neque minus devitanda. They hve Women actors in Spaine, as we have femle Spectators, and Playing Boyes in Womens attire. Mulieres excellenti pulchri∣tudine, eximia actionum venustate & gratia inducuntur in Theatrum, quod maximum est incitamentum libidinis, & ad corrumpendos homines potissimum valet. Deus enim (uti Basilius ait libro de virginitate) cum conderet ani∣mantes in utrum{que} sexum distinctas, aestrum mutuae cupidi∣tatis inseruit, inter homines maxime, qua se invicem appe∣terent, majorem multò in viro, quoniam faeminam de ejus latere formatam diligit ut proprium membrum, & ad eam toto impetu rapitur. Nta. Sic faemina in se quandam virtutem habet, miram{que} potestatem trahendi ad se virum, non secus a Magnes, cum ipse non moveatur, ferrum ad se rapit. Contra hanc potissimum cupiditatem pugnare debent, quicun{que} pudicitiae dignitatem consequi student, nun∣quam interrupto us{que} ad vitae finem certamine: Let Play-haunters pon∣der this. Quod an ij faciant, qui tanto studio ad Theatra concurrunt, pius
& modestus lector secum ipse consideret. Enim vero cum histriones studia omnia lucro metiantur, ut multitudi∣nem alliciant, quam non ignorant aspectu mulierum, & auditu maxime capi, omnes fraudes suscipiunt, nulla ho∣nestatis cura: us{que} eò ut in templa etiam turpes has mu∣lierculas inducant: quod his Annis non semel factitatum est, neque uno loco in Hispania, quod horrescunt audire aures; de quibus rebus egerint pudet, piget{que} dicere. Et Nota. Principum munus est resistere levitati multitudinis, & perditorum hominum temeritati. Non ignoramus antiquis temporibus mulieres in scenas fuisse invectas, quas in∣signi impudentia corpora etiam nudasse, omnem{que} aeta∣tem objecta specie libidinis expugnasse passim at{que} cor∣rupisse, sua quo{que} aetate Hom, 38. in Matth. Chrysostomus multis locis accu∣sat. Nudas quidem in nostra Theatra mulieres prodi∣re non arbitror, tametsi nonnunquam in ipsa actione nudari audiebam, certe tenuissimis vestibus indutas prodire, quibus membra omnia figurantur, ac ferme subijcuntur oculis. Mulieris autem aspectu pulchrae & ornatae, pre∣terea getus & verba in molliciem fracta adjungentis, quid potentius esse possit ad illiciendas animas, at{que} in sem∣piternam mortem impellendas, inflammandas{que} libidine, ego sane non video: vincit officium linguae periculi magnitudo: eo amplius quod haec etiam turpitudo suos patronos ha∣bet, non quosuis de populo, sed viros eruditionis & modestiae opinione praestantes. Aiunt enim aut comaedias in universum abdicandas, aut mulieres inducendas in Theatrum, Nota bee. quod majus periculum immineat si pueri sub∣stituantur in veste muliebri & ornatu, quo aspectu ad prae∣posteram & nefariam libidinem populus solicitetur. Nimi∣rum velamen malitiae quaerunt: aliud agunt, aliud agere videri volunt. Hispanorum nationi suspicio criminis imponitur, à quo natura abhorret, (paucos excipio) & nos in provincijs quibus id malum viget, scimus saepe pueros in scenam prodijsse sine periculo; varias{que} per∣sonas ut res se dabat cum dignitate, eligantiaque acti∣tasse. Cupiditas autem muliebris sexus latius patet, ma∣joresque
multo impetus habet, non solum in corruptis∣simis hominibus & pravis, quales sunt qui puerorum a∣moribus indulgent, sed in alijs etiam viris, aliqua pro∣bitatis & modestiae laude conspicuis. Mito quod fae∣minae scenicae, quae histriones consectantur & adjuvant, for∣masunt venali, sive quod tot viris procacibus & otiosis circumseptae, Nota bene. mirauli instar esset, si pudice viverent: & ex turpi questuplerum{que} raptae, posito amplius in Theatro pudore ad ingenium redeunt. Ita vulgato inter plures cor∣pore omnibus exitium afferunt, juvenes otiosi & perditi (quorum magnus numerus ubi{que} est) eo aspectu concitati feruntur precipites: unde rixae graves, vulnera, & cedes, contemptus parentum & rei familiaris prae amore earum muliercularum. Quae probra, & similia multa alia, qui digna non putat quae omni studio avertantur, ferreus sit & communi hominum caeterorum sensu ratione{que} destitutus. No standing Play-houses are to be suf∣fred by this Iesuits sen∣tence, whose reasons I wish all Magistrates and others would consi∣der. Censeo praeterea nullam certam sedem histrionibus ex∣truendam publice, domum aut Theatrum, quam lucri parte locatam unde inopes alantur, aut quod in alias publicas utilitates impendatur; ea enim species obten∣ditur ab ijs qui contra statuunt. No standing Play-houses are to be suf∣fred by this Iesuits sen∣tence, whose reasons I wish all Magistrates and others would consi∣der. Primum enim facto Theatro occasio manifesta praebetur honesta conditione viris & faeminis inter se libere conveniendi, praesertim domus, aut Theatri magistro venali: nam qui emit magno, venda necesse est omnem licentiam, quae ab illo flagitare homines perditi poterunt: fiet{que} ex Theatro lupanar multo exitialius quam alia: deinde frequentiores ludi erunt perpetua sede publice designata, quam omnino sit opus. Alliciet loci oppor∣tunitas ad ludendum & spectandum, & praefectus cum magno eam sedem conduxerit histriones undi{que} conquiret, nullum{que} diem elabi sine ludo patietur; quin potius diebus noctes continuabit, quanta cum perturbatione reipublicae dicere non est necesse. Quis enim juvenes avellat ab ea vanitate? Opifices & agrestes relicto opere quotidiano concurrent, fa∣muli heros contemnent, faeminae viros & familiam, prae cupi∣ditate spectandi: quod scimus hoc etiam tempore ex parte contingere. Praeterea histrionum numerus extructo certe
Theatro per urbes & oppida, immensum augebitur pon∣dus iners atque inutile, cum sint enervati voluptatibus; nam & lucri aviditas multos excitabit, neque nisi mag∣no numero poterunt tam multis Theatris satisfacere. O that all Christian Princes, Magi∣strates, and Play-haunters would well weigh this reason. Postremo, num juvenes ex his privilegijs & bacchanali∣bus, aut strenuos milites, aut bonos senatores fore credimus? discent illi quidem ea inspectione amare, armorum pondus, alias{que} molestias sustinere non poterunt, cum totos dies resi∣dere in Theatris consueverint: quo tempore aut aequos cal∣caribus inciare & flectere potuissent, aut alia ratione vires corporis exercere, aut certe pacis artes commentari. Scimus Romae primum ex lapide Theatrum à Gneio Pompeio fuisse extructum, nam antea scena ad tempus ex materia facta utebantur, tanta ex eo opere populi gratia, ut mag∣ni cognomen ex ea fabrica accesserit. Id fuit multitu∣dinis judicium, qua palae instar levissimae in omnes par∣tes circumfertur: nam prudentiorum magnae partis re∣praehensionem incurrit, unde laudem captabat. Sic do∣cet Tacitus libro quartodecimo, productis etiam in utramque partem probandi & improbandi Theatra ar∣gumentis: ut Nota bene. quod in ea temporum faece & morum labe dubitatumest nobis pro certo lege esse debeat, nequaquam populi Christiani moribus & sanctitati convenire, ut per urbes & appida, certa, perpetua{que} sedes histrionibus detur. Scimus saepa à Censoribus Romae eversa Theatra nihilomi∣nus, quasi morum certissimam à lascivia labem: & erit in populo Christiano, hac professione, qui restituenda contendat? Ad haec: Suscepta Christi religione per omnes pene Civi∣tates cadunt Theatra, uti Augustinus ait, caveae turpitudi∣num & publicae professiones flagitiosorū; & nos ea instauran∣da contendamus? Vincit rei dignitas orationis facultatem. Nota Neque excuses, nostra Theatra non esse conferenda cum antiquis, neque majestate operis, neque ludorum apparatu Turpitdinem loci accusamus, non structurae modum; rivus tenuis, naturam continet fontis unde ma∣nat; surcuus arboris unde excisus est, succum habet. Nam si magno vectigali, sublato Theatro rempub privari
accuses, risum tenere non potero, ne{que} enim tanti lucrum esse debet, ut mores populi & religio negligantur; neque deerunt aliunde rationes, si Theatra repudiemus, ad ege∣norum inopiam sublevandam. Et mihi qui secus statu∣unt, magni Pompeij factum imitari velle videntur. Is enim ut reprehensionem evaderet quasi Theatro consti∣tuto turpitudinis scholam apperuiset, Veneris Templo Theatrum quasi appendicem adjunxit, religionis sancti∣tate novam structuram velaturus, nimirum verebatur ne aliquando memoriae suae censoria ignominia accederet, quasi arcem omnium turpitudinum struxisset; uti Tertullianus ait: Ergo Pompeij imitatione cum templis, aut hospi∣tijs pauperum theatrum jungatur, quo majus lucrum sit, honestius susceptae improbitatis velamen. Note this ensuing pas∣sage, and the accursed fruits of Stage-playes, well. Censeo ergo cum multis, fore è republica, si histriones pretio venales penitus removeantur. Omnes enim pecuniae vias norunt, & pecuniae causa omnes turpitudines suscipiunt, instillant{que} alijs; questuaria arte exhauriunt iunt pecunias, & veluti sopitis voluptate sensibus latenter extorquent, quas non minori tur∣pitudine insumant, otio & desidia ut torpeant Cives effici∣unt, quae omnium vitiorum radix est, vitijs omnibus & fraudibus viam muniunt, libidine maxime, quae auribus & oculis suscipitur. Divinum Cultum minuunt diebus festis, cum vacandum esset rebus divinis, populo ad specta∣cula attracto, quae pestis omnibus piaculis procuranda vide∣batur. This the Iesuit writes, not that hee would have any Stage-playes suffred, for he profes∣seth the con∣trary before; but onely by way of preven∣tion; that in case he could not procure all Playes to bee suppressed, that yet those that were tolerated might bee thus regulated. Quod si non obtinemus, ut ludi scenici penitus amoveantur, & placet nihilominus eam oblectationem populis dare: quod jus & aequitas postulare videtur, impetrare certe cupimus, ut delectus aliquis sit, neque promiscue licentia quidvis agendi histrionibus conce∣datur: sed legibus certis circumscribantur & finibus, quos nemo impune transgrediatur. Nota bene. Tametsi nullis le∣gibus putabam furorem hunc satis frenari: prudenter quidam O here, inquit, quae res nec modum habet ne{que} Con∣silium, ratione, modo{que} tractari non vult. Sequamur tamen Platonis institutum, qui poetarum Carminibus exami∣nandis praefici sanxit viros prudentes non minores
quinquaginta annis: eorum judicio quaecunque agendae erunt fabulae examinentur, ipsi etiam intermedij actus quibus major turpitudo inesse solet; mulieres in Theatra inducere nefas esto: Theatrum nusquam publice constitua∣tur. Diebus festis (ui antiquis legibus sancitum memi∣nimus) ludi scenici ne exhibeantur, ne temporibus quidem jejunij Christiani: quid enim commercij squalori cum Theatri risu, plausu{que}. A templis & sanctorum qui cum Christo in Caelo regnant, ac omnino divinis celebritatibus amoveantur: ac praesertim ij modi & gestus, quibus turpi∣tudo in memoriam revocatur, & ferme oculis subijcitr, quae sunt vulnerareligionis nostrae probra, monstra{que} immania: Hispanorum nationis dedecora, See here, pag. 213.445, 446, 881. & BB Po∣net his Apolo∣gie or Answer to D. Martyn, p. 61 & 78. Baaeus Centur. 8. pag. 665. where the Sodomy of the Papists and Popish Clergie is descried. adeo faeda, ut stilus contrectare vereatur, suoque se faetore tueri hoc genus mali videatur. Postremo, quoad fieri poterit minori aetate pueri & puellae arceantur ab ijs spectaculis, ne à teneris rei∣publicae sminarium vitijs inficiatur, quae gravissima pestis est. Asint inspectores publice designati, viri pij & pru∣dentes quibus cura sit ut turpitudo omnis amoveatur, & potestas coercendi paena si quis se petulanter gesserit. Deni{que}, populus intelligat, histriones non probari à republica, sed populi oblectationi at{que} importunis precibus dati: quae cum non potest quae unt meliora obtinere, solet ali∣quando minora mala tolerare, & populi levitati aliquid concedere. What could any Puritan or Precisian (as the See here Part 1 Act 8. Scene 7. pag. 797. to 828. according∣ly. Quod autem de istis quaedam inhonesta & ma∣ligna jactantur, nolo mireris, cum scias hoc esse opus smper Diaboli, ut servos Dei men∣dacio lacerat, & opinionibus falsis gloriosum nomen infamet; ut qui conscientiae luce suae clarescunt alienis rumoribus sordidentur. Cy∣prian. Epist. l. 4. Epist. 1. p 170.171. world now stiles all such who run not with them into the same excesse of riot and prophanesse) write more a∣gainst Stage-playes, Play-houses, Players, Play-haunters; or what have I said more against them in this Trea∣tise, then this great Iesuit hath done, and that by pub∣like approbation both of his Royall Soveraigne, his Visitor and Superior too? And must not Stage-playes then be extremely bad when as pofessed Iesuits so se∣verely censure them? yea, shall not Protestants, nay Papists to, be unexcusably licentious, if they should be more moderate or indulgent unto Playes, then they? Let no Player, or Play-haunter, no voluptuous libertine
therefore henceforth quarrel either with me or others, as being too puritanically rigid against Stage-playes, when as these loose Iesuits equalize, if not exceed us in their Play-condemning Censures, as this large tran∣scribed passage fully proves. 2 Pet. 3.17. Yee therefore, beloved Readers, seeing yee now know these things before hand, be∣ware lest ye also being led away to Playes, to Theaters, with the error, the example, the importunate sollicitations of the wicked (as many ignorant and unstable nominall Christians have beene before you;) fall from your owne stedfastnesse, faith and Christian vertues, into a sinke of hellish vices, to your eternall ruine. Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus, that great Shepheard of the Sheepe, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good worke to doe his will; working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Iesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Augustinus de Symbolo ad Catechumenos. l. 4. c. 2. Quisquis contempto Deo sequeris mundum, & ipse te deserit mundus. Sequere adhuc quantū potes fugitivum, & si po∣tes apprehendere eum, tene eum: sed video non potes, fallis te. Illen. labiles motus suos torrentis ictu percurrens, dum te videt inhaerentem sibi, & tenentem se, ad hoc te rapit, non ut salvet, sed ut perdat te. Quid n. cū pompis Diaboli amator Christi? Noli te fallere, odit n. tales Deus, nec in∣ter suos deputat professores, quos cernit viae suae desertores. Ecce ruinosus est mundus, eccetantis calamitatibus reple∣vit Dominus mundum, ecce amarus est mundus & sic a∣matur, quid faceremus si dulcis esset? O munde immunde! teneri vis periens, quid faceres si maneres? Quem non deci∣peres dulcis si amarus alimenta mentiris? Vultis dilectissi∣mi non inhaerere mundo, eligite amare creatorm mundi, & renunciate pompis mundanis, quibus Princeps est Diabolus cum Angelis suis. FINIS.
A TABLE (VVITH SOME briefe Additions) of the chiefest Passages in this Treatise: p. signifying the Page: f. the Folioes from pag. 513. to 545. (which exceeded the Printers Computation) m. the marginall notes: if you finde f. be∣fore any pages from 545. to 568. then looke the Folioes which are overcast: if p. then the pages following. A Abomination, used alwayes for a heinous sinne in Scripture. pag. 181.212. Mens wearing of womens, and womens putting on of mens apparell, an Abo∣mination to the Lord. p. 178. to 216.879. to 899. Acting of popular or private Enterludes, for gaine or pleasure, infamous, un∣lawfull, and that as well in Princes, Nobles, Gentlemen, Schollers, Di∣vines, as common Actors. p. 133.134, 137, 140, 841. to 911. p. 571. to 668. Sparsim. accompanied with effemina∣cic, hypocrisie, and others sinnes. p. 151. to 250.841. to 911. It occasions divers sins in Actors and Spectators. p. 151. to 250.907. to 911. It helpes not mens action or elocution. p. 931. to 939. Objections for acting of Playes answered. p. 84. to 106. & 913. to 943. Children ought not to bee trained up nor taught to act. pag. 135.138, 168, 169, 172, 908. Acting of Idols, Devils, evill persons pars, or evill things, sinfull p. 84. to 106.141, 176, 177, 405, 406, 949. See Idols. Achilles taxed for putting on womens apparell. p. 182.199, 884. Adrian his Temples built for Christ, without Images. pag. 901. Adultery an hainous dangerous sinne. pag. 376. to 384. punished with death in divers places. p. 382.383. See the Ho∣mily against Adultery. part 3. pag. 86.87. and Thomas Beacon his 3. Booke of Matri∣mony. p. 660. to 670. occasioned, fo∣mented by Playes and Play-houses. p. 227. to 446.498, 662. AEgyptians, condemned musicke. p 287. AEtredus, his censure of lascivious Church-musicke. pag. 279.280. of Playes. pag. 684. AEneas Sylvius, his prophane Play and life. p. 112.113, 765. his recantation of his amorous Poems. pag. 840.918. his censure of wanton Poets. p. 917.918. of Playes and Players. pag. 691.737 m. AEschylus, one of the first inventors of
Tragedies. pag. 17. f. 552. his strange and sudden death. fol. 552.553. AEthiopians, punished adultery with death. pag. 382. Agefilaus his answer to Callipides. p. 741.742. C. Agrippa, his censure of Daning. pag. 237.238. of lascivious Church-mu∣ficke. pag. 284285. of Popish Stewes, and of the incontinency of Monkes, Nons, and Popish Clergie men. pag. 213.215, 445, 446, 880, 881. of Playes and Players. pag. 692.869. of wanton Poems. p 385.836, 915. Alcibiades, traduced by Eupolis. pag. 121. f. 553. his dislike of Musicke. p. 287. Alcaeus, his modestie. fol. 515. Alchuvinus, his censure of Stage-playes, wanton Musicke, Kalends, New-yeeres gifts, and mens acting of Playes in womens apparell. pag. 197.198, 278, 564, 755, 756. m. his pas∣sage for sanctifying the Lords Day. pag. 630. m. Ale-houses, much haunted on Lords-dayes and Holy-dayes. f. 536. Clergie men prohibited to keepe, or haunt them. p. 591. to 637.655, 666, 667. Alexander Fabritius, his censure of Dan∣cing, Dancing-women and their at∣tires. p. 238.256, 257, 258. Of Dice-play; Epistle Dedicatory 1. & p. 626. m. of Stage-playes p. 434.435. Alexander Severus, his Temple for Christ. p. 901. m. withdrew Players peusions. pag. 313. Alipius, a memorable story of his fall and Apostasie by resorting to a Play-house. fol. 548. Bishop Alley, his censure of Playes and Play-bookes. p. 99. to 923. Altars, honoured and danced about by Pagans. p. 235.236, 758. m. none in the Primitive Church. p. 896. placing of Tapers on them, derived from Sa∣turne his worshippers. pag. 758. m. See Bishop ewels censure of Altars, & of their standing at the East end of the Church; in his Answer to M. Hardings Preface. p. 6. in his Reply to Harding. Artic. 3. Devis. 27. pag. 195.196. & Artic. 13. Devis. 6. p. 488. Thomas Beacon, in his Catchisme. fol. 484. William Wraghton, in his Hun∣ting of the Romish Fox. fol. 12. Bishop Hooper, his Iudgement of them. See Hooper. Gulielmus Altisiodorensis, his censure of Playes. pag. 68. S. Ambrose, his censure of Dancing, especi∣ally in women. pag. 223.232. m. of Dicing. Epist. Ded. 1. of mens putting on womens apparell. p. 191.192, 193. of mens long and frizled haire. p. 190.193, 209. m. of Images, especially of the Deity. p. 898. m. of Kalends and New yeeres gifts. p. 20.786. of lasci∣vious Songs. p. 266. Of Stage-playes. p. 339.671. of giving money to Play∣ers. p. 316.323. How Christs Nativity ought to be celebrated. p. 774. to 781. Ammianus Marcellinus, his censure of Playes and Dicing. p. 465.710. Annaus, his effeminacy. pag. 88. Anselme, his censure of Playes. pag. 684.846. fol. 545. Anthemius, his Edict for sanctifying the Lords Day, and suppressing Stage-playes. pag. 469.470. against Images. pag. 900. Antioch, its preeminence before Rome, p. 410.424. Antiochus the mad, taxed for his Dancing, Masquing, Play-haunting, pag. 249.250, 857. Antiphanes the Comedian, his death. fol. 553. Antoninus the Emperor censured for his Dancing and delight in Playes. pag. 710.854, 855. Antoninus his censure of Playes and
Players. pag. 691. Apparell, the end and use of it. p. 207. o∣ver costly new-fangled Play-house apparell censured. pag. 19.216. to 220.420, 427, 571, 584, 586, 755, 757, 772, 775, 776, 896. to 904. Mens putting on of womens, and womens of mens apparell (especially to act a Play) unlawfull, abominable, un∣naturall, the occasion of Sodomie and lewdnesse: proved at large. p. 168. to 172.178. to 276.584, 850, 859. to 889. Appearances of evill to be avoyded. p. 88.89, to 106, 948, 949. Apostles, their Constitutions against Stage-playe and Actors. p. 550.649. to 652. slandered and persecuted as Se∣ditious persons. p. 813.833. Puritans, as the world now judgeth. pag. 799.800, 801. Applauses of Playes and Players censured p. 297.298, 299. See Chrysost. Hom. 30. in Act. Apostol. Tom. 3. Col. 549.550. against Stage-applauses, and the heming and applauding of Preachers in their Ser∣mons. Aquinas his censure of Playes, Players, & putting on womens apparell. pag. 179.182, 306, 324. f. 543.689, 887. Arabians punish adultery with death. p. 382. Arcadius his Edict against Sword-playes. pag. 75.468. Architas his modesty. pag. 515. Ardalion his strange baptisme and con∣version. p. 119. Ardaburius censured for delighting in Playes. pag. 857. m. Arias Montanus his censure of Dancing, Playes and Acting. fol. 558.559. pag. 842.843. Aristodemus his effeminate practise and death. pag. 05. Aristophanes his abuse of Socrates. p. 121.730. Aristotle his censure of Playes, Players, and wanton pictures. p. 121.366, 367, 448, 449, 484, 586. m. 703. Arnobius his censure of Playes and Dan∣cing. p. 222 334. of Images in Chur∣ches, and of making Gods Image. p. 896.897. m. Astrius his verdict against Dancing, Stage-playes, Mummers, Kalends, New-yeeres gifts, Stage-playes, and mens acting in womens apparell. pag. 197.316, 317. fol. 533. Ateas his censure of Musicke. p. 287. Athanasius, what singing he ordained in Churches. p. 283.284. his testimonies of George the Arrian. pag. 671.672. of the ill effects of acting Pagan Idols vices. p. 95. against Images. p. 900. m. Atheisme, occasioned and fomented by Stage playes. f. 550.551. & p. 363. Atheagoras his censure of Sword-playes and Stage-playes. p. 558669. Athaeneus, his censure of Dancing, Dan∣cers, Players, Playes, long haire, effe∣minacy, lascivious Musicke, &c. p. 249.250, 288, 209. m. 704.883. Athenians first inventors of Stage-playes. p. 17. their prodigality on them and hurt by them. p. 312. fol. 562. p. 709.710. Abandoned Playes and Play-Poets at last. p. 457.730, 921, 839. S. Augustine, his censure of Dancing and amorous Songs. p. 223, 270, 271. of Images, specially of God. p. 898 m. of New-yeeres gifts and Heath-drink∣ing. pag. 20.22, 756. Of Stage-playes Players, Theaters, & Play-haunting. Epistle Ded. 2. p. 49.50, 164, 165, 313, 316, 324.325, 341, to 349, 474, 475, 476, fo. 524, 525, 532, 541, 542, 560, 681, 843, 844, 971, 987. of mens act∣ing in womens apparell & long haire. p. 193.194.189.202. See Enar. in Ps. 32. p. 244. his repentance for resorting to Playes before his cōversion. f. 568. his
opiniō of the beginning of the Lords Day. p. 643. of giving mony to Stage-players. p. 324.325, 873. Augustus his proceedings and Lawes a∣gainst Playes, Actors, and Dancing. p. 459.460, 707, 708, 861. M. Aurelius his lawes and censres a∣gainst Playes and Players, whom he banished into Hellespont. p. 318.319, 463, 464, 137, 138. Axiothea her resort to Plato his Schoole in mans apparell taxed. p. 184. B Bishop Babington his censure of Stage-playes. p. 359.360. Bacchanalia, how celebrated by Pagans. p. 744.745, 751. to 760. Imitated by Christians. f. 536. p. 743. to 749.757. to 765. Bacchus, Players, Playes & Play-houses dedicated to his worship. p. 17.22, 168, 510, 511. not to be invocated. p. 584. Baptisme in jest upon the Stage turned into earnest. p. 118.119. Stage-playes and Dancing the uery Pompes of the Devill which wee renounce in bap∣tismo. p. 3.15, 25, 42. to 61.129, 230, 236, 257, 425, 430.522, 523, 524, 528, 560. to 567, 658, 684, 704, 829, 836, 837, 911, 990. Our vow in bap∣tisme to be performed and most seri∣ously considered, p. 53. to 61. a great preservative against sin if oft remem∣bred. p. 563.564. Baronius his censure of Stage-playes. p. 566.567, 696. S. Basil his censure of Dancing. p. 223.224, 225. m. 277.278. of Health-drinking, p. 22. of lascivious Songs and Musicke. p. 266.273, 276, 277, 278, 308. of Stage-playes, and Play-poets. p. 308.337, 679, 680, 915. of mens effeminate long haire. p. 211. m. Batologies in prayer prohibited. p. 19. Thomas Beacon his censure of Dancing, Dicing, and Stage-playes. pag. 626. m. 693. of lascivious Church-Musicke. p. 282. to 28. Bellarmine his censure of Playes. fol. 538. pag. 696.697. Beare-baiting censured and prohibited. p. 583. & fol. 556. S. Bernard against Stage-playes, Dicing, long haire, and ribaldrie Songs. p. 350.560.684. against Images, &c. p. 902.903, 904. his prayse of the Scriptures fulnesse. p. 928. Bza his recantation of his lascivious Poems. p. 840. Bishops children prohibited to behold, act, or set forth Stage-playes, p. 574.591, 653. ought to suppresse Playes, Dan∣cing, & Play-haunters. p. 150. ought to invite the poore to their tables, and to have some part of the Scripture read at meales, and then to discourse of it p. 591.653. See Gratian. Distinct. 44. not to weare costly apparell. p. 621 must not play at Dice, nor be∣hold Dice-players, nor keepe any Di∣cers or idle persons in their houses. p. 657. to 661.666. Bishops parts not to be acted on the Stage. p. 596.601. ought not to read Heathen or pro∣phane Authors. pag. 78.79, 915, 916, 925, 926, &c. ought to preach con∣stantly once a day in BB. Hoopers opi∣nion. fol. 521. p. 629. See Ministers. Petrus Blesensis hi character of an Offi∣ciall. f 537. m. his censure of Players. and such who harbour them. pag. 556.684, 737. Bodine his censure of Stage-playes. pag. 483.484. M. Bolton his verdict of Stage-playes pag. 16 364, 365. Bonefixs condemned by Councels and Fathers. p. 21.22, 580, 583, 585, 587, 588, 770, 772, 773, f 535,
Bookes of Paganisme and Pagan Idols prohibited to be read. p. 78.79, 915, to 928. Prophane, lascivious, amorous Play-bookes, Poems, Histories, and Arcadies unlawfull to be pennd, printed, read, especially of children and youthes. pag. 103. m. 108. m. 307.453, 454, 831.913. to 929. Magicke, and lascivious Bookes ought to bee burnt. p. 916.717, 919, 920, 922. Bowing to and before Altars, derived from Pagans. p. 236, See my Lame Giles his Haltings. p. 36. to 39. & the Appendix to it. p. 15.16. Bowing and kneeling downe to Images, is Idolatry. p. 896. to 904. m Exod. 20.5. c. 23.24 Levit. 26.1. Num. 25.2. Deut. 5.8, 9. Iosh. 23.7, 16. Iudg. 2.12, 17, 19, 1 King. 19.18 2 King. 5.18. c. 17.35. 2 Chron. 25.14. Dan. 3.5, 6, 28. Rom. 11.4. Therefore bow∣ing and cringing to Altars (a thing never used by the Iwes or Primitive Church and Christians, but onely by the Papists, who de∣cree thus: Summa reverentia & honor maxim{us} sanctis Altaribus exhibeatur, & maxime ubi sacrosanctum corpus Domini resrvatur & Missa celebra∣tur. Bochellus Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 4. Tit. 1. c. 81. p 558.) must be Idolatry too. If any reply; that they bow and kneele not unto Images, Altars, or Communion Tables, but before thm: I answer, that as bowing, kneeling, praying, and worshipping before God; is the same in Scripture phrase with bowing, kneeling praying unto God, and worshipping of God: as is evident by Det. 266. 1 Sam. 1.12, 15, 19. 2 Chron. 20.18 Psal. 2.7. Psal. 72.9 Ps. 869: Ps. 95.6. Ps. 96.9, 15. Psal. 98.6, 9. Isay 66.23. Rev. 3.9. c. 4.10. . 5.8. cap 7.11. c. 15.4. compared with Isay 45.23. c. 49.23. c 60.14. Rom 14.11. Gen. 24.26.48. c. 47.31. Heb. 11.21. Exod. 4.31 c. 12.27. c. 34.8. 1 Chron 29.20. 2 Chron. 7.3. c. 29.29, 30. Nehem. 8.6. P. 72.9. And as bowing, kneeling, or fallng dwne before mn, is all on with bowing, kneeling, and fallng down to men: witnesse Gen. 49.8. 1 Sam. 25.23. 2 Sam 14.33. cap. 24.20. 1 King. 1.16, 23. 2 King. 2.15. Prov. 14.9. compa∣red with Genes. 27.29. Exod. 11.8. 1 King. 2.9. 1 Chron 21.21. So bowing, kneeling, and falling downe before Images, Altars, or Communion-Tables, is the very same in Gods owne language and repute, with bowing, kneeling, and falling downe unto them: as the 2 Chron 25.14. Lk. 4.7. Dan. 3, 3.5, 6. paralleld with Exo. 20.5. Levit. 26.1. Matth. 11.9 and the fore al∣leaged Scriptures infallibly demonstrate, and the Homily against the perill of idola∣try. p. 44. to 75 with William Wraghton his Repy to the Rescuer of the Romish Fox, and the Authors here quoted. p. 902.903. abundantly prove: Needs threfore must it be most grosse Idolatry, as our owne Ho∣milies and Writers teach us. Thomas Bradwardine his passage against Stage-playes. p. 689. Bramnes, Brasilians, & those of Bantam pu∣nish adultery with death. p. 382.383. Bribe-takers act their parts in Hell. p. 13. M. Brinsley his censure of Stage-playes. p. 63.364. f 550. Brownists censured. p. 38. Bucer his opinion of academical and po∣pular Playes. p. 7.692. for two Ser∣mons every Lords Day. p. 629 m. Brissoniu his censure of Stage playes. p. 695. C. Bulengerius his censure of, and Booke a∣gainst Stageplayes p. 320.358, 696, 697 Iohn de Burgo his verdict of Players, Playes and Dancing. p. 238.239, 689, 844. m. 846.847. C C. Caligula censured for favouring Play∣ers, for acting and frequenting Stage-playes, putting on womns apparell, and drinking his Horses health. pag.
200.249, 462, 708, 709, 736, 741, 848 849. slaine at a Play. f. 554. p. 849. Calvin his censure of Playes and Play∣ers. p. 692.907. of Dancing. p. 226.240. Candlemas, and the burning of Tapers on it derived from the Pagan Februa∣lia. p. 758.760. Canticles, anciently prohibited to be read of children and carnall persons p. 914.915. Cappadocia, its extent and division. p 678.679. its prayses. p. 675. Cappadocians, not alwayes infamous. pag. 674. to 677. Cappadox, not a proverbiall but a natio∣nall title. p. 674. to 678. Carinus censured for favouring Players, and lewde persons. f. 547. p. 710.857. Cassiodorus his censure of Playes and Players. p. 470.471, 478, 682, 683. Cirque-playes censured and condemned by Fathers and Emperours. pag. 470. 556, 685, 340, 729. fol. 519, 523, 524, 525. Catiline his conditions, pag. 133.149. Cato, how much feared of the Romanes. f. 529. his gravity. p. 740. Catullus censured, pag. 916. Censors appointed to correct Playes and Players. p 38.478, 472. Charles the Great his censure and Edicts against Stage-playes, Dancing, and ribaldry Songs on Lords-dayes and Holy-dayes, p. 271.715.996. See the places of Bochellus quoted in the mar∣gent: against Images. p. 900. Charles the 6. of France his danger at a Masque. f. 557.558. Charles the 9. of France, his Edicts a∣gainst Playes and Dancing on Lords-dayes and Holy-dayes. p. 715. King Charles his pious Statute for suppres∣sing all Playes, and Enterludes, and unlawfull pastimes on the Lords-day. p. 241.243, 495, 715, 716, 717. Dancing upon Lords-dayes punisha∣ble by this Statute. Ibidem. Charondas his law against Cowards pag. 584 m. 883. Children to be kept from Playes. p. 366.367. See Parents. Christ wept oft, but never laughed. pag. 294.402, 403. fol. 526. accused of se∣dition & rebellion. p. 822.823. coun∣ted a Deceiver. p. 816. a Puritan, pag. 799.800, 801. his Nativity how to be celebrated. p. 48.225, 526, 743, to 783 for what end he dyed and suffered, and was incarnate. p. 26.526, 749. to 752 the onely patterne of our imi∣tation. f. 526. p. 732. dishonoured and offended with Stage-playes p. 44.48. f. 525.526. p. 743. to 750. His passion ought not to be acted, and yet Papists and prophane Iesuits play it. p. 108. to 119, 624, 636, 763, 764, 765, 766, 929. Why he redeemed us. p. 26.27, 749, 450. Christians, must imitate & follow Christ alone. p. 98.99, 526, 732. must excell Pagans in grace and vertue. p. 57.98, 99, 45, 454, 455, 711, to 713. what they are and ought to be. p. 56.57, 63, 425, persecuted and hated for their goodnesse and because they are Chri∣stians. p. 799. to 826 nick-named pag. 824. accused of faction, rebellion, and hypocrisie. pag. 816. to 828. must not follow Pagan customes. p. 17. to 28. 32, 33, 47, 578, 580, 582, 583, 584, 585, 586, 587, 751. to 762. not to read Playes and wanton Bookes: but the Scriptures and good Bookes. p. 913. to 924. the Primitive Christians con∣demned Stage-playes, and excommu∣nicated Players and Play-haunters. p. 2.3 4, 49. to 53. 325. to 355.545. to 705. and passim. Ill Christians worse then Pagans. p. 454.455, 711. to 713. 798 exceedingly dishonour Christ,
and scandalize religion. pag. 744. to 749. Christmas disorders censured at large p. 48 225, 743, to 783.600. to 635. See. Had∣don Cont. Osoriū. l. 3. f. 203. derived from Papists, & Pagans Saturnalia. p. 600. to 635. Sparsim. 751. to 769. Christmas, how to be celebrated. p. 48. 225, 226, 526, 576, 585, 586, 600. to 635. Spar∣sim. 743. to 783. See Holi-dayes. Christmas Lords of Misrule, whence deri∣ved. p. 767. Chrysologus, his censure of Dancing pag. 224. m.f. 526. Chrysostome, his censure of dancing, espe∣cially at mariages. p. 222.223, 228. m. 555. See Marriage. of Dice-play. Epist. Dedicit. 1. p. 423. of lascivious Songs and Musicke. p. 263.267, 268, 269, 412, 413, 420. See Homil. 20. ad Ephes. & Hom. 12. ad Collos. of gawdy apparell and Stage-attires. p. 219.420. of excessive laughter. p. 290. to 296.403, 404. of ffeminacy pag. 169. of mens long haire, womēs cutting their haire, & mens putting on of womens apparell. pag. 169.195, 196, 426. Of Stage-playes, Players, Play-haunters and Play-houses. p. 50.66, 156, 164, 169, 392, to 432, 474.552, 563, 566, 680, 681, 738, 988, 989. See Hom. 12 in Collos. & 20. in Ephes. Churches, no Playes, Dances, scurrilous Songs or Pastimes to bee suffred in them, nor yet in Church-yards. p. 581.600. to 660. Sprsim. 995.999, 947. Gazers in i censured. p. 418.999. no Images, Crucifixes, or Saints Pictures to be suffred in thē. p. 894. to 905. not to be overcuriously or vainly adorned. p. 902.903. the Primitive Church ex∣communicated Players & Play-haun∣ters, & condemned Stage-playes, and dancing. p. 134.543. to 690. See Playes. Clemangis his censure of Dancing, Di∣cing, Playes, and Players, and of the abuses on Lords-dayes and Holi∣dayes. f. 535.536, 5 7. p. 690.691. of Popish Non and their grosse incon∣tinency. p. 880. m. Clemens Alexandrinus his censure of lasci∣vious kisses and dancing. p. 166. m. 222. of mens acting in womens appa∣rell and wearing long haire p. 167.187 189. of lascivious apparell. p. 218. of Images, especially of God the Father. p. 896.897. m. of excessive laughter. p. 392. surrilous Songs. p. 266. effe∣minate Musicke. pag. 275. of Stage-playes, and Theaters, p. 67. m. 329. 344, 472, 532, 609. Clemens Romanus his censure of mens long and frizled haire. p. 189. m. of Players, Playes, and Play-haunters. p. 49. f. 532. p. 649. to 652. his command and exhortation to Lay-men to read the Scriptures. p. 927. Commodus, censured for acting the Play∣er and Gladiator; for favouring Play∣ers and Gladiators, for Sodomie and putting on womens apparell, &c. fol. 555.721, 852, 853, 894, 882. his mur∣ther. f. 555. p. 854. Company of vill persons to be eschued. p. 144, 148. to 153. f. 547.548. a dan∣gerous snare, apt to draw men to Playes and sundry sinnes. pag. 143. to 152.416, 417. f. 547.548, 549. got by frequenting Playes. f. 547.548, 549, 598. See Master Boltons walking with God. p. 73, &c. Constantine the Great an Englishman borne: a suppressor of Stage-playes, of Sword-playes. p. 75.467. and of Images. p. 900. Constantius his Edict against Sword-playes. p. 468. Councels: 55. against Stage-playes. pag. 570. to 668. against Dancing, Dicing, Health-drinking, Beare-bayting, Bonefires, Newyeeres gifts, lascivi∣ous
Pictures, Songs and Musicke pro∣phaning of Lords-dayes, Holi-dayes, Churches, Pagan customes, haunting of Ale-houses and Tavernes, Clergy∣mens seeing and acting of Playes, Dancing, Dicing, Non-residency, &c. p. 570. to 668 p. 150. m. 221.222, 240, 265, 286, 287, 354, 756, 915, 917, &c. See these severall Titles. Generall Councels binde in point of manners. Ibidem. For snctifying the Lords Day. p. 242. m. 570. to 660. Crab his Councels against Stage-playes. p. 571. to 660. Crossing of the face when men goe to Playes, shuts in the Devill. p. 342. Crownes of Lawrell not to be worne of Christians. p. 20.36. Cyprian his censure of Mens long haire. p. 189 of mens acting in womens ap∣parell. p. 168, 169, 187, 188. of lascivi∣ous apparell. p. 217, of Images. p. 897. his Bookes against Stage-playes, and censure of Players, Playes, Play-haun∣ting and Theaters, &c. pag. 135.136, 168, 169, 187, 188, 331, 332, 333, 334, 473, 523, 546, 558, 562, 670, 392, 722, 728, 729. Cyrllus Alexandrinus, his censure of ma∣king Gods Image. p. 898. of Dancing & Stage-playes, especially on Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes. pag. 278.279, 533, 534, 682, of wanton Musicke. p. 278.279. Cyrillus Hierusolomitanus, his censure of Stage-playes, as the Devils pomps, &c. which we renounce in baptisme. pag. 49.339, 562, 565. D Damascen his censure of Playes & Dan∣cing, specially on the Lords Day. pag. 260.349. f. 533.544. p. 683. of making the Picture of God. p. 899 m. Damnation, oft occasioned by Stage-playes. f. 565. to 569. p. 910. oft to bee thought on. Ibidem. Dancing at marriages, condemned. p. 20. 22, 36,, 222, 278, 555, 573, 602, 603. See Marriage: the Devils procession and invention. p. 228.229, 232, one of the Devils pomps which we renounce in baptisme. p. 225.228, 229, 232, 236, 238 257, 562, 565. an occasion of the breach of all the 10. Cōmandements. p. 231.232. an offence against all the Sacraments. p. 257.258. derived from Pagans who spent their Festivals in dancing, and courted their Idols with it. p. 225.233, 234, 235, 236, 251, 575, 576, 584, 704, 751. to 763, 771, 779. Infamous among Pagans, and con∣demned by them. pag. 245. to 252. & 709. to 711.849. to 864.884, 854, 855, 801. a concomitant of Stage-playes. p. 220.221, 259, 260. condem∣ned by the Waldenses and French Protestants. p. 226. to 233.636, 637. Christians ought not to teach their Children, especially their Daughters, to dance. p. 232.233, 236, 636, 637. Delight & skil in Dancing, a badge of lewde lascivious women & strumpets. pag. 232.236, 237, 238, 240, 245, 248, 249.250.258. The Devill danceth in dancing women. p. 228.229, 232, 257, 258, 260. effeminate, mixt, lascivious dancing condemned by Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, Pagan and mo∣derne Christian Authors of all sorts, as an occasion of much sin and lewd∣nes, &c. p. 22.56, 220. to 262.271, 272. f. 534.575, 576, 599, 584, 600.636, 637, 652, 666, 693, 799, 698, 704, to 711.729, 765, 770, 771, 772, 479. Pro∣hibited and condemned upon Lords-dayes, and Holi-dayes as a sinfull, un∣semely, and unlawfull pastime, by Councels, Fathers, Imperiall and Ca∣nonicall Constitutions, Christian
Writers of all sorrs by our owne En∣glish Canons and Homilies, and by the Statutes of 1. Car. c. 1. & 5, & 6. E. 6. c. 3. p. 231. m. 220.222, 240. to 245. 257, 258, 260, 71, 272, 530. to 540. p. 575, 576, 580, 605. to 609.615, 620, 621, 622, 625, 627. to 636.664, 715, 716, 717, 770, 771, to 779, 780, 781, 913, 693, 419. All Clergie-men prohibited to dance, or to behold o∣thers dancing, or to reward or encou∣rage Dancers. p. 573. to 678. Sparsim. See Prudentius contr. Symmachum. lib. 1. Bibl. Patrū. Tom. 4. p 910. D Greg. Nyssen de Resurrect Christi. Oratio. 3. p. 160 Va∣lerin. Hom. 1. De bono pudicitiae. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 5. pars 3. p. 477. C.D. Arias Montanus in lib. Iudicum. c. 16. p. 568. to 573. Ioannis Munster De Saltationibus. lib. Gulielmus Stckis Antiqu. Convivalium. l. 3. cap 21.22. Zeghedini Loi Communes. Tit. Chorea & Saltatio. Gulielmus Peral∣dus Summa Virtutum ac Vitiorum. Tom. 2. Tit. De Luxuria c. 3. p. 68. M. Deering his 10. Lecture on the Hebrwes. Francis Salis his Introduction to a devout life. part 3. c. 32.33. p. 648.649. Vincentius Belua∣censis Speculum Morale l. 3. pars 9. Distinct. 6. p. 251.252. & Summula Raymundi. fol. 93. where a Dance is thus defined. Chorea est circulus cahenatus cujus cen∣trum est Diabolus. with sundry others here omitted, against Dancing. David his Royall resolution. p. 737. cen∣sured for feining himselfe mad. p. 894. 160. his dancing before the Arke no justification of our lascivious dan∣cing. p. 552. to 555.729, 773, 729. Day of Iudgement at hand, and ever to be meditated on p. 56.59.976. to 979. Dice-play, and Dice-houses censured, con∣demned, by Councels, Fathers, all sorts of Writers both Christian and Pagan, by Mahomet in his Alcoran, by Imperiall Edicts, and Princes Lawes, and by the Statutes of ou Kingdome Epistle Dedicatory. 1.2. p. 471.492, 494, 495, 618, 626, 627, 655 to 666.693, 700, 795. Ministers and Clergie-men prohibited to play at Dice or Tables, to stand by or looke upon Dicers, or to suffer any Dicing, Carding, or Gaming in their houses. p. 573. to 668. Sparsim. Dicers excommunicated and kept from the Sacrament in the Primitive Church. p. 618.926. Didcus de Tapia, his censure of Players, Playes, and Theaters. pag. 481.482, 483, 766. Diodorus Siculus his testimony of the ori∣ginall of Playes: & censure of them. p. 510.704. Diogenes Cinnics his censure of Musicke. p. 287. Diogenes Lartis his censure of Stage-playes. p. 707. Dion Cassius, his censure of Dancing, Playes, & Caligula his acting of them. p. 707. to 710. Dionysius Halicarnasseus his censure of Playes, their originall and use. p. 704. Devils and Devill-Idols the inventors, the fomenters of Stage-playes, and Dan∣cing which were appropriated to their solemne honour and worship, their Festivals being spent in Playes and Dancing, which they exacted from their worshippers. p. 9. to 50.96, 131, 164, 165, 177, 25, 228, 229, 32, 236, 238, 257, 403, 404, 430, 47, 479, 509, 510, 522, 523, 524, 550, 551, 561, to 567, 576, 584, 658, 684, 692, 704, 726, to 734, 751, to 763, 766, 772, 773, 779, 780, 786, 793. have Stage-playes in Hell every Lords-day night. p. 12.13. The inventors of no good things, and the enemies of mankinde. pag. 9.14, 15, 16, &c. Claime Playes, Play-haunters, and Play-houses as
their owne. p. 10.11, 483. f. 523, 524, 555. honoured oft-times in stead of Christ. p. 744.745, 759. The onely gainers by Stage-playes. p. 44. to 48. Divinations and charmes unlawfull. pag. 20.21, 583. Divorce; women who resort to Playes & Play-houses, may be divorced from their Husbands by the ancient Ro∣manes and Iustinian his Lawe. p. 391.661, 662. S. Dominicke, a story of his going to Hell. p. 12, 13. Domitian banished Players and suppressed Playes. p. 461.714. Domna censured for putting on mans ap∣parell. p. 204. Drunkennesse, occasioned by Stage-playes p. 508. to 512.731, 732. a great and scandalous sinne, especially in Clergy men. p. 508.509, 591. to 636. Sparsim. 780. m. E Edgar, his excellent Oration to his Pre∣lates. p. 762. Edricke his censure. p. 133. Edward the 6. his Statutes and Commis∣sion for abolishing Images and Saints pictures out of Churches. p. 902.903. m. For sanctifying the Lords Day, &c p. 781. his Comedy, De Meretrice Babilonica. p. 834. Effeminacy, a great sinne. p. 167.206. fol. 546.547. a necesary concomitant of Play-acting and a fruit of Playes. pag. 167. to 214.420.422, 458. f. 540, 547, 548, 874. to 895.949. in haire, appa∣rell, speech or gestures much condem∣ned. Ibidem. Queene ELIZABETH, and her Coun∣sell suppressed Playes, Play-houses, and Dice-houses. p. 491.492. her In∣junctions against Images & Pictures in Churches, which she caused to bee demolished & taken out of Churches. pag. 902.903. m. her Statutes against Playes and Players. p. 495. Englsh Lawes, Statutes, Magistrates, Vniversities, Writers, against Dicing, Mummers, Players, Dancing, Stage-playes, lascivious Songs and Musicke, Play-bookes, &c. p. 109.110, 227, 261, 273, 279. to 288.358. to 366.434. to 445.485. to 497. f. 517, 518, 519. p. 698.699, 700, 715, 716, 717, 793, 794, 919. to 924. against Images in Churches. p. 901.902, 903. m. Epist. Ded. 1. For the sanctification of the Lords Day. pag. 241.242, 243, 715, 716, 717, 781. Ephori. pag. 288.922. Ephorus his censure of Musicke. p. 287. Epicarmus punished for his wanton Ver∣ses. p. 921. Epiphanius his censure of Stage-playes, wanton Musicke, mens wearing of womens apparell, long haire, and womens cutting their haire. pag. 188.279, 556, 680. of Images in Churches p. 899. m. Erasmus his censure of wanton Church-singing. p. 285. Esau and Iacob a tipe of the Reprobate and Elect. p. 347. Euclid censured for putting on womens apparell. p. 182. Euhrosina and Empona censured for cut∣ting their haire, and putting on mans apparell. p. 184.204. Eupolis the Poet drowned by Alcciad. p. 121. f. 553. Eusbius his censure of Stage-playes, Dancing and wanton Musicke, espe∣cially on Lords-dayes. p. 164.260. fol. 533.534. . 279.670. of making the Image of God. p. 899. m. Euripides his death. f. 553. Eustatius condemned for an Heretique, for perswading women to cut their haire and put on mans apparell under pretence of devotion. p. 203, 204 184.
Examples of Gods fearefull Iudgements upon Play-poets, Players, and Play-haunters. f. 553. to 565. Exhortations to Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters, p. 53. to 62. f. 567.568. pag. 566. to 569 686, 687, 701, 711, 712, 717, 718, 89, 830, 974. to 995. F Fae-painting condemned p. 159, 160, 505 394, 229, 890, 799, 780, 854, 893. See Gulielmus Peraldus Summa Virtutum ac Vitiorù. Tom. 2. De Superbia. c. 14. Fathers: against Dancing. p. 22.36, 221. to 230. Dicing. Epistle Dedicatory. 1. Heathenish customes. pag. 20. to 37. Health-drinking. p. 26.597, 598, 609, 614, 615. Mens long haire and Peri∣wigs. p 188. to 191.209, 210. lascivi∣ous Songs and Musicke. p. 261. to 285. fanastique and gawdy apparell and fashions. p. 217.218, 890. to 904. Ima∣ges in Churches, and the making of Gods Image. pag. 894. to 904. Stage-playes. p. 66 67, 309. to 355.392. to 432.668. to 688. Sword-playes. p. 74.75, 347, 467, 468, Reading of Play-bookes and prophane Authors. p. 78.79, 915. to 928. New-yeeres gifts. p. 2036, 197, 198, 429, 430, 755, 756. See all these Titles. Their concur∣ring resolutions to bee submitted to. p. 685.686, 687, 718, 719, 720. Puri∣tans. p. 222. 798. to 802. Feastivals of Pagans spent in Playes, in dancing and excesse. pag. 225.233. to 237.251, 751. to 761.771, 779. See Dancing: to bee abandond by all Christians pag. 20.21, 575, 576, 584, 751. to 761. turned into Christian Holi-dayes, and so brought in Hea∣thenish abuses. pag. 751. to 761. Se Holi-daes. Fasts of the Primitive Christians descri∣bed p. 768. to 780. Few saved. p. 244.787, 788. See D. Cetwin his strait way and narrow gate. Iulius Firmicus, against mens long haire and putting on of womens apparell: and Stage-playes. p. 194.195, 670. Floralian Enterludes acted by Whores ob∣scene and invective. p. 122.163, 214. fol. 529. Fornication a hainous sinne. pag. 375. to 30. men prone unto it. p. 372.373. occasioned and fomented by Stage-playes. pag. 327. to 446.144, 145, 146, 432, 433, 498, 662. See whores and whoredome. Not to be acted among Christians. p. 63. to 72.89. to 94. Adreas Frisis his censure of Dancing, Dicing, Playes and scurrill Songs. pag. 693. G Gallienus censured, yea slaine for favou∣ring Players, acting and frequent∣ing Playes. p. 465. f. 555. p. 739.856. Gallus the Poet censured. p. 454. Gelliu his censure of Stage-playes. p. 452. George the Arrian, a Cappadocian borne. p. 671. to 679. George the Martyr made Symbolicall by Melancton and others. p. 676.677. Gerardas his saying. p. 920. Geranes punish adultery with death. p. 382. used to poll thir wives taken in adultery & so urne thē packing. p. 203 condemned Stage-playes & kept their wives from them. p. 434 457, 458, 713. Gerson his censure of lascivious Poems, Playes and dancing. p 690.538.922. Gesturs of Ministers and others ought to be grave. p. 934.935. Gluverius his censure of Stage-playes. p. 457.458. Gods Image or Picture cannot, ought not to be made; a great impiety to make it p. 894. to 904. his Comman∣dements not to be broken in est pag. 84. to 88. he abhorres Stage-playes
130, 131. fol. 525, 526. Gorgias his censure of Stage-playes. pag. 449.703. Gosson a penitent Play-poet, his censure & Books against Stage-playes. p. 140.360, 36, 362, 436, 437, 486, 489. I.G. his refutation of the Apologie for A∣ctors, and his censure of Playes. p. 141.142, 146, 487, 491, 698, 700, 795, 796. Gothes and Vandals rejected Stage-playes p. 457. f. 527 p. 713. Gratian the Emperour his Edict against Players, and Playes. p. 468.813. Gratian the Canonist, his censure of Players and Playes. pag. 684.846. of New-yeeres gifts. p. 796. of Health-drinking. p. 596. Grecians, the originall inventers of Playes p. 17.509. admired Playes and Players at first, but abandoned and made them infamous at last. pag. 455.704, 730, 731, 738, 843, 844. Their manners, customes, and Playes prohi∣bited Christians. p. 21.22, 549, 586, 650, 651, 652. Gregory the Great, turned Pagan Festivals nto Christian. p. 759.760. his cen∣sure of Playes and Pagan Authors. p. 78.79, 683, 848. Gregory Nazianzn, his censure of Dan∣cing p. 225.279, 637. m. 771.772, 773. ace-painting. p. 217.890, 893. mens long and frizled haie. pag 189. mens putting on of womens pparell. pag. 169.170, 188, 189. lascivious attyres. p. 217.896. Players and Stage-playes. p. 136.163, 164, 169, 315, 338, 39, 473, fol. 527.680. how Christs Nati∣vity must bee solemnized. pag. 771. 772, 773. Gregory Nyssen, his censure of Dancing, lascivious pictures, and Stage playes. p 337.338, 527. fol. 559.560 pag. 680. of Images and Gods Picture. pag. 898. Gregory the worker of Miracles, his ha∣tred of Playes caused a sudden pesti∣lence among Players and Play-haun∣ters. f. 559.560. Th. Gualensis his censure of Playes and laughter. p. 296.301, 689. Gualther his censure of Dancing, Players, Iesters, Playes, and Play-haunters, p. 45. m. 226.320, 479, 480, 481, 692, 737, 739. Guevara his censure of Stage-playes and Actors. p. 461.462, 696, 731. Gulielmus Parisiensis his censure of Stage-playes and Dancing. p. 688. his passage and reasons against mens putting on of womens apparell, or women of mens. p. 884.885, 886. Gunda her punishment for cutting her haire, and putting on mans apparell. p. 800. H Haire, womens cutting and frizling of their haire condemned by Deut. 22.5. 2 King. 9.30. Isay 3.18, 20, 22, 24. 1 Cor. 11.5, 6, 14, 15. 1 Tim. 29. Ti. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. Rom. 1.26. Zeph. .8. Prov. 7.10, 13. Rev. 17.4. c. .8. by Councels, Fathers, and Chri∣stian Writers of all sorts as an unna∣turall, impudent whorish practise. pag. 184. to 206.217. m. f. 514, 799.805.879. to 890. Sparsim. 994. See Gulielmus Peraldus Summa Virtuum ac Vitio∣rum. Tom. 2. Tit. de Superbia. c. 14. accordingly. Examples of women who have cut their haire, censured. Ibidem. Whores and Adulteresses pu∣nished heretofore by cutting their haire, which our women now make a fashion. p. 202.203, 204. Popish Nons cutting of their haire when they are admitted into Nonneries derived from the ancient punishment of Harlots, and Eustatius his Disciples. p. 202.203, 204. condemned. Ibidem.
Mens wearing of long, false, curled haire & lovelockes, condēned by Deut. 22.5. Ezech. 44.20. Dan. 4.33. 1 Cor. 11.14, 15. Rev. 9.8. Num. 6.5. Ier. 7.29. Psal. 68.21. compared toge∣ther, by Councels, Fathers, and other Writers, as an effeminate unnaturall amorous practise, an incitation of lust, an occasion of Sodomy, and a practise of ancient Ganymedes and Sodomites. p. 186. to 203.209, 210, 211.426, 560, 799, 873, to 890.893. Ep. Ded. 2. & 3. To the Reader. See Guli. Peraldus qua supra. M. Bolton his com∣fortable directions for walking with God. p. 195.200. W. T. his Absoloms fall, wherein every Christian may as in a Mirror behold the vile and a∣bominable abuse of curled long haire so much now used in this our Realme pag. 8.9, 10, 17, 1, 19. Arch-bishop Abbot his 18. Lecture upon Ionah. sect. 11. p. 570.571. Augustin. Ear. in Psal. 32. Tom. 8. pars 1. pag. 24. M. Edward Rainolds his sinfulnesse of sinne. p. 135. Quintil. Instit. l. 1. c. 15. agaist mens long compt haire. Hauking, Hunting, yea keeping of Haukes and Hounds prohibited Clergie men by sundry Canons and Councels. p. 587. to 668. Sparsim. Haymo his censure of Stage-playes and Actors. p. 349.863. of making Gods Image. p. 900. m. Health-drinking, prohibited, condemned by Councels, Fathers, and others. pag. 22.596, 597, 598, 609, 614, 615, 656, 772, 780. m. 782.790. See my Healths sicknese, with the Authors thre quoted. Habanus Maurs Com. in Titum. c. 1. Tom. 5. pag. 502. E. Homil. in Dominicis diebus. Tom. 5. Op. p. 605. D. Iohannis Sarisberi∣ensis, De Nugis Curialium. l. 8. c. 6. Iuo Carnotensis. Decret. pars 6. c. 252 Master Gualther Hom. 9. in Haba. p. 229.230. Innocentius 3. Operum Tom. 1. p 470. Gulielmus Stuckins An∣tiqu. Convivalium. lib. 3. thorowout. Hostiensis Summa. l. 1. Tit. de Tem∣pore ordinat. f. 51. Ioan. Langhecruci∣us. de Vita & Honestate Ecclesiastico∣rum. l. 2. c. 11. p. 250. &c. 12. p. 254.255 Gratian Distinct. 44. Polydor Virgil. de Invent. rerum. l. 3. c. 5. p. 215. D. Iohn White his Sermon at Pauls Crosse. March 24. 1615. sect. 16. Nathaniel Col his preservative against sinne. p. 380. M. Heildersham his 12. Lecture upon Iohn the 4. vers. 20. pag. 130. Barnaby Rich his Irish Hubbub. London 161. p. 24.25. M. Edward Raynolds his sinful∣nesse of sinne. 1631. p. 125. who ex∣presly condemne the drinking and pledging of Healths, especially in Clergie-men, who ought by the Ca∣non Law to be deprived for it. Heaven, no Stage-playes there. pag. 964.965. Hecataeus Abderita his testimony of the Iewes wanting Images. p. 894. Hlena Constantine the Great his Mo∣ther, an English woman. p. 467. Heliodorus deprived of his Bihopprick for his amorous Bookes. p. 916. Heliogaalus censured. p. 278.710, 856. Henry the 3. the Emperor rejected Playes and Players. p. 471. Henry the 4. of England his Statute a∣gainst Rimers and Minstrels. p. 493. Henry the 8. his Statute against Mum∣mrs, Vizards and Dice-play. p. 493.494. his expences upon Playes and Masques. p. 320. his Commissions for abolihing Images in Churches. pag. 903. m. Heny the 3. of France his Edicts against Stage-playes and dancing on Lords-dayes and Holi-dayes p. 715. Hercules censured for putting on wo∣mans
apparell. pag. 888. Herod Agrippa smitten in the Theater by an Angell, and so dyed. fol. 554.555. See Freculphi Chronicon. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 14. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 9. p. 408. Herod the Great, the first erecter of a Theater among the Iewes, who thereupon conspire his death. p. 486. f. 552.553. p. 555 Herodian his censure of Playes and Dan∣cing. p. 710.851.852, 853, 854, 855. Herodias, her dancing taxed: the Devill danced in her. p. 228.229. m. 232. m. 260.773. f. 534. Hiro punished Epicamus for his wanton Verses. p. 921. Hierom his censure of mens long and curled haire. p. 188.340. of lascivious Musicke and Songs. p. 275.276, 340. of Images, specially of God. p. 898. m. of Players and Stage-playes. pag. 340. 680. of Dancing. p. 223. of reading Poets and prophane Authors. p. 78.79 114, 115, 917, 918, 925, 926, 927. his trance. p. 925.926. for Laymens rea∣ding the Scripture. p. 928. m. how Mi∣nisters ought to preach. p. 936.937. Hilarie his censure of Stage-playes, pag. 339.670. of making Gods Image. p. 900. m. Histories sophisticated by Players and Play-poets. p. 940.941. Holot his censure of Stage-playes and Dancing. p. 229. m. 256.689. Holi-dayes, how to be spent and solemni∣zed. p. 240. to 244. f. 537.538, &c. 575 585, 586, 605. to 686. Sparsim. 743. to 783. exceedingly prophaned with dancing, dicing, drunkennesse and prophane pastimes. p. 222.232. to 250. Sparsim. 271.363. fo. 530. to 541.575. to 666.743. to 783.933. Dancing and Stage-playes prohibited on Holi-dayes by Councels, Fathers, and all Writers, Ibidem. See Dancing. & p. 913. Augmented by Papists who have tur∣ned Pagan Festivals into Christian. p. 751. to 761. See Haddon Cont. Oso∣rium. l. 3. f. 262.263, 264. Abridged by Trajan. f. 539. Hoinesse becommeth Christians. pag. 63. 64, 528. Homilies of our Church against Images in Churches, &c. p. 286.901.902, 903. Honorius Augustodunensis censure of Stage-playes. pag. 505. m. 684. of Playerly Masse-priests. p. 113.114. Honorius the Emperour suppressed Sword-playes, p. 75.468. Bishop Hooper preached twice every day of the weeke; would have Bishops to preach once every day, would have two Sermons every Lords Day. his censure of those who complaine of two much preaching. f. 531. a profes∣sed Anti-Arminian. f. 532. condemned Dice-play. Epist. Ded. 1. yea, Altars too, of which he writes thus in his 3. Ser∣mon upon Ionah, before King Ed∣ward 6. An. 1551. p. 81. If questio now be asked, in there then no Sacrifices left to b done of Christian people? yea truely ut none other then such as ought to be done without Altars: and they be of 3. sorts: The first is the sacrifices of thankes-giving. Psal. 51. 17, 19. Amos 4.5. Heb, 13.15. Hos. 14 2. The 2. is benevolence and liberality to the poore, Mich. 6.8. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2, 2 Cor. 8.19. Hebr. 13.16. The third kinde of sacrifice is the mortifying of our owne bodies, and to dye from sinne. Rom. 12.1. Matth. 1. Luk. 14. If we study not daily to offer these sacrifices to God, we be no Christian men. Seeing Christian men have no other sacrifices then these, which may and ought to be done without Altars, there should among Christians be no Altars. And therefore is was not without the great wisedome & knowledge of God, that Christ, his Apostles and the Primitive Church
lacked Altars, for they knew that the use of Altars then was taken away. It were well then that it might please the Magistrates to turne the Altars into Tables, according to the first institution of Christ, to take away the false perswasion of the people they have of sacrifices to be done upon the Altars. For as long as the Altars remaine, both the ignorant people, and the ignorant and evill perswaded Priest will dreame always of sarifice. Therefore were it best that the Magistrates remove all the mo∣numents and tokens of Idolatry and superstiti∣on. Then should the true Religion of God soo∣ner take place, &c. & Sermon 8. f. 150. A great shame it is for a Noble King, Emperor or Magistrate contrary to Gods Word to detaine or keepe from the Devill or his ministers, any of their goods or treasure, as the Candles, Images, Crosses, Vestms, Altars; for if they be kept in the Church as things indffeent, at lengt they wll be maintained as things necessary. And doe not wee see his words prove true? Against the making of Gods I∣mage and sffring or erecting Imges in Churches. pag 902. m. of which hee writes thus in his Declaration of the second Commandement. London 1588. fol. 29. to 32. This Commandement ath 3. parts: The first taketh from us all liberty and licence, that we in no case represent or manifest the God invisible & incomprehensible with any Figur or Image, or represent him unto our sences that cannot be comprehended by the wit of man nor Angell. The scond part forbiddeth to honour any Image. The third part sheweth us, that it is no need to present God to us by any Image. Moses giveth  reason of the first part, why no Image should be made, Deut. 4.15. Re∣member, saith  to the people, that the Lord spake to thee in the vale of Oreb. thou eard∣est a voyce, but sawest no manner of siilitude, but onely a voyce berdest thou. Esay c. 40.18. & 449 &c. diligenty sheweth what an absurdity and undecent thing it is to prophre the Majestie of God incomrehnsible with a little blocke or stone; a spirit, with an Image. The like doth Paul in the 17. o th Acts. The text therefore forbiddeth all mannr of Images that are made to expresse or represent Almighty God. The second par forbiddeth to honor any Image made: The first word ho∣nour signifieth, to bow head, legge, knee, or any part of the body unto them, as all those do (pray marke it) that say with good consci∣ence they may bee suffred in the Church of Christ, &c. Seeing thn there is no Cōmandement in any of both Testaments, to have Images, but as you see the contrary; and also the univer∣sall Catholike and holy Church never used I∣mages, as the writings of the Apostles and Pro∣phets testifie, it is but an Ethnike vrity and Gentile Idolatry, to say God and his Saints be honoured in them, when as all Histories testifi, that in manner or th space of 500. yeeres af∣ter Christs Ascention, when the doctrine of the Gospell was most sincerely preached, was  Image used, &c. Therefore S. Ioh biddeth us not onely beware of honouring of Images, but of the Images themselves. Thou shalt finde the originall of Images in no place of Gods Word, but in the writings of the Gentiles and Infidels, or in such that more followed their owne opinion and superstitious imaginations, than the authority of Gods Word. Herodo∣rus saith, that the AEgyptians were the first that made Images to represent their gods. And as the Gentiles ashioned their gods with what figures they lusted, so doe the Christians. To declare God to be strong they made im in the forme of a Lion, to be vigilant & diligent, in the forme of a Dog, &c. So doe they that would be accounted Christians, paint God and his Saints, with such pictures as they imagine in their fantasies. God, like an old man wth a orie head, as hough his youth were past, which hath neither beginning nor ending &c. No difference at all beteene a Christian man and Gentile in this Idolatry, saving onely the name. For they thought not their Images to be God, but supposed that their Gods would
be honoured that wayes, as the Christians doe. I write these things rather in contempt and hatred of this abominable Idolatry then to learne any Engishman the truth, &c. The third part declareth, that it is no ned to shew God unto us by Images, and proveth the same with 3. reasons. First, I am the Lord thy God, that loveth thee, helpeth thee, defendeth thee, is present with thee: beieve and love m, so shalt thou have no need to seeke me and my fa∣vourable presence in any Image. The second reason: I am a jealous God and cannot suffer thee to love any thing but in me and for me. I cannot suffer to be otherwise honoured than I have taught in my Tables and Testament The 3. reason is, that God revengeth the propha∣nation of his Divine Majesty, if it be transri∣bed to any creature or Image, and that not only in him that committeth the Idolatry, but also in his posterity in the third and fourth genera∣tion, if they follow their Fathers Idolatry. Then to avoyd the ire of God and to obtaine his fa∣vour, we must use no Image to honor him with all. Gods Lawes expulseth and putteth Images out of the Church, then no mans lawes should bring them in. All which he thus seconds in his briefe and cleare Confession of the Chri∣stian Faith in an 10. Articles, according to the Order of the Creed of the Apostles. London 1581. Artic. 79. & 87. I believe (write he) that to the Magistrate it doth appertaine, not onely to have regard unto the Common-wealth, but also unto Ecclesiasticall matters, to take away and to overthrow all Idolatry and false serving of God, and to ad∣vance the Kingdome of Christ, to cause the Word of the Gospell every where to be preach∣ed, and the same to maintaine unto death: to chasten also and to punish the false prohets which leade the poore people after Idols and strange gods, &c. I believe also that the begin∣ning of all Idolatry was the finding out and in∣vention of Images, which aso were made to the great offence of the soules of men, and are as snares and traps for the feete of the ignorant to make them to all. Therefore they ought not to bee honoured, served, worshipped, neither to be suffred in the Temples or Churches, where Christian people doe meet together, to heare and understand the Word of God, bt rather th same ought utterly to bee taken away and throwne downe, according to the effect of the 2. Commadement of God: and that ought to be done y the common authority of the Magi∣strate, and not by the private authority of every particular man For the wood of the Gallowes whereby justice is done, is blessed of God, but the Image made by mans hand is accursed of the Lord, and so is he that made it. And there∣fore we ought to beware of Images above all things. This was this Godly Martyrs faith concerning Images: this was the faith and doctrine of all our pious Mar∣tyrs and Prelates in King Henry the 8. King Edward the 6. Queene Maries, and Queene Elizabeths Raignes: this is the authorized doctrine both of the Articles and Homilies of our Church which every English Minister now subscribes to, and is enjoyned for to teach the people as the undoubted truth: Yea this was one of the Articles propounded by Do∣ctor Chambers, to which the reverend Bishop, Iewell, and all other yong Prote∣stant Students in both our Vniversities subscribed, in Edward the 6. and Queene Maries Raigne, Imagines & simulachra non esse in Templis habenda; osque gloriam Dei imminuere qui vel fuderint vel fabricati fu∣rint vel finxerint, vel pinxerint, vel fabri∣canda & facienda locarint: as Doctor Hum∣fries De Vita & Morte Iuelli. pag. 43. in∣formes us: which I wish our moderne Innovators and Patrons of Images would remember. Horace his censure of Playes & Players. p. 370.452, 711, 834. Hybristica sacra, how solemnized. p. 204. Hylas the Player whipped. p. 459. Hypocrisie, a necessary concomitnt of
acting Playes, and a damnable sinne. pag. 156. to 161. 876. 877. Christ, his Apostles, the primitive and mo∣derne Christians unjustly taxed of it. p. 816. to 821. Hypocrites and Players, the same. p. 158. 159. 876. Hypolitus his censure of Stage-playes, and lascivious Songs. f. 565.566. I King Iames his Statute against propha∣ning Scripture and Gods Name in Playes. p. 109.110. his Statutes make Players Rogues, and Playes unlaw∣full pastimes. pag. 495.496. expresly condemned the making of God the Fathers Image or Picture. p. 901. Iason, the first introducer of Heathenish Playes among the Iewes. p. 548.549, 550, 552, 553. Ianus the author of New-yeeres gifts, &c. See Kalends and New-yeeres gifts. Idlenesse a dangerous mischievous sinne occasioned, fomented by Stage-playes. p. 141.471, 501, to 504.909, 947, 951. to 956.480, 1002. Idols and Devils parts and stories unlaw∣full to be acted; their Images, shapes and representations not to be made. p. 75. to 106.141, 176, 177, f. 550.551 552. pag. 547.865, 866, 890. to 904. The mentioning of their names and imprecations, adjurations, or excla∣mations by them, unlawfull. p. 32.33, 36, 77. to 89.891, 925. Things origi∣nally consecrated to them unlawfull. pag. 28. to 42.81. to 90. Stage-playes invented by, and consecrated unto I∣dols, and Devil-gods, who were courted with them in their Festivals. See Devils, Dancing, and Festivals. pag. 478.479, 482. fol. 558.559, p. 731, 732, 735. Idolatry a grand sinne; to which men are naturally prone. p. 27.58, 59, 80, 81, 82, 83. the mother of Stage-playes. p. 28. to 40.58, 59. f. 522.558, 559. pag. 546.547. The acting of an Idols part, or making his representatiō Idolatry. p. 89.90, 865, 866, 891, 892. The vey reliques and shadowes of it o be a∣voyded. p. 27.58, 59, 80, 81, 652, 891, 892. occasioned by Stage-playes and Play-poets p. 80.81.84, fol. 550.551, 55. p. 650.651, 652. Iesuits act Christs passion, &c. in stead of preaching it p. 116.117, 765, 766, 767, 999. Gods Iudgement upon them for a prophane Play. f. 558. Some of them have condemned Stage-playes. pag. 996.997, &c. Iewes, condemned and rejected Stage-playes, and Idols shapes and vizards. pag. 466.552. to 556.714, 718, 723, 894, 981. had no Images in their Temples, and condemned the vey art of Imagery. p. 894. to 902. keept their Sabboth from Evening to Eve∣ning. p. 639.642. Ignatius the Martyr, condemned Dan∣cing on the Lords Day. p. 222.231. m. Ignatius Loyola, prohibited Terence to be read in Schooles. p. 917. Images and Pictures of God the Father, Sonne and holy Ghost unlawfull to be made, or set up in Churches. pag. 286.894. to 904. See Hooper. Images in Churches condemned by Fathers, Councels, Emperours, Protestant Churches and Writers, and by our owne English Statutes, Articles, In∣junctions, Homilies, Canons, ancient Bishops and Writers, Ibidem. See Bi∣shop Ieels Reply to M. Harding. Ar∣tic. 14. p. 496. to 517. Rodericke Mors his complaint to the Parliament in King Henry the 8. dayes. cap. 19.24 D. Iohn Ponet BB. of Winchester, his Apologie or Answer to Martyn. 1555.
cp. 6.7. pag. 74.84, 85. Archb shop Vshers Anwer to the Iesuits Chal∣lenge. pag. 495. to 514. Edit. ult. & a short Description of Antichrist. 1555. pag. 26. Demolished at Zuricke, and Basil, and here in England by Henry the 8. Edward the 6. and Queene Eliza∣beth. p. 903. m. Images condemned by the Persians, Syrians, Scythians, and Lybians of old. Origen. Cont. Cel∣sum. lib. 7. fol. 96. none suffred in the Temples and Synagogues of the Iewes, Turkes, Sarazens, Mores, Mos∣chovites, or barbarous Heathen Na∣tions of Asia, Africa and Europe now. Haddon. Cont. Osorium. lib. 3. f. 254. condemned by Maomet in his Alcoran. Edit. Lat. Bibliandri. 1550. p. 19.105, 126, 144, 152. & shall Christi∣ans, shall Protestants suffer, applaud, erect them, when as these condemne them? See Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 19. De Religiosorum domibus. cap. 150. to 162. Imitation of Pagans and their customes unlawfull. p. 18. to 23.730. to 734. See Pagans. Impudency a dangerous sinne occasioned by Stage-playes. p. 441.512. to 516. Infamous to act Playes. See Acting, Play∣ers. p. 412.429, 841. to 860. Intention of Play-haunters. p. 943. to 947. Inventions of Pagans, how farre lawfull and unlawfull. p. 16. to 42. Iosephus his censure of Stage-playes and Theaters p 466.467, 553, 554, &c. of Images. p. 894.895. Isiodo Hispaesis, his censure of Dice-play Epist. Dedic. 1. of Stage-playes and Theaters. p. 349. f. 524.525. pag. 562.583, 757, 758. m. of New-yeeres gifts. p. 757.758. m. of reading pro∣phane Writers p. 78.79, 915, 916. Isiodor Pelufiota his censure of Playes and Players. p 477.795. of reciting hu∣man Authors in Sermons. pag. 937 938. Isocrates his censure of Playes and Play∣ers. p. 121.450, 703. Ireneus his censure of Players & Playes. p. 158. m. 669. Iudgements of God upon Play-poets, Players, Play-haunters f. 550.552. to 565. Iulian the Apostate his Edit against Ministers resort to Playes or Ale∣houses. p. 461.665. Iulius Messalla his expence on Playes. p. 315.322. Iuo Carnotensis his censure of Playes, Players, acting in womens apparell, &c. 665.684, 846, 886, 906. Iunius Mauricus his censure of Playes. p. 458. Iustinian his Edicts against Dicing, Play∣ers, Sword-playes, Stage-playes, which hee stiles the Devils pompes. p. 469.562, 563, 656. to 663. his law for divorcing of Play-haunting wives. p. 391.661, 662. Iustin Martyr his censure of Images. pag. 896. of lascivious Musicke. p. 275. Iustin the Historian his censure of Playes and Dancing. p. 709.710. Iuvenal his censure of Players, Playes, Play-haunters and Dancers. pag. 249. 250, 319, 370, 452, 843, 852. m. 859. 860. K Kalends, their observation, especially of the first of Ianuary, prohibited. p. 19. to 23.197, 198, 429, 430, 580, 581, 583, 755, 756, 780, 752. Kings most honoured when God is best served by their subjects. p. 644. have suppressed Playes and Dicing, and exi∣led Players. p 455. to 472.656. to 665.703. to 713.725, 870. infamous for them to act or frequent Playes, or fa∣vour
Players. pag. 250.451, 428, 429, 459, to 47. f. 557.558. p. 707. to 711.734. to 744.848. to 858.897. A good King and bad Councellors, worse then an ill King and good Councel∣lers. p, 153. what makes Kings evill. f. 547. Their life ought to bee exem∣plary. p. 734.735, 741. Kissing in Dances and Playes dangerous p. 166.243, 386. Knights prohibited to act, to dance, or come upon the Stage. p 459.860, 861, 862. L Laberius, his censure of his Play-acting. p. 860.861. Lacedemonians prohibited Stage-playes, and lascivious Musicke. p. 121.122, 288 455, 713, 921, 839. Lctantius his censure of Images. p. 896.897, 898 m. of acting in womens ap∣parell. p. 88. of Stage-playes and A∣ctors. p. 169.180, 334, 335, 336, 473.670. Ioan. Langherucius his censure of Health-drinking, Stage playes, acting of Aca∣demicall Enterludes, and acting in womens apparell p. 596.597, m. 695. 864, 865, 866. Lasciviousnesse condemned: a necessary concomitant and effect of Playes, and Play-acting. p. 161 to 178.332. to 446. Bishop Latymer his censure of Dice-play. Epist. Dedic. 1. of dancing and pro∣phaning Lords-dayes. f. 535. of Ima∣ges. p. 902. accused of sedition. pag. 85. Laughter, prophane, profuse, excessive, censured. p. 290. to 298.123, 403, 404. Christ never laughed. 294.403, 404. this life no time of laughter but of eares. p. 293.294, 404. See Chrysost. Hom. 12. in Collos. 4. an excellent discourse to this purpose: occasioned by Playes. p. 175.290. to 304.403, 404. Laurell, Christians prohibited to dresse their houses with it. p. 21.581, 756, m. 770.771, 772. See Tertul. de Corona militis. lib. c. 11.12. Laymen enjoyned by Councels, Fathers, and God himselfe to read the Scrip∣tures diligently. Epist. Dedicat. . pag. 585.924. to 932. are spirituall Priests and ought to be as holy as the Cler∣gie. p. 410.647, 648. Leo the Emperour his Edict for the san∣ctifying of the Lords Day and sup∣pression of Stage-playes p. 469.470. Lewis the 9. of France his Edict against Players, Play-houses, and Dice-hou∣ses. p. 870. Leucippus, his effeminacy in haire and apparell censured. p. 883.885. Livie his censure of Stage-playes. p. 449.450. f. 560. p. 705. Lodovicus the Emperor his Edict against Clergie-mens resort to Playes, &c. p. 715. Lodovicus Arch-bishop of Magdeburge, his death, f. 557. Lodovicus Vives, his censure of Players, Playes, Play-bookes, Dancing, and Popish Enterludes. pag. 114.115, 134, 226. fol. 554. pag. 691.916. London Magistrates suppressed Playes, Play-houses and Dice-houses. p. 491.492. Lords Day, (exceedingly prophaned by Stage playes, Masques and Dances, which are prohibited on it by Coun∣cels, Fathers, Imperiall Lawes, our owne English Statutes, Homilies, In∣junctions, and sundry other Writers,) how it ought to bee spent and sancti∣fied p. 13.22, 240. to 24.271, 363, 468, 469, 470, 491, 530. to 541.489, 554, 556, 575, 576, 615. to 663. Spar∣sim. 715.716, 913, 946. See Dancing, Holi-dayes. & Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 17. cap. 140.141, 142 Playes,
Masques and Dancing unlawfull on it, Ibidem. & p. 575.576, 996. and on Lords Day and Saturday nights. pag. 12.13, 40, 645, 646. It begins at eve∣ning, not at morning or midnight; proved at large by Councels, Fathers, and others. p. 638. to 646. Hence Iuo carnotensis. Decret pars 6. cap. 71. Gratian Distinct. 75. and all Canonists on this place of his, upon the words of Pope Leo Epist 81. cap. 1. conclude thus, that the Lords Day begins at Evening: Non passim (say they) dibus omnibus sa∣cerdotalis vel levitica ordinatio celebretur, sed post diem Sabbati ejus{que} noctis quae in prima Sabbati lucsit, exordia consecrandi deligantur. Quod ejusdem observantae erit∣si mane ipso Dominico die continuato Sab∣bati jejnio celebretur, à quo tempore praece∣dentis noctis initia non recedunt. Quod ad diem resurrectionis (sicut etiam in Pascha domini declaratur) pertinere non est dubi∣um, &c. His qui consecrandi sunt nunquam benedictio nis in die Dominicae resurrectio∣nis tribuatur, cui à vespere Sabbati initium constat ascribi. Dies Dominica initium ha∣bet à vespere Sabbati; & vespera praece∣dentis noctis trahitur ad diem sequentem, ut sive de vespre in Sabbato, sive de mane in Dominio ordines conferantur semper in die Dominico videantur conferri. Hence also Hostiensis. Sum. lib. 2. Tit. de Ferijs. fol. 149 Baptista Trovomala in his Sum∣ma Rosella Tit. Feriae sect. 4.5. Summa Angelica. Tit. Dies sect. 1. Lindwood Constit. provin lib. 2. Tit de Ferijs. ol. 74. with all other Canoniss Tit de Ferijs, & Ioannis de Burgo Pupilia oculi pars 9. cap. 6. De Ferijs. DE. lay downe this for an infallible maxime. Quod abstinendū est à servilibus operibus omni die Dominica ab¦hora vespertina diei Sabbati inchoando, non ipsam horam praeveniendo. Quod feriatio∣nem tenere debemus à vespera in vesperam. Quod debemus festum incipere, quantum ad feriationem à vespera in vesperam; scilicet ab ultima parte diei praecedentis seu vigiliae. Quod dies diversis modis incipit & desinit: nam quoad celebrationem divinarum, consi∣deratur de vespera in vesperam: quoad ju∣dicia, de mane in vesperam, & sic de luce in lucem: sed quoad contractus, de media nocte in mediam noctem: And this hath beene the received resolution of all former ages, which should over-bllance all new opinions. See Polydor Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 2. cap. 6. for the be∣ginning and ending of dayes. Lovelockes, bushes of vanity whereby the Devill leads and holds men captive. Epistle to the Reader: provocations to lust and unnaturall lewdnesse, in use among Sodomites and Pagans of old, nd none else. p. 188. to 195.209, 210, 211, 882, 883, 888. See Haire. Lucas Tudensis against making the picture of the Trinity. p. 900 m. Luxury a dangerous sinne, occasioned by Stage-playes. p 508. to 513. Lycurgus prohibited Playes. p. 455. Lydans effeminated by Musicke, Dan∣cing, Playes, and idlenesse. p. 288. Lyes, condemned: frequent in Playes. p. 106.107, 108, 837, 838. Lysimahus his Court censured. p. 856. M Macarius AEgyptius his censure of Playes and Players. p. 45. m. f. 556. p. 670. Macrobius his censure of Dancing and Play-acting. p. 245.246, 129, 704, 860, 861. his testimony of the Saturnalian Feasts. p 751.752. Macro his advice to Caligula. p. 741. Magicke Bookes censured p. 917. Magistrates ought to suppresse Players, Playes, and Play-houses, and have anciently done so. p. 448. to 495.787. Mahomet his censure of Dice-play. p 665.
Manners and mindes of people corrupted by Playes. p. 329. to 501. Marriages; Dancing and Playes at them prohibited, condemned by Fathers and Councels. See Dancing: & Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Colos. 2. Tom. 4. Col. 1210. to 1214. Hom. 20. in Ephes. 5. Tom. 4. Col. 1009. where hee writes thus. In matrimonio omnia oportet esse plena temperantia & modestia, gravi∣tate & hoesta. Contrarium autem video, saltantes tanquam camelos, tanquam mulos. Quid facis ô homo? quid ludibria illa, quid monstra inu∣cis? Omnino turpe est & indecorū, viros molles & saltantes & omnem pompam Satanicam domum introdu∣core. Quando unguentum componi∣tis nihil malè olens sinitis appropin∣quare. Matrimonium est unguentum; cur caeni faetorem inducis in compo∣sitionem unguenti? Quid dicis? sl∣tar virgo, & nō eam pudet suae aequa∣lis? oport enim ipsam hac sse ho∣nestiorem & graviorem, ex ulna enim egressa est, non ex palaestra, &c. Ne transuehas & in pompam ducas virgi∣nitatem. An non sunt haec probrum & dedecus? Sunt. Probrum enim & dedocus est se indecore gerere etiamsi sit Regis filia, etiamsi serva si virgo, &c. The rum enim non est matri∣monium, est mysterium, seu sacra∣mentum, & rei magnae typus. Sacra∣mentum inquit, hoc magnum est, ego auem dico in Christo & Ecclesia. Ecclesiae est typus & Christi, & salta∣tries introducis? Si ergo, inquis, n̄∣que vrgines saltant, neque quae nup∣serunt, quis saltabit? Nullus. Salta∣tionis enim quaenam est necessitas? In mysterijs Graecorum sunt saltatio∣nes: in nostris autem, silentium, ho∣nesta gravitas, pudor & modestia. Magnum peragitur mysterium, foras meretrices saltatrices, foras prophani, &c. Haec vobis non temere dicta sunt, sed ut vos nec nuptijs, nec saltationibus, nec choris adsitis Satanicis. Vide enim quid invenerit Diabolus. Nam quoniam a scena & ijs quae illic sunt turpia & inde∣cora, ipsa natura abduxit mulieres, quae sunt theatri abduxit in gynaecium, mol∣les inquam, se pathicos & meretrices. Hanc pestem invexit lex nuptialis, imo vero non lex nuptialis, absit, sed lex no∣strae mollitiei. Quid ergo dico oportere? Omnia tupia cantica quae sunt Satani∣ca, inhonestas cantilenas, immundorū juvenum circuitiones auferre à matri∣monio,, & haec poterant castigare spon∣sam & modestam reddere; statim n. apud se considerabit, Papae; qualis est hi vir! est philosophus; hanc vitam nihili ducit, ad procreandos liberos & educandos me domi duxit, & ad domum custodier dm. Ex his ipsis ostendit mentem suam, nullo horum delectai, ne{que} unquam concessu∣rum ut siant saltationes & canntur im∣pudica cantica. Sed haec sponsae sunt in∣jucunda ad primum us{que} & secundum diem, non autem deinceps; sed & maxi∣ma apiet voluptatem se ab omni suspi∣cione liberans. Nam qui neque tibias neque saltantes, nequ fractos antus su∣stinuerit, idque  nuptiarum, vix ipse in animum induxerit ut turpe ali∣quid unquam aut faciat aut dicat. Sed videntur res quidem inifferens quae fi∣unt circa matrimonium. Sunt autem causae magnorum malorum. Omnia sunt plena iniquiate. Turpitudo & stulti∣loquium & scurrile verbum, inquit, ex¦ore vestro non exeat. Omnia autem illa sunt turpitudo, & stultiloquium & scur∣rilitas, non leviter, sed cum intentione. Ars enim est hoc, & magnam affert lau∣dem ijs qui eam exercent. Ars facta sunt peccata. Non leviter & tomre ea tra∣ctamus sed adhibito studio & scientia, &
de caetero Diabolus est harum rerum Dux & Imperator. Vbi n. ebrietas & lascivia, ubi lermo obscaenus & saltatio, adet Diabolus sua afferens. Cum his convivans dic quaeso, Christi mysterium peragis, & Diabolum invocas? Me fortè existimatis gravem & importunū. Nam hoc quos{que} est multae perversitatis, quod qui increpat ludibrio habetur tanquam austerus. Nonne auditis Paulum dicen∣tem. Quicquid faciatis sive comedatis, sive bibatis, sive aliquid faciatis, omnia ad gloriam Dei facite? Vos autem ad maledicentiam & ignominiam. Non auditis Prophetam dicentem. Servite domino in timore, & exultate ei in tre∣more? Vos autem diffundimini & luxu diffluitis. An non vero licet etiam tu∣tò laetari? Vis audire pulchros modos? Maximè quidem ne oporteret quidem. Sed me dimitto, & me tibi accommodo. Si velis, non audias Satanicos modos, sed spirituales. Vis videre saltantes? Vi∣de chorum Angelorum. Et quomodo fieri potest ut videam? Si haec abegeris, veniet Christus quoque ad has nuptias. Si adsit autem Christus, adest etiam cho∣rus Angelorum. Si velis, nunc quoque faciet miracula sicut & tunc. Faciet nunc quoque aquam vinum & multo admira∣bilius. Diffluentem & dissolutam con∣vertet laetitiam & cupiditatem, & trans∣feret ad spiritualem. Hoc est ex aqua vinum fcere. Vbi sunt Tibicines (pray marke it) nequaquam est Christus. Sed & si fuerit ingressus, eos primum eijcit, & tunc fa∣cit miracula. Quando itaque es facturus nuptias ne domos obeas, specula & ve∣tes commodato accipiens; res n. non fit ad ostentationem, neque filiam addu∣cis ad pompam: sod ijs quae in ea sunt domum exhilerns, voco vicinos, amicos & cognatos. Quos nosti quidem bonos & probos, eos voca, & ut ijs quae adsunt contenti sint admone. Ex ijs qui sunt ex Orchestra, adsit nullus. Illic n. est sumptus vacuus & indecorus. Ante alios omnes voca Christum. Orna sponsum non aureis ornamentis, sed mansuetudine & pudore & consuetis vestibus. Pro quovis mundo aureo & implicaturis & intexturis, induens pu∣dorem & verecundiam, & quod illa non quaerat. Nullus sit tumultus, nulla perturbatio. Vocetur sponsus, accipiat virginem. Prandia & caenae non sint plena ebrietatis, sed satietate cum voluptate. Videamus quam mul∣ta ex hoc sunt bona, quando viderim{us}, ex ijs quae nunc fiunt nuptijs, si nup∣tiae & non potius pompae sunt dicen∣dae, quot mala? Illic enim Christus, hic Satanas. Illic tristitia, hîc cura. Il∣lic voluptas, hîc dolor. Illic sumptus, hic nihil tale. Illic probrum & dede∣cus, hîc modestia. Illic invidia, hîc nulla plane est invidia: Illic ebrietas, hîc salus, hîc temperantia. Haec autem omnia cogitantes, hactenus ma∣lum sistamus, ac cohibeamus, ut Deo placeamus, & digni habeamur qui consequamur bona quae sunt promis∣sa ijs qui ipsum diligunt, gratia & be∣nignitate Domini nostri Iesu Christi. The whole Homilies are worth the reading, but thus much onely I thought good to insert to controll the marriage disorders of our lascivi∣ous age. Marbachius his censure of Vizards, dis∣guises, wanton apparell, and acting in womens apparell. p. 889.890. Mariana the Iesuit his Book against, and censure of Stage-playes, Players, and Theaters. p. 695.996. to 1000. Marius his censure of Dicers, of Players. p. 450. Martiall his Poems censured. p. 792.916, 917. Masse turned into a Stage-play, and
priests oft-times into Actors. p. 112. to 116.573. to 668. Sparsim pag. 762. to 767.877, 935, 999. Sacrilegious unto Christ and his merits. p. 759. Massilienses prohibited and condemned Playes and idlenesse. p. 65.445, 446, 480, 713, 920, 839. May-games, and May-poles derived from the ancient prohibited Heathen Ma∣jumae. p. 253. m. 807. m. & from the Floralian Feasts and Enterludes of the Pagan Romanes, which were so∣lemnized on the first of May. See Ovid Fastorum. lib. 4. pag. 81. Mille ve∣nit varijs florum dea nexa coronis. Scena joci morem liberioris habet. Exit & in Majas Festū Florale Kalen∣das. & lib. 5. pag. 86. t 92. Mater a∣des florum ludis celebranda jocosis Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maij: Alter te fugiens, cùm venit, alter habet. Cum tua sint, cedantque tibi confinia mensùm, Convenit in laudes ille vel ille tuas. Circus in hunc exit clamata{que} palma Theatris, &c. Dic Dea, respondi, ludorum quae sit origo. &c. Convenêre Patres: & si bene floreat annus. Numinibus nostris annua festa vovent. Annui∣mus votis, Consul nunc consule ludos. Posthumio Lenas persoluêre mihi. Quaerere conabar quare lscivia ma∣jor, His foret in ludis liberiorque jo∣cus; Sed mihi succurrit numen non esse severum, Aptaque delicijs mune∣ra ferre Deam. Tempora sutilibus cinguntur tota coronis, Et latet in∣jecta splendida mensa rosa. Ebrius incinctis philyra conviva capillis, Sal∣tat, & imprudens utitur arte meri E∣brius ad durum formosae limen ami∣cae Cantat: habens unctae mollia er∣ta comae. Nulla coronata peraguntur seria fronte: Nec liquidae vinctis flore bibuntur aquae, &c. Bacchus a∣mat flores; Baccho placuise coro∣nam Ex Ariadnaeo sidere nosse potes. Scena lenis decet hanc: non est, mihi credite, non est, Illa cothurnatas inter habenda Deas. Turba quidem cur hos celebret meretricia ludos, Non est de tetricis, non est de magna professis, Vult sua plebeio sacra patêre choro, &c. See Alexander ab Alexand. Genial. Dierum lib. 6. cap. 8. Godwin, his Roman Antiquities lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 3 pag. 87. Polydor Virgil, de Invent. Rerum. lib. 4. c. 14. Bulengerus De Theatro. lib. 1. cap. 50. pag. 296. to the like purpose. He who shall but seriously consider this man∣ner of celebrating these Floralian Festivals, and paralell them with our May-games; will soone conclude as Polydor Virgil doth in expresse tearmes (De Invent. Rerum. lib 5. cap. 2) that our May-games, Maying, and May-pole (adorned commonly with Flow∣rie Garlands) had their originall from these Floralian Feastivals, or the Heathen Majumae; and that there∣fore Christians ought wholy to aban∣don them, as they are expresly enjoy∣ned both by Imperiall Edicts, Coun∣cels and Fathers. See here, p. 807. m. 575.576, 581, 583, 584, 587, 755, 756. m. (Pope Martyns Decree) pag. 750, 770, 780, 20, 21, 22, 23. Tertullian De Corona Militis lib. Polydor Virgil. De Invent. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 2. M. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses. p 109.110. (who particularly condemne both May-games and May-poles:) and Francis de Croy his first Conformity cap. 19.20. accordingly. Menander the Comdian his death fol. 553. Ministers and Clergie-men, prohibited to Dance, Card or Dice, or to behold Dancers, Carders, Dicers, in publike or private, or to suffer them in their
houses, to act or behold either pub∣like or private Enterludes: to play at any dishonest or unlawfull games: to disguise themselves: to Hauke, Hunt, or to keepe Haukes or Hounds: to haunt or keepe Tavernes or Ale∣houses, or to enter into them but on∣ly in case of necessity when they tra∣vell: to begin or pledge any Healths; to frequent or make any riotous Feasts; or to weare costly apparell. p. 150.469, 739.933. to 938.979, 980. fol. 528. pag. 573. to 668. Sparsim. See Vincent Speculum. Hist. lib. 27. cap. 39. 40.47, Summa Angelica Clericus. 11. & all Canonists. De Vita & Honestate Cleri∣corum: conclude the like. Ought to suppresse and disswade others from Dancing, Dicing, Health-drinking, or resort to Playes. Ibidem. Scurrilous Iesting, Dancing, Dicing, Play-acting, or Play-haunting Ministers to bee suspended and deprived. Ibidem. Their duties. Ibidem. Ought not to meddle with secular affaires; not to beare se∣cular offices. Ibidem. Ought to be re∣sident on their Cures, and to preach twice a day. fol. 531. pag. 639.623, 624. Ought to be grave in their ge∣stures and speeches, nor Player-like. p. 933. to 938. Ought not to read lascivious Poems, or prophane Au∣thors, not to stuffe their Sermons with them, p. 70.79, 915. to 939. No Players or Actors of Playes to bee made Ministers, or to take Orders, f. 528. p. 846.847, 934, 935. Minucius Felix, his censure of Playes and Players, p. 336.337, 558, 670. of Images. p. 896.897. Modestie and shamefastnesse banished by Playes. fol. 512. to 516. their prayse. Ibidem. Molanus his justification of prophane sa∣crilegious Popish Enterludes. p. 763. 764, 765. Monkes many of thē Sodomites, Whore∣masters, Epicures. pag. 213.760, 761, 762, 880, 881. See Vincentij Specu∣lum. Hist. lib. 27. c. 29. to 58. lib. 28. cap. 6. to 19. cap. 90. to 101. Women-Monkes. pag. 184.185, 201, 202, 203, 204, 880, 881. Morice-dances censured. p. 20. See Dances and May-games. Moscovites how they keepe their Christ∣mas. pag. 782. Moses prohibited Playes and Enterludes. why. pag. 555. Mourning for other mens sinnes, a duty. p. 291. to 295. This life a life of mour Ibid. & p. 967. to 973. See Chrysost. Hom. 12. in Colos. accordingly. Multitude no argument of goodnes. pag. 787.788, 442. Mummeries and Mummers condemned. p. 493.494. fol. 51.891. to 904. Murthers occasioned oft by Playes. fol. 516. to 520. Musicke, lawfull, usefull. p. 274. lascivious effeminate Musicke, unlawfull. p. 273. to 290.394.395. See Vincentij Speculū. Hist. lib. 29. cap. 144. M. Northbrooke his Treatise against vaine Playes, &c. fol. 39.40, 41. Agrippa De Vnitate Scient. cap. 64. M. Stubs his Antomy of Abu∣ses. p. 128.129, 130, &c. Church-mu∣sicke ought to be grave, serious, pious, not quaint, delicate, or lascivious; which abuses of it are censured. p. 276 to 288. & Reformatio Legu Ecclesiast. ex Authoritate Regis. Hen. . & Edw. 6. Lodii 1571. Tit. De Divins Offi. c. 5. . 43. grounded on, and authorized by the Statutes of 25. Hry 8. c. 19.27. Hy S. c. 15. &. 3. & 4. Edward 6. c. 11. which proscribos this rule in . In divinis  recitandis & Psalmis , ministri & clerici diligentr Doe cgitare ebent, non solum se Doum ladari oportere, sed
alios etiam hortatu & exemplo & observa∣tione illorum, ad cundem cultu adducendos esse. Qua propter partite voces & distincte pronuncient, & cantus sit illorum clarus & aptus, ut ad auditorum omnis fensum, & intelligentiam perveniant. Ita{que} vibratam iam & operosam musicani, quae figurata dicitur, auferri placet, quae sic in multitudi∣nis auribus tumultuatur, ut saepe linguam non possit ipsam loquentm intelligere. (See Q. Eliz. Injunctions. Injunct. 49, accor∣dingly.) Which kinde of quaint and delicate Church-musicke is largely censured, by Hugo Parisiensis. lib. 2. de Claustro Animae, by Vincentius Beluacen∣sis. Speculum Histor. lib. 27 c. 45. by Iohn Bale his Image of both Churches, on Rev. c. 18 sect. 10.11 by William Wragh∣ton his Hunting and Rescuer of the Romish Fox. fol. 12.59, 125, 126. by Gualtherus Haddon Contr. Osorium lib. 3. fol. 263.264. & M. Northbrooke against Dice-play. fol. 40.41. Musicke, when, why, and by whom brought into the Church. p. 277. to 288. N Name of God not to bee used in Playes, in which it is oft prophaned. pag. 108. to 112. Names of Idols not to be named, invoca∣ted, &c. by Christians. p. 32.33, 36, 77, 78. to 88.584, 891, 926. Naked Harlots not to be looked on. pag. 406. dancing naked censured. p. 246. 251. See Lampridij Commodus. p. 90. Nero censured, and his death conspired for his singing, acting, dancing, and Masquing on the Stage. p 451.465. fol. 517.555. pag. 707.736, 737, 843, 849. to 853. Suppressed Playes and Players. p. 460.516.517, 714. Nerva prohibited Sword-playes. pag. 75. 468. New-yeeres gifts, and the observation of New-yeeres day, condemned as a Pa∣gan custome, by Councels, Fathers, and others. pag. 20. 36, 197, 198, 429, 430, 580, 581, 583, 755, 756, 757, 781. Spent in Stage-playes, Mummeris and dances by Pagans. Ibidem. a pub∣like fast enjoyned on it to bewaile the abominations thereon committed by Pagans. Ibidem. Night, not to be spent in Playes, in Dan∣cing, Masques, and such disorders, but in sleepe, in prayer, in devotion: night disorders censured. p. 255.360, 645, 646, 746, 747, 754, 755, 848, 849, 946, 429. Nilus his censure of Playes. pag. 349.385, 682. Non-residency censured by 55. severall Councels. p 623.624. by sundry Ca∣nonicall Decrees and Canonists. Ibid. See the Canonists in their itles, De Clericis Nonresidentibus. & My Anti-Arminianisine. Tit. Bishos in the Table, to∣gether with M. Whetenhall his Discourse of the Abuses now in question in the Churches of Christ. p. 170 182.192, 202, 203, 206, 208. D. Taylor his Com∣mentary upon Titus. c. 3. vers, 12. p. 726 to 730. Doctor Wille on the 1 Sam cap. 14 28. Master Robert Bolton, of True Hap∣pinesse. pag. 111. Master William Atter∣soll on Philemon. Master Ieremy Dike his Cavat to Archîppus on Col. 4.17. London 1619. of late: Bishop Hooper on the 8. Commandement, his first Sermon upon Ionas. fol. 22. Sermon 3. fol. 69.70. Sermon 5. fol 112.119, Bishop Latymer his 4. Sermon of the Plough. Master William Tyndall in his Workes. London 1573. pag. 20.102, 135, 136, 267, 289, 360, 373. Master Roger Hutchinson in his Image of God, 1550. Epistle Dedicatory to Archbi∣shop Cranmer, & f. 76.77, 86, 87, 173, 174, 175. and his 1. Sermon of the Lords Supper. 1552. Reformatiole∣gum
Ecclesiasticarum fol. 31. cap. 12.14.15. Bernard Gilpin his Sermon be∣fore King Edward 1552. p. 8. to 26. See in Ezechiell Woodward, his Dowayes Drosse, Epistle to his revolted Coun∣try-men, a story of Gilpin against Non-residency. Haddon Contr. Osorium. l. 3. f. 297. The ship of Fooles. p. 58.59, 60. Thomas Beacon his Preface to his Workes, to the Archbishops and Bi∣shops of England, & his Catechisme. f. 361. ulielmus Peraldus Summa Vir∣tutum & Vitiorū. Tom. 2. Avaritia p. 58.59, 60. Petrus Binsfeldius de Iustitia & Injustitia Clericorum in Ordine ad Beneficia. c. 3. in his Enchiridion Theologiae. 1609. pag. 489. to 506. Summa Angelica Clericus 7. Ambrose Serm. 7. & 9. Tom. 5. p. 5. & 6. G. H. Hierom. Epist. 1. c 7.8. Epist. 3. c. 5. E∣pist. 4. c. 1. Epist. 83. c. 2. Prosper de Vita Contempl. l. 1. c. 13. to 35. Augustinus de Pastoribus. lib. Tom. 9. Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio. lib. 6. Tom. 5. Operum Greg. Magnus Pastoraliū. lib. & Hom. 47. in Evangelia. Bernard. Hom. 77. Super Cant. De Consideratione. l. 2. c. 4. Declamationes, & ad Pastores. Sermo. Hildebertus. Epist. 46. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 12. pars 1. p. 328. Hinc mari Rhemensis. Epit. 14. Bibl. Pa∣trum Tom 9. pars 2. p. 47. Perus Ble∣sensis. Epist. 148. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 12. pars 2. p. 824. Athanasius Constanti∣nsis, De Necessria Episc. Residentia. Epist. 8. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 13. pag. 486 to 492. Cyprian Epist. l. 1. Epist. 2. 3 9. & l. 3. Epist. 15. BB. Iewell on the Thesaonians. p 406.407. with sun∣dry other Commentators on the 8. Commandement, on Ezech. 34.2. to 18.22, 23 c. 44.8. Ier 23.1. to 5. c. 3.15. c. 6.3. c. 31.10 cap. 50.6, 7. Zech. 11.4, 5, 7, 8, 15. Ml 2.6, 7, 8. Prov. 27.23. Isay 40.11. c. 54, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ps. 78.71, 72. Gen. 31.38, 39, 40. 1 Sam. 17.28, 34, 35. Luk. 2.8. Ioh. 10.3. to 14. c. 21.15, 16, 17. Acts 20.18, 20, 28. cap. 15.35, 36. Rom. 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 9.7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 27. 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. Phil. 2.20, 21, 26, 30. Col. 4.17. 1 Thes. 2.7, 8, 9. c. 5.12. 2 Thes. 3.10, 11. 1 Tim. 3.1, 2, 5. c. 4.6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. c. 5.17, 18. c. 6.17. 2 Tim. 1.6, 11. c. 2.1, 2, 4, 14, 24, 25. cap. 3.16, 17. c. 4.1, 2, 5, 7, 17. Titus 1.5, 9. c. 2, . to the end. c. 3.1. to 12. Heb. 10.24, 25. c. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. c. 5.1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. Iude 3.5. all which condemne Non-residency, and Non-residents, who act their parts in Hell. pag. 13. and goe to Heaven by their Curates, to Hell by themselves. pag. 88. For preaching and feeding of their flocks with care & con∣science being a personall duty imposed on them by God himselfe, as the very essence of their function, they can no more discharge it by a Substitute, then themselves or Laymen can receive the Sacrament, pray, heare, read the Word, or serve God by a Deputy, neg∣lecting all these duties themselves. And if cures may bee well discharged by a poore stipendiary Curate, I see no rea∣son but Lay-patrons (as some Ecclesia∣sticall doe) may keepe their Livings in their owne hands when they fall, so as they procure a sufficient Clergie-man to discharge the cure, which they may doe perchance with the tenth part of the profits: which some Non-residents thinke too much for a laborious learned Curate who takes all the toile, when as two or three good Livings is not suf∣ficient for themselves, who take no paines at all, or very little. Certainely if 10. or 20. or 30. pounds a yeere be a sufficient stipend for an able painefull Substitute, (perchance a man of more worth, more learning, and of a greater
charge then his Master Non-resident) it must needs be a more then sufficient com∣petency for the negligent Encūbent, who transcends not his Curate, either in fun∣ction, or desert, but onely in sloath, in pride, and idlenesse. I shall therefore de∣sire all such Non-residents & Pluralists who feed their flockes by Substitutes, to consider the words of Guli. Peraldus Sum∣ma Virtutū ac Vitiorū. Tom. 2. Tit. Avaritia f. 59.60. (a most excellēt discourse against Pluralists,) where thus he writes. Contra illos verò qui credunt se posse habere plura talia beneficia, quia vicarios ponunt. Primò dicimus, quod eadem ratione Laīcus unus, immo etiam mulier posset habere decē beneficia ecclesiastica: posset enim ponere vicarios. Praeterea, ridicu∣lum est matrimonium contrahere spe ponendi vicarium; & qui hoc facit, vi∣detur incidisse in illam maledictionem. Deutronomij 18. Vxorem habebit & alius dormiet cum ea. Tertio, quaerimus de Vicario eo, utrum it Pastor vel mer∣cenarius? Si mercenarius est, latro est, sicut prius ostensum est. Quum ergo di∣cit aliquis, Bene possum habere hoc be∣neficium, quia ponam ibi vicarium, pae∣ne idem est ac si dicat; Bene possum il∣lud habere, quia ponam ibi Latronem, qui furetur, & mactet, & perdat; Ioan∣nis 10 Si verò Pastor est, quae ratio est ut tu habeas duas Ecclesias, ipse vero nullam? Nunquid dicet tibi Ioannes, id est gratia Dei, vel in quo est gratia Dei; Non licet tibi habere uxorem fra∣tris tui? Quarto quaerimus à tali, utrum vicarius ille it minus bonus, vel aequè bonus, vel melior quam ipse? Si minus bonus, tunc naturalis ratio dictat, quod non est recipiendus pro eo. Operarius n in vineam alicujus conductus, non potest vicarium minus bonum ponre. Si verò aeque bonus est vel melior, quae causa est, quod iste habeat duo beneficia, & ille nullum? Quintò, quod ipse deberet attendere quid acciderit de primo vica∣rio Synagogae. Sic enim legitur Exodi. 32. Moyses relinquens popu∣lum, satis parvam moram facturus cum Domino, dimisit vicarium satis bonum Aaron, & tamen in reditu po∣pulum quem reliquerat fidelem, infi∣delem & idololatram invenit. Praete∣rea dixit Apostolus, quod si quis non laborat, non manducet. Quo jure igi∣tur pascitur aliquis de beneficio illo ubi ipse non laborat? Ordinavit Deus, ut qui seminat spiritualia, metat carna∣lia. Qua ratione ergò pauper vicarius spiritualia seminabit, & alius carnalia metet? Et quum Dominus dicat; Quos Deus conjunxit homo non separet: quo jure denarius ille quem subditus offert vicario pauperi sibi spiritualia seminanti, accipietur à patrono male vivente? Et si quò ad forum contensiosum jus ibi vi∣deatur habere: tamen quoad judicium sacae Scripturae ipse raptor est, usur∣pans sibi alterum eorum quae à Deo conjuncta sunt sine reliquo; id est mer∣cedem sine Iabore: immo etiam homi∣cida reputatur, & respectu mercenarij quem defraudat, & respectu pauperum subditorum quorum sudorem comedit. De primò legitur. Ecclesiast. 33. Qui effundit sanguinem, & qui fraudem fa∣cit mercenario, fratres sunt. De secun∣do egitur ibidem. Qui aufert in sudo∣re panem quasi qui occidit proximum suum. Vltimò dicemus, quod illi qui vicarium ponunt, qui sola cupiditate lu∣cri serviunt, & non amore Dei, talem a∣morem faciunt matri suae ecclesiae qua∣lem amorem aliquis faceret matri suae carnali, si pedem verum ei auferret, & loco ejus pedem ligneum subitueret. Pes ligneus non vivit neque corpori ad∣haeret. Si vicarius qui charitatem non habet non est membrum vivum vita spi∣rituali,
nec adhaeret corpori ecclesiae. Sola n. charitate vivit quis, & adhae∣ret caeteris membris Ecclesiae. See much more to this prpose in that pithy Discourse. Nonnes, many of them notorious Whores, and Bawdes; who have clad themselves in mans apparell, shorne their haire, and entred into religion in Monstaries as Monkes, to satiate these their holy Votaries lusts. pag. 184.185, 201, 202, 203, 204, 879.880, 881, 885. See William Wraghton his Hunting of the Romish Fox. fol. 24. and Iohn Bale his Acts of English Vo∣taries. Cambdeni Britta. Glocester-shire, Barkly Castle. Their haire shaven off when they enter into Orders. pag. 201.202, 203, 204. Yet Ioannes de Wankel. Clementinarum Constit. Tit. de Statu Monachorum. f. 64. pro∣pounds this question. An moniales possint nutrire comam, aut debeant sibi crines praescindere? & Hostiensis Sum. lib. 1. Tit. de Tempore ordina∣tionis, &c. concludes: Quod mulie∣ribus ordines non sunt conferendi, quia nec tonsurari debent, nec mulie∣ris coma amputanda est: quoting Gra∣tian Distinct. 30. to warrant it. See Summa Angelica. Faemina. sect. 1. & Sum, Rosella. Faemina. 2. accordingly. Master Northbrooke his Treatise against, and censure of Dancing, Dicing, Stage-playes, and Actors. p. 485.698.626. m. 227. O Oathes of the Gentiles, or by Pagan-I∣dols unlawfull. pag. 21.22, 81. to 89. fol. 551. Objections in defence of Stage-playes, of acting, penning, and beholding them, answered. pag. 34. to 42.96. to 106.124. to 127.721. to 828.913. to 975. in defence of lascivious mixt Dancing, answered p. 252. to 257. Obscenity and scurrility condemned; which abound in Stageplayes p. 62. to 72.160. to 168.262, 264, 265, 382, 385, 423, 914. to 930.593, 594. Occasions of sinne to be eschued. pag. 423.424, 911. Ochin his Tragedie of Free-will. p. 834. Odo Parisiensis, his Decretals against Clergie-mens Dicing and resort to Playes. pag. 654.655. Officiall, characterized. f. 537. See Vin∣centij Speculum. Hist. lib. 29. cap. 128. Ofilius Hilarus the Player, his death. fol. 553. Olaus Magnus his censure of Players, Ie∣sters, Playes, lascivious Pictures, and such who favour Players. p. 739.740. 741. Olympiodorus his censure of Playes and Play-haunting. fol. 524. Operius Danus his wanton Bookes cen∣sured. p. 922. Opmeerus his verdict of Stage-playes. pag. 481. Oratorie not helped or acquired by acting Playes. p. 931. to 938. Organs by whom brought first into Churches. p. 260.283, 285, 286, 287. See William Wraghton his Hunting of the Romish Fox, and his Answer to the Rescuer. fol. 12.59, 125, 126. Origen his censure of Altars and Images. p. 896.897. of Stage-playes, Actors, and Play-haunters. fol. 528. m. 330.331, 555, 669, 670. Orosius his doome of Stage-playes. p. 476. fol. 560. p. 682. Ortyges his effeminacy and death. pag 882.883. Osorius his censure of wanton Bookes and Poems. p. 916. m. Ovid his exile for his amorous Bookes.
pag. 369.921. See Thomas Beacon his Booke of Matrimony. pars 4. fol 662. his censure of Playes, Play-houses, Play-poets, and the resorters to them; and of wanton Dancing, Songs and Musicke. p. 249.272, 288, 369, 370, 452, 453, 454, 921. his description of Pagan Feastivals. p. 233.753, 754. Oxford, the Vniversitis Edict against Stage-playes. p. 490.491, 941, 942. P Pagans, the originall inventors and fre∣quenters of Stage-playes. pag. 16. to 40.731, 732. See Stage-playes: their customes and ceremonies to be avoy∣ded. Ibidem. & p. 236.545, 546, 552, 555, 561, 575, 578, 580. to 588.650, 651, 652, 658, 730. to 734.743. to 781. Sparsim. No paternes for Chri∣stians, who must excell them. p. 96. to 100.111. to 228.730. to 734. Some inventions of theirs lawfull, others not. p. 18. to 29. Their vertues coun∣terfeit, and shining sinnes. pag. 96. to 100. spent their Feastivals and hono∣red their Idols with Playes and Dan∣ces. See Dances, Feastivals and Idols. Ma∣ny, yea al the best of them condemned Stage-playes, and made Players infa∣mous. See Players and Stage-playes. Paganisme, men prone unto it. pag. 27.28. Rich. Panpolitanus his censure of Playes and Play-haunters. p. 690. Papists much addicted to Playes, many of our Players being such. p. 12.142, 560. to 568. Sparsim. 762. to 766. Act the passion and story of our Sa∣viour, the Legends of their Saints, &c. both on the Stage and in Chur∣ches, which many of them condemne: many of their Priests Players. p. 108. to 119.580. to 668. Sparsim. 762. to 766.99, 999, 1000. See Popes, Monkes, Nons. Parents ought not to traine up or encou∣rage their children to act, to dance, or behold Stage-playes: See Acting and Dancing. & pag. 335.336, 339, 340, 342, 343, 350, 33, 364, 306, 367, 369, 370, 373, 37, 391, 392, 437, 439, 441, 44, 447, to 491. Sparsim. 574.999 to 1005. S. Paul his Constituions against Playes and Players. p. 550.55, 652. would not have a lodging in Rome neere the Play-house, and why. fol. 545. See HRabanus Maurus. Comment. in Epist. Pauli. lib. 26. Operum. Tom. 5. pag. 537. D. Thomas Waldensis. Tom. 3. Tit. 19. De Religiosorum Domibus. cap. 149. fol. 268. Hierom. Comment. in Philemon. Tom. 6. pag. 216. E. Iacobus Pamelius Comment. in Epist. Pauli ad Philem. apud HRabanum Maurum. Operum. Tom. 5. p. 166. G. and most ancient many moderne Protestant and Popish Authors on the Epistle to Philemon, accordingly. Pauls Church in London originally con∣secrated to Diana. p. 38. Peace becomes Christians who must bee peaceable. p. 73.74, 120. Pericles his grave saying. p. 921. Petrarcha his censure of Playes and Dan∣cing. p. 237.238, 355, 356, 357. Philipides the omedian his sudden death. fol. 553. Philip Augustus, his dislike and censure of Playes and Players. p. 471.484, 715. Philip of Macdon, slaine at a Play. f. 554. censured for acting and dancing. pag. 857. Philo Iudaeus, his prayse. p. 554.668. his censure of Stage-playes, Dancing, mens putting on of womens ap∣parell, and wearing Periwigs, or long effeminate frizled haire. p. 168.186, 209. m. 222.307, 308, 554, 637. m. 668.669. of Images in Churches. pag.
895. m. of the Vizards and Histories of Pagan-Idols. pag. 79 89, 901 of luxurious Feasts. p. 554.754, 755. his opinion how the Sabboth should be sanctified. p. 554. m. Pictures amorous and lascivious, provo∣cations unto lust and lewdnesse, con∣demned. pag. 94.367, 387, 586, 740, 741, 329, 338, 865, 866. Pilades the Player whipped. p. 460. Plages occasioned by Stage-playes. fol. 559.566, 561. All the Roman Actors consumed by a plague. Ibidem. The Romanes used Playes to asswage the pstilence that was in Rome. Ibidem. & p. 18.28, 29. Plato his censure of lascivious Songs and Musicke, Play-poets, Players, and Playes. p. 264.288, 368, 448, 703, 918, 839, 480. Plautus his misery. f. 553. Play-bookes: See Bookes. Players, infamous, both among Christi∣ans and Pagans, excommunicated the Church, debarred from the Sacra∣ments, uncapable of Orders, of gi∣ving testimony, of bearing any pub∣like office, of inheriting lands: dis∣franchised their tribes, rogues by Statute, and subject to the whipping-post, p. 46. m. 133.134, 137, 140, 193, 341, 362, 429, 455, 456, 460, 468, 481, 482, 495, 496. fol. 527.528, 560, 561, 567, 571. to 587.617, 618, 626, 637, 649, 52, 654, 691, 699, 735. to 741.43. to 870.904, 905, 910, 998, 999. Renounced their profession before they could be admitted into the Pri∣mitive Church. Ibidem. Many of them Papists and most desperate wicked wretches. p. 100.125, 132. to 143.388, 728, 907, 908, 909, 998. The giving of money to them, a grand sin, yea a sacrificing unto Devils. pag. 46.324, 25, 326, 472, 688, 739, 904, 905, 906. Their gaines, theft, and ought to bee restored. Ibidem. Professed a∣gents and instruments of the Devill, the pests of the Common-weale, the corrupters and destroyers of youth. p. 92.472, 133. to 143.330. to 355.447. to 501. Sparsim. 842. to 911. Sparsim. 980. to 986.002, 1003, 1004. Hypocrites: See that Title. Can hardly be saved without repentance and giving over their ungodly trade. Ibidem. & p. 45.46. fol. 521. to 547.565, 566, 567, 842. to 911. Play-haunters, the worst and lewdest per∣sons, for the most part. p. 100.104, 143. to 155.388, 389, 415, 416, 451, 476, 505, 514, 711, 71, 719, 720, 730, 797 788, 798, &c. See Whores: excommu∣nicated in the Primitive Church. pag. 392.393, 527, 528. Vnfit to heare Gods Word, or to receive the Sacra∣ment. p. 392. to 396. 399, 400, 401, 425, 426, 430, 431, 432. f. 521. to 550, 988, 989. Their mindes and manners corrupted by Playes, and themselves made guilty of many sins. Ibid. See p. 302. to 368.910, 911, 912, 913, 943. to 975. Iudgemēts o God upon Play-haunters. f. 555. to 563, 850, 851. Play-haunting unlawfull. p. 72. to f. 832.911, 912, 913. Objections in defence of it answered. p. 943. to 960. Play-houses stiled by the Fathers, and o∣thers, the Devils temples, chappels, synagogues; the chaire of pesti∣lence, the dens of lewdnesse and fil∣thinesse; the schooles of bawdery and uncleanesse; the Stewes of shame and modesty; the shops of Sa∣tan: the plagues, the poysons of mens soules; a Babilonish Brothell, &c. p. 10.11, 49, 50, 52, 67, 68, 69, 101, 102, 144, 145, 163, 172, 329, 330, 337 341, 349, 369, 370, 374, 386, 389, 390, 418, 431, 440, 441, 446, 472,
474, 488, 489, 580. f. 513.560. Publike Stewes and common Receptacles of whores in former times and now to. p. 144.145, 380, 389, 390, 331, 332, 333 349, to 369.370, 391, 419. to 448. 524, 452, 453, 498, 662, 1005. See Whores & Stewes. Alwayes ful of devils, who claime them as their owne. p. 11. 51, 52, 143.404, 431, 483. f. 510.523, 524, 556. p. 766. Not to be tolerated, and why. pag. 369.370, 404, 415, 416, 422, 427, 428, 431, 447. to 501. Sparsim. 1002.1003.1004. Play-poems recited, not acted in former times. p. 834.835. Play-poets, examples of Gods Iudgements on the chiefest of thm. fol. 552.553. Their profession and the penning of Playes, for Play-houses, unlawfull p. 448.831. to 843. the Objections in defence of them answered. p. 913. to 943. Examples of divers Play-poets who have repented, bewayled with much griefe and many teares their penning of Playes, and written against it too pag. 138.360, 436, 437, 438, 440, 486. fol. 542.545, 566, 568, 837, 840, 910, 917, 918, 922. Pleasures: See worldly. Pliny his censure of Playes and Actors. p. 450.451.462, 463, 703. Plutarch his censure of Playes, Players, and Play-poets. p. 321.449, 706. Potry, lawfull and commendable. p. 882. to 830. Obscene Poets, Poems, most pernicious and unlawfull. p. 385.835. to 843.913. to 930. See Bookes. Poes, banished by Plato. p. 449 918 the chife fomenters of Paganisme p. 78.80. The greatest Panders. p. 385.915, 916, 919 to 925. Policarpus his censure of Marcion p. 194. Polydor Virgil his censure of effminate wanton Church-musicke, p. 283.84. of Dancing, Stage-playes, and Mum∣mers. p. 226.117, 494, 692. Poma, what it signifieth. p. 565.566. Pompes of the Devill which we renounce in baptisme, are Stage-playes and Dan∣cing. See Baptisme, Dancing, Devill. Poore prejudiced by Stage-playes. pag. 45.311, 325, 471, 472, 481, 718. ought not to wander abroad. Ibidem. Pope Boniface the 8. his Secular Enter∣ludes. p. 760 763. Pope Clement the 1. his censure of Playes, Players, Dan∣ces, &c. See Clemens Romanus. Pope Cle∣ment the 5. his prohibition of Nons to behold Playes or Dances. pag. 654. Pope Eugenius his Decree against En∣terludes & Playes on the Lords Day. p 913. Pope Eusebius his Decreall a∣gainst Clergie-mens resort to Playes, &c. p. 652.653. Pope Gregory the first his censue of Playes and Players. p. 83.846. against Bishops reading of Pagan Authors. p. 78.915, 916. turned Pagan Festivals into Christian. p. 759 760. Pope Innocent the 1. his censure of Playes. p. 655.656. See Iuo Carnotensis Decret. pars 6. c. 349, & pars 11. c. 78. Pope Innocent the 3. his censure of Playes. p. 684.685. Pope Ione, an infa∣mous Strumpet, who cut her haire and clothed her selfe in mans apparell. p. 185 879. Pope Leo the 1. his censure of Playes  533. p. 682. Pope Leo the 10. reputed the History of Christ a meere fable. p. 117. Pope Nicholas the 5. his Scular Playes. f. 559. p. 763. Pope Pius the 2. See AEneas Sylvius. Pope Pius the fift, his Decretall a∣gainst Clergie-mens Dancing, Di∣cing, or resorting to Playes, &c. pag. 654. Sextus his Decretals against acting and jesting Clergie-men. Pope Sixtus the fourth, erected a male and female Stewes, out of which hee and his Successors reserved an annual R∣venue. p. 215.445.446.
Popes, Popish Priests, Prelates, Monkes, &c. great Sodomites, Adulteres, Epicures, &c. p. 213.214, 215, 445, 456, 879, 880 881. The chiefe fautors and bringers in of Stage-playes, Christmas disor∣ders, and Pagan customes into the Church, yea oft-times Actors and Spectators of Stage-playes. p. 108. to 119.580. to 666. Sparsim. 754. to 767 929. Popish Saints what they are, and how honoured. p. 116, 117, 118. Porpherya Player, his strange conversion. p. 118.119. Processions, their reason and abuses, pag. 115.116. Prodigality a great sinne occasioned by Playes. p. 157.310. to 327.47.472, 708, 709, 710, 416, 429, 481, 512, 857, 1004. Propertius his censure of Playes & Play-houses. p. 455. Prosper Aquitanicus his censure of Playes p. 349.682. his opinion for plaine and profitable preaching. p. 937.938. Prudentius his censure of Playes. p. 680.720. fol. 561. Psalmes ought to bee sung at Christian Feasts, not filthy songs. pag. 48.264, 554, 555, 766. to 780.642. m. Ptolomie censured for dancing, playing, and acting. p. 710. Puel de Dieu, her mannish practice and execution. p. 185.284, 285. Puritans; condemners of Stage-playes and other corruptions stiled so p. 3.4, 5567, 568, 569, 797. to 828.1005. The very best and holiest Christians called so, even for their grace and goodnesse. Ibidem. & fol. 542. Christ. his Prophets, Apostles, the Fathers, and Primitive Christians, Puritans as men now judge. p. 797. to 828. hated, and condemned onely for their grace yea holinesse of life. Ibidem. accused of hypocrisie and sedition, and why so. pag. 816. to 828. Puritan, an honourable nickname of christianity and grace. p. 827. Q Quarrels & tumults occasioned by Stage-playes. p. 516.517, 518. Quiroga his Index Expurgatorius expun∣ging a passage of Lodovicus Vives a∣gainst Popish Enterludes. p. 115. Quintilian his censure of Playes, &c. pag. 705 706, 966 m. of the ill education of youth. Ibidem. of Seneca. p. 842. a∣gainst childrens or mens acting of Playes to make them Orators. p. 933. R HRabanus Maurus his censure of Players, Playes, Dancing, New-yeeres gifts, Health-drinking, and acting in wo∣mens apparell. p. 198. fol. 524. p. 562. 683, 756, 780. m. his judgement of the beginning and sanctifying of the Lords Day. p. 645. m. D. Rainolds his Overthrow and censure of Stage-playes both popular and aca∣demicall; of Dancing, and mens acting in womens apparell. p. 198.199, 227, 309, 320, 358, 487, 698, 887. of Images in Churches. pag. 900.903. Vindicated against a late Opposer. p. 671. to 680. Rare things most admired. p. 742.743. Rayling and Satyrs, especially against goodnesse, and good men, frequent in Stage-playes. p. 120. to 127.814, 815. condemned. Ibidem. Raymundi Summula its prayse of the Scripture. pag. 927. against giving to Players. p. 873. Reading: See Bookes and Scriptures: Some things lawfull to be read, and yet un∣lawfull to be penned or acted. p 928. to 931.
Recreations, when, why, and how to bee used, what circumstances requi∣site to make them lawfull. p. 945. to 948. See Master Bolton his generall Directions for our walking with God. p. 154 to 181. Great variety of honest Recreations besides Stage-playes. p. 40.417.965. to 970. Repetition of Sermons commended, com∣manded by Scriptures and Fathers p. 432.800, 801. See Chrysost. Hom. 20 in Epes. 5. Tom. 4 Col. 1010. C. Sint praeces vobis communes; unus∣quis{que} ea ad ecclesiam, & eorum quae illic dicuntur & leguntur, & maritus ab vxore partem domi exigat, & illa à marito. Si sanctum quemquam in∣veneris qui possit domu vestrae bene∣dicere, & pedum ingressu valeat uni∣versam inferre Dei benedictionem, um voca: Thus he See 1 Cor. 14.35. Domi inquit, à suis maritis discant. Hoc autem & illas ornatas reddit, & viros attentiores facit, ut qui debeant, quae in Ecclesia audiverunt, uxoribus ea interrogantibus recitare, ac veluti apud eas deponere. Theophylact. Enar. in 1 Cor. 14. pag. 427. See Primasius in 1 Cor. 14. and most moderne Prote∣stant Commentators, accordingly. Reprehention of sinnes and vices, how, when, where, and by whom to bee made. p. 124. to 127. not to be done by Players. Ibidem. Rpublike, much prejudiced by Playes and Actors, which ought not to be tolera∣ted in it. p. 45.445. to 501 997. to 1006. Restitution, to bee made by Players and Gamesters p. 46.906. Romanes, ancently condemned, sup¦pressed Playes and Theaters, and made Players infamous. p. 456.714, 843, 844, 737, 998, 99. Rome Christian, the same with Pagan. p. 757. to 765. Its beastines. p. 215.767. Roscius the Actor his skill. p. 932. Tull his censure of his acting. p. 848. f. 525. Ruscians much given to Dancing. p. 602 603. S Sabbth: See Lords Day: examples of Gods vengeance upon the propha∣ners of it. f. 556.557. Sabine Virgis ravished at a Play. pag. 30.452, 453. Salust, his censure of Playes and Dan∣cing p. 245.704 Salvian his censure of Stage playes: Epi∣stle to the Reader. p. 51.52, 105, 313, 314, 351, 352, 477. f. 525.526, 527. p. 682. Samians taxed for their effeminacy and long compt haire. p. 883. Iohn Saresberi against lascivious Mu∣sicke, Playes, Players, and Dice-play. p 281.282, 318, 350, 351, 684. Saturnalia, when and how celebrated. p. 751. to 766. the ground and patterne of disorderly Christmasses. Ibidem. Scipio Africanus, his censure of Dancing. p. 245.246. Scipio Nassica, his censure, his suppression of Playes and Theaters. p. 458.475, 561, 714. Scriptures against Dancing. p. 228. Pagan customes, and names of Pagan-Idols. p. 18.19, 77. Stage-playes. p. 545. to 551.723, 724. against effeminacy, a∣dultery, fornication, idlenesse, prodi∣gality, drunkennesse, mens long haire, womens curling and cutting their haire, mens acting in womens appa∣rell, lasciviou attire, fashions, appa∣rell: lying, hypocrisie, vanity, &c. See hese Titles: Ought diligently to bee read, as well of Laymen as Clergie-men. Epist. Ded. 2. f. 521. pag. 585.586, 913. to 940.591.760, 772. To be read at meales at Bishops and Ministers Tables. p. 591.653, 769,
772, 773. Not to be abused or used in Stage-playes, Iests, Libels, &c. f. 405. p. 110. to 116.929. f. 553.763, 764, 765. Their excellency and all-sufficiency. p 927.928. Sedition, occasioned by Stage-playes. pag. 136. fol. 516.517, 518. Christ, his Pro∣phets, Apostles, and Christians in all ages accused of it, though most unjust∣ly. p. 821. to 88. See 5. R. 2. c. 5.2. H. 4. c. 15.2. H. 5. c. 7.1. & 2. Phil. Mary. c. 6. Haddon Contr. Osorium. l. 2. f. 212. where we shal finde Witcliffe, Luther, & the an∣ciet English Protestants, whom they nicknamed Lalards, accused of Sediti∣on. Occasioned for want of preach∣ing, not by preaching. f. 531. Semproni taxed for her dancing p. 245. Sempronius Sophus divorced his wife for resorting to Playes without his leave. p. 39.662. Seneca his censure of Stage-playes. p. 68.369, 449, 47, 484, 703. of dancing, lascivious songs and musicke, of mens comp long frizled haire. p. 24.249. of mens putting on womens apparell. p. 199. of night disorders. p. 746.747. m. of the anciē Sturnalia p. 752.73. of making Gods Image. p. 895. m. Sermons twice euery Lords-day and so∣lemne Holi-day enjoyned by BB. Hoo∣per, Martyn ucer, a Popish Councell. f. 531. p. 629. & by 5 & 6. E. 6. c. .3. . Eliz. c. 2.25. liz. cap. 3.1 Ia. c. 4. which joyne divine Service and Ser∣mons together on Sundayes & Holi-dayes, because on such dayes one of them should be as frequent as the o∣ther, & men ought to heare them both alike, See 5. . 2. c. 5. Ought to be plain, edifying, not fraughtwith Poets, Histo∣ries, flashes of wit, &c. but with Scrip∣ture profe and phrases. p. 935. to 939. God-fathers enjoyned by our Church to call upon their Godchildren to heare Sermons. fol. 530. Shaving of Priests crownes and beards in use with Papists, an Heathenish cu∣stome. p. 23.24. Shaving and polling of Nonnes, censured. p. 202. to 205. Socrats traduced in Playes. pag. 121. his censure of Playes. p. 450. Sodoms Theaters and punishent. f. 561. Sodomie occasioned by acting in womens apparell, by wearing long compt haire and Love-lockes. p. 208. to 214.882, 884, 885, 1001, 105. Players, Play-poets guilty of it. pag. 125.211. Popes, Popish Prelates, Priests, Monkes addicted to it. pag. 213.445, 446, 881, 767, 100, 1005. See Balaeus Ont. Script. Brit. pag. 665. Ma∣ny Nations, and mans nature prone unto it. pag. 20. to 214.1001, 1005. An execrable sinne, stiled abomina∣tion in Scripture. p. 208.212. Capitall by our English Lawes. p. 214. Sodomites uually clad their Ganymedes in womens apparell, caused them to nourish, to frizle their haie, to weare Periwigs and Love-lockes pag. 208. to 214. & 882. to 890. Solon his censure of Stage-playes. p. 449.484, 516, 838, 839. Songs lascivious and ribaldrous frequent in Stage-playes condemned. p 261. to 274.412, 413, 420, 435, 518, 572, 578, 579, 588, 606, 610, 611, 613, 771, 774, 532. See Vicnij Speculum. Histor. lib. 29. cap. 144. & Agripp De Vanitate Scien. cap. 64. Sopoces the Tragedian his death. f. 553. Spoctacls of Christians, what Epist. Ded. 2. pag. 245. to 249.971. to 975. Speeches of Christians ought to be graci∣ous and profitable. fol. 521.528, 529, 6, 128.924. Spels unlawfull. pag. 21.583. Stage-playes: condemned by Scripture. p. 545. to 551.73. to 727. By the whole
Church of God both under the Law and Gospell. p. 551. to 570. By 55. oe∣cumenicall, Nationall, Provinciall Synodes, Councels, the Apostles Ca∣nons, sundry Imperiall, Canonicall Constitutions. p. 570. to 668. By 71. Fahers & ancient Christian Writers from our Saviours Nativity, till An. 1200 p. 668. to 688329. to 354.392. to 434.47. to 478. f. 522. to 528. By above 50. moderne Christian Writers from An. 1200. to 1632. p. 688. to 702. pag. 68.69, 355. to 366.434. to 445.485. to 488. By 40. Heathen Au∣thors. p. 702. to 713.365, to 361447. to 467. By divers Pagan & Christian Nations, Republikes, Emperors, Ma∣gistrates, Kings, &c. both ancient and moderne. p. 455. to 472.713. to 718. & 137.138.847. to 862. By our owne English Statutes, Princes, Magi∣strates, Vniversities, Writers, Divines. p. 68.69, 357. to 434.485. to 499.698, 699, 700, 715, 716, 919. to 923. Pro∣ved unlawful in sundry respects. First, of their inventors which were Devils, Pagans. p. 9. to 48 96. See Devils, Pa∣gans. Secondly, of the ends for which they were invēted, to wit, the solemne worship & honor of Devil-Idols, on whose Festivals they were acted, or o∣ther unlawfull ends. p. 28. to 54. See Devils. Thirdly, of their subject mat∣ter, which is, first, amorous, obscene. p. 62. to 72.327. to 480. & 914. to 94. Secondly, tragicall, tyrannicall. p. 72. to 75. Thirdly, Heathenish, prophane. p. 75. to 106.176, 177. Fourthly, false, fabulous. p. 106. to 109. Fiftly, sacrile∣gious, impious, blasphemous, abusing the Scripture, & our Saviours Passion. p. 108. to 125.763. to 767.929, 999, 1000. See Christ. Sixtly, Satyricall, in∣vective, especially against religion and religious men. p. 120. to 127 fol. 542.543, 8.4, 815. Hence the beleeving Iewes and Christians. Hebr. 10.33. (& 1 Cor. 4.9.) are said , to be made a Play, a Spectacle, or gazing stocke, through reproaches and afflictions, or to bee brought on a publike Stage & there de∣rided, personated, traduced, as Chrysostom, Ambrose, Primasius, Haymo, Anselme, Remigi∣us, & most other interpret it: because no∣thing was more usuall in the idolatrous Gentiles Stage-playes, then to personate jeare, & lander Christians (as now they doe Puritans) on the Stage See pag. 814.815. Seventhly, vaine, unprofitable, bring∣ing no glory to God, or good to men. p. 38.43, 44, 127. to 132. Fourthly, in re∣gard of their Actors, Spectators, which are commonly lewde & wicked persons. p. 132. to 155 f. 547. to 550. See Players, Play-haunters. Whores. Fiftly, in regard of their manner of acting and those cir∣cumstances which attend it: as first, hypo∣crisie & dissimulation. p. 156. to 161.876, 877. Secondly, lasciviousnesse. p. 161. to 176. Thirdly, effeminacy. p. 167. to 173. f. 546. p. 877. Fourthly, vanity, ridiculous folly. p. 173. to 175.877, 878. Fiftly, lewde Diabolicall sinfull parts and pasages. p. 75. to 106.175. to 178.890, 904. Sixtly, mens acting in womens apparell. p. 178. to 216.879. to 894. Seventhly, gawdy, lascivious, fantastique apparell, vizards, disguises. pag. 216. to 220.890. to 904. Eightly, effeminate lascivious mixt dan∣cing. p. 220. to 261. See Dancing. Ninthly, amorous scurrilous Songs and Poems. p. 261. to 273. See Songs. Tenthly, effeminate lust-provoking Musicke. p. 273. to 290. See Musicke. Eleventhly, profuse lascivious laughter and applauses. p. 290. to 302. See Laughter, Applauses. Sixtly, in respect of those mischievous fruits that issue from them: as first, mispence of time. p. 302. to 310.39, 45, 1002. See Time. Secondly, prodigality and vaine expence. p. 39.45,
302. to 312, 1004. See Prodigalty. Thirdly, the inflamation and irritation of mens lusts. p. 327, to 446.1000.1002. Fourth∣ly, much contemplative & actuall adulte∣ry, whoredome, uncleanes. p. 328. to 446.1002, 1003. See Adultery, Whores. Fiftly, a generall depravation of the Actors, the Spectators mindes, manners, and the Re∣publikes hurt. p. 42.132, 140, 447. to 501. 734, 735, 740, 784, 795, 796. Sixtly, loath and idlenesse. p. 501. to 508.709, 710, 1002, 1003, 1006. Seventhly, luxu∣ry, drunkennesse, and excesse. p. 508. to 512. Eightly, impudency and shame∣lesnesse, even in sinfull things. f. 512. to 516. Ninthly, cosinage, fraude, theft. f. 515.516. Tenthly, cruelty, fiercenesse, quarrels, seditions, murthers. fol. 516. to 520. Eleventhly, unprofitable, vaine, lewde discourses. f. 520.521. Twelfely, indisposition to all holy duties; avoca∣tion from Gods service: prophanation of Lords-dayes and religious Festivals: contempt of Gods Ordinances, Word Ministers; and the making of all Gods Ordinances ineffectuall to mens soules. p. 393. to 404.407, 408, 431, 432. f. 521. to 54.988, 989, 1004. Thirteenthly, an emnity against, & disesteeme of grace, of virtue, and all religios men. f. 542.543. p. 120. to 127. p. 814.815. Fourteenthly, inamoring men with sin, vanity, and in∣disposing them to repentance. f. 544.545. Fifteenthly, effeminacy in words, appa∣rell, haire, actions. p. 167. to 212. f. 546.547. p. 708.740. Sixteenthly, acquain∣tance with lewde companions. p. 131. to 155. f. 547. to 550. Seventeenthly, Athe∣isme, Paganisme & grosse Idolatry. p. 75. to 106. fol. 550.551. Eighteenthly, the breach of all the 10. Commandements. f. 551.522. Ninteenthly, the drawing down of Gods heavy Iudgements both upon their Penners, Actors, Spectators, with those Republikes and Cities which suffer them. p. 484.485. & f. 552. to 565. Twentiethly, eternal damnation of mens soules without sincere repentance. p. 45.46, 61.476. f. 565, 566.567. & p. 910. See Players. Authorities against them. p 305 to 721. Sparsim. Objections in defence of them answered. p. 721. to 830. The pen∣ning, acting, beholding of them prooved unlawfull. p. 831. to 914. Objections in defence of the penning, acting, seeing of them, answered. pag. 913. to 989. Stage-playes, the very pompes of the Devill which we renounce in baptisme. See Bap∣tisme, Devill, Pompes. Stiled by the Fathers and others, The seminaries of vice, of lewdnesse; the lectures of bawdery, the plagues, the poyson of mens soules, and mindes: the grand empoysoners of all grace, all goodnes, the spectacles & food of Devils, &c. p. 2.10, 46, 47, 50, 67, 69, 329. to 590. Sparsim. f. 566 See Play-hou∣ses: unsufferable vis in any Christian Church or State f. 330. to 501. Sparsim & 545. to 780. Devils & Devill-Idols de∣lighted with them, honored by them. See Dancing, Devils, Idos, Festivals. Incorrigible mischiefes. p. 38. to 42. The Devill the onely gainer by them. p. 44. to 47. More obscene of latter then any in former times. pag. 38.39, 70, 132, 458. Rare∣ly acted heretofore. pag. 742.743, 768. Academicall Stage-playes censu∣red. pag. 7.8, 490, 491, 700, 701, 841. to 867. Sparsim. 99.999. Statius his censure of Achilles wearing of Womens apparell. p. 199. Statutes against Players, Playes, and Dice-play. Epist. Ded. 1. pag. 109.495 496, 497, 715, 716. Stephanio the Plaer whipped. p. 459. Stewes erected by Heliogbalus. p. 389. Suf∣fred in Pagan Rome of old. p 767. Ere∣cted in Antichristian Rome by Pope Sixtus the 4. and continued by his Successors, who make a great revenue
of them. p. 215.445, 446. Play-houses, Stewes in former times, if not now to. p. 144.145, 358, 359, 389, 390.446, 993. See Iustin: Autent. Cllat 5. Tit. 4. f. 46. Strabo the Geographer a Cappadocian borne; his division of Cappado∣cia. pag. 678. Straton King of the Sydonians, censured for his dancing, &c. p. 250.857. Master Stbs his censure of Dancing, Di∣cing, May-poles, Wakes, Stage-playes, Epist. Ded 1. pag. 227.358, 435, 436, 698, 626 m. 793.794, 795, 796. Guli. Stuckis his censure of Dancing, Health-drinking and Stage-layes pag. 996 Sword-playes condemned, prohibited, suppressed by Fathers, Emperours, and others. pag. 74.75, 347, 367, 368, 548, 685, 467, 468, 519. Sybarites their effeminacy and effeminate Pages who did weare long haire and Love-lockes, censured. p. 883.209. m. Sylla his expence pon Actors. pag. 315.840. T Tables, and no Altars in the Primitive Church. p. 396.400, 408. See Altars and Hooper. C. Tacitus his censure of Playes, of Play∣ers, of Nro and others who either acted or frequented Playes. pag. 368.451, 465, 705, 849, to 853.858, 859. Tamerlan his lewd-nesse. p. 387. Tapers on Altars and in Churches, deri∣ved from the Pagans: censured. p. 22.23, 36, 758. Tatianus his censure of Playes and Play∣ers. p. 334.669. Tecla censured for cutting her haire, and wearing mans apparell. p. 879. Terence his death. f. 553. his Comedies censured, prohibited to bee read in Schooles. p. 916.917. Terynthians, much accustomed to laugh∣ter. &c. . 200. Tertullian his censure of, & Booke against Stage-playes. pag. 49.162, 163, 330, 331, 472. fol. 522.523, 547, 557, 69, 972, 973. against acting in womens apparell. p. 187.888. against Images, Vizards and Stage-disguises. p. 36. m. 60.89. m. 160.897. m. 901. his censure of face-painting, lascivious apparell, false haire, wearing of Lawrell crownes, Bonefires, and disorderly Festivals pag. 20.160. m. 217.581. m. 745. m. 768.769, 770. m. Thales pressed to death at a Play. f. 557. Theatre, not alwayes taken for a Play-house, but sometimes for a place of publike meeting where Orations were made, and Malefactors execu∣ted. pag. 724. to 727. Theaters over∣turned by tempests. f. 558.559. Theft, occasioned and taught by Stage-playes and Dicing. Epist. Ded. 1. fol. 558.559. Mony got by Dice-play, un∣lawfull games, or acting Stage-playes, theft. p. 325.326, 905.906. Themistocles his law against Magistrates resort to Playes. p. 456.457. Theodectes his punishment for inserting Scripture into his Playes. p. 110. fol. 553. Theodora censured for putting on mans apparell. p. 201.879. Theodoret his censure of Playes and Play∣ers fol. 550, Theooricus is censure of Playes and Players. p 470.471. fol. 517.518. Theodosius his inhibtion of lascivious Songs, of Stage-playes and Actors p. 263.264, 422, 423, 424.68, 715. Theophilact his censure of Playes, and dancing. pag. 224.228, 684. See his Enar. in Act. 17. p. 804. Theophilus Atihenus his censre of Plaes and Players. p. 334.557, 558, 669. Theopompus his divine punishment. p. 110.
Tiberius Atinius a story of him. p. 11.12. Tiberius banished Players, and suppressed Playes. p. 122 137, 460. f. 516.517. p. 708. his lewdnesse. p. 387. Tibullus, not to be read. pag. 453.454, 916, 917. Time shrot, pretious, and to bee redee∣med. p. 48. m. 302.303, 310.346. con∣sumed, mispent on Playes and va∣nities. pag. 302. to 310.837.903, 946, 951. to 946.951.952, 953, 957, 958. f. 530. vacant times and houres how to be spent. p. 952. to 956. Tstaus his censure of Playes, and Play∣ers. p. 690.846, 847. Tragedies and bloody Spectacles, censured p. 72 to 76. f. 516 to 520. Trajan his censure and suppression of Playes and Players. p 462.463, 714. his abridgement of the number of Holi-dayes. f. 539. Trebonius Rufinus banished Playes from Vienna. p. 458. Tully his censure of Dancing and Stage-playes. p. 246.247, 248, 449, 703. his contesting with Roscius. p. 932. his cen∣sure of him. p. 848. Tumblers censured. pag. 22. Turkes, punish adultery with death. p. 382. may justly censure Christians for their excesse. p. 747.748. condemne idlenesse as a mortall sinne. p. 506. V Valens his Edict against Players and Playes. p. 468.843. Valentinian his Edict against Sword-playes, Stage-playes, & Stage-players. p. 468.843, 844. Valerian his censure of amorous Musicke, Songs, Playes. pag. 269.270, 276, 683. Valerius Maximus his censure of Playes. p. 450.704, 732. Valesius a story of him. pag. 11. Vanity and vaine things to be avoyded of Christians. p. 128.129, 173, 174. fol. 544.545. Stage-playes vanity, and vaine delights. Ibidem. & p. 52.127. to 132.173. to 178. Venus the Patronesse of Stage-playes. p. 168.386. her effeminate Priests in womens attire and long haire. p. 194.204, 207, 885. her sacrifices. Ibidem. Veronius Turinus his death. pag. 920. Vertue of Heathens, no vertue, no pat∣terne for Christians. pag. 96. to 100. God onely can teach it, not Playes or Players. p. 96. to 103.139. Vestal Virgins how punished for forni∣cation. p. 382. did cut their haire and consecrate it to Lucina, from whence the polling of Popish Nonnes is de∣rived. pag. 202. Vestments of the Gentiles prohibited. pag. 22. Vices, acted in, and taught by Stage-playes pag. 100, to 106.305. to 568. God only can teach men to hate vice, not Stage-playes. p. 139.140. Vigils why appointed. p 642. See Gratian Distinct 75. abolished. p. 754. m. 578. Vincentius Beluacensis censure of Playes, and Dancing. p. 637. 688, 471, 472. Vitellius taxed for favouring Players. pg. 856. his law against Knights acting on a Stage. pag. 862. Lod. Vives, his censure of Players, Playes, and Popish Enterludes. p. 103. m. 114. 115, 134. m. 691. Vniversities their censure of common En∣terludes. p. 490.491, 941, 942. m. Volateranus his censure of Playes. p. 730. Vortiger his vices. pag. 133.135. Vulgar, delighted with Playes. fol. 540. Vzza his death. pag. 943.944. W Wakes, derived from the ancient Vigils. p. 236.754. m. their hurt. fol. 516. See M. Stubs his Anatomy. pag. 112.113. Waldenss, their censure of Dancing, Di∣cing, and Stage-playes. p. 228. to 233.
636. See Lydij Waldensia. Tom. 2. p. 358. & Andreas Frisiu de Republica mēdanda. l. 1. cap. 23. f. 90. Of Church-musicke, Altars, and Organs. p 285. m. Thomas Waldensis censure of Stage-playes as the Devils pompes pag. 565.690. Paulus Wan his censure of Playes, and Dancing, p. 691.258. m. Whipping-post, Players adjudged to it. pag. 413.459, 460, 847, 848, 849. Whredome occasioned by Stageplayes. p. 328. to 446. See Adultery. Whres harbored, prostituted in Play-houses. p 144.145, 349, 358, 389, 390, 391, 856. Vsuall resorers to Playes to Play-houses, whether few wo∣men but knowne or suspected Har∣lots, and Adultereses reort. pag. 144. 145, 146, 349, 361, 362, 363, 370, 371, 389, 390, 391, 419. to 442.438, 453, 662, 355, 356, 369, 944. fol. 54. p 856.991, 994, 1002. Wickliffe his censure of giving money to Players. p. 324.689. Women, skill in dancing no good signe of their honesty, ought not to learne, nor traine up their children to dance. pag. 220.229. to 261. See Dancing. Ought not to frizle or cut their haire, to weare false haire, to put on mens ap∣parell, to paint their faces, or to weare garish lascivious attyre. p. 159.179. to 221.258. f. 514.879. to 890. See Haire, Apparell, nd Face-panting. & Gulielmus raldus. Summa Virtutum & Vitirum. om. 2. f. 119. to 128. Ti. Superbia & fol. 16. to 21. Tit. Luxuria: Ought to nurse their owne children. p. 705.706. m. See Reformatio Legum Ecclesiastica∣rum. Ti. De Matrimonio. c. 13. f. 2. D. Taylos Commentary upon Titus. p. 382.383. Thomas Bacon his Cate∣chisme. f. 517.58. Ought to be kee∣pers at home, not gadder abroad. p. 434435, 992, 993. Ought not to re∣sort to Playes to Play-houses, which either finde or quickly make them Whores. p. 340.341, 349, 356, 360, 362, 370, 389. to 393.419, 434. to 446.453, 662, 457, 458, 992, 993. See Whores. The Devils Sword and Instru∣ment especially when they dance. pag. 228.229, 230, 258. Women-Actors, notorious whores. p. 162. 214, 215, 1002, 1003. Vnlawfull. Ibid. Hence Iustinian. Autenticorum Col∣lat. 5. Tit. 4. f. 46. enacted this Law: Scenicas non solum si fidejussores prestent, sed etiam si jus-jurandum dent quod observabunt & impiam com∣plebunt operationem, & quod nunquam ab impia illa & turpi operatione cessabunt, possent sine periculo discedere. Et tale jus-jurandum à scenica praestitum, & fidejussoris datio non tenebit. And good reason: for S. Paul prohibites women to speake publikely in the Church. 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Tim 2.12. And dare then any Christian women be so more then whorishly impudent, as to act, to speake publikely on a Stage, (perchance in mans apparell, and cut haire, here proved sinfull and abominable) in the presence of sundry men and women? Dij taem terris aver∣tite pstem. O let such presidents of im∣pudency, of impiety be never heard of or suffred among Christians. Words idle and unprofitable condemned. pag. 128. World, the fashions and customes of it not to be followed. p. 18 to 28 57, 58. this world no place of carnall mirth and jollity. p. 293.294, 907, 908. Worldly pleasures dangerous, and to bee avoided. pg. 907.966, 967, 968, 969, 970. fol. 551. X Xenophon his story of the Persian School-master, of the Syracusian and his
dancing Trull. p. 249.361, 366. f. 515.516. Y Youth how to bee educated; to bee kept from acting, reading and beholding Playes. p. 366.367, 498. See Acting, Bookes, Parents. Yvie Garlands not to be worne of Chri∣stians; dressing of houses with it pro∣hibited. p. 21.581, 756. m. Z Zeno Veronensis his censure of Playes and Dancing. p. 670. Fr. Zephyrus, his censure of Playes, and wanton Poets. p. 694. Tho. Zerula, his censure of Playes. p. 696. Thod Zuinger his censure of Playes and Actors. pag. 694. The names of many other Authors quoted in this Treatise against Stage-playes, Dancing, &c. I have omitted in this Table for brevity sake, a Catalogue of whose names and Workes you my finde p. 32. to 566.969.668. to 713.843. to 860.882. to 890. FINIS. ERRATA. Courteous Reader, besides the Printers mistakes collected in the beginning of the Booke, I shall desire thee to correct these Errataes following. In the Pages. p. 17. l. 15. p. 39. l. 35. & p. 65. l. 29. for Major, r. Minor. p. 29. l. 14. & p. 66. l. 2. f. ad∣vers. & Contr. ad Autolichum. p. 69. l. 4. Brissonius. p. 77. l. 6. demoniacall. & l. 30. names of Idols. p. 91. l. , righteous. p. 115. l. 28. reasons. p. 140. l. 34. sinners. p. 153. l. 6. it is. p. 189. l. 16. & lib. 3. p. 191. l. 11. judges. p. 201. l. 12. words. l. 226. l. 11. Dub. 13. & l. 13. Mapheus. p. 250. l. 10. f. Strabo, Straton. p. 279. l. 2. f. Turvy Towres. p. 281. l. 20. ingemiscit. p. 291. l. 19. & 296. l. 22. Antoninus. p. 315. l. 12. Players. p. 357. l. 29. Agrippa. p. 378. l. 7. strike, & l. 24. Twelfely. p. 400. l. 7. evidence. & l, 20. thy. p. 408.  34. if it. p. 445. l. 20. f. three, foure. p. 447. l. 1. f. 5. r. 6. p. 440. l. 19. undoubted. p. 451. l. 17.18. Soloni∣nus. p. 489. l. 34. his Reutation of the: fol. 530. l. 24. he fol. 546. l. 25. f. Epist. Epit. fol. 559. l. 26. f, first, fift. & 8. l. 4. for might, nigh. p. 549. l. 2. Hispalensis. p. 551. l. 21. sinfull. p. 620. l. 24. f. Dances, Playes. p. 628. l. 15. vanu. p. 644. l. 29. dii. p. 643. l. 2. r. 291. l 3. r Can. 1. f. 2. l. 6. r. p. 277. p. 666. l. 31 Ecclesia. p. 66. l. 14. r. 71. p. 669. l. 33. f. worke, worth: & l. 32. Antichrist. p. 671. l. 12. & in other places, f. Zozomen. Sozomen. p. 672. l. 32. indigni p. 673. l. 16. Flacius. p. 678. l. 11.12. p. 679. l. 7. f. Glo∣ster & Glocester-shire; Oxford & Oxford-shire. p 691. l. 24. f. Histrio, Adulatio. p. 695. l. 17. f. 210. r. 230. p. 707. l. 9. Ves. l. 29. vel. & l. 37. wites thus. p. 709. l. 10. perijt. p. 723. l. 11. f. this his. p. 733. l. 8. dele, . p. 747. l. 27. Infidels p. 818. l. 32. f. ne, me. p. 819. l. 29. f. qui, quae. p. 827. l. 10. f. Protestants, Laicks. p. 835. l. 33. dele by. p. 840. l. 37. r. dulcibus vitijs. p. 842. l. 22. r. saltando praebendū. p. 843. l. 15. f. aut, r. ad. p. 845. l. 2. No m: & l. 0. tertiam. p. 848. l. 9. Sylla. p. 857. l. 2. popina. p. 858. l. 22. Cocciu. p. 861. l. 32. cautam. p. 867. l. 9. Christians. p. 22. Theaters, & l. 27. Stage-playes. p. 870. l. 29. Rufinus. p. 880 l. 15. Gunda. p. 881. l. 1. meetricularū. p. 884. l. 6. f. Ascanius, Numanus. p. 887. l. 28. & 907. l. 29. Belua∣censis. p. 885. l. 9. Ccogrcus. p. 909. l. 35. f. Lastly, Fiftly. . 915. l. 23. lib. 3. c. 6. p. 934. l. 33. f. that, all. p. 935. l. 27. f. estimation, ostentation. p. 940. l 2. have. p. 942. l. 13. finde. p. 950. l. 6. f. his, their. p. 957. l. 24. vulneri. p. 958. l. 10. obvious: & 17. thm. p. 996. l. 11. mixt. p. 997. l. 26. facili. p. 998. l. 37. certa∣minibus. p. 999. l. 14. fabula. In the margent. p. 4. l. 2. f. advers. r. ad. p. 23. l. 29. r. Hist. l. r. p. 25. l. 10. r. Quid. p. 74. l. 31. f. Contr r. ad. p. 75. l. 5. & other places, . Sozomen. p. 94. l. 45. ad Demonicū. p. 110. l. 18. injuria. p. 126. l. 39. aliene. p. 129. l. 13. Panomimū. p. 153. l. 39. Vnus. p. 156. l. 14. migrvit. p. 158. l. 49. mimum. p. 171. l. 41. a. p. 179. l. 23. Can. p. 38. Tom. p. 189. l. 38. hominis. p. 200. l. 2. . 28. p. 212. l. 34. fabulam. p. 215. l. 35. & 552. l. 25. Alvarus. p. 219. l. 40. versatur. p 233. l. 38. Phryx. p. 30. l. 26. r. c 41. p. 324. l. 14 & 326. l. 25. f. Rosella, Angelica. p. 358. l. 20. Varo. p. 374. l. 39. munera. p. 457. l. 23. f. ad, . p. 459. l. 2 Aurelius. p. 472. l. 37. Theatra. p. 480. l. 5. & pag. 448. fol. 516. l. 1. Cyprian. f. 550. b. l. 40. contemnere. l. 42. jurat. f. 55. l. 12. Suetonij Iulius. sect. 39. omitted. f. 559. l. 41. so writes p. 549. l. 26. Hispalen∣sis. p. 561. l. 37. Nomocan. p. 614. l. 43. precipimus. p. 685. l. 29. Vincentius. p. 686. l. 33. Furens. p. 708. l. 12. vitious. p. 715. l. 22. r. lib. 4. Tit. 7. p. 720. l. 16. r. p. 20. p. 755. l. 41. augurijs. p. 798. . 15. irasce∣ru. p. 82. l. 29. teneritudinem. p 832. l. 16. jungere. l. 34. Librarie. p. 834. l. 25. Satyr p. 836. l. 6. f. Ar∣tic. r. Act. p. 841. l. 37. Stage-playes. p. 844. l. 41.42. debet propter. p. 845. l. 13. r. 481. p. 848. l. 31. & 851. l. 44. Sabellicus. p. 849. l. 30. nimirū. p. 852. l. 15.16. artes Gaudenti. p. 853. l. 4. Zonaas. p. 858. l. 1. Rrū. l. 19. Suid. p. 869. l. 5. cum subeunt. p. 879. l. 11. crucius. p. 884. l. 5. vob. p. 894. l. 13. f. m, in. p. 900. l. 4. Enar. in Psal. l. 44. r. p. 902.903. p. 902. l. 39. r. 79. p. 933. l. 41. r. omnes. p. 964. l. 37. ise∣runt. p. 971. l. 3. Tom. 2. p. 990. l. 36. secularu.
