20779.5 24402543 27640
A True and Exact Relation of the most remarkeable passages which haue happened in the Ile of REE, commonly called Saint MARTINS Iland, since the 6. of August last past to the 24. of the same. Wherein is also declared, in what state our Armie (vnder the Command of the Duke of BVCKING∣HAM his Grace) is in. As also how it fareth with them of the Fort, with the great hopes of the sudden surrender thereof, being dri∣uen to great want both of victu∣alls and water. Together with The description of the seuerall workes, both offen∣siue and defensiue about the Fort. The names of diuers Persons of qualitie both slaine and hurt on the French side. The present state of Rochell, and the borde∣ring places about it. The willingnesse of those of the Religion to adhere to the D. of Buckingham, with the pre∣paration of the French King to oppose them. Written in French by a French Gentleman of speciall accompt in the Ile of Ree, to a person of note here in England. Faithfully translated out of the French. LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter dwelling neere S. Austines Gate, 1627.
A True and Exact Relation of the most remarkeable passages, which haue happened in the Jle of REE, commonly called Saint MARTINS Jland, since the 6. of August last past to the 24. of the same. SIR, I doubt not but that you are informed of all that which hath past in this Iland of S. Martin, vntill this present time, by rea∣son of the good acquaintance which you haue at Court: Ne∣uerthelesse, I cannot leaue in re∣gard of your loue which you haue
expressed to me, to make you participant of all what is both here and in France past of late. They of Rochell hauing as it was differred as long possible vnto them to declare themselues, intending to get great store of Corne into their Citie, which they had about it, neuerthelesse they finde themselues now for∣ced to doe it, by reason of the cruell and hard vsage of their enemies, which haue not suffered them to get one halfe of it into it, and are now come so close to it, that hardly shall any man get any more into it by Land, for the Duke of Angoleine inquartered himselfe on Satur∣day last at Estre, with three thousand foot, and a great number of horse, which are dispersed, besides many o∣ther foot throughout the Prouince of Rochell, which make there much spoile. The common Counsell of the said Citie being thereupon assembled, they resolued to send presently for ayde to all their neighbours & friends and at the same time they sent some of their Commissi∣oners to this Iland to craue my Lord Duke and Mon∣sieur Soubise to assist them speedily with fiue hundred Frenchmen which wee had here, to aide them to raise vp againe the Fort of Tasdon, of which their enemies would make themselues Masters: and they were yester∣day promised, and sent vnto them vnder the command of Monsieur de Loudriere. But there were some that before their departure would shew their valour by an A∣ction, which Monsieur Sabignae Valouso did vndertake, and executed their enterprize on the last Sunday about the euening, with fiue and twentie men. They of the Cittadell being brought to great extremities, and com∣past round abound with trenches, which hinder them to get any refreshments, did keepe with great care a pit in a halfe Moone, which furnished them euery day with
sixe or seuen pipes of good water. The said Monsieur de Sauignac went about eleuen of the clocke in the night time to assault the said halfe Moone, and at the same time went three or foure souldiers of great resolution to throwe some great bottles with Trane oyle into the said pit, which they did, so that according to the relati∣on of a souldier of the Cittadell, who surrendred himselfe yesterday, the said bottles being broken in pieces at the throwing in, the said oyle hath infected and spoiled it, that hardly the water of it will bee good at any time to be vsed. If the said Monsieur de Sauignac had not beene hurt. I beleeue that they should haue taken the said halfe Moone, for hee was hurt by a bullet of a pistoll in his Groine, of which I hope that he shall shortly bee cured, and besides himselfe there were two of his wounded, but he and his slue eight or tenne of the Enemies, and a bat∣talion of English which seconded our Frenchmen, lost eight souldiers, and had betwixt twentie and thirtie hurt, amongst which the Lieutenant of the Colonell Boroughs was one. In the same night did the Shalops of our Armie which waite euery night abroad, that none may goe in or out of the said Cittadell, did take a Barque of tenne tunnes, which came to bring into it Bread, Wine, Meale, Pease, and Porke, besides another Shalop, in which were seuen or eight men of note, and as many sailers, which were carried by a wicked man of this Iland who is a Papist, both the Shalop and the men were drowned, except three, which were more happie then the other, hauing beene throwne into the Sea, and hurt in their heads with many musket shot. They being brought to the Land, I went at the dawning of the day on the border of the Sea, to see our Souldiers
imbarked, I did there a good turne to the said Gentle∣men, for I drew them out of the hands of the Souldiers, to make them to get lodging, and to bee cured by the Surgeons. Besides the Conductors called Morrisiers and the Marriners, there were drowned these Gentlemen, Monsieur Artaignan, Cornet of the Companie of the Kings horse which carrie little muskets, who was much beloued of his Maiestie. Monsieur de la Tournelle, who was a Gentleman of the Duke of Bellegard. Monsieur du Clos, Lieutenant of Monsieur de Contamines, which was slaine at his landing, with two or three of his ser∣uants. The names of them which are escaped are these which follow here: Monsieur de Iony Sonne of the Go∣uernour of Brest, Monsieur de Saint Michael Ensigne Colonell of the Regiment of Champaigne, and Monsi∣eur de Grandry Gentleman of the Duke of Bellegard, which came hither to get honour, and as we vnderstood had promises of some places which might first fall voide. My Lord Duke and Monsieur Soubise visited the said Gentlemen on the same day they were landed. For to keepe a good order I ought to haue begunne with the murther, which hath beene intended against the person of my Lord Duke of Buckingham, which matter happened as followeth. A yong man of Blois being in the said Cittadell du∣ring the space of two months, hee being a resolute and couragious fellow, & hearing many of the Propositions which were made amongst the French, hee offered to fire one of the Ships of his Maiestie of Great Britaine, if they would furnish him with a Shalop and other neces∣saries for that purpose, yea he offered to fire the Ship in which my Lord came, and did still lye in the night time as our enemies conceiued.
A certaine Captaine whose name is Castellan, per∣ceiuing this said yong man to be so couragious and reso∣lute, thinking him fit to performe a wicked deede, hee propounded vnto him, that if he would goe and murther my Lord Duke of Buckingham, that he could easily doe it by Land, and get a great reward, and an in compara∣ble glorie. This fellow accepted to doe it, vpon condition that Monsieur Thorax (the Gouernour of the Citadell) would condiscend to it; the said Captaine assuring him of the consent of Monsieur Thorax, the said Souldier goeth in the night time out of the Citadell on the sixt ot August, carying with him a very short Dagger, but broad and of a good edge. But hee being perceiued and taken by our Horse, he told vnto them that he came with an intenti∣on to serue on our side, which being not beleeued by them, seeing that he was of the Romish Religion, he was caried to Monsieur Soubese, and hee suspecting him, sent him as a Prisoner to the Prouost: Being there Exami∣ned, hee persisted constantly in his first Tale: but at last when he was threatned to be Tortured, vnlesse he would confesse the truth, hee begun to change his colour in his face, and grew very pale, and prayed that he might bee caried to my Lord of Buckingham, to make his Grace acquainted with matters of great importance: He being come to his Grace, he told him that which is here aboue reported, with diuers other circumstances which I con∣ceale here for some good reasons, and hee was caused to set his hand to his deposition. My Lo. Duke sent word the next day to Monsieur Thorax in the Citadell, and gaue him to vnderstand, that if he would send vnto him three or foure of them of his Garrison, in which hee put
most trust, that they should come safely, and that hee would make them to see something, which hee desired they should communicate afterwards vnto him: The Gouernour sent thereupon presently sixe of hs most tru∣sted friends, and amongst the rest the Barron of S. Surie: But the aboue mentioned matter being shewed vnto them, they denied it flatly, and the Prisoner maintained it against them, and thereupon returning to the Citadel, some that mistrusted the matter, murmured against the Gouernour, and others which thought well of him, de∣fended his credit and honour. They hauing made this report vnto the Gouernour, he protested that hee was innocent in the said matter, and sent againe after dinner to our Campe, both his owne Brother and Baron of Surin, besides the Captaine Castellan, which laboured there both with faire spee∣ches and great oathes to take away this ill opinion and conceit of the Gouernour, as they termed it. But the Prisoner persisted still in his former saying, and maintai∣ned his deposition as before. They requiring thereupon that hee should bee put to the torture, ours laught at it, saying, that it is but giuen to them which deny a crime, and not to such as con∣fesse it.
They intreated thereupon that wee would put him to death, with a protestation, that in case hee did not recall his saying before his death, that they all there would in such case suffer themselues to be hanged after him, & that if it were required, they would yet cause tenne other to come, that should stand to the like condition. Their offer was at that time refused: but my Lo: Duke sent them word the next day, that he would cause the mi∣serable wretch to be put to death, if they would send him the said Castellan, vpon condition that he might doe with him what he should be pleased to doe, if the said prisoner should not recall his deposition before his death, but per∣sist in his accusation, and that hee would giue way that they should giue him such a Confessor as they should like best: besides tenne of their Gentlemen which should be witnesses of that which should passe. But they of the Citadell refused to send the said Castel∣lan, alledging that he was there very necessary for the ser∣uice of the King: whereby it happened that many which doubted of the matter the day before, did then firmly be∣leeue it. I did not thinke in the beginning to extend my selfe so largely in the relation of the particulars of the aboue∣mentioned matter, but many are somtimes glad to learne the circumstances of a businesse or accident, to iudge the better of the matter. I beleeue that if they can send Letters from the Court of France to that of England (as they report here, that there is good passage) that they will doe their best endea∣uours to make you there to beleeue many idle and friuo∣lous tales. But concerning mee you shall haue nothing from mee but truth according to mine owne vnderstand∣ing and knowledge. My Lord Duke knoweth now very well their deuices, and laughes them out sometimes with much grace, when hee speaketh to any of the enemies of their great force
both by water, and by land, of their vndoubtfull succour, and of their imaginary armies in diuers parts of France, which should amount according to their calculation to more then 50000 men, which are now come to eight or nine thousand, for the most: And although they were so strong as they report, they were not able to hinder vs of the taking of this Cittadell and that within the space of fifteene dayes, or three weekes. The common souldiers which are in it haue now but one bisket in a day, and once water, and the Gentlemen and Captaines haue not much more. It is true that this retardment is troublesome, and not onely hindered our designes, but maketh them likewise more difficult to ef∣fect, and shall therefore be more glorious if wee atchieue them. I thinke that there shall be a good occasion giuen to vs in these parts; for almost all the forces of the French King march towards Rochel, and there are already foure∣teene Companies of the Regiment of the Gardes, besides many Swissers, and a great deale of ordnance. Many are resolued to succour them, although the passages are well stopt. They haue seized vpon the person of Mons. de Beaulieu d'Ampierre in his owne house, fearing that hee should molest them, as he hath done in the former wars. We haue already meanes to make them to restore him vnto vs, and we hope shortly to haue more. We are cer∣tified that the Duke of Rohan is very strong in the field, and that he intendeth to goe to Montauban on the 25 of this moneth. Seeing that the City of Rochel hath now in a manner declared it selfe, I doubt not but that all the rest of the Religion which are in France which before ex∣pected to learne what they should doe, will shortly make some attempt. Here are lately some ariued from Rochel, which report that our souldiers are there happily ariued, and receiued with great ioy. It is true, that their little delay hath made them to gather great store of good prouision, by
which the City is furnished for the space of a yeare, or more. And in this Iland there shall be wine enough ga∣thered, notwithstanding the wastes and spoile which the souldiers and Mariners haue made. We are likewise assu∣red that this night there haue beene sunke three Shalops which were comming to the said Citadell, which shall make them to lose all desire to venture any more in such a manner. This is all most-what we haue of any importance at this present time. For to trouble vs with other particulars of no moment, it is not needfull, namely concerning them which haue either beene slaine or hurt of both sides, as in the ren∣contres, skirmishes, and with the Cannon shot and cast∣ing of granads, and other things of lesser importance, which would require a whole volume to write them all together downe. Now at this instant are here ariued some Commissio∣ners of Rochel which are come to conferre with my Lord Duke and Mons. de Soubise, to make him acquainted with that which is Saturday last past betwixt them and the D. of Angoulesme, who hath made faire offers vnto them, and did yesterday send into the said City Mons. de Com∣minges, who commandeth the Fort which is called Lewis, protesting that if they will cause the English to remoue, that good contentment shall be giuen to them, and all the Protestants of France. At S. Martena in the Isle of Ré the 26 of August, 1627 new stile.
This same day, 17 of August Mons. de Brissac a Gen∣tleman of the Religion is come out of the Citadell, with some other Gentlemen, to retire home with the permissi∣on of my Lord Duke and of Mons. de Soubize. They con∣fesse that in the Citadell they suffer great incommodities, but they thinke they may yet keepe it a whole moneth, or thereabout. Eight Souldiers which haue fled out of it, & are come to vs, affirme that they are at their last breath. My Lord Duke is loued and admired of all men for so ma∣ny great and excellent parts which are in him. SIR I sent you eight dayes agoe a little packet, and ha∣uing now occasion to acquaint you with more newes, I will impart vnto you such as I haue at this present. Since that time we haue not receiued any other but good newes. They of Rochel haue begun to make their workes out of the gate of S. Nicholas neere which lyeth their Fort of Tadon to hinder the aproaches of their Enemies inquar∣tering. Although they haue not as yet made any open declarations, they gouerne themselues neuerthelesse as if were ioyned. The Priests and chiefest Papists haue alrea∣dy forsaken the said Citie, and there come daily some souldiers in it, which are there well receiued and lodged. A declaration of the French King being lately sent vnto them, which forbiddeth very strictly to adhere or ioyne with the English, they would not publish it, knowing ve∣ry well, that vnlesse the English succour had come, there was a resolution taken to subdue them this Summer. Wee expect here shortly 5000 men from England, and if they come, we will vndertake some other enterprises then the taking of the Citadell, which is now at the last gasp, not∣withstanding that they expect succour from Marans both of men and victuals within the space of two daies, as they say. Their Ensigne of the Colonell, of which I made mention in my former, hath by reason of the negligence
of his keepers, three dayes agoe made an escape. His Companions were caryed to the Shipps board by good fortune: for they were all three as a recompence giuen to that braue English Captaine, who was hurt with Mouns-Savignac. We haue foure dayes agoe sent into the Citadell all the women and children of those of this Borough, which are in the Citadell, which were retreated into it, in lieu of so many Gentlemen and Souldiers, which haue forsaken it, but they may serue them to dresse their meate, for they haue lately killed and salted the remnant of their horses. They of the Fort are now so enuironed with our tren∣ches, that a dogge cannot come into it. There shall now an offer be made vnto them to surren∣der themselues within the space of a few dayes, and after the expiration of them there shall no composition bee made with them as it is here reported. For those which are in the Fort de la Pree, they are so little regarded, that wee assault them not, but kill and take them onely when they come abroad, and dare goe into the next villages for refreshments. This is almost all the matter of importance which I had now to write. All the newes which come from Pa∣ris are much to be suspected. Both there and in other pla∣ces of France there are rumors spread abroad of Massacres against the Protestants, I pray God to preserue them. It is likewise reported that the French King is to come in per∣son to besiege Rochel with 40000 men: But if the 30000 men shall timely come, which the Protestants expect, they will finde them worke enough. The Duke of Soubize hath lately receiued very good newes from Languedock and other places, the particulars whereof are not yet come to my notice. At the next occa∣sion I shall acquaint you with them, and of such things as shall fall out from time to time.
From the Iland of S. Martin the 24 of August, 1627 new stile. To vs the 14. I Haue heard now newes of Capt. Gifford since I came from Portsmouth, where I parted from him when hee was ready to goe on boord his ship. I enquired for him af∣ter the battell, but he was not landed, neither is his ship yet come into the Fleet. I pray God it be not cast away. You may let my Godfather know this, but none else. I pray remember my duty to him. Capt. Talbot is not slaine, therefore put out his name from among the dead. Sir George Blundel dyed at Rochel of the wounds he receiued in the sight. Sir Charles Rich was shot in the shouldier, but there is no danger of death by it. It is reported confidently at Burdeaux, that we lost 3000 men at our landing, and the French but 70. I haue scaped many dangers since I par∣ted from you, I thanke God, both by sea and land. The enemy playes vpon the Towne wherein wee are continually with his ordnance from the Cittadell, which is lesse then musket shot from the Towne, and wee play vpon the Cittadell, hauing three batteries by land, and one by sea. I haue escaped narrowly from being slaine by the shot both of the Cannon and Musket, and diuers other wayes, I thank God, I hope he hath reserued me for a better end, and I pray heartily he would preserue mee from sudden death. My lord Duke hath gained a great deale of honour in this imployment, and is sometime blamed for hazarding so much his owne person. Our house wherein he lodgeth hath beene twice shot through, and his Barge-roome shot through and through. We tooke one that was incouraged by Mons. de Tho∣rax, and others in the Cittadell to kill our Generall: hee
had about him a short Poniard, and did confesse that hee was resolued by that or some other way to kil my L. Duke within a fortnight. From Pindennis Castle in Famouth, Aug. 21. Wee haue receiued newes from the D. that Sir Ralph Shelton by killing a braue Monsieur hand to hand in fight of both the armies, is made a Lieutenant Colonell to Sir I. Radliffe, who is made Colonell. FINIS.
