22038 99843269 7986
REASONS For which the Service Booke, urged upon SCOTLAND ought to bee refused. 1. IT cònteineth divers points and directions, vvhich vvould breed a change in some Articles of that Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of the said Kingdome, vvhich is both vvarranted in Scripture & approved by Parlament: and it seemeth to be as vvell against State wise∣dome as against Religion, to change any thing either in the matter or forme of the sayd doctrine and discipline, vvithout first shewing both some evill or defect in the things to bee changed, and what good & benefit it is that the said Service booke vvill afforde more to the Edification of the Church, or true vvorship of Almightie God, then the points of doctrine & discipline, vvhich the said Service booke vvould breed a change of? 2. In the pretended Communion, it hath all the substance and essentiall parts of the Masse, and so brings in the most abominable Idolatrie that ever vvas in the vvorld, in vvorshipping of a breaden God, and makes vvay to the Antichrist of Rome, to bring this Land under his bondage againe, as may bee seen at large by the particulars of that Communion, wherein some things, that were put out of the Service booke of England, for smelling so strong of the Masse, are restored, and many other things, that vvere never in it, are brought in, out of the Masse booke, though they labour to cover the matter. It hath the commemoration of the dead: The Table set Altar wayes: The oblation of the Bread and Wine to God before the conse∣cration: It hath the Popish consecration, that the Lord would sanctifie by his Words, and by his holy Spirit, those gifts and creatures of Bread and Wine, that they may be unto us the body and blood of his Sonne, and then repeat the words of institution to God, for that purpose. It hath an oblation of it againe, after it is consecrat, the consuma∣tion by the Priest, kneeling before the consecrate Bread and Wine. It takes avvay the eating and drinking by faith, mentioned in the
English Liturgie. It hath the patin challice, two Paternosters in En∣glish, before the Masse, and severall other particulars, that vvould take a long time to rehearse and confute. 3. Though they vvould take avvay the Idolatrous Masse out of it, yet it hath a number of Popish superstitions and Idolatrous ceremonies: as, 29 holy dayes, vvhereof 22 are dedicated to Saints, two of them to the Virgin Mary, the one vvhereof is called, The Anuntiation of our Lady, so shee is made a Lady to Christians, not being on Earth, shee must be a Lady in Heaven: Is not this to make her a God∣desse? It hath 14 Fasting dayes, and some vveekes. It hath also the humane Sacraments of Crosse in Baptisme, laying on of the Bishops hand in confirmation: a Ring for the outward seall in Mariage: a sanctified Font, holie vvater, holinesse of Churches and Chancels: private Baptisme, private Communions, Ceremonies for Buriall of the dead, and purification of vvomen after Childbirth, the Priest standing, kneeling, turning to the people, and consequentlie from them, speaking vvith a loud voice, and consequentlie sometimes with a lowe voice. Peoples standing at Gospels, at Gloria Patri, & Creeds: their ansvvering to the Minister, & many such-like, in number above 50. besides any religious Ornament, that the King, or his Successours, shall prescribe, and Ceremonies that Bishops shall determine, or that shall bee conteined in Bookes of Homilies to bee set foorth heereafter. 4. And though they would take out of the Booke, both the Masse & all those superstitious Ceremonies, yet it hath a number of other materiall errours: as, leaving unread about a 120 Chapters of Gods Worde, and putting this reproach upon them, that they are least edifying, & might best bee spared, and reading sundrie Chapters out of Apocrypha, under the stile of holy Scripture of the olde Testament. It hath a Letanie more like conjuring then like Prayers: It hath some places out of vvhich Papists may prove, that Sacraments are absolutelie necessarie to salvation, in apoin∣ting Baptisme in private, vvith such haste, that, if necessitie require, he that baptizes needs not so much as to say the Lords Prayer, and out of vvhich they may proove, that Sacraments giue grace by their vvorke vvrought, in saying, Children baptized, have all things necessarie
to salvation, & be undoubtedly saved. It hath other places out of which they may proue moe Sacraments then tvvo, vvhich they say euerie Parishoner, who is alreadie baptized, shall communicate, & shall also re∣ceave the Sacraments, and that Sacraments two, are generally necessarie to salvation, as if there vvere others, eyther not so generall, or not so ne∣cessarie. It hath other places out of vvhich they may proue universall grace: saying, God the Father made mee, and all the world, and God the Sonne redeemed mee, and all mankinde: One Collect pretends to begge from God, that vvhich they dare not presume to name, and a number others of this sort. 5. Though likevvise they amend all those errours, and that there were no materiall errour in it at all: so they read nothing at all but Scriptures, yea, and that all their Prayers & Exhortations vvere nothing but vvords of Scripture, yet such a Liturgie vvere not lawfull to be made the onlie forme of Gods Worship in publike: for, though a formed Liturgie may bee to serve for Rule to other Churches & monuments to Posteritie what formes are used, or that it may lead the way, or bee a direction to those that are beginning in the Ministrie, yet it is not by reading of Prayers and Ex∣hortations that the LORD appoints his servants of the Ministerie to vvorship Him, or edifie his people, but hee hath given gifts to them to Exhort, Pray, and Preach, vvhich they ought to stirre up and use, and though they may in their private studies take helpe of other mens gifts, yet it is not lawfull for a man to tie himselfe, or bee tyed by others, to a prescript forme of vvords in prayer and exhortation, for these reasons: First, Such a prescript Forme is gainst the Glorie of God, in stinting to him such a daylie measure of service, and so hindring the many spirituall Petitions and prases that otherwse would be, if Gods gifts were used. Secondlie, It is against the dignitie of Christ, in making his gifts need∣lesse: for, though hee send downe no gifts at all, they can serve themselves with the Booke, without them. Thirdlie, It quenches the holy Spirit, because hee gets no employment. Fourthly, It hinders the Edification of Gods people, they may as well stay at home, and bee edified by reading the Booke themselues. Fiftly, It is against the Conversion of those that know not God: will ever a Rat yme of words sayd over without feeling or blessing, worke upon an unrenewed heart?
Sixtly, It will never serve to convince an Hereticke, to check a pro∣phane Person, or to waken a secure Soule: they may long goe on or such a service byte upon them: yea, it osters people in a presumptuous conceit, that they are well enough if they be present, and say their part of service. Seventhly, It fosters a lasie ministrie, and makes way for putting downe Preaching: they need take no paynes, and therefore needs no stipend: yea, they may come from the Ailhouse, or a worse place, and step to and read their Service, without eyther check or preparation. Eyghtly, It may all be done by a Boy of 7 yeares olde, and so every pri∣vate man that can read, yea, a Turcke if he can read, may be such a Minister. Ninthly, It cannot expresse the severall needs of all people to God, or deale with them, according to their severall estates, that will alter otherwise then any prescript forme can be aplyed to. Tenthly, If any one stinted Liturgie had beene good, or needfull, no doubt but CHRIST would have set one downe to us. 6. Though a prescript forme of Liturgie were lawfull, yet there is no war∣rand for imposing of one: for, might not able Ministers (at least) make a prescript forme to themselves, which would fit them and their people best? But if it were lawfull to impose one, then there is one in this Countrie already. Ought not that rather be imposed, then any other, seeing it is already established by Parla∣ment, now of a long time? But now, if a new one ought to be imposed, then it ought to come in by a lawfull maner: by a generall Assemblie, and men chosen to make it that are knowne to have the gift of Prayer themselves, and not the Masse booke, translated into English, urged by Antichristian Prelats, upon Gods people, without consent of any Generall Assemblie or Parlament, against the will of all men, & with no small offence & scandall to the minds and consciences of such, as thinke all Liturgie unlawfull, that is either in the Masse way, or inconsistent with the practise & peace of the reformed Churches of Scotland hitherto, and against the hearts of such as know many things in the English Liturgie and Canons, which the practise of, neyther hath warrand in Gods Word, nor can bring any such adition, to the profit, honor, or power of the King, that is able to compense the losse hee may make of his good Sub∣jects affections, by commanding such a change, as the urged Liturgie would bring to the Peace of our Church, and respect due to the Acts of Parlament and long custome, whereby our Church dis∣cipline, Order, and Government hath beene established. PRINTED in the year of GOD. 1638.
