22634 99852629 17959
Frontispicij & seqq. Enarratio Historica, Or a Declaration of the Frontispice or first Page, wherein in intimated the whole Scope of the Poeme, and not obscurely, the complete platforme of this ensuing History. A Stately Nymph of Nereus traine, Waue-bred in the Virgiuian Maine, Ycleped Albion, kept ere-whiles, So famous erst the FortunateVnder which name of beata∣rum Insularum, & Fortunatae, alluding to Hesiods words and other Fables of the Greekes, it seemes the ancient Romanes pointed out these Bryttish Iles; see more in the end of the 5. Ode. Iles! Whose treasures, as of equall price, With Hesperid's Fruit and Colchos Fliece, Braue Knights to seeke Aduentures came, To winne this wealth, and court this Dame; FromSamothes supposed to bee Mesech. Syria one, a next fromAlbion, sonne of the Greeks, (if not some other) Neptune. Greece, The thirdThe Gyant Race of Inhabi∣tants. a home-bred churlish peece, A Brute fromBrutus descended of Aeneas. Troy, theMulmutius descended of the same Troian Line, and neere kin to the last Kings, descended from Brute. fift neere kinne, The one quels Deuils,Brutus ouercame the Gyants, reputed of Antiquitie to haue bin the Race of Danaus Daughters and Deuils; Mulmutius the se∣ditious Bryttons in the Heptar∣chie. t'other Men; A sixt fromCaesar. Rome, and next fromHengist the Saxon, of the German Nation, whose chiefe Riuer is the Rhene. Rhene, The eighthSweno with his Danes in∣habiting Gimbrica Chersone∣sus. from Cymbria, ninth fromWilliam the Conquerour; from Normandie a Dutchy of Frāce. Seyne: All these were Warriors, all these came, By dint of Sword to purchase Fame! But comes aKing Iames crowned King of Scotland at a yeare old. tenth in shew more milde, A crowned King euen from a Child, And though new-Lords, new-Lawes! yet strange, New-Lord, nor Law nor State did change; Because, perhaps this peace-full Impe, Or so lou'd Albion, or faire Nymph Most lou'd by her: To see their Glories, Whereof they vaunt; behold their Stories. To win this Nymph, her wealth or fauour, TheSamothes, whose darke anti∣quitie representeth a bright shine of Honour. Syrian first, who came to craue her, Bore Armes through eld, obscure and darke, Seemes his great Grandsire Noah's Arke; NextAlbion, whose father Nep∣tunes trident Mace, was the to∣ken of his chiefe Honour, and rule, as god of the Sea. Neptunes sonne of Paynim Race, Talkes of his Fathers Trident Mace, The third a Gyant-Satyr wilde, Pan-like in shew, and Cham-bred stilde! The fourth from Troy, Venus his Guide, Brute doth one crowne in three deuide. TheMulmutius sonne of Clote∣nus Duke of Cornwall, who e∣stablisht Peace after a bloudie Schisme. fift agen of fiue makes one, Happie Cornish Prince, blest vnion. Sixt Caesar vaunts hisFrom whence they gloried to be descended. gods at Rome, His Eagle and Troyes Trophees some: TheHengist, whose Saxon Suc∣cessours conquered all England, but deuided the same among them into seuen petty Kingdomes till Egbert who erected it to a Mo∣narchie. seuenth next with his seuen fold Crowne And Saxon Horse, would beare all downe. The eighth theWhose Armes & Ensigne were ordinary the Rauen, Embleme of rapacitie, for such were the Danes Rapines rather then Con∣quests. Dane, in armes by stealth, Sought win, or wed, or weare her wealth. AndWilliam the Conqueror, then taking aduantage of grieuous broyles. ninth, aduanc'd 'mongst these Misrules His Norman Leopards, bath'de in Gules! But now theKing Iames vniting the long deuided and dissentious Realmes of England and Scotland. tenth sans strife or Warres, Brings Peace and Vnion, stints all Iarres. Giue sentence then, if any craue; Who best deserues this Nymph to haue.
THE HISTORY OF GREAT BRITANIE from the first peopling of this Iland to this pre∣sent Raigne of or happy and peacefull Monarke K: JAMES, by Will: Slatyer. London Printed by W: Stansby. for Rich: Meighen, and are to be sold at his shop at St. Clements Church.
POTENTISSIMO, SIMVLAC SERENISSIMO, IACOBO, Magnae Britanniae Monarchae, cui se suam{que} PALAE-ALBIONEM dicat, consecrát{que}, Authoris Epiphonema. GReat Brytaines King, sprong from great'st wights; Who claym'st iust right, in all their rights, From IAPHETS sonnes first, comes thy Grace, As all our Northerne peoples Race! And as for ALBION his intrusion, And CHAM-bred Giants fell confusion, Disclayme it. All the rest of them, That e're wore Englands Diadem, Danes, Saxons, Brittish, Romans came, With Normans Armes, and TEVDOR'S Name, Deriu'd to thee, whom Scotlands Throne With all her Iles, calls her deare owne: To thee my humble Muse doth bend These Stories of thine owne thus penn'd. Daigne to receiue, shee prayes, in worth, Till grauer golden Pens step forth, To blaze praise-worthy acts, whose posies French Lillyes with the English Roses, Shall sweetly wreathe about that Lyre, Which we and all the World admire. And for great'st persons oft, great'st grace Afforden: makes me bring in place, And lay what of their rights I sing, Just at thy feete, great Brytaines King.
Odarum ordo, numerus, & nomina Disticho comprehensa. Vestra Mesech1, Chemnita2, Gygas3, laus Brute4, tui{que}5 Laurea Iule6, Angli7, Sueno8, Celta{que}9; Oliua Iacobi10. With Samothes1, Albion2, Giants3, Brute4, comes peacefull5 Prince Donwallo, Caesar6, Hengist7, Sweno8, William9, IAMES10, faire Vnion-Iem done follow.
TO THE WELL-AFFEC∣TED AND INGENIOVS, OR NO MORE CVRIOVS THEN COVRTEOVS READERS. FAirely disposed Friends: Since the world (of Cri∣tiques) for custome-sake at least, would take it else in scorne; it being growne so coy and squea∣mish, or, good City-Dame, so much affecting, as we see, Court fashion, that with an oyly tongue shee must be complemented with; otherwise in stead of courtesie nothing but curiositie can be expected. Bowing therefore to, rather then of singularitie offering to infringe her doted-on Dar∣lings customary proceedings, that Momus so might haue lesse cause to carpe and mow at what he cannot mend, or Zoilus to bite and snarle at it, by this importunity I yeeld to be thus ceremonious, Preface-wise to salute a World of (some cap∣tious and capricious, no doubt, others more friendly) Rea∣ders; and thy selfe, perhaps, a more iudicious, and so lesse supercilious Censurer: for satisfaction to such thy selfe, being somewhat here is to be said of this ensuing Treatise; let mee find fauour to be borne with, in speaking these few words, more for fashion sake then else, of that thou knowest before, or canst not but streight-waies collect, from the but viewing the first Pages of this present Historie. Historie her Encomium needs not farre fetching, so fre∣quent in our mouthes, the Life, Light, and Mistresse of Prudence: Life of past; Light of present; Directresse of fu∣ture actions: memorizing Monument, and Trophey of the worlds ages and minoritie; Glasse of Time; Historie so conspicuous in it selfe, enueyled in the robes of Poesie, if
worthily commendable, in many a famous forreine Nations gests, I may well thinke it no wayes disallowable in our owne; how-e're obscuritie like a Cymmerian night, hath ouer-clouded the infancy of this our Iland! still bearing sway with most, thereby yet prouing vs not degenerate in that, from our not curious Ancestors, in conseruation of Antiquities, we quit as little, if not lesse industrious to obserue and note the same! when notwithstanding, with the enuious Mans, and curious, our eyes gaze on our Neighbours ground, his manners, sel∣dome looking to our selues, neare home. We better skill the warres of Troy and Thebes, with the Pharsalian fields, the halfe-feyned fights of Hercules, Achilles Turnus, Hector and Aeneas, (I will not say of Amadis, Don Quixot, and such like) then as Heroike, if not more warlike, and worthy to be renowned martiall spirits of our owne; Danes, Saxons, Romans, Nor∣mans, Brittons, and other noble Captaynes here at home; the great Britannicus Caesars, Cassiuelane, Guider, Hengist, Arthur, Egbert, Rollo, Alfred, Marcia's, Elfled's, and their equalls, as truely glorious and worthy Wights, in this our Sea-encom∣past little Bryttaine-World, as euer were those halfe-deified and Pagan-sainted Heroes, of whose acts Homer and Hesiods, the Mantuan and Theban Poets layes in that so famous and triumphant wise resound! yet then I feare, we should not be the true, plaine, downe-right, shall I say, or fantastique En∣glish-men, if Apes, Toyes, Monkeyes, Parrots, and Baboones, or yond-sea Owles, other Country-far-fetcht and new-fangle fashions, were not more fancy-able to our braine-sicke hu∣mours, and plausible to our nice palats, then wiser and better obiects, more profitable and fitting matters, in staid and setled iudgements, nearer concerning both our selues and na∣tiue home. Which being so, sans enuy be it spoken, for cor∣recting our too generally corrupted iudgements, in applause of any nouell monstrous (I might say Monsters) manners, as more especially strangers gugawes, and to the present pur∣pose, forreine stories neare or farre before our owne; where∣by the same lie more vntrimd and trodden vnder foot; since, what Scholers studie see wee? as nor Merchants traffique for those things, how good so-e're, that are but seldome sought for, want vent, and are not saleable. This yet, incited me the more to trie new wayes, that Noueltie it selfe, and Nouelists fancying fancie pleased, and others, the best at least, conten∣ted,
Albion and her Worthies might by this meanes, at all hands receiue some, though the meanest part of their true lustre, due, ancient and deserued glorie. The ayme of this discourse, the full scope of our Bryttish hi∣storie, so diuided, that according to the ten great Reall or ap∣parant changes of Estate, each seuerall Booke or Ode, from such mutation, take their subiect and beginning in historicall order, and from some partie of prime note, denomination; the first treating of our first Founder Samothes and his succes∣sion called Samothes; the second Albion, of him chiefe actor in the same; the third the Giants of their rude regiment; the fourth named Brute, of his next stablishing a Kingdome; fift Mulmutius, of his re-vniting the distracted Prouinces; sixt Caesar, of his conquest, and the Roman Caesars gouernment; the seuenth entituled Hengist, of his foundation of the Saxon Heptarchy; eight Sueno, of his, and the then rapines and op∣pressions of the Danes; ninth Gulielmus, of his Norman con∣quest; tenth Iacobus, of him a plant of that pacifique Oliue, fortunate Peace-maker, of famous memorie HENRY the se∣uenth; now anew also planting peace, and vniting foure Kingdomes; whose other stories on that occasion are briefly there displayed. In all which passages, what is lesse lightsome, or delightsome, impute it, if not to the obscuritie and harsh∣nesse of the matter, to his weaknesse, that yet was and is wil∣ling, far as able, to giue all best contentment in that kinde. That Poesie should shadow Historie, such , and pleasant studie, I may hope to find out Patrons for protecti∣on, as well as patterns, and those right ancient and worthy, for imitation and excuse! What nouell is should not for nouelty distaste; the English Poeme glosse to the stranger Idiome, that speaks perhaps such barbarous States-matters, like our English Lawes, but rude; the marginall notes seruing for il∣lustration to them both, supplying the defects, guiding and supporting the course of Historie: other Annotations, Ana∣lyses, or Explications proposing order, pointing at method, light and life of all discourse; as they cannot but yeeld some profit, how-e're painefull and laborious to me, I wish to thee as vsefull and commodious, not doubting then thy well ac∣ceptance of the same! The Title, suiting to the Treatise, -Albion, or Antiqua-Albion, should seeme to promise Al∣bions
antiquities, and ancient storie of our Ile! if alluding to -Olbion, as thou fauourest one, happily enioy the other; and as a Fauorite of Albion mayst thou be fauoured in the highest Olbion; for whose sakes I say, and wish to say, Sentio quâ Natale solum dulcedine Cunctos Sentio quâ Coeleste solum dulcedine Sanctos Ducit, vt immemores non sinat esse sui. Not censuring before thou reade; not reading with preiu∣dicate opinions of thine owne or others; and not con∣demning all, before thou haue read all. As I shall much expect such censure, and approue it; so shall I most respect the Censurer! I will not be so rash or harsh to say, commend, or else come∣mend; yet doe con∣clude thus with the Poet, Siquid nouisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti, si non, his vtere mecum. GVLIEL. SLATYER.
Typus breuis, siue Analysis totius operis, poematis scilicet Historici, quae PALAE-ALBION inscribitur. This Treatise or Poeme, according to the ten seuerall great mu∣tations and changes of the state or name of this Iland, is diuided into ten Bookes, or Odes, Whereof the 1. COntayneth, after an assertion of the storie, a briefe description of Britayne and Ireland, with the first succession of Kings from Samothes descended, A. M. 1787. till Albion, A. 2200. by the space of 400. yeares. 2. A second race of Kings: Albion and Bergion, with their discent; accor∣ding to the ancient and Greeke Histories, also an illustration of the pre∣sent and domestique, as well as some forren Antiquities and Genealogies, together with their defeate by Hercules, circa Annum 2250. 3. The Anarchy or Interregnum of the Gyants, that succeeded Albion and Hercules, from A. 2300. till Brute, A. 2850. being 500. yeares & vpwards. 4. Brute, and his succession, Kings of this Iland, from A. 2850. till Malmu∣tius Dunwallo, A. 3500. aboue 600. yeares. 5. Malmutius and his race Kings here, till the Romans Conquest vnder Iulius Caesar, which was A. 3900. about 400. yeares. 6. Caesars Conquest, and the Romans Gouernement in Britayne, by their Presidents, and Deputy-Kings, from Iulius Casars to Valentinians dayes, A. 4400. neare 500. yeares. 7. The seuen Kingdomes of the Saxons: begun in Hongist, A. 4400. And reduced from Heptarchy into Monarchy, by Egbert, King of West-Saxons, A. 4800. after neare 400. yeares. 8. The often inuasions and rapines of the Danes, so continually vexing the Land, and the Kings of England from Egberts time, till Harold and William the Conqueror, Anno Christi 1060. neare 300. yeares. 9. The Norman Conquest: William the Conqueror and his issue, Kings of England: with the bloudy faction and schisme betweene the houses of Lancaster and Yorke, ended in Henry the seuenth, in whose issue also the Realmes of England and Sotland grew vnited, after 500 yeares from the Conquest. 10. The happy discent of King Iames from Henry the seuenth, whereby the vnion of the two Kingdomes of England is accomplished, as vnder one Prince, so flourishing vnder one name of great Britayne. In the end a briefe touch of the Scottish, Irish, and French Histories. A more perfect and particular Type or Analysis of the first Booke or Ode. The first Ode contayneth, 1. As a Proaemium, a generall deducing of Historie from the beginning, and Noah: with an assertion of the storie, and antiquities of this Iland, compared with those of other Nations, especially of these Neighbouring and Northerne Countries. 2. A briefe description, both of the Peoples and Situations of the Ilands of great Britayne and Ireland: according to the Rules (in so compendious limits) of Chorographie, Geographie, and Historie. 3. The Historie and succession of the first race of Kings here, viz. Samo∣thes, A. M. 1800. his sonne Magus, his sonne Sarron, his sonne Druis, his sonne Bardus, his sonne Longho, and successor Bardus 2. in whose time Albion and Bergion obtayned the Dominion of Britayne and Ireland.
PALAE ALBION. Ode prima, Inscripta SAMOTHES. ARGVMENTVM. Prima palaephatiâ Samothen Sobolem{que} papyro,Series Poematis in hac margine. Samotheae Dominos ceu not at Oda canit; Albion adueniens fatalia donec in arua, Pellit eos, statim pulsus & ipse cadit. . Institutum operis: & occasione arreptâ, opera Creationis; Rerum tam omnium, quam impraesentiarum primordia. VIsam Laurigero sacrata palatia Phoebo, Dodoni{que} Iouis patulas, Oracula Graijs, Quercus! Parnassi Colleis, & Phocidos aruae, Sacrorum saltus Memorum, Hyantaea{que} Rura; Pierij Laticis Decus ô Decus omne, Sorores, Nymphae, noster Amor, Libethrides, Aurea Virgo, Gorgophora,Institutum operis & Votum. & Paeon, linguis animis{que} fauete; Et Dea Mnemosine, pandens ab Origine primâ, Mecum Dic Britones, populos & Praelia Reges: Heroum{que} Ducum{que} Britannûm parta Trophaea; Monstraiter! Aonios superabo, Te Duce, Saltus. Quàm fuit aut Tellus, aut Quod tegit omnia, Coelum, Siue aequor glaucum,Narratio, in qua exquirltur origo Mundi, secundo Gen∣tium, ac Denceps Britonum. Chaos & Lis omnis in Orbe est! Lite{que} Dirptâ, fulserunt sydera Coelis; Fronde tegi syluas, cingi Labentia riuis Flumina, protendi Campos, surgescere Colleis Fecit: , Valles subsidere. Littora fluctus Insano fremitu pulsando tumescere Ventis. Terra feris, aqua pisce, repletus & Alite fulgens Aer, non Regio vlla suis animalibus Orba; Aureus egit iter super aethera Apollo, Madentes Nube cadunt Imbres submota,Creationis series. Maximus Atlas Sydereis humeris leuat astra cadentia, Prodit Res Quaeuis, Quocun{que} Modo aedita Lucis in Oras!
Tum Zonis Coelum, omnipotens pater ille,Mundi, per parteis, ordinatio & dispositio. secari Iussit; Parte gradus istâ nix altaretardat, Parte aliâ torrent sudantis Brachia Cancri: Innocuas vireis, exercent flamine venti, Persida{que} Eurus adit, Nabathaea{que} regna; recessit Auster ad Aethiopes; positi{que} sub axe tepentes Hesperio Zephyri! Boreae spirantia Thracis, Frigora saeua Scytho-taurûm famulantur in oris. . Hominis formatio, lapsus, Gygantes, & Diluvium. TErra recens partu, producens Plasma decorum,Prima hominis formatio. Induit ignotas hominum (res mira) figuras: In se fusa{que} habet Diuinae semina mentis. Natus homo è terrâ colit ex quâ creuerat ipse, Glebam, tuta sedet Pinus, non montibus altis Caesa erat, vt poterat peregrinam visere terram; Non tuba, bella canunt, strepitu non cornuarauco; Aurea tunc vere fuerant ea pristina saecla:Descriptio Paradisi, siue Aureae aetatis. & Lapsus hominis. ac demum Gygansomachiae. Poma cibi, frutices{que}; fluebant Nectare Riui, Lacte gregs, duro stillabant roscida mella Cortice, dona Ceres nullo cogente ministrat. Fraga rubent nascentia humi, lapidosa{que} Corna; Ver tepet aeternum! sed iam meliore cadebat, Ante statû, quo natus homo; verum{que} fides{que}, Fugêre, instrârunt furor & sine lege libido: Affectando, ferunt, Coelestiaregna Gyganteis, Velle Iouem superis regem detrudere Regnis. Hij sceleraimponunt sceleri, super Ossan Olympum, Multa{que} moliti Diuûm conscendere sedes; Quae Pater ac summa vidit Lucetius Arce, Insidias hominum iratus probitate carenteis, Foeda Lycaoneae referens conuiuia mensae, Consilium stetit humanum genus efferum & excors, Perdere aquis! Nymbis Auster fluuialis anhelis,Diluvij caussa, & Descriptio. Suffultus celer Aeolio de carcere fugit: Flumina non iniussaruunt per rura, per agros, Per{que} hominum villas; Latis spaciatur in oris, Aequor caeruleum! migrans Neptunus in arua, Campos & colleis spissâ perfundit arenâ! Cum{que} satis arbusta rapit, pecudes{que} viros{que}; Nat Lupus inter Oueis, Fuluos vehit vnda Leones, Tigres aqua! ablato minime velocia Ceruo Prosunt crura; diuterris vbi sistere posset Quaesitis, lassis volucris vaga decidit alis: Omnia Pontus erat, nec habent quae littora pulsent, Flumina Nereides sub aquis, vrbeis{que} domos{que}
Mirantur, syluis ludunt Delphines in altis: Qui vir de tot erat modo millibus ecce superstes, Cnm consorte thori, sibi coniugibus{que} receptis, Pignoribus{que} datis, vectus rate sospes adhaesit, Montibus Armenijs! Edocti ita Moseos ore,Diluvij cessatio & Mundi in∣ter Nohae posteros diuisio. Crediderant Patres; Monumenta{que} sacra reuoluunt; Prole sua toto qui restaurabat in orbe, Humanum genus, vt mundi melioris origo! Nec lamen vt cautum est, scelerata euanuit aetas, In meliúsue redacta fuit, Gygantúmue Anguipedum soboles, prodeunt sceleraomnia in aeuum; Ille suae soboli terras partitur, & vnus, Relliquiae miserae mersae, primordia Gentis, Alterius renouae, prolem dimisit in omnem Terram, sole suo lustratam vbi vertitur axis Fulgidus & minimè freta stricta gelu aurea tingunt Sydera,Historia Nohae, & Gnatorum. Bubsequa neué cadentia plaustra secutus; Aethiopes vltra nigros Garamantas & Indos. Corniger vnci Apis primus monstrator aratri, Mizriam ad Aegypti deuenerat ora fluentis Nyli; sub Zephyro colit Hespera limina Tubal; Magog adit Tanais ripas Scythiam{que} niuosam; Ille quo{que} Europam, dictus quod finijt illam, Quam recolunt homines terram, Gomer; Arcades illic, Climate in Arctoo potiuntur sede & Olympo. Te{que} canunt prolem{que} tuam, res dignarelatu, Nos canimus Grandaeue Mesech; Quem saecla subacta, Illustrem norunt Rhutupino in littore Regem. . Vt Europaearum, ac Borealium magis ita Britanniarum Gentium Origo, & Laudes. QVid Cretes Britonen? Quae Nympha inferre parantem, Vim Minoa sibi, fugit; commisit & vndis leutenerum Corpus rapidis! Quid Pryton Araxes Gnatum, Brytannis memorem dare nomina Regnis? Vestra Iaphet Samothen soboles! Chem creta Gygantes, Albiona! Bruti proles sedêre Brytannis Oris! Angliacis habitârunt finibus Angli. Sed quid ego moror hisce,Vt nom Brit sonat. recenseo{que} ab Ioue gentem? Seu Bruti soboles, seu Picti, * seu Gomeraei, Diues opum patria est, nec si generosa probatis Stemmata,De Britannicae gentis Nobi∣litate, discertatio, quorum laus petita, & satis conspicua. nonne sat est quod sint sine crimine Mores; Nec tam auersus equos nostro sol iungit ab orbe, Non obtusa adeò gestamus pectora, Néue Ingenia illepidus septentrio frigore stringit!
Quid doteis animi referam?Ex Moribus, Dotibus Animi, & Corporis, Sosijs; & eiusdem Rei Amplificatio, à patriae situ, Corpúsue labores Posse pati? certè populi, quos despicit Arctos, Viribus vt{que} animi inuictis, ita corpore pollent; Flectere ludus equos & mittere spicula cornu, Siue forum retinet, siue vnctae dona palestrae, Enitet vtra{que} laus! & nunquam ociosa iuuentus Venatu inuigilant; modo rus geniale colendo Exercent vireis; & concutere oppida bello: Durum à stirpe genus Maeotiacas{que} paludeis, Qui circa Tanain habitant, & Phasios vndas: Massagetes qui fugit equo, Pictus{que} Gelonus, Et fera quos homines producit Taurica Tellus, Noruagenus, Dacus, Scythicus trucis incola Iernes, Sauromatae{que} leues, & quos Germania mittit, Dalmata, Maenapî, Cymbri! virideis{que} Britannos Adiungam; longis{que} leueis Axônas in armis: Caussa nec est, cur heîc despecta habeatur origo, Arua quòd haec late Boreas, septem{que} Triones Stringunt! solantur mentem Rhodopeiae arces, Alta{que} Pangaea, & Rhaesi mauortia tellus: Hebrus item{que} Getae! nunquam viduata pruinis, Riphaeis, perfusa niuis conspergine tota Arua ora: Claróue celebria quae loca fastu, Edita iam quae non ne{que} laeserat Inuida fama;Sua aliarum{que} gentium ori∣gine, Gentibus his Italus natus, Longiusúe remotis Exoritur Francus, Germanus, laesus Iberus; Pannonius satus, e{que} hoc stemmate Alemanus ortus: Quas{que} ferunt Arceis Antenora condere: (qui de Troia prosiliens olim, medijs{que} Mycenis, Turbae vrbem fessis,Periculis, & tum suis, aliorum{que} consimilibus casibus, posuit super ora Timaui:) Sanguine misceri Scythico, rea Ibera{que} tellus. Illius immunis non Anglica terra pericli, Quando Scythae toto debacchabantur in orbe: Quòd modò contulerint, fari horret perbreue tempus, Hellespontiacâ damnum numerosius Alga! Laeua{que} siqua fuit, sors semper laeua meorum, Dente Theomno si velles laedere laudem, Sunt vrbes captae, sunt terrae, deijcere auram Fama adulatricem; vt cnm iam praedixeris omnia, Obtrectes alijs famam quo{que}, liuide morsor, Morsor habes quod{que} Inuideas, praeclara nepotum Stirpis auita suae gesta! & modo certius illo, Cum virtute patrum semper memorabile nomen; Ergo vbi liuor abest, quae belli palma Britannis Mansit adhuc, steterat{que} diu fuit aut vigor ingens Ille animi! vt micuit{que} patrum longe inclyta virtus, Consule scripta virûm clarorum, & Carmina vatum: Nam{que} vti non semper fautrix, ne{que} semper acerba, Caeca sibi Diua, & Dociles non parcerc parcae, Persa potens olim! & iam Media concutis orbem,
Dux{que} Philippiades Macedum,& Infortunijs ac denuò, ditione premebas; Gentibus ille Ninus qui transtulit omnibus arma, Caedit auum, incoluit primus qui Persidos oris, Bactra auro, ac gemma pretiosa ditia Regna, Assyrio{que} prior rex Rege Aegyptus & alter, Sarmaticus Tanais vastant vicinia Bello! Sed ne{que} Persepolis, nec quam ipsa Semyramis vrbem Condit, coctilibus Babylon circundata muris; Perpetuò sua colla superba leuarit ad astra: Néue suo assuescat diffuso gurgite in ora Septem, Nylus aquis, spolijs gazis{que} repletas, Ferre rateis Ebeno Indo oneratas; Quam{que} tulisse Telam depectunt sylua Gangetide Scres! Semper Saurobates fugiatné, Semyramis, Iras? Flumine deiectum quem viderat Indus aquoso; Subdita vel Scythico Pontus virosa Tyranno? Roma ingum imposuit populis, Lassis{que} resurgens Viribus, vs{que} potens per saecula Graecia multa! Sed fugit, & mundi volat irreparabilis aetas, Quod{que} fuit non est, neque erit, quod perstet in orbe. . siue infortuniorum quorundam excusatio. ILle graueis Persas, qui subijcit, atque superbus, Fine redit Lybies, victor, Gangetide terra, Portando palmas,per Romanos subiugatione; Brytannicus esse superbit; Cum neque adhuc sciret, quid sit pendere tributuns Romanis rerum Dominis, Brito! Moenia Troiae, Quae modo despectis, duce cum{que} Atriade, Achiuis, Olim Aurorigena nigro sub Memnone in Armis, Defendere diu, non tanti erat Indica bello Agmina vicisse, & Parthos superare fugaces, Medosué Italidas Generosos! vt Latijsue Hospes Dardanius, profugus, fera bella colonis, Concitet! Indomitis, plus, Iulius arma Britannis, Intulit & potuit bello domuisse feroceis! Quis Deus opposuit Phrygibus Phrygas? aut duce quo vel Numine vel furia,Epiphonema. vertêre in viscera ferrum? Ilus & Assaracus Genitor sua stemmata clara, Tros{que} parens faciunt, & Troiae Cynthius author! Vt{que} suae stirpis, nostri sis carminis! O ter Principe te dignus fuero, Sol Candide, foelix: Phoebeiae Comites, Parnassi fauete Choraea; Combibat & vates Latices è fontibus haustos, Sic ego, sic qui Delon amat, velit, & Iuga Cynthi, Id{que} Canam, quod non Deus ipse referre recuset!
. Britanniae Topographia. TRans Gessoriacum mare, Gallica littora contra, Insula in Oceano est,Britanniae Illustratio. à diuisa Britannia ab orbe, Gallûm in conspectu tellus; notissima Fama! Faucibus angustis, Gemini heic vbi Ianua Ponti, Caerulus ille pater spumantia littora fluctû Concutit irato; Morinûm de littore ad Anglos, Traiectus breuis: vs{que} citò,situ & situatione, à prora illita hiulcet, Littus vtrumque maris, Dorobe finibus Anglis, Labenteis vndas, Gallorum à parte Caletae, Mirantur, celeri{que} vident freta concita cursu; Nereus aequoreos Britannos ambit, & huius Forma triquetra patet residentis rupibus albis Insulae,qualitate loci postea, vnde Hybernos quae sustinet vndi{que} fluctus! Angulus ad Gallos, quibus Auster nubila anhelat, In mare progreditur, Rhutupinum littus apertum; Promontoriolum, sed longè, flumina Ibera, Belerium, Zephyri qua molles, spectat Hybernos! Ora vbi Iuuernae cincta est sub sole cadenti, Vergiuio Oceano: Scotiam secluserit Orcas, A Scythi Hyperboreas turbante Aquilonibus vndas: Orcades & validum positae inter Scotum & Hybernen, Aebudes Oceano apparent, vt Sporades inter Aegaeos fluctus, Terrarum{que} vltima Thule: Germanùm terras, Euri si respicis Ortum, Vidimus Aurorae iuga subdita Matutinae! Germanis{que} Ortus, Phoebus cadit inter Iberos, Oceani immergens liquidis caput aureus vndit. . Encomium Britanniae. SEd nimium neque stricta gelu,Laudes. neque sydere ferues, Insula, Diues opum, studijs{que} asperrima belli, Sedes antiqua, at{que} satis famosa cygantum; O nostrae regionis opes! ô florida prata, Pascua{que} & Colles, dumi, campi{que} virences! Cincta ô frondoso nemore, alta cacumina montium, Vmbrosae{que} specus, liquentia flumine rura! Frugiferae valles, zephyri praedulcia anheli, Flamina, syluarum saltus, fluuij{que}, lacus{que}, Muscosi fontes, & quae circumfluus humor Irrigat arua, hortos, mandata{que} semina terrae; Totius ac terrae Tempe celebrata per oras Thessala! cuius opes si possem ac ditia dona, Dicere,Vberior expatiatio, in Bri∣tanniae laudibus, argumento sumpto, si cultus operosos, denique floreis, Ordine contextos & iunctas vitibus vlmos!
Arbors aura comas, hominum tua carmina, Aedon, Turturis & gemitus dimulcent suauiter aureis: Alma quies, opum ac deliciarum suarum  Coeli um eli natura & be∣n , cum mobilibus sopita susurris, Aurae, inter frondes densas, vmbras{que} virenteis, Praetentat sensus suadenti languida somno, Ponere membra, super viridi lanugine ripam, Praetextam, lenè labentis murmure riui; Colle Lyaeo vuae, Bacchi pendere Racemo; Vellus ouis manibus tondentis, vt Indica Serûm Lanugo! Dea Gargaridas succidier vncâ Falce stupet messeis! Tellus mitissima frugeis, Producit! nostra ô Coelo{que} solo{que} beata Insula: Quid Scythicis nascens aconiton in oris, Nescia, quid posset Pontus virosa venenis. . Stirps prima Regum, seu regni Britannici origo. GRatulor huic orbi,& Incolatum : Historica relatio, de quod non sata dentibus Hydrae Monstrosis, enata, sinu terra alma fouebat, Neu creure hominum, veteres vti, corpora, bullae Instar, vulgârunt, plunialibus edita fungis! Ipse pater Samothes qui regna prioribus annis, Transtulerat Gallos super aequoreos{que} Britannos: Nam{que} vti flumineâ Cymba pater omnibus vndis, Elatus vidit nemorosa Cacumina montium, Fluctu submersa, iratis{que} euaserat olim Fluminibus, sedem soboles quaesiuit vbi{que}, Tunc{que} nepos Iapetiades, iuga Pontica Mesech, Transgressus, queis fata dabant consistere terris, Vltra Cappadoces positam & Bithynica Regna, Inuenit sedem; sancit sua regna quibus{que} Alpes Aerei latis spaciantur in oris: Non procul hinc, triplici famosi corpore, Ibero Geryones Tauros lauêre, & saltibus herbam, Nequic quam insoliti, nullo pascente per arua, Gramineis errare boues carpsêre! Rapinae, Dignae eo, vt Allectus Tirynthius attigit oras! . Samothae Britanni Regis primi Imperium ac sedes. VEnimus ad Samothen!Samothe Rege, quod aiunt, Britanniarum primo. diducunt stemmata ab ipso, Qui{que} Pyrenaeis habuerunt montibus ortum, Qui{que} sub Alpinis oriuntur collibus: aut qui Burgundam iuxta Sequamam; statuisse priusquam Ripis Parisios fertur Marcomyrus vrbem! Lenem Ararim, Rhodanum{que} bibunt, Gens{que} vltima littus  Deinceps de Quae colit, extremas vbi pandit Gallia terras, Supremis hominum Morinis, regnis{que} Britannis.
Ille iugis totis superatis venit in arua Sorte data! & Gallum requieuit littore; Rheni Alpini cum iam super ora, & adus{que} Pyrenen, Regna pater sibi venturis{que} nepotibus olim, Obtinuit Samothes! agnouerat Insula Regem, Quamlibet ignoto sita nostra Britannia Ponto. . Samothidarum Regna. DIuinam norat Sophiam Rex primus in oris Britannis Samothes! Qui non moritura reliquit,Samothidis: Samothae sc. Ne∣potibus ac posteris. Regna Mago! Populis{que} suis Magus ille dedisse Arteis & Sophiam, quas à patre caeperat ante; Fertur! vt ornârit studijs non saecula docta: Assyricis arteis,Magia, & Magi. adeò vt magiam{que} professis, Astrologis Persis, dubium est, dederit ne sacratas. Defuncto{que} Mago, populis patriae{que} dicatus, Succedit Sarron! & non sine honore gerebat, Imperium; instituit primus Gymnasia; lumen, Adrectum virtutis opus! ter nobile sydus; Quod Parnassiacos colleis,Academiarum prima institu∣tio. Phoebaea{que} Templa, Visere, Castalios{que} detore bibisse liquores: Haec, ó Samothides, non rerum oblite tuarum, Vt gentem Sophiae studijs, & moribus ornes. Sarronides Druis, Arctoos, vbi Sarron ad astra Conscendit,Druidarum origo, secta, Autoritas, & literatura, populos rexit! Dicuntur ab illo, Quorum prima foret publicis pro rebus agendis, Atque vigil semper communis cura negotî: Hij cultus docucre Dei immortalis; & ipsum Norunt, pectore dum probitas innata maneret, Nedum ficta iuuet Fanis idola tueri; SiueDocnts Metemsuchosim. senis Samij temerassent dogmate sectas: Praeriptunt liteis populo, praesaga futuri Mens erat; & viscum Druides clamare solebant. Graecano ita manu Druidum,Apud Gallos, Graecos. illustrata{que} Athenis, Pallados Aaeis, Timagenis arte; choraeis Litter: Qui ritu Druides periêre profano Gallia quos olim, quos fouit & Anglica tellus. . De Bardo, & Bardi sectatoribus Poetis. VLtimus vsque feros fertur rexisse Britannos, Samothidum Bardus! Musarum dulcis Alumnus; Qui cum suanisonas tentaret pollice chordas,Bardorum Detinuit ripis mirantibus agmen aquarum,
Et tacitos pisceis: captae modulamine syluae, Exoptant vatem, modò quae Phoebaea sonoro Efferret cantu, stupet inscia turba ferarum Carmina, magne Poeta, tui vestigia, Bardi Sectantur! forteis animas bello{que} peremptas, In longum innumeris,Poetarum nomen & origo, a∣pud antiquos Gallos & Bri∣tannos, eorum{que} institutum sectae primum, per∣quam laudabile, & Mores, sed & ab instituto Defectio & deflectio, satis illaudata & vilis, Vnde querimonia. qui ducunt laudibus aeuum, Gesta Ducum, Calamo, & Regum recinendo triumphos; Gratia{que} illa fuit, Quam non aboleuerit aetas Vatibus! Ingenium fuluo pretiosius auro; Ennius emeruit Calabris in montibus ortum; Hic decus, ille lares, & non moritura per igneis Nomina! Priamiden, quis, si latuisset Homerus, Nouerit Haemoniûm vi ducier Hectora equorum? Quis Campos, vbi Troia stetit? Quis Moenia Troiae Inclyta Dardaniae? Diuum domus, Ilion ingens Gloria quae Teucrùm est? Quis fortem nosset Achillem? Anni quis Solis{que} vias? Lunae{que} labores Compertos, primam{que} ratem quae nesciat aetas? Carmine ni celebrata forent, fidibus{que} canoris! Gratia tanta lyrae est, Reges Regum{que} triumphi, Hijs cedunt! sed tam periêre fauor{que} decus{que}; Occubat Augustus vatum solatia pascens, Moecenas obijt, nunquam rediturus ab Orco! Sunt quo{que}, stulti-loquis, dicant, quae praemia Musis? Efficite vt redeant Moecenas, & Deus ille, Qui secùm abstulerat discedens vatibus omnia; Ingenij vires, modò venerit ipse, redibunt! O vatum praedulce decus! Libata priusquam, Phoebo grata, mero cithara est; & Bacchica festa, Absynthi ac celebret prope flumina Thracia Bacche! Cum ne{que} sic Furijs, Idaeis, Moenades actae, Bacchauere iugis, sacer vt chorus iste Camoenis. Heu quid inest pretij Musis! vbi grata venustas, Queis venit Alma Thaleia modis? periêre Camoenae; Nos malè deuoti, grex hic imbellis, iners{que}, Vatum, Moeonij mirabimur ora Magistri: Et laudem ipsius canimus, qui monte potitus, Ridet anhelantem dura ad fastigia turbam. . Irreligiosa feritas Samothidarum, euersio Imperij. VIx dum, qui rigidas quercus at{que} ardua cantu, Saxa mouere suo quiuit, volucreis{que} feras{que} Mollijt indomitae durissima pectora plebis; Quid iuuat ad surdas si cantet Pythius aureis? Nam{que} irrepsit acerba lues,Samothidarum, vbi Longus, & alter Bardus, Samothei gessêrunt sceptra nepotes:
Effera colla iugo populus detraxerat, aris Submouêre igneis,vtique & aliorum quorundam vanitates, & Improbitates superstitiosae, easdem{que} securae poenae, & infandum! Relligio{que} Ter pia cum probitateiacet, neglecta{que} iura, Sancta patrum, & Legum semper veneranda potestas! Quis stupet in peius si vel meliora residant, Caepta? quod in piscem Seiren formosa superné? Molis erat tantae, impatientia subdere fraeno Colla, aut conceptus animi mutare proteruos. Aurea sic Latij{que} abiêrunt saecula Regis; Regna{que} Samothidum verita est quos Anglica tellus, Quondam! deperit & multos sacrata per annos Relligio, hijs terris, Diuini{que} aetheris haustus Mentis; Sarronides quid enim Bardi{que} Magi{que} Samothei{que} omnes, docuêre nisi ista? Remotis, Qui colitis lucis, ritus, morem{que} sinistrum, Barbaricos, Druides, Coeli quid numina prosunt, Orbe alio, quándo reget idem spiritus artus? . De Magis & Idololatricae gentium superstitionis origine. ET Galli Druidas, Bardos{que} habuêre canoros; Arsacidae{que} Magos! sed non Samothes, ne{que} Sarron, Hos certe docuêre Deos, quos impiae honore Afficiunt Gentes! Phoeben ne{que} Apollina diuos, Martem, ipsum{que} Iouem: quis eorum nomina norat? Donec erant Belus Saturnus & omnis Ogyges, Vesta{que} Dij Gentium! quando ignorantia caeca, Nomina Nymbrotes, magni occuluit{que} Iapeti, Tum iuuat à diuis proauorum duce re turmas; Et Saturnus erat Genitor, dein Corniger Hammon, In fanis passim colitur, Crocodilon adorat Aegyptus, saturam{que} pauet serpentibus Ibin! Inscia plebs Diuos ignota{que} nomina Diuûm, Immaneis statuas stupet, ingenteis{que} Colossos: Barbara Memphitim miratur pubes Osyrim! Heu scelus infandum! miserae{que} piacula plebis, Quosque suo sacris peragendis sanguine tristeis Inficiunt Ritus! placatur sanguine diro, Teutates; horrensque feris altaribus Haesus; Taranis & Scythicae non mitiorara Dianae. . Samothidarum regni finis. TE Duce, qui poteras resona testudine quercus, Carmine blandiri Rupes, atque agmina Tygres,
Omne nefas latuit scelus & sentina malorum;Pernicies. Quin Duce de medio sublato, & lumine casso, Vulgus iners neque ius, neque fas exercuit! ingens Pestis & exitiosa lues, patriae{que} suique Supplicium fatuo dominatur vbique popello! Nox aeterna ruit, terras Astraea relinquens Magnanimi{que} Iouis superas conscendit in aedes: Astra fides sua distulit! omine purpureus Sol Perquam fatidico, miseris mortalibus, orbem Perstrinxit radijs, hij contempsêre Gygantes Cum superis{que} Iouem; non fabula notior vlla! Pyndo imponebant Ossan, & Pelion Ossae, Anguipedum soboles, Phlegraeis horrida castris; Non minus Albionis per inhospita littora, non iam Dictae, at dicendae nuper, ferus incola, turba, Nequitiae addentes fraudem sceleri{que} Rapinas, Accelerant certam amotâ pietate ruinam; Scilicet improbitas semper scelerata, rescindens Iussa patrum, Leges{que} sacras transgressa, pericli Immunis nunquam euasit! neque honoribus vnquam Quis Reges,Exaggeratio, in qua putet, exutos putet ignibus Aras Nudatas, lusosúe Deos impune tulisse Monstra diu! non fata sinent, quin, improbe, poenas Heu dabis haud miteis, laesas violator adaras! Sic Bacchi Pentheus, sic Brennus Apollinis iras Senserat occisus, comixtâ grandine Nymbo: . de impietate, occasione sumptâ ex Samothidarum improbitate. SIc Reges commissa suûm, commissa{que} Regum Saepe luunt populi;ffectus scelerum commisso∣rum monstratur in priuatis & publici, tam rapta vel imagine diuae, Palladio è Troiâ; potiusné exurere classem Argiuûm, atque ipsos voluit submergere Ponto, Vnius ob noxam, & furias Aiacis Oilaei, Aegide Pallas ouans? Tholosano haud segnius auro, Dux populus{que} perit, violati ob nummis iram. O igitur caeci, & rerum coelestium inanes, Si genus humanum & mortalia temnitis arma, At sperate Deos, memores fandi atque nefandi. Aut si sacrilegis manibus rapere omnia Templis, Sacra, aras, igneis, census, donaria, honores, Vsque adeò libitum, sanctis{que} illudere diuis, Aspicite at celebres dantem Salmonea paenas! Vsque adeò haud licite forsan fieri ista docebit, Detonat ac magno miseris mortalibus ore, Discite iustitiam moniti & non temnere diuos! Et quis non solos pacis{que} piae{que} patronos,
Omnimodae fateatur eos,Personis, quam Relus; Regnis scilicet, & Imperijs. fontem{que} salutis? Ecquis item nisi mentis inops Iouis omnia plena Ceu videat, summos non illi affingit honores? Quando igitur vacuas video Iouis ignibus aras, Neglectis{que} suis, diuina humana{que}, sacris, Misceri, ruere, ac sine numine, nomine nudos Consilij{que} inopes, suetos rapere omnia Templis; Turpiter infameis cunctis, Ire omnia pessum Ex factis liquet hisce satìs: videor{que} videre Sedibus & populis Reges, populos{que} tumenteis Regibus at{que} sibi saeuam intentare ruinam. Relligione equidem spretâ sequitur{que} Deorum Contemptus,Eiusdem rei amplificatio, & confirmatio, per rationes. spreto{que} deûm ter numine sacro, Quis pudor? in sanctos Diuûm sub imagine Reges, Quis timor? in moreis vergit Natura deorsùm Damnatos prona, & mutari nescia, vt ante, In melius, ne{que} saepe prehensa, recedere donec Regna ruant, nimium{que} frequens suae sero pericla, Sentiat Impretas, ausa & temeraria damnet. Quandoquidem ille auro patriam, charos{que} penateis Vendidit, hic Leges fixit pretio, at{que} refixit, Vt facile haud quenquam contentum videris vno Flagitio, aut finem ponat sibi, caeca libido, Peccandi & furiosus amor quem coepit, & omnem Excussit semel attrito de fronte ruborem, Regna haec vna, eadem{que} domos subuertit & vrbeis; Funditus Impietas: vos, ô mea dicta, tyranni, Percipite haec animis, multum{que} ignobile vulgus, Instabile, Oceani refluis velut vnda marinis, Fluctibus, assiduos vel passa Diana labores: Percipite haec animis quanquam indignantibus, vs{que} Dura, at ver a tamen, imis{que} reponite sensis. Impietas, mirum, nisi debita praemia dignis Non dabit; eijciet populos, euerterit vrbeis; Facta Ducum scelerata luunt, Regum{que} cruentas Saepe manus, soboles, temerata palatia, & arces. . de improbis. HAec mea Samothidûm velut extera linea Regum Eruta saepe docent; quasi talia saepe perennis, Moliri improbitas non desinat ante supremos Credo ità si posset mundum euersura,Experimenta, & Exempla. nouos{que} Semper in exitium sibimet motura tumultus! Sicubi Samothei cedunt Neptunia proles, Succedunt similis{que} cadunt cito conscia culpae, Post igitur Samothen qui regnat adus{que} Pyrenen,
Persis vt nostris Magicae pater artis & author, Quando penes Persas Magus est, qui syderanôrit, Qui sciat herbarum vireis, cultus{que} Deorum, Persepoli clarus! Sarron{que}, Druis{que} Poetûm Carminibus magno Bardus celebratus honore, Longus & à longè sequitur, Bardus{que} secundus, Ordine postremi! quibus vs{que} gerentibus aurea Sceptra manu magni Samothae cessere nepotum. Regna Britanniacis quondam celeberrima in oris: In Gallijs regnante Lyco! qui proximus illis Fertur apud Celtas regnasse; vbi venerat olim Albion Albionis, Iernes vti Bergion Oras. . Hyberniae Descriptio. AC velut Albionis tractum quasi praepete pennâ,Hyberniae breuis illustratio. Lustrata es dudum & sita Littora rupibus albis, Ogygiae{que} situm, peramaena{que} limina Iernes, Nostra referre precor non dedignere Thalia! Vtra{que} ab Aequatore Brittannias Insula distat,Chorographia, Forma, Situs, & Nomina, Loci Natura, Mira, Incolarum suorum Mores, Habitus, Opes, ac Diuitiae. Quinquaginta gradus, ter quinque Canariâ Eoos! Vergiuio{que} iacens minor Insula Hybernia Ponto, Cingitur Occiduo: Primas tenet omnibus vndis, Indica Taprobane, dicente Geographo, eidem Succedit{que} secunda Britannia, tertia Ierne! Oblonga, in Boream protensa, simillima{que} ouo, Forma rotunda patet, plenae stagnantibus vndis, Insulae, Hyperboreo quae cingitur vndique ponto. Hesperia{que} plagâ, procul haud se iungit ab Anglis, Quam modo virgiuius circumquâque alluit aestus. Virginia in Zephyrum, longè iacet, Anglia ad Eurum, Thule Aquilonari, opposito{que} Hispania tractu: Dicta eadem antiquis, Ierne, & Iuuernia & Iris, Quae Tartessiaco propior setingere Soles, Conspicit Oceano! Cauri subiecta procacis, Flatibus Aeolijs, quamuis, Hiemis{que} fragori! Cui Deus aut melior Natura, hoc muneris Almi, Concessit chara cum Cretâ altrice tonantis Solis nulla suis edant vti sibila in oris, Terrifici tabo creti Phorcynidos angues: Fortè quo{que} illati compressis faucibus atris Viroso pariter vitam cum sanguine ponant. Degentes{que} ferox inclultis horrida syluis Gens habitat, saeuo mauortia pectora bello, Qui cursu Alipedes norunt praeuertere Ceruos Ierna feris faecunda, fouet! Generosa Caballos Egregios; Armenta boum, pecoris{que} niuosi, Lactea dona sui; miratur, & educat vuas, Pampineis ramis, quamuis nec amata Lyaeo,
Nec Cereri nimiùm: Laedaeos flumine cygnos, Piscosos{que} lacus profert; voiucrum{que} paludeis Omnimodûm lustris faetas! stanni{que} fodinas, Et puri argenti venas, quas terra refossis Visceribus maneis imos visura recludit, . Albionis aduentus in Britanniam. QVin redeo ad susceptum opus! A dominis{que} verendis Dicta ferunt Samothe, siue Regressio, ad propositam de Samotheda∣rum exitio, & Albionis ad∣uentu, ac denuo nostra Anglia; iam{que} Britannis Plusquam tercentos annos dominantur in oris, Samothei Celtae: donec freta caerula pando Myoparone secans. Neptunius Albion oram, Milite stipatus forti turmis{que} suorum, Attigit Albionis: fatalia{que} inuenit arua, Regna heu Samothidûm miserè vastata furentûm; Cum{que} Britanniaco proles Neptunia Rege, Bergion aduenit, cui subdita Ogygia Ierne! Haebus & Ila suâ atibus{que} imperuia Thyle, Sub ditione iacent. Iapetiadas{que} furore Neptune geniti per litora saeua Tyranni Exagitant fessos lucem{que} oculos{que} perosos: Quos super accumulat Chemnita per inuia rura, Infands strageis, miseranda piacula Dirae Sortis vti exortae propter contagia pestis. Iam verò ingemuit tellus, cladis{que} miserta est; Albion in{que} sinus placidos accepit opimos, Heroes Titaniadas, quibus vs{que} vocata est Albion, à dominis deducens nomina! dudum Virgineo cultu, speciosa{que} colla comas{que} Ornata: in qualem iussu Sirena Deorum Formosam posses mutari credere Nympham, Nautis inuisam, quam perdidit acer Vlysses, Neritius quondam; cum iam Scironia saxis Fluctibus in medijs mutarier à Ioue possent Ossa, Seuerinis, ità nostra Britannia nummis, Rupibus vnà ac Nerëidum super insidet albis.
. ad sequentem librum & Historiam. NVnc Caelireserate vias Heliconacolentes Diuae! opis indigeo vestrae,Transitio ad seq. iuuat ire per astra, Iuuerit astrigeris humeris insistere Atlantis, Hinc homines, instar pecudum, rationis egenos, Despectare procul lubet,De ortu & interitu eiusdem, necnon regno ac regni extir∣patione, quae in Oda proxima describuntur, historiam. & contemnere curas, Rerum humanarum fluxus ediscere, Coelos Sperare, & ferriclarum super aethera mente. Musavola, & resonis pete candida sydera pennis; Dic antiquum Argos, Argiua Aegypta{que} castra, Quam{que} papyriferi septemflua flumina Nili, Rege nouo Graiam fluctu innuectare carinam, Fama refert! Tellus, vberrima cuius inundans Littora Nilus aquis immersit & arua meatu, Illa virum nouit, cui coniux Inachis Iö, Memphitis Dea; funeribus qui raptis iniquis, Non styga perpessus,Osyris. Phlegetontideué obrutus vndâ Surripuit Templis altaria lucida flammis; Considet in{que} epulis Diuûm, coelo{que} receptus, Numen habet terris, genitus Ioue, magnus Osyris. Odae primae Finis.
PALAE ALBION. The first Ode, Entituled SAMOTHES. THE ARGVMENT. First Ancient'st records that we finde Enrolled in the Towre of Fame,Synchronis∣mus, siue cō∣putatio anno∣rum sequitur in hac scrie. Samothes and his by Fates assign'de T' our Ile,Supplementum Historia in isto latere. thence call' Samothea, came; Who long time herc as Kings did raigne, Till chat hence by rude Albions traine. CANT. I. The scope of the Poeme, and by deducing Storie from the beginning, the Creation touched. FAine would I visit Phoebus shrine, And Dodon Oracles diuine, Parnassus hill, and Phocis fields, That sacred Cells and Solace yeelds: Pierian sisters, honored Nymphs, Lou'd and ador'd, by Learnings Imps. Pallas, faire Sol, and Memnosine, O Gently fauour my designes, And shew me out of stories old The warlike acts of Britons bold; Or guide me to the Towre of Fame, To find their first birth: Ere heauens frame, Or Earth, or Sea was, Chaos was! And out of that Confused Masse, Natures CommanderPrincipio creauit Deus, &c. Gen. 1. The works of the Crea∣tion: the spring and originall of all things, and so consequently of the Kingdomes of the Earth: and therein the Kinreds, Peoples, and Nations. Coelum & Terra. did produce,Opera primorum sex dierum. Bright star's for heauen, heau'n for earths vse; The flowry vales, the hills and woods, Fresh Riuerets, and salt swelling floods, Vnder this truth of the Crea∣tion of Heauen and Earth, the Poets would needs inuolue great mysteries and fictions of their owne, concerning Vranus or Coelum, and Terra called Ve∣sta, the most ancient of their Pa∣nym Gods, being indeed in re∣gard of their Pagan and Idola∣trous worship, truely Terrae filij. Sol. And earth, and aire, and sea, brought forth Their wondrous Creatures, sundrie sorts! The golden Sunne appeares in skie, And dainty showres in Clouds on hie. Whiles Atlas on his shoulders beares The burden of the starry Spheares.
Then mightie Ioue, cuts earth and heauen By zones, degrees,Zonae. and portions eauen: Farre North or South are frosts and snowes, I'th midst sweat Cancers scorched pawes, Both sides beene temp'rate zones: the windes Eurus and Zephyr, to both Indes,Venti. Auster to th' Aethiops hyes apace, Boreas to Scythia, North, and Thrace. CANZ. II. The creation of Man, his Fall, the Gyants, Floud, and World re-peopled. THen new borne earth puts on Mans feature Of all, the last, but perfitt'st Creature. Inspir'de byFormauit Deus hominem de limo terrae, & inspirauit in faciem eius spiraculum vitae, Genes. 2. Gods immortall Breath, Though set, whence tane to till the Earth, The stately Pine on Hills remaynes; Not forc't to plough vp th'Ocean playnes. No Trumpets sound doth Mars enrage In this the truely goldenAurea aetas, The golden Age, vnder which terme, the Poets seeme to set forth Paradise, and the happy estate of Man in his cre∣ation and innoceny: as vnder the title of the Iron Age, the fall of him at first, with his degenera∣ting more, to these present times. Age, But Apples, Milke, and Honey there Pure Nectar, and Ambrosia were; Whiles Ceres with her golden Tresses, Glads many a Field which no man dresses. Eternall Spring, on Earth abode With Man, till Man forgot his GOD: Then Vertue fled; then Paradise Did fade away; and in came Vice. Men-Deuils then, a Gyant race, Heapt sinne on sinne, Heau'n to out-face. Like Ossa laid onGygantes autem erant su∣per terram in diebus illis, Ge∣nes. 6. So in these Gyants, as in the story of the Floud, the Poets seeme to allude to the history of the Bible, hauing perhaps read the same, as may be gathered by Or∣pheus in his Hymnes. Olymp hie, To pull downe Ioue, and scale the skie; Till Heauens dread Roy to mocke their pride, Remembring fell Lycaons deed, To quench their malice, thought it good,Vniuersale Di∣luvium Nohae, e∣rat A. M. 1656. T'orewhelme the World withWhence the fabulous Greekes stealing and forging all Antiqui∣ties of others, and vsurping all such things to the glorie of their Nation, would shaddow this vni∣uersall Deluge, vnder the colour of their Deucalions floud, which was but an invndation of some, though perhaps a great part of Thessaly. Noes flood! The Winds sent from th' Aeolian Caues, From Sea to Shore bring Nereus waues. And Neptune with his Sea-Nymph traines,Diluvium Ogy∣gium, circa An. 2250. apud The∣bas sub Ogyge R. Doth driue the Land-Nymphs from the Plaines. The cristall Brookes and their cleere Springs, Let loose to hurt, helpe drowne all things: And sweepe from Fields and Mountaines steepe,Deucalionis Di∣luvium à Poetis tantummodo ce∣lebratum in par∣te Thessaliae, cir∣ca An. 2440. Woolues, Lyons, and whole flocks of Sheepe; Swift Tygres, nor the winged Quire, Could scape the furiousSome haue beene of opinion, that the breaking of Sicilia from Italy, of England from France, and the like, were the effects of this furious Deluge, though there want not reasons alleaged to the contrary, which may be these and other like strange euents of that nature, the accidents of later ages. Oceans ire. No Shores appeare, but all's wild Sea; O're Townes tops wanton Dolphins play;
And Mermaid monsters of the floods, Dance in the hyest Hills and Woods. When all flesh sayes the sacred spell, Di'de, saue what Noe, in's Arke-likeNoahs building of the Arke, hs entrance into, and comming forth of the same, Gen. 7. & seq. Cell Sau'de, whose Arke lastly rested at Th'Armenian MountaynesQuicuit Arca in montibus Armenijs vocatis Ararat, Ge∣nes 8. Supposed a branch of the Mountayne Caucasus, where Prometheus is fayned to be tyed in chaynes by Iupiter, for stea∣ling fire from heauen: where in∣deed Noah sacrificed first, whe∣ther deriued or hauing such holy fire stolen to prophane and Hea∣thnsh Rites, by Cham, in all likelihood their founder, therefore cursed, and as afterwards per∣petuo patris Anathemati sub∣iectus. Ararat. Whence sprung this newer latter race, That now ore-spreads the Earths broad face. Yet who so lookes on this our Time, Might scarce thinke, th'Adder-footed line Of Gyants were extinct, to see Heauens scorne so rife on earth to bee. The second worlds first Father then,A. M. 1750. quo tempore Peleg natus est, circa 100. annos post Diluvium. Into all Lands that now agen Their heads aboue the flouds shewBecause of the wild beasts a∣bounding anciently in Albion, and diuers sea fish shels & great bones found in the vpper skirts of Germanie and France, Master Verstegan is of opinion that the Low Countries, and those inferior parts of Germany haue beene recouered from the Sea since the floud, there hauing beene an Isih∣mos between Albion & Gallia, and of later ages broken vp, and the higher Seas towards Den∣marke vnburdening themselues into the lower towards Spaine, those Prouinces appeared; the like inequalitie hauing beene no∣ted by the Kings of Egypt of the Red Sea aboue the Mediterran, and of late of Mardel zur, aboue the Atlantike Ocean. sorth, Sends out his Sonnes, East, West, and North, As farre as frozen Charlsiz-Wayne, That neuer diues in th'lcy Mayne: To Lybia and the Lands that shew The Moores and Indians blacke of hew. Mizraim to Nyle, Tubal toOf this first plantation and peopling of the world, and the Iles of the Gentiles, Gen. 10. of the further di∣uisions and distributions of the Princos among the sonnes and posteritie of Noah. Vide Ioseph. de anti∣quit. Berosum, & al. Spaine, Magog to Scythia; Gomer gaines, Furd'st Europe,A. M. 1787. post Diluvium 131. where th' Arcadian Beares Are plac't by Ioue, ith'heauenly Spheares. Then Mesech namde in holyMesech, Mooch, or Samothes, came, as is said, with Gomer and Fuisco, or Aschenas, founders of the Westerne Gaules and Germans, about Anno 1787. what time twentie other Dukes of the sonnes of Noah, are supposed sent, who peopled Europe and these parts. Writ, Our Samothes, they say, did sit By-North the Alpes as Monarke or'e The Gaulish and our Brittish shore. CANZ. III. European Nations, and especially the Britons originall, with all deserued praises in their honor. WHat need our Ile then hunt for fame, From Britones and Prytus name? Since Samothes from IaphetThe foure names that this King∣dome of Britaine successiuely tooke from her Lords and inhabi∣tants at seuerall times: viz. Sa∣mothea, of Samothes or Me∣sech: Albion, of Neptunes Sonne Albion: Britaine, of Brute: And lastly, the chiefest part, Engla-lond, Anglia, or England, from Egbert, and the Angles: To which may fitly bee added, with that addition, the renouation of her ancient name, or new naming, now great Bri∣taine; Embleme of the ioyfull v∣nion of her long distracted King∣domes, in the raigne and person of her happy and peacefull Prince, and Monarch, King IAMES. sprong, First rul'd Samothea!Samothes, A. M. 1787. post Dilu∣vium 131. and e're long Cham's Sonne of's owne name cald it Albion. Brute,Ante Christum, 2158. Britaine names, brings Troy from Ilion: And English Englands Scepters sway,Albion, A. M. 2200. Till Normans wore the Victors bay! But whether sprung from Brute or Ioue,Brutus, A. M. 2850. Ioue, sure, himselfe their Land doth loue; Their Countries rich, their manners ciuill,Egbert, A. 4750. And though farre North their chance not euill,Gulielmus Con∣questor, A. M. 5020. Since Phoebus doth their brests inspire With sacred and celestiall Fire;A. Christi 1070.
How for their worth can I set forth Those fairest peoples of theAll Naturalists affirming, the more Southerne peoples to be sub∣till, politique, and ingenious: nei∣ther can they, if they would, deny, but that al our part of the North, being but the temporate Zone, af∣fordeth peoples ingenious, bold, & warlike, and for outward linea∣ments of body, strong, goodly, and beautifull; that no Nation can deseruedly haue greater prayses, then they aue at all times pur∣chased and howeuer the Prouerb stupidus Thrax, may intimate very farre North, more dull of apprehension, it hath beene euer seene that these haue beene in di∣uers gifts admirably excelling. North,Iacobus Primus in magna Bri∣taniâ. Whose minds as free as bodies faire, Though bred ith' cold and frozen aire,A. M. 5550. To ride,A. Christi 1602. to run, to plead, or fight, Their laurell Crownes, and martiall might Were such, all Nations farre and eere, Haue seene or felt, or sore did feare, Those hotter clymes yeeld frozen blouds, When North of Tanais frozen flouds, Beene firie spirits, warlike brutes, The Massagett's and painted Iutes; Numberlesse as Hybla's swarmes, the Scythes, Danes, Sweuians, Norwayes, Moscouites, Gaules, Germans, and the folke that held The North and BrittishVnder the name of British Iles, or Insulae Britannicae was anciently comprehended both Bri∣taine and Ireland, and all the adiacent Iles of Orcades, Hae∣budes, and the rest. Iles of eld: Who th'off springs iustly can despize, That from the Northerne clymes did rise? Since there is Rhodopeian Thrace, Pangaea Mount, fierce Rhcsus place, Swift Hebrus, and the warlike Getes, With cold Riphaean snowy seates, So graced erst and famous now, As Enuy ne're could disallow. From these, or farther North then these, Whole Armies oft did South-ward prease, WhenceThe Spaniard will not indure to bee accounted sprung from  Moore, or other stranger inhabi∣tants of Spaine, then the Goth; which he much applaudeth, affir∣ming in his owne tongue, Io soy del antigo Gotho. Spaniard and Italian both, Are said descended of the Goth; The courtly French, and Almaine stout, From Picts and Hun's that Scythian Rout, Then Britaine was not free from harmes, When Picts and Huns were vp in armes. Who came downe with their furiousWbence many great Warriours and Armies, hurrying ouer and harrying in very furious sort Greece, Italy, Spaine, and the Southerne Countries, haue often∣times come, as Danes, Cym∣brians, Gaules, Goths, Van∣dals, Hunnes, vnder the con∣duct of Totyla, Alarik, Attyla, Brennus, &c. Hosts, From Norway and the Scandian Coasts; And then, if others were not free From enuious fate, what if not wee? When furie of these Northerne blasts, Our Cities, Land, and Countrie wasts! Yet if for this bites Zoilus, Zoilus bites others more then vs. To reade, what Enuie shall repine To reade! see but the Brittish line; Their valiant acts and deeds of old, Their Bardes our Poets erstBardes were the auncient Gaulish and Brittish Poets, as Druides their Priests and Philo∣sophers, who also were Magi∣strates. haue told: So cleare their praise, and palmes their prize, Their brightnesse bleares dimme Enuies eyes. Sometimes,Assyr. Monar∣chia. perhaps, they were cast downe: On whom did Fortune neuer frowne?Belus, A. M. 1750. So various are the change of State, So fickle Fortune,Nium, A. 1790. doubtfull fate!
Sometime theThe first Monarchy or Empire of the World, was that of Assyria begun by Ninus, and ended in Sardan palus, or the Babylo∣nians; the second, of the Medes & Persians, begun by Arbaces, but flourishing to the greatest height vnder Cyrus: the third of the Graecians, begun by A∣lexander: the fourth of the Ro∣mans, begun in the nature in∣deed of an Empire by the Con∣suls and Magistracy, but perfe∣cted and reduced from Aristo∣cracy to Monarchy by Caesar, who first of the Romans entred Britaine. Persian Empire flourisht, And Media Easterne Monarks nourisht,Medorum, Arbaces, A. 3076. Then Macedonian Scanders Court, Was the Worlds Empires whole resort;Persarum, Cyrus, A. 3400. Though first th'Assyrian Monarks wore Th'Imperiall Purple long before!Graecorum, Alexander, A. 3620. Yet kept they not their Honors won, Persia,Romanorum, Caesar, A. 3907. nor towred Babylon; For Fame hath left this now long while Euphrates shores, and seuen-fold Nyle,Carolus M. 4750 The Seres with their silken woods,A. Christi 800. And those that dwell by Ganges floods, Might lastly sit and take their rest, By Westerne Warriors long opprest! Being Pontus and the Regions nie, Set free fromOf Mithridates and ancient∣ly the Amazons and other cy∣thian Warriors, did euer out of the North disturbe the Empires of the Medes, Persians, Greeks and Romans; as of later yeares the Vandals, Gothes, Huns, &c. from almost the same coasts; and since, the Turke, Tamer∣lane, and the Tartars. Scythian slauerie: But Rome at last bore all the sway, When Greeks had lost their Phoebus bay; Thus Ages, Empires, wondrous strange, The world, and wee, and all doe change! CANZ. IIII. Excusing, as also incident to the greatest Nations, their misfortunes. BVt Conquerors with Laurell crown'd, That Persia turn'd to Roman ground, Indus and Lybia's desart shore; InAnd with their Titles of Im∣perator, Foelix, Augustus, Triumphator, &c. inerted Britannicus: many time trium∣phing for their Conquests, gotten here. Brittish titles gloried more; A much grac't stile! when nere erst they Tribute to Roman Lords did pay: Nor was it held so great a grace T'haue held those Indian troopes in chase, Whose Ancestors, to Greeks annoy, Stoutly defended stately Troy; Or Parthians put or Medes to flight, Or Turnus powers in bloudie fight; As Iulius deeds, who Britaine pierc't, And tam'd her brood, vntamedBy Caesar supposed to be Gauls; though sine consisting of oure Nations especially, vsing so many different sorts of speech within the compasse of the Iland, viz. the first & ancientest the Welsh, be∣ing the very Britons: The second, the Cornish, part Britons, as their Dialect argueth, and likely to bee with-all the remnant of the Gaules, if any were, as Caesar intimateth, and their corner or part of the Land called Cornu∣gallia, doth seeme to sound: The third and greatest, Angles and Saxons, now called Englishmen: The fourth, Scots, the very race of the Irish; Ireland being first Scotia and Scotia Magna: Ta∣maris diuideth Cornwall from the rest of England, whereof it is now accounted but one of the for∣tie shires or countries: Seuerne and Dee do naturally diuide the Welsh & their Wales from vs: Tweed nowe parteth vs from Scotland. erst; But what or God, or power, did send Troians with Troians to contend? Tros, Ilus, and Assaracus, Being Parents both to them and vs! And thou, Troyes founder, both our glories Author, bright Phoebus in these stories, Whiles I the Brittons acts reherse, Daigne to be Patron of my Verse! With such sweet influence thy traynes Shall then perhaps inspire these straynes, That thy selfe, faire Sol, at my sute, Shalt sing them to thy Ebon Lute.
CANZ. V. The description and site of Britaine. BEyond the Mayne and shores of France, Brittish Iles their chalkie topsOf which whitenesse of the Rocks, appearing to passengers, Antiquitie hath supposed her cal∣led Albion. aduance: Short being the passage twixt both Strands, From Douer Cliffs toNot past thirtie miles. Callaice Sands; Whence flouds in narrow Seas with force, Doe beate vpon both Britaines shores; And Nereus euery way doth bound Our Iland with the Ocean round: Whose whitish Rocks and three-squareOne and the narrowest flat∣side lying against France, South: the second, East, against Den∣marke: the third, West, against Ireland: and the Ebudes, the angles or corners pointing as fol∣loweth. forme, Feele th'Oceans rage, and sore Sea stormes. Right South is France, South-East doth lie, One angle towardsFrom which Corner, viz. Sandwich in Kent, ouer against German▪ to  Mount in Cornwal (o frm Saint Da∣uids to Yarmouh) bring the breadth of the Iland, extending from East to West,  ned 200 miles and vpwards; and from the sad Corners to the far∣thest  of Scotland reahng among the Orcades, being the length of Britain, extending from South to North, is 800. miles r better, so that it very neare  with Caears ac∣count, to be 2000. miles in com∣passe, or much more according to the now Italian miles. Germanie, At second corner Michaels Mount, South-west doth Spaine and Ireland front: The last third angle pointeth forth, 'Mongst Orkney Scottish Iles iust North! Ireland is West, more North therewhiles, Ebudes, furd'st Thyle, and Orkney Iles: Denmarke is East, and Germanie, Norway North-East; so heauens bright eye Rising, as 'twere, from Germans East, Twixt Spaine and Ireland seemes to rest! South narrow Seas, North frozen bee, Th'East German, West Vergiuian Sea. CANZ. VI. The qualitie and richnesse of the soile. THus lyes our Ile, our pleasant seate, Nor vext with cold, norIn the temperate Zone, the South parts of Britaine, about the Degree of 50: of North lati∣tude, reaching thence 10. De∣grees North: the longitude there∣of being from the Degree 17. to 25. o thereabouts. So the De∣grees of latitude measuring the length, of longitude the breadth of the Iland. Cancers heate. Doubtfull whether for Gyants bold, Or wealth, or warre, most fam'd of old! O, our rich flowrie Fields and Plaines, In Summers pride, when Flora raignes, Greene meadowes, mountayns, dales & downes, Whom many a groue with shaddowes crownes, Lakes, Riuerets, Flouds, and Fountaynes faire, Where Zephyr breathes his sweetest aire! Plentie and pleasure temp'red are, So sweet, scarce Tempe may compare, Those famous fields of Thessalie, With this our pleasant Arcadie: Such beds of flowres and Hybla Thyme, The louing Elme with spreadingThat there haue beene flore of Vines and Vine-yards in Eng∣land, as at Windsore, and other places, appeareth in the Records kept by the Clerke of the Pleas for that Castle, the Honours and Forrests; where is set downe the charge of the Vineyard in the litle Parke, and making the Wine, whereof tithe was paid to the Ab∣bot of Waltham. Vine, Soft gentle aire, sweet Philomel, Kind Turtles moanes, and shadie Cells,
Intyre ones yeelding eares and eyes, To taste such daintiest nouelties: Or rest or sleepe by Riuers sides, Whose streames with gentle murmur glides. Our Land doth yeeld LyaeanTo these prayses of the Land, for the peoples honor, adde this as a corollary: since Arts taught scarce any Nation more ingenious: since Christianitie, more zealously giuen and religious; witnesse the many Schooles of learning, the V∣niuersities, besides those in Scot∣land, two in England, compa∣rable with any in the world; the faire Churches, Buildings, Hospi∣tals, Monasteries, Religious hou∣ses and Colleges, though a multi∣tude swept away and defaced, in the reigne of King Henrie the eight, yet monuments of the piety, arte, wisedome and industrie of our Ancestors, in such abundance, as scarce any Nation able to equall, at least, to surpasse them. Vines, The golden fleece, or twist as fine, Almost as Indian Seres weaue; Pomona's fruit, and Ceres sheaues, Thrice happy soile for Earth and Aire, Scarce knowing what (the lesse her care!) To Scythian Aconitum strong, Or Pontus poysons doth belong. CANZ. VII. First entrance and inhabiting thereof. THis ioy we more, that not our Land From teeth of Hydra sowne in sand, Receiued her Peoples,Gomer suppo∣sed founder of the most Western Gaules. Tuisco or Aschenaz, of the people of the more Southerne coasts, & higher Germany. Mesech, Mo∣soch, or Samo∣thes, of the more North and East parts of Gaule, Germany and Britaine, with other the sonnes of Noah, are said to come into Europe, A. M. 1787. post Diluuium 131. Ante Christum 2158. they their birth, Like wat'ryAs the  in Greece, and Aborigines in Italy, were supposed to haue had there begin∣ning: And the old Germans affirmed their first founder Tuis∣co, to be the sonne of the Earth; all Pagan antiquitie deriued their Gods and great Men, from Vranus and Vesta, signifying, Coelum & Terra, which might be Noe, and Arezia his wife, Arez signifying the Earth in He∣brew. So did the West Indians, the Americans, of ate time, a∣bout Peru, worshipping their gods Pacha-Cama and Con, suppose, and were taught they were sonnes of the Sunne and the Earth. Mushromes from the earth! Since Gaules and Britons, both of these, Are said to come of Samothes, Great Noahs Nephew; for when hee Saw one world drown'd, and scaping free, With woodden Horse, not winged Steed, Vnto th'Armenian Hills did speed. Our Sire, his Nephew, Iaphets sonne, So twise all Nations sprung from one, Mesech call'd Samothes that time, Passing beyond the Pontike clime, In Europe plac't his seate betweene The snowyFrom whence it is said, with Colonies sent ouer, be peopled and ruled Britaine, as Caesar in his time perceiued affinitie betweene those neighbouring Countries. Alpes and frozen Rhene: Not farre from whence by Iber's side, The Geryons Heards, fam'd farre and wide, Long since did feed! till Victor-wise, Alcides tooke them for his prize. CANZ. VIII. Samothes Rule and Empire here, the first King of this Iland. NOw sing we Samothes, whose Race Held th'Alpes,Or at least the more Northern parts of France, Gallia Belgi∣ca, and Britaine; if the Westerns parts (as they are by some) be as∣signed for Gemers habitation, or Kingdome, according to the fa∣shion of raigning of those first Kings, in the ruder age of the World. Pyrene, and all the space Twixt that and Seyne, where now aspires, Faire Paris, built by Marcomyre; And Rhene, and Rhosne, and Arar's source, And farthest French and Brittish shores. First Samothes came from the East, Whither Fate assign'd him place of rest;
Who sate him downe, sole Lord betweene The Pyrene Hills, and Alpine Rhene: For vnto Samothes they say, Both France, and Brittish Iles obey: Who was to all or Sire or King, That with him came, or from him spring. CANZ. IX. Samothes issue, Kings after him, Magus, Sarron, Druis; of whom the Druides tooke their name, and beginning. IN Samothes sacred wisedome shone;Samothes, A. M. 1787. Next him sateMagus now signifieth , Sapiens, a wise man: and so were the Philosophers in Persia, and the East named: And of them were chosen the Kings or chiefe Counsellors to the Kings. This Magus is said to haue built a∣mongst the Gaules, the Cities of Neomagus, Sitomagus, Rho∣tomagus, Nouiomagus, &c. Magus in his Throne; And with his Fathers Crowne inherits, His prudence, iust and best demerits! Diuiner Artes he lou'd, and taught Those Magi of the East, 'tis thought! Magus sonne,Magus. Sarron, next succeeds Heire, both to's Crowne, and vertuous Deeds. He founded Schooles,Sarron. the Load-starre bright, That vertue guides with louingFirst, Schooles and Vniuersi∣ties, founded by Sarron, the tbird King of this Land. light. Then Parnasse Nymphs, and Phoebus Shrine, And learnings Lamps seem'd here to shine. O, well becomes itA pious and Prince-like ear. Royall blood, And Prince, to care for peoples good! Sarrons sonne,Druis. Druis, next is King, From whom theOf the Druides, Priests, or chiefe Philosophers and States∣men among the ancient Gaules and Britons, how they gouerned the state, determined matters, sa∣crificed to the gods, and therein vsed Mis-toe, called Viscus, which they accounted a most holy branch, taught the people, and their owne Sect; their learning consisting chefly of a great num∣ber of Verses, said and learned by heart, with others of their beha∣uiours & superstitions, Tacitus, Suetonius, and other latine Au∣thors, abundantly doe mention. Druid's name did spring, Whose care and state was vnderstood, For peoples worth, and publike good. These taught diuine Philosophie, What Vertue meant, what Pietie, Ere they in Temples Idols plac't, Or with strange Sects their owne disgrac't. They iudge the people, prophetize, Vs'd Misle-toe at sacrifize. Greeke literature, from them, 'twas thought, ByPhilosophie nd good Let∣ters, brought from whence, and by whom, to Athens. Timagen, to Athens brought: Though since they fell, that sometimes flourisht, Whom Gallia er'st, and Britaine nourisht. CANZ. X. Bardus, last absolute Lord and King of that race here, of whom the Bardes, the ancient and grauer Poets, glorie to haue beene followers. THe last of these Samotheans race, Druis sonne,Bardus. Bardus, takes his place; TheBardus, according to his ex∣cellent qualities, the honourable Author of both their Poeme, and the Brittish Poets name: of him afterwards called Bardi, and Barthes to this day. Graces Darling, Muses Friend, Whom choisest vertues did commend.
Like Orpheus with his daintie Lute, The Woods, Fields, Flouds, and Fishes mute, He held attentiue, and among, The sauage Beasts with his sweet song. French Bardes, great Poet, and Welsh would grace Their name, when theirs, in thine they trace! Who soules to rest departed sing, It was their practice, the re∣counting of the exploits of noble Captaynes, and famous men; Ge∣nealogies, such was Hesiode, Theogonia, and singing them to their Instruments of musique, in very stately sort, as followeth. Heröes acts and gests of Kings: Once wit was priz'd more worth then gold, And once these flourisht! so of old, Iapigian Mountaynes won much honors For Ennius birth, Athens for Homers! And who had knowne or Priams glorie, Or Hector stout, or Troians storie, Dardanian Troy, or Ilion Towres, Great Thetis sonne, or Ida's Bowres. The various motions of the Spheares, And all those acts of elder yeares, IfMore may bee said in the ho∣nour of true Poetrie, that elswhere as well as here,  authours and fauorites were of the greatest and best Princes & Personages of the World: and the Diuines, Priests, and Philosophers with Princes, were of the chiefest Poets, or at least well skild in poefie: To leaue those mre sacred Poets, Dauid, Salomon, the author of Iobs booke, Debora, Moses, &c. witnesse Phoebus and King Pie∣rus Daughters, Chyron, Achil∣les, Hesiodus, Orpheus, Py∣thagorus, Phocylides, Tyr∣taeus, Aristotle, Augustus, with a multitude of the worthyest, dedi∣cating themselues to it, or most de∣lighted in the same. Poets had not sweetly song, And so preseru'd their fames thus long! Kings with their triumphs may giue place To laureate poesie that doth grace, Their worth's with praise! the worthies names With trumpe of neuer dying Fame. But some haue said 'twixt spight and hate, That poesie now is out of date: Indeed, Moecenas he is dead, And great Augustus lapt in lead; But let such liue againe, and see, If euer fades the Laurell Tree. Yet more, I muse not much, if Phoebus And gentle Nymphs the Muses leaue vs, Since these our Poets more adore Their Bacchus feasts, then Phoebus lore: Whose follies fits, as furiousNot to suppose many licentious, bald, and ribauld rimes, where∣with much paper hath beene stuf∣fed, worthy to passe vnder the name of Poesie; being more di∣stant from true Poetrie, them Sy∣nons subtiltie, from wisedome: foole-bardy acts, or Aiax impa∣tient attempt of murdering him∣selfe, from true valour: such being indeed but sterquilinium ve∣lamento Aureo-seico obdu∣ctum. A varnish of words, or scarce that: Apes in outward imi∣tation, Parats for verball pro∣nunciation, else, nothing parta∣king of the grauitie, wisedome, and moderation of the former. beene As Moenad' froes, on Ida's greene! Let best admire but ne're come neere, That graue, sweet, old Moeonian quire. CANZ. XI. The irreligious and barbarous acts of the Samotheans, their ouerthrow. BVt our Prince-Poet Bardus, when Hee could moue Rocks, could scarce moue Men. With his so sweet enchanting tongue; Deafe eares despize e'en Phoebus song! For when next age, in France they sayne, The waing of the Brittish Monarchy vnder Longho, and second Bardus, Kings in France and here, with the causes of the fame. Longus, and second Bardus raigne;
Brittons rude lawlesse wild desires, From th'altars hur'ld, their hallowed fires, And Pietie being thrust out of Grace, Pollicy yet stept not vp in place; Thus oft begun well, sometimes failes, And Syrens formes haue fishes tailes: So great a worke of waight and wonder, 'Twas now to bring these peoples vnder. That Saturnes golden Age is vanisht, And from the Brittish coasts are banisht, Samothes and his; fall what may fall, Religion, Scepters, Monarchs, all! Which Monarchs then both Priests and Kings, Melchisedek-like did rule all things, Guiding both sacred and prophane, Teaching things heauenly and humane. CANZ. XII. The originall of Idolatrie and Heathenish superstition. FRom Samothes and Sarron sprong, Druid's for State-matters, Bardes for Song; And Magi so for wisedome nam'd In Persia, or to Persia fam'd: Did flourish long: that yet not taught Those fables fond with dotage fraught Of Saturne, Ioue, Pan, and Apollo, And all those Heathen gods that follow; WhoseThe beginning of Pagan and Heathenish Idolatrie, by letting vp and honouring the Statues of their deceased Kings, in some pla∣ces; otherwhere by other meanes & deuillish illusions. So among the old Germans and Saxons were the dols & Statues in their Tem∣ples of the Sunne and Moone, and of their ancestors, Tuisco, Wo∣den, their Mars or Mercurie, Thor their Ioue, Frea thir Venus, and Seater, of whom the Weeke dayes, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Satrday, continued from the Saxons to vs, doe yet retayne their names, with the I∣dols of Emenseal, like Hermes or Mercurie, Flnt, standing on a flint stone, and in a sheete, like Death: Helmsteed, Prono, Fidegast, Siwe, and diuers o∣thers, to whom, euen till late times, they sacrificed Creatures, and in extremitie their sonnes & daughters, in Germany, Nor∣way, and those Septntrionall Regions. names were neuer heard nor knowne, Till blindnesse blossomes were full blowne, And Ignorance had with their fames Almost hid both themselues and names; Of Noe, Nimrod, and the rest, Of those great Worthies, then at least, Each one with might and mayne did striue, From Gods their Linage to deriue; Then Ioue and Saturne honoured were, For Gods, some are so wise, they feare Huge Idols, stocks and flouds, as Nyle, Anubis, and theSo did the Egyptians & their superstitions did ouer-spread a great part of the world; Busiris also King of Egypt, did offer strangers bloud to his gods, the like was done in these North Countries and Scythia, to Taranis, and Dina Taurica; they offered their childrens bloud, in Syria, Egypt, and elsewhere, the Bible sheweth. Crocodyle: And with their owne, or strangers blouds, Foile th'altars of their Scythique gods. CANZ. XIII. The end of the Samotheans Kingdome. WHile thou didst liue, whose sweetest voyce, Made rocks, wild beasts, & woods reioyce,
All ill was hush't! when thouBardus, being so excellent & Musician and Poet, and King of this Iland. didst die, Stept in foule rude impietie, And all what plagues or deadly smarts, Could pierce such lawlesse peoples hearts. Eternall night might cloud our skie, To heauen when Iustice seem'd to hie, And Faith was fled! might Phoebus beames Well faile or faint, when such foule streames Of loathed vice, in heauens disgrace, Both heauen and him seem'd to outface, As if those Gyants had beene reuiu'd, Noahs floud erst of life deptiu'd; These Monsters now of men, so much Degenerate, their rudenesse such, Vice heap't on vice, they godlesse grow, And haste on fast their ouerthrow. Yet mark't who will, when orders meete, And Lawes beene troddenTo this tune was that sung by the famous Poet of our Land, When faith failes in Priests sawes, And Lords lusts bin held for lawes, When robbery is holden purchase, And lechery is counted solace; Then shall the Land of Albion▪ Be brought to great confusion, vnder feete, It neuer past vnpunisht quight, Or God or King dis-rob'de of right, Heauen suffred long such lawlesse rage To prosper! or at least next age, Done rue, or damne, to lowest night, Deeds so ill sped to heauens despight! Pentheus, to Bacchus, Bren t'Apollo's Rauisht shrin fearefull vengeance follow's. CANZ. XIIII. Wickednesse, the destruction of Empires. KIngs haue ru'd peoples faults, they Kings, Whence State & Realmes oft ruine springs, So for one Greeks fault, Pallas ire Thousands drown'd or consum'd with fire, Of sacred Rapin'd haplesse gold, Where not one of the Souldiers or others that spoyled the Temples or tooke, or had share of their gold, escaped a most fearefull end, insomuch, that like pennae A∣quilinae, or Seianus horse, Tho∣losanum aurum, was taken vp prouerib-wise, for an vnfortunate possession, or an execrable and vn∣happy spoile, such as all rapines from Churches and hallowed v∣ses are. Tholouze for meed shall e're be told. O foolish Mortalls most vnwise, Can you so Heauen and Hell despise, And thinke with sacrilegious hands To heape vp treasures, leaue faire lands, And not heauen and her Saints fell doomes Reuenge wrong'd Altars, Temples, Tombes! That 'tis not safe to iest at Saints, Or mocke heauens Host, thy wretched plaints, Salmoneus, shew, and Mizers notes, Yell'd through their hellish bellowing throates, Who heauen nor hop't nor fear'd, now dwell In dungeons deepe of darkest hell!
When I see some so much want grace, As Church and Gods right would deface, How needefull wer't to call out then, Dare not God, though you dread not men! All things must runne to ruineFor where they dare be so busie with God, it is likely they will bee bold with mortall men; and the dispising and despite of Religion, which is the bnd of peace, and things pertayning to the same, in very morall obseruation leauing the diuine Iustice, decaying the ordinarie Fidelitie and Integritie of men, subuerteth Kingdomes, the only neglect thereof working confusion and disorder, being the way leading to the assured ruine of Crownes, and all setled estates. needs, Whereso foule swelling tumor breeds; Nor to sole priuate state this tends, Such Comet kingdomes fall portends! For the that puls Gods honors downe, From Kings head puls withall the crowne: Or do's what ere he can to tread Downe Vertue, and lay Honour dead. Many poore weeping states can tell How ill Kings far'd, where God not well; God builds their houses that build his, And puls downe theirs that pull downe this; Or if God should not vengeance take, Sense shewes how senselesse they mistake, With Tyrannous and Turkish might, Or policy rather then right, That thinke to rule; giue leaue, but marke, Gainst milde Religions cause that barke, How carnall, and on how weake grounds They build, selfe-wit selfe-weight confounds! See they that most religion spight Or wrong the Church, Fooles-motto right, They cut the bough they stand on! take Religion downe, shall not crownes shake? For God not worshipt, to his Image, Kings, who will reuerence doe or homage? Who then shall gouerne, how protect, Liues or lands in such lawes neglect? And who will feare to sinne, when sin May goe vnpunisht? who begin To care for goodnesse when there's naught That's good, or God, or Conscience taught? CANZ. XV. Exemplified in these Samotheans, and not vn∣punished. SEe then, you Tyrants, that misconster Religion! many-headdedVulgus bellua multorum capitum, as the Prouerbe sayes, and so called, as also instabile vulgus, of their folly and vncon∣stancy. Monster That barkes at thine owne bowels: theirs, Is thine, and thine may be their heires! Time will shew truth. Most famous men Most grac't Gods House, that theirs agen; When they that pul'd it downe most fast, Swine-like must liue, most miseries tast.
Small strokes leaue small impressions! greater Make the great giuers ne're the better! Experience of this truth, they sayne, Samotheans irreligious trayne, Growne orderlesse and lawlesse feeles; Albion to scourge them hard at heeles: That wrought their ruine; what time came Bergion to Ireland, so sayes Fame. CANZ. XVI. A short description of Ireland, occasioned by Bergions comming in with Albion, and possessing the same. NOw gentle Muse, since in thy flight Thou Albion coasts didst touch! but light: AndThe description of Ireland briefly, and of her situation and people. Ireland now her neighbour neere Comes thus in place! Touch also here, Lightly her site! since ancients stile By name of Brittish either Ile: Fifty degrees North; East fifteene Both lye, or but small difference seene; Third chiefe Ile plac't by Ptolomey, Next Britaine and Taprobane, Seated in the Vergiuian Mayne, Full of Lakes and of Egge-forme playne. Ireland is North-extended! East England at hand; Virginia West. Aloofe in thatIreland is almost round, the length that is so varying from a direct round, is extending from North to South, accounted 300. Miles. Verginian Mayne, Island farre Northward, South lyes Spaine. Iuuerna, Ierne, and Iris height; Subiect to wind and winters spight, Sees the Sunnes set, in Iber's floud: Whom God and Nature gaue this good With Candy Ioues owne foster place, Equall, that none of Pythons race, Doe breed there; and if thither brought They die! a secret notWhence they haue supposed it called anciently, as Ogygia, so Banno, and holy Iland; being no such venemous Creatures liue there; and it is said, the roofe of Westminster Hall framed of Irish Oake, and imber brought from thence, so breedeth neither Cobwebs nor Spiders. vnsought; From venom's free! The men for warres, Swift runners, nimble swimmers; Mars Their ee'n ord'narie play-mate takes, For Townes or Cities, Loughes or Lakes, That beene with Fish and Fowle repleate, And snow-white Swans their pleasant seate, Whole herds of beasts both wild and tame, In pastures largeThe commodities of Ireland. for goods and gaine, Much milch-store and fam'd Hobbies race; Their grounds for Corne and Wine lesse grace! By Ceres nor Lyaeus lou'd, Their ill-late-ripened fruits well prou'd;
Her Plutus pelfe neere Pluto's Cell, Th'Earth hides in mines e'en halfe at Hell. But to retire to Albion, whence We came, returne, deare Muse, from hence With Proserpine, to th' Orientall, Ioues Pallace, from this Occidentall. CANZ. XVII. Albion, Neptunes sonne, comming hither, destroyeth the Samotheans, Bergion ruleth in Ireland. NOw Samothes Sonne in France and heere, Had raign'd wel-nigh three hundred yeere! Of whom our Iland first tookeSamothea, and since that time called Albion, as some say, of the Greeke word, Olbion, Happy; others, ab Albis Rupi∣bus, white Rocks, appearing to to them that on the South coast saile by it; others of Albion, Neptunes sonne; and lastly, some but most fabulously of Albania, Dioclesians supposed Daughter; the name of Britaine, some de∣riue from Britone, a Nymph of Creete; others of one Prytus; some, as Sir Thomas Eliot, of the Greeke Prytaneia; Master Lluid, of Welsh Pryd-cain, a faire forme; Master Camden, of Brith, a painting, that the old Britons vsed; Goropius Be∣canus, of Free-Dania, or Bry-Dania, as it were, Free Den∣marke, but quite besides the marke, as well as they that sup∣pose the name to haue come from little Britaine, for that it was ancienter of name then either of them, and little Britaine recei∣ued name from hence, the com∣mon receiued opinion is, that it is so named of King Brute, as Eng∣land of the English. name, Samothea cleped, so sayes Fame; Yet now their rule was in the wayning, Longus, and second Bardus, raigning In France among the Celts, before Albion found out our Brittish shore; As soone as this our Brittaine shore; As soone as this our Brittaine stoopes To Neptunes Albion and hisThe end of the Samotheans raigne, and the comming in of Albion & Bergion, who hence∣forth ruled this Iland and Ire∣land. troopes, His Brother Bergion sayles for Thyle, Haebudes, Ireland, Orkney, and Ile; But still Cham's issue, Albions traine, From Neptune sprung, in great disdaine, Massacre their lawlesse Caytifes, and Chase them through their misgouern'd land, Wearie of their liues, in all their borders Doing penance for their foule disorders; So heauen tooke vengeance whiles earth stood, Amaz'd to see't e'en drunke with blood; And Albion, her new Lords that came, Gently receiues and keepes their name. Faire Ile, whose flowry bosome is A Paradise of earthly blisse, So faire, so sweet, that all mens eyes, Thy Syren beautie doth entice, O, sure some Nimph thus turnd by Ioue, Drown'd for vnkinde Vlysses loue, For Syren-like with wauingThe Emperour Seuerus did so describe this Iland of Albion in his Coy. locks, Seuerus seates thee on white rocks.
CANZ. XVIII. A descending to the seeking out of Albions descent, which, with his acts and fall, are the subiects of the second Ode. NOw, aid me Muses, for I long To rest on Atlas shouldersThe Transition to the Story (in the second Ode) of Albion, and his trayne, next inhabitants of this Ile, who came from Greece and Egypt, where Osyris raign∣ed, whose Cousin or Grand-child Albion was. strong, Whence Ialoofe, with carelesse eie, Viewing poore mortals miserie, May earth despise, and rapt aboue Those starry battlements of Ioue, On contemplations spotlesse wings, To heau'ns cleere light the soules faire spring, Taste, feede, and feast on, ô best good, Heauenly Ambrosia, Angels food; My mind most free, whiles I in verse Doe Albions due descent rehearse, Should then suruey Aegyptian Nile, And ancient Argos where some while, Osyris raig'nd, and Isis Queene, Alcides Tutoresse, Albions teene, Who plac't in heauen, for iustWith holy Vowes were sacrifi∣ced and prayed vnto, for their propitious ayde, by their deuout Clyents, thereby to obtayne their Petitions, and iust desires: A re∣uerent salutation and hayling of the Deities, being then accustom∣ably vsed. desires Were hayl'd on earth, with hallowed fires. The end of the first Ode.
A briefe type of the second Booke or Ode of PALAE-ALBION, called ALBION. The second Ode contayneth, 1. AN Apologie for Poësie in generall, and more expres∣ly in respect of some moralizing fictions, and sup∣posed escapes in this present, or the like moderne Historie of our Land of great Britaine. 2. An asseueration of the peopling of this Iland soone after the floud, as were the rest, by Noah, the great Belus or Saturne of Assyria, and his sonnes: whose stories are compa∣red with those ancient Panym fictions of Saturne, of Creet, and vnder him the flourishing golden Age. 3. The comming in of Albion, and his descent from Neptune, the sonne of Osyris, Iupiter, or Saturne of Egypt, the sonne of Cham, the sonne of Noah, who with his brother Bergion, were Kings of this Iland, Ireland, and the Orcades. 4. The ouerthrow of Albion and Bergion, by Hercules, the sonne of Iupiter, Europs or Osyris of Egypt, who with his mother Isis came into Germany and France, where he espou∣sed the daughter of Lycus, King of Celts: whose issue reigned there, and from whom the people and many of the chiefest places tooke their names.
PALAE ALBION.Series Poematis & Artificium siue . Ode secunda, Inscripta ALBION. ARGVMENTVM. Proximus Albionis ceu nominet Albion oras, Et genus & proauos Oda secunda refert: Ambo, sed Alcides, fratrem{que} ipsum{que} coegit, Noctis adire nigrae, tecta inamoena, domos. . antiquitatum, & inde occasione oblatâ, Poese Apologia. SAmotheam Samothes, velut Albiona, Albion olim, Insulam vter{que} suo dixit de nomine; Fama est. Quis tamen aut Samothes, aut quis fuit Albion ille, Clariùs vt referam, cum res vix clara vel vsquam Quaesita antiquis, aut orbi cognita nostro; Cymmerijs videar tenebris anquirere solem;Antiquitatum, Fama malum, mendax! quid non? veneranda vetustas Occubuit, solùm ignorantia caeca superstes! Cum ne hominum aetatem, quis mundi saecula norit? Prima obscura aetas,Contra suos exagitatores, & eorum molestias. nugis{que} referta secunda, Tertia sola fidem historijs polita meretur. At Pol ego Magnis quae sunt libanda Poetis, Carmina, vel cedro digna, aut linenda cupresso, Gesta legens magnûm monumenta{que} prisca virorum,Defensio. Semideûm laudes Heroum fortia facta, Celsa quibus viguit fulgens super aethera virtus,Vn Sic soleo afficier, hausto quasi caelitus igne, Ambrosijs{que} epulis iussus consistere Diuûm;cum Et cupio hijs fieri similem,Poeseos verae ac genuinae, vt & vetustissimae vindicatione à calumnijis! cuius laudes & approbatio, vel ideò eluces∣cant & clariores fiant Argu∣mentis inde sumptis. vel ad astra leuari, Sedibus hijs miseris hominum socijs{que} relictis; Vt cum ijsdem placidam possem traducere vitam; Nam vel erant homines, nunc dij, hominesue deceret, Taleis esse, sient Diuino vti munere Diui, Sancti Immortales, aeternâ pace beati. Siue igitur figmenta forent, ea seria siue, Nam{que}, fatebor enim, fuerant dignissima lectu,
Plurima virtutum fomenta, repagula prauae Nequitiae, stimulus{que} exempla illustria laudi. Desine mirari,Laudabilibus & miris suis ef∣fectibus, res ingeniosa Poeta est; Ornatu miro, varijs{que} coloribus vsus, Plusquam Parrhasiâ depictis arte tabellis, Tum menteis,in Viuentibus oculos{que} hominum demulcet & aures, Si bonus est; natum inter spelaea ferarum, Quem nutrijt Rhodope, aut horrenti Caucasus antro, Ingenuum{que} hominem{que} facit, praecepta{que} tradit, Non bene formatae, verè moralia vitae. Ficta{que} res persaepe iuuat, si vera relatu Defuerint, summi ne desint semina honoris, Neu' pia virtuti, deessent sua praemia laudes: Hinc merito debetur honos,& Mortuis satis ex voto conspi∣cuis: diuine Poeta, Chie Melesigenes tibi suauiloquis{que} Camoenis. Qui canitis magnos Heroes, gesta, triumphos! Hij Ioue prognatos cecinêre Deos{que} Duces{que} Ne quisquam aut proprio, aut digno fraudetur honore, Hinc iuuat à Diuis proauorum Ducere turmas; Nec cito crediderim, qui stemma suum, ab Ioue summo, Deduci cupidè vellet, quin protinus Idem Vellet item cupidè, nato Ioue dignus haberi, Virtutis{que} ergò, Herculeos perferre labores. Nobilitas populi, Maiestas vrbis & orbis, Clara trophaea, vocant mundi miracula, vulgus, Atria, Templa, Domus, Statuae, ingentes{que} Colossi, Magnatum elato praetendunt nomina fronte;Cuius etiam vt monumentorum antiqui∣tatis aliorum consimilium vis tanta, Gloria quanta ijsdem fuerat, pictas{que} fides{que}, Quos fundatores praeconia splendida iactant. Accensus velut hijs animus stimulatur ad omne Virtutum genus,& Energeia, esse cupit primordia gentis Clara suae, meritis vti laudibus omne per aeuum, Maiores super astra ferens, se immisceat illis. Aura nec ista leuis, vanâ spe lactat hiantem Famae! etenim in dubijs constans fiducia rebus, Mentem hominis firmat, vt maiorum & gloria semper Fida Comes, praesens oculis, animo{que} figuras, Exhibet haud tristeis! ne{que} deserit illa labanteis, Donec in Elisios migrarint se Duce Campos. Durior at siquis dicat mihi forsan,Omnes praesertim ingenuos sui dulcedine & amore captos vt ille, Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis, Aeacidae similis, vulcania{que} arma capessas, Quàm te Thersitae similem producat Achilles!Rapiant, & Alliciant. Nobilitas equidem, sola est at{que} vnica virtus, Ingenuè fateor! sunt & sine crimine mores; Neué obtusa adeò gestamus pectora; soli Virtutis{que} rudes, soboles & inhospita Musis! Sin etiam cupimus meritis clarescere auorum, An vitio nobis vertat, quod Graecia laudi, Docta sibi, Aegyptus, Babylon, Roma, Ilion, Argos!
. A thesi ad hypothesin ! & ita historiae & antiquitatum Britannicarum assertio excusatoria. HIjsce superbire, & saltem virtutis amorem Prae se ferre homines perhibent, praesagia honoris; Nobilitatis enim propriae,Ipsissimae Apologiae, ceu conscia mens est, Vt stirpis generis{que} sui! Non saepe videmus Maiori{que} ardore cieri, at{que} impetu in ipsam Virtutem? & quasi iam sibi debita praemia poscat? Nec vana,Item Apologetici, sicut & aut fallax haec talis opinio nostris, Censeri possit, ceu fabula inutilis, Anglis! Certa vti{que} è tenebris cum redditanuper in Auras, Canicies veneranda, accepta{que} grata{que} multis, Anglos effulsit super aequoreos{que} Britannos!Apologizatorum quorundam aliorum Apologia, . Saxones à Noe, Thursto{que} parente & Odeno; Quos medios Itas{que} olim inter-creuerit Anglus; Britttones à Bruto, pictóue colore Agathyrsi, Quem Brith dixerunt patrio sermone Britanni! Caesar Aborigines quos sensit, serior aetas Inuenit Bruti sobolem{que}, Hunnos{que} Scythas{que}; Tum Samothenoris, primum, Albionem{que} Britannis. . Nohae tanquam Saturni historiae adumbratio: plurimarumue hinc inde gentium antiquitates & Origo. DIcitur,Instituti primi resumptio, & Nohae, sub Saturni persona, Historiae hy∣poypose . in toto, notissima Fabula Coelo, Saturni vt mundo cessêrunt Aurea saecla, Treis Regna in parteis olim diuisa fuisse; Coelica sceptra Ioui, Neptuno caerula, Diti Infera sorte data! , anné negabit Esse quis Assyrium Noe? qui totius orbis Diuidit imperium Gnatis tribus? Indica cedunt, Regna Asiae Semo! Iaphet Europa; Africa Chamo! Diuino eloquio, citò pagina sacradocebit. Coeli Oriens typus Illustris! sic, forsitan ille Iupiter Assyrijs, oris Sem iustus Eois, Sceptra gerens pacis! qui Melchi-sedek{que} Salem{que} Ante Ninum & Belum, infameis; qui iam duo vidit Diuisos ab aquis mundos! cui nescia vitae Principij aut finis, series numerosa Dierum. Coeli Oriens dixi Typus! Orcus & infera forsan, Aegyptus Chusij{que}{que} nigri, Loca; Torrida Zona, Chamo ceu diti, cessit, maledictio patris! Hesperio{que} Mari, quae dicitur Insula Gentium, Ceu medio, Ionio, Euxino, & Maeotidos vndis, Cincta loca, Iapeto quasi Neptuno data!Aplior summi Vates decantant; & norunt omnia Vates!
Quod siquis niueos interstrepit Anser Oloreis, Vates hic dicet; quis enim non clarius ipso Sole,Eiusdem rei illustratio, & confirmatio, ab Anxia dubtatione, confusio∣ne, & incertitudine, omnium aliarum antiquitatum, nisi istuc reducantur: vnde nostrarum vel & principaliorum Gentium O∣rientalium, & aliarum pri∣mordia, huc referuntur, hinc deducuntur videt tenebris se errorum inuoluere caecis? Creta Iouis geniale solum! fateor{que} benignè! At quis non videat, captus nisi mente & ocellis, Saturnos{que} Ioues{que} Deos{que} per oppida plureis, Promiscuè cultos? Alcidas nouimus ipsi, Et Lybicum, & Gallum, & Graiugenam Amphitryonis! Antiquo de more, etenim, Gens quaelibet olim, Saturnum{que} Iouem{que} habet incunabula stirpis Prima suae! hosce canit multum admirata vetustas: Hos solita est numeris mirè celebrare canoris. Iupiter in Cretâ est! Aegyptius alter, Osyris! Hammon in Lybia! Durstus quo{que} fortè & Odenus, Iupiter & Saturnus erant Germanici! eisdem Sic placet Hebraeis pater Aschenas! Aschenes ipsi, Hebreis hodie dicti! Sic Graecia, Iauan, Ionios populos habet! vt Dodanim, Dodonaeo Sacra Ioui Quercus, feret aut tua nomina Dedan! E{que} Tyrash Tyrij, Thraxuè; E{que} Gomer Gomeraei, Antiquo historicis dicti quoque nomine Cymbri: Quos Belgij Gallos, quos nunc vocat Anglia Wallos, Se Cumero, Cumeraeg, quo vsi Idiomate dictant: Stemmatis antiqui memores, quasi per dere nomen, Indignè aut minimè, cum agris & sede ferentes! Haud secus ac miseri ex aruis & arce Syonis, Quae Gens rapta tuo, Salmanasar impie, iussu, Tartaricis vltra Babylonem agit hospes in oris; Fama refert, vti eis, Solymorum flebilis inter Cantica prorumpti Gemitus, Io, Ierushalaim; Sic genus & Natale solum, patria alma, Penates, Nescio quâ, at video, vt rapiant dulcedine cunctos. Vt{que} minus mirere, meis quasi fabula verbis, Et non vera fides, adsit, precor, adspice Gentes, Eoas, quae sunt Semi de sanguine cretae, Quae{que} Austrum coluêre, satae de stemmate Chami. Nonne Madai Medès, Paras sua nomina Persis, Sicut Elam, dedit? Assur, Aram, Saba, Hauila, Sydon, Samarithes, Chanaan, Hethus, Iebus, Amor, Heuaeus, Qui magnas dixêre suo denomine Genteis. Mizraim in Aegypto, qui sedit ad ora fluentis Nili, Niliacae imposuit sua nomina terrae: Testibus Hebraeis, Hebraeoùe idiomate gnaris. Aethiopes Chusios, genuit Chu! At Lybicos nè, Coniectare licet Lehabim; ceu saba Sabaeos? Cum{que} Lydi Ludim; Iones & Graecia Iauan; Ryphath, Ryphaeis qui habuere in montibus ortum; Moschus habet{que} suum Mosoch, & Turca Togarmah: Serius è tenebris velut eruta Nomina! quid nî, Iam pulsis nebulis orientis lumine Phoebi,
Verior elicior: videatur & hinc tua Gomer, Progenies? Cumeri, ceu Cymbri seu Gomeraei, Quae gens relliquiae cupide audit Cambro-Britannae; Et sedes? siquidem tua nomina, terminus! inter Sedem habeas, Morinos, hominum extremos{que} Britannos. Siue Gomer,& explicantur. siue ille Mesech, Germanica, & ista Litora Samotheae, tenuêre, & forsan vter{que}, Ambo Iapetiadae; quem primum Europa Monarcham Agnouit! soboles forsan Germaniae in Oris Eois Mesech, Hesperijs Gomer, Aschenes austro, Sub tepido! primos vtcun{que} Britannia Gallis Germanisué suos, debet de iure colonos. Trans mare in Albionem, deducta colonia multa, Caesareis visa est! Samothes quo{que} littore vtro{que} Regnauit, perhibent, Celtas{que} super{que} Britannos: Quippe Mesech Samothes dictus fuit! Insula nomen Traxit & inde suum; sic vos cecinisse sorores Aoniae memini! Cur dicta sit Albion olim, Musa rogata, & refer! ceu quis fuit Albion ille, Vnde etiam nomen praenobilis Insula, dudum Caeperat; a toto seclusa Britannia mundo. . De Osyridis, Albionis aui, Aegypti regno, & vrbe Memphi, ve∣tustissimis. VRbs antiqua fuit;Deductio historiae ad Nohae posteros, in persona Chami. prisci tenuere Coloni, Illius Authores, soboles Chami{que} nepotes, Ad Nili ripas positam,& Osyridis Aegyptij. qua postea fertur Ostentasse superba procul, miracula Memphis! Hîc olim regnasse ferunt, genitum Ioue Osyrim, Iupiter ille idem, dictus{que} Aegyptius ijsdem, Cui dea memphitis, coniux erat Inachis Iö Isis dicta eadem,Cuius Regnum & Ciuitas vita. per{que} omneis inclyta Gentes; Ille Aegyptiaci, qui venit ad ostia Nili, Et sua Niliacis relliquit nomina terris Mizram, apud nostros magnus reputatur Osyris! Qui Serapis & Apis erat; ceu corniger Hammon In Lybijs! vnci{que} puer monstrator Aratri, Fortè Aegyptiacae Gentis Saturnus! vt olli Nepthum erat genitus, monstrat sacra pagina! quidam Neptunum dixere; itidem satus Albion illo Qui dedit Albioni nomen, sic Fama, Brytannae.
. Loquacitas & fabulae Graecorum hîc praesertim de Iside, Argo, & Osyride. HIc tamen incertam, in caecos impingere Cymbam Errorum scopulos, video; vt ne plurima fando, Aut tractus lustrando omneis, attingere portum, Securus possim; Miris adeo{que} referta est, Fabellis, monstris, mundi haec obscurior aetas; De se,& de eodem figmenta apud Graecos Aegyptios recitantur. de{que} alijs, res mira, at dignanotatu; Quàm propè nil audet non dicere Graecia mendax! Se{que} suos{que} canendo, nimis dum iactat abundè, Sic certa incertis, veris sic falsa remiscet, A summo vt medium, à toto quo{que} discrepet imum. Omniavae miserè, quantùm haec facundia, plusquam Libera, turbarit, cupit omnia, perdidit omma; Ingenium{que} decus{que} suis famam{que} perennem. Hij regem Argiuûm, Argiuis Regno{que} relictis, Aegyptum migrasse, rudeis docuissevti sulcis Mandarent cererem, & reliquas faeliciter arteis? Vnde bouis formâ, monstrator Osyris aratri, Dein colitur; referunt: deberi ita singula doctis, Gloriolam certè, primùm omnia cognita Graecis, A Ioue deceptam{que} canunt, nam{que} omnia vellent De Ioue dicta suo, vaccae sub Imagine terris Errantem ignotis, venisse ad flumina Nili, Quae furijs agitata dolis Iunonis iniquae, Aegypti impleuit falsis mugitibus agros; Reddita forma prior, donec, fit Osyridis Isis, Iö dicta priùs! genitus quo{que} creditur Eius, Esse Epaphus! cuius dicta est de coniuge Memphis! Quanquam alij Lybien, referunt, de nomine dictam. . Beli Nohae, cum reliquis Beli nomine insignitis, collatio. CRedo equidem ante alios Rex Antiquissimus omnes,Accommodatio praemissorum ad praesentem locum & ma∣teriam, Assyrijs Noe est dominus sic dictus in oris; Belus enim dominum sonat, hoc quo{que} nomine Belus, Aegypti Danai{que} pater, quos postea gentes Aegypti Danaûm{que} canunt, Belo{que} priori, Dico satas omnes,den docet hoc sacra pagina, genteis! Hoc{que} satus Belo, fortè est antiquior Apis, Illo Diuae Iûs famoso conige; & Ille, Forsan vt alter erat, siet altera{que} Isis, Osyris! Aegialeus Frater, Coniux fuit Inachis Iö,
Eius qui histoijs tantum est celebratus Osyris.Prosecutio historiae propositae de Osyride & posteris. E{que} Ioue hoc sata, iam soboles Neptuni, multis Coeperat esse locis celebris, & sceptra gerebant Quacun{que} est toto circum diffusa profundo Insula! magnus enim fratreis sic iusserat Apis, Triginta aut plureis, varijs dominarier oris. Lestrigo Italiam colit; Hespera limina habebant Geryones! alios{que} inter, maria omnia lustrans, Bergion Ogygiam Iernen at{que} Orcades; omnem Albion Albionis tractum capit, insula nomen Cum dominis recipit{que} nouum, dominos{que} priores Aut fugat aut caedit miseros, duráue subactos Seruitute premit, Neptunius Albion omneis. . Ob Samothidarum per Albionem extirpationem querela, ambo∣rum{que} nequitia, adnotatur. HEu, heu, Samothidûm periêrunt gloria, nomen, Heu grandaeué Mesech tua iam cecidêre decus{que} Et sceptra, in manibus quae olim gessêre nepotes, Tum lauro Phoebaâ,Albion contra Samothidas molitur machinationes bel∣licas hedera{que} reuincta decoris! Cum pia Relligio, & probitas deserta, fides{que}, Tum iacuêre simul, deserta{que} splendida sceptra; Relligio basis est nexus{que} & vincula pacis, Hanc vbi neglexere, homines Astraea reliquit; Insequitur vindicta scelus! & rabies{que} Cigantum, Contemptus superûm; pestis mortalibus aegris! Nequitiam improbitas superat! se Daemones ipsi Excruciant:& cum populorum subiugatio∣ne & Tyrannide, alia nefan∣da sceleta, clauus clauo, vndâ pellitur vnda. Albion inuisus superis, reliqui{que} Tyranni, Neptuno-geniti longè late{que} per omneis Terras, haud secus ac vasti Titanides olim, Viperea proles, omni pietate remota, Accumulare scelus sceleri, ceu Pelio Ossan, Aggressi,Tum ipse & reliqui Gigantes at{que} Ossae frondosum inuoluere Olympum; Donec auus, sic fama refert, grandaeuus Osyris, Magnus & annoso multum venerabilis aeuo, Iratus diro scelere & furialibus ausis Increpat hos, grauiter culpans crudelia facta. Vnanimi consensu omnes, hunc tollere censent Eviuis, aetate grauem, curuum{que} senectâ! Nec mora, vti cautum est, vbi coniuratio facta est, Immaneis inter,contra Osyridem insidias struunt, & perimunt: sceleratos{que} hosce Giganteis, Exequitur scelus ipse Tryphon; tibi frater Osyris! Et clam, è conspectû dilectae coniugis Iûs, Crandaeuum perimit (sceleri scelus additum,) Osyrim:
Isis vt absentem, longâ spe caeca, Maritum Non videt,At verò horrendae male sedula, nescia fraudis, Per syluas & agros at{que} inuiarura, furenti Persimilis, solis, comitata timore & amore, Nî sociam addiderat, timidae{que} superuenit, Eccho Errabat quaerens socium, pia Nympha, ingalem; Scissa comas, laniata genas, incessibus agros, Atterit illa suis, querulis vlulatibus auras! Donec vt omne nemus, fontes{que} & flumina Nili, Murmure clamarent magno, tua nomina Osyris. Ipsa sed in somnis inhumati venit Imago, Ostendens{que} scelus, transfixa{que} pectora ferro, Vindictam hinc animo, mandat, sua{que} ossa sepulchro. . Osiridis à funere tymbus, sacra & exequiae. EXilit e somno, somnis exterrita,Contra hos omneis Alcides, & vmbram Persequitur verbis, quòd non se sistat ocellis; Et fugis ô Coniux, inquit, miseram{que} relinquis? Ibimus ô Coniux pariter, pariter{que} Tyranni, Sanguine perfusi, pulsabimus ostia Ditis: Tum vero quibus ipse locis monstrauerat antè, Inuenit, at{que} rogo imponit, consumpta{que} flammis, Cum celebri pompâ, capit ossa recondita in vrna, Insula in Aegypto, quae Abatos accincta palude, Quam dicunt stygiâ, Diuae contermina Memphi. Indè bouem Aegyptus colit, inuentum{que} quotannis, Barbara Memphitim miratur pubes Osyrim: Forsitan & Lybicis qui corniger Hammon in oris! Parta dolo, vi regna Tryphon sceleratus habebat; At Regina graui iam dudum saucia curâ, Multa animo secum tacito{que} in pectore voluit! Vindictam meditatur ouans, ad caetera moesta. . Alcidae contra Gigantes bella & belli occasio. HErculis adsciscens cunctos perferre labores Virtutem inuictam,Matre dea Iside, instigatus, socium comitem{que} pericli, Nympha suum Lehabim, Lybium quo{que} fortè vocatum; Alter hic Alcides, multum{que} antiquior illo Alcidâ, Alcmenae gnato; sed forsitanidem Cum Gallo, quòd ibi, Celtarum in littore, saeuos Albionis strauit, faelici marte Tyrannos: Huic Dea, dum scelera enarrat, caedem{que} parentis,
Vs{que} adeò exacuit mentem{que} iras{que} querelis;Bellum mouens, necem & exum parat? Vis excelsa viri emicuit, velut ignea flammis Fax è coelo ardens, vindictam exposcit ab omni Peste Tyrannorum; virtutis verae & honoris Accensus stimulis: horrentia{que} intulit arma Hijs hominum monstris, totúmque ad bella per orbem Prouocat immaneis horrenda mole Gigantes. . Alcidae profectio, pereginatio, & gesta contra Gigantes. TVm clara Alcidae virtus, à Gadibus vs{que} Auroram & Britones, caedit superat{que} Tyrannos, Dijs gratus superis; victricia vti{que} per omneis am coeli plagas circumtulit arma; serenam Restituens mundo pacem: primum{que} Typhonem Verius Italiae referam Aegyptine Tyrannum, Anthum in Lybia domuit,Vnde eius ex Aegypto per Lybiam in Europam, & has mundi plagas proectio, proprias{que} columnas Transgressus Calpen & diuerso in littore Abylen, Vltima in Hesperiâ: fingunt tria corpora in vno, Geryonem informem, superat, seu treis ita dictos Neptuni potiùs gnatos! Lestrigona contrâ, Faucibus Italiae saeuos prolem{que} tyrannos, Vnde Anthropophagi saeclis venientibus orti, Alcidae virtus parat ire! Alpeis{que} niuosas, Dum transit, cupiens Celtarum inuisere regna, Celtarum{que} Lycum regem,vbi inter alios incidit in Albio∣nem vnum è Gigantibus Bri∣tanniae tunc Regem, quem vita ac regno spoliat. cui iam ferus hostis Imminet, Aëreas posuit qui castraper Alpes, Albion! è coelo veniens diuinus & hospes Alcides videare Lyco! & iam terga premebat Hostis agens raptas quaecun{que} per oppida praedas; Sollennes epulae, conuiuia festa parantur, Hospitibus leuet vt curas fessis{que} laborem; Laetitia tonat ingenti,Interea cum Regia Celtae, Vulgus item festas passim duxêre choraeas; Phoebus vt Eurotam, plaudente, vel ad iuga Cynthi, Sic populo, Didûsue recepti Troes in vrbem: Et Galathaea genas roseo suffusa nitore, Gnata Lyco, formam faciem{que} simillima Diuae, Nympha rosas potis & Ledaeos vincere cygnos, Ornatur, niueae vt deceptus amore puellae, Alcides patrem & populos defendere possit.
. Inter Herculem & Albionem belli motus & praeparatio. COniugio hunc stabili vinctum charis{que} Hymenaeis,Hospitium apud Lycum re∣gem Galliae, memoratur, & vtrius{que} apparatus belli, tum foederis & Sociorum, Praesidium tutum esserati, firmata{que} in aeuum, Foedera, sceptra, sibi, seris{que} nepotibus olim, Rex cupit hoc, populus, pariter pulcherima Nympha; Hinc iurata prius clades & nobile lethum, Albion Herculeâ, tua certa accita{que} dextrâ! Efferus interea gentis populator opimae Celtùm Gomereae sobolis, furiosior Adriâ, Et fratrum Impatiens necis, & quasi percitus oestro, Herculis aduentu fratrum occisoris, & arcto Foedere cum Celtis inito; malus aestuat Iris! Accersens fratrem, in fratrum occisoris inultûm Perniciem, ex Ierne, Scotica Orcade, & Acmode, & vltimo Ex Britonum tractu, Tamesino aruo{que} Sabrino, Albion in Campum secum rapit agmina! Gallûm Littora ceu tota insolito sonuêre tumultu. Excitat Ogygiam Iernen, Scythicam Orcada & omnem, Quâ patet acris hiems, ratibus{que} imperuia Thule, Insulam, in auxilium fratris, fretus{que} suorum Bergion acer adest turmis; Iungunt{que} Phalanges, Inuisi superis fratres; & cedere nescij! Magni vtri{que} duces, solùm, duo fulmina belli, Bergion Herculeis, vincendus & Albion armis. Impiger Alcides iam notum limen Amicae, Amplexus molleis benè concessas{que} relinquens Delicias, quas ferre solent dulces Hymenaei; Quos celebrare parat deuictis hostibus! haud iam ditus imbelli Cytharae; sed Cornua rauco Cum stridore iuuant; clauo exuuijs{que} Leonis Hordidus, & teneris nequicquam amplexibus aptus Coniugis! Arma vocat, Iustas{que} exasperat Iras, Heroicae plenus virtutis, dignus honore Summo, dimeritus pia serta, trophaea, triumphos, A saeuis totum monstris qui liberet orbem: Tum comites Celtae{que} simul multo agmine facto,ac In sua castrarunt, pectus dedit Inclyta famâ, Magnanimi ducis, & foelix celebrata{que} virtus! Qui prius attoniti vt lepores, vix hiscere nuper Ausi prae dubio, infandum, nimio{que} pauore; Ac timidi sic fortè aliquando, ad pocula Damae, Cum canibus venient, velut hij sua tecta Domos{que}; Nunc virtus menti, mens insita pectore, cunctis Vis Inuicta viris, certae spes vna salutis: Tantae molis erat Ducis inclyti honos{que} Decus{que}!
. Praelij commissi apparatus, & Albionis euersio. IAm properant acies, toruis aspectibus ambae,Demum praelij commissi descriptio: Eiusdem euentu & consequentia, Herculis sc. triumphi Herculis ex vnâ, diuersâ ex parte Gigantum, Inficere Herbosos cum caede & sanguine Campos; Ac nisi vana fuit Phlegraeis fabula castris, Aggressi superos, Iouis vt nunc filium in armis, Horrendo fremitu stolidi immanes{que} Gigantes, Ceu Boreas bello, pluuiosus & Auster aperto, Congressi magno turbantes murmure coelum, Exercent vireis, & terras turbine perflant; Crebros{que} excutinunt attritis nubibus igneis! Sic fremitu ingenti, & telorum nubibus aether Turbidus, infestos reddunt solem{que} diem{que}, Et quasi misceri, coelum{que} solum{que} videres, Laxa est terra cruore, fluunt de sanguine riui, Nescit habere modum rabies, studium{que} nocendi; Donec permissù superûm Neptunia proles, Virtuti Alcidae cessit, caesis{que} tyrannis, Cum socijs; maduit fraterno sanguine tellus; Ceu fato cecidêre pari, & quasi turbine missis Imbribus è coelo. Comitum pars maxima Saxis, Narbonensi agro, Lapidoso in littore Le-Craux; Ad Rhodani ripas; diuerso in limine, quidam Dixêre, ad Scaldim, vel amoeni fluminis Albis, Bergion Herculeis, vti pressus & Albion armis. Iam{que} aderant festus{que} Dies, laeti{que} Hymenaei; Magnificum Paeana canunt, celebrant{que} triumphos, Pax quoniam Arcto, & liberta reddita mundo. . Herculis de Albione triumphi, & cum Galathaea Hymenaei. TVm bonus Alcides clauo, spolijs{que} Leonis Depositis, Nymphae dulceis meditatur amores Formosae; Dryades, Fauni, Satyri{que} petulci, In syluis, iuuenes,& Nuptiae cum Galathae, vbi passim, innuptae{que} puellae, In Thalamis Galathaes tuis! tum pronuba Iuno, At{que} Hymen hanc celebrant pompam taedas{que} ingaleis. Nascitur ex illâ Calates, qui nomina Celtis Imposuit! Celtum verò e Celtice & Hercule natum, Parthenius Nicaeus ait, dare nomina Celtis; Illa autem Bretani gnata est! Bretano{que} Britannos
Deduci perhibent! ceu nomina Graeca sonarent, &  ue; Quòd si ita sint, & certa fides adhibenda Nicaeo, Quid Britonen Cretes Nympham? qu Pryton Araxes Gnatum,Dissentientes quorundam o∣piniones aliquatenùs recon∣ciliantur; In fine. Brytannis memorent dare Nomina regnis? Vel Brutum? vel vbi Galates, Galathaea, Lycus{que}? N Bretanus Lycus ille foret, Galathaea{que} dicta Celtica, ceu Galates Celtus; ceu nomina rebus, Aut alia, aut intorta nimis, data saepe videmus. Iudicium hic alios, per me, penès esto licebit! Fama etiam victis domitis{que} Gigantibus olim, Alciden cum matre deâ, (quae gloriagentì;) Germanis venisse, simul docuisse feroceis Tunc populos, arteis, & commoda plurima vitae. At quidam venisse, ferunt, cum{que} Iside Osyrim, Ad Marsum Regem; sed non ego credulus illis; Serior hic nisi Osyris erit, siet altera{que} Isis; Aut illo genitus, pro illo ponatur Osyris! Trans Rhenum at{que} Alpeis qui iam peruenit adus{que} Germanos, vel quae gens illi proxima Gallos, Ac fudit, dum quaerit ouans, toto orbe Giganteis. . Transitio ad seqq. obiter tamen adnotatis Herculis sobole, postea Francorum Regibus. INclytum apud Gallos, ad sequentia, obiter verò recensitis Her∣culeis posteris, Francorum Regibus, ad Brutum vs{que} & Corynaei tempora. charae tenerae{que} sodalis, Implicitum Thalamis, reliquósue domare Gigantes, Forte paraturum, Alciden relsinquimus! Orti, Gallorum ex illo Reges, per saecula multa, Nati natorum, qui{que} enascuntur ab illis, Perpetuâ serie, Galates, & Lugdus, Harbon, Beligius Iasius{que} ferox, seri{que} nepotes Herculei, Allobroges, Romus, Paris, at{que} Lemanus, Olbius, hoc, Galates{que} secundus in agmine, Nannes, Et Remis, & Francus, & longo post ordine Pictus. Odae secundae Finis.
PALAESynchronismus, siue supputatio Annorum. ALBION.Supplementum historiae. The second Ode, Entituled ALBION. THE ARGVMENT. The second Ode, sings Albions acts, Whose downefall and his brother Bergions, Beene fam'd for Gaule-Alcides facts; Their remnant issue, in these Regions, On Danaus Daughters, got the race Of Cyclops huge, that haunt the place. CANT. I. An assertion of approued Antiquities, with an Apo∣logie in defence of Historie and Poesie. SAmothes Samothea's, Albions style, Albion, saies Fame, gaue this our Ile. Who Samothes or Albion were To make report, of eld more cleere, When doubts like mists doe seeme t'arise, And ouercast our clouded skies, We will seeke what those Ancients sayne To shew the cause of truth more plaine, Although we know some said not late, Fames rumors want, most, their true date; Her monuments all saue last vnsure, Flatteries or fables or obscure; One scarce knowes th' acts of present ages How much lesse th'old worlds halfe lost pages? Yet in their venerable dust Like Ennius leaues,Ennius. lyes gold sans rust. And when I read those stately Poesies, Whence Phoebus with his traine discloses A gracious splendor, and affords Th'old Heroes fame, among old records, Their honors gests though mixt with fables, Worthy Cypresse, or Cedar tables, Engrauen there; I so admire, And feele such sparkes of heauenly fire, To heare their legends, reade theirThe good vse to bee made of Poeticall sables and figments for honourable ends deuised. story, Spectacles of old, spur's to new glory,
What more repast? how more refrest, If set at Ioues Ambrosian feast? That I then only wish that I, Might with those Worthies liue and die: And rest where in th'Elisium blest, Their spirits possesse all peace and rest. For whether truth, or fain'd Tropaea's Plato's Eutopian world's Idaea's, Yet such as should be; whose heart scant As soft as steele, or Adamant, Not mou'd, or not enflam'd to heare Those honoured acts of elder yeares? When Poets, when they please, impart To liuelesse things such liuing Art! That one might say, yet Hector liues, And great Achilles fameGreat Alexander, who visi∣ted Achilles tombe, wished that hee had such a trumpet of his fame, as Achilles had, meaning that mellifluous Homer, that preserued his glorie in a more di∣uine manner, then that his decay∣ing and defaced monument; whose works he so delighted in, that hee was seldome without thm, but carryed them in his bosome. suruiues, His marble Monument! whence they sayne, Great Scander wisht like fate, full fayne. And laurell crown'd bee all those pen's That are incitements to great'st men, Through Vertues Temple most diuine To tread the way to HonorsSo was the Temple of Honor in Rome placed, that the way into it lay through the Temple of Vertue: the morall of it , as it were, No comm to honour, but by vertue;  truely noble, that were not wor∣thily vertuous. shrine! Haue we not knowne of Ioues bloud some Supposing onely they had come, As Poets told them, in that height Of courage and auspicious might, Such toyle haue ta'ne worthy to raise, From Homers pen Herculean praise; For who but generous spirits aspires To be fam'd with their famous Sires? Dumbe shewes, which admiration sunders From common things! theAntiq. worlds rare wonders, Whose high forefronts hunt after fame, Shewing proudly forth their founders name, Townes, Cities, Castles, and Colossi, As well as th'Hesperid's read in Poesie: And hanging Gardens in the East Th'Assyrian Monarkes presence blest. Colleges and Temples, built for loue Of vertue, and those Quires aboue, With what content, and sweet satietie, They feede the Eye; with what varietie, They feast a free and honest minde, That needes must wish praise in this kinde! Whom like them honored for good deedes Olymph may crowne! whose minde not heedes Such heauenly height: but base earth tombes, Must needes be most ignobleThe basenesse and ignoblenesse of their minds, that heed not such honorable and vertuous designes, doth yet more appeare in those, who doing no good themselves, in enuious sort repining at others fame, themselves onely worthy with Herostratus, to be chroni∣cled for infamy: defacing and pulling downe Monuments of o∣thers honor, doe what they can to despite and controll the deuoires of any flourishing, or sprred on by the triumphant incitements of magnanimitie and heroicall vertue. Groomes.
CANZ. II. Applyed to the present matter of our owne Nation. IF Momus taxe me, that I taxe Not their great worthi's and noble acts, Of vanitie! Vngracious dayes! Nor good deeds done, nor none will praise; And more then most ingratefull wee, If snatch the fruite, yet scorne the tree! Which if we mend not, 'twill not misse, Next age must want much of our blisse: For had these men their mindes, too late Wretched experience ship-wrackt State, Might weepe, with had I wist, to see, What confus'd Chaos things would be. Thus natures, arts, dumbe, all records, Sweet sollace to good minds affords: Whence many Nations for their fame, Trauerse out their first founders name; Brittons there find as well as these, Brute, Albion, and old Samothes; Whiles Saxon too for companie, On Thurstus and greatWoden, from whom all our Saxons doe deriue their Genea∣logies, as the Welsh from Be∣maur: like as all other Nations had some great Man  Prince, from whom they gloried to bee descended, the very Iewes their Abraham and Patriarkes; E∣gyptians, Osyris; Syrians, Be∣lus; Greeks, Danaus; Ioue or Hercules, or some of the race; Latines, Romulus & Aeneas: and generally all Europaean na∣tions, of a kinde of fancy which they had from Troy, or one of her wandring and distressed pil∣grime Captaynes. Woden crie. CANZ. III. The Historie of Noe shewne, shadowed in the fables of Saturne, with the originall of diuers, if not most Na∣tions, and consequently of Albion and the Brittons. ENuie them not; Rome, Babylon Greece, Aegypt, and fair'st Ilion, Curious in farre-fetcht Pedegrees Censure that finds vs, them not frees! Yet sure this fault if t'any bee, Best deserues Grace, for ought I see: Since such too curious though, must needes Loue honour that delight her deedes. Britaines name and Albions, whence deriu'd Many men haue many a meanes contriu'd: Britt's, some of Brith, their paintedFor they were altogether giuen to painting themselues with woad, enter-chased with diuers and strange figures, in Caesars and the Romans time. hew In their owne tongue cald! CaesarWhich the Latines called In∣digenae or Aborigines, borne and bred in the same soyle, not knowing whence their Ancestors were descended, but as if they had there right, like Mushromes growne or sprung out of the earth. knew, only! latter ages, With Brutus line, haue fild whole pages: Albions descent, no lesse dissented On, as if t'were too strange inuented; Truth rest to try! Gaules, Scythes or Hunnes, Brutes, Samothes, all's, or Albions sonnes: Needes must I, faire Sol, guide my wayes Begin at Saturnes golden dayes.
That famou'st Legend vnderThe description, and perhaps also the true morall or interpreta∣tion of Saturnes time, and the Golden Age. Sunne,Nohae diluuium, A: 1656. Shortly after which must needs be Sa∣turnes golden Age. That Saturnes reigne ends, Ioues begunne, The golden worlds Realmes parts betwixt Ioue, Neptune, and the Lord of Styx; Were Noah, Saturne! cursedNoah, to be Saturne; blessed Sem, Ioue; cursed Cham, Pluto; Iaphet, Neptune, being Iaphets, part Europe, called by the Iewes, Insula Gentium, or the Iles, as Neptunes part was the Seas: Saturne also like No∣ah, was a great planter of Vines, witnesse Arcadia & Italy, whi∣ther it is said Noah likewise came: Cham and Chus, like Pluto, had the lower and blacke Sunne-burnt Regions of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia and Sem like Ioue, in most honourable sort succeeded his Father, being Mel∣chi-sedek: a King in the East, the Orient being  manner the type or figure of Heauen, whence Phoebus and the Planets daily ascend, mounting thither, as it were, in our Hemispheare. Chem, Blacke Dis,Noah liued al∣most to the yeere 2000. with th'Aethiops! blessed Sem Salem's Melchisedek, Syon sayes, Sans yeeres beginning or end of dayes;Sem dyed, A. 2158. Ioue in the Orient,His name Mel∣chi-sedek, sig∣nifieth King of Iustice; Salem, also whereof, it is said, hee was King, signifieth Peace. heau'ns Type! whiles Iaphet hath Europe shores; they th'Iles O'th Gentiles cald! Iust Neptunes part; How stories fit? or if nice Art, Call Candy Ioues owne foster-place; Tis true! yet must they grant this grace, More Ioues then Creet's! more, Hercules, Then that Amphitryo's sonne of Greece; And many Saturnes more by ods, As euery Countrey had their gods: From whom they drew their stem's! though Greece, Stole their great'st Gests, from most of these, In Creet Ioue! Lybia, Hammon he, In Aegypt, Apis Altars be. Durstus or Woden, GermansWhere note, though Seater was acknowledged lately for the Idoll Saturne, as also appeareth by that weeke day, alluding to both the names, yet in another sense, as founder of a Family or Nation. Tuisco and Thurstus or Woden, were their Ioue and Saturne, for euery Nation, or for the most part, and those the chiefest, had of their owne home∣bred founders, their Mercuries, Mars, Venus, Hercules, and o∣thers, especially Ioues, and Sa∣turnes of their owne: of owne: of Wo∣den, was Wodensdeag or We∣densday, called as Tuisday of Tuisco; Seater-deag, of Sea∣ter, their Saturne; Frige-deag, of their Friga, Prea, or Venus; Thusday, called yet of the Swe∣dians, Thors-day; of the Dutch Dunders-dagh; of the old Sax∣ons, Thunres-deag, of Thor or Thur, abreuiated, as it were (like the Latine Tonans for Iupiter) of Thunre, which wee write Thunder. Ioue, Or Saturne may, most likely proue! Then who'le denie, Noe was at least Th'Assyrian Saturne in the East: From whose sonnes sent to farthest Seas, All Nations draw their Pedigrees! As th'Iönes,Inachus, A. 2090. King of Argos: iam senex, and therefore likely to be Iauan. Iauans impes; sure Ioues, Or Inach's! those 'bout Dodon Groues, Of Dedan come; of Tyrash,So is it written by Iosephus, Berosus, and many other Anti∣quaries. Tyrians, Or Thracians; of Gomer, Gomerians. Haply, our Cambrians, who call'd long Themselues Cumero, Cumeraeg their tongue, Like Syon's sonnes, wer't loath to lose Their name, though borne on tydes of woes! Banished and carried from their owne, To Tartars, beyond Babylon; To mirthfull musique yet proclayme, In mournefull wiseAnd so doe the Hebrewes write and pronounce Ierusalem! there are also where they vse this kind of song, among the Hrdes of the Tartarians, which places from Iudaea lie right beyond old Babylon, prouinces and peoples called Danites, Assareth, and the like, as it were, arguing there to bee the seates of those Tribes, carryed into perpetuall captiuity, whose names they doe yet seeme to preserue. Ierushaläym: As hands should faile, and heart breake, e're They would forget their Countrey deare! Sweet secret sympathy betweene, One and ones natiue soile thus seene. But you'le lesse wonder at these new, And strange reports, yet likely true, If you but heed Sems Easterne Nations, Or sun-burnt Chams sonnes, South generations, There Madai, Paras, Amor, Heth, Assur, Elam, Saba, Samareth,
Lud, Lehabim, Canaan, Sydon, and A many more nam'd each his land: As Mizraim his on Nilus streames, And Chus the EthiopianThe Hebrewes call Egypt Mizraim; Greece and lonis, Iauan: Aethiopia, the Land of Chus, and the like the others; as Germany & the Germans, Aschenez to this day. Realmes; What lets it Iaphets sonnes likewise, Should not their names to lands deuise; Both to posterities! as 'tis thought, Iauan his name, t' Ionia brought; Riphath to cold Riphaean boundes, Mosoch to Moschi; TwiscoThe Italian calleth the Ger∣man Tudesco at this day; this Tuisco, by some, at Sebastian Munster, is held the sonne of Noe, by his wise Arezia or Ty∣thea, borne after the floud; by o∣thers to bee the snne of Asche∣nez, Grand-child to Iaphet: that ancient Germans held him for the sonne of the Earth, at the Aborigines thought themselues, all approued Authors; as Taci∣citus and whers, hold him the first great Commander among the Germans, whom they honoured for one or chiefe of their Gods, as was the Pagan fashion in old time. soundes, Neere the Duttch, Aschenez, they say, Th' Hebrues so call them to this day. And yet with Aschenez might well Mesech and Gomers Cambrians dwell, Gomer in Gaule, Mesech more East, Higher Aschenez; all right GermansAs brothers or so neere kin. rest. So well thought Caesar that of yore, From German, Gaule, or Belgique shote, Colonies to vs transplanted were, From these thus Germans 'tis mostFor German and Germany, are thought by some to be names imposed by others, not themselues; others thinke of themselues impo∣sed for terror to the Romans, and other Inuaders, German & Alman signifying a stout warrior, Gar being the same with all, as Garans (whence our Carouse) all is out, or off: so Gar-man or German, and Alman, wholly a Man or a stout Man! The like name tooke the Sycambers, or Sigh-Campers, of Sigh-Victorie or Victorious, and Campers, Fighters, or Combatters in the old Teutonic tongue, in which language, Istaenoues seeme to sound outerest-woners, in English, Outermost-dwellers; Ingaeuones, In∣ner-woners, or Inward dwellers; Burgundiones, Bourgh-woners or Dwellers in Boroughs or fenced places; Hermiones, Herst-woners or dwellers in or neare Woods, all of them ancient appellations of peoples in Germany. cleere; For Samothes Mesech thought, reign'd o're Our Brytaines both and Belgian shores. CANZ. IIII. Of Osyris, Albions Grandfather, and his most King∣dome of Aegypt and Citie of Memphis. TIll Albion! whose descent ere-whiles We meant to seeke o're seuen fold Niles, And Neptunes flouds, where Memphis faire Aduanc't her stately pride in th'Aire, Her towring spires, built by Chams seede, Whom Aegypts fruitfull wombe did breede; Here sometimes reign'd, Osyris,Osyris was called Iupiter Europs, and Mizraim in He∣brew, first Egyptian King. first Aegyptian King, call'd Saturne erst Or Ancient Ioue;Osyris the first or Mizraim, A. M. 1800. some thinke, the same, That Misraim Hebrw writ doth name, Who had to spouse, Iö faire Greeke, Whose Deiti's said so oft to seeke, Serapis hight! If Nephthuim His sonne be Neptune, then from him; We streight doe bring our Albion, whoe, So nam'd our Ile so long agoe.
CANZ. V. The truth of which story is conferred with the fabulous narrations of the Greekes BVt here of Apis I'me to seeke More then ere they; the fabulous Greeke Hath so inuolu'd these ancient'st yeeres With tales of his ten moderneThe Graecians would haue this storie vnderstood of their loue of Creet, who was many hundred yeares after this Osy∣ris, and the time that same part of the storie was indeed truely ordered. Peeres, That all that ere was spoke may be,Iupiter Belus of Assyri, and Iupiter Europ or Osyris of E∣gypt, circa An. 1800 or very shortly after. Iupiter of Creet, A. 2400. or not much before. Spoke of his Ioue and none but he, It much obscures most things, that cleere Might else to all the world appeare. But giue them leaue, for thus they sing, That leauing Greece, an Argiue King Went into Aegypt and there taught Them to sow Corne, poore soules, who thought His Godhead worthily t'adore In Apis Oxe-like forme therefore. Then sing they how, Iö faire dame, Cow-turn'd for feare of farther shame,Inachus or Ia∣uan, A. M. 2090 iam senex, King of Argos. Io the first, cal∣led of her father Inachis, of her brother Phoro∣nis, flourisheth about An. 2000. shee liued 400. yeares. No sooner iealous Iuno spies For iealousy hath an hundredWhence grew the fable of Argus hundred eyes, being by iealousie, that is euer waking enjoyned to keepe watch ouer Io. eyes, Argus set sentinell, Ioues faire loue, As farre as Nilus streames did roue! And like one in forlorne despaire, With bellowing sounds she fils theVnderstand hereby the brutsh sensualitie of those who are led by their lust and appetite. aire. Till Iuno reconcil'd was sene, Ioues Paramour Isis Aegypts Queene, Wed to Osyris, and their sonne Epaphus built Memphis walls anone; And of his wise so call'd the same, Yet some say Lybia weares her name: And I doe find, at least there beene Hundreds of yeeres these Ioues betweene. CANZ. VI. As that of the Assyrian Belus, Noah, with the other Bele's of Aegypt and Greece. SO from this Labyrinth turnes to winde, Ariadnes clew,Belus of Egypt circa A. M. 2400 one had neede finde: This make me then say th' ancient'st Bele, Noe, rul'd th' Assyrian common-weale: Nimrod was Belus too, which word, In Hebrew signeth King orBelus and Baal, are all one, and in Hebrew signifie King, Lod, or Master, whence both the Assyrians Kings and Idoll-gods were so named; and Noah might well be so called there, as he is in Italy supposed to be Ianus, by Berosus and others, of his com∣ming thither and planting Vines, Iajin signifying wine in Hebrew: so hee might bee Vranus to the Greeks, as father of their and all other Satutnes,  wife being called, as Authours report, Tythea or Arezia, which seemeth to be the Hebrew Arez or Ares, for Earth, as Vranus or Coelum and Vesta, interpreted by Ouid, terra, à vi stando, were the Heathens reputed first gods, and greatest ancestors. Lord; Danaus syre, and Aegyptus,Danaus, An. 270. King of Argiues. hee's A latter Belus farre then these,
And others more, rays'd great, this same Iupiter Bele's so ambiguousBy reason of the many Baals, or Beles, Nimrod, Ninus, or Assur, and other Emperours there, aswell as the Kings of Tye, Dido's ancestors, and Danaus father o called, and many of them accounted loues, or Saturnes, to their succeeding generations. name, Our Mizraim oldest Belus Impe Or grand-child, and that beauteous Nymph Inachus or Iauans Daughter beene, Aegypt's much fam'd, first King and Queene. And these perhaps did teach good Artes, So deifyed for their great deserts, Their nephewes, Neptunes sonnes it seemes, Their Grandsire plac't in diuers realmes; Italy Lestrigo's, Geryon's Spaine Antaeus Lybia; Albion raignes And Bergion in the Brittish Iles, Where they hauing set foote ere whiles, Wretched Samotheans thence they chac'te; And wel-nigh lay'd their countrey waste. CANZ. VII. Albion hauing made hauocke of the Samotheans, and the other Giants Neptunes Imps, tyrannizing euery∣where, reprehended by Osyris the most ancient Belus of Aegypt, cause him to be murdered. GReat Samothes,Samothes 1787. as oft as I Thinke on thy sonnes, whose progenie Might haue worne Crownes, borne scepters gay, With Iuie wreath'd, and Oliue spray? I see that Kings and greatestAs Horace said, Stultitiam pariuntur ope they afford no priuiledge nisi per accidens, for the owners to be better or wi∣ser then others. ones, May hap to haue vngracious sonnes! When on their Phaeton-fall; I thinke, Some great ones now how soone they'le sinke; When these would heauen and hers out-face, Contemne Religion, and disgrace Astraea; Albion, scourge of God, Bruis'd them,Albion 2200. reigned 44. yeares. though Ioue soone burnt this rod; So Deuils to Deuils tormentersSic clauus clauo, sic vnda superuenit vndae Omnium rarum vicissitudo: cum tamen hora horam pellt, dies diem docet. beene, Naile driues out naile, streame driues on streame. Albion and all the Giant crew, So godlesse then and gracelesse grew, That were they not, they might well bee Th' earth's sonnes, whom heauen abhord toTerrae filij, for ignoble and base creatures, in proubium cessir; opposite to such contemp∣tible ones, albae Gallinae filius, is taken for an honorable or for∣tunate person. see; Like Titans broode, that in their Pride Laid hils on hils, and heau'n defyde, Heapt sinne on sinne, ee'n seem'd to striue How Vertue least, most Vice might thriue. Till great Osyris, quite asham'd To heare their leudnesse, them much blam'd! Who though, despis'd his counsels sage, With all his graue and reuerend age, And all, with one consent conspire, Gainst his graue yeeres, their leud desires
Sole obstacles! whom they meane to kill, So gracelesse ones, quit good withill! Tryphon his brother, with the rest, Well ware of their vnnaturall hest, The secret Tragique stroke then gaue, Hasting his gray haires to theirAnd this Tryphon did vsurpe the Crowne of Egypt, till he was slaine by Hercules. graue; Least minding such perfidious vowes, Isis laments her absent spouse, Not knowne where hee's become, her voice, Niles banks redouble with Ecchoing noice; So oft, so shrill, groues, flouds, good Dame, Might seeme t'haue learn'd Osyris name, Whose pale Ghost, in nights shady gloome, Told her their treasons, points h ombe. CANZ. VIII. His carcasse is sought, found, and honorably entombed by his wife the Goddesse Isis, and diuine honours in∣tituled to him by his subiects. SHee much amaz'd at that horrid sight, Yet faine t'haue caught the fleeting spright, Sought and found out, where he did shew His mangled corps, the Tyrants slew: And good Queene in that heauy dumpe, Bringing him backe, with funerall pompe, Addrest in Ceremonious sort, And state to fit his Kingly Port, His vrne and ashes tomb'd; where hee Pale Ghost pointed himselfe to be: In Abatos Ile, neere Memphis walls, Girt with a lake, some Stygian calls; These Nilanders the Memphians since, In memory of their so lost Prince, And his good deedes! seeke, andThe people of Memphis and Egypt, did honour Mercurie vnder the forme of the  A∣nubis, or the winged Ibis, Osy∣ris of an Oxe; whom after acer∣tayne time, hauing made away or drowned the Priests, went vp and downe howling with the people, to find another so spotted and like the former, and then with great ioy and honour they brought him in triumph to Memphis, thence∣foth applauding him as the Idoll of Osyris. adore, Serapis found, with honours store. CANZ. IX. Isis reuenge on the Tyrants by her sonne Hercules or Lehabims meanes. NOw TryphonTryphon. weares the kingly stile, With force maintayn'd what got with guile; Whiles heauy Isis, wofull Queene, Wants time and meanes to wreake her teene On all that Parricidious crew, Which though they thinke not, well she knew, With patience arm'd awhile, till some Reuenge resolu'd on, might strike home;
And therefore breakes her mind anon, To Hercules her warlike sonne, Cald Lehabim! ancienter then hee, Blaz'd so Alcmena's sonne to bee, The Lybian, or as may seeme true, The Gaule, since there, he Albion slue. CANZ. X. Hercules ouerthroweth and slayeth these Giants euery∣where, and commeth into Gaule, where he encountreth Albion. TO him as whom 't concerned chiefe, Hauing laid downe her cause of griefe, He 'stonisht at such strangest words, Iust courage, so iust cause affords; As quick as lightning, and as fierce As thunder, clouds and towres that teares, Streight vowes reuenge, and soone proclaimes Th'inhumane Tyrants, TraytorsThe occasion that Hercules slue the Giants, and sought so many strange aduentures, in e∣mulation of whom the Greeks set forth their Alcides, long after being Amphytrio's and Alc∣mena's sonne. names! Then gan his glory shine as faire, As Phoebus from his golden Chaire, From whose cleere orient Ganges east, As farre as Gades Pillars west, Hercules his honor was heard fam'd, For peace protected, tyrants tamd! Then Tryphon fell! in Libia's slaine, Giant Antey; Geryons inDiuers other the Giants that Hercules ouerthrew, about the time that he slue our Albion and Bergion. Spaine: Lestrigo and his sonnes, from whom Th' Anthropöphagi Italian Canibals come, 'Bout Italy they say did fall! And he prepares to visit Gaule: Where Albion neere the Alpes by chance, Then sore vext Lycus King ofLycus succeeded Bardus iu∣nior or second, that followed Longho and Bardus, the last King ouer both Gaule and Bri∣taine. France.Lycus King of France, A. 2200. Diuine Alcides at that time, How did thy presence blesse their clime, To Lycus one so neere opprest, Nor vnwish't, nor vnwelcom'd guest. The peoples then of Gaules all round We guesse were glad, and Pallace crown'd With triumphs; Court and Countrey euen Ioy'd, as he had come downe from heauen: That Phoebus might not, with more Ioy, To Cynthus come, Venus to Troy.
CANZ. XI. He is entertained by Lycus King of Gaule, Albion be∣ing professed enemy to them both whom Hercules pre∣pareth to ouerthrow. FAire Galathaea, that more faire, Then Leda's Cygnet, might compare With th'orient beauty, and sweet rosesLehabim or Hercules, King of Gaule, circa An. 2250. about what time Al∣bion fell, hauing reigned 44. yeares. Aurora's morning blush discloses; With sweetest Art, as louers doe Did spread her wanton plumes to wooe, And win their guest to be their Prince, Her spouse, her sires and lands defence. Dumbe eloquence that conquers hearts, Where Loue and Beauty play their parts! So, willing he was eas'ly wonne, To doe what else he would haue done, Doubly bound by loue, honour; all, To worke Gaules freedome, Albions fall. Albion was now vext many wayes, His Brothers death's, the victor'sFor his conquests of the other Giants in Lybia, Italy, and those other parts before hee came to passe the Alpes into Gaule. bayes; This league with France and what great ioy, The Gaules conceiu'd, for their new Roy! T'was neede aswell for his owne good, As for reuenge of others bloud, Of fresh supply from Brittish realmes, From Trent, Thames, and faire Scuernes streames, Fierce enemies to encounter thoe, And force of such a furious foe! His Brother Bergion comes fromWhose dominion all those Northerne Ilands and Ireland, were said to be. Thyle, With powers of Irish, Orkes, and Ile; Ioyn'd like two Thunder-bolts of warres, Mated to be by none but Mars. Alcides leauing then his Loue, Ioues Eagle takes for Venus Doue, His Lyon-skin stead of softer tyre, And winded Hornes for warbling lyre. So from her Chamber to his charge, His iust designements shewne at large, Drawes with him of his presence fayne, Celts mingled troopes with his owneFor Albion, who warred now in France, hauing called the I∣land Albion of his owne name, had also banshed the name of Samotheans or Celts, call them how you will, into Gaule. trayne, Who late more fearefull then the Deere Hunted to toyle; though now of cheere, To front their proudest foes; his fame Their fainting hearts did so inflame, Signes of true valour shewne they forth; Such courage giues, the Captaines worth!
CANZ. XII. Albion and his powers vanquished and slaine. BOth sides prepar'd now for these warres,Albion and Bergion slaine, circa An. 2250. hauing reigned in Albion and the Isles adia∣cent, about 44. yeares. Alcides and those twinnes of Mars, Neither of them euer match't till now, Eith'r ayming others ouerthrow, Haste on right sore, with might and mayne Greene fields with purple gore to stayne, Fierce as the Giant-troopes that stroue From heau'ns high towres to pull downe Ioue; For Albions tree-like traines did yeeld Like monsters as fought PhlegraThe battell wherein the Giants warred with the Gods, whereof Ouid & other Poes make men∣tion; when the Gods hauing the worst, Ioue hid vnder the fme of a Ram, in which forme Ham∣mon is honoured for Iupiter in Lybia, Mercurie of a ag, Phoebus a Cow, Venus a Fish, Iuno a Cow, Diana a Cat, Bac∣chus a Goat, whence  P∣nims since honored them in these formes some of them. field; These met on Frances floury pride, Like raged boystrous windes that tyde, Whose furious force, sends flames of fire From blowes redoubled in their ire: Their steele-strokes glittring, lightning seeme, Their clamors thunder, and betweene, Heau'n clouded with hurld weapons store, Th'ayre fild with groanes, ground fild with gore! When as'twere heau'ns cause gainst these rude Heau'ns and earth's out-lawes! that fell feude, 'Gainst right rais'd, Gods good hests and Ioues! Ioue showr'd downe from his realmes aboue, Such stormes of stones, with vengeance mixt, Sent many of these fiends to Styx. The place they say as yet isLe-Craux is indeed so stony a shore as if it had ryned  there; as this fiion pretends! but that those Giants were saye thereabouts, an indiffernt an∣cient writer, Pomponius Mela beareth witnesse. showne, Le-Craux, in Narbone coasts by Rho'ne, Monument as 'twere of that strange shower, The stony Shore cald to this hower: The rest of them that so not fell, Hercules sent with their Lords to hell. CANZ. XIII. Hercules marrieth Galathaea Daughter to that Lycus King of France, which of their sonne Galates or Celtes, tooke name. Diuers stories hereof are here reconciled. ALbion and Bergion slaine; was so France freed from feare of Giant-foe, And almost all the world was clear'd Of Cylops-monsters whom they fear'd; Hercules returnes incontinent, To Venus bower, from Mars his Tent. Then Court, and Countrey Nymphs not coy, And Fawnes and Syluanes sung with ioy Their nuptiall Hymens; sweete Napaeas, Hercules Loue and faire Galathaea's;
Queene Iuno too, chiefe president Of marriage rites, gaue all content. So from this noble paire there came, Galates that gaue the Celts their name; Niceus though, sayes Celts theyThe names conferred together, of Bretanus supposed Lucus or Lycus, Celtica or Galathea, as Celtus or Galates, of whom the Galatae or Celts may haue their name; seme thus reconci∣led, and the rather since you shall obserue our Oxonians  discourse of Tully,  Cantbrigians wholly , and why not  e∣specially of , through diuersitie of Name, Surname, and other addition, as Hercules Alcides, Artaxasta Xerxes, Chasmonai Macha∣baei, and so perhaps Bretanus and Lycus. bee Of Celtus, Celtices sonne; and shee, Hercules wife, Bretanus Impe, who names Vs , as Greeke Idiome frames. Wher's Prytus then Araxe's Impe? Lycus, Brute, or Britone CandyesShee fld from Minos, who would haue rauished er, of whom some would deriue the name of Britaine, as others from Pretus, the sonne of A∣rax: others of the famous Pry∣tanaeum of Athens. Nymph? Vnlesse Bretanus may Lycus bee, Celt Galates, Celtica Galathey? As oft wee see names so much chang'd, Wondrously from themselues estrang'd! Let others iudge hereof! there beene Say Hercules and his mother Queene Dame Isis came into these parts, And Gaules and Germanes taught good Arts,Marsus King of Germany, A. M. 2190, and reigned neare 50. yeares. Others Isis and Osyris bring To Marsus ancient GermaneMarsus the sixt from Tuisco, first King of Germany, or at least the higher parts of the same. King: Makes me thinke their sonne Hercules, so, His name might be Osyris too. CANZ. XIIII. Their issue Kings in France afterward, whose names only there recorded; the next Ode pursueth the story of the remainder of those Giants in this Ile of Albion. BVt leaue we Hercules now to seeke Aduentures whether Gaule or Greeke, With his faire charge, his tender spouse, Whose race, French Kings, old storyAfter Lycus Hercules and his sonne Galates succeed, then all arow, Harbon, Lugdus, Be∣ligius, Iasius, Allobrox, Ro∣mus, Paris, Lemanus, Oibius, Galates the second, Nannes, Remis, Francus, and Pictus, who was discomfited by Cory∣naeus and Brute; of these the peoples & diuers parts of Frāce, are said to be named; as was done by Sueuus, Vandalus, Teuto, Alman & his sonnes Noricus, Hunnus, Helueus, Boiu, &c. being Marsus issue in Germa∣ny. showes, With Lugdus and a number more, Belgius that nam'd the Belgique shore, Paris, Reme, and Francus, till they sayne, Pictus by Coryne ta'ne or slayne. The end of the second Ode.
A briefe type of the third Booke or Ode of PALAE-ALBION, called GIGANTES. The third Ode contayneth, 1. THe description of the confused Chaos of a King∣dome not well ordered: Seene in the Anarchy or Inter-regnum of the Giants, the race or remnant of Albion, and Samothes traynes, liuing disorderly like brute beasts, ma∣ny hundreds of yeares without any discipline of State or po∣litique Gouernement in their Land. 2. The comming in of Danaus daughters to these Giants, whence were descended those monstrous Creatures, that Brute and Corynaeus found at their arriuall here; by reason whereof the stories of Belus and Danaus, with the occasion of these Ladies comming, are briefly touched and set downe. 3. The arriuall of Brutus in this Iland, and his aduen∣tures and trauels to Greece, and other parts of the world be∣fore he came hither: with a short Apologie, both for his and the other precedent Histories of Albion and Samothes.
PALAE ALBION.Series Poemat's: siue . Ode tertia, Inscripta GIGANTES. ARGVMENTVM. Terti{que} Oda canit, quota inhospita saecla, Gigantum Relliquiae saeuae, littora nostra tenent! Queis Neptunigenis ortam, Danai{que} puellis, Cyclopeam sobolem, trans Styga, Brutus agit. . Odae propositum, & proaemium. NVnc interregnum Albionis, rabiem{que} Gigantum, Albione occiso, & nullo dominante per arua, Musa refer! Sine Regerudeis, sine lege Britannos Viuenteis, Satyrûm in syluis aut more ferarum; Quos Neptunigenas inter, Danai{que} puellas, Ceu sama est, oritur malè sana Gigantea moles, Quos aliquot post saecla, accedens Troius Heros, Littoribus nostris Plutonis ad ostia Brutus, Praecipites{que} nigro misit Corinaeus auerno! Iam chorus alme faueto precor,Institutum libri; dum singula paucis Expediam, cuncti{que} sciant quid Numina possint Castalides mecum castae, doctae{que} sorores. Et quanquam in tenebris priuati lumine caecis Errabundi agimur, tamen eruite ista Camoenae, Vt tandem videant nostri sua stirpis auitae, Gesta, Gigantaeos contra, reliquûm{que} furores! Siqua fides dubijs, chorus alme referre stupendam, Annuite ô, sobolem, vati{que} haec diciite vestro. Albione Albionis, caeso, Iernes{que} Tyranno, Foelicem heu nimiùm, quae diceris Olbion olim, Si poteras Dominos non agnouisse Tyrannos, Insula, sed Dominis nimiùm nudata seueris Amplius inuenit nullos,Votum & seqq. Historiarum cum prae∣cedentibus, connexio. moderamina rerum Qui caperent, quid sanctum esset, iustúmue docerent;
Nec quis erat tantâ fretus probitatè fide{que} Qui regere Imperio, vel Lege, rudi{que} popello Aut premere, aut laxas sciret dare iussus habenas! Donec vti perhibent, Troiano sanguine cretus, Longum post tempus, quingentos plus minùs annos, Brutus in Angliacas serò deuenerat Oras. Tum rudis vs{que} adeo{que} ferox Gens,vnde Daemonas esse, Credimus Historijs dictos, pietate carenteis, Nulla Lege, (nefas) aut Relligione reuinctos, Inter se socios{que}; hinc fabula forsitan illa, Daemonas, in Danai gnatis, genuisse Giganteis! . Danai & gnatarum Historia. ALtiùs vt repetam pandens ab origine primâ: Beli Epaphus pater,Exordium à Danao & Reginae filius Iûs, Phoebi fortè alijs, Chusiué caloribus vsti, Neptuni & Lybies gnatum, cognomine Belum, Dixêrunt alij; Gnatûm pater ille duorum Aegypti Rameses dicti, Danai{que} parentis Argiuûm Danaûm; Rex factus vter{que} tenebat Niliacae partem terrae, Aegypto{que} fuêrunt Quinquaginta aiunt gnati,& eius Gnatis 50. pulcherrima proles, Et Danao gnatae totidem! vt sibi firmet in aeuum Imperium,Quae soboli{que} suae, concedere gnatis, Postulat Aegyptus gnatas, Danaus{que} recusat; Audierat quoniam, & vatum responsa timebat, Deberi fato generum sibi, sceptra animam{que}, Qui non impauido, auferret, sic voluere Parcas! Armis Aegyptus cupidè,Ex Aegypto primùm profugae, bello{que} parabat, Indignum, quod pace nequit precibus{que} potiri; Molitur{que} fugam, regno patria{que} relictis, Cum gnatis Danaus! auris{que} fauentibus vsus Appulit Argos, vbi populis solió{que} receptis, Liquit adhuc, prius ignotae sua nomina Genti, Cognatae tamen, vt cui atauo, grandaeuus Osyris. Insequitur pulchrâ, profugos, cum prole parentem, Aegypti soholes! Europae limina & Argos, Ingressi, lento vastant sua regna duello, Vi{que} coactus erat Danaus,ob earum tam tradere charas Inuisis gnatas sollenni more maritis, Quod se facturum simulat, sed consciamens est Egregij sceleris! somno vinó{que} sepultos, Prima nocte viros,Nouum & inauditum facinus caededco iuges prima nu∣ptiarum nocte. gnatas deper dere iussit, Saeuum & inauditum scelus, omneis! omnibus vna, Sors manet, in Thalamis sponsi iacuere cruentis, Praeter Hypermnestra,Excepto seruatum Lyncea amore;
Vt curae est capitis Nisi non purpura Scyllae, Minoem ac sectata, timet non Minoa patrem Cnossia amans decepta dolo, à te pessime Theseu, Vt nec Hypermnestra agnoscit pia iussa parentis, Fidaluit poeas, caeco{que} in Carcere clausa est; Vincula amor menti, dederat, quo{que} vincla lacertis, Pro nimiá pietate pater!Lynceo, qui solus beneficio  eruatus est, no∣uo & inaud to modo exposi∣tae, & ceu Lynceus omnem Euasit dubij casum{que} metum{que} pericli, Aegyptum remeans celeri pede reppetit Argos, Vindictae causâ, ingenti comitante Cateruâ: Et Danaum, Regno spoliatum & lumine cassum Infera Taenarij detrudit in atria Ditis: Fato sic refragus transuersum agit omnia fato; Liberat è vinclis inclusam Carcere, charam Coniugem Hypermnestram, Lynceus! turbam{que} sororum, Caede maritorum Infameis; non caedere motus Suae prece Hypermnestrae,in exil : ortè for∣tuna, in duce remigio{que} carenti Imposuit naui, pelago{que} immisit aperto: Acnè vndis Remos dederat, ne{que} Carbasa ventis. . Gnatarum Danai in Albionem Aduentus. TRistis Amymone Phrygijs Errabat in agris;Britannias appellunt Insulas, Exposita{que} iris ventûm Oceani{que} furentis, Myrmidone Scylla, Scea, Trite, Chrysothemis{que} Glaucippe, Polybe, formosa Vrania, Chlio, Euridice{que}, Erato, Danaë, Philomela canora, Demophile, Hypareta, Hyale, Hero, Electra, Pyrene; Has certè, plureis{que} canunt Neptunio in alto, Abs{que} Gubernaclo, per Caerula Flumina Lembo, Huc fore delatas; non Oris Assyris illa Attulit impulsa Albine sua nomina nostris. Has etiam Albionis Nymphas ad littora fato Ventis{que} appulsas,vbi Monstiosis Samothidarum & Albionis lociotum reliqus appimè Barbais  incultis, nubunt, proge  sic paren∣tes factae Monstsioris. vastis{que} Gigantibus olim Relliquijs caesùm Herculea virtute Cyclôpum, Daemonijs forsan magnâ ex feritate vocatis, Commixtas, syluis, montium{que} horrentibus antris, Historiae Immaneis referunt peperisse Gigantes. Hac quo{que} stirpe satos, olim domuisse feroceis, Monstra hominum, Albionis inculta per aura colonos, Creditur à nostris mira celebratus honore, Nomine non celebri, at famoso Carmine Brutus; Brutus ab Aenea,Quae ad Bruti nostri tempora per∣rexerunt, qui deleuit eos. Troiano stemmate clarus. His quo{que} temporibus, simul-at{que} sequentibus Annis, Carleon vrbs celebris florens{que} Leone Gauero,
Fundatore suo gaudet; famosa Gigantis,Cuius Mox Italûm, Arx belli, Britonum{que} sat inclyta sedes! Antra{que} saxosae{que} domus, monumenta lacertûm, Roboris inuicti; at{que} effossa stupenda sepulcris Ossa, docent quales fuerint! scelera vs{que} Latrones Monstra malos monstrant, hominum{que} Deûm{que} perosos. . In Bruti Historiam praefatiuncula inuocatoria,Historia proximo in loco ha∣betur: & . NVnc mihi Musa virum memora, qui primus ab oris Italiae, fato profugus, Brytannica venit Littora; qui multum terris iactatus & alto, Vi superum & saeuae memorem Iunonis ob Irae, Iugiter ac Phrygios miserandâ strage fatigat; Multa quo{que} & bello passus, dum Littora nostrae Quaereret Albionis; veteres, vastos{que} colonos Dijs genus inuisum superis, superaret, alumnos Martis, terribiles horrendâ mole Gigantes. . Bruti natalitia, Exilium & in exilio Gesta. SYluius in Syluis Aeneae posthuma proles,Primò quibus ortus est ipse Brutus, tempore, natali solo, & parentibus, Nascitur Aeneas, quo tempore clara fuere Regna sub Ascanio, in longâ quam condidit Albâ; Huius & Aeneae soboles, sic Fama, parentem Obruit Imprudens! patriae{que} è finibus Exul, Brutus agens vitam, Assaraci venit hospes in vrbem, Troiani Ducis in Graia ditione potentis,Eiusdem Deinde infortunia, in Grae∣ciam fuga, & ibidem casus, Nec minus hospes erat gratus modo fratribus olim, Hectoris Andromache, Pyrrho{que} parentibus ortis, Pergameo, Pyleo, iam Chaoniae{que} Molosso Principibus, qui castra Olli sedem{que} dedêre. Bruto aderant iam multa manus de sanguine Troûm Mancipijs nati, & iuga sub seruilia missi, Fatali Bello oppressi, Troiaeqúe ruinis. Qui Brutum vn omnes Regem{que} ducem{que} salutant, Et dulci vt donet se Libertate requirunt, Se socios{que} rogant; quorum pars plurima, tractu Finitimo pressi, Pandrasi regis in Aulâ, Seruitute graui.& praecipuè contra Regem Pan∣drasum gesta, Firmato pectore Brutus, Pandrasum infestum Phrygibus Troia{que} profectis, Regem Acheloigenam rogat vt dimittere vellet, Troes, immiti quos iam ditione premebat. Infensum{que} super{que} minantem pluma verbis,
Compulerat belli dubio discrimine victor, Brutus agens laetis, victricia capta{que} signa, Vecta triumphali currû Regem{que} trophaeis. Fratre etiam Antigono capto, ingenuâ{que} puellá Innogenâ egregiae formae, iam virgine Regis Gnatâ; quam pater ac Bruto pro coniuge spondet,Quem Bello vincit, sed Regis filia Innogena in vxorem ducta; Magnis▪ Immenso argenti dotatam pondere & auri. Caussa{que} tum belli sublata erat omnis; ab hoste In generum Conuersus; honoris praemia Brutus Iusta tulit, dignos celebrans dulceis{que} Hymenaeos! . Peregrinationis Bruti Apparatus & socij. FOrmosa Brutus cum Coniuge, diuite dote, Muneribus{que} datis, socijs{que} & classe receptis, Regali Illustris pompa comitum{que} decoro Incessu,cum Honore ac diuitijs è multo stipantibus Agmine, turmâ{que} Ingenti, ipse animi excelsi, eximij{que} nitoris Ante omneis, auro decoratam, & dentibus Indis, Conscendit nauem,Graecia ad quaerendum no∣uas sedes nauigaturus, in iti∣nere. sequitur dein omnis & ipsum Ipse Iuuentutis Regni flos; omine fausto Laeti; Regna & non arctatas quaerere sedes, Brutus ouans Graio Classem de Littore soluit. . Brutus Leogetiam appellit oracula Dianae consulturus. INde Leogetiam vectus, iacet Insula ponto In medio, Immenso circum diffusa profundo; Non bene nota frequensué viris; sed templa Dianae, Struxerat ecce pia, & multùm deuota vetustas. Brutus vt è ratibus descendit,In Leogetiam Insulam, & inibi Dianae templum incidens. littore curuo Rellinquens classem, comites vocat ordine longo; Et quae conspexit, non marmore clara, ne{que} Auro, Sed luco, & nemore vmbroso, plane inuia, sacris Templa adit orba diu, & pompa viduata frequenti; Inuenit hic sine thure focum, at{que} altaria Diuae; Thura aras super accendens, spumantia Baccho Brutus vtris{que} leuat manibus Carchesia,It Oracula consultum. ceruae Sanguine tum niueae, gratae olli, altaria spargit, Et genibus flexis, sistens se, oracula Diuae Consultûm! Magnum prece supplice Numen adorat:
. Bruti oratio, & Oraculi ad eundem responsa! O Comes errorum,Vndè tulit Arcadicis dea Cynthia lucis, Parthenijs{que} potens in saltibus Ilithyia; Bruto ait, & socijs, sedes da diua quietas: Nosti etenim Dea, quae, toto Sol Aureus orbe Despicit, & Genteis, inculta{que} margine ponti, Littora; dic sedes igitur quocun{que} sub axe, Queis olim nos fata sinant consistere terris; Dic sedes vbi Templa tibi de marmore ponam, Templa{que} dicabo, tibi, virgineis{que} choraeis. Cui Dea sic, placidis, demulcens pectora verbis, In somnis responsa tulit; simul Atria tota, Signa Deae aduentus, nebulis perfusa & odore Diuino Ambrosiae; aethereo{que} nitore refulsit Diua potens! haud talis equos Threissa fatigat, Harpalice; haud talis Pharetraeta Semyramis olim, Quantúmuis speciosa! Duci quintalia fatur, Troiano; placidis, demulcens pectora verbis: Zephyreo terra est celebris sub sole cadenti,Responsa dex perquam be∣igna, & Tota oram insana Oceani collisa fragore, Insula, trans Rheni or a Alpini, antiqua Gigantum Illa domus! modò desertam lege littoris oram, Chare nepos; locus est Idaeis Gentibus aptus; Hanc pete, nam{que} tibi soboli{que} erit illa perennis Sedes, & surget noua Troia tibi{que} tuis{que}, Hic de prole tua Reges nascentur, & omnis Subdita terra sibi, quam Phoebe accingo rotatû, . Bruti & sociorum ob Oraculi responsum gaudia. INtonuere simul adtus{que} at{que} Atria diuae, Cum strepitu ingenti, penetralia{que} intima Templi; Brutus at in terram pronus,inde comites{que} silenti Murmure, fas, magno Numen venerantur honore; Iam{que} egressi omnes venerandae Limina Diuae, Instructis{que} Pyris, vin{que} & aromate pastis, Fragranti magnum perfundunt aëra odore; Ingeminant responsa Deae, reboantia circum Littora, cum fremitu, quae è syluis rettulit Eccho Plaudentis populi, vox{que} aurea syderatangit.
. Bruti Brytanniam versus nauigatio & cursus. CLasse iterum totâ,Classem soluens è portu & statione solutâ, Cursu dum Brutus celeri, maria omnia lustrans, Alter vt Aeneas, fatalia tendit in arua; Puppibus oram Africae attingunt, vltra{que} columnas Herculis egeressi, sinuosa ad littora Troes, Classe, Pyrenaeis loca subdita montibus, ipsos Gallos Hesperios{que} inter Confinia Iberos, Appellunt! Magno, hîc sociati foedere certo Cum Corinaeo, alijs{que} antiqua stirpe creatis, Troianâ, sibi cognatis; duce, creditur, Illo Qui Illyricos penetrare sinus, at{que} intimatutus Regna Liburnorum potuit, fontem{que} Timaui, Venêre è Troiâ! & Garamantica sydera contra, Nunc oram Illyricos vltrâ, Gallos{que} Pyrenen, Incoluêre;cum Antenoris socio, nobili quo∣da Troiano, duce Corinaeo, foedere inito, Vbi descendentem è montibus, Eccum, Hijsce Pyrenaeis Brutus, socium{que} ducem{que} Adsciscit, comitem{que} viae: Dein littora Gallûm Lustrando, Ligeris superora Aquitannici; aperto Marte, (tulit quippe indignè sua barbara iussa, Pictonûm insulsi Regis,) virtute Corini,& Spoliato Galliae Rege Goffa∣rio qui eis insidiatus est, & ad Herculem Genus suum refe∣rebat: Goffarium fudit Celtam, cognomine Pictum, Herculea, quem stirpe satum cecinêre poetae. Inde dato cursu, Brutus comitatus Achate Fido, ceu Phrygiâ Corinaeo stirpe nepote, Gallorum spolijs cumulatis nauibus, aequor Exarat, & superis aurâ{que} fauentibus vsus, Littora Foeliccis intrat Totnesia Portus. Brutus at Albionis, placidâ iam sede sinu{que}, Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum, Albionem tendens, fatalia in arua receptus, Ionio{que} mari, Maleae{que} sequacibus vndis Erutus & Lybicis tutus,Citò Brytanniam appulit, Aris{que} Philenûm Gadibus Herculeis visis; altáque Pyrene, Gallis ceu Graecis superatis, Ocyor Aurâ Damnoniae portum simulac ingressus; inoram Prosiliens! Salue O fatis mihi debita tellus, Vos{que} ait, ô fidi Troiae saluete penates; Heic domus, haec patria est, sic dixit Cynthia Diuae. Nunc repeto! heic rutilis, altaria lucida flammis, Diua tibi, festos{que} dies denomine Phoebes, Instituam!vbi Enumeratis periculis, vota precel{que} fudisse, & Dijs pro∣pteea litatum fuisse. duce te magnas obcuntia terras, Tot maria intraui, Gades penitus{que} repostas Massylûm Genteis, praetenta{que} syrtibus arua, Iam tandem Albionis fugientem prendimus Oram! Sic deinde effatus frondenti tempora ramo Implicat, & genium{que} loci, primam{que} deorum
Tellurem, Nymphas{que}, & adhuc ignota precatur Flumina, tum Noctem, noctis{que} Deam ithyiam; Idaeum{que} Iouem, Phrygios{que} ex ordine Diuos, Inuocat ore pio;Nemo non credat. cum Laomedontia pubes Gramineo Ripae religauit ab aggere classem, Fluminis ignoti; fusi{que} in littore toto, Instituêre dapes, & adorea Liba per herbas, Subijciunt epulis! sic tandem, Numine Diuûm, Laetus in Albionis consedit limine Brutus. . : ac primò Samothae & Albionis Historiae. AC velut antiquum Samothen,Exinde sequitur, è stemmate Noes; Neptuni & Nerei Albionem, rabiem{que} Gigantum, Vidimus immaneis (ita fama palaia) Tyrannos Non minùs ad Bruti venientes tempora, Brutum, Si non Graiugenis direptae & littore Troiae; Finibus Italiae, saltem, Troïae{que} propinquis, Incolumem Angliacis nuper diduximus oris: Quum tamen Albionem,sicut Samothae & Albionis, it Neptunigenas{que} Gigantes, Grandaeuum{que} suis malè sedula turba Britannis Vexârunt Samothen, conati expellere Regnis. Primus vt à primo Noe, sibi stemma parente, Traxerit; an dubitare locus? fideine sacratae, Danda, vel Historiae violandae erit ansa proteruis? Et Neptunigenas, toto quibus Insula Ponto, Praedia vbi{que} patent, vno quasi nomine Nautas, Quis minimè vocat, aut quae non Fabella vocabit? Siue igitur pirata fuit, siue Albion vnus Neptuni illius vero sic nomine dicti, Filius! In nostris ausim memorare nepotes, Et Nerei sobolem,  sedisse Brytannis; Nec meruisse fidem minùs hoc videare quod olim, Albiona Herculeis, Mela, Bergionem{que} sub armis Occubuisse refert! Rhodani prope flumina, quando, Albion Historijs, haec nostra Brytannia Graijs, Dicitur, & passim Monumentis: Rupibus albis, Quî magis, ac Domino, foret aut Domitore superba? Quandoquidem hos constet, mundi dominarier ris Arctoi, extremas quâ pandit Gallia terras.
. Bruti Historiae Apologia: seu defensio. SEd venio ad Brutum! cum{que} haec. Aporetica iniquis, Secta adeò inualuit, ceu non rata, sancta{que} firmè, Temporibus nostris,Bruti historiae vindicatio à quibusdam calumnijs, non minùs nouiter quàm verisi∣militer falsò aspersis. satiùs dubia omnia credit, Res quasi vel libitu, leuium argutijs{que} sophorum Essent delectu sine, subijcienda procaci Quaelibet ingenio cuiusuis! Gredo sagaces, Prudenteis{que} viros sapere hijs meliora; malis{que} Consilia in melius maturè adhibendo, mederi! Hijs igitur leuibus, leuis argumenta sophistae, Persando;Ac liceat, tumidis occurrere verbis Non probro vacuis, Euris{que} fauentibus vsos, Cursum eius contra velis volitare secundis. . Dubitationes variae contra Brutum, & earundem solutiones. SCilicet extenuant Brutum{que} aditum{que} Brytannis Littoribus;Primò propter Casais alio∣rum{que} authoritatem & graui∣tatem. tum prisca fides, tum certa recentis Notitia historiae; Monumenta{que} muta reclamant; Caesar ouans, Tacitus{que} tacent! Extinguere laudes, Qui cupit, in tenebris inuoluere nomina caecis, Velle etiam & genus & proauos & stemmata clara, Quis dubilet? Caesar forsan conatus vtrum{que}; Ce prius! Et dolus, an virtus quis in hoste requirat? Obscurare alijs Famam,A silentio & taciturnitate eo∣rum, Elumbes negatiae a∣tiones, quibus inclyta gesta Offscare suam, videat, queis stemmata, stirpi, Officiant splendore suo, si certa notentur. Sin Druidae, in Cambros fineis, Monae{que} recessus, Secum prisca suae Patriae & ditionis Auitae, Seu Regum, retulêre! patriae ecquis crederet hosti Munimenta suae, & clarûm monumenta penatum? Caesareos siquando citi aufugere Triumphos! At miranda magis reuirescit vulnere virtus; Et rursum è Cambris Oris,& earum appositae dilutiones, Bardis{que} furentum E sobole Druidum, superas venit omnis in Oras, Progenies caelata diu! Bruti{que} nepotes, Cum Cadwalligenis, nigri prope limina Ditis, Detrusi nuper, soboles, caput extulit Orci, Sedibus vmbriferis. Quod si non extera nostrae, Saxonica historiae meminit ne{que} pagina Cambrae: Quando leui Calamo percurrere Cambro-Britannûm Gesta solent; mirum quid, si latuisset in atris, Brutus, & Arthurus velut & Cadwallader vmbris? Anglorum hîc muti Annales, licet omnia chartis,
Libroso hoc saeclo,quatenus ex vetis scateant, nugis{que} sonoris; Ergo minùs miror Monumenta prioribus Annis, Muta magis! si non Anglus, non extera Musa, Scilicet id populus curet!& verisimilibus coniectare licet, aut datur, ac Quasi vulgus & exter! Cambrica nunc Monumenta quidem vix inspicit Anglus, Vix quisquam Historias; meritò ergo vel omnia lustrans, Quàm potes, ignoras Britones fortissime Caesar; Aemula siue latent cupido, monumenta, vel hosti, Inuida Caesareae doctrinae! Druidaene laborent Inuidiâ turpi? An cuperet premere Arte vel Armis, Maximus ille putem? placeat sententia neutra! Quin Druides siquidem chartis minùs, omnia verò Mandârunt menti, memores; Hinc Caesaris error; Siqua magis visa est, res circa incuria nostras. Siquis & in sensa illius iurare paratus, Sensit Aborigines;  esse, Britannos. Caesaris at Domini vestigia, verba Magistri, Sectatur Taecitus!denuo post alia quorundam obiects, Doctissimus ille Latinus, Varro, vbi  prius, post , solùm Tertia{que} Historiae adsignârit tempora certae; Quid nî alios, aequè ac nos conuenit? Italus olim, Italicas Maro! Graeca tuba, Smyrnaeus Homerus, Res Phrygias Graiûm{que}& similiter solutiones, & aliquo∣rum aduersariorum recrimi∣nationes, canit. De nomine Cambrae Queis magis ac Cambris, credam, vel origine Gentis? Aeneam{que} aliquis Gnati, neget esto, cruento Vulnere confossum Bruti, cecidisse, fidem{que} Deroget historiae; videat tamen ille quod vs{que} Fermè simul duo Syluij erant, Gnatus{que} pater{que}, Aeneae Reges Itali, minime{que} priori Si satus est, quis item ne{que} posteriore docebit? Sin minùs arrident nimis aspera Nomina nostris Auribus; insuauis foret ac quasi Barbara, Bruti, Vox, minime{que} Latina; neges licet, optime Caesar, Inuenio tamen, Italiae antiquissimae in Oris, Et Brutios populos, tractus{que} & nomina Bruti. Hijs ne{que} jejunis forsan,in . ne{que} prorsùs ineptis, Aut leuibus modò coniecturis; adde, quod olim, Nostra Sibyllinis memorata Brytania libris, Dicta quasi à Bruto, foret; .
. ,Attexitur. siue excusatio, & Metabasis ad seqq. CVi minùs haec placeant, ne{que} picta BritanniaVt Camdenus luculenti, Bri∣tanniae illustra∣tionis, ita deri∣uationis à colore Brith, quod sci∣am, author est. veris, Clara tuis Camdene coloribus! omnibus vnus, Doctior, aut veniam, dabit, aut meliora rogamus! Sic mihi, sic nostris, modò nomina, stemmata Cambris, Concedat claros{que} olim magnos{que} Monarchas, Albionis Dominos, Troiano sanguine cretos, Priamidas,Metabasis, siue transitio ad commodiorem historiae conti∣nuationem spectans. sobolem{que} Heleni, socios{que} leuatos Pandrasijs odijs, feret alta per aethera Brutus. Odae tertiae Finis.
PALAE ALBION,Supplementum historiae. The third Ode,Synchronismu, siue computatio Arum. Entituled GIGANTES. THE ARGVMENT. The third Ode, th'Interregnum sings, Of Syluan swarmes, that baunten here, Whiles Danaus Daughters brood, of Kings The Royall style vnworthy were; Where Brute, that brought these Caytifes downe, Stablisht Throne, Scepters, Regall Crowne. CANT. I. The Subiect proposed of the present discourse, shadowing the turbulent and confused state of a disordered king∣dome, here represented in Albion. NOw sing we th'Interregnum next Of Albion, neuer more perplext, Then now for want of Lords & lawes; Faith fayling Priests, truth all men sawes; For Albion slaine, sans guide or grace, The remnant of his Giant race Like Satyrs liu'd in Saluage wise, Of whom and Danaus Daughters rise Those monsters rude, were heere, the same Time Brute and Corinaeus came. Thou sacred Quire that sits and sings Amid's Parnassus pleasant springs, Turne o're the duskie leaues of fame, And let me, pray, o'relooke the same; That I may th'vn couth Lords repeate, That sometimes held this floury seate. When Albion, Albion's scourge, ere while, And Irish Bergion fell, our Ile, How truely Olbion, happyOlbion, signifieth in Greeke, Happy, whence some deriue, o∣thers onely allude thereto, the name of Albion. then, For Tyrant Lords had shee found men? But they vnkinged, were found none, Were fit to sit on regall Throne; That knew what long'd to Morall piety, Much lesse to high and holy Deity,
Or could teach, guide, or rule; till heere Brute after many a hundred yeere, Came in and found so rude a race, As Deuills seem'd haunt, not men the place. And for they were so rude a crew,Of these Giants, as no acts, but their rudenesse, so neither can Chronologie be registred, sauing onely thus gene∣rally. Albion slaine and Hercules liued in Gaule, about, or before, An. 2300. Brute came not till after, An. 2800. so this Interregnum continued fiue or sixe hundred yeares. From thence the fables haply grew, How they, to Ladyes strange (God wot) Right ragged Saluages, begot Like Deuils on Danaus Daughters then, That Paynim race, of monstrous Men. CANZ. II. The story of Danaus and his fiftie Daughters that mur∣dered their husbands, with the euent thereof. THese Cyclops pedegrees to bring Deriued from their ancient'st springs; Bele's sonne t' Io's sonne,The common receiued opinion is, that hee was sonne of Lybia, daughter of Epaphus, sonne of Io the second, who was grand∣child to Argus, of whom the Ar∣giues tooke their name; which Argus is reckoned the fift in des∣cent from Inachus. Epaphus; Some Sol's, some thine blacke sun-burt Chus, Some Neptunes him, and Lybia's sayne; Bele, his two sonn's deuide in twaine, Aegypt's so much fam'd fruitfull soyle, Plac't on his-bankes-neglecting Nyle. Aegyptus t'one,Aegyptus and Danaus Kings of Egypt, circa An. 2500. that Aegypt nam'd, And Danaus,Of whom they gloried to be cal∣led Danai, hee did establish so flourishing a Kingdome, and Common-wealth amongst them. Argiues founder fam'd. Aegyptus he had fiftie sonnes; As many Daughters gallant ones, Had Danaus, whom Aegyptus craues Wiues for his sonnes, faire Nymphs, to haue! But Danaus nild, who had heard told A sonne in law vnking himSome blind prophesie, which he had heard, and seeking to shun it, as the fashion of such is, more surely entangled himselfe therein and hastned, if not so framed the euent. should: Which by Aegyptus and his trayne, Was taken in so foule disdayne, That father both and Daughters bee Faine flie to Greece,Danaus, King of Argiues, car∣ca An. 2500. where Danaus hee, Reignes Argiue King, till to these Dames Aegyptus sonnes maken fresh claymes. And last by warre forc't Danaus giues In sollem sort, long-wish't their wiues! But fie on falshood, with bloud-shed Each bride she staines her bridall bed, First night, so father will'd! saue one, Hypermnestra's loue, sau'd, scap't and gone! Whil'st she's poore soule honouring loues deity, Wrong'd, prisond, for her too much piety; So Scylla priz'd Minos welfare, 'Boue her sire Nisus purpleWhich haire shee for loue be∣trayed to Minos, though therein consisted the slay and welfare of her father, and his whole King∣dome. haire; And Minos Daughter skil'd the same Lesson for Theseus loue, faireWho guided him by a clew of threed into the Labyrinth, where∣by hee slue the Minotaure and freed his Countrey of Athens, from the bloudy tribute and ser∣uitude to Minos and the Can∣dians. Dame.
Lynceus thus by his faire loues means, Scap't from his trecherous Vncles Realmes, Returning soone, with so strong hand, As Argos powers could not withstand, In fell reuenge of brothers slaine, Wrought Danaus still-fled, sore-feard bane; Who flying found fate following fast Spur'd on with winged speede for haste.Lynceus, King of Argos, An. 2525. Lynceus thus by this conquest wonne, Set on his Vncles Argiue throne, His faire loue frees, who prison'd long, For his sake had sustayn'd much wrong; But had fordo th'vngracious sisters, Saue, for his loued Hypermnestra's Suite, at whose pray'rs, he set them in A ship, sans helme, sayles, oares, or men! And so the abandon'd Ladies went, T' Atlantique seas toA like story (but more vncer∣tayne, as hauing no probable au∣thor or ground) is told of Dio∣clesians daughters, a King or Emperour of Assyria, wereas there was neuer any such; and one Albina, amongst them that should giue name to this Iland Albion. banishment. CANT. III. They are banished to the Sea, and arriue in Albion; where they become the mothers of the succeeding race of Giants, of whom nothing is memorable, besides their rudenesse, disorder, and ouer throw by Brute, saue that Leon-Gauere built Carleon. THis makes me thinke; not Dioclesian His Daughters, nor the faire Assyrian, Albina brought our Albions Name, Since likelyer these Nymphs hither came, Hal'd by windes, waues, and Nereus force, To Neptunes sonne's on Albions shores! Who though long since in Celt-land dead His name's yet on our white-rockes read.These Ladies must come, cir∣ca an. 2525. for at that time Lynceus was King of Ar∣giues. Their weather-beaten Barke, being cast On British coast, right sore agast, Amymone-like, sad, left alone, On Phrygian mountaines makingWhere shee is said to haue wan∣dred comfortlesse, till Iupiter pi∣tied her or tooke her for his Pa∣ramour. mone: These meete such mates in our wild Groues You'd thinke vnfit for Ladies loues, Faire Greekes! Vrania, Scylla, Scaea, Hero, Hyale, Glauce, Galathaea, And twise three times as many more, By Aeolus brought to Albions shore; Which passing prize with merry glee, The Syluan's seize, pretty to see, Such Nymphs keepe Sheepe vpon the Downes, Such Ladies laid by such right Clownes. So their halfe-Greeke, halfe-barbarous brood, Brutish before ere British bloud,
From Troian Brute deriu'd, they sayne, These Centaure-like huge monsters raigne.This only act and name of Leon Gauere, but without expresse mention of time when hee built Carleon, now called Chester, is found during those many hun∣dred yeares, of their rude mis∣gouernment or Anarchy. Leon Gauere, builds Carleon's bowers Other tracts shew'n crophees of their powers, Whose tombes portend, in equall range, With monstrous might their statures strange. CANT. IIII. An Exordium to the History of Brute. NOw Muses sing the Man, whose might, Italian Tents in Albion pight; Who long kept off, turmoyl'd and tost To many a farre and forreine Coast, By Iuno's ire,The Historie of King Brute, and his comming towards Britayne. and wreak-full spleene,Troi excidium, A. M. 2767. Or Gods that Troians torturers beene: Our second wandring Prince of Troy, As great aduentures, with great Ioy, Sought, as his Grandsire; and at last, That big-bon'd broode, from Brytaine chac't. CANT. V. The descent of Brutus, the cause of his exile, and tra∣uailes and aduentures in Greece. WHen after great Aeneas death, Syluius in saluage Woods tooke breath, Did his half-brother, yclep't Iùle, In new-built Alba Longa rule.Ascanius buil∣ded Alba-Lon∣ga, A. 2774. reigned there 38. yeares. Brute then, they say, this Syluius sonne Had by mischance his sireBrute slue his father by mis∣fortune as they were bung in the Forrest together, and so fled or banished from Italy, went in∣to Greece into exile. fordone, And fled to Greece, where Hectors once Andromache's and Pyrrhus sonnes, His noble Cousins now liu'd, and Were Princes of Chaonia land, Pergameus, Pyleus, and Molossus, Whose welcome cheeres, whom fortuneThe like friendly entertayne∣ment, hee found at the hands of another Troian Prince there, named Assaracus. crosses! Who had by them, lands giuen him then, But that a numerous band of men, From Troy descended, captiu'd all By King Pandrasus kep't in thrall, A neighboring Prince; did him importune, To free them, and if th'hand of Fortune So friended them; they once set free, Vassals to him their Prince, would bee. First then, Pandrase he gentlyThese captiued Troians and their race, prayed Brute to bee their Captayne, saith the Storie, as desirous to seeke aduentures, and weary of their seruitude in Greece. prayes, Who with proud threats, their suite denayes;
Which caus'd him force the Tyrant feele, The strokes of vnrelenting steele: And Pandrase and his children then, Antigonus, and Innogen, Captiu'd, the victors price hadKing Pandrasus Citie Spar∣tianum, was taken by Brutus, and many of his men drowned in the Riuer Schelu, and  after the King brought into  hands, was glad to buy his Lands and freedome at that friendly rate. paid, But that Brute for the beauteous Maid, Faire Innogens sake, set them free, And marrying her, for dowry hee May haue, but what hee'le craue! so strange, Foes to friends; warres to weddings change! CANT. VI. Brute marrying King Pandrasus daughter with great prouision of Ships and company, seeketh fortune, and other larger dominions, wherewith his remnant Tro∣ian troopes to inhabit. THen Brutus and his beautious Make,Brutes setting forth from Greece. To ship and Seas themselues betake, With money, men, munition, and The youthes choise flowers of all the land; All seeking fame, and with new seates, Aduentures strange, by warlike feates: That not those Peeres of Argo fam'd, Set forth with courage more enflamd, To Colchos for the golden fleece, Then Brute, and his they done from Greece. CANT. VII. He falleth with an Iland called Leogetia, where he sa∣crifizeth, prayeth, and asketh counsell at Dianas O∣racle. THence sayling forth with prosperous course, They light on LeogetiaLeogetia, one of the Ilands about Greece or Italy, where it seemes ood one of Dianas Tem∣ples, and so Brute doing sacrifice, seeketh to the Oracle. shores; An Iland in an vnknowne Ocean; There founded by zealous deuotion, Brute found, where one of Phoebe's shrines, With gold nor sparkling Iewels shines, But o're top't by the dangling trees And fenc't with thorny passages. Heere calling out his Mates arow, He sacrifiz'd a milke-white Doe, And mighty bowles of wine there beene Crownd by him to nights shady Queene; And 'fore her Oracle whiles he stayes, For her propitious aid thus prayes.
CANZ. VIII. Hee receiueth answere, to bend his course for Brytaine. GReat Goddesse that th'Arcadian groues, Parthenian hils and CynthusThe places where shee was principally resident and most ho∣noured, as luno at Samos; Pal∣las at Athens; Phoebus at Delphos, &c. loues, Giue gracious Audience to my suite, And gently guide thy Beads-man Brute, That o're rough Seas with prosperous winde, Their seats of rest by fates assign'd For him and his, he may attaine; To thee then and thy virgin trayne, Great Oceans Queene, wee'll to thy praise, That right'st our course, faire Temples raise! The Goddesse then in Vision-wise, Sleepe hauing now seiz'd BrutusAs was the manner to sleepe before to Oracle, on the skins of the beasts that were slaine for sa∣crifice. Eyes, Shewing cleere tokens of diuine Maiestike presence, in her shrine, Her selfe more stately to be seene, Then th' Amazon, or Assyrian Queene, Most rauishing bright, with heauenly looke, She thus bespake the valiant Duke. In westerne Sea's an Isle is plac't, Subject to gentle Zephyr'sThe answere of Dianas O∣racle, concerning his voyage and aduentures, directing his course for Britayne, then called Al∣bion. blast, Neptunes sonnes, Seamen say'ne of yore Huge Cyants held that wealthie shore: Deere Nephew that's a place right fit, For Ida's Peoples there to sit, Where I deuine New-troy shall rise, And Kings, whose fames shall pierce the Skies, Thy sonn's! beyond th'Herculean straites Seeke out those seates assign'd by fates CANZ. IX. The generall applause of his whole company, and ther preparation for the same. THe Chappell with her words seem'd shake, And Brutus from his trance awake, With his companions halfe agast, Perfumes vp to the Heauens they cast, Of Frankinsence, and costly spice, Th'aire Ecchoing forth, and open skies, These sawes; with their glad shouts for ioy In hope of their new-builded Troy!
CANZ. X. Their meeting with Corynaeus and other Troians neere the Pyrenine mountaines, ouerthrow of Guffar King of Poytewes in France, and arriuall in Britaine. THence putting forth to seas againe, The Lybian Syrts and Midland mayne, He leaues, passing by Hercules Pillers into th' Atlantique Seas; Aeneas-like perhaps by kinde, Seekes forraine shores, New-Troy to finde: And casting by the coast of Spaine, Before he met with Frances Mayne, Where Pyrene hills deuide both lands, Hee's seene by CorynaeusA man of approued wisedome and valour, tha was Captayne of a remnant of these that came from Troy with Antenor, to seate themselues in Illyria, and the Westerne coasts: and now had light on the orders of the Pyre∣nine Hills, inhabited by a people called Nomades. bands, A Captaine that at great Troyes foyle, Chaing'd Ilions for Illyrian soyle, And with Antenor noble Prince Came to Timaus springs! and since, Leauing Lyburnian Kingdomes quite, To South and Indies opposite, On Spaine and Frances bounds At foote of Pyrene hils was found, Whose tops fir'd by the NomadThe Nomades hauing their name of feeding Cattell, to whose pastures the woods being no friēd∣ly neighbours, they fired the sme on those Pyrene Mountaynes, of which great burning of the vast woods, the Hills tooke their name: Pyr, signifying fire in Greeke, not much dstant frm the Dutch, and English Saxon words, Fyre, and Brn, that is, Burne. Nation Thence nam'd, or'elooke the vast west Ocean. This Corynaeus and his traine Both sides of such Colleagues full faine, All of one stocke, one Troian Kin, All neere Allyes, Brute takes him in, Complice Copartner and Companion Of Trauels, who on th'Aquitanian King Guffar, come of Hercules bloud, Proofe of his valour shew'd rightArriuing in the mouth of Loire, and receiuing some discourtesie from king Guffar, called Pictus, of whom the Pictones, quasi picti, or Poytewes, some would deriue; they ouerthrew  and some of his confederate neighbour Princes And so with wealthy spoiles set saile for Albion. good: Whose ransack't townes and subiects slaine, When King to fly himselfe was faine, Deere did abuy, th'opprobrious words He proudly gaue those Troian Lords. From hence with wealthy spoyles,Brute, circa An. 2850. cous{que} peregri∣natus est. they say, Embark't againe withouten stay, They make for Deuon and Totnesse strand, Albions fore-told long-lookt-for land, Thus hauing past the dangerous Syrtes And Altars on fam'd AffrikeArae Philenûm as the Syrtes and like dangerous places, were so called, it might be, for that the ships ommin neare, could ard∣ly escape from being sacrificed to Aeouls and the Oceans fury, of them Virgil sings, Treis Notus abreptas, in Saxa latentia torquet; Saxa vocant Itali, medijs quae in fluctibus, Aras. skyrtes Malaea's gulfe, and lately seene Furd'st Gades Pillers and Pyrene: No sooner safe from vunder sayle, But toucht, but leaping forth, All haile, All haile, cries Brute, thou sacred seate, Faire Ile which Cynthia goddesse great; Promis'd to me and mine for ay, This is the place; here must I pay
My vowes to her, whose gracious hand From vnknowne Peoples, and strangeBrutes trauailes and nauiga∣tion in that Age were great, being ouer all the Mediteriane Sea, and a great part of the Atlan∣tique Ocean: Vlyses and Ae∣neas wondred at aduentures, ly∣ing all within the narrow com∣passe of the former. Lands, And Seas, and Syrts, and dangers store, Hath brought vs safe to Albions shore. And then, as was the manner, crown'd, With leauy sprayes his temples round, Deuoutly he by pray'rs doth call On Phrygian gods in order all, Ioue, Cybele, Sunne and Moone, and Night, And what or Genius god or spright, Was hallowed there, or haunts the place. His Mates their businesse ply apace, All got a-shore, glad of sweet rest, On Albions flowry fields they feast. CANZ. XI. An Apologie for the storie of Samothes or Mesech, and Albion. NOw Brute's in Brytaine;Apologia. Noahs brood, Though fetcht from th'vniuersall floud, Nor Neptunes sonnes escap't not free, From Zoilus carping, much lesse hee; How secretly so e're he came, From Troy, some that maligne his fame, Haue made sore search! they'le not endure, That he should flourish, theyHerostratus would haue a name, were it for burning so goodly a Monument, as the Tem∣ple of Diana was reputed among the Ephesians and Heathen; so doe some now nothing more, then hunt for Name, though by vnder∣mining truth. obscure! Samothes, whose stories nearest fit With verities of sacred Writ, That from great Noahs Arke doe bring, The second Worlds new-birth and spring, 'Bout whose obscure and ancient dayes, Few'st scruples sure, deserue most prayse. For Neptunes sonnes and Albion hee, 'Twas e're the guise, and e're will bee, That those, that furrow th'OceanOceano-geniti, and Nep∣tunia proles, though sometimes otherwise taken, doe most fitly point out Sea-faring men, who must needs be the first inhabiters of this Ile, and if any more doubt were (but Mela's report makes all cleare) whence this allusion could not choose but haue origi∣nall. flouds, Beene term'd by Poets Nereus brood! And these must needs possesse of yore, Waues-all-encircled Albion shore. But more to make their storie plaine, Mela reports of Albion slaine, Neare Britaine; why not he the while As rathe as white Rocks, names this Ile?
CANZ. XII. The like for that of Brute, his descent and race. ANd now to Brute; since some in game Or spight, will sport at others fame; But sure I know not how to please, Such curious queint conceits as these; And certes! th'AporetiqueAporetici, a braine-sicke sect of Philosophers, that not trusting any known verite, foolishly doub∣ting of all things, would call all things, euen the most certayne truths, into question. Sect, In all establish Lawes neglect, Hath too too much preuail'd in this Sicke Age of ours, and much amisse, When nothing once, so firme was thought, That now's not vnder Quaere's brought: Though more staid heads will one day see, Such too much medling should not bee; Or by experience learne, at last, That hee's not wisest, prates too fast. CANZ. XIII. All ordinary Obiections to the contrary answered and clearely refelled, and the Sybils Oracle-verses cited to that purpose. BVt now, pray heare, what they can say, That Brutes Detractors parts would play!Obiections against the story of Brute, vrged by some. Caesar, forsooth, was wondrous mute, And Tacitus, in not namingThe first Obiection answered, and the reasons following, why Caesar might bee ignorant of the British stories and antiquities, as well as their present estate, notwithstanding hee should then seeke the same, which may bee doubted of. Brute. Indeed, I thinke, 'twas wisest art, For Caesar, to conceale some part; And not the best of them to say, From whom he bore the worst away: His glorie was obscur'd too much, To lose the day, his lucke was such! Or if he truely had good will To say the truth! he had small skill To reade the Brittish Annalls o're, And leisure lesse he had therefore, I doubt! or if he had; ICaesars conquest in Brytaine, as it seemes not very faire exten∣ded, for fours of the Kings ee conquered were onely of Kent, and Cassiueanes City of the Tinobantes, or London his most fayned opposite, on the very edge thereof, at whose submission his conquest was determined. weene, In Kent alone his conquests beene. And our chiefe Monuments, they say, Farre off in Mona secret lay; Among the Druides: And who, Would wish or trust such with his foe? When they themselues from Romans ire, To their remotest Cells retyre? But now from Mona's secretThe Brittish story reuiued and flourished from those parts and parties, that were fled and hid from Caesar. Cells, And Druid' Priests inuolued spells, The Bard's the Druid's off-spring haue, Rais'd Brute and Arthur from their graue;
Where they yet slept, forgotten long, In the Bard's songs, and Brittish tongue. See, now in these great lett'redThe Saxons and English, e∣uen to this day, doe little inter∣meddle with the Brittons gests: insomuch that more obscure are they to them, and lesse minded by them, then the storie almost of a∣ny other Nation. dayes, We scarcely minde those Brittish layes, Or heed their gests and moderne acts, Much lesse those ancient times and facts. No maruell then if Latine storie, Or Saxon silence Brutus glorie: Lesse wonder too, that Caesar should Not finde these matters though he would. For grant the Druid's not enuy'de This, so to baulke great Caesars pride, Yet we finde they committedAnd this vse of committing the greatest matters to memorie ra∣ther then writing, could not but much increase Caesars ignorance of the state. then Most things to memorie, least to pen, Whence he t'affirme them knowes not whether, or from France come thither; And Tacitus may-be sought no more, Then his great Lord obseru'd before. Th'Obscure first Age doth Varro call, Next Fabulous, third Historicall: The learned Latine too,The second Obiection, Sol. per concess. sayes true, But toucheth all both vs and you! And if great Maro meritAnd what lets it that we should not take the Brittish storie on their credit, with the like ap∣plause, at the Brittons hands: since the Maxime is, vnicuique in sua arte redendum? The third Obiection answered: cum recriminatione Polydo∣ristarum. Bayes, For Romes first Lords, in Latine layes! And Homer like-grac't, when he sings His owne Greeke Peeres, and Dardan Kings! Whom rather for their stories else, Seeke we to then, then Brittons selues? More, some obiect, in RomanIn the ancient Roman storie, euen of their Kings, is much ob∣scuritie, I may say contrarietie & apparant contradiction, which if it shall condemne the rest, their storie must be exploded as well as ours! but then, sauing the holy Writ, I know not what historie should be saued. writ, Brute, nor his slaine Sire, read in it; And Brutes name barbarous seemes! We may, If Brutes name be not found, well say, They writ but barely of their owne Much more, of forraine more vnknowne, Their Kings e'en clouded! specially In those first Ages; and yet I, See diuers Syluij; if not ones Sonne, who can yet shew Brute was nones? And Brutij, with Caesars goodBrutij, were an ancient people in Italy. grace, In ancient'st Italy had place.
CANZ. XIIII. A transition to the next, and conclusion of this present Ode. MOre, to confirme vs to our Brute, Since sacred Sybills seeme notAnd it is certayne, the Oracles delighted in naming the places after the most ancient, and some∣times obscure and aeigmaticall names. mute; Whose books well worthy best respect, Frame Brutus Iles in GreekeAethicus translated by Saint Ierome, aboue 1000. yeares since, calleth them Insulas Bru∣tanicas: the Greeks writing it by , it soundeth our u. And the Welsh doe the like, as is seene in Brytys, by them pronounced Brutus: Also English Writers that are aboue an hundred yeares since, call it Brutaine. J. Mandeuill. Dialect: Needs, such as this, nor aught will please, We pray them better shew, or cease, And giue vs leaue, and Welsh to raise, Aswell our Brutes, as Arthurs praise. The end of the third Ode.
A briefe type of the fourth Booke or Ode of PALAE-ALBION, called BRVTVS. The fourth Ode contayneth, 1. A brief recapitu∣lation of Brutus storie, his descent & trauels with the aduen∣tures hee found here, when he came in∣to this I∣land: Quelling the Gi∣ants, and establish∣ing his King∣dome in Albion, called since Bri∣tannia or Brutania of his owne name. 2. Brutus Acts, Race, and succession of Kings here: viz. Brute, 2855. he reigned 24. yeares, and diuided his Kingdome among his three sonnes. 1. Locrine King of Loegres, or England, reigned 20. yeares; His wife was Guen∣doline; His Paramour the beauteous Estrild. 2. Camber King of Wales or Cambria. 3. Albanak King of Albania or Scotand. Madan his sonne, and Gwendoline, reign. 55. yeares. Mempritius his sonne, reigned 20. yeares: Hee slue his brother Manlius. Ebranke his sonne, reigned 60. yeares: His sonnes conquer Germany: He builded Oxford. Brute Greene-sheld his sonne, reigned 12. yeares. Lei his sonne, reigned 25 yeares. Lud-Rudibras his sonne, reigned 29. yeares. Bladud his sonne, reigned 20. yeares: A Magitian, he founded Bath. Leir his sonne, reigned 40. yeares. Expelled by his elder Daugters, Gonorilla and Ragan, and their husbands; Is restored by Cordyla his youngest Daughter whom he had reiected. Cordyla, daughter to King Leir, reigned 5. yeares. Cunedagius, sonne to Ragan, slue his Cousin Morgan, sonne of Gonorilla, and possessed the Kingdome, and reigned 33. yeares. Riuallo his sonne, reigned 46. yeares. Gurgius his sonne, reigned 38. yeares. Syssylth, Riuallo's sonne, reigned 49. yeares. Iago, Gurgius sonne, reigned 15. yeares. Kmac, sonne of Syssylth, reigned 54. yeares. Gronodugo or Gorbodugus, reigned 63. yeares: His sonnes Ferrex and Porrex being slaine, began the Pentarcy or fiue Kingdomes in fiue seuerall parts of the Land, which Mlmutius Dunwallo, sonne of Clotenus Duke of Cornwall, reduced into Monarchy, after fiftie yeares. 3. A remon∣strance oppo∣sed to the er∣ronious retec∣tion of some supposed Er∣rours, by Po∣lydore Virgill, an Italian wri∣ter, of our En∣glish Annalls: refelling some of his errours; detecting and rectifying his vvrong cōpu∣tation of times and calculating the K. reignes according to the same. Also shew∣ing how vn∣iust his & some of his Follow∣ers calumnia∣tions are, that are made a∣gainst the Bri∣tish & our Hi∣stories.
PALAE ALBION. Ode quarta, Inscripta BRVTVS. ARGVMENTVM. Brutus vt Albionem, Bruto{que} Brytania Nomen, Coepit, & excisus, quarta dat Oda, Gygas! At Mulmutiadae, stirps altera, Bruto oriundis, Sceptra licet serò, surripit illa tamen. . Prooemij Ioco, istius Odae Hypothesis. SAmotheam exorsi primùm,Series Poematis, siue . lustrauimus! Oram Desertae Albionis promouimus inde; Brytannos Nunc tractus, vti{que} olim etiam indita nomina nostris Temporibus rediuiua vigent, benè nota recensens, Musa veni, & resonis pete candida sydera pennis! A Mauris, Luso, vel aquis, quae Tania dicta est, Aut venit, aut videt, aut vicit Brutus! Amoenae Albioni,Institutum libri, impositum, à Bruto Brytania Nomen: Hic claruêre eius per saecula multa nepotes, Brutigenûm, donec acer Romanus in oras Deuenit, Gallûm{que} manu spolijs{que} superbus, Dempta{que} cognatis populis è sanguine Troûm, Ortis, Tarpeiâ suspendit in Arce trophaea, Casar in aequoreos, qui transtulit arma Brytannos. Nota canam! vati linguis animis{que} fauentes, Annuite Aonides!& votum, Brutus trans Gallica Regna, Lustrans fata, solum geniale inuenerat olim. Pandite Daedaliae fonteis Helicona{que} Diuae, Vos meministis enim Nymphae, quibus Anglica iam tum, Floruerit terra alma viris, quibus arserit Armis▪ Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura.
. Bruti in Brytanniam aduentus. CVm pius Aeneas sociorum flebile fatum, Occasum Troiae suprema{que} funera vidit, Monte sub Attandro molitur vti{que} biremes,Inde post recapitulationem bre∣uem, praecedenuum ante Bruti aduetum, Tendens{que} in Latium, sedes vbi fata quietas Ostendebant, fas vbiregna resurgere Troiae, Getulis Lybicis{que} ereptus Syrtibus, exul, Impulerat sospes Lauiua ad littora classes; Nec citius Latijs tuto consederat Agris, Quam fuit Alecto, stygijs infecta venenis, Quam fuit Alecto & coniux Iouis effera Iuno, Quae Phrygas & Rutilos miseranda strage fatigent. Sed postquam Aeneiâ deiectus cuspide Turnus, Concidit,etiam reliqua Bruti historiae series & gesta, attexuntur; & sero facta est Liuinia Coniux, Syluius in Syluis ex hac tua posthuma proles, Nascitur Aeneas; hoc saeclo, recta fuêre, Regna sub Ascanio, & quae dicitur Alba; sed huius Aeneae soboles, diuersa per aequora vectus, Brutus in Angliacas tandem deuenerat oras. Has etiam terras meministis vt antea sanctae Aonidum turmae, vasti tenuere Gygantes! Neptuni filij: nam postquam regna fuêrunt, Olim Saturni diuisa, habet aethera summus Iupiter, infernum styga Dis; maria omnia lustrans Caeruleis dominaris aquis Neptune, nepotes Cuius, regna patris, per Caerula flumina nando, Oras inuenêre, & finibus incoluêre Desertae Albionis, faelicia rura, Gygantes: Quorum aliquam partem disiecit littore Celtûm Virtus Alcidae; hic reliquos Aeneia proles; Damnoniae attingens Totnesia littora Brutus,Ac primo cum Ecce tenet portum; iam stabant littore curuo Naues; quam primum summis de montibus hostis, Apparet tanquam nemorosa, procera{que} sylua; Sic nautae vidissle ferunt in montibus olim Trinacriae Cyclopas, & hic è Collibus astra Sublimi ceruice ferit; Naualia Bruti, In mare progreditur lustrans, vt consitaripâ Populus Eridani, verrit{que} Cacumime nubes. . Bruti cum Gygantibus praelium & praelij euentus. NEc mora, quin stricto cernuntur praelia ferro; Vndi{que} concursant vasto clamore Gygantes,
Ac nisi vana fuit Phlegraeis fabula castris, Dijs infestae acies, certarunt Pelio Ossan, Insuper at{que} Ossae frondosum inuoluere Olympum, Imperio Diuos premere, & supera astra tenere;Gigantibus congressus; ini∣toque praelio, Praelia Brutus init, tremit horrida terra tumultu, Euolat interea certis victoria pennis, Brutigenûm turmis, releuans sua pectora! vt hostis Aufugit, insequitur Brutus, nec rara Gigantum Corpora sternit humi; vt secus haud respersa videres, Passim per terras & per Genialia rura, Quàm vel in Autumno, Boreali flamine frondes: Nituntur Bruti Comites, & puluere condunt, Quoscun{que} aspiciunt, ac caesa cadauera campis, Rellinquunt lanianda Lupis; sic Iupiter altus, Centimanum{que} Gygen, Briarea{que} & obruit Aetnâ, Enceladum: è campis Phlegrae, Titanida{que} Olim Condidit Inarines aeterna mole Typhaea. Neu priùs è regno extirparunt martis alumnos, Neptuni & Nerei sobolem,opera Corinaei, à quo Cornubia nomen traxit, Victeria. quàm summus honore, Dux Corinaeus opem tulit; huic pro munera tanto, Arua dedit Brutus, Corinaea{que} rura vocauit; Proxima Damnonijs, quâ inter confinia currit, Loegriae Tamaris diuisor Cornubiaeque; Quo tractu montes aiunt Titanibus illis, Antiquis famulosadomus, quibus vda ferarum Terga dabant vestes, cruor haustus pocula trunci, Antra lares, dumeta thoros, Caenacula rupes, Praeda cibos, raptus venerem, spectaculacaedes, Imperium vires, animos furor, impetus arma, Mortem pugna, sepulcra rubus: monstris{que} gemebat Monticolis tellus, sed eorum plurima tractû, Pars crat occiduo; terror, maior{que} premebat Te furor, extremum Zephyri Cornubia limen; Fortè quia huc multo occursarunt agmine Teucris, Tunc ità perculsi, insolito terrore Gigantes. Hos auidum belli robur Corinaeus Auerno Praecipites misit,Et deinde cubitis ter quatuor altum Gogmagog Herculeâ suspendit in Aere luctâ; Anthaeum{que} suum, scopulo detrusit in aequor, Qua Tamaris glauco immiscet sua flumina Ponto, Potauit fuso Thetis ebria sanguine fluctus, Diuisum{que} tulit corpus mare, Cerberus vmbram.
. Vortigerin facinorosa regni occupatio, & Romani Im∣perij finis. REge breui, à famulis Picto{que} satellite, caeso, Vortiger hac princeps in proditione Tyrannus,Ingenio pollens, diadema & regnū per traudem occupat; & heic Ode, est Romani apud Brito∣nes imperij, meta & periodus. in Epiphonemate isto, conclu∣sionis aut corollarij vice, qua∣si inuolutae. Euadens, potitur sceptris, solio{que} Brytannis. Vther & Aurelius, defuncti Regis vter{que} Frater, Aremoricum vicino littore tractum Cesserunt, ne{que} iam totam cum Scotus Hybernen Mouit, & infesto spumauit Remige Tethys, Te modo vicinis percuntem Gentibus, olim O Nympha aequoras inter celeberrima diuas, Ferro picta genas, cuius vestigia verrit Caerulus, immenso Brytannia cincta profundo, Defendit rapidis acer Romanus in armis, Ampliùs, aut reprimit Pictûmve, Scotûmve tumultus: Caesar abes; ter Consul opem negat Aetius! hostis, Britannum Oceano, Oceanus{que} repellit in hostem. Quo nunc? Caesar eras, non deserere ausus Alumnos, Quo ruit Imperium? deserta quod Insula Iule, Parta trophaea tuâ, quondam fortissime, dextrâ. Scilicet ingenium, senio, mens, forma, laborant Cunctae sue! Imperij{que} suis iacet aegra ruinis, Maiestas; multum languens annosa veterno. Imperij in nostros heic meta! à Caesare primo, Postquam quingentos, lustris labentibus, annos, Seu propè Brytannis Itali dominantur in oris. Odae sextae Finis.
PALAE ALBION, The fourth Ode, Entituled BRVTVS. THE ARGVMENT. The fourth Ode brings in Troian Brute Mong's sonnes, that parts his Realmes in three, Scot'sh yet and Cambrian Kings ow'n suite And seruice t' Englands Primacy, That in right Line arow descends T'his Heires, till Schisme their glorie ends. CANT. I. The intention of the present Booke discouered. SAmothea first, siue supputatio Annorum. next Albion shore Now so, both now and nam'd of yore,Supplementum Historiae. Great Britaine shewes! new dayes forth brings, Th'old names, and ancient race of Kings. Thou sought'st, deare Muse, how Mauritane, Spanish Lusitane, French Aquitane, Coasted or kend' or conquerd', last Brute at Brute-tania anchor cast! Call'd Albion erst; where many a-day His issue reign'd,Caesar. till Caesars way Hither lay through France; so French and ours With Trophey's deckt Tarpaeyan towers; Nor booted kindred: Mars decides Th'alliance, lands by lot diuides. Then Pallas and my Muse that sings Their Roman Lords or Troian Kings, How Brute who quell'd the Belgique hoast, Found entertaynment on our coast; Diuine Dames you remember when He came, his chance, the meanes, the men, With whom he fought, that Giant race: Now briefely, that both time and place, And all things else I may reherse, Pray, prompt my pen, tune well my Verse.
CANZ. II. A briefe recollection of the precedent story of Brute, continuing it to his encounter with the Giants that he found in the Iland. VVHen once the wandring TroianA briefe recapitulation of the former story of Brute, ere hee came at Brytaine; and so pro∣ceeding on, and descending to his acts here. Duke To salt Sea woues himselfe betooke,Troiae excidium, A. M. 2767. In Barks ybuilt' in Ida, and Leauing furious Dido's loue, and land, Had safe set foote in ium, where Fates had decreed,  Troy to reare, And Romes great ; soone were seene, Fell Furies rais'd  hie Queene. But tumults laid, and Turnus dead, Troyes Prince he doth Lauinia wed, Whose late-borne Babe, since Fathers death, Syluius in saluage woods tooke breath; From him whose brother halfe of bloud, Built Alba-Longa, t'goes for good, Came our first founder Brute; what time Vast Giants did possesse this Clime;Ascanius King in Italy, A. 2774 Great Neptunes sonnes; for SaturnesThe golden Age, and diuision of the world vnder Saturnes heires; whereby Neptune and his sonnes came to be Lords of the Seas and Iles. lands, When they came to his childrens hands, Beene had by them, thus, Poets please; Ioue Heau'n, Dis Hell, Neptune the Seas. So Neptunes sonnes held this our shore, And many a wealthy Ile of yore: Of which race, Herc'les some in France Did quell; these here, 'twas Brutus chance; Who striking in at Totnesse Strand,Brute King bere, A. 2855. In Deuoshire brought his Barks to land! But scarce had time to view the coasts, Ere from the Hills he spies huge hosts, And Cyclops swarmes, as 'twere great woods Come from their fields to th'neybouring flouds: Such, Sea-men sayne, they vs'd to see 'Bout Mongibell, inMont-Gibello, the moderne name of the aunciently so much famed Mountayne, Atna. Sicily. Such statures strange, they say'n, of eld, Both their and our Trinacria held, Th'Aetnaean Monsters, matching tho Tall Poplar's on the banks of Poe. CANZ. III. The Giants ouerthrowne, and Gogmagog the greatest slaine by Corinaeus, who hath Cornwall assigned to him; their manners decyphered. VVIth these, whose tree-like tops did skar The flutt'ring clouds, must Brutus war;
Not much vnlike such match, I weene, In Phlaegra fields there once was seene, Where Ossa laid on Pelion hie, Made Olymph tops out-towre the skie; Whiles for to win, fell Monsters stroue, Those starry battlements of Ioue These liuelesse, breathlesse, chac't and slaine, Brute strewes their corpses o're the plaine; Like eares of corne while haruest lasts, Or leaues borne downe by Boreas blasts! A prey for Wolues, and daintie feasts For rauenous Birds, and for wild Beasts. So Ioue dealt with theThe sonnes of Tytan, and their adherents, the Giants that warred with Iupiter, and the Gods. Tytannoy's, Th'huge Monsters quelling, layes the poise Of Aetna on this Giants brest; Of Iles and Sea-rocks on the rest; Of Inarine's burden sore and streight, Typhaeus feeles the endless weight. But Albions coasts were not set free, From Albions brood; e're braue Knight hee, Duke Corinaeus tooke in hand, To rid these vncoth Creatures, and Had faire lands giuen him, call'd, they say, Of his nameCorn-wall so called of Cori∣naeus name; some say of the fa∣shion of it lying out like a horne in∣to the Sea, opposite to Gaule, and held by ancient Gaules in Bry∣taine, thence called Cornugal∣lia; which westerne parts were accounted the chiefe receptacle & abode of these Giants, where also are reported most stories of them, and most monuments yet appearing, tokens of their mon∣strous strength and hugenesse. Cornwall to this day; Where on the bankes of Tamaris, Which now the Cornish confines is, He with Herculean might o're-threw Gogmagog, Chieftaine of that crew; Who hurl'd downe head-long, Doris deepe His corps, Styx had his soule to sleepe. And it was thought that westerne coast, Of this our Iland pest'red most, With those huge-limbed Centaures, who In stead of house and harbour, doe On Mountaynes liue in dens and caues That summers sunne, and winter saues: The running Riuers, Herbs, and Rootes, Right sauage-like, raw flesh and fruits, And skins of wild beasts, such theirTherudenesse of the Giants. states, Their meate, drinke, cloth, and finest cates, And greatest strength bore greatest sway, Till Corine chac't them quite away!
CANZ. XV. Vortiger steppeth vp dispossessing the right heires, and b∣teyneth the Crowne; the Romane Epire wayning and fully ended in Britaine. VOrtiger for wisedome by report,Vortiger King of Brytaine, A. 447. reigned in all 20 yeares. Gracious with all, but most at Court, Amidst these broyles so laid his traine, The King by a Pict in's Guard was slaine, And himselfe crown'd: both the right heires, Kings brothers fled to France forAurchs  after∣wards returned and  Vortiger and the Saxon Hengist  ther in Law, of the Crowne feare. And now, alas, this noble Ile, Albions that wert, since Brytaines style, Admir'd of all, nor lou'd in vaine, By Nereus beauteous Sea-Nymph traine, In their soft armes waue-circled round, By th'other powers with pleasures crown'd; Now lay'd and left, at lowestFor in former times  in vaine  to Rome for aide; and a letter to Aetius in Franee, the  whereof was (Aetioer Consult; the  of the Britons; The  enemy driues vs to the Sea, the Sea backe to the enemy, between these twie arise two deaths, wee are slaine or drowned) but the Romans could afford them small succour, beng ouer laid by Bleda and ttyla Kings of Huns and others, and so ended the Roman Empire here, with the beginning of Vortigers and the Saxons reigne. bay, For Hunn's, Picts, and wilde Scots a pray; Romes Lords nor Aetius eft-soones prou'd By piteous plaints t'aide Brittons mou'd, Prime tropheys erst of Caesars glory,Iulius Caesar came hither, a∣bout A. ante Christum 51. Vottiger began since Christ 447. so the whole time of the Romans rule & stay here was within two yeares of 500. And rar'st Lords, once, in Romans story: Though't seemes the wayning Empires state Through very eld, leaues them; and late Languishing plac't her reignes period here, From Iulius nigh fiue hundredMeta Romani apud nos Imperij. yeere; Where then Rome left, rose Saxon Kings, Whose race, and acts, my Muse next sings. The end of the sixt Ode.
A briefe type of the seuenth Ode of PALAE-ALBION, Entitul HENGISTVS. the seauen Ode contayneth, 2. The Heptarchye, eauen Kingdomes of the Saxons, with their seue eginnings, extent, encrease, continuance ding, viz. 1. The ori∣ginal & cal∣lgn of the Saxons vn∣der Vortiger, and the end of the By∣tons reigne, vnder their Kings. vz. Vortiger, A. 417. R 20 v. Vmer, his son, dead in his fathers life time. Aureli' Am∣brose, son of Constantine, late King. R 32 yeares Vther Pen∣dragon, his brother, r. 18. Arthur. sur∣named the Great. V∣thers sonne, R. 26 years. Constantine, duke Cadors sonne, reig∣ned 3 years. Conan. Ar∣thurs Ne∣phew, R. 3 Vortiporus, his son R. 4. Malg R. 5. Carcus, R. 3 yeares. Cadar, R. 22 yeares. Cadw, R. 48 yeares. Cadwallader his son, last King of the Brytons R. only 3 years 1. The Kingdome of Kent, Anno 456. vn∣der Hengist, who reigned 24. yeares. Octa, his sonne R. 24. Otho. his sonne, R. 22. Ermenrike, his sonne, reigned 25. Ethelbert, his sonne, reigned 56. In his time Saint Augustine came into England conuerting the Sax∣ons. Eadbald, his sonne, a notable Pagan, reig∣ned 24 yeares. Ercombert, his sonne, a good Prince, reig∣ned 20. Egbert, his son, reig∣ned 9. Luthere, Egberts bro∣ther, reigned 11. yeares. Edrg, his Cousin, 2. Guthred, sonne of Eg∣bert, reigned three yeares. His three sonnes. , R. 23. Eth, 11. A, 4. Cuthred, R. 8 yeares, Aled, alias Balared, expelled by Egbert, King of west Sax∣ons, Anno 827. hee reade his sonne Astane Duke thereof. 2 The Kingdom of Mer∣cia began, A. 586. vnder Crida, who reigned 9. yeares: his sonne Wibba reigned 20 yeares. Ceorlus, his sonne, reig∣ned 10. Penda, sonne of Wibba, reigned 30. slame by Oswy, K. of Northumbers. Wolfere, his sonne. R. 17. Ethelred, Wolferes sonne, R. 29. Hee warred with Egfride of Northumberland, and Lothaire of Kent. Kenred, sonne of Wolfer, reigned 5. Celred, Edreds sonne, reigned 8. Hee warred with Ina. Ethelbald, of the bloud of Eopa, brother of Penda, reigned 40. slaine by Bernred, that R. 10. y. Offa, a bloudy King reig∣ned, 39. Egfride, his sonne, reig∣ned 4 moneths. Cynewolf, of Penda's line, reigned 24 yeares. Kenelme, his sonne, ame by his sister Quindred. Cwulf, brother to K. Cynewolf, reigned two yeares, expelled by nulf who was van∣quished by Egbert, and saine by the East-An∣gles, afterwards Ludicenus, reign. 2. y. and Whitlafe, 15 yeares, made tributarie to Egbert, a∣bout, Anno 827. 3. The Kingdome of Northumbers began der Ida, A. 547. he reigned 12 yeares: af his death his Kingdom was diuided into t petty Kingdomes or Prouinces: In Bremcia. Ada, his son, and his brothers, reigned 30 yeares. Deira. Ella, the sonne Histria, a  Duke, R. 30 Ethelfride, nephew to Ida, expelleth Ed sonne of Ella, heire of Deira, and reigneth uer both Prouinces 22 yeares: Edwine afterwa ouerthrew Ethelfride, and reign. ouer all 17 Eaufride, sonne of Ethelfride, R. 1. y. Osrijc, sonne of Ethelfride, R. 1. Oswald, sonne of Ethelfride, the Cadw and was slaine by Penda King of M he reigned ouer both Prouinces 8 yeares▪ Oswy, brother of Oswald, after Oswine slaine, reig∣ned ouer both the Pro∣uinces, which were neuer againe after ioyned, as they had before been, 28 year Oswine, son Osrijc, slain Oswy, R. 8 Egfride, sonne of Oswye, reigned 15 yeares Alfride, his brother, reigned 20 yeares. Osred, his sonne, reigned 11 yeares, slaine Kenred, his Cousin, who reigned 2 yeares. Osrijc, his other Cousin, reigned 10 yeare Ceolf, brother of Kenred, reigned 8 yeare Egbert, reigned 24. Osulfus, reigned 1. murdered. Edilwald, reigned 11. slaine by the Vsu Alred who reigned 10 yeares. Edilbert, sonne of Edilwald, expelled 2. Dukes Ethelbald, and Herebert, but after 10 ye reigne of A sonne. Aswald, slaine by one Siga, and his bree Osred, that reigned 1 yeare: expelled, reigned againe many yeares, &c. But the Northumbers sore vexed by these other intestine wars of their Kings or Du and also by the Danes, submit to Egbert. Circa Anno 820.
The Kingdome of the East Saxons, A. 527. vnder Erchenwine, who reigned 60 yeares. dda, his sonne, reig∣ned 17. ert, his sonne, reig∣ned 13. red, his sonne, red, his bro∣ther, bald, his bro∣her, bertus Paruus nne of Sewrd, bert, sonne of igebald. deline. gaire. sonne of igebert' Paruus. lbius, Associate of Sigaire. gard, and Sew∣red, sonnes of elbius, and sonne of Sigaire, from,—Anno 617. ill—Anno 717. R. all of them 100. years red, sonne of Sige∣t, reigned 38 yeares. then followed thelwald, Albert, ena, and Suthred, anquished by Egbert, f west Saxons, hauing eigned there till the yeare 800, or after vt dicitur. 5. The Kingdome of East Angles, began An. 492. vnder Vffa, of whom his Successours were called Vffings: he reig. 7 yeares. Tytullus, his sonne, R. 20. Redwald, his sonne, R. 25. he aided Edwine of Nor∣thumberland, against E∣thelfride. Eorpwald, his sonne, R. 12. Sigebert, his brother, who founded Cambridge, and Edrike, his cousin, R. 60. y. Anna, sonne of Ewide, brother of Redwald, R. 20 yeares: All these three last Kings were slaine by Penda of Mercia. Adilherus, brother of An∣na, slaine by Oswy, with Penda, R. Edilwald, his brother, R. 9. Aldulf, sonnes of A∣dilhere Reign 25. Eluold, 12. Hisbern, or 26. Beornas,   Edilred, a good Prince, reigned 52 yeares. Ethelbert, his sonne, about An. 790. a very godly Prince, trecherously slain by Offa King of Mercia; whose Lands taken by Offa with the Kingdome of Mercia, came to the west Saxons Crowne, & Egberts hands, about An∣no 827. 6. The King∣dome of the South Saxons began A. 478 the first of all the other king¦doms next to the Kingdom of Kent, in Hengists life∣time, vnder Ella, who reigned 36. yeares. Cissa, his son, who builded Chichester, reigned 76. yeares. After them Edilwalcus, reigned 25 yeares. Berthunus, & Anthynus, were slaine by Cedwalla, K. of west Sax∣ons, and Ald∣wyne by his Successor Ina; so this King∣dome came first of all the rest into the west Saxons hands: Circa Annum 713. 7. The Kingd. of west Saxons began, A. 499. vnder Cerdic, who reigned, or was in Bry∣taine, 27. Kenrik, his sonne, R. 25. v. Ceauline, his sonne, R. 33 y. dyeth in exile. Celrijc, his grand-child by Cutwyne, reigned 5 yeares. Ceolfus, sonne of Cutha bro∣ther of Ceauline, reigned 12. Cunegulf, son of Ceola, son of Cutha, brother of Ceauline, reigned 31 yeares. Guthred, son of Guicheline, son of Kingulf, R. 3 yeares. Kenwal, son of Kingulf, r. 30 Sexburga his wife, R. 1 y. Elckwyne and Centwyne, sons or nephewes of Kingulf, r. 11. Cedwalla, nephew to Cut∣wine, reigned but 3 yeares and went to Rome. Ina, his cousin, reigned 37 y. Ethelard, reigned 14 yeares. Cuthred, reigned 17 yeares. Sigebert, reigned 1 yeare. Kenulf, R. 29. slaine by Cy∣neard one of the bloud Royal. Brytricus, poysoned by his wife Eadburga, reign. 17 y. Egbert, who before had bin a petty King among the west Saxons, and fled into France for feare of Brytricus, recal∣led, was made King, A. 802. He reduced all the Kingdoms to one, vnder his obedience, and reigned 37 yeares. 3. The vnion of the seuen Kingdomes of the Saxons vnder the west Saxon King Egbert, into Monar∣chy againe, who at a ge∣nerall Coun∣cell, or Par∣liament, as∣sembled at Winchester, Anno—caused him∣selfe to bee crowned King ouer all the seuen Prouinces; and by his E∣dict-Royall, commanded the land to be called from thenceforth Engla-Lond, as the Sax∣ons write, and as wee pro∣nounce Eng∣land: he reig∣ned 37 years, and dyed about, Anno 839. first King of Eng∣land, he also subdued the Danes, Wales, and a part of Scotland.
HENGIST and HORSVS, Brittons harmes, Their Ensignes signing both their names, The Saxon Horse their Armes, Braue warriours hither came. Whose mightie stocke, Like Hydra bud, So huge a flocke Of Saxon brood; That Brytaine bends To th'Pagan force, But late as friends Call'd to their shores. Kent first, her Kings, West-Saxons then, And Sussex sings As Essex men: East-Angles, and Northumbers wilde; Last Merken-land Great'st Kingdome stylde. So while these raigne, Brittons race failes: When Welsh-men faine, Fly into Wales, Leaue Albions faire And best parts free To th' Foe, to reare Their Heptarchye; Which flourisht long with fame Till EGBERTS warre-like force Brought all to one; and England names, Faire speede to th'honoured Saxon Horse.
PALAE ALBION. Ode septima, Inscripta HENGISTVS. ARGVMENTVM. Septima septenis sub Regibus Anglica vixdùm, Oda regi recitat Regna, Britanna cadunt! Egbertus, tot sceptra tamen, coalescere in vnum Rex west-Saxo facit, iam{que} monarcha gerit. . Institutum Odae, & Prooemium. ILle ego qui Samothem,Series Poematis, siue ma∣teriarum . Albiona, immaneis{que} Gigantes Brutum Brytannis, cecini, agmina{que} Italain oris; Iam venio ad parteis Anglorum, & Saxones Anglis Vicinos, primum{que} in littora nostra vocatos, Rege iubente, rudeis contra hostiles{que} tumultus, Gentis Hyperboreae, Pictûm{que} Scotûm{que} rapinas. Quaesitos igitur toties, toties{que} negatos, Numine Phoebeis,Praesentis instituti Exegesis. primos ostendere fonteis, Saxonici illustris generis, concedite vati Vestro, augescentis florescere germen honoris, Percupienti; & tandem archaia, arcana reclusa, Pandite Daedaliae nobis Oracula Diuae. Sic ego, sic Britones, Iuitae, Angli, Saxones, omnes, Florea serta simul, sollemni more feremus. . Anglum, & Saxonicae gentis, vt & nominis Origo. SAxones à Sacis, ducunt sua stemmata; Sacae, Sarmatiam coluêre, Getae iuga Pontica; Iuitae Dicti,Vbi primùm, ac terra illis concessa est Cymbrica sedes; Vicinae heic gentes! cum Iuitis Saxonas olim,
Periustrasse ferunt, pandis freta caeca Cyulis; Hos praedae intentos contra, tumidos{que} furores, Saxonicae Comites orae instituere Quirites; E contrà,Sxonum Archaiologia &  exquiritur, hos Comites sibi Vortiger euocat! Atquî, Vimine texebant puppeis, alnos{que} cauatas, Flumina senserunt; direpta{que} terga iuuencûm, Fluctibus insiliunt ratibus velamina pandis. Vix Venetus stagnante Pado, ceu Saxo furenti Nauigat Oceano! talem videt Indus in alueo, Saurobatis perhibent contextam vimine Cymbam, Primùm vbi Semiramis summo fluitantia malo, Caeruleis Regnis victricia signa leuârat. Vtcun{que} hos primùm video esse necesse fateri, Sarmatiam, aut Scythiae partem, aut confinia Sacas Incoluisse; Getae sedêre ad littora Ponti, Iutae nunc dicti, & Iuit-landia, Cymbrica Nesos, Sedes percelebris Boreali in Cardine mundi: Sauromatûm & Sacûm sedem, Scythiam, Europaeam{que} Olim Sarmatiam, Poloni, alij{que} Polonis Vicini lota tota tenent; Scythiam vlteriorem,qui è Scythiâ forsan Europaeâ aut proximè adiacenti Asiaticâ, & Oris Hordae Tartaricae gentes{que} Hierosolymitanae; Sunt{que} ingressi Europam, aiunt, Scytha, Sarmata, Sacae: Sacas{que} è Scythiâ redeunteis subripuisse Paulatimin Cymbriâ sedes; ne{que} Negnone natum Saxona commemorem! qui certè Sassones altâ Chersone so primùm posucrunt maenia Cymbriâ; Quos medios Iuitas{que} oliminter-creuerit Anglus, Flens-burgum propè; quod Saxonia protulit Anglos, Hoc patet in linguâ niueo{que} colore! & ibidem Anglia, aiunt, vetus est, locus, & sacer angulus Anglis; Saxones in{que} suâ & nostrûm linguâ, quasi Sacûm Progenies sonat, & nos Saxones indè vocamus: Sedem{que} Armenijs Sacas invallibus olim Sacacenam habuisse ferunt, magnum{que} Monarcham Ante Cyrum Sacas fugisse, Cyrum{que} fugasse, In{que} vicem victum & victorem, ait inuida Fama! Indè olim Persae, Sacaea{que} festa quotannis, Instituunt celebri, Eustathio referente, triumpho. Persa Scythas quamuis vno omneis nomine Sacas,Perfidi vicinis oriundi, in Germaniam, exinde in Britan∣niam transmigrârunt: Saepe vocet; nosmet tamen hijsce parentibus ortos Scilicet è Sacis; Persis{que} potentibus olim, Contiguas habuisse domos, ne{que} forsitan illa Coniectura leuis, quam multa vocabulain vsu Iam nostris hodie, cum{que} hijs communia Persis, Arguerent;A ijdem historijs recinentibus, Albim Transuecti Sueuos turbârunt, & modò Gallos, Et Salicam Gentem, delata{que} postea ad illas Gens Anglûm recolit dictas de nomine sedes.
. Saxones à Vortigerno accersiti, praemijs, & praedijs donati. VOrtiger Imperio ac sceptris velut ante receptis, Circumlustranteis pandis freta caeca Cyulis,Vortigerno, sc. euocati; qua oblata occasione cum Saxones accersit sibi, praesidiaria, turbas Hostileis contrâ, socia agmina, Scoto-Hybernûm; Nam{que} ferunt Britones{que} feros, in montibus olim, Finibus expulsos Italo regnante per vrbeis, Secessu è longo, extremi{que} Aquilonis ab Axe Agresteis homines, Dumis{que} horrentibus ortos, Pingendi Pistos prisco de more vocatos, Affore & antiquis sibi reppetere Arua Colonis Iure sua! Hybernis, turmis{que} Scotûm inter-mixtis; Odêrunt quippe Britones, cane peius & Angue, Italionatos, antiquior illa Brytannûm Vera{que} progenies; quanquam horrida, picta, rudis{que}, Quanquam etiam agnatos viuenteis iure Quiritum; Vortiger hos reprimit duce Saxone; pace ptitus, Praemia militiae Hengisto, fatalia dona, Cantia rura dedit; quae Saxone Saxo repleuit; In{que} tenent hunc vs{que} diem, pater at{que} nepotes. . Vortigerni & Rowennae Hengisti filiae, amores & nuptiae. HVic erat Hengisto,Duce Hengisto, ibi sedem fixêrunt; vnde paulatim, pulcherrima filia Nympha, Nomine dicta Ronix, alij dixêre Roennam; Illa adeò insigni formâ, vultu{que} decoro, Vt Venerem potuisse putes, & vincere Cygnos Ledaeos iurare velis, ità candida virgo Pectoribus niueis totum spirabat amorem, Qualis in Arcadiâ Phoebe, Cytheraea sub Idâ, Visa, vel Aurora est in vertice montis Hymetti, Talis erat Ronix, talem se Regis ocellis, Praebuit, & gestû & formae splendore superba, Lilia sic amicita rosis, sic vere tepenti, Flora rubens pratis;& praecipuè Rowennae gratiâ, potestas & autoritas eorum creuit, Brytannorum vero Roseos diffundere odores Est quo{que} visa Ronix, anniveris{que} decore Florida; sic teneris, Veneres, Charites{que} labellis
Spargere: cùm pendens placidè ridentis ab ore, In mensis medijs, Dapibus vino{que} repletis, Vortiger immensam rapuit sub pectore flammam; Illic saepe animos iuuenum rapuêre puellae, Illic Rex positis pro virgine concidit armis. Tum primum spumante cypho, pulcherrima Was-heil Instituit Regi Ronix! Rex impiger vno Vinum haustu venerem{que} simul, Lenaeum & Amorem Libauit! Proceres, Ciues, ignobile vulgus, Quis credat? facti memores, hucus{que} quot-annis, Concelebrant Was-heil, & Bacchica festa coronant; Cum bene me, bene te, bene nos, bene vos, bene nostram Et dominam ingeminant, cassâ{que} salute salutem: Sicubi eam visam{que} cupit potitur{que} cupitâ, Reginâ gnatis{que} tribus, vel carcere clausis Vel saltem spretis; ad virginis omnia nutum, Saxonicae genti Regni permisit habenas: Omnia iam poterant; & nil non Saxones audent. Paganos minimè passi, (sic nam{que} vocabant Saxones;) vlteriùs Brytanni! Rege sepulto, Aut vitijs quasi sopito, sibi pro patre Gnatum Vortimerum ex primâ statuebant coniuge Regem. . Belli inter Britannos & Saxones initium, & regni Bry∣tannici finis. IAm{que} parant miseri plusquam ciuilia Ciues Bella, heu innumeros non extinguenda per annos; Saxones à Patris, a Gnati stant parte Brytanni, Rex{que} Octam accersit & ex Scotica Orcade Ebusam; Spectatrix prima miserûm Deruentio cladis, Saxonum, & Anglorum; queis non benè fata fauebant, Bellorum{que} duces, saeuo periêre Duello,in peius in dies prolabens; ex conflictatione cum Saxone, iam hoste, turmatim, in Magnanimi, mutuo confossi vulnere, fratres Wodenî Hengisti, & Britannûm Regis; acerbo Funerc submersos, pulcherrima corpora bello, Deflerunt Briiones, & versis Saxones armis. Saxones ac pugnis fracti cecidêre cruentis Rex fugit, at{que} penes Britones victoria mansit; Turbas sedatura sed ipsa Nouerca, priuigno Pocula Vortimero Medaeis miscuit herbis; Qno simul ablato▪ ac Hengisti fraude dolo{que} Delet fuerant proceres; Rex pace quiesset, Nî noua Aremoricus mouisset praelia tractus; Nam Constantini fratres modò Regis vter{que} Vther & Aurelius socias iunxêre Phalanges;
Iura{que} poscebant, & pro diademate certant Vortigeri;Angliam confluente, tandem sub posterioribus Regibus à domino quam dempserat antè coronam. Hisce lacessitus bellis, lassus{que} cruentis, Victori Aurelio linquens sibi debita Iura Voriger aufugiens, Eboraci ad Moenia tendit. Saxones Aurelius Regem{que} à Saxone factum Vortigerum insequitur, nec destitit antè ruinis Horum inhians, solio sese firmasset Eburno. Vortigerum perijsse iniectis vndi{que} flammis. Castro in Mont-Cloarijc dicto, prope flumina Guanae, Hengistum{que} ferunt virtute superstitis Eldol, Qui vnus ab Ambriaco euasit stratagemate sospes: Vitâ Octam donatum, aiunt, Scotiam{que} remissum. Bis senos tamen Hengistum occidisse tremendo Marte Duces Britonum audimus; Britones{que} fugasse, Quos domitos bello, Creisfordia vidit aperto; Ac tandem placida compostum pace quiesse: In{que} vicem perhibent, Octa, Otho, Irmenricus olli Post successores sua Cantia Regna tenebant. Non tamen inficias eo, Regem quippe vocatum Aurelium Ambrosium, Britonum sibi splendida sceptra Acquisita manu, insigni virtute tueri; Ac laudis monumenta suae,Arthur qui aliquandiu labantis patriae columen extitit, succedenti∣bus, in nihilum recidit, praeclara trophaea Relliquisse, vti Saxonico bene tincta cruore. Illo{que} extincto post bis tria lustra venenis, Vther successit; modò Merlinaeâ ope fratris, Ambrosij-buriae ad fineis, ex vrbe Dablanâ Allata est lapidum structura, Choraea Gigantum Dicta! Guilo-mauro Iernes, tum Saxone fusis. Illo{que} extincto post bis duo lustra veneno, Proximus Arthurus, Constantinus{que} Cadori Filius insequitur; Constantino{que} Conanus Aurelius, cui Vortiporus, cui Maglonus, olli Cathericus,Et penitus euanuit. Cadwanus ei, Cadwallo, puer{que} Qui Brito-Romanûm longo vltimus ordine Regum. . Heptarchiae, siue septem Regnorum heic Saxonicorum . SAxones interea,Saxones autem rerum potiti, septem locis, Regna Minutu∣la, Regnoúmve Idaeas sibi connxêrunt, Aurelio regnante & Vthero, Sub Ducibus, sii, quis{que} suis, sua Regna parârunt; Diuersis{que} locis florere Heptarchia coepit: Prima equidem Cantij; sed floretissima Merciae; Nerthumbriae{que} fuêre, Essexiae splendida sceptra, East-Angliae parua, at Sussexia quàm propè nulla:
Verùm vni tibi soli omnes West-Sexia cedunt. Cantij erant Cantiae ditionis & Insula Vectis, Parent{que} Hengisto Hengisti{que} nepotibus lim.quorum sc. Cantij, Merciae; Herefordi, fuerint{que} Vigorina, Gleuum, Lectodorum, Oxonium, Staffordi, Hertfordia, Leyri Castra, Notinghamia, & quos Buckinghamia saltus, Northamptonia{que} habet, Varuicum; Erythraea{que} rura, Cestria, Salopia, Huntingdonia, Derbia, Lindum, Quae Trentam,Merciae, & Tamisim, Sabrinae & flumina Deuae, Prata bibunt; quaquâ vergens media Anglica tellus: Quas genteis Latiâ dixti fortissime Caesar Voce Catechlaunos, Coritanos, at{que} Dobunos, Cornauios{que}, omnes Merciae sub lege iugo{que}, Primum habuêre Cridam, & gnatos sibi postèa Reges. Northumbriae amplexû Lancastria At{que} Eboracenses,Northumbriae, Dunelmia, Cumbria & omnes Westmoriae, late{que} tui Northumbria fines Contenti; & Regio Borealis tota, Marinis Scotiae Edinburgi contermina adus{que} fluentis: Ipsi, ora haec omnis, soboli{que} obtemperat Idae. Essexiae Regnum, Trinobantes Caesaris olim Hertfordiae partem, cùm Middel-sexiam, & ipsam Essexiam amplectens,Essexiae fuit Vffae, Vffae{que} nepotum. East-Anglûm genteis, quos iam Norfolcia diues, Cantabrite,East-Angliae, Suffolcia, Eliensis & Insula pauit, Vffa habuit; Tityla, & Titylae tenuere nepotes. Primos sed paucos profert Sussexia Reges, A Cissâ quamuis,Sussexiae, Ella{que} parente oriundos Surreiam sibi iunctam habuit Sussexia, vbi Ella, Primus ab Hengisto Rex: at citò postea Regnum, Cum West-Saxonico, perhibent, coaleuit in vnum. West-Sexiae Regnum est, Dorsetia, Danmonij{que}, Bercheria, Hamptonia, Wiltonia, amoena{que} sedes Aestatis,& West-Sexiae regnorum  iue Hypotyposes carptim hic proponuntur: satis & Cornubia clara metallis; Cerdicus est à quo, West-Saxones ordine longo Nascuntur Reges! pater Ella; aus vnde Gewisses. . Saxonum, & votum. NVnc Heleconiades, in tanto turbine rerum, Saxonieos Reges memorate,& eo ordine, paulo fusiùs▪ in seqq. eluci∣dantur. trophaea{que} Diuae: Dijs genitos equidem se oriundos Saxones omnes Inclamant, magno attollentes nomina fastû! Saturnus Seater, quocum Sol, Luna, Dea{que} Dij{que} dies, sacro, Hebdomadae de nomine censent;
Mars Tuisco,vndè Cytheraea Frea, Geta Apollo, Thor ipse Iupiter esse, Herms{que} adeo celebratus Odenus, Creditur! hinc oritur tam verè Martia proles; Orti à Seth, & Adam; & aui numerantur auorum. Cantia nunc Primâs, Regni{que} Metropolis olim, Primi Saxonici; primùm ergo canenda camoenis. . Cantij Regni & Regum primorum origo, & ordo. GRandaeui,primò inter Cantios Reges tanquam omnium primos, & Vtheum gesta, vt perhibent, Hengistus noster Odeni, Progenies, Magni{que} Getae; modò quartus ab illo! Cantia Regna tenet; successit filius Octa; Quicum Pen-dragon exercet lachrymabile bellum, Rex{que} in praelio apud Mont-Badon concidit Octa; Cornubiae Ducis Igernae, ce captus amore Victor vti{que} suos minime citò Pendragon igneis Vicerat,vt & Arthurum posteà recitantur, omnificas Merlini consulit artes; Mentitur{que} Ducis habitus, & Rege latente, Induit absentis praesentia Gorlois ora. Est locus Abrimi sinuoso in littore Ponti, Rupe situs mediâ, refluus quem circuit aestus, Fulminat heic latè turrito vertice Castrum Nomine Tyndagium veteres dixêre Corini: Hac specie tectus, hoc nomine falsus adulter, Tyndagel irrupit; ex illo Arthurius ingens Concubitu genitus; Brytannûm gloria! Cuius Mira frequens{que} canit laudes Lyra!cuius Arthuri sc, natale Martis alumni. . Tempore primorum Cantij Regum, Arthuri gesta & laudes. OCtae Otho successit, aiunt, Irmenricus olli Tempestate istâ fusis vbicun{que} Britannis, Northumbriam Ida regit, South-Saxones Ella, Gewisses Cerdicus, & paullò Crida posteà Merciam, & ambos Gnati Orientaleis Anglos & Saxones Vffae: Haec mala tot Britonum, capita ac quae pullulat Hydra, At{que} renascenteis vires quasi sanguine Lernae Debellare aggressus eras Arthurius omneis, Nam{que} Scotûm turmas at{que} agmina Pictica Loti,gesta Cui data Connubio Arthuri soror Anna, Ducem{que}
Nor danhumbrorum Colgernum Saxona, fudit, Bis, decies{que} aiunt Anglos; vires{que} repressit. Formosam hinc Nympham Guinheram nomine dictam Accipit in socias sibi taedas! Scoto-Hybernis, Vs{que} metu micuêre sinus, quando algida Ierne, Brutigenum aduentu spumantem remige Tethym Sensit! eum norant, Islandiae, quae{que}, Britanno, Insula in Oceano, Germani, Gallia, Gothae, Saxones & Daci confecti caede cruenta, Gallia at Infidum redeunti, è trans{que} marinis, Cantia Lotiden Mordredum bella fugarunt; Quem videt ac stratum Zephyri Cornubia limen, Arthurus{que} cadit; mutatam vbi Cambula fontis Naturam stupet esse sui; ceu transit inundans, Sanguineus torrens ripas, & voluit in aequor Corpora caesorum: cognatum ac perculit hastâ Comminus accepit lethalia vulnera Princeps; Mellodunus{que} vbi aquas confundit Dulios vndis,Domi & foras occasus Tymbus, Gloria & Encomi, virtutis praemia, re∣censentur. Cuius conuersim per Riuos per{que} paludeis Pont-perilos recipit fluctus remeantis; in illis Ille locis ensem Calibur Arthurius alto Vulnere confossus proiecit! Iam{que} leuare Desierat fuso morientia membra cruore; Somersettiae agris! Pomorum vbi in insulâ Auallon, Glasconiâ tumulatus humo, iacet inclytus Hector; Saxonicas toties, qui fudit Marte cruent, Turmas, fulmineo qui Pictos ontudit ense, Qui Scotos, Gallos; Germanos qui{que} feroceis Perculit, & Dacos bello confregit aperto; Dum tumuli Elogium, & canet hos tibi tymbus honores, Perpetuo celebrata vigescent fortia facta, Militiae clarum decus & virtutis Alumne! O igitur proles Gentis generosa Brytannae, Ceu facitis, Regiter magno assurgite vestro, Et tumulo sacro Rseas inferte Corollas, Officij testes redolentia munera vestri.
. Reliqui Reges, & regni Cantij finis. ARthuro extincto, simul-ac ruit omne Brytannis Imperiale decus, virtus{que} refloruit Anglis: Postquam lustra decem, Otho, at{que} Irmenricus eiu Successor, rexêre, aut iam latuêre per Arua Cantij; Ethelbertus sequitur! pia nupserat lli Francorum Regis Chereberti filia Berta: Iisdem Augustinus,Inde Cantiorum Regum, tum inter eos, pientissimi Ethelberti, vice Apostoli, vt Angelus Anglis, E Coelo, Christi{que} fidem, cum Chrismate sacro, Attulit in terris summum vir sanctus honorem. Immanis tamen huic solio Paganus in alto, Gnatus Eadbaldus successit; Apostata saeuus! Cui sorr, Edwino Ethelburga pijssima Nympha, Northumbro, Nupta est, Christi serua optima, secum Paulinum{que} ferens & non mortalia dona. Olli Ercumbertus; satus illo Ecbertus; & illi Successor Lotherus erat; furialia bella Merciae Ethelredus quicum gerit!& Reliquorum, siqua precipua, memorantur gesta, Edricus illum Filius Eeberti, belli armorum{que} perosum Cognatus perimit, solum{que} duo Edricus annos Rex, in ciuili simul occubat ipse tumultû: Tum Cedwalla potens West-Saxo, Cantia Regna Vast abat miserè; Cui postea visere Romam (Fratre sed amisso West-Saxonis antè,) volenti Filius Ecberti Guithredus lenijt iras, Immensum soluens Argenti pondus & Auri. Guithredus ille Edrici frater, tres{que} ordine Gnati, Pace Ethelredus{que} Edbertus, & Alricus almâ Cantia sceptragerunt, centum vel circiter annos; Alter & Edbertus sequitur, Cynewolfus at illum Deturbat solio, Rex Merciae; ei{que} Cuthredum Substituit;ad Egberti tempora, qui sibi Cantios cum reliquis Regnis subiugauit. perhibent, iam proximum & vltimum in isto Ordine successorem Alredum è limite pulsum Liquisse Egberto fatis sibi debita Sceptra, Angliaco Regi primo! cui serius vni, Heic omneis parere,Exinde vitas & Saxones; Anglûm Regna simul septena, audimus, sic voluere Parcas.
. Merciaci regni, primorum{que} Regum origo & ordo. ETiam Merciacos mihi Musa recense Tyrannos! A Crida exorsi,Merciae Regum & inter eos praecipuè, Guifa proximus; inde Ceorlus, Bellator{que} potens, terror{que} pudor{que} Brytannûm; Proximus ast illi successor Penda, Brytannis Foedere coniunctus Northumbrûm fortiter armis, Opposuit Regem Edwinum, Gnatos{que} Ceorli Gnatae Quinburgae Edwino priùs anteà nuptae;Pendae, Saxones Occiduos Bellonae turbine vexat, Quippe quòd indigna est iniuria lata sorori, Sponsae â Rege suo spretae; at pax alma secuta est. Iam{que} orientalis Anglos treis ordine Reges, Et solio & vitâ spoliarat; deni{que} quarto Iunctus foedere, cum socio simul occubat ipse, A Rege Osuuio Northumbro, victus vter{que}; Occupat Osuuius Regnum, minimè{que} ferentes Aequo animo proceres, sua subdere colla Tyranno, Externo tanquam Merciae de sanguine creto, Wolpherum in Regno statuunt,Woferi, Regem{que} salutant; Saxone qui fuso occiduo, Vectam{que} subegit, Quam dat Edilwalco, Regi Sussexiae! at lli Frater Edilredus successit, Cantia Rura, Crebris qui spoliat bellis;Edilredi regnante Lothero: Nec minùs Egfridi Northumbrica sceptra, perempto Egfridi fratre Alcwino, prope flumina Trentae; Atquî operae-precium! Accensos in praelia Reges, Ecce Theodorus placat, dat Mercia Dron: Wolferi at soboles simulac Rex ille cucullum Induerat, Diadema capit Kenredus; & olli, Gnatus Edilredi; quicum fera bella gerebat Ina!& Ceolredus succedit: proximus illi, Ortus Ethilbaldus fratris de sanguine Pendae, Eopides! Wallos qui contudit at{que} Meatas, Occiduo tamen à Cuthredo Saxone fusus, Bernredo occisus; quem sustulit Offa tyrannum.
. Regni & reliquorum Regum Merciacorum acta & exitus. WAlli Offa veniente tremunt,Offae Regis nequam gestorum Catalogus & Cantia Regna, Saxones occidui, & Northumbria tota tumultû; East-Anglûm Regem, in generum taedas{que} paratas, Conscius egregiae fraudis, sceleris{que} vocatum Interimi iubet, & Regnum rapit; at pia Nympha, Alfreda, heu lachrymis tumulum decorata Mariti Sperati, & facinus crudele exosa parentis, Incusans patrem, Monacham induit! Anglo-Eoûm, Caeso ità Ethelberto, meta haec fuit vltima Regni; In{que} manus venit Egberti, cui Mercia venit: Offa vti{que} Alcuinum, ad Carolum cognomine Magnum, Misit, vt illius sibi conciliaret amorem. Et quid non illi facanda Lutetia debes? Vix latuit quater, & toto quater orbe recreuit Luna,ad Egberti tempora vsque pro∣tenditur, proximè vbi post patrem cito funere raptus acerba, Filius Egfridus Offa satus appulit vmbras: Succedis Cynewofe, satus de sanguine Pendae. Edbertum strauit, dat Cantia Regna Cuthredo; Quem soror & latis Quindreda reliquit in aruis. Confossum. Infelix sequitur puer ipse Kenelmus; Inde Ceolwolphus Cunewolfi frater; at illum Bernulphs pellit, Regno mox pulsus & ipse, Fusus ab Egberto, sed ab Anglis caesus Eois; Et quamuis Ludicenus ei, ceu Guthlacus olli, Successêre, iugo tamen ambo Egbertus adegit, Subdere colla, sibi{que} ratum pendere tributum Angliaco Regi primo: sic Fata volebant. . Regnorum Breniciae ac Deirae, Regum{que} Northumbrorum Origo & admodum varia successio. IAm{que} Ottadinos, dabis ordine Diua Toparchas! Ida regit primus Northumbros;Northumbriae Regum, & inter eos praecipuè celebratorum nomine clarus, Regio! & imperij fineis promouit ab Humbro Flumine, adus{que} fretum Scoticum; socio agmine victis, Ltho Pictorum, ac Conrano Rege Scotorum; Intra bis senos spacium quo rexerat annos.Id Idae Ada Breniciae; at Histriae, Rex Ella Deirae:
Regnum Ellae cis, Adae, Scoticos tendebat in agros Glappa, Theodulphus, Freodulphus, Adam{que} secuti Ter modo Theodoricus denos, & Ethelricus omnes, Breniciam! Deiros vnus rexisse tot annos, Dicitur Ella suos! Ellae tamen vnicus haeres, Vix ab Ethelrici Ethelfrido,Ellae, tutore maligno, Euadens sospes, Redoualdi Regis, & oras East-Anglum venit Edwinus; charissimus olli! Cuius ope fretus solio sceptris{que} potiri Bello Ethelfridum aggreditur, sternit{que} furentem; Quanquam & pace forent firmata sibi omnia, postquam Imperij extendens fineis,Ethelfridi, Britones{que} fugara, Et Scotum Ethelfridus, Pictum{que} & ab Orcade Regem; Quo caeso, in Scotiam se proripuêre tenelli, Quin{que} cius Gnati, Don-Waldi Regis ad aulam, Osricus, Oswaldus, Eufridus, Osuuius, Offa, Ebba{que} virgo soror! Longè hic Scotica aura & Hybernas Ebrides imperio adiecit; pulchrâ{que} Ceorli Merciaci ex Gnatâ Quinburgâ, mascula bina, Nata sibi soboles; Gnatae{que} ex coniuge binae, Cantia Ethelburgâ!Edwini, quae Christum, candida Nympha, Attulerat secum dotem, & coelestia dona: Primùm ibi tum fundata fides, & Cantia sedes, Aemulam habet Famae mater sanctissima gnatam, Inuidet Edwino infaelix West-Saxo Ceolphus, Interimi{que} cupit, bello tamen occubat ipse. Penda sed & Britonum Princeps Cadwallinus, armis Edwinum & Gnatos Quinburga ex coniuge caedunt, Offredum, Edfredum{que}: Offredum cum patre aperto Marte,sanctissime alium{que} datae violato faedere pacis: Queis caesis, misera Ethelburga in Cantia Rura, Heu virgo infelix, natis comitata duabus, Venit Eadbaldum ad fratrem, transfixa dolore, Et teneram prolem externas pia mater in oras Misit, vbi aethereis desiêrunt vescier auris. Breniciae ac Deirae, Eufridus & Osricus Accâ, Sponsa Ethelfridi, Edwini{que} sorore creati, Regna adeunt; ab Adâ veniunt, & ab Histriâ & Ellâ; Finibus è Scotiae reduces! sed concidit Osrijc, Concidit & positis, Wallo Duce, Eufridus armis. Tertius Oswaldus venit acrem infensus in hostem Vlturus Fratreis crudelia vulnera passos; Conuersam in cinres patriam, charos{que} Penateis. Est locus; Oswaldi, Heauen feildia nota trophaeis, Dictus, vbi caedit victor, domuit{que} Britannos: Neu Britonum ignoras O Denisbornia clades, Rex ibi Saxonicis Cadwallinus occidit armis; Quem sequeris Britonum Cadwallader vltime Regum.Oswaldi.
. Oswaldi pientissimi regis gloria, & nepotum gesta. POsteà pacificus sine caede aut sanguine Pictos, Continuit{que} Scotos, Britannos, Saxones omnes, Foedere; Brenicios simul vnanimi{que} Deiros, Pace suos! queis vixdum animis concordia concors: Pacis amans, summa pietate insignis, egenis Dans Elcemosynas largis, manibus{que} quod aiunt, Ambabus, populo Ecclesias, donaria templis; Haud secùs ac Anius, Rex ille, Dei{que} Sacerdos. Rex ipse Oswaldus sacer interpres{que} Deorum; Quando ex Aidani venerandi praesulis ore, Verba sacra excerpens,Regis honoratissimi, & Osuuij gesta, ac populi spargebat in aures. Tandem Merciacus multâ feritate tyrannus Saeuus, & immanis Christiani nominis hostis, Oswaldum superat Penda, & transmisit ad vmbras: Osrici at Oswino, Oswalditam Deira nepoti Obtigit, Osuuio, Oswaldi Brenicia fratri; At{que} ita Brenicios inter-cidit at{que} Deiros, Schisma iterum; quanquam, non multùm ità postea capto, Caeso{que} Oswino, Osuuium penes vtra{que} mansit, Breniciae Deirae{que} simul Prouincia: Pendae Osuuius bellum{que} mouet; bello{que} peremit; Dat{que} Peda Pendae Gnato, pro coniuge Gnatam, Australem{que} plagam Merciae; sibi caetera victor, Rettinuit, moriens{que} Egfrido sceptra relinquit; Gnato, â Merciacis victo, Pictis{que} peremt; Qui sponsae, florens quamuis iuuenilibus annis, Virgineam haud soluit Zonam, Monacham{que} remisit: Frater at è gelidis rediens Elfridus Hybernis, Ad cultum ingenij capiendum eous{que} profectus; Succedit: sequitur{que} Osredus filius, lli, Cognati Kenredus & Osricus; inde Ceolphus, Egbertus{que} pius, Monachi ambo, Deo{que} dicati; Egberto{que} satus, turbis{que} excisus Osulphus. . Regni Northumbrici per bellicas turbas dissipatio. NOrthumbris vbi iam discordia turpis oriri Coepit, Eidwaldus cadit, Alredus{que} Tyrannus;
Factus Ethelbertus bis Rex toties{que} reiectus,postremò turbae ciuili odio deflgranium, ad Egberti vf∣que tempora, facinora expli∣cantur, Oswaldus, frater{que} Osredus eos{que} secuti, Post Alfwoldum Ardulphus, & isto turbine, fato, Aut pulsi, aut capite plexi, cecidêre tremendo, Omnes postremi Reges: vti Sceptra iacebant, Visa Seianeio magis infortuna Caballo Quando duces inter, multos viduata per annos Regibus; vt praeda infestis Northumbria Dacis, Occubuit, sua fatagemens crudelia; cum{que} Bella cient miseri, plusquam ciuilia ciues. Quis cladeis etenim miseras, quis funera fando, Explicet, aut possit lachrymis aequare dolores? Sylua nemus{que} omnis, deiectis frondibus arbos, Aethereus montium tractus, scit & ardua rupes, Quos gemitus; qualeis{que} Tigreis, rapidos{que} Leones, Posse mouere putes, silices adamanta{que} durum, Instar Arioneae citharae!Deinde Egberto{que} mouente Praelia, Palladios pacis praetendere ramos, Legatos mittunt, Regem{que} vno ore salutant; Et quanquam Egberto incipiunt pendere tributum, Vix tamen à Dacis, tutos fore, fata ferebant. . Essexiae Regnum; & Regum series. NVnc claros mihi Pande tuos Essexia Reges; Et primus magno venit Erchenwinus ab Vffâ,Essexiae Regum, inter quos Erchenwinus primus, Sledda deinde, sacro{que} Sebertus chrismate tinctus, E Sleddâ satus ille fuit, Ricula{que} sorore, Cantij Ethelberti; sceptris{que} inglorius haeres, Serredus; sequitur{que} nepos cognomine Paruus At{que} alter Sigebertus; eum{que} subinde secuti Suithelinus, simulac Regni socio{que} Sigerus Cum Selbio, Monachum induto, Gnatis{que} Sigardo, Seufredo{que} suis;Offa pijssimus habentur, multum{que} pijssimus Offa, Vrbis visendae studio, veniae{que} petendae Romam primâ aetate profectus, ibi{que} sepultus. Offae Celredus perhibent, successeraet olli Clarus Edilwaldus; Alberto, Vmbêna; cadebat, Regum East-Saxonicâ supremus ab arce Suthredus,Egbertum sque catalogus perducitur, sed & Qui West-Saxonico linquens sua Regna tyranno, Cesserat Egberto! longè cui Martia virtus, Sic micuit reliquos inter, socios{que} Dynastas Vndi{que} vicinos; quos iam malè fata fouebant,
. East-Angliae siue Angliae Regnum orientalis & Regis. NEc minus O recine Alma tuos East-Anglia Reges;East-Angliae Reges recensen, tu,  quos Vffa primus Exoritur magno, primo{que} Tytullus ab Vffâ, Filius huic Redoualdus erat, qui flebile bellum Mouit Ethelfridum contrâ. Edwino{que} fauêbat; Ol Forpwaldus; Sigebertus proximus; illo, Plurima patrono sibi Cantabrigia gaudet:Sigebertus Cantabrigiae sun∣dator clasimus, Tres{que} adeò à Pendâ saeuo, veluti ordine Reges Continuo occisi, prior hic ingressus Eremum, Cognatus{que} Edricus, nec fortunatior Anna; Hos{que} secutus Edilherus dat sanguine poenas Cum Pendâ Osuu, Christi pro Dogmate spreto. Ordine Edilwaldus sequitur; succedit Adulphus,Ethelbertus vltimus ab Offa Merciae Tyrannoc cumuen∣tus: qui East-Angr regnum occupauit; & successores am∣bo, Egberto relinquunt. Gnatus Adilheri; Eluoldus{que}, illis{que} Beornas; Clarus Edilredus, & chara pro coniuge ab offâ Caesus Ethelbertus, Rex vltimus Anglo-Eoûm. . Sussexiae Regnum, & siqui supersunt Reges. IAm paucos numerare potes Sussexia Reges: Saxonum ab aduentu, vix dum trigesimus annus. Voluitur, ac solio regnantem viderat alto, Austri Ellam plaga! Plettigero, Cissâ, at{que} Cymene,Inde Sussexiae pauci qui sunt Re∣ges & gesta recitantur. Cum gnatis tribus; egregijs, Rex ille Britannos, Afflixit damnis; successit Cissa parenti, Eius Cissan Cestria opus: West-Saxone cuncti Posteâ Edilwalcus, mox & Berthunus, Athuno Cum socio caesi à Cedwalla, Aldwinus ab Inâ: Hos West-Saxonici primùm absorpsere Tyranni, Mox Reliquos:Vltimo quos Musa olim memorate Monarchas.
. Dynastiae & regum West-Saxonum historia. CErdicus est,West-Saxonum Regum & in∣ter eos claridimorum, praeci∣puè, à quo, West-Saxones ordine longo Nascuntur Reges! Britones, serò aduena ab axe Zephyreo eiecit; soboles{que} huic Kenricus, olli Rex{que} Ceaulinus,Cerdici, ferus hostis vter{que} Brytannis: Iis{que} Ceaulini frater Cutha, tristia beila Intulit, & villas rapuit, domuit{que} feroceis; Treis{que} fudit Britonum Reges!Ceaulini, at Regia proles, Cutwinus tamen occubuit, Regni vnicus haeres: Illius{que} patris vice filius, ortus ab illo, Celricus exuli auo successit; ei{que} Ceolphus; Cuius in Edwinum mala Machina, se opprimit ipsum! Succedit Cynegillus ei Ceolae{que} Cuthae{que} Filius, hic Ceolae ipse Cuthae: Kenoualchius olli; Armat in exitium sibi, vindictam{que} sororis, Spretae, iras iustas Pendae; mediante sed Annâ, East-Anglo, sponsam{que} & pristina regna reepit! Septra gerit Segburga manu, moriente marito: Postea{que} egregij luuenes, Elewinus, & alter, Centwinus Cuthwino orti; domat ille Britannos, Merciacos prior. Et post hos Cedwalla, reuersus Exilio,Ceadwallae, inuidiam propter quo missus abijsset, Ipse etiam Cuthwino ortus! temerarius ausu, Primus Edilwalkus, mox & Berthunus Athuno, Cum socio, heic fusi, Sussexiae vtri{que} Tyranni; Iam{que} feris bellis vastabat Cantiae Regna, Cum tamen à Cantio, amisso sed fratre Molone, Pacatus grandi nummorum pondere cessit; Sceptris substituens Inam! Romam{que} profectus Sacro vbi chrismate eum tinxit,Inae, Petrum{que} vocauit, Sergius Antistes, sanctâ iacet vrbe sepultus. Fuso{que} Alwino, Regnum Sussexiae in vnum Cum West-Saxonico coalescere, Cantia fecit Regna suo subiecta iugo, pendere tributum, At{que} Ceolredum! & Wellijs, iam pace potitus Sanctorum Monumentum ingens Rex Ina laborum, Condebat templum; Benedictinis{que} celebre Coenobium Monachis, cùm praedia templa{que} ponit; Olim vbi Glasconiae, fore Arymathiense sacellum, Fama refert, Christi, velantis syndone corpus: Dormierunt{que} Deo, Rex Romae ingressus eremum, Berchyngae{que} domi, Ethelburga pijssima coniux. Successêre Ethelardus ei, domuit{que} rebellem Oswaldum; Cuthredus ei, domuit{que} ferocem Merciae Edilwaldum; primo Sigebertus at anno, Turbatus solio;Brytrici, fusus{que} Kenulphus ab Offâ, Postea{que} à Regum Cyneardo è sanguine creto,
Caesus, & occisore suo comitatus ad vmbras. Inde salutatus fuerat Rex Brytricus! olli, Valde suspecta est, orti de sanguine Regum, Egbertivirtus! suspectam Galliae in oras, Cogit in exilium; fato cedente sed ipso, Hunc omnes reducem expectant, Regem{que} salutant. . Egberti Regnum & cum vnione 7. regnorum gesta florentissima. MErciacos statim aggressus,Egberti gesta celebrantur, Wallos{que} rebelleis, Ambos West-Saxo, & sibi Cantia Regna iugauit; Inde Orientaleis, deuicto Rege Suthredo, Saxones imperio adiecit; sed & Anglo-eoos, Merciaco, spreto{que} ingo, strato{que} tyranno Bernulpho, ad se vltrò venienteis, omine perquàm Fatidico recipit: Ludicenus & Vthlacus olli Merciaci Reges succumbunt; praelio vter{que} Ille occisus, & hic iuga sub seruilia missus. Iam{que} Ottadinos contà conuersus, Oliuâ Palladiâ circùm redimitos tempora,vti{que} eiusdem Egberti operâ, Da∣norum tunc saeuientium pro∣flitatio, & amicè Legatos recipit, Rex{que} ipse receptus ab illis; Et sibi promittens tutelam, è limine toto, Dispulit,Heptarchiae, septem scil. Reg∣norum in vnam politeian re∣ductio, & bello Dacos confregit aperto; Tunc Northumbriacis solum quasi finibus hostem Totius Abionis miserandam posteà pestem. Vicit & Ordouices velut antè Silures, & vrbem Carleon ad flumen Deuae: sic Cantia rura, Mercia, Northumbri, Walli, Anglo-Saxones omnes, Vni iam parent Egberto; Florida rerum Angliacarum erat haec facies! Heu parcere Parcas, Indocileis diuas, at{que} inuida fata! paterent, Quorsùm ea Normannûm spolijs Danûm{que} rapinis? Wintoniam{que} regressus, vbi proceres{que} Duces{que} Hospitio excipiens laetos per cuncta benig nè Concilio indicto,vndè ab ipso, genre Anglo, Diademate clarus & auro, Totius Albionis nostrae, Rex inde creatur. Totam etiam illius, quae dicitur Anglia, partem Publico eam edicto, iussit, sermone vocari Saxonico Engla-lond;Anglia & Angli, Edicto eius publico, nomen suum, & eo cum Oda haec finem, sortiun∣tur. nostro contractiús England; Rex West-Saxo, genus ducens Egbertus ab Anglis. Anglis sic effulsit honos, quo tempere primùm, Desijt Heptarchia, florere Monarchia coepit. Odae septimae Finis.
PALAE ALBION, Entituled HENGIST. The seuenth Ode, THE ARGVMENT. Seuen Saxon Kings this seuenth Ode tells, And Hengist how, 'gainst Pictish pride, By Bryttons call'd in, both expells, And Conquerour-like their Lands diuides: But Egbert brought all Crownes to one, Erecting new styl'd Englands Throne. CANT. I. The scope proposed of this present Ode. I That late sung,Synchronismus siue computatio Annorum. in humble straine,Supplementum Historiae. Samothes, Albion, Brute, Romans traine; Sing now the warlike English, and Saxons neare kin, Kings of this Land, Call'd in by Vortiger, t'oppose Picts rapines first, and other foes! Whose Ancestors and Gentries ground Not so rare sought, as seldome found, Daigne, gentle Phoebus, to reherse, And be thou Patron of my Verse: Brits then, Iuits, Saxons, we and they, Will decke thy shrine, with Garlands gay; So honouring thee, that honour'st them With Blazon of their Royall stem. CANZ. II. A summary discouery of the Saxons originall and hono∣rable antiquitie. FRom Sacae comes the Saxons name, The Sacae they from ScythiaAll those Countries East and North, Sarmtia, Polonia, Moscouia, Tartaria, &c. were anciently called Scythia, the hi∣thermost Europaea, the other Asiatica; like as the south-east Countries, all India's: the Southerne termed Lybia's. came, Inhabiting erst Sarmatia, where, The Pontique Getes, neare neighbours were;
And now, since plac't in CymbrikeCymbrica, Chersonesus, Denmarke, and a great part of Scandia. seates, As nigh beene set, the Iuites or Getes; And rouing since, Romans 'gainst these Set th'Earles of Saxon shores, andComites Saxonici littoris; such was Carausius. seas: Though rouing so, Vortiger, he prai'd, 'Gainst Picts, and Scots, these Pyrates aide, Whose boates of so small bulke, to row, Venice scarce would venture on her Poe; As these compact of twigs of willowes, Couered with skins, to cut salt bllowes; Much like Saurobates Indian fleete, Semyramis did in triumph meete: First sea-fight first time land-reft woods Seeme quarrell on fam'd Indus flouds. These Saca's son's their Scythian style, Inhabiters of the ScandianScandia and Scandinauia, are all those Countries called North of Germany, Prussia, and Polonia, which the Danes, Iuits, Swedians, Norwayes, and their Northery neigbhours doe inhabit. Ile, Saxons and moderne Iutes; old Getes, For Iuit-land and their Cymbrian seates; Left their erst home, more easterne site, To th'Pol, 'tis thought or Moscouite; Perhaps, Tartarian Hords! sayWhere the Hords haue names of Assareth, Danitae, and the like, as if deriued from the tribes of Israel, carryed that way cap∣tiue by Salmanasat beyond Ba∣bylon. some, That from faire Syons Towers did come. Getes, Gothes, Iutes, Saxons, all sate in The Baltique sea-coast, all neere kin, And mid'st these Iuites and Saxons, neere Flensburge, old Anglia's found weThe place from whence the Angles, Angli, or English tooke their name, scituate betweene Flensbuge and the floud Sly, whereon Sleswike standeth, from which place came those peoples, called Saxons or English, or English Saxons, saith Ranzo∣uius. here, What need's then, seeke th'English to bring, From other, then the Saxon spring; Whose manners, beauty, speech and guise, Bewrayes it! nor neede they deuise, Negnon's Saxo, or otherSaxo is said to be the sonne of Ngo, who was brother of Vandalus, of whom, according to some, the Vandals were named. grace, Then their trew ancient Saca's race, Which Saca's sonnes spoke short andSac's sons, is Saxons: x. valuing c. s. They were also an∣ciently written Salones, with ss. Verstegan will not allow of this, but wil haue them called Seaxen or Seaxes, of their skeynes they vsed to ware, as we call Lances, Carabines, Pikes, Muskets, the bearers of those weapons, so these for distinction sake, named of their Seaxen, as the Verse go∣eth, Quippe breuis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur, Vnde uum nomen Saxo traxisse putatur. And the like of this hee vrgeth of the Galli∣glasses in Ireland. round, Saxons, their very name doth sound: And in th'Armenian bounds was seene Saca's old Citty Sacacene; Where conquering Cyrus, conquer'd oft, Was lastly by Thomyris scoft: For Persians they promiscuously, Sacae, and Scythians call;As it may bee seene in Eusta∣thius Commentaries vpon Dio∣nysius, de Situ, or descripcio∣ne Orbis. whereby, Triumphs memorizing Scythian gests, Beene nam'd by them Sacaean feasts. More to confirme this our assertion Of their so bord'ring on the Persian, Trauellors and skilfull Linguists may Gather from their speech, good proofs, theyHauing beene neighbour Nati∣ons; many of their words, as Feadar, Madar, Breadar, Do∣ctear, Star, Baud, for father, &c. and the very Idiom, like, or the same; which may argue their originall from thence. say! So thence, first Germany, now long-while, Since haue they held faire Albions Ile.
CANZ. III. Their calling in and first plantation here vnder Vortiger. VOrtiger,Vortiger, Anno Christo 447. reigned first 7. yeares, after∣wards 12. yeares or mot. as was before set downe, Hauing by fraud gayn'd Brytaines Crowne, Call'd in these Saxons t'helpeThe Saxons to the number of 9000. came in certayne long Ves∣sels they called Keeles, with their Leaders, two brothers, Hengist & Horse, nobly descended, whose ensigne, as was an vsuall and ho∣norable deuice of antiquity, allu∣ded to their names (Hengst, sig∣nifying a stond horse; Horse, as the word importeth) their Ban∣ner, being a white or siluer Horse, in a field Gules, Armes which the noblest Families of Saxons, and other thence descended, haue borne. with stand Irish, Scots, and Picts, that spoil'd the Land; Some holden th'ancient Britons race, When Roman Lords reign'd in their place, Retyr'd to Scotlands MountaynesAs being not Romanized; for it was Agricola's policy to haue had the Brittons brought vp after the Latines fashion, so to haue them more tractable, and leaue their rudenesse. wilde, And Irish Orkes, thence beene Picts stylde, Because they, as they vsed, e're Since Caesars dayes, be-paintedWho reported this their guise; that they dyed themselues with wad, of a wan and blewsh co∣lour, to make themselues seeme more terrible in battaile, the hair they ware being long, but shauen all sauing the head and vpper lip: then taking their name of Britts or Brittons, of their owne word Brit, from their painting, since Picti of the Latines, as on like occasions Longa-bardi of their long beards; Gallia togata and Braccata, with the peoples of their habit there, wearing Togae and Braccae, tooke their name. were, Notes of their Gentrie such! this wise, Retayning still th'old Brytons guise; Hating th'Italionate new brood, As we say, worse, then Turke or Toad! Proud of their painting! none true Brittons, Else held; most painted, so most Great-ones. Vortiger represt these Picts rude traynes, By th'Saxons aide; and for hisThe Saxons had onely the Ile of Thanet first giuen them, where they first landed, and whither Vortimer afterwards chased them out of the rest of the Land, till he and the Barons were slaine, then Hengist bad all Kent assigned him, Geffrey of Monmouth saith, Vortiger first gaue him ground to build a Castle, so much as could be composed in a thong of a Bulls skin, which is Thong-Castle by Sittingbourne in Kent. paynes, Gaue Hengist Kent,Hengist began his reigne 8. yeares after his first arriuall, about Anno 456 he reigned 34. yeares. whose sonnes, they say, Held since, and hold it to this day. CANZ. IIII. Vortiger taking Rowen, Hengists Daughter, to wife more establisheth the Saxons power and authoritie, whereat the Bryttons repine. BVt fairest Rowen, Hengists Impe, Some call her Ronix, beauteous Nymph, Whose rarest parts, so rauishing are, As one would sweare, were no compare, Like Leda's Swans; and Venus Doues, The Queene of soft and wanton loues; Or else faire Lillies; mixe with those, The orient beauties of the Rose, When Zephir's gentle breath makes sweet Th'aire, and strew's flowers at Flora's feet. So sweet was Rowen, faire her face, Such Nymph-like gate, and goddesse grace, Her Spring-time fresh, and gallant youth So liuely bloomes, and louely shew'th:
That but her Peeres on Ida's greene, Cynthus e're or Arcadia seene; Lesse wonder then, that one soBy her meanes the Saxons chiefly got the great fauour and sure footing in the Laud, as wel as by their fauour in repulng the Picts, and other enemies. sweet, At feasts where Loue and Bromius meet, Should snare the King! vnwares so tan'e, Tooke many a heedlesse youth their bane. This gallant Dame, with courtly grace, Was-heall myn Liege, they say her phrase, Dranke to the King; who pledg'd so deepe, That loue his senses lull'd asleepe; And Venus with Vines-bloud he raught, Loue and Lenaeus, at one draught. Was-heillWasil, or , was heall hlaford Gyning,  in Saxon, e of health Lord King, to which the King directed by his Interpretour, answered, Drinke-heall, or Drinke health; whence the like words of health, and especially wassaile, may well be supposed to take originall. perhaps tan'e vp from hence, In City, Court, and Country since, Health's ply'd so round, till quaffing healths To Mistris fann's, craze healths and wealths. The King bewitcht, as 'twere and thrall, For RowensThe King for her sake diuorst himselfe from his lawfull wife, by whom hee had three sonnes, for which cause most of the Brittons forsooke him. sake abandons all, Spouse, Sonnes, Friends; Saxons only guide, The State, that rues their Pagan pride; Which made the Brittons in disgrace, Make his first wiues sonne, King in'sVortimer, at which accidents, and by the counsell of the good Archbishop Vodinus, of Lon∣don; Vortiger lamenting his ill acts and life; Hengist perceiuing it, sle the said Vodinus, the 13. and last Archbishop of that See, and defaced and spoyled all the Churches and religiou houses in Kent. place. CANZ. V. Warres flaming betweene the Saxons and Bryttons, Vor∣tiger is dispossest of the Kingdome. ANd now began that mortall feud,Vortimer, son to Vortiger, by his former wife, began, An. 454. & was poysoned by Rowen, his step-mother, ha∣uing reigned 6. yeares. Many yeares asswag'd not, nor much bloud▪ That 'twixt Brittons and Saxons heere Endur'd aboue a thousand yeere. Octa and Ebysse, sent for from th'Orke, At Derwent made first wofullThe second battell was fought at Crocan-ford, or Craford in Kent; the third at Weppeds Fleet; a fourth at Colmore. worke: In King and Hengists aide; these done Defend the Sire, Bryttons the sonne. In this first fight their bane, braueHorsus, Hengists brother, & Cattigern, Vortimers: whose tombes are shewed; Horsus, at Horsteed, within two miles of Aglesthorpe, or AElsford in Kent, where, some say, the bat∣tell was fought, and the inhabi∣tants affirme, Horsus was there slaine. And at the same AElsford, is also shewed a monument, which the people call corruptly, Citt's Cattihons, very likely to be Cattigernes Dukes Vortimers and Hengists brothers tooke, But Saxons fayll'd, and were o're aw'd, Till Vortimer fell by Rowens fraud, And Hengist the Welsh Barons slew, Whose fate, strange Stonedge stones yetThe hanging stones on Salisbu∣ry Playnes, neare Amsbury, or Ambresbury, where the chiefest Brytons being inuited to a feast or parley, being a watchword gi∣uen by the Saxons, Nimen eot Seaxen, which is, take your Sexes, with short skeynes id vnder their clothes, 300. or more of the Brytons Nobiliti were slaine, and that monument there erected by Merlins arte, in remembrance of the same. shew. Then Vortiger had gayn'd rest, but for Fresh broyles from th' Aremorique shore, The last slaine King Constantius brothers, Vther and Aurelius, no more smother Their title, hoping t'haue the Crowne, And Vortigern, and Hengist downe;
Vortiger e'en weary of allOf Vortigers flying into Wales building has Castle, the log let of the same, his Prophet Meline, and the Fayery; Geffrey of Monmouth and others speake many and miraculous things. warres, Calling to minde his ancient scarres,Aurelius, sonne of Constantine A. 466. reigned 32. yeares. Flying towards Yorke, did in plaine field Bayes and gold-wreath t'Aurelius yeeld; But so hard chac't by th'Britons traine, T' his Castle plac't on Riuer Guane Mont-Cloarik cal'd, burnt in it there, T' Aurelius leaues his regall Chaire. And Hengist was by Eldol slaine,Hengist, A. 456 reign. 34. yeares. Alone that skap't from Salsbury plaine: Octa was sau'd,Osca, succeeded his father Hen∣gist, A. 490. reign. 24. yeares. but sent away To Scotland backe, the Brittons say. Though we doe heare that Hengist slew, Twelue Britton Dukes; and Brittons crew, From Creisford fled;Otto, his sonne, A. 514. R. 22. y. since when, warres cease, And he liu'd, rested, slept inSo saith Marianus Scotus, he dyed honorably, hauing reigned 34. yeares, though Peter de I∣cham sath, Eldol, Duke of Glo∣ste, by the counsell of Eldad Bishop there, smote off his head at Conesborow. peace: And his sonnes Octa, Otho, and Irmenrike reign'd in Kent their land.Irmenrik, is sonne, A. 536. reigned 25. I thinke no lesse, though, gather'd hence, Aurelius was a worthy Prince, And by strong powerfull hand maintain'd,Vther Pen∣dragon, brother of Aurelius, A. 498. R. 18. y. The Brittish scepters which he gain'd; With swords point hewing tokens fresh Of honours on the Saxons flesh.Arthur, Vthers sonne, A. 516, reigned 26. Whom poyson'd, thirty yeeres King succeeds Vther,Constantine, Cadors sonne, A. 542. R. 3. y. much-fam'd for Merlines deeds, That t'Amesbury from DublineThat were also brought out of Africke thither, and placed on Mount Kyllare. translates, That trophey of the Welshmens fates,Conan, Ar∣thurs nephew, A. 545. R. 33. Those hanging stones, the Gyants bower, Saxons slaine,Vortiporus, Conans sonne, A. 578. reign. 4. and KingKing of Ireland. Guilla-moure; Him poyson'd, twenty yeeres King succeeds Arthur most fam'd for martiall deeds;Malgo, reign. 5. Next Constantine Duke Cadors sonne,Caretic, eig. 3. Conan,Cadwan, R. 22. Vortiporus, and Malgwn, Catherik,Cadwallo, 48. Cadwane, Cadwallo,Cadwalladar. and His sonne last King of Brittons land.Cadwallader, reigned 3. yeares. CANZ. VI. The seuen Saxon Kingdomes their arise and extent. ANd now the SaxonsAll these seuen Kingdomes; by three of the Nations of the strong∣est in Germany: The Iuits or Vites; Saxons and Angles; of the Vites came the Kentish, part of the West-Saxons and Ile of Wight, of whom it tooke name: of the Saxons of old Saxonia, came the East and rest of South and West Saxons; of the Angles came the East-Angles, Mercians, and Northumbers. euerywhere,The Heptarchy or seuen King∣domes, began 456. Their Kingdomes plant! first Kentish were,THE HEPTARCHY. Fair'st Merke-lands and Northumbers beene; East-Angles were not so much seene; Essex lesse, Sussex small or none; All yeeld last to West-Saxons one.
Kent with the Ile of WightThe Kingdome of Kent, with the bounds, and race of Kings. repaires,Kingdome of Kent began, A. 456. ended A. 827. endured 371. yeares. To Kents throne, her Kings, Hengists heires. To Merk-land longen, Hereford, Chester, Wor'ster, Gloster, Warwike, Salop, Leyster, Northampton,Kingdome of Mercia began, A. 586. ended in A. 875. vna. Alred. Lincolne, Derby,The Kingdome of Mercia, & race of Kings, with the bounds thereof and Nations, how styled in Caesars time. Notingham, Huntingdon, Hertford, Bedford, Buckingham, Oxford, Rutland, and Stafford bee, The Thames and Seuerne,Kingdome of Northumbers began, A. 547. ended, A. 940. vnder Adel∣stane and Ed∣mond, in Sith∣riks sonnes. Trent and Dee, Within her march! These Cattechlauni, Cornauij, and wit▪ Corytani, Caesars Dobuni beene! their Prince, Crida first King, and his sonnes since. Beene in Northumbers circuiteNorthumbers, their King, race, and bounds of their King∣dome. nam'd Lancashire,Kingdome of East Saxons began, A. 527. ended about A. 800. in Su∣thred. for faite women fam'd; Yorke; Durham; erst a Kingdome, Cumberland West-morland, and our now Northumberland; E'ne almost to Scot'sh Frith! and once Ida's dominions,Kingdome of East-Angles began, A. 492. ended A. 885. in Edmond, slaine by the Dane Hinguar vnder Alfred. since his sonnes. East-Saxons, perhaps,East-Saxons kingdome and Kings. Trinobantes Of Tre-nuidh call'd or Troy-Nouant; Vffa, and his, ore Essex were, Middle-sex and part of Hertford-sheere. East-Angles Kings and kinglyEast-Angles. stile, Cambrige admires and Elye Ile,Kingdome of South Saxons began, A. 478. ended A. 13. in Alwine vn∣der Ina. Norfolke, and Suffolke; Vffa there; Tytila, and his sonnes Princes were. South-Saxons, Sussex, Surrey,South Saxons kingdome and race of Kings, who were first Kings of Saxons here, sauing the Kensh, the first ouerthrowne by the West Saxons, shew, Though the next first Kings, yet but few,Kingdome of West Saxons began in Cerdic who arriued here A. 499. and subduin▪ the o∣thers, hath conti∣nued hitherto, thugh interrup∣ted somewhat by the Danes rapines & Nor∣man Conquest. Great Ella's sonnes! whom first the West Saxons deuou'd, since all theThe kingdome of West Saxons, the bounds and race of Kings, who lastly conquered all the other kingdomes of the land, and redu∣ced it to Monarchy. rest. West-Saxons Kingdome though not great, Deuon, Dorset; flowry Sommers-seat, Corn-wall with mines stor'd, Hampshire full, Berks and Wilt-shire, with corne and wooll: From Ella's sonne, call'd Cerdijc, came Their Kings! Gewisse his Grand-siresOf whom the people were cal∣led Gewisses. name. CANZ. VII. The Saxons glorying in their Ancestors and Gods. ANd now great Heliconian Dames, Our Saxon Kings trophee's and fames, From gods descended all-arow, Ioue, Woden, Geta, TuiscoWith the Saxons Thor, or Thurstus, is said to be Iupiter; Tuisco, Mars: Woden (who is farre ancienter then Hengists great Grand father Woden) Mercury, by some Mars: Geta, Apollo; Frea, Venus; Seater, Saturne, who with the Sunne and Moone, and others, had their seue∣rall Idolls and peculiar worships: from whom also the dayes of the Weeke were called Sondeag, Moondeag, Tuis-d, Wondens-d. Thursdeag, Frea-d. Scaterdeag: as we now say, Sunday, Monday, &c. for the Germans and Saxons then worshipped the Planets aswell as their ancient founders for their gods. show,
Seater, with Sunne and Moone, from whom Th'old Saxon weeke-dayes names did come; And what Seth's martiall brood did here, Reigning since many hundred yeare; Prime Kingdome once, as Primates See, Kent was, and my first song shall bee. CANZ. VIII. The story of the first Saxon Kentish Kingdome, conti∣nued till Arthurs birth. WOdens and Geta's sonne,Hengist, first King of Kent, A. 456. R. 34. y. the fourth,The Kingdome of KENT. From him was noble Hengists worth; Who first wore KentishThis was the chiefe of the se∣uen Kingdomes, and to whom the rest were in a sort Feodaries, for that Vortiger at the defeat vpon Salisbury plaine, deliu red seis of the whole to Hengist; whence the Kings of Kent challenged So∣ueraigtie of the whole Countri from thence to Humber. Diadem: Octa, his sonne succeeds! with him, Pendragon waging warre,Octa, A. 490. reign. 24. yeares. they tell, How at Mont-Badon OctaMont-Badon supposed to bee Bannar-downe, by where to∣kens of battell, bones and teeth of men are ploughed vp in great abundance. fell. But the late Conquerour conquered proues, Captiu'd by faire Igerna's loue, The Cornish Duchesse;Vther-Pendra∣gon, A. 498. reign. 18. yeares. Merlines art Helpt the King play his Louers part; Like Ioue transform'd t'Amphytrio's shape, To Goylen's he, commits this rape; And in the absent GorloisThis Duke of Cornwall was after slaine by the King at Duui∣lioc. place Did his deceiu'd faire Spouse embrace: So Tyndagel whose towring pride Is plac't on flowry SeuernesThe place of Arthurs birth. side, Great Arthur got; whom in their Layes Welsh Harps, and Poets, loudly prayse. CANZ. IX. Great Arthurs prowesse, life and death. OTho succeeded Octa; than,Otho, alias Ota, A. 514. reign. 22. yeares. Irmenrijck: and right nowThe Heptarchy began: The first Kingdome was Hengists in Kent, A. 456. The last, but grea∣test, of Mercia, beganne vnder Crida, An. 586. About which time reigned Cadmane grand∣father of Cadwalladar, last King of Brittons, it being then the very wane of the Brittish Mo∣narchy. began Th'Heptarchy;Irmenrik, sonne to Otho, A. 536 reign. 25. yeares. 'mongst Northumbers Ida, South Saxons Ella, Mercyans Crida, West Saxons Cerdic, Vffa's sonnes Won Essex, and East Angles Crownes; Brittons weake powers could now no good Against those Hydra's heads that bud, Though Arthur rose with powerfull hand,Arthur, surna∣med the Great, A. 516. R. 26. y. The Saxon foe-men to withstand;
And in twelue fierce-fought fields,Whereof the first was at the wa∣ter of leine or Gledy; the se∣cond, third, fourth, and fifth, neare the uer Douglasse, in the Country of Lineux; the sxt at Riuer Bassus; the seuenth at Cr-ci Caldon, or the wood Calydon: the eight at Castle Gwineonthe ninth at Carlee: the tenth by the Sea-side, at a place called achen-Rith, or Rther-wood: the eleuenth on te hill Agned-Cathergonien: the twelfth at Badon hill, Bath Towne or Hill. they say, Did brauely beare the bell away: His wife was faireGuinhe was Cousin to Ca∣dor Duke of Cornwall, Goen or Gorlois sonne; but daughter to the King of Biskay. Guin-hera, fam'd For beautie! By his prowesse tam'd Great Saxon Colgerne, and the Scot, With's sister Ann's Spouse Pictish Lot, Island and Ireland, vtmostHauing ouercome the Saxons or abated their courage, be in∣tuted the order of the Round Ta∣ble for his Knights honour; which he kept at Carleen, and Win∣chester, and Camelot, a place neare south Cadbury in Somer∣setshire. There is a place hewn out of the Rocke at Lansannan in Denbigh-shire, which the inhabitants call Arthurs Round Table. Thyle, French, Germans, Scottish, Orkes and Ile, Gothes, Danes, and Saxons: Welshmen needs Will haue to rue his warlike deeds; With whom at his returne from France, The trecherous Mordred tryes warresHauing quieted the Saxons, they say, hee made an expedition into Norway, which ee conque∣red with the Regions adioyning, so farre as Lapland and Russi, causing them to be baptized, and obtayned of the Pop to hau them confirmed to the Crown of this Realme, calling Norway the Chamber of Brytaine:  ∣tring France, ouercam the Go∣uernour, and in warre slue Lucius Hiberus, who demanded tribute, and sent his body to the Senate of Rome for tribute; in which meane time his Kinsman Mor∣dred, to whom he betooke the rule of Brytaine, combined with Ge∣dic and the Saxons against him. chance, At first in Kent; and after slaine Where bloudy Riuers did distaine Cambula's fresh Fountaynes waters cleere, In Corn-walls confines! Arthur heere, Had his deaths wound, but after dy'de By Mellodunes low Lake-ish side; Into whose troubled streames he throwes, Accustom'd to warres deadly blowes, His conqu'ring sword, and 'mongst those Lakes His farewell of the world heThe riuers below Glastenbury in Somersetshire, where for the plenty of fruit Aualo tooke name, signifying Insula Pomorum. takes. In Somerset-shire! and Aualon Ile, That of her Orchards weares that style, Glastenbury now call'd, doth enfold His liuelesse corps, there laid inAt his return from beyond seas, the traytor Mordred gave him battell at Sandwich near Rich-borow, where were slaine Angussel of Scotland, Gawen, & Cador, whence thewarre translated into Cornwall by their retur∣ning thither; where Mordred was slaine, and Arthur receiued his deaths wound; neare the Riuer Alanne or Camblan, thence conueyed into Somersetshire, he dyed and was buried at Glastenbury. mold; He that subdu'd by restlesse paines, French, Picts, Scots, Germans, Saxons, Danes, Though clos'd vp in his marble tombe, His dust, her euerlasting home; His fame yet liues, and with fleet wings, O're the worlds surface nimbly flings: And that dumbe monument though, doth blaze Such things to his immortallSaith Wil∣liam of Malmesbury, a Prince worthy to haue had his acts recorded in true History rather then fables, which haue made his story doubtfull, being in his time the onely prop and pillar of his Country and decaying Nation, by credible Historians report; a very martiall Prince, borne where he was slaine in Cornwall, crowned at Carleen, or Caer-Seguent, an old decayed Towne in Hampshire, called Cilicester, by Dubricius Arch∣bishop of Caer-Legionum; tombed with his wife Guinhera at Glastenbury, as his tombe digged vp in the reigne of Henry the second witnessed, wherein were found their bones, and this inscription, Hic iacet se∣pultus Rex Arthurus in Insulâ Aualoniae. the tresses of Guinhera's haire seemed whole, and finely plot∣ted of colour like to gold; but being touched fell away to dust. praise, As rosie Garlands and fair'st flowers Beene fit'st to decke his dead-mans bowers.
CANZ. X The story pursued to the end of the Kingdome of Kent with the first plantation of Christian faith among the Saxons. WIth Arthur,Ethelbert, son to Ermenrik, A. 562. R. 53. Bede saith 56. Bryttons hopes decay, And Saxons now beare all the sway; Otho, and Irmenricus, had raign'd Forty yeeres; and Ethelbert, next gain'd His sires throne; weds French Cherebert's Impe, The Lady Bertha,Augustine sent by Pope Grego∣ry, A. 596. since the Saxons first arriuall 147. in the yeare of E∣thelberts R. 33. beauteous Nymph, And gracious Queene, for Saxons good Her meanes, here heauenly AngelsQueene Berta brought with her a godly Bishop named Leta∣dus, by whose meanes the King was made tractable to the recei∣uing the Christian Faith: when Pope Gregory, A. 596. sent Au∣gustine, who was founder of S. Augustines, and Archbishop of Canterbury, with Melitus, Iustus, and Iohn, and other zea∣lous men to preach the Faith, who were proudly withstood by the Monks of Bangor, & Brytaine, on whom Gildas doth complaine. Melitus made Bishop of Lon∣don, preached to the East An∣gles: Iustus was Bishop of Ro∣chester, where Ethelbert built the Church of Saint Andrewes, at he did Paules in London for Mellitus or Miletus. food Christs faith by Augustine had plantation, Apostle of the English nation: A monstrous Pagan though their sonne,Eadbald, son to Ethelbert, a notable Pagan, and vicious King A. 616. R. 24. Edbald succeeds in's fathers throne, Whose sister to Northumbers King, Edwine wed! Christian faith did bring.Ercombert, a good Prince, A. 641. R. 25. Ercombert his sonne next; EcbertAbout Ercomberts time Honorius Archbishop of Can∣terbury, diuided his Prouince into Parishes, as is recorded a∣mong the Antiquities of Christ-Church in Canterbury. his, And then Lothaire! To warre with this,Ecbert, Et∣comberts son, A. 666. R. 9. Mercian King Ethelred begonne, But Edrike slew him EcbertsThe Lady Dompneua right heire to the Crowne from Ead∣bald, about this time founded the Monastery of Minster in Thanet, and was first Abbesse there her selfe. sonne: Edrike his cousin,Loathaire, Ec∣berts brother, A. 674. R. 13. too, left his life Within two yeeres by ciuill strife. West-Saxon Ceadwall now in'sCeadwalla's brother Mollo being slaine by the Kentish men, he was furious against them, till Guthred with great summes of money purchased peace, this Gu∣thred founded the Monastery of Saint Martin in Douer, with him one King Sebherd did reign ioyntly in one part of the Kingdom. ire Wasted Kents townes with sword and fire;Edrik, sonne of Ecbert, A. 688. Till Guthred Ecberts other sonne Appeas'd his wrath and warres begonne;R. 2. years. After whose death the West Saxons many yeares sore vexed Kent. Guthred. a. 698 This Guthred and his three sons then Ethelbert, Edbert, and AlrijcIn Edberts time strange Co∣mets were sene, the Pagans the while cruelly infesting France and Spaine. beene Kentish Kings,R. 33. yeares. Edbert, A. 731. and that Diadem wore, An hundred yeeres,R. 23. yeares. Ethelred, A. 754. R. 11. years. Alrije, A. 765. in peace, or more. An other Edbert, followes next, Whom Merk-lands King vnthron'd and vext, Cynewolfe,R. 34. yeares. Edbert, alias Pren; did vsurp and was pulled downe, and Cuthred made King, A. 799. that to his great'st disgrace, Did set vp Cuthred King in's place; Next Alred, last King, leaues by fate, T'Englands first Egbert Crowne and state; So last,R. 8. yeares, Alred, alias Baldred, heire to A. 807. after 20. yeares, expelled by West Saxon Egbert. Kentish, all the rest Submitten to th'West-Saxons hest.
CANZ. XI. The Mercian Kings their originall and order till Offa. ANd now sing Merk-lands Lords dear Dames; First Cride,Crida, A. 586. R. 10 yeares. then Guipha,The Kingdome of MERCIA. third placeThis Kingdome was the grea∣test though latest  of all the ret, the first King whereof Crida, was the  from Woden. names Ceorlus Brittons fell foe;Wibba, his son, R. 20 yeares. next Brittons friend Penda,Ceorlus, Wib∣ba's sonne, &. 10. that sore vext Northumbrian Edwine,Penda, sonne of Wibba, A. 626. reign. 30. yeares. and his once First spouse Ceorlus daughters sons; With Kenwalke then, West-Saxons King, War's for his sisters sake did spring; But shee and all receiu'd toAnna King of East-Angles. grace, By Anna's meanes, sweete peace tooke place! Yet two East-Angles Kings beside, And Anna fell, for Penda'sBoto Sigebert that founded Cambridge, turned Monke in his old age, but drawne out into the field, and his  and  Anna, all three succes∣siuely Kings of East-Angles. pride: But being confederate with aAdhere, brother to , next King. fourth Both fall,Peda, sonne to Penda, and Oswy, A. 656. R. 3. or 4. yeares. by noble Oswyes worth; Northumbers King: who hauing gain'd Penda's dominions thus; thereThree yeares but gaue all the fourth parts from  to Pen∣da's sonne Peda, with his , who  King, who  Chri∣stianity, which Owy and Peda had begun: but ee  his two sonnes for frequenting the holy man Cedda's Cell, whose bodies their mother Ernenelda buried at Stone in  a Church to bee built there, shee afterwards became a Nunne at Ely, vnder her mother Sex. burga, sometime Queene of west Saxons; and heere penting that deed, among other pious works in building Churches and Monaste∣ries, bestowed great cost on Me∣dishamsted or Peterborow, which Penda's sonnes & daugh∣ters (though hee were a Pagan) did build from the foundation. raign'd: Till Merk-lands Nobles loath t'obay Others then of Merk-lands bloud, made way, For Wolphere,Wolfere, Pen∣da's sonne, A. 660. R. 17. who Northumbers yoke, West-Saxons warre attempts too, broke; T'Edilwalke Sussex King giues Wight, Leaues Merklands Crowne t'his brother, hight Edilred! that vext Lothaire of Kent; And hauing slaine Alcwine by Trent,Edilred, sonne to Penda, A. 677. R. 30. Brother to Egfride Northumbers King,Kenred, Wol∣feres sonne, A. 707. R. 5. and went to Rome. Yorkes Primate stints the strife that spring: Edilred turn'd Monke then, WolferesEdilred founded the shoprike of Worcester, turned Monke at Bardoney in Lincolnsture. sonne Kenred possest theKenred went to Rome and was Monke in the Church of S. Peter, he founded the Monaste∣ry of Euesham. regall throne; Edilreds sonne Celred that succeeds,Celred, sonne of Edilred, A 711. R. 8. And Ina, try'd their martiall meeds. Ethilbald next King,Ethelbald, des∣cended of Eopa brother of Pen∣da, A. 719 R. 41. from Penda numbers His descent; Welsh quels, andThis King Ethelbald by the procurement of the Poes Legate, Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, an English man borne; with aduice of Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, made good Church lawes, giuing Churches and Monasteries great priuiledges and exemptions from taxes and tributes, bee also founded the Abbey of Crowland. Northumbers But by West-Saxon Cuthred foyl'd Bernred of crowne and life dispoyl'd.Bernred vsur∣ped 10. yeares.
CANZ. XII. The end of the great Kingdome of Mercia. OFfa then Tyrant Bernred slew,Offa nephew to Ethelbald, A. 760. R. 39. his sonne not one yeare. Northumbers doth and KentHe made a Dike called Offa∣dike, to bound his Kingdome a∣gainst Wales, extending from the South part neare Bristoll, ouer the Mountaynes towards Flint and the North Sea to the mout of , see ounded the Mona∣stery of Bath, translated the  See to Lichfield, caused the  of Saint Al∣ban to bee laid in a  at old Verulam, which hee  adorned with gold and  stones: and raysing there a Prince∣ly Abbey, hee gaue  to it: the Charter dated,  79. of his reigne 33. witnesse  selfe, Egide his sonne, nine Kings, 15. Bishops, 10. Dukes, &c. subdew, Welsh foyl'd; West-Saxon Kenulfe slaine, He by pretence of marriage,The Chappell where the said Offa was bury∣ed being demo∣lished by the Ri∣uer Ouse at Bedford, his leaden tombe, as it were some phantasticall thing, apeareth often to them that seeke it not, but to them that seeke it, saith Rouse, it is in∣uisible. traines Ethelbert East-Angles King t'his Court, And slue him there, in cruell sort: Foule fell act! which his promis'd spouse Faire Alfred so much disauowes, With hands wrung, and di-sheuel'd haire Distilling many a pearlyHe was slaine at Sutton-wal∣lis or Kenchester,  Offa's Palace was: and buried on the Riuer Lugg's banke, where Maurde Church : whence remoued to Hereford, ouer him is builded the Church of the Bishops See, dedicate to the same Ethelbert. teare At her loues herse, poore soule, so greeues, She her fires Court, and Pallace leaues, And vow'd t'auoide all farther strife, To liue, and led an AnchoresseAt Crowland shee prophesied against  mother, who caused Ethelberts death, and against her brother; all which sell out ac∣cording to her words: of her bro∣ther Alcuine wrote, that for his fathers bloudy deeds, his reigne and dayes were the shorter. life! East-Angles Kingdome that here ends, This Tyrant tooke! Alkuine he sends, To France to famous Charle-maine: His sonne Egfrids scarce foure-month's raigne Kynewolfe succeds,East-Angles Kingdome fell so to Offa and the Mercians, A. 790. or 800. and with the Mercians Crowne to the West Saxons afterwards. that downe didSome say that on the day of the dedication of the Church of Win∣chelcombe, which hee built, hee released the said Edbet, the foun∣ded the Church of Saint Ethel∣bert in Hereford. bring Edbert, made Cuthred Kentish King. His haplesse young sonne next doth raigne Kenelme, by's sister QuindredHe is accounted the Martyr, his body was found by a scroll cast on the Altar, thus written in Saxon, Ke∣nelm King barne, lye vnder thorne Heaued-bereaued, that is, Kenelm Kings child lyeth vnder a thorne, bereft of the head or life. slaine! Kenulfs brother,Kenulf, nephew in the fift degree to Penda, A. 799. R. 23. next wore the Crowne Ccolwolf, by Bernulf; he put downe By Egbert; to whom Ludicene, And Whitlafe, Tributaries beene: And euer-since West-SaxonsFridulf, Burthred, and others, being set vp by the West Saxons and Danes afterwards, scarce worthy the name of Kings rather Dukes. count Themselues Merklands Lords Paramount.Ceolwole, expelled by Bernulf, A. 820 reigned . Bernulf subdued by Egbert, A. 824. R. 3. Ludicene expelled the East-Angles, A. 825. Whitlafe, A. 826. reigned 13. yeares. CANZ. XIII. The originall of the Kings and Kingdome of Northum∣berland and the many deuisions thereof before good King Olwalis tie. NOrthumbers Kings Muse next relate!The Kingdome of NORTHVMBERS. Ida first founder of the state,Octa, Ebysse & Saxons sent by Hengist into the North, it seemes long time molested by the Picts, Scots, & Brittons, before they were fully possest of any Kingdome for 99. yeares space, and after Hengists  60 yeares, being A. 547. that Ida began, being the 10. from Woden,  reigned. 2. yeares. From Tine to Cluid reign'd;Lot was father to Mordred, allyed both, yet enemies to great Arthur. vanquisht Lots Pict-troopes, and Conrane King of Scots; But after twelue yeeres reigne deuided, Beene his lands! his sonne AdaThe Kingdome of Brenicia, extēde from Edenborow rith to Tyne; Deira from the said Tyne to : but they were quite vnited againe in Oswy, Ethelfrides sonne. guided
Brenicia's North! South Deira tooke,Idas sons 559. Histria's sonne Ella,Ada, reign. 7. Glappa, 5. Tidwald, 1. Fridulf, 7. Theodorik 7. in Brenicia, whiles Ella, son of Histria, reig. 30. in Deira. Ethelrik, R. 5. partly in both Prouinces. Saxon Duke; Glappa, Tydwald, Fridulf, Thyery, and Ethelrik in Brenicia's land Scarce thirtie yeares reign'd: Ella alone Sate so long on Deira'sHe was surnamed the  Throne. Ethelriks heire though, Ethelfride, Had almost set Edwine beside Ella his Sires seate! who was made Fly to East-Angles King for aide.Ethelfride, son of Ethelrik, A. 589. R. 27. ouer both Pruinces; Ella's sonne Ed∣wine being yong or expeld. Redwald that lou'd him dearely well, Holpe him, so that Ethelfride. fell, Though growne so great, that all Kings heare, Wales, Scots, and Orkeys stood in feare. Ebba, Oswy, Oswald, Eaufride, Osrijc,Edwine, Ella's sonne, A. 616. R. 17. ouer both Prouinces; the sonnes of Ethel∣fride being led into Scotland. and Offa, fled that tide; His tender daughter and fiue sonnes, To th' Scot'sh Kings Court, poore little ones! Edwine possest, of all what state Long'd to Northumbers both Crownes late, Th'Ebrides he did t'his Empire adde; By Mercian Ceorles daughter had Two sonnes,Paulinus Bishop of Rochester went with queen Ethelburga, A. 626. And Ed∣wine and the Northumbers generally recei∣ued the Faith, A. 627 ogni 11. as many female Imps By Ethelburga, Cantian Nymph, Who brought Christs Faith, and greatThe king gaue Pauline the Bishops See at Yorke, and began to build Saint Peters Church there which was finished by Os∣wald; and Paulinus founded the great Church of Lincolne. Pauline To Yorks See, chiefe, next Kents faire shrine. Edwine, West-Saxon CeolphHe sent a desperate fellow na∣med omer, to murder Edwine; and continually vexing all his neighbour Princes with warre, was slaine in the quarrels he mo∣ued, and Edwine was slaine by Cadwallo and Penda. sought To wrong, but fell by th'wiles he wrought; But Penda and the Brittons Prince, Slue Edwine and his both sonnes since, Mercyan Quinburga's issue,Edfred and Offed: Offed with his father Edwine  battell at Hatfield,  fell with them Eadbaldus King of the Okeyes: Edfred  afterwards. Edwines reigne had beene so peacefull that a woman with a sucking child might haue trauelled free from violence ouer all his Dominions; yet so triumphant that Banners displaid were borne before  both in warre and peace. these First in fierce warre, next in false peace! Kents Nymph with her Imps from wars chance Fled into Kent; fayl'd, sent to France. From Scotland now return'd at once, Ethelfrides and Edwines sisters sonnes: Faire Acca's Royall off-spring,Osrijc aud Eaufride, A. 633. reigned a very small time. so From Ella sprong, andWho fled into Scotland to king Donald when Edwine got the Crowne; they being the sonnes of Ethelfride (from Ida descen∣ded) and Acca, sister to Edwine, daughter to Ella, the kings both of Brenicia and Deira. Ida too, Eaufride Brenicia's, Osrijc glad Deyra's Crowne and Scepters had, Whom Cambrian Prince Cadwall slue, Whose cause doth Oswald fresh pursue, Where neare Picts wall, is Heauen-field nam'd, The place by Oswalds conquest fam'd,Oswald, sonne of Ethelfride, A. 634. R. 8. y. And Denisbournet that saw in plaine Field Bryttons King Cadwallo slaine; Cadwallader, his sonne, next in place, Last King of Cambers of that race.
CANZ. XIIII. The rest of the continuance till the subuersion of that fa∣ctious Kingdome. ANd now good Oswald fayne makes peace 'Twixt his two factiousSo vertuous & godly a prince, that after his death  was Cano∣nizd for a Saint. Prouinces, Brenicia and Deyra; since, They late scarce brooke one Law or Prince: Both whom, with Picts, Scots, Bryttons bold, He did in due subiection hold. His plenteous almes the sumptuous shrines He built, and whence his glorie shines; Such power hath Faith, such grace affords Interprets reuerend AidansA holy & learned man, whom the King for propagation of the Gospell had sent for out of Scot∣land, and giuen him Lindisern or holy Iland for his Bishops See. words, T'his men,Oswine reigned with Oswy a∣bout 8. yeares. seemes Anius-like for these, Priest of th'high GOD, and Prince of Peace. But Pagan Penda, Mercians King, T'vntimely death goodAt Maserfield, or Oswalstre, the Towne now so called of his name. Oswald brings. Then Oswalds brothers, Osrijc's sonne, Oswine had Deira,Oswye, sonne of Ethelfride, A. 642. reign. 28. Oswye wonne Brenicia; and betwixt these twaine, New warres, and schisme, 'gan now againe, Till Oswyne slaine, Oswye alone Had Deira's and Brenicia's Throne. He Penda slue, and MerciansAt which time Oswy vowed great lands to  from Yorke. Crowne, As Fortune would, annext t'hisAnd by this meanes the Mr∣cians receiued the Faith: hee founded the Bishops See of Mer∣cia at Lichfield; and Dwina Bishop at Lindesferne was also Bishop of the same. owne; Whereof part, Peda, Penda's Impe Dower with his daughter had, false Nymph. Egfride succeeded next,Egfride, Os∣wyes sonne, A. 670. R. 15. his sonne Who leaues his Virgin-Spouse, aHer name Mildred or Ethel∣dred, after twelue yeares, she be∣came Nunne at Ely, where shee founded the Monastery whereof shee was Abbesse. Nonne, Though in youths prime! when th'Irish rew Mercians foile, Picts KingAt a place called Nectans∣more, hee was buried in Saint Columbes Iland. Brudeus slew. Next then his brother Alfride rules, Taught,Alfride, base sonne of Osway, A. 685. R. 20. and trayn'd vp in IrishWhere learning then flourisht more then in Brytaine, it being the fashion to send the noblest youth thither, as now to our Vni∣uersities. Schooles; Osred his sonne next,Osred, A. 705. reigned 10. Osrijc then, His cousin, and Kenred crowned beene; Ceolfe and Egbert soone,Kenred & Os∣rijc, reign. 13. Ceolf, A. 728. reigned 8. years, Egbert, A. 736. reigned 20. that,Ceolf or Ceolnulf, became Monke in holy Iland: in his time glazing, painting, and Masons were brought into the land by the Monke Bennet, or Benedict: venerable Bede dedicateth his Ecclesiastique history to this king. Egbert also became Monke, and his brother of the same name, was Archbishop of Yorke; which See hee greatly aduanced, and founded the Library, worthily furnished with all good Authors. strange Royall Robes done for Regular change. CANZ. XV. Their last encumbrance by the Danes, and submission for reliefe to the West-Saxons. EGberts sonne Osulfe then,Osulfe, reig∣ned 1. yeare. and next Whiles grieuous ciuill warres sore vext
Northumbers, afterEdilwald or Mo. l, A. 758. reigned 11. Alred, reign. 11. Ethelbert, son of Mollo, A. 780 reigned first 5. y. and after Als∣wald or Oswald 11. & Osred 1. he reigned 4. all the others bare but the titles of Dukes rather then Kings. afterOr Mollo who slue Earle Os∣wine that rebelled, and himselfe slaine by Alred, that vsurping succeeded. Ethelwald, Alred! and twise downe, twise enstal'd, King Ethelbert; since those twoSonnes of Alred, then Ethel∣bert againe, after him Ardulf Alwold, Eandred, Etheldred, Readulf, Osbright, and Ella; which last Kings were slaine by the Danes, Hinguar and Hub∣ba, incited to that by the Lo. Beornas whose wife Osbert or Osbright had rauisht: most of these latter Kings or Dukes ac∣knowledging Egbert of west Sax∣ons, and his sonnes Lo. Para∣mount. brothers Oswald, Osred; since diuers others. For this poore Kingdome more of late, Then Sejan's horse vnfortunate, As if she kingly style not brookes, Was a while gouern'd by her Dukes. Scarce any of the latter traine Of Kings that scap't and was not slaine, Such tragique ends and fearefull fate Pursu'd the Princes of thatPartly fallen by the Danes in∣uasion, but more by ciuill warres: last Kings of all were Risiga the Dane, then Cuthred and Syth∣rik, to whom Adlsane gaue his daughter in marriage; but their sonnes were finally expeld by Ed∣mond and the succeeding Kings, about, A. 950. State; The flowry dales, the fields and flouds, Fresh stain'd with streames of purple bloud, And Eccho pitious plaints affors What she could though she wanted words, Earth's face shew'd forth her graues like scarres Part the Danes worke, part ciuill warres. Northumbers therefore tooke, Fame sings Wst-Saxons Egbert for their King. CANZ. XVI. The Kings and Kingdome of East-Saxons. EAst-Saxons Kings,Erchenwine, A. 527. R. about. 60. yeares. Sledda, sonne of Erchenwine, A. 587. R. 17. Sebert, sonne to Sledda, A. 604. reigned 13. from An. 617. by the space of 100. y. reigned Serred, Seberts , with his brothers and their sonnes. Sigebert, son of Seward, & Si∣gebert. sonne of Sigebald, the brothers of Ser∣red; and Swi∣deline, Sigaire with Sebba or Selbius, and his sons Sigard and Sewfred; and Offa, sonne of Sighere, till A. 717. In Selbius time Erkenwald builded the Monastery of Croteley in Surrey for himselfe, and Berking in Essex for his sister Edilburga, Queene of West Saxons; he was after Bishop of London, about A. 700. Celred, A. 718 reigned 30. Edilwald, Albert, Vmbena, and Suthred, reigned till A. 800. or after. may now nextErchenwine the 8. from Wo∣den, sonne of Vffa, his sonne Sledda married Ricula daugh∣ter of Ermenrik King of Kent, and to their sonne Sebert first Christian King there, came Mile∣tus from Augustine and Ethel∣bert King of Kent, who preach∣ed the Faith, conuerted and bap∣tized the King and his people, who then builded a Church in ho∣nour of Saint Peter at West∣minster then called Thorney, where he & his wife were buried. song;The Kingdome of EAST-SAXONS. First Erchenwine from Vffa sprong, Sledda, and Sledda's Sebert, since, And Ricula's sonne, first Christian Prince: Ignoble Serred, then a paire Of Sigeberts, Swithline,Serred and his brethren, sons of Sebert, enemies of Christiani∣ty, were slaine by Kynegilfus King of West Saxons, but the se∣cond Sigebert, son of Sigebald brother of Serred, called the ho∣ly man Cedda to him, making him Bishop of East Saxons; hee baptized Swideline, Anna King of East Angles being his God∣father. Sigaire, And Selbius, Sigaires consort, once, Monke-profest turn'd! next his twoSebba or Selbius, Monke at Saint Paules in London. sonnes Sigard and Sewfred: after them Good Offa weares the Diadem, That of deuotion visit'sHe endued the Church of Saint Peter in Westm. with faire possessions and buildings: and leauing his wife Geneswede, Penda's daugh∣ter, went to Rome with Kenred King of Mercia, and Edwine Bishop of Worster, and there liued in a Monks habit. Rome, And youths best good, found there his tombe. Next Celred, and then Ethelwold, Albertus, and Vmbena, hold East-Saxon scepters, SuthredSubdued by Egbert, about the very time that he conquered Kent. last West-Saxon Egbert quite displac't; Their trophees doe, with all else, meete, Thus at victorious Egberts feete,
CANZ. XVII. The East-Angle Kings and their time of gouernement. EAst-Angles Kings would next be told!Vffa, A. 492. reign. 7. yeares. Tytullus, a. 499. R. 20. Redwald, R. 25. Eorpenwald, reigned 12. Sigebert, sonne of Redwald, A. 569. and his cousin Edrik, R. 60. yeares, slaine by Penda. Anna, sonne of Ewide brother of Redwald, R. 20. yeares. slaine by Penda. Adelhere, bro∣ther of Anna, slaine with Pen∣da, A. 656. Edilwald, bro∣ther to Anna, reigned 9. yeares Sonnes of Adilhere, Adalphe reigned 25. Eluold, Hisbern, Edilred, Ethelbert, sonne of Edilred, A. 790. Vffa's sonne Titylla's firstVffa: the 8. from Woden. enrol'd;The Kingdome of EAST-ANGLES. His Redwald, that on Edwines side, Warres with NorthumbrianWhom he slue, and repossest Edwine of the Kingdome. Ethelfride, His Carpwald, and Sigebert, whoot's aid, Learned Cambrige first foundationHe also plated Christian saith there by the hlpe of Foelix a Burgundian, sent by Honorius Archbshop of Canter whom hee made Bshop of Dunwich: an  of Suffolke, which  was after diuded by one Bisi ishop tere into two, viz Dunwich and Holmham. laid: But old, and leauing kingly weeds For Monks cowle, Edricus succeeds His cousin, and Anna next doth raigne, By Mercyan Penda, all threeSigebert, foundr of Cam∣bridge was fetch out of the o∣nastery into the field against Penda, where both hee and E∣gricus were slane; and so was Anna afterwds. slaine: Brother though thus slaine, and kinsmen were, By th'wretch, with him ioyn'd, Edilhere, Christs enemies fell by OswyesBoth  and Penda, A. 656. neare the Riuer Iewet: his wife was , daugh∣ter to Hereticus, and sister to Abbesse Hilda; his daughter E∣theldred founded Saint Peters Church in the Ile of Ely, A. 674. hand! Edilwald then, Adulfe, Alfwold, and Beorn, Edilred, and last King slaine, Ethelbert fall's by false Offa'sKing of Mercia, in whose hands and his successors the chiefe Kingdome remayned till Egbert. traine; East-Angles so, with Mercyans lands, Came to West-Saxon Egberts hands. CANZ. XVIII. The ancient South-Saxon Kings with their short dominion. NOw Sussex next in order brings Her few indeede,Ella, with his 3. sonnes and three ships, landed at a place called Cy∣menshore, An. 470. in Hēgsts life time his king∣dome begn, R. 36. yeares. Cisia, A. 514. reigned 76. Edilwalcus, A. 590 R. 25. Aldwine. slaine by Ine, and Sus¦sex vnited to the West Sax. crown about, A. 713. though next first Kings,The Kingdome of SOVTH-SAXONS. When Ella, within thirtyElla, the 8. from Woden, wit his sonnes put the Bryttons to flight first at Cymens-shore, where hee landed, then at Ma∣croeds bourne, after won A∣dreds-ceaster, and so began his Kingdome. yeere Of Saxon Hengist reigned heere, Who with his three sonnes, Cymen, Plettinger And Cissa, that builtWhich is called Cissan-cea∣ster in the Saxon tongu. Chichester, Sore vext the Brytons; after them Edilwalcus wore theHe gaue  to Wilfride Archbishop of Yorke, who came to plant the Faith in Sussex, where Wilfride set a Monastery for Episcopall Se; yet Sussex was since sometimes vnder Winche∣ster, and the See translated also to Chichester. Diadem; Last Tyrants Berthune andCeadwalla ouerthrew Ediwalke in his yonger yeares before he went into exile, Berthune and Anthyne after, when he came to be King of West Saxons. Anthyne, By Cedwal slaine, Aldwine by Ine; West-Saxon Kings thus swallowed them, West-Saxons Kingdome my next theme.
CANZ. XIX. The west-Saxon Kings and whole time of gouernement vnder the Heptarchy vntill Egberts time. WEst-Saxon Monarkes!Cerdic and his son Kenrik with 5 ships arriue at a place called Cerdic-shore, A. 499. slue Na∣tanlod, K. of Brittons, and 5000. men, and conquered the Ile of Wight, hee reign 17. yeares. CerdicCerdic, the 10. from Woden, vanquished the Bryttons first at Cerdics-ford, then at Cerdicks lege, and at Withgar-birg in the Ile of Wight, which hee gaue to his Nephew Withgare, who reigned there, and was buried at the Withgar-birg, or With∣gares City. firstThe Kingdome of WEST-SAXONS. From the west draue the Welshmen erst; Kenrik his sonne, his Ceauline, And Cuthe, and Ceaulines slaine Cutwine, All Brittons foes, but CuthaThey vanquished the Brytons fiue times, and tooke from them the Cities of Glocester, Giren-Cester, Bathan-Cester, and diuers other ownes, but at last Geaulines sonne and heire Cut∣wine was slaine by them, and he expeld by his brother Cuthas son (Ceoli and Cutwolf) but his grand child Celrijc succeeded, and after him Geolfe, that vex∣ed all the neighbour Princes, which was slaine by the South Saxons. most, By whom the Brittons three Kings lost. Next Cuthwines Celrijc, then, whose wyles, 'Gainst Edwine, Ceolph's owne selfe spoiles. Gutha's Ceola's sonne next Kingulfe springs Berinus conuert Christian With Kingulf his sonne Gui∣cheline, christned, and ioyntly reigned and dyed, and his sonne Guthred reigned no past 3 or 4 yeares after his father and grand∣father, whom Kenwalk succee∣ded that founded the Cathedrall Church and Bishops See of Win∣chester. King;Kenric, A. 526. reigned 25. Kenwalcus then,Ceauline, An. 552. R. 33. whom Penda chac't From thence,Celik, A. 588. reigned 5. for sisters sake disgrac't; But by East-Angle Anna's meanes, Wife,Ceolf, sonne of Cutha, brother of Ceauline, A. 594. R. 14. Kingdome, Crowne and all regaines. Sexburga reignes her husbandShee founded a Monasry in the Ile of Shepey, and became a Nunne, & after Abbee there, and in the Ile of Ely, whither al∣so came her daughter Ermenil∣da, wife sometime to Wolfere King of Mercia. gone; And Elewine, next sate on his throne, And Centwine,Kingulf, son of Ceola, sonne of Cutha, brother of Ceauline, A. 603. R. 31. his son Guicheline and his sonne Guthred, reign in Kingulfs life time and foure yeares after. Kenwalkus, son of Kingulf, A. 643. R. 30. both of Cutwines race, This Brittons, that Mercians disgrace; Then Cedwall much enuy'd, from long Exile return'd, from Cutwine sprong, That Edilwalcus erst o'rethrew, Now Berthune and AnthunusThe Bryttons confound the stories by falsely supposing this Cedwals, to be their last King Cadwalladar, and so attributing Cedwalla's acts, and going to Rome to him. slew, Sussex Kings: and with fatall feuds Bath'd flowry Kentish fields in bloud, Till leauing more with losse, then gaine Of spoyle, his brother Mollo slaine, Peter,Saxburga, reig. a small time. Elkwine, Ne∣phew of Kingulf A. 673. R. 2. he by Sergius Pope of Rome, Baptiz'd there found both fount and tombe. His Cousen Ina King in's place Rootes Aldwine out,Kentwine, Kingulf Ne∣phew, oreire, reigned 9. Sussex Kings race; For Ceolreds Mercyans Crowne and Kent, Makes the Kings pay him tributary rent; With faire Saint Andrewes Church in * Wells, Glastenburies Benedictine Cells,Cedwalla, Ne∣phew to Cut∣wine & Ceau∣line, A. 685. R. 3 yeares and went to Rome. Where Arymathean Ioseph lurkes Archorite of ld! his pious workes; Who payes to God his life and vowes At Rome;Ina, a kinsman of Cedwalla's, of the line of Cerdic, A. 688. reigned 37. at Berking his faire spouse. Next Ethelard doth Oswald tame, And Cuthred Earle Adelme o'recame, With Mercians,Ethelard, An. 724. R. 14. and the Kings of Wales; Then Sigebert one sole yeere King fayles: Foyl'd Kenulph,Cuthred, An. 739. R. 17. fled from Offa fayne, Cyneard oth' King bloud slew,Sigebert, anno 757. R. 1. though slaine.Kenulph, anno 758 R. 29. He bulded it for a Colledge, but his successor Kenulf turned it to a Cathedrall Church and Bishops See, for Ina had diuided the Bi∣shoprike of West-Saxons into two Sees, Winchester & Shir∣burne, and erected Selsey by Chichester to a Bishops Se, and made Abbot Gadbert Bishop there; he gaue to the Monasry of Glastenbury, which he erected, in ornaments, as Censer, Chlice, Paten, Bason and Vessels of gold and siluer for the Altar, with a Pall for the same, Candlesticks; and the Images of Christ and our Lady, and the 12. Apostles, with other ornaments for the Monks, with precious stones inserted, to the weight 264, pounds of gold: and 2640. pounds of siluer, he also made Peter pence to be paid to Rome, where he dyed a Votary, as his wife at Barkin.
Whence Brytricus obtayn'd the Crowne,Brytricus, of the line of Cer∣dic, A. 786. R. 17 Enuious at Egberts highBrytricus of the Bloud-Royall, a louer of peace rather then war, aduanced to the Crowne, marryed Eadurga daughter to Offa K. of Mercia, by whose power hee expelled Egbet,  was a pet∣ty King among the West Saxons, but being poysoned by his wife, in detestation of the fct the Nobles ordayned that the Kings wiues should not bee called Queenes, nor sit with them in  of Estate: she fled into France, where shee ued leudly, and dyed miserably; whence Egbert was recalled home. renowne, Whom more bloud-Royall did aduance; Who fled, to free suspect, to France, Till Brytrike was, vnheard-of fact, Slaine, his false Spouses loathed act. CANZ. XX. Egbert King of West-Saxons, reducing the seuen King∣domes to one, and calling it England, with the bgin∣ning of his Monarchy concludeth this Ode and the Heptarchye. THen Egbert all with one consent Wisht,Egbert, A. 802. R. 37. yeares and 7. moneths. thron'd, crown'd King, incontinent, The Merks, Welsh, Cornish, Kentish all, Yeeld, bow, or downe before him fall; East-Saxon Suthred could not stand, East-Angles left Mercians command, Submisse to him; Bernulfe was slaine, Ludicenus vanquisht, WhitlafeAll three, Kings or Vsurpers of the East Angles and Merci∣ans Crown. ta'ne. Northumbers, doubtfull which, perplext, By Danes, or ciuill warres, more vext, With Pallas peacefull Oliue spray, Their Legates crown'd, did Egbert pray To be their King, and free them from Bloud-thirsty rapines rise at home: Who their Liege, they his Liege-menta'ne, Englands plague since, expulst theHe fought with & ouerthrew the Danes at Carham; at Hen∣gisten-doune, and the Ile Tha∣net in Kent, hee vanquished the Mercians, and Bertult at Hel∣lan-dune: he subdued the Ken∣tish-men and East-Saxons, and receiued to his protection the East Angles, and Northumbers: he brake down the brazen Image of Cadwalline King of the Brit∣tons, and commanded the land to bee called Anglia or Engla∣lond and not Brytaine; he was crowned and buryed, hauing reig∣ned 38. yeares, at Winchester. Dane: Thus Mercyans, Danes, those by cold Tweede, Trent, Tyne, and Humbers pleasant side, Welsh, East, West-Saxons, Angles now, All Subiects beene, or to him bow. Braue state of things! pitty that e're Danes spoiles they should or Normans feare. At Winchester with Royall feasts, He entertaynes his Lordly guests, Nobles and Knights; where with consent Of a then held full Parliament, Egbert Crown'd, Thron'd, in greatest state, Was of all England King create; HisThis Edict, and new aing the Land by him, was about A... and the... yeare of his reigne. Edict-Royall publisht then, That England nam'd, vs English-men; So Egbert first brought into one, Seuen Kingdomes, rear'd one Regall Throne. The end of the seuenth Ode.
A briefe type of the eight Booke or Ode of PALAE-ALBION, called SWENO or SWANVS. The eight Ode contayneth, 1. The O∣riginall of the Danes, frō old Dacia, by Danu∣bius side, whose off∣spring in Scandia sere vex∣ed the Realme of Eng∣land, first by Ro∣uers, then by the King. Iuarus in Ethelreds time, after by Hin∣guar and Hubba in Alfreds time, and after, till Sweno made a conquest, though lost againe by the suc¦ceeding Kings. 2. The story of the chiefe Kings of England, viz. Egbert, A. 830. who left his sonnes Ethelwlf King, A. 839. hee reig∣ned 18. yeares. Adelstane Duke of Kent. Ethelbald, his sonne, reigned 3. Ethelbert, his brother, reign. 5. Ethelred, his brother, reign. 7. Alfred, his brother, R. 29. he had great war with the Danes, & made Oxford an Vniuersitie. Edward Senior, his son, R. 24. y. Adelstane, his son, R. 15. yeares. Edmond, his brother, R. 5. years. Eldred, his brother, R. 9 yeares. Edwine, Edmonds sonne, R. 4. y. Edgar, his brother, R. 16. y. A right worthy Prince, especially in his latter yeares. Edward, his sonne, surnamed the Martyr, reigned three yeares. Ethelred, his brother, he reigned in all 38. y. In his time Sweno got the conquest of this land and tri∣bute, and exiled him into Nor∣mandy. Edmond, his sonne, surnamed Ironside, after the Danes were a∣gaine expeld, reigned 2. yeares. Canute, the son of Sweno, reig∣ned 20 yeares. Harold, his sonne, R. 3. yeares. HardKnute, his brother, R 2. y. Edward, sonne of Ethelred, sur∣named Confessor, R. 23. yeares, a good Prince. Harold, the sonne of arle God∣ine, and Thyra, as some say, the after of Canute, vsurpeth one eare, and is dispossessed by Wil∣liam the Conquerour, An. 1066. 3. Certayne fragments of the stories of the tri∣butary and petty Kings of diuers Prouinces, set vp, and for the most part sub∣iect to the former, viz. Of East-Angles King Offa, a∣bout the time of Ethelwolf. King Edmond, his adopted son martyred by the Pagan Danes. K. Guthrum, set vp by the Danes, R. 12. King Edrike, also set vp by the Danes and last King of the East-Angles, reigned 14. sauing that some name Turkillus or Turketillus the Dane, King of East-Angles, about Adel∣stanes time. Mercians. Whitlafe, R. 15. y. Fridulf, R. 13. y. ouerthrown by the Danes, whom Ethel∣wolf vanquisht in Surrey. Burthred, made King by Ethelwolf, married Ethelswide the Kings daugh∣ter, but at last hee fled frō the Danes to Rome about Al∣freds time. Eldred, made King by Alfred, e∣spoused the noble Lady Elslede, who also after her hus∣bands death go∣uerned the Merci∣ans with great ho∣nour, & defended them right nobly against the Danes: her brother King being much hol∣pen by her marti∣all aide and politike counsels, af∣ter whose death K. Edward tooke the land of Mercians wholly the Crowne. Northumbers. Osfride and Ella rebell against Ethelred, and are slaine by the Danes, a∣bout the beginning of Alfreds reigne, Egbert, made King by the Danes, expelled by the Northumbers. Ricsiga, King vnder the Danes, R. 3. yeares. Egbert, a second, vn∣der the Danes, R. 7. y. Guthred or Gormo a Dane, but God-sonne to King Alfred, regned 11. Sythrik, his son, reig∣ned next, and espoused Edyth daughter to King Edward, sister to Adel∣stane: but Aulafe and Godfride their sonnes, for mouing some sediti∣on against Adelstane, were expelled, and fled, Aulafe into Ireland, God fridus into Scotland; where they raysed some powers, but were not∣withstanding at seuerall times vanquished by A∣delstane and Eldred. Af∣ter that one Edrike did clayme the Kingdome of Northumberland: but was ouercome by Eldred, about, An. 950. since when, Northumberland hath onely remayned an Earledome or Dukedome.
PALAE ALBION. Ode octaua, Inscripta SVENO. ARGVMENTVM. Oda velut varijs, Anglos, octaua procellis Iactatos canit, huc Danica turba ruit; Dura{que} Suenc lcèt pensa imperet, omne retrorsum Cessit at Angligenis Imperale decus. . Prooemio Odae, inserta hypothesis. BRitannos Latij▪Series Poematis, siue historiae Syntaxes ratio. cum Italis modò Sax Brytannos, Sedibus è patrijs & finibus expulit ambos: Saxones è solio, simul omnia turbine versant, Daci disijciunt. Nostris ita saepè minutis, Ludit in humanis diuina potentia rebus. Sic{que} vices Fortuna fouet, Natura{que} cursu Omnia perpetuo varians, sic{que} explicat annum; Ver fugit aestates, aestatum terga lacessit Pomifer Autumnus, Nymbis cessurus & vndis. Vt{que} canit Samius,Prooemio, sic nos, sic omnia verti, Nunc has, nunc alias videas florescere genteis; Celsaolim, veteres nunc Troia, humils{que} ruinas, Et pro diuitijs tumulos estendit auorum; Clara fuit Sparte, quondam viguêre Mycenae, Cecropis, & Prami, necnon Carthaginis arces: Vile solum Sparta est, clarae cecidere Mycenae, Celsa{que} Carthago, Thebae celeberrimae & Argos. Laomedonteae, quid nunc nisi nomina Troiae? Quid Pandionijs restant nisi nomina Athenis? Tam variat Fortuna vices, tot mille figuris, Vt quod erat non est,inconstantis Fortunae accu∣tione constanti, ne{que} erit quod perstet in orbe. Imperiale decus, saeclo isto, pessim Hirene, Transferre ad Gallos, velles insana Monarcha.
. Dacorum siue Danorum & Daciae domen & origo. SAxones Egberto florent regnante, cruento Mox ipsi praedae Daco, miserae{que} rapinae; Vnde igitur Dani veniunt, quibus incola terris Olim Dacus erat, qui tot modo coedibus Anglo Saxones affecit; pandens ab origine primâ Musa rogata refer!stati subtexitur Archaiologia siue origo Danorum è Dacia ve∣teri uxta Danubum sitâ, Fuit olim Dacia propter Ripam Istri, Gothi{que} Getae{que} ad littora Ponti, Contiguas Dacis sedes habuêre, sed intus Daci Danubicis iuxta adsedêre fluentis: Contiguas quo{que} nunc Boreali in cardine mundi Quaesiuêre sibi sedes; nam Gotthia fineis Dacorum attingit, quâ tendit Cymbrica Nesos. Illi multoties Romano à milite victi, Trajani ac iussu Caracallae: postea bellis Romani Imperij fineis regnante Philippo, Turbârunt miserè, Europam{que}, Asiam{que} remiscent, Donec ab Aurelio victi, validis{que} fugati, Aut propè deleti, irruentùm à gente feroci Hunnorum, Eoas dominante Valente per oras: Exin cessêre, at{que} vbi iam sedêre, potiti Sede, ex quâ Marius Cymbros deleuerat, inter Arctoos mundi populos numerantur: Eorum Dacia Pannonijs vicina, Valachia nuper Dicta, tulit Danos dudum, Dragulas{que} sibjipsis Infestos; parili{que} odio flagrànte, vocatus Turca iugum imposuit collis, Danos{que} trucidat Instinctu Dragulûm! Sic turpè vtris{que} subactis, Possidet arua ferox hostis;vnde in Cymbricam Chersonesum, celeberrima donec, Rettulit Hunniades, à Turcis capta trophaea, Extitit ac patriae vindex, Lunas{que} repressit; Sic{que} vetus, perhibent, produxit Dacia Dacos, Iam Danos Dragulas{que}; hodierna{que} Dania dudum, A sibi cognatis Danis, aut sede potitis Antiqua Istriacâ, nomen traxisse putatur. Crebra{que} cos inter commercia vtros{que} fuisse, Dacos{que} & Danos, olim Edgaris acta docerent; E{que} sinu quamuis, quidam autumat hosce Codano, Danos iam dictos; siue haec seu verior illa Summi vtrius{que} authoris erit sententia, Dacos Siue vocare lubet Danos, de nomine quippe Sollicitè minùs Orator monet esse seueros, Cum dere constet: suo enim diplomate Regem Dacûm s profitetur ouans,Ind ad nos transierunt; Quibus tamen Rex Daniae! ab illis Littoribus certum est venisse, vbi Scandia in Arcton Brachia protendit, tum limina nostra rapinis, Infestasse diu! sunt Oceano{que} propinqui Dani, Baltiaci{que} sedentes margine Ponti,
Eoum{que} per Oceanum, sua littora contrâ, Hostibus infestis; breuis hinc traiectus ad Anglos; Hic fons, hoc flemma, haec Dacûm celebratur origo. Iam{que} Deà vnde fores digressa, reuertere tempus, Et mecum Albionis placidam lege littoris oram. . Egberti dominatus, & Dynastiae finis. PRimum quem canimus,Angliae Reges, vt hic ordine , restitrunt▪ Egberto Principe primo, Gaudet nata recèns, roseas induta Corollas Anglia, pace choros celebrans, laurum{que} triumphos. Saxonum ab aduentu, quadringentesimus annus Est propè coeptus agi, Egberto iam Rege salutis{que} Octingentesimus,Egbertus, & tricesimus, Ogdoos idem, Postquam Merciacis Wallis{que} Monarcha subactis, Euri{que} & Zephyri, Anglo-Saxones at{que} Meatas, Septem Regna suis adiunxerat; extera{que} arma Finibus è totis repulit; cum stamina vitae Ruperunt Parcae, & florentia Sceptrarelinquit Filio Ethelwolfo: hic Romam proficiscitur, vrbis Visendi studio, & votis Monacho{que} solutus, Quo priùs indutus fuerat,filius Ethelwolfus, Regalia iura, Sceptra capit, solium{que} sibi, & Diademata Patris. . Egberti filij Ethelwolphi Regnum & gesta, DVctâ{que} Osburgâ formosâ coniuge, Gnatos Bis duo suscepit, totidem ordine postea Reges. Huic Diuus Swithinus, Adelstanus{que} celebres, Consiliarij erant; Egbertus & anteà Gnato, Cantia rura Duci dedit Adelstano, vti fama est. Dotibus egregij naturae instructus & artis, Iusticia{que} suos & multâ pace fouebat,fortiter profligârunt; Cum subitò Oceani emergens quasi fluctibus ingens Dacorum numerus, turbantes omnia, Regni Fineis inuadunt! quos Damnoniae{que} Ceorlus, Vicit, Adelstanus{que} per aequora tota fugauit; At priùs & villas multùm populantur & agros, Et Thamesim ingressi, Londinum, & Mercica rura, Cum, duce Merciaco, dicto modò Rege, Fridulph, A Dacis fuso; comiti pro coniuge Gnatam Rex dat Ethelswidam, Burthredo; & Marcia donat Sceptra, & quam potuit magno conamine iuuit, Infestos contra Dacos, inimica{que} tela,
Donec eos multâ discedere strage coegit.reliqu Reges Sicuti iam radijs, aliquot obscura per annos, Dispergens nebulas, Anglis pax alma refulsit: Rex Iuditham duxit Francam, solio{que} locarat Contrâ quàm Proceres Reges{que} ipsi antea contrâ Brytici Eadburgam statuissent Regi-Cidam: Wintoniae{que} iacet post bis duo lustra sepultus. . Ethelbaldi, Ethelberti & Ethelredi, trium Ethelwolfi Gnato∣rum regna. REgnat Ethelbaldus cum patre & fratre,VI sibi{que} Iudittham malus, vxorem patris, omine diro, Concubitu incesto,Ethelbaldus, male tum copulauit & audit: Despectus{que} suis, paucos{que} superstes in annos Vixit;Ethelbertus, Ethelbertus{que} olli successit; in illum Danica turba ruit; valida at virtute repressit, Ac citò post moritur, vix quintâ aestate peractá. Frater Ethelredus sequitur,Etheledus, quem Dania totis Viribus aggressa est: etenim Rex Dacus Iuarus, Cum classe ingenti Angliacas simul appulit oras; Temporis intereâ Mercios{que} parum{que} fideles, Regi Ottadinos perhibent; ipsos{que} regebant, Burthredus Mercios, Osfridus & Ella Meatas; Rex tamen & Dacos superat, Regem{que} cecidi: Vnde duces,multùm rapinis eorum infe∣statieos tamen repressunt. cum fratre Agnerus Hubone creati. Quanquam alij referunt Regem haud perijsse, sed ipsum Pace impetratâ, terrâ{que} hoc nomine quantum Tergo, ceu Corio circundare posset equino, Doncastrum posuisse, domum{que} measse, subortos Ad compescendum motus & furialia bella; At{que} ita substituit fratreis, sed foedere nullo, Foedifragi poenis Daci magis vs{que} stetêrunt: Vnde breui post bellum oritur, ingens{que} secuta est Dacorum strages! cum,At sub primis Alfredi tempori∣bus, accepto vulnere, paullò Posteà Ethelredus, animam exhalauit in auras. Et minimus natû Alfredus, moderamine rerum Iam potitur;Rebelles reguli Northum∣briae & Merciae Dacis suc∣cumbunt, potitis{que} domi circùm vndi{que} pace Compositis; votíne ergô, an faciebat honoris, Romam abiens, diadema verendo à praesule coepit.
. Quarti Ethelwolphi filij Alfredi Gesta florentissima. PErfidiae interèa fuso dant sanguine poenas, Merciaci{que} infidi, Ottadini{que} rebelles; Nam{que} per id tempus Northumbria paruit Ellae, Offrido{que} Anglum{que} iugo sua colla leuârat; Cum ducis infoelix spensam violare Beorni, Haud cunctatus erat Northumbricus ille Tyrannus Osfridus; vindex{que} Thori laesi{que} pudoris Coniugis assertor, vocat in confinia Dacos, Aspergens{que} odijs commissa ob crimina Reges, Vallo ipsos Eboraci intra sua moenia cingit, Nec vita & solio, ac spoliarat, destitit ambos: Crimen adulterij Osfridus cum sanguine pensat, Et prpè Vro-uicum locus est qui dicitur Ellae Campus, vbicaesus cum sanguine nomina liquit. Nacti opportunum Daci tempus{que} locum{que},Qui vice illorum regulo alios substituunt, & Nunc Regum ac scelus infandum quo pellere Reges Nulli non libitum; illorum sibi Regna iugarunt; Regi{que} Egberto cuidam Northumbrica sceptra Mandarunt! pulso{que} illo, Ricsiga, secuti, Egbertus{que} alius! Gormo successerat illis, Guthredus{que} aliâs dictus, charissimus vnus Alfredo quandam; Daci omnes Regna gubernant. At{que} ità Northumbris dominati sedibus, vltrâ Merciacis agris latè populantur, & Anglos Inuasere etiam fineis; lento{que} duello, Corruente Edmond sanctae pietatis alumn, Alkymondâ orto, Norymberga{que} Sywarâ; Regem siue ducem sibi substituêre Guthormum; Eois sequitur{que} nouissimus Edricus Anglis. . Daci & eorum Duces saepiùs ab Alfredo profligati. BVrthredo haud Mercio minus, Alfredo{que} furentes Multùm perfidiosi ingentia damna tulerunt Daci; qui nullis pacto ne{que} foedere,Alfredus ipse quamuis Dacis saepius fusis, ac pulso stantes, Exoniam Alfredo ripiunt, inopina{que} Regi Struxêre insidias; Rex, impiger arma capescens, Bristoliam propè primò, Abingdoniae{que} secundò Praelio eos, magnum{que} ducem modo strauit Hubonem: At{que} iterum à bellis sancito foedere cessit. Tempestate istâ Dacis veniebat ab oris
Rollo,Rollone, & ab Alfredo victus, ceu littora longè Neustriaca aspiciebat, apum{que} examine, gente Mellificâ, ductore, procul, sed debita fato, Regna petit, fluuios Ligerim super at{que} Garumnam, Et Sequanam vs{que} sitam sedem!Neustriae & Normannorum rimo Duce; à quo postea Reges Neustriae, & Angliacis qui olim dominantur in oris. . Alfredi infortunia, sed & eorum foelix exitus. PErpetua intereà Dacis-cum bella fuisse, Sancitum quamuis esset foedus{que} fides{que} Irrita cum votis, notum satis omnibus; vni Tot varios rerum casus, tot adire labores Contigit Alfredo inuicto! cui mixta dolori, Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori, Cui vestes sudore iugi, cui sica cruore Tincta iugi, quantum sit onus regnare probârunt, Vix{que} foret quisquam immensi per climata mundi Cui tot in aduersis vel respirare liceret, Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum Decreuit! quanquam à Burthredo Regia Dacis, Mercia{que} exposita est praedae; confinia Regis Alfredi, cum se Romam modò contulit, ausus Vlterius tumidis sese haud committere bellis; In{que} manus Dacûm sic Mercia venit; vt antè Desertis Ducibus Northumbria; tota{que} Eoûm Rura,i angustias deductus, & Londinia East-Anglûm pulcherrima sedes: Hisce malis pressum & cingentibus vndi{que} Danis, Alfredum, perhibent, per deuia rura vagantem Haud secus ac Phoebum Admeti inter prata, paludeis, Somersetiae agris, tanquam loca tuta tenentem; Insula Nobilium, per id tempus Athelnea texit Hostium ab incursu! & speratae penè salutis Immemorem: at Cutheberto, aiunt, hortante labantem, (Posteà cui,In Somersetiâ latuit, donec à S. Cutheberro solatus, & co∣hortatus, (pario positum est de marmore templum Ingens Cestriae Ei;) donaria multa dicauit, Dunelmense solum, Cutheberti{que} arua!) palude Rellicta, in fuluam, contrà, descendit arenam. Post toties fractâm{que} fidem, iurata{que} frustrâ Numina Rex totis insurgens viribus, hostem Finibus è patrijs repulit! mox Mercica Regna Ingressus subigit sibi;resumptis armis Dacos & quoscun{que} hostes eiecit, Noruegios{que} ferenteis Praesidiariam opem, sternit, Dacum{que} cohortes; Et quem Burthredi vice substituêre Ceolphum Merciacis Daci, indignum vel nomine Regis, Infimae vti sortis, musis ne{que} Martis alumnum.
Cestria dein redit ad Regem, & Northumbria! Dacus Praeficitur quibus, Alfredi ex baptismate Gnatus, Gormo! fugâ, quaquâ versum sibi consulit hostis, Pars patriam repetens, pars munijt aggere fossas; Praeterèa ac nemo bellis tot victor apertis, Vno, vti qui septies Dacis-cum cerneret anno: Londinium, ereptam Dacis vbicun{que} fugatis,& inter alia ipsius, Merciaci{que} soli partem, cum coniuge Gnatâ, Dat Duci Ethelredo, Elfledae Rex nomine dotis: At bellis simulac Dacum{que} furore quiescens, Tum Monachis aedes,opera magnificentissima Oxo∣nium Academiam insttuit. Cutheberto{que} arua dicauit, Rex Tinam at{que} Athesim inter flumina; debeat olli Quicquid habet Phoebi & Musarum splendida sedes, Oxonium studijs florens, mihi dulcis alumna: Qui primùm instituens gymnasia, praemia fixit, Pallados, Hesperidum{que} sacri cultoribus horti, Wintoniae{que} iacet post bis tria lustra sepultus. . Eduardi Senioris regnum & gesta. GNatus Eduardus sequitur,Eius soboles, Wallum{que} Scotum{que} Hic primo Imperio & fratrem,Eduardus Senior, & Dacos{que} cecîdit, Fratris Athelwoldi insigni feritate rebelleis: Northumbros{que} armis domat, East-Anglûm{que} Guthormì Successorem Ericum, ereptis cum sanguine sceptris: Mortuo & Eldredo, Augustam, Oxonium{que} recepit; Merciâ at in reliquâ populos Elfleda feroceis Inclyta Amazoniâ plusquam virtute coercet: Varuicum huic multum,Elfleda▪ Staffordia, Cestria debent, Salopia, at{que} aliae posuit queis moenia villae: Scilicet & Wallos domuisti, insignia{que} armis Bellica Northumbris, Dacis{que} trophaea tulisti, O Elfleda potens, ô terror virgo virorum, Penthesilaea Phryges, Italos pharetrata Camilla Inter & ipsa tuos Dacis{que} verenda virago! Mercia{que} hac vitâ functâ, estreuoluta Coronae Fratris, & imperium Scoticos, penetrauit inagros; Daci etenim & Walli, Eduardo, at{que} Anglia tota, Praeter,posteà. quae Sythrico solum Northumbria Daco Guthredi Gnato, parent! sexus{que} vtrius{que}, Sex Gnatas, sed non ex vna coniuge▪ treis{que} Suscepit Gnatos, totidem ordine postea Reges: Nupta Editha est Sythrico, Northumbro; Elgina Monarchae Francorum Carolo, Elysis Rex visere campos Tendit, Wintoniae{que} habet ossa recondita Tymbus.
. Adelstani & fratrum, splendidum solis Imperium. GNatus Athelslanus sequitur,Adelstanus Regem{que} Scotorum, Arma vocantem, armis reprimit; Binos{que} nepotes, Defuncti Sythrici Gnats, furialia bella Ad minimum tacitè de seditione mouenteis Consilia, è regno pellit, solio{que} paterno: Godfridus{que} Scotos, fugiens, Aualassus Hybernos, Mouit Adelstanum contra; sed vtros{que} manebat Belli eadem fortuna; Scotûm{que} exercitus ingens Concidit, illorum{que} etiam Reges{que} Duces{que} Non pauci!cum Dacis, Wallis, Scotis, alijs{que} regno indiatoribus fortiter & liciter praeliatur. Repetit{que} suos Aualassus Hybernos. Non impunè Scotos rupisse{que} foedera Dacos, Passus Athelstanus, Dacos subsidere, & ipsum In sua verba facit Regem jurare Scotorum: Vimerum{que} cepit, Wallos{que}, aggressus Huuallum, Regnis restituens ipsos; domitos{que} rebelleis Exus Cornubios,similiter ecêrunt mox pulsos flumine ab Exi, operâ turrita Excestria vidit; Cui Tamaris{que} datum est recipit Cornubia limen, Florente Imperio illius quo{que} tempore florent, Wolstanus Deirae, sanctus Cantuariae Adelmus, Cùm Monachis aedes, sibi nomina clara, parabat, Et fratri moriens sobole sine, splendida sceptra Permisit; Dacos qui perculit at{que} rebelleis Northumbros Edmondus ouans: Rursus{que} nepotem Fudit,Edmondus & si ex Scoticâ redit idem Aualassus Hyberne! At breue fata nimis tempus vitae{que} dierum{que} Indulsere sibi! cuius post flebile bustum Bina superstes erant soboles, Edwinus & Edgar; Frater ei successit, adhuc impubere prole, Eldredus; teneris{que} datur Rex tutor Alumnis. . Eldredi & pupillorum dominium, & gesta. VNus hic Angliacos Reges celeberrimus inter, Eldredus! cui tanta hominis sapientia, virtus Bellica & integritas,Eldredus Reges meritò ho∣noratissimi; morum candore, parata, Vt facilè hostileis audito nomine solùm Sedaret motus! Hunc Odo, duos{que} sequenteis, Edgarum & Edwinum fratres; treis ordine Reges; Odo coronauit, Cantuariae Episcopus! Ormi Rursum Aualassus ope soceri, Northumbrica Regna Inuasit, rursum{que} petens, reppulsus ab ipsis Northumbris; posthaec Ericum sibi denuo sceptris Successorem habuit! Quem nigro immersit auerno, Impiger Eldredus: Quem post duo lustra secutus,
Edmondi puer Edwinus; qui insignia praeter Sumptamanu,Edwinum verò infamem, sanctos{que} viros, meliora monenteis Candidè, in exilium pulsos, eapropter & iras, Praeter & incestum, haud quicquam memorabile gessit, Dignum Rege nihil: Quare Northumbria & omnis Mercia, mirati teneris adeò Edgaris annis Eximias doteis claro sat stemmate dignas, Asciuêre ducem sibi eum, Regem{que} salutant; Quo facto, irarum, curis{que} ingentibus, aeger, Fluctibus,sequitur Edgar frater, occubuit frater citò; coepta{que} Regis Fama nec immeritò volitare per ora virorum: Dictus eras Edgar-Etheling pulcherrime rerum los, honor, Anglorum sydus ter nobile gentis, Deliciae, patriae decus, & virtutis alumnus! . Edgaris Acta famosissima. VNdè equidem reliquos super, inclyta fama, Monarchas, Edgaris eximijcelebratur, & ardua virtus; Disposuit classem, munimina, littora circùm, Dunstanum reuocat, Wallum{que} Scotum{que} subegit: Regum octo, Cumbriae, Wallûm, Scotiae, Orcadum, Hybernes, Vs{que} remigio,cuius gesta florentissima, nisi est transuectus flumina Deuae; Classe etiam aequoreos tractus solitum ire per omnes, Et Regni fineis circum-lustrare quotannis, Florentem perhihent suprâ omneis antea Reges! Is Wallûm Regem Luduuallum nomine, iussit, Trecentos, res bella, lupos, de more quotannis, Noxium ità, id genus, omne animal perdendo, tributi Nomine pendere. At mullum illi infamiae amores Inspersère leues; spaciatus amasius Edgar Rure & Vere nouo, deceptus amore puellae, Quae Ioue digna rapi visa est; pulcherrima Nympha; Sollicitus{que} suos Matri dum narrat amores, Percupiens praedam, Danaes disponderat Imbrem. Mater vt, & natae illibato virgine flore, Posset Amatorem placasse, auro{que} potiri, Construxit Thalamum, at Nympham subduxit amanti, Ancillam{que} suam pro virgine Regis in vlnas Ignari dedit! ignoscente{que} nomina fassae Edgaro, ab imperio dominae fit libera! vti illam Prostituisse iuuet, turpi pro foenore corpus.
. Amoris Edgaris infames, aliá{que} gesta. ORgerij{que} Ducis Gnatae,Qòd leuioribus nimiùm in∣duserit amoribus; quae eius intamia est, postquam improba fama, Eximiam formam illius retulisset ad aures, Misit Ethelwoldum Comitem satis antè fidelem, Aequè formosam ac famosam visere Nympham: It, videt hanc, visam{que} cupit, potitur{que} cupitâ Mentitus Regi; Alfredae pulcherrima▪ amatae Formam{que} faciem{que} at{que} ora simillima Diuis, Ceu Rege indigna, aut potiùs sibi congrua Nymphae Connubia; at{que} istis non absona caetera fingens, Rege petit veniam, Gnatam patre, virgine amorem, Quam capit in sociam, accelerans sua fata, iugalem: Mox vbi fama iterùm est formam admirata puellae, Se Rex infido delusum sensit amico, Spectatum{que} suis quo certior esset ocellis, Cornubiae Ducis, Orgerij patris, omnibus vni Praeter Ethelwoldo,Regem alioqui satis inclytum demon∣strârunt. valdè exoptatus in aedes, Edgarus ecce venit! Tyrio{que} nitentior ostro Interfusa genas roseo formosa pudore Constitit ante oculos, heu talis vt alma Dione, Candidior nive, pulchra suos. Alfreda decores Ostentans; quamuis coniux secus antè rogasset; Causas{que} exposuit delusi Regis amores: Quo magis illa stupet, magis & formosa videri, Falsa, sui similis, leuior{que} fugacibus auris, Deperit! Hancce mouent, non pignora chara preces{que}; Mollicie{que} animi indutâ, illaqueatus amore, Rex sponsum interimi curat, votis{que} potitur: Decept{que} priùs Domino simili arte, rapinam, Inter venandum transfixus arundine liquit. Wilfreda ex Monachâ, Monacham{que} habet Edgar Edytham, Wiltoniae primam Abbatissam; dijs{que} relatam; Edgaris ista iuuenta fuit; quapropter abundè Sancto à Dunstano est reprehensus; serior aetas Sanctior! heic Monachis indulgentissimus aedes Extruxit{que} nouas,Eius filij veteres{que} alio{que} receptas Transtulit ijs, auxit{que} alias, reparat{que} vetustas; Ijs{que} tulit leges, Regno{que} apprime salubreis.
. Eduardi Martyris & Ethelredi regna diuersimodè infoelicia. LEgitima ex Elfredâ Edouardus coniuge natus, Ex Alfreda alter Copronymus! Edgarus auris Aethere mutatis, Edouardo sceptra relinquit. Fraude sed ille suae impettitus & arte Nouercae,Eduardus Martyr adit, Occubuit rediens venatu incautus ab agris, Impia Ethelredo Gnato, dum regna pararet Alfreda;Ethelredus Copronymus pro∣phetante S. Dunstano, hunc tanquam emergentem ex sanguine fratris, Diris deuouet; at, tandem sacrare coactus Diuus Dunstanus, sacra ceu baptismata vates, Foedantem, Angligenis insignia damna ferentem: Ignauum at{que} malum, fore iam praedixit, vt olim. Eius Ethelredi vitia, & simul Anglia Nympham, Te vitâ demptam Guinthildida luget in aeuum. Dacus enim hinc fineis armis inuaserat Anglos, At{que} agitat praedas per littora curua; paratam Proditor insignis classem dedit Aelfricus hosti; Tum primùm, hisce malis, fractis Rex Sueno Britannis Imposuit vectigal, & icto foedere cessit. Brictius at postquam flêrunt madidi{que} Nouembres Danorum interitum, quos puncto temporis vno, Fraudis Ethelredi memorant insigne trophaeum Excisos! dolus an virtus quis in hoste requirat? Sueno iterum Angliacas venit indignatus in oras; Toto{que} Eoo tractu, Thamisim inter & Humbri Flumina, tum populis ripam extra vtrius{que} subactis, Rex fugit ad socerum, Richardum, coniugis Emmae Patrem, Normannûm Regem; regno{que} potitus Sueno erat,vitijs & ignauiâ suâ, Angliam miserijs oppletam, Dacis Suenone Rege, tributariam praestitit, Angliacis Dacûm Rex primus in oris: Quo vitâ functo, insulsûm misera Anglia Danûm Lassa iugo, reuocat{que} domum, recipit{que} misellum Rursus Ethelredum! miseranda strage peremptis Dacis, Sueniades sua trans mare regna Canutus, Mox{que} reuersurus furiali more recessit. Regiâ Ethelredus praeter spem sede potitus, Postquam lustra suos propè rexerat octo Britannos, Ceu priùs Edmondum, ex Elginâ, postmodo Regem Eduardum Alfredum{que} ex coniuge ceperat Emmâ, Londinij morbo,at recuperato regno, filius Ed∣mondus; fraude an curis confectus acerbis, Iam Diui Pauli tumulatus in aede recumbit.
. Edmondi Regis immaturè extincti nobilissima progenies. REgna adit Edmondus, qui littora ad ista reuersum, Impiger excipiens horrendo marte Canutum, Multa quo{que} est bello passus, stratagemmate multa Indigno, malè fidi Edrici, cognomine dicti Stratonici! tandem ad Sabrinae fluminis vndas, Monomachia duos inter suscepta Tyrannos, Litem aufert! socijs vtrin{que} astantibus armis, Oluea, Sabrinae in medio sita fluminis Alueo, Insula vidit eos lentum admirata duellum, Pugnando fessos demum{que} ita{que} conuenit actis, Inter eos publicis; Borealior ora Canuto, Edmondo Zephyri at{que} austri subiecta procellis Cessere,tamen proditoris Edrici occumbit, & socias iunxerunt foedere dextras. At citò fraude Edrici Edmondus cadit, Anglia fleuit Flore iuuentutis raptum! sunt Regia proles Daciam adus{que} suam ablegati à Rege Canuto: Et fieri sic firmaratus sibi sceptra tyrannus, Quo Daca effuso fratrum conspersa cruore Terra foret,vnde Canutus Suenonis filius regnat, premere incautos nece Knutus alumnos Impius ac voluit, frater concedere nollet; Rex Dacus, factum crudele perhorruit intus, Pannonico Regi externam qui misit in oram Imberbes iuuenes, vbi cessit vescier auris Edmondus superis! Agathae{que} sui{que} hymenaeos Eduardus celebrat; voluuntur vt omnia fato! Pannonicae illa soror Reginae, filia Neptis, Regum & Alemaniae dominorum; oriuntur ab illo Stemmate, Qui Reges, Scoticis dominantur in oris: Hijs satus Edgar erat, Margareta{que} nupta Scotorum Regi Malcolmo,& Edmondi puelluli, exilio de∣gentes vitam, temporis tra∣ctu tamen, & longa post suc∣cessione ad Angliae & Scotiae coronam, in suis posteris ad∣spirârunt. Scotiae quibus ordine longo Nascuntur Reges; Maria{que} sorore, Mathildis Henrici primi coniux, sed & illa Mathildam Induperatricem genuit, fuit illa secundi Henrici genitrix; comiti quo{que} nupta Maria Bononiae Eustathio, Stephani hijs sata sponsa, Mathildis Altera! sic{que} Scotis dominata & vbi{que} Britannis, Spreta licet, despecta quasi, insidijs{que} petita, Progenies toto longè celeberrima mundo.
. Kanuti Daci apud Anglos Imperium. SIc Ferreo-latere extincto,Ipsi verò Canuto, simul exule prole Sceptra Canutus habes, iam totius Anglia; Olauo Noruegiam pulso subigens, Scoticos{que} rebelles, Noruegiae, Dacûm, Scotiae, Angliae, vnus & idem Quatuor ingentûm populorum habeare Monarcha! Cui viduâ Emmâ vxore, data{que} sorore vicissim, Normanno; illius sobolem succedere celso Pactus erat solio: egregiè hic maris imperat vndis, Stulto adulatori illudens;duo ipsius Gnati. Christo{que} Coronam Dedicat, imperium{que} pedes pius antè resignat; Poenituit scelerum ac commissûm! inuisat & vrbem Romanam, in cineres post bis duo lustra reuersus. . Canuti & Emmae Gnatorum successionis ordo & dominia. TReis Regna in parteis,Haraldus cognomento Hare∣foot, soboles, diuisa capescit, Noruegium Sueno; satus Hardi-Kanutus ab Emmâ, Vulgo sic dictus, Daciam; sed & Anglica sceptra, Suppositus, perhibent, Gnatus inuasit Haraldus; Regnum & confratreis vexans odijs{que} Nouercam, Rex{que} triennis obit!& Hardi-Kanutus, ac tandem Solio successor in alto Rex Dacus sequitur, satus Hardi-Canutus ab Emmâ Rex{que} triennis obit! solio{que} Edouardus Eburno Successit, sanctus Confessor! & ipse Canuto, Ex Emmâ frater;Ethelredi Gnatus Eduardus Confessor dictus, succedunt, geminis{que} parentibus ortus, Emmâ & Ethelredo: Godwini huic filia nupta est, Pulchra adeò pia Nympha, pudica, modesta, decens{que}; Ac quasi spina rosam, perhibent, Godwinus Edytham Barbarus at{que} ferox genuit, pater improbus! Eius, Godwini malè consilijs, Rex saepius vsus, Multa minùs rectè, matrem{que} alios{que} fideleis Contra equidem falsò insimulatos crimine, amicos, Gessit; donec erant, Gnati{que} pater{que} rebelles Pulsi,Quo & in exilium missi, pia nupta{que} eorum Culpâ Wiltoniae Monachis est reddita Nymphis. Rex{que} manens virgo cum virgine coniuge, fama est, Praedam alijs moriens, sobole sine, sceptra reliquit.
. Eduardo Confessore sine prole decedente, varij suborti motus in Anglia. POstea at in Regis, Gnati{que} pater{que} fauorem, Depositis redeunt obijs; ipso{que} iubente Rege, per insolitos saltus, tractus{que} niuosos Victor agens currus Snowdonis montibus hostem Perculit,sobole sine decedente, & bello minimè confregit aperto, Contectos Wallos nemore at{que} silentibus vmbris, Godwino satus acer Haraldus! vti{que} Sywardus Disiecit Scoticum, Ottadinus Comes ipse Tyrannum Machutam! Et Regum Scotiae de sanguine cretum Malcolmum statuit Regem; cui postea nupsit Edmondi neptis, soror Edgaris! Angliae in oras Qui modò cum patre, matre Agatha, at{que} sororibus, vnâ Accessurus erat,Regnum tanquam praedae ex∣positum, inter Competitores, Rege accersente: sed ecce Interèa Eduardus moritur pater; exulis ergò Dicti, Edgar-Etheling Gnatus, Regni audijt Haeres, A Rege Eduardo, Angliaci; & Protector Haraldus. His ità compositis,Edgarum, cui plurima sancta{que} virtus Emicuit, sanctâ Eduardus Rex pace quieuit. At dubij Proceres, & quò se vertere nescij, Seu fugere antè suam,Haraldum Godwini Gnatum siue expectare ruinam, Normannas metuunt vireis, iactata{que} vulgo Facta Duci promissa; at Godwineius Haraldus Ingentem populi sibi conciliarat amorem: Et iam Pannonico, fato ecce superstes ab orbe Nobilitate potens, dudùm Edgar, Regia proles, Venerat Angliacas, patre condecoratus in oras; Sed puer Edgar adhuc, & nondùm aetatis adultae, Nec tam acri,& Gulielum, denuò Conquae∣storem, dilaniandum & dis∣cerpendum reliquit, aut tanto potis est occurrere morbo, Nascentisue mali infenfas restinguere flammas! Hijs ità suspensis animo; Protector habendus Su genere, anne magis hoc audax nomine Regnum Nemine eum prohibente, ferox inuadit Haraldus! Sceptra manu rapiens, frontem Diademate cingit: Bis{que} fidem fractam, puero{que} Duci{que}, parabat, Armatà{que} manû,cuius aut quauis ratione tueri.
. Sub aduentum Gulielmi Normanni, valdè tumultuantis An∣gliae descriptio. AT iam corda hominum terrent,Miseriae hypotyposis ad se∣quentm Odam, fit quasi Metabasis. visus{que} Cometes, Hij{que} noui motus, fata & contraria fatis! Anglia, & accensis furialibus vndi{que} flammis, Insula tota ferè flagrat! ciuilibus armis Frater Tosto furit; Venetâ iracundior Adriâ. Addidit infestas vireis, plaga frigida mundi, Noruegiae{que} manus, Scotia, Orcades, vltima Thule; Nec Gulielmus abest longè, quem Flandria totis, Neustria quem sequitur, quem Gallia viribus: Olli Charta sacrata mea est, illi haec mea carmina! Terris Qui decus, Oceano Dominos, genus addit Olympo. Odae octauae Finis.
PALAE ALBION, Entituled SWENO. The eighth Ode. THE ARGVMENT. Th'eighth Ode the rapines of the Dane, And Swane's supposed conquest sings, Who here impos'd Dane-gut, but t'ane Away by Fate, few Danes were Kings, For English as they back regaine Their Phoebus Bay, agen did raigne. CANT. I. The Exordium drawne from the various changes of all humane things. BRittons the Latian Lords of eld,Synchronismus siue computatio Annorum. Them Saxons, DanesSupplementum Historiae. them both expeld: So Ioue, Kings crowns like bas in sport, Tosses in Fortunes tennis-court; Whiles shee her shapes and vassals tornes Vortumnus-like t'a thousand formes. So Nature her things; nothing strange, Doth yearely vary, hourely change: Spring, Sommer; Fall, doth Winter chace, Liue take Deads, Young their Elders place. Of Soules, Seas, Empires, Vs and all, Pythagoras, or the trans∣migration of soules from one bo∣dy to another, and sometimes of diuers and strange kinds, as of the soules of men into Apes, Swine, &c. for punishment, a∣mong the various changes of things, wa the doctrine of the Pythagorians. sang the Rise and Fall, How, now this King, anon that Nation Triumphs; soone, suffers alteration: Troy now for towers may tell her toombes, Whose ruines take their stately roomes; That buried in their owne falls beene; Thebes, learned Athens, faire Mycene, Sparta, Argos, Carthage; armes, pride, fame, What newes? where now? seen nought, saue name. Th'old Samians saying, so, notPythagoras is saying. strange, Townes,Hirene the Em∣presse, A Christi 800. We, States, World and all doe change. Hirene mad now more to change States, Greeks Empire would to French translate.
CANZ. II. The originall of the Danes that so molested England. EGbert now flourisht,Egbert, A. 802. reign. 37. yeares. and his raigne Free from the rapines of the Dane: Who whence they came that England vext So, bee't thy taske, deere Muse, now next. Old Dacia lay by Donow,The originall of the Daci o Danes, now Dani; their Coun∣try being called Daca, or Dania. where Goths their neere Pontique neighbours were: These though not farre, Danes neerer bide To Swan-lou'd Isters pleasant side; Southerne of eld; the selfe same seene Now Northerne Nations, neighbours beene; Goth-land and Denmarke dwellers, neere The Baltique now, erst th'Euxine Meere. These Daci, oft the Romans thralls By Traians power and Caracalls,Trajanus, anno 100. Vext th'Empire sore in Philip's raigne Till by Aurelius foyl'd or slaine, Th'Huns too, o're ranne them with huge hoasts, When Valens rul'd ith'easterne coasts; So, faine to seeke this northerneThe old Daci of Dacia, by Ister or Donow, opprest and ex∣pulst by the Romans and Huns, were faine to seeke new seates about Cymbrica Chersone∣sus, and the Baltique Ocean, whence Marius expeld the Cymbrians. Cell Whence Marius did the Cymbri quell. That ancient Dacia, that since hight Valachia, lately brought to light Two factious families, t'one of Danes T'other Draguli; that their owne banes Wrought by vnciuill ciuill flames To their great losse, and Christians shames, Whiles Turke deuoures with rauening Kite, Those frogs and mice-like warriours quite, Though soone Don Iohn of Austria fam'd From Mahounds moones their lands reclaim'd. Thus Dacia once her Daci, now Her Danes and Draguli did show, Whence moderne Denmark, name and race, From those on Donow's bankes they trace: Whose old mutual commerce and loue, Since, Edgars acts and theirs, seeme proue. Though Danes name nor meane authors some Would haue from Codane gulfe toSinus Codanus being all that Sea and Gulfe, bordcring the now Dania or Denmarke. vide Ortelium. come; So here's inuentions choise! lesse neede, Striue o're names, things themselues-on greede: Since Danes King, King of Daci writes, And his Danes from (t'vs) easterne sites, Their Dacian seates on Scandian coasts Harrow'd England erst, with furious oasts; And 'tis but from their shores to these A short cut o're the German Seas.
Such their old seates, their stocke and stem; Leauing a while their lands and them, Goe we whence we digrest before, Backe to our best knowne Brittaine shore. CANZ. III. The flourishing reigne and Monarchy of King Egbert, vniting the seuen Kingdomes of Saxons, and subdu∣ing the Danes. COmes that now first in place to sing Egbert first new made EnglandsThe whole Land being then newly by his Edict called Anglia or Engla-lond, of the Angles or English, of whose stocke the King was. King;The latter end of Egberts reigne, hee being tn King of all England, who began, A. Christi 802. and R. 37. was, . 838. and 839. And from Hengists com∣ming 390. years; who came about the 450. yeare of Christ. His due for Peace the myrtle spray And Rosy wreath's, for warres the bay! Four-hundreth from first Saxons heere, Eight-hundreth and nie fortieth yeere Of grace it was; and Egbert raign'd O're all seuen Saxon Kingdomes gain'd, And Danes driuen out, t'him Englands King Angles all-haile, and Saxons sing; Hauing so subdu'd both Welsh and them, He dyes, and leaues his Diadem And scepters flourishing full faire To Ethelwolfe, his sonne and heire: Who went to visit Rome; whereHe was Bishop of Winchester, saith Iohn Bompton, Abbo of Iauaux; at Rome e repayed the English Schoole, founded by Offa King of Mercia. freede From vow'd do's on the regall weede. CANZ. IIII. His sonne Ethelwolphes acts and reigne. THen marrying faire Osburga,Ethelwolfe, sonne of Egbert, A. 839. . 18. springs From them, twise two sonnes, after Kings; Saint Swithine, and good Ethelstane, Were his chiefe councell; this they sayne As was his father Egberts minde, Had for his Earledome Kent affign'd. This good Kings time saw iustice raigne And peace; till troubled by the Dane; Whom when Cerle by land o'recame, Athelstane did by sea the same; Though they had first borne Fridulfe downe, And sack't and fir'd his Merk-land townes, Being come so farre as London,The Dane hauing entred the Thames with 530 ships, spoyled London, ouer-ran Mercia, and entred Southrye, there foyled by the King and his sonne Ethel∣bald, at a place called Aolca, and in the West; and after by A∣delstane, and Earle Calchere, at Sandwich in Kent, where 9. of their ships were taken. and Her Thames the pride of all the land. Merk-land her dower, for Buthred's bride, Her sire then gaue faire Ethelswide; And with ioynt-powers opposing thoe, They done represse the Danish foe,
So peace againe in's latter dayes Gan to shew forth his goldenSauing that his sonne Ethel∣bald rebelling, diuided his King∣dome with him, and made him take the worser halfe. rayes; French Iudith made his Queene anon The King set her on regall Throne, Contrary to what was decreed For Brytrik's Queenes King-quelling deede, Eadburga's act; Winchester deignes, Her King tombe for twise ten yeeresWhere he was sometimes Bishop as some write, before hee was King. reigne. CANZ. V. Ethelbalds, Ethelbert and Ethelreds times sore pestred wth incursions of the Danes; NExt Ethelbald,Ethelbald reig∣ned with his fa∣ther; and his fa∣ther dying, An. 857. he reigned 3. yeares after. Ethelwolphes sonne, Succeeds, and 'mongst his deeds ill done, Foule acts befit incestuous beds, His fathers wife French Iudith weds; But liues not long. His brother next Ethelbert whom the Danes sore vext, Reignes but fiue yeere! chac't hence the Dancs. Ethelred then third brother raignes,Ethelbert, An. 860. R. 5. yeares, buried at Shir∣burne. Ethelred, An. 866. R. 7. yeares, buried at Wim∣bourne. Who was much pestred with those hoasts Of Pyrates from the ScandianIn his time the Danes harrow∣ing England, ouerthrew the fa∣mous Monasteries of Bardoney, Croyland, Medishamstede, or Peterborow and Ely: the Ab∣besse of Coldingham, cut off her owne nose, and vpper-lip, perswa∣ding her sisters to do the like, ther∣by to become odible to the Danes so to preserue their Virginitie; which made the Danes in de∣spight burne both the Monastery and Nunnes therein. coasts; More, Merk-lands Duke Burthred rebels, And Humbers Lords Offride and Elle; But Ethelred quencht all these flames, Danes, faithlesse friends, and enemies tames, When Danes King slaine, famous Agner And Hubbo, Dukes createdOr Hinguar or Hubba, who ouerthrew the valiant Earle a∣mong the East-Angles, Walke∣tulus, and shortly after the holy king Edmond, whom they bound to a stake, shot himfull of arrowes as bee was making his prayers to God; and lastly strake off his head. were; Though some say, he with Englands peace Went hence home ciuill broiles to cease: But first from Ethelred procur'd, Land where those brothers them immur'd, Like Byrsa, Carthage Castle strong, What might be compast by oneLike to this was done by Queene Ddo at Carthage, and by Hengist at Thong neare Sittingburne in Kent. thong, Whence Thong-Castle or Doncaster As soone suppose, surnamed were. But Danes brake truce; whence to those Danes Warres dismall chance, brought all their banes; And Ethelred hurt in theAfter a battell at Basing hee was slaine or deadly hurt at Whitingham, and buried in the Monastery of Wimbourne, his Armes were a Crosse Florye. fight, Dy'd shortly after; whose crownes right, Did to fourth brother Alfred come, For honours sake then fetcht at Rome.
CANZ. VI. Alfred made King of Northumberland and a great part of England besides, being ruled by the Danes. BVt now Northumbers in this tide,Alfred, the 4. son of Ethelwolf, A. 872. R. 29. And Mercians paide deere for their pride, Who left the English yoke, and tane, Were made slaues to the Lordly Dane. Northumbers tyrants, one of them That then vsurpt the Diadem, Osbright, rauisht Beorna's spouse, A Lords! that solemne vengeance vowes; When Danes call'd in, within Yorke walls With hostile armes girt, Osbright falls. Nor distant is farre from theThe place called Elles-Croft. same Where Ella left, both life and name. Northumberland then,Osbright and Ella, Kings of Northumber∣land, slaine. these two slaine, Was forthwith subiect to the Dane; One Egbert first, next Risige,Kings set vp by the Danes in Northumberland. then Another Egbert bring they in, And Guthred's made the Crowne to weare, Sometimes by Alfred loued deare. The Danes thus 'mongst Meatae they Reigning, was Merkland made their prey, East-Angles too, their good KingHis predecessor Offa, though of meane estate, King of the Fast-Angles, making his voyage to the holy Land, went by Saxony and Norymberge, to visit his cousin Alkymond, and young ne∣phew Edmond, whom hee pro∣mised to make his heire, and did accordingly, sending him his ring in token thereof, from the place where he dyed in the iourney; wh bringing diuers learne;  ouer with him, reigned in East-Angle, till he was so ouercome by Hin∣gur and Hubba, and in prof∣sion of the Faith martyred by the mercilesse Pagan Danes: his Psalter in the Saxon tongue was long kept as a monument in the Monastery of Saint Edmonds∣bury. gone, Edmond great Alkymonda's sonne,King Edmond of East-Angles the Martyr. And Queene Sywares! by holy vow, King Offa's heire, whom Danes o'rethrow. And Guthrum in his place they bring, And Edrick last East-Angles King. CANZ. VII. Alfred forsaken of some of his rebellious Dukes, yet van∣quisheth Rollo the Dane, great ancestor of the Nor∣mans. THerewhiles as one of friends forsooke, Alfred alone though, could not brooke Those rech-lesse rapines of the Dane, Troth-lesse truce-breaks, that had ta'ne Exeter by such craft; and laid waite For the Kings life: who therefore straite With his few Southerne forces, did First battell nigh to Bristow bid; And next, neere Abingdon he slew, Great Hubbo, Chieftaine of theA great beape of stones was copped vp in the place where hee was buried, which is yet called of his name Hubbesow. crew. So Danes sought peace! and Rollo came Foe-like, but was repulst with shame;
And hony-bees their gentle guides By Loyr's, and by Seynes floury sides, He and his warlike Danish hoast Plac't themselues in faire Frances coast, Which Northmen Normans been!Rollo the Dane, A. 890. whence springs, Their Neustrian race ofThe ancestors of William the Conquerour, Dukes of Norman∣dy, descended from this Rollo the Dane, the  of Guion, being then expulsed hence by king Alfred. English Kings. CANZ. VII. Afterwards brought to the lowest ebbe of fortune, and faine to lurke vnknowne in the marishes in Somerset shire, yet againe recouereth the Monarchie of the whole Iland: he founded Oxford. NOr yet can noble Alfred cease From wars, though Danes themselues craue peace; Whose troth-plight promise broken still, Done raise fresh broyles and farther ill, That scarce one found, more truely bare A crowne of thornes then Alfred ware, Whose head from care, nor hands from bloud, Or he from toyle, ere vacant stood; Each passed paine, seeming t'haue beene Prologue, t'a more prodigious scene! That he, almost, and none but hee Could liu'd, or haue beene halfe so free From feare, or farther danger, when, His foes so false and faithlesse beene. For Burthred, by this time toWhere he dyed, and was buried in the Saxons Schoole, founded by Offa King of Mercia, and since repayred by his father in law, King Ethelole. Rome From Merk-land fled and natiue home, Left pallace, lands, and what remaines Expos'd to th'rapines of the Danes: East-Angles and Northumberland More, e're this, held by Danes strong hand. Good Alfred too, by frownes of fate At lowest ebbe; in stead of state In Athelney the NoblesSo called of King Alfred and his Nobles, lurking there and ∣ding them from the Danes cru∣elty. Ile, In ragged poore attire, a while, Wearied by warre, in Somerset-sheere, Among the marshes hid himWhere it is said, a poore wo∣man the wife of a Cowheard, ba∣king cakes on the coes, as the King was in the house dressing his bow and shafts by the fi shee threw them away  & saying, Why doest not thou turne the bread , but lette it burne, and yet wilt bee ready to eate it e're it behalfe baked: not knowing it to bee the King that had fought so many share  against the Danes for them. there, And Sol-like with his lyre, that song T'Admetus heards, he too among Those rushie pastures, seemes, was glad In minstrell-like meane habit clad With Harpe in hand, so to spie out The ryots of the Danish rout. Whom holy Cuthbert cheering, and Perswading to take armes in hand, Had Cuthberts lands vow'd, and in fine Dedicate to him Chesters sumptuous shrine; Alfred much like the sparke that came From cynders rak't, resumes newAnd first at a battell sought at Exceter, the Danes ensigne called Reaan, a Banner with the Rauen, held by them in great estimation, for that it was im∣brodered by the daughters of Lodbroke, the three sisters of Hinguar and Hubba, with rich spoiles was taken; after they were defeated at Ethan-dune, then at Rhoaf-ceaster or Rochester which they besieged; after that at Farnham in the Parish of Ales∣ford in Kent, and thence chased into Essex through the Thames; then at Beaufleet, a place which the Dane Hasting new come ouer with 80. ships ad fortified; and lastly, quite discomfited at Bultinga-tune, by Scuerne, at the Ile Mersig or Mersey in Esex, at the Riuer Ligea or Ley that goeth vp to Ware, which carried vp their ships, but by Al∣fred trenched and dryed that they could not bring them backe; but so forced to  into Nor∣thumberland, and thence home to Denmarke. flame,
And first from his owne realmes the Danes, Next most ignoble King that raignes, Ceolfe he sets from supreme seate Merks Dane-King since Burthreds defeate! Fresh Norway powers foyl'd, Chester fail'd, Northumbers then, and London quail'd, He Humbers flowry bankes betooke This god-sonne Gormo Danish Duke; Eldred,Eldred, or E∣thelred, King of Mercia. with Kings-child, Elfled flower Of maides, hath Merklands part her dower! So foes fal'n or fled, newes to bring To th'Neth'rlands or their Norway King, In peace Monks cells hee plac't andThis most victorious and ver∣tuous Prince, well seene in the liberall Sciences and Poetry, a carefull lusticer and prouider for the Poore, and Orphanes, and Wi∣dowes, most vigilant and deuout in the seruice of God; sent for Grimbald a learned man, and by the counsell of Neotus erected common Schooles of the liberall Sciences in Oxenfourd, turned the Lawes and diuers books into English; diuided the Day, eight houres to his study and prayer, eight to beare his subiects causes, and eight to his sleepe and repast: his reuenues likewise, part to his seruants, part to building, part to Schooles, strangers, Monasteries, by him built and others; hee also founded the Monasteries of E∣thelingsey, Shaftsbury, and Winchester, where he was bu∣ried: his wife Alfwida founded the Monastery of Nunnes in Win∣chester. signes Saint Cuthberts lands twixt Tees and Tyne. More honoring Oxfords Pallas-towers With Sols and Muses sacred bowers, My deer'st nurse e're his praise will sing, Whom Cair-Guent tombes these ten yeers King. CANZ. IX. King Edward Senior, and the Princesse Elfleda's warlike acts. WHen Alfred who made Mars rage cease In warre triumphant,Edward, surna∣med Senior, A. 900. R. 24. his brother Adel∣wold rebelling fled to the Danes & made their King, was slaine, and the o∣ther Kings of the Danes, Heal∣den & Eouils, at Wodens field by Wol∣frune-hamp∣ton, in Staf¦fordshire, A. 910. slept in peace, His sonne first Edward, Danes Welsh, Scots, Northumbers and false brothers plots With Edrike last East-Angles King Subdu'd! and Eldred dead, did bring From Merk-lands back t'his Englands crowne, London and Oxford, Thames chiefe townes. Though Elfled, Amazonian Dame, His sister gouernes with great fame Her Mercians! that not more fear'd beene Camilla, nor those ScythianThe Amazons. Queenes; Whiles Danes, Welsh, and Northumbers yeeld, Her warlike tropheys in theThis Lady after she had once felt the paynes of childbirth, leauing her husbands company, wholly gaue her selfe to such matiall a∣ctions, much aiding the King his brother by her powers and coun∣sell and policy in the warres, she tooke a Queene of the Welsh in battell, diuers times chased the Danes, and in person tooke and entred Derby, being fortified by them; besides those other Townes shee fairely repayred Tamworth, Lichfield, Watersbury, El∣desbury, Leycester, the Towne and Castle of Runcorne, builded Brymsbury, and a Bridge there euer the Seuerne shee ouercame the Yorkeshire men, and hauing nobly gouerned eight yeares, shee dyed and was buried at Gloce∣ster in the Church which her hus∣band and shee had builded. field; And Shrewsburies,Turketillus, likewise counted King slaine, A. 915. with other Danish Earles and Dukes of Bed ord, Buc∣kingham, &c. And Edrike al∣so after Gu∣thrum made King of East-Angl by the Danes. Staffords, Chester townes With Warwikes walls, this Queene renownes: Who dead; t'her brother King, doe fall Both Mercia, Danes, and Welsh and all, To Scotland borders; saue alone Northumbrian Sythrik's, Gormo's sonne, T'whom was wed Edith, Edwards Impe, As Elgine to French Charles, faire Nymph; Foure daughters more he had, and sonnes All three Kings;Winchester by the Brittons called Caer-Guent. Cair-Guent, tombes his bones.
CANZ. X King Adelstanes worthy reigne vnder whom flourisht fa∣mous VVolstane and Adelme. REignes his sonne Athelstane next! who,Adelstane, A. 924. crowned at Kingstone by Adelme, Arch∣bishop of Can∣terbury, R. 15. y. was buried at Malmesbury. Foyl'd by the Scot'sh King, and thoseAnd making Constantine king of Scots, hee added this Princely word, that it was more honour to make a king then to bee a king; one hapning of fortune, so to be borne, the other being of worth and valour. two Sonnes of dead Sythrike, that for warres Secretly sow'd seditious iarres; And fled though, mortall feud to cherish, Godfrey of Scots, Aulafe oth' Irish Obtaine whole troopes, but both like sped For th'Irish fell, and Scots lay dead: And Scot'sh King on his knees brought downe, Fealty faine sweares to th'EnglishBut in a second expdition in the said Aualaus aide againe, who had married his daughter, he was slaine with fiue kings and twelue Dukes, Leaders of the ar∣my, consisting of Danes, Irish∣men, Scots, and Ilanders. crowne. Siferth too, and Howell Welsh Kings both, Tane and restor'd, tane the likeHee made them also pay the yearely tribute of twenty pound gold, and three hundred pound siluer, 2500. head of neae, with Hounds & Hawkes to a certayne number. oath: Cornish rebells repell'd to th'Exe, And from her riuer thence t'a next, Exceter, being towr'd by this Kings meanes, Saw them confin'd at Tamaris streames. Athelstane flourishing, flourish't then, Wolstane, and Adeline, holy men, Yorkes Sees Primates, and Canterberies: This King builds diuersHee ounded Saint Germans in Cornwall, which was since a Bishops See, Saint Petrocus at Bodmyn; so likewise Pylton Priory, Middleton and Michel∣ney; in his time Guy Earle of Warwicke slue Colbrond the Danish Giant in Hide-meade by Winchester. Monasteries, And dying issue-lesse leaues the crowne Too's brother Edmond! who put downe, Danes and Northumbers first,Edmond, A. 940. R. 5. yeares. and then His cousen, new-risen with th'Irish-men; But rapt alas too soone byHe was fam'd for a good Iu∣sticer and vertuous Prince, hee granted the priuiledges of Saint Edmondsbury: he was staine at Puckle Church, rescuing his seruant from a thiefe, and buried at Glastenbury. fate, Two tender Impes in pupills state, Edwine and Edgar, crowne and heire, He left t'his brother Eldreds care. CANZ. XI. Of King Edmonds sonnes Edwine and Edgar brought vp vnder their vncle Eldred, who nobly expelled the Danes. EDmond thus dead,Eldred, brother of Adelstane, A. 946. R. 9. y. buried at Win∣hester. his sonnes and throne, All left to's brothers charge alone; Eldred then reign'd, whose veryHe tooke on him onely the rule as Protector at first, but was af∣ter crowned at Kingstone; hee founded the Bishops See of Corn∣wall at Saint Germans, where it continued till Edward the Con∣fessor translated it to Exeter: he builded Mich at Abingdon, giuing great lands & confirming them Charters with seales of gold. name His foes did daunt, whose noble same For iustice, and Prince-worthy parts Rebels represt, wonne good-mens heart; His cousen Aulasse that th'Irish prai'd, By's father-inlaw Duke Ormus aide; Inuades: and after ErikeThe Northumbers had recei∣ued Aulafe for their king, and a∣gaine reiecting him, set vp Eri∣cus, but Eldred repayed all their disloyalties according to their de∣serts. claimes Northumbers scepters; but both slaine, Next Eldreds ten yeeres reigne,Edwine, sonne of Edmond, A. 955. R. 4. not long, Edwine as ill-dispos'd as young,
Succeeded, famous for no facts Saue vicious stead of vertuous acts; His Cousen, on'sAnd after slue her husband, so to enioy her vnlawfully the more! freely. Coronation-day, He rauish't! Dunstan fled away, And good men banish't from his Court, Must leaue him needs but bad report; Northumbers they, and MerklandSo being depriued by the Mer∣cians and Northumbers, hee dyed soone after for griefe, and was buried at Winchester. men, Chose for their Prince young Edgar then, Whose much admir'd, and princely parts, Had stolne their loues and all mens hearts: His brother dyde for very griefe, Whose fam's his infamy!Edgar, sonne of Edmond, A. 959. R. 16. hee was surnamed the Peaceable. Edgar chiefe Of English Kings; mought all of eld, As well as latter times so held. CANZ. XII. Edwine being despised for his vice, Edgar obtayneth the Crowne, a most fortunate and victorious Prince Mo∣narke ouer all Britaine. FAire flower though last, not least renown'd Of three Kents Primate OthoHimselfe, his brother Edwine and vncle Eldred, were crowned by Archbishop Odo: hee was crowned at Bath, enterred at Glasenbury. Crown'd Wer't th'English Rose, and thence call'd Etheling, As countries vertues, honours darling, He call'd home Dunstan, and o'requell'd Both Scots and Welshmen that rebell'd, And Ludwall yeerely tributeWhich was not past 3. or 4. yeares, e're no more could bee gotten. pay'd Three hundred Woolues till they decay'd. Eight Kings, we reade, row'd him onThere were the Kings, Ri∣noch of Scots, Malcolme of Cumberlād, Macone of Man, Dyfn-wall of Dymetia, Si∣ferth and Huwall other Kings of Wales, Iames of Galloway, and Iukill of Westmerland: his nauy of 3600. ships, sauing when bee compassed the Iland trium∣phantwise in the same, hee dispo∣sed at three seuerall places 1200. at a place, for defence of the Kingdome. Dee: And oft in gallant fleete at Sea, In sommer-time he sayles Brittaine round, T'was thought his peere till then not found: Though wanton loues did much disgrace His royall person and his place; For at one time deceiu'd by loue, Or a wench worthy wanton Ioue, 'Bout Andeuor his faire loue dwels, Whose mother charm'd with golden spels By amorous Edgar; faine t'haue found His gold, that sau'd her daughter sound, Laid in loues armes, by darke deceiu'd, Her waiting maide; which when perceiu'd By morning-sunne, this Lasse he frees, And gaue deseru'd her golden fees.
CANZ. XIII. King Edgar infamed for his wanton loues. ANother time the Cornish Dukes Fam'd daughters faire enchanting lookes For loue and beauty, made him send Earle Ethelwold a faithlesse friend, To view; who went, and woo'd and wonne For himselfe, not his Prince! This done, Returnes, tells wanton Edgar then T'was course stuffe, fit for common men, Not Princes Chambers! fame bely'd her, (Or rather he,) to say beside her, Was none so faire! But pleas'd his grace, Her parents, portion, birth and place, More fit for him: and so with leaue To wed, both Prince and selfe deceiues! For fame againe boasting too much Her peerelesse parts, as 'twere none such, Edgar mis-doubts, deceiu'd, to proue Too-farre to trust false friends in loue; Faines there to hunt, rides to behold, Wish't, welcom'd t'all saue Ethelwold, Who then disclos'd t'his wondring bride, Kings foule loue crost, by his false deede, And by what else, vowes, loue, or duty, Coniures her to conceale her beauty, Or cancell it by mis-attire, To blinde the Kings else blinde desire: But deafe as dumbe, and wanton as Light lyther aire, more faine she was To seeme more faire, right woman too, Spreads all her Peacocks plumes to woo, Fresh as the morne fond Nymph, to gaine Light loue! her spouse a-hunting's slaine. Faire Wilfride bore too, (for't hee's taynted), Edyth first Wilton Abbesse, Sainted: This youth displeas'd Saint Dunstan sore, Though in ripe yeeres for vertues more, Freed from ill tongues, and enuies iawes, He built great Abbeyes, made goodHee restored and new founded 47. Monasteries, intending to make the number 50. In the pre∣sence of all the Nobilitie on Christ∣masse day, A 974. he confirmed the Abbey of Ramsey, which his Kinsman Alwine had founded, made the Monastery which Bishop Owald had builded, the Cathe∣drall Church of that shire. Among other Lawes he made some against Ale houses, and the number of them, and against Drunkards, & that none vnder a certayne paine should exceed, in drinking, cer∣tayne marks which were  in or∣dinary drinking cups for that purpose. Lawes.
CANZ. XIIII. His bastard sonne Ethelred obtayneth the crowne from Edward Martyr poysoned, and Sweno King of Den∣marke expelleth him, but at Swenos death he regaineth the Crowne. ELfiede his lawfull wise bare one;Edward surna∣med the Maryr, A. 975. R. 3. he was crowned by Dunstan Arch. of Canter. at Kingstone; poy∣soed at the a∣stle of  in the il of Pr∣beck, by his step∣mother, and bu¦ried first at Warham, after at Shatesbury. Alfred, bare Eldred his base sonne, Cornwals Duke Orgar's Impe! when hee Chang'd earth for heauen, then Alfred shee, False stepdame greets with poysonedAlfred afterwards doing pe∣nance, builded two Monasteries of Nunnes, at Amesbury and at Warwell, where shee liued a so∣litary life till shee dyed. potion The good King Edward, whose deuotion With vs the name of Martyr merits. So her base sonne the crowne inherits, Ethelred, whom Dunstan forc't, not el's Crownes, sacring execrates, and tels Prophet-like strange and fearefullHe was crowned at Kingstone by Dunstane, who refused to per∣forme that  for him, as one that rose  his brother  to it, in stead  king many  of the losses that England should sustayne by the King, who also foyled the Fount at his baptisme. fate, To this fount-foyling King,Etheled or El∣dred, surnamed the Vnready, A. 978. R. 38. y. but in the meane time was once expeld by the Danes, who reigned part of that time; he be∣ing in exile, ere he recouered the Crowne againe. and state. This Kings vice, sloth, and Guinchild slaine Tow'rds England made Danes flocke amaine, When trecherous Elfrike did betray The Kings ships to the Dane by sea. So Eldred first sore prest by th'Dane Admits Dane-gelt, submits toAbout, A. 95, Ethelred ∣countred by Swane K. of en∣marke, and the King Olafe of Norway, was fayne to admit 16000. pounds tribute; but after the Danes were slaine on Saint Brices day, 13. Nouemb. 1002. and Swans sister Guinhildis; she in reuenge of their deaths in∣uaded so furiously, that in the yeare 1011. 48000. pounds tri∣bute was imposed, and A. 1012. Ethelred notwithstanding fayne to fly into Normādy, the Danes cruelty more & more raging both against Elsegus Archbishop of Canterbury, and the King. Swane, Till Saint Brice wept and wet Nouembers For the Danes dounfall in huge numbers Massacred in one minutes while Ouer all England;A. 995. the body of S. Cuthbe and the Bisho∣prike of Lndis∣fn or holy I∣land, were re∣moued to Dur∣ham, and the yeare before, viz 994. the Bi∣shops See of Ex∣eter erected. whether guile Or policie wer't, then of a foe Some doubt! but warres fresh flaming thoe, Made Ethelred to Duke Richard flie His father in law, in Normandy, And Swaine, see Fortune, Fame proclaimes First Dane-King heere from Trent to Thames! But he dead; th'Englishmen reuoke, Weary of the Lordly Danish yoke, Their exil'd Ethelred; and Swaines Sonne Knute,A. 1011. the bo∣dy of Saint Ed∣mond being brought into Lōdon through Criple-gate by Bishop Alwne, who fled from the rapines of the Danes in Es∣sex, miracles were said to be done, and the lame that begged at the gate restored, praysing God. Sue∣no or Swanus first Dane-King of England, A. 1012. R. 2. yeares. home for to fly wasHauing the like mrcy shewed to him and his followers, as  fa∣ther not long before had shewed to the English, all put to fire and sword. faine; Againe despair'd of late and gone, Ethelred set on regall Throne, Ny forty yeeres wore the Diademme; Two sonnes he had by Norman Emme, One by Elgine, next King in's roome! In Paules in London in his tombe.
CANZ. XV. Edmond Ironside and his childrens fortunes. EDmond,Edmond sur∣named Ironside of his hardinesse and valour, A. 1016. R. 2. y. Elgina's sonne, suceeeds, Whose prowesse and praise-worthy deeds Did Cnutus brauelyA full battell at Penham neare Gingham; the second at Sher stae in Worstershre, the third, the  notwithstanding I drinke did what hee could to  the En∣glish, blazing flasely in the  of the fight, that the King was slaine; the Danes flying thnce to London, Emond , and at  else-where discomfited them, till  the sixt battell at Assen dune in Essex neare , by the practize and plot of Edike, who sled of purpose, losing the day, hee was fayne to fly towards Glou∣cester, where hauing gathered new powers, the warre was yet ended by single combae. entertaine, That came to claime these Realmes againe; Bare downe both Danes and by strong might, Edrike of Scattons trecherous slights: When after many a well fought field, 'Twixt the King this conclusion held, Their two sole duell should decide This diffrence by faire Seuernes side, Where lay their powers; and Olwey Ile Saw them fight hand to hand long while, Till breathlesse, pawsing; peace brake forth; The South tooke Edmond, Knute the North: But peace though plac't, Edmond o're-tane By Traytor Edriks fraud wasThis Edcus de Streona, or Stratonicus, in Edmonds reigne, and Aeltrius Duke of Mercia, in his fathers time, were two notable Traytors: but Ca∣nute in recompence of his good seruices slue Edrike lest he should play his parts with him, as hee had done with his Predecessors. slaine, Which mou'd all England to much ruth For him so rapt in prime of youth.Canutus the Dane, sonne of Sueno, A. 1018 reigned 20. Then his two sonnes young Princes were By Knute conuey'd to Denmarke, where He meant their deaths; but that hisOr as some say, a Prince of Sueth-land, who contrary to the trust reposed to kill them, so pre∣serued their liues. brother Denmarks King loath'd so vile a murther, And sends them to Pannonia, where Edmond dy'de, Edward married there Agatha, the Empresse sister,Daughter to Henry the fourth Emperour. nice To th'Almaigne Lords and Dukes! From these, Both English came and Scottish Kings; Edgar from these and MargretEdmond Ironside had two sonnes, 1. Edward that married Agatha the Emp. daugh∣ter, & had by her 1. Edgar surnamed Etheling who dyed without issue. 2. Margret wed to Mal∣colm, K. of Scotland, had issue Edgar, Dauid, & Alex∣ander, all three Kings of Scotlād. Maud wife to Henry the first King of En∣gland, had issue Diuers children drowned in the Sea. Maud the Empresse, mother to Henry the second. Mary wed to Eustace Earle of Boloigne, had issue Maud wife to king Stephen. 3. Chri∣stian who was a Nunne profest. 2. Edmōd, that dyed without issue. springs, Margret to Malcolme wed, their Impes Beene Maud and Mary; Maud faire Nymph's First Henries spouse,Their Race, though they were thus exil'd, re∣turning to be Kings of Eng∣land, in the person of Henry the second, about 120. yeares af∣ter, in A. 1155. Maud th'Empresse mother Whose son's next Henrie! Mary t'other Weds Eustace Earle of Bolloignoys, Their Maud King Stephen then Earle of Bloys! And thus a race as royall springs Of Scotch and English Britaine Kings, From this poore wrackt despised stem. As e're ware golden Diadem.
CANZ. XVI. Canute the Danes famous reigne ouer England, Scot∣land, Denmarke and Norway. NOw Edmond slaine, and his sonnes fate Exil'd, Knute meant should mend his state, For Norwayes oin'd to th'Danish Crowne And King Olaue, and Scots pull'd downe, English, Scots, Danes and Norwayes they, Foure mighty people himCanutus hath foure King∣domes vnder him: hee was fanid for a iust Prince, in all sauing his tyrannie against the two young Princes, the sonnes of . obey; More to make friends to th'Norman Duke, His sister giues to wife, and tooke Ethelreds widdow Emme!By th meanes notwithstanding his conquest, the Crowne did re∣uert to the ancient . entailes The crowne, they say, t'her issue males; This Cnute commands the seas toSeae Parasites in flattery cal∣ling him as a dem-god, Lord of the Seas; becaused a chaire to be set where the tyde  come, and commanding the  to wet his Kingly feet, staid till the Sea keeping her , wel wash∣ed his flatterers and hi selfe, who thus derided their fllies: e gaue great priuiledges to the Monastery of Saint Edmonds∣bury, which hee founded a new: he dyed at Shaftesbury and was buried at Saint Swithins in Winchester where Queene Emma made her abode euer after. shew, His Sycophants flattering termes vntrew, And knowledging Christ his only trust, Return'd from Rome, returnes to dust. CANZ. XVII. Harold Hardyknute, and Edward Confessors reigne. MOngst his three sonnes his lands in three,Harold surna∣med Harefoot, A. 1038. R; 3. y. he dyed at Ox∣ford, and was buried at West∣minster, after at Saint Clemēts without Tem∣ple barre. Hardy-Cnute, A. 1041. R. 2. y. was buried at Winchester. Deuided; Bastard Harold, hee Britaine; Swane Norway; sonne to Emme, Hardi-knute, ha's Denmarks Diadem. Harold then working hisQueene Emma's whom hee accused grieuush, and barshig her, put one of her son, , to death: Edward the Confessor hardly escaing by ght. stepmothers Discredit, vexing realmes and brothers, Dies three yeeres King! likewise Emmes sonne Hardiknute, next set on Englands throne Dies three yeeres King too; his halfe-brother Edward, by Norman Emme, their mother, Confessor call'd then reignes, th'off-spring Of Ethelred, late EnglandsSonne of Ethelred & Emma, borne at Isp by Oxord, but brought vp mch in Normandy; he is accounted chiefe founder & composer of the Cōmon lawes of the Land, collected from the or∣dinances and customes of those foure principall Regiments that sometimes flourished here, viz. the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes and Northumbers; the Normans since added, or new broached others more rigorous & tyrannicall ones, whence haue di∣uers commotions beene, for the abolishing of such, and reesta∣blishment of these. King; This King weds Edyth Godwines Impe,Edward the Confessor, An. 1043. R. 23. y. Kind, modest, comely, vertuous Nymphe, So faire, so sweet, the by-word goes, Her Syre the Bryer, brought her the Rose; Earle Godwine; whose ill counsels long, King abus'd, friends and mother wrong, Till he, and's sonnes expulst; she lastWhen they rebelled, because they could not in euery thing haue their minde, the father was fame to fly into Planders, the sonnes into Ireland. of All into Wilton Nunnerie's cast off! Both louing too much virgin-life Expos'd the Crowne, to strangersIn this Queenes commendati∣ons, Ingul us Abbot of Crow∣land wh then flourished, spea∣keth much, for her wisedome, learning, humility, modesty, and behauiour, nothing sauouring of the barbarousnee of her father and bro∣thers: shee endowed that Monastery of Wilton with goodly buildings and faire possessions. strife.
CANZ. XVIII. Edward dying, Harold Earle Godwines sonne vsurpeth against Clyto Edgar. BVt Godwine, and his sonnes reclaim'd To the Kings fauour,A. 1050. was the Bishoprick of Saint Germans translated to Exeter. Harold tam'd The Welsh-mens powers on Snowdowne hils; Syward Northumbers Earle then kils Macbeth! which Scot'sh vsuper gone, Malcolme his grand-child ha's hisEarle Sywards daughter was King Malcolmes mother, being also Duchesse or Queen of Cum∣berland. throne; Malcolme that married Margret after, Edmonds neece, Edward out-lawes daughter, So call'd as outed by disseyssor Knute, call'd home though by the Confessor; He with his Children and his wife, Hitherwards returning ends his life. His sonne young Edgar though's setHee was called Etheling, a name proper onely to the Kings children in hope and possibilite of the Crowne. downe, As heire apparant t'Englands Crowne, And Godwin's sonne Protector;Hee released the grieuous tri∣bute, called the Dane-gelt, af∣firming, he saw a Deuill dancing about the money when it was brought in: he translated the Bi∣shops See of Saint Germans to Exeter, founded the Colledge of Saint Mary Otery in euon, and the goodly Abbey of Westm. where he was buried. these Things thus compos'd, good King in peace Edward he rests!Harold dispos∣sesseth Edgar, and made King, A. 2066. reign∣eth not full one yeare. but soone from's death Edgar's disrob'd of's royall wreath; For Nobles doubt; and Normans threat Edgar but young: Godwines sonneThe reasons mouing the No∣bles to fauour Harolds part the more. great In all mens fauours, and of might To match, if neede, his foes in fight; Though Edward promising, Harold tooke Oath, some say, to the Norman Duke, As his Liege-lord; yet Nobles since, And vulgars, wish him for their Prince; As, being his troth-plight promiseNow twice, once to the Duke, and since to King Edward, in the behalfe of Edgar, who should haue beene by right, and was ap∣pointed King. broke, Able to ward warr's steely stroke: When Edgar heire by's fathers side, Sign'd Prince and prince-like else alli'd, As young, thought weake to quench the flame Of Normans furie if they came.
CANZ. XIX. All England vexed with strange feares and vproares, at the comming in of the Conquerour. T'Was easie now for Harold, none Opposing, thus to gayne the Throne; To make sure worke, he quickly downe Did set him, and do's on the Crowne; His twice-broke trust, and troubled State Arm'd to free, or meet Foes and Fate. Flame Starres, fume Tosto, not theTosto raysed all those Nor∣therne Countries against his bro∣ther Harold: A Comet also was seene for many dayes together, in Aprill, the same yeare, viz. An. 1066. being the yeare of the Con∣quest by the Normans, made of this Land. while Powers of Scots, Norwayes, Orkes and Ile, Danes, Newstrians, maken him afraid; William, nor France, nor Flanders aide: His Goale's Crowne! My Muse next sings His fall, then facts of Norman Kings. The end of the eight Ode.
A briefe type of the ninth Booke or Ode of PALAE-ALBION, called GVLIELMVS. The ninth Ode contayneth, 1. The Origi∣nall of the Nor∣mans with their Conquest, and the great alte∣ration of the land vnder Wil∣liam the Con∣querour, who was the sonne of Robert the se∣cond Duke of Normandy, who was the sonne of Richard the second sonne of Richard the first, sonne of William the first, sonne of Rollo the Dane, that in King Alfreds time inuaded England, and thence expeld, seated himselfe in Normandy, and became Duke thereof; who receiuing Christianity, was baptized Robert, and so Robert the first, being the sonne of Guion a Noble man of Den∣marke. 2. The Race and succession of the Nor∣mans, Kings of this Land. viz. William the Conquerour, A. 1066. who R. 20. yeares. William Rufus, his sonne, reigned 12. yeares. Henry Beauclerke, his brother, R. 35. y. Stephen, Grandchild to William the Conquerour by his daughter Adela, married to the Earle of Bloys, he reigned 18. yeares. Henry the second, grandchild to Henry the first by his daughter Maud the Empresse, R. 34 y. Richard Coeur-de-Lyon, his sonne, R. 9 y. Iohn, called Without land, his brother, R. 17. y. Henry the third, his sonne, R. 56. y. Edward the first, his sonne, R. 34. y. Edward the second of Carnaruon, his sonne, R. 19. y. Edward the third, his sonne, R. 50. y. hee instituted the round Table, and first laid claime to the Crowne of France. Richard the second, his grandchild by Edward the blacke Prnce, R. 22. y. Henry the fourth of Bolingbroke, sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, fourth sonne of Edward the third, R. 13. y. he began the bloudy schisme betweene the houses of Yorke and Lancaster. Henry the fift, his sonne, conquered France, R. 9. y. Heney the sixt, his sonne, lost France, R. 50. y. Edward the fourth, of the house of Yorke, descended of Lionel, third sonne of Edward the third: resto∣red the house of Yorke, and reigned 22. yeares. Edward the fift, his sonne, murdered ere he was crow∣ned, reigned not one yeare. Richard the third, his Vncle, vsurped three yeares. Henry the seuenth, descended of Iohn of Gaunt, of the house of Lancaster, espoused Elizabeth eldest daugh∣ter of Edward the 4, of the house of Yorke, whereby the schisme of the Houses, and Roes of Lancaster and Yorke, was fully determined, and ended, A. 1485. which had endured almost 100. yeares, to the destruction of many hundred thousands. 3. The Vnion of the long di∣uided and bloudy schisme betweene the Houses and Ro∣ses of Lancaster and Yorke (the red Rose being the cognizance of the House of Yorke, as the white Rose was of Lancaster) by the marriage of Henry the se∣uenth, with the Lady Elizabeth daughter to Edward the fourth, from whom also sprang the Lady Margaret, whose marriage into Scotland hath since produced betweene those two long foe∣sworne King∣domes of Eng∣land and Scot∣land, a no lesse hapy and blessed Vnion.
PALAE ALBION. Ode nona, Inscripta GVLIELMVS. ARGVMENTVM. Nona vbi Neustriacos canit Oda trophaea, triumphos, Contrâ Anglis clades, perniciem{que} parat; Sceptra sed Angligenis sua restaurantur, vti ipsis In{que} hunc vs{que} diem nomine regna vigent. . Prooemio statim subijcitur, Ducum Normannorum stemma∣tis disquisitio. SIc Britones Latijs,Series Poematis, siue Marginalia . Saxones ipsis Cessêrunt Dacis; Daci sic Neustriae & Anglis. Saxones & Dacos, Italos, Bruti{que} Nepotes Neptuni & Nerei sobolem, immancis{que} Gigantes, Et Samothen cecinisti olim ter candida Peitho, Anglus vt Eois, oriundi, Dacus ab Istro, Vnde Itali, in toto notissima fabula coelo; Brutus & è Troiâ, sacrum, traxit{que} furenti Albion Oceano, Samothes genus omnibus vndis: Nunc mihi Musa virum memora, prosapia in oris Cuius adhuc viget Angliacis; nisi nomina totis Inclyta iussa recèns, facerent magis esse Brytannis, Cui decus & debetur honos, quem postea Reges, Innumeri numerant{que} patrem & numerantur ab illo, Neustria quem genuit, Gulielmum, habet Anglica tellus, Nomine Conquastus clarum, sobolem{que} Monarchas. Illius repetens proauos ab origine primâAuspicatur haec Oda, Diua veni, & resonis, super aethera lucida pennis, Tolle virum! Modò Danus, at idem oriundus ab Istro, Guionides Rollo, Dacis olim asper ab oris Infestus bello fineis inuaserat Anglos: Rege sed Alfredo, Brytannûm littore pulsus, Postmodò sede sibi, Gallis, Regno{que} potitus Dux, ibi consedit multos longaeuus in annos;
Belligerae ex illo gentes nascuntur & ipsi Reges Neustriacis,à  Gulielmi Conquaestos, dominati postea & Anglis. Ille Elephantiasi, lotus quasi fonte salutis Chrismate, curatà, dictus modò Rollo, Robertus; Ex Ope Bellouacûm comitis, sibi coniuge, Gantâ, Gnatum suscepti Gulielmum; haud simplicis olli Filia erat Caroli, in sponsam! sed & inclyta longè Fmicuit virtus Gulielmi;à Rollone Daco, cuius heic s∣bles Nomanom Duces recculntur: indè eius{que} Richardus Primus erat, primi{que} secundus & Emma, secundi Tertius insequitur, soboles, frater{que} Robertus: Sponsa{que} Ethelredi fuit Emma; pater{que} Robertus Ille secundus erat, Gulielmi huisce secundi, Conquaestûs titulo heic clari, & cognomine primi: Illa Ducum series; Regum haec memoratur origo. . Haraldi, regni vsurpatio, & Gulielmi in eum praeparatio bellica. SCeptra manu simul ac,usdem Gulielmi Regni{que} capescit habenas, Godwino{que} satus Thyra{que} sorore Canuti, Omnibus ille cèbris populo adblanditur Haraldus: Neue sibi fraudem intentatam existimet Edgar, Scilicet egregio iuuenem decorauit honore Oxonij titulos, Comitem huic pro Rege reponit; Legati sedenim, à Gulielmo multa monentes Praestò aderant, domino{que} Duci, sua Regna reposcunt; De{que} fide, fractis, iuramento{que} querentes, Antè Duci factis,ad Haraldum, Angliae tunc Re∣gem, Legatio, responsa superba tulerunt; Quae iurat mens est, non coniurauimus: illa Cogor vt orba darem, at{que} dedi sine pectore vocem, Vrba fide! gnatae{que} Ducis simul at{que} rogassent De Thalamis, pactis{que} tuis Adeliza Hymenaeis; Néue istis meliora, tibi, responsa tulissent; Sumere perfidiae poenas, Sceptris{que} potiri, Eximia Dux classe parat; magnâ{que} manûm vi, Exorsus fineis, hostem{que} lacessere bello; Carperet ac Regni{que} Rosas, capiti{que} Corollas, Conciliat Flandrûm{que} fidem Gallûm{que} cateruas. Tosto sed interè a Flandris è finibus exul Oram omnem Eoam, Bellonae turbine vexat, Quem iuuenes verè regij,posteà in ipsum & Angiam vairs procellis agitatam iuncto agmine fratres Northumbriae & Merciae Comites, Edoumus & vnâ Malcherius fudère trucem, Scotiam{que} fugârunt: Vndè citò remeans reparatis viribus, omni Noruegiae, Scotiae{que} & ab Orcade milite, circum- Cinctus adest; Comites, belli duo fulmina, fratreis, Cum turmis disiecit, & aspera praelia miscens, Northumbros populatur agros; Rex donec Haraldus,
Marte aggressus, eos, Deruentae ad flumina fudit. Aufugêre leues turmae; Scotiam{que} reuersi Noruegiae cum Rege-sato, Rex Orcadum, Olaue: Tosto{que} Noruegiae{que} cadunt famosus Haraldus. Nec mora, ceu Normannûm acies, lectas{que} phalanges Audijt, Hastyngum prope, descendisse Carinis, Impiger in bello,Expeditio; Rex, intrepidus{que} pericli, Sanguine fraterno tinctas, & caede recenti Conseruisse manus properans, festinus ad arma Concitat ore suos; pugnae{que} immittere dextras: Vt vix, aut ne vix, iam respirare liceret Fessis assiduo, dudùm, lassis{que} labore: Sic bellum bello, sic vulnere vulnera condi Curat, & haud dubiam expectat cunctando salutem, Inuictus belli terroribus, acer Haraldus. . Gulielmus victor, vulgò Conquaestor, euadens coronatur. SEd iam tempus adest, & ineluctabile fatum, Cum cecidit Princeps supremus in ordine Regum Saxonicae stripis; ducentos circiter annos, A Rege Egberto; sexcentos, Saxone primo: Vndecies sexto{que} supra millesime eodem Voluente, vt perhibent, à partu Virginis anno. Cunctanti haud similis, furijs agitatus iniquis Rex venit, Anglorum{que} ingens fuit edita strages, Dux{que} catus fugiens quò vincere posset, inoris Sussexiae strauit Regem:vtique Haraldo profigato Conquae∣stus, Rex illicò factus Rege cadente; ita fortè Ducem dea caeca beârat! Redditum erat Matri, caesi modò Regis Haraldi Corpus ab hoste, Thyraenè putem, lachrymans{que} sepulchro, Walthamiae ipsa dedit, quam munijt antè Tyrannus: Vno, eodem{que} anno, iam primo vtrius{que} Monarchae. Londinum Proceres turmis{que} ignobile vulgus Se{que} recepêrunt ciues; Ducis Angliaiussu In cineres conuersa flagrat! Scotiam{que} petebant Malcherius cum fratre, huc tempestate furenti Edgarus actus erat; pelagi{que} tumentibus iris, Pannoniam repetens diuersa in littora vectus, Nupta{que} Marguerita fuit, soror vna, Scotorum Regi Malcolmo; Monacham induit altera, Christi Serua, professa fidem velamine, nomine, Sanctam: Iam{que} immiscuerat coelum{que} solum{que} fauillis, Caede furens, late{que} ferens, incendia totis Spargebat campis Gulielmus; denuò in vrbem Londinum tendens, & principe sede receptus!
Quae Christo carnem genialis,& die natah Christ coronatio. & illa Coronam Induerat lux alma Duci; Aldredus{que} sacrauit Illum Eboracensis praesul: Cantuariae alumnus Illustris virtute, sacris, pietate Stygandus, Praeclarum facinus satis, & me morabile pensat. . Stygandi & Gulielmi, Episcoporum in suos beneficia; reliquae verò Angliae miseria. PRessuro iam-iam Gulielmo Cantia bellis Rura feris; illi, contrâ, Archi-Praesul adortus, Ingenti{que} manu stipatus, & agmine forti, Fronde, suis iussit, velarier arma comas{que}; Praetendunt manibus ramos,Cuius primis temporibus Cantium atte, & stratagemate Stygandi Archiepiscopi, Regi{que} propinquant; Rex cum Normannis gradientem cernere syluam Cu stupet, insolitùm monteis motare cacumen, Cignaea in valle est propè circumuentus ab hoste: Cui patriae intentus pro libertate Stygandus Arma mouet, ni iura sibi sua pristina mâlit Concedi; abiectis{que} apparent frondibus arma, Et totis circùm densis seges horruit Hastis, In campis stricto{que} paratis cernere ferro: Annuit at votis Rex, proijcit arma Sacerdos. Moribus antiquis & consuetudine priscâ Hinc gaudent hodiè; hinc leges & pristina iura Cantia rura colunt! quae clare Stygande, perennis Laus tua:Londinum Gulielmi Episco∣properâ liberatibus & priui∣legijs suis gaudent. Londinum{que} virum qui fouit amoenâ Libertate, suam Gulielmus Episcopus vrbem, Acropolis canit; huic, vel adhuc plaga Cantia laudes. Quem tamen, integritas minimè, aut sacra infula texit Inuidiâ, at citò post disiectus culmine honoris, Carcere vir sanctus moritur; Cadomensis & Abbas, Lanfrancus Cathredâ successit homo Italus olli: Tum verò mulctis grauitèr, sine crimine noos, Immeritùm{que} suis spoliabat honoribus Anglos At{que} opthus, dedit at{que} suis Normannus! & agris Expulit antiquos, aliâ heic de gente Colonos,Reliqua verò Anglia vulgus, Induxit{que} feras alibi; Forresta vocatur Quâ noua, Wintoniae circùm loca plurima tractû, Templa aequans ac tecta solo, ludibrio haberet Diuûm acsi populi{que} domos, dat ludere capris; Ceu viduae, haud lachrymis prolisúe patrisúe pepercit; Heu pueri hèic cecidêre Richardus, postea Rufus. Rex{que} malo ductus genio, mala plurima nectit, Feralcis{que} tulit, legis{que} apprimè nociuas Anglis: iam{que} Foro circum-sonat extera lingua, Quam qui non nôrit nedum generosus haberi Turpè, foret dignus; ità barbara verba Theatris, In querulis caussis, inter conuiuia, mensis
Barbara tota strepunt: Anglos{que} idiomatis Angli, Paenè pudet; varias{que} fugit malè sedula in oras, Anglica nobilitas,Proceres irrisa{que} spreta{que} terris, Hospite vt hoste suis; toto ludibria Coelo: Pars Scotiam penetrant, pars ad iuga Cymbrica Dacis. Hoc quo{que} praetextu, simulac ditionis auitae, Bella mouens Dacus Normannis concidit armis, Cum profugis ducibus{que} suis Rex ipse Canutus, Fratres{que} è Scotià comites, Malcolmus & Edgar, Cum profugis turmis{que} Scotûm, confinia bellis Diuexant crebris; Herewardus & agmina iungit: Rex parili fortuná omneis, Wallos{que} rebelles, Vicit & exegit iuramentum à Rege Scotorum; Appulûm{que} suûm trans-mittitur Edgar in oras, Ac redit in Regis, donis decoratus, amorem. . Regis in suos etiam saeuitia, & in Gallia tymbus. REgis crant fratres, Arlettâ ex matre oriundi, Verùm Herlouino, ignoto quasi patre; Robertus Mortonus Comes, & Bayocensis Episcopus Odo! Odo Comes Cantij, & Pro-rex à Rege creatus Bellis implicito, summâ virtute rebelleis, Northumbros,rater Regis Odo, vt alios{que} domat; triplici{que} coronae Papa inhiat, vigili Hildebrando morte perempto, Augurio malus ac laeuo cecinisset haruspex. Verùm vbi celsa sibi pretio{que} palatia Romae Praegrandi conducta forent, in carcere vinctum Detinuit frater, sua busta nec ante remisit. Rex{que} aedes monachis posuit iam pace potitus, Templa{que}, de{que} nouo, Pauli celebre, inchoat, igne Consumptum prius; & tot castra, quot antea Regum Nemo vnquam extruxit: censu{que} recognita ab illo Anglia tota,& filius Robertus, dant illi cō∣missorum poenas, domus{que} Dei liber extitit ingens. Saepius Armorico tractu, gnato{que} Roberto, Intulit, & sibi finitimis fera praelia Gallis; Intestina patri, ceu mouerat antè Robertus, Bella ipsum contra. Gallorum à Rege Philippo Adiutus fuerat, gnati ergo furore represso, Neustriaco insonuit, iam Gallia tota tumultu; Francorum{que} iterum fineis intrare parantem, Rothomagi morbo detentum irrisit acerbè Ignano quasi puerperio per Scomma cubantem Anglum,in Galliâ praeliatus occumbit, Rex Gallus; iurata{que} numina frustrà Non sunt, Mille meis lucebunt ignibus Arae Cum valem, Anglus ait, mulierum more sacellis
Ceu purgatum iëro; sua verba fides{que} secuta est, Gallia vbi{que} flagrat, sensêre Altaria flammas. Saliu vbi fractus equi, media inter praelia, morbo Correptus grauiore perit; Cadomi{que} negatus Vix capit octo pedum tumulus; quem Gallia nuper Vix tenuit; sed nudus humi{que} relictus, & auro Terra emptâ,Cademi sepultus, magno{que} omnium terrore sepultus; Gallia quem nuper tremuit, Normannia nato Rege superba suo, Cenomania & Anglia, claro Conquaestu, Armoricus cui subdere colla Brytannus Gaudebat, Walli{que} Scoti{que} fuêre triumpho: Sic cine regna abeunt? sic flos? sic gloria mundi? . Gulielmi Rufi non multùm laudata Dynastia. ANglica ceu Rufo, Normannica regna Roberto Thesauri Henrico cedunt; mox omnia! Gnatae, Caecilia Abbatissa fuit;progenies: inter quos Stephano{que} Blesensi Nupsit Adela soror; Comiti, Constantia Alano Armorici tractus, sponsa, Eleonora{que} Regi Alphonso Hispano;Gulielmus Rufus, satis illau∣datè, sponsata{que} Haraldo Adeliza. Iam{que} inter fratreis belli exorientibus addit Odo oleum flammis! sedenim cedentibus iris Foedere coniuncti, Wallûm{que} Scolûm{que} tumultus, Normannûm{que} premunt; sacra adit loca, bella, Robertus; West{que}-Monasteriensis opus Rufi Aula; Donaldi In{que} vicem, Rex fit Malcolmius Edgar ab illo; Lanfranco heic viuente minùs, moriente, Tyranni Vafricies visa est; populi, arae, templa, rapinae, Omnia erant, Sanctus{que} monens meliora remissus Praesul in exilium Anselmus! Dij sumere poenas Vellent: Templa quibus, fora ciuibus, arua colonis, Ceu pater antè,posseà aiunt, Beaulensi in limine dempsit: Rex Ceruum insequitur, Regem vindicta, Tyrellus Transfixit; modo Rex, bis sex inglorius annos, Wintoniae pompâ sine, cassus honore recumbit.
. Henrici primi Dominium, & honorifica gesta. HEnricus sequitur,Heinricus cognomento Beuclerk, aliquanto melius: Regnum administraun Musarum & Martis alumnus, Claram ob Doctrinam & doteis cognomine, Beuclerk; Sancti{que} hic placitis Edwardi indixit honorem; Quanquam etiam ingenio, genio, Martis{que} fauore Insignis, tamen, vt mollis, crudelis, anarus, Audijt infamis: Reuocat memorabilis aeui Anselmum, ac monitis, vix paruit vs{que} verendis: Frater & è Solymis rediens sua iura Robertus Poscit, at in pacis conuentum est pacta ab vtris{que}, Donec lite iteram exortâ, Dux captus, ocellis Priuatus, longo Cardyffae carcere, fato Cessit, & illius Gnatus Gulielmus, ad arma, Gallis{que} & Flandris accitis, morte recumbit. Tum Wallos domat Henricus, primi{que} Senatus Parliamenta vocat: Templarius incipit Ordo! Castra{que} Vindesorae surgunt in culmine ripae Piscosi Thamisis, iam posteà clara Georgî Militiâ ac titulis: Nostro pia Nympha Monarchae Filia Malcolmi, Scoti, soror Edgaris alma, Nupta Mathildis erat; queis sola Matilda superstes, Oceano absumptis reliquis, data nubere primùm, Induperatori Henrico, demùm Andegauensi Galfrido Comiti, pulchrâ illum prole parentem Henrico facit, at{que} alijs; hinc postèa Reges Angligenae, antiquâ de Saxone stirpe creati; Quippe Mathilda illi genitrix, Margreta Mathildae, Margretae Eduardus pater Edmundi{que} puellus, Angli olim Regis: tenerâ hanc cum prole Matildam Legitimos Regni haeredes statuebat, & oris Neustriae obit; septem{que} iacet post lustra Redyngae. . Stephani Blesensis Regnum: omni ex parte turbulentissimum. IAm Stephanus,Stephanus succedit, quorum Mathilda, de iure Coronae certat pro filio suo. Stephani Gnatus, Stephano{que} dicato, Induerat Diadema die; satus ipse Blesensi Ex Conite, & Gnatâ modò Conquaestoris Adelâ: Hunc Proceres crebris,Qui Augusta{que} Nympba Matildae Vexarunt bellis! Donec sua sceptra Mathildae obitum, Henrico, ablegarat Regia Gnato; vitâ tamen ipse sua durante, maneret: post ferè his duo Feuershamia Tymbus:
. Henrici secundi inquietum, alioqui foelix satis Dominium. PRimus at Angliacis Rex Plantaginêta, Matildae Filius Augustae, Henricus{que} secundus in oris, Succedit Stephano: Renouata{que} linea Regum Saxonicae stirpis,Henrici nomine 2. praeclara edidit facinora. quasi iam videantur in illo, Alfredus Senior{que} Edouardus, & inclytus Edgar, Stemmate materno satus hijs: Rex ille Britanno Orcades adiecit,Eius ditienes,  Wallos{que} Scotos{que} reduxit Imperio! virideis{que} super dominatur Hybernos, Primus: Dermitio vel ita exposcente Lageno. Materno haec, velut & Normannia; iure paterno, Turones in Galliâ ei, Cenomania & Andes Parebant, Gnato{que}, vbi iam data Nympha, Conani, Filia Galfredo, Armoricus Britannia tractus: Pictauia vxoris dos at{que} Aquitania, Franci Regis desertae modò coniugis Eleonorae; Pictonûm Comitum Gnatae, & ditionis auitae Haeredis!soboles, sobole ex illâ Comite Armoricano, Susceptâ, simulac cum Rege Iohanne Richardo; Cum{que} immaturè, at iustè, & sine nomine Regis Olli obitum ante, coronato, at{que} rebelle perempto: Et gnatas habuit; quarum, Eleonora cubile Hispani ascendit Regis, Siculi{que} Iohanna, Saxonici ducis Augustos genitura Mathildis! At Regem infamant veneres, nimium{que} proteruae Cliffordis Rosamunda,Ieuiusculi amores, Adeliza{que} Franca! loquelas Improba quid fingis; complens modò cantibus auras Blandiloqua, ah Syren, querulis! Si Regis ocellos Formâ, vt mellitis ore aut sermonibus aures, Ac Labyrinthaeo tenuisti in limine captum Anglica Cliffordis Circe, ceu Galla Calypso. Zelotypa at sensit Regina, irata{que} Iuno Inuenit in medio, & Ioue non praesente, Maeandro, Inficit aegra, datis, sibi pocula saeua venenis; Et gnatos in bella ciet! quâ ductus Erynni, Concidit Henricus:odia domestica flagrantia, Rex illam, ac senserat iras, Carcere conclusit. Becketti at sanguine tinctas Criminibus{que} alijs, Diuis fuit ille relatus, Ceu purgare manus Solymis de more sacratis, Ferre parabat opem, Gnatûm{que} odijs{que} Philippi Francorum Regis,Tymbus. detentus Galliae in oris Occubuit; septem post lustra; Chinone sepultus.
. Richardi primi honorificentissima domi & fortis gesta. SVccessit patris in solio sceptris{que} Richardus,Richardus eius filius Coeur-de-lyon dictus; Solymos qui visere colleis, Intentus, bellis{que} sacris ingentia mouit. Insula Carpathio, circúm diffusa, profundo, Diues opum Cyprus, bello, & modo concidit Acon, Aca cadit, quam nos Ptolemaida dicimus vrbem; Chaonia{que} graueis, & diuite merce repletas, Ille rateis, Ioppem, & quae munimina cepit Niliacus Princeps dudùm victricibus armis Instaurans victor,Hierosolymis & locis sacris o∣pitulatus, Rex in reditu èter∣ra Sanctâ, virtute pericla refellit; Sed iuga Christicolis grauia imposuêre Tyranni Heu Saladinius, & Turcarum dira potestas, Excelsis Solymis impigro marte potiti. Quando sibi infestis coniunctus foedere Gallis, Infidus frater, tulerat socia arma Iohannes. Ille pedem retrò,ab Austriaco Duce nequam cap∣tiuus injuriosisimè detine∣tur? at Leopoldi Principis oris Austriaci, iratâ ventis dum nauigat Adriâ, Naufragio eiectus, contraius fas{que} tenetur Captiuus, donec, lutron persoluerat ingens, Ac posuit pulchrae sua moenia clara Viennae: At veniam supplex iam à Rege fratre reuerso, Matre inter cedente petit, petitam{que} Iohannes Obtinuit, miro{que} illum Rex fouit amore: Cui rapto, sobole sine, post duo lustra, tumultu Carleoli facto,I Galliâ illatus, iniurias vlturus occmbit; & ibidem tumula∣tus est. successit! humantur ibidem Viscera, Rothomagi cor, Caetera fontis Ebrardi. . Regis Iohannis, ob Baronum aliorum{que} odia, tempora turbis refertissima. REge Iohanne,Iohannes frater, eontrà tuâ Galfridi prole reiectâ, Maioris natu fratris, comitis{que} Brytanni, Omnia pessum abeunt; Gallorum ope fultus at impar, Cesserat Arthurus: sedenim Rex iura Iohanni, Arte magis quàm armis dempsit,Cognatos, sibi Gallica Gallu: Et Regni Proceres vulgo inclyta turma Barones Olli imentarunt turbas,Episcopos, simulant{que} salutem, Ceu dulci patriae pro libertate reclament. Nec minùs immunis Stephani Archi-praesulis iris, Rex modò censurae Romanae fulmina sensit,
Donec in Ecclesiae gremio iam pacereceptus, Papa Coronam aufert capiti,Papam cui Coronam tandem resignat, & rursum{que} reponit; Pandulpho satagente, à quo consistere iussi Saeua manus Procerum, Rex Gallus & acer in armis Delphinus, Procerum causâ transgressus ad Anglos, Vix tamen â bellis compostâ ita pace quieuit:Proceres suos tumultuatus, moriens, Quisuâ raptis provirgine, coniuge, Nymphis, Zelotypi Proceres, quibus & lasciuia Regis Probro erat, insanos multùm indignantur amores. Treis Gnatas equidem nuptas tot Regibus, vnam Induperatori; Gnats duos,turbas filio postea Reges, Henricum Angliae, habebat, Alemaniae{que} Richardum; Post tria lustra veneno obijt, Vigornia tymbus. . Henrici tertij benè diuturnum & foelix Regnum. REx{que} nouennis adhuc infans, puer illius, Anglis, Lustris bis senis propè regnaturus in oris,Henrico tertio, & eius tutori∣bus sedandas & siniendas re∣liquit. Tertius Henricus sequitur; quem turma Baronum Infestant odijs, quem Gallia, Wallia, Bellis: Quos omneis superat, leuibus non arte nec armis; Nobile sed bellum, imprimis curante Gualone Sedis Apostolicae legato! Regia proles,Eius filius Assyricas turmas Aegyptia{que} agmina sternunt, Inuicti bello fratres! Solymis{que} reuersi Rex fit Edouardus, fratri Lancastriacessit, Edmundo! simul-at{que} patri West-minstria tymbus. . Eduardi primi Regnum & bene fortunata gesta. PRimus Edouardus Leolino Principe caeso Wallia Edouardum natum,Eduardus 1. Hierosolymis an∣te regnum adeptum, posteà decorauit honore,
Ac titulis, vtimos, solitis! Scotiae{que} Iohannem Baliolum praefert! Brusio{que} furente Roberto, Aduena ciuili qui semper crimine creuit Miles habet belli funesti praemiarura,In Walliâ & Scotiâ victor laure∣at ssimus, Angliaci ex dono Regis! post lustra{que} septem Ceupulchram ex Gallâ, numerosam ex coniuge cepit Hispaniâ sobolem, magnos{que}Coronam aliquando Monarchas, In Scoticis morientis agris West-mynstria Tymbus. . Edwardi secundi dominandi ratio malé sana, & miserior exitus. ALter Edouardus sequitur, celebrat{que} Isabellae, Procurante Petro Hispano,Eduard se undo lio relin∣quit  vaide insanienrem &  be getentm plu∣tma ad nutum Gauestom & alm. connubia Gallae; Quem fudere leues Scoti, infamem{que} dedêre, Anté Gauestonus, mox & Spenserus vter{que}; Quorum adcò insulsùm peruerterat omnia nutû; Heroes ac, proceres{que}, malé stomachantur opimi; Mortimerûm{que} odijs,Infida coniux & Amasius Mortimerus Regno & vita spoliant; filius & saeuae coniugis iris, Depositus post bis duo lustra; vbi morte misellâ Barkleyo in Castro perijt; Glocestria Tymbus. . Eduardi tertij domi tum foras apud Scotos & Gallos splendor verè Martius. TErtius Eduardus,Eduardus tertius Rexfactus obitum patris ante, Coronam Induerat; mollis deprensum in limine amicae Reginae matris, nimium{que} tumentibus ausis Mortimerum interimi mandat: teneram{que} Tyrann Sororem quamuis Dauidi Brusio antè locârat, Consilio illorum ductus! seu scommate motus, Fama ait,In Mortimeri & matris nequitias animaduertit. indigno, seuiure fide{que} negatis; Baliolum iuuit, Baruicum cingit, auitis Regem restituens regnis; Dauidem{que} fugauit Ad Gallos: Bellonae horrenda Halydonia testis, Quàm nullâ Anglorum caede,Scotos subigit, anhelas. innumerâ{que} Scotorum Percelebris. Cum iam tacito sub pectore voluit Maius opus, Rex Anglus ouans! celebrando Philippae Hannouiae Comitis Gnatae{que} sui{que} Hymenaeos; Gallica Sceptra animo, nec spes malê fouit inaneis: Quippe soror Caroli, Belli{que} Isabella Philippi
Eduardi genitrix, Haeres & filia Regum: Coniugis ac tenerae genitrix, soror ipsa Valesî, Qui iam Franca ferox rapuit sibi Regna Tyrannus. Ergo petens sua certa, erepta{que} pristina auorum Iura, faces belli Gallorum accendit in agris: Neustria Francorum{que} vrbes in limine plures,ad Galliae coronam Hostileis timuit{que} superba Lutetia flammas, Auratis fulgens tectis! Quà lympidus Amnis Cresseidis syluae latus alluit, vtra{que} gentis Tandem conuenêre acies, & vallis amoenae Delectati opibus floreis, Marti{que} dicatis, Conseruêre manus, rubeis{que} coloribus herbas Inficiunt virideis;famosissimis praelijs fudit Gallos; sic lactea Lilia rubrae Tincta colore Rosae; at{que} oleo-flammantia signa, Sanguineis maculis conspersa Draconibus Anglis. Rex ibi consuluit certus fugiendo saluti Celta suae; Innumeri, vulgus, Comites{que}, Duces{que}, Maiorci, Reges{que}, aiunt, cecidêre Bohemi; Nomina dant syluae, his, loca famosissima bellis; Sic Cadomum, Guisnes, sic Tanker-villa, Caletae, At{que} aliae haud paucae,Eius autem filius nec parui Nominis, vrbes Galliae, & occiduus circùm, citò posteà tractus, Reddita sunt Anglo Regi: Brusius{que} Tyrannus, Bella mouens, Celtâ suadente, in finibus Anglis, Captiuus premitur! Rex foedera Gallus ab Anglo, Ceu petit, inducijs potitur; moritur{que} Philippus Cui Gnatus patrijs solio sceptris{que} Iohannes Successit. Princeps Niger appellatus in oris,Eduardus Princeps Niger, fi∣ue ex nigricantibus armis, fi∣ue luctuoso & atro Gallorum fato, its appellatus, Iunior Eduardus, Gallis, Aquitaniam & omnem Hesperiae tractum Galliae, qua Phoebus Iberum Prospicit occiduum, patreità mandante, regebat; Gallorum{que} agros latè populatur & vrbeis, Cum iuuenes inter illustreis, laudis auitae Ceu Regni cupidos, summi{que} Heroas honoris, ob expeditiones in Galliam, Certatum est acriter! Pictonûm in finibus Anglus Sed rerum potitur, Poyteusi ait accola bello; Et proceres Princeps Gallos, Regem{que} Brytannus Captiuos duxit spectacula laeta Triumphi.
. Vtriusque Eduardi patris & filij mors vltima vitae linea, fama finis nescia. I Am{que} vstae Lybies Indis{que} virentibus oris; Tempestate ista Armorum portenta furentûm, Apparent oculis sublimia in aëre Castra Quorum in conspectu ferus incola praelia gessit,Hispaniam Pars nigra Memnonijs, armis turma altera in albis; Rorantem{que} comam perfusa{que} sanguine cristas, Turma cadis positis niueo velamine & armis, Palma nigris remanet, locus Aethera deperit inter. Neustria, Burgundi, Britannia, Gallia tota, Principis ante pedes, tremuit{que} Nauarra tumultu; Castellae{que} Petro, disiecto à fratre tyranno, Auxilio iuuat, & frontem diademate cingit; Rex{que} Cypriposcebat opem; sic Principis Angli Captiui duo, Rex{que} Cypi famulantur in Aulâ. Ipse Periscelidi suras,omni bellicâ laude eumulatis∣simus ante patrem diem obijt. Chlamydis{que} intenti, Ornatu fulgens, heu funere raptus acerbo, Occubuit Princeps; Anglûm decus! vnde Richardus Ornatus titulis, patrijs & honore superbit. Rex tamen ante, auro{que}, datis, & Galliae in oris Terrarum ingenti tractu, modo pace remisit, Gallorum Regem & Delphinum: Brusius heros,Reliqu Lutra dedit, Reges{que} inter pax alma refulsit; Clarensi{que} Duci Leonello, candida Nympha, Mediolanensis Galeasî filia nupta est; Lata{que} cum spons â formosâ, possidet arua, Finibus Italiae,Proles Leonellus Regia proles: Lancastro{que} Duci, Gandauo prima Iohanni, Regni haeres nupsit, Cantabrigiae altera fratri, Castiliaè Regis gnatae: quare Hespera Regna Dux petijt; Rexs{que} ipse nouus, quo posset amorem Conciliare,multùm vigult. Iohanne satam, socijs Hymenaeis Accepit, multo{que} Ducem donauerat auro. At miser héic claris Dux ciuibus at{que} sacratae Inuidus heu nimium Ecclesiae, macrescit opimis Praelatorum opibus, titulis & honoribus aeger, Hos{que} leuare opibus dignatur,Rex ipse, omnium reliquorum qui in Angliâ floruêrunt, vt e∣ius opera testantur, honoratis∣simus. honoribus illos, Wicleafi incendens magno mala dogmata fastû, Quem tamen Ecclesiae, Wickhamo, ciuibus vnum Conciliare student, Edouardus, Aliza,Alizia Pierce ob cuius nimiam cum ipso consue∣tudine Rex au∣dijt infamis. Richardus. Huius Edouardi quasi Vindesorensia sacra, Festa{que} Regis opus! modò munereclara Georgî Cappadocis: quorum alma cohors chlamydata, superbas,
Cincta periscelidi suras, sic laudibus illum Illustrat, tantis radijs perstringit & orbem Vt iam Phryxaeum prae illis Burgundia vellus Contemnat, Cochleis variatos Gallia torques,Nepotem Et Cruce conspicuas Pallas Rhodos, Elkala, & Elb. Quinis foemineâ, septiens, prole virili, Laetus agens foelix{que} diem, Richmondiae obiuit Rex pulcher, post lustra decem, Westminstria Tymbus. . Richardus secundus Regno temerè administrato, spoliatur; vnde schisma. DEfunctis successit auo{que} patri{que} secundus Audit,Richardum 3. Edwardi Nigri Principis Gnatum at heu nimiâ infamis leuitate Richardus! Anna Bohema, nouis vestitu habitu{que} superba, Franca Isabella, etiam, sobole sine Regia coniux; Hic vulgi motus propè inauditos{que} furores, Ceu Wallûm, Scotûm{que}, truces{que} domabat Hybernos! Sancti Edouardi aureis insignibus vsus & albis. Quando ducis rediens ancastri filius exul Dux Herefordensis, Boling brokius{que} vocatus, Excipit Henricus,Haeredem, quamuis Wallis, Scotis, & alijs hostibus debel∣latis, bellicosum satis, at lon∣ge alijs inf liciorem reliquit; vt qui tandem redeuntem è littore Iernes, Regem armis, nudum{que} premit, nudat{que} Coronâ; Nobilis hinc oritur contentio, flebilis Anglis, Lis{que} tremenda viris,ab niueae{que} rubrae{que} Rosarum Factio, schisma Dueum, rerum & confusio Regum, Rex{que} fame Pont-fracti obit, ad Proto-Martyris aedes, Magnifici, quamuis mollis, Langleya Tymbus. . Henrici quarti tempore ob Coronae indebitam adeptionem variae inde secutae turbae. QVatuor Henricus quartus post lustra,Henrico 4. Coronâ & regno nudatus, in magn miseriâ, fame perijt. Richardum Deposuit; quem Mortimerus{que} & Wallus Oenus, Glendower dictus, primùm, Scotici{que} tumultus,
Posteà turbárunt! sed concidtt acer Owenus, Mortimerus{que} gener! rursum{que} Halydonia fastis,Rex nnus varijs lacessitus sedition bus & bellis, supera∣t omibus, semper victor euadens, Damnata in Scoticis, Scotica agmina fudit, & Anglo, Albaniae Gnatum Ducis, Oceanus{que} Iacobum Roberti Regis, dederant, Proceres{que} Scotorum Non paucos; qui sic in Caesaris arce vel arcto Detenti custode, Scotae flos ipse iuuentae: Regi, Herefordensi ex Nymphâ, pulcherrima proles, Principe cum{que} satû Cambriae, Gnatis{que} duâbus, Bedfordi,Sceptra auctiora filio Gleui{que} Duces, Thomas{que} Clarensis! In{que} Hierosolymis Cameris, ità fama, vocatis Terno obijt Regni lustro; Cantuaria Tymbus. . Henrici quinti Gesta, triumphali curru dignissima. FIlius Henricus,Henrico 5. relinquit, quivitiis & societate improborum, qui∣bus in prima iuuenta, irreti∣tu, fuerat, excussis, Cambriad confinia, quintus, Monmuthiae ortus agro; vitijs, primae{que} iuuentae Rellictis socijs; iris{que}, odijs{que} furentûm Marte domi oppressis, veteris deliria Castri Vulgo sic dicti, celebris Wicklefia sectae Erroris{que} sati socios & dogmata damnat: Postèa{que} externas Celtae conuersus in oras,Princeps optimus res domi pace composuit; & Iam meditatur ouans, sua iura reposcere bello, Regis Edouardi titulis & honore superbus, Quondam ataui! Gallûm{que} olim domitoris, in armis Lilia qui socianda Rosis curârat amoenis. Pro{que} pilis missis pessum dedit omnia pilis; In{que} ferens totis inimica incendia campis,regnum Franciae recuperare aggressus, bellicosissimè se gessit, Galliae agros rapidis mandauit & ignibus vrbeis; Clara{que} Agincourti, famosa{que} praelia, summis Laudibus Angligenas ornant, nitidis{que} trophaeis. Pars ibi magna cadunt Procerum{que} quàm maxima Gallûm Nobilium capti, Angliacis decora alta triumphis; Victor at instat ouans, donec iam Gallia supplex Venerat, & Regi pulcherrima Regia virgo, Nubilis oblata est, Katharina{que} Nobilis, Anglo, Filia Francorum Regis: Data nomine dotis,
Gallica sceptra placent genero; oblectatus vter{que}, Rex, socero viuente regens, functo; audijt Haeres: Parrisijs{que}vnde acceptâ coniuge Regis filiâ Ka haâ, haeres & admini∣st regni Francae institu∣ts est. frequens pompas celebrante cateruâ Nobilium cum Rege suo, inuenes{que} senes{que}, Foemineus{que} tener chorus, innuptae{que} puellae, Pacificos laeti celebrant dulceis{que} Hymenaeos: Pace istâ, noxa{que} sibi Delphinus abhorret Solus! at insequitur totis{que} è finibus Anglus Pellit eum patrijs: Katharina inuiserat Anglos Mutua{que} Angliacis haec sedibus, illius infans Ortus Vindesorae Tamesini ad fluminis vndas, Parrisijs Gallis, frontem Diademate cincti: Cum citò Rexmoriens tenerae heu propè flore iuuentae, Faeliceis nuper,Florenti, per Gallica littora, victor, Phoebeia insignis lauro, plantâ{que} Mineruae Pulcher agens currus, febre iam correptus acutâ Res ità disponit,ver Gleui Ducis Anglia nutu Bedfordi Ducis & Burgundi, Gallia cessit; Et tenero Tutor datus est Excestrius Heros,aetate decedens; filius Qui monitis{que} pijs Regem educat, instruit, ornat; Parrisijs{que} obijt, cum vix duo munere lustra Functus erat regio, Heroicè; Westminstria tymbus: arterius{que} huius, Richmondia celsa, Syonis Claustra{que} Regis opus! quo iam moriente Monarchâ, Vix nouimestris adhuc, Haeres modò, filius infans, Incipit Henricus sextus regnare Britannis. . Henrici sexti sanctissimi Regis egregia infortunia. CVi Burgunda tamen soror,Henricus 6, nouimestris in∣fans; & Burgundio, coniux, Delphinum domuêre Duces! Gallos{que} fugaces; Donec fata suae ruperunt stamina vitae Bedfordi illustris: domitor{que} Richardus Hybernes, Dux Eboracensis regali stemmate clarus Olli successit,primò citò Warwicensis & lli Sufficitur Comes! At Burgundio Celta{que} Gallo Deficiunt Carolo; gens perfida! quando Britannis
Dudum oriens furiosa domi dominatur Erynnis: Musa sile,Galliae (gliscente inter tuto∣es discordiá) & aut mussa infortunia temporis huius; Ceu Fortuna nouerca furit, capit oppida Gallus Delphinus: facile est populum domuisse volentem Tendentem{que} manus vltro; nec clarior ornat Gloria vincentem fuso sine sanguine Regna. Dux Eboraci odijs & Somersettus in armis Flagrabant mutuis: queis tanta incendia flammit Vt vix dùm accensas poterant restinguere, multo Albionis fluerent quamuis, de sanguine riui. Priuatis{que} oriens, publicae cito certa ruinae Caussa agitata odijs; & de Diademate lis est. Ac gelidis redijt, domitis{que} Richardus Hybernis, Dux Eboracensis, claris velut anteà gestis, Inuidet Edmondus Dux Somersettus, vter{que} Aequè opibus, proauis, rerum splendore superbi: In{que} vicem probris onerant, lacerant{que} scipsos. Sicuti saeua, animis{que} ingens discordia gliscit, Millia multa hominum, pulcherrima corpora bellis, Occubuére feris!ind ingruente ciuili bello, quasi regno incuria regnet, Ferre Richardus opem parat; hinc sua stemmata pandit, Rege suo potiora magis! huic Anna Rogeri Filia Mortimeri genitrix, huic Gnata Philippa Clarensis Leonelli, Edouardi hic tertia proles: Rex solum è quartâ, Gandauo prole Iohanne, Venerat Henricus Lancastro stemmate cretus. Inde Somersetti Verulamia prima cruore, Blore-hethi celebres & Northamptonia pugnae; Quarta Eboracensem dominum Wake-feildia sternit: Filius Eduardus quartus tamen occupat vrbem Londinum, & Regio cinctus Diademate fulget; Intereà Henricus Scoticos fugit exul in agros,Angliae dominatum, cum vitâ & fo Henrico, amisit Marguerita{que} moesta Thori socia, inclyta Nympha, Neapolis Siculi & Solymorum filia Regis Reyneri, titulis Ducis Andegauensis onusti, Restaurare viro cupiens Gnato{que} coronam, Instaurat bellum; rursum Verulamia caede Et Wallûm clarae, & Scotiae ad confinia pugnae: Haec fugat ad Gallos Edouardum, iterum{que} reponit Henricum in solio Regina; iterum{que} repressa Haec fugit ad Gallos, patriâ{que} ope fulta, regressa, Varuici casum Barnetti in collibus audit; Dum parat vt reparando petat, pereundo salutem; Supremae, loca clara Theoci Curia, pugnae, Heic capitur cum matre tener, manibus{que} Tyranni Caeditur Eduardus, truce circumstante coronâ! Cùm partim Scoticis, partim Anglis, pauper & exul, Heinricus pater orbus agens in finibus, agris Lancastris latuit; Talbottus at obtulit illum Regi, vbi Caesareâ detentus & obrutus arce:
In prece multus erat, sanctae pietatis alumnus, Pacis auens,Rex pijssimus. virtutis amans, Rex summus honore, Tristia sanguinei deuitans praelia campi, Se non si potis, immiscens ciuilibus vndis, Captabat placidae securior ocia mentis: Octo{que} lustra priùs,Cui iam post duo lustra, monarchae Vix totidem menses, Castella Georgica Tymbus. . Eduardus quartus & soboles, ludicrae fortunae specimina. QVartus vbi Edwardus Gallis fera bella Scotis{que} Intulit, hijs arceis, ijs aurea pensa recepit. At Shori infamis famosa coniuge Ianâ; Et pulchrae perhibent,Eduardus quartus, ex Ebora∣censi familia, oriundus, inces∣sit, ceu mollis amator Elizae Graij equitis viduae nubens! Carolotta sorori Franca tuae Regina bonae, ducis{que} Sabaudi Illusit gnatae,qui leuibus amoribus, parili{que} illuditur arte; Filia Delphino iussu Elizabetha parentis Desponsata fuit, Margretta sed Austrica nupsit. Confixus{que} acri moriens, ità fama, dolore, Londini; liquit Gnatos duo, quin{que} puellas; Bis duo cui post lustra sacella Georgica Tymbus. Filius Eduardus quintus puer, anté coronâ Tempora cincta forent, Gleui Ducis arte Richardi, Intra aliqut menses, in celsâ Caesaris arce, Cum Duce fratre perit; rapit & sua Regna Tyrannus. Hoc metuens pater,& Fratris nece infamis, Richar∣do alteri fratri, moriens, suos puellulos in manus, quasi op∣ptimendos tradidit,  antè nigris transmisit auernis, Clarensem, infandum, fratrem! quae machina Gleui Dicitur esse Ducis: meliùs quò fraude nepotes, Opprimere incautos poterat protector alumnos; Tertius in{que} manu terit aurea sceptra Richardus. At sequitur vindicta scelus; facinus{que} superbum, Odêrunt populi:vndè Richardus tertius tyrannidem triennem exercuit, monstris{que} insomnia terrent, Manes, & horrendae ante oculos mala mille figurae; Tartareis{que} canes inferni vlulare tenebris Visi, animae{que} negant, irata{que} spectra quietem; Donec eis dederat scelerato sanguine poenas.donec
. Henrici septimi gesta: & connubia foelicissima. SEptimus Henricus Lancastro stemmate cretus, Margretâ venit ecce satus; Margreta Iohanne, Ille Thomâ,Henricus septimus Lanca∣strensis, eum solio deturbans, & Elizabetham Eboracensis familiae, hic magno Grandauae stirpis alumno, Et Katharinâ olim dictâ Swinfordiâ! adepti Bewforti titulis iuga Somersettia; Wallus Huic Edmundus, ei{que} parens, pulcherrima quinti Henrici Katharina, pater Theodorus Ocnus! Dux{que} Somersettus, Comes & Richmondius audit: Mater eum inuitat Stanleyo nupta Baroni; Nymphae ambae regiae, mater{que} & filia Elizae, Mortonus{que} pius,Edwardi quarti gnatam, in vxorem accipiens, sanguino∣lento schismati, cum hâc Odâ, finem imponit. Buckinghamius{que} Tyranno Infesti, accelerant remorantem Galliae in oris. Ille manu paruâ Britonum comitante, profectus, Milfordum Cambris in finibus, indé triennem Bosworthi in campis petit occidit{que} Tyrannum; Cui pompâ sine, vix lacero Leir-cestria tymbus. Clara dies, pia cuius ope, pax reddita mundo! Elizabetha etenim Dux & Richmondus eundem Conuenêre Thorum! Iam Musa recense triumphans Germina dijs gratae pacis modulamine dulci; Hinc viget ambarum, niueae, rubeae{que} Rosarum Vnio, Regnorum Anglo-Gallo-Hyberno-Scotorum! Hinc veniunt, certo{que} sequuntur in ordine Reges, Septimus, octauus{que} Henrici, Edouardus, & vnae Hispano nupta, Hispanis oriunda Maria! Diua{que} virgo, satus{que} Anglis quasi virgine Diuâ, Tu{que} puer{que} tuus, ter Eliza beata, Iacobus. Odae nonae Finis.
PALAE ALBION, The ninth Ode, Entituled GVLIELMVS. THE ARGVMENT. Ninth Ode, shewes, Danish broyles o'reblowne, How Norman William here set foote, Whose Conquest by that name's yet knowne; But th'English race againe tooke roote; Whiles Albions Scepters e'en t'our dayes Plantaginet's name and Tewthors swayes. CANT. I. The descent of VVilliam the Conquerour, from Great Rollo the Dane. ROme,Synchronismus siue computatis Annorum. Brittons ruine, gaue Saxons roome,Supplementum Historia. Danes they, Danes stood at Normans doome; Normans, Danes, Saxons, Romans, Bryttons, Neptunes and Nereus brood, huge Eattons, And Samothes, sang you, learned Sisters, Angles from th'East lands, Danes from Isters, And Simois side, both ours and theirs Romes Lords, you brought, and Bryttaines heires; Albion from's Oares, and Samothes, From th'Arke, when all the world was Seas. Now name the man, deare Nymphs, whose line, Reignes now, in Brutes new Sainted shrine, Whom England and great Brittaine sings, So much-fam'd Conquerour, Sire of Kings! Whom Newstria bred, now Brittaine holds Him and his off-spring Monarkes bold. Sing we our Williams warlike feates, His conquests and atchiuements great, And first his Stocke from whence he came, Reuoluing elder yeares of Fame. From Istrian Daci, erst,The descent of William the Conquerour, and Dukes of Nor∣mandy, from Rollo, and the Danes. they sayne, Came Rollo Guion's sonne, great Dane, And England skal'd, whom Alfreds worth Repell'd; but France shores, nearest North,
Afford him land-roome, whence now springs, Their Norman Dukes race, Englands Kings: This Rollo, christ'ned Robert, th'Earle Of Beauois, not Charles Simples,As some haue written, but not rightly, for he married Poupa, as some call her, daughter of Been∣ger Earle of Bessin and Beau∣uoisie: but indeed another Nor∣man Princes a little before, mar∣ried Gilda Neece to Carolus Crassus, whence is supposed, sprang the error: William the first called Long-sword, espoused Sporta, daughter of Herbert Earle of Senlis, by whom hee had Richard the first, called, With∣out feare, who espoused Agnes si∣ster to Hugh Capet, after Gun∣nor a Danish Lady, by whom he had Richard the second, who espoused first Iudith sister to the Earle of Brytaine, after Paula daughter to Sweine K of Den∣marke; by them hee had Richard the third, neuer married, and Robert the second, who by his Concubine Arletta, a mans daughter of the Towne of Fallaise, had William the Conquerour. Gyrle, Weds, and hath issue, William; who Had Richard; he a next; he too, Another Richard, and his brother Robert, whose Aunt's Saint Edwards mother: Which second Robert was the father Of second William; with vs rather Call'd first; of Norman Dukes the second; 'Mongst English Kings, the foremost reckon'd! Such was this Dukedome, name and race, Comes now his Kingdome next in place. CANZ. II. The Conquerours quarrell, claime, and preparation to gaine the crowne of Englands. WHen fates had Edwards life-thread spon,Harold, son of Earle Godwine and Thyra, as some say, sister to King Canutus, whence was some pretended shew of a title, An. 1066. reigned not full one yeare Soone Godwines Harold Thyra's son, Caught Englands Crowne; seeks all mens fauours; And left, too grosse fraud Edgar sauours, Makes him some mends! part guilt, for pearle, For Englands King, sooth, OxfordsEdgar is by Harold made Earle of Oxford, a goodly re∣compence for his Kingdome taken away by him. Earle; But now, besides his cancell'd oath, To Edgar made, and Edward both, (More shame,) a harsh Embassage came, From Norman William, who much blame, His troth-plight promise broke, which made He did the Dukes vow'd right inuade; But no expected words or deedes, For Duke or them, from him proceedes, Dukes daughter too, his promis'd spouse, Forsakes they say, forsweares all vowes: Which so incen'st the Dukes sharp spleene To worke reuenge, and wreak his teene, He men and ships to seaHis Nauy 896. ships. bequeathes To winne the rosie royall wreathes. Flanders and France with him combin'd, Fierce Tosto was not farre behinde, To worke his brothers bane, till those Two noble Earles against him rose Morcare and Edwine, who himMalchere or Morcare Earle of Northumberland, Edwine of Mercia sent To th'Orks as t'were to banishment; Whence Norway, Scot'sh and Orkey powers He drew, that not those martiall flowers, Northumhers Earle, and Merk-lands flame Could stay him till King Harold came;
Who by faire Riuer Darwents side, Foyl'd Scot'sh and Orkeyes Prince and pride, And Tosto sent and Norwayes King, To Pluto's Palace newes to bring; When more, streight, more might make him feare, He heard the Normans landedAt Pemsey in Sussex on the 28. day of September, in. 1066. and fought the great battell at Battaile the 14. of October, and William was crowned in Lon∣don on Christmasse day next following. were, Neare Hastings! with vndaunted spright: Streight he calls forth his men to fight, Longing t'allay that fatall feud, With hands new dipt in's brothers bloud; His wearied war-mates waxing faint, Vnbreath'd, were faine yet fresh to paint Their scarres with bloud and wounds with gore, As daring Mars at deaths owne dore: So furious Harold hastes to meet His fate like fire with winged feet. CANZ. III. His successe, conquest, and coronation, on Christmasse day, Anno 1066. NOw comes that houre,William the Conquerour, af∣ter this victory, getting much of the Land and withall London was there crow∣ned 25. Decemb. the same yeare 1066. dyed 9. September. 1087. hauing reigned 20. yeares, 8. moneths and 16. dayes. and times full date, That wrackt the Saxon Princes state, From EgbertsEgbert began, A. 802. ended 838, whence to this yeare 1066. is 228 years. Hengist came al∣most 400. yeares before that, An. 449. began his reigne, An 456. Whence to the present yeare 1066 is 610. yeares. reigne two hundred neare, From Hengist nigh sixe hundred yeare; Since CHRIST, one thousand sixtie six; When Fate or some foule Friend of Styx, Hastes Harold on! WilliamTowards the end of the day William caused his men to re∣tire, which the English percei∣uing, thinking they had fled, brea∣king their rankes  to pursue, were easily euercome; where this battaile was fought the Conquerour after found,  Bat∣taile Abbey; there were slaine of the Normans 6013. of the En∣glish 47944. or after some 7974 scarce euer the like uerthrow and number slaine heard of a∣mong the English before. that fayn'd To fly, both Crowne and Kingdome gayn'd; In Sussex battaile th'English fell, Strange Comets did such change foretell. Harolds corps (the Duke, now King, so doom'd) By him built Waltham, ha'sIn the colledge of S. Crosse, which he had founded, and there placed a Deane and eleuen Chan∣nns entoomb'd, Thyra mourning! being, selfe-same last yeere, As his first! First, first William's heere. Then th'English fled to London fast, Whiles Normans did their Countries wast: Northumberlands andEdwine and Morcare. Merk-lands Lords For safetie tending Scotland wards, Met there young Edgar, who set late Sailes for Appulia, but by Fate, Or mightie Aeol's Impes thus crost, Cast on a quite contrary coast: Whose sisters, Margret's Malcolmes wife Scot'sh Queene! t'other vowes Monastique life. Now made the Norman Leopards pray On Englands spoile, and tooke their way For London, which they friendly found, Where Christ-masse day, was William crown'd
By Aldred, Yorkes Arch-bishop!The famous exploit and strata∣gem of Stygandus, Archbishop of Canterbury: Eglesine Ab∣bat of Saint Augustines and the Kentishmen, at Swans-coomb two miles from Gauesend, whereby they gayned the Freedome and Priuiledges of their Countrey. whiles Famous Stigand, whom England stiles Her other Primate, thus entends His Countries freedome to defend. CANZ. IIII. The Arch-bishops Stygands famous stratagem whereby he procured Kents liberties and ancient freedome, all England else groning under the Normans tyrannie. AS William ween'd with warlike powers To o're runne Kent; in greene-wood bowers Th'Arch-Bishop he, his men arayes Couering their armes, with leauie sprayes: Saint Austines Abbot Eglesine Did in this act with him combine, The King at Swans-coombe kend, who stood Maz'd thus to meete this moouing wood, By which sleight they encompast round His Normans on vnequall ground, Who casting downe their boughs, appeares Their Kentish force, to Normans feares: But Stigand only praying peace And countries freedome, so to cease All warres, and farther strife; which thing, The King grants, and they greete him King. Hence Kent enjoyes (our Lawyers say) Her ancient customes to this day. Londons Charter Bishop WilliamThe same first yeare of the Conquerour, the Archbishop Sty∣gand so proured the liberties of Kent, William Bishop of Lon∣don procured the Charter and priuiledges thereof. names Her fauourite! Kent-freed Stygand fames. Yet such his faith nor fame defends His worth from Enuie, subtile fiend; But dying disrob'd in prisoners weedes Cane's Abbot Lanfrank himTo Lanfranke, and the See of Canterbury, the Archbishop of Yorke at this time made a knde of submission for him and his See; Scotland was then vnder the Prouince of Yorke. succeedes. And now began our, th'English, bane, Some fyn'd, some punish't; som's lands tane And giuen to strangers, many a place To wild-beasts, faire fields made a chace: Hamp-shiere townes on New-forrestMany Towns, Villages, and Churches in Hampshire were vnpeopled and ruined, to make the Kings Chase of new Forrest, not without the griefe and many bitter curses of the poore wron∣ged owners. side Could witnesse well this Normans pride, Where Church and all, laid leuell ground, Wilde Deere or Satyr's dance around, Where plagues for Widowes, Orphan cryes, Richard Kings-child and Rufus dyes. No lesse the Nobles for their parts Or feare, or feele, as grieuous smarts, Feele present wrongs, feare future dangers, Their fellowesmade foote-stooles forwhich made the English No∣bilitie, as Morcare & Edwine, Gospatrik Earle of Cumber∣land, Walthe of Earle of Nort∣hampton, Syward, Hereward, Clito Edgar, and Bishops, and the rest, attempt many insolen∣cies against the State, ioyning sometimes with the Scots, other∣whiles the Danes, end doing many outrages, till at last most of them were slaine and came to vn∣timely ends. strangers, When each Iack iets for gentleman That skill of French or Norman can,
Stage, Court, Lawes turn'd French, strange to see How brag French beggers English't bee. So great and small, skorn'd or skar'd sore, All feare, some fled their natiue shore, And ioyning with the warlike Dane, Who claim'd the crowne his right, were slaine: Others ioyn'd with th'inuading Scots In Edgars quarrell, chanc't like lots. Both Welsh and Scot'sh and HerewardsHereward, his father Leo∣frike Earle of Leycester, being dead, came out of Flanders to claime has lands that were giuen to Normans; hee was a valiant and right worthy warriour, and long time defended hmslfe is the Ile of Ely, being made Knight by his Vncle Brand, Abbot of Peterborrow; the fashion then being that the Knight to be made, after Confession and Abolution, watching afore the Altar all night, then offereth his sword, which receiuing againe with a benediction from the Abbot or Bishop, hee was thenceforth ac∣counted a lawfull Knight, which order as well as  with golden crosss, the Normans a∣boshed, substituting others in their places. powers The brother Earles braue martiall flowers, Haue all like Fortune, Welsh are tam'd, The rest quite fled, foyl'd, or reclaim'd. Malcolme do's homage, Edgar too, And his as tane to fauour, doe Receiue the Kings rich gifts! all friends His course thence for Pannonia bends. CANZ. V. The Kings tyrannie also against his brother, his death and strange funerall in France. THe Kings halfe brothers were by'sArlotta, why before the Duke his fathers death, married one Herlewine of Gantreuill of meane estate; & as proceeding of her immodest behauiour towards the Duke, some allude the name of Harlot as it were descended. mother, Robert Earle of Morton, and his brother Odo Bayon's Bishop, Earle of Kent, Who vice-Roy made, when William went To warre in France, Northumbers wilde, With th'rest of's Kings foes brauely foyl'd; But gaping for the Papall Crowne, When fates great Hidebrand pull'd downe, Was prisnor'd by his brother-King, Enuie par'd proud Ambitions wing, Doubly deceiu'd by lying Augury Lost triple-Crowne, and long time liberty! Peace gain'd, the King did Poules repaire, Built many a Church and AbbeyThe Abbeyes of Battaile in Sussex, Gane in Normandy, to which he gaue his Crowne and Ornaments, which King Henry the first redeemed at a great rate▪ Selby Abby in Yorkshire, Saint Nicholas Priory in Exeter: hee gaue lands and priuiledges to the Colledge of Saint Martins le grand; ten Monasteries built by his Ancestors in Normandy hee enlarged: in his time were 2. in diuers parts with his consent and confirmation founded, with the greatest part of Paules Church and the Tower of London, and many other Castles in England and Normandy. faire, And castles, and of England tooke The great suruey, in Doomes-dayIt was called the Roll of Win∣ton, of being laid vp at Win∣chester; the booke of Bermond∣sey saith it is called Domus Dei Booke, of lying in the Kings Treasury called Domus Dei, at Westminster, such a Rolhad, Al∣fred before set forth, all Eng∣land thereby taxed by Shires, Hundreds, and Tings. booke. Last time King William France inuaded, Because French Philip 'gainst him ayded Robert his so vnnaturall Sonne; Falne sicke at Roan, the French begonne And King to scoffe, as if his sicknesse Were Child-bed faintnesse, womens weakenesse; Which made him mad-chas't vow, should shrines And altars with burnt-offrings shine, At his safe Church going; saues his oath, Th'Altars flame, townes, and temples both: 'Mongst which warre tumults, bruisedAt the firing of the City of Meux. fore By his horse leaping; sickning more,
Soone after dyes! when (wofullDying at Roan, he was left by his seruants who fled, his body was found naked on the floore, and most of his stuffe an  stollen; thence conneyed to Cne, one Fitz Arthur denyed the K. buriall in the Abbey Church (as ground which was wrongfully ta∣ken by the King from father) till he had 100 pounds paid him for it; the Kings Coffin there breaking, to the feare and amaze∣ment of those present, there issued so  a stench of the body not bowelled, that the Priests and Monkes could scarce abide to finish the ordinary Kites and fune∣rall dutie; the end and embleme of all flesh though neuer so proud or stately. case) Great Cane scarce yeelds him buriall place; A spacious Empire, so small roome, To fit her Monarks eight-foote toombe, Till 'twas with loathsome neede for gold To all beholders terrours sold! Whom Normandy nurst, France did feare, England and Picards, conquests were, Lesse Brytaine bowes to, Scot'sh, Welsh, both Triumpht! Ah, worlds pride, glory, froth! CANZ. VI. The smally-praised governement of William Rufus. HIs death makes Robert NormansSo was the Kings will, lying on his death bed, when hee wil∣led all prison dores to fly open, & all prisoners to be released sauing his brother Odo, whose contenti∣ous nature, and ambition, he fea∣reds but at the last gaue consent to his release also. Duke; Rufus our King;William Rufus 9. Septemb. A. 1087. R. 12. y. 11. moneths wanting 8. dayes, cowned at Westminster by Lanfranke Archbishop of Cant. sline by Tyrell in the new Forrest in Hampshire, 2. August. A. 1100. youngst Henry tooke, His treasures; Stephen Earle of Bloys Adela weds! the Britannoy's Earle Alam, Constance; Spaines Alfonso Elnor; Adeliza and his throne so, Both Harold left! they Cicely call Canes Abbesse; Williams issue all! Now Odo free'd by's BrothersThe Nobles and hee setting vp Robert for King against Rutus: but being reconciled, Duke Robert went with Godfrey of Bol∣loigne to the holy Land, were they achieued many honourable victories against the Saracens: whiles William at home, ouer∣came the Vsurper Donald, and made Edgar King of Scots: also the contention growing hot in Wales between lestin & Prince Rees, William and the English ouercame them, and tooke many goodly Lordships and Territories, in the chiefest parts of Wales from them. fate Nurst fell flames till wit deare bought late, Vnites the Nephewes powers, that quell'd Welsh, Scot'sh and Normans that rebell'd. Then Robert gone to th'Holy-land Rufus makes Edgar Scot'sh King; and Builds Westminster great Hall; but lead A most loose life, being LanfrankDuring Lanfranks life hee so liued, saith the story, that hee might have beene a mirrour of Princes, though afterwards his rapines, sacriledges, and synonies exceeded: of his variablenesse is noted this, That to the Iewes who brought him presents, encourage∣ing them to fight against Christians, he would say; if they overcame, and swore by Saint Lukes face, which was his oath, he would be one of their sect. A note of his prodigalitie is recorded, his rating his Chamberline for bringing him a paire of hose that cost but three shillings; who fetching a worse paire, and saying, they cost a marke, he was pleased: which may with more wonder taxe the excesse of meaner persons in this age. dead, Who rul'd him much: and exil'd flies Reuerend Anselme who taxt his vice! Though rapine nor of Church nor State Scapt scot-free. Tyrell, such his fate, On the new Forrest, ill-got ground From Gods and men, gaue him deaths wound; Whom Colliers Carts, vncourtly bring, Winchester toombs th'eleuen yeeres mSir Walter Ty∣rell that slue the King escaped, o∣ther of the Kings seruants fled, his body laid on a Colliers Cart, was by a silly leane iade drawne into Winchester, & there in Saint Swithins church entombed. King.
CANZ. VII. Henrie the first called Beuclerks honourable reigne. NExt, young'st Henry,Henry the first, called Beuclerk, of his learning, third sonne of the Conqueror, borne at Selby in Lin∣colnshire, brought vp in study at Cam∣bridge; began his reigne 2. Au∣gust, was crow∣ned 5. August 1100. at West∣minst. by Mau∣rice Bishop of London, being Anselme then in exile; he reig∣ned 35. y. 4. m. A. 1116. the first Parliament at Salisbury. A. 1122. the king went to Poys∣land, being Co∣man of North∣wales in peace with him, but Meredith ap Blethin, and Eneon, Madok and Morgan, the sons of Ca∣dugan, pursuing the wars awhile, at last sought peace. the first, restoring Saint Edwards Lawes, and most adoring Artes, armes, and honour, Beauclerk styl'd; Fam'd yet for couetous, wanton, wilde; He banisht Anselme backe doth call, Regards his counsels yet but small. Robert, now from Ierusalem Comes, claimes his royall Diadem; But peace tooke place, till last, fresh broyles Captiu'd the Duke, whom Cardiff spoyles Of eyes and life: his sonne thatWilliam called Earle of Flan∣ders, the Kings nephew, a worthy young Captaine; he was staine at the siege of the castle of Angeou. flyes To th'Duch, and French for aid, soone dies. First Parliaments, and TemplersThe first conuocation of the State: Prelates, Nobles, and Commons of the Land, was 19. A∣prilis, A. 1116 and A. regni 16. when beforetimes the Kings made their Lawes by the aduice of the learned without altogether such solemne meetings. Of Templers, the first were the honorable men Hugo Paganus and Galfridus de Saint Andemate, vnder Baldwine King of Ierusalem: their white habit they had from Pope Honorius; their red Cros∣ses from Eugenius, their name from their first Mansion ard by the Temple at Ierusalem. first Vnder this Henry heard! who earst Build Windsore Castle, after fam'd So by Saint George! He Welshmen tam'd; Weds Maud, Scot'sh Edgars sister, whose Sole heire, (the rest sea-swallowed!) spouse Maud too, to th'Emperor, after tooke Geofrey Plantaginet, Angeou'sMaud was first married to Henry the Emperour, then to Ieffrey Plantaginet Earle of Angeou, whose issue Plantagi∣nets reigned in England, till Henry the seuenth. Duke: Whose issue, second Henry brings In, th'ancient race of Saxon Kings, His mother th'Empresse Maud! hers too Maud Scot'sh-Queene Margrets Daughter, who Had to syre Edward, Edmonds sonne Nam'd Ironside, King heere long agone! These heires! Henry beyond-seaIn Normandy, 1. Decembr. 1135. his bowels, braines, and eyes, buried at Roan, the rest at Reading where hee founded an Abbey of blacke Monks in place of a Nunnery which he suppressed: so he conuerted a rich Colledge of Prehends at Cicester to an Ab∣bey: hee sounded the Priory of Dunstable, the Hospitall of S. Iohn in Ciceter, and Castle and Colledge at new Windsore; he is noted to haue beene better disposed at the beginning, then end of his reigne. dyes; Thrise twelue yeeres King; at Reading lyes. CANZ. VIII. King Stephens altogether troublesome time. BVt Stephen Earle of Bloys his sonne,Stephen, sonne of Stephen, Earle of Bloys, and Adela the Conquerours daughter, crow∣ned on S. Ste∣uens day, 1135. did found an Hospitall by the west gate of Yorke: two Nunneries at Carew, and Higham by Grauesend, the Abbey of Cogshall in Essex, Furnesse in Lancashire, and Feuersham in Kent, where he was buried, ha∣uing reigned 18. yeares, 10. moneths, and odde dayes, he dyed 25. Octob. 1154. On Stephens day crownd his reigne begunne, By's mother Adela, Conquerours Impe; Whose Nobles, and the Imperiall Nymphe So vext him, faine at last, as 'twere Adopts her sonne, young HenryFor during all his reigne En∣gland was full of bryles, Ra∣nulph Earle of Chester, Ro∣bert Earle of Gloster, Miles & Roger Earles of Hereford, and many others of the obles & Bishops, and King of Scots, holding with the Empresse; & once tooke the King prisoner; but this con∣clusion procured peace at the last. heire: Yet hee, for's life King, weares the Crowne Nigh twenty yeeres; tomb'd at Feuersham towne.
CANZ IX. Henry the second his partly vnquiet, otherwise fortunate and flourishing gouernement. SEcond Henry,Henry the se∣cond, sonne of Maud the Em∣presse, in whose person reuiued the ancient race of Saxon kings, that were before the Conquest, be∣gan 25. Octobr. A. 1154. crow∣ned at Westm. 17. of Decemb. following, he dyed in France at Chinon, hauing R. 34. y. 7. m. wāting 11. daies. This Henry that rebeld against his father, was at the age of seuen yeares maried to the French K. daughter Mar∣gret, being but three yeares old, An. 1160. and crownd A. 1170 but in his fathers life sime rebel∣ling, slaine, dyed before his father A. 1183. A. 1185. Maud the Empresse did found the Abbey of Brodesley, shee was buried at Reading, with this epitaph Ortu magna, viro maior, sed maxima partû, Hic iacet, Henrici, filia, sponsa parens: being daughter to Henry the first, wife to Henry Empe∣rour, mother to Henry the se∣cond king of England. first Plantaginet, sonne To th'Empresse; new as 'twere begonne Th'old Saxons line; in him exemplar'd Seem'd famous Edgar, Alfred, Edward; By's mothers side from these descended, O're Scotsh, Welsh, Orkeys, heA. Regni 10. Malcolme K of Scots, and Rees K. of Wales did homage to him at Westminst. extended His British Empire; conquering foote In Ireland sets, at Mac-mor'gh'sDermon Mac-Morough K. of Leymster, go of the K. Ri∣chard Strongbow Earle of Chepstoll for is aide with Welsh & English, who reposses∣sed him of his land, and married his daughter Eue, and brought Ireland with the Kings thereof, Maurice K. of Meth, Duue∣nald K. of Limerik, and all the other Kings and Bishops to the subiection of the king of Englād, who came ouer from Pembroke, and receiued their sealty, & built a Princely Palace it Dubline: these acts were confirmed by ove Adrian the fourth an English man succeeded Anastasius, his name being Nicholas Breake∣speare, borne at Langley in Hartordshire; he had beene Bi∣shop of Alba, Cardinall and Le∣gate to the Norwayes whom be conuerted to Christianitie. suite; All these were his, with Normandy In's mothers right! Towrs, Picardy And Angeou, were his fathers lands, Lesse Brytaine too came to his hands, Ieffrey his sonne, wedding the Gyrle, Daughter and heire to Conan Earle. Yet more his land in Frances mayne Extends; Poytew, and Aquitaine, Being his wiues dower; did Elnor bring, Forsaken though by Frances King, Poytew's Earle Williams issue,William a name almost hereditary with those Dukedomes, wherfore her first son was named William, but he liued not long. their Earledomes and Dukedomes both sole heire. By her were Richard, Ieoffrey, Iohn And Henry's crown'd, slaine rebell son; Girles Elnor, Spaines Queene; Sicill'sIone Queene of Sicily. t'other; Maud Saxons Duchesse, Cesars Mother. But subtill Syrens, two faire dames Light loue our wanton King defames; French Adeliza, andAdeliza daughter to the king of France, espoused to Richard the king of Englands son, trayned to the kings lust after Rosamōds death, whose ancestors were Clyf∣ford, then & since Earls of Cum∣berlād, hr tombe was at God∣stow by Oxford, with these Verses thereon, Rosamond, Of Cliffords race; who held him bound, In her loues Labyrinih; Woodstocke bowers Shrowding her, their loues, & loue-stolne houres. But iealous Iuno,Hic iacet in tumbâ Rosa Mundi, non Rosa Munda, furious Queene, Found a fit time to worke her teene,Non redolet, sed olet, Quae redolere soler. But cast out of Godstow Church, by Hugh bi∣shop of Lincolne, who said, That monument of shame befitted not so hallowed a place. In her Lords absence, as he goes To French warr's; on his beauteous Rose: Whom she did poyson; and sets on In armes against the sire his son; But younger Henry falls, both crown'd By's fathers life, and laid in ground. Which furious acts of hers, when seene The King imprison's th'angry Queene; And hands thought stain'd with BecketsWho was slaine by William Tracy, baron of Mortn, and other knights, as was thought with the kings priuity; though the king took it on his oath he was not therewith acquainted, and was so assoyled of the same. bloud Meanes purge by warres for Holy-lands good: But French broyles staying him, fates assigne, Chinon, thrise twelue yeeres King, hisHe dyed at Chinon and was entombed at Fount-Eucrard, in a Monastery of Nuns, which hee there founded: hee also built the Priories of Stanley, Douer, and Basingwarke, and the Abbey of Regular Chanons at Waltham: hee began London Stone-bridge, now the Thames course, being turned by a trench, beginning at Redrife, and ending at Battersey. shrine.
CANZ. X. Richard the first: called Cuor-de-Lyon and his victorious acts. SVcceedes braue Richard Cuor-de-lyon,Richard surna∣med Coeur de Lyon, of his va∣liancy, began his reigne 6. Iuly 1189. hee dyed the 6. of Aprill 1199. hauing reigned 9. y. 9. moneths: hee re∣iected his wife, the French K. sister, supposed his fathers Con∣eubine, and e∣spoused Beren∣garia the king of  daughter. Who as his sire, meanes visit Syon, And from the BabylonianThe Souldan, or Soultan, signifieth in Hebrew, and likewise Arab, or Morisco, Lord or Prince. Prince, Cyprus, Acon, and Ioppa winnes, And ships, towne, towers, and forts regaines, With warlike and victorious traines; Though Souldan yet, and Saracens bold, The faire Ierusalem still did hold! But wo-worth those crost such designes, False brother Iohn, with France combines To quench with flames, retiringBeing withdrawne from the holy Land warres, by the conspi∣racy of his brother, & the French king Philip, who fell out with him and departed from Aco; he thus taken was fame for his ran∣some to pay a great summe (for which the Bishops, Abbots, and Prelates, brought the fourth part of their reuenues, and all the Cha∣lices of siluer and gold and orna∣ments of their Churches) and pro∣mised more: which being shewed to the Pope he excommunicated the Duke, who refused to yeld re∣stituton, and after back his leg, and dying to great anguish, re∣mayned vnburied till his  released the pledges taken of king Richard, and sware to obey the decrees of the Church of Rome. fast, 'Bout Austria coasts by tempest cast, Ignobly by Limpoldus Duke, 'Gainst law of nations pris'nor tooke, Great ransome giues;Vienna and her walls the bul∣wark of Christen∣dome, against the inuasions of the Turke these ma∣ny ages. fayne too, as 'tfalls To build the faire Vienna's walls. Safe when return'd, false brother sought And mothers mediation, wrought Such peace, that he, being Richard gone Sans issue, obtayn'd his ten-yeeres throne; WhoBeing so enuied by the Empe∣rour and French king, for that he shewed more vlour in his expe∣dition to the holy Land then any other. In his time were those fa∣mous out-lawes, called Robin∣hood, and Little Iohn, and a seditious Preacher called Willi∣am with the Beard: also Hubert Archbishop of Cant. chiefe Iuice Vice-Roy and Lieutenant in the kings absence, set peace amongst the Welshmen being at variance among themselues, and vanquished them after when they did rebell. falne ith'French warres, Chalne conteynes His bowels there, where he was slaine By Bertram Gordon's venom'd dart, His corps Fount-Euerard, Roan his hart. CANZ. XI. King Iohns vnfortunate reigne, and troubles by the Barons warres. KIng Iohn scarce crown'd;K. Iohn, though not right heire, was elcted and crowned by Hu∣bert Arch. of Cant. 26. May, 1199. who was made Lord Cha∣cellor of Englād though in king Richards life time he had both resisted the tyrā∣ny of the now king, & excōmu∣nicated him, and preferred the ti∣tle of Arthur, Geofreyes son: K. Iohn died the 19. of Octob. 1216 hauing reigned 17. y. and 5. m. lacking 8. dayes. K. Iohn had continuall warres with either the French or Emperor, or his Barons at home, partly for their liberties and Saint Edwards Lawes, and partly other priuate  he had warres in Scotland, and with his son in law Leoline of Wales; he dyed in the heate of the warres: the K. of France hauing taken vp  a second time, in the Barons behalfe, and Lewes the Dolphin being then come ouer into England. when France will needs (The elder brothers sonBut King Iohn soone got his nephew Arthur, that had espou∣sed the King of Frances daugh∣ter, and was right  to the Crowne, into his hands and mur∣dred him. indeed!) Set Arthur vp; but got but harmes, If aught, 'twas more by art then armes; Till more his Barons warres him vext, For countries good, faire foule pretext. Th'Archbishop Langton too, rak't th'ashes, Whence Romish thundring censureThe Bishop's, William of Lon∣don, , of , and Malgor of Winchester, execu∣ting the Popes  vpon the Realme, it came, that the dead were buried in , and cor∣ners, bylaymen, like dogs: King Iohn then seised the Abbeyes and Ecclesiasticall liuings, and put them in Laymens hands: Pope Innocent then absolued all Princes and o∣thers from subiection to King Iohn, incited the King of France and Dolphin to seize England, as they did all beyond the Seas: and his Nobles and the Welshmen conspiring against him, hee was forced to call home diuers exiled Bishops, recall diuers vniust lawes, and put Saint Edwards lawes in execution, Pan∣dulph the Legate chiefe actor herein, to  in the Popes behalfe he resigned the Crowne. flashes; Nor reconcil'd to them, till when Vnking'd, vncrown'd, the Pope agen
Put on his Crowne; Pandulfe the meanes Who blest, vext, curst, and calm'd the Realmes. Lewys of France the Dolphin then Who came to th'aid oth' English men Ith' Barons cause, although call'd home,King Iohns 3. daughters were Isabel, wed to the Emperour Frederike, Io∣han espoused Leoline Prince of Wales, Ianc espoused Alex∣ander King of Scots. Scarce stints all strife! his Nobles some For rauisht wiues, for daughters other, Fell rage conceiu'd, can scantlyAnd among others Maud tbe Faire, daughter of Robert Fitz-Walter, who not consenting to his vnlawfull loue, was by him poysoned, where shee was buried at Dunmow. smother; Henry Englands, Richard Almaignes beene, Kings both his sonnes; three daughters Queenes Princely wed! when Iohn, poyson'dAs it is said, by a Monke in Swynstead Abbey: yet hee had founded the Abbey of Beauly in Hampshire; the Monasteries of Farenden, & of Hales Owen, in Shropshire; hee redified Godstow, Wroxhall, and the Chappell of Snaris borough. dyes Thrise six yeeres King! at Worster lyes. CANZ. XII. Henry the third his acts, and his sonnes warlike exploits at the holy Land. THird Henry then his infant sonne,Henry the third borne at Win∣chester, King Iohns eldest son, but 9. yeares of age, beganne his reigne 19. Octob. A. 1216. crowned at Glocester by Peter Bishop of Winchester, & Ioseline Bishop of Bath: in pre∣sence of Walo the Popes Legate 28. Octob. 1216. and after peace concluded with the Barons, by Stephen Lang∣ton Archbishop of Canterbury, at Westminster on Whitsonday, A. 1219. he dyed 16. Nouemb. 1272. hauing liued 65. yeares and 28. dayes. His nigh threescore-yeeres reigneGualo the Popes Legate, the Bishop of Winchester, and Wil∣liam Marshall, Earle of Pem∣broke, being Protectors of the Realme and Kings person, so wrought that the Barons were quieted. Lewes the Dolphin de∣parted, and things setied in peace: of this William Marshall is read this Epitaph, in his honour, Sum quem Saturnum sib sensit Hybornia, Solem Anglia, Mer∣curium Nrmnnia, Gallia Martem: towards the end of his reign the Parons taking vp armes againe: Symon Montfort Earle of Leister, & Gilbert de Clare; principall actors therein, vnder pretext of the Acts of the Parliament, called, The mad Parliament of Ox∣ford, A. 1258. to the ruine of many of the Nobilitie; but the warre was ended partly by the battell of E∣uesham, partly by Legate Othobone, and the Acts of the Mad Parliament repealed at Winchester, 1265. A 1268. was the Parliament of Marleborow, and the Statutes enacted, called, Of Marlebrige. begon; Whose Barons warres, with Welsh and French He all, scant eas'ly though did quench; Legat Gualo chiefly managing, The Realmes affaires, for the young King; Whose valiant Impes long after spoyle The Souldans townes, and Syrians foyle, And safe return'd from Syons aide, First Edward King of England's made; Lancasters Duke his brother Edmond, To Westminster their sire beingHe builded the Hospitall of Saint Iohns in Oxford, a house and Church for Conuerts of Iewes and Pa∣gans in London, the Chappell at Westminster, whither Saint Edwards the Confessors boes were tran∣slated out of the Quire by him, and himselfe buried. summon'd. CANZ. XIII. Edward the first, and his decyding the right of the Crowne of Scotland. Edward his sonne first English Prince of VVales. BY Edwards hand Prince Leoline falles,Edward the first, surnamed Longshanks, being in the parts beyond the Seas towards Ierusa∣lem, beganne his reigne 16. No∣uemb. 1272. and came into England, was crowned at Westminster by Rob. Kilwarby Archbishop of Cant. 15. August. 1274. he dyed 7. Iuly 1307. R. 34. y. 7. m. & odde dayes. And Edwards son's borneAnd called Edward of Car∣naruan; for the Welshmen af∣ter Leolines death, earnest with the King for a Prince of their owne Countrimen; the King told them they should haue a Prince there borne that could speake no Eglish, which they contented with, he named his fant Sonne; who, of this policy, the Queene being brought to Carnaruan, was borne there: hee diuided Wales, incorporated into Eng∣land, into Shires and Hundreds. Prince of Wales,
And Robere Bruse by him put downe,A. 1292. 18. No∣uemb. Alex. K. of Scots being dead without is∣sue: the K. of En∣gland, as Lord Paramount, ha∣uing heard all the titles and claymes of the 12 Competitors, as beires to the Crowne of Scot∣land, adiudged the Crowne to To. Baliol, of whom he tooke homage; who rebelling, K. Edward entring Scot∣land and Edenborow, tooke all the regall ensignes, and offered the Chaire, Crowne, and Scepter of the Scottish King to Saint Edward at Westminster. Iohn Baliols right beares Scotlands Crowne! But Scottish broyles s'mbrew'd all hands, That th' English Lords deuide theirTo whom the King gaue Man∣nors and Signiotes with great li∣berties throughout all parts, euen to the farthest end of all Scotlād whence tooke roote there many English customes and names. lands. Made sire t'a race of royallBy ianor of Spaine, he had Prince Edward, and foure other sonnes, and 10. daughters: for this Qucenes sake were builded the Crosses of Cheapside and Charing-crosse, and diuers others, as all the places where her Herse rested being brought from Lincolne (where shee dyed in the Kings iourney to Scot∣land) to Westm. By Margret the K. of Frances daughter, he ha two sonnes, and one daughter. Impes, By's two Queenes, Spaines and Frances Nymphs Elnor and Margret! Westminsters Shrine, him fiue-seuen-yeeres King interres. CANZ. XIIII. Edward the second called of Carnaruan, an vnfortunate Prince, much wronged by Gaueston, the Mortimers, and Spensers meanes. NExt Edward; Frances heire, as't fell,Edward the second, named of Carnaruan, began 7. Iuly, 1307. deposed 25. Ianuary, 1326. R. 19. y. 6. moneths and odde dayes. (Peter Hispan's plot) wedsDaughter to Philip le Beau, and heire to France, all her bro∣thers being dead without issue. Isabell; Him Scots chac't home, and Gauestone, And Spensers, made him lou'd ofFor their insolencies the Ba∣rons tooke vp armes against him, but he was by the Queene at last, and Mortimer her Minion depo∣sed: and most lamentably vsed and murdred at Barkley Castle, on 5. Matthews day, 21. Septemb. 1327, then buried at Gloster. none; Whose pride the mis-rul'd State much rues, Till they fled. Then whom they abuse, King twenty yeers, Queene & Mortimers doom'd Him; Barkley murdred, Gloster toomb'd. CANZ. XV. Edward the third his warlike acts, and conquest of France. THird Edward crown'd ere's fathers death,Edward the third, borne at Windso. e, be∣gan 25. Ian. 1326 and crowned at Westminster by Walter Re∣ginalds Arch∣bishop of Cant. 1. Feb. next, in his fathers life time: he dyed at Sheene, now Richmond, 21. Iune, 1377. ha∣uing reigned 50. yeares, 4. months, and odde dayes. Edward Baliol was crowned K. of Scots, 27. Septemb. 1332. there were then slaine at Halidon of the Scots, 8. Earles, 1300. horsemen, and of common Souldiers 35000. As he the Earles ouer-boldnesse seeth, Slue Mortimer, whiles heCausing him to bee condemned by his Peeres, but neuer brought to his answere, like as hec before had serued diuers others. disapproues, His, and his mothers wanton loues. And married though with his consent, But their appoint, his sister went To Scotland; yet for homage, not Perform'd, or scofs giuen by theAmong others this rime is said to bee cast abroad by the Scots about that time, Long bearas heartlesse, Painted bods witlesse, Gay coates gracelesse, Makes England thriftlesse. Scot, Beleaguring Barwicke, Dauid Bruse His brother in-law, so hard pursues To Halydon hill, Scots great'st disgrace, He Balioll king'd, in Bruse his place; Who fled for France, whither angry fate Brought our King soone, to claim's estate, Laying title to Frances Lillies Of right his motherEdward the third, his mother, daughter to Philip le Bel, sister to Charles the fift, and Lewes Hutin, whose heire she was, they dying without issue. Isabella's,
Charles sister, and Philip the Faire Last King of Frances daughter and heire, Valoys, the vsurpers sister Impe. Queene Philip, our Kings wife, faire was daughter to  of Henault,  Philip de Valos, who new v∣surped France against Edward the third,  his mother  title. Nymphe, Brought Henault, and with th'Earle her syre Flanders with England fierceThe Flemings tted them∣selues to the King of Englands obeys and  the Earle three times, and King Edward was  of the Empire, 1339. clected also  Emperor, 13 . conspire, That Newstria, and her neighbour France 'Gan hope war's, helplesse, haplessechance; Paris e'en felt for feare the fire, Of English warriours in their ire, And Cresseid flowry vale beheld A famous, fierce-fought well-pitcht field, When greene-grasse beds, with gore were spred, White milkie Lillies dyde bloud-red; And mercy ne're-taughtOyly-flame, was  the French KIng  ∣sying, No mery, but vpon  of death, of prisoner to the , against this the King of England  his Banner of the Da∣gon, noting . Oyly-flame Learn'd th'English Lyons were vntame. The French King fled, his Lords they tell, Kings of Maiork, and Beme, theyWith the Kings of Maiork and Beme sell, the Archbishop Zan∣ximus; the Bishop of Noyoune, the Dakes of  and Bur∣bon, the Earles of Alenson, Haecourt, Aumarle, Sauoy Noy, Mont byliard, Niuers and Franders, the Grand Prior and 4000. men of armes, besies that innumerable multitude of the commons. sell; With troopes of Commons numberlesse In this fam'd battell nam'd of Cresse; Tankeruill, Guisnes, Cane, Callaice, and Many a faire towne that late did stand For Philip then, and all the west Submit to th'English Conquerors hest. Bruis in French cause afresh French aided, Was tane as England heAt the battell of Durham or Neuils Crosse, William de la Zouch, Archbishop of Yorke, vicegerent for the King in the Marches, giuing him battell; the said Dauid King of Scots, was taken by Iohn Copland Esquire and so sent to the Tower, where he remayned many yeares. inuaded: The Pope for French-King treating peace, Takes truce, whiles did th'old King decease, Whom his sonne Iohn succeeds, with whom Young Edward, call'd in Frence whilom The Black-Prince; who rul'd France full farre And Aquitane, moues mortall warre; Wheth'r noble youth's for crownes or praise You stroue, or both, and Phoebus bayes; When Poyteu fields were skarletIn this battell of Poytew, were slaine the Dukes of Burbon, Da∣fines, the Marshall of France, and many Lords; and taken pri∣soners, the King and his sonne Philip the Dolphin, the Archbi∣shop of Senon, the Earles of Pontue, Ewe, Longvile, Tan∣keruill, Daatet, Vendadour, Vindome, Wademont, Slan∣cer, Iuyney, Don-Martin, Sa∣so, Selabrase: Viscounts, Ner∣bon and Belemont: and many Lords, who were by the Prince brought prisoners into England, in triumph: the King of France was lodged in the Sauoy; and all the Kings and Princes, the King and Prince of England, the captiue kings of France and Scotland, the Dolphin and king of Cyprus, with many of the Nobilitie, were sumptuously entertayned and feasted by Henry Pyeard Vintner, Maior of London. dyde, When fell the chiefe of Frances pride, Were Dolphin, King, and many a Lord Captiu'd by Black-Prince Edwards sword, Tropheys of triumph, high that raise Englands both Prince and souldiers praise.
CANZ. XVI. Edward the blacke Prince his honourable atchiuements, and vntimely death. GReat signes o're south and Indian shores Seemes to foreshew such strange vprores, White troopes 'gainst Aethiopians blacke In Azure skies to threat fierce wracke; But while they fell, wheth'r Mahounds powers, Or else, were showne by Memnons Moores. For now great warres in Normandy Lesse Britaine were, andBeing inuaded by the Kings of England and Nauarre. Burgundy; France fell before our Princes feete Trembleth Nauarre, Spaine doth entreate For her King Pedro, who's newHee was expelled by Henry his bastard brother; but being restored by Prince Edward, hee was shortly after treacherously murdred; the two daughters of the said King Peter, were after married to Iohn Duke of Lan∣caster, and Edmond Earle of Cambridge, the King of Eng∣lands sonnes; & Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, who marri∣ed the elder sister Constance, wrote himselfe King of Castile, and challenged it; and aided the King of Portugal aganst bastard Henry: but receiuing a large summe of money, gaue his daugh∣ter in marriage to the said King, and quitted all claime to his kingdome. made King by braue black-prince Edwards aide, Came Cyprus King his helpe t'obtaine 'Gainst Turks; were then in's royall traine Worth registring on fames faire wings Two captiues and the Cyprus Kings;A. 1350. was ce∣lebrated the first feast of S. George at Windsore. A. 1376. the Prince dyed. Whiles he thus glorious Knighted shines Both at Saint George, and Marses shrines, Pale foe to honour, winter-power Of death, nipt this faire springing flower; Whence Richard, black-Prince son's made Prince. French-King, and Dolphin, Bruse too, since, Tributaries and ransom'd ioyneThe King of France, was to deliuer the lands of Gascoigne, Guienne, Poyters, Limosin, Baleile, Exante, Galaice & Guisnes, freely to the King of England, and three millions of Florences, for his ransome, Dauid king of Scots, was to pay 100000 marks in ten yeares next follow∣ing his release. hands; So peace shone fresh, on all three lands. Clarence Duke Lyonell, weds the faire Millaines Duke Galease, hisViolentis her name, the sump∣tuousnesse of which marriage, whereat Francis Petrach was present, and the magnificence see∣ming to equall, if not surpasse, the state of the greatest and wealthi∣est Princes. heire, Hauing with her goodly lands! his brother Iohn of Gaunt, Lancastrian Duke, and t'other Cambrige Earle Edmond, wed two Nymphes Castile King Pedro's beauteous mpes, Whence claim'd the Duke the Crowne; but giues Only his daughter, and receiues Of the new King, a masse ofOf Henry the bastard. gold, From lucre of which drossy mold, 'Gainst Cities wealth, and Churches state, His enuie first growes to such hate, Might Wicklifes words worke Wicham's dole Or theirs, hee'd gladly blow theHee was a great enemy to the Bishops, City, and Clergy, bolste∣ring Wicklife against his Ordi∣nary the Bishop of London, with such intolency, that had not the Bishop, requiting euill with good, entreated the Citizens in his be∣halfe, they would haue slaine him at his Palace of the Sauoy. cole; Scarce King, or Prince, for him long space Gain'd Wichams Church, or Citizens grace. This our third Edward's Windsores round Saint Georges feasts with honour crown'd,
And Garter his inuentions;Hee instituted the most noble Order of the Garter, and round Table at Widsore; & on Saint Georges day, A. 1350. kept the first Saint Georges feast, with the beginning of that institution of Knighthood: the King of Frace in imitation of him then began a like order of round Table, to keepe the noble men of Italy & Spaine from the King of Englands, but with no successe. He almost new built the said Castle of Windsore; to the eight Channons there, hee added a Deane and fifteene more, and 24. Knights: he builded the new Abbey by the Tower of white Monks, and one for Nunnes at Dert∣fort in Kent, and Kings Hall in Cambridge, and Maison de Dieu, an Hospitall in Callaice, and augmented Saint Steuens Chappell in Westminster, giuing it more 500. pounds per annum. since So fam'd: let th'orders of no Prince,Edward the third his issue were Edward the black Prince, William of Hat∣field, Lionel Duke of Cla∣rence, Iohn of Gaunt, Willi∣am of Wind∣sore, Thomas of Woodstock: Isabel, Ioan Queen of Spain, Blanch, Mary, and Margaret. Contend, or not compare with these, Rhodes Pall's, nor Colchos golden Fleece. Seauen sonnes, fiue daughters, royall state Shew'd him thrice blest and fortunate; At Richmond, fifty yeeres King he dyes, At Westminster there tombed lyes. CANZ. XVII. Richard the second stript of the crowne by Henry Bo∣lingbrooke; whence grew the schisme. BOth's father Prince,Richard borne at Burdeaux, began 21. Iunij, 1377. crowned at Westminster by Simon Sud∣bury Archbishop of Canterbury, the 16. of Iuly next: what time he made foure Earles and nine Knights: he was deposed 29. Sep∣tember 1399. hauing reigned 22. yeares 3. mo∣neths and odde dayes: he was murdred at Pomfret, 14. Februarij fol∣lowing, buried at Langley by Saint Albons, and after remoued by Henry the fift to Westminster. and Grand-sire King, Richard succeeeds, for many a thing Infam'd! Sans heire die both his Queenes, French Is'bell, and proud Anne ofShee is said to haue beene the first bringer in of many strange attyres for women, and also the vse of side-saddles, and Gownes with long traynes. Beme. The Commons he, vnheard-ofWat Tyler the master of the Kentish rebells, was slaine with a dagger by William Walworth Maior of London, close by the Kings side, in the Kings defence, who was therefore knighted and the City since giueth for armes the Dagger: at that time Iohn Liti∣star a rebell in Norwich, and his crew were dispersed by the Bi∣shop of Norwich, Henry Spen∣sers valour: the like rebellion in other parts of Norfolke and Suf∣folke, with their Captayn a Priest one Iohn Wraw, who intended to kill all Gentlemen, Lords, knights, Bishops (and began with the arch-Bish) Abbots, and all the Orders of religious, sauing begging Fryers together with the King himselfe, and especially the Lawyers whom they termed the Oppressors of the poore: but they were, not without great adoe, and much bloud-shed▪ suppressed. broyles, Wat-Tylers, Scot'sh and Welsh turmoyles, And Irish tam'd! 'mong whose rude traines Saint Edwards armes the garlandThe Irish are said to haue much honoured and admired the me∣mory and armes of Saint Edward the Confessor, which were, a crosse Paton Gold and Gules, with foure white Martellets; insomuch that foure of the Irish Kings came and voluntarily submitted. gaines: Whom, thence returning, Herefords Duke, Late banisht Henry of Bolingbrooke, Captiu'd, and soone vnking'd; whence rose Those wofull flames 'twixt either Rose! In which so many thousands bane, Kings, Dukes, and noble Captaines slaine; Poore King, at Pomfret, famish't dyes, At Langley, neere Saint Albons lyes. CANZ. XVIII. Henry the fourth his most vnquiet gouernement. FOurth Henry,Henry the fourth borne at Bolingbrooke, sonne of Iohn of Gaunt, fourth sonne of Edward the third, began 29. September 1399. crowned at Westminster by Thomas Arundale, Archbishop of Canterbury, 13. Octo∣ber, prox. he dyed 20. Martij, 1412. hauing reigned 13. yeares, 6. moneths lacking 10. dayes. after twise ten yeere Proclaim'd, deposed Richard, heires;
In Wales with Owen GlendowersThis Kings reigne was full of tumults and troubles, among which that of Owen Glendor, & Henry Hotspur of the North were not the least; Owen (called of the place where he dwelt, Glen being a Vale; Dour, Water, or the Riuer of Dew, in the Parst of Corwen, in Meoneth∣shire.) hauing maried his daugh∣ter to the Earle of March, who had title to the Crowne. dew,Westm. by Tho. Arundale, arch∣bishop of Cant. 13. Octob. prox. he died, 20. Mar∣tij, 1412. hauing reig. 13. y. 6. m. lacking 10. daies Henr. 4. his issue were Henr. 5. Thom. Duke of Clarce, Iohn Duke of Bed∣ford, Humfrey Duke of Glo∣ster, Blanch Duchesse of Ba∣uiere, and Phi∣lip Queene of Denmarke. Mort'mer his sonne in law o're threw; Th'English too, sore, and oft rebell, Scots at vnfortunate Halydon fell, Where Dukes-son's tane of Albancy, Many Lords and Kings son Iames byIames sonne of Robert King of Scots, was detayned in Eng∣land prisoner, till A. 2. Henr. 6. sea; Which Scotsh nobilities youths choise flower Were long deteyn'd in Londons Tower; Kings herse three sonnes, three Dukes, bewailes, Two daughters, and the Prince of Wales! Twise seuen-yeeres King, then Henry dyes, At Canterbury, entombedHe founded a Colledge at Bat∣taile field in Shroshire, was a benefactor to Christ Church in Canterbury where he was buried, his halfe bothers Thomas Beufort was made Earle of Somerset, and Henry Beufort, Carall and Bishop of Winchester, in his time were the two famous Poets Chaucer and Gower. lyes. CANZ. XIX. Henry the fift, his short, but victorious reigne and conquest of France. Fift Henry of Monmouth,Henr. 5. borne at Monmouth, began 20. Mar∣tij, 1412. crow∣ned at Westm. by Tho. Arun∣dale, Archb. of Canterbury. In his younger yeares hee had kept such compa∣ny as his father much misliked, and one of the Iudges for his misse-dem ors in defence of his fellowes, com∣manded him to the prison of the Kings bench, but now vtterly a∣bandoning the leud company, he became a iust and good Prince; he dyed in Frāce 31. August 1422. hauing reigned 9. y. 5. m. and dde dayes, much infam'd, In's younger yeeres, but now reclaym'd, Stints many ciuill strifes at home, With Wickliefs sect, Old castlesThey were stubborne and sedi∣tious, both against the Bishops and the King, insomuch that it was threatned that Sir Io. Oldcastle and Sir Rich. Acton would bring 25000. men into the field to de∣fd Wiclifes sect, but they were spersed and many of them by the Kings care executed: and Sir Io. Oldcastle himselfe that inci∣ted the Scots to inuade, was ta∣ken and hanged whiles the King was in France. doome! Then casting o're his eyes' ow'rds France, Soone th'English armes did there aduance, In his great Grand-sires right, whose posies French Lillyes ioyn'd with th'English Roses; Though scoft; 'gainst Frances proud'st towne walls Sent bullets backe, forCharles the Dolphin of Frāce, bearing of the Kings intent for the conquest of France, in moc∣kage sent him ouer a present of Tennis-balls, as it were, that hee should bestow his time as hee had done, and let ance alone, to which he returned answer, Hee would send thm such  should make Franc shake. Tennis-balls; And Agincourts first famous day Adorn'd his browes with victors Bay, Where most part of the French Kings traine Of Nobles were or tane or slaine, Braue men at armes, who late plaid cards For English prisoners, now theirWhich was right triumphum cnere ante victoriam, ouer∣night the Nobles of France,  they had already conquered  English, plaid at Cards for them, being the next day almost all slain or taken prisoners by them; there were slaine, one Archbishop, three Dukes, sixe Earles, Barons and the like 80. Knights 1500. Esquiers and Gentlemen 7000. besides  multitude of the meaner sort: taken prisoners the Dukes of Orleance and Burbon, of Earles  others 1500. guards; Trophees of Englands triumphs! nor Henry so held his hand, before France su'd for peace, and humbly proffers Her child and crowne with fairest offers, Regent proclaim'd, for th'old Kings life, He tooke! France him heire! he to wise
The Princesse Katharine, France her dower, Whose royall marriage stately Low're, Peeres, nobles, commons, young and old As first to heare, glad to behold; At these, all these, seem'd to clap hands So peacefull Hymens ioyfull bands! Only the Dolphin heThis Charles the Dolphin had slaine the Duke of Burgoine treacherously, wherefore the yong Duke claue so stedfastly to the English, and the King his father now disinherited him the more willingly: but both the Kings dy∣ing within two yeares, left their sonnes to wrestle for the French Crowne; when Henry the sixt lost it through the contentions and dissentions that burst sorth and flamed then in England. abhorres, This present peace; whom th'English force, From France expulst; whiles Kath'rine Queene Crown'd was by Thames,Queene Kathe∣rine was crow∣ned at West∣minster 14. Fe∣bruar. 1421. her young sonne at Paris, 7. De∣cembr. 1431. her sonne by Seyne! Whom Windsore borne, his father than, Too true prophetique dying Swan! Diuines to reigne long all toHis father, it is said, hearing he was borne at Windsore, brake forth into this speech, I Henry borne at Monmoth, shall small time line and gayne much, but Henry borne at Windsore, shall long time liue and lose all: which he did, his Realms first of France, then England, and his life in the Tower. lose; Himselfe short-liu'd; all too-right! whose Triumphant Carre, late deckt with bayes Now herse-wise shaden Cypresse sprayes! By his last will, old Exeter tooke Care of the young King: Glosters Duke Doth gouerne England; Frances land Burgundy and Bedford Dukes command. More, Bethlem, stately RichmondHe builded faire his Mannor of Sheene, called Richmond, and hard by founded two Mona∣steries, by the Thames, of Car∣thusians called Bethlem, and of the order of Saint Briget, called Syon, with the Brotherhood of Saint Giles without Criplegate, and or∣dayned Garter principall king at Armes: He also gaue 1000. marks and diuers ornaments of much price, to the Chappell of Westminster; whither hee was conueyed out of France, and laid at the feete of Ed∣ward the Confessor. towers Sheene, and religious Syons bowers And Garter, as his founder, doth Admire him; who in's flowers of youth At Paris faire, of feuer dyes, At Westminster entombed lyes. CANZ. XX. King Henry the sixt his wonderfull misfortunes. SIxt Henry,Henry the sixt began, vlt. Au∣gusti, A. 1422. crowned at Westminster 6. Nouember, 1429. at Paris 7. December, 1431. Deposed 4. Martij, 1461. Restored 6. O∣ctobr. 1470. Againe deposed and sent to the Tower, and murdred 21. May next following. eight moneths old made King, Did by his noble Tutors bring The Dolphin downe, till Bedford dyes, Whom Richard Duke of Yorke supplies And Warwick! what timeThe occasion of breaking being his too much familiarity with the Countesse of Salisbury, which the Earle tooke in ill part; and his alliance with Burbon and Cleremont, contrary to the En∣glish mens liking. Burgundy Gan to play false, and French fast flye From th'English rule; whiles English broyles Lost France, and selfe hand-selfe-bloudDissentions arising betweene Richard Duke of Yorke, and Edmond younger sonne of Iohn, and then Duke of Somerset, in A. 1451. when Richard returned out of Ireland with conquest; after grew to greater quarrells, and clayme laid to the Crowne. soyles.
Be silent, or bemone, sweet Muse, These times and these sad times abuse! Well might the Dolphin conquest gaine When none oppos'd, or few but faine To leaue vs left: small glory crownes Such paines to take such yeelding townes! For th'English hy'd home, all diuided Parts-take, with one or other sided: The Dukes of Somerset and Yorke, Did first begin this wofull worke, Whose priuate quarrels bred too rathe A world of mischiefe, publique scathe, Whiles Richard Duke of Yorke, whoHee came thence 1451. but from A. 1448. when the Kings great vncle the Cardinall dyed, France was but negligently loo∣ked vnto; and as it were on lo∣sing: the Commons at home re∣belled in Kent and Essex vnder Iack Cade, and was slaine at Hothfield in Sussex; but these mutinous courses of the Nobles raised all the land to armes, whence lastly King Henry lost his Crowne. came From Irelands conquest with great fame, Enui'd by Somerset, ne're smothers His wayward tants, not his Kings brothers; For words first, next for Crownes the game, Riuers of bloud not quench't the flame! Richard, the world in hand doth beare, The Realmes they how misgouern'dSuch was his protestation at the first, An. 1453. but after∣wards and at the Parliament, An. 1460. hee insisted on other things, and set forth his title to the Crowne, as followeth. were, Protector so, by force proclaim'd, So not content, the Kingdome claim'd, And this his right! Anne his, her mother Philip, her sire being elder brother Lionell, third Edward second sonne King came, but from his next sonne Iohn! Hence Somersets fall first Verlam yeelds Blore-heath's fam'd and Northampton fields. And though Yorkes Dukes at WakefieldThe battell of Saint Albons was, A. 1455. where the Duke of Somerset was slaine: of Blore∣heath, 1459. at 1460. where the King was taken, and in the Par∣liament next holden allowed the Dukes title, and proclaymed him Protector, and heire apparant to the Crowne, reseruing it to him∣selfe only during life; which Q. Margret disliking and renoun∣cing, gathering power gaue the Duke battell at Wakefield 1461 where the Duke was slaine. The same yeare the Queens party had the soyle at Mortimers Crosse neare Ludlow, by the Dukes son the Earle of March; and whiles the Queene got another victory at S. Albons: the Earle of March attayned London, & was there crowned, 4. Martij, 1461. slaine, His sonne fourth Edward, London gaynes, There crown'd; whiles haplesse Henry flies Tow'rds Scotland, noble Queene she hies T'her syre! Angeous Duke Reyners child, Naples, Sicills, Syons King so styl'd; Whence fresh supplies, wrought foes fresh harmes And Margret warlike Nymph at armes, Yet once againe wins Henries crowne, Who yet againe is soone put downe; But after many a grieuous losse, Barwick, Yorke, Barnet, MortmersThe battaile at Mortimers Crosse was fought immediately before Edward the fourth gayned London and was crowned: next at Towton was a great field fought on Palmesunday, 1461. King Edward victor, and 35000 slaine. In An. 1463. many light skirmishes and sieges of Yorke, Barwick, and other Castles by the Queene, and Scots, and French, and Normans, with their Cap∣tayne Pierce le Brasile, that came to aide the Queene. Hex∣ham field 1464. Edgecote field 1469. and shortly thereupon was K. Edward taken at Northam∣pton by the Archbishop of York, but escaped at Yorke and flying beyond Seas: Henry the sixt was crowned 6. Octob. the same yeare: but Edward returning, War∣wicke of the Queenes part was slaine at Barnet, the King and Queene taken prisoners, and their sonne, Prince Henry slaine at Teuxbury. crosse: At Tewksbury last, her selfe was tane And her young sonne Prince Edward slaine; Henry the sixt, poore King, oppressed Good-man, scarce e're one more distressed; Tane in the north, to London sent, From Caesars to Ioues towers he went; Vs'd so milde speech, such often pray'r, Lou'd peace, liu'd vertuous, heauenly care On contemplations spotlesse wings Rapting his thoughts to holyer things;
His heart so void of hate or strife, On earth he led an AngelsThe Bishop his Confessor a∣uouching in ten years that he was Confessor, he committed no mor∣tall crime; he vsed no oathes nor made any shew of reuenge against any that wronged him, he founded the Kings Colledge in Cābride and Eaton Colledge, and gaue large guifts to All-soules Colledge in Oxford: he abhorred vice, and was honoured by the name of holy king Henry: his red veluet hat was accounted euen to worke miracles of healing; hee should haue beene canonized: what is now become of his body, at Windsore is scarce knowne. life, Nigh fortie yeeres King, first time, but then Not forty weekes next, though crown'd agen; Long prisond, poore, exil'd, last, death-doom'd, At Chertsey first, then Windsore toomb'd. CANZ. XXI. Edward the fourth and his sonnes, true spectacles of enuious fate. FOurth Edward,Edward 4. borne at Roan, began 4. Martij, 1461. crowned 12. Martij prox. expulsed 6. mo∣neths in A. 1470. dyed 9. Aprilis 1483. hauing reigned 22. y. one moneth and dde dayes. Edward the fourth his issue. Edward 5. Richard mur∣dred in the Tow∣er. Elizab. espoused Henry the 7. Cicely espoused Viscount Wels. Briget, a Nunue at Dertford. Anne espoused Tho. Howard Earle of Surrey, Duke of Nor∣folke. Katharine e∣spoused William Lord Courtney, Earle of Deuon. Edward 5. began 9. April. 1483. but the prepara∣tion for his coro∣nation was tur∣ned to the setting the Crowne on his treacherous Vncles head, 6. Iuly following, by whose meanes he and his brother were soone after murdred in the Tower. Earle of March, the fourth Of March was crown'd, whose martiall worth Sixt Henry, French, and Scots so weilds T'ons Crowne, next Crownes, thirdHe had Henry the sixt's crown, and 72000. crownes paid him by the French King, A. 1475. and tribute of 50000. yearly granted▪ from the Scots he tooke Barwick & Bamburgh Castles, & others. Castles yeilds! But Shores faire wife; & widdow Gray, So woo'd, so wed! and Bona gay, Left, being the loue-embassageWhiles the Earle of Warwick was in France to treate the ma∣riage with the Lady Bona, sister to the French Queen, & daugh∣ter to the Duke of Sauoy: he ma∣ried the widow Lady Elizabeth Gray: which made Warwicke take part against him, and the French King afterwards maried the Dolphin (who was to wed king Edwards daughter Elizabeth, by him called often the L Dolphi∣nesse) to Margret of Austria, daughter to Duke Maximilian. there, Made French King fume, and Warwicke sweare, Both vow reuenge; so Edwards Impe, The Dolphin wooes, weds th' Austrian Nymphe: Which Edward tooke so ill, that tyde, For very griefe, 'twas thought hee dy'de! Fiue Girles, and two sonnes left behind, Thrise seuen yeeres King, at WindsoreIn the new Chappell which he builded, hee erected the Colledge there, and repayred the Castles of Nottingham, Douer, the tower of London, and the house of Eltham. shrin'd. His sonnes, fift Edward few-moneths King With's brother Duke, did Gloster bring T'vntimely end in Londons Tower, Vnknowne where tombed to this hower; This their sire fearing, cursed plot, Though Glosters guile, the crowne that got, Made Clarence dye a maulmeseyDrowned in a Butt of Malme∣sey by the Duke of Glosters meanes, as was thought; who with his owne hands, it is said, murdred Henry the sixt there in the tower. death And by this means, must needes bequeath To murdrous tyrant Crook-backs hand Guiding both of his sonnes and land; Which opportunity gaue toThe King hearing of a certaine prophesie, that G should dispos∣sesse his children of the Crowne, was consenting to his death; inter∣preting G to be George Duke of Clarence, which fell out to bee Gloster, to whose tyrannie hee left them by this vngodly meanes. act By Gods and men, s'abhor'd a fact; That furies, fiends and specters fell, Fore's death, gaues conscience taste of hell.
CANZ. XXII. Henry the seuenth concludeth this Ode with the conclu∣sion of the schisme, by the vnion of the long deuided Roses and howses of Yorke and Lancaster. SEuenth Henry now,Richard the third, surnamed Crook-backe, about 22. Iunij, 1483. was first called King and crowned, 6. Iuly next: slaine at Bosworthfield in Leicester∣shire, 22. Augu∣sti, A. 1485. ha∣uing vsurped 2. yeares 2. mo∣neths. whose mother is Margret, her sire Iohn, ThomasThey were made legitimate in the Parliament, 1397. vnder Ri∣chard the second, and called Beuforts, and by him was Tho∣mas made Earle of Somerset; by Henry the fourth Marques Dorset, A. 1411. by Henry the fift, A. 1416. Duke of Exeter; his sonne Iohn Earle of Somer∣set, is made Duke of Somerset, his sole daughter and heire Mar∣gret, espoused Edmond sonne of Owen Tewther and Queene Katharine, Duke of Somerset, (after Edmond and Henry, Iohns brother and his sonne) he was slain at Tewxbury, A. 1470. and this Henry his sonne now li∣ued in France for safety sake, with the Duke of Brytaine. his, Iohn-a-Gaunt's by Kath'rine Swinfords race, Bewfort's! whom Som'rsets titles grace; Owen Teuthors and Queene Kath'rines sonne, Edmond his sire too, that in one Th'Earle Richmond's wore and Som'rsets stile, Liuing in France; his friends the while, Buckingham, Morton, and mother deere, With both Elizabeths wisht him here; T'one th'eldst of Edwards forlorneElizabeth, as was said, pro∣mised heretofore to the Dolphin of France, and by her father Ed∣ward the fourth, at that time ap∣pointed, to bee called the Lady Dolphinesse. Impes, Queene mother, and daughter, royall Nymphes! Th'earle, though with few, French Britton bands, At Milford hau'n, in Wales he lands! At Bosworth field, with warlike crew Then three-yeeres Tyrant Richard slew,Henry the se∣uenth ouerthrew the Tyrant Crook-backe at Bosworth∣field, and so be∣gan his reigne, 22. August, A. 1485. Whose carcasse torne, to th'horse-taile doom'd, Leyster scarce daign'd to see it toomb'd. So Henry and Elizabeth, Ioyntly wore Englands royall wreath, And Yorke and Lancaster inThe vniting of the long diuided Roses; from whence also spring∣eth the Vnion of the Realmes of England and Scotland. these, Were wed; thrise happy lasting peace, That bloudy schisme betwixt the Roses, And Kingdomes too, in vnion closes! Which so begunne, so heauens King frames, Planted then, full compleate in Iames. The end of the ninth Ode.
A briefe Type of the tenth Booke or Ode of PALAE-ALBION, called IACOBVS. The tenth Ode contayneth, 1. The succession of the Kings of Eng∣land, from Henry the 7. in vvhose is∣sue vvere vnited the Kingdomes of Eng∣land and Scotland, viz. Henry the 7. reigned 23. yeares. Henry 8. his sonne, reigned 37. yeares. Edward 6. his son, reigned 6. yeares. Q. Mary, his sister, reigned 5. yeares. Q. Elizabeth, her sister, R. 44. years. Iames, the sonne of Mary, Q. of Scots, daughter of Iames 5. K. of Scotland, (son of Iames the 4. and Margaret, eldest daughter of Hen. 7.) now reigneth, & Diu. V. R. 2. The des∣cent of the Kings of Scotland from Fer∣guse 2. in the Romās time or be∣fore, and so down con∣sequently to this pre∣sent age, with the originall of the Scot∣tish Name & Nation; according to the iudg¦mēt of the most ap∣proued au∣thors, that haue writ∣ten of the same. 3. The be∣ginning and descent of both Irish and Scottish Nations, more amply set downe, with the O∣riginall of the now Irish and their se∣uerall Con∣quests by the English made of latter times, where∣by the Kings of England came first to bee Lords, and since Kings of Ire∣land, as they are at this present day. 4. The descent of the Kingdom & Crowne of France, to the king of England, whereby are touched the des∣cent of the Merouin∣gians, kings of Frāce, from Pharamond; the Carlouingians, from Carolus Martellus, & Pepin: The Capevin∣gians or Hugonetts, (so termed for diuers respects, and partly in the worst sence by the Guise) being the modern K. of France, from Hugh Capet; of whose Line, Isabella the Heire, was wife to Edward the se∣cond, King of Eng∣land, in whose right Edward the third claymed, Henry the sixt wore the French Diadem.
PALAE ALBION. Ode decima, Inscripta IACOBVS. ARGVMENTVM. Vltima iam Myrto dignum, vel fronde Mineruae, Innuba cui circum tempora laurus eat; Oda virum recinens, velut Anglica sceptra, trophaeis, Iungit Hyberna Scotis, Lilia Franca Rosis! . Primâ fronte, libri institutum, & Authoris votum, . EXtremum hunc, Aracyntha, mihi concede laborem,Series Poematis: eius∣dem{que} ratio siue . Magna tui velata comas, Dea candida ramis! Dijs data dona fero! Theodorae nomina stirpis, Omnia pacis habent; Scoto-Anglis, Cambro-Bry∣tannis: Septimus Henricus Theodori, & Regia coniux, Elizabetha, parens Anglorum postea Regum, Carminibus nostris celebrandi & mascula virtus, Heroicae sobolis, veniunt; nisi Diua faueres, Viribus huic impar tanto succumbo labori; Ergo feres mea, amabò, paterna per aethera tecum, Carmina,Odae quae si non lauro, at decorabis Oliuâ. Quando Brytanniacis Astraea pijssima in oris, Et preciosa magis pax omnibus aequore Conchis, In{que} dies aliae inueniantur & vnio Gemmae,Hypothesi Littoribus nostris: Credo, sic voluere Parcas. Scilicet Heinricus, ambas coniunxit in vnum Et niueam, rubeam{que} Rosas;Hypotyposi quasi recens natae & emergentis flicitatis, duo regna Iacobus; Anglorum & Scotiae: Binae inter-vtris{que} fuêre Foederibus, nuptura parens, innupta{que} proles, Henrici octaui, ceu filia, mater, Elizae: Nupta Rosas vinxit, vinclo{que} innupta iugali, Regna, piae pacis, pia filia, mater, vtrae{que} Aeterna laude dignae, aeternum{que} beatae. Hinc Astraea meis, hinc vnio fulserat Anglis,
Et vigeat magis at{que} magis stirps inclyta, donec Cumeae redeant (precor) aurea saecla Sybillae:voto obsecundatur reliqua hi∣storiae series; ac primo vnde tanquam ex fonte caetera e∣manârunt fortunatissima, At{que} vtinam ac toto quondam pax reddita mundo, Schismata{que} extirpata forent, velut Arius Hydrae, Pax nostris vti{que} & simul effluat omnibus oris Constantina fides! Iterum{que} trophaea Britannis Debeat Arctois! iustis Deus annue votis: Vestrae opus est opis, Aonides, sacra turma fanete. . Henrici septimi coniugium, proles, gesta, omnia meritò celebratissima. CEu cecidit toruus fatali Marte Tyrannus, Septimus Henricus,Henrici 7. connubia, & hinc orta soboles, & foelicissima coniux, Maxima quae natu est Edouardi filia quarti, Haec niuei, rubei satus ille propagine floris, Nympha Eboracensis, Lancastri stemmatis Heros, Bellis regna, animos odijs, populos{que} leuârunt; Gnati queis duo, tot proles pulcherrima Gnatae, Hispanae Arthurus Katharinae sponsus, & olli Succedens titulis Thalamis{que} Henricus opimis; Marguerita Scoto, Gallo sponsata Maria, Hispano priùs, at Brandonia postèa coniux! Derbia Stanleyum, Comitem{que} Deuonia cernit Courtneyum; citò, Bedfordi Pembrochia nomen Rege creante Ducis, simul induit ipse coronam. Mortonus{que} olim fidus, velut alter Achates, Cantuariae antistes,cuius Amicis honoratis, Eliensis Episcopus audit! Tempore quo tellus fit berica libera Mauris. Qui cecidit seris modò Plantaginêta sub annis, Varuici Comitem Clarensi ex stirpe Georgi, A primis perhibent, sublimi in Caesaris arce Detentum simul ac simulat Lambertus Hybernis, Londini lanio satus, actus vter{que} furore, Debito eis fato cecidêre;Insidiatoribus ad pedes pro∣olutis & profligatis; alius{que} Richardum Se simulans quinti fratrem, fore turre perempti Regis Edouardi; Comitissae ea Techna, ità famae est, Burgoniae puerorum amitae, Eduardi{que} sororis Quarti, eius sobolem quasi; cùm furialibus ausis, Primus ad arma feros, Rex primùm ibi natus Hybernos, Perkinus mouit, notus cognomine Warbek: Mox Flandros falsus, Francos{que} Anglos{que} Richardus, Egregiâ pollens formâ; at pulcherrima coniux, Heroina etiam secum Gordonia capti Ambo ruunt! Francis{que} mouens fera bella & Hybernis, Iuuit ope Armoricos, alios{que} domi{que} rebelleis Perdomuit! Monachis multas, aedeis{que} Sabaudas Pauperibus posuit; Petro pulchella sacella,Inter alia eius opera pijssim,
Treis{que} vbi viginti suprâ, regnauerat annos, Multa pace pius, patriae pater, Anglica gemma Vnio visa duûm niueae{que} rubrae{que} Rosarum,pulcherima Westmonasteri∣ensis Capela, ab ipso condita tymbus eleberrimus. Occubat, occidui{que} Petri sacra limina, Regis, Structa capella suapte operâ celeberrima, Tymbus. . Henrici octaui gesta, omnium ore hominum, decantatissima▪ PRincipis Arthurititulis,Filius nimium{que} propinquis In Thalamis, solio{que} patris successit Eburno, Filius Henricus, quem nos octauius! Olli Plurimus à teneris viguit decor inclytus annis:Henricus 8. primis tempori∣bus, multa domi & foras prae∣clarè gelsit; Qui Papâ suadente ferox, & foedere Iberis Coniunctus Francos contrâ, fera bella mouebat; Clara vbi laus, vbi Flander ouans, sub Rege Britanno Militat, & Castris meret Induperator in Anglis! Tornacum hoc ipso cecidit{que} Terouana bello: Rex vti{que} ante alios, Glauco magè, Maior Achille Fulgidus at{que} furens, plumis{que} coruscat & auro. Intereà Scotus Anglorum confinia, Celtâ Rege iubente, armis vexat; sed vertice montis Floddonis quartus, quintus{que} Iacobus amoenae Carleoli cadit in conspectu, vbi fluminis, aiunt, Aufugiens tumidis solitò magis obrutus vndis;quo Regnante, primùm Pars bona Caesaream capti mittuntur ad arcem Nobilium Scotiae; priùs at data foedera Gallo, Henrici{que} soror! Ducis, vndè reuersa, subintrat, Suffolci Thalamos, Celtâ moriente, Maria. . VVolsei, Wolsei{que} alumni Cromwelli Legendae sub Henrico octauo ortus & occasus, celeberimi. HIc equidem spectare iuuat memorabile in aeuum Wolsaei fatum! fortunae insigne trophaeum:Tho. Wolsaeus Cardinalis, Heu Diuae indignos ludibria, dona, dolores! Purpureus pater ille grauis; grauis ille Sacerdos, Fortuna{que} humili obscuris{que} parentibus ortus, Dorsetti Comitis primùm, mox Principis aedes Inuisarat; eum{que} Henricus septimus olim A sacris habuit, charum{que}, vbi Nuncius inter Induperatorem existens Regem{que} sat ingens Edidit ingenij specimen! merito{que} recenti Indolis egregiae, multùm adquisiuit honoris: Vndè Eleëmosynis olli, Lindi{que} Decanus;
Iam{que} à Rege nouo accipiens decora alta, vocatus Primum à consilijs, Tornacensis Episcopus audit, Trans mare Francorum bellis cum Rege profectus;mirum in modum Posteà Lincolnensis, Eboracensis, & idem Albionis Primas fulget, sumpto{que} Galero Rubro, conspicuus, prae Cardinis ordine, Papae Legatus fuit à latere! & celeberrimus vnus Anglorum satrapas inter, facilè omnia nutu Regem{que} & populos, plebem proceres{que} gubernat: Regi à consilijs velut intimus, vnicè amatus Consiliarius, & modò Cancellarius, Anglis Iustitiam indulgens alios supereminet omneis;elatus, Illustris{que} adeo quasi saecula nulla priorem Vix ea nostra parem tulerint; facundia tanta. Bis Carolum quintum inuisat, pompa{que} frequenti Regali planè excellebat; Caesar eundem Plurimùm honorificè accepit, donis{que} remisit Dotatum Regijs! Legatum Gallia serò Nec celebri minùs aut celebratum lumine vidit! Casum inopinatum paulò ante; vbi Regia coniux Est deserta suo Katharina Hispana marito, Ex illis foret ac Thalamis prognata Maria,posteâ Wolseius postquam pater & Campeius ambo Sensa reseruarunt Papae, titulis & honore Priuatus citò post Legatus noster acerbo Confectus moerore obijt! paulò ante Tyrannis Clara Rhodos Turcis capta est; ceu Roma tumultu Papa{que} Borbonij Ducis; & Rex Celta sub armis Caesareis cadit: at iam Celta Nauarrus & Anglus Foedere coniuncti, Papalia iura & Iberûm, Papae infensiomnes, vti Caesaris acta, rescindunt. Et quamuis gladium, sibi, Caesaream{que} tyaram Iulius, vt titulos decimus Leo, quando Lutherum Perstrinxit calamo, fidei Aegida, postea Clemens, Mirandi{que} operis,Wolsae▪ aurata Rosaria misit; Wolseio moriente tamen, Romana recessit Relligio, citò Caesareis Henricus abhorrens, Papam trans Tyberim ablegarat, Iberica Nympha Deseritur. Domini{que} alter morientis vt haeres Fati & Fortunae,seru Phaethon, Regis{que} fauore Conspicuus, simili Cromwellus turbine demùm Mersus & elatus, verè Wolseius alumnus Aut meruit dici, aut poterat sucessor haberi. Nam fortunâ humili, obscuris{que} parentibus ortus, Mechanicen, perhibent, primis exercuit annis; Mox Wolsaei intrat solers,Cromwellus, similibus Iudi∣ fortunae blandimentis fa∣ctus ugidior, mox principis Aulam, Wolsaeo{que} cadente, verendo praesule, eandem Ingressus, callens{que} viam, securior Arteis Seruus adeptus erat Domini, Regis{que} fauorem: Regi à Consilijs, Clerum contra, omnibus vnus
Praelatis magis elatus, taxarier illos Imprimis mulctâ poenae{que} grauedine curat; Destruit & Monachis aedeis; Regis{que} iubentis Promouet articulos clero; primùm{que} sigilli,mserabili Dein Rotulûm custos, Regis{que} Vicarius, ipse Clerum ipsum, Cleri veluti caput, assidet inter: Hac pompâ vt bullâ turgens, hac lassus in vmbrâ Laetitiae, demùm titulis & honore superbus Essexi Comitis, detectus Crimine laesae Maiestatis,casu periêunt. erat, capite truncatus; hic illos Exitus, haec taleis mansit Fortuna Cometas. . Crebra Henrici octaui connubia, aliá{que} nouissima ipsius gesta. REx Carolum quintum, accepit Scotûm{que} sororem Reginam hospitio;Sub regni finem, Rex varia & frequens valdè celebrat con∣nuba, & Regem cum coniuge Dacos, Heinricus; iuuit Flandros, repressit Hybernos: Hispanâ{que} priùs Katharinâ, matre Mariae, Annosi Thalami desertâ coniuge, quamuis Inuito Papa, neglecto Caesare, Ibero Dira vouente, acri, frustra{que} fremente boatu! Cantia virgo licet, fremat, & mala millè licebit, Henrico datur Anna Bolonia, mater Elizae; Truncatam{que} caput, sequitur Seymeria Nympha, Mater Edouardi, Thalamis{que} puerpera primis Pulchra obijt; Cliuiensis ei successerat Anna, Olli desertae, Katharina Howardia, vt olli Iam capite plexae, Katharina{que} Parra, sub annos Illo cum seros mansura!iem eius gesta, & Nouissima Scotis Ceu venit Hertfordus Comes & Dudleius Heros, Lythe, & Edinburgum; Rapitur{que} Bolonia Gallis, Rege ferente leueis, tectis incendia, flammas: Regnantis{que} octo propè lustra, suprema voluntas, Eduardum primò, Mariam{que} subindè & Elizam Legitimos Regnihaeredes vbi sanxerat;suprema voluntas, de regni haeredibus, hîc attexuntur. annis Hinc olim seris, omnes velut ordine iusto, In{que} vicem sibimet soboles successerat; olli Vindesorae praeclara Sacella Georgica Tymbus.
. Eduardi sexti, immaturo funere absumpti, dynasteia. SExtus Edouardus soboles Seymeria,Eius filius, Edwardus sextus, regno per tutores administra∣to, Patris (Indolis egregiae puer) aurea sceptra capescit! Protector{que} sui, Regis, Regni{que} nepotis, Pro Comite Hertfordo Dux Somersettius audit: Varuici{que} Comes primùm Dudleyus alumnus, Dux{que} tuus citò pòst claro Northumbria fastû Gestijt ac fieret; Kettum{que} alios{que} rebelleis, Eximiâ virtute premit; turmas{que} Scotorum Muscelburgum iuxtâ, acri certamine vicit. Papa relegatus Romam malè audit ab Anglis, Et Calices & opes, nitidis donaria Templis, Erut Relliquijs{que} olim gazis{que} repletae Ecclesiae purgantur, haberet vt omnia Regis Fiscus, & in priscis, minùs aurea vasa sacellis, Psalmistûm{que} ferunt bona vendita siqua supersunt. Insimulatus at interea Dux crimine laesae Maiestatis erat Somersettensis,breui moritur, non fine veneni su∣spicione; & illo Purgatus, capite plexus tamen occubat vmbris: Protectore cadente etiam citò posteà Rex{que} Concidit ; olli Westminstria Tymbus. . Iana Graia Riualis à Regina Mariâ profligatur, cuius celebrantur cum Philippo Hispano, Regnum & nuptiae. CVm tamen, heu, cui Graia,Iana Graia, cum viro Guil∣fordo Dudley, parentum do∣lo, in regno succedere pro∣clamati, capite plectuntur; viro Suffolcia Nympha, Gilfordo Heroi Dudleio nupta; patenteis Regis & ostentant literas; succedere, nutû Suffolci Ducis, & Northumbri, vtrius{que} parentum, Inuiti ambo, patrum facinus{que} patrare coacti, Perdebant miseri, acceptam, caput ante coronam! Et patres periêre Duces! Fratris{que} Maria Sceptra capit, solio{que} patris succedit Eburno. Haec Papam reuocat,& Maria, Her. 8. filia, Regina euadens, Papam reuocat, lapsas instaurat & aedeis Quas potuit, Monachis, indulgentissima Princeps; Perceyum{que} videt Comitem Northumbria, Regni Gardinerus{que} sui fit Cancellarius. Ipsa Regina Hispano, consanguineo{que} Philippo, Reclamante Anglo quanquam & renuente Wiatt, Nupsit; vbi titulis sat onustus vter{que} superbis; Anglia,Philippo Hispano nubit. Ierna, Syon, Neapolis{que} & Gallia Reges! Principem vtrum{que} vocant Trinacria Ibera{que} tellus! Austriaca Archiduces! Burgunda, Brabantia, & arua
Mediolana Duces claros, Comites{que} salutant, Flandria, vt Aspurgus, celeberrima tota Tyrolis. Principibus{que} istis Legatio Regia Romam, Missa erat, & magnos Papa ijs indulsit honores, Quos potuit! Polus Antistes Dorouernius audit; Principe cum{que} viget, moritur moriente Mariâ, Cognatâ! effecit quem Cardinis ordo celebrem: Quando iam Gallos inter florebat & Anglos, Pax{que} eadem Hispanos, Flandros, populum{que} Philippi, Continuit; Gallus subitò, sacra foedera rumpit, Deuastans Flandros flammis hostilibus agros: Scota sub id tempus, Gallo, bona Nympha Maria, Nupsit Delphino! & iam Martius vndi{que} terror Emicuit latè:Eoque  Galliâ absente, & bellis oc∣cupato, moritur, vnde Hispanus ceu belliger Anglus, Flandria & Aspurgus, Germanica terra, Tyrolis, Dalmata Burgundae{que} acies, fortissimus Humus, Coniunctus contra Gallos{que}, Scotos{que} Philippo Militat acer, opem{que} tulit gens plurima apertis, Contudit ac Gallos bellis, capit, oppida Diui Quintini; quam{que} & salsis Thetis alluit vndis, Nobile Conquetum! At Gallis rediêre Caletae, Anglo iniucundum facinus; moritur{que} Maria, Bellis implicito, Gallijs{que} absente marito, Quinquennis Regina! eius West-Mynstria Tymbus. . Elizabethae pientissimae nuper Angliae Reginae, Regnum & gesta florentissima. ELizabetha suae post funera flenda sororis,Elizabetha, natù minima Hē∣tici 8. filia regnum adit, Diua adeò ingenuas edocta fideliter Arteis, Aurea sceptra manu, frontem Diademate cincta, Candida virgo capit! solio{que} innexa paterno, Romanam{que} fidem, Papam{que} suos{que} repellit; Gessit & imprimis sociantibus agmina Gallis, Cum{que} Scotis fera bella;Quae Papae hostis infensi sima, cum Gallis, Scotis, Hispanis, cre∣bra gessit praelia, dein sacra foedera sancit; Depositis priùs at titulis, quae sumpserat antè, Nympha Scota, & suasû Guisiorum, insignibus Anglis: Capta sed illa Anglûm modò limine, postea plexa est. Hispanos etiam contra, prece mota Monarchae Francorum fratris, Ducis Andegauensis, (hic idem Dux{que} D' Alenconius,) Germanica praelia gessit. Posteà & illustris lassos Leircestrius Heros Iuuit ope Flandros iussu Dudleyus Elizae! Hêic pulcher Sydneie cadis,Flandris verò plurimùm opi∣ulata est. dilecte Camoenis,
Cygnus vt Aonidûm, decus immortale Brytannis, Sydneij ingenium Musae, Germana trophaea Dudleyum, celebreis ambos canit Anglia alumnos. . De viris alijs quibusdam claris, & famoso Anno 1588. nauali praelio. NEc minùs insignes istis floruêre sub annis, Ille pererrati, notus cui terminus orbis Vltimus,Rei nauticae periti, vt at{que} alijs incognita, cognita solis Phoebo meta sibi{que} fuit; populos{que} patenteis Extra anni Solis{que} vias, vbi coelifer Atlas, Tenrifa, China, Gygas Chicae, extremis{que} sub Indis, Aetherei montes caput inter nubila condunt, Lustrans, Hesperijs, Austrinis clarus & Eurijs, Drakus, & Arctois monstra Frobisherus in oris; Drakus & armatae contra ausa immania classis, Hispanae, Carolo{que} sub-Admiralis Howardo, Magna patrans, magnum satis est sibi nomen adeptus; Mille vbi quingentos{que} à partu Virginis almae Octauus{que} suprâ venit octogesimus annus, Famosâ satis Angligenis,& Famosa 1588. naualis pugna toto orbe Christiano expcta∣tissima, inter Anglos & be∣ros. celebratus, Iberis Infami satis, Oceani refluentibus vndis Nauali pugnâ; cùm tu dux magne Medinâ, Gloria cui celsum{que} decus Sydonia, tractus Iam Scoticos fugis, at{que} Scotos transgressus Hybernos, Indè domum, indomitis ostendens terga Britannis. Tylbericis praeerat castris Leycestrius heros, Reginae adhaesit lateri, praenobilis Hunsdon, Pontus habet reliquas, Neptunia Regna cateruas, Classis Ibera quibus perijt! sic gaudia nostris Summa tulit celebris, mihi qui genialis & annus. . Reliqua Reginae Elizabethae praeclarissima Gesta. POstmodò Norricius penetrant,Aliáque & Drakus Iberos, Se{que} Comes comitem dedit ijs Essexius; hastam Arma{que} Vlyssiponae infixit qui martia portae: Cui pater antè truces, eques aureus, vrget Hybernos,
Gualterus D'Eureux, Ferrers, Chartleyus Heros; Quo satus iste Robertus erat, qui primus Iberis Bella;nouimis regni temporibus Nauarraeo Regi, dein, agmina Gallis Auxiliaria, opem{que} tulit, modò calcat Hybernos; Anglia{que} heu raptum gemuit, decorant{que} trophaea Mount-ioyum, & spolia, & captus trucis incola Iernes! Haec tua supremis gesta Elizabetha sub annis, Clara satis;praeclatè perpetrata facinora celebrantur; seu pace tuis pietatis alumna, Siue geris bella, in bellis metuenda Virago. Eius & ornati Caesar, Rex Dacus & Anglâ Celta perisceidi, Eliza indulgente fauorem! Lustra nouem dominata suis pia Nympha Britannis, Heu fugit Elisios Eliza inuisere campos; Ossa licet breuis vrna tegit, Westminstria Tymbus, Omnia non capit, at solum domus illa perennis Corpus habet, laus orbe viret, mens aurea Olympo. . Potentissimi Iacobi Regi prosapia, vndè Scoticae aliorum{que} historiae hic referuntur. CYnthia seu sol noster, Arabs, an Afra auis orbi, Mira canam, occubuit quanquam, mala nulla sequuta! Mira loquar, sed vera tamen, recitando Hymenaeos Hinc ortos, saeclis{que} istis, velut ante cupitos, Annulus Oceanus, quibus Amphitheatrica mundus, Templa, fidem spondent duo regna, Monarcha Sacerdos. Antea nupta Rosas vnijt, roseas{que} Corollas Virgine,Illâ{que} decedente, regnorum Angliae & Scotiae, sub Potentissimo quàm nuptâ satus Irenarcha Iacobus; Nupta parit sobolem, sboles successit Elizae, Virgo parit certam minimè pariendo salutem, Et pacem Regnis, Scoto-Anglis-Gallo-Hybernis! Ceu venit è Scotia, Diuae successor Elizae, Qui regit Angligenas, Gallis{que} Monarcha & Hybernis! Quàm potes ô lassis quanquam dea candida pennis,Iacobo Rege, vnio foelicissi∣ma. Tolle virum precor, & des stemmata clara, meis{que} Ceu titulos dederis, populos percurrere Iernes, Dedignere leui calamo, ne{que} carmine Gallos; Parcius in reliquis; Scotum sub origine primâ Ad mea perpetuum deducere tempora carmen Musa velis; nostris Cynthi Deus annue coeptis.
. De Pictis & Scotis, tum vtrius{que} gentis origine. VNde Scoti traherent, dubium est; Pharaonida pulchram, Vix ego crediderim Scotis dare nomina Scotam; Et Scotiâ magnâ, potiùs, quando Insula Ierne, Exculta est Scoticis, per secla priora, Colonis; Vndè etiam his velutijs nomen, trucis incola terrae Postea pro Scoticis, narrabit, Hybernus Hybernis: Quando tamen nostras primùm Scotus appulit oras, Hic labor,Cuius Titulos & prosapiam prose∣quendo, hoc opus, haec vel adhuc sub iudice lis est. Aruirago quondam aut Mario regnante Brytannis, Intra annos centum natae de Virgine Prolis, Moribus affineis Gothis, patria{que} propinquos E Scythiâ populos, perhibent, appellere Iernen, Vndè citi, modò Hyberno-Scotis suadentibus, oram Albionis, gelidâ positam, petiêre sub Arcto: Híc postquam fixere pedem; ne{que} foedera Pictis, Siue forent alij, siue ex Alcidâ Agathyrsi, Dignantur Britones; ne{que} connubialia iura In thalamis socijs; ijdem cum Scoto-Hybernis, Picti ineunt foedus!Scotiae, aliorúm{que} Haec talia gesta feruntur Roderico Duce Pictorum; ex pactis{que} virili Deficiente olim Regum prosapiâ, Hybernos Ius penes esto Scotos, Regis de more creandi, Foeminea ex turmâ, aut Scoticâ, sibi nubere missis. Quanquam ego crediderim potiùs Romano-Britannos Hos verè Britones contrâ, Pictos{que} rudeis{que} In siluis rigidis, dumis{que} horrentibus ortos, Vs{que} adeò infesto,Antiquitat Latio quasi sanguine cretos, Esse animo, vt Pictos vocitent, contemptui haberent; Vis{que} repellendae causâ, cum Scoto-Hybernis, Foedus, amicitiam{que} ita contraxisse coactos: Agricola hos alij{que} frequens, Caesar{que} Seuerus His vallum obducens, Stilico propè dispulit olim. . Fergusij magni Scotorum Regis natalitia, vt & gesta ac soboles. HIs quo{que} temporibus, cum praedabundus, Hybernes Littore Scotus adest, Latio tamen agmine turbas Italus amborum Pictûm{que} Scotûm{que} repressit, Reuda venit, testante Bedâ; qui primus in oris Imperium Scoticum, firmat Scotus aduena nostris. At Scotici Annales referunt,& Historiae, multò antè Gathelum, Aegypti generum Pharaonis, Iberica quondam Sceptra, eius{que} Symone Brecho regnante, nepotes
Scoto-Hyberna manu tenuisse, illo{que} creatum Sanguine Fergusium; illustrem modò candida partû Rocha, suo sobolem tulit Ercho, Daca, Marito, Fergusium! satus Erchus erat de stemmate Regum Albaniae; & Gothis Romam populantibus, armis, Fergusius,Fergusius Rex Scotorum fa∣mosissimus, quo nomen habet Knok-Fergus Hybernis, Alarico Comes vnus erat; fatalia secum Saxa ferens, Scotiam{que} petens, insignia rubrum Regia, aiunt, portat soboles{que} secuta Leonem, Scoto-Britannorum Rex primus; vt indè nepotes. Reuthero{que}, (is Reuda Bedae) socijs{que} fugatis, Reutherum at redijsse ferunt, reditum{que} fuisse Reutheri, aduentum minimè, Reudam{que} secutos, Eugenium primum, citò, Fergusium{que} secundum, Eugenium{que} eius gnatum; Dongardus at olli, Praeliaquem perimunt contra suscepta Britannos; Constantinus ei successit filius, illum Foedere Saxonico detentum, numinis almi Palladio suadente fidem, redijsse Britannis, Sanctiùs ac perhibent sumptis communibus armis Saxonicos contra Christiani nominis hosteis; Congallus{que} ex fratre nepos, illi{que} Goranus, Tertius Eugenius, Conuallo, Anitellus & illis Aidanus, Cheneth, Eugenius, Ferquarra, Donaldus, Maldonus, Eugenijs{que} duo, Ambercletus ab hoste Picto interfectus,eiusqu successores, & eorum acta, & ordo, dein Eugenius{que}, satus{que} Mordacus Ambercleto, Etsinus, vitijs{que} notati Eugenius cum Fergusio, Soluatus Achaius{que} Etsini Gnatus, Caroli qui foedera Magni, Primus auet, Francis{que} manum dedit, vndè perennis Forsan & inuiolata fides, per saecula multa Inter eas mansit genteis! cumulatus & omni Laude ferunt, dignus{que} fuit cui Gallia dextram Porrigeret; Conuallus, ei, Dongallus, & olli Alpinus Pictis captus, nullo{que} verendae Maiestatis honore habito simulat{que} peremptus, Chennetho patris vlturo miserabile bustum, Pictorum, omnino crudelia fasta dederunt Ansam extirpandae sobolis; caedis{que} cruentae Pictorum, portenta quasi, casum{que} minati,adusque Pictos pentus ex Scotiâ de∣letos; Aetherei crebris implent hinnitibus auras Solis Equi, Zephyris Cauris{que} parentibus orti, Arma sonant, resonat plangoribus igneus aer.
. Reliqui Scotiae Principes. adus{que} Malcolmum Gulielmi Con∣questoris tempore Regem. DEletis{que} ità, Drusheno cum Rege, feroci Picto, Regna vigent vti nunc Scotiae! indè Donaldus Chennethum sequitur, quem Constantinus & Ethus, Quem citò Gregorius Regno spoliarat, & idem Dongalides domat, & domitis dominatur Hybernis; Inde Donaldus ei,Et Consquenter Constantinus filius Ethi, Qui modò Edouardum contra, feralia bella Mouit, Adelstanus iurare in verba coegit; Malcolmus, dein, Indulphus qui militat acer Alfredo Danos contra, Dufus, at{que} Culenus; Chennethus{que} alius, Constantinus{que} Tyrannus, Grimus, Malcolmus, Duncanus & ortus auorum Stirpe ducum, Regis{que} nepos, modò Glammius Heros, Macbethus intrusor, citò quem detrusit ab alto Malcolmus solio; crudelia{que} illius olim Fata magos cecinisse ferunt, quae, flebile bustum, Sceptra gerenda manu, casus{que} fuisse suorum, Quàm vel in excelsi Dusitana cacumine montis, Castra forent syluae Byrnanae tegmine circum- Cincta, mori prius haud posse; at, ne{que} faemina partû Quem tulit, inuictis victum occubuisse sub armis Illius, ac cecidit: non eluctabile fatum. Dux scleris{que} vltor rediens è finibus Anglis, Impetratâ ope Malcolmus, comitante Sywardo Northumbro Comite, ingens quò caelauerit agmen Hosti, frondoso socios cingebat amictû Ramum,ad Macbethi Tyrannidem, etenim iussit velarier ora comas{que} Obuiàm in anfractu nemoroso vbi venerat altae Byrnanae syluae; hij nemoris decus omne renidunt! Quis{que} comam folijs ornatus, & arma, reuulsis Arboribus sylua alta tremit, voces{que} canora Eccho tulit reboans verba ingeminantia cliuis. Hijs acies instructa dolis, venére vbi castra Structa per excelsi nymbosa cacumina montis, Ecce comas folijs laxârunt, & caua fronde Tempora, dixit vti maga sedula saepius ista: Regi subrubet hoc viso mirabile dictû, Cor gemit, & caeci latitant sub corde dolores, Pectore vel quoties suspiria traxit ab imo,Malcolinum 3. Flectere si posset superos iratae{que} fatae, Si nequeat subiens armato corde labores; Quid fugis, vt vincas inuictos? Mars tuus omen Vs{que} malum iam nunc habet, innuba non tua lauras Phoebi instar Clarij victricia tempora cingit:
Albaniae Comes vnus erat, qui saeua Tyranni Iuss, sui{que} manus fugiens, patrios{que} penateis, Iuit ad Angligenas; furiatâ hic mente tyrannum Insequitur veluti currus agitante choraeâ Eumenidûm: conscensus equo fuit Ocyor aurâ Macbethus, cursu donec praeuerterat illum Macdufus, & sua strauit humi morientia membra; Mandit humum & saeuo confossus vulnere terram Calcauit moriens; bustum docuêre sorores! O artis magicae nimiùm confise susurris, Neu pia cum grauidâ,& Gulielmi Conquestoris, tempora; mater gestauerat illum, Edidit infoelix partû, sed caesus ab aluo! Praecinit ista truci veluti Magus antè tyranno. Pannonis huic nupsit, sata Regibus Edgaris almae Malcolmo Margreta soror! quibus ordine gnati, Edgar,cum Alexander, Dauid, totidem ordine Reges. . Reliqui omnes Scotorum Reges, adusque Iacobum sextum, iam magnae Brytanniae Monarcham. REx{que} Dauid Scotiae, quando Anglûm Regis in Aula Consumpsit placidam, fato meliore iuuentam. Nubit ei formâ pulcherrima Nympha Matildis Filia Northumbriae Comitis Hunting doniae{que} Vndè Scotus petit hos comitatus; ille Mathildae Ceu fauet Augustae,cito posteà à Stephano superatur, & obses Filius Henricus datur; Heinrici{que} Puellus Malcolmus successit auo, Gulielmus, & Olli Gnatus Alexander, cui gnata Iohanna Iohannis Angliaci data nupta fuit, modò filius illi Alter Alexander.Lis inter 12. Scoticae Coronae competitores, composita per Edw. 1. Angliae Regem, Dedit ac pro coniuge gnatam Tertius Henricus; fato cedentibus ijsdem, Defecit quoniam prosapia Regia, Regno Primus Edouardus lites dirimendo, Iohannem Baliolum praefert! Brusius{que} Robertus abegit: Baliolum{que} Edouardum Edouardus tertius, illum Deturbat{que} Dauid Brusius,Indies renouatur, suasû{que} Valesî, Bella mouens Anglis, captus precio{que} redemptus; Tres{que} Roberti, aiunt, regnant! quo stemmate creti, Continuo{que} sequuntur in ordine quin{que} Iacobi, Nullo inter posito, noster{que} subinde, Mariâ Solùm interposita, Regina matre, Monarcha Primus in Angliacis, Scotiae qui sextus in oris! Primus at ille olim Scotiae,per Brusios, qui Regis Edw. sen∣tentiam respueban, quorum Neptunio in alto, Sub quarto Henrico captus, sexto{que} solutus, Nupta Somersetti cui filia Iana Iohannis,
Gnatâ etiam centum Nymphis comitantibus illam, Margretâ ad Gallos missâ, sua Regna secundo,Ex stirpe ordinata Regum Scotiae successio, ad sextum lacobum, vsque pertingit, Relliquit! quarti{que} suo petit ille Iacobo Caeciliam Eduardi gnatam, sed bella parandos Praeueniunt thalamos; neptis tamen vna, nepoti Illius, Octaui quarto data Nympha Iacobo Henrici Margreta soror; quinti{que} Iacobi Mater, at illa viri post funera flenda perempti Floddonijs campis, facta est Douglasia coniunx; Quo Margreta thoro Douglasia, nupta Mathaeo Leuiniae Comiti, pettingit, satus hijs Darnleyus Heros, Cui demum quarti data nupta Maria Iacobi Gnata, eadem Angliaci mater, pater ille Monarchae! Qui nouus exoriens quasi sol, sacer, aduena, nostras Nunc terras beat; aduentum modò panditae Diuae. . Varij motus in Scotiâ Reginae Mariae temporibus. DEficiente equidem Regali stirpe sub istis, Henrici octaui, Eduardo{que} Mariâ & Elizâ Temporibus, Margreta soror, soboles{que} Brytannis Totius Albionis Haeres velut vnica, Sceptris Dijs data visa suis! Scotiae quae napta Iacobo, Stirpe suâ, fratris{que} Angli soror audijt haeres!cuius ab Hen. 7. . Mater enim quinti, cui gnata Maria Iacobi Regis erat; caeso{que} Scotûm victoribus Anglis Agmine, praenimio patre iam moriente dolore, Vix septem, Regina tamen, fit paruula Nympha, Nata Maria dies; litem tutela ciebat; Beta{que} cum socijs detruditur Imperiali Sede, ope maiorum minimâ, sibi suis{que} potitâ In{que} vicem infantem Comes Arraneyus Hamilton Protegit. At miseram Franci infelicibus armis,Reginae Mariae matris regum turbulentissimum, Infestant Scotiam, furibundi, Dessius Heros Dandelotus{que} Duces Francorum; Strozzius agmen Italicum, & positis Gallûm furialibus armis, Ringrauius populos quos Alemania nutrit In Scotiam duxit; ac nequa deesset Erynnys, Addidit infestas vireis Rhodos! omnia lento Sic miserè in Scotiâ corruebant vndi{que} bello. Verùm vbi Hamiltonus Gallis, Leuinia{que} Anglis Fauêre, ad Francos delata Maria tumenteis, Delphino nubit; tenerae heu fera fata puellae! Exposita à primis Martis terroribus, annis,
Exul & extremis degens, patre mortuo, in oris Nupta viro virgo est: Neu gaudia vera; sed vmbrae Laetitiae, inusto, rapta heu rapta omnia letho; Vir flendus, tumulata parens, & quaerere Regna Non noua,Varia sed potior virtus fuit parta tueri! Scotica cum peteret lento vexata duello, Sceptra, acuit crebris Neptunia Regna procellis, Aeolus, & Nympham Angliacas coniecit in oras; Ac tenuit portum, inuisat patrios{que} penateis, Bella manu parat,Infortunia, a. infensas restinguere flammas. Vt{que} erat in bello, bellis memoranda virago, Munia magna obiens, orbatà luce Mariâ Angliacâ, Angligenae, decorata superba Trophaeis, Induit & vestes Tyrias, circundata{que} auro Nympha Scota praefert atauorum insignia Regum: Hoc illi peperère decus, Heroes opimi Guisi, Quos genuit male sedula Gallia fouit, Errores Stygios,demùm quos ia a sors atra premebat; Fouit abortiuam prolem; non viscera bello Lugubrivastata diu, sed Scotica damna Sunt releuandamanu; viridi latet Anguis in herbâ! At positis odijs, Scotos vclut inter & Anglos Pax venit & cultus laxarunt ocia, mens est Apta capi;Fortunatior rerum status, leuis vt{que} puer praeuerterat illam, Constitit ante oculos Heros Darnleyus; ocellis Enitet ille genas roseas, annos{que} decus{que} Flagranteis vultus at{que} ora simillima diuis: Ora rubor, virtus mentem, decet aurea pectus Integritas morum, succinctus tempora Myrto Littoreâ, victor{que} aureos egisse triumphos Fertur,Gum amor, fingit{que} metus, illa omnia voluit, O non est quaestus, Didûsue audijsse furores, Roranteis oculos & moestas ore querelas; Ardet amans, fouet & velut altera Amasia Dido Flammas, dilecti iuuenis iuuat ora tueri! Talis Apollo fores, talis Lenaee, vtì Nymphae Gnossiados potiris thalamis, deserta vbi salsis Dia feritur aquis, Satyris clamantibus Euohe. Rosseyus{que} Comes,Heroe Darnleyo nuptiae, Dux Albaniae{que} creatus, Reginae ingreditur thalamos Darnleyus Heros, Leuiniae Comitis gnatus, Scotiae{que} Stuartûm; Rex magnus satus hijsce tuis Regina Hymenaeis, Angliae erat primus, Scotiae sextus{que} Iacobus. Rege sed absumpto, Hepborno citò posteà nubit Bothwello Comiti; malé ceu suspecta necati Coniugis alterius, sua{que} ad pomaria caesi; Sistier ante suos Proceres Regni{que} Dynastas Indignata, adit armatos in praelia ciueis,
Nuda genu, nodo{que} sinus collecta fluenteis, Sola Duces belli alloquitur, feruens{que} morata est! Hanc tamen in caeco dimittunt carcere clausam; At fugit,& alia gesta memorantur. & Dacis moritur Bothwellus in oris: In Proceres{que}, elapsa suis custodibus, armis, Saeua parat Regina necem; sed passa repulsam, Epatrio euadens manet Anglo in carcere; donec Effera fata suae ruperunt stamina vitae. . Iacobi sexti sub tutela existentis, anni primi varijs procellis ob∣noxij. SEd ne{que} Hamiltonij desiêre immanibus ausis, Quàm caperet manibus Rex aurea sceptra tenellis, Qui priùs Annotinus{que} infans, sacra purpura sumpsit; Regis enim teneris, rerum moderamina, cunis, Ceperunt Comites Murreij,Eorum filius Iacobus sextus Annoti∣tinus intans, Rex Scotiae cre∣atut, Leuiniae{que} Regis auus, Maris libatae Alemanio alto, Mortonus{que} Comes; capiebat quo Duce Regía Sceptra manû, populis{que} Ducem profitetur in annis Rex teneris; merito{que} agnoscit Scotia Regem: Solus enim Ioue dignus eras, vel Caesare magno Ter sancte, ac venerande puer! memorabilis aeui; Coelesti sophiâ, primis imbutus ab annis, Totius Albionis, simul at{que} Monarcha Brytannus; Tutè Iacobus eris, manibus date Lilia plenis! Ceu pulchrùm infertis Roseas de more corollas,posteà totius Brytanniae Monarcha Laurca serta simul, capiti imponatis honorem, Olli qut diuae in solio successit Elizae. . Anglis vicinae, Scotis{que} propinquae, gentis Hybernicae antiquitates. AT quoniam arctoo, Scotico sol noster ab orbe, Nec minùs Occiduis, perhibent, Scotus ortus Hybernis, Qui Britonum parent sceptris;& Hyberniae; cuius mihi pauca recensens, Musa agè & Ogygios Iernes reserato colonos. Insula Virgiuio circùm vndi{que} cincta profundo,Ideó Quae fuerat Graijs olim glacialis Ierne Iasoniae{que} ferunt puppis benè cognita nautis Dicta etiam antiquis Iuuerne, & Hybernia, & Iris! Camber Yuerdhon, aiunt, Erin incola, Hybernus Hybernen Ipse suam vocat, Occiduo ceu nomina tractu Traxerit; Hesperio velut Hesperia, Austria Eoo, Ambo sitû! quando patrio sermone sonare
Occiduum,Antiquitates variae, Hiere, notant! & Ierna, & Ierne, & Iernus, Hesperijs visuntur adhuc, loca, flumina, montes; Siue ibi perpetuis, & Hyberno tempore, nymbis: Siue Duce Irnaulpho, & for san quis credat, Hybero, Sic dictam; Ogygiam{que} & sacram, vti Banno Poetis Multoties! Scotiam{que} olim cognomine magnam Allabani{que},Nomina, Albin{que}, aliam quasi Banno Brytannis Vt Scotiam paruam, nostris quae Albania in oris; Nam prima haec Scotia est, arctois vnde Brytannis Paulatim Scotus irrepsit, Brytones{que} fugauit; Quos Brito-Romanus Pictos, malè forsan alumnos Tractat & ipse suos, mores stomachatus agresteis, Ceu vidit, rudibus{que} notam cum nomine inussit. E Scythiâ{que} venit, modò coniectura valeret, Ac fuerit populus,Gentes, Scytha, origine, nomine, Scotus. Graeca , vbi lexis habet; Germanica Scutten, Ambo Scythas{que} Scotos{que} notat! Northumbria Scettes; Saxonicè Scyttan, Scyttan-Lond Scotia dicta est. Vt{que} Getae Getici{que} ijdem, Gothici{que} Gothi{que}, Fortè Scythae Scythici{que} forent Scotici{que} Scoti{que}: Et Scythiae populos tenuisse Hispanica Regna Sarmaticos{que} doces attollens Susana muros Et qui Massagatem,Mores, monstrans feritate parentem Cornipedis fusâ satiaris Concane venâ: Hosce etiam Scythiae populos è finibus olim Cantabris perhibent appellere littora Iernes; Hinc{que} Scoti populi Scythici! quis crederet illos: Esse , obscuro nomine claros? Nomina siue dedisse sibi Pharaonida pulchram: Quem tamen aut noua delectant, aut mira relatû, Illius Historiamuè cupit Pharaonidos; Eccam! . Hybernorum de suis relatio  in principio, in seqq. vera & historica. DIluuij ante ferunt sacra tempora, Caesara Noes Neptis, adit gelidos, sed quâ rate nescio, Hybernos! Postmodò (te quid enim taceam, sobolemue silerem Bartolene tuam?) veniunt pater,Historia, suae originis, ipsissi∣mis Hybernis talia referenti∣bus; at{que} Ruthurgi Stagna, quibus debent, aërei{que} Salangae Culmina, tum vetus, vt perhibent, Langinia nomen! Bergion at{que} venis, post{que} Oceanitida prolem, Syrus adest, Syrum{que} Gygantea turma Nemodum Dispellit! tamenecce Delas socijs{que}, Gyganteis Dispellunt Graij! Scythici, at soboles{que} Nemodi,
Noti vtri{que} Delae; interea veniunt{que} Brytanni, Gurguntio regnante: sedô memorabile monstrum! Tempora Patricij, (quis credat?) adus{que} Ruanus Perrexit! quanquam fuso{que} Gygante, Gatheli Progenies aderant; qui Cecropis, anne Neoli Filius, Aethiopes contra Pharaone sub Or Moseos, infami{que} tuo Israelita labore Militat; & gnatam pro coniuge praemia duxit! Nempe Scotam: Hispanae qui denuò margine Mundae, Turbae vrbem fessaesocijs & moenia ponit! Hinc Gael, & Gaothel, sua lingua Gaoth-Lag Hybernis; Quippe Simone Brecho Scotis regnante; ac denuò nepotes Hermion adueniunt & Hybernica littora Hyberus, Fatalem lapidem secum, quo, splendida quondam Supposito capiti, scala coelica visa Iacobo; Fatalem lapidem secum, sobolem{que} ferentes. Saepiùs & Scythici, Cantabris finibus orti Certè aderant, populus Hispano limine pulsi; Fergusius venit hijs, veniunt Scotiae{que} Coloni E Scotiâ magnâ; sic nam{que} palaephata Ierne! Parua velut Scotia est nunc Scotia; Scoto-Hybernos, Saepe olim Britones petiêre & Saxones armis; Edgar,Variae eorundem per Anglos subiugationes, & dominij a∣pud eos confirmationes, Edouardus sanctus, primus{que} Richardus, Ceu penetrant, virideis{que} suprâ dominantur Hybernos! Dermitio sed opem Rege implorante Lageno, E patriâ pulso, Henrico regnante secundo, Sat magnas secum vires, Pembrochia vester Chepstoli{que} Comes ducens, vbi fregit Hybernos, Dermitij accipiens terras gnatam{que} Lagêni Angli habet vt feodum Regis; dominus{que} Iohannes, A domino Papa, Henrico satus, audit Hybernes! Annulus & digitis Adriani Insignia iussû; Vrbani ex dono Iunonia vertice pauo, Emicuit cristis! pennisue corusca Corona. Poslea sed Papae reddens, pendebat Hybernis Trecentas Marcas! vti septinginta Brytannis,vnde Hyberniae Dynasteia, Goronae Anglicae annexa est. Sceptris pro laceris: pater at velut anteà Hybernes, Rex audijt, Pauli bullâ id testante, Maria Cum Thalami socio, Rex & Regina creati; Elizabetha etiam titulos. noster{que} Iacobus, Iam tenet,Postremò. vt Francos! queis nomina Franca & origo, Quàm Salicae gentis sint libera; pandite Diuae.
. Francorum historiae, & Angli Iuris in eosdem commemoratio breuis. SEd tamen heîc Francum,Variarum in Franciâ Regia∣rum familiarum, Anglorum∣que itidem Regum, Pictum, Herculeos{que} Nepotes, Ordine non referam! ne{que} secula prisca, priusquam Parrisios pulchram posuit Marcomyrus vrbem Ad Sequanae ripas; Marcomyrus vltimus Author Carminis esto mei; meta vltrâ incognita multis. Hoc patre iam veniens, Rheni super ora niuosi, Franconum an Francûm primus Pharamondus in oris, Firmati{que} sibi, seris{que} nepotibus olim, Fundamenta iacit Regni! Merouaeus adauxit; Perficit & primus Clodouaeus,ad Coronam Franciae at ordine quintus, Illustrat{que} modis, Christiano dogmate, miris: Floruit illorum{que} diu prosapia; donec, Altera progenies, Carolus sibi Sceptra suis{que} Transtulit à primis Martcllus! Ei{que} Pipinus, Successit soboles, series numerosa{que} Regum, Tertia progenies; donec, sub Hugone Capeto, Hosce etiam solio,Atque ità serenissimi R Iaco∣bi hinc orti Iuris ipsamet re∣tectio: Lex Talio talis, abegit: Hac sata stirpe venit Francorum filia Regum, Floret adhuc Gallijs quorum prosapia, nostri Mater Edouardi! patre functo, & fratribus, Haeres Vnica Francorum Regni! Katharina{que} quinto Heinrico secum Diademata, nupta ferebat, Purpura{que} induerant, tenerâ cum prole parentes. Saepè etiam Angliacae, pendere coacta tributum Lilia iure Rosae, cedant, flos Celta Brytannae; Ceu Lyra,Cui Walla Scotae! Cornubia, Cambria, Ierne, Anglia, Celta, Scotus, vario sermone, Iacobo, suum totidem linguis, aut pluribus edant. . Peroratio operis ad eundem Iacobum, horum quatuor Regnorum potentissimum Monarcham. ET iam coelestes animae,Tanquam cui haec debentur omnia, Musa supplex quibus aethera curae, Viuite ter magni Heroes, aeternum{que} valete, Viuite foelices, oro, nostrum{que} beetis Aspectu placido carmen; quando Anglia Reges Indigenas quandam vidit; Deus ille sed crrans, Qui nunc in terris, modò sedem adfectat Olympo, O valcat, vigeat, viuat, vincat{que} Iacobus, Rex{que} velut sanctus nunc heîc,. super Astrabeatus, Olim degat, eo{que} iugi florente Monarchâ, Desine Maenalios, mea desine Tibia versus. PALAE-ALBIONIS, Odae decimae ac vltimae finis.
PALAE ALBION, The tenth Ode, Entituled IACOBVS. THE ARGVMENT. The tenth Odes taske, though last, not least, Brings Teudor in, vnites the Roses, Whence sprong that Iemme, that euer blest, Two factious Realmes in vnion closes, Bryttaines King IAMES! to ken whose glories, eene epitomiz'd French, Scot'sh, Irish stories. CANT. I. The Authors vow, and intention of the Ode. GReat Pallas, crowne this Ode,Synchronismus siue computatis Annorum. we pray,Supplementum Historiae. This last, grant, peacefull▪ Oliue, may! Since, signifies, Dei donum, Gods gift, which is, the name of Theodor, spoken briefly Teudor, or Tewther. Theodor signes Gods gift, & thine, Then warlike Neptunes more diuine; Brittish, Irish, Scot'sh, Welsh, all our layes Beene peace and glories of our dayes; Then goddesse gracious be; whiles I, Would fayne sing most melodiously, This our great Theodor, and his Line, Whose beauties now in England shine; And Peace our Poeme! if not Bay, Let Myrtle crowne't, orBay, a token of learning and victory, as Myrtle of Ioy, Oliuè of peace. Oliue spray. Ioues Impe and th'Oceans, peace and Pallas, Astraea, and Vnion meet, whose sollace Our Nymphs well-wishing, for their head, Wreathes made of Roses white and red, And in their pearly chaines vnite Rarest Iems with th'English Margarite; Seuenth Henry, and Elizabeth Re-vnite both Roses in one wreath, Mayd'n Queene Elizabeth weds foure Realmes, For her Virginities sonne King Iames; Happy then, may bothThe former Elizabeth and her spouse Henry the seuenth, vnited the Roses or Families of Yorke and Lancaster. The next Eliza∣beth, daughter of Henry the eight, by her not marring produ∣ced the Vnion of the Realmes of England, France, and Ireland, with Scotland. Eliza's rest, That our great Bryttaine so haue blest!
And till the golden age returne Sybills foretold, ne're be outworne, Such royoll race, whence springs our peace. Might they, O might they, all warres cease, And second Brittish Constantine, May he, as some, all schismes decline; Church, vertues, godlinesse sworne friend, Raze errors, truth and rightSuch also was the first Con∣stantine, called the Great, a Britton borne, vnder whom the heresie of Arius was extirpate, and the Church began to flourish triumphantly by his meanes. defend. CANZ. II. Henry the seuenth his marriage, ofspring and honoura∣ble act related. NOw aide me Muses,Henry the se∣uenth borne in Pembrooke Castle, began 22. August 1485. crowned at Westminster by Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterbury, 30. die Octobris, prox. espoused the Lady Elza∣beth 18. lanuar. nex: dyed the 22. of April, 1509 hauing reigned 23. yeares eight moneths; buried in the new Chap∣pell of Westm. which he built and had bestow∣ed thereon 14000 pounds. whilst I tell, How after Tyrant Crook-backe fell, Seuenth Henry victor, he oth' house, Of Lancaster white Rose, his spouse, Fourth Edwards eldest daughter, heire Of Yorkes red rosie Garland faire, Concluded such perpetuall peace, As after ages all shouldKing Henry the seuenth his children were, Prince Arthur that dyed in his fathers life time. Henry the 8. K. Margret wed to Iames the fourth of Scotlād, and Mary promised to Chares King of Castle, but wed to e∣wes the twelfth, King of France, after to Charles Bradon, whom Henry the eight made Duke of Suffolke. blesse; Hence Arthur, Henry; Margret wed To Scotland, whence the vnion bred! And Mary troth'd to Spaine, but married, To th'bedred French King, Brandon carried! Their Coronation day, 't did grace, Stanley with Derbies Earledomes place, Courtney wih Deuonshires, Bedfords Duke Shines Pembrooke! faithfull MortonIasper Earle of Pembrooke the Kings vncle made Duke of Bedford; Morton Bishp of E∣ly, who chiefly plotted be Kings aide, and Rhard th third his ouerthrow, ent for by K. Henry  of Flaners, succeeded Tho. Bourchier, who shortly after dy∣ed in the See of Canterbury. tooke For Elyes, Englands Primates See; From heath'n Moores, now, was Spaine set free! But to disturbe such peace so praised Lambert in Ireland tumults raysed, Personating in these plots begonne, Warwick's Earle, drown'd Duke Clarence sonne; Last, young Plantaginet, who waxtThe Londoner that persona∣ted Edward Earle of Warwick, sonne to George Duke of Cla∣rence, that had beene prisoner in the ower from the beginning of King Henries reigne till then, was hanged at Saint Tho. of Waterins; Prkin Warbeck that did counterfait Richard Duke of York, second sonne to Edward the fourth, at Tybourne; and the Earle of Warwick him∣selfe beneaded on the Tower bill, all three dyed within the com∣passe of yeare 1499 Lambert that had before fayned himselfe to be the said Earle of Warwicke in Ireland, was made the Kings Faulconer. old Close kept in Landons strongest hold; In like sort a meane London groome Fayning too; both fell by like doome! In Ireland Perkin Warbek goes Currant, fore Lancasters white Rose Fourth Edwards counterfet young'st child: Yorks Duke, by's Aunt and Dam, so styl'd The Burgoine Countesse; but bothMargret Countesse of Bur∣goine, sister to Edward  fourth, set vp both this Perkin, and that other Lambert, as en∣uying the prosperous estate of Henry the seuenth. hee, And his faire spouse tane, headded bee! Henry both these, and all else flames Doth quench; and French and Irish tames; And 'gainst their foes, to make some mends Aids the Brittons his ancientAgainst the King of France, An. 1488. friends:
And for Religious, Abbeyes store He deck's the Sauoy for theHe conuerted the Sauoy built by Peter Earle of Sauoy and Richmond, in Henry the third his time, (which long since belon∣ged to the Dukes of Lancaster, and now to the Crowne) to an Ho∣spitall for 100. poore people; hee new builded Richmond & Bay∣nards Castle; founded three houses for Frantiscan Fryers obseruants, at Richmond, Greenwich, and Newarke; three others for Franciscan Fryers Conuentualls, at Canterbury, New Castle, and Southampton; he builded the faire Chappell of Westminster where he lyeth entombed. poore; When after twenty three yeeres raigne Fortunately famous, he is layne In Westminsters Saint Peters trim And stately Chappell built by him. CANZ. III. The famous acts of Henry the eight. EIght Henry (being his brother dead)Henry 8. began 22, Aprill, 1509. crownd at West∣minster with Q. Katharine, by William War∣ham Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England, 22. Iunij next fol∣lowing: hee dyed 28. Ianuar. 1547 hauing reigned 37. yeares 9. mo∣neths and odde dayes, buried at Windsor. Prince Arthurs spouse, and crowne doth wed, Whose tend'rest yeeres yeeld fairest hope; And warres with France as will'd theWho had dispensed with him for the marriage of Q. Katharine. Prince Arthurs wise. Pope, Where th'Emperour then, and Flemming they, Were wag'd, and tooke King Henries pay! Turwin, and Turney yet full well His pompous state, and traine, can tell, That did in brauest sort behold Him glistring, and his troopes in gold! Scots then inuade, so French King will, England; but fell at FloddonWhere the King of Scots en∣camped, the field is by some called Bramston field, of a place there neare adioyning. This victory was gotten by Tho. Howard Earle of Surrey, A. 1513. the same yeare that the King got Turwyn and Turney; where hee made Tho. Wolsey, being one of his Coun∣cell, Bishop of Turney. hill; With Iames the fourth! so did fift Iames, At Carliell's fresh swolne torrent streames; And Scotlands Nobles choisest flower, Are fafe bestow'd in Caesars bower. But Henryes sister Mary sent To France, doth stint much discontent; Whence being return'd, Brandon that carried her, Suffolks Duke made, soone after marryed her. CANZ. IIII. Cardinall VVolseys, aud the Lord Cromwells Comet-like blazing state, and falls. IN this Kings reigne the rise and falles Of two of Fortunes Tennis-balles, Were famous; Father Wolseyes fate And Cromwells Comet-blazing state, Well worth beholding! WolseyThe strange fortunes of both Cardinall Wolsey and the Lord Cromwell, in this Kings reigns well worth the noting. hee From parents sprong of low degree, First Dorset Earles, then his Kings Court, Henry the seuenth's were his resort; Whose Chapleine, being 'twixt King & Emperor Employ'd, wonne thereby no small honour; Then Almoner made, and Lincolnes Deane, The new King add's new honour, when
In France first of his councell grac't him, Then Turney wonne, there Bishop plac't him; To Lincolns thence, and Yorke translate, Prince-like in Primates See he sate; More Card'nall made, his glories shine, And power transcendant Legantine, Wonne Prince and peoples whole aspect, Both Lords and Laytie at his becke! So choicely priuie Councell, more Chauncellor, almost Kings paramour; So liberall lou'd, so iust they dread him, So few come nigh him, none exceed him; So faire-spoke, such his oratorie, At Charles the fift's hand gain'd muchBoth his Embassies, and Court at home, were with such state be∣yond compare, the greatest of the Gentrie and Nobilitie of the land attendant in his trayne. glory, T'whom twise Embassag'd, th'Emperours Court That saw his state, can best report; France view'd his last braue pompe, e'en late Before his suddaine fall and fate. Spaines Nymph, was then to be diuorst, Which sentence cause the Card'nals crost; Campegius staies not, Wolsey hyed To Yorke: disgrac't, for griefe heAs some say, he poysoned him∣selfe at Southwell, fearing more disgrace, as hee was comming to∣wards the King, who sent for him to London. dyed! Then famous Rhodes by Turkes was tooke;Rhodes taken, A. 1523. Rome sacked, and the French King taken, be∣fore Pauye, A. 1525. the Duke of Burbon was slaine at Rome. The Pope and Rome by Burbons Duke; And French King falles at Caesars foote, Which made France find a league to boote With England and Nauarre, the scope, 'Gainst Spaine her Emperor and the Pope! Though Iulius Crowne and SceptersPope Iulius the second, sent a Cap of maintenance and a Sword to Henry the eight, which were receiued 19. May, 1514. with great solemnitie. Leo the tenth gaue him the Title, Defender of the Faith, for his writing his booke against Luther 1521. Cle∣ment the seuenth sent a Rose tree of gold, with buds and branches and a Rose, wherein was a rich Saphire; it was presented to the King at Windsore, 1524. sent, Tenth Leo titles, when he lent Luther sore lashes, faiths Defender, And Clement golden gifts did tender; Yet Wolsey dead, the Pope to Rome, Spaine, Caesar, all from hence sled home. Then Wolsey's man, his masters heire Of's fate, and fall, from Phaetons chaire, So Mushrome-like comes Cromwell, he From parents of as meane degree, To seruile trade train'd, growing great Mounts yet amaine tow'rds honours seate, As Wolsey wan'd, whose fauours plac't him In princes Court, whose fall more grac'tWho was, as some thought some part of the meanes of his Master the Cardinalls downfall, which was his raysing to honour. him If not disgrac't him; but his Prince Fauours such his double diligence, Whose counsels to the Clergies paine Brought the Kings Coffers, noe small gaine; And more he sayes, t'enrich theThough indeed it fell out cleane contrary, as Tho. Arundell arch-Bishop of Cant. said in a like case entended in a Parliament, Henr. 4. A. 1404. to the like euill Coun∣sellors of the King; that not for all the Cells and Religious houses pulled downe then, worth many thousands (now many millions) the King was the richer halfe a Marke, but rather the common Treasures and Weale of the Land, wherein lyeth the Kings chiefe wealth and State, impouerished, priuate persons hauing begged and appropriated them to themselues, conuerting that to priuate, and sometimes leud vses, which was before to hospitality, and a gene∣rall benefit & reliefe of the land. Crowne Pulls the Religious houses downe, Whose ruines reare his greatnesse glory, To blow the bladder of his story.
Secretary Comwell, 'mongst them sate As head of the spirituall state; Making his pride seene no small deale, Master of the Rolles, and priuie-Seale; Essex Earle and great Chamberlaine, So swoll him that he brast againe, For at the top and highestThe great Titles the Lord Cromwell possest before his fall; when the King tooke displeasure against him about his marriage with the Lady Anne of Cleue, whom Cromwell had so com∣mended, by which meanes the marriage was made, which pro∣ued after so distastefull to the King, and shee not loued. port Presume and Traytor cut him short; Thus blaz'd these Stars, and out againe, Fell first to waxe, grew then to wane. CANZ. V. King Henry the eight his latter time, seuerall marriages, and last will concerning his heires. OVr King both EmperourThe Emperour Maximilian was in pay with the King of En∣gland before Turwyn, 1513. the Emperour Charles was royally feasted and entertayned by him at Callaice, A. 1520. in Lon∣don, 1522. the Queene of Scots, 1516. King Christie of Den∣marke and his Queene, 1523. the Palsgraue of Rhine Frede∣rick, 1539. when he came to con∣clude the marriage betweene the King and the Lady Anne of Cleue. entertaines Scots Queene, & King and Queene of Danes: The Irish tames, and French-men faine, And Flemmings aides in spight of Spaine: When once his Spanish twenty yeeres spouse, Queene Maries mother he disauowes, Let Pope and Spaine, and Caesar freat Holy maid of Kent, and spare not threat; Queene Eliza's mother soone was seene Pembrookes Marchionesse, Englands Queene: And when Anne Bulleine lost herAfter the King was diurced from Queen Katharine of Spain Queene Maries mother, with whom he had liued 20. yeares & more: hee made the Lady Anne Boleine Marchionesse of Pem∣brooke, and married her, 1533. by whom he had Queene Elza∣beth: he married Iane Seymer mother to K. Edward, An. 1536. Anne of Cleue, 1540. the La∣dy Katharine Howar, the same yeare; the Lady Katharine Par, 1543. head, Iane Seymour next, in Childbirth dead King Edwards mother! next was taken, Faire Anne of Cleue, and she forsaken, Katharine Howard soone lost her head, Kathar'ne Parre, saw him lap't in lead. His last warres vexed France, and raz'd Bolloigne, till peace was bred, and blaz'd; Edenborow and Lieth were tane the while, By Shrewsbury, Seymour, and Lord Lysle. By his last will, Edward firstKing Henry the eight his last Will, partly contrary to some acts of Parliament made in his life time. heire, Next Mary, third Eliza were; Many's fall, his reigne nigh fortie yeeres; His fall, on Windsore monumentsOther Kings were famous for building many monuments of pie∣ty and Religion; hee for defacing almost all that were raysed, since the first planting and foundation of Christianity in this land. reares.
CANZ. VI. The short reigne of King Edward the sixt. SEymors Nymphs sonne his Scepters tooke Whose vncle,Edward 6. borne at Hamp∣ton Court, began 28. lan. 1547. crowned at Westminst. 20. February following; dyed 6. Iuly, 1553. reigned 6. years, 5. moneths, and odde dayes, bu∣ried at Westm. th'Earle Protector, Duke Of Somerset's made, Dudley Lord Lysle Weares Warwick, and Northumbers style; Kets he procur'd, and RebelsOf whom there was then great store, there being commotions in Somersetshire, Lincolnshire, Deuon, and Cornwall, Nor∣wich and Yorkshire. sorrow, And Scots disgrace, at Muscleborow. And now by SomersetsIn which battell, of the Scots were 14000. slaine, 1500. taken prisoners; the English onely ha∣uing lost 60 men. command, All not yet seiz'd on Chauntry-land, All church reuentions, treasure, plate, And tokens of her ancient state, Trophees of wealth, or worth that deck her, Been turn'd into the KingsChauntries, Free-chappells, and Brotherhoods, as the remain∣der of religious houses that were not demolished in King Henr. 8. time, were pulled down about the bginning of K. Edw. 6. reigne. And afterwards the Iewels, cba∣lices, Vesseis and Ornaments of gold and siluer, out of all Cathe∣drall Churches and others, were call'd for into the Tower; Copes, Vestments, cloth of tyssue, and the like, into the Kings Wardrobe; money and peeces of plate sold, into the Exchequer. Many Chur∣ches and Chappells being pulled downe, among other the Church of the Strand to build the Lord Protectors house, who was shortly after beheaded, 1552. after whose death the King liued not long. Exchequer: Pope, Saints, and reliques, haue like doome, These banisht, this dismist to Rome. Somersets Duke, about this season, Acquitted was, accus'd of treason, And yet soone after lost his head, Who failing; seemes, full soone too, dead Not seuen yeeres King, in bud of youth, Westminster tombes, to Englands ruth. CANZ. VII. The Lady Ianes downefall, Queene Maries comming to the Crowne, and marriage with Spaine. WHen Suffolks daughter Lady Iane,Lady Iane, daughter to Francis daugh∣ter to Mary, King Henr. 8. sister, was pro∣claymed Queen, 10. Iuly, 1553. but Queene Mary preuay∣ling, shee & her husband were beheaded, 12. February next following. Mary daughter of Henr. 8. and Q▪ Katharine of Spaine, be∣gan from the death of her brother, 6. Iuly, 1553. (though interrupted by the Lady Iane) she was crowned at Westm▪ by Bishop Gardiner of Winchester, Lord Chncellor, 1. O∣ctob. following; shee dyed 17. Nouemb. 1558. R 5. y. 4. M. and odde dayes: the same day of her death deceased her cousin Card. Poole at Lambeth; she buried at West. he at Cant. With her spouse Guilford DudleyHe was fourth sonne to Sir Io. Dudley Lord Lisle, Earle of Warwick, and Duke of Nor∣thumberland, so created by king Edward the sixt. tane For King and Queene, their sires craft crost, Their heads, life, Crowne and Kingdome lost; Queene Maryes right, so farre preuail'd, Both Dukes Impes, plots, pretencesThe Duke of Northumber∣land was beheaded, 22. Augusti, 1553. Henry Gray Duke of Suffolke, father to the Lady Iane, the 23. of February fol∣lowing. quail'd: Who set in sires and brothers throne, Rome her Religion here soone shone; Bishop Gardner's made Chancelor, and Piercy Earle of Northumberland. To Wyats and English greatSir Tho. Wyats pretence of Religion, being to withstand the Queenes marriage with Spaine; he was beheaded, 11. April. 1554. disdaine She weds her Cousen King of Spaine, Whose style's so stately to be seene, Philip and Mary,The style and royall Titles of King Philip and Queene Mary, proclaymed by the king of He∣ralds, at the time of their mar∣riage, being on Saint Iames day, 1554. King and Queene Of England, Ireland, and with them France, Naples, and Ierusalem; Princes of Spaine, Sicilia, Indies; Austrich Arch-Dukes; Dukes of Burgundy,
Millaine and Brabant! the low Countreys Tyroll and Haspurge, Earle and Countesse. Their royall Embassie to Rome, The Pope returnes much honoured home; Cardinall and Canterburies Primate, Poole, with his cousen Queene, braueThe Queene sent for him from beyond the Seas, where he was in great estimation in the Court of Rome; and Cranmer being burned, he was made Archbishop of Canterbury, 1556. Queene Mary also restored and buded what religious houses were in her power or possession, a sat Green∣wich, Westminster, Syon, Sheene, the blacke Fryers in Smithfield: all which were sup∣pressed by Queene Ezabeth. Prelate Flourisheth and fadeth! once againe Reuiues here the Religious traine; Peace sweetely did her selfe aduance 'Twixt France, and Spaine, and vs; had France Not broken first, that'gan to bourd Philips Flemish townes, with fire and sword. Thy'young Queene of Scots the DolphinFrancis the Dolphin of Frāce, espoused Mary daughter & sole heire to Iames the fift King of Scots, 1558. 28. Aprilis at Pa∣ris. A marriage was heretofore intended betweene her, & King Edward the sixt. weds, Whiles Mars his rage their Realmes o'respreads: Dutch, English, Switzers, Pole, with Spaine Walloones, too in his warlike traine, And many a sort more to be seene That 'gainst his foes combined beene With Philip, forrag'd France, and downe Raz'd Conquet, and Saint Quintines townes; But that which most the English crost, Callaice in lieu thereof was lost: Philip from home, our fiue yeeresAbout this time also dyed Charles the fift Emperour, fa∣ther to King Philip, hee being busie at his warres in France. Queene At Westminster her tombe is seene. CANZ. VIII. Queene Elizabeth her admired and famous acts at the beginning of her reigne. SO by her sister Maries death,Elizabeth se∣cond daughter to K. Henr. 8. be∣gan 17. Nouemb. 1558. crowned at Westm. by Doc∣tor Oglethorpe Bishop of Car∣liele, 14. Ianu. next following. Dyed 24. Martij An. 1603 or ac∣cording to the computation of the Church of England, 1602. buried at West∣minster, reig∣ned 44. yeares, 4. moneths, and 7. dayes. The Crowne came toShee had beene kept prisoner in the Tower, and elsewhere, a good part of her sister Queene Maries reigne. Elizabeth, So Goddesse-like a mayden Queene, Seld-when or ne're in England seene: She pull'd downe such religious cells Her sister built, and Pope expels; And warr'd with Scots and France and Spaine, Till Scots and French crau'd peace fullPeace was concluded between all foure Realmes, A. 1. Eliz. be∣tweene the Kings of Spaine and France, the Dolphin and his wife Queene of Scots, & the Queene of England: but the Q. of Scots set on by the Guises of France, the peace broken, quarrells, and wars grew; and she being taken as she fled from her owne subiects into England, long after suffred death at Fodringhay Castle, A. 1587. Diuers inroades in the mean time were made into Scot∣land by the English, against the Hamiltons, and in aide of the K. and likewise into France, but A. 1564. peace was again concluded with France, and the K▪ inuested with the most noble order of the Garter. faine. Scot'sh Queene then laid downe Englands armes She had tane vp by th'Guises charmes! Though after tane ith'English bounds, Her head flew off; such Crowne-lawes grounds! Eliza, by the Mounsieurs meanes And his French brother-King, then leanes To Flemmings aide and French! when Dudley To Flanders went! with noble Sydney; Where Sydney fell, and Dudley'sRobert Dudley Earle of Leicester, went ouer Lieutenant Generall and Gouernour of the Low Coun∣tries, A. 1585. where his Excellency (for so he was styled:) was entertayned with great triumphs, and many worthy and warlike exploits were then done by him and Sir Philip Sydney Gouernour of Flushing; after whom Captayne Norrys and Sir Francis Vere, were held for noble warriors, and in great estimation. glories Read yet in the low Countries stories:
He that with Mars might; Philip well, Sweete Sydney striue with Philomell: Both Britaines deerest Darlings; whose Fame no end, name no Period knowes. CANZ. IX. Diuers other then memorable matters, and her warres with Spaine. FAmous no lesse at this time were, Drake and far-trauail'd15. Iunij, 1576. and the three yeares following, he made seue∣rall voyages into the North-west Seas, to seeke that way a passage to Cathaia; and comming to the places called Queen Elizabeths Foreland, Frobishers Streights, and meta incognita, brought thence Mineral at seueral times, which then were supposed to bee gold Ore, but proued otherwise. Frobisher, Frobisher that sail'd North and East Seas; T'other by South-west passages, Sought the Sunnes-setting,This yeare 1588. by diuers fore∣spoken, was cal∣led, Mirabilis Annus, in Au∣gust, and the moneths follow∣ing, were great reioycings and triumphs in all England, Lon∣don, and at Court, for their deliuerance and the discomfiture of the Spanish fleet: In the yeares following were diuers voi∣ages made to the Spaniards great losse, vn∣der the conduct of Sir Io. Nor∣rys, Sir Fran∣cis Drake, and the Earle of Essex. and strange lands Where Phoebus steeds, and stable stands! Till rounding th'earth, comne backe agen, Liu'd one day lesse, then other men That liu'd as long as he! thatCaptayne Francis Drake with fie ships, of which the Pelli∣cane was Admirall, set out from Plimmouth, 13. Decemb. 1577. passed by the coast of Brasile, Rio de plata, and entred the Magellane streights, came to the Molucco Iles and Iaua; so returning by Cape de Buona esperanza, arriued in England A. 1580. the yeare following the Queenes Maiesty dining at Det∣ford in Kent, where the Vessell was laid vp which he had so for∣tunately guided round about the World, going into the ship to see it, there in the same gaue him the honour of Knighthood. The like voyage was performed by Cap∣tayne Cauendish, and finished, An. 1588. view'd Huge India's shore and monsters rude: Whose quaintance great, with Neptunes realmes, Wrought wondrous feates on Doris streames In eighty eight; when Spaines chiefe pride Did hithr'ward on Sea-horses ride! Sea-Nymph-rounds guiding o're the mayne Great Duke Medeena's glorious traine; That with lesse state soone after sees Both Scottish Orkes, and Irish seas. Tilburie campe was Leyr'sters e ward,The Queene being at Tilbury Campe in Essex; the fight on the narrow Seas, was continued betweene the two fleets of Spaine and England, from the 24. to the 28. of Iuly, in which time Don Pedro, and other Nobles were taken; and many of the Spanish Gallyes and Ships, burned, sunke, and spoyled: the Prince of Parma, that should haue sent aide to the Duke, was hindred by the Hollanders, whose Fleet lay at the mouth of the Riuer which hee should passe, to ioyne with the Duke: insomuch that 29. Iuly, the Spansh fleet began to fly, the English men chasing them Northwards towards Scotland, where about the Orkeyes and coasts of Ireland, many ships and men were lost, the Duke returning with greatest dishonour into Spaine, had lost ships men. Hunsdon did the Queenes person guard; Charles Howard chiefe, vice-Admirall Drake, Made Spaines huge great Armatha quake Flying faintly fast! So triumphs cheere, Our natiue soyle; and my first yeere. CANZ. X. Lastly, her latest glorious atchiuements, as Irelands con∣quest finished, Virginia's plantation began before her death. NOr left we so; for Norys next And Drake againe, and Essex vext Spaines borders, thundring fire and fate To Seuills shrine and Lisbone gates.
Walter Deuereux the sire, braue Knight That Lord Ferrers of ChartleyWalter Earle of Essex went into Ireland, Lord Generall of the warre, 157. Robert his son Earle of Essex, 1591. went into France with a band of men, sent from the Queene, to aide the French King. And An. in∣to Ireland to suppresse the rebel∣lions there; hee was wondrously loued and honoured by the En∣glishmen about all the Peeres of his time. hight, Pierc't Ireland! this man went as farre Hauing sped Naarr's, French, Spanish warre! But England dew'd his tombe with teares Whiles Irish tropheys Mount-ioy weares: Whose conquest and Virginia's gaine Were last acts of this Virgins raigne. Beene Caesar, French and Danes King dight Saint Georges, so this maydensCharles the ninth of France 1566. Maximilian the Empe∣rour, 1567. Frederk the second King of Denmarke, 1582. were by Queene Elizabeth inuested Knights of the most noble order of the Garter. Knights! And forty fiue yeeres Queene she fades Eliza to the Elizian shades; The world her praise, Westminster herHer time being to all ages wor∣thily memorable for her admired Mayden reigne, her conquests abroad and peace at home. dust, Heauen ha's her soule shrin'd with the iust. CANZ. XI. By reason of her successor King Iames, is enforced the discourse following out of Scottish and other forraigne histories. SVnne-rise did Cynthia's set disclose, And from her Phoenix ashes rose No fairer plumes,Iames the sixt in Scotland, the first in Englād, borne at Eden∣borrow, 19. Iunij, 1566. descended of the Lady Margaret, eldest sister of Henry the eight, began his reigne in Scotland, 29. Iulij, 1567. crowned in Sterling church being but one yeare old: he be∣gan his reigne in England, 24. Martij, 1602. crowned with Queene Anne his wife, daugh∣ter to the King of Denmarke, on Saint Iames his day next following, at Westminst. by more royall crest E're found in princelyest Eagles nest, Th'Arabian bird, with spice-bed, then Deck't Pallas bowers, our Hymens, when The world the shrine, the sea the ring, Two Realmes were wed, the Priest aThe Ocean, the Ring wherwith our whole Albion, or great Britayne is encompassed; the Kingdomes of England and Scotland, wedded, vnited to∣gether by King Iames. King: A Wife vnites both Roses; Iames Both wiues and Virgins heire, both Realmes! The marryed brings a sonne; her merit Th'vnmarryed leaues him crownesQueene Elizabeth. t'inherit. Hence our foure-crown'd King Iames doth flou∣rish O're English, Scottish, French and Irish! Friend me deere Muses whiles I bring From Scotland's bounds our Englands King; And when you haue toucht Scotlands glories, Briefely then France and Irelands stories; Shewing so King Iames his Maiestie, Thron'd in his foure-fold Monarchie.
CANZ. XII. Of the Originall of Scots and Picts. SCarce thinke I, th'race of Scottish Kings From Pharao's Daughter ScotaThe most approued Authors hold the story of Scota, King Pharao's daughter supposed, wedded to the Argiue Knight Gatholus; whence Scots would draw their name and pedigree, a meere fable; but certayne it is Ireland was auncienly called Scotia, and thence the Scots came; whence Ireland is called Scotia, of Scythes or Scutten, is shewed hereafter in the de∣scription of the Irish: these Scy∣the or Scythians, came thither out of Spaine, partly, where they were long planted, and partly, it is like, immediately from their North-easterne Countries. springs; Sure from great Scotland since of eld, Ireland so call'd, the Scottish held: Whence Ireland's call'd so, her relations Seruen both Scotsh, and Irish Nations! When th' Irish Scots, though, Scotland wan, The tymes vnneath, most hard to skan; 'Bout Marius,Marius, Anno Christi 73. reig∣ned 53. in his time came Ro∣derick or Reu∣da, saith Beda; and by him van∣quisht, the north parts of Scot∣land were assig∣ned to them for place of habita∣tion. or Aruiragus raigne, 'Bout th'hundreth yeere of grace, they sayne, Came Scythian Gothes, or neighbours neere, First t'Ireland, thence t'inhabitThe Gees or Gothes aboue Pontus, and all the Neighbour∣ing Countries North and North∣east, Polonia, Sarmatia, Rus∣sia, and almost Scandia and Tattaria, were in ancient time called Scythia, a generall name; as all the East, scarce knowne or called by other name then India. heere, With their Duke Roderick! Whether these Were of the race of Hercules, Th'old Agathyrsi; or whos'e're Fell feuds 'twixt them and Brittons were; Which made them backe to th'Irish fly, Then Scottish call'd, for fresh supply; So wiues from greater ScotlandWhich was Ireland: and they did couenant, that in case the Kings bloud did aile, the Irish should haue a voice in the election of a new King; and the Irish to be eligible in regard of that affi∣nity contracted with them, as ha∣uing giuen them both aide and wiues. came, And aid; and lesser Scotlands name! Whence grew the guise, if Kings bloud failes In Scotland, Irelands voice preuailes In new Kings choice; to be extract, From female race, as of compact; Though some haue thought, th'old Brittons rude Scorn'd by the Romanized broode, Of Brittons new-come vp, ee'ne hated, Of their owne kinne, Italionated, As rudenesse Emblemes so were made To fly to th'Irish Scots for aide; 'Gainst these Caesar Seuerus wall Was rais'd, and warres not few nor small; Last Roman Lord being Gallio fam'd For both Scots, Picts, and Irish tam'd. CANZ. XIII. The Scottish Kings numbred from Ferguse to the end of the Picts reigne. REuda first reign'd, sayes reuerendThe Scots will onely haue im then a Pictish ing, that reigned in some little prt of Scotland. Bede, In Brittish Scotland, though we reade, In Scottish Annall's how th' Aegyptian Pharao's Impe Scota, with her Graecian Husband Cathelus long did raigne, With their succession Kings in Spaine;
Whence Scots were nam'd!In this the Scots most ancient, though fabulous story. Fergusius antiquis. was Anno M. 3640. Durstus King of Scots that mar∣ried Argasia, Daughter o Si∣ciius King of Brytaine, Anno M. 3850. This Erchus espoused Rocha the Danish La∣dy, and by her ad Ferguse that was with Goth Alarick at Rome, circa annum 4350. & an. Christi, 400 This Fergu, An. Christi. 424. Dongard, Anno 470. and Brechus King; Their Colonies they to Ireland bring: From whom the Great FergusiusBeing as they write a whole race of Kings before him and another Ferguse, almost of the same time with Mulmutius, 600, or 700 yeares since Brute, within few Descents of Gathelus; when this Ferguse is 700. yeares after the other, and 1400. yeares from Brute. What confusion is in the Storie, about these things, I can∣not but attribute it muc to Po∣lydore Virgil, who did his part to obscure our Historie to all se∣quent times, as much as lay in him; his Scottish History I fol∣low, neuerthelesse since hee is so much receiued in these succeeding Kings. came, Whom to her Erchus beares, faire Dame, Danish Rocha, to her Spanish Spouse, Of Scotlands Kings ennobled House; He with Goth Alaricke made Rome flame, Ferguse that gaue Craig-Fergus name; And brought with him so long agone, Scots gloried in the fatall Stone, Iacob lay on, in the Land of Syon; With Brittish-Scotsh Kings Armes theirHold they did this Stone in wondrous fatall admiration, for the Prophesie that they say went thus, Nempe Scotis fatum, (res mira) vbicunque lcatum. Inuenient lapidem, regna∣re tenentur ibidem. Lyon! Whom Reuther, Beda's Reuda, followes, Roderick, that put to flight, with's fellowes, Came backe againe; whence call they't right, Rew thers returne, not his first flight! First Owen followes, Ferguse next: Second Owen then, and Dongard vext, And slaine by Brittons; Constantine, His sonne in Christians Cause diuine, Palladius Conuert,Palladius was sent by Pope Caelestine to the Scots and the Iland of the Brytons in the Oce∣an, he flourished at the beginning or a little before the Saxons en∣try heere; who dying, Gaelestine ordeined his Successor Patricius, borne in Cluidesale, Scholler to S. German; accounted since as it were their Apostle. warfare-goes In Brittons aid, 'gainst Saxon foes! Next Congall, Conrane, Owen, Conuall, Aidan, Kenneth, Owen, Ferquard, Donwall, Maldwine, and with two Owens moe, Amberkeleth falne by Pictish foe, Owen,Donald. 632. to him King Ethel∣frides children of Northumber∣land fled, when their Father was slaine by Ed∣wyne. Mordak, Ethfine, and lesse gracious, Owen and Ferguse, then Soluatius And Ethfines sonne, who entertaines Amitie with French King Charlemaine, Worthy of Frances friendship;Which may bee obserued especi∣ally in their Wars with England, eyther affected with others di∣stresse, and helping other; Scot∣land the back-dore by which En∣gland was alwayes molested in her Conquests of France; and France ayding the Scots in their Warres with the English. whence Remaines th'inuiolate league ere since. Then Congall, Conuall, and sans true Respect to Excellency due, Or King-hoods Maiestie diuine, Alpine, butcher'd at Pas-Alpine, By bloudy Picts; made them too late,Alpine 830. in his Father A∣thaius right K. of Scots, in his Mother Fergu∣siaa's heire of Pictland. To rue their cruell facts andThe vtter ruine of the Picts in Scotland, with the cause there∣of. fate; For Kenneth kils them all, vnneth, In fell reuenge of Fathers death; Whose ouerthrowes, not vn-fore-kend, Strange ights in Skies seene, seeme portend; So Picts, with their King Drushen slaine, Sole Scottish Kings, in ScotlandThey then brought the fatall Stone into Pictland, and placed it at Scone; whence it was about Edward 1. time brought into England. raigne.
CANZ. XIV. And so downeward to Macbeth and Malcolme in Wil∣liam the Conquerors time. NExt Kenneth,Chenneth. 834. Donald, Constantine, And Ethus, by Gregour in fine Depriu'd of Crowne and Kingly stile; Who wanne, they say, the WesterneIreland. Ile. Then Donald, and late Ethus sonne, Constantine,Constantine, Anno 903. who fell feud begunne, With Edward; but was homage ta'ne From him subdu'd byHauing perfidiously ayded the sonnes of Sythrick, last King of Northumberland, against the King of England. Athelstane! Malcolme then next,Malcolm. 1. Anno 943. murdred at V∣rine, buried at Colin. and Indulph, who With Alfred wars 'gainst Danishather vnder Edred or Ed∣gar, vnlesse it were in his yonger yeares. foe: Dfe, Cullen, Chenneth, Constantine, Grime, Malcolme, Duncane, and of Line Of th'ancient Princes and Bloud-royall, Glamuis Lord; and yet most disloyall Intruder,Malcolm 2. Anno 1010. murdered at Glamuis. Tyrant Macbeth,He was sonne to Syne Thane of Glamuis, by Doada, younger Daughter to Malcolme the 2. whose Fate and fall, Wizards fore-disclose; But with so doubtfull and obscure Aenigma's he thought him most sure;Malcolm. 3. Anno 1061. Sonne of Dun∣cane, King of Scots, 1040. who was sonne of Beatrice, daughter to Malcolm. 2. Malcolm. 3. his Mother was E. Sywards of Northumber. Daughter, by whose aide, and K. Edward the Confessors, hee slew the Vsur∣per Macbeth, and gained the Crowne. Till Dunsnane Castle high in th'Ayre Encompast were with th' Woods of Weyre He should not fall; being child nor other He should e're fall by, borne by Mother: Which Riddle,The Prophesie of a Witch, wher∣by hee was deceiued, for Mack∣due that slue him, was not borne but ripe out of his Mothers Wombe. put him out of doubt, Though't fell, for him, too truly out; For Malcolme with reuengefull hand, And Syward of Northumberland, His Grandsire, and their English aid, Comming thitherwards, in Weyr-woods staid To decke and hide their arm'd aray, In green-wood bowers, with leauy spray; When so attir'd their troopes drew nie, To tow'ring Dunsnane Castles hie, Throwing their leauy Crownes away, Appear'd they clad in Armour gay: Which suddeine shewes, vnlook't for bale, 'Gan make the Tyrants courage quaile; His towers so girt, with foes so drest With Wyre-wood Crownes, streight armed Crest: Flying therefore fast, with feth'red speed, Sets spurres to his e'en winged steed, Macbeth,Macbeth the Vsurper, 1046. R. 16. yeares. t'auoid his foe-mens ire. Mackdufe as furious as the fire, Who erst from Tyrants angerAbout this time also, Fleance, from whom the later Kings of Scotland are descended, fled frō his tyranny into Wales; where by Nest Daughter to Griffi ap Lewlyn then Prince of all Wales, he had Walter, first Lord Steward of Scot. this Fleance was sonne to Bianquo Thane of Loquhabar, an ancient House and allyed to the Kings; who be∣ing inuited by Macbeth to a Supper, was there murdered. flew To voluntary Exile; new
Return'd, as swift as he that flyes, Repayes home all his courtesies, O're-taking him, fels him to ground, And so did Mackbeths pride confound, Who vainly thus deluded dyes By those prodigious Prophesies: Yet true they were, to thee, Fame tels, O too misled by Magicke spels! Thy foe not timely borne,An. 1061. Mal∣colm. 3. R. 36. Y. but ript From Mothers wombe, thus Mackbeth tript! This Malcolme marrying Margret, Neece To Edmond Iron-side, Issue sees, Edgar,Edgar & Alex∣ander, 1100. R. 29. yeares. Scander, and Dauid, who, Were Kings of Scotland all-a-row. CANZ. XV. The residue of the Scottish Kings vntill Queene Marie, Mother of King Iames the sixt. DAuid who led in Englands Court His pleasant youth in Princely sort,Dauid their Brother, 1125. R. 29. yeares. Whence Scotland claimes them, weds the faire Huntingdons and NorthumbersHee marryed Maud Daughter to the Earle of Northumberlād and Huntingdon; whereby the K. of Scotland had thse Earle∣domes or a pension for them; hee fauouring the right of Maud the Empresse, was taken by K. Ste∣phen, and faine to giue his sonne Henry pledge for him, which Henries sonne Malcolme, his Grand-child, did succeed him in his Kingdome. heire The Countesse Maud! Maud th'Empresse rights Fauourite,Malcolm sonne of Henry, 1153 R. 12. yeares. by Stephen foilde in fight: Gaue his sonne pledge, whose sonne succeeds Malcolme in's Sire, and Grandsires steeds; William then, and Scander who weds Ioane, Daughter to our Englands KingAlexander the first espoused Ioane, Daughter to K. Iohn; A∣lex. 3. maryeth Margret daugh∣ter to Henry the third King of England, after whose death, rose twelue Competitors, laying claime to the Crowne of Scotland. Iohn; And their sonne Alexander too, Had our third Henries Daughter, who Dying Issue-lesse; in Kings account! Englands Kings, as Lords Paramount, Edward the first Iohn BaliolAs son of Deuorguild, daugh∣ter of Margret, daughter of Da∣uid Earle of Angus, Brother to King William the Ly; Robert Bruse being also sonne of Isabel, another Daughter of the same Dauid Earle of Angus. plac't, Robert Bruse all he could disgrac't; Third Edward, Edward Baliols Crowne Aduanc'd, whom Dauid Bruse puld downe, T'inuade England, by Valoys swaide, Captiu'd, the Victors price he paid! Three Roberts were, and next to them Fiue Iameses from that Royall Stem, And next his Mother-Queene; sixt Iames, First English, reignes from Tay to Thames. First Scottish Iames on surgingFor griefe whereof and of his sonne Iohns death, Iohn K. of Scots, who named himselfe Ro∣bert, some say dyed. Seas, Fourth Henry tooke, sixt Henry frees;
Whom Somersets faire Daughter Iane, Had to her Husband! his, they saine, Went with a hundred Nymphs to France; And for third Iames, 'twas second's chance, Fourth's Edwards Cicely, t'aske to Wife; But mortall War's stint farther strife! T'ones Nephew yet, weds t'others Neece, Seau'nth Henries Imps, suchIames the second required Ci∣cely, Daughter to Edward the 4. King of England, for Wife for his sonne Iames the 3. but Warves a∣rising brake off that Marriage in∣tended: yet Iames the 4. grand-childe to Iames the 2. espoused Margaret grand-childe to Edw, the 4. whence sprang the vnion of both Realmes in the person of Iames the sixt, now King of all Brytaine. Fates decrees, Fourth Iames Spouse; Mother to fift Iames, Margret, who after Floddon flames, Wed's Archibald Douglasse; whose Girle Margret wed's Matthew, Lennox Earle,Iames the sixt an Infant of a yeere old; began his Reigne in Scoland, 1567 ouer all Brytaine 1602. Their sonne Lord Darnley, wed's fift Iames Nymph, Mother to thy King, faire Thames; Who comming from beyond cold Tweed, Relate, deare Muse, with happy speed! CANZ. XVI. The troublesome State of Scotland in Queene Maries time; her Marriage with the Lord Darnley. BEing in these our last times, our late Henries Parenthesis of State, Mary, Edward, and Elizabeth, Vanisht, and banisht vitall breath, Was Henries Sister Margret faire Their Aunt, whole Albions sole heire, Fourth Iames Wife! so the Raceyclept hers, Sway Scotsh-Sites, English Mothers Scepters; Her sonne fift Iames; his tender Impe Scarce seu'n dayes old, yet Queene, poore Nymph, So left by'r Sires vntimely end, Causde Mother Queene, and Peeres contend For her and her Lands Gouernment, So France to warre with Scotland went; But Hamilton, from the French Faction Obtaynes the Queene, andThe defection of the Hamil∣tons, and vprores made by the French in Scotland, in the be∣ginning of Q. Maries Reigne. Lands protection; Whiles furious French, in Scots despight, The Rhine-graue, and the Rhodian Knights, Fierce Almaigne and Italian bands Allure, to vex their late friends Lands, And gaine th'yong Queene, or lay the State Of Scotland, could they, desolate; But say'n they, soone as Lennox fauor'd Our English, th' Earle Protector wauer'd, And Mary Scot's yong Queene was carryed To France, and to the Dolphin marryed!
Alas poore Nymph, as soone as borne She's crown'd indeed, but with but thorne! And married now, but all her ioyes Soone marr'd or mixt with sore annoyes; Soone dyes her Spouse; her SireThese accidents happening neer about the first yeares of Queene Elizabeth. long-since; Her Mother now, and she yong Prince, In forreine shores, and scarce 'tis knowne, Where's Crowne or Kingdome of her owne: So vext they were with ciuill Warres, So bruisde besides by strangers skarres. As she was comming homewards, tost By Aeol's blasts to th' English Coast, And thence return'd, domesticke crosses She scarce regaines but with great losses, Quenching those flames of fatall feud, With Riuers streaming Scottish bloud; Yet soone as English Mary dies, Too forward, seemes, swaid by the Guise, She tooke vp th' English Ensignes! France Backes th' Errours she did first aduance; Foolish France, must needs so much for strangers, Th'owne brests laid ope t'a World of dangers. But after much their fruitlesse paines To eithers losse, and neithers gaines, Both Scot'sh and French o're-poiz'd with harmes, Both ciuill rew'd and forreigne Armes. So Mars fled, and Peace sweetly smilde Twixt Scots and English reconcilde, When in the Queene of Scotlands Court, Mongst other Lords of Princely port, Youthfull Lord Darnley there was seene, New come from Englands Court and Queene, Right well of Scotlands Prince belou'd, And such her after fauours prou'd; First Rothsey's Earle, then Duke create Of Albaney, and next her mate; Third sonne of Lenox Earle, there-while, Henry Steuart, Lord Darn∣ley, 3. sonne of Matthew Earle of Lennox, and Margaret Dou∣glasse, Daughter to Margaret Henry the eighths Sisters made Earle of Rothsey, and Duke of Albany, espoused Mary Q. of Scots, Daughter to lames the fift, and had by her lames the 6. who is first of all Brittaine, being beire to the Kingdome of Scot∣land by his Mothers side; hee to the Kingdome of England by Margaret his great Grandmo∣ther, and on both Fathers and Mothers side. Weares Scotlands Crowne, and Kingly style, Henry Lord Darnley, Stewart borne, Scotlands King made in youth's fresh mornes; Their sonne anew Great Brittaine names, Scotlands sixt, Englands first King Iames! But shortly Henry Stewart crownde, In the Queenes Orchard's murdred found, And she to Bothwell's Earle soone wed, No small suspect of falshood bred; When she not daigning to be brought, Fore her Realmes Peeres to answere ought,
Sans womanish feare, with threatning charmes Affronts her subiects vp in Armes! But bootes no braues, she prison'd lyes; Bothwell, to Denmarke fled, there dyes. And she from Keepers scap't prepares Her Peeres sore bale; but ill she fares, From Scotland prison'd, flying strife, In England prison'd ends her life. CANZ. XVII. The gouernment there in the minority of Iames the fixt. THen Scotland felt sore foes out-rage, Before her yong King came to age, Crown'd one yeares yongling, in his Realme His Grandsire Lennox, steeres at helme; Morton, Murrey, and Marre helpe guide, The Vessell o're rough-swelling tyde; Till sore with surging billowes tost; The King tooke to hisThe Realme of Scotland. Barke nigh lost, And Pylot-like at greatest neede Brought her to hauen, with happy speed! Flourish great Prince, whiles thee fame raises Equall to Ioues, or Caesars prayses, Thy Reigne since peacefull Oliue-crownde, Thy browes Sols Bayes don circle rounde, And more, t'adorne thy Kingly Posies, France shall bring Lillies, we will Roses; Since our Eliza did bequeath Thee Royall Garlands, at her death. CANZ. XVIII. As before of Scots, so heere the Historie and originall of their Ancestors the Irish, with diuers coniectures concerning the same. ANd for our Sunne like sommer time Rose from farre North cold Scottish clime, In this oblike Horizon!The Kings of England are now descended of the Scottish Kings, the Scottish no lesse and their Kings from the Irish, so that as the Realmes are vnited, so are the Houses and Bloud-royall, whereby the Kings of this Land are the true and naturall Liege Lords ouer all these Nations. whose Set, Rise, and Regiment Ireland knowes, Ours comne from Scotsh-kings, theirs from them, All now but one Kings Diadem; Irelands both Impe, and Lord now; see, We th' Ancetors, they Posteritie. That Westerne Ile, whose shoresA description of Ireland, with the site thererof, the olde and mo∣derne names, and diuers other Antiquities. doe face Wilde Cambers Cliffes; by her owne race Cald Erin; by their Neighbours wilde Yuerdhon; Ireland, English stilde;
From Iasons Greekes, t'is thought we learne, To call Iuuerna, Iris, Ierne; Whether from her site, as Austrich East, Spaine West, so Hiere should be guest So sounding, since more Ierne'sCalled so of their Westerne site, Iernus and Ierna a Mountaine, place and Riuer in the West parts of Spaine; as our Ierne, the Westerne Ile or Ireland, as being west from England. beene By-west, Hils, Rils, and places seene. Hybernia else of winter weather, Iber, or Duke Irnaulph, choose you whether; Ogygia, old, and holy Ile, Banno, and great Scotland, Poets stile! Albany, and Alban, as't wereIreland called Banno, Albin, &c. t'other, Lesse Banno, sprung from this her Mother, Lesse Scotland from this greater; Brittish, Scots, from these Irish Scots, and Pictish To thinke that Scots beene Scythians Race, Coniectures may perhaps finde grace Since Greekes doe Scythians  call; The Germanes, Scutten, Scots and in the Greeke, which seemes the originall of the rest, is so pronounced as Scuttn, or Scyttan though the Latines haue much varied from the suund pro∣nouncing Syth, and not Skha, as the Greeke originall, and o∣ther Tongues doe import, Master Verstegan would haue Scytha deriued from the Duch word Schietten, to shoote, quasi , good Shooters, Archers. all, Our Saxons, Scyttan; Gothes, beene Getes; What let's it Scythes, Northumbers Scettes? And Getes and Scythian peoples held Spaines Townes and Cities sure of elde! Susana, and many places more, Scythian names, walles, and guisesSusana, the Citie, and the peo∣ple Concani, Authours witnesse as they had Scythian names, had also their barbarous Customes in Spaine; as that of drinking and sucking their Horses bloud: from Spaine also is certainly knowne their transportation into Ireland. wore: Whence Scythians into IrelandVt fabula, á side dignis hi∣storieis reprobatur; nec mi∣nus reliquae; adusque Fergu∣sij 2. tempora. came, For Spanish dwellers did, sayes Fame! But some will say, beleeue't or smile! Scotos, from , draw their stile, Some say from Scota; but if you Would faine heare Fables, more then true, Or monstrous matters for disport, Her Legend you shall heare: but * short! CANZ. XIX. Diuers of their ancient historicall Relations, and lastly, the late Conquests thereof made by the English. BEfore the vniuersall flood, This Storie now begins for good! Came Caesara, old Noahs Neece, Not knowne what ship, nor o're what Seas; Next comes, (nor will I leaue thy glories, Sublimate quintessence of Stories,) Bartolenus and his sonnes, whoseIn the time of Corymbratus King of great Britaine, Barto∣lenus or Partholinus Brother Cantaber, is said to haue builded Cambridge. names Their Cels, and Irish stations fames; Then Bergion comes!Bergion, Anno M. 2200. Nemodus then; Whom Bergions Race chac'd thence agen:
Greeke Dela though the Gyants Mates, He Syrians knew, and Scythians States, Nemodus and his mens! what time, Gurguntius claimes, the Irish clime! But mightie Monster! RumorRuanus the Gyant, they say, li∣ued 2040. yeares, and instructed Saint Patrick. sayes Ruan liu'd till Saint Patricks dayes; Though 'twas thought, next Scota's braue Knight, Gathels Race, queld those Gyants quight. 'Gainst th' Aethiops, Moses andGathelus banished from Greece came into Egypr, where he had such fortunate successe: & thence setting forth to seeke Ad∣uentures, arriued in Spaine; where he builded the Citie Bri∣ganta; his sonnes Hiberus and Himecus, went into Ireland, & his nephew Hermion sonne of K. Metellanus is said to haue come thither afterwards in their aide. Gathelus, Warring vnder Aegypts King, they tell vs, Cecrops or Neols much prays'd heire,Gathelus, Anno M. 2400. Weds Pharao's Daughter Scota faire, Whence set for Seas, on Spaine they light, Their tongue from him Gaoth-lag hight; The Scots from her! from them deriued In Simon Brechus Reigne arriued In Ireland, Hermion and Hyberus, From Spaine; from them, in hand they beare vs, Came Ferguse; so from th' Irish traine, Came Brytaine Scots, those Scots from Spaine. Still vnderstand, the fatall stone, Goes with them Iacob slept vpon! But true indeed all Stories saine, Scots came from th' Irish,Edgar, Anno Christi, 959. they from Spaine. These Ireland-dwellers, Edgar vanquisht; Saint Edward lou'd!Edw. Confessor, Anno 1042. first RichardsThe seuerall Conquests of Ire∣land made by the English; both before and since the Norman Conquest. Conquest; But in the second Henries Reigne, Dermon Mac-Morough did complaine,Rich. primus, Anno 1189. Whom Strong-bow Chepstols Earle releeues,Hen. secundus, Anno 1155. Winnes his Lands, weds his Daughter Eue; Is Englands Feodist! to King Iohn, Made Irelands Lord, Pope Adrian, Sends him a Ring; Vrban a Crowne; But after by the Popes puld downe,K. Iohn, Anno 1200. England and Ireland he fullHee paid 700. Markes tribute for England, and 300. Markes for Ireland. deare Rents at a thousand Markes by th'yeare. Eighth Henry King, the Pope first stil'd; Philip and Mary reconcil'd To Rome; and Queene Elizabeth weare The same; so doth King Iames the heire.
CANZ. XX. The ancient gouernments of France, and how the Crowns right is now deuolued to the English. The conclusion of all. SO the French Titles!Marcomirus, Anno 128. whose free State,A briefe view of the Suc∣cessions of the Kings of France; their seuerall Houses. And Salique Lords, deare Nymphs, relate! But leaue th' Herculeans race andConcerning whom, see the end of the second Ode. traine,Marcomirus a∣lius 378. Tili Paris faire was plac'd on Seyne, By Marcomyre; whose Issue beene Pharamond and his Monarchs o're Rhene,Pharamond. 419. O're Francks or Francons; he beginnes, And Merouey much honourOf him Pharamonds Race and Successors, were called Me∣rouingians; as the second Race from Carolus Magnus, Carlo∣uingians; and that third Race of Kings from Hugh Capet, Ca∣peuingians or Hugoners, which word hath since and especially, bin spoken and taken by the house of the Guise against the Kings, in a secret sort disgracefully. winnes,Merouaeus, 448 But Clouis most,Clodouaeus, Rex Christianus, 484. who addeth first Christ to his Crowne, or that to Christ! Their Race long flourisht, till vp springs Maior Domus vnder th' idle Kings, Martellus Issue then gan Raigne, Pipin,Ppinus, 750. and famous Charle-mayne; Hugh Capet, though,Carolus Mag∣nus, 777. his second Race Roots out;Hugo Capetus 987. so Talion Law tooke place! From him descended Isabell faire, France her sole and indubitateSee in the Reigne of Edw. 3. his Title, Warre, and Conquest of the same. heire, Third Edwards Mother,Edw. 3. Rex. An∣gliae, Franciae, Dommus Hyber∣niae, Anno 1. 26. though misprizde, By fabulous Salick Law deuizde. Since Katharine from that Royall Stem. Her Dower brings Frances Diadem T'Henry the fift,Hen. 5. A. 1412. whose sonneSee the Agreements, and Hen. the sixt his Coronation at Paris, before in the Reigne of Henrie the third and sixt. anone Sate crown'd on triumph t' Frances Throne. So France and Englands flowers so sweete,Iacobus Rex Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hy∣berniae, A. 1602. Welsh, Scotsh, and Irish Musicke meete Their Prince, by side of siluer Thames, To greet with ioy Great Monarck IAMES. CANZ. XXI. A Peroration to King Iames. AND now great, gracious, glorious sprights,Peroratio. Whilome braue Worthies, still braue wights, Liue long aud happie euer; daigne Your sacred influence to these straines, You that in Albion reign'd; and you, That doe, but hope for Heauen your due! Fortunately famous, fairely shine Sainted on Earth, in Heauen diuine; And glad thou canst but ken his dayes, Deare Muse ceasse thy rude Mantuan Layes. The end of the tenth and last Ode of PALAE-ALBION.
POTENTISSIMO IACOBO, MAGNAE BRYTANNIAE MONARCHAE. QVando leui calamo, Britonum Heroes{que} Duces{que}, Quàm potui dignis cupiens celebrare camoenis, Quanquam infoelici magis exitu; at ordine iusto, Percurri, & titulos, magnos{que} aliquando Monarchas; Cui magis at{que} tibi dedero? Flos inclyte Regum! Cum Sophiae sancto, pietatis lumine, pulchrâ Stirpe vtrius{que} Rosae Regali stemmate claro? Muscas non capient Aquilae; at Lyra, Lilia, amoenis Cum{que} Rosis, ruris{que} choros, Regum{que} tryumphos, Saepe equidem celebrant! habitarunt Dij quo{que} syluas, Musae{que} Aonios saltus; placeant{que} ita nostro Cynthus ceu Clario, tibi agrestia numina Phoebo; Non Lepori inuisus Leo, Non Iouis Armiger ales, Fulgura, celsa magis, Iouis ira terebrat Olympum; Inuidia alta petens, humilis mea Musa, supremis Vix Aganippaeos latices libata labellis, Quod parcas nimiumuè rudi, lapsaeuè rogabit, En supplex! magis at{que} tuis quàm tuta sub alis, Musca Aquilae; Lepus ante pedes, ceu Dama, Leonis. Rex Regum, video es, titulis Agamemnonis! Olim Anglia septenos habuit, duo Scotia Reges; Wallia treis, totidem quo{que} Gallia, Hybernia quinos, Haebus & Ila aliquot, ratibus{que} imperuia Thyle, Cumbria praeterea, & Druidum celeberrima Mona; Quos omneis tamen Imperio, tot plurima Regna, Pace tenes, teneas{que} precor pietatis alumnus Egregius; natura, no uum, tua lumina donec Eripiens terris, addat Dea Sydus Olympo.
IPSISSIMO MAECENATI. THus haue I brought this Worke to end, Ioue gently will (perhaps,) befriend; And all those Sun's now or of yore, Haue shin'd on our deare Albion shore, Will send their pleasing sweet aspect, If onely thou thy beames reflect: Do'st now Lord of th' Ascendant Raigne, Tis more then guerdon for my paine; And gentle Nymphes, I hope, will smile, On Bryttons, thy Gests, my rude stile. ILLVSTRISSIMO AC SVMMAE SPEI M. Brytanniae CAROLO PRINCIPI. WRiting, though rudely, Brittons ancient Storie, Whence th'old might luster yeeld to moderne glorie, One Tome toucht to Yous and your Fathers dayes, That yours and his might a next Volume rayse, By some sweet Attique Muse! Or could a rill Of honyed Nectar dew my barren Quill, What rarer Theme would I, more Royall text, Then your worth's, whom Europe admires, expects Your milde aspect, faire Prince, making me soone, Think my night day, and such faire morning noonel
NOBILISSIMIS HEROI FRIDERICO, RHENI Palatino Comiti, & Elizabethae Principi. GRaue though all youthfull, ancient though young Prince, That matchles raught'st Englands fair'st flower from hence, Your comming o're thus caus'd my artlesse Penne, Rouing from Thames to seeke you out by Rhene. Your Germany, I know, affords such store Of choice wits now, as no Age, no Land more, To charme your eares! which might amate my Muse; But yet your Noblesse doth new spirit infuse, And such your Grace, thrice Roiall paire, shall make, Me sing your praise for loued Albions sake. REVERENDISSIMO DOMINO SVO, DOMINO GEORGIO, Prouidentia Diuina Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi. TH'Eagle stoops not to catch at Flies! her wings Shade often though, & shelter meanest things. That Eagle piercing sight, and learnings height That sores aboue the vulgar low conceipt, Makes sure swift wing, at higher, holier things, As Heauen, the source from whence such knowledge springs! Yet since your Grace doth somtimes please to looke On our meane Acts, as to me, to my Booke, Daigne to be Patrone, and whats'ere you deeme, Your worthie censure I shall most esteeme.
HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, GEORGIO, Marchioni Buckingham, aureae Periscelidis Equiti. WEnd thou thy wayes deare Muse to Court, whiles I in Shepheards Weed, Thus tune such homely Mantuan Layes on my poore Country Reed, Or sitting on the lowly Downes, among my Syluan Swaines, Doe mone my royall Mistris losse, t'our sweet Arcadian Plaines. Whose daintiest Nymphes if they perhaps, shall grace thee so to make Thee rest in Albions stateliest Towers, againe, for her deare sake, Doe as those ancient Knights profest, with all respectiue dutie Thy best endeuours euer prest to honour Vertue, Beautie. I wish thee more, seeke out the Man, whose Marquisate and Fame, From Tityr's beech-tree shades renownd, deriue their noble Name, Admired of the vulgar sort, and of the Realme a Peere, A chiefe flower of the Courtly traine, and of his Prince held deere; T'is he can giue thee free accesse vnto thy Kings good Grace, Thou need'st not feare though thou so meane, and he so high of place, Tender thy best deuoire and loue; he cannot but protect Thy suite, and goodnesse of thy Cause; a good Cause gaines respect, For goodnesse stands at Greatnesse gate, sole ay true glorie shines, Where Vertue free from flatteries fraud, guides, acts her blest designes; When after Ages all that dare boldly the truth auerre, Proclaime them noble whose high Acts from Honours Lawes not erre. So hauing gain'd thy Souereignes grace, soone all th'attending traine, Of Stars that on faire Sols Carre waite, will thee like fauour daigne; Those Stars that our Horizon sees, whom like the welkin cleere, Ioues Pallace, Sols bright Zodiake holds, to glad our Hemisphere, Their names should beautifie these lines, but that these lines would blenne Their Honours that should be descriu'd by Homers golden Penne. Id'e hope you'd pardon't yet, great Duke, ally'd to the House of Kings, That Pans Pipe plaid, till Phoebus tun'd his Lyres melodious strings. And you both Earles, that Worsters weare, and Pembrookes ancient style, Sydneyan Worthies, Cambrian Lords, and Leyster-graced Lysle, Sussex, Essex, nor Oxford then, with Howards haughty Name, And more braue spirits that there possesse, place of respect and fame, Should passe vntold, saue now I leaue, to loftier lines this taske. And of the man first mention'd heere, this Boone I humbly aske,
That as he is among his Peeres possessest of chiefest place, Hee'll daigne to bee the meanes may gaine, my Muse her Souereignes grace; Who if he lending louing lookes, on lowly Albion smile, Her loue and labours will not thus, leaue honouring this our Ile, But sing that sandy Seuerne-waues, Trent, Tweed, and siluer Thames, Shall loudly Eccho forth her Layes, deuoted to King Iames. Author ad Librum. FOrtè, nec inuideo, celsam liber ibis in vrbem Me sine, vel placido Principis aula sinu Excipiat foueat{que} rudem; Tu suauiter aures, Quàm potes, incantes, forsan & vs{que} potes! Heroum{que} citans, licèt haud tuba Homerica, laudes Optârit meritò vir bonus esse suas; Gratia seu tibi sit plus debita, gloria dignis Haud absit; similis nec tuba desit eis! Et tibi quis nequid, Scoto-Anglûm, Cambro-Brytannûm Debeat? indigenûm ceu canis arma Ducûm: Dente Theonino siquis tua dona, rubenteis Suspicor at{que} Rosas rodere velle; vale. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE CONTAINING ALL THE PRINCIPALL MATTERS mentioned in this Poeme, and in the Illustrations thereof. A ACts, the victorious Acts of Albion, 29. The victorious Acts of Ebrank; and his sonnes, 97. The war-like Acts of Bundicia, 139. The honourable Acts of Henry the seuenth, 269 The famous Acts of Henry the eighth. 271 Adelme, his flourishing. 209 Adelstane, his Reigne. 209 Age, the golden Age. 5. Agricola, his War-like Acts in Brittaine. 141 Albion, who gaue that name to this Ile. 7. The originall there∣of. 39.41 Albion, his Descent and first comming to Samothea, and de∣stroying the Samothes. 29. 47. Al∣bion an enemy to Hercules and Licus. 53. Albion ouerthrowne and slaine. 55. The disorders of the Kingdome after Albions death. 61. The Storie of Albion defended. 75 Alfred, made King of Northum∣berland. 203. Alfred forsaken of his Dukes, yet conquers Rollo the Dane. ibid. Alfred brought to the lowest ebbe of Fortune, hides him∣selfe in the Marishes of Somerset∣shire. 205. He founded Oxford, ib. Antiquities, an assertion of An∣tiquities. 34 Arthur, his prowesse, life and death. 171 Aulus Plancius, his beginning was in Guiderus Reigne. 137 Aegypt. 43 B BArdus, his Reigne. 17. His ver∣tues and imitation. 19 Barbarossa, his Conquest of Den∣marke. 117. His planting in Ire∣land. ibid. Barons, their Warres, 243 Bathe, the foundation thereof, 99 Belinus, his ciuill war with Bren∣nus. 113. His honourable Acts at home. 117. His founding of Arch∣flamins. ibid. Belus, or Belees the diuersities, 45 Bergion, his comming into Ire∣land. 27. His rule there. 29 Bladud, his Reigne. 99 Brennus, his ciuill warre, with Belinus. 113. His Conquest at Rome 115. His sacriledge and punish∣ment at Delphos, ibid. Britons their originall and com∣mendations.
7. Their manner of fight and furniture, 123 Britaine, who first gaue that name. 7. Britaine described. 13 The qualities and richnesse of the soyle. ibid. 15. Who first entred & inhabited Britaine. 15. The ori∣ginall of Britaine. 39. 41. Britaine much wasted. 149. Britaine aban∣doned by the Romanes, and left to the Picts. 151 Bundicia, her Warre-like Acts. 139 Brute, his Descent, his Exile, Turmoyles and Aduentures in Greece. 67. His Markage vnto Pan∣drasus Daughter; and the seeking of his fortune. 69. His comming to the Iland Leogetia and his going to the Oracle of Diana, ibid. His an∣swere from the Oracle. 71. His ioy and preparation, ibid. His meeting with Corinaeus, the ouerthrow of Guffar, and Brutes arriuall in Bri∣taine. 73. The storie of Brute defen∣ded. 77. All Obiections answered, ibid. Brute his encounter with the Gyants, his ouerthrowing of them, & killing of Gogmagog. 87. Brutes diuision of the Kingdome. 91. The end of Brutes Issue. 105 C CAmbridge new founded. 117 Cantaber, the Founder of Cambridge. 117 Canute, the Dane, his famous Reigne. 219 Caratacus, betrayed and borne in triumph to Rome. 139 Caracalla, the Emperour. 145 Cassibeline, his Protectorship, & his repulsing Caesar. 123. His death. 135 Caesar; his entring Britaine, and his manner of fight. 123. His deli∣uering of the Storie of Britaine. 125 More of Caesars Acts. 131. 133. The Britaines subiect to Caesar, and Tribute yeelded. 135 Christ, born in the dayes of Cim∣beline. 134 Cimbeline, refuseth to pay Tri∣bute to Caesar. 135 Claudius, finished the Conquest of Britaine, and regained the Tri∣bute. 137 Clito Edgar against Harold 221 Constantine, the Great, his glori∣ous Acts. 147. The Reigne of his sonnes till Theodosius, ibid. Constantine, the Tyrant his Reigne. 149 Cordilla, her Reigne 101 Corinaeus, his meeting with Brute 73. His killing of Gogmagog, and inhabiting of Cornwall. 89 Coylus, and other Kings reignes, till Hely. 119. the flourishing of the Christians vnder his Reigne. 143 Creation, of the Creation of the World. 3 Cromwell, Lord Chancellor, his Comet like-blazing. 271 Cunedagius, his enuie vnto Cor∣dilla. 101 D DAnaus, his Storie, and of his fiftie Daughters. 63. Their banishment and arriuall in Albion. 65. The Descent of the Gyants from them, ibid. Danes, the originall of them in England. 197 Dissention, ciuill Dissention af∣ter Gorbodugus Reigne. 103 Druis, his Reigne. 17 Dudley, Earle of Leicester, made General into the Low Coun∣tries. 279
E EAst-Angle Kings, and their go∣uernment. 178 East-Saxons, their Kings and Kingdome. 195 Ebrank, his Victories, and his sonnes. 97 Edgar, his Reigne. 209. Hee ob∣tayneth the Crowue. 211. Hee is infamous for his wanton loues. 213 Edmond Iron-side, and his Chil∣drens Fortunes. 217 Edward senior, his Warrelike Acts. 207 Edward Martyr, poysoned. 215 Edward Confessor, his famous Reigne. 219. His death. 221 Edward the first, his deciding the right of the Crowne of Scot∣land, 245. His sonne first English Prince of Wales. ibid. Edward the second, his vnfortu∣nate Reigne, and wrongs done by Gaueston, Mortimers and Spen∣cers. 247 Edward the third, his Acts and Conquests of France. 247 Edward the blacke Prince, his noble Acts and death. 251 Edward the fourth, his Reigne, and his sonnes. 261 Edward the sixt his Reigne. 277 Edwine, his Reigne. 209. Hee is vicious. 211 Egbert, his reducing the King∣domes to one, and calling it Eng∣land. 199. His flourishing Monar∣chie and Reigne. 199 Elizabeth Queene, her admired and famous Acts at the beginning of her Reigne. 279. Her imprison∣ment before shee was Queene, ibid. Her generall peace with Scots, France and Spaine, ibid. Elfleda, her Warrelike Acts. 207 England, who first gaue that name. 7. Her feare at the Conque∣rors comming in. 223 Estrild, drowned by Guendo∣line, 93 Ethelred, his obtayning of the Crowne. 215 Ethelwolphes, his Acts and Reigne. 199. His troubles with the Danes, 201 Europa, her seuerall Nations and commendations. 9 F FErguse, his Reigne till the Picts, 285 Flouds, their creation. 5 France, the ancient Gouerne∣ment thereof. 303. How the Crownes right is now deuolued to the English, ibid. G GErmanie, conquered by E∣brank, 97 Giants, their creation. 5. The Descent of the Giants in Albi∣on. 65 Gogmagog, slaine by Corinaeus, 89. He was the greatest of Giants. ibid. Gorbodugus, his Reigne, 103 Greenshield, a most worthy Prince, his Reigne. 103 Guendoline ouerthrowes Locrine, drownes Estrilde and Sabrine. 93. Guendoline her Reigne. 95 Guffar, King of Poytiers in France, ouerthrowne by Brute. 73
Guiderus, in his Reigne did Au∣lus Plancius begin. 137 Guitteline, and his Queene very famous for their Lawes 119 H HArold-Hardiknute and his Reigne. 91 Harold, Godwines sonne, his v∣surpation. 221 Henry Beauclarke, his honou∣rable Reigne. 239 Henry the second, his Reigne. 241 Henry the third, his Acts. 245 Henry the fourth his vnquiet Reigne. 258 Henry the fift, his Reigne and Conquest of France, 255 Henry the sixt, his wonderfull misfortunes. 257 Henry the seuenth, his ioyning the Houses of Yorke and Lancaster, 263. His marriage, off-spring, and actions. 269 Henry the eighth, his famous Acts. 271. His Reigne in his latter time. 275. His seuerall Marriages, and last will concerning his Heires, ibid. Heptarchie, the beginning there∣of. 189 Hercules, the son of Isis, 49. His slaying of the Gyants, his com∣ming into Gaule, and his meeting with Albion. 51. His entertainment by Lycus, and preparing to ouer∣throw Albion. 53. Hee kils Albi∣on, and his power. 55. Hercules marryeth Galathea the Daughter of Lycus, ibid. Historie defended, 37. Diuers Histories repeated and reconci∣led, 55 Humber ouerthrowne by Lo∣crine. 91 I IAmes the sixt of Scotland, and first of England, his succeeding Elizabeth. 283. The Gouernment of Scotland in his minoritie. 297 A Peroration to King Iames. 303 Iane, the Wife of Lord Guilford Dudley, her down-fall. 277 Idolatrie, the originall there∣of. 21 Iohn, King of England, his Reigne. 243 Ireland described. 27. Glorious Atchieuements there. 281. The o∣riginall of the Irish. 297. The Con∣quest of Ireland by the English. 299 Isis, the Goddesse, buries Osiris. 49. Her reuenge by the meanes of Hercules her sonne, ibid. Iupiter, or Ioue, their diuersi∣ties. 45 K KEntish Kingdome, the Storie thereof. 171 Kent, the Liberties thereof, how gained. 233 L LEicester builded, 101 Leil his Reigne, 99 Leon-Gauere, did build Cairle∣on. 65 Leir, the vnnaturalnesse of his
three Daughters, and his crosse Fortunes, 101 Licus, the King of Gaule, 53 Locrine, his Reigne, and ouer∣throwing of Humber. 91. Locrine ouerthrowne by his Wife Guendo∣line. 93 Lud-Rudibrasse, his Reigne. 99 Lud, his building of London, and the Gates. 121 M MAcbeth, his Reigne. 289 Madan, his Reigne. 95 Magus, his Reigne. 17 Malcolme, his Reigne. 289. Some other Scottish Kings. 291 Man, his Creation and his fall. 5 Marie, Queene of England, her Reigne, & Marriage to Spaine. 277 Mary Queene of Scotland, her Reigne, and Marriage, to the Lord Darnley. 293 Martia the Wife of Guitteline, famous for her Lawes. 119 Memphis, a Citie in Aegypt. 43 Mempricius, deuoured by Wolues 95 Mercia, the first originall of their Kings and order. 177. The end of the Kingdome of Mercia. 179 Misfortune, how incident to the greatest Nations. 11. Misfortunes excused, and the misfortunes of this Ile, ibid. Morgans enuie to Cordilla. 101 Mulmutius, his Reigne. 103. His Noblenesse and the restoring of the Brittish Monarchie. 111 N NOe his Historie shewed vnder the shaddow of Saturne, 39 Northumberland, the originall of their Kings and Kingdome, 179 The subuersion thereof. 183. Their incumbrance by the Danes, and submission to the West-Saxons. ibi∣dem. O OSiris, Albions Grand-Father, 43. Osiris slaine. 49 Oxenford builded. 97 P PIcts, their originall. 285 Poesie or Poetry, defended by an Apologie. 37 Polydore Virgil his subtilties, and disgrace of the Brittish Ile, vnmas∣ked and confuted. 105 Poole Cardinall, his flourishing vnder Queene Marie, 279 R RIchard Cordelyon; his most fa∣mous Reigne. 243 Richard the second, deposed by Bullingbrooke. 253 Riuallo, his Reigne. 103 Rome, Tribute paid vnto Rome, 135. No Tribute paid to Rome, ibid. S SAbrine, drowned by Queene Guendoline. 93
Samothes, his Off-spring, and Reigne, and the giuing of the name Samothea. 7. Samothes first Rule and Empire. 15. Samothes Issue. 17. The Storie of Samothes de∣fended. 75 Samotheans, their irreligious and barbarous Acts▪ and their ouer∣throw. 19. 21. The end of their Kingdome, 23. Their punish∣ment. 25 Sarron his Reigne. 17 Saxons, their originall and An∣tiquitie. 159. Their calling in and plantation vnder Vortiger. 163. Warres betweene the Saxons and the Brittaines. 165. The seuen Sa∣xon Kingdomes, their arise, and ex∣tent. 167. The Saxons glorying in their Ancestors and Gods. 169. The first plantation of the Chri∣stian Faith amongst the Saxons. 175 Scots, their originall. 285. Whe∣ther the first Scots sprang from Pha∣raohs Daughter. ibid. Seauerne, whence the name was deriued. 93 Sibilla, diuers of her Verses re∣cited. 77 South-Saxon Kings, and their go∣uernment. 187 Spaine, memorable Warres in Spaine. 281 Stamford, the first foundation thereof. 99 Stephen, his troublous reigne. 232 Stygands, an Archbishoppe, his stratagem, for the libertie of Kent. 233 Superstition, the originall there∣of. 22 Sweno, King of Denmarke, his obtayning of the Crowne. 215 T THeodore, what it signifies, 267 an allusion of it to Tewther, or Teudor, ibid. Theomantius refuseth to pay Tribute to Caesar. 135 Tholouse, their Crueltie and Sa∣criledge. 23 Triphon, kils his Brother Osi∣ris. 49 V VArietie, the various changes of all humane things. 195 Vespasian, his Warrelike Acts in Britaine. 141 Virginia, the first Plantation there in Queene Elizabeths reigne. 282 Vortiger, his comming to the Crowne. 153. His Marriage. 163. Vortiger dispossest of his King∣dome. 165 W WEst-Saxon Kings and their Gouernment, 189 William the Conqueror, his Des∣cent from Rollo the Dane, 227. His quarrell, claime, and preparation to get the Crowne of England. 229. His successe, Conquest and Coro∣nation. 231. His Tyrannie against his Brother. 235. His death and
most strange Funerall. ibid. William Rufus, his Gouernment, life, and death. 237 Wickednesse, how it is the de∣struction of Empires. 23 Winds, their creation at the first. 5 Wolston, his flourishing. 209 Wolsey, a Cardinall, his Comet∣like blazing. 271 World, the creation thereof, and the repeopling. 7 Z ZOnes, their creations at the first. 5 FINIS.
Palae-Albion Liber, lectoribus sapientibus ac be∣neuolis salutem! nimiûm seueris Talionem. KInd Readers, were't your trauels lyen, Tow'rds Pilgrim-sainted Dauids shrine, Where in an Antique sacred Cel, Holy aged Heremits once did dwell, There now by little Alluns side My Master 'mong his flockes, this tyde On Oate-reede tunes such rurall Songs To Cambrian Nymphes and Neat-heard throngs. Sometimes he sate by siluer Thames Now rests neere sandie Seuerne streames, In valley low, where Syluan Swaines Replenish rude Meneuian Plaines! If Londay Nymphes can tell no newes, Haile Scalmey; & if they refuse, Gresham, Ramsey, or those shreud Sea-markes, Men call the Bishop, and his Clerkes; Pembrochian borderers, Neighbours neere To Deusland; theile direct you where! Found tell him, pray, how by his lang Absence, I haue sustein'd much wrong; For fearing words might breed vnrest, I for my silence haue beene prest, An so in Duresse forced aye, To say what I would faine vnsay! Spare then sharpe Censure, and supplant These Errours, which I thus recant, Pleading for pardon! would you please, T' expunge, or mend such faults as these. Errata. Pag. Line Fault for Correction reade 1 7 succeffion succession 3 4 affignde assignde 4 20 gregis greges 6 30 Britanniarum Britannicarum 8 25 longuis longiùs   37 Theomno Theonino 10 15 Flamine Flumine 12 10 Doroberina Derobernia 15 1 Intire Intice 17 27 worth wealth 27 41 feate seate   43 and gaine or gaine 29 10 sone sons 39 44 rest rests 40 37 Medes Medis 42 39 Nephthuni Nephthuim 45 7 ten e'n 49 1 obstacles obstacle 52 35 demeritus dimeritus 70 31 aditus{que} adytus{que} 73 21 — vtmost 74 2 Hithiam Ilithyiam 84 17 Fania Tania 85 28 aud aid 120 10 omni omnis 133 30 transferr it transferit 134 31 & est 138 6 vteranorum veteraniorum 161 21 Lords Hords 170 19 Abrimi Abrini 182 17 Oswald Oswaldi 198 40 Marcia Mercica 207 18 these thrise 211 38 that yet 212 32 Wilfredam; Wilfred 217 27 nice neece 228 29 vrba verba 244 11 dus du 252 6 septiens septenis 254 31 procerum{que} procerum 258 25 Bex Rex 266 16 Omnia omina 273 41 wau'd wan'de 276 14 Eruti Eruta 286 25 Eugenijs{que} Eugenij{que} 298 39 — suum debent       quibus 301 40 the heire her heire. Lesser faults as mispointings, or the like, or others that may escape the most vigilant Correctors Eye; the courteous Reader will amend.
Poetarum facilè Principi, ac Coriphaeo, Michaeli Drayton, Ar. . DEare, Diuine Drayton, I admire Thy Layes enspir'd with Delphian fire, On whose plaine song, Seld one more blest, For Graces Minion, Muses Guest: Seld one more seene in old Folk-mote, Deskants a most delicious note; Doe not ennie me, though I sing In rurall tunes, such highest things. Your Layes will liue, though mine doe dye, Sung long erst, I confesse it, I Thy Poly-Olbion did inuite, My Palae-Albion, thus to write. Thy Songs, mine Odes, thy Poësie, My harsh tunes, notes rude Symphonie; Thine, ancient Albions moderne Glories; Mine, moderne Olbions ancient Stories; This th 'only difference, mine's borne dying, Thine sure on Fames wings euer flying. Ceasse then my Muse, and yet disclose A neuer dying Loue to those, That wish their Country well! Alhaile Deare Olbion, may thy Fame ne're faile, But be grac'd still, till at loues call, Heau'n Crowne Earths glories, thine and all That Brytaine loue, would Honour nourish; May they ne're fade, but euer flourish, May be, Albion then, with Olbion may, Ken many a faire and happy day! Whiles Auon's cleere source that heares thee sing, As she slides from her Chrystall spring, Shall teach our Seuernes bankes to sound, With Ecchoes shrill, to the Sea-Nymph-round, Thy Olbions Odes, tuning with ioy Albions chiefe pride, Thames, and her Troy.
Authoris votum! At the Poeticall shrine of IVPITER XENIVS, on the Altar there found written in a scroll, with this Inscription: Vniuersis Iouis ac Pallados filijs; sanctis Musarum alumnis, : vt & Lectori candido, salutem: . ZEus Xenius, or thou friendly Ioue, That strangers do'st and Pilgrimes loue, To thee, my humble Muse, her song Should offer, rapt from Cradle yong, Where shee began these Odes to treate In pleasant flowry SommersAlluding to the name of So∣merset, Vnde ex humili Pago Tykenham nominato, origi∣nem duxit, quâ propè Bristo∣liam flaua Sabrina fluit. seate: Neare that Faire-place, beene with brightBright-stow, the name of Bristow, signifying a faire place; it being a pleasant site, and the chiefe Emporium, of all the townes seated on the Seuerne, and on the coasts of Wales beames The pride of sandy Seuernes streames, Sweet Cells! though not compar'd with those Neare Ouses-fourd, where faire TameOuse-fourd the true inter∣pretation of the name of Oxford so called of the Riuer Ouse, run∣ning by it. flowes, Whith'r brought, my Muse, some part full faine Chaunts of her yet vnheard-off straine. Thence siluer-founted Crystall Thames, His fore-head deckt, cleare lympid' streame With dangling Reedes, and flaggy Flowers, Conuay'd her downe to old LudsSome will haue London to be anciently so called, viz. Lud∣stowne and Caer-Lud. bowers, Where shee beheld, with wondring eyes Both Cities pride and Courtly guise, Whom noblest Nymphs that haunt the place, Gently daign'd more then lookt-for grace. Next Courtly troupes, the Countrey traines, Did heare her sing, and those wild plaines That thee, deare Daniel, so did blesse, And rauishing notions firstSo Master Daniel writes of himselfe, and Wilton, of which Wilton, Wiltshire, (alluded by some from the wild plaines, quasi Wilde-shire) takes her name; Vbi in villâ Bedwyn antiqui∣tus totius Comitatus paenè nulli secundâ, nec satis igno∣bili, tam ob incolarum Rusti∣citatem, quam ob suarum o∣lim celebritatum iacturam, a∣liquandiu Moram traxit. impresse Into thy soule! from whence shee went To Cambers wild, and flowry Kent, Rhutupian farthest shores i'th East. Old holy Dauids shrineRhutupiae or the coasts of Douer, and Sandwich East, & Saint Dauids called Meneuia, in the West, are, and are ordinari∣ly accounted the vtmost limits those wayes of great Brytaine. by-west Did heare her tunes, and Odes shee ended In those well hop't-of bowers entended To Phoebus honour, of King IAMES Nam'd; west of London by faireChelsey Colledge is K. Iames foundation, and in the Patent so called of his name. Thames! From Somerset, her natiue home Thus t'Ouse-fourd rapt, and Luds faire Towne,
To those wilde plaines, and whither th'age Last past vow'd holyVnde, Roma semel quan∣tum, bis dat Meneuia tātum. Pilgrimage T' old Dauids cells, where Phoebus falles, Saint, Prophet, Priest, and Prince of Wales; And from fard'st west to th' Orient, As farre as rich vnhealthyThe ordinary saying amongst vs, affirming the farther parts of Kent to be wealthy though vn∣healthy, the middest healthy not wealthy, but both healthy and wealthy neare London. Kent. If friendly fauour moue your brest To entertaine this wandring guest For your delight, or more grac't see Since Albion hight! thus farre yet wee Curteously salute you, and your loue Zeus Xenius Guerdon't, gentle Ioue.
Lauro, ac Laude Dignis S. P. D. G. S. POets Laureate, on whose sacred browes Flourish Garlands of ne're fading boughes, Whose sweete layes more delicious beene, Then Philomels or Paphos Queenes; Helicon is yours, and though that I, Cannot vp to the heauenly numbers flye, Yet faine I doe admire you, and Ee'n beg this boone at Phoebus hand, To rest where in th'Elisian plaines, Faire fields, I may heare your sweete straines, Our Ennius, Chaucer, with old Line, Or Orpheus, where, Sidney deuine Sits with Musaeus; Johnson, Spencer, Drayton, Daniel, English Horace, Homer, Maro, Ouid; so sing 'twould inspire, My dull Muse with deuiner fire. Or if not; but with Eccho dombe, Her Cradle needs must be her tombe, Then sing her Requiem, much fam'd Cells, Pyndus, Tempe, Troy, and Thames farewell.
In amici Palae-Alb. S. P. REader, abide, marke, buy: Diuisa Britannia Mundo, (Mundus & alter) adest; here a World thou hast for a little (World! not a little) worth: Vasa est{que} Britanno-Latina; (Mundus idem at{que} alter.) To the World, see, Brittan a Lattine, English it is to her owne; Liber iste est liber vtris{que}. Tempora dat{que} Locis: of Time here's added another World with a world of Affaires: Res gestae hic ordine antur, Antiqua & noua habes: Praise Slatyers Muse, or amend it. TEMPOKA, RESQVE SVIS, CANIT, ATQVE DAT ISTE BRITANNIS. In PALAE-ALBIONIS, Historiae, sc. Angli∣canae, Odas & Authorem earundem, Odula. ALbion aequoreas inter celeberrima Nymphas, Virgiuio quondam flumine Diua potens, Caesare, Saxonicis ducibus, Dacis{que} petita, Normannis demum, dulcis amica tamen Angligenae soboli; venit ac Scoto-Cambro-Hybernâ Stirpe sato Regi! queis tua Musa fauens, Chare Slatere, canit festos dulceis{que} Hymenaeos; Charior in{que} dies, vestra erit ergo pari Tam benè famoso, Nympae, magno{que} Monarchae Albion, his Odis clara, palaia nouis. . ALbion, illius{que}, notis, sacer incola quondam Claruit antiquis, nuperior{que} nouis! Incisos siquidem Britones, Pictos{que} figuris, Glastove infectos corpora, mille modis, Caesaris antè, ferunt, saeclum rude; iam{que} Albion ecce otis picta, placet{que} nouis. N. GWIN.
In fratris sui charissimi G. S. Odas Historicas, PALae-ALBIONIS nomine insignitas, L. C. Carmen. GEsta antiqua nouis, collata nouissima primis, Albion haec Odis, cuncta, palaia suis, Ceu canit, & tenebris Britonum incunabula caecis Eruit, arrident plus sibi, siqua tibi; Prisca petis? obscura caue! Noua? Nota; recensens Quae{que}, placere cupit, nec minus ergo placent. IO. SLATYER. Musarum Praeconi blando, Amico suo integerrimo G. S. de sua Palae-Albione, opere Historico-Poetico, Melisma sacrum siue Paean. TAle tuum carmen nobis, diuine Poeta, Quale sopor fessis in gramine, quando per aestum Membra fouere iuuat, molleis per, amoeniter vmbras; Ille dies longos, longum ipse leuaueris aeuum, Ceu canis Angligenas! leni non murmure riuus, Non examina apum, florem depasta salicti, Siue thymum in pratis, demulcent suauiùs aures; Perge bonis auibus, nostrûm{que} recense triumphos, Gesta{que} Apollineâ citharâ, vel carmine digna, Te{que} trophaea manent, Britonum tua, tu{que} Britannûm. THO. NEWTON.
Clarissimo Amico suo S. PVRCHAS, multis{que} nominibus colendissimo, G. SLATYER, S. SIc ego, sic vdis niue concolor ales in herbis, Maeandrina sedens propè flumina! qualis Aêdon, Amissos lugens foetus; vel candida in agris Altera Amymone Phrygijs; ego planctibus auras Sic repleam querulis, talis loca, flumina, fonteis! Sed quid agam rogitas,  longè Limitibus proprijs semotus & vrbe, & amicis? Scilicet illud ago, quod Thessala Cynthius olim Admeteia inter rura, hortos, pascua, saltus, Ad studia & Lyricen intentus fortè, vel artem Aesclapij Medicam! mihi sic nihil, omnia curae: Ruris honos, Veris{que} decus, florentia prata, Lucida stagna, virens{que} nemus capiuntur orellis, Ac capiunt oculos, menti solatia praestant. Saxa inter silices{que}, abruptâ in rupe iacentem Lata per arua modò, nemorum{que} virentibus vmbris, Turturis ad gemitus, Prognes vel Adonis odas, Poetices studium illustre, affectus{que} süaues, Quam retinent, mir{que} iuuant, & pectora mulcent; Musica vel quoties modulamina, rustica quamuis, Mentis item Medicina meae! memorabilis aeui Historia, ac blandis animum sopita susurris, Delectat modò! linguarum persepe leuarit Cura dies longos; quid sancta, quid aurea dictat Argiuûm dialectus, Hebraea, Pelasga sophia! Solantur modò Barbaries Corydonia, mecum Ruricolûm turmae, dicam turbaene, Agathyrsis Herculeis genus asperius; quin dulce meorum Quidni mentem etiam moueat, quin saepe moretur Visendi{que} tui, desiderium{que} tuorum: Mens amat, alternat{que} vices! in rure beat, Degere quis nolit foelix? In rure beatus, Abs{que} sodalitio dulci, Musûm{que} sacrato, Viuere quî poterit cultor Parnassidos horti
Nunc amo, nunc fugio, quid nescio; & an scio coelum Mens{que} hominis, quàm paenè capacia neutra quietis; Ciuicus esse velim, nî Ciuica iura reclament; Rusticus; at duros horret mens lenta labores: Cum mihi quod Flacco videat euenisse, vel vs{que}, Instabilis vocer! ac videam cecinisse quod ille, Romae Tibur amo, ventosus, Tibure Romam. Iam voco foeliceis, vos, qui potiore Quiritûm Conditione frui possitis! & vrbica statim Taedia percensens, mirere, vti protinùs idem O me, itidem clamem, foelici sydere natum, Vos{que} aio, contectos Fagi florentibus vmbris! Re tenui allicier solitos, conuictu & amictu, Nec grauibus pressos, curisuè ingentibus aegros: Sit grauis in{que}-vicem gratus quasi, Protea agenti, Visus vter{que} status; modò Rus, modò ciuica damn. Iudicio meliore tamen, (sed parce labanti Seriò siue, iocne foret,) bona qui sua nôrunt, Dixerim eos, quocun{que} statu, quocun{que} sub axe; Viuam igitur quocun{que} solo; aut vbicun{que} locorum, Dissita quam{que} locis longè, procul inde remotis, Cambria siue tenet, teneant seu Cantia Rura Propitiâ bonitate dei, me crede scientem Viuere contentum{que}, illâ{que} ex parte beatum: Sic horas fallo, insumo sic temporis annos Lusibus ingenij, ingenuis quo{que} mentibus aptos. Fortè equidem dices! Releuaminis etia quaerens, Talia sollicitus; nulli vt mea carmina prosint. At mihi nempè viden! volat aetas; hinc voco Musas Quas vereor veneror{que} volens, sic{que} inuoco Diuas; His vitae spatijs & verni temporis aeuo Florenti stadio: nec me formidine terrent Immanes rerum fluctus, quibus astuat ingens Haec hominum domus, ac mundi vaesana vorag; Non liuor, leuis ira, tumens iecur, atra{que} bilis Torquebunt miserum, sapiam modò; sed ne{que} sperem Deposuisse, vel antè mea ista cadauera ponam Corpus humi moriens, cineres at{que} ossa sepulchr: Cum nemo his vitijs sine nascitur, optimus ille est Quem lacerant minimè, retrahantùe trahantue sequentem. Sum vacuus curis, à turbine liber, amoenum Rus geniale colo, lustro, lito, laudo Camoenas Syluestreis, quod aiunt, & agrestia numina Faunos! Me Galathaea, humilis precij redimita corymbris Poma, Pyros{que} manu, pressi{que} coagula lactis Rustica dona ferens! te celsa, superba Amaryllis, Regia, diues opum Nympha, auro, albo{que} orychalco, Ceu gemmis Asiae rigens ac dentibus Indis,
Iam tenet, e{que} tuis antris quasi pumice tectis, Cantantem sublimè ferent ad sydera Cygni; Iceler, O coeli{que} vias superato supernas! Quin simulac nobis illam monstraueris artem, Terras{que} trastus{que}, oleo{que} & lacte fluenteis, Vicinas tiimet sedes! velut ante verendus Cygneius cecinit vates; meliora sequendo, Qui magis ac tecum, dicam vrbicè, an aulicè viuam. . , , , . , . , .
This Poeme, entituled PALAE-ALBION, is digested into ten seuerall Bookes or ODES: Whereof, THe first, Ayming principally at the story of Sa∣mothes, and his Race, first Kings of this Iland is called— SAMOTHES. The second, Shewing the descent and comming in of Albion, (that so named the Iland;) and his defeat by Hercules: is entituled— ALBION. The third, Setting forth the Anarchy or Interregnum of the Giants, that liued here many hundred yeares before Brute, is thence named— GIGANTES. The fourth, Relating Brutus his establishing a King∣dome, and his Race successiuely Kings after him, is therefore styled— BRVTVS. The fift, (After the surcease of Brutes issue, in the direct line) bringing in Mulmutius Dunwallo, and his Race, Kings here, is thence called— MVMVTIV The sixt, Contayning Caesars conquest of the Land with the Romans time of gouernment, is en∣tituled— CAESAR. The seuenth, Being the comming of Hengist, and seuen Kingdomes of the Saxons; is thence na∣med— HENGISTVS. The eight, Shewing the often rapines of the Danes, with a seeming foundation of a kingdome, by con∣quest, & a tribute imposed by Sweno; thence called SWANVS. The ninth, The story of the Norman conquest and succession of Kings from William the Conqueror: and so styled— GVLIEMVS. The tenth, The Vnion of the long-diuided and dis∣sentious Realmes of England and Scotland, vn∣der the flourishing and peacefull reigne of our now most excellent Prince! and to his honour vowed,— IACOBVS.
Chronologia breuis ad sequentis Historiae seriem concinnata; & ad ordi∣nem Regum & tempora faciliùs animo concipienda, apprimèNoae Dila. Ante Chr. 2289. conducens & necessaria.Nohae Dilu. A. M. 1656 Assyr. Monarch. Belus,A.M. 1750 poll Diluuis 100. qui putatur Nim∣rod, Ninus, 1790. Semiramis A.M. 1840. Ninias Zamaeis Arius Arallus 1948. Xerxes Arma mithres Beluchus Balaeus Sethus Mamythus Aschalius Sphaerus2100. Mamylus Sparethus Aschatades2200. Amyntes Belochus Lamprides Sosares Lampraes2400. Panyas Sosarmus Mythraeus2500. Tetamos Teutaeus Chalais Anabos Babyos2700. Thyraeus Dercylus upacines2800. Laosthenes Pyritiades Ophrateus Epacheres3000. Acracames Tonos Conleros sie Sardanapalus Quem Regno priuant. Apud As∣syries. Belesus Phulus3100. 2. Reg. 15. 29. Tiglath. Pileset. Reg. 15. 29. Salmanas∣sar. Apud Me∣dos. Arbaces, A. 3077. Mandanes Sosarmus Artycas Biblia de He∣braeis. Peleg, natus est A M. 1750 post Dilu. 100 Abram, natus A. M. 1948. Isaac, natus Sem, moritur, 2158. Iacob & Esau nati, 2108. Ioseph natur. Aaron natus, 2370 Moses natus, 2374 Exitus ex Aegyp∣to, A. 2452. Ingressus Canaan & diuisio terrae. Iudices Debora, 161. Gedeon, 2652. Sampson Samuel Saul, A. 2880. Dauid, 2890. Salomon, A. 2930. fundat Templsi. A. 2932. Asa, A. 2988. Achab. Athalia, A. 3063. Sanhedrim, sine Consistorium Iu∣daicum. German. Reg. Tuisco filius No∣hae, A.M. 1787. post Dilu. 131. Mannus Ingaeuon Istaeuon, & vxor Frea. Hermion Marsus, ad quem Osyris cum Iside ex Aegypto, in Germaniam venit & arteis & agri∣culturam docuit. Gambriuius Sueuus Vandalus Teuto Alman. Q. anne Her∣cules alius sit filij Noricus Hnnus Heluet. Boius. Bous quo tempo∣re duae legiones in Asiā mis∣sae Cymbrorū & Amazonum quae Ephesū condebant. Ingramus Adelherus Larrein Vlfing, vocatur Vlysses, Brenner, quo tem∣pore Amazones ad Troiam. Hoctar Wolfeinus, alias Wickinger. Eius 3. fi∣lij Kells, Gall, Illyr. Vnde Celtae Galli & Illyrij. Homerus, circa An. 3030. Carthago condita circa an. 3070. Obit Hesiodus sub initium Olympia∣dum, circa A. 3170. Sicyonij R. in Pe∣loonneso. Agialaeus, A.M. 1860. Europs Telchin Ayis Thelxion Aegyrus Thurimacus Leucippus Mesapu, &c. Circa hoc tempus A∣thenis primū regnat, Cecrops, Cranaus. Deucalionts Dilu∣uium. Amphictyon Ericthonius Pandion, pater Pro∣gnes & Philomelae. Erictheus, pater Ori∣thyiae. Cecrops secundus, Pandion secundus, Aegaeus Theseus Demophoon Oxyntes Aphidas, vltimus ex stirpe Ericthei. Deinceps Melanthus Codrus, & inde Archontes. K. Tyri Abibelus Hy∣ram Baleasar Abdestartus Astartuss Ascrimus, Pheles. Ithobilus, siue Itho. Baal, Achabi socer per filiam Iezebel, Badezorus Matgenus Pygmalion a quo Dido fugit, circa An. 3060. Esayas floret, circa An. 3180. Argiui R. Inachus, qui fortè Iaan & iam se∣nex, A.M. 2090. Phoroneus Apis, qui & Osiris. Argus vnde Ar∣giui, Criasus Phorbas Triopas Phorbas Crotopus Sthenelas Gelanot, quem e regno pellit Da∣naus. Danaus Lynceus Abas Acrisius Sthenelas, cum patre Perseo. Euristheus Myce nis translato Regno. Atreus & Thyestes Plisthenes Agamemnon Aegysts Orestes Tisamenus & Pē∣thilus Orestae filiji sed desijt Regnū, oh reditum Hera∣clidarum, qui de∣inde regnant La∣cedaemone duae familiae, Corynthi tertia, circa An. 2850. Lycurgus, 2. 3070. Olympiades, cir∣ca annum 3170. Roma condita O∣lympiade septi∣ma. Britanni & Angl. R. Samothes, vel Mesech: vt ve . le est, ve∣nit n Iropam cum Gomero, Tuiscone, vel Aschenaz, circ. A.M. 1787. post Diluuium 131. ante Christum 2158. Magus Sarron Druis Bardus Longus, & Bardus 2. siue potius interre∣gnum ad Albi∣onis & Bergio∣nis tempora. Albion & Ber∣gion in Bri∣tanniam ve∣niunt. Alcides (sorsi∣tan cum ma∣tre) in Gal∣liam venit. Interregnum aliud. Danai Gnatae, & Gigantes. Brutus in Brit. venit, circa A.M. 8330. a Troiae exci. dio 70. Loerinus Madanus Mempricius Ebrankus Brutus 2. Leilus Luarudibrasus, B adudus Leyrus Leyri filiae cir∣ca annū 3160. Morganus Cunedagius Riuallo Goruntius Fes Memo∣rabilios. Babel Ninie, & Babvion conditae. Ante annum. 2150. . Sparta con∣dita a Sparto Phoronei, vel  filio. Deucan, circa 2440. Regnum Deucer Dardanus Ericthomus. Tros Ilus Lan∣meō, Pria∣mus, Exit∣dium Troiae. Ianus Picus Faunus Hercules Cacus occidit. Latinus Aeneas Ascanius. Syluins Posthum. Aeneas Sylius Latinus Syluius A. 2870. Alba Syluius, 292 Acpytus Syluins Calpetus Tybermus Syluiu Agrippa Syluius Alladius Auentinus Proca Amulius, Numitor, A 3197 Romulus & Reniu
A. M. 3200 ante Ch. 748 Reg. Assyr. Senacherib Assar. haddon Succumbunt Baby∣lons. ArkeanosA. M. 3300. Relvthus Ieraedin Saoucimus Kvnlladacus Nabopollassar Nabuchadnezar Belsazer Nabonedus Darius Persarum & Medorum Imperium. Cyrus, An. 3439. Cambyses Darius Histaspis Xerxes, A. 3405.3500. Artaxerxes Darius Nothus Artaxeixes Mnemon Artaxerex Ochus Arses Darius Codomannus ab Alexandro Victus. Graecorum Imperium, A. 3620. Alexander Magnus, & post eius obitum 4. eius Duces exer∣citus regnant in Sy∣ria, Graecia, Asia, & Aegypto, quorum v∣nus nec infimus in Syria Seleucus. Seleucus Nicanor Antiochus Soter Antiochas Theos3700. Seleucus Callinicus Seleucus Ceraumus Antiochus Magnus Selecucus Philopator Antiochus Epiphanes Epator Demetrius Soter Alexander Veles Demetrius Nicanor Annochus Eutheus Antiochus Sydetes Demetrius Antiochus Gryphus Antiochas Cuyzenus Tigranes ob intestina Seleucidarum bella e∣uocatus victor euasir, sed eo victo,3900. Romani Svriam in Prouinciam redegerunt.Romanorum Imperium. Caesar Augustus Tiberius Caligula ClaudiusA. M. 3999 Christ. 52. Nero 1. persec. Vespasiani duo Domitianus 2. persec. Nerua Traianus 3. persec. Adrianus 4. persec. Antonini duo 5. persec. Commodus Seuerus 6. per∣secut. Caracalla He∣liog. Seuerus Max.A. C h. 240. 7. persec. Gordianus. Iohannes Baptista Rex Regum & Saluator Mundi Christus, Apostoli & caeteri, Chri∣stiani, Antiochiae pri∣mum dicti, Act. 11. Synodus Apostolorum, A M. 3999. Christi 52. Papae, R. Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, Alex. Sixtus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, Victor, Zepherinus, Callistus, Vrbanus Pontanus Anteru Fabianus Cornelius, & Nouatus. Babylonij. & Medi. Nabonassar Nassius Porus Dalilaeus Merodach Arbianes A. 3235. Deioces Phraortes siue Atines Cyaxartes siue Astybaras Astvages Cyrus, tādē per totam Asiam do∣minatur, A. 3439. Biblia Sacra. Achas, A. 3206. Exechias, A. 3223. Manasses Circa an. 3230. capti∣uitas perpetua 10. Trib. 2. Reg. 18. Amon osias Zedechias Babylonem abduci∣tur, & Templi exci∣dium, A. 3372. Salathiel Zorobabel Hester, & restauratio Templi, A. 3532. Nehemias Iaddus Pontifex ab Alexandro Magno honorat. A. 3620. Hyrcanus Iudas Macchabaeus A. 3780. Ionathas Symon Io. Hyrcanus Aristobulus Alexander Iammaeus Alex, Salome. Aristobulus Hyrcanus Hierosolymae a Pom∣peio captae: & ille sacerdotium absque Regno Hircano re∣stituit. Antipater Idumaeus Herodes Mag. necat Infantes. Herod. Antip. occ. Ioh. Herod. Agrip. occ. Iac. Herodes Agrippa 2. quo Rege Hieroso∣lymarum excidium A. 4010. Polycarpus S. Io∣hannis Euangelistae Discipulus, floret circa Ann. 4120. A. Christ 170. Irenaeus. Germ. R. E Seythia aut Oriente aiunt circa annum 3490 cum suis co∣pijs, venit ad ostia Rheni Marcomyrus ex Antenore Troiano ori∣undus. Antenor, ex cuius vxore Cambra dicti Sycambri. Priamus Helenus Diocles Helenus Basanus Clodomirus Nicanor Marcomirus Coldius Antenor Clodomirus Merodacus Cassander Anthari s Francus Clogio Hermerus Marcomirus Clodomirus Antenor Ratherius Roterodami Conditor. Richimerus Odemarus Marcomirus Clodomirus Farabertus Sunno Hildericus. Bartberus. Britanni. Sicilius Iago Kymarus Gorbodugus eius filij mu∣tuis vulneri∣bus confossi, viz. Ferrex & Porrex, regnum Bri∣tan. in 5. partes diui∣sum, e schismate eruen∣dum Mulmu∣tio relique∣runt. Mulmutius, A M. 3507. ante Christū 441. Belinus, & Brennus, An. 3547. ante Christū 401. Gurgustius Guithelinus Cecilius, Kymarus, Elaumus Morindus Gorgonia∣nus & 5. fratres. Emerianus, & fex cius fratrū filij. Cadelfrs Coelus Porrex & alij 24. Reges, minus celebrati no∣minis, intra spacium 200 annorum. Quorum no∣mina vix quicquam a∣liud de ijs habetur, ad∣us{que} Heliam. Helva Ludus Cassibelinus Theoman∣tius, Cymbelinus Guiderins Aruiragus Marius Coilus Lucius, first christned K. of this land, Papa Eleu∣therio. Seuerus Rex & Imperat. Bassianus Carausius. R. Romani Tatius cum Romu∣lo, Nama Pomp. A. 3237. Tullus Hostilius, 3280. Ancus Martius Tarquinius Priscus e ruius Tullus Tarquiius Super cum filio Sexto & tota familia & Re∣ges omnino pulfi ob Lucretiae rap. tum. Consules primi Iunius Brutus, & Valerius Poplicola, A. 3443. Leges 12. Tabula∣rum, Deemuiri, & Censores. Roma a Gallis capta, & Camillo liberata A. M. 3562. Bellum cum Pyrrho. Bellum Punicum. Cathago deleta. Numantia deleta. Bel∣lum Dalmaticum, Iugurthinum, Cymbricum, Marsicum, Mithridaticū, Gladiatorum. Syria a Pompeio subacta. Britannia a Caesare petita. Bellú Hierosolym. Britan. Marcoman. Sucuicsi, &c. Schisma primum Romae, inter Pa∣pas Corne∣lium, & Noua∣tum, a quo Nouatian idicti. Res Memo∣rabiliores. Nahum Propheta floret. Tyrtaeus Zaleucus Locrensis Legislator. Draco & 7. sapiētes A. 3340. Anacharsi Phalaris Sappho Cresus Daniel Pindarus, A. 3470. Miltiades Malachias Esdras Thucidides Sophocles Socrates, A. 3550. Aristoteles Zeno Berosus Hanibal Plautus Ennius Carneades Terentius Cornelius Nepos Virgilius, & Horatius, circa annum 3900. Tigranes ob intestina Seleucidarum bella e∣uocatus victor euasir, sed eo victo,3900. Romani Svriam in Prouinciam redegerunt.Romanorum Imperium. Caesar Augustus Tiberius Caligula Claudius3947. Christus. Nero 1. persec.A. M. 3999 Christ. 52. Vespasiani duo Domitianus 2. persec. Nerua Traianus 3. persec. Adrianus 4. persec. Antonini duo 5. persec. Commodus Seuerus 6. per∣secut. Caracalla He∣liog. Seuerus Max.A. Ch. 240. 7. persec. Gordianus. Iohannes Baptista Rex Regum & Saluator Mundi Christus, Apostoli & caeteri, Chri∣stiani, Antiochiae pri∣mum dicti, Act. 11. Synodus Apostolorum, A M. 3999. Christi 52. Papae, R. Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, Alex. Sixtus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, Victor. Zepherinus, Callistus, Vrbanus Pontanus Anteru Fabianus Cornelius, & Nouatus. Babylony. & Medi. Nabonassar Nassius Porus Dalilaeus Merodach Arbianes A. 3235. Deioces Phraortes siue Altines Cyaxartes siue Astybaras Astvages Cyrus, tádé per totam Asiam do∣minatur, A. 3439. Biblia Sacra. Achas, A. 3206. Exechias, A. 3223. Manasses Circa an. 3230. capti∣uitas perpetua 10. Trib. 2. Reg. 18. Amon osias Zedechias Babylonem abduci∣tur, & Tempoli exci∣dium, A. 3372. Salathiel Zorobabel Hester, & restaurantio Templi, A. 3532. Nehemias Iaddus Pontifex ab Alexandro Magno honorat. A. 3620. Hyrcanus Iudas Macchabaeus A. 3780. Ionathas Symon 10. Hyrcanus Aristobulus Alexander Iammaeus Alex, Salome, Aristobulus Hvrecanus Hierosolymae a Pom∣peio captae: & ille sacerdotium absque Regno Hircano re∣stituit. Antipater Idumaeus Herodes Mag. necat Infantes. Herod. Antip. occ. Ioh. Herod. Agrip. occ. Iac. Herodes Agrippa 2. quo Rege Hieroso∣lymarum excidium A. 4010. Polycarpus 5. Io∣hannis Euangelistae Discipulus, floret circa Ann. 4120. A. Christ 170. Irenaeus. Germ. R. E Seythia aut Oriente Aiunt circa annum 3490 cum suis co∣pijs, venit ad ostia Rheni Marcomyrus ex Antcnore Troiano ori∣undus. Antenor, ex cuius vxore Cambra dicti Sycambri. Priamus Helenus Diocles Helenus Basanus Clodomirus Nicanor Marcomirus Coldius Antenor Glodomirus Merodacus Cassander Anthari s Francus Clogio Hermerus Marcomirus Clodomirus Antenor Ratherius Roterodami Conditor. Richimerus Odemarus Marcomirus Clodomirus Farabertus Sunno Hildericus Bartberus. Britanni. Sicilius Iago Kymarus Gorbodugus eius filij mu∣tuis vulneri∣bus confossi, viz. Ferrex & Portex, regnum Britan. in 5. partes diuisum, e schismate eruendum Mulmutio relique∣runt Mulmutius, A M. 3507. ante Christú 441. Belinus, & Brennus, An. 3547. ante Christú 401. Gurgustius Guthelinus Cecilius, Kymarus, Elaumus Morindus Gorgonia∣nus & 5. fratres. Emerianus, & fex cius fratrú filij. Cadelfrs Coclus Porrex & alij 24. Reges, minus celebrati no∣minis, intra spacium 200 annorum. Quorum no∣mina vix quicquam a∣liud de ijs habetur, ad∣us{que} Heliam. Helva Ludus Cassibelinus Theoman∣tius, Cymbelinus Guiderins Aruiragus Marius Coilus Lucius, first christned K. of this land, Papa Eleu∣therio. Seuerus Rex & Imperat. Bassianus Carausius. R. Romani Tatius cum Romulo Nama Pomp. A. 3237. Tullus Hostilius, 3280. Ancus Martius Tarquinius Priscus e ruins Tullus Tarquinius Superit cum filio Sexto & tota familia & Re∣ges omnino pulfi ob Lucretiz rap. tum. Consules primi Iunius Brutus, & Valerius Poplicola, A. 3443. Leges 12. Tabula∣rum. Desemuiri, & Censores. Roma a Gallis capta, & Camillo liberata A. M. 3562. Bellum cum Pyrrho. Bellum Puncium. Cathago deleta. Numantia deleta. Bel∣lum Dalmaticum, Iugurthinum, Cymbricum, Marsicum, Mithridaticú, Gladiatorum. Syria a Pompeio subacta. Britannia a Caesare petita. Bellū Hierosolym. Britan. Marcoman. Sueuieū, &c. Schisma primum Romae, inter Pa∣pas Corne∣lium, & Noua∣tum, a quo Nouatian idicti. Res Memo∣rabiliores. Nahum Propheta florer. Tyrtaeus Zaleucus Locrensis Legislator. Draco & 7. sapiétes A. 3340. Anacharsi Phalaris Sappho Crefus Daniel Pindarus, A. 3470. Miltiades Malachias Esdras Thucidides Sophocles Socrates, A. 3550. Aristoteles Zeno Berosus Hanibal Plautus Ennius Carneades Terentius Cornelius Nepos Virgilius, & Horatius, circa annum 3900. T. Liuius Strabo Q. Curtius Athenaeus Montanistarumh h∣refis, circa tem∣pora Imperatoris Antonini Philo∣sophi, irrepsit, A. M, 4110, A. Christi 160 Herodianus Dio Cashus Origenes Paulus Samosatenus & haeretici.
A.M. 4200. Christ. 252. Imperatores. & Pontifices. Decius. 8. persecutio, Valerianus 9. persec. Gallienus Claudius. Aurelianus Tacitus Probus, Carus, Dioclesian, 10. pers.A.M. 4300. Christ. 352. Constantinus Magnus pax Ecclesiae datur. Diuisio Imperij inter Const. M. filios. Iulianus Iouinianus Valent. Gratianus. Theodosius, & secun∣da Imperij diuisio inter Theodosij fi∣lios. Valentinianus.4400. Gothi Rom. Imper. vastant, Constantinopoli Regnant Leo Thrax Zeno, Anastasius, Iustinus, Iustinianus, Iustinus4500. Christ. 552. Tiberius Mauricius Phocas Heraclius Constantinus Heracleonas Constans4600. Constant, Pogona∣tus, Iustinianus secundus, Philippus Arthemius Anastasius Theodosius Leo Isaurus Constant. Coprony∣mus,4700. Christ. 752. Leo, Constant. Irene, tertia Imperij diuisio. Carolus Magnus Ludouicus Pius Lotharius4800. Lodouicus Carolus Caluus Lud. Balbus Carolus Crassus Arnolphus Ludouicus Conradus Henricus Auceps Otto Magnus Otto secundus4900. Christ. 952. Otto tertius Henricus secundus Conradus Henricus dictas Ni∣ger. An. Christi 1040. Lucius, Steph, Xistus, Dionysius, Foelix, Eutychianus, Caius, Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius, Melchiades, Syluester Marcus, Iulius, Liberius Damasus Siricius Anast. Innocent. Zosimus, Bonif. Coelestinus Sixtus Leo Magnus Hilarus Simplicius Foelix Gelasius Anastasius Symmachus Hormisda Iohan. Faelix, Bonif. Ioh. Agapetus, Siluerius, Vigilius, Pelagius, Iohan. Catellinus, Pelagius, Gregorius, Sabinus, Bonif. duo. Deusdedit Bonifacius Honorius, Seuerinus, Iohan. Theodorus, Martius Eugenius Vitalianus Adeodatus Domnus Agatho Benedictus Iohan. Conon. Sergius, Ioh. duo. Constan. Gregor. duo. Zacharias Steph. duo. Paulus, Const. Steph. Adrianus, Leo 3. Steph. Paschal. Eugenius, Valent. Gregor. Serg. Leo 4. Benedict. Nicolaus, Hadr. Ioh. Mar. Hadr. Steph. Formosus, Bonif. Steph. Rom. Theod. Ioh. Bened Leo, Christof. Serg. Anast. Lado. Ioh Leo, Steph. Ioh. Leo, Steph. Mar, Agapetus, Io. Leo, Bened. Io. Bened. Bonif. Bened. Io. Bonif. Ioh. duo. Gregor. Syluester, Io. tres. Serg. Bened. Io. Bened. Syluest. Gregor. Clem. Damasus, Leo, Ioh. Germ. & Franci K. Clodius Gualtherus Dagober∣tus, Clogio Clodomi∣rus, Geuebal∣dus, Richimerus Theodorus Clogio Marcomi∣rus, Dagober∣tus, Genebal∣dus, Pharamuu∣dus, Clodius Merouaeus Childerius Clodouaeus Clothrius & filij 4. Chereber∣tus, Chilpericus Clothar. 2. Dagober∣tus, Clodouaeus Childericus & Clotharius Maiores Domus, Pipinus Car. Mar∣tellus, Pipinus qui Rex pro∣clamatur. Carolus M. Ludouicus Car. Calnus Lud. Balbus Carloman∣nus, Car. Sim∣plex, Car. Cras∣sus, Lud. Trans∣marinus, Lotharius Lodouicus, Hugo Ca∣petus, ex stirpe fa∣mosa. Wittikindi, Robertus, Henricus. Britan. R. Alectus Asclepiodatus, Constantius Constantinus M. & eius filij. Et consequen ter Imper. Ro¦mani Reges Brytanniae, re∣putatur adus{que} Constant um Trannum, & Costantium e∣ius filium, qui a Voitigero. A. 447. excisus est: inde Vortiger, Hēgritus Saxo & eius filij, & successo∣res debella∣tis Britā∣nis, in 7. Re∣gnis adus{que} Egberti tem∣pora, A. 802. Ethelbertus Rex Cantij. Cherebetti Regis Fran∣ciae filiam vx, duxit, & Augustinus eisuperue∣nit. Cadwalladar vltimus Bri∣tannorum Rex, circa A. 660. Ina Rex West Saxonum, A. 688. Eius successor; West Saxo num Rex. Egbertus, ante A. 837. omnia 7. Regna Saxo∣num in Monar∣chiam reduxit. Ethelwolfus Ethelbaldus & fratres, Edward. senior Adelstanus Edmondus Eldredus Edwynus Edgar Edw. Martyr, Ethelredus Edmondus Canutus Haraldus Hardi-canutus Edw. nomine Confessor. Harald. a Gu∣lielmo Cōque∣store obrutus. Scot. R. Quidam a Gathelo Mosis. coae∣taneo, & Symone Becho Storum Regum se∣riem de∣ducūt. Nos Polydorum sequuti ab hoc solummodo Fer∣gusio didu∣imu. Pergusius cū Alarico Gothorum Rege Ro∣mam Pofectus, An. Christ. 410 Eugenius Fergusius Fugenius Dongardus Cōstatinus Congallus Goranus Eugen us Conuallo Amtellus Aidanus Chēnethus Eugenius Ferquardus Donaldus Maldonus Eugenij duo Ambercle∣tus, Eugenius Mordacus Etsinus Eugenius Fergusius Saluatus Achaues Conuallus Dongallos, Alpinus Chēnethus Donaldus Cōstātinus Ethus Gregorius Donaldus Cōstātinus Malcolmus Indulphus Dufus Culenus Chēncthus Cōstātinus Grimus Malcolmus Duncanus Macbethus Hispani. R. West  in Hispania. Athanaricus Alaricus Radagisus Ataul, hus Sgerieus The daredus Totusundus Alaricus Gea arcus Athaaricus Theodginus Athanagldus , Liwa secundus Gaudematus, Sis. hilla, senaudus thus, Bamba Eigius Rodericus Pelagius Fauila Alfonsus Ca∣thol cus, Froila Vere∣mundus, Alphonsus Ca∣stus, Ranierius Alphonsus 3. Ordonius Ramirus Ordonius Sanctius Ramirus Vermundus Alphonsus Veremundus Ferdinandus qui Regna A∣stuiarum Legi∣onis & Castllae ducta Sanctia Alphonsi filia in vnum con∣iungit. Res & viri Celebres. Porphytes Manes Arius Athanasius, A Christi 320. floret. Concilium A. Christi 326. Iamblichus Nazianzeius. Augustinus. Concil. Oecum. 2 Cōstāti∣nopoli. A. Christ. 381 Machomdes Concil Oecumen. 6. Constan. 681. Concil. Ocumen. 7. Niceae habitum, A. Christi 787. Beda Damascenus Alcumus Iohannes Scotus Hinmarus. Concil. Oecumen 8. A Christi 870. Theophvlactus Luitpradus Rhazes, Medicus, Guido Atuus Haymo ildebrandus postea Papa.
A. M. 5000 Christ. 1052 Germ. & Romani, Imperatores. Pontifices. Henricus qu us, An. Christi 1056. Henricus quintus, Lotharius Saxo, Conradus Fidericus Barbaros∣sa dictus.A. M. 5100. Christ. 1152 Henricus Asyer Otto Quartus Fridericus Secundus ConradusM. 5200. Richardus Ang. Rodolphus . Adolphus Nsou Albertus Austr. Henricus Larzenb. Lud. Bauarus Carolus Quartus5300. Christ. 135. Wenceslaus Rupertus Sigismondus Albertus Fridericus5400. Maximilianus An. Christi 193. Carolus Quintus An. Christi 1517. FerdinandusA. M. 5500. Christ. 1552 Maximilianus Kodolphus Matthias Ferdiuandus An. 1619. Romani, Pontifices. Victor. Steph. Nieol Alex. Honor. Hildebr, siue Greg. 7. Victor. Vrban. Paschalis, Gelas. Call. Honor. Innoc. Coelestinus, Lucius, Engenius, Anast, Hadr. Alex. Lucius, Vib. Gregor. Clem. Coelestinus, Innoc. Honorius, Gregor. Coelestinus, Innocentius, Alex. Vrban. Clem. Gregorius, Innoc Adrian. Io. Nicol. Mart. Honor. Nicolaus, Coelest. Bonif. Benedict. Clem. Io. Nicol. Bened. Clem. Innoc. Vrban. Gregor. Vrban. Bonif Innoc. Gregor. Ioh. Mar Eugenius, Nicolaus, Calixtus. Pius 2. 5400(d ctus antè Aencas Svluius.) Paulus, Xistus, Innoc. Alex. Pius, Iulius, Leo, Adr. Paulus, Iulius, Marcellus, Paulus 4. Pius 4. Pius 5. Gregor. 13. Xistus 5. Vrban. 7. Gregor. 14. Innoc. 9. Clem. 8. Leo 11. Paulus 5. Franci R. Philippus Ludonicus Philippus Ludonicus Philip. Ludou. Ludouicus qui & sanctus. Philip. Audax Philip. Pulcher Lud. 10. Philip. Longus Philippus Va∣lesius Iohannes Carolus 5. Carolus 6. Carolus 7. Ludou. 11. Carolus 8. Lud. 12. Franciscus Henricus Franciscus 2. Carolus 9. Henr. 3. Henr. 4. di∣ctus Nauar∣raeus. Angli R. Guielmus cō∣quaestor 1066. Guliel Rufus Henr. 1. Stephanus Henr. 2. Richardus Iohannes Henr. 3. Eduard. 1. Eduard. 2. Eduard. 3. Gallias vic. Richard. 2. Henr. 4. Henr. 5. Henr. 6. Eduard. 4. Eduard. 5. Richard. 3. Henr 7. Henr. 8. Eduard. 6. Maria Elizabetha an. 1558. Scot. R. Malcolmus Duncanus Donaldus Edgar Alexan. Dauid Malcolm. Gulielmus Alex. 2. Alex. 3. Io. Baliolus Rob. Bru∣sins Edu. Balio∣lus Dauid Bru∣sius Robertus 1 Rob. 2. Rob. 3. Iacobus 1. Iacobus 2. Iacobus 3. Iacobus 4. Iacobus 5. Maria Iacobus 6. in Scotia: & idem Iacobus 1. in Magna Brytannia. Hispani. R. Sanctius Alfonsus Alfonsus 7. Alfonsus 8. fiue bonus. Sanctius Ferdinand. Alfonsus 9. Henr. 1. Ferd. 3. Alfonsus A∣stronomus. Sanctius Ferdin. 4. Alfons. 11. Petrus Henr. 2. Iohan. 1. Henr. 3. Iohan. 2. Henr. 4. Ferdin. 5. Philippus Carolus 5. Philip. 3. Philip. 3. Res & viti insigniret. Lanfrancus Haymo Bernardus Reges Hierosolymi∣tani Christiani, an∣no Christi 1100. Gratianus Lombardus Primislaus, Rex pri∣mus Boemiae, cir∣ca annum Christi 1100. Bonauentura Thomas Aquinas Scotus. Ottoman primus, an∣no Christi 1299. Bartolus Frosardus Ioh. Hus Tamerlanes Trapeuntius Sclopparum & Artis Typographica in∣uentio, circa ann. 140. Anno Christi 1453 Constantinopolis a Turcis capta. Lutherus Erasmus Zanchius Bellarminus Baronius Sealiger Lipsius. Iam florent, Regnant ANNO Mundi 5568. ANNO Gratiae 1619. & Olympiadis 597. 1.
