23517.5 S4930 24089313 27162
A SHORT SVRVEY OF THE KINGDOME of Svveden CONTAINING A BRIEFE DES∣cription of all the Provinces of this whole Dominion. As also the riches of this Kingdome, the antiquitie, nature, and manners of this Nation. Together with the Government of this Realme, Might and Power of this great King, as well by Sea as by Land, his great Officers, his Customes, and Reuenues of the Crowne. A Catalogue of many of the Kings of SWEDEN, of those especially who have reigned these last five hundreth yeares, with some of their most memorable Acts and Deeds, with their Alliance, and Issue, or Off-spring, Something also more particularly concerning that Illustrious in∣vincible Great GVSTAVUS ADOLPHUS the 2. and some of his most Memorable Acts since his comming to the Crowne, as well before, as since his entring into Germany, untill this pre∣sent yeare 1632. LONDON, Printed for Michael Sparke and are to  sold at the Bl Bible in Greene Arbo, 1632.
The Contents or principall heads handled in this whole Discourse. 1 OF the division of all these Northerne Countries, and antiquity of the king∣dome of Sweden, together with the large extent of this dominion, and the commodities this kingdome af∣fords. 2 A more particular survey of the kingdome of Sweden, with a shore description of the particular parts or Provinces thereof, and the be∣nefit they yeeld to the king and sub∣iect.
3 Of the nature, manners, and cu∣stomes of the Swedish or Suetians, and into how many rankes or de∣grees the people are divided, where the Clergie is also comprehended. 4 Of the politicke and civill govern∣ment of the kingdome of Sweden. Of their five great Colledges, or courts of Iustice, and some others also. Of the chiefe great officers of the king∣dome. Of the might and power of the king of Sweden, both by sea and land: of his horse and foot forces, and great store of brasse ordnance. Of the great number of warre-ships and other ships for seruice, and the great number of marrriners wherewith this kingdome is for all occasions furnished.
6 Of customes and tributes, or subsi, dies ordinary and extraordinary belonging to the king of Sweden. 7 A catalogue of some kings of Swe∣den, together with some of their most memorable acts. 8 A more particular survey of the last kings of this countrey, of these last 500. yeares, wih some other prin∣cipall acts, alliance, issue, or off∣spring. 9 Of great Gustavus Adolphus this present king now reigning, with his most memorable Acts, both before and after his entring into Germany.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE KINGDOME OF SWEDEN. I. OVr moderne Geogra∣phers call all those Northern countries of Europe declining to∣wards the North; the Northern world.Division of the Northern world. This whole countrey (say they) is divided into two parts, Scania, and Dania, Scandia, or Scan∣dinania, by Pliny, called an Iland of unknowne greatnesse, hems in & begirts about all the nor∣thermost part of Europe. This is a large and vast Region, extending it selfe from the 55. to the 72. degree of northerly latitude, above 1000.
English miles, and from the 25. to the 65. degree of longitude, or 2400 of our miles. On the south side, it borders on Germany and Denmarke; on the North and West, on the Ocean Sea, and on the East on Russia. The parts of this countrey lying neerest to the South, where the Pole is not ele∣vated above 60 degrees is indifferent temperat; the Region lying betwixt the 60. degree and the arctick circle, are not so temperate, howbeit, the intemperature of the ayre is well regulated with the fertility of the soyle, in such places e∣specially as are not covered over with woods, or rocks, in the south & easterne parts principally. But the extreme, or most notthern parts, lying betwixt the arctick circle, and the pole arctick, enjoy neither a temporate ayre, nor yet a fruitful soile, and since, by reason of the faint heat of the Sun, corne could not there well ripen, therefore the wise Creator of all things hath furnished these countries with great variety of wild beasts and divers rivers, lakes & gulfes furnished with variety of wholesome fishes, for the sustaining of the inhabitants lives. It would seem that this Scandia was in former times far more populous, then it is at this time, witnesse these frequent transmigrations, and, as it were, inundations of the Scanzian people into other remote regions of the world; when as partly by reason of the mul∣titude, and naturall fecundity or fruitfulnes of that people, partly by reason of dearth of corn, & partly by their inclination to war and avoyding idlenes, like Bees they sought out new hives for
themselves and their children, and those great heapes of stones, even at this day in the most desarts & woods to be seen, & in former times, no doubt gathered together to cleanse the high waies, do undoubtedly evidence unto us, that in former times all those places have bin peopled, and therefore not without great reason, did the ancient writers call this country, a shop of peo∣ple: Officinam gentiū populorū que vaginam, & from hence have we not only the Normans, Suevians, Vandals, & divers other nations: but the Westor∣goths, and Ostrogoths, also who after many pere∣grinations, thorow many Provinces and King∣domes, whom they wearied out with their wars, at length they setled themselves in Spain, where even at this day they beare rule. This Scandia, or Scādinavia,Antiquity of the kingdome of Sweden. comprehends under it 2 northern kingdomes, Sweden & Norway. The kingdome of Sweden, as witnesse the Scanzian hi∣stories, is more ancient then any of the others, from whose Kings hath the ancient families of the Kings of Denmark & Norway, are desceneded for Dan first King of Denmark, from whence this country was called Dania, or Danmarchia was the sonne of Humelus the 16 King of Sweden, and the Norvegians, in their Chronicle, before ever they come to their owne, reckon vp 25 Kings of Swe∣den, of whom is descended Hwithen, by the mo∣ther descended of one Soluon, a certaine Prince of Norway succeeded him in his dominion, and haviuing not a little inlarged the same, left it to his lawfull heires and successros, from whom
Haraldus Harsagher, being lineally descended in the fourth degree, having vanquished and ex∣pelled all the other petty Kings, did there first of all establish an absolute Monarchy, as wit∣nesseth the ancient Chronicle of Norway, writ∣ten by Master Iohn Martinus Slangerupensis, and published in Denmarke, Anno. 1595. Of this kingdome of Sweden, I purpose now to say some thing, as I finde it written in the Swe∣dsh History, howbeit, as briefely as I can: and speaking of the countrey, I shall say something of the several Provinces and Territories belong∣ing to this Crowne, the commodities and riches they yeeld, both to King and Subject; as also concerning the politicke government, together with divers customes of this countrey. In the next place, something shall be said of the might and power of this great King, both by Sea and Land, his chiefe Officers of State, &c. and then come wee to the Kings of that countrey, both ancient and of latter times, with some of their chiefe acts, and the latter Kings alliances. In the last place is something more particularly said concerning this great Gustavus Adolphus now raigning, and his chiefe acts, both before and since his expedition into Germany, briefly hand∣led. The King of Sweden, or Swethland, call it as you list, although untill now of late yeeres, not so much taken notice of in these parts of the world as many other Princes and Potentates; yet may
it well appeare that hee is no meane Prince, nor of small power. His chiefe countrey, and from which he takes his chiefe denomination, is cal∣led by some Suconia,Suconia. and the people from thence Sucones: as also, and with us most frequently Suevia,Suevia. and the people Swevi; now there is in high Germany, another countrey founding some∣what like it, called Suevia, the people Suevi, and in high Dutch, Swaben, bordering on Bavaria, be∣ing a colonie in former times come out of this countrey of Sweden, of whom my purpose is not here to speake. This potent King then hath un∣der his dominion, not onely this country of Swe∣den, properly so called, but also Gothland, Flint∣land, and a great part of Lapland, besides some Territories in the dominion of the great Duke or Knez of Russia, or Muscovia, as hereafter shall appeare. This countrey is a very fruitfull soyle, a land flowing with milke and honey, and yeel∣ding corne in great abundance; besides the great abundance of mettalls digged out of the bowells of the earth, and the excellency of the pastures of this land, may from hence appeare, that some countrey people of Holland, removing their habitation into Sweden, affimed that they made as much butter of 60. measures of milke there, as they did in Holland of a hundred the like measures. This pleasant countrey is reple∣nished with innumerable lakes, furnished with most dainty fishes; & out of these same lakes do run and issue out many pleasant and profitable
rivers. This country is in the South parts more plain & even; but towards the North and West more mountainous, not without great store of woods, very usefull for the fining of those met∣tals, in so great abundance digg'd out of many of those mountaines. The maritane parts not of Swethland onley, but of Finland also, are for the most part environed with high and steepe rocky hils & Ilands, many of them being scarce cove∣red with greene grasse, and this is the cause why it is so hard and difficult a matter for strangers, without some skilfull Pilot of the naturall inha∣bitans, to saile neere their shore, and strangers at their first approaching wonder that such a coun∣try should afford the inhabitants meanes to su∣staine life, until such time, as they are better ac∣quainted with the inner parts of the countrey; and this land hath likewise commerce with the Ile of Brittaine Denmarke, Norway, Poland, Russia, and such other Notherne Regions beyond the 50 or 51 degrees of Northerly latitude, that it bringeth forth none of that noble liquor of the grape, which is notwithstanding in great abun∣dance brought from other countries, and be∣sides, they are well furnished with good ale and beere for their ordinary drinke. 2. Division of the kingdome of SwedenThe Kingdome of Sweden is divided into Swe∣den, Gothland, Finland, Ingria and Esthionia. Swe∣den, or Swethland, called Suecia, or Sucovia, into Sucovia, properly so called, and the Northlands,
Nordlandias. Of Sucovia, properly so called,Sucovia, and the parts thereof. are these parts or Provinces following. Vplandia, Vestmania, Dalecharlia Nevira and Suedermania. This country VplandiaVplandia. hath most commonly bin graced with the pre-eminence above the rest, and where the King hath most commonly kept his Court.Conmodities of this coun∣trey. This country is very well furnished with plenty of very good corne, the which is li∣berally imparted to these daily diggers of met∣talls upon the mountaines.Mines in this countrey. Division of Vplandia. It is not destitute of good mines of yron, and leed especially, and in some places, of silver also, although not very much. It is againe divided into three folk-lands (as they call them) that is; shires, or Provinces of three people; and these againe sub-divided into smaller parts, much answerable to our division of hundred, and which name they also attribute unto them. Of all the cities and townes, not on∣ly of this, but of all the other Provinces of the Swedish dominions, StackholmeStockholme. is the chiefe, and where the King most cōmonly makes his abode and residence, seated in an Iland among the wa∣ters, as Venice, for the which cause it had this name imposed. By meanes of the lake Melenus it hath brought from the inland al maner of grain, butter, cheese, and such other commodies use∣full for the life of man, as also copper, yron, and other mettals; and again, by the same way sends them back such cōmodities as are brought from remote regions: and by the sea it is supplied with wine, oile, salt, &c. It is much of the same degree of northerly latitude with the city Aberden in the north
of Scotland, it being seated in the South part of Sweden, to wit, betwixt the 58. and 59. degree. Next unto it, is Vpsalia,Vpsalia. somtime the royal seat of the adjacent northerne parts: for there was kept the Kings Court, the supreme court of justice, and there was also the Archbishops sea with a faire cathedrall Church, the which onely of all the rest, continueth yet untill this day. There there is also a famous Vniversity, of the which more hereafter. This City is seated, as it were, in the very center of this rich Province, on the banke of the River Sala. Besides these, there are yet in this Province some others of good note, howbeit, inferiour to the former, to wit, Enecopia, Sigrundia, Oregrundia. The next Province of Sneonia, is Vestmania,Vestmania. in fertility nothing inferiour to Vplandia, but in mettalls farre exceeding the same: for in it is a very rich silver mine, called Salbergh; as for good yron and steele, there is there also great abun∣dance,Rich Mines. where mines of copper, lead and brim∣stone are not also wanting. The chiefe Citty thereof is called Grosia, and commonly Westeras, adorned with a Bishops sea, and a cathedrall Church, where is also a saire stately castle to be seene, and heere may one see great store of cop∣per and lead brought from the hils of that coun∣trey: There are yet besides this, the Townes Arbogia and Koping abounding with the same mettalls, but yron especially. The Province of Dalecharlia,Dalecharlia. although it be
not inferiour to the former in the abundance of mettalls and mineralls, yet in the abundance of good copper digged out of these deepe vaults and cavernes, to the no small amazement of such as are not acquainted with such sights; it doth farre exceede any other; and besides copper, the same myne yeeldeth yet great store of brim∣stone, alum and copperas. And the water which is drawne from thence,A profitable water. changeth yron into good copper, with the losse of the fourth part, if the waight of the yron be in small pieces; and the third part only, if the pieces be great and thick. This countrey yeelds also good store of graine; howbeit, scarce sufficient to furnish those labo∣rious painefull pioners, there being there such a number of them maintained at worke. Next unto it, is Nericia,Nericia. where although there be a silver myne, yet yeelding but small bene∣fit, is therefore neglected. The mynes of brim∣stone yeeld also store of alum and copperas. It would seeme, that all the inhabitants of this countrey, are borne naturall Smiths: for they send abroad into all the neighbouring countries all manner of yron implements. They have but one citty, called Orebregia. The last is Sudermannia,Sudermannia. which is neyther de∣stitute of mettalls, nor yet of good store of yron, especially the parts adjoyning to the great lake Melerus. The chiefe city of this countrey is Ny∣copia,Nycopia. a famous port for traficke, and withall ad∣orned with a faire castle, where the Duke of this
countrey most commonly had his abode. Next is StrengosiaStrengosa. an Episcopall Sea, with a Cathe∣drall Church, graced with the dead corps of Charles the 9. of that name, and father to the most famous and victorious King, great Gusta∣vus now raigning. There are yet some other Townes belonging to this teritory, to wit, Tolga, Torsilia, and Trosa,Telga, Torsilia, Trosa. all very rich and commodious for trafficke and commerce. The other part of Sweden, is properly called by the name of Northland.Northland. Of this Northland, there are two Provinces, Gestricia & Helsingia. Gestricia,Gestricia. had corne enough to supply the inhabitants wanrs, and besides, is well furnished with yron mynes: It hath in it one very good City, called Gervalia,Gerralia. seated by the Sea-side, as well for ex∣portation, as importation of all manner of com∣modities, and about halfe a daies journey from the coper mynes. By ancient records, it appea∣reth that this Helsingia in former times,Helsingia, sometimes a kingdome. was a ge∣nerall name, comprehending the rest of the Nor∣thern Provinces; and the Scanzian Histories doe testifie, that this same country in former times, was graced with the Title of a kingdome, and was governed by Kings, until such time as Iugel∣lus, King of Vpsalia, and father to Olavus Tretelias, King of Vermelandia, at his coronation burnt to ashes,Helsingians, an ancient peo∣ple. the last Helsingian King, with some other moe, whose kingdome hee after incorporated to that of Vpsalia. Many other things concerning the antiquity and valour of this Nation, for bre∣vity,
I purposely let passe. Among all the Swe∣dish people, these are most remarkable for their great hospitality; and besides,Affectionate to learning. they are so affe∣ctionate to learning, that although publike Schooles for good literature, be but rare among them, yet are private persons, who have attai∣ned to any learning, so forward to instruct their neighbours, that it is a hard mattter to find one going at plough, but hee can read. The inhabi∣tants of this country, are either Helsingians, pro∣perly so call'd, or Laplanders. Of the Helsingians, then the Provinces, or these: Helsingia properly so called, Medelpadia, Angermania, and Bothnia. This Hesingia, properly so called,Helsingia pro∣perly so cal∣led. was formerly caled Sundhede and Nordslegh. The soyle of this country is fruitfull enough, and the inhabitants much addicted to grazing of cattle, and many of them are very industrious in making of linnen cloth, and not unskilfull in many other manu∣all trades, some being also addicted to fishing. It containeth one good city, Hudinswaldia,Hudinswaldia. whose inhabitants transport into other countries great store of butter, tallow, hides and skins, pitch and rozen, masts for ships, clap-boord and the like. MedelpadiaMedelpadia. is much of the same nature & quali∣ty with Helsingia, but that it is somewhat narrow and fuller of woods. It is furnished with 2 good rivers, well stor'd with exceeding good fish, as Salmons especially, and it is supposed, that in former times, the Helsingian Kings kept their Court in this Countrey. Angermannia,Angermannia. although it be full of high and
steepe rockes, yet are the vallies so fruitfull, that if but once in ten yeeres compassed,Fertility of the soyle. they bring forth every yeere exceeding good corne, if the unseasonablnesse of the weather, doe not some∣times frustrate the husband-mans expectation. It is, as it were, divided into two armes, the one more southerly, running towards the West; the other towards the Sea, and further to the North. It is watered with one faire river, a∣bounding with divers sorts of good fishes, Sal∣mons especially: there is in it also one faire city. Bothnia.Bothnia is not so hilly as this Angermannia, and yet by reason of the sandy soyle, and the cold∣nesse of the climat, the countrey is not so fruit∣full as the former, which defect, notwithstan∣ding, is well supplyed with the abundance of other commodities. It is very well watered with divers great rivers, abounding with very good fish, Salmons, especially: It hath in it no city, howbeit, every Parish is, as it were, a towne of trafficke and commerce; for in som∣mer they provide store of corne, and such other commodities, as their neighbour Laplanders want, which they buy of such as trafficke into their countrey, which commodities in the win∣ter they carry into Lapland, where all rivers and rivers and lakes are hard frozen; and bring again backe from thence great abundance of rich furres, fishes dryed and hardened with the frost, and many the like commodities. Lappīonia, or Lappic.Next followes Lapponia, or Lappia, called com∣monly
Lapland, and the inhabitants Lappones, Laplanders. This is the northermost Province belonging to this potent Prince, a large and vast countrey, but hath neyther corne-fields, ci∣ties nor townes. The countrey is full of hills, woods, rivers, lakes and pooles; and in many places very good pastures. The people are in∣genious enough and civill, living most by hun∣ting and fishing:Their manner of life. They live like unto the Tar∣tars, travelling in great troupes together, with their cattell, and settle about some river or lake, where there is good pasture for their cattell, and when that is all eaten up,Their inno∣cencie. remove to another place. Adultery and murther is scarce heard of among that people, nor yet any theft, and merchants travelling that way, ordinarily leave their wares, covered onely with some old cloth to keepe off the snow, and after divers daies, at their returne, never misse any of their goods. Their apparrellTheir appa∣rell. is made of skinnes of beasts and wollen cloth brought to them from other coun∣tries; as for linnen cloth they have none; but to sew their clothes, they make thred of the nerves or sinewes of beasts, dryed, beaten, and dressed like flaxe,Strange thred. with the which they both sew their garments, & cover the same also with tinne, as we doe with silver and so adorne their garments therewith, as we doe with silver and gold lace. In former times, they were much ad∣dicted to sorcery and witchcraft, howbeit, that is now well reformed.Their tents. In stead of houses they
use tents made of the barke of birch sowed to∣gether.Their tents. In the winter time, they meete togther at certaine places, and faile not, where both these aforementioned merchants, find them to trafficke with the Kings customers,The meetings to demand their tribute, and the Churchmen were wont to come to catechize them, and to baptize their children, &c. But Charles the 9. and father to this famous and great Gustavus, now raigning, built in severall places of this country certaine chap∣pells, and churches for the exercise of Religion. Nature of the people.This people is ninble, active, and very good souldiers, which if envy it selfe should deny, yet that memorable battell fought neer Leipzig will witnes to the worlds end:Good soldiers Diamonds, Topazes, and Amethists▪ among them. some of the hils of this country yeeld precious stones, viz. Diamonds, Topazes, and Amethists. At this day, these Laplanders are subject to 3. Kings, of Sweden, Denmark, and the great Duke of Russia. The greatest, & the best part of this coun∣try, viz. all the South, & mediterranian part, be∣longs to the King of Sweden, a very huge vast countrey, extending from the 69. to the 71. de∣gree of northerly latitude, being above 400. miles in length and above 360. in breadth. Diuision of this countrey.This country is diuided into 5. several territo∣ries, or jurisdictions, called Lapmarchia, to wit, Vmalapmarck, Pitalapmarck, Tornlapmarck, & Kimi∣lapmarck, whose inhabitants pay tribute to none but to the King rf Sweden. To Norway, now under the danish King, belongeth that tract running a∣long
the sea-coast, called Finmarchia, and the in∣habitants Siofuni, or maritime inhabitants, li∣ving upon fish onely. The rest belongs to the Russian Prince, from the castle of Vardhus to the mouth of the milbrie sea, in the Swedish tongue called Trennes: in the Laplanders language Prihi∣nienni; and in the Russian speech Tarchanavolech even at this day. Now next after the country of Sweden followes in order Gothia,Gothia. or Gothland; as if one should say, a good land, being also subect to the Crowne of Sweden, & divided from the same by a great wood only. This is the ancient country, and naturall soile of so many warlike people, which in former ages have made their names famous to future generations, which honour many other nations would willingly assume unto themselves, the wch subject, for brevities sake, I must here passe. This countrey is divided into two parts,Division of this country. East and West Gothland. To West Gothland belong these Provinces following Vestrogothia, Dalia and Vermelandia, vnto which some joyne Hallandia. Vestrogothia,Vestrgothia. as it is somewhat inferiour to the most fruitfull parts of Sweden, in regard of corne; so doth it againe in good pastures for cattle ex∣ceed them; wherein consists their chiefe riches, as the others in their tillage, & increase of corn. It is also watered with many rivers, yeelding great store of fish, besides divers Citties and Townes. The CittiesCitties. are Gotheburgum, a great and rich staple for trafficke; Slara an
Episcopall Sea, Mariesladum, and Lidecopia. The townesTownes. thereof Fabropia, Sbredni, Hin, Bogesurd, Beretta, and Lindosia the old. Dalia.Dalia, is a mountainous countrey in most pla∣ces; hath many fishie rivers and lakes, and pa∣sture for cattell in no small abundance, in so much, that there are farre greater oxen found in that countrey, then in other places. Vermelandia.Vermelandia, among all the Gothish Provinces best inhabited, and colonies first carried thither by Olaus Trekelius. It is a hilly and wood-land countrey, yet not unfurnished, of yron mynes, and one of copper reasonable rich, but lately found aut. In it is one citty called Carolostadium,Carolostadium. built by Charles the 9. in a place before called Tingualla, Hallandia, a little countrey adjoyning thereto, because belonging to the King of Den∣marke, I there of set purpose passe by. The Provinces of East-Gothland, are Ostrogothia, Smalandia, and Oelandia, with which in former times, were also reckoned Gotlandia, Scania, and Blockingia Ostrogothia,Ostrogothia. is for the most part a plaine champian countrey, and so fruitfull, that it ex∣ceedeth many other Provinces of Sweden, and by some thought,Fertility of the soyle. not to equall onely, but even to exceede Vpland it selfe, the principall Province of the whole Swedish dominion. It is exceeding pleasant, and very well furnished with many fishie rivers, abundance of wild beasts and wild fowle; and finally, whatsoever is useful for mans sustnance, except wine and salt. Neither is it
unfurnished of mynes in the mountanous parts of Godegard, Hellestaberg, and Vangaberg. In it is seated the City Vadstenan, adorned with a faire castle, and an Abbey dedicate to Saint Brigeta. There is besides it, Scheningia, sometimes of great fame and note, but now reduced to the forme of a Towne, Laenicopia, an Episcopall Sea, Norcopia, and Sudercopia, two famous staples, or Townes for trafficke. Smalandia,Smalandia. a large country, above 300. miles in compasse, and is, for the most part, full of great woods, and yet for good pastures, nothing infe∣riour to many of the neighbour countries,Good pas∣tures. inso∣much that they send many very great fed cattle into Denmarke, which are from thence yeerely in great abundance sent into all high Germany and the lowcountries. In it are also great store of great rivers & lakes, wel stored with abundance of excellent good fish.Mines of cop∣per and steele. In that part called Tin∣stia there are copper mines newly found out. In Taberg there are good steele mynes: and be∣sides, out of their lakes, they gather a certaine rude matter, which with very small labour is made very good yron. This countrey is divided into divers parts, the principall whereof, are Ticherad, Verandia, Tinstia,Division of this country. as also Finberdia and Mantingia, famous for the Longobards expediti∣on. Cities for the largenesse of the countrey it hath not many; the chiefe are Calmarnia, Ievec∣pias Vexio an Episcopall Sea, Elresio, and Ves∣tervile.
OlandiaOlandia. is a rich and fruitfull Iland, abounding in many rich commodities. But because this Iland, as likewise Hallandia and Bleckingia are at this present under the obedience of the Da∣nish King,Occasion of warres be∣twixt the two neigh∣bouring Prin∣ces.. I will here passe by it. And yet shall it not be out of purpose to take notice that these Ilands have beene the cause of great quarrells and controversies betwixt these two neighbouring Princes, Sweden and Denmark: and no lesse cotnrouersie hath it caused among Writers, some pretending a right, some a long prescription of time to corroborate the Title of their Prince, whose right they tooke upon them to maintaine. Finlandia.Next in order followes Finland, which some thinke so to be called in comparison of Sweden, as though it did in fruitfulnesse farre exceed it, who are foulely deceived:VVhy so cal∣led. for it is more proba∣ble that it was first called Fiendland, by reason of the great hostility those Finlanders exercised against this nation, so long as they were com∣manded by a King of their owne. This coun∣trey abounds in corne, pastures, fish, and fowle; and finally, in such things as are most necessary for the life of man: this people is very laborious and able to endure hardship.Nature of this people. Of old they were esteemed the mildest among all those Scanzian people, howbeit, at this day, they be somewhat harsher, and their valour in warre was well wit∣nessed in this last memorable battle, fought neere Leipsig in Misnia. They have a peculiar
language of their owne, in the which are some singularities to be observed; namely, that some letters they cannot pronounce: as B, D, G,Singularities in their lan∣guagess. and that they want the letter F, neyther have they any word beginning with two consonants, and therefore when they pronounce any such word, in other languages, they leave out such letters: and for this cause, if they be not sent abroad while they are yet young, they can never learne to pronounce forreigne languages, and thus for gratus, they pronounce ratus, for spes, pes: for Dominus, tominus: for bonus, ponus, &c. And this is the reason, why the Nobles, Mer∣chants, and others of ability, send their youth to be instructed in the Swedish tongue, by which meanes they are afterwards fitted for the learning of any other. Againe, in their language, they observe no genders, having one onely articles, se, which they attribute to both sexes, and to all genders. Some others for brevity, I here willingly passe by. These Finlan∣ders in former times,When, and by whom first subdued. had Kings of their owne nation, great warres with the Swedish, untill such time as being by Ericus King of Sweden, subdued in the yeere 1130. they were also for∣ced to embrace the Christian faith. Now this King subdued not the whole countrey, but afterwards Birgerus Ieri subdued Tavastia, and againe Turgillus subdued Runts, or Carelia, and about the yeere 1193. the better to keepe them in obedience, and withall to inhibit the
incursions of the Russians, hee built the castle Viburg. Finland is dived into the South, North, Caia∣nia, Savolaxia, Tavastia, Nylandia and Carlia: The Northerne part is divided from the Southerne by the river Amarokei,Division of the country. running hard by the Epis∣copall sea Abo. In the Westerne part thereof, is that old castle Gusto, now ruinated; in the East part the castle Raseberg,Cities, towns and castles. together with the juris∣diction thereto belonging. The Northerne part thereof extends it selfe towards the Bothnicke gulfe, Northward; comprehending the one and the other Salagundia, Vienio, and Maseo. In it is a famous river called Cumo-elffe, abounding with Salmons, and many other dainty fishes, and neere the Episcopal City, Biornebegh, falling in∣to the Sea. Betwixt this city and Abo, are the townes Raumo, Nystadh, and Nadhandill, where was of old, that famous Monastery, called the valley of grace. Caiania,Caiania. called also the Easterne Bothnia, is furnished with many goodly fishie rivers. It hath lately built there in the townsTownes. Vla and Vasa; as also the castles Caianoburgum and Vloburgum. SauolaxiaSavolaxia. abounds with goodly lakes and ri∣vers, and almost all of them disburden them∣selves by the river Vox, into that great lake, La∣doga. This lake Togetha, together with these ri∣vers among all the rest of this Scanzian country, doe onely breed the seacalfe,Lake-Ladoga. called Phoca, and Vitulus Marinus. They are likewise furnished
with abundance of other good fishes,Sea-calfe. and among others great Iackes and Pikes, which are from thnce, being first dryed with the frost, in great abundance transported to Viburgum. In it is al∣so a very faire strong castle, built in the yeere,Nystat. 1475. by one Ericus Axelson, Master of the Kings houshold, and by him called Saint Olanus castle. Tavastia is a mediterranean countrey,Tavastia. Nystat or New-castle. and in it that famous and renowned lake Peiende. The strong castle of Tavastia was built by Borgerus Ie∣ri, to curbe and keepe under these Tavastians by him: newly conquered, and subjugated under the Crowne of Sweden, having withall compel∣led them to embrace the Christian religi∣on. In the North parts of this countrey, the in∣habitants fish out of the bottomes of their lakes a certaine rude matter, which,Yron made of water. with small labour and paines, and as little charges, they make ve∣ny good yron, and very serviceable for mans use. Nylandia, not that it was so called, as though in former times it had beene without any inha∣bitants,Nylandi. but by reason that those who doe now inhabite the same, in comparison of other, were but newly come thither, for the Helsingians and other people of Sweden, sent thither their colo∣nies. The countrey is fruitfull enough, and well furnished with store of fish, fowle & wild beasts for hunting. It hath in it two townes,Townes. Borgo, and Hefingfors.
Carelia is a large and vast Region, and seemeth that the old inhabitants lived most by their sheepe and cattell: for Curia in their language, signifieth sheepe or cattell. So long as the Fin∣landers had a King of their owne nation over them, all this countrey of Carelia belonged to Finland: but since the Swedish did so much by warre annoy the inhabitants, that by little and little, they brought many of the Provinces of that country, to become tributary to them; the Russians much suspecting the power arising of so potent a neighbouring Prince, thought in time to anticipate his enemies, designes: for the which cause, this Russian Prince by force of armes, made himselfe Master of this whole countrey. And this same country was for many yeeres after the common theater of warre be∣twixt those two potent Princes of Sweden and Russia, and that for a long tract of time, with va∣rious and doubtfull event, sometimes the one, and sometimes again the other party prevailing, untill such time as Magnus, surnamed Smek, King of Sweden, and George, Duke of Novegardia divi∣ded it equally betwixt them, setting & appoin∣ting their limits and bounds in Systerbecke. Now how it came wholly within these few yeeres un∣der the crowne of Sweden, shall hereafer in its proper place appeare. In this Carelia is that strong city Wiburg,VViburg, a famous staple or mart towne for merchants, exceeding well fortified with strong walls, and deepe large motes round about, and a
strong castle in the same. This same City have the Russians often (but in vaine) besieged with 100000. armed men. Rexholmia,Rexholmia. by the Swedish corruptly so called, and by the Russians, Carologo∣red, or the fort or fortresse of Carelia is seated very strongly in two little Ilands, at the mouth of the river Wexen, in the one of which is seated the ci∣ty, and in the other the castle. The soyle is very fruitfull, especially such places as adjoyne next unto the great lake Ladesco Ozera: but 15. or 20. miles further from the lake, it is so marshie and fenny, that the mountainous and hilly parts thereof will onely beare corne, for the which cause the inhabitants there live most vpon fish and wild beasts, and this aforementioned lake is one of the greatest of all Europe,Greatest lake of all Europe. as being above 190. miles in length, and about 80. in breadth, and of this lake, about the fifth part onely be∣longs to the Russian Prince, and all the rest to the Crowne of Sweden. In this great lake, besides the great abundance of Salmons and other fi∣shes, there is there caught a little fish also little bigger then a hering, and in their language cal∣led Ladog (no where else in all Russia, but there to be found) from whence this lake takes the denomination. In the countrey of Rexholme,A peculiar fish. Rubies. are some rubies found. Next Carelia, followes both in the order of nature and situation the countrey called Ingria,Ingria. which was but lately annexed to the Crowne of Sweden. The soile is very fruitful in the which are
many rivers full of good wholesome fish. Be∣sides, in that country is great store of wild fowle and wild beasts of severall kinds; and among these they hunt most that wilde beast in Latin called Alce,Alce, Elgh, or Elent. in the Swedish language, Elgh, and in high Dutch Elent. These beasts twice a yeere in great troopes passe over the river Nieva: for in the spring, they passe in great number out of Russia into Carelia; and in harvest againe re∣turne the same way into Russia. This countrey hath in it many strong forts and castles, which have hitherto beene accounted the keyes of the Russian kingdome, and no other in all his domi∣nious with them to be compared. NotteburgNotteburg. is the chiefest and strongest hold of all the rest, and therefore held impregnable, howbeit, at length taken in by the victorious King now reigning, as hereafter shall appeare. In the same counry, are also Capurio,Courio, Iama∣grod. Iamarod, Castles not onely strong by nature, but very well furnished also by the art of man. The last of all the Provinces belonging to this Crowne and Kingdome of Sweden, is cal∣led Esthonia, being a part of that vast countrey, called Livonia, and hath not beene vnder the Swedish gouernment above 60 and odde yeeres, and by this meanes came first under that iuris∣diction.Esthonia. How it came first under the Swedish. Crowne. Certaine Nobles who tooke upon them to propogate the Christian religion being sent for into Livonia, forgetting the errand they came about, gave themselves wholly over to car∣nall
lust, and gluttonie, and drunkennesse; and withall keeping the inhabitants in such a base and slauish subiection, that they seemed rather to command ouer beasts then men. And for this cause, God the auenger of all wrongs, and puni∣sher of all wickednesse stirred vp Basilius the ty∣rant of Muscovia to suppresse their insolencie and punish their pride, who subdued a great part of Livonia, destroying all in their way that made resistance, with fire and sword. These poore Livonians now perceiuing themselves put to such a strait, implored the ayde of the Empe∣rour Charles the 5. keeping then a dyet, or gene∣rall meeting of the whole estates of the Empire at Ausbourg 1551. this countrey then being a member of the Empire. The Emperour then, distracted with other warres, not being able to send them any succour, wished them to seeke for succour and and ayde of the king of Sweden and other neighbouring Princes. The Revalians therefore, and the Oselians demand ayde of the king of Denmarke, (Revalia being heretofore built by Valdarius, a King of Denmarke, and from him received their priviledges howbeit to no end And therefore fiding no sudden suc∣cour against so mighty and potent a Pine, they were constrained to implore ayde of Ericus 14, king of Sweden, and therefore in the yere 1561, freely submitted themselves under his obedi∣ence; which petition of theirs notwithstanding his father Gustavus had in his life time denied:
and therefore some are of opinion that this king Ericus brought vpon himselfe and successours a great deale of trouble. His sonne Iohn was as wel successour to this quarrell as to the kingdome, and tooke from the Russian many of his strong holds.Provinces of this countroy The Provinces of this countrey of Est∣hionia are, Revalia towards the North, seated neere vnto the Finnicke gulfe: vizia in which are these places, Rosenburgh, Tolsburgh, and Bor∣holme, Alentakia, where is that famous mer∣chant staple, Naruia and Nystot; Iervia, where is Wittensleyn and Lais: and Vickia, where are Hapsal, Lebal and Lode. And to this Esthionia belong these Islands also: Dagho, Orinso, Nu∣ko, VVrango, Odensholme, Nargo, Vlfso, and the one and other Nogho; the inhabitants of which places, as also of Osilea, and most of the maritime parts of the continent speake the Swe∣dish lnuage. In this great countrey of Livo∣nia besides the Swedish,Fve severall languages in Livonia. there are yet foure o∣ther seuerall languages spoken: the German or high Dutch, vsed by the Nobles and better sort: in the North-parts towards the Finnicke gulfe the Estthionian or Finnicke: in the mediterra∣nean parts the Livonians, being now almost quite worne out: and finally in the South parts thereof they vse the Letticke speech, or of the countrey of Lettow, which the people Eureles likewise vse, the which is as it were a hodge-podge of many severall languages mingled to∣gether. And these languages differ not onely in
dialects, but wholly and totally one from ano∣ther. This whole countrey of Livonia,Commodities of the coun∣trey. and con∣sequently this Esthionia abound with all such things as are necessary for the life of man, and are vsually to be found in these Northerne cli∣mats. And so much shall suffice shortly to haue said concerning the description of the countrey of Sweden, and Provinces subiect to the Swe∣dish dish crowne. CHAP. III. Of the nature, manners, and customes of the Suecians or Swedish, and into how many rankes or degrees all these peo∣ple are diuided. THis people is reasonable wittie and vnder∣standing,Nature of the inhabitans. and that not onely for learning and vnderstanding of any mechanicall trade, but even for the learning of the arts and sciences, as also any outlandish tongues whatsoeuer. For such as are of any eminent ranke and degree, or competent meanes, content not themselves with their Latine tongue and knowledge of the libe∣rall arts▪ but give themselves also very much to the learning of the Germane or high Dutch & French tongues. In former times their maners &
conditions were very plaine and homely, and although now somewhat declining from former simplicitie, yet are they farre from that height of luxurie and pride, whereunto many other nati∣ons are now so much addicted.Not so vici∣ous as many other Nati∣ons. Apparell of this people. Their buil∣dings. The apparell of the vulgar sort is but meane; but the Gentilitie are now somewhat given to follow outlandish fashions, and to emulate their equalls. Private mens houses as well in townes as the countrey, are for the most part, built low and of wood, and that both for warmth, and for avoyding the dint of great winds. In Stooke-holme notwith∣standing, and some other walled Cities and townes, most of their buildings, are either of bricke or free-stone.Woods here very frequent The countrey commonly yeelds plentie of good corne, and might yeeld more, if some of those vast unprofitable woods were cut downe, howbeit there is there seldome felt any scarcitie of corne, unlesse sometimes the yeare proue very unseasonable, which in hotter climats commeth also sometimes to passe:Bread of the barke of trees and in such a case the countrey-people are sometimes forced to make bread of the barke of the firre and pine-trees, which they esteeme very wholesome, agreeing well with their stomacks, and free from any maligne qualitie. Fish and flesh is here very plentifull, howbeit neither in great request fresh, but either salted up, or dryed in the sunne or smoke. They are also well stored with venison, as also with wild fowle, such espe∣cially as are accounted the daintiest.
The coniugall bed is among them kept unde∣filed and inviolable.Adultery there vn∣knowne. Their maides are not there maried without consent of parents or guardians: neither yet is it lawfull for any man to betroth, or marry such a maide without the presence of 4 witnesses, two of the part of the bridegrome, and as many on the brides side, a penaltie of fourtie markes to bee imposed upon the partie that infringes this decree.Manner of their marriage and betroth∣ing. VVhen a maide is thus betrothed, the guardian may not obiect any thing to hinder the marriage, except it be very lawfull, and by the lawes of the land determi∣ned to be such; if he shall chance to doe other∣wise, the bridegroome may lawfully breake o∣pen the doores, and carry her away by force if he cannot otherwise: and if there should by this meanes, either death or wounds ensue, no pu∣nishment shall be inflicted for wounds, or death of the resisting partie. But if the other partie that is about to recouer his spoues, be either wounded or killed, the punishment of such a re∣sisting person shall be doubled, and the woman shall be esteemed lawfully rescued, and not ra∣vished and taken by force. Againe, these be the words of the law-maker Whosoeuer departs from his wife, and makes a contract and agreement to coha∣bite with another woman, the other wife to him before lawfully married being yet alive, and this be, by suffi∣cient witnesses, legally prooved, they shall both lose their lives the man being beheaded, and the woman stoned to death.
VVhen as either man or woman dyes, leaving children behind him,Manner of succeeding in inheritances. whether sonnes or daugh∣ters, they shall succeed in the inheritance, the sonne shall have two, and the daughter one part for her share: and the nephew shall have the like share as a sonne, and the neece as a daugh∣ter, whether their children live or dye; but with∣all all the fifth degree is here excluded from succes∣sion. If the heire be absent.If any person dye, whose next heire is with∣out the Realme, if the heire returne within a yeare and a night, with sufficient proofe that he is lawfull heire to the deceased partie, he shall as lawfull heire succeed to the partie deceased. But if he come not within a yeare and a night, the king shall be his heire, whether the goods bee moveable or unmoveable: and this is common∣ly called Dana-arf.Dana arf. If the goods given to any, be not moveable, let him receive them againe that gave them. If the heire be vnknowneIf any native of the country dye, and the heire be knowne, the inheritance shall be kept for the right heire: but if it be not knowne who is the right heire, and no word be sent from him, or else some other assurance where he is, or that he come not within a yeere and a day; then the Kings exchequer shall receive the one halfe of his estate, and the other halfe was formerly to be employed for praying for his soule; but since the reformation of Religion converted, to other charitable uses.
This people, not onely of late, but even of old hath been much commended for their great hospitalitie in entertaining strangers;Their hospi∣tality. the which as it is common to all these Northerne people, so is it most conspicuous in the Swedish nation, it being esteemed there a hainous indignitie to deny entertainment to strangers and travellers, there being among them certain particular con∣stitutions concerning this same particular.Robberies seldoe heard of among this people. Be∣sides, they are of that sinceritie of life and con∣versation, and so far from wronging others, that this hath caused no smal admiration to strangers and travellers passing that way; which may in this appeare, that although there be very great forrests found in that countrey, yet seldome any robberies by the high wayes are amongst them heard of. In ancient times both the Swedish and the Goths had their owne proper letters and lan∣guage,Gothish let∣ters abolished howbeit their letters have beene by the first founders of Christianitie in these parts quite abolished, and Latine letters put in their places. And of this some render this reason; that among these people were many bookes full of their an∣cient heathenish superstition, which superstition of theirs they thought would hardly bee quite rooted out, vnlesse as well their letters, as books written with those letters were utterly aboli∣shed. But by this meanes it is to bee supposed, that we are likewise deprived of many ancient acts and antiquities not unworthy the knowing,
which are by this meanes buried in eternall ob∣livion. And of this prerogative beyond all other people of Europe (the Grecians excepted) doth this nation bragge, that they never borrowed their letters of any other nation. And it is thought that if their letters and bookes had vn∣till this time continued, they might have conte∣sted for antiquity with the most famous histo∣ries, either Greeke or Latine. And therefore a∣bove all other nations the Goths were most ad∣mired for their opinion concerning the immor∣tality of the soule: concerning which opinion, although there bee left no ancient records; yea and if there were no testimonie of strangers to witnesse the same; yet may this by many monuments even untill this day remaining, plainly appeare, the which are written upon great grave-stones in this same ancient chara∣cter of Rumcke letters, as the author speakes, for in them were commonly added towards the latter end of the inscription, these words, The Swedish much addic∣ted to the high Dutch speechThat is, God helpe the soule of such a one. But as it hath fared with many other ancient na∣tions that in continuance of time they have al∣tered their ancient language; so hath this nation tasted likewise of the same alteration & change. For by reason of their commerce and trafficke with their neighbours the high Dutch, they have also borrowed much of their language, and
mingled it with their owne, as may, by many arguments appeare; and the better sort addict themselves to learne this language in perfection. The like hath also befallen many other nations of the Christian world. The Italian what is it else but a bastard,Italian lan∣guage. composed of that pure elegant Latine spoken in Tullies time, and the rude lan∣guages of these barbarous nations, Goths, Van∣dals, and Longaburds, like an inundation in the declining of the Romane Empire, overflowing all Italy.The Spanish. What the Spanish tongue but the same Latine mingled with the ancient Gothish, and some others? And the moderne FrenchFrench. tongue so idolised of every one is but the ancient Gaules (the ancient inhabitants of that countrey) lan-language enterlarded with many Latine words. Now that this people is a great lover of learning and letters, may from hence appeare,Goths louers of learning. that even at this day the very countrey people and shep∣heards, have engraven upon their great staves and shepheards crooks all the principall matters set downe in our ordinary almanacks in their ancient Gothicke letters: by which means they are able to understand the change and other times of the moone, bissextile or leape yeare, the golden number, dominicall letters, and the like, concerning this subiect. The subiects of all the dominion of Sweden,Sixe rankes or degrees of the Swedish nation. are divided into sixe rankes or degrees, differing in eminency and dignity each one from the o∣ther: the Princes of the bloud, the Nobles, and
Gentrie, the ecclesiasticall estate, souldiers or martiall men, the merchants and husbandmen, or labourers of the ground. The Princes of the bloudPrinces of the blouds are commonly the Kings sonnes or brothers. The Kings eldest son doth now, according to the custome, usually suc∣ceed, and the others are called Dukes, and li∣vings answerable to their birth and greatnesse assigned them. The daughters have portions as∣signed them, yet not out of the Kings treasure, but of the subiects purses. And although the Kingdome be now become hereditary, yet doe the Kings alwayes sweare to maintaine religion according to the Augustane confession. The Nobility Their titles were not he∣reditary.The Nobilitie is divided into Earles, Barons, Knights, Squires, and ordinary Gentry. The Earles were of old called Ieri, and were by thei Kings created, as likewise Dukes, called Hert∣zogh for their singular valor & worth; but none of those titles were hereditary or descended to posterity. And by reason those great men had often in rebellion opposed themselves against their naturall Kings, therefore for divers yeeres these titles were quite omitted, vntill such time as Ericus 14.Wh made hereditary. in imitation of other Kings and Potentates introduced again these titles of Earles and Barons, and made them hereditary to poste∣rity. As for Knights they ever were, as now they are also, made for their worth and proofe vpon the atchieving of some noble exploits, and descend not to posterity, unlesse they succeed in
their predecessours vertues and valour. As for the other Geny, the chiefest of them are those we commonly call Squires, and of old were cal∣led aff-wapu. Out of these rankes of Nobility a∣bove mentioned are elected and chosen the su∣preme ministers and officers of iudicature and other great employments of the Kingdome; and for this cause have great maintenance allow∣ed them. As for the clergie and state ecclesiasticall,The clergie or persons ecclesiasticall it is composed of these persons following: first is the Archbishop of Vpsalia, together with seuen other Bishops; and besides these, there are yet foure superintendents, who although in name they differ from the former, yet in nature & fun∣ction little or nothing; and this last is most com∣monly the highest title among the Protestant Churches beyond the seas, as well Lutherans or others. So these Bishops and superintendents were adioyned the Canons, Prebends, &c. and under them Ministers and Preachers of euery Parish.Bishops lived like Princes in Sweden. The Bishops in former times were pos∣sessors of many strong holds and Castles, and great livings, and were exceeding rich, by reason whereof they were able to live like great Prin∣ces (as at this day in Germany and other places is to be seen) by this means they became so haugh∣ty, and insolent, that sometimes they waged war with their owne natural Princes, sometimes expelling them out of their kingdome. For this cause Gustavus the 1. of that name, lest the like
should befall himselfe or his successours, assem∣bled the whole estates of his kingdome to take counsell against the Bishops then making prepa∣ration for an open rebellion; and by their advice and consent annexed unto the Crowne their lands and possessions, together with all their strong holds and Castles, reserving for these ec∣clesiasticall persons some part as well of the tythes as other revenues, to be for them a fit and competent maintenance. In former times these Bishops had place among the chiefe Senatours and counsellours of the kingdome, and the Arch∣bishop of Vpsalia, and sometimes also the Bi∣shop of Lincopia assumed unto themselves the title of Primate of the whole Kingdome; for the which cause in those dayes this dignity was by great Nobles sued for: but since this King∣dome made profession of the reformed Religi∣on, the clergie of highest title meddle only with Church-affaires; and now mens sonnes of the meanest degree and birth, merchants or hus∣bandmens are admitted unto such functions. And yet this priviledge they still enioy, that in e∣very parliament they have a voice as well as any of the Nobility or others. The military forces.Next follow the military forces as well horse as foot, which notwithstanding consist not of forreine mercenary forces: For the foot forces are culled and pickt out from among the choicest youth of the kingdome,The trained ands, where∣of consist the foot forces, by decimation, or ta∣king every tenth man. After they are once en∣rolled,
they are not onely freed from all subsi∣dies, impositions, or other payments whatsoever, but have also a yeerely stipend allowed them of the king, who causeth certaine commanders for this same purpose appointed (being first furni∣shed with all manner of weapons) for certaine yeares to traine them vp at home, in the meane time enuring them to endure all manner of hard∣ship, and such toyle and labour as souldieours are wonted in war to endure; while in the mean time the old bands (if need so require) be emploi∣ed in forreine expeditions. And thus it commeth to passe, that although the King carry never so great an army out of the countrey against a for∣reine enemy, yet is the kingdome never left un∣furnished of sufficient defence, ready to serve up∣on all occasions, and by this meanes there is the lesse use of mercenary souldiers, unlesse upon ur∣gent and extraordinary occasion, as now in this great and memorable expedition against the Austrian house, and the whole Catholike league. It need not therefore seeme strange, that this great King hath even in our memories waged war alone and the same time against all his three potent neighbours, the king of Poland, of Den∣marke, and the great Prince or Duke of Russia. For whensoever his forces are either wearied or worne out, he is able presently to exchange with a new supply, who being already inured t hardship and military labor and toile, are able t undergoe any difficulty whatsoever.
Their horse-forces are raised both from a∣mong the Gentrie and the common people.The horse-forces, and how raised. The Nobles according to the greatnesse of their Lordships and lands maintaine many horsemen for the defence of the countrey: and besides these, the commons of every Province possessing rich Manors or Farmes, to free themselves from all tributes and taxes maintaine according to their meanes, certaine horsemen under the com∣mand of the Captaine of that place where hee liveth. The fifth degree, ranke or order is of mer∣chantsMerchants. inhabiting cities and townes. These both bring in, and carry out of the kingdome divers merchandizable commodities, bought first of the naturall inhabitants, from whence they ga∣ther no small gaine. Now these cities and mer∣chant staples have among them certaine peculiar municipal lawes and constitutions, derived from the law of the most ancient city Biria, the which about 600. yeeres ago was the seat Royal where the King kept his Court,Certain lawes and constitu∣tions have been appoin∣ted for traf∣fick and com∣merce. and the chiefe staple of of the whole kingdome. Each of these cities and townes enioyeth also certaine particular privi∣ledges, and very laudable constitutions, by which it was ordained and determined after what manner the mediterranean cities should trafficke and trade with the inhabitants and ma∣ritime, to the end that each place might bee an indifferent sharer in the gaine: and besides, this laudable constitution was also enacted, that
the benefit, gaine, or rising of one City should not prove the ruine of another. But these lauda∣ble lawes and wholesome constitutions by rea∣son of so many wars and broyles wherewith this kingdome hath so often beene troubled, have beene by the governours of this kingdome now for a long time neglected; and by this meanes many disorders are by little and little crept into their trafficke and commerce. And therefore this illustrious and victorious king Gustavus Adolphus now reigning, to testifie and make knowne his love and fatherly affection to his countrey, in re∣storing and repairing the ruines and breaches of the common-wealth, among many other things, did againe as it were, revive, and put life into those now almost dead lawes, and enlarge the same; the which if afterwards they shall be due∣ly observed, no doubt but these cities will soone againe returne to their former splendor and dig∣nitie. The last ranke and degree among this people, is that of husbandman,Husbandmen. the which although low∣est in degree, yet not of least vse and necessitie, as being the very ground and foundation of all the rest, and who furnish all the others, both with food and rayment.Free-holders. And of these there are yet two sorts: the first are free-holders, having their lands and possessions hereditary, and out of the which they use to pay something yeerely to the king, the which payment is seldome ray∣sed to any higher rate; and withall, this privi∣ledge
hath beene granted them of old, that if they be able to furnish themselves with a good horse and compleat armour, being able to serve the king in his warres, so long as they, or yet a∣ny of their sonnes serve in this kind, their Ma∣nours or Farmes are freed from any manner of payments to the king; and this is the reason why many from their very cradle, as it were, apply themselves to military affaires; by which means also the number of the kings horsemen is won∣derfully encreased. Among these are also to be ranked such as worke in mynesWorkers in the Mynes. in the mountai∣nous and hilly places of the kingdome, who thereby purchase to themselves no small gaine, and are for the most part very rich. The rest of these countrey people are Farmers,Farmers. who, al∣though besides the set rents they pay their land∣lords, they performe likewise diuers services; yet by reason of the great benefit and commo∣dity they make by fishing, fowling, and of wood of the forrests, they reape no small com∣modity, whereby they are enabled ro live in ve∣ry good fashion recording to their owne ranke and degree. For this is to be understood, that this whole kingdome aboundeth with lakes and rivers, full of very wholesome fishes; besides the abundance of woods, which partly in regard of their number, and partly by reason of the re∣motenesse, yeeld oftentimes but small benefit to the owners: and for the same reason no where are fish and fowle, as also hares cheaper then
in this kingdome. It is likewise to be observed, that in all Parliaments, the countrey people,They have a voice in Par∣liament. this last and sixt ranke I meane, have a voyce as well as any of the others. And thus it commeth to passe, that the meanest or lowest degree is not neglected, nor no well deserving subiect hinde∣red to climbe to as high a pitch of honour, as his vertues can attaine unto. CHAP. IIII. Of the Politicke and civill govern∣ment of the Kingdome of Sweden. IN ancient times each Province of this king∣dome had it's severall lawes and constitutions, whereof, as it is supposed, there were divers au∣thours, whose names, by reason of the long tract of time, are now for the most part buried in ob∣livion. And the Vestrogothian lawes are so ancient, that it is apparant they were made at such times as the Goths departed out of this kingdome,Antiquities of the Vestro∣gothian lawes or at least shortly after: for there is mention made of the Goths inhabiting Greece and Thracia: to wit, that none of them should enioy or possesse any of their ancient possessions in their owne countrey, unlesse they would returne and dwell
there. And it is apparent that they dwelt there before the times of Alexander the great, who, as he affirmed, were to be shunned and taken heede of. Besides, even before the incarnation of our Lord and Saviour, they were such a terror to the Romans, that they were by them much hindered from inlarging their dominion beyond the Da∣nubius. Now these lawes doe for the most part agree with the lawes of the Visigoths, set down by Isidorus, although they be farre shorter; for the which cause it is not unlike that these same lawes of Isidrus were at the first collected out of the constitutions of the Vestrogoths, and after, as the titles testifie enlarged by the kings of the Visigoths of Spaine. Out of all these Provincial lawes and other constitutions of this kingdome, did the Bishops and Senatours thereof above 270 yeares agoe compile this generall law, very agreeable to the law of nature, and not much differing from the civill law, but that by this controverted cases are far speedilier ended. But before we speake any thing concerning their lawes, we will premit some generalities. In this kingdome therefore there are severall principall colledges or societies,The whole government of this king∣dome com∣prehended in certaine soci∣eties or col∣ledges. which comprehend the whole government of the same. The first of these is called the Colledge of Iu∣stice,1 Colledge or societie of Iustice. in the wihch are three degrees or rankes: the supreame, the middle most, and lowest of all. In this supreame or highest ranke or order, are the noble Senators of the kingdome: in the
next are such as they call Lagman; and in La∣tin Nomophylaces, as if we should say; Recorders or Registers. In the third ranke or order are the Iudges of particular cities or townes, being men of good esteeme, and of honest life and con∣versation, and not unskilfull in the lawes of the land. In this supreame court are iudged causes of the whole kingdome, as well criminall as ciuill; and to this supreame court, the subiect may from any inferiour Court of the kingdome appeale, whereas they determine and iudge whether the inferiour court hath iudged right or no; and from this court there is no appeale, un∣lesse it be to the king himselfe, in whose power it is either to qualifie the punishment, or to re∣mit the offence. Vnder this suprame court are immediatly subiected and subordinate two o∣thers, that of criminall causes, and that of the court or chamber. The next to this colledge is the colledge of war, wherein are handled all Martiall or Mili∣tary affaires, and is called the Court marshall or martiall.2 Colledge or societie is that of warre, or court Marshall. To this court belongs the Councell of War. wherein are all military matters deli∣berated and discussed: and over this court pre∣sides the great Marshall of the kingdome. His office is, when the king cannot be present in his owne person, as generall to command over the whole army. This great officer hath with him ioyned di∣uers other associates and collegues, amongst
whom is chiefly he whom they call Riick-scirs Siigmeister, as much to say, as master of the Or∣dnance. Besides, there is also a field marshall, and under him many other commanders, both of the horse and foot forces. The third colledge or court is that of the Chan∣cerie;3 Colledge, the court of the Chancery in which are handled all manner of causes both civill and ecclesiasticall. In this Court presides the Lord Chancellour of the kingdome,The Lord Chancellours office. who hath the chiefe charge of the broad seale, receiveth and readeth all letters sent to the king, and dispatcheth answers. Besides, in the coun∣sell he propoundeth such heads as they are to consult about: and withall he hath the charge of setting downe and publishing all Proclamati∣ons; all decrees and acts of Parliament. Hee is also Iudge of al private complaints and appeales from inferiour courts to the King: and finally, he hath the oversight of all the Secretaries, Clerkes, Religious persons, and ecclesiasticall ceremonies; and all controversies and negotiati∣ons with forreine Princes, war, peace, and truce receiving messages from forreine Ambassadors, and dispatching their answers. This great offi∣cer hath ioyned with him for associates or col∣legues, a Vice-chancellour: and divers counsel∣lers of the Chancerie, besides the kings Secreta∣ries, with divers others. The fourth Colledge or Court is that of the Admiraltie,4 Colledge, the Admirall court. over which is the great Lord Ad∣mirall; whose office is to oversee the Navy roy∣all,
and to see that it be in a readinesse, with all things thereto belonging, against the time of need. He hath under him a Vice-admirall, be∣sides Captaines and Commanders of every ship. To his court belong all causes concerning tres∣passes against constitutions made for the preser∣vation of the Navy-royal, and many other things concerning maritime affaires. The fifth and last is the Exchequer,5 Colledge is the Exche∣quer. or, as the French call it, the chamber of accounts, where are received all the revenues belonging to the crowne, tributes, customes, subsidies, &c. Over this Court presides the Lord Treasurer of the kingdome, who hath also ioyned with him in commission two others of the Nobility; and to this court belong also a number of clerks, who are chosen out of the inferiour ranke of people. He hath also under his custodie the royall en∣signes of the kingdome, the apple, the crowne, the scepter, and the sword. He payes also all the kings armie, and so doth hee all the kings ser∣vants their wages, In a word hee takes all, and payes all, being accomptable to no body, but to the king himselfe. Amongst all the great officers of the kingdome, the Lord Marshall is accounted the chiefe,The Lord Marshals of∣fice. be∣ing master of the kings houshold, and admini∣strator or orderer of the great counsell; who by the kings authority, hath power to assemble the whole States of the land, to command silence and attention, to give leave to speake in Parlia∣ment,
to welcome ofrreine Embassadours, and to provide things necessary for their entertain∣ment. To his office also it belongeth to remove out of the counsell such as belong not thereunto, and to see the kings decrees, concerning mat∣ters of defamation, and punishment of death du∣ly put in execution. Hee supplyes also the place of the master of the ceremonies, and suppresseth all tumults and disorders. To him belongeth al∣so the oversight of the kings houshold and do∣mesticall servants, and to correct the offenders. And finally, in all publike meetings he beares the great staffe before the king. Next unto him in dignitie is esteemed the great Lord Constable, the field Marshall, the great Sewer, the Lord Chamberlaine, &c. Particular di∣vision of he Provinces in∣to smaller parts.Moreover, this whole kingdome is not onely divided into severall Provinces, Duchies, and Counties, but besides each Province is againe subdivided into certaine territories or iurisdi∣ctions, commonly called Haradh, of the which, some containe moe, and some fewer parishes. Each Province againe hath its governor or lieu∣tenant called Landz-herren,Severall Iudges. or State-haller; and each territorie or iurisdiction hath a Iudge called Leensman; and besides, each parish hath a Iudge called Nembdarius, or Nembde∣mannus. Now all these are distinct offices, and subordinate one to another, and so may the plan∣tife appeale from one inferiour court, to a next superiour in due order and forme.
The supreame governour or magistrate of the Province is called Legifer,The supreame Iudge Legifer as it were a law-gi∣ver and iudge, and are esteemed in dignity next unto the king, as being his iudges and uice-ge∣rents. Now as many as are the Provinces, as many are there of these supreame iudges: to eleven, under whom are againe above 300. Vi∣counties, or particular iurisdictions; not unlike the courts of Parliament of France, and the mul∣titude of presidiall courts. But the difference is, that these supreame Iudges visit every yeare a great part of their Province, untill all their Pro∣uinces be visited, and when they have travelled the round, they returne againe where they first began (which the French Parliaments doe not) much after the manner of the Iudges circuits in this kingdome. And as this course is very con∣venient for the remedying of the publike disea∣ses of the kingdome; so is it also some ease to the subiect, these iudges demanding the tribute and taxes by turnes, and not all at once, of such territories and parishes as they visit, that so the people be not all burdened at one and the same time. It is yet further to be observed, that by the ancient customes and constitutions of this king∣dome, besides all these aforementioned courts, there was yet one generall court commanded to be kept in foure eminent places of the king∣dome once or twice a yeere, for determining and finishing some cases, which by the other
Iudges had not beene, or could not so well be de∣cided. And this they call Iudicium Pratoriale,Iudicium praetoriale. which was a meeting of many Iudges together, where controversies were duely and strictly ex∣amined, and sentence according to equity pro∣nounced. This court was by Charles the ninth, father to this now reigning king Gustavus Adol∣phus ordeined to be kept twice a yeere, once in Vpsalia, in winter at the time of a great faire then kept; and the other about Saint Peters day in summer. The Iudges were without faile to appeare at the place appointed in proper person sixe weekes after the publication of such a mee∣ting. Now whatsoever was in this pretoriall court determined betwixt party and party, was to stand firme and inviolable for ever without appeale to any other court whatsoever. The Ral or Court Royal.And because the king will be sure, that iustice be duely executed in all his dominions, there∣fore besides all these former courts, there is yet another great and solemne court sometimes kept, called the court Royall or Ral; whereas either the king in proper person, or else a depu∣ty or speciall commissioner heares all the grie∣vances betwixt party and party: and this is a court of reformation, wherin some things which in other courts have not beene so well ordered, are here reformed and amended. And this court I take to be much like that solemne court some∣times kept in the kingdome of Scotland,Iustice heire of Scotland. called the Iustice aire, wherein very small offences
were severely punished. Now the king is sixe weekes before the time of sitting to intimate the fame to his subiects. And within 14 dayes af∣ter, whosoever hath a complaint against any, he must cause summon his adversary to appeare at the day and place appointed by the kings letters, to that purpose to bee read in the first Plac it or Court; or where there is none kept, then at the next Parish Church. Now if any upon this sum∣mons shall refuse to appeare, the king or his vicegerent, shall notwithstanding his non-ap∣pearance, (unlesse very iust cause may bee shew∣ed) proceed to sentence against him. Now as concerning their particular lawes, statutes, and ordinances, the times and turnes of their meetings in Courrts of Iustice, the manner of choosing their Iudges, their oaths, and what by them to be observed, as being too long and tedious for this short tractate, I willingly passe by. But if any be desirous to know their particu∣lar statute lawes, he may have recourse to their history, and such as have of set purpose collected and set them downe in order. I proceed now to speake of the might and power of this great king, and then by what meanes it is maintained.
CHAP. V. Of the might and power of the King of Sweden, as well by Sea as by land. ANd first for his sea forces,Sea forces it is certaine that the king of Sweden (besides his gallies and small ships,Number of ships. whereof in those seas he possesseth no small number) hath beene many yeeres agoe furnished with fifty brave war-ships, upon all occasions ready for service; and many of them furnished with 60. 70. or 80. great peeces of brasse Ordnance; and now questionlesse hee is furnished with a farre greater number. Neither yet is it any hard matter for him to make vp the number of 6000 saile within his dominions,Number of Mariners and sailers. not of rowers and ordinary watermen I meane, but even of expert sailers, pilots, masters of ships, masters mates, &c. For all that tract about the sea coast of Finland, being at least 40, miles in length, together with the coast of the Redeucke sea twice as long, besides a number of Ilands af∣ford the inhabitants daily meanes of no small commerce and traffiking by sea; by which means the marriners may easily become both bold and expert. Besides, their maintenance is not very
chargeable to the king: for the most of their pay is in fish, flesh, butter and cheese, ryce and barly, such commodities as many of his coun∣tries yeeld him for tribute. These ships in time of peace use to be distributed into divers parts of the kingdom. The greatest cōmonly ly in Stock∣holme haven, which Port is so fenced against all winds, that there they may safely ride against all winds without any anchors: besides, that there they are also free from any hostile invasion, there being no accesse thither for any ships but by 24. miles sailing, and that by a number of dangerous rockes. The rest of those ships are dispersed into divers other harbours, especially those of Finland, that so they may be alwayes in a readi∣nesse, if peradventure the Russian should make any sudden stirre. Some of them a∣gaine are bestowed in such ports and haven townes whereas they may inhibite the importa∣tion of such commodities out of high Germany, as might tend to the ruine of the kingdome: and therefore the kings maiesty suffereth no ship to come from thence, unlesse they have first a passe granted them, subscribed with his maiesties owne hand; the which the Merchants of Lubeck often purchase at a round rate. And to conclude, this king is very powerfull by sea. And no lesse powerfull is he also by land:His land for∣ces. for he is able in a short space from among his owne subiects to raise a great armie of foot, who by reason of their frequent conflicts sometimes
with the Dane, sometimes with the Russian, but especially with the Polonian, have purchased un∣to themselves no small experience in military affaire, having infinitely improved the valour and prowesse derived unto them by their an∣cestours. This king may in a fortnights space call out twelve legions of well experienced souldiers, (reckoning three thousand to a legion) and may carry them whither he list out of the kingdome, yea if it were even to the very Indians, neither yet is he unfurnished of choice, able, and skilfull horsemen as well in Sweden as in Finland, both these countries being well furnished with excee∣ding good horses; the which how farre in bulke of body inferiour to those of high Germany, and other nations,The horses not bigge in bulke. so farre perhaps doe they againe surpasse them in bountie. And in truth they are very stout, and in consideration of their low sta∣ture, exceeding strong, being accustomed to hard labour, and easily undergoing any tra∣vell or toile, and withall contented with any food. This king hi∣reth com∣monly his horsemen.The lownesse of their stature hath beene the sole cause that heretofore this king hath most commonly hyred his horsemen out of high Germany, when he was to wage warre against a∣ny potent enemy. Now how great forces both of horse, & foot, this mighty Prince is able to bring into the field, may not onely by his late war a∣gainst the Polonian, but by this late and last ex∣pedition
into Germany, undertaken for the free∣ing of many distressed Princes and people from the tyranny of the Austrian house, and restoring them againe to their ancient inheritances, easi∣ly be evidenced and witnessed unto us. After a∣ges no doubt will stand amazed at the multitude of his valiant acts, with so great celerity, valour, and magnanimitie atchieved in so short a time, who may well with that great conquerour Iuli∣us Cesar, say, veni, vidi, vici; and gratefull poste∣ritie will eternize his name so long as sunne and moone shall endure, and blesse the time that so pious and prosperous a Prince was borne to the Christian world. Many things were some yeeres agoe related to the Pope by his Nuncio concer∣ning the multitude and distribution of the mili∣tary forces of this kingdome; concerning their pay also, military discipline, &c. all which, al∣though since that time much improoued, yet for the present I let passe, and proceed to other matters.
CHAP. VI. Of customes and tribute belonging to the king of Sweden. NOw to maintaine all this great charge of warre and other expences, there must bee some meanes whereby it may bee effected.Customes threefold. For this purpose therfore there are certaine tributes and customes yeerely paid into the kings coffers: and these are of three sorts.Customes a∣rising from his mynes. The first sort of tri∣bute is that which is raised of his mines; out of the which not onely are digged iron, copper and lead in great abundance, but even silver also, of the which are coined the Swedish dollors, for finenesse of mettall inferior to no other silver whatsoever. Now some of these Mynes are digged at the kings owne cost and charges, and some at the cost of private persons. Of the first the king hath the whole benefit, and of the latter but the tenth part, as of other commodities. Of two copper Mines onely, at this time the king receives a very great benefit; and besides, by reason of this abundance of brasse and cop∣per, it commeth to passe that hee is so well able to furnish himselfe with brasse Ordnance; and
that not for his Castles and Forts onely, but for his Ships also;Great num∣ber of brasse Ordnance. the sum whereof is no lesse then 8000. at the least: and in the Castle of Stocke∣holme alone, there are at least 400. great pieces of brasse Ordnance and more might yet be made if there were any need. And if the country peo∣ple did not oftentimes conceal some mines new∣ly found out, the profit which would arise out of these mynes would amount to a farre greater summe.Customes & revenues ari∣sing from the fruits of the earth. The next way by which the kings revenues are increased, is from the fruits of the earth, and his customes as well by sea as by land: for the king hath the tythes of all manner of graine, wheate, rye, barly, &c. as also of butter & cheese of beasts, hides, fish, and the like; the certainty of which reuenues although it be not to us assu∣redly knowne; yet no question ariseth it to no small summe, and as is credible, to little lesse then 9 or 10. millions say their writers: but this must be understood of their owne coine and ac∣count, not of Sterline money. Now concerning his customes,Customes of all manner of merchandise. the king re∣ceiveth custome of all wares transported out of the kingdome, or imported into the same. And that there be no want of good silver coyne with∣in the kingdome, this order hath beene for ma∣ny yeares agoe established; to wit, that for every hundreth dollors worth of merchandize trans∣ported out of the kingdome, they shall pay into the custome-house tenne silver dollors in kind, or
else tenne ounces of silver; for the which they receiue in present pay the worth in other small copper coine of Swedish money currant within the kingdome. And for every hundreth dollors worth of wares so transported out of the kingdome, the merchant is tyed to bring into the kingdome a∣gaine the worth of 90. dollors of such wares as are usefull for the kingdome; and for these 90. dollors worth of wares, they are to pay into the custome-house tenne dollors, or ten ounces of silver, or else the worth thereof in other money. And whosoever shall faile in any of the premis∣ses, for the first fault hee shall pay 20 Swedish markes;Customes of furres and rich skins. and the next time all his wares shall be confiscate. As for the revenue and custome of rich skins and furs, it is sometimes more, and sometimes lesse, according to the intensenesse and remis∣nesse of the cold, and the abundance of snow. For the greater is the snow, the greater number of these wild beasts are taken. Out of the country of Lapland the Northermost of all his Provin∣ces the king receives a great number of these skins or rich furs. And to the end he be not couz∣ned, he sendeth thither euery yeare an officer, be∣ing a clerke, who so narrowly inquireth into the number of these beasts so killed, that very hardly can he be deceived. These rich furs the king disposeth of among his kindred and friends: and sometimes also
hee exchangeth them with merchants, for other wares wherewith they furnish his Court. The third sort of revenue consisteth in volun∣tary or arbitrary contributions,The third sort of cu∣stome or re∣venue, arbi∣trary or vo∣luntary con∣tributions. answerable to our subsidies and fifteenes in this kingdome. For whensoever the king is to undertake a warre of∣fensive or defensive, he calls a Parliament, wher∣in he acquainteth the subiect with his purpose, and what charges it is like to arise vnto: and then the States of the kingdome agree vpon a certaine summe answerable to the busines to be undertaken. But the Nobles and chiefe Gentrie, and their tenants are for the most part freed from these impositions, unlesse upon very urgent and im∣portant occasions. But if there be an extreame necessitie, and there be not otherwise sufficient supply, then their vassals and tenants are tyed to pay halfe of the taxe or subsidie, as well as those who are immediately subiect to the king him∣selfe. Besides all this, the subiect is tyed to contri∣bute to the marriage of the kings daughters, whose dowrie hath been hitherto 100000. dol∣lors, neare upon 40000. pound sterling money, besides plate and other mooveables; unto the which neverthelesse the king may adde at his pleasure as he seeth occasion. And whensoever the king permits any of his Court deserving subiects to any preferment, he commonly assignes him a certaine number of
country people who are esteemed as his vassalls and subiects, and are to doe him homage, and pay him tribute and certaine duties. CHAP. VII. Of the Kings of this countrey of Swe∣den, with some of their chiefe and memorable Acts. MOst of the Northerne nations have time out of mind had their Kings by election: as the Dane, Swedish, Polonian and Bohemian. The kings of Sweden have beene untill of late yeeres electiue. And although it was a matter of no small difficulty among barbarous nations, where Mars was more honoured then Minerva, and good literature (the meanes to eternize he∣roicall worth) scarce heard of in these remote regions, to finde out any thing concerning their kings worth the writing; yet have we the names of divers kings of that nation recorded of old; howbeit a constant and continued successi∣on without any interruption wee cannot reade of.
1 In the first place then they tell us that Ma∣gog1 King Magog sonne to Iaphet, Noahs son, the founder of the Scythian nation in Europe, having passed o∣ver the Venedicke gulfe into Gothland (by the Latines afterward called by the name of Scy∣thia) reigned over those people called Gete. O∣thers, and that of the more learned ascribe ra∣ther the originall of the Goths to Gomer Iaphets eldest sonne, and make those two nations Goths and Gete, different and distinct nations. 2 Vnto Magog, as they write, succeeded Swen∣nus,2 Swennus. from whom the nation tooke the name. 3 Gethar.3 Gethar, 4 Vbbo,4 Vbbo. who as they write, builded Vpsalia before Abraham was borne. And from that time untill our Lord and Saviour they reckon up 35. kings, and distinguish them all by their severall names; and many of those, for their sanctitie of life, and conspicuous and eminent vertues, were by the rude rimes of those dayes highly com∣mended. And besides these, divers other kings are yet recorded to have reigned ouer those, who under the command of one Berico, for feare of intestine warre, fled their owne countrey, and a∣mong those mention is made of one king of the Getes in order. 22 Colison by name, to whom Augustus Ce∣sar betroathed his daughter Iulia; about the which time also Antonius demaunded his daughter in marriage, as may cleerely appeare
by Suetonius in the life of Augustus. Moreover, about the time of our Savior reigned Ericus the third, surnamed Diserius, who for his worth and merit attained to this government. To this E∣ricus40 Ericus the 3. succeded to the government of the Swedish nation, 41 Godrichus41 Goodrichus his sonne; and next to him 42 Haldanus;42 Haldanus during the reigne of this king, lived that monster of strength, for the same cause called Starcherus, who is said at singu∣lar combats to have killed that great champion Ham, which afterwards gave denomination to that famous City Hamburg. After those is a long catalogue of their kings recorded, but no∣thing concerning their acts worth the reading recorded, that nation then standing more upon the point of valour and honour, then upon pen∣ning of them for posteritie. But farre more fortunate have they beene in their forreine expeditions and transmigrations, when as like a great deluge and inundation they overflowed a great part of the world under the names of Ostrogoths, and Westrogoths, and under the commandement of Theodoricus, Attala∣riake, Iotila, Ataulphus, &c. whose martial and he∣roicall exploits the Romans highly advancing, and lest they should conceale their owne worth, have pubished to all posteritie. Vnder Biorno100 Biorno. their 100 home-bred king, Lewes sonne to Charles the great, swaying the scepter of the Westerne Empire this, nation of Sweden
first received the Christian faith, Sanctus Augeri∣us a monke of Gorbey much furthering then this so worthy a worke, Author est Ludolphus de Beben∣burg in libro de zelo religionis Christianae. CHAP. VIII. 124 ERicus Sanctus124 Ericus Sanctus 4. or the holy, after whom the posteritie of Suercherus and Ericus by turnes with much contention, as the one or the other grew strongest usurped the gouernment. This pious Prince, notwithstanding his great agnitie and pietie, and paines taken in an expe∣dition to convert the Finlanders to the faith, had but a slender reward, being bulled by a conspi∣racy of some of his Nobility, Henry King of Denmarke, and Magnus his sonne being the ring-leaders of this faction, An. 1160. 125 Charles125 Charles 7. sonne to Stercherus, having raig∣ned two yeeres during the raigne of Ericus over the Ostrogoths (who in the election of a king dissenting from the Swedish had chosen one of their owne) and afterwards for the space of 8. yeares, very religiously and vertuously ouer both kingdomes, but being now hated by reason of his friendship with the Dane, was at length by Canutus sonne to S. Ericus, (being by some per∣swaded that this Charles with the helpe of the
Dane had contriued his fathers death) killed in in the Iland of Visnuga 1168. 126 Canutus129 Canutus. sonne to S. Ericus, having done penance for killing king Charles, and being by the discreet counsell of the Bishop of Lunden, di∣verted from assailing the Dane, dyes 1192. 127 Stercherus117 Stercherus sonne to Charles, a martiall man, wise and eloquent, itching for revenge on the posterity of Canutus, having altered his for∣mer nature, & gathered great forces out of Den∣marke, was at length with his whole army ut∣terly overthrowne, and againe in another bloudy battle himselfe killed 1210. 128 Ericus128 Ericus. 3. sonne to Canutus having escaped Stercherus his hands, raigned very prosperously for the space of 7. yeares, the which 7 yeares histories mention to have been exceeding fruit∣full; but in the eight yere with the death of their king, this fruitfulnes was also finished 1216. 129 Iohn129 Iohn 1. sonne to Stercherus, a very pious young man, of exceeding great hopes, dyed notwith∣standing within three yeares after 1222. 130 Ericus Balbus130 Ericus Balbus sonne to the nephew of S. Ericus. Against him conspires his kinsman Fol∣chingus, expelling him out of his kingdome, but within a short space the tyde turning, he being killed, he left Ericus the peaceable possession of the kingdome; after this he converts his forces a∣gainst the Tavastians, sending against them the Prince of the Ostrogoths, a man of very eminent vertues; whom after hee had subdued and con∣verted, he dyes 1150.
131 Valdemarus, by meanes of a valiant souldi∣er Iuanus Blaa, during his fathers absence, was elected king. The father being returned from this expedition against the Tavastians, alledged, that the crowne was rather due to himselfe then to his sonne: but beeing terrified by the stout answer of this brave souldier (who affirmed that he could shake a king of Sweden out of his ierkin, if as Birgerus alledged, there should want one to succeed) he was contented to be his sonnes governour, wherein he discharged him∣selfe very worthily. But by the fathers death,131 Valde∣marus this young king be∣ing now left to himselfe, by the perswasion of his wife being a Dane, hee deales very harshly with his owne brothers, untill at length he was taken prisoner by his brother Magnus, being therein borne out by the Swedish themselves, and was also shortly after by the Peeres of the kingdome deprived of the kingdome of Goth∣land, which his brothers kindnesse had hitherto suffered him to enioy. 132 Magnus Ladolos132 Magnus Ladolos 1. in the yeare 1276. succee∣ded his brother: Valdemarus, by the Danes meanes notwithstanding not ceasing still to molest him, yet after a once or twice dissem∣bled reconciliation, at length by the captivitie of Valdemarus the controversie was composed. Hee much wronged himselfe in setting stran∣gers, the Danes especially, over the affaires of the kingdome: for at a friendly feast (as he supposed)
the Danes, not regarding sacred hospitality, tooke him prisoner. And besides, he drew upon himselfe the im∣placable hatred of the whole Swedish nation, but principally of the family of Folchingus, a∣gainst whom he bare a great grudge: and there∣fore having cunningly under the color of friend∣ship invited them to a feast, he murdered those of chiefe note, and almost extinguished the whole race of Folchingus. But towards the lat∣ter end of his life, he much reformed his former carriage, giving himselfe wholly to Gods wor∣ship and service, dyed in the Ile of Visingia, ha∣ving left his sonne to succeed him, and Turgillus Canuti to be his governour and guide. 133 Birgerus133 Birgerus. sonne to Magnus, a dishonour both to himselfe, and the whole Swedish nati∣on, the ruine and overthrow of his owne bre∣thren (a prodigious and unnaturall part) the be∣ginning of his raigne having promised better proceedings, after the reiecting of Turgillus, his cruell nature began to discover it selfe. For ha∣ving at first accused his brethren of treason, hee afterwards by force of armes assaulted them, by whom being first taken prisoner, after a coun∣terfeit reconciliation, having invited them to a feast, he layes violent hands on them, thrusts them into a dungeon there to dye of famine; and lest there should be any hope of succour, throwes the key into a deepe river running hard by. The which barbarous and inhumane crueltie, being
odious both to the Swedish and Gothish nation, they tooke armes and expelled him out of the kingdome, who together with his wife, died mi∣serably in Denmarke. 134 Magnus Smech,134. Magnus Smech. 2 sonne to Ericus slaine by his brother Birgerus, in the yeere 1319. succee∣ded in the government, who no whit terrified by his Vncles example, trod still in the same footsteps; in so much that for his contempt of religion, prodigious lust and barbarous cruelty, he was called a robber or spoyler (Predo) which was the elogie he purchased to himselfe, making a shew that he would admit of his sonne Ericus for a consort in his government, secretly sub∣ornes one to kill him; which being prevented, yet his owne mother Blanca a French woman poysons him. Being taken prisoner by Haguinus the second king of Norway, but presently againe let goe, he flyes into Denmarke, and causing intercept his sonnes spouse Dutches of Holstein, by force obtrudes upon him Margaret the Danes daugh∣ter: and in the meane time while he is a provi∣ding great forces against his subiects, hee thun∣ders out proscription against them. 135 But in the meane time Albert of Meckel∣burg,135. Albert of Meckle∣burge. nephew to Magnus by his sister, is by the proscribed Nobles elected king, and shortly af∣ter at Stockeholme confirmed. Being now set∣led in the throne royall he proffers agreement to Magnus, who refusing the same, and being all
for warre, was at length taken prisoner, and so kept close for the space of whole seven yeeres, untill he was by his sonne Haguinus released. Af∣ter this, being returned from a Parliament held at Wismare, he began to contemne & despise his subiects, of whom, in requitall, he was as little regarded, whom now they could not endure. He was shortly after intangled in warre against Queene Margaret, to whose side some did en∣cline, wherein he was taken prisoner, and detei∣ned captive whole seven yeares, and at length forced to release his subiects of their oath of fi∣delitie. 236 Margaret the Dane,36 Marga∣ret the Dane. and wife to Haguin king of Norway, was now in the yeare 1395 Queene of three kingdomes: a woman indeede of a high and magnanimous spirit, if shee had bent her will the right way, & vertuous designe had beene the utmost end she aymed at. But she, making no more account of any oath shee had sworne (whereunto notwithstanding shee was very forward) then of childrens sport, with insatiable covetousnesse spoyling all, and delive∣ring up the Castles and strong holds of the king∣dome into the hands of strangers, being extream∣ly hated of the Swedish, fled into Denmarke, after she had by terrors and threatnings obtai∣ned the kingdome for one Ericus, her own sisters sonne, a young man about twenty foure yeares of age. When she was admonished that shee should not commit the custody of the forts and
castles of the kingdome into strangers hands, it was her answer, keepe you well your evidences, and I will have a care to keepe your castles. She dyed and was buried at Flensburg, An. 1412. 137 Ericus Duke of Pomerania137 Ericus Duke of Po∣merania 7. did too much rellish of the persidious practises of his aunt, keeping no covenant, vexing the Nobility with with warre, spoyling and impoverishing his subiects at home, and marring all commerce a∣broad, was therefore opposed by Eugelberius of a Noble and Princely family; and he by Danish treachery being supplanted, Carolus Canuti took upon him the government of the Realme. Ha∣ving fled into Denmarke, and at length odious also to the Dane, sometimes attempting, and sometimes againe despairing of his returne in his kingdome (which not withstanding upon kee∣ping of covenant was still ready to receive him) at length in his returne hee tooke in Gothland, whereby he might the more easily robbe all the ships sailing towards the North. But beeing at length by Carolus Canuti besieged, and now not daring trust the Danes, hee fled into his owne countrey of Pomerania, and there spent the rest of his dayes in peace and quietnesse, Anno 1487. 138 Christopherus, Prince Palatine of Rhene, and Duke of Bavaria,138 Christo∣pherus Prince of Palatine of Re and Duke of Ba∣varia. and sisters sonne to Ericus, against whom by the Danes meanes he was inti∣ced to come; and yet not without great doub∣ting and deliberation, and the Danes great com∣mendation
would the Peeres give their assent to his election. The faire sunne-shine of the beginning of this Princes reigne were eft soone by the Swedish supplanting one another overclo uded. Hee had once a conflict with the English, wherein he had the better; and afterwards labouring to take in Lubecke, and being disappointed of his purpose, he suffered shipwracke on the Swedish shore, after which hee lost all hope of taking in these townes of the Vandals. For his lust and other wickednesse the land was punished with pesti∣lence and famine: and afterwards having by sea lost his great treasures he had with him carryed out of the country, at length in Denmarke hee dyed childlesse 1448. 139 Carolus Canuti,139 Carolus Canuti. after this nation had been some yeeres without a king, was by the Peeres of the land now loathing a forreine yoake, crowned king 1458. After he was come to the crowne, he subdued Norway; and being after∣wards invaded and assaulted by the Dane, hee damnifies him exceedingly. By reason of the insolency and misdemeanour of his governours and officers, and by the instigation of the Arch∣bishop of Vpsalia, especially, the people of the land rebelled, and rose up in armes against him; and in the meane time that he went to Dantzick for succour from the king of Poland, they bring in and crowne Christiernus king of Denmarke. But in the meane time Catillus Bishop of Linco∣pia,
and nephew to the Archbishop, of a Pre∣late now becomes a man of warre, and gathe∣ring together what forces he was able, expells out of the kingdome both Christierne (who kept no covenant, nor yet performed any promise) and all his favourers and adherents: and at length in a memorable battle fought upon the ice, overthrowes Christierne, and puts his whole army to rout. After this the Bishop calls the king home out of Prussia, who being now retur∣ned, and having againe recovered the peoples love and good will, and growne now wiser to his cost, he places over them such officers as might give them better content. At length graced and adorned with as many worthy vertues as dayes and yeares in reigning, dyes in 1470. After this Charles some reckon Christierne for 140. Iohn his sonne 141. and Christierne Iohns son 142. although others are of opinion they were titular kings onely, and rather intruders then true kings, and therefore the next shall be, 140 Steno Sture,140. Steno Sture. 1 sisters sonne to the aforesaid Charles, not onely repelled Christierne and his ar∣my, now approached neere unto the walls of Stockeholme, but put both himselfe & his whole army to flight, and kept him from invading the countrey any more. He subdued also afterward the same kings soone Iohn, by meanes of some disagreement be∣twixt him and Swanto by the helpe of the Russi∣ans and some factious people brought in and
crowned. At length bringing backe the captive Queene to her husband Iohn, being then in Sma∣landia, having sickned at a feast, dyed the 30. yeare of his reigne. A great magnanimous and vertuous Prince, but yet in this, as it were, excee∣ding himselfe, in that hee refused the diademe royall being offered. 141 Suanto,141 Suanto. Prince of the Ostrogoths, and a counseller of the kingdome was elected king of the Suetians. Having made a confederacy with those of Lubecke, he made warre against Chri∣sterne the second, sonne to Iohn (whom many, (for the hatred they bare to the sonne,) did earnestly desire) against whom while as hee is making great preparation, hee dyes 1512, and of his raigne the 8. He was a vertuous Prince, liberall, mild, intermingled with a gratefull seve∣ritie. 142 Steno Sture,142 Sbéno Sture 2 younger sonne of Suanto suc∣ceeded in the government. This Prince by his prudence escaped the lying in wait of Christerne king of Denmarke, having sent to the private conference whereunto he was solicited, Gaddus and Gustavus Ericson. Afterwards stoutly and va∣liantly opposing Christerne, now come into the field with a very great army, and himselfe vali∣antly fighting, was at length shot thorow with a gunne. He being now dead, and the Swedish disper∣sed and scattered, Christerne, by the Nobles of the Danish faction was crowned king; having at
a banquet the very day of his coronation, killed all the Nobility by him suspected to bee of the contrary faction. But by reason of his extraor∣dinary cruelty, the same moneth he came, was againe expelled the kingdome. Now before we proceed to the orderly succes∣sion of the ensuing kings,Something concerning the title the kings of Den∣marke pre∣tend to the crowne and kingdome of Sweden. something may bee said concerning the king of Denmarke, and the originall of the claime he layes to the crowne of Sweden. Christierne the 1. of that name (of whom something hath been said already, the whole royall race of Denmark being now quite extinguished, of an Earle of Oldenburg, by the consent of the Peeres of the kingdome, was ele∣cted king, and installed in the throne Royall, and that chiefly by the commendation of Adolphus of Holsasia his mothers brother, and afterwards there arising some broyles and tumults in the kingdome of Sweden, the factious of the king∣dome, of whom was chiefe Iohannes Benedictus Archbishop of Vpsalia, having before reiected their naturall king Carolus Canutus: and is the pretended right the Dane claimes to the king∣dome of Sweden. After his decease Iohn his sonne for the space of thirty two years continued king of Denmark. He was in like manner by the factious Goths e∣lected king of Sweden, after they had reiected Steno the elder, who had succeeded his mothers brother Charles: but was in a short space after by Swanto (being the meanes of Henningus Gad∣dus
Bishop of Lincopia, by the consent of the States of the land elected in the roome of Steno, againe driven out, and in many conflicts being still put to the worse, at length fled into Den∣marke. This Suanto shortly after dying, the Peeres of the kingdome after great altercation (the Danish faction willing to set against him Ericus Trollus) the memory of paternall worth and vertue pre∣vailing, made choice of Steno Sture, the youn∣ger sonne of the aforesaid Suanto. Two yeares after the death of Suanto Christierne the second, succeeded in the kingdome of Denmarke,Christierne the 2 invades the countrey of Sweden. the greatest scourge that ever befell the kingdome of Sweden, who presently resolves to prosecute the pretended right, his father and grandfather had to this crowne, Steno their new elected king seeing himselfe now, as he thought, setled in the peaceable pos∣session of the kingdome, giving too much eare to flatterers (often too frequent in Princes Courts) and by their evill counsel seduced, com∣mitted many grosse and fowle faults in his go∣vernment; by which meanes there following an alienation of the minds of the Nobility, he lost likewise at length the love of many of the com∣mons also. The Dane who left no wind unsailed to bring his purpose to passe, thinking it now good fi∣shing in a muddy water, took eftsoone hold of this opportunity, and gathering together a great
army, he begirt Stockeholme round about: but Steno likewise with a great army opposing him, raised the siege. The wind in the meane time being contrary for his returne into Denmarke, for the space of three moneths he was put to an extreame great strait for want of provision for his army. Steno, who used all possible meanes to winne his love and savour, with all meanes of necessary provi∣sion for his countrey into Denmarke, supplyed his present necessitie, granting him free leave to returne without any trouble or molestation. But this so great a curtesie and kindnesse was but ill reuited. For foure yeares after,A great in∣gratitude. having about some matters of great importance, as he preten∣ded, desired private conference with Steno, hee had almost yeelded to goe aboard the enemies ship. Being then thus prevented, he wished Steno to send him some men of note as Ambassadors to conferre with him: and having sent Gaddus and Gustavus sonne to Eric, and after king, against his oath and promise, carries them both captive into Denmarke. This was but the beginning of the next yeres Tragedie. Having then the next yeare gathered together a farre greater army then the former, he invaded the country of the Vestrogoths, and the battell being fought upon the ice, Steno being shot tho∣row the thigh with a gunne, dyes shortly after of
this wound, upon which followed the dissipa∣tion and dispersing of the Swedish army. Im∣mediately sfter was Christierne by the Danish fa∣ction, in the principall city Stockeholme elected and crowned king: having also after a solemne manner sworne the confirmation of all their pri∣viledges, and promised immunitie and pardon for whatsoever was past. But the same day (fearing lest afterwards in his absence the sonnes of Steno might by the contra∣ry faction be elected) having first commanded the gates of the City to be shut up, and invited to a feast the chiefe of all the Nobility of the contrary faction, in the fight of all the people, now trembling and quaking for feare, slew 94. of them, leaving their dead bodies in the great Court before the towne hall for the space of three dayes for a terrour to the people. The dead body of Steno was by the tyrants command ta∣ken out of the grave,Extreame barbarous crueltie. and (as some write) after he had like a dogge torne it with his teeth, com∣manded to burne is to ashes with the others late∣ly killed. The inhabitants were also by the rude souldiers, without any regard of sexe or age cruel∣ly killed and murdered, and young children be∣ing hung up, their heads were cut off from their shoulders. The City was rifled and spoiled by the souldiers, and no manner of outrage and in∣solency omitted. After his departure from thence as some write) he went into a monasterie,More then haunce eltie. where he was entertained after the best manner the
Monkes were able: but after service, being Can∣dlemasse day, he commanded to take the Abbot and all his Monkes, tying them hand and foot, and threw them into a deepe river running by: the Abbot having by some meanes untyed him∣selfe was swimming a shore; which being by him perceived, he caused to follow him with a boat and kill him. Having thus committed many outrages and insolencies, the people of the land being much therewith distasted, tooke courage, and about some 30000. in armes pursued him, now fleeing and marching more by night then by day, untill at length he came into Denmarke. Boing now so embrued in bloud, he could not refraine from crueltie even against his owne kindred, he was at length assaulted by Frederick Prince of Holstein, ane those of Lubecke, and his conscience now affrighting him, with his wife Isabella the Em∣perours sister and his children, flees into Ze∣land, which was the third yeare after the massa∣cre of Stockeholme. 1523
CHAP. IX. 143 Gustavus Erickson 1.124 GVstavus 1. called Erickson, or sonne of Ericus, after long imprisonment▪ esca∣ping out of prison, fled speedily out of Denmark, and was at length by the generall consent of the States now surviuing, accepted for king of the Realme; being thereunto well furthered by those of the City of Lubecke, which supplyed him with store of money. This noble and praise-worthy Prince liued and reigned very peaceably with the love and good liking of his subiects the whole space of 38. yeares, and dyed in 1560. The most memorable of his acts (and was it not memorable indeed?Reformation of religion in the king∣dome of Swe∣den An. 6560) was that hee banished out of his whole kingdome and dominions the superstitious worship of the Church of Rome, and thorow his whole dominions caused them to professe the reformed religion, according to the confession of Ausbourg or Augustane confes∣sion. And because we account the Danes usur∣pation to haue beene no right possession, there∣fore according to Historians we make him to follow in order 143. immediatly after Steno, whose daughter some say he marryed, howbeit if he so did, we reade of no issue he had by her.
The first wife therefore by whom he had any is∣sue, was Katharine daughter to Magnus, Duke of Saxony, and by her he had 1. Ericus who succee∣ded him in his government. His second wife was Margaret, daughter to a noble knight A∣braham Loholu, governour of Vestrogothia, whom he marryed An. 1536. who bare unto him these children following. 1 Iohn afterwards king of Sweden. 2 Katharine, marryed to the Earle of East-Freezland 1559. and bare to him Enno, Gustavus, Iohn and Christopher, Earles of East Friezland. 3 Cecilie, marryed to Christopher Marquesse of Badn 1564. to whom she bare Edward called the Fortunate, Christopher, Constans and Phi∣lip. 4 Maguus, Duke of Ostrogothia, and dyed 1595. 5 Steno, and dyed a child. 6 Anna, marryed to George Iohn, Count Pa∣latine of Rhene, and Duke of Bavaria 1564. to whom she bare George, Gustavus, Iohn, Ruphel, An∣na, Margaret, and Vrsula, marryed to the Duke of Wirtenberg. 7 Charles, who presently dyed. 8 Sophia, marryed to Magnus Duke of Saxo∣nie 1568. and bare to him Gustavus Duke of Sa∣xonie, who dyed at Holmin 1597, 9 Elizabeth, marryed to Christopher, Duke of Meckelburg, who had by her one only daughter, called Margaret, & married to the Megapolitane Duke.
10 Charles, Duke of Sudermania, &c. This fruitfull Queene dyed in the yeare 1551. After her decease he married againe Katharine daugther to Gustavus Olaus, Baron of Torpa, 1552. but had by her no children. 144 Ericus144 Ericus 8. succeeded his father Gustavus, and was crowned in Stockeholme 1561. This king for a certaine time waged warre against the Danes and city of Lubecke, and drew upon him∣selfe the hatred and evill will of all his neigh∣bours: and as though this had yet beene but a small matter, he irritated his own people, whom he exceedingly discontented. His brother Iohn who had marryed Katharine, sister to Sigismund, king of Polands widow, did altogether mislike his brothers turbulent cour∣ses and enterprizes; who in his returne from Re∣valia into Livonia, left with the Polonian king his kins man a great summe of money, for the which this being put into his hands as a pledge, certaine castles and commanderies in the coun∣trey of Livonia. This fact his brother (otherwise very suspici∣ous) interpreted in the worst sense, as though his brother had beene combined and ioyned in league with the Dane and Polonian, and for this cause with his whole forces assaults his brother, takes himselfe, wife, and whole family prisoners in a towne of Finland, called Ako, brings them all with him to Stockeholme, where ha∣ving first openly accused him, he cast him in∣to
prison, where he continued for the space of foure whole yeares: besides, that he put to death many of his familiar friends and acquaintance. But at the foure yeares end the case is quite alte∣red, his brother finding a meanes to free him∣selfe out of prison, takes his brother captive, and makes him drinke of the same cup he had before made him begin, with keeping him in close pri∣son during his whole life time 1568. 145 Ericus thus iustly thrust out of his throne,145 Iohn 2. his brother was with the unanimous, free and generall consent of the whole State elected king in his brothers turne. During his reigne he had also great war with but especially with the Dane, the Muscovite or Russian. He was born 1537. and crowned 1569: He marryed first Katharine daughter to Sigismund, king of Poland, by whom he had, 1. Sigismund, now king of Poland. 2. Anne. After this Queenes decease, he marryed one Gunila, daughter to one Axelurs Bielke de Here∣seter, a noble Knight and governour of Ostro∣gothia, whom he marryed 1585. and by whom he had 1 Iohn, who in the yeare 1612. married Mary Elizabeth, daughter to Charles the 9. King of Sweden. 2 Charles, borne 1550 first Duke of Suder∣mania, Neriva and Vermelandia, and afterwards also elected king of Sweden.
This king Iohn constantly maintained the same religion of the Augustane confession, which his father had formerly professed; although under∣hand he suffered his sonne Sigismund by his mo∣ther Katharine to be educated in the Romish re∣ligion, which cost him no lesse then the losse of his kingdome of Sweden, as hereafter shall appeare. And the better to secure his subiects of his constant perseverance in the religion he profes∣sed, he gave them his brother Charles, Duke of Finland (whom he loved dearely) for a pledge or pawne, that no innovation should therein be attempted, whom he also appointed by his last will and testament, during his sonnes absence, to be gouernour of the whole kingdome. This king dyed in the yeare 1592 19. of November. 146 Sigis∣mundus.246 Sigismundus, sonne to the aforesaid Iohn, being before during his fathers life time in 1590 beene designed and appointed king of Poland (being during his fathers life time, elected king of Poland, where he also lived and reigned at the time of his fathers death) was in the yeare 1599 crowned king of Sweden, and the very day of the Epiphanie was appointed for this purpose. Now there was in the kings company one Fran∣ciscus mala spina, Bishop of Vrlia in Italy, the Popes Nuncio, whom the king and his followers much desired to performe the solemne rites of the Coronation: and this Prelate was of opini∣on, that if the States of Sweden had once given
way to this beginning, the Romish religion might more easily afterwards be againe intro∣duced. But against this with might and maine did Adamus Andracanus, then Archbishop of Vpsalia oppose, affirming, that it was flat against the lawes and constitutions of the kingdome that any other but the Archbishop of Vpsalia should set the diademe royall upon his head: and besides, that he must now sweare to main∣taine that religion now professed within the kingdome of Sweden, according to the Au∣gustane confession, exhibited to Charles the fift Emperour, professed by his grandfather Gusta∣vus, and his owne father Iohn the 3. and by a late synod holden at Vpsalia, by the whole States of the kingdome confirmed; and that he shall not assigne or grant any Church or Churches in any towne of Sweden to any other religion then that of the Augustane confession. And further, that du∣ring the time of his abode in Sweden, he should be contented with the service performed with∣in the private chapell of his owne palace. A∣gainst this did oppose the peeres and Nobles of poland that accompanied the king: howbeit the peeres of Sweden were resolute in their pur∣pose, insomuch that some dayes were thus spent in alteration. At length about mid Ianuary, see∣ing no remedy, it was agreed that the bishop of Vpsalia should performe such rites as belonged to the coronation, which was accordingly per∣formed.
The oath of Sigismund.Ericus Sparce also Chancellour of the king∣dome, administred unto the king his solemne oath; he reciprocally answering him, and pro∣mising first, that he would maintaine iustice and truth within his kingdome, and that he would punish and suppresse all iniustice and lying, that he would doe iustice to all the Swedish nation, as well rich as poore, and that according to the lawes and statutes of the kingdome, he should governe the same, and that by the counsell and consent of his brother Prince Charles, and the senate or counsell of the kingdome, that hee shall consult with the natural inhabitants of the king∣dome, and not with strangers: that hee shall bring no strangers within the realme; that hee shall commit the castles and forts of the king∣dome, and the deserts of Vpsalia to none but the natiues of the countrey; that he shall impose no new tribute or taxe upon the subiect, unlesse in case of great necessitie for the defence of the kingdome, in feare of any intestine commotion or sedition: when the kings sonne or daughter is to be marryed, when the king is to make any solemne perambulation thorow his whole king∣dome, or something for the reparation of the desarts of Vpsalia shall be required. Moreover, that he should confirme all privi∣ledges and immunities heretofore granted to the Peeres of the land, the whole people and the clergie thereof, and that by all meanes possible, he should procure peace and tranquillitie to all
his subiects; adding lastly this clause to the oath, So God be good to my soule and body as I from my heart sweare to observe all the premisses. After this was a solemn assembly of the whole States of the kingdome, or a Parliament called at Stockeholme, wherein was consulted of the government of the kingdome, during the kings absence, and divers good and wholesome lawes enacted. In the moneth of Iuly next after the king de∣parted againe into Poland. But some few yeares after,Abdication of king Sigis∣mund. hee was by the same States againe abdicated and quite reiected from ever having any right or interest in the go∣vernment of the kingdome of Sweden, and was in a Parliament holden at Stockeholme 1590. confirmed. And againe, in another Parliament holden at Lincopia 1600. as well he himselfe as all his is∣sue and off-spring are for ever excluded from the succession to the kingdome of Sweden. The rea∣sons were diuers, but especially for sending an army of strangers into the countrey, quite con∣trary to his oath and promise; the which, if their plot had taken effect, might have over∣throwne the whole State, besides the ruine of religion. There were divers other causes pub∣lished in print, as the story mentions, the which I have not as yet seene. But withall in the abdi∣cation of this king, this condtion was inserted▪ that if within sixe moneths after the finishing of
the last Parliament holden at Lincopia, this king Sigismund would send over into Sweden his son Vsladislaus, to be governed and ruled by his Vn∣cle prince Charles, and to be educted in the rel∣ligion then professed in the kingdome of Swe∣den; that assoone as he were come to yeeres ca∣pable of government, they would receive and acknowledge him for ever afterwards for their lawfull king and governour: the which motion not being entertained, nor yet any answer with∣in this space returned, their former decree of abdication of him and his seed was there solemn∣ly ratified and confirmed. Sigismund marryed first Anna daughter to Charles, Archduke of Austria, by whom hee had, 1. Anna Maria. 2. Katharine. 3. Vladistaus, designed for King of Polo∣nia. 4. Christopher, cut out of his mothers wombe, and shortly after, both he and his mo∣ther dyed. Sigismund thus solemnely reiected, and put besides the Crowne and Kingdome of Swe∣den, his brother Iohn next unto him, accor∣ding to the ordinary course and custome should have succeeded: but by reason hee was suspected to bee too much addicted to his el∣der brother, king of Poland, and therefore assigning him large and ample meanes sutable to
his birth and parentage, they made choice of the youngest brother Charles to take upon him the government of the kingdome, who notwithstan∣ding would not for a good while accept of the regale title. Charles therefore at length,147 Charles 9. at the earnest sol∣licitation of the whole estates tooke the go∣vernment upon him, borne in 1550. and at first, Duke of Sudermania, Nericia, and Verulandia, and after three yeares government without the regale title, at length in the yeare 1607. accep∣ted of the same. This noble and worthy Prince swore to the maintenance of religion, and the lawes and con∣stitutions of the kingdome, as hath beene lately declared, all which hee did accordingly per∣forme. The Peere of the kingdome, for his worth and valour, and many good offices he had perfor∣med for the peace and preservation of the State, were not onely contented this dignity should be conferred upon himselfe, but consented also that the fame should be confirmed to his heires and successours for ever, which fayling then was the same to return to his elder brother Iohn, and his heires male. It was also agreed upon, that by reason of di∣vers inconveniences arising from this root that sometimes the kings of Sweden have accepted of another kingdome, and by that meanes often residing in another countrey; it was therefore likewise enacted and agreed upon,
that no hereditary Prince, and heire apparant to the crowne of Sweden,An act against the accepting of a forreine kingdome, unlesse he re∣fine himselfe in Sweden. His warres a∣gainst Den∣marke and Russia. shall hencefoorth ac∣cept of any forreine kingdome, unlesse he resolve neverthelesse to live and continue in the same kingdome of Sweden. This noble king after he came to the Crown, waged warre with the king of Denmarke, and at one and the same time with the Russian also. For Iuan Wasilieuitz Suski, with many of the Peeres being in his chiefe City Mosco very straitly besieged by the Polonians, hee sent for aide and succour to this Charles king of Sweden; there being then great danger, not of the losse of the king and his Nobles onely, but even of the utter overthrow and ruine of his whole domi∣nion. This Prince therefore sent with great expe∣dition under the command of Iairus de la Garde, Earle of Leccho, and Arch-marshall of the kingdome of Sweden, a great army, wherewith he raised the siege, overthrew the enemies for∣ces, and set at libertie this distressed Prince, and all his Peeres. The aforenamed Suski making shew of a gratefull acknowledgement of so great a kind∣nesse received, not onely promised, but also sea∣led some deeds, whereby hee freely gave unto this king Charles, and to his heires and succes∣sours kings of Sweden for ever, certaine territo∣ries and lordships, together with the townes, castles, and forts thereunto belonging. But the
perfor∣mance was not answerable to promise: for this unthankfull persidious Prince sent secretly to the captaine of one of his castles, wishing him with some forces to intercept those deeds, toge∣ther with the money agreed upon for the soul∣diers pay. King Charles, by such an iniury irrita∣ted (and blame him not) raises againe new for∣ces, invades the countrey (the Polonian having now likewise seized upon Mosco the chiefe Ci∣ty) he takes in Rexholme, and possesses himselfe of a great part of the countrey round about. But while he is now in the middest of his good suc∣cesse, behold cruell Aopus suddenly cuts the thread of his life, end so by this meanes, toge∣ther with his hereditarie dominions leaves like∣wise this warre to be finished by his sonne Gusta∣vus Adolphus, at this time king of Sweden, whereof more hereafter. He dyed of a great sicknesse in a warre against Denmarke: An. 1611. Octob. 30. His first wife was Mary daughter to Lewes E∣lector, and Count Palatine of Rhene, whom he married, An. 1579, and had by her, 1 Margaret Elizabeth, and died at the age of 5. yeares. 2 Elizabeth Sabina, who dyed also young. 3 Lewes, who died instantly after his birth. 4 Katharine, borne in 1584. and in 1614. marryed to the illustrous Prince Iohn Casimir, Prince Palatine of Rhene, and Duke of Ba∣varia.
5. Gustavus, who dyed a child. 6. Mary, who dyed also young. This vertuous Queene dyed of her selfe in the yeere 1580. His second wife was Christina, daughter to Adolphus, Duke also of Holsatia, who bare to him 1 Christina, who lived not long. 2 Gustavus Adolphus, the illustrious and vi∣ctorious king of Sweden, and born in anno 1594 Decemb. 9. 3. Mary Elizabeth 1596. who in the yeare 1612. was marryed to Iohn, an hereditary Prince of the kingdome, and Duke of Ostrogothia. 4. Charles Philippe, a hereditary Prince, and Duke of Sudermania, Nericia, and Ver∣melandia 1601. He dyed in Livonia unmarried.
CHAP. X. Of the Noble, Illustrious, and invincible Prince, great Gustavus Adolphus, the 2. King of Sweden, Goths, and Vandals, &c. and some of his Acts before his en∣tring into Ger∣many. 148 GVstavus Adolphus148 Gustavus Adolphus 2. borne the ninth of De∣cemb. 1594. as said is, being but of a tender age for the swaying of the scepter royall, his father dying in 1611. he being then but 17. yeares of age, was crowned in 1617. Conside∣ring then his young yeares, and laying them in one scale, and the waight of affaires lying on his shoulders in the other, we may most iustly won∣der and admire at Gods might and power in ma∣king him a sit instrument to effect such matters, as I doubt not but after-ages shall admire the same. In the yeare 1620. he marryed Mary Eli∣nor, sister to the illustrious Prince George Willi∣am, Marquis of Brandenburg, one of the Prin∣ces Electors of the sacred Empire, who although she bare him some children, yet lived they not
long. In the yeare 1624. she bare him a daugh∣ter. 1. Christina, but dyed the same yeare. The next yeare after she bare him againe ano∣ther daughter, called also 2. Christina, yet living, and in the yeare 1627 she was in a Parliament then holden at Stocke∣holme, declared nere apparent to the crowne of Sweden. It hath been a little before related how his father Charles the ninth of that name died, du∣ring his warre with Denmarke, and withall hath beene shewed, how at the same time the same Prince had hot warre with the Prince of Russia: by which may easily appeare into what a laby∣rinth of troubles was this young king at his first comming to the crowne involved. In both these warres he carryed his affaires so well, that tho∣row the helpe of Almighty God he hath procu∣red himselfe ever since a firme and inviolable peace with that great Prince.His war with the king of Denmarke. He had with the Dane divers conflicts, yet alwayes demeaned himselfe so worthily that he came off with great honour and credit; so that at length that great king seeing hee had to meddle with his match, was willing to accōodate his Martiall thoughts, to entertaine a treatie of peace: and so these two grea Princes of mortall enemies, became lo∣ving and kind friends, and have since confirmed a strait league of amity and friendship. As for the Russian Prince, he had with him yet some grea∣ter difficulty to undergoe, there resting some
strong, and almost impregnable places to be ta∣ken, and the evidences concerning such territo∣ries, as the Russian had, for good consideration, assigned his father, to bee recovered. And al∣though my purpose bee not particularly to en∣large my selfe upon all the severall occurrences of this warre; yet are there in the same, some things to be obserued, not unworthy the r∣ders consideration, whereof I will give but a touch. After his fathers decease then,His war with the Russian Prince. having setled the affaires of his kingdome at home, although he had to deale with so patent an enemie as the king of Denmarke, as hath beene said already; yet did he not neglect this warre against the Rus∣sian; and for this purpose prepared a great army to prosecute that which his father had left unfi∣nished. Now it is to bee understood that these forts and places hee tooke in from the Russian Prince, are the strongest holds,  it were, the very keyes of all the Russian dominion. That countrey is corruptly called Reaholme,The countrey of Carelia corruptly cal∣led Reaholme taken in. from a strong City and Castle seated in two little I∣lands in the mouth of the river Woxen, in the one of which the Castle, and in the other the City is seated; although the right name of this countrey among Historians be knowne by the name Carelia. But among all these strong holds & castles, none is to be compared with the strong fort. Notreburg,The invinci∣ble force of Notrebugh. which hath therefore hither∣to ever beene holden invincible, untill now of
late experience hath taught us the contrary. It is built in a little Iland in the mouth of the swift river Nerva, and by reason of the breadth of the river could not be battered with ordnance. This strong castle therefore being of so great impor∣tance, was never unfurnished. But the great God of heaven, who according to his good will and pleasure, disposes of all these sublunary things, and infatuates the wisedome of the wise, delive∣red this inuincible fort into the hands of an in∣vincible Prince: a presage, no doubt, of his fu∣ture, great and glorious victories. But the man∣ner is yet more admirable: for within the soul∣diers were not unfurnished of sufficient foode, and the enemies force (as said is) they needed not much to feare;The strange manner of taking in the Castle of Notreburg. but within their mouthes and throats there grew so many great warts, that although they had food sufficient, yet could they not feed on the same, nor yet swallow down any sustenance, for the which cause they were forced to surrender this strong fort into his maiesties hands. And so he that made the walls of Iericho at the sound of a rammes horne to fall downe, to make a way for his owne people of Israel to enter this City, found out this way to take in this in∣vincible fort. And whosoever sees not the same providence accompanying & prospering him in this so great a warre now undertaken against the whole power of the Austrian house and the Ca∣tholike league, I thinke is more then pur-blind. There is in that same countrey another strong
Castle Iuanogorod,The taking in of the strong fort Iuanogo∣rod. seated on the top of a high rocke, in an Isthmus, or narrow plaine, a great part thereof being environed with this swift ri∣ver. And although on the west side, as it loo∣keth towards the river it might be batered; yet both that way, as likewise both the south and north parts were well defended by this river; and on the east there was a low valley, digged by natures owne industry, where the people had ther habitation, the countrey about being plain and levell, and so high that the ordnance could touch onely the tops of the turrets, and goe no lower. Neither yet was there any undermining by reason of that soile which was altogether rockie. This fort notwithstanding, together with the former 2. and many more were by this same king taken in the yeare 1617, in so much that this great Prince was then put in no small feare of loosing all or the greater part of his do∣minion, whereof there was then no small danger. Wherefore the great Knezor or Duke, Michael Feodoronitz, sonne to the former perfidi∣ous Iuani Vasilienitz Suski, earnestly suing for peace, it was at length by the mediation of king Iames of famous memory effected, and in the yeare 1618. fully finished and agreed upon. And thus were those aforementioned townes and forts, and divers others belonging to this Carelia Ruthenica, or countrey of Rexholme, to∣gether with all the deeds and evidences there∣unto pertaining, resigned over and delivered in∣to
the hands of this king, and for ever annexed unto the Crowne of Sweden; and all other pla∣ces during this warre taken from the Russian, a∣gaine to him restored; as in the articles of agree∣ment in 18. more at length is to be seene. Nei∣ther was this king then past 21. yeares of age, when he had brought to a happy end two so great and important warres. Now after this hap∣py and peaceable conclusion, having established peace in al his Prouinces, he gave not himselfe over to his lustfull pleasures (as is often too customa∣ry with young Princes) nor to drowne himselfe with sinnefull delights; but gaue himselfe whol∣ly to beautifie and adorne this peaceable king∣dome, whereof shee was now fully possessed: which could no better be effected, then by non∣firming the ancient good and wholesome lawes and constitutions of the kingdome, adding some others as occasion required.Confirmation of the ancient lawes concer∣ning trafficke and commerce betwixt the sea townes. And therefore, as was already touched, he not onely rein∣forced the former lawes and constitutions concerning trafficke and commerce be∣twixt the sea townes, but added also divers o∣thers, tending to that same purpose; together with many other things, whereon for brevity I may not now insist. But that he might leave a perpetuall memori∣all to the Christian world, that he was as well a favourer of Minerva as of Mars, hee hath left thereof a sufficient proofe to all after ages. Du∣ring the reigne of Ericus Balbus, the then Arch∣bishop
of Vpsalia, Iezlerus instituted and foun∣ded in the same City a colledge of 4 professors; and afterwards the number of professours being increased, together with an addition of far grea∣ter meanes, it was in the yeare 1476. by Pope Sixtus the 4. erected into the forme of an Vni∣versitie, and adorned with the like priviledges, as that of Bononia. This Vniversitie by iniurie of time and devouring warres being much en∣dammaged, and having lost much of it's ancient splendour and beauty, was again by the late de∣ceased Charles the 9. as it were, out of her ashes not onely restored to former dignity and splen∣dor, but a good encrease also added to her for∣mer beauty. And this same invincible king now living, to testifie to posterity the love he beareth to learning,The Vniver∣sitie of Vpsa∣lia is by him much enri∣ched and a∣dorned. hath so encreased both the number of learned professors and their maintenance, that now it may well be compared with many of the best Vniversities of Europe; and lest it should at any time hereafter by reason of the want or un∣certainty of meanes come to ruine or decay, did in the yeare 1624. out of his owne revenues settle upon the same very great and large means, and confirmed the same in most large and ample manner, and made the possession of these lands and rents, as sure and firme as the best Noble∣mans of the kingdome. This Prince, after he had lived a few yeares in peace, was againe intangled in a new warre with his Vncle Sigismund king of Polonia, in the
which he tooke from him many strong townes and forts of no small importance,His war with his Vncle, Si∣gismund king of Poland. without any losse to himselfe (for he made warre in his ene∣mies countrey) both in the kingdome of Poland, it selfe, in the Duchie of Lithuania, and in the rich countrey of Prussia; so that if this king had continued as he began, and affaires of a higher nature and straine had not invited him another way, notwithstanding the ayde the Emperor his brother in law sent him, he had, perhaps, ere now beene deprived of a great part, if not of all his great dominion. The which by him wisely, and in time foreseene, he earnestly sued both to our gracious kings maiestie now living, and to the king of France to mediate a faire agreement be∣twixt him and his nephew; the which was ac∣cordingly performed the 29. of Septemb. 1629. a truce and cessation of armes beeing for sixe yeares after ensuing there agreed upon: by ver∣tue of which agreement the king of Sweden re∣stored againe to his Vncle many places by him taken in the kingdome of Poland, and Duchie of Lithuania; howbeit he reteineth still many good townes and castles in the countrey of Prus∣sia. The particular articles of their agreement for avoiding tediousnesse of set purpose I here passe by; and who so is desirous to see the same, may have recourse to the histories.
The entring of the inuincible king of Sweden, great Gustavus Adolphus into Germanie with a great Armie, Anno 1630. with a touch of some principall exploits by him since that time atchie∣ved and brought to passe. RAdolphus, Earle of Halsburg, being in the yeare 1274. crowned Emperour at Aquis∣granum or Aix, layed the first foundation of the greatnes of the Austrian house. This Prince then besides that with many great lordships, partly by force and violence, and partly by purchase he much increased his hereditary dominions; the country of Austria also by want of a lawfull suc∣cessour fell into this Emperors hands to dispose of; which he eftsoone conferred upon his sonne Albertus. Into this Austria then were incorpo∣rated all these other dominions. Radolphus being dead, Adolphus Earle of Nassau was elected Em∣peror, and afterwards by the aforesaid Albertus killed, who got himselfe afterward chosen Em∣perour. This Prince likewise spared no paines, but improoved his utmost power and means for the increasing of this already grounded greatnes. And this made him so eager an enemy to the
Helvetian liberty, labouring by all meanes, di∣rect or indirect, to hooke in whatsoever he could compasse to make his sons great, and to advance the now rising Austrian house; yea, so eager was he in prosecuting his purpose, that he spared not the very monasteries and religious houses, but either bought out right what might thus bee purchased, or else procured himselfe and his sons to be made patrons and protectors of such eccle∣siasticall places, a faire way for future possession. But the uniust murder of his predecessor, being by his own brothers sonne revenged (who killed this ambitious Albert) and all his covetousnesse and ambition now layed in the dust;Albert killed. the Princes of this Austrian house, as they had now & then their turnes in this supreame authority, so were they not wanting to themselves and successors, but as time and opportunity were offered, went on in their predecessors footsteps. At length, af∣ter the death of Sigismund the Emperour in the yeare 1438. another Albert of this Austrian house,Another Al∣bert Empe∣rour. and sonne in law to the aforesaid Sigis∣mund was elected Emperour; the which his suc∣cessors (having now yet once againe gotten the ball before them) have kept close unto them∣selves almost for the space of 200 yeares, even untill this very day; having also afterwards ad∣ded to their former greatnesse the kingdome of Hungaria,Wonderfull greatnes of the house of Austria. Bohemia, with the appurtenances thereof, Silesia, Moravia, the one and other Lusatia▪ and become also at several times, Lords
and masters of Stiria, Carinthin, and Sirolis; and by marriage afterwards gotten in the 17. Prouinces. At length Charles the fifth (as though this house had not yet bin great enough) brought for his share the kingdomes of Spaine and Por∣tugall, together with all the kingdomes and do∣minions thereupon depending: as namely the kingdome of Naples, Sicilie, and Duchie of Mi∣lan; besides the West-Indies, and all the riches of that Westerne world, with some thing in the East-Indies also. All this notwithstanding, this great Monarch, according to his plus ultra, not contented with all these dominions;Charles the 5. attempted the over∣throw of true religion, to∣gether with the Germane liberty. aimed yet further at the subversion and overthrow both of true religion, and the liberty of Germany, and began to act such a tragedy in high Germany, as his sonne Philip afterwards attempted in the low countries: for the which cause to have Pope Leo the 10. for his friend, as he had before anathe∣matized Luther, so this Emperor to act his part, proscribes him. This plot for a while succeeded according to his wishes, insomuch that Iohn Fre∣dericke, Prince elector, and the Landgrave of Hessen Protectors and maintainers of the true reformed religion preached by Luther, and the Germane liberty were in open field overthrown their forces dispersed, and they themselves ta∣ken prisoners. But at length, Maurice, Duke of Saxonie the Emperours Generall, and newly possessed, not onely of his kinsmans lands and possessions, but of his electorate dignity also,
contrary to the Emperours expectation, turning his power against himselfe, forces him, not one∣ly to a restitution of the captives, but likewise to a setled peace and liberty of religion within the whole Germane countryes: and so it did here plainely appeare how God brought light out of darknes. The Iesuites, the incendiaries of the Christi∣an world, envying the peace and prosperitie of the same, as in other parts, so in this countrey of Germany have they laboured to overthrow and subvert both the State of the true reformed Church and common-wealth. And although they have been a long time proiecting such a plot, yet could it not so conveniently be brought about untill such time as Fredericke primus, Pala∣tine Elector, having accepted of the Bohemian Crowne, being freely and lawfully thereunto e∣lected, this viperous generation, being of a martiall breed, failed not to lay hold on such an offered opportunitie; and therefore cease not to incense and stirre up the Emperor Ferdinand the 2. (of himselfe sensible enough of any thing that might but in shew derogate from the dignity of the Austrian house) to prosecute that which be∣fore had been proiected. And thus was this No∣ble Prince deprived not onely of his kingdome of Bohemia, but of all his hereditary domini∣ons and electorate dignitie. And whereas many ignorant of the Iesuites farre fetched secret stra∣tagems, did verily beleeve that now they were
attained to the utmost end they aimed at, it ap∣peared farre otherwise. For now the fire that so long lay covered under the ashes breakes foorth, and sets upon a sudden all these flourishing Pro∣vinces of Germany on fire: and the visard now remooved their purpose, was made manifest to the blindest eye-sight; to wit, the totall ruine and overthrow of the true religion in many, yea in most places of Germany professed, the redu∣cing of them againe to the Romish superstition, and utter overthrow of the liberties of the Ro∣mane Empire: whose designes whosoever, in de∣fence of Gods cause and liberties of their owne countrey, did any way oppose, have been in most barbarous manner prosecuted and persecuted with fire and sword, and many forced to forsake their ancient inheritances to save their lives and keepe a good conscience, in still professing that religion wherein they had heretofore beene brought up. Others againe more pusillanimous and loath to loose all for Christ, yet besides, a shameful and persidious abiuration of that truth which before they had professed, were yet not∣withstanding forced to yeeld to such slavish and servile conditions, as the insolency of a victori∣ous enemy was pleased to impose upon them. When this tyranny had now at least, for the space of tenne yeares beene after a rigid man∣ner prosecuted, it pleased Almighty God of his infinite goodnesse, all other meanes now failing, in pitty and compassion to his poore afflicted
Church, now destitute of the least appearance of any humane helpe, to raise up meanes of deliverance, where, I am sure, it was least expe∣cted, euen that illustrious and victorious king of Sweden, Captaine of the Lords host. Gustavus Adolphus, King of the Swethens, Goths, and Vandals, arriued in Pomer, in Febru∣ary, An. 1630. and landed neere unto the Isles of Rugen, and Vsdome, at a little village, called Pennemund, with no more at the first, then 6000 souldiers. Himselfe comming on shoare, falls downe, and powres out this vnto God, O Lord, thou that rulest ouer the Heauens, the earth, and the vast sea, I cannot sufficiently giue thee thanks, that thou hast preserued me so graciously in this perillous iourney; O Lord I render thanks vnto thee, and giue praise vnto thee, from the very bottome of my heart, beseeching thee, seeing thou knowest, that this voyage, my purpose and intent tends not to my owne, but onely to thy glory and honour, and for the comfort and helpe of thy afflicted Church, that if now the time, and ap∣pointed houre be come, Assist me further with thy grace and blessing, & grant me a prosperous wind, and good weather, that I may behold the rest of my Army with a ioyfull eye, which I haue left behind me picked vp, out of diuers nations, to the end that with them, I may aduance forward thy holy worke. Amen. The Kings Officers and Councell, stepping on land after him, and hearing such a zealous pray∣er, comming from him in this manner, could not forbeare weeping, which the King perceiuing,
said vnto them, Weepe not my friends, but pray fer∣uently, from the bottome of your hearts, the more yee pray, the more victory God will giue you, for earnest prayer is more then the gaining of halfe a battle. It seemes, since that time, that the Kings prayer hath auailed much with God, and how mightily the Lord hath been with him, in taking in ma∣ny countries, cities, and townes, in ouerthrowing the Emperours inuincible Army, and that of the Catholike League, and the mighty increasing of his Armie, since his first landing. Other par∣ticulars may giue satisfaction to the Rea∣der; to God the onely author, and gi∣uer of them, be giuen im∣mortall praise. A∣men. FINIS
