24259 S102025 99837826 2171
THREE SMALL AND plaine Treatises. 1. Of Prayers or Actiue Diuinitie. 2. Of Principles, or Positiue Diuinitie. 3. Resolutions, or Oppositiue Diuinitie. Translated and collected out of the Auncient Writers for the priuate vse of a most Noble Ladie. By an old PRAEBENDARY of the Church of Lincolne.
CERTAINE PRAYERS, AND short MEDITATIONS translated out of the Writings of S. Augustine, S. Gregorie, S. Bernard, Ioannes Picus Miran∣dula, Ludouicus Viues, Georgius Cassan∣der, Charolus Paschalius, and others, for the priuate Vse of the L. M. B. Morning Prayer. MY Soule fleeth vnto the Lord before the mor∣ning Watch,Psal. 130.6. I say, before the morning Watch. O let me heare thy louing kindnesse betimes in the morning,Psal. 143.8. for in thee is my trust: shew thou mee the
way, that I should walke in, for I lift vp my soule vnto thee. O Lord assist mee with thy holy Spirit in my pray∣ers, And let my cry come vnto thee. Our Father which art, &c. A Prayer for Confession of sins. S. Greg. Ho∣mil. 33. in Iob.REceiue (O Lord) in the armes of thy mercie, thy distressed hand∣maiden, who in remorse and contrition, returnes vnto thee from her sinnes. Be∣cause the life of that sinner is not abhorred of thee,
which is accompanied with sighes, and repentance. Par∣don then (O Lord) all my offences for thy deare Sons sake. Amen. A Prayer for the Morning. ALmighty God,Georg. Cas∣sander Pres. Eccles. our hea∣uenly Father, which hast brought me thy hand∣maiden to this present mor∣ning, protect mee still with thy mighty power, that this ensuing day, I may fall into no sinne, nor run into any kinde of danger, but that my thoughts, wordes, and deedes may tend to the ho∣nor,
and glory of thy name, and the eternall comfort, and saluation of mine own soule, through Iesus Christ my Lord, and onely Saui∣our. Amen. Another. Viues.O Most syncere, and pure Light, from whence this light of the day, and of the Sunne fet∣cheth his beginning; Thou which enlightenest euery man, that commeth into the world. Thou Light, whome no night, or eue∣ning can obscure, but con∣tinuest euer in thy High∣noone brightnesse. Thou
Word, and Wisedome of so great a Father, enlighten this morning my soule, and vnderstanding, that thy weake handmaiden may be this day as blinded to the Vanities of the world; and quick-sighted only to those things, which are pleasing vnto thee, and leading to the wayes of thy Comman∣dements. Amen. For the Mediation of Christ. LOrd Iesus,Greg. Hom. 7. in Ezech. that art not onely righteous, but righteousnesse it selfe, and art my Aduocate with
God the Father, iustifie thou me thy hand-maiden in the day of iudgement, be∣cause I acknowledge, and accuse my self, as full of vn∣iustice, and pollution. For it is not vpon any action, or contrition of mine owne, that my soule relies, but on∣ly vpon a faith, assurance, and bolde confidence in thee, mine Aduocate, who liuest, and raignest with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen.
Against Temptations. GIue me thy grace (O Almighty God) so to vanquish,Aug. Serm. 86. de ver∣bis Domini. and o∣uercome the lusts, and temp∣tations of this world, that I may triumph with thee o∣uer the Diuell, and his wic∣ked angels in the world to come. Amen. For Piety. I Humbly beseech thee (O Almighty God) that this desire of reading,Aug. Serm. 82. and hearing thy sacred Word,
which by thy holy Spirit thou hast planted in my heart, may by thy grace, and mercie be daily renued, and augmented vnto a perfect fire of zeale, and deuotion to the honor of thy Name, and saluation of mine owne soule in Christ Iesu. Amen. A Prayer for a Noble-woman. Carolus Paschalius.O Lord Iesus Christ, that art so far from contemning Nobili∣tie of birth, that thy Euan∣gelists haue diligently sear∣ched out, and recorded thine owne genealogie, giue
me thy vnworthy hand∣mayden the grace, that I a∣buse not by ingratitude this thy fauour, and mercie. But rather, as it was first acqui∣red in my Auncestors, let it still be preserued in my per∣son, by my continuall ser∣uing of thee, and doing (as it shall lie in my power) all workes of Charity to my neighbours. Giue me grace, that as thou hast plac't mee in Birth, and rancke, so I may be found in deuotion, pietie, lowlinesse of minde, meeknesse, and a religious care of thy worship, conspicuous a∣boue others. And if it bee hy gracious will to make
me a mother of children, and a mistresse of a family, let me appeare a patterne and ensample of deuotion, and pietie to all that are about mee. And make mee and them so to liue in thy feare, that we may die in thy fa∣uour, through Iesus Christ our Lord, and onely Saui∣our. Amen. A Prayer for a Wife. Charolus Paschal.ALmighty God, which haste giuen me to be a comforter, and an hel∣per vnto my husband, en∣due my soule with those
heauenly Graces, wherwith I may be most enabled to serue thee, and please him. Knit our mindes, as well as our bodies in an indissolu∣ble band of syncere affecti∣on. Giue either of vs san∣ctified hearts, zealous to∣wards thee, thankefull to∣wards our Soueraigne, syn∣cere, and louing one to∣wards another. Crowne withal, if it be thy will, these chaste intentions with thy fructifying Grace, that wee may become the happy Pa∣rents of such Oliue branches, as may one day aduance thy glory in this Church, and Commonwealth. In a
word, so incorporate vs both by faith in Christ vnto thy kingdom of Grace, that we may at the last attaine vnto thy kingdome of glo∣rie. Amen. A prayer for one attendant neere the person of a Prince. Carolus Paschal.ALmighty God, by whose gracious pro∣uidence it commeth, that my Lord, and Husband is thus employed in that neernesse of attendance vp∣on his Royall Maiestie, giue him grace so to serue thee, that hee may the better serue
him, and by making him thy Saint, continue him his seruant. Fill his mind with all wisedome, knowledge, and other vertues befitting his ranck and calling, that he may seeme no more ele∣cted by the King, then sele∣cted by thee for these em∣ployments. Make him vi∣gilant, carefull, and indu∣strious in his Masters af∣aires. Make him to accompt it his onely happinesse to serue thee, his onely vertue to obserue him, and all the rest as glittering vanity. That after a troublesome, but long life in a Kings Court, his soule may bee
carried by the Angels vnto thy Court, where one day is better then a thousand. Grant this for thy deare Sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Meditation. Count MIRANDVLA, his twelue Thoughts, or weapons against all the temptati∣ons of Sinne. Thinke Io. Pici Mi∣randulae Doctr. Salu∣tif.1 THe pleasure thou art tempted vnto, but short, and momentarie. 2 And euen this is atten∣ded
with loathing and an∣xietie. 3 And yet that for this, thou must loose Heauen. 4 That thy life is but as a dreame and shadow. 5 Thy death is suddaine, and at thy doore. 6 Thy time of repentance casuall, and vncertaine. 7 Thy reward, or punish∣ment endlesse and eternall. 8 That thou art a creature of an excellent worth, and made to serue God. 9 That thou hast no hap∣pinesse to the peace of Con∣science. 10 Thinke how good thy God hath bin vnto thee.
11 Thinke of the Crosse, and of Christ, who there died for thee. 12 Of examples of holy men and Saints, who liued be∣fore thee. Walke about your chamber a turne or two after your prayers, and meditate vpon these points seriously, and you shall finde, that temptations to sinne will va∣nish away, and leaue to assault you. The 4. last things to bee first thought vpon by all good Christians. Bern. Bona∣uent. Dio∣nys. Carthus.1 The day of thy death, thou knowest not how suddenly. 2 The day of iudgement, that will come certainely. 3 The ioyes of heauen, if thou liue religiously. 4 The paines of hell, if thou con∣tinuest to doe wickedly. The end of Morning prayer.
Euening Prayer to bed-ward. O Lord heare my prayer. And let my cry come vnto thee. Our Father which art, &c. A Prayer for Euening. O LORD,Carol Paschal. I doe confesse to my shame, and con∣fusion, that this day hath beene spent by me with lesse puritie, and pie∣tie, then it should haue bin. I haue augmented sithence this morning the score of my sinnes. My thoughts haue beene polluted, my wit pro∣phane,
and vnsanctified, my tongue more rash, and vn∣bridled, then became any one of that rancke, and cal∣ling, wherein thou hast set me. I haue sinned through idlenesse, ignorance, slouthful∣nesse, and malice. And this darknesse of the night puts mee in minde of that eter∣nall darknesse my sinnes haue deserued. Pardon, and forgiue me all my transgres∣sions. Let this darkenesse bee a fit time vnto mee of rest, and sleepe, and no op∣portunitie of snares, and temptations. Send thy holy Ghost into my heart, to free, and purifie the same from
all rolling motions, and sugge∣stions of Sathan, and from the vsuall terrours, and af∣frightments of the night. Pre∣serue this house in safety (O Lord) and all the people that are therein. Let my prayer ascend vp vnto thy pre∣sence as the incense, and let this lifting vp of mine hands be as an Euening sacrifice, through Iesus Christ our Lord, and onely Sauiour. Amen. Another. HAuing spent the day,Viues. wee betake our▪ selues to our repose in the night. So after the troubles of this present life,
wee shall rest our selues in death. Nothing doth more resemble our life then the day, our death then sleepe, our graue then the bed, and our resurrection then our a∣waking in the morning. Doe thou then, O God my pro∣tectour, and defender, pre∣serue me in my sleepe, from the incursions, and tempta∣tions of the diuell, and in my death from the guilt and pu∣nishments of my sinnes. I haue no strength to resist in the one, nor merits of mine owne to display in the o∣ther. Looke only vpon the merits of my Lord, and Sa∣uiour, and giue mee a strong,
and stedfast faith, to apply his righteousnesse to mine owne soule. In confidence, and full assurance of whose satisfactions for all my sins, I doe for this night lie mee downe in peace, and take my rest, for it is that Lord onely, that maketh mee to continue in safetie. Amen. Another. ALmighty,G. Cass. and euerla∣sting God, who makest the light to succeed the dark∣nesse, giue mee the grace to spend this night freed from the snares of sinne and Sa∣than, and to bee here againe vpon my knees in the mor∣ning,
to giue thee thankes for the same, through Iesus Christ my Lord, and onely Sauiour. Amen. MEDITATIONS. When your mayd is getting you to bed. Ʋiues.HEe that willingly goes to bed, should as willingly goe to his graue. We willingly put off our cloathes, being to put them on againe in the mor∣ning: and should as willing∣ly put off our bodies, beeing to put them on againe in the Resurrection.
2 After the troubles of the day comes the quietnes of the night,Viues. in the which the King, and the swaine differ nothing: so after this life comes death; where poore, and rich are alike, and equall. 3 Here is a fit time (especially layd in your bed) to fall to your Audite for the day past.The practise of the Kings Maiesty, as I haue heard What euill you haue commit∣ted by 1. Swearing. 2. Lying. 3. Taunting. 4. Beeing too angry. 5. Vaine tal∣king, especially of Religion. 6. Exceeding in fare or appa∣rell. 7. Iniuring of another. Repent of it. Detest it. Resolue to doe it no more.
What good you haue omitted, as Saying grace when you eate. Praying. Releeuing of a poore bodie. Respe∣cting your husband parents. Spending some time vpon Meditations. Works of charitie. Desire Gods grace to be more warie. What good you haue performed If you haue learned any thing that day. If you haue done any man good that day. If you haue kept your priuate and pub∣like prayers, that day. If you haue giuen any almes that day. If you haue heard the Word, or recei∣ued the Sacra∣ment that day. If you haue spent any time vpon your Meditatiōs that day. Reioyce in it, and giue God thankes for it.
When you haue runne ouer these ac∣compts, and finde sleepe comming, say, Into thy hands I commit my Spirit, for thou hast re∣deemed me (O Lord) thou God of truth. Amen. The end of Euening prayer. Some other Collects. For Faith. MAn is blinded by sin,Ʋiues. but thou (O Christ) by the goodnes and mercie of God the Father, art become our guide in the way of saluation. And yet such is our wretchednesse,
and miserie, that we stagger for all this, sometimes not vnderstanding, sometimes not beleeuing, many times not applying to our soules with a sure confidence thy promises of saluation set downe in the Gospell. O mi∣serably blind that we are, that can neither see our selues, nor beleeue our gui∣der, and instructer. O thou eternall, and pure veritie, vouchsafe so to slide into our hearts, that we may be more certainely perswaded of thee, and thy Truth, then of those things wee see with our eyes, heare with our eares, and handle with our handes,
the weake apprehensions of our bodily senses, vpon which this flesh and blood doeth so much depend. Ap∣pease and asswage those rol∣ling thoughts, and wandring motions of the flesh, that make vs to doubt, and stag∣ger in those high mysteries, of the which wee ought most firmely to bee fixed, and resolued. Faith is thy gift, and therefore worke it by the holy Ghost in my heart, that all my senses, and ima∣ginations may become slaues, and captiues to the same. Lord, I beleeue, helpe thou mine vnbeleefe. O Lord increase my faith. Amen.
MEDITATION. Ʋiues.1 How easily wee be∣leeue a lewd, and lying man, and yet how scrupulous we are to beleeue God himselfe. 2 We beleeue a man in things, which nothing con∣cerne vs; we beleeue not God in matters of our saluation. Man is impotent, God omni∣potent. 3 We beleeue our senses, which often delude vs, as in all trickes of Legeyr-demaine: we distrust Christ, who can neither be deceiued, nor de∣ceiue vs.
For the King, and the Royall Issue. I Humbly beseech thee,G. Cass. Almighty God, to pre∣uent with all blessings of goodnesse, our King, and his Royall issue. In∣crease vpon them day by day all thy fauours, van∣quish with thy mighty hand, all open enemies, and priuie Conspirators, who op∣pugne their religion, life, dia∣deme, or dignitie. Crowne each of them with all ver∣tues, these vertues with long liues, and their liues at the last with eternall glory. Amen.
For Charitie, or the workes of Mercie. August. Meditat.O Lord of mercie, and compassion, I be∣seech thee by the tender bowels of thy Sonne Christ Iesus, to mooue my stonie heart to the workes of mercie, that I may keepe my howers of prayers, mourne with them that mourne, counsell them that are amisse, helpe them that are in mise∣rie, releeue the poore, comfort the sorrowfull, helpe the op∣pressed, forgiue them that trespasse against me, pray for them that hate mee, requite
good for euil, despise no man or woman, reuerence my betters, respect my equals, be humble, and courteous to my inferiors: imitate those that are good: shunne those that are bad: embrace ver∣tue, eschew vice. Be patient in aduersitie, modest in pros∣peritie, thankfull in either. Keepe a watch ouer my tongue. Scorne this world, and thirst after heauen. Amen. For the receiuing of the B. Sacrament. O Lord Iesus Christ the onely begotten Sonne of God,G. Cass. tho∣rough whom onely is gran∣ted
forgiuenesse of sinnes, and life euerlasting, who diddest iustifie the Publican, when he confessed, the wo∣man of Chanaan, when shee prayed, Peter when hee re∣pented, and the thiefe vpon the Crosse, when hee called vpon thee, grant vnto me, a most miserable, and wret∣ched sinner, pardon and for∣giuenesse of all my trans∣gressions, which I most humbly confesse I haue committed against thee: that I may receiue this Com∣munion of thy body and blood, not to my iudgement, and condemnation, but to my euerlasting comfort and sal∣uation,
who liuest and raig∣nest with the Father, and the holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen. Meditation When you haue newly receiued. O Lord encrease my faith, O Lord,G. Cass. let the body and blood of Christ be fixed in my soule to my comfort in this life, and eternall saluation in the life to come. Amen.
For that day you expect to heare a Sermon, or when you reade vpon your Bible. G. Cass.ALlmighty, and euer∣lasting God, whose Word is a lanterne to our feete, and a light vnto our pathes, open and enlighten my vnderstanding, that I may learne the mysteries of thy Word, so farre foorth, as is necessary to my saluation, purely and syncerely: and bee so transfigured in my life and conuersation, vnto that which I shall learne, as to please thee in will, and
deede, through Iesus Christ my Lord, and onely Saui∣our. Amen. For sicknesse, and all other vses, you haue excellent Prayers in the Booke of Common prayers. PRINCIPLES. Few Notes for the priuate vse of my L. M. B. A Prayer to be said vpon your knees, before the reading o∣uer of these Notes. ALmightie God, the Fountaine of true Wisedome and knowledge, send thy holy Spirit into
my heart, that I may suffici∣ently vnderstand, and sted∣fastly beleeue all the do∣ctrines necessary to my Sal∣uation, and adde such pra∣ctise and obedience to this Faith, thorough the whole course of my life and con∣uersation, as I may so serue thee in thy kingdome of Grace, that hereafter I may be made partaker of thy kingdom of Glory, through the onely merit and media∣tion of thy deare Sonne, and my deare Sauiour Iesus Christ. Amen.
I. MAn, sithence his fall in Adam, hath no hope of saluation, but by the Co∣uenant of Grace betwixt God and Man; Whereby God pro∣miseth vnto man, Mercie and Forgiuenesse of Sinnes, and man vnto God, true Faith in Christ and holines of life and conuersation. II. ALl men haue not inte∣rest in this Couenant of Grace, but they onely that are of Gods Church: Now the Church of God is; Any Company or Con∣gregation of men whereso∣euer
liuing, called by God through the sound of the Gospel, vnto the Faith of Christ, and distinguished from other Societies by these fiue Marks especially, 1. hearing and reading the Word, 2. Faith thereunto, 3. the vse of the Sacraments, 4. Prayer, and 5. Sanctity of life. Where these fiue things are, there is euer a Church of God and sufficient means of saluation. III. THe Word must be read often vpon your Bible, with modesty and short de∣sires of the heart vnto God,
to giue you grace to vnder∣stand it, to beleeue it, and to practise it, It must bee heard vpon all conuenient occasions, especially in those two houres of the Sabbath day, appointed by the Church and the State for that Diuine worship, and then you must obserue foure Rules. 1 Obserue the Preacher with attention & modestie. 2. Secondly, apply vn∣to your selfe in particular, the Doctrines and Vses which are deliuered in ge∣nerall. 3. Examine your con∣science if you be guilty of
the sinnes there reproued, and presently call to God for grace to amend them. 4. Thinke vpon these things againe when you come to your Chamber. IIII. THis outward hearing and reading of the Word, together with the in∣ward working of the holy Ghost in your heart, doeth beget a true, liuely and sa∣uing faith, which is, A certaine knowledge and assurance of the heart that all is true which God hath spoken or promised in the
Scripture, and that you rest wholly and confidently vp∣on God, that he hath gran∣ted vnto your selfe in parti∣cular, forgiuenes of sinnes, and true righteousnesse in Christ Iesus. This is the maine point you are seriously to medi∣tate vpon, and therefore ob∣serue these precepts, 1. If you doe not be∣leeue, or if you doe doubt of any thing in Scripture, presently pray vnto God to strengthen and enlighten you. 2. If you doubt whether
you may haue any particu∣lar interest in those generall promises of grace in Christ, propounded in the Gospel, fall againe to your prayers for an increase of Faith. 3. If you doubt, and yet can finde in your heart to pray for more faith, Let your conscience neuer bee troubled with such a doub∣ting. 4. Marke well when the Creed is in reading, and giue an assent with your heart to euery Article. And (as I doubt not you haue learned it) so keepe it still in memorie.
V. NOw as this faith of re∣mission of sinnes, and righteousnesse in Christ is wrought in vs by the rea∣ding and hearing of the Word ioyned with Prayer, so is it signed and sealed in our hearts by the two Blessed Sacraments. Baptisme. The Lords Supper. Obserue in either Sa∣crament two parts. A visible signe Water in Bap∣tisme. Bread & Wine in the Supper. An inuisi∣ble grace. Remission of sinnes in Baptisme. The benefite of Christs passi∣on in the Sup∣per.
VI. BAptisme is the first Sa∣crament of the new Te∣stament, to wit, An outward washing of Water appointed by Christ in his Church, with this promise, that vpon your being Baptized, you were as certainely washed from your sinnes Original being an infant, and actuall, if you had beene of yeeres, by the holy Ghost, and the Blood of Christ, as you were rin∣sed outwardly in body by this Element of Water.
Marke then these vses of Baptisme. 1. It assures vs wee are wa∣shed from our sinnes by the Holy Ghost, and the Blood of Christ. 2. It keeps vs from despaire, because it assures vs our sinnes are washed away. 3. It keepes vs from sinne: for it is a shame for one washed to soile himselfe againe. 4. It giues an entrance into the Church. 5. It hath a visible signe. Water. Grace inui∣sible. Forgiuenesse of sinnes by the blood of Christ.
VII. THe Lords Supper is a di∣stribution of Bread and Wine, which seales, signes and exhibits, or giues vnto you Christs true Body offe∣red, and his true Blood pou∣red out vpon the Crosse, for your sinnes, as certainely, as the Priests exhibite vnto your hands the Bread and the Wine. And withall, the Supper assures your heart, that Christs Body and Blood nourish your soule to perpetual life, as surely, as Bread and Wine doth nou∣rish your body to the offi∣ces of this temporall life.
Marke then the vses of this Sa∣crament of the Supper. 1. It assures you of all the benefit that is to be ex∣pected from the Bodie and blood of Christ. 2. It puts you continual∣ly in minde that Christ dyed for you. 3. It strengthens and as∣certaines your faith, if it be receiued worthily. And therefore you must not neglect (twice in the yeere at the least) to approch with all reue∣rence this heauenly Ta∣ble.
VIII. THat this Sacrament may be receiued wor∣thily, you must examin your selfe before the receiuing, Pray vnto God for Faith in the receiuing, and take heed of grosse and premeditated sinnes after the receiuing of this Sacrament. IX. BEfore the receiuing, you must examine foure things: 1. You must examin your knowledge, 1. Whether you know how you ought to liue. To this end read ouer the 10. Commande∣ments. 2. Whether you know how to be∣leeue. Read ouer attentiuely your Creed. 3. Whether you know how to Pray. Say ouer aduisedly the Lords Prayer.
Without this little know∣ledge (at the least) you are not fit to Receiue. 2. You must examine your faith Whether you are assured in your heart, that Christ hath fully sa∣tisfied for your sins, and perfect∣ly reconciled you vnto God, not others only, but your selfe also. Without this assurance (in some measure) you may not receiue. 3. You must examine your Re∣pentance. 1. Whether you are sory for your sinnes. 2. Whether you hate sinne. 3. Whether you resolue to indea∣uour to sinne no more. Without this Repentance you cannot receiue wor∣thily. 4. You must examine your Cha∣ritie. 1.Whether you forgiue all the world. 2. Whether you are free from malice and hatred. When you haue exami∣ned these foure points you may receiue worthily.
X. NOw your faith in Christ which you haue gotten in Gods Church, being thus hatched by the holy Ghost in your heart, brought foorth by your hearing, che∣rished by your reading of the word, sealed by your Baptism, and strongly confirmed and strengthened by your partaking of the blessed Sa∣crament of the Supper, must be continually maintained and preserued by these two meanes, Prayer vnto God & him only. And Good works, or holines of life.
And this is the summe of all your notes which I recommend vnto you for this time. 1. Saluation is only by faith in Christ. 2. Faith onely in Gods Church. 3. Where, by the Word read or heard, Faith is nouri∣shed. 4. By the Sacrament of Baptisme assured. 5. By the Sacrament of the Supper ratified and con∣firmed. 6. By Prayer and Good workes for euer established.
A Prayer after the reading of these few Notes. O Lord God, that I may be partaker of thy couenant of Grace, make me a beleeuing mem∣ber of thy Church, send thy holy Spirit into my heart to beget there a confidence and full assurance of the remissi∣on of all my sinnes in Christ Iesus, let this assurance bee still nourished with my hea∣ring and reading of the Word, let it be sealed vnto mee by my Baptisme, confirmed by the Sacrament of the Sup∣per, and fully established by
my seruing of thee in Prayer and Good workes, to the glo∣ry of thy Name, and the endlesse comfort and salua∣tion of mine owne soule, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
¶ A SHORT CATECHISME concerning Faith and good Workes, to be read and medita∣ted vpon once euery weeke at the least: which may be well called, The Catechisme of the Conscience. Question. WHy hath GOD made me a reaso∣nable Creature, and not (as well hee might) of a meaner kinde? Answ. That with your whole heart, that is, with your will, and vnderstan∣ding, you might serue him, and loue him: which crea∣tures
only indued with rea∣son can doe. Q. How is God princi∣pally serued, and loued of mee? A. By your faith and good workes, which God commaunds you in his Word. And these good workes of yours are two∣fold, Prayers to God. Charitie to men. Q. What is Faith? A. A full beliefe, assu∣rance, and perswasion of your heart, whereby you are vnmoueably resolued of these three points:
1. That there is one onely God, one Es∣sence, & three Persons. The Father, who created you. Sonne, who redeemed you. Holy Ghost who san∣ctified you. 2. That God the Sonne came into the world, to doe all that was to bee perfor∣med, and to suffer all that was to be endured by you, for your sinnes actuall, and originall. And hereby ob∣tained for you perfect for∣giuenesse of all your sinnes, and hath bestowed vpon you his owne perfect righ∣teousnesse, by the meanes whereof you stand iust, and guiltlesse before the throne of God.
3. That God hath prom∣pted with his holy Spirit the Pen-men of the Scrip∣tures, to teach you all this faith, and beleefe, as also all the course of his wor∣ship. And that euery thing contained in these Scrip∣tures is true. Q. Why doeth God so much require of mee Faith, and be∣leefe? A. Because without be∣leeuing in him, you cannot loue him, nor reuerence him. As if you did not be∣leeue your father to be your father, you would not loue him, or reuerence him, as your father.
Q. How is this Faith first wrought? A. By your hearing of Gods word, and vsing those two Sacraments appointed by Christ in his Church, Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper: And withall, by praying continually vnto God, and doing of good workes. Q. How shall I know that I beginne to haue Faith? A. If you finde in your selfe these alterations: 1. If you finde, that you haue gotten more know∣ledge of God, and of Re∣ligion, & are glad therof. 2. If you doe desire more
then you did, to haue the Sonne of God to be∣come your Sauiour, and to stand betwixt you and Gods wrath for the sinnes you haue com∣mitted against God. 3. If you take more delight then you did in Reading and hearing the Word of God. Receiuing the Sacrament. 4. If you finde doubtings in your minde, and can pray vnto God, to streng∣then your Faith. 5. If you endeauour to ab∣staine from sinne, for feare of offending so good a God. 6. If you beginne to endea∣uour to liue godly, and
righteously, because it is the will, and commande∣ment of God. 7. If you take more delight then you did in praying to God. 8. If you thanke God pri∣uately for these his good motions. By these eight points you may soone know, whether you haue true faith or not. Q. What is the infallible marke of true, and iustifying Faith? A. The effectuall apply∣ing of Christ, and all his be∣nefits to your owne soule, in particular.
This appli∣cation doeth make a diffe∣rence betwixt iustifying Faith, and all other kindes of faith, which cannot saue vs: As Historicall Faith, which is a bare knowledge. Faith of Miracles, which is a bare assent. Temporary Faith, which is but a bare profession of the Faith for a time, em∣braced onely for the de∣sire of Knowledge. Credite. Profite. Q. What is the meaning of this assertion of S. Paules, that we are iustified by Faith alone? A. The meaning is this. Euen as when you giue your almes to a begger, it is receiued by his hand alone, and yet his hand is not alone when it receiues these alms, but accompanied with an arme, sinewes, and arteries: Euen so, when God offers
vnto you Christ, and his righteousnesse, you doe re∣ceiue him by Faith alone, and yet this Faith, which re∣ceiues Christ is neuer alone, but still accompanied with Charitie, and good workes. In a word. 1. To holde almes is proper to the hand, and not the arme: and to holde Christ, proper to Faith, and not good workes. 2. You are iustified by Faith alone, and yet if your faith be alone, it cannot iu∣stifie you. Q. What is the meaning of S. Iames, when hee sayth, That wee are iustified by
workes, and not by Faith? A. The meaning is this? 1. Faith iustifieth vs before God, good works before men. 2. Faith makes vs, good workes declare vs to bee iustified. 3. Faith giues vs our first iustificatiō; good works our second, which is our Sanctification, or holi∣nesse. Q. What is the least, and weakest degree of Faith, that I may build vpon, to keepe mee from despaire, in case I finde not all those alterations in my selfe, which you spake of before? A. 1. If you desire Faith,
or pray vnto God, that you may desire Faith. 2. If you can pray, or de∣sire of God, to enable you to pray. 3. If you find fault with your want of faith, and de∣sire sometimes of God to helpe this want. You are for all that the childe of God.
RESOLVTIONS. OPPOSITIVE DIƲINITIE: OR The ordinary Obiections of Papists, against them of the reformed. Churches. DIALOGVE. Papist. Protestant. CHAP. I. Of the Church. Pap. THe Church of England is no Church,
strange, considering your owne Writers conclude a Church to be there, where there is found 1 doctrine of saluation,Georg. Cassan. consult, titul. de Ecclesia. according to Scrip∣ture, 2 the vse of the Sacra∣ments, and 3 outward disci∣pline, or Ecclesiasticall go∣uernement, although the Churchmen should fall short of those Apostolicall, and primitiue perfectiōs, which flourished in their prede∣cessours. Pap. Yea, but it is not the Catholike Church men∣tioned in the Creed, I beleeue in the Catholike Church. Prot. 1. No more is the Church of Rome: for there
was no Church at all in Rome, when the Creed was made by the Apostles at Hie∣rusalem;Ruffin in Symb. Augustin. Ser. 115. euery Apostle ma∣king his Article, when they were to depart to plant par∣ticular Churches in Rome,Id. Serm. 181. de Tempore. England, and other places. 2. But our Church is a branch, and portion of that Catholike Church, as is also theTheoriani collo. Damia∣nus à Gots. Onuphrius in vita Iulij. Greeke, Armenian, Ae∣thiopian, and Syrian as well, if not rather then the Ro∣mane Church. Pap. Peraduenture these other Churches may bee members of that Catholike Church, as ioyned and vni∣ted with vs, but the vnion
betwixt your Church, and ours hath beene cut asunder aboue an hundred yeeres agone, and therefore you are quite cut off from the Catholike Church. Prot. This is more then you know, or then I am bound to beleeue. For Cassand. consult. pag. 930. meer∣ly spirituall consisting in Faith, Hope, Charitie, true Doctrine, &c. Institut. of a Christian fol. 19.This vnion of the mem∣bers of the Catholike Church is inward, not out∣ward, and therefore discer∣ned onely by God himselfe: We neuer sundred our selues from the people, or Church of Rome, but from the Fa∣ction, or Court of Rome, not from the sincere doctrine of that Church, but from the
corruptions and innouations foisted into that Church. And therefore although we be neuer so hated,Cassand. ibid. and excommunicated by your Priests, yet, we may be still vnited in internall societie with your Church, if you re∣taine those principles of Reli∣gion sound, and vnaltered, in the which our forefa∣thers died, and (as we well hope) were saued. Pap. How are you then gone from vs, if you be still vnited with vs. Prot. As the Prophets went from the corrupt Churches of the Iewes, and as Christ, and his Apostles from the
Scribes, and Pharises, claman∣do, & dissentiendo, by crying out against your corrupti∣ons, and dissenting from your innouations, and thisCas. consult. pag. 929. Gerson. de p∣tate Ecclesiae.your owne men allowed vs to doe. Pap. I, but some of your men say, that wee had no true Church of God in the West of many yeeres before Luthers time. Prot. Their meaning is to be limited in respect of the Predominant, and preuai∣ling Faction. Your Church held (I confesse) a sauing profession of the Trueth of God, but your Church-men mingled therewith many
damnable impieties. And these innouators onely carry∣ing the greatest shew of the Church, are denied by our Writers to bee the true Church of God. Pap. This it is we Ca∣tholikes obserue. You dare not for all your malice deny the Church of Rome to haue in some sort a sauing profes∣sion of the truth of God, but our Priests conclude direct∣ly that your Church hath no truth at all, and thatBarclaius paraenes. li. 1. pag. 7. none can be saued in that Church. Prot. As in euery king∣dome the generall estate is nothing so forward, actiue, quicke, and peremptorie, as
the priuate Factions, and yet is found at the last more wise, and stayed in finall re∣solution: So in the Catholike Church, theCan. loc. the∣ol. l. 4. c. 1. Lindan. panopl. lib. 4. cap. 7. Factions are euer more headie, and pre∣cipitate in their denunci∣ations of Heauen, and Hell, then the maine body thereof. Hence it commeth to passe, that although the Greeke, Armenian, Ethiopian, and Sy∣rian, and (for the most part) the Protestant doth censure charitably of those Laickes, who liuing rather In then Of the Church of Rome, hold the grounds of the do∣ctrine of Saluation, without any notorious mixtures,
with the late superstitions, and impieties crept into the same; yet doth theQuodlibet pag. 342. Papist, Russic. conun. c. 23. p. 103. Russeist,Sle. Hist. l. 5. Anabaptist, Allens confes. Fa∣milist, andProtest. p. 16. Puritan hold no Church a Church of God, but his owne conuenticle, and all to bee damn'd, that are not of his societie, and com∣bination. Now what beliefe you shall affoord these Bou∣teseux of the Catholike Church, that dispose of Heauen, and Hell, as if it were their own Fee-simple, I leaue to your wisdome and com∣mon vnderstanding. Pap. Me thinks you now put me in minde of another obiection, which vsually we
make against the Prote∣stants of England that they bring in too much good fel∣lowship in religion, and make Saluation a flowre, which growes in euery mans gar∣den. Seeing that according to their Tenets, Papist, Prote∣stant, Anabaptist, and Fami∣list, may euery one of them by meanes offered in his own Church, as a portion, or frag∣ment of the Catholike Church attaine vnto Saluation. Prot. If you were learned I could answere you in a word, that none of these three Sectories considered in his owne Formality, Qua talie, as he is a Papist, Ana∣baptist,
or Familist can euer attaine vnto Saluation, but only as he is a Christian man, admitted by Baptisme vnto the visible Church, & there made partaker of Gods word, and Sacraments. For then (al∣though these blessed means are very much weakened, and obscured in their Syna∣gogues by the malice of Sa∣than, and inuentions of men) yet may that holy Spi∣rit, thatIohn 3.8. bloweth where he li∣steth, worke in such a mans heart by these weake instru∣ments, (and the rather, the more the Word is faithfully preached, and the Sacra∣ments be in those places sin∣cerely
administred) a true faith in Christ Iesus, to bring him to saluation. So then we doe not hold, that Pa∣pists, Anabaptists, and Fami∣lists, but onely that some Christians liuing in their congregations may (though with great difficultie in comparison of this flouri∣shing Church of ours, and these admirable meanes of Saluation tendered in the same) by the speciall mercy of God be saued, and preser∣ued. If we be in an errour, it is safer to erre in Charity, then in Malice, and praeci∣pitancie, considering the euent hereof is vnknowen to either of vs.
Pap. I but where was your Church before this re∣formation began? Prot. 1. When our Sauiour Christ with-drew the people from theMatt. 16.12. leauen of the Scribes, and Pharisees, to the bread,Iohn 6.35. which came down from heauen, and to saluation by faith in his Name, was it fitting to demaund of him, where his Church was before that Reformation? 2. When these Chur∣ches of1. Corin. 5.1. Corinth,Galat. 3.1. Galatia, Reuel. 2.12. Pergamus, andReuel. 2.18. Thiatyra, were full of abuses, if some part onely vpon the preach∣ing of the Apostles had re∣formed themselues, and so a
diuision had growen: would you straight wayes haue tax't them of Nouelty, or ask't them where their Church had beene before this reformation? 3 When the Apostles cast off he Lawe of Moses, excepting only thoseActs 15.29. three or foure Ceremonies: and when the Primitiue church some hundred yeeres after, cast off those Ceremonies also (for I finde them brea∣thing of their last as it were about the times ofAnno . 140. Dialog. qu instur Tryphon. Iustin Martyr) had it not beene a poore challenge of the Iewes, or Traskists of those times, to demaund, where this vn∣ceremoniall
Church lay hid be∣fore the reformation? I answer then, that our Church, before this refor∣mation began, liued toge∣ther in one communion with yours, with toleration of all those abuses, which you haue still retained, and wee most iustly reiected. Pap. I, but I hope you dare not compare in the gifts of the Spirit with Christ, his Apostles, or those worthies of the primitiue Church. And therefore how presumed you to re∣forme your selues? Refor∣mation, being a worke fit∣ter for a generall Councell to
haue gone about, then for a small handfull of Nor∣therne people. Prot. Luther. in epist. ad Galat. in praefat. distin∣ctio admissa in Comitijs Augu∣stanis ab ipsis Germanis Principibus. Scultet. annal. decad. 1. pa. 43.The Court of Rome had so gained vpon the Church of Rome, that is, the Pope, and his conclaue of Cardinals had wriggled in themselues to that transcen∣dencie of power ouer the rest of the Clergie, and well minded laity, that it appea∣red both atIn the yeere 1415. ConstanceIn the yeere 1546. & Trent, there was small hope of Reformation from such a Councell, where the Pope the partie to bee reformed, became the party reforming, and supreame Iudge, and president of the Reformati∣on
it selfe. Although poore seduced ignorant women are much caried away with the name of the Councell of Trent; yet you will quickly find out this ridiculous ab∣surdity. In a generall Coun∣cell (as now it is held si∣thence the decay of the Em∣pire) the Pope is the party to be accused, yet puts vp his owne endictment, passeth a iury of his own vassals, and finde they what they will, being to giue finall iudge∣ment, he will be sure to do, as his supposed predecessor taught our Sauiour to doe, to wit, fauour himselfe.Matth. 16.22. So as there was no hope of doing
good by a Generall Councell,See the histo∣ry of the Councell of Trent. vnles it were a generous and free Councell, and such a one the Pope (you may bee sure) would neuer abide.Gerson. de con∣cil. vnius obed. And therefore one of your own writers concludes, that in such a case, seuerall kingdomes are to reforme themselues by National Councels, which England and Denmark did put in practise. Pap. Yea, but it is too wel knowne, It was no zeale of Reformation, but carnall re∣spects, that mooued King Henry to touch vpon reli∣gion. Prot. To you (it seemes) it is giuen to know these se∣crets,
but I see no reason we should thinke so. The King could not bee induced to this reformation, as a meanes to possesse himselfe of the Abbeies for they were already swallowed vp.31. Henr. 8. Nor as a preparatiue for his woing (as Saunders thinks) because Fisher the Bishop of Roche∣ster, who opposed his mar∣riage, made vp the one and twentieth prelate in banish∣ing the Pope out of this Kingdome.Instruction of a Christian in the Preface. But without doubt, the finger of God was the cause, whatsoeuer was the hint, or occasion.Act. 23.1. Fe∣stus his popularitie, and hu∣mour of pleasing gaue S. Paul
occasion to appeale to Cesar, and to visite Rome, where, and when hee layd the first stone of the Romane church. Would you like it well a Protestant should say, that your Church was founded vpon courtship and popularity? If any carnall re∣spect, whetted on the king, that was but the opportunity, God onely was the first mo∣uer, and prime Agent in this reformation. Pap. Nay surely, God is the God of vnity, but your Church being once seuered from the Romane, was pre∣sently cantl'd out, into as many factions almost, as
there are Countries; witnes the Lutherans soft and rigid, the Caluinists, Puritans, Con∣formitans, Brownists, Anabap∣tists, &c. So as one may ea∣sily guesse, from what Ler∣ma, and fenny ground this Hydra of so many heades had her first Originall. Prot. This argument sounds very bigge in a la∣dies closet, and weighs much with the ignorant, and vn∣learned people, but with a man, but of a reasonable vnderstanding, this seeming diuision is no scandall at all to our reformed Churches. What man of any reading in the Histories of the time,
but knowes well, that after the trumpet for this refor∣mation had blowne, the first warning byIn the yeere 1375 Wicklef,In the yeere 1410. Hus, and Hierome of Prage, and then the second byde signis ru∣in. eccl. Gerson,1411. Peter de A∣liaco,Bucholcer Anno 1517. Cardinall Cusanus,in Theor. Picus MirandulaPhil. Comin. l. 3. Saua∣norola, and many others, (of whom we reade inGuic. hist. l. 4. Guic∣chiardyn) whenIn the yeere 1512. Luther in Germany blew the last, and that there appeared no hope of a free and indiffe∣rent Councell, so as seuerall kingdomes were thus neces∣sitated to prouide, and take care for themselues, this worthy Act of Reformation,
beginning in sundry estates, by reason, partly of their diuers shapes, and formes of gouernements, and partly, of a great disaduantage that one part of Christendome, knew not, what another did, nor consulted with their fel∣lowes, that so they might with vnanimitie proceed in the same, did necessarily produce a seeming difference in the outward formes of particular Churches. But loe, the goodnesse, and prouidence of Almighty God. Although these Chur∣ches haue seuerall faces, yet haue they all but one heart, there being no essentiall, fun∣damentall,
or materiall diffe∣rence amongst any of vs of the reformed Religion, as you may easily finde by rea∣ding the confessions of our seueral churches. And ther∣fore for these odious Nick∣names of Lutheran, Caluinist, Huguenot, Zuinglian, and the like, be more sparing of them, vntill you haue re∣concil'd your own church∣men, as your Minorits, and Dominicans about the con∣ception of the blessed Vir∣gine, your Iesuits, and Do∣minicans about predestina∣tion, and those dependant questions, your Sorbonists, and Iesuits about the boun∣ding,
and mereing out the Re∣gall, and Papall Authority: and you shall finde more doctrinall oppositions in your owne, then you can imagin in our Churches. But keepe you at home in your natiue countrey, and looke (with∣out enuie or partiali∣tie) vpon this flourishing Church of England, & name me one Kingdom in all Eu∣rope that hath continued ve∣ry neere this hundred yeres in that constancie, and immu∣tabilitie of doctrine or dis∣cipline. Wee are ordered with that consecration, thatSand. de schis. Angl. lib. 3. Archbishop32. of Hen∣ry 8. Cranmer was, we renounce the Pope
by that abiuration, that Arch∣bishop Cranmer did, we sub∣scribe to those Articles of re∣ligion, whichIn the yeere 1552. Archbishop Cranmer in the Reformation pitch't vpon, before we can be admitted to any Ecclesia∣sticall function. Some wilde coults we haue, that start, and boggle at the first, if they see but their owne shadowes, but by the discipline of the Church they are curb'd, and fetch't about againe, and taught in a little while to come on gently to this vni∣formitie and subscription. So that malice it selfe cannot challenge the Church of England, this most glorious
portion of that Catholike Church, of any fractions, or diuisions in points of Do∣ctrine. Pap. Nay, but I haue of∣ten heard, that you haue no Bishops or Priests at all in your Church. But that in the beginning of Q. Eliza∣beths raigne, lay-men in the Parliament did appoint you Bishops, who consecrated one another in a Tauerne at theSander. de Schism. lib. 3. Harding a∣gainst Iewell.Nags-head in Cheapside, and that your Priests were ordered onely by these Par∣liamentary Prelates. Prot. This tale of the Nags-head, Harding, Sanders, and Stapleton haue forged
out of their owne Nagges-heads without any ground, or likelihood at all. And yet as easily as they came by it, it put aM. Mason Archdeacon of Suff. Minister of our Church to an infinite deale of learned paines. Who by his Maiesties speciall com∣mandement, did search out the auncient Records of the Archbishop of Canterbury (agnized sithence by many Priests and Iesuits, in the Clincke, and other prisons) and out of them hath com∣posed a learned booke, shew∣ing the successiue Consecra∣tions of all the Bishoppes of England, from that first con∣uocation thatInstitut. of a Christian. fol. 19. banisht the
Pope about the yeere 1536, so as any Minister looking out that Bishop, who gaue him Orders, may presently ascend in a right line of Bi∣shops to those Prelates, that liued in the raigne of Henry the eighth, before the refor∣mation. And therfore if your owne Priests be lawfull, you may not quarrell with ours, differing onely from yours, in their renouncing of your impieties, and superstiti∣ons. Pap. This Record you speake of, is somewhat to the purpose, vnlesse the he∣resie of those first Bishops did disable them for gran∣ting
of lawfull Consecrations, and Orders. Prot. S. Basil. Nazianz. S. Ambros. S. Hierom. S. Austen: were in their times called heretiques. Lindan. panopl. lib. 4. cap. 7.Heretique indeed, is a common word for vs, in the mouth of euery wo∣man, that is but a little Ro∣manized. But is it not strange howInstitut. of a Christian, fol. 18 he should be an He∣retique, that sayes the Creed, and the Lords prayer in that literall, and explicite sense, and meaning, that all the Fathers of the Church for the first 500. yeeres vnder∣stood the same? Yet this is nothing to the point in hand. For first, if the Bi∣shops in Queen Maries time were lawfull, notwithstan∣ding their being consecra∣ted
by Cranmer, and other tainted Bishops (as you terme them) why may not the Bi∣shops in Queene Elizabeth, and King Iames his time, expect the same priuiledge? And secondly, your owneDominic. a Soto. in 4. Sent. d. 25. Biel. in 4 d. 25. q. 1. Con. 4. Capreol, in 4. d. 25. q. 1. art. 3. &c. Writers confesse, that He∣resie (which we suppose, but not yeeld these Prelates fal∣len vnto) cannot rase out from that Character of a Bi∣shop, this inseparable power of consecrating, and orde∣ring. Pap. Yet there remaines an obiection against your Church, that it cannot pos∣sibly be a true Church, be∣cause it is seuered from the
true visible head thereof the Pope of Rome. Prot. This is a stale ob∣iection, and soone answe∣red. The church ofEuseb. li. 5. c. 23. Eras. epist. in Agrippa de vanit. c. 59. Asia se∣uered from Pope Victor in the yeere 200.Baron. tom. 3. ad ann. 375. Athanasius, and his fellowes from Faelix and Tiberius in the yere 375,Euseb. l. 7. c. 2. 3. 4. Casian. consult. art. 7. Cyprian, and his brethren, yea and three National Coun∣cels from Pope Stephen, in the yeere 250,Bellar. de Ro. Pont. l. 2. c. 25. & 46. Lindan. panopl. l. 7. c. 89. Possevinus in Apparat. titul. Carthag. the Bishops of Carthage Schismatized from all Popes of Rome for an hundred yeres together, about the yeere 409. lastlyBellar. de Ro. Pont. l. 2. c. 31. Idem de Matri. c. 15. art. 2. the Greeke Church cut off from the Roman for 300. yeeres, are sufficient testi∣monies,
there may be a true Church of God, though se∣uered▪ and diuided from the Pope of Rome. And here in this kingdome it was no Protestant, but Popish Bi∣shops, that concluded in a Nationall Synode,Institut. of a Christian, set foorth anno 1537. by Au∣thority. our King might (if he pleased) create a Pope of his owne in his own kingdoms, and dominions, and yet remaine a member of the Catholike Church. Pap. Well the best is you haue beene so tedious in your answeres, that I haue (I thank God) forgotten all, that you haue said for your reformed Church. Prot. But I will helpe that
quickly by summing vp of all into these 12. Positions: 1 We haue a Church, as hauing Doctrine. Saluation. Discipline. 2 It is a portion of the Catholique Church. 3. It hath a Spirituall v∣nion of doctrine with the vntainted members of the Church of Rome. 4 And yet hath seuered her selfe from the Church of Rome by crying against, and dissenting from her Su∣perstions. 5 Which some of vs hold no true Church of Gods, in regard of the preuailing Fa∣ction.
6 Although we iudge charitably of the Saluation of some in that Church. 7 Who notwithstan∣ding are saued not as Pa∣pists, but as Christians. 8 And in one lumpe, or communion with this Church liued ours before the Refor∣mation. 9 Which then for want of a Generall, did seuer her selfe, by a Nationall Coun∣cell, from the same. 10 Nor was it any by-re∣spect of the Kings, but God, and the cry of that age, that caused this reformation. 11 Nor doe our refor∣med Churches dissent a∣mongst
themselues in do∣ctrine, but in outward poli∣tie, and discipline onely. 12 Our Bishops and Priests come by a lineall Succession from Henry the eights time, nor can a supposall of Here∣sie cut off this descent. CHAP. 2. Of the Scriptures. Pap. DOe you then hold this Church of yours to bee the ground of your Faith, and reason of your beleeuing, So as you doe therefore be∣leeue
all the points of your saluation to be true, because the Church doeth teach, and instruct you in the same? Or haue you any other rule, and ground of your faith? Prot. The Authority, and good conceipt we haue of Gods ChurchAugust. con∣tra Epistol. fun∣dam. c. 5. prepareth vs to beleeue the points of our Saluation, and serueth as an introduction to bring vs to the discerning, and perfect apprehension of these my∣steries of our faith, but the Scripture onely is the ground, and reason of our beleeuing. For as theIohn 4.29. Samaritans were induced, and drawne on to beleeue in Christ by that talk
of the woman, but hauing heard Christ himselfe, pro∣fesse plainely, they beleeue no longer for her saying, butIohn 4.42. be∣cause they heard him speake himselfe: So doe we beginne to beleeue; moued thus to doe, by the good conceipt we haue of the Church, but rest not in it, as the ground of our beleeuing, but onely in the infallible assurance of Gods truth in the booke of Scriptures. Pap. Then God helpe you, if that be your last re∣solution. For our Church can∣not erre, but your Scriptures without the helpe of the Church, to tell you so much,
can neuer bee ascertained vnto you, to be the word of God; And therefore what assurednesse of beleefe can you propose your selues vpon so vnsetled a founda∣tion? Prot. The Catholike Church indeed,Wald. doctr. fid. l. 2. art. 2. c. 27. spread ouer the world, cannot erre dam∣nably, though the Church of Rome, and all other particu∣la Churches, may, as your owne Writers confesse. But the Scriptures wee know to be the word of God, not because the Church, or Churchmen, doe tell vs so much, but by the Authority of God himselfe,Caluin instit. l. 1. c. 7. d. 4. whom we
doe most certainely discerne to speake in his word, when it is preached vnto vs. For if we bring pure eyes, and perfect senses, the maiestie of God forthwith, present∣eth it selfe vnto vs in the holy Scriptures, and beating downe all thoughts of con∣tradicting, or doubting things so heauenly, forceth our hearts to yeeld assent, and obedience vnto the same. And therefore if you doubt whether that which you reade in your Bible be the word of God, or finde any reluctancy in your vnder∣standing to the doctrine of the same, it is in vaine to flie
vnto either Church, or Churchmen, to be perswaded in this point, but down vp∣on your knees, and pray fer∣uently vnto God for Faith, and the illumination of the Holy Ghost, which can on∣ly assure you of the trueth of the Scriptures.Caluin. instit. l. 1. c. 7. dist. 5. For after wee are enlightned by the Spirit, we do no longer trust either our owne iudgement, or the iudgement of other men, or of the Church, that the Scriptures are of God, but aboue all certainety of hu∣mane iudgement, wee most certainely resolue, as if in them wee saw the maiestie and glory of God, that by
the ministerie of men they came vnto vs from Gods owne most sacred mouth. Pap. But what certaine ground of faith can you place on the Scriptures, seeing by the seuerall interpretations of men and women they are turned and wrested like a nose of wax to euerie pri∣uate designe and purpose? Doe not you obserue how the Catholikes, Protestants, and especiallie the Brow∣nists, and Anabaptists, doe fit all their turnes out of the holie Scriptures? on which of these senses, and imagi∣nations is your faith roo∣ted? or peraduenture, haue
you some odde capritchious kinde of interpretation of your owne apprehension to direct you in these busi∣nesses? Prot. Wee lay-folkes are licensed in the Church of England to reade,Doe all inter∣prete. 1. Cor. 12.30. but not to interprete Scriptures, excep∣ting onely those passages, which containe the neces∣sarie points of our Saluation, the which passages are so plaine, & easie euery where, that any man, or woman of the meanest capacitie (espe∣ciallie if he, or she be instru∣cted in their Catechisme or grounds of religion) may perfectly conceiue,Staplet. cont. 6. q. 7. exp. si art. and vn∣derstand
them. But for the harder and more difficult places, we leaue them to be interpreted by our Church∣men in their Sermons, and dailie ministerie. For the ordering of which inter∣pretations, there are (as I haue beene told) 10. seue∣rall helps,Obserued out of D. Field, M. Hooker, Chemnitius, and Trelca∣tius. the which if they be followed wil be sure, and vnfallible guides, to bolt out the true meaning of each place of Scripture. 1 An illumination of the vnderstanding by the Holy Ghost. 2 A minde free from other thoughts, and desirous of the truth.
3 Knowledge of the Scrip∣tures, Creedes, Cate∣chismes, Principles, and other Axiomes of Diui∣nitie. 4 A considerations how our meaning suites with o∣ther points of Christia∣nitie. 5 The weighing of circum∣stances, antecedents, and consequents. 6 Knowledge of Histo∣ries, Arts, and Sciences. 7 Continuall reading, me∣ditating, and praying. 8 Ioint, and vniarring expositions of the Fa∣thers. 9 Consenting decrees of auncient
Synods, and Councels. 10 Knowledge in the tongues. Because therefore lay-men, and women, Papists, Brownists, and Anabap∣tists, are wanting in all, or some of these helpes, they bring foorth many times such lame, and prodigious interpretations. Pap. If wee make the Scripture, & not the Church the rule of our Faith, how shall we beleeue, the Creed, the Trinity, the Sacraments, the vnity of Essence, the three persons in the Deity, &c. words neuer read in the Bible, and yet necessarily to
be apprehended of vs vpon paine of damnation? Prot. I say that all these things are set downe in Scriptures, either in so many syllables, or at leastwise by necessarie inferences, and de∣ductions. And wee doe not therefore beleeue them be∣cause they are onely taught by the Church, but because they are rooted and groun∣ded in the holie Scriptures, the onelie stay and pillar of our affiance. To summe vp therefore all this Chapter, 1 The Church doeth prepare vs, but the Scripture onely doeth force vs to be∣leeue.
2 The whole Church cannot, any part thereof may erre damnablie. 3 Wee are taught the Scriptures to bee the word of God by the Holy Ghost, mouing in our hearts, and not by the Church sounding in our eares. 4 Lay-men are to reade, not to interprete Scriptures. 5 The misse of some rules causeth wrong exposi∣tions of Scriptures. 6 All things necessary to bee beleeued are either found in, or collected and inferred from the Scrip∣tures.
CHAP. 3. Of Iustification. Pap. HOW then doe you learne out of the Scrip∣tures, that you are to be iu∣stified, and saued before God? Prot. I am to bee iustified before God, by an Act single in it selfe, but double in our apprehension, which is, By Gods not imputing vnto me my sinnes, and the same Gods imputing vnto mee Christs righteousnesse, and with∣all
by his creating of faith in my heart by the Holy Ghost, to assure my Soule that God, for the Actiue and Passiue obedience of Christ Iesus hath accomplished those two former Actes, of not imputing my Sinne, and of imputing vnto mee Christs righteousnesse. Pap. A verie easie, no doubt, and reasonable religion, which you haue learned out of the Scriptures. Heere is no burthen left for your owne backe, you cast all vp∣on Christs shoulders by the meanes of these two fine wordes, Not imputing, and imputing, and a third swim∣ming
notion of your own conceipt (which any man may haue with a little ima∣gining) termed by you faith, it would be knowne there∣fore, where your Church hath found out these words of Art, in the holie Scrip∣tures. Prot. We do in all humi∣litie confesse, that the globe of our sinnes, and the world of that righteousnesse, which is to appeare in the presence of Gods Iustice, is too massie for vs to sustaine, that are but dust and ashes, and sup∣portable only by that Atlas,Verba Lutheri ep. ad Henr. 8. tom. 2. ep. p. 290. Christ Iesus, vpon whose shoulders, not our conceits,
but the goodnes of God hath plac't and pressed them. But that these wordes imputing, and not imputing, are such Greeke vnto you, I doe im∣pute it to your not reading of Scriptures, and taking vp your religion by trust, and credit from such Fripperers, and Brokers, as by lending your soules, a false opinion of merits and good workes▪ do diue into your purses, and eat vp your estates, by way of interest. Not to trouble you (as I might) with a thousand places, aske Dauid,Psal. 32.1. whether not imputing of sin, and S. Paul,Rom. 4.45. whether the im∣puting of Christs righteous∣nesse
doth not make vs bles∣sed, and iustified. For the words vse your owne eyes, and inspection. And for the meaning, I referre you toAugust. tom. 8 in psalm. 31. S. Augustines vpon the one, andAmb. in ep. ad Rom. c. 8. S. Ambrose his com∣mentarie vpon the other passage. Now that you fondlie imagine, that Faith, this heauenly hand, that reacheth at this double Act, and applies it to our owne Soules, is such an apprehen∣sion, as you may command, when you please out of your owne phantasie, it is such a poore opinion, that no Soule, warmed with the least touch or feeling of re∣ligion,
but contemnes with a most holie scorne, and re∣proach. I tell you, (and if you once haue it, your con∣science will tell you no lesse) this Faith is the rich∣est iewell in Gods cabinet,Ephes. 2.8. and can neuer be compas'd by any endeuour of ours, vntill the Holy Ghost comes downe from heauen to set, and enchase it in our hearts with his owne fingers as it were. And being once ob∣tained, it new moldes, and fashions the whole nature of man, so as the vnderstan∣ding becomes more enlight∣ned to know God, the will to obey God, the affections,
to loue God, and our bre∣thren. Nor can it bee pre∣serued (to the comfort of our conscience) without daily praying, meditating, do∣ing good workes, reading the Scriptures, hearing good Ser∣mons, and perusing of de∣uout, and godly Treatises. My beliefe therefore is this: Gods not imputing of sinne, and imputing of righteousnesse is the worker, The Merits of Christ the procurer, Faith wrought by the holy Ghost the instrument, or applier, good workes, or my inhe∣rent righteousnesse (poore as it is) a consequent onely, ef∣fect, and follower, of my iusti∣fication.
Pap. I haue heard some of your side, raile against the very name of inherent righteousnesse, which you seem now to acknowledge, & embrace. Do Protestants therefore challenge any o∣ther righteousnesse, besides that of Christs, which is im∣puted? Prot. They doe acknow∣ledge a Sanctification, or in∣herent righteousnes, in the same sence as the auncient Fathers tooke the Word, but not as Iesuits of late mistake it. We haue righteousnesse inherent, or subsisting in vs, according to the which we shall be iudged, but not ac∣cording
to the which wee shall be iustified. You make your righteousnesse to goe before as the cause; we ours, to come after, as the effect of Iustification. You sup∣pose yours so absolute as to euict from God; all wee ex∣pect from ours, is, but to te∣stifie vnto men, that we are iustified. You bragge of a perfection of degrees, wee onely teach a perfection of parts in our righteousnesse. For as in the dawning of the day, euery part of the hea∣uens is enlightened, though none as yet in a full, and compleat splendour: so af∣ter the Act of Iustification,
apprehended by faith, euery facultie of the soule is san∣ctified, and made righteous, the vnderstanding, the will, the affections, the thoughts, the words, the deedes, but none of those, so exactly perfect, as to implead a Iusti∣fication at the throne of God. We therfore waue off this little righteousnesse of our owne, as a piece ofEsay 64.6. pol∣luted cloth in the Act of our Iustification, and cast an∣chor onely vpon the merits of Christ. But according to your Doctrine ofConcil. Trid. infused Charitie, not the Almighty reconciled, but the man qua∣lified, not Christ patient, but
an habite inherent, not God by grace pardoning, but an instilled vertue (like a re∣ceipt of Mithridate) expel∣ling sinne, is the cause of your Iustification. Pap. But haue you any vse of your Free-wil in either righteousnes; I meane that imputed, or this inherent? Or are you (as some relate your opinions) meerely suffering, and passiue, like so many stockes, and stones, casting not so much as a sigh, grone, or short wish, to∣wards this great worke of your conuersion? Prot. In our first conuer∣sion to be righteous, and the
Act of our Iustification, wee are like so many Niobes, or images of marble, which moue not at all, but as they are, in the whole lumpe, car∣ted, and transported; Our vnderstandings not affoor∣ding themselues the least glymps of knowledge, nor our wils, the least shew of inclination vnto this Act, but as they are either of them powerfully bended by the Holy Ghost to lay holde by Faith on this imputed righte∣ousnesse. But in our second conuersion to be more righte∣ous, which we call the Act of our Sanctification, wee moue likeArist. polit. 1. c. 1. Daedalus his sta∣tues,
or pageants vpon wheeles, dull, and vnweldy in our owne natures, but so quickened, and enliued by those engines of Grace, and motions of the holy Ghost in our soules, and consciences, that now our vnderstan∣dings, wils, and affections doe cooperate, and runne along, with the Grace of God in all our workes of pie∣tie, and deuotion. To that imputed righteousnesse ther∣fore we haue no freenesse, or cooperation of our Willes: to our inherent righteous∣nesse we haue. Wee haue no concurrance in that first Act of our Iustification, but
we haue a cooperation of the will (rouzed vp, and excited by grace) in all sub∣sequent Acts of our Sanctifi∣cation. The points therfore of this Chapter are these: 1. Iustification consists, in Gods not imputing of Sinne, and in his impu∣ting of Christs righteous∣nesse vnto vs. 2. It is not our conceipt, but the iustice, and mercy of God, which layes this loade on our Sauiour Christ. 3. Whosoeuer is acquain∣ted with the Scripture, cannot be vnacquainted
with imputed righteousnes. 4. Imputed righteousnesse is soone apprehended, but infused Faith, must bee first obtained. 5. We haue an inherent righ∣teousnesse, which is the effect, but none, which is the cause of our Iustifi∣cation. 6. Grace alone works our iustification; Grace, and we together (but wee in the second place) our Sancti∣fication.
CHAP. 4. Of Saints, Soules of the Dead, and those dependant questions. Pap. WEe are scandali∣zed likewise at your Church, because you giue no more reuerence to the Saints then you doe, nei∣ther praying vnto them, nor adorning their images, nor giuing them any set im∣ployment aboue in heauen, or the least care of vs here on earth. Which smels ve∣ry much of the heresies of
theEpiphan. Cainans, and Eunomi∣ans condemned so many yeeres agone in the Christi∣an Church. Prot. What employment the Saints haue in heauen, besides the contemplation of God face to face,Hugo de S. V. l. 2. de Sacram. c. 11. Alis. l. 3.we know not, nor doeCassand. in consult. art. 21. we deny their praying for vs. Vpon earth they receiue in our Church, all that honour bespoken for them in the primitiue Church. Wee keepe duely the memorials of the blessed Ʋirgine, and the twelue A∣postles, and a yeerely pane∣gyricall commemoration of all the Martyrs, & Saints of God: respecting them▪ as
ourAugust. contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 2. fellowes and friends, though not as ourIouius hist. lib. 24. Tutelar gods, and young little Saui∣ours. We admire their liues, and as we doe not furiously deface, so doe we not adore their images. BecauseAugust. in Psal. 113. S. Augustin would faine know, where that Christian may be found, that prayeth or a∣doreth, beholding an image.Idem de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 10. We reare them no Temples, as to Gods, but trophees onely of praise, as to deser∣uing men.Epi. ad Hebr. cap. 11. S. Paul him∣selfe did all this, and hee did no more. We dignifie them as Saints by celebration, wee dare not deifie them, as Gods by inuocation. YourEckius in his Enchirid. owne
men confesse, there is for this praying to Saints nei∣ther precept nor example in all the Bible. AndOrig. l. 2. in Epist. ad Rom. Origen made but a question,Basil. cited by the Bishop of Lincolne. S. Basil an If,NaZ. Orat. 1. in Iulian▪ & orat. in Gorgon. Gregory Nazian∣zene a thinking, or an opinion onely of this, which you make an Article of Faith. We are commanded to call vponPsal. 50 15. God, vpon himMatth. 4.10. one∣ly, for he is ourPsal. 74.12. King of old, and we are starke mad if we thinke to better our selues by changing of Masters. Pap. I, but how will you answere Antiquitie: For I haue beene told, that there are found in the writings of the Auncient Fathers, pray∣ers
made to many of the Saints and holy men de∣parted. Prot. If you please to ob∣serue them well, you shall finde, they are no Orisons, but Orations. A certain kind of passionate, and rhetori∣call exclamations made vnto the dead, concerning some notable euents happened vn∣to the Church in generall, or the parties themselues in particular. This is easily beleeued of them, who vse to reade the Greeke Fathers, which are full of such eiacu∣lations in their affectionate Discourses. And that their passages, are no prayers, this
is an argument.Eliens. resp. ad Apolog. pag. 42. Because there is not any of all these Fathers, when they treat of prayer, (as it is their vsuall theme) of set purpose, and handle all the obiects, and kindes therof, that euer men∣tion one syllable of this prayer to Saints. This is an answere will neuer be taken away by any of your side. Now if your Priests tooke an hint hereby, to erect Mas∣ses for theVide Epist. Vratislauiens. apud Slte∣tum, Annal. decad. 1. p. 150 dead, I hope you know they loose nothing by the bargaine. Pap. You likewise con∣temne, and deride the Re∣liques of the Saints, which are shewed, preserued, and
adored in our Churches. Prot. We are so farre from contemning any thing in this kinde, that did wee knowe them to bee true reliques, and no impostures, we should honour them more then you doe, to wit,K. Iames pre∣face monit. with an honourable, and Chri∣stian buriall. Wee heare indeed that there were of oldAugust. de moribus Eccle∣siae. some Christians that attributed too much to the reliques of the Martyrs, but we heare from the same Fa∣ther,August. de ciuit. Dei, l. 8. cap. 27. The better sort of Christians did not so. And we hold it very idle toPlin. Sec ▪ l. 4. ep. 8. pro∣pose for our imitation any other, then the best, and
most absolute patterne. Pap. You do also speake basely of the blessed virgin, and compare her to your owne wiues, and such bag∣gages. Prot. A rayling French∣man doth charge Melanc∣thon with such a compari∣son,Florim. Remond en son Histoir ex Hom. Mel. in euang. de in∣carnat. but that booke or pas∣sage hee cites, is not to bee found among the workes of that most learned and mo∣dest writer: Howeuer, our Church hath neuer aRogers in art. 22. Saint Ruffyn (as yours hath) to heale all frenzies, and mad∣nesses, and we count no bet∣ter of those desperate spee∣ches, that any one shall vo∣mit
against the glorious vir∣gin. Yet I thinke your men abuse her farre more,Leo 10. ep. ad Bemb. 17. one calling her a Goddesse, ano∣therRosar. Mar. the Goddesse of the sea, which is the title of Venus. Making of Mary the euer Virgin a meerein Petr. Arbit. Quartilla, that could neuer remember she was a Virgin. In euery deed you all abuse her. ForPolan: synt. l. 3. c. 24. as one wel obserues, when you say your Aue Maries, you pray for her. But wee hold, as to pray for her to be mostAug. serm. 17. de verb. Ap. iniurious, so to pray to her to be mostEpiph. l. 3. aduers. haeres. vn∣lawfull and superstitious. Pap. Also you neuer vse to pray for the dead, al∣though
the Auncients did so. Prot. Wee dare not in∣deed For if they bee in Heauen,P. Lomb. 4 sent. distinct. 45. we shall wrong them, if in Hell, we cannot helpe them; and Purgatory,Roffens. contra art. Luther. art. 18. your owne men confesse, was neuer heard of amongst the Auncients. Now for those prayers for the dead in the old Liturgies, they were conceiued (if you marke them) for men dying,Caessand. prec. eccles. and passing, not dead already, and so they are still vsed in the Church of England, and most diligently, & deuour∣ly in the Collegiate Church of Westminster. But to
stretch, and extend theseVide epist. Vra∣tislau. apud Scultet. Annal. dec. 1. pa. 152. Collects to men stone-dead, and past their particular iudgements was a pretty pro∣iect of the Monkes and Fri∣ars, and they were very wel payd for their wit, and in∣uention, as you shall finde, when you shall haue occa∣sion to purchase a Masse for any of your kindred de∣parted. Pap. Nay say you nothing of the Masse, for out of ma∣lice, and derogation from the Sacrifice therin offered, you haue bred in the peo∣ple such a sleight opinion of the Blessed Sacrament, as they make of it, but a bare
signe, or a token, or a figure, or I cannot tell what: And dare not conceiue Christ to be there, for feare of impri∣sonment, or the high Com∣mission. Prot. Wee doe indeed ac∣knowledge no oblation in the blessed Sacrament, but aSee common praier booke. liuely commemoration of that oblation of Christ, which he offered vpon the Crosse for our redemption. Nor any Sacrifice at all, but that Sacrifice of Collects, prayers, and thankesgiuing, which the Church powres out vnto God at the recei∣uing of the Sacrament. And these commemorations, and
collects, are the reason, why the Supper of the Lord, was termed by the Auncients, a Sacrifice, an Oblation, the Eucharist, the Hoast, &c. But the reuerence due to this great Sacrament is as ob∣seruable, as the maner of Christs presence therein is vnexpressable. The names of a figure, a signe, a type, and the like, wee keepe to ex∣pound the words onely, but not as though they were keyes to open, and vnfolde the maner of the mysterie. The speech is to be expoun∣ded figuratiuely, becauseSchoolemen in 4. sent. This, and Christs body (be∣fore the pronuntiation of
the last syllable of the wordes) are disparats and of a contrary nature. But Christ is present there, for the matterAug. confess. a∣pud Cassand. consult. art. 10. substantially,Caluin. in 1. Cor. 11.21. truely,Melan. in ep. ad Palat. & Granguellam. really, nay most truely,Fortunatus Caluinista a∣pud Greg. de Valent. l. 1. de praesen. Chri∣sti in Euchar. c. 7. dist. Istius. and most really, and more truely, and more really, then the bread and the wine, but for the maner ineffa∣bly, and vnexpressably. And this is that Caluinisticall do∣ctrine, you so much cauill at, and deride. 1 Wee honour the Saints with Ecclesiasticall ob∣seruation, but not with a Spirituall adoration. 2 The ancient Fathers made Orations, but no Ori∣sons vnto them.
3 The bles∣sed Virgin is more abused by Papists who make her To giue sucke to a Priest. Vincent. Spec. hst. l. 7. 84. Mend Thomas a Beckets old hose. Cantip. lib. 2. c. 29.12. Heale a scabd head. Caes. l. 7. c. 25. Clippe a Monke. Id. l. 7. c. 51. Kisse another. Id. l. 7 c. 33. Sing to a third. Id. l. 7. c. 22. Lie betweene man and wife. Vincent. lib. 7. c. 8. Supplie a Nunnes place that was gone to a Bawdy house. Caesar. lib. 7. cap. 35. Bring an Abbesse to bed gotten with childe by her Seruing-man. Vin∣cent. Spec. hist. lib. 7. cap. 87. 4 Wee are ready to bu∣ry, but not to adore re∣liques. 5 We pray for men de∣parting, as the Fathers did, not for the departed as the Friars did.
6 Christ is in the Sacra∣ment really for the matter, ineffably for the maner. CHAP. 5. Some idle personall exceptions. Prot. HAue you any other points of our Religion that you stumble at? Pap. These are the main points of your religion questioned. But some as∣persons more are cast vp∣on the persons of your Mi∣nisters. As that they lie wil∣fullie,
and against their knowledge in points of Diuinity, and are thus zea∣lous in the cause, out of a desire onely to preserue their great estates in the Church, wheras our Priests haue no other worldlie comfort, but the goodnesse of their cause, and the testi∣monies of their consciences. Prot. Let your common discretion be your iudge in this case, whether wee, that ground our doctrines vp∣on the word of God, inter∣preted by those ten rules I formerly set downe, or these men, that put all to the determination of the Church
that is, to their own proper phantasies, and the grosse ex∣position of an vnlearned Pope, are most likely to gull the world, with crotchets, and Chimaeras. Besides, you know how full this king∣dome is of men well read, as in all sciences, so especial∣ly in Diuinity. You know (and yet none knowes it so well, as they that best know him) the profound learning and deepe apprehension of the King himself, as hauing perfectly digested, the very body and bulke of all sacred knowledge. And is this a stage for ignorance & impo∣sture to play their parts on?
Or doeth this learned Mo∣narch, the Lord of 3. King∣domes, woed and sought vnto, by all the Catholike Princes, palliate his religi∣on, in hope of a Bishoprick? These are poore and tooth∣lesse aspersions. Then for our Ecclesiasticall estates, they are so par'de, and pol'de with duties, and impositi∣ons (all which had their O∣riginall from the Court of Rome) that the time of the charge of breeding vp a mi∣nister, would raise him a better meanes then he hath in the Church in any other trade or trafficque whatso∣euer The King is gracious
to his seruants of all profes∣sions. But a Countrey Mini∣ster cannot inne for the har∣uest of a whole yeere, what a Iesuite can get in an hours confession. Lastly, concer∣ning these professors of po∣uerty the Priests, and the Ie∣suites, it is too well knowne they want no maintenance. What by traducing our Nation abroad, and sedu∣cing our people at home, their bones are full of mar∣row, and their eyes swell with fatnesse; and what the Statute hath taken from vs, cogging, and cheating hath drawen vpon them, I mean the priuie Tithes, and Bene∣uolences
of the Kingdome. But to choke this Obiecti∣on in one word. That our meanes is no cause to keepe vs in this profession, witnes our Brethren in France and elsewhere, who without the same means, teach & preach the selfe same doctrine. Pap. They also inform vs that your Ministers haue neither learning, nor hone∣stie. Prot. It is true indeede, they teach their Nouices, that the greatest Doctor in our Church, doth not vn∣derstand the common grounds of Diuinity, and must ofBritanno-Ro∣manus pag. 19. necessity bee put
to his A. B. C. againe. But common reason can inform you, whether this bee true or not. Againe, they are onely the base fugitiues, and discontented runnagates of our own nation, that spread these rumours, who thinke their Countrie-men the grossest fooles in Christen∣dome, that they dare thus amuse them, and lead them by the nose, with such im∣possible assertions. And therefore I will giue you a touch heere, how other Pa∣pists haue ingeniously ac∣knowledged the learning, and piety of many Prote∣stants.Aeneas Sylui∣us de orig. Bo∣hem. c. 35. Pope Pius com∣mended
Hus for learning, and purity of life;Alph. lib. 2. ad∣uers. haeres. tit. Ador. haer. 2. Alphonsus de Castro Oecolampadius for all kinde of knowledge, and the tongues especially,In annot. in Tert. coron. Mi∣litis. In defens. conc. Trid. l. 1. p. 41. Rhe∣nanus also Conradus Pellican as a man of a wonderfull sanctity, and erudition; An∣dradius likewise, Chemnitius for a man of a sharpe wit, and great iudgement; Co∣sterus all the Protestants for their ciuill behauiour, their almes, their building of ho∣spitals, and forbearing from reuiling, & swearing;Enchirid. c. 2. p. 101. De pro∣hib. l. 2. c. 13. Gret∣zer himselfe, our ordinarie writers to bee (for the most part) of great learning,Recherches de la Fraunce, pag. 910. & 511. and iudgement, Stephen Paschier
held Caluin worthie (set his opinions aside) to be com∣pared for zeale and learning to the chiefe Doctors of the Catholique Church.Lib. 11. epist. 11. Epist. Eras∣mus held Luther of that inte∣gritie of life, that his very e∣nemies had nothing to cast in his dish;Lindan. l. 3. Strom. cap. 33. Lindanus ac∣knowledged Melancthon to be adorned with all kind of learning. In a word, your Writers themselues did so applaud the persons of their aduersaries for learning, and pietie, thatIndex expurg. distinct. 2. Pope Clement the 8. was faine to com∣mand all your Controuer∣sie-writers to bee reuiewed; and these graces, and praises
bestowed on our men, to be blotted out, and expunged. And therefore when you next heare a Iesuite in this theme, thinke vpon these true relations, and withall laugh at him, and pray for him. Pap. Sir, I haue receiued some satisfaction, that mat∣ters are not so farre out of square in the Church of En∣gland, as I haue beene infor∣med. But yet my consci∣ence will not serue mee, to come to your congregati∣ons, because there are (be∣side these triuiall) many o∣ther points of doctrine ne∣uer heard of amongst Pro∣testants,
which be in very deed the Caballas, and my∣steries of the Romane-Ca∣tholique Religion. You haue beene very tedious in your answeres and declara∣tions, I pray you therefore bestow the last Chapter vpon me, to shew the reasons, why so many Ladies, and good Soules refuse to con∣forme themselues to the Church of England. Prot. With all my heart, I will therefore end my speach with the summing vp this fifth Chapter, and leaue the euent to God, and your Conscience.
1. The meanes of our Churchmen are not so great, as to make them maintaine a false religion, but their religion is so true, as it makes them contented with any meanes. 2. Yet in other countries, where no hope of prefer∣ment appeares, there ap∣peares an equall zeale of our Religion. 3. Our Church-men are com∣mended for their liues, and learning, by the pens of their prime aduersa∣ries.
CHAP. 6. Reasons of refusall to leaue the Romish religion, collected out of printed Authors. Pap. I Cannot leaue my Religion. I. Reason. Because, We must sim∣ply beleeue the Church of Rome, whether it teach true, or false. Stapl. Antidot. in Euang. Luc. 10.16. pag. 528. And if the Pope beleeue there is no life to come, wee must beleeue it as an Article of our Faith. Busgradus.
And we must not heare Protestant Preachers, though they preach the Truth. Rhem. vpon tit. 3.10. Blasph.And for your Scripture, we litle weigh it. For the Word of God, if it bee not expounded, as the Church of Rome will haue it, is the word of the Diuell. Hosius de expresso verbo Dei. II. Reason. You rely too much vpon the Gospel, and S. Paules E∣pistles in your Religion, whereas,Blasph. the Gospel is but a fable of Christ, as Pope Leo the tenth tels vs. Apol. of H. Stephen. fol. 358. Smeton. con∣tra Hamilton. pag. 104.
And the Pope can dispense against the New Testament. Panormit. extra de diuortiis. And hee may checke, when hee pleases the Epi∣stles of S. Paul. Carolus Ruinus Consil. 109. num. 1. volum. 5. And controule any thing auouched by all the Apo∣stles. Rota in decis. 1. num. 3. in nouiss. Anton. Maria in ad∣dit. ad decis. Rotae nou. de Big. n. 10. And there is an eternall Gospel, to wit,Blasph. that of the holy Ghost, which puts down Christs. Cirellus a Carmelite set it foorth.
III. Reason. You attribute all your Saluation to Faith in Christ alone. Whereas, He is the Sauiour of men onely, but of no women. Dial. of Di∣ues and Pauper, compl. 6. cited by Rogers vpon the Artic. and Postellus in Iesuits Catech. l. 1. cap. 10. For women are saued by S. Clare. Mother Iane. Som. in Morn. de eccl. cap. 9. Postellus in Iesuits Catech. lib. 8. cap. 10. Nay to speake properly, S. Francis hath redeemed as many, as are saued si∣thence his dayes. Conformit. of S. Fran.
And the blood of S. Tho∣mas a Becket. Hor. Beat. Virg. And sometimes one man, by his Satisfactions, re∣deemes another. Test. Rhem. in Rom. 8.17. IV. Reason. In your Church there is but one way to remission of sinnes, which you call Faith in Christ, but we haue ma∣ny. For we put away
Our Venials, with a litle holy water, Test. Rhem. in Rom. 8.17. Mortals, by 1. Merits of the B. Vir∣gine, Hor. B. Virg. 2. The blood of Becket, ib. 3. Agnos Dei, or holy Lambes, Cerem. l. 1. t. 7. 4. Little parcels of the Gospel, Breuiar. 5. Becomming Francis∣cans, confor. l. 1. fol. 101. 6. A Bishops pardon for 40. dayes, a Car∣dinals for a 100. daies, and the Popes for e∣euer. Tak. Camaer. apud Espens. in 1. ad Tim. V. Reason. You stand too precisely vp∣on your Sacraments, and re∣quire a true Faith in the partaker. Whereas with vs, To become a Monke, or a Nunne, is as good as the Sa∣crament of Baptisme. Aquin. de ingres. relig. l. 2. c. 21.
And the very true, and reall body of Christ may bee deuoured of dogs, hogges, cattes, and rattes. Alex. Hales, parte 4. q. 45. Thom. parte 3. q. 8. art. 3. VI. Reason. Then for your Ministers, euery one is allowed to haue his wife, or else enforced to liue chastly, whereas with vs, the Pope himselfe can∣not dispense with a Priest to marrie, no more then he can priuiledge him to take a purse. Turianus found fault withall by Cassand. Consult. art. 23. But whordome is allow∣ed
all the yeere long. See Sparkes discouery, pag. 13. & constitut. Othon. de concubit. cleric. remouend. Abhominable.And another sinne for Iune, Iuly, August. which you must not know of. Al∣lowed for this time by Sixtus Quartus to all the family of the Cardinall of S. Lucie, ves∣sel. Grouingens. tract. de indul∣gent. citat. a Iacob. Laurent. Ie∣suit. lib. pag. 196. vide Io. Wol∣fij lection. memorab. centen. 15 p. 836. For indeed the wickednes of the Church-men is a prime argument of the worthinesse of the Roman Church. Bellar. l. 4. de Rom.
Pont. cap. 14. artic. 28. And the Pope can make that righteous, which is vn∣righteous. l. 1. Decretal. Greg. tit. 7. c. 5. And yet can no man say vnto him, Sir, why do you so? In extrau tom. 22. titul. 5. c. ad Apostolatus. VII. and last Reason. You in the Church of England haue cast off the Bishop of Rome,Blasph. whereas the Bishop of Rome is a God. Dist. 96. c. Satis eui∣denter. & Panorm. cap. Quan∣to Abbas. FINIS.
