25016 99837899 2246
¶ A Preaty Interlude called, Nice wanton, ¶Wherein ye may see, Thre braunces of an yll tree, The mother and her chyldren three, Twoo naught, and one godlye. Early sharpe, that wyll be thorne, Soone yll, that wyll be naught: To be naught, better vnborne, Better vnfed, then naughtely taught. Ut magnum magnos, pueros puerilia deocus. Personages. The Messenger. Barnabas. Ismael. Dalila. Eulalia. Iniquitie baily errand. Xantipe. Worldly shame. Daniel the iudge. ¶Anno Domini. M.D.LX.
¶The Prologue. e messen¦r. THe prudent Prince Salomon, doth say, He that spareth the rod, the chyld doth hate He wold youth shuld be kept in awe alwaye By correction in tyme at reasonable rate, To be taught to fear god and theyr parents obey To get learning and qualities, thereby to maintain An honest quiet lyfe, correspondent alway, To gods law and the kynges, for it is certayne. If chyldren be noseled in idlenes and yll, And brought vp therin, it is hard to restrayne, And draw them from naturall wont euyll, As here in thys Interlude, ye shall se playne. By two chyldren brought vp wantonly in play, Whom ye mother doth excuse, whē she should chastise They delyte in daliaunce and mischief alway, At last they ende theyr lyues in miserable wyse. The mother perswaded by worldly shame, That she was the cause of theyr wretched lyfe, So pensife, so sorowfull, for theyr death, she became, That in despaire she would lea her sel wih a kinfe Then her sonne Barnabas, (by interpretacyon, The sonne of comfort,) her yll purpose do stay, By the scriptures he geueth her godly consolation And to concludth, all these partes wyll we playe.
Barnabas commeth. Barnbas. MY mayster in my lesson yesterday, Dyd recite this text of Ecclesiasticus, man is prone, to euil, frō hys youth, did he say Whych sentence may wel be verified in vs My selfe, my brother, and sister Dalila, Whom our parentes to theyr cost to scoole do fynde I tary for them here, time passeth away, I loose my learnyng, they euer loyter behynde, If I go before, they do me threate, To complayne to my mother, she for theyr sake, Being her tender tidlynges, wyll me beate: Lorde, in thys perplexit ye, what way shall I take? ismael What wyl become of them? grace god them sende, To apply their learnyng, and theyr maners amend. Dalila Here we comen, and here we louen, come in sygyng. And here we will abide abyde ay. Barna¦bas. Fye brother fye, & specyally you sister Dalila, Sobrenes becommeth maydes alway Dalila What ye dolt ye be euer in one songe, Ismae yea sir it shall cost you blowes ere it be longe, Barna¦bas. Be ye not ashamed the treauandes to play? Losing your time & learning, & that euery day Lernyng bringeth knowledge of god, & honest liuing to get Dalila Yea mary, I warrant you, master hodypeke, Barna¦bas. Learne a pace syster, and after to spyn and sowe, And other honest huswifely poyntes to knowe. Ismae Spyn quod ha, yea by ye masse, & wt youre heles vp wynd For a good mouse hunt, is cat after kyng Barna¦bas. Lewd spekyng corrupteth good maners s. Paule doeth sai Come, let vs go, if ye wil to scole thys day I shal be shent for taryng so longe, Barna" goeth oute
smael Go get the hence, thy mouth full of horse donge. Now prety syster, what sport shall we deuyse? Thus paltyng to scole, I thynke vs vnwyse In sommer dye for thryst, in wynter for colde, And styl to liue in feare of a churle, who would? alila. Not I by the masse, I had rather he hanged were Then I would syt quakyng like a mome for feare I am sonne burned in sommer, in winter the colde, Maketh my limmes grosse, and my beauty decay, If I should vse it, as they would I should, I should neuer be fayre woman I dare say. smael No syster no, but I can tell, Where we shal haue good chiere, Lusty companyons two or three, At good wyne, ale and biere. alila. Oh good brother let vs go, I wyll neuer go more to to scoole, Shall I neuer knowe, What pastyme meaneth? yes, I wyll not be suche a foole. Ismael Haue with the Dalila, Fare well our scoole, hey raste aye cheir kes. Away with boke and all, I wyll set my heart, On a mery pynne, What euer shall be fall. lalia. Lorde what folly is in youth? Howe vnhappy be chyldren now a dayes? And the more pitye, to say the truth. Theyr parentes mainteyn them in euyll wayes: Which is a great cause that the world decayes, For chyldren brought vp in ydlenes and play,
Unthrifty and desobedient, continue alway, A neyghbour of myne hath chyldren here by, Ydle, desobedyent, proude, wanton and nyce. As they come by, they do shrewed turnes daily, Their parentes so to suffer them surely, be not wise They laugh me to scorne, whē I tel thē mine aduise, I wil speake wt their elders & warne thē neighborly Neuer in better tyme, their mother is here by, God saue you gossyp, I am very fayne, That you chaunce now to come thys way, I longe to talke with you a word or twayne, I pray you take it frendly that I shall say: Ismael your sonne, and your daughter Dalila. Do me shrewde turnes, dayly more and more, Chide and beat my chyldren, it greueth me sore. They sweare, curse & scold, as they go by ye way, Giuyng other yll ensample to do the same, To gods displeasure, and theyr hurt an other day, Chastyce them for it, or els ye be to blame: Xātippe Tusshe tusshe, if ye haue no more then that to saye, Ye maye holde your tonge and get ye a waye, Alas poore soules, they sit a scoole all day, In feare of a churle, & yf a lytle they play, He beateth them lyke a deuyl: when they come home Your mestresship would haue me lay on, If I should beate them so oft as men complayne, By ye masse wt in this month, I shuld make thē lame eulalia. Be not offended I pray you, I must say more, your sonne is suspect, lyght fyngered to be. your daughter hath nyce trickes three or foure, Se to it in tyme, leaste worse ye do see, He that spareth the rod, hateth the chyld truely,
yet Salomon sobre correction doth meane, Not to beate and bounce them to make them lame: ātippe God thanke you mestres, I am well at ease Such a foole to teache me, preachyng as she please, Dame ye belye them deadly I know playne, Because they go handsomly ye disdayne, ulalia. Then on the other as well would I complayne, But your other sonne is good, and no thank to you These wyl ye make naught by swete Iesu. ātippe Eupliade, my chyldren naught ye lye, By your malyce they shal not set a slye, I haue but one mome, in comparison of hys brother Him the foole prayseth, and despiseth the other. ulalia. Well Xantippe, better in time, then to late, Seing ye take it so, here my leaue I take. Exit. ātippe Mary good leaue haue ye, the gret god be wt you My chyldren or I be curst I thinke, They be complayned on where euer they go, That for theyr pleasure they might drynke. Nay by thys the poor foules be come frō ferle wery, I will go get them meate to make them mercy, niqui. Lo, lo, here I brynger Iniquitie, Ismael, and Dalila, comein together. smael What is she nowe ye haue her? Dalila. A lusty mynyon louer. Iniqui. ll together For no golde wyll I gyue her welcome my hony ay. Iniqui. Oh my heart. Here he speaketh, Thys wenche can synge, And play her parte, Dalila. I am yours (and you mine) with all my hart. Iniqui. By the masse it is well songe, were ye not sory ye were a mayd so longe?
Dalila Fye maister iniquitie fye, I am a mayd yet, Ismae No sister no, your maiden head is sicke: Iniqui That knaue your brother wyl be a blabbe styl, I wisse Dalila ye can say as muche by him, if ye wil. Dalila By him quod ha, he hath whores two or three, But iche tell your minion doll, by gogs body: It skylleth not she doth holde you as muche Ismael ye lye falsly, she wyll play me no suche touche, Dalila Not she? yes to do your heart good I could tell you who putteth a bone in your hood. Ismae Peace whore, or ye beare me a boxe an theare, Dalila Here is mine eare knaue, stryke and thou dare. To suffer him thus ye be no man, If ye wyl not reuenge me, I wyl fynd one, To set so litle by me, ye were not wont, Well, it is no matter. Though ye do ceteri nolunt, Iniqui Peace Dalila, speake ye laten poore foole, Dalila No no, but a prouerbe I learned at scoole. Ismael yea syster, you went to scole til ye were past grace Dalila yea, so dydst thou by thy knaues face. Iniqui Well, no more a do, let all thys go, We kinsfolke must be frendes, it must be so. Come on come on come on, He casteth dit on the bord. Here they be that wyll do vs al good, Ismael If ye vse it long, your hear wil grow throught your Iniqui. Come on knaue with christes curse. I must haue some of the mony, Thou hast pickt out of thy fathers purse, Dalila He, by the masse if he can get his purse, Now and then he maketh it by halfe the worse. Ismael I defie you both whore and knaue
niqui. What ye pryncockes, begin ye to raue? Come on. Dalila. Mayster Iniquitie, by your leaue, I wyll play a crowne or two here by your sleue smael. Then be ye seruaunt to a worshypfull mon. Mayster Iniquitie, a right name by saint Iohn. Dalila. What can ye say by mayster Inquitie? I loue hym and his name most hertely, niqui. God a mercy Dalila, good lucke, I warrant the, e kisseth er. I wil shryue you both by and by, Ismael Come on, but fyrst let vs haue a songe, Dalila. I am content, so that it be not longe. Iniquitie and Dalila singe. Iniqui. Golde lockes, She must haue knockes, Or els I do her wronge, Dalila. When ye haue your wyl, Ye were best lye styll, The winter nightes be longe Iniqui. ¶When I ne may, An other assay, I wyl take it for no wronge: Dalila. Then by the roode, A bone in your hoode. I shall put ere it be longe. Ismael She macheth you sira. Iniqui. By gogs bloud she is the best whore in England. Dalila. It is knauishly praysed, gyue me your hand, Iniqui. I woud thou haddes suche in other, Ismael By the masse rather then .xl. pound brother. Iniqui. Here sirs come on seuen. They se him. A leauen at all.
Isma Do ye nycke vs be knaue your noly, Iniqu Ten myne Syre myne, Isma casteth Haue at it, and it were for all my fathers kyne, It is lost by his woundes, and ten to one, Iniqu Take the dice Dalila, cast on. Dalil Come on fye, she casteth, & they fet Thryue at fayrest, Isma Gup whore, and I at rest, Bigogs bloud, I wene god & the deuyl be agenst me He loset Iniqu If thone forsake the, thother wyll take the, Ismae Then is he a good felow, I would not passe, So that I myght beare a rule in hell by the masse, to tosse fierbrandes at these penyfathers pates, I would be porter and receiue them at the gates, In boyling lead & brimston, I wold sethe thē ech one The knaues haue al ye mony, good felows haue none Dalila Play brother, haue ye lost all your money now? Ismae yea, I thanke that knaue and suche a whore as yu, Tis no marter, I wyll haue money or I wil swete, Bygogs bloud I wyll robbe the next I mete. yea, and it be my father. he goeth out. Iniqui Thou boy, by the masse ye wyl clyme the ladder, Ah sira, I loue a wenche that can be wylye She perceyued my mind, with a twinke of myne eie, If we two play boody on any man, We wyll make him as bare as Iob anone, Wel Dalila, let se what ye haue won, Dalila Sir, I had .x. shillinges when I begon, And here is all, euery farryng, They tell Iniqui. ye lye lyke a whoore, ye haue won a pound, Dalila, Then the deuyll stryke me to the grounde,
niqui. I will fele your pocket, by your leaue mestres, alila. A way knaue, not mine by the masse, niqui. Yes bi god, & geue you this to boot, he geueth her a box alila. Out horeson knaue, I beshrew thy hert root Wilt thou rob me & breat me to? Iniqui. In the way of correction but a blowe or twoo, Dalila. Correct thy dogges thou shalt not beate me, I wyl make your knaues flesshe cut I warrant the, Ye thynke I haue no frendes, yes I haue in store, A good felow or two percaunce more. She goeth "te, yea, by the masse they shall boxe you for this geare, Iniqui. A knaue I found the, a knaue I leaue the here. Gup whore, do ye heare this iade? Louing when is pleased, When she is angry thus shrewd, Chief brother, sylter whore, Two grases of an yll tree, I wyl tary no longer here, Fare well, god be with ye. he goeth out Dalila. Alas wretched wretche that I am, ommeth in ragged, her face hd or isfigured atinge on  stafe. Most miserable caitife that euer was borne, Full of payne and sorow, croked and lome. Stuft with diseases in this world forlorne. My senowes be shronken, my flesh eaten wt pocs My bones fin of ache, & great payne, My head is bald, that bare yelowe lockes, Croked I crepe to the earth agayne, Mine eie sigth is dimme, my hands tremble & shake My stomake abhorreth all kynd of meate: For lacke of clothes, great colde I take When appetide serueth, I can get no meate. Where I was fayre and amiable of face,
Now am I foule and horrible to se, Al this I haue I deserued for lacke of grace, Iustly for my sinnes god doth plague me. My parentes did tidle me, they were to blame, In steade of correction, in yll did me maintain: I fell no naught, and shall dye with shame Yet all thys is not halfe of my greife and payne. The worme of my conscience yt shall neuer dye, Accuseth me dayly more and more: So oft haue I sinned wilfully, That I feare to be damned for euermore. Barna∣bas. What wofull wight art thou? tell me, That here most greuously doest lament, Confesse the truth, and I wil comfort the, By the word of god omnipotent: Although your tyme ye haue mispent, Repent and amend while ye haue space, And god wyll restore you to heatlh and grace. Dalila. To tell you who I am I dare not for shame, But my filthy liuing hath brought me in this case, Full oft for my wantonnes you dyd me blame, yet to take your councel I had not the grace, To be restored to health, alas it is past, Diseae hath brought me into suche decay, Helpe me with your almose, while my lyfe doth laste That like a wretche as I am, I may go my way. Barna∣bas. Shewe me your name sister I you pray, And I wil helpe you now at your nede, Both body and soule wyl I fede. Dalila. your haue named me already, if I dust be so bold you sister Dalila, that wreche I am, My wanton nice toyes ye knew of olde,
Alas brother they haue brought me to thys shame, Whē you went to scole, my brother & I wold play Sweare, chide, & scodle weth man and woman, To do shrewde turnes, our delyte was alwaye, Yet were we tidled, and you beaten now & than, Thus our parentes let vs do what we woulde, And you by correction they kepthe vnder awe: When we grewe bigge, we were sturdye and bolde By father and mother we set not a strawe, Small matter for me, I am past, But your brother and mine is in gread ieoperdy: In daunger to come to shame at the last, He frameth hys liuyng so wyckedly. arna∣s. Well siker, I euer feared ye would be nought, your lewde behauiours sore greue my hart: to trayn you to goodnes, al meanes haue I sought, But in vaine, yet wyl I play a brotherly part. For yt the soul is more precyous, most derely bought with the bloud of Christe, dying therfore: To saue it first, a meane must be sought, At gods hand by Chryste, mannes onely sauior. Consider Dalila, goddes fatherly godnes, Which for your good, hath brought you in thys case. Scourged you with hys rod of pure loue doubtles. that ones knowing your self, ye might cal for grace, Ye seme to repent, but I doubt whater, For your sinnes, or for the misery ye be in: Earnestly repent for your synne rather, For these plagues be but the reward of sinne, But so repent that ye sinne no more, And then beleue with stedfast faith: That god wyll forgeue you for euermore,
For Chrystes sake, as the scripture sayth. As for your bodye, if it be curable, I wyll cause to be healed, or duryng your life: I wyl clothe you, and fete you as I am able, Come sister, go with me, ye haue nede of relief. The go Dan" As a iudge of the countrey here am I come, Sent by the kynges Maiestye, Iustyce to do: Te iug Iniquitie bayly rr come in,  iudge ir∣eth dow Chiefly to procede in iudgement of a Felon, I tary for the verdite of the quest re I go. Go baily, know whether they be all a greed or no If they be so, byd them come away And bring their prisoner, I wold hear what they say I go my Lord, I go, to soone for one, He is lyke to play a cast, wil breake his necke bone, I beseche your lorshyp be good to hym, The man is come of good kynne If your Lordshyp would be so good to me, As for my sake to set hym free, He ellet hym in h eare the  may heare I could haue .xx. pount in a purse, Yea, and your Lordshyp a right faire horse, Well worth ten pound. Get the a way thou hell hound, Daniel t iudge. If ye were well examined and tried, Iniquitye goeth ouer ye iudge keth styll Perchaunce a false knaue ye would be spyed, Brybes (saith Salomon) blind ye wise mans sight That he can not se to geue iudgement right, Should I be a bribar nay he shall haue the law As I owe to god and the kyng obedience and awe. Iniqu Ye be tyed fayre ynough for runnyng away If ye do not after me, ye wyll be hanged I dare say They bring Ismael in bound pite a prysoer If thou tell no tales, but holde thy toungue, I wyl ethe at lybertye ere it be longe.
Though thou be iudged to dye anon, dge. Come on firs, I pray you come on, Be you all agreed in one? one of thē speketh for ye qest. yea my Lord, euery chone, dge. Where Ismael was intided by .xii. men, Of Felony, burglary, and murdre, As thinditement declareth, howe, where, and when ye heard it read to you lately in ordre: you with the rest, I trust all true men, for the st Be charged vpō your othes to gyue verdyte directly, Whether Ismael therof be gilty or not gilty, niqui. Gilty (my Lord) and most gilty, udge. Wilt thou hange my Lord, horeson noddy? niqui. The lorde haue mercy vpon the, udge. Tusshe, holde thy tonge and I warrant the Thou shalt go to the place thou camst fro, Tyl to morow .ix. of the clocke, there to remain, To the place of execution then shalt thou go There be hanged to death, and after again, Being dead, for ensample, to be hanged in a chain Take hym away, and se it be done, At your perill that may fall thereupon. smael Though I be iudged to dye, I require respite, For the kinges aduantage in thinges I can recite, niqui. A way with him he wyll speake but of spyte, udge. well we will heare you say what you can. But se that ye wrongfully accuse no man, smael I wyll be lye no man, but thys I may say, Here standeth he that brought me to thys waye: niqui. My Lorde he lyeth like a dampned knaue, The feare of death doth make hym raue, Ismael His naughtye company and playe at dice,
Dyd me first to stealyng entice. He was wt me at roberies, I say it to his face, yet can I say more in tyme & space, Iniqu Thou hast said to much, I beshrew thi horsons face Hange him my Lord, out of the way, The thief careth not what he doth say Let me be hangman, I wil teathe him a sleight, For feare of talkyng. I wil strangle him streight, Tary here that lyst, for I wyl go. he would go. Iudg No no my frend, not so, I thought alwayes ye should not be good, And now it wil proue, I se by the rood, They  him in al¦ter he figteth wt th Take him and lay him in yrons stronge, We wil talke with you more ere it be longe, Iniqu He that layeth handes on me in this place, Iche lay my brawlyng yron on his face: By gogs bloud I defye thy worst, If thou shouldest hange me I were a curst. I haue bene at as low an ebbe as this, And quyckely a loft again by gisse: I haue mo frendes then ye thynke I haue, I am entertained of all men lyke no slaue: Yea, within this moneth I may say to you, I wyl be your seruaunt, and your maister to. ye, crepe into your brest, wyl ye haue it so? Iudge A way with them both, leade them away, At his death tell me what he doth say, For then be lyke he wyll not lye, Iniqui I care not for you both, no not a sly: they lead thē out. Iudge If no man haue here, more matter to say I must go hence some other way. he goeth out Worldly shame. Hah ha, though I come in rudely be not agast, I must worke a feate in al the hast.
I haue caught two byrdes, I wyll set for the dame, If I catche her in my clutche, I wyl her tame. Of all thys while know ye not my name? I am right worshipfull maister wordly shame, The matter that I come now about, Is euen thys, I put you out of dought. There is none Xantippe, a curst shrew, I thynke al the world doth her knowe, Suche a iade she is, and so curst a quene, She would out scold the devils dame I wene. Sirs thys fine woman, had babes three, Twayne the derest darlinges that might be, Ismael and faire Dalila, these two, With the loute Barnabas, I haue nothyng to do. Alwas good, that these tidlynges do might, Sweare, lye, steale, scolde or fight: Cardes, dyce, kysse, clippe and so furth, All this our Mammy would take in good worth. Now sir, Dalila my daughter is dead of y• pockes And my son hanged in chaynes, & waueth his lockes These newes wil I tel her, and the matter so frame That she shal be thyne owne mayster worldly shame, Hah ha ha. Xātippe ommeth in Peace, peace, she comweth hereby, I spoke no word of her, no not I, Oh Mestres Xantippe, I can tell you nedes, The fayre wenche your dere daughter Dalila, Is dead of the pockes, taken at the stewes, And thy sonne Ismael, that preaty boy Whom I dare say you loued very well, Is hanged in chaynes, euer man can tell. Euery man saith thy daughter was a strong whore
And thy sonne a strong thief, & a murderer to It must nedes greue you wonderous sro, That they died so shamefully both two: Men wyl taunt you and mock you, for they say now The cause of their death, was euen verye you Xātippe I the cause of their death? She wold sowne Worldly shame Will ye sowne, the deuyl stop thy breath? Thou shalt die (I trow) with more shame I wyl get me hence out of the way, If the whore should dye, men would me blame That I killed her, knaues should say. Exit. Xātippe Alas alas, and weale away I may curse the time that I was borne, Neuer woman had suche fortune, I dare say, Alas two of my chyldren be forlorne. My faire daughter Dalila is dead of the pockes, My dere sonne Ismael hanged vp in chaynes, Alas the wynd waueth his yelow lockes, It fleaeth my heart, and breaketh my braynes. Why should god punish & plague me so sore? To se my children dye so shamefully, I wil neuer eate bread in this world more wt this knife wyl A sley my self by & by She wold stick her self a with a knife. Beware what ye do, fye mother fye Barna∣bas. Wyl ye spyl your selfe for your own offence And seme for euer to exclude gods mercy, God doth punysh you for your negligence: Wherfore take his correction with pacience, And thanke him hertely, that of his godnes He bringeth you in knowledge of your trespas. For when my brother & sister were of yonge age, You saw they were geuen to ydlenes and play,
Would apply no learnyng, but liue in outrage, And mencomplagned on them euery day. Ye winked at theyr faultes, and tidled them alway. By maintenaune they grew to mischief and yll, So at last gods Iustice did them both spill. In that god preseruerued me, small thanke to you If god had not geuen me speciall grace, To auoyd euil, and do good, this is true, I had liued and dyed in as wretched case: As they did, for I had both suffraunce and space, But it is an olde prouerke, you haue herd it I think That god wyl haue se, shall not wynke. Yet in this we may al take comfort, They toke great repentaunce I heard say, And as for my sister, I am able to report, She lamented for her sinnes, to her dyng day: To repent and beleue I exorthed her alway, Before her death she beleued that god of his mercy For Christes sake, would saue her eternally. If you do euen so, ye nede not despaire, For god will frely remitte your sinnes all, Christe hath payed the raunsom, why shuld ye fear. To beleue this and do well, to god for grace call. All worldly cares let passe and fall, And thus comfort my father, I pray you hertely, Xātippe oeth ote, I haue a lytle to say, I wyl come by and by. Right gentle audience, by thys Interlude ye mayse How daungerous it is, for the frailtye of youth, Without good gouernaunce, to lyue at libertye, Suche chaunces as these, oft happen of truth Many miscary, it is the more ruth, By negligence of their elders, & not taking payne.
In tyme good learnyng & qualities to attayne. Therfore exhortyng al parentes to be diligent, In bringing vp their children, yea to be circumspect Least they fall to euill, be not negligent, But chastice them before they be sore infect: Accept their well doing in yll them reiect, A yonge plant ye may platte & bowe as y wyll, Where it groweth strong, there wyll it abyde styll Euen so by chyldren, in theyr tender age, Ye may worke them like waxe to your own entent But if ye suffer them longe to liue in outrage They wil be sturdy and stiffe, and will not relent: O ye chyldren, let your tyme he well spent, Applye your learnyng and your elders obey, It wil be your profit an other day. Now, for the Quenes Royal maiestie let vs pray, He knele downe That god (in whose handes is ye hert of al Quenes,) Maye endue her highnes wt godly puissance alwaye that her grace may long raign & prosper in al things In gods word & iustice may giue light to al Quenes Let vs pray for the honorable councel & nobilitie, that they may alwayes coūsel in wisdō wt trāquility, He make curesy a goeth out ¶God saue the Quene, the Realme and cominaltie. ¶Finis.
¶A songe. reyng answea∣g other talwaies iii. staffe ysing to∣ther.¶It is good to be mery, But who cam me mery? He that hath a pure conscience, He may well be mery. ¶Who hath a pure conscience tel me? No man of him self, I ensure the, Then must it folow of necessitie, That no man can be mery. ¶Puritie it selfe may purenes geue, you must aske it of God in true beleue, Then wyl he geue it, and none repreue, And so we may be mery. ¶What is the practice of a conscience pure? To loue and feare God, and other allure, And for his sake, to helpe hys neighbour, Then may he well be mery. ¶What shall he haue, that can and wil do this After this life, euerlasting blisse, yet not by desert, but by gyft ywisse, There god make vs all mery. ☞Finis. Imprinted at London, in Paules Churche yearde at the Sygne of the Swane by Iohn Kyng.
