26135 S106617 99842330 6975
A briefe re∣hersal of the death resur∣rectiō, & ascention of Christ, gathered together oute of ye foure Euangelistes and Actes of the Apostles by the most godly and great learned man Hul∣driche Zuinglius, written first in Latin, and now trāslated into Eng∣lishe, that such as vnderstande not the Latin tongue should not wante the vse of so worthy and pro∣fitable a treatise. ¶Perused and allowed according to the order appointed in the Quenes maiesties Iniunctions. decorative woodcut title page border
❧The preface and intro∣duction into the history of the Passion and death of Christ. AMong all the histories (gentle reader) that any time haue bene written frō the beginning of the world vnto this present was there neuer any to be compared to the historie of the Passion, resurrec∣tion, and ascension of Christ, written most exactly by ye foure Euangelists, albeit dispersed and in sondry places, and aptely not without great trauell and payne gathered in due order by ye most godly & wel learned man Zuin∣glius, with certaine briefe annotatiōs and many wholesom & godly instruc∣tions and declarations of the harder places adioyned vnto it by the same man for the easier vnderstanding to ye reader, which history as it is most cer∣taine and true, for that no percel ther∣of was written but by the holy ghoste
(although he vsed men as instrumēts therunto) which onely is truth, & frō whom proceadeth nothing but truth. So by it is sette forthe vnto vs the springe and ground of our saluation, namely the passiō and death of Christ the price of our redemption, the onely pacifieng of the wrath of god towarde vs, & way to eternal ioy which Paule affirmeth to be great and wonderful & such as neither eye hath sene, neither eare hath heard, nor heart can imagin but what shal I nede now to make a∣ny lōg or further declaratiō either of ye certaintie therof, wherof no christiā man hauing ye feare of god before his eies hath euer douted: or of the cōmo∣ditie comming vnto vs by the same, whiche is so amply and manifestly set forth in the treatise it selfe. But for as much as it is writtē in a strāge tonge namely in latin which ye multitude of our countrey vnderstand not, and al∣so (which is much to be lamented) ma∣nie
of these which are in place of tea∣chers, such is the infelicitie of this our time, lest these I say shuld vtterly wāt the vse of so fruitefull a worke, I was moued and thought good both for the aduaūcement of the glory of god, and also for our brethrens farther encrease of knowledge, to bestow some labour at such conueniēt leasure as I coulde well spare, to turne it into our Eng∣lish tongue plainly and truly without all arte or eloquence, as one tendyng nothing els but the endes aforesaide, which if I obtein, I shal accompt my labours right wel bestow∣ed, minding also farther to trauail in the same kind of labor, if I shall se by this that my labour hath bene pro∣fitable.
FOr as much as the deathe of Christ is the lyfe of all the e∣lecte, it behoueth therfore to know by what meanes it is made our saluation, which in it self cannot be but saluatiō: For Christ (as Simeon de∣clareth) as he is set for the rising of many,Luke. ii. so is he agayne set for the fall of many, And this commeth to passe (which oftētimes hapneth) that that which is geuen vnto vs for a reme∣dy against poyson, by our vice is turned to be nomand destructiō. There be which do think vpon the crosse and death of Christ our saui∣oure after a certaine kynde of carnall affecti∣on thinking thei haue done their duety excel∣lētly wel, & that they haue done god high ser∣uice if so be yt thei haue euery yeare a certaine grief with Christ dieng, & that they witnes ye same with teares. Those ought to remember that Christ desired the women not to weepe for his sake,Luke. xxiii. for he saithe, wepe not for me or for my sake, but he admonished thē, of the mi∣sery which shoulde come vpon them for their ingratitude and infidelitie, and therfore he ad¦deth wepe for your selues, for the dayes wyll come. &c. I wyll not speake now of the ambi∣tion which we haue sought for in such fayned sorrow, for we would seme to be suche as wer heauy with Christ, when as in dede we were nothing lesse. Others minble vppe certayne colde praiers in memory of the passiō, others deuide the order of the passion for synguler dayes, or certaine houres, other some againe
doe abuse the same as it were by magicall en∣chauntments to their owne glorye and co∣uetous desyre, not sekyng Christ, but them∣selues, let vs rather thinke, or rather medi∣tate, and depely weigh & consider why Christ died: and here shal the vaynes of faith and cha¦ritie open themselues. God so loued the world (saith S. Iohn) that he gaue his only begottē sō for it,Ioan. iii. that whosoeuer beleueth in him shuld not perishe, but haue lyfe euerlasting. It com¦meth of a singuler charitie, that god doth geue his onely begotten sonne vnto the death for miserable and damnable seruantes, the which beyng considered, kindleth our hartes & bin∣deth vs altogether to god: and whatsoeuer o∣ther thing god hath geuē vnto vs besides him selfe, it would haue done vs litle good, yea al∣though he had geuē a most excellent creature it would not haue satisfied the fleshe, he gaue himself therfore to vs, in his sonne, that there by we shoulde nothing doubte of his loue and fauour, but he died that we mighte liue. He was nayled to the crosse, that he myghte de∣liuer vs for he hathe borne our synnes vppon his body,Esay. liii. i. Pet. il. and hath taken al our infirmities v∣pon him, by whose beating & whipping we ar healed. He is the price which was geuen for our redēptiō, by him our vnrighteousnes is put away. & blotted out before god. In hym the iustice of god is pacified, in him is life geuē to them which beleue. The meditatiō of these things will leade vs, not onely into the vains of God his goodnes, but also to the springs of our synnes. Let vs therefore consider this in
Christ, for what thing he was geuen vnto vs of god, wherfore Christ dothe not onely teache vs, that we shoulde thorowly acknowledge our selues vnrighteous and condemned, but also doth open vnto vs with the same, the bo∣some of mercye, as a most sure sanctuary, and doth also comforte the consciences which in a maner are desperate and heauy ladē with the burden of synnes, geuing vnto them which be his,Rom. viii. peace and tranquilitie. For what can he which hathe geuen his sonne, denye vs after∣ward? Let vs therfore first thinke vpon thys in the crosse of Christ, that is, Christ to be the price of our redemption, the sacrifice for sins, our satisfactiō,i. Cor. i. our righteousnes, life, holines, gate and way to god, the pledge of saluation & euerlasting life, the onely mediator, interces∣sor, and reconciler, by whome the way to god is made open, by whose death our synnes dye and perishe.Michel. v. i. Pet. ii. Hebr. xiii. Then let vs remēber, what this capitayne and emperour of our life dothe sette before vs, which is geuen vnto vs of God the father, not onely for a redemer, but also a foregoer and guide of the way, that we reiec∣ting all thinges, might follow his steps, and hauyng our eies fixed vpon him,Rom. viii. might folow him, without the walles of the castel, bearing the reproche which he had, we might be made semblable vnto the Image of the sonne of god vtterly denieng all vngodlinesse,Ad Tit. ii. and hurtfull desires,Rom. vi. yea denying our selues, let vs beare the crosse after him, being grafted in his deth, let vs mortifie the members which are vpon
the earth, and wheras before we haue set our myndes vpon vnrighteousnes, let vs now en∣deuour our selues to righteousnes and holy∣nes. Neither is Christ a painted or grauē ex∣ample and so dead, but a liuely example and of efficacy, which doth shine in the faithfull, and is expressed, and worketh truely, which dothe shew forth it selfe both in worde and in dede, and in the whole actions of the life, a liuely example I say, and such as expresseth all hea∣uenly vertues, as charitie, obedience, modesty long suffring, gentlenesse, patience, purenesse and constancie, then which example there is none more perfite or absolute, for what grea∣ter charitie can there be than for to suffer deth for his enemies? neither was this in his child¦hode, as the children were slaine of Herode: neither died he after the manner of the riche or honourable men, but he died a most filthye and vile death, that is to say, of the crosse, and that betwene .ij. theues. I meane he was put to suche a deth, as wicked & mischeuous men are, beyng counted for a disceauer. Moreouer Christ toke vpon him in himself, whatsoeuer is hard, vile, and troublesome in this world. This I say did Christ choose, and toke it vpō himselfe for vs, lest the flesh might haue any occasion of complaynte. Men wyl suffer any thing so that they may escape deth but Christ besides all euils suffred death, and that a most bitter deth, he despised whatsoeuer is great & precious in this worlde he chose and suffred whatsoeuer is vnpleasaunt and euill vnto the
flesh as pouerty, reproche, infamye, rebukes, blasphemies, stripes, bonds, woūds, & finally death, to thend that we mighte learne to de∣spise the world with all his entisementes, and to suffer all aduersitie for him with ioye. For we cannot approche to heauenly thinges ex∣cept we cast away & despise earthly things, he which loueth the world, cānot loue god, & he which despiseth the world & whatsoeuer is in the world sauoureth eternal things, & things of god. No aduersitie cā trouble or throw doū such a mā, no prosperitie cā puffe him vp, hu∣mility, obediēce haue nede of his exāple which being god, descēded, & toke vpō him our infir∣mitie, being obediēt vnto the father, euē to the death. By these thinges which we haue fore∣spokē I thik it is manifest inough, after what sort the deth of Christ should be meditated of vs, what is set before vs to be learned by the same, & what it is to haue grief wt him, name∣ly to follow his steps, which cōmitted no sin, neither was ther foūd any guilem his mouth which being railed on wt euil wordes,i. Pet. . replied not euil words again being troubled wt euils he threatened not, but referred the vengeance to him which iudgeth iustely, let vs also learn ye like things, that we may be strong without feare & cōstāt, & if any thing be to be suffered for Christ his sake, for the truth and for righ∣teousnesse, that with a couragious minde we maye beare reproches, rebukes, and deathe, that there be nothing so hard nothing so gre∣uous,om. viii. which we should not be ready to beare
for him. This is to bee made like fashioned vnto Christ, to suffer that which he suffered, to do that which he did, to glory and reioyce if any thing happen to bee suffered for Christ, for god forbid that we should seeke any other glory in this worlde,Rom. v. then in the crosse of our lorde Iesus Christ,Gala. vi. by whome the worlde is crucified vnto vs, and we to the world,ii. Cor. vi. ii, Cor. iiii. ii. Cor. v. whose markes lette vs beare in our bodies, in muche suffring, in afflictions, in necessities, in tribu∣lations, in stripes, in imprisonmēts, in sediti∣ons, in labor, in watching, in fasting, in pure¦nesse. &c. We are alwayes deliuered vnto the deathe for Iesus sake, that the lyfe of Iesus might be made manifest in our flesh. The loue of god doth constraine vs that we diligently weying this that if one man died for all men, then all we before were deade, and that one died for all, yt they which liue hereafter might not liue to themselues, but to him which died, and rose againe for them. Let vs neuer there∣fore be weary,ii. Cor. i for although our outward man be corrupted, the inwarde man neuerthelesse shalbe renewed euery day, for the smalnesse of our affliction which endureth but a very smal time, shall get vnto vs an euerlasting weight of glory aboue measure,i. Pet. iiii. so that in the meane time we regard not those thinges which we see, that is to say whiche dure but for a tyme, but those thinges which are not sene, that is to say eternall thinges. Wherfore seing Christ hath suffered for vs in the fleshe. Let vs also be armed with the same cogitation, that he
which suffreth in the fleshe hath ceassed from sinne, for this purpose, that now he shuld not lyue according to the lustes of the fleshe, the rest of the time which is in the flesh, but accor∣ding to ye wil of god, let it suffice vs that we al our life tyme before, haue liued accordyng to the manner of Gentiles, when as we were conuersant in wantonnesse, in lustes, dronkē∣nes, gluttony, bibbings, and bancketings, and in detestable worshipping of ymages, let vs not meruaile, as though some new thing hap∣ned vnto vs if that we be tried by fier, for this is done to trye vs withal, but let vs reioyce, that God thinketh vs worthye to suffer any thing for hym, and that we shoulde bee made parteners of Christ his afflictions, in the re∣uelation of whose glory, we shal also ioy with great reioising, if we suffer rebukes & slaun∣ders for the name of Christ, we are blessed, bi∣cause the glory and spirit of god remayneth v∣pon vs. For if we haue died with Christe, we shal also liue with him,. Tim. ii. Rom. vi. if we haue suffred with him we shal also raign with him & no man is crowned, but he whiche lawfully wrestleth. Let vs therfore suffer afflictiō as good souldi∣ors of Christe, whiche haue made promise to Christ in ye sacramēt of baptisme,b. xii. being apoin∣ted to go on his warfare & grafted in his deth. Therfore let vs not be wrapped with the bu∣sinesse of this life lette vs not be defiled with worldly desires, let vs run by patience in the battell which we haue set before vs, hauing an eie to Iesus which is the capitaine of faith
and finisher, who setting before himselfe ioye, suffred the crosse, contemning reproches and rebukes, let vs diligently consider that he suf∣fred such gainsaying of synners that we be∣yng weried in our myndes should not faynt. Let vs thinke how vile a thing it is to shrink away from such a capitayne, or for vs to bee so sluggish, when as he fighteth so strongly & so valiauntly. Let vs consider how euil it be∣commeth the members to be proud, high min∣ded and enuious, when as the hed doth so hū∣ble it selfe, and is so feruent in charitie. Let vs also weighe how great infamy it is for a capi∣taine, to take vpon him so many woundes & lastly of all death,ii. Tim. ii. Act. xiiii. Eccle. ii. Iacob. i. Ioan. xiii. & the souldiors to be a slepe and geue themselues to rioring, whosoeuer therfore will liue godly in Christ Iesus, must prepare themselues to suffer persecutions, and by many tribulacions, must striue to come to euerlasting life, they must abyde in the feare of god, and prepare their myndes to temptati∣ons, and kepe thēselues pure frō this world. Christ hath geuē vs an exāple, that we shuld do euen as he hath done. Luke. 22. ¶Now the feaste of vnleauened bread drew nighe which is called ye Passe∣ouer, namely after two daies. IT was commaunded vnto the Iewes that on the feaste daye of the Passeouer,Exod. xii. xiii. xiiii. when they did eat the lambe, they should eate vnlea∣uened
cakes 7. dais after, which figure Paul openeth in the 1. Cor 5 & sheweth that we must purge the old leauē, for that a littel leauē doth leauē al that is mingled with. It is meete for such as ar born of new by Christ to liue a new & innocēt life, that they may be as it wer a cer¦tain new dough & vnleauened. For our Passe ouer Christ (saith he) is offred vp a lamb with∣out spot. Let vs therfore celebrate this festi∣uall day, not with old leauen, neither with the leauē of malice & wickednesse, but with bread wantyng leauen, that is with sinceritie and truth. The Passeouer of the Iewes hathe a figure of the libertye whiche should come by Christ, for euen as in the old tyme god saued the children of Israel in Egipte frō the mur∣ther, with which the Egiptians were puni∣shed, namely whose doores were sprinckled with the bloud of the Lambe, and after that he led them forth with a mightye arme safe and sound thorow the red sea, and so deliuered thē from the most greuous yoke of Pharao. So also he saueth those by Christ whiche beleue, from euerlasting deth, and hath deliuered thē frō the power of darkenesse, trāsferryng them into the kingdome of his beloued son,Colo. i. by whō they haue redemptiō, namely remission of sin∣nes by his bloude,Iohn. i. and this is the cause why Christ would die at this time, that we might vnderstand that is that lambe of god, whiche should take away the sinnes of the world and they which are washed with his bloud shuld be safe frō the destroyer,Iohn. iii. for so God loued the
worlde that he gaue his onely begotten sonne or it, that euery one whiche beleued in hym might not perishe but haue life euerlastyng,Iohn. v for they which do beleue in Christe doe come vnto no iudgemēt or punishmēt but haue pas∣sed frō deth to life yea although thei wer dead yet shall they haue life in him which is the re∣surrection and life But where as Marke sai∣eth it was Easter, and Mathew,Iohn.  after two daies shalbe Easter, Luke expoundeth it and saith, the festiuall day of the Passeouer drewe ere, or was at hād, that is, it should be short∣ly. namely after ij. dayes. It is therfore a pre∣uēting of the time. But the feast of the Passe∣ouer by Iohn, doth seme to be the day follow∣yng the eatyng of the Lambe. So the daies of swete bread are put for the Passeouer, bicause they came both togethers. ¶Then the highe priestes, and the el∣ders were gathered together in the house of the high priest, whose name was called Caiphas, consulting to∣gethers howe they might take him and kill him by guile, but they fea∣red the people, and therfore thei said amōgst themselues, not on the feast day, lest peraduēture there be a com¦motion made by the people. THen this woorde, then, is not referred vnto the time in the whiche he speaketh these thinges, but to the tyme wherein
they were gathered together. The audacitie of the flesh is here to be noted: which whē it goeth about to lye in wait against the truth, it consulteth diuers wayes, and in those coun∣sels choseth and obserueth occasion and tyme for the purpose. Wherfore then they lay theyr heds together, when as the people were busi∣ly occupied in preparyng of the lambe. They which resist the truth, do assemble & lay theyr wittes together,Psal. ii. against their lord to destroy him bicause he was contrary to their works. They inuente diuers causes to accuse hym withal, knowing that as sone as he were takē all the people woulde forsake him. But howe impudent so euer the flesh is, it feareth neuer∣thelesse, where as nothing is to be feared. For whē they had agreed that he should not be ta∣kē on the festiual day, yet neuerthelesse by the ordināce of god, he was takē on the feast day, & that without any vprore: & yt hapneth oftēti∣mes vnto the wicked, which they feare, yea & which they seke by al means possible to auoid. This we may perceaue in ye coūsel of Caiphas who thought it better, that one should be takē away, thā that the whole natiō should perish, and furthermore if Christ should be taken a∣way, to take hede that the Romanes shoulde not oppresse them. But whilest these folishe men do auoyde one vice, they runne into the contrary. The Iewes hoped that if Christe were rid out of the way that then the people wuld forsake him, but after the deth of Christ many more beleued & came vnto Christe, thā
there did before, when as in one daye manye thousandes receaued the faithe. They feared lest if Christ liued the Romanes would haue taken away their countrey and nation, which hapned vnto them 40. yeares after. So God derideth the counsels of the vngodly, & bryn∣geth to passe that they are snared and takē in their owne counsels. And the selfe same thing in our dayes, doth the Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishoppes, the Monkes, and euill sena∣tors, but they hide their counsels, yea they a∣dorne them with the title of honesty & religiō. ¶And Sathā had entred into ye hart of Iudas Iscariot which was one of the xii. & he wēt his way to the chief priests & magistrates, euē with this mind to betray him vnto thē. He al so bargained with thē how he might betray him vnto them, saieng: what will ye geue me, and I will deliuer him vnto you▪ And they hearyng this wer glad, and bargained with him, promising to geue him xxx. syl∣uer pieces. When he hadde therfore promised this vnto them, he sought occasion & opportunitie, to delyuer him vnto them without a tumulte. THe Euangelist Iohn reherseth by occasi∣on, what moued Iudas to betray Christ,
forsoth bicause he was sory that he hadde lost parte of the money, of the price of the oynte∣ment which Mary had powred vpon Christ. Wherfore this most couetous mā wuld satis∣fie this losse an other way. He describeth ther¦fore the Supper whiche was prepared for Christ in the house of one Simō, and besides that, he declareth the thinges that were done there. If any man thinke it good, he may ad∣ioyne that history vnto ours, we studieng to be briefe haue onely taken but a few necessa∣rye thinges. Mathew who also by the way maketh mention of this cause, saieth that the disciples did murmure, which seemeth to bee spoken by the figure called Synecdoche, for Iohn saith by expresse wordes, that Iudas was angry, and that he alledgeth the care of the poore, to bee the cause of his anger when in dede he nothing cared for the poore, but lu∣cre and gayne moued him, for he was a thiefe and bare the bagge, he couereth his couetous∣nesse with a shew of liberality and mercy. So do they which say they do defend the olde re∣ligion. They make a shewe as thoughe they sought to defend the honour of God, the wor∣shipping of sainctes, and the authoritie of the sacramentes. &c. Let vs learne to what incō∣uenience couetousnesse and studieng for mo∣ney doth driue a man vnto, we do all condēne and curse Iudas, but we should see, whether we be not also lyke vnto him, which do scrape vnto our selues richesse by hooke or crooke, we lye, deceaue, and forsake iustice. But they
are a great deale more hurtfull which vse dis∣ceite in ecclesiasticall goods, and suche goods as bee dedicated to the poore. Their myndes were now readye on euery side to the matter they wente aboute, beyng moued thereto by enuy, and couetuousnesse of gayne. For suche is our nature, that we bee all more prompte and redy in priuate matters than in common and this commeth to passe, bicause all oure thoughtes, all our counsels, and all that euer we can do, tende onely vnto this end that we may enriche our selues, and for the same we study both dai and night. Seing therfore that all our cogitations and reasons serue for thys purpose, that is to keepe and seeke our owne thinges, it is no maruell thoughe we bee no∣thing attentife about those thinges whiche appertaine vnto the common profitte, and bi∣cause the fyre of loue is wholly tourned vp∣pon oure selues, it canne not put forthe anye flame towardes our neighbour, and it is not possible for vs to seeke the glorye of GOD from our hearte, when we seeke oure owne glorye in all thynges. If the Maiestrate shoulde consulte, or deliberate at what price wyne of Heluetia shoulde bee solde, or what it shoulde bee esteemed at, euery one woulde weyghe and consyder wyth hym selfe ma∣nye dayes beefore, howe he myghte saue hys owne thynges, and augmente hys owne Lucre. And thereof commeth it that all and synguler beeynge compelled, doe speake and pronounce moste promptelye and diligentlye
in the senate. If we were as diligente and busye in publique affaires, and in matters of godlinesse and vertue, if we would so think of them daye and nighte, as we doe of pri∣uate matters, we should be then more profe and ready, when we should consulte of them. But alas, we are feble in these thinges, & we be slouthful, negligent, idle, and sluggish, see∣king our own things only, and not those thin∣ges which are of Christ, and this is the cause that they be so cold which are rulers either in religion or in common weales, hereof com∣meth so greate a number of wycked deedes amongest the people, for they whiche wyl bee riche,i. Tim. vi. doe fall into the snares of the diuell, and into diuers temptations, so that the sam may say that couetousnesse is the roote of all euils. The minde which is geuen to couetous∣nesse doth nothing that is righte and honest▪ for it hath shaken of the feare of god, and we¦ded it selfe to all mischiefe, but why goeth h to the high priests? when the euil will talk or haue to do with the euil, there muste com some occasiō and commoditie betwene. Ther is none of such an audacitie, which wil call a other vnto him, to helpe him to steale, of wh he is not persuaded before in his mynde, tha he is a thief, or els at the least, that he fauou¦reth thieues, and that he gathereth by certa outward signes, which do shewe for the wha the inward minde is. None will offer to de¦floure an honest matrone or a virgine, vnless there be some occasion geuen him by their ma¦ners
and gestures. If that the shamefastnesse of virgins could not be won by flattery, then would there none craue it so wantonly of thē. Therfore Iudas goeth to those whō he knew o be offended with Christe, he taketh counsell with those men, whose myndes were bente with hatred against Christ, whiche had con∣sulted a littell before of the death of Christ he had learned by many signes, that the priestes were such men, therfore he feareth not to goe nto them, but rather solliciteth them first be∣ore he was called of them, what will ye geue me? saith he. Oh what an impudēcy was this o these bouchers and thieues, which do exer∣cise and follow warrefare, which do take cor∣rupted bribes of straungers, are not ashamed o aske them of Emperours, kinges, & Prin∣es, yea and those whiche haue neede of them re not ashamed to thinke it lawfull, for them o geue them such bribes. But how such men re made companiōs and parteners with Iu∣as, the Euangelists do plainly declare, whē s they say that Sathan entred into the hart f Iudas, for when he doth once possesse the earte, he hurleth men hedlong into all mis∣chiefe. Therfore he beyng styrred vppe by the iuell and by couetousnesse doth meditate to etray his Lord and sauiour, yea such a lorde s had elected him to the Apostleship, whiche had made him ruler of his thinges and loued him excedingly, and when he hadde deuysed his mischeuous deede, he maketh meanes to accomplishe his wicked enterprise, and dili∣gently
executeth the same he woulde haue it done without tumult, that many shoulde not haue knowledge thereof. For Iudas soughte oportunitie to take him at such a tyme and in such a place whereas multitude of the people which did vse to followe Christ verye often, might not be with him. ¶Beefore the feaste of the Passeouer, when Iesus knewe that his howre was come, that he shuld depart out of this world vnto the father, for as much as he loued his owne whiche were in the world, vnto the end he loued them. I Told you before that Iohn toke the Passe ouer, for the day folowing the eatyng of the Lambe: the Euangelist dothe Rhetorically amplify the excellēcy of Christ, that his low∣lines might ye more depely be knowē. He (sai∣eth Iohn) which knew al thinges, he whiche knew the houre of his death, he to whom the father had geuen all thinges into his hands, which came from god. &c, He I say washet the feete of his disciples. Let all prophets, by∣shops, gouernors of common weales, and lea∣ders of the people learne of this teacher, fayt loue, & care towards those whiche are cōmit∣ted vnto them. Christ loued his euen to th death, he neuer forsaketh them, he neuer cea∣seth, after he had once begun to loue them, h
was obediēt vnto the father euen to the death, that he might set before vs an example of hu∣militie and weldoyng. &c. ¶Now on the first day of the feaste of vnleuened bread, the disciples came vnto Iesus, saying vnto him where wilte thou that we prepare for thee the Passeouer? & he said, go into the city, & prepare for vs to eat ye Passe∣ouer there but they said, where shal we prepare? Iesus aunswered, goe into the city vnto a certain man, be∣hold there shall meete you entryng into the city a mā bearing a pitcher of water, follow this man into the house wherin he entereth, and saye you to the good man of the house. The maister sendeth vnto thee, my time is at hand, that I should eatin thy house the Passeouer wyth my disciples, wher is the lodging, wher I shall eate the Passeouer with my disciples? And he will shew you an vpper chāber, which is large, trim∣med and prepared, there make it re¦dy for vs. So his disciples wente forthe, and came to the city & found as he had saide vnto them, and they made ready the Passeouer.
NOthing is done here by chance, nothing is done rashly all things are foresene and ordained by the prouidence of God, with∣out beginning. All thinges are gouerned by his counsell and will. These thinges are ther∣fore writtē by the Euangelist, that we might vnderstand, that Christ was not compelled to die by violence or of necessitie, but of his own free will and by the wyll of the father, and bi∣cause that all the shadowes of the old Testa∣ment vanished away in Christ, it is declared also that Christ is that Lambe which is pre∣figured in the old Testament, as Paule tea∣cheth in the 1. Cor. 5. ca. But this word Passe ouer is taken diuers waies, sometymes pro∣perly for that passing or slippyng ouer of the Angel in Egipt, whē as he slew the firste be∣gotten of the Egiptians, but spared the Isra∣elits, vpon whose dores the bloud of the lamb was sprinckeled, sometimes it is takē for the festiuall day it selfe, and sometimes for the lāb which is killed and that by denominacion, as here when he saieth to kill, to eate or prepare the Passeouer. So this worde Passeouer is put for the Lambe, & agayn the Lambe is cal∣led the Passeouer,Gen. xvii. when as it was only but a memoriall of the passing ouer. So the breade is called afterwards the body of Christ, whē as it is but the token of the body, & circumci∣sion is called the couenaūt,Gen. xvii. of the which coue∣naunt it was but the signe. We learne here the pouerty of Christ, who not hauing where to put vnder his head, is cōpelled to prepare
his supper with hys disciples in other folkes houses after the manner of the poore. ¶And when euen was come, Iesus came with the xii. and when it was time he sate doune, and the xii. with hym, and he said vnto them, I haue earnestly desyred to eat this Passe∣ouer with you before I suffer. For I say vnto you, henceforthe I wyll not eate of it any more, vntill it bee fulfilled in the kingdome of God, and as they wer eating. Iesus toke the bread, & geuing thankes, brake it, and gaue it to his disciples, say∣eng. Take and eate this is my body which shalbe geuen for you, do this in remembraūce of me, and taking the cup he gaue thankes, and sayd, Take this and deuide it amōg you, this cup is the new testament tho∣rowe my bloud, whiche is shed for you, for I saye vnto you, that after this I wil not drinke of this fruite of the vyne, vntill that day, when I shall drinke it new with you in my fathers kyngdom, & they al dranke of it.
JT is exactely described of all the Euange∣listes, how Christ did institute the sacramēt of his body & bloud after ye figuratiue supper yt he might declare, that the figures of the old testament were accomplished and finished in him, and that all thinges were renewed, that they mighte haue in memory his wonderfull great benefit geuen them in the crosse, no lesse thē the old fathers had in eating of the Passe∣ouer, that the newe might be agreable to the olde, and that light might succede darkenesse. He sheweth first with how great a desyre he did eate this supper with them, namely wyth a vehement and a most feruent desire: for this figuratiue speache in Hebrew is, I haue de∣sired, or in desiring, that is, I haue desired wt a wonderful & great desire to eate this Passe∣ouer, that is, this memoriall Lambe, and I haue no lesse desired to eat with you this new supper, in the which I commēd vnto you the memory of my deth to be celebrated of you for euer. For as often (as Paule expoundeth) as ye shall eate of this breade, and also drinke of this wyne, you shalbe myndfull of my death. Let the memory of this benefitte neuer slippe from you, let it neuer be forgotten, lette it al∣wais remain in your hearts. Let your mouth alwais declare and shew forth this, preache you this euery where, celebrate thys without ceasing, and geue wonderfull great thankes for this. For it is not meete that you shoulde at any time put in obliuion my deathe, seyng that I haue with so great a desire suffred deth
for you, which am so desirous of your saluatiō that I do euen geue awaye my life for you, I wll suffer my body to be nayled to the crosse as a sacrifice for your sinnes, and I will shed my bloud to wash you withall. I do so muche esteme you, that I am redy to redeme you by my death, from euerlasting death. I do set be∣fore you signes of this benefite and of this re∣demption, whiche being eaten of you shall re∣new the memory of me, vnto the which signs I gaue the names of my body, and bloud, that they might the more strongly moue your sen∣ses. My deathe is your lyfe, if so be that you beleue that by my death I haue appeased god for you, and that my bloud hath washed away your sinnes, this shall norishe and fatten you inwardly. This beyng weighed with a true faith, shall make mery and pacify your myn∣des. Take therfore and eate, do this in remē∣braunce of me, I go now from you, so that frō henceforth I shall not eate and drynke wyth you after the accustomed maner. I shall with my bloud being shed confirme that testament which somtyme I established with Abrahā, but after a new sorte, not by the bloud of bea∣stes as it was in the olde tyme, but by myne owne bloud. Neither shal my couenaunt stād with the Iewes only, but with al mankind. This worde braunche or fruite of the vine, is a paraphrases of wyne, and doth signifye not onely that to be wyne which Christ dranke in the cuppe and gaue vnto his disciples, but it also declareth, that it was bloud, but such as
came out of the vine, and not powred out of his body, as if a man would say: this is of the fruite of wheat, he shoulde by circumloqution signifie bread, and therwithall declareth, that it is not onely bread, but also it is bread made of wheat and of no other graine. For there is also bread made of Rye and of Otes. &c. And this emphasis haue all parephrases, and speci∣ally the Hebrew parephrases. So whē Christ calleth himselfe the sonne of man. Therfore he saith, henceforth I wil no more eat nor drink (wherfore it is likely, Christ him self also dyd eate and drinke) namely after this sort, but af∣ter an other sort and newe, that is to say after my resurrectiō, & I wil thē eat with you whē as you shall eate with me at my table in the kingdom of my father, but not after that sort as bodies are wonte to be fed, but in the state of immortalitie. Therfore the kingdom of god is either the time after the resurrection or els a more full knowledge of Christ,The king∣dom of God or els the e∣ternal life after this life, in the which the faith full shall eate and drinke vppon the table of Christ wiih Christ that most swete drinke of immortalitie as appeareth in the .xxii. chapi. Luke. As concerning the sence of these wor∣des of Christ, this is my body and of the foode of the soule, we haue spoken inoughe of, in an other place. Let vs not dispute how the bread is made the bodye of Christe, but lette vs ra∣ther remember the benefitte performed vn∣to vs by the bodye of Christe, that being in∣wardly satiated in our minds we may lift our
hartes to him which sitteth at the right hand, of the father, that is in a certain limited place in heauen, that we may loue one another, that we may liue innocētly, that we may geue thā∣kes vnto the Lord, and walk worthely in our vocatiō. To eate of the body of Christ is none other thing, but to beeleue that his body was geuen to the death, to make satisfactiō for our sinnes. To drinke the bloud of Christe, is no∣thing els but to beleue that Christ his bloud was shed for ye washing away of our sins: nei¦ther is there any other eating of the bodye of Christ, then that which is done by faith, of the which Christ speaketh in the 6. chap of Iohn neither can it be done of any but of the godly. But the eating of the simbolical and mistical bread, is common both to the godly and also to the vngodly, althoughe after a diuers sorte. For there be some which do eate the bread of the supper vnworthely, and drinke the wine vnworthely, and by that meanes do get vnto themselues death and iudgement, that is pu∣nishmēt. And those although they eat & drink with their mouth the sacramēts of the body & bloud of the Lord, yet neuerthelesse, they eate not the body of Christ, neither do they drinke his bloud, vnlesse they will make Christ a ly∣ar (which farre be it from the euerlasting and infallible truth) whē as he saith. They which eate my fleshe and drinke my bloud, abyde in me and I in them. There is none (I thinke) that will affirme if he haue his right wittes, that this agreeth with the vngodlye, but as
for the godly, they do not onely eat with their teath the signes, neither haue they are signs but besides the eating of the signes whiche is done with the mouth of the body, they are in∣wardly fed in their mindes with the body and bloud of Christ by the eating of faith, which faith the spirit of Christ kindleth within thē, at such tyme & as much, & to whō it pleaseth him. For the operatiō of his spirit is not boūd to the signes, neither is grace so put in them, that it shuld be brought vnto them as it were in a wagon, but Christ that chief and eternall bishop doth feede the faithfull with his body and bloud, the minister only administring the sacraments outwardly, vnto whome he set∣teth before their eyes, putteth in remēbraūce, and declareth the grace of god, he bringeth it not to them he geueth it not, neither doth he distribute it to thē. Therfore a faithful mind doth receaue the body and bloud, and hauing receaued it, the spirite of God doth with heat disgest it, & poureth it into the inwarde bow∣els of the soule, of the which springeth a mar∣uelous and inwarde refreshing vnto a godly mynde, when we celebrate therfore the Sup∣per of the Lord or thankes geuing, let vs re∣member that only sacrifice which was offred vppon the crosse with thankes geuyng. For we are admonished that by the flesh and bloud of the onely begotten sonne of God, offred vp∣pon the crosse for vs, we are redemed from e∣uerlasting death, and that the same are made to vs spirituall foode to norish and kepe vs in
euerlasting life, & for as much as Christ hath offred vp himselfe a most acceptable sacrifice for vs vnto ye father, in geuing his body to the deth, & powred forth his bloud to wash vs wt∣all, it is wholy our partes to meditate and to preache abroad, so great a loue, and so wōder∣full great a benefit, and to geue thanks for so liuely a death, and by that meanes our faythe will more encrease towardes God the father, also his loue, and good will towards vs will be more and more kindled. Moreouer we are admonished by this most holy Supper, to of∣fer and vowe our selues wholy bodye & soule vnto Christ for a sacrifice, considering that he hath suffred death to restore vs vnto life, and desire not to lyue nowe to our selues, but to Christ. Finally the remembraūce of the body geuē, and of the bloudshed, is therfore set be∣fore the church of Christ in the holy signes of the supper, that by the same it might more cer¦tainly receaue as it were a certain priuy tokē of her redemption, and might cal into memo∣ry, that we are so compacte by faithe into one bodye, that we are made the members of one head Christ. It is therfore mete that we bee bound together with a singuler charitie amō∣gest our selues, and with doyng good one to an other. Let the death of Christ therfore ne∣uer slip out of our heartes, let vs alwayes re∣member that Christe is wholly made oures. that we should also be his by faith and chari∣tie, and our neighbors by charitie, and let vs abyde in him by faithe, and he in vs by loue,
let vs do and suffise all thinges for him which died for our sakes. ¶And when supper was done, when the diuell had put in the hart of Iu∣das, Simon Iscariot to betray him Iesus knowing that his father had geuen him all thinges into his hā∣des, and that he came from God, & should go vnto God, he rose from supper, and put of his garmentes, and when he hadde taken a linnen towell, he girded himselfe with it, then he poured water into a basen, and began to washe the fete of hys disciples, and to wype them wyth the lynnen towell wherewyth he was girded. GOd setteth before vs in Christ an exam∣ple which oughte neuer to goe out of our sight, namely of all vertues. Let vs consi∣der his vnspeakable charitie, ioyned wyth a singuler humilitie. God therfore teacheth vs in Christ charitie, humility, liberality, gentle∣nesse, strength, long suffring, and constancie. Let vs do good vnto all men, both to our frē∣des, and to our enemies, neyther let vs looke for any other thyng for our benefits, then ha∣tred and most greuous persecutiō. Yet let vs
not in the meane while be drawne away from doyng good, neither let vs at any tyme cease. This is that which Paule saith, al that will liue godly in Christ Iesus must suffer persecu¦tiō. He which amōgest mortal men wil plan vertues, and set forth righteousnes, must put forth himselfe wholy to the hatred of all men, and must vowe him selfe for rightuousnesse, and euē as Christ could not be plucked away by no reproches or hatred,i. Thes. i from rightuous∣nesse and truth, from charitie and wel doing, but that he obeied the father euen to the deth, and constātly suffered whatsoeuer the vngod¦ly didde vnto him, & loued his so wel vnto the end. So also must al the godly do. They must constantly go forward to do good in the myd∣dest of all euels, neither must they faynt or be wery at any time as ouercome wyth the ha∣tred of euill men. Christ loued and did good e∣uen vnto his death, he serued and profited all men, and therby got nothing but extreme ha∣tred, and most cruell death. To departe out of this world, and go to the father, is a periphra∣sis of his death, as though he would say, Ie∣sus knowing that he should dye nowe, but as we haue tolde you, the Hebrew periphrasis haue great emphases, and are of more effica∣cy, than if the sentence had ben set forth plain∣ly and wtout figure.What is to dye. For by these woordes he sheweth & declareth a great consolatiō vnto the faithful, namely that the deth of the faith∣full, is no other thing, but to leaue the worlde nd to go to God. And is not this a great cō∣solation
to leaue the world, that is, al wicked∣nesse, all infidelitie, al labour and affliction, & to go vnto God which is the most good, and also the most louing father? who woulde not reioyce when he heareth this, that by deathe he is deliuered from al euils, and endued with all good thinges? And to the christians to die, is no other thing, than to leaue the world and to goe vnto God, whereas otherwyse if we shuld die without Christ, deth were the most terriblest thing that could be vnto all fleshe. The Euangelist therefore by these wordes doth make death pleasant and acceptable, and doth declare what death & also what the pain of sin is made vnto vs by the death of Christ, namely the end of all euils and the beginning of a new and euerlasting life. Therfore wor∣thely saith Dauid, that the death of the saints is precious in the sight of God, whē as in the meane time, the death of sinners is moste yll. The farther we departe from the worlde, so much the nerer we come vnto God. Agayne the more we come and addicte our selues vnto the worlde, the more we departe from God, betwene these two there is no meane, neither maiest thou cleaue to both of them, but in that the Euangelist doth say that the diuel did put this treason into the hart of Iudas, he doth it to declare that these wicked deedes and mis∣chiefes are done by the diuel, as of the author of them, that is to say by his instrumēts. For in dede there be in man certain good affectiōs created of God, but by mans faulte they are
corrupted and made euill, as the couetous de∣sire of thinges. These affections dothe the di∣uell snatche vnto himselfe, and draweth vnto hym whatsoeuer he catche, and vseth them at his owne pleasure. So that which is created good in vs of God, the deuill draweth to our destruction. He put of his garments. &c. It is a kind of speaking, which describeth the thing manifestlye, and as it were setteth it beefore our eyes. ¶Then he came vnto Simon Peter, and Peter said vnto him, wilt thou washe my feete? Iesus aunswered, what I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter, Pe∣ter said vnto hym: Thou shalte ne∣uer washe my feete. Iesus aunswe∣red: If I washe thee not, thou shalt haue no part with me. Simon Pe∣ter saide vnto him, Lord not onelye my feete, but also my handes and my head, Iesus sayd vnto hym. He that is washed hath no nede, but to washe his feete, but is altogether cleane, and ye be cleane but not all, for he knew which of them shoulde betray him, and therfore he sayd, ye be not all cleane.
HEre is set forthe in Christ an example of singuler charitie and humilitie, & in Pe∣ter the blindnesse and curiosity of humain wisdom. Christ perfourmeth the same in dede which he had taught in worde, for in the ele∣uenth chapter of Mathew,The submissi¦on of the mynde. he saith, learne of me bicause I am meke and humble in hearte, he therfore expresseth humilitye in him selfe, for what greater a basenesse can there be than for the sonne of God, and the Kyng of Kinges to humble himselfe to the feete of his seruan∣tes▪ Let vs hereby learne to throwe downe our selues, to attribute nothing to our selues and to boast nothing at all, yea and loke how much the more in estimation we bee, so muche the more let vs humble our selues. So sayeth Paul in ye xij to the Romanes & ij. to the Phi∣lippiās. But in Peter is declared ye stubborn¦nes of the flesh, which inquireth after captiue al things curiously, neither doth it obey God but his owne reason, but it should haue made his vnderstāding vnto the obediēce of Christ, Peter vnderstode what Christ would do, for he did se that he would wash his feete, but he vnderstode not what Christ mēt by this wa∣shing. Therfore Christ saieth, that whiche I do, that is, that which I entend, thou know∣e not, that is, thou vnderstandest not, thou perceiuest it not: we are so dul and so sluggish, that after we haue sene things done, it is lōg before we can vnderstād them, neither do we know what they mean? God oftētimes signi∣fieth by som outward thing, that which at the
first sight we vnderstād not, as we may easi∣ly see in the prophets by whō he declareth cer¦tain thigs by exāples, which afterward he o∣peneth & expoundeth. So in the supper he ge∣eth bread & wine that by these things & to∣kēs he might set forth vnto them the remem∣braūce of his death, he washeth the fete, not to hat entēt, that he wuld wash away the filthi∣nesse of the fete but that he might signify, that he only is he which should purify vs, settyng orth som higher matter, which may be mani∣festly perceiued by his answer vnto Peter, & by other wordes. For many haue and receyue parte with Christ, whose fete Christ hath not washed,To be wa∣shed, is to be¦leue truly. but no mā shalbe partaker of the glo∣ry of Christ, and of the life euerlasting, but he which shalbe washed wt the bloud of Christ & whose affections shalbe purged by his grace. Moreouer he commendeth vnto his disciples charitie, that one might helpe an other by mu∣tual loue, not only in washing of fete, if neces∣sitie so require, but in helping our neighbour in al things, but this is to be marked diligēt∣ly, that they which be faithful haue yet neede to wash their fete, that is, to wash away their daily fallings & to purge away the affections stil springing in the flesh which thing certaine not considering, haue come to that madnesse, and pride that they dare affirm themselues to be wtout sin, for al that Iohn saith. If any mā saith he hath no sin,i. Iohn. i. Rom. vii. he is a liar & deceiueth him self. Paul cōplained yt he foūd in his mēbers another law, repugning the law of the mind &
spirit. Or how can those men pray this praie euery daye, forgeue vs our trespasses, when as they acknowledge none? Christe therfore teacheth that the beleuers ar purified by faith that is to say, by the sprinckling of his bloud. Moreouer that they whiche are purified and cleansed, yet neuerthelesse haue nede to wash their feete, and that they are stil vnpure, last∣ly he pronounceth manifestly ynough, that al they be not cleane which are conuersaunte in the outwarde fellowshippe of the disciples of Christ. For he saith, ye be cleane but not all, meaning Iudas which was present amongst the Apostels in body, but his minde and hart was all one with the Pharises, wherfore to be washed or to be cleane, whiche are all one, is to beleue verely and without any dout that thou art washed and purified by the bloud of Christ.To wash the fete. To washe the feete is to acknowlege and confesse before God with sighing and de∣testing our dayly synnes, and then after oure fall to runne to God by repentaunce. For we can not passe thorowe this waye whilest we lyue here amongst so many enemies, without fallyng, it is so dirtye and vnplayne, and the weakenesse and slippernesse of the fleshe is so great. But howsoeuer the feete doe stagger, yet yf the head of fayth be safe, the matter is well inough. For the faithful can not be bea∣ten downe, by such fallinges, if the Lorde vp hold them with his hand. ¶After therfore he had washed theyr
fete, and put on hys garmentes he sate downe, and sayd vnto them a∣gayne, doe you know what I haue done vnto you? you cal me maister and lord and you say well, for I am so, if I therfore which am your lord and maister haue washed your fete ye ought also one to wash an others feete, for I haue geuē you an exam∣ple, that euē as I haue don, so might you also do. Verely, verely, I saye vnto you, the seruaunte is not grea¦ter than his lord, neither the Mes∣senger greater than he, which sente him, yf you haue knowen these thin¦ges, blessed are ye, if ye do them. THe lorde by this exaumple of humilitie and wel doyng, dothe put vs to shame for our hautenes of minde and coldnesse to do good, which as we gape for honour and riches, and do bragge of those thinges which we haue not. So also we dispise & neglect our fellow seruaunts neither do we onely neglect them but besides that we hurte them and do them iniury. Let vs therfore follow the exā∣ple of our Lord Iesus Christ. Let vs put a∣waye our hautenesse of mynde, lette vs caste downe our courages, let vs embrace our bre∣thren with feruent loue, let vs beare and suf∣fer the infirmitie and burthens of other men, being redy to submit our selues to all men for
hym which did so much cast downe hym selfe for our sakes. Let vs alwayes remember the Lordes commaundement of brotherly loue & liberalitie towardes the poore, for he wil haue mercy and not sacrifice. Christ in deede dothe prescribe vnto vs a most perfect forme of life,Ose. ii. yea & in maner impossible for vs to do whē as he saith, so loue one an other, as I haue loued you. How be it if we shall endeuour to follow the same, and if we shall attempt to folow af-his prescripte as muche as he shall geue vs grace to do, although we attain not vnto it (as we shall neuer do) yet he will gentlye forgeue vs our trespasses. It is not inough to knowe these things, and to heare them, or to preache them, but we must do them, that is, we must study and apply our selues to these thynges, we must exercise our selues in these thynges, and as it were contend with our neighbour in well deseruyng. So at the lengthe we shall proue learned and exercised in them. ¶And there was a greate contention amongest thē, which of them should seme to be the greatest, but he sayde vnto them. The kings of the gen∣tiles reign ouer them, & they which haue power ouer thē are called gra¦cious, but ye shal not be so, but let ye greatest amōgest you be as the lest, and the chiefest as he that serueth. For who is greater he that sytteth
at the table, or he which serueth? Is not he whiche sytteth at the table? And I am in the middest of you as he that serueth, and ye are they that haue continued with me in my tēp∣tations. Therfore I appoint vnto you a kingdome, as my father hath appointed to me, that ye may eate and drinke at my table, in my king∣dome, and syt on xii. seates iudging the xii. tribes of Israell, when I sēt you without bagge and scrippe, and shoes, lacked ye anye thinge? And they sayde nothing, he said therfore to them but now he that hath a bag let him take also a scrip, and he that hath none, let him sel his coat & bye a sworde. For I saye vnto you that yet the same which is written must be perfourmed in me. Euen wyth the wycked was he numbred, for doubtlesse those things whiche are written of me haue an end, and thei said behold there are two swordes, and he said vnto them, it is inough. VVHen as Christ teachest most humility, the flesh seeketh to be exalted and to be great. So corruptis our nature, that it
seketh nothing els but his owne, yea and thē whē as most ernest matters are in hād, Christ teacheth them to submit themselues to others to loue one another, to helpe one an other by charitie, and yet in the meane tyme they are not ashamed to reason, who shoulde be grea∣test, and this moued them to this question, bi∣cause Christ declared vnto them his deathe, but Christ putteth down with great grauitie ye hautenesse of mind, & exhorteth thē to sub∣mit thēselues, shewing thē who is ye greatest in ye church, namely he which submitteth him self to al mē & is seruāt to al mē. But bicause thei were elected to preach the word, he ther¦fore withdraweth their myndes from his hautenes, wt ye which the princes of the world are almost puffed vp. The princes of the gen∣tils,Prophane Princes. it is a kinde of speaking for the Princes of the nations, not they onely which gouerne the gentiles or infidels, as the chief capitains of the Anabaptists do expound, when as they go about to proue by the wordes of Christe, that a christian man ought not to be a Magi∣strate, but Christ by these woordes dothe not helpe their opinion, but rather subuerte it, of the which we will speake in his place. Christ doth fortifie before, the minds of his disciples, whom he had elected to preache the gospel a∣gainst the hurtfull affections of the fleshe, a∣mongest the which the study for honour & di∣sease of ambition, hathe no small power, the which if they once creepe into the heartes of prelates of religion, they bring with them in∣numerable
hurts. Neither is there any other pestilence more hurtful to the church, than the desire of ambition, pride and confidence in it selfe. For he is no true godly mā that trusteth to him selfe, and the apostels were sick of this disease, the Lorde permittyng the same, that they might learne by this, so muche the more to acknowledge & hūble thēselues. Therfore he saith, O ye my disciples ye ar not of the nū¦ber of them which are prnces & magistrates in ye world, you haue an other office apointed you. Princes obtayne their names according to their doynges, and haue in the meane time some dominion ouer those which are commit∣ted to their charge, That affection of domini∣on and principalitie ought not to bee in other kynges and princes, but rather they do gette thē names to be called gracious in deseruing well of their subiectes, as Euergetes, and the father of the countrey Abimilech. &c. And it is more often sene, that they do more oppresse their subiects, than ease them of their burthēs and although this be euil, yet neuerthelesse it must be suffred in them which haue dominiō in the world but not in the kingdome of hea∣uen. For when they take armour and dryue away the enemy and punnishe the euill, they serue also Christ with their sworde, when as neuerthelesse they are somewhat defiled, and haue some thing common with the busines of the world, so that they cannot be wholly with out dregges, and be alwayes bent to heauen∣ly thinges. But for you which are the lighte
of the world, being lightened of me which am the true light, a greater integritie is mete, & a greater purenesse, ye must shine aboue other in the light of faith and charitie, not in worde only but in example of life, let not your hartes haue a regard to earthly thinges, but beyng purged from the contagiousnesse of al earthly dregges, let them be caried vpward as it wer like fyre vnto heauenly thinges. Be ye ther∣fore far from ambition, from the desire of mo∣ney, and frō all those things which may wrap your mindes in earthly thinges. Se that you seke not gredily for glory & rule in the world, for I haue preferred you to the kingdome of heauen, that is to the preachyng of grace, and truth. Be ye not therfore bent to other things which might withdraw you from your office, let other men seke to be lordes, haue ye onely a care to serue others, that shall extoll you to the eternall ioy, and shall make you mightye in dede. Looke vppon me whiche came not to rule or to be greate, but I am rather conuer∣saunt amōgest you ministring vnto you as a most abiect seruant, and washing your feete, I haue lefte heauen and descended vnto you, takyng vpon me for your sakes all pouerty & affliction, why should you then be ashamed to serue others for my sake? It is a smal matter that ye haue abiden with me hitherto, & that ye haue cleaued vnto me, which neuerthelesse was not of your owne power, for ye haue not elected me, but I descending from my fathers seat haue called and chosen you, what good so∣euer
therfore ye haue, you muste not ascribe it vnto your selues, but altogether vnto me, lift vp your mindes to thinges that are to come, you shall not lose your labor if you abide with me, I will reward it to the vttermost, euē as you haue bene partakers of my afflictions, so shall you also be companions of my ioy, so that ye be constant in that which I send you about and apply not your mindes to other thinges. For it is not sufficient, that ye haue abiden wt me hitherto after a sorte, for they were but skirmishes, & sleight battails, but now there be greater troubles at hand. The time is now present that Sathan turneth al his force and all hys armour against me and you. Ye know that ye wāted nothing, when I sent you wt∣out thinges necessary for your iourney & also vnarmed, be ye therfore constant, and stande ye firmely, for such a multitude of wicked per¦sonnes shall come vpon vs, that it shall seeme that we haue nede of swords. For those thin∣ges which are written of me must needes be performed, and go ye forwarde without feare in preaching of the truth, I will neuer be ab∣sent from you, as I haue before defended you. I will prouide for you, and minister vnto you all such thinges as ye wante. By these wor∣des the lorde plucketh out of the hartes of the disciples, the affection of the flesh, wherewyth they were touched, and also he prepareth and encourageth them to battayles whiche were to come. For they should suffer greater thin∣ges after his departure, when as they should
stir vp by ye preching of the truth ye displeasure of all mē against them. Of the which euils he hath presētly shewed an exāple by himself de∣claring vnto thē & to all the godly, what they must suffer in this worlde for the truthe, and that there is a wonderfull great reward pre∣pared for them which continue vnto the end. But in that he sayeth, let him sell his coate & bye a sworde, it is a phrase of speache, by the which is signified a most great daunger to be at hand, as though Christ would say. If they rage so against me, they will not spare you, be ye therfore stronge and constante, for they shall so spoyle and kill you, that it shall seeme that ye haue nede of swordes, & yet he biddeth not them to fight with the sword, which be∣fore so diligently had forbidden them that they should not resist euell, and to turne the other cheke to him which would geue thē a blowe, yea and afterward he biddeth Peter (striking Malchus) to put vp his sword, neither cā the Papists proue by this an ecclesiastical sword and a prophane sword. Christ simply foretel∣leth the daunger which drewe nere to him & his disciples, teachyng by the way that they should ouercom and driue away al these thin∣ges by the sword of bothe the testamēts, that is to say, by the sword of the spirite. The men which followe the Apostels haue no neede of swordes, but if they shall diligently continue in preachyng of the truth, thei shal stir vp the swordes of al the wicked ones agaynst them, whom they shall agayne resist with the sword
of the spirite, and they shall ouercome in this battail the lord aiding them. ¶I speake not of you all, I knowe whom I haue chosen, but that the scripture might be fulfilled, he that eateth bread with me, hath lifted vp his hele against me, I tell you now before it be done, that when it shal∣bee done ye myghte beeleue that I am he. VVHen he had spoken of the washyng of the fete,Anagogi Analepsis Epanodo he ascendeth in the meane time by a figuratiue speach vnto the puritie of the mynde, and by the same very aptely en∣clineth his talke to the vnpurenesse of Iudas the betraier, and it is a repeticion or a retour∣ning. Election maketh the sonnes of God, but faith is the sign of electiō, for none haue faith but the elect. By these words he teacheth the hart of Iudas, for there be many alwayes in the church, which dissemblyng a faithe, being otherwise most wicked. Let these men thinke that they cannot hide themselues from God, although sometimes they deceaue men for mā seeth but the outward thinges onely,To lift vp the hele. God be∣holdeth & alloweth the heart. To lifte vp the foote or hele dothe signifye after a figuratiue kinde of speache, to lye in waite for any man, to offend, oppresse, despise or to hurte any mā and with the feete to make hast to accomplish
the same. The Germains vse the same kinde of speache. So likewise in the Psalme. Their feete make hast to shed bloud.To eat brad &c. To eat bread with any man, is to be partaker of his table. & also simbolically to be familier, and to be recei¦ued into a more frendeship. So Iudas was taken into the number of the Apostels, & dyd eate the supper with the Lorde, and yet thys vnfaithfull and ingrate man, was not asha∣med to betraye his lorde, whiche had done so great a benefite for him. By these wordes he doth make the fault of the betrayer more gre∣uous, but to that entent that by making men∣tion of his gentlenesse towards him, he might plucke him backe from his purpose. ¶When Iesus had sayde these things, he was troubled in spirit and sayd. Verely, verely I say vnto you that one of you shall betraye me, for the hand of hym which betrayeth me, is with me vpon the table. All ye shal∣be offended by me this nighte, for it is written.zach. xii. I will smyte the shepe∣heard, and the shepe of the flock shal be scattered, but after I am risen, I will go before you into Galile, but Peter answered & saide vnto him. Though al men should be offended by thee, yet wil I neuer be offēded,
Iesus sayd vnto him. Verely I say vnto thee, that this nighte, beefore the cocke crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. Peter said vnto him, though I shoulde dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said al the disciples: and the lord sayd Si∣mon, Simon, behold Sathan hathe desyred you, to sift you as wheate, but I haue praied for thee, that thy faithe faile not, therfore when thou arte conuerted strengthen thy bre∣thren. And he said vnto him, Lorde I am redy to go with the into prisō and to death. And he said, I tel thee Peter, the cocke shal not crow this day, before thou haste denied thryce that thou knewest me. Verely I say vnto you that one of you shall be∣tray me, and they wer exceding so∣rowfull, and beganne euery one of them to say vnto him, is it I lorde? & the disciples behold one another, doubtyng of whome he spake, and he aunswered and sayd, he that dip∣peth his hand with me in the dish, he shall betraye me. Surely the son of man goeth his way, as it is wri∣ten
of hym, but wo bee vnto that man, by whome the sonne of mā is betrayed, it had bene good for that man if he hadde neuer bene borne. Then Iudas which betrayed hym sayde. Is it I maister? he sayd vnto hym. Thou hast said it. Now there was one of the disciples of Iesus which leaned on his bosom, name∣ly he whom Iesus loued. To hym therefore beckened Simon Peter that he shoulde aske, who it was of whome he spake, he then as he lea∣ned on Iesus breast, sayd vnto him Lord who is it? Iesus aunswered it is he to whome I shal geue a sop when I haue dipped it, and when he had dipped the breade he gaue it Iudas Iscariot Simōs sonne, and after the soppe, Sathan entred into him. Then sayde Iesus vnto hym, that thou doest, doe quicklye, but none of them that satte at the table knew for what cause he spake it vn¦to him, for som thought, bicause Iu¦das had the bagge, that Iesus had sayde vnto him, bye those thynges that we haue neede of againste the
feast, or that he shoulde geue some thyng vnto the poore, as sone then as he had receiued the sop, he went immediatly out, and it was night. CHrist the kyng of the heauenly kingdome, which came to preache and offer the kyng∣dome of heauen to the men in the worlde (but yet to such as he had chosen oute of the worlde) which also hadde geuen in charge to his apostels to call all men to this kingdome doth first plucke out of their hartes all suche diseases which ought to be farre absent from the kingdome of heauen, namely the lustes of the flesh and of the world, to the entente that they which should teach others that kingdom might first expresse the same in themselues. For God hathe translated vs (saieth Paule) frō the kingdom of darkenesse,Colo. . into the king¦dom of his welbeloued son, into his wōderful light, that we mighte nowe be the sonnes of God, who renouncing the old Adam,i. Pet.  Tit. ii. and ca∣sting away all vngodlinesse, and worldly de∣sires, might lyue godly iustly and soberlye in this world, lookyng for that blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the great God, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christe.Heb. xiii For we haue here no abiding citie, but we looke for one to come, namely that heauēly Ierusalem, in the which we are appointed citizens, fellow citi∣zens with the sainctes and of the houshold of God,Ephe. . i. Pet. ii. but it is mete that they which be straū∣gers
and pilgrimes in this world, should ab∣staine from fleshly lustes, which fight against the soule, hauing honest conuersation amon∣gest the gentiles, that they which speake euil of vs as euill doers, may haue vs in estimati∣on for our good workes, and glorifye God in the day of visitatiō. In his former talk he re∣proued ambition and couetousnesse, now he re¦prehendeth selfe trust and desire of money, of the which the one was in Peter and thother in Iudas & the disciples. Peter not weigh∣ing his own strength promiseth greater thin∣ges than he can performe, neither doth he be∣leue the lord who admonished him of it, but despising all other, boasteth himselfe only to be strong, Iudas which had conceiued this hor∣rible mischeuous acte in his harte, dothe not heare the Lord which called hym backe from it. So plaieth our fleshe, when it is lefte to it selfe. No man acknowledgeth his errour, no man wil beleue him which admonisheth him. Euery man hopeth that he can be hiddē, whē as he is not called by name, howsoeuer his cō¦science withstand him inwardly. Christ assay∣eth Iudas diuers wayes to withdrawe hym from his pretence, in whiche the wonderfull gentlenesse and loue of Christ is to be marked who will not the death of a sinner, but that he should be cōuerted and liue but the more that Christ sheweth and putteth forth his louyng kyndnes, so much the more his vngodlines is hardened, so that he dare most impudently say is it I? Moreouer this most wicked varietie
dareth thrust himself into the holy fellowship and table of the lorde, not fearyng to lye vnto him which knoweth all thinges. So greate a thing is hipocrisie, and a harte possessed with couetousnesse. So in lyke maner dare we som¦times com to the holy communion with Iu∣das boasting our selues to be godly, when as inwardly we be most vngodly. And althoughe both Peter and Iudas fell either of them, yet great is the diuersitie betwene the deniall of Peter, and the betrayeng of Iudas. Peter be∣ing ouerwhelmed with a sodayne terror syn∣ned of feare and cowardnesse of mynde, but Iudas sinned of a pretensed malice, for the deuell had possessed his harte, Christ therfore saith that Peters faithe was not altogether gone, for althoughe he denied him outwardly with his mouth, yet neuerthelesse his hearte fell not from Christ, and god suffreth the god∣ly sometymes to slippe, that they may knowe themselues more throughly, and humble thē∣selues in mind, learne and acknowledge their infirmitie, and after their fall they may rise a∣gayne more strong and better couraged. Thei may learn to put no confidence in themselues, to be sory for other mens falles, and to be more carefull, and for that cause Christ saieth, and thou after thou art conuerted strengthen thy brethern. Sathan so stirred vp Iudas, as we haue heard before, that not onely he shroncke from Christ, but besydes that he betraied him to his enemies to be destroied, & here it is said that the diuell entred into him, after the sop,
which is thus to be vnderstanded, that the di∣uell which before had possessed him, did now more fully possesse him, and more vrge him to bring to passe the mischiefe which he had con∣ceiued. For euen as in faithe there are certain degrees, so also is there in infidelitie & breach of faith. No man is made most good vpon the sodayne, so no man is moste wicked sodenly, by littell and littell we slide into the pitfall, if we watche not, if we resist not the beginning and if we neglecte small matters. Our foote muste be plucked by and by out of the clay of synnes, least it fasten more depely in, we must streight way resist the affections, least they come to haue dominion ouer vs. Sathan sle∣peth not, he neuer ceaseth, but walketh about like a roaring Lyon, seeking where to get his pray, whom let vs resiste by faith, and he wil flye from vs. The lord is strong to deliuer vs out of the mouth of the Lyon, so that we flye vnto him by and by with our whole hart, and cast our selues all wholy vpō him with a soūd faith, let vs take hede of the meate and of the baite which that moste subtill enemye layeth for vs, lest when we haue deuoured it, we fal with Iudas into the euerlasting night. ¶And when he was gone Iesus said, now is the sonne of man glorifyed, and God is glorified by hym, and God shall glorify hym by hym self, and shal glorify him by and by. My
littel children, yet a littell while I am with you, ye shall seeke me, and as I haue saide to the Iewes, whi∣ther I go, ye cannot come, so also I saye vnto you nowe, I geue you a new commaundement, that ye loue one an other, euen as I haue loued you, do ye also loue one an other, by this shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, yf ye haue mutuall loue amongest your selues. Simon Peter said vnto hym, lord whither goest thou? Iesus aunswered hym, whither I go, thou cāst not follow me now, but thou shalt followe me hereafter. Peter said vnto him, lord why cannot I follow thee nowe? I wil geue my life for thee, Iesus aū∣swered, wilte thou geue thy life for me? Verely, verely I say vnto thee the cocke shal not crow before thou hast denied me thrice. WHen the betrayer was gone, Christ ma∣keth mention of his glorifieng not with∣out o, and reioysing of the spirite. Now is the sonne of man glorified. He speaketh of the thing to come and at hand as thoughe it were now past, that we might see the certein∣tie
of gods prouidence. The time is now pre∣sent that the sonne of man shalbe made noble after a new sort yt is to say, by his deth, crosse, resurrection, and ascension, and other thinges which folowed after the sēdyng of ye spirit, as miracles and the conuersion of the Gentiles. &c. For that cause saith Paule in his Epistle to the Romanes, that the son of God, whiche was borne of the seede of Dauid as touching the flesh, was declared to be the sonne of God with power, as concernyng the spirite of sāc∣tification, in that he rose again from the dead. And this power of ye resurrectiō, of the which Christ also speaketh here, shuld follow with∣in few daies after, which was not done by an aungell, or by any creature, but by the power of the father, as Paule witnesseth in the se∣cond of the Colossians, where he saieth. Who hath raised him vp. &c. Christ therfore sayeth and God shall glorifye hym. He also by these wordes comforteth the harts of his disciples who were not a little troubled now, bicause he had made mention vnto them of his death, as though he woulde say. The tyme is come that I shall accomplish the will of my father that is, that I shall dye, but by this my death my father shalbe glorified. Be ye not therfore troubled, ye shall see and that by and by what great glory my father will geue me. By these wordes we be taught not to be sorye, if anye troubles com vnto vs by the vngodly, for the crosse & also death get vnto the godlye moste great glory, when as nothyng can chaūce vn∣to
the godlye, whiche is not ordeined by the good will of the father, and whiche shall not bryng vnto them wonderfull greate glory. Furthermore the glory of God commeth by those thinges which we suffer for his names sake, and what is he that would not wishe to haue the glory of God set forth, yea euē with his owne hurt and danger? And when as hi∣pocrites do go away from the fellowshippe of the faithfull, then is the church deliuered frō a most great euill, so that the faithfull which desire to haue ye glory of god set forth, may wor¦thely reioice. And for bicause that Christ had foretold that such great euils shuld come vnto his disciples, and had shewed them the daun∣ger, which they should be in by the means of fals brethren, of whom Iudas went before as a figure of them, nowe in the meane tyme he comforteth and encourageth them, least they shoulde bee fainte harted, and discouraged, teaching them, by what meanes, they mighte stand stedfast, and to be safe againste all the e∣uils, which were at hand, namely by concord and mutual loue amōg themselues, as though he would say. Howe soeuer diuers tempestes do happē, how soeuer the vngodly rage against you, haue ye only a care for this, the which a∣boue all other thinges I geue you in charge, that ye be ioyned together amongest your sel∣ues with a feruent charitie. For so shall ye stand firme againste all the assaultes of your enemies, if ye be boūd with this bond no mā can hurte you. This shalbe the most certayne
signe, that ye be my disciples, if they shall see in you that loue which was in your maister. The boastyng and presumption of the flesh is sene in Peter, which that he might be takē a∣waye, the lorde suffereth him to fall that he might learne to acknowledge hym selfe, and to liue afterward in feare and with modestye. In the meane tyme we must mark the loue of God, which doth not altogether reiect vs, bi∣cause of oure infirmitie, but taketh in good worthe our folishnes, and turneth it to good, we haue of purpose left out that which Iohn writeth from the xiiii. chap. to the xviii. least our booke and those thinges whiche we haue expounded in Iohn should encrease to a great volume. They therfore which are desirous of the same, let them read them in Iohn and ap∣ply them to this place. ¶When Iesus had spokē these words he went out according to his accu∣stomed maner with his disciples o∣uer the brooke Ceder, that is to say into the Mounte Olyuete, where was a gardein into the which he en¦tred, and his disciples also and Iu∣das also which betrayed him knew the place, bicause Iesus had often∣times resorted thither with his dis∣ciples, and when he came vnto the
place which is called Gethseman he said vnto them, sit ye here, tyll I go asyde and pray, and he toke Peter & Iames and Iohn with him, and he began to be afraide and to be vexed & he said vnto them my soule is so∣rowfull euen vnto the death abyde ye here and watche with me, praye that ye enter not into temptation, and being gone forward a litel, and departed from thē almost a stones cast, he fel vpon the earth and being prostrate kneling vpon his knees, he prayed, saying, Abba father, all thynges are possible vnto thee, yf it be possible take away this cup frō me, neuerthelesse not my wyll, but thy will be done. CHrist had armed his disciples against the persecutiōs which were to come, and had taught them, wyth what swordes they should resist them, that is to say, by the know¦lege of both the testamentes, and by the sword of the spirite which is the worde of God, be∣yng a two edged sword and cuttyng on either syde, and percyng euen into the inwarde par∣tes, furthermore he had admonished them not to put any distrust of hys care and goodnesse,
for that hauing him for their defence and saue garde they shoulde bee euen as safe as they had bene alwayes beefore. For althoughe he should go from them as concernyng the body, yet for all that he would not forsake them, but be present with them in his spirite euen vnto the ende of the worlde. Moreouer he woulde pluck out of thē the affectiōs, with the which nature is defiled, to the intente they mighte wholly depend of him, renouncing the world, and applieng themselues to heauenly things. Now he setteth forth an example in himselfe, with what mynde, and with what constancy all the godly should receaue the crosse, he go∣eth forth against death that he might declare, that he died not against his will, but willing∣lye, and of loue, not dissembling in the meane tyme his infirmitye and feare, lest we should dispair if at any tyme our flesh should be made afrayde with temptations and daungers cō∣myng vpon vs, if it should bee touched wyth sorrow, or haue an horror of aduersitie, proui∣ded that we do not cowardly faynte and flee. For there hapneth also vnto the godly and cō∣stant men some feare of the flesh, but the feare of God which is in them, and their faythe to God, shaketh of and ouercommeth the fear of the flesh. This we see manifestly in Christe, who as he toke vppon him for our sakes, the infirmitie of the flesh, beeyng made like vnto his brethren in all thinges, so also he was not ashamed to confesse his feare and sorrowe to his disciples. That we might haue wherwith
to comfort vs in all temptations, and that we might know that God will not reiect vs. bi∣cause of the infirmity of the flesh, so that we fly vnto him wt our whole hart, and wt a perfecte faith. He was sory for vs, he prayeth vnto the father for vs, that we mighte learne by hym, what we shuld do in daūgers, and to whō we should flye vnto, he declareth hymselfe to bee man in dede, which is touched with the fee∣lyng of deth, neuerthelesse in the mean tyme, he consecrateth himselfe wholy to the wyll of the father, vnto whose will he submitted hys owne will. The selfe same thing must we do. when tempests do assayle vs, Let vs acknow∣ledge our own imbecilitie and let vs attribute nothing to our owne strength, neither truste to our selues, and howesoeuer the deuill, the fleshe and the world rage, howsoeuer the ene∣my oppresse and vrge vs let vs not for al that dispaire but let vs fall downe before our most pitiful father, lette vs desyre hys ayde, and lette vs vtterlye denye oure affections, and consecrate oure selues wholly vnto him,Math. x. let vs caste oure selues wholly vppon hym. It hath pleased our heauenly father, that this in∣firmity should abyde here in our flesh, that we should be put forth vnto many and diuers af∣flictions and oppressions, that we shoulde bee obiected to daūgers assailing vs on euery side no otherwise then whan shepe are thrust forth amongest wolues, that by these meanes, oure stubborne flesh might be at the leaste by some meane restrayned, and brideled with certayn
snafles, euen as a wilde and vntamed horse is, that we might learne to lyue alwayes in humblenesse and in the feare of the lorde, and when we are tossed wyth the oppressions of the worlde to haue oure whole regarde vnto him in whome onely we haue peace. Lette vs acknowledge the most good wil of our father in all affliction,Psal. lxv. and temptation, who leadeth vs through water and fyre, but to oure refre∣shing, who boyleth away our drosse in the for¦nace of temptation, that we be made pure ves∣sels to his glory and sanctifying of his name, let vs diligently weigh the profitte that com∣meth therby vnto vs here and in the world to come.i. Cor. x. And that our father is alwayes present with vs, neither suffreth he vs to be tempted aboue our power, but with the temptatiō doth also shew the end, either in geuyng strength & constancy in the battayle, and comforting our imbecillitie, or els surely in pluckyng and de∣liuering vs out of euils and daūgers. It is al together mete that we vtterly denying oure selues, doe sacrifice and consecrate our selues wholly vnto his will. To be altogeher with∣out the crosse it profiteth vs not, therfore our most best father leadeth vs betwene feare and hope, & laieth vpon vs a crosse, that we might not be caried after our owne luste, but mighte follow Christ his sonne which is our heade, & in all these thinges our mindes are heauy, so∣rowfull and moued with impatience, by reasō of the infirmitie of ye flesh, but yet in the mean time faith sustaineth this infirmity of the flesh
that it cannot altogether fal or faynte, and the power of God dothe more manifestly shewe forth it self in our weakenesse.How we ought to pray. whē as it doth erect & stay vs vp by putting forth his hand. Christ teacheth vs furthermore, wt what sub∣missiō of the mynd & of the body, wt what fer∣uentnesse, and with what gesture of the body we should praye, also what place is apte and mete for prayer, to whome we should directe our prayer, and in what sort it should be done and when we should pray &c. For althoughe the mynde of the godly ought alwayes to be bente vnto God, yet most of all when the ene∣my doth assayle it, leste it fall into an agonye, and the more we are greeued and vexed, so muche the more feruently must we geue oure selues to praier, and for bicause that prayer is an earnest talke of the faythfull harte wyth God, therfore we must chose out a litte place for the same, which maye be voyde of all con∣curse of people and noyse lest there should be any thing, be it neuer so small that mighte di∣sturbe a man or plucke him backe from God, but that the mynde may cleaue vnto God wt∣out seperation, & with how great a submissiō of the body a mortal mā should appeare before gods maiesty and the throne of grace, Christ doth manifestly declare in falling prostrate wt his body, & bowyng on his knees, & a feruent praier doth not only lift vp to god yt hāds, but also it lifteth the eies & the hart vnto god, that is to say vnto the hils frō whēce cōmeth help Besides this an ernest & deuout praier dothe
burste forth with teares out of the eyes, but also with droppes of bloud out of the body, as we maye see in the tremblyng of Christ. We learned therfore by our head, that we shoulde neuer dispaire of gods help, when temptatiōs do assaile vs, & not to fal when any pensiue∣nesse of harte or impaciēce commeth vpon our mindes, but rather run vnto God with a sure faith and declare vnto him our cause, to desire him to shewe vs how to come out of tempta∣tion, and to supporte our weakenes with his spirite. ¶Then Iesus came agayne vnto hys disciples and founde them sleping, and he sayde vnto Peter, Symon slepest thou? couldest thou not haue watched one hour with me? watch and praye that ye enter not into temptation. The spirit is redy, but the fleshe is weake. HEre is declared after what sort the frail¦nesse of ye flesh behaueth it self towardes the vnmeasurable & vnspeakable grace of Christ, and how vnthankful we bee for so great benefits, Christe prayeth and sweateth bloud wholly to aduaunce the saluation of his but they slepe soundly, forgetting their excel∣lente free promise whiche they beefore hadde promised. Christe therfore geueth them war∣ning,
to learne to know themselues, and to rū vnto God for strēgth. Our wil is oftentimes prone, and bursteth forth with a sodaine vio∣lence, but we are very slowe in performyng, wherefore Christ which knoweth vs, bothe within and without, teacheth modestye and putteth away all rashnesse frō vs, he teacheth vs to be myndefull of our fraylenesse, and to be seruente in prayer vnto the father, with∣out whom we can do nothyng and by whom we may do all things. Neither let vs cocker the flesh to muche least we should truste any thing in oure owne strengthe. The faythfull must alwayes stand girded in their standing, Sathan sleepeth not, no more must we slepe, but watche and stoutely resist, we are still in the battayle. All thinges are full of daungers and snares, we must not therfore lie snorting on slepe but we must watch & fight wt a feruēt faith and faithfull prayer. Christ also teacheth that when we haue finished oure talke wyth god, we should haue a regarde to oure neygh∣bors and chiefly the weake ones, to exhort and stirre them vp. From faith we muste returne to charitie and so like a circle from charitie a∣gayne to faith. For a man is not occupied al∣wais with one kind of busines there be cour∣ses of things. This sentence, pray that ye en∣ter not into tēptation is expounded two wais either that tēptation is ouercome by a fayth∣full prayer, the more ye pray, the lesse ye shall be tempted, or els that we shuld pray that the Lorde lead vs not into temptation, as it is in
the vi. chap. of Math. in the lordes praier, the spirite of the faithful being endewed with the spirite of God is ready, but the flesh hathe yet infirmitie adioyned which repugneth against the spirit. For the faithfull doth fynd an other law in his mēbers which repugneth the law of the spirite, howsoeuer the inward man de∣lighteth in the law of god, as though he wuld saye, ye haue promised many thinges, but ye performe littell. ¶And he went agayne and prayed the same woordes. O my father if thys cup canne not passe away from me, but that I must drink it, thy wil be done. And returnyng, he found thē on sleepe agayn. for theyr eyes wer heauy, neither could they tell what to answer him, and he left them and went agayne, and prayed the third tyme, the same woordes, saying. O father yf thou wilt, take away this cuppe from me, neuerthelesse not my will be done, and there appea∣red an Aungell from heauen, com∣forting him, and being in agony, he prayed more earnestly, & his sweate was lyke droppes of bloud, tricke∣lyng downe to the ground, & when
he had risen from prayer, and came to his disciples, he founde them sle∣pyng for heauinesse, and he said vn∣to them, what slepe ye? Slepe hēce∣forth & take your rest, it is enough, rise, watche and praye, that ye enter not into temptation. Beholde the houre is at hande, and the sonne of man shalbe betrayed and geuen in∣to the handes of synners. Ryse vp, let vs goe, lo he that betrayeth me is at hande. LEt vs aboue all thinges diligently weigh and cōsider the loue of Christ, who loueth vs euen to the death, being careful for the saluation of his, of whom neuerthelesse he re∣ceaued small thanke, he tooke vppon hymselfe whatsoeuer is contrary to the flesh, being like vnto his brethren in all thinges without sin. But in his most greuous daūgers he alwais runneth to the father, he imploreth him onely he looketh for consolation at his handes only, neither doth he in the meane tyme forget his, whiche were weake and feble and troubled, but goeth to se them agayne, comfortyng and strengthening them. Lette vs acknowledge that we haue nothing but fraylenes and syn∣nes, let vs set these thynges before the father and require helpe of hym, for he tempteth vs to that end, that we should runne vnto hym,
and cast our selues wholly vpon him, loking vndoubtedly for helpe for him. For euen as he was presēt wt his son, & sent his angel to cō∣fort him, so wil he alwais be presēt wt vs; so yt we cal vnto him for helpe, & shrink not away frō hī. We easily learn by the exāple of Christ of what force prayer is before God, when it is repeted wtout werinesse and feruēt. Wherfore the godly must alwayes watch and pray that we may ouercome the temptations which be at hande, and that we maye beware of them which be to come. Slepe now and rest, either it is a nipping taunte, or els a fatherly gen∣tlenesse in bearing with the weake ones. ¶Iudas then when he had receaued a hande of men, & officers of the high priestes, came thyther with lāterns and torches, and weapons, & while he yet spake (I saye) Iudas one of the .xii. came, and with him a greate multitude with swordes and club∣bes, beyng sent from the high prie∣stes and elders of the Scribes, but Iudas wēt before them, and he had geuen them a token saying, whome so euer I shal kisse, he it is take him and holde hym, and lead him ware∣lye. When Iudas therefore drewe nere to Iesus to kisse him, he sayde. God saue thee Maister and kyssed
hym, and Iesus sayde vnto hym. Frende wherfore art thou come? O Iudas betrayest thou the sonne of mā with a kysse? Thē Iesus know∣yng all thinges which should come vnto hym, went forth and sayd vn∣to them, whome seeke ye: They an∣swered hym, Iesus of Nazareth, Iesus sayde vnto them, I am he. Now Iudas which betrayed hym, stoode with them, assone then as he had sayde vnto them, I am he, they wente backewardes, and fell to the grounde. Then he asked them a∣gayne, whome seeke ye? And they sayd, Iesus of Nazareth, Iesus an∣swered, I sayd vnto you that I am he, therefore if ye seeke me, let these go their way, that the word myght be fulfilled which he spake. Of them whyche thou gauest me haue I lost none. AFter that feruent prayer, in the whiche as he had prayed that he might not fall into the daunger that was at hande, so also he submitted himselfe wholy to the wyll of the father, vtterly denying his owne wyll, he now sheweth his obedience and constancye
in goyng to meete his enemies, & that wyth wyllyng and redy mynde, as Esay hath pro∣phecied,Esay. liii. for no man coulde haue taken away his lyfe from him yf he himselfe had not wil∣lingly geuen it. Let vs also after oure prayer in the which we committe our selues to the father, and desyre his ayde, learne of our head stoutely for to fight, and to perseuer with sin∣guler patience in the battayle, nothing doub∣tyng but that our father will be present with vs his children, euen as he was present with hys sonne, remembryng this that it lieth not in our enemies power to oppresse vs. when they list themselues, but then only, when our father wil who hath care ouer vs. For the ene¦mye cannot hurte vs one whit, vntill God do permitte hym the same, as it is manifest by Iobs tēptation, but more manifest in Christ and his disciples. For how often woulde they haue put him to deth? and yet they could pre∣uayle nothing against him, before the howre appoynted by the father, yea and when they tooke Christ yet mighte they not lay handes on his disciples, ouer whome Christ hauyng a care commaunded them that they should de¦parte in safety. If so be it shall seeme good to our father to make vs pertakers of the afflic∣tions of his sonne, let vs diligentlye consider hys loue and good wil towards vs, who hath not spared his owne proper sonne but hathe geuen him to the death for vs. Why shoulde we then refuse to suffer and to be adflicted for hys glory. But let vs rather geue thankes to
the father who layeth vs forth with hys son to diuers temptations, and affections. For yf we haue bene pertakers of his death and pas∣sion, we shall also be pertakers of his resur∣rection. It we suffer with him, we shall also raigne with him. Let vs bee throughly per∣suaded of this, that our father doth so loue vs that he will suffer nothing to happē vnto vs which shall not be done to his glory and oure saluation, and that nothing can chaunce vnto vs against his will, whome to repugne or to be against is most ill for vs whiche be called and are the sonnes of god. Neither ought we only stoutly to go forward, and to receaue the daungers brought vnto vs for Christ, but we must also do it cherefully with mekenes, hu∣militie, obedience, suffryng and singuler cha∣ritie. This is to be marked in Christ, that he would not vse his owne power, by the which he might haue destroyed his enemies, which came vnto him, but he entertained them with most great gentlenes and loue, obeying the fa¦ther euē to the deth. So let vs also geue place to our righte and let vs not resist euell, but o∣uercom euell with good. Let our hearte be ar∣med with patience, feruente in loue, and en∣dewed with weakenesse, that in our patience we ma possesse our soules, how louingly doth he receaue the betrayer? howe graciously he speaketh vnto hym and calleth him friende? how gētly he vouchsafeth to kisse him, & how swetely he allureth his traiterous mind from his pretence to repentaūce? let vs diligently
marke in the example of Iudas besides those thinges whiche are spoken of beefore gooddes iudgement, and let vs learne humbly to think of our selues, and to stande before God wyth great feare and trembling. For let him which standeth (saith Paule) take heede that he fall not. There is nothyng safe from chaunce, no∣thyng is of all partes blessed, when as suche a great disciple of Christ doth fal, who can hēce∣forth trust to him selfe? Let vs beware of hi∣pocrisy, that we be not wolues amongest the shepe of Christ, and false brethren in the felow¦ship of the godly. Nothing is more contrary to god than hipocrisy and vnpurenesse. Nothing doth more alienate vs from God than doth the couetous desire of things. Let vs not therfore faynte from the grace of God, lette vs not slip away from so greate dignitie, as to be the son∣nes of God. Let vs not refuse the gatheryng together of vs, for what a foule thing shall it be, for to depart from the lyuyng God, from suche a most louing father, to fall awaye from so great a benefactor, and to ioin himself to be a souldiour of the Diuell, and to flee vnto the enemy of Christ? Ah how great an vnthank∣fulnesse is it, for them which be washed wyth the bloud of Christe, and sanctified with the spirite of God, for to ioyne themselues in fel∣lowship which the vngodly wicked ones, and to be made of the sonnes of God, the seruaun∣tes of Sathan? In that they come with wea∣pons, it is a figure of those whiche fighte a∣gaynste
the truthe by violence and not by the truthe. ¶Then they came and layed handes vpon Iesus & toke him, & whē thei which were aboute him sawe what would follow, they sayd vnto hym. Lord shal we smite with the sword And Iesus answered, and sayd, suf∣fer them hytherto, and beholde Si∣mon Peter one of them which wer with hym, stretchyng out his hande drewe out his sworde, and strikyng the seruaunt of the high priest, cut of his right eare, & the seruaūts name was Malchus. Then said Iesus to Peter, put vp thy sword in ye sheth, wilt thou not that I shall drinke of the cuppe which my father hath ge∣uen me? Put vp therfore the sword in his place. For all that take the sworde shal perish with the sword. Either thinkest thou that I cannot now desyre my father, and he wyll geue me moe than twelue legions of Aungels? How then shoulde the scriptures be fulfylled whiche saye, that it muste so bee done, and when
Iesus had touched his eare he hea∣led it. THe flesh is wonte in aduersitie not to rū vnto God, but to his own weapons, and this doth Christ reprehende in Peter, as though he would saye, we must not fighte now with weapons, but with sufferaunce and mekenes. It is no time now to strike the ene∣my wt the sworde, but to obey the wil of God. If I haue nede of weapons & armies of soul∣diours, I coulde sodenly haue of my father a great and infinite number of souldiors redy to helpe me. I am not also here, neither came I hither, to the intent I shoulde fight with the sword, but that I mighte redeme you by my death, and leaue with you an example of pati∣ence. By these wordes Christ doth teache vs patience, that we should not reuenge our sel∣ues if that any man haue done vs any displea¦sure in priuate things, but that we should pa∣tiently and quietly beare the iniuries whiche he dothe vnto vs, he doth not for all that take away the sworde from the magistrate, which beareth it according to the lawes. for the de∣fence of the good, and the destruction of the e∣uell,Rom. xiii. Math. xv. for he sayeth, he which taketh the sword, vnderstād, beyng moued therunto of his own pleasure, rashly. and of a wicked affection. as for the magistrate he taketh it not after that sorte, but receiueth it, God deliuering and cō∣mitting it vnto him, and taketh it that he may vse it iustly, and according to the will of God, & that he may with the same punish the hurt∣ful
as often as nede shall require, that is, as often as the glory of God and helth of the god¦ly requireth it.Rom. xiii. The magistrate as long as he vseth the sword laufully, he himselfe doth not strike, but God by him. For god vseth the ma¦gistrate as his minister, all things haue their tyme, to sondrye men are certaine offices ap∣pointed, so that it is not euery mans parte to take vnto hym the sword, and to stryke, ney∣ther must it be done at all tymes. That was the tyme wherin Christ would shew his most great loue towardes mankinde wherein he woulde declare himselfe to bee the sauiour of the worlde, and would put forth himself to all euils, and not the tyme wherin he would vse his power and most iust iudgemente. Christe therfore restraineth & kepeth vnder the zeale of Peter, which was fruene in dede, but it was not directed to gods will, and he decla∣reth that he came not to hurt or to worke dis∣pleasure, but to saue and obey the will of the father in all thynges. Iesus is taken that we might be deliuered, he is boūd that we might be losed from the bondes of sinnes, he is solde to vngodly ones, that we being solde vnder sight be broughte into the libertye of the son∣nes of God. Let thys exaumple of Christe be sette alwayes before oure eyes, let it be depe∣lye imprynted in oure hartes, that we maye learne to put oure stubborne and obstinate stiffe necke vnder the yoke of Christ. Let vs not put awaye the bondes of gods law, let vs willingly serue God and our neighbor, let vs
not be full of ianglyng, stiffenecked, stubborn and desirous of reuengemente, but let vs goe forward in humilitie, obediēce, and lowlines of mynde, as shepe appointed to be slayne and kylled. ¶The same houre sayde Iesus to the multitude, and to them which came vnto him, from the high priests and magistrate of the temple and elders ye be come out as it were agaynste a thiefe, with swordes and clubbes, to take me. I sate daily teaching in the temple amongest you, & ye toke me not, but this is your howre and the power of darknesse, but all this is done, that the Scriptures of the prophets myght be fulfilled. Then al his disciples forsoke him and fled and there followed hym a certaine young man, clothed in linnen vpon his bare bodye, and the young men caughte him, but he lefte his linnen cloth, and fled from them naked. CHrist as he is redye to suffer all thynges which these men deuised to work against him so also he ceaseth not to reuoke them from their malice which they hadde taken in hande, neither doth he allow their entent, al∣though
he suffer it quietly, declaring also vn∣to thē yt thei could haue had no power against him, if he him selfe had would. As though he would say, and do ye not vnderstande that ye can do nothing against me, when as I beyng dayly conuersaunt amongest you▪ and yet ye could not take me, although ye assayed it di∣uers tymes. Now ye haue chosen the nighte for this purpose, and that not vnaptly, for ye be crafty varlettes and children of darkenesse the prince of darkenesse leadeth you captyue and stirreth you vp to persecute me and my disciples, and this was forespoken not long a∣goe of my prophetes. So oughte we to suffer the inuasions of the wycked, and that wyth greate mildnes of mind, and patience, neither must we reuenge our selues with our owne hand. But in the meane tyme must so set bee∣fore the eyes of the wicked their mischeuous doings, that they may vnderstand how much they synne againste God and vs, to see yf we can by any meanes reuoke them from theyr conceiued malice, and win them to the lord, or at the leaste to take from them all occasion wherby they might excuse their synnes. ¶Then the band and the capitain, and the officers of the Iewes toke Ie∣sus and bound him and led hym a∣way to Annas firste, for he was fa∣ther in law to Caiphas which was
the high prieste the same yeare, and Caiphas was he that gaue counsell to the Iewes, that it was expediēt that one man should die for the peo¦ple, and Annas sente hym bound to Cayphas the high priest. They ther¦fore takyng Iesus led him to Cay∣phas the hyghe prieste, where the Scribes, the chiefe priestes and the elders had assembled together. LVke the Euangelist sayeth, they led him and brought him, and this semeth to bee spoken not wtout an emphasis as though he would say. They led him which had healed all men, and which contayned and led al thin¦ges who if he had not led them, they had all perished. Luke & the other leaue out the house of Anna, of the which Iohn maketh mention very aptly, howbeit there is nothyng left out of the Eāngelists, that pertayneth to the ve∣ritie of the history, and it semeth that this ex∣amining of Christ concerning his disciples & his doctrine, was done in the house of Cay∣phas, and not in ye house of Anna. For in that he is led to Anna, it was done bicause it was in their way as they wēt, and to honour An∣na withall. But examining of his doctrine & disciples belonged to Caiphas who was the high priest for that yeare. Therfore Anna sē∣deth him by and by away to Caiphas his son in law, which thē was in office. And I iudge that al the denials of Peter were done in the
court of the bishop which may easily be gathe∣red if they be weighed by ye order of the history of Iohn & others. Iohn maketh mention by the way of Anna, & thē returneth to Caiphas which if it be not marked, it might seme that al these thinges wer done in the house of An∣na, which neuerthelesse the other three men∣cion to be done in Caiphas house (& Cayphas was he) It is a digression to the description of the person. Caiphas counsell, whiche is more manifestly set forth in the xi. of Iohn, is so put forth of him, as though it should be healthfull to the common wealth, when as he entended nothing but to put Christ to deth. In that he spake the truth, it was of the holy ghost, but he spake this of guile and malice, for the ranc¦kor of his harte made him to speak those wor∣des. In the mean while he adourneth his en∣uy, and pretendeth the common welth to hide his deceit, and he vseth the words which wer like himself. The priestes saw their authority to diminishe daily, and that very manye claue vnto Christ, & therfore they feared their own things, for ye which cause Caiphas vseth this argument, by the which he might chiefly stir vp their harts. Why stay ye, sayth he? doe ye not see our aucthoritie decayeth, and that by this mā? Yf ye wil haue your own state to be in safety, thē take this mā away, ye be slouth∣full and lingerers, which shall turn at length to your owne displeasure. &c. Wherfore he is the firste authour of Christes deathe, and he encourageth the rest, to the conceiued mische∣uous
acte, his house therefore was a fit place for the vngodly ones to take coūsel together. Let vs apply these thinges to our tymes and let vs learne to discerne betwene a good citi∣zen and a faithfull senator, and betwene a trai¦tor and a false man. They which haue trayto∣rous mindes doe alwayes pretende in their counsels the health of the common wealthe, when as they goe aboute the destruction of all good men, and into their houses do the owles flye vnto, where they dare speake free∣lye. Suche metinges, assemblies and conspi∣racies in cities, are most certain causes of the distruction of a common wealth, which euery man may most easily perceiue, thoughe he be meanely skilled in histories, and if so be that ye O magistrates are ignoraunt of these thin¦ges, then be ye very vnskilfull, and ye haue small experience of thynges, but if so bee that ye do know those thynges, and do not beware of them. nor punishe the authors, then are ye to vniuste, wycked, and enemies to your coū∣trey, and in that we do so crye against those, we do it not to this end onely, that ye should punish them (which I feare me is in vayne) but bicause it is our dutye so to do, and for so muche as we assuredly forsee, that suche men wil be the destruction of the common wealth. it is therefore nedefull to admonishe you of them. Least we shoulde be blynde watchmen and dombe dogges. ¶And Peter followed him a farre of
euen to the inner courte of the high priest, and there followed also an o∣ther disciple which was knowen of the high prieste, who also entred in wyth Iesus into the house of the high prieste. But Peter stode with∣out at the dore. Then went out the other disciple which was knowen to the high prieste, and spake to her that kept the dore, and broughte in Peter, and when Peter was come in, he sate downe with the officers to see the ende, and when they had made a fire in the middest of the hal, and were set down together. Peter also sate downe amongest them, & warmed him at ye fire, & the seruaū∣tes and officers stode there, whiche had made a fire of coales, for it was cold, and they warmed themselues and Peter also stode amongest thē, and warmed himselfe, whom when a certayne maide of the high prieste which kept the gate, saw sittyng by the fyre, and lookyng earnestly vpō him, sayde. wast not thou also with Iesus of Galiley? Then a certayne other sayd. This mā was also with him, Peter denyed it before them al & said: womā I know him not nei∣ther
do I know what thou sayest, & he went forth into the porch, and the cocke crewe. Then an other mayde saw hym, and sayd vnto them which were there. This mā also was with Iesus of Nazareth, and he denyed it againe with an othe saying? I know not the man, and aboute the space of an houre after, other whiche stoode therby sawe him, & sayd, verely thou also arte one of them, for thou arte of Galiley, and thy speach also bewray∣eth thee. Then sayde one of the ser∣uauntes of the hygh priest, hys cou∣sen whose eare Peter smote of, dyd not I see thee in the gardē with him Then began he to curse hym self and to swere, that he knew not the man. And immediatly while he yet spake, the cocke crew, and the Lord turned backe, and looked vppon Peter, and Peter remembred the wordes which Iesus had sayd vnto hym, before the cocke crowe tise, thou shalt denye me thrise, and Peter went forth and wepte bitterly, Here doe we learne mans inconstancye and mutabilitie, but the Lord doth leaue thys in vs
least we shoulde presumptuouslye clayme any thyng to our selues, and that we myght ryse a∣gayne after our fall, more cherefull and wary, and to learne thereby to depende wholye vpon God, & put no confidence in our owne strength these examples are to thys ende set forth, that we eyther standing shoulde be afrayde and be∣ware of a fall, or ells that after we haue fallen, we shoulde not dispayre, but retourning with Peter should bewayle our sinnes. The Lorde knoweth howe to vse the fallings of his to his owne glorye. If we haue sinned with Peter, let vs repent with Peter, and wepe bitterlye. For the elect being admonished after they haue fallen, they doe aryse agayne, they boaste not in their sinnes. they reioyce not when they haue done euell, and dispyse not Gods admonition. In that Christ loketh vpon Peter in the mid∣dest of his sinnes, it teacheth vs, that God doth not forget hys, but admonisheth thē both with∣in & without. Let vs marke the degrees which are in sinnes, and how Peter falleth from one deniall into an other, and doth alwaies drowne him self more depely in. It is a goodly matter to haue no felowship with vngodly and wicked men, Let vs with spede plucke backe our foote if we chaunce to fal in company with such men let vs withstande the beginninges, neyther let vs cleaue to the company of sinners. For if we do abide with thē. then can we not doe it with∣oute wonderfull great hinderaunce of oure sal∣uation and innocencye: Peter partely holdeth
his peace, and partly denieth, but not of infide∣litie, but of weakenesse and feare. For his faith was not altogether quenched. They be like vn¦to Peter whiche do knowe what is right and iust, & yet dare not vtter it, and set it forth whē nede requireth. Those must diligently weigh the wordes of Christ, where he saieth, He that shalbe ashamed of me before this generation, I wil also be ashamed of him, before my father And let vs vnderstand these things, when the glory of god, and the healthe of our neighbour doth require it. For it may come to passe that somtimes it is better to kepe silence and to dis¦semble the matter. Again, there is place where to dissemble is to betray Christe with Iudas. The Scripture when it setteth forth vnto vs the fallinges of the sainctes, it teacheth not to forsweare and denye, but if it happen to haue fallen of feare, it rather comforteth him, & stir∣reth hym vp to repentaunce, when as it open∣ly declareth ye bosome of gods mercy, to such as sinne greatly. Christ vseth ye crowing of ye cock which is natural, not only for a signe of Peter hys deniall, but he also admonysheth Peter by the same crowing to repente, we see yt in thing so little the prouidence of God doth not cease, moreouer it declareth the creatures are the in∣strumentes of God hys grace and power. The cocke knoweth nothyng of Peter, but is mo∣ued by his own nature and doth also crow, but God knoweth and appoynted him for his pur∣pose. Let vs also marke this that there is great differēce betwene those which sīne of weaknes
and feare, and those whiche sinne of a purposed malice. The sinne of the weake ones is not to the death, but the sinne of the vngodly is com∣mitted agaynst the holy ghost, and by that mea∣nes it shal neuer be forgeuen. They which fal or slippe, yea though it bee moste greuouslye, yet if they being admonished do ryse vp agayne after their fal, and do vnwrap them selues out of sin∣nes, do forsake their vngodlynesse, and also the vngodly do wept and shew forth signes of true repentaunce it is manifest that those men are e∣lecte and Godly, and that they sinned of weak∣nesse. Thei abide no longer in the filthe of sins, but as soone as they come to them selues, they place their foote into the waye of ryghteousnes, they runne vnto God hys mercye for forgeue∣nesse, and they be made more humble wary and diligent, but they which dispise the admoniti∣ons of the godly, neyther runne after thei haue fallen to the sanctuarye of God hys grace, but reioyce and glory in their sinnes, heapyng one mischiefe vpon an other, neither can be reuoked by any meanes, being not onely conuersaunt a∣mongst the vngodlye and enemies of the truth, but also declaring them selues to be capitaines and Emperours agaynst the truth, it is many∣fest that such men are vngodlye, and that they haue sinned of a purposed malice, we maye see the examples of both kyndes of these sinners, the one in Dauid and Peter, the other in Saul and Iudas. ¶The high prieste asked Iesus of hys
disciples and of hys doctrine, Iefus aunswered hym, I spake openly in the worlde. I euer taughte in the Synagoge, & in the tēple, whether all the Iewes assembled, & I haue sayde nothyng in secret, why askest thou me? Aske them whiche harde what I spake vnto them, beholde they knowe what I haue sayd, and when he had spoken these thynges, one of the officers which stoode by, gaue Iesus a blowe sayeng, Aun∣swerest thou the hygh priest so. Ie∣sus aunswered hym, if I haue euell spoken, beare witnesse of the euyll, but yf I haue spoken wel, why smi∣test thou me? CHrist teacheth in hys answere how free∣lye the Preacher of the woorde of God ought to speake before the maiestrate and the church, when he is asked, and the glory of God requireth the same, he sayth therefore, I haue spoken nothing in secret, that is, I haue sayd nothyng which I would haue hidden, or that I am ashamed of. My doctrine is of god, true and sincere. I haue vttered the same ther¦fore vnto all men, bycause it behoueth al men to know it, and it is healthful vnto al men. Furthermore I haue not sought for any secret
corner, but I haue preached in an open place, where the people assembled to gether. It be∣longeth therefore vnto the pastor and minister of the word of God, to set forth the sincere doc∣trine of God frely and openly vnto the people he must inueigh frely and vehemently agaynst vices, that they which are not moued with the loue of ryghteousnesse, yet may be feared from them by shame, so that eyther they maye doe thinges that be good, or ells cease to do euill. For to him it belongeth to reprehend wicked∣nesse with great authoritie, when neede so re∣quireth, For he which then dissembleth, or de∣nyeth, whither he do it of feare, or of any other affection, he falleth into the sinne of Peter. It is not ynough to kepe fayth in the hart, and to deny with ye mouth whē place requireth, other∣wyse wherin offēded Peter? So Paule saith, with the harte we beleue to ryghteousnesse, but by the mouth is confession made to salua∣tion. Moreouer he referreth the iudgement & witnesse to the hearers, whereby he declareth that if there happen any question concernyng doctrine, then the iudgemente and witnesse of the same belongeth to the hearers, and not that one or two should be hard agaynst the Prea∣cher, but the whole Church. Some man will aske, whye Christe dyd not turne hys other cheke to thē which stroke hym. which he ne∣uer the lesse had taught himself before? By thys place we see ye the words of Christ ought not to bee wrested to any kynde of outwarde
shewe and hipocrisie, but to the preperation of the mynde. Finally thys is a great & an hygh thing to haue the mynd so prepared that it wil not onely suffer one iniurye or two but verye great iniuries, so that it may aduance the glo∣rye of God, and bring any commoditie to oure neyghbour. And if that happen not, it is better to preferre the lesse iniurye before the greater. Therefore it was expedient to turne the other cheke here, when as by that meanes he shuld haue brought no other thyng to passe, but haue geuē an occasiō to haue had more iniurye done vnto hym. All things ought to be done of the beleuers to edification. And what was there to be hoped for in thys varlet? What was there to be loked for of thys most wicked high Byshop? Which eyther commaundeth or per∣mitteth to strike one being bound and not con∣dempned, contrary to all lawe and ryght, yea and that in that place, where the innocentes shoulde seeke for defence. There is therefore a place, where we ought to suffer paciently, and contrary there is a place where we must resist malice and vngodlines euen to the death. Cha∣ritie shal teach vs these thynges, and prescribe a measure in al things. A faythful spirit know¦eth where to spare, where to strike and where to resiste. Therfore this wicked seruaunt was worthy to be rebuked of Christ, that he might acknowledge hys wickednesse, and yet for all that Christ departed not one heare bredth frō charitie or pacience, but stoutlye suffereth the iniurye done vnto hym, being readye to suffer
more greuous, Briefly al things are so to bee suffered, that the glorye of Christ & the truth may be defended & our constancy may appeare Now ye chiefe priests, & the elders & the whole coūsel sought false witnes a∣gainst Iesus to put hī to death, but they found none, yea though many false witnesses came, yet foūd they none, for many barefalse witnes a∣gaīst hī but their witnes was not suf¦ficiēt. but at ye last came two false wit¦nesses, and said, we haue heard this mā say, I wil destroye thys temple made with hands, and within three dayes, I wyl build an other made wythout handes, and neyther yet were their witnesses sufficiente y∣noughe. Then the chief priest arose and stoode amongest them, and as∣ked Iesus saying, aunswerest thou nothyng? What is the matter that these beare witnesse againste the? But Iesus helde his peace, neither aunswered he any thing. Again the high priest asked hym and said vnto hym. I charge thee by the lyuyng God, that thou tel vs, if thou be the
Christ ye son of God? Iesus sayd vn¦to hym, thou hast sayd it, I am he. Neuerthelesse I say vnto you, here after ye shall see the sonne of man syttyng at the ryght hande of pow∣er, and commyng in the cloudes of heauen. Then the high priest rente hys clothes, saying, he hath blasphe¦med, what haue we any more neede witnesses? beholde nowe ye haue heard his blasphemy, what thinke ye? and they aunswered and sayd, he is worthy of death & the men which helde Iesus, mocked hym and beat hym, and they spare in hys face, and couered his face, smote him on the face wyth their hands, saying. Pro¦phesye vnto vs O Christe who it is ye smote thee? & many other things rephrochfuly spake they against him HEre were occasiion to entreate of false witnesse, but bycause we studye to bee briefe, we doe admonishe iudges of thys one thyng, that they diligently remembre this that if false witnesses doe aryse vp agaynste Christ, whose lyfe and doctrine could be accu∣sed by no meanes, what we then hope for? Let
them therefore obserue equitie and not follow affections. The vngodly do wrest the wordes of Christ contrary to hys meanyng, and thys slaunder is a parte of false witnesse, when as we do eyther peruerte any mannes wordes or talke, or doe rehearse them otherwise then he spake thē, or els enterpreate them otherwyse then he spake or ment them Christ spake of the temple of hys bodye, and they falsly enterprete it to the materiall temple. Euen as in the olde tyme sacrifices were done in the temple, and peace offrynges and clensinges were done by sacrifices, so is Christ made a sacrifice vpō the crosse for our sinnes, pacifying god his wrath agaynst vs and sanctifying vs. In that Christ holdeth his peace at the false witnesses, it was not somuch, bicause of his meaknes, as bicause of his wisedome. This example ought they to follow which are oppressed with false witnes∣ses, & chiefely before such a iudge as estemeth and geueth credite to false witnesses. For then no answeres or excuses are any thyng worth, it shalbe moste safegarde to kepe silence. I ad∣iure thee that thou tell me, whether thou bee the Sonne of God? By this question it is ma∣nifest, that the Iewes confessed and knewe ryghte well that the Messias shoulde bee the Sonne of God. But they aske hym this capti∣ous question to the entent that they might ca∣uille and maliciously accuse him in his answer, that is, that they might take and trappe hym in hys talke, that he which had made him selfe the Sonne of God, should therfore be worthy
to dye, and that according to the lawe. So do our papistes now of dayes extorte of the mini∣stres of the word, what their opinion is of this new doctrine (as they terme it) And whē they answere thē the truth, then are they by and by put to tormentes, but if they holde theyr peace they betraye ye truth. Wherfore the hipocrites do seke the truth to this entent, that they may persecute it, when they knowe it, and also kill hym which confesseth it. Hereafter ye shal see, &c. This is a gentil and healthfull admonitiō, as though he woulde saye. In dede ye see me now humble, and as it were the Sonne of the Carpenter, but be not offended with thys my humilitie, for nowe is the tyme of humilitie, I do not now shewe forth my glorye and power, but shortely ye shal see what māner one I am. He is gilty of death. The chiefe priest speaketh this to his complices, whiche were lyke vnto hym self namely haters of Christ, he hath blas∣phemed (sayeth he) what neede we any more witnesses? They fayne thē selues, as though they had a care for the glory of God. when as neuerthelesse their mindes are vngodly. & vn∣pure. So they say now a daies. He hath slaun∣dered the holy Virgin, he hath polluted the sa∣craments, therfore he is an heritike, what nede we any more witnesses? So I say do they cry now of daies against the preachers of the Gos∣pell, and for a coulour they pretend the honour of God and the holy Virgine, when as onely they excedingly hate the truth, and soly seeke for theyr owne commoditie. For it is not possi∣ble
that they should speake these thynges frō the heart, and should thynke so vndoubtedly, when as God doth not confyrme a lye in the hart of man. They which speake so do alwaies doubt and wauer, which may easily be sene in Pharao, who one while spake one thing, an o∣ther while an other thing, sometymes denyed and somtimes affyrmed. One while he sayed, who is this Lord? By & by he sayth I know the Lorde is iuste. and that I haue sinned and yet for al that in the meane tyme he goeth for∣ward in hys mischiefe, &c. We will set forth thys more playnly. They which thus speake, thys man hath taught that we should not call pon the blessed Virgin, Let hym therefore be taken away for he is an herityke and giltye of death. These men I say are neuer certayne & put out of doubt in theyr harts that we should call vpon Marye, or that he shoulde be put to death which teacheth the contrarye, that is to say, that we shoulde worship one God. For it s vnpossible that this should be certainly per∣swaded in the hart of man, that he shuld doubt nothing of it, or thinke nothing to the contra∣ry. Therfore they be hipocrites, which pretend hese thynges, thinking otherwise inwardlye. yea their conscience repugning it, they fayne thē selues outwardly to be good men, & would eme to be such, whē as they are inwardly vn∣godly. For although the Lorde doth blind and arden a man, yet neuerthelesse he setteth the truth so playnly before the same mās eyes, that e leaueth hym no excuse of ignorance, but cō∣pelleth
hym to say & acknowledge in his hart, that he doth erre & sinne, how so euer he figh∣teth agaynst the truth knowen. They doe call Christ by the honorable name of a Prophet, & turne it to mockage. As though they woulde say, All men call thee a great Prophet, or thou boastest thy self to be a prophet, prophecy ther∣fore vnto vs, &c. Let vs marke the nature of the vngodly and hipocrites which conspire a∣gainst the truth. Vnrighteousnesse accuseth righteousnes. Lyes oppresse the truth. Enuye hurteth charitie, and yet for all thys al things are so adorned, that they seme to haue a certain shew of iustice & law. They preuent him with false witnesses, they vrge him wt deceiptful in∣terrogations. The Iudges ar both accusers & also witnesses. And they which are most blas∣phemous, do lay blasphemye to an innocentes charge, that they might seme: to be reuengers of blasphemye. But they do al things in vaine when as they finde not so much as a shewe of wickednes in Christ. Let vs follow this, that we may be so honestly conuersaunt amongest menne and liue so innocentlye, that euen fame may be affeard to lye of vs. Now what grea∣ter cruelty can there be deuised: thē this which the souldiour vse against Christ? An innocente is least in the handes of most vile men, to vse hym according to their owne luste, yea they do sharpen & quicken their luste in him, in which souldiours there is no godlinesse, no compassi∣on, they mocke hym, spitte vpon him, & beate hym, neither omitte they any thing that ser∣ueth
to the infamy of Christ, or to hys iniury. The same is done now a dayes by most cruell men, yea by no men, but rather wilde beastes, whiche haue put away all humanitie, whiche haue depriued them selues of the feling of na∣ture, that is to say, which do burthē miserable men which are led for the truth of Christ, wt reproches and spiteful wordes, & do mocke thē being otherwise afflicted, whē as neuertheles the lawes of nature forbyd that we shoulde burthen such as are punished, with more gre∣uous spiteful words. No man excuseth Christ no man pitieth him, no mā deliuereth hym. No man defendeth hym, No man speaketh in hys cause, Nor no man remembreth the benefites paste, to say once, he hath healed all diseases, he hath fed the hungry, he hath taught the igno∣raunt, he hath done good to all men. Thus so many and so great benefites done by Christ a∣mongest these moste ingrate men were loste, Thus cruelty and enuy had blotted al thinegs These thinges are not done without the pro∣uidence & will of God, and yet for al that they which cōmitte these things, do sinne most hey∣nously, & so do they also whiche take not heede that these thinges might not haue beene done. The lord permitteth such cruel wicked dedes to be done sometimes, to stirre vp our slouth∣fulnes & sluggishenesse, so that sometimes we should be wakened at such enormities, and thē to shew forth our strength and faith, yet in the meane time are we wtoute excuse, whiche haue geuē occasion to the wicked by our negligence
to go forward in their naughtines, neither are we free from so great blame. We ar so weake, so slouthful, & vnfaythful that no mā c cōmit so great wicked dedes, wherby we ar moued yea not a litle. So blockish ar we altogether & with out felinges. There are no wicked actes so de∣testable or terrible, which can shake away our slepye sluggishnes frō vs. And seing that thin∣ges are at this pointe, let vs loke for nothing but the vtter punyshment and vengeaunce of the Lord. These be as certain signes of destruc¦tion, as when the heauē is red in the morning, it is a signe that it wil rayne. The which thin∣ges if any man see not then is he blind, but if he see them & beware not of thē, then is he mad. We must withstand the beginnings, A bough when it waxeth hard can not so easly be bowed Let vs therfore withstand wicked actes before thei grow into an vse, & possesse al things, me∣dicine is prepared to late, when as the euils by long tarying are established. ¶When the morning was come, all the chiefe priests and Elders of the peo∣ple tooke counsell agaynst Iesus to put hym to death. And they led him to theyr counsell, saying, Arte thou the Christ? Tel vs. And he sayd vn∣to them. If I tell you, ye will not beleue. If I shall aske you ye will not aunswere me, neyther wil ye let
me goe. Hereafter shall the Sonne of man sit at the righte hande of the power of God. Then sayed they all, Art thou the Sonne of God? And he sayd: Ye say that I am. Then sayd they what nede we any further wit∣nesse? For we our selues haue heard it of hys owne mouth: Then arose the whole multitude and led hym a∣waye bound from Cayphas into the common Hall, and deliuered him to Pontious Pilate ye president. And it was morning, & they them selues wente not into the common Hall, least they should be defyled, but that they might eate the passeouer. THe truth increaseth and sheweth forth it self more bright in tribulations and op∣pressions. The Iewes therefore get no∣thing by their coūsel to kil Christ, which thing yet only they sought for. Let them which go about to extinguishe Christ with persecuti∣ons & death diligently marke thys. And thus is the Christian fayth planted with bloud, and also augmented by bloud. But wo be vnto thē which do oppresse the truth, which neuerthe∣lesse can neuer be oppressed. On the contrarye parte lyes and iniquities although they reigne for a time, yet shall they neuer be fyrme & sure:
and who wil be affeard to persente that which can neuer abyde? Agayne who wil be affeard to deffend hys cause, which cā neuer be oppres∣sed? And yet for al that we are all slepye to ac∣complyshe excellent and diuine thinges, when as we may see that the vngodlye neyther cease nor yet sleepe being about their wicked actes, but break their night slepes, & in the dawning of the daye returne agayne to their counsels. Their industry & vigilancy doth put to shame our sloughfulnes. If I shall say. The vngod∣ly somtymes aske for the truth, but not for to embrace it, but for to persecute it. So play our papists, they somtimes obiect captious questi∣ons to the Godlye, and when they go about to geue thē a reasō of their doctrine, thē wil no sa∣tisfaction serue, but they adiudge them by and by to the death. Christ vnderstanding this, sai∣eth, what shuld I tel you? If ye had bcne de∣sirous of the truth, ye mighte haue learned it long a go by my doctrine and miracles. Which seing ye haue not done, what neede I to talke any more with you? Hitherto is power geuen vnto you to rage agaynste my humilitie, but hereafter ye shall see the Sonne of man sitting at the right hand of God.What to sit at the right of god is By this Periphrasis he doth euidentlye proue hym selfe to bee the Sonne of God. As though he would say, Ye shall here after see that I am the sonne of god. This did the Iewes vnderstande, and so they pronounced him giltie of death, when as none can sit at the righte hande of God the Father,Psalme. 109 with chiefe glorye and maiestye but onely the
sonne of God. Therfore they thought in their own opinion, that Christ was iustly cōdemp∣ned, according to the law in. Deut, 13. of a false Prophet, but it was falsly vnderstode & inter∣preted: For there it speaketh of the Prophete which doth withdrawe men frō the true God. which Christ did not. Ye saye, or, thou sayest, is not a worde of doubting, but of affyrming af∣ter the Hebrewe Phrase. ¶Then when Iudas whiche betrayed hym, sawe that he was condempned he repenting hym selfe, broughte a∣gayne the thyrtye pieces of siluer, to the chiefe Priestes and Elders, say∣ing. I haue synned betraying the in∣nocente bloude. But they said, what is that to vs? Looke thou to it. And when he had caste downe the siluer pieces in the Temple, he departed and wente and honge hym self: And the chiefe Priestes tooke the pieces of siluer, & sayd, it is not lawfull for vs to put them into the threasory, bycause it is the pryce of bloud. And they tooke counsel and bought with them a potters fielde for the buryall of straungers. Wherefore that fielde is called the field of bloud vntil this
day. Then was that fulfylled which was spoken by Ieremye the Pro∣phete, saying. And they toke, xxx. sil∣uer pieces, the price of hym that was valewed, whom being valewed, thei bought of the children of Israel, and they gaue them for the potters field, as the Lord appoynted me. IN Iudas is set forth a most horrible exam∣ple of Gods iudgemente vpō those whiche synne of purposed malice and vnfaythfulnes of whiche men the betrayer is a figure. God calleth al men mercifully to his grace, but they whom the deuil blindeth & moueth doe despise hym which calleth them, or being allured to be in the number of the Sonnes of God, doe goe backewarde, wrapping them selues in synnes after such a forte, that they can by no meanes be pulled backe agayne. Sathan doth so blynde them, that they can not ponder the heynous∣nes of their wickednes, vntil he haue throwne them downe hedlong into hell, and then at the length be theyr eyes opened, that they may see the greatnes of theyr wickednes, & the sharpe∣nes of the punishment, but yet in such a sorte, that in the meane tyme they can not consider the exceding greatnesse of Gods mercye, ney∣ther can they runne vnto the same. They are sorye in deede, not bycause they haue offended the chiefe God, but bycause they see their ende prepared for them. And therby cōmeth despera¦tion
and tormenting of the conscience, in the which they perishe. Let vs therfore take hede from shedding of innocente bloude, from coue∣tousnesse & wilfull stubbernes, for they whiche are possessed with these mischieuous actes are lyke vnto Iudas, and shall come vnto the like end that he did. To this are they driuen at the length, which woulde neuer obey the Lord ad∣monishing them. It nothing profited Iudas to be in the nūber of the twelue, nothing to be the Disciple of Christ, nothing to be partaker of the holy table, nothing also to haue Preached the word of truth, but for all this at the length hys hipocrisye was made manifest & also pu∣nished. So these things shal profit vs nothing if so be that we shall be vnfaythfull and hipo∣crites. It is vnpossible for any manne to please God without fayth.The poure of faith. But where as fayth shal∣be, therewit also be an eddeour to lyue iustlye and innocently, and an horror of wicked actes there is God heard, neyther is his calling de∣spised. Our title maketh vs not acceptable to God, but fayth. Fayth hath a regard of God, worshipeth God, kepeth his word, feareth his studieth to kepe hys commaundementes and obeyeth his wil. Wherfore it is nothing worth for vs to bragge of fayth, if we want it, for thē are we proued to be hipocrites and vnfaythful. Moreouer in the Iewishe priestes is set forth the figure of hipocrites, whiche do abhorre to entre into the house of an Ethniche, & to put the price of bloude into the treasurye, & yet for all that abhorre not from sheding of innocente
bloud, strayning at a gnat, & swallowed down a Camell. As many as doe make cleane that whiche is withoute neglecting to haue it pure within, are like vnto these whiche do neglecte charitie, righteousnes and faith, & cleane super¦sticiously vnto certayne ceremonies, in ye which they put the sōme of Godlynesse, with whiche mē, the traditions of men & their owne lies are of greater value, then the commaundementes of God, which do either make equal or els pre∣ferre their own traditions before god his com∣maūdements. But yet in this thing we iudge these iewyshe priestes more iuste and wiser thē the papistes, bycause they woulde not receaue that filthye price into their threasory. But the other haue most gredily drawē vnto thē by vi∣olence as wel stollē goods, as also goods naugh¦tily & vniustly gotten. Furthermore it is not ynough to say vnto Iudas, See yu to it. They should haue chaunged their sentence, whē thei knew their error, and not haue accused an in∣nocent, but defended him. And Iesus stoode before the gouernor, who said, what accusation bringe ye against this man? They aunswered, if he wer not an euil doer, we would not haue deliuered him vnto thee. Then sayd Pilate vnto them: Take ye him therfore youre selues, and iudge him after youre owne lawe.
Then the Iews said vnto him, it is not lawful for vs to put any man to deathe. That the woorde of Iesus mighte be fulfilled, which he spake, signifieng what deth he should dye. Then they began to accuse him, say∣eng, we haue taken this man peruer∣ting the people, and forbiddinge to paye tribute to Ceasar, and sayinge, that he is. Christ a king, and Pilate asked him saying. Art thou the king of the Iewes? And he aunswered & saide, thou sayest it. Then Pilate said vnto the high priestes & people I find no faulte in this manne. But they wexed more fierce, sayinge, he stirreth the people, teching through¦out all Iudea, beginning at Galiley euen to this place. And when Pilate heard mencion of Galiley, he asked whether the man were of Galiley? And when he knewe that he longed to Herode his Iurisdiction, he sente him to Herode, who was also at Ie¦rusalem at that time. HEre may we see by the Iewysh priests & elders, what cōmeth of sentences decyded & determined before ye iudgemēt be geuē,
They had at once cōspired the death of Christ, yea they adiudged hym to death, and therefore they thinke it not mete, that their iudgemente should be counted vniust, and that there shuld be any farther inquisition made. If he had not bene an euill doer (say they) we would not haue deliuered hym vnto thee: Beholde with what vnshamefastnesse these moste wicked men doe speake, going about to ouercome the iudge by their impudent cry. So in these dayes senten∣ces are determined and geuen vpon the Prea∣chers of the gospell before their cause come be∣fore lawfull iudges. If he were not (say they) an heretike, and worthy to be condempned we would not haue taken him: He hath done con∣trary to the counsels, cōtrary to ye ordinaunces of the fathers: He is a troubler and a deceauer, &c. By these cryes they do preuent the mindes of the iudges, that they should think it against equitie to make any more inquisition of those which are brought befor thē, & by & by thei cō∣maund thē to be had away. The king of peace is falsly accused, of seditiō and tumulte, which studie of reforming of things getteth much dis∣pleasure of all men. Vnder the pretence of thys wicked acte, not only Christe, but also almoste al the Prophetes are oppressed. In that Christ was not killed of the Iewes, but of the Gen∣tiles, that is to saye, deliuered to the power of the Romaines. The Euangelist declareth that it was not done rashly, for Christ had foretold hys disciples that he should be deliuered to the Gentils. They ioyne many accusations toge∣ther,
& that by arte & a certayn craftines, of the which some touched the Iewes, & others some Pilate & the Gentiles, & al this was done to make Christ to be hated of all mē, & to alienate the mindes of all men frō him. Pilate litle ca∣red for their accusations which thei brought a∣gainst Christ cōcerning theyr own law, but he reuēgeth ye cause of treasō, thīkīg that that per¦teyneth to his office. I woulde to God ye prin∣ces which do persecute the Gospel would ob∣serue this equitie towardes the godly, whome they examine. There is no cause why the ma∣gistrate should be affeard of the Gospell & doc∣trine of Christ, which abolisheth not the Ma∣gistrate, but rather establisheth it, & teacheth true obedience. ☞And when Herode sawe Iesus, he was exceding glad, for he was desy∣rous to haue sene him of a long sea∣son, bicause he had heard many thin∣ges of hym, & he hoped to haue seene some signe done by him. Thē questi∣oned he with him of many thinges, but he answered him nothing. But the high priests & scribes stode forth and accused him vehemently: And Herode with hys men of warre de∣spysed hym, and whē he had mocked him & clothed him with a white gar∣ment he sent him agayne to Pilate. And the same day wer Pilate & He∣rode made frēds together, for before they were enemies one to an other.
LEt vs consider here the mekenes & obe∣dience of our hed, and capitain, who being him self innocēt, is set before vniust iuges and tirauntes for vs trespassers. The Lambe without spotte openeth not hys mouth when he is mocked and made a laughing stocke to a tyraunt whiche was not worthye to heare the most swete wordes of Christ, & the doctrine of the truth, when as he was not desyrous of the truthe, but rather curious of newe thynges. Let vs learne of oure Maister, that if we be at any time vniustlye accused, if we be mocked & despised, we may be readye to suffer pacientlye all reproche for Christ and his truth. Let vs not be reuengers of our owne glory & name. Let vs remembre that we be worthye of euer∣lasting reproch, for we are nothing but a lompe of sinne. Let vs seke our glorye in the crosse of Christ, for it is the chiefest glorye to be out of estimaciō in thys world for christs sake. There is no tyme of glory here: If we can suffer re∣proches with Christ, we shal also be partakers of hys glory. He which was god (sayth Paul made him self of no reputatiō taking vpō him the forme of a seruaunt, & became obedient vn∣to the Father, euen to the death of the crosse, wherfore ye father hath exalted him, & brought him to most high glorye. And hath geuen hym a name aboue euery name. Therfore thei whiche wil be in dede glorious, muste learne to suffer infamye & reproches wt Christ, they muste also follow his humilitie & obedience. Let no man thinke that his glorye is diminished, if that he humble him selfe & serue others. For by thys
meanes his glorye is not diminished but made more noble. How soeuer the vngodlye be at di∣stance or discention in their minds one against another yet for al that in the persecuting of the truth & of rightousnes thei cā agree togethers. ☞ Thē Pilate called together the high priestes and the rulers, and the peo∣ple, & said vnto thē: ye haue brought thys man vnto me, as one that per∣uerted the people, and behold I ex∣amining him before you, do finde no faulte in thys man, of these thinges whereof ye accuse hym. No nor yet Herode, for I sente you to him, & beholde there is nothing worthy of death done by him. Then Pilate en∣tred into the common hall agayne, & called Iesus and sayd vnto him: Art thou the King of the Iewes? Iesus aunswered hym, sayest thou that of thy self, or did other tel it thee of me? Pilate aunswered, am I a Iewe? Thine own nation & the high prie∣stes haue deliuered thee vnto me. What hast thou done? Iesus answe∣red, my Kyngdome is not of thys world: if my kingdome were of this world my seruauntes would surely fyght, that I should not be deliuered
vnto the Iewes, but now is not my kingdome frō hence: Pilate thē sayd vnto him, art thou a king thē? Thou sayest that I am a king: For thys cause am I borne, and for thys cause came I into ye world, that I should beare witnes to the truth, euery one yt is of the truth hereth my voyce. Pi¦late said to him, what is the truth? & whē he had saide that, he wente oute agayn vnto the Iewes, and said vn∣to them, I fynde in hym no cause at all. But ye haue a custome, that I shoulde deliuer you one loose at che passeouer, wil ye therfore that I lose vnto you the King of the Iewes? Then cryed they all agayne, saying, not hym but Barrabas. Nowe thys Barrabas was a thiefe whiche was in prison with the authors of an in∣surrection made in the citie, wherin was murther committed. Thē Pi∣late spake vnto them agayn, willing to let Iesus lose. But they cried, say∣ing, Crucifye crucifie him. And he sayd vnto them the thyrd time, what euil hath he done? I fynde no faulte worthy of death in him. I wil there∣fore
chastise hym and let him lose. PIlate at the firste sheweth a certaine sem∣blaunce of Iustice and equitie, for that he goeth about to deliuer an innocente, and to pluck him out of their handes, and he being an heathen man doth beare witnesse of the innō∣cency of Christ, but he is vnconstant and wa∣uering like a rede, and he fowly goeth against his conscience, being moued partly by feare, & partly by gredy desire to reygne. He ought not to haue suffred that he, whom he confessed to be innocente, should be beaten of the souldiours, and muche lesse to be crucified. For bycause, that Christ sayth that hys kingdome is not of this worlde: the Anabaptistes abuse thys say∣ing, and would take away Magistrates from amongest Christians. But they should marke that Christ speaketh of him selfe, & appoynteth the kingdome of the spirite. Christ came not to possesse a kingdome in ye world, but to set forth an example of humilitie and obedience. So in lyke case no Christiā mā ought in his mind to be desirous of a kingdome, no though he be cho¦sen to gouerne others. So Christ was the king ouer the whole world, as he is also at this day, but he coueted not a kingdome, for he came not therfore but for to Preach: and yet for all that he denyed not him self to be a king, but he de∣sired no kingdome but only of consciences. So all preachers & ministers of the word ought to do. For although thei be appointed ouer king∣domes
& princes,Iere. 1. . Cor. 10. yet ought they by no meanes to make suite for thē, as Ieremy saith, but thei ought to gouerne consciences with the worde of God. So Paule sayth, that the weapons of our warfare ar not carnal, but mighty through God to cast downe holdes, by the which we o∣uerthrowe the deuises, and euery high thyng, that is exalted against the knowledge of God, & we leade euery thoughte captiue to the obe∣dience of Christ, and we haue in a redines ven¦geaunce against al disobedience. We may boast in this authority, whiche God hath geuen vs for edification and not for destruction. I came for thys intent that I might beare witnesse to the truth: as though he would say, I came not to the end to reigne but to beare witnesse to the truth. To beare witnesse of the truth, is the Periphrasis of a Preacher.To beare witnes to the truth. So Iohn was sent to beare witnesse of the lyghte, that is of the truth. So Christ sayeth to his Apostels in the xv Chapter of Iohn, and ye are my witnesses. Also in the last of Luke thus it is written, and thus it behoued Christ to suffer,Iohn. 1. and to arise a∣gayn frō the dead the thyrd day, & that repen∣taunce & remissiō of sinnes shoulde be preached in his name amongest al nations,Luke. 24 beginning at Ierusalē. And ye be witnesses of these thinges not only in Ierusalē,Act. 1. but also in al Iury & Sa¦maria, & finally vnto the vttermost part of the earth. The father therfore sent the sonne into the worlde, to beare witnesse vnto the truth, that is to say, to make hym selfe knowen of the world, for he is the truth, Iohn the .xviiij. chap.
And who soeuer hath but euen a crome of the truth within him, the same is begotten of him, & heareth his voyce. Christ is not onely made equall with wicked persons, but is cast muche more lower thē wicked persons. For the thiefe is loosed but Christ is killed. They geue a mur¦therer his life, but they desyre to haue ye author of lyfe crucified: they chuse a thiefe and reiecte a Sauiour. By the whiche we are taught not only the maliciousnesse of the Phariseies, but also the inconstancye & ingratitude of the com∣mon people. It was not long before that they cried and sange Hosanna, and extolled him ri∣ding vpon the Asse with great prayses, saying, blessed be he which commeth in the name of the Lord. Now they crie as faste again, he is a de∣ceauer, Let him be crucified. Let no man ther∣fore hunt for prayse of the people. Let no man glorye, if the common people prayse hym. The wauering and inconstante people is by and by perswaded vnto a contrarye sentence, so he is cursed in deede that putteth his confidence in man. Pilate beareth witnes more then once of the innocencye of Christ, and saith that he doth fynde no cause of death in him. He is therefore vniuste, bycause he suffreth an innocent to bee whypped. But he feared men more then God. A iuste iudge ought not to punyshe the giltles to get the fauour of other mē. The Romaines did put to death those whō they had beatē. Al∣though it semeth ye Pilate dyd not beate Christ to ye intent that he would put him to death, but  by this meanes. he might deliuer hī frō death
All these thinges are done by the prouidence of God, that Christ might suffer all the punishe∣mentes, which euen the most wicked do. Here may we iudge the loue of god the father which thrusteth his well beloued & only begottē sōne for vs vnto most greuous punyshmentes that we might also learne to beare pacientlye what things so euer shall happen vnto vs. ¶Then Pilate tooke Iesus & scour∣ged him, and the souldiors platted a crown of thorns, and put it on hys heade, and they clothed him wyth a purple garmente, and sayde, Hayle Kyng of the Iewes & they buffeted him. And Pilate went forth agayne, & sayd vnto thē, behold I bring him forth vnto you, that ye may know that I find no fault in hym at all. Thē came Iesus forth wearynge a crown of thorns & a purple garmēt, & Pilate sayd vnto them: behold the man. Then when the highe priestes and officers saw him, they cried say∣yng. Crucifye him, crucifie him. Pi∣late said vnto them. Take ye him & crucifye him, for I finde no faulte in him. The Iewes aunswered him, we haue a law, & accordinge to our law he ought to dy, bicause he made
him selfe the sonne of God, whē Pi∣late then hearde that worde, he was the more afeard and went againe in to the common hall, and sayde vnto Iesus, whence art thou? But Iesus gaue him no aunswere. Then sayde Pilate vnto him speakest thou not vnto me? Knowest thou not that I haue powre to crucify the? and haue also power to lose the? Iesus āswe∣red, thou couldest haue no power at all against me, excepte it wer geuen thee from aboue. Therefore he that deliuered me vnto thee, hathe the greater synne, from thense forthe Pilate sought to lose Iesus, but the Iewes cried, saying, if thou lose this man, thou arte not Ceasars frende, Whosoeuer maketh himselfe a kyng speaketh agaynste Ceasar. PIlate is a figure of a tyrannous and negli∣gente iudge, bearing a certayne shewe of righteousnesse, whē as in dede he hath not so much regard to it. So often tymes we out∣wardly shewe one thing, and inwardly in oure hart meane an other thing. He would haue sa∣ued Iesus so that it might be done with Cea∣sars fauoure and the Iewes. But if his hart had bene inflamed with the desire of Iustice, he would not haue defended an innocent so care∣lessely
and coldly, but stoutly and vpryghtly. A iudge ought not to haue a respect to the fa∣uoure or displeasure of men, but vnto the rule of equitie and lawe. They which be softe and weake, doe by litle and litle slippe, till at the length they declyne altogether from the ryght waye Whiche we may see by Pilate, who for that he doth not constantly prosecute yt whiche he knew to be ryght, is compelled at the length to geue sentence agaynst an innocent, his own conscience accusing him to the contrary, in cō∣dempning of whom he condempneth him selfe when as he saith with arrogant boasting, that he hath power to lose Christ. Whom the Lord doth gentelly reprehend,Rom. 13. declaring vnto hym that no man can doe any thyng but so farforth as the Lord shall permitte. And bycause that al power is of God, therfore a Magistrate ought not to abuse the same power to oppresse inno∣centes with all, euen as they lust them selues. Also this is a comforte vnto vs, when as we know that mē cā do nothing vnto vs though they bee neuer so cruell, but so muche as the Lorde shall permitte them. Thys must we al∣so marke, that the Father dyd laye our sinnes vpon Christe, therefore Christ was scourged for oure synnes, by whose stripes we are hea∣led, by whose woundes oure woundes are cured. He offereth hys backe to them whiche stryke hym, and hys cheakes to them whiche buffet hym.Esay. 53. Esay. 20. Let vs therefore with griefe re∣member the hepe of our synnes, which Christ
suffred for in hys bodye, beinge despysed and put to shame, that he myghte deliuer vs from euerlastyng shame and punyshmente, Let vs also make readye oure backe and oure whole bodye to beare stripes for hym, whiche hath lo∣ued vs with so great a loue, Iesus holdeth his peace, geuing an example to the Godlye, that they shoulde not greatly indeuour to excuse or deliuer them selues when they shoulde suffer death for the truth. ☞And when Pilate hard that worde, he broughte Iesus forthe, and satte down for to geue iudgemente, in the place which is called the paued place and in Hebrew Gabarha. And it was the preparation of the passeouer al∣most about the sixt hower, & he saied vnto the Iewes, behold your king. But they cryed awaye with him, a∣waye with him, crucifye him. Pilate sayd vnto them, shal I crucify youre kyng? The high priestes aunswered we haue no kyng but Cesar. And the hygh priests with the elders accused him of many thinges. And when he was accused of the chiefe priests and elders, he aunswered nothing. Thē
said Pilate vnto him, dost yu not here how many witnesses thei brīg agaīst thee And he āswered him not to one word after ye, insomuch that the go∣uernor marueyled gretly. Now at ye feast the gouernour was wont, to de¦lyuer vnto the people a prisonner whome they woulde. And they had at that time a notable prisonner cal-Barrabas. which was in prisō with the authors of a sediciō, in the which sedicion they had cōmitted murther, when they were gathered then toge¦ther, & that the people made a noyse, he begā to requir them instātly, that he might do as he had alwayse done vnto them. Therfore Pilate said vn¦to them, whether wil ye that I lose vnto you Barrabas, or Iesus which is caled Christ, for he knew ful wel, that they hadde delyuered hym for enuye. THe Iewes desyred nothing so much as to recouer theyr King. But nowe these moste wicked persons doe dissemble that stoutly, to destroy Christ whiche tolde thē that he was a king, which was that king that was promised vnto them. Of which king also there
are amongest the Gentiles which witnessed of him. For thus writeth Suetonious in the life of Vespasion, There spred thoroughoute the whole east an olde and constante opinion, that it was destimed that at that time Iury should obtayne the dominion of thinges. The Iewes applying that to them selues which was fore∣spoken of the Romaine Emperoure, as it ap∣peared in the end, rebelled and slewe their pre∣sident. Moreouer they droue awaye the Liue∣tenant of Siria, comming to succoure the go∣uernour, and ouerthrewe the Romaines stan∣derd. Thus farre writeth he. Where agayne we may learne also the lightnes and inconstan∣cye of the common people: when he fed them, they would haue made him a King: when he inueigheth against theyr peruerse manners, they desire to haue him crucified: He is there∣fore a foole and a mad man that sticketh to the fauour of men. Thei preferre a thiefe & a mur∣therer before Christ an innocent, which is cō∣monly sene now a dayes, yea & amongest those whiche are called by the name of Christ, when as varlets and vngodlye men, despisers of the truth, religion, and all godlynes are promoted to the gouernaunce of the common wealth, and to common offices, but they whiche are honest and simple men are despised. And where suche things are done, most hardest things are to be loked for to suche common wealthes: & what shoulde we hope for any other thing, when as vngodly men are promoted? If so be ye a maide clothed with a white garment woulde beleue
that she coulde kepe her clothes white amōgst the middest of colliers. Shoulde shee not make her self a laughing stocke to all mē? And what other thyng is an vncorrupte senate, then a certayne vndefiled Virgin decked with moste pure silke? And if thou ioyne vnto the same corrupte and naughtie men, then is it vnpossi∣ble, but that the senate shoulde be steyned and corrupted. Pilate wondereth not so muche at Christes silence, as he doth bycause he defen∣deth not hys owne innocencye, whom he knew to bee an innocente, and to bee deliuered of enuye. ☞And as Pilate was syttyng to geue iudgement, his wife sent vnto him, saying: haue thou nothīg to do with that iust man, for I haue suffred ma∣ny thinges this day in a dreame for him: but the chief priests and the el∣ders perswaded the people, that thei should aske Barrabas and shoulde destroy Iesus: Then the gouernour aunswered, & sayd vnto them, whe∣ther of the twaine will ye that I let lose vnto you? And they sayde Bar∣rabas. Pilate said vnto them, what
shal I do then with Iesus which is called Christ? They said al vnto him let him be crucified. whē Pilate saw yt he auailed nothing, but that more tu¦mult was made, he tooke water and washed his handes before the peo∣ple, sayinge I am innocente of the bloud of thys iust man, ye shall loke to it: and al the pleople aunswered, his bloud be vpon vs and our chil∣dren. Then he willing to satisfy the people, losed vnto them Barrabas, geuing sentence that it should be as they requyred. And he deliuered Ie¦sus to do with hym what they wuld to be crucified. SOme ascribe vnto the suggestion of the deuill, that Pilate is admonished by hys wyfe. But I thynke that it was done of God, bycause Pilate shoulde want no warnyng. So he admonished Pharao very often tymes, to see if he coulde reuoke him by any meanes from hys purpose, that Goddes iustice myght be excused, and oure malice vn∣excusable. God hys prouidence and goodnesse neuer wāteth, it neuer ceaseth, but it reuoketh them which straye. It alwayes geueth an oc∣casion to departe from euell and to doe good.
Hys bloud be vpon vs (say they) whiche came to passe in dede, but they speake these words in an other meaning. They woulde by thys say∣ing shew them selues to be innocentes, so bold a thing is hipocrisie, that it dare boast it self for an innocent, when as it knoweth it selfe to bee most corrupt. Pilate slippeth by litle and litle, which knowing Christ to be most innocente, & to be deliuered of malice, finding also no faulte in him, doth for al that suffer an innocent to be most cruelly beaten wt stripes, to demened with al kynde of euils & at the length to be punished with death. Now he sayth: Take ye him & kil him. And before he spake otherwise. But a iust iudge ought not to do so, but ought to defende him whom he knoweth to be an innocent, or to punish him which is conuicte of hys cryme. It auayleth nothing to wash the hands with wa∣ter, whē as the conscience within is wounded. Neyther will it serue to say, looke ye to it, yea he must loke to it, which condemneth the iuste man, and adiudgeth him to death, & also letteth loose him which is giltie. If is not ynough to be once or twyse cōstāt, vnlesse a man continue constantly in defending of iustice euen vnto the end, neither ought he to be made affeard from doing ryght, eyther with threatnings or elles with flatteryes. A Iudge muste contempne both the hatred and the fauoure of all men, he must fixe his eyes only vpon iustice, and not to satisfye the will of the people. Thē the soldiors of the gouernor toke
Iesus into the common hall, and there gathered about him the whole bād, and when they had striped hym they put on him a scarlet Robe, and they put on his hed a crown platted wyth thorns, and a rede in his right hand, and bowed theyr knees before him, and mocked him, saying hayle kyng of the Iewes: and when they had spitte vpon him, they tooke the rede and smote hym on the hed: And when they hadde mocked hym, they tooke away the robe from hym, and put hys owne rayment on him, and led him away to crucyfy hym: And he bare hys crosse & came into a place whyche is named the place of deade mens skulles and in Hebrew called Glgatha. And as they led hym, they toke one Symon of Ciren, whyche came oute of the countrey, and was the father of Alexāder & Rufus, vpō hym they layd the crosse, and compel¦led hym to beare the same after Ie∣sus: And there folowed him a greate multitude of people and women, whych women bewayled and lamen¦ted hym: But Iesus tourned backe and sayde vnto them: Daughters of
Ierusalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your selues, and for your chrildren, for behold the dayes will come, in the which men wil say: ble∣ssed are the barrein, & the wōbs that neuer bare, and the pappes which neuer gaue suck. Then shal they be∣gyn to say vnto the mountayns, fal vpon vs: and to the hilles, couer vs for if they do these things to a grene tree, what shalbe doone to the drye? And there were two others whych were euel doers, led with him to be slayne, and when they came to the place whyche is called Caluarie, there they crucifyed him, & ye two other e∣uell doers with him, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left and Iesus in the middest: And the scripture was fulfilled which sayth, he is counted with the wicked. THe wonderfull great cruelty of the soul∣diors is described by the Euangelistes, whether they were hyred of the Iewish priests to do it or whether they did it of their owne luste, so that they are rather to bee counted beastes then men, which haue so put a∣way all humanitie. Moste cruell wolues exer∣cise
their fiercenesse vpon a most meke Lambe. neyther can they be satisfied with their outra∣giousnesse by any meanes, they beate hym, thei spitte vpon him, they mocke him, only they de∣uoure him not. He which clotheth all thinges is striped out of hys clothes. He whiche ador∣neth all things is made deformed. The meke∣nesse of Christ is to bee marked whiche recea∣ueth all reproche in hym selfe for vs, bearyng his owne crosse to deliuer vs from euerlasting punishmente. He tooke vpon him al our sinnes making satisfaction vpon the tree for them that we might knowe to whom we should flye, & on whom we should lay the burthen of our sinnes. Come vnto me (sayth he) all ye that labour and are laden and I wil refresh you. Learne of me bycause I am meke and humble of hart. Take my yoke vpon you, and ye shall fynde reste for your soules. Let vs caste awaye therefore the burthens of our sinnes, and submit our neckes vnder the commodious and lyghte yoke of the Lorde. Let vs take vp our crosse, and followe our capitayne and Prince, by whom the world is crucified vnto vs, & we to the world. Bles∣sed is he whom the Lord exalteth to so great an honour, to make hym companion with hym of hys crosse. In that yt they bewayle that ye iust man is led forth, whome before they requyred to haue put to death, it setteth forth the incon∣stancye, of the foolyshe common people, and what it is to truste vnto them.
Christ semeth to signifie (as far as I cā iudge) by the grene tree perfect things, & by the drye tree, thinges of the Iewes now decaying: As though he would say: If ye when things be in safety, & that your thinges floryshe, doe thus, what will be done then when things are despe∣rate, and whē your enemies shal oppresse you? If ye dare rage against me so vniustly & furi∣ously, when as yet the lawes be in force and of strength, what will they dare doe then when they are deuided amongest them selues, & whē as common lawes and ryghtes shall not be ex∣ercised by reasō of warres & seditions? Others referre the grene tree to Christ, and the drye to the Iewes, as though he would say, If they rage so agaynst me, which am innocent, what wil they commit against those which haue pu∣trified them selues in sinnes. Let euery man a∣bounde in his own sense, Furthermore Christ teacheth vs, why we should weepe, namely sor our sinnes, & punyshment which we haue de∣serued by sinning, that we may preuent & turne from vs the anger of God by true repentaunce by flying from sinne and conuerting to Christ. Let vs not bee ashamed to bee infamous for Christs sake, seing we see Christ our hed led a∣mongest the wicked doers, and counted for the ryngleader of the vngracious, which commit∣ted no sinne, neither was there guyle found in hys mouth, ☞And Iesus sayde: Father forgeue
them, for they know not what they doe. And Pilate wrote also a title, & put it on the crosse, And it was writ¦ten Iesus of Nazareth kynge of the Iewes: This title then red many of the Iewes, for the place where Ie∣sus was crucified was neare to the city, and it was written in Hebrew, Greeke and laten: Then sayde the high priests of the Iewes vnto Pi∣late, wryte not, The kynge of the Iewes, but that he sayd, I am kyng of the Iewes, Pilate aunswered: What I haue written I haue writ∣ten. Then the souldiours when thei had crucified Iesus, tooke his gar∣ments, and made foure partes, to e∣uery souldior a part, & his coat, & the coat was wtout seame, being wourn from the top throughout: They sayd therfore one an other, let vs not cut it, but cast lotts for it who shal haue it, that the scrypture myght be fulfil∣led whych sayeth: They parted my garmentes amongest them, and on my coate dyd caste lottes. And these thynges in dede dyd the souldiors. IEsus setteth forth to vs an example of won∣derfull mekenesse and loue, for being repro∣ched
with most great infamye, and vexed with extreme euils of most wicked men, yet doth he make intercessiō vnto the father most feruent∣ly praying for thē which crucified him. Father (saith he) forgeue thē, they know not what they do. Thys dyd he to teache vs to praye also for them which hurte and persecute vs, & to wysh them good which curse vs. Mat. 5. Some of thē knew ful wel what they did, but Christ spea∣keth so mildly, according to his naturall good∣nesse & mildnesse: and he mitigateth their sinne to teach vs pacience and charitie. other some marked not what they dyd: Agayne other some being seduced by the high priestes and Phari∣sees were ignoraunte, what greate mischiefe should come therof. Oh the inuincible goodnes of Christ. Oh the vncomprehensible loue. Oh the vnspeakable gentilnes which could not be ouercome by any euils, by any cruelty, or fierse¦nes, somuch as to speake one harde or vngen∣tle worde were it neuer so small. Here is that fulfilled whiche Esaye Prophecyed,Esay. 53. he hath borne the sinnes of many, & he prayed for trans¦gressours, that they might not perishe. Who wil now dispayre of the gooddesse of God and forgeuenesse of synnes, when as they obtayne grace and remission of sinnes, which haue cru∣cifyed the fountayne of grace? Let no man therefore dyspayre of hys saluation, though he haue synned neuer so grieuouslye, so that ca∣styng awaye hys packe of sinnes he runne vn∣to
Christ, by true fayth and repentaunce. The gates of Gods mercye are yet open, Christe reiecteth no man that is desyrous of saluation and of a newe lyfe. Let vs remember these thynges continuallye, that the fountayne of Gods mercye can neuer bee extinguished by our synnes, it can neuer bee emptied,Ioan. 1. zach. 13. of whose fulnesse all men maye drawe, the fountayne of the bloude of Christ is euer flowyng in the Churche: for the remission of synnes. If we be armed with these weapons, then shall we be safe agaynst Sathan, whiche is busilye ccupied to driue vs being ouerwhelmed with the heape of synnes to desperations. The sanc∣tuarye is open to all them whiche beleue in Christ, wherein they fynde a sure defence,Heb. 10. and vnpregnable place of refuge agaynst all temp∣tations. In that he hangeth naked vppon the Crosse, and is spoyled of hys garmentes by moste vyle men, it teacheth vs to beare wil∣lingly pouertye, and the robbing of our goodes lthough they bee moste wicked which do put vs to infamye, and spoyle vs of our goods. Let vs remember we entred naked into the world, and naked shall we goe out of it. Let vs leaue hese thynges whiche bee of the worlde, vnto he worlde, and make haste in mynde to oure eauenlye Father with whome we shall dwel erpetuallye, and haue the fruition of heauen∣y thynges, which will endure euerlastynglye. Let vs being naked,2. Cor. 5. follow Christ which was
naked, which will not suffer vs to bee naked, but will clothe vs with a wedding garment & vnspeakable glory. They kepe hyd of purpose that he made him selfe the Sonne of God, to please the Romaines withall, whoe bare then the chiefe swey in all thynges. ☞And they whyche passed by reuyled hym waggyng theyr heddes saying: Art thou he that destroyedst the tem¦ple, and buyldest it agayne in three dayes? Saue thy selfe if thou be the sonne of God, come down from the cros. Lykewise also the hygh priests mockyng hym wyth the scrybes and elders, said, he hath saued others, can can he not saue hymself? If he be the kyng of Israel. Let him come down now frō the crosse, & we wyll beleue hym, he trusteth in God, let hym de∣lyuer hym now, if he wyl haue hym, for he sayde, I am the sonne of God: The same also the thieues whyche were wyth him cast in hys teeth and reuiled him:If he will that is if he fauor hym. Namely one of the euel doers, whych honge by hym rayled on hym saying, if thou be chryst saue thy selfe and vs: but the other aun∣sweared and rebuked him sayinge
fearest not thou god, seing thou arte in the same condemnation? And we are in dede rightously, for we receue thynges worthye of that we haue done, but this man hath done no e∣uell. And he sayd vnto Iesus, Lord, remember me when thou comeste to thy kingdome: And Iesus said vnto hym, Verelye I saye vnto thee, thys daye shalte thou bee with me in pa∣radise. IN Christ is set forth vnto yt faythfull a most absolute example of all vertues, which shuld neuer be seperated from their sight, being al∣so besides that the price of our redemption. He tooke vpon hym for our sake all manner of re∣proche, he is reuiled frō the lowest to the high∣est, no man pitieth him, no man hath compassi∣on on him being afflicted, no man comforteth him, they rage agaynst him most cruelly with∣out mercy, and yet could not hys goodnesse be ouercome by theyr malice. Nothing coulde plucke hym backe, from the worke of oure sal∣uation, which he had begonne, nothing coulde withdrawe him from hys office. Let vs follow our hed, and despise what soeuer is delectable & glorious in the world,Math. 10. Luke. 21. let vs also willingly suf∣fer reproche, following the steppes of hys hu∣militie & pacience. Let there be nothing so hard nothing so paynefull to feare vs awaye from
our vocation. For in pacience we shall possesse our soules, and he whiche abideth to the ende shall be saued. Let vs not be ashamed to be e∣uill spokē of for Christ: Let vs not be ashamed of the witnesse of our Lorde Iesus Christ, nei∣ther let vs be abashed if any afflictions be to be suffred for his sake.. Tim. 1. For if we haue bene parta∣kers of his crosse, we shall also be parteners of his glory. All thinges though they be neuer so hard or paynefull shall be welcome vnto vs, if we shall considre that our hed hath suffred the same thinges before. In the thiefe is set forth an example of Gods loue and grace, whiche is not denyed, yea euen to moste greate sinners, if that with a true fayth they call vpon God by Christ, if they acknowledge Christ to be theyr Sauiour, if they repente from the bottome of the harte. Let vs also acknowledge our sinnes with the thiefe, Let vs acknowledge remission of sinnes to come by Christ, and we shall finde the lyke comforte at his handes. We muste in the meane time acknowledge and confesse that we are worthye both of eternall death and al∣so of infamye for our wickednesse, and we must cast our selues vpon the grace of Christ, which is our righteousnesse and life: when our consci∣ences are sore troubled, and as it were in mā∣ner desperate, we muste runne vnto Christ, & saye, Remember me Lorde in thy Kingdome. Great is his mercye which loued vs and gaue his Sonne for vs, that by him we might liue. He desireth not the death of a sinner but that he may be conuerted and liue. I expound para∣dise
for all kinde of ioye and pleasure, this daye shalt thou reioyce with me, and haue the frut∣tion of eternall pleasures. By these wordes is the error of the slepers confuted, whiche saye, yt the soules departed out of the bodye do slepe: The soules of the Godly slepe not, but as sone as they bee loosed from the bodyes they are in vnspeakeable ioye with Christ. ☞And it was aboute the sixte howre, and there stoode by the crosse of Ie∣sus, his mother & his mothers sis∣ter Mary the wife of Cleophas and Marye Magdalen. Then when Ie∣sus saw his mother, and the disciple whome he loued standing by, he said vnto hys mother, woman beholde thy sonne. Then sayd he to the disci∣ple behold thy mother. And frō that howre the disciple toke her for hys. WE haue now very often spokē of the most great infamye whiche Christ suffred, and of the extreme sorrow wherewith he was af∣flicted, which declareth his exceding great loue towards vs, when as nothing is more vnplea∣saunt vnto man, then losse of his fame & glory. Moreouer what is more greuous vnto ye flesh then to bee beaten and wounded? It is meete the refore that we loue him, whiche of his vn∣speakable loue hath suffred most greuous thin¦ges for our sakes, so that he mighte deliuer vs frō euerlasting punishment & infamye. It hap∣peneth somtimes yt in afflictions, ye presence of frendes, doth bring cōfort & mitigate ye sorrow.
But in Christ al thynges are otherwise, for he receaueth no consolation by his Mother stan∣ding by, but a more greuous sorowe, when as neyther he cā helpe his mother, nor his mother him. In the meane time his fayth and loue to∣wards his mother ceasseth not, but he dying cō¦mendeth her to his welbeloued Disciple, which shoulde thenceforth take care ouer her in his stede. But in that Iohn writeth that his Mo∣ther stode by the crosse, it is not done without a reason, and a certaine Emphasis, for by these wordes is signified that there was a constan∣cye of fayth with an exceding greate modestye in his Mother, which constancye might miti∣gate her vnmeasurable sorow, yea and myghte fortifie her, and staye her vp. This vertue be∣ing in the beleuers maketh them, that they can commit nothing vnworthily in trouble, neither can they altogether fall, the Lorde assisting thē with his hand. ☞And from the sixte howre there was darknes ouer the whole earth vnto the ninth howre, and the sunne was darkned, and about the ninth howre Iesus cryed wyth a loud voyce, say∣enge. Ely, Ely lama azasthaui. That is, my God, my god, why hast thou for¦saken mee? And some of them that stode by there whē they heard it said: thys mā calleth Helias, and straight
wayes one of them ran and tooke a sponge and fylled it with vineger & put it vpon a reede, and gaue it him to drinke, but other sayde, let be, let vs see if Helias will come and saue hym. CHrist in all his torments both of body and mynde, hath nothing to lighten his payne though it were neuer so litle: the Lord did thrust hym down and drowne him in all euils, and tooke awaye from him all comforte, to the end we should not dispaire if the lord somtimes withdrawe his comforte from vs in temptati∣ons and seme to be a slepe. In the meane tyme Christ declareth in hym selfe to bee of the true nature of man, and sheweth the weakenesse of the fleshe, to put them to shame, whiche fayne that Christ had a fantasticall bodye, or do take from hym the felyng of payne. Also the vayne and hipocritical opinion of the Stoikes is here confuted which make their wise mā to be with out griefe. Christ is not so and yet was there neuer any at any tyme eyther more holy than he, or els more absolute in vertue, but he gro∣neth, he wepeth, he is sorrowful, and he com∣playneth to the Disciples of hys lot, he crieth that he is forsaken, when as neuerthelesse in an other place he saith, that he is not alone,Psalm. xvi. but hys father is with him, yea his Disciples for∣saking him. We see therefore that thys is spo∣ken after the fashion of men, & that in our per∣son,
who toke vpon him selfe all our infirmitie, but yet without sinne. The Lord teacheth vs by this figure, what he requireth of thē which worship him, namely to denye thēselues whol∣ly and to be redye to follow theyr capitayne in all thynges, yea though the consolation of god be absent or withdrawne. For it is not so great a matter to beare the crosse, if a man feele pr∣sent consolation. For the more he feeleth conso∣lation, the lesse doth the burthen of afflictions trouble him. It is pleasaunt to all fleshe to re∣ceaue grace or consolation in aduersities, but wholly to denye him self, and to seeke neyther in him self nor without him selfe any thing, but God only in al things. Here is the work, here is the labour: This finally declareth him to be a stoute souldier of Christ. Let it not therefore be greuous to vs if we bee forsaken of all men, yea and of our most derest frends. This is not one dayes worke, but it requyreth a longe and continual fight, if a mā wil ouercome him selfe and cleaue only to God. A man is hardened by afflictions, so that all thynges be they neuer so paynfull will be easye. Let vs not therfore des∣payre if the Lord somtimes hide away & with∣drawe hys ayde and comforte from vs. Thys is no newe or rare thing to those which are ex∣ercised in the waye of God and in the spiritual battayle. Courses of thynges are altered, so that after rayne and tempestes, followeth most pleasaunte fayre weather and calmes. The Lord is neuer vnmyndfull of hys, how so euer
he dissemble sometymes, whiche is myghtie to comforte vs after oure longe temptation, and yt with a great increase of spirituall ioy. Wher∣fore the saintes complayne in their extreme ad∣uersities that they be forsaken of god, when as yet for all that in the meane tyme they dispaire not, but desyre helpe of God so much the more feruently, as they doe acknowledge them sel∣ues to bee more forsaken, nothyng doubting, but that God wil be present in tyme, and shew forth hys power in theyr weakenes. We must therefore according to the example of Christe stande stedfaste in afflictions, neyther muste we come downe from the crosse, how so euer our enemyes rage or bee woode agaynste vs. We shall see streyght waye God will ayde vs from aboue. He is ready to succor them which fyghte and hope in hys grace: And althoughe he seeme somtymes to vs to deferre or to bee a slepe, thys is done to geue vs an occasion to fyght, & so by that meanes to ouercome: These thynges happen vnto vs from oure moste piti∣full. Father to trye our fayth and to teache vs to acknowlede our weakenes, to flye vnto him and to requyre helpe of him. Let their doctrine therefore be put awaye from the Churche of Christ, whiche affyrme Christ to haue dispay∣red vpon the crosse. But let vs rather thynke thus, that the heauenly Phisition tooke vpon him self al euils for vs,Heb. 2. that we myght acknow¦ledge that we haue a faithful high priest, which can be sicke with them whiche bee sicke, and to haue compassion of oure infyrmitie.
Christ soroweth with them which are sorow∣full, and the hed powreth out his complaynte for the members which are sicke. This voyce is of the fleshe, whiche feleth payne, & yet doth it not rebell nor dispayre: Innocent flesh feleth extreme payne, a moste holy bodye feleth moste greuous torment, which is so wonderful great that euen the insensible creatures beare wit∣nesse that they be sorowfull concernyng a cer∣tayne horror for the death of theyr creator. Christ expresseth thys vnmeasurable griefe by xample and graue wordes. ☞Afterward when Iesus knewe that all thinges were finyshed that the scriptur might be fulfilled, he said, I thirst. And there was set a vessel ful of vineger, and they filled a sponge with vineger and ysope, and put to hys mouthe. Then when Iesus had receaued the vineger, he sayde, it is finyshed. THere is no member in Christ withoute paine and torment. Wherin we may per∣ceaue partly the loue of the father, which put hys Sonne so forth to all euils for vs, and partly the cruelty and ingratitude of ye Iews. God hath not spared hys owne Sonne (sayeth Paule) but hath deliuered hym for vs al. The heauenly Phisition setteth before vs a reme∣dy
against the disease of our first parents, who by the prouocation of the apple, would satisfie their appetite whereby synne hath flowed into vs all. Christ therfore woulde not offend with his tonge, that he might heale thys disease: tea∣ching in the meane tyme all the Godly to tem∣per them selues from the delicatenesse & plea∣sures of the body, wherby the feare of god doth almost growe out of vse in the hartes of men. In that he sayeth, it is finyshed, he declareth that whatsoeuer thynges were Prophecied of him in the law and Prophetes, are now finy∣shed. For al did demōstrate Christ, & the shad∣dowes and olde figures were put oute, when Christ the true light shined: Of ye which thing we haue spoken more aboundauntlye in other places. Let vs learne here that our saluation is finished in Christ, and let vs not seke it any fur∣ther in other things besides Christ. There re∣mayneth nothing whiche can be added vnto it eyther by the Pope, or by any creature. Thys is left that we should followe the accomplisher of our fayth constantly and stoutely, and to a∣bide in our calling euen to the end,2. Tim. 4. 1. Gor. 9. that we may at the length say with Paule, I haue fought a good fighte, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the fayth, and that we runne not as in an vncertaine course, but yt we may win the price. ☞And Iesus cried with a loude voice, Father into thy handes I committe my spirite, And when he had sayde
thus he bowed hys hed and gaue vp the Ghost. THe lyfe of al mortall men dieth vpon the crosse, as touching the flesh, opening vn∣to vs by his death the way of life, and de¦uouring death by his death. An innocēte dyeth for wicked mē, a lābe wtout spot is made a most acceptable sacrifyce vnto the father for our sinnes: Let vs pore wretches therfore flye vnto so healthful a death, and draw out our life there. Furthermore let vs also learne to dye dayly to the the affections of the flesh: we must cast away the world, and those thinges which are in the worlde, that beynge cleane from the contagiousnes of the world, & so beynge naked we may follow Christ naked, in whome here∣after we must both liue and dye: we must offer our selues wholy vnto him which hath offred himselfe for vs, in whose mercye we puttinge our trust, let vs commend our soules to the fa∣ther which is a true God, & hath redemed vs. ☞And beholde the vayle of the temple was rent into two partes from the top to the botome, and the earth did quake and the stones were clouen, & the graues wer open, and many bo∣dies of the saintes which slept, arose and came oute of the graues after his resurrection, and wente into the hollye citye, and appeared to many.
But when the Centurion, and they which were with hym watching Ie¦sus, saw the erth quake & the things that were done, they feared greatly saying, trulye this was the sonne of god. For when the Centuriō, which stode ouer against hī, saw that which happened, and that he thus crienge gaue vp the Ghost, he glorified God saying. Truly this man was iuste & ye son of God. And al the peple that came together to that sight, and had sene the thinges whych happened re¦tourned smiting theyr breasts. THe vayle is rent, this is of the kind of ex¦amples which are called pure or dombe. where examples teache and speake with deedes and without wordes. The like wherof is when Ezechiell is cōmaunded to burn some of the clipped heares, and to cast awaye other some. Also when as Tarquinius walkinge in a gardein did out of with a staffe before his sōs seruant the chief toppes of the poppye. So the vayle being rent doth teach vs that al fygures ar accōplished in Christ, and whatsoeuer hath bene hidden or kept secret in the old testament is now expounded, the dayle beyng takē away & his bloud being shed entred into the Sanctū Sanctorum. So he spake by the earth quake & by other signs to declare, firste the vnworthi∣nes of the thinge, which the earthe coulde not beare whilst his creator suffred.
Secondly to shake of as it were an old garmēt declaring that it would one day put on a newe face by his preaching, which now suffred, and that it should be moued by the preaching of the Gospell. Where the Gospell & death of Christ is Preached there do the foundacions and cor∣ners of the earth tremble: the fleshe quaketh & is troubled when that it heareth that hys wor∣kes are nothing worthe,Prolip. and that the death of Christ hath thoroughly payed all thinges. But in that it is written that the dead dyd aryse a∣gayne, that is done by a figuratiue speache of Hebrewe. For fyrst he setteth forth as it were by a generall proposition, all things that were done but yet at sundrye times, then he entrea∣teth of euery perticular thing, for by and by he returneth to his buriall. So the dead did then ryse agayne from death and come into the citie when Christ was now risen, which is the first fruites of thē which slepe: and that they might testifie that they liued in deede, they appeared vnto many that the Iewes might the easlyer beleue yt they shoulde also one day ryse againe, when as they see Christ & their elders to haue risen agayne. So the stones doe detest the vn∣worthynesse of the thyng, and the hardnesse of the Iewes, which do crucifie theyr Sauiour. Moreouer also they doe signifie the Gentiles whiche be a harde people, and yet for all that, they should be clouen and subdued to the Gos∣pell: Into the holy citie. So was Ierusalem called in the olde tyme: but it was so corrupted with naughtinesse and wickednes, that it was
made rather a denne of theues. Esay. 1. The bodye of Christ (as it semeth) was cōmitted to the Centurion and his souldiours to bee wat∣ched, for the souldiers crucified him. This Cē∣urion when he sawe the wonderfull thynges that happened, knewe that Christe was more then a man, which he testified and confessed wt  loude voyce. These thinges are not written without a cause: As though the Euangelyste woulde say, Though that man were a Gentile and a warrior, neuerthelesse he gaue God the glory. To geue God the glorye after the He∣rewe Phrase, is to beleue the truth, to cōfesse the true god, & to cleaue vnto the truth. First e calleth him a iuste man, and thys is the first egree vnto fayth, and then he calleth him the onne of God. The smyting of the breast, hath n admiration with griefe and shame. For thei which cryed crucifie him, now are sory and are ricked in conscience. Wherby is noted besides he grief which followed of sinne, also the incō∣tancye of the people whiche before tooke the priestes part, and now take Christes part.Pricking of conscience followeth wicked acts So o late at last commeth shame and punishment. So in lyke case came it to passe in our first Fa∣her Adā, that he was ashamed bicause he was aked, when as he was also neuerthelesse na∣ed before hys sinne. He whiche bendeth hys mynde to commit wickednes, persuadeth with imselfe that he can be hidden, but it commeth o passe otherwise, for the day of the Lord re∣ealeth al thinges, & also the conscience it self.1. Cor. 3. But put case it be not made manifest here, yet
for al that it shalbe reueled at the comminge o the lord before the whole world.Math. 10. Time vteret al things, & ther is nothīg so secret which sha not one day be reuealed. After sinne folowet shame, feare and trouble. ☞Then the Iewes bicause it was th preparation of the passouer, that th bodyes mighte not remayne vpon the crosse on the Sabaoth daye (for that Sabaoth day was a hygh day) desyred Pilate that theyr legs migh be brokē & the bodyes taken down. The soldiors therfore came & brake the legges of the fyrste, and also o the seconde whyche were crucifyed wyth hym, but when they came vn∣to Iesus, and saw that he was alre∣dy deade, they brake not his bones, but one of the souldiours thruste a speare into his side, and incontenent¦ly there ran foorth water and bloud, and he which sawe it bare witnes & hys witnes is true: and he knoweth that he speketh the truth, that ye also myght beleue.Exod. 12. For these things wer done that the scripture might be ful∣fylled, ye shall not breake a bone of hym. And againe an other scrypture sayeth. They shall looke vpon hym, whome they haue persed.
THe preparacion whereof is here spoken, I take to be for the Sabaoth following, and not for the eating of the lamb, for that was almost past, but ye .vii. daies lasted stil, in which they did eat vnleuened bred. And this sabaoth bicause it fel within the dayes of the passeouer was called a gret day, because it was the most solemn. The euāgelist doth manifestly enough declare that all these thinges were not doone rashly, but that the truth mighte corresponde with the fygures. The Church is built out of the syde of Adam sleaping, and out of the same floweth forth water to washe the sinnes of the whole worlde. The gate is opened that there might be a sanctuary in that place for all bele∣uers, and a hole made in the rocke, where as many as labor do fīde rest, ther ye hart opened yt we might nothing doubt of loue. This foun∣teyne of Gods mercy neuer ceaseth to spreade abrode, of whose fulnes all they which thurste do drinke and are refreshed, that it mighte be made in them a foūteine of water ouerflowing to eternal life: Let vs therfore draw water out of the fauntaynes of our sauiour, that we may herafter lyue vnto hym alone, which is so woū¦ded for vs, which doth open his harte vnto all men, and sayth, geue me your hart O my chil∣dren. Here shal the shepe of Christ find the ry∣uers of life, and the gate thorough which they goe in and out at. I woulde to God the Lorde would woūd our harts with his loue,Pro. 23. that we might ryghtly weigh & cōsider so gret a loue to yt which we cā neuer worthely enough āswer, no though we should dye a. M. times for him
Let vs learne therfore by the death of Christ to acknowlege our own deth, which as it was dew vnto vs, so also was it taken away by hys death. Let vs also learn to dye vnto sinne, and affections, and take vp our crosse and followe Christ, that when Christ shal appeare, we al∣so may appere with him in glory. ☞And when the euen was come, be∣cause it was the preparation of the passeouer, which went before the Sa¦baoth, there came a rich man of Ari∣mathea, named Ioseph a counceller and an honeste senator, a good man and a iust, he did not consente to the counsell and deede of them, whiche also hymselfe wayted for the kyng∣dome of God, and therwithall was a disciple of Iesus, but secretlye for feare of the Iewes, he taking bolde∣nes went vnto Pilate and asked the body of Iesus. And Pilat meruelled if he were alredy dead, and called vn¦to hym the centurion, and asked him if he had bene anye while deade, and when he had knowne the trueth of the Centuriō, he gaue ye body to Io∣seph who bought a silken cloth, and toke down the body and wrapped it in a cleane silken clothe. And there
came also Nycodemus, whych came to Iesus before by night, bringinge myrhe and aloes mingled togethers about one hundreth poundes. Then toke they the body of Iesus, & wrap¦ped it in lynnen cloth wyth the spi∣ces as the manner is of the Iewes to bury. And there was in the place where he was crucifyed a gardeyn, and in the gardeyn a new sepulchre, wherein was neuer man yet layde. Then Ioseph put the body of Iesus in hys new tombe, which he had he∣wen oute in a stone, there therefore layd they Iesus, because the Iewes preparation day, for the tombe was nere. And when he had roled a great stone to the dore of the sepulchre he departed. THis worde Decurio, in the olde tyme did signifie to Latten men a senator, and ra∣ther taketh hys name of Curia, that is to saye, of the courte, and not of thys woorde Decem which signifieth ten. Iosephe is called Iuste, not that he was without sinne. but by∣cause he abhorring from the councell of the vn∣godly, consented not to the death of Christ, and bicause he wayted for the kingdome of heauē.
So also are we iuste if we receaue Christe by fayth whom they wayted for, and if we keepe our selues vnspotted from thys worlde▪ For Christ is our righteousnesse: That man setteth forth an example both of greate constancie and also of fayth. For in how great a daunger doth he put him selfe, when as he consenteth not or els withstandeth the enterprises of the malici∣ous? Who seeth it not to be a present daunger for any man to aske the bodye of Iesus in so great hatred, and crueltie, and to burye it ho∣nourably? But fayth if it be a true fayth, at∣tempteth great and perillous thinges with an inuincible courage. When as then the Euan∣geliste saith that he was a noble and riche mā, we muste not regard that onely in him, but the Euangelist setteth forth hys couragious mind and great fayth. As though he woulde saye, al∣though he were suche a man, yet coulde ney∣ther fauoure, nor feare nor ryches make hym declyne from the truth to consent to the ende∣uoure of the wicked. Besides that he was so stoute, that also after hys death, whē as others blasphemed and contemned him, he wente vn∣to the iudge nothing abashed, neither feared he to burye him, whom all men had condemned. Let vs thinke the same of Nicodemus, & haue a regard not of what power and riches he was, but of how great fayth, and boldenes of minde. Let vs marke with how great an argumente they beare witnes of their fayth which do put themselues forth to the displeasure of all men and to the daunger of lyfe for Christes sake.
If they had followed him in his lyfe time, they had not vttered so greate fayth, as when they cleaue vnto him being vilelie reproched & con∣demned: neyther are they ashamed to honoure hym very noblye whom all men detested as a wicked one. They therefore whiche before hyd thēselues and dissembled the matter for feare, come now forth with glorye, to the example of al the faythful. It commeth to passe somtimes yt they which be very timorous, do when time serueth fyght more couragiously and stoutely, namely takyng harte agayne vnto them. We learne here also that riches and power may be ioyned wt fayth, and they adde a great honoure to the beleuers. Riches hinder nothyng if the eye be simple and the mynd faythful. To waite for the kingdome of heauen is a Periphrasis of the faythful: He loked for the kingdome of god, that is he was a faythfull man he beleued. And surely his faith was no smal faith, which durst thinges being yet freshe in the middest of the rage of the furious and malicious mē, aske the body of Christ. There was in these men a per∣fect and an approued vertue, whiche as it stic∣keth vnto god, so cā it neuer bee made ashamed or fall. In that he putteth Iesus into his own Sepulchre, he declareth his vehemente loue towardes Iesus. For we be all suche louers of our selues that we wil not so much as lend our neighbors any thing of ours. He roleth a stone to ye gate of the graue, yt the bodye of the inno∣cent might not be violated by the vnbeleuers, which is a tokē of an earnest care & of godlines
And God vseth this thyng for a witnes of the resurrection wherfore god often tymes doth dispose the workes whiche we doe, otherwyse then we purposed, In the meane it is not done without the ordinaunce of God that Christ is put into a newe tombe, wherein none had euer bene buryed, least the enuye of the Pharisees would falsly haue alledged Christ to haue ry∣sen by the power of an other. But in all these things doth the prouidence of God shine forth, which styrreth vp the hartes of the Godly to this thing, to burye the most holy body of their Christ honourably, least it should lye or be cast forth withoute renowne and vnburyed, & that by the honourable burial the prophecy of Esay in the xi. Chapiter, mighte be fulfilled, saying, and his rest shal be gloryous. Nowe after hys humiliation and ignominye beganne the tyme of glorification, and of a newe and immortall life which Christ the fyrst fruites of thē which ryse agayne from the dead sheweth forth.Ioan. xvii. The graue is new, the linnen white and cleane that all thinges might signifie a certayne newnes vnto those whiche are baptised in the death of Christ, being buryed with him in hys death. Rom. vi.And Marye Magdalene and Marye Iose beheld where he should be lay∣ed, sitting ouer agaynste the Sepul∣chre for there followed hym women which came with him from Galiley these sawe the graue, and howe hys
bodie was layed. And they being re∣tourned prepared odours & oynt∣ments, and they rested on the Sab∣both day according to the commaū∣dement: But the nexte daye that fol∣lowed the preparation of the passeo∣uer, the high priestes and Pharisees assembled vnto Pilate: saying, Syr we remēber that that deceauer said, while he was yet aliue: After three dayes I will ryse agayne. Com∣maunde therefore that the sepulchre be made sure vntill the thyrde daye, least his Disciples come, & steale him away, and saye vnto the people. He is rysen from the dead, and so shall the last error be worse then the fyrst. Pilate sayde vnto them, ye haue a watch, go and make it as sure as ye can. And they went theyr waies, and made the Sepulchre sure, sealed the stone, and set watche men to kepe it. IN these women is an example of Godly∣nesse and diligente loue, as they had follow∣ed the Lorde in hys lyfe tyme, so doe they not forsake hym when he is dead. They runne and watche with a Godlye pensiuenesse, hauyng an earnest care to annoynte hys bodye. This
example ought we to followe, for there is no let but that we may bestowe this godlines vp∣on Christ, but yet in his membres, for that he after this is no more with vs in his body. Let not vs be ashamed to serue Christ & to be libe∣rall vnto the poore. Let it not repente vs if any thyng depart frō our goods, whē as we may see that he hath geuen his life for vs, which doth so much commend the poore vnto vs, when as we may see also these women & honest mē to haue spared no coste, for to bury the body of Christe moste honourablye. For we learne here what great griefe & sorowe they had which dare not cōfesse Christ openly for feare, & yet neuerthe∣lesse they cease not to runne priuily, & to watch, to admonishe, and to helpe that they might doe Christ seruice at the leaste by some waye. We which may professe the doctrine of Christ frely without feare & daūger, ought to pray for these to helpe thē with our seruice, & succour thē wt our benefites, to chearish thē in cōforting thē & exhorting, &c. Cōtrarilie in the priestes & Pha∣risees is set forth an example of enuie, for they wer not yet fatisfied with the putting of Christ to death, but also they muste persecute him be∣ing now dead, & shadowe his glorye. They are tossed with infernall madnes, with enuie, feare & curiositie. The vngodly are inwardly vexed & fearefull how so euer outwardlye they set a face on the matter, We remēber (say they) that that deceauer, &c. Such bitter words doth en∣uie vse til it come to destruction. The Phari∣saicall infidelitie had perswaded to it selfe that the light & sauior of the world was a deceauer
They be like vnto those which crye also nowe of dayes that the doctrine of the Gospel is he∣resie. And if so be that Christ be a seducer and a deceauer, what nede these wicked mē to be af∣feard of him? Doth God raise vp deceauers frō death? Wil god assiste those which cleaue vnto lies? No truly: What are they affrayed of thē? This feare declareth that they beleued other∣wise, thē they confessed by mouth, thei cal him a deceauer, but yet thei iudge hī to be somwhat more noble: their conscience putteth thē in re∣membrāce that he was the sonne of God, or at the least greater thē a man. And if it so be that thei were persuaded that he was the Sonne of God, why then did they crucifie him? So the vngodlye do alwaies shew forth in some parte that they knowe and beleue that thyng to bee true, which thei impugne, persecute & pursue. So Herode feared least Iohn wer risen again. So also an other Herode feared leaste a childe new borne should possesse the kingdome. Thei make safe & seale the sepulchre but what they brought to passe by all these things, the honou∣rable Resurrection of Christ doth ynough de∣clare. Vaine therfore ar the enterprises of the vngodly which labour to oppresse & to quenche the truth. For there is no councell against the Lord, & the truth cā not be oppressed, but it ap∣peareth alwayes more bright. Let no mā ther∣fore be affeard of the power of ye world, though it be neuer so great, ye Lord is strōger & migh∣tier, he which cleaueth vnto him shal neuer be put to shame.
Here followeth the historye of the Resurrection and As∣cention of Christe. ANd whē ye sabboth day was past, in the euen of the Sab∣both, Marye Magdalene, & Mary the mother of Iames & Salome, bought odours, that thei mighte come & embaulme him. And vpō an euening of ye sabboths which dawneth of one of ye sabboths, name¦ly the fyrste daye of the Sabbothes, when it was yet darke, they came to see the Sepulchre. And they came ve¦ry early in the morning vpō the first day of the Sabbothes when the sōne was risen. And beholde there was a great earthquake, for the Aungel of the Lorde descended from heauen, & came and rolled backe the stone frō the dore, and sat vpon it: and hys countenaunce was like lyghtening, and hys raymente whyte as snowe, for feare of whom the kepers were astonyshed, & became as deade men, And behold some of the kepers came
into the cytie, & shewed vnto ye high priests all the thyngs that had hap∣pened. And they gathered thē toge∣ther with the elders, and tooke coū∣sel & gaue money largely to the sol∣diers, saying, Say ye that hys disci∣ples came by night and stole him a∣waye when ye were a sleape: And if this come to the presidēts eares, we will perswade him, & saue you harm¦les: So they tooke the money and did as they were taughte, and this sayeng is noysed amōgst the Iewes vnto thys daye. Then the women when they were on theyr way, sayd amongest thēselues, who shall role away the stone from the dore of the sepulchre? (For it was a verye great one) and when they looked they saw how the stone was rolled awaye frō ye dore of the sepulchre. And they wēt into the sepulchre, but found not the body of Iesus, but they saw a yonge mā, sytting on the right hād, clothed in a white garmēt, and they were a∣frayed. And the aungell aunsweared and said vnto the women: Feare ye
not, I know yt ye seke Iesus of Naza¦reth which was crucified, he is risē, he is not here, he is risen I say, euen as he tolde you, come see the place where they layed him: But go your waies & tel his disciples & Peter, yt he goth be∣fore you into Galiley, there shal ye se him as he sayd vnto you. THe history of ye resurrectiō of our sauior Ie¦su christ is painfully & most diligētly writē theuangelists, namely for ye vse of the church. Wherin is prīcipally declared how yt hūble & despised Iesus beīg crucified betwene thieues is glorified after his death, & to what renowm he is exalted vnto. For neyther could deth hold him,Heb. 3. which hath abolished both deth & also him which hath dōiniō ouer deth, & hath made thē free as many as throgh feare deth wer al their life time subiect to bōdage. Christs resurrectiō therfore is oure lyfe & righteousnes, which for this cause was diuers wayes proued by the a∣postles, namely to cōfirme our faith. For other¦wise our flesh doth hardly beleue the resurrec∣tiō of the fleshe, which semeth to it self impos∣sible & absurd: which may be sene in thapostles whose wauering doubtfulnes coulde scarce be taken away, notwithstand so many most e∣uidēt demōstratiōs god suffereth his sōetimes to be tēpted & to fal, that their weaknes might be made manifest to thē selues, & also to others but he ceaseth not to rayse vp & confyrme thē by his powre, till he fully performe, & take frō
them al distrust. So far is he from casting vs a¦way for our weakenes, that he also appeareth vnto womenne, and maketh them Apostles of his resurrection. For they came of loue to the sepulchre, partly to see the Sepulchre, partly to annoynte the bodye of Iesus. The earth was moued at the death of Chryst, to de¦clare that it was heauy with his creator: And it is in like case moued at the resurrection, de∣siring gladlye to restore hym whome it had re∣ceaued, and as it were reioysinge that Christe was risen agayne. Moreouer the earthe was moued at the sēding of the holy Ghost, to teach vs by this figure, that by the death and resur¦rection of Christe thorough vertue of the holy Ghost the whole world shoulde not only be mo¦ued but also be renewed: we learne further∣more that the councels of the vngodly agaynst the truth are vayne, for howe soeuer they go aboute by lyes to extinguishe the truth, yet doth God bryng to passe, that by those things which they haue excercised to oppres the truth the truth shall more brightly shyne forth: wor¦thely therfore are ye Iewes repudiated & blin∣ded, which do abhor ye truth, so that they which could not abide to be saued by the truth, should pearish beyng wrapped in lyes & errors. This gospell is chieflye declared vnto Peter, who was in most great he uynes, aswel for the deth of his lorde whome he offended by denyenge of hym, as also for hys deniall, that he might re∣ceyue comfort and knowe that his synne was forgeuē hym. Furthermore christs resurrectiō to a new life, doth stir vs vp to newnes of lyfe,
that we beyng dead to sins mighte henseforth liue to righteousnes. They which doe still lye and rotte in the filthynesse of sinnes do declare that they haue not yet risen again with Christ. For they which are risen truly in Christe, doe shew forth the same in worthy fruites, neither doth sinne reigne in their mortall bodye. They thincke not vpon earthlye thinges, but their minde is vpon heuenlye thinges aboue, where Christe their hed sytteth at the righte hande of the Father. ☞And they went out quickly and fled from the Sepulchre, for they trem∣bled, and were amased, neither sayd they any thing to any man, for they were afraid: And Mary Magdalene ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whome Iesus loued, and saide vnto them. They haue taken awaye my Lorde out of the graue, and we can not tell where they haue laied him. Peter thē went forth and that other disciple & came to the sepulchre: And they ran both together, & the other disciple did out runne Peter, and came first to the se¦pulchre. And when he had stowped downe, he sawe the linnen clothes lyeng, yet went he not in. Thē came
Simon Peter folowinge him and wente into the Sepulchre. And he sawe the linnen clothes lye, and the napkin that was about his hed not lyeng with the linnen clothes, but wrapped vp in a place by it self. Thē wēt in also that other disciple which came firste to the Sepulchre, and he sawe and beleued. For as yet they knew not the scripture that he shuld rise again from the deade. Then the disciples went away again to theyr own howses.Epanodus But Mary stode with out at the Sepulchre weping. And as she was wepīg, she bowed her self into the sepulchre, & saw two aūgels clothed in white, sittinge the one at the heade and the other at the feete there where they hadde layed the body of Iesus. They sayd vnto her woman why wepest thou? She sayd vnto them. They haue taken awaye my Lord, neither wot I where they haue layde him: When she had thus sayd, she tourned her backe, and saw Iesus standing, and knew not that it was Iesus: Iesus sayd vnto her, woman why wepest thou? Whome seakest thou? She supposing hym to
be a gardener, sayed vnto him. Syr if thou haste borne him hense, tel me where thou haste layed him, and I will fetch hym. Iesus sayd vnto her, Marye, Shee tourned her selfe and sayed vnto hym. Rabboni, which is to saye, Maister. Iesus sayd vnto her, touch me not, for I am not yet ascen¦ded vnto my Father, but goe to my brotherne, and say vnto them, I as∣cende vnto my Father and to youre Father, to my God and to youre God. Marye Magdalene came and tolde the disciples, that she had sene the Lord, & had spoken such things vnto her: Shee tolde, I saye, them which were with him as thei mour∣ned & wept. And they although they hearde that he was on liue and that she had sene him, beleued not. THe Euangelistes do by many & diuers wordes beate into our heddes the re∣surrection of Christe, that we myghte see that Christe was exalted after death, and beleue that we shall enter into lyfe by the death of Chryst, and that also our fayth and hope myght be confirmed. Christ could in dede haue illustrated the harts of his disciples wt his sprite as sone as he was dead, so yt they
should haue nothing douted of his resurrectiō, but he loueth this doubt & weaknes in thē, to make them so much the more earnest in their supplications vnto God. The more a sick man fealeth his woundes and diseases, the more is he made desirus of medicine. So lykewise the more we fele in our selues the weaknes of the flesh, the more do we run vnto God for ayde & the lesse do we bragge in our owne strengthe, which can doe nothing without god: when as therfore we feele oure fayth begin to fall, then haue we occasion offred vs to call vpon God wyth continuall prayers. The prouidēce ther∣fore of God doth by litle and litle leade the dis∣ciples to the knowlege of the resurrection of his sonne till it hath fullye made them perfect. Thei saw the stone rowled a wai, thei foūd the sepulchre empty, thep sawe the napkins & the lynnen clothes layed aparte, the place wherin he laye, and finally the aungell testifyinge that he was truly risen. And this is diligently to be marked, that the Angell sayth that Christe of Nazareth whiche was crucified is not there, by which wordes theyr opinion is plainly con∣futed, which cōtēd to haue ye body of Christ eue¦ry wher after his resurrectiō & not in a place. For what other thing do they, then deny the verity of the humayne nature in Christ, and re¦uoke from hel Marcyons opinion. Christs bo¦dy was not in the sepulchre after his resurrec∣tion, when as it appeared vnto Marye Mag∣dalene, neyther was it wyth the eleuen at
Ierusalē, when as it was with the two which went toward Emaus. No more can it be in the breade, when as according to the scriptures it was taken vp to heauē and setteth at the right hand of God the father. For Christ went from the father and came into the worlde, againe he left the world and went to the father. But he left not the worlde, in respecte that he is God, when as he is with vs to the end of the world: therfore left he the worlde as concerninge his manhed, that is, he caried into heauen the bo∣dy, which he toke of the virgin Mary into the glorye of the father. This is the foundation of the Catholike and Christian faythe, and the hope of all the elect, which whilest they denye or stirre, let them take heede, what they make of Chryste, or howe they are to be counted for Christians. Let them take heede I saye what foundation they stick vnto. The flesh of Christ also is glorified after his resurrection, and yet for all that is it flesh in deede, and putteth not of the nature of flesh, and although it be spiritu¦all, yet is it not conuerted into a spirite, and much lesse into God. A spyrite (sayth Christe) hath neyther flesh nor bone as ye see me haue: The body therfore of Christ is in heauen, and not in the bread of the supper which coulde be neyther necessarye nor profitable: yea it was caried vp is heauen after the resurrection in the sight of the Apostles, which was so expedi∣ent for theyr fayth, which fayth they could ne∣uer establysh by the suppenor by the presence
of his body glorified, but that thei alwaies wa∣uered and doubted til suche time as they were confyrmed by the holy ghost. We must there∣fore transferre our minde from all corporal and visible thing into heauen, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of god, & beleue that Christe hath geuen his body to the death for vs. After this sorte is the body of Christ eaten, not with the teeth of the body, but by the contemplacion of fayth. For fayth in dede, which cleaueth on∣ly to God may vse corporall things, but not as though saluation were bounde to those things, and be deliuered to vs thorough them, but to put in practise fayth and charitie. Euen so we cary about the bread and wine in the Supper, we distribute it amongest vs and we eate not to merite any thing of God by the same as it were by a certayn worshipping, but bycause by these outward signes our senses are stirred vp, to weigh & consider more diligentlye the grace of God geuen vs by the death of Christ and to lift vp our mindes to Christe the bread of lyfe, which for our sakes descended frō heauen. For our weakenesse therefore are the sacramentes instituted of Christ, as it were certayne signes of the grace and beneuolence of God towardes vs, which do stirre vs vp to consider the pro∣mises of God, wherein our fayth is exercised. For they whiche vse these signes doe testifye that they haue fayth in the promises of God, and that they bee of the number of those which acknowledge God for theyr God, whom they
worship in spirite, in whom they trust to whō they geue thanks, &c. And whē doth god more declare & shewe him selfe to be our God & most louing Father, thē when he promiseth to geue vs hys sonne and also performeth it?Roma. viii. For how can he not geue vs all thinges with hys sonne? Or what can he denye whiche hath geuen vs his only begotten Sonne?Iohn. iii. And he hath geuen him vnto vs, not to punishe and condemne vs, as we iustly haue deserued, but that by him we might be saued and haue euerlasting lyfe. For he gaue him to be ours al whole, to be our righ¦teousnesse, wisedome, hollynesse, redemption, saluation and life. What a great loue is thys, what a great grace, the eternal Sonne of God descendeth and taketh vpon hym selfe our na∣ture: that we being made newe by his grace, might ascend, taking after a sort the diuine na∣ture. He descended that we creping on ye groūd might be thoroughe him transferred and lift vp to his glory. The Lord of al things taketh vp∣on him the shape of a seruaūt, to make vs which are by nature seruaunts, & oppressed with most greuous bondage, the sonnes of God. He ta∣keth vpō him selfe our weakenes to strengthē vs with his spirite. He is made man to trans∣forme vs by his grace in a manner into Gods. He hath communicated with vs in fleshe and bloude being made partaker of the same, that also the children, namely we, might haue euer∣lasting fellowship with him. In fine, he would be made like to hys brethren in al thyngs,Hebr. 3. that
we myghte see that we haue a mercifull and faythfull high prieste to doe all those thinges which we haue to do with God, which maketh satisfaction by his bloude for all our sinnes. He hath taken vpon hym selfe all that is ours, to participate vnto vs what so euer he him selfe is and hath. And thys is it which he sayeth to Magdalene, I ascende to my Father and your father, my God and your God. See what a loue the father hath geuē vs, both to be named and to be the Sonnes of God.i. Iohn. iii For the which cause he is not ashamed to cal vs brethren, say∣ing, God to my brethren, &c. For his spirite bea∣reth witnes to our spirit that we are the sōnes of God. For we haue not receaued a spirite of bondage to be affeard,Roma. viii. but the spirite of Adop∣tion, by the which we crye Abba Father. God therefore is our Father and our God, and we are hys children, with whom he hath made a new couenaunte, and confyrmed it by the bloud of hys Sonne, that we might nowe haue fel∣lowship & mutuall perticipacion with the fa∣ther & hys sōne Iesus Christ. These benefites so great and most ample are geuen vnto vs of God,ii. Cor. iii. i. Cor. xiii. but they are receaued of vs only by faith (which selfe fayth is also the gifte of God) and are felt inwardly in spirite. For as yet we doe not beholde the glorye of the Lorde with open face (for partlye we knowe and perceaue by a glasse in a riddell) and it hath not yet appeared what we shall be, which is done to our profit, yt the father should not make vs fully perfecte whilest we liue in this fleshe, but doth geue
vs the knowledge and fruition of him selfe by certain degrees, that we might learne to think humblye of oure selues, & to walke before oure heauenly father in the feare of God, and to de∣pend al wholly vpō him, we are therfore made safe, but yet in hope, whiche hope is not nowe sene fullye otherwise it shoulde be no hope (for how can a man hope for the same thing that he seeth?Roma. viii.) Therefore we wayte for yt by pacience which we see not but onely beleue & hope for. Let vs be exercised in the meane time vnder ye crosse, & so shal we continually be made perfect by his spirit being hated & oppressed in ye world that we may the soner aspire vnto our father & be very desirous to come to our heauenly coū∣trey.Heb 13. Titus. ii. We are straūgers in this world, we haue here no abiding citie, but we looke for one to come, wayting for that blessed hope & appearīg of the glory of the great God, & our sauior Ie∣sus Christ.i. Iohn. iii ii. Cor. iii. And we knowe that whē he appea∣reth, we shal be like vnto him, bycause we shal see him as he is and we al representing the glo¦rye of the lord in a glasse wt vncouered face, are transformed into the same Image, frō glory to glorye, as it were by the spirite of the Lorde. This is signified & shewed before, as it were in a certayn figure, in that Christ openeth him selfe after his resurrection by litle & litle, & lea¦surely by certain degrees, as we see in the wo∣men, in the trauellers of Emaus, & in the dis∣ciples. Sometime he appeareth in the forme of a straūger & holdeth their eyes that thei knew him not, sometime he talketh with Marye in
forme of a gardener, sometime he sendeth hys Aungell vnto them, sometime he offreth hym selfe to be sene and handled openly, & sometyme he forbiddeth them to handle him, & sometime he appeareth at Ierusalem, & sometime in Ga∣lile, till he openly ascended into heauen al doubt set asyde they loking vpon him, & sent his spi∣rite fully vnto them from aboue. So God of∣tentimes deferreth and will not be sene by and by, and being called vpon sendeth not succoure strayght waye, that our hartes mighte be kin∣dled more & more & our fayth shine forth more brighte. Who vnderstandeth not that Mary Magdalene was pulled away frō Christ with an euil wil whē as he sent her to the Apostels. For vndoubtedly shee woulde haue gladlier a∣biden longer with Christ, & satiated her minde with the contemplacion & fruition of him: But it was more necessary to serue her neyghbor, that that ioye, and so wonderfull comfort shuld also be brought to the Apostles. Whereby we learne that we can not fully haue the commodi∣tie of the contemplacion of the Godhead whilst we liue here, but we had neede to serue oure neighbour by charitie. Paule acknowledging thys writeth vnto the Philippians after thys sorte, What to chose I knowe not,Phillip. i. for I am constrayned of these two thinges, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is much and farre better. Neuerthelesse to abide in the fleshe is more nedefull for you.
And the woman entred into the sepul∣chre & found not the body of ye Lord Iesus: And it happened as thei wer amased therat, behold two mē stode by thē in shining garments: And as they were affrayed, & bowed downe theyr faces to the earth, thei said vn∣to them: why seeke ye the liuyng a∣mong the dead: He is not here, but is risen. Remember howe he spake vnto you, wen he was yet in Galile saying, That the sōne of mā must be deliuered into the hands of sinneful men, & be crucified, & the thirde daye rise agayn. And they remembred his words & returned frō the sepulchre, & tolde al these thinges to the eleuen & to al the rest. And as they wer go∣ing to tel it to the disciples, beholde Iesus met thē, saying Al hayle. And they came & held him by the fete and worshipped him. Then sayed Iesus vnto thē, be not affeard: Go tell my brethren, that they go into Galile & there they shall see me. And it was Mary Magdalene, & Ioanna & o∣thers that were with them whiche tolde the Apostles these things. And their words semed vnto them fained
things, neither beleued they them. DIuerse wayes doth Christe (as I haue sayd before) declare that he is risen from death in deede, but yet to those, oute of whose hartes the feare of the crosse had not al∣together shakē of Christ, & which sought hym with a feruent fayth. Charitie is diligent & ne∣uer ceasseth, they go often to one place & looke againe being desirous to serue Christ: Whose feruentnes doth put to shame our sluggishnes. They seke one absent, being very desirous of him, we eyther disdayne Christ being presente in the poore, or els we thinke scorne to bestowe a litle of our money vpon thē. They spare no laboure nor coste, we are so addicted to thinges that we can let thē go empty away. The Lord therefore doth not frustrate the desire of these godly womē, but meteth thē, saluteth thē frend¦ly, & offreth him selfe to be felte of thē, finallye he comforteth them. All these things are done, that their weake faith might be strengthened. Let vs not doubt therefore at all, but that the Lord wil be with vs and comfort vs, whē we are in afflictions and temptacions. So that we seke the lord and cease not till we fynde hym. And behold two of them went the same day to a castle called Emaus whiche was about threscore furlongs distant frō Ierusalē. And thei talked betwene thē of al these things yt had happened
And it came to passe as thei were in talking and reasoning together: Ie∣sus also him selfe drewe nere & went with them, but theyr eyes were hol∣den that they knew him not. And he said vnto thē, what manner of talke is thys whiche ye haue together as ye walke, and be so sad? And one of them aunswered whose name was Cleophas, and sayd vnto him. Arte thou only a straunger in Ierusalem and knowest not the things that are happened there in these dayes? To whom he answered, what thinges? And they sayd vnto him, of Iesus of Nazareth, whiche was a Prophete, mighty in dede and word before god and al the people: And how the high priests and our rulers deliuered him to be condemned to death and haue crucifyed hym. But we hoped that it had bene he whiche shoulde redeme Israell: And nowe as touching al these thynges, this is the thyrde day since these thyngs are done: yea and certayne women also of our compa∣ny amased vs, which came to the se∣pulchre before daye lyghte, & finding
not hys body, came and sayed, that they had seene a vision of Aungels, which sayed that he is on lyue. And some of them whiche were with vs went vnto the sepulchre, and founde it euen so, as the women had saide, but him they saw not. THe same daye, namely in the which the Lord had risen,Luke. 10. two of these seuenty disci∣ples whom the Lorde whē he was yet li∣uing had chosen, wente forth: It appeareth that these disciples woulde haue fled for feare, namelye of the persecution, which they suppo∣sed to be at hande. This historye also teacheth that it was true which Christ promised, name¦ly that he would be presente euen there where as but twoe were gathered togethers in his name. God is alwayes present with his, yea & then when they think least, he putteth them in memorye of him selfe, telleth them what coun∣sel is best to take, & manifesteth him selfe vnto them. More ouer he speaketh outwardlye by his word, by his sacramēts, and finally by all his creatures, to stirre vp and prouoke vs to praise him. God therfore is alwayse and euery where presēt with vs an arbiter & a beholder not onely of all our woorkes, but also of our thoughtes. This teacheth vs to liue honestly with feare and great reuerēce before him. For if we be ashamed to commite vile thinges whē men behold vs, how much more ought we to be ashamed to committe any such thing in Gods
syghte? The presence therefore of god doeth euerye where admonishe vs to abstaine from sinnes: we hoped (saye they) that it had beene he whiche shoulde haue redemed Isra∣ell. By these wordes maye be gathered, that there was then a solempne and famous opi∣nyon amonge the Iewes, as touchynge Messias the king, which should redeame them and renewe theyr kingdome. For such a one had they promised thē, eueri where both in the law & the prophetes: But they applied al that to acertein tēporal kingdome & carnall setting at liberty: although our Iewes nowe a dayes deny that there was a Messias promised, whē as neuer thelesse the Scribes aunsweared the wyse menne whyche soughte Christe, that he shoulde be borne in Bethelem, and that by the prophecy of Michea. Their fayth is weake & feable, but not altogether extinguished, they talked of Iesus, they desyred hym feruentlye. Christ therfore ioyneth hym selfe with them, & fyrst dissēbleth, neyther openeth he hym selfe by & by vnto thē, to make thē cōfes with their owne mouth their weakenes: And then at the last he declareth vnto them the scriptures, and nourisheth and kindleth that little sparke of fyre which was so depely hiddē in them, which they also themselues confesse, sayinge, did not our hartes burne within vs while he talked with vs. The word must be added vnto those which are yet in doubte of their faythe, accor∣dynge to the example of Christe, by the whych
worde fayth is encreased like as fire is when wod is put vnto it. But there muste firste be a fayth, thoughe it be neuer so small, otherwise it is done in vaine, to put wod to the fire, that is, it is to no purpose to preache the worde of God to an infidele. And whereas the faythful do willingly heare the worde of God, it can not be chosen, but that the mynde shalbe illustrate and kindled by the spirite of God. ☞And he sayed vnto them O fooles & slowe of harte to beleue all that the prophets haue spoken: Oughte not Christ to haue suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? And he began at Moyses and all the pro∣prophetes & enterpreted vnto them in al the scriptures which wer writ¦ten of him, and they drew nye vnto the castle which thei went vnto, and he made as thoughe he would haue gone farther. And they constrayned hym sayinge, abyde wyth vs for it draweth toward nyght, and the day is farre spent. And he went in to ta∣rye with them. And it came to passe as he sat wyth them, he tooke bread and blessed, & brake & gaue to them:
and their eyes wer opened, and they knewe him, and he vanished out of their sighte. And they saide betwene them selues, did not our harts burn within vs, while he talked wyth vs by the way and opened vnto vs the scriptures? and thei rose vp the same howre, & returned back again to Ie¦rusalem, and found the eleuen gathe¦red to gether, and them that were with them, which said The Lord is risen in deede and hath appeared to Symon: And they tolde what thinges were done in the way, and how he was knowen by the brea∣king of the bread. CHriste nourisheth their faith, althogh it be but weake, but first he rebuketh them, to make them more attentiue: He shaketh a∣waye the drowsines and forgetfulnesse, of the fleshe, that they mighte geue attentiue hede to those things which the scriptures witnesse of him and draweth forth the spirite which spea∣keth in the sriptures. But the places which Christe broughte out of the lawe and Pro∣phetes, are not here lefte oute withoute the prouidence of God (although they be here and there mencioned afterwarde by the Apostles)
to make vs more diligently to search thē, whē as we heare, that the scriptures beare witnes of Christ. For so sayth Iohn in the v. Chapi∣ter. Search the scripturs, for in thē you think ye haue eternall life, and they are they whiche testifye of me. Yf ye had beleued Moyses, ye woulde haue beleued me also, for he wrote of me. He therefore which will confyrme the weake ones in faythe, and comforte them whiche be heauye and faynte harted muste bringe the holye scriptures, for the woorde of God is the meate & lyfe of the soule. And the sriptures doe testifye two thinges of Christe, fyrst how he was humbled, & throwne downe for vs and what he also suffered for our sakes: Secondlye what greate glory he was exalted vnto after his passiō: that we might also learn &. stedfastly beleue ye Christe suffered for vs to make satisfaction for our sinnes. And then that he rose again for our iustificatiō, that we might beleue Christ to be our righteousnes, and that our life is restored vnto vs by Christe, when as we hope we shal arise again to eternal life. But we must take hede in ye meane time which waye we may come to this life, namely by the crosse and denial of our selfe. For it is not law∣ful for vs to go by any other way to the inheri¦taunce of the heauenlye glorye, then that waye which the onely begotten sonne of God wente. And it behoued Christe to suffer and so for to enter into his glory: he that doth not diligent∣ly weigh this, is a foole & slow of harte, and let him desire of god to open his mynd in the ho∣ly
scriptures: This is also to be noted, that re∣pentance and forgeuenes must be preached one¦ly in the name of Christ: but he meaneth by re¦pentaunce and forgeuenes of sins the Gospell. For the partes of the gospell are repentance & forgeuenes of sinnes. For saluation gotten by Christ hath many names, and sometimes it is called but by one of the names, and that by the figure where one part is put for the whole,Synechdo∣che▪ as maye appeare by the actes of the Apostles. He whych doth not acknowledge him selfe to be a synner, can not be able to receaue forgeue¦nes, neyther can he be desyrous of saluation by Christ. But he which feeleth and aknowled∣geth his disease, he I say runneth gredelye to Christ the Phisition of the soules, & there doth vncouer and laye forth his disease. True faith reioyseth to communicate vnto other suche thynges as it hath receaued and therfore they returne streightway to tel the other rheir new ioyes. ❧Whilest they spake these things (and it was the same day at nighte which was the first day of the Sabaoths, & the dores wer shut, where the disci∣ples were assēbled together for feare of the iewes) came Iesus, & stode in the middest of them, and sayed vnto them. Peace be vnto you: And they were abashed and affearde,
and supposed that they had sene a spi¦rite, and he sayd vnto them: why are ye troubled, and why do thoughtes arise in your hartes: And agayne he sayd vnto them: peace be vnto you: and when he had thus spoken, he shewed vnto them hys handes and hys syde, and therwythall sayed,Luke saieth his handes and feete. be∣hold my handes and my fete, that it is euen I my selfe, handle me and see, for a spyryte hath not fleshe and bones, as ye see me haue. Then were the dysciples gladde, when they saw the Lorde, and whyle they yet beleued not for ioye and wonde∣red, he sayd vnto them, haue ye here anye meate? (For he appeared vnto the eleuen as they satte at meate, & cast in their teeth their vnbelief, and hardnes of harte, because they bele∣ued not them whyche had seene that he was risen agayn) And they offred him a pyece of broyled fyshe, and a piece of an honye combe, & he tooke it, and did eate it in theyr syghtes. WE see againe how Christ according to his promyse is present with his which are as∣sembled & gathered together in hys name
For feare causeth them not to be the lesse belo∣ued of Christe. And euen in the faythfull there is a feare & dread, but they which are stronger in spirite ought to erect those vp. For that is it which Christ sayth, ye shall haue oppression in the world, but in me peace. There shalbe al∣wayes men therefore which shal persecute the iust, so that the flesh which is in them shal ne∣uer be without dread & complaint. But yet the godly persist in ye wil of God, til it be the lords pleasure to delyuer them, how so euer the flesh in the meane tyme do struggle and complaine. But what nede had ye glorified body of meate? He eateth not to refresh his body, and he vseth not this corporall meate for necessitye, but to declare vnto his the veritie of humayn nature in him: He eateth not therfore for him selfe but for his Apostles. So let vs also doe those thinges which serue for ye edifieng of our neigh¦bors, although there be no necessitye for vs to do them. For we oughte to lyue and serue not our selues but our neighbours. ❧But Thomas one of the twelue, which is called Didimus was not with them, when Iesus came, The other disciples therfore said vnto hī, we haue sene the Lorde, but he said, excepte I se in his hands the printe of the nailes, and put my finger in∣to the printe of the nailes, & thruste
And after eyghte dayes agayne hys Disciples wer within, and Thomas with them, then came Iesus when the dores were shutte, and stoode in the middest and sayd, peace be vnto you. After that he sayd vnto Tho∣mas, bring thy finger hither, and see my hands & reache hither thy hande and thrust it into my side, and be not faithlesse but beleuing. Thomas an∣swered and sayd vnto him, my Lord and my God. Iesus sayd vnto him: Thomas bycause thou hast sene mē, thou hast beleued, blessed are they yt haue not sene and yet haue beleued: And many other thinges did Iesus in the sight of hys Disciples whiche ar not writtē in this boke. But these things are writtē yt ye might beleue ye Iesus is the Sonne of God, & that in beleuing ye mighte haue life tho∣rough hys name. IN that Iohn saith that Thomas was not wt thē, & Luke mencioneth of eleuen, this may be holpē by the figure of Synechdoche. For although Thomas was not presente with thē bodily, yet his minde was with thē, nei∣ther was he seperated frō thē as Iudas was, so that he was of the number of the eleuen, vn∣to the whiche Luke had a respecte. Iohn the
Euangeliste testifieth that the dores wer shut and that Iesus entred in when the dores wer shut: Neyther for al thys doth this absurditie and impossibilitie follow, which some do gather by this place, namely that the bodye of Christe did penetrate the substāce of the woode, or was together with the woode in one and the selfe place, For the glorified bodye can by no other reason entre. The Sonne entreth through the glasse, and a voyce thorough a dore, and yet it followeth not that two bodyes are both in one place. This is not done rashely and withoute Gods prouidence, namely that Thomas who was very hard of beliefe was not wt the reast of the Apostles when he appeared, and that he obstinately gainesayth his fellowes which told him they had sene the Lorde. For Christ vsed yt incredulitie of Thomas to support our faith withal, that ye veritie of his resurrectiō might the more manifestly be knowē. And the weake fayth of Thomas beareth stronger witnes of hys resurrection, then doth the easye & quicke beliefe of Magdalene. So the Lorde knoweth how to vse our naughtinesse to hys glorye and our saluation. Fayth is the gifte of God & no man can beleue, except it be geuen him of god. Here may therfore be gathered three sortes of men out of this present historie: Iudas, Peter and Thomas. Iudas is a treacherer and a runnegate, which betrayeth an innocente. Pe∣ter denyeth and sweareth. Thomas doubteth and obstinately gaynesayeth. Here we learne
firste that there is a greate difference and cer∣tayne degrees in sinnes. No man surely liueth without fault, & all we are sinners, but one sin∣neth more heynously then an other. We muste take hede therefore, that we may dye daily vn∣to sinnes, and that we may be regenerated into new men, and if it so be that we can not beware of all sinnes, yet let vs take hede, frō the worst sinnes. If we be sorye and weepe with Peter, God wil looke backe vpon vs and be merciful vnto vs. If we doubt and wauer in fayth, Let vs not forsake the church: Let vs not cut a sun¦der the vnitie, neyther let vs seperate our sel∣ues frō our brethren, and the Lord wil appeare vnto vs, as he dyd vnto Thomas, and will strengthen our weakenes. But let vs beware of couetousnesse, misbeliefe and treason, that we most vilely perishe not with Iudas, The weakenesse and doubting of Peter and Tho∣mas profited very much for this cause, that we might learne to acknowledge our weakenes & the power of God.1. Cor. 1. Consider brethren (sayeth Paule) your vocation, that there be not many wise as concerning the fleshe called, nor many mighty or borne of a noble kinred, but god hath chosen the folishe things to the world, to put to shame the wyse, &c. That no flesh should boast before hym, & that it might not seeme to be our power but Gods power, that we  boaste that men wre chaunged  learning, or by our own w sdome  yt we might acknowledge the  benefite of God & the opera of
Moreouer from hence may argumēts be takē for the confyrmation of our Christian fayth. If any man woulde doubt of the Christian fayth or woulde affyrme it to be but a deceite & a col∣lusion, as dyd Porphyrius and Symmachus most wicked blasphemers of Christian Religi∣on. For if the doctrine of Christ had bene but a guyle, then Iudas would neuer haue repented him of his betraying, he woulde nothing haue bene ashamed to haue returned to the reaste of the Apostles, he had nothing neded to haue re∣stored the money and to saye, I haue sinned a∣gainst Innocente bloude. For thieues & suche as be wicked although they fall out somtimes among them selues, yet are they sone agreed a∣gayne, and they renewe theyr frendship. But Iudas dareth not retourne agayne to the A∣postles, but being in despayre hāgeth him selfe, And what nede had Peter to haue wept so bit∣terly, neyther would he also haue retourned to the Apostles if his conscience had accused hym of any guile? But he was desirous of the truth and a louer of righteousnesse: and Thomas fol∣lowed that which is iust, good and righte, how so euer he wauered. In that Peter therfore is vexed, in that Thomas seketh & earnestlye re∣quireth greater tokens, it is a most stronge ar∣gument that the doctrine and religiō of Christ is true and cleaueth to the truth & not to coul∣lours or guile. The truth which thei see & find in Christ, draweth them to laboure so diligent∣ly, to come into his fauour againe. The nature & condition of a glorified bodye suffreth not to
be touched or to be felte, but the Sauiour and louer of soules succoureth suche as are weake in fayth. He offreth him selfe therfore to be hā∣dled and felte of them, to confyrme in them the fayth of his resurrection. Thomas is not vt∣terly vnfaythful, but onely doubteth of the re∣surrection. Christ therfore sheweth vnto them the printes and skarres of his woundes, that thei might see it was the same body which was crucified on the crosse, and to declare vnto thē that he was truly risē frō ye dead to a new life, and that with the same bodye. As though he would say, beholde and knowe that euen I, I say, which suffered and was crucified for you, am truly risen againe frō yt dead, that ye might beleue also that your bodies shal arise agayne. This doth Paule vrge when he saith. If thou shalt confesse the Lorde Iesus with thy mouth and shalt beleue in thy harte,Rom. x. that God raysed hī vp frō the dead, thē shalt thou be saued. And againe if the spirit which hath raised vp Iesus from the dead, do dwell in you,F then he whiche hath raised Christ frō the dead wil quickē al∣so your mortall bodies thorough his spirite in∣habiting in you. Let vs learne also of our head, to receaue, norish, & paciently to beare with the weake ones in fayth. My lord & my god. This is the confession of a perfecte & true fayth. As though he would say, Now I know that yu art god in dede, whē as yu hast risen agayne frō the dead, yu at the last oughtest to be my God, for∣geue me my incredulitie, &c. Blessed are they which haue not sene & yet beleue, namely yt doe
not see me corporally presēt. As though he wold say: I wil not alwaies offer my self to be hādled of euery body, I wil take away this carnal pre¦sence, I muste be handled & touched by fayth. Blessed therfore are they which although they see not my body to haue risē agayne, as yu doest, & which doe not handle it but yet beleue in the meane time that I am verely risē. For Christ speaketh of the present occasiō▪ & continueth his argument of his resurrection, otherwise what so euer a mā saw not & beleued should be faith. This I speake bycause of those which wreste the words of Christ to the sacrament of the ho∣ly supper, & will proue by these words yt theyr fayth is better whiche beleue that the bodye of Christ is in the bread, thē theirs is which saye that the bread is but a signe of the body. They marke not that Christ speaketh not here of the holy supper, but to fortifie the faith of the resur¦rettion. He that beleueth that Christ was cru∣cified & that he also arose againe, this man is blessed, although he see it not with his corporal eyes as Thomas dyd. Otherwise there should be two wayes to saluatiō. One to beleue that Christ suffred for vs & rose agayne, & an other to beleue that the body of Christ is in the bread But there is none whiche vnderstandeth not how great an absurditie this is & not agreable to fayth. Here is also to be noted that in these wordes, bicause yu hast sene me thou also bele∣uest, this word beleue is here takē not propre∣ly but improprely.Heb. 11. For that which a mā seeth, the same he beleueth not. For Paule saith that fayth is the substance & certeinty of an inuisible
thing. Fayth therefore is here takē for experi∣ence, & to beleue, For to try. And many other signes did Iesus, &c. As though Iohn would saye, I haue diligently set forth and writtē the actes of Christ, although not al: for who cā do that? Neuerthelesse those thinges whiche are writtē are sufficient for oure saluation, namely such thinges as pertaine to the Godhed & hu∣maine nature of Christ, to his doctrine & mira∣cles, & finally what so euer pertayneth to the true fayth, whereby we are saued, and also to obtaine euerlasting life. He which beleueth not these things which are left, neither woulde he beleue other things if they shoulde be written. These things therfore suffice the beleuers nei∣ther seeke they for any more thinges. For the which cause suche thinges as the Euangeliste testifieth to be writtē for our saluatiō must bee red and marked of vs with greate reuerence & earnest studye: Let vs daye & night be conuer∣saunt in these things & meditating of thē, that our fayth may be supported, that our hope may be established, charitie may be kindled, paciēce exercised obedience, modestie, & all other good spirituall giftes aduaunced. But they be fooles yea and vngodly, whiche go aboute to proue by these wordes, that it is lawful for these Popes to deuise and imagen certayne other thynges of their owne heade, to fill vp the place of such thinges as are here lefte oute. For Iohn the Euaungeliste hath in briefe comprehended the whole some of Christian Religion, name∣lye that Christe is the true Sonne of GOD
which for our saluatiō came downe from hea∣uen, and was dead and rose agayne, and prepa¦red for vs eternall life: what can they adde to these thynges? ¶Afterward did Iesus shewe him selfe againe at the sea of Tiberias, and on this wise shewed he him felfe. There were together Simō Peter, & Tho∣mas whiche is called Didimus and Nathanaell of Cana in Galile, and the sonnes of Zebedei & two others of hys Disciples. Simon Peter sayd vnto them, I goe on fishyng: They sayd vnto him, we will also go with thee. They went forth & entred im∣mediatly into a ship, and that nyght they caught nothing. But when the morning was nowe come, Iesus stoode on the shore, neuerthelesse the Disciples knew not that it was Ie∣sus. Iesus sayd vnto them, Childrē haue ye any meate? Thei aunswered him, no. And he sayd vnto them, cast out the nette on the right side of the ship and ye shal finde. They cast out therfore, and anon they were not a∣ble to drawe it for the multitude of fishes. Then sayd that Disciple whō
Iesus loued vnto Peter, It is the Lorde? When Symon Peter heard yt it was the lord, he girded his coate vnto him, for he was naked, & sprāg into ye sea. The other disciples came by ship, for they wer not far frō lād, but as it wer two hundred cubites, and they drew the net with fishes. Assone then as they were come to land, they saw hote coales and fyshe layd theron, and breade: Iesus sayde vnto them, bring of the fishes which ye haue now caughte. Simon Peter went vp and drewe the net to lande ful of great fyshes an hundred fiftye and three: And for all there were so many, yet brake not the net. Iesus sayd vnto them, come and dine. And none of the disciples durst aske hym to say, who art thou? For they knew that it was the lord. Iesus thē came and tooke the bread and gaue them, and fyshe lykewyse. Thys is nowe the thyrde tyme that Iesus shewed hym selfe to his dysciples, after that he was risen agayn from the deade. THe nyer the Lord draweth to his ascention, the more he prepareth the mindes of his dis∣ciples
to the office which they should haue to doe, establishing first the thee certeinty of hys resurrection: he had called thē vnto him before from fishing, that they mighte also catche men by the preaching of the word: He putteth thē againe in remembraunce of thinges doone be∣fore, and stirreth them vp by a newe myracle, to remembre to what an office they were ap∣poynted, and what fruite they shoulde bringe therby, and that not by their owne power, but by the powre of God: For they had taken no∣thinge before Christe appeared vnto them. All our labour is in vaine, where as the operation of the holy Ghost and powre of Gods word is not annexed: And what soeuer we shall take, what fruicte so euer shall come of our prea∣achinge, that all whole oughte to be ascribed to the benefite of the Lorde: Let vs acknow∣ledge that the Lorde was with vs and gaue the succes. Let vs bring sish, that is men being caught by the net of the Gospel, out of the tem¦pesteous sea, & that not to our selues but vnto the Lord. In the meane time is shadowed the multitude of the gentiles which should be dra∣wen vnto Christ by the Apostles: And this is a very trim similitude of the net to the church, as Christ teacheth in the xiii. of Mathew. ❧Then when they had dynied, Iesus sayed vnto Symon Peter, Simon loueste thou mee more then these?
He sayed vnto him, yea Lorde, thou knowest that I loue thee, he sayed vnto him, fede my lambes: And he sayed vnto him agayn, Simon Io∣anna, Louest thou me? He sayd vn∣to him: Yea Lord thou knowst that I loue thee: He sayd vnto him: Fede my shepe: And he sayd vnto him the thyrd time. Symon Ioanna, louest thou me? Peter was sory because he sayd vnto him the third time, louest thou me. And he sayd vnto hī. Thou knowest all thinges, thou knowest that I loue thee: Iesus sayed vnto him, fede my shepe. HEre is opened in Peter the bosom of gods mercy to sinners, who when he had fallen heynousely, is for al that fullye restored a∣gain by the Lord, so far is Christ frō reiectyng of him, that he cōmitteh him to fede his lambs Let no man therefore dispayre but gette him to Christe the pledge of grace: A treble confession is opposed to a treble deniall. And therwithal is prescribed in a figure a certaine ordre for the pastors of the Churche of Christe, which they must followe, namely for the loue of Christe to fede his shepe. Peter is consecrated of new by the grace of Christ to ye office of an Apostle, frō ye which he worthely fel in denying through his
own folly, that grace might exceade where sin had abounded. Christ requireth charitye of his ministers,Rom. 5. 2. Tim. 1. which charitye is thend and marke of al lawes & precepts. Out of the loue of God springeth the loue to our neighbor. That harte which will preach Christe vnto others oughte to burn in loue. For if the fire of charity do not burne within, all other thinges which he shall speake and do wilbe but cold and slēder. They ought to haue a certeyn zeale to aduaunce the glorye of God, and the health of theyr neigh∣bors, which when as the most parte of the mi∣nisters want, it is no meruel though they pro∣fyte so little. For when charity waxeth colde, then must nedes a heape of all wickednes fo∣low. Hereof cometh so great idlenes, negligēce and sluggishnes, this is the cause whye the lawes of maiestrates are so little estemed, thys is the cause also that so manye wicked deedes spread abrode,Osey. 4. Esay 58. and bloude toucheth bloude, bi∣cause (as the prophet saith) they be hipocrites, I will not saye wolues, which doe possesse the rome of pastours, and when as they oughte to thunder with a moste loude voyce against the vices of princes, maiestrats, and of the people, they are dombe dogges,Esay. 56. seking their own and not those thinges whiche belonge to Iesus Chryst. And certeine prynces adioyn vnto thē selues suche teachers, namely those princes whose eares itch, turning them away from the truth and harkening vnto fables they adioyne vnto them such doctours namely as will flat∣ter their affectiōs,2. Tim. 4. and they suffer them gent∣lye
and learnedly to talke & reason of the gos∣pell, so longe as they touche not the sore & boile wherof they are sick. They winck therfore at certaine most vile thinges which are cōmitted of those princes neyther dare they rebuke thē accordynge to theyr Apostolicall authority and christian libertye. How wany is there now of dayes of those which preach the gospel in prin¦ces courts, ether to those which haue the chief gouernment of thinges,Esay. 1. that will exalte theyr voyce like a trōpet, and say with the prophet: The princes ar fellowes of thieues, traytors, vnfaythful contemners of the glory of god, of true religion and of Common iustice? They game, they goe a whorynge, they set all their mynde to fill the belye, and the meane time all Iustice decayeth. The turk possesseth the lāds of Christian religion, whilst they be at variāce one with an other like a frogge and a mouse, and whilest they cocker their filthy appetites: Rioting and pride with all kinde of concupis∣cence, do not only reygn in city and court, but also there be very few which set them selues a brasen wal agaynst them and mend agayne the breach of the hedge:Ieremy. 1 Ezechiel 22 Let these men remember what loue they beare to Chryst and also consi∣der how great a treasor is committed to their keaping, namely a flock gotten by the bloud of Christ.Math. 24. Let them diligentlye weigh with what punishment the Lord wyl punysh the vnfaith full ministers when he retourneth to take ac¦compt: he wil cut him in twayne (saith Christ) and put his parte with hipocrites
Verely verely I say vnto the: whē thou wast young, thou girdest thy self & did∣dest walke whither thou wouldest, but when thou art olde, thou shalt stretche forth thi hādes, & an other shal gird the & lead thee whither thou wouldst not. And this he spake signifing by what de¦ath he should glorifye God, & when he had spoken this, he sayd vnto hī, folow me: Peter turned about, & saw that dis∣ciple, whō Iesus loued, following, who also leaned on his brest at supper, & had said: lord which is he yt betrayeth thee? when Peter therfore saw him, he said to Iesus, lord what shal this man do? Ie∣sus said vnto him: If I wil haue him ta¦ry til I come, what is that to thee? Fo∣low thou me. Then went this saieng a∣brode amōg the brethern that yt disciple shuld not dy, yet Iesus said not to hī, he shal not die, but if I wil yt he tary til I cōe, what is yt to thee? The disciple is he which beareth witnes to these thin∣gs, & wrote these things, & we know yt his witnes is tru. Ther ar also many o¦ther things which Iesus did the which if they should be writtē euery one I sup¦pose the world could not conteyne the bokes that should be written. THat which is spoken by christ to Peter, let vs thinke the same to be spoken vnto vs al,
namely yt we should follow christ vnseperably, & cleaue vnto him keepinge our selues safe frō straunge things. Let euery man be vigilant in his own office, and not curiouslye searche and enquire out other mens sayings and doyngs. And let not affection be of more force with vs, thē the gouernmēt of god. Let Gods wil be the rule of our life, wherof to aske a reason of God is moste wicked. And althoughe these thinges are spoken vnto all men, yet chieflye they per∣tayn to the ministers the word, that they shuld earnestly follow Christ wtout any tarying set∣ting al other thīgs apart, beīg redy for his glo¦ry not ōly to lose their goods but also their life. The seruāt is not greater thē his lord, & there can be no greater glory then to suffer death for Christs sake. And the eleuē disciples departed to Ga¦liley to a mountaine, where Iesus had appointed thē. And when thei saw him, they worshipped him, but some of them doubted, whose vnbelief after he had re¦buked he saide. These are the woordes which I spake vnto you, while I was yet wt you that al things must nedes be fulfylled, whiche were written of me in the law of Moyses, & in the prophetes, & in the psalmes. Then opened he their mind, yt thei might vnderstād the scrip∣tures, & he saied vnto them: Thus is it written & thus it behoued Christ to suf¦fer & to rise again frō the ded the iii. day
and that repentance and remissiō of synnes shoulde be preached, in his name amōg al natiōs, begīning first at Ierusalem. And ye are witnesses of these thinges: and behold I sende the promise of my father vpon you: But tary ye in the city of Ierusalē, vntill ye be endewed with powre from aboue. THe shepherd being strikē, the shepe were scattered as saith ye prophet but afttr yt I am risen againe (saith Christ) I wil goe before you into Galile:Marh. 26. zach. 13. & the angel reher∣synge these words sayth: Go tel the disciples yt the Lorde is risen agayne and will goe before you into Galile. This to be nowe accōplished, the Euāgelist Mathew testifieth we haue de∣clared before what it is to preach repentance & forgeuenes of sins through the name of Christ:Math. 26. And the beginninge was made at Ierusalem first amonge the Iewes, for whose sake Iesus came:Esay. 2. om. 11. yet in the mean time Let vs reioyse that we also are called vnto thesame lot, & let vs be thāful, lest we be cut of again, It behoued that Christ should suffer yt he might be made a sacri¦fyce to pacify god for our sins, by the which sa∣crifice gods iustice myght be satisfyed. It beho¦ued hym to arise againe from the dead to make vs beinge raysed from the death of sinnes, righ¦teous vnto God the father and partakers of the life to come.
☞And Iesus came & spake vnto hys Disciples, saying, Al power is geuē to me in heauen and in earth. As my father sente me, so sende I you also: & when he had spoken these things, he breathed vpon them, and said vn-them: Receaue the holy ghost, whose sinnes so euer ye shall forgeue, they are forgeuē them, and whose so euer synnes ye shall retayne, they are re∣tayned. Go ye therefore, & teache al nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to obserue all thinges what so euer I haue commaunded you. And behold I am with you alwayes euen to the end of the world. Goe ye into al the world, and Preache the Gospell to all creatures: He that beleueth and is baptised shal be saued, but he that beleueth not shal be dāpned. More∣ouer these are the signes yt shal fol∣lowe them which shal beleue, In my name they shall cast out deuils, they shall speake with newe tonges, they shall driue away serpentes, & if they drinke any deadly drinke, it shall not
hurt them. Thei shal lay their hands on the sicke, and they shal recouer. AFter Christ had manifestly proued to his Disciples hys Resurrection, he sheweth thē what great glory he shall be exalted vnto, yt they also might abide vnder the crosse, knowing that eternal glory is prepared for thē with Christ. He sayth that all power is geuen him as well of heauē as of earth, to make vs to vnderstand how great a lord we haue, in whose hands all things are put. And no man hath in his hands the dominion ouer all thinges, but he must nedes be god also. For god geueth not his glory to an other,Esay. 42. as witnesseth Esay. Let vs not therefore be affeard, if vile men threatē vs, and conspyre agaynste vs, But let vs flye vnto the Lord, vnder whose tuition we shal be safe.Luk. xix. Psalm. ii. And although there be some which do say, we wil not haue him to reigne ouer vs & let vs caste away theyr bondes from our neckes, nei∣ther will yet acknowledge such and so great a Sauiour and king, but go aboute to cut of his kingdome, such rebelles neuerthelesse shall be subdued vnder his gouernment wil they or nil they,Phalme. ex. Psal. 2. & be made his fotestole. Whom the King of Kinges and Lorde of Lordes shal bruse with an yron rod, & shall breake them in pieces lyke a potters vessel, & shal reigne ouer thē for euer. Hitherto (sayeth he) haue I serued you with most humilitie, being put to reproches & al kind of euils, now is the time present wherin the fa∣ther wil glorifie me with the same glory which
I haue had alwayes without beginning, that euery knee might bowe vnto me, & the whole world might acknowledge me to be their Sa∣uiour, by whom the way to god is made open.Iohn. xvii. Philip. ii. I haue elected you witnesses of this thing, and I sende you into the whole worlde, to declare this ioy to al men, namely that I descended frō heauen, & haue ouercome death, & opened the way to heauen for miserable mortal mē,Math. x. taking away death and hell. Preach not these thynges only to the Iewes, as I charged you fyrste, which was to kepe the fidelitie of my promy∣ses, but go now to all nations, and call them to be companions of my glory whē ye shal preach these things through out the world, the vngod¦ly wil set vpō you by diuerse snares and wiles: Ye shal be hated of all men for my names sake, but be ye of a good courage,Iohn. xvi. I haue ouercome the worlde, and in me also shall ye ouercome all your enemies, for al power is geuen to me both in heauen and earth. I will alwayes be presēt with you and defende you against al inuasions Although I shall now withdraw from you my corporall presence which shall be profitable for you. I will yet be with you to the ende of the world. with my power, with my spirite & with my grace. This promise is not made only to the disciples, but to al beleuers, for the apostles li∣ued not to the end of the world. This is ye grea¦test cōfort yt cā be in aduersitie, diligently to cō¦sidre the power and kingdome of Christ.Math. 16 Thei which leane vnto this rocke the gates of hell shall not preuayle any thing against them. As my father sent me. We must vnderstād yt these things are spokē by cōparisō & not by equalitie.
As though he would say, My Father sent me to preach & to die for the truth, doe ye so lyke∣wise. But this is the differēce betwene Christs death, & his disciples death and ours, In that Christs death is healthfull to ye whole world, & pacifieth gods wrath for the sins of the whole world, & so is not his disciples death nor ours. Christ was sent of the father to be ye saluatiō & life of the whole world, so were not the apostles sent, but to preache this saluation and life to ye world. He geueth thē the holy ghoste, that we might vnderstād yt he which wil preach the gos¦pel wt a stoute courage hath neede of the holy ghost. For mā cā do nothing of his own power onles he be endued & holpē by the power frō a∣boue. And he sendeth his ministers, not to gape for riches, to make marchaundise, to seeke for gaine, to hunte for glorye, to swel in pride, & to burne in filthie lustes but to preach saluatiō vn¦to mē, The father sent not his sonne after that sort, neither studied Christ for such matters. He sent him to preach the truth,Phillip. ii. to teache the knowledge & true worshipping of God, & that he taking vpō him yt for me of a seruaunt, might serue al mē, & might be obediēt to the father euē to the death of the crosse, to take vpō him selfe the hatred & reproches of al mē, & in the mid∣dest of these to do good to al mē, & to saue al mē. Let thē then whiche are chosen to the office of preaching follow Christ in these things, let not thē do their own wil,Iohn. 6. but his wil yt sent thē, Let thē desire of the father the holy ghost to accom∣plish these things,Luke. 11. who worketh & performeth these things in thē: Whose sins ye shal forgeue.
That which might be spokē impersonallye, he attributeth to the persō, which is done after the Hebrue manner, who speake not seldome that impersonally whiche longeth to the persō: & a∣gaine thei attribute that to the persō which is impersonal. But wheras he saith whose sinnes ye shal forgeue, it is a periphrasis & definition of the gospel, for what is the gospel? This is ye gospel that god the father sent his son to make satisfactiō for the sinnes of mē, & to forgeue thē the same: Why thē he that preacheth remission of sins preacheth the gospel. As though Christ would say, To whō so euer ye shal preach the gospell, & if they receaue it, thē shall their sins be forgeuē thē. For he expresseth the same sen∣tence more plainly in the last of Marke, sayīg: Preach the gospell to all creatures, he that be∣leueth shall be saued, he that beleueth not shall be condempned. He that beleueth namely the gospell preached by you. Remissiō therefore of sins is geuē to the apostles bicause thei preach that wherby sinne is forgeuē, for they preache the gospel, or the same Christ, or grace of God by Christ, wherby sinnes are forgeuē, This is therfore the meaning, whose sinnes ye shal for∣geue, that is to whō ye shal preach the remissiō of sins, & they shall beleue the gospell preached by you, vnto thē are their sinnes forgeuen. Let vs diligently therfore note this, that that is at∣tributed to the Apostles, which belongeth on∣ly to God. For it cōmeth by the holy ghost, and not by ye preaching or voyce of mā yt the consci∣ence of mā shuld be assured yt god is his father and that his sinnes are forgeuen and the anger
of God pacified. But bycause the apostle is the instrumēt by the which god sheweth forth sal∣uatiō vnto men, and a certain part (as I may terme it) wherby God wil haue his grace prea¦ched. Christ therefore vouchsafeth thus to speake, & he attributeth yt to vs which belōgeth only to him self bicause of the cōiunction & com¦municating which the mēbers haue wt the god∣head.2. Cor. 11. 2. Cor. 3, God worketh al in al, he is nothīg which watereth, he is nothing which plāteth, but god which geueth the increase: god doth al things, he moueth the mouth & the tong of yt preacher, he draweth & illustrateth the hart of the hearer. It is al one saying therefore to say, whose sins ye shal forgeue, are forgeuē thē, &c, & to say he which beleueth shal be saued, But Markes wordes are more plaine. For to binde & to loose are darcker then to beleue & not to beleue the preachers. Thei are darker to vs I meane, & not to ye apostles of Christ.To bynde To bind therfore is to preach ye gospel, which gospel he yt beleueth not,To lose is bound. Contrarilie to lose, is to preache the gospel, which he yt beleueth is loosed frō his sinnes, Iohn repeated the words of Mathew in the .xvi. Chapi. Baptize thē in the name. &c. It semeth to me that to baptize is takē in al the new testament al most for to bee admitted & ac∣cepted that no man should obstinately vrge the letter as do the Anabaptists.To baptise Baptize thē, that is, admit thē to Christ, & grafte thē in the name of the father & of the holy ghost, that is, lead thē by water & doctrine into the knowledge, pow∣er, & vertue of the father, the sonne & the holye ghost. But we haue entreated of this againste the Anabaptistes in an other place, and we wil speake more amply of it afterward: He that be∣leueth
Saluation & eternall life consisteth in election, for his hand is not shut or shortened, that he will saue none amongest the Gentiles. For God can poure faith into the hearts of the Gentiles,Rom. ii. which they proue and shew forth by workes, as I iudge and that not rashelye of Socrates, Seneca, and many others. Some man will say: why they beleued not. I aunswere if they beleue not they are not saued. The words therefore of Christ ought to bee vnderstanded thus, that they be spoken vnto such as the spo∣pell is preached vnto, who are dampned if thei beleue not the gospell preached vnto thē.Iohn. xv. For Christ sayth, If I had not come & spokē vnto them, they should not haue sinned. This place therfore, he that beleueth not shal be condemp∣ned, appertayneth nothing vnto those whiche neuer had the Gospel preached vnto them. For although the outward gospel of Christ be not preached vnto them, yet can god saue them by Christ, For as many as are saued, are saued by Christ, that is by the mercy of God whiche he offred to the world in Christ. For there is none so iuste or so innocent which can stand be∣fore ye iustice of god. We must al flie therfore to ye mercy of god by Christ. And signes shall fol∣low ye beleuers. This is a promise which muste be vnderstād by Synechdoche. For ye Apostles wrought many signes▪ whē nede required. And it doth not debilitate ye promis of christ,Acres. v. bicause ther are no signes wrought now a daies by the preachers of ye word. For it was necessary thē ye signes should be wrought, to cōfirme the new & vnaccustomed busines preached by ye apostles wherby the whole world should be made new.
And to stirre vp their mindes to receaue the doctrine of the Apostles. But now is the doc∣trine of Christ & the Apostles sealed wt diuerse signes, the whiche signes he that beleueth not, neither wil he beleue if signes should be presēt∣ly done. We muste marke the ordre. Fyrste the ministers of the word are chosē out by Christ. Then thei are instructed with his word & doc∣trine. Thirdly thei are cōfyrmed by the spirite. Fourthly they are sent to preach the Gospell. Thei which thrust thē selues in by arte or vio∣lence, they which are not sent, whiche preache not, or els preach not the Gospell, which seke for theyr own things & not the things whiche be of Iesus Christ, such I saye are not the mi∣nisters of Christe, but thieues, robbers and wolues. Hitherto we haue intreated of the glorious Resurrection of oure Lord, and nowe wil we speake of hys Ascention into heauen. IEsus led hys Disciples forth to Bethania, and gathered thē together in the same place, and spake vnto them of the King∣dome of God, & cōmaunded them, that they should not depart from Ierusalem but to wayte for the promise of the Fa∣ther,
wherof (saide he) ye haue heard of me, how Iohn baptised with wa∣ter, but ye shall be baptised with the holy ghoste within these few dayes: when they therfore were come toge∣ther, they asked of him saying: Lord wilt thou at this time restore againe the kingdome of Israel? And he said vnto thē, It is not for you to know the tymes and seasons, which the fa¦ther hath put in his own power but ye shal receaue power, after the holy ghoste is come vpon you, & ye shalbe witnesses vnto me, not only in Ie∣rusalem, but olso in al Iewry & Sa∣maria, and euen to the endes of the earthe. Then the Lorde Iesus after that he had spoken these things with them, he lifted vp his handes, & bles¦sed them. And it came to passe, when he had blessed them, he departed frō thē, & whyle they behelde he was ta∣ken vp on hihg, & was caried vp in to heauen, and a clowde toke him vp frō theyr eyes, & setteth at the right hād of god: & while they loked sted¦fastly vp toward heauen, as he wēt beholde two men stode by them clo∣thed in white garments which also said, ye men of Galiley, why stād ye
gasyng vp into heauen? This same Ie∣sus which is taken vp from you into heauen shall so come, euen as ye haue sene him go into heauen. And they wor¦shipped him & retourned to Ierusalem with great ioy, frō the mount which is called Oliuete, which is from Ierusa∣lem a Sabaothes dayes iourney. And when they were come in, they went vp into a parler, where abode Peter and Iames, Iohn & Andrewe, Phillip and Thomas, Barthelmew and Mathew, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, and Sy∣mon zelotes, and Iudas the sonne of Iames. These all continued wyth one minde in prayer & supplication with ye womē, and Mary the mother of Iesus and with his brethren. MArk doth compendiously & briefly touch all thinges describing together things whiche were not done together. For he sayeth, as the eleuen disciples sat at meat &c. It is most like¦ly that Christ dayly appeared vnto his Apo∣stles all the whole forty dayes after his resur¦rection & commaunded and prescribed them an ordre wherby they shoud prech the Gospel through out the whole world. This doth he put thē in memory of at his departure & more strongly beat it into them. For to this end wer they chosen. Ther is no cause therfore why we should vrge the letter, and draw this history of Mark only to the ascētiō, but to the whol time that was betwene the resurrectiō & ascentiō of Christ. But nowe let vs come nerer to the
hystory, whych Luke hath in the actes: Luke deuideth his Gospel into two partes. In the first he describeth what Christe did in his life time. In the latter he seteth forth what things were done after his ascention: He spake vnto thē of the kingdō of god. The kingdome of God is in a manner called the gospell wher∣of he spake vnto them fourty dayes continual∣lye,The kyng∣dome of god and commended vnto them the preachinge therof: Christ therfore speaketh vnto them of the kyngdome of God, of the gospell, of his grace, and of the mercy of god, and that out of the Scriptures namely of the law & of the pro¦phets, as Luke sayd before he opened theyr vnderstāding in the scripturs: But with what word, or after what sort he spake vnto them, it is not here written but that may be gathered by theyr doctrine. The Apostles were chosen out by Christ to spread abroade the kyngdome of God, throughout the world, and to dilate & extēd the territories of the heauēly kingdō, but thei being yet after a sort carnal, dream of a cer¦tein carnal kingdō & enquire therof acording to the iugemēt of the flesh: which carnal opiniō of the restoring again of Israel sticketh also yet at thys day in the Iewes & in some christians. Christ in deede semeth somewhat to acknow∣ledge the restoryng of Israel, when he sayth. It is not for you to knowe the times and sea∣sons &c. Which Paule also declareth in the xi. to the Romaynes. But together therewith drawing thē frō theyr carnal sense he speaketh somewhat deeper of the kingdōe of god saying, but ye shal receaue the holy Ghost: As thogh he would saye, yt is your kingdōe to receaue ye sprite of god by the which ye shalbe taght & led into the
true knowledge of God, so that ye maye also testifye of the same before others: And ye shall preache of me also euen in that place, where ye forsooke me, fledde awaye and denyed me, so greate shall the power of the heauen∣uenly sprite be. They had bene so long time cō¦uersāt with Christ they had hard so many and so great thinges out of his moth, they had sene so many myracles, and yet they reason of a cer∣teyne carnal kingdome. They hoped that some body should be sēt which should deliuer thē out of the power of the Romaines. The Lord doth stil reuoke them back to the sprite. They were very weake still as long as Christ was presēt corporally with them, yea and then also when he beyng glorified was presente with them af∣ter his resurrection. There came therefore no strengh to thē by the flesh of Christ being cor∣porally presente, as he himselfe testifieth. It was expedient for them, that he wente other∣wise the spirite shoulde not come. He taketh therfore from his disciples what soeuer is cor∣porall and outward euen in him selfe▪ to affixe them wholye to the spirite of God. They had neade of a certaine other power from aboue, which Christ had promised them. Now ther∣fore he repeteth ye promise,Iohn. 14. & cōmādeth thē not to depart from Ierusalem, till the spirite were geuen them. Iohn (saith he) baptized you with water, water is the signe of doctrine and in∣struction. As though Christ would say, Iohn taught and enstructed you after a sorte, name∣ly he brought you to me by the outward word and sign, but that sprite of God which I haue promised you, whom I will send, which shal come, and whome ye ought to loke for, he also
shal baptise you within, that is, he shal teache you and enstructe you more playnlye and per¦fectly: Ye are hitherto baptized with the bap¦tisme of Ihon (for the baptisme of Iohn and Christe are all one, as touchynge the out∣warde water and outwarde preachinge for e∣uen as the preaching of the gospell which was done by thapostles, is caled forgeuenes of sins whiche longeth only to Christe, so also is the baptism of Iohn called Christs baptisme that is, Iohn did the same by the commaundemēt and aucthority of Christ) but or euer it be lōg ye shalbe baptised with an other baptisme, namely with the holy Ghost: The baptisme therefore of the holye Ghoste whereby faithe commeth followeth the baptism of water whi¦che I speake to refel the error of the Anabap¦tistes: and in that it is called the baptisme of Ihō, it is done, because he dipped mē in water and taughte them by the commaundement of christ, which were both outward signes: And euē Ihō him self doth testify yt of him self say∣ing that he only dippid men in water, but ther shuld come one after him which shud baptise with the spirite: The meaninge therefore of Christes woordes is,Math . All the thinges whiche hitherto were done outwardlye, as the water of Iohn, my doctrine, yea euen that breathing which when I rose agayne I breathed vpon you, are to weak to sanctify, purge and strēg∣then you within, they were only signes of the holy ghost, which ye shal receaue most perfec∣tly, ther be not a few, which euen now in these dayes seeke & follow onely the flesh in Christe
and which thinke that they are sanctified and purged by certayne outwarde ceremonies and signes: But these are but outward signes and so they continew, neyther can they moue any thynge in the harte of manne, excepte the po¦were and operation of the Spirite of God be ioyned thereunto: We must therefore moste earnestlye desire that spirite at Gods handes which may draw vs illustrate, confirme and make vs perfect. This sprite because the Phi¦losophers wanted, therefore were their moste learned wrytinges nothing els but subtile dis∣putations, and also cauilations, and not the true Philosophye, for they had not within thē the liuing sprite of God: Dead and colde ther∣fore are theyr writinges and not inspired and illuminated by the holye Ghoste: Let vs then passe ouer all those outwarde signes and fixe our eys vpon the operation of the spirite, and desire the same continually with most feruente prayers. The godlye which are endewed with the holy Ghoste dare yea and enterprise greate things, the spirite doth kindle and draw theyr hartes vpwarde, and encourageth them to all thinges be they neuer so perillous, and to he∣roicall vertues which procede from God, and are directed to God as to be humble, to denye him self, to be pleased with him self in nothing, to suffer many thyngs, to be meake, mercyfull and liberal: But flesh seaketh his owne, it labo¦reth for riches and glory, and enterpriseth gret and perillous thyngs, but yet such thinges as hurt his neyghbor. He lifted vp his hāds after the manner of one that prayeth, and not of one
that blesseth: For this word here, he blessed thē in greake , I thinke is put here as a signe of farewel, as they vse to wish good luck which depart. They worshipped him namely because he was god which could ascend by hys owne powre: they reioysed in the meane time, bicause they were the legates of such & so great a Lorde. And in that it is wrytten that they were alwayes in the temple, it must be vnder stād that they werin the tēple in due tyme. For sometymes they assembled together in a certen house (as appereth by the acts) for feare of the Iewes. So is it sayd of Anna the widow that she was day and night in the temple. This is according to the hebrew manner of speakinge that is, she was often in the temple. In like manner the Apostles came very often into the temple, although sometimes they were gathe∣red to gether in some certeyne house to auoyde the snares of the Iewes.Loke in Plinis E∣pistles to Traian, de more Christiano¦rum. They did euen as many christians in these dayes ar compelled to do, in those places, where it is not lawefull nei¦ther to heare nor yet to read the gospel openly: they assemble together in some house, they read they pray, they hear the word of God and geue thancks &c. Then they come into the common assembly with other men to auoyde suspition, bearing somewhat with ceremonies which ar not vtterly vngodly. But this they do but for a time. So the apostles abhorred not from the temple of the Iewes wherin were yet the sa∣crifices of beastes, which notwythstandynge were streight wayes to be abolished.
They did therfore preach Christe eyther in the temple or els in the porch though the supersti∣tions of ye Pharisees remained still there. And here do those hipocrites chifly erre which seeke a pretence & excuse to thēselues by this facte of the Apostles & so sticke stil to papistry, ming∣ling thēselues with their wicked seruices, for feare of their goods, or els of their estimation, either els of their life. Thei go not streight but halte on both sides. These mē must remember that the nature of the ceremonies whiche were prescribed vnto the Iewes in the law of God was farre differring from the nature of the ce∣remonies whiche the popes haue fayned by the persuasion & suggestion of Sathan, so that by no meanes these are to be conferred to thē. And besides that they come not to the papistical ser∣uices of God with that same minde, that the a∣postles did to the Iewish seruices. For the A∣postles in the meane time preached Christ, and laboured to winne the Iewes frō their iewish∣nes to Christ, but our men are affeard of them selues, and dissemble Christ, & dare not confesse him openly & frely before this wicked nation, & so they cleaue continuallye vnto them, not to winne them vnto Christ, but to betraye Christ & to peryshe with the vngodly or (as they per∣suade thēselues) to be in safetye. And agayne the Apostles committed nothing against theyr conscience, but were present only at such cere∣monies, as God had commaunded by his own mouth & prescribed for a time. Those I say thei vsed only for a time wtout any vngodlynesse or
supersticiō: But cōtrarywise these are presēt to these vngodly rites against their own cōsciēces as whē they bowe their knee to ye bread of the papisticall masse, which (at the least waye in a shewe) they worship, they fall down before I∣dols and brieye they defile them selues with these vnpure customes and filthye fellowship. Let these men diligently considre what happe∣ned to Peter as long as he was amōg the soul∣diers, he denied Christe more and more, till he wrapped him selfe out of their companie, & got him to Christ with bitter weping. Awake vp therfore O my brethren, and come out of Ba∣bilon, come out I say frō among them & touch not the vncleane. Let nothing kepe you backe. Let nothing cause you to linger.2. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 3, Christ hath no fellowship with Belial, the temple of god hath nothing to do with Idols and ye are the tem∣ple of God, do not prophane that which Christ consecrated with his bloude: Let it not repent you if ye muste forsake or loose any thing for Christs sake,Math. 19 the Lord will restore vnto you an hundred folde, If Iacob the patriarch left ma∣ny thinges behinde him to haue the fruition of the best things in ye land of Egipt,Gen. 45. why should it be greuous vnto vs to forsake earthly thin∣ges, seing we shal be recompensed in the world to come with such ioy as the eye hath not sene, thee are hath not heard, neyther can the hart of man comprehend it?Esay. 64 Iudas in gaping for gold lost both his bodye & soule. Wherfore vnwrap your selues oute of these bondes, caste awaye whatsoeuer holdeth you backe, to auoyde the
immynent daunger although nakedly.Prou. 1. Cōtend vnto the Lorde with the whole hart, why lest time serueth: Contempne not his voyce, lest he mocke you to scorne when euill thinges happen vnto you. There is an other error of the Ana∣baptistes, which count it wicked to preach the truth in temples whiche are amongest the pa∣pistes, yea though the Idols and papistical su∣persticions be now abolyshed out of them. But where cā Christ be more commodiously prea∣ched, then in those places where the multitude of people accustome to assemble together. This certaynely dyd the Apostles, eyther on the ho∣ly dayes or elles on the Sabboth dayes when the people were assembled together, both to be there present them selues, and also to bryng the Iewes which claue vnto their old supersticiō, to Christ, which might be done moste commo∣diously in the temple whether the people of the Iewes resorted. Neyther dyd they so stub∣burnly and disdaynefully seperate them selues from the Pharisees and the reste of the Iewes as the Anabaptistes nowe of dayes accustome to seperate themselues from those which do be∣leue and cleaue vnto Christ. That the soules of the Godly are receaued into Ioyes, and the soules of the vngodlye are pulled to punysh∣mentes, not only the holy Scriptures do testi∣fie but also the writers of the Gentilles. And the Philosophers and Poets doe manifestlye agree with the Prophetes in these thynges al∣though they speake it with other words. Here of come the fieldes of Elisius, and the sorow∣full
lake of Acheron, and that some are coun∣ted to be receaued after theyr death into ye nū∣ber of God, &c. The soule is not of it selfe, but of God. Wherfore when it is seperated frō the bodye it retourneth vnto God, euen as all o∣ther thinges returne vnto the fountayne from whence they came, all thinges flowe agayne to theyr author. These thinges are so in dede and so are written. And Christe truly testifieth in him selfe that the soule liueth after the death of the body, and that men retourne to their au∣thor. which thyng was neuer before that time set before the eyes of men, although as many as were of sounde iudgemente vnderstoode it. Christe proueth the lyfe of hys soule by hys Resurrection & Ascencion and that glory shal come to the whole man with God. He there∣fore teacheth not only by worde, but also decla∣reth in deede what shall be come of the Godlye after this lyfe. He ascended vp into heauen, to prepare the waye to glorye for vs, I we should knowe, whether we shall goe after death, and what so euer our mindes fele and beleue, al the same do we see to haue gon before in our head Christ. Christ descended once for our saluation sake, agayne he ascended once, that we shoulde not hence forth requyre the corporall presence of Christ, but our hartes being lifted vpwarde we shoulde meditate the heauenly lyfe with Christ oure King. Put case there were a king whiche woulde seeke for the common profite, woulde doe Iustice, and make equall and good lawes, and graunt that he were a father of the
coūtrey, &c. It cannot well come to passe that euery one in hys kingdome can see hym, for some dwell farre from hym, some are blynd or lame so that they can not come vnto him, there are but fewe which haue the libertie to bee fa∣miliarly conuersaunte with him, and yet in the meane time al of thē though they dwel neuer so farre of haue the fruition of the common peace and tranquilitie, which he hath gotten and de∣fendeth by his wysedome, euen as mplye as thei which are alwaies present with him in the courte. And if so be that the king die, yet do the citizens reioyce in the lawes and ordinaunces ordayned by him. Euen after the same sorte is it with our king Christ, it is not geuen to al mē to see him corporally, which happened to the a∣postles by a singulare prerogatiue, yet may all the godly by faith haue the fruition of the grace and redemption gotten by him, yea euen those whiche neuer saw thym with theyr corporall eyes: and for this cause dyd Christe when he shoulde departe from his Disciples as concer∣ning his had promise vnto them an other com¦forter and aduocate namely the holy ghoste, whiche shoulde teache them the spirituall and true knowledge of Christ. He draweth oure hartes vpward where Christ is at the ryghte hand of God, that we despising all the goodes of this worlde mighte cleaue only to him, and haue reste in hym. Let vs in the meane time serue our neyghboures by charitie, and dili∣gently plante the Kingdome of Christe in the world, namely that he may reigne in the harts
of all men. Let the eyes of our mind be alwaies fixed in heauē vpō him which is our aduocate before the father which hath sanctified our flesh in him selfe, which hath ioyned our nature vn∣to the godhed, and hath so exalted it that ther might be an assured hope in vs, yt we shall liue wt him for euer. He is flesh of our flesh, bone of our bōes our brother & hed, in whō is setforth vnto vs the hope of immortall lyfe.Ephe. 2. Wherfore for asmuch as god which is rich in mercy, hath of his singuler loue wherby he loued vs, yea e∣uen then when we were deade thoroughe sins hath quickned vs together with Christe, and hath raysed vs vp to gether agayne with hym, and made vs set together in heauenlye places with Christe Iesus and hath sealed vs with the holy spirite of promyse whyche is the earneste penye of our enheritance for the re¦demptiō of the possession gottē to the praise of his glory,Ephe. 1. let vs for al these things geue thāks to God, and pray that the god of our Lord Ie¦sus Christ the father of glory would geue vs the spirite of wysdome & reuelation by know∣ledge & illuminate the eyes of our minde, that we may know what the hope is wherunto he hath called vs, and how rich the glorye of his inheritaunce is toward the sayntes, and how excellente the mightines of his power is to∣ward vs, which beleue according to the effica∣cy of his might and strēgth, which he hath she¦wed forth in Christ, when he raised him from the deade, and made him to sit at his right hād in heauen, aboue all principalitye and power,
strength and dominion and euery name that is named not only in this worlde but also in the world to come, and hath subdued al thinges vnder his feete and hath made him the heade of the church aboue al thin¦ges, which is his bo∣dy the perfec∣tion of him which filleth all in all, to whome be prayse and glory worlde without end. AMEN. Jmprinted at London hy Iohn Daye dwellinge ouer Aldersgate beneath Sainct Mar∣tynes. Cum gratia & priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
