3927 S114246 99849472 14621
To the Honorable Knight, the most Iudicious and lear∣ned Sir FRANCES BACON, the Kings Attorney Generall. IT was my chance (Right wor∣thy Sir) that you were pre∣sēt a hearer of my first made sermons:At Ken∣sington in Iuly 1607. and if I might take their words that told me, you gaue good words of me then, and concei∣ued good hopes of me for the time to come: on this inducement I resolued to present you with my first publisht writings, but I was a∣bashed in my selfe, and ready to fall off from my purpose, remembring a passage in your first booke of The Aduancement of lear∣ning, where you seeme neerer to reprehensi∣on then defence of those, that dedicate their books & writings not to their owne equals, but to men of greater rancke. And had I not considered with my selfe, that where there were so many good parts of nature and lear∣ning, there could not choose but be much hu∣manity; the greatnes of your place, and your worth surmounting greater places, then that you hold, had deterd my meannesse and slen∣dernesse
from this attempt, neither had I dared to haue offerd that vnto you, which I haue now presumed. This I know, that for the Argument there can be an vnfitnesse in no booke to be presented vnto you, a man so generally read and learned: & I am perswa∣ded that he that is so industrious as your selfe, and abounding with so many vertues, will euen loue and cherish the least shew and resemblance of the same in others. Well iacta est alea, I am now come before you, and if you shall vouchsafe mee but a kinde and cheerefull aspect, it will much cheere me: but if I might vnderstand that I haue written any thing that may be to your tast, the approbation of your learned iudgement alone shall bee vnto me more then the ap∣plause of a large Theater. Howsoeuer it shall be, let me intreate and obtaine this of your goodnes in the name of learning, though I be but the least and meanest in her com∣mon wealth, that you would not vtterly dash and put me out of countenance, whose very wit and courage will euen stand and fall with your countenance. The man that highly loues and admires your vertues RICHARD BRVCH.
Reader IF thou shouldest aske mee, why I would write of things so much in∣treated off, why I would write in such a method, I haue an answer at hand for both thy questiōs, though not one and the same for both: there lay a kinde of necessity on mee to write of one part of this treatise, The Lords Praier, (that drew on the rest) to disauow a sonne of the people that was fatherd on me, nothing like me nor my children, who though they are most of them rough-hewed like their father, yet haue they all their portion of wit and common sense. For the nouelty of the method, let this answer thee, that knowing that by many parasanges I could not come neere, nor attaine vnto the worthies of our Church, as many as haue written of these things a Caluin & an Vr∣sin, a Ʋiret and a Ʋirell, a Perkins or a Grana∣tensis, with others whose learned comments and bookes of institution are in hand: I fell into this new forme of method, that thou mightest know though nihil est iam dictum, quod non sit dictū prius, & al do sing but the very same song: yet we can in this age set out our learning in new fashions of word, and method, as the men of the age can set thēselues forth in new fashions of cloathes. Thou hast the reason of these my numbers, maiest thou vse them to thy profit & comfort, fare thou well. Thine R. B.
A preface or introduction to the Booke, containing a rea∣son of the Title. I Feare me it may be iustly said of many a one, that now a daies makes profession of re∣ligion, as it is said to the An∣gell of the Church of Sardis, Reuel. 3.1. Thou hast a name that thou liuest, and art dead: For how great soeuer the shew be that they make to the world, yet if they were examined of their faith, it would be so farre, that they should be bespoken with the Canaanitish woman, Great is your faith. Mat. 15.28. That we should ra∣ther bespeake them as our Sauiour his Disci∣ples. Mat. 16. O ye of little faith, or, O ye of no faith rather. If their workes were well seene and considered, we would not commend them for their fruites, but speake to them in the words of the Baptist, As trees that did not bring forth good fruit. Mat. 3.10. yea if they would seriously consider with themselues of their key cold praiers, how heauy, leaden, dull, and dead they were in their deuotions, they would euen testifie against themselues, that they had little or no feeling at all in them∣selues, that they had little or no life at all of grace in them. Of their holy and sound faith, of their god∣ly
conuersation, of their deuout praiers, are men rightly termed religious, the outward shewes of words, of lookes, of gestures make men no more such, then doth his weed the Frier: He that hath true faith is religious. The iust by his faith shall liue. Abac. 2.4. Here then is life. He that walkes in the way of the commande∣ments, in the way of good workes, which God hath ordained that we should walke in them, is religious: These are the waies of life, wherein if we keepe vs, we shall be safe a ruine mortis, from the ruine of death: here is also life. Aliue from the dead saith the Apostle. Rom. 6.13. and dead indeed o sinne, but aliue vnto God through Iesus Christ our Lord, v. 11. If the spirit and life of God be in a man, he shall quickely find it in his praiers, he shall thereby quickely find, if he haue any sparke of grace or religion, if he be earnest and feruent in them, if they be full of zeale: It is a sure signe that a mans soule and heart are religious, when hee can powre them out in praier before God. There is the presenting of our bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy and acceptable vnto God. Rom. 1.1. And there is the presenting of our praiers also a liuing sacrifice, for our soules are in them. Here then also is life. True faith, an holy conuersation, and pure deuotion doe constitute a man and absolue him for religious: in each of these there is life, in
them altogether is the life of religion. 1. The rule of things that are to be beleeued, Regula credendorn, is the Creed; in this short exposition y perchance be found some. what that may informe a mans vnderstanding in the knovvledge of the mystery of godlines, and to teach him also to make application of his knovvledge to himselfe. This is for faith. 2. The rule of a mans life are the Comman∣demens, of vvhich vve may say in the vvords of the Prophet: This is the way walke in it. This small treatise vvill affoord a man some light in the way, and giue him some entrance, to the vnderstanding of the precept, and pra∣ctise of the duties that are required. This is for conuersation. 3. The rule of a mans praiers, is that praier which the Lord himselfe hath taught vs, som∣what for a mans learning to teach him to pray according to this praier, may hee find in this small Booke. This is for deuotion. 3. The Lord of life giue vnto vs to liue in this World the life of grace, that in the other vve may liue the life of glory: here to liue religiou∣sly, that there vve may liue blessedly, through his Sonne our Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus. Amen.
THE LIFE of Religion. The first Heads or Grounds of the Exposition following. The Creed. I Beleeue in God,] 1. ACknowledg∣ing that hee is but one. 2. Apply∣ing him to my selfe. 3. Relying on his helpe. The Father,] 1. Of his eternall Sonne. 2. Of his elect Angels. 3. Of his faithfull people.
Almightie,] 1. To doe whatsoeuer hee shall please. 2. To doe things to vs impossible with ease. 3. To giue strength to the feeble, and increase power to him that hath no strength. Maker of Heauen and Earth,] 1. Creating of all things the kinds. 2. Establishing their order. 3. Guiding their course. And in Iesus; which saueth vs,] 1. From the guilt of sinne.
2. From the punishment of sinne. 3. From the power of sinne and Sa∣tan. Christ, annointed vnto vs,] 1. A Prophet. 2. A Priest. 3. A King. His onely Sonne,] 1. Not by creation. 2. Not by adoption. 3. But by eternall generation. Our Lord,] 1. Not by a power vsurped and vn∣iust. 2. Not by a power borrowed and limited.
3. But by a power ingenit, and law∣full purchase. Which was conceiued by the Holy Ghost;] 1. After the will of God alone. 2. After a manner vnspeakeable. 3. After the prophecies that went before. Borne of the Ʋirgin Mary,] A thing. 1. In reason wonderfull. 2. In example singular. 3. In effect desirable. Suffered,] 1. According to the truth foretold. 2. With great fruit to vs.
3 Leauing vs an example to follow his steps. Ʋnder Pontius Pilate,] 1. Before whom hee was brought bound. 2. To whom he was accused falsly. 3. By whom hee was condemned vniustly Was Crucified,] 1. Despising the shame. 2. Enduring the torment. 3. Bearing the curse. Dead,] 1. Verily and really. 2. Voluntarily. 3. Necessarily.
Buried,] 1. That he might shew the certain∣tie of his death. 2. That hee might bury our sinnes with him in the graue. 3. That pursuing death vnto his farthesest hold, he might there con∣quer him, and sanctifie the graue. He descended into Hell,] 1. That he might deliuer vs from the streights and torments of hell. 2. That he might destroy the els Kingdome. 3. That hee might triumph ouer powers and principalities, and make an open shew of them, ha∣uing disarmed them.
The third day he rose againe from the dead,] 1. Which is to vs a signe that hee hath ouercome death, and fully satisfied for all our sinne. 2. Which is to vs a token that wee must be raised here to newnesse of life. 3. Which is to vs a pledge that we shall rise againe to the resurrecti∣on of life. He ascended into Heauen,] 1. That he might prepare the way thither, and take possession therof for vs. 2. That he might giue gifts vnto men. 3. That he might send the comfor∣ter vnto his Church.
And sitteth on the right hand of God the father almighty,] 1. Partaking of endlesse rest and fe∣licity. 2. Administring and gouerning all things both in Heauen and in Earth. 3. Making intercession to his Father for his people. From thence he shall come,] 1. Visibly, 2. Gloriously. 3. Sodainely. To iudge both the quicke and the dead] 1. The wicked of them with all se∣verity.
2. The iust amongst them with all clemency. 3. All in generall with all equity. I beleeue in the holy Ghost,] 1. Acknowledging his Godhead. 2. Taking him to be my Sanctifier and comforter. 3. Putting all the confidence of my heart in him. I beleeue the Church,] 1. The house of God. 2. The piller & ground of the truth 3. The mother of the faithfull. Holie,] 1. By imputation of righteousnes.
2. By inchoation of righteousnesse. 3. By being consecrate to an holy and diuine vse. Catholique,] 1. In respect of place. 2. In respect of time. 3. In respect of men, the members of the same. The communion of Saints,] which consists, 1. In the vnion and coherence of the faithfull with Iesus Christ. 2. In the vnion and fellowship of the faithfull one with another while they liue together here on earth. 3. In that which these of the Church militant partake with those of the Church trium∣phant.
The forgiuenesse of sinnes,] 1. The guilt of them done away. 2. The spot of them purged. 3. The punishment remitted. The resurrection of the body,] 1. Wherein there shall be a finall destruction of the workes of the diuell. 2. Wherein there shall be a full ma∣nifestation of Gods mercy on the faithfull. 3. Wherein there shall be a fearefull declaration of his iustice on the wicked.
And the life euerlasting,] 1. Which is the gift of our God. 2. Which is the end of our hopes. 3. Which is the complement of our happinesse.
The ten Comman∣dements. God spake these words,] 1 VVhose is the gretest authority 2 Whose words are words of veritie. 3. Who requires our perfect obedi∣ence and the hearts sinceritie. Saying: I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of E∣gypt, out of the house of bondage. In the words of which preface, that we should yield more willing o∣bedience to the precepts following: the Lord sets out vnto vs three things to induce.
1. A declaration of his eternall rule and power. 2. A promise of the goodnesse of his grace. 3. A remembrance of his benefits before conferd. The first Commandement, Thou shalt haue none other gods be∣fore me,] First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That we know the true God and acknowledge him. 2. That we fall downe and doe re∣uerence before him. 3. That with purpose of heart and minde we cleaue fast vnto him. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Ignorance of God his word and works.
2. Errors concerning God, the per∣sons of the godhead and their properties. 3. The affection set on any other thing but God. The appendix of the first Commande∣ment. Thirdly, Promises and threatnings not exprest. 1. If herein we harken to his voice we shall be his chiefe treasure a∣boue all people. Exod. 19.5. 2. If we like not to retaine him in our knowledge, he will giue vs o∣uer to a reprobate minde, and vile affections. Rom. 1.26.28. 3. If in our hearts we estrange our selues from him, he also will be farre from vs, and from our helpe.
The second Commandement. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, &c.] The things required in this precept are: 1. That we be religiously carefull of all the parts of Gods seruice. 2. That we stir vp our selues there∣unto by all godly meanes. 3. That we stoutly oppose against all corruptions, which may de∣file the pure worship of God. The things prohibited in this precept, are 1. Idolatry. 2. Hypocrisie. 3. Prophanenesse.
The Appendix of the second Comman∣dement. Thirdly, An exhortation to obedience set downe at large, 1. Because the God that requires the true worship, and forbids the false, is a mighty & a iealous God. 2. Because he punisheth the breach of this Commandement seuere∣ly on the wicked and their poste∣ritie. 3. Because he rewardeth the obser∣uance thereof plentifully to the godly and their seed after them. The third Commandement. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine,] First, The things inioyned in this precept are, 1. That wee sweare in due and law∣full manner.
2. That wee zealously confesse to Gods glory the truth and will of God that we know. 3. That we call vpon the Lord, and glorifie him giuing thanks vnto him. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are: 1. That we vse no needelesse and vnholy oathes. 2. That we speake not vnreuerently of God, his word, his workes, or titles, &c. nor abuse them. 3. That wee disgrace not our holy profession by an vnholy conuer∣sation. The Appendix. Thirdly, Threatning from God, that he will be reuenged on those, that sacri∣legiously rob him of his glory, which he will doe 1. Surely. 2. Swiftly. 3. Seuerely.
The fourth Commandement. Remember the Sabboth day to keepe it holy. First, The things commanded in this pre∣cept are, 1. That on the Lords day we doe all holy and religious works. 2. That we cease from our worldly labours, 3. That we rest from sin and wick∣ednesse. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. The foreslowing of the assēbling of our selues in the congregation. 2. The doing of our ordinary works. 3. The doing of the works of the flesh and of the diuell. The Appendix. Thirdly, A reason drawne from the ex∣ample of God. 1. Who rested that day.
2. Who blessed that day. 3. Who sanctified that day. The fifth Commandement. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy daies, &c,] First, the things required in this precept are, 1. That we obey them in all things in the Lord. 2. That wee deale faithfully and thankefully with them. 3. That wee shew our selues respe∣ctiuely kind vnto them. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Resisting them in their iust com∣mands. 2. Prouing vnfaithful and vnthank∣full towards them. 3. Hating of their persons, and dea∣ling frowardly with them.
The Appendix. Thirdly, A promise of long life to the ob∣seruers of this commandement: Now they prolong our daies. 1. By their fatherly care & prouisiō. 2. By their praiers. 3. By their blessing. The sixth Commandement. Thou shalt not kill,] First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That we be peaceable in our whole conuersation. 2. That our hearts be fraught with pittie and compassion. 3. That we defend and deliuer as much as in vs lieth, our selues and others from danger, violence and vexation. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Wrath, and euill conceiued, and
hidden inwardly in the heart. 2. All outward signes prouoking or incouraging to a mischiefe. 3. Hurt and damage offered to any mans body and life in deede. The Appendix. Thirdly, A threatning: He that sheds mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Gen. 9: or, The murtherers hore head shall not goe downe to the graue in peace. 1. King. 2.6. God in his iust iudgement. 1. Either cutting him off by the sword of iustice. 2. Or shutting vp his soule into the hand of his enemy. 3. Or making the man of blood the executioner of himselfe. The seuenth Commandement. Thou shalt not commit adultery.] First, The things required in this pre∣cept are, 1. That for the preseruing of cha∣stity
we be religiously watchfull ouer all our members. 2. That we tame our flesh and bring it in subiection, 3. That we vse the remedy that God hath appointed against inconti∣nency. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. All acts of vncleannesse. 2. All thoughts of vncleannesse. 3. All things that may nourish lust, and stirre vs vp to vnclean∣nesse. The Appendix. Thirdly, A threatning of fearefull iudgements which ouertake Adulte∣rers, who are punished of God 1. In their owne wiues, God paying them home in their owne coine. 2. In their owne bastard slips. 3. In their owne persons.
The eight commandement. Thou shalt not steale,] First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That I labour with mine hands the thing that is good. Ephe. 4.28. 2. That I pay to euery man the thing that I owe. 3. That I rest contented with the things that I haue. 1. Tim. 6.6. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. That I take not any thing from a∣ny man with a strong hand. 2. That I hurt not any man by craft, or forged cauillation. 3. That I be no picker, purloining priuilie from my brother his goods and substance. The Appendix. Thirdly, A threatning of Gods iudge∣ment against the theefe. 1. In his bodily life.
2. In his soule. 3. In his goods and substance. The ninth Commandement. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour,] First, The things commanded in this precept are, 1. That wee set forth that which is good in our brother with deser∣ued praise. 2. That wee interpret that which is doubtfull in him in the better sēse. 3. That we couer his infirmities and weaknesses in loue. Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. That in any wise wee speake not that which is false of our neighbor. 2. That we speake not that which is true of him with a false heart. 3. That we discouer not his infirmi∣ties discurteously, nor aggrauate his faults.
The Appendix. Thirdly, A caueat to beware of the breach of this Commandement, least transgressing it, 1. We be made like vnto the Diuell. 2. We be punished in the same kind. 3. We be shut out from the presence of God. The tenth Commandement. Thou shalt not Couet,] First, The things required in this pre∣cept are, 1. That our hearts be full fraught with charity. 2. That wee detest all sinne and ini∣quitie. 3: That we delight in all righteous∣nes and equity.
Secondly, The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Euill thoughts arising out of our owne corruption. 2. Euill entertained from the diuels suggestion. 3. The least pleasure or delight in a∣ny euil motion. The appendix of this tenth Commande∣ment, as also of the whole decalogue. Thirdly, An instruction to vse both this and those as a looking glasse therein to behold and see our owne deformity, wants and imperfections, who transgresse this and the other Commandements daily. 1. In thought. 2. In word. 3. In deed.
The Lords Praier. Our father,] 1. NOt in name only, but of our life and being also. 2. In affection, and 3. In effect and deed. Which art in heauen,] 1. Of greatest maiestie. 2. Of perfect happinesse. 3. Of euerlasting continuance.
Hallowed be thy name,] 1. While beleeuing, we doe after thy word and commandements. 2. While we speake reuerently of thy great name and titles. 3. While in our hearts we religious∣ly regard and thinke of thy pow∣er, wisdome, mercy, iustice, iudge∣ments, &c. Thy kingdome come,] 1. In the preaching of thy Gospell. 2. In the power of thy Spirit. 3. In the appearing of thy glory. Thy will be done in earth, 1. On vs, in all that thou shalt thinke good. 2. In vs, in all that shall be good. 3. By vs in all that our hand shall finde to doe.
As it is in heauen,] 1. By thine only Sonne. 2. By thy holy Angels. 3. By thy blessed Saints. Giue vs this day our daily bread,] 1. For our present necessitie. 2. Further commodity. 3 Future ability. And forgiue vs our trespasses,] 1. Sinning of ignorance. 2. Falling of infirmity. 3. Offending of set purpose. As we forgiue them that trespasse a∣gainst vs,] 1. Not retaining their iniuries.
2. Not returning their iniuries. 3. Doing them good moreouer for their iniuries. And leade vs not into tempta∣tion,] 1. With drawing thy grace assisting from vs. 2. Stirring vp stormes and warre a∣gainst vs. 3. Laying baites & blocks before vs. But deliuer vs from the euill,] 1. Of our owne concupiscence. 2. Of the wicked aduersary. 3. Of the examples of this naughty age.
For thine is the Kingdome, 1. Ouer all excel∣ling. the power, 2. All ruling and disposing. and the glory,] 3. Alwaies brightly shining. For euer,] 1. In all ages past. 2. At this time present. 3. In all times to come. Amen: So shall it be.] 1. As thou hast said. 2. As we haue praied. 3. Herevpon our faith is staid, we beleeue, Lord helpe our vnbeliefe euen so Lord Iesus, Amen, Amen.
The Resolution of the Creede. 1. THere are three maine parts of this the Apostles creed. 1. The obiect of our faith, God. 2. The subiect of beleeuing, the Church. 3. The benefits that we receiue of God in the Church. 2. The obiect of our faith, God is distinguished into three persons. 1. The Father. 2. The Sonne. 3. The holy Ghost. 3. The first person is set out vnto vs vnder these Appellations. 1. Father. 2. Almighty. 3. Creator of heauen and earth
4. The second person is set out vnto vs by his 1. Titles. 1. Iesus Christ. 2. his Sonne 3. our Lord. 2. Incarnation containing his concep∣tion and birth. 3. His double estate of humiliation and exaltation: of humiliation, he suffered &c of exaltation he rose, &c. 5. The third person is set out vn∣to vs by his 1. Name, Spirit. 2. Attribute, Holy. 3. The intimation of his office, vnder these, his name and attribute. 6. The Church is set out vnto vs by her qualities & description, to be 1. Holy. 2. Catholique. 3. The communion of Saints. 7. The benefits that we receiue of God in the Church are these: 1. Forgiuenesse of sinnes. 2. Resurrection of the body. 3. Life euerlasting.
THE LIFE of Religion. The Creed. The first Article. I Beleeue in God,] 1. ACknowledg∣ing that hee is but one.Perkins. 2. Apply∣ing him to my selfe. 3. Relying on his helpe. For he is 1. Alpha and Omega. Reuel. 1. 2. My portion and my lot. 3. A tower to those that put their trust in him.
Vse 1. Therefore resort I to his written word therein to bee instru∣cted concerning him, 1. That he is. 2. What hee is. 3. Who he is. That I may haue a ground for this my faith 2. Therefore come I vnto his fountaine, thence to draw of the 1. Fulnes of his grace. 2. Sweetnesse of his comforts. 3. Truth of his promi∣ses. That I may taste & see how good he is. 3. Therefore walke I without all feare, committing may way vnto him, and what belongs vnto me, 1. Not trusting in my s lfe. 2. Not trusting in the sonne of man. 3. Not trusting in any other creature. That I may hold mee fast by him.
The Father,] 1. Of his eternall Sonne. 2. Of his elect Angels. 3. Of his faithfull people. For, 1. He came out of his bosome. 2. They are called the children of God Iob 1.6. 3. They are reckoned to him for a gene∣ration. Vse 1. Hereupon I vtterly con∣demne the blasphemies of those that denie God to haue a Sonne; and he∣resie of those that deny the Sonne to be begotten of the substance of the father, such as are 1. The Iewes. 2. The Mahume∣tanes, and— 3. The Arrians. And doe be∣leeue and hold this generatiō. 2. Hereupon I renounce the er∣ror of the Saduces, which deny God to haue any such sonnes as Angels;
notwithstanding, besides in the names of their nature and office, the Scripture sets them out vnto vs, ter∣ming them 1. Of their dignitie, thrones, and domi∣nions. Bucan.2. Of the effect, Sera∣phim. 3. Of the forme of their apparitions Cherubim. And acknow∣ledge that hee hath such of∣spring. 3. Hereupon I wholy build v∣pon my God, that he will doe for mee, as for other his faithfull people, like a louing father 1. Chastening me in mercie. 2. Prouiding for my need. 3. Turning al my suf∣ferings into good. And in this confidence I draw neere vn∣to him.
Almightie,] 1. To doe whatsoeuer hee shall please. 2. To doe things to vs impossible with ease. 3. To giue strength to the feeble and increase power to him that hath no strength. For 1. Nothing can hinder him to execute his will. 2. He is neither faint nor weary of his worke. 3. His power is performed in the weak∣nesse of the creature. Vse. 1. I am humbled therefore in my selfe, thinking on such might and strength, and doe learne
1. To trust in his mer∣cies. 2. To tremble at his iudgements. 3. To magnifie his workes. Which brings such mightie things to passe. 2. I measure not his omnipo∣tence by the scantling of my percei∣uerance, when I see him worke great effects by 1. Weake meanes. 2. No meanes. 3. Yea, against all meanes. Which doth that which is wonderfull in our eies. 3. I consider not my weakenesse in the worke of his grace, being per∣swaded that he will inable me in all things 1. To doe. 2. To suffer, and 3. To ouercome. Which will be glorified in his Saints, and made maruel∣lous in all them that beleeue.
Maker of Heauen and Earth,] 1. Creating of all things the kindes. 2. Establishing their order. 3. Guiding their course. For 1. This is the worke alone of his power. 2. This is the worke of his wisdome. 3. This is the worke of his prouidence. Now then, Vse 1. I acknowledge none for Gods to put my trust in them, but this all forming power, and forsake all other Idoll Gods; whether they be the names of 1. Diuels. 2. Men, or, 3. Fained Monsters. For he is the true Iehouah. 2. I wonder at no wisdome but at his, which ordereth all things come∣ly, in 1. Measure. 2. Number. 3. Weight. For he is the eternall.
3. I bow my knee to him alone, and rendring my selfe to him, cast all my care vpon him, 1. Giuing thankes in my successes. Basin. Caluin.2. Patint in my suf∣ferings. 3. Hauing a good hope for the time that is to come. For he doth gouerne all things.
The second Article. And in Iesus; which saueth vs] 1. From the guilt of sinne. 2. From the punishment of sinne. 3. From the power of sin and Satan. For 1. He was made sin for vs. Gal. 3.13. 2. He was made a curse for vs. Ga. 4.4. 3. Hee appeared to loose the workes of the diuell. Ioh. 16.54. Vse 1. Whereas therefore the law of God accusing me, in my selfe I am but a lost creature, and can find nothing in me, but 1. A froward heart. 2. A wicked life, and 3. A defiled consci∣ence. I betake me to this saluati∣on. 2. Whereas wrath is here gone forth against me, and hell else-where prouided, that I may yet haue hope and safety
1. In life. 2. In death. 3. In iudgement. I cleaue vnto this Iesus. 3. Whereas solde vnder sinne a captiue to the Diuell, I haue liued long in bondage, that now I may be freed from such, 1. Bad Masters. 2. Heauy chains, & 3. Seruile labours. I flie vnto this Sauiour. Christ, annointed vnto vs] 1. A Prophet. 2. A Priest. 3. A King. For he 1. Teacheth his people the will of his Father. 2. Maketh atonement twixt them and their God. 3. Doth mightily gouerne and defend his Church. Vse 1. I therefore leaue all other teachers, which speake not as the
word of God, to harken to this Pro∣phet, with whose 1. Threatnings I am terrified. 2. Promises I am allu∣red. 3. To whose precepts I doe obey. Because hee hath the words of truth and peace. 2 I come vnto the father through him, offering spirituall sacrifice, tru∣sting to be accepted, and lay hold vp∣on his sacrifice, which was 1. Priest. 2. Altar. 3. Sacrifice. Because hee is the high and only sacrificer. 3 I count me happy liuing in his gouernment, and will shew me faith∣full to him, that so 1. Mightily ouer-rules and puni∣sheth his enemies. 2. Gratiously rules & protects his sub∣iects. 3. Bountifully rewar∣deth all their serui∣ces. Because he is the King of pace & righ∣teousnesse.
His onely Sonne,] 1. Not by creation. 2. Not by adoption. 3. But by eternall generation. For 1. So are othr men and Angels sonnes of God. 2. So are sonnes all the chosen people of God. 3. So is Iesus Christ himselfe alone. Vse 1. These oter therefore men and Angels, though they are called sonnes of God, as being from him in the institution of their nature, in whome 1. They liue. 2. They moue. 3. They haue their being. Yet do they not partake of Gods own na∣ture. 2. These other Saints of God and chosen people, hough they haue the honour to bee called the Sonnes of God, because they are
1. Elect of him before all worlds. 2. Begotten of his im∣mortall seede, the word. 3. Borne againe of water and of the spirit. Yet do they not communi∣cate of Gods owne essence. 3 But this his Sonne alone, his vndefiled of-spring, begotten of him before all worlds, and deare to him that did beget him, is rightly called his onely Sonne, being 1. The bright image of his Father. 2. Light of his light. 3. Coaeternall to him and consubstantial. Because hee alone commu∣nicates of the diuine nature and essence. Our Lord,] 1.Potestas arrepta. Accepta. Not by a power vsurped and vn∣iust. 2. Not by a power borrowed and limitted.
Igenita de Soto.3. But by a power ingenit, and law∣full purchase. For 1. So are Lords also the tirants of the earth 2. So are Lords also those that raigne by him. 3. So is he our Lord alone that is heire of all things. Vse 1. Hence therfore am I quic∣kened in my seruice, to performe all due obedienc, and doe willingly re∣signe to him my body, soule & sub∣stance, whom I serue Greg. li. 2. Morall.1. Out of the affecti∣on of charity. 2. Out of the loue of iustice. 3. Free from all ser∣uile feare and ter∣ror. Because his gouernment is so iust and e∣quall. 2. Hence draw I no small com∣fort, both for the hope of the reward of my seruice, and helpe in need and trouble, as also from the dignity of this my calling, that I serue a power,
1. Whose ability is not poore to reward. 2. Whose arme is not short to helpe. 3. Whose will cannot bee crossed by a greater power. Because he is chiefe Lord subordinate to none. 3. Hence thinke I of the account that I am to make of my goods and tallent, and withall referre all that I haue to his goodnesse, and all that I speak, think, or do to his praise, from whom I haue so much receiued, and whose I am by right of 1. Creation. 2. Redemption. 3. Preseruation. Because he is my true and naturall Lord.Vrfin in loco.
The third Article. Which was conceiued by the Holy Ghost,] 1. After the will of God alone. 2. After a manner vnspeakeable. 3. After the prophecies that went before. For 1. He decreed it thus to come to passe. 2. Wee cannot conceiue nor vtter how. 3. They spake thus of it long agoe. A Virgin shall conceiue. All which was done, Vse 1. That he might be without all spot or blemish in his conception, 1. The sourse of cor∣ruption being stop∣ped in his mother. 2. Purenesse infused
into the masse wher∣of he was made. 3. The humane nature vnited vnto the god-head. That so his in∣tegrity might couer our de∣fects. 2. That we might know, that by the same spirit Christ may be formed in our hearts,ulgent: li. de in∣carnatio. August in Ps. 17 by which he was con∣ceiued in the wombe, if we haue the virginity of the minde: which is 1. Sound faith, 2. Solid hope. 3. Sincere charity. That so a fit receptacle bee prouided for him in our soules. 3. That we might be assured that nothing shal fall to the ground which the Lord hath spoken, though it seeme as impossible to vs, as a Virgin to conceiue: a thing, 1. Which is beyond the course of nature. 2. Which hath not en∣tred into the heart of man. 3. Which hath not o¦therwise been hard of in the world. That so our faith may bee confirmed in the promises.
Borne of the Ʋirgin Mary,] A thing 1. In reason wonderfull. 2. In example singular. 3. In effect desirable. For 1. Who can tell out of his generation? 2. Who can euer instance in the like? 3. Blessed and happy is the wombe that beares him. Vse 1. I acknowledge herein therefore the great worke of God maruellous in our eies, so strangely ioyning these three things together, Bern. ser. in vigil natiu.1. God and man. 2. A mother and a maide. 3. Faith of these things and the hart of man. And magni∣fie his glorious name there∣fore. 2. I regard herein the humility and loue of my Sauiour, which be∣ing borne from euerlasting of the fa∣ther, God rich ouer all, dwelling in the heauenly palaces, came downe into this earth, to be,
1. Borne of his hand-maide. 2. Wrapt in clouts. 3. Laide in a man∣ger. And follow him in, and loue him for, these vertues. 3.August. I long to beare him blessedly in my heart, as the mother of God did beare him blessedly in her belly: whom I may, 1. Conceiue without sin 2. Beare without bur∣den. 3. Bring foorth with∣out paine. And imbrace him in mine armes with all ioy.
The fourth Article.] Suffered,] 1. According to the truth foretold. 2. With great fruit to vs. 3. Leauing vs an example to follow his steps. For 1. Thus the scripture testified of him. 2. There is depe matter hid therein. 3. We also by suffering must enter into glory. Vse 1. I confsse therefore that it is true of Christ, which I haue read and heard of him, that he should be 1. Sold of the wic∣ked. 2. Villainously des¦pighted. 3. Slaine for snne. Whereas there was no euill found in him. 2. I propose his passion to my selfe to apply it to my soule, therein beholding both the horriblenesse of
my sinne, and his vnspeakable loue, who was 1. Sold to redeeme me. 2. Despighted to ho∣nour me. 3. Slaine to quicken me. Whereas I was his enemy by kinde.August. in serm. quodam. 3. I arme me likewise with such minde, calling his passion to my minde. 1. Pet. 4.1. 1.Greg. in Epist. To suffer all things willingly. 2. To spend my selfe bearing other mens burdens. 3. To honour and loue him in the highest degree. Whereas he suffred so great things for me. Ʋnder Pontius Pilate,] 1. Before whom hee was brought bound. 2. To whom he was accused falsly.
3. By whom hee was condemned vniustly 1. He was then deputy and iudge in Iury. 2. The witnesses could not agree. 3. He had pronounced him innocent be∣fore. Vse 1 This forraine ruler shewes me that this was true Messias, who was thus brought bound before him, as a sacrifice tied with cords: for now, 1. The scepter was departed from Iu∣dah. 2. The law giuer frō between his feete. 3. The stock of Lesse was growne old and bare. That henc∣forth I ex∣pect no other Christ. 2. This accusation tels me, wher∣by the harmelesse fell, and yet did holde his peace, that I shall be absol∣ued, and haue leaue to cry to God, through him that was accused, and yet would answer nothing when it was falsely laid to his charge, that he,
1. Seduced the people. 2. Raised sedition a∣mong the people. 3. Went about to make himselfe a King. That I should not feare what may be broght against me. 3. This condemnation of the in∣nocent acquits me that am nocent from the iust condemning sentence 1. Of the law of God. 2. Of mine owne con∣science. 3. Of the heauenly iudge. That I might be blamelesse whilst he beares my guilt. Was Crucified,] 1. Despising the shame. 2. Enduring the torment. 3. Bearing the curse. 1. For it was a punishment of slaues and the last of men. 2. For it was with incredible paine of all parts of the body. 3. For it is written, cursed is he that hangeth on the tree.
Vse 1. I will here then consider of the inestimable loue of Christ pas∣sing all vnderstanding, who humbled himselfe so low, as that to deliuer me and other his people from deserued shame, he vndeseruing vnderwent the shame of the crosse, where hee hung sixe houres; 1. Naked in the sight of all mn. 2. In the middest be∣tween two thieues. 3. Derided and scor∣ned of all sorts of men. That I may loue such loue and neuer be a∣shamed of such a Maister. 2. I will looke vp to his crosse to see how much sinnes doe paine him, which haue fastned him to the wood pierst his side, digd his hands and feet, and ponder in the ballance of my heart,August. 1. The wounds of him that hangs there. 2. The bloud of him that dies there. 3. The price of him that redeemes there. That weigh∣ing his tormēt I may wound my soule with sorrow for my sin.
3. I will not henceforth feare the curse of the law, nor yet the wrath of God, seeing he was made a curse, and bare the whole wrath of God in his flesh; 1. To satisfie Gods iustice for me. 2. To appease his wrath towards me. 3. To make me parta∣ker of the blessing. That so I may receiue the promise of the spirit through faith. Dead,] 1. Verily and really. 2. Voluntarily. 3. Necessarily. For 1. The cripture saith, that he gaue vp the ghost. 2. He had power to die, and not to die. 3. The iustice of God, his tueth, and pro∣mise did so require it. Ʋse 1. He did not therfore coun∣terfeit a passion,Bast. ex August. de haeres. as wickedly say the Manichees and Cerdonians, nor sub∣stitute a Symn of Cyrene to bee
slaine for him, as say the Basilida Heretickes: but though he were the Lord of life, he did indeed lay downe his life, and died to quicken vs, and by the power of his death oue came, 1. Death. 2. Hell, and 3. Damnation. Deliuering vs from the feare, and taking a∣way frō vs the sting of death, and victory of hell. 2. He willingly for vs laid downe his soule, an offering for sinne Es. 53 10. to deliuer vs from the punish∣ment of sinne. Rom. 6.3. and left vs an example that we should also wil∣lingly, Perkins.1. Die rather then sinne. 2. Die for Christ. 3. Die for the bre∣thren. Imitating his zeale and loue that tooke vpō him our per∣son, and satis∣fied for our transgressions. 3. He was ordained before of God
and promised to be that all sufficient sacrifice, that should take away the sinnes of the world, and therefore ac∣cording to the necessity of his decree and word he died, and by his death obtained 1. Pardon of our sins. 2. Reconciliation for vs with God. 3. The gift of the ho∣ly Ghost. Paying a suf∣ficient ransom for vs,Ʋrsin. & sustai∣ning a punish∣ment aequiua∣lent to the e∣ternall, which none but hee could doe. Buried,] 1. That he might shew the certain∣ty of his death. 2. That he might bury our sins with him in the graue. 3. That pursuing death into his far∣thest hold, he might there con∣quer him, and sanctifie the graue. For
1. They bury nne but those that are dead indeede. 2. He so would haue our sinnes hidden from the face of his father. 3. He there tooke away the victory of deat, & consecrated the graue filling it with his odours and sweete smels Vse 1. I will hold therefore of his buriall for the assurance of my faith concerning his death, and thinking of his burying, meditate al∣so of the misteries of his sepulchre, in that he was laid, 1. In a new graue, who loues to haue his lodgeing in a new heart. Bucan.2. In another mans graue,August. that died & was buried for other mens saluation. 3. In a graue cut out of the rock, which o∣peneth the stoniest hearts, and in them doth make his cham¦bers. That I may lay these things the better to my heart.
2. I will not violate the sepulchre of my sauiour, raking vp againe the sinnes which he hath buried, but ra∣ther striue to haue sinne buried in me: neither will I any more feare my sinnes, inasmuch as he hath buried them that they shall neuer rise vp a∣gainst me in iudgement, 1. To accuse me be∣fore my God. 2. To condemne me with my God. 3. To hinder from me the loue and mercy of my God. That my con∣science may be quieted in this life within my brest. 3. I will not henceforth feare the power of death, nor the horror of the dust and graue, seeing my Lord hath conquerd death, and sanctified the graue, to be to the bodies of his Saints a bed to rest in (Es. 57.2.) where they repose them till the resurrection, 1. Hauing laid aside a grieuous burden, the burden of the flesh. 2. Free from the trou∣bles
and miseries of this life.August. in Ioan. 3. Kept safe to immor∣mortality. That I may lay me downe quietly at the time of my dissolution, & also sleepe in peace. Ps. 4.8. He descended into hell,] 1. That he might deliuer vs from the streights and torments of hell. 2. That he might destroy the diuels Kingdome. 3. That hee might triumph ouer powers and principalities, and make an open shew of them, ha∣uing disarmed them. for 1. We were before in feare and danger of hell. 2. He onely could ouercome the strong man, binde him, and spoile his house. Luk. 11.21. Mat. 12.29. 3. Thereby he led captiuity captiue, and tooke into his hands the keies of death and hell.
Vse 1. Whereas therefore by this descending of Christ into hell, I finde my selfe deliuered from the danger of hell: I doe consider that it is my duety, that as my Sauiour hath deliuered me from this death, so I should endeauour also to saue others from this place of torment, where there is 1. Want of all grace. 2. Defect of all glo∣rie. 3. Excesse of all paine, Sadnesse bur∣ning the minds of men,Bern. de med. geh. suppli. and flames the bo∣dies. 2. Whereas by this his conquest of the infernal powers, my Lord hath strucken a perpetuall terror and feare into the diuell, I see that I need not to stand in feare of satans tyranny, seeing he shall neuer more be able to set vp his kingdome thus destroyed, 1. Although he hath great wrath. 2. Although he hath great subtlety. 3. Although he hath great power. Alwaies en∣uying the peo∣ple of God, & fighting against the Saints.
3. Whereas my Lord rides on in his glory, with his and our enemies bound before him, I will no longer looke on the mockgames of this worlds vanities and triumphs, but turne mine eies from all earthly spe∣ctacles to behold this glorious show where 1. The conqueror is the Lord of hea∣uen. 2. The conquered are the powers of dark∣nesse. 3. The monument of victory is the crosse A triumph excelling all o∣ther shewes, & alone worth the beholding.
The fifth Article. The third day he rose againe from the dead,] 1. Which is to vs a signe that hee hath ouercome death, and fully satisfied for all our sinne. 2. Which is to vs a token that wee must be raised here to newnesse of life. 3. Which is to vs a pledge that we shall rise againe to the resurrecti∣on of life. For 1. Els could he not haue freed himselfe out of deaths hold, and prison of the graue. 2. We must be made conformable, as vn∣to the image of the death,Phil. 3.3 so also to the resurrection of Iesus Christ. 3. As he raised himselfe by his owne power, so also will he quicken our
mortall bodies to make them like vnto his glorious body. Vse 1. What great comfort then is this vnto my soule, that I haue an assurance that my Lord by dying hath not onely quite abolished and done away my sinne, but also by ri∣sing againe hath brought vnto me righteousnesse and life, applying vn∣to me by vertue of his resurrection the whole merit of his death and pas∣sion, whereby I am, 1. Separate from sin∣ners 2. Reconciled vnto God, 3. At peace and qui∣etnesse in mine own conscience. Ro. 5. Which is my chiefest ioy & happinesse in this world. 2. What great care and consci∣ence should I vse, seeing Christ is risn againe from the dead, that I no longer lie amongst the dead? how should I pray vnto him that as by the power of his god-head hee raised himselfe from the graue, so he would also raise me vnto newnesse of life
from this death and graue of sinne? where I ly rotting and stinking, while I 1. Delight in sinne 2. Worke sinne, 3. Accustome my selfe to snne. Which is my greatest misery in this life.Aug. de ver. dom. 3. What great hope and assured confidence should I haue that I shall be raised vp againe to life? for if he being dead could raise himself,Vrsin. Max. in ser. de pa. much more being aliue can he raise me: If he my head, my flesh, my blood and my portion be risen, then shall I his member, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone also rise, and come to an inheritance in heauen 1. Immortall, 2. Vndefiled, 3. And that fadeth not away. Which will be my blessednes in the world to come.
The sixth Article. He ascended into heauen,] 1. That he might prepare the way thither, and take possession there∣of for vs. 2. That hee might giue gifts vnto men. 3. That he might send the comfor∣ter vnto his Church For 1. He is entred before into the rest, and makes vs to sit together with him in heauenly places. 2. He did ascend that he might fulfill al things. Eph. 4.10. 3. He saith Ioh. 16.7. If I goe not a∣way the comforter will not come vn∣to you. Vse 1. I will therefore leaue all by pathes of this world to take me to
this way, which my Lord hath trod before me, and trained it with his blood: neither will I be slothfull in it, nor turne out of it, but in affection hast me into heauen,Greg. following thi∣ther in my heart, where Christ is in his body, where I conuerse already in hope and expectation, and view∣ing him with the eie of my faith as∣cending.Aug. E∣pist. ad Dardan. 1. Beleeue on him in his absence. 2. Hope for his com∣ming. 3. By his hidden mercy feele his presence. Nothing doubt∣ing, but that where my Lord is, I his seruant shalbe also. Ioh. 14.3.11.26. 2. I will not swell on that which I haue receiued, nor otherwaies abuse my gifts, because from him I haue them receiued: nor scorne my bro∣thers graces to quench the spirit in him, but rather stirre vp the gift of God in me acknowledging the giuer.
1. Of whom, 2. Through whom, 3. For whom are all things. Rom. 11.36. Nothing of good giuings & perfect gifts but comming down from him the fa∣ther of lights. Iac. 1.17. 3. I will not seeke for solace in the heauinesse of my soule, and day of mine affliction from any worldly comfort, but from that heauenly spirit which he sent downe ascending who in flesh departing from vs, yet alwaies remaines with vs, as concer∣ning his Aug. tra. 50. in Io.1. Maiesty, 2. Prouidence, 3. Vnspeakeable good∣nesse. Nothing wan∣ting to true con¦solation, where he is present by his holy spirit.
And sitteth on the right hand of God the father almighty,] 1. Partaking of endlesse rest and fe∣licity. 2. Administring and gouerning all things both in heauen and in earth. 3. Making intercession to his father for his people. For 1. In the presence of God is fulnes of ioy and at his right hand there are plea∣sures for euermore. Ps. 16.11. 2. He is ordained King & head ouer al. 3. Hee is our great high Priest that is passed into the heauens. Heb. 4.14. Vse 1. As therefore I beleeue that he now rests in heauen in happi∣nesse and blisse, after his so many la∣bours, and so much suffered here; so doe I also hope that I shall rest with him there
1. Where nothing shall be wanting to me. Cyp. de lau. Mar.2. Where nothing shal be hurtfull to me. 3. Where Christ being present shall fill all my desire. Though here I mourne and suffer for a sea∣son. 2. As I beleeue his kingdome, so doe I trust in him my king, and bowing my knee vnto him, yeelde him reuerence and obedience with∣all thankfulnesse,Perkins. hoping that he will graciously in his good time come and 1. Supply al my wants 2. Vanquish all mine enemies. 3. Succour and helpe me in all mine ad∣uersities. Though he differ his helpe and comming for a while. 3. As I beleeue him sitting at the right hand of the throne of maiesty to make request to God, so doe I goe with boldnesse vnto the throne of grace,Heb. 4 16 being very well assured that I shall receiue mercy, and finde grace to helpe in time of neede through
him that makes intercession for me, 1. By the worth of his sacrifice already of∣fered. 2. By his owne will, 3. By the consent of the father. Though my person be vn∣worthy & my praier sinne.Ʋrsin.
The seauenth Article. From thence he shall come,] 1. Visibly, 2. Gloriously, Mat. 24.30 Vrsin.3. Suddainely. For 1. They shall see the sonne of man come in the cloudes of heauen. 2. As his first comming was in humili∣ty and weakenesse, so his second com∣ming shall be in power and maiestie. 3. Of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels of God in heaen. Vse 1. I beleeue therefore that the iudgement shall be his, not onely as he is God, but also as he is man, in as much as he shall so come as he was seene to goe into heauen. Act. 1.11. returning in his body at the last day
1. A great comfort to the godly, 2. A great terror to the wicked, 3. A great signe and wonder in heauen. As he shall come riding vnto vs vpon the cloudes. 2. I looke not for him againe in the shape of a seruant in his humble∣nesse, but as the Lord of all things in his brightnesse, descending vnto vs, 1.1. Thes. 4 16 With a shout 2. With the voice of the Archangell, 3. With the trumpet of God. As he shall come accom∣panied with the Angels of God. 3. I dispute not curiously about the time of his comming, but like a faith∣full & wise seruant watch that I may be ready against his comming, that he come not to finde me sleeping, in the day that I looke not for him, nor in the houre that I am not ware of, Mat. 24.50. for then his comming will be to me
1. Like the suddaine lightning. 2. Like trauaile vpon a woman that is with child, 3. Like a thiefe in the night. As it will be to al the world on whom hee shall come at vnawares. To iudge both the quicke and the dead,] 1. The wicked of them with all se∣ueritie. 2. The iust amongst them with all clemency. 3. All in generall with all equity. For 1. He shall inflaming fire render them vengeance. 2. When they are iudged they shall not be condemned. 3. He shall giue to euery man according as his workes shall be. Apoc. 22.12. Vse 1. Hence conceiue I of the terrour of the wicked in that day, when their owne consciences accu∣sing
them, and their sinnes witnes∣sing against them: they shall say to the rockes couer v and to the hils fall downe vpon vs, to hide vs from the presence of that iudge, 1.Bast. Who wisedome knoweth all things. 2. Whose power is al∣mighty. 3. Whose iustice is vn∣changeable. And there∣fore will giue sentence a∣gainst vs for our wicked∣nesse. 2. Hence conceiue I of the incre∣dible comfort of the godly, which they haue both from the goodnesse of their cause,Bast. Vrsin. and the ends of the iudgement, as also from the promise and person of the iudge. 1. Who is their Prince & they his subiects.Caluin. 2. Who is their head, and they his mem∣bers. 3. Who is their patron and they his cli∣ents. And there∣fore will giue iudgment with them to saluati∣on.
3. Hence learne I patience in my sufferings; not to reuenge my selfe, though here I suffer wrong,Eccle. 4.1 and the strength be of the hand of them that oppresse me, thinking of his iudge∣ment, because it is iust: hence learne I diligently to doe my duety, and to bee carefull to shew foorth good workes, seeing he will iudge accor∣ding to works, 1. From whom no∣thing secret is hid∣den.Ambr. I. de offic. 2. By whom nothing vncomely i ap∣proued. 3. To whom all iust and honest things are a pleasure. And therfore will iudge his people accor∣ding to equity.
The eight Article. I beleeue in the holy Ghost,] 1. Acknowledging his God-head. 2. Taking him to be my sanctifier & comforter.Perkins. 3. Putting all the confidence of my heart in him. For 1. I worship him, calling vpon him, and giuing thanks vnto him. 2. I am assured that he dwels in me. 3. It is good for me that I hold me fast by God. Vse 1.Bastin. Let Seruetus therefore and his schollers say, that the holy Ghost is no substance, but a working and a motion: Let Macedonius impiously affirme that he is a creature, and not the creator: yet this is my faith, that he is a distinct person in the godhead and with the father and the sonne,
1. Coeternall, Ʋrsin.2. Coequall, 3. Consubstantiall. Proceeding from them & the spirit of both. 2. Let mine infirmity be neuer so great, let ignorance, blindes, dulnes, euill affections, lusts in my members fighting against the spirit, heauinesse and distrust of Gods gracious helpe and fauour possesse my body, soule and spirit: yet shall he purge out of me all corruption by his fire, all dark∣nesse by his light, all infirmity by his strength, all heauinesse by his com∣forts,Bern. in ser. 2. Pē∣tecost. which giueth vnto me 1. The strength of life, 2. The light of know∣ledge; 3. The earnest of sal∣uation. Teaching me in these three, all things that pertaine to sal∣uation. 3. Let others trust in man, & make flesh their arme. Ier. 17.5. In lying words. Ier. 7.4. In vanity and things of nought. Es. 59.4. as in their owne counsels, wisdome, riches, strength:
yet will I trust in him the spirit of truth: while I consider these three things, in which my hope consists, 1. The charity of his adoption. 2. The trueth of his promise, 3. The power of his performance. Hauing an an∣nointing from him which is the oile of glad¦nes.Bern. de frag. sep. hom. 3.
The ninth Article. I beleeue the Church,] 1. The house of God. 2. The piller & groūd of the truth. 3. The mother of the faithfull, For Mat. Virell. Caluin li. 4. In∣stitut. c. 1 l. 4.1. Hee dwelleth in it to defend it and-guide it by his spirit. 2. By the ministery thereof God preser∣ueth and propagateth his truth in the world. 3. Shee brings forth sonnes and daugh∣ters vnto God. Vse 1. Happy therefore am I li∣uing in this family, where God the father is the House-holder, Iesus Christ the first borne, and the heire, the holy Ghost dispencer of all gra∣ces, the Preachers of the word the Stewards, the word it selfe the foode and portion, the faithfull the dome∣sticks, liuely stones of that building, and golden vessels of that house, which are
1. Elect of God be∣fore all world. 2. Separate from the rest of men. 3. Knit and vnited vnto Christ their head. They bring one body and one spirit, as they are called in one hope of their vocation. Ephe. 4.4. 2. Sure shall I be to bee led into all truth, and to come to him which is way, life, and truth, Iesus Christ the righteous, if I hold mee fast by this piller, and be led by it as the Is∣raelites by the pillar of cloude and fire in the wildernesse. Exod. 13.21. and seeke him in this Church, and with this Church, of which hee is head, 1. In perfection. 2. In office, and 3. In efficacie. Hauing in all things the praeeminence,Bucan. Col 1.18 & gouerning and inspiring all his mem∣bers. 3 Worthy were I to perish for want of food,Caluin. li. 4. Iusti∣tut. 1. sect. 5. if I should refuse it gi∣uen vnto mee from Heauen by the
hand of such a mother: worthy were I to be driuen out of the tents of the godly, and to be cast out of the sight of God my Father, if I should despise the instruction and the gouernment of the Church of my mother,Pro. 30.17. known to me to be the true spouse of Christ by the 1. Profession of true doctrine. Ʋrsin.2. Right vse of the Sacraments.Bucan. 3. Profession of obe∣dience to the do∣ctrine or Ministe∣rie. Nourishing vp children vn∣to God by the preaching of the Gospell, & examples of good workes. Holie,] 1. By imputation of righteousnesse. Ʋrsin.2. By inchoation of righteousnesse. 3. By being consecrate to an holy and diuine vse. For
1. Christ holnesse and obedience is imputed vnto t. 2. The regenerate members  e diligently apply themselues to new∣nesse of life. 3. It is sequestred from the rt of the wicked, and those that are without the Church. Vse 1. Because therefore I am as∣sured that I am a member of this Church, which is holy by being clo∣thed with the ro of Christ his righteousnes: when I prorate my selfe before my heauenly Iudge in the examination of mine owne con∣science here, searching my heart and sifting my life; or els at the last iudge∣ment: should I fole and feare 1. The imperfction of mine own righ∣teousnesse. 2. The multitude & grieuousnes of my sinnes. 3. The dread and terror of the angry Iudge. I will hide my sinne from sight, my selfe from wrath, vnder the skirt & couering of his roabe.
2 Because I professe my selfe, to be one of this congregation, which is called of God vnto holines, followes the example of the Sonne of God in holines, is guided by the spirit of ho∣lines, is instructed in the word con∣cerning holines, and daily profi more and more in holines: keeping these three things for holines sake Aug. li. de doc. Christia∣na1. Purity and clean∣nesse of bod. 2. Chastity of minde, 3. Veritye of doc∣trine. I will exercise my selfe to god∣lines & Holines of ife. 2 Tim. .7 Perkins. in lec.3. Because, I haue ioined my selfe to the people of God, & am become one of his house, I will be no com∣panion to Atheists, drunkards, blas∣phemers, fornicators, and other god∣lesse persons, which are not of this people, neither are they of this house: but all my delight being on the Saints in earth; and those that ex∣cell in vertue, conuersing with them alone
1. Bse they are ust. 2. Because I may mak them iust. 3. Because I may bee bttered by them my selfe. I will haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of dark∣nesse.Octau. de trin. cap. 6. Ephe. 5.7. Catholike,] 1. In respect of place. 2. In respect of time. 3. In respect of men the members of the same. For 1. It spreads it selfe throughout the world. 2. It hath had a being i all times and ages. 3. It is gathered out of all sorts of men, states, kindreds, and nations. Vse 1. m therefore from the largenes of the Church i respect of the place taught, that it can neither bee shut vp in one corner of the world,Caluin. Orb in orbem. nor the world be brought in∣to one City, nor the Church restrai∣ned
to one schismaticall congregati∣on, though there hath beene; and is much and earnest contention with the 1. Donatists. 2. Romanists. 3. Separatists. While they would assert the Church to their quarter, City, side a∣lone. 2. I haue to answere the adersa∣rie, when hee shall aske me of our Church, where it was before the preaching of these men, Luther, Me∣lanchton, Zwinglius, and such like that neither are they the founders of our faith, neither is our Church or yester∣day,  would they pretend; but that it had its being in all ages 1. Before the law. 2. Vnder the law. 3. In the time of grace While we hold ast the founda∣tion wheron the faithfull al times haue been built.
3. I see how vniustly the Romish Priests,Perkins. and shauelings doe challenge to themselues & to their tribe alone the name of the Church, which con∣sists of all degrees of men, estates and callings: I see here matter of incredi∣ble comfort ministred vnto all Gods people; in that no degree or estate of men are excluded from grace in Christ,Ambros. sup. luc. li. 5. and that none can take him from them, but that they may 1. Follow him. 2. Lay holde of him. 3. Feed on him. While they hut not out themselues by vnbeleefe,Bernard in ser. and take them∣selues from him. The Communion of Saints, which consists,] 1. In the vnion and coherence of the faithfull with Iesus Christ. 2. In the vnity and fellowship of the
faithfull one with another, while they liue together here on earth. 3. In that which these of the Church militant pertake with these of the Church triumphant. For 1. Hee i their head, they are his body and members for their part. 1. Cor. 12.27. 2. They haue all things common a∣mongst themselues. 3. These conuerse with those in heauen in affection; those other pray for these n earth. Now then Vse 1. If the case stand thus twixt Christ and the faithfull, that they haue an vnion and communion be∣tween themselues, then surely he the head will inspire them his members with vigor, feeling, mouing, and spi∣rituall life: nay he wil receiue of them what is theirs: namely their sinnes and sorrowes, and giue vnto them what is his,
1. To bee called the sonnes of God. 2. To haue right to his righteousnes. 3. To haue iust claime and title to his fa∣thers Kingdome. Conuaying these his goods vnto them by the preaching of the word, & administration of the sacra∣ments. 2. If there be such a fellowship of the Saints on earth, then euery one of them ought to bee thus minded, readily and cheerefully to bestow the gifts that he hath receiued to the common commodity & safety, and to let religion and charity so vnite and moue their hearts, 1. That they may thinke the same things. 2. That they may bee of like affection one vnto another. 3. That they may be ready to distri∣bute of their sub∣stance vnto euerie one as he hath need. Maintaining as much as in them lieth, and promoting this holy fellow∣ship.
3. If the distance betwixt this and Heauen cannot hinder the affe∣ction of the Saints on earth, but that it will reach euen the seat of the blessed: if the security and pleasures of that Kingdome cannot make the blessed departed to forget the suffe∣rings of their brethren here on earth whom they do not see, but that they minde them, pitty them, and pray to God for them. How can I then per∣swade my selfe that I am one of these Saints, if my conuersation be not al∣ready in heauen? How can I speake of this communion, if I remember not poore Ioseph, to pray for him and to pitty him? whom I daily see 1. Destitute 2. Afflicted. 3. Tormented. My bowels yerning vpon him in cōpassi∣on of his mise∣rie.
The tenth Article. The forgiuenesse of sinnes] 1. The guilt of them done away. 2. The spot of them purged. 3. The punishment remitted. For 1. They shall neuer bee imputed vnto vs. 2. The blood of Iesus clenseth vs from all sinne. 3. Christ hath suffered whatsoeuer was due to our sinnes. Vse 1. I can therefore settle my soule in rest and quietnesse, hauing great ioy and peace in mine heart, knowing that I am the blessed of the Lord, and that nothing can separate twixt me and my God, my sinne be∣ing not, & being not imputed, it is as
if it were not: I can also haue great boldn in the day of the Lord, no∣thing fearing the iudgement, nor in the iudgement the acculation 1. Of the Diuell. 2. Of mine owne con¦science. 3. Of the Lawe of God. Seeing I shal not be reputed wicked where I did amisse. 2. I will not defile my selfe againe with my sinnes, returning with the dogge to his vomit, and with the sow to wallowing in the mire, but with all care and conscience keepe 1. My sle chast. 2. My body vndefi∣led. 3. My garments cleane. Seeing I haue bin washt from mine iniquity, and cleansed from my sinne Ps. 52.2. 3. I will not dreame of satisfying for my sinnes by mine owne doing or suffering, neither will I feare the wrath in this world, nor the reuen∣ging flames of purgatory after this life, to roast and broyle my soule, till
they haue purged out my drosse, and eat vp all my corruption:Or thus Who hath made per∣fect satis∣faction for my sinne by this. 1. Most part nati∣uity. 2. Most holy life. 3. Most bitter pas¦sion and cruell death. Seeing. &c. but cast from me all seruile feare; knowing that Gods iustice cannot punish that againe in his seruant, which hee hath already punisht in his Sonne, 1. Who was numbred with the transgres∣sors. 2. Bare the sinne of many. 3. Made intercession for the trespassers. Es. 53.12. Seeing the Lord laide on him the iniqui∣ty of vs all. Es. 53.6.
The Eleauenth Article. The resurrection of the bodie,] 1. Wherein there shall be a finall de∣struction of the workes of the Di∣uell. 2. Wherein there shall be a full ma∣nifestation of Gods mercy on the faithfull. 3. Wherein there shall be a fearefull declaration of his iustice on the wicked. For 1. Then sinne and death shall be vtterly done away. 2. The same flesh that was partaker of the Crosse, shall be made also partaker of the glorie. 3. As their soules sinned dwelling in their bodies for their lasting, so shall
they bee punished soule and body for Gods euerlasting. Vse 1. I know therefore that how∣soeuer sinne hath now defaced my soule and body; howsoeuer death for a while may hereafter pray vpon my carkasse in the graue: yet there shall be a time of restitution, and a time of refreshing from the Lord, wherein my state shall bee made farre better then it was at first in Adam, Christ becomming deaths death, and being made vnto me life, by whose voice I shall be awaked, and by whose pow∣er I shall be raised from the graue 1. The same body. 2. Made like vnto Christs glorious bo∣die. 3. Now no more sub∣iect vnto death. For this cor∣ruptible must put on incor∣ruption, and this mortal im∣mortality 1. Co. 15.53. 2. I beleeue that howsoeuer here the godly mourne for a season, being afflicted and brought low, yet the time is comming when all teares shal
be wipt away from their eies, & they made free from misery, hauing gi∣uen vnto them a large retribution, namely at the resurrection of the iust, when their soules being ioined againe vnto their bodies, they shall be brought to meet the Lord, and so for euer be with the Lord: in the assu∣rance of which comfort 1. My heart is glad. 2. My glory reioiceth. 3. My flesh shall rest in hope. Ps. 16.9. For I shall not dwell for euer with straitnes, nor lodge for ages in the graue. 3 I perswade me that howsoeuer the wicked flourish here vpon earth for a season,Et sor∣tem, & vsuram. Greg. li. 4 Dialog. and it goeth well with them: yet the time is comming when they shall pay for all, being there∣fore in the resurrection restored to their former being, that they may for euer leese their well being, and be condemned to suffer
1. Death without death. 2. Defect without de∣fect. 3. End without end. For immor∣tall neuer fa∣ding, infinite shall bee their death, defect, and end.
The twelfth Article. And the life euerlasting,] 1. Which is the gift of our God. 2. Which is the end of our hopes. 3. Which is the complement of our happines. For 1. He bestoweth it vpon vs though Ie∣sus Christ. 2. We can desire nothing but this, wee can expect nothing beyond this. 3. It includes the presence of all good, and the absence of all euill. Now therefore Vse 1. If I doe owe vnto God my whole selfe, because he hath created me: If I owe vnto him more then my selfe because he hath redeemed me: how can I speake of that inutterable band of debt, wherein I am tied vn∣to
him, that hath giuen to the eter∣nall life? the first fruits whereof I feele in this life, though the absolute comforts thereof he reserued to that other life, in which I shall 1. Perfectlie knowe God. 2. Fully inioy God. 3. Worthily praise God. Being vnited vnto God, and cōformed with God. 2. If that eternall life be the end of my hopes, I will learne farre to stretch them beyond this momenta∣ry life & the perishing things there∣of; Gold shall not be my hope, nor siluer, nor seruants, nor children, nor wealth, nor health, nor bewty, nor honor, nor ease, nor age, but that life which is hid with Christ in God, af∣ter which I sigh and long, as one that is from home, while I am here in the flesh: knowing that there are prepa∣red for me of God the things which
1. Eye hath not seene. 2. Eare hath not heard. 3. Neither haue they entered into the heart of man. Es. 64.4. 1. Cor. 2.9. Being one of those that feare God, and doe reuerence be∣fore him. 3 If there be nothing to be desi∣red which is not in that life, if there be nothing to be wisht away which i in that life: why should I then re∣gard this present life of troubles, sorow sicknes, danger, need, vexati∣on, which giues no satisfaction for contentment, no secuity for rest and safegard to set my loue vpon it? why should I not rather contemne it thinking on eternity? and in the height of mine affection and earnest desire of this blessednes cry? Come Lod Iesu, come quickly, that I may also com.
1. To thy gladsome presence. 2. To the sweet fel∣lowshippe of thy saints in Heauen. 3. To the blessed com∣pany of thine An∣gels. Being made partaker of the fatnes of thine house,Heb. 12.22. and the fulnesse of thy pleasures.
The diuision of the De∣calogue. 1. We may deuide the Comman∣dements thus into three, 1. A Preface of the whole. 2. The precepts of the first table. 3. The Commandemets of the second. 2. In each Commanement is han∣led, 1. The affirming part. 2. The forbidding part 3. The Appendix. Thereof. 3. The Appendix of each Com∣mandement is either 1. A promise. 2. Or a threatning. 3. Or some other rea∣son. Exprest in the Commande∣ment or vn∣derstood.
The ten Comman∣dements. God spake these words,] 1. VVHose is the greatest autho∣ritie, 2. Whose words are words of ve∣ritie, 3. Who requires out perfect obedi∣ence, and the hearts sincerity. Saying I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. In the words of which preface; that we should yeeld more willing obe∣dience to the precepts following,
the Lord sets out vnto vs three things to induce, 1. A declaration of his eternall rule and power. 2. A promise of the goodnesse of his grace. 3. A remembrance of his benefits before conferd. For he saith 1. I am the Lord Iehouah, 2. I am the Lord thy God. 3. I brought thee out of the land of E∣gypt out of the house of bondage. Vse 1. A powerfull argument to moue vs to obey, seeing he that re∣quires our obedience is the Lord of power, the almighty eternall, onely wise God owner of all that is in hea∣uen and in earth, who abideth the same for euer vnchangable in his 1. Essence, 2. Will and 3. Workes. And therfore in right of his do∣miniō & respect of his excellencie requires our ser∣uice. 2. A pithy perswasion to affect
our soules to yeeld him ready seruice seeing he is no strange God that re∣quires it, but our God; ours not one∣ly because he hath created vs, doth preserue and gouerne vs, as he hath and doeth also all the rest of his crea∣tues: but because he doth singularly participate and manifest himselfe vnto vs louing and fauouring vs before all others in as much as hee hath 1. Chosen vs for his own inheritance. 2. Called vs to the knowledge of him∣selfe in his sonne. 3. Inspired vs with his grace and holy spirit. And therefore with the remē∣brance of this his goodnesse would win our hearts. 3. A forcible reason to stirre vp our mindes readily to receiue, and haen to his words, seeing he that spakes them hath before deliuered vs, as Israel from Egypt and the house of seruants, so our soules and bodies from the
1. Diuell, 2. Sinne, and 3. Death. And therefore in regard of so great purchase and deliuerance expects our thankfulnesse.
The first Commandement. Thou shalt haue none other gods before me.] 1. The affirming part of this pre∣cept, Iehouah must be our God. The things commanded in this pre∣cept are 1. THat we know the true God and acknowledge him. 2. That we fall downe and doe re∣uerence before him, 3. That with purpose of heart and minde we cleaue fast vnto him, For 1. Otherwise he cannot be our God, nei∣ther can we be his people. Ier. 24.7. 2. Otherwise we cannot glorifie him as God, nor be thankfull. Rom. 1.21. 3. Otherwise wee cannot tast and see
how good and gracious the Lord is Ps. 34.8. Vse 1. As therefore we desire that when God writes vp his people he should not passe by vs, so should we indeuour also to know him for our God, as he hath reuealed himselfe vnto vs in his word and workes; and knowing to acknowledge him 1. With our hearts, 2. With our mouthes, 3. With our workes, As it becom∣meth those that call vpon his name. 2. As obedient children to the fa∣thers of their bodies are in their in∣ward well affected, and with their whole minde, will and heart doe ho∣nour and respect them: so should we much more God, which is the father of spirits, rendring vnto him from our soules 1. Honor, 2. Obedience, 3. Thankfulnesse. As it belōgeth to such glory, power, good∣nesse.
3. As we would haue the Lord to be with vs in all our troubles and aduersities, standing on our side a∣gainst al that rise vp against vs, as we would haue him to lift vp the light of his countenance vpon vs, to cheere and to refresh vs, as we would heare his voice which is sweete, and see his countenance which is come∣ly: so let vs cleaue to God,Cant. 2.14. and make the Lord our stay,Ier. 17.7 knit vnto him a∣lone, in 1. Affiance, 2. Loue and 3. Feare. As it beseemeth well his Saints, and is agreeable to his holy will.Perkins.
2. The forbidding parts of the first commandement. We must preferre no other thing aboue the head of our ioy. The things defended in this pre∣cept are 1. Ignorance of God, his word and workes. 2. Errors concerning God, the per∣sons of the god-head and their properties. 3. The affection set on any other thing but God. For 1. How can we imbrace and worship the things we doe not know. Act. 2. How can we be saued if we erre con∣cerning the trueth. 2. Thes. 2.10. 3. How should we not desire the chiefest and greatest good. Aug. l. de nat. & gra. Chrysost.Vse 1. Although therfore there are some things, which are better for vs not to know then to know, although we may be ignorant of some things
without sinne: yet can there be no∣thing worse then either the naturall or affected ignorance of God: for knowledge must needes goe, before the imbracing of vertue, and no man can faithfully desire that which he doth not know: wherefore they are iustly here condemned, whosoeuer are ignorant of God, because they are 1. Carelesse of know∣ing him, 2. Sloathfull in lear∣ning of him. 3. Ashamed to in∣quire after him. Whereas both by the benefit of our creatiō,Bern. and his graci∣ous manifesta∣tion we ought to know him. 2. Although as in many things we offend all, so in many things we erre all, yet beware we,Iam. 3.2. that we doe not erre concerning God; for as the least error in the beginning is made greatest in the end, so the least error concerning him was in the beginning if it be not corrected, may make vs concerning all trueth to erre in the end, growing to this impiety,
1. To suppose that there is no God, 2. To imagine that there are more gods 3. To set vp in our hearts & thoughts an idol & false God in stead of the true. Whereas such Atheisme and Idolatrie is for∣bidden in this law. 3. Although there are many things in this world of which we may haue a liking, and that without sin: although naturally we may desire & affect some things without offence, a wiues, children, parents, brethren, friends, &c. yet let this be our care, that our life be not bound vp in the loue of them, as old Israels life in the life of his sonne Ioseph:Gen. 44 30. that we loue them not inordinately and in excesse least our hart be therby withdrawne from God, so that as much or more then in the creatour 1. Wee affie in the creature, 2. Wee affect the crea∣ture, 3. We feare the crea∣ture. Whereas God shold be honou∣red with the be of our affectiō
3. The appendix of the first Comman∣dement. Promises and threatnings not ex∣prest. 1. If herein we harken to his voice we shall be his chiefe tresure a∣boue all people. Exod. 19.. 2. If we like not to retaine him in our knowledge, he will giue vs o∣uer to a reprobate minde and vile affections. Rom. 1.26.28. 3. If in our hearts we estrange our selues from him, he also will be farre from vs, and from our helpe. For 1. Thus doth God honour those that ho∣nour him. 2. Thus doth God testifie his wrath in this world against vnbeleeuers and wicked men. Rom. 1.26. 3. Thus is it iust with God to punish those that forsake him and contemne his maiesty. Vse 1. Seemeth it a small thing in
our eies to be the people of the Lord to be the men that God will honour, to be those vpon whom he will shew forth his goodnesse? and all for the obseruance of this commandement, 1. In temporall bles∣sings, 2. In spirituall gra∣ces, 3. In the euerlasting rewards. What then wil seeme great or worthy in our eies? 2. Thinke we it not a grieuous punishment for the breach of this commandement to be forsaken and left of God, and giuen vp vnto our owne lusts? so that being past the feeling of sinne, and remorse of con∣science, the feare of Gods iudgement cleane extinct in our soules, and his cords cast away from vs,Ps. 2.3. 1. We should euen giue our selues ouer to wickednesse, 2. We should make a trade of sinne, 3. We should commit vncleanenes euen with greedinesse. What wil we then thinke great of wrath or euill.
3. Iudge wee if we haue lifted vp our hands to any strange god, and our heart departed from him, that it shall not be iust with God to with∣draw himselfe from vs, though in our aduersities we make long prai∣ers and stretch out our hands vnto him, when we shall be 1. In misery waking. 2. In misery sleeping. 3. In misery whe∣thersoeuer we turn our selues. What then wil be iust & equal in our sight?Greg. in ser.
The second Commandement. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, &c.] 1. The affirming part of this Com∣mandement. We must worship God according to his will reuealed in his word. Or we must worship God as he hath ap∣pointed by his word. The things required in this precept are 1. That we be religiously carefull of all the parts of Gods seruice. 2. That wee stirre vp our selue thereunto by all godly meanes. 3. That we stoutly oppose against all corruptions, which may defile the pure worship of God. For
1. Thus it becommeth vs to fulfill all righteousnesse. 2. Thus it behooueth vs to quicken and confirme our selues in the worke of the Lord. 3. Thus it befitteth vs to striue for the maintenance of the faith. Iud. 3. Vse 1. This therefore should stir vs vp to the diligent reading, hearing and meditating on the word, and to the reuerent vse of the sacraments and praier, and teach vs to bewaile our former negligence herein: this should make vs sory for occasions lost, wherein by godly conference and instruction we might haue bet∣tered others, and beene betterd by them our selues, and to lay hold here∣after on all occasions offerd of the like, that so we may thereby be 1. To the praise of God, 2. To the benefit of our brethren, 3. To the singular comfort of our soules. In things be∣longing to the worship of God.
2. This should make vs to vow vn∣to the Lord his worship, and keep it, to purge our mindes by fasting, and thereby also to raise vp our vnder∣standing,Aug. in ser. to bring the flesh in sub∣iection to the spirit, to make our hart contrite and humble: but aboue all to keep a fast in our soules from sinne and from our owne waies, that there∣by we may the the rather serue God in holinesse, whom we worship as in soule, so also in body with 1. Bar heads, Ʋirell.2. Bowed knees, 3. Lifted vp hands and eies. In all humility seeking his face in his temple. 3. This should cause vs to take heede of adulterating Gods seruice with any our owne will worships, or any heathenish or papisticke rites and ceremonies, or of giuing the best approbation or allowance thereun∣to to, but to keepe our selues within the listes and tarriers that God hath set downe vnto vs for his worship in the
word, this should make vs also to be∣ware of all confederates and leagues with vnbeleeuers, and society with heretickes, least wee learne of their waies and fall into their terrours, who 1. Are reprobate con∣cerning the truth. 2. Beget of themselues new and false opi∣nions of worship. 3. Follow also other mens idle fancies. In matters cōcerning the faith and true religion. The forbidding part of the second commandement. 2. We must not prophane the lawfull worship of God with supersticious rites. The things prohibited in this pre∣cept are 1. Idolatry, 2. Hypocrysie, 3. Prophanenesse.
1. Wee must worship God in spirit. Io. 4. 2. We must worship God in trueth. Io. 4 24. 3. The holy God requires holy worship. Vse 1. Here then is a reproofe for the heathen falling downe before their stockes and stones, and looking vp to the hoast of heauen: this meets with the Papists and their images, which they haue set vp to themselues to worship, vnlawfull representati∣ons of the god-head, seruice and re∣uerence done to such idols, and o∣ther shapes of the creatures, their crosses, their hee Saints and their shee Saints: all which as idolatrous and occasions of idolatry the Saints of God haue iustly 1. Cast out of their mindes, 2. Cast out of their Churches, 3. Cast out of their houses. That so Gods worship might not be defiled. 2. Here is that condemnes all outward showes of Gods worship,
when the heart is not inwardly af∣fected with his loue and feare: all negligence in Gods seruice: all ser∣uing of the intentions of the world by the causes of God:Greg. lib. 21. Mor. Mat. 23.23. the tithing of mint, anniseed and cummin, and let∣ting passe the waightier matters of the law, such as are 1. Iudgement, 2. Mercie, 3. Fidelity. That so Gods seruice might not be forshew 3. Here is that condemnes the contempt of religion, and the omissi∣on of the worship of God, whether inward or outward, or any part ther∣of: when men account of this ser∣uice but us a needelesse matter, and of the dueties here required but as fri¦uolous, and things of no esteeme 1. Vilifying them in their thoughts. 2. Iesting at them in their speeches, 3. Slighting them in their gesture and behauiour. That so these dueties might be disesteemd.
3. The Appendix of the second Com∣mmandement. An exhortation to obedience set downe at large 1. Because the God that requires the true worship, and forbids the false is a mighty and a iealous God. 2. Because he punisheth the breach of this Commandement so truly on the wicked and their posteri∣tie. 3. Because he rewardeth the obser∣uance thereof plentifully to the godly, and their seed after them. For 1. Hee cannot indure that any part of of the worship due to him, should ei∣ther be with holden, depraued, or gi∣uen to any other. 2. Hee visits the iniquities of the fa∣thers vpon the children, vpon the third, &c. 3. Hee shewes mercie to thousands of them that loue him. Vse 1. Although therefore we may
flatter our selues in the breach of this precept, and cry peace, peace, and all shall be well, and the Lord will not regard to punish it; although we can make a deminitiue of this as of o∣ther sinnes: yet let vs know for cer∣taine that God accounts it it hainous seeing hee doth thus intermine, and threaten the trespassors, shewing them that he wants 1. Noe cause. 2. Not will. 3. Nor power. To plague & punish such as breake this law. 2 Although a man commits ma∣ny sinnes against his owne soule on∣ly, according to that of the Prophet, that Soule that sinneth shall die, E∣zech. 18.4. yet against him that set∣teth vp his Idols in his heart, and put∣teth the stumbling blocke of his ini∣quity before his face, the Lord will doe somewhat more, Ezech. 18.7, 8. for the Lord will not only set his face against that man, and make him a signe and a prouerbe, and cut him off
from the midst of his people if hee doe not repent him; bus he will also plegde his seed, 1. Leauing them in their naturall cor∣ruption. 2. Leading them forth in the steps of their parents. 3. Giuing them vp to the hardnes of their heart, and wilfull blindnes. To make vp the measure of their fathers sinnes. 3 Although Gods wrath and iea∣lousie burne like a fire which will consume the aduersaries: although the vengeance be great that visits to the third and fourth generation, and able to affright vs: yet must we here obserue how God sets but his good∣nes to inuite vs to obedience, ampli∣fying his mercies, and promising it to thousands, the rather
1. By the greatnes of his goodnes. 2. By the desire of our owne good and safe∣tie. 3. And the good and safety of or chil∣dren. To win vs to the obseruance of this his lawe.
The third Commandement. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine, for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine,] 1. The affirming part of this pre∣cept. We must haue the name of God in singu∣lar reuerence, The things inioined in this precept are 1: That we sweare in due & lawfull manner. 2. That wee zealously confesse to Gods glory the truth and will of God that we know. 3. That we call vpon the Lord and glorifie him, giuing thanks vnto him. For
1. It is written. Deut. 6.13. Thou shalt feare thy Lord God, serue him, and sweare by his name. 2. Wee must as well confesse with the mouth to saluation, as beleeue with the heart. Rom. 10.10. 3. We must sanctifie the Lord God as in our hearts, so also in our words, and workes. 1. Pet. 3.15. Vse 1. Howsoeuer therefore the Anabaptist condemne all oathes,De ser. dom. in monte. and swearing, yet dare say with Au∣gustine; Thou dost not ill, that vsest an oath well, that is, which swearest to the glory of God, thine owne, and thy neighbors good 1. In truth. 2. In iudgement, and 3. In righteousnesse. When thou art lawfully & ear∣nestly required thereunto. 2 Howsoeuer all truths at al times are not to be spoken, and that of the words which are good, and things we know for certaine, there is as well a time to keepe silence, as a time to
speake. Eccl. 3.7. yet should it euer be vnto we as to the Prophet Dauid, pain and griefe to abstaine from good words, so to hide any thing within vs that may tend to Gods glory, whose truth wee must confesse with boldnesse, and not shrinke from the same, for feare either of the faces of men, or any worldly losses, whether it be of 1. Friends. 2. Good name and re∣putation. 3. The meanes of liue∣lihood, or life it selfe. When it con∣cerns the main∣tenance of his glory, & the ad∣uancement of his kingdome. Sup. mat. cap. 24.3 Howsoeuer some as, Chrysostome saith, worship Saints, yet scorne san∣ctifie: what manner of holines call ye this? yee must wee know for surety that wee cannot be to the praise and glory of God, as is required of his Saints, vnlesse we haue as an holy confession and remembrance of his name in our mouthes; so also an ho∣ly expression and resemblance of his vertues in our manners: vnlesse what∣soeuer
we doe or say, we doe it to his honour, which we must alwaies seek, 1. Declaring his word and Gospell to our brethren. 2. Imploring his aide and succour in our needs and troubles. 3. Magnifying his mercies in our suc∣cesses and deliue∣rances. When at any time occasion shall be offered of these things. 2. The Negatiue. Wee must doe or speak nothing ten∣ding to the prophaning of the name of God. The things forbidden in this pre∣cept are, 1. That we vse no needlesse and vn∣holy oaths. 2. That we speake not vnreuerently of God, his word, his workes, or titles, &c. nor abuse them. 3. That wee disgrace not our holy
profession by an vnholy conuersation. For 1. Wee must not sweare by heauen or earth, or any other oath. Mat. 5.34. Iam. 5.12. 2. We must feare this glorious and fear∣full name, the Lord our God. Deut. 28.58. 3. Wee must not take the name of God in our mouthes,Psal. 50.16. if we hate to be re∣formed, and haue cast his words be∣hind vs. Vse 1. Come hither therefore all you wicked, and men of impure lips, you that are so farre from making conscience of idle & wicked words, that you make no conscience of foule and blasphemous oathes: see here condemned your prophane and rash swearing, your blasphemies, your cursings, and your periuries, wherewith you haue grieued the ex∣cellency of Heauen, and withall pro∣cured
1. Hurt to our owne soules. 2. Hinderance of Gods glorie. 3. Offence and griefe of hart to the Chri∣stian hearers. And let this teach you to forsake this sin 2. Come hither you wilfull scor∣ners, prophane deriders, and horri∣ble abusers of Gods holines, you that haue vsed the name of God, his word and titles with no fit respect, speak∣ing of them contemptibly and with∣out due regard, as of vile and com∣mon things: see here condemned your prophanenes and abhominable impiety; who haue spoiled the Lord of his honour, whereas his name and Scriptures by you 1. Haue beene iested at. 2. Haue been wrested. 3. Haue beene abused to inchantment. And let this make you trē∣ble at his word 3. Come hither you that draw neere vnto the Lord, and honour him with your lips, and in yoor harts
and waies depart farre from him: you that make profession of religion, yet liue in all prophanenes,2. Sam. 12.14. Aug. in Ps. 23. giuing there∣by great occasion to the enemies of the Lord for to blaspheme: see hee condemned your halting and your double iniquity: who calling your selues the seruants of the Lord; yet liue like the sons of Belial, and there∣by are a cuse of 1. Great griefe to the godly. 2. Great scandall to weake. 3. Great hardning to the wicked. And let this cause you leaue your croaked waies. 3. The Appendix. A threatning from God that he will be reuenged of those that sacrile∣giously rob him of his glory Which he will doe 1. Surely. 2. Swiftly. 3. Seuerely. For
1. The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. 2. He will be a swift witnesse against all such impiety. 3. He will not spare in the day of venge∣ance. Vse 1. Albeit therefore the brea∣kers of this precept, may in this case despise the lawes and wrath of men, who haue but sillily prouided against this transgression, and doe very slow∣ly punish it, and are oft times very little or nothing offended, when Gods name is abused and his holines prophaned: or if they take it to heart, it is not so much to them as if their owne credit were called in question: yet when the Lion hath roared, who will not feare? Amos 3.8. when the Lord hath spoken and threatned sure vengeance, who will not be terrifid from this sinne? which hath in it nei∣ther
1. Pleasure, nor 2. Profit, nor 3. Shew of any good. Which might induce men to incurre this wrath. 2 Albeit in other sinnes wicked & vngodly men grow bold on Gods sufferance, and their heart is fully set in them to do euill, because sentence against an euill worke is not execu∣ted speedilie, Eccle. 8.11. yet let all men take heed of prouoking in this kinde: for their iudgement sleepeth not that offend on this fashion, and vengeance is against them on the way, the zeale of the Lord wil hasten it, and bring this thing to passe, 1. That the mouth of all wickednes may be stopt. 2. That others may feare because of the iudgement. 3. That honour may be giuen vnto God. Which should deter vs from this hainous sinne. 3. Albeit as the law takes no no∣tice of the least things, so God takes
not present vengeance of euery small sinne, because he will not alwaies be chiding: yet will he make his plagues wonderfull against this sinne, for his curse shall come into the house of the offender to consume it, Zach. 5. his curse shall ouertake the swearers and blasphemers in their soules and in their bodies, when he beginnes with them in vengeance, he will not spare, when he begins he will also make an end, and he will do a thing vnto them at which both the eares of them that heare it, shall tingle. 1. Sam. 3.11.12. as it appeares vnto vs 1. In many examples in the word. 2. In many examples in other writings. 3. In many examples in the world. Which should assure vs that hee will not spare.
The fourth Commandement. Remember the Sabboath day to keep it holy: Six daies shalt thou la∣bor and doe all that thou hast to doe: But the seuenth day is the Sabbaoth of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt doe no manner of worke, thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, thy man seruant, nor thy maidseruant, nor thy cattell, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: For in six daies the Lord made heauen & earth the Sea and all that in them is, & rested the seuenth day: where∣fore the Lord blessed the Se∣uenth day, and halowed it.]
1. The affirming part of this com∣mandement. We must keepe this an holy rest vnto the Lord. The things commanded in this pre∣cept are 1. That on the Lords day we doe al holy and religious workes. 2. That we cease from our worldy labours. 3. That wee rest from sin and wick∣ednesse. For 1. They suite well with the season, in holy day holy workes. 2. In it wee must doe no manner of worke. 3. So the Lord by his spirit shall worke in vs his good worke. Vse 1. Hereby therefore am I taught and shewed, that as I should at all times as much as my vocation and necessitie will permit, be carefull to visit Gods temple, to heare and
reade his word and meditate there∣on, to call vpon the Lord by praier, to doe the worke of piety and cha∣rity, and as much as in me lieth, to stirre vp others also thereunto: so should I especially on this day do the workes of the day, that is 1. Make praiers and sing praises vnto God. 2. Gather instructi∣on to mine owne soule, meditating on Gods holy word and workes. 3. Exercises the works of mercy to my brethren. As he hath cō∣manded that is the Lord of the day. 2. Here I perceiue that as to liue idely on the other daies is damnable, so to be troubled with Martha about the many things of this life, and of this world on this day is abominable wherein is commanded a remission of all seruile labours and the workes of our callings, that wee may serue God more freely in our places, whom
we are this day especially to honour with our 1. Bodies, 2. Soules and 3. Substance. Prou. 3.9. As he hath re∣quired that ap∣pointed this rest. 3. Hereby I am instructed, that I must not rest this the Lords day, as the people of Israel did fast in their day. Es. 58.4. for strife and debate and to smite with the fift of wickednesse: but all through my whole life I am to keepe a perpetuall sabboth vnto the Lord from sinne, loosing the bands of wickednesse, and applying my selfe wholy to holinesse, so more especially and strictly on this day: wherein, that I may obserue it accor∣ding to the word I may not 1. Doe mine owne waies, 2. Finde mine owne pleasures, 3. Speake mine owne words. Es. 58.13. As he hath or∣dained that in∣stituted the sabboth.
2. The forbidding part. We must take heede of prophaning the Sabbaoth. The things forbidden in this precept are 1. The foreslowing of the assēbling of our selues in the congregation. 2. The doing of our ordinary works. 3. The doing of the workes of the flesh and of the diuell. For 1. This day is an holy cōuocation that we should humble our selues. Num. 10.7. Melius est arare, quam sal tare in sabbatho.2. Are there not sixe daies to labour? 3. It is better to plough, then to play on the sabbath. Vse 1. Let such men therfore here aduise themselues, that neuer take care to set their feete within the court of the Lords house, to come into his presence, nor to visit his holy temple, how they will one day answer their negligence to this law giuer, who hath giuen so
strickt a charge with a memorandum that we should singularly reard and reuerence, 1. The day of his wor∣ship to hallow it, 2. The place of his worship to come vnto it, 3. The parts of his worship to per∣forme it. That they frō henceforth faile not in these duties. 2. Let such men here consider how vnthankfully, how vniustly they deale with God, who as hee is the Lord of flesh, so also is the Lord of al daies, that of seauen daies which the Lord hath made, cannot be con∣tent with sixe that are giuen vnto them to bestow them on themselues, but they must needes also incroach on that one which the Lord hath chosen and set apart for himselfe: and like the vxorious Dauid in the plurality of his wiues, not satisfied with his owne store, taking vnto him by violence Vriahs owne little lambe 2. Sam. 12.2. the onely wife of his bo∣some:
so vse this as their owne which the Lord hath called his, hauing therein 1. Their hearts ful of the cares of this life. 2. Their mouthes of the talke of earthly matters. 3. Their hands of the affaires and busi∣nesses of this world. That hence∣forth they pol∣lute not the Lords sabbath 3. Let such men here bethinke themselues of their prophanenesse, whether it be not damnable, who being inioyned all their life time to keepe a continuall sabbath or rest from sinne, will not euen on this day breake off their sinne: but as it were to despight the almighty by so much the more runne riot on this day; by how much the Lord of the day hath the more diligently forbidden the prophaning of the day: more eager∣ly on this day then at other times pursuing and seeking after
1. Wicked societies, 2. Vaine delights and 3. Fleshly pleasures. That hēceforth they make not this the Lords day a day of sin 3. The Appendix. A reason drawne from the example of God, 1. Who rested that day, 2. Who blessed that day, 3. Who sanctified that day. For 1. He made no moe new kinde of crea∣tures after the sixt. 2. He hath appointed it a meanes of bles∣sing to them that religiously keepe it. 3. He hath set it apart to an holy and re¦ligious vse. Vse 1. If examples be of greater force then exhortations, and a thing be taught more fully in the worke, then in the word:Leo papae in ser. de Ieinnio. see then here to the precept put the patterne of his rest, that commands the rest, to which
if we conforms our selues and acti∣ons we shall not doe amisse, because, 1. His place is most high, 2. His example most perfect, 3. His actions most renowmed. And therefore worthy is hee of our chiefe respect. 2. If hee that instituted this sab∣bath, hath blessed this sabbath, then will he vndoubtedly also blesse vs, if we keepe this sabbath: for ordering it aright vnto its ends, and applying our selues to that which is required on that day, we shal surely finde from the Lord thereon, 1. A blessing on our hearing, 2. A blessing on our power, 3. A b esing on the breaking of the bread. And therefore good it is that we make it our delight. 3. If Peter, Act. 11.9. might not call that common, which the Lord had clensed, how much lesse may we make that common, which the Lord
hath hallowed and set apart? abusing it to labor, idlenesse, or prophane∣nesse, when hee appointed it vnto these ends, 1. That it might bee the solemne time of his worship, 2. That it might sha∣dow out vnto vs the euerlasting rest, 3. That it might serue for a remission of labour to vs, our seruants, cattell, &c. And therefore it is requisite that we so ob∣serue it.
The fifth Commandement. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy daies may bee long in the Land, which the Lord thy God giueth thee.] 1. The affirming part of this precept. We must giue to our superiors all due re∣spects. The things required in this precept are 1. That we obey them in all things in the Lord. 2. That we deale faithfully & thank∣fully with them. 2. That wee shew our selues respe∣ctiue and kind vnto them. For
1. This is right. Eph. 6.1. and well plea∣sing vnto the Lord. Col: 3.20. 2. This is an honest thing and accep∣table before God. 1 Tim. 54. 3. This will be as refreshing vnto them from the face of the most high. Now then Vse 1. As the inferior is here taught his duty to obey them that are set o∣uer him of the Lord in all things in the Lord: so is the superior also shew∣ed his, which is that he command & gouerne only in the Lord: for al∣though it be simply euill not to o∣bey the precept, yet it is not alwaies euill; namely when the ruler com∣mands those things which are con∣trary to God, for then it is better to obey God then men, and to say with Augustine, giue leaue O Caesar, giue leaue O Father, Ruler, and such like.
1. Thou thratenest thine indignation & displeasure, God his wrath. 2. Thou threatenest losse of goods and substance, God of all good things. 3. Thou threatenest band and prison & God hell. Whether is now more to bee feared say you, God, or man? 2 As faithfulnesse and thankful∣nesse is here required of children, so are the Parents also minded of their care, that in the education, gouerne∣ment and prouision for those of their charge, they doe that which is thank∣worthy: for although it be required of inferiors that they doe their duties no what the lesse, though their Supe∣riors be froward & vnworthy, yet if hee that is in place of excellency doe first neglect his duety, and then hee that is vnder gouernement doe come likewise short of his
1. Not assisting him with his praiers. 2. Not seruing him with his substance. 3. Not ministring vn¦to him in his per∣son. Whether is more to be bla∣med think you this, or that? 3 As respect and kindnesse is re∣quired of the children, so is the same affection also of the Parents: for if loue and kindnesse doe not first dis∣cend, how should they ascend? we loue God, because he loued vs first, where the Parent is an Ostrich if the child doe proue a viper it is but a iust plague: where the Ruler esteemes his people but as sheep and oxen, and beasts of the field, if the people be re∣bellious and lifting vp the heele doe doe kicke against authority, it is but like for like. If those in authority neg∣lect and contenme their charge, if those vnder authority despise their gouernment, not respecting the wor∣thinesse of their persons, which stands,
1. In the dignity of their places. 2. In the excellency of their gifts. 3. In the length of their daies. Whether is the greater de∣faulter, iudge you, the one or the other? 2. The negatiue of this Conmaunde∣ment. We may not derogate any thing from the dignity of our Parents. The things forbidden in this pre∣cept, 1. Resisting of them in their iust commands. 2. Prouing vnfaithfull and vnthank∣full towards them. 3. Hating of their persons, and dea∣ling frowardlie with them. For 1. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft. 1. Sam. 15.23. 2. He that forsakes his father is a blas∣phemer. Eccle. 3.16. 3. To whom will a man be kind and lo∣uing,
if he be wicked and churlish vn∣to them? Vse 1. Hearken therefore O you sonnes and daughters of disobedi∣ence, you wiues of vndutifulnes, you Subiects of rebellion, you seruants of stubbornesse, stiffenecked and per∣uerse: you that would so faine cast of the yoke, loose the cords, and breake the bonds in sunder. Here is the re∣proofe of your vngodlines, lay it to your hearts: but aboue all you chil∣dren heare & feare, listen and learne, consent and obey 1. To doe reuerence to your parents. 2. To follow their ad∣monitions. 3. To beare their cha∣sticements. Lest he seuere∣ly punished your vndutifulnesse that commāds this dutie. 2 Here ou children of Beliall vn∣toward & ingratefull, take the confu∣sion of your sin vpon you; is this the requitall of the loue and kindnes of your parents, which gaue you life, & with great care and cost haue nouri∣shed and brought you vp? that you
should with-draw your selues from their helpe, that you should spoile & rob them, render them euil for good and suffer their eies to faile? looke to the stocke from whence you were hewen, and to the pit from whence your are digg'd, I meane to the father that begat you, and to the mother that bare you in her body, & brought you vp vpon her knees, that yee pay vnto them the things that yee owe, 1. Loue for their loue. 2. Helpe for their helpe. 3. Prayers for them for their good wi∣shes for you. Lest God at the hearing of their sighes & sight of their teares bee moued to wrath against you. 3 Hearken O you scorner the a∣bomination of the Lord. Pro. 3. Is it a small thing for you to detract your due obedience, and to leaue vndone that which iust authority hath impo∣sed, but that you will also hate & de∣spight the parsons of your parents, masters, rulers? lay you hand on your heart, correct the thoughts of your hearts, that your sinne may be forgi∣uen
you, put on the charity of those that are set ouer you in the Lord, and shew your selues no more vnreue∣rent in your 1. Bitter speaches. 2. Froward lookes. 3. Vnseemely gestures. Least there be laide vpon you from the Lord, iudgements pre∣pared for scor∣ners, & stripes for the backs of fooles. Pro. 19.29. 3. The Appendix. A promise of long life to the obseruers of this Commandement, now they pro∣long our daies. 1. By their fatherly care and proui∣sion, 2. By their praiers, and 3. By their blessing.Eccl. 3.9 For 1. Hereby it giueth well with vs. Ephe. 6.2.
2. Hereby they procure this blessing from God vpon vs. 3. Hereby the houses of the children are established. Vse 1. Is it not great reason thinke you, that wee should haue a care of them to loue, honour and obey them all our life, who haue prouided for vs from the wombe, and from the cra∣dle, and ministred vnto vs for the ne∣cessity and commodity of our life? by whom we haue this that we doe not onelie liue, but also liue more happi∣lie, being furnished by their care 1. With food and rai∣ment for our bo∣dies. 2. With good instru∣ctions for our soules 3. With honest arts and trades of li∣uing. So wanting nothing that is good & need∣full. 2 Is it not better and more profi∣table to haue them pray to God for vs, then to sigh to God against vs? whereas God will giue vs sorrow for their sighes, and blessings for their
praiers, the blessing of long life: for which that they may be earnest sui∣tors vnto God, the father of heauen, let vs doe all suites and seruice vnto them our fathers here on earth, and performe out duties to them 1. Constantly. 2. Willingly. 3. Cheerefully. So failing in no point of the ho∣nor that we owe them. 3 It is not a thing to be wished for of vs, that each care that heares vs, then might blesse vs, & each eie that sees vs might giue witnes vnto vs? Iob 29.11. then was Iob deceiued, who reckoned this among other as his chiefe crowne and glory, and a wit∣nes of the vprightnes and integrity of his life. But if this be to be desired from any man, much more from these by whom we are men, and so much the more to be desired because their blessing will establish, their curse will root out the foundation: the Lord blessing when they blesse, and hearing when they curse vs in
the bitternesse of their soules, and bringing the disobedient 1. To shame and re∣buke. 2. To a morsell of bread. 3. To an euill end. So pouring out his vengeance and wrath vpon them.
The sixth Commandement. Thou shalt not kill,] 1. The affirming part of this pre∣cept. We must make much account of the life of man. The thing commanded in this pre∣cept are 1. That wee bee peaceable in our whole conuersation, 2. That our hearts be fraught with pitty and compassion, 3. That we defend and deliuer as∣much as in vs lieth, our selues and others from danger, violence and vexation. For 1. If it be possible, as much as in vs li∣eth,
we must liue peaceable with all men. Rom. 12.18. 2. We must be mercifull, euen as our fa∣ther also is mercifull. Luk. 6.36. 3. If wee shall not saue and succour when we may, we doe kill, and mur∣ther. Vse 1. Let them come hither now that are the sons of wrath and trespas ready to offer to their brethren all indignities and wrongs, impatient of the least; yea but supposed crosses and offences from others, and learne to doe away the fiercenesse of their natures, the roughnesse of their man∣ners, the iniquity of their conditi∣ons, as occasions and things incli∣ning to strife and bloodshed: that the peace be not disturbed and bro∣ken by them, when for the peace and quietnesse sake they should haue, 1. Discretion to passe by offences, 2. Care to giue no oc∣casion of offence, 3. Warinesse to recon∣cile offences. Which all men well aduised haue and shew.
2. Let them come hither whose inwards are of flint, their bres of i∣ron, their hearts of stone, whose bowels neuer yet yearned ouer their brethren in affliction: whose eye ne∣uer yet spent teare when they saw the extreame necessity of their friend and neighbour, who neuer yet knew what it was to suffer with those that suffer, and grieue with those that mourne: and learne to doe in the di∣stresse and calamitie of others, as Ie∣sus did when he saw the Iewes and Marie weeping. Ioh. 11.23.35. who 1. Grieued in the spi∣rit, 2. Troubled himselfe and 3. Wept. Which all wil doe, of tender hearts & bow∣els. 3. Let them come hither that are negligent of the safety of their owne, or other mens soules and bodies: which for themselues tempt God, thrusting themselues into danger, as the horse rusheth into the battell: for others care not what becom of them
but with the euill shepheard say, let that which will perish; perish, hauing the question of Cain in their hearts. Gen. 4.9. Am I my brothers keeper? Let them come hither I my & learne to be more regardfull of themselues and others. 1. Least their owne blood be vpon their owne heads. 2. Least the blood of their brethren be required of them. 3. Least they perish exposing thēselues to needlesse dan∣ger. Which men of any conscience will beware. 2. The Negatiue. We mst by no meanes endanger or hurt our owne or another mans life. The things forbidden in this precept are 1. Wrath and euill conceiued and hidden inwardly in the heart.
2. All outward signes prouoking or incouraging to a mischiefe. 3. Hurt and damage offered to any mans body and life indeede.Mat. vi. rel. For 1. Whosoeuer hateth his brother is a manslaier. 1 Io. 3.15. 2. He loueth transgression, that loueth and stirreth vp strife. Pro. 17.1. 3. Hereby Gods image which hee hath ingrauen in man, is wronged and a∣bused. Vse 1. An euill guest surely is wrath hid in the heart, that will make place for the diuell, resist it there∣fore if thou canst giue place, if thou canst not.Ambros. If anger hath preuented and fore possest thy minde, and riseth vp against thee, leaue not thy place, thy place is thy patience: least thou take vpon thee insteed of God to re∣uenge thy selfe, who saith of himselfe vengeance is mine: least thou grow from wrath to slaughter, of which thou maiest be guilty, and haue thine hands therewith defiled, though thou lay not thine hand on thy bro∣ther;
but doest either, 1. Secretly consent to, 2. Wickedly counsell, or 3. Vniustly command and will. The thing for which the earth wil cry for ven∣geance. 2 An horrible crime it is to be tainted with blood, a grieuous im∣putation to bee called the man of blood, a man may not thinke him∣selfe free of these, the crime and im∣putation, for that he hath not giuen the deadly blow or poison, for that with his owne hands, he hath not ta∣ken away the life of his brother: re∣member Dauid slew Vrias by the hand of the children of Ammon. A man may be written vp before God in the list of murderers and man-kil∣lers, that neuer drew sword in wrath but yet hath animated others to wrong and violence, 1. By his words, 2. By his lookes, 3. By his gesture. The thing for which the land it selfe doth mourne.
3. An heauy account they haue to make to God, that vncharitably haue withheld their hand from their brothers helpe: how wil they answer then that haue smitten with the fift of wickednesse? An hard iudgement shall they finde that haue not main∣tained life: Goe from me ye cursed, when I was hungry, &c. Mat. what shall their iudgement bee that haue spilt both limbe and life, surely most grieuous, and eternall torments in that place, 1. Where death kils and doth not ex∣tinguish,Greg. l. 9. moral. 2. Where griefe tor∣ments but doth no whit driue away feare, 3. Where the flame burnes but doth not expell darke∣nesse. The thing to bee considered of the men of blood.
3. The Appendix. A threatning, he that sheds mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Gen. 9. Or the murderers hoare head shall not goe downe to the graue in peace. 1. Reg. 2.6. God in his iust iudgement 1. Either cutting him off by the sword of iustice, 2. Or shutting vp his soule into the hand of his brother enemy, 3. Or making the man of blood the executioner of himselfe. For 1. The magistrate beareth not the sword in vaine. Rom. 13.4. 2. Ere the murderer shall goe vnpunish∣ed, the man that findes him shall slay him Gen. 4.14. 3. Of how many haue wee read that haue turned their murdering wea∣pons into their owne breasts. Vse 1. Consider this you murde∣rers & manquellers, when you haue spoiled others, shall you not be spoi∣led
your selues? when you haue spilt innocent blood with the hand of vi∣olence, shall not the hand of iustice cut you off? yea, though you flie to lay hold of the altar, yet will he slay you there, that is appointed of God the auenger of blood, to cut off from the earth all 1. Ioabs, 2. Athaliahs, 3. Theudasses. And others of that crimsen-handed crue. 2. Consider this, ye men of blood that haue hurt and yet are hidden, that haue slaine, and no man pursues you: thinke not that your iudge∣ment sleepes: nay vengeance dogs you at the heeles, for an euill and vn∣naturall death shall finde you. 1. Either in the wood with Abshalom. 2. Or in the field with Achab. 3. Or in the deepe as it did Pharaoh & the Egyptians. And others of that list in other places.
3. Consider this, you sanguina∣ries, that are imbrued with gore, yet no man dares say vnto you, why doe yee so? that make it a sport to kill, and spill the blood of the innocent like water vpon the ground: thinke you to escape vntoucht because the sonne of man riseth not vp again you, because an euill beast out of the forrest doth not read you? God can vse your owne hands against your owne liues ere you shall goe vnpu∣nished, and goe down to your graues by a drie death, as he did 1. Abimeleches, 2. Sauls, and 3. Zimries. And others guilty of like crimes as these
The seuenth Commandement. Thou shalt not commit adultery.] 1. The affirming part of this Com∣mandement. We must gouerne all the parts of our life chastly and continently. The things required in this precept are, 1. That for the preseruing of chasti∣tie, we be religiously watchfull o∣uerall our member. 2. That we came our flesh and bring it in subiection. 3. That we vse the remedy that God hath appointed against inconti∣nency. For 1. Chas is of times wounded by the
eyes, oft times by the eare. Cassian. de instit. monarcho. li. 6.2. Thereby dwelling in the body, wee shall in a sort goe out of the flesh. 3. Marriage is honourable amongst &c. and it is better to marrie then to burne. Vse 1. Where are they now that are so confident of themselues, that they dare touch pitch and thinke not to be defiled, that dare take fire into their bosomes, and thinke not to be scorcht? what hath separated you from others, and the feare of their danger? did Dauids eye wound his soule with Bathsheba? and thinkest thou whosoeuer thou art to escape without a wound and dishonour that sufferest not onely thine eie to wander, but also thine heart and tongue to speake lewd things? could others the Saints of God hardly es∣cape the danger? though with Iob they made a couenant with their eies though they kept their immunity, watcht the way, made their loines strong, and fortified their power?
and thinkest thou to bee safe from feare and gunshot, that neuer shun∣nest the opportunity of 1. Person. 2. Place, and 3. Time. In each of which the tempter hath secret y laid his snare. 2. Where are they that crie out of the fire, and yet goe about to put out the burning with more wood? soft cloathing, dainty diet, full feeding, and much ease nourish luxuriousnesse, and increase this flame: all which we must forsake if we will doe a greater miracle, then cast the vncleane spirit out of other mens bodies, that is, cast the spirit of vncleanenesse out of our owne flesh, which kinde as our sauiour speakes of that vncleane spirit in the gospell, goeth not out but by 1. Praier, 2. Labour and 3. Much abstinence. In each of which there is an especi¦all vertue against vncleanenesse.
Mat. 19.11.3. Where are our votaries and single liuers, that vow that which is not in their owne power. Euery man cannot receiue this saying, saith our Sauiour Christ; saue they to whom it is giuen: yet will these contemne the ordinance and forsake the reme∣die, when in the meane time they burne with strange and vnnaturall lusts, defiling their bodies, 1. Priuately and alone in wantonnes. 2. Cleauing to harlots. 3. Men with men working that which is vnseemely. Rom. 1.27. In each of which there is an horrible & odious crime. 2. The forbidding part of this comman∣dement. Wee must not defile our selues with any inward or outward filthinesse. The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. All acts of vncleannes,
2. All thoughts of vncleannes, 3. All things that may nourish lust, and stirre vs vp to vncleannes. For 1.Iud. 23. We must euen hate the garment spot∣ted by the flesh. 2. These also doe defile the man. 3. He that will auoid sinne, must auoid also all occasions of sinne. Vse 1. What an abuse is this of the body which is the Lords? the vessell which according to the Apostles rule. 1. Thess. 4.4. Euery one should possesse in holines and in honour, to prostitute it to vncleannes, abusing any member, or all the members thereof to fleshly filthines, and to giue our selues ouer to lasciuiousnes, to worke all vncleannes with greedi∣nes, Ephe, 4.19. hauing 1. Our eies full of a∣dultery. 2. Our mouthes of rot∣ten talke. 3. Our whole behaui∣our of wanton and lustfull manners. When wee should so much abhor the flesh and filth there∣of.
2 What profiteth it to chastitie, though we looke not on the bewty and shape of weomen abroad, to be caught with their eye-lids, and in the tresses of their haire: if in the meane time our thoughts be foule at home, shaping out vnto vs in priuate all fi∣gures of fleshlines, and making the shadowes of vncleannes to dance be∣fore vs in imagination on our beds, as that damsell before Herod in the banquet? nay, if wee will be chast in deed, we may not so much as thinke of the thing 1. Which may bite our conscience. 2. Which may make vs blush. 3. Wherein our rea∣son will say vnto vs there is filthines. When the ve∣ry thought it selfe sufficeth to make soule. 3 What will be of power to pre∣serue vs against this sin, and to keepe vs vndefiled of the flesh, if we nou∣rish against our selues our owne ene∣my by idlenes, by fulnes of bread? E∣zech. 16.45. How shall we possibly a∣uoid
this sinne,Perk. if we like and imbrace the things that lead vs thereunto? lasciuious companie, lasciuious bookes, lasciuious attire, lasciuious representations of loue matters, las∣ciuious dancing, lasciuius pictures, lasciuiou talke: each of which as a sparke of hell, falling on the tier of our corruption will conceiue a flame and set on fire the whole frame of our nature 1. While in the flesh we liue fleshly. 2. While we fight not dailte with our selues. 3. While wee obserue not the enemy with∣in vs with a curi∣ous eye. When the lost prouocation of these things may be occasi∣on of great sin and mischiefe. 3. The Appendix. A threatning of fearefull iudgements which ouertake adulterers, who are punished of God. 1. In their owne wiues, God paying
them home in their owne coine. Wis. 4.4.2. In their owne bastard slips, and 3. In their owne persons. For 1. His wife shall grinde vnto another that hath defiled his neighbours bed. Iob. 31.10. 2. They shall take no deepe rooting, nor lay any fast foundation. 3. God will wound the hairy scalpe of him that goeth on still in his wicked∣nesse. Psal. Vse 1. Harken now to thy judge∣ment thou sonne of vncleannes! shall not shee that thou hast taken to bee the companion of thy life, be as false to thee, as thou bast beene faulty to others? shall not shee forget the coue∣nant of her God with thee, as thou hast transgressed the word of his mouth with others?Ezech. the powring forth of thy wiues adulteries,Ier. the o∣pening of her feet to euery one that passeth by, and multiplying of her whoredomes, are a iust punishment of thy transgression, who neighing after thy neighbors wife
1. Hast laid waite at his dore. 2. Hast climbed vp in∣to his bed. 3. Hast discouered his shame and naked∣nesse. Thus will the Lord visit for these things, & be auenged of this wickednes. 2 Harken now to your confusi∣on you dissolute generation! thou a∣dulterer, which hast ploughed, but it hath beene with another mans hei∣fer; which hast sowen thy seed, but it hath beene in another mans ground: thou adultresse which admittest of many louers, and delighting in the sweetnes of stollen waters, and plea∣santnes of hidden bread, hast filled thy belly with strange seed: shall the children of your wandring lusts be the delight and light of your eyes grow vp before you, and prosper? nay;
Wisdome 4.1. They shall bee wit∣nesses of wickednes against you in their triall. 2. They shall bee sud∣denly cut off. 3. They shall wither in their branches. Thus will the Lord make a consummatiō in the houses of adultery. 2 Hearken in the last place to the sentence that is gone foorth against your owne soules, the plagues that God will bring vpon your persons, you children that transgresse in lust: you haue tasted of the pleasures of sinne in the forbidden fruit, you haue soud your selues in the de∣lights of fleshlines, and haue wallow∣ed therin in as the sow in the mire: know you not that all these pleasures will be bitternes in the end? when for all your sweetnesses you shall receiue a reward.
1. Of the euill sauour of infamy in your names. 2. Of foule diseases in your bodies. 3. Of eternall damna∣tion of soule and bo∣die without you re∣pent. Thus will God poure forth his wrath vpon you for your filthines.
The eight commandement. Thou shalt not steale,] 1. The affirming part of this precept. Wee must shew to all men all iustice and equitie. The things required in this precept are 1. That I labour with mine hands the thing that is good. Ephe. 4.28. 2. That I pay to euery man the thing that I owe. Rom. 3. That I rest contented with the things that I haue. 1. Tim. 6.6. For 1. By the Apostles rule hee that will not labour must not eate.
2. This is iust and honest both in the sight of God and men. 3. They that will bee rich fall into temp∣tation and a snare. 1. Tim. 6.9. Vse 1. This then doth reproue the inordinate that liue without a cal∣ling, 1. Thess. 2.11. This reproues the slothfull that liue negligently in their calling: let euery man bestow him∣selfe honestly in some lawfull way, and then none shall need to inuade their neighbors goods: for what hath brought forth vnto vs so many thieues, but idlenes the fosterer of the sonnes of Beliall, when the mouth re∣quiring, and they hauing not to sup∣ply their wants, fall to this abhorred trade for their bellies, and to fulfill their lusts: whereas they might haue both for their owne necessities, and wherewith also to bee helpfull vnto others, by 1. Their industry. 2. Their frugality, and 3. The blessing of God vpon their labours. If they would imploy them∣selues in an ho∣nest calling.
2. This meeres with those that care not how farre they thrust them∣selues into other mens debt and dan∣ger, nor yet how little they discharge and pay: all is lawfull purchase that comes within their net; and whatso∣euer they with-hold and eat of other mens, hath with it a sweet and plea∣sant tast: but let them know that this bread of iniustice shall turne to gra∣uell in their teeth, they that will not pay and make testitution on earth, shal pay the vtmost farthing in hell: but aboue all an heauy iudgement lies against those men, that cruellie with-hold and keepe to themselues 1. The poor mans pledg. 2. The hire of the la∣bourer. Iam. 5.4. 3. The goods of the fa∣therlesse and widowes If restitution be not made in time. 3. This cheks all couetous per∣sons, & the swelling spirits of discon∣tentment, that are not content with the things that they haue. Heb. 13.5. that will not learne to frame their minds to their meanes. It is a blessed contentation, wen a man hauing
but food and raiment, can therewith be content. 1. Tim. 6.6. when a man hath learned with the Apostle, Phil. 4.11. in what estate soeuer he is, ther∣with to be content. We should not heare as wee doe of the grinding of the faces of the poore, nor of the sel∣ling and peruerting of iustice, nor of the compassing of the brethren by craft nor of bribes, nor of violence, nor of the greater and lesser theeues, nor of any iniustice whatsoeuer, but we should liue in peace and quietnes. 1. Far from transgres∣sing against others. 2. Without feare of o∣thers transgressing against vs. 3. Exercising all iu∣stice one vnto another. If this vertue were surely setled in our soules. 2. The Negatiue. Wee must not hurt our neighbour in his temporall goods. The things forbiden in this precept are, 1. That I take not any thing from a∣ny man with a strong hand. 2. That I hurt not anie Man
by craft or forged cauillation. 3. hat I bee no picker, purloi∣ning priuily from my brother his goods and substance. For 1. God is an auenger of all such things: 1. Thess. 4 6. 2. The Lord will also visit for these things. Ier. 5.29. 3. No man can haue an vniust gaine without iust losse: gaine in his chest, and losse in his conscience. Aug. in ser. de decem plagis.Aug. in ser. de de∣cem pla∣gis. Vse 1. Let me here therefore call vpon thee, O Nimrod, and thy bre∣thren in violence and oppression: you haue robbed, and no man hath resisted you, you haue with Beniamin Gen. 49.27. rauind as a wolfe in the morning, deuoured the pray, and at ght duided the spoile, what though you account al that likes you lfull, and all that you haue extor∣ as iust prize: what though the strength be of the hand of you that oppresse, and there be none to helpe and comfort the oppressed. Eccl. 4.1.
yet know you for certaine that rapine is 1. Hatefull to God. Es. 61.8. 2. Detestable to man 3. Damnable to your selues. Howsoeuer you reioice in such like spoils 2. Let me speake a word vnto thee thou Publican, that pretendest the law and iustice for all thine ex∣actions, that compassest thy bro∣ther with a net, and laiest fast holde vpon him with a claw of cauill: wilt thou cleare vp thy browes and stand vpon thine honesty, because the law of man laies not hold of thy deceipts thou must euen stand here in the list of theeues, and I will ranke thee with others the children of craft, those that goe beyond their brethren in couenant, in buying and in selling, either adulterating their wares, or doing vniustly, in 1. Meat-yard, 2. Weight, or 3. Measure. Leu. 19.35. Howsoeuer these deceipts be oftimes hid.
3. Let me commune with thee O Achan of thy wedge of gold and Babylonish garment. Ios. 7.10. Let me talke with thee O Iscariot of thy bag. Ioh. 12.6. Thou hast got a good boo∣ty Achan in the ouerthrow of the cit∣tie, and thou O Iudah hast prouided for one out of the common purse: now if you could hide your thefts it were some what, and yet your con∣sciences would bite you sore: but now with him that digs through the wall in the darke, with him that re∣moues the auncient land markes. Deut. 27.17. with him that pilfereth his neighbours goods 1. You are discouered to your shame, 2. You haue lost that you tooke by stealth 3. You haue also lost and forfeited your selues. Howsoeuer you had hope to be holpē by this trade.
3. The appendix. A threatning of Gods iudgement a∣gainst the thiefe. 1. In his bodily life, 2. In his soule and 3. In his goods and substance. For 1. God will cut him off from among his people. 2. He shall be filled with confusion here, and without repentance euerlasting∣ly confounded. 3. Gods curse shall remaine in his house to consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. Zach. 5.4. Vse 1. Is it now a great aduan∣tage that you haue purchased to your selues, you theeues and robbers? you stretch your conscience in stretching out your hand to take that to your selues, which is not your owne, for maintenance of your liues, and loe hereby you cut off your liues: as
1. The word of the Lord hath spoken. Pro. 21.7. Pro. 1.19. 2. The law of man hath decreed. 3. Examples are to frequent to bee seene. Such is the is∣sue of your wicked waies. 2. Is it not a goodly gaine that you haue gotten by your falshood, to winne drosse & to leese your soules? or thinke you that you shall not pay for it so great a prise?Aug. de ver. dom. c. 20. consider with your selues, and reason from the les∣ser: If he shall bee cast into the fire that hath not giuen of his own, where thinke you shall he be cast that hath inuaded another mans? If he shall burne with the diuell, that hath not cloathed the naked, where thinke ye shall he burne that hath spoiled him of his raiment? heare therefore you thieues and deceiuers, and feare the horror of that place where there is
1. No ease of tor∣ments. 2. No drop of conso∣lation. 3. No hope of release. Such are the punishmnts tht abide you there. 3.H Is not this a goodly couetous∣nesse that you h coueted to your houses, you that would grow rich by theft and rapine? you haue added the riches of vnrighteousnesse to the rest of your store, and that like a fire will eate vp all your substance, when you brought your robberies into your dwellings, you brought in with them also a curse, 1. That will cleaue like the leprosie to your wals, 2. That will vnder∣mine the founda∣tion, 2. That will make your hoasts to spue out your generati∣on. Such is the re∣ward of your vnrighteous dealing.
The ninth Commandement. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour.] 1. The affirming part of this pre∣cept. We must defend our neighbours credit reporting the trueth of him. The things commanded in this pre∣cept are 1. That we set foorth that which is good in our brother with deser∣ued praise. 2. That we interpret that which is doubtfull in him in the better sense. 3. That we couer his infirmities &
weakenesses in loue, For 1. It is an especiall benefit to be praised in honest things. Nazianzen. 2. Charily that thinkes no euill is incli∣ned to beleeue and iudge the best. 1. Cor. 13. 3. Thus we shall shew the affection of the members of the same body one vnto another. Now then Vse 1. If as the sauour of a sweete ointment, so is the blessing, and benefit of a good name, wherein can we recompence our neighbour better to refreshment, then remem∣bring his good things, which will be vnto him a spurre in the way, to o∣thers an incitement to like things: for 1. Praise brings forth emulation, 2. Emulation brings forth vertue, 3. Vertue brings forth felicity. Which is the end of all that is desired,Naian∣zen. and whereto all the motion of a good man is re∣ferred.
2. If we would haue our brethren to abstaine from al hard censures and sinister iudgements of vs, then must we doe the same also by them, look∣ing with a fauourable eie on all their actions, speaking fauourably in all their courses, if their matters be not so exorbitant, that they will admit of no excuse: for wee must still re∣member, 1. That the same coine shall be paid to vs, 2. That the same iudgement shall be made of vs, 3. That the same mea∣sure shall bee met to vs. Which we haue made to bee paid of, & met to others. Mat. 7.12 3. If we would not that others should blase foorth our slips, our foo∣lish speaking & vndiscreete behauior, when we chance to be transported with the passions of anger, griefe and ioy: if wee would not haue other mens eies too curious in obseruing vs, their mouthes to open in laying vs open where we are most weake:
let vs remember that we doe not so by them; but rather salue the sor, that there may be an healing, then discouer the greatnesse of the wound to make for a reproach: for it is a part of our wisdome, and loue to the brethren 1. To passe by their offences towards vs. 2. To excuse their er∣rors towards o∣thers. 3. To hold them vp, where they are rea¦dy to fall. Which is the garmēt of cha∣rity that coue∣reth all their nakednes. Gen. 9.23. 2. The forbidding part. We must lay nothing wrongfully to our neighbours charge. The things forbidden in this precept are 1. That in any wise we speake not that which is false of our neigh∣bour.
2. That we speake not that which is true of him with a false heart. 3. That we discouer not his infirmi∣ties discurteously, nor aggrauate his faults, For 1. We must put away lying. Eph. 4.25. 2. God loueth and requireth the trueth from the heart. 3. As we would that other men should doe to vs, so must wee doe also vnto them. Mat. Vse 1. Marke this therefore you that say and thinke as it is in the 12. Psalme: our lips are our owne, that take vnto your selues liberty to speake what you list: your flatteries and backbitings, your officious and pernitious lyings are notorious: be∣sides your priuate and secret trans∣gression with your tongues, you haue also publikely faulted with this member in fae witnessing and false sentencing, and when you should haue stood for the trueth you haue beene silent, whereby
1. God hath beene much offended, 2. Your neighbour greatly iniured, 3. Your conscience sorely hurt. So hainous is the breaking of this precept. 3. Consider this you that will re∣port mens words and not their mea∣nings to bring them into hate and danger: you that can make the worst of bad in your brethren, dissembling that in them which you know to be good: you that can so well act the part of the diuell, who when hee speaks not falsum an vntrueth, speaks the trueth adfalsum, that he may de∣ceiue: what auaileth it to the keep∣ing of this commandement, though your tongues cannot bee conuict of falshood, when your hearts are full of fraud and iniquity? a man in the iudgement of God is a lier and slanderer, though he speake nothing but true of his brother, if he speake true of him with a false heart, which he may doe.
1. Accusing him to get him blame. 2. Praising him to procure him enuy. 3. Flattering him to make him sail into his net. So open and o∣dious are these sleights to God 3. Harken to this all ye that can so slippe ouer al your brethrens good parts and vertues as if you did not see them, to insist on their infirmities, prie into their faults, and blaze them in their frailties, you that can so soone espie an hole in your brothers coate and make it wider, or else deale with their vntoucht fame, as Ashijah the shilonite did with Ieroboams new gar∣ment. 1. Reg. 11.30. rent it in twelue peeces: Is your brothers reputation and credit no more precious in your eies? but that in euery light offence you are ready to accuse him and make his trespasse great? See what God hath here defended,
1. That we should not easily suspect or iudge euill of others 2. That we should not easily report euill of others. 3: That we should not easily receiue an e∣uill report against others. So tder is he of mens fame and credit. 3. The Appendix. A caueat to beware of the breach of this commandement, least trans∣gressing it. 1. We be made like vnto the diuell, 2. Wee be punished in the same kinde. 3. We be shut out from the presence of God. For 1. He was a lier from the beginning, and an accuser of the brethren. Iohn 8.44. Apoc. 12.9.10. 2. How should not other men speake cursedly of vs, when our heart doth
know that we haue slandered others. Eccl. 3. He that telleth lies shall not tarrie in his fight. Ps. 101.7. Now then Vse 1. You may glory in the pat∣terne whereto you haue conformed your selues you slanderers and back∣biters: other sinnes make men like vnto beasts; as his lechery the lasci∣uious person to a goate or dog; his wrath, the foolish person to a shee beare robbed of her whelpes;Pr. his drunkennesse, the intemperate per∣son to a swine; and so in other sinnes, and other persons: but your sinne with the branches and circumstances thereof makes you like to the diuell. 1. Whose dialect of lying is in your tongues, 2. Whose marke of impudency is in your foreheads, 3. Whose image and superscription of falshood is in all your thoughts. As all your words and ge∣stures plainely shew.
2. You may boast of the gaine that you haue purchast by your lying, when you haue cast vp your accoūts, you false & lying tongues: you haue traduced and defamed others, and borne downe your brethren by false witnesse; you haue loued to speake all words that might doe hurt:Ps. but when you looke to the reckoning you shall finde your selues no gai∣ners, vnlesse it be gaine, as you haue spoken euill of others, so to heare and beare your owne reproach, op∣pressed with slanders & accusations 1. In the same, 2. In the like or 3. In worse things. As it is iust with God to giue your deseruingsQuintil. 3. You may reioice in that which you haue gotten you false, excreable & accursed speakers: your flatteries, and false witnes sings, lyings and slan∣derings haue perhaps giuen you fa∣uour with some men that you haue gratified therby, or that are like vnto your selues, but they haue quite cast
you out of fauour with God, who hath in his word. 1. Condemned euery one that loueth or maketh lies. Reu. 2. Threatned to de∣stroy him that pri∣uily slandereth his neighbour. Ps. 3. Promised to be a swift witnesse a∣gainst all false wit∣nesses. As we may reade in diuerse passages therof
The tenth Commandement. Thou shalt not couet thy neighbors house, thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid seruant, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that is thy neighbours,] 1. The affirming part of this pre∣cept. We must bee wholy possest with the affe∣ction of loue. The things commanded in this pre∣cept are 1. That our heart bee full fraught with charity. 2. That wee detest all sinne and ini∣quity.
3. That we delight in all righteous∣nes and equity. For 1. Loue is the fulfilling of the law. 2. He that committeth sin is of the diuel. Ioh. 3.8. 3. So the Lord will delight in vs, and make vs partakers of his heauenly pleasures. Now then Aug. de laude charit.Vse 1. If as Saint Augustine spea∣keth, he that hath charity in his man∣ners, hath that which is laid open, & that also which is hid in the booke of God: If the end of this Commande∣ment, the Commandement be loue out of a pure heart,1. Tim. 1 5. a good consci∣ence, and faith vnfained; let vs all striue to be rooted and grounded in loue, to be fulfilled with this charity, which will so guide the motions of our hearts
1. That we shall affect the things that wee ought.Ʋrsin. 2. That we shal affect them in such sort as we ought. 3. That we shall affect them to that end that we ought. The appetites of our nature being ordered aright. 2. If sinne be deadly not onely in the birth and growth thereof, but al∣so in the conception: If we beare the image & superscription of the diuell not onely in our words and actions, proceeding from our corruption, but also in our very thoughts and motions of our hearts we must if we will hate sinne with a perfect hatred, not onely abhorre and condemne the enormity of euill words and acti∣ons, but also the irregularity of our thoughts, as a transgression of this precept, and contrary to originall iu∣stice and righteousnes, which is,
1. The true light of knowledge in our spirit. 2. A perfect desire, in∣clination, and power to good things in our soules. 3. A ready disposition of all the parts of the body to obey Gods knowne will. The whole frame of our nature being disposed aright 3 If to delight in good things be the way to attaine to Gods refresh∣ing, if God require our heart, and to giue our heart to God, be to set our delight on the things that are his li∣king, righteousnes, peace, goodnes, and the fruits thereof? why doe wee not with Moses hauing respect vnto the recompence of the reward. Heb. 11.16. Renounce all the pleasures of sinne, euen that of the thought, and so imbrace all righteousnes, that it, and nothing but it?
1. Bee the song of our eares. 2. Bee the hony of our mouths. 3. Be the iubilie of our hearts. The desire of our affections being se and ordered aright. 2. The Negatiue. Wee may not concerne any thing in our minds tending to our Neighbours hurt. The things forbidden in this precept are, 1. Euill thoughts arising out of our owne corruption. 2. Euill entertained from the diuels suggestion. 3. The least pleasure or delight in a∣ny euill motion. For 1. As God forbiddeth and hateth the bitter fruits of wickednes, so doth he the first roote, spring, and blossomes thereof. 3. If we giue place to the diuell. Ephe. 4
27. he will fill our hearts. Act 9.3 and incline them vnto wickednes. 3. This delight will draw on the con∣sent, consent the action. Vse 1. Here therefore are wee taught the perfection of this do∣ctrine, aboue all doctrines of men, of this law aboue all humane lawes; men teach that the passions are euill, this doctrine saith, that the propassi∣ons are also euill: mens lawes require onely an outward discipline and or∣der; this, that we set our thoughts in order: they meete with sinfull and wicked actions when they are com∣mitted: this cuts the throate of vices in the minde,Ps 137.9 Fulgent. de orat. & com. cordis ad Probam Hieroni. epist. ad Demetri and takes and dasheth the little ones of Babylon against the rocke, in which the foote-steps of the serpent are not seene, that wee should learne thereby an holy cruel∣ty to kill sinne and wickednesse in the wombe: which cruelty is the onely kinde of piety
1. Acceptable to God. 2. Profitable to our selues. 3. Offensiue to the Di∣uell. Because it puls vp euill by the rootes. 2. Here is a reproofe of our care∣lesnesse in respect of our soules and selues; we are aduised to whom we o∣pen when our doores are shut, and what guests wee suffer to tread ouer our threshold, and sit downe with vs in the house: but we are carelesse of our soules to keepe the doores and passages, while wee admit of euill guests, flying thoughts, glances, and fancies, which are of the diuels sen∣ding, who if he get within vs, will soone make sure his standing he sure¦ly will suggest, but wee should not consent; he will thrust violently to come in, but we must shut the doore against him, and resist him in the strength of God, who
1. Visits vs that wee may fight. 2. Helps vs that wee may ouercome. 3. Confirmes vs that we may not faint. Because his power should be perfected in our weaknes. 3 How are we to be admonished, that when the world of euill is giuen either out of our owne corruption or otherwise, that we incline not our eares and hearts vnto it, to take plea∣sure in it; for euill knowes no rest: but like a stone that is roled from the top of a steepe hill, finds not where, nor how to stay his course till it come into the lowest valley: and as fire be∣ginning at the ground, and catching in the timber of the wall, ceaseth not till it clime vp to the roofe, & flame aboue it, and at last consume & bring all the house into ashes: so is euill and our corruption, if it be once set a worke, it neuer ceaseth stirring, till it tumbles vs into the lowest hell: so is the fire of our corruption, if it be not carefully watched & couered, it will easily set the whole frame of our na∣ture
in so great a combustion, that much water will not quench it, and there is no escaping of this flame, vn∣lesse 1. Wee abstaine from things forbidden. 2. We delight in things lawfull. 3. Giue our consent a∣lone to godlines. Because the sire is so violent & our nature so combustible 3. The appendix of this tenth Comman∣dement, as also of the whole deca∣logue. An instruction to vse both this, and those as a looking glasse, therein to be∣hold and see our owne deformitie, wants and imperfections, who trans∣gresse this and the other Commande∣ments daily. 1. In thought. 2. In word, and 3. In deed. For 1. Euery imagination of the thoughts
of mans heart is onely euill continual∣lie.Gen. 65. Gen. 6.5. 2. Nothing but corrupt communication proceeds out of our mouths. Eph. 4.29. 3. Our whole liues are nothing else but a walke of wickednes, and common trade of impiety. Now then O Lord Vse 1. How should this humble and cast v downe in respect of our thoughts? how regular wouldst tho haue them? but oh what a disorder doe we espy amongst them? what holines and sanctification doest thou require in them? but how vncleane and wicked doe we finde them: how doe we find our selues in them cap∣tiued and sold vnder sinne? for wee daily and hourely 1. Conceiue that which is euill. 2. Incline to that which is euill. 3. Consent to that is euill. Helpe Lord & free vs from this wofull bondage. 2. How should this humble and cast vs down in respect of our words?
O Lord, thou hast giuen vs tongues and vtterance to speake to thy praise, but therwith we blaspheme and pol∣lute thy holy name: thou hast giuen vs ability of speech, that therewith we might edifie our brethren, but we peruert them with our leasings and boastings, and with our false tongues we hurt and slander our owne mo∣thers sonnes: thou hast created the fruit of the lips, peace: but we haue dipt our tongues in the poison of Aspes, and in the gall of Dragons, and made them sharper to wound then anie two edged sword. O Lord this is our infirmity, this is our death that where euermore wee should be giuing of thankes, there is alwaies in our mouthes the rottennes of 1. Of bitter speaking. 2. Filthy communica∣tion. 3. Foolish talking. E∣phe. 5.4. Helpe Lord & heale vs of this euill sicknes. 3. How should this humble and cast vs downe in respect of our workes? thou hast giuen vs thy word
and these commandements as a rule, thereby to square our liues, thou hast opened our eies, and set vs in a good path, and said vnto vs, this is the way walke in it: and if this were not suf∣ficient, to thy rule thou hast added thine example, to thine owne pre∣cept, thine owne patterne: but wee will neither hearken to thy voice in thy word, nor conforme vs to thine example, but haue set vp thine arch enimy in our hearts, to resemble him in all his parts, as all our deeds and a∣ons doe well witnes, which are 1. Pleasing to the di∣uell: 2. Displeasing to thee. 3. Hurtfull to our neighbors, and our selues. Helpe Lord & pardō all these our misdoings.
The diuision of the Lords Prayer. The Lords Prayer is thus to be diuided, 1. The proeme, Our Father. 2. The petitions, Hallowed, &c. 3. The thankesgiuing, For thine is.
An exposition on the Lords Praier. Our Father,] 1. NOt in name onely, but of our life,Act. 17.28 and being also Graten inrdom.2. In affection, and 3. In effect and deede. For thou hast 1. Created vs, 2. Adopted vs, and 3. Ministrest all good things vnto vs. The vse 1. How should wee not wholy bestow our liues in ser∣uing thee, which haue this; that we are, breath, and liue from thee?
Who 1. Fashonedst vs be∣neath in the earth. 2. Breathedst the breath of life into vs. 3. Broughtest vs a∣liue and safe out of the wombe. Such is thy power and might in the workes of thy hands. 2. How should we not loue the brethren to liue with them in the bond of peace and vnity? how shold we not loue thy loue againe, being taught and shewed such loue of thee? Who 1. Louedst vs to choose vs to thy selfe before all worlds. 2. Louedst vs, when we were yet thine e∣nemies. 3. Louedst vs redee∣ming vs vnto thy self, calling vs to thy grace, and conser∣ning vs in thy grace. Such is the fa∣uour that thou diddest beare vnto vs.
3. How should we not rely vpon thee with full trust, and praise thee for the good things, that thou hast giuen vs with all thankefulnesse? which makest all thy creatures to serue vs For our Bradford Martyr.1. Necessitie, 2. Commodity, and 3. Admonition. Such is thy prouidence & care towards vs.
Which art in heauen,] 1. Of greatest maiesty. 2. Of perfect happinesse. 3. Of euerlasting continuance. For 1. Thou art higher then the highest. 2. In thy presence is the fulnes of ioy. 3. Thy yeares shall not faile. Vse 1. Therefore doe wee come vnto thee in all humility, with full confidence that thou wilt 1. Grant that we pray for, 2. Deliuer vs from that wee pray a∣gainst, 3. Accept the calues of our lips, Because thou art as gratious as wee esteeme thee great. 2. Therefore doe we despise the shame of the world, and endure with all patience the
1. The scornes, iniu∣ries and violences of the sons of men. 2. The crosses, & losses of this present life. 3. The miseries and infirmities of our soules and bodies. Because thou hast set such ioy before vs. 3. Therefore do we desire nothing in the earth of this worlds fading 1. Pleasures, 2. Honours, 3. Riches. Because we are heires of thy kingdome, our inheritance is in heauen.
Hallowed be thy name,] 1. While beleeuing wee doe after thy word and commandements. 2. While we speake reuerently of thy great name and titles. 3. While in our harts we religiously regard and thinke of thy power wisdome, mercy, iustice, iudge∣ments, &c. For so 1. Shall wee glorifie thy name by our workes. 2. Shall we praise it in our words. 3. Shall we hallow it in our thoughts, & To this end grant most holy God. Vse 1. That keeping the faith and a good conscience, we may here lead an vncorrupt and holy life, in all 1. Righteousnesse, 2. Sobernesse and 3. Godlinesse. So shall not thy name be euil spo¦ken off amongst those that are without through vs.
2. Keepe vs that we doe no way prophane a thing so holy. by 1. Speakeing inconsi∣derately or con∣temptuously of thee. 2. Wresting or mak∣ing a scoffe of thy word. 3. Swearing vainely or falsely by thee. So shall we be innocent of the great offence. 3. Kindle in our hearts a zeale of thy glory, that we may 1. Stād for the main∣tenāce of thy truth 2. Attribute nothing to our selues of the things that thou hast brought to passe on vs or o∣thers. 3. Mourne for the sins of the people wher∣by thou art disho∣noured. So honouring thee thou wilt also honor vs.
Thy kingdome come,] 1. In the preaching of thy Gospell. 2. In the power of thy Spirit. 3. In the appearing of thy glory. For it 1. Will informe vs in thy truth. 2. Will subdue vs to thy scepter. 3. Will blesse vs with thy sight, for which things gratious Lord. Vse 1. Thrust forth faithfull la∣bourers into thy haruest; which may giue attendance 1. To reading. 2. To exhortation, & 3. To doctrine. That we may be taught the knowledge of thy waies. 2. Deliuer vs from the tiranny of our infestest enemies 1. The Diuell. 2. The world, and 3. The flesh. That we may serue thee without feare. 3. Make an end of these euill
daies on earth, and bring vs to thy palaces where dwels All 1. Pleasure. 2. Tranquillity. 3. Security. That we may liue with thee in glory.
Thy will be done in earth,] 1. On vs, in all that thou shalt thinke good. 2. In vs, in all that shall be good. 3. By vs, in all that our hand shall finde to doe. For 1. All that comes from thee workes to∣gether for the best to thy children. Rom. 8.28. 2. This is thy will euen our sanctifica∣tion. 1. Thess. 4. 3. Thus it behoueth vs to conforme all our actions to thy rule. Wherefore O heauenly wisdome, Vse 1. Make vs in all our purpo∣ses to submit our selues, vnto thy 1. Seasons. 2. Meanes, and 3. Endes. Well pleased with thy good pleasure. 2 Giue vs thine holy spirit, to san∣ctifie our
1. Bodies. 2. Soules, and 3. Spirits. That in vs thou maiest take pleasure 3. Strengthen vs vnto all good workes, that in thee we may 1. Beginne. 2. Continue. 3. Ed. Doing thy wil and pleasure.
As it is in heauen,] 1. By thine onely sonne.Ʋrsin. 2. By thy holy Angels. 3. By thy blessed saints. For 1. He doth all thy will. 2. They obey the voice of thy word. 3. They walke in thy sight. Now then Vse 1.Prosper de vit. contem. l. 3. After thy sonnes patterne we striue vnto perfection 1. Preferring profita∣ble things before those that are plea∣sant. 2. Honest things be∣fore those that are profitable. 3. Holy things before those that are honest. That we may bee to thy praise. 2. After the example of thine Angels wt doe thee seruice, obeying thee
1. Willingly. Perkins.2. Speedily. 3. Faithfully. That we may keepe thy say∣ings. 3. After the manner of thy Saints, we walke in the way, that is Chryso∣stome.1. On high. 2. Direct, & 3. Narrow. That we may attaine vnto thy rest.
Giue vs this day our daily bread,] 1. For our present necessity. 2. Further commodity. 3. Future ability. For so 1. Wee shall be kept in life. 2. Wee shall haue all needfull comforts for our life. 3. We may also be helpefull vnto others. Vse 1. Then shall we learne (most bountifull God) still resorting vnto thee alone for maintenance, not to doe amisse, 1. Asking it of Saints 2. Seeking it from di∣uels. 3. Getting it by euill meanes. If thou vouch∣sase vnto vs foode and clo∣thing. 2. Then shall we praise thee for our plenty, acknowledging thy pro∣uidence ouer vs, and confesse that
1. Wee cannot subsist except thou giue vs bread. 2. Wee are vnable to get our bread. 3. Wee are vnworthy of our bread. If thy boun∣ty be so great vnto vs. 3. Then shall wee also striue to doe good to others, in their wants: 1. Feeding the hun∣gry. 2. Cloathing the na∣ked. 3. Generallie helping the necessitous. If thou cut out our com∣mons so large vnto vs.
And forgiue vs our trespasses,] 1. Sinning of ignorance. 2. Falling of infirmity. 3. Offending of see purpose. For 1. We know not good from euill. 2. Wee are vnapt to good, and proue to euill. 3. Our hearts are oft times hardened in euill. Wherefore most kinde and merciful Lord Vse 1. Giue vs a sight and feeling of our sinfull wretchednes, to perceiue and see 1. Our owne naturall corruption. 2. What we haue done against thy law. 3. What wee haue left vndone comman∣ded in thy law. That wee may know and ac∣knowledge the debt of our sin.
2. Grant vs true sorrow and con∣trition for our trespasses, out of the sense and feeling of our 1. Inabilities and ill deserts for sinne. 2. Thy iustice and hea∣uie displeasure a∣gainst sinne. 3. Our owne harmes and dangers by sin. That we may loath & leaue our sinne. 3. Remember not how wee haue broken out in disobedience, not∣withstanding our knowledge, so ma∣ny meanes and mercies to with-hold vs, 1. To the great hurt of our selues. 2. To the grieuous of∣fence of our neigh∣bors. 3. To the high con∣tempt of thee. That thou maist blot out, and doe away our sinne.
As we forgiue them that trespasse against vs,] 1. Not retining their iniuries. 2. Not returning their iniuries. 3. Doing then good moreouer for their iniuries. Though 1. Enuiously they hur vs. 2. Maliciously they hae vs, 3. Extreamely they doe mischiefe and indanger vs. 1. But put out of or mindes offences for thy loue 1. Quickly, 2. Wholly, 3. Freely. Because thou hast forgiuen vs so great a det. 2. But spare them passing by of∣fences for thy sake, out of our
1. Pitty, 2. Courage, 3. Wisdome. Because their trespasses are nothing to our debt. 3. But recompence them good things for thine honour, notwith∣standing their offences, wronging vs in our 1. Persons, 2. Goods and 3. Fame. Because thou art so good vn∣to vs, notwith∣standing all our debt.
And leade vs not into tempta∣tin,] 1.Perkins. Withdrawing thy grace assisting from vs. 2. Stirring vp stormes and warre a∣gainst vs. 3. Laying baites and blockes before vs. For 1. Thereby we shall vngarded. 2. Therewith wee may be ouer-whel∣med. 3. Thereat we may offend. Vse 1. And then thy grace which did preuent vs that we might arise, failing vs now standing, we shall fall againe, returning 1. To the vomit of our former euil opiniōs. 2. To wallow in the mire of our former euill manners. 3. To run yet further into farther mischiefe. Our latte end being worse then our be∣ginning.
2. And then our house smitten on the corners with the winde will be shaken 1. The roofe of our pa∣tience. 2. The walles of our hope. 3. The foundation of our faith. Our hearts melting away for very feare & dying with∣in vs. 3. And then the deceiueablenes of sinne will bewitch vs, and peruert our simple mindes, making vs 1. To tast the forbid∣den fruite. 2. To eate of wicked mens delicates. 3. To swallow the hook with the baite. Our soules incli∣ning to wicked∣nesse, & turning away after euill counsailes.
But deliuer vs from the euill,] 1. Of our owne concupiscence. 2. Of that wicked aduersary. 3. Of the examples of this naughty age. For otherwise 1. We shall serue sinne in the lusts there∣of. 2. We shall be led captiue of the diuell after his will. 3. We shall be caried away with the cur∣rent of the times corruptions. 1.Aug: con. Iulian. So shall that which cannot vtterly be consumed in vs in this life, be daily more and more abated, 1. Wrath out of our hearts. 2. Malice out of our flesh: 3. Euill desires out of our soules. Til we at lēgth al∣together be freed frō these workes of brick & clay. 2. So shall Satans worke be hin∣dred and ouerthrowne, which labors daily to subuert vs,
1. Fighting violently and incessantly a∣gainst vs. 2. Taking al aduanta∣ges of times,Leo pap. ser. 8. na∣tiuitatis. meanes and places to annoy vs. 3. Sifting all our cu∣stomes, cares and affections to per∣uert vs & do vs harm. Till we haue at last escaped from this Pha∣raoh. 3. So shall we be saued from this euill generation, and from this pre∣sent world, without being 1. Defiled with the pitch of it.Bern. in ser. 2. Inwrapped in the bird-lime of it. 3. Intangled with the snares of it: Till we be at last deliuered out of Sodome.
For thine is the Kingdome, the power, and the glory,] 1. Ouer all excel∣ling. 2. All ruling and disposing. 3. Alwaies brightly shining. 1. Whereto none may be compared. 2. Which cannot be vvithstood. 3. Which shall not be obscured. Vse 1. Therefore doe we thy sub∣iects make request vnto thee, in 1. Praier, 2. Supplication with 3. Thankesgiuing. Because thou art our King. 2. Therefore are we perswaded of thy present helpe and succour in all our 1. Dangers, 2. Necessities, and 3. Tribulations, Because thou art so mighty. 3. Therefore doe wee ascribe all praise and honour to the
1. Father, 2. Sonne, 3. Holy Ghost. Because it is thine of right and duety. For euer,] 1. In all ages past, 2. At this time present, 3. In all times to come. Amen: So shall it be.] As thou hast said, 2. As we haue praied, 3. Hereupon our faith is staid. We belieue, Lord helpe our vnbeliefe: euen so Lord Iesus, Amen, Amen. FINIS.
A short and plaine trea∣tise of our fit preparation to the Supper of the Lord, and wholsome participation thereof. 1. COR. 11.28. Let a man examine himselfe, and so let him eate of that bread, and drinke of that Cup. AS Iacob blessing Asher. Gen. 49.20. said his bred shall be fat, and he shall yeeld royall dainties, or giue pleasures for a king; So may I say, speaking of the fat things of this Table, a little inuerting the words: the King here giues vs his
pleasures, and feedes vs with his best things and roiall dainties. Who am I (saith Dauid vnto Saul. 1. Sam. 18.18) that I should be sonne in law vnto a King? and to Sauls seruants in the 23. verse, Seemeth it a light thing vnto you to be a Kings sonne in law? like question may wee all make vnto our soules concerning this table & ban∣quet? who are we? or seemeth it a light thing vnto vs that we are the in∣uited of a King? If some great man should inuite vs to his Table, how would wee study to compose our selues, our apparell, our behauiour, that there might bee nothing in vs that might offēd so great a presence? how much more ought wee thus to doe comming to the Lords Table, whee we are to sit and eat of better foode then that of Angels, and that also in the presence not of any earth∣ly greatnes, but of the heauenly ma∣iesty? That therefore we may come as fit and worthy guests, wee must before hand prepare our selues: For if the
Virgines Hester 1. comming to King Ahashuerosh were to be purified sixe monthes, and the people comming to receiue the Lawe of God, three daies, Exod. 19. how much more wee comming to this Table, where the flesh of God is taken & eaten, ought to be purged & purified in our hearts from dead workes, and to bee prepa∣red as fit guests for so heauenly a ban¦quet? This aboue al things euery one of vs that will come ro this Table well prepared, must dsire of God with ardent and eanest praiers, that he would purge the chamber of our heart, in which Christ will eate his Passeouer with vs. Now that we might fitly prepare, and wholsomely participate of the Table of the Lord, the Apostle hath set downe two things: first what we must doe before wee come there; namely examine, &c. 2. What wee must doe when we are there: namely eate of that bread, and drinke of that cup. If it be askt who must examine, or
who must be examined, the Apostle resolues a man;Who ex∣amine, who exa∣mined. or as Beza, Quisque: Euery man, the examiner, his owne soule and conscience, his owne selfe; for so saith the Apostle: Let a man examine himselfe. The touch-stone is for the met∣tals, this triall is for our selues. E∣uery man heere is of the Inquisition, to examine whether his owne heart bee holie or hollow, his loue false, or vnfained, his wares, his workes good, or adulterated, his coine base or currant: which that a man be able to doe, it is necessary as Saint Peter requires, that he be ready to render a reason of the faith and hope that is in him: and how can he be ready to render a reason of his faith, &c. when he knowes not a reason of his faith? how is it possible that a man should examine himselfe, when he knowes not vpon what interrogato∣ries he should examine himselfe? The heart of man is deceitfull aboue all things, how shall he be able to finde out the corruptions thereof, that
is not taught out of the word, to know when his heart is vpright, and when it is corrupt? How shall hee bee able to try or examine his faith, that knowes not of what faith hee is? led in blindnesse, mis∣led in superstition, and can say no more of what he belieues, but that he belieues as the Church belieues. Herein the blinde guides of the Church of Rome haue much abused the Church, and simple ones of the church: herein the doctrine of the church of Rome is contrary to the A∣postles doctrine; for if euery man be to examin himself, it is manifest that no man that comes to this Sacramēt must be so ignorant, as not to know what is required to be in himselfe, what hee is to search for in himselfe? which he can neuer doe, which can say no more for his faith, then that he belieues as the Church belieues, not knowing what the Church belieues. If a man can examine himself and do not, his neglect is haynous, his danger is more great; if we will not
search our selues, he that hath fierie eyes will search vs: Let no man think to lie hid in the multitude, and say; if God haue a list, Omnes punire nocentes quando ad m veniet? to punish all of∣fenders, when will he come to mee? When the King came in the Gospell to see his guests, hee espied one that had not on a wedding garment, and he bid take that one, and binde him hand and foote, and cast him into vtter darkenes: there was but one Iu∣das at the Supper with our Sauiour, and the diuell entred into him. This is a duty required, the neglect of it is not without danger, for that besides it may bring on vs the euerlasting punishments, a thing greatly to bee feared, it makes vs also in perill of temporall punishments; for so saith the Apostle in the wordes that fol∣low, for this cause many are weake and sickely amongst you, and many sleepe. As euery one of vs therefore would bee carefull to auoide both the temporall and eternall punish∣ments,
so let vs come to this table prepared, hauing before exami∣ned. Euery man then must examine,Examine himselfe. but whom? himselfe: so saith the A∣postle. Let a man examine him∣selfe. This may serue for a reproofe of the curiosity of many men, who when they are as, Canes venatici, to enquire and finde out in other mens faith and manners, are as blind bats and beetles in their owne: what hast thou, may I say to such a one, to iudge of thy brother? hee stands or fals to his owne master: Enquire in∣to thy selfe, and why iudgest thou of thy brother? knowest thou what teares he hath shed before God in se∣cret for his sinne? knowest thou what ardent sighes and violent praiers hee hath powred out before God, that there might bee an healing of his infirmity, and doing away of his sinne? Iudge thy selfe, so shalt thou not be iudged: looke into thy selfe; & looke not thus about thee. Correct thine owne life and man∣ners,
enquire not into thy Neigh∣bors. Heare what one saith well, Gra∣ue curiositatis vitium, &c. Grieuous is the vice of curiositie, because while it leades a man out of him∣selfe to enquire into the life of his Neighbour, it doth alwaies hide from him his owne hidden things, that knowing other mens affaires, hee may bee ignorant of himselfe: For it cannot bee that hee that at∣tendes thus to others, should bee carefull of himselfe; and therefore Augustine saith well: Curiosi ad in∣uestigandum vitam alienam, desidiosi ad corrigendam suam: They that are curious to looke into other mens liues, are very sloathfull to amende their owne: But our A∣postle requires of euery one that will bee a fit guest to come to this Table; that hee leaue off to med∣dle of other Mens liues, and en∣quire into them, that hee come home by himselfe, and to him∣selfe,
& set in order the things of his own house, descending into himself, sounding his owne heart, iudging of his owne faith, trying his owne workes, examining his owne loue. And when hee hath so done, then may he approach and draw neere vnto this Table, else may the diuell enter into him as into Iudas with the soppe, else as the sons of the Pro∣phets said Mors in olla, there is death in the pot: so may he chance to finde that there is also Mors in calice, death in the cup. Yet this is not so stricktly to bee vnderstood,Who are also to ex¦amine o∣thers. as if no man were to be watchfull ouer others, and carefull and diligent to examine others: the minister, the father of a family, are besides themselues to examine their flocke, their children, seruants: I and my house saith Ioshua will serue the Lord; so these are to be carefull of others, as the minister of the Lords house, the father of the family in his owne house, that those belonging to their charge be well instructed in the
way of God. Of my hand said Iudah to his father Iacob concerning his brother Beniamin. Gen. 43.9. shalt thou require him, and if I bring him not backe vnto thee, I will beare the blame for him for euer: so may we say concerning those that are set ouer others of the Lord, that God will re∣quire them at their hands, and if through their default they perish, they shall beare the blame of them for euer. This euery Minister and Maister of a familie must consider, that in the Church of Christ he beares two per∣sons; the first, as he is a Christian; the second, as he is a gouernour: as he is a Christian, he is to examine himself: as he is a gouernour he is also to ex∣amine others. If a man should aske me now of this examination after what manner it is to be done,The man∣ner of ex∣amining our selues I shall answer him, not slightly, perfunctorily, and for fashion onely, as the formalists of the world doe all the workes of religion; but seriously, exactly, and vprightly,
ripping vp our hearts, and descen∣ding into our thoughts, carefully and diligently viewing what image and superscription they beare vpon them considering directly our owne infir∣mities what sinnes we are most incli∣ned and subiect vnto,Bernh. that we may be hartily contrite and sorrie for them, and labour to amend them: what defect of knowledge, zeale and loue there is in vs, that wee may la∣bour to reforme it. If there be any sore or vlcer in our soule, whether it be of wrath, or en∣uie, or luxuriousnesse, or worldli∣nesse, we must not deale with it as the sores of our bodies, affraid to touch them: but we must descend into it, finde it out, search into the cor∣ruption thereof, confesse it, and leaue it. It is not a generall confession that will serue our turnes to say in the words of the Publican; Lord be merci∣full vnto me a sinner: but wee must bring forth our particular and be∣loued sinnes, Agag, and the best of
best of the cattell, that which wee haue kept to sacrifice not vnto God,1. Sam. 15 8.32. but to the diuell, and cut them in peeces before the Lord in Gilgal. If we examine not our selues af∣ter this manner, the Lord that search∣eth Ierusalem with candles. Zeph. 1.12. will take the worke into his owne hands, hee that hath fiery eies will looke into the darke and filthy cor∣ners of our hearts, if we confesse not he will not forgiue, if we couer and hide our sinne, hee will discouer it and set it before vs to the confusion of our faces. the things whereof we are to examine our seluesNow after the manner, if I should be askt of the matter of our exami∣nation, or the things whereof we are to examine our selues, I shall answer that first in particular we are to exa∣mine our selues concerning this sacrament: first, with what intenti∣on: secondly, with what deuotion we come vnto it: secondly, more in ge∣nerall we are to examine our repen∣tance, faith and loue. 1. We are to examine our selues
with what intention we come to this table; whether for custome, of fa∣shion, for felowship,Bonauen∣tura de processu religionis cap. 22. for feare of pu∣nishment, for respect of outward profit, or any other worldly respect: or whether the loue of God doth draw vs thither, and the sight of our owne infirmity, the conscience of our sinnes, the desire of grace from God, and of giuen thankes to God, renewing the memory of his passi∣on, and thinking on the inestimable benefit of our redemption. 2. We are to examine our deuo∣tion, whether we come vnto this ta∣ble rashly, not discerning the Lords body; or whether we come vnto it with feare and reuerence: whether we come vnto it with a loathing sto∣macke, that despiseth the hony combe; or whether we come vnto it with a longing appetite that desires to be fed & filled with these dainties. More generall wee must exa∣mine our repentance, faith and loue. 1 We must try our selues in the mat∣ter
of repentance, whether we haue sifted the corners of our hearts, whe∣ther we haue beene sorry for our sin, whether wee haue made confession thereof to God, whether loathing our sinnes and our selues also for our sinnes, we haue a setled purpose here∣after to forsake all our euill waies, and in new obedience to walke be∣fore God to the glorifying of his ho∣ly name. 2. We are to examine our faith, which consists of two parts; the first a certaine knowledge of the whole misterie of saluation: the second, an application of this knowledge to our selues. A man therefore comming to this sacramēt must examine himself, whether he haue such knowledge as is required in particular of the num∣ber and nature of the sacraments, in generall of the principles and parts of religion, the principles, first God: secondly, the word of God: the parts first mans misterie falling and fallen from that which hee was in his na∣tures institution; secondly the grace
of God in the great mercy that was shewed vpon him in his restituti∣on. 2. The explication of this know∣ledge is in bringing of it home into our owne soules, and concerning this we must examine our selues, whether we haue contented our selues with the bare knowledge and theory of the things in this word, or whether we can make vse of our knowledge to our information, consolation, and can say with Thomas. Iohn 21.28. my Lord and my God. 3. If we will come as worthy com∣municants to this table, we must exa∣mine our selues concerning our loue first, whether our hearts be vpright towards our brethren, as we would that theirs should be towards vs: se∣condly whether we can be content to remit and passe by their offences towards vs, as wee would that they should passe by ours towards them: thirdly, whether, where we haue gi∣uen each offence, or done any wrong and iniury in word and deede, wee
be ready to confesse it, and to make amends. If we can finde in our selues such intention, such deuotion, such repen∣tance, such faith, such loue, we may be bold to draw neere vnto this Ta∣ble, not doubting but that the Lord will accept our offering. I but here some man may thinke or say; if there be required such pre∣paration, such intention, deuotion, faith, knowledge, sorrow for sinne, loue, this will rather deter me from this Table, then drawe me to it: for if the danger be so great of those that communicate vnworthily, and no man can doe it worthily, that cannot thus examine himselfe; and not one man amongst a thousand, either can or doth thus examine himselfe, or examining himselfe can find in him∣selfe such knowledge, loue, deuoti∣on as is here required: how shall I dare to draw neere vnto this Table, that find so great & fowle defects in my selfe, least I eate and drink mine owne damnation?
Let not this deterre nor driue thee backe; thou canst doe no more in this examination, then thou canst in other religious dueties, that is as much, as humane frailtie can attaine vnto: and God in this, as in other things, will vse his clemen∣cy; for he knoweth our corrup∣tions and defects, hee knoweth whereof we are made, he conside∣reth that we are but men. Psal. 103.14. Thou findest not such an ap∣petite in thee as is required; desire God and hee will stirre it vp in thee. Thou findest not in thy selfe such earnest sorrow for sinne: desire of God and he will giue it thee: Be sor∣ry because thou canst bee no more sorry. Thou art laden with the bur∣den of thy sinnes, come vnto God and he will ease thee. Thou findest in thy selfe a manifest defect of good workes, and a languishing faith: Come vnto this Table, it is a medicine: Come vnto Christ, hee is the Physitian, and hee will heale thee. Thou thinkest with
thy selfe, I am not worthy: our best worthinesse is to confesse our vn∣worthinesse; confesse with the Church, and say, I am not worthy to licke vp the crummes, &c. Thou art not able of thy selfe to doe any of these things required, yet in Christ thou art able to doe all things: com∣fort thy selfe therefore, and let not this deterre thee; come vnto Christ that calleth thee, accept his offer that inuiteth thee. Onely let me admonish thee, that there be not in thee a show and neg∣ligent minde comming to this ta∣ble, but that thou stirre vp thy selfe to attend to what thou doest, and if thou feele any want in thy selfe, con∣fesse the same to God, & say: I know O Lord, that thou requirest of thy guests a conscience pure from sinne, good intention, a good deuotion, faith, repentance, &c. Now, O Lord, although my preparation bee but lame, yet vouchsafe to accept it, my desire is in all things to please thee, but mine infirmity is great; O Lord
of health, heale all mine infirmities; if wee haue such thoughts in our hearts, such praiers in our mouthes comming to this table, he that will not break a brused reade, nor quench the smoaking flaxe, will not reiect nor put vs backe, although our infir∣mity be great vpon vs. Now from that which we are to doe before we come to the Lords ta∣ble,What wee should doe at the Lords ta∣ble. let vs come to that which we are to doe at the Lords table: so let him eate of that bread and drinke of that cup: when a man hath examined and pre∣pared, it is not left at his discretion whether he will communicate or no, but he must first examine, and then eate: for whereas the sacraments are badges by which we Christians are knowne from vnbeleeuers and ido∣laters in the vse of them, wee must needes communicate, vnlesse we will shew our selues ashamed of the pro∣fession of our faith. This sacrament is a seale to con∣firme our faith; therefore as we desire to haue an assurance of Gods pro∣mises
sealed vp vnto vs let vs come vnto this table. By this we are v∣nited vnto Christ; therefore as we desire to be one with Christ, so let vs communicate. The Lords sup∣per is a linke of vnity, that knitteth vs one vnto another: therefore as we desire loue and brotherly kind∣nesse, so let vs frequent this ta∣ble. What though Augustine say? Crede & manducasti, Beleeue and thou hast eaten, yet let no man thinke that is sufficient to beleeue and not to eate: for although there is no holesome eating without faith, yet at the Lords table we are holpen, furthered and confirmed in our faith by our out∣ward sences. When we heare it said, this is my body, &c. (faith you know is by hea∣ring,) we are stirred vp to lay strong hold on the promises of God, when we heare this word, doe this in remem∣brance of me. We are assured that this is Christs commandement, when we see the bread broken, & the wine
powred out, we are giuen to consi∣der of his passion, that was broken for our sinnes, and thinke of his blood that washeth vs from all sinne when the Minister offers vnto vs, and we receiue the sacrament, we thinke of that thing which God offers vn∣to vs, and we receiue by the hand of faith. Great therefore is the vse and ne∣cessity of this Sacrament, and let no man slacke his comming vnto it, that is inuited; there are that are content to come and heare, but refuse this table: what doe they thinke them∣selues vnworthy of it? who can be worthy: or doe they contemne God is his ordinance? Let them looke to it, there is a iudgement for such men: those that refuse to come (saith Christ) shall not tast of my banquet. As God herein hath tendered our infirmities, so let vs tenderly respect the good of our owne soules, not withsg our selues withsome, nor neglecting with others, but let vs eate.What we must eate
Let a man eate of this bread, &c. Quisque probet, &c. Let a man, or let euery man examine, eate and drinke (saith Paul) not so saith the Church of Rome. Let the Laity, not examine, but be confest; let them eate if they will all, but they shall not drink all; we haue kept say the priests the chalice for our selues, and they shall bee content with it vnder one kinde. I will not say it is the licorish∣nesse of wine in men giuen to the ap∣petite, or a desire of innouating and changing this institution, or their high presumption that their Church cannot erre though they decree against Christ, that makes them thus sacrilegiously to abrogate the ordinance of Christ. This I know hee that gaue himselfe for all; said to his, drinke of this all. But the Church of Rome will giue Christ the checke; not all saith she, but some of all, my shauelings, my deare sons: for the rest though Christ command it, though Paul preach it, yet shall they but haue it vnder one kinde.
Sic volo, sic iubeo. See the impious boldnesse of men, whose conscien∣ces are seared with an hot iron, and out of this iudge of the rest. Quid non audebunt? what will they not dare to doe? I could but that I will not long with-hold my reader, speake heere to the reproofe of the same men, for keeping the host in a boxe, when they are bid to eate the bread, but I desire not to insist long on that which is to be eaten, onely heere I cannot passe ouer that question which hath exagitated the Church so many yeeres, namely what is that which is eaten? for what for transub∣stantiation on the one side, what for consubstantiation on the other side, the Church is so diuided that it nowes not readily what to beleeue and hold concerning this Sacrament. But because these are the things which are euery where spoken off, and spoken against, I will moue no longer question of it, but indeuour out of these words, other scriptures,
reasons and fathers briefely to shew, that we must vnderstand in the Lords supper no Capernaiticall creophagie, or carnall eating, but that which is spirituall, and by faith. This will appeare vnto vs, if wee consider well this place in which the Apostle saith, eate that bread; if it be bread when it is to bee eaten, then it is not the very flesh of Christ presently after the words of consecration; and againe the same Apostle: Panem quem frangimus, The bread which we breake. And is it bread when it is broken? then it is not the body of Christ presently after the consecration: and if wee will be∣leeue Christ. Iohn 6.35. he will tell vs that to come to him, and to beleeue is to eate, and drinke him the bread and water of life: his flesh is meate indeede, and his blood is drinke indeede. ver. 55. but it is the spirit that quicke∣neth; the flesh profiteth nothing.
verse 63. see heere how our Sauiour would haue vs to vnderstand a spiri∣tuall eating. Besides these, and such like places of Scripture, how many absurdities in reason will follow vpon this do∣ctrine? How absurd a thing is it that a mortall man, who is not able to make one haire of his head white or blacke, should bee thought able to create his Creator? how absurd a thing to thinke that the reprobate, rats, mise, and other vermin should eate the flesh of Christ? it must needs thereupon follow that they haue e∣ternall life in them. What an absurd thing is it to thinke that accidents can be without their subiects? A bo∣dy without his dimensions? the same body at one and the same time in in∣numerable places? these and many such absurdities in reason follow on this doctrine. Now heare the Fathers.Fathers. Num , mysterium nostrum pro∣nuncias, & irreligiosè ad cràssas
cogitationes vrges fidelium mentes? & humanis cogitationibus attentas ea tractare, quia sola pura et ex∣quisita fide accipiuntur. Cirill: ad Eu∣tropium? What doest thou call our mystery, an eating of mans flesh? and doest thou irreligiously vrge the mindes of the faithfull to grosse thoughts? and doest thou attempt to handle those things with humane thoughts, which are receiued by pure and exquisite faith alone? Christus assumpto pane, qui cor ho∣minis confortat, veritatem corporis sui repraesentauit, saith Ierome. Christ ha∣uing taken the bread, which comfor∣teth the heart of man, hath repre∣sented the truth of his body. A repre∣sentation is a signe or remembrance of a thing, it is not the thing it selfe: Augustine what doest thou prepare thy tooth and thy belly? beleeue and thou hast eaten. Cyprian, we sharpen not our teeth to bite, but with sin∣cere faith wee breake and diuide that holy bread. Bernard. Christus tan∣ge potest sed affectu,Ser. 20. in Cant. non manu, veto non
oculo, fide non sensibus: tanges manu fi∣dei, desiderij digito, devotionis amplexu tanges oculo mentis: Christ may bee toucht but with affection, not with the hand, with the desire, not with the eye, with faith, not with the sen∣ses. Thou shalt touch him with the hand of faith, with the finger of de∣sire, with the imbracing of deuotion, thou shalt touch him with the eye of the minde. Credere inuenisse est, saith one, to beleeue is to haue found. Et credere edisse est, say I, to beleeue is to haue eaten? Norunt fideles (saith another) Chri∣stum habitare per fidem in cordibus su∣is; quid proprius est? The faithfull know that Christ dwels by faith in their hearts, what can be neerer. All these speake of a spirituall ea∣ting and no other, an eating that is of faith: should I then teare him againe with my teeth, that was once pitti∣fully torne for mee with nailes, thornes, speare, vpon the Crosse? should I dreame that my stinking carkase should be a Sepulcher to bu∣ry
my Sauiour, descending into the cauernes of my belly? I will bury thee oh my Sauiour in the new sepulcher of my soule, where neuer yet any man lay. Thus of examining our selues be∣fore we eate, of the manner of exami∣ning of our selues, of the things wher∣of we are to examine our selues, a∣gainst the doubtings of our vnfitnes & vnworthines, of eating, & of what we receiue, the conclusion is that ha∣uing receiued Christ into the cham∣ber of our heart, we be thankefull to him for his comming, we desire him to stay and lodge with vs all night, we so demeane our selues towards him, that we grieue not his spirit, & make him to leaue his lodging, which if we doe, our soule that was his lodging, will become a cage of vncleane birds and our latter end will be worse then our beginning.
A praier before the Com∣munion. VVHat shall I doe (O Lord) drawing neere to this thy ta∣ble, but confesse against my selfe mine owne vnworthines? thou requi∣rest that thy guests haue on the wedding garment, and behold I am couered as yet with the rags of mine owne filthinesse, and with the confu∣sion of my sinne. The corruption of my nature, the iniquity of my life, the vnprofitablenesse of my best workes, the abhomination of my worst, the despight that I doe to thee, the euill example that I haue giuen to men, the shame and horror that I haue brought vpon mine own face and conscience, my want of faith knowledge, loue, and sorrow for sin, mine indeuotion to thy seruice, my seruing of mine owne intentions, out of the causes of thee (my GOD) and the causes of religion, the whole bande of mine other iniquities,
my secret, and to my selfe vnknowne sinnes, stand vp against me to accuse me and cast me in the teeth. I am in a straight with Dauid, neither know I what to doe, or what to choose: whe∣ther to draw neere to this thy Ta∣ble, or to with-draw and turne my selfe away. If I with-draw my selfe, I forsake thy comforts and refreshing: if I draw neere I am in danger of my sin. But I will draw neere vnto thee, trusting in the multitude of thy mer∣cies; O my Lord Christ, I come laden with an heauy burden, thou wilt ease my shoulder: I come in my defects, thou wilt couer them with thy per∣fection. I come in the confession, vse my sinne, with thee is forgiuenesse, thou wilt doe away my sinne. I come in the feeling of my wants, thou art God all sufficient, thou wilt supply all my wants. I come in the acknow∣ledgement of mine vnworthinesse, thou wilt accept me, make me wor∣thy, and refresh me heere with the comforts in thy word, with thy bo∣dy and thy blood at thy Table, else∣where
thou wilt make mee drinke of the riuer of thy pleasures, in the king∣dome of thy father, where thou raig∣nest euerlastingly, one God with him and the Holy Ghost: To thee be a∣scribed all praise and glory, world without end, Amen. A Praier at the receiuing of the bread and wine. O Lord Christ and blessed Saui∣our, which hast giuen mee thy body to bee my meate, thy blood to be my drinke, thy soule to be my re∣demption: enter now the chamber of my heart, with all thy vertues, gra∣ces, & spirituall benedictions: adorne it & make it beautifull, and dwell in it for euer, and graunt that the memory of thy most bitter passion, & of all o∣ther thy wonders and benefits may neuer slip out of my minde, but that I may alwaies thinke on thy loue, me∣ditate on thy mercies, and thanke thee for thy goodnesse, which hast done so great things for thy Church thy chosen, and for my soule, Amen.
A Praier after the receiuing of the Communion. AWay from me all ye workes and workers of iniquity, out of mine heart all euill thoughts, out of my mouth all euill wordes, from mine hands all euill deeds, for I haue made a couenant with my God to serue him with all my strength, with all my soule, and with all my members, and hee is come to dwell in mine heart. Oh (my GOD) and oh my mercy! how can I giue thee worthy thankes, which being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, hast not scorned to visit my soule, and to come vnder the roofe of my poore dwelling? Teach me (O LORD) to loue thy loue, and for thy loue to denie all vngodlinesse and wordly lusts: teach mee to leaue this world for thee, which for my sake leftest Heauen to come downe to mee, and gauest thy selfe vnto mee, being made my bro∣ther in thy birth, mine example in
thy life, the price of my redemption in thy death, my food and nourish∣ment at thy Table, my reward in the Kingdome, mine wholly and what∣soeuer thou art I cannot vtter the ioy of mine heart: I cannot conceiue words to expresse my thankfulnesse: If I had the tongues of men and An∣gels I cannot speake sufficiently to thy praise. Grant (O Lord) that I which haue receiued so much from thee, of thine, thee thy selfe, may in all things indeauour to bee to thine honour and praise. Amen. My Thankesgiuing after GOD had raised me vp from the bed of my sickenesse. I Haue a song of praise to sing to the Lord, O LORD thou hast hol∣pen me, and comforted me: when I had receiued the sentence of death in my selfe, thou saidst vnto me Liue? when my life drew neere vnto the pit, and to the buriers, thou saidst vn∣to me, Returne. I had now almost im∣bced the dust, and claimed my kin∣dred
in the graue, saying to corrup∣tion, thou art my father, and to the wormes yee are my mother, and my sister: I had giuen ouer all hope of life, and said in my weakenes, I am cut off, I shall no more returne to see the sunne: yet thou gauest life, which art my light and comfort, thou ga∣uest strength; and madest me againe to reioice with my friends, and to vi∣sit my dwelling. Though thou bra∣kest me with breach vpon breach in the day of my distresse, though thou powredst out my gall vpon the ground, though thou tookest mee by the necke, and shakedst me in pee∣ces, and settedst me vp as a marke for all thine Archers: yet haddest thou mercy on me, to spare one, that thou wouldest not put out all the light of my children in one day; & take both their parents from of their heads at once. I should haue desired, as did old Simeon, when thou hadst set me on the way, Lord now lettest thou thy ser∣uant depart in peace: I should haue ear∣nestly beg'd of God, that in death we
might not haue been diuided, whom no affliction, nor sorrow, nor want, nor euill-deuised counsell of euill men could diuide in our liues: I should haue reioiced as if I had found a treasure, when I had found the graue, and reckoned it a great suc∣cesse and benefit to haue bid good∣night to this world, and to haue gone to sleepe together in the dust; but that my bowels were moued with∣in me, in compassion of my children: Alasse, (quoth I) in the weakenes of my body, in the weakenesse of my minde, and heauinesse of my soule, shall all these yong ones now be or∣phans? (yet thou O God art the fa∣ther of orphans,) and shall the eye of mine enemie see in mee and them? O take mee not therefore away in the midst of mine age, spare my life, O Lord of thy goodnesse, helpe and heale thy seruant in remembrance of thy mercies, visit thy sicke and priso∣ner, to giue me health, & set my feet at liberty: so didst thou heare & heale me, and hast done this great thing
for mee, whereof I reioice. And now Lord what is that which I aske at thine hands? namely this, com∣fort me for the time, wherein thou hast afflicted me, and for the yeeres wherein I haue suffered aduersity: Put to rebuke the men of mine ha∣tred, recompence their good to their soules that haue done me good: binde vp now the bones which thou hast broken in me, O Lord send me now prosperity: make me to walke worthy of my calling, to walke wor∣thy of thee, expressing my thanke∣fulnesse vnto thee, not in my tongue onely, but in my life and conuersati∣on also. Giue me thy feare to wound my flesh, thy comforts to sustaine my heart, thy mercies to preuent me, accompany me, and follow me while here I liue; and after this life translate me to that place, where all teares shall be wipt from mine eies, where there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, nei∣ther shall there be any more paine, there in the company of all Saints
and congregation of the first borne that are written in he, y thy bright and blessed-makng igt, and to raigne with thee for all ge through thy sonne Iesus Christ. FINIS. Triunni Deo Gloria.
Errata. Page 54. l 7. dele of. p. 58. l. 3. put in, for. p 60. l. 17. r. my sinnes p. 85. l. 1. for bring r. being. p. 97 in margin l. 8. r his. l. 10. r. pure. p. 112 l. 15. r. inwards. p. 123. l. 22. r. him that was. p. 13. l. 21 r. least approbati∣on p. 133. l. 2 r. confederacies. l. 6. r. errors. p. 136. l. 9. for so truely. r. se∣uerly. p. 141. l. 12 r yet dowe say. p. 153. l. 12. r. as through p. 155. l. 2. r for ead r. regard. l. 15. r of all flesh. p. 158. l. 20. for power r. praying. p. 164. l 22. r. as a blasphemer. p. 166. l. 25. r. your hand p. 172. l. 7. in some, dele and haue power, and l. 21. in some for shall. r. should. p. 177. l. 2 in some, for vnchangeably. r. vncharitably. p. 178. l 11. dle brother p. 182. l. 25. for immunity. r. munition. p. 184. l. 9. in some for know. r. burne. p. 198. l. 7. r. Iudas. p. 199 l. 16. r. Is it not now. p. 201 l. 23. for hoasts r. houses. p. 217 l. 8. for concerne. r. conce. p. 220. l. 17. r. here are we &c. l. 8. r word of euill. p. 245. l. 10. r. shall he. p. 254. l. 3. r. the examined. p 264. l. 25. for mistery. r. misery. p. 265. l. 3. r. application. p. 268. l. 14. for show. r. sow. p. 271. l 25. r. not withdrawing.
