6497 99840973 5523
Dekker his Dreame. In which, beeing rapt with a Poeticall Enthusiasme, the great Volumes of Heauen and Hell to Him were opened, in which he read many Wonderfull Things. Est Deus in Nobis, agitante calescimus Illo. LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES. 1620.
TO THE TRVELY-ACCOMPLISHED GENTLEMAN, and worthy Deseruer of all Mens Loues, Master ENDYMION PORTER. SIR: IF you aske why, from the heapes of Men, I picke out you onely to bee that Murus a∣haeneus, which must defend mee, let me tell you (what you know already,) that Bookes are like the Hungarians in Paules, who haue a Pri∣uiledge to holde out their Turkish History for any one to reade. They beg nothing, the Texted Past-bord talkes all; and if nothing be giuen, nothing is spoken, but God knowes what they thinke. If you are angry, that I thrust into your hands a Subiect of this Nature; O good Sir, take me thus far into your pardon; that it was impossible for me to beget a Better: For, the Bed on which seuen years I lay Dreaming, was filled with thornes instead of fethers, my pillow a rugged flint, my Chamberfellowes (sorrowes that day and night kept me company) the ve∣ry, or worse than the very Infernall Furies. Besides, I
herein imitate the most Courtly Reuellings; for if Lords be in the Grand Masque, in the Antimasque are Play∣ers: So in these of mine, though the Diuell bee in the one, God is in the other; nay in Both. What I send you, may perhaps seeme bitter, yet is it wholesome; your best Physicke is not a Iulep; sweete sawces leaue rot∣ten bodies. There is a Hell named in our Creede, and a Heauen, and the Hell comes before: If we looke not into the first, we shall neuer liue in the last. Our tossing vp and downe (here) is the Sea, but the land of An∣gels is our Shoare. Sayle so long as we can beare vp, through Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and all the sensuall Billowes of the World: yet there is one Harbour to put in at, and safely to arriue (There) is all the Hardnesse, all the Happinesse. Bookes are Pilots in such voyages: would mine were but one point of the Compasse, for a∣ny man to steere well by I doe not thinke, but euen those Courtiers, who are most taken with the glittering of Pallaces, doe from those glorious Enter-viewes, masques, tilt-triumphs, & such like, (with which their eyes are so often banqueted) reade sometimes excellēt lectures to their soules, by a comparatiue laying those transitory Ones, and those immortall beauties of heauen together. The very Roofes of kings Courts, do almost draw vs vp
to such a contemplation: For when the Pauements of such Places are at the best but Marble, yet the vpper seelings are like Firmaments of Starres: There you see the golden Embosments, and curious Enchainings: The true brauery is aboue. An excellent Dinner was that in France, when the King and Queen sáte at Table, and with them, Thomas Aquinas and Bonauentura (the two great Schoole∣men.) whilst the others were feeding, one of these cast an earnest and fixed eye vpon the beauty of the Queene: at which the King wondring, asked, why hee did so? O (quoth he) if the great Worke-maister, out of a peece of clay, can mould and fashion so admirable a creature as your Queen is; I am rapt into an astonishable amazmēt, to thinke, how glorious those Bodyes are, who are Cour∣tiers attending vpon his Maiesticall Throne. If I hold the Pen longer in my hand, I shall fall asleepe againe: But howsoeuer I wake, or haue mine eyes closed,—Irest Euer ready to do you seruice, Tho. Dekker.
To the Reader. OVt of a long Sleepe, which for almost seuen yeares together, seized al my sen∣ces, drowning them in a deep Lethe of forgetfulnesse, and burying mee to the World, in the lowest graue of Obliuion: Meeting in that drowzy voyage with nothing but fright∣full Apparitions, by reason (as now I guesse) of the place in which I lay, beeing a Caue strongly shut vp by most Diuellish & dreadfull Enchantments; I did at last fall into a Dreame, which presented to my waking Soule, infinite Pleasures, commix'd with In-vtterable Horrors. More did I behold thus Sleeping, then euer I could before, when my eies were wide open. I climbed to the tops of all the trees in Paradise, and eate sweeter Apples then Adam euer tasted. I went into the Star-Chamber of Heauen, where Kings and Princes were set to the Barre, and vvhen the Court arose, I fed vp∣on Manna, at a table vvith Angels. Ierusalem vvas the Pallace I liued in, and Mount Sion the hil, from vvhose top, I vvas dazled vvith glories brighter
than Sun-beames. This vvas my Banquet: The Course-meate vvas able to kill mee. For I vvas throvvne (after all this Happinesse) into a sea In∣fernall, and forced to svvim through Torrents of vnquenchable fire. All the Iayles of Hell vvere set open. And albeit the Arraignements vvere hor∣rid, yet the Executions vvere ten-times more terri∣rible. Ioyes tooke me by the hand in the first dance, but feares & sorrovves vvhipt me forward in the second. I must not novv tell, vvhat I savv, neither can I now see so much as I haue told. What Musicke led both these measures, do but o∣pen my song-Booke, and the Lessons are there set downe. If the Notes please thee, my paines are well be∣stowed. If to thine care they sound vntuneable, much are they not to be blamed, in regard they are the Aires of a Sleeping Man. Farewell.
Dekker his Dreame. Which beeing truely Interpreted, is able to Comfort the Good, and ter∣rifie the Bad. WHen downe, the Sun his golden Beames had layd; And at his westerne Inne his iourney stayd, That Sleepe the eyes of man and beast did seize, Whilest Hee gaue light to the Antipodes: I slep'd with others, but my Sences stream'd In frightfull formes, for a Strange Dreame I Dream'd. Signes before the last day. PEace fled to Heauen (me thought.) And as she went, Warre. Her Roabe fell from her, which Warre finding Rent Into a thousand Ragges, dying them in Gall, As before Christs com∣ming first into Mix'd with Mans bloud, and chargd the World to call
Those spoyles his Ensignes: then (all-Arm'd) bestriding there was an Vniuersall Peace: So be∣fore his last cōming, there shalbe (if not General wars) euery mans heart fighting one against another Famine. A Canon, and with Thundring voyce diuiding Nations Colleagu'd, downe fell the Golden Chaine Of Sweete Commerce, linck'd both by Loue & Gaine: Order ran mad, Disorder fild his Roome, When beating at Hell gates the Fatall Dromme, Out-yssued Vengeance, Horror, Incest, Rape, Famine and Death, in the most vgly shape That Hell could send them out in. At these Sights Seas threatned Shores, The Earth (in strange affrights) Shooke at the Center: then (me thought) one drew From his Full Quiuer, poysned shafts, which flew With burning feat s of Hot Pestilence, Pestilence. Filling the wide-worlds vast Circumference With blaines, and blisters, whilest each Kingdome raues, To see the whole Earth but one field of Graues. Anon (me thought) Treason, and Murther cry'de Treason. Kill, Kill; wilde Vproares Gates flew open wide: The Father stabd the Sonne, the Sonne the Brother, Man was not Man, till he destroyd Another; Each man was both the Lyon and the Prey, And euery Corne-field, an Aceldema: A Citty on a Citties ruines stood, And Townes (late peopled) now were Lakes of Bloud. As boystrous billowes, boystrous waues confound, So Nations, are in Nations glories drownd▪ The Turkish Halfe Moone on her siluer Hornes, Slauery. Tosses the Christian Diadem, and adornes The Sphaere of Ottoman with Starry light, Stolne euen from Those, vnder the Crosse who fight:
The Sacred Empire did it Selfe o're whelme, Ciuill vp∣roares. State, on State trampled, Realm did beat downe Realme: Religion (all this while) a Garment wore, Religion made a Str umpet. Stayn'd like a Painters Apron, and turn'd Whore To seuerall Countries, till from deepe Abysme Vp her Two Bastards came (Error and Schisme), She in That motley Cloake, with her Two Twinnes, Trauell'd from land to land, sowing Ranck Sinnes, Which choak'd the Good Corne, and from them did rise, Opinions, Factions, black leau'd Heresies; Pride, Superstition, Rancor, Hate, Disdaine, So that (me thought) on earth no good did Reigne. All this afore named (and more terrible praedictions then the weake Pen of a silly man can set down) are liue∣ly written in Gods Eternall Calendar: where his Prophet Ezechiel thus thundereth forth the Terrors fore-going the later Day. The fish of the Seas, Birds of the aire, Beasts of the Ezech. 39. field, and al that creepeth on the ground, together with all humane generations, which liue vpon the face of the earth, shall be in an vproare. Hils shall bee ouer∣turned, Hedges broken downe, euery strong wall fall to the ground. I will call against them the sword from the tops of all Mountaines, and euery mans sword shall bee bent against his owne brother; my Iudgement shalbee in pestilence and bloud, &c. And I will raine fire and brimstone. Marke, how an Euangelist seconds a Prophet, with this new battry vppon the world. When (saith hee) you shall heare the fame or bruite of warres and vp∣roares, Luk. 21.
be not afraid, for that these things must bee. And yet presently the end of the world shall not ensue. One Nation shall rise against another, and one Kingdome shall inuade another; there shall be great earth-quakes, pestilence, and famine, most terrible Signes and tokens from Heauen. The latter day. THese transitory, poore Terrestriall terrors, Seru'd but as Heralds to sound forth the Horrors Of woes Eternall: this, was but a Sceane To the Great following Tragedy. So that then (Me thought) one fitting on a Raine-bow, sounded A trumpet, which in earth-quakes Earth confounded. And then a voyce, shrill (but Angelicall) Full of Command and Dreade, from heauen did call, To Summon the whole world to stand toth' Barre, Both All that euer haue beene, and now are, To giue a strict account how they had spent That Tallent of their life, which was but lent. We must All be Summoned before the Tribunall Seate of Christ, and euery man receiue either Good or Euill, ac∣cording as he hath behaued himselfe whilst he liued vp∣on earth. Christ taketh Account of all his Tallents, Luke 12. 16. 19. 10. Math. 26.
Terrors of the later Day. THe Leaues of Heauen (me thought) thē rent in sunder, Clouds shruck vp like parch∣ment. Out of which, Lightning brake, and Horrid Thunder, Which pash'd (in peeces) Kingdomes: whizzing flakes Of Brimstone rain'd, that Seas seem'd Burning Lakes: Rocks crumbled into powder; Scalded Mountaines In their drie Iawes, dranck riuers vp and fountaines: Fury, with Snaky locks, and Smeared hands, (Tossing about her eares two firy brands) Met Wrath, and Indignation, raving-mad, Tearing each others flesh, and wildly clad In Skins of spotted Tygers: vp and downe They ran, and spied (at last) Confusion: With whom swearing a League, black stormes they Hurl'd. With whirlewind violence to crush the world, And bury her in's quick Ruines. All the Floore Celestiall, crack'd and fell downe in a shower Of Bloud, whilst the Terrestriall Pauement burn'd, Starres. In which the Starres to spent-out Snuffes were turnd. The Sun leap'd from his Chariot, and in feare Sunne. Of Firing, headlong ran to'th Moones cold Sphaere, But she (for all her Flouds, Ice, Frosts and Snow) Moone. Did like a lampe of steele, i'th Furnace glow. The Sun and Moone were neither Sun nor Moone, Their Shining could be cald, nor Night nor Noone: This Massy, Vniuersall, Earthly Ball, The world on fire. Was All one Bonfire, and it burnt out All. In an eies Twinkling, more by Fire was lost, Than Twenty Earthes, and all their wealth e're cost.
Christ his Comming in Glory. AS in an Army Royall (led by a King) After the Canons Sulphurous thundering, A Simile. Battring downe Bulwarkes, Rampires, Parapets, Forts, Gabions, Palizadoes, Cazimates, Horror on all sides Roaring, Wings here flying At Wings (like armed Eagles) here Troopes dying. A butcherous Execution through the field, Bellowing with Fiend-like threats, when yet none yeeld, Though Death stalkes vp and downe, ghastly and pale, The Victors Wreath lying in a doubtfull Scale; The King himselfe, safe guarded on a Hill, Seeing this black day, yet stirring not vntill He findes fit time to Strike: then downe, amayne, Whorrying he comes, a glorious dreadfull Trayne Of High-Heroick Spirits, circling him round, Who with swift Vengeance do their Foes confound, And slaue-like drag them at prowd Chariot wheeles, Whilst miseries (worse then Death) tread on their heeles: The terrour of Christs Com∣ming. Veniet splendo∣re Rutilans, pul∣chritudine Ad∣mirandus, ,  horribi∣lis. So (but with greater Terror, State, and Wonder) Heauens Supreme Monarch (one hand griping thunder, The other stormes of Haile, Whirle-winds. and fire, Ensignes of his hot-burning quenchlesse Ire) When the Worlds buildings, smothered lay in smoake, (With sparkling eyes) Maiestically broke Out of his Pallace, ne're set ope' before, And stood like a Triumphant Conqueror. Esay 28.
Trampling on Death and Hell: About him, round (Like petty Viz-royes) Spirits (me thought) all-Crownde, O Death! Where is thy sting? &c. Shewd, as if none but Kings, had bin his Guard; Whole Hierarchies of Saints were then preferd, With Principalities, Powers, and Dominations, How Christ comes guar∣ded and atten∣ded. Thrones, Angels, and Archangels, (all att' once) Filling the Presence: Then like heauen-borne Twinnes, Flew fiery Cherubins, and Seraphins, Whilst the old Patriarches, cloath'd all in white, Patriarches. Math. 13. Prophets. Were rap'd with Ioy, to see beames far more bright, About the Prophets and th' Apostles runne, Than those whose Flames were kindled at the Sun. Martyrs (me thought) with selfe-same lustre shinde, Martyrs. As Gold, which seuen times was by fire refinde: Virgins, whose Soules in life from Lust liu'd cleare, Virgins. Psal. 30. Had Siluer robes, and on their heads did weare Coronets of Diamonds. Were my Fingers flint, My Pen, of pointed Adamant t'imprint Characters in tough Iron, or hammered brasse, In imitation of that in Virgill. Mine inke, a depthlesse Sea; All these (alas!) Would be worne out, ere I one lyne should draw, Of those Full Glories, which (I dreamd) I saw: Nor could I write this (though it be but meane) Did not some Angell guide my Fainting Pen. Gods Heire Apparent (here once made away) Triumph'd in this his Coronation day, In which Heauen was his Kingdome, Mercy his Throne, Iustice his Scepter, a Communion Of Sanctified soules, the Courtly Peeres, And his Star Chamber Lords: who now had yeeres
Which neuer turn'd them Gray, by Times rough wether, Greatnesse was now, no more cald Fortunes fether, Nor Honor held a fruitlesse golden Dreame, The Saints in heauen inioy all perfection. Nor Riches, a bewitching swallowing streame, Nor Learning laugh'd at as the Beggers Dower, Nor beauties painted cheeke a Summers Flower. No, no; life endlesse was, yet without loathing, Honor and Greatnesse wore Immortall cloathing, Riches were Subiect to no base Consuming, Learning burnt bright, without Contentious fuming, Beauty no painting bought, but still renew'd, Each one had (heere) his full Beatitude. O my weake eyes! how did your Balls (me thought) Burne out their Ielly, when they had but caught One little-little glimpse of those Diuine And in-accessible Beames, which did out-shine Hot-glowing coales of Fire? no mortall Sight Can stand a Maiesty so infinite. That Face whose Picture might haue ransom'd Kings, As Christ was in euery part of his body crucified by Iewes; So will he come Glo∣rified in al per∣fection, to the Terror both of Iewe and Gen∣tile. Yet put vp Spettings, Baffulings, Bufferings. Esa. 50. Ierem. 3. Math. 26. Marke. 14. Luk. 22. That Head, which could a Crowne of Starres haue worne, Yet spightfully was wrench'd with wreathes of Thorne, Math. 27. Mark. 15. Iohn 19. Those Hands, and Feete, where Purest stamps were set; Yet Naild-vp like to Pieces Counterfet. Psal. 77.
Those Lippes, which though they had Command o're All, Being thirsty, Vineger had to drinke, and Gall. Luk. 23. That Body, scourg'd and torne with many a wound, That his deere Bloud (like Balme) might leaue vs Sound. Luk. 23. Psal. 129. Zach. 13. The Well of Life, which with a Speare being tride, Two Streames (Mysterious) gush'd out from the Side. Iohn 19. Messias, great Iehouah, God on hie, Yet Haild, King of the Iewes, in Mockery. Math. 27. Mark. 15. Luk. 23. The Manger-Cradled Babe, the Begger borne, The poorest Worme on earth, the Heighth of Scorne. Math. 2. Psal. 22. That Lord, by his Owne Subiects Crucified, Lo, at this Grand Assize comes Glorified, With troopes of Angels, who his Officers are, To call by sound of Trumpe his Foes to a Bar. Thus stood be Arm'd; Iustice his Breast-plate was, Iudgement his Helmet, stronger farre than Brasse: On his Right Arme, Truths Shield he did aduance, And turnde his Sharpned Wrath into a Lance: Wisd. 5. Out of his Mouth, a Two-edg'd Sword did flie, To Wound, Body and Soule, eternally; Apoc. 1.
Arm'd (Cap-a-pe) thus, who 'gainst him durst fight? There was no ground for Strength, nor yet for Flight. At this (me thought) All Graues that euer held Dead Coarses, yawn'd wide-open, and compell'd The bones of Dead-men, vp with Flesh to rise; Yea, those on whom the Seas did tyrannize, And drown'd in wrackes, and which were peece-meale eaten, With liuely bodies to the shoares were beaten: Whom Sword, or Fire, Iibbets, or Wheeles had torne, Had their owne limbes againe, and new were borne: From the first Man God made, to'th last that died, The Names of All, were here Examplified, Emp'rours and Kings, Patriarches, and Tribes forgotten, The generall Sessions. The Conquerors of the world (moldred and rotten) Lords, beggers, Men and Women, young and old, Vp (at a Bar set forth) their Hands did hold. The Iudge being set, in open Court were layd The bookes of Conscience o∣pened. Vnusquisque cernet ante fa∣ciem suam expo∣sita Opera sua, fiue bona illa, si∣ue mala, &c. Item, Formida∣biles libri ape∣rientur, in qui∣bus scripta sunt Opera nostra, & Actus, et Verba; et quaecunque egimus in nec Vita: illic non solum Actus, verum et cogi∣tationes, et in∣tentiones Cordis, scriptae erunt. Ephra in lib. De Vera Poeniten∣tia Cap. 4. Quid nobis mi∣seris fiet, cum omnia (orbi V∣niuerso) palam facta, in tam a∣perto, támque il∣lustri Theatro de nudata, Ho∣minum nobis partim cognito∣rum, partim in∣cognitorum ocu∣lis subijcienturè &c. D. Chryso∣stom: Homil. 5. ad Roman. Huge Bookes: at sight of which, All were dismaid, Would faine haue shrunck back, and fell downe with feare: In sheetes of Brasse, all Stories written were (Which those Great volumes held) Charactred deepe▪ With Pens of Steele, Eternall Files to keepe Of euery Nation, since the Earth began, And euery Deede, Word, thought, of euery Man: Sins hatch'd in Caues, or such whose Bawd was Night, The Minutes of the Act were here set right. Great men, whose secret Damn'd sins vizards wore so close, that none vpon their Browes could score The least Black line (because none durst) had here A Bill of Items in particular,
What their Soules owed for Sin, to Death and Hell; Or, if it happened that they e're did well, In these True Iournals, it at large was found, And with rich promise of Reward was Crown'd. The Bookes were opened, &c. Apoc. 20. Which done (me thought) the Sessions thus began, Conscience the Cryer, cald forth euery Man, To make appearance, and (though to my sight The Numbers that were there were infinite) In an Eies-twinkling yet they parted were, The Good from Bad, the Spotted from the cleare; The Wolues and Goates, to th' left Hand howling went, The Lambs, and Harmelesse Sheep, to th' Right were sent. After this Separation, vp did rise Heauens-Lord-chiefe-Iustice, and this Sentence flies Cōscience the Cryer of the Court. Out of his Dreadfull Breast: O you (quoth he) That haue my Lambs bin, and did follow me, As your true Shepheard, and did know my Voyce, Tritium a zi∣zanijs, bonos pis∣ces a malis sepa∣rable. As I in you, you shall in Mee reioyce: And now is come the day: this is the Houre, In which my Blessings on your Heads I poure: The Lord-Chiefe-Iustice his Sentence on the priso∣ners. Beloued of my Father, Come and Take A Kingdome layd vp onely for your sake; For me you haue bin Mock'd, Reuil'd, and Beate, Mount therefore now into a Glorious Seate: Come you Blessed, &c. O blessed word! which none but he can speake, O word of Loue Diuine! when (not with weake Math. 25. But Armes Omnipotent-strong, spread ope'-wide-) He cries, Come, Come? How is Man dignifide Math. 5:
(Being but a Vassaile groueling on the ground) Next to his Kings owne Throne thus to sit Crown'd? Come and possesse: O what shall you possesse? The excel∣lence of that Inheritance laid vp in hea∣uen for those that doe well. A Kingdome, whose vast Boundes none can expresse: Had all the Peebles in the world bin cut Into Rich Diamonds, and both Indies put Into Two Hils of Siluer, and fine Gold, Nor all Kings hoorded Treasures downe being sold, Can this Inheritance buy, which for your Good Is purchast at a High Rate (Christs deere blood.) Come, and Possesse, what Time can neuer Rot, Theeues steale, Warres spoyle, or Cank'rous Enuy blot; Come, and possesse, a State whose Title, Law, Attorneys Wiles, no, nor the Scarlet Awe Of corrupt Iudges euer can Intangle, No Bawling Pleader at the Barre shall wrangle To proue the Right of This, being Stronglier Grounded Than Descents Lineall, by which Realmes are Bounded. Sit at his Table, which doth Euer lie Couered with banquets of Eternitie: Saluations Cup stands fill'd for you to'th Brim, Come Drinke, where Immortality doth swim. Come and Possesse you blessed. Blest in This, The deere Sonne giues you a Coelestiall Kisse For welcome: Come you blessed, and possesse Wealth, Honor, Glories, Pleasures numberlesse. Forth-with (me thought) they All were Crownd with Gold, The not-guil∣ty, how rewar∣ded. Set thick with Starres, and in their hands did hold Scepters of sparkling Diamonds, which out shinde Sun-beames, or Siluer, seuen times being Re-finde.
The Ioy at this, was wondrous: All the Skies Danc'd to the soundes of seuerall Harmonies, Both Angels, and Arch-angels loudly sung, All Heauen was but One Instrument well strung, But They, who on the Left-hand were set by, (As Out-casts) shooke and trembled fearefully, The guilty, how perplexed. Like falling Towers: their Sinnes and Soules were black, And troopes of Hel-hounds waited at their Back: They beat their breasts, they tore their flesh and haire, And curs'd that houre in which they first drew aire. And then with Grones (able to split in sunder If the condem∣nation bee so grieuous, what wil the execu∣tion be? Osee 10. Their very Soules, like trees riuen through with Thunder) They wrung their hands, sobd, shrik'd, & howl'd, & prai'd That Rocks and Hils might on their backs be layd, And they to dust be grinded, so that they Might from the Iudges face but turne away: And seeing themselues inforc'd to stand the Doome, They gnash'd their teeth, and curs'd their mothers wombe. Ierem. 20. They who on earth were reard (Colossus-high) Spurn'd Kingdomes, trod on Thrones, and did de fie Ierem. 25. Psal. 149. Omnipotence it selfe, into base graues Tombling prow'd Monarches, here tooke place with Slaues, And like to broken Statues downe were throwne, Trampled, and (but in scorne) not look'd vpon. Their cries, nor yellings did the Iudge regard, The Iudge im∣placable. For all the doores of Mercy vp were bard, Iustice and Wrath in wrinkles knit his forhead, And thus he spake: You cursed and abhorred, You brood of Sathan, sonnes of death and hell, In fires that still shall burne, you still shall dwell: Be Maledicti.
In hoopes of Iron, then were they bound vp strong, (Shrikes being the Burden of their dolefull Song.) Scarce was the Sentence breath'd-out, but mine eies Euen saw (me thought) a Caldron, whence did rise A pitchy Steeme of Sulphure and thick Smoake, Able whole coapes of Firmament to choake: Soules tormen ted. About This, Diuels stood round, still blowing the fire, Some, tossing Soules, some whipping them with wire A-crosse the face, as vp toth' chins they stood, In boyling brimstone, lead, and oyle, and bloud. Millions were here tormented, and together (All at this Sessions doom'd) were condemn'd hither. My frighted Soule (me thought) with terrors shooke To see such Horrid Obiects: bloud forsooke The conduite-pipes of each Exterior part, And ran to comfort and defend the Heart. But the worlds Glorious Frame being rac'd in fire And none aliue left, I had then desire (e thought) to see That black Infernall Court, Whither (in thousands) Soules did so resort. The way was quickly found: paths numberlesse Facilis descensus Auerni. (Beaten with feete which thither fast did presse) Lay trodden bare, but not One Path returning, Vestigia nulla retrorsum. Was euer seene from this dark house of Mourning. This Flaming Kingdome hath One Ferriman, And he One Boate: he rowes through Acheron Styx, and Cocytus, Riuers that in Hell Spread all the Countrey ouer: Fogges still dwell Stinking and thick, vpon them, and there growes Vpon their bankes (in wild disordered rowes)
The Poplar (white and black) with blasted Ewgh, The deadly Poppy, Cypresse, Gall, and Rew, (Emblems of Graues, Tombes, Funerals, and beeres) And on the boughes no other Bird appeares, But Schriches, Owles, and Rauens, and the shrill throates Of Whistlers; death still listning to their Notes. These Riuers of Hell, Poetically inuented, cary a Morall and Mysticall Interpretation: for Acheron (the first water) A pardon for these Poeticall Fictions, may (without much begging) bee giuen, if the Curious Cen∣sor makes but true vse of the Inclusiue mo∣ral, no way de∣rogating from Diuinity. signifies Bitternesse: Styx, a detestation; and Cocytus, a Sorrow or Repentance, and are thus applyed. When Soules, by reason of their Sinnes, are to passe ouer the troublesome Riuers of Death, being tormented with re∣membrance of the losse of worldly Honors, Riches, &c. then they passe Acheron, it is a bitter draught: Styx is the next, for when they see no remedy, but they must passe ouer to their last shoare, they begin to haue a loa∣thing of their Ante-acted life: and then comming to fer∣ry ouer Cocytus, they mourne and howle: so that all the conflicts, combats, and earthly wrastlings about the time of a Mans departure, are figured vnder those Three Riuers. I hollowed to the Ferriman (me thought) And with a stretch'd voyce, cry'd a Boate, a boate. Hee came at first call, and when neere he drew, That of his Face and Forme, I had full view, Death terrible in countenāce. My bloud congeal'd to ice with a cold feare, To see a Shape so horribly appeare: His eyes flash'd fire, grizled and shagg'd his Haire, (Snarl'd all in felt-lockes) Terror and Despaire
Lay in his wrinckled cheekes, his voyce was hoarse, And grumbling, he look'd ghastlier than a Coarse. This description of the Vgly Ferriman, is but an Ar∣gument how terrible the apparence of death is vnto vs, at our last voyage, which we take in departing from the world. By those who there stood thronging on the Shoare, I heard his name was Charon: A black Oare And dirty, held he in his brawny hand. And though 'mongst those who stood vpon the Strond He saw some Kings, some Beggers, None had roome Mors sceptra li∣gonibus aequat. For Birth, or Bloud, but sate as they did come: None gaue the Cushions here, for there was none, But in heaps tumbling in, All were as One: Some thither came, laden with bags of gold, Some with braue cloath's; then did he barke, and scold, And snatch'd all from them, with looke sharpe and grim, All Fares (he sayd) must Naked goe with him. Iob. 4. As Death hath no respect of persons, for the beggers dish & the kings standing cup of gold, are to him of one weight; so he spoyleth all men of all that they possesse, Princes of their Crownes, Lords of their Mannors, Iudges of their Scarlet, Gentlemen of their Reuenues, Citizens of Riches, Souldiers of Strength, Scholers of Learning, Women of Beauty, Age of Experience, Youth of Comelinesse. And as they enter into the Lists of the world, weake and vnfur∣nished; So must they go forth, Beaten, Vanquished, and Disarmed.
At last (me thought) I leap'd into the boate, Which seene, the Sculler pluck'd me by the throate To haue his Fare first; asking what it was, He cry'd a Penny. I for That did passe: Being glad for bought experience I could tell, That Auarice house stood the next doore to hell. Couetousnesse a hag infernal. Charon, by interpretation is Ioy; for after we haue fer∣ried What Charon is ouer the troublesome passage of death, and landed on the shoares of Blessednesse, then the Ferriman (how churlish and terrible soeuer hee seemed at first) hath a countenance merry and comfortable. Charon also, is pictured Old, thereby signifying Good Councell, & Sweete Perswasion to prepare for death, and that brings Ioy: For what Ioy can bee greater, than that which ariseth out of an assured knowledge of a spotlesse Innocence, or of an hope that sins committed are repented and par∣doned? Anon (to see with what a Restlesse Gyre The Soule entranc'd is whirld, some times through fire, Then waues, then Racking Clowdes: earth, heaun and hell Lying (then) all-open, free, and passible) Me thought, being in a Twinkling ferried o're, And trembling on the horrid Stygian shore, I saw the Brazen gates of deepe Abysse In a vast bottome standing: none can misse The way, it is so beaten, and so wide That ten Caroches (breast-wise) in may ride. To is there is a Headlong base Descent, Slippery in whorrying downe, yet turbulent
Through throngs of people dayly poasting thither, For Day nor Night are the Gates closde together. Noctes at{que} Di∣es patet atri Ia∣ua Ditis. As at some direfull Tragoedy (before Not Acted) men prease round-about the dore Crowding for Entrance, yet none entrance haue, But (like toss'd billowes) this and that way Waue: So Here; I ask'd the cause, and thousands cry'd, Hell is so Full, there's roome for Few beside. Hell extreame full. In thrust I'mongst the thick'st, and sweating got (For all the Aire mee thought was sulphry hot) With much a-doe to'th Gate, where stood a grim And churlish Porter, being in voyce and limbe Cerberus Por∣ter to Hell. A Dog; yet like the Porter of a Iayle, On new-come guests he Fawn'd and wagg'd his taile, But bawl'd aloud for Fees, ready to teare Their throats, who without bribes begg'd Entrance ther, I choak'd the Curre with what he crau'd, and went On with bold steps to the Black Regiment. The Feeding and Feeing of Cerberus, taxeth those in office, who wey the gift, not the cause; and haue no o∣ther language in their mouthes, but Quid dabis? yet S. Paul willeth him that hath an office, to looke to his of∣fice: And as for-taking of Bribes, there is a direct Sta∣tute against it, set downe by the Vpper house of Heauen, in these expresse words, Thou shalt take no Bribe, Exod. 23. Noyse was my Guide (mee thought) by which being led, I got to'th Court where Soules were Sentenced: Full was it of braue Fellowes and fine Dames, Their Haire (once so perfum'd) all turn'd to Flames.
The Prince of Darkenesse, sate vpon a Throne Lucifer in his state. Of red-hot Steele, and on his head a Crowne Of Glowing Adamant: As in he drew The noysome Ayre, flames from his nostrils flew, His Eyes flash'd fire, and when with dreadfull sound He Roar'd (for that's his Voyce) he shooke the grownd Of his Tartarean Pallace) massy Keyes (The Ensignes of his Empire) held (as Stayes) A Canopy of Brasse aboue his head, Which hard (to last) in Hell was Hammered. Those Keyes being Emblems of Eternall paine, For who there enter ne're come forth againe, Being lock'd-vp Euer: At his clouen feete Three Iudges sate, whom I did lowly greete. Those Iudges names are Minos, Rhadamanth, and AEa∣cus: the Infernall King is called Pluto. Now, albeit by The infernall Iudges. the lawes of God we both beleeue, and are bound to ac∣knowledge Him onely to bee Supreme Lord and Iudge both of Heauen, Earth, and Hell, yet sithence those for∣mer figured Names (drawne from Poeticall Inuention) carry in them a Morall and Instructiue Meaning, they are not altogether to be reiected; and the rather because in Picturing forth so Terrible an Obiect as the Kingdome of Hell, and Tortures of the Damned, I striue to shaddow the Horrors of them, and to set them off with height∣ning both of Profit and Delectation. Hee will bruse them with a rod of iron, &c. Psalme 2. The Iudges in their hands held Whips of Wire, Dipp'd in boyld brimstone to pay Soules their hire According to their Facts: The King of Fiends Spying me there ith throng, roares out and sends
Two of his Furies (Beadles of the Court) To drag me to him, who in currish sort (Like flesh-hooke-fingred Sergeants) hal'd me on: Being there, the Iawes of Black Damnation Thus yawnd, and bellowed: Wherefore art thou come Hither (thou Slaue) ere Death sets downe thy Doome? Thou art aliue, and not a soule that drawes Breath Vitall, by our dread infernall Lawes Must here set Footing. Humbly then (mee thought) With pale and fright full lookes I Him besought, That since I was a Stranger, and aliue, Hee by his Hellish large Praerogatiue Would signe my Passe, but to walke all the Rounds Of his vast Countries and to view their Bownds: A yelling Out-cry all-about was hurld, That'twas not fit one of the Vpper World Should be a close intelligencing Spy Of their scorch'd shores to make discouery. But the Crim Tartar, with distorted brow Thwarting their grumbling, held it scorne to bow To any wish of theirs, and Vnder-writ The Passe, with to ades bloud from the Witches pit, Charging me as my soule (if ere it fell Into his Pawes) should answere it in hell, Not to a next World that my Pen betrayd What there I saw. His threatning being obay'd, From him I tooke my way, nor did I feare To lose my path, Hels path was euery where.
Heere begin the Descriptions both of the Darkenesse and fires of Hell, &c. as also of the particular Torments assigned to euery Man, according to his particular Sinnes. ON wings of hot desire I flew from thence With whirle-wind swiftnesse, noyse, and violence, Being mounted on a Spirits back, which ran With Mandrake-shrikes, and like a Lubrican: Whilst round (mee thought) about me there did roare Ten thousand Torrents, beating on a shoare Made all of Rocks, where huge Leuiathans lay Iob 27. Esay. 57. Gaping to swallow Soules, new cast away. The Darkenesse of Hell. VVEre all the Rowndure betwixt Hell and Heauen One Clowd condensd, & into blacknesse driuen, The darknesse of Hel (no way to bee descri∣bed) is heere notwithstan∣ding by com∣parison of o∣thers, made fearefull vn∣to Humane vnderstanding by such things as we know. Not That; no, nor the Chaos vn-refinde, (When in one Bundle Darknesse vp did binde That confus'd Lumpe of Mixtures) being put too, Not That: no nor if since the world was new, All Nights (that euer were) might grow in One, Neither could That: nor that AEgyptian Caliginous, Black vapor, which did rise From Caues infernall to blind Pharaohs eyes, Clammy as if that pitch from Heauen did melt, And glutinously-thick it might be felt:
Adde to all these, that hideous direfull howre, When all the lamps Coelestiall out did powre, Their lights like spent oyle, dropping from their Sphaere (As in my dreame at first it did appeare:) Not all these Darkenesses together glowd, And ten-times-ten Redoubled and Renewde, Are halfe so dismall as the Night infernall, The properties of hells darke∣nesse. Black, Stinking, Stiflling, Poysning, and Eternall. See for this Darkenesse Math. 22. 13. Iud. 13. Iob 10. Prou. 4. 14. Psal. 107. 10. Horror of Hell Fire. HOw then (it may be asked) did my weake Sight Pierce these thick walles of Horror, where no light Euer shed Beame? why, on that Sorcerous Coast Where Hagges and Witches dwelt was not I lost? My Spirit had balls of Wild-fire in his head For Eyes (me thought) and I by them was led: For All these coale-pits (faddom'd deepe as hell) Still burne, yet are the Flames Inuisible. This fire is none of that, which God lent Man, Tartare  ardor,    Ig∣nem vincit, vt noster pictum, &c. Anselm. When (driuen by sinne out) he from Paradise ran, Bitten with cold, beaten with frosts and Snow, And in meere pitty did that Warmth bestow, Teaching him how to kindle it at first, And then with food combustible haue it nurst:
No; this Red, Gloomy Fornace is a Firing, Deuouring, yet not wasting nor selfe-tiring. Arithmetick cannot in Figures set An Age of Numbred yeares to swell so Great, As to fill vp that time when these shall dye, Being NEVER, for it burnes Eternally, From the Worlds first Foundation, to'th Confounding: Were Deluges on Deluges abounding, Not All that Raine (able to drowne the World, Reach'd it to heauen) nor thousand Oceans hurld On top of all those Waters, can euer slake Or quench the least drop of this brimstone Lake. For (which most dreadfull is) the Flames cease Neuer Fire without light. To torture Soules, and yet no light seene Euer: It is a Burning which doth Brightnesse lack, The Coales being infinite-hot, and infinite black. Yet through my horse of Hell gallopp'd amaine, Now plung'd in Boyling lakes, then vp-againe; Leaping into vast Caues, where heate neuer comes: For sharper cold then Winters breath, benummes. The Aire so stiffe, it freezeth All to ice, And Clowdes of Snow; whose Flakes are harder thrice Than those Quadrangled Haile-stones, which in Thunder Kill Teemes, and Plough-men, and riue Oakes in sunder.
The Extremities of Cold in Hell. THe Hyperborean wind, whose Rough hand flings Mountaines for Snow-balls, and on's Marble wings Simile. Beares Rocks of ice, fetch'd from the Frigid zone, Which stuck ith North Seas, Seas and shoares were One; Ten thousand wild Waues hardned in the Aire Rattling like Isicles on his grizly Haire, And in his driueling Beard Snow ten-times more Than e're the bald-pate Alpes in Periwigs wore, When from his Caues of brasse (bound there in Giues Of Adamant) out he whorries, and' fore him driues (In whirlewindes,) Haile, Frosts, Sleete, and Stormes; and With rugged Winter, whom he Roaring greetes, (meetes Then clapping their obstreperous Squallid Wings, Each of them on the frozen Russian dings Such bitter blasts downe, that they flye in Droues (Though swadled all in furres) to Sweltring Stoues: The Muffe, the Scythian, nor the Freeze-land-boore, Nor the Laplandian Witch once peeping o're A threshold, left their Noses, Cheekes, and Eyes (Pinch'd off by his Clumzy Nailes) be made a prize To snarling Boreas. O yet! all this cold (Were it pil'd vp in heapes a hundred fold, In stifned Clowdes to freeze ten thousand yeere) Is a Warme Thaw, to'th piercing Horrors heere. Hells Cold so biting, so Inuincible, The effects of the cold in hel Insufferable, Inexpressible,
That from all cold else the sharpe nips doth steale; Should fire come neare it, it would fire congeale, Till Flames turne icy Flakes, and force fire leese His Vertue so, that coales Red-hot will freeze. Here I beheld (mee thought) Soules Scar-crow-like, Some bound, some hang bith heeles, whose heads did strike The Icy-knobbed-roofe, toss'd too and fro, By Gusts implacable, able downe to throw Rampires of Brasse; which still beate out the Braines. And still Renewde them with Plangiferous Paines. Here, I beheld Kennels of fat-paunch'd Dogges, From one to one howling in Dialogues Of Hellish Language, cursing that they sat Hard-hearted∣nes punished▪ At prowd Voluptuous Tables, yet forgat Numm'd Charity, when at their gawdy gates She begg'd but Scraps of their worst Delicates, Yet staru'd for want; whilst they at Toasting fires Bath'd their Ranke Guts: and with sharpe whips of Wires (But nothing else) heated her Shiuering limbes: They quaffing Bowles (ith' mean time) crown'd to'th Brims. And when ragg'd Souldiers, of their Bodies making Souldiers vn∣pittied. Anatomies in Wounds, with chill blasts quaking And shrunke-vp mawes, did to their Worships come, A Whipping-Poast, and Halter was their Doome. Or when Thin-pale-cheek'd Schollers held but forth Schollers vn∣rewarded. Their Thread-bare armes, and did beseech their Worth To pittie haplesse Learning once so much As not to see her beg: No, they'd not Touch A Poore bookes couer, though within it lay Their Soules wealth, but (in scorne) Shuffled away.
O Diuine Vengeance! how most Iust thou art? What they Stung ochers with, is Now their smart. Bleake Agues, Apoplexies, Murres, Catarrhes, Coughes, Dropsies, Rhewmes, diseases that make wars, And in cold bloud kill Health, did here reigne rife, And though they could not Wast, yet Worried life. Death from his earthy hands flung here and there Cold Snakes, and Scorpions, which did piece-male teare Frost-bitten Soules, and spewd them vp againe Wanting Disgestion: And to whip Paine with Paine, Ten thousand Salamanders (whose chill thawing Puts Bonfires out) their stark-stiffe lunges were gnawing: Harsh was their Musicke therefore, on no string But Yels; Teeth-gnashing, Chattring, Shiuering. When thus farre I was transported by my Dreame: I called to minde (me thought) that vpon earth I had heard many great Schollers defend, that there was no Cold in hell: But then (turning ouer the leaues of my memory) I found writteu there, that Iob once spake thus. They shal passe from the waters of Snow, to too much Heate. And that vpon those wordes Reuerend Bede Sebastian Bar∣radas in 4. Euan gcl. lib. 10. cap. 5. did inferre, that Iob seemed to point (with his finger as it were) at Two Hels, the one of Fire, the other of Cold. And that S. Hierome vpon the tenth of Mathew, did auouch the same thing: And againe, that Hugo Victo∣rinus, in his Booke De Anima, had ser downe, that in Hell Hugo Victori∣nus lib. 4. cap. 13. there was a Passage from the waters of Snow, to the heate of Fire, and both of these were Insufferable, &c. Iob 24.
I likewise (me thought) remembred, that the Author of the Booke (intituled De Triplici Habitaculo, that is to say, Of Heauen, Earth, and Hell) being thought to be the Tom. 9. cap. 2: worke of Saint Augustine, had these wordes, There are two principall Torments in Hell; viz. Intollerable Colde, and Intollerable Heate. Whereupon the Euangelists wrote, there shall bee in Hell, Weeping, and Gnashing Math. 13. Luke 13. of Teeth: Teares, melting from the eyes through the extremity of Fire, and that of the Teeth, proceeding from the Sharpenesse of Colde. Then called I to minde, that Iustinianus, in his Booke De casto Connubio Animae, sayd thus: There Iustinia. cap. 16. is in Hell, a Fire Corporeall, Inextinguible, wanting Com∣bustible matter to nourish it: It shines to Punishment, not to Consolation. In that place there is Colde Incom∣parable, Gnashing of Teeth, and Smoake most Horrible-Stinking, &c. And that Haymo commenting vpon Mathew, sung the same Tune, thus: That among all Haymo in Ma 8. cap. the Tortures in Hell, the greatest were Heate and Cold. My memory (me thought) amongst these mustred, Anselmus in his Elucidary, Innocentius with his booke De Innocent. lib. 6. cap. 4. Contempta Mundi, with many others, all fighting vnder the same Opinion. Againe, I tooke hold vpon the 39. Chapter of Ec∣clesiasticus, speaking thus: They are Spirits created for Reuenge, and in their fury they haue fortified their Tor∣ments; when the finall Day shall come, they shall powre forth the force and rage of him that created them, Fire, Hayle, Famine, &c.
These, & other Fortifications of Reading defending me, were Armors sufficient & of proofe, that there was Cold in Hell: And that haply the Infernall torments did Bede in Iob. 24. so change, that some times the Soules of men were scor∣ched in fires, and anon as grieuously plagu'd with inex∣pressible anguish of cold: yet considering with my selfe, that it was no Pillar for Saluation to leane vpon, to be∣leeue that there was or was not any such thing, it could (me thought) be no offence to Perswade, It was so, or not so: and the rather, because it was but a Dreame. My Mephostophilan Nag (which foam'd before With a white frothy Sweate, by scudding o're The Fields of Flames) had now the Glanders got Through sudden Cold, when he was Extreame hot: Foundred he was besides (halting downe-right) So that I durst nor on, nor yet Allight; My selfe (mee thought) being almost frozen dead. Back therefore did I reyne his stubborne Head, When quick as Thought, he gallopp'd thence away, And came againe where Soules all broyling lay: Vpon them fell downe stormes of burning Speares, Trumpets red-hot, blowing Flames into their Eares, Each Sence, and Member, that on earth had bin An Armour in the quarrell of Damn'd Sin To fight' gainst Heauen, were (here) in pieces rent, And Faults weigh'd out with equall punishment. Esa. 27. The Glutton roar'd for Cookes to giue him meate, I will exercise Iudgement in weight, & Iu∣stice in mea∣sure. Iere. 25. Esa. 27. Drunkards for Wine, to quench their scalding Heate, Adulterers for their Whoores, to coole those Fires Which now burnt hotter then their old Desires:
Some for Caroches cry'd, some for their Trayne Of Vassailes to attend, but cry'd in vaine. They shall cry to the gods whom they serued in this life, and they shall not saue them in this time of afflicti∣on. Ier. 2. Gay gawdy women, who spent yeares of Noones In tricking vp their Fronts with Chaperoones, Pride of womē (and in that the effeminacy of men in this age) is heere taxed, and re∣warded. And powdred Haire: whose Taylors sheares did quarrell With Pride, how to cut onely their apparrell, Whose Backs wore out more Fashions then their Wit, Phantasticknesse being short to alter it Into so many shapes, as they did vary The loades, being more then those when fed Mules carry (In Sumpters) Great Lords things: whose heads were Ith' Aire high as a Stags, boue all the Heard; reard And when they rode (their Foote-men running by) They seem'd prowd Ships in all their Gallantry, Newly-arriu'd, full-fraighted, vnder sayle, Slight empty Cock-boates dancing at their Tayle; These Dames, who each day in French Chariots sat Glistring like Angels, a prowd-bounding Trot From foure faire Steedes drawing all on them to wonder, That the Clowdes eccho'd, and the Earth shooke vnder: But when their Coursers tooke their full Cariere, It look'd like that Day, when the Thunderer Struck with his Triple-fire Heauens Rider downe; Phaetunt. Fab. Ouid. Metam. lib. 2. For (from their horses nostrils) Breath was throwne Hot-quick as lightning, and their Hoofs vp-hurld Such Clowdes of Smoake, as when he fir'd the world.
O horrid sight! These (once so much Ador'd) In hell were drudges, spurn'd at, and abhorr'd; Their Painted cheekes, turn'd into Witches looks, Bright Haire to Snakes, long Fingers into hooks, Pearle-Chaines to roapes, their gawdy Robes to Ragges, And delicate bodies, vglier farre then Hagges. They that for Table-crums refus'd to buy And (for their soules) hoord vp Eternity, Here offred worlds of Treasure, but to get One drop of Water: (O hels infinite Heate!) Yet not a drop was sufferd once to fall: To quench their thirst, Diuels held out caps of Gall. Diues the patterne of such vncharitable wretches, cries out in that Language: O Father Abraham, haue compassion vpon me, and send down Lazarus vnto me, that he may dippe the toppe of his finger in water and coole my tongue, &c. Luke 16. Cram'd-vp in stinking corners I beheld What rable are in Hell. Base Heapes tumbled together, who all yell'd Like bandogs tyed in kennels: High-way-standers, Foists, Nips, and Iylts, Prinadoes, Bawdes, Pimpes, Pan- Theeues. Panders. Bawdes. Olde sunck-eyde Beldames, hir'd to keepe the doors, (ders, Till their owne Daughters were by slaues made whoores: Catchpolles, and Varlets, who did poore men fleece Catch-polles. (To their vndoing) for a Twelue-peny peece. Mongst these were mingled Periur'd common-Baile, Commonbail. Petti-foggers Light weights breede heaui∣nesse. With Petti-foggers, that set Law to sale With Cauterized Consciences; Theeues, Cheates, Tradesmen that fed vpon the Broken Meates
Of Oathes and Rotten-wares; and those to sell Car'd not for single money to buy Hell. Ten thousand Packs (like these) were basely throwne Into a Ware-house of Damnation, Where Fire their foode was, Adders galls their Drinke, Good cheere in hell for sin∣ners. And their Tobacco, a strong Brimstone stinke. His bread (speaking of the wicked Worldling) in his Iob. 20. belly shall be turned into the gall of Serpents, hee shall be constrained to vomit out againe the riches which he hath deuoured, God shall pull them forth of his belly, he shall be constrained to suck the gals of Cockatrices, and the tongues of Adders shall slay him, &c. Iob 10. The Worme of Conscience. THe whips that lash'd the Damn'd, were some of wire, And some of Iron; others were roapes of Fire Knotted with ragged stones of glowing Flint, Which though in thousand formes they did imprint Tortures vpon their Soules, yet there was One To which all Torments else compar'd, were None. A kinde of Worme there was, all speckled black, That shot tenthousand Prickles from his back, The Worme of conscience. Sharper then quils of Porcupines, and longer, And further flying, and more swift and stronger; It bare a Tearing forked sting behinde, Which in the Striking did so strangely winde,
It wounded euery way where it did Hit, Nor could it be put by, by force or Wit: This Worme had Teeth of needles, and lay gnawing Both night and day, Black Soules in peeces drawing: The more 'tis rack'd, it liues; the more it Fries In Flames, the lesse it Burnes, and Neuer dies. Our Sauiour speaking of the paines of the Damned, saith; that their Worme dieth not. Mar. 9. 44. To call but this Worme to minde (amongst the other Torments of that Infernall Lake) marke in what passions one powreth forth his feares: Gehennam timeo, quippe interminatam, exhorreo Tartarum vt cui nimium insit Cyrillus Allexan∣drinus in Orati∣one de Exitu A∣nimae. Caloris, paueo Tenebras quoniam nihil admittunt Lucis, For∣mido pectiferum VERMEM, quoniam est perennis, &c. I feare Gehenna, because it hath no end, Hell to me is horrible, because it hath too much Fire, the Darkenesse I Gehenna, one of the Names of Hell, taken from Hinmon valley, &c. trēble at, because it hath no Light, the Deadly WORME affrights me, because it is Euer-lasting. Holy Bernard beeing pierced to the Soule with the same Agony of Feare, thus confesseth it: Paueo Gehen∣nam, Bernard. Serm. 16. in Cantic. Contremisco a Dentibus Bestiae infernalis, Horreo VER∣MEM rodentem, et ignem torrentem, Fumum, et Vaporem, et Sulphur, et Spiritum Procellarum, &c. I am (saies hee) afraid of Hell, I tremble at the teeth of the Infernall Dragon, the Gnawing WORME is a Horror to me, and the Roasting Fire, and the Smoake, and the Brimstone, and the Spirit of Stormes, &c.
One Soule, me thought, boyling in Sulphurous flame, A soule bitter∣ly accusing God of iniu∣stice. Curs'd God, and on his Rigor did exclame, Rail'd at him for Iniustice, and thus Cri'd: If for my Sin thy Sonne was Crucified, Why am I hell'd in Execution In this Damn'd Iayle, euer to be Vndone? If Hee layd downe his life to set me Cleere From all my Debts, why am I Dungeon'd Here? Why for a life no longer then a Span, Am I an Euerlasting damned Man? He whom the First bad woman did intice, Was but once driuen out of Paradice, Yet hee (euen then) was Sole Monarchall Lord Adam a Mo∣narch after his deposing. O're the whole Globe, Seas did to him Accord In sweete Obedience: all the Beasts on Earth, As vnder his Dominion they tooke birth, So from him had they Names, they all did Bow Their knees to him, and did obserue his Brow. He lost a Garden, but an Orchard found, Wall'd in with Seas, with Sun-beames compast round, Where Birds (whose Notes were neuer since so cleare) Seru'd as Musitians All, to tune his Eare: A Serpent cozened Him by sorcerous Charmes, But (in his stead) a woman fild his Armes: A woman! in whose Face more Beauties shone Then all the Beauties after made in One: He was Mans Maister-thiefe, Robd him of All, Droue him from Eden, and (so) forc'd him Fall Out of the Sphaere of Innocence: and yet Those Crownes of Blessings God on him did set.
Why then for Sin but of a minutes date, Must I for Euer be a Rebrobate? Gods holy hunger though it oft did kill me, Gods holy Banquet yet did neuer fill me; Auri sacra Fa∣mes. The Silke worme ne're for me wrought in her Loome, I neuer slept in a Rich Lordly Roome, Neuer eate Pies of Nightingales Tongues, or sate Like Diues at my table seru'd in Plate. My Beldame Nurse (the Earth) when she gaue Suck To me, her left Breast still she forth did pluck, Being Iuicelesse; or from thence if Drops did fall, How could I quench my thirsty Iawes with Gall? I neuer lackeyed by proud Fortunes wheele: For all the taste of Pleasures I did feele, Was in the warme Embracements of my Whore: If that were Sin, why then did Nature store My Veines with hot bloud, blowing lust full fire? 'Twas her Corruption, and not my Desire. I likewise (now and then) was wash'd within All-o're with Wines, but why should that be Sin, When God the Vineyard planted, and in's word Bid Man drinke wine? Thou art a Rigorous Lord, (Mee thought) the Hell-hound howl'd, for trifling Crimes To Damne me in a World out-lengthning Times. Say, that full sixty yeares my Glasse did run, More then that halfe I slept, there was won Little to Hell in sleepe: but my lifes thread Reach'd but to thirty, so that I lay dead Fifteene of those, and of those fifteene, fiue At least were childish: O must I aliue
Be held for Euer in Damnations Iayle For poore ten yeares! when I perhaps did saile Some part of them towards Heauen? What cursed waue Threw'st Thou to drowne me in th' Infernall Graue? My Parents blest me Mornings, Noones and Nights, Were all those spent in Vayne? I tooke delights Inplucking Apples from t'Hesperian Trees, Which Eating, I grew Learn'd: adde to All these My Priuate Readings, which more School'd my Soule, Then Tutors, when they sternliest did Controll With Frownes or Rods: some Dayes in This were Spent: So that if All my Faire-writ leaues were Rent Out of Gods Memory, alack! it were A Thin Booke of the Foule: yet must I (here) For sowing some Few Acres vn-awares Of Bad Corne, reape an Endlesse Field of Tares? At this, ten thousand Soules (rauing mad) Roard That on their Heads the selfe-same shot was scoard: But then, a Voice (tun'd to an Angels Sound) With repercussiue Ecchoes did rebound Through all the Court of Barathrum, thus Thundering Terrors that shooke Hells Center: Ceasse thy wondring (Thou Bawling Reprobate,) a recompence Is giuen thee to the Weight of thine Offence. For had thy yeares out-reach'd Methuslem's Age, Thy Black lifes Torrent (with impetuous rage) Had Boundlesse, Bottomlesse, Restlesse bin; So that as Thy Eternity did Sin Peccas Homo in AEterno tuo: Pu nit Deus in AE∣terno suo. Tortured thou art in Gods Eternity: Thy faults to him, his rods for thee doe buy:
Nor can he in his Iustice pittie those, Who pitty not themselues, but do expose Their Soules to Foule Acts, scorning threatned Paine, Like Whoores, who buy Damnation for small Gaine. Thou on the bread thy Sins did earne doest feede, Not paying by the Day, but by the Deede. What was thy whole life but a Mutinous Warre 'Gainst thy Creator? Euery Sense did Iarre From his Obedience: like to Mad-mens swords Thy works were wounds, and blowes flew from thy words: Thy Lips, Eares, Eyes, haue still bin Gates set wide To let in Blasphemy, Lust, Auarice, Pride, And Legions of such Diuels. Thou didst Dwell First in a House of Flesh, but now in Hell: That was thy Partner, and (as Partners doe) The soule and body beeing Partners, vndo one another. Hath thee Vndone for Euer: Thou shalt Rue His Ryots, VVhorings, Swearings, his Disorders Are thy Damnations: euery Sense now furders Thy Torments; the loose Glances of the Eyes, The Liquorishnesse of Taste, the Melodies To the Lasciuious Eare; All-all these turne To thy Perdition, thou for these shalt burne. To no hand holden-vp can helpe be giuen, The Left is Hels, the Right beat back from Heauen: In Flames go it Wher, and grow Green againe; Paine kill thee, yet thou still shalt liue in paine. On was he going but to drowne this Voice, All Hell broke loose, and then were heard no Noyse But Vlulations, Shrikings, Horred Soundings Of Ratling-Chaynes, and thousand strange Confoundings
Of Indisting guishable dire-mix'd Terrors: (rors. At which (I Trembling) WAKDE; and though the Er- Of my Sleepe-wandring-Soule, were now left Cleare, And that my cold hands had tane leaue of feare, Yet my Heart panted, and my Haire turn'd white, More through the Ghastly Obiects of this Night, Then with the Snow of Age: And yet euen then, Collecting vp my selfe, I read of Men The Volumes ouer, and the world, so well That I found Here worse Diuels then are in Hell FINIS.
