7508 99856907 22549
¶ A Prayer sayd in the kinges Chappell in the tyme of hys graces Sicknes, for the restau∣racion of his helth, commaunded to be sayd there, by the right Honorable Erle of Bedford, and niete to be vsed of all the Kinges trew Subiectes. Set forthe the .xix. day of Iune. M. D. LIII. royal blazon or coat of arms Allmighty, and moste merciful Lorde, the onely lyfe and helth, of all theym that truste in thee, which workest sal∣uaciō in thy elect, aswell by sicknes as other wise, and therfore bringest theim very lowe, and yet restorest to helth a∣gaine: looke downe wyth thy pytyfull Eies vpon thy seruaunt Edward our Kyng, and vpon this Realme of Eng∣land, professing thi worde & holy name, and as thou didest moste fauorably deliuer King Ezechias frō extreame sicknes, and prolongedst his lyfe for the saluegarde of thy people the Israelites, & defendedst theim and the Citie from the Tyranny of the Assyryās: so we moste entierlye appeale to thy great mercies, graciously to restore the helth and strēgth a∣gayne of thy serut Edward our Soueraine Lorde, that as tho haste begonne by him the rooting out of Errour, Idolatry & Supersticion, and the planting of trew Religion, trew wor∣shippyng & veritie: so it may please thy mercyful goodnes, lōge to preserue hym for the confyrmacyō & establishmēt of the same, and also for the saulfgarde and defence of this Realme, from al outward & inward Enemies, for the glorye of thy holye name. Looke not herin (O Lorde) vpon our desertes, whyche for a∣businge thy worde, and sinfulnes, deserue great punishmentes, but vpon thy plentyful mercyes, whyche reioycest to heale the greatest myseries. Be no lesse fauorable (O Lorde) at this pre∣sent, to Edward our kyng, restorynge thy trew religion: then in times past to Ezechias refourmyng thy Religiō. Be no lesse mercyfull to England thy Churche now: then in those dayes to Iury thy Churche than. But as thy heauēly grace hath ben more reueled in these dayes by the cōmyng of thy deare Sōne our Sauiour and mayster Chryste, and preachyng of the Gos∣pell: so it may please thy fatherlye loue and goodnes, to bestow vpon vs more abundaunce of the same fauourable grace and mercy, according to thy wyl in this our hūble request. Do thys O most mercyful Father for thy owne names sake, and for the merytes and death of thy Sonne our only medyator and rede∣mer Iesus Christe. Amen. Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the Sygne of the Rose Garland, by wyllyam Copland.
