a276 12656189 65370
AN ACCOUNT Of the digging up of The Quarters of William Stayley, Lately Executed for HIGH TREASON, For that his Relations abused the KINGS Mercy. Nov. 30. 1678. Imprimatur, WILLIAM SCROGGS. WHereas William Stayley being found Guilty of High Treason at the Kings Bench Bar, on Thursday the one and twentieth day of November 1678. received then his Sentence to be drawn on a Sledge to the place of Execution, there to be hanged by the Neck, cut down alive, his Quarters to be se∣ed, and disposed of as the King should think fit, and his Bowels burnt; Which Sentence on Tuesday  following was accordingly Executed, at the common place of Execution, and his Quarters were ought back and left at Newgate, in order to their being set up on the Gates of the City of London, and  Head on London-Bridge, as Traytors Quarters usually are; But the said William Stayley having beha∣ himself very penitently, from the time of his Conviction until the time of his Execution, which was sted by the several Ministers that visited him during that time; And the Relations of the said William Stayley humbly Petitioning His most Sacred Majesty that He would be graciously pleased that his Quarters might be delivered back to them to be privately Buried, and not to be set up on the Gates of the City: which  most Sacred Majesty, out of His Princely Clemency and Compassion was pleased to grant; and Ordered the eriff of the County of Middlesex to deliver the Quarters to his Friends, by them to be disposed of, as afore∣id, which were delivered accordingly. But since that (to the great Indignity and Affront of His Majesties Mercy and Favour) the Friends of the said William Stayley caused several Masses to be said over  Quarters, and used other Ceremonies according to the manner of the Church of Rome, and appointed a ime for the Interrment, viz. Friday the twenty ninth day of November 1678. in the Evening, from his fathers House in Covent Garden; at which time there was made a Pompous and great Funeral, many Peo∣ple following the Corps to the Church of St. Pauls Covent Garden, where he was buried: Which His Majesty hearing of, was justly Displeased, and Commanded the Coroner of the Liberty of Westminster to take up the Body of the said William Stayley, and deliver it to the Sheriff of the County of Middle∣ and that the said Sheriff should cause the Quarters to be set up on the Gates of the City of London, and  Head on London Bridge. The Coroner, according to His Majesties Command, immediately goes to the Church Wardens of St. Pauls Covent Garden, and caused the Body of the said William Stayley to be taken up, and the Coffin to be broken open, to see that he had the right Body: which when he had done, he caused the Body to be car∣ried to Newgate, and there delivered it to the Sheriff of Middlesex to be disposed of as aforesaid. London, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery-lane, near Fleet-street. 1678.
