a337 12255706 57432
AN ACCOUNT OF THE Present, Miserable, State of Affairs IN IRELAND. AS ALSO, A Relation of a Late Bloody Fight between the Papists and Prote∣stants in that Kingdom: With the Particular Number, of the Protestants and Irish Papists that were Slain. Together, With A True Narrative of the Late K. James's Entry in Dublin; and of the Three several Proclamations Issued by Him there. Licensed, According to Order. 1689. I Have not omitted to give a Weekly Account of the present State of Affairs here, but I fear a Miscarriage in the Post, or some other way, may prevent their coming to your Hands, by Reason of these distracted Times. The Pac∣ets have been stopt; no less than Ten came in the st time together; there being as many now due. They, when ever they come, are carried to the Lord hancellours, where they are all viewed and opened, d such as are not lik'd, committed to the Flames. There is no publick News Letter, nor Gazette, suffe∣d to be in any Coffee-House, only the Dublin Ga∣tte, which is a Legend of their own Composition. All ings here are in a confused distracted Condition; since e were disarmed, very few Shops opened, Trading ire decayed, no Money stirring, the People dayly ocking to the Isle of Man for Sanctuary, amongst hich number, I thought to have made a shift for one: ut the Late King coming for Ireland, and being now Dublin, where he arrived from Kinsale, on the 24th.  March, gave us some Hopes, it would abate the uelty of the inraged Tyr—l. Upon this hopes of Protection, I think to stay a little ger, The worst we fear is, that they will impose ch Oaths upon us as will not digest with some tender consciences, or that we shall be expos'd to the orders of the Soldiers to Plunder us, which they ten threaten; Nay we fear a Massacre, if by a Speedy pply from England, or Some Extraordinary Providence be not timely prevented. They may do with us hat they please, for we are at their Mercy. Since the Late King came here, he hath set out three roclamations. 1. For the Advancing of Coin for e better payment of the Army. 2. For Calling me his Subjects of Ireland, to Remain upon the Pre∣ses, otherwise their Estates to be Sequester'd, for Car∣ing on the War. 3. For Calling a Parliament, which to Sit the 7th. of May. In the mean time, all Stra∣tagems are put in Practice, for the Reducing the Re∣bels (as they call them) in the North, who if they do not lay down their Arms in a short time, are to be Sacrificed, Man, Woman, and Child. Yet, tho' the Warlike Roman has the Name of the Soldier, the Sub∣tile Britain out-does him in Policy. The Lord Kingston with a party of 1500 Horse, and 3000 Foot, having lately bawk'd a Body of 14000, who were in search of him. He first got his Men over the Black-Water in small Boats, which he sunk assoon as he Landed, then coming to a Pass, he Marched over his Men, where, when he had them safe over, he burnt the Bridg, by which means he got safe into London-Derry, while the Enemy were left destitute of all means to pursue him. A like Stratagem happened at Colraine, against which the Irish with a Numerous Party had lai'd a formal Seige; The Beseig'd made two Resolute Sallys which so galled the Enemy, that they Resolved the 3d time to push at all. The Third Sally is made, and further then before, where pretending to run they made towards the Garri∣son; the deluded Foe with much Fury pursues to the Gates, where the Protestants, opening to the Right, and Left upon the Signal given, they Fired six Pieces of Conceal'd Cannon, which made such Slaughter a∣mongst the Poor Irish, that it stopt their Carreer for that time, the Rest being blown up in a Mine to the Number of about 2 or 3000. The Protestants are yet Considerably strong in the North, haveing Intrenched themselves in; in Expectation of a Battle. Tyrconnel is going down with a Powerful Army to Reduce them, which when he has done, he threa∣tens to Invade Scotland; Nay further if not timely pre∣vented; But one 20000 out of England would spoil his Design, and soon under God re-establish the Peace of this Distracted Kingdom.
