A3544 11644480 47973
AN APOLOGY FOR LOVERS. OR A Discourse of the Antiqui∣ty and Lawfulnesse of LOVE. By Erastophil, no Prose∣lyte, but a native of that Religion. Faelices ter & amplius Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malia Divulsus querimoniis Suprema citius solvet amor die. Horat. ad Lydiam. Ode, 13. London, Printed in the year, 1651.
TO My Dearest Sister, Mrs. M. VV. My Dearest Sister, WHat I long since promised I now perform, if a thing imper∣fectly flubber'd over, and in hast, may merit
the name of a performance: but for that as I acknowledge the debt, so I look upon you as an easie Creditress, and not so scrupulous as to refuse pay∣ment, because it comes in clipt and broken money. 'Tis true, I have sometimes heretofore thought of it, but those thoughts perisht almost in the very conception without pro∣ducing any thing, unless it were some few rude lineaments, and which I should call the rough draught of this discourse, but that I should be injurious to it as it is now, by robbing the thing of its apellation; al∣though I am perswaded the conceptions concerning this
subject, being so exceeding fine, and having so little com∣merce with sense, are not to be exprest to the life by the most curious Pencil, much lesse by so uneven an hand as mine, but are like to those which Apelles is said to have drawn when he contended with Protogenes, Lineas visum effugientes: how∣ever deliniated, it is yours by a double relation; both because I know you to be (and me thinks there should be no one of so little humanity as not to be) a friend to lovers; and next be∣cause it is a task which I had not undertaken but upon your assignment, and so in both res∣pects most properly belonging
to you. For a conclusion, I wish you all the joys of Love, of Youth, and Health, and what ever Happinesse else is to be found in this World, and in the next, eternal and ever last∣ing Felicity. Your most affectionate Brother and Ser∣vant. Erastophil.
To my worthy friend the Author on his Apology for Lovers. I'Ve seen thy fair Design, and I approve Thy each part, like the first great Act of Love, When fire pursu'd, and water stood at Bay, Heat fought with cold, and darkness with the day: When Nature was all tempest, when no Cheek Had smiles, nor were there lips to kiss or speak: When unfledg'd Cupid had no wings to flie, Nor were his shafts plac'd in the killing eye, Love calm'd the Chaos, and re∣duc'd the brawl, Into a good, a great, and glorious ALL.
Thus friend thy p transcribes his draughts above. And every line runs parallel with Jove. Something alike in both my fancy finds, He work'd on matter, thou doost work on minds. Love was his creature, but thy ward: nay thou Ar't more then Guardian to that passion now. He in a larger volumn did ex∣press His admir'd flame, thou doest it in a less: And though thy narrow Trace may not contend With his vast course, yet both con∣spire in th' end; To the same point of union thou dost run, As Heliosropes do imitate their Sun.
Me thinks I see the soul like some course fire Ally'd to Coal, inslav'd with a de∣fire Of pelf and stock, so that her noble flame Feeds on cheap chips, and stuff be∣neath her name. Health to thy brave design, that would translate Our Spirits from this durty Kit∣chin-state, And fix them in a heaven, where eys with eys, And beams with beams may twist and eternize. Why should we doat on trash? and so misplace That on the Fan, which is due to the face? Stars mix with stars, and trouble not the earth, Least st should interpose and soi the Birth.
I would fright the Mother, did the Childs aspect But figure that, most fathers do af∣fect, And well she might mistake her self a Mint, Did stamp Philippo's, and bring forth in Print We should have children fac'd like Duckatoons, And like George riding too, out of the Wombs. Such indirect affections I can pitty, And justly may bequeath them to the City: There without Love, Gold onely hath the Name They have the Fuell, but they want a Flame. Eugenius Philalethes.
To my dear Brother, upon the pub∣lishing of his Apologie for Lo∣vers. I Thank thee for this Credit, thou hast done A Stock of super-erogation: Now I may run upon the score, and say, My Younger Brother will the rec∣k'ning pay; Thou mak'st up what I want; I now may play The Fool, and Elder-Brother ev'ry day, And yet be born with; for though my Scale's light, It well may passe, because thine's over-weight. But is't impossible I should be screw'd
T'a higher pitch more near thee? Am I mew'd Unto a Ne plus ultra, nor can find Some way to Elevate my sluggish mind? Am I so sottish, or so little kin To Thee, that Emulation cannot win Upon my Genius, nor resemble it, In some proportion to thy lofty wit? It will not be: Nor can a man in∣vite (On any tearms) an Aethiop to look white. Where didst thou get (my dear E∣vastophil) This huge advantage? I did climb the Hill Of Nature first: but now (in all beside) Thou hast out stript me the whole Heaven-wide. Sure there's a different stuff in Thee and Me;
Or is't the Fate of firstlings, that they be Essayes and rough casts, which the following draughts Exceed far more then do the second Thoughts. I'me but thy Hench boy, and thy Harbinger, The Prologue to thy day, thy mor∣ning star; Nay to speak truth, thou art so much alone, That there's between us no compa∣rison. Nor can my verse commend more then the Gown On Horseback did that Otacou∣sticon, That would demonstrate his new ta'ne degree To his admiring friends in the coun∣try. Yet fear not, thou shalt have thy due applause.
The great Eugenius, who knows natures laws, And can tie love knots there, he who held forth A candle to the world, approves thy worth, And Deigns to Vsher in thy Virgin muse▪ So did the noble generous Romans use To grace their friends, as Scipio for his brother, Wore a blew coat, for his own son another. F. W.
AN APOLOGIE FOR LOVERS. Gen. 29. vers. 20. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few days, for the love he had unto her. CErtainly, if man could ever have brocked Solitude, or beene happy in himselfe, without the So∣ciety of another, it was the
in the state of his Innocency, when his understanding was clear and unclouded, his will indifferent and unbyassed, his affections regular and obedi∣ent, and in a word, all the fa∣culties and powers of his soule healthfull and undiseased; for having so absolute a com∣mand over himself, so vast a Seigniory and unlimited Em∣pire over the creatures, it was not to be expected, that his condition should be more in∣dependent than then it was or himself better able to subsist without supply from any o∣ther: yet even then, amidst all these perfections he was im∣perfect, amidst all these rich∣es
he was in poverty, there was something wanting to compleat his happinesse, for so God himselfe, his Creator, (who made him of the dust, and formed him of the Clay, and must therefore best know his temper and composition, and what was most requisite and best for him) pronoun∣ced, and that after a most de∣liberate Consultation held there by the Vnity, as in the Chapter before, when he crea∣ted him by the Trinity, not improbably to shadow forth and adumbrate allegorically that Vnity and self-samenesse, (as I may so tearm it) that ought to be in this great and
neer Relation; God I say himself pronounced of him, Non est bonum, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him. Some out of Curiosity of Wit may perhaps conceit that the remedy here propo∣sed might have produced some inconveniencies, for it is evi∣dent will they say, That had man continued in his first In∣nocency, his Obedience had been rewarded with an Im∣mortality here, which being granted, as it cannot be deni∣ed, then there may arise this Question, How this small Globe of Earth, which as
Astronomers not only say, but unanswerably demonstrate to be no bigger then a little Punctum est in quo vivitis, in quo regna desponitis, in quo bella ge∣ritis. Seneca in Praefat. ad Nat. Hist, Point, compa∣red to the Uni∣versall Globe of the World (as the most igno∣rant themselves would confesse, were they but capable of conceiving the reason) should have been ever able to have held and contain'd so many infinite millions, and vast numbers of people, as we must necessarily imagine, would have been, had the propaga∣tion of mankinde run still on, exempted from the stroke of
merciless death, and unbrie'd Lawes of Mortality; or if wee suppose it might have held them, because we see a few Acres will contain a mul∣titude of persons, yet how they should ever have been able to have liv'd one by another, we do not see: Again whe∣ther there might not have bin a cure more apt and apposite found out against the want of company, then the Ceeation of woman; perhaps if there had been such a set and defi∣nite number of men only for∣med, as would have serv'd to have peopled the whole earth, which would have remedied the inconvenience before-mentioned;
Furthermore, which might likewise not un∣fitly, will they say, and with∣out violence be drawne into question, Whether friend∣ship betwixt man and man, or conjugall Love betwixt man and wife be more agreeable and gratefull to humane Na∣ture, or better satisfie the in∣tention for which Woman was created, which is here exprest to bee for a remedy against solitude; but these are subjects fitter for the anxious enquiries of Philosophers, then the humble beliefe and credulity of Christians; lea∣ving them therefore, and o∣ther the like quaeries to Dis∣putants
and Polemicks; let it suffice us that we have here God Almighties Probatum est annexed to this cure, and no other, and ought therefore to conclude it of all other the best and most soveraigne. But I pass on to the Text it selfe, in which we have these parts considerable. First, here is the Lover, or after our modern phrase, the servant Iacob. Secondly, here is the pe∣nance served. Thirdly, here is the aggra∣vation of the penance from the length of time, viz. Seven years. Fourthly, here is the object
of his love and affections, or according to the mode of Lo∣vers, his Mistress, Rachel. Fifthly, here is the wonder, and they seem'd to him but a few dayes. Sixtly and lastly, here is the cause rendred, which being once known, the wonder va∣nisheth, and ceaseth to be any longer a wonder, viz. He lo∣ved her. And Jacob served se∣ven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few days, for the love he had unto her. I shall take a view of the parts severally as they lye in order, and first therefore of the first Branch of the Text, the Lover Iacob, brought in
here by way of connexion with the story precedent, viz. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, &c. They that have taken upon them to passe Censures, and make Observations upon the various and uncertain dispo∣sitions of mankind, affirme that such minds as are not ei∣ther Religious, or Philoso∣phical, or Amorous, are sor∣did and earthy dispositions, altogether unworthy, as ha∣ving nothing of noblenesse or generosity in them; but here we have a concatenation of them in this our Amourist, they are all three linkt toge∣ther: for his Piety and Reli∣gion
it is throughout this whole book of Genesis conspicuous; and for his learning and deep knowledge in Phylosophy, we have amongst others a no∣table instance in that politick invention which hee used to inrich himself, and im∣poverish Laban, upon the contract which he made with him, which shewes that he was no superficial, and meer notionall Phylosopher, but had conjoyned experi∣ment with reason, and that of the most abstruse and highest nature, for such is the knowledge of the strange power and miraculous effects that are, and may be wrought
by imagination: but omitting him in both these capacities, of a Divine and a Scholler, I shall onely consider him in the quality of a Lover, for with that aspect onely he looks upon me in this text, And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to Him but a few dayes for the Love he had unto her. Every Breast is not an Altar fit for Love to sacrifice upon, nor every Soul a Shrine worthy of so great a Saint: No, the Altar must be first consecrate, and the Shrine hal∣lowed and purified before this Deity be there Lodged. There are to make a Lover,
peculiar conditions required, of which every one is not capable of the performance. Love is not an Artifice, or a Disguise that can be assumed and left off at pleasure, but like Vertue ceaseth to be, when it is once dissembled. It is Nature that must mould a disposition for a Lover; and that you may not mistake him, he hath usually (as Ar∣tists tell us) these Markes whereby you may know him. First, he is mild and gentle expressing in his very coun∣tenance, modesty and simple vertue. It may beget wonder in any one that shall serious∣ly
and attentively consider, how exceedingly much na∣ture is delighted with varie∣ty, how she playes and sports her self in it, hence it is, that amidst so many thousand fa∣ces of men and women (not to mention the disparities which are in other crea∣tures) there is so great and strauge diversities outwardly exprest in their countenances and yet the inward discre∣pancy and disagreement of their minds is farre greater, and this is the reason, that one and the same thing enters mens minds cloath'd in a dif∣ferent habit, and is represen∣ted with so much advantage
by some, and disadvantage by others, as may be seen for ex∣ample amongst others, in a Covetous man, and a Prodi∣gal; before whom do but set a sum of money, and present∣ly you shall see one of them with his eyes fixed and im∣moveable, as if he were won∣der-struck, eagerly gaze upon the beauty of so beloved an object, with which his very soule seems to be ravished; the prodigall on the other side, he looks upon it with no such eyes, it appears to him no other then a Masse of cold, pallid, ponderous earth, and is so far from be∣ing in love with it, that he
thinks the very sight of it wil contaminate him, but is so far assured, that he dare swear the touch of it would defile him: betwixt these two ex∣treams is the Provident and frugal man placed, who looks upon it neither so carelesly as the one, nor so greedily as the other. So we have here one and the same thing yeeld∣ing a different relish, accor∣ding to the diversity of the ta∣sters palates. Instances of this nature are infinite, but to re∣sume our discourse, I say with Charron in his Book of Wisdome, That for the most part, the face is the soul abre∣viated; her very pattern and
image, in which is placed her Escutcheon, with many quarters, representing al her titles of honour, being set in the gate and fore-front, to the end men may know, that this is her abode and her Pallace. And although this Rule is sometimes fallible, yet it holds generally true, and therefore it was wel answered by Socra∣tes, and like a Phylosopher, who when his friends (that were well acquainted with his Vertues, and greatly had them in admiration) were an∣gry with a certaine Physiog∣nomist, for saying he was blockish, given to Wine; and to all manner of vices, 'Tis
very true (saith he) what he speaks; for such a one I was by nature, and should have been, had not the study of Phylosophy and good letters weeded out and eradicated those vitious inclinations. But to fit the garment to the bo∣dy, and the Dyal to the Me∣ridian, to apply what hath been spoken in general, to our lover in particular, we read in the history of his nativity, that Jacob was a smooth man, and as his complexion was, such was his disposition, calm and serene, smooth and even, as there was no tempest in his looks, so neither was there in his breast, all was
quiet there and in tranquili∣ty: contrary to him in all things was his Brother Esau being of body hairy and rug∣ged, and of mind sierce and violent, a man of an untamed beat, and every way unfit to make a Lover; neither do I find that he was ever guilty of so much humanity; indeed I read that he was a Polyga∣mist, and had more wives then one, as namely Iudith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite, which were as the text saith, a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah, and afterwards a third Malahath daughter to
Ishmael, when he saw the o∣thers were nothing pleasing to his father and mother; but you wil say, if this were his crime, yet he had that comfort of mi∣serable persons, company, and which doth greatly alleviate his brothers too, whom here∣in you shall find as faulty as himself: but do you think in good earnest, to do a thing vo∣luntarily with election and premeditation, and to be in∣forced to it by affection the strongest motive in the world having been by Laban so no∣toriously deluded, after so ma∣ny years service and sufferings makes no alteration in the case? nay what will you say
after all this, if I make it ap∣pear, that he had no other wife besides Rachel? for of this opinion are the Casuists, who say, that the consent which proceedeth so from errour, that the errour gives cause to the consent (whether it be error personae of the person, as in this case, or Conditionis aut qualitatis ad essentiam conjugij pertinentis, of the condition or quality belong∣ing to the essence of Wedlock, such as is mentioned Deut. 22. 20. and which Ioseph sus∣pected of the blessed Virgin such consent say they is void and to be accounted for none, and consequently no marri¦age,
for in that, as in all other contracts the consent of both parties must precede and go before: and this consent must be voluntary or else it is not Consensus Humanus, the consent of a rationall creature; if it be asked, why he retain'd Leah afterwards? I answer, as his concubine, and not as his wife, which that age then dispenced with, for I cannot think but that herein he would imitate, the pious example of Abra∣ham and Isaac, who were both Monogamists, the latter not having so much as a con∣cubine. But whether am I digrest, while I pursue the ing notions too farre? I
shal onely add thus much fur∣ther and return. These two brothers so different in their dispositions, me thinks are no unfit allegory of reason and passion, or policy and strength, in which we see the great ad∣vantage that reason and policy hath over passion and brutish strength; for indeed therein beasts properly excell: and therefore it was foretold by God at their nativity, that the elder should serve the young∣er; for passion is in every man elder then reason, for he is first a slave to passion, before he comes to be a subject to rea∣son, and though Kingdomes and Dominions are usually
gain'd by the sword, yet they could never subsist without good laws and administrati∣on, the nerves and ligaments of all Common-wealths, which proceed from that supreame and soveraign part of man his intellect and under standing, to which onely the Throne is due, and to which all the other fa∣culties ought to be subordi∣nate. But I proceed to the se∣cond Symptome whereby na∣ture discovers a Lover, and that is, that he is of a great, but withall a mercifull spirit, herein resembling God Al∣mighty himself, who as he hath the greatest power to pu∣nish, so he hath the greatest
mercy to forgive, which as it proceeds from God out of his infinite love and goodnesse to his creatures, so it doth like∣wise from a Lover out of that naturall and innate Sympathy, which he beareth to his fellow creatures; for indeed the lover is the onely person of humani∣ty, all others are but Lycan∣thropoi, meer Wolves one to a∣nother, for the proud man he looks upon others as his foot∣stools and vassals, the ambitious man as his ladders, the cove∣tous man as his prey and booty, the fearfull man starts and looks upon others as bug-bears, the envious person he looks upon others too, but it is a
squint, and as upon his tormen∣tors, onely the lover looks up∣on others with an eye os com∣passion, acknowledging even in the basest and poorest persons, the communion of minds and mortality. The third mark which na∣ture gives of a Lover, is that he is impatient of idlenesse and all occasions of sloath. But upon the very mention of this, me thinks I hear some cry out, A Paradox, and that I sin against experience, and the old verse, Otia si tollas, they al∣ledge that idlenesse is the oyl which maintains and feeds the flames of affections, and that were it once substracted,
Love would instantly go out, perish, and die of it self. But I pray you what a kind of Love do these men ideate and fancy to themselves? will you know? why truly nothing else but some loose extravagant & wanton heats, to attribute to which the name of this most pure and unspotted flame, were an impiety altogether unpar∣donable; no, when Love hath once taken possession of the soul, when affection hath once inspir'd it, it presently sets all the faculties and powers of it on work, there is no room then, no place for idlenesse, every corner is filled, every angle is replenished, every recesse is
taken up. How many from meer beasts and savages in a sort (to instance in adventiti∣ous & acquir'd love, of which we have examples as well as of naturall) hath it restored to reason and humanity? How many proud and ambitious men hath it taught humility and obsequiousnesse? How ma∣ny fierce and cruell minds hath it made affable and gentle? How many ignorant and bloc∣kish persons have become great Schollars, Fools Philosophers, & Cowards valiant, being instru∣cted by Love, then which there is not a more excellent School∣master in the World? Away
then ye morose Rigid Satyrists, and supercilious Antiamorists, with your long Beards and starcht faces; you that can personate Vertue with such a counterfeit and seeming Gravity, and like the Philoso∣pher in Lucian, have taught your browes the knack to bend at the mention of Vice, when indeed for all your dissem∣bling and hypocritical Vizards none are more rotten and cor∣rupt at the bottome then your selves. Most excellently and truely is Love described and vindicated from those most false and unjust Aspersions ye have cast upon him, by
Barelay in his Icon▪ a∣morum. one whose Know∣ledge is greater thē your Ignorance. Vnjustly (saith he) do severe men accuse Love, and paint him in a loose and feeble Fi∣gure, when there is nothing more sincere amongst man∣kind, provided that he burn in just limits, and those rai∣sed by Vertue, and fire not with an unlawfull Flame, where he is forbidden. And in another place, saith he, This Flame is kindled even in children, in whom their in∣nocency may be a sufficient Apology for the purity of it; Nay (saith he, elsewhere) you
shall see many of the ho∣nest est kind of men tormen∣ted with a care (or to call it rightly) a love of some Youngmen. And this Love is a certain tye of Benevolence more but and violent then to be called. Friendship. How so∣licitous are they? how feare∣full lest they should do any thing amisse or unworthy of those thoughts and cares they bestow upon them, that you may know that Love is plan∣ted in Worthy Breasts? I will conclude therefore, that so far forth is Love from making men to become effeminate and slothfull, that there is not in the World a greater spur or
sharper Incentive to Noble and Heroicall Actions. Lastly I might note in our Lover one thing more, and that is that he was a Younger Brother, and from thence infer (if I shall not be thought too much to strain for this Inference) that Younger Brothers, as it should seem, are more fitted and bet∣ter dispos'd for Lovers then Elder, whether it be that Na∣ture takes the better aym from her first Aberrations, correct∣ing these Younger Copies by the Errata's of the former, or that Custome which is a second Nature gives them this Pri∣viledge and Advantage; for being for the most part habi∣tuated
to sufferance and hard∣ship, there mindes become thereby, as more gallant and resolute, so withall more hum∣ble, pliant, and tender, and fitter for Love to make his Noble Impressions in: whereas on the contrary side, Elder bro∣thers being bred up with hopes and expectations of estates and fortunes (though by their fa∣vour, to speak the truth in be∣half of all Younger brothers, neither by the Lawes of God nor Man have they any so absolute a Birthright, but that the Inheritance may at any time with the consent of Pa∣rents, bee as lawfully and as justly dispos'd to any Younger
son, as to them, or any of them. And that this is no idle or vain Assertion, be pleas'd but to read over a Book intituled, The Younger Brothers Apology, a most excellent Discourse, and very wel worthy the perusal of al Owners of estates of Inheri∣tace to rectify their judgments by, wherein what I say is fully and evidently demonstrated, and clear satisfaction given in the point; whereto I might likewise adde, that through∣out the whole Book of GOD, you shall not finde any to whom he exprest a more pe∣culiar favour to, then to yong∣er Brothers, as were easie to instance in Abel, in Iacob here,
in Judah, in Joseph, in Ephra∣im, in Moses, in David, in So∣lomon, and in many others, which I cannot now call to mind, all Younger Brothers) I say Elder Brothers being for the most part delicately and wantonly educated, and not with that rigour and severity which the Younger are, by that meanes their mindes be∣come more haughty and im∣perious, and that suits not with a Lover, for he must be of a disposition, though not servile, yet obsequious and wil∣ling to suffer and endure any thing whatsoever for his Mi∣stresse sake; which brings me to the next branch of the Text,
The Penance served, And Ja∣cob served. All men by nature were born free, Servitude and Bon∣dage was first brought into the world by Sinne, and is by the Civilians defined to be a Constitution of the Law of Na∣tions, by which, contrary to nature, one is subjected to ano∣thers power; for Sin first in∣slaving his minde, his body soon after came to be capti∣vated, for by sin entred death, and all other miseries, both precedent, concomitant, and subsequent; and indeed, it was but just with Almighty God, that since man would not be obedient to, but devia∣ted
and deflected from the rule of his most sacred & perfect Will, whose service is perfect Freedome, that he should be made a slave to the unjust and tyrannicall Will of his Fellow-Creature, which heretofore hath been so large and so far extended, that they had Vitae & potestatis necem, absolute power over life and death, to save and kill at pleasure, (and afterwards had a very unli∣mited Authority and Juris∣diction, untill such time as Justinian the Emperour in favour of Liberty, abrogated the Law stiled Lex Fusia Caninia, which was very ri∣gorous and severe, even in the
formalities of Manumission) though now it be utterly ceast and quite grown out of fashion throughout all Chri∣stian Commonwealths, and in∣deed it might be truly cal∣led what Sennertus doth in another case of being born deafe and dumb, Miserandum malum; for herein the condi∣tion of man was more misera∣ble then that of Beasts, for we do not see that they serve one another, only if they contend, as it sometimes happens, the more impotent and weaker gives place to the stronger and more excellent, for herein their excellency consists as properly as in any thing else;
but the misery of servitude in man received agravation, from his having reason to be sensible of it, in all the cir∣cumstances which might ex∣asperate and heighten it. For first, the original of it pro∣ceeded not from any Victory obtain'd by one man over the reason of another, which might justly challenge a supe∣riority, since therein the ex∣cellency of man consists, as be∣ing thereby distinguisht from a beast, but from that where∣in he is by beasts exceeded; strength and ability of body and limbs; for he upon whom nature had bestowed the more sinewy and brawny arms,
making use of this advantage, fell upon another that was weaker then himself, vanquisht and overcame him, and so by this means he became his cap∣tive and his slave; afterwards in processe of time, it may be this property thus acquired which he challeng'd in him, might either by gift, or sale, or contract, or some way or another, be transferred to one possibly every way inferiour to himself, and even in this, which was the first cause of his captivity. I do not discom∣mend valour: I deny not but that it is a great ornament to any man, and of great use too, for that by it, he is able to pro∣tect
himself in the doing of his duty, to countenance ver∣tue, and to adde authority to it likewise: neither will I deny but that nature may have see∣med to have marked out some persons for Soveraignty and command, and again others for servitude and slavery, by induing the former with Brave, Noble, Heroick disposi∣tions, and the others with Low, Servile, and Sordid; for indeed there are millions and multi∣tudes of people, that have no∣thing of man in them, but one∣ly the outward aspect, being otherwise little superiour or better then beasts, insomuch that they may seem to have
begot that question, whether beasts differed from men spe∣cifically, or onely gradually? I say not to deny but to ac∣knowledge all this, yet we can∣not grant valor a Prerogative above reason, being, without this to govern it and appoint it its limits, nothing else but a rebellious and stubborn heat, for did beasts but equall men in reason, as they exceed them in strength, they would quick∣ly be masters of the world, and turn man out of that do∣minion which he pretends as Lord over the creatures, in despight of all his walled Towns, strong Castles, and fortifications. But not to ex∣patiate
further, I say liberty being accounted so precious, and so highly valued by every one, that Iacob quite contrary, being born free, should vo∣luntarily prefer servitude be∣fore this so esteemed, happy condition, may seem to most people very strange and won∣derfull; but I perceive these Wonderers are ignorant what it is to Love, or else they might have read, that even Jupiter himself, Rex superum, the King of the Gods, was not ashamed, as the Poets fa∣ble, to assume the shape of a beast, and bellow like a Bull a∣midst the fields, for the love of the fair Europa; and that
Hercules too, after all his La∣bours and Conquests, refused not, even with those victori∣ous hands with which he had performed such Wonders, to hold a Distaffe, and spin at the command of Iole his Mistress. Such is the efficacy and power of all-powerfull Love that there is no Office so mean, no Danger so great, no Hazard so apparent, no Peril so immi∣nent, that a Lover will stick at, and refuse to undergo: And therefore, what that great Ad∣vācer of Learning saith in the beginning of those excellent Precepts which he gives about moulding a mans owne For∣tunes, namely, that it is as
hard and severe a thing to be a true Politique, as to be tru∣ly Moral; I might transfer, and say, That it is as difficult a matter to be a true Lover as either, and that Love layeth as heavy Impositions as either Vertue or Fortune: And in∣deed, what is there that we highly prize, that is easily ob∣tain'd? Do not we see that men commit themselves to the Sea, to Death, and to a thou∣sand dangers to gain a little wealth and riches, and shall a Lover sit still and do no∣thing to obtain a prize so ex∣cellent as an Heart, a treasure so far beyond all treasures, if we will beleeve Solomon (and
he was no unwise man) who saith, that Cantie∣, 8. v. 7. if a man would give all the substance of his house for it, that it would be utterly con∣temned. Were there no diffi∣culty in the obtaining, there would be no pleasure in the injoyment, for it is that which renders the fruition so much the sweeter, so miserable is our Lot here, that we cannot relish the least contentment, unlesse it be seasoned with the bitternesse and acerbity of mi∣sery, Pleasure and Pain being by Iupiter, as the Fable hath it, inseparably linkt together, not by any means to be part∣ed asunder. But I come in the
next place, to the Aggravati∣on of the Penance from the lēgth of Time, viz. Seven Years. And Iacob served Seven years. There are some who are of Opinion, that there is a certaine hidden and secret Magicke in Number, and in some more especially then in others; this conceit seem∣eth to be first deduc't from the Pythagoreans, who were great and Religious Admirers of the Vertues and Powers of Number. Amongst the rest, or rather above the rest, hath this Number of Seven been celebrated, as to any one who shall take the pains to read the many Comments upon
that famous place in Virgil, Oter{que} quater{que} beati, will evidently appear. Frequent mention is likewise made of it in the sacred Scriptures, e∣specially in Amos, where we have it repeated no lesse than eight times in the two first Chapters, where we read so often these words, For three Transgressions, and for four, &c. But I shall not make so superstitious a scrutiny into the words, onely from the number of the Years, which make up one compleat Clima∣cterick, in which they say there are so many great Chan∣ges and Mutations in Disposi∣tions and Affections. I shall
observe the Constancy of our Amorist, and commend it to the Imitation and Practice of all Lovers; for indeed, this is that which Crowns all acti∣ons: and is the very Touchstone to discern a sincere and loyal, from a masked & pretending Lover. Whosoever thou art therefore, that intendest to enter these lists, be sure to come well Fortified and Ar∣med against all Dangers and Difficulties whatsoever, and resolve either to Die or Con∣quer; for know, that many may please themselves with the Thoughts of being Lovers, till they come to suffer, and then their Inconstancy betrays
the Weaknesse of their Resolu∣tion, and discovers the Sandi∣ness of the Foundation upon which they were built: for, how many do we read of, that have beene Candidates and Probationers, whom yet the strictnesse of the Discipline hath deterr'd and frighted from becomming profest Lo∣vers? How many that have proceeded further, yea, so far, that they have attain'd even within sight of the Haven, and yet there, by an ill Fate, have been shipwrackt and cast away? that have escaped the ninth Wave, and yet have been absorpt and overwhelmed by the tenth? unfortunately
quitting the Siege, then when if they had continued never so little longer, the Fort had been yielded up, and delivered into their Possession? If thou wouldest therefore steer a right Course, in the middest of a Sea so tempestuous, so beset with Rocks, with Shelves, and Quick-sands, be sure thou a∣avoid Presumption on the one hand, and Despair on the o∣ther, both alike Enemies to this Vertue of Constancy; and though thou doest wait long, yet consider, that thy Patience will at last be Crowned with Victory and Conquest. The Angler, though he sit long in silence and expectation by
the Brook-side, yet at last drawes up the Fish. The Husbandman, though he take so much pains to plow and sow, forcing the stubbernness of the barren Earth, to make it fertile, yet at last receives a plentifull Crop, which pays him for all the labour and toyl that he hath taken: So thou, if thou continuest Con∣stant and Patient, though thou mayest meet with some hinderance in thy passage, some difficulties and obstructi∣ons in the way, yet thou wilt assuredly at the last arrive at the Haven of thy Desires and Wishes. Come we in the next place, to the Object of all this
Love & Affection, his Mistress Rachel. And Iacob served se∣ven years for Rachel. It was the opinion of Ari∣stotle, that the first Monarchs; and those to whom others yeelded Subjection, were such as were most beautifull, by this Submission acknowledging that Nature had indulg'd and bestow'd upon them a Privi∣ledge and Prerogative extra∣ordinary above and beyond others; for certainly, there is in Beauty an awfulness and Soveraignty, that forceth eve∣ry one to stoop to it: for even very Beasts are sensible of the power of it; and without all question, it is most usually
an Index and symptome of a vertuous and wel dispos'd soul, and therefore it is said, that Mores saepe sequuntur tempe∣ramentum corporis, the con∣ditions oftentimes follow the temperament and crasis of the body: This that judicious and excellent Poet Homer well knew, for he makes Thersites who was deformed in mind to be alike deformed and misha∣pen in body; Now whether Beauty consists in a certaine pleasing Harmony and Sym∣metry of Parts, which they call good features, or in a per∣fect mixture of Colours and Complexion; or lastly, which seems to be a more immediate
efflux of the Soule, in a cer∣tain Aire and taking Garbe of the whole, which renders all the actions gracefull and be∣comming, is not easie to define, Men disagree so much about it; neither can we allow them for competent Judges in this case; so much doth naturall prejudice corrupt the judge∣ment of every one: for as se∣veral humours are predomi∣nant in every body (which though they be reduc'd to four Heads, yet are infinite in degree and mixture) so are the Phantasies and Conceits severally framed and effected accordingly; hence it is that what one man loves, another
hates, and again what is dis∣liked by him, is affected by a∣nother; for why else do the Chinoses esteem great powting lips, and flat noses, such as we call saddle noses, to be the one∣ly Beauty, when amongst us it is held and accounted so great a deformity? notwithstanding this incertainty of opinion (if I might be admitted to give in my Conjecturall suffrage) I should assigne the first place to that which we called the Air or garbe, the next to the countenance, and the last to the complexion, and indeed so great is the force of Beauty to beget Love, and that with so much ardency and violence,
that we read of many that have died for love, because they were deny'd the enjoy∣ment of those they so passio∣uately affected, so we read that Iphis died for the love of A∣naxarete, Dido for Aeneas, and a great many more that I will not now instāce in; & yet alas without Vertue, how admira∣ble and excellent soever Beauty be, it is nothing, so much doth a vitious soul within deform the most beautiful form & out∣ward appearance of the fairest body; for certainly, if accord∣ing to the cōceit of that famous Opti Vitruvius, Nature had windowed every breast, the deformity of the minde would
appeare greater and fouler then that of the body; and Vertue, as Cicero hath it, Mi∣randos sui excitaret amores, would ravish all eyes with the sweetnesse and lustre of its Beauties, and therefore we read of Socrates, that though he was very deformed, and ex∣treamly crooked, and bunch∣backt, yet his eyes were irra∣diated with a certain sweet and amiable splendour rais'd from his vertuous soule, wher∣with the beholders were mar∣vellously delighted. Seeing then that Jacob had such a Mistresse indued as well with all vertuous qualities as beau∣tifull perfections, being as ver∣tuous
as she was faire, and most faire and beautifull a∣midst so many vertues, it is no wonder if to gain a jewell so inestimable (for so Salomon saith in the beginning of that large Encomium which he makes in praise of a good wife, where he interrogates and asks the question * Who Prov. cap. 31. 10. can find a vertuous Wo∣man, for her price is far above Rubies) he despised his liberty and all the injuries of the Climate and inclemency of the weather, which by the way let me tell you, was much more rigorous and extream in Syria (as Geographers will in∣form us) then it is any where
with us. Now that she was vertuous I need not prove be∣ing every where so fully de∣monstrated, and that she was beautifull we have Divine te∣stimony for our Authority, which can neither erre nor be deceived. Indeed Lovers that see onely through the mists and clouds of their passion, doe many times hyperbolize, set∣ting out their Mistresses elabo∣rately with borrowed & feign∣ed Metaphors and Titles impo∣verishing every thing to en∣rich them: but of Rachel here, though we have no particular Description, yet we have her set down Beautifull and well∣favoured in general, & one in∣stāce
for al in particular, even in that which is held to be the chiefest Prerogative of Beau∣ty, the Eye, the Sun that inligh∣tens this little world, the win∣dow of the soul, from whence she takes her fairest & most immediate prospect, so much we may by Cōsequence gather out of the Text it self, which we read thus, Gen. 29. 17. Now Leah was tender-ey'd, but Rachel was beautifull and well-favoured; we do not find any other defect of Beauty here, wherewith Leah is char∣ged, but onely this, that she was tender Ey'd, and yet this one single Blemish is opposed to being beautifull and well∣favoured,
as if because she wanted good Eys, she were nei∣ther beautiful nor well-favou∣red, the whole beauty or de∣formity of the Face (as it should seem) consisting in the having or wanting this principal part of beauty. But leaving this, I come in the next place to the Wonder, And they seemed to him but a few days. And Iacob served seven years for Rachel, and they see∣med to him but a few days. There is no one that by na∣ture loveth or desireth that which feems Evil to him, but flyeth from it, and avoideth it, and this out of principles of self-preservation ingrafted in∣to
every one; for as St. Paul saith, Ephes. cap. 5. ver. 26. No one e∣ver yet hated his own flesh. To take away the Malignity of a thing, and to render it privatively good, is much; but, that that which every one abhorreth as evil, by a strange Metamorphosis, should not onely disappear to be so, but likewise become amiable and pleasing, is the greatest Wonder, and must needs proceed from some strange and excellent Cause. Had Iacob spent these seven years of Service with as much pleasure and content∣ment as ever he did when he was free, and at his own dis∣posing,
why this had been strange, seeing it involves in it a Paradox, so universally contradicted, viz. That Ser∣vitude is as much to be de∣sir'd as Liberty; for, if there be that Content and Satisfac∣tion to be found in it that is in Liberty, why should it not be alike desired? but that there should be in it a great deal more sweetness then in Liberty, cannot but beget a world of admiration; for this is analogically in effect, as if Gall should not onely leave and forsake its bitter∣ness, but become sweeter then Hony or Sugar: For do not we see, how many Recreati∣ons,
and those many of them sinfull too, are daily inven∣ted and found out, as An∣tidotes and divertisements a∣gainst Melancholy, meerly to passe away and beguile the time; for the truth is, time seemes so tedious to us, that we know not what to do with it, we are a weary of it, and it lies upon our hands, like a Merchandize or Commodity that we would fain utter, but cannot tell how, and therefore to be rid of it some way or other, we do not onely suffer others to steal it from us, but we rob our selves, and are those fures temporis, which Seneca saith that Friends are,
when notwithstanding our disestimation, as he himself tells Lucilius in his first Epi∣stle, The thing is so precious, quod ne gratus quidem, po∣test reddere, He that studies Gratitude never so much, can never be sufficiently Gratefull; whereas on the contrary side, to a busie Lover, the time seems short, and the Years fews, Seven years time appears to Iacob but a little time, and two thousand five hundred fif∣ty and sixe Days seeme but a few Days (for so many upon computation you will find them, allowing the In∣tercalation of one day for a Bissextile, though I am not
ignorant that the Julian ac∣compt was many hundred years after) a ot compu∣ted the years by the Sun, but by the Moon (as some say the years of those lōg-liv'd fathers before the Floud were) or if by the Sun, aer, as it should seem, by his Diurnall then his Annual Motion, this is wōder∣ful indeed & strange, & some∣thing like to that Prerogative of Gods, of which Saint Peter speaks, 2 Peter c. 3. v. 8. when he saith, that a thousand years to him are but as one day, for with him all things, past, pre∣sent, and to come, stand and re∣main in the same station and consistency perpetually, with∣out
any manner of flux or alteration. Come hither then all ye that think the time slow, and the wheels of his Chariot heavy, that like the mother of Sisera Iudges 5. chap. ver. 28. look out of the win∣dow, and cry thorow the lattess, why is his Chariot so long in comming? why tarry the wheels of his Chari∣ot? would you have not one∣ly a lawfull and honest, but a most sweet and pleasing di∣version to beguile the time withall, (if I may call that a diversion, which is the no∣blest and the greatest busi∣ness) why learn to love, retire your selves into your selves,
learn to know your selves, to which nothing in the world conduceth better then love, being the best comment that was ever writ upon that text of r, and that by which it is most illustrated, enter into your chamber which is your heart, for so St. Augustine calls it. Cubi∣culum tuum, est Cor tuum, and shut the door after you, and make fast the Lattess, for as long as ye look out at the windows, as long as ye look out of your selvs to see what faults ye can spy in others, ye may cry long enough, Why so long? and Why tarries? yee may oscitate and gape, yee
may stretch out first the one hand, & then the other, but ye are like to find but little ease or satisfaction, but rather perpetual lassitude and wea∣riness of spirit. But I hasten to the last part of the Text, viz. the cause of all this won∣der, which we have here ren∣dred in these words, viz. for the love he had unto her, And Ia∣cob served seven yeares for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few dayes, for the love he had unto her. All wonder and admiration is begot by ignorance, and is the child thereof; for that which we know we doe not admire, but onely that which
we are ignorant of. Hence likewise proceeded Fortune, being as Iuvenall speaks ex∣cellently, a Goddess of our owne making. Te facimus fortuna Deam, cae∣loque locamus. For when any thing hap∣ned that was strange and won∣derfull, and for which they could assign no reason, that they forthwith attributed to Fortune; then Altars must be built and erected to her, and Sacrifices offered, and because her distributions were so ve∣ry unequall, she must be fi∣gured and painted blind, when
indeed the blindness was their owne, for Fortune is nothing else but that serpentine or crooked line of Providence, as Dr. Brown in his Reli∣gio Medici. one Metaphorical∣ly defines, or rather describes it; the o∣ther being drawn straight and evēn, and so obvious to every eye: or as the Schoolmen more Logically, Fortune is an Acci∣dentall cause in Voluntary A∣gents, whereby such events doe follow our Actions as were neither foreseen nor in∣tended by us; for in other actions (as I said) the line of providence is straight and easy to be seen of all, but in this more tortuous and winding, as
we know if we lock straight a∣long a level of a great length, we may easily see to the end of it because there is no ri∣sing in the midst to interrupt and obstruct the sight, and therefore Mathematicians say, Linea recta est brevissi∣ma, but in any thing which is crooked, it is otherwise, by reason that the eye is inter∣cepted by the tumor and un∣evenness of it; but leaving these digressions, let us now lastly come a little seriously to consider and examine the cause which instead of satisfying our wonder as we expected, ministers to us fresh cause of a stonishment and admiration.
For now me thinks my Heart wants thoughts to conceive, & my tongue words to utter any thing in the least measure suit∣able to the dignity and excel∣lency of this subject; I must therefore with the Painter that was to picture Agamem∣non, a father beholding the sacrificing of his own daugh∣ter Iphigenia, who because he was not able to express a sorrow so unconceivable drew him onely with a Vaile over his face, thereby better ac∣quitting himself, then if he had made a rash venture, at that which he knew all his art came so far short of perform∣ing, so I presume my best
Sanctuary and Refuge here would be Silence, seeing that whatsoever I shall be able to say or speak, will be no∣thing else; for what should this be that hath so strange a power and efficacy, as to ren∣der the bitterness of Servi∣tude sweet? to make the te∣diousness of time seem short? that is able to trample upon all extremities of heat and cold, and set the Wind and Weather at defiance? Cer∣tainly, whatsoever it be, it hath occasioned a great deal of wrangling amongst Philo∣sophers, and some of them, as Tul. de nat. Deorum. Li. 1. Cice∣ro saith of Velleius
Epicurus, de nullo magis du∣bitans, quam ne de aliqua re dubitare videretur, doubting of nothing more then least they should seem to doubt of any thing, and fearing least their silence should seem to confess and acknowledge their Ignorance, have given us a Definition of it, such as it is, Love, say they, is an Appeti∣tion of a Good which is pre∣sent, if there be an Appetiti∣on when the Good is absent, it is then called Desire: If there be a possibility of obtaining this absent Good, why then it is Hope: but how far short this comes of giving us any true knowledge what Love is,
I leave every one to judge: For the truth of it is, the Es∣sence of it is not capable of a definition, neither is it demon∣strable a priori, but we must content our selves with such a rude Description of it as we are able to gather from the Effects, taking an imperfect and short View from thence. And here me thinks Xeno∣phon gives us some little light (who as my Lord of St. Al∣bans saith in his Advance∣ment of Learning) obser∣veth truly; That all other affections, though they raise the Mind, yet they do it by distorting and uncomlinesse of extasies and Excêsses; one∣ly
Love doth exalt the mind, and neverthelesse, at the same instant, doth settle and com∣pose it; strange, that so dif∣ferent and repugnant Ef∣fects should proceed and flow from one and the same Cause; and therefore it is elegantly said by Menander (saith the same Lord of St. Albans else∣where) Amor, melior, So∣phista lavo, ad humanum vitam; That Love teacheth a man to carry himself better then the Sophist or Preceptor, which he calleth left-handed, because with all his Rules and Preceptions he cannot form a man so Dexterously, nor with that facility to car∣ry
and govern himself, as Love can do. Let us give a guesse then at the Cause by the Effects, (for that is all we are able to do) and from these gracefull and amiable Operations, imagine and con∣jecture, how much more ex∣cellent and beautifull that must necessarily be, from whence all these beauties and excellencies proceed and are derived; For we know the Old Maxime, Quod efficit ta∣le, illud est magis tale, That which makes a thing to be so, be it good or bad, must needs be more, and in a far greater measure so it selfe. Now some have undertaken to
discover and find out the in∣tricacie of this involv'd and hidden Mystery, by several Symptomes, some by one, and some by another, as by the Eye, the Pulse, &c. Con∣cerning the Eye there have been great questions mov'd, which are the amourous or the loving Eys? Whether the dying, or the smiling, or the wild, such as Aristotle calls, in sani, the mad eys? for all of these have found their asser∣tors, who have tooke up the Gauntlet in maintainance and defence of them; or again, whether it be true, what some of the Platonists held, That the Spirits of the Lover
do pass by the Eye into the Spirits of the Person loved, which causeth the desire of return into the body whence they were emitted? where∣upon (say they) followeth that Appetite of Vnion which is in Lovers. So likewise a∣bout the Pulse, Whether there be not a love-Pulse, or a Pulse proper and peculiar to discover Love by? as wee read in Plutarch, of Erasistra∣tus the Physitian, that found out that young Antiochus the son of Seleucus was in love with the fair Stratonica, his fathers Wife, by the unusual beating of his Pulse; and then again, what kind of mo∣tion
it causeth, whether, great or little, quick or slow, or ra∣ther quite irregular, and alto∣gether confused, like to that which is observ'd to be at the point of death, at which time the Heart doth so palpitate and tremble, that the Systole and Diastole are in a manner confounded. This I onely mention, to shew how hard a matter it is, amidst so ma∣ny difficulties and diversities of Opinion, to state any thing aright concerning this sub∣ject: Give me leave there∣fore to draw over the Cur∣tain again, and to leave it here, seeing we may be ra∣ther said to admire, then
know it, as long as we are here upon Earth, where we see but onely in Aenigmate, & tanquam per speculum, darkly and in much obscurity. To conclude then, I say, that even God Almighty himself is most happy in that he is most loving, infinitly loving, or ra∣ther 1 Ioh. 4. v. 8 Love it self) as St. Iohn speaks) & the De∣vil is most unhappy in that he is not capable of this excellēcy and Divine perfection. Having therefore the example & pat∣tern of so great a Patriarch before us, let no Lover here∣after be asham'd to imitate it, or write after so excellent a Copy, when he reads that Iacob
served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few dayes, for the love he had unto her. I have now done with the literall and Historicall parts of the Text, I shall a little touch upon the allegoricall and so make an end; This indeed is the kernel and the marrow, the other is but the bone and the shell; this is the spirit that quickneth and giveth life, the other is but a dead letter; for so Saint Paul saith, Litera oc∣cidit spiritus autem vivificat; By Iacob therefore is here meant every Christian Mili∣tant upon earth, by the ser∣vice which he indures, the af∣flictions
and crosses which he must abide and undergoe in this world; by Rachel the Kingdome of Heaven: By Seven Years, the whole time of his life, which will then seeme short and pleasing to him, when his Heart is kin∣dled and inflamed with Love towards God, and Charity to∣wards his Neighbour. Let us but a little consider the vast & infinite disparity and dispro∣portion, betwixt these things; and surely we shall be asha∣med to have made the Compa∣rison: For what, shall Iacob undergo so much sufferance and hardship, and that with so great delight and pleasure,
for a temporal Remand? and should not every Christian ∣dure much more ∣nall and far more  weight of Glory? For  is this life, but a Stage &  of Misery and Discontent, whereon every one acts a sad and sorrowfull part, some more, some less, but every one hath a share. Man is born to Misery (saith Job) as the Sparks fly upwards, and how natural it is for light bodies to ascend, such as sparks are, every one knows. What is this life, but a Repe∣tition of the same things over and o∣ver, or (as Dr Brown in his Reli∣gio medici one
elegantly saith) a Dull re∣taining to the Sun and Moon, we eat, we drink, we sleep, that we may eat, and drink, and sleep again; and thus the Year runs round: And as the same seasons return which were before, so do we reite∣rate the same follies again and againe, and yet for all gaine no experience from thence, or grow a whit the wiser; for, as if we had not work enough to do at home, we live out of our selves, and leaving our own Houses, as we imagine, clean swept and garnished, we are prying into the Dirt and Imperfections of others; for indeed, most
mens whole lives are in a manner from first to last, no∣thing but a lying at the catch and advantage, how they may undermine, surprize and destroy others. Then this man must be incēsed to that mans Spleen, another sacrificed to his Lust, a third Holocausted to his Ambition, and what is the reason of all this? but because there is no love in the World, (1 Iohn c. 5. v. 19▪ totus Mundus positus est in maligno, as St. Iohn saith) nor scarcely so much as Hu∣manity; Would men but vi∣vere secundam naturam, live according to Nature, which is that which Seneca so often
inculcates in his Epistles, it were no hard matter to sa∣tisfy them. Vivitur exiguo melius, Natu∣ra beatis Omnibm esse dedit, si quis cog∣noverit uti. Saith Claudian. Nature is content with a little, but mens ambitious desires think it a confinement and constraint to be bounded within the narrow limits of one world, as it was said of Alexander, Aestuat infaelix angusto limite Mundi.
This little, scant, diminu∣tive world, did so crowd and crib up the young gallant, that he was not able to turn him∣self, but did sweat again for want of elbow-room; what a Monster had this been, if his body had been but of the same tumid and swelling bulk with his mind? Certainly Gara∣gantua had been a meer Pig∣mie to him. It is the least part of mens businesse now a dayes to live, but as Pompey answered those that disswa∣ded him from putting to sea in a storm, by telling him, that thereby he would endan∣ger and run the hazard of his life, What tell ye me of
life, saith he? Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam, There is a Necessity that I should go, but there is no necessity that I should live; that is no part of their concernment: when they have got the whole world in their possession, then perhaps they will bethink of living, as Pyrrhus King of Epirus told Cineas, who seeing him so ea∣gerly bent to make war a∣gainst the Romans, took occa∣sion one time when he was at leisure, to ask him, what be∣nefit they should reap from the victory, in case they were so fortunate as to obtain it, why (saith Pyrrhus) doest thou not see that the Romans
being once overcome, there is an open and an easie way then to such and such, and so great conquests? and so run on from country to country, and place to place, and Cineas still per∣sisting to know what the bet∣ter they should be when all was done, at the last when he could go no farther; Why then good Cineas (quoth he) we will be quiet and take our ease, and make feasts eve∣ry day, and be as merry as we can possibly devise, Cine∣as (that had been Demosthenes scholler & was a sober and wise man as well as an eloquent) having brought him to this point, said again to him. My
Lord, what letteth us now to be quiet and merry together, since we injoy that already without further travel and trouble, which we will now go seek for abroad with such shedding of bloud, and so ma∣nifest danger? and yet we know not whether we shall e∣ver attain unto it, atter we have both suffered, and caused others to suffer such infinite sorrows and trouble. But to all this Pyrrhus was deaf, and would on, till at last after many conquests, he was knockt on the head in the City of Ar∣gos, by a tyle thrown by a wo∣man from the top of an house. But to proceed I say, that Na∣ture
(as one well observes) hath made one world, and Art another, and the paint and a∣dulteries of this latter, have quite spoiled the reall and so∣lid beauties of the former, it is this that hath undone the good old world, and left us no∣thing now but an hear-say, that there was ever such a time, which for its happinesse was called the Golden Age, for this that we now live in is so wretched, so full of miseries, that certainly, did but men fore-know them, or could they but fore-see them, they would chuse rather to return into their mothers wombs again, as Pliny relates of an infant
of the City of Saguntum, that year that it was taken by Ha∣nibal, then venture to come forth into so miserable a place; and therefore man is not un∣fitly said to be, animal , a weeping, or according to the word, a tear-loving crea∣ture, (as it is elegantly exprest in that Epigram) set down by Caussinus in his Symbols. ; ▪ !
Sum natus lachrymans, lachry∣mans moriorque, peregi In lachrymis vitae tempora longa meae. O Genus humanum miserum & lachrymabile! Let us consider again, that although Love be the most excellent thing in this World, yet here it is but imperfect, being subject to a thousand hopes and feares and discon∣tents; and likewise Beauty, to how many casualties is it obnoxious? how soon doth a little sickness blast it, and the pride and lustre of it is gone, and the flower withered? Or
suppose it exempted from these misfortunes, yet at last comes old Age, and quite con∣sumes it, not leaving so much as a ruine to tell that Beauty had there once her habitation: Theoerit, Eidyll. 25. . But in the World to come as our Saviour told the Sad∣duces: (albeit Matth. chap. 22. ver. 30. they neither marry there, not are given in mariage, but are as the An∣gels of God,) there Love is e∣ternal, and Beauty ever youth∣full, alwayes young, and per∣petually green, (as the Poets
sancied the Elizian fields to be,) and therefore the Apo∣stle, when he comes to speak of those joyes, and that place, he give us but a negative de∣scription, which 1 Cor. chap. 2. ver. 9. nei∣ther Eye hath seen, nor Ear hath heard, nor hath it entred into the Heart of man to conceive; for of an affirmative one we were not capable. No (may some say?) why what is there that hath any thing of beauty or delight in it, that the Eye hath not seen? hath it not be∣held such and such most ra∣vishing and beautifull ob∣jects, as lovely and beautifull persons, fair and goodly pros∣pects,
stately and magnificent buildings, pleasant Orchards and Gardens, flowrie fields, shady Groves, clear Fountains, soft gliding Rivers, murmur∣ing Brooks, the Heavens spangled and beset with twinkling-Starres, sweet E∣venings, blushing and rosie Mornings, and a thousand other most glorious and plea∣sing sights, and is Heaven like none of these? I answer, no; it falls not within the prospect of this sence, Eye hath not seen it, nor any thing, that resem∣bles it. Yea, but notwithstan∣ding it comes not within the view of this sense of seeing, yet possibly the Eare, that hath
heard such exquisite variety of all sorts of Musick, such sublime and deep learned dis∣courses, that hath had derived and conveyed to it, so many primitive and ancient traditi∣ons, may have met with some strain something like it, or at least may have heard some ti∣dings of it. No, it fals not un∣der the latitude of this sence neither, Ear hath not heard it: yea, but yet notwithstanding it falls not within the know∣ledge of the sences which are corporeal, yet surely the Vn∣derstanding, which is inorga∣nical and incorporeal, and which needs not the support of these Crutches, but is able
to subsist & act without them, may be able to find out and discover what kind of place this is; for we see we are a∣ble to conceive a great many things which never were, nor shall be, much more then (as one would think) this, which we are as certain is, as we are uncertain what it is; by this we are able to move from the Center to the Circumference, and back again in a moment, we can dig as deep and low as Hell, and immediately soar againe above the Stars: and although there be in eve∣ry thing that we have seen or heard, something that dis∣pleaseth us, for even the swee∣test
Musick is not without some discord, and the most excellent Beauty hath its nae∣vos, and its blemishes, and (as the Optists tell us in their Maxime, that Omnis visio fit per Pyramidem, that every thing that we see enters into the eye by a sharp angle, like the Cuspis of a Pyramid (the object making the Basis) so that it may seem to prick as it enters, as Alexander said the beauty of the Persian Ladies did the Macedonians, so that it made their Eyes sore again; so me thinks, every object hath in it really something of that figure, something that is sharp and pungent, something that
pricketh, and is distastfull and ingrate; and yet nevertheless, we are able by our Vnder∣standing to sever and abstract whatsoever dislikes us, and to retain onely so much as plea∣seth Us. I say, by our Vnder∣standing we are able to do this; sure then, although we never saw nor heard of them, yet we may be able to con∣ceive the joyes and pleasures that are there. Why no, not thus neither; it hath not en∣tred into the Heart of man to conceive. Why then let us be satisfied, and rest assured, that they are beyond the per∣ception of our sences, and be∣yond the fancy of our imagi∣nation,
and apprehension of our Vnderstanding. Seeing therefore then, that we have so excellent a Reward propo∣sed and set before us, let us with all humble earnestness, contend thither, qua non passi∣bus itur sed affectibus, whither with our feete wee cannot come, they are too slow, and too heavie, neither is the way at all pervious to them; it must be the wings of devout and pious Affections that must bear us thither; it must be Love by which we must be carried thither, love to God, and love to our Neighbour; for no man (saith St. Iohn) lo∣veth God, and hateth his Bro∣ther:
and he gives an excel∣lent Reason for it, for 1 Iohn chap. 4. ver. 20. how (saith he) can he love God whom he hath not seen, and hate his Brother whom he hath seen? O Lord, which art the true and perfect Love, kindle in our Hearts, we beseech thee, the love of thy self, and thy perfections. Let our souls ascend thither upon the wings of Faith and Charity, whither other∣wise we cannot come; let us die unto this World, that we may live unto Thee; let it seem bitter unto us, that we may taste no sweetnesse but in thee. O Lord, we have had abun∣dant experience of the Vanity and Falsenesse of it, we have sought for contentment and satisfaction in it, but we have not found it, we have
wandred up and down in the wayes of Wickednesse, but we have found no rest for the soles of our feet; and now at last, that we are weather∣beaten, and weary, now we are for∣saken of every thing, we come unto Thee. As long as any thing would receive or entertain us, we cared not, we would not return, and therefore thou mightest justly now deny us admission; but yet, O re∣ceive us, for his sake who is our Peace-maker, and hath parchased it at so dear a rate, even with the effusion of his own most precious Bloud, Jesus Christ the righteous, our blessed Lord and onely Saviour. AMEN. FINIS.
