a386 10390238 44933
An Account of the Sentence which past upon TITUS OATES (Upon Conviction of Horrid Perjuries) At the Kings Bench-Bar, Saturday May 16th. 1685. ALSO, A Relation of his Behavior in the Kings Bench-prison ever since his Convictions, (viz.) May 8, & 9. YOu lately had some account of his Convictions for Perjury, and also the clear proof that was against him; But here (together with an account of his Punishment,) is a true Relation of his Behaviour both Then, and since, (viz.) He was first brought by Coach from the Prison with a strong Guard, and carry'd to the Sun Tavern in K. street, where he staid till the Court sat; then to the Hall where (during the whole Tryal) he behav'd himself most impu∣dently: Then he return'd to the same House, and refresht himself; From thence he took Coach for his return to Prison, but the Rabble soon espy'd him, and follow'd him with huge Exclamation, crying aloud, Hang the Rogue, let him go no further; O the bloody Villain that hath been the death of so many Innocent Men, besides the Ruine of so ma∣ny poor Families; and so continued till they came to Ivey bridge in the Strand, where they began to abuse the very Officer that guarded him from their Fury, insomuch, that with hazard of their own lives; they got him out of the Coach, and clapt him into the next Boat, and so got him safe to the Prison; where he no sooner came, but he again began his old way of Railery against the King and Govern∣ment, and was in so great passion, that for that Night he slept little; And the next morning being brought up by Water, (for they would not venture themselves by Land,) and catry'd to the same House, he still retain'd his old Impudence, and carry'd it along with him even into the very Court, as appear'd by his impertinent Questions, and Re∣flections upon those worthy Persons who gave Testimony against him. Upon the second Conviction, he withdrew again to the Sun-tavern, where, to avoid the tumult, they staid somewhat late, then slipt him into a Boat, and so conduct him safe to the Prison; where he remain∣ed very sullen, and more abusive than ever, his old Cronies hardly escaping his ill language, &c. He held up his Table daily to Two good Dishes, and a plentiful supply of good Liquors, often saying, They shall never make him refrain his Meat and Drink, &c. He is grown very malitious, insomuch that they watch him every night, least he may have hid a remnant of the Poison he gave the Keepers Dog; But as for the 35 Fathom of Rope, That is reserv'd for him, against he has occasion to make use of part of it.
On Saturday the 16th. instant, this famous swearing-master was again brought by Water to the Sun-tavern, and as soon as the Court sat, was brought in; where he seem'd somewhat abated of his former In∣solence, and pretended Four several Errors, (as he would have them) and beg'd time for 3, or 4, days to Argue them; But was Answer'd he had longer time than the Court usually allow'd; Then he beg'd till Monday, but that the Court did not allow, being altogether Impracticable; Then the L. C. J. most Learnedly set forth the Sin of Perjury, as also the dreadful Consequences, and Dire Effects it lately wrought upon these 3 Kingdoms; telling them, that in for∣mer Ages, Perjury was present Death; But after (for some Rea∣sons,) was mitigated to cutting the Tongue, &c. But since That, it was again mitigated, not but the Crime was as great as ever; It ne∣ver being suppos'd that any Person could be so damnably Impudent, as falsly to swear any Man out of his very Life, or Estate. When this was ended, they pronounc'd Sentence, which was thus, (viz.) That he should for ever be Degraded, and forthwith stript of all his Priestly Habits. That he should stand in the Pillory before Westminster-hall-gate on Monday the 18th. instant, one hour, (between the hours of 10 and 12,) with a Paper on his Head, writ, Perjury, Perjury, twice; and walk round the Hall with the said Paper on his Head. On Tuesday the 19th. to stand an hour in the Pillory, (between 11 and 1) before the Royal Exchange, with the same Inscription over his Head. On Wednesday the 20th. to be Whipt from Ald-gate to Newgate. And on Thursday the 21th. to be Whipt from Newgate to Tybourn. On Friday the 22th. to stand in the Pillory at Tybourn, with the same Inscription of Perjury over his Head, his Face towards Tybourn. And for these Two Perjuries to pay a 1000 Marques for each Per∣jury, and to abide in Prison. And when he hath perform'd this Ceremony, he is to stand in the Pillory Three times Annually, (viz.) On the 9th. of August, at Charing-cross, with his Inscription, &c. On the 22th. of September over-against the Templegate, with the same Inscription over his Head. On the 24th. of April at Westminster-hall-gate, with the Inscription over his Head, &c. Perjury, Perjury, &c. Note, He is to perform these three last shews Annually, and be kept a close Prisoner during Life. Printed for A. Banks, at Charing-Cross, Anno Domini, 1685. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom, 1685.
