A3816 R216538 99828265 32692
ARTICLES CONCERNING THE SVRRENDER OF WORCESTER. printer's or publisher's device OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity, A. D. 1646.
Articles of Agreement for the Surrender of the Citty and Garrison of WORCESTER, and the Forts belonging there unto, concluded July the 19th 1646. Between Col. Tho∣mas Rainborow on the behalfe of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Gene∣rall of the Forces raised by the Parlia∣ment, and Col. Hen. Washington Go∣vernor of Worcester. THat the city of Worcester, with all Forts, Ordi∣nance, Stores and Provision of Warre there∣unto belonging, shall be delivered without willfull spoile and imbezle∣ment, unto his Excellencie Sir Tho∣mas
Fairefax, or to such as he shall appoint to receive them, upon the 23. of this instant Iuly, at tenne of the Clocke in the mornin, in such man∣ner, and with such exceptions as are contained in the Ensuing Arti∣cles. 2. That on the Twenty third day of Iuly, The Governour, and all Officers and Souldiers of the Garrison, with all other Persons therein that will, shall march out of Worcester, with their Horses, Armes and Baggage properly be∣longing to them, to any place within one Mile of Worcester which the Governour shall chuse, where all their Horses and Armes, except what are allowed in the ensuing Ar∣ticles, shall be delivered up to such
as his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairefax shall appoynt, all the Soul∣diers shall be disbanded, and all such both Officers, Souldiers, and others as shall ingage themselves by promise never to beare Armes any more a∣gainst the Parliament of England, nor do any thing willfully to the pre∣judice of their Affaires, shall have the benefit of these Ensuing Arti∣cles. 3 That all such as shall desire to goe to their own homes, or private friends, shall have the Generalls Passe and Protection for their peaceable repaires and abode at their severall places they shall desire to goe unto, the Governor to passe with all Horses, Armes, and Bag∣gage properly belonging to him, each
Colonell to passe with three Horses, each Lieut. Colonell, and Serg. Ma∣jor with two Horses, each Captain Lieutenant and Coronet with one Horse, and every person not under the degree of an Esquire with three Horses, and all of them with their Armes and Goods properly belong∣ing to them to be carried on their Horses, and all Souldiers with their Swords, and such Baggage as pro∣perly belong to them, which they carry about them. 4 That all Persons which are to have the benefit of the preceding Ar∣ticles, shall if they desire it, have Passes to goe beyond Seas: provided they depart this Kingdome within two Months after the surrender of the Towne.
5 That the Citty and Garrison of Worcester, and all the Inha∣bitants thereof, shall be preserved from all Plunder and violence of the Souldiers. 6 That Sir William Russell now residing in Worcester be ex∣empted from any benefit of these Ar∣ticles. FINIS.
