B1127 13586343 100548
THE Speedy Coming OF CHRIST to Judgment, Represented in a FUNERAL SERMON, On the Death of Mr. Benjamin Ashurst, Who deceased the 11th of Sep∣tember, 1687. By William Bates, D. D. LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in S. Pauls Church-Yard, MDCLXXXVII.
To his Honour'd Friend, HENRY ASHURT, Esq. SIR, I Have complied with your desire in publish∣ing the following Ser∣mon upon the Death of your Dear Brother. The Soveraign Disposer of all things has been pleased to take away in a few Years several Persons very near to you in the Consanguinity of Nature,
and younger than your Self: a solemn Call to remember you, that the last Day of your pre∣sent Life is approaching that will be attended with its Night, and to excite you to prepare for your great Change from Time to Eternity. You have indeed peculiar Obliga∣tions and Encouragement to be Religious in a de∣gree of Eminence; whose Father was so bright a Light, and Guide to all
his Relations in the E∣verlasting Way, by his Holy Counsels and Hea∣venly Conversation. Of him I could speak many excellent Things, were not his Goodness so uni∣versally known, that De∣traction it self could ne∣ver fasten an unworthy Imputation upon him. It shall suffice to give this short Character of him sincerely: He was adorn'd with all Di∣vine
Graces, and by their conspicuous Exercise was singularly eminent among the Saints. He made so particular an Application of that ge∣neral Precept, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind, as if it had been solely given to himself: the Love of God inflam'd his Heart, and shin'd in his
Life. This made him one day in a week (be∣sides that which is Sacred by Divine Appointment) to withdraw himself from the Business of the World, that he might more free∣ly enjoy Communion with the blessed Object of his Spiritual Desires. His Piety was in Conjuncti∣on with all those Ver∣tues that are requisite to accomplish a Christian: Temperance and Purity of Manners, Justice and
Equity in his Commerce with others, and those Vertues that cast a more lively Lustre, and have an attractive force upon Men. A rare Humility, an amiable Meekness, conde∣scending Affability and Sweetness, compassionate Charity and Beneficence to the Souls and Bodies of Men, were really ex∣hibited in his Deport∣ment and Actions. He was so lovely in his Con∣versation, so loving to
all, that he was beloved of all. The uniform and regular Tenor of his Life obtain'd this Testimony, that was given to our Blessed Master, he did all things well. A constant Serenity reigned in his Countenance, the visible sign of the Divine Calm in his Breast, the Peace of God that passes Under∣standing. And for an entire Conformity to our Saviour, that the Image of his meek suffering
Evil, as well as his zea∣lous doing Good, might radiantly appear in this chosen Saint, the Divine Providence call'd him forth to a very sharp Tryal; for being under the afflicting Severities of the Stone, and by the Advice of his dear Friends perswaded to sub∣mit to the dangerous Re∣medy of Cutting, with what resigned Submissi∣on did he yield himself to the Will of God?
With what Tranquil∣lity did he expect the issue either of surviving or dying? You remember his words before that ter∣rible Operation, When I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil: When so great a Wound was made in his Flesh as an open passage for Death to enter, and such cruel pains followed as struck the Spectators with trem∣bling, he endur'd them with
an inspired Patience and Constancy. Thus God was pleased to perfect dear his Servant by Suf∣ferings. Your descent from such a Father should be a powerful Incentive to you to imitate his admirable Example: you should con∣sider whose Name you bear: to be a faint Copy of so bright an Original, as it is below your Duty, so I am perswaded will
not satisfy your Affections. Methinks a sacred Ambi∣tion should inflame you to excel in all Holiness and Godliness, that the living Image of your Father's Graces may be clearly visible in your Person and Conversation. Pro∣ceed, dear Sir, in the everlasting way, where∣in you are so happily ad∣vanced; be always aspi∣ring, and with Zeal en∣deavouring to obtain the Coelestial Prize. I un∣feignedly
recommend your self, your Excellent Lady, and your Family to the Divine Blessing. I am with great Respect, Sir, Your affectionate and faithful Servant, W. BATES.
Books newly printed for J. Ro∣binson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard. A Short Description of the Blessed Place and State of the Saints a∣bove, in a Discourse on the words of our Blessed Saviour, Joh. 14. 2. Preach∣ed on occasion of the Death of the Re∣verend Mr. David Clarkson. By Will. Bates, D. D. The Way to the Highest Honour, a Funeral Sermon on John 12. 26. Preach∣ed upon the Decease of the Reverend Dr. Tho. Jacomb. By the same Author. A Plain Representation of Transub∣stantiation, as it is received in the Church of Rome, with the Sandy Foundations it is built upon, and the Arguments that clearly evert and overturn it.
Errata corrigenda. PAg. 8. line 5. for was, read be. l. 7. f. Appetite, r. Appetites. P. 11. l. 18. f. conveyed, r. conceived. P. 25. l. 6. f. 'tis, r. til. P. 28. l. 6. f. Judg∣ment, r. Judgments. P. 65. l. 3. f. Atheist, r. Atheists. There is now in the Press the Third Edition of Dr. Bates's Harmony of the Divine Attri∣butes, &c.
REVEL. xxii. 12. And he said, behold, I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give every Man according as his Work shall be. THESE words were spoke by the Lord Jesus Christ, the su∣pream Judg of the World, upon his finishing the Reve∣lation to St. John. In them we may observe, 1. An Excitation, Behold. 2. The Coelestial Object, I come quickly. 3. The End of his Coming, my Reward is with me, to render to every one ac∣cording to his Works.
'Tis observable that the prophetical Notice of the Lord's coming to Judgment is ushered in with great So∣lemnity: Thus Enoch the seventh from Adam, foretel∣ling his Judiciary Appea∣rance, said, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment up∣on all: and the Circumstance of the suddenness of his Coming, is used as a power∣ful Motive to awaken our drowsy Spirits, and fix our scatter'd Minds intirely on this so eminent an Object. So the Apostle James gives an awful Admonition, Behold, the Judg stands before the door ready to pass a final Sentence.
And St. John breaks forth in an Extasy at this admirable Spectacle, Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they which pierced him: And the everlasting Judg himself assures us of his speedy Coming with this Preface, Behold, I come quick∣ly. The words contain this Proposition. 'Tis our high Wisdom and Du∣ty, to represent by actual and so∣lemn thoughts the certain and speedy Coming of Christ to the righteous Judgment of the World. I will illustrate and prove this Doctrine in this order.
First; Consider what is revealed in the Scripture of his certain coming to Judg∣ment. Secondly; The circumstance of Time, his coming quickly. Thirdly; The Rewards he will then immediately di∣stribute. Fourthly; The respective difference of the Rewards, according to the Actions of Men in this Life. And then apply it. First; In the managing the first Point, I shall not insist upon the Proofs of a future Judgment, but only direct to the Fountains of Arguments that are demonstrative to
attentive▪ and unperverted Minds. 'Tis a Doctrine of Natural Reason and Divine Faith: if we consider the essential and necessary Perfections of God, or the Frame of Man, we must strongly infer his ac∣countableness for his Actions. There is an essential Subordi∣nation between Man and his Divine Maker, and being en∣dowed with Understanding and free Faculties, 'tis becom∣ing the Wisdom of God to govern him by a Law, to re∣gulate his Choice and Acti∣ons: This is the Rule that di∣stinguishes between Vertue and Vice, and the Holiness, Justice, and Goodness of God
are infallible assurances to us, that there will be Recom∣pences according to the di∣versity of Mens Actions, ei∣ther conforming or transgres∣sing his Laws. Besides, eve∣ry Man has an internal Senti∣ment, a judicial Impression in his Breast of this great Truth. Conscience, the inseparable Faculty of the reasonable Soul, has a directing and re∣flecting Light, to shew us our Duty, to examine our Acti∣ons, and accordingly to excuse and comfort, or to accuse and terrify; which Acts necessa∣rily imply, that 'tis deputed by the Supream Judg of the World, to observe our ways in order to its final Testimony
before his Tribunal. This Proof is the more convincing and palpable, in that those Persons who are exempted from humane Judgment by their Power and Dignity, those who are above Reproof, and by a fatal Priviledg damn themselves with less contra∣diction than others, yet are not impenetrable to the stings of Conscience, but at times have a conscious feeling of their Guilt: and in those who have so far stupified Consci∣ence, that 'tis either silent, or speaks with a low Voice, yet when they are in distress, e∣specially in the approaches of Death, Conscience recovers Life and Vigor, sets their
Sins in order before them, and flashes the Terrors of fu∣ture Judgment in their faces; an evident presage that altho Conscience was not strong e∣nough to controul their licen∣tious Appetite here, it will be strong enough for their Con∣viction and Torment here∣after. Now Divine Revelation renews the decayed Notions of the future Judgment that are natural to the Minds of Men, and confirms them a∣gainst the opposition of the Carnal Faculties, it regulates and enlarges them, with re∣spect to the Certainty and Circumstances of it, who shall be Judg, and the man∣ner
of his coming, and trans∣acting the Affairs of the great Day. I will more particularly in∣sist upon the certain coming of Jesus Christ in Person to judg the World; and for the orderly discourse of it, 'tis ob∣servable that a double coming of Christ is foretold in Scrip∣ture: The first in a low Con∣dition; the second in a glori∣ous State. The ends of his first and second coming regu∣late their manner: The Mes∣sias came at first, to be the Me∣diatour between the righte∣ous God and sinful Man, by patient suffering the most af∣flictive Evils; to propitiate the incensed Justice of Heaven
against us; to restore us by Humility who fell by Pride; To illustrate his signal Love to us, to recommend by the efficacy of his Example, the meek Suffering all the transi∣ent Evils of the World: But the second will be to perform the last Act of his Regal Of∣fice, to determine the eternal States of Angels and Men, and suitably in the Glory of his Deity. The Divine Ora∣cles were never less obscure than in describing the first and second coming of the Messias; the Eclipses of the Sun of Righteousness, and his future Glory: and the most clear ac∣complishment of them in his Humiliation, is a convincing
visible Argument they shall be fulfilled in his Exaltation. Now in regard his lowly O∣bedience, and sorrowful Suf∣ferings, are the Titles to his Triumph, and the height of his Glory shall be answerable to his extream Debasement; I will briefly compare his first and second Coming. His first Coming was in the likeness of sinful Flesh: tho he was exempt from the rebelli∣ous Sin of our first Parents, and the poisonous tincture that is derived to their com∣mon Race, being miracu∣lously conveyed by the Holy Ghost, yet he was charged with the Frailties, and expo∣sed to those Afflictions that
are the Penalties of Sin. His first reception in the World was so mean, that if Poverty it self had assum'd a visible Appearance, it could not be received more poorly. He was born in a Stable, and died on the Cross, the humble Po∣verty of his beginning was not discordant from his ignomi∣nious End: and his Life from his first Breath to his last in the World, was a course through Poverty, Disgrace, Injuries, Indignities, and the most cruel Sufferings. He was made not only lower than the Angels, but than the lowest of Men: In the lan∣guage of his Type,Psal. 22. a Worm and no Man. In this poor, weak,
and contemptible State, dark∣ned with the Clouds of Sor∣rows, O how unlike to him, who appeared in a Coelestial Vision to the Prophet Esay,Isa. 6. sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up, and the glorious Se∣raphims in a posture of Re∣verence about him, and in an Extasy of Admiration cry∣ing, one to another,Joh. 12. 41. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory. Carnal Eyes could not dis∣cover the Son of God in the Son of Man so vilified and afflicted. The words of the Prophet are justly applicable to him in the state of his Hu∣miliation,Isa. 45. 15. Verily thou art a
God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Saviour. Now to all those steps of our Saviours depression in his first coming, are correspon∣dent the degrees of his Exal∣tation in his second coming. He shall come the second time from the highest Hea∣ven the true Sanctuary of God, and appear without Sin, having perfectly expiated it by his Sufferings on Earth. His first coming was in Disho∣nour, his second shall be in Glory. He came at first on foot, in the form of a Servant, then he shall come in the form of God, riding on the bright Clouds, and all the Chariots of God, the Angels of Light attending him.Psal. 68. 17.
He shall come in the Glory of his Father, in the visible bright∣ness of the Deity. The Rods, the Thorns, the Nails, the Cross, all the conspiring In∣struments of his cruel and disgraceful Sufferings shall be exchanged for the Ensigns of Majesty: His Sacred Head shall be crown'd with Glory, of which the Sun in its Lustre is but a dark shadow; a Scepter of Righteousness shall be in his hand, he shall sit on a great white Throne, the Emblem of his unspotted Holiness. His first coming was in Weakness, but his second shall be in Power. Thus he told his Enemies,Mat. 26. 64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sit∣ting
on the right-hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Hea∣ven. His Voice shall break the silence of the Grave, and all that are in the bowels of the Earth, or the bottom of the Sea, shall come forth; they that have done good,Joh. 28. 29. unto the Resurrection of Life; they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation. By his Omni∣potence he will change our vile Bodies,Phil. 3. 21. that they may be fashioned like to his Glorious Body. As Gold at first taken out of the Mine, seems but common Earth, but by the refining Fire has a Brightness superin∣duced, that it seems rather the product of the Fire, than from the Vein of the Earth from
whence it was taken: Thus our Bodies that in their Ori∣ginal are but Earth; from the Earthly Adam; shall by the Power of the Lord from Heaven be made heavenly, clothed with a living Lustre and Vi∣gor. He will then convent the God of this World, with all the invisible Legions of re∣bellious Spirits, and force their Submission to his High Tribunal. He will dissolve the old World, and raise the new: from his Face the Earth and the Heaven shall flee away, and there shall be no place found for them. According to his Pro∣mise we look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.
Briefly, in his first coming he was despised and rejected of Men, condemned and cruci∣fied, but then he shall be re∣vealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance upon all that know not God, and disobey the Gospel. How will the wicked be surpriz'd with the Terrors of the Lord? At the promulgati∣on of the Law, the Senses of Hearing and Seeing, that are the inlets of▪ Terror, were so strongly affected with the Presence of God, when fear∣ful Lightnings were darted from his Eyes, and Clouds of Smoke came from the Breath of his Nostrils, and at the loud sounding of the Trumpet,
and the quaking of the Moun∣tain; that the Hearts of the Spectators were ready to die within them, and Moses himself was terribly afraid; but how will the Sights and Sounds at the last day overwhelm the guilty with Terrors, when the Son of God shall appear in his terrible Majesty! when the Arch-angel shall blow the Trum∣pet of God, when the Pillars of Heaven shall fall, and the Foundations of the Earth be overthrown, and a dreadful Judgment shall pass upon the impenitent Transgressors of the eternal Law! how will they appear spiritless, in sad Confusion in the great Day of the Lord Almighty?
Secondly; We are to con∣sider the Circumstance of Time, his coming quickly. 'Tis verified by universal Experi∣ence, that no carnal Princi∣ple does more fortify Sinners in a false Security, than putting the evil day far from them, and the Presumption that they are not in present danger of God's Displeasure, when inevitable and great Evils are look'd up∣on as remote, they make a slite Impression, but the Pro∣pinquity of such Evils in∣spires Terrors. We have an Instance of this in Cain, who (after God had denounced his Punishment for his bloody crying Sin) full of Perplexi∣ty
and Dispair breaks forth, My Punishment is greater than I can bear! and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me, shall slay me. But when he was secured from present Revenge, and expected a long Life in this World, he freely indulged his sensual Desires, and built a City, to drown the noise of his accusing Consci∣ence. The World follows this way of Cain, and freely pur∣sues the Satisfaction of their Lusts. When Men look up∣on the Divine Judgment at an immense distance, and when the evil Servant shall say in his Heart,Mat. 24. my Lord delays his coming, he will satisfy both the angry and voluptuous Appe∣tites,
he will smite his fellow-Servants, and eat and drink with the drunken. To awaken there∣fore Mens drowsy Spirits to prepare for the Judgment of the great Day, to check their exorbitant Lusts, their Lasci∣viousness, excess of Wine, and Re∣veling 'tis threatened, they shall give an account of them,1 Pet. 14. 1, 3. to him who is ready to judg the Quick and the Dead. And to induce a patient Temper and asswage Sorrow, the Apostle James encourages afflicted Christians, that the Judg stands before the door. There is a seeming diffi∣culty how to reconcile the Predictions of Christ's sud∣den coming to Judgment, with the interval of so many
intire Ages laps'd since, and what may remain of Time before the last Day is uncer∣tain. This difficulty will be resolved by considering the following Particulars. 1. The words of the Text are to be understood in the strict literal Sense: For our Saviour having represented in a visionary Scene the State of the Church in the several Periods of its Duration to the end of the World, its Conflicts, Victory, and Tri∣umph over Antichristian E∣nemies, and having described the Tranquillity, Purity and Glory of the Church in the very last part of Time, which is preparative to the glorious
everlasting State in the next World, he declares, I come quickly,Rev. 22. 5. and my Reward is with me: After the final accom∣plishment of those Prophe∣cies, there is no more use of Time, the unjust, and unrighte∣ous, and filthy,Esa. 22. 1. continue un∣chang'd and impenitent;Micah. 7. 1. the righteous and holy are confirm'd in their Perseverance,Heb. 1. and immediately shall receive Re∣compences according to their Works. 2. The whole flux of Time, from the first to the second coming of Christ is called the last days. The Prophets foretold of an astonishing Change that should arrive in the Church and the World, that the Ce∣remonial
Law should be a∣bolish'd, when the Messias, the Substance of it, and Per∣fection was come, and a new Covenant be immutably e∣stablish'd in the Church, 'tis the final expiring of Time. In this Sense the Apostle speaks to Christians in the first Age of the Church;1 Cor. 10. 11. Now all these things happened unto them for Examples, and they are writen for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come. Now in the division of Time, this being the last part of it, for the duration of the World, the second coming of Christ is represented as near. The last Glass of Time was turn'd up at the Revelation of the
Gospel by the Son of God, and now the last Sands are running; when 'tis out, it shall never be turned more. 3. Sometimes the speedy coming of Christ to Judg∣ment immediately respects the destruction of the Jewish State, and their principal Ci∣ty. Thus in his last Ser∣mn on Mount Olivet, the Tmple being in his view, he fretold that one Stone shall not be left upon another: And after his describing the fearful E∣vents that should surprize that Nation, tells his Disciples, Ve∣rily I say unto you, this Genera∣tion shall not pass,Mat. 24. 24. till all these things be fulfilled. The time of this Judgment, is called the
great and illustrious Day of the Lord,Acts 2. 20. when by visible Ven∣geance upon that Nation, he declar'd his Divine Power and Glory before the World. And to this famous Destruction of the Jews, may refer several places, where the Apostle en∣courages Believers to unfaint∣ing perseverance in their Du∣ty, notwithstanding the cruel Opposition they met with from Infidels of the Jewish Nation: Not forsaking the as∣sembling of our selves,Heb. 10. as the manner of some is, but exhort one another, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching; that is, when Christ will appear for the subduing his Enemies, and for the relieving his People.
4. We must distinguish be∣tween the Judgment of Sense and of Faith, and this will rectify our estimate of the time of God's particular Judgment upon Earth, and of his universal Judgment when he will distribute eter∣nal Recompences. To Sense Afflictions seem not only grievous, but often they seem long: for Sorrow fastens the Thoughts upon the Affliction; in sharp Pains the Soul is as it were confined to the diseased part, and strictly observes all the hours and smaller parts of their Duration, which when we are at ease slip away with∣out notice. In distress we would fain hasten away the
present time, expecting Re∣lief by what shall succeed: and winged time seems slow in its motion. From hence are so many doleful Com∣plaints of the Saints, Lord, how long?Psal. 70. 8, 9. Lord, make haste: as if he had forgot to be graci∣ous to relieve them, and just to repay their cruel Enemies. But Faith in the Divine Pro∣mises looks to their accom∣plishment in the time set by the most wise and holy dispo∣ser of all things. A stedfast Be∣liever never counts God slow in coming to Judgment; for he is never too late. The Vision of the Churches Deliverance is for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; tho
it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. This is applied by the Apostle to the particular Judgment upon Jerusalem; and is appli∣cable to the universal Judg∣ment: For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come,Heb. 10. and will not tarry: tho he bears long with the Sufferings of his own Elect, yet he will avenge them speedily: At the prefixed time, when the number of the E∣lect shall be compleat, and all the Vessels of Wrath are fitted for Destruction, the discerning Judg will come and separate them for ever. 5. Compare Time with Eternity. Time is numbred and distinguished by the Mo∣tions
of the Sun and Moon, and is accounted long or short by us with respect to our transient and limited Du∣ration in the present World: but Eternity is an endless Du∣ration. The whole space of Time, from the first Motions of the Heavens to the last, has not that proportion to Eternity, as a short Span has to the vast Compass of the Heaven. Now God, who is absolutely eternal, and truly infinite, measures the continuance of things by his own Standard: according∣ly the Psalmist tells us,Psal. 90. 4. A thousand Years in his sight, are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a Watch in the Night: as
the space of a few hours that passes without the least per∣ception in sleep. God com∣forts his suffering Church: for a small moment have I forsaken thee,Esa. 54. 7, 8. but with great Mercy will I gather thee: In a little Wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee. St. Peter re∣plies to the Infidels of the last days, who scornfully say, Where is the Promise of his coming?2 Pet. 3. One day with the Lord is as a thousand Years, and a thousand Years as one day: all the measures of Time are de∣termin'd in Eternity. This estimate will reconcile the two seeming opposite Dura∣tions, the long delaying, and
the speedy coming of the Judg. If a Malefactor be taken, sentenc'd and executed in a day, 'tis quick Justice: the longest in God's Duration is no more than the shortest among Men. And the Application of this is more sensible and evident, with respect to the particu∣lar Judgment that immedi∣ately attends the Death of Men, whether graciously re∣warding, or justly punishing them: The Afflictions of the Saints are but for a moment,2 Cor. 4. compared with the eternal State of Glory they enter in∣to: and tho an impenitent Sinner live to extream Age,
yet his Judgment did not slum∣ber, but was hastning, for his Death, that is the end of an hundred Years on Earth, will be to him the beginning of an hundred thousand Years in Hell, attended with an end∣less Duration after. Thirdly; We are to consi∣der the Rewards he will then immediately distribute. What the Rewards shall be in their general nature we may un∣derstand, but the degrees of Happiness or Misery in the future State are beyond the utmost comprehension of our Thoughts, or expressions of our Words. A Child may as soon be instructed to under∣stand
and relate the deepest Counsels of a Senate; as a mortal Man can fully con∣ceive or explicate what Hea∣ven or Hell is. The Judg stiles it my Reward, who is the great. God and our Saviour: and 'tis correspondent to his infinite Goodness and Boun∣ty, or to his terrible Majesty and offended Justice. Who can unfold the Treasures of his Love, or the Treasures of his Wrath? Who knows the Power of his Anger? Tho no Resemblance be capable to express fully the soveraign Felicity, and the extream Mi∣sery in the future State, yet for our Instruction they are set forth in the most intelli∣gible
and affecting manner with respect to our narrow Capacities. The Reward of the Saints is a State of Glory and Joy in the Presence of the blessed God, the Foun∣tain of true Felicity. The Apostle assures us, that those who continue in well-doing shall be rewarded with Glory, and Honour,Rom. 2. and Immortality. The Reward is shadowed forth by chosen Compari∣sons, a Crown of Glory, a Crown of Life: by the Joys of a Marriage Festival that shall be celebrated in the Ci∣ty of God. In short, the Reward contains the highest Perfection and exceeding Sa∣tisfaction of the reasonable
Nature. Our most beauti∣ful Expressions darken the Eternal Brightness of that State: Heaven is infinitely better known by one minutes Enjoyment, than by the De∣scription of the Divinest O∣rator. The Recompence from re∣venging Justice is set forth by words of the heaviest Sig∣nification: by Indignation and Wrath,Rom. 2. Tribulation and Anguish: and by most fearful Repre∣sentations, to typify the Tor∣ments of the Damned: by the Worm that never dies, and the Fire that shall never be quenched: by the blackness of Darkness for ever, and the bottomless Gulph of Horror and Mise∣ry.
Briefly, as the blessed Reward eminently contains all those Joys, of which we have but dark shadows here, so the Punishment is more ex∣tream and fearful than the literal meaning of the most violent Figures express. This Reward he saith is with him. This I shall consider in three things. 1. 'Tis a present Reward. Here the Saints have a sure Title to the immortal and unde∣filed Inheritance; a right to the Tree of Life. He that hath the Son, hath everlasting Life: an unfeigned Faith that unites us to Christ, that purifies the Heart and Conversation, and works by Love to our Redeemer, secures to
us an intire Interest in the Kingdom of Glory, both up∣on the account of the Pur∣chase of it by the sacred Treasure of Christ's Blood, and the unchangeable Tenor of the Gospel, wherein God promises Heaven to all obe∣dient Believers: but the actu∣al bestowing of this upon their entire Persons, is not till the last day. Then the King will say to them on his Right-hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foun∣dation of the World. He will crown them with his own Hands, and imediately intro∣duce them into his own Joys.
Now Sentence is past up∣on those who disobey the Gospel; he that believes not, is condemned already, but the Exe∣cution of it is suspended for a while. Tho sinful Men are guilty of such violent Pro∣vocations as would conquer all created Patience, yet their Judg endures with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. He is the God of Patience, 'tis one of the Divine Attributes, and cannot be violated by the In∣dignities of rebellious Sinners, but has its perfect Work in this lower World. He ever en∣joys the Serenity and Blessed∣ness that is inseparable from the Perfections of his own
Nature, and spares the wicked for a time in order to their Salvation: but when he comes to Judgment, the Ex∣ecution will immediately fol∣low: For the Sentence will be peremptory and final; there can be no Appeal from it: The Son shall then ap∣pear with equal Majesty and Authority with the Father: All Judgment is committed to him: And his Power to exe∣cute the definitive Sentence is irresistible, we may read the Tenor of it, Take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer Darkness: there is no possible escape by flight from his righteous Fury, no possible resistance of his Al∣mighty
Power, but the Wic∣ked shall presently suffer the decreed Vengeance. 2. The Reward is com∣pleat: for it shall be the issue of final Judgment, with re∣spect to all things done in the Body, whether good or evil. Se∣parate Souls act in their op∣posite States: the Saints above continually glorify God, and do his Commands: The wicked in Hell continually blaspheme God: but the obe∣dience of the Saints in Heaven is not in order to a Reward, for they are actually possest of it, and compleat Holi∣ness is a principal part of their Felicity: and the Sins of the Damned do not incur a new
Guilt, and expose them to more Severities of Punish∣ment, for they are in the hands of revenging Justice, and their Sin is a principal part of their Punishment. The Rewardableness of Hu∣mane Actions is limited to the present Life; and when Men shall appear before the Judg∣ment Seat of Christ, a full Reward will be distributed to them. Here the faithful Servants of God have some Vails to encourage them in their Work, and to delight in their Duty: and in their various Sorrows and Sufferings they are cheared with some fore∣running Beams of Heavenly
Light, revived with the Air of Paradise, refresh'd with Waters of Life from the sa∣cred Springs of Comfort, the Promises of God, and rejoyce in the hope of Glory: but then they are received into God's glorious Presence, where there is fulness of Joy, and Rivers of Pleasure for ever. What De∣fect can there be in their Happiness when they are en∣tred into the Joy of their Lord, and Joy enters into them reple∣nishing all their Faculties? Here the wicked feel some beginnings of Sorrows, the twinges of an accusing Con∣science that settles into the undying Worm: The first Breath of God's Indignation
sometimes singes them here: but then the Flames of it will break forth with vehemence: in this World his Dispensati∣on is a Compound of Justice and Mercy, he is unwilling to use Extremity: when he is exceedingly provok'd, Mer∣cy mollifies the Rigor of Justice, calms the Fierceness of his Wrath, lightens the Weight of his Power: he does not reward them according to their Iniquities: but then no∣thing will break the blow of his Revenging Hands: Strict Justice will then inflict a Pu∣nishment commensurate to the guilt of their Sins. All the leading Faculties of the Soul, the Mind, the Fancy,
the Memory, the Will, the Affections, that have been polluted with Sin, all the sensitive Faculties of the Bo∣dy that have been instrumen∣tal in the commission of Sin, shall be tormented. The voluptuous Wretch, whose Soul was drown'd in Flesh and Blood, and riotously feasted every day, his Tongue was tormented in the Fire. Briefly, Pain is more in∣tense and violent according to the Capacity of the Pati∣ent, and the Activity and Im∣pression of the Agent: Thus in the Body those parts that are of the quickest and most tender Sense, are most recep∣tive of Pain; and wher∣sharp
and piercing Humours fall upon them, are vehe∣mently affected: How great shall be the Punishment, when the intire Man the Soul and Body are prepared to be most capable of Torment, and Infinite Power inflict it? weeping and gnashing of Teeth, extream Sorrow, and extream Rage, are the Cha∣racters of Damnation. O doleful State beyond all pos∣sible Expression! 3. The Reward is perpe∣tual: 'tis the issue of Eter∣nal Judgment: The Sentence is fixt and unalterable for e∣ver. The Saints shall ever be with the Lord, whose Presence is the living Fountain of Fe∣licity.
Their Bodies shall be endowed with a Coelestial unfading Beauty and Vigor becoming the glorious Qua∣lity of the Sons of God: their Souls shall for ever be satisfied with the sight of his Glory, and ravish'd with the Fruition of his Love. There is no defect in that blessed State, and no danger of losing it. The Love of God to∣wards his elect Vessels of Mercy is as unchangeable as his Nature: and the Divine Beauty fixes the flame of their pure Affections upon the Dei∣ty: They enjoy an everlast∣ing Communion with him. Eternity crowns and consum∣mates their Happiness.
The wicked are excom∣municated from the Beatifi∣cal Presence of God, and the joyful Society of the Saints for ever. They are imprison'd in Hell during the Displea∣sure of the Immortal King, who is inflexibly angry, and irreconcileable for ever In the present State violent Pains or Passions extinguish Life, as a fierce Fire devours the matter that feeds it: The natural Body could not en∣dure the Torments of Hell a moment, the frail Taberna∣cle of Flesh would presently be dissolved: But the Divine Power will uphold the dam∣ned in vivacity to feel infernal Torments. Here there are
intermissions and pauses be∣tween the strokes of God's Hand; even Pharoah that proud Rebel was indulg'd at times, to lead him to Repen∣tance: but there is an un∣cessant perpetuity of▪ Tor∣ments: the obstinate Sons of Darkness are without ease or end of their Misery. Fourthly, We are to consi∣der the respective difference of the Rewards, according to the Actions of Men in this Life▪ and that with respect to the kinds whether good or evil, and the degrees of good and evil in them. He will then lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plum∣met,
and bring every Work to Judgment,Eccles. 12. 14. whether good or evil. He will try our good Works inclusively, with our Princi∣ples, and Aims, and Affecti∣ons, wherein their spiritual value consists. He alone has exact Scales to weigh the Spirits of Men, a Divine Faculty to see the deepest Seeds of their Actions. When Religious Duties, when Acts of Cha∣rity and of any Vertue are performed in Obedience to God, to please and glorify him, they shall be rewarded accordingly: but when done from Carnal Motives, for our own Repuation, our own Interest or Pleasure, the Judg will then declare, I have
not found your Works full before me:Rev. 3. 2. tho never so specious and glittering in the Eyes and esteem of Men, tho appea∣ring with a great show of Goodness, yet without the internal Exercise of gracious Affections that are the Life of Obedience, they are of no account in that day. Ac∣cording to the Sincerity, Zeal, and measure of our good Works, the Reward shall be: He that sows sparing∣ly, shall reap sparingly;2 Cor. 9. 6. and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. This Rule of Judgment does not in the least imply that there is any desert of the Reward in the best Works of Men: the
Scripture is most express, that Eternal Life is the Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord: The Kingdom of Glory is infinitely more a Gift than a Reward. As the Predestination of the Saints to Life is an Act of Soveraign Mercy; so the Glorification of them is an Act of equally free Mercy, without respect to any Merit of ours: but the wise and holy Lawgiver dispenses the blessed Reward according to the Tenour of our good Works: and as by the excel∣lence of the Reward he de∣clares what value he sets up∣on our Obedience; so by the exactness of our Obedience
we declare what value we set upon the Reward. The Recompences of di∣stributive Justice shall be ac∣cording to the evil Works of Men. All Sins with the in∣hancing Circumstances of Guilt shall be brought to Judgment Sins of Omissi∣on, I was an hungry, and you gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink, shall be charged upon the Repro∣bates by the Judg himself. To him who knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is a Sin.Jam. 4. 17. All Sins of Commissi∣on, whether secret or open: God will judg the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ: The Sins con∣cealed from the Eye of the
Day, the Light of the Sun, and from the Eye of the Night, the Light of a Candle, shall then be made manifest: and all the notorious and infamous Sins, Lasciviousness, Lusts, excess of Wine, Revelings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatry,1 Pet. 4. 4, 5. Men shall give an account of to him, who is rea∣dy to judg the Quick and the Dead. Sins of Thoughts and Words, as well as of Actions, shall then be remembred; the vain Thoughts that have lodged in the Heart, and every idle word that hath been spoken by Men, they shall give an account of in the day of Judgment. The degrees of Punish∣ment shall be correspondent to Mens Sins: How much
they have lived deliciously and presumptuously, so much Sor∣row and Torment shall be given them. The more rebellious, outragious, and obstinate Sinners now are, the more fearful Severities shall be their portion. Those who know their Masters will, and do it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes. The Proceedings of that day shall be transacted by the Son of God in his glorified Humane Nature, and suita∣bly to the Capacities of Men that the Justice of his Sen∣tence may be evident: there∣fore St John, describing the process of the last Judgment, relates,Rev. 20. 12. I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God;
and the Books were opened; and the Dead were judged out of those things that were written in the Books, according to their Works. The Records of Consci∣ence shall then be opened, and all the Sins of Men, even those that are now obliterated and forgotten, shall then ap∣pear in so clear an Impression, with all their Aggravations, that the wicked will be inex∣cusable to themselves, and Conscience will subscribe their Condemnation. The Judg himself who knows all things will then unfold the Registers of his Omni∣science, and publish their Sins before the World. Then shall
the King say, I was hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; I was thir∣sty, and ye gave me no Drink: and by just Analogy we may infer he will charge Sins of all kinds upon the Wicked, of which they have been guilty, that the Righteous∣ness and Reasonableness of his Proceedings may appear: he will overcome when he judges, the Condemned shall have nothing to reply, struck into Silence and Confu∣sion: the Saints and An∣gels shall with Admiration magnify his true and righte∣ous Judgments.
Application. The Doctrine of Christ's speedy coming to Judgment, should be a powerful Incen∣tive to our most solemn and ready preparing for it. The Affair is infinitely serious, 'tis our incomparable Interest to secure the Favour of the Su∣pream Judg: if we are cast in Judgment, our Misery is irrecoverable. There may be Errors in Humane Judg∣ments, and other days of Trial to review and alter the Sentence; but the Judg∣ment of the last day is irre∣vocable. And is it a slight matter to be saved or damn'd
for ever? Then the Children of this World are absolutely wiser than the Children of Light. But 'tis not possible for the Mind of Man, unless monstrously perverted, to conceive such a Thought. From whence then is it, that the eternal Judgment is so unconsider'd, so unexpected, and unprepa∣red for, by most of the World? Should not the Excel∣lence of their Judg make Sinners afraid? His universal Know∣ledg, for all things are naked and open to him, with whom we have to do; His immaculate Holiness, for he is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with∣out aversation; His incorruptible Justice that will not spare
the guilty; His Eternal Power that can so easily and terribly revenge all wilful Disobedi∣ence to his Law, and has been so insolently contemned, all the Perfections of his Di∣vine Nature, and the bleed∣ing Sufferings of his Hmane Nature to purchase Salvati∣on so wretchedly neglected, will render their Judgment fearful and intolerable.Esa. 10. 3. What will they do in the day of Visi∣tation? Can their Hearts endure,Ezek. 22. or their Hands be strong in the day that he will deal with them? Can they think to mitigate his hot Displeasure, when his Clemency, so often despised, will inflame his Justice? All the Mercies which they have
so ungraciously abus'd, shall be produc'd in Testimony of their Rebellion, heighten'd with the most unworthy In∣gratitude: What Consternati∣on will seize the Guilty, when ten thousand Accusers shall rise up in Judgment against them, and not one Advocate appear for their Defence? Methinks the hearing such terrible Truths should make their Ears tingle, and their Hearts die within them, yet (O astonishing Security!) tho God speaks so loud by the Voice of his Ministers, and sometimes by his power∣ful Providence, they are as deaf as Adders; but let a carnal Lust whisper within
from their earthly part, they presently hear and are char∣med. From whence is it that the Eternal Judgment, so sure as Death, does not cause an extream Apprehen∣sion in unpardoned Sinners? The next cause of this Stupi∣dity is, that they put the evil∣day at a remote distance, as the Scorners said, the Vision isEzek. 12. 22. for many days: they study to be secure, and delay their Pre∣parations, presuming to have time enough before them. Vain Men! how willingly do they deceive themselves? Can they be assured of the present Life one hour? Some in their impure Em∣braces, others at voluptuous
Feasts have been seized by Divine Justice: the day of Death is equivalent to the day of Judgment; for im∣mediately after there is a fi∣nal decision and actual dispo∣sing of Men for ever. That we may therefore be duly prepared, these Directi∣ons are to be followed. 1. Let it be our special care to plant the Belief of this great Truth in our Minds, and preserve it in its Vigor, that we may feel its Efficacy and Influence in our Hearts and Lives. Customary Be∣lievers, whose assent to Di∣vine Truths is only from the prejudice of Education, and the current Opinions of o∣thers
with whom they live, are as careless and secure as direct Atheist: The substan∣tial Fruits of Godliness and Holiness spring from internal Notions deeply establish'd, and experimentally felt in the Soul. The usual coldness in the Duties of Religion, and presumptuous boldness in Sin, is because Men have but a slite Belief of their great account. But we have infallible assu∣rance from the Judg him∣self: Behold, I come quickly: his Throne is like the fiery Flame, and his Wheels as burning Fire, an Emblem of his swift coming to Judgment. The stedfast Belief of this will arrest our vain Thoughts, and
controul our vicious Affecti∣ons, and regulate our Con∣versations. Faith is the Prin∣ciple of Fear; and Fear is a preventive Passion, it enga∣ges the Mind to consider with becoming seriousness, how to escape the Damnation of Hell. Then we throughly believe this fundamental Principle of Religion, when the design and work of our Lives is to be approved by our Judg. 2. Moderation both in the Pleasures and Business of the World is requisite, that we may with intire Application of Mind prepare to appear before our Judg. 'Tis the aweful Caution of our Sa∣viour to his Disciples, Take
heed to your selves,Luke 21. 34, 35. lest at any time, your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunken∣ness, and Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon you unawares. For as a Snare shall it come on all them, that dwell on the face of the whole Earth. Watch ye therefore and pray al∣ways, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. The universal Snares that fasten Men in security are sen∣sual Pleasures and Worldly Cares: They are natural and insinuating into our Hearts. A dissolute voluptuous course is attended with a stupid neg∣lect of God and the Soul:
and the indulging of the Car∣nal Appetites, tho not in such vicious Excesses, as the noto∣riously profane are guilty of, lessens the fear of Caution, which is instrumental to make us serious and diligent, lest we be surprized in an un∣prepared State by the Judg of the World. The subtilty of Satan is to be observed, he does not tempt Men to take so deep a surfeit of Pleasures as might cause a loathing of them, but gently feeds the voluptuous diseased Appe∣tites, knowing that a Sensual Life alienates the Mind from a severe reflecting upon the State of their Souls, and in∣duces a deep forgetfulness
of their Accounts with God. From hence it is, that the danger wherein so many are of losing their Souls for ever, is not perceived till their case be desperate. Others are so involv'd in Secular Business, their Minds are so overshaded with the Cares of the World, that they are not at leisure to at∣tend to the one thing necessary, and can take no right Aspect of the World to come. Their Affections are stiff and setled in the Earth, their Thoughts are immerst in the Affairs of this present Life; they think it their Discretion and Duty to ingage in the uncessant prosecution of their Worldly
Designs, and the Devil takes this advantage to prevent in them the pity and care of their Immortal Souls: Or if at any time serious Desires are kindled in them to Sal∣vation, an inundation of Worldly Thoughts present∣ly quench them. Thus Men perish by the abuse of law∣ful things. The Flood broke in upon the old World whilst they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in Marri∣age, buying and selling, and destroyed them all: The last Fire will devour the present World in the same dull In∣cogitancy, and stupid neglect to prepare themselves for Judgment, As it was in the
days of Noah,Luke 17. 26. so it shall be in the days of the Son of Man. The sensual and worldly∣minded are usually secure, and when they shall say Peace and Safety, sudden Destruction cometh upon them, as Travel up∣on a Woman with Child, as sur∣prizingly as irresistably, and they shall not escape. 'Tis a divine and solemn warning,Rev. 16. 15. Behold, I come as a Thief in the night, blessed is he that watcheth, and keep∣eth his Garments unspotted from the World, lest he be found naked without the Robe of Holiness, and be exposed to confoun∣ding Shame in the great Day. 3. The frequent and seri∣ous trial of Conscience with respect to our spiritual State,
and the Actions of our Lives is requisite to our preparing our selves for our last ac∣count: for there will be a a manifestation of them in that day. The most never spend a serious hour in consi∣dering whether they are trans∣lated from Death to Life. The Rule of Judgment is de∣clared by St. John; He that hath the Son, hath Life: and he that hath not the Son, hath not Life. The Justification of our Persons from the guilt of our Sins, is wholly to be ascribed to the Divine Mercy upon the account of his most pre∣cious Merits and Mediation: and all the saving Benefits purchas'd by his Death are
actually applied only to those who are united to him by an unfeigned lively Faith. All the vital Influences of his Merits are derived from him to his Members: he is the Head of the Church and Savi∣our of the Body. His most precious Blood that was shed on the Cross, must be sprinkled on the Conscience to purge it from dead Works: The Blood of sprinkling speaks better things than the Blood of Abel. And the Faith that is saving is not a mere assent in Speculation to the Doctrine of the Gospel, but such a Belief in the Blessed Mediator of his reconciling us to God, as produces a su∣perlative Love to him, and
by that Love sincere and uni∣form Obedience to his most holy Laws. By Faith we are justified from the Guilt of Sin, by Works from the Charge of Hypocrisy, in that we have sincerely complied with the Terms of the Gos∣pel, by receiving intire Christ as our Lord and Saviour. We can never with Com∣fort appear before the righte∣ous Lord, if we have not an interest in him as the Lord our Righteousness. There are some of a Mo∣ral Temper and Civil Con∣versation that finally miscar∣ry, by their neglect of com∣ing to Christ with earnest hunger and thirst after his
Righteousness, which alone can endure the Trial of God's Judgment-Seat for our Abso∣lution: They have not such a conscious feeling of their undone Condition by Sin, as to make them earnestly seek for a Remedy: the Deceiver of Souls insinuates into their secret Thoughts, that they are safe enough, and shall stand in Judgment, because they are not guilty of enormous Crimes; they rarely feel the lashes of Conscience, which those who rebel against the clear Light do. But how fair so ever the Lives of Men appear, such is the exact Pu∣rity of the Divine Law, so many known and secret Sins
even the most circumspect are guilty of, that without an interest in the Blessed Media∣tor, they will be cast in Judg∣ment for ever. 'Tis there∣fore of infinite Consequence to examine our selves whe∣ther we are in a state of Fa∣vour and Acceptance with God: the Jealousy of many holy and tender Spirits sus∣pends the comfortable Judg∣ment of Conscience, and the vicious Self-love of car∣nal Persons supends the con∣demning Judgment of it. Besides, the daily review of our Actions is of excel∣lent use to prepare us for our last account. Conscience is plac'd in our Bosoms as a vi∣gilant
Inspector and Dome∣stick Judg, to observe our Actions and compare them with the Rule, and according∣ly to censure or approve us: When we fail in our Duty, and violate God's Precepts, it should work upon the Af∣fections of Grief and Shame, and cause us earnestly to ad∣dress to the Throne of Grace for Pardon: and renew the Application of the Blood of Christ to our Souls. Accor∣ding to the quality of our Sins, our Repentance should be more solemn and special, we should more severely judg our selves that we may not be judged by the Lord. This is very unpleasant Work to car∣nal
Men: but 'tis the indi∣spensible Condition of ob∣taining pardoning Mercy: 'tis the most congruous way of recovering Sinners both for the Honour of God, and our Good, for the broken and contrite Person will most prize the Favour of God, and be most fearful of returning to Sin. Indeed then our Re∣pentance is unto Life, when the dominion of Sin is subdued, and the way is forsaken. Now, the speedy coming of our Judg should recommend this severe Repentance to us: it should excite Conscience to the daily observation of our Errors, then when Sins are committed, we may be
restless till we get them par∣doned: tho Men may suppress and smother the Convictions of Conscience at the present, yet it will shortly, like a fierce and terrible Officer, take the Guilty by the Throat and command him to pay what he owes to Divine Justice. 'Tis our Wisdom to compare the bitterness of Repentance with the Torments of Hell: Repenting Sorrow is for the cure of Sin, the Sorrow of Hell is for the Punishment of Sinners for ever. Repent, that your Sins may be blotted out in the times of Refreshment from the Presence of the Lord. 4. The perswasion of this Doctrine is an excellent
means to obtain a calm and contented frame of Spirit in every State: For if we con∣sider within a little while all Civil Distinctions of High and Low, Rich and Poor, shall be at an end, and only the Moral Distinctions of Holy and Unholy, Righteous and Unrighteous, shall remain, that all must stand in an e∣qual Line before the Judg∣ment-Seat of Christ, to re∣ceive eternal Recompences, how will it vilify this World in our esteem, and conse∣quently make a mean and low Condition tollerable to us? 'Tis related of Julius Cae∣sar, that being in a Storm at Sea, he was fain to strip
himself naked and swim for his Life, carrying in one hand his Commentaries writ∣ten by himself of his Mili∣tary Actions: Within a short time we must be devested of all the external Circumstances of the present Life, Riches, Honours, Dignities, and of the Garment of our Flesh, and our naked Souls shall only carry with them the Book of Conscience, where∣in all our Actions are recor∣ded with our own Hands, into that vast Eternity before us: this should make us more indifferent what our present State is, that we must short∣ly leave, and very sollici∣tous to order our Conversa∣tion
so as to be accepted of our Judg. Particularly it should ren∣der the Praise or Dispraise of Men a very small matter to us. Within a little while we shall only have to do with God, depend intirely upon him, and according as his Sentence shall be favourable or fatal, must be determin'd for ever; how reasonable then is it in comparison of his Judgment to disvalue the contingent Opinions of Men, who raise or depress our Names according to their Fancies and Passions, and to be satisfied in God's Appro∣bation.
5. The Consideration of this Point should encourage us joyfully to endure Re∣proach or Violence for the Testimony of Divine Truth, to suffer for Righteousness sake: for, as the Apostle com∣forts the suffering Christians, Within a little while, he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; and will bestow an excellent Reward in Heaven upon his faithful Servants. This, duly considered, will inspire not only Patience, but Divine Joy in the Saints in their most afflicted State for the Name of Christ. 6. The Consideration of this great Truth should regulate our Deportment towards all
Men, with Sincerity, Equity, Benignity, and Clemency. 'Tis the Apostles chosen Ar∣gument, Let no Man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any matter;1 Thess. 4. 6. because the Lord is the Avenger of all such. Let your Moderation be known to all Men,Phil. 4. 5. the Lord is at hand. To sum up all: Let us with intire Application of Soul, and zealous Endeavours strive to be approv'd by our Judg. We labour, saith the Apostle,2 Cor. 5. whether present or ab∣sent, to be accepted by him. The certain Rules of pleasing him, are to imitate his Example, and obey his Precepts. He will be a Lamb to all who
are like him in Innocence, Patience, and Purity. He went about doing Good: let us do good to all, especially to the Houshold of Faith. To use an Estate only for mean Ends, our Temporal Convenien∣cies, much more to abuse and pervert it, to foment Pride and Luxury, will make our Ac∣counts to be uncomfortable, and grievous: but to be libe∣ral and rich in Good Works, is the infallible way to obtain a rich Reward. He forgave his cruel and unrighteous Ene∣mies; his dying Prayer mixt with his precious Blood was to reconcile God to those who shed it; and our Absolution in his Judgment is suspended
upon this indispensable Con∣dition, that from the Heart we forgive even the most in∣jurious Offences,Mat. 6. and violent Provocations from others. An unforgiving Temper, like a Mill-stone fasten'd about the Neck, will sink us into un∣fathom'd Misery. He that is stiff and irreconcileable, ei∣ther never seriously considers his own numerous Sins, or never receiv'd God's pardon∣ing Mercy. Let us uniformly obey the Commands of Christ. We must stoop to his Power as our Judg; As I live saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall con∣fess to God; 'tis our Wisdom
therefore to yield Obedience to his Authority as our Law∣giver. He is the Author of e∣ternal Salvation to all who obey him. Let us faithfully improve all our Talents, all the means and advantages to serve and glorify him, for the Account will be strict, and the Re∣ward infinite. Briefly, let us learn this point of Wisdom of our spiritual Enemy, who, because his time is short, is more active and vigilant to do Mischief; so considering our opportunity of doing good is short, and the omissi∣on irreparable,1 Cor. 15. let us with zea∣lous diligence always abound in the Work of the Lord, knowing
that our Labour shall not be in vain in the Lord. O that Men were wise to consider their Mortality and Immortality: to do those things now, which in the last and great Day they shall wish they had done. I shall now, as the present occasion directs, speak of the deceased Mr. BENJAMIN ASHURST, of whose Good∣ness there are very valuable Testimonies. He had the Felicity to be instructed and order'd in his early and obse∣quious Age by a wise and holy Father: and as usually the gracious or vicious Habits of the first Age are transfused into the next, so his succeed∣ing
Life was correspondent to his Education. There is a fit resemblance between the natural Culture of the Earth and the moral of our Minds: Three things are re∣quisite to make the Earth fruitful, a good Soil, good Culture, and good Seed; so by Analogy, that Education may be successful, a well∣disposed Nature, an Under∣standing and good Instructer, and the Precepts of Religion and Vertue are necessary. All these concurr'd in the present Subject. Some by a rare Priviledg are exempted from those tyrannous Passions that so frequently disorder the Lives of Men; and in their
Childhood are of such mild and gaulless Spirits, so recep∣tive of vertuous Impressions, that at the sight of their Dis∣positions and Carriage we may have a conjecture of the Felicity of the innocent State, of which one Ray, or rather Shadow, is so amiable. With such a happy Temper God was pleased to endow our de∣ceased Friend: his Spirit was humble, modest, gentle and complying with the Counsels of his gracious Father, who with tender Care led him in the way to Heaven. When he was grown up to the Age of Vanity, he was preserved from youthful Lusts: His Con∣versation was unstained: He
was not swell'd with Pride, nor ruffled with Passion, nor disorder'd with Excess. And as to a judicious Eye, no Spectacle is more deformed than an old Man in whom the Vices of Youth are noto∣rious, levity of Mind, vehe∣mence of Passions, and vani∣ty in Conversation: So on the contrary, there is not a more amiable sight, than a young Man in whom the Vertues of Age are conspi∣cuous; a staid Mind, tempe∣rate Desires, a compos'd De∣portment: and it were hap∣py for the World if foolish old Men were as rare to be found, as wise young Men.
This Praise-worthy Per∣son, when fit to enter into a particular Calling, was pla∣ced in the Family of a Turky Merchant: there his Behaviour was so religious and serious, that it was said of him by some that observed his Actions, that he would be a Merchant for Heaven. He after some time went to Smyrna, and preserv'd his In∣tegrity and Purity in the midst of Temptations: where many by vicious Excesses dis∣parage the Sanctity of the Christian Religion profess'd by them, he adorn'd it by the Sobriety of his Conversation. He return'd to England after some Years spent beyond Sea,
and persever'd in his Christian Course, serious and solemn in his Carriage, and ready to do good to those that wanted supplies from relieving Cha∣rity. A few Years after his return, he fell into a dy∣ing Consumption that quick∣ly put a Period to his Days. In his languishing Disease he exprest an humble quiet Submission to the Divine Disposal: he was silent from murmuring, but not from Prayer, which he performed with solemn Reverence to the Lord of Life and Death even in his Weakness. When the hour of his Departure was come, he calmly ren∣der'd his Soul to his faithful
Creator. There is just cause of Sorrow that one in the Flower of his Age, of such hopes, should so suddenly wither and return to Dust: if one old in Years and Vi∣ces, a Corrupter of others by his contagious Example die, the World is well rid of him: if a good Man comes to the Grave in a full Age, like as a shock of Corn comes in his season, there is cause of Thanksgiving, that he was so long a Blessing to the World: But when a young Saint dies, that might accor∣ding to expectation have long glorified God upon the Earth, and been a happy In∣strument of doing good, we
should pay our tributary Tears, and have a due and ten∣der sense of the general Loss. Yet those who are most near∣ly concern'd, and mournfully affected should quiet their troubled Thoughts by con∣sidering the unaccountable Will of God, nay, comfort their sad and dejected Spirits, by considering, that he has lived long enough in the pre∣sent World, who by dying arrives to Perfection and Fe∣licity. FINIS.
