B1850 R170503 12435469 62018
THE Court Secret: A NOVEL. PART. I. Written by P. B. Gent. LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old-Baily. 1689.
TO THE Right Ho John, LORD LO &c. Captain of the Band of Pensioners. MY LORD, THE Motives which have in∣duc'd so great a stran∣ger as I am, to shroud under your Honours
Protection, this little Historical Novel, is that Zeal, which, from Heaven, animated your Breast, and push'd you forward, to be Exemplary in the earliest endea∣vours of uniting your own Person, and those worthy Pa∣triots, under your Lordships Conduct, to our late Generous Liberator's aid, our now most Gracious
Lord and King, in the Freeing of our Distressed Country from those many heavy Pressures un∣der which it had lain groaning so long, and which invited that Personal Valour, with which you so bravely Oppos'd the Multitude, which only could resist, (though not without the forfeiture of their Lives,) your no less
Just than Generous Designs. I have en∣tertain'd some hopes, My Lord, that you would be pleas'd to look with a favour∣able Aspect, on a Piece borrowed from a Design much like that, which stirred up your Honour to lay all at stake, when the True Religion, and the Proper Liberty of the Subject, call'd out so loud on all true
English Mens Assist∣ance. I am very sen∣sible, My Lord, of the fair opportunity I have at present, to enumerate, in a large Catalogue, your Ho∣nours Noble Quali∣ties and Virtues, ac∣cording to our Mo∣dern way of Dedi∣cations; and cer∣tainly, My Lord, I could not let pass so fit an Occasion, of following the Mode,
but that I had been perfectly inform'd, how much your Ho∣nour abhors such Gross Flattery, which has rais'd in me a fear of offending your Lordships Generous Temper, and made me rest contented, with the Relation of those few, but true Passa∣ges, cull'd from a prodigious Heap, which, besides the business I had in
hand, Justice it self required from me, at the beginning of this Epistle. May your Lordship long live on Earth, to en∣joy the Fruits of those Noble En∣deavours and At∣chievements, and re∣ceive hereafter in Heaven, those Re∣wards laid up for such, as like your Lordship, preferr'd the safety of their
Religion and Coun∣try, before their own Lives, and all other Worldly Interests; So most heartily Prays, My Lord, Your Honours most Humble Servant, P. B.
The Court Secret: A NOVEL. THere are no States nor Em∣pires, but, at some time or other, have felt the dreadful Effects of those Re∣bellions, which, under the specious Cloak of Reformation in Religion, have been stirred up and fomented by the Turbulent Spirits of Wicked Ambitious men; and though our Europe can sufficiently supply us with useful Examples of the same, yet it is not to be fixed wholly to that little Corner of the World; all Countries that the Sun enligh∣tens,
have shared in those general Calamities; amongst which, the Ottoman Empire will at this pre∣sent furnish us with a Story. The Mahometan Religion, which is singular in that vast Empire, is not without Divisions into di∣vers Sects, of which the principal is that of a great Prophet amongst them, named Haly, which was at first the same with Mahomet, but since, through the Ambition Pride, and Luxury of its Priests, so alter'd and disguis'd, by the introduction of an Idolatrous, Impertinent, Pom∣pous way of Worship, that there is not so much left in it, as its true Name; for the Followers of it scorn to call it after its Foun∣ders Name, but distinguish it from their true Ancient Religion of Ma∣homet, by the name of Haly's U∣niversal Religion. Those Innovations were the Cause that a select number of the true Mahometans, seeing so many
Superstitious Ceremonies daily in∣troduc'd into the outward worship, and so much Idolatry in the Es∣sential part of their Religion, and every Age still adding new Inven∣tions to that new superstructure, did withdraw themselves from those so gross and palpable Affronts which were daily offer'd unto the Deity, by taking from the Crea∣tor the Honour and Glory, which of all right and due doth only, and wholly appertain to him, to give to his Creature; and they worshipped their God by them∣selves, in Holiness of Life, and Purity of Doctrine, protesting a∣gainst all those Innovations which had been foisted in, by the proud Priests of the Sect of Haly. For which, the Priests of Haly's Sect were not wanting in all their Arts, to cast dirt on the true Mahome∣tans; they proclaim'd them Schis∣maticks, Hereticks, Doggs, and persecuted them in all places with
Fire and Sword, declaring that they deserv'd a worse Usage yet, for having separated themselves from the Body of the Church; while they themselves were the persons that had distanc'd them∣selves, and fallen off from the true Mahometan Religion, by their prodigious addition of new Inven∣tions, not becoming any sober, true Religion, while that those which they so much calumniated, were the true Observers of the Maho∣metan Religion, which they still follow'd, and had only separated themselves from the Innovations of the Halists, to avoid offering of those great Injuries to their God, which so Idolatrous a Guilt as the Halists did practice, would have oblig'd them to do. The Persians, who had more generally embraced the corrupt Sect of Haly than the Turks had, were more numerous and power∣ful than the true Mahometans, and
their Emperors were such Zealous Maintainers of it, that, as their present Emperor has declar'd, they had design'd long since to root out of their Dominions the Mahometan Religion, but that the State Affairs would not till his time admit of o great a Change. But he being wholly govern'd by the most wicked order of Profes∣sors of the Sect of Haly, he fol∣low'd their advice, and began by the murther of his own Subjects, of the true Mahometan Religion, that Universal Reduction to Haly's Sect, of all the true Mahometans, which he pretended to accomplish. In that he has outdone all his Predecessors, for they contented themselves with retrenching little by little, the Authority which Se∣paratists (as they call'd the true Ma∣hometans) had obtain'd, together with the Priviledges and Liberty which they enjoy'd in their own Empire, and in sending into the
Mahometan Empire swarms of Em∣missaries of the Sect of Haly: es∣pecially of those from amongst them, which are the most Learned and most Wicked, and that a∣mongst all the rest of the distinct Orders amongst the Priests of Haly, have as proudly as wrong∣fully assum'd the Title of the order of Mahomet, had thence call'd them∣selves Mahometists. Selim, the first Turkish Emperor of that Name, who had Married a Daughter of a Persian Emperor, of the Sect of Haly, did dreadfully feel the effects of the Divisions which those wicked Mahometists had sow'd amongst his People. For a certain sort of disaffected Men to the Government both in Church and State, under the pretence of Reformation in both, rais'd Arms and Rebell'd against their lawful Emperor, took him Prisoner, Mur∣ther'd him, and chose the Aga of the Janizaries to be their Pro∣tector,
after they had caus'd the Sultana and her three Sons, Selim the Second, Amurat and Osman, to flye from their Cruelty into Per∣sia. Where she attempted by the solicitation of the Mahometists, to have her Children (who had al∣waies been brought up by Selim's particular Care in the Mahometan Religion, in which he himself had liv'd and dy'd) to be brought over to her own Perswasion, which being come to Selim the Second's Know∣ledge, he got from her his youngest Brother, which he secured under good hands, but she retain'd Amurat, which by that means was brought up in the Sect of Haly. After the Turks had liv'd some years under divers sorts of Go∣vernments, still finding themselves, as oft as they chang'd of Form of Government, after the Death of him they had chose Protector, in a worse condition than they were under the Reigns of their lawful
Emperor, they recalled back Selim the Second from his Exile; he and his two Brothers were re∣ceiv'd by the whole Empire, with all the Expressions of Joy imagina∣ble, he was seated on his Throne, Crown'd, and even Ador'd by his People. Of Truth, never was Prince, except his Father, Endow'd with so much Goodness and Mildness, mixt with Majesty and Greatness of Soul. He had not been long re∣established in his Dominions, but that, through the sollicitation of his people, who earnestly desired to be govern'd by an Off-spring of so good a Prince, he Marryed a Foreign Princess, of the same tem∣per of mind as himself, though an Halist, by whom he had no Issue. This was a great Misfortune to him, because that his natural, mild, and good disposition, did incline him infinitely to love Children,
and the Conversation of the  Sex, when he had a mind  bend his thoughts, and give  self some Divertion from the busi∣ness of State. Cha-abas, the then Emperor of Persia, who had fill'd Selim's Em∣pire with all sorts of Orders of the Sect of Haly, especially of the Mahometists, who were like so many Spies in Selim's Court, was inform'd amongst the rest of Se∣lim's Amorous Disposition, to which Inclination he gave the more scope, for want of Children by his Sultaness, to pass his time with. There was sent over to that pur∣pose, a Persian Woman, indiffe∣rently handsome, of a mean Ex∣traction, a great Zealot of the Sect of Haly; with full instructions how to gain Selim's Affections, and when that was done, how to govern him, get from him a cer∣tain Knowledge of all the most private Consultations and Designs
of the State, and to influence him in all his undertakings; she soon got so much the mastery over Se∣lim's Heart, that through her means, all the secrets of the Port were known in Persia, according to which, Cha-abas, and his Mahome∣tical Counsel, did take such mea∣sures, as did still tend towards ac∣complishing that great work, of extirpation of Heresie (as they sti∣led it) which had been so long contriving. It was thought that the quickest way would be, in getting Selim to forsake the Religion he was brought up in, and to bring him over to the Sect of Haly: very particular in∣structions were given to that pur∣pose to his Persian Mistress, whom he lov'd the more, because she had brought him forth some Chil∣dren, which were the Darlings of Selim's Heart. She together with others of that Faction in the Court, did use all their Indeavours to
bring that great work about, and finding him so firm and stedfast to his Principles in Religion, as not in the least to yield to their Solicita∣tions; Cha-Abas, with his wicked Counsel, thought it fit to remove him from the Throne, to make room for his Brother Amurat, who as you have already heard, was very zealous to the Sect of Haly, and did privately pro∣fess it. All things being fitted in Church and State for that great Change, upon which depended the entire and universal destruction, of the true Antient Orthodox Mahometan Religion, so long before design'd, and privately whisper'd about, and which could never be accomplish'd, till the Mahometan Religion, as it was particularly exercis'd in the Ottoman Empire, were first ruin'd. There was a design fram'd of Murthering the Sultan, of sending over a Persian Army, all of the
Sect of Haly, of sending Commis∣sions to all the Nobility, that were of the Sect of Haly in Selim's Em∣pire, and in fine, of setting up A∣murat to be Sultan, who should aid to bring in the Sect of Haly, and by his Power and Authority maintain it, and should declare himself of that Sect, and the Main∣tainer of it. The Storm was ready to break and fall upon the Ottoman Empire from Persia, when the Plot was discover'd, the Grand Council of the Divan being Summoned, they took the business into considera∣tion, sifted it to the bottom, and found out all the contrivances, the Conspirators, and their Abettors; all those that could be seiz'd at Constantinople and elsewhere in the Empire, were put in Prison, Exa∣min'd. Convicted by Authentick and undeniable Evidences, to be guilty of the Enterprise, which being against the Laws of the Em∣pire,
they suffered the Condign Punishment which the said Laws had order'd to be inflicted on such Notorious Criminals; after which, all the Priests of the Sect of Haly were seiz'd, that could be taken; and according to a Statute of the Empire, whereby they are declar'd Traytors, divers of them receiv'd the due Reward of such Villainous Enterprises, which they had made against the Sultan and the Empire. And all those in the Empire, of what degree and condition soever, that were of the Sect of Haly, were divested from all Publick Offices or Employes, incapacitated for the future, from having any Sway, or bearing any Offices either Civil or Military, banished from Court, and commanded to remain at twenty Miles distance from Con∣stantinople, on great Penalties. Thus that great storm, which so severely threatned the whole de∣struction of the Ottoman Empire, was
dispers'd, and the Empire reassum'd again its pristine Greatness, Quiet, and Natural Te, all ersons believing themselves, and secure from any fut Aem,  o that Nature, by  whole∣some Laws, tha Selim and his great Council did Enact upon this great Deliverance, amongst which they would have made one, that should have excluded from succee∣ding to the Throne, any Persons that should be of Haly's Sect, though they were in all other respects qua∣lified, and known to be the un∣doubted Heir to the Empire. But Selim's tender Love and Affection to his Brother Amurat, would ne∣ver permit him to give his consent to it, so that it was not done. Things were in this posture, when Roxana, of whom we are go∣ing to rehearse the Story, began to appear in the World, with all those Charms, which made her as many Slaves as she had of Spectators.
She was Daughter to Aladin, the Seraquiere or Lord Lieutenant of a Province, a Person of a Noble Extraction, very Wealthy and Po∣pular, and of the Sect of Haly: She was Endow'd by Nature with all the Perfections, which could ac∣complish a Person of about eighteen or nineteen years of Age, and she had receiv'd an Education propor∣tionable to her Birth and Beauty. Her Father, who perfectly under∣stood the ways of the Court, thought it his best course, in order to preserve his Fair Daughter from the censure of the World, to keep her as far as he could from Constan∣tinople, and to dispose of her in Marriage to some Worthy Person, suitable to her Quality, and that great Portion which he design'd her. But his Wife, being of another mind, and very desirous to see the Court, did watch but for a time to go thither, and to bring her beau∣tiful
Daughter Roxana along with her. She was not long without a fair occasion for that purpose. Her Sister Marrying of her Daughter there, to a person who had a very considerable Employ at the Port. The earnest Invitation which they received from her Sister, to honour them with their presence, and some occasion which did call upon Ala∣din, to give his attendance at the Port about that time upon earnest business; made them to take hold of this Opportunity, so that they all came to Constantinople, where Aladin had a very stately Palace of his own. It was not long before Roxana's Beauty was blaz'd all about Con∣stantinople, even within the Gates of the Seraglio; amongst those who had had the happy Opportunity of seeing this Beauty, one who was the Son of a Bassa, and who had an House in another Street, whose Wall joined to the end of Aladin's
Garden, was the most passionate of all her Lovers. He had contriv'd so cunningly, a hole in the Stone Wall, which answer'd to Aladin's Garden, that it could not be per∣ceiv'd, it being so small in Aladin's Garden, and large enough in Ibra∣him's Garden (so was the Lover call'd) to put his Head in so, that he could almost see all over that part of the Garden, that was next to that Walk. He had heard of Raxana's Beauty, which had made him desirous to see whether her Face did answer that Fame which was spread of her, and having learn'd that all the Air that she took, was in the Walks of her Garden, which was not overlook'd from any house, but her Fathers; and that neither himself, nor any body else had lived in his House, since the death of his Father, therefore he hoped to gratifie his earnest desires and curiosity. He wanted not of opportunity of seeing Roxana, for she delighting
in Cultivating of Flowers, did Con∣stantly towards the Cool of the Evening walk in the Garden, and look after her Plants; one day, a sudden shower of Rain falling, she was forc'd to retire into a little Sum∣mer House, where, sitting down, she began to entertain her sel with her Woman, and the Subject of her discourse being the mariage at which she had lately assisted, she asked her Woman what she thought of the Bridegroom? who made answer, that she did think him very accom∣plish'd. To which, Roxana replyed, that for her part she could not af∣fect him, and then began to speak of a man as she would like, and that she could Love. Her maid said, that such a man was not to be found in Nature; to which she replyed again, that she would have such a one or none, and that she would stay till she found such a one. This discourse was clearly overheard by Ibrahim, who had then cause to admire her
Wit, as well as her Beauty; of a truth he was so taken with both, that he resolved upon a De∣claration of Love, which he thought ought first to be ushered in by asking of her Parents Consent, and immediately he set some of his Friends about it, but his Suit was so rejected by the Father, who de∣sign'd to marry her in his own Province, that Ibrahim thought it needless to apply himself any longer to her Parents, but resolved to endeavour the gaining of her Af∣fections by all the means imaginable; but how to come to the speech of her, or by what means to con∣vey his thoughts to her, was the business. After divers thoughts on that point, he thought it conveni∣ent to usher in his declaration by some pieces of Services, such as he should be capable of performing, and which he should think would please her best. He had not been above two or
three days in Town since the death of his Father which was above two years before, and having scarce been seen at Constantinople, he gave out to those few Friends which he had visited, that a business of impor∣tance which he was to accomplish, in the Country, and which had occa∣sioned his coming to Constantinople, calling for him in haste back, he would be immediately gon a∣gain; after which having taken leave of them, and gone with his People out of Town a little way, he sent them all to his Country House, under the care of his Stew∣ard, only retaining with him one Slave, who was his Gardner, in whom he had reposed very great Confidence. He had lain at a Friends House those two days he had been in Town, so that the Gates of his House having not at all been open'd, in the Night he return'd into the Town, where being come, he sent his Slave Moretto to get in such
things as he should necessarily want, and to bring them to him the next Night at the deadest time of it, and that he should take a special care of not being seen, when he came into the House by the stable door. After having given these in∣structions to his Servant, who was an absolute Stranger in the City, he got privately into his House, and having found in the Garden house some Tools, he fell to work, in making a hole in the Garden Wall, through which he might Peep, and behold his invisible Mistress. It was through that Hole, that he had beheld her, and heard her speak; he observed how she ordered her Flowers and Plants, and once he heard her say to her Maid, they would do much better, if they were removed in the empty Bed, which was on the other side of the Gar∣den, and that if they were Water'd early in the Morning, they would thrive much better; but that she
and her Maid were both too lasie to rise so early, and that she would not trust the care of those Plants to any but her self, that when they were come to Perfection, they might owe the whole obligation of their being to her own hands and Care, and that she might take the greater delight in the use of them. This Ibrahim took upon himself, as if his Mistress had spoken par∣ticularly to him, he therefore takes the Resolution in the dead of the Night, to get over the Wall into her Garden, and there perform all that she had mentioned to her Ser∣vant, but because he thought the work might be too much for one pair of hands to perform in some few hours, he commanded Moretto to follow him. They got over the Wall, and the first thing they did, was to gather up every the least bit of Rubbish which might have dropp'd at their coming over, which put him in mind also to go towards
the place where the hole was made, and examine how that stood, he found much Rubbish fallen there, but some Weeds growing high and thick in that place, as being some∣what out of the way, they did hide them: however, for fear of any discovery, when those Weeds should be cut down, he caus'd Mo∣retto to gather them all up, and fill his Pockets with them, while he himself took care to hide the hole under a large Leaf, which he might easily at any time remove to the one side, with a little green Sprig. This done, they immediately fell to work, Moretto dug up the Roots, and brought them to Ibra∣him, and he set them again in the other place; when they were all remov'd, he water'd them very well, out of a Cistern which was near the little Summer House, in which he had last seen Roxana; while Mo∣retto was employ'd in smoothing
up the old Bed, and cleansing all places so well, that no foot-steps nor any other things might be seen out of order. They after that, got over the Wall again into Ibrahim's own Garden, and went to rest the remainder of the night. The Sultana having heard of Roxana's Beauty and Wit, she had a great desire to see her, wherefore she sent the next morning, to in∣vite her and her mother to the Se∣raglio. This being such an honour as was not to be refus'd, they soon got Aladin's consent for their going thither; where they were very courteously receiv'd by the Sul∣tana, who, finding Roxana's Beauty and Wit, beyond all that she had heard, did present her with very Rich Jewels, and was very unwilling to part with her so soon as that night, she was desiring their stay with her for two or three days longer, which they knew not well how to grant, because Aladin did expect them
home that night, nor how to re∣fuse the Sultana, who had been so liberal to them, and who had re∣quir'd them to stay in so obliging terms, when that News were brought to the Sultana, that the Janisaries had taken up Arms, and were tumultuously assembled, to demand their Arrears, and the Heads of some of the great ones of the Divan; that they were so outrageous, that it was not safe for any one to appear in the street, this presently caus'd Roxana and her Mother to consent to the Sul∣tana's desires. So that they both remain'd in the Seraglio four days, at the end of which, the Janisaries having been appeas'd, with the Money which they had receiv'd for their Arrears, and a Months whole pay advance, provided they would lay down their Arms, and retire every one to their quarters, with assurance that those persons whose heads they demanded, should
be strictly examin'd, and if found guilty in the least, their heads should go off, they all were dis∣pers'd; and Roxana and her Mo∣ther, having thanked the Sultana for the honour she had made them, they return'd home well satisfyed. Roxana was no sooner return'd, but she made ready to go visit her Nurselings, she had taken the Key of that part of the Garden with her, which she usually kept in her pocket, and that unexpected delay from attending them, having made her think they were all destroy'd for want of watering, she hastned in great diligence with her Maid into the Garden; but how great was her surprisal, when come∣ing within sight of the bank or border that she had left the Flow∣ers growing on, seeing nothing but the Mold, she presently con∣cluded, that they had all been burnt up by the Sun, but coming
nearer, she could not so much as perceive the least sign that any had lately grown there; and causing her Maid to dig for a Root, and finding none neither, it increas'd her wonder, so that she knew not what to think; but looking on her Maid, said she, by this very misfortune happened to all my Flow∣ers, may be gathered, that we should never defer to another time what we can do at the present; had I re∣mov'd my Flowers, continued she, in that shady bed against that other Wall, as I intended before the Sul∣tana had sent for me, I might have found them all alive yet. All this was said as she was walking towards another part of the Garden; being come to the end of a quick-set, which took from her, till then, the sight of her regretted Flowers, of a suddain presenting themselves all fresh and flourishing to her Eye, it again did strikner into such an amazement, that she stood still,
admiring, without speaking one word, which gave time to her Maid to say, Certainly, Madam, it was out of your mind that you had order'd some body to perform this Transplanation? Who, I? reply'd Roxana, and have the Key in my pocket, and not the least remembrance of giving such orders, nay, never ha∣ving had the least inclination to∣wards commanding any body about that work, but your assisting of me? In this place, where I am certain not a man nor woman have set their fool, but us two, since our coming hither; there is no such thing, continu'd she, besides these Flowers look not as if newly transplanted, they are all full own, and hold up their heads, as if this had been their first natural led, neither can I perceive one sign of any persons having been here, and if I should mistrust some body coming over the Wall, all those houses that abut on our Garden are empty. And who would have
come over here, but with a design of robbing me, rather than of pre∣serving of those things in which I take so much delight. Yet, Madam, said the Maid, something must be the matter, they cannot, at your single command or desire, have transplan∣ted themselves. I know not what to say, nor what to think, reply'd Rox∣ana; say nothing of the adventure, till I have examin'd every body in the house in particular, even my Fa∣ther also. Come let us in. Of truth it was surprising to find all those Flowers to prosper so well upon their removal, but divers things did concur to it. First, the trans∣planting of them in the cool of the night, the quick dispatch of the work, the plentiful and coni∣nual watering of them, by our new Gardiner and his Man, and the supporting of those that droop'd at first, by soft and gentle props, which had been remov'd when they look'd up again, all which Ibrahim
had done ever since their removal; for you must know, that he having not seen the next day Roxana as he us'd to do, (and he and his man by turns, had been incessantly on the watch) he had sent him out to know what was the matter; which having learnt from one of the Ser∣vants, and that no body had a Key to that furthest part of the Garden, but Roxana, who was very curious and laborious in bringing up of Flowers. Moretto did fur∣ther of his own accord (being a good Gardiner of himself, inquire whether he might be admitted as Gardiner, to the Father, or to the Daughter, and promise having been made him of an inquiry into it, he had brought the News of Roxana's absence to his Master, who had taken the opportunity of Roxana's absence, to take a parti∣cular care of those Plants which he had remov'd, as the greatest Jew∣els his Mistress delighted in, and
as Lovers use to fancy, by her special Command. He had like∣wise left upon the Table in the Summer House, whence he fancied to have receiv'd those orders, a paper of Verses, of which I here give you a Copy. Our Mighty Prophet, cannot be a∣low'd With such Perfections to have been endow'd, As you would have the man you chuse to be, In fancy only such Heroes you'l see. Yet Mahomet was good, was great, was just, And in him our great Ala put his trust. But if his Soul was fill'd with mighty Jove, My heart is as brim full of mighty Love. In this I go beyond him, I love more, And you alone, Roxana, I adore.
Roxana was to pass by that Sum∣mer-House returning, she cast her Eye that way, and perceived the Paper, which gave her the cu∣riosity of stepping in, and taking of it up; she opened, and read it, and was no less surprized at that than she had been at the Flowers removal, which made her to hasten the more to the House to be bet∣ter inform'd of those Mysteries, if she could possible; not without great reflection on the whole. Be∣ing got in, the first thing she did was to enquire of her Father whe∣ther he had employed any body since her absence to work in the Garden? He told her no, and that he had not seen any person appear in it besides the old Gardner, since her going to the Sultana's, though he had walk'd in it more than u∣sually, since he had been detain'd at home by the Janisaries Tumults, and that as far as he could see in her Nurcery over the Quick-set, he
had not perceiv'd any body. She, after this answer made as strict an enquiry as she could possible of all the Servants and Slaves, one by one; threatning some, and mak∣ing fair promises to others, if they would discover who had been in her Privy-Garden since three or four days; but all to no purpose, none could inform her; Where∣upon she resolv'd to set a Watch for some nights, to surprize any person that should come over the Walls, and have them brought to examination. But all was to no effect. In the mean time, Ibrahim was not wanting in sending forth his Scout in the night, to learn how things were: Moretto was told that Roxana was sensible that du∣ring her absence, some body had got into her Garden, but which way she knew not, but upon sus∣picion that is could not be with∣out the old Gardner's knowledge, though he could not be brought
to confess any thing, she had cau∣sed her Father to turn him away, who had readily complyed with his Daughters desires in a business of that nature; that they were now in want of a Gardner, and if he would offer himself, and were ex∣pert at it, he might easily get the place, which was worth looking after. Moretto having had these Infor∣mations, desired the Fellow to pro∣pose him the next day for Gard∣ner, which the other having pro∣mised to do, he returned to his Ma∣ster, full freighted with all this good News. Ibrahim, who expected his return with the impatiency of a Lover, was glad to see him, and more too, when he heard all the story, and that there was not the least di∣strust from his House and Garden; but above all, when Moretto told him, that with his leave, if his Ma∣ster thought he could do him any
service in it, he believ'd that he could be taken as Gardiner into Roxana's Father's House, in the place of the old Gardner that had been displac'd, upon Roxana's Suspitions. I'll give thee leave, reply'd Ibrahim, and charge thee most strictly also, not to lose so good and great an Op∣portunity of serving me, which if thou dost honestly, I shall not on∣ly set thee free, but shall also pre∣fer thee to some handsome Employ∣ment answerable to those great Ser∣vices which thou shalt render me; but thou must first get me in all manner of provision for a Week, and then go and engage thy self to that Service, from which I expect such great advantages, as it may be contri∣ved betwixt thee and me, but be thou sure still to engage industriously Roxana as she passes by thee in some discourse, upon thy particular skill in the raising of Flowers, that she may, if possible, have a fancy to thy Service, or at least to some of
thy advice; and observe exactly all her actions and her words, that thou mayest give me a faithful ac∣count of them. Thus was Moretto sent to get in Provisions after which he went to learn of his Friend, what hopes he had of his getting him into that Family; It is your fault, if you get not in this very day, said the Friend, I have proposed the matter; it is hearkned unto, especial∣ly by Roxana, who has commanded me to bring you to her Father so soon as I saw you next, therefore come in with me, and I will shew you to our Master, who is now walking in the Garden. So said, so done; And A∣ladin did so well like of Moretto's person, promises of performance, and brisk answers, that he immedi∣ately sent for Roxana, and told her, he had met with a Gardner, who, he fancied to be more skilful than orinary in his Art, wherefore he design'd to retain him, and that if she desired it, he should also have
an Eye over her Garden. This did Moretto readily offer to do, pre∣tending extraordinary skill, in the raising of Flowers from seeds; she answer'd, that she wanted no body for that work, but that having a de∣sign to remove some Flowers on the shady side of the Garden, seeing that those did so well that had been al∣ready remov'd there she knew not how, she would therefore employ him in stir∣ring up the Earth, and fitting it for the Transplantation. Moretto was not wanting in presently informing them of the great Art he had in preparing of Earth, so that no Ver∣min nor Weeds should molest the Plants. After which Aladin and Rox∣ana retir'd; and Moretto fell to work in the Garden. In the Evening, Moretto took the pretence of g ing to fetch some Lin∣nen, that he might lw he liber∣ty of giving his Mas an Account of h good Scess; he told him all that had passed, and that he did
not despair of finding opportunities to serve him to some good purpose. They took their measures accor∣dingly, and that they might have a correspondency together without suspicion; they agreed upon this following expedient. Moretto could not write, but read very well his Master's Writing; Ibrahim therefore was to write what he desi'd to know; which he was to fasten to a stone, and this Stone he was to throw in Aladin's Garden, presently after he had made a certain noise, and which was to be answer'd by Moretto's stri∣king upon his Spade, with the In∣strument that he used to clean it with, which was the sign he was at hand to receive the Message; that Moretto having taken it up, and read the Contents, he should fling over a white Stone for the Affirmative, and a black stone when it was in the Negative. This Intreague went on very currant for three or four days, during which, Ibrahim did
often see Roxana in her Garden; but one day Ibrahim having heard the Signal, and casting the Stone short, so that it fell on this side the Quick-set Hedge in Roxana's Garden, the door of it being shut, and not knowing which way to come at it, he at last sought so long, that he sound in a Corner next to the Wall at the foot of the Quickset, a space which was more thin than the rest, he went to work about it, having first looked about whether the Coast was clear, and with his Knife ha∣ving made himself a passage, which he industriously covered without and within, with the Branches which he had left to that purpose, he got into Roxana's Garden, took up the Stone, and could not forbear run∣ning hastily to the Hole in the Wall, to see whether he could see or speak with his Master; by good Fortune his Master was on the Watch, and hearing a noise he went to the peep-hole, where he saw his
Moretto, who told him of the occasi∣on of his coming, which was to advertise him that he should throw the Stones far enough, for fear that at some time or other he should be discover'd going to fetch them, through the hole he had made in the Quickset. Ibrahim had so many Questions to make to Moretto, that it kept him so long in the Garden, that he heard a noise at the entry of it. It was Roxana, who, sooner than her usual hour, was come with a design to take Moretto into her Garden with her, and shew him, what she would have him to do; he heard her speak to her Woman, and by the Voice, judged they were drawing nearer to the place where he was. Ibrahim did not know what to advise him to he idding him go hide himself in the Sum∣merhouse, which Moretto would have done, but beginning to per∣ceive their Cloaths, he could not re∣cover that place without ing dis∣covered,
at last being prest to it, he fell a digging, and minded them not. Roxana was wonderfully sur∣priz'd, when she first perceiv'd this new Gardner at work in her Gar∣den, she came up to him, and ask∣ed him how he came there, and who had set him to work? he resolutely made answer, that finding the door open, and having heard her say, That she design'd to have the rest of her Flowers remov'd to that side of the Garden, he had taken the boldness to step in, and to shut the Door after him; and that when he was in, he could not forbear trying the goodness of the Earth with his Spade, that he might give her an account of it. The readi s of the Answer, and the boldness with which it was given, did incline Roxana to believe the Story  be true: wherefore having check'd her Maid for having not shut the Gar∣den Door when they went last out of it; to which, the Maid pro∣tested,
she thought she had; gave Moretto her Instructions. And then she went into the Summer-House, where Ibrahim, who was still upon the watch, did see her pull out a Paper, which she read very atten∣tively; which done, Ibrahim heard her say, It is strange that I cannot learn who wrote this Paper, and by what means it was convey'd here? it speaks as if it came from one who knew my very thoughts. As if, Madam, the person had heard what you had spoken the day be∣fore, said the Maid, when you ask'd me my thoughts on the Bride∣groom? Prithee what did I say, reply'd Roxana? That you could not fancy such a Man, Madam, answer'd the Maid, and then, con∣tinu'd she, you gave such a Picture of an Hero, as scarce could ever be found in any Romance. I hum∣bly conceive, Madam, that the Au∣thor of those Verses aims at that, when he says, that even our Great
Prophet was not so qualified, as you require your Lover should be; and certainly, Madam, he that wrote those Lines had a world of Love, at least he expresses much of Pas∣sion, and if his other qualities an∣swer that, though he should not be so perfectly accomplish'd in beauty and shape as you would de∣sire; he doubtless might merit much. Hold, not so fast, reply'd Roxana, if you would not have me believe you had an hand in the con∣veyance of the Paper here, and are become his Advocate: If I were Madam, though I protest I am all Ignorance in this Mystery, reply'd the Maid, if his good Meen, his Birth, his Riches, his Courage can∣not be question'd that dares lift up his thoughts to you; if, in a word all other things answer'd the Great∣ness of his Soul, would you be an∣gry I should serve a Person that should express so much Love for you, Madam, whose happiness I
wish for above my own. But what dost thou know, reply'd Roxana, but that he counterfeits, and that his Body is as counterfeited as his Mind? But if otherwise, reply'd the Maid? well Madam, give me leave to wish for your Content, that he were as I fancy him, and that you could be satisfy'd of that with your own eyes. Thou speakest of impossibilities, reply'd Roxana, 'twas easie to have this Paper conveyed here, but a man cannot so easily convey himself; besides, it were beyond, what my Condition would permit me to allow of, without the highest resentment imaginable. Yet a Letter of Submission and of Love from such a person would not destroy you, Madam, reply'd the Maid. But how should I know still whether all the rest did answer to that Love, or whether that Love was not meerly pretended to make him sport withal? Then Madam, said the Maid, he would be the worst of men, and I should be
sorry of ever having harbour'd one good thought of him in my Opi∣nion. Well, to tell thee the truth, reply'd Roxana, such a Person I should be glad to see, if it did not cost me too dear. May you have your desires, Madam, reply'd the Maid, and I wish I could have him in∣form'd of it. Not for the World, re∣ply'd Roxana, I have a great fancy that he had an hand in the transplant∣ing of my Flowers, though no mention is made of it in his Verses. I have had the same Thoughts, Madam, reply'd the Maid, for why should not he who knew your thoughts in one thing, know them in another also. Well, all that I can make of it, reply'd Roxana, is, I fear, that some of my Servants have been brib'd to let a Person into my Garden, who being closely conceal'd, did over∣hear all that I said and acted, ac∣cording as his humour led him after it. Pray, Madam, give me leave to consult a Caldean about it, said
the Maid, I know one that is very expert, and who has told me strange things concerning my self? Do what thou wilt, reply'd Roxana, but take it all upon thy self, I will have no hand in it. With that Rox∣ana went out of the Summer-house, ordering Moretto to draw the door after him when he had done in the Garden. You may imagine in what rap∣ture Ibrahim was at all he had seen and heard; he resolved to make good use of it, and to that purpose he did cast a little Stone over, towards the place where Moretto was at work; who did guess at the meaning of it, and having seen whether the Coast was clear, he drew near to the peep-hole, where Ibrahim told him all that had passed; after which, it was agreed that Moretto should ask leave to go to a Caldean which he had heard of, who us'd to in∣form him as to Gardening, to know
of him when the Stars and the Moon were in the best disposition for to transplant those Flowers which Roxana had commanded him to remove; that that should be an introduction by which, through his Wit and good Management, he should insinuate to the Maid that she could not employ a more Learn∣ed Man than that Caldean, if she should give him the least hint of any desire she had that way; and if so, that then he himself would in a disguise pass for the Caldean, and by that means work his own ends to his full content. This be∣ing agreed upon, Moretto return'd to finish his work, and then he re∣turn'd into the House, while his Master retired to rest, and to ex∣pect his answer. Moretto, whose Wit answered the great inclination which he had to serve his Master, fail'd not of addressing himself to Roxana's Maid, to obtain leave of going out, as
he had projected; and he told her so many wonderful things of this Caldean, that the Maid grew impa∣tient of speaking with him her self, with a design that if he did not an∣swer exactly the expectation which Moretto had stir'd up in her by his recital, she would pass him by, and go to her old acquaintance; and no sooner was Moretto gone, but that she acquainted Roxana with the wonders which Moretto had told her of his Caldean; this set her as much a-gog as her Maid, of hearing what he could say, but for fear any body should have the least suspition of it, she ordered her Maid to enter∣tain him from a low Window, and that she would be concealed in some convenient place of the room, where she might hear all. Mean time away gets Moretto in the dusk of the evening to his Ma∣ster, with such accoutrements as
were proper for to make an abso∣late Caldean of him, he fitted them upon him, gave him his Cue, and when it was dark they both got out at the Stable door, and away they trudg'd towards Aladin's House, which, though near, required many steps to get the right way unto it; being got thither, our new Caldean stood at a little distance from the House while Moretto went into give the Maid notice, who being upon the watch, bid him stay a little for an answer, and went towards her La∣dies Appartment: This gave Mo∣retto some thoughts that her Lady was to be made acquainted with it, in which he was presently confir∣med; for after the Maid had told him at what Window he should bring the Caldean, he going out, turn'd back suddenly, to ask her if he should remain with the Caldean, or come in again, he had a glimps of Roxana who was getting into that low Room; he was bid to
come in again, and leave the Cal∣dean to discourse with her pri∣vately. Moretto presently inform'd Ibra∣him of his new discovery; after which he brought him to the ap∣pointed Window, where he left him, and so went into the house, leaving his Master to manage those two Females. The Maid ask'd him, whether he was the Caldean of whom their Gardner had given so great a Cha∣racter? he answer'd that he was the person, in a low voice; she bid him speak louder without fear, because there being No body else that could hear: no, said he, then I find you have a mind to play upon me, and seeing that you will not deal with me, as I design'd to deal with you both, added he, I'll re∣tire immediately, and Roxana shall not have the satisfaction which she expected from me. At the word Roxana, both the Mistress and the
Maid started, and perceiving that he was going to be as good as his word, by moving from the Win∣dow; Hold, said the Maid by Rox∣ana's Command, and since nothing is hid from your great Knowledge, speak boldly to us both! Do, said Roxana, and if thou goest on as thou hast begun, I will highly gratifie thee. Then say not one word more, reply'd Ibrahim, for it were needless; I know your Thonghts, and as dark as it is can read them on your fore∣heads as easily as the Verses in your Pocket. Ask me no more questions, I say, continu'd he, no more than I ask you, but hear with attention all that I know of your Thoughts, your Wishes, and Desires. 'Twas by my great Art, my Infallible Art, that the Flowers in your Garden were Transplanted; I caused those Verses to be Wrote, which you found in the Summer-House, after you had given your Maid an account of the qualifications that man should have that you could
Love. I infus'd into such a Person the desire to see you, to like you, and to give you that short decla∣ration of Love in Verse: Ask me not why I did this for you, I see your longing desire to do it, not one word. I read also that you would be glad to see that so accomplish'd a Person, and foresee that you will love him, and that your hearts will agree. I know that your Servant would have addres∣sed her self to another of my Profes∣sion, but he had not given you all this satisfaction. I know your Pa∣rents will thwart his Love to you, and that it is not to be slackned by their greatest severity; and that you will, nay that you must, for the Hea∣vens have Decreed it, I say, you must repay his Love with yours, mu∣tually enterchange your hearts, and by firm Promise make you both one Person, 'till time and Friends work your Parents to give their consent. I know, lastly, that you would be glad to see the Person's Idea or Form,
which you shall do; hear it speak, Court you, as if it were he himself, if you dare with only this your Maid, go to the Summer-House this night at Twelve, where I engage nothing shall appear, or be heard to affright you. And now I have done; when you would hear more, send for me here a∣gain, or I'll come of my self when I think you may want me: remember this night at Twelve, on which de∣pends much of your future happiness. He was Retiring, when Roxana holding a Purse in her hand, cry'd hold, take this. At which turning his head, I despise your gilded dross, said he, and move by Nobler Mo∣tives. So he retir'd. It is scarce to be imagin'd, in what surprizal and confusion of thoughts our Caldean left his Mi∣stress and her Maid by his pretend∣ed miraculous Skill, they took him for no less than a great Prophet; but the only scruple which was left in Roxana's thoughts was, why
he had, by his own Confession, so much concern'd himself in the inte∣rest of a Person so absolute a stran∣ger to him as she was? to which the Maid made answer, That though he was not pleas'd to discover his rea∣sons for it, she might conclude, that if she knew not him, it was probable that he not only knew her, but had also some great Reasons that led him to act as he did: and pray, Madam, give me further leave, added she, to tell you, that I look not upon this Person as one of those ordinary men which we employ to tell us our For∣tunes. Nor I neither, reply'd Rox∣ana, I rather take him to be some Great Master in the Mathematicks, who by his great Reading, and profound Learning, joyned to some conversation with Christians, who it is said are incomparable in those fore-telling Arts, has attained to this wonderful heighth of Know∣ledge, as to read our very thoughts. And in that opinion, I have a great
desire this night to try this prodi∣gious experiment which he has said he would shew me. There Madam, I leave you, said the Maid, and must acknowledge my weakness, my fears and apprehensions, of I know not what danger, prevail too much upon me, to venture so far. Thy panick fears, reply'd Roxana, I have as much to hazard as you, and yet my desires are so great to see the shape of the Person he mention'd, that I will venture on the thing. Ma∣dam, I confess, that as you are of a greater Rank, you have more to lose than I, but then give me leave to tell you, that you have also more to gain; for if I mistake not, pardon my boldness, Madam, there is another Motive than bare curiosity that leads you on, while I have neither interest nor curiosity enough to venture. You cannot think it should be Love should push me on, reply'd Roxana, with a Person that I never yet did see? But, Madam, there may be
Inclinations and Desires to see an Object so conformable to ones wishes, as our great Man has promis'd to shew you, said the Maid. I must confess, reply'd Roxana, that nothing could please me more than to see such a Person as I have represent∣ed to my self divers times, and which I have never seen. Doubt∣less, Madam, said the Maid, and it would not be very difficult for you to love such a Person too. Thou com'st near to the point, reply'd Roxana; well, to encourage thee to attend me with thy endeavours, I will confess to thee that I have had some inclination towards that Person who writ the Verses which I found in the Summer-house, ever since I first read them; and that then, and divers times since, I have wish'd that that Person were qualify'd ac∣cording to my desire. Be sure to keep my Secret, now that I have made thee my Confident. This is to engage you further, added she, giv∣ing
her the rse which our Ma∣gician had refus'd, take it as an assurance of my further Favours, which I will always measure by those Services that you will render me. There needed no more to engage her Maid wholly to her devotion; she protested that she would go through Fire and Water, and pass over the greatest difficulties ima∣ginable: that she was not only rea∣dy to attend her that night, but also to lay down her life at any time for her Service: Thus they having spun the time away till the hour of Ten. Roxana laid her self in a Day-Bed, which was in an open Room, joyning the Gardens, more to rave on the Adventure she was going about, than to sleep; while she left her Maid watching, with strict charge to call upon her at the appointed Hour; she hav∣ing such an ascendant over her Mother, and now that Aladin was still absent, as he had been for two
days before, she disps'd of her self and Servants as she pleas'd; which was the reason that she had pre∣tended that to enjoy the cool Air which came from the Garden in∣to that Room she had chosen to lye there that night. If Roxana busied her thoughts one way, Ibrahim was not more quiet in another. He hugg'd him∣self a thousand times for carrying on his Design so well, and without the least suspicion; he thank'd his propitious Stars as oft, and wish'd that he might but converse for some few moments with his Mo∣retto, to take further measures to finish the so well begun Work: He was weighing every particular cir∣cumstance; his Fears and Hopes were ebbing and flowing accord∣ing as his thoughts did suggest him, when Moretto, who through his hole in the Quickset had got in∣to the Garden, so soon as he had seen the Coast clear, did cast some
Stones over into his Master's Gar∣den, to give him notice of his being at the hole. Ibrahim, whose soli∣citous thoughts did not hinder him from being attentive that way, pre∣sently repair'd to the place; where, hearing that it was Moretto, he cast the Rope-ladder over the Wall, and bid him come over to him. There he told him what he had done, and in what an amazement he had left both Mistress and Maid; what he had promis'd them to perform that night at Twelve, and what he design'd further to act. But, my dear Moretto, continu'd he, dost thou think that Roxana will have so much Curiosity and Cou∣rage as to adventure her self at the Place? Sir, reply'd Moretto, if the Character you have given her of your own Person has touch'd her Heart, you may be sure that she will pass over all dangers to see so charming an Object; and that she had some propensity that way, is clear,
by her desire to be present at the Caldean's Discourse. However, re∣ply'd Ibrahim, I will prepare my self for that purpose, in which I must have thy assistance to carry all off without the least suspicion. Then he told him how he had laid the Plot, what part he was to act, and that he would perform the rest; he bid him put on that Caldean Habit which he had worn, to dis∣guise himself; that he should hide himself behind the Bushes which surrounded the Summer-House, so that he might see when they were got into the House, that then he should pull the door close by a String ty'd to the Lock, and keep it shut on the out-side, till he should hear him to dismiss them, and then he should let loose the door, slip off the string, and get as fast as he could into the out-houses where he usually lay. Ibrahim having made an end of informing Moretto how he should
act, he gave him some Lamps to set up in divers places of the Sum∣mer-house, with order to watch their coming, and to fling a Stone for Signal of their approach; after which Moretto got over the Wall in his Caldean Habit, dispos'd of the Lamps, fastn'd the String to the Lock of the Door, and went to watch their coming. Roxana in the mean time being too full of imaginations to get a moments sleep, began to talk to her Maid, which was over-heard by Moretto, as he was got to the outward Quickset, which parted Roxana's Garden from her Fathers; this made him Curious to lend an ear to those Voices, but what with their speaking too low for fear of being over-heard in the House, and with the distance he was at, he could not understand what they said, so that he did not know who those persons were; but he was soon inform'd of that, for Roxana ha∣ving
a mind to try her own Cou∣rage as well as her Maids, in go∣ing into her Father's Garden before hand, (for then it was but half an hour after Eleven) she had ventur'd out, and they were walking to∣wards the Quickset partition, on the other end of it that Moretto's Creeping hole was so that he could distinctly hear the Maid say, Ma∣dam, I know not what I ail, but a certain horrour seizes me on the sud∣den, which makes me fancy I see strange things about me. Thou art able, reply'd Roxana, to produce fear in the most resolute, with thy strange fancies; and thy talk so works upon my imagination, that methinks I see strange things also; I find we are both very unfit for so great an Enterprise, continu'd she, and seeing thou hast not the Courage to hearten me up, I'll think of a timely retreat, and desist from this attempt, at least for this night. With this she turn'd back to go to∣wards
the House, still discoursing with the Maid. Moretto, who had heard this, thought he had enough, and ha∣ving the Caldean's di upon him, did resolve to break heir new measures; to that purpose he crept all along a Hedge which hid him from their sight, in order to inter∣cept their return, and to fright them into a compliance to his Master's designs: but as he was making all the haste he could, he made a noise; which conducd to his designs, for Roxana hearing it, and as fear aug∣ments all Objects, so it increases Sounds, she imagin'd it to be much nearer to her than really it was, which made her and her Maid remain moveless in the place where they were. This gave time to Moretto to recover himself, and to get before them unseen into the Room, where he found the Door open, not doubting but that they came from thence; where he de∣sign'd
to stand, and to affright them back again towards the Gar∣den. After that Roxana had stood listning a while, and heard no more noise, she began to whisper to her Maid, that she wish'd her self in the House again. To which the Maid answer'd, that it was her thoughts also; and added, pray Madam let us get in so soon as we can; this she said, creeping softly after her Mistress, that mov'd as slow as she could; they got at last to the door of the Room, where the Maid, being more frighted than the Mi∣stress, would have run in first. But what a horrour was she in, when she found the passage possest by the Caldean, which she knew by his Habit, with that small light of the Stars which they had. She pre∣sently run back, giving a shriek, which made Roxana do the like; but striking violently one against another it broke the violence of it;
so that it being in the deepest si∣lence of the night, and far from the body of the House, by good for∣tune it was not heard. But what with the fear and the shock they had given one another they both had fallen, the Maid in a swoon, and Roxana not far from it. This put Moretto into greater trouble than before, he knew the hour was near, that his Master was in ex∣pectation of them, but how to get them thither he knew not; he found that Roxana mov'd, which made him to tell her, That she should not fear any thing so long as he was by her; that so soon as he did foresee her fears coming upon her, and that she design'd to retire, and not give her self the satisfaction of seeing that which she most desired, and on which depended all her future misery or happiness, he had Transported him∣self to her aid, to strengthen her confidence, and to be her Protector; That he very much feared some evil
would befall her Lover or her self for the want of Faith, and that if she would not bring her own or the Persons ruine upon him, which she was to have seen, she ought to go on boldly, being assured that under his conduct, she and her Maid would both remain secure from all manner of dangers. All this he said, feigning his voice, pretending to speak soft∣ly for fear of being over-heard; but his design was to disguise his voice that they should not perceive the change was put upon them. They had never heard him speak but once before, and had not seen his face till then, because that at the Window, the Street being lower than the Room Roxana was in, they could not well see his face, so that he pass'd for currant for the same person in both their Opinions; I say in both their Opinions, because that by this time the Maid was recovered out of her Trance, and had lain still and heard part of what
Moretto had said to Roxana, and was sitting on the ground at her Mistresses feet, whom Moretto had raised up. Roxana being somewhat comforted, assured, and affrighted by the danger she or her Lover would be in, if she still persisted in refusing to go, told the Caldean, that if he would accompany her, she would under his protection adventure on. He having again spoken all he could to encourage them both, with assurance of his protection, Roxana gave him the Key to open the door of her Garden, and he led them both towards it. He was still in a peck of troubles for want of an opportunity of giving Ibra∣him the sign of their approaches, that the Lamps might be light∣ed. And Roxana had more than once complain'd of the darkness, which she confess'd increas'd her fears; and to assure her, he had told her that he would order lights sufficiently by that time they got
there. I have but to speak a word, give a sign to my Spirits, or cast a stone, and they will soon obey my will; you shall see the Experiment of it, continu'd he, so stooping he took up a stone, and flung it towards the Summer-House; now, said he, ob∣serve how the place will be enlightned to your desire. They had not gone two steps further, but they began to perceive a Light in the Summer-House, which still encreased, as they drew near. Moretto did en∣tertain them as well as he could, with assurances of safety, to take off all their fears; at last coming towards the Summer-House, he rais'd his voice on purpose, that his Master should not be surpriz'd at his coming with them, and said, Now, Madam, is the time for you to banish from you all fears, and to fill your heart with Love, for I have done for you more than I promised; I only told you I would bring that Person's Idea to your presence, who
wrote the Verses, but there is some∣thing which must still remain secret, which makes me think I can ne∣ver do too much for you, wherefore I have transmitted the Person himself here; he was in his sleep when I did it, but I suppose by this awakned, or will soon awaken at your coming. Moretto being now come to the steps that went to the Summer-House door, Ascend, Madam, conti∣nued he, and then admire what I have done for you. With that, he led her up, and put her into the house, then took the Maid who follow'd her Mistress, and put her in also, and bid them go forward to the Table. As re-assur'd as Roxana was, she durst not contradict her Guide, which gave him time to shut the door upon them, and to retire. Roxana was wondering at the great and clear light which so many Lamps as were placed there did give; when that Ibrahim, as if new∣ly awakned, being set off with the
most advantageous Dress that he could possible put on, and adorn'd with a world of Jewels, did raise himself from a Day-Bed, on which he was lying, and, as if amaz'd, startling and staring. Is it a Dream, or do I wake? said he; then looking a∣bout him, Where am I? continu'd he. Then looking on Roxana, Ha! What do I see? the very Darling of my Soul, my Heart's Delight, and all that I most desired. What good Angel has been so kind as to continue and con∣clude my Dream with such a blessed Vision! Roxana, Divine Roxana here, and I stand still, and not cast at her feet a Heart that is so wholly hers! Pardon, sweet Angel, the Errour that the great surpri∣sal I am in, at so fair a Vision, has caus'd me to commit; and deign to accept the offers of an Heart whose greatest Glory is to be your Slave. With that he was going to throw himself at Roxana's feet, when she moving her Body that
way, But hold, said he again, to himself, let not my excess of Joy render me too rash, and lose the Blessing I enjoy in this bright Ap∣parition, by drawing too near with my Terrestrial Body: then falling back again, while he was speaking this, thus he continu'd; If you are not but condens'd Air, or some Etherial Spirit, who to mock my Passion for a time, has assum'd this glorious shape to render me after∣wards the most miserable wretch living, when you again dissolve into soft Air. Speak, give me some signs of Life; a Voice coming from so admirable a Shape, cannot but be all Harmony to my Heart. At this Roxana bowing forward, was go∣ing to speak, when he again in∣terrupted her thus; By Heavens, it moves! but one word, and I am blessed for ever. Then did Roxa∣na say, Whoe're you are, that thus exercise your Wit and Fancy upon a Person who knows her self much
inferiour to what the extasy you seem to be in leads you to speak; know that I am the real Roxana, Mistress of this place. If all I hear and see is not Inchantments, which I am apt to believe is, when I consider that Shape which is before me, and those Expressions, which, whether true or feigned, real or delusive, please my Ears and Heart? and if you are as real Substance as I find my self to be, I may now say I have seen the reali∣ty of those things which I before did only frame in my imagination; and since I find that all which that Great man has told me proves true, even beyond my expectation, I am apt to believe that all the rest he has told me will be of the same stamp. If he has said, Madam, reply'd Ibrahim, that you should see a Per∣son, in whose single heart there was more Love contain'd for you, than in all the World besides, (though all were too little yet.) If that he told you, that it was im∣possible
for that person to live a day longer after seeing you, with∣out the hopes that you would ac∣cept of an Heart which is wholly yours. If he has assur'd you that from the first moment that person beheld you, he vow'd to live e∣ternally yours: I am the person. In confirmation of which, I here lay my life, and all I can call mine at your feet; protesting by our great Prophet, that I will never rise again from this place, till you are pleas'd to accept and receive this free (though unworthy) Gift I make you of my self. Saying this, he slung himself at Roxana's feet; she extended her hand to raise him, but he taking hold of it, and pressing it hard with his lips, No, Madam, continu'd he, never must I rise from this place, till you have spoke my happiness. To which thus Roxana answer'd, That I may the sooner relieve you from this un∣beseeming and uneasie posture, and
to follow what the Heavens have decreed, in which peradventure con∣curs something of my own inclina∣tion; for I cannot but think, when I reflect on all that has been acted this night, that it is the will of Heaven. Here is my Hand that I receive those offers you have made me of your Heart, in ex∣change of which, I give you another, that was never any others but mine, and now yours. And I, Madam, re∣ply'd Ibrahim, do take the boldness to seal this Contract on this white Author of my Happiness with my Lips. With this she took him up; then said to him, looking on her Maid, Here is one shall be a se∣cret Witness of our secret Love, till we find means to get our Friends consents; mean time, you know my Father's severity towards me, by which you may guess that if he had been now at Constantinople, I should not have had this opportunity, which I know not when we shall have again,
because he is expected here again to morrow. After this they fell to particular discourses about the means they should use to see one another; and they agreed that Moretto, for having been so instrumental to their mutual happiness, in bringing them to the knowledge of the Cal∣dean, should be admitted into the Confidence, not doubting but that betwixt him and her Maid they should have such frequent news of one another, that they should not be long before they met again; upon which, and divers other dis∣courses of that nature, day begin∣ning to break forth, they thought fit to separate, which, after a thou∣sand repeated assurances of con∣stancy on both sides, they did; he leading first Roxana to the Gate of her Garden, then he getting over the Wall by his Rope-ladder. The brightest ay is frequently follow'd with a ormy Night, and the fairest Night succeeded by a
Cloudy Day. Our Lovers Joys, like all vehement Motions, were too great to last long, and though the Cause of it was not in themselves, but from abroad; yet so suddain, so great, and so passionate a Love, as was between them, rendred them not long happy, as you shall hear from what follows. Ibrahim was a Person, that in all respects was very desirable; no wonder then if that Roxana was so impatient to see again a Person so like that which she had fram'd in her imagination, that could only please her. She had employ'd her Maid, and the Maid Moretto, so that she was certain that her Fa∣ther would not return the day fol∣lowing to Constantinople. Ibrahim was to be advertis'd of that, and means contriv'd of getting to the Summer-House, the only convenient place for their private interview; Moretto was to be consulted upon this, wherefore, when Roxana knew
that he was at work, she took the opportunity to speak to him, as she went to visit her Flowers towards the Evening, and told him, That she did not know how Ibrahim could get into the Summer-house that night; as he had been the night before? Why, Madam, the same way, reply'd Moretto. We have no longer any need of the Cal∣dean's assistance, said Roxana, and I would gladly converse with him, after his own coming to this place. Moretto, finding that he had like to have committed an error, said, Madam, though he was last night carried into the Summer House, while he was asleep, by the Caldean's won∣derful Power and Art, yet I sup∣pose that he convey'd him there through the Air over those Walls which encompass your Garden; and no question, Madam, but that if I in∣form him, by your Order, of your de∣sires, let me but know the hour, and his Love will be sufficient to find him Wings to flye to you, if all other
means were failing, he'll find or make a way over the Walls, no question. Well, said Roxana, I leave that care to you, fail not to give him timely notice of it; but, added she, where will you find him? we forgot that. Trouble not your self, Ma∣dam, reply'd Moretto, the Caldean will soon satisfie me in that. 'Tis true, reply'd Roxana, but after you have got that knowledge hasten to him, and deliver him this Note: Then she gave him the Note, and went to walk in her Garden as she us'd to do; but being come near the Summer-house, she had not the power to ad∣vance one step forward till she had gone into it; where being seated, she began to reflect on all that had happen'd to her there the last night: a while after, she pull'd Ibrahim's Verses out of her bosom, and ha∣ving kiss'd them, she read them o∣ver, kiss'd them, and put them into her bosom again; then fell a raving as before; and then by and
by again, out would she pull the Paper, kiss, read, and kiss it a∣gain; and this sport she repeated over divers times. All this while Ibrahim, through his peep-hole, had the pleasure of seeing how much his beloved Mistress did make of his Verses; for he had seen them so often that he could discern them at such a distance. This sight did infinitely please him, and he was so attentive at it, that he per∣ceiv'd not Moretto, who was coming to him, 'till he was close by, he acquainted him with Roxana's de∣sires, then gave him the Letter, which being opened by Ibrahim, he read in it what follows. You'll wonder it may be at my for∣wardness, in making these advances, which I should, with the Decorum of my Sex, have expected first from you, but mighty Love causing me to re∣flect on all that the Heavens have done for me of late, I can no longer withstand his invincible Power, it is
he that has guided my Pen, to in∣form you that my Father not return∣ing home this day, this night may be as freely ours as was the last. Hea∣ven knows what we shall do to con∣tinue our enterview after Aladin's return; but I leave all to Love, to whom I have wholly devoted my self. I will not doubt but that you will be as desirous to meet me in the Summer-house this night, at the same hour, as I shall be to see you there. It is Roxana gives you this advice. It was now Ibrahim's turn to kiss the Letter, which he did over and over, and having bid Moretto to fetch him Ink and Paper, he pass'd his time till his return, in contemplating his Dear Roxana, who by this time was fallen asleep, holding the Verses in her hand, which were ready to drop. To enjoy the better the bene∣fit of the cool Air, she had cast aside her Vail more than usually, by which he did discover whole
mines of Beauties which were spread all over her neck and Breasts. When Moretto was return'd, he could not take off his Eyes, from so Charming an Object, and when he did it, he enviously turned his back towards the Hole, that Mo∣retto should not rob him with his Eyes, of some part of that which he thought was wholly due un∣to his Love. In this place, as in many others of this Book, I might make di∣vers curious Reflections; as here, for example, jealousie is the na∣tural effect of Love, &c. But my design being to give you only a bare account of the Court-Secret, according to the faithfulness of my Memoires; besides that, the Sub∣ject of this Novel is sufficient enough of it self to furnish me with mat∣ter, I shall decline all such kind of superfluous digressions, and stick close to my Subject. This is then what Ibrahim writ back to Roxana.
Our Love had a more noble birth, than to ascribe unto it any of those low Formalities, which were invented by meaner Souls than my Roxana's, and that are put in use by such persons as make Love more by form than by inclination. Let it suffice, that your kind invitation is as acceptable to me, as if it was an assurance that you gave your consent to answer one from me. I shall employ all the time, till the happy hour be come, in such pleasant Reflections on what has al∣ready pass'd, and in such Raptures on the Joys to come, that I shall, by those means, make that time, which otherwise would seem an Age to me, be but a moment of pleasure, till that happy hour. The Heavens, who has made me for my Roxana, and she for her Ibrahim, preserve us both. This Letter being finished, he dispatched Moretto away with more than usual haste, only that he might lose no more of that sight which his sleeping Roxana did afford him. He was still gazing on, wishing
himself all turn'd into Eyes, that he might devour her with looking on, when on a sudden a great noise was heard, of a confusion of Voi∣ces, which still drawing nearer to his Garden, he thought fit to re∣tire into his House, for fear of a surprize. When he was got thi∣ther, he more distinctly heard the Voices, and gathered by them, that it was a Slave who had made his escape. Some of the Pursuers were for getting over the Wall, and to search in the Garden; others a∣gain said that no body liv'd in that house; the sooner for that, cryed others, let us search there; at last the most voices carried it, for the search in the Garden: Some pre∣sently got over by the help of o∣thers, at which Ibrahim having made fast all his doors, he kept within, and let them do what they pleased without, when, after they had looked all over, and found no body, they left off, but it was not without some cunning observations,
made by one of those that came first over; he, before the rest was come, had observed some footsteps new made upon the Grass which was high, and those steps tending towards the House, he had follow'd them, and leaning his Ear to the Key-hole of the door, he had heard some kind of treading in the House, all this gave him some Jealousie, that the Fugitive was gotten into it; he made no more noise of it at that time, but was resolved to watch thereabouts that night, to seize on the Fugitive himself, when he should think of getting off, and have the sole Honour and Reward of the business to himself; with these thoughts he mixt himself with the rest of the Rabble, and got over the Wall as he had got in, and the noise going by little and little, further and further, at last all was quiet as before. So soon as the Storm was over, Ibrahim could no longer refrain from going again to have another
view of his Mistress asleep; but when he came he found her gone, 'tis likely being awakned by the noise. Ibrahim guessing that he had lost his happiness by the noise which the multitude had made, did wish that he had had some of them there to revenge himself up n; but pre∣sently considering that  night he should have the happines o ee her nearer at hand, and to discourse with her, he quieted himself with that Expectation, and return'd into the house to wait till the good hour. Mean time, Roxana on her part did not think the time less long, though she had slept some part of it away. She had receiv'd Ibrahim's answer by Moretto, and she was so ordering of things, and disposing of the Servants, that none but her own Maid and Moretto, the two Confidents, should know of the business: All things being put in order, and the hour drawing near,
she thought it would be some satis∣faction to her, to spend the rest of the time at the Summer House, which she did, taking her Maid a∣long with her, and leaving Moret∣to at her Garden door, to be in readiness to give them the Alarm, if any Enemy should appear. At last the twelve a Clock at night Prayers were proclaim'd from the top of a Tower, accor∣ding to the custom of that Coun∣try, where they have no publick Clocks, nor Bells; and Ibrahim came to the Garden with his Rope-Ladder, he presently fix'd it, and got up, and was striding over the wall, when a piece was discharg'd, which shot him quite through the Body, so that he fell head-long into Roxana's Garden. He that had shot him, followed close his Game, not knowing which way he had fallen, and believing that he had shot him, and not finding him on that side of the wall, cryed out, if there be any body in the next Garden, stop
that Fugitive which I have shot; and looking for some convenient place to get over, he at last found the Rope-Ladder, on which having got, he leapt into Roxana's Gar∣den, and was still so attentive after his pursute, that he consider'd not the persons that were by, but glo∣rying in his Prowess, 'twas I kill'd him, said he: Moretto, who was come, and had seen what had hap∣pen'd to his poor Master, was in such a rage at this Villains Inso∣lence, that with a Spade he had in his hand, he cleav'd the fellow's head in two, and laid him spraw∣ling on the ground. You may imagine in what a con∣dition Roxana was, who, so soon as she had heard the Gun go off, and the person fall, imagining it could be none other than her Ibra∣him, she had run to him, and be∣ing stunn'd by his fall, she had con∣cluded him dead, considering the great effusion of Blood which came from him; she presently sent her
Maid to call the Servants of the house up, and to send them for help; she tore her Hair, endea∣vour'd to stop his wounds with the Linnen which she rent off her self; she rais'd his head in her lap, call'd upon him to speak to her, and finding no answer come from him, and that he was without motion, she fell backwards with her head against the Wall, in a swoon. In this condition were they both found by the Servants, the Assi∣stance which had been sent for, and by her own Mother, who had been told of the sad dis∣aster, by some over-diligent Ser∣vant, that had brought her thi∣ther. The Surgeons, moving of his body to search his wounds, saw a great deal of Blood on Roxana, which had run from him, and they not knowing of the business any more than they saw, did judge her hurt also, and by the place where the blood was, that she was mor∣tally
wounded. They stirring of Ibrahim's body, he came to life again, open'd his Eyes, turn'd his head about, and presently ask'd where Roxana was, and whether she was safe? He was answer'd, that there she lay by him dead, as they suppos'd; Then is all your assistance in vain, said he, I cannot live, if she be not, open my wounds afresh, or I'le tear them open with my own hands, continu'd he. Roxana's Mo∣ther by this was run to her Daugh∣ter, and with rubbing of her, and giving her some Cordials, she was brought to her self again. The first thing she did, as if they had con∣serted together, was to turn her head about, and then to ask where Ibrahim was? Here, Madam, said, one. Ay and dead, said she! then farewel life, I can no longer live, if he is dead. With that she flung her self back, and was returning into a swoon∣ing fit, but that divers cry'd out aloud, Ibrahim is not dead, he lives.
Yes, Madam, said Ibrahim, long enough to tell you that I dye yours, as I design'd ever to have liv'd. Then do I breathe again, said Roxana. At last the wound being search'd, the Sur∣geons were ask'd what judgment they gave of it, whether Mortal or not? They with down looks, and sorrowful countenances, an∣swer'd, there was no hope of life. At which words, Roxana crying out aloud, then farewel Ibrahim, I'le go before: she fell into a greater swoon than before, in which she was carryed by Servants unto her Apartment, and laid in her bed. Ibrahim was also carryed to the house of one of his Friends, that he might have better Attendance, where after he had languish'd two days, he dyed, crying continually on Roxana, his dear Roxana; and Moretto was struck with so much sorrow at the loss of so good a Master, that he stabb'd himself, and dyed at his Master's beds feet.
As for Roxana, she continu'd so long in her fainting, that every body near her thought her to be dead; and when she came to her self again, it was with such extra∣vagancies, such unjointed discourses, and such sudden flyings out, that it was easie to perceive her grief was greater than she could bear. Her Maid was had into examina∣tion, who having confess'd all, was at last dismist, and put away from her Mistress's service; they would have confronted her with Moretto and the Caldean, but the first being dead, by which means the last was not to be found, the business termin'd there. The body of that Wretch who had committed the Murder was found to be the Person who had watch'd for the Fugitive; he was deliver'd to his Friends, who came to demand him: Another person was plac'd near Roxana, on the account she might ad∣minister Comforts to her as well
as other Services during her distra∣ction; she was Sister to a Mufti, whose name was Repset, and hers was Zora: This Mufti did also frequently visit Roxana during her sorrow, in order to reduce her to her self again. But enough of that at present; we shall have occasion more than once to speak of this Mufti and his Sister, till then I leave giving you a Character of them: mean time, leaving Roxana to the care of those persons that were appointed by her Father and Mother to attend her, we will now come to the continuance of the Hi∣storical part of this Novel, till we have occasion to return to Roxana, and bring her again in play. Cha Abbas the Persian Emperour, perceiving that things did not go on as he would have them, towards the entire destruction of the Maho∣metan Religion, on which depended his Conquest of the Ottoman Em∣pire, at which he aim'd, under the
pretence of pure Zeal to his Reli∣gion; and that notwithstanding all his Efforts, the formidable number of Priests of his sort, which he had sent to be like so many Spies in the very heart of that Empire, the great number of Pensioners which he kept amongst Selim's Courtiers and Chief Ministers of State, and the vast expences he had been at to defray all those Charges, he re∣solv'd to play quit or double. Se∣lim's Pulse was once again to be felt, how he stood affected; and perceiving that it still beat true to the Mahometan Religion, in a great Council which was held at Ispahan, in which the Mahometists did rule the Rost, it was order'd and con∣cluded that seeing no good was to be done by Selim, he should cer∣tainly be laid aside; whether there was any foul play shew'd to him after this, my Memoirs therein fall short, but it is certain he liv'd not long after that resolution was taken;
he dyed in a manner suddenly, not without great suspition, that there had been given him some strong ingredient, which came from Per∣sia, which had been mixed with his Cossee, or with those Herbs which he delighted frequently to smell to. His death surpriz'd all the world, but those that were of the Cabal, and made way for his undoubted Successour Amurat to mount on the Throne. After the Ceremo∣nies of his Coronation were over, and that he was firmly Establish'd, he openly declar'd himself of the Sect of Haly; but did promise that he would preserve the Laws of the Empire, and the Ottoman Religion according as it was Establish'd, and as his late Brother Selim had left them. Of Truth, Amurat of himself had very good inclinations, he was very Just, Pious, Religious, Charitable, and desirous to oblige
all persons, that came near him, and had he been left to his own Will and Pleasure, he had doubt∣less Govern'd the Empire with all Peaceableness, Tranquility and Ju∣stice, to the great joy and content of his people. But what will not a blind Zeal do, which is continually fomented by such as breathe no∣thing but ruine and destruction! It was now high time for Cha-Abbas and all his Creatures, to put the last hand to the great work; to this purpose, all the Priests of Haly's Sect, which were about the Em∣peror, were charg'd never to let him rest, till they had brought him to a firm resolution, of changing the Religion of the Empire, by to∣tally rooting out and expelling from it, the Ottoman Religion, and establishing in lieu of it, the Sect of Haly: This peal was daily rung in Amurat's Ears, proclaiming that the Heavens having made choice of him, to be the great and wonder∣ful
instrument of so good, so great, and so pious a work, by which he should avoid all expurgatory pu∣nishments for his sins, and should be immediately carried up by Angels, and laid at the feet of the great Ala, who should seat him in a Throne of Glory near unto him∣self; that he would leave behind him here on Earth a Name and Fame that should endure for ever, that his Memory would ever be in good Odour to all good persons, and that he should be here wor∣shipped as a Saint, with many o∣ther such like assurances of honour and Glory, did at last prevail with him. This was the daily practice of the Mahometists, but they finding that though through their incessant plying of Amurat, all the day long, they brought him to their Bow, yet every morning, he would, after consulting with his Pillow, still continue in the goodness of
his natural disposition, so that he al∣waies appeared cold in the morning in the promoting of their designs, how warm soever they had left him the night before. They had recourse to another Stratagem, the same promises of greatness and glory in this world, and the next, which they had promised to him, they also assur'd to the Sultana, that she should enjoy in ample manner, if she did but plye Amurat at night, when they were in bed together, as they did all the day long, telling her on the other hand, that if she was slack or remiss in it, she would not only lose all those Honours, that Happiness and bliss which was prepared for her, but incur by her neglect eternal Misery. To what height will not a blind Zeal be screw'd up, by such fair promises on the one hand, and the terror of such dreadful punishments on the other! No wonder then, if that the Sultana's good, mild, and
affable disposition, which she had alwaies shewn before she was Em∣press, did change into a morose temper, and into a most violent aversion against all those that were not of Haly's Sect: She assur'd Haly's Priests, that she should not lose all those glories, which had been promised her, by any neg∣lect in the performance of what was required of her: Of truth, she so ply'd Amurat by night, and the Halists by day, that the worst of his Subjects or Slaves, was happy in comparison to him; at bed, at Table, at Council, at his Recrea∣tions, and Divertions, nay even at his Devotion, and greatest Retire∣ments, he was so perpetually haun∣ted and bated by those Wolves in Sheeps cloathings, that he divers times wish'd himself in the same Station that he had formerly been, provided he might but enjoy also that tranquility of Mind and Spirit which he then possess'd. Who
could resist, to so many redoubled, nay rather to such a continu'd as∣sault? For his own ease and quiet, and that he might but enjoy that content and quiet, which the mea∣nest of his Servants possoss'd, he was forc'd to yield to the Halist's perpetual solicitations, he promis'd to do all that they would, and to root out of his Dominions the Ma∣hometan Religion, to establish in lieu of it, therein, the Sect of Haly, to change and alter the Laws which had been from time to time made against that Sect, and to make new Laws, or that he would dye in the attempt. From the moment that the Ha∣list's had got that assurance from him, they gave him liberty to breathe again. Presently was Cha-Abbas acquainted with the good suc∣cess of the Halists, and great joy was expressed at it through all Persia. But th was not all, there was still more to be done; they had
got but one point yet, the present establishment of Haly's Sect, but how that should be secur'd for the future, was now the business in hand. New Orders were therefore sent from Persia, that the Priests of Haly should immediately enter upon that work, that a Successour of the same Sect should be procur'd, and secur'd, to supply Amurat's place after his Death, for fear of a relaps of the whole Empire, into the Religion of Mahomet again; and presently the whole Crew fell to work: Divers ways were propos'd, too long here to be repeated, my Memoires mention only two of the most eminent, which were most insisted upon. The first was, that the Bodies of Amurat and of his Sul∣tana, should be so prepar'd and order'd by Medicines, as that the Sultana might bring forth a vigo∣rous young Prince, to live, to be brought up in the Sect of Haly, and to be Successor to Amurat.
All those means were us'd, but to no purpose; this stubborn refusal of Nature, not to comply with the desires of such persons, as use to overcome all obstacles, in lieu of teaching them that Ala was above all their designs, did but enrage them the more, and make them the more earnestly bent upon their wicked enterprises. A Successour was to be produc'd, that should be of the Sect of Haly, and that should step in betwixt the Heir apparent to the Ottoman Empire and it, be∣cause that the right Heir was of the Mahometan Religion, and conse∣quently unfit for their purposes, wherefore no means were to be left unsought after, no ways untry'd, and no designs unattempted, that could conduce to the work in hand. They therefore concluded to try what Prayers, Pilgrimages, and Offerings would do. The thing was propos'd to the Emperor and the Sultana, and in short agreed
upon, and the day prefix'd for the setting forth of the Court, that all things might be in a readiness a∣gainst the appointed time, yet still delay'd from time to time by the Sultana and the Emperor's orders. Amongst the Priests of Haly was reckon'd in the first rank this Repset, which I have before men∣tion'd, to be employ'd in admini∣string of Consolations to the af∣flicted Roxana. Not that he was more Learned, or endowed with greater Gifts, or of a more Pious, Religious, and Sober Life than o∣thers, but that through his Crafty Insinuations, and Indefatigable Ap∣plication and Attendance, he had got first the Sultana's good opini∣on, and by her means and recom∣mendations, had rendred himself Master of his Master, the Empe∣rour: He had his Ear as well as his Heart, so that he did order and dispose of all places of Authority and Trust: He was of all the
Councils, even to the most secret and particular: In a word, he was be∣come the Dominus fac totum. This acquired him a great Repute, Esteem, Respect, and even Fear; for those that had no occasion of his Services, did fear his Frowns, on which de∣pended their Ruine, as their Estab∣lishment on his Smiles and Conde∣scentions. This Creature, of mean, obscure Extraction, of as mean a mercena∣ry Soul, and of vitiated Principles, in the Station he was got, was the Primum mobile, or great Wheel, which set the whole Machine of the Halists to work in the Ottoman Em∣pire; he had access to the Empe∣rour and to the Sultana at all times, at all hours of the day and night, even when they were in their pri∣vatest retirements: He had since his greatness at Court shaken off the Rags of Monasteries, and had lick'd himself from a shapeless Cub, into a spruce Courtier. The Court
was then replenish'd with Ladies, whose Beauties might compare with those of all the other Courts in the World. But the Sultana did tarnish them all, and forc'd them tacitely to confess, that she alone eclipsed their Lustre. The Sul∣tana had her Diversions amongst those Ladies which compos'd her Court; and their Beauties did at∣tract to them from all parts of the Empire divers Adorers of the o∣ther Sex. But still our Mufti not∣withstanding his multiplicity of Bu∣siness elsewhere, would make one; he was always amongst the Ladies, and it was thought that those hours which he was to have em∣ployed in Private and Publick Pray∣ers, and in other Devotions, he spent in his conversation with the Female Sex; being led thereunto by that most powerful Magnet, his na∣tural inclination: He had not been satisfied with those private Stealths which he made on particular Per∣sons
Wives and Daughters, under the Authority and Power of his Function; but his Ambition and Lust still encreasing, as did his Fortune and Credit, he resolved to look higher, and to attempt the highest piece of Villany, and Im∣pudence, under the Cloak of his Religion, and the design of pro∣pagating of it, as could be imagined. The Sultana, according to divers occurrences, had given our Mufti not only a free access into her greatest retirements, but in diver∣sion had been more free with him in her Speeches and in Carriage than with others; her Beauty and this Freedom, which he thought his good Meen and Deserts had ac∣quired him, did so puff up his mind, that he thought it no difficult thing to ingratiate himself into the Sul∣tana's Affections: this impudent conceit of his (I can term it no better) did set all his Wits to work to accomplish his end; to which
purpose, he did watch but for an opportunity of privately deliver∣ing to the Sultana what he had to say without interruption. He was not long without one; the Sultana being one day some∣what indispos'd, was retired into her Closet, with order that she would not be disturbed by any body. Our Mufti, who was al∣ways on the watch himself, be∣sides the Spies he employed, had soon an intelligence of it; he dress'd himself with all the ad∣vantage imaginable, set himself up in the Glass, perfum'd himself, in fine, he was fitted as a Bridegroom on his Wedding day; in this equipage he presents himself to the Sultana's Closet door, and be∣ing deny'd entrance, he took it in such scorn and contempt, that he stay'd not a second repulse, but turning the Lock, entred of his own accord, and boldly intrudes upon the Sultana, who was look∣ing
over of some Papers; he comes up to her briskly, and making a profound reverence, Madam, said he, your Servant would have deny'd me entrance to you. The Sultana, who was amaz'd to see him so gay, so brisk, and so much more confident than usually, though he never wanted any, looking upon him, as somewhat surpriz'd, told him, That the Servant had done nothing but what he had in charge, for that she being indispos'd, she had rer'd with a design nor to be disturb'd, but since that he was come, she bid him to tell her what he had to say. Madam, said he, I am sor∣ry I have thus intruded on your pri∣vacy; and the business I come about requires a long discourse, with a great deal of attention: I think it will be best for me to defer the opening of it to another time, and at present to retire. If the business is not of such a nature as to lend fewel to a certain Melancholy which has seiz'd
me at present; I should rather chuse this time than any other, to hear what you have to say, reply'd the Sultana: It may afford me some di∣version; and as things are order'd on other accounts, you may not be disturb'd in the relation: Place your self at ease, and let me hear what you would say. This good beginning did still inspire our Mufti more and more with Hope and Joy, which was so great that it discover'd it self upon his Face, in his Eyes, and in all his Actions; having fitted himself for to deliver his Speech, he thus began; It cannot be unknown to you, Madam, how instrumental I have been, through the assistance of Heaven, in bringing about the great work of extirpating of He∣resie out of this Empire, and of settling in it the Religion of our Great Prophet Hali: Since that it has reach'd the great Mufti's Ears,
who upon that information, has Commissionated me to go on with that work so well begun, and to finish it, according as I shall find occasions to act. You also know, Madam, with how little success all Physical means have been used, both as to your person and to the Emperor's; so that all helps are laid aside of having a young Successor from his Loyns. I am not of your Opinion, replyed the Sultana, and I believe that the defect lyes more in me than in the Emperor, for though I seem not to see, that I might not in the least check his pleasures, I know very well, that of late he has had a Child by one of his Mistresses. Madam, replyed our Mufti, you know not the Wiles and Artifices of those kind of Crea∣tures, they value not who gets their Children, they adopt them to what Father they think are most proper to own them, it is sufficient only that they have once
enjoyed the man; to perswade him, nay convince him, that he is the true and right Father of the Child they go with; they go yet further, Madam, according to the persons inclinations, to one Sex more than another, the Child shall be right or wrong of that very Sex; or there shall be no child in the whole Em∣pire of that Sex, to make a change with. I cannot think however, but that I am more in the fault than Amurat, replyed the Sultana, I am apt to believe that a certain decay which I feel in me, is the cause of my having no Children of late, where∣fore I am desirous to try, what the Heavens will do, being solicited to that purpose, by those Holy Pray∣ers, Pilgrimages, and Offerings, which you your self have propo∣sed, and that have been resolved upon both by the Emperor and the whole Court, and it is no little wonder to me to find you so soon, in so contrary a mind. Madam
replyed the Mufti, I must deal plainly with you, I have not, I con∣fess, all the faith that might be imagin'd in those things; of truth, they are good and necessary, pious frauds, to amuse the Vulgar withal, and to work divers good and Reli∣gious ends; and it is to that purpose only, that we have now designed them, to please and blind the people, and to exalt our Religion, with which none can compare for contriving of Miracles, of which that of your pro∣ving with Child presently upon the return from the Pilgrimage, however otherways the Child were got, would be none of the least, but to the purpose. Madam, give me leave to tell you, Therefore that what I now propose, is not in the least to put off the Pilgri∣mage, on the contrary, it is to the same end. I have read something of Phy∣sick, have seen some operations, and dissections, and I am sufficiently versed in those Arts, to be bold e∣nough to lay a Wager, that the de∣fect
is not in the least in you, Ma∣dam. How can we be sure of that, replyed the Sultana? How, Madam? answered he again, if you made use of any other person than the Empe∣ror to trye the Experiment, and that I had layed a great sum on it, I should soon draw the Stakes. You speak of things that cannot be, replyed the Sultana. That cannot be, Ma∣dam, replyed the Mufti, say rather, Madam, that you will not admit to be? Is it not my Duty not to admit of any such thing? said she hastily, raising her voice. Yes, Madam, said the Mufti, according to the com∣mon Rules; but, Madam, when the welfare of Empires, the extirpating of Heresies, the establishing of true Religion call for our Assistances, all those little particular Rules cease, they are overrul'd by an higher pow∣er, and in the very design and inten∣tion of establishing of Religion, all these small tyes upon our Duties, va∣nish into Air; nothing can be too good,
too great, nor too holy, not to be sa∣crificed to so laudable and so pious a work. That great and general Duty, swallows up, and dispences with all those little ones, which at other times are in force; all must yield to that great work: and that which at any other time would appear unjust or un∣lawful, becomes the most just, lawful, and necessary good that can be done, when it is for the good of the Church. This Doctrine is so new to me, answe∣red the Sultana, that I am more sur∣priz'd at, than edified by it. This, Madam, I have foreseen, said the Muf∣ti, and it is for that reason, that I did chuse this opportunity, in which, without disturbance, I might in∣fuse those weighty Reasons, which I have in order to perswade you, to condescend to so just a request as I am going to make to you. You have sur∣prized me, I say once again, and the nature of the business requires some seri∣ous considerations. Not that I in the least incline to what you propose, but that I
may arm my self with such Argu∣ments, against those w Doctrines which you set up, that I may have some colour for my refusal, besides, the natural abhorrence which I find in me towards what you propose, and I wish that some other means might be found out, in which I might be so happy as to serve the Church. None greater than this, Madam, Replyed the Mufti, who would not so easily be put by, and give me leave to add, Madam, to what I have said alrea∣dy, that the Emperor is obliged for the forwarding of so great a work, to give his consent to it, only all the business in this case is, that it must be made a Mystery, a Court-Secret, to avoid all Scandal; for in such Cases, Sin (if it may be call'd so, considering to what a pious end it is acted) be∣comes none, and the Scandal only which might arise from the Knowledge, and the divulging of so great a Secret, be∣comes sin. In a word, Madam, do but chuse a Person secret, discreet, and
in all other respects according to your liking, and the Blessing of Heavens go along with the work. In saying these words, the Mufti pricked up himself, that the Sultana should take more notice of his person, and perceiving that she made no answer, Let me further tell you, Madam, con∣tinued he, that this is not the first time, such things have been acted, still to a good end, though never none to so great and pious an end as this. It was but in the last Age, that a Neighbouring Empire to this, had fallen into the hands of its Enemies, had not a Mufti been employed to get an Heir unto it; of truth, Ma∣dam, there are no fitter persons in the World than those of the Clergy, for such works, in divers respects; and especially, I would advise you, Madam, to employ in this, one whose fidelity, trust, and fore-knowledge and pre-in∣gagements in this our great work, is throughly known to you, that you may easily gain to you, without making any
more persons privy to those Mysteries, and great Arcanas of States; for in these Cases, it is most certain, that the fewer are employed, the more secure the business is from discovery. Here the Mufti made a full stop, not daring to discover his intention more plainly, (though he had said enough already) till he heard how the Sultana did resent it; and per∣ceiving, that instead of giving him some answer, she busied her self in perusing of the papers that were before her. This slight did so of∣fend him, that, he could not for∣bear saying, I am sorry Madam, that I, who have already done so much for your service, and that of the Church, and who is ready to lay down his life for the service of so great, and so char∣ming a Princess as you are, should be so little regarded, and his good ad∣vises so little valued. And with that he put himself in a posture of going, at which the Sultana, not so much as looking once on him, said,
I have already told you, that I would take time to weigh your Reasons, and the nature of the thing you propose to me, and then after that I would give you my answer, till then forbear gi∣ving your self or me any further trouble about it, I have a mind to sleep, so good night. Though our Mufti had a months mind to have stay'd longer, and to have ventured a little further, in pointing at the most proper person for the work, which he fancyed to be himself, this unexpected an∣swer from the Sultana with her hasty rising up, did force him to a decent retreat, which he did with∣out answering one word more, af∣ter he had made a profound Reve∣rence. The Mufti being gone, the Sultana reseated her self, and doubtless made many and great reflections on things propos'd to her, by a Mufti too, which were so opposite to her Principles and Inclinations; after
which, having call'd for attendance, she charg'd very strictly all that were about her, and whose duties were to keep the doors, not to permit the Mufti Repset, on any pretence whatsoever, to enter, when they knew that she was retired, and alone; she was resolv'd to give him no more the opportunities of uttering such discourses, so unbe∣seeming his Function to speak, and her Modesty and Greatness to hear; and she knew well enough how to avoid his impertinencies, should he attempt any before Company; and of truth, she was so offended at his late discourse, that had it not been that he was a necessary In∣strument in forwarding the work (already begun) of Reformation: She would have acquainted the Em∣perour with his attempt, and have had him dismist the Court. But notwithstanding the Sultana's aver∣sion to all such sorts of ill ways, she had another charge by our
Mufti, though not altogether of the same nature, who came accom∣panied with two or three more, that were Ministers of State, and privy Counsellors, which demand∣ed for admittance into a private Conference with the Sultana, on pressing affairs, which oblig'd the Sultana to give them admittance. This second visit was on the ac∣count, that notwithstanding a day had been prefix'd for the en∣tring on the Pilgrimage, there was still something or other in the wind which broke it off; where∣fore they now came with threat∣nings, to terrify the Sultana into a compliance with their designs. The Mufti told the Sultana that since the last time that he had the honour of entertaining her, he had been divers times to learn her resolutions, but that not being ad∣mitted her presence, and the bu∣siness they were come about pres∣sing, he had associated to himself
those other worthy Persons, to communicate an Affair, though not quite of the same nature as the former, yet tending to the same end, which was the good of the Church, and the glory of Ala. The Sultana reply'd, That she was very desirous to be instrumental in so Pious and Good a Work, provi∣ded it were not by any sinister ends. To wave entring upon the late Dis∣course I had with you, Madam, said the Mufti, we are come here to let you know, that for very high and weighty reasons you must forthwith, and without any further delays, set forth in Pilgrimage to the Holy Wa∣ters with the Emperour, and imme∣diately after you have made your Offering and Devotions, give out that you are with Child: and you must so order matters, that every body may give credit to it, for those very reasons which have already been given you. And I, said the Sultana, tell you for answer, as I
have already told you, that I will never consent to any such thing, nor impose upon the World thus, to the exclusion of the right Heir, without the Emperor's consent, and I am already certain before hand, that he will never give his assent to so ill a practice. Madam, said one of the Councellors, we have reason to be∣lieve it, for we have already been de∣ny'd by the Emperor, though we have us'd all the Arguments imaginable to perswade him to it, on the contrary, we have found so much and so great an aversion in him, towards such a thing, that we despair ever bringing him to it; wherefore we are come, Madam, to denounce to you from his Sanctity, the Grand Mufti, that all you have done hitherto is of no value, if you persist not in doing all the good you can for the advancement of the Ʋni∣versal Faith; and that in lieu of gaining any advantage by what you have already done, you are immedi∣ately to be pronounced degraded from
all the fair and assured hopes of Ho∣nour and Glory, which you were to have receiv'd in this and the other world, in case you had persisted to the end, and you are immediately to be deliver'd up to the Prince of Dark∣ness, to do with you at his Pleasure. Wonder not at this proceeding, Ma∣dam, said then our Mufti, it is but justice, that punishments should be in some measure proportionable to the Crime for which they are inflicted, and can there be a greater, than to (wil∣fully and meerly to gratifie some few shallow scruples) be the immediate cause of the destruction of so great a work, so happily begun, and so prospe∣rously gon on. You have no more therefore to do, but to countenance the business, to shape you a great belly, which you must increase as the time of your reckoning will require; to which pur∣pose you must confide in three or four women, which you shall think fit to intrust with so great a secret, which
may assist you all the time of your feigned Breeding, and at the time of your delivery also. I find so much difficulty in all this, reply'd the Sultana, that I know not what to say, nor what to do, I would do much to avoid those horrid threatnings which are preparing to be put in execution against me; but on the other hand, how is it possible that I should in the first place deceive the Emperor, who being made jealous of some trick acted against his will, will be the more curious in the detection of it; and if he should at any time desire, for his satisfaction, to feel the stirring of the Child in my body, How shall I pre∣vent him from taking that liberty of satisfying himself? Besides, grant this was feasable: How is it possible to delude so many great Persons highly interessed in this great business, who by the Law of the Empire are to be present, that are of Mahomet's Religion, and who have at present so much fears upon them, and so much
cause to suspect foul play, that they will be more diligent than usually in respect to the business? To this we an∣swer, Madam, in the first place, that the very solemnity of the Pilgrimage, will be of great moment; next, that as to the Emperor, we foreseeing such a thing, have provided against that inconveniency, by letting him know, as we have done already, that we have reciv'd an Holy Ointment, with which your Belly being once rubb'd, to prevent miscarriage, no prophane hands must for ever after offer to touch it till after delivery; and to that purpose, Madam, when you have once given out to the Emperor, that you are with Child by him, you must keep your self so close lapped up, that he may not, by any surprisal when you are asleep, attempt the Tryal. He is so exact an observer of all things, which the Church imposes upon him, that after you have once assured him of the thing, he will be one of the first that will rejoice at your preg∣nancy,
and that will spread it abroad. And as to the other doubt you have rais'd, Madam, in the first place, long before hand, we shall get seve∣ral Women that reckon about the time we have prefixt, that amongst them we may have a Male-Child to substitute for yours; and as to the ways of conveyance of it into the Bed to you, there are a hundred ways besides warm Clothes, warming-pans, trapp-doors, back-doors, and private windows at the Bedshead to bring a Child in; pish those things are pra∣ctis'd every day, especially amongst us of the Clergy, who are not permitted to marry; but because the grand Mufti knows that we, and he him∣self, are made of the same Flesh and Blood as other men, we are per∣mitted the use of Women in private, and without giving Scandal, by which conversation it frequently happens, that we are put to such and the like Shifts; then let us alone for ordering things, so as that none
but those of our Sect shall be present, at the time of your pretended deli∣very, some shall be sent one way, others dispers'd in other places, so that all will have the wished for success that we all desire and pray for. The Sultana having attentively hearkned to what had been said, and being beforehand terrified with those horrid threatnings which they had denounc'd, considering within her self that all the evil that was in it, they took upon them∣selves, and that she had no further end in it, but the good advance∣ment of her Religion, she consen∣ted, though yet not without some kind of Reluctancy; and told them, that since they assured her, that they would take upon themselves all the evil that she might fancy to be in the Action, and that they would stand by her always, encounter and oppose all the Jealou∣sies which the Emperor might have on this Affair; she yielded to their
desires, and said she would imme∣diately go to the Emperor, and fix-on a certain day to set forth. All things being thus agreed up∣on, they left the Sultana to perform her part, and every one of them went about to act theirs, in order of bringing about this grand work. Here we shall leave once more the Court, to give a visit to poor Roxana, who through the great care of those that were about her, had perfectly recovered her Senses, but was so melanchollick and so de∣jected, that she avoided all Society, having no delight but to walk in her Garden, and to visit the Sum∣merhouse, in which she had first seen her beloved Ibrahim; though not without great disturbances; and some time, when it came into her mind, looking on the place where she last saw him, what a dismal sight it was to her, to see him wel∣tering in his own Blood. Mufti Repset had continually from time
to time, given her Visits, and such of his Counsels and Advises as he thought fit, and finding her to be perfectly recovered of her alienation of mind, and fancying her more beautiful than ever, in that negli∣gent dress she now did wear, espe∣cially after the loss of all his Amo∣rous hopes towards the Sultana, he resolved to change his Note, and under pretence of diverting her from her deep Melancholy, to en∣tertain a commerce of Love, and gallantry with her. This was easie for him to do, for what with the Li∣berty usually allowed to Persons of his Profession, the small care, or rather little Love which her Fa∣ther had for Roxana after this mis∣carriage; and that part which Zo∣ra acted, who was the Mufti's Si∣ster, as I have told you already, in her Brother's interest; the Mufti had opportunity enough, to declare his mind to Roxana, with all the Liberty and privacy imaginable.
He made as much use of it as he possibly could, unto which his Si∣ster Zora, who had been with Rox∣ana ever since her distraction, did not a little contribute. She was a Lady of the Town, one that lov'd much more to sing a Lampoon, than to turn over her Beads, she was for all Commerse; all Ages, Complexions, Humours, Conditi∣ons, so they but brought Grits to the Mill, were welcome. But above all, she had a particular inclination for a brisk young man, of good Parentage, good Meen, Education, and Inclinations, but of little or no Fortune, whose name was Cara, and who had as little hopes of get∣ting any at Court; for being no Halist, and having but a small stock of ready Cash, wherewith to push on his Fortune. Zora affecting this young Man, as I have said, she did all she could to gain his Affections, but he knowing what a course of life she had always lead, he was
not very forward on the business, no further than to take his share in the Croud, amongst the rest of those that kept her Company. She was handsome, and of a pretty good Con∣versation, but above all, she was Sister to the all-doing Repset, the Mufti. This last made him to in∣cline very much to humor Zora, when he considered what influence she had over her Brother, who was all at Court; he knew that Zora was inform'd of his Religion, and seeing, that notwithstanding, that she took all occasions of expressing her kindness towards him, though she never would admit him to the last Favour, as having other designs upon him particularly, he began to build upon that bottom, and on that account, did visit her frequent∣ly. She on her part, thinking that his repeated Civilities, were the pure effects of her Beauty, she did all she could to add lustre to that proportion which Nature had
bestow'd on her with a Liberal hand: Thus did Cara and Zora live in good intelligence together, which was not discontinu'd, when she came into Aladin's family, though she was then oblig'd, to bid fare∣well to that great troop of Follow∣ers, which she formerly entertain'd, and was oblig'd to divert her self by stealth in that Nature, in pri∣vate Corners. For though Aladin, like the rest, was forced to hold a Candle to the Devil, more for fear than love or worship, which had made him yield to the taking of Zora into his Family at the first request, which Repset had made him. It was with a Resolution of not permitting any ill thing to be act∣ed in his House, abroad she might do what she pleas'd, but what De∣vil soever she was then, she was to be a Saint in Aladin's House, and in this her Brother the Mufti had not lost his aims, which were to get her a good Name again, if it
were possible, which he knew she might as soon get in Aladin's Fa∣mily, as in a Convent, which had made him take the Opportunity of offering her service in the behalf of Roxana, which at that time was accepted more freely, than it might have been at any other juncture. One day Zora seeing Cara pass by Aladin's Gates, she sent a slave to let him know that she would speak with him. He came to her, and she told him, that she could not doubt of the knowledge which he must have gain'd by this time, of her affections towards him, but to let him know that her intenti∣ons were real, and that she had re∣tired her self into Aladin's sober Family, but to give her self more intirely up to him, she would now at that very time present him to her Brother, who was then in the House, and ingage him to take a particular care of him, and to ob∣tain from the Emperor some con∣siderable
preferment, but that this should be on condition that he should make her a promise of marrying her. This word Mar∣riage did not a little surprise Cara, he was so disturbed at it, that he stood mute, which gave time to Zora to continue thus. What are you so great a Libertine, as to be affrighted at a bare proposal of Mar∣riage? No, Madam, not at the word, replyed Cara, but at the thing it self, for having never yet spent one thought that way, it now a little in∣tangles my Wits to find out an an∣swer, suitable to my thoughts, and the honour you do me. Well, I'll allow you three days, replyed Zora, to consider of the Business; in the mean time, I will be beforehand with you, and instantly present you to my Brother. He was retur∣ning most humble thanks to her, when that a noise being heard, he is coming, said she, I'll go and meet him; with that she stept towards
the Mufti, who was going out, and told him, that there was a Gentle∣man which she would recommend to his particular care, as a person, though no Halist, yet that in all other respects, did deserve his friend∣ship and favour. At these words, the Mufti, to whom good words, and fair promises, never cost any thing, whatever the effects were, came to meet Cara, who was coming to sa∣lute the Mufti, and told him, Sir, my Sister has beforehand given me such a Character of you, if your name is Cara, that will oblige me to serve you with the utmost of my power; you may firmly build on that fond, and so soon as I can possible, I shall make you sensible of the effects of my Promises; but you must have a little patience, my hands are full, do but put me in mind of you sometimes, by appearing before me, or before my Sister, and your business is done. Cara was going to return him a great Complement of thanks, when
he thus interrupted him, Look you, Sir, said the Mufti, I know what you would, and what you should say, time is precious, be assured that I'll be as good as my word, my Sister shall en∣gage for me, and so Sir, your Servant. With that he took his Sister by the hand, and led her in another Room, which made Cara retire, to re∣flect on Zora's news proposals. The Mufti had so heated himself near Roxana, who being that day in a little more pleasing humour than usually, with the assurances that her Father had given her, to carry her into the Country again; that it had added much Lusture to her natural Beauty, which of late had been clouded with the black fumes of Melancholy, upon the hopes of being in a short time freed from this Priest's impertinen∣cies. She had been a little more free than ordinary in her Conversa∣tion, which had made him to of∣fer at more Liberty than usual; this
had so offended her, that she had risen from her Seat, and left the room. At which our Mufti all on a fire, had taken pet, and was gone down, to make his Complaint to his Sister, and to acquaint her with his Resolutions. Dear Sister, said he to her, you can no more be ignorant of the Love which I have for Roxa∣na, than I am of that which you have for Cara. I have given you my word, that I will prefer him to a conside∣rable Employ, and that I will ob∣lige him first to marry you; and I here assure you anew, that I will per∣form all that I have promised you to a title; but my Dear Zora, you must take pity on me also. I must tell you that I can no longer live, except I enjoy Roxana. Oh! how the thought of her disturbs my heart, ad∣ded he? I have used all the fair means imaginable, and she proves the more obdurate to all my supplications, to all my submissions, and to all my Vows. What must I do in this con∣dition?
There pausing, Zora made this answer. Sir, I pity your condition the more, because that mine is of the very same nature. And seeing you have so generously offered me your assistance, I can do no less than to assure you of mine, but speak what you would have me do, and 'tis done. But remember this, both for my sake, as well as your own, that no time must be lost, because Aladin has gi∣ven orders to his Servants to be in a readiness, to march to his Govern∣ment three days hence; wherefore you must be quick in the execution of your resolutions. For that matter, replyed the Mufti, let me alone, I, who go∣vern the Emperor, will easily deal with Aladin; and oblige him to re∣tard his Journey at my pleasure, nay and if there is occasion, as you will find there will be, when I have told you all; I will have him so suddenly sent into the Country, that he shall not have time to take above a Ser∣vant or two with him, therefore Dear
Zora, set your heart at Rest, that way. But to the point. I have been thinking that some little forcible at∣tempt might prevail more with Roxa∣na's humour, than all other means that I have tryed yet. I know that some Women will be forc'd, that they may have that to say for themselves, when afterwards they readily comply with our desires. I have a great mind to try what that will do, when Aladin is gone, but without you I can do no∣thing in it; it is you that must di∣stance the Mother from Roxana's A∣partment, and that must either send out of doors, or employ at distance, all the Servants, that none may hear her Cryes, in case she would be so foo∣lish, and let me alone for the rest. I will attempt her but once more by fair means, and then I'le go to extreams. Well, Brother, said Zora, be you assur'd of me, let it be your bu∣siness to get Aladin remov'd far e∣nough from hence, against that time for his prying Eye, and di∣strustful
disposition, would spoil all, and be sure not to forget Cara. Trust to me, dear Sister, answered Repset, and let me alone to manage things. With that he took leave of his Sister, and went his way. Aladin growing weary of the Mufti's too frequent visits to his Daughter, and of Zora's Intreagues, how close soever she carry'd them, was resolv'd to put an end to both, by retiring to his Government, see∣ing that he no longer had any Business to do in Constantinople, and he had dispos'd of all things to be in a readiness to transport himself and his whole Family thither, with a full resolution never to let his Wife nor Daughter see that great City again, at least so long as the last were under his Government, which he hoped would not be long, for he was resolved to marry her out of hand, so soon as he were got down, to any Gentleman that would have her, to free himself
from the trouble of observing her. To this purpose, he went to the Court to ask the Emperor's leave to retire the next morning to his Government, but he was come too late. The Mufti had already influ∣enced the Emperor, that Aladin's presence was necessary for some time longer here, at least till a particular Council were over, at which he was to assist, which would not be till two or three days hence. This had the Mufti done, that he might have the Op∣portunity of giving Roxana one Visit more, in which he would use all the Rhetorick imaginable to gain her Affections, and which should be the last, if he did not succeed. Aladin having receiv'd the Emperor's absolute Orders not to stir, till that Consultation was over, he return'd home in order to obey it, but with a firm resolu∣tion that so soon as it were over, to be gone without any fur∣ther
leave, but take hold of the Emperor's words, who had told him he should not go till that time was over; wherefore he still kept all things in readiness for his Jour∣ney, only acquainting with it his Wife, and Roxana, who was daily courting of him to be going, as much as the Mother had a desire to stay, for she thought her self young enough yet to make a Fi∣gure at Court. Cara all this while had leasure to reflect on what Zora had pro∣pos'd to him, and did not know what course to take. He had a fancy towards her, and would glad∣ly have establish'd a commerce of Gallantry betwixt themselves, but when the thoughts of marrying her came in his head, that would so pall his appetite, that nothing could quicken it again, but the hopes that her Brother would get him into some considerable employ∣ment; that would again make him
resolve not to break off wholly with Zora: in this his fluctuation of thoughts, he at last designed to steer a middle course betwixt Sylla and Charibdis, to avoid the dange∣rous Rock of Matrimony, and that of want and necessity also, by of∣fering Zora a verbal promise of Marriage, which he would engage to perform when he was through∣ly settled in an Employ, though he never intended it: In this de∣sign he resolves to go see Zora, he finds her at Aladin's, and lets her know that he was come to tell her that the love he had for her was sufficient of it self to oblige him to do any thing that she should require of him, but that he thought it prudence to be fully possess'd and fix'd in some Office or Em∣ploy by the Mufti's means before he married her, for fear that that being once done, the Mufti's wil∣lingness to serve him should slacken, or that he should quite give o∣ver
all thoughts of assisting him. This so reasonable a request did stop Zora's mouth, so that she had nothing to say, but that she knew so well her Brother, that besides the interest and share that she had, or at least expected to have in the business, he was a person that would be as good as his word, so soon as it could be done without prejudice to the rest of his Concerns; that in the mean time, she desired his frequent visits, declaring that she was never well pleased but in his company; and that he did not know how much it would oblige her and her Brother, if that he would give her a verbal assu∣rance of Marrying her, as he had already promis'd, when things were settled to his mind. I am so far, Madam, replyed Cara, from refu∣sing you so just a request, and so much conformable to my own desires, that I will propose further, with your leave, to confirm this promise,
and to make it a firm marriage be∣twixt you and I. 'Tis the Mufti, that I fear, and not you; I will consummate the Marriage by bedding you privately. You know, Madam, that Marriages are made in Hea∣ven, that we do but ratify them here on Earth, that that is perform∣ed by our mutual consents, and that the outward and pompous Ceremonies thereof are but to satisfy the World that such a Man and such a Wo∣man are going to lye by consent with one another; and why may not we do that without all that bustle, when our hearts have before hand agreed upon the point? I know that what you say, is true, replyed Zora, but should you prove false to me after all, then should I be wanting in the means to right my self, which a publick Matrimony would afford me. That is an errour, Madam, give me leave to tell you, replyed Cara; for were I so ill inclin'd, that could not hinder me from leaving you,
at least, and what difference be∣twixt the one and the other? But you must not fear any such thing from a Person that has so much Love and Respect for you as I have. Well, I find, replyed Zora, that you have a charming Tongue, which with the concurrence of my Love towards you, makes me apt to give credit to what you say. You way rely on me in this, Madam, reply'd Cara, as on an Oracle. I will be true to you, nay, to my self, I should say; for my Love to you makes me to espouse your Interest as my own: do but consent to afford me time and Opportunity of turning the verbal Promise you required of me, into an absolute marriage, by re∣ceiving me into your Bed, into your arms. Well, replyed Zora, Since that I have already, long since, re∣ceived you into my heart, I shall the less stand upon terms, on the assurance you give me, that you will publickly own our private mar∣riage,
when you are once firmly fixed in some handsome Employ, I yield to your desires, and I will take but a day or two's time to contrive how to manage the bu∣siness, that we may not be disco∣vered; after which I shall give you notice of the time and place. In the mean time fail not to see me every day, and never abuse the trust which I put in you. Cara answe∣red Zora with kisses, after which having once again assur'd her of his constancy, he went his ways. The Mufti, whose Love to Roxa∣na did render as impatient and rest∣less as could be imagin'd, had not patience to defer the last tryal which he design'd, of his Addresses to Roxana; he did not fail to give her a visit the next day, notwith∣standing the repulse which he had so lately received from her; but so soon as she had heard that the Muf∣ti was return'd, she had got into her Mother's Company, and would
not admit of his Visit, but in her Mother's presence; he was forced to comply to that, for fear of gi∣ving any suspicion, wherefore he went in, and fell to compliment both Mother and Daughter, but much after another manner than he had don the day before. How∣ever, he seem'd so complaisant, that the mother was exceedingly pleas'd with his Conversation; he stayed the longer in hopes that in time, business would call the Mother a∣way, or that she would go of her self; but he was very much mista∣ken in that, she still had a Colts Tooth of her own, and the Mufti's very eajoling of her Daughter, tick∣led her Fancy so, that she some∣times would apply the discourse to her self, and would answer accordingly, not without tacitly promising her self, to repeat such pleasing Conversation as often as she could, during her stay at Constantinople. At last the Mother
was whispered by a Servant, that some Company was come to give her a Visit, she arose presently to receive them; and so soon as Roxa∣na saw her Mother's motion, she likewise did rise to follow her, but for all that she could do, the Mufti did hold her so fast, that she was forc'd to stay. I find, Madam, said he, that you have resolved to ren∣der me desperate; how cruel are you, to see a man, such a one as I am, dye at your feet without the least regret for having been the cause of it? If I am the cause of any Evil to you, replyed Roxana, I assure you that I am a very inno∣cent one. I should be sorry to cause the least disturbance to my Ene∣mies, much less would I be guilty of such a Crime as you lay to my Charge, against a Person whose Function I Honour and Respect. Good, Madam, replyed the Mufti, less of Honour and Respect to the Profession, and more of Love and
Complaisance to the Person: You know, Madam, that I adore you, I have told you more than once, that I cannot live without you, take pity of me. Sir, I have alrea∣dy told you I do, and I again tell you so, the rather, because I am so unhappy as not to be in a ca∣pacity of easing you of your trouble, what can I say or do more? Re∣pay my Affections and Love with yours, reply'd the Mufti, and Cross not for ever the saying, that Love begets Love. Why, to tell you the truth, Sir, that Proverb is no Friend of yours, for every time I think on't I am convinc'd, that all you say to me is down right Gallantry and Amusement, because that I find no other Inclination in me but of such like Diversion, but not one grain of Love, I can assure you. The more miserable wretch am I, Ma∣dam, said he; it is like that some o∣ther is more happy than me, though not more in Love, nor more de∣serving
in any other respect. Par∣don me. Sir, replyed Roxana, if I am not prepar'd at present for Con∣fession, another time I may give you that trouble, till then, your Servant, with that she run out of the Chamber so suddenly, that he could not overtake her. This usage did quite put him be∣side the Cushion, he was at once in love, mad, angry, and full of spight. He went off with a resolu∣tion to have a full revenge of the Daughter on the Father. To that end, that very night he inform'd the Emperor, that some Rumours which were spread abroad of some insurrection in or near Aladin's Go∣vernment, did require his immedi∣ate presence there, that in case there were any occasion for it, he might quell the disturbance, or by his presence prevent any such Designs, so that the Em∣peror
would do well to give him notice that very night to be gone early in the morning. The Emperor told him, that but the day before, he had advised him to retain Aladin at Constantinople a while longer, wherefore he won∣der'd at the sudden Alteration of his Council. The Mufti answer'd, that these news having been spread abroad, not without some grounds, since he had given him that advice, he thought that now it was necessary to alter it. Well, said the Emperor, send for him in my Name, and I'le give him orders to depart to morrow. In the Morning, Sir, said the Mufti, for we know not what his delay of some hours might produce. Well, said the Emperor, be it so; little dreaming of the Mufti's aim in it, which was, that Ala∣din might not have so much time, as to take his Wife and Daugh∣ter with him, which he feared he might do, with two or three Ser∣vants,
and leave the rest to follow, should he have any longer time aloud him. Aladin was sent for, and he re∣ceiv'd Command from the Empe∣ror, to depart the next morning early towards his Government. He was surpris'd at the order, and con∣sidering the Mufti's assiduous visits to his Daughter, he mistrusted that he had a hand in the business, and that it was with a design to retain Roxana in town; he was the more troubled too, because his Wife be∣gan also to hearken to the Mufti's Tales; this made him to de∣sire of Amurat, but so much time as to take his Wife and Daugh∣ter, with some few Servants, with him, assuring him that he would be gone in twenty four hours. The Emperor, thinking that there was not so great and pressing a necessi∣ty, for Aladin's departure, as the Mufti had suggested, did grant him his request; for which favour Ala∣din
having return'd his thanks, he went home, to use all diligence for his depart. He presently gave order to his Wife and his Daugh∣ter to be in a readiness against next Morning, very early; he did appoint all those of his Servants that should go along with him, and those that should come after; and gave order for all other things requisite for the Journey. The Mufti was not present when that Amurat had granted a day longer to Aladin's desires, wherefore he knew nothing of that stop; and Aladin had been so cunning that he had not given any notice of it to Zora, and had forbid his Wife and Daughter to speak of it, for fear she should have given her Bro∣ther some information, who would have again broke his measures; so that the Mufti at his usual time of visit fail'd not to come to A∣ladin's House, as he us'd to do: he thought that now he was se∣cure
enough from being interrupt∣ed by Aladin; but he still was in fear of the troublesome Mother's company, which was not requisite, on the account of his visit to Rox∣ana, but he thought that he would find a way to employ her else∣where. He stay'd not to be usher'd in, as usually, but briskly getting up stairs, humming of a tune to himself, as he went; he push'd open the door of Roxana's Cham∣ber, and rush'd in on the sudden, and was so hasty to shut the door upon him, that he might not be disturb'd by the Mother, in his last address of Courtship to Roxana, that he had not perceiv'd Aladin and the Mother, who were both in the Room. You cannot but think that he was strangely dis∣compos'd at Aladin's presence, who he thought far off on his Journey? not in the least, I assure you; what with his accustomed confi∣dence, and that presence of mind
(which he never had but in such amorous intreagues) I come to tell you, Sir, said he to Aladin, that the Sultana hearing of Roxana's safe and perfect recovery, desires to congratulate her and her Mother of it, as she does you by me; and that to that end she will have them to attend her this Evening at the Seragli I have no more to say. You may wonder peradventure, why I was employ'd to deliver this Message; but the reason was, that I was de∣sirous to be the Messenger of so good news to you. Prepare against the time, and fit your selves for so ho∣nourable a visit. As to you, Sir, turning to Aladin, you may conti∣nue your design of setting forth in the Morning; Amurat expects you should, for which I wish you a safe conduct from our great Prophet. Having deliver'd this formal So∣ry, I must be going, continu'd he, earnest business stays for me, where∣fore I take my leave.
Though Aladin did believe all this to be a Sham, he also knew that the Mufti had power and in∣fluence enough upon the Sultana to put in her head a desire to see Roxana, for whom she had a par∣ticular kindness, not doubting but that the Sultana would be glad to have an account of Roxana's late adventures from her own mouth: this was the Mufti's opi∣nion also; wherefore he immedi∣ately address'd his steps towards the Seraglio, and all places being open to his confidence, he soon found access unto the Sultana, in whom he easily inspir'd the desires of sending for Roxana and her Mother; which care he took up∣on himself, and having already done that part, he had no more to do, but to fix on the day of the violent attempt on Roxana, with his Sister Zora's assistance. They both being certain that now Aladin would be oblig'd to be
gone the next morning without his Daughter, who should not re∣turn home that night, by his con∣trivance. They fix'd the time for the great work on the next day, about the time that Roxana came from walking in her Garden; she usually did retire into her Closet for a time: Zora undertook to keep the Coast clear; and the Mufti assur'd her that he would act his part like a Man of Mettle. Aladin not knowing how to remedy all this, thought it his best way to leave all to Fortune, for the present; and so soon as he were got to his Government, to send for his Wife and Daughter; or to obtain leave to come and fetch them himself: mean time, he knew that it was but folly to withstand the Mufti's designs; and believing they inclin'd so much towards his Daughter, that by that means his Wife might e∣scape; and Roxana having alrea∣dy
been censur'd by the World, for her late misfortune, he took the whole business more patient∣ly; and receiving a message at night from the Seraglio, that the Sultana would not part with his Wife and Daughter till the next day; he rested contented, at least seemingly so, dispatch'd the rest of his business, and set forward on his Journey early the next Morn∣ing, with two or three of his most necessary Servants. Roxana and her Mother were courteously receiv'd by the Sultana, who being crowded with visits that day, through the Mufti's contrivance, had not the con∣veniency of satisfying her self of Roxana's adventure, as she desir'd; that, with the Emperour's coming to partake of the relation, by the Mufti's instigation also, made it so late before the Sultana was ful∣ly satisfy'd with Roxana's compa∣ny, that she oblig'd her, and her
Mother, to stay there all that night, and part of the next day, after which, the Sultana dismiss'd them, not without Presents, as her Cu∣stom was to do. Roxana was in hopes that her Father would have stay'd for their return, to have taken them along with him, but the Mother wish'd on the contrary, that he might be gone, that she might enjoy more of those pleasant Conversations with the Mufti, of which she had had but a small relish, which made her mouth water for more. This that made Roxana's sorrow for A∣ladin's, departure, when she was return'd home, was a matter of rejoycing for the Mother; and both believing that all was of the Mufti's contrivance, he was bless'd and curs'd for it, according to the divers interests of the Parties con∣cern'd. Mean time, to make good the Proverb, That the more the Fox
is curs'd, the more he thrives; the Mufti was hugging of himself at this good success, and at the hopes he had of prospering as well in the great work of that day; so that it was with great impatience, that he waited for the lasie Hours, that were to usher in that happy moment. Zora was likewise giving all the necessary orders beforehand, for to distance all the Servants from Roxana's Apartment, that no inter∣ruption should be given that way, and had found out a means to di∣vert the Mother another way, so that all things were in a readiness, and seem'd to concur with the grand Design. Cara, who since the late Engage∣ment he had with Zora, was more assiduous in his Visits than ever, sel∣dom fail'd of seeing her once a day, he did usually take the time that Roxana walked in her Garden, because that she, not caring much for Zora's Company, would go
without her, whereby Cara had the greater liberty of entertaining her; according to his Custom he came, and finding scarce any per∣son in the body of the House, Zo∣ra her self being, just at that instant, out of the way, Cara believing that she might be in her own Cham∣ber, went to see, but finding her not there, and passing by Roxana's Chamber, looked in, but not seeing her there neither, and that the Key was in Roxana's Closet door, he ventured in, and having knock'd, and no answer made, he made bold to open the Door and peep in. He was so surprised at the fight of so many delicate things, which com∣pos'd the Ornament of it, that ga∣zing earnestly on, he enter'd quite in, and forgot himself in the a∣mazement he was. Roxana being somewhat indis∣pos'd, did return from her Garden sooner than ordinary, she came in∣to her Chamber, and was immedi∣ately
followed into it by the Mufti, (who was in watch with Zora in a dark Corner in the passage,) so close that she had not time to reach to the Closet. So soon as he was got in, he shut the door upon him with∣in side, and went after Roxana, who, little thinking of him, was crying out, Oh! Ibrahim, Ibrahim. Madam, said he, coming softly behind her, and taking her gently by the middle with both his hands, disturb not the dead; at this Roxana started, for she thought it had been some of her people that were giving their at∣tendance, who had shut the door; A living Dog is better than a dead Lion, continued he, and the Com∣parison is not so disproportionable as you may imagin, betwixt your dead Ibrahim, and your living, most humble, most passionate, and most miserable Lover, who not able to subsist any longer without your con∣sent, is come to dye imploring your pity and compassion; saying of this,
he flung himself at Roxana's feet, who had been prevented by the Mufti, from discovering Cara in the Closet; you may imagine with what apprehensions he remained there; Roxana, infinitely sur∣priz'd to find her self alone with the Mufti, and the door shut, would have got to her Closet; but the Mufti taking hold of her Garment, said, Can you have so much cruelty in you, Madam, as to let me perish here, and not so much as afford me one word of Comfort? Speak, Madam, and let me know whether you doom me to life or death; there pausing, Roxana, who could not get from him, was forced to make him this answer. I wonder, Sir, that notwithstanding I have so frequently told you, that I should eternally so much love the memo∣ry of Ibrahim, that I should never afford to spare one grain of Love on any thing else, you will still per∣sist in a fruitless pursuit of an ima∣ginary
Bliss; which you can never obtain. If the World, Madam, re∣plyed the Mufti, is not mistaken, I∣brahim, did gain from you, what you so severely deny to me. To un∣deceive you, Sir, replyed Roxana, If you please to rise, for I must not see you any longer in so unbecom∣ing a posture before me, I will tell you, that though Ibrahim was my Husband, as much as all the sacred Tyes of faithful Promises and Oaths could bind us together, never to mar∣ry any other, and to consummate that our private Contract and Ma∣riage so soon as we had brought my Parents to consent. Know, Sir, I say, that I never admitted him to any further favour, than the most modest Virgin in the World would a person that were an absolute stran∣ger, setting aside one single private enterview, unto which I was sur∣pris'd, when I gave my heart whol∣ly to him, in lieu of his that he had given me.
But Madam, answered the Mufti; your promises were made to a li∣ving man, and they did bind you no longer than till death had broke those bonds. Sir, replyed Roxana, interrupting him, with a little heat, if the Vows I made him were made void by my death, which I wish had been so, he had not been freed from his part towards my me∣mory, had he remained alive; the same it is with me. I tell you I am still an untouch'd Maid, and that in the resolution I am at present, which I hope time will never al∣ter, should a Lover with an Em∣pire be offered me, I should reject it, though it were in the just and lawful account of marriage; where∣fore, Sir, never think to gain any the least point over me in those sinister ways that you attempt. Then, Madam, replyed the Mufti, seeing that you are so plain, I will be so too, and tell you that my Passion being grown to that height
and strength, that I can no longer be Master over it, I am now come to know of you, whether I must obtain by consent or by force, that without which I can no longer live, and be my self. This made Roxana to change Colour, look about her, and to tremble, not being able to stir from the place where she was, which was far from the Door. Af∣ter this, said she, it is neither safe nor just, for me to remain here, wherefore let me go, or I shall call for aid. In vain, Madam, replyed the Mufti, I have provided before hand, against all preventions, you are in my Power. There is not one of your Servants that can so much as hear you, the door is fast, you cannot escape me; therefore, once more, Madam, I humbly beg of you to have compassion on me, and to afford me freely, what you see you cannot prevent me from ta∣king by force, and with that he held her faster than before. Roxana,
perceiving in what a danger she was, and that she was to expect no∣thing less than what the Mufti threatned, by the fierceness of his looks, and the fire in his Eyes, call'd out aloud for aid; at which he, with a forced smile, said, In vain all this, I am not a person to do my work by halves, I once a∣gain tell you, that no body can hear you, and that I will not lose this fair opportunity, and this ad∣vantage of giving a vent to those Flames, which would burn me up to ashes, should they remain any longer blazing in my breast. Rox∣ana made her last effort, to get from him, towards the door, which made the Mufti say, Nay then, Ma∣dam, I must carry you to that Couch, with that taking her up in his Arms, notwithstanding all the resistance that she could pos∣sibly make, he carried her to∣wards the Couch, at which, ha∣ving given a great shriek, she sain∣ted away in his Arms.
When Cara had heard the Muf∣ti's resolution of forcing Roxana, he had design'd to rescue her, though he run himself into great danger by it; but to disguise him∣self, he had put upon him a long Vest of Cloth of Silver, and flung a thick Veil over his head, and face, which conceal'd him from any bodies knowledge; so soon as he heard Roxana's last shriek, and perceiv'd through the Key-hole, by the Mufti's Violence, that it was time for him to come to her as∣sistance; he came softly out of the Closet, and violently forcing Rox∣ana out of the Mufti's arms, (not without flinging him forcibly on the Floor) he laid her gently down on the Couch, went to the door and opened it, after which, he re∣turn'd to Roxana, all this without speaking one word; he did what he could to bring her to life, at last she breathed again, opened her Eyes, and perceiving a strange shape by
her, appear'd disturb'd at it, and presently expressed it more by a relapsing into a swoon again. Cara perceiving it, and guessing that it might be his Dress that did afflight her, while she had still the appre∣hensions of her danger upon her, he made towards the Closet, to lay by those things he had put on, and so hastily steal out of the Chamber unseen; and being turn'd, he found that the Mufti was got a∣way. He was but just got into the Closet again, when Zora came in∣to the Chamber, who had doubt∣less been sent there by her Brother, she presently run towards Roxana, pretending a great surprise, whom she found coming to her self again, which made her run into the Clo∣set, to get some Cordials for her; Cara not knowing what to do, not to be discover'd, clapped on again the Vail, which he had already thrown off, and standing upright against the Wall, without motion.
So soon as Zora perceiv'd him at the entring into the Closet, she made a great shriek, and running out as fast as her legs would carry her, she got out of the Chamber, not mind∣ing Roxana, who was by that time quite out of her fainting fit. Cara, fearing that the longer he staid, the more difficult it would be for him to get off without being known, made after her, out of the Chamber, and being got in a blind passage, he let drop his dis∣guise, and as well as he could, got out of the House, being perceiv'd by no body but one Slave, who was at the outward gate. Roxana having at this second apparition of the Vision, taken more notice of it, did fancy that she knew that Vest, and perceiving no body in the Room, and the door wide open, after a little pause she got off of the Couch, went into her Closet, and fin∣ding that the Vest she had seen was wanting, having lock'd the door up∣on
her, and taken in the Key, she recover'd her self little by little, and busi'd her thought in unravelling the mystery of her great and wonderful deliverance, finding her self in the same condition that she was in before the Attempt, setting aside the disor∣ders that her fears, and her struglings, had made in her Cloaths and mind. Roxana was not interrupted in the least by Zora, she had been so frighted, at what her Brother had told her, just passing by her, and what she her self had seen, that she had not the courage to return to Roxana's Chamber, not doubting but that Roxana would pronounce her accessary in her own thoughts, if not the chief Instrument of the Mufti's wicked enterprise, and the Mother being very busie else-where, in putting up things which were in her particular Custody, to be sent after Aladin, who could not take them along with him, through her absence, when he left the City.
Roxana had full leisure to reflect on the Mufti's bold attempt, and on the strangeness of her delive∣rance, she remembred how near she was being ravish'd, when past hopes of all assistance, the door be∣ing lock'd on the inside by her ra∣visher, but could not retrieve how it came to pass that she had remain'd untouch'd, her ravisher gone, the door left open, and she delivered from all her fears, and apprehensions, when there was no body by. Then again she could not imagin who should be the Person, that should get into her Closet, how it came open, and wherefore they should go out, without saying any thing to her, with one of her Vests on, and one of her Veils over their face; all these things appear'd more like a Dream or a Vision to her than a Reality, she would have inclined to believe it so, had not she mist her Vest, and her Vail; and still remained sensible of the disturban∣ces
and disorders she was in. She had a great desire to inform her self of all these things from Zora, but she wondred that she came not near her, and conjecturing by that, that it was her guilt which made her not to appear; she could not tell which way to begin to open the business to her. She was sen∣sible of the Mufti's boundless pow∣er, that he who had had so much impudence, as to attempt so horrid a violence upon her Chastity, in her own house too, would not be wanting to himself, by some means or other, of shifting his neck out of the Collar; nay, she even ap∣prehended that if she should make a noise of it, he would not stick to turn all the ill of the business upon her self, and that what with his tongue, his impudence, and his as∣cendant over the Emperor, the Sul∣tana, and the chiefest of the Court, he would so manage things, that he should be counted innocent, and
she guilty. In this perplexity of thought she knew not what to re∣solve upon; she continu'd ponde∣ring on the business, without com∣ing to any Resolution, till her Mother finding the Chamber door open, did step in to see for her Daughter, after whom she had in∣quired; not seeing her in the Cham∣ber, she call'd, to know whether she was retir'd into her Closet; Roxana hearing her Mother's voice, open'd the Door, and her Mother briskly telling her, that she had been a great while very busie in sending her Father's things after him; it put her quite off of giving any account of what had hap∣pen'd, and from that Moment, she resolv'd to make no noise about it, at least for some time, till she had got as much light into the Business as she could possibly attain to. The Mother asked her whether the Mufti, according to his Custom, had not seen her that day? Truly,
said she, not giving her Daughter time to answer, he is a man of ex∣cellent Conversation, and considering, that no Scandal can happen from the visits of a Person of his Profession, though never so frequently repeated, I must confess, that I should take as much delight in that sort of Diver∣sion, as in any other that I know. What think you Daughter, are not you of my Opinion? No, Madam, re∣plyed Roxana, being vext at the subject of their Discourse; I do not find in his Conversation that satis∣faction that you imagine, and most commonly when he busies himself in telling me all the fine things that he can think of, my thoughts are so em∣ploy'd elsewhere, that I very frequent∣ly, have given him such unsuttable answers to what he has said, that he has let me know how sensible he was of my insensibility, as he was pleas'd to term it. This is to have ones thoughts wholly taken up another way answe∣red the Mother; for shame leave off
those melancholy Reflections, you dai∣ly employ upon a person that cannot so much as be sensible of them, much less to requite them, and think on some other Subject, more fitting your youth and condition. I am fix'd, Madam, replyed Roxana, and be∣lieve time which cures all things, will be defective in easing me of my trouble. We are always apt to indulge those affections which please us most, re∣plyed the Mother, but none are so agreeable, but that in success of time, they become out of date, and almost quite defac'd out of our memory; it will be so with you, Roxana, hereaf∣ter; your grief is but young yet, it is still in its full strength and vigour, but it will grow old, decay, and wi∣ther quite away, as all things else do. I cannot tell, Madam, what I shall be, but I know what I feel now, I cannot answer for the future, but now I can admit of no greater com∣fort, than of thinking of what I have lost. Well, replyed the Mother,
since you are so wedded still to your grief, and that I find you at this pre∣sent, more than ordinarily involv'd in it, I will not go about to asswage it any more for the present, for fear of raising it higher, therefore I'll leave you. Saying of these words, her Mother went out of the Clo∣set, and left her musing, though not wholly on that subject which she imagined. Roxana was so vext at the sub∣ject of her Mother's Discourse, which was very unseasonable at that time to her, that she was scarce able to give her Mother the respect she owed her: She re∣solv'd not to stir out of her Clo∣set till she would go to Bed, and see whether Zora would come to her of her own accord, by which she might guess whether she had a hand in her Brother's late At∣tempt, as she question'd not but she had; but whether she had or had nor, as she made a resolution
in her self never to give the Muf∣ti the liberty of speaking more with her, so she design'd to leave Zora behind her, so soon as her Father should send or come to fetch her into the Country, which he had promised her he would in a Letter which he had left behind him. The Mufti being got home, and retir'd privately into his Closet, to consider how to come off clear∣ly of so foul a business, had gi∣ven order to his Servants to say to any that should ask after him, he was not within. Of all the whole business, that which he could by no means apprehend, was the manner of Roxana's rescue from his embraces, when he was so near accomplishing his business; he could not tell what to make of it: some times he thought that he had not shut the door, then when he assur'd himself he had, he fancied that there was certain∣ly
some secret door belonging to Roxana's Chamber, which he had never heard of, nor Zora neither, or that she certainly would have secur'd it, or given him notice of it; then again he fancied that in the great haste he had made to get up and away, to the best of his remembrance, he had seen the Closet door open, and why might it not be some body that was in that Closet that had thus dash'd all his hopes in pieces? That he thought the most probable of all the conjectures which he could make: But then, how that Person should come to be there, to what end, what business he had to do in Roxana's Closet, and why in such a strange kind of disguise, for he made no question but that it was a Man, by the roughness with which he had been handled by him. All these questions which he made to himself were unan∣swerable; the most that he could
make of it was, that he believ'd that some Man was employ'd a∣bout some business or other in the Closet, and that not willing to be known, he had come to Roxana's rescue unexpected, and after that, return'd about his bu∣siness: This gave him apprehensi∣ons that he might have a greater and more difficult game to play, in the discovery of the Person, and stopping of his mouth, than in appeasing of Roxana: this did perplex him infinitely, insomuch that he knew not which way to go about to purge himself from all guilt. After he had taken di∣vers turns in his Chamber, then return'd into his Closer, it being necessary that he should go about justifying himself without delay, he at last took up the resolution of writting a Letter to Roxana, which he would inclose in ano∣ther to his Sister, and send it im∣mediately by his Servant, to be
deliver'd into Zora's own hand: He thus writ to Zora, What Devil, envious of my Hap∣piness, was got into the Closet, or had plac'd that Person there, who has not only been the great and only obstacle to my Joyes, but who, I fear, may prove more difficult to lay again, I know not; but certain it is, that when I had pass'd over all other difficulties, and that I was ready to lose my self in that Ocean of Pleasures, which I was just going to enjoy, my Prey was snatch'd from me, I rudely thrown on the Floor, Roxana rescu'd, and I glad to get off so, without any further knowledg of my Enemy; I cannot think of any neglect in you, but wholly attribute all the misfortune to my unlucky Stars. Fail not to deliver this inclosed into Roxana's own hand, after you have read it and sealed it up; I hope it will in some measure appease that fury
she must needs be in at present a∣gainst me; and though I have no longer hopes of obtaining any thing from her by fair means, I am re∣solv'd not to stop there, but to go on, and to leave no Plot, Stratagem, or Surprizal unattempted, till I get my ends, seeing that it is im∣possible for me to live much longer without enjoying of her. This Letter being deliver'd into Zora's hands by a trusty Servant of his, she read it, but durst not venture to deliver it to Roxana with her own hands: She dread∣ed to encounter the Storm which Roxana would raise against her, had she the least suspicion that she had an hand in the business; and it was very probabable that she did mistrust it; she therefore gave it to the Messenger, and bid him to take no notice of having seen her, but that he should enquire for some of Roxana's Servants, to
whom he should give it, and charge him immediately to go and deliver it into Roxana's hands, while he should stay for his re∣turn. It was in short, deliver'd to Roxana who not knowing the hand, open'd and read it; but how vexed was she, when she read from whom it came, that she had not im∣mediately sent it back again, with∣out so much as looking upon it! but now it was too late, and since she had begun to read, she had as good go on to see the rest of it as not, she then read as follows. I should think you to be the most insensible Person in all the World, Ma∣dam, should you not vent your Pas∣sion against me, with all the rage and fury imaginable, and nothing more could perswade me, that all you had done to save your Honour, were but feign'd, did you not think me the very worst of all men Yes, Ma∣dam, you ought to resent in the high∣est
nature, what I have attempted against you, and I am bound in con∣science to give you that good and wholsome Advice. But after all, Ma∣dam, when you have given all that is due to your just resentments, and your revenge, let me advise and intreat you to allow justice its due also, and after you have treated me like a Criminal, so long as you had no other reason but to believe me so, you ought to receive again some good impressions of me, in your heart and mind, when you are well inform'd of my Innocence, and of the Violence that I was forced to use upon my self, before I could submit to become the Instrument by which you have receiv'd so much trouble. For who durst per∣sist long in the refusal of the express orders of the Emperor, especially af∣ter I had so highly incens'd him at my refusal to obey him, in a thing of such a nature, which I knew would so highly offend you? Yes, Madam, Amurat being overcome with your
Beauty, had a desire to know whether you had not been defiled by Ibrahim, so as to have been rendered unwor∣thy of the Honour of his Embraces; he chose that way of Tryal, and he forc'd me to go about it. I have not yet given him an account of what I have done, and I wait to learn from you what I shall answer, according to the Inclination you may have of becoming his Mistress or not. For my part, I know how to think of you, and how to value so chast and so virtuous a Woman, and if I durst give Counsel against my Prince, I know what I would advise you to do. But, Madam, your own Chast thoughts are sufficient to inspire you with such an Answer, as is fitting and suitable to so much goodness as you are Mi∣stress of. Leave me not long with∣out an answer, that I may frame ac∣cordingly my report to the Empe∣ror. I doubt not, but after this Infor∣mation, of the reasons of my rash pro∣ceedings against you, you will take care
to clear me from being censur'd by that Person that insolently took the rest of the work out of my hands, just when I was going to desist from a∣ny further prosecution of that in which you had so intirely satisfi'd me, that you might have seen that my Commission ending there, I had no more to do, than beg your pardon for what I had done, so much against my own incli∣nations, and that profound respect which I have for so Charming a per∣son. These Reasons how plausible they might appear to the Mufti and Zo∣ra, did so ill consist with the me∣thod he had taken, the Violence he had us'd, the passion, or rather rage, that he had exprest, during the attempt, and his former lustful sol∣licitations, besides those passionate Expressions in the Letter, that Rox∣ana did but admire at his Impu∣dence, that employed Amurat's Name and Commands, to justifie
his Beastliness; upon that she tore the Letter in a thousand pieces, and confirm'd her self in the Resolution of never more giving him the least opportunity imaginable of speaking to her, and presently taking Pen Ink, and Paper, she writ to Ala∣din, to most humbly and earnestly intreat him to come, and deliver her from that Misery she liv'd in, through the wicked Mufti's means, and immediately dispatch'd a Mes∣senger with the Letter to her Fa∣ther. Having thus settled her mind again, she call'd for some of her At∣tendants to put her in Bed. Zora thought that a fit time to appear in, before Roxana, because that she thought she would not take notice of any thing, before her other Ser∣vants, and that so soon as she were in Bed, she would retire to her Chamber; so that she might see and guess by her looks, at the agi∣tation of her Heart, and so pro∣ceed,
as she should find occasi∣on. The Servants being come, Zora appear'd also with the Vest and Vail which had been found in the dark Corner. Look you, Madam, said she, what has been found in the dark Passage! Can you tell who laid them there, replyed Roxana? If you could do that you would pleasure me for I am sure that I am infinitely oblig'd to that Person, who ever he be, that took the pains to carry them so far, and I wish he had them for his pains. They are worth acceptance, I assure you, Madam, said Zora. If you think so, replyed Roxana, do so much for me, as to make a strict enquiry all about the House, to find out the Person, and if you can disco∣ver him, present them from me to him, but if you cannot learn who it is, pray accept of them your self. Rexana spoke this with something of Chearfulness, which made Zora to believe that Roxana had accep∣ted of the Mufti's Reasons as suffi∣cient.
That made her venture to ask her, whether she design'd an answer to the Letter she had late∣ly receiv'd, for which there was a Servant waited below. No, reply∣ed Roxana, I leave it to the Per∣sons own discretion, that writ it, who is too well supply'd with that, to want my advice, and not to act in it for the better, as he shall think fit. Saying this she went in Bed, and ordered that the Curtains should be close shut, and no noise made, because she would go sleep, which oblig'd all the Servants to retire, and Zo∣ra with them. All that Zora could do, to sa∣tisfie her own Curiosity, and to serve her Brother, in the discove∣ry of Roxana's Deliverer, was to no effect. No body in all the House could give her an account of him, only a slave told her, that about such a time, he had seen a Man go out of the House hastily, whom he knew not. She fancied
it might be Cara, who after his u∣sual manner, coming to give her a Visit, and not finding her, was gone back again to his Lodgings. To be certain of this, she presently dispatch'd a Servant to him, to let him know that she would speak with him, and in case he was not at home, to leave word that he should come to her, so soon as he was come in, or very early the next morning. Roxana's dubious answer, did work very much in Zora's mind, and she thought that it would do so in her Brother's also, where∣fore she sent word of it in writing to the Mufti, and inform'd him be∣sides, of all that she could; this made the Mufti to come to Aladin's house that very night, to consult with his Sister, what was to be done, and upon that to take new Measures, in the pursuance of his first designs, to which he was two much wedded, to ever leave them
unaccomplished. Zora acquainted him with all that she knew, and he repeated to her all that he had done, and the result was, that least Roxana should by some means or other, break all their Measures, the Mufti should make another attempt upon her, but with more Craft, and less of force. To this end it was concluded, that the Mufti should provide a good pro∣portion of some choice prepara∣tion of Opium, by which it should be quicken'd in its operation, and weaken'd in its taste, and that Zora should administer it to Rox∣ana, in that Dish of Coffee, which she used to take every night go∣ing to bed. The time to do this was appointed to be the following Night, and the hour, when all the rest of the Family were retir'd. After this the Mufti return'd home, and Zora went to her Bed. Cara all this while had not wan∣ted matter to busie his thoughts
with, but above all, he had been wondring at the Mufti's bold at∣tempt, to which he doubted not but Zora did assist, and at the fair escape which he had made out of the Closet, without being disco∣ver'd, after he had had the good Fortune to prevent the Execution of so great a piece of Villany, and the happiness of serving Roxana in so high a measure. He did not doubt but that Zora had as Viti∣ous Inclinations as her Brother, but yet her Beauty prevail'd o∣ver all, and when he represented to himself, her amiable Person, no∣thing would serve his turn, but the enjoyment of that, at what rate soever, upon which he was fully bent, though not at so dear a rate, as to be tyed to her in Matrimony. He went to bed also in those thoughts, and in a de∣sign to obey her Summons the next morning.
Cara in the Morning came to Aladin's house, where he was ex∣amin'd by Zora, whether he had been the day before to visit her; for that she having been busied that day more than ordinary, in assisting Roxana's Mother to put up those things which Aladin had left behind him, and to send them away, he might have been there, and not see her. Cara, to take from her all distrust of his know∣ing any thing of the Mufti's late attempt, did tell her, that earnest bu∣siness having call'd him elsewhere, he had been defective in that du∣ty, for which he came to beg her pardon, and know what was her pleasure with him. She told him that there was nothing more in it, than to know why he had been de∣fective in performing the promise which he had made her of daily visiting her. I would add, conti∣nu'd Zora, that peradventure, I thought it long since I had seen
you, but that I fear you would take advantage of it. Yes, Madam, re∣plyed Cara, I would, and do so; and I now most earnestly beg that you would be so just to your self and me, as immediately to appoint the happy moment in which I am to dye in your embraces; the time you had taken for it, is expired: and if you would not have me to dye for love presently at your feet, my dear Zora, speak that hap∣py moment. You are in haste, it seems, replyed Zora? Yes, Ma∣dam, answered Cara; and I had already designed to wait on you, to demand the performance of your word, before I receiv'd your Com∣mands; because I know not whe∣ther I shall be oblig'd to at∣tend your Brother, the Mufti, in his journey after the Court, which sets forth to morrow. Well, re∣plyed Zora, you shall prevail; but remember your promise; at twelve this Night come into that Cham∣ber
where Aladin used sometimes to lye, when here, by the door of the Gallery, which shall be left o∣pen, and there I shall be ready to receive you; but be sure, you let no body see you, and that you make no noise. I know the Chamber, re∣plied Cara, and I shall fly to your embraces as a miserable Slave would do to his unhop'd for Freedom. This bargain made, they con∣firm'd it with kisses, and so part∣ed till the appointed time. Roxana having had a very rest∣less night, being affrighted with horrid Dreams, did resolve not to lye any longer in her own Cham∣ber, at least for a while, till her mind were more quiet: where∣fore, so soon as she was up, she order'd that all things should be remov'd from her Chamber, that she should want, into that in which her Father us'd to sleep, as being more remote from noise, and that the sight of those places
in her own Room, in which she had been so highly offended, might not affect her Imaginati∣on with such fancies as she had had the last night. This remo∣val being come to Zora's ears, she presently sent a Messenger to the Mufti, to inform him of it; and another to Cara, with a Let∣ter, in which she let him know that it having been Roxana's plea∣sure to change Chambers with her for a night or two, because she slept not well in her own; that she sent him that timely notice of it, that in lieu of her own Chamber, he should go further in∣to Roxana's Chamber, still by the Gallery door, where he should find his Zora. But the time seem∣ing long to Cara till night, he was gone out on visits, to divert himself, and make the time less tedeous; so that the Letter was left to be given him with a Servant of his, who forget∣ing
to deliver it at his com∣ing home: Cara was by that means left wholly ignorant of the change. The Messenger who had been sent to the Mufti had had better success, he had deliver'd the Let∣ter into the Mufti's own hands, had waited for an answer, which he brought back to Zora, with the ingredient which she was to mix in Roxana's Coffee. All things did thus tend little by little to∣wards their determination on the three Lovers accounts, who were all very impatient of the arrival of the happy moment in which they were to consummate their Joyes; but above all did the Muf∣ti grow impatient, when he re∣ceiv'd a Summons from the Coun∣cil, to give his attendance there forthwith, to deliberate of the measures that should be taken to keep the discontented and murmu∣ring People quiet, during the ab∣sence
of the Court: the Business being of very great concern, re∣quired also a long and vigorous debate about the means that were best to be us'd: the Council on this business was divided, and e∣very one, according as his own particular Interest guided him, gave his voice for this or that way, Our Mufti did all he could pos∣sible to bring things to a con∣clusion, but could not prevail; he had divers times made offers to retire, (it growing towards the hour of his assignation) but had been oblig'd as often to sit down again, by Amurat's Command; at last, the Council having made an end of the business in hand, broke up, and our Mufti was let loose to his own desires; he made all the haste that he could possi∣ble to his own Lodgings, to ac∣commodate himself a little fit for the great Work he had in hand, but the hour appointed being al∣ready
come, he made all the haste imaginable towards Aladin's House. Cara had not fail'd to come at the critical minute to enjoy his dear Zora, who having before hand taken all her measures with the Mufti, so that he was not to see her any more that night, but go directly to find Roxana in A∣din's Chamber, she had retir'd her self in Roxana's Chamber, in ex∣pectation of her dear Cara's com∣ing. Cara having got into the House by the back door, which answered to the Gallery, he had pull'd it close after him, and it be∣ing a spring-Lock, it had shut of it self; he address'd his steps to∣wards Aladin's Chamber, as he had been directed, and coming to the door, which he found upon the Latch, he open'd it, went in, shut it again, undress'd him∣self, and went to bed to his Mi∣stress Zora, as he suppos'd. He
began his Caresses, and whisper'd fine things in her Ear; but find∣ing no return, neither in word, nor in actions, and perceiving that she was so fast asleep, that all he said or did could not awake her, he con∣cluded that Zora did observe that silence, either to prevent him from making a noise, or that it was in point of modesty; wherefore he troubled himself no further, but fell about the business that he was come for: he was strangely sur∣priz'd in several respects. He found not that complyance and complai∣sance which he with reason did ex∣pect from Zora; on the contrary, he met with a kind of repulse and opposition, which though not very vigorous and strong, was continu∣al, and which came from the per∣son, as if it design'd a more vigo∣rous resistance, had she not been overcome by a profound sleep, which was accompanied with a louder voice than was requisite to
be heard at such a time, and which was so forc'd and inarticulate, as those persons that in their Dreams offer to speak, but cannot; but that which surprised him above all, was to find that which he least expected, namely, a Virgon: he left making reflections till another time, and as he had done the bu∣siness he was come about, and find∣ing the person, whoe'er it was, to awaken more and more, so that she began to cry out, he hastned all he could to slip on his cloaths, and to get away in all diligence, for fear of any surprizal; but be∣ing very desirous to know with whom he had had to do, he had flipp'd a Ring off the Person's Fin∣ger, which he took along with him; he presently got to the door he had come in at, and getting in∣to a Court-yard, through which he was to pass before he came to the Street, there he espied a Per∣son muffled up, who turn'd aside,
as having no desire to be known, he passed by, and went his way home, contented with his present good fortune, and wonderfully surpris'd at his good success. The Person that Cara had seen in the Court was the Mufti, who having found the door shut, had walk'd up and down there, in hopes it should be open'd to him. The desire he had of concealing himself, and the haste which Cara had made away, had hindred the Mufti from perceiving who it was; he went in, and being got into the Gallery, he found Zora very much disorder'd, who was running for help, who told him that Roxana was waken'd in a strange dis∣order, that through some dream, or the effects of what had bin gi∣ven her; she talk'd very loud of strange things, and that certainly she would make some strange dis∣covery, of what had passed betwixt them, if he found not some present
expedient to allay the Fury she was in. What dost thou mean, re∣plyed the Mufti, I rather think that thou art mad, or thou wouldst never have left me till now, dancing attendance in the Court. Why, re∣plyed Zora, have you not been with her? No, replyed the Mufti, how could I, when the door (which you said should be open,) was shut; but some body else, more happy than I, has gathered the Fruit, is  of all my Labors. Yes, continued he, I had a glimps of him as he run by me, and I very much fany it was Cara. Has he been with you this Night. No, replyed Zora, I can as∣sure you. While they were thus ex∣amining one another, they heard a noise, which obliged the Mufti to retreat the same way he had come in. He was no sooner got out, but that Zora returning back upon her steps, perceiv'd Roxana coming towards her in the grea∣test disorder imaginable; she had
misplac'd all her Garments about her, and they were so loose put on, that they were ready to drop off, her Hair were about her head, her Eyes look'd as a person's that is in drink, she reel'd and stagger'd much after the same manner, and her words came from her, much with the same dissiculty, as persons in drink bring them forth, and but with little or no more Sense; in her hand she had a naked Sci∣miter, which at the sight of Zora, she lifted up, And have I found thee, thou Robber of my Honour, said she, then there is for thee, with that she discharg'd as great a blow with the Scimiter upon Zora, as her weak∣ness would permit her to give, which Zora prevented from light∣ing upon her head, by receiving it upon her Arm, which was cut to the bone; Zora staid not for another blow, but presently run away, and lock'd her self up in her own Chamber, barricadoing the
door within side, with all that she could find. It being yet very Early, so that she found no body about the House, she went rummaging on, still cry∣ing out, where is the Thief, where is the Ravisher, where is that De∣vil who has depriv'd me of my Jewel? I must have it again, I must find it, nay, I will have it, I'll to the Emperor, and make my moan to him, sure he will redress me; all this she said, going up and down and striking with the Scimiter as she went along; this noise awaken'd at last some of the Women, who wondring what was the matter, hearing Roxana's Voice, stepp'd out to see, but so soon as she espy∣ed the first, running at her as well as she could, the Wo∣man made her escape into Roxana's Mother's Chamber, where having shut her self in, she told the Mo∣ther what she had seen. Roxana, with the haste she had
made, running after the Woman, had fallen down, and could not get up again, which made some o∣ther Women with the Mother, who had been awaken'd at the allarm, to venture upon her, and having taken by force the Scimiter from her, they took her up, de∣fending themselves as well as they could from her Teeth and Nails, and conveyd her to her Mother's Bed, being the nearest at hand, where she was forc'd to be held with meer strength of Arms. After the Mother had a little recollected her self, she caus'd some body to go call Zora to her; the Messengers were knocking at the door till they were weary, with∣out any answer, which made them look through the Key-hole, and by an imperfect dim light, it being yet early, having perceiv'd her fallen on the ground, and a great deal of Blood about her, they ha∣stily run back to the Mother, and
told her that Zora lay murthered on the Floor, in her own Cham∣ber, and that the Door being look'd within side, there was no coming at her. The Mother did present∣ly give order that the Door should be broke open, that to that pur∣pose some men servants should be call'd up, as also to be sent for some Physitians in all haste; all was done accordingly, and Zora was found coming to her self again; for the loss of Blood, which had caus'd her fainting, in which she had falln on the Floor, being thereby stopt for the present, she had come to life again; those that were about her stopp'd the blood, and bound up the Wound as well as they could, till further help came. She was asked who had done her the mischief? and the question being made by those that were inferior to her, she thought not fit to give them any account of it, but wav'd the Dis∣course.
Roxana, in the mean time, ha∣ving amongst the rest of her ex∣travagant talk, mention'd the Muf∣ti's Name two or three times. The Mother having given strict Charge she should be held in her Bed, did go to Zora's Chamber, to see her, and to ask her some questions. She asked of her, in the first place, who had so wounded her, to which Zora made answer, that having heard a great noise in the Womens apartment, she had stepped out of her Chamber to see what was the matter, and that as she was returning, she had met with Roxana, who calling her Robber and Thief, had given her that blow with a Scimiter that she had in her hand, at which she had run away, and locked her self in her Chamber, for fear she should follow after her, to give her more. The Mother asked her, whether the Muf∣ti her Brother, had been there that day, to which Zora made answer, No. Are you very sure of that, said
the Mother, Yes, Madam, answe∣red Zora, and I am certain, that no body in all the House can say he has been seen by them this day. He may have been here, and you not know it, reply'd the Mother. No, Madam, answered Zora, I can, and will give you ample proof of what I say. And pray, Madam, continued she, because my Wound will not permit me to write, call but for some body that can, and I will send the Mufti word, that he should give us an exact account of the places and Company he has been with all the Day, and all the night. A person being brought, Zora bid him only write, justi∣fie your self, and give good proofs where you have been of late. This was presently sent by Zora's special order, to her Brother, who was found in his Bed. By this time the Surgeons being come, they took Zora in hand, and dres∣sed her Wound.
No sooner did the Mufti read that note, but he presently got up, though it was so early, and he began his Certificate, which was, that having been at the Council till past twelve of the Clock, he had from thence gone home, from whence he had not since stirr'd out. This was sign'd by all his Servants. Of truth there was but one, who knew of his going out, who was his Consident, the others be∣lieving really that he had not been out that night. So soon as it was convenient for him to stir forth, he went to divers of the Counsellors, and obtain'd from them their hands to certifie, that he had been with them in the Council Chamber, till after twelve, telling them, to satis∣fie their Curiosity, that a wager depended upon it; after that he went to all the other places where he had been all that day, and ob∣tain'd from those Persons in whose Company he had been, to sign to his Certificate, which he sent back to Zora.
He thought this a very necessa∣ry thing for him to do out of hand, because the Court was moving that day, towards the Holy Wa∣ters, that he might be so far justifi∣ed to the World, that he should not in his absence be accused of a deed, which he verily believ'd was done, but knew not by whom, and had no hand in it, with hopes, that at his return, he might renew his Friendship with Roxana, who still stuck at his heart, though he believ'd her ravish'd. Thus he fitted himself for the Journey, and went with the Court. The Physiti∣ans having administer'd things to Roxana, in order to compose her Spirits, and to cause her to rest. The Scimiter was examin'd, and no body could imagine how Roxana came by it, nor any body remem∣ber that they had seen such a one in the House: But when Zora had view'd it a little more nearly, she fancy'd that Cara did wear just such a
one, which confirm'd her in the suspicion she had before, that Ca∣ra had come, and taking one Rom for another, had met with Roxana, while she her self had been disap∣pointed. The Mother not knowing what to think of all this, nor what to make of it, began to wish her self in the Country with her Husband, or he with her at Constantinople, to dive a little deeper than she could in all these Mysteries, and to unravel the Riddles. Cara, for his part, having got by his change, was well satisfied, fancying that it was with Roxana that he had met in the dark, in lieu of Zora, of which he hoped to be one day fully satisfyed, by the Ring which he had taken from off her Finger; nothing did trou∣ble him in all this business, but the loss of his Scimiter, which he knew not whether he had dropt by the way, or left behind him,
through his extreme haste to get away unseen, which he had almost despair'd to do, by the great noise which Roxana began to make. By this time of the day, the Emperour and the Sultana were rea∣dy to go their Journey, accompa∣nied with the principal Officers of the Court, not forgetting our Mufti amongst the rest. Not but that he would fain have lingred behind for some few days, to have learn'd, of certain, who had been his Substi∣tute, of which he had but a bare distrust, and to have had some ac∣count of Roxana's condition. But the Emperour calling particularly for him, he was forc'd to go, and leave all to Zora's care, which was to send him word how things were; but he resolv'd to take Cara along with him, to prevent him from a∣ny further progress in his good for∣tune with Roxana, under the pre∣tence of having then more oppor∣tunity to present him to Amuat,
and to get him some employ. Roxana, who was all this while in her Mother's bed, had at last fallen asleep, and by the assistance of those Remedies which had been administred to her, all that had pass'd, that had been done to her, or that she had acted, did appear as a Vision; and had she not found in her self so great a change, which of necessity did perswade her that there was but too much reality in the case, all had pass'd with her for a Dream. She still insisting on the Mufti's violence to her, Zora gave Roxana's Mother that Certi∣ficate which her Brother had sent, and the Mother having read it, she gave it to Roxana, who having ex∣amin'd the Witnesses names over and over, could not but be satisfi'd in that respect, not doubting, but all those hands were true: the Muf∣ti, as wicked as he was, not daring to counterfeit so many Privy Coun∣cellors hands, which would of ne∣cessity
have risen up in judgment against him, and have declar'd him a person not fit to live. Thus was Roxana still in the dark, as to the knowledge of her Ravisher; but though she found that the Mufti was not the imme∣diate Person, she suspected that it was his, and his Sister's contrivance and design, but that by some strange accident some other per∣son had made use of an opportu∣nity which Fortune had presented to them. She enquir'd what was become of the Scimiter, with which she had wounded Zora, and desir'd to see it: it was brought to her, and she neither knew how she had come by it, nor whose it might be; she only learn'd that no body in all the Family could remember to have seen such a one in all the House: and Zora did believe that she came out of Aladin's Chamber with it. Roxana laid up the Scimi∣ter safe, that when time should
serve, she might make what use she could of it, in order to some discovery. Presently after, calling for water to wash her hands, she miss'd the Ring off of her Finger; she said nothing of that, but would go her self into Aladin's Chamber, to seek after it; being got thither, she caus'd all that had come with her to retire; she lock'd her self in, and left no corner unsearch'd, both for the Ring, and the Scimi∣ter's Scabbard, but to no purpose; she then considered how all things lay in that Chamber, the great disorder the bed-cloths were in; and prying a little further, she perceiv'd some signs of the vio∣lence which had been us'd against her; whence she concluded, that whoever it was that had been there, he had designdly taken her Ring away, but left the Sci∣miter by accident, with haste to get away unseen. After this, she concluded that something had been
given her, to cast her in a Sleep or Trance, that she might not make that noise and resistance which they might expect she would have done; and who could do all this without Zora's privacy? Then remembring that she had complain'd to her of an odd taste in the last Coffee she took at night, that confirm'd her still more in the belief that all had been acted by Zora, with a design to assist her Brother in the pursuit of his first Design, of getting from her by force, what he could not obtain by fair means, but that he being detain'd about some other Con∣cerns, some other Person more for∣tunately had met with what the Mufti had so long sought for, and had made use of the fair opportu∣nity that presented it self to him, not troubling himself who was the Person; and that as a great argument that she conjectur'd right, it was observable, that no
body but her Mother and Zora did know of her lying in Aladia's Chamber that night, where she had never lain before. Roxana having made those, and divers other reflections, she re∣turn'd to her Mother's Chamber, where she declar'd all that had happen'd to her, and all the sur∣misals that she had made upon the business; concluding, that seeing of necessity, Zora must be the prin∣cipal Instrument in all the business of her ruine, she would never see her Face more, no more than her Brother, the wicked Mufti; and she earnestly begg'd of her Mother to advise Zora to retire from their House, because she had conceiv'd a prejudice against her, which would hinder her perfect recove∣ry by the sight of her. The Mo∣ther did speak to Zora about it, and Zora knowing her self guilty, and that Roxana was very like to revenge her self on her, in the ab∣sence
of her Brother, she stay'd not to be bid to go twice; and that very day, she retir'd to the House of a Relation of hers, and Roxa∣na liv'd with her Mother a more retir'd life than ever: all her di∣version being in walking some∣times in her Garden, sitting a while in the Summer-house, and the rest of her time she spent in Sighs and Tears, in her own Chamber and Closet. The Court had not been gone a Month, but that a Rumor run a∣bout every where, that the Sulta∣na was with Child; and there were divers persons that did not stick to affirm, and offer to lay wa∣gers that it was of a young Prince. This made all the Bassa's and other Grandees of the Port, and of the Empire, who were not of the Sect of Hali to look about them; they had very well inform'd themselves of the Emperor and the Sultana's Phisicians, that she could not bring
forth a living Child, which made them conclude that these Rumors were spread abroad but to feel the pulse of the People, and to find how it would be resented by those that were more particularly con∣cern'd in the business. Presently a private Messenger was sent to Prince Soliman, of that wicked practice against his right to the Succession of the Empire. He was of the blood of the Otto∣mans, had married Zelinda, the Eldest of the two Daughters which Amurat had had by a former Sul∣tana, who was of the true anci∣ent Religion of Mahomet, and who had had her Children educated the same way. The youngest had been married to another Prince, of the same Religion also. The Prince return'd them thanks for the time∣ly advice which they had given him; and he further desir'd them to continue their good will to∣wards him, in giving him from
time to time, such intelligences and advices as might conduce to their own good as well as his, assuring them that he would stand by them against all Attempts which should be made against their Religion, Laws, and Liberties. This answer was so agreeable to their Wishes, which they receiv'd from Prince Solyman, that it did not only revive their drooping Spirits, but set them all to work themselves, and, by Spyes upon Amurat, and the Sultana's Person, to find out all that they could of their de∣signs against the Empire, and they at last found that Cha-Abas the Per∣sian Emperor had so poison'd the Sultana's mind by divers rich Pre∣sents, great assurances of his Aid and Succor in the great Work of Reformation (as he call'd it,) and the continual Solicitations of his Pensioners, and Emissaries in the Ottoman Empire, that they no long∣er doubted of their designed ruine,
and that they were sold with the Empire to Cha-Abas's Ambition. They gain'd some of the Ladies of the Mahometan Religion, whose places oblig'd them to be constant∣ly near the Sultana in the Serag∣lio, to observe her exactly, and to give them from time to time, what reports they could, concerning her feigned pregnancy. The Emperor and the Sultana, having finished their Pilgrimage and Devotions, the Court return'd to Constantinople with great joy, the Emperor and Sultana declaring publickly that she was with Child; for which, great joy was expressed amongst all the Followers of the Sect of Haly, and our Mufti was none of the backwardest in pro∣claiming the wonderful Miracle. But that did not hinder him from minding his own concerns, and learning the reasons of Zora's com∣ing away from Aladin's Family. She told him all that she did know,
and all that had passed in his ab∣sence, but she did not know how the Certificate which he had sent, was taken, because that she had gone from thence that very day. She after that asked him news con∣cerning Cara, he told her that he had for her sake, got him the Com∣mand of a Galley, and that he was gone to enter upon it, that after that he would return to Constantinople. With this story he pleased her for the present. Of truth he had procu∣red him that Command, but it had been with a design to keep him at Sea, far from Constantinople; and from attempting to get here∣after, by fair means, from Roxana, what he believ'd meer Fortune had thrown into his Arms; for not∣withstanding all these Frowns of Fortune on his amorours designs, he doubted not but to succeed in time, and to obtain from Roxana now, what she so positively refus'd him before, being of Opinion that
she would not think her self for the Future so oblig'd, as she was before her Rape, to preserve that which was not of so much value, how highly soever he did still value it himself. The Mufti did make strict inqui∣ries after Roxana's Health, and di∣vers offers to visit her, but all to no purpose; he address'd himself to the Mother, who receiv'd him ve∣ry Civilly, and did express so much satisfaction in his Conversation, that he continu'd his Visits to her, not without hopes to make her in time an Instrument for his access to his beloved Roxana. He was not long without solliciting the Mother on that account, but still she wav'd the Discourse, and put it off, not without being offended in her self, at the slight the Mufti made of her Company, in so earnestly pres∣sing for her Daughter, while she believed her self more suitable in Age for his grave conversation,
than Roxana was. But the Mufti at last growing quite weary of the Mother's company, which made him to slacken his Visits, she was oblig'd to make him a Promise, that she would speak to Roxana a∣bout him, to keep him still to her. That made him to repeat his Visits more frequently again, but still more to solicite and press the Mo∣ther to obtain leave of her Daugh∣ter, that he might see her, than for any diversion which he could please himself with, in the Mothers Com∣pany; however he appear'd as com∣plaisant towards her as he could force himself to represent, and he did so press the Mother to the performance of her promise, that she was at last forc'd to speak to Roxana about it. Roxana did not only receive with all the coldness imaginable what she said, but took upon her to reprimand her Mother for en∣gaging her self in so fowl a business,
declaring once for all, that if she would not let her be quiet at Con∣stantinople, where she remained meerly in complaisance to her, and without any the least inclination of her own, she would immedi∣ately write to her Father, to send for her into the Country. This answer made the Mother mute for ever after in the Mufti's concerns, and rather than to be mew'd up again as she had formerly been, in the Country, (which she fear'd would happen but too soon,) she resolv'd to lose one Courtier, in the person of the Mufti, to preserve all the rest that address'd themselves to her. She therefore told the Mufti; that she had us'd all her endeavours to perswade her Daughter, but all to no purpose, she being so wedded to her deep Melancholy of late, that she abhor∣red all manner of Conversation. This made our Mufti to withdraw himself in a short time after from
the Mother's Coversation also, though not to desist from his a∣morous pursuit of Roxana. Great rejoycings were at Court for the Sultana's pregnancy, Cha-Abas fail'd not to send an Ambas∣sador to Congratulate the Emperor and Sultana about it. And at last the time came of the Sultana's quick∣ning, those news redoubled the joys of the Halists, insomuch, that they no longer doubted of a Suc∣cessor to the Empire, that should be of their Sect, and that conse∣quently would preserve that Reli∣gion in the Empire. Mean time the true Mahometists, who were all disgraciated, and laid aside from all Offices of Trust, and publick Employes, were very diligent in their enquiry into things, and they had a very great progress in the discovery of Cha-Abas's designs, but they thought it not time yet to shew the least sign of their know∣ledge; that did so perswade the Ha∣lists,
that they were possest with a Spirit of stupidity, and that they were wholly depriv'd of all Sense and foresight of their Misery at hand, that they set the less guard on their Actions, and acted so visibly their wicked Designs, that they became obvious to the very Vulgar Eyes. But amongst all those rejoycings, care was taken to distance from Constantinople, all such Persons as were to be concern'd in prying more narrowly into the Birth of the Pretended Child, than were consistent with the Halists Designs. Wherefore some were confin'd to their Country Houses; some few, who had yet some Governments of Provinces, were charg'd not to stir from thence without special or∣ders from the Emperor; others were sent in Embassy. Amurat's youngest Daughter was sent by the forc'd Advice of her Physicians, to some Baths of warm Waters, at a great distance from Constantinople,
in order to recover that health, of which she found no want. In fine, all but the Mufties of the true Mahometan Religon, were dispers'd far enough from offering to prye into the grand Secrets of the Court. But those Mufties were to be dis∣pos'd of also: Our Mufti was em∣ploy'd particularly in that work, he invented a Paper, which he caus'd Amurat to proclaim, was his plea∣sure, should be read in all the Mos∣quées in his Dominions, which was so much against the formal Laws of the Empire, and of such dan∣gerous Consequences to the true Mahometan Religion, that the Muf∣ties unanimously declin'd the read∣ing of them, in their respective Mosquées, only some few that were Temporisers, did sacrifice to their Interest and Ambition, the true Dictates of their own Consciences. This was sufficient matter to bring those refusing Mufties into Examination, they were examin'd
before Amurat, and notwithstan∣ding all that they did alledge of just and honest, in vindication of their Innocence from the aspersion of Disobedience, and Rebellion, with which they were charg'd, they were all sent Prisoners to the Tower of the Dardanelles. As this Confinement of the Muf∣ties did highly rejoice the Halists, which did all conclude from thence, a sudden fall of the Mahometan Re∣ligion, to the Elevation of theirs, so it did raise such fears and appre∣hensions in the true Mahometists, that they began to provide with more vigour than ever, though un∣derhand, against the Fatal stroke, which was ready to fall upon their Religion, Rights, and Lives. They sent Messengers to Prince Solyman, to intreat him to be in a readiness to defend his own Right, and the Laws of the Empire. He hearken'd to their advices, and made Prepa∣rations underhand to assist those
of his own Religion, and to free them from Persian slavery. Thus were all Parties busie in supporting and promoting their own interest, by all means imaginable. The one pufft up with great hopes, and the other as much abased with fears and apprehensions. Roxana was not without a very great increase of trouble on her part, notwithstanding the general rejoi∣cing of all those of her own Sect. She had felt some motions in her Belly, which she was not accustom'd to feel, which with some sick fits, that had lately come upon her, had made her to give her Mother an account of the whole; her Mother did presently Judge by what her Daughter had told her, and by some other Circumstances and Signs, that Roxana had not only been ravish'd, but that she had been got with Child also; She confirm'd her Daughter in those Suspicions that she had of it, and the knowledge
of that further mischief did whol∣ly cast down Roxana, so that from that time she confin'd her self entirely to her Chamber, and would not admit but one from amongst all her Servants, in which she most confided, to approach near her, or to see her. Our Mufti was not satisfied with applauding himself, with his late invention, wherewith he had en∣trapp'd his great Enemies, the Mufties of the true Mahometan Re∣ligion (as he deem'd them) but he would be prais'd for it likewise by all his Party, not sparing A∣murat and the Sultana from ac∣knowledging his Subtilty in the managing of that branch of the great work. To this purpose he went to pay his devoirs to the Sultana, who he had not seen since that great Exploit: She fail'd not to magnifie his ingenuity, and to praise his indefatigable In∣dustry in the propagation of the
Faith: after which falling on par∣ticular discourses, the Sultana ask'd him what was become of Roxana and her Mother? saying that she had not seen them, nor heard of them since her return, and that she had expected a congratulatory visit from them for her great bel∣ly. The Mufti glad that the Sul∣tana had fallen on that Theam of her self, made answer, that he had heard by accident, that they were still both in Town, but that his multiplicity of business had hindred him from making any fur∣ther enquiry about them. The Sultana said that she had a desire to see the Beauteous, and Ingenious Roxana again; and with that or∣der'd that a Messenger should be im∣mediately sent from her, to the Mo∣ther and Daughter, to command them to wait on her that very day. The Messenger deliver'd the Message to Roxana's Mother, but did not come to the speech of her;
and all that her Mother could say or do, after the Messenger was gone (to whom she had said, they both would obey the Sultana's ob∣liging Commands) she could not prevail with her to keep her Com∣pany. What will the Sultana think, said the Mother? What shall I say? What excuse shall I make? All that Roxana said, was, what you please, use your own discretion, and act according to your own fan∣cy. The Mother was forc'd to go to the Seraglio without Roxana, very much dissatisfied, and very full of thoughts, what she should tell the Sultana, and whether she had best to discover to her what misfortunes had hapned to Rox∣ana, or not: She left all to the conduct of Fortune, and resolv'd to discover, or keep secret accord∣ing as the Sultana would give her occasion to act. She was kind∣ly receiv'd by the Sultana, who presently ask'd after Roxana. Is
she sick, said the Sultana? Yes, Madam, reply'd the Mother; she is not well, nor very sick neither. What Riddle is this, reply'd the Sultana? Pray unfold it. At this, the Mother, who had much to do to retain her Tears, and in whose Face the Sultana had observ'd great marks of Sorrow, could no longer contain her self: She gave her Eyes liberty to dischage themselves upon her Cheeks, which so sensi∣bly mov'd the Sultana, that she once again bid her to let her know what was the cause of so great a Sorrow as she express'd? assuring her, that nothing should be wanting to give her comfort. My Griefs are of that nature, Ma∣dam, reply'd the Mother, that they will not admit of any Redress. I must rest satisfy'd in letting you know them, without any hopes of Comfort, neither from you, nor a∣ny body else in the World, continu'd she. But, Madam, since it is your
pleasure to hear my sorowful Story, be pleas'd, at least, to afford me your Pity. With that she told the Sultana all that had happen'd to Roxana, since the Court's remo∣val and return. This is very ill for poor Roxana, said the Sultana, the rather, because that there is no means left to know her Ravisher, who, though I do not believe to be designedly so, yet deserv'd some pu∣nishment, for using so ill the oppor∣tunity which he had of serving poor Roxana in a nobler way; at least, if he were a person sutable to her rank, he should be compell'd to marry her, or I should lose my In∣terest with Amurat. But though I cannot redress your Griefs accord∣ing to my own desires, in some measure I will alleviate them, and render them somewhat more easie for you both to bear. Does any body know of Roxana's misfortune, added the Sultana? No, Madam, not any one, I can assure you; for
she has not seen the Face of any person since; nor could I so much as prevail with her to wait upon you, Madam: I cannot deny, but that Zora, Mufti Repset's Sister, may suspect something of the busi∣ness, as having had a hand in it on the Mufti's account, so far as his design went. That's nothing, reply'd the Sultana: They are both of the Cabal, in which I now will joyn you and Roxana, as being persons that may be of great use to me in carrying on the great design. But you must be all secret, not a whisper, or a betraying look, or all is lost. Madam, you may com∣mand our Lives, reply'd the Mo∣ther; we should go to our deaths without murmuring, if it were to serve you. I believe you, and thank you, reply'd the Sultana. Know now, that for the good of our Cause, and the Glory of the Sect of our great Prophet Haly, it has been thought fit by our Privy
Council, that I should feign to be with Child; and it has been so gi∣ven out already, to be about that very time in which Roxana was made so in effect. There are some Women that have prov'd pregnant about that time also, who have Spies upon them, to observe whether they will have a Boy at the time of their delivery, that I may be supply'd with a Male Child, when my feigned time of deliverance is accomplish'd: now if Roxana's Child proves to be a Son, nothing would be more conformable to my desires, than to have it to pass for a Prince. Tell Roxana this from me, that she should continue in her solitary re∣servedness still on this account, and that when the business is over, I shall take care to provide for her according to her quality and me∣rits; mean time, continu'd she, give her this from me, with an assurance of my special favour: With that, she gave her a rich
Jewel, and so dismiss'd her. The Mother being return'd home, told all the whole Story to Roxana, who being still more and more afflicted at the publish∣ing of her misfortune, did not rejoyce, as her Mother expected, at the Sultana's confidence which she repos'd in them, nor at her kind assurances of favour and pro∣tection; on the contrary, she plung'd her self deeper still in Melancholy; so that from that time she continu'd in darkness, admitting of no more light into her Chamber, than what a small dim Taper did afford. The Confinement of the Mufties in the Tower of the Dardanelles, had much disturb'd the whole Par∣ty of the true Mahometists; they had murmur'd aloud, they had acted with more fire than usually, so that it was known that they did expect some assistance from some place, but whence not yet
certainly known; and business not being ripe to come to a con∣clusion, on the Halists party, till the pretended Heir were come in∣to the World, to satisfie the mul∣titude as well as others, and keep them under, till their rising would be to no effect, a day was appoin∣ted for bringing the imprison'd Mufties to a publick Examination, to satisfie the true Mahometists, but it was so deferr'd, that it should not be till after the Sultana had been deliver'd of her fictitious great Belly. The time of her delivery at last grew near, according to that reck∣ning which they had given out, but because it did not exactly agree with the true reckoning which Roxana made, or that her Mother made for her, (for she her self minded nothing) another Reckning was set up, and given out, and that being near out also, the Sultana had ordered at what places she
would Lye In, which were some∣time in one place, sometimes in a∣nother; that no body should have any certain knowledge of it, but those who were of the Secret. It was not long after, that Roxa∣na's Mother sent a Letter to the Sultana, to let her know that her Daughter was in her effectual La∣bour; Orders were presently sent back in a Letter, that she should be brought into the Seraglio, if it were possible to be done with Secresie. But she was so far gone, that it could not be; and she being deliver'd of a Son, the Child, according to the orders that had been given, was secretly convey'd to the Seraglio, into that Appartment which the Sultana had last made choice of, there kept by a good Fire in the next Cham∣ber to that appointed for the Sul∣tana's Lying In, and notice pre∣sently brought to the Sultana, that every thing was in a readiness. The Sultana did presently get her self
carried to that Apartment by some of her Attendants, and put into her Bed, the Midwife and all the rest of the Confederacy at hand. Amu∣rat had notice given that the Sul∣tana was in Labour, and he sent to his late Brother's Sultana, and to divers others of the Sect of Hali, instantly to repair to that Appart∣ment, to which the Sultana had been newly transported, there pre∣sently was a considerable appearance at the appointed place, of such as were of the Sect of Hali, except two or three at the most of old true Mahometists, who being held in Discourse by Amurat at the Beds feet, the Curtains being shut close round the Bed, so that nothing was to be seen, and scarce heard, for the Sultana not being accustomed to those sorts of Pageantry, she could not bring her self to cry out with that vigour and strength that acute Pains cause Women to do; but however the Child being con∣veyed
into the Bed by a by door, which was at the inward side or Ruel of the Bed, (to which they had given some small thing to cause it to sleep, for ar that it should cry out and scover all) A little while after e Midwife pulls it out of the Plapped up in warm Cloths, pu it into her lap, and conveyed h self and it into the next Room, rough the same by-door, not dearing what it was that she had go, but pre∣sently after it was told to Amurat, who spoke it to the Company, re∣joycing mightily at it. Thus was Roxana's Child us'd to sutitute an Heir to the Empire, that might be brought up in the Sect of Hali, to the prejudice of Zelinda, who was the true and undoubted Heir apparent, only because she was of the true Mahometan Religion. The News of a new born Prince being spread abroad, it afforded new Subject of great Joy, to all
those of the Sect of Hali; amongst the rest of their demonstrations of joy, there was a Fire-work, which was so great, and so curiously contriv'd, that it seem'd as if those Fusees of which it was com∣pos'd, were flying up, with a de∣sign to consume the Region of Fire, to burst in pieces the Thun∣derbolts, to fire Lightning, and to allarm the very Stars. Presently were seen Ambassadours from all parts, amongst which, one from Cha-Abas was not the last to com∣pliment the Emperour and Sultana on the birth of the young Prince. But now that so much of the great work was done; that which remained yet undone, was to be thought of. Roxana remain'd still unconsolable, insomuch that she never made any enquiry after her Child, whether it was dead or a∣live; neither did she take such care of her self as she ought to do; but that was her Mother's
part, of which she acquitted her self as she ought to do. The Ca∣binet Council thought fit to have Roxana convey'd out of the way, lest that, having been made privy to the Plot, at some time or o∣ther she should in one of her me∣lancholick fits discover the whole mistery: and the Mufti Repset was appointed to perform that pious piece of work. He undertook the business, but it was not till after he had attempted and try'd all the ways and means imagina∣ble to reclaim Roxana out of her deep melancholy, and to bring her to give an ear to his addresses; but finding all to be labour in vain, he on the sudden converted all his former Love into Hatred; insomuch that he did not only con∣trive her Confinement in some place in Persia, but he charg'd those who were appointed to guard her, and convey her to the Galley that should transport her, with
Letters which contain'd, that that Person should be receiv'd, meaning Roxana, into the Order to which she was directed; and that after she had been brought by hardship to a severe penance, she should be sent into another World by the means of some gentle Poison. And that the Mufti should not be want∣ing in the least in his revenge, he di∣rected her to be privately con∣vey'd into that Galley which was commanded by Cara; that he whom he believ'd to be Roxana's innocent Ravisher, should have a hand in her death. Thus Roxa∣na was sent away incognito, to her own ruine, under the pre∣tence of change of Air, for her health sake. All this while Aladin had been kept in ignorance of all that had pass'd at his House in Constantino∣ple, and as oft as he had sent for leave of the Emperour to come up to Constantinople, he still had
been deny'd by our Mufti's con∣trivances: but so soon as Roxana was sent away, he had liberty sent him to come to Constanti∣nople. The Sultana having accidental∣ly had some intelligence of our Mufti's cruelty against poor Rox∣ana, to whom she had promis'd her protection, gave private notice to Roxana's Mother, that there was a Letter sent with her, which was to be deliver'd to the Captain of the Galley, which he was not to open, but to deliver it as it was to those persons to whom he was to deliver Roxana; which Letter contain'd orders for Roxana's death. And she advis'd the Mother to send immediately an express after Roxana, to give her private notice thereof in writing. The Mother lost no time, and the Messenger came just as Roxana was getting into the Galley. Cara having re∣ceiv'd his order, and, by the reti∣nue,
believing his Charge to be some person of quality, who de∣sir'd to remain conceal'd, he shew'd her to the best Cabbin, without any further inquiry who this per∣son should be; and of truth, there was no body there that could inform him: for at Roxana's de∣parture from Constantinople, all her own Servants had been discharg'd, and new ones, which she had ne∣ver seen before, were appointed to wait on her that Journey. Thus was poor, unfortunate Roxana doom'd to death, and sent to it by him who had been the chief cause of her greatest sorrow. But the Heavens, who permit sometimes Wickedness to triumph over Innocence and Virtue for a while, will not rest till they have brought the Wicked to Punish∣ment, not permitting Goodness to be always oppress'd, as we shall see in the continuation of Roxana's Story.
The great rejoycing which the Halists made for their young Heir to the Empire, did but the more incense those of the true Mahome∣tan Religion, who were highly disturb'd already at the imprison∣ing of their Mufties, and they mur∣mur'd openly at it, which caus'd that the Halists, who had now no further occasion for their Con∣finement, at least for the present, did release them, after a kind of Examination, which was more for Form, than any thing that could with Justice be alledg'd against them. But more Severity than e∣ver was us'd against all true Ma∣hometists; and the Halists were so full of the designs which they had of suddenly destroying them, that they could not forbear their open threatnings. Of truth, it was discover'd that there was an agree∣ment made betwixt Amurat's Coun∣cil and Cha-Abas to destroy all such as would not become Halists;
and to that purpose, Cha-Abas was to send a Persian Army into the Ottoman Empire, which was to as∣sist the Halists in their wicked de∣signs, to totally root out the True, Ancient Mahometan Religi∣on, to destroy all the maintain∣ers thereof with Fire and Sword, and to clear the whole Empire of that Religion The Blow was ready to be gi∣ven, when that all the Nobility of the Ancient and True Religion of Mahomet, made an association amongst themselves, to stand and fall one by another, for the main∣tenance of their Religion, and the preservation of the fundamental Laws of the Empire. This they signed, and sent over to Prince Soliman, by a particular Messen∣ger, with Letters to humbly in∣treat him to defer no longer his coming to redeem them from Sla∣very and Idolatry; that now the Persian Sword was ready to fall
upon their Heads, and that if he stay'd any longer from giving them assistance, that in their ruine he would meet with an end to all his just pretensions to the Successi∣on of the Empire. Soliman, who had had sure in∣telligences from all hands of Cha-Abas designs, that knew that he would no sooner have done with the Ottoman Empire, but that he would be for divesting of him al∣so, of his Dominions, did present∣ly march at the head of a great Army, into the Ottoman Territo∣ries; where being come, and not finding the Bassa's to joyn with him, as they had assur'd him they would do, he was thinking of retiring again, knowing well, that how great soever his Army was, it was very insufficient to oppose Amurat's Forces, so long as they remain'd united; but he was not long in that suspense, for so soon as the Nobles had conveniences,
they all came over with their men to him, who being so strong∣ly reinforc'd, and Amurat's Army so weaken'd, or rather entirely rui∣ned, he march'd streight-way to∣wards Constantinople, without the least considerable resistance, all pla∣ces yielding to him as he march'd. This sudden and unexpected Change in the Halists Affairs, did so surprise them, that every one of them began to shift for themselves, amongst which, the Priests of eve∣ry order of Hali's Sect, were not the last. Amurat himself, seeing what a prodigious Change had happen'd in all his Dominions, thought it necessary to send se∣cretly away, the Sultana with the Child, into Cha-Abas's Dominions, and he himself, did not long after, follow them, resolv'd to deprive himself of the Empire for the good of his Subjects, seeing that the con∣stitution of the Government did not sute with his Religion.
It is now time we should return to poor unfortunate Roxana. At her reception into the Galley, through her disorder in getting in, her Vail had fallen so much aside, as to give Cara a sufficient view, to let him know what a Beautiful Person he was intrusted withal. But Roxana was so alter'd from her former con∣dition, by her incessant grief that persons who had more and frequent∣er opportunities of seeing her, than Cara, would not have known her again; besides, he was far from im∣magining, that she, who had liv'd all along so retiredly, should be for going into Persia. He had then as much sight of her, as was sufficient to set his heart all on fire, and to create in him an extraordinary de∣sire of seeing more openly that Beauty, and of inquiring who she was. Roxana's thoughts were taken up another way, she sitting alone in her Cabin, had time to run over
all her Misfortunes, and to descant upon every particular Circumstance of them. But that which troubled her most in that juncture, was the advice which her Mother had sent her in Writing, concerning the Let∣ter which had been delivered with her into the Captain's hand, in which was written the Sentence of her Death; but no Advice or Counsel had been added to her Mo∣ther's Care, how she should avoid or get off that danger. Cara's Love would not let him rest, he took all occasions, and made use of all the opportunities that offered them∣selves, to shew a more than usual Zeal and Diligence, to serve her personally, thereby both to get a∣nother fair sight of her, and to in∣gratiate himself into her good o∣pinion; of truth, he was so diligent in serving her, beyond that morose way which most of those, who use the Seas, are inclin'd to, that Rox∣ana could not but observe it; and
those assiduous Services being se∣conded with divers Presents of Re∣freshments, and offers of further Services, Roxana had no longer a∣ny place to doubt, but that all was the Effects of her unfortunate beau∣ty, as she us'd to stile it. Upon this Opinion, she began to build some hopes to attain to the knowledge of the Particulars con∣tained in the fatal Letter, whereby she hop'd that she might find out some means to prevent that mis∣chief, which she was going to. To this purpose, she thought that her Beauty, though so much alter'd of late, might much contribute espe∣cially towards a person, who she perceiv'd did endeavour by all means imaginable, to see her face wholly unvail'd, she therefore was not long without giving him an opportunity of so doing, but so as if it were by meer accident. She pre∣tended that the want of a free Air in the Cabin, did make her sick,
and therefore desired Cara that he would give his Prisoner leave, (as she term'd her self) to take a little Air upon the Deck. That was a Request so suitable to Cara's de∣sires, that he made her this answer. My Prisoner, Madam, said you? I know of no such thing; and if you were so really, you have those Charms about you that will set you free, when∣ever you desire them to act; be as∣sur'd, Madam, continued he, that I am so far from thinking you a Pri∣soner, much less of using you like one, that I here offer you all my Services, in any thing that may tend to your satisfaction and content; with that he took her by the hand, and led her upon the most convenient place on the Deck. Where she sate un a large Umbrello, incompassed round with her own Slaves and Ser∣vants. The Wind blowing a little fresh, her Vail was disordered by it, she took that opportunity of shewing
her self, in pulling it quite off, as she was about setting of it in or∣der again, as if by accident; which causing her to blush, she said to Cara, who stood as if struck with Thunder at the admiration of so much beauty, The very Ele∣ments are set against me, they would not else have discovered to you, Sir, that which may hereafter slacken your Civilities towards a Person, that now you will have no longer any O∣pinion that she deserves them. Cara stood still mute, gazing upon Rox∣ana, though vail'd again, without the power to stir or speak one word. Roxana taking that for a good sign, took the liberty to proceed thus. Cast your Eyes upon some other Object, which may blot out of your imagina∣tion those Lines which my deficiency may have traced there, that you may be no longer troubled at your so free offers of Services, to a person so little deserving them; I'll release you of them, Sir. Madam, replyed Cara,
who was a little come to himself again, I am so strangely surprised, at what chance joined to my good For∣tune has shewn me, that I know  whether I had better wish my self turn'd all into Eyes, to gaze on that Treasure of Beauty I have seen, or in∣to one whole heart to offer at your Feet, as a Sacrifice, though most un∣worthy to so much perction. Roxana, finding the Air too cool, arose to retire, Cara accompanying her to her Cabbin. She said, I take, Sir, what you are pleas'd to say to me, as words of course, which your mouth uses to utter, while your heart may have no share at all in them. If ever I was guilty of any such thing, Ma∣dam, answered Cara, be assur'd that now what I say, is the pure and sin∣cere Dictates of an heart, that would be too happy to expire in your Service, and that my mouth has no further to do with it, than in obedience to my Heart's commands. Take heed, Sir, that you say, replyed Roxana, you
know not to whom you make those fair offers, and what great inducements I may have to take you at your word! You may wonder, and not without cause, at my forwardness, in the ac∣ceptance of your Services, continued she, but know, Sir, that those circum∣stances that I at present lye under, may be of such a nature as may plead my excuse, for a way of proceeding so contrary to the Rules that the most prudent and modest of our Sex do observe. In a word, Sir, I find that I have not too much time left me, to imploy after some means, to preserve my life. Once more, Sir, I tell you that I am your Prisoner, and that you have orders to lead me and to deliver me up to my Executioners. Who I, Madam, replyed Cara, strangely surpris'd, when did I re∣ceive such Orders? and from whom? From Mufti Repset, replyed Roxa∣na. It is he who has pronounc'd my Sentence, and that has trusted you with the care of seeing it execu∣ted.
Riddles, all Riddles to me, Madam, I can assure you, answered Cara, I have no further orders, than to receive you, and your Servants, with your Goods, on board my Vessel, to convey you all to Persia, there to deliver you into the hands of certain Religious Persons, which for their austerity of Lives, and discipline of Religion, are the most unfit Persons that could ever be pitch'd upon, to perform so horrible an Act, as your bare mentioning of makes my very heart to tremble within me. Well, Sir, replyed Roxana, to convince you that I know more of the reach of your Commission, than you know your self, give me leave to tell you, that you have in your power, my Life and Death. Yes, Sir, I know that you have a Let∣ter, in which is contain'd the De∣cree of my Death, and that in the delivery or retention of that Let∣ter, consists either my happiness or misery. I must confess, Madam, that
I have a Letter, answer'd Cara, which I have order to deliver with you into such persons hands as I have mentioned, but what the Contents are, I am wholly ignorant of; only this intimation I have had from the Mufti you mention'd, that it con∣tain'd the Emperor's particular or∣ders, and that therefore I should be very observant in the delivery of it. Well, Sir, replyed Roxana, o∣bey the Order, and deliver me up a Victim to the Mufti's revenge, though you incur the Emperor's displeasure, Who, I am certain, knows nothing of it. The Mufti will re∣ward you one day, for the signal Service you will render him, in the destruction of miserable Roxana. Say∣ing this she let fall a deluge of tears, at which Cara was so wonderfully mov'd, as well as at the name of Roxana, that he had not the pow∣er to speak for a considerable time; but at last recollecting himself, Rox∣ana! repeated he divers times, di∣vine
Roxana! Oh Heav'ns! what turn of Fortune is this? I serve the Mufti in so foul a deed, (for it must needs be true, since Roxana has said it) I serve the Mufti? nay Amurat him∣self, against Roxana's Life? May all the Elements contrive my imme∣diate ruine first, and instantly bring it upon me. No, Divine Roxana, continu'd he, casting himself at her feet, Rather than be accessary in any thing that can cause the least trouble to you; nay, rather than not return the Heavens thanks, for having thought me worthy of so great an Honour, as to be instrumen∣tal in the preserving of that Char∣ming Creature from all manner of Evil, let my Vessel split, and I be swallowed up immediately into the deep, never to be seen more, so Roxana be but safe. These passionate Expressions, with her Name so frequently repeated, made Roxana to believe that she was known to Cara, though she
could not remember that she had ever seen him; it made her put a stop to her Tears, and lifting up her Eyes, to see whether she could call to mind any remembrance of him. You speak, Sir, as if you knew me, at least my Name, said Roxana, and as if you were concern'd more than ordinarily at my misery. Nay, you seem to believe that the Mufti is my Enemy? Your Enemy, Madam, replyed Cara, the blackest of them, and more, that he is the only prime cause of all your troubles, though peradventure some person more hap∣py, and at once more unhappy than he, by meer hazard, may have been thrown upon the prosecution of his Hellish designs against so ex∣cellent a person as Roxana is, where he himself had fallen short of them. At these words, Cara chang'd Co∣lour, look'd on the Floor, and seem'd so discompos'd, that Roxana was seis'd with such strange Apprehen∣sions at it, as made her to desire to
be in private, under pretence of be∣ing suddenly taken ill. That was so conformable to the condition that Cara was in on his part, that he went out of the Cabin, without spea∣king one word more, nor so much as looking towards Roxana, who had turn'd likewise aside. Roxana being thus alone, began to reflect on what Cara had said: she wondred that a Person so whol∣ly unknown to her, should have so much knowledge of her most secret Concerns, as he seem'd to have, she not doubting, but that he knew all, by what he had al∣ready said; she believ'd that he was not ignorant of her Rape, and fancied that peradventure he might know the Person that had done it. This made her to desire to know more, but she had not the confi∣dence to require it: She wish'd that Cara would of his own ac∣cord fall accidentally on that Sub∣ject again, yet she dreaded to hear
any more. In fine, she was in such a perplexity of thoughts, that they had almost driven from her all the apprehensions which she should have had of her approaching dan∣ger. Cara, on his part was not less surpriz'd; he had under his care that beautiful Person, which meer Fortune had thrown into his Arms, at the same time that the Mufti had contriv'd things so as to make her his own. He believ'd that the Muf∣ti had mistrusted that he was the Person who had disappointed him, or taken his place; and he was per∣swaded, that his procuring of him such an Employ as he had, was but to distance him from Roxana, that he might not have the opportunity of making his peace with her, when she should know that he had enjoy'd her, when he had no thoughts of her, but was wholly bent on ano∣ther. And finally, he believ'd, that in pure rage and revenge he had
done her some very ill office to∣wards the Emperour, which had made him consent to her death. These, and divers other thoughts did agitate him most violently: there wanted nothing more to confirm him in the belief of all those things but her acknowledging of the Ring he had taken from that Person whom he had enjoyed, but he had not the confidence to give or shew it to her: at last, he resolv'd to set down in writing what he would willingly have her to know, and to give it with the Ring wrapt up in it, to one of Roxana's Servants, to deliver it to Roxana: whereupon having taken Pen and Ink, he fram'd this following long Letter, that it might fully supply all that he had to say, which he could never utter before Roxana's presence. It is with the greatest respect, and humblest submission imaginable, divine Roxana, that venture upon this en∣terprize,
of informing you of a secret, on which, as you will resent the know∣ledge of it, depends either my eternal Misery or Happiness. And though I know my self to be wholly free from all ill designs or evil practices, in the whole business, yet I cannot but trem∣ble when I think you may be ready to condemn me before you have read my Letter quite out. You may remember how long it is since you lost that Ring, which I send you here inclosed, though I believe you do not know how. No, Madam, those things which the wick∣ed Mufti had perswaded his Sister Zora to give you, had too great a power over your Senses to permit you to make use of so much discernment; and could you have done that, you had been likewise capable of resisting those gentle efforts which I made on your Person. Yes, Madam, I here confs that I am the Person, who the Hea∣vens thought more fit than the abo∣minable Mufti, to gather those Fruits which he had design'd and contriv'd
for his own Tooth, with contrivances that were hatch'd in Hell. But, Ma∣dam, I was innocent all this while; witness the strange surprizal I was in, to find that I had gather'd such Fruit as none had ever touch'd before, at that time, that all my thoughts were bent only on Zora, who that ve∣ry night had made me an assignation in that Chamber where I met with you, Madam, and from whom I was far from expecting such Virgin Fruit, whose Life and Conversation I knew but too well. How she came not to be in that Chamber, and how I came to light on you there, does still remain a Riddle to me. I must confess, that at the resistance you would have made, and which you endeavour'd to make, as much as the narcotick effects of your Opium would permit, I found my mistake; but who could then ab∣stain and retire? No Flesh and Blood, Madam: I accepted of what For∣tune had thus thrown into my arms; and because I was absolutely ignorant
of the Person I had met with, I took from her Finger the Ring which I have sent you. If any thing in all this adventure can be laid to my charge, which might render me guilty in the least circumstance imaginable towards you, I will doom my self immediately to death; nay, what is worse, I will deprive my self from the happiness of ever seeing you more, and yet live. But, Madam, if nothing but meer hazard and Fortune had the conduct of all that mystery, let me not for what is none of my fault, suffer the greatest of evils, your Frowns and Anger. The Heavens, in rescuing you from the embraces of so wicked a per∣son as he, who had plotted the ruine of your Honour, did resign you into mine; and they thought me once be∣fore worthy of being your Deliverer. The same Heaven, Madam, did after∣wards take you from the Mufti, to give you to me; and they have given me a Heart that is capable-of all things that are Noble and Just, and which
may be valu'd on the very account of aspiring to the Honour of pleasing you. Though my Fortune is not great, my Extraction is Noble: deign therefore, beautiful Roxana, to look down a lit∣tle upon a Person that the Fates de∣sign'd you from the beginning, that was produc'd for you, and that they have given you already: for who can look upon our unexpected, unsought, and unthought of encounter, and not con∣clude that it is the will of Heaven that we should be united? Is not this last act of your blackest Enemy, the greatest argument imaginable, that when he design'd most your Ruine, I should be chosen for the most happy Instrument of your deliverance, by the Heavens, as I had been once before of your deliverance from his filthy embraces? How can you then doubt, but that I was certainly design'd for you, as you have been for me. Resist not then against what the Heavens have decreed, but accept of an heart, which is so freely offer'd you.
Cara found that he could dwell for ever on this Theam, therefore he was forc'd to break off his Letter, which he gave to one of Roxana's Servants, who went immediately in∣to the Cabin, and presented it to her. Roxana asked from whom it was, and she was told from Cara, which set her all in a trembling, with the apprehension of learning that which she so earnestly desired to know: She open'd it, and read it, and after that remain'd for a con∣siderable time agitated with abun∣dance of contrary thoughts on the whole Mystery of her deliverance, and afterwards of her ravishment, by the same person; and having se∣riously weighed all Circumstances, and convinc'd her self that Cara had not been in the least to blame, ex∣cept he had before-hand known who she was, which he did not: She began to think, that of truth, the Heav'ns had design'd Cara for her, and she for him. Being further con∣firm'd
therein, by that Providence which once appointed him to be her deliverer, and had delivered her into the hands of a person, that so passionately lov'd her, when she was design'd to have been given by that very person to her Executioners. She therefore resolv'd to comply to the Heav'ns Decrees, in receiving of Cara's Service in the preservation of her Life, which should pass as an Atonement for what he had done, and that she would place on the account of Merit, for the future. But when all was done, she had not the courage to speak to Cara, she therefore writ to him these fol∣lowing Lines. I am convinc'd, that the Heavens have a great share, in the preserva∣tion of my Life, in so ordering of things, as to make me light into the hands of the same Person, that had acciden∣tally preserv'd me from the most loath∣some Embraces of a Monster, and that had a second time done the same,
though at the dearest rate that I could purchase it. And I am but too well convinc'd, that I have met with my Ravisher by the Ring I have receiv'd, and that he is the same Person that was before my Preserver. But I am strangely disappointed as to the re∣venge, which I had always assur'd my self to take on the Thief. I find the flowing bitterness of my Gall, to turn into a more calm and pleasant Relish, and that I shall be forc'd to acknow∣ledge Heaven's Decree and Dispensa∣tion in all the course of my misfortunes. I therefore must submit to its pleasure, and believe that I am oblig'd in gra∣titude, as well as on other terms, to acknowledge you my deliverer also. I know not how to tell you all this, and much more that I have to say. If you would save the Blushes of a person who is not us'd to make such Confessions, bring the Mufti's Letter along with you to me, and let me take my Eyes from you, to employ them on reading what death was appointed for me,
while you shall busy your thoughts in contri∣ving what course is best for my deliverance. Cara having receiv'd this answer, was so over-joyed at it, that he presently run into Roxana's Cabbin, with the Letter open in his hand, after he had read it; and casting himself at Roxa∣na's Feet, Here, Madam, said he, take this, take me, take all, and dispose of me, of my Vessel, and all my Men as you shall think sit; all is at your Command. Roxana was reading attentively the Let∣ter all this while, after she had done, raising him up, You see Cara, said she, by this Letter, that the Heavens have decreed I should be yours; they would not else thus render me oblig'd to you for my Life; and since they have so order'd, that I must receive it as a Present from you, I think I ought in gratitude to return it again into your hands, and at your disposal. Ma∣dam, replyed Cara, my Life is bound up in yours, so that I cannot live with∣out you; receive mine therefore, with all its habilities and functions, as absolutely depending on yours; and accept of a Per∣son who shall ever be your Slave and your Admirer. I must do so, replyed Roxana; it is decreed, and I must submit to the will of Heaven, continu'd she, giving
him the Ring, receive this Pledge again, which I now freely give you, in confir∣mation that I give my self to you also; and accept of this Weapon, which I present you, wherewith to defend me from all my Enemies, with that she gave him that Scimiter which he had left in her Chamber at Constantinople. He presently knew it a∣gain, receiv'd it, and said, I hope, Ma∣dam, that henceforth I shall have no occasion of using such Arms in your defence; I shall free you from your trouble by easier means. The wicked Mufti's Party is now so ruin'd, that the Ottoman Empire has spu'd him out, with divers more of his wicked Sect. Wicked indeed, replyed Roxana, so wicked, that I hate the very thoughts of that Sect, and would gladly embrace the True, Ancient, Mahometan Religion. You wanted nothing but that, Madam, replyed Cara, to ac∣complish you as my heart could wish; and certainly it is the same kind Heavens who have preserv'd your Life, that now takes care of your Soul also, in inspiring you with so good thoughts; oppose them not, but yield immediately to this Call from Heaven; re∣tire from amongst a People that are pleas'd but with Deceits and Cruelties, and come amongst such as delight to serve their God in Spirit and Truth. I will immediately give order to steer back again to Turky, where
you shall be instructed in the true Worship of our great Ala. Dispose of me as you please, reply'd Roxana; I am now yours by Gift, and so soon as I can get my Portion out of my Father's hands, I shall be yours also by Marriage. Cara having kiss'd Roxana's hand, they consulted together of the ways they should take to discover to Prince Soliman, the grand Cheat which the Clergy of Haly's Sect had put upon him, and the whole Ottoman Empire. In short, they had a better Wind in return∣ing, than they had going, which quickly brought them back to the Shore, from whence they came to Constantinople, where the Prince was made sensible of the wrong which was intended to him by the Halists. The whole Empire thought themselves oblig'd to Soliman, in so high a measure, that in the great Assembly of the Divan, he was pro∣claim'd Emperour, and Zelinda Empress, that very day after she came to Constan∣tinople. Roxana had her Portion allotted to her, which was sufficient to make Cara and her live happily together. She pre∣sently made open Profession of the True, Ancient, Mahometan Religion, and was married to Cara after that manner, and now live comfortably together, with all the Content and Satisfaction imaginable. FINIS.
THE Court Secret, A NOVEL. PART II. LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Mag∣nes in Russel street in Covent-Garden. 1689.
TO THE READER. NO sooner had that Piece call'd, The Amours of Messalina, appear'd in Publick, but some mali∣cious Persons gave out, that I was the Author of it, they having heard under-hand, that I was about some such thing; and though presently after, there came forth another Piece on the same Subject in my Name, Entitled, The Court Se∣cret, in which Crown'd Heads are treated with that Reverence and Respect which is due to them: They have still continu'd to misrepresent me to the World, adding, That the
severe Rebukes which I had recei∣ved for my rude Behaviour towards Sovereigns in the first, had made me to compose the last in another strain, by way of Submission. Did those Persons that thus asperse me but consider with what Respect I speak of Persons that once have had Dominion over me, they would not find one grain of that ill Nature in all my Writings, with which the Amours of Messalina have been season'd by its Author, as if de∣signedly writ as a Satyr against the late King and Queen, which has prov'd a Scandal to all moderate and modest Persons. There are Men in the World that resemble some Creatures, which the Naturalists report to be of so venomous Natures, that suck Poi∣son from those very Plants that other Animals gather Odoriferous Bal∣sams and Honey, and that corrupt the very Air they take in; so that
at the breathing of it forth again, it destroys all that approaches near them. Their natural ill Dispositions and Inclinations have such strong Tendences to Evil, that they con∣vert all the Advantages which they might have receiv'd from Educa∣tion, Learning, and good Exam∣ples, into scandalous Conceptions and Expressions, without respect to Dignities or Persons. Certainly those Persons must needs be void of that Charity, which co∣vers a multitude of Defects, that thus delight to impose the worst of Crimes on those that have been their Lords and Sovereigns, unto whom all Honour and Respect is due, from those who once were their Subjects, if it were but for the bare Relation they have to our present King and Queen, whom God long preserve. It may be alledged (though dis∣ingeniously) That I my self am guil∣ty of that which is blamed in others,
by speaking too largely of another King, under the Name of Cha-abas the Emperor of Persia. But when all is done, that very Person intended, was never my King, and God for∣bid he ever should be so; and what do I say of him, nay, what can I say more of him, than what has al∣ready been declar'd and proclaim'd, not by a few of his own inconsidera∣ble Heretick Subjects (as he is plea∣sed to call those that are Prote∣stants) but also by the Emperour of Germany, the Kings of England, Denmark, Sweden, the States of Holland, and all the Confederate Princes, all which has been con∣firm'd by his most Holy Father the Pope? Is he not publickly declar'd the common Enemy of Christendom? Has he not with Justice acquired the Mock-title of most Christian Turk, in lieu of that of most Chri∣stian King? Has he not fomented the Disorders in Hungary, and in∣vited
the Turks to invade the Em∣pire, promising them to give such a diversion to the Emperour's Arms another way, that they should find a very easie Conquest of it? And has he not shew'd us greater Ex∣amples of Cruelties, than the very Infidels have done against poor Chri∣stians on the bare account of their Religion, in the barbarous Murthers of his own Subjects? Pillaging, burn∣ing, and destroying all places that the Justice of his Enemies Arms force him to abandon, not so much as sparing those which are consecrated to that God which he adores (if he owns any at all) and all this after the Murther of Men and Children, and the Ravishing and Deflowering of the grave Matrons and Virgins? Nay, it rather may be ask'd, What has he not done of most cruel, bar∣barous, and inhumane? And when he was rather tired, than satiated, not contented with all those Acts of
Cruelty which he had committed both at home and abroad, in the profoundest Security that a Peace could procure, while he himself took breath; Has he not us'd his utmost Endeavours to delude a too easie Prince who he had charm'd with his Flatteries and deceitful Promises, and by the influence of his all-doing dazling Gold, to follow his sleps, till trusting too much on his plausi∣ble Assurances, he has been depriv'd of the Love of his own People, of the Friendship of his Allies, and at last of his three Kingdoms also? And had we not by this time all of us been convinc'd of the sad Effects of the French King's Advices and Counsels, by a most woful and lamen∣table Experience, had not the im∣mediate Hand of God interpos'd. If then that King has rendred himself so odious to all Christians in becoming their profess'd and declar'd Enemy, through the Tyrannical Go∣vernment
of his own People, and his perfidious Ʋsurpations on his Neigh∣bours, as to draw upon himself such harsh, though rightly deserved Cha∣racters, I may very well be excus'd, for what I have said of the same Person, in a Novel, where Hyper∣bolies are allowed in their largest extent: I having had no other de∣sign in the whole Business than to gratifie the Reader with joyning the Pleasant to the Ʋseful, without the least intention of railing, or so much as making any severe Reflexions, or bearing malice against any Person, even my profest Enemies, much less against such as are absolute Stran∣gers to me.
A Key to both Parts of the Court Secret. Selim the First, King Charles I. Selim the Second, King Charles II. Amurat, The Duke of York. Osmond, The Duke of Glocester. Soliman, The Prince of Orange. The Sultana, Queen Mary. Zelinda, The Princess of Orange. Cha-abas, The French King. Clorinet, Tyrconnel. Chilase, The French King's Confessor. Repset, Peters the Jesuit. Zora, His Sister. Clorineta, The Lady Tyrconnel. Monitenna, Madam of Maintenon. Emperor of Migrena, Emp. of Germany. Grand Visir Rinola, D. of Loraine. The Bassas of Swibrunckia, D. of Brunswick. Abrania, Bavaria. Brugulnea, Lunenburg. Xonisea, Saxony. Grubdenbran, Brandenburg. Sehes, Hesse.
Stenrum, Munster. The Saraguere Kelwad, Waldeck. The Ottoman Empire, Great Britain. The Persian Empire, France. Albiona, England. Myrgena, Germany. Pesina, Spain. Haldon, Holland. Clonstad, Scotland. Leridan, Ireland. Constantinople, London. Ispahan, Paris. Risauta, Austria. Blunid, Dublin. Lynderodon, Londonderry. Mahometans, Protestants. Mahometists, Jesuits. Halists, Papists. Grand Mufti, The Pope. Mufti, Bishops or Priests. Heathens, Turks. The Grand Council of the Divan, or of the Empire. The Parliament. As for Aladin, Roxana, Cara, and Moretto, the Reader may apply them as he thinks fit.
The Court Secret: A NOVEL. PART II. AMbition is a Passion so ab∣solute and imperious, that when a Mind is once pos∣sess'd with it, there is rarely any admittance for any o∣ther at the same time: It seizes the whole Man, and Love it self,
that masters the Masters of the World, can scarce get entrance in an heart prepossess'd with that Tyrant, that is continually fed with those Court-Flatteries where∣with Princes are usually enter∣tain'd. Yet there is no Rule so general, that will not admit of some Ex∣ception, and in the Person of Cha-abas, the now Emperor of Persia, may be seen that that unsufferable Ambition, which caus'd him to aim at an Universal Monarchy, and that has arm'd all the World against him, threatning no less than the utter Subversion of his Empire, has at the same time receiv'd also into his Bosom that little Deity, who blinds all those Victims which he designs for Sacrifices; inso∣much that the Vulgar, who sel∣dom dive into the Secrets of Prin∣ces, have attributed wholly to his boundless Ambition, that in which
Love had as great a share, if not the advantage. I shall leave it to the Reader's Judgment in the reading of this Second Part of the Court Secret; in which that Emperour's Private Amours are set forth ac∣cording to the Memories fallen in∣to my hands. When the Persian Emperour had been advis'd by his Politick Council, to make choice of a Wife for Amurat, that might espouse the Persian Interest, be capable of governing him when he should come to the Government, which right or wrong was to happen, according to the measures which they had taken, in the prospect they had that Amurat was a great Proselyte to that Sect. This pre∣sent Sultana was pitch'd upon as the most proper and fit person that could be had for that purpose. She was therefore chosen from a great
number that aspired at that ho∣nour, to become, in success of time, the chiefest Instrument by which all the Halists should work their Designs in that Empire. Of truth, her Wit, Address, Presence of Mind, Courage, Boldness, and exquisite Beauty, which gave lu∣stre to all her other excellencies, did highly contribute in rendring her Mistress of Amurat's Affecti∣ons, and fitted her above all other persons in the World to carry on so great a Design. The Sultana had formerly liv'd in the Persian Court, where Cha-abas had had the opportunity of admiring her Charms; and doubt∣less he had been so absolutely ma∣ster'd by them, as never to have been brought to resign such a Trea∣sure of Beauties to another, when he had it at his disposal, had he not been diverted from it, by the choicest Beauties of his Empire,
which were daily offer'd to him, and the Shame which was conti∣nually set before his eyes, of lo∣sing so fair an opportunity of ren∣dring himself Master of the Otto∣man Empire, so much coveted and aimed at by his Predecessors, the Glory of the Performance being by his Fortunate Stars, reserv'd for his invincible Arms, which would illustrate all his Conquests, esta∣blish for ever the Religion of Haly throughout the Ottoman Empire, and Crown him with eternal Glo∣ry and Renown. Those and such like Arguments, for that time, caus'd his Ambition to triumph over his Love; he yielded to their Advices, and per∣mitted himself to be led by Inte∣rest, to the prejudice of Love, who enraged at the Assront, devested Cha-abas Heart from its Natural Severity, and infus'd it into the Sultana's Bosome, rendring it
thereby so obdurate to all his Inter∣cessions, that all his Repentance and Submission should not be of force to make in it the least im∣pression. The violent Counsels of the Mufty Repset, and other Halists, having been the occasion of that prodigious and wonderful change in the Ottoman Empire, which had caus'd Amurat and the Sultana to retire into Persia, from the Fury of an enraged Multitude, against whose Torrent no Bank of Reli∣gion, Allegiance, or Loyalty can hold, and that nothing but its own impetuousness can allay. They were oblig'd to run the same For∣tune also; the Mufti, like the rest of his Order, not much troubling his Head at the wonderful Altera∣tions which he, with the assistance of others of his Fraternity, had wrought in Turky. Of truth it may be said of that Society, that
they were ever true to that design they first took in hand, to stick to the Interest of the House of Ri∣sauta. That made them, when they found, notwithstanding all their efforts, that the Persian Em∣perour still grew more and more formidable, to the great preju∣dice of the Pesinians, they on the sudden feign'd themselves weary of protecting the Pesinians, made Overtures to wholly relinquish their Interest, and to come over to that of Persia; which was greedily embrac'd by its Empe∣rour, who not distrusting them, did wholly relie on their Coun∣sels; they in the mean time, by that means and Stratagem, design∣ing the total Ruine of the Persian Empire, and the raising of the House of Risauta above whatever it had yet been. This made them to put Cha-abas upon glutting his Ambition by all base and violent
Usurpations, Breaches of Treaties Treacheries upon the Territories of those Neighbouring Princes that were at Peace with him, which made the Grand Mufti himself to be affronted by him, by which doings he has now drawn upon him the hatred of all Princes, who have all joyn'd against him that will not hear of any Terms of Accommodation; who have oblig'd the Grand Mufti not to protect him, but to aban∣don him to the just Revenge of all those Princes whom he has so highly offended, and that even will not assist Amurat in the least in the recovery of his lost Em∣pire, because it has happen'd through his following the evil Counsels of the Persian Empe∣rour, though he is so great a Preselyte to the Religion of Haly, of which most of those Confede∣rate Princes against Cha-abas are
Professors. Thus have the Maho∣metists, under pretence of Friend∣ship to Persia, work'd those Ends, and brought about those purposes for the advantage of Pesina, which they could not compass by open force, and put the Pesinians by their entring into the Confedera∣cy, in a Capacity of not only re∣covering suddenly all that Cha-abas has at several times basely stol'n from them, but in sharing also in that spoil which is intended of the whole Persian Empire. I hope the Reader will pardon this Digressi∣on, on condition that I will not trouble him with any more. And now I return to my Subject again. Cha-abas having gone so far in his Design against the Ottoman Empire, as to cause Amurat to desert it, though his Designs were first quite different from what had happen'd, he design'd farther to
make use of Amurat's Desertion of his Empire, to his particular advantage, which could not be done, without causing Amurat to change the Resolution which his good Nature had promp'd him to, of retiring from the World into some Religious Place, there to end his days in Devotions. To this purpose Cha-abas gave Orders, That all persons, from the high∣est to the lowest, in his Domini∣ons, should give the same respect to Amurat and to his Sultana, as they us'd to shew to himself; He caus'd them to be bravely and magnificently entertain'd in all places they pass'd through, made his own Guards to attend them, and sent his own Chariots to bring them to a magnificent Pa∣lace which he had caus'd to be richly furnish'd, and adorn'd with all necessary things for their Re∣ception, and went some part of
the way himself to receive them, with all the Demonstrations of Sorrow imaginable, and all the Assurances of Friendship, Aid and Assistance that could be expected; protesting, That notwithstanding all those formidable enemies which he had at that time on his hands, he would re-seat Amurat on his Throne; and that he would beg for Peace on his bare Knees of his enemies, rather than not pursue the destruction of the Mahometan Religion, which he was resolv'd to accomplish, happen what would, and to make Amurat a more glo∣rious and absolute Prince in the Ottoman Empire than ever any of his Predecessors had been. Thus did that Vain Man, that Monster of Pride, Cruelty, and Ambition, domineer and huff, when he knew not which way to turn himself, before the Confede∣rate Princes, who were all resolv'd
to pull down his Pride, and to take from him at once all those places, and whole Provinces which by fraud and deceit he had at di∣vers times encroached and stoln from them. He had first tried all means imaginable, and had apply'd himself to the Grand Mufti, and to the Emperour of Myrgena, with promises to restore all that he had gained from them; but they told him, that they knew him too well to trust any longer to his Word, which he had never kept. So that finding that that would not do, he had propos'd to beg those Princes Pardon which he had offended, and to make full restitution of all that he had pos∣sest himself of theirs, with an as∣surance, that he would submit to all that they should please to im∣pose upon him, provided, they would but withdraw their Forces from falling upon him, till he had
accomplish'd that great Design he had so well begun, of totally rooting out the true Mahometan Religion: But those Confederate Princes knowing, that all that he said, was but to divert them from taking revenge of all his perfidi∣ous dealings against them; and that at the very time that he so earnestly begg'd for a Peace, he was animating and fomenting the Heathens, to continuing a War a∣gainst the Mahometists; they therefore gave no ear to any thing he said, but went on still with their preparations of War against him, with all the vigour imaginable. This made Cha-abas to look out for a place of Retreat in time, in case he should be driven out of his own Empire; but he did it with that same Pride and Ostentation which usually accompanies all his Actions. He cast his eye on the
Island Leridan, pertaining to A∣murat, and which still held out for him, all the Natives of that Kingdom being Halists, and go∣vern'd by Clorinet, who was a great Halist also, and who had been plac'd in that station by A∣murat. After then that he had brought Amurat and his Sultana to that Palace which he had appointed for them, and settled an Allowance for their Maintenance suitable to their Greatness, he began to con∣sider which way to begin, and in what proper Terms to propose to Amurat, so that he might not find out his drift, the rection of Clonstad and of Albiona to him; but Amurat was not long without giving him himself a fair opportunity of declaring his Mind; for he being still dejected and un∣consolable, for the loss of the Love of his Subjects, without which he
had no prospect of ever recover∣ing his Right again, did still pur∣sue the Design which he had ta∣ken, of leaving the World, and of retiring into some Religious House, where to end his days in peace and quietness, and menti∣on'd his Design to Cha-abas. There needed no more to set the Persian Emperour on, this was matter sufficient for him to work upon: He represented to Amurat, that that would tarnish the Glory of all his former Actions; it would give occasion to the World to cen∣sure him, and to future Ages to entertain a very ill Opinion of him▪ He added, That he himself was so highly concern'd in the whole Business, that it would greatly tarnish that Glory which the Justice of his Cause, and the good success of his Arms had ac∣quired him, if he did not re-esta∣blish Amurat on his Throne, and
totally root out of all his Domi∣nions the Mahometan Religion, as he had already done out of his own Empire, and would do out of the whole World, before he would be quiet: That a War which was founded on Religion, and the extirpation of Heresies, as his was, was not to be left undone, being of quite another Nature than those Wars which are made on the account of securing ones Right, enlarging of ones Dominions, increasing of ones Glory, and the like; That who∣soever once set his his Hand to that Plough, wherein Religion was concern'd, was not to look back, but to go forwards, over all the Hazards and Difficulties imagina∣ble, being confident, that the more perillous, the more glorious the Achievement of the thing would be; that he was ready to assist him with Men, Arms, Am∣munition
and Money, with Ves∣sels to transport them over into Leridan, where he thought it the most convenient to begin, by the total suppression of all his Maho∣metan Subjects, through the aid and assistance of those Forces which were all Halists, under the Conduct of his Lieutenant Clorinet. In fine, he said so much to Amurat, and did so subtly dis∣guise his Designs to him, under the Veil of Religion, that though he did not absolutely yield to his Reasons, yet he had nothing to say for himself, but that he would consider of it, and give Cha-abas an Answer in a day or two. Cha-abas finding that Amurat began to shake in the handle, thought of making use of that o∣ther means which had succeeded so well before, which was, in put∣ting the Sultana on following close by Night those Lessons which he
and the Mufties of his Party did continually buz in Amurat's Ears all the Day long; which made Amurat to believe himself in a worse condition than ever; and of truth, meerly to rid himself of that continual trouble that he saw himself exposed unto, by those perpetual Tongue-Batteries, dis∣charg'd against his Constancy and Resolutions, he yielded to their Efforts, and began to capitulate with Cha-abas about the Business. Cha-abas told him, that he had no other end in it, than the re-esta∣blishing of him on his Throne a∣gain, and, all under one, to extir∣pate Heresie: But that because A∣murat had been so unsuccessful in his former Designs, for want of good Counsellors and Officers, to perform and execute those Resolu∣tions that the Councils had taken, he did think it not only conve∣nient, but very necessary to give
him such a Counsellor as they might both trust in for Fidelity and Conduct; that to avoid all occasion of Murmurs amongst his Subjects, who would all expect Relief from the Monies which he should transport with him, there should go along with him a Per∣sian Treasurer, that should have the whole and sole disposal of his Treasure; and that neither of his Subjects, either Halists or Ma∣hometans, that were Officers, should envy one another, (for those last were to be a little while longer consider'd) he would send also some Persian Officers to be put in all strong places to command the Army, and to govern the Military Affairs, as occasions should serve: So that Amurat should have nothing to do, but to countenance the whole proceed∣ing, as being made in his Name, and on his Account, till the Busi∣ness
was ended; and that then he should take upon him again the whole management of Affairs, and Rule as Emperour there, and recover, through Cha-abas continued assistance, the rest of his lost Empire. All these sugar'd Bates did A∣murat swallow down, with the greatest security that could be, not so much as once doubting in the least, but that all that Cha∣abas said, was real and sincere: He therefore resolv'd once again to launch himself into the World, and through Cha-abas kind assi∣stance, go and recover his lost Empire. Amurat having taken this Resolution, and having past his Word to Cha-abas of being wholly and absolutely govern'd by him, to see whether that would alter the ill success which he had had hitherto in all his Undertakings. There was pub∣lick
Rejoycings at it; Amurat had Liberty to breathe again, and was no longer tormented with the continual Alarms which he re∣ceiv'd Day and Night from those whom Cha-abas had appointed to torment him. But there happen'd another Obstacle, which was to be remov'd, as a great Impedi∣ment to Cha-abas other Designs: So far he had consulted but his own Pride and Ambition; but Love claim'd a share in his Bo∣some also, and the Sultana's Charms had already made so deep an impression in his heart, that it was impossible for him to yield to those earnest Intrea∣ties and Prayers which she made, that she might attend on Amu∣rat in that Expedition; He re∣presented to her the Season of the Year, the Inconstancy of the Elements that she would expose her self to, the Uncertainty of
the Success, the Inconveniencies of lying long at Sea, of Land∣ing amongst Enemies, of going from a pure to an unwholesome corrupt Air, where diseased men might make it still more dange∣rous. In fine, he himself, and those whom he set on the Sul∣tana, to disswade her from going, acted so well their Parts, that not only the Sultana, but Amurat him∣self, (who had already given his Consent for the Sultana to ac∣company him,) did resolve, that she should rest behind, at least, till it were convenient for her to come over: Mean time, all Dispatches were made for the sud∣den putting in execution what had been design'd and agreed on betwixt the Two Emperours; insomuch, that in a short time Amurat was told, that the Fleet, and all the things necessary for his Expedition, were in a readi∣ness,
and ready to set Sail, on∣ly they wanted his Person, with∣out which nothing could be done. Thus was Amurat sent away from his Sultana, to countenance Cha∣abas Designs on Leridan, and to give more Liberty to his amo∣rous Intrigues. For no sooner was Amurat gone, but that Cha∣abas laid close Siege unto the Sultana's Vertues, and follow'd it so close, that he prevented the Design which she had taken, and which doubtless she had execu∣ted, of confining her self into some Society of Religious Wo∣men, during Amurat's Absence, had not Cha-abas Love been very diligent in breaking her measures. He had not yet made any De∣claration of Love to her, and all those Services and Demonstrati∣ons of Respect which he shew'd her, pass'd but for the effects of his Courtesie and Civility, to a
Princess in affliction: He had had some thoughts of declaring his Passion, but he thought it was not to be done in a mean and ordinary method, but in such a manner as should correspond with his Glory, the Greatness of the Sultana, and the Excess of his Passion. He daily did afford her new Divertisements, and find∣ing that there still reign'd over the Sultana's Brow, a certain me∣lancholick Air, which though it added no small Lustre unto the Sultana's Majestick Gravity, yet did not so well answer his a∣morous Designs towards her; he resolv'd upon communicating of his Designs unto Clorineta, Wife to Clorinet, who had accompani∣ed the Sultana from Turky into Persia, and all along been Privy to all the Sultana's Contrivances, Plots and Intrigues, and in whom the Sultana put all her Confidence and Trust.
We have had no occasion in the First Part of the Court Secret to mention this Person, but having divers opportunities to bring her upon the Stage in this Second Part, it is fitting that I should give you a short Description of her: She was very handsome yet, though some few years had of late left some Traces behind them, which spoke the Relicks of a very exquisite Beauty; and her gay Humour, free Air, and Natural Amorous Disposition, did still perswade her, and not without Cause, that she had Beau∣ty enough left to captivate the Heart even of the proudest Mo∣narch of the World; and she had divers times tacitely within her self, wish'd that those Addresses at large which Cha-abas had made to the Sultana, had been design'd to her, who had certainly given them more favourable Receptions
and Returns, than he might ever expect from the more vertuously strait-laced Sultana, not without hopes that she might thereby gra∣tifie those Two Passions of Love and Gain, which had still so great an Ascendant over her, and which made her design within her self to make a Prize of Cha-abas; in which she was already confident she should not be oppos'd by the Sultana, who as she found her in∣clin'd, especially at that time, would rather encourage and assist her in her Design, than thwart it, in hopes that it would in part di∣vert those Addresses which Cha∣abas might disturb her quiet with, and which she could not tell how handsomly to avoid, considering the Obligations which both she and Amurat seem to have unto him. Cha-abas then watching for an opportunity of entertaining Clo∣rineta
on that Subject, did one day find her all alone, walking in a private cover'd Walk in the Garden, where she had given an assignation unto the Mufti Repset, who was one of her Favourites. Cha-abas came up to her, and salu∣ting her; Madam, said he, I may thank my good Fortune for giving me this fair opportunity of decla∣ring to you something of nearest concern to me, and on which depends my Happiness or Misery. This On∣set did so tickle Clorineta's Heart, expecting nothing less than a de∣claration of Love from that Em∣perour, after so fair a beginning, that she could not forbear assuring him, that whatever he should say unto her, would be so great an Honour, as she would lose a Thou∣sand Lives to merit it, and that it would be all her study how she should answer so great a Monarch's Desires, wih all the Humility and
Respect imaginable; and at the same time she wish'd with all her Heart, within her self, that her Mufti should forget the Assigna∣tion, or mistake the Time or Place, that his coming might not interrupt Cha-abas Discourses, nor create in him the least Jealousie and Suspicion. Cha-abas, on his part, desiring not to be interrup∣ted neither, and for fear of be∣ing seen by the Sultana, who us'd to walk sometimes there, said, Madam, if you will honour me so far as to accompany me to ynder Pavillion, where I may more freely and more at leisure disburthen my Mind into your Bosome, you will infinitely oblige me. Any thing, Sir, reply'd Clorineta, that you shall please to command me, I shall take as a great honour to perform. With that Cha-abas taking of her by the Hand, lead her towards the Pavillion, which was at the
end of the Walk, making Signs to those that had follow'd him into the Garden, and that in re∣spect had stopp'd at some distance from Clorineta, that he wanted not their Company. After Cha-abas had seated Clori∣neta and himself, fetching a great Sigh from the bottom of his Heart, he thus began, This fore∣runner of my Discourse, Madam, does but too much inform you of the Nature of it, without any further clearing of the business, and letting of you know, that it is Love, that All-powerful Deity, who makes me sigh in his Chains: Yet, Madam, it were in vain for me to deny or go about to conceal a Passin, which how close soever I should resolve to carry it, would in despight of all my Circumspections manifest it self: I love, Madam, and—There Cha-abas making a pause, as if he was afraid to discover any more
of his Passion, it gave opportuni∣ty to Clorineta to say, You can command, Sir, as well as love; and doubtless that your Power is as absolute in that as it is in all other things that depend on your Will and Pleasure: What is there in your Court, in your whole Em∣pire, over which you have not that Power and Authority to command? And who would not think them∣selves the most happiest persons, in obeying, especially in things of this Nature? You say right, Madam, reply'd Cha-abas, I can command in my Dominions my own Subjects; but besides, that Love must always be free, and without force: Per∣adventure that the Person who makes me sigh, is not my Subject, but one that I must serve with the greatest Submission and Respect that I can possibly pay to her Great∣ness and Illustrious Person.
Notwithstanding that these Two last Words had been suf∣ficient to have enlightned a less discerning person than was Clori∣neta, yet she was so puff'd up with her good Fortune, and so prepos∣sess'd with the Opinion, that all that Cha-abas said, was meant to her, that she went confidently on, taking all to her self, and framing Answers suitable to her imaginati∣on, which she return'd to Cha-abas with such amorous Glances, such pathetick Expressions, and such passionate Zeal, that Cha-abas could not but take notice of it, and believing it to be as it was, and finding her worthy some con∣sideration, he let her remain in her mistake, and resolv'd to take hold of an opportunity which offer'd it self so fairly: therefore he thus continued, Yes, Madam, You have so many Charms, and they so pow∣erful, that should you be my Sub∣ject,
they were capable of rendring me your Slave. Clorineta was go∣ing to answer, when that she per∣ceiv'd her Mufti coming with a round pace towards the Pavilli∣on: The very thoughts of his ap∣proach, and discovering any In∣trigue betwixt them, did so con∣found her, that she knew not what to say; and to avoid all Suspicions, she remov'd her Seat something more behind the Door, to conceal her self from Repset's View, pretending that the Air did blow something too cold upon her, and she put the Door a little closer than it was before. But that did but serve to discover the more visibly the set Assignation which had been betwixt them; for Repset who had had an Eye of her at a distance, which caus'd him to redouble his pace, made a stop at the foot of some steps that led up to the Pavillion, say∣ing
aloud, I have seen you, Ma∣dam, and notwithstanding the De∣sign you had to put the Dye upon me Love, who would not let so great a Votary as I am to him, lose such an Assignation, lent me his Eyes to see you at that distance, and his Wings to fly to your—Saying this as he was getting up, pushing the Door wide open, and percei∣ving Cha-abas, he made a full stop both to his Words and Motion. It were hard to declare which of these Three Lovers was the most surpriz'd. The Mufti retiring, begging pardon for his Mistake, and bold Intrusion, went down Stairs again as fast as he had got up, and sneaking through little by-Allies, he retir'd to his Lodg∣ings, with all the haste and con∣fusion imaginable. This made Clorineta to pluck up her Spirits, and tell Cha abas, That the Mfti meeting of Two Persons there
which he little expected, had cer∣tainly strangely confounded him, and that doubtless it would make him lose the Assignation which he had mention'd, of all which he had so well inform'd them, except the Name of the Person. Cha∣abas all the while look'd earnestly on Clorineta, as desirous to have been further inform'd by her Looks or Gestures, which she perceiving, for fear of saying or doing any thing that should betray her to her new Lover, she did rise, making some offer to go out, saying, that peradventure they might have an∣other view of the Mufti, which would inform them further. Cha∣abas, who was as desirous as she, to know certainly who was the Person whom the Mufti had not nam'd, and which he had some Jealousies was her self, by the great disorder that his coming had put her in; besides, the sus∣picion
he had entertain'd at her shifting of her Seat so soon as she had perceiv'd him, under pretence of getting more out of the Cold Air, consented to her desires, and taking her by the Hand, led her out, begging of her a further op∣portunity of discovering his Pas∣sion; which she, with all the mo∣desty she was Mistress of, endea∣voured to evade; and they meet∣ing with Company, with which that Walk us'd to be fill'd at that time of the day, they parted with∣out any further appointment or Rendezvous than what Fortune should present to them, as it had done before. Cha-abas mixt him∣self with a Company of Ladies, amongst which was one named Monitenna, who had render'd great pieces of Services to Cha-abas, during his late Distemper, and to whom he had protested a World of Acknowledgments and
of Love: She look'd on Clorineta with a World of Disdain, Rage and Spight, as on a person that intended to deprive her of that Love which her most assiduous Cares, and indefatigable Labours, had obtain'd from Cha-abas: And though she could not lay claim to any Beauty, and that she was but the Relicks of a mean Person of Birth and Estate, though of a cele∣brated Wit, of which she also had a great share, she thought that her Services might stand her in place of all those other things, as being more material and effectual: Wherefore from that moment, she declar'd her self, in her own Mind, a mortal Enemy unto Clo∣rineta, and did her afterwards all the ill Offices that she could pos∣sible, as we shall have occasion to declare. As for Clorineta, she had a Mes∣sage deliver'd to her from the Sul∣tana,
which made her to retire. Though her Beauty had (while present) suspended Cha-abas Pas∣sion towards the Sultana for that time, he had no sooner retired from her Company, but that the Sultana presented her self, to his Imagination, with all those Per∣fections, and that Majestick Grace which always accompany her. He soon forgot, that he had told Clorineta, she was the Person he ador'd; and as if nothing of that had ever been, the next time that he met with Clorineta, which was in the Sultana's presence, he took no more notice of her than if he had never seen her before, and wholly address'd himself to the Sultana, to whom he said aun∣dance of very fine things, but at such a distance, that they might have been shar'd amongst the rest of the Company; and this Visit which he had made to the Sulta∣na,
with a design of giving her some more particular Marks of his Passion than he had ever done yet, termin'd only in inviting her to a great Ballet and Mask∣ing, which he had design'd, for to give her some diversion; though his design was to give her then, in as splendid a manner as he could possible, a Declaration of Love in Writing. She a long time pleaded her melancholly Humour, which render'd her more fit for the Conversation of Religious Women, than to parti∣cipate of the Pleasures of so splen∣did a Court, especially in the ab∣sence of Amurat, who, for ought she knew, might be exposed to e∣minent dangers, while she should be revelling here; but those her suggestions having been over-rul'd by divers Discourses, back'd with assurances, that before all things could be fitted for so magnifi∣cent
an Entertainment as he in∣tended, there would certain news come of Amurat's great success in Leridan; she at last on those Con∣ditions yielded to lend her presence to so Noble an Assembly, where all the Chief Lords and Ladies of the Persian Court were generally invited. Every body from that time be∣gan to make Preparatives to ap∣pear as splendid as they could at the Grand Ball, which was call'd The Ball of the Royal Love; and to get such Disguises that would keep them from the knowledge of all Persons, but those unto whom they would be known. As for Cha-abas, he spar'd neither Cost nor Charges to render it the most magnificent and splendid that ever was. Of truth, it was so like the Ambition of the Giver, that I cannot but find a sheet or two of Paper more than ordinary, to set
down the Description of it in my Novel, not doubting but that the Reader will not grudge the time that he shall employ in the read∣ing of it: But first we will give time for the preparation of all the necessary things for this great Mask, and in the mean time give me leave to entertain you with some Transactions in the Ottoman Empire, relating to the Historical part of my Novel. Upon Amurat's deserting of his Subjects, and abandoning them to the Fury of all their Enemies, which in the Opinion of many of his Subjects, acquitted them of their Oaths of Allegiance to him; for as they said, There were mu∣tual Oaths pass'd betwixt Amu∣rat and his People at his accession to the Crown; He on his part did promise to govern them according to the Established Laws of the Land, and to maintain the Maho∣metan
Religion, and all the Laws that had from time to time been made for its preservation, against all the Assaults and Conspiracies of its sworn Enemies the Halists, and to protect and defend his People from all Forreign Usurpation and Invasion; and his People on their part had promis'd to obey him, as their King and Governour, and to pay unto him the same Allegiance and Obedience, which they had done to his Predecessors, on the assurance that he would faithfully and inviolably keep and observe his Coronation Oath. I say, that many of his Loyal Subjects did believe, and thought in their Con∣sciences, that the Emperour's Breach of his Oaths had dispenc'd them from those which they had taken to him of their Allegiance. Yet there remain'd some amongst them, who still were of Opini∣on, That though Amurat had
broke his Coronation-Oath, that did not free them from those Oaths of Allegiance to him which they had taken, saying, That his doing ill, or commit∣ting an Errour, was no warrant for them to do the same. But when it came to that pass, that the Emperour deserted them and his Kingdoms, and thereby re∣nounc'd to the protecting and de∣fending of them: Nay, That on the contrary, he joyn'd with the Halists against his own People, and applied himself to the great∣est declared Enemy of the Otto∣man Empire, and of the Mahome∣tan Religion, which he had de∣clar'd over and over, he would root out of the World; then, I say, that help'd to take off all those Scruples which had been left on their tender Consciences, and found, that what at first was but strife, who should have the
upper hand, of the Halists or Ma∣hometans, in the Ottoman Empire, was now turn'd into a War of Re∣ligion, in which the true ancient Mahometan Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Sub∣ject were concern'd. In fine, where all lay at stake, and in which he that had sworn to be their Protector and Defender, was gone over to the greatest Enemy of all their Rights, and had solicited him against his own People; then they thought them∣selves absolutely freed from all Duties to him, and from all fur∣ther Passive Obedience, which was so much enjoyn'd to them by the Doctrine of their Church, who commanded them to fly from Persecution in their own Land by their own Prince, into another, after that he had de∣serted and abandoned them to their Destruction, and joyn'd him∣self
to the implacable Enemy of their Religion, Established by the Laws of the Nation. Then they thought that their staying at home for the Defence of their own Religion, and to oppose the threatned Usurpation and Invasi∣on of the Halists under Cha-abas conduct, was the same thing as their flying from Persecution at home into another Country, now that their Head, their King, their Pro∣tector had abandon'd them to the Fury of their most barbarous and bloody Enemies; was the same thing as flying from Persecution. had their Emperor staid to protect them. They therefore joyntly Crown∣ed Prince Soliman and the Princess Zelinda, as the next Heirs to the Crown, which had been forfeited to them by Amurat's abandoning of it; and they took those usual Oaths which are tender'd to all the
Emperour's at their Coronation; and the People acknowledg'd them to be their Lawful King and Queen, and on that account swore to them the Oaths of O∣bedience, Allegiance and Submis∣sion, which were usual on such occasion; all which was confirm'd by the Grand Council of the Em∣pire, receiv'd in all parts, and pro∣claim'd throughout the whole Em∣pire, except by a small Party of Halists, which had been kept to∣gether in Arms in Leridan by Clo∣rinet, after he had turn'd out from amongst them all those that profest the Mahometan Reli∣gion. News by this time are come to Ispahan of the Persians Fleet safe arrival at Leridan, where they had discharg'd their Men and Am∣munition, and where Amurat at his first Landing, had obtain'd a considerable Advantage over his
Enemies, and had great hopes to subdue that Kingdom, to trans∣port those Forces afterwards into the Kingdom of Clonstade, where there was a great Party ready to receive him; from whence, after that was recover'd, he would march with his Conquering Army into Albona, and so make himself once more Master of his Empire. These Letters were shown to the Sultana, who not finding the same Contents in Amurat's Letters to her, nor in Clorinet's Letters to his Wife, so clearly set down, did fear giving too much Credit to them; but what with the con∣struing which was put on the Sultana's and Clorineta's Letters, the Sultana was perswaded to be∣lieve all that was told her, as most authentick, which made her re∣solve to breathe a little, and to give some release unto her con∣tinual Sorrow, in appearing accor∣ding
to her Grandeur and Rank at the great Mask, with all the Mirth and Jolity that her present Condition could afford her to yield. Cha-abas was so strongly bent on this great Design, that one would have thought he had no o∣ther business in hand; He laid a∣side all other Concerns, and did resolve, happen what would, to give all the Scope and Liberty imaginable to his Amours, which made such a noise, that some of the more Sober sort of his Court did not think convenient to ap∣pear at that great Festival, at a time when the Blessing of Heaven was to have been implor'd upon their Arms against so many for∣midable Enemies that did encom∣pass them round: Of truth there was not less than 157000 Men arm'd against Persia: There was of the Myrgenians 7000, of the
Abravians 10000. of the Wasbians 5000 under the Conduct of the most Valiant Bassa of Abravia. The Bassa of Reinola had the Com∣mand of 20000. Myrgenians and Cranfonians, 10000. Xoniseans, 8000. Swibrunckians and Brugul∣neans, and 8000 Seheseans: The Bassa of Grubdenbran commanded of Grubdenbranians 26000. and of Stennumians 6000: The Aga Kalkwad led 50000. Halldonians, and there was 7000. Pesinians, be∣sides the formidable Navies which threatned him by Sea. All these, I say, could not abate any thing of his Ambition, especially now that it was boy'd up, and carried on the Wings of Love. At last, his particular Mufti, unto whom only he imparted the Secrets of his Heart, was pitch'd upon to represent to him the unseasona∣bleness of the thing, and the great inconveniences that would
attend it. But he severely rebu∣ked him for his unask'd for ad∣vice, and desired him not to trou∣ble him with his Counsels, till he sent for him. The Mufti, whose Name was Chilase, was but newly return'd home, not much concern'd how he had succeeded in his Admoni∣tion to Cha-abas, when Repset came to give him a Visit. They were both of the wicked Order of the Mahometists: They had held perpetual Correspondence by Let∣ters with one another; all the time that the Destruction of the Mahometan Religion in Albiona had been hatching, they were very fa∣miliar together, and no Secret was hid from one another but in their Amours; there they were Two, as unanimous soever they were in all other Businesses. Rep∣set's Design in that Visit was to learn, whether Cha-abas had said
any thing to Chilase concerning the mistake which he had lately made in the Garden: He had made his Peace well enough with Clorineta, but he would gladly have known how the Emperour had resented it, and what his thoughts might be on that ac∣count. Chilase told him, That he had not spoken but once since to Cha-abas, who was so atten∣tive to his great Entertainment, that then he had rebuk'd him for offering to give him some Advice about it, which he had been desired to do by some of the principal Lords of the Court: But let him go on, continued he, we shall have the satisfaction of being partakers of it. Yes, said Repset, though not in so high a measure as he designs for himself: Of truth it must be confessed, con∣tinued he, the New Object of his Love, which puts him on all this,
has such powerful charms, that no Flesh and Blood were able to resist. You speak so feelingly of the Effects of those charms, reply'd Chilase, that I cannot but fancy you are more than ordinary interested in it. No Brother, reply'd Repset, the great number of cares that I had continually upon me, and the Na∣ture of them, did keep me off of any such Designs, though certainly she is the finest Person in the World, the most courteous and affable to the meanest of her Subjects; and it is a thousand pities that she has an Husband who is not capable, through his infirmities, to perform towards her those Matrimonial Devoirs which she ought in reason to expect, and which 100000 Persons would think themselves most happy to supply her with. What pity then is it, said Chilase, that she should now be courted by another Prince as insuffi∣cient to perform to any purpose
those amorous Offices, which in rea∣son she might expect, were she in the least flexible to his applicati∣ons? But, in my Opinion, she has not the Air, carries not that Gay∣ety of Humour, that Briskness, which usually speaks a Person amo∣rous. No more do many other Wo∣men, answer'd Repset, who never∣theless are all Love: I tell you, that any person that would manage that business discreetly, might ob∣tain from her more than you think, if they did but observe to nick her reserv'd Humour, and to make no noise of it; and were I in your place, I know what I would do. Repset's Design in engaging Chi∣lase in an Amour with the Sulta∣na, was to divert him from look¦ing in, and having any thoughts towards Clorineta who had spo∣ken, he thought, too much to Chilase's advantage, and had ex∣press'd to him a great desire to be
more particularly acquainted with him; besides, he had once found Chilase in a very close Discourse with Clorineta; all which did not please him very well: wherefore he endeavour'd to create in him some Desires towards the Sultana, that might make a Diversion; so that he might not hereafter thwart him in his Amours to Clorineta. Chilase swallow'd the Bate, and though he seem'd not to take much notice of what Repset spoke concerning the Sultana, he re∣solv'd within himself, from that moment, to push his Fortune, and try what he could do in gaining the Sultana's good Will by some signal Pieces of Services, though to the prejudice of his Master Cha-abas Designs. From these Particular Discour∣ses they fell to Generals, concern∣ing the Grand Mask, where they could not forbear mentioning the
great Opportunities it gave to Courtship, address'd indifferently to any person, under those Dis∣guises, and by consent to particu∣lar Men and Women, who be∣fore-hand had agreed on ways of knowing one another: That there the meanest Person in the World, for a little Money and Cost, might be admitted to hazard his Fortune with the best in the Land, if he had but Wit, Confidence and Address; For Example, said Chilase, If you or I should have a fancy to try what those Masking Meetings termine to, how easie would it be for us to so disguise our selves, as to enjoy all the pleasure and sa∣tisfaction of the whole Entertain∣ment, and not be discover'd? You say true, answer'd Repset; but I am so far from any such thought, that I design that day to take the Air out of Town, and lye all night at a Friends House, to whom I
have long owed a Visit. And I, said Chilase, design to take Phy sick that day; for of late I have sound my self indispos'd, and that Day and Night I shall not need to fear the trouble of impertinent Visits. With these and such like Discourses they ended the Day: Repset took his leave, and went to visit his Clorineta; and Chi∣lase fell musing on those Fancies which Repset had put in his Head: The more he thought on it, the more it rais'd his thoughts, the more bold it made him, and the more desirous to attempt the thing: He thought that this Masking Bout was such a fair opportunity to try his Fortune in, that he was not to let it slip, lest he should never meet with such an∣other. The Sultana represented her self to his Imagination, all Charming; and the very thoughts of enjoying so great a Princess, so
lovely a Person, did almost ravish him beyond his Senses. I will push on my Fortune, said he to him∣self, and try what I may hope or fear for the future, by the success of my first Attempt, in which my Disguise will secure me from all Dangers: And what if there were never so many Dangers, who would regard them? Who would not pass over the greatest Difficul∣ties imaginable, to attain to so much Happiness? Well, I am re∣solv'd, and I will early in the Morn∣ing begin to prepare for so glorious an Enterprise. With this Resolution he went to his Bed, though not to sleep. Amongst those Persons which the Sultana admitted to her Pri∣vacy, of the Persian Ladies, was Monitenna, who was most passio∣nately in Love with Cha-abas, and whose Jealous Humour had occasion'd her to seek for a parti∣cular
Friendship with the Sulta∣na and with Clorineta, that she might the better pry into their Actions, and break all their mea∣sures with Cha-abas, who she knew had a Love for them both: She disguised the Love which she had for Cha-abas, under the No∣tion of her Duty in the Care she had taken, and still took of him in his Distemper, and of a Princi∣ple of Gratitude towards him for so mony Favours and great Ad∣vantages which she had receiv'd: And she did endeavour by all manner of means, so to oblige them both, that they were forc'd to receive her into their particular Favour, even in Gratitude. That sight which she had had of the Emperour with Clorineta, stuck by her; and she apprehended more danger that way, than from the Sultana, whom she per∣ceiv'd had not yet any inclinati∣ons
for Cha-abas, while the o∣ther did nothing else all day long, but extol him to the very Skyes, and express'd the great desires she had of carrying on that first Interview which she had had with him, into a perfect A∣morous Intrigue. Mean time, Monitenna plaid so well the part of an unoncern'd person, still extolling his Liberality and Gal∣lantry, that Clorineta, who was of a very free and open Disposi∣tion, made her her Confident in her amorous Designs. Repset still follow'd close his Game with Clo∣rineta, and being desirous to par∣take of the Mask and Ball, he propos'd it to her, and they both agreed in what Disguises they should be, not to be known but by them Two only; at least, Repset was not to be known; but as to Clorineta, she was to be known by the Sultana, who was to know
her also, designing also to make her self known to the Empe∣rour by some private Mark. The Cause of her easie yielding to Repset's Desires, was because she knew him to be violent; and that if she should offer to oppose him in that which she believ'd was put on by some Jea∣lousie which he had entertain'd of Cha-abas ever since he had found them together, though she had endeavour'd by all means imagi∣nable to let him know there was nothing less than Love in the Case, and that it was a meer acci∣dental Rencounter, and that all the Discourse they had was on the Sultana's Beauty, with which Cha-abas seem'd to be exceeding∣ly captivated: She fear'd that it might carry him to do some extra∣vagant thing, which might re∣dound to her prejudice; but with∣all, she resolv'd to put the Change
upon him, and to dress one of her Women in those Disguises which she had design'd for her self, and put on others, which should not be known but by the Sultana and Mo∣nitenna. Chilase in the mean time had by the Vertue of Gold (a thing with which the Persians use to work Miracles), got the know∣ledge of the Sultana's Disguise; so that he was in all Points ready for the Mask. Monitenna, who had from Cha-abas himself, how he was to appear, and who had inform'd him in what Dress the Sultana was to be, as also of the first Dress which Clorineta had pitch'd upon, had no more to do, but to fit her self with all the means imaginable to do all the Mischief she could possible, and to create a Confusion amongst these Lovers.
At last the Day came in whose following Night the Ball was to begin: There never was a more splendid appearance; There was nothing to be seen but Tissu's, Cloaths of Gold and Silver, Em∣broideries with Pearls and preci∣ous Stones, and whole Rocks of Diamonds, which, with the light of a Thousand White Wax Ta∣pers, plac'd in Silver and Chry∣stal Candlesticks and Sconces, did produce a light more piercing than that of the Sun in its full Meridian, contracted within the limits of a most spacious Hall. The Maskers being all enter'd, and after some Dances having ta∣ken their Seats at the upper end of the Hall, there were heard in the Air most admirable Consorts of Musick, of Voices, of Flutes, and of other Instruments, answer∣ing one another, and sometimes all together, singing all in the
praise of Love. During these Harmonies, which charm'd not less the Ears than the Maskers did the Eyes. There appear'd towards the middle of the Hall, like a Flock of flying Hearts, of all sorts and Sizes, fluttering in the Air, to which presently came flying a little Cupid with his Bow and Arrows, shooting at the whole Flock still as he flew, with little Silver Shafts. At last he shot the biggest of all the Hearts that were in the whole Flock, which tumb∣ling down on the Floor, transpier∣ced with the Shaft, and bleeding, the little Cupid made after it with all the Wing he had, and lighting on the Ground, seiz'd on the Heart, with which he began to play Childish Tricks. At last he looks round on all the Ladies, as if designing to bestow it on one of them; He walks round, and not knowing to whom to deli∣ver
it, he falls a crying, lays him∣self down by the Heart, pushes it from him, kicks it, still lying; and plays a Thousand little Apish Tricks with it, pouting, and seem∣ing very sullen. As he was toy∣ing thus, comes, as from out of the Hangings, which represented whole Figures to the Life, a Ve∣nus and the Three Graces. They come up to Cupid, who perceiving them, takes the Heart, and huggs it in his Arms, as afraid they should take it from him: Venus begs it of him, he kicks at her; she offers to take it, he defends it; the Graces assist Venus in the get∣ting of it from him; he scrambles with them, kicks one, pinches another, scratches a Third, spits at the Fourth; and finding that they were too many for him, he on the sudden having secur'd the Heart betwixt his Thighs, catches up his Bow, and pulls out an Ar∣row
to shoot; at which they all run away and left him; he laught at them, laid himself down again, and began to fool as before; pre∣sently after comes out as from ano∣ther part of the Hanging, Old Time with his Wings and his Scythe, leading in one Hand Fortune with a Vail over her Eyes, a Sail in her Hand, a Wheel on her Head, and in the Name of it a Golden Ball, and in the other Hand Fame, with her Two Trumpets, her Gown all over bestrew'd with Ears and Eyes. They come up to Cupid, he seems pleas'd with them, but still secures the Heart; He plays with the Feathers of Times Wings, gives Fortune a blow, then hides himself behind Time and Fame; while she gropes after him, he gets one of Fame's Trumpets, and blows in it: They let him play so with them, till he gets into a good Humour, which Time per∣ceiving,
he leads him by the Hand towards the Ladies: Cupid seems bashful at first; at last takes a round, and after divers offers to several Ladies, he lays it in the Sultana's lap, and presently flies a∣way, Time, Fortune and Fame be∣ing gone before. This Heart was no sooner laid in the Sultana's lap, but that she was surpriz'd to see it open, fall in pieces, and discover it self to be within side a whole Cluster of Diamonds and Pearls, in the midst of which was a Paper neat∣ly folded, which she had a great mind to open, and to see what it contain'd; but she was unwilling to gratifie her Desires at that time, because that all the rest of the Maskers had their Eyes fixed up∣on her: However, her Curiosity was so great, that she could not forbear turning up one Corner of it, in which having read the Word
Love, she secretly convey'd it in∣to her Pocket, together with the Heart, and took no further notice. By this time a large Table fill'd with all manner of Delicacies, sprung up as out of the Floor, with Seats round it; and out of the Hangings round, came out divers Servants with Bottles of all sorts of Liquors, and Glasses, which were supply'd by others, which appear'd but half in and half out of the said Hangings, still shifting of Glasses after they had once been us'd. The Maskers did all rise, went and seated themselves round the Table, and took of what they lik'd best, with which some stor'd their Pockets, others their Handkerchiefs, which they carri∣ed after on the Stools on which they were seated before; after which the Table and Chairs dis∣appeared again. The Consorts ceas'd, and the Four and Twenty
Violins struck up some Tunes, to invite the Maskers to dance; af∣ter they had danced so long as it was thought convenient, there appear'd other Maskers, no body knowing how they came in, who danc'd divers Sarabrands, and other Antick Dances, very pleasant and diverting. Which ended, and the Dancers retired, then did all the Maskers promiscuously mix toge∣ther, and every one apply'd him∣self as his Fancy led him. It was then that Cha-abas took the opportunity of addressing him∣self to the Sultana; and under his Disguises did take a greater liberty than he durst have done at another time, of mentioning his Love to her; each moment seeming very tedious unto Chilase, who was watching at a distance for the time that Cha-abas would give the Sultana some respite, that he might tell her what he had to say. Clo∣rineta
was not less impatient on the other hand, and thought it long before the Sultana dismiss'd the Emperour, as she had promi∣sed her to do, that she might have the opportunity of entertaining him in her turn. Mean time Rep∣set was plying his time tooth and nail in his Courtship to Clorine∣ta's Woman, thinking her to be the Mistress, with no other De∣sign than to hinder a Commerce betwixt Cha-abas and Clorineta. While all the Maskers were thus busie in entertaining one another, and sometimes shifting from one another, either for the sake of meer change, or to meet with some particular Person that they had a mind to entertain, to find out some other that answer'd more home to their Propositions, or to take breath when they had spoken all they had to say. The jealous Monitenna was observing all the
passages betwixt those Persons with which she was concern'd, she saw how that so soon as the Sultana had shifted from Cha-abas, Clori∣neta had supply'd her room, in passing opportunely by just in the nick, which had made the Empe∣rour to detain her, and try her Wit. It troubled her not a little to see that her long detaining of Cha-abas, had made him once or twice offer at a Change, which in Civility is always left to the Wo∣mans choice, and how still she had ingag'd him a-new, and held him fast by the hand, that he might not go from her, till she had emptied her mind; she per∣ceiv'd how that the Mufti Chilase had done the same with the Sul∣tana, and how hot he was upon his Design. At last she had the satisfaction to see Clorineta let go Cha-abas hand; but that satisfa∣ction was dash'd again, by a pri∣vate
Whisper which she saw Cha-abas give her, and how that he then took the opportunity of kis∣sing her neck. Those were so many points of Daggers in poor Monitenna's Heart, which hasten'd her the more to put in execution that Revenge which she had de∣sign'd. Cha-abas being thus disingag'd of Monitenna's long Conversation, sought after none but the Sultana, to whom he thought he had gi∣ven sufficient time to recollect, and fit her self for a second Charge; but perceiving a Person very ear∣nest with her, he was so discreet, as to entertain himself with the next Lady he met near her, till he should find the place empty, which our amorous Mufti Chilase did still possess. Monitenna being ready to play her Game, step'd a∣side to Repset, and whisper'd him in the Ear, that he was mistaken,
and that Cha-abas had been enter∣taining Clorineta all that while, who he had but just now quitted, and that if he would follow her, she would bring him to her. Rep∣set, who had two or three times been surprised at the Discourses of the Woman which he enter∣tain'd, and at her unwillingness to speak, but when oblig'd to give an Answer, though she would sometimes speak pretty pertinent∣ly, as knowing her Lady's Intri∣gues with Repset, did believe the Intelligence which had been given him to be real, and so follow'd Monitenna, who brought him to Clorineta. Where he fell a fuming and fretting against her, for ha∣ving put the Change upon him, which she excus'd as well as she could, telling him moreover, that that was not a time to clear doubts in, and that she would give him full satisfaction after the Ball;
mean time she was in a peck of troubles to get to the Assignation which Cha-abas had given her presently after the Ball, she thought that he would not let his Eye go off of her, and that if she should offer to speak to Cha-abas to put off the Assignation to another time, for some important Reasons, that would but exasperate Repset the more, so that she did not know what to do, but was wish∣ing for some sudden disorder, or accident which might give her the opportunity of stealing away; when that Monitenna having de∣liver'd a Note to the Emperour, which intimated, that his two late Mistresses were both enter∣tain'd at that very moment by two Mufti's, whose Names she conceal'd, and at the same time having given the two Mufti's Notes, which gave them notice, that they were discover'd, and
that a Friend of theirs had provi∣ded them a Coach, to make their escape, to which they should be guided. Both the Mufties still un∣known to one another, broke off abruptly their Courtship, and with all the haste they could pos∣sibly, made towards the door of the Hall, they were met there with two Persons whom Moni∣tenna had posted on purpose, who told them, taking them aside into a little Room, that they had Or∣ders to let no body go by with∣out they first deposited their Dis∣guise, that there being some Jew∣els lost in the Company, it was suspected that some Rogues or other had taken this opportunity of pilfering something in so great an Assembly. The two Mufties, half dead at these News, offer'd to be search'd, and would have given all the money they had about them, so they would but
let them go in their Disguises, protesting of their innocence; to which the two men answer'd ac∣cording to their Qew, that they believ'd them far from the Theft by their free offering to be searcht, but because that it was the Empe∣rour's particular Order, and that it would be as much as their lives were worth to transgress it, they plainly told them, that they could not answer their desires: Thus were the two Mufties forc'd to uncase, fearing a worse disaster, should they stay any longer. But how great was their surprize, when they knew one another, how they star'd, how their Countenances chang'd, and with what confusion they were seiz'd, there was no time to lose, they desired to be conducted to the Coach, which was accordingly done. They both got into the Hackney Coach in the dark, the Coachman asked where
they would go; they made An∣swer, towards their Lodgings, and told him where they were, they being not far from one another. When they were got out of the crowd and confusion of Coaches and Lights that were waiting a∣bout that part of the Court; The one said to the other, Is this your Physick that you would take? And is this your Country-journey? re∣ply'd the other. Well, said Rep∣set, I have some Reasons for what I have done. And I also, reply'd Chi∣lase; wherefore it will be best for us to wave any further Discourse for the present; we are near our Lodg∣ings, continu'd he, let us go to rest, and to morrow, if you please, about twelve, we will confer Notes, in my Chamber, and endeavour to find out how we have been betray'd, and what Cha-abas thoughts are of us. With that they took leave of one another, and retired each to
their Appartment. Where we will leave them, to return to our Mas∣kers. Cha-abas, upon the Information, going to give Orders for the pri∣vate securing of the two Mufties without noise, pass'd by Clorineta, who taking him by the Hand, be∣ing over-joy'd that Repset was gone, said, that the hour of the Assignation drew near; I will but step to give some Orders, said he, and I am yours. With that he went from her, she was presently supply'd with some other, as well as was the Sultana, who not knowing of the Discovery which had been made, was wondring at her Gal∣lant's sudden departure, after so many protestations of Love, which he had made her, tho' he would never let her know who he was, notwithstanding that she had press'd him much to it; she had made him very fair returns to
all his protestations, and had gi∣ven him an Assignation the next Evening in a certain Walk of the Garden, where he had assur'd her he would not fail to be, tho' she design'd to put the Change upon him, in sending Clorineta in her room, and she did long till the hour came, that she might learn the success of the Cheat. Cha-abas being return'd, and the Company growing weary, the Ball broke up, the sooner too, that he might meet his Mistress at the Rendez∣vous. Clorineta presently slipp'd out of the way, for fear the Sul∣tana should take her home with her, and so disappoint the Empe∣rour; the earnest haste which Clorineta made, and the appre∣hensions which she discover'd at her going off, for fear the Sultana should see her, gave farther suspi∣cions to Monitenna, that it was an Assignation betwixt the Empe∣rour
and Clorineta. She therefore follow'd her close, and bid one of those Persons, which she had em∣ploy'd before about the Mufties, to dodge that Person, and to bring her word in the Sultana's Coach where she was gone; she present∣ly return'd to the Sultana, who knew her, that ask'd her what was become of Cloreneta, she told her that she knew not. 'Tis no matter, now I have you to keep me company home, reply'd the Sultana, it may be she will be at home before us. How shall we get home un∣known? I wish we had a Hackney Coach, continu'd the Sultana. Your own will do as well, Madam, reply'd Monitenna; for no body will ima∣gine that you would make use of it your self. With the like Discour∣ses, they got to the Sultana's Coach, which they caus'd to drive a little out of the Crowd; by this time the Person that Monitenna had sent,
was return'd, who having told her that Clorineta was in such a certain place walking all alone, the Sultana propos'd going there to take her up, wondring what she should do in such a retired place by her self. They had much to do to disingage themselves from the confusion and concourse of people; they were so long about it, that when they were come to the place of Clorineta's Rendez-vous with Cha-abas, they found them both together. This was accord∣ing to Monitenna's Heart's desire: She made no question, but that that Object would create strange Jealousies in the Sultana's Mind, if she had but one grain of Love; and of truth she could not forbear giving some touches of her re∣sentments both to Cha-abas, and to Clorineta. She told him, that he had not deceiv'd her in her expectations; That she had set no
greater value on his Protestations than she now did see them to a∣mount unto, and that she look'd on all that he had said as Words spoken in the Air. She spoke to Cha-abas all the while, as if they knew not one another, and serv'd Clorineta in the same manner. But after all, she left Cha-abas and Clorineta to∣gether, and retir'd with Moniten∣na to her Coach, which was in the Street, not permitting either of them to stir one step after her, which was no small Affliction to Monitenna, who by that saw her self frustrate of the Design which she had of disappointing them. They staid not long after; They reflected a little on the Discovery, and how they had been surpriz'd: They fram'd some specious pre∣tences, as that it was to desire Clorineta to solicite the Sultana in Cha-abas behalf, and to inform
him, how his Declaration of Love had been receiv'd and resented; all which he had not had time to do, by reason of the sudden break∣ing up of the Ball. Of truth it had lasted longer, but that the Company perceiving the Empe∣rour, who was very well known, to go out so hastily, they thought that it was in order to retire, which gave the occasion of break∣ing up some time sooner than o∣therwise might have been expect∣ed. After this they parted, that by Clorineta's sudden return home after the Sultana, it might take off all occasion of suspicion; and Cha-abas retir'd, to give a full swing unto his Amorous Thoughts. Monitenna was very well pleas'd at Clorineta's coming Home so soon after them, and gather'd from it, that no Action had past be∣tween the Emperour and her Ri∣val; and when that Clorineta as∣sur'd
the Sultana, whom she ral∣lied on the Assignation, that there was no other Design in it, but for Chaabas to gain her to be his So∣licitor in his Amours towards the Sultana, and to be inform'd by her how his Declaration of Love had been receiv'd by her, she found her self quite at ease on that side. The Sultana said to Clorineta, That she had perceiv'd a Paper which was conceal'd in that Heart which had been given her by the little Cupid, but that she had not had the Curiosity yet to see what it contain'd; with that, taking out of her Pocket both the Heart and the folded Pa∣per, after they had admired the Richness and neat Contrivance of the Heart, the Sultana gave the Paper to Clorineta to read. That Freeness did abundantly speak the great Considence which the Sulta∣na repos'd in Clorineta, and in Mo∣nitenna
also; for in such Cases but few Women will admit of Com∣munication; but such was the Sultana's Love to Clorineta, and indifferency for all men but Amu∣rat, that she set no Value upon any thing else. This is what was writ in that Paper: IF my Abilities did answer but in some measure the Ambition of my Will and Desires, Divine Princess, I should e're now have laid the whole World at your Feet; Not that I could be so vain as to imagine it worth your considerati∣on; for many Worlds would not suf∣fice to make a Present proportionable to your Grandeur; but as that which could approach next to my Heart, the nearest to your Merits, though still at a vast distance. Yet divers Worlds are wrapt up in the aspiring Desires of that Heart which I humbly present you, with
all that it has already perform'd, and what it shall be capable of at∣chieving hereafter, to render it, most charming Princess, the more acceptable. Let this Emblem of it represent its firmness and constan∣cy in the Resolution of being eter∣nally yours, as well as its Riches and Purity in Love. Yes, Madam, it is so full of that Divine Flame, which your charms have kindled, that being not of so yielding a Na∣ture as to melt, it has burst in sun∣der, permit that Balm which per∣petually flows from your lips, to pre∣vent the same effect in the Original, and give leave to that breath with which you perfume the Arabian Spi∣ces, and give Life to all things, to refresh its Ardors, yield a favour∣able Reception, adorable Sultana, to an Heart replenish'd with the most passionate Desires imaginable of serving you, and entertain as yours, that which is all Love for you, and
that can never find rest nor satisfa∣ction till it has even out-run your very desires in its performance, which no Mortal can do with such a zealous Love as your Slave, Cha-abas. So soon as Clorineta had read this, the Sultana said, This is so like the Humour of him that writ it, that any person might easily have guess'd at the Author, tho his Name had not been to it; and really all that he has said to me, was very much of the same Nature: How he has had information to find me out from amongst so great a crowd I know not, tho I would gladly be satisfied in it: It was ill done, and so much against my intentions, that I am troubled for having confided in persons that have betray'd me. Mo∣nitenna made great protestations of her Innocency, and Clorineta
made answer, Who should betray you but your self, Madam? Who, I betray my self, reply'd the Sul∣tana? after I had taken such cau∣tions measures, after I had had o∣ther Apparels made in private that very Day, when you your self knew nothing of my Designs but some few hours before. You are making out what I was saying, Madam, That nothing but your self could discover you to the Em∣peror: For how is it possible to con∣ceal that Greatness, that Majestick Air, and that agreeableness with which you adorn all your Actions, and attract the Eyes as well as the Hearts of all companies. It can no more be hid than the Sun's Beams in its full lustre. You need to have been seen but once to be known again, and distinguish'd from all the rest of the World, Madam, tho you had shrowded you self under all the Dis∣guises that Art could produce. A∣way
with those gross Flatteries, an∣swer'd the Sultana, you know I hate them; Monitenna, I dare say, is not of your Opinion, and does rather believe that some of my Servants, or some of the Dressers has been won by Gold to betray me. Madam, reply'd Monitenna, tho' I cannot de∣ny but that which Clorineta has said is true, to which I could add a great deal more, and sufficient to have made a Discovery of your Per∣son against your Will and Intenti∣ons, yet I verily believe that you have been betray'd, and that I could detect the Person through which the Discovery has been made. Pray oblige me so much, reply'd the Sultana, that I may punish them accordingly; for I will never endure such near my Person. To take all suspicions from off my self, Madam, I am the more earnest to tell you, that Yesterday Morning I perceiv'd one of those Gentlemen
which Cha-abas uses to employ in secret Messages and Intrigues, very earnest in Discourse with one of the Tailor's Servants, in the passage that leads to the place appointed for their Workroom, where I did see him give the Fellow Money for something which he had convey'd in∣to his hand. The Gentleman had certainly known me, but that the Passage being something dark, and I turning my Face towards the Wall as I pass'd by, I took from him the opportunity of so doing. If this be examined into, Madam, continued she, you will find that, or something worse at the bottom; for those Per∣sons are never employ'd by Cha-abas but on some Amorous Intrigue, and every day in change of Habits. I am satisfy'd, reply'd the Sultana, and believe it to be so; and since it is none of my own Servants that has been prevail'd with, I'le trouble my self no further about it; all
my Care shall be wholly to avoid all opportunities of giving Cha-abas any conveniency of disturbing the quiet of my Mind, either in his own Per∣son, or by the Mediation of any of his Mercuries; For the I cannot be so rude as not to receive with a great deal of Respect, his Addresses, yet I shall not afford them such Re∣turns as he may expect; for besides, that I never had any inclinations towards the carrying on of Amorous Intrigues; the present condition of our Affairs will not permit me to yield all the complaisance that I might otherwise have afforded in meer Diversion; and since I find that Cha-abas looks two ways at once, and that at the same time he makes his Addresses to you, Clori∣neta, I assure you, that you shall find me the most obliging Rival that ever was, and that I will forward your good Fortune as much as I can possible; only I will take the opportu∣nity
of his Addre  both, to make some Dive  and to create some little Mirth ongst our selves. By this time the Sultana being quite undress'd, she went to her Bed, and presently after Clorineta and Monitenna did the like. Clorineta was no sooner retir'd, but that she gave a full Scope to all her Thoughts; She reflected on all that Cha-abas had told her, on the Assignation he had given her, and on that which he had made her promise to give him; all which clearly shew'd, that he perfectly knew her, and on that great Condescention which the Sultana had promis'd to her Amours; from all which she pro∣mis'd to her self a World of Satis∣faction and Content, which made her wish a Thousand times, that she had not been enter'd so far into a Commerce of Gallantry with the Mufti Repset, as there was already
bout it, and to sift the business to the bottom, and find out the Mystery through Clorineta's Maids assistance. As for his clearing him∣self towards his Companion Chi∣lase, having found him as deep in as he was himself, he troubled not much himself about that, and he did rather tend to disclose his A∣mours and Intrigues to Chilase, than to make a Secret of them, if he found him in a Communica∣tive humour. Chilase was much more con∣cern'd, his thoughts were at once agitated with divers things, a∣mongst which, Cha-abas know∣ledge of his having been at the Masking, did not the least trou∣ble him, especially if he had also been inform'd of his Addresses to the Sultana, he wish'd a thousand times he had but some knowledge of the Person that had discover'd him, that he might take his mea∣sures
accordingly; as to the rest, he was so pleas'd with the cour∣teous Answers which he had re∣ceiv'd from the Sultana to all his Courtship, that he was impatient to proceed, and to give her that further account of his Person, which he had promis'd her to do, according to her own desires. As to Repset's knowledge of his ha∣ving been at the Mask, he was much of the same opinion with his Fellow Mufti, with a resolution of informing himself better the next day, and of clearing all doubts and suspicions, he endeavour'd to sleep; but his Fancy was too much elevated with the thoughts of his success in his Addresses to the Sultana, to let him take any rest. While we leave all our Lovers contriving which way is best to bring about their Designs, and of compassing of their ends, it will
not be amiss to give the Reader a further account of the proceedings of Affairs in the Ottoman Empire. Amurat had had the good Fortune to miss the Ottoman Fleet, which lay wait for him, and to land that Ammunition and Men he had both of Persians and Ottomans, which had gone into Persia, and offer'd their Service to him, amongst which but very few, or none at all of the Mahometan Religion. Amurat found soon after his Land∣ing, that he was no longer Em∣perour over Leridan, for presently the Persian Council began to give him Directions in whatsoever he was to do, insomuch that he found he had not so much Power left him, as the meanest Officer in the Army, tho' nothing was yet act∣ed but under his Name and by his supposed Orders. The first thing, was to turn out of the Council all those of the Mahometan Religion,
which had till then sat in that Council, and had stuck stedfast unto Amurat's Interest; the Per∣sians declaring, That they could not joyn in Council with any but the Halists. This was follow'd presently with turning out of their Governments and Places of Trust all the Albanians and Leridonians, of what perswasion soever, and to fill up their places with such Per∣sian Officers, as Cha-abas had sent over to that purpose; and tho' Amurat did intercede in the behalf of some, who had rendred signal pieces of Service, as their Fathers had done before, both to his Father, Brother, and to Him∣self, all was over-rul'd by Cha-abas absolute Command, and the necessity of Affairs requiring it to be so: All this one would have thought had been sufficient to have open'd Amurat's Eyes; but he suffer'd befides all that a world of
indignities, and was so infatua∣ted with the Persians flattering Tongues, that he was not back∣ward (as he had Orders to do) to represent on all occasions in publick the great Love and Care that Cha-abas had for him, and what he had done, and what he would daily do to restore him to his Throne, and to establish the Halist's Religion throughout all his Dominions; at which, while the Persians laught in thei sleeves, Amurat's poor dejected Subjects could not but wonder, and with their sighs, tears, and groans, pity their Emperour's blindness, and bemoan their own miserable and desperate condition, I mean amongst them that had not hearts or opportunities to take up Arms, in their own defence, against so vi∣sible an Usurpation of the Persian Prince, who was bringing them into the same slavery, as his own
Subjects were. But others that had Courage enough to expect a good success from their Arms, and the Justice of their Cause, being clearly convinc'd, that the War they were going to make through their opposition of the Persians, was directly against the designs of Cha-abas, in which their late Em∣perour had no Concern at all. They took up Arms, gather'd to∣gether, made themselves Masters of some strong Holds, which they fortified, got in Provisions against a Siege, and declar'd one and all, that they would stand by one a∣nother, to the last drop of their blood. The little or no resistance which Amurat had found at his Landing, and some time after, did so raise the Hearts of all the Halists in all his Dominions, that the Fortress of Blunid in the Kingdom of Clonstade, whose Governour had required
time to deliver it up, did ut∣terly refuse to perform his promise; on the contrary, being in hopes of some Relief, he fortify'd him∣self in it, and bid defiance unto the Senate of that Kingdom, de∣claring, That he would never part with it, but to Amurat, who had plac'd him in there, and for whom he would preserve it to the last extremity; and divers Halists did arm themselves secretly, and did associate together in small Troops, in hopes of being reinforc'd by Amurat from Leridan, so soon as he should have reduc'd that King∣dom, which they expected he would do in a very short time. News were also sent over into Albania, that Amurat, with some of his Friends Halist, and a nu∣merous Army of Persians was landed in Leridan, had subdued his Enemies, recover'd that King∣dom, banish'd from thence all Ma∣hometans,
and was going with all expedition to do the like in the Kingdom of Clonstad, from whence he would march to them with a Triumphant Army, and restore all his Friends the Halists to their Estates and Employs, destroy wholly the Mahometan Religion, banish all its Abettors, and esta∣blish there the Religion of Hali: they went so far as to prefix a time for Amurat's Return, and in all their Discourses, their Acti∣ons, and in their very Looks, they express'd as much confidence and assurance as could be imagin'd, that all this would infallibly come to pass. Mean time the Grand Senate of the Empire was continually in Consultation how to secure the Mahometan Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Sub∣ject, and the whole Empire from the Persians Usurpation, and all
the Conspiracies of the Halists; they order'd, amongst other things, that all Halists should depart at ten miles distance from the Metro∣polis of the Empire, but they were so puff'd up with the expe∣ctations of their sudden delive∣rance, that they minded it not, and but very few, and them of the most timid amongst them, did observe those Orders. On the other hand, the Confederate Prin∣ces, against Cha-abas unsufferable Pride and Ambition, did daily gain Victories against his Forces, who were forc'd to retreat, and aban∣don all that they had taken a∣gainst their former Treaties and Engagements, but it was not with∣out using all the Violences and Cruelties imaginable, there was nothing to be seen but Fires, Ruines, Desolations, Rapes, Thefts, and Murders in all places that they quitted, not so much as spa∣ring
of Mosquees, nor the Palaces of Princes, and other publick Buildings, which amongst all Na∣tions were ever preserv'd between the most implacable and invete∣rate Enemies. Moreover, Cha-abas call'd the Heathens to come and make di∣versions with their Arms in the Territories of the Confederate Princes, assuring them, that they might do what they pleas'd against them, whilst he would buy off their other Enemies, and with his whole Power keep them in play to∣wards his Frontiers. Thus did that great Pretender of the Extirpation of Heresies, and of the setting up of Hali's Religion, cause the sworn Enemies of the true Mahometan Religion, to destroy with Fire and Sword those who profest his own Religion, which plainly shew'd, that Religion was only a Pre∣tence he made use of, to usurp the
Rights of others, and to render himself absolute Monarch over all that part of the World; a thing which he had long since design'd, and divers times attempted, and for which now all those Confederate Princes of his own Religion, and others of the Mahometan Religion had unanimously agreed to call him to an account, not doubting but that the Great Ala, who knew all his Treacheries, and perfidious Dealings, and Usurpations would bless their Arms and Undertakings, in so just a Cause, against that common Enemy. Things were in this posture, when that Cha-abas having per∣mitted Love for a time to triumph over his insatiated Ambition, was laying close Siege unto the Sultana's Chastity. He dress'd himself with all the advantages that he could possible, to please her Eye; he fram'd the most pathetick Speeches
that he could invent, to charm her Ears; he made her the richest Presents that he could possible do, to please her Pridè and Ambition, and he express'd as great Passions and transports of Love, to gain some returns of the same Nature from her. He sent one of those Mercuries, which I have men∣tion'd, to know of the Sultana, when he should have the Honour to wait on her, and receive her Commands, and at the same time privately to convey into Clori∣neta's Hands a little Note, in which he express'd the continua∣tion, or rather increase of his Pas∣sion, and put her in mind of the Assignation which she had pro∣mis'd to make him. This Messen∣ger was receiv'd by the Sultana with that courteous and affable disposition with which she charm'd all Persons that approach'd her Presence, and bid him tell the Em∣perour,
that no Laws were to be prescrib'd him in his own Empire, where it was but too much ho∣nour for every one to obey especially, by a poor dejected Princess, who had refug'd her self under the Wings of his generous Protection, but that she should be better disposed and more fitted to receive so great an honour, with that respect which she ought to shew to so great and glorious a Mo∣narch, about the Evening, if he plea∣sed to do her so great an honour, and so dismiss'd the Messenger with Civility; who having finish'd his business in publick with the Sul∣tana, made a Complement to Clo∣rineta, who had been present at the delivery of his Message to the Sultana, and who had remain'd behind, when the Sultana had re∣tired, to know whether Cha-abas had retain'd any thoughts of her. The Mercury soon found an op∣portunity
of secretly conveying the amorous Note into Clorineta's hand, who greedily receiving it, told him, that she would take the first opportunity that she could possible to read privately the Contents, and that according as it required, she would send an Answer by an express Messenger. With that the Messenger went his ways, as having finished the business he was came about, and returned to give Cha-abas an ac∣count of his Embassy. Monitenna with a Rival's look, than whose Eyes none are more piercing, had observ'd the deli∣very of the Note, the earnestness with which Clorineta had seis'd it, and the care with which she had conveyed it into her Bo∣som, all this increas'd her rage and whetted her revenge; she did not abandon her Rival one moment all that Day, endear'd
her self as much as she could possi∣ble to her, and seeing her in a pensive humour, ask'd her what she ailed, and whether she could assist her in any thing, and do her service? Yes, answer'd Clo∣rineta, and my dear Monitenna, you may save my Life, or let me loose it, I am in such a condition that I want the assistance of such a friend as you are to help me out of it by your good Counsels and Directions. Let us get in some private place, my Dear, added she, while the Sultana is retir'd, according to her daily custom obout this time, and there I'll lay open my Heart to thee, in hopes that thou wilt be my faithful Friend and Counsellor; with that taking Monitenna by the hand, she led her into her own Appartment. When they were got privately together, here said Clorineta, gi∣ving the Note to Monitenna, read
what the Emperor has writ to me, with that Monitenna opening the Paper, read in it as follows, I Hope that envious Demon of my happiness, which guided the Sultana to disturb our Assignation, will not be so malicious as to give us new cause of Complaint. I shall pay the Sultana a visit this Even∣ing, if you can prefix a time for that happy moment, and convey to me your designs in Writing, I shall be as obedient und diligent in the performance of your Commands, as I am impatient of all delays, defer no longer, giving me some new Assu∣rances of your condescention unto the most passionate desires of him who dies for love of you. What do you think of this? said Clorineta, so soon as Monitenna had made an end of reading, I think, Madam, that there are no Instructions to be given you upon this, he has spoken so plain. 'Tis
true, reply'd Clorineta, but yet there is something that infinitely disturbs my mind. What can di∣sturb the mind of a Person who sees her self belov'd passionately, belov'd by the greatest Monarch in the World, reply'd Monitena; those who he abandons, who he Sacrifices to you, may have cause to complain, but for you, upon whom his love flows beyond bounds or measures—Then Clo∣rineta interrupted her saying; From thence flows my misery also, for on the one hand, I must wrong the best Princess in the World, to whom he also makes his Court at the same time; if I keep the knowledge of it from her, and if I let her know it, I shall incurr her hatred, and his di∣spleasure in betraying him to her But besides all this, I must confess to you that I have gone so far in a commerce of Gallantry with the Mufti Repset, that knowing
how apthe is to be transported with Passion, should he come to the knowledge of my entertain∣ing of any new love, though that of a Prince, he would be apt to break forth into some extrava∣gancy or other, though he should involve himself in my ruine. This is my case dear Monitenna, continued she, and you see how much I stand in need of your Advice in such an intricate business. I am not capable of giving you Counsel in this, I can assure, re∣ply'd Monitenna, and where I in your case my self, I should stand as much in need of Advice as you do at present, which if I could not get, I would then follow my own In∣clinations, and obey my own de∣sires. The love of an Emperor is a great inducement to what I say. You speak very true, reply'd Clorineta, and I do verily believe, that should I discover Cha-abas's love to the Sultana, she would
not be so much concern'd at it, considering how little she regards his to her self, farther than allow∣ing him that respect due to Crown∣ned Heads. Well, my Will is good, I could venture on in giving the Emperour an Assignation, if I could tell where conveniently, and that I could conceal it from the Mufti's knowledge; Where do you think would be the most convenient place, continu'd she? None like one of the Pavillions in the Garden, an∣swer'd Monitenna, after every body is retir'd; there you may have all the freedom imaginable of enter∣taining one another. You say right, reply'd Clarineta; but should Rep∣set at that time come to my Cham∣ber, all hours being alike to him, and he not find me there, nor at the Sultana's, what noise and di∣sturbance would he not make in his Jealousie? I know not, answer'd Monitenna, except you should pre∣tend
you were gone ill to Bed, and had given out, that you would not be disturbed by any Person whatso∣ever. I believe that might do, re∣ply'd Clorineta, if you would be so kind as to give him his Answer, I should do a great deal more for you, reply'd Monitenna, than that comes to; Then will I go write the Assignation for this Night, said Clorineta, and give it to Cha-abas when he comes by and by to visit the Sultana, and then I will dispose my self to go meet him at the place and time appointed, which, I believe, will be most proper betwixt eleven and twelve, for the Sultana retires not till eleven, besides the Mufti seldome comes to me after eleven: I shall rely upon you, continu'd she, to manage the Mufti, in case he should drop in at such an unseasona∣ble time. Fear me not, reply'd Monitenna, as to my part with the Mufti. With that Clorineta setled
her self to writing the Note, and Monitenna went out, leaving her very busie about it. I Make no question but it will be thought ill of Monitenna's play∣ing double with Clorineta, but those Censurers little know what liberty is taken of that Nature, amongst Ri∣vals in Love, if that we daily see, that in Ambition, which is a pas∣sion less blind than that of Love, notwithstanding how Friends, Rela∣tions, Brothers and Sisters, Fathers and Children, nay even Wives and Mistresses, are sacrific'd to the gree∣diness of that devouring Passion; How much more cruelty may be ex∣pected from a Rival in Love? Yet in all that Monitenna acts, there is no mixture of cruelty, there is barely the satisfaction of Revenge on an imperious Rival, who is so im∣prudent as to lay her self open to a Person, of whom common Fame spoke some Intelligence with the Emperour,
which could not have scap'd Clori∣neta's Ears; besides, she did but break her measures, as to the en∣joying part, and made her self sport with raising of Jealousie in the Mufti Repset's bosom towards her Rival, of truth it was too much Vanity in Clorineta to think her Beauty ca∣pable to exclude all other Preten∣ders from their share in Cha-abas Affections. She might have consi∣der'd, that Monitenna's assiduous Services and Cares to Cha-abas, during his late Distemper, might claim as great a share in his Affe∣ctions, as her own Beauty could do; and she ought not to have believ'd all that a Rival may say against her self in such a case, but rather have distrusted that there lay some Train hid under that design to blow her up with, when opportunity should serve; wherefore she was but justly punisht for her imprudence, and want of cir∣cumspection.
Now I come to the two Mufties, Repset had been at Chilase's Apart∣ment, where after divers Discourses, they were so well agreed together, that they had made a resolution to go hand in hand with their A∣mours, with assurances of assisting one another; as to Repset, his Court was already made, he wanted but a Promise from his Rival not to in∣trench upon his Prerogative at any time, now, or hereafter, in case he should come short of his Designs with the Sultana, which had been solemnly sworn to him, but with what resolution to be kept by him, I know not; for it is a Maxim, That all Rivals are to be adjudg'd Here∣ticks in Love, and no body is bound to keep their Faith to Hereticks, according to the blessed Doctrine of the Order of the Mahometists. Repset was satisfied with his Clori∣neta, and Chilase had writ a Letter to the Sultana, to intreat of her the
favour which she had promiss'd at the making of an Assignation, which Letter Repset had engag'd Clorineta should deliver to the Sultana, without knowing from whence it came. Upon these as∣surances of Friendship one to ano∣ther, they had parted, but could never find out, nor so much as come near suspecting of the true Person that had given them no∣tice of their being discover'd, and hearing no more of it, they rested very well contented, not questio∣ning but that they should have heard more of it e're then, if there had been any further design in it, than giving them a false Alarm. The Emperour, 'tis true, had made some reflexions on the Confidence of the two Mufties his Rivals, which at first had put him upon a further search into the business, to have known their Names; but not knowing to whom to address
himself for further intelligence, and on the other hand, being rest∣less in his new Amours, this last had put out of his mind all thoughts of the first. Monitenna thought she had In∣telligence sufficient from her Rival, to give her the opportunity to serve her a Trick, and all under one to serve her own turn; she writ a Letter in a strange Cha∣racter to Repset, which she caus'd to be convey'd to him by a strange Hand, in which she gave him no∣tice, that if he would prevent Clo∣rineta from going to an Assigna∣tion that Night at eleven of the Clock, which she had given to a Rival of his, he would do well to come to her about ten of the Clock that Evening, and not to stir from her till the Hour was over, that he should be convinc'd of the reality of the business by the uneasiness and restlesness that he should find her in, and that if
he let her know that he had had some Intelligence of her Designs, it would disenable the Informer from ever more doing him such another piece of Service. The Mufti did receive the Note, and promis'd to himself to be with his Mistress early enough to spoil her Sport for that time, and to ob∣serve her exactly. At last the Hour was come, in which Cha-abas was to make his Visit to the Sultana, he was dres∣sed to the greatest advantage ima∣ginable, and had prepar'd himself to speak his mind throughly to her, and to learn from her mouth what he might expect of return: He enters the Sultana's Chamber, she who was resolv'd to give him a positive Answer, goes to meet him; Madam, says Cha-abas, pre∣suming upon that Goodness which I believe to be in you in as great a Splendour, as all the rest of your
Perfections, I come to lay my life at your feet, expecting from your breath my Sentence to live or die. With that he put one knee on the sloor. Sir, said she to him again, making an offer to raise him, If your life or death were at my disposal, you might be sure to be absolute Master of both, for I should instantly resign unto you that Power so justly due to you alone under the Heavens. Live, Great Sir, con∣tinu'd she, live to reflect on the unworthiness of that Person, in whose power you would deposite so great a Treasure. 'Las! what is life, Ma∣dam, answer'd Cha-abas, if it is not bless'd with your allowance; and who can see you, and not desire above life, above all, to have a share in your Affections? No, Madam, it is far better to die than to live, and not have some hopes of being one day bless'd with your Love: The Hea∣vens that have made you so admi∣rable,
so charming, so much to be belov'd by all that see you with dis∣cernment, cannot have made you so cruel, as to take no better advan∣tage of all your Perfections, than to strike Admiration and Love in peo∣ple, and then to let them perish in their Love, without the least grain of pity or commiseration, for those suffer∣ings which your Beauty does occasion. The same Heavens, Great Sir, an∣swer'd the Sultana, have design'd me from the very beginning for Amu∣rat, I have given him all that he had Right to claim of me, and I have left nothing at my own disposal, in the o∣pinion that I had no body else to please or gratifie but him. You see, Sir, that by that gift I am no more my own, and that if you require any thing from me beyond that Respect and Honour which I ought to have for the greatest Prince of the World, it is to Amurat, and not to me, that you ought to address your self: I
now do but keep for him, and wear about me for his use, whatever I once could call my own. Yet, Madam, an∣swer'd the Emperor, some pity may be allow'd unto the miserable, and Amurat be no Loser by it; you may command my Empire, I will imme∣diately beg on my bare knees a Peace from my Enemies, and bend instant∣ly all my Forces against his Enemies, if you but consent to it, nay I will head them my self, and lead them on through the thickest of your Rebels, if my Services may be but receiv'd. I will not only receive your Servi∣ces, answer'd the Sultana, but your Commands also, if I can be so happy as to oblige you in either, Sir, with∣out too great a force on my inclina∣tions; and here I declare, Sir, that next to Amurat, you may claim the greatest share in my Esteem and Re∣spects. That is no more yet, reply'd the Emperour, than what you would mo∣destly allow to any person that would
but in the least measure deserve it, and beg it of you, but not one grain of Love, Madam. Yes, Sir, reply'd the Sultana, I love, nay I adore your Vir∣tues, and amongst them that Noble Zeal, which has made you not to spare your own Subjects, but sacri∣fic'd them to your just resentments, in their disobedience of your Commands, to abandon their Heretical Religion to cleave to yours: But as to Love, besides, Sir, that my natural incli∣nations and disposition lead me quite another way, whether through infir∣mity of body, or prepossession of mind by other more powerful motives, I find at this present, that it will ve∣ry ill answer the condition that both Amurat and I am in, and the sad circumstances that we groan under, which are Causes that should pro∣duce care, sorrow, and fretfulness, rather than Love and a gay Hu∣mour. In a word, Sir, your Person is most acceptable, your Wit, Cou∣rage,
Courtesie, Obligingness, and all other Ornaments are without ex∣ception, and worthy to be admir'd by all the World. They may, nay they do stir up an admiration and high esteem for you in all persons, that are capable to judge of your Excellencies; but you must excuse me, if they cannot incite Love in a Bosom that is not capable of any. The more miserable Wretch I am, Madam, and peradventure it is that I am come too late, continu'd he, after some more happy Rival; and— he was going on, when the Sul∣tana thus interrupted him; Sir, whenever you see, or are by any cir∣cumstance imaginable, convinc'd of my yielding to another what I be∣lieve no Monarch in the World would better merit than your self, except the Ottoman Emperour; do not then only tax me with all the Evils that could taint a virtuous Soul, but loath and detest me as
the worst of my Sex; but till then let me humbly beg of you to harbour a better opinion of me, and to be∣lieve, that I have for you all the respect, honour, and esteem that can be produc'd in a generous and grate∣ful Spirit, by all the Endearments, and all the rare Qualities and Vir∣tues that can be imagin'd. Well, Madam, I will not insist any longer, reply'd he, on a business that is not pleasing to your Ears, at this pre∣sent especially, but will live in hopes, that by my most assiduous Services, my indefatigable diligence and my matchless Love, I shall in time produce in you that Love which you will not own to have, which I so passionately desire to find in your Bosom, and without which I shall ever remain the most miserable Prince in the World. He had much to do to get time to end these words, by reason of Company, which he saw at distance coming
to visit the Sultana, which pre∣vented her also from giving him any other Answer, than, Well, Sir, agreed, let us leave all to time. With that the Sultana arose, and receiv'd the Company, which pro∣duc'd an agreeable Diversion, in which Cha-abas had a part, tho' not long; for his repulse by the Sultana did but whet him the more in his application to Clori∣neta, to whom he gave the op∣portunity to convey her thoughts in writing to him, and stay'd not long after, that he might not give the least suspicion that could be to the Sultana, and to gratifie his amorous Curiosity and desires, which rendred him very impati∣ent to learn the success of his A∣mours with that Mistress, he re∣tired then, and read in that Note what follows.
IT is no small Tryal, Great Sir, that you put upon my Spirits, to try how well they could bear all the happiness they are capable of at once, and yet keep within their bounds; yes certainly, Sir, the Ho∣nour you do me in your last Com∣mands, has so much exasperated my mind, that I wanted something to allay its happiness, which I have found, in the very thoughts, of what misery I should be plunged in, by such another disappointment unto the longing desires of one that is so whol∣ly yours, as is Clorineta; you will find that Person betwixt eleven and twelve in the same Pavillion, in which she first had the Honour to learn, that so great a Monarch was pleas'd to look down on somean a Person, who waits for that happy moment with all the Love and im∣patience imaginable.
There needed no more to set Cha-abas heart all on fire, he thought the time very long till the hour was come, and did all he could to divert himself till then. The Mufti Repset having recei∣ved the Information, which Mo∣nitenna had given him, tho' he knew not from whom, did think it of that concern, as was not to be neglected; wherefore before the hour of ten he came to Clori∣neta's Lodgings, where he found her and her Woman exceeding bu∣sie in setting of her forth with all the advantage that Art could lend to kind Nature's gifts; but in what a surprise was she when she perceiv'd him come into her Cham∣ber? She had given Order, that he should be told she was not well, and retired to rest, with a desire not to be disturb'd; but a Person, like the Mufti, who had made bold to intrude, formerly on the
Sultana's retiredness, was not to be put by on his Mistresses's ac∣count. He therefore giving no ear to what was told him, being spurr'd on with some sparks of Jea∣lousie, which the Information had stirr'd up in him, he entred, and found Clorineta as busie as a Bride on her Wedding day, who, you may imagine, was strangely dis∣consoled at the Apparition. Is this the sick Idy, said the Mufti, looking earnestly on Clorineta; Yes, answer'd sh, and had you stay'd but two minutes longer, you had found  Bed, from which I have been diverted but some few moments to try these things which the Taylor and Tire-woman have brought me, that they may mend the faults out of hand. I am sorry, Madam, to learn that you are ill, tho' I hope not with much danger, and I am much of your mind, that the Bed may contribute much to your reco∣very;
to which purpose I will retire for some time in the next room, to give you the liberty of going to your Bed, where, Madam, I will come and read by you to divert you, as I use to do. For you must know, that one of the pretences for the Mufti's coming at any hour into Clorineta's Chamber, which pass'd currant with all her Servants, but one particular Favourite, who was privy to their amorous Intrigue, was his pretend∣ing to bring her the News and In∣telligences from Leridan, where her Husband was Bassa, to read them to her, and to consult with her a∣bout those concerns, and sometimes also to read new Pieces that were curious and witty. Clorineta hear∣ing his Design, was almost distra∣cted at his resolution, and said, That truly her head did so ake, that reading would but the more discom∣pose her, and that she desired no∣thing but silence and darkness. How,
Madam, does your head ake so vio∣lently? then there is more danger than I apprehended. Pray, Madam, let me feel your Pulse, you know that I have some skill in Physick, and continu'd he, holding of her Arm, I find indeed so great a disturbance, and such an agitation of Spirits, that my care of your Welfare will not permit me to go from you, till you have had some two or three hours sleep, after which I shall be able to judge, whether Nature will be so kind as to overcome the distem∣per without the assistance of cooling Julips or Bleeding, or whether we must flie to Remedies for aid. Go, Madam, continu'd he, hasten to your rest, I find you want it much, and I will not detain you any longer from it. Clorineta believing that he was now going his way, was overjoy'd within her self at the good success of her feigned illness, when her flash of Joy was im∣mediately
extinct, by the ad∣dition which the Mufti made of his going into the next room, where he would wait till she was in Bed, would once again feel her Pulse, after that he would stay in the next room for her awaking, that he might not disturb her with any noise, and then he would see what alteration her repose had made in her, and whether for better or for worse. With that he retired without speaking a word more, nor hearing her, and sat himself down in the Anticham∣ber. He was no sooner gone out of one door, but that she caus'd it to be made fast within side, and she sent to desire Monitenna to come to her by another door, unto whom she told all her Grievances, and ask'd her what she should do; I know not now, reply'd Moniten∣na, but you should have given order
sooner of having no body admitted to you, and you should have kept your self lock'd up in your own Cham∣ber; and he would have stay'd, re∣ply'd Clorineta, and waited all night, as you see he will now, before he had retired without seeing me; Then there should he have waited, said Monitenna, while you might have convey'd your self to the Ren∣dezvous another way. But what is to be done now? reply'd Clorineta, I am ruin'd, undone for ever, I am the miserablest Wretch in Nature, I will dress my self and be gone, and leave him waiting where he is, till he is weary. Consider, Madam, the inconveniencies that will attend that, you know his hasty Temper, that he will see you in Bed, and then wait till you have slept, his impatience will never let him rest an hour without coming to see whe∣ther you repose, and feel your Pulse, of he is denied entrance, that will
but raise his Jealousie, which will make him ten thousand times more restless, and uneasie, and what he may not do when his passions are up, you may imagine. Heavens, what shall I do then? reply'd Clorine∣ta, I shall die, I shall perish, I shall not live till morning, assist me with your counsel, or I shall run distracted. All that I can tell you, said Mo∣nitenna, is, that you must rest sa∣tisfied. What, and leave the Em∣perour waiting in vain, reply'd Clo∣rineta in a passion, that must not be, I had rather hazard all, and endure all that the Mufti's rage can suggest him to do, than fail of meeting Cha-abas at the time and hour: You do not consider, reply'd Monitenna, that there wants not above half an hour, and that it is impossible you should be dress'd by that time, and get thither, by the Mufti's amusing you so long. I'le run stark naked rather than fail
him, reply'd passionately Clorineta. Do what you please, said Monitenna, but—but what, good now, reply'd hastily Clorineta? I say, that if I was in your case, reply'd Monitenna, I would resolve to send some person to him, with some great excuse, which should express the sorrow that you are in for the disappointment: Well, I think I must do so, and if you would take that trouble upon you, for I have no body else that I durst confide in, you will infinitely oblige me, he will not know you in the dark, tell him that—tell him what you please; your mind being less troubled than mine is at present, you may better frame an excuse than I can my self. Pray lose no time, remember the Nature of the Busi∣ness, and act accordingly in it, I will go to Bed, which in the per∣plexity and disturbance of mind I am in, is the fittest place for me, since I cannot go where I would, you
may safely say, it was a sudden Fit of Sickness surpriz'd me; and I believe that it will be so in earnest by morning. I will not de∣tain you any longer; I will retire. With that she prepar'd her self for Bed. Monitenna was ravish'd to see her Plots succeed so well; she knowing before hand to what she should bring that business, had dress'd her self to all the advantage she could possible, and wanted but some little addition to her Head, to fit her to personate Clorineta, with the Emperour, as she had projected to do. She made all the haste i∣maginable to fit her self to the pur∣pose she was going about, and set forth for the Adventure: She came into the Garden by the help of the Sultana's Key, which Clorineta had secur'd before hand for her purpose, and address'd her steps to the Pa∣villion, where she was not long
before Cha-abas came. He pre∣sently run to her, and flung him∣self about her Neck with the great∣est transport imaginable. And is Fortune so kind at last, said he, as to bring me into the Arms of that Person that I so much prize above the World? Monitenna, who all this while had not had time to speak, reply'd, You mistake the Person, Sir, I believe, and forget who you were to meet. Not in the least, dear Ma∣dam, reply'd Cha-abas, I know that the Sultana is at this time retir'd to divert her self with her sullen Humour, and that I have now the happiness to possess that towards which my Heart has the greatest ten∣dency, there being more of Gallantry and Respect in its application to the Sultana, than Love, which I bring intirely to the most charming Clori∣neta. Still you may mistake, Sir, said Monitenna, for I find you spake not those things which you intend to
me; and I fear very much that your Heart and your Tongue go not toge∣ther. Think, Sir, better before you speak, and go not on so fast to ruin a poor credulous creature that has but too much trusted in your fair Words: I am not the first, it may be, that has been too credulous, and I believe would wish themselves now in my place. But few, Madam, can pretend to that Happiness, I assure you, reply'd he, and none to such a share in my Love as my dear Clori∣neta. Yes, you will except Moni∣tenna, doubtless, reply'd Moniten∣na. Monitenna, reply'd the Em∣perour, in a scornful Tone! Alas, poor creature, she has deserv'd much, I must confess, by her assiduous care in my late illness, and I have, and will still more reward her for her dili∣gence, which I must confess was ex∣traordinary; but—But she loves you, I dare say, reply'd Monitenna hastily; and it was that Love of
hers which made her do for you what you might not expect from any other Person that had not been mov'd by Love: And doubtless you have given her some hopes of Return in the same Nature, or— There Cha-abas in∣terrupted her in his turn, saying, I might encourage her, 'tis likely, with some such hopes, to continue her in the same Humour of assisting me as she had done: But what is that to Love? Nay, what is that to you, to me, to our present concerns, dear Madam? Let us lose no longer time in things that so little concern our present business; let us enjoy our selves while we may—Saying of this he began to be a little more busie with his Hands than he had been; but finding that there was no Reply, nor so much as the least resistance made, that the Lady was fallen forwards on him, her Arms ex∣tended downwards, and without Motion, it made him desist from
the Labour of his Hands, to look after her: He lifted her up, which motion bringing poor Monitenna to her self again from the Swoon that his Cruel Expressions had put her in: Oh! cruel Prince, said she, giving a great sigh, and most un∣fortunate Monitenna! With that she return'd into a fainting Fit a∣gain, which gave time to Cha-abas to consider more exactly who it was, by the aid of the Moon, which had risen since their meet∣ing, than he had done before in the dark. He saw plainly his mistake, and was doubtless troubled at what he had done; but he was no less struck with wonder at Monitenna's supplying of Clorineta's Room: He did all he could to bring her to life again; He laid her down on the Seats that were in the place, and run to the Fountain that was not far, and brought from thence Wa∣ter in his Hat, which he flung in
her Face: At last he did so much, that the poor afflicted Monitenna came to her self again, and fetch∣ing a deep sigh, and looking sted∣fastly on the Emperour, Oh! do not, Sir, said she, take so much pains on a Person that is so unworthy of it; Reserve those Labours for more hap∣py Persons: And since that the mi∣serable Monitenna has no hopes left of obtaining the Effects of those vain Promises in which she so unfortunate∣ly put too much confidence: Be not so doubly cruel, as first to kill her, and then not to let her die. My dear Monitenna, reply'd Cha-abas, be∣lieve that I have a share of Love for you also, and let me intreat you to attibute my Failings to that Li∣berty that we Men have given our selves of courting all New Faces: Sometimes it may be, when we lose by the change, and are invited to it meerly by Novelty: You know, dear Monitenna, that we are Nature's
Children, and that we love to follow the steps of that dear Mother, who her self is delighted with Variety: I love thee, I protest I do, and shall give thee further Demonstrations of it whene're thou pleasest. We are both mistaken, continued he, it is true, I did not think to find thee here; I confess that I had appointed to meet the Lady Clorineta, but how she has fail'd, and you come in her Room, is a wonder to me. You are mistaken in her, Sir, answer'd Monitenna, who was a little come to her self, she has other Assignati∣ons, other Amours to manage besides yours; she loves Variety as well as you say you do, Sir, continued she; and it was the entertaining of ano∣ther Lover, which she prefers to you, that made her desire me to supply her place, and to tell you, that some sudden Distemper has been the cause of her disappointing you. And does she prefer any man to me? reply'd
the Emperour in an huffing tone, Is she so weak as to forget who I am? and can she please her self in any others company better than in mine? Then let her go, I will no longer think her worthy of my thoughts, I will leave her to associ∣ate with Persons more suitable to the lowness of her mind; she does not merit the Love of a Monarch, that can prefer a meaner Person to his Favours. But as for that Person who she prefers to me, I will banish him out of my Empire; none shall find protection in it, that shall have dar'd to lift up his thoughts where there might be but the least suspicion imaginable that I design'd: Let me but know that insolent Varlet, and I shall soon break his measures. Great Prince, reply'd Monitenna, know that the Person is not worth your Anger, no more than she for prefer∣ing a mean pitiful Mufti before the greatest Monarch in the World: Let
them alone for the present, Sir, and I engage to you, that in some few days I shall not only bring you to surprise Clorineta and her Lover to∣gether, but also shew you another Scene at the same time and place, betwixt another Mufti and the Sul∣tana, how reserv'd soever she car∣ries it towards you. How! ano∣ther Mufti, reply'd Cha-abas, as surprised, has the Devils set loose all the Mufties in the World to op∣pose and thwart me in my Amours. Must so great and mighty a Prince as I am, be baffled in his Enterpri∣ses by so mean a thing as a Mufti? I shall make such Examples of them as shall for ever deter all such Black Coats from casting but an Eye on any Object that I deign to favour with my liking: And as to you, my dear Monitenna, here is my Hand, that for the future I shall have you in greater Esteem than ever, and you shall be sensible henceforth both of
my Bounty and Love: Build upon it, as on a sure Foundation that shall ne∣ver fail you. Monitenna remain∣ing still very much disorder'd by her late disturbance, return'd hum∣ble Thanks to Cha-abas, and as∣sur'd him, That she would endea∣vour by all means imaginable to deserve in part his Favours, though she could never pretend to merit so much Honour: She told him moreover, That she fear'd her late Disorders might bring some Fits upon her, which she would en∣deavour to intercept, if she could come to some Remedies which she had in her Closet against such Di∣stempers. Upon this Cha-abas ta∣king of her by the Hand, gave her a Kiss, as a Pledge of what he had promis'd her, and saying, That seeing she still continu'd ill, he would not detain her any longer from her Rest, and would put off to another time giving of her
more ample Proofs of his Love. With that he led her to the Garden Door which answer'd to her A∣partment, where, for fear of be∣ing discovered, he parted with her. Monitenna was not a little pleas'd with her self for having so much disgusted the Emperour of his Two New Mistresses, and in∣gratiated her self into his Favour again: She resolv'd to manage it, and to gain him wholly to her; wherefore she pursu'd her Design, in rendering the Sultana and Clori∣neta as suspected to the Emperour as could be, not making any scru∣ple at all to undermine those Per∣sons who had insinuated themselves into Cha-abas's Affections, to her prejudice, and who, as she thought, had encroached on her Preroga∣tives, which she laid claim to by Precedency. She enquir'd at her return after Clorineta's Health; it
was told her, That she had conti∣nu'd in Bed ever since, without Sleep; that the Mufti had fre∣quently visited her, and was still attending in the Withdrawing-Room; and that she had frequent∣ly ask'd after her, and order'd, that she should be brought to her so soon as she return'd; that made Monitenna to hasten to Clorineta's Chamber, where going to her Bed-side, she gave her such an account of her Transaction with Cha-abas, as she thought fit, to put her nei∣ther in extraordinary Hopes or De∣spair: She could not stay long with her; for the Mufti, who had been a whole half hour without seeing her, could hold out no long∣er, and was demanding admissi∣on; So that as Monitenna was go∣ing out at one Door, for fear of creating more Jealousies in his Head, the Mufti came in by the other. Well, Madam, said he to
Clorineta, how do you find your self now, taking her by the Arm? Truly the worse for you, replyed she; for you will not let me sleep, but are continually disturbing me when I fall into slumbers, which strangely discomposes me. Well, Madam, I hope that you will be so just, as to attribute it to my care of your health, and my Zeal in your Service: And since I find, that there is no increase of Fever, now that it is towards day, I will leave you wholly to your rest, which I shall pray may be sweet and com∣fortable to you. I shall visit you again when I think you have suffi∣ciently repos'd, with hopes to find you quite recover'd: mean time, I am your humble Servant. With that he took his leave of Clori∣neta, and went his way, not doubting but that he had broke the Assignation for that time; and he set himself on thinking how he
should secure her wholly to him∣self for the future. Cha-abas, for his part, was strangely alter'd in his Mind, since the Information which Mo∣nitenna had given him of Clori∣neta's Plurality of Lovers: She did not concern him so much, peradventure, not thinking her any longer worthy of his Esteem, after the prefering of a Mufti to him: But more particularly was he troubled at the Insolency of that Mufti, that durst aspire to the Sultana's Favour, who he could not beat out of his Head, but 'twas Repset; and not well knowing who the other Mufti could be, he was still apt to fall into the Opinion, that it was the same Person who made Love to both his Mistresses, at the same time. This he imprinted so well in his Imagination, that nothing could beat it out, no, not his re∣flecting
on what Monitenna had told him, of bringing him to surprize both his Rivals at once: He thought that she meant, that he should see Repset courting of both his Mistresses presently after one another; or that he had not well understood her: But still his Mind was entirely bent on the belief, that Repset was the only op∣position which he found in his Amours, which made him take the Resolution to watch him close, to examine all his Actions, every step that he made, and what Com∣pany he kept all the day long, by such trusty Persons as should give him full Information of all that he desired to know; and in that Resolution to set some Persons about it that very day, he went to rest. Mufti Chilase having by this time taken all his measures and precautions in his further Addres∣ses
to the Sultana, had writ a Let∣ter, in which he did give her a further account of his Person: He got a trusty Messenger to con∣vey it to Repset's Hands, who had promis'd him to give it to Clorine∣ta, who should present it to the Sultana, not knowing from whom it came: So that Repset carried it along with him when he return'd that same day to give a Visit to Clorineta, which was towards E∣vening. After he had entertain'd her a while, he took his leave of her, to go about a Business of high Concern, intreating her to deliver that Letter which he gave her in∣to the Sultana's own Hand, with∣out any enquiry after the Au∣thor; which she having promis'd to do, he went his way, and she not long after waited on the Sul∣tana, unto whom having deliver'd that Letter, without a Name, the Sultana had the Curiosity to read in it as follows:
THat vast disproportion that is betwixt your Greatness and my Ʋnworthiness, Great Prin∣cess, would leave me nothing to say for my self, had I not been assur'd from your own mouth, at the Mask∣ing, That my most humble Addres∣ses, should not be wholly rejected: But not daring to approach too near the splendor of your Soveraignty, without being shrouded under the favourable Veil of your Permission, for fear of burning the Wings of my Ambition, and casting my self into eternal misery, I have presum'd, not without trembling, to address my self to your affable Goodness, most Adorable Princess, by the media∣tion of these Lines, to humbly re∣present to your commiseration, to what an height of Love and Ambi∣tion my Heart is risen, through your singular Bounty and Permission; that Heart and Mind, Madam, so
disproportionable to the meanness of my Birth, when compar'd to your Il∣lustrious Self. Give me leave to be∣lieve, Madam, that such an aspi∣ring mind, must be other than of the common stamp; and it creates in me some thoughts, that through some mistake in Nature, my mind was de∣sign'd for some body of a more No∣ble Blood than that which contains it now; or that my mother, resol∣ving to have a child answerable to her Ambition, might be endowed with so much Beauty, and other En∣gagements, as to invite some Person of a Noble Birth, to satisfie there∣in her Towring Desires. How durst I else, most Illustrious Sultana, raise my thoughts to that height, in which the Heavens and Nature have plac'd you above the rest of the World? Deign, most charming Empress, to entertain some favourable thoughts, as I endeavour to insinuate into your mind, of an Heart so much ravish'd
with the consideration of your match∣less Perfections, and permit your Slave to appear in your Presence, with all the Submission and Respect that he is capable to express; and be assur'd, Madam, that there is no Attempt nor Enterprize so diffi∣cult, that I would not undertake at your command, with confidence, that the merit of the cause of my acting, and the vigour of all my Faculties in so glorious a cause, would be suffici∣ent to carry me through all difficulties in which I were led on by your com∣mands. When I consider, high and mighty Princess, the boldness of my Attempt, that Heart that dares all to render himself worthy of your E∣steem, trembles, and dissolves in my Breast: Encourage it, Great Prin∣cess, to go and throw it self at your Feet by your commands, which by the same Hand that has presented you this, may be convey'd unto the meanest of your Adorers, but the
greatest Admirer of your Perfecti∣ons, and the most Passionate of all your Lovers. The Sultana was no less surpris'd at the Presumption of the Person, whom she was inform'd was of low Birth, as she was at the Od∣ness of the Style and Expressions: She guess'd, that it could not come but from that Person who had so earnestly solicited her at the Masking, for an Interview, which was quite out of her Mind, as having never design'd any fur∣ther Conversation or Correspon∣dency with any one, beyond the Limits of that Night. She re∣solv'd to see how far this Insolence would go; wherefore she desired Clorineta to assist her in it, in wri∣ting Two Words to that Person, in which she should give him notice of a Time and Place for an Inter∣view, where she her self should per∣sonate
the Sultana, and under her Name meet him, and make sport with him: Which Clorineta ha∣ving undertaken to do, she re∣tired to write, that it might be ready against Mufti Repset's next Visit. Here let us leave our Lovers once again, to return to the Hi∣storical part of our Novel. A∣murat was not long before he found, that those Forces which he had brought over with him, nor those which he had found in Leridan, would answer his De∣signs: It was signified to Cha-abas, who order'd some Recruits to be sent over, with a Con∣voy, who had the good For∣tune not to meet with the Ot∣toman Fleet, but after they were got into an Harbour, and had discharg'd their Lading. They were no sooner espy'd, but
that they made towards them with all the Sails they had, as well as the Wind would permit them, and some few of their Vessels fell upon the Persians, the rest of their Fleet not being able to come up, or at least pretending so; for it was shrewdly suspected, that some Persian Gold had in∣fected some of the Officers, and had so infatuated them, as to make them forget to add Bullets to that Powder which they shot against the Persian Fleet. How∣ever, those few of the Ottoman Fleet which engag'd, did so well behave themselves, that the Per∣sians, though Six or Eight to One, had nothing to boast of but Blows. They retired on their own Coasts, and into their own Harbours: The Seas were extreamly pester'd with Persian Privateers, which would do mischief to some pri∣vate Merchant Men; and on
both sides there were daily some Vessels taken. But that was not to last; the Conjuncti∣on of the Two Fleets of Hal∣don and of the Ottoman Empire, which was to be very suddenly, would soon put an end to all those little Pickroons, strike Ter∣ror to all its Enemies, and even make the Ocean to groan under their pressure. That Re-enforcement being thus arriv'd at Leridan, Amurat having joyn'd it to the rest of his Forces, he attempted to re∣duce a strong place in that King∣dom, call'd Lynderodon, in which a very considerable Number of the poor persecuted Mohometans were refuged with store of Pro∣vision, and a firm Resolution to defend themselves in it to the last Man.
That oblig'd Amurat to send from Blunid, the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Leridan, some Forces to besiege Lynderodon. The Besieged made a brave resistance, and in many Sallies got a great deal of Booty, so that they found themselves provided with suffici∣ency of all things to endure a long Siege, not doubting but that before they were forc'd to yield to their Enemies, they should re∣ceive some considerable Succour from Albiona: In the mean time the Persians, that had come over with Amurat to that Expedition, began to play their Golden En∣gines, which had never fail'd them yet, and with which all their Treacherous Conquests have been bought; for it was never known yet, that they ever got a pitcht Battel fairly fought, especially a∣gainst the Turks. But their Gol∣den Battery having made so much
noise, that it had come to the knowledge of the Besieged, they seiz'd on their Governour, and imprison'd him, in order to Exa∣mination, and of making a woful Example of Him for his Treache∣ry, but he made a shift to escape that punishment which he had deserv'd. They made Choice of a new Governour, to whom by his desires they associated another, by which that City was secur'd, and bravely defended from the Rage and Fury of all those Per∣sians, Halists, and those of the Country; who had sworn not to spare Women nor Children, if they should take it by force; which had been the same case, tho' it had yielded upon Composition; for all those other poor people that in other places had yielded them∣selves up upon Composition and Promises confirm'd by Oaths, that they should not be molested, were
all destroy'd  and put to the Sword in cold blood, by the in∣stigations of  bloody Priests of the Sect of Hly; who would not permit any of their Religion to give Quarter to any of the true Mahometans, declaring▪ That who∣ever did keep his Faith to any Hereticks, as they call the true Mahometans, were worse than Dogs, and should be eternally damn'd without Redemption. Thus went things in Leridan, while that divers small Parties did rise in Clonstad through the instigation of some Halists that still did hold for Amurat, and who had receiv'd private Letters from him, that he would sudden∣ly come over to their aid and assistance, with a formidable Ar∣my of Persians and Leridanians, so soon as he had subdu'd those Rebels, that had retired and for∣tified themselves in Lynderodon.
But those Parties were daily bea∣ten and dispers'd, there was no∣thing but the Castle of the Me∣tropolis of that Kingdom which held out still for Amurat, which caus'd the Senate of that King∣dom to declare the Bassa that held it, and all his Adherents Traitors; for as to the Mountaneers, they had been routed, dispersed, and driven to take Sanctuary in their own wild part of that Kingdom, whence they had first descended. Albiona all this while being secure within it self, notwithstanding all the Intrigues and Plots of the Ha∣lists, which still remain'd in Con∣stantinople, notwithstanding all the Orders that had issued out for them to retire at ten miles distance from that great City, which was obey'd but by a very small number of them, it did daily send Forces to the Frontiers of Clonstad, and to other places to be ready to embark for
Leridan, with the first opportu∣nity, to go and assist there their distressed Brethren, and joyn with those brave men that so stoutly oppos'd and withstood all the Forces that Amurat and Cha-abas had in that Kingdom. The Mufti Repset, after his u∣sual manner, came to render his Mistress a Visit, as much to satis∣fie his Jealousie, as to enquire af∣ter her Health, she gave him the Answer to Chilase's Letter, and did not enquire after the Person; after he had been a while with her, he left her to carry that An∣swer to his Friend Chilase, in which he doubted not but he should highly oblige him: He found him, deliver'd him the Letter, and read in it what follows. THE obligation which I have of keeping my word, with that respect you shew in your submissive
Letter, has invited me to let you know, that to morrow in the Eve∣ning about ten of the clock I shall be at the Grotto, at the further end of the great Walk. Make the best use you can of this information. I am the most happy man in the World, cry'd he aloud as soon as he had read the Letter, I am made for ever, I shall run beyond my self for Joy; Oh, for some allay to those Joys, that otherwise will transport me beyond Recovery. See, my dear Friend, continu'd he, giving the Note to Repset to read, behold my Happiness. With that he walk'd hastily up and down the Room, set himself down, hastily rising up again, then he would jump, and make such loud Exclamations of Joy, that it very much imita∣ted a man that was transported with an unruly Passion. Repset having read the Paper, What
think you, said Chilase to him? That I guess right, answer'd he again, and that you are half Seas over already in this Intrigue, all the difficulty in it, that I can per∣ceive, is to get to the Rendezvous without being perceiv'd; for you must be as tender of her Honour as of your Life. Let me see this Note once again, continu'd he, looking on the Paper, this is not the Sul∣tana's hand, which I know very well, and this Writing I am acquainted with also, though I cannot call it to mind presently. This made Chilase to hearken a little, and to stand still; which being perceiv'd by Repset, and that it answer'd his Expectation: I would advise you, continu'd he, to be very circum∣spect in this business, and to weigh every circumstance of it before you embark in it too far, consider before you leap, and endeavour to avoid all surprises. What if this should
be to bring you into an Ambuscade, where in lieu of meeting with a Sultana, you should feel the weight of some thing else on your shoulders, or a worse Entertain ; great Persons think they may  hing. This Advice did  allay Chilase's Transport, he   to think; Why, said he to pset, do you think that there may be n∣ger in it? I know not reply'd Rep∣set, it is as things may happen, Women have humours, and most commonly they are guided by that which predominates, especially a∣mongst such persons as are, or at least think themselves not liable to give any account of their Actions in such cases; to gratifie their Passions, a mans life is no more than that of a Fly, they need but say the word, and it is done. Why all this is true, reply'd Chilase, whose Cou∣rage Repset had strangely allay'd by these learned Cautions, he began
to ask him his Advice in that Case; I know not what to advise you, reply'd Repset, this business is like all others, the greater the danger, the greater the Honour: But how∣ever, if I was in your place, I would not go in a Clergie-dress, I would try my Fortune like a Cour∣tier, or like a Souldier, that in case any disaster should happen, I might not be oblig'd to scandalize the Church. Besides, at the first interview to appear in your own Habit, might breed contempt, tho' after some time, and that you were both agreed upon the matter, then you might plainly discover your self. All these Reasons are very weighty, reply'd the other Mufti, and I in∣cline very much to follow them, for which I give you many thanks, and I will instantly go about to procure such a Dress, as shall make me an absolute Cavaleer, Hat and Fea∣thers, Sword and Wigg shall not
be wanting: I must think of some pretences to borrow all these things, and fit me from head to foot against the happy hour. I'le leave you, reply'd Repset, to your business, and wish you good success in it. With that they parted. Repset was agitated betwixt two troublesom Passions, Envy and Jealousie, which made him take the resolution to spoil Chilase's Sport; sometimes he was raging mad with Envy, to think that after all he had done towards the Sultana, to get to that pass, which Chilase had so easily attain∣ed to, all to no effect, which hap∣py success in another he could not brook; another time, he fancy∣ing the Writing to be Clorineta's, that stirr'd up Jealousie in him, believing that the Sultana despi∣sing the Address, Clorineta had been glad to take the opportunity of her refuse, to personate her,
and to enjoy that which the other slighted; eitherwise did put him upon mischief, which he was re∣solv'd to act with a witness. To that purpose, when it drew near the hour of the Assignation, he under-hand enquired, whether the Sultana did design to stir out that Evening? And he had Intelligence that she was indispos'd, and had been all the day, and design'd to go to her Bed; that information, cur'd him of his Envy; but then it increas'd his Jealousie, not doubt∣ing now but that Clorineta had a mind to know whether all Muf∣ties were alike, the rather too, be∣cause he had been inform'd, that Clorineta had declar'd she would go forth that Evening. He made no more noise about it, but went immediately to the Gardiner, and for a little money, got from him the Keys of those Cocks which made all the Water-works play
that were in and about the Grotto, and prepared to get privately a∣bout the place of the Appoint∣ment a little before the hour. All things being thus got ready on all sides, Repset came first to the Grotto, where he hid himself, as well as he could, under one of the Seats that was nearest to the Cock. That Night prov'd very dark, which contributed much to his concealment; this was about half an hour before the prefixt time. Some time after Chilase came in∣to the Garden by a Key, which he had got of the Gardiner for money; and he was not long there, till he was follow'd by Clo∣rinetta, who had got in by the same Key which Repset had made use of, and left the door open af∣ter her, which was the Sultana's. Chilase was as an accomplish'd Spark in all appearance, as could be: He had a white Beaver Hat
on, a curious long, flaxen, curl'd Wigg, Embroider'd Clothes Point Linen, and all things else sutable. In this Equipage he maches to∣wards the Grotto. tho' any Dress might very well have serv'd the turn in the dark. There was no body that frequented the Garden that could lose their way to the Grotto, all the Walks in it leading to it, which was in the middle of the furthest Square of the Garden; but he went on very slowly, his Heart failing him, and prophesy∣ing some ill at hand, nay, the ne∣ver failing Prognostick amongst the Superstitious happening also, (bleeding at the Nose) he was upon the very point of giving over his Design, and of making an honourable Retreat. This last accident, though he had bled but some few drops, did put a stop to his proceedings for some short time to clean himself. Mean time,
two Persons were come to the Grotto, and had seated themselves presently after Repset had con∣ceal'd himself. The one said to the other, My heart akes for fear of some surprise, Oh! Love, to what hazards and dangers dost thou lead thy Votaries. Fear nothing, an∣swer'd the other, we are safe e∣nough, but we must lose no time, for nothing but that can cause us any mischief: Remember your Vows and Promises, said the first again; To a tittle, reply'd the last. After this from wors they were going to action, when that our envious, malicious Mufti (Jealousie it could not be) slipt out of his lurking hole, turn'd the Cocks, and set all the whole Grotto on water. From above, from below, from all sides, there were a thousand Springs, which put the two poor Lovers in such a pickle, that it quite extinguish'd every spark of
their amorous Fire, at least for that time. They got out of the Grotto half drown'd, and blinded, every one shifting for themselves, as also did Chilase, who was just entring the Grotto when the Squibs of Water began to play, so that he had his share of the re∣freshment also. Clorinetta was a∣bout the middle of the Walk, when she heard the noise of the Water-works, and perceiv'd as well as she could in the dark, some Per∣sons running, amongst which one came up to her; Oh, are you there? said he, I am glad I have found you, we are surpris'd, let us get into the Lodge as fast as we can by the same door we came out, if they have not shut it, from whence we will get into the street, thence to my Lodgings, where we will shift us. With that he pull'd Clorineta hard by the hand, with another that was wringing wet, and as
cold as a Ghost. Clorinetta, who had been frighted at this, did not know what to do, while she was thinking whether she had best to cry out, keep silent, discover her self, or run from this Person that pull'd her along by force, but which was qualified sometimes with a Come, Madam, there is no danger for us but in this place, and we are safe, if but once out of it. She was forc'd to yield to the Per∣son's strength, and to follow; he led her to the Gardiner's Lodge, where finding the door open, they got into the street, where pre∣sently after, a Footman coming by with a Light, Clorinetta did perceive that he belong'd to her; she bid him to stay, calling him by his Name, then looking on the Person who held her by the hand, and that left a Train of Droppings where-e're he went. Sir, said she, you may by this time,
I suppose, have found your mistake, I perceive you want clean Linnen, I'le leave you to go shift your self. With that she turn'd to her Ser∣vant, and bid him to light her to her Apartment, which was not far. When she was got to the door, she was strangely surpris'd to see a brave Spark, with a young Lady in his hand, both in the same Condition with the other she had so lately left. Madam, said the Gentleman, by a misfor∣tune this Gentlewoman and I have been put in this condition, and if You would be so obliging as to direct us to the Sultana's Apartment, You would infinitely oblige us. This was Chilase, who having met with that Person, whom the other Gen∣tleman, who had taken Clorinetta, had lost, and taking her for the Sultana, he was leading of her home, thinking to pass her for one belonging to the Sultana. This
new Spectacle did strangely sur∣prise Clorineta, who could not forbear rallying of them, (at which she was very expert) I cannot but wonder where I was, and under what shelter, when so much Rain fell, and be so dry: Certainly, con∣tinu'd she, it was a sudden Stor, which has not so much as wet the Pavement hereabouts; But if you belong both to the Sultana, conti∣nued she, your nearest way will be through this place, this Fellow shall conduct you thither. With that she bid her Servant to go with them so soon as the Lights were come that had been call'd for. By this time the wash'd Gentlewoman finding that the distrust which she had had all along, that she had not the right Person by the hand, was on good grounds, was contriving how to get off, her Hoods, which the violence of the Water had forc'd over her Face,
where they did stick very fast, and kept her conceal'd; said that it was a mistake of the Gentle∣man's, that she had no acquain∣tance at the Sultana's, and she begg'd leave to retire, and did not desire to be known. With that she disingag'd her self from Chilase, and desiring to be excus'd, having made a Curtsy, she went her way as fast and as well as she could, not knowing her self where to go, nor how to dispose of her self. Chilase being left alone, Clorinetta offer'd the same Civility to him; but he, for fear of being disco∣ver'd, would not accept of it, but she would force it upon him, and the Lights being come, she com∣manded her Man not to leave the Gentleman, till he was got to his Lodgings, and so she retir'd to think on the strange Adventures of that Night. Chilase being a∣lone with the Footman, gave him
a piece of Money, desiring him to lead him to the next Inn, where he would take up for that night, he being very cold and wet, and his Lodgings too far off; which the Fellow readily perform'd, and went and told Clorinetta where he had left him, for she long'd to know who that Person was; wherefore she charg'd the Man to return to the Inn, and watch there all the rest of the night till mor∣ning, when he should be reliev'd, and if that Person did go out to dodge him to his Lodgings, she gave him something to drink while he watch'd, and sent him immediately away. The Wet Lady had not gone far, but that she fell into Repset's Hands, who did avoid, as well as he could, all persons, for fear of being discover'd, he being in the Querpo Dress of his Order. He had lost his way, and had been
forc'd to get out through the Gardner's House; and perceiving a Petticoat, he offered her his Ser∣vice. She, who was for making all the haste she could possible to the Gardners, whose Daughter she was, would hardly give him an answer, and she pursuing her way, he took her by the hand and would follow her: He had done better to have saved himself that labour, for they were both met by the person who had brought first that Woman into the Grotto, she told him that she could not be rid of that Person, who was very troublesome to her; at that, the Man, who was already vex'd at all the misfortune that had hap∣pen'd to his Mistress, took the pains to lay a lusty Cudgel he had in his hand on Repset's shoulders, who run away as fast as he could, crying out Murder with a full mouth: That noise a∣wak'd
some persons in the Gardi∣ner's House, who all this while had lain in a profound sleep, lit∣tle thinking, no more than their Master and Mistress did, what had happen'd during their sleep. The two Lovers hearing the bu∣stle that the Servants made in the House, thought it was time to retire, and that made her yield to his importunities of going a∣long with him, upon condition that he would marry her the next morning. Upon which Terms they agreed, and went their way, where he would lead her. The Gardiner's people having found nothing amiss in the House, and having reported so to the Master, who had begun to move, all was quiet again, and every body went to make an end of their Work in their Beds. Thus ended the odd Adventures of that cross and ill condition'd Night, which had ne∣ver
been cut out for Lovers: We will leave all our Lovers to go to their Beds, not to sleep, I dare say, but to reflect on the strange Ren∣conters that that Night had pro∣duc'd, and return to Cha-abas, who all this while had been way∣laying of the Mufti Repset. He had been inform'd, that he was frequently seen to go up the stairs which went to a passage in which was a back-door out of the Sultana's Chamber, so that these were the back-stairs to her Lodg∣ings for Servants to pass by. Of truth the Mufti did often go up and down those stairs, because he had no other way to go to his Lodgings, which were one pair of stairs higher, and backwards, whereas the Sultana's Chamber was forwards. This Intelligence had so exasperated Cha-abas anger against this wicked Mufti, which so disturb'd an Emperour's quiet,
that he resolv'd upon watching himself, and surprise him going into the Sultana's Chamber, where he would give him that Correcti∣on himself, which he deserv'd. To this purpose, having disguis'd him∣self under a long black Cloak, in which he muffled himself all over, he waited one night in a little by∣room, at the foot of the stairs, incognito, till his Spies should bring him word of the Mufti's getting up the stairs; but the late drub∣bing which Repset had receiv'd, having caus'd him to keep his Bed, at least his Chamber, for two or three days; for so long time was Cha-abas disappointed also of his sweet Revenge. But that time be∣ing over, one night as he was on the Watch, News were brought him that the Mufti was just gone up stairs, as he really was, Cha-abas muffles himself up, and up stairs he trudges after him, and as he
was earnestly looking after him as he was getting up, he perceiv'd his own shadow against the Wall, caus'd by the Light that was plac'd above the stairs head; he took not time to examine, but being pre∣possest with having the Mufti in Chase, he takes it to be him, he fiercely runs after it, still as he moves, that went on before him towards the Sultana's back-door, till by Cha-abas coming nearer, it seem'd to go in, losing it self in the darkness which was betwixt the inmost and the outward door; at the sight of which the Emperour making his last Efforts to reach him, stretching out his Arms to grasp him, he unfortunately struck his Foot against a little Threshold, which made him come down with all his strength against the inward Wianscote door, which with his force he made to flie open, and having at his stumble lost his Hat
and Peruque, and got hold with both his Hands of the Cloak in which he was muffled; Have I got you, cryed he aloud, not con∣sidering in what a posture he was, nor where he was, You shall not scape me, now Priest, continued he. The great noise which he had made with his Fall against the door and on the floor, had sur∣pris'd the Sultana, who being lain on her Bed, did rise, and enqui∣red what was the matter of those Women that waited in the Cham∣ber, who stood all gazing on, not stirring a foot, in as great an a∣mazement as did the Sultana, not knowing all this while who this Person should be, that so rudely durst thus disturb the Sultana's rest. Mean time, Cha-abas having recollected himself, and with all his fumbling under his Cloak, finding that he had lost his prey,
and in what a strange posture he was before the Sultana who stood still looking on, and admiring what that Person should be; he laps himself up in his long Cloak over Head and Ears, gets up, and without speaking one word, got out of the Chamber down stairs, and retires to bemoan his misfor∣tune. All this while, the noise that Cha-abas had made with his hasty getting up stairs after the Mufti, had caus'd Repset to stop when he was got to the second pair of stairs, which were a little beyond the Sultana's Chamber-door, whence he had been looking all that while on the Scene which was acting below, and having over∣heard the word Priest, which in the Emperour's passion he had spoke very loud; he seeing that Person gone, and that the Hat and Peruque, which had been thrown
from out of the Chamber into the passage, had been taken up by one whose Office it was to wait there, he gave him a little Money to let him have them, pretending he knew to whom they belong'd; and he retir'd with them to his Chamber to examine them more at leisure, and to endeavour to find out who was the Owner of them. Cha-abas being got in private, after he had spent some time in musing, he sent for Monitenna to come and speak with him; He told her, That ever since she had imform'd him of his being Rival'd by Mufties, he had had an Eye on Repset's actions; That he had caus'd him to be observ'd, and that News being brought him of his frequent going up and down those back-stairs, which led to the Sultana's Chamber, and so went on, telling her the disaster that
had befallen him, concluding, that the Sultana had conceal'd him in her own Chamber, and sav'd him from that punishment which he design'd him. To which she an∣swer'd, That she was at that very time, and had been for above an hour before in the Sultana's Cham∣ber, where I assure you, Sir, that the Mufti Repset was not all that while, continu'd she, and we were all so surpris'd with the noise and suddenness of the business, that all our thoughts were bent in knowing what was the matter, and who that Person should be, that had made that disturbance. Was I not known then, said the Emperour? Not that I know, reply'd Monitenna, but some of us going to the door, and exquiring of some Person that wait∣ed there, what had been the mat∣ter? He made Answer, That he knew not, more than that the Mufti Repset having gone up stairs to his
Lodgings, as he us'd to do, some body muffled up in a long black Cloak, had presently after come up stairs, whether in pursuit of him they know not, but that this last Person, who he did not know, having per∣ceiv'd his own shadow against the Wall, had fiercely run and catch'd after it, still following it till it were lost in the dark betwixt the two doors, that that Person had there fallen, and when he had got up again, and gone his way, he had left his Hat and Peruque behind him, which having been thrown out of the Chamber after him, the Per∣son said he did take them up, but that the Mufti Repset, who from the other pair of stairs, having seen all that had pass'd, did give him some money for them, pretending that he knew the Person to whom they did belong; that therefore he had let him have them: And are my things in the Mufti's hands
then, reply'd Cha-abas, that trou∣bles me more than all the rest, see∣ing that I have not been known? My dear Monitenna, continu'd he, assist me in this business, the Hea∣vens, I see, have decreed that I should be perpetually oblig'd to thee, and I will certainly acknowledge it, if I get but once off of this business without being known; and that I have reveng'd my self of these two Mufties, I think thou didst name, as thou hast promis'd me I should. Be patient till then, Sir, answer'd she, and spoil not all by too much precipitation; I have promis'd it you, be patient then, and rely on my word, which I will make good with the first opportunity. But you must be sure, said Cha-abas, to get my Hat and Peruque out of Repset's hands, with all the expedition you can possible; for I fear very much, that by his shewing them up and down, they might at last be known
to be mine by some body or other. She assur'd him that she would get them into her possession that very night: After which they had other Discourses mixt with some amo∣rous Expressions, which lasted till Monitenna thought it was time for her to retire, and see after the getting of those things from Rep∣set. She left the Emperour then, and retiring to her own Chamber, she sent thence one of the Sultana's Servants in the Sultana's Name, to demand from Repset that Hat and Peruque which he had in his Hands, to which the Mufti made answer, That he had already sent them by the first Messenger that the Sultana had sent for them. The Person return'd to Monitenna with that Answer, which made her immediately to run to the Sultana's Apartment, to learn more of the business. There she found
Clorinetta, who was giving an ac∣count of her last night Adventure to the Sultana, and how she had found out that the Person, who was to be at the Assignation, was Mufti Chilase, how he had been serv'd by she knew not who, but that the Gardener, who had lost his Daughter that Night, did con∣fess that he had lent the Key of the Water-works to the Mufti Repset that very Night, only to make Sport, as he pretended, but that he believ'd he had an Hand in conveying his Daughter away, and that if she was not suddenly restor'd to him, he would com∣plain of him to the King. Never were persons, Madam, in such a pickle, continu'd she, as was the Mufti Chilase, the Gardener's Daughter and her Gallant; by good Fortune, the Mufti Repset had be∣stow'd his Favours on them before I came to the Rendezvous; I heard
the noise of the Water-works at a distance, which made me listen, which prevented me of having my share. How insolent these Mufties are grown? said the Sultana. You had no Discourse with Chilase then? continu'd she, None at all, Madam. I assure you I lost the Happiness of being courted by him, reply'd Clo∣rinetta: Well, 'tis no matter, the Sport we have lost of that we have had another way. But how come you to know that this is the Emperour's Hat and Peruque? continu'd she. Madam, reply'd Clorinetta, a cer∣tain Person who knew that the Em∣perour was gone up these stairs in a Disguise, and seeing him come down some time after without them, made some enquiry after them of the Per∣son that waits in the passage, who denying that he had them, the other told him that they belong'd to the Emperour, to terrifie him, I sup∣pose, and to get them from him;
which made him confess, that Mufti Repset had them. A Servant of mine passing by heard this, and pre∣sently came to tell it me as a great Secret. The Mufti made no scru∣ple of delivering them to the Per∣son; I sent to him, said the Sul∣tana: it was answer'd, No, by some of her Servnats. Thus did Monitenna learn, that it was known it was the Empe∣rour who had given them that Larrum, and left those signs of it behind him, but not one of them could guess at the right Cause, which had made him do that, till having recollected what the Fel∣low that waited had seen, and what they themselves had seen and heard: out of all they pickt out, that it was some Jealousie that Cha-abas had of the Mufti Repset's going to see the Sultana that back-way, which had put the Emperour himself on the De∣sign
of surprising him in the Fact. Monitenna had enough, she flipt from the Company without being suspected, and sent word to the Emperour of all that had happen∣ed in a Letter, which put him into such a rage against every body, that none could have a free access to him but Monitenna, who was become his right Hand. He sent for her, she came to him, and brought a long with her those things which he had left behind him; and upon his asking her Advice, what he had best to do, she advis'd him to trouble himself no further about it, that what was pass'd could not be mended, and that the more he should stir in it, the more noise it would make, and oblige people to pry the nearer into the business. What, said he to Monitenna, and must those two wicked audacious Mufties rest unpunish'd, at least let me know
the other Name also. Great Sir, answer'd Monitenna, if you will but put so much confidence in me, as to rely wholly on my care and con∣duct in the punishing both of Repset and Chilase, those two insolent Muf∣ties, you shall have the satisfaction of seeing it with your own Eyes, to your full satisfaction. I will not re∣ly on thee for that only, my dear Monitenna, reply'd Cha-abas, but in any thing else that thou shouldst advise me, nay I will lay my life into thy hands. Then, Sir, I pro∣mise you, reply'd Monitenna, that within the space of two days I will give you full satisfaction, as to your Revenge. That's all I desire at present, reply'd he, I am pretty well weaned of those desires which I had towards the Lady Clorinetta, and the lowness of her mind, in her thoughts towards a Mufti, when she was courted by an Emperour, has made me to turn all that good Will
and Esteem which I had for her, into a perfect Love to thee, of which I shall daily make you sensible. As to the Sultana, I must confess that she has stirr'd up in my Heart a very great esteem for her; but if thou shewest me that she prefers so mean a Person to me, I shall no longer have any other regard for her, than what I owe and ought to pay to a Sultana under my Prote∣ctiou. Divers other Discourses pass'd betwixt Cha-abas and Mo∣nitenna, which were mixed with amorous Expressions; after which Monitenna retired, leaving the Em∣perour in a much more quiet tem∣per of Mind than she had found him. Chilase by this time had wip'd off all sorrow; he had gone so far in the Discovery of the late night Adventures, as to learn that the Gardener had his Daughter stoln from him that night, that though
he had receiv'd his share of the refreshment which the Water-works had afforded, he believ'd that it was not intended for him, by reason that he was but just step'd into the Grotto, and that he had seen and heard some Per∣sons run out of it, and pass by him. He did not know but that the Sultana might be going towards that place, and prevented by the noise of the Waters and of those Persons that run away, and so have retired to her Apartment a∣gain; a sign of it was, that when he thought that he had met with the Sultana, he had led her out of the Garden by her own door, which was found open, how∣ever he had lost the way after∣wards, in which he was the more confirm'd by meeting with the Lady Clorineta at that time, which he believ'd the Sultana might take along with her so far as into the
Garden, where peradventure she was to have stay'd till her return; thus did he run on in construing all the accidents to his own advan∣tage, and according as his Heart desired they should be. As for Repset, he was left in the dark still, still tormented betwixt Jea∣lousie and Envy, in which he did all he could to clear and inform himself further; to which pur∣pose he daily visited Chilase, who had, as far as he knew himself, told him what had happened that Night, at which Repset would ad∣mire, but own nothing of that part which he had in it. Chilase was so prepossest and so positive, that the Sultana had been in the Garden, that Repset's Envy was the more kindled at it, which made him take the resolution to have a finger in the Pye, though it were by surprise.
One day as he was going into Chilase's Lodgings, which were on the other side of the Garden, op∣posite to the Sultana's Apartment, which made the way a great Com∣pass about, a Person came to him, and ask'd him, if he was the Mufti Chilase; What would you have with him? reply'd Repset, only deliver this Note; Sir, said he, giving him the Note, and my business is at an end: So the Per∣son presently return'd the same way that he came. Repset took the Note, observ'd the privacy with which the Messenger had deliver'd it, and upon this fancied that it was some secret business, which giving him the Curiosity to pry into it, he return'd back to his own Lodgings without see∣ing Chilase, where having shut himself in, he open'd the Paper, and found in it these Lines.
You are in the right to believe, that a mark of your being some∣thing more than you seem to be, may be gather'd from the boldness of your Attempt, which has highly confirm'd me in the good Opinion I had already entertain'd of you, and in which you had succeeded, had not those accidents, which happened that Night, made me retire, when I had already gone some steps in the Garden, in order to meet you. It is not the first time that an Heart worthy a Princess's Esteem, has been found to reside in a meaner Breast, than that which should of Right contain it. You cannot give me a greater confirmation of the good thoughts I entertain in your behalf, and of the greatness of your Love, than in rendring your self at my Apartment this night about twelve, where you shall be receiv'd by a Person that shall conduct you to me. Your Person is perfectly
known to me, by what means, I shall inform you my self. Let it suf∣fice you, that I intend this Honour to Chilase, though not in my own hand. In what a Surprise was Repset at what he had seen! What shall I do in this case? said he to him∣self; this I find was intended by the Sultana unto Chilase; however For∣tune has been so kind as to let it fall into my hands, and with Justice too: I have deserv'd more from that unkind Sultana than ever he could, have rendred her more and greater Services than ever he is like to do, and my Love and Courage is as great as his. Seeing then that it has once pleas'd Fortune to be fa∣vourable to me, I will not disoblige her in refusing her Kindness, I will personate that happy Mufti, and push on my Fortune as far as it will go in this Intrigue, and what know I but that it may guide me into the
Sultana's Arms. Oh, that I were there, continu'd he with a deep sigh, well I will instantly to Chi∣lase, and feel his Pulse, but not a word will I tell of the Assignation. Thus he set forward again to∣wards Chilase's Lodgings. No soo∣ner had R pset gone towards his Lodgings with the Note, but that the same Person who had given it him, and who had watch'd his going, run presently to Chilase's Lodgings again, enquired after him, and gave him another Note, and presently went his way. Chi∣lase retired, read in it the same words which were in the other, which Repset had been invited to intercept, only with this ad∣dition at the bottom: If you let the Mufti Repset know or give him the least occasion imaginable of sus∣pecting any Commerce between us, particularly this nights Assignation, you are lost for ever in my thoughts.
Chilase had much to do to keep himself within his own bounds at the reading of this Note; he read it over and over, and kiss'd it as often: Go, said he, yes, through all the dangers that all Mankind and all the Devils in Hell could lay in my way, I would step over them thus and thus, most charming Princess, to come to your Summons. Thus was he expressing his Courage and his Love when Repset came into his Chamber without knocking, which had almost surpris'd Chi∣lase past reprieve. So soon as he saw Repset, he slided the Note into his Pocket, and perceiving that he had seen some of his Actions, and heard some of his Words; I was just repeating some words out of a Tragedy which affects me much, said he. Well, what News, continu'd he, from beyond Sea? I have nothing new, reply'd Repset, that is plea∣sing; the Sultana, I believe, has
none neither to her mind, she looks so sowre and melancholick: I believe that a Nunnery would be the best place for her to retire in with her sad and melancholick thoughts, with which she disobliges all the World but you. But me, reply'd Chilase, I had, 'tis true, a glimpse of some hopes by an Assignation; but what did it come to? and what hopes have I had since? who have not heard one word more from her since that time. Those great Persons will take their own time, reply'd Rep∣set, and please their own humours; what you have not had yet, no doubt, you may expect; in short, next time her inclinations move her, you shall hear from her. Not if she has oc∣casion of sorrow, reply'd Chilase; That ebbs and flows, as Women please, answer'd Repset, after they have given a moments space to those troublesom thoughts, they soon banish them from their Hearts,
they empty themselves of all that can but in the least check their De∣sires, and are all Love and Plea∣sure within, with whatsoever forma∣lity and sowreness they disguise them∣selves without. Wait with patience and be happy in your great Enter∣prise, while I must rest contented with my meaner Fortune. Your For∣tune, reply'd Chilase, is certain, and you certainly happy in the posses∣sion, while I live only upon hopes and desires. The two Mufties were enter'd into those serious Reflexi∣ons, far from either of their thoughts and designs, when that Word was brought in, that a Per∣son of Quality was come, who demanded to speak with Mufti Chilase, which made the Mufti Repset to retire. Monitenna had engag'd in this her Design against the Mufties, a Person who was highly oblig'd to her, for having obtain'd for him a
Favour from the Emperour; he was to bring along with him a Friend or two more to assist him; she had inform'd them in every Circumstance; she had engag'd the two Mufties by the two Notes which she had sent, not doubting but that Repset's Jealousie would oblige him to watch Monitenna, or his Envy and Malice towards Chilase, mixt with Love towards the Sultana, would make him en∣deavour to prevent his Rival's Happiness, in interposing be∣tween, either of which would serve her turn, though she wish'd he might take the last Course. In fine, she had fitted all things to her purpose, and all this with the Sultana's approbation, and to Clo∣rineta's knowledge, so far only as it concern'd Chilase, but not a word of Repset had she mention'd; she had posted her Friends in a lit∣tle Room, next to that in which
she design'd to bring the two Mufties, as in the Sultana's Cham∣ber, all was to be transacted in the dark, as if by the Sultana's Orders she had advertis'd Cha-abas of the time, that he should appear, and what he should say, and she her self was to be their Conductor; she had no more to do but to wait the hour, which was near at hand. To give a better Colour to the business, and take off all Suspicion on the Muftie's sides, the Sultana had quitted her own Chamber to Monitenna's disposal for that night, and was retired to her Closet with Clorinetta, to pass the time at Cards till the Sport was ready; and Cha-abas had been dispos'd of in the nearest Pavillion in the Garden to the Sultana's Cham∣ber. The hour being come, News were brought to Monitenna, that
the Mufti Repset did appear. There was no body stirring in the whole Apartment, and an obscurity reign'd all over it, but in such places as Monitenna had thought fit to enlighten with some small Candles, with the help of one of them which stood at a low Win∣dow, was the Mufti discern'd. Monitenna, who was in a Dress which did sufficiently disguise her for a Woman belonging to the Sultana, came, and taking him by the Hand, I see you are pun∣ctual, said she, and rather a little before your time; Follow me, con∣tinu'd she, and I'le lead you where you may be undressing your self while I go to the Sultana, to learn when I shall bring you to her. With that she led him into a little Room, where there was a Light, in which she lock'd him up, and went to be ready to receive the other Mufti, whose Love would not let
him stay one moment beyond his time; she accosted him with Words much of the same Nature, and led him into another conve∣nient Room, where she bid him undress himself, and prepare for to go along with her to the Sul∣tana, so soon as she should receive the Orders from her so to do, a∣bout which she was now going; she shut him in also, and went to call that Woman who had infor∣med her of the Mufti's coming; she bid her to follow her, and to take that Person by the Hand, which she would give her in the dark, and to lead him very slowly into the Sultana's Chamber and to her Bed-side, where she should leave him and retire, locking the door after her; and that when she was come to the Bed-side, she should pull the Curtain a little open. Ha∣ving thus plac'd that Woman, she went into the Chamber, where
she put out the Candle, telling the Mufti, there would be no occasion for one, and taking him by the Hand, she led him in his Morning-Gown to the passage where the Woman was in the dark, and put him into her Hand, so run before through the Sultana's Chamber, took the other Mufti by the Hand, and led him hastily to the other side of the Sultana's Bed, where ha∣ving heard the sign of the Curtain being drawn, she left him: With what eagerness did those two Muf∣ties pull off their Gowns to step into the Embraces of a languishing Sultana! How were their Souls agitated with the very thoughts of the Enjoyments they were go∣ing to surfeit with! How many different violent Passions did at once seize on their Spirits! Love, Fear, Respect, and Ambition were all struggling at once, which should have the Mastery over
their Spirit; and the Contention was so equally great, that it was the Cause, neither of those Passi∣ons had the power to quite exas∣perate their Spirits, and transport them beyond their natural bounds. They stept into the Bed at the same time, with all the gentleness and reservedness imaginable, and with trembling Hands, and aking Hearts, stretcht forth their Arms to feel out for the prey, they met one anothers Hand, and at the very first touch pull'd them back, as if each had met with a Viper, not without a strange sur∣prisal, and both lay quiet a while after, which endeavouring to in∣form themselves better with their Legs, they approach'd them to∣wards the middle of the Bed, with as little satisfaction as they had receiv'd from their Hands, but with much more apprehensions: At last the boldest of the two had
so much Courage as to lay his Hand on the others Face and Head, which having fully infor∣med him, that it was a man he had felt, and that having embold∣ned the other to do the same, as much by way of prevention or defence, as to satisfie any further his Curiosity, they at last through fear of danger, did seize one ano∣ther so hard, that the smart caus'd them each to offend his Enemy as much as he could, in order to se∣cure themselves: these seising at last came to blows; and they were accompanied by words, and in the bustle and confusion of the Combat, holding still one another very fast with one Hand, while they laid on with the other, they at last both came down on the floor together. This being heard by Monitenna, she presently run to Cha-abas, and brought him in∣to the Chamber, ushering him
with two Flambaus in her Hands, at the sight of which our obstinate Combatants would not yield. Cha-abas seeing them thus all bloo∣dy, their shirts half torn off of their Backs, and the few Hairs they had strow'd over them; How now, Gentlemen, said he to them, what do you do here in the Sultana's Chamber at this time of the night, and in this posture? They hearing the Emperour's Voice, turn'd all their late animosity into shame and confusion, each of them en∣deavouring to recover their Night-Gowns, and to hide themselves. I'le send some body to you to cool your Courage, said Cha-abas, and when they have done their business; I'le give you another Visit, mean time prepare your selves for the Mortification which is intended you. With that he went out of the Chamber, laughing heartily at them. Monitenna, who had left
one of the Lights in the Cham∣ber, follow'd the Emperour, and lock'd the door upon them; and when she had convey'd Cha∣abas, where he might see and hear the second Scene, and not be seen, she went and brought the Sultana and Clorineta into the Chamber, that they might have a share of the Mrth, which the Confusion of those two Lechers did produce, they all the while hanging down their Heads, and hiding their Fa∣s, as if they thought to conceal  knowledge of who they were. The Sultana began first to speak; Why, how now, said she, my Gallant split in two? or has he brought a Friend with him to let him see his Happi∣ness, or to partake of his Felicity? He must by all means take share with him in his good Fortune. With that she fell a laughting at them, but was not seconded in it by Clorineta, as she had been at their
first coming in. She perceiving two, though they had so well muffled themselves up in their Gowns, that their Faces were not to be known, had some certain apprehensions, that she might be too far concern'd in the conclu∣sion of the business to afford any share of her Mirth to it, more than she had done already. I hope, con∣tinu'd the Sultana, that the Em∣perour will reward his grave Con∣fessor for so noble an Attempt on the Person of a Princess that had shel∣ter'd her self under his generous and Royal Protection; and will not let his Companion, whoever he is, lose his share of the Recompence: May I not know who it is, conti∣nued she, raising her voice, I must know to whom I am so much oblig'd for their Visit, Who can inform me? This she said looking on Moni∣tenna. None better than themselves, Madam, if they please but to speak,
answer'd Monitenna. Yes, Madam, I will speak, said then Repset in a Tone that spoke nothing but Rage, Fury, and Despair, I am that un∣fortunate Repset, said he, who had the Heart-breaking to receive a Note of this Assignation, which was intended for that Person, and tho' I found that it was not your Hand that had writ it, yet believing it to be a pursuance of that Intrigue, of which Chilase had made me his Confident; out of Envy to his good Fortune, and with a design to disappoint him, I came thither, under the assurance of that Note, which had been deliver'd to me, which in the reading I found to be directed to him; and now let him answer for himself. You may imagine, or rather it cannot be imagin'd, into what a Consternation this put poor Clo∣rinetta, not many days before she had wish'd Repset far enough from
disturbing her new Amours with the Emperour; but so soon as she had lost all hopes of any further Conversation through his silence after those unluckly Disappoint∣ments which had happen'd to their Assignations, she had recall'd her Love to Repset, and was of opi∣nion, that playing at a small Game, was much better than be∣ing quite out of Play, though it were but for the sake of the Com∣pany. She therefore could not conceal so well her resentments, but that notice was taken of them both by the Sultana and Moniten∣na, which oblig'd the Sultana to retire sooner than she intended, who was followed by Clorinetta and Monitenna. No sooner had the Sultana set a step towards her retiring, but that those Persons who had been appointed by Monitenna to play their parts, came into the Room,
they had been waiting some time for the Sultana's retreat, they came up to the two Mufties, and taking fast hold of them in a kind of rough way, told them that by Order from the Emperour, they came to remove their station into another place; they led them in∣to another Room, where the door being shut upon them, they had leisure to consider that there were two or three men more who look'd like Surgeons, with Inci∣sion-Knives, Razors, Scissers, Pla∣sters, Rowlers, and such like things on a Table before them; then casting their looks towards the Chimney, they saw Searing-Irons in the fire. These things of them∣selves spoke terrour enough to the Criminals, and doubtless they were apprehensive that they de∣sign'd a punishment proportiona∣ble and suitable to their Crimes, in which they were presently
confirm'd, when one of the Sur∣geons ask'd those Persons that had brought them in, Whether those were the two Persons that were to be made Eunuchs? Yes, reply'd the two other; Then assist us to bind them, said the Surgeons, that we may obey the Emperour's Orders, who has declar'd, that he would have us serv'd so, if we obey not his Commands to a tittle. With that, all those that were in the Room, came about the two poor Mufties, as with a design to bind them. When they both set them∣selves to oppose with all their violence the severity of that De∣cree, pleading both, That they had been trepan'd; That it was a designed Plot to put a signal Affront upon the whole Clergy in their particular Persons, and that they were to be put into Ec∣clesiastical Hands to be punish'd, if guilty, but that they knew not
any fault that they were guil∣ty of. Thus did the terrour of the punishment reconcile in a mo∣ment two Persons who but a mi∣nute before were declar'd Ene∣mies: They were answer'd, That their very being at such an unsea∣sonable hour in that Undress in the Sultana's Chamber, could not but speak them guilty; and upon that, the Surgeons came up nearer to them, as with Cords in their Hands, with a design to bind them. When Repset, who was the most valiant of the two, and nearest the fire, stoopt on the sud∣den, and taking up two of the red-hot Irons out of the fire, he gave one to Chilase, saying, Here, take this in your defence, and let us die bravely, and sell our lives as dear as we can, rather than en∣dure tamely that horrid Torment that these cruel Hang-men would inflict upon us. Let them not unman
us, but let us die like men. This sudden and desperate Re∣solution in Repset, which had been embrac'd also by Chilase, who had been rendred couragious by Ex∣ample, set the others on retreat∣ing some steps, and enter into a Consultation, the result of which was, That the two Delinquents should desire that one of them should be sent to the Emperour, to humbly remonstrate to Him of the one hand, that they were both alur'd into this Praemunire; to which they consented, saying, That the one had but obey'd the Sultana's Command, and the other but design'd to break his measures; That this force us'd against two Persons of such eminent Ranks a∣mongst the Clergie, was a too great intrenching on their Prerogatives; And on the other, that rather than yield to so severe a punishment, they would die, though they should be
forc'd to kill themselves, if they could not overcome their Enemies, unto whom they would sell their lives as dear as they could. These Instructions being deliver'd to Persons that had no further Or∣ders, than to affright them to the last extremity, were sufficient to set them going to the Emperour. Mean time there was a Cessation of Arms, and a further Parley betwixt the two Parties, in which abundance of things were said on both sides; yet all this while nei∣ther Party knew one another per∣sonally, nor so much as the Names of any Persons, and the two Muf∣ies were so alter'd in their Coun∣tenances with the apprehensions of the eminent danger they were n, besides their odd kind of Dres∣ses, that persons who had been familiarly acquainted with them, ad scarce known them.
The Messenger that was sent to Cha-abas, return'd with an Olive-branch in his mouth, and smiling, said, Well, Gentlemen, whoe're you are? for we know you not; wherefore you may be certain, that we have done nothing without Orders from the Emperour. I am to declare to you the Emperour's last Will and Reso∣lution in this present Business: Know then, That through the Inter∣cession of some Ladies, which are to be nameless, something more than your Lives is granted to their hum∣ble Requests, on Conditions, that from henceforth neither of you ever attempt more to go to Balls and Masqueradings; That neither of you presume to court or solicite any La∣dies of what degree soever, nor be so vain as to take their Sports with such inferiour Persons for Realities and serious Assignations; And that neither of you shall ever dare to lift up your eyes, much less your thoughts
in any place where the Emperour looks but with a respectful Counte∣nance. What say you, Gentlemen? Will you stand to this Agreement, and solemnly promise to perform eve∣ry tittle thereof upon your words? Chilase did presently give his con∣sent and assurance, that he would be a true Observer of the Articles; but as to Repset, he made some de∣mur in the matter: He said, That he would promise to go no further than he was entred already in any Com∣merce with the female Sex, and that he would never look after, nor aspire at any more Correspondency with any Woman whatsoever, than what he had done already; but that as to what was already past, he could not recal it back again. With such Equivocations and mental Re∣servations he resolv'd to cleave still to his Clorinetta; but what he said was taken for satisfactory, the Surgeons, at least those Per∣sons
that were disguis'd, pack'd up their Tools, and required of the two Mufties their fiery Wea∣pons, which having put up also, they went their ways. The Muf∣ties Cloaths were afterwards brought to them by the same Wo∣man, whom Monitenna had em∣ploy'd before, they dress'd them∣selves, bundled up their Night-Gowns, and convey'd them under their long Robes, and were after that convey'd into the street, where the door being shut after them, they took each of them that course which they liked best. Monitenna gave a full Relation to the Sultana of the whole Busi∣ness before Clorinetta, who was forc'd to joyn in their Mirth, with some few forc'd Smiles, but long'd extreamly to see Repset, or at least to hear from him. As to the two Mufties, the frights they had been put in, had brought them
both into most violent Feavers, in which the Mighty French Pa∣naceas for all Diseases, Clysters, Julips, and Bleedings were not wanting, and if that cure them not, they are as surely doom'd to Death, as any of our Rusticks are when no amendments appears af∣ter the advantageous use of a Pep∣per-Posset. Chilase was the first which was reckon'd out of danger, yet he had a lingring Feaver on him for a long time. But Repset being of a more fiery disposition, the fuel of his Feaver lasted longer before it had spent it self, insomuch that he was almost brought to the last gasp: Yet at last through a sight which he had got of Clori∣netta, who had solicited the Sul∣tana to send her to him with an How do you? He began to reco∣ver little by little, but remain'd so long weak, and so oppress'd with Melancholy, that he stirr'd
not out of his Chamber in two months time. Cha-abas was infinitely pleas'd with Monitenna, for having given him so Comical a diversion and revenge, in which there had been so much terrour, and so little hurt, and the Reputation of both the Mufties secur'd by the con∣cealment of their Names and Per∣sons under Disguises. Monitenna, mean time, did triumph within her self, for having at once so bravely reveng'd her self of all her Enemies, and ingratiated her self so far into Cha-abas Favour again, as not to be remov'd from thence in haste by any new Pre∣tender. Things were in that amorous and diverting posture in the Per∣sian Court, when News came from divers parts of Cha-abas ill Success against those Confederate Princes that were resolv'd to re∣cover
their Rights, which Cha-abas had basely taken, and with the same injustice with-held from them. But if he was beaten, and forc'd to surrender those places that he had formerly surpris'd, he would be sure to level them first, to blow up all publick Edifices, to set fire on every place, not sparing the very Churches, and even to dig up the very Founda∣tions of the City-walls. This was done always in cold blood, after they had satiated themselves with Ravishments and horrid Murders. All this under pretence to leave the Country so desolate, as that their Enemies should not be able to subsist in it; though it was well known, that it was but with a design to animate and encou∣rage his men, who being con∣vinc'd of the unjustice of their Ma∣ster's Cause, would frequently take all opportunities of deserting
so cruel and bloody a Master, to adhere to such persons as with Ju∣stice prosecuted a generous War against that general Enemy of Mankind. Of truth his Cruelties were such, that those few of his Allies, who had at first stuck to him, abandon'd him, having not the Heart to assist a Person that had so wholly given himself up to the ruine and destruction of Man∣kind. Neither was he more successful in Leridan. His Army there, which though joyned with that of the Natives of that Kingdom, which though very cruel against the Mahometans, was so out-done in those barbarous Acts by the Persians, that they began to fear the falling under their Tyranny. They did not stick to declare this, and to confess that they had ra∣ther continue to live under the Mahometan Yoke, than to be made
Slaves to the Persians; and when they were told by the Persian Officers, that those Mahometans, with whom they prefer'd to live rather than under them, were Hereticks, they boldly answer'd, that so was their Emperour and themselves also, for having made War against the Grand Mufti, and declaring him not infallible, which Tenet, said they, none but He∣reticks would hold: Besides, they highly murmur'd at the ill Suc∣cess which they had in all their Undertakings, at the loss of so many brave men before so mean a place as was Lynderodon; now that they could not effect any thing with their Golden Batteries, as they had formerly done in other places. These Complaints of the Leridians to the Persians, produ∣ced nothing but Grudges and Heart-burnings betwixt them, which amongst the Officers on both
sides, after having reproach'd one another of want of Courage, came to quarrels, which ended in blows and Duels, in which commonly the Persians came by the worse. While that the common Souldiers did daily desert, retiring in their Fastnesses and Retreats, where they bid defiance to the Persians. The Mahometans mean time, kept themselves in strong Holds, and with unspeakable Valour did oppose their Enemies, daily ex∣pecting a very considerable Re∣lief from Albiona and Clonstad. Especially those of Lynderodon, be∣haved themselves with such ex∣traordinary Valour, that they, in divers Sallies, did kill and take so many, both Officers and Souldiers of their Enemies, that they were forc'd to raise the Siege, and to retire at such a considerable di∣stance from that place with their Army, that these brave Mahome∣tans
remain'd Masters of the Field ten miles round them. The Winds proving contrary, during a long time, for the trans∣portation of those Men and Am∣munition which were ready to go, as it is usual at that season of the year. The Fleet appointed to carry them, put divers times to Sea, but as often were driven back again by Westerly, Nother∣ly, and Northwest Winds. In the Kingdom of Clonstad, the principal Fortress was surrendred at discretion, and all those that had taken up Arms for Amurat, were beaten and dispers'd, divers Packets of Letters, Instructions and Commissions sent by Amurat from Leridan, to those of his Party in Clonstad, were discover'd, the Persons seiz'd and imprison'd, their Papers brought to the Grand Council of that Nation, read and examined, whereby all the Ha∣lists
Designs and private Plots at that time in agitation in that King∣dom, were laid open and detect∣ed; upon which divers, of all he three States of that Kingdom, wee apprehended, and made close Pri∣soners, and all the Hopes of Amu∣rat and of his Party thereby quite dasht to pieces, beyond all hopes of recovery. Now were the Ottoman and Haldonian Fleets joyn'd at Sea, which made Cha-abas Fleet to di∣vide it self; part of it was sent by him to annoy and destroy some of the Ottomans and Haldonians Plantations in the Indies, and the rest was kept in their Harbours, not daring to stir forth, but watch∣ing for some opportunity of con∣veying some Recruits of Men, Arms, and Ammunitions into Leridan, which was almost im∣possible for them to do the direct way, because the Ottoman Fleet
lay in the Chanel. He likewise sent some Ships with Relief for Leridan, whose Officers were to steer their Course quite another way, to such an appointed di∣stance, where they were to open their Commissions, and then they were order'd to steer round, and to land in Leridan, where they could most conveniently, not to be molested by the Ottoman Fleet. But if that Cha-abas had such Designs on Leridan, which King∣dom of truth he had bought very dear, and for which he had alrea∣dy, some years since, made divers considerable Payments, and which was yet to cost him much more Money and mens Lives, before he could be absolute Master of it, if ever he did get it. Solyman and his Grand Council of the Divan were not wanting on their parts to supply the two Kingdoms of Clonstad and Leridan with all Ne∣cessaries,
to suppress all the Ha∣lists Plots and Machinations, to disarm them, seize them from amongst them that were the most forward in broaching of false Re∣ports, in dispersing of libellous and treasonable Papers, and in sowing of Sedition and Rebellion amongst the Mobile. Divers of them were seiz'd, sitting in their dark Councils, some in dispersing of false and forg'd Proclamations and Declarations, under Amurat's Name, and others in buying of Arms, and making great Provi∣sions, in order to a Rebellion. These Arms were discover'd, seiz'd on, and secur'd, and the Gaols were fill'd with those seditious Halists. Thus by the Emperour's Vigilance, and the Grand Council of the Ottoman Empires wise Coun∣sels, all their mischiefs were pre∣vented, and all things tended to a perfect Peace and Settlement of
the whole Empire; insomuch that those who sat at the Helm, thought fit to give Cha-abas some diversion, and to attack him by Sea, while the rest of his Ene∣mies were prosecuting of the War againk him by Land. To that purpose there were De∣signs laid of going with the great∣est part of the united Fleets before that Haven where Cha-abas Fleet lay at Anchor, and there, as oc∣casion should serve, and as they should think most convenient, ei∣ther send a considerable number of Fire-ships in amongst them all at once, and so burn and destroy them in their Harbour, or else block them up in it, so as that they might not be able to get out, by sinking divers old Carcasses of Ships laden with stones at the mouth of the Harbour. It was also deliberated, That during that Diversion a conside∣rable
Army should be landed thereabouts, to seize on the Forts, Castles, and other strong Holds that were the Guards of that Ha∣ven. These things and divers others of the same Nature, were debated, and some concluded up∣on, which shew'd that all things were in good posture in the Otto∣man Empire, since that they be∣gan from being wholly on the defensive to undertake their part of an offensive War with the rest of their Allies against Cha-abas, that universal Enemy of Mankind, and of the true, ancient, and Ma∣hometan Religion. Thus far did my Memoirs reach, from whence I have taken that matter, of which I have com∣pos'd the first and second Part of the Court Secret. May the down∣fall, ruine, and total destruction of the Ante-Titus Vespasianus of
our days, afford me matter suffi∣cient to make a third Part of the Court Secret, or to make a com∣pleat Piece of it self under the Ti∣tle of, The prodigious Birth and Life, Tyrannical Government, and miserable Fall of the Christian Turk, Lewis the Fourteenth. FINIS.
