B1904 12046711 53096
A True Tryall of the Ministers and Ministry of England; As also a true Discovery of their Root and Foundation, and of the called English Church, with its Ho∣nours, Possessions, Tythes and Maintenance. Together with the fruits of the said Ministers and Ministry. Published for the sake of the simple Ones, that they may no longer be deceived; but may come to witnesse the Altar, whereof they have no right to eat who serve the Taberna∣cle,Hebr. 13. 10. Written forth by Gervase Benson. The Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid is their own foot taken, Psal. 9. 15. His mischief shall return upon his own head; and his violent dea∣ling shall come upon his own pate, Psal. 7. 16. FRiends and People: Now in your dayes is the Lord, who is the Living and Faithfull God, fulfilling his Pro∣mises; and hath fulfilled what he said by Isaias the Prophet, Isa. 2. 9. The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; and they that dwelt in the Land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. By which their feet are guided into the way of peace: and in which light they see their salvation, through the tender mercy of God, and the remission of their sins, through the knowledge of Him, who is the Light of the world, and hath enlightened every one that cometh into the world: which light is the Saints Teacher; and the Worlds Con∣demnation that hate it. Therefore that all of you might come to know the true God, whom ye ignorantly worship,
(both Priests and People) who contrary to the light do walk, and act; To the light which Christ Jesus hath enlightened you withall, take heed, and it love, and obey, in whatsoever it shall shew unto you: (That is the light which shewes you darknesse, sin, and evill, and all things that ever you have done brings to remembrance:) and all your Deeds, to the Light bring, that with it they may be proved, whether, or nay, they be wrought in God: for all things that are repro∣ved are made manifest by the light, Ephes. 5. 13. And that with the light ye may come to see Him, who is the way to the Father of Lights, with whom is no variablenesse, nor shadow of change; who is the Truth: And there is no coming to the Fa∣ther, but by Him, who is the Life, who is the beloved Son of God, in whom alone he is well pleased: who the true Prophet is, which God promised he would raise up, whom all the people should hear, Acts 3. 22, 23. and every Soul that will not hear this Prophet (whom God hath raised up for a light to the Gentiles, that he might be his salvation unto the ends of the earth, Isa. 49. 6.) shal be destroyed from among the peo∣ple, and salvation they shall never witnesse; for there is no other Name under Heaven given among men whereby they must be saved; neither is there salvation in any other, Acts 4. 12. but by this Jesus, who continueth a Priest for ever, over the houshold of God, who to himself took not this honour, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day begat I thee, he also saith, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchize∣deck, who endureth for ever, hath an everlasting Priesthood, who perfectly saveth them that come to God by him: who is holy harmlesse, undesiled, and separate from sinners, who is consecrated for evermore, ever liveth to make intercession for the Saints: who is become their High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands: That is to say, not of this building; who by his own blood entred in once, into the holy place, ha∣ving
obtained eternall redemption for them whose consci∣ences he hath, and doth purge from dead works, to serve the living God: not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the new∣nesse of the Spirit, Rom. 7. 6. Whose hearts are sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed with pure water. And of this Saviour Iesus, and this High Priest, whom God hath exalted, and is exalting with his Right Hand, to be a Prince, and a Saviour: are they witnesses who have belie∣ved in the Light, who are the Children of the Light, who by the Children of Darknesse (which hate the light, whose words and deeds be evill) are in derision called Quakers: who witnesse Him in them, who is greater then he that is in the world: who is entred into the Holiest of all, daily ma∣king intercession for them. And the true Tabernacle made without hands, they are witnesses of: and the New Cove∣nant, and the anointing, that teacheth them of all things, so that they need not, that any man teach them: but as the same anointing teacheth them, of all things and is true, and is no lye. And by the holy Ghost, which he hath given them, can they truly say: That Iesus is the Lord, and that in him, they are compleat, which is the head of all Principality and Pow∣er, in whom also they are Circumcised, with the Circumci∣sion made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptisme: wherein also they are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead, who is the first and the last: Even he that liveth and was dead, and behold he liveth for evermore. And with the light which from the Lord Iesus Christ doth come they do see and know, That other Lords and Priests, besides him have had Dominion over them, but he that hath wrought, and doth work all their works in them: the living powerfull God of Life and Light, hath made and is making,
their memory to perish: who have brought nothing to per∣fection, who hold up those places wherein the Nations ser∣ved their Gods, which the Lord commanded should utterly be destroyed, Deut. 12. 2. And do allow, and practise those things which Christ Iesus have disanulled, blotted out, and nailed to the Crosse, the hand-writing of Ordinances, imposed untill the time of reformation: Of which time and reforma∣tion, the People of God called Quakers are witnesses in life, and power: and so also is the Holy Ghost. And the time is accomplished, wherein the Lord is drawn near to judgment, and is become a swift witnesse, against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and against the Oppressors, and against the Hirelings: And against the Shepheards, that feed themselves with the fat, and cloath themselves with the wool; but feed not the flock: And against the Scoffers, and against all who after their own ungodly lusts walk; who are talkers of a reformation; but say that the time is not yet come. Men of corrupt minds they are, being desti∣tute of the Truth, supposing that gain is godlinesse: who go about to uphold a worldly Sanctuary, and make Priests of the lowest of the people, which are not the Sons of Levi: who set up a worship, devised of their own heart; for which they have neither precept nor example, in the Scriptures: and take Tythes of the People, and demand them as theirs by a humane Law, made in the will of Man; which the Mi∣nisters of Christ Jesus never did act any such thing, nor sue any man at the law: but hee that preached the Gospel, li∣ved of the Gospel; for so hath the Lord ordained. Neither did Levi, nor his Sons under the first Priesthood act any such thing; for that Priesthood was made by a law, Exod. 4. 13, 14. and Exod. 28. 1. And had a commandement to take Tythes of the people according to the Law, Hebr. 7. 5. And no man took this honour to himself, but he that was cal∣led of God, as Aaron was, Hebrewes 5. 4. And those
that did not bring their Tythes to the Store-house robbed God, Malach. 3. 8. 10. and not the Priests, neither were the Priests to go to the Magistrate to compell them by a law, to pay them Tythes, and Treble damages (as the Priests now in England do) but according to all that the Lord command∣ed, so did they: as you may read, Levit. 8. 36. But these men now in England, who are called Ministers of the Go∣spel and of Christ, are neither called of God (who never heard his voice) as Aaron was, and those under the first Priesthood: who received their Law from God, and had a commandement from Him to take Tythes of the People; Nor as the Ministers of the Gospel were called, who wit∣nessed their call from God, not of men, neither by man; but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1. 1. And the Gospel which was preached by them was not after man, neither received they it of man: neither was taught it but by Revelation of Iesus Christ. And Christ Iesus is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: and the Gospel is the same, for saith the Apostle, Gal. 1. If any preach another Gospel, then that which wee have preached, let him be accursed. And the Ministers of Christ are the same, and are one, who hold one Head, who are led and guided by one spirit, even the Spirit of Truth, which the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him, Joh. 14. 17. And as many as are led by the Spirit of Christ, they are the Ministers of Christ, who a∣bide in his Doctrine, and do whatsoever he commandeth them; But they that have not the Spirit of Christ (even the same spirit which was in the Apostles of Christ) they are none of his Ministers, Rom. 8. 9. And they that deny Revelati∣on, and affirm and say, That al Revelation is ceased, are no Mi∣nisters of Christ, who know not the Father, nor the Son, For no man knoweth the Father but by the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Matth. 11. 27. And they who were
the Ministers of Christ Jesus witnessed Revelations, and de∣livered and preached to others, no other doctrine, but what they received of the Lord. Even that which from the begin∣ing was, which they had heard, which they had seen with their Eyes: which they had looked upon, and their hands had handled of the Word of Life, 1 John 1. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 3. which Word of Life, those called Ministers in England, who deny Revelation, who sue men at the law for Tythes and maintenance, never heard; who are yet in their sins, who live in pride, covetousnesse, and oppression; who hold, and teach that none can be free from sin, nor overcome sin, whilest they live here, contrary to plain Scriptures, Rom. 6. 18. 22. and 1 John 2. 13. 14 And so they being servants of sin, are free from righteousnesse: for it is they that are free from sin, that are the Ministers of Christ, Rom. 6. 18. For he that commits sin is the servant of sin: and no man can serve two Masters: none can be the servant of Christ, whilest he is the servant of sin, John 8. 34, For Christ and sin, are two contrary Masters: and betwixt light and darknesse there is no fellowship, 2 Cor. 6. 14. For whosoever sinneth hath not seen Christ neither known him, 1 Joh. 3. 6. And how can they be Christs Ministers, who neither knew him nor ever saw him? For who are Christs Ministers, he is their Lord and Master, and they do whatsoever he commandeth them, John 13. 13. And where Christ Iesus is made manifest, the works of the Devill are destroyed, 1 John 3. 8. Now sin is of the Devill, 1 John 3. 7, 8. And the Devill is no Minister of Christ, nor none that are of him: and he that commits sin is of the devill, who was a lyar from the beginning and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him, John 8. 44. neither is there truth in them: who teach for do∣ctrines the Tradition of men, Matth. 15. 9. Who hold up a worship and maintenance, and the high places devised by man: which they received by Tradition from the Pope, and
his Prelates, after the customes of the Nations, and not after Christ, who make the Commandements of God of none ef∣fect by their traditions: these are such as the Apostle spoke of, 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2. who give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devills, speaking lies in hypocrisie, having their consciences seared with a hot Iron: who run but God never sent them; and say, Thus saith the Lord, when he never spoke to them: and therefore it is, they have not profited the people at all; because they stood not in the counsel of the most High God, who are not built upon the foundation of Pro∣phets and Apostles, and Ministers of Christ Jesus, the Rock of ages: but from the foundation of the Prophets, Apostles, and Disciples of Christ Iesus, they are razed and excluded, who are unholy; for if their Root had been holy, the branches would have been holy also, Rom. 11. 16. but their fruits have made them manifest, to have sprung up from the bitter root: who have troubled and defiled many, Heb. 12. 15. them∣selves being unclean, manifesting their root. And therefore all people, every where, consider what ye are doing, that hold up a Generation of men, whom you call Ministers of Christ, and of the Gospel, who be unholy, and unclean, who do the Temple of God defile: who in the way of Cain do go; and after Errour of Balaam for rewards run gree∣dily: These are they that be spots in your feasts of Charity, when they feast with you, they feed themselves without fear; clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; Trees, whose fruit withereth, without fruit; who are Murmurers and Complainers, who can never have enough, who say, What shall we eat? What shall wee drink? Wherewithall shall we be cloathed? Matth. 6. 25, &c. Heathens they are, and no Ministers of Christ; who after their own ungodly lusts do walk, whose mouths speak great swelling words, having men persons in admira∣tion
for advantage, sensuall they are, who have not the same spirit, which was in the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, as sundry of them have confessed and published in print: whose Foundation and Root is now discovered and made manifest; whom ye call your Ministers, Parsons, Vicars, and Curats: and the foundation of your Churches, as you call them, and your Parishes, and your Fonts, and your Basons, and your Sacraments, for which there is no Scri∣pture; and your Infants Baptisme, and your Tythes Pre∣diall, and Parsonall; and your Oblations, Obventions, and Easter Reckonings, and Mortuaries; and your Crysoms, and your Churching of Women, and your first-fruits, and your Patrons, and your Presentations, and your Orders, and your Approbations, and Augmentations; and all your wor∣ship, as you call it, which is not in Spirit, and in truth, to be of man, and from man, and was invented by fallen man: and their Titles and Dignities they received of man, and from man, and one from another; and their Original Head, and Root, and Foundation, was the Archbishops and Bishops (amongst which the Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, was Chief, and Supream head) untill the Raign of Henry the Eight, late King of England, as by the Lawes and Sta∣tutes of this Nation doth and may appear. And these called Archbishops and Bishops, and such as received Orders from them to be Priests, Ministers and Dea∣cons, and Clerks as they called them; were called the body Spiritual, and were and are called the English Church, as by the Statute of 24. Hen. 8. Cap. 12. doth and may appear, And as that Statute declareth: The Kings and Nobles of this Realm, endowed the said Church both with honour and pos∣sessions, to keep them from corruption and sinister affection. And the Pope and the See of Rome had the Tryal (amongst other things) of the right of Tythes, Oblations and Obven∣tions.
And by that Statute it is ordained and declared, That all spirituall Prelates, Pastors, Ministers and Curates within the Realm of England may use, Minister, execute, and do all Sacraments and Sacramentalls, and Divine Service unto the Subjects of the same: And by the Statute of the 26. Hen. 8. Chap. 1. King Henry the Eight, and his Successors is decla∣red the only Supream Head in earth of the Church of En∣gland: And by the Statute of the 25. Hen. 8. chap. 20. The Annals or first fruits which were payed by the Archbishops and Bishops of England to the Bishop of Rome, are taken from the Bishop of Rome called the Pope: And by the Statute of the 26. Hen. 8. chap 3. The first fruits and profits of every Archbishoprick and Bishoprick, Parsonage, Vicaridge, &c. are given to Henry the Eight, and his Successours; and over and besides a yearly tenth of all spiritual livings, as they are called. And by the Statute of the 25. of Hen. 8. chap. 20. It is ordained and established, That the King and his Successours may grant to the Prior and Covent, or the Dean and chapter of the Cathedral Churches or Monasteries a Licence under the great Seal, as of old time hath been ac∣customed, to proceed to the Election of an Archbishop or Bi∣shop at every avoidance of any Archbishoprick or Bishop∣rick within the Realm of England: with a Letter Missive con∣taining the name of the person which they shall Elect, and choose, &c. And by the Statute of the 25. Hen. 8. chap, 21. The Archbishops of Canterbury have Power and Authority given at their discretions to grant Dispensations, Licences, &c. unto the King, his Heires and Successours, for causes not being contrary to the holy Scriptures; as before had been accustomed and used to be obtained by the Kings of England from the See of Rome. And by a Statute made 13. Eliz. chap. 12. It is ordained, that every person under the degree of a Bishop, which doth or shall pretend to be a Priest or a
Minister of Gods holy Word and Sacraments, &c. shall in the presence of the Bishop declare his assent, and subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which concern the confession of the true Christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacra∣ments comprized in a Book imprinted, Entituled Articles whereupon it was agreed by the Archbishops and Bishops, and the whole Clergie in the Convocation holden at London in the year, 1562. And that none should be made Minister, or admitted to preach, or administer the Sacraments in England under the age of 24 years: or unlesse he be appro∣ved by the Bishop of the Diocesse, being a Deacon at the least, &c. And all admissions to Benefices, &c. and all Licences or Tolerations made to the contrary to be meerly void in Law, as if they never were. So that it is manifest, That the foundation of the late Archbishops and Bishops here in England was Man viz. The Kings and Queens of England, with the Priors and Covent of Monasteries, and the Deanes and Chapiters of the Cathedrals. And that the Ministers, Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, and Cu∣rats, as they call them, were members and branches, ari∣sing from that Root and Body, To wit, The Archbishops and Bishops; which Archbishops and Bishops by a late Or∣dinance of Parliament were and are abolished and taken away. And by another Ordinance or Act of Parliament, the Kingly Power and Government was and is taken away and rendred uselesse in this Nation: and the same declared to be a free Common-Wealth. And by another Ordinance of Parliament the late Deans and Chapiters, &c. are also abolished and taken away: So that it is manifest by the Lawes, Statutes, and Ordinances aforesaid; That the called Priests, Ministers, Rectors, Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, and Curats, were Members and Branches of the late Archbishops and Bishops of this Nation; and had their rising, and sprung
from that Root and Body, and of that Root and Body were members and branches: And that the Archbishops and Bishops themselves were made and had their rise from the late Kings and Queens of England, with the Priors and Covents, and Dean and Chapiters aforesaid: which said Kings and Queens, Priors, Covents, Monasteries, Deans and Chapiters, Archbishops and Bishops, Root and Branch, and their Power and Authorities, being disannulled, ren∣dred and declared uselesse, abolished, and taken away as aforesaid: It doth clearly appear, and is manifest; That all the Priests so called, and Ministers in England, with the caled Rectors, Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, Clerks, and Curats, being Branches and Members of that Root and Body, viz. the late Archbishops and Bishops, as branches and members of that Body and Root, are ta∣ken away, disannulled, and abolished; and the Root of their Root, the Kings and Queens of England, &c. And thus having clearly proved, and made manifest their foun∣dation to be of man, and from man: and them and their foundation, and the Root of their Root, by man razed, taken away, made Null, and rendred uselesse; I leave them in the Pit; without foundation, either of God or man, where they and their memory shall rot, who have brought nothing to perfection; and all that go about to set up, write again, and uphold that which God hath cast down and disannulled; and blotted out the hand-writing of Ordinances; the commandement by which the Priests took Tythes, and changed the Priesthood that was change∣able, that had a commandement to take Tythes of the peo∣ple, during the first Priesthood, as you may read Hebrews the 7. And do witnesse Christ Iesus the unchangeable Priesthood, the end of all Types, Figures, and changeable things: and the Priesthood that had a commandement to
take Tythes, changed; and the Law by which they took Tythes, disanulled: because of the weakness and unpro∣fitablenesse thereof; for the Law made nothing perfect: but the bringing in of a better hope made perfect, whereby wee draw near to God, Heb. 7. 18, 19. And do own and wit∣nesse the Ministery and Ministers of the Gospel, which is not of man, neither by man, whose foundation standeth sure, abideth for ever, changeth not, neither can be shaken; who are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being their chief and head, Ephes. 2. 20. who by him are gifted, for the gathering to∣gether of the Saints, for the work of the Ministery, and for the edification of the Body of Christ, till they all meet together in the unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; and unto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ, Eph. 4. 12, 13. And all who are Ministers of Christ have received a perfect Mini∣stery, which freely they have received, and freely they de∣clare, without being burthensome to any: And do wit∣nesse and own the Church whereof Christ Iesus is the head, which is his body, which is holy; and the assembly of the righteous, from which all the ungodly are exclu∣ded, Psal. 1. 5. And the Ordinances of Christ Iesus; of which none that are unholy can partake. And do own and witnesse the worship of God, which is in Spirit and truth: and the Law of God, which is holy, just, and good, which never changes by no diversity of place or time: And do witnesse, That all Lawes, Statutes, Ordinances, Pre∣scriptions, or Customes, brought in against this Law writ∣ten in the heart (which is the Law of the Eternall un∣changeable God, though called by many the Law of Rea∣son, or of Nature) to be things void, and against Iustice: and being but the Lawes of men, they are inferiour to the
Law of God which is Superiour; and therefore to it must they give place. And being that Tythes by the Lawes and Statutes of this Nation are given to God, and holy Church. And being as before is proved, That by God, and the Church which is holy, Tythes are denyed: and that the called Church of England, the body spirituall, called the Spirituality, who receive Tythes, are unholy, not being free from corruption and sinister affection; but stand in need of honours and possessions to keep them from corruption and sinister affection; for which end they were given them, as by the Statute of the 24. Hen. 8 chap. 12. it appeareth: Therefore by the Lawes and Statutes of England, the caled Priests, Ministers, Preachers, Rectors, Parsons, Vicars, Clerks, and Curats, who are unholy, have no right to Tythes; and an Evill custome or usuage is to be abolished and taken away, saith Cook upon Littleon. And that custome or usuage which requires me to give wages to him that never did, nor doth any work for me, or mine, is against reason, which is said to be the ground of all Lawes. And being as afore is said, That all Lawes, Sta∣tutes, Cnstomes, or Prescriptions against the Law written in the heart, called the Law of Reason, or the Law of Nature are void: and if any be brought in against it, they be no Prescriptions, Statutes, nor Customes, but things void, and against Justce, as you may read in Do∣ctor and Student, Chap. 2. Therefore all Lawes, Sta∣tutes, Customes, Usuages or Prescriptions, which would set up, and uphold that which God hath dis∣annulled and made void, and his Law beares▪ witnesse against, and would have me to contribute towards the upholding of a Ministery which is changeable, and makes nothing perfect (who are not one amongst them∣selves: neither the same this generation, that was the last
before; but alters and changes with times and men: as the called Ministers, and Priests of England, and their Prede∣cessors have done, as is manifest: that in the time of Henry the éight the late King of England, their predecessors de∣nied the Pope for their head, and owned Henry the eight for their head: and in the time of Edward the sixt, their Predecessors denied the Msse Book, and received the book of Common Prayer at his command: And again in Queen Mary her time, they denied the Common Prayer Book, and received the Masse: And in the time of Queen Elizabeth they denied the Masse Book, and again received the Book of Common prayer: And in the time of the late Parliament they denied the Common Prayer Book: and received the Directory, rather then they would deny their Honours and possessions: and what they now own, is manifest to all the Children of Light; to me they are of no force, nor of me can take hold being thereunto dead: and therefore from them freed, being to another married, even the man Christ Iesus: who is raised from the dead, that I should now bring forth fruits to God: and from henceforth serve Him in newnesse of life, and not in the oldnesse of the Letter, and in so doing by God, and that of God in every mns con∣science I am ustified: who art thou oh man that condem∣nest? Gods enemy thou art, who contrary to that of God in thy conscience doth act. And thus to all both Ma∣gistrates, Priests and people have I cleared my conscience, and laid down the grounds and reasons why I, who of the world and to the world am known by the name of Gervase Benson, deny the called Ministers and Priests of England aforesaid: and to pay Tyths contrary to the Law of God: which is written in my heart not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, who am the servant of the living God, who doth him obey: whose soul is made subject to
the higher powers for conscience sake, and to every ordi∣nance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the Superiour, or unto Governours as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evill doers, and for the prayse of them that do well, 2 Pet. 2. 13. 14. For so is the Will of God that by well doing I may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; who resisters are of the power which is the Ordinance of God which whosoever doth re∣sist, shall receive to themselves damnation: for Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evill, Rom. 13. 2, 3. And if for my subjection to the Higher Powers, for conscience sake: and for bearing witnesse against all resisters of the power according to the Ordinance of God: or for not swea∣ring, contrary to the commands of Christ Iesus, who saith, Swear not at all, Matth. 5. 34. And the doctrine of the A∣postle of Christ, James 5. 12. who saith: Above all things, my Brethren, swear not: neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, least ye fall into condemnation: or for not putting forth my hand to Act that, which that of God in my conscience doth shew me to be evil: or for not owning a form which is contrary to the Truth: and so more then yea and nay, I suffer, I suffer: knowing (if the Will of God be so) It is better to suffer for well doing then for evill. And so to the Will of my God, I commit my soul and body in wel-doing, who saith, If we suffer with him, we shall raign with him: And before Governours and Kings ye shall be brought for my sake, for a Testimony against them and the Gentiles. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the West End of Pauls, 1656.
