B4937 R1926 12014047 52491
A CABINET OF CHOICE JEVVELS OR, A Box of precious Ointment. Being a plain Discovery of, or, what men are worth for Eternity, and how 'tis like to go with them in another World. Here is also a clear and large Discovery of the several rounds in Jacob's Ladder, that no Hypocrite under Heaven can climb up to. Here are also such closs, piercing, distinguishing and discovering evidences as will reach and suit those Christians who are highest in Grace and spiritual Enjoyments; and here are ma∣ny Evidences, which are suited to the Capacities and Experiences of the weakest Christians in Christ's School: And here Christians may see as in a Glass, what a sober Use and Improvement they ought to make of their evidences for Heaven; and how in the use of their gracious evidences they ought to live. First, upon the free grace of God. Secondly, upon the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. Thirdly, upon the Covenant of Grace: With several other Points of grand Importance, &c. By Thomas Brooks, formerly Preacher of the Gospel at St. Margarets, New-Fishstreet. Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be repro∣bates? Or, , unapproved or rejected. Omnis anima est aut sponsa Christi, aut adultera Diaboli. Austin. London, Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock at the first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil, at the sign of the three Bibles, or at his Shop in Bishops-Gate-Street, near great St. Hellins, 1669.
To the Right Worshipful, Sir John Frederick Knight, and the Lady Mary Frederick his pious Consort. To Mr. Nathaniel Herne, and Mrs. Judith his vertuous Wife. All confluence of blessings, both for this Life and for that which is to come, from the Father of Mercies and God of all Consolations. Honoured and Beloved in our Lord Jesus, THough I croud your Names together, yet I owe more than an Epistle to each of your Names; but the Lod having made you near and dear one to another, more wayes than one, I take the boldness to present this Treatise to you jointly. Here is no∣thing in this Book that relates to the Government of Church or State: The design of this Treatise is to shew what men are worth for Eternity, and how it is like to
go with them in another World.Granctensis tells of a wo∣man that was so affected with souls miscarry∣ings, that she besought God to stop up the passage into hell with her soul and body, that none might have en∣trance. O anima! Dei insignita imagi∣ne, desponsata fide, donata spiritu, &c. Bern. O divine soul! invested with the image of God, espoused to him by faith, &c. There are none of the sons of men, but bear about with them precious and im∣mortal souls, that are more worth than ten thousand thou∣sand worlds; if the soul be safe all is safe, if that be well all is well, if that be lost all is lost. The first great work that men are to attend in this World, is the eternal safety and security of their souls; the next great work is to know, to be assured, that it shall go well with their souls for ever. And these are the main things that are aimed at in this Discourse. The soul is the better and more noble part of man; upon the soul the Image of God is most fairly stampt; the soul is first convert∣ed, and the soul shall be first and most glorified; the soul is that spiritual and immortal substance that is capable of union with God, and of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. Plato though a Hea∣then, could say, That he thought the soul to be made all of eternity, and that the putting the soul into the body, was a sign of great wrath from God. Each living corps must yield at last to death, Pindarus.And every life must leese his vital breath. The soul of man that only lives on high, And is an image of Eternity. The Romans, when their Emperors and great Ones died, and their bodies were buried, they caused an Eagle to mount on high, thereby to signifie the souls immortality and ascent. He gave good counsel, who said, Play not the Courtier with your soul; the Courtier doth all things late, he rises late, and dines late, and sups late, and repents late. A Scythian Captain having for a draught of water delivered up his City, cryed out, Quid perdidi, quid prodidi? What have I lost, what have I
betrayed? So many at last will cry out, What have I lost, what have I betrayed? I have lost God, and Christ, and Heaven, and have betrayed my precious and immortal soul into the hands of divine Justice, and into the hands of Satan. Who these men are that will at last thus cry out, this Treatise does discover. I have read that there was a time when the Romans did wear jewels on their shoes: Most men in this day do worse, for they trample that matchless jewel of their souls under feet; and who these are, this Treatise does discover. One well ob∣serves,Chrysost. That whereas God hath given many other things double, two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with, two hands to work with, and two feet to walk with, to the intent that the failing of the one might be supplied by the other; but he hath given us but one soul, and if that be lost, hast thou (saith he) ano∣ther soul to give in recompence for it? Now, who those are whose souls are in a safe estate, and who those are whose souls are in danger of being lost for ever, this Treatise does plainly and fully discover.Psal. 15. Psal. 144.15. To describe to the life who that man is that is truly happy in this world, and that shall be blest for ever in the other world, is the work of this ensuing Treatise. The grace of the Covnant in us is a sure evidence of Gods entring into the Covenant of grace with us. To be in a gracious state is true happiness, but to know our selves to be in such a state, is the top of our happiness in this world. A man may have grace, and yet (for a time) not know it.1. Joh. 5.13. The child lives in the womb but does not know it. A man may be in a gracious state, and yet not see it;Psal. 77. Psal. 88. he may have a saving work of God upon his soul, and yet not discern it; he may have the root of the matter in him, and yet not be able to evidence it. Now to help such poor hearts
to a right understanding of their spiritual condition, and that they may see and know what they are worth for ano∣ther world, and so go to their graves in joy and peace, I have sent this Treatise abroad into the world. Will you give me leave to say, First, Some men of name in their day have laid down such things for evidences or characters of grace, which being weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary will be found too light. But here a mantle of love may be of more use than a lamp; and therefore, Secondly, Many, yea very many there are, whose graces are very weak, and much buried under the earth and ashes of many fears, doubts, scruples, strong passions, prevail∣ing corruptions, and diabolical suggestions, who would give as many worlds as there be men in the world (had they so many in their hands to give) to know that they have grace, and that their spiritual estate is good, and that they shall be happy for ever. Now, this Treatise is fitted up for the service of these poor hearts; for the weakest Chri∣stians may turn to many clear and well-bottomed eviden∣ces in this Treatise, and throw the Gantlet to Satan, and bid him prove if he can that ever any prophane per∣son or cunning hypocrite under heaven had such eviden∣ces, or such fair certificates to shew for heaven, which he has to shew. The generality of Christians are weak, they are rather Dwarfs than Gyants,1 Pet. 2.2, 3. 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. Isa. 40.11. they are rather bruised Reeds than tall Cedars, they are rather Babes than men, Lambs than sheep, &c. Now, for the service of their souls, I have been willing to send this Treatise in∣to the world; for this Treatise may speak to them when I may not, yea when I cannot, yea which is more, when I
am not. Famous Mr. Dod would frequently say, He cared not where he was if he could but answer these two Questions. 1. Who am I? And, 2. What do I hear; am I a child of God, and am I in my way? But, Thirdly, Some there are who are so excessively and  immoderately taken up with their Signs, Marks and Evi∣dences of grace, and of their gracious state, &c. that Christ is too much neglected,Where Christ was born, they were all so ta∣ken up with their guests, that he was not minded nor re∣garded; when others lay in stately rooms, he must be laid in a manger. Luke 2.7. and more rarely minded by them, their hearts don't run out so freely, so fully, so strongly, so frequently, so delightfully towards Christ as they should do, nor as they would do, if they were not too inordinately taken up with their Marks and Signs. Now for the rectifying of these mistakes, and the cure of these spiritual maladies, this Treatise is sent into the world; we may and ought to make a sober use of characters and evidences of our gracious estates, to support, comfort, and encourage us in our way to heaven, but still in subordi∣nation to Christ, and to the fresh and frequent exercises of faith upon the person, blood, and righteousness of Jesus. But O! how few Christians are there that are skil'd in this Work of Works, this Art of Arts, this Mystery of Mysteries. But, Fourthly, Some there are who in these dayes are given up to Enthusiastical Fancies, strange Raptures, Reve∣lations,  and to the sad delusions of their own hearts, crying down with all their might all discoveries of Belie∣vers spiritual estates by Scripture Characters,2 Thes. 2.9, 10, 11. Marks and Signs of Sanctification, as carnal, and low, and all this under fair pretences of exalting Christ, and maintaining the honour of his Righteousness and Free∣grace, and of denying our selves, and our own righteous∣ness.
Though sanctification be a branch of the Covenant of grace as well as Justification,Jer. 33.8. Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. yet there are a sort of men in the world, that would not have Christians to re∣joyce in their sanctification, under a pretence of reflect∣ing dishonour upon their free justification by Christ. There are many who place all their Religion in opinions, in brain-sick notions, in airy speculations, in quaint dispu∣tations, in immediate Revelations, and in their warm zeal, for this or that form of worship. Now, that these may be recovered, and healed, and prevented from doing further mischief in the world, I have at this time put to a helping hand. But, Fifthly, No man can tell what is in the breasts, in the womb of divine Providence;The Brathman∣ni had their graves before their doors. The Sybarites at Banquets had a deaths head delivered from hand to hand by every guest at the Table. The Egyptians in the midst of their Feasts, used to have the Anatomy of a dead man set before them, as a memorandum to the guests of their mortality. The poor Hea∣then could say, that the whole life of man should be medi∣tatio mortis, a meditation of death. Dwell upon that, Deut. 32.29. Prov. 27, 1. no man can tell what a a day, a night, an hour, may bring forth. Who can sum up the many possible deaths that are still lurking in his own bowels, or the innumerable hosts of external dan∣gers which beleaguer him on every side? or how many invisible arrows flie about his ears continually? and how soon he may have his mortal wound given him by one of them, who can tell? Now, how sad would it be for a man to have a summons to appear before God in that other world, before his heart and life is changed, and his evi∣dences for heaven cleared up to him? The life of man is but a shadow, a post, a span, a vapour, a flower, &c. Though there is but one way to come into the world, yet there are many thousand wayes to be sent out of the world; and this should bespeak every Christian to have his evi∣dences for heaven alwayes ready and at hand, yea in his hand as well as in his heart, and then he will find it an easie thing to die. The King of terrors will then be the King of desires to him, and he will then travel to glory
under a spirit of joy and triumph. We carry about in our bodies the matter of a thousand deaths, and may die a thousand several wayes several hours: As many senses, as many members, nay as many pores as there are in the body, so many windows there are for death to enter in at. Death needs not spend all his arrows upon us, a Worm, a Gnat, a Fly, a Hair, a stone of a Raisin, a ker∣nel of a Grape, the fall of a Horse, the stumble of a Foot, the prick of a Pin, the pairing of a Nail, the cutting one of a Corn; all these have been to others, and any of them may be to us, the means of our death within the space of a few dayes, nay of a few hours. Don't it therefore highly concern us to have our evidences for heaven cleared, sealed, shining and at hand. Naturalists tell us, That if a man sees a Cockatrice first, the Cockatrice dieth; but if the Cockatrice sees a man first, the man dies. Certainly, if we so see death first as to prepare for it, as to get our evidences for heaven ready, we shall kill it; but if death sees us first, and arrests us first before we are pre∣pared, and before our evidences for heaven are cleared, it will kill us everlastingly, it will kill us eternally. Time travelleth with God's decrees, and in their season brings them forth; but little doth any man know what is in the womb of to morrow, till God hath signified his will by the event. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. That man that knows what himself intends to bring forth, does not know what the day will bring forth; the next day is not so neer the former in time, as it may be remote from it in the effects of it. Seneca could say,Seneca, Epist. 102. Nihil est miserius dubitatione venientium, quo evadunt; There is no∣thing more miserable than the doubtfulness of things to come, to what they will come. Providence in this life is
the Map of changes,Ezek. 1.16. the picture of mutability. Who can sum up the strange circumferences, and rare circuits and labyrinths of providence. Providence is as a wheel in the midst of a wheel, whose motion, and work, and end in working, is not discerned by every common eye. Three dreadful judgments God hath lately visited us with, viz. Sword, Pestilence and Fire; but who repents? who smites upon his thigh?Isa 1.16, 17. Psal. 106.23. who finds out the plague of his own heart? who sayes, what have I done? who ceases from doing evil? who learns to do well? who turns to the most High? who layes hold on everlasting strength? who makes peace with God? who throws himself into the gap? &c. Are not multitudes grown much worse after judgments than they were before? Don't they bid higher defiance to heaven than ever? and therefore, who can tell what further controversie God may have with such a people, especially considering that terrible Scripture, Levit. 26.14. to the 34. vers. with scores of others that sound that way. Were our forefathers alive, how sadly would they blush to see such a horrid degenerate po∣sterity as is to be found in the midst of us? How is our forefathers hospitality converted into riot and luxury, their frugality into pride and prodigality, their simpli∣city into subtilty, their sincerity into hypocrisie, their charity into cruelty, their chastity into chambering and wantonness, their sobriety into drunkenness, their plain-dealing into dissembling, and their works of compassion into works of oppression, &c. And may we not fear, that even for these things God may once more visit us. The Nations are angry, and we are low in their eyes; our enemies are not asleep abroad, and are not we too secure at home? and what further conclusions may be in the world, who can divine? I point at these things only to
provoke all those into whose hands this Treatise may fall, to make sure work for another world, to make sure their evidences for heaven, and to keep their evidences for life and glory alwayes sparkling and shining, and then I am sure the worst of calamities, the sorest of judg∣ments, shall but translate them from earth to heaven, from a wilderness to a paradise, from misery to glory, & from mixt and mutable enjoyments, to the pure & ever∣lasting enjoyments of God, Christ, the Angels and the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12, 22, 23, 24. But, Sixthly and lastly, In this Treatise, as in a Glass,  all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flat∣terers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 1. That their present state and condition is not so safe, nor yet so happy as they judge it to be. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 2. The happy and blessed state of the people of God, against whom their spirits rise and swell, &c. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of Hypo∣crites may see, 3. What those things are that they need, and that they ought to beg of God. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 4. What those things are, without which they can neither be happy here nor hereafter. Now, were there no other Reasons for my sending forth this Trea∣tise into the world, this alone might justifie me. But Honoured and Beloved, before I close up this Epistle, give me leave to say, That there are two sorts
of men that my self, and all the world, are bound, 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And, 3. Great∣ly to honour above all other men in the world, and they are these: First, men of publick spirits. Secondly, men of charitable spirits, men of merciful spirits, men of tender and compassionate spirits. First, Men of publick spirits, my self and all others are bound, 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And, 3. Greatly to honour above all other men in the world, and that, First, Because a publick spirited man is a common good, a common blessing; all in the Family, all in the Court, all in the City, all in the Countrey, fare the better for that Christians sake that is of a publick spirit. All in Laban's family did fare the better for Jacob's sake;Gen. 30.27. & 19.21, 22, 23, 24. & 41. &c. and all in the City of Zoar did fare the better for Lot's sake, and all Pharoah's Court, and the whole Countrey of Egypt did fare the better for Joseph's sake. Sodom was safe whilst Lot was in it; Eliah was a man of a publick spirit,2 King. 2.12. and he was the chariots and horsemen of Israel; Moses was a man of a publick spirit, and he often di∣verted ruining judgments from falling upon Israel.Psal. 106.23. Num. 16.46.49. Phineas was a man of a publick spirit, and he takes up his Censer and stands between the living and the dead,Though I do not, I dare not say, that every publick spirit is a gracious spirit, yet this I must say, that every gracious spirit is a pub∣lick spirit. and the Plague was stayed. Men of publick spirits are publick mercies, publick blessings; a man of a publick spirit is () a publick, diffusive blessing in the place where he lives; men of publick spirits are the true Atlasses both of Church and State, they are the Pillars on whom all do rest, the Props on whom all do lean; do but overturn these Pillars, and all will fall about
your ears, as the house did about the Philistines when Sampson shook it; wrack but these, and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths shall be quickly wrackt them∣selves. When Metellus heard of the death of Scipio Africanus a man of a publick spirit, he ran out into the Market-place and cryed out, O Citizens, come forth and consult what is to be done, for the walls of your City are fallen down. But, Secondly, Because publick spirited Christians are  most like to Christ, and to the choicest and most excel∣lent Saints.John 17. Heb. 2. Isa. 63.3. Rom. 8.30, 31, 32, 33. Heb. 7.25. John 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Acts 10.38. Phil. 2.4, 5. Christ made himself poor to make others rich, but men of narrow souls make others poor to make themselves rich. 1 Cor. 6.8. 2 Cor. 8.9. Christ left his Fathers bosom for a publick good, he assumed our nature for a publick good, he trod the wine-press of his Fathers wath for a publick good, he died for a publick good, and he rose for a publick good, he ascended to heaven for a publick good, and he conti∣nues in heaven for a publick good; when he was in this world he went up and down doing good, he healed o∣thers but was hurt himself, he fed and filled others but was hungry himself; Christ was all for a publick good. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. Though self be a great stickler, yet he that will write after Christs Copy, must neglect himself to serve others. That Christian acts most like Christ, who prefers the publick interest before his own private interest. The Stars have their bright∣ness not for themselves, but for the use of others; and the Sun hath her shining light, but not for her self, but for others. In the natural body every member is diffu∣sive, the eye conveys the light, the head spirits the liver, blood, &c. And why should it not be so in the politick body also? And as Christ, so Moses was a man of a
publick spirit, when God made a very fair profer to him, that he would make him a great Nation,Exod. 32.10, 11, 12. So Num. 14 4, 10, 13, 14. if he would but stand Neuter till he had revenged himself upon a rebellious people; but Moses had no mind to preser∣ment upon those terms, he preferr'd the publick good before his own honour, profit and advancement, and therefore follows God closs, and never gives over plead∣ing for them till he had procured their pardon,Ver. 13.14. and turned away the wrath of God from them. So Joshua was a man of a publick spirit.Josh. 19.49. When they had made an end of dividing the Land for inheritance by their coast, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them. Joshua might have served himself first, and he might have taken as large an Inheritance as he had pleased, but he preferr'd the good of the people before his own; he who had di∣vided the Land to others, was himself contented with very mean preferment, for his inheritance was among the barren Mountains,Hierom. as some observe. So Jehoiada was a man of a publick spirit;2 Chron. 24.16 you read that they buried him in the City of David among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, both towards God and towards his house. Men of publick spirits shall be honoured both living and dying.Neh. 5.14, 15. So Nehemiah was a man of a brave publick spirit, he holds on twelve years together in pub∣lick work upon his own cost and charge.Esther 4.16. So Esther was one of a publick spirit, and therefore she takes her life in her hand, and goes in to the King with an If I perish, I perish. And so Mordecai was a man of a publick spi∣rit. Mordecai the Jew was next unto King Ahashuerus, and great among the Jews,Esth. 10.3. and arcepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed. Mordecai was more mind∣ful
and careful of his peoples peace, prosperity and welfare, than he was of his own concernments. And so Dvid was a man of a publick spirit, for after he had served his own generation he fell asleep.Acts 13.36. The spirit of the Lord has put this upon record for Davids honour and our imitation. Davids soul did not live in a narrow Bowling-alley, he was not a man of so poor, low and narrow a spirit, as to make himself the center of his designs and actions. David was a man of a generous, noble spirit, the publick good lay nearest his heart, and to serve his generation he was willing to spend and be spent. The publick spirited man of all men is most like to Christ, and to those Worthies who were once glo∣rious on earth, and are now triumphing in heaven. The Apostle speaks of some who are lovers of themselves, 2 Tim. 3.2. and who are seekers of themselves, Phil. 2.21. and who are minders of themselves, Phil. 3.19. They mind earthly things. Of all these we may say as God speaks of Israel, Israel is an empty vine,Hos. 10.1. he brings forth fruit unto himself; yea of all these we may say, that light is not more contrary to darkness, heaven to hell, glory to shame, than these are contrary to Christ, and to those precious servants of his who are crown'd and chronicled in the blessed Scriptures for their publick spi∣ritedness and publick usefulness in the world. But, Thirdly, Men of publick spirits are rare men, excel∣lent  men, of all men they most resemble God,Mat. 5.45. Vir bonus ma∣gis aliis prodest quam sibi. who does good to all; there are none so excellent and truly ho∣nourable as these. All the Instances cited to make good the second particular evidences this, to which I may add that of Daniel, who was a man of a publick spirit, and of that excellent spirit, as that he carried the Bell
from all the Presidents and Princes of Darius his Court. Dan. 6.3. Then this Daniel was preferred a∣bove the Presidents and Princes, because an excellent spirit was in him, and the King thought to set him over the whole Realm. I might give you many other Instances from the Patriarchs and Apostles, but what need that, when blind nature speaks so loud in the case. Men of publick spirits have been very excellent and honourable in the very eyes of all the Heathen. Take a few Instances among the many hundreds that might be produced. M. Attilius Regulus was a man of that publick spirit,In Austins ac∣count he was the gallantest of all the old Romans. that he valued neither State nor Life to serve his Countrey and preserve his own honour; he got very much for his Countrey, but little for himself, seven Acres of Land being all that ever he had; he was a man highly honoured among the Romans. Titus Vespasian was a man of a publick spirit, he governed so sweetly, moderately and prudently, that he was generally termed Delitiae humani generis, the de∣light of mankind; he was greatly honoured whilst he lived, and when he died the people wept so bitterly for him, as if they had been resolved to have wept out their yes. Curius Dentalus was a man of a publick spirit, and very victorious; when his Countrey was setled, he was found at dinner feeding hard on a few parched Pease, when the Ambassadors were sent to tender him a great sum of gold, which he refused, saying, He had rather be at his pease, while they whom he ruled over had the gold, than he to have the gold and they the Pease When some unworthy persons once accused him for keep∣ing
back somewhat from the publick, he brought forth a wooden platter, and did swear, That it was all he had reserved to himself of the spoyls. He was had in great honour and reputation among the people. That Pilot dies nobly (saith Seneca) who perish∣eth in the storm with the Helm in his hand. Aristides was a man of a publick spirit; after the overthrow of the Persians, when there was a Mass of treasure, gold, silver, and rich apparel, he would not touch it, nor take so much as one farthing of it to himself, he was in high esteem among the people. Tully in his Book of Scipio's dream, brings in a dead Father (now in heaven as he supposed) encouraging his son to do service for his Countrey (wherein himself had given him a most noble and notable example) upon a very high consideration, viz. There is a most sure and certain place in heaven for every man that shall procure the weal of his Countrey, either by freeing it from peril, or increasing the happiness of it any way. To hear a Gen∣tile tell of heaven, as of a thing certain; to hear him tell of certain places provided there for those that should do vertuously, to have the service of ones Countrey pressed on his soul with so celestial an argument, what matter of wonder and admiration is it! Another speaking of men of publick spirits, saith, Such ennobled spirits, they are the dear off-spring,Cicero. the delight and care of God; a divine race it is, from the heavens they come down to us, and to the hea∣vens again when ever they take their leaves of us, shall they triumphantly return.
A Cataline sayes the Satyrist) a trouble of man∣kind grows as the weed,Jur. almost every where; but a Bru∣tus, a worthy Patriot, that bears the welfare of others, the true prosperity of his native Land upon his heart, and sets his eyes perpetually thereon for good; such an one is a rare jewel, worthy of all honour and embraces where ever he is found. Men of publick spirits of all men,1 Sam. 2.30. do most exalt the Lord, and honour the Lord, and therefore the Lord first or last will most exalt them and honour them. In all the Ages of the world, and in all the Nations of the world, men of most publick spirits have been best beloved, and most highly honoured. A man of a narrow spirit is like the Hedge-hog, that ne∣ver goes abroad but to gather what he can for himself, who ever suffer by it; but a man of a publick spirit is like the Pellican that draws out her own blood for the good of others, and therefore the light of nature as well as the Law of grace, will lead men by the hand to ho∣nour such. Fourthly, Men of publick spirits do most and best answer to one of the noblest and highest ends of their creation.Doth the Bee gather honey for it self? Doth the Sheep yield wool for it self? Doth not all creatures serve the com∣munity. Non nobis solum na∣ti, said the Heathen. By the Law of creation every man is bound to serve the publick, to serve his generation. A nar∣row, a private spirited man is a shame to his Creation, because he walks so contrary to the great intendment of God in it. 'Tis a base and unworthy spirit, for a man to make himself the Center of all his actions. The ve∣ry Heathen man could say, That a mans Countrey and his Friends, and others, challenge a great part of him. That man sins against the very Law of his being, who is swallowed up in his own, private interests. Men of publick spirits should not bear the sword of justice
in vain, for by the Law of creation they are bound so to handle it as to be a terror to evil doers,Rom. 13.3, 4 and a praise to them that do well. 'Tis cruelty to the good to spare the bad, 'tis wrong to the Sheep to let the Wolves alone, 'tis the death of the Lambs to spare the Lions. If you will pity Cataline (sayes one) pity Rome much more; let the whole have a share in your pity rather than a part. (Pereat unus magis quam unitas) better have one inju∣rious person sit mourning, than a whole Nation lan∣guishing, &c. Men of publick spirits should be for the ease of all, and the peace of all, and the comfort of all, and the encouragement of all, and the safety of all. But this Age is full of Droans and Cyphers, and of spiritless, lifeless men, who look at nothing, who design nothing, who aim at nothing, and who endeavour no∣thing, but how to raise themselves, and greaten them∣selves, and inrich themselves, and build up themselves, though it be upon others ruinnes. How many are there who are so swallowed up in their own interests and private concernments, that Gallio-like, they care not whether the publick sink or swim.Acts 18.7. These put me in mind of Jo∣thams Parable.Judg. 9.8, 9, 10, 11, &c. The Trees went forth to anoint a King over them. They go to the Olive, to the Fig-tree, and to the Vine; but shall I leave my fatness, saith the Olive? shall I leave my sweetness, saith the Fig-tree? and shall I leave my wine, saith the Vine, and go up and down for other Trees? This is the very temper, spirit and carriage of many in our day: If you go to them and desire them to lay out themselves for the publick good. What say some, shall we leave our ease, our pleasure, our profits? And say others, Shall we run this and that hazard? Shall we lose such and such friends, and create to our selves such and such enemies, to serve other men,
to save other men, to advantage other men? we cannot do it, we will never do it. Learned Tully was a zealous Patriot and lover of his Countrey; he wished two wishes (though he never saw either of them effected) one was, That he might see Rome setled in its just liberties; and the other was. That he might see every mans estate poportionable to his affection and love to the publick. Deubtless if Tullies wish might take place in our times, the purses of many would be more empty, and the publick Coffers would be more full. But, Fifthly, Of all men on earth, there are none that have such a stock of prayers going for them as men of publick spirits. Men of publick spirits are not only most highly prized, and cordially loved, and greatly honour∣ed, but they are also most upon the hearts of all sober and serious Christians, when they are in the Mount with God. The lives of such are most desirable, and the deaths of such will be most lamented, who make it their business to serve their generation.2 Chron. 21.20 Men of publick spirits shall never die as Jehoram did, undesired and unlamented. Men of publick spirits lye most open to snares, tempta∣tions, and oppositions, &c. This all sober Christians well understand, and therefore they can't but pray hard for such: The names, the lives, the liberties, the estates, and all the concernments of men of publick spirits alwayes lye nearest their hearts, who lye neerest to the heart of Christ. Men of the greatest name, and of the greatest renown, and that have had the greatest stock of prayers going for them all the world over, have been men of publick spirits. But, Sixthly and lastly, When Christians of publick spirits
come to dye, their publick spiritedness and general use∣fulness will be no small comfort and cordial to them. Nehemiah was a man of a publick spirit, and accord∣ingly he pleads it with God. Think upon me,Neh. 5. ult. See Chap. 13.22. O my God for good, according to all that I have done for this people. This was that which sweetned death to Hezekiah, I beseech thee, O Lord, to remember now, how I have walked before thee in truth,2 King. 20.3. Acts 13.36. and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And when David had served his generation, he fell asleep. Sleep is not more welcom and sweet to a labouring man, than death is to him who has made it his business, his work sincerely and faithfully to serve his generation. Such Magistrates,2 Tim. 4.7, 8, 9. John 17. Ministers and Christi∣ans who have made it their business according to their dif∣ferent measures faithfully to serve their generation, have found the King of terrors to be but the King of desires to them; when death to men of narrow, selfish spirits, hath been like the hand-writing upon the wall,Dan. 5.5, 6. very ter∣rible. Many score Instances might be produced out of Hi∣story to evidence this. Take one for all. Henry Beau∣ford that rich and wretched Cardinal, Bishop of Wn∣chester, and Chancellour of England (a man swallowed up in self interest) in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, when he perceived that he must dye,Acts and Mon. fol. 925. and that there was no remedy, O! how terrible was death to him? and, O! how did he murmur, and fret, and vex at death, that his riches could not reprieve him till a further time? For, saith he, wherefore should I die being so rich; if the whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it. Fie upon death (saith he) will not death be hired? will money do nothing? I might instance in men of a higher rank,
but then I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle. The second sort of men, that my self and all others are bound. 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And 3. Greatly to honour: Are men of charitable spi∣rits, men of merciful spirits, men of tender and compas∣sionate spirits. The Hebrew word for godly  signifies merciful, to note that the godly man is the merciful man, and the merciful man is the godly man. Loving kindness is an ingredient unto godliness. The godly man is frequently called Chasid, gracious or merciful; it notes one that hath obtained mercy, goodness, grace, piety and benignity from the Lord, and that is pious, kind,The Italian form of beg∣ging is, Do good to your selves. gracious and merciful to others. Though charity, bounty, is the most compendious way to plenty, and giving to getting, and scattering to encreasing, and layings out to layings up, Prov. 11.24. There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth. Ver. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered also himself: Yet how few in our dayes do ho∣nour the Lord with their substance?Prov. 3.9. Mic. 4.13. how few look a this as a duty, to consecrate any part of their gain unto the Lord, or of their substance to the Lord of the whole earth? Most men now carry it as if God himself had last his propriety, and as if there were no rent-penny due to his poor. But yet some there are, who have liberal hearts and open hands;Deut. 15.11. some there are, who do open their hands wide to the poor and needy. Now, here give me leave to say,Mat. 25. Prov. 31.8, 9. That these, 1. Discharge their consciences in the duty of charity, 2. These rightly improve the ta∣lents of mercy, with which they are intrusted. 3. These treasure up a stock of prayers,Job 29.13. 2 Tim. 1.16. both for themselves and theirs; the blessing and the prayers of them that were ready to perish will come upon them and theirs. 4. These
evidence the liveliness of their faith, James 2.17. Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead being alone. Ver. 18. Yea, a man may say thou hast faith, and I have works; shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. Ver. 26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also 5. These take the surest way, the readiest course to assure their own souls of Gods eternal favours and mercies to them, 1 Tim. 6.17. Charge them that be rich in this world. Ver. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Ver. 19.Aeterna vitae, vera vlta. Aug. Lay∣ing up in store for themselves a good foundation a∣gainst the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Charitable Christians are as wife Merchants, happy Usurers, parting with that which they cannot keep, that they may gain that which they cannot lose. 6. These take the surest way to draw down more outward mercies upon themselves. The fountain is not diminished,Pedagog — 3. c. 7 Clemens, Alex. but augmented by giving water to the thirsty. The widows oyl did increase by running; we do not lose, but in∣crease our mercies by imparting of them for God's ho∣nour, and the comfort and benefit of others.Luk. 6.38. Give (saith Christ) and it shall be given to you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. The Jews more large and loose garments, so that they could bear away much in their bosoms. Hence this expression, into your bosom. The meaning is, That the Lord will largely reward the beneficence of his people; yea, that he will so reward them, that they shall perceive that they are rewarded. Ho∣nour the Lord with thy substance,Prov. 3.9, 10. so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out
with new wine. God will certainly bless their substance, who honour him with their substance. The Jews at this day,Godw Heb. ntiq. 27.7. though they are not in their own Countrey, and though they have not a Levitical Priesthood, yet those who will be reputed Religious amongst them do distribute the tenth of their increase to the poor,The safest chest is the poor mans Box. God will never for∣get your chari∣ty to his, Heb. 6.10. Cicero could say, that to be rich is not to possess much, but to use much And Seneca could rebuke them that so studied to en∣crease their wealth, that they forget to use it. being perswaded that God doth bless their increase the more; for they have among them a very elegant Proverb to that purpose; De∣cima ut dives fias, Pay thy tythes that thou mayest be rich. The poor mans hand is Christs Treasury, and he shall not lose his reward that casts his mites into that Treasury. It is fabled of Midas, that what ever he touched he turned it into gold. But this is most sure, that whatever the hand of charity toucheth, it turneth it into gld; be it but a cup of cold water, nay into heaven it self, Mat. 10.42. And whosoever shall give to drink, un∣to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. Cold water having not fuel to heat it, cold water which cost not the charge of fire to warm it. A Sea of pleasures, a heaven of bles∣sings attends men of charitable minds, though their charity can extend no further than to a cup of cold wa∣ter; for God measures mens deeds by their minds, and not their minds by their deeds. The Kenites in Sauls time, that were born many Ages after Jethro's death received life from his dust, and favour from his hospita∣lity, nay, the very Egyptians, for harbouring, and at first dealing kindly with the Israelites, though without any re∣spect to their righteousness, were preserved by Joseph in that sore famine, and kindly dealt with ever after by Gods special command. I have read a story of one Eva∣gi a rich man, who lying upon his death-bed, and be∣ing
importuned by Sinesius, a pious Bishop, to give some∣thing to charitable uses, he yielded at last to give three hundred pounds, but first took bond of the Bishop that it should be repaid him in another world; but before he had been one day dead, he is said to have appeared to the Bi∣shop delivering in the bond cancelled, as thereby acknow∣ledging, that what was promised was made good. Whe∣ther the Relation be fabulous or not, I shall not now stand to determine; but this is certain, that all acts of charity shall be certainly and signatly rewarded. Several Writers observe, that the ground is most barren nearest the golden Mines; and experience tells us, that many who are enriched with fair estates, are most barren in good works, but this will be bitterness in the end. He that shall consult two Scriptures (among many others) will conclude, that he that hath a withered hand has no honest heart, 2 Chron. 31.10. 1 John 3.17. The wealth that such men have, is but as Aristotle calls it,Arist. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 6. Foelix amen∣tia, a happy madness, because they are so taken up with their wealth, that they neither know what they are, nor what they do. Josephus writing of the waters of Egypt, saith, That they were blood in the hands of an Aegyp∣tian, but water in the hand of an Israelite. Wealth in the hand of a worldling, is like blood in the hand which is good for nothing;Josephus. but wealth in the hand of a chari∣table Christian is like water in the hand, which may be of use both to a mans self and others. By what has been said, there is nothing more evident than this, viz. That men of publick spirits, and men of charitable spirits, of all men on earth, are, 1. To be most highly prized. 2. Most cordially loved. And 3. Most greatly honoured, &c. Gentlemen, those that shall read what I have writ in this Epistle, concerning publick spiritedness and chari∣tableness,
and know you well, they know how to make the Application without any further direction from me. Sir John, I must crave leave to say, that it is and will be your honour and comfort, both in life and death, and in the day of your account, that in all the great Places, Offices and Employments unto which divine Providence has called you for divers years together, you have laid out your time, your strength, your estate for the publick good; when others have been serving themselves upon the pub∣lick, you have been a serving of the publick. Sir, 'tis your great mercy and happiness, that you can stand forth and say; as once Samuel did, Behold, here I am, wit∣ness against me,1 Sam. 12.3. whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I re∣ceived any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? Your prudence and moderation before your Mayoralty, and in it (when you had many a narrow bridge to go over) and after it, to this day will never be forgotten by all sober Citizens. Sir, the French History tells us, that when an old Courtier would needs depart from the Court, and retire himself to a private life, the King desired him to leave his advice in some general Rules, about the Go∣vernment of his Kingdom: Upon this motion of the King, the old Courtier took a sheet of white paper, and writ upon the top of the leaf Moderation, and in the middle of the leaf Moderation, and at the bottom of the leaf Moderation, intimating to the King, that the only way to keep his Kingdom in Peace and Prosperity, was to manage his Government throughout with a spirit of Moderation. When Vespasian asked Apollonius what was the cause of Nero's ruin; he answered, That Nero could tune the Harp well, but in Government he
did alwayes wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low. Both of your staying in London in the time of the last great Plague, when death peep'd in at every win∣dow, and when most Magistrates, Ministers and Peo∣ple were fled from their Habitations (the terror of the Lord and of his judgments being very great in that day, upon all sorts and ranks of men) and that chiefly, main∣ly (if not only) upon the account of publick service, and that nothing might be wanting on your side, to preserve poor creatures from perishing. The old Romans for les∣ser services than you did in these dismal dayes, have set up many a statue of brass; but the Lord is faithful, and will not forget to reward your work, your great work, your hazardous work, and that matchless love and bowels that you shew'd to very many that were impoverished for want of Trade, and to very many that lay in a sick, languish∣ing and dying condition: How free, how full, how sea∣sonable, how sutable, how impartial, how constant, and well regulated your charity then was, and since hath been, is very well known to God above, and to some faithful friends still alive; but all will out in the great day.Mat. 25. I know you don't love that your left hand should know what your right hand doth,Chap. 6.3. and therefore I shall not provoke you by sounding a Trumpet.Ezek. 1.8. & 10.8. The Angels have their hands under their wings, they do much good, and yet make no noise. There are some in the world that are like to them; the Violet grows low and covers it self with its own leaves, and yet of all flowers yields the most fragrant smell to others. There are some charitable Christians that resemble this sweet flower. Gentlemen and Ladies, your respects and undeserved favours, that have been many wayes manifested unto
me, hath emboldned me to Dedicate and present to you this Treatise as a real Testimony of my unfeigned love, service, gratitude and desires to promote the inter∣nal and eternal welfare of all your precious and immor∣tal souls: And wherein could I (or any body else) be more truly serviceable to you than in endeavouring to pro∣mote your assurance of eternal salvation, which is the grand Design and Project of this Book.1 Pet. 5.1. Now, the God of all grace fill all your hearts with all the fruits of righ∣teousness and holiness,Gal. 5.22, 23. unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding,Heb. 10.22. and of faith and hope in this Life, and at last crown you all (and all yours) with ineffable glory in the life to come. To the everlasting arms of his protection, and to the perpetual influences of his grace and mercy in Christ, he commends you all, who is to you all Your much obliged and affectionate friend and souls servant in our dear Lord Jesus. THO. BROOKS.
The CONTENTS. A Of the appearance of sin. EIght Arguments to arm us against the appearances of sin. 114 to Page 126 Of Assurance. The sense and evidence of the least grace, yea of the least degree of the least grace, may afford some measure of as∣surance. Page 17, 18, 19, 20 That Christians may more easily attain to a comfortable assurance of their gracious estate, than many (I than mst) do apprehend or believe; This is strongly and fully made good. Page 25 to Page 57 There is a threefold Assurance Page 27 Perfection of Assurance, in respect of de∣grees, not attainable in this life. Page 57, 58 Assurance is not to be expected by any extraordinary way of Revelation. Page 58, 59, 60 Assurance excludes not all fears, doubts, conflicts, &c. Page 351, 352 B About Babes in grace. The generality of Christians are but Babes in grace. Page 339, 340 C About changing a mans condition. A godly man won't change his conditi∣on with men of this world, for ten thousand worlds Page 200, 201 About chusing. Mo man can chuse God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and happi∣ness, as their chiefest good, but such who are really good Page 202, 203 Of the commands of God. He that hath a respect to all Gods com∣mands, shall never be ashamed. Page 27, 28 See O, of Obedience. About heart-condemning. He whose heart does not condemn him, in six things, may have confidence to∣wards God. Page 29, 30 About confession of sin. The second part of true repentance lyes in confession of sin Page 234, 235, 236 There are eight properties or qualifica∣tions of true penitential confession of sin. Page 236, to 255 Of the Covenant of grace. When a Christian casts his eye upon his
gracious evidences, he must remem∣ber that he has to do with God in a Covenant of grace Page 83, 84, 85, 86, 87 The Covenant of grace is a Christians Fort Royal Page 363, 364 In the Covenant of grace, God stands engaged to give what ever he requires, which is evidenced by an induction of twelve particulars. Page 364, to 369 The Covenant is everlasting, in two re∣spects Page 370, 373, 374 The Covenant is a sure Covenant. Page 370, 371, 372 About delighting in God. Five Arguments to prove that no Hy∣pocrite can delight himself in God. Page 322, 323 D Of desires. That true desires of grace is grace proved by six Arguments. Page 170, to 178 No man can sincerely desire grace for grace sake, but he that has true grace. Page 178, 179, 180, 181 No man can sincerely desire every grace, but he that has grace. Page 181, 182 No man can sincerely and graciously de∣sire grace for gracious ends and pur∣poses, but he that has true grace in his soul. Page 182, 183 No man can sincerely desire, and earnest∣ly endeavour after the highest pitches of grace, but he that has grace. Page 183, to 186 No man can alwayes desire grace, but he that has true grace Page 186, 187 No man can sincerely desire to abound, to abound and excel most in those parti∣cular graces, which are most opposite and contrary to those particular sins, which his natural temper, constitution, complexion, &c. does most expose him and incline him to. Page 187, 188, 189 About the dominion of sin. He over whom presumptious sins have no dominion, is upright. Page 29 Eight wayes for a man to know whether he be under the dominion of sin or no. Page 39, to 48 Against trusting in our own duties. Three Arguments against trusting in our own duties. Page 374, 375, 376, 377, &c. E Of Evidences. Sound id Evidences are the best way to prevent delusions Page 4, 5 Two special Rules are still to be seriously minded in propounding of Evidences for men to try their spiritual and eter∣nal estates by Page 6, 7. Seven Reasons why many men cry down Marks and Signs, and deny sanctifi∣cation to be an evidence of mens justi∣fication. Page 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342 'Tis lawful and useful to make use of gracious evidences. Page 342, 343 Such Saints as are now triumphing in glory, have made use of their gracious evidences, &c. Page 343, 344, 345, 346 He that can find but one gracious evi∣dence in his soul, he may safely con∣clude that all the rest are there. Page 347 What a Christian should do when his evi∣dences are so clouded and blotted, that he cannot read them. Page 352, 353, 354, 355, 356
When a Christians evidences shine brightest, his heart and the eye of his faith is to be most firmly fixed upon three Royal Forts. Page 356, 357, 358 & 374, 375, 376, 377, &c. F Of Christians folly. Eight Arguments to shew the folly of such sincere Christians, who make their condition worse than 'tis. Page 51 to 57 Of forsaking of sin. There is a fourfold forsaking of sin. Page 28 Of Free-grace. When a Christians evidences are either clear or blotted, it highly concern him to be still a living upon free-grace. Page 356, 357, 358, 359 G Of Grace and Graces. Where there is any one grace in truth, there is every grace in truth Page 7, 8, 9 The sense and evidence of the least grace, yea of the least degree of the least grace, may afford some measure of as∣surance. Page 17, 18, 19, 20 Probabilities of grace may be a great stay, support and comfort to poor Chri∣stians that want assurance; probabili∣ties of grace are mercies more worth than ten thousand worlds. This is made good by ten Arguments. Page 60, to 65 Six considerable things about probabili∣ties of grace. Page 65, 66, 67, 68, 69 If a Christian can't say he has grace, yet he should not say he has no grace; for he may have grace, and yet not know it. Page 81, 82 He that prizes the least dram of grace above ten thousand thousand worlds, certainly that man has true grace in him. Page 200 Tis the wisdom, and ought to be the work of every Christian to own the least mea∣sure of grace that is in him, though it be mixed and mingled with many weaknesses & infirmities. Page 332, 333 'Tis the wisdom, and should be the work of every Christian, to look upon all his graces and gracious evidences, as favours given him from above, as gifts dropt out of heaven into his heart, as flowers of Paradise stuck in his bo∣som by a divine hand. Page 333, 334 335 When you look upon your graces in the light of the spirit, it highly concerns you to look narrowly to it, that you don't renounce and reject your graces as weak and worthless evidences of your interest in Christ, &c. Page 335, 336, 337 The spirit does four things in respect of our graces Page 348 Christians may safely rejoyce in their graces. Page 349, 350, 351 The more grace any man hath, the more clear, the more fair, the more full, the more sweet will his evidences be for heaven, &c. Page 378, 379, 380, 381, 382 When your graces are strongest, and your evidences for heaven are clearest, and your comforts rise-highest, then in a special manner it concerns you to
make it your great business and work to act faith afresh upon the free, rich and glorious grace of God, and upon the Lord Jesus Christ. Page 382, 383, 384, 385 H Of the hatred of sin. An Hypocrite can't hate sin as sin. Page 303, 304, 305 True hatred of sin includes six things. Page 305, 306, 307, 308 Of the heart, and of keeping of it. Where the constant standing frame of a mans heart, desires and endeavurs, are set for God, Christ, Grace, Ho∣liness, there is a most sure and in∣fallible work of God upon that mans soul. Page 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132 A gracious heart is an uniform heart Page 161, 162, 163, 164. A gracious heart sets himself most a∣gainst his darling sin, his bosom sin, his constitution sin, &c. Page 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170 He that has given up his heart and life to the Rule, Authority and Govern∣ment of Christ, he has a saving work of God upon him. Page 203, 204 That man that will cleave to Christ with full purpose of heart, that man shall certainly be saved. Page 204, 205 That man that makes it his principle care, his main business, his work of works to look to his heart, to watch his heart, to reform his heart, that man doubtless hath a saving work of God upon his heart. Page 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210 Ten wayes shewing how men should keep their hearts. Page 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216 There are many that are great strangers to their own hearts. Page 339 Of Hypocrites. First, an Hypocrites inside is never an∣swerable to his outside. An Hypocrites inside is one thing, and his outside another thing. Page 287, 288 Secondly, no Hypocrite under heaven is totally divorced from the love and liking of every known sin. Page 288, 289, 290, 291 Thirdly, an Hypocrites heart is never throughly subdued to a willingness to perform all known duties. Page 291, 292, 293 Fourthly, There is never an Hypocrite in the world, that makes God, or Christ, or holiness, or his doing or re∣ceiving good in his Station, Relation or Generation, his grand end, his highest end, his ultimate end of living in this world. Page 294, 295; 296, 297 Fifthly, no Hypocrite under heaven can live wholly and only upon the righte∣ousness of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, the merits of Christ, for ju∣stification and salvation. Page 297, 298, 299, 300 Sixthly, an Hypocrite never embraces a whole Christ, he can never take up his full rest, satisfaction and content in the person of Christ, in the merits of Christ, in the enjoyment of Christ
alone. Page 300, 301, 302, 303 Seventhly, an Hypocrite can't mourn for sin as sin, nor grieve for sin as sin, nor hate sin as sin, nor make head a∣gainst sin as sin. Page 303, 304, 305 Eighthly, no Hypocrite is habitually low or little in his own eyes, no hypo∣crite has ordinarily mean thoughts of himself, or a poor esteem of himself. Page 308, 309, 310, 311, 312 Ninthly, no Hypocrite will long hold out in the work and wayes of the Lord, in the want of outward incourage∣ments, and in the face of outward dis∣couragements. Page 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318 Tenthly, no hypocrite ever makes it his business, his work, to bring his heart into religious duties and services. Page 318, 319, 320, 321 Eleventhly, an hypocrite never per∣forms religious duties from spiritual principles, nor in a spiritual manner. Page 321, 322, 323, 324, 325 Twelfthly, no hypocrite in the world loves the Word, or delights in the Word, or prizes the Word, as 'tis a holy Word, a spiritual Word, a beautiful Word, a pure Word, a clean word. Page 325, 326, 327, 328, 329 Thirteenthly and lastly, an hypocrite can't endure to be tryed, and searcht, and laid open. Page 329, 330, 331 I Of judging our selves. We must not judge our selves Hypocrites by those things that he Scripture ne∣ver makes a character of an Hypo∣crite. Page 74, 75, 76, 77. We must not judge our selves hypo∣crites for such things which being ad∣mitted and granted to be true, would unavoidably prove the whole generati∣on of the faithful to be Hypocrites. Page 77, 78, 79 In judging of our spiritual estates and conditions, we must alwayes have an eye to our natural tempers, complexi∣ons, &c. Page 79, 80, 81 Of judgments. Spiritual judgments are the worst of judgments. Page 338 L Of love to the Saints. No man can truly love grace in another, but he that has true grace in his own soul. Page 189, 190 Six wayes whereby men may certainly know whether their love to the Saints be real or not. Page 190, to 200 M Of singular manifestations. Some Christians live under the singular manifestations of divine love. Page 341, 342 Of Melancholy. The evil effects of Melancholy. Page 72, 73, 74 Of merciful men. Such as are truly and graciously merci∣ful, are blessed, &c. Page 34, 35, 36
Of true mourners. Such as are true mourners are blessed. Page 32 N Of Name, and of a great Name. Many Professors take up in a great Name. Page 337, 338. O Of Obedience. If your obedience springs from faith, then your estate is good, then you have as∣suredly an infallible work of God up∣on your souls. Page 132 Seven wayes to know when your obedience is the obedience of faith, with the re∣solution of some considerable questi∣ons about obedience, worthy of serious consideration. Page 132, to 161 P Of the Promises. The Promises of God are a Christians Magna Charta, his chiefest eviden∣ces for heaven. Page 9, 10 Q. How may a person come to know whe∣ther he has a real and saving interest in the promises or no. This great Que∣stion receives nine Answers. Page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. All great Promises are made over to faith and repentance. Page 26, 27 The promises prove an inseparable con∣nexion between true faith and eternal glory. Page 48, 49, 50, 51, 52 Many scores of promises will be of no use to a Christian, if he may not lawful∣ly come to the knowledge of his gra∣cious estate, in a discoursive way ar∣guing from the effect to the cause, Page 346, 347 Of being poor in spirit. To such who are poor in spirit the king∣dom of heaven belongs. Page 30, 31, 32 Of prizing grace. No man can really prize grace above a thousand worlds, but he that has true grace in him. Page 200 Of purity of heart. They that are pure in heart are blessed, and shall see God. Page 36, 37, 38, 39 R Of Relapses. A true child of God may relapse into the same sin again and again. Page 278, 279, 280, 281 That a child of God does not relapse in∣to the same sin in such a manner as wicked men do relapse, is made good seven wayes. Page 281, 282 About receiving of Christ. Such as receive Christ aright are the Sons of God. Page 26 About Repentance. There is a Repentance that does accom∣company salvation. Page 217 See sorrow for sin, see confession of sin, and see turning from sin. Of Christ's Righteousness. When a Christians evidences are either clear or clouded, it highly concerns him to have his heart fixed upon the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. Page 359, 360, 361 Five admirable comforts the Mediatory righteousness of Christ will afford to
every gracious soul. Page 361, 362, 363 Remedies against fears. Two Remedies against those fears that many times rise in a gracious soul. Page 388, 389, 390 S Of Satan. Satan is a grand enemy to the peace, joy, comfort, settlement and satisfaction of every poor Christian. Page 340, 341 Of Scripture. All men and women that are desirous to know how it will go with them in an∣other world, they must peremptorily resolve to be determined by Scripture, in the great matters of their inte∣rest in Christ. Page 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 Of sin, many weighty things about it. A universal willingness to be rid of all sin, is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace in a mans heart. Page 88, 89, 90, 91, 92 A constant habitual willingness to be rid of all sin, is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace in the soul. Page 92, 93 A transcendent willingness, a superla∣tive willingness to be rid of sin, is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace in the soul. Page 93, 94, 95, 96, 97 That soul that does not allow himself, or indulge himself in a course of sin, or in the common practice of any known sin, that soul is certainly a gracious soul. Page 97, 98, 99 That soul that conflicts most with heart-sins, and is mst affected and afflicted with spiritual sins, he is certainly a gracious soul. Page 99, 100, 101, 102 That soul that abstains from sin, and whose heart rises against sin, because of the evil nature of it, &c. that soul has certainly a principle of grace, a seed of God in him. Page 102, 103, 104, 105, 106 Where there is an irreconcileable opposi∣tion in the soul against sin, there is a saving work of God upon that mans heart. Page 106, 107, 108 Where the very prevailings of sin are or∣dinarily made serviceable to high and holy ends, there certainly is a saving work of God upon that mans soul. Page 108 109, 110 Where a bare naked command of God is commonly of that power, force and authority with the soul, as to curb sin, and restrain the soul from sin, and to fence the soul against the encroach∣ments and commands of sin, there is certainly a saving work of God upon that mans soul. Page 111, 112, 113 Constant desires, and earnest and con∣stant endeavours to avoid and shun all known appearances of sin, eviden∣ces the truth and reality of grace in the soul. Page 114, 115, 116 He that sets himself mostly, resolutely, habitually, against his bosom sins, his constitution sins, &c. he has certain∣ly a powerful, a saving work of God upon his soul. Page 126, 127 That soul that would not willingly, wil∣fully, resolutely, maliciously, wickedly, habitually, &c. sin against the Lord to gain a world, that soul is certainly
a gracious soul Page 201, 202 Paul layes down eight aggravations of his sins, and all to greaten and heigh∣ten them. Page 244, 245, 246, 247 Many indulge their lusts. Page 338, 339 Of sorrow for sin. When a mans sorrow for sin is sinful, shewed in six particulars. Page 87 Sorrow and grief of heart for sin com∣mitted, is that first part of repentance to which the promise of forgiveness of sin is made Page 218, 219 Eight ways whereby men may know that their sorrow is true godly sorrow, that it is that very sorrow that is a part of true repentance. Page 219, to 229 There are seven concomitants or compa∣nions that attend and wait on godly sorrow. Page 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234 Of the Spirit. Without the light of the Spirit our gra∣ces shine not Page 347, 348, 349 T Of thirsting. They which truly hunger and thirst after righteousness are blessed. Page 32, 33, 34 Of time and times. Christians should take the mst compen∣dious time for the casting up of their spiritual accounts. Page 69, 70 There are seven times, seasons or cases, where a Christian should not cast up his spiritual accounts. Page 70, to 74 Of turning from all sin to God. The third part of true repentance lyes in turning from all sin to God. Page 254, 255, 256 First, that turning from sin which brings a man within the compass of the pro∣mise of forgiveness of sin, is a cordi∣al turning from sin. Page 256, 257 Secondly, a true penitential turning is an universal turning, a turning not from some sins, but from all sins. Page 257, 258 Eight great Reasons why the true peni∣tent turns from sin universally. Page 258, to 269 In answer to an Objection it is declared, that a true penitential turning from all sin consists in six things. Page 269; to 274 Thirdly, a true penitential turning is a constant, a continued turning from sin. Page 274, 275, 276; 277 Q. But in what respects is a true peni∣tential turning from sin, such a turn∣ing from sin, as never to return to sin any more? in what respects is the pe∣nitents turning from sin, a continued and stedfast turning from sin. Sol. This is a very sober, serious, weigh∣ty Question, and bespeaks a very so∣ber, serious and satisfactory Answer; and therefore 'tis answered, First, Negatively, from 277, to 282. And Secondly, Affirmatively, from Page 282, to 284 A true penitential turning from sin in∣cludes a returning to God; sin is an aversion from God, and repentance is a conversion to God. Page 284, 285, 286
W Of walking. There is no condemnation to such who walk after the Spirit Page 47, 48 Of the witness of the Spirit. Their mistake pointed at, who have made the witness of the Spirit the only marks or evidence of our interest in Christ. Page 1, 2, 3, 4. There is at the end of this Book, a Catalogue of all Mr. Brooks's Books.
ERRATA. PAge 4. line. 14. fleshly for flashy, p. 16. in the Margent, r. dance, p. 17. Margent, pat for part, p. 18. l. 32. for gradually r. perfectly, p. 19. l. 2. r. it, l. 25. for Marcol r. Murcot. p. 30. l. 2. hat for that, p. 35. l. 8. r.  p. 39. l. 31. r. Asa's, p. 63. l. 17. for wate r. children, p. 106. l. 15. r. gerandum, p. 110. l. 28. r. Antiperistasis, p. 142. l. 30. add only, p. 239. l. 2. for heels r. feels, p. 258. l. 19. outging for outing, p. 292. Mar∣gent, r. vitiums for vitium, p. 117. l. 16. for were r. where, p. 311. Mar∣gent, r. , p. 326. l. 22. r. word for world, p. 333. l. ult. add the, p. 347. l. ult add as. p. 356. l. 21. for five r. three, l. 26. for five r. three, l. 34. for five r. three, p. 357. l. 8. springs for spring, in the Margent r. , p. 368. l. 13. r. patent, p. 376. l. 14. r.  p. 383. l. 16. to for in, in the fourth leaf of the Epistle, in l. 9. blot out one, in the same leaf, l. 32. conclusions for confusions.
CHAP. I. Containing eighteen special Maxims, Conside∣rations, Rules and Directions that are seri∣ously to be minded and observed, in order to the clearing up of a mans interest in Christ, the saving work of God upon his own soul, and his title to all the glory of another world. The first Maxim or Consideration. FIrst, Some have made the witness of  the Spirit to be the only mark or evi∣dence of our interest in Christ,But this opinion being well laid a∣sleep in these dayes, I shall not put my self to the trouble of a∣wakening of it a∣fresh, but leave it to sleep with the Authors, who are now in their graves. and deny all signs from the fruit of the Spirit; but this is to deny the fruit growing upon the Tree to be a sign that the Tree is alive, whereas our Sa∣viour expresly tells us, That the Tree is known by his fruit, Mat. 12.33. Certainly 'tis one thing to judge by our graces, and another thing to rest on our graces, or to put our trust in our graces, or to make a Saviour of our graces; there is a great deal of difference be∣tween declaring and deserving. Doubtless Christians may look to their graces as evidences of their interest in Christ,
justification and salvation, though not as causes of their in∣terest in Christ, justification and salvation. O Sirs, we must alwayes carefully distinguish 'twixt the root and ground of our comfort, and between the testimonies or evidences of our interest in the root of our comfort. Now it must be readily granted that Jesus Christ is the only root and ground of a Christians comfort and triumph; and therefore saith Paul,Gal. 6 14. God forbid that I should rejoyce in any thing, but in the Cross of Christ. And so in that, 2 Cor. 2.14. New thanks be unto God, which alwayes causes us to triumph in Christ. So that, if at any time we behold this or that saving grace, or this or that part of holiness shining in our hearts or lives, we take comfort in it, not as the cause, or root, or ground of our comfort or triumph, but as in a testimony or evidence, because it doth manifest our interest in him, who is our comfort,Luke 2 25. Col. 3 11. Gen. 9 13, 14, 16. v. our peace, our joy, our salvation, our all in all. Look as the Rain-bow is not a cause, why God will not drown the world, but a sign that God will not drown the world; and as it is a sign that God will not drown the world, we may and ought to rejoyce in it, and to take comfort from it. So here, &c. 'Tis agreed on all hands, that sancti∣fication is a precious benefit of the Covenant of grace,Jer. 33.8, 9. Ezek. 36.25, 26. Heb. 8.10, 12. &c. as well as justification; and what crime can it then be, to evi∣dence one benefit of the Covenant of grace, by another be∣nefit of the same Covenant. That he that is justified, is also sanctified, and that he that is sanctified is also justified, is so clear, so bright, so sparkling, and so full a truth con∣tained in the Covenant of grace, that no man or devil can deny. Now what evil or error can it be for a man to assert, That he that is certainly sanctified, is certainly justified; (it being the very language of the Covenant of grace) and that therefore he that knows himself to be sanctified, may also know thereby that he is justified. Certainly, those persons that shall deny sanctification to be a most sure, sweet and comfortable evidence of a mans justification, they must not only blot out and abolish the Epistles of James and John, but must also race out and abolish all those Evangelical pro∣mises of grace and mercy, of happiness and blessedness,
that are made to such persons as are invested, enriched and bespangled with the several graces of the holy Spirit; this might be made evident by many hundred Scriptures: but take that one for all, Mat. 5. where our Saviour himself (who was the most Evangelical Preacher that ever was in the world) makes eight or nine promises of mercy and blessed∣ness to those very persons that had the graces of the Spirit inherent in them, as poverty of spirit, mourning, meek∣ness, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, &c. O Sirs, why should we be so frequently and earnestly call'd pon to try and examine our selves,2 Cor. 12.5. ver. whether we be in the faith or no, if we were not to come to the knowledge of our faith, in a discoursive way, arguing from the effect to the cause. Have not the Saints of old come to assurance and the knowledge of the goodness of their estates this way? Pon∣der seriously on that, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly since∣rity we have had our conversation in the world. Mark, their joy was founded on the testimony of their conscience, and their conscience gave in this testimony from the sincerity of their conversation in this world. So Paul in that, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, Certamen illud praeclarum certa∣vi. Beza. I have fought that excellent fight. By wrest∣ling the Apostle useth the same Metaphor also in that, 1 Cor. 9.25. v. I have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. How plainly, how fully, how with open mouth (as I may say) does he conclude his right to the crown of Righteous∣ness (so called, partly because 'tis purchased by the righte∣ousness of Christ, and partly, because he is righteous that hath promised it, and partly, because 'tis a just and righte∣ous thing with God to crown them with glory at last, who have for the Gospel sake, and his glory sake, been crowned with shame and reproach in this world, and partly (if not mainly) because 'tis a crown that can only be had (or ob∣tained) in a way of righteousness and holiness) from his gra∣ces and gracious actings in this world. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; yea, 'tis further observable, that in the blessed Scripture, we are strongly prest to do good works, that by them we may make our calling, election and salvation sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Where∣fore
the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure. By good works; so say all the Latine Copies, and so say some Greek Copies, though not those that our English Translators have been pleased to follow, and that is the reason why those words (by good works) are not in our English Bibles; but he that shall seriously weigh the scope of the Apostle in this place, he must of necessity grant, that good works are to be understood, thogh they are not exprest in the Text; and that of the Apostle, in 1 Tim. 6.16, 17, 18. seems plainly and strongly to sound the same way. The second Maxim or Consideration. SEcondly, consider, That true, sound, solid marks, signs and evidences, are the best way to prevent delusions; there is no such deceit in sound and solid evidences, as there is in fleshy joyes, and in high and strange raptures, by which many glistering Professors have been sadly deceived and de∣luded. Young Samuel being not acquainted with any extra∣ordinary manifestations of the presence and power of God, took the voice of God from heaven to be the voice of old Ely.1. Sam. 3.5. Ah, how many have there been in our dayes, that have taken the irregular motions of their own hearts, and the violent workings of their own distempered fancies, and ima∣ginations, and Satanical delusions, to be the visions of God, celestial raptures, divine breathings, and the powerful im∣pulses of the Spirit of God, and so have been stirred up to speak, write and act such things that have been, not only con∣trary to the holy Word of God, but also contrary to the very Laws of nature and Nations. Satan by transforming of himself into an Angel of light, hath seduced and ruined ma∣ny Professors,2 Cor. 11.14. v. Gerson in his Book (de proba∣tione spirituum) of the trial of spirits. against whom, as an Angel of darkness he could never prevail. Gerson tells a remarkable story of Sa∣tans appearing to a holy man, in a most glorious and beauti∣ful manner, professing himself to be Christ; and because he
for his exemplary holiness was worthy to be honoured above others, therefore he appeared unto him; but the good old man readily answered him, that he desired not to see his Sa∣viour in this wilderness, it should suffice him to see him hereafter in heaven, and withal added this pithy prayer: O let thy sight be my reward, Lord, in another life, and not in this; and so he became victorious over Satan, though he had trans∣formed himself into a glorious Angel of light; but such a a victorious crown has not been set upon every ones head to whom Satan has appeared as an Angel of glory.See Dr. Casaubon, and Dr. Moore, concerning En∣thusiasm. Cer∣tainly, they that stand so much, so mightily for an imme∣diate testimony, seem to open such a gap to Enthusiasm, as will not be easily shut; yea, how will they be ever able to secure to purpose, poor souls from sad delusions? for how easie a thing is it for Satan (who is the father of lyes? Joh. 8.48. who is an old deceiver, Gen. 3.13. 1 Tim. 2.14. who is the grand deceiver, Rev. 12.9. Rev. 13.14. Rev. 19.20. Rev. 20.10. who has his devices, Cor. 2.11. his wiles, Eph. 6.11. his snares, 1 Tim. 3.7. his depths, Rev. 2.24.) to find various artifices to counterfeit this imme∣diate testimony, and bear witness in the spirits stead; so that, when poor souls thinks that they have the Spirit of grace and truth to assure them that all is well, and shall be for ever well with them; they have none but the father of lyes to deceive them, they have none but the devil in Sa∣muels mantle, to put a soul-murdering cheat upon them. I am not fond of advising any poor souls to lay the stress of their hopes of heaven and salvation, meerly upon imme∣diate impressions, lest they should subject themselves to in∣finite delusions. O Sirs, the way of immediate Revelation is more fleeting and inconstant, such actings of the Spirit are like those outward motions that came upon Sampson, Judg. 13.25. The Spirit came upon him at times; and so upon every withdrawment, new doubts and scruples arise; but the trial of a mans estate by grace is more constant and durable, saving grace being a continual pledge of God's love to us; flashes of joy and comfort, are only sweet and de∣lightsom whilst they are felt, but grace is that immortal seed that abideth for ever, 1 John 3.9. But,
The third Maxim or Consideration. THirdly, consider, In propounding of evidences for men to try their spiritual and eternal estates by, there are two special Rules for ever to be minded and remembred, and the first is this, That he that propounds evidences of grace, which are only proper to eminent Christians, as be∣longing to all true Christians, he will certainly grieve and sad those precious Lambs of Christ that he would not have grieved and sadded. Look, as there is a strong faith, and a weak faith,Mat. 15 28. and Chap. 8 26. It is one thing to shew you the pro∣perties of a man, and another thing to shew you the properties of a strong man, 1 Pet. 2.3. 1 John 2.1, 12, 13, 14. v. so there are evidences that are proper to a strong faith, and evidences that are proper to a weak faith: Now, he that cannot find in himself the evidences of a strong faith, he must not conclude that he has no faith; for he may have in him the evidences of a weak faith, when he has not the evi∣dences of a strong faith in him; in Christ's School, House, Church, there are several sorts and ranks of Christians, as babes, children, young men, and old men; and accordingly, Ministers in their preaching and writing, should sort their evidences, that so babes and children may not be found bleeding, grieving and weeping, when they should be sound joying and rejoycing. Secondly, no man must make such characters, marks or evidences of a child of God, which may be found in an hypocrite, a Formalist, &c. for this were to lay a stumbling block before the blind, this were to de∣lude poor souls,Ezek. 13.22. v. and to make them glad whom God would not have made glad; yea, this is the high-way, the ready way, to make them miserable in both worlds. The rule or evidence that every Christian is to measure himself by, must be neither too long nor too short, but adequate to the state of a Christian; that is, it must not be so long on the one hand, as that all Christians cannot reach it, nor yet so short on the other hand, as that it will not reach a true Christian; but the rule or evidence must be such as will suit and fit eve∣ry sincere believer, and none else: Some Christians are apt to judge of themselves, and to try themselves, by such rules
or evidences as are competent only to those that are strong men in Christ, and that are grown to a high pitch of grace, of holiness, of communion with God, of spiritual enjoy∣mens, and heavenly attainments, and sweet and blessed a∣vishments of soul; and by this means they come to conclude against the works of the blessed spirit in them, and to per∣plex and disquiet their own souls with needless fears, doubts and jealousies; others on the other hand, are apt to judge of themselves, and to try themselves, by such things, rules or evidences that are too short (and will certainly leave them short of heaven) as a fair civil deportment among all sorts and ranks of men, a good nature, paying every man their de, charity to the poor,Mat. 23. Luke 18 9, 10, 11, 12. v. Isa. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. a good name or fame among men (yea, happily among good men) outward exercises of Reli∣gion, as hearing, praying, reading, fasting, or that they are good negative Christians, that is to say, that they are no drunkards, swearers, lyars, adulterers, extortioners, op∣pressors, Sabbath-breakers, persecutor, &c.Phil. 3.4.5, 6 v. Gal. 6.3. Isa. 33.14. Thus far Paul attained before his conversion, but if he had gone no fur∣ther, he had been a lost man for ever; and by this means they flatter themselves into misery, and are still a dreaming of going to heaven, till they drop into hell, and awake with everlasting flames about their ears: And oh, that all that preach or print, read or write, would seriously lay this to heart, some in describing the state of a Christian, shew rather what of right it should be, than what indeed it is; they shew what Christians ought to be, rather than what they find themselves to be, and so they become a double edged sword to many Christians. But, The fourth Maxim or Consideration. FOurthly, consider, Where there is any one grace in  truth, there is every grace in truth, though every grace cannot be seen. Look, as a man may certainly know a wicked
man by his living under the reign and dominion of any one sin,As they say of the cardinal ver∣tues; Virtutes sunt inter se con∣nexa, The ver∣tues are chained together; so we may say of the graces of the Spirit, &c. Mark, saith Chry∣sostom, 'tis not working of mi∣racles, casting out of devils, but love to our bre∣thren, that's the infallible proof of being a Disciple. though he does not live under the power of other sins, because there is not any one sin mortified in that man, that hath any one sin reigning in him, and that does not set him∣self in good earnest against it as his greatest enemy. So when a Christian can but find any one grace in him, as love to the Saints, for grace sake, for godliness sake, he may safely con∣clude, that there is in him all other graces; where there is but one link of this golden chain, there are all the links of this golden chain, Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. He doth not say, if ye work miracles, if ye raise the dead, if ye give eyes to the blind, or ears to the deaf, or tongues to the dumb, or feet to the lame, but if ye love one another. There have been many, yea, very many precious Christians, who have lived and died with a great deal of comfort and peace from the application of that Text to their own souls, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. Sincere love to the brethren, is a most evident sign of a Christians being already passed or translated from death to life; observe, the Apostle doth not say, we think we have passed from death to life, but we know we have passed from death to life; nor he does not say, we conjecture we have passed from death to life, but we know we have passed from death to life; nor he does not say, we hope we are passed from death to life, but we are assured that we are passed from death to life, that is, from a state of nature into a state of grace, because we love the brethren; for ever re∣member this, when all other evidences have failed, many gracious Christians, and all other Texts of Scripture have afforded them no comfort here, they have anchored here, they have found rest for their distressed souls, and upon this one single planck, this one evidence they have swam safely and comfortably unto the haven of eternal happiness. Eve∣ry real Christian hath in some measure, every sanctifying grace in him; as a child so soon as it is born is a perfect man, for integrity of parts and entireness of limbs, though not for bigness and bulk of body, so every regenerate person, at
the very first hour of his conversion,1 Thes. 5.23. John 3 5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. 1.16. Psal. 45.13. The new creature hath all the pats and lineaments; as in the body there is a compo∣sition of all the elements, and a mixture of all the humours. he is in part renewed in all parts, all the habits of grace are infused into the soul by the Spirit at once; at first conversion, the soul is bespangled with every grace, though every grace is not then grown up to its full proportion or perfection; so that where there is one grace in truth, there is every grace in truth; that soul that can truly and seriously conclude, that he has any one grace in him, that soul ought to conclude, that there is eve∣ry grace in him. Such as diligently search the Scripture, shall find that true blessedness,Mat. 5.3, 4, 5, 6, &c. Every child of God hath all the graces of the spirit in him ra∣dically, though not gradually. happiness and salvation is at∣tributed to several signs, sometimes to the fear of God, sometimes to faith, sometimes to repentance, sometimes to love, sometimes to meekness, sometimes to humility, some∣times to patience, sometimes to poverty of spirit, some∣times to holy mourning, sometimes to hungering and thirst∣ing after righteousness; so that if a godly man can find any one of these in himself, he may safely and groundedly con∣clude of his salvation and justification, though he cannot see all those signs in him; there is no Saint but may perceive one sign in him, when he cannot another. Now, he that can groundedly be perswaded of any one sign of grace, he may safely conclude he hath all the rest, though for the present he can neither see them nor feel them in himself. But, The fifth Maxim or Consideration. FIfthly, consider, That the promises of God are a Chri∣stians  Magna Charta, his chiefest evidences for heaven; divine promises are Gods Deed of Gift, they are the only assurance which the Saints have to shew for their right and title to Christ, to his bloud, and to all the happiness and bles∣sedness that comes by him. Look,Gen. 38.18-27 as Judah by pleading and bringing forth the signet, the bracelets, and the staff, saved her life, so we by believing, pleading, and bringing forth the promises, must save our own souls; the promises are not only the food of faith, but also the very life and soul of
faith, they are a Mine of rich treasures, a garden full of the choicest and sweetest flowers, in them are wrapt up all celestial contentments and delights. And this is most cer∣tain, that all a Christians conclusions of interest in any of those choice and precious priviledges which flow from the bloud of Jesus Christ, ought to be bottomed, grounded and founded upon the rich and free promises of grace and mercy. But how may a person come to know, whether he has a real and saving interest in the promises, or no? Now to this great Que∣stion, I shall give these nine following Answers. First, A holy relyance, a holy resting, a holy staying of thy soul upon the promises, makes the promises thine own; yea, it makes all the good, and all the sweet, and all the happiness and blessedness that is wrapt up in the promises, thine; even as thy staying, relying and resting on Christ, makes Christ thine, and all that is in him, and that comes by him, thine; so thy staying and resting upon the promises makes them thine. Secondly, If thy heart ordinarily, habitually, lyes under the word of command, then the word of promise does assu∣redly belong to thy soul,'Twas a good say∣ing of Augustin, Da quod jubes, & juhe quod vis, Give what thou commandest, and command what thou wilt. To such a frame the promises belong. Numb. 13.28. to the end. Psal. 119.6. Act. 13.22. Luke 1.5, 6. There is no soul under heaven that commonly lyes under the commanding power of the Word, but that soul that has an interest in the word of Promise; men that have no interest in the word of Promise, commonly live in the neglect of the word of command; if the word of command commonly carries thy soul, then the word of promise, with∣out all peradventure, belongs to thy soul: Many deal with the commands of God, as the Heathens dealt with the com∣mands of their gods; When their gods called for a man, they offered a candle; or as Hercules offered up a painted man, instead of a living man. Such as deal thus with the commands of God, they have no interest in the promises of
God; flesh and bloud looks upon the commands of God as impossible to be obeyed, like the unbelieving spies; O we cannot conquer the Land; but faith and love, like Caleb and Joshua, conclude the Land may be conquered, the commands may be Evangelically obeyed, and accordingly they readily ndertake it. Now, to such a frame of heart the promises are entail'd. But, Thirdly, If in the face of all objections,The longer, said the Emperor's son, the Cooks are preparing the meat, the better chear I shall have. His meaning was, that the longer he staid for the Empire, the better and greater it would be; so the longer the soul waits for a mercy, the bet∣ter and greater it will be when it comes, &c. discouragements  and difficulties, thy soul be kept up in a waiting frame, for the fulfilling of the promises, as Abrahams was, Rom. 4. then certainly the promises belong to thee. There are some pro∣mses that relate to the subduing of sin, as that, Jer. 33.8. Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. Mich. 7.19. Psal. 65.3. And there are other precious promises that relate to a growth in grace, as that, Mal. 4.2. Job 17.9. Psal. 92.12, 13, 14. Prov. 4.18. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Now if thy heart be kept up in a waiting frame, for the accomplishment of these promises, then they do certainly belong to thee; the same I may say of all other promises, The waiting soul shall be sure to speed, Psal. 40.1, 2, 3. Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. Isa. 30.18. Heb. 6.12, &c. God never did, nor never will, frustrate the ex∣pectations of the patient waiter, &c. But, Fourthly, He that hath those divine qualities or super∣natural  graces in him, to which the promises are made, as faith, repentance, love, fear, hope, uprightness, patience, a waiting frame, &c. He has an undoubted interest in the promises, he may lay his hand upon any promise, and say, this promise is mine, and all the blessings, the benefits, the heavenly treasure that is laid up in it, is mine. But, Fifthly, He that lives upon the promises as his daily food,  he has an unquestionable interest in the promises; wicked men may make use of promises as of physick, in some cases, as when they are under anguish of spirit, or gripes of con∣science, or in fear of hell; or else when they are under some outward wants or streights, &c. but he that lives upon
them as his daily food, he has a most assured interest in them; our outward man lives not upon kickshaws, though now and then we may taste of them, but we live upon wholsom food; so here, no man lives upon the blessed promises as his ap∣pointed food, but he that has a real interest in the promises. Look, as there is a nourishment proper to every Animal Spiders feed on flies, Moles on worms, the Horse on gass, the Lion on flesh, &c. so there is food (nourishment) that is proper for mens souls, viz. the precious promises; and Christs flesh, which is meat indeed, and his bloud, which is drink indeed, Iohn 6. and he that daily feeds on this food, will be happy for ever. But, Sixthly, If you are united and married to Christ by faith, then you have a real, a saving interest in the promises, Gal. 3.29.Gal. 4.28. Heb. 1.2. Rev. 21.7. And if you be Christs, then are you Abrahams seed, and heirs according to the promise. The promise is the Join∣ture, and there is no way under heaven to enjoy the Join∣ture, but by matching with the person of Christ. And faith is the grace of graces, by which the soul gives both its assent and consent to take the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is tendered and offered in the Gospel, and is therefore called some∣times a receiving of Christ, Iohn 1.12. The only way to enjoy a Ladies Jointure, is to marry her person; and so the only way to enjoy the promise of Christ, is to be willing to marry the person of Christ; 'tis our marriage-union with Christ, that gives us a right and title to all the promises of Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him, Amen. All absolute and conditional pro∣mises, either of grace or unto grace, are made to us in Christ, and only enjoyed by our enjoying of Christ. Seventhly, He that can clear his right to any one pro∣mise, he may safely and boldly conclude his interest in eve∣ry promise. The promises are a golden chain, and he that has a right in one link of the chain,2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. Eph. 5.22, 23. 2 Pet. 1.4. has a right in every link of the chain. As there is a chain of graces, so there is a chain of promises. He that can lay his hand upon any one
promise, and truly say this is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon every promise, and say these are mine; he that is an heir to any one promise, he is an heir to every promise. Hence it is they are called heirs of promise, Heb. 6.17. not hei s of this promise, or that, but of promise; that is, of every promise, or the Covenant which comprehends all the precious promises of the Gospel in it. Though the pro∣mises may be distinguished one from another, yet they may not be severed one from another; he that has a right to any one promise, he may safely infer his right to every promise. The whole Covenant (which is a bundle of promises) is cer∣tainly thine, if any one promise be thine; the promises by a divine hand are mutually tyed and linked together; and those whom God has joyned together, no man may put asun∣der. The promises can be no more divided, than Christ can be divided, or than heaven can be divided; the promises are not like loofe and unstringed pearls, but as pearls made into one entire chain. He that can lay his hand upon that pro∣mise, Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, and truly say, this pro∣mise is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon that promise, ver. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, and say this promise is mine; and the same he may say of the rest of the precious promises that are specified in v. 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11. of that Chapter. He that can lay his hand upon any one promise, that God has made to them that love him, and truly say, this promise is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon every promise that God has made to them that love him, and say these are all mine. He that can lay his hand upon any one promise that God has made to them that fear him, and truly say this promise is mine, he may assured∣ly lay his hand upon every promise that God has made to them that fear him, and say these are all mine. He that can lay his hand upon any one promise that God has made to faith in Christ, to believing in Christ, and truly say this promise is mine, he may safely lay his hand upon every promise that God has made to faith in Christ, to believing in Christ, and say all these promises are mine. He that can lay his hand upon
any one promise that God has made to the returning sinner, and truly say, this promise is mine, he may securely lay his hand upon every promise, that God has made to the return∣ing sinner, the repenting sinner, and say all these are mine. He that can lay his hand upon any one promise, that God has made to the waiting soul, and truly say this promise is mine, he may without all peradventure lay his hand upon every promise that God has made to the waiting soul, and say all these are mine; prove but your right in one, and you may safely infer your right to all. But, Eighthly, If in the times of your greatest outward and inward straits and trials, when you are most sadly and sorely put to it, you flie to the precious promises, as to your sure∣est and choicest City of refuge, then certainly you have an interest in them. Thus Abraham did, Rom. 4.17-22. and thus Jacob did, Gen. 32.6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12. compared, and thus Sarah did, Heb. 11.11. and thus Moses did, Num. 10.29. and thus Jehosaphat did, 2 Chron. 20.1, 10, compared with the 7, 8, 9. verses of that Chapter. And this was Davids common practice, Psal. 27.12.13. and Psal 60.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. compared, and Psal. 119.49, 50. Turn to these Scriptures, and ponder upon them. And so when a man is under the guilt of sin, he flies to promises of par∣don and forgiveness, as to his surest and choicest City of re∣fuge, Num. 14.19. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 33.8. Isa. 40.1.2. Chap. 43.25. Mich. 7.18. Jer. 31.34. Exod. 34.7. Dan. 9.9. And so when a man is under the strength, power and prevalency of sin, he runs to such promises wherein God has engaged himself to subdue the sins of his people, and to purge and cleanse away the sins of his people (Mich. 7.19. Rom. 6.14. Psal. 65.3. Isa. 1.25. Mal. 3.3. Zach. 13.9. Isa. 27.9. Mat. 3.12. Ezek. 36.25.33. Jer. 33.8.) as to his surest and choicest City of refuge. And so when a man is deserted, he runs to such promises as are proper to that state, as to his surest and choicest City of refuge, Mich. 7.19. Isa. 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Psal. 5.12. Psal. 84.10. Psal. 97.11. Psal. 112.4. Isa. 49.14, 15, 16. And so when a man is tempted, he runs to such supporting, succouring and incou∣raging
promises as are most sutable to that state, as to his surest and choicest City of refuge, 1 Cor. 10.13. Heb. 2.18. Rom. 16.20. James 4.7. Now certainly, such as in all their inward and outward straits run thus to the promises, as to their surest and choicest City of reuge, they have an unquestionable interest in the promises. The rich mans wealth is his strong City, Prov. 10.15. Wealthy world∣lings in times of distress & danger, do run to their hoards and heaps of riches, as to a strong City that is able to outstand all sieges and assaults, and to be safety and security to them; so when once a man makes the precious promises to be his strong City, and runs to them in the day of his distress and dangers, as his only safety and security, then he has doubtless an interest in them. But, Ninethly and lastly, If you daily present a greater and a choicer good in the promises to your souls, than any this world affords, then certainly you have an interest in the pro∣mises. If when honours, or riches, or pleasures, or the ap∣plause of men do present themselves unto you, you can readi∣ly present to your own souls higher honours in the promise, 1 Sam. 2.30. Luke 12.32. Rev. 2.17, 26, 27. Chap. 3.5, 12, 21. Chap. 5.10. and more durable riches in the promise, Prov. 8.18. 1 Pet. 3.4. and sweeter and choicer pleasures in the promise, Psal. 16.11. Isa. 12.3. Chap. 35.2, 10. Jer. 33.9, 11. Psal. 132.16. and greater ap∣plause in the promise, Mat. 10.32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven; I, and before the Angels too, Luke 12.8. Mat. 25.31-41. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. 2 Thes. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Rev. 3.9. Isa. 60.12, 13, 14. Then certainly you have an interest in the promise. When a man can shew his own heart daily, in the glass of the promises, a greater worth, excellency and glory, than all this world affords, without all controversie he has an interest in the promises. Thus those Worthies, of whom this world was not worthy, Heb. 11. and the Martyrs in all ages, did commonly present better, higher and greater things to their own souls in the promises,
than any their adversaries were able to propose to draw them off from Christ, their profession or principles, &c. and by this means they did very couragiously & honorably maintain their ground in the face of all the gay and golden temptations that they met withal.Mat. 5.10, 11, 12 Burn my foot if you will (said that noble Martyr S. Basil) that it may da ce ever∣lastingly with the Angels in heaven. Crudelitas vestra, gloria nostra, Your cruelty is our glory, said they in Tertullian; and the harder we are put to it, the greater shall be our reward in heaven. Basi will tell you, that the most cruel Martyrdom is but a crafty trick to escape death, to pass from life to life, as he speaks; It can be but a dayes journey between the Cross and Para∣dise. Though the Cross be bitter, yet it is but short: A lit∣tle storm, as one said of Julians persecution, and an eternal calm follows. Adrianus seeing the Martyrs suffer cheer∣fully such grievous and dreadful things, asked, Why they would endure such misery,1 Cor. 2.9. when they might (by retracting) free themselves; upon which one of them alledged that Text, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entred in∣to the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. The naming of the Text, and seeing them suffer such hard things cheerfully, did (by a blessing from on high) so really and effectually convert him, that afterwards he became a Martyr too.Acts 16.25. When we see poor, weak, feeble Christians, defying their torments, conquering in the midst of sufferings, singing in prison as Paul and Silas did, kissing the stake, as Henry Voes did: clapping their hands when they were half consumed with fire, as Hawkes did; blessing God that ever they were born to see that day, as John Noyes did; calling their execution day, their wedding day, as Bi∣shop Ridley did; we cannot but conclude, that they had an eye to the recompence of reward, and they saw such great, and sweet, and glorious things in the promises, that did so refresh, delight and ravish their hearts, and transport their souls, that all their heavy afflictions seem'd light, and their long afflictions short, and their most bitter afflictions sweet and easie to them. But,
The sixth Maxim or Consideration. SIxthly, consider, That 'tis granted on all hands, that the least degree of grace, if true, is sufficient to salvation; for the promises of life and glory, of remission and salva∣tion, of everlasting happiness and blessedness,Mark. 16.16. John 3.16, 36. Mt. 5. John 6, 40. are not made over to degrees of grace, but to the truth of grace, not to faith in triumph, but to faith in truth; and therefore the sense and evidence of the least grace, yea of the least degree of the least grace, may afford some measure of assu∣rance. Grace is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. and the Tree is known by his fruit, Mat. 12.33. I don't say,An eminent Mi∣nister, who was a famous instru∣ment of convert∣ing many to God, was wont to say, that for his own pat he had no o∣ther evidence in himself of being in the state of grace, than that he was sensible of his deadness. that weak grace will afford a strong assurance, or a full assurance (for that rather arises from strength of grace, than from truth of grace) but I say, weak grace may afford some assu∣rance: And oh, that all weak Christians would seriously lay this to heart, for it may serve to relieve them against many fears, doubts, discouragements and jealousies, which do much disturb the peace and comfort of their precious souls; though the least measures of grace can't satisfie a sincere Christian, yet they ought to quiet his conscience, and chear his heart, and confirm his judgment of his interest in Christ. The least measure of grace is like a Diamond, very little in bulk, but of high price and mighty value, and accordingly we are to improve it for our comfort and encouragement. A Goldsmith makes reckoning of the least filings of gold,Slight not the lowest, the mean∣est evidences of grace. God may put thee to make use of the lowest as thou thinkest, even that, 1 Joh. 3.14. that may be worth a thou∣sand worlds to thee. Page 33. of a little piece cal∣led a choice drop of honey. and so should we of the least measures of grace. A man may read the Kings Image upon a silver penny, as well as upon a larger piece of coyn. The least dram of grace bears the Image of God upon it; and why then should it not evidence the goodness and happiness of a Christians estate. It's a true saying, That the assurance of an eternal life, is the life of this temporal life. I have read, that Mr. Jordain, one of the Aldermen of the City of Exeter, would use to ask grown Professors, whether they had any assurance; which if they denied, he would tell them, that he was even ashamed of
them; In good earnest (saith he) I would study the promises, and go into my closet, and lock the door, and there plead them to God, and say, that I would not go forth, till he gave me some sence of his love. He would often mention and try himself by these three Marks: First, a sincere desire to fear the name of God, which he grounded upon that, Neh. 1. ult. Secondly, a sincere desire to do the will of God in all things required; which he grounded upon Psal. 119.6. Thirdly, a full purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord, which he grounded upon Act. 11.23.The discovery of grace in thy heart though but one grain, and that of mustard-seed, will assure thee of thy election and final salvation. Fords spirit of Adoption, p. 248. These he would often press upon others, and these he frequently tryed himself by, and from these he had much assurance and comfort. Mr. Stephen Marshal, in a Ser∣mon of his, on Isa. 9.2. saith, Look and examine, whether thou dost not loath thy self as a base creature; and dost thou make this nothing? Secondly, Dost thou not in thy heart value and prize the meanest child of God, more than the greatest men in the world, that have not the image of God, the image of grace and holiness stampt upon them, I pray God (saith Mr. Marshal) that many of God's people do not want these evidences. If our souls (saith another) shall like of Christ for a Suior, when we find no other jointure but the Cross,Mr. Dod on the commandments page 313, 314. we may be sure we are Christians. A man may want the feeling of his faith, and cry and call again and again for it, and feel nothing all this while, and yet nevertheless have true and sound faith: For the feeling of, and mourning for the want of faith, and the earnest and constant desire of it, is an in∣fallible sign of faith. For this is a sure Rule, that so long as one feeleth himself sick he is not dead; and the high estimation of faith, joined with a vehement desire of it, is a singular evidence that there is a sound and lively root of faith in our hearts.1. Pet. 1.2. Mr. Love, his zealous Christian, pag. 29. last part. All the elect of God shall have the sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and the sprinkling of the bloud of Christ upon their hearts, sooner or later. I do not press the having of these things gradually, but sin∣cerely; an elect person may want many a degree of grace, but if he have them in sincerity,Dr. Sibbs, his com∣mentary on the first Chapter of the second Epistle of Paul to the Co∣rinthians, ver. 22. pag. 491, 492. though in the least measure, it is a sufficient evidence of his election. An earnest is little in regard of the whole; perhaps we have but a shilling to secure us of many pounds: so then the point is this, That howsoever we may be assured of our estate in grace, and likewise that we shall hold out, yet the ground of
this assurance is not from any great measure of grace; but though t be little in quantity, it may be great in assurance and security. As we value an earnest, not for the worth that is in it self, but because it assures us of a great bargain; we have an eye more to the consummation of the bargain, than to the quantity of the earnest; so it is here, grace is but an earnest: yet notwithstanding, though it be little, as an earnest is, yet it is great in assurance and vali∣dity, answerable to the relation of that it hath to assure us. Though grace be little, yet as little as it is, seeing it is an earnest, and the first fruits (as the Apostle saith) which were but little in regard of the whole harvest, yet it is of the nature of the whole, and there∣upon it comes to secure. A spark of fire is but little, yet it is fire as well as the whole element of fire; and a drop of water is but little, yet it is water as well as the whole Ocean. When a man is in a dark place, put the case it be in a dungeon, if he have but a ittle light shining into him from a little crevice, that little light discovers that the day is broke, that the Sun is risen. Put the case there be but one grape on a Vine, it shews that it is a Vine, and that the Vine is not dead: So put the case that there be but the ap∣pearance of a little grace in a Christian, perhaps the Spirit of God appears but in one grace in him at that time, yet that one grace sheweth that we are Vines, and not thistles, or thorns or base plants, and it shews that there is life in the root. Thus you see how fully this Reverend Doctor speaks to the case. That friend that writes the life and death of Mr. John Marcol, once Preacher of the Gospel at Dublin, saith,See his Treatise, published by Mr. Winter, Mr. Cham∣bers, Mr. Eaton, Mr. Carryl, and Mr. Mantou, pag. 36, 37. That in preparation for the Sup∣per-Ordinance, he would bring himself unto the Test, and to say the truth, was very clear in the discovering and making out his own condition, being well acquainted with the way of Gods dealing with the soul, and with the way of the souls closing with Christ. In∣stance, April. 3. 1653. Upon search I find, 1. My self an undone creature. 2. That the Lord Jesus sufficiently satisfied as Mediator, the Law for sin. 3. That he is freely offered in the Gospel. 4. So far as I know my own heart, I do through mercy heartily consent, that he only shall be my Saviour, not my works or duties, which I do only in obedience to him. 5. If I know my heart, I would be ruled by his Word and Spirit. Behold, in a few words (saith he that writes his life and death) the sum and sub∣stance
of the Gospel. By these Instances we may see, that some of the precious servants of God have found a great deal of comfort, support, rest, content, and some measure of assu∣rance, from a lower rank of evidences, than those that many strong Christians do reach unto, &c. But, The seventh Maxim or Consideration. SEventhly, consider, That all men and women that are desirous to know how it will go with them in another world, they must peremptorily resolve to be determined by Scripture in the great matters of their interest in Christ; the blessed Scripture is the great uncontroverted Rule,This we believe, when we first be∣gin to believe, that we ought not to believe any thing beyond Scri∣pture. Tertullian. and therefore if a person can prove from Scripture that his gra∣ces are true, or that he is in a gracious estate, or that he has an interest in Christ, or that he has sayingly, graciously stricken Covenant with God, then he must resolutely and peremptorily resolve to grant so much as unchangably to ac∣quiesce in it, to stick fast to it, and to hear nothing against it, from the world, the flesh, or the devil. God hath plainly told us in his blessed Word, who shall be saved, and who shall be damned, though not by name, yet by the qualifications, by which they are described in the Bible; there are the Sta∣tute-Laws of heaven, and the standing Rule by which all must be tryed, every man must stand or fall, be eternally blessed, or eternally miserable, as his condition is conso∣nant to, or various from the infallible characters of saving grace contained in the holy Scripture, witness that, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light (or no morning) in them. So John 12.48. He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. Mat. 5.18. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, on jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled. So John 10.35. And the
Scripture cannot be broken, or violated, or made void; but though this be an indispensable duty, yet certainly there is (especially in times of great afflictions, temptations, de∣sertions, fears and doubts) a very great aptness and prone∣ness in Christians to expect strange means rather than right means, and new means rather than old means, and invented means rather than appointed means, & to build their faith up∣on somthing beside the Word, or that is without the compass of the Word, rather than upon the plain and naked Word it self; being in this very like to many weak, crazy, distempered and diseased Patients, that are more ready to fancy every new Medicine and new Doctor they hear of, and to be tamper∣ing with them, than to expect a recovery, by going through a course of Physick prescribed by the Physician that best understands their diseases, and the most proper and effectual means for their recoveries. You know when Naa∣man the Assyrian came to the Prophet Elisha to be cured of his Leprosie, he only sent out a Messenger to him, who bid him go and wash seven times in Jordan, and his flesh should come again unto him, and he should be clean, 2 Kings 5.10. but Naamans bloud rises, and his heart swells, and he grows very wrath, and all because he did not like the means pre∣scribed by the Prophet, and because he thought in his own heart, that the Prophet would have used more likely means to have wrought the cure, ver. 11, 12. So many Christians when they lye under great agonies and sore perplexities of soul, and are encouraged to act faith upon the promises, and to rest their weary souls upon the Word of grace, they are ready to think and say, that these things, these means will never heal them, nor comfort them, nor be a relief or support unto them, unless the Lord does from heaven, by extraordinary Revelations, Visions, Signs and Miracles, confirm his promises to them; and hereupon they make light of the blessed Scriptures, which are the springs of life, and the only bottom upon which all our comforts, peace and hap∣piness is to be built; yea, they relinquish that more sure word of prophecy which shines as a light in a dark place.2 Pet. 1.19. Certainly the acting of faith on the precious promises, and
the cleaving of the soul unto those blessed truths declared in the Gospel of grace, is the most sure, ready and com∣pendious way of obtaining a blessed assurance,Eph. 1.13. and a full establishment of heart,Com. on Gen. cap. 38. in all sound, solid and abiding joy and peace; and therefore Luther, though (as he confesseth) he was often tempted to ask for Signs, Apparitions and Reve∣lations from heaven to confirm him in his way, yet tells us how strongly he did withstand them, Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, &c. I have (saith he) indented with the Lord my God, that he would never send me Dreams, Visions, Angels, for I am well contented with this gift, that I have the holy Scripture, which doth abundantly teach and supply all ne∣cessaries for this life, and that also which is to come. Cer∣tainly, Austin hit the mark, when he prayed, Lord, let thy holy Scriptures be my pure delights, in which I can neither deceive, or ever be deceived. Certainly the ballance of the sanctuary should weigh all the Oracles of God, decide all, and the Rule of Gods Word be the square and judge of all. O Sirs, dare you venture your souls upon it, that the blessed Scriptures are false, that they are but a Fable? dare you stand forth, and say, if the Scriptures be not a lye, let us be damned for ever and ever? dare you stand up and say, we are freely contented that the everlasting worm shall gnaw on our hearts for ever, and that our bodies and souls shall for ever and ever lye burning in infernal flames, if the Scriptures prove not at last a cheat, a deceit, a meer forgery and imposture? Now, if you dare not thus to say, and thus to venture, then peremptorily resolve to be determined by Scripture, in the great concernments of your precious souls. They that would take their parts in promised comforts, they must follow the voice of the Word, and subscribe to the sen∣tence of conscience, following that Word. If the Word approve of thee, as sound and sincere with God, assuredly thou art so, for that rule cannot err: If the Word saith, that thy heart is right with God, thou must maintain that Testi∣mony against all disputes whatever. Never enter into dis∣pute with Satan, or thine own self, about thy estate, but by taking and making the Scripture the judge of the contro∣versie;
when fears rise high, you say you shall never have mercy; bt dot the Word say so? The Lord never gave himself to me; but doth the Word say so? Never was any as I am; but doth the Word say so? I cannot see, nor con∣ceive, nor think, that the Lord hath any love for me; but doth the Word say so? yea, doth not the Word say, That his thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor his wayes as your wayes?Isa. 55.8, 9. But as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his wayes high∣er than your wayes; and his thoughts than your thoughts. I have not that peace and joy that others have, therefore the Lord intends no good towards me; but doth the Word say so? Oh, but if my inside were but turned outward, good men would loath me, and wicked men would laugh at me; but doth the Word say so? Oh, but my heart was never right with God; but doth the Word say so? Oh, but that which I have ta∣ken all this while for saving grace, is but common grace; but doth the Word say so? Oh, but the face of God is hid from me, my Sun is set in a cloud, and will never rise more; but doth the Word say so? Oh, but Satan is let loose upon me, and therefore God hates me; but doth the Word say so? yea, doth not the Word tell you, That those who have been most beloved of God, have been most tempted by Satan? Wit∣ness Christ, David, Job, Joshua, Peter, Paul, &c. Oh, but I am afflicted, so as never was any before me; but doth the Word say so? Oh, let the Word have the casting voice, and not thine own frail distempered reason: Oh, don't only hear what sin, and Satan, and thine own heart can say against thee, but hear also what the Word of the Lord Jesus can say for thee. Let the Word of the Lord be judge on both sides, and then all will be well. I know that the impenitent and unbelieving person that lives and dies without grace in his heart, and an interest in Christ, shall as certainly be damned, as if I saw him this very moment under everlasting burnings; because God in the Scripture has said it, Mark 16.16. John 3.18.36. Rev. 21.8. Rom. 2.4, 5. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Heb. 12.14. And I know that the holy, humble, true, peni∣tent, believing, self-denying, and sin-mortifying Christian,
shall be as certainly saved, as if at this very time I saw him in an actual possession of glory; because God in the Scri∣pture has said it, Mat. 5.3-12. Rom. 8.1.13. Act. 10.43. Joh. 3.15, 16, 36. Chap. 6.37, 38, 39, 40, &c. O Sirs, no man in his wits dares dispute against the Authority of Scripture, or deny it as false and erronious; and therefore if the Scripture say, a man has grace, he ought in conscience to subscribe to it against all objections or temptations to the contrary. For ever remember this; Till a man comes to be willing to have his spiritual and eternal estate to be deter∣mined by Scripture, he will never enjoy any setled rest or quiet in his spirit. When once the goodness of a mans estate is cleared up to him by the Word, he is never to regard what Satan or carnal reason objects against him; Satan is a lyar and a deceiver, of neer six thousand years standing; he is full of envy, and full of malice, and full of wiles, devi∣ces and fetches, and therefore give no credit to any of his reports against the report of the Word, but stand by the te∣stimony of the Word, and the witness of your own consci∣ences, against all Satans cavils, temptations, objections and suggestions; and then, and not till then, will you find rest to your souls. He that would hold on cheerfully and resolutely in a Christian course, and go merrily to his grave, and sing∣ing to heaven, he must maintain the testimony of the Word against all the gainsayings of sense or carnal reason, he must hear nothing, nor believe nothing against the Word, nor against the goodness and happiness of his own estate or condition, which has been evidenced to him from the Word. Men will not be easily baffled out of their estates: If some great man should come and lay claim to your estates, you will not presently give them up, though your evidences are not at hand, or though they are blotted, or though perhaps you cannot clearly make out your title, yet you will not tamely and quietly give up your estates; and yet how ready are many Christians, upon every clamour of Satan against their souls and spiritual estates, to give up all, and to con∣clude, that they are hypocrites, and have no true grace and spiritual life in them! &c. But,
The eighth Maxim or Consideration. EIghthly, consider, That a godly man may not only come  to a sure knowledge of his gracious estate, but it is also more easily attainable, than many (may I not say, than most) do apprehend or believe; for if a gracious man will but ar∣gue rationally from Scripture, he shall be forced to con∣clude, that he has grace, and that he has an interest in Christ, and that he shall be saved, unless he be resolved before hand boldly to deny Scripture-truths. Sirs,Rom. 8.15. look in what way the spirit of bondage doth ordinarily work fear, terror and hor∣ror in the hearts of unconverted persons, in the same way the spirit of Adoption doth ordinarily work hope and assu∣rance in the heart of the Saints. Now,John 16.8. the spirit of bondage commonly awakens secure sinners, and fills the hearts and consciences of poor sinners with fear, horror and amaze∣ment, by setting home upon their souls such practical syllo∣gisms as these: Every lyar shall have his portion in the lake,Rev. 21.8. that burneth with fire and brimstone. But I am a lyar, Therefore I shall have my portion in that lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. Or thus. He that believeth not, is condemned already.John 3.18. I believe not, Therefore I am condemned already. Or thus. He that hateth his brother, is a murderer,1 John 3.15. and hath not eter∣nal life abiding in him. I hate my brother, Therefore I am a murderer, and have not eternal life abiding in me. Or thus. Christ shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire,2 Thes. 1.7, 8, to take ven∣geance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gos∣spel of his Son.
I know not God, I obey not the Gospel of his Son, Therefore Christ shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, to take vengeance on me. Or thus. Psal 9 15.The wicked shall be turned into hell. I am wicked, Therefore I shall be turned into hell. Now in like manner the spirit of adoption brings the heirs of the promise to the assurance of hope,Heb. 6.17. by setting home such practical syllogisms as these. First, Whosoever truly and heartily receives the Lord Je∣sus Christ, are truly and justly reputed to be the sons of God,, signifies authori∣ty. Such as re∣ceive the Lord Jesus, have autho∣rity to be called the sons of God. Others may call God father, and themselves sons, but they have not that right and authority to do it as believers have, Mark 16.16. Joh. 3.16, 18, 36 Mat. 3.2, 8. Luke 24 47. Act. 5.31. Chap. 3.19. Luke 13.3. Joh. 1.12. But I have received Christ all the wayes that the Word there can import; I am heartily willing to receive the Lord Jesus Christ in all his offices, viz. as a King to rule me, a Prophet to teach and instruct me, and a Priest to offer and intercede for me; I am willing to receive him as a Sanctifier, as well as a Saviour, and to receive him as my Lord, as well as to receive him as my Redeemer, and to re∣ceive him upon his own terms, viz. of taking up his Cross, denying my self, and following of him; therefore I may safely, boldly, plainly and warrantably conclude, that I am a son of God, and that I have an interest in God, according to the Scripture last cited; which Scripture cannot be bro∣ken, nor cannot fail, nor cannot be unbound or loosed, as the Greek word in that, John 10.35. imports, &c. Secondly, A gracious soul may argue thus; All the great and precious promises concerning everlasting happiness and blessedness, are made over to faith and repentance, as the Scriptures do abundantly evidence: Now, he that really finds faith and repentance wrought in his soul, so that he is able to say, I am a repenting and a believing sinner, he may truly and safely conclude, that he shall be saved; for all the promises of eternal happiness and blessedness, do run out with a full stream to faith and repentance: I readily grant, that a strong hope results from the clear evidence it hath of
both these. We read in Scripture of a threefold assurance: As first, an assurance of understanding, Col. 2.2. Second∣ly, an assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. Thirdly, an assu∣rance of hope, Heb. 6.11. And 'tis a very choice note, that acute D. A. hath upon it, viz. That these three make up one practical Syllogism, wherein knowledge forms the pro∣portion, faith makes the assumption, and hope draws the conclusion. I do (saith the Christian) assuredly know from the Word that can't deceive me, That the believing and re∣penting sinner, shall be saved, my conscience also tells me, that I do unfeignedly believe and repent, therefore I do firmly hope, that I shall (how ever vile and unworthy (other∣wise) be saved. Now mark, answerable to the evidence that a man hath in his own soul, that faith and repentance is wrote in him; so will his hope and assurance be weaker or strong∣er, more or less. If a mans evidence for the truth of his faith and repentance be dark, and weak, and low, and uncer∣tain, his hope and assurance that is born of these parents (as I may say) must needs partake of its parents weakness and infirmities, and be it self weak, and dark, and low, and wavering, and uncertain, as they are from which it results; ope and assurance ebbs and flows, as the evidence of a mans faith and repentance ebbs and flows. Assurance can't be ordinarily had without a serious exa∣mination of our own hearts, for assurance is the certain knowledge of the conclusion drawn from the premises, one out of Scripture, the other by a reflect act of the understand∣ing or conscience, thus: He that believes and repents shall certainly be saved, that is the voice of the Word of God; then by the search of a mans own heart, he must be able to say, but I believe and repent, and from these two doth re∣sult this assurance, that he may safely conclude, therefore I shall be saved. And, O that all Christians were so wise, as seriously to ponder upon these things. Thirdly, a godly man may argue thus. He that hath re∣spect  unto all Gods commands, shall never be ashamed, Psal. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto
a l thy cmmandments.Shame is both the tempora deter∣nal fru sin, Rom 6 . Dan. 12.2. He that is so honest and faithful with God, as to do his best, shall find that God will be so gracious as to pardon his worst. And this Gospel indulgence, David does more than hint at in those words, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. Or, as the Hebrew has it, Then shall I not blush when my eye is to all thy commandments. The Traveller you know, hath his eye to∣wards the place where he is going; and though he be yet short of it, yet he is putting on and pressing forward all he can to reach it; so when the eye of a Saint is to all the com∣mands of God, and he is still a pressing forwards toward full obedience, such a foul shall never be put to shame, it shall never be put to the blush, but it shall be able, living and dying, boldly to appear in the presence of the Lord. Mark, the Psalmist doth not say, when I obey all thy command∣ments, but when I have respect to all thy commandments; and that implies an inward aw and reverential eye towards every duty God requires: You know, to have respect unto a thing is this, When that of all others swayes most with us, as when a Master commands such a business, the servant will do it, because he respects him; and at his command he will go and come, though he will not at the command of any other.) But I have respect unto all his commandments, therefore I shall never be ashamed. Fourthly, a godly man may argue thus. He that loveth the brethren, is past from death to life, and consequently is in Christ, 1 John 3.18, 19. But I love the brethren, there∣fore I am passed from death to life, and so consequently am in Christ. Fifthly, a godly man may argue thus. He that confesseth and forsaketh his sin, shall certainly find mercy, Prov. 28.13. But I confess and forsake my sins (1. In respect of my sin∣cere desires. 2. In respect of my gracious purposes. 3. In respect of my fixed resolutions. 4. In respect of my faith∣ful and constant endeavours) therefore I shall certainly find mercy.
Sixthly, a godly man may argue thus. He that hath the  testimony of a good conscience, he may rejoyce in that te∣stimony 2 Cor. 1.12. Isa. 38.3. But I have the testimony of a good conscience, therefore I may rejoyce in that testi∣mony. Seventhly, a godly man may argue thus. He over whom  presumptious sins has not dominion, is upright (Psal. 19.13. keep back thy servant from presumptious sins, let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright.) But pre∣sumptious sins has not dominion over me, therefore I am up∣right. Mark, unfeigned willingness to part with every sin, and to mortifie every sin, is a sure sign of uprightness, a sure sign of saving grace; when a man is sincerely willing to leave every sin, and to indulge himself in none, no not his darling sin, it is a most certain sign of his integrity and sin∣cerity, as you may evidently see, by comparing of these Scriptures together, Psal. 17.1, 3, 4. Psal. 119.1, 2, 3, 6. Job 1.8. and Chap. 2.3. Psal. 18.23. I was upright be∣fore him. Oh, but how do you know that? how do you prove that? how are you assured of that? Why by this, that I have kept my self from mine iniquity. Doubtless, there is as much of the power of God required, and as much strength of grace required, and as much of the presence and assist∣ance of the Spirit required to work a man off from his bosom sins, from his darling sins, from his beloved sins, as there is required to work him off from all other sins; a conquest here, clearly speaks out uprightness of heart. Eighthly, a godly man may argue thus. He whose heart doth  not condemn him (1. Of giving himself over to a volunta∣ry serving of sin. Or, 2. Of making a trade of sin. Or, 3. Of allowing of himself in any course or way of sin. Or, 4. Of sinning, as wicked men sin, who sin studiously, resolute∣ly, affectionately, delightfully, customarily, wilfully, or with their whole will, or with the full consent and sway of their souls. Or, 5. of indulging, conniving or winking at any known sin. Or, 6. Of living in the daily neglect of any
known positive duty against light and conscience, or of an ordinary shifting off of any known service hat God requires of him in that place or station wherein God has set him) may have confidence ( is boldness, liberty of speech) towards God, 1 John 3.21. But my heart does not con∣demn me, 1. Of giving my self over to a voluntary serving of sin. Nor, 2. Of making a trade of sin. Nor, 3. Of allowing my self in any course or way of sin. Nor, 4. Of sinning as wicked men sin, viz. studiously, resolutely, affe∣ctionately, delightfully, customarily, wilfully. Nor, 5. Of indulging, conniving, or winking at any known sin. Nor, 6. Of living in the daily neglect of any known duty against light and conscience; therefore I may have confidence or bold∣ness towards God, I may use liberty of speech with God, I may use the liberty and freedom of a favourite of heaven, I may open my heart to God, as favourites do to their Prince, viz. freely, familiarly, boldly. When Austin was convert∣ed, and his heart sincere with God, he could bless God that he could think of his former evil wayes (which were very bad) without fear: O, to what a height of holy boldness and fa∣miliarity with God, had this man of God arrived to! But, Ninethly, a godly man may argue thus. To such who are poor in spirit, the Kingdom of heaven belongs, Mat. 5.3. By poor in spirit, is not meant poor in substance, that not being a thing praise worthy in it self,Chrysost. in loc. but the broken and humble in heart, who hath no high thoughts or conceits of himself, but is lowly in his own eyes, as a young child. Bles∣sed are the poor in spirit; that is (non habentes inflantem spiritum) who hath no lofty or puffed up spirit.Augustin. Hilar. Tertullian. The poor in spirit, are those that are lowly, being truly conscious of their own un∣worthiness. Nulli pauperes spiritu nisi humiles; none are poor in spirit, but the humble. Blessed are the poor in spirit; that is, blessed are they whose spirits are brought into such an humble gracious frame, as willingly, quietly and contentedly to lye down in a poor low condition, when it is the pleasure of the Lord to bring them into such a condition. Blessed are the poor in spirit; that is, blessed are they who are truly and kindly
apprehensive and sensible of their spiritual wants, poverty and misery,There are some that are poor in estate, and others that are poor in spirit; and there are some that are poor spirited in the cause of God, Christ, the Gospel and their own souls, and there are others that are poor in spi∣rit; there are some that are spiritual∣ly poor, as all are that are destitute of grace, and o∣thers that are poor in spirit; there are some that are Evange∣lically poor, and others that are superstitiously poor; as those Pa∣pists who re∣nounce their e∣states, and vow a voluntary pover∣ty. The poverty that hath blessed∣ness annexed to it, is only an Evan∣gelical poverty. that see their need of God's free grace to par∣don them, that see their need of Christs righteousness to cloath them, that see their need of the Spirit of Christ to purge, change and sanctifie them, that see their need of more heavenly wisdom to counsel them, that see their need of more of the power of God to support them, and of the goodness of God to supply them, and of the mercy of God to comfort them, and of the presence of God to refresh them, and of the patience of God to bear with them, &c. that see their need of greater measures of faith to conquer their fears, and of greater measures of wisdom to walk holily, harm∣lesly, blmlesly and exemplarily in the midst of temptations, snares and dangers; and that see their need of greater mea∣sures of patience to bear their burdens without fretting or fainting; and that see their need of greater measures of zeal and courage to bear up bravely against all sorts of oppo∣sition, both from within and from without; and that see their need of greater measures of love to cleave to the Lamb, and to follow the Lamb whither ever he goes; and that see their need of living in a continual dependance upon God and Christ, for fresh influences, in-comes and supplies of grace, of comfort, of strength, whereby they may be inabled to act for God, and walk with God, and glorifie God, and bring forth fruit to God, and withstand all temptations that tend to lead the heart from God; and that see nothing in them∣selves upon which they dare venture their everlasting estates, and therefore flie to the free, rich, sovereign and glorious grace of God in Christ, as to their sure and only sanctuary, Luke 18.13. Phil. 3.9. Blessed are the poor in spirit; that is, blessed are they that are truly apprehensive and sensible of their spiritual poverty, that see themselves fallen in the first Adam from all their primitive purity, excellency, and glory. There are five things we lost in our fall. 1. Our ho∣ly Image, and became vile. 2. Our Sonship, and became slaves. 3. Our Friendship, and became enemies. 4. Our Communion, and became strangers. 5. Our Glory, and be∣came miserable. And that see an utter inability and insuffi∣ciency
in themselves, and in all other creatures, to deliver them out of their fallen estate.) But I am poor in spirit, therefore the Kingdom of heaven belongs to me. Tenthly, a godly man may argue thus. Such as are true mourners are blessed, & shall be comforted, Mat. 5.3. (That is, such as mourn for sin with an exceeding great mourning, that mourn for sin with a funeral sorrow (as the word  signifies) that mourn for sin,. Beati lugentes. Blessed are they that mourn. The way to Paradise is through the valley of tears. Some report of Mary Magdalen, that she spent thirty years in Galba, weeping forer sins. as a man mourneth for the loss of his only Son, Zech. 12.10. or as Jacob mourn∣ed for Joseph, or as David mourned for Absalom, or as the peo∣ple mourned for the loss of good Josiah, 2 Chron. 35.24, 25. That mourn for secret sins as well as open, for sins against grace as well as for sins against the Law; that mourn for sin as the greatest evil in the world, that mourns for his own sins, Ezek. 7.16. as David did, Psal. 51. or as Ephraim did, Jer. 31.18, 19. or as Peter did, Mat. 26.75. or as Mary Magdalen did, Luke 7.38. And that mourns for the sins of others as well as for his own, as David did, Psa. 119.136, 158. and as Jeremiah did, Jer. 13.17. or as Lot did, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. or as they did in that, Ezek. 9.4 That mourns under the sense of his spiritual wants, that mourns under the sense of his spiritual losses, as loss of communion with God, loss of the favour of God, loss of the presence of God, loss of the exercise of grace, loss of the joyes of the Spirit, loss of in∣ward peace, &c. or that mourn, not only for their own af∣flictions and miseries, but also for the afflictions and mise∣ries of Joseph, as Nehemiah did, Neh. 1.2, 3, 4, or as Iere∣miah did, Ier. 9.1.2. or as Christ did when he wept over Ierusalem, Luke 19.41, 42. or that mourns because he can∣not mourn for these things, or that mourns because he can mourn no more, or that mourns because God has so little honour in his heart, in his house, in his life, in the world, in the Churches.) But I am a true mourner, therefore I am blessed, and shall be comforted. Eleventhly, a godly man may argue thus. They which truly hunger and thirst after righteousness are blessed, and
shall be filled, Mat. 5.6.They are not therefore blessed because they hunger and thirst, but because they shall be filled; blessedness will be in fulness, not in hunger; but hunger must go before filling, that we may not loath the loaves. Aug. de verbis Domini, Serm. 5. (Or they that are hungring and thirsting, as the Greek runs, being the participle of the present tense, intimating, that where ever this is the present dispo∣sition of mens souls, they are blessed: He that sees an abso∣lute necessity of the righteousness of Christ to justifie him, and to inable him to stand boldly before the throne of God; he that sees his own righteousness to be but as filthy rags, Isa. 64.4. to be but as dross and dung, Phil. 3.7, 8. He that sees the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his riches and righteous∣ness, clearly and freely offered to poor sinners in the ever∣lasting Gospel; he that in the Gospel-glass sees Christ to be made sin for them, that knew no sin, that they may be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5, 21. He that in the same glass sees Christ to be made wisdom, and righte∣ousness, and sanctification, and redemption, to all those that are sincerely willing to make a venter of their immortal souls, and eternal estates, upon him and his righteousness; and he that sees the righteousness of Christ to be a most per∣fect, pure, compleat, spotless, matchless,Some take hun∣gering and thirst∣ing here litteral∣ly, comparing of it with Luke 6.21 Others under∣stand the words morally, by hun∣gering and thirst∣ing they under∣stand a moral hunger and thirst, which is when men hunger and thirst for justice and judgment to be rightly execu∣ted. Psal. 119.5, 10, 20, 131. Judg. 15.18. 1 Chron. 11.18. Psal. 42.1, 2. infinite righteous∣ness, and under these apprehensions and perswasions, is carried out in earnest and unsatisfied hungerings and thirst∣ings, to be made a partaker of this righteousness, and to be assured of this righteousness, and to put on this righteous∣ness as a royal robe, Isa. 61.10. he is the blessed soul; and he that hungers and thirsts after the righteousness of Christ imparted, as well as after the righteousness of Christ impu∣ted, after the righteousness of sanctification, as well as after the righteousness of justification, he is a blessed soul, and shall at last be filled. The righteousness of sanctification, or inherent righteousness, lyes in the spirits infusing into the soul those holy principles, divine qualities, or supernatural graces that the Apostle mentions in that, Gal. 5.22, 23. These habits of grace which are severally distinguished by the names of faith, love, hope, meekness, &c. are nothing else but the new nature or new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Eph. 4.24. He that hungers and thirsts after the righteousness of sanctifica∣tion, out of a deep serious sense. of his own unrighteousness;
he that hungers and thirsts after the righteousness of sancti∣fication, as earnestly as hungery men do for meat, or as thirsty men do for drink, or as the innocent person that is falsly charged or accused, longs to be cleared and righted, or as Rachel did for children, or as David did after the water of the Well of Bethlehem, or as the hunted Hart doth after the water brooks; he that hungers and thirsts not after some righteousness only, but he that hungers and thirsts after all righteousness, he that hungers and thirsts not only after some grace, but all grace; not only after some holiness, but all holiness; he that hungers and thirsts after righteousness, out of love to righteousness, he that hungers and thirsts af∣ter righteousness, from a sight and sense of the loveliness and excellency that there is in righteousness;Phil. 3.10-15. he that hungers and thirsts after the highest degrees and measures of righte∣ousness and holiness,Psal. 63.1.8. Jer. 15.16. he that primarily, chiefly, hungers and thirsts after righteousness and holiness, he that industriously hungers and thirsts after righteousness and holiness, he that ordinarily, habitually, constanly, hungers and thirsts after righteousness and holiness, Psal. 119.20. My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all times. By judgments we are to understand the statutes and command∣ments of God) Mark that word, at all times. Bad men have their good moods, as good men have their bad moods: A bad man may under gripes of conscience, a smarting rod, the approaches of death, or the fears of hell, or when he is Ser∣mon-sick, cry out to the Lord for grace, for righteousness, for holiness; but he is the only blessed man that hungers and thirsts after righteousness at all times, and that hungers and thirsts after righteousness, according to the other fore∣mentioned short hints; he is certainly a blessed man, heaven is for that man, and that man is for heaven, that hungers and thirsts in a right manner after the righteousness of justifica∣tion, and after the righteousness of sanctification.) But I do truly hunger and thirst after righteousness, therefore I am blessed, and shall be filled, &c. Twelfthly, A godly man may argue thus. Such as are truly
and graciously merciful, are blessed, and shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7.Micha 6.8. Luke 6.36. August. de civit. Dei, 9.13. (Mercy is a commiserating of another mans mi∣sery in our hearts, or a sorrow for another mans distress, or a heart-grieving for another mans grief, arising out of an un∣feigned love unto the party afflicted. Or more plainly thus: Mercy is a pitying of another mans misery, with a desire and endeavour to help him to the uttermost of our ability. The Hebrew for godly,  Chasid signifies gracious, merciful. The more godly any man is, the more merciful that man will be. Blessed are the merciful, that is, blessed are they that shew mercy to others, out of a deep sense of the mercy of God to them in Christ: Blessed are such who shew mercy out of love to mercy, out of a delight in mercy; blessed are such as shew mercy out of love and obedience to the God of mer∣cy; blessed are such as shew mercy to men in misery, upon the account of the image of God, the glory of God that is stampt upon them; blessed are such as extend their piety and mercy, not only to mens bodies, but also to their precious and immortal souls: Soul-mercy is the chief of mercies; the soul is the most precious jewel in all the world, it is a vessel of honour, 'tis a spark of glory, 'tis a bud of eterni∣ty, 'tis the price of bloud, 'tis beautified with the image of God, 'tis adorned with the grace of God, and 'tis cloathed with the righteousness of God; such are blessed as shew mer∣cy to others, from gracious motives and considerations, viz. 'Tis free mercy that every day keeps hell and my soul asun∣der, 'tis mercy that daily pardons my sins, 'tis mercy that supplies all my inward and outward wants, 'tis mercy that preserves, and feeds, and cloaths my outward man, and 'tis mercy that renews, strengthens and prospers my inward man, 'tis mercy that has kept me many times from commit∣ting such and such sins, 'tis mercy that has kept me many a time from falling before such and such temptations, 'tis mer∣cy that has many a time preserved me from being swallowed up by such and such inward and outward afflictions. Such as shew mercy out of a design to exalt and glorifie the God of mercy, such who shew most mercy to them to whom God shews most mercy; these are blessed, and shall obtain mer∣cy.
Now mark, to such who are thus graciously, thus spiri∣tually, thus divinely merciful, do these precious promises belong, Psal. 41.1. Blessed is the man that considereth the poor and needy, Prov. 22.9. He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he giveth of his bread to the poor, Prov. 14.21. He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth, but he that hath mercy on the p or, happy is he, Prov. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made ft, and he that watereth shall be watered also himself. That 2 Cor. 9.8. is very remarkable; And God is able to make all grace abound towards you, that ye alwayes having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. Behold, how words are here heaped up to make grace, and all grace, and all grace to abound; and who is it to? unto the liberal man, the mer∣ciful man, Job 29.13. The blessing of him that was ready to pe∣rish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing for joy, Luke 6.38. Give and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. Behold and wonder at the height of these expressions, that you have in this Text; we account it good measure when it is heaped up, but when it is heaped up and pressed down, that's more; but when it's heaped up and pressed down, and then heaped up and running over again, this is as much as possible can be made, this is as much as heart can wish. O Sirs, those that are of merciful spirits, they shall have mercy heaped up, pressed down, and running over; certainly that man must needs be in a happy and bless∣ed condition, that can be in no condition wherein he shall not have mercy, yea mercy heaped up and running over, to supply all his necessities, Mat. 25.35. Come ye blessed of my father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Come ye blessed, that's their estate; receive the kingdom, that's the issue and reward; and why so? I was hungry, and you gave me meat, I was thirsty, and you gave me drink, &c. But I am truly and graciously merciful, there∣fore I am blessed, and shall obtain mercy, &c. But, Thirteenthly, A godly man may argue thus. They that are pure in heart, are blessed and shall see God (that is, en∣joy
him, and live for ever with him) Mat. 5.8. But I am pure in heart, therefore I am blessed and shall see God. By the pure in heart, here in the Text, we may safely understand the sincere and single hearted Christian,1 Tim. 1.5. Jam. 1.8. 1 Pet. 1.22. Prov. 20.6. Eccl. 2.21. 1 John 1.8. James 10.3. John 3.2. Luke 1.5, 6. in opposition to the double minded Christian, as you may easily perceive by com∣paring the Scriptures in the margent together. Mark, puri∣ty is two-fold: First, simple and absolute; and in this sense, no man is pure in this life, no not one. Secondly, respective and in part, and that is the purity here meant. A pure heart, is a plain simple heart, without fraud or guile, like Nathaniel, in whom there was no gile; 'tis a heart that is evangelical∣ly blameless and sincere. But secondly, purity is opposed to mixture, purity consists in the immixedness of any thing in∣ferior; that metal we account pure metal, which hath not any baser than it self mixed with it; if you mix gold with silver, the silver is not made impure by the mixture of gold; but if you mix lead or tin with it, it's made impure. Remem∣ber once for all, viz. that a pure heart is such a one as hath cast off and cast out the love and allowance of every known sin, and mingles not with it, though never so small; such a heart as hath renounced every known way of sin, though there is corruption remaining in it, &c. yet it can solemnly and seriously appeal to God, that there is no known way of sin, but it hates, and abhors, and strives against, and will up∣on no terms allow of. This heart, in the language of the Gospel is a pure heart; yea, 'tis such a heart as dares ven∣ture upon the trial of God himself, Psal. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me (or any way of pain, or of grief, or of provocation, as the Hebrew hath it, or any course of sin that is grievous to God or man. A gracious heart, a pure heart, can neither allow of any way of wicked∣ness, nor wallow in any way of wickedness, nor make a trade of any way of wickedness, nor give up it self to any way of wickedness. Though sin may cleave to a pure heart, as dross doth to silver, yet a pure heart will not mix nor mingle with sin) and lead me in the way everlasting, or in the way of eterni∣ty, or in the way of antiquity, as the Hebrew hath it; that
is,Jr. 6.16. that good old way that leads to peace and rest, to heaven and happiness. Evangelical purity of heart lies in this, that it will not admit any known sin to mingle with the frame and purpose of the heart; a pure heart like a pure fountain, will still be a working and a casting out the mud and filth that is in it: Though sin may cleave to a regenerate man, as dross doth to the silver, yet it mingles not with the regenerate part, nor the regenerate part mingles not with it, no more than oyl mingles with the water, or water mingles with the oyl. Now you know, though the water and the oyl touch one another, yet they do not mingle one with another; so though grace and sin, in a regenerate man, may as it were, touch one another, yet they don't mingle one with another. Dear hearts, look, as we truly say, that that gold is pure gold that is digged out of the Mineral, though much dross may hang about it; and as we truly say, that such and such an Air is pure Air, though at times there be many fogs and mists with∣in it; and as we truly say, that such and such springs are pure springs, though mud, and dirt, and filth may be lying at the bottom of those springs; and as we truly say, that face is a fair face, though it hath some freckles in it; so we may as truly say, that such and such a heart is a pure heart, though there may be much sinful dross and filth cleaving to it. The Jews report, that when Noah sent forth his sons to people the world, he delivered to every one of them some Reliques of old Adam; it may be fabulous for the history, but 'tis true in the morality, the Reliques of his sinful corruptions cleaves close to us all. Beloved, the best, the wisest, the holiest, and the most mortified Christians on earth,Rom. 7.22, 23. do carry about with them a body of sin and death, they have in them a fountain of original corruption, and from this fountain sin will still be arising, bubling and a boyling up as the scum in a pot over the fire: but mark, as in wine, or honey, or water, though scum and filth may arise, yet the wine, the honey, the water, will be still a purging and purifying it self, and a working and casting it out; so though sin, though corruption, though spiritual filth may, and too often doth, arise in a gracious heart, yet there is a spring of grace, a spring of living wa∣ter
in him,John 4.14. All resistance of sin in a Scripture phrase, is called conquest; for in the resistance of it, there is as much love shew'd to God as in the conquest of it, though there be not so much power seen. there is a holy cleansing and purifying disposition in a regenerate person, that will still be a working and cast∣ing it out. But now mark, in men of impure hearts and lives, the scum doth not only arise, but it seeths and boyls in, Ezek. 24.12. She wearied her self with lyes, and her great scum went nt f rh out of her; notwithstanding all the threat∣nings of God, and all the judgments of God upon her, yet her scum and filthiness boyled in; though God boyled Jeru∣slem in the pot of his judgments, yet her scum and filth stuck to every side of her; wicked mens scum and filth doth not only arise, but it also seeths and boyls in, and mingles toge∣ther with their spirits, but so doth not the scum and filth that rises in a gracious heart; a Sheep may fall into the mire, but a Swine delights to wallow in the mire. But, Fourteenthly, A godly man may argue thus. Such as sin  hath not a dominion over, are not under the Law, but under Grace, Rom. 6.14. But sin hath not a domiion over me, there∣fore I am not under the Law, but under grace. Sin may rebel in a Saint, but it shall never reign in a Saint. Look as those beasts, in that, Dan. 7.12. had their dominion taken away, though their lives were spared and prolonged for a season and a time; so when Christ and grace enters into the soul, they take away the dominion of sin, though they do for a time spare the life of sin. To prevent mistakes, premise with me briefly these few things. First,Rom. 7. that in every regenerate man there are two men, an old man and a new man; or if you please, flesh and spirit. Secondly, The old man, the fleshly part, will incline the soul, and byass the soul, as well to sins against the Gospel, as to sins against the Law, and to great sins as well as to small sins, witness Noah's drunkenness, Lot's incest, Assur's oppression, David's murder and adultery, Solomon's idolatry, and Peters blasphemy. Thirdly, The old man, the fleshly part is as much in the will, as in any other part of the regenerate man; and therefore, when he falls into hainous sins, he may fall into them with consent, delight and willingness, so far as his will is unrenewed.1 Thes. 5 22. Though a real Christian be chang'd in every part, yet 'tis but in part,
and imperfect. Fourthly, The old man, the fleshly part is in a regenerate mans members, as well as in his will, and therefore they may be exercised and imployed in and about those sins they have consented unto. Fifthly, High sinnings do waste and wound the conscience of a regenerate man, and lay him open to the sore rebukes of God, and call for great repentance, and fresh and frequent applications of the bloud of Christ. These things being premised, a Question may be propounded, viz. What does the dominion of sin import, and wherein does it con∣sist? Now to this considerable question, I shall give these eight following Answers. First, Sin is in dominion, when it hath the absolute and so∣veraign comma of the soul, when it hath an uncontra∣dicted power, when it hath such an authority in the soul to command it as a King doth his subjects, or as the Centurion did his servants, Mat. 8.9. For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me; and I say to this man go, and he goeth, and to another come, and he cometh, and to my servant do this, and he doth it. Now when sin has such a universal and easie au∣thority and command over the whole man, body and soul, as that it can use them in the service of sin, when and where, and how it pleaseth, then sin is in dominion: where there is a peaceable,Eph. 2.2, 3. uncontrouled, willing, universal subjection of the whole man unto the commands of sin, there sin reigns. But, Secondly, Sin is in dominion, when in a course, when ordinarily there is a quiet, free, willing and total yielding of subjection to the authority, Law and command of sin. Mark, 'tis a full possession, a plenary delight, and a constant con∣tent in sin,Rom. 6.13, 14, 15, 16. that speaks out the reign and dominion of sin. Dominion of sin imports a compleat and universal resigna∣tion of the whole will, and man to the obedience of it. That man that is wholly addicted and devoted to the wayes of sin,
that man is under the reign of sin; that man whose whole heart is universally married to his lusts, that man is under the dominion of his lusts; when a man does as freely, cheer∣fully, universally and readily obey his lusts,Eph. 2.3. 1 King. 21.25. Micah 7.3. A man may be subjects as a cap∣tive in this or that particular, tyranny of sin, who is not obedi∣ent as a servant to all the govern∣ment of sin, for that takes i the whole will, and an adequate submis∣sion thereof to the peaceable and uncontrouled power of sin. Rom. 7.15, 19, 23 as a child does his father, or a wife her husband, or a servant his Master, or a subject his Prince, then sin is in dominion; when a man sins with greediness, when with Ahab he sells himself to work wickedness, when he commits wickedness with both hands, when he gives himself up or over to all uncleanness and fil∣thiness, when he freely and voluntarily resigns and surren∣ders up his body and soul to the obedience of sin, then sin reigns, then it keeps the throne; where the dominion of sin is erected, there it sits in the heart, as a King in his Throne, and gives forth its Laws and commands to the soul and body, and those commands are listned and consented to, approved and delighted in, &c. A subject can't in a course more free∣ly, willingly, universally and cheerfully obey the commands of his Prince, than a sinner doth in a course freely, willing∣ly, universally and cheerfully obey the commands of his lasts; and where ever this sad temper of spirit is, there is sin in dominion. But now mark,The Apostle, as Chrysostom and Theodoret ob∣serve on Rom. 6.12. doth not say, Let not sin ty∣rannize, for that is sins own work and not ours; but he sayes, Let it not reign in you; for when a King reigns, the Sub∣jects do (s it were) actively obey and em∣brace his com∣mand, whereas they are rather patients than agents in a ty∣ranny. a regenerate mans will riseth against his sin, even then when he is worsted by sin, and led captive by sin: A Tyrant is obeyed unwillingly, the wills of his subjects rise up against his commands, and if his power were not superior to their wills, they would never obey him. Sin is no King, but a Tyrant in the souls of the Saints, and therefore their wills so far as they are renewed, can't but rise against it. O Sirs, remember this for ever, that the molesting, vexing and tempting power of sin, does not speak out its dominion; for sin may molest, and vex, and tempt as an enemy, where it doth not rule and reign as a King; as you see this day in many Nations of the earth, there are many enemies that do molest, vex and tempt the subjects of those Nations, who yet are far enough off from having any rule or dominion over them; but then sin is in dominion, when it commands in the heart as a King in his Throne, or as a Lord in his house, or as a General in his Army, freely, boldly, universally, cheerfully; and when
the soul doth as freely, boldly, universally and cheerfully sub∣ject it self to sins commands; where men commonly yield up their wills and affections to the commands of sin, there sin reigns; and this is the case of every unregenerate man; but where the will does commonly make a stout opposition to sin, there it reigns not; now this is the case of every regenerate man. That Prince cannot truly be said to reign in that Kingdom, where commonly he meets with stout op∣position: So 'tis here; A sincere Christian makes it the great business and work of his life (above all other things in this world) to make all the opposition he can against his lusts, and is throughly resolved to die fighting against his sins, as Pietro Candiano (one of the Dukes of Venice) died fighting against the Nauritines,It is a harder thing to fight with a mans lusts, than to fight with the cross. Augustine. with the weapons in his hand. A Caesar said in a battel he fought against one of Pompey's sons, at other times I fought for honour, but now I fight for my life: so a sincere Christian fights against his sins, as for his life. Castellio's opinion was vain, viz. That men are of three sorts, some unregenerate, some regenerating, and others regene∣rated, and that these last have no combat betwixt flesh and spirit, which is quite cross to Scripture, Rom. 7.14-24. Gal. 5.17. &c. and contrary to the experience of all Saints, in all the ages of the world. But, Thirdly, When a man is usually peremptory in his sin∣nings, in the face of all reprehensions and arguments that tend to disswade him from sin,Prov. 29.1. Jer. 5.3, 4. & 44.15, 16, 17. then sin is in dominion; when the constant bent of the heart is inflamed towards sin, and when the desires of the soul are insatiably carried after sin, and when the resolutions of the soul are strongly and habitu∣ally set upon sin,Hos. 2.6, 7. then sin is in the Throne, and then it reigns as a King; when God hedges up the sinners way with thorns, yet the sinner will break through all to his sin; when life and death, heaven and hell, glory and misery are set before the sinner,Deut. 30.15, 19. & 11.26, 27, 28.29. yet the sinner will be peremptory in his sinnings, though he lose his life, his soul, and all the glory of another world, then sin reigns. But,
Fourthly, When men ordinarily, habitually, commonly,  are very careful, studious and laborious, to make provision for sin, then sin reigns, Rom. 13. ult. Make no provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof; or as the Greek has it,David in an hour of temptation, once made provi∣sion for his lusts, 2 Sam. 11.14, 15. but this was not his course, his trade, &c. Make no projects for the flesh, or cater not for the flesh; when a mans head and heart is full of projects, how to gratifie this lust, and how to satisfie that lust, and how to fulfil t'other lust, then sin reigns, then 'tis in its throne, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Both the Law of God and nature, requires me to make provision of raiment, food and physick for my body, and for theirs that are under my charge; but it may cost me my life, my estate, yea my very soul, to make provision for my lusts. Such as ask amiss, shall be sure to ask and miss; he that would make God a Baud to his lusts, may ask long enough before God will answer; of all affronts there is none to this of making God a servant to our lusts,Hos. 2.8. and where this frame of spirit is, there sin is in dominion. He that abuses mercies to serve his lusts, fights against God with his own weapons, as David did against Goliah, and as Benhadad did against Ahab, with that very life that he had newly given him; such a soul, like the waters of Jordan will at last certainly drop into the dead lake. But, Fifthly, When sin is commonly, habitually sweet, and the  soul takes a daily pleasure and delight in it, then it reigns, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the margen together;Joh 20.12, 13. Prov. 2.14. Amos 6.13. Zeph. 3.11. 2 Thes. 2.12. when a man daily takes as joyful contentation and satisfaction in his lusts, and in walking after the wayes of his own heart, as he does in his highest outward enjoyments, o in his nearest and dearest relations, then certainly sin is in do∣minion. Such men as can go constantly on in a way of wicked∣ness, meerly to delight and content the flesh, such men are certainly under the power and reign of sin. Many of the Heathens, who knew what rational delights were, scorned sensual delights as inferior to them: These will one day rise in judgment against many of the Professors in our dayes. I know there is no real pleasure or delight in sin; if intem∣perance
could afford more pleasure than temperance, then Hiliogabalus should have been more happy than Adam in Pa∣radise; yea, if there were the least real delight in sin, there could be no perfect hell where men shall most perfectly sin, and most perfectly be tormented with their sins. Heark Scholar, said the Harlot to Apulciu, 'tis but a bitter sweet that you are so fond of.Prh. When an Asp stings a man, it doth at first tickle him, and make him laugh till the poyson by little and little gets to his heart, and then it pains him more than be∣fore it delighted him. 'Tis so with sin, it may tickle the soul at first, but it will pain it at last with a witness. I have read of a Gallant addicted to uncleanness, who at last meet∣ing with a beautiful Dame, and having injoyed his fleshly de∣sires of her, he found her in the morning to be the dead bo∣dy of one that he had formerly been naught with, which had been acted by the Devil all night, and left dead again in the morning; so that the Gallant's pleasure ended in no small terror. And thus 'tis doubtless with all sinful pleasures: What sin is there so sweet or profitable, that is worth burn∣ing in hell for, or worth shutting out of heaven for? &c. But, Sixthly, When men commonly take part with sin, when they take up arms in the defence of sin, and in defiance of the commands of God, the motions of the spirit, and the checks of conscience, then sin is in dominion; he that rea∣dily, resolvedly and habitually fights sins battels, is sins ser∣vant, and without all peradventure under the reign and domi∣nion of sin. Look, as we groundedly conclude, that such men are under the reign and dominion of that King, that they readily, resolvedly and habitually take up arms to fight for; so when the inward faculties of the soul, and the outward members of the body, do readily resolve and habitually take up arms to fight for sin, then and there sin is in dominion, as you may plainly see by consulting the Scriptures in the mar∣gent;Rom. 6.19, 20. Eph. 2.2, 3. Titus 3.3. but where the soul readily, resolvedly and habitually strives against it, conflicts with it, and makes war against it, there 'tis not in dominion, there it reigns not, as you may see
by comparing the Scriptures in the margent together.Rom. 7.23, 24. Gal. 5.17. Rom. 8.13. That man that can truly appeal to God, and say, Lord, thou that knowest all hearts and things, thou knowest that there is nothing under the whole heavens that I am so desirous and ambitious of as this, that my sins may be subdued, that my strongest lusts may be mortified, and that those very cor∣ruptions that my nature, constitution and complexion is most inclined to, may be brought to an under. That man that can appeal to God, and say, O Lord, what ever becomes of me, I will never be reconciled to any known sin; yea, Lord, though I should perish for ever, yet I am resolved to fight against my sins for ever: Let God do what he will against me, I will do all I can against my sins, and to honour my God; that man is not under the reign and dominion of sin. But, Seventhly, When sin commonly rises by opposition, then  it reigns. Look, as grace, when it is in the Throne, it rises by opposition, 2 Sam. 6.22. I will yet be more vile. Mark 10.47,Act. 4.6. to the 34 & 5.40, 41, 42. 48. And many charged him that he should hold his peace, but he cryed the more a great deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me; so when sin is in the Throne, it rises higher and higher by opposition. As the more water you cast upon Lime, the more fiercely it burns; so when sin is in its reign and domi∣nion, it flames out the more by opposition; witness the Jews malice and envy against Christ, which when it re∣ceived but a little easie gentle check by Pilate,Mark 15.12, 13, 14. they cryed out so much the more, Crucifie him, crucifie him. A man that is under the reign and dominion of sin, is like the Rainbow; the Rainbow is never on that side of the world, that the Sun is, but wheresoever it appears, it is in opposition against the Sun; if the Sun be in the East, the Rainbow is in the West, &c. Where sin has the Throne, it will still rise high∣er and higher by opposition; reprove a swearer for swearing, and he will swear so much the more; yea many times he will swear, that he did not swear, when indeed he did; and so it holds in all other vices that the sinner is given up to. 'Tis said of Catiline, that he was a compound and bundle of warring
lusts and vices; the same may be said of all others, where sin is in dominion. But, Eighthly and lastly, If the Lord Jesus Christ hath not dominion over you, then sin has certainly dominion over you:Rom. 6.17, 18. Christ hath no dominion over that soul that sin hath dominion over, and sin hath no dominion over that soul that Christ hath dominion over; Christ and sin cannot have do∣minion over the same soul at one and the same time, Christ's dominion is destructive and inconsistent with sins domi∣nion, &c. But how shall I know, whether the Lord Jesus Christ hath do∣minion over my soul or no? How shall I know whether the Lord Jesus Christ be my Lord, or no? For if I can but groundedly con∣clude, that Christ is my Lord, then I may very boldly, safely and undoubtedly conclude, that sin is not my Lord; but if Christ be not my Lord, I may more than fear that sin is certainly my Lord. Sol. Canst thou truly say, in the presence of the great and glorious God,Psal. 139.23, 24. Psal. 26.2. Jer. 11.20. & 17.10. Prov. 17.3. 1 Thes. 2.4. that is the tryer and searcher of all hearts, that thou hast given up thy heart and life to the Rule, Authority and Government of Jesus Christ, and that thou hast chosen him to be thy Soveraign Lord and King, and art truly wil∣ling to submit to his dominion, as the only precious and righteous, holy and heavenly, sweet and pleasant, profitable and comfortable, safe and best dominion in all the world, and to resign up thy heart, thy will, thy affections, thy life, thy all, really to Christ, wholly to Christ, and only to Christ. Canst thou truly say? O dear Lord Jesus, other Lords, viz. the world, the flesh, and the devil, have had do∣minion too long over me;Isa. 26.13. but now these Lords I utterly renounce, I for ever renounce, and do give up my self to thee, as my only Lord, beseeching thee to rule and reign o∣ver me for ever and ever: O Lord, though sin rages, and
Satan roars, and the world sometimes frowns,Josh. 24.15. and some∣times fawns, yet I am resolved to own thee as my only Lord, and to serve thee as my only Lord; my greatest fear is of offending thee, and my chiefest care shall be to please thee, and my only joy shall be to be a praise, a name, and an ho∣nour to thee: O Lord, I can appeal to thee in the sincerity of my heart, that though I have many invincible weaknesses and infirmities that hang upon me, and though I am often worsted by my sins, and overcome in an hour of temptation, yet thou that knowest all thoughts and hearts, thou dost know that I have given up my heart to the obedi∣ence of Jesus Christ, and do daily give it up to his rule and government, and 'tis the earnest desire of my soul, above all things in this world, that Jesus Christ may still set up his Laws in my heart, and exercise his dominion over me. Now doubtless there is not the weakest Christian in the world, but can venture himself upon such an appeal to God as this is, and without all peradventure, where such a frame and temper of spirit is, there the dominion of Jesus Christ is set up; and where the dominion of Christ is set up, there sin has no dominion;Mat. 6.24. but where the dominion of Christ is not set up, there sin is in full dominion. Christ's dominion cannot consist with sins dominion, nor sins dominion cannot consist with Christ's dominion. Now by these eight things, if men are not resolved before hand to put a cheat upon their own souls, they may know whether their sins have do∣minion over them or no, and so accordingly conclude for or against themselves. But, Fifteenthly and lastly, A godly man may argue thus. There  is no condemnation to them, who walk not after the flesh,Walking in Scri∣pture, signifies to hold on a course of life, Gen. 5.22. & 17.1. but after the spirit, Rom. 8.1. But I walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, therefore there is no condemnation to me. Walking after the flesh, notes a course of sin; and walking after the spirit, notes a course of godliness: Now to such as keep off from a course of sin, and that keep on in a course of godliness, there is no condemnation, there is not one condemnation; for God the father won't condemn such a person, nor Jesus Christ won't condemn such a person, nor
the holy spirit won't condemn such a person, nor the word of grace won't condemn such a person, nor no commandment or threatnings will condemn such a person, no nor such a mans own heart nor conscience (if it be rightly informed) won't condemn him; and therefore well may the holy Ghost say to such a one, there is no condemnation to such a one, there is not one condemnation, &c. ☞Now, thus you see, by comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, and by a rational arguing from Scripture, a man may attain unto a comfortable certainty of his graci∣ous state, and safely and groundedly conclude his interest in Christ. Now this assurance of Gods favour, by the witnes∣sing of our own spirits, which assurance is deduced by way of argument syllogistically, is more easily attained than many (may I not say, than most) Christians imagine; for let a gracious man but clear himself of heart-condemning sins,1 Joh. 3.20, 21. and rationally argue as before has been hinted, and he will speedly reach to some comfortable supporting, soul-satisfy∣ing, and soul-quieting assurance, there being an infallible connexion between the forementioned graces, and future glory. These fifteen arguments may well be lookt upon as fifteen sure and infallible evidences of the goodness and hap∣piness of a Christians estate. O that you would often, every day think on this, viz. That the undoubted verity of Gods promises, proveth an inseparable connexion between true faith and eternal glory, John 3.14, 15, 16. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up; That who∣soever believeth in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. John 5.24. Verily, verily (these serious asseverations or protestations amount almost to an oath) I say unto you, he that heareth my words, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. John 3.36. He that believeth on the Son, hath everlasting life. (He hath it in the promise, he hath it in
the first Fruits, Rom. 8.23. he hath it in the earnest, Ephes. 1.13, 14. and he hath it in Christ his Head, Ephes. 2.6.) Mark 16.16. He that believeth and is Baptised, shall be saved, he that believeth not shall be damned. 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief Corner stone, Elect precious, and he that believeth on him, shall not be confounded. John 6.40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Verse 47. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believeth on me, hath everlasting Life. John 2.25. Jesus said unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. Verse 26. And whosoever liveth, and be∣lieveh in me, shall never dye. John 20.31. But these are written, that ye may believe that Iesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his name. Look as cer∣tainly as the unbeliever shall be cast into outer darkness, so certainly shall the Believer be partaker of the glorious inhe∣ritance of the Saints in light; for certainly the Promises are as true as the threatnings, Acts 16.30, 31. Believe on the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.Josh. 23.14. chap. 21.45. The Apostle speaks not doubtingly, perhaps thou shalt be saved, nor they do not say, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and it may be thou mayest go to Heaven, but they speak boldly, confidently, pe∣remptorily, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved. O my Soul, what greater certainty and security can any man have, than the infallible promise of that God that is truth it self, who will not, who cannot deny his word. but the same love and free Grace that moved him to infuse grace into his childrens souls, will move him also to keep the word that is gone out of his mouth, and to make good whatever he hath promised; thus you evidently see that the Promises prove an inseparable connexion between Grace and glory, between Faith and everlasting Life; so that let me but prove that I have a saving Faith, and the Scriptures last cited, prove infallibly that I shall be saved. O labour as for life, daily to give a firm and fixed assent to the truth of those blessed Promises last cited, and hold it
as an indisputable and inviolable Principle, That whosoe∣ver believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ, or whosoever hath received Christ as his Lord and Saviour, shall be certainly saved.1 Tim. 1.15. 1 John 1.9. Heb. 6.17, 18. zek. 32.11. and chap. 18.32. 1 John 5.10.14. Jam. 2 19. This is the person that hath the Word, the Promise, the Covenant, the Oath of that God that cannot possibly lye, or dye for the pardon of his sin, and for the Salvation of his Soul. Now O my Soul, what security couldest thou ask more of a deceitful man, than that which the great Iehovah, he faithful God of his own accord hath given to thee, viz. his word, and his. Oath. Now not to believe God upon his Promise and Oath, is to make him a Lyar, yea the worst of Lyars; yea, 'tis to do worse than the Dvils r they be∣lieve and tremble. Though the word of the Lord desrves the greatest credit that any mortals can give unto it, (he be∣ing truth it self that hath said it) though it had no Oaths, nor no Asseverations to be its surety, yet God in his infi∣nite condescending love to poor sinners, that he may sink the truth of what he saith deeper into the hearts and minds of his people, and leave the fairer and fuller print in our assents to the same, he sets on the word of Promise with the weight of Asseverations and Oaths; yea, and to all these he hath annexed his Broad Seal, the Lords Supper, and the Privy Seal of his Spirit: O unreasonable unbelief! shall not the Oath of God silence all Disputes? A man would never de∣sire of any honest man, so much as God hath condescended to, for the confirmation of our Faith, witness his Promises, his Covenant, his Oath, and his Seals; and therefore let us give glory to him by believing, and quietly rest upon his faithfulness. O Sirs, that soul that dares not take his sanctification as an evidence (yea, as a choice and sure evidence) of his inte∣rest in Christ, and of the Lords precious love to him, accor∣ding to the Promises of his favour and Grace (several of which hath been but now under consideration) that Soul ought to acknowledg it as his sin, yea as his great sin, for which he deserves to be smartly rebuked, as making God a loud Lyar. O my friends, it is a spiritual peevishness, and
sinful crossness that keeps many good men and women long in a sad, dark, doubting, perplexed, and disconsolate condi∣tion; and certainly 'tis no small sin to set light by any work of the blessed Spirit, and the joy, comfort, and peace that we might have by it; ah how many are there that fear the Lord, who quench, grieve, vex, and provoke the holy Spirit, by denying his work, and by quarrelling against themselves, and the blessed work of the Spirit in them? Certainly 'tis the duty of every Christian to hear as well what can be said for him, as what can be said against him: Many poor,Psal. 77.2. Psal. 88. Job 15.11. chap. 16.8, 9. weak (and yet sincere) Chr stians are often apt to be too sowre, rigid and bitter against their own souls, they love to practise a merciless severity against themselves; they do not indif∣ferently, impartially consider how the case stands between God and their own souls. It is in this case, as Solomon speaks in another. There is that maketh himself rich,Prov. 13.7. Ever since man ceased to be what he should be, he striveth to seem to be what he is not. It is not the outward shew, that shews what things are. and yet hath nothing. And there is that maketh himself poor, and yet hath great Riches. That is, there be those in the world that pretend they are rich, and make a shew before men as if they were men of great estates, whereas indeed they are ex∣ceeding poor and needy. There are not a few that stretch their wing beyond their nest, that bear a port beyond their Estates, that trick up themselves with other mens plumes, laying it on above mea∣sure in cloaths, in high entertainments, in stately Buildings, in great Attendance, &c. when not worth one groat in all the World, but either they dye in Prison, or lay the key un∣der the door, or compound for twelve pence in the pound, &c. And there are others again that are exceeding rich and wealthy, and yet feign themselves, and look upon them∣selves to be very poor and needy. To apply this spiritual¦ly. 'Tis the damning sin of the self-flattering Hypocrite,Rev. 3.17. to make himself rich, to make himself significant, to make his condition better than 'tis: And it is the vanity, the folly, of some sincere Christians, to make their condition worse than indeed it is, to make themselves more miserable and unhappy than indeed they are. Ah Christians, 'tis sad with you, ts night with you, when you read over the evidences of
Gods love to your souls, as a man does a Book which he in∣tends to confute. Is it not sad when Christians shall study hard to find evasions to wheel off all those comforts, re∣freshings, cheerings, and supports, that are tendered to them that are due to them, and that they may upon Gospel-grounds justly claim as their portion, as their inheritance. And O that all such Christians would seriously and frequent∣ly lay to heart these eight things. First, that they highly dishonour the blessed God, and the work of his Grace, by denying that which he hath done for them, and wrought in them. Secondly, they are spiritual Murderers, they are self-Murderers, they are soul-Murderers; for by this means they stab and wound their own precious souls and Conscien∣ces through and through, with many a deadly dart. Now is there any Murder like to spiritual Murder, to self-Murder, to soul-Murder? surely no. But, Thirdly, They are Thieves, for by this means they rob their own precious souls of that joy, peace, comfort, rest, content, assurance, and satisfaction, which otherwise they might enjoy. Now there is no theft to spiritual theft, and of all spiritual theft, there is none to that which reaches the precious and immortal soul. Mark all prevalent Disputes about our personal integrity, they do hold off the Applica∣tion and tasts of comfort, though they do not disanul the ti∣tle and right. Even the good man will walk uncomforta∣bly so long as he concludes, and strongely fears that his E∣state is sinful; for sensible comfort riseth or falleth, cometh on, or goeth off, according to the strength of our judgment and present apprehensions; observe, it is not what indeed our estate is, but what we judg of it, which breeds in us sen∣sible comfort, or discomfort, a false heart may (even) break with a timpany of foolish joy upon an erring perswasion o his estate, and so may a sound sincere heart be very heavy and disconsolate upon an unsound misconstruction and judg∣ing of its true condition. But,
Fourthly, They bear false witness against Christ, his Spi∣rit,  their own Souls, and the work of Grace that is wrought in them. O how many dark, doubting, drooping Christi∣ans are there, who, if you could give them ten thousand worlds, yet would never be brought to bear false witness against their poorest Neighbour, Brother, or Friend, and that out of Conscience, because of that Command, Thou shalt not bear false witness, &c. who yet make no Conscience, no bones of it, frequently to bear witness against the Lord Je∣sus Christ, and his gracious works upon their own hearts? But, Fifthly, they joyn with Satan and his work, and his sugge∣stions,  and with that strong party he has in them, against the Lord Jesus Christ and his work, and his weak party in them.See Mr. Dod on the Command∣ments, p. 310, 311. and p. 321, 322, 323, 324. Sin is Satans work, and Grace is Christs work: Now how sad is it to see a Christian fall in with Satans work in him, against the work of Christ that is in him. Satan has a strong party in their souls, and Christ has but a weak party; now how unjust is it for them to help the strong against the weak, when they should upon many accounts be a helping the wak against the strong, a helping the Lord against the mighty, a helping weak grace against strong and mighty cor∣ruptions: An how skilful and careful are many weak Chri∣stians to make head against the work of Christ in their own Souls, and to plead hard for Satan and his works in them, as if they had received a Fee from him to plead against Christ and their own Souls. O Christians, that you would be wise at last, and let Baal plead for Baal, let Satan plead for himself, but do you plead for Christ and that seed of God that is in you. Well, remember this,John 1.3, 9. that as fire is often hid under the embes, so grace is often hid under many soul distempers; and as a little fire is fire, though it be even smothered under the embers, so a little Grace is Grace, though it be even smothered under much corruption: Now by these short hints, you may easily perceive how many Royal Commands these poor Christians transgress, who de∣ny and bely the blessed work of the Lord in them. But,
Sixthly, They rob the Spirit of all the honour and glory that is due unto him for that blessed work of grace and holy∣ness that he has formed up in their hearts; O what a grief and dishonour must it be to the holy Spirit, that when he hath put forth a power in mens hearts,Rom. 8.11. equivalent to that by which the world was created, and by which Christ was rai∣sed from the dead, to find it overlookt, and not at all ac∣knowledged. Spiritus sanctus est res delicata, the Holy Spi∣rit is a very tender thing, but do these poor doubting Souls carry it enderly to him, surely no. Dear Christians, the standing Law of Heaven is, Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thes. 5.19. Now if the word Spirit is not here taken essentially, for the three persons in Trinity, nor yet metonymically, for the fruits of the spirit, but Hypostatically, for the Third per∣son in Trinity, (as some conceive) then you must remember that you may grieve and quench the Spirit, 1. Not only by your enormities, Isa. 63.10. 2. Nor only by refusing the Cordials and comforts that he brings to your doors; yea that he puts to your mouths, Psal. 77.2. 3. Nor only by slighting and despising his gracious actings in others, Acts 2.13. 4. Nor only by Fathering those sins and vanities upon him,Mark, you cannot despise the gifts or graces of any that are sincere, but by interpreta∣tion, you judg the Spirit, and despise the Spirit, as it is said of the poor in Prov. 17.5. that are only the Bats and fruits of Satan and your own hearts. But also in the fifth place, by misjudging and miscalling the precious Grace that he has wrought in your Souls, as by judging and calling your Faith fancy, your sin∣cerity hypocrisie, your W sdom folly, your light darkness, your zeal wild-fire, &c. Now O Srs, will you make Con∣science, yea much Conscience of Quenching the Spirit in the four first respects, and will you make no Conscience of Quenching the Spirit in this fifth and last respect? O how can this be! O why should this be? But, Seventhly, They keep Grace at a very great under, for how can Grace spring, and thrive, and flourish, and increase in the soul, when the soul is full of daily fears and doubts, that the root of the matter is not in it, or that the root is still unsound,Job 19.28. 1 Thes. 1.5. or that the work that is past upon it, is not a work in power, or that tis not a special and peculiar work,
but some common work of the spirit, which a man may have and go to Hell? But, Eghthly and lastly, They very much discourage, dishear∣ten,  and dsanimate many poor weak Christians, who obser∣ving of them (of whom they have had very high and honoura∣ble thoughts, for the Grace of God that they have judged to be in them) to be still a questioning of their integrity, and still a doubing of the graciousness and goodness of their conditions, do begin to question their own Estates and con∣ditions, yea, and many times peremptorily to conclude, that surely they have no grace, they have no interst in Christ, and that all this while they have but put a cheat upon their own souls. Now O that all poor, weak, dark, doubting Chri∣stians would never leave praying over these eight things and pondering upon these eight things, till they are perfectly cured of that spiritual malady that they have been long la∣bouring under, and which has been very prejudicial to the peace and comfort of their own souls. Dear hearts, a gracious soul may safely, boldly, constant∣ly, and groundedly say that which the Word of the Lord saith: Now the Word of the Lord saith,Matth. 5.3, 4, 6, 8. That the poor in spi∣rit are blessed, and that they that mourn are blessed, and that they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness are blessed, and that they that are pure in heart are blessed, and therefore he is blessed. And assuredly he that cannot embrace and seal to these as true and blessed evidences of a safe and happy condition, is greatly to lament and mourn over his unbelief, and earnest∣ly to seek the Lord to perswade his heart, and to satisfy and over-power his Soul in this thing, as the poor man in the Gospel did, Mark 9.24. And straightway the Father of the Child cryed out with tears, Lord I Believe, help my un∣belief. O Sirs, the condition of the Promises last cited, being fulfilled, the Promises themselves must certainly and infal∣libly be fulfilled, else the great and blessed God should lye,Josh. 21.45. chap. 23.14, 15. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. be unrighteous, unfaithful, and deny himself, which is as im∣possible as for God to dye, or to send another Saviour, or to
give his glory to Graven Images. Assredly the too hard, the too harsh, the too severe, the too jealous thoughts and conjectures, and the too humble (if I may so speak) censures and surmises that many weak doubting Christians have of themselves, or of the goodness or graciousness of their Estates (by reason of the weakness of their Graces, or depth of melancholy, or the present prevalency of some unmorti∣fied lusts, or the subtilty of Satan) shall never make void the faithfulness of God, or the Promises of God, which in Christ Jesus are all Yea and Amen. Doubtless God will ne∣ver shut any poor weak doubting Christian out of Heaven,2 Cor. 1.20. because through bashfulness or an excess of modesty, or the present darkness tha is upon his understanding, or through the ungroundedness of some strong fears of an eternal mis∣carriage, he cannot entertain such good thoughts, such ho∣nest thoughts, such gracious thoughts of himself, or of the goodness or happiness of his condition, as he should enter∣tain, and as he would entertain, if once he could but be too hard for the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. O that you would remember this for ever, viz. That the Lord never makes any Promises to support, comfort, cheer, and encourage his people against their sadness, darkness, doubts and droopings, but they shall support, comfort, cheer, and encourage his poor people in that condition, for otherwise the Lord should provide means for an end, out of his infinite Wisdome, love, and tender care and compas∣sion towards his people, and yet they should never attain that end, but thus to imagine is no small folly; yea, 'tis little less than Blasphemy. Well Sirs, this is to be for ever re∣membred, viz. That whatsoever gift or Grace of God in man brings him within the compass of Gods Promises of eternal favours and mercies, that git, that Grace must needs be an infallible sign or evidence of Salvation; but such are the gifts and Graces specified in the fifteen parti∣culars but now cited, and therefore that Soul that really finds those gifts and Graces in himself (or any of them) shall cer∣tainly be saved. But,
The Ninth Maxim or Consideration. NInthly, Consider this, That in divers men there are  divers degrees of Assurance, and in one and the same gracious Soul, there are different degrees of Assurance at divers times, but there is in no man at any time in this life, perfection of degrees, for our understanding and knowledg in this Life is imperfect, both as to the faculty and its acts, 1 Cor. 13.12. For now we see through a glass darkly (Gr. in a Riddle) but then face to face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know evenAs, is not a note of equality, but likeness, so that the sense may be this, look as God knoweth me after a man∣ner agreeable to his infinite excel∣lency, so shall I know God accor∣ding to my capa∣city, not obscure∣ly, but perfectly, as it were face to face. as also I am known. A clear distinct, immedi∣ate, full and perfect knowledg of God is desirable on earth, but we shall never attain to it till we come to Heaven, this Well is deep, and for the most part we want a Bucket to draw withal, the best of men can better tell what God is not, than what he is; the most acute and judicious in Divine knowledg, have and must acknowledg their ignorance, wit∣ness that great Apostle Paul, who learned his Divinity among the Angels, and had the Holy Ghost for his immediate Tu∣tor, yet he confesses that he knew but in part; certainly there is no man under heaven that hath such a perfect, com∣pleat and full assurance of his Salvation (in an ordinary way) as that one degree cannot be added to the former; Nei∣ther is there any repugnancy in asserting an infallible assu∣rance, and denying a perfect assurance, for I infallibly know that there is a God, and that this God is holy just and true, and yet I have no perfect knowledg of a Deity, nor of the holiness justice and truth of God, for in this life the most knowing man knows but in part: Dear friends, in the Church of Christ there are Believers of several growths, there are Fathers, young men, Children and Babes, 1 John 1.13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.2. And as in most families there are commonly more Children and Babes than grown men; so in the Church of Christ there are commonly more weak staggering doubting Christians than there are strong ones, grown up to a full assurance. Some think, that as soon as
they be assured, they must needs be void of all fears, and fil∣led with all joy in believing; but this is a real mistake, for glorious and ravishing joy is a separable accident from As∣surance, nor yet doth Assurance exclude all doubts and fears, but only such doubts and fears as ariseth from infidelity and reigning hypocrisy. But, The Tenth Maxim or Consideration. TEnthly, Consider we have no ground from Scripture to  expect that God should either by a Voice from Hea∣ven, or by sending an Angel from about his Throne, or by any glorious apparitions or strong impressions, or by any extraordinary way of Revelations, assure us that we do be∣lieve, or that our Grace is true, or that our interest in God and Christ is certain, or that our pardon is sealed in Heaven, or that we are in a justified state, and that we shall be at last undoubtedly saved, O no! But we are to use all those blessed helps and means that are appointed by God, and common to all Believers, for the obtaining of a particular Assurance that we are Believers, and that our state is good, and that we have a special propriety in Christ, and in all the fundamen∣tal good that comes by him. Mark, he that will receive no establishment, no comfort, no peace, no assurance, except it be administred by the hand of an Angel, and witnessed to by some Voice from Heaven, &c. will certainly live and dye without establishment, comfort, peace, or assurance. Gregory tells us of a Religious Lady of the Empresses Bed-Chamber,Vide Gregorii Epistolae á Lapide in 8. ad Rom. v. 16. whose name was Gregoria, that being much trou∣bled about her Salvation, did write unto him, That she should never cease importuning of him, till he had sent her word that he had received a Revelation from Heaven that her sins were pardoned and that she was saved. To whom he returned this Answer, That it was a hard, and altogether a useless matter which she re∣quired of him; It was difficult for him to obtain, as being unwor∣thy
to have the secret Counsels of God to be imparted to him, and it was as unprofitable for her to know; and that first, because such a Revelation might make her too secure; and secondly, because it was impossible for him to demonstrate and make known unto her or any other, the truth and infallibility of the Revelation which he had re∣ceived, to be from God, so that should she afterwards call into questi∣on the truth of it, as well she might, her troubles and doubtings con∣cerning her Salvation would have been as great as they were before. O therefore let all Believers that would have sure establish∣ment, sound comfort, lasting Peace, and true and sweet assu∣rance of the love of God, and of their interest in Christ, &c. take heed of flying unto Revelations, Visions or Voices from Heaven to assure them of their Salvation, and of the love of God, and of their interest in Christ, &c. If you who are ad∣vantaged to consult H story, please to do it, you will find upon Record, that where one hath been mistaken about sear∣ching his own heart, and trying his wayes, and observing the frame and temper of his own spirit, many hundreds have been eternally deceived and deluded by Voices, Visions, Apparitions, Revelations,2 Thes. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. and strange impulses and strong impressions, especially among the Romanists; and within these few years, have not many hundreds in this Nation fal∣len under the same woful delusions, who are all for crying up a Light within, and a Christ within, &c. And this you are seriously and Conscientiously to observe in opposition to the Papsts, who boldly and stoutly affirm, That assurance of a mans Salvation can be had by no other means than by ex∣traordinary Revelation: Witness the Councel of Trent, who have long since said, That if any man say that he knoweth he shall certainly persevere, or infallibly be assured of his Election, except he have this by special Revelation, let him be Anathema. With∣out all peradventure God will one day cross and curse such a wicked Councel that curseth, that Anathematizeth his people for asserting and maintaining that that may certainly be obtained in this life, as I have sufficiently proved by ten Arguments in my Treatise called Heaven on Earth, from page 1. to page 26. I think there is a great truth in that con∣fession of Faith that saith, that infallible Assurance doth not
so belong to the essence of Faith,1 John 5.13. Isa. 50.10. Mark 9 24. 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 John 4.13, 14. Heb. 6.11, 12. Ephes. 3.17, 18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.10. but that a true Believer may wait long, and conflct with many difficulties before he be partaker of it; yea, being enabled by the Spirit to know the things which are freely given him of God, he may with∣out any extraordinary revelation, in the right use of ordina∣ry means, attain thereunto; and therefore 'tis the duty of every one to give all diligence to make his Calling and Ele¦ction sure. But, The Eleventh Maxim or Consideration. ELeventhly, Consider that probabilities of Grace, of sin∣cerity, of an interest in Christ, and of Salvation, may be a very great stay, and a singular support, and a special cordial and comfort to abundance of precious Christians that want that sweet and blessed Assurance that their Souls do earnestly breath and long after. There are doubtless many thousands of the precious Sons and Daughters of Zion comparable to fine Gold,Lam. 4.2. that have not a clear and full Assurance of their interest in Christ, nor of the saving work of God upon their Souls, who yet are able to plead many probabilities of Grace, and of an interest in Christ. Now doubtless probabilities of Grace and of an interest in Christ may serve to keep off fears and doubts, and darkness, and sadness, and all rash and peremptory conclusions against a mans own Soul, and his everlasting welfare, and may con∣tribute very much to the keeping up of a great deal of peace, comfort and quietness in his Soul. The probable grounds that thou hast Grace, and that God has begun to work pow∣erfully, and savingly upon thee, are mercies more worth than ten thousand Worlds; will you please seriously and frequently to dwell upon these ten particulars. First, That though many weak gracious souls don't enjoy communion with God in joy and delight, yet they do enjoy
communion with God in sorrow and tears.Hos. 12.4. Isa. 38.3. Psal. 51.17. A man may have communion wi h God in a heart humbling, a heart mel∣ting, and a heart abasing way, when he hath not communion with God in a heart reviving, a heart cheering, and a heart comforting way. Tis a very great mistake among many weak tender spirited Christians, to think that they have no communion with God in duties, except they meet with God embracing and kissing, cheering and comforting up their Souls: And O that all such Christians would remember this once for all, viz. That a Christian may have as real commu∣nion with God in a heart humbling way, as he can have in a heart comforting way;John 20.11-19. a Christian may have as choice com∣munion with God when his eyes are full of tears, as he can have when his heart is full of joy; when a godly man upon his dying bed was askt which were his most joyful dayes (either those before his Conversion, or those since his Con∣version) upon which he cryed out, O give me my mourning dayes again, Give me my mourning dayes again, for they were my joyfullest dayes. Many times a poor Christian has never more joy in his heart than when his eyes are full of tears. But, Secondly, Though many poor weak doubting trembling  Christians dare not say that they do love the Lord Jesus Christ,'Twas a famous saying of Austins, he loves not Christ at all, that loves not Christ above all. yet they dare say that they would love the Lord Jesus Christ with all their hearts, and with all their Souls, and they dare say, that if it were in their power, they would even shed tears of blood because they cannot love Christ, both as they would and as they should. Blessed Bradford would sit and weep at Dinner till the tears fell on his Trencher, be∣cause he could love God no more. So the poor doubting trembling Christian mourns and laments because he can love Christ no more. A man may love Gold, and yet not have it, but no man loveth God but he is sure to have God, saith Augustine. A good man once cryed out, I had rather have one Christ, than a thousand Worlds. Thirdly, Though many poor weak doubting trembling  Christians dare not say that they have Grace, yet they dare
say that they prize the least dram of Grace above all the gold and silver of the Indies;Cardan saith, that every precious stone hath an e∣gregious vertue in it. The same we may say of every saving Grace. were all the world a lump of gold, and in their hands to dispose of it, they would give it for Grace, yea for a little Grace. Now certainly no man can thus highly prize Grace but he that has Grace. No man sees the worth and lustre of Grace; no man sees a beauty and excellency in Grace, nor no man can value Grace above the gold of Ophir, but he whose heart has been changed, and whose eyes has been opened by the Spirit of Grace. Bt, Fourthly, Though many poor doubting trembling Chri∣stians dare not say that their condition is good, that their condition is safe and happy, yet they dare say that they would not for ten thousand Worlds change their conditions with the vain and debauched men of the World, who delight in sin, who wallow in sin, who make a sport of sin, and who live under the Reign and Dominion of sin; they had rather with Lazarus,Luke 16. be full of sores and full of wants, and live and dye in rags, and after all be carried by Angels into Abrahams bosom, than with Dives, every day to fare sumptuously, and be cloathed gloriously, and perish eternally. Though they are poor, and wicked men Rich, though they are debased, and wicked men exalted, though they are empty, and wicked men full, though they are low, and wicked men high, though they enjoy nothing, and wicked men enjoy every thing, yet they would not for as many worlds as there be men in the world, change conditions with them. But, Fifthly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling Christians dare not say that they don't sin, because there is not a just man upon the earth, that doth good and sinneth not, Eccles. 7.20. And because no man can say I have made my heart clean,1 John 3.6, 8, 9, 10. I am pure from my sin, Prov. 20.9. And because in many things we offend all, James 3.2. And because if we say We have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. yet they dare say that they would not willingly, wilfully, wickedly, resolutely, maliciously and habitually sin against the Lord to gain the whole World, though they dare not say
they don't sin, yet they dare say, if they might have their choice, they would never dishonour God more, nor Crucify the Lord of glory more, nor grieve the Spirit of Grace more, nor wound Conscience more, nor cloud the face of God more, nor darken their evidences for Heaven more, nor in∣terrupt their communion with God more, &c. But, Sixthly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling  Christians dare not say that God is their God, or that Christ is their Redeemer, or that the Spirit is their Comforter, yet they dare say, that if God and Christ and the Spirit, and grace and glory, and holiness and happiness were offered to them on the one hand, and all the honours pleasures profits delights and carnal contents of the World were offered them on the other hand, they had ten thousand times rather,Cant. 5.10. Deut. 26.17. Psal. 73.25. Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. they had infinitely rather choose God and Christ & the Spirit, & grace & holiness, & everlasting happiness than the contra∣ry. Look as Rachel cryed out Give me Water or I dye; So these poor hearts are stil crying out, O Lord give me thy self, or I dye; Give me thy Christ, or I dye; Give me thy Spirit and Grace, or I dye; Give me pardon of sin, or I dye; Lift up the light of thy Countenance upon me, or I dye; Bring me under the bond of the Covenant, or I dye; O Lord let all these things be done, or I am undone, and that for ever; Lord let the men of this World take the World, and divide it among themselves, let me but enjoy thy self, thy Christ, thy love, and I shall say my Lot is fallen to me in a plea∣sant place, and verily I have a goodly heritage, Psal. 16.5, 6. But, Seventhly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling  Christians dare not say that they have Grace in their own hearts, yet they dare say that they dearly love,Acts 11.23. Psal. 15.4. Psal. 16.3. Lam. 4.2. 1 Thess. 1.2, 3. Heb. 11.38. and highly honour, and greatly prize the Graces of the Spirit which they see sparkling and shining in the hearts and lives and lips of other Saints, And they dare say that there are no men in all the world that are so precious, so lovely, so wor∣thy and so honourable in their eyes, or so high in their esteems as those who have the Image of God, of Christ, of
holiness most clearly, fairly and fully stampt upon them. But, Eighthly, Though poor doubting trembling Christians dare not say that they have such strength and power against their sins as they would have, or as they should have, or as many of the dear Saints of God have, who often lead Cap∣tivity Captive;Psal. 65.3. Gal. 5.14. yet they dare say, that when the Lord is pleased (now and then by his Spirit, Power, Word, Grace, &c.) to help them, though it be but a little, against their sins, to help them in any measure to subdue their sins, or to assist them to bring any one sin or another to an under, or to arm them against any temptations, occasions or provocati∣ons to sin, there are no such times or seasons of joy, comfort, delight, refreshing, and content to their Souls as these are. The language of their Souls in such a day as this is, is this, O that it might be alwayes thus with us! O that every day we might lead Captivity Captive! O that every day we might have our lusts at an under! O that every day we might triumph over the old man! O that every day one lust or another might fall before the power, the Spirit, the pre∣sence, the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. But, Ninthly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling Christians dare not say that they make so much advantage,Psal. 4.3. Psal. 66.19, 20. Psal. 138.3. Lam. 3.55, 56, 57, 58. so much earnings of the Sermons they hear, or of the Pray∣ers they make, or of the Scriptures they read, or of the com∣munion of Saints that they enjoy, as others do; yet they dare say that they would not for all the World cast off Pray∣ing or Hearing, or Reading, or the Communion of Saints, and give up themselves to the wayes of sin and Satan and the World. But, Tenthly and lastly, Though poor doubting staggering trembling Christians dare not say that Christ is their Savi∣our, yet they dare say that they desire and endeavour to ho∣nour Christ as their Lord, though they cannot see Christ be∣stowing himself on them as their Redeemer,John 20.8. yet they are willing
to make a resignation of themselves up to him as their King; they are willing to resign up their hearts and lives to the Government of Jesus Christ; though they cannot find com∣fort, yet they will oppose sin; though they cannot compre∣hend Christ, yet they will not willingly offend Christ; though they cannot see their own propriety in Christ, yet they desire nothing more than that Christ may claim a pro∣priety in them; though they cannot see Christ as a friend, yet they can look upon sin as an enemy; though they cannot close with the Promises, yet they will close with the Pre∣cepts; though they cannot close with the Priviledges of a Christian, yet they will close with the Services of a Christi∣an; though they cannot share in the comforts of a Christian, yet they will side with the duties of a Chrstian; though they cannot clear up their interest in Christ, yet they are willing to yield subjection to Christ; though they want strength to throw themselves into the arms of Christ to save them, yet they will cast themselves at the feet of Christ to serve him; though they want the light of comfort and consolation, yet they will walk in the light of commands and directions, Isa. 50.10. All men will grant that these ten things are strong proba∣bilit es of Grace, but give me leave to say that they are with∣ou all controversy, most sure, sound, solid and infallible evidences of true Grace, and of an interest in Christ and Salvation; and therefore all those poor doubting staggering and trembling Christians that find all these, or any of these ten things in their own Souls, they ought for ever to bless the Lord, and speak well of his Name upon these accounts. And therefore O my Soul, be thou much in adoring and ad∣miring of free and infinite Grace, that hath wrought all these thngs in thee and for thee. But now dear hearts that this eleventh particular concer∣ning probabilities of Grace may the better stick upon you, and be the more seriously minded and weighed by you, I be∣seech you often to ponder upon these six following things.
First, That you have deserved Hell, and therefore for you to have but a probability of going to Heaven, is infinite grace and mercy; you have deserved to be shut up in chains of darkness with Devils and damned Spirits to all eternity,Jude 6. and therefore for you to have a probability of enjoying for ever the presence of God,Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Isa. 33.14. Christ, the glorious Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect in Heaven, is a mercy more worth than ten thousand worlds; you have deserved to dwell with a devouring fire, and to lye for ever under those flames and torments that are easless, endless, and remedi∣less;Psal. 16. ult. and therefore for you to have a probability of satiating and delighting your souls in that fulness of joy, and in those everlasting pleasures that be at Gods right hand, is Grace, yea glorious Grace upon the Throne, &c. But, Secondly, Consider that if you cast up a true and faithful account, you will certainly find, that the comfort, the peace, the joy, the quiet, the rest, the satisfaction, the content that the generality of Saints do enjoy, is more from probabili∣ties of Grace, than tis from any certainty or assurance that they have of Grace being in their Souls; tis more from pro∣babilities of an interest in Christ, than from any assurance of an interest in Christ; tis more from probabilities of being saved, than tis from any special perswasions that they shall be saved; tis more from probabilities of going to Heaven, than tis from any raised fixed confidence that they shall go to Heaven; and therefore the people of God have very great cause to bow before the Lord, and to adore his Grace, and for ever to speak well of his name, for the very probabili∣ties of Grace, and of an interest in Christ, and of being saved and glorified. Thirdly, Consider that there have been very many under such dreadful horrors and terrors of Conscience, and under such wrath and displeasure of an angry God, and that have lain trembling upon their dying beds, and that have been even ready to be swallowed up in the gulf of despair, who would have given all the world (had it been in their power)
for the very probabilities of Grace.He dyed despe∣rately, who dyed with this despe∣rate saying in his month, Spes & fortuna valete, Farewell life and hope together. Despair is Satans master-piece, it carries men head∣long to Hell, as the Devils did the herd of Swine in∣to the deep. Spira being in a deep despair for renouncing of those Doctrines of the Gospel, which he had once stoutly profest said, That he would willing∣ly suffer the most exquisite tortures of Hell fire for the space of ten thousand years, upon condition he might be well assured to be releas∣ed afterward. He further added in that hellish and horrible fit, that his dear wife and children (for whose sake princi∣pally he turned away from the Gospel, to embrace this pre∣sent world) appeared now to him as Hangmen, Hags and torturers. A despairing Soul is Magor Missabib, a terror to himself, his heart a Hell of horrour, his Conscience an Acel∣dama, a Field of black Bloud: So that as Augustin describes such a one flying from the Field to the City, from the City to his house, from his house to his Chamber, from his Cham∣ber to his bed, &c. So that he can rest no where, but is as if infernal Devils in fearful shapes were still following of him, and still terrifying and tormenting his distressed and perplexed Soul. Now doubtless such poor souls would have given ten thousand worlds (had they so many in their hands to give) and that for the very probabilities of Grace; and how many tempted, deserted, clouded, wounded, and benighted Souls are there, who would think it a Heaven on this side Heaven, if they could but see probabilities of Grace in their Souls? O therefore let not the probabilities of Grace be a small thing in your eyes, but bow the knee, and let the High Praises of God be found in your mouths, even for probabilities of Grace. But, Fourthly, Consider that Saan is a very deadly enemy to  the least probabilities of grace, and will do all he can to cloud, darken, and obscure probabilities of Grace, since divine vengeance has cut him off from the least hopes, from the least probability of ever obtaining the least dram of Grace or mercy.Let not any think (saith Luther) the Devil is ow dead no nor yet asleep, for as he that kee∣peth Israel, so he tha hateth Israel never slumbreth or sleepeth. O how does he storm and take on against every probability of Grace and mercy that God vouchsafes to his people for their comfort and encouragement! Satan is an old experienced enemy, almost of six thousand years standing, and he very well knowes that probabilities of
grace will certainly arm a Christian against many tempta∣tions, and sweetly support him under many afflictions, and exceedingly heighten and raise his resolutions; he knows that probabilities of grace will turn crosses into Crowns, storms into calms, and Winter nights into Summer dayes; Satan knows that probabilities of grace will make every bitter sweet, and every sweet seven times more sweet; and therefore his spirit rises and swells against every probabili∣ty of grace. Now the greater Satans rage is against the probabilities of grace, the more thankful we should be for the probabilities grace; tis good to move and act cross to him, who in all his actings loves to act cross to the glory of God, and the good of our Souls. But, Fifthly, Consider that from probabilities in outward things, men commonly gather a great deal of comfort, sup∣port, quietness, and satisfaction; when the Physitian tells the Patient that tis probable, yea very probable that he will recover, live and do well, O what a support, comfort, and refreshing is this to the languishing Patient; when there is but a probability of a good Market, how does the Market∣man smile; when there is but a probability of good Tra∣ding, how does the Tradesman cheer up; when there is but a probability of a good Voyage, how does the Merchants and the Marriners spirits rise; when there is but a probability of a good Harvest, how does the Husbandman sing; when there is but some hopes, some probability of a Pardon for a Condemned man, how does his spirits revive, and how does his heart even leap and dance for joy; and so when a Chri∣stian has but some hopes, some probabilities of grace, of an interest in Christ, and of being saved, he may well cheer up and maintain his ground against all fears and doubts, objecti∣ons and temptations. But, Sixthly and lastly, Consider there is a great deal of grace and mercy in Scripture peradventures,Exod. 32.30. 1 Sam. 9.6. 1 Kings 20.31. 1 Tim. 2.25. as you may easily see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together: Scripture peradventures ought to keep down despair, and
raise our hopes and our hearts to know that God is favoura∣ble, and that sin is pardonable, and that mercy is attainable, and that Hell is avoidable, is no small comfort to a poor doubting trembling Christian. And as there is a great deal of grace and mercy in Scripture peradventures; so there is a great deal of grace and favour in Scripture may-be's, as you may see by comparing these Scriptures in the Margent to∣gether. Now if Scripture-peradventures,1 Sam. 14 6. 2 Sam. 16.12. 2 Kings 19.4. Isa. 37 4. Ezek. 14 11. Amos 5 15. Zeph. 2 3. Dan. 4.27. and Scripture may-be's afford so much support, relief and comfort to your souls as indeed they do, then doubtless probabilities of grace, of an interest in Christ, of going to Heaven, and of being saved, ought very much to support, relieve, cheer, and comfort the hearts of all those that have such probabilities. A gracious soul may say when he is lowest and weakest, Well, though I dare not say that I have Grace, yet I have a peradventure for it; and though I dare not, I cannot say I have an interest in Christ, yet if I have a may-be for it, I ought to bear up bravely and comfortably against all fears and doubts; yea and to take the com∣fort, and the sweet of all those blessed probabilities of grace, of an interest in Christ, and of being saved, and of all the peradventures and may-be's that are scattered up and down in the Book of God, and with Hannah, to walk up and down without a sad countenance, 1 Sam. 1.18. The Twelfth Maxim or Consideration. TWelfthly, Consider that tis a Christians greatest Wis∣dom  and highest concernment, to take the most com∣modious time for the casting up of his spiritual accounts: If I would know what I am worth for another World, and what I have to shew for the inheritance of the Saints in light, then I am to take my heart when tis at best, and when I am most divinely prepared and fitted for this great service, then to enter upon it: Tis no wisdom for a man to go to see his face in troubled waters, or to look for a Pearl in a puddle.
There are some particular times and seasons in which tis no way safe nor convenient for a Christian to enter upon the tryal of his Spiritual estate.Times of deserti∣on and temptati∣on, are rather times and seasons for mourning, watching, restling and seeking of God, than for jud∣ging and deter∣mining of our conditions. As first, when the body is great∣ly distempered. 2. When the Soul is greatly tempted by Satan, or sadly deserted by God. 3. When the Conscience is so deeply wounded by some great falls, as that the Soul is filled with exceeding great fear, terror and horror; it is with many poor Christians in this case, as it hath been with some who have been so struck with the fear and horror of death before the Judg, that though they were good Schollars and able to read any thing, yet fear and horror hath so sur∣prised them, that when their lives have been at stake, and the Book hath been given them to read, they have not been able to read one line, one word. So many of the precious ser∣vants of Christ, when they have been under wounds of Con∣science, and when they have been filled with fears, terrors and horrors, they have not been able to look up to Heaven, nor read their evidences, nor turn to the breasts of the Pro∣mises,Psal. 40.12. Psal. 77. Psal. 88. Job 23.8, 9. nor call to mind their former experiences, nor be∣hold the least glimpse of Heavens glories. No man in his wits, if he were to weigh gold, would weigh it in the midst of high winds, great storms and horrible tempests, which would so hurry the ballance up and down, this way and that, that it would be impossible for him to weigh his gold exactly. Now the tryal of our spiritual estates is like the weighing of gold,Job 31.6. Dan. 5.27. for we are all to weigh our selves by the ballance of the Sanctuary. God himself will one day weigh us by that ballance, and if we hold weight when he comes to weigh us, we are safe and happy for ever: But when he comes to weigh us in the ballance of the Sanctuary, if we shall then be found too light, it had been good for us we had never been born; when Belshazzar saw the hand-writing upon the wall, his countenance was changed,Verses 5, 6. and his thoughts troubled, and the joynts of his loyns were loosed, and his knees smote one against another; but what was all this to an everlasting se∣paration from God, and to those endless, easless, and reme∣diless torments that such must endure,2 Thess. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. who when they are weighed in the ballance, shall be found too light? A man
that would weigh gold to a grain,The candle will never burn clear whilst there is a thief in it, sin in∣dulged in the con∣science, is like Jo∣nah in the ship, which causeth such a tempest, that the Consci∣ence is like a troubled Sea, whose waters cannot rest, or it is like a more in the eye, which causeth a perpe∣tual trouble while it is there. must weigh it in a quiet still place: And so a man that would make an exact tryal of his spiritual estate, he must take his Soul when tis most seri∣ous, quiet, still, and composed; he must take his heart when it is in the best frame, and most disposed to solemn and weighty work. There are some times which are very unapt for a gracious person to sit as Judg upon his Spiritual estate, and to pass sentence upon his own Soul. The best Christi∣ans under Heaven do meet with divers inward and outward changes, sometimes the light shines so clear that they can see things as they are, but at other times all is dark and clou∣dy, and tempestuous, and then they are apt to judg them∣selves by feeling and new representations, and not accor∣ding to the truth. O Sirs, remember this once for all, that times of inward or outward distresses are best for Praying, and worst for judging. If a man will at such times pass sen∣tence on himself, or his estate as a Judg, he will certainly judg unrighteous judgment, for then the Soul is not it self, and is very apt and prone to take Satans work for his own, and to side with him against it self, yea, and then usually it will see nothing, it will think of nothing, it will dwell upon nothing but what makes against it self. 4. When God exercises a man with some exceeding severe and unusual Providences, when God steps out of his ordinary way of Dispensations in his dealings with a man: When God sets a man up before all the world as a mark to shoot at, as he did Job. Now a poor Christian is ready to doubt and conclude,Job 7.20. c. 16.12 Surely the Lord has no regard of me, he has no entire love for me, his heart is not certainly towards me, seeing all these sore tryals make so much against me; but here the poor Christian is mistaken, as Jacob once was, Gen 42.36. And Jacob their Father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away, all these things are against me.Gen. 45.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. But Jacob was out, for all those things made for him, and for the preserva∣tion of the visible Church of God in the World. Certain∣ly all the afflictions that befall the people of God,Rev. 3.19. Heb. 12.5, 6. are but his love-tokens. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten, and there∣fore
those Christians are miserably mistaken that take them for testimonies of his wrath, and effects of his disfavour. O Sirs! what can be more absurd, displeasing, and provoking, than for a Christian to make that an Argument of Gods ha∣tred, that he intends for an instance of his love? and ye Christians are apt thus to act. It is observable the Apostle reckons affliction amongst Gods honoraries and tokens of respect,Judg. 6.12, 13. Exod. 17.7. Phil. 1.29. For to you tis given (saith he) not only to believe, but al∣so to suffer. Which (saith Father Latymer) is the greatest promotion that God gives in this world.Job 7.17, 18. Job (when he was himself) could not but admire at it, that God should make such an account of man, and that he should so magnify him, and dignify him, as to think him worthy of a rod, a whiping; as to think him worth a melting,Prov. 1.32. Psal. 73.5. Eccles. 9.1, 2. and trying every morning, yea, every moment. Tis certain that great prosperity and worldly glory are no sure tokens of Gods love, and tis as certain that great troubles and afflictions are no sure marks of Gods hatred, and yet many poor Christians, when the wa∣ters of affliction rise high, and are ready to overflow them, O how apt are they to conclude that God hates them, and will revenge himself upon them, and that they have nothing of God or Christ, or the Spirit, or Grace in them? Or, 5.Lam. 1.16. When the Spirit the Comforter stands afar off, and witholds those special influences, without which, in a com∣mon ordinary way, a Christian cannot divinely, candidly, clearly and impartially transact with God in order to his own peace, comfort and settlement. Or, 6. When either a Christians evidences are not at hand, or else they are so soiled, darkned, blotted and obscured, as that he is not able to read them.Psal. 88. Job 33.10. It is an old saying that Melancholia est vehiculum Daemonum. In the German proverb, Luther sayes it goes for currant, Caput Melancho∣licum diaboli Bal∣neum, The melan∣choly head is the Devils bathing place. Or, 7. When a Christian is extreamly op∣prest with melancholy. Melancholy is a dark and dusky hu∣mor, which disturbs both Soul and body, and the cure of it belongs rather to the Physitian than to the Divine. It is a most pestilent humor where it abounds, one calls it Balneum Diaboli, the Devils Bath; tis a humor that unfits a man for all sorts of services, but especially those that concern his soul, his spiritual estate, his everlasting condition. The Melan∣choly person tyres the Physitian, grieves the Minister, wounds
Relations, and makes sport for the Devil. There are 5 sorts of persons that the Devil makes his Ass to ride in triumph upon, viz. the ignorant person, the unbelieving person, the proud person, the hypocritical person, and the Melancholy person. Melancholy is a disease that works strange passions, strange imaginations, and strange conclusions. It unmans a man, it makes a man call good evil, and evil good, sweet bitter, and bitter sweet, light darkness, and darkness light. The distemper of the body oftentimes causeth distemper of soul, for the Soul followeth the temper of the body. A Melan∣choly spirit is a dumb spirit, you can get nothing out of him,Mat. 9.28, 29. It is no more wonder to see a Melancholy man doubt and questi∣on his spiritual condition, than it is to see a child cry when he is beaten, or to hear a sick man groan, or to hear a drowning man call out for a boat. You may silence a Melancholy man, when you are not able to comfort him. Whilest Nebuchadnezzar was under the power of a deep Melancholy, he could not tell whether he was a man or a Beast. Melancholy is the mother of fears, doubts, disputes, and discomforts. and a deaf spirit, you can get nothing into him. Now of all the evil spirits we read of in the Gospel, the dumb and the deaf were the worst; darkness, sadness, solitariness, heavi∣ness, mourning, &c. are the only sweet desirable and de∣lightful companions of melancholy persons. Melancholy makes every sweet bitter, and every bitter seven times more bitter: the melancholy person is marvellously prone to bid sleep farewel, and joy farewel, and meat farewel, and friends farewel, and Ordinances farewel, and duties farewel, and Promises farewel, and Ministers farewel, and his Calling farewel, and tis well if he be not even ready to bid God farewel too. Melancholy persons are like Idols that have eyes but see not, and tongues but speak not, and ears but hear not. Melancholy turns truths into Fables, and fables into truths; it turns fancies into realities, and realities into fan∣cies. Melancholy is a fire that burns inwards, and is hard to quench. Now if a Christian be under the power of natu∣ral or accidental Melancholy, his work is not now to be a trying his estate, or a casting up of his accounts to see what he is worth for another world, but to use all such wayes and means as God hath prepared in a natural way for the cure of Melancholy; for as the Soul is not cured by natural causes, so the body is not cured by spiritual Remedies. Now in the seven cases last mentioned, a Christians work lyes rather in mourning, self-judging, self-loathing, self-abhorring, and in repenting and reforming, and in fresh and frequent ex∣ercises of Faith on the Lord Jesus, on his Blood, on his Pro∣mises,
and on his free rich sovereign and glorious Grace, hat is displayed and offered in the Gospel, and in a patient waiting upon the Lord in the use of all holy and heavenly helps for deliverance out of his present straits, tyals and exercises, then in falling upon that great work of casting up his spiritual accounts, and of searching into the Records of glory, to see whether his name be Registred in the Book of Life or no. O Sirs, when poor Christians are bewildered, their proper work is to cast themselves upon the Promises, to trust in the name of the Lord,Isa. 50.10. Job 13.15. and to stay themselves up∣on their God. Job in a cloudy stormy day, resolves to trust n the Lord, though he should slay him; and so must you: And O that this rule were more seriously minded, and effe∣ctually observed by all doubting, trembling, and staggering Christians. But, The Thirteenth Maxim or Consideration. THirteenthly, Consider you must never judg your selves unsound,The grand Rule by which we must try and judg of our spiritual and eternal estates, is the word of God, Isa. 8.20. in this Scripture the Prophet plainly shews whither we must go with our doubts, fears, scru∣ples, questions, and with whom we must consult, and of whom we must take advice, and that is the Law and the te∣stimony. or Hypocrites, by those things which the Scripture never makes a Character of an unsound Christian, or of an Hypocrite, or of Hypocrisy. Mark, as you are to receive no comfort, but what is backt with clear Scripture, nor no evidences for the goodness and happiness of your spiritual estate and condition, but such as are backt with clear Scriptures; so you are to receive, you are to admit of no Arguments, nor pleas, nor reasonings, to prove your self an Hypocrite, or unsound, or that you have no Grace, or that your spiritual estate and condition is not good, but such Arguments pleas, and reasonings, as are backt with clear Scriptures. Now tell me O thou weak doubting stag∣gering trembling Christian, if thou canst, where are those clear Scriptures that proves wandring thoughts in Duty, or that proves narrowness or straitness of Spirit in a duty, to be characters of an Hypocrite, or of hypocrisy, or of one
that is unsound? tell me O thou sighing Christian, if thou canst, where are those clear Scriptures that proves the want of a good memory for the best things, or the want of those gifts or abilities that many Christians have, to Pray, to speak, to discourse, to open Scripture, or to dispute for the con∣cernments of Christ and his Kingdom, to be characters of an Hypocrite or of hypocrisy, or of one that is unsound? Tell me O thou distressed Christian if thou canst, where are those clear Scriptures that will justify thee to conclude that thou art an Hypocrite, because thou art without the present evi∣dence of thy sincerity? Are there not many of the precious sons and daughters of Zion comparable to fine gold,Isa. 50.10. 1 John 5.13. Gen. 44. Lam. 4.2. who have true Grace and sincerity in their hearts, though for the present it be hid from their eyes? Josephs Brethren had their mony in their sacks, though they did not see it, nor know it till they came to their Inn and opened them. So many of the dear children of God have sincerity in their hearts, though for the present they do not see it nor know it. O Sirs! tis Christs work, not Graces, to evidence it self so clearly and fully to our eyes, as to enable us to own it; tis one thing for the Spirit of God to work Grace in the Soul, and another thing for the Spirit to shine upon his own work; now till the Spirit shines upon his own work, the Soul is in the dark,1 Cor. 2.12. the Graces of the Spirit are best seen in the light of the Spirit, as we see the Sun best by his own light: Tis good for doubting Christians when they are in the dark, to hold fast this conclusion, viz. that they may be upright, though at present they are not able to see their up∣rightness. Now though this will not bring in a full Tyde of comfort into their Souls, yet it will keep them from de∣spair, and it will support and uphold their hearts, till the Spirit, who is a Messenger of a thousand, shall shew them their uprightness. Tell me O thou mourning Christian if thou canst, where are those clear Scriptures that proves deadness, dulness, and indisposedness in duty (though it be sadly lamented, bewailed and mourned over, and much stri∣ven against, yea though it be the great grief and burden of the Soul) to be characters of Hypocrites, or of hypocrisy,
or of one that is unsound? Tell me O thou disquieted Chri∣stian if thou canst, where are those clear Scriptures that proves the want of those enlargements, ravishments, joyes, comforts,In all Soul cases, God expects we should consult his word, and cleave to his word, with∣out warping or turning aside ei∣ther to the right hand or to the left, John 12.48. That book that shall try you at last, and that shall save you or damn you in the great day, is the only book by which you must make a judgment of your present and fu∣ture estates. Cle∣mens of Alexan∣dria, speaking of the Word, saith, it is the touch∣stone of truth and falshood. peace or assurance that some others have, to be characters of Hypocrites or hypocrisy, or of one that is un∣sound? and yet upon the account of the above mentioned things on the one hand, and under a sensible want of the things last cited on the other hand, how exceeding apt and prone are many poor weak doubting trembling Christians, confidently and peremptorily to conclude themselves to be Hypocrites, and to be unsound, and that they have not a dram of Grace, nor no saving interest in Christ at all. O Sirs! remember this once for all, that as you must never admit of any Arguments, Pleas, or Reasonings for the comfort peace and refreshment of your souls, but such as are attended with the evidence of clear Scripture; but such as are backt with pregnant Scriptures: So you must never admit of any Pleas, Arguments or Reasonings, to trouble, vex, perplex, and disquiet the peace of your souls, but such as are attended with clear Scripture evidence, but such as are well backt with Canonical Scripture. Now if this choice Rule were but wisely observed, and carefully, fre∣quently, and conscientiously practised by many weak doubt∣ing trembling Christians, how would it set them at liberty from their fears, doubts, and misgivings of heart; how would it knock off all their chains, and wipe all tears from their eyes, and remove that sadness that lyes like a load upon their hearts, and how soon would it bring them into a con∣dition of peace, comfort, quietness, and settlement. O Sirs! every working and appearance of hypocrisy, doth not presently prove the person in whom it is to be an Hypocrite. A man may be hypocritical either 1. Really. Or 2. In Opinion and fancy, many of the dear children of God are very apt and prone many times both to suspect and falsly charge the true estate of their souls. A child in a distemper may question the inheritance which is entailed on him, &c. But remember this, if thy heart be upright, all comfort is thy portion, for as our distrustful fears do not prejudice the
reality of the estate of grace. So our frequent suspitions that we are hypocrites, does not cut us off from the title and right of promised comforts. Christians must carefully di∣stinguish between the presence of hypocrisy, and the pre∣dominancy of hypocrisy. In the most upright hearts that are in the world, there is more or less hypocrisy remaining in them: All the Saints that ever were in the World,Rom. 7.22, 23. Heb. 12.15. have found more or less of this root of bitterness springing up in them; tis not the presence of hypocrisy, but the reign of hypocrisy that damns the soul; that hypocrisy that is discer∣ned, resisted, opposed, and mourned over, will never make a Christian miserable. Where the standing frame and gene∣ral bent of a mans heart is upright, there the presence of hy∣pocrisy cannot denominate a man an hypocrite. All men must stand and fall for ever according to the standing frame and general bent of their hearts; if the standing frame and general bent of their hearts be sincere, they are happy for ever; but if the standing frame and general bent of their hearts be hypocritical, they are miserable for ever. But, The Fourteenth Maxim or Consideration. FOurteenthly, Consider you must never judg your selves  unsound, or hypocrites for such things, or from such con∣siderations, or by such Arguments or reasonings, which be∣ing admitted and granted to be true, will necessarily and un∣avoidably prove the whole generation of the faithful,Psal. 7.15. the whole body of them that fear the Lord, to be unsound, and to be a pack of notorious hypocrites; he that shall judg himself unsound or an hypocrite, because his thoughts and imaginations are, that he is not sincere,Isa. 55.7, 8, 9. for because he is thus and thus tempted, or because he is at particular times and in particular cases thus and thus worsted and captivated by sin, (notwithstanding all the resistance that he is able to make against it, and notwithstanding his hatred of it, and his loa∣thing
and judging of himself for it) or because he is thus and thus afflicted in his Family,Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, He∣man, Paul, and those worthies in the 11th. of the Hebres, have been as much af∣flicted as thou hast been; now for thee to conclude that thou art not beloved, because thou hast been thus afflicted, this is to conclude a∣gainst all those worthies, of whom this world was not worthy, Heb. 11.38. or in his Relations, or in his own person; or because he is thus and thus dstracted in Prayer, and straitned in Prayer; or because he is somtimes troubled with sad, hard, hideous, and blasphemous thoughts of God; he does in so judging, judg and condemn the whole Generation of the Righteous, for there are none of them but first or last, more or less, have been exercised even as he is, or as he has been exercised: Who dare judg his neigh∣bour, his brother, his friend, an hypocrite, because the hand of the Lord has been various wayes lifted up against him, or because Satan has been let loose to play with his grand bat∣tery upon him? Now if thou darest not judg thy neighbour an hypocrite upon these accounts, how darest thou to judg thy self an hypocrite upon the very same accounts? When thy neighbour, thy brother, thy friend is thus and thus afflict∣ed, tempted, distressed, &c. thou canst tell them that this has been the common lot of the People of God in all the Ages of the World; thou canst tell them that no man knows love or hatred by these things; and that all things come alike to all;Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3. Isa. 1.25. chap. 27.9. Heb. 12.10, 11. James 5.10, 11. thou canst tell them that the most choicest Saints have been most afflicted, tempted, clouded, and distressed; thou canst tell them that all shall end well, that all shall is∣sue well. Remember the patience of Job, and consider the end that the Lord made with him. Thou canst tell them that thou hast got that good by afflictions, temptations, cloudings, distresses that thou wouldst not exchange for ten thousand worlds. Now if Christians when they are afflicted, temp∣ted, clouded, distressed, would be but as kind, favourable, and merciful to themselves as they are to others in the same condition, how wel would it be with them, how soon would they get out of the snare. O Sirs, if ths rule were but prudently considered, and seriously practised, how would the fears, doubts, and darknesses of many poor weak doubt∣ing staggering and trembling Christians vanish, and what peace, comfort, and settlement would they quickly find. O Sirs, we must never stand to that judgment which we pass upon our Spiritual estates, which is irrational, or without
suffi∣cient ground from Scripture, or which would be to condemn the Generation of the just; we may safely appeal from that sentence of our judgment which acts it self in times of pas∣sion, or violent temptation, as he did from Alexander drunk, to Alexander sober, &c. We must not unjustly vex our own hearts, and dash out our integrity, when the sentence that we pass upon our selves is rather of imagination than of rea∣son. When a man thinks, and thinks again and again that his heart is not sincere with God, though many (if not all) evidences of sincerity appear in him, and when he cannot produce any one inherently distinguishing ground of an hy∣pocrite in himself, why this is but an imaginary judgment, and uttely unreasonable, for this is to condemn the innocent without cause. O Sirs! that soul will never be setled in peace and comfort, which gives way to his own imaginati∣ons and passions, and which hath a conceit that every sinful thought, or violent temptation, or more durable conflict with an inward corruption, or the resurrection of some old sin, or frequent distractions in Religious duties, or particu∣lar falls or flips into this or that sin, cannot stand with grace, cannot stand with uprightness, cannot stand with singleness and soundness of heart; O that you would for ever remem∣ber this, viz. That where a man hath either no ground at all, or those that he hath are false, he should never so settle on them, and yield and entertain them, as to question his estate for them, or for them to shut the door of comfort against his own Soul. But, The Fifteenth Maxim or Consideration. FIfteenthly, Consider in judging of your selves, and your  spiritual estates and conditions, you must alwayes have an eye to your natural tempers, complexions, constitutions, and inclinations, and the sins and temptations that these do lay you most open too, and remember that as in some tem∣pers a little grace makes a very great shew; so in other tem∣pers
a great deal of grace makes but a very little shew.A little gold ring upon an Alabla∣ster hand, makes a more glorious shew than a very great Ring upon a leprous hand; the Application is easy. A little water in a long narrow mouth'd glass seems to be a great deal, when ten times, yea twenty times as much in a large Cistern is hardly discernable; the application is easie. A little Sugar will serve well enough for sweet Wines, but much more is requisite to sweeten that Wine that is sharp and harsh. A little grace will make a very glorious shew in such men and women whose very natural tempers are sweet, soft, gentle, meek, affable, courteous; when a great deal of Grace is hardly discernable in those men and women whose very natural tempers are cross, crooked, cholerick, fierce, passionate, ruff and unhewen. As a good man said of an eminent light now in Heaven, That he had Grace enough for ten men, but scarce enough for himself, his natural temper was so bad, which he would himself often lament and bewail, saying to his friends, That he had such a cross crooked nature, that if God had not given him grace none would have been able to have lived one day quietly with him. A sincere Christian may have more roughness of nature, and more sturdiness of pas∣sions than is in many a moral man; he that hath more Chri∣stianity, may have less Morality, as there is more perfection of animal and sensitive faculties in some bruits than in some men. Tis an old experienced truth, that those sins are with the greatest pains, labour, travel and difficulty subdued and mortified, which our natural tempers, complexions and constitutions do most strongly incline and dispose us to, and were but those lusts subdued and brought under, it would be no difficult thing to bring all other sins to an under; when Goliah was slain, the Philistims fled; when a General in an Army falls,1 Sam. 17.51, 52. the common Souldiers are quickly routed. So tis here, get but the sins of your natural tempers, complexi∣ons and constitutions under your feet, and you will quickly ride in a holy triumph over the rest. When Justice is effe∣ctually done upon your constitution sins,2 Sam. 18.14. ult. other sins will not be long lived, thrust but a dart through the heart of Absolom, and a compleat conquest will follow. Now before I close up this particular, let me advise you frequently to consider, that you can never make a true, a right, a serious judgment
of your selves, or of your spiritual estates and conditions, without a prudent eye upon your natural tempers, complexi¦ons, and constitutions, granting to your selves such indul∣gence and grains of allowance upon the account of your na∣tural tempers, as will stand with sincerity and the Cove∣nant of Grace. But, The Sixteenth Maxim or Consideration. SIxteenthly, Consider, If you cannot, if you dare not say  that you have grace,Mark 4.26, 27, 28. yet do not say that you have no Grace, for the being of Grace in the soul is one thing, and the seeing of Grace in the Soul is another thing. A man may have Grace, and yet not know that he has Grace, he may have a seed of God in him, and yet not see it;1 Joh. 5.13. he may believe, and yet not believe that he does believe; the child lives before it knows that it lives. If you cannot say that your Graces are true, yet do not say they are counterfeit, lest you bear false witness against the real work of the Spirit in you. There are none so apt to question the truth of their Grace as those are that are truly gracious; though Sa∣tan cannot hinder the holy Spirit from working true grace in the Soul,1 John 4.4. Psal. 77. yet he will do all he can to fill the Soul with fears and doubts and jealousies about the truth of that grace that the holy Spirit has wrought in it. When did you ever know the Devil to tempt an Hypocrite to believe that his Graces were not true, and that certainly he had not the root of the matter in him; if you cannot say that you have an in∣terest in Christ, yet do not say that you have no interest in Christ, for a man may have an interest in Christ, and yet not see his interest in Christ, not know his interest in Christ; there are many precious Christians that walk in darkness, who yet have an interest in that Jesus that is all Light, Life,Isa. 50.10. and love; if you cannot say that your pardon is sealed in the Court of your own Conscience, yet do not say that tis
not sealed in the Court of Heaven, for many a Christian has his pardon sealed in the Court of Heaven,Psal. 51. before tis sealed in the Court of his own Conscience. A Pardon sealed in the Court of Conscience,Rev. 2.17. is that new name and white stone which God does not give to every one at first Conversion; God will take his own time to Seal up every Christians Par∣don in his bosome. If you cannot say that your name is written in the Book of life, yet do not say that tis not writ∣ten in the Book of life; the Disciples names were first writ∣ten in Heaven before Christ bid them rejoyce,Luke 10.20. because their names were written in Heaven. A man may have his name written in Heaven, and yet it may be a long while before God may tell him that his name is written in Heaven. I you cannot say that the precious Promises are yours, yet do not say that they are childrens Bread, and such dainties that your Soul shall never tast of; tis not every precious Christi∣an that has an interest in the Promises,Psal. 77. Psal. 88. 1 Pet. 1.4. that can run and read his interest in the Promises. If you cannot say that the heavenly inheritance is yours, yet do not say that tis not yours, do not say it shall never be yours. A Christian may have a good title to the heavenly inheritance, and yet not be able to make good his title, to clear up his title; as a child in the arms or in the Cradle, may be heir to a Crown, a Kingdom, and yet he is not able to make good his title. If you cannot say that you have Assurance, yet do not say that you shall never have Assurance, for a man may want Assurance one year, and have it the next; one Moneth, and have it ano∣ther;Luke 19.1-10. Acts 16.29-35. Rom. 11.33. one week, and have it another; one day, and have it another; yea, one hour, and have it another. If you cannot say that you shall certainly go to Heaven, yet do not say that you shall undoubtedly go to Hell, for who made you one of the Privy Counsellors of Heaven, who acquainted you with the secret decrees of God, &c. Now were this Rule but throughly minded, and conscientiously practised, O how well would it go with many tempted, troubled, bewildered, and clouded Christians! O how would Satan be disappoint∣ed, and poor souls quieted, composed, and refreshed. But,
The seventeenth Maxim or Consideration. SEventeenthly, When ever you cast your eye upon your  gracious evidences, it highly concerns you seriously to remember that you have to deal with God in a Covenant of Grace, and not in a Covenant of Works. Every breach of peace with God, is not a breach of Covenant with God. Though the Wife hath many weaknesses and infirmities hanging upon her, and though she may often grieve, pro∣voke and displease her Husband, yet as long as she remains faithful, and truly loving, and in the main obedient to him, though he may alter his carriage towards her,Jer. 3.12, 14, 22. Hos. 14.4. Isa. 43.22. to 26. ch. 57.16, 17, 18, 19. Every thing which is a ground of grief or sorrow to the people of God, is not a suffi∣cient ground of questioning their integrity, or the goodness and hap∣piness of their spiritual estates and conditions. If upon every slip, failing and infir∣mity, a Christian should question all that ever was wrought in him, and done by God upon him, his life will certainly be made up of fears and doubts, and he will never at∣tain to any setled peace, comfort, or assurance or be able to live that life of joy, praise, and thankfulness that the Gospel calls for. yet he will not withdraw his love from her, or deny his relation to her. No more will God towards his weak miscarrying ones, as you may evidently see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together. Doubtless there are many dear Christi∣ans whose troubles of Conscience about their spiritual and eternal estates, arises from their looking upon God, and dealing with God in a Covenant of Works. Are there not many precious Christians, who when they fall before temp∣tations, and are worsted by their corruptions, that are rea∣dy to question all, and throw up all as lost, and peremptori∣ly to conclude against their own Souls, that all is naught, ve∣ry naught, stark naught, and that they are Hypocrites, and that God will never own such as they are, nor never accept of such as they are, nor never delight in such as they are, nor never have any thing to do with such as they are, and all this because they do not a right understand the Covenant of Grace, and think that they have to deal with God in a Cove∣nant of Works. Though many Christians do freely and rea∣dily acknowledg that there is a Covenant of Grace, yet up∣on the least stirring of any corruption, or the least conquest that is made upon them by the violence of any temptation, they are so full of fears, faintings, reasonings, diffidences, and despondencies, &c. And they carry it so weakly and unworthily towards the Lord, as if there were no Covenant
of Grace at all, or as if they had wholly and only to deal with God in a Covenant of works. Now what a high dishonour is this to the free, rich, infinite, sovereign, and glorious Grace of God, which so sparkles and shines in the Covenant of Grace, and which tells us that our eternal estates shall ne∣ver be judged by a Covenant of Works, and that the want of an absolute perfection shall never damn a believing Soul, and that the obedience that God requires at our hands, is not a Legal, but Evangelical? O that all those dear Christians who are so apt to be dejected and overwhelmed upon the account of the prevalency of such and such corruptions, and because they fail in keeping Covenant with God, and in wal∣king in a Covenant-relation with God, I say, O that all these would frequently and seriously consider of these three things! First, That so long as a Christian doth not renounce his Covenant with God, so long as he doth not wilfully and wick∣edly break the bond of the Covenant, the substance of the Covenant is not yet broken, though some Articles of the Co∣venant may be violated, Psal. 89.30. to 35. 2 Sam. 23.5. (while Christ lyes at the bottom of the Covenant, it cannot be utterly broken) As among men there be some trespasses against some particular clauses in Covenants, which though they be violated, yet the whole Covenant is not forfeited; tis so here, every jar, every miscarriage doth not break the Marriage-Covenant; no more doth every sin, every mis∣carriage break the Covenant between God and the Soul. Bt, Secondly, Seriously consider that many weak Christians are much mistaken about the terms and condition of the Covenant of Grace, they think that the condition of the Covenant is perfect and unsinning, obedience, whereas tis only sincere obedience.Isa. 54. Isa. 7.8, 9, 10. Jer. 31.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Mark, that man sincerely obeyes and sincerely walks in Covenant with God, who sincerely, who heartily, who ordinarily desires, labours, and endea∣vours to obey the Law of God, the will of God, and to walk in Covenant with God. Mark, particular actions do not denominate any estate, it is the course of actions which doth
denominate a mans walking in Covenant with God, or his not walking in Covenant with God; if his course of actions be sinful, he walks not in Covenant with God; but if his course of actions be holy and gracious, he walks in Cove∣nant with God. Though the needle of the Seamans Com∣pass may jog this way, and that way, yet the bent of the nee∣dle will still be Northward; so though a Christian in Cove∣nant with God may have his particular sinful joggings, this way or that way, yet the bent of his heart will still be to walk in Covenant with God. But, Thirdly, Consider that infirmities, aberrations of weak∣ness,  do not nullify or evacuate our Covenant with God, nor hinder our walking in Covenant with God; for if they should, then no man could possibly keep Covenant with God, or walk in Covenant with God; Infirmities God passes by and pardons in course, and will never put them into the account, and therefore they cannot hinder our walking in Covenant with God. Breaches made in the first Covenant were irre∣parable, but breaches made in the Covenant of Grace are not so, because this Covenant is established in Christ, who is still a making up all breaches. Mark, there are five things which shew that the deviations of Gods people are only in∣firmities, and not enormities, weaknesses, and not wicked∣nesses; and the first is this, viz. That they do frequently and principally arise from the subtilty and sudden power of Satans temptations. 2.1 Chron. 21.1. Rom. 7.15, 16, 19, 23, 24. That the frame of their spirits is against the evil that they do. 3. Their daily cries, tears, and complaints, speaks it out to be an infirmity, they are in this particular like a lost sheep, or a lost child, or a lost friend. 4. Though they do fall, yet they rise again, though they do step or wander out of the way, yet they do return into the right way again. 5. When they do fall, there is a vast diffe∣rence, a mighty difference between their falls, and the falls of wicked men that are not in Covenant with God, and that first, in respect of willingness. 2. In respect of choice. 3. In respect of affection. 4. In respect of course. 5. In respect of quietness. 6. In respect of continuance. Mark, When wicked men fall, when men out of Covenant with
God fall, then they fall willingly, they fall out of choice, they fall out of affection to fall, they fall in a course, they fall, and they are quiet under their falls; they fall, and con∣tinue to fall,Isa. 55.12. to morrow shall be as to day. But persons in Covenant with God, though they do fall, yet they do not fall, nor cannot fall as they do that are out of Covenant with God. For first, There is in all such persons an habitual pur∣pose to keep Covenant with God. 2. An habitual desire to keep Covenant with God. 3. An habitual resolution to keep Covenant with God. 4. An habitual endeavour to keep Covenant with God. Now where tis thus, there that man is certainly in Covenant with God, and that man walks in Covenant with God, he is under a Covenant of Grace, his sins are pardoned, and therefore they shall never be his ru∣ine.Isa. 63.17. Doubtless many precious Christians have charged and condemned themselves for those things that the great God will never charge them with, nor condemn them for. Bles∣sed Bradford wrote himself an Hypocrite, a painted Sepul∣cher, but doubtless God will never bring in such a charge a∣gainst him. O Sirs, the stirrings of sin, and the workings of sin, and the prevalency of sin, for particular acts will stand with the Covenant of Grace, though not with the Covenant of Works. You may not by any means conclude that you are not in a Covenant of Grace, because such and such cor∣ruptions stirs in you, or because such or such weaknesses now and then breaks forth and discovers themselves, either in your lips or lives: Did Christians but study the Cove∣nant of grace more, and understand better than they do the difference between the Covenant of grace and the Cove∣nant of works, how would their fears and doubts about their spiritual and eternal estates vanish, as the clouds before the Sun when it shines in its greatest strength and glory, &c. 'Twas the saying of an eminent Minister on his death-bed, That he had much peace and quietness, not so much from a greater measure of grace than other Christians had, or from any immediate witness of the spirit, but because he had a more clear understanding of the Covenant of grace than many others, having studyed it, and Preached it so many
years as he had done. Doubtless had Christians a more clear and a more full understanding of the Covenant of grace, they would live more holily, serviceably, humbly, frutfully, com∣fortably and sweetly than they do, and they would dye more willingly, readily, and cheerfully than many (may I not say than most) Christians use to do. But, The Eighteenth Maxim or Consideration. EIghteenthly and lastly, That trouble, grief, and sorrow  for sin, that drives a man from God, is sinful, and must one day be repented of, and wept over. All true trouble,Hos. 5.14, 15. chap. 6.1, 2, 3. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Psal. 51. Hos. 14.1, 2. Psal. 25.11. grief, and sorrow, drives to God, as is evident by the Scrip∣tures in the Margent; Suppose thou hast so and so sinned, yet tis a false inference that therefore thou shouldest be dis∣couraged, and let thy hopes sink, and thy heart faint, as if there were no help, no hope, no comfort for thee in thy God. Quest. But when is a mans trouble or sorrow for sin sin∣full? Answ. 1. When it keeps Christ and the Soul asunder. 2. When it keeps the Soul and the Promises asunder. 3. When it unfits a man for the duties of his place and call∣ing wherein the providence of God has stated him. 4. When it unfits a man for the duties of Religion, either private or publick. 5. When it takes off the sweet and comfort of all outward comforts and enjoyments, and renders all our mercies like the white of an Egg, that has no tast or savour in it. 6. When it weakens, wasts or destroyes the outward man, all godly sorrow is a friend to the Soul, and no enemy to the body. And thus much for those divine Maxims, Considerations, and Rules that are seriously to be minded and observed in order to the clearing up a mans Interest in Christ, and his title to all the glory of another world. Certainly these
Eighteen Maxims, Considerations, or Rules (if God shall please powerfully to set in with them) are of singular use for the clearing up of the saving work of God upon poor souls. And therefore it highly concerns Christians seriously to ponder upon them, as Mary did upon the sayings of the An∣gel in her heart. Now these things being premised, I shall come in the next Chapter to lay down some infallible evi∣dences of saving Grace.Luke 2.19. CHAP. II. Containing many choice, precious, and infallible Eviden∣ces of true saving grace, upon which a Christian may safely and securely, comfortably and confidently, rest and adventure the weight of his precious and immortal Soul, and by which he may certainly know that it shall go well with him for ever; and that he has a reall sa∣ving interest in Christ, and shall be everlastingly hap∣py, when he shall be here no more, &c. FIrst, There are some things in regard of sin, and a Christians actings about it, that speaks out a graci∣ous estate, and that discovers a saving principle of Grace to be in the Soul. I shall instance in these Eleven particulars. First, A universal willingness to be rid of all sin, is an
infallible evidence of the truth of Grace in a mans Soul;Isa. 28.15, 18. Isa. 30.22. Hos. 14.8. Rom. 7.22, 23, 24. the first saving work of the Spirit upon the soul, is the divi∣ding between sin and the soul, tis a making an utter breacl betwixt sin and the soul, tis a dissolving of that old League that has been between the sinner and his sin. The first work of the Spirit, is to make a man look upon sin as an enemy and to deal with sin as an enemy, to hate it as an enemy, to loath it as an enemy, to fear it as an enemy, and to arm against it as an enemy. When the holy spirit takes possessi∣on of the Soul, from that day forward the soul looks upon sin with as evil, and as envious an eye as Saul look'd on Da∣vid when the evil spirit was upon him. O, saith Saul, that I were but once well rid of this David; and O (saith the gra∣cious Soul) that I were but once well rid of this proud heart, this hard heart, this unbelieving heart, this unclean heart, this froward heart, this earthly heart of mine, &c.Gen. 26.35. Look as the daughters of Heth even made Rebeccah weary of her life, so corruptions within makes the gracious soul even weary of his life. Many a day have I sought death with tears (said bles∣sed Cowper) not out of impatience, distrust, or perturbation,Restraining grace doth only suppress and abate the acts of sin, it doth ne∣ver alter the dis∣position and will of a man as to sin. You may chain up a Lyon, but you cannot change the na∣ture of a Lyon. but be∣cause I am weary of sin, and fearful to fall into it. Look as when Christ hath won the will, he hath won the man: So when sin hath lost the will, it hath lost the man. The will is the heart; My Son give me thy heart, is, My Son give me thy will; the will is the Fort-Royal of the Soul, tis that strong hold that stands out stoutest, and longest against all the Assaults of Heaven; when the will is won all is won, the Castle is won, the heart is won; the man is won when the will is won. A mans judgment and reason may say, I ought t rn from sin, and his Conscience may say, I must turn from sin, or it will be bitterness in the end, and yet the work not done, nor the Soul won; but when the heart sayes, the will sayes, I will turn from sin, then the work is done, and the man is won. Where reason saith these lusts ought to be subdued, and the Conscience saith these lusts must be subdued, and the Will saith these lusts shall be sub¦dued, (Psal. 65.3. As for our transgressions, thou shat purge them away) there is a saving work upon the Soul. When
the will ceases to sin, as Ephraim said to his Idols, Get you hence, what have I any more to do with you, then the work of God is begun in power upon the Soul. A universal willingness to be rid of all sin, speaks the heart to be sound and sincere with God; the enmity that Grace works in the heart against sin, is against the whole kind, tis against all sin, as well profitable and pleasurable sins, as dis∣paraging and disgracing sins; and as well against small sins as aginst great sins; true Grace strikes at root and branch, at head and members, at father and son. A true Israelite would not have one Canaanite left in the Holy Land, he would have every Egyptian drowned in the Red Sea of Christs bloud, Psal. 119.104. I hate every false way, Psal. 139. ult. Search me O Lord, and see if there be any wicked [way] in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Saving Grace makes a man as willing to leave his lusts, as a Slave is willing to leave his Gally, or a Prisoner his Dungeon, or a Thief his Bolts, or a Beggar his rags. But now take a man that is in his natural condition, and he is as unwilling to part with his sins, as Abraham was to turn Hagar and Ishmael out of doors. Am∣brose reports of one Theotimus, that having a disease upon his body, the Physician told him, That except he did abstain from intemperance, drunkenness, uncleanness, &c. he was like to lose his eyes; his heart was so desperately set upon his lusts, that he answered, Vale lumen amicum, Farewel sweet Light then, he had rather lose his eyes, than leave his sins. So they in Micha 6.6, 7. do make very large offers for a dispensation to live in their sins, They offer Calves of a year old, they offer thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oyl; yea, they offer their first born for thei ansgressi∣ons, the fruit of their bodies for the sin of their souls. Sin∣ners hearts are so glued to their lusts, that they will rather part with their nearest, dearest, and choicest enjoyments, than part with their sins; yea, when they are put hard to it, they will rather part with God, Christ, and all the glory of another world, than they will part with some base bosom lust; witness that young man in the Gospel, who went away sorrowful, because he had great possessions, Matth. 19.21,
22. Look as a man leaves his Wife and Children,Gen. 21.11. Matth. 19 21, 22. 2 Sam. 3.15, 16. Augustin in his youth (before his Conversion) pray∣ed thus, I said in∣deed with my lips, Lord give, and yet in my heart I was too willing to give longer day, and could have said, Lord, pray not yet, I was even afraid lest thou shouldst hear me too soon, and too soon heal and subdue my cor∣ruption for me. Aug. Con. his Countrey, Estate, and Trade, with tears in his eyes, and sorrow in his heart; so does an unregenerate man leave his lusts, with tears in his eyes, and sorrow in his heart. Very observable is the story of Phaltiel, David had Married Michol, Saul injuriously gave her to another; when David came to the Crown, and was able to speak a word of command, he sends for his wife Michol, her Husband dares not but obey, he brings her on her journey, and then, not without great re∣luctancy of spirit, takes his leave of her: But what was Phal∣tiel weary of his Wife that he now forsakes her? O no, he was forced to it, and though she was gone, yet he cast many a sad thought after her, and never leaves looking till he sees her as far as Bahurim, weeping and bemoaning her absence. And just thus tis with carnal and unregenerate men, who though for fear, or some other reasons, they shake hands with their sins, yet they have many a longing heart after them, they part, but tis upon a force; they part, and yet they are very loath to part asunder. Look as the Merchant throws away his goods in a storm, because he cannot keep them; so carnal en in times of sickness and distress, or in times of horror and terror of Conscience, or when death (the King of terrors) knocks at their doors, or when they see Hell ga∣ping to devour them, and God as a terrible Judg standing ready to pass an eternal doom upon them, then they are wil∣ling to cast overboard their usury, their drunkenness, their Swearing, their Cursing, their Lying, their Flesh-pleasing, &c. but not out of any hatred to their lusts, but out of love to themselves, and out of fear of being damned, &c. for could they but enjoy their sins and Heaven too, sin and they would never part. But now, were there no danger, no wrath, no hell, no damnation, no seperation from God at∣tending sin, yet a gracious Soul would be heartily willing to part with all sin, and to be rid of all sin, upon the account of the vile nature of sin, upon the account of the defiling and polluting nature of sin; of all things in the World, sin is the most defiling thing, it makes us red with guilt, and black with filth, tis compared to a menstruous cloath, Isa. 30.22.
which of all unclean things in the Law was the most unclean, as some observe; and upon this very account a gracious soul would be willingly rid of it. Secondly, A constant habitual willingness to be rid of all sin, is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace in the Soul; 'tis not a transient willingness to be rid of sin, when a man is either under some outward trouble, or some inward distress, that speaks out the truth of saving grace, but a permanent, lasting, and abiding willingness to be rid of sin does. Pha∣raoh in a fit, in a fright, when Thunder, and Hail, and Frogs, and Flies were upon him, was then willing to let Israel go, but when his fright was over, and the Judgments removed, he grew prouder and harder than before. So many men, when they are a little Sermon-sick, or under some smart pangs of Conscience, or under some startling or amazing Judgments, O then they will be willing to let Israel go, then they will be willing to let drunkenness go, and pride go, and uncleanness go, and worldliness go, &c. but when their sick∣ness is over, and the pangs of Conscience abated, and Judg∣ments removed, O then they return with the Dog to his vo∣mit,2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. and with the Sow to the wallowing in the Mire again. There was a man well known to a Minister in this City, who in the time of his sickness was so terrified in his Conscience for his sins, that he made the very bed to shake upon which he lay, and cryed out all night long, I am damn'd, I am damn'd, I am damn'd; and this man in the dayes of his outward and inward distresses, made many and great protestations of amendment of life, if God would be pleased to recover him; in a little while he did recover, and being recovered, he was as bad, and as wicked, if not worse than he was before. So in the time of the great sweat in King Edwards dayes, as long as the heat of the Plague lasted, all sorts and ranks of people were still a crying out, Peccavi; Mercy good Lord, Mercy, Mercy, Mercy! Then Lords and Ladies, and other persons of quality cryed out to the Ministers, For Gods sake tell us what we shall do to avoid the Wrath of God, take these bags, pay so much to such a one whom I have deceived, and so much re∣store
unto another, whom in bargaining I over-reached; O give so much to the Poor, and give so much to such and such Pious uses. But after the sickness was over, they were just the same men that they were before. Men in time of trouble are very rea∣dy to cry out, Arise and save us, Jer. 2.27. And with them, Deliver us this time, Judges 10.15. And with the Samaritans, who when God had sent Lyons among them, enquired after the manner of his Worship, 2 King's 17.25, 26. And yet af∣ter all this to remain as vile and wicked as they did, Jer. 2.20. For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands, and thou saidest, I will not transgress, when upon every high hill, and under every green tree thou wandredst, playing the Harlot. A wick∣ed mans willingness to be rid of his sins is transient, not constant, 'tis like the morning Cloud, and the early dew that passeth away, Hos. 6.4.Hos. 11.7. Psal. 78.34, 37, 57. Hosea 7.16. The Jews were a very unstable peo∣ple, a people bent to backsliding, a people that would often start aside like a deceitful Bow. Sometimes when the Judg∣ments of God were heavy upon them, or when they were un∣der the reign of some good Kings, then down went their Groves, their Altars, their Idols, and their High places; but soon after you shall have them as much set upon Idolatry as before; sometimes they were willing to be rid of their Idols, and at other times they were mad to go a whoring af∣ter their Idols. But now a godly man (when he is himself) he is never unwilling to be rid of his sins, yea, to be rid of all his sins, the fixed, standing, and abiding disposition and bent of a godly mans Soul, of a godly mans will, is to be rid of every sin; and thrice happy is that man that is habitu∣ally under such a choice and blessed frame. Thirdly, A transcendent willingness, a superlative wil∣lingness,  an overtopping willingness to be rid of sin, is an infallible evidence of the truth of Grace in the Soul. When a mans willingness to be rid of his sins overtops his unwil∣lingness; when a man is more willing to be rid of his sins, than he is to continue in sin, then his spiritual state is certain∣ly good. A gracious heart had much rather, if it were put to his choice, live without all sin, than to have allowance to
wallow in any sin; he had rather live without the least sin, than to have liberty to live in the greatest, or the most flesh∣pleasing sin. 'Tis certain that sin is more afflictive to a gra∣cious Soul, than all the losses, crosses, troubles, and tryals that he meets with in the World.2 Sam. 24.10. David cryes not perii, but peccavi; not, I am undone, but, I have done foolishly. He does not cry, Take away the pestilence, but take away the iniqui∣ty of thy servant.Dan. 9.5. Nor Daniel cries not out, O we are sadly reproached, we are greatly distressed, we are wofully op∣pressed;Hos. 14.2. but, We have rebelled. And the Church cryes not out, Take away our Captivity, but take away all iniquity; 'tis not take away our chains, but take away our sins; 'tis not take away our afflictions, but take away our pollutions; 'tis not take away all our enemies lives, but take away the lives of all our lusts.2 Cor. 11.16. ult. And so Paul cryes not out of his re∣proaches, or persecutors, or bonds, or chains, or stripes, or perils,Rom. 7.23. or prisons (he rather glories in these). But he cryes out of a Law in his Members, rebelling against the Law of his mind, and bringing of him into Captivity to the Law of sin, which is in his Members. Paul does not cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from all my sorrows and sufferings;Verse 24. But O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death. A sincere heart (when he is himself) had much rather be rid of his sins than of his sufferings; yea of the least sins, than of the greatest suffer∣ings. 'Twas a sweet saying of Bernard, I had rather (saith he) that God should better my heart, than remove his hand; I had ra∣ther that God should continue my strokes than my sins. And the same noble spirit was working bravely in Job, when he was under the heavy hand of God,See Job 7.20, 21. Job 34.31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done ini∣quity, I will do no more. But now graceless men are much more willing to be rid of their afflctions,See Exod. 10.17. than to be rid of their sins, witness Pha∣raoh, who cries out, take away the Frogs, Exod. 8.8. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the Lord that he may take away the Frogs from me, and from my people, and
I will let the people go, that they may do Sacrifice unto the Lord. 'Tis not intreat the Lord, that he would take away this proud heart, or this hard heart, or this besotted heart, or this blind mind, or this perverse will, or this benummed Conscience that is in me and my people, but intreat the Lord that he may take away the Frogs from me and my people. A grace∣less heart is more abundantly willing to be freed from pu∣nishment the effect of sin, than 'tis willing to be freed from sin, the cause of punishment. A gracious heart sees more filthiness in sin than in Frogs, and had rather be rid of his sins, than of all the Frogs or Toads that be in the World. See what a sad spirit was upon the children of Israel, in that Numb. 21.6, 7.Heb. Burning Ser∣pents, thus they are called, from the effect of their biting, which cau∣sed a mortal bur∣ning, and conse∣quently such an excessive thirst as killed them. And the Lord sent Fiery Serpents among the people, and they bite the people, and much people of Israel dyed. Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee, pray unto the Lord that he take away the Serpents from us. Now mark, in the fifth verse you have them murmuring against God, and Moses, and divine dispensations, and nauseating of the Wheat of Heaven as light meat, because they came lightly by it; they distrust the Providence of God, they let fly at God, their spirit swels against the holy one of Israel, and they scorn, deride, revile, and contumeliously and despitefully speak against Moses; and though they had often smarted for these sins, yet they are at them again; upon this God sends an Army of Fiery Serpents among them, and they bite and devour many of them. And now they run to Moses (who but a little before they had despised) and are very importunate with him to pray to the Lord to take away the Serpents from them. They do not desire Moses to improve his interest in Heaven, that God would take away their proud hearts, their distrustful hearts, their murmuring hearts, &c. but that God would take away the Serpents; they were much more desi∣rous to be rid of their Serpents, than they were to be rid of their sins. So those in Jer. 30.15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of thine iniqui∣ty; because thy sins were encreased, I have done these things unto thee. They do not cry out of their sins, but they cry out of
their afflictions. Why cryest thou for thine affliction? un∣sound hearts are more ready and willing to be rid of their afflictions, than they are willing to have their Souls better∣ed, or their lives mended, or their lusts subdued by them. Pilate was unwilling to condemn Jesus, witness his seek∣ing to release him, and his washing his hands, and his plea∣ding his innocency, &c. Matth. 27.17, 18, 22, 23, 24. but yet the prevailing part of his will carryed him forth to deli∣ver up Jesus to be scourged and Crucified, v. 26. So Herod was unwilling to behead John Baptist, witness that word, The King was exceeding sorry, Mark 6.26. But yet the prevailing part of his will carried him forth to cut off John's head, v. 27. whose head was more worth than Herods Kingdom. So Dari∣us was very unwilling to cast Daniel into the Lyons Den, wit∣ness his being sore displeased with himself, and witness his setting his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and witness his great unquietness of spirit, for he could neither eat nor drink, nor sleep, the night after he was cast into the Lyons Den; and witness his great joy at Daniels safety, Dan. 6.14, 18, 19, 20. All which did clearly argue a very great un∣willingness that Daniel should suffer, and yet the prevailing part of Darius his will carried him forth to sacrifice Daniel to the Lyons; yea to that which was worse, viz. the lusts of his enemies, v. 16, 17. By all these instances, 'tis most evident that the prevalent part of a wicked mans will, stands most strongly byafs'd towards sin. But now the prevalent part of a Christians will, is to be rid of sin: If the Lord should say to a gracious Christian, Ask what thou wilt, O Christian, and it shall be granted to thee; the Answer would be, Lord rid me of my sins, Lord take away mine iniquities, Lord mortify my corruptions, Lord whoever lives, let these lust dye, Lord drown these Egyptians in the Sea of thy Sons blood, who have so violently and unweariedly pursued after the Blood of my precious Soul; Lord kill and crucify all these sinful evils, that have killed and Crucified the Lord of life and glory.Psal. 5.2, 7. Lord wash me throughly from mine iniqui∣ty, and cleanse me from my sin. Lord purge me with Hysop,
and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall be whiter than Snow: Lord, carnal reason, and flesh and bloud, would fain have such and such pleasurable sins, and such and such profi∣table sins indulged and spared, but Lord, the earnest, the ar∣dent desires of my soul are, that I may be rid of them, and that Justice to the heighth may be done upon them. Lord be but the death of my sins, and my soul shall say, My lot is fallen in a pleasant place, and verily I have a goodly heritage. Lord cleanse me but from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, and I shall cry Hsanna to thee, Matth. 21.9.Psal. 16.6. 2 Cor. 7.1. Lord let me but out live my lusts, and follow them to the Grave before others follow me to my Grave, and I shall say it is enough. And thus every gracious Soul is more willing to be rid of his sins, than he is to keep his sins. A Porter cannot be more willing to be rid of his burden, nor a sick man to be rid of his disease, nor a Beggar of his nasty louzy rags, nor a Prisoner of his chains, than a gracious Soul is willing to be rid of his lusts, &c. Fourthly, That Soul that does not (nor, through Grace  assisting, will not) allow himself, or indulge himself in a course of sin, or in the common practise of any known sin, that Soul is certainly a gracious soul. The evil that I do,Rom. 7.15. I allow not. So Psal. 119.1, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that walk in the Law of the Lord, they also do no iniquity; that is, they allow not themselves in the practice of any ini∣quity. Blessed souls live not in the service of sin, they live not in an ordinary practice of any iniquity. 1 John 3.9. Who∣soever is born of God, doth not commit sin, for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. He that has the seed of God, the seed of Grace and Regeneration in him, he cannot allow himself in away of sin, he cannot give him∣self over to a voluntary serving of sin, he cannot make a Trade of sin. So Prov. 16.17. The highway of the upripht is to depart from evil, (that is) it is the ordinary, usual, constant course of an upright man to depart from evl. An honest Traveller may step out of the Kings Highway into a house, a Wood, a Close, but his work, his business is to go on in the
Kings Highway. So the business, the work of an upright man is to depart from evil; 'tis possible for an upright man to step into a sinful path, or to touch upon sinful facts; but his main way, his principal work and business, is to depart from iniquity: As a Bee may light upon a Thistle, but her work is to be gathering at Flowers; or as a Sheep may slip into the dirt, but its work is to be grasing on the Mountains, or in the Meadows. Certainly there is no man in the world so abominable wicked, but that he may now and then (when he is in a good mood, or when he is under distress of Con∣science, or bleeding under a smarting rod, or beholding the hand-writing upon the Wall, or under a sentence of death) depart from evil; but this is not his course, this is not his business, this is not his work, this is not his highway. Thieves do but now and then step into the Kings Highway to take a purse, they do not keep the Kings Highway. But now the upright mans Highway, his common and ordinary course, is to depart from evil, and therefore he cannot allow himself liberty to walk in an evil way. Titus 2.11, 12. For the Grace of God that bringeth Salvation, hath appeared to all men, (without distinction of Nations, Sex, Age, or condition) teaching us, that denying ungodlyness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. Under the name of ungodliness, he compriseth all the breaches of the first Ta∣ble; and under the name of worldly lusts, he compriseth all inordinate desires against the second Table; and those three words, soberly, righteously, and godly, have a threefold re∣ference; the first to our selves, the second to our neighbour, and the third to God. We must live soberly in respect of our selves, righteously in respect of our neighbours, and god∣ly in respect of God. And this is the sum of a Christians whole duty. Now if the Grace of God which bringeth Sal∣vation, teaches Saints to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, then certainly Saints that are taught by that Grace, cannot live, nor allow themselves in ungodliness or worldly lusts; without all peradventure Heaven is for that man, and that man is for Heaven that can appeal to Heaven, that he allows not himself in the practice of any known sin. Thus Da∣vid
did, Search me O Lord (sayes he) and know my heart,Psal. 13.24. try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me. 'Tis a most sure sign, that sin hath not gained a mans heart nor consent, but committed a rape upon his Soul; when he al∣lows not himself in it, but cryes out bitterly to God against it, as Paul did, Rom. 7. If the ravished Virgin under the Law cryed out, she was guiltless, Deut. 22.25, 26, 27. Cer∣tainly such as cry out of their sins, and that would not for all the world allow themselves in a way of sin, such are guilt∣less before the Lord. That which a Christian does not al∣low himself in, that he does not do in divine account, &c. But now the whole Trade, the whole life of formal and carnal Christians, is nothing else but one continued web of wickedness; there is no wicked unregenerate person in the world, but lives in the daily practice of some known sin or other; but allows himself in some Trade or way of wicked∣ness or other, as you may evidently see by comparing of these following Scriptures together, Prov. 1.20. to 33. Jer. 5.3. Jer. 44.16, 17, 18, 19. Jer. 9.3, 4, 5, 6. Jer. 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Psal. 50.16, 17. Isa. 66. 3. Matth. 7.23. Rom. 6.12, 13, 19. Rom. 8.5. Luke 13.27. Ephes. 2.2, 3. Phil. 4.19. Titus 3.3. 2 Pet. 2.14. Sin is a sinners absolute work, it is his main work, and the sinner is besides himself, besides his Calling (as it were) when he is besides his sin. Fifthly, He that conflicts most with heart-sins, and is most  affected with spiritual sins,Psal. 19.12. Psal. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts. Psal. 30.6, 7. Isa. 64.7. and that laments and mourns most over secret sins, invisible sins, sins that lye most hid and remote from the eyes of the World, he is certainly a graci∣ous soul; Grace in truth, and grace in power, will rise and conflict, and make head against the most inward and secret vanities of the Soul, as against secret self-love, and secret hardness of heart, Isa. 63.17. and secret unbelief, Mark 9.24. and secret carnal confidence, and secret hypocrisie, and secret envy, and secret malice, and secret vain-glory, and secret fretting and murmuring, and secret lustings, and se∣cret runnings out of the Soul after the meat that perisheth,
and secret pride; hence Hezekiah humbles himself for the pride of his heart;2 Chron. 32.25. 2 Sam. 24.10. Psal. 42.11. and so David, he humbles himself for the pride of his heart in numbring of the people. And how does the same Prophet chide himself for sinful dejection of spirit,Psal. 73.22. Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquited in me? And how does he at another time be-fool himself, and be-beast himself, for his secret grudging and fretting at the prosperity of the wicked. So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. And so Paul was most affected and affli∣cted with a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind; Inward pollutions and defilements did sit closest and sadest upon his spirits. And the same Apostle in that 2 Cor. 7.1. is for keeping down the filthiness of the spirit, as well as the filthiness of the flesh; he is for inward cleansing, as well as for outward cleansing.Rom. 7.22, 23, 24. Having therefore these Pro∣mises, (dearly beloved) let as cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God: So Mr. Bradford was a man that had attained to so great and eminent a heighth of holiness, that Doctor Taylor (the Mar∣tyr) calls him, That Saint of God John Bradford; and yet O how sadly does he bewail his secret hypocrisy. True Grace makes opposition as well against the being of sin in a mans nature,Col. 3.5. as against the breakings out of sin in a mans life. True Grace will make head against the corruptions of the heart, as well as against the excursions of the feet; 'tis as willing and desirous to be rid of a polluted heart, as 'tis wil∣ling and desirous to be rid of a polluted hand. It would fain have, not only sinful acts, but also sinful dispositions; and not only irregular actions, but also inordinate affections mortified and subdued. O friends! heart-sins are root-sins, they are the springs that set all the wheels a going, the Foun∣tain that sets all the streams a running, the fire that sets the Furnace a smoaking, the Bellows that sets the fire a burn∣ing. Certainly a proud heart hath more of Satan in it than a proud look, and a wanton heart is more vile than a wanton eye, and a murtherous or adulterous heart, is worse than a murtherous or adulterous act, &c. And therefore true grace makes head against heart-sins, against spiritual sins,
against the most inward secret sins, against those very sins that lye not within the reach of reason, or the Sword of the Magistrate, or the piercing eye of the most knowing or ob∣serving man in the World, but are only obvious to an omni∣scient eye. But now carnal men, as they make little of outward sins, so they make nothing of heart-sins, of spiritual sins. If they are not drunkards, nor swearers,Matt. 19.16-27. nor extortio∣ners, nor whoremasters, nor cursers, nor cheaters, nor op∣pressors, nor lyars, nor persecutors; if they are good nega∣tive Christians, then they think themselves very good Saints, and in a very fair way for heaven, and that no man can say Black is their eye; when their hearts are as full of evil thoughts, and secret lusts, as Ignorance, Atheism, unbelief, pride, envy, discontent, anger, formality, hypocrisy, indif∣ferency, lukewarmness, deadness and hardness, &c. as the Sun is full of light, or as Hell is full of darkness. Restrain∣ing grace, common grace, only makes head against gross enormities, against palpable vanities, as you may see in the Scribes and Pharises; but saving grace makes head against heart-sins, against spiritual sins. Common grace is all for washing the outside, but Saving grace is for washing the in∣side as well as the outside. Common grace is only for wash∣ing the feet and the head, but Saving grace is for washing both feet, head, and heart. Look as in a dark night we can only see those stars that are of the greatest magnitude;Matth. 23. John 13.9, 10. so by the star-light of natural Conscience, the natural man can on∣ly see those sins that are more great and gross. Natural con∣victions can reach no further than natural light, but spiritual convictions reach to the most inward, secret, spiritual, and undiscernable sins. Certainly that is a sincere heart, a heart more worth than gold, that smites a man for inward sins as well as for outward sins; for sins done in a corner, as well as for sins acted upon the house top; for spiritual sins as well as for fleshly sins; for sins against the Soul, as well as for sins against the body; for sins committed in a Closet, as well as for sins committed on the most publick Stage. Cer∣tainly that trouble and grief that springs from heart-sins, from spiritual sins, from secret sins, bears a more imme∣diate
relation to the holiness of God, who only observes them, and is offended by them, and so is a most sure and in∣fallible evidence of saving Grace, and of the work of the spi∣rit in power upon the Soul. When open commissions do humble and abase the heart, and secret inclinations to sin do even break and burst the heart asunder, then the heart is certainly sincere with God. A Christian will readily grant that his God is a good God, and that Jesus Christ is the chief∣est of ten thousand, and that the Gospel is a glorious Gospel, and that the Promises are precious Promises, and that the Ordinances are blessed Ordinances, and that the lively com∣munion of Saints is the Sweetest communion in all the world. But yet he will say, I have such a proud heart, such a hard heart, such a flight heart, such a carnal heart, &c. and I am so vexed and molested with sinful motions, and with sinful imaginations, and with sinful inclinations, and with Atheisti∣cal risings, and with private murmurings, and with secret unbelievings, and that in despite of all my conflictings, and strivings, and prayings, and mournings, and sighings, and groanings, and complainings; that I am oftentimes even weary of my life: And if this does not speak out Christ within, and grace within, and the Spirit within such a Soul, I know nothing. O friends! remember this once for all, viz. That the main Battle, the main warfare of a Christian lyes not in the open field, it lyes not in visible skirmishes, but his main quarrels and conflicts are most within, and his worst and greatest enemies are them of his own house, they are them of his own heart. A little grace at first conversi∣on, may reform an ill life; but it must be a great deal of grace that must reform an ill heart. A little grace may make a man victorious over outward gross sins, but it must be a great deal of grace that must make a man victorious over inward sins, secret sins, spiritual sins, heart-sins, yea, a through conquest of these sins will hold a man play all his dayes. But, Sixthly, He that abstains from sin, he whose heart rises against sin, he that sets himself against sin, because of the evil
nature of sin,2 Cor. 7.1. I have read of the Ermin, that she will rather dye than be got into the dirt to defile her beautiful skin. And rather than Joseph will defile his beautiful soul by defiling his Masters bed, he will to a dirty Dungeon. He had rather that the Irons should en∣ter into his Soul, Psal. 105.18. than that sin should enter into his Conscience: He had rather that his chains should eat into his flesh, than that sin should pollute his soul. Isa. 59.1, 2. Amos 3.6. Acts 5.39. because of that vileness and filthiness that is in sin; he certainly has a principle of Grace, a seed of God in him. He who refrains from sin, and whose heart rises more against sin, because of the purity of the Law which forbids sin, then because of the severity of the Law which condemns sin, is certainly under the power of renewing Grace, of saving Grace. Psal. 119.140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loveth it: 'tis only pure Grace that can inable a man to love the Word for its purity. The A∣postle to set forth the formidable evil that is in sin, expres¦ses it thus, Rom. 7.13. That sin might appear to be sin. He could find nothing more evil and odious to express it by than it self. Sin is so great an evil, that it cannot have a worse Epithet given it. Paul can call it no worse than by its own name, sinful sin. Had the Apostle said that sin might appear to be a snare, a Serpent, a Viper, a Toad, a Plague, a Devil, a Hell, &c. he had said much, but yet not enough to set forth the transcendent evil that is in sin, and therefore he calls it sinful sin. All other evils are but outward, they only reach the name, the body, the estate, the life, but sin is an inward evil, a spiritual evil, an evil that reaches the precious and immortal Soul, and therefore is the greatest evil. Death puts an end to all other troubles, viz. poverty, sickness, dis∣grace, scorn, contempt, crosses, losses, &c. but sin is so great an evil, that death it self cannot put an end to it, Eter∣nity it self shall never put a stop, a period to this evil of evils. All outward evils can never make a man the subject of Gods wrath and hatred. A man may be poor, and yet precious in the eyes of God, he may be greatly abhorred by the World, and yet highly honoured by God; he may be de∣based by men, and yet exalted by God. But now sin is so great an evil, that it subjects the sinners Soul to the wrath and hatred of God; all other evils do but strike at a mans present well-being, but sin strikes at a mans eternal well-being; all other evils can never hinder a mans communion with God, a man may have communion with God in pover∣ty, in sickness, in Prison, in Banishment; but sin is so great an evil, that it interrupts communion with God, it cuts off
communion with God. All outward evils are Gods crea∣tures, Is there any evil in the City that the Lord hath not done. But sin is the Devils creature, 'tis a brat of his own begetting, yea, 'tis worse than the Devil, 'tis that which has turn'd glo∣rious Angels into infernal Devils. All other evils do not fight against the greatest good, but sin is that grand evil that fights against the greatest good, it fights against the being of God, the essence of God, the glory of God. Peccatum est Dei-cidium, sin is a killing of God, 'tis a murthering of God; Sin is a universal evil, 'tis all evil, 'tis nothing but evil, there is not one drop, one spark of good to be found in any sin; but now in all outward evils, there is some good, there is some good in poverty, in sickness, in war, in death, but there is not the least good in sin, sin is the sole object of Gods hatred, he hates nothing but sin, he is angry with no∣thing but sin, he has forbid nothing but sin, he has revealed his wrath from heaven against nothing but sin, so great an evil is sin. Sin is that grand evil that has Midwiv'd all other evils into the world. 'Twas sin that drown'd the old world with water, 'twas sin that destroyed Sodom with fire and Brimstone,Judges 5.8. Psal. 107.34. Deut. 28.21. 'twas sin that laid Jerusalem on heaps, 'twas sin that has Midwiv'd Sword, Famine, and Pestilence into the World, 'twas sin that laid the Foundation of Hell, that laid the corner-stone in that land of darkness, for before sin there was no Hell. 'Twas sin that Crucified the Lord of glory. Now O how great must that evil be that has ushered in all these great evils into the World.Rom. 8.7. Sin is enmity against God, God hath no enemy in the World but sin, and those whom sin hath made him; Sin hath set all the World against the Lord of glory; 'tis sin that has turn'd men into incarnate Devils, and that has drawn them out to fight against God, and Christ, and their own Souls, and the things of their everlast∣ing peace. Now when a man looks upon sin as the greatest evil in the world, and his heart rises and is enraged against it, because of the vile, filthy, odious and hainous nature of it; 'tis a clear evidence that such a man has the Divine nature in him, take that one instance for all, Psal. 19.12, 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins. But why does David
pray thus, So (sayes he) shall I be innocent from the great trans∣gression. Mark, he does not pray thus, Lord keep me from presumptuous sins, that so I may be free from troubles with∣out, and from terrors within, or from Hell beneath; but Lord keep me from presumptuous sins, that so I may be in∣nocent from the great transgression. He does not say, so shall I be free from the great correction, but so shall I be free from the great transgression. Thats a heart worth gold, that is more sensible and more affected with the evil that is in sin, than with the evil that comes by sin.Aug. Epist. 144. 'Twas a weigh∣ty saying of Austin, That man (sayes he) which fears Hell, he doth not fear to sin, but fears to burn; but that man fears to sin, that fears sin as he would fear Hell. Common Grace never works a man thus to fear sin, but renewing grace doth. Common convictions carry the Soul out to look more on the evil that comes by sin, than on the evil that is in sin; and hence it comes to pass, that Souls under common convictions, are more affected and afflicted at the fear of Hell, and dread of wrath and damnation, than they are affected or afflicted at the vileness, odiousness, and hainous nature of sin. When an unsanctified person is angry with sin, and chides sin, and falls out with sin; and makes some head against sin, 'tis ei∣ther because it hath crackt his credit, or clouded his honour, or hindered his profit, or imbittered his pleasure, or provo∣ked his friends, or incensed the Magistrate, or enraged his Conscience, or exposed him to shame, disgrace, or contempt here, and Hell hereafter. Bt never because a holy God is dishonoured, a righteous Law transgressed, a blessed Saviour frequently Crucified, or the blessed Spirit greatly grieved. The child will not touch the Coal because it will burn him, and the prudent man will not touch the Coal because it will st him. A gracious heart rises against sin because of its defiling and polluting nature, but an unsanctified heart rises against sin because of its burning and damning nature. A sanctified person hates sin, because it pollutes his soul, but an unsanctified person hates it because it destroyes his soul. A sanctified person loaths sin, and abhors sin, because it fights against Gods holiness; but an unsanctified person
loaths it, and abhors it, because it provokes and stirs up Gods Justice. A sanctified person detests sin, because of the Hell that is in sin; but an unsanctified person detests sin, because of the Hell that follows sin, &c. But, Seventhly, Where there is an irreconcileable opposition in the Soul against sin, there is a saving work of God upon that mans heart. Where there is such a detestation of sin, and such an enmity raised in the soul against sin, as that the Soul cannot,The contrariety to sin which is in a real Christian, arises from an in∣ward gracious na∣ture which is op∣posite to the whole species or kind of sin, as contrarie∣ties of nature are to the whole kind. As light is contra∣ry to all darkness, and fire to all wa∣ter. So that this contrariety to sin arising from the inward man, is universal to all sin, &c. nor will not, upon no terms in the World, ad∣mit of any Truce or Reconcilliation with sin, there is Christ and Grace formed in the heart. The War between a graci∣ous heart and sin, is like the War between Rehoboam and Je∣roboam, 1 Kings 14.30. There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their dayes. The Oracle said to the Cirrheans (Noctes diesque belli gerendum), they could not be happy unless they waged war night and day; no more can we, except we perpetually fight against our lusts. O friends! A gracious heart that is weary of sin, will certainly and habitually fall a striving against it, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusteth against the Spi∣rit, and the Spirit against the flesh, for these two are contrary the one to the other. Now contraries are naturally expulsive each of other: Such a pair as a Jacob and an Esau; such Twins as an Isaac and an Ishmael, cannot lye quietly together in the same womb; no nor live quietly together in the same house, but there will be a mutual prosecuting and persecu∣ting each of other. Fire and Water may as well agree in the same Vessel; as grace and sin in the same heart. True Grace hath a real repugnancy and contrariety to all sin; and remember this once for all, that saving Grace is not contra∣ry to sin because it is open and manifest, nor to sin because it is private and secret, nor to sin because it is of this or that consequence, but to sin as sin, whether publick or private, because both the one and the other are contrary to the Law of God, the will of God, the glory of God, the nature of God, the designs of God, &c. As it is with true light, though it be but a beam, yet it is universally opposite to all dark∣ness; or as it is with heat, though there be but one degree of
it, yet it is opposite to all cold. So true Grace, it is oppo∣site to all sin, it cannot comply with any known sin. Look as sin and Grace were never born together, and as sin and Grace shall never dye together, so sin and Grace can never be reconciled together. There is a natural contrariety be∣tween sin and Grace, and therefore you can never reconcile them in the heart. The opposition that Grace makes against sin, is inward as well as outward, 'tis against sin wheresoever it is. Nothing will satisfy a gracious soul but the destructi∣on of sin, Rom. 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is Crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. The Greek word , that is here rendred destroyed, signifies weakned, and the strength of it broken, and made idle, fruitless, and uneffectual. So Psal. 51.2. Wash me throughly (or multiply to wash me, or play the Fuller upon me) from mine iniquity. (David looked upon his sin, his stain, to be so inveterate, so ingrained, that it would hardly be ever gotten out till the cloth were almost rub'd to pieces) and cleanse me from my sin. David was as desirous to be cleansed of the Leprosy of sin, as ever any poor Leper was willing to be cleansed of his Leprosy under the Law; And so ver. 7. Purge me with Hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. All the Sacrifices of expiation of sin in the old Law, were done by blood, and that blood was sprinkled upon the people by a bunch of Hyssop, so called from the Hebrew word Ezob, by reason of the nearness of the sound. In the legal sprinklings made with Hyssop, was shadowed out the washing away of sin through the blood of Christ.Rev. 1.14. Job 9.30. The Brides garments are made white in the blood of the lamb, and not by any washings in Snow water: When a gracious Soul looks upon sin, he cries out, Lord raze it, raze it down to the ground, Lord let not one stone be left upon another. In every gracious Soul, there is such a detestation and such an indignation against sin, that neither Mountains of Gold, nor Rocks of Pearl, nor honour, nor applause, nor favour on the one hand, nor frowns nor threats, nor neglects, nor scorns, nor contempt on the other hand,  win the Soul over to sin, or make the Soul
one with sin. Look how it was between the Lord and Ama∣lek, so it is between a gracious soul and his sins. Now if you turn to that Exod. 17.16. you shall find how it was between the Lord and Amalek, Because the Lord hath sworn, that the Lord will have war with Amalek from Generation to Generation; Or as the Hebrew has it, The hand upon the throne of the Lord, Gods hand is lad upon his own Throne, as swearing to root out Amalek; or because Amaleks hand is lifted up against Gods Throne, that is the Church, (so called in Jer. 4.21. and Crown of Glory, Isa. 62.3.) therefore God will have perpetual wars with Amalek. God could as soon be recon∣ciled to Amalek, as a gracious Christian can be reconciled to his sins. Others sense the words thus, that Moses had a so∣lemn Oath (as it were laying his hand upon Gods Throne) for asseveration and assurance, that he and the people will have an irreconcilable war with the posterity of Amalek. And so every gracious soul is resolved to make an irrecon∣cileable war with sin. But now where there is only com∣mon Grace, there a man deals by his sins as David did by his son Absolom, banish him his Court for a time, and afterwards receive him into full favour, and court him as much or more than before. An unsound heart may fall out with his sin, and be very angry with its sin, for the consequence of it, for the shame it brings upon his person, for the blot it leaves up∣on his name, and for the stinging guilt and convulsion fits which it causeth in his Conscience, and yet this very person be in a very close and strict league with sin, and his heart in∣wardly and strongly adhering unto sin. But a gracious heart will be still a restraining of sin, a curbing of sin, a crossing of sin, a making head against sin, and a withstanding it in all its workings. Anger may be reconciled, but hatred cannot. Eightly, Where the very prevailings of sin are ordinari∣ly made serviceable to high and holy, to gracious and spiri∣tual ends,Ezek. 16.61, 63. Ephes. 2.7, 6, 7. there certainly is a saving work of God upon that mans soul. As when they produce more Soul-loathing, Soul-humiliation, Self-judging; Self-abasement, Self-abhor∣ring; or when they fill the Soul with a grea  admiration
of the freeness and riches of Grace, or when they keep down pride, and prevent the despising of others, or produce holy shame, or when they make the blood of Christ more preci∣ous and dear to the Soul, or when they engage a Christian so much the more to watch and pray, and pray and watch, that he may either be kept from the hour of temptation, or in the hour of temptation, or when every fall makes sin more bit∣ter to the soul than ever, and Christ more sweet to the Soul than ever, and all the means of Grace more delightful to the Soul than ever, and heaven more desirable to the Soul than ever; or when sin is made the prevention of sin, or when sin through the over-ruling hand of Grace is made an occasion of more Grace; as that good man said, As I get hurt by my Graces, So I get good by my sins. You know all the falls and knocks, and blows, that children get that are learning to go, do but make them cleave the closer and hang the faster upon the Nurses skirts, or about the Mothers neck. So when all a Christians falls do but work him to cleave the closer, and hang the faster upon the strength of Christ, and to be still a drawing more and more vertue and power from Christ; then is the prevalency of sin made serviceable to holy and gracious ends; and where God ordinarily thus works, there is certainly a work of God in power upon that Soul, 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a god∣ly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehe∣ment desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge, in all things you have approved your selves to be clear in this matter (this Scrip∣ture I have fully opened in my eighth sign of godly sorrow, in this book, and to that I refer you). The Mother by suffering the child to get one fall, keeps the child from many a fall, and so 'twas with these Corinthians. Adams fall was an inlet to abundance of grace; and his unrighteousness did usher in∣to the world the most glorious Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Hezekiah falls, and by his fall,2 Chron. 32.25, 26, 31. God gives him a clearer and fuller sight of his own heart than ever he had before in all his dayes. Sin is no gainer, but a loser by every fall of the Saints. God does, and will, by the over-ruling hand of his
grace, make the very miscarriages of his people to be glori∣ous inlets to more eminent degrees of Grace and holiness. God hath a great Revenue of glory from the very infirmities of the Saints; and the Saints have a great Revenue of com∣fort from their very miscarriages, by the wise, powerful, over-ruling, and sanctifying hand of God. God is that powerful, that skilful Physician, that can make an Antidote, and Sovereign remedy of sin, that is the most deadly poyson in all the World. God does and will make the very sins of his people to further the Salvation of his people, according to that golden promise Rom. 8.28. God never suffers his people to fall into any sin, but out of a design to break the neck and back of that sin they fall into: God suffered David to fall into those two great sins of Murder and Adultery, but by these very falls he broke the very back of those sins, for we never read that ever he fell into those sins the second time. And so God suffered Peter to deny him once, but by that sore fall God broke the neck of that very sin, for we never read that ever he denyed Christ any more at the voice of a Damsel; yea, 'tis very observable, that Peters courage and boldness for the truth, received a very high advance by those deep wounds that he had formerly given them, when he denyed the Lord that bought him. After his sore falls, for courage and boldness he carries the Bell from all the Apostles, as you may see in Acts 4.12. It is the nature of true Grace to gather strength by every wound. Grace ga∣thers strength by contraries, as Fire doth when it is compas∣sed about with coldness by an Antiper stasis. By all a Ch i∣stians falls his graces grow brighter and stronger. At the long run, a Christian by all his falls loses nothing but his dross, his chaff, his scum, his filth. Now he that finds his sins thus over-ruled for the good of his soul, he is certainly a gracious Soul. O Sirs! remember this for ever, viz. That the oftner an Hypocrite, or a Formalist falls, the more ground and strength his sins get upon him, and so will con∣tinue to do, till all that Grace and goodness which he seemed to have had, be quite extinguished. But,
Ninthly, Where a bare naked command of God is com∣monly,  ordinarily of that power, force and authority with the soul, as to curb sin, and restrain the soul from sin, and to arm and fence the soul against the encroachments and commands of sin, there is certainly a saving work, a power∣ful work of God upon that Soul. When a man can say to Heaven and Hell, stand you by for the present, and to preci∣ous Promises, stand you by for the present, and to Divine threatnings, stand you by for the present, here is a Com∣mand of God that forbids such and such actions, and there∣fore I cannot, I dare not do this or that wickedness,Gen. 39.9. and sin against the Lord, there is certainly a principle of Grace in that mans heart. That is a great word of David, Psal. 119.161. My heart standeth in awe of thy word. When a naked command from God does so over-awe the heart, as that it dares not sin against God, then doubtless the heart is sincere with God. A child does not stand in more awe of the rod, nor a servant of a beating, nor a Favourite of his Princes frowns, than a real Christian (when he is himself) stands in awe of the Word. So Psal. 119.11. Thy Word have I hid within my heart, that I might not sin against thee. When a man hides the Word in his heart as a Treasure, that he may not lose it, and as a Rule that he may not transgress it, then his heart is indeed right with God. When the Law of God in a mans heart, arms him against the lusts of his heart and life, then doubtless his heart is sound with God. So Psal. 17.4. By the words of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroy∣er; or as some read the words, According to the command and charge of thy words, I have kept me from the sinful wayes, manners, behaviours, &c. of the destroyer, or the cruel man.Matth. 28.18, 19, 20. Acts 10.41, 42. Christ commanded his Apostles to make him known to the World, and to Preach the everlasting Gospel, and to make known those Mysteries and Riches of Grace that were hid in former Ages. The Jewish Authority threa∣tens them and commands them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus, Acts 4.17, 18. But the command of Christ carries it with the Apostles against all their threat∣nings and commands, verse 19.20. But Peter and John an∣swered
and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judg ye; For we cannot but speak the things which we have heard and seen. When the commands of Authority run counter-cross to the commands of God, the commands of God must be obeyed, though the greatest Auhority under Heaven should be displeased and enraged. God never gave the greatest Authority in the world, any Authority to act contrary to his commands. Dis∣obedience to unlawful commands, is no disobedience. Wo to hm that obeyes the commands of men in opposition to the commands of God, 1 Cor. 9.16. For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; For necessity is laid upon me, yea, wo is unto me if I Preach not the Gospel. Now 'tis infinitely better to fall under the displeasure of men, than to fall under the woes of God. The Jews under a pretence of their Au∣thority, command the Apostles not to Preach Jesus to the people; but the commands of Christ carry it with the Apo∣stles against all their contrary commands. The Apostles (who were like to Bottles of new Wine, that must either vent or burst) knew very well that 'twas not obedience to mens commands that could excuse their disobedience to Gods commands. So in that third of Daniel, the commands of the great God carried it with the three Children against all the dreadful threatnings, proud boasting, and Idolatrous commands of King Nebuchadnezzar. Certainly the com∣mands of sin are of all commands the vilest commands, they are all illegal, sin hath no ground, no reason to command our souls; Sin is but a Usurper, a Traitor, and therefore hs no Authority over us. All sins commands are purely sinful, they are plain and notorious rebellions against the Laws of Christ, the life of Christ, and against the Crown, Honour, and Dignity of Jesus. All sins ommands are grievous, bur∣thensome, and painful commands; of all yoaks, none so heavy as that which sin layes upon the sinner; hence sin is compared to a talent of Lead, Zach. 5.7. to shew the weigh∣tiness and burthensomness of it; and hence 'tis that sinners are said to weary themselves in committing iniquity, Jer. 9.5. And hence 'tis that wicked men are laid to travel with
iniquity, Psal. 7.14. to shew what anxious pain and trou∣ble they have in bringing about their wickedness. Behold he travelleth with iniquity; or as the Hebrew has it, he shall tra∣vel, or he continually travelleth, he takes as great pains to go to Hell, as a travelling woman doth to be delivered. Wicked men are as laborious, and as restless and unquiet in the practice of wickedness,Prov. 4.14, 15, 16. as a woman in labour is when the pangs of Travel are upon her. Sugred poisons go down pleasantly, O but when they are down, they gall, and gnaw, and gripe the very heart-strings asunder, 'tis so with sin. Lastly, the commands of sin are extreamly unreasonable, what an unreasonable thing is it to command a man to run into the fire, or to drown himself in the water, or to strangle himself, &c. Now all the commands of sin tend directly and intentionally to the burning, drowning, strangling, and destroying of the sinner. All sins commands tend to the dishonour of God, the breach of his righteous Laws, and the damnation of the precious and immortal Soul. Now where the commands of God do commonly carry it, against all the commands of sin, there the Soul is certainly sincere with Go. That we owe perfect obedience to Gods will, to Gods commands, is evident enough several wayes, and in particular from the universal obedience of all Creatures, I mean those which are without reason, sense, or life, for they inviolably observe his commands, Isa. 48.13. Mine hand hath laid the Foundations of the earth, and my right hand hath spann'd the Heavens; when I call to them they stand up together, as prepared to execute his commands. The insensible parts of the world are so compliant with his will, as to contradict their proper natures to serve his glory. Fire descends from Hea∣ven at his command, Gen. 19.24. 2 Kings 1.10, 11, 12. And the fluid Sea stands up at his command, Exod. 14.22. Now what a sad thing is it that Christians should at any time prove disloyal and rebellious, when all inferiour Creatures do with one consent serve and glorify the great God. But, &c.
Tenthly, Constant desires, and earnest and constant en∣deavours to avoid and shun all known appearances of sin,Where do you read in all the Scriptures, of any one Hypocrite that ever made Consciene of shunning and a∣voiding the ap∣pearances of sin. evdences the truth and reality of Grace in the Soul. Cer∣tainly that man is a true Nathaniel that makes it his business his work, to abstain from all appearances of evil. An Hy∣pocrite loves the appearance of good more than goodness it self, and a sincere Christian hates the very appearance of evil, as well as the evil it self. He who hates a person, loaths his very picture. A wicked man may abstain from broad-fac'd evils, but commonly he is very bold and ventrous upon ap∣pearing evils. O what vain Apologies do many make in these dayes for long hair, gaudy Apparel, Antick Fashions, Spotted Faces, Naked Breasts, Wanton Behaviours, Effe∣minate Dalliances, and a thousand other suspicious practices and vanities. But now a man that is truly gracious, he makes Conscience, not only of shunning real gross, known evils, but also of shunning the very likeness of evil. His heart does not only rise against real sins, but he is very shy of that which looks like sin. When Josephs Mistris took hold of him and said, Lie with me, he left his garment in her hand and fled, and got him out, Gen. 39.12. Joseph would not be found in the company of his impudent brazen-fac'd Mistris, that could so barely and basely, so boldly and frequently, solli∣cite him to defile his Masters bed, and to damn two Souls at once, her own and his, that so he might avoid the very ap∣pearance of evil, the very suspition of sin. By wanton tou∣ches and dalliance, mental Adultery is often committed, and therefore Joseph flies, as being unwilling to touch her, or to be touched by her.1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And so Paul refused the using his liberty in taking a lawful maintenance for his labours, lest a sinister interpretation of covetousness and mercenary affection should have been put upon it by his Adversaries. And so the same Apostle would needs have Titus and two others cho∣sen by the Church, to joyn with him in carrying the bene∣volence of the Church of Macedonia to Jerusalem, because he was very careful to avoid all suspition of dealing ill in that business, 2 Cor. 8.20, 21. Avoiding this, that no man should blame us, in this abundance that is Ministred by us: Providing for
honest things, not only before the Lord, but also before men. So Daniel would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat (that is, say some,Dan. 1.. he would not defile his Conscience by eating such unclean meats as were forbidden under the Law, for the Babilonians did eat of divers meats, as of Swine, Hares, &c. and of sundry sorts of Fishes and Fowls which were forbidden by God unto the children of Israel, Levit. 11. Deut. 14) nor with the wine which he drank (but in the He∣brew the plural number is used, of his drinks, whence some gather, that the King drank divers sorts of Wines, which were also set before Daniel and his companions), therefore he re∣quested of the Prince of the Eunuchs, that he might not defile himself. Daniels living at a full Table, and his feeding upon Kingly dainties, might have been, not only a means to en∣snare him, and drown him in the sensualities of the Court, but it would have carried with it also too great a shew of Da∣niels conformity to the Courts manners and customs, and have been too great an appearance of Daniels forgetfulness of the sore and miserable calamities and matchless miseries of the captive Church, who sate sighing and groaning and mour∣ning in her cruel bondage, and had none to comfort her, or speak peace unto her; and therefore Daniel purposed in his heart (or set it upon his heart, or laid it upon his heart, as the Hebrew may be read) that he would not defile himself with the portion of the Kings meat, &c. that so he might avoid all shews or suspition of evil. 'Tis very observable, that in the Law of the Nazarite (who did for a time special, consecrate himself to God, that besides his not comming to the dead, and suffering his hair to grow.) 'Twas ordained of God that he should abstain from these six things. 1. From Wine and strong drink. 2. From the Vinegar of Wine or strong drink. 3. From any Liquor of Grapes, though it were but the water wherein they were steeped. 4. From the green or moist Grape. 5. From the dryed Grape or Raisin. 6. From the husk or kernel of them, Num. 6.3, 4. Had the Nazarite eaten but the skin of the Grape or Raisin, he had broken the Law. Now hereby the Lord would teach us, that those that separate themselves from the world, to be
in a special manner serviceable to the Lord, they must avoid not only that which is plain sin, downright sin, or such sins that men may run and read, but also that they must shun and be shy of the very appearances of sin. It was good counsel that Liva gave her husband Augustus,Dio in vita. It behoveth thee (said she) not only not to do wrong, but not to seem to do so, &c. We must shun and be shy of the very shew and shadow of sin, if either we tender our credit abroad, or our comfort at home, walk∣ing in the power of holiness lyes much in shunning the very appearance of sin. The Primitive Christians would not en∣dure that any Christian should look towards Jerusalem pray∣ing, because they would avoid the least shew of Judaism. And indeed there are great reasons why every Christian should avoid whatever may have the suspition of sin; and this will be evident, if you please but seriously to consider of these eight following particulars. First, Consider those clear and plain commands of God which makes this duty to be a duty, as that 1 Thess. 5.22. Ab∣stain from all appearance of evil. God requires us not only to abstain from all apparent sins, but also from all appearance of sin; we must do nothing which hath a shew or shadow of sin; 'tis duty to abstain from whatever is of an ill shew, or an ill report. And so God commands us to hate the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. Saints must abhor every thing that carries with it but a savour or suspition of unclean∣ness.Hence that saying of the Jews, Re∣move thy self from filthiness, and from all that which hath a shew of it. See Drusius prae∣terit, in 1 Thess. 5.22. The Apostle alludes to legal uncleanness, which was contracted by touching the houses, the vessels, or the gar∣ments of unclean persons, Levit. 15. Christians must not only hate uncleanness, but they must hate every thing that looks like it, or that has the least communion with it. So in that Deut. 12.30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared, by following of them, after that they be destroyed from before thee, and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, how did these Na∣tions serve their gods? even so will I do likewise. God does not only command his people to abstain from gross Idolatry, but he also commands them to take heed of all those wayes and means, and enquiries that might tend to draw them to Ido∣latry,
or that might carry with them the least shew or appea∣rance of Idolatry. 'Tis observable in the Law, that God commanded his people not only that they should Worship no Idol, but that they should demolish all the Monuments of them, and that they should make no Covenant, nor have any affinity with those who Worshipped them; and all to avoid the very shews of Idolatry, and to prevent his people from being drawn by those means to commit Idolatry with them. And so Exod. 23.7. Keep thee far from a false matter. Every good man must stand aloof off, he must keep at a di∣stance both from the occasions of sin, and from the appea∣rance of sin. So Prov. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house. He that is farthest from fire, is safest from burning, and he that is most remote from the water, is in least danger of drowning. It is no small wick∣edness to approach near the door of wickedness; he who approaches near the door of a Whores house,Prov. 22 14. and ch. 23.27. is already in the door of whoredom. It argues too much mind to be in the house, for any one knowingly, willingly, to come near the door of it. O how should a man dread the comming in∣to that house, where he must needs either perish, or else over∣come? Certainly 'tis infinite better not to be in danger of perishing, than being in danger not to perish. So Hosea 4.15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear the Lord liveth. Gilgal was once the Key of Canaan, scituate between Jordan and Jericho, famous for sundry ser∣vices there performed to God, as might be easily shewed by many instances; but now Gilgal was basely abused to Idol-Worship; and hence 'tis that God charges them not to come near it, that so they might avoid both the shew and danger of Idolatry; and 'tis upon the same account that God charges them not to go up to Beth-aven. By these Scriptures 'tis evident that God would have his people to abstain from all shews and appearances of sin. But, &c. Secondly, The holiness of God, and the honour of God,  calls aloud upon all Christians to avoid the suspition of sin.
God is so essentially holy, so unmixedly holy, so universally holy, so eminently, so transcendently holy, so superlatively holy, so originally, radically, and fundamentally holy; he is so Independantly holy, so unchangably, so constantly, and so exemplarily holy, that he cannot but hate and abhor the very appearance of evil. Look as apparent sins stir up the judici∣al anger of God against sinners, so the appearance of sin stirs up the Fatherly anger of God against Saints. A gracious heart knows, That God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. and therefore he keeps at a distance from the appearance of iniquity, of all men in the world none honour God at so high a rate as those that keep most aloof off from the appearance of evil. Many by their apparent evils have lived God, and Christ, and the Gospel, and their Profession, and precious Ordinances, into disgrace, scorn, and contempt; and O that we would all make it our great business, by ab∣staining from all appearance of evil, to live God, and Christ, and the Gospel, and our Profession, and precious Ordinances, into a greater credit, praise, and honour than ever. He keeps farthest off from dishonouring God, that keeps farthest off from the appearance of sin. But, &c. Thrdly, This is the way of wayes for a man to keep him∣self clear from other mens sins, that man that abstains from the appearance of sin, is very rarely guilty of other mens sins, Men many times by venturing upon the appearances of sins, come to wrap themselves up in the guilt of other mens sins. Effeminate Dalliance is an appearance of evil, and had Jo∣seph been toying, and playing, and sporting with his Mistris in a wanton manner, how soon might he have wrapt himself up in the guilt of his Mistresses burning Lusts. He that would not tempt nor entice others to sin, must keep off from the very appearance of sin. Certainly there is not the ho∣liest man in the World, but has sins enough of his own to sad him, though not to sink him; to humble him, though not to damn him; to abase him, though not to deject him; and therefore how much does it concern the best men in the World to abstain from the very appearance of sin, that so
they may not bring upon themselves the guilt and burthen of other mens sins. 'Tis very well observ'd by some, that a more grievous punishment is reserved for them which cause others to sin, than for them which sin by their occasion; thus the Serpent was punished more than Eve,2 Kings 9.30-ult. compared with 1 Kings 22.34, to 9. and Eve more than Adam. And so Jezabel who tempted and provoked Ahab to sin, was punished with a far greater and sorer punishment or Judgment than Ahab himself was. To sin (saith one) hath not so much perdition in it, as to make others to sin; and therefore as you would never draw others to sin, keep off from all appearance of sin; O that all Superiours, Inferiours, and equals, would lay this counsel to heart. But, Fourthly, The keeping off from all appearances of evil,  is the best and noblest way under heaven, to keep a good Name, and to keep a good Conscience. Now a good Name, and a good Conscience are Jewels more worth than all the Scepters and Myters in the World, and there is no Wisdom in the World to that which leads a man by the hand to secure his Name and his Conscience, Prov. 22.1. A good Name is rather to be chosen than great Riches, and loving favour rather than Silver and Gold. So Eccles. 7.1. A good name is better than precious Ointment, the one being but a persume of the Nostrils, the other a perfume of the heart. 'Tis observ∣able the Princely Preacher does not say, A great Name is bet∣ter than Precious Oyntments, but a good Name is better than precious Oyntments. Oyntments are here named, be∣cause in those Eastern parts they were laid up in the Kings Treasury, even among his most precious things, Isa. 39.2. And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed him the house of his precious things, the Silver, and the Gold, and the Spices,Exod. 30 22-23. Exod. 28.41. 1 Sam. 16.13. Psal. 89.20. Heb. 1.9. Isa. 61.3. Amos 6 6. Esth. 2.12. Psal. 23.5. Luke 7.46. Psal. 92.10. Deut. 33.24. Prov. 21.20. and the precious Oyntments, &c. Precious Aromatical Oyntments were things greatly in use and esteem amongst the Israelites, and a special part of their Treasures, as is evident by the Scriptures in the Margent. And yet a good Name (which hath its Foundation in vertue, and in a holy, innocent, blame∣less, harmless, and exemplary life) is better than those most precious Oyntments. And 'tis observable that the initial
letter of the Hebrew word  Tob, that is here rendred Good, is bigger than ordinary, to shew the more than ordi∣nary excellency of a good name and fame amongst men. 'Twas good counsel the Moralist gave, when he said, what∣soever commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve that Jewel of a good Name. A good renown is better than a gol∣den girdle, say some. And a mans eye and his good Name, can bear no jests, say others. And if I may but keep a good Name, I have wealth enough, said the Naturalist. O friends! as ever you would keep a good Name, keep off from the ve∣ry appearance of evil, for the very appearance of evil will both Eclipse and wound a mans name and his Conscience at once. Certainly a man were better not to live, than to out∣live his good Name. A mans good Name is like a piece of white Paper, which if once blotted, will very hardly be got out again, so as to leave no Print of it behind; it is like a fair structure long time a rearing, but quickly ruin'd; or like a Merchants estate, long a getting, but lost in a moment. And therefore how much does it concern every Christian to keep his Name as he would keep his life, and this he can ne∣ver do, except he keeps off from the appearance of evil. 'Tis his Name only that shall be kept green and flourishing, like the Rod of Aaron, that was laid up in the Tabernacle, who keeps off from the appearance of evil. He takes the best and the wisest course under heaven to preserve his good Name in the World, and to maintain the peace of his Con∣science, who is most studious and industrious to abstain from all appearances of evil. But, &c. Fifthly, The appearance of evil may very much offend, scandalize, stumble, and tempt weak Christians, and there∣fore it highly concerns us to keep off from the very appea∣rance of evil. The more Grace any man hath in his own heart, the more fearful he will be of stumbling or offending those that have less. Venturing upon the appearance of evil, may not only defile my own Conscience, but also wound my weak Brothers Conscience, and therefore it concerns me to be very shy of the appearance of evil. If in things of an
indifferent nature, I must deny my own liberty,1 Cor. 8.11, 12, 13. chap. 10.25, 28. (as I must) rather than grieve or offend, or wound the Conscience of a weak Brother for whom Christ hath dyed. O how much more then I must I shun the very resemblance of sin, consider∣ing how wonderful apt weak Christians are to be offended, and stumbled, when they see others so bold as to venture up∣on the appearance of evil. Alexanders Macedonians having offended him, laid by their Arms, put on mourning Apparel, and came running in Troops to his Tent, where, for almost three dayes together, they remained with loud cries and tears, to testify their remorse for offending him; and shall we make nothing of offending those weak Christians that are the price of Christs bloud, and the travel of his soul, the Lord forbid. Besides, our venturing upon the appearance of evil, may prove a great temptation to weak Christians, not only to venture upon seeming evils, but also to venture upon real evils; doubtless many weak Christians have been drawn to apparent evils, by observing others to venture upon the ap∣pearance of evil. 'Tis commonly seen, that when strong Christians will adventure upon appearing evils, weak Chri∣stians will be emboldned thereby to commit real evils, 1 Cor. 8.8, 9, 10. But meat commendeth us not to God, for nei∣ther if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse. But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stum∣bling block to them that are weak. For if any man see thee which hast knowledg, sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the Consci∣ence of him which is weak, be emboldned to eat those things which are offered to Idols? When the weak shall see men of know∣ledg communicating with Idolaters in their Feasts, their Consciences will be emboldned and confirmed in their old Superstition about those Idols, which they were beginning to leave, returning now a fresh to a more reverent esteem and service of them than ever, &c. O friends, as you would not offend the weak, as you would not tempt the weak, keep off from all shews and appearances of evil, &c. But,
Sixthly, Christians venturing upon appearing evils, will exceedingly harden and encourage wicked men to commit real evils. 'Tis very natural and customary with wicked men to make use of the appearing infirmities of the Saints, as excuses and Apologies to bear them out in their greatest enormities and wickednesses. Why did not such and such knowing eminent Christians do thus and thus! and we have gone but one step beyond them, and is that so great and hainous a crime? they have been playing and sporting them∣selves about the pit, and we are but slipt or stept into the pit. They have been sitting and bibbing with such and such com∣pany, and we have but taken two or three merry cups more than ordinary in the same company, and is that so great a sin? &c. O Sirs! As we should walk wisely towards those that are without,1 Thess. 4.12. Jude 22. so we should walk compassionately towards those that are without. Of some have compassion, making a difference.Jer. 9.1. Did not Jeremy wish that his head were waters, and his eyes a Fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his people? Did not Samuel mourn for Saul?1 Sam. 15.25. Luke 19.10. Luke 10.30-35. Phil. 3.20. Levit. 19.17. 1 Sam. 17.34. Gen. 31.40. Did not Christ weep over Jerusa∣lem? Did not the compassionate Samaritan bind up his wounds, pouring in Oyl and Wine, who fell among Thieves in his going from Jerusalem to Jericho. Did not Paul weep over those that were enemies of the Cross of Christ: Yea, shall we shew pity and compassion to an Ox or an Ass that is fallen into a Ditch. Nay, shall David rather venture upon a Lyon than lose a Lamb? Shall Jacob rather endure heat by day, and cold by night, than neglect his Flock? Shall Moses fight with odds, rather than the Cattle shall perish with thirst. Nay, shall Xenocrates a Heathen, shew compassion to a poor Sparrow, that being scared and pursued by a Hawk, flew into his bosome for succour, &c. And shall not we have that compassion on poor sinners precious and immortal Souls, as to abstain from the appearance of sin, which may more wayes than one prove so exceeding prejudicial to them, &c. Jer. .50.Wicked men are wonderful prone to watch for the Saints haltings; Christians are lights upon a high Hill; yea, they
are Stars in the Firmament of the Church, and therefore eve∣ry mans eye is upon them, and if wicked men can but discern the least indecency, the least appearance of any excentrick, or irregular motion, O how readily will they let fly against God, and the Gospel; against Religion, and against all that have a Profession of Religion upon them. Now the honour of God, and the credit of the Gospel, should be so dear and precious in the eyes of every Christian, that he should ra∣ther chuse to dye, than to venture upon the least apparition of sin, whereby the honour of God may be clouded, or the credit of the Gospel impeached or eclipsed; or the Soul of a poor sinner endangered or worsned; both the least sin, and the least appearance of sin must be avoided and prevented, the Cockatrice must be crushed in the Egg, else it will soon become a Serpent; the very thought of sin, if not thought on, will break out into action, action into custome, custome into habit, and then both body and Soul are in the ready way of being irrecoverably lost. Camerarius tells us a sad story of two Brothers, who walking out in the evening, and seeing the Element full of bright spangling Stars, one of them be∣ing a Grasier, wished that he had as many Oxen as there were Stars in the Firmament; then said the other Brother, If I had a Pasture as big as all the World, where would you keep the Oxen? he answered, In your Pasture: What said the other, whether I would or no? Yes said his Brother. The matter was very light, 'twas but a little evil, or an appearing evil, but it fell out very heavily, for presently they fell to words, and then drew one upon another, and in the close kil∣led one another. O friends, as you love the lives of sinners, and as you love the Souls of sinners, keep off from all appea∣rance of evil. But, Seventhly, Other precious Saints have abstained from all  appearances of evil, witness Joseph, Paul, Daniel, &c. but  lately cited. And to these let me add that great instance of Augustine, who retracted even Ironies because they had the appearance of evil. And so the Primitive Christians would not let up Lights and Bayes at their doors, though for this
they were persecuted as enemies to the Emperour,Tertullian. because the Temple, and the doors of Idolaters were wont to be thus garnished.2 Sam. 24.21, 22, 23, 24. And so David refused to take the Threshing floor, and Threshing instruments, and Oxen, &c. of Arau∣nah as a gift, but would needs buy them at a price, and this he did, partly out of a Divine nobleness, and partly to avoid the very shew of Covetousness. Now why has God left all these famous Presidents upon Record, but on purpose to en∣courage his Saints in all Ages, to abstain from all appearing evils, as well as from all apparent evils. Certainly God looks that we should so eye the best, the highest, the worthy∣est, and the exactest examples, as that we should make it our great business and work to come up to them, and to imitate them to the life. O friends! the examples last cited should be very awakening, very perswading, very convin∣cing, and very encouraging; because in them you may see that though abstinence from the appearance of evil be a diffi∣cult thing, yet 'tis a possible thing. Shall we love to look upon the Pictures of our friends, and shall we not much more love to look upon the holy examples of those eminent Saints that had the lively picture of Grace, and the lovely Image of Christ fairly stampt upon their hearts and lives. 'Tis both our Mercy and our duty to eye the examples, and to follow the footsteps of those Christians that have been most eminent in Grace, as you may plainly see by compa∣ring of these Scriptures together, Prov. 2.20. Heb. 6.12. 1 Thes. 1.6. Phil. 4.9. 2 Tim. 3.10, 11, 12. Heb. 12.1. Phil. 3.17. 1 Cor. 11.1. Titus 2.7. He that would fain write a fair hand, had need have his eye often upon his Co∣py; and he that would fain abstain from all appearance of evil, he had need often to eye the gracious examples of such who have made Conscience of abstaining from appearing evils as well as from apparent evils. But, Eighthly and lastly, Consider what some refined Heathens, and civilized Pagans have done in this very case; There are stories of Heathens that would not look upon excellent Beau∣ties, lest they should be ensnared. Dmocrit pluckt out his
own eyes to avoid the danger of uncleanness. Socrates speak∣eth of two young men that flang away their Belts, when be∣ing in an Idol-Temple, the lustrating water fell upon them, detesting, saith the Historian, the garment spotted by the Flesh. Alexander would not see the woman after whom he might have lusted. Scipio Africanus warring in Spain, took New-Carthage by storm,Aure victor. at which time a beautiful and noble Virgin fled to him for succour to preserve her Chastity, he being four and twenty years old, (and so in the heat of youth) hearing of it, would not suffer her to come into his sight, for fear of a temptation, but caused her to be restored in safety to her Father. So when Demsthenes the Oratour, was asked an excessive sum of money to behold the beautiful Lais, he answered, He would not buy repentance so dear, neither was he so ill a Merchant as to sell eternals for temporals. Nor Caesar would not search Pompeyes Cabinet, lest he should find new matters of revenge. Memorable is the story of the children of Samosta, that would not touch their Ball, but burnt it, because it had touched the Toe of a wicked Here∣tical Bishop, as they were tossing and playing with it. Now shall some refined Heathens, shall civilized Pagans abstain from the appearance of evil, from occasions and temptati∣ons to sin? and shall real Christians fall short of them? Shall blind nature do more than Grace? Shall men fallen in the first Adam, do more than those that are raised and enlivened by the second Adam? But to prevent all mistakes, let me add, though many Heathens have abstained from the appear∣ance of some evil, yet they have not abstained from the ap∣pearance of all evil; neither have they abstained from the appearance of any evil out of a hatred of evil; nor from any principles of saving light, or life, or love; nor out of any regard to any Royal Law of God; nor out of any regard to the honour or glory of God, but either out of vain-glory, and popular applause, the Pole-stars by which they steered all their actions, or out of Hypocrisy, which set a tincture and Dy upon all their actions; what Writer hath more golden Sentences than Seneca, against the contempt of Gold, yet (if Tacitus, and others of his contemporaries may be credi∣ted)
none more rich, none more covetous than he, as if out of design he had perswaded others to cast away their money, that he himself might come and gather it up again, &c. And thus you see that there are very great reasons why every Chri∣stian should avoid the very shew, suspition, or appearance of evil, &c. But, Eleventhly and lastly, He that sets himself resolutely, mostly, habitually, against his bosome sins, his constitution sins,Psal. 18.26. his most prevalent sins, &c. he has certainly a saving work, a powerful work of God upon his Soul. True Grace will make a man stand stoutly and stedfastly on Gods side, and work the heart to take part with him, against the most dar∣ling sins, though they be as right hands or as right eyes. True Grace will lay hands upon a mans most beloved lusts, and cry out to Heaven, Lord Crucify them, Crucify them, down with them, down with them even to the ground. Lord do Justice, do signal Justice, do speedy Justice, do exemplary Justice upon this Head-lust, this Master-sin. Lord hew down root and branch, let the very stumps of this Dagon be broken all in pieces. Lord curse this wild Fig-Tree, that never more Fruit may grow thereon. Certainly God and Christ is set up highest in that mans heart, who bends most of his thoughts, strength, and endeavours against his constituti∣on sins, against the sins of his Place, Calling, condition and complexion. 'Tis very observable, that the Jews, after they had been in the Babilonish Furnace for Idolatry, they ever hated and feared that sin as much as the burnt child dreads the Fire; yea, they would dye any death rather than admit an Idol. Josephus tells us how stoutly they opposed Pilate and Petronius, that would have set up Caesars Statue in their Tem∣ples, offering their throats to the Swords of the Souldiers, rather than they would endure that Idol in Gods house. O when once the heart of a Christian comes thus to be set against all his Golden and Silver Idols, then we may safely say, Behold a true Israelite in whom there is no guile. He that finds his lusts, his bosome, his darling lusts, begin to fall be∣fore him,. 6.1. as Hm once begun to fall before Moreoai; he
may safely and confidently conclude that he is of the seed of the Jews, and that the seed of God abideth in him.1 John 3.9. (But ha∣ving discoursed so largely as I have concerning bosome sins, darlng lusts, head-corruptions, in my other writings, I need say no more at this time) And thus you see that there are Eleven particulars in regard of sin, and a Christians actngs about it, that speaks out a true saving work of Grace to be in the Souls of the Saints. But, &c. Secondly, Where the constant, ordinary, standing, and  abiding purpose, disposition, frame, and general bent of a mans heart, soul, spirit, desires, and endeavours are fixed and set for God, for Grace, for Holiness, in heart and life, there is a most sure and infallible work of God past upon that mans soul; the constant bent, and the setled purpose of a true child of God, is for God, for Grace, for Holiness in heart and life, Psal. 119.112.Psal. 40.8. Psal. 39.1. Psal. 101.3. 2 Cor. 1.12. Psal. 119 4, 5, 20. 2 Chron. 19.3. 2 Chro. 30.18, 19 Neh. 1.11. Isa. 26.8, 9. I have inclined my heart to keep thy Statutes alwayes, even to the end. Verse 38. Stablish thy Word unto thy Servant, who is devoted to thy fear. Verse 44. So shall I keep thy Law continually, for ever and ever. Verse 45. And I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy Precepts. Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have alwayes a Conscience void of offence toward God and toward men. Heb. 13.18. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. Gracious Souls do strongly affect that which they cannot easily effect, Psal. 119.57. Thou art my Portion O Lord, I have said that I would keep thy words. Some read this Verse thus, Lord I have said, my portion shall be to keep thy words. Holy David was fully determined and resolved in himself, to keep Gods Royal Law, in spite of the World, the flesh, and the Devil. And so Barnabas exhorted the Dsci∣ples, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11.23. As if all piety and truth of Grace consi∣sted in Gracious purposes of heart. Certainly when the bent of a mans mind, and the setled purpose of a mans Soul, and the unfeigned desires of his heart, are for God, for Grace, for holiness, in heart, in life, then the estate and condition of that man is safe and happy. 'Tis very observable, that
that great Apostle Paul,Though the Nee∣dle or the Sea∣mans Compass may jog this way and that way, yet the bent of the Needle wll still be Northward. So though a Chri∣stian may have his particular sinful joggings, this way or that way, yet the bent of his heart will still be God-wards. Una actio non de∣nominat. in his spiritual conflict, layes a very great stress upon these things, witness Rom. 7. ver. 16. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law that it is good. So Verse 18. For to will is present with me. So Verse 19. For the good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I do. So Verse 21, 22. I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. So Verse 25. So then with the mind I my self serve the Law of God. Certainly, the truth, the lise, and power of Grace, of Holiness, of Regeneration, is not so much seen in our actions, as in the renewing and san∣ctifying of our minds and wills, according to that Rom. 12.2. Be ye transformed (or Metamorphosed, as the Greek has it) by the renewing of your mind. No man is to judg of the sound∣ness or sincerity of his Spirit by some particular acts, but by the constant frame and bent of his Spirit, and by his general conversation in this world; If particular actions might de∣termine whether a man had Grace or no Grace, whether he were in Christ or not in Christ; whether he were a Saint or not a Saint; whether he were sincere or unsound, we should many times conclude, that those had no Grace who indeed have, and that they were not in Christ who indeed are, and that they are no Saints who indeed are, and that they are not sincere, who certainly are true Nathaniels. The best Saints have had their extravagant motions, and have very foully and sadly miscarried as to particular actions, (even then when the constant course and bent of their spirits have been God-wards and Christ-wards, and Holiness-wards, and Heaven-wards, &c) witness Davids Murther and Adultery. Noahs Drunkenness, Lots Incest, Josephs Swearing, Jobs Cursing, Jonahs Vexing, Peters Denying, and Thomas his not believ∣ing. Such twinklings do and will accompany the highest and fairest stars. As he who foots it best may be found sometimes all along, and the neatest person may sometimes slip into a slow. He that cannot endure to see a spot upon his Cloaths, may yet sometimes fall into a Quagmire. So the holiest and exactest Christians may sometimes be surpri∣sed with many infirmities and unevennesses, and sad miscar∣riages.
Certainly particular sinnings are compatible with a gracious frame, though none are with a glorious condition. Though no darkness, no clouds can be mixt with the Sun in Heaven, yet both may be in the Ayre which is enlightned below. Our best estate on earth is mixt, and not absolute. Glory annihilates all sinful practices, but Grace only weak∣ens them; the most sincere Christian is but an imperfect Christian, and hath daily cause to mourn over his infirmities, as well as he has cause to bless God for his Graces and mer∣cies. Well Sirs! Look as every particular stain doth not blemish the universal fineness of the Cloth, so neither doth this or that particular fact disprove and deny the general bent of the heart; particulars may not decide the estate either way, 'tis true, a man by a particular sinning is denominated Guilty, but by no one particular can a mans Estate be chal∣lenged, either for good or bad. He that shall judg of a Christians estate by particular acts, though notorious bad, will certainly condemn the Generation of the Righteous. We must alwayes distinguish betwixt some single good acti∣ons, and a series of good actions.Meer particular actions do not conclude (either way) the estate of the Soul, an hy∣pocrite may do some good act, and an upright person may do some sinful act. A man must give in Judgment for, or against himself according as the habitual purpose and temper of his heart stands, &c. It is not this or that par∣ticular good action, but a continued course of holy Actions that denominates us holy. Certanly, as there is no man so holy, but sometimes he falls into this or that particular sin; So there is no man so wicked, but sometimes he falls in with this or that particular duty, witness Pharaoh, who in a fit de∣sires Moses and Aaron to pray for him; and witness Balaam, who in a good mood desires to dye the death of the Righte∣ous; and witness Saul, who under a pang condemns himself, and justifies David. And so witness Ahabs humbling of him∣self, and Nineveh's repenting, and Foelix his trembling, and Herod's hearing of John Baptist gladly. Now look as every sin which a godly man falls into (through infirmity) doth not presently denominate him ungodly, so neither will a few good actions done by a wicked man prove him godly. 'Tis what the course and tenour of the life is, that must be most diligently and wisely observed, for every man is as his course is; if his course be holy, the man is so; if his course be wick∣ed, the man is wicked. There is a Maxim in Logick, viz.
that no general Rule can be stablished upon a particular in∣stance; and there is another Maxim in Logick, viz. that no particular instance can overthrow a general Rule. So here, as no man can safely and groundedly conclude from no bet∣ter Promises than from some few particular actions (though in themselves materially and substantially good) that his heart is therefore sincere;'Tis not a pang of the Soul, nor a mood, nor a fit of an Ague, nor a flash of Lightning nor a mans being as the morning dew, but his ha∣bitual purpose, resolution and in∣clination to good, that evidences the man to be re∣ally good. Psal. 119.20. My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy Judgments at all times, &c. A sheep may slip into a slow as soon as a Swine; and an Apple-tree may have a fit of barrenness, as well as a Crab-tree. But the sheep loves not to wallow in the Mire as the swine does. And though the Apple-tree be barren one year, yet it brings forth fruit the next. so on the contrary, no man ought to conclude, because of some gross particular sinful actions, and extravagant motions, that his heart is unfound. O Sirs! we are not to make a Judgment of our states and conditions by some particular actions, whether they are good or evil, but we are to make a Judgment of our states and conditions, by the general frame, bent, and disposition of our hearts, and by the constant tenour of our lives. 'Tis certain, that God accounts every wicked man guilty of all those sins, wicked∣nesses, and vanities, which the setled purpose, desire, bent, bias, and frame of his Soul inclined him to, though he doth not actually commit them, Matth. 5.28. He that looketh on a Woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery already with her in his heart. A man may commit Adultery, and yet not touch a Woman. There are many thousands that dye of the wound in the eye. So 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hateth his Bro∣ther is a Murtherer. A man may commit Murther, and yet not kill a man, yea he may commit Murther and yet not touch a man. Prov. 23.7. For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he. The man is as his mind is. God esteems of wicked men according to their hearts, and not according to their words. So 'tis as certain that the Lord accounts every god∣ly man to do all that good, that the setled purpose, frame, bent, biass, and unfeigned desires of his Soul inclines him to, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind, 'tis accepted. So Heb. 11.17. By Faith Abraham when he was tryed, offered up Isaac, and he that had received the Promises, offered up his only Son; that is, in disposition and full purpose of heart, and willingness of mind, which God accepted for the deed; a true intent is in Gods account as a real act. So David had a purpose, a mind, a will to build God a house, and for this God commends him, 1 Kings 8.18. And the Lord said unto
David my Father, whereas it was in thy heart to build a house un∣to my Name, thou didst well that it was in thy heart; yea, God rewards him for it, as if he had actually done it, and tells him in his ear that he would build him an house, 2 Sam. 7.27. So when that servant that ow'd his Lord ten thousand Talents, had shew'd his readiness and willingness, and resolvedness to pay all. Lord have patience with me, and I will pay thee all, Matth. 18.26. (a thing as impossible for him to do, as 'tis for us to keep the whole Law, and not to fail in one point; but his desires, his mind, his will, his purposes was to do it) well, and what does his Lord do? why his Lord had compas∣sion on him, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt, v. 27. his Lord took this for full and current payment, he accepted of the will for the deed. So when Zacheus had unfeignedly professed his purpose and willingness to make restitution, Christ presently replies, This day is Salvation come to thy house, Luke 19.9. Certainly the Lord accounts that Soul a true Believer, and a blessed Soul, that unfeignedly desires to be∣lieve, witness that Matth. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. And 'tis as certain that the Lord accounts that sinner a true penitent, that doth unfeignedly desire, purpose, and resolve to repent, to break off his sins, and to turn to the Lord, as you may see in that great instance of the Prodigal, Luke 15.18, 19, 20. I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more wor∣thy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants. And he arose and came to his Father; But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him. Assoon as ever the Prodigal did but purpose and resolve to repent, and return to his Father, the compassions of his Father are kindled and turned towards him, and he does not go, but runs and falls on his neck, and in stead of kicking and killing, there is nothing but kissing and embracing a returning Prodigal. God alwayes sets a higher value upon our dispositions, than upon our actions,2 Cor. 8.10. 1 Cor. 9.17. 1 Pet. 5.2. Exod. 25.2. Philemon 14 and in our best services he esteems more of our wills, than he does of our deeds, as is evident by the Scriptures in the
Margent. Every good man is as good in the eye and account of God, as the ordinary frame and bent of his Spirit speaks him to be. Every man is as holy, as humble, as heavenly, as spiritual, as gracious, as serious, as sincere, as fruitful, as faithful, as watchful, &c. as the setled purposes, desires, re∣solutions, and endeavours of his Soul speaks him to be. Hence Noah is said to be a just man, and perfect or upright in his Generation, Gen. 6.9. And hence Job is said to be a perfect and an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil, Job 1.1.8. And hence David is said to be a man after Gods own heart, 1 Sam. 13, 14. And to fulfill all his wills, Acts 13.22. here the Greek word , is wills, to note the universality, and sincerity of his obedience. And hence Zacharias and Elizabeth are said to be both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordi∣nances of God blameless, Luke 1.5, 6. Hence the Church is said to be all fair, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee. And hence those hundred forty and four thousand Saints that had their Fathers Name written in their Foreheads, Rev. 14.1. are said to be without fault, v. 5. And in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault be∣fore the Throne of God. God in the Covenant of Grace, and upon the credit of his Sons blood, and for the glory of his Free Grace and favour, is graciously pleased to accept of his people, and to approve of his people, and to delight in his people, and to interpret his people, according to the com∣mon bent, frame, disposition, resolution, unfeigned desires, and constant endeavours of their Souls. But, &c. Thirdly, If your obedience be the obedience of Faith, then your estate is good, then you have assuredly an infallible work of God upon your souls. Quest. But how shall we know whether our obedience be the obe∣dience of Faith or no? how may a man discern when his obedience springs from Faith? Answ. You may certainly know whether your obedience be the obedience of Faith or no, by these following particu∣lars.
First, That obedience that springs from Faith, is a full obe∣dience,  a universal obedience. David did look upon his universal obedience as a special testimony of his uprightness, Psal. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect un∣to all thy Commandments. Mark! the Psalmist doth not say, When I obey all thy Commandments, then shall I not be ashamed; but, When I have a respect to all thy Commandments, then shall I not be ashamed. Now a respect to all Gods Com∣mandments, notes an inward awe and reverential eye to∣wards every duty that God requires.The rule is good and true, Quic∣quid propter deum fit, equaliter fit, he who doth serve and obey God for Gods sake, will equally obey all that God com∣mands him. No one Command is unjust or unreaso∣nable to him whose heart is upright in obedi∣ence, &c. Seneca describing a vertuous man, (Epist. 120.) saith of him, that he is Idem semper, et in omni actu par sibi. Bacharti from a∣char, the word notes a careful and diligent choice, upon good tryal and proof. The words according to the Hebrew, may be read thus, Then shall I not blush when my eye is to all thy Commandments. Now you know the Tra∣veller hath his eye towards the place whither he is going, and though he be short of it, yet he is still a putting on, and pres∣sing forwards all he can to reach it. So when the eye of a Saint is to all the Commands of God, and he is still a pressing forwards towards full obedience, such a Soul shall never be put to the blush; such a Soul shall never be ashamed in the great day of our Lord Jesus. So Acts 13.22. I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will. . all my wills, to note the sincerity and universality of his obedience. So Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have alwayes a Conscience void of offence toward God, and toward men. So Heb. 13.18. We trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live ho∣nestly. That obedience that springs from Faith, doth neither dispute Divine Commands, nor divide Divine Commands one from another. Zacharias and Elizabeth were both righ∣teous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.5, 6. That obe∣dience that springs from Faith, is a full obedience, a univer∣sal obedience; It is universal in respect of the subject, the whole man, and 'tis universal in respect of the object, the whole Law. Mark! he who obeyes sincerely, obeyes uni∣versally, though not in regard of practice (which is impossi∣ble) yet 1. In regard of his will and desires, his will and desire is to obey all, Rom. 7.18. For to will is present with me. Psal. 119.5. O that my wayes were directed to keep thy Statutes.
2. In respect of election or choice, he chooses to obey all. Psal. 119.173. Let thine hand help me, for I have chosen thy Precepts. The word here rendred chosen, signifies to choose upon tryal and examination, I have chosen thy Precepts be∣fore all, and above all other things. I have chosen thy Pre∣cepts for my chiefest good, and for my only treasure. I have chosen thy Precepts to own them, to follow them, and to obey them. 3. In respect of approbation, he approves of all the Commands of God, as holy, just, and good; he highly approves of those Royal Commands that he cannot perfectly obey, Rom. 7.12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, just, and good. And Verse 16. I consent unto the Law that it is good; He assents to the Commands of God as holy, and he consents to them as good. 4. In re∣spect of affection, he loves all the Commands of God, he dearly loves those very Commands that he cannot obey, Psal. 119.97. O how I love thy Law! Such a pang of love he felt, as could not otherwise be vented, but by this pathetical exclamation, O how love I thy Law! Verse 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. Verse 163. I hate and abhor ly∣ing, but thy Law do I love. Verse 119. Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross, therefore I love thy testimonies. Verse 127. Therefore I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold. Verse 159. Consider how I love thy Precepts. Verse 167. My Soul hath kept thy testimonies, and I love them exceeding∣ly. 5. In respect of valuation or esteem, he highly values all the Commands of God, he highly prizes all the Com∣mands of God, as you may see by comparing these Scriptures together, Psal. 119.72, 127, 128. Psal. 19.8, 9, 10, 11. Job 23.12. 6. In respect of his purpose and resolution, he purposes and resolves, by divine assistance, to obey all, to keep all, Psal. 119.106. I have sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. Psal. 17.3. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. 7. In respect of his inclination, he has an habitual inclination in him to keep all the Com∣mands of God, 1 Kings 8.57, 58. 2 Chron. 30.17, 18, 19, 20. Psal. 119.112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy Sta∣tutes alwayes, even to the end. 8. In respect of endeavours,
they endeavour to keep all, Psal. 119.59. I turned my feet un∣to thy testimonies. There is no man that obeyes God truly, who doth not endeavour to obey God fully, and thus you see in what respects that obedience that flows from Faith, is a full obedience, a universal obedience. A child of God obeyes all the commands of God in respect of his sincere de∣sires, purposes, resolutions, and endeavours; and this God accepts in Christ for perfect and compleat obedience. This is the glory of the Covenant of Grace, that God accepts and esteems of sincere obedience as perfect obedience. Such who sincerely endeavour to keep the whole Law of God, they do keep the whole Law of God in an evangelical sense, though not in a legal sense. In the work of Conversion,Ezek. 11.19, 20. God infu∣seth all Grace together, and writes not one particular Law in the hearts of his children, but the whole Law, which is a universal Principle, inclining the Soul impartially to all. The gracious Soul sincerely falls in with every command of God (so far as he knows it), without prejudice or partiality, he dares not pick and chuse what commands to obey, and what to reject, as Hypocrites do; he hath an eye to see, an ear to hear, and a heart to obey the first Table as well as the second, and the second as well as the first; He doth not ad∣here to the first, and neglect the second, as Hypocrites do; neither doth he adhere to the second, and contemn the first, as prophane men do. All Sauls, Jebues, Judas's, Demas's, Scribes, Pharises, and temporaries,Matth. 23.23. they are still partial in their obedience, for while they yield obedience to some commands, they live in the habitual breach of other Com∣mands. Jehu boastingly calls out,2 Kings 10.29, 30. Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts. But if Jehosaphat had gone a little further, he might have seen his Calves too, contrary to Gods Com∣mands. Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things; but if John will be close and plain with him,Mark 6. he shall then first lose his liberty, and then his head for his la∣bour. A sincere Christian loves all the known Commands of God, and prises all the Commands of God, and sees a Di∣vine Image, Majesty, and Authority stampt upon all the Commands of God: And therefore the main bent and dis∣position
of his Soul, s to obey all, and to be subject to all the Commands of God. Let me in a few particulars open this great truth a little more fully to you. And therefore take me thus. First, A sincere Christian will endeavour to obey God in suffering Commands, as well as in doing Commands, in lo∣sing as well as gaining Commands; an unsound Christian, he loves cheap obedience, he is willing to fall in with those Commands that are not chargable or costly; he loves a cheap Gospel, and a cheap Ministry, and a cheap Membership, and a cheap Communion of Saints, &c. But when his obedience comes to be chargable, when his obedience to Divine Com∣mands may cost him his health, his strength, his Liberty, his Riches, his Estate, his Friends, his Credit, his Name, &c. then he retires,John 6.60. then he cries out Durus sermo, it is a hard say∣ing, who can bear it? this is a hard Commandment, who can obey it? When Religion is attended with freedom, honour, and safety; when Religion is attended with Riches, Pleasures, and Applause, then unsound hearts will put for∣wards; but when these part, then they bid Religion farewel. As you see in the young man in the Gospel,Matth. 19.20. to 25. who was willing to follow Christ, so long as he might be no loser in follow∣ing of him; but when it came to this, that he must part with his Riches, or with Christ, then he falls off, and went away sorrowful, because he had great possessions. But now a sin∣cere Christian will obey even the most chargable and costly Commands of God, as you may see in that little book of Martyrs, tenth and eleventh Chapters of the Hebrews; and as you may see in the three Children in Daniel, in the Disci∣ples,Matth. 19 27. in the Primitive Christians, and in the Martyrs in the Marian dayes. But, Secondly, If your obedience springs from Faith, then you will endeavour to obey God in relative Commands, as well as in absolute Commands; you will not only hear, and pray, and read, and meditate, and fast, and mourn; but you will labour to be good in your Relations, both as a Husband, a
Father, a Master, a Magistrate, a Minister. Remember this for ever, every one is that really that he is relatively. Many make a great Profession, and are under a great Name, and have great parts and gifts, and can discourse rarely well on any subject, whose houses are not Bethels, but Bethavens, not little Temples, but little Hells. One, writing of the Ita∣lian women, saith that they were Angels in the streets, Saints in the Church, and Devils in their houses; this is very appli∣cable to many high Professors this day, who are very forward in the general Duties of Religion, and yet make little Con∣science of relative duties; but he whose obedience springs from Faith, he will make Conscience of relative commands as well as of absolute commands: Whatever Command hath the stamp of God, the Authority of Heaven upon it, though it seem never so small, he dares not disobey it; if he sees a beam of divine Majesty sitting upon the face of any Command, he will submit to it; you know men will not re∣fuse a penny if the Kings stamp be upon it, so if the Authori∣ty of God be stampt upon the least Command, a sound Chri∣stian will yield subjection to it, as well as the greatest. Mark, if a man make no Conscience of relative Commands, though his general conversation as a Christian be never so admira∣ble, yet he hath great cause to suspect himself and his estate, and that his heart is not right in the sight of God.Acts 8.21. O that you would seriously consider! that relative and domestical Graces and duties do more demonstrate true piety and god∣liness than publick duties, than general duties do; for Pride, Vain-glory, Self-ends, and a hundred other outward, carnal considerations, may put a man upon the general du∣ties of Religion, as you may see by the Scriptures in the Mar∣gent,Isa. 58.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Hos. 5.14. Zech. 7.4, 5, 6, 7. and as you may see in the Scribes and Pharises through∣out the New Testament; but it argues both truth and strength of Grace to be diligent and conscientious in the dis∣charge of relative duties, and this is the true reason why the Apostles in their Epistles, do so frequently, so earnestly, and so strongly, by variety of motives press Christians to the performance of those relative duties that lye upon their hands. But,
Thirdly, If your obedience springs from Faith, then you will endeavour to obey God in affirmative Commands as well as in negative Commands. You will not only lok upon what God would not have you to do, but you will also look to see what God would have you to do.Luke 16.19-29. Matt. 25.24-31. Dives was no cast into Hell for oppressing Lazarus, but for not shewing mercy to Lazarus: He was not damn'd because he took any thing from him, but because he gave nothing to him. The evil servant did not riot out his Talent, but omitted the im∣provement of it, for which he was cast into outer darkness Nor those Reprobates in the same Chapter did not rob the poor Saints, but omitted the relieving of them, which was their ruine.Deut. 23.3, 4. Moab and Ammon were banished the Sanctuary to the tenth Generation, for a meer omission, because they met not Gods Israel in the Wilderness with bread and water. Look as the omission of good diet breeds diseases, so the omission of Religious duties will either make work for Re∣pentance,Luke 18.11. or for Hell, or for the Physician of Souls. Mark, there is many a mans Religion lyes meerly in negatives, he is no Swearer, no Drunkard, no Adulterer, no Oppressor, no Defrauder, &c. A formal Professors obedience to Di∣vine Commands, does principally lye in negatives, he consi∣ders not so much what the Command requires, as what it prohibits, and he pleases himself rather in abstaining from evil, than in doing of good; in being outwardly reformed, than in being inwardly renewed; he thinks it enough that he turns from sin, though he makes no Conscience of turning to God: If you ask him concerning affirmative Commands, there you will find him speechless. Ask him, art thou holy? art thou humble? art thou heavenly? art thou sincere? art thou a Believer? dost thou set up God as the great object o thy fear? dost thou love God with a superlative love? is the Sabbath of the Lord a delight unto thee? &c. Now here you strike him dumb, he looks upon the neglect of these things as no sins,Isa. 8.13. Psal. 18.1. Isa. 58.1 because they are not such scandalous sins as the others are. Remember Sirs, sinful omissions many times leads to sinful commissions, as you may see in the Angels tha fell from Heaven to Hell; and as you may see in Adam, who
fell from his highest glory, into a woful gulf of sin and mi∣sery. But, Fourthly, If your obedience spring from Faith, then you  will endeavour to obey God in the Spirit of the Com∣mand, as well as in the letter of the Command. In every Command of God there is an intra, and an extra, one part of Christs Law binds the Flesh, and another part binds the Spirit, Thou shalt do no Murther,Matth. 5.21.22. Verse 27, 28. there is the letter of the Command. Thou shalt not be angry with thy Brother without a cause, there is the Spirit of the Command. Thou shalt not commit Adultery, there is the letter of the Command: Thou shalt not look upon a Woman to lust after her, there is the Spirit of the Command. The Pharisees of old did not look to the Spiritality of the Law, but only to the Letter of the Law; they rested wholly upon an outward conformity to the Law, when their hearts were full of Hellish lusts, they were all for the outside of the Law, they regarded not the inside of the Law; they were all for washing of Platters and Cups, and for beautifying of Tombs, like an Adulteress,Matth. 23.23. Phil. 3.6. Rom. 7.9. Could a man come up to all affirmative and negative Precepts in his outward conversation; yet if he were not spi∣ritual in all these, his obedience would be but as a body without a Soul. The Phari∣sees rise high in their outward o∣bedience, and yet Christ clearly and fully convinces them, that they were wretched Adulterers and Murderers, though they were not guilty of any such outward crimes, &c. whose care is to paint, and set a fair face upon a foul matter; they were all for paying Tythe of Mint and Annise and Cummin; but they regarded not the inside of the Law, they omitted the weightier matters of the Law, viz. Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. While Paul walked by the letter of the Command, he was blameless in his own account; but when he came to walk by the Spirit of the Command, then sin revived, and he dyed. Friends, there are the more general duties of Reli∣gion, as Hearing, Praying, Reading, Receiving, Fasting, Repeating, Discoursing, &c. Now these all lye in the very letter of the Command, and there are the more inward and spiritual duties of Religion, as the exercise of Faith, fear, love, hope, joy, patience, contentation, humble submission, and chusing of God, and cleaving to God, and delighting in God, and admiring of God, and exalting of God, and fol∣lowing hard after God, and holy Meditation, and Self-exa∣mination, &c. Now all these lye in the very spirit of the Command. Now in the exercise of these more spiritual
duties, our fellowship and communion with God mainly lyes. In the more general duties of Religion, an hypocrite may manifest the excellency of his gifts, but in the more spiritual duties of Religion, a sincere Christian doth mani∣fest, both the excellency and efficacy of grace. Mark, an un∣sound heart looks no further than to the bare letter of the command, to bare hearing, and bare praying, and bare preach∣ing, and bare fasting, and bare giving, and bare receiving, and bare suffering; he looks no further than to that part of the command which only binds the flesh, or outward man; and if he does but observe that in the gross, he thinks he hath done marvellous well; like a melancholy man that matters not what melody and harmony he makes, so he does but touch the strings of the instrument: But now, a found, a sin∣cere Christian, he looks to the Spirit of the command; and if he does not come up to that, in sincere desires, in graci∣ous purposes, in fixed resolutions, and in cordial endeavours, he can have no peace, no rest, no quiet, no comfort. O Sirs! as ever you would see God, and enjoy God another day, you must labour, not only to obey the letter of the command, but also to bring your hearts to the sincere obedience of the Spirit of the command. This is a very close, piercing, di∣stinguishing and discovering sign. But, Fifthly, If your obedience springs from faith, then you will labour, not only to obey God in the matter, but also in the manner of the command, not only in the substance of the command, but also in the circumstance of the command. God requires the manner as well as the matter; and God looks upon that work as not done, that is not done in a right manner. Did not the Lord command sacrifice? and did not Cain offer sacrifice?Gen. 4.5. and yet God had no re∣spect to him, nor to his offering, because his sacrifice was not offered up in a right manner, his offering was not of∣fered up by a hand of faith; he offered his offering, but be∣cause he did not offer himself as an offering to God, his offer∣ing was rejected by God. A work may be materially good,Luther.
that is not formally and eventually good, and this was Cain's curse. How frequently did God command the Jews to pray?Isa. 1.15. and yet he plainly tells them, When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear. He commanded them to sacrifice, and yet he saith, To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices?Verse 11. and all because they did not manage their prayers, nor sacrifices, in a right manner; their hands were full of bloud, and their hearts were full of sins, and their lives were full of lewd∣ness; and therefore all their services were vain oblations, yea, an abomination to God. An unfound heart looks no fur∣ther than to the substance of the command; if he has heard, and prayed, and fasted, and read, and repeated, and given alms, and received the Lord's Supper, he strokes himself, and blesses himself, and hugs himself, and thinks all is well, and so he looks no further: But now a sound sincere Christian, he looks to the circumstance as well as the substance, to the manner as well as to the matter of the command; when he prayes, he labours to pray fervently, earnestly,Jam. 5.17, 18. he labours to get his heart into his prayers; when he hears, he will hear with attention and intention of spirit; when he walks,Mich. 6.8. 1 Pet. 2.12. & 3.1, 2, 3. 1 Thes. 2.10. 2 Cor. 1.12, Psal. 110.3. he endeavours to walk wisely, humbly, faithfully, fruitfully, circumspectly, exemplarily, winningly, convincingly, blame∣lesly; when he obeys, he desires and endeavours to obey freely, willingly, cheerfully. O Sirs! if we pray, and pray not fervently; if we hear, and hear not fruitfully; if we obey, and obey not willingly; if we shew mercy,Isa. 58.13. and do it not cheerfully; if we sanctifie the Sabbath, and not with de∣light, all is worth nothing, all will come to nothing. Mark, there are some circumstances accessary, some necessary, some wherein the being, and some wherein the well being of a duty doth consist; and if you abstract these from them, the duty is worth nothing; take away fervency and humility from prayer, take away faithfulness and fruitfulness from hearing, and take away willingness and delight from obedience, and all will be worth nothing. God regards not only the matter, but the manner. Criton the Papist could say, That God loved better Adverbs than Nouns, not to pray only, but to pray
well; Non bonum sed bene agere, Not to do good, but to do it well, is the great wisdom of a Christian; what is the Sun without light, or the fountain without water, or the body without the soul, or wood without fire, or a bullet without a gun, or a Ship without a rudder? no more are words in prayer, without the spirit of prayer. God looks more at the manner, than at the matter of your prayers. And let thus much suffice to confirm the first particular. But, Secondly, That obedience that springs from faith, is an obedience that is only grounded upon the Word of God, the Commands of God, Ps. 119.4, 5. Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently; O that my wayes were directed to keep thy Statutes! Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Mat. 5.18. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. John 10.35. If he called them Gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken. Chap. 12.48. He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. 2 Tim. 3.16, 17, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, fr reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the mn of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works. Now the reasons why that obedience that springs from faith, is an obedience that is only grounded upon the Word of God; the Commands of God, are these five. And the first is drawn from the supremacy and soveraignty of God, who alone is to prescribe to man his duty; he is our great Lord and Master, he is our Lord and Law-giver, Isa. 33.22. For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Law-gi∣ver, the Lord is our King, James 4.12. There is one Law-giver, who is able to save and to destroy; who art thou that judgest another? Now by the Laws of this Lord and Law-giver, we must square all our actions. Look, as it would be very absurd in a servant to do that work which he thinks meet, and not what his Ma∣ster
commands; so 'tis as absurd for men to think, that God will accept of this or that at their hands, when they can't plead his superscription and authority for what they do. God will one day say to such, Who hath required this at your hands?Isa. 1.12. O Sirs! you must lay the command of God as a foundation for what you do, or else all your buildings, though never so glorious, will certainly totter and fall; in all you do, you must be able to say, Thus saith the Lord; or else after you have done your best, you may be undone for ever. But, Secondly, God's promise and blessing is only annexed to  God's command; he that will have the sweet of the promise, and the blessings of heaven, he must look that his obedience be bottomed upon divine commands; in holy actions 'tis not thy performance, nor thy grace, nor thy warmth, nor thy zeal, but the command and the promise that is annexed to it, that will bear thee out;Gal. 4.28. Heb. 6.17. therefore we are called children of the promise, and heirs of the promise. The children of God in all their obedience, should still keep an eye upon the com∣mand of God, and the promise of God, as ever they would run the race that is set before them, Heb. 12.1. But, Thirdly, Our obedience must be grounded and bottomed  upon a divine command, because of that great corruption, pollution, blindness and darkness which is upon our minds and understandings, which would carry us to what not, if we were not to steer our Christian course by divine commands.Col. 2.20, 21, 22. The Apostle condemns those things which had a shew of hu∣mility and great mortification, because they were not bot∣tomed upon a divine command; and Christ condemned ma∣ny practises of the Scribes and Pharisees, because they were not bottomed upon a divine command. As you may see by comparing the 6, 15. and 23. Chapters of Matthew toge∣ther. But, Fourthly, Our obedience must be bottomed upon a di∣vine  command, because else we can never be able to bear up our hearts comfortably, couragiously, confidently and reso∣lutely,
under all the afflictions,Psal. 44 9—ult. Ezek. 28.12, 22. oppositions, temptations, persecutions and discouragements that we meet with in the wayes of the Lord, and in doing the work of the Lord. All the Messages that the Prophets delivered, were still grounded upon a divine command,Acts 4.19, 20. & 5.29. Thus saith the Lord; and this steeled their spirits in the work of the Lord, this made them reso∣lute and undaunted in the midst of all the afflictions and op∣positions that they met with: And so 'twas a word of com∣mand that raised the spirits, and encouraged the hearts of the Apostles in the work of the Lord, in the face of all the op∣positions, threatnings and buffetings that they met with from the civil powers. You know Absalom layes his bloudy com∣mand upon his servants, as their highest encouragement to that bloudy work of killing his brother Amnon, 2 Sam. 13.28. Now Absalom had commanded his servants, (his Assasines) say∣ing, Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be couragious, and be valiant; or sons of valour, as the Hebrew runs. And so a Christian must lay the command of God before him, as his highest encouragement to do what God requires of him, &c. Fifthly and lastly, Our obedience must be bottomed and grounded upon the commands of God, to difference and di∣stinguish our selves from all hypocrites, formalists, super∣stitious and prophane persons, whose obedience is sometimes bottomed upon the Traditions of men, and sometimes upon the commandments of men. 'Twas the sin of the Ten Tribes, that they complyed with the command of Jeroboam and his Princes,Isa. 29.13, 14. Mat. 15.1 to 10. Mark 7.8 to 10. Hos. 5.11, 12. to worship the Calves at Dan and Bethel; and for this the wrath of the Lord fell heavy upon them. Ephraim is op∣pressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the commandment. And sometimes their obedience is bot∣tomed upon the examples of men, sometimes their obedience is bottomed upon the examples of their forefathers and an∣cestors,Jer. 44, 17, 18, &c. Joh. 7.48, 49. Jer. 10.3. The customs of the people are vain, &c. and sometimes upon the examples of great men. This was that which the Pharisees objected against believing on Christ;
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? but this people who knoweth not the Law are cursed. And sometimes they bottom their obedience upon the example of the mul∣titude. This was Demetrius his argument against Paul,Acts 19.26, 27. on the behalf of Diana, that all Asia and the world did worship her; and therefore the doctrine of Paul, that they be no Gods which are made with hands was falfe, and not to be suf∣fered. This hath alwayes been, and is still the common plea of many, We do but as the most do; and sure a great many eyes can see more than one or two: And hereupon they ex∣claim against others for their singularity, because they won't do as the rest of their neighbours do. But, Thirdly, That obedience that springs from faith, is a grow∣ing  obedience, 'tis an abounding obedience; such a man's desires, will, study and labour, is to get up to the highest pitch of obedience, to get up to the highest round in Jacob's lad∣der, Rev. 2.19. I know thy work, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first. The Angel of the Church of Thyatira,'Tis not every be∣lievers happiness always to make a progress in grace. Solomon and Asa, and o∣thers, run retro∣grade. Saints have their winter sea∣sons; they have their decaying times, and wither∣ing times, as well as their thriving times, their flou∣rishing times, Rev. 2.4. is commen∣ded, First, for his love. 2. For his charity. 3. For his faith. And, 4. For his patience: And in the general course of his life, he daily became more excellent; for his latter works were more than the first, that is, they were more manifest proofs of his constancy, and more worthy of praise than the first. This faithful Pastor is commended for his holy pro∣gress in grace and holiness. So Paul, Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am ap∣prehended of Christ Jesus. Ver. 13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before. Ver. 14. I press towards the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. The Greek word , doth emphatically import, a pressing, with an eager pursuit after the mark: It is the same word that signifies to perse∣cute, because the earnestness of his spirit in pressing toward the mark, now is the same that it was in the persecution of
those that pressed toward the mark before. Look, as good runners, when they come near unto the mark, stretch out their heads, and hands, and whole bodies, to take hold of them that run with them, or of the mark that is before them; so he in his whole race so laboured unto that which was be∣fore, as if he were still stretching out his arms to take hold of it. If such a man might have his choice, he would be the most humble, the most holy, the most heavenly, the most mortified, the most patient, the most contented, the most thankful, the most fruitful, the most active, the most zealous, and the most self-denying Christian in the world;1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Mat. 5. if he might have his choice, he would be holy as God is holy, and perfect as his heavenly father is perfect; he would do the will of God on earth, as those Princes of glory, the Angels, do it now in heaven, viz. freely, readily, cheerfully, de∣lightfully, universally, reverentially, and unweariedly, &c. if he might have his choice,Eccl. 9.10. he would exercise every grace, and perform every duty, with all his might; he sees so much excellency and beauty in God and Christ, that he can't be at rest till he be swallowed up in the enjoyment of them; he sees so much excellency in grace, that nothing but perfection of grace will satisfie him; he makes perfection not only his utmost end, but he also labours after perfection with his ut∣most strength and endeavours. When God is made the one of a mans desires, the one of a mans affections, the one of a mans life and comfort, then will he be the one of a mans en∣deavours too. That obedience that springs from faith (when 'tis not winter-time with a Christian) is a fruitful obedience, 'tis an abounding obedience, 'tis a progressive obedience. Look, as the mercy and favour of God to a believer, is not stinted nor limited, so the obedience of a believer to God is not stinted or limited; but now the obedience of hypocrites is alwayes stinted and limited; this command they will obey, but not that; this duty they will do, but not that; this work they will attend, but not that, &c. Fourthly, That obedience that springs from faith, is the obedience of a son, not of a slave; 'tis a free voluntary evan∣gelical
obedience, and not a legal, servil, and forced obe∣dience, Psal. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness; in the Hebrew, 'tis wil∣lingness in the plural number, to shew their exceeding great willingnesses, Psal. 27.8. When thou saidest, seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek. By face is meant, 1. God himself, Exod. 20.3. Before my face; that is, before me. 2. His favour, Jer. 18.17. I will shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity. Now, no sooner had God given forth a word of command, for the Psalmist to seek himself, and to seek his favour, but pre∣sently his heart did eccho to that command; Thy face Lord will I seek. So Jer. 3.22. Return ye back-sliding children, and I will heal your back-slidings; behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Every gracious soul hath the duplicate of God's Law in his heart, and is willingly cast into the mould of his Word, Rom. 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart, the form of doctrine that hath been delivered to you, or whereto you were delivered (as the words may be read) They did not only obey, but they obeyed from the heart, their hearts were in their obedience, Psal. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God! yea, thy Law is within my heart,Col. 1.12. Phil. 1.8. Jer. 31.33. or in the midst of my bowels, as the Hebrew runs; these note the tenderest affe∣ctions. There is the counterpane of the Law written, yea, printed upon every gracious heart; a godly man will live and dye with the Law of God stampt upon his heart. O eata Apocalypsis (said that Martyr, catching up the Revelation that was cast into the same fire with him to be burnt) O Blessed Revelation! how happy am I to be burned with thee in my hands? It was Christ's meat and drink to do his Father's will; and the same mind is in all the Saints,John 4. Phil 2.5. Rom. 7.22. as was in Christ Jesus: They delight in the Law of God after the inward man. True obedience flows from principles of heartiness and love within, and not from by and base respects and ends, that are carnal and worldly. It is observable, that John's obedience was as ample and as large as God's command, 2 King. 10.30. And the Lord said unto Jehu, because thou hast done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast
done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the fourth generation, shall sit on the throne of Israel. And yet because his heart was not in his obedience, and be∣cause he did not purely act for God, but for himself, that he might bring about his own designs, he met with a revenge in∣stead of a reward; as you may see in that, Hos. 1.4. And the Lord, said unto him, call his name Jezreel, for yet a little while, and I will avenge the bloud of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. Jehu's heart was not in his obedience, he had a dispensatory conscience; for though he rooted out Baals worship, yet the golden Calves must still continue: He destroyed Idolaters, but not Idolatry; and this carnal policy brought down ven∣geance and misery upon him and his posterity. Artaxerxes goes far, Ezra 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done. To what a highth doth this Heathen Prince rise? He will do anything for God, he will do every thing for God that he requires. But mark, what is that which moves him to it? Is it love to God? is it delight in God? O no! all his obedience proceeded from nothing but fear of wrath and vengeance, as is evident in the latter part of the verse; For why should there be wrath upon the Realm of the King, and of his Sons? Or, as the Hebrew runs, Why should there be boyling or foaming anger, great indignation? As it is rendred and made the utmost degree of divine dis∣pleasure, in that Deut. 29.28. Some read these words, Against the Realm of the King and his Sons, as distinct one from an∣other, and not depending one upon another, thus; Against the Realm, the King and his Sons; and this reading the Ori∣ginal will bear: And this reading shews, That as the King feared God's wrath against himself, so also against his Realm and Children; and accordingly he was the more studious and careful to escape it; blind nature was afraid of divine wrath,zek. 26.25, 26, 27. and therefore was the more sedulous to prevent it. O, but now a true child of God, he has the Law of God writ∣ten, not only in his understanding, but also in his heart and affections; and this is that which makes his obedience to be pleasing and delightful to him; so that if he might be free from the injunctions and directions of the Word (with the ser∣vant
in the Law) he would not value such a liberty;Exod. 21.4, 5, 6, &c. he would not swear, nor lye, nor be drunk, nor whore, nor dissemble, nor cheat, nor run into all excess of riot if he might, be∣cause in his soul he has a principle of grace, and an inward contrariety and antipathy against it;Eccl. 9.2. he would not cease to hear, to read, to pray, to meditate if he might, because his soul takes a delight & sweet complacency in these things; there is a principle within him agreeable to the precept without him, which makes all religious performances to be easie and pleasurable to him. Look, as the eye delights in seeing, and the ear in hearing, so a gracious heart (except when 'tis un∣der a cloud of dissertion, or in the School of temptation, or under some grievous tormenting afflictions, or sadly worsted by some prevalent corruption) delights in obeying: Actions of nature, you know, are actions of delight; and so are all those actions that spring from a new nature, a divine na∣ture, &c. Fifthly, That obedience that springs from faith, is a trans∣forming  obedience; it mightily alters and changes a man, from impurity to purity, from sin to sanctity,2 Cor. 3.18. Rom. 12.1, 2. from unrigh∣teousness to righteousness, from earthly-mindedness, to hea∣venly-mindedness, from pride to humility, from hypocrisie to sincerity, &c. Such as please themselves with this, That they are no changlings, and that they are whatever they were,Acts 8.13. these are still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. That obedience of the Romans,Rom. 16.19. which was said to have come abroad unto all men, was an exemplary obedience, and a transforming obedience. Certainly, Gospel-obedience is a grace of much worth, and of great force upon the whole man; for when it is once wrought in the heart, it worketh a conformity to all God's holy will. But having spoken more largely of this in my other writings, let this touch here suf∣fice, &c. Sixthly, That obedience that springs from faith, is a con∣stant  obedience, 'tis a fixed and resolved obedience, not in respect of practise and continued acts (for in many things we
offend all.Ja. 3.2. Eccl. 7.20. Prov. 20 9. 1 Kings 8.46. 1 Joh. 1.8. Psal. 17.3. There is not a just man upon the earth, that doth good and sinneth not: Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? There is no man that sinneth not; If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.) &c. But in respect of a Christians sincere de∣sires, bent of will, purpose of heart, resolution of soul, and faithful endeavours, Psal. 119.20. My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all times. Ver. 112. I have enclined my heart to keep thy Statutes alway, even to the end. Ver. 33. Teach me, O Lord! the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end. Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands, shall be stronger and stronger. So Isa. 40.29, 30, 31. Job 2.3. Mark, the renewed man hath at all times a desire to fear the name of the Lord, Neh. 1.11. A will to live honestly at all times. Heb. 13.18. And it hath some endeavours and exercise of Spirit, to keep always a conscience void of offence towards God and men, Acts 24.16. The Israelites in their marches toward the holy Land, were many times interrupted by divers enemies; but yet they advanced in their course, as soon as they could get rid of their enemies: So though the believer be many times interrupted in the course of his obedience, by many fierce temptations, and strange working of corruptions; yet after the temptation is over, the believer returns to the course of obedienc with greater forwardness,2 Cor. 7.1. and with redoubled strength and cou∣rage, and in the end perfects his course of holiness in the fear of the Lord. Mark, the appearing motion, and walking of an unregenerate man in a way of righteousness and holiness, is but artificial from the engine of hypocrisie, and self-inte∣rest, like the flying of Arhitus his artificial Dove; and therefore having no inward principle of life, it eneth not; but the motion and walking of a man, renewed by grace in wayes of holiness and righteousness, is like the natural living motion of birds, it continues as long as life continues, and as e∣very thing in motion, the nearer it comes to the center, the more swiftly it moves: So the nearer the believer, through time to his rest in heaven, the more propense he is in all his motions towards God; he forge is the things that are behind, and reach∣eth
forth unto those things that are before.Phil. 3.13. That obedience that springs from faith, is a fixed and resolved obedience, like Da∣vids worthies, it will break through an host of Philistines, through an Army of difficulties, impediments and discou∣ragements, that it may be found doing the will of God. To make this a little more clearly and fully out, observe with me these few things. First, No contrary commands of men, shall take this man off from his obedience to the commands of God, Acts 4.19. Chap. 5.29. &c. Secondly, No stream of evil examples, no current of cor∣rupt times, shall bear them down in wayes of obedience, Josh. 24.15. I and my houshold will serve the Lord, though all Israel should serve Idols. And Noah was upright with God, and walked with God in his generation, when the whole world was overspread with violence, and all flesh had cor∣rupted their wayes, Gen. 6.9. Chap. 7.1. Thirdly, No worldly profit or advantage shall bribe this man from his obedience, Heb. 11.8. Abraham will obey and follow God, though he forsakes all the benefits and content∣ments of his native Countrey, and of his Father's house, not knowing where his lot should fall, &c. Fourthly, No carnal disputes or reasonings with flesh and bloud shall disswade him from his obedience, Heb. 11.7. Noah might have raised many objections against that strange attempt of building an Ark, a work of an hundred and twen∣ty years continuance; but Noah waves all disputes, and falls upon building of the Ark, according to the command of God. So Paul, as soon as he was converted, he was command∣ed by God to preach to the Gentiles; he might have made abundance of objections against that service, but instead of objecting, he falls closs to his Master's work, and never con∣sults with flesh and bloud, Gal. 1.15, 16, 17.
Fifthly, No floud of natural affection shall hinder them in the way of their obedience. When God commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac as a Burnt-Offering, he goes about it readily, and never acquaints Sarah with it, lest she should have hindered him in his obedience, and he goes three dayes journey to effect it, Gen. 22. compared with Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. When God commands, Abraham will not stick at it, though it be to offer up a Son, a natural Son, and not an adop∣ted son; an only Son, and not one of many; a Son of the Free-woman, and not of the Bond-woman; a Son of his old age; a Son of the Promise; a Son in whom all the Na∣tions of the earth should be blessed; a Son of his love and delight; a Son that made the good old man laugh and be merry; (Isaac signifies laughter) a Son that was grown up to some years, witness the Wood of the Burnt offering that he laid upon him, Gen. 22.6, 7. And this was the commenda∣tion of Levi,By Urim and Thummim, some understand since∣rity of life, and soundness of do∣ctrine. Deut. 33.8, 9. And of Levi he said, let thy Thum∣mim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, (Urim and Thummim, signify light and perfection according to their best derivati∣on in the Hebrew tongue, and they are here put in the plu∣ral number, lights and perfections, to note the plenty as well as the excellency of divine Graces) whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah. Who said unto his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledg his Brethren, nor knew his own children. This relates to that Heroical fact of the Levites, Exod. 32.26.29. when at the commandment of Moses they slew their Idolatrous Brethren that had Worshipped the Golden Calf, not sparing those that were most nearest allyed to them, but did execute Gods Judgments upon Parents, Brethren and Children, as if they had been meer strangers to them: the Levites were so impartial in Gods cause, as not to acknow∣ledg either Father or Mother, Brother or Children against his Command. Natural affections are strong, but superna∣tural obedience is stronger. Some have well observed that the Married Martyrs, who were Parents of many children (as Rogers, Watts, Guest, Rawlins, &c.) suffered with most ala∣crity.
Sixthly, No terrors, no threats, no reproaches, no afflcti∣ons,  no oppositions, no persecutions, no bonds, no banish∣ments, no dangers, no deaths, shall deter them or affright them from their obedience; as will evidently appear by comparing of these Scriptures together, Psal. 44.16. to 21. Acts 20.23, 24. Acts 21.12, 13. and chap. 24.14. Dan. 3.14— 19. Rev. 12.11. This is most evident in the Histories of the ten Persecutions, and in all other Histories, both of a former and a later date, &c. Physicians observe a difference 'twixt the natural and pre∣ter-natural heat in mens bodies; the preter-natural heat, which ariseth from distemper, may be more for the present, but as it exceeds for measure, so it abates for time, because the natural heat is a more equal and moderate, and durable heat, every part hath an equal share, and it is not extream, and yet it continues. Thus it is with Hypocrites and up∣right persons in the matter of obedience. The hypocrite may (in a kind of preter-natural heat) in a hot fit, in a pre∣sent heat, fall upon hearing, and reading, and praying, and reforming of his Family, and upon leaving of this sin and that; and upon casting off this vain company and that, and upon associating of himself with this good company and that. Bt this hot fit does not last, the cold fit takes him again, and then he shakes hands with all his duties, and loses all his good inclinations, and layes aside all his warm resolutions.Job 27.8, 9. Hosea 6.4. Psal. 78.36, 37. Will the Hypocrite pray alwayes? Ephraims goodness was as a morning Cloud, which soon vanisheth, and as the early dew which is soon dryed up by the Sun-beams; they were both false and fickle, unsteady and unstable; constant only in inconstancy; their hearts were never right with God, for they were not stedfast in his Covenant. There are four times wherein an Hypocrite may express a great readiness and forwardness to Religious duties. First, When he is under terrors and distress of Consci∣ence; O how for a little ease! a little rest! a little quiet!  a little comfort! what wont the Hypocrite do? &c.
Secondly, When he is under sore and heavy afflictions, Hos. 5.15.So Pharaoh and Ahab, &c. In their affliction they will seek me early. Isa. 26.16. Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a Prayer when thy chastening was upon them. Psal. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him. It is a reproach to some, No Penny, No Pater-noster. And it is a shame to others, No Plague, no Pater-noster; no punishment, no Prayer, &c. Thirdly, When Religion is in fashion, when 'tis a credit to be a Professor, and when Profession is the High-way to profit and preferment; in the warm Summer of prosperity, when there is no hazard, no danger, no loss to be a Christian, who then so forward in Religious duties as the Hypocrite? but when the Sun of Persecution is up, then he falls away, Matth. 13.5, 6. Fourthly, When others presence, counsel, and examples, have an influence upon them,2 Chron. 24.2, 17-23. O now they keep close duties! Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the dayes of Jehoiada the Priest; but when Jehoiada was dead, Joash serves Groves and Idols, and turns a deaf ear to those Prophets that testified against him, and gives Zechariah the Son of Jehoiada his Pasport out of the World, for inveighing against his evil manners, and the wicked courses of his Prin∣ces and People. Whilest the good Judges lived, the Israe∣lites kept close to the service of God, Judges 2.7. And the people served the Lord all the dayes of Joshua, and all the dayes of the Elders that outlived Joshuah, who had seen all the great works of the Lord that he did for Israel.Judges 17.6. Chap. 21.25. But when the good Judges were dead, the Israelites did what was right in their own eyes, every mans lust was his Law. Whilest Moses was present, there was no talking of a Golden Calf, but no sooner was his back turn'd, but the Israelites make a Golden Calf, and worship it when they had done, Exod. 32.1-9. &c. But now mark, that obedience that springs from Faith, that is a constant obedience, that is constant in opposition to fits and starts, and imports the course and bent of a Christi∣ans
life, which is alwayes to walk with God, to cleave to God, to follow God, and to obey God. But, Seventhly and lastly, That obedience that springs from  Faith, is directed to right ends. Gospel obedience has al∣wayes Gospel ends atttending of it. Quest. What are they? Answ. They are these nine. First, To testify our thankfulness to the Lord for all his  favours and benefits that we have received from him, Psal. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. Psal. 116.12. &c. Secondly, To recover the Image of God again to the  heighth of what we are able. The first Adam lost the Image of God by his disobedience. Now this Image of God we recover again in Christ our second Adam; but so, as that the more enlightned, the more holy, the more humble, the more heavenly, the more righteous, the more gracious, and the more obedient we are,Ephes. 4.24. the more we recover of this Image of God, which consists in knowledg, righteousness, and true holiness. Now saith the Believer, my intent is to recover that precious Image of God which I lost in the first Adam, and therefore do I labour to come up to the highest pitches of obedience, because the higher I rise in my obedience, the more I shall recover of the lost Image of God; I know that I lost this Image by partaking of the disobedience and pollu∣tion of the first Adam; and I know that I have recovered in part the same Image, by partaking of the obedience and ho∣liness of the second Adam: And I yet further know, that the more holy and obedient I am, the more I shall be like to that God, that is holiness it self, and the more I shall recover of that blessed Image, which consists in perfect holiness. Thirdly, not for the justification of their persons, for that  is only by Christs compleat obedience, which is made theirs by Faith, 1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 2.10. But for the testification of their justifying Faith, according to that of the Apostle, Jam. 2.17, 18, 26. &c.
Fourthly, That they may imitate the Lord Jesus, that they may be the more conformable to Christ their head, who pro∣poses his holiness to Believers as a pattern for them to fol∣low, as a Copy for them to write after, 1 John 2.6▪ He that saith he abideth in him,Matth. 11.28, 29. ought himself also to walk even as he walked. Now saith the Believer, O how holy, how humble, how hea∣venly, how meek, how compassionate, how zealous, how ex∣emplary, how convincing, how winning, how obedient was he, when in this World! and therefore O my Soul! look to it, that thou makest it thy business, thy work, thy Heaven, to mitate the Lord Jesus to the utmost that thou art able to each too. Fifthly, Though not for the obtaining of Salvation, that being made sure to us by Christ, yet for the obtaining of As∣surance of Salvation, and for the making of our Calling and Election sure, according to that word, 2 Pet. 1.5 — 11. Sixthly, That they may keep up their communion with God; for though the Union the Saints have with God by Christ, depends wholly upon that which is without, viz. their being married to Christ, and cloathed with his Righteous∣ness; yet the Communion which the Saints have with God through the Spirit, hath much dependance upon a Saints wal∣king, and upon his obedience: So that if a Saint shall dare to walk carnally and loosly,Jer. 3.14. Isa. 49.1, 2. though he shall not break the Marriage-knot, and lose his union, yet he will by such sinful practices grieve the Spirit, and lose his communion with God. But on the other hand, when a Believer walks spiritu∣ally, graciously, obedientially, O what sweet communion! what delightful communion! what high communion! what commodious communion! what Soul-satisfying, Soul-ra∣vishing, Soul-filling, Soul-contenting communion with God does he then enjoy! When the Child walks wisely, and obedientially before his Father, what sweet and delight∣ful converses and communion is there between the Father and the Child? but if the child walk foolishly, stubbornly, rebelliously, disobediently, the prudent Father will carry it
severely, strangely, frowningly, and at a distance, though his heart be still full of love to, his child; and though he won't disinherit him, yet he wont be familiar with him. The application is easie, &c. Seventhly, To keep down the body, and to bring it into  subjection to the soul, 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection. By spiritual exercises the Apostle d d subdue his flesh to the obedience and discipline of the spi∣rit; in former times they had several exercises, as wrestling, and running for the prize. Now, such as were slow, pursie, unweildy, and lazy, were cashiered; they would not admit such to be of their society or company, who wrestled and run for the prize: Them that were admitted to those exer∣cises, kept their bodies at an under, and did not pamper their bodies with dainties and delicates. To these the Apostle al∣ludes, of idleness there comes no goodness; when the spirit is not acting in that which is good, that the flesh may be kept under, the flesh will take an advantage to be very active in those things that are evil, that the spirit may be kept under; the flesh is like an unruly beast, which through rest, idleness, and high feeding, grows wild and masterless. Now, the only way to tame this beast, is to work him hard; so the way of wayes to keep the body under, is to keep up the soul as much as may be, in the full exercise of holiness and obedience; such as have most pampered their bodies,Deut. 32.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Jer. 5.7, 8, &c. Rev. 3 16, 17, 18. have been the great∣est enemies to their own souls; and how many are there this day, that pamper their bodies, but starve their souls? that adorn their bodies, but defiles their soul? that trick and trim up their bodies with gold, and silver, and silks, whilst their souls are naked of all grace, holiness and goodness? like the Laodiceans of old. The body it self, if you set too high a price upon it, will make a cheap soul; a man may be as hap∣py in Russet, as in Tissue; and he is certainly an unhappy man, whose outside is his best side; our bodies are but dirt handsomly tempered, and artificially formed; we derive our pedigree from the dust, and are a kin to clay; and there∣fore we need not scruple the keeping of it under by holy
exercises, and by all wayes of Gospel-obedience, &c. Eighthly, To the profit and advantage, both of sinners and Saints; 1. To convince sinners, to silence sinners, and to stop the mouths of sinners; let but one man that walks wisely, humbly, circumspectly, convincingly, exemplarily, blamelesly, come into a Town, a Parish, a Family, made up of drunkards, swearers, Sabbath-breakers, whore-masters, &c. and his holy walking, will convince them, and condemn them, 1 Pet. 2.12, 15. Chap. 3.13, 16. 2. To the profit, advantage and encouragement of the Saints. The strict ex∣act walking Christian, provokes the slight loose Christian to mend his manners, and to order his steps and conversation a∣right; and the lively active Christian, puts the dull, heavy, sluggish Christian to a blush, and spurs and quickens him up to a more lively walking with God; and the warm, flaming, zealous, burning Christian, puts heat and warmth into the cold, formal, frozen Christian; and the free, liberal, boun∣tiful Christian, provokes others to be free, noble, and liberal, for the supply of the necessities of the Saints, 2 Cor. 9.1, 2. Chap. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 19, 20, &c. The ninth and last (though not the least end) is the honour and glory of the great God. God's grace is the spring, and God's glory is the end of all a Christians obedience; God's glory is the ultimate end,Rom. 14.7, 8. Phil. 1.20, 21. the primary end, the universal end, the Sea to which all a Christians actions, like so many Rivers, move and bend: 'Tis true, many poor, low, mean, base ends, may creep into a Christians performances; but here mark, 1. They are disallowed. 2. They are loathed and abhorred. 3. They are resisted and striven against. 4. They are lamented and mourned over. 5. The gracious soul would willingly be rid of them; if a Christian might have his choice, he would never be troubled with any base end any more. Beloved, you must alwayes distinguish between a mans setled and his suggested ends; a mans setled end may be one things, and his suggested end another thing. Now for ever re∣member this; That the great God alwayes makes a judgement
of men according to their setled ends, according to the uni∣versal frame of their spirits, and not according to those ends that may be suggested to them, by the world, the flesh, or the devil. It is in this case, as it may be with a man that shoots at a mark, he aims aright at the mark, but his elbow may meet with a jog, which may carry the arrow quite another way than what he intended; or as it is with a man that is sailing to such a Haven, or to such a Harbour, he steers a right course by his Compass, but the winds blowing contrary, and the Sea running high, he is forced into such a creek, or such a Harbour, which he never intended, &c. Is it requisite for the clearing of the sincerity of our hearts,  that we have a continual eye to the glory of God in every action we do? First,  You must distinguish between an actual aim and  intention, and an habitual aim and intention. For the first, an actual aim and intention of the Spirit, in every particular action that a man doth to the glory of God, is utterly impos∣sible, whilst we carry about us with a body of sin and death: The Angels and spirits of just men made perfect, do thus actually aim at the glory of God in all they do; but 'tis a work that will be too high and too hard for us, whilst we are here in a polluted estate. This was so high a mark, that Adam mist it in his innocency; no wonder then if we often miss it in our sinful state and condition. But, Secondly, There is an habitual inclination in us in every  action we do, to aim at the honour and glory of God, though there be not the actual intention of the spirit in every action we do; it is with us, as with a man travelling towards a Town or City, he thinks in the morning to go to such a Town, such a place, where he purposes to lye the first night, and therefore sets forth towards it; and though he doth not think of this every step he takes, yet it's his purpose in his journey, to rest there at night; or as it is with a man that comes to Church, his end is to hear the Word of the Lord; yet in every word he hears spoken, he hath not the thought
of his end upon his spirit, but he is there by vertue of his first intention: So here, though in every particular there be not an intention of spirit to level this or that action to the glo∣ry of God, yet it is the main drift and habitual scope of a mans spirit, that Gods glory may be the end of all his actions. Thirdly, There is a mediate, and there is an immediate eying or looking to the glory of God; as when I forbear such or such a sin, because God by such a command hath for∣bidden it, or I do such or such a duty, because God hath com∣manded it. Now, in eying of the command of God, I eye the glory of God immediately, though not mediately. But, Fourthly, In some particular or special cases, I ought actually to eye the glory of God: As, 1. In some eminent or extraordinary service that I am to do for Christ. Or, 2. In some special testimony that I am call'd to give for Christ or his Gospel. Or, 3. In some great thing that I am call'd to suffer for Christ, or his Gospel, or his interest. But, Fifthly, The more a Christian actually eyes the glory of God in all he does, the more, 1. He glorifies God. 2. The neerer you are the life of heaven, and the more you act like the glorious Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect. 3. The more will be your joy, comfort and peace, both in life and death, and in the day of your account. 4. The more strong will be your confidence and assurance, that your spi∣ritual estate is good, and that you shall be saved for ever. 5. The better you will be able to bear up under all the false, hard, and sowre censures of this world. 6. The more you will be temptation proof. 7. The more glorious and weighty will be your crown of glory at last; he shall be highest in heaven, who has actually aimed most at the glory of God in this lower world. And thus you see how you may know whe∣ther your obedience is such an obedience as springs from faith, or  Now, if upon trial you shall find, that your o∣bedience is the obedience of faith, then you may safely and groundedly conclude, that you have a saving work of God upon your hearts. But,
Fourthly, A gracious heart is an uniform heart. Ubiquity  is a sure evidence of integrity. He that is truly good, will be good in bad times, and in the worst of places;Psal. 119.112. 1 John 3.9. Hosea 6 4. principles of grace and holiness, are lasting, yea, everlasting; they are not like the morning cloud, nor the early dew. A gracious soul will be steddy and fixed in his principles, in the worst times, in the worst places, and under variety of dispensa∣tions; let times and places be what they will, he will not dishonour his God, nor blemish his profession, nor wound his conscience to preserve his safety, or to secure his liberty. An upright man is a right man: So  Jashar is rendred by the Septuagint, Judg. 17.6. He is one that will not be bowed or bent by the sinful customs or examples of the times and places where he lives.Gen. 6.9. Abraham was righteous in Chal¦dea, and Noah was perfect in his generation, though it was the worst in the world; and Lot was just in Sodom,Job 1. and Job was upright in the Land of Uzz, which was a place of much prophaness and superstition; and Nehemiah was couragious and zealous in Damasco, and Daniel was holy, yea, eminently and exemplarily holy in Babylon. The several generations wherein these holy men lived, were wholly devoted to wickedness and superstition, and yet these precious, gracious souls had wholly devoted themselves to the Lord and his ser∣vice:Psal. 119.20. So David, My soul breaketh for the longing it hath to thy judgments at all times! Let the times be never so dangerous, li∣centious, superstitious, idolatrous or erronious, yet David's heart was strongly carried forth to Gods judgments; that is, to his Word (for under this title, Judgments, you are to under∣stand the whole Word of God.) So there were some in Sardis that were of the same spirit, with the worthies last mentioned, Rev. 3.4. Thou hast a few names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.Psal. 119.1, 2, 3. In polluting times pure hearts will keep themselves pure; a holy heart will keep himself undefiled, even in defiling times, Rev. 14.4. These are they which were not defiled with women; when others are besmeared all over,Dan. 3.17, 18, 19, 20. he will keep his garments white and clean. The three Chil∣dren, or rather the three Champions, were so highly resolved
to keep themselves pure from the abominations of their day, that it was neither Nebuchadnezzars musick that would flatter them, nor his fiery furnace that could scare them from their God, or from their Duty, or from their Religion. Let the times never so often turn, you shall find that he that is really holy, he will be holy under every turn; no turns shall turn him out of a way of holiness, Job. 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands, shall be stronger and stronger. The Lawrel keeps its freshness and greeness in the Winter season; a gracious soul is semper idem, let the wind,Psal. 125.1. and the world and the times, turn which way they will, a gracious soul for the main, will still be the same; he is like mount Zion which cannot be removed, Job 27.5, 6. Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me; my righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. A gracious heart is (in some measure) like the heart of God, without variableness or shadow of changing. That Christian that is not for substance,Jam. 1.17. the same that once he was, was never what he ought to be. A gracious heart is firm and fixt for God and godliness, both in prosperity and in adversity; take him among the good or among the bad, take him in storms or calms, in Winter nights or in Summer dayes, take him among friends or foes, take him at bed or board, take him in health or sickness, take him in an Ordi∣nance or out of an Ordinance, take him in his work or take him at his recreations, take him in his commerce or in his converse, take him living or take him dying, and you shall still find that the byass of his soul is still God-wards, Christ∣wards, Holiness-wards, and Heaven-wards. A gracious man will stand his ground,Josh. 24.15. Psal. 112.7. Mal. 3.6. The poor Hea∣then could say, that change of place causeth not any change of mind, &c. Calum non ani∣  qui tr ae crrunt Horat. l. 1. ep. 11. and hold his own in all changes, his heart being fixed upon an unchangable God. The Philoso∣phers good man is (Tetra-gonos) four-sqaure; cast him where you will, like a Dye, he falls alwayes square and sure: So cast a gracious man where you will, and into what company you will, and into what condition you will, yet still he falls sure and square for God and godliness. Let the times be ne∣ver so sad, nor never so bad, yet a gracious soul will keep his hold; he will let all go, he will let every thing go, before
he will let his God go, or his Religion go, or his integrity go. A gracious Christian is like gold. Now, cast gold into the fire, or into the water; cast it upon the dunghil, or into the kennel; cast it among the poor, or among the rich; among the religious, or among the superstitious, &c. yet still it is gold, still it retains its purity and excellency: So cast a gra∣cious Christian (who is the only golden Christian in the world) into what condition you will, and into what company you will, yet still he will retain his purity, his innocency Lapidaries tell us of the Chelydonian stone, that it will retain its vertue and lustre, no longer than it is enclosed in gold: A fit emblem of an hypocrite, who is only good while he is inclosed in golden prosperity, safety and felicity. An un∣sound Christian like green timber shrinks,Mat. 13.6. when the Sun of persecution shines hot upon him. The heat of fiery trials, cools the courage of an unsound Christian. If you put wa∣ter into a Tub, it will have the shape of the Tub that you put it into; or if you put water into a glass, it will have the shape of the glass you put it into. This is the very picture of an unsound heart; but a sincere Christian is like a massie vessel of gold, that keeps its own shape and figure, at all times, in all places, and in all companies; unsound hearts, they will be righteous among the righteous, and licentious a∣mong the licentious; they will be as the company is amongst which they are cast; with the good they will be good, and with the bad they will be bad; with the zealous they will be zealous, and with the superstitious they will be superstitious; and with the lukewarm they will be lukewarm; they are for all times and tydes, they are for any turn that will serve their turn, they are for any Mode that will bring either pro∣fit or pleasure to them; they are like Alcibiades, of whom it was said, that he was (nium horarum homo) a man for all times; for he could swagger it at Athens, and take any pains at Thebes; he could live most sparingly at Lacidaemon, and bib among the Thracians, and hunt among the Persians; they are like the Chamelion, ready to change their hue with every one they converse with; they are like Polypus, that resembleth every stone that it sticketh to; or they are like the Buskins
anciently used in Tragedies,Lucian. that would serve either leg alike; they are as fit for one society as another; or like the Players that used them, such as acting Princely parts, wear royal apparel, keep state, and demean themselves gravely and soberly,Sen. ep. 76, &c. so long as they are in publick view upon the Stage; but when they have done acting, are no sooner off the stage, but they pass presently into another habit, and retain neither Princely behaviour nor apparel, but are most beggarly, base and debauched, either in private among them∣selves, or among their companions like themselves. Unsound hearts can accommodate themselves to the times, and com∣ply with them what ever they be; with Proteus they will transform themselves into all shapes, as the times change so will they; what the times favour, that they will favour; what the times commend, that they will commend; what the times cry up and admire, that they will cry up and ad∣mire; and what the times frown upon and condemn, that they will frown upon and condemn. Look as curious and well-drawn Pictures seem to turn their eyes every way, and to smile upon every one that looks upon them; so these can turn with the times, they can look as the times look, and smile as the times smile, they can say with the times, and sail with the times; sometimes they can act one part, and some∣times another part, as the times require; if the times require a large profession, they can make it; if the times be speak them to leave their Religion at the Church door, they can leave it. But now, a sincere Christian, he will labour to be so much the more gracious, by how much the more the times are licentious. A sincere Christian is like gold; if you cast it into the fire, it will not waste; if you throw it into the water, it will not rust, it will retain its own purity and ex∣cellency, wherever you dispose of it. But Fifthly, a gracious heart sets himself most against his dar∣ling-sin, his bosom-sin; against the sin of his complexion, constitution,Heb. 12.1. inclination, and calling, &c. There is some one sinful quality that is more predominant in the heart of man,Paceatum in de∣litiis. Aug. than any other; there is some one Dalilah, some
one darling sin that a man is more apt to play withal, and to hug in own bosom, than any other; there is usually some one sin that is favourite, some one sin which the heart is most fond of, and which the byass of the soul doth most naturally and strongly incline towards. Pliny writeth of some families, that had privy marks on their bodies, peculiar to those of that line; and so every man hath as it were his privy sin, which is most justly and peculiarly called his; as in a ground that lyeth untilled amongst the great variety of weeds, there is usually some master weed, one among the rest that is rifer and ranker than all the rest: And as it is in the body of man, that although in some degree or other, more or less, there be a mixture of all the four ele∣ments, not any of them wholly wanting, yet there is some one of them predominant that gives the denomination; in regard whereof some are said to be of a sanguine, some of a phleg∣matick, some of a chollerick, and some of a melancholick constitution. Now thus 'tis in the souls of men; though there be a general mixture and medly of all evil and corrupt qualities, yet is there some one usually that is paramount, more powerful and prevalent, that swayeth and sheweth forth it self more eminently, and more evidently than any other of them do; and from this therefore, more frequently and apparently discovering it self, is the denomination wont to be given, whereby some are styled ambitious, some lasci∣vious, some envious, some malicious, some haughty, some hasty, and the like; or as in every mans body there is a seed and principle of death, yet some are more prone to die of a Fever than of a Dropsie, and others are more prone to die of a Dropsie than of a Fever, &c. So though original sin hath spread it self over all our noble and ignoble parts, yet every man hath his particular inclinations, to one kind of sin rather than ano∣ther; and this may properly be called a mans own sin, his own evil way. Now mark, a gracious heart makes most head, most opposition against his darling sin, against his complexion sin, against those sins that were once as dear to him as his right hand, or as his right eye, or as Dalilah was to Sampson. Herodias to Herod, Isaac to Abraham, and Joseph to
Jacob, Psal. 18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquty: That is, from my darling sin, whereunto I was most inclined and addicted; what this bo∣som sin was that he kept himself from,In that, 1 Sam. 21.2, 8. he tells three or four round lyes, and the like he did in that, 1 Sam. 27.8, 10. is hard to say: Some suppose his darling sin was lying, dissembling, for it is cer∣tain he often fell into this sin, Psal. 119.29. Remove from me the way of lying; others suppose it to be some secret iniquity, which was only known to God and his own conscience; others say it was uncleanness, and that therefore he prayed, that God would turn away his eyes from beholding vanity, Psal. 119.37. Others juge it to be that sin of disloyalty which Saul and his Courtiers falsly charged upon him: Well, be it this or that, it is enough for our purpose, that his heart did rise against that very sin, that either by custom or complexion, or some strong inclination, he was most naturally apt, ready and prone to fall into. This is the laying of the ax to the root of the Tree; and by this practise David gives a clear proof of the integrity of his heart.Jer. 17.1, 2. Hos. 2.. Isa. 31.6, 7. & 44.9. &c. Idolatry was the darling sin of the peo∣ple of Israel; they called their Idols delectable or desirable things; they did dearly affect, and greatly delight in their Idols: But when the Lord in the day of his power, wrought savingly and gloriously upon their hearts, Oh! how did their hatred and indignation against their Idols rise? as you may see, Isa. 30.22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy moiten images of gold; thou shalt cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shat say unto it, get thee hence. They were so delighted and enamoued with their Idols, that they would lavish gold out of the bag (or they waste or spend riotously, as the Hebrew runs) that they might richly deck them up,Isa. 46.6. After the return of the Jews out of Babylon, they so hated and ab∣horted Idols, that in the times of the Romans, they chose rather to die, than to suffr the Eagle, which was the imperial arms to be set up in their Temple. and set them forth in the greatest glory and bravery. O, but when the Lord should make a glorious turn upon their spirits, then they should readily and roundly deface, defile and disgrace their Idols, then they should hate and abhor them, then they should so detest and loath them, that in a holy indignation, they should cast them away as a menstrous cloth, and say unto them, get ye hence, pack, be gone, I will never have any more to do with you. And so in that, Isa. 2.20. In that day (that is, in the day of his people,
vers. 17.) A man shall cast his idols of silver, and hs idols of gold, which they made, each one for himself to worship, to the Moles and to the Bats: In the day when God should exalt himself in the souls of his people, and before the eyes of his people, they should express such disdain and indignation against their Idols, that they should not take only those made of Trees and Stones, but even their most precious and costly Idols; those that were made of silver and gold, and cast them to the Moles and to the Bats; that is, they should cast them into such blind holes, and into such dark, filthy, nasty and dusty corners, as Moles make under ground, and as Bats roust in: So when Christ, and grace, and holiness comes to be set up in mens hearts and lives, then all their darling sins, their bosom lusts, which are their Idols of silver, and their Idols of gold, these are with a holy indignation cast to the Moles and to the Bats, they are so loathed, abhorred, abandoned and cashiered, that they desire they may be for ever buried in oblivion, and never see the light more. Idols were Ephraim's bosom sin, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joyned (or glewed, as the word signi∣fies) to Idols, let him alone. But when the dew of grace fell upon Ephraim, as it did, in Chap. 14.5, 6, 7. Then saith Ephraim, What have I any more to do with Idols? ver. 8. Now Ephraim loaths his Idols as much or more than before he lov∣ed them, he now abandons and abominates them; though be∣fore he was as closly glewed to them as the wanton is glewed to his Dalilah, or as the enchanter is glewed to the Devil, from whom by no means he is able to stir; (as the words in the fountain imports) When it was the day of the Lords power upon Ephraim, then Ephraim cryes out, What have I any more to do with Idols? O, I have had to do with them too long, and too much already: O, how doth my foul now rise against them? how do I detest and abhor them?Deut. 13.6, 7, 8, 9. Surely I will never have more to do with them. The Scripture tells us, That if father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or kinsman, or friend, should go about to draw a man from God, his hand should be first upon him, to put him to death. Now, bosom sins, complexion sins, they seek to draw a mans heart from God; and therefore a gracious soul can't but rise up a∣gainst
them,Gen. 27.41. and do his best to stone them, and to be the death of them. The dayes of mourning for my father are at hand (saith bloudy Esau) then will I slay my brother Jacob; ('tis a bloudy speech of a vindictive spirit, whom nothing would satisfie but innocent bloud) So saith the gracious soul, The dayes of mourning for the death of my dear Saviour, are now at hand, and therefore I will slay my bosom lusts, my constitution sins; now will I be revenged on them for all the dishonours that they have done to God, and for all the wounds that they have made in my conscience, and for all the mercies that they have imbittered, and for all the favours that they have prevented, and for all the afflictions that they have procured, and for all the duties that they have hindered.Judg. 16.28. Sampson pleads hard with God, that he might be avenged on the Philistines for his two eyes; and so doth the gracious soul plead hard with God, that he may be avenged on his bosom lusts, on his com∣plexion sins, which have put out his two eyes, which have so blinded him that he has not for a long time been able to see God, or Christ, or the things that belong to his external, in∣ternal or eternal peace. The next of kin in the Law, was al∣wayes the avenger of bloud, and to him it appertained to hunt after the murderer, to bring upon his head the innocent bloud that he had shed; if therefore we will shew our selves brethren or sisters of Christ, or any thing of kin unto him, we must even be the avengers of his bloud upon bosom sins, upon complexion sins; for, for them as well as others was his bloud shed. O Sirs! what bosom sin is there so sweet or profitable that is worth a burning in hell for, or worth a shutting out of heaven for? surely none. This a gracious soul seriously weighs, and accordingly he sets himself against the Toad in his bosom, against his darling sins, against his complexion sins. But now, unsound hearts are very favoura∣ble to bosom sins, to complexion sins; they say of them as Lot of Zoar,Gen. 19.20. Is it not a little one? and my soul shall live. And as David once said concerning Absalom, 2 Sam. 18.5. Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom; be∣ware that none touch the young man Absalom, Ver. 12. And the King said, is the young man Absalom safe? Ver. 29. An un∣sound
heart is as fond of his bosom sins,2 King. 5.18. of his complexion sins as Jacob was of his Benjamin, or as Jeha was of his calves, or as Naaman was of his Idol Rimmon, or as Judas was of bearing the bag, or as Herod was of his Herodias,Acts 19. or as Deme∣trius was of his Diana, or as the Pharisees were of devouring widows houses,Mat. 23. and of having the uppermost seats in the Sy∣nagogues, and of being saluted in the market places, with those glorious titles, Rabbi, Rabbi. The besotted sinner is most engaged to his bosom sins, his complexion sins, and therefore 'tis as bitter a thing as death for him to part with them;Mich. 6.6, 7. he had rather part with burnt-offerings and calves of a year old; he had rather part with thousands of Rams, and with ten thousand Rivers of oyl; yea, he had rather part with his first-born, than with his bosom sin;Job 20.12, 13. he is ready to give the fruit of his body, for the sin of his soul. Let God frown or smile, stroke or strike, lift up or cast down, promise or threaten, yet he will hide and hold fast his bosom sin; let God set life and death, heaven and hell, glory and misery be∣fore him, yet will he not part with his bosom sins; let God wound his conscience, blow upon his estate, leave a blot upon his name, crack his credit, afflict his body,Jer. 20.3, 4. write death upon his relations, and be a Magor-missabib, a terror to his soul, yet will he not let go his darling sins. An unsound heart will rather let God go, and Christ go, and heaven go, and all go than he will let his darling lusts go: But now a sound Chri∣stian, a throuhgout Christian, he sets himself most against the Dalilah in his bosom, against the Benjamin, the son, the sin of his right hand. A sincere Christian looks upon bosom sins, upon complexion sins as the most God-provoking sins; there are no sins so provoking to Gods jealousies and justice, as bosom sins; he looks upon bosom sins, complexion sins, a the most dangerous sins; he looks upon bosom sins, com∣plexion sins, as the worst thing in all the world; he looks up∣on bosom sins, complexion sins, as more ugly and horrid than the devil himself, or than hell it self; he looks upon bosom sins as the great make-bates between God and his soul, and between his conscience and his comfort;Isa. 59.1, 2. Lamen. 3.8, 44. he looks upon bosom sins as those enemies that have provoked God often
to turn a deaf ear to all his prayers; he looks upon his bo∣som sins as so many Judas's that have often betrayed him into the hands of the devil; he looks upon his bosom sins as the waters of Marah, that has imbittered all his mercies; he looks upon his bosom sins as the only things that have often clouded the face of God; he looks upon his bosom sins as dead flies in the box of precious ointment that spoyls all, and accordingly with all his might he sets himself against them. 1. He fights most against these. 2. He weeps most over these. 3. He watches and ams most against these. 4. He prayes most against these. 5. He resolves most against these. And 6. He layes the axe of repentance most to these, &c. But pray Sir, before you close up this Chapter, lay down some sure and infallible evidences of the goodness, gracious∣ness and happiness of their estates and conditions, who are but weak in grace, who are but babes of grace, that so they may have their portion, satisfaction, support and consolation as well as others. Ans. I shall endeavour to do it, and therefore thus. Sixthly, True desires of grace is grace, true desires after Christ, and grace, and holiness, is grace; he who does sin∣cerely desire to believe, he does really believe; and he that does sincerely desire to repent, he does really repent; and he that does sincerely desire to obey the Lord,1 Pet. 2.3, 4. 2 Chron. 30.18, 19 Mat. 7.8. Psal. 42.1, 2. Psal. 63.1. &c. and to fear the Lord, and to serve the Lord, he does really obey the Lord, and fear the Lord, and serve the Lord. It is the first step to grace, for a man to see his heart void of grace; and it is the first degree of grace, for a man to desire grace. Mark, all true desires of grace, have the very nature and truth of grace in them. As there is true fire in a spark, as well as in a flame, and true water in a drop, as well as in a stream, and true light in a beam, as well as in the Sun, and true gold in the very filings of gold, as well as in the whole wedge of gold; the least of any thing partakes of the nature of the whole.Isa. 55.1, 2. & 65. 1. John 7.37. True desires of grace argues a state of grace and salvation, Psal. 38.9. Lord thou knowest all my desire, my groanings is not hid
from thee. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled; or as the Greek runs (after the participle of the present tense) they that are hun∣gering and thirsting; intimating, that where ever this is the present disposition of mens souls, they are blessed, Rev. 22.17. And let him that is a thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.Augustin. Where there are sincere desires of grace, there are the seeds of grace, the con∣ception of grace, the buds of grace. Sincere desires of grace are those holy seeds, those divine beginnings of grace in the soul, out of which grace springs and grows up to its measure and perfe∣ction. O Sirs! look as no man can sincerely seek God in vain, so no man can sincerely desire grace in vain. A man may love gold, yet not have it; but no man loveth God, but is sure to have him. Wealth a man may desire, and yet be never the neerer for it; but grace no man ever sincerely desired and missed it: And why? it is God that hath wrought this desire in the heart, and he will never frustrate the desire that him∣self hath there wrought; let no man say, I have no faith, no repentance, no love, no fear of God, no sanctifying, no saving grace in me. Doth he see a want of those things in himself? yes, that is it which so grieves him, that he cannot love God, stand in awe of him, trust in his mercy, repent of sin as he should; yea, but doth he seriously and unfeignedly desire to do thus? yes, he desires it above all things in the world, and would be willing (as it were) to buy even with a whole world the least measure, or dram, or drop only of such grace. Now let me ask him, who is it that hath wrought this desire in him? Not the Devil, for he would rather quench it than kindle it in him; not his own corruption, for that is na∣turally averse to every thing that is good, it must needs then be the work of the Spirit of God, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, and who pronoun∣ceth all them blessed that thus desire after grace.Kemnitius, Ursi∣ni Catechis. When I have a good desire, saith one, though it doth scarcely shew it self in some little slender sigh, I must be assured that the Spi∣rit of God is present, and worketh his good work. Wicked men do not desire the grace of the holy Spirit, whereby they may resist sin, and therefore they are justly deprived of it; for he that earnestly desireth the holy Ghost hath it al∣ready,
because this desire of the spirit cannot be but from the Spirit.Taffnies Book of the marks of Gods children. Our faith, saith another, may be so small and weak, as it doth not yet bring forth fruits that may be lively felt in us; but if they which feel themselves in such an estate, desire to have these feelings (namely of God's favour and love) if they ask them of God's hands by prayer, this desire and prayer are testimonies that the Spirit of God is in them, and that they have faith already; for is such a desire a fruit of the flesh or of the Spirit? it is of the holy Spirit, who bringeth it forth only in such as he dwells in, &c. Then those holy desires and prayers being the motions of the holy Ghost in us, are testimonies of our faith, although they seem to us small and weak. As the woman that feeleth the moving of a child in her body, though very weak, assureth her self that she hath conceived, and that she goeth with a live child: So if we have these motions, these holy affections and desires be∣fore mentioned, let us not doubt but that we have the holy Ghost (who is the Author of them) dwelling in us, and con∣sequently that we have also faith. Again, saith the same Au∣thor. 1. If thou hast begun to hate and flie sin; 2. If thou feelest that thou art displeased at thine infirmities and cor∣ruptions; 3. If having offended God, thou findest a grief and a sorrow for it; 4. If thou desire to abstain from sin; 5. If thou avoidest the occasions of sin; 6. If thou doest thy endeavours against sin; 7. If thou prayest to God to give thee grace, all these holy affections proceeding from none other than from the Spirit of God,Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor. 8.10, 12. ought to be as so many pledges and testimonies that he is in thee. It is as impossible for us naturally to do the least good, or to desire the least grace, as 'tis for a Toad to spit Cordials. Sincere desires af∣ter God, and Christ, and Grace, is sometimes the all that the people of God find in themselves. This was all that Nehe∣miah could say of himself, and the rest of his brethren, Neh. 1.11. That they did desire to fear God's name. And so the Church, Isa. 26.8. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thy holiness. And vers. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night. So the Spouse, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. So David, Psal. 27.4. Psal. 42.1, 2. Psal. 63.1. They
must needs be sure of grace that have an unfeigned desire of it. This is a Maxim that we must live and die with, viz. That no man can truly desire grace, but he that hath already grace; certainly he that desireth grace, hath grace to desire it. It is an infallible sign, that that man hath already some measure of grace that doth seriously desire to have it; he would never seriously desire to fear God, who stands not in some awe of him already; nor he would never seriously de∣sire to love God, who has not in him some love to God al∣ready; nor he would never seriously desire to believe, who has not in him some faith already; nor he would never se∣riously desire to repent, that hath not repented already; nor he would never seriously desire sanctifying grace, whose heart in some measure is not already sanctified by the spirit of grace. It is the very essence of righteousness, saith one of the Ancients, for a man to be willing to be righteous.Angustine, Pars magna boni∣tatis, est vell fieri boum. Sen. Ep. 34. And the poor Heathen could say, It is a principal part of good∣ness, for a man to be willing to be good. It is natural for e∣very one to desire his own natural good, but to desire spiri∣tual grace, holiness, sound sanctification, faith unfeigned, the true fear of God, serious repentance, &c. is more than ever any natural man did or can do. No man did ever desire to eat which had not eaten before, nor no man did ever desire to believe, that did not believe before; all true desires after faith spring from faith as the root of them. Certainly wick∣ed men don't, nor can't so much as desire saving grace, Job 21.14. Isa. 53.2. and that, First, Because grace is above the reach of nature, 1 Cor.  2.14. But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. The water riseth no higher than the springs from whence it came; so natural men can ascend no higher than nature: Spiritual things can nei∣ther be discerned nor desired, but by those that are anointed with the eye-salve of the Spirit. The natural man is dark and blind, and he sees no beauty nor excellency in grace, that he should desire it, or be in love with it. Man in his natural
estate is without, Eph. 2.12. There are five withou ts, 1. Without Christ, 2. Without the Church, 3. Without the Promise, 4. Without hope, 5. Without God in the world. Now every natural man being under these five with∣outs, how is it possible that he should have any serious desires after grace? Such is the corruption of our nature, that if you propound any divine good to it, it is entertained as fire by water, or wet wood with hissing; propound any evil, then 'tis like fire to straw, 'tis like the foolish Satyr that made hast to kiss the fire, 'tis like that unctious matter which Na∣turalists say sucks and snatches the fire to it with which it is consumed.Rom. 8.7. The contrariety and enmity that is in every na∣tural mans heart, against God, and Christ, and grace, and holiness, may sufficiently satisfie us, that the natural man is a meer stranger to serious and sincere desires after God, or Christ, or grace, or the great things that belong to his ever∣lasting peace. Such sincere and serious desires as these, Oh, that Christ were mine, Oh, that I were married to his per∣son, Oh, that I were cloathed with his righteousness, Oh, that my soul were adorned with his grace, Oh, that I was fil∣led with his Spirit, Oh, that he would be my King to rule me, and my Prophet to teach and instruct me, and my Priest to make an atonement for me; Oh, that I might enjoy choice and high communion with him, Oh, that I might sin no more against him, Oh, that I may do nothing unworthy of him, Oh, that after death I might live for ever in the enjoyments of him, &c. I say such serious and sincere desires are not to be found in the natural mans breast. Secondly, Because grace is contrary to nature. The wis∣dom of the flesh is enmity against God, Rom. 8.7. Fire cannot desire water, nor water fire, because they are contrary, one expelling the other; for either the water will quench the fire, or else the fire will lick up the water: So here, nature would have a man love himself, and seek himself, and exalt himself; but grace will have a man love God, and seek God, and exalt God, &c. Take nature when 'tis most adorned, enriched, raised, elevated, &c. yet then you shall find it at enmity with God and grace. Ergo, &c.
Thirdly, Because grace is not only above nature, and  contrary to nature, but it is even a hell to nature; grace and holiness is a hell to a natural man.See my Treatise on holiness, page 64, 65, 66. Look as a glorified estate would be a hell to every wicked person, (Coelum est altera gehenna damnatorum, saith one of the Ancients; Heaven is an∣other hell to the damned) so would a gracious estate also. Grace puts a man to take up the Cross of Christ, to deny his natural self, his sinful self, his religious self, his relative self, and to give up a mans self to the strictest and exactest wayes of God, and to crucifie his lusts, and to pull out his right eye, and to cut off his right hand, &c. And oh! what hard work is this, yea what a hell is this to nature? &c. Fourthly, Wicked men don't, nor can't so much as truly and seriously desire saving grace; witness their daily with∣standing  and slighting the offers of grace. Compare these Scriptures, Prov. 1.20.—ult. Chap. 8.1.—12. Ezek. 24.13. Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.41, 42, &c. Fifthly, Wicked men don't, nor can't, so much as truly  and seriously desire saving grace; witness their common, or∣dinary, habitual provoking, vexing, quenching, resisting and grieving of the spirit of grace. Turn to these Scriptures, Gen. 6.3. Isa. 63.10. Act. 7.55. Eph. 4.30. Sixthly, Wicked men don't, nor can't truly and seriously  desire saving grace; witness that enmity, hatred, rage and madness that is in them against the Saints, whose hearts and lives are enamel'd with grace, Gen. 3.15. Psal. 34.21. Psal. 44.10. Job 31.29. Amos 5.10, &c. I have read of a desperate wretch, that when he came to die, he gave good portions to all his children but one, and to him he would give but twelve pence; and being asked the reason of it, he made answer, he was a Puritan; I have heard him say, said his wretched father, That he had a promise to live on; let us now see whether a promise will maintain him or no. Certainly, wherever there are true serious desires after grace, there is a dear love to those upon whose hearts the
work of grace is past. Now by these short hints, 'tis evi∣dent enough, that wicked men don't, nor can't sincerely, se∣riously desire grace; certainly such that are poor in spirit, and that mourn for their spiritual defects, and that hunger and thirst after grace and holiness, after a righteousness im∣parted and a righteousness imputed, must confess themselves to be in a blessed estate, and consequently in a state of grace; (for what true happiness is there out of it?) or else they must contradict our Saviour, and charge truth it self with untruth, who hath pronounced them blessed that are so qualified, so affected. Were this well weighed and seriously considered of, how would it comfort, refresh, support and stay up many a troubled soul? and what a well-spring of life would this be to many a wounded spirit? Doubtless the greatest part of a Saints perfection in this life (witness Pauls own ingenious confession after fourteen years conversion,Rom. 7.15, 18, 19, 21, 22. say some; and who ever went beyond him? and how exceedingly do most fall short of him?) consisteth rather in will than in work, and in desire and endeavour more than in deed. There is so much good in good desires, that it is the main that the godly have to speak of, and to reckon of; make an inventory of a Christians estate, and search every room, if you find not these you find nothing; and if you set these down in the inventory, you set down even all he is worth for another world. Daniel is called a man of desires, and so is every gracious man, a man wholly made up of gracious desires.Dan. 10 11. Mark, God makes a judgment upon the sons of men, according as their desires stand; he that desires to steal, he is a Thief in the account of God; and he that desires to commit adultery, he is an adul∣terer in the account of God; and he that desires to oppress, he is an oppressor in the account of God; and he that de∣sires to deceive, he is a deceiver in the account of God; and he that desires to persecute, he is a persecutor in the ac∣count of God; and he that desires to prophane the Sab∣baths of God, he is a prophaner of the Sabbaths of God in the account of God, &c. Look, as every wicked man is as bad in the account of God, as his desires are bad; so every godly man is as good in the account of God, as his desires
are good; he that sincerely desires to believe, he does be∣lieve in the account of God.Mr. Perkins in his grain of mu∣stard-seed. The desire (saith one) to be∣lieve in the want of faith, is faith; though as yet there want firm and lively grace, yet art thou not altogether void of grace; if thou canst desire it, thy desire is the seed, con∣ception or bud of what thou wantest. Now is the Spring-time of the ingraffed Word or immortal seed cast into the fur∣rows of thy heart, wait but a while, using the means, and thou shalt see that leaves, blossoms and fruits will shortly follow, &c. Another saith,Ursin. Faith in the most holy is not perfect, nevertheless, whosoever feels in his heart an earnest desire to believe, and a striving against his doubts, he both may and must assure himself, that he is indued with true faith. And he that sincerely desires to repent,Mr. Fox. he does re∣pent in the account of God. Holy Bradford writing to Mr. Jo. Careless, saith, Thy sins are undoubtedly pardoned, &c. for God hath given thee a penitent and believing heart; that is, a heart which desireth to repent and believe,Let thy desires be before God, and he which seeth in secret, shall re∣ward thee open∣ly; thy desire is thy prayer, and if thy desire be continual, thy prayer is conti∣nual, &c. for such a one is taken of him (he accepting the will for the deed) for a penitent and believing heart indeed. And he that sincerely desires to mortifie sin, he does mortifie sin in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to walk with God, he does walk with God in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to honour God, he does honour God in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to deny him∣self, he does deny himself in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to be weaned from the world, he is weaned from the world in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to be conformable to God, he is comform∣abe to God in the account of God; and he that desires to grow in grace, he does grow in grace in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to improve mercies, he does im∣prove mercies in the account of God; and he that sincerely desires to glorifie God in the hour of his visitation, he does glorifie God in the hour of his visitation in the account of God. A gracious man may make a better judgment of his estate by his sincere desires, than he can by his duties; and so a wicked man may make a better judgment of his estate
by his desires, than he can by his words or works. I have been the larger upon this evdence, because of its great usefulness to weak believers. But, Seventhly, No man can sincerely desire grace for grace sake, viz. faith for faiths sake, and love for loves sake, and humility for humilities sake, and uprightness for uprightness sake, and meekness for meekness sake, and holy fear for ho∣ly fears sake, and hope for hopes sake, and holiness for holi∣ness sake, and self-denial for self-denials sake, &c. but he that has true grace. Mark, no man can sincerely and seri∣ously desire grace, for the inward beauty, glory and excel∣lency of grace,Psal. 45.13. 2 Cor. 3.18. but he that has true grace. The Kings daugh∣ter is all glorious within, though within is not all her glory; grace differs nothing from glory but in name, grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at the full; grace is glory mi∣litant, and glory is grace triumphant; grace has an inward glory upon it, which none can see and love, but such as have grace in their own hearts: Wicked men can see no beauty, no glory, no excellency in grace, why they should desire it, or be taken with it;Isa. 53.1, 2, 3, 4. and no wonder, for they could see no beauty, nor excellency, nor glory, nor form, nor comeliness in Christ the fountain of grace, why they should desire him, and be taken with him. Though next to Christ grace is the most lovely and desirable thing in all the world, yet none can desire it for its own loveliness and desirableness, but such as have a seed of God in them; though grace be a pearl of price, though it be a jewel more worth than the gold of Ophir, though it be a beam of God, a spark of glory, a branch of the divine nature; yet carnal hearts can see no glory nor excellency in it, that they should desire it. If car∣nal eyes were but opened to see the excellency of grace, Mirabiles sui excitaret amores, it would ravish the soul in de∣sires after it; but graces beauty and glory is inward, and so it is not discerned but with spiritual eyes. Plato was wont to say, if moral vertues could be seen with bodily eyes, they would stir up in the heart extraordinary flames of admiration and love.1 Cor. 2.14—ult. I might say much more of grace; Grace, 1. Puts
an excellency, it puts a lustre and beauty upon mens persons.Prov. 12.26. 1 Pet. 34, 5, &c. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour; and pray what makes him so but grace?Dan. 11.2. Wisdom makes a mans face to shine; riches, and honours, and dignities, and royal or∣naments, and costly fare, and noble attendants, don't put an excellency and glory upon man; witness Antiochus, Saul, Haman, Herod, Dives, &c. but saving grace does; the gra∣ces of the Spirit are that chain of pearl that adorns Christ's Bride. 2. Grace puts an excellency upon all a mans duties; By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain; faith put an excellency upon Abels sacrifice. 3. Grace puts an excellency upon all a mans natural and acquired ex∣cellencies; it puts an excellency upon beauty, honour, riches, name, arts, parts, gifts. Now, how excellent and glorious must that be, that puts an excellency upon all our excellen∣cies? 4. Grace makes a man conformable to God and Christ. 5.1 John 4.17. 1 John 1.1, 2. 2 Cor. 13.14. Zech. 3.7. Mal. 2.2. Prov. 2.11, 12. Grace fits a man for communion and fellowship with Father, Son and Spirit. 6. Grace fits a man for the choicest services. 7. Grace turns all things into a blessing. 8. Grace fills the soul with all spiritual excellencies. 9. Grace pre∣serves a Christian from the worst of evils, viz. sin. 10. Grace sweetens death, it makes the King of terrors to be the King of desires. 11. Grace renders a man acceptable to God, and that's the heighth of a Christians ambition in this world, 2 Cor. 5.9. Wherefore we labour (, we are ambi∣tious) that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him. The Apostles made it their ambition to get acceptance in heaven: riches, and honours and gifts, and arts, and parts, &c. may commend us to men; but 'tis only grace that commends us to God, and that renders us lovely in his eyes. 12. Grace will eternalize your names, grace will perfume and embalm your names, Heb. 11.2. By faith the Elders obtained a good re∣port. Ver. 39. And these all having obtained a good report through faith received not the promise. Nothing raises a mans name and fame in the wold like grace. A man may obtain a great re∣port without grace, nothing below grace will perpetuate a mans name.Acts 6 5, 3. The seven Deacons that the Church chose were gra∣cious
men,Act. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 22. and they were men of good report, they were men well witnessed unto, well testified of, as the Greek word imports.Act. 9.10, 20. compared with Chap. 22.12. Cornelius was a gracious man, and he was a man of good report among all the Nation of the Jews. Ananias was a gracious man, and he was a man of a good report. Gaius and Demetrius, they were both gracious men, and they were men of good report, witness that third Epistle of John. How renowned was Abraham for his faith? and Moses for his meek∣ness? and Jacob for his plain-heartedness? and Job for his uprightness? and David for his zeal? and Joshua for his cou∣rage?Heb. 11.4. Psal. 112.6. Prov. 10.7. Holy Abel hath been dead above this five thousand years, and yet his name is as fresh and fragrant as a Rose, to this very day. Grace will make your names immortal; The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance: The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Wicked men many times out-live their names, but the names of just men out-live them; when a gracious man dies, he leaves his name as a sweet and as a lasting scent behind him, his fame shall live when he is dead. According to the Hebrew the words may be read thus; The memory of the just shall be for a blessing; the very remembring of the just shall bring a blessing upon them that remember them. When a gracious man dies, as he carries a good conscience with him, so he leaves a perfumed name behind him. Grace is the image of God, the delight of God, the honour of God, the glory of God; grace is the purchase of Christ, and the birth of the Spirit, and the pledge of glory; grace is the joy of Angels, the glory of man, and the wonder of the world; what's the body without the soul? what's the cabinet without the jewels? what's the Sun without light? what's the fountain without water? what's Paradise without the Tree of Life? what's Heaven without Christ? That's a soul without grace. Now every gracious soul sees a real, internal excellency, beauty and glory in grace, and accordingly it is carried out in its desires after it; it sees such an innate excellency, beauty and glory in that faith, wisdom, humility, meekness, patience, zeal, self-denial, heavenly-mindedness, uprightness, &c. that sparkles and shines in such and such Saints, that it many times
strives with God in a corner, even to sweat and tears, that it may be bedecked and inriched with those singular graces that are so shining in others. O, that I had the wisdom of such a Christian, and the faith of such a Christian, and the love of such a Christian, and the humility of such a Christian, and the meekness of such a Christian, and the zeal of such a Christian, and the integrity of such a Christian, &c. O, that my soul was but in their case! I don't covet their riches but their graces: Oh, that I had but those graces! Oh, that I had much of those graces, that sparkles and shines in the hearts and lives of such and such Christians! I see a beauty and glory upon Sun, Moon and Stars, yea upon the whole Creation, but what's that to that beauty and glory that I see stampt upon grace? And this fires his heart with desires af∣ter grace. But, Eighthly, No man can sincerely desire all grace, every  grace, or the whole chain of graces, but he that has true grace.2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Vain men, when they are under some outward or inward distresses, may to serve their present turns, desire (in a cold, formal, customary way) patience, or contentation, or meek∣ness, or hope, or faith, &c. but they don't, nor can't, whilst they are wicked, whilst they are in their natural estate,Act. 8.19. to 25. whilst they are in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, sin∣cerely desire every grace, especially those particular graces that are most opposite to their master sin, to their darling lusts, to their constitution sins, to their complexion sins, to those particular lusts that are to them as dear as their right eyes or right hands. Austin before his conversion, he was much given to whoredom, and he would often pray, Lord, give me continency, but not yet; Lord, give me continency, but not yet; he was afraid lest God should have heard him to soon, as himself confesseth. Wicked men would be very sorry if God should take them at their words, and in good earnest an∣swer the cold and lazy desires of their souls: If when the drunkard in a good mood should desire sobriety, God should take him at his word, he would be very angry; or if when the unclean person should desire chastity, continency, God
should answer his desires, he would not be very well pleased; if when the covetous person, should (under some pangs of conscience) desire a free, a charitable, a noble, generous spirit, God should take him at his word, he would be sore∣ly displeased. The same may be said of all other sorts of sin∣ners; but now a real Christian, though he be never so weak, yet he seriously desires every grace, he is for every link of the golden chain of graces, he finds in his own heart, sins that are contrary to every grace, and therefore he desires every grace, that he may make head against every sin; and he finds his heart and life so attended and surrounded with all sorts and kinds of temptations, that he earnestly, seriously, and frequently desires the presence and assistance of every grace, that so he may be temptation-proof, yea, victorious over every temptation; and he sees and feels the need of e∣very grace, to fill up every place, station and condition wherein the Lord has set him, and therefore he begs hard for every grace; and he sees a beauty, and a glory, and an ex∣cellency upon every grace, and therfore he desires every grace as well as any one single grace, which no hypocrite or pro∣phane person in the world does. But, Ninthly, No man can sincerely and seriously desire grace for gracious ends and purposes, but he that has true grace in his soul.Joh. 1.1, 3, 4 & 2.6. Mat. 11.29, 30. No man can truly desire grace, that he may enjoy communion and fellowship with the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, and that he may be made comformable to Christ, and that he may be serviceable and useful to the interest of Christ, and that he may walk even as Christ walked,Psal. 119.32. 1 Joh. 5.4, 5. Rom. 14.7, 8. Phil. 1.20. in the exercise of every grace, and that he may be rid of his sins, yea all his sins, especially his special sins; and that he may run the ways of God's commands more easily, more readily, more de∣lightfully, more resolutely, more patiently, more unwearied∣ly, and more zealously; and that he may be made vi∣ctorious over the world, the flesh, and the devil; and that he may so live, as to be a praise, a name, an honour, and a glory to Christ; and that after all, and by all, he may be prepared and fitted for an eternal fruition and enjoyment of Christ,
but he that has true grace in his soul. Now, every weak be∣liever is able to appeal to God, that he desires grace for gracious ends and purposes, as for the ends last cited, and others of the like nature with them. Wicked men may in a fit desire grace,Act. 8.18, 19, 20. as Simon Magus did desire the holy Ghost to get money by it, or when they are under some pangs of con∣science, they may desire grace to be rid of their horrors and terrors, or when they are upon a dying bed they may desire so much grace as may keep them out of hell, and bring them to heaven; but in all this they look no further than self, they are far from desiring of grace for gracious ends and purposes. There is nothing in all the world that the great God so much regards as man; All these things have my hands made, but to this man will I look, Isa. 66.2. Nothing in man so much as the heart; My son, give me thy heart. That is the Mount Sion which God loveth above all the dwellings of Ja∣cob, and nothing in the heart, so much as the aim and end of it. Let a mans profession be never so glorious, let him be never so abundant in the performance of duties, let his de∣sires after this and that good thing be never so strong, yet if his ends be wrong, all his pretentions and performances are but beautiful abominations. Did David pray three times a∣day?Mark 12.40. Luke 18.12. Mat. 6.2. Luke 11.42. Mat. 23. so did the Pharisees. Did David and Daniel fast? so did the Pharisees, and that twice in the week. Did Corne∣lius give alms? so did the Pharisees. Did Abraham pay tythes? so did the Pharisees, they tythed their very Mint and Rue, but their ends being wrong, their time was lost, and their pains was lost, and their duties was lost, and their alms was lost, and their souls was lost, and that for ever. God writes a nothing upon all those services wherein mens ends are not right, Jer. 32.23. But, Tenthly, No man can sincerely desire & earnestly endeavour  after the highest pitches of grace, but he that has true grace; though the weak Christian has but a little grace in his heart,Phil. 3.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, &c. yet he has the top of grace, the perfection of grace in his sin∣cere aims, in his sincere desires, and in his earnest and con∣stant endeavours; and if the weakest Saint might have his
desires, his mind, his wish, his will, his choice, he would ne∣ver sin more, he would never dishonour Jesus Christ more, he would never grieve the spirit of grace more, he would yield unsinning obedience, he would obey in this lower world, as the Angels, and as the spirits of just men made perfect do obey in that upper world;Heb. 12.22, 23. Luke 17.5. the weakest Christian has his eye to the highest round in Jacob's ladder, and fain he would be at the top of it; and Oh, how sweet is every Providence, and every Ordinance, and every duty, and every mercy, and every opportunity, that helps his soul more Christ-wards, and heaven-wards, and holiness-wards! sincere desires, and seri∣ous endeavours to grow in grace,2 Pet. 3.18. 1 Pet. 2.2. 1 Joh. 5.13. 1 Joh. 3.9. is an infallible evidence of the truth of grace. Look, as a man may have grace and not know it, so a man may grow in grace and yet not discern it. As in the lopping of a Tree there seems to be a kind of di∣minution and destruction, yet the end and issue of it is better growth; and as the weakning of the body by Physick seems to tend to death, yet it produceth better health and more strength; and as the Ball by falling downward riseth upward, and water in pipes descends that it may ascend, so the Chri∣stians spiritual growth, when seemingly dead and declining, and to stand at a stay, is still carried on by the hidden method of God to encrease; for every true Christian is a member of a thriving body, in which there is no Atrophy, but a con∣tinual issuing of spirits from the head;The righteous shall flourish like the Palm tree, Psal. 92.12, 13, 14. The Palm tree never loseth his leaf or fruit, Pliny. Grace grows not alike in all Saints; in the parable, some brought forth thirty, some sixty, and some a hundred fold. so that life being wrought by the spirit of life never dyeth, but is alwayes up∣on the growing hand (except in the dark winter night of de∣sertion and temptations) ripening and encreasing even in the midst of all ordinary troubles and trials. The Apostle tells us, that the whole body of Christ (whereof every true Chri∣stian is a limb) is so compact together in it self, and so firmly fastned with certain spiritual nerves and ligaments to the head, that from it there is by them conveyed to each part a continual supply of spiritual grace, both sufficient to furnish it, and to further the growth of it. Let me give a little fur∣ther light into this particular, by this similitude: A man is bound for the East-Indies, and shapeth his course thitherward, but by the way is put often off by cross winds to the West∣ward;
he is by contrary winds compelled to put into di∣vers Harbours, and to make some stay by the way there, either to shift off stormy weather, or to take in fresh water, or to stop a leak, or to get some fresh provisions; and yet all this while we truly say, he is going on in his way in his voyage, because his setled purpose and constant resolution is to make to his Port, his Haven whither he is bound, and all these seeming lets shall help forward his voyage. It is so in spiritual things, for our very growth in grace consists much in sincere desires, in fixed resolutions, and in faithful endea∣vours to grow in grace.Aristot. Rhet. l. 1. c. 11. Seneca l. 2. c. 27. Phil. 3.13. Aristotle makes it the mark of a good man, that he studieth how he may grow better than he is, not contenting himself with any degree or measure of goodness. And another Heathen observes, that the earnest de∣sire of what men would have, maketh them forgetful of what they have. I forget what's past (saith the Apostle) and press on to what is before. Their eye is more upon what they want, than upon what they have. It is with good Christians in this case, as it is with rich worldlings; that like men in a race, have their eye on those that be before them, not on those that come after them, they are ever eying those that seem to out-strip and out-go them in wealth, and think they have nothing, and that they are but poor men, so long as they come short of such and such, who are rich and great in the world: And so it is with many precious Christians, they have still their eye fixt upon those whose examples they either read of, or whose courses and graces they are eye∣witnesses of; and hereupon they think that they have no grace, or else that they make no progress in grace, at least worth speaking of, so long as they come behind and fall short of such and such, who are very eminent, or most eminent in grace and holiness; and upon this account it is, that they make such sore complaints of their spiritual wants, and of their slow progress in grace and holiness, and that they can hardly perceive but that they stand still at a stay. Now mark, these sad complaints of theirs, and their serious desires to grow in grace, is a sure and infallible evidence of the truth of grace in them; yea it is a sure argument that they love
grace as it is grace, that they love grace for grace sake, which none can do but such as have grace. 'Tis a sure sign that he was never truly good, that desireth not to be better (ille non est bonus qui non vult esse melior) yea, he has very great cause to fear, that his heart is naught, very naught, if not stark naught, that desireth not to be as good as the best, to be as gracious as he that is most gracious, and to be as holy as he that is most holy. Well Sirs, this will be found an everlasting truth, viz. That no man can sincerely desire, and habitually endeavour after the highest pitches of grace, but he that hath true grace. Eleventhly, No man can alwayes desire grace, but he that  has true grace, constant desires after grace, argues the reali∣ty of grace;Isa. 26.7, 8, 9. Cant. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Psal. 106.3. constant desires after grace, speaks out a state of grace, Psal. 119.20. My soul breaketh for the longeth that it hath unto thy judgments at all times. Pliny speaks of a golden vine which never withereth. All gracious desires are such golden desires as never wither: Take a Christian when you will, and where you will, and among whom you will, and in what condition you will, and still you shall find his heart full of gracious desires.Num. 23.10. O, that I had grace! O, that I had much grace! &c. Balaam in a fit, in a good mood, desires to die the death of the righteous, but his desires were fleeting and flashy, they were transient, not permanent. Some poor sin∣ners,Dan. 5.6. when they are in a good mood, or under some distress of conscience, or under some grievous trials, or when they see the hand-writing upon the wall; and when death, which is the King of terrors, and the terror of Kings knocks at their doors; O! then they cry out, O, that we had grace! O, what shall we do for grace! O, send to such a Minister, and to such a Christian, whom we have hated, scorned, re∣proached and opposed, and desire them to be earnest with God,Hos. 6.4. Psal. 78.37. Psal. 5.9. that he would give us grace, for now we see, that with∣out grace there is no escaping of hell, nor no coming to hea∣ven. But all these desires of theirs are but like the morning cloud, or the early dew that quickly passeth away: But now if you look upon the weak Christian, as you shall commonly find a tear in his eye, a sigh in his breast, and a complaint in
his mouth; so you shall alwayes find desires in his heart after grace, O, that I had grace! O, that I had much grace! O, that I did but excel in grace! O, that I had as much grace as such a Christian! O that I had a greater exercise of grace!Psal. 42.1, 2, 3. Psal. 63.1, 2, 3, 8. Whatever outward or inward changes may attend a Christi∣an in this world, yet you shall still find him full of holy de∣sires, and breathings, and hankerings, and longings after God, and Christ, and grace, and holiness; O, that I had more of these! O, when shall I have more of these! O, that God would cut me short in any thing, yea in every thing, rather than cut me short in these things, that the desires of my soul are so much running after! These desires of theirs may fur∣ther be set forth by a spring between a couple of hills; the spring will alwayes run through those lets that stop it, or else it will run over those lets, for it cannot cease running if it be a living spring; so the desires of a gracious soul will still be running after God, and Christ, and grace, &c. The good desires of bad men after God, and Christ, and grace, and ho∣liness, are like water in a Cistern, that quickly runs out; but the desires of a godly man after God, Christ, grace, holiness, are like water in a fountain that is still a running. An un∣sound Christian is never good at all times, he is only good by fits, and starts, and turns sometimes when he is Sermon-sick, or under a smarting rod, or a gauled conscience, or when he is under some heavy cross, or sad loss; O, then he will be good! O, then he will have God, and he will have Christ, and he will have grace, and he will have heaven; but this good frame, this good temper of his is not lasting, 'tis not abiding, 'tis like a vapour that quickly vanishes, or like a wind-mill that goes as long as the wind fills the sails, but no longer. These are like Sigismund the Emperor, who when he was sick, would be very godly; but when he was well, none more wicked. But, Twelfthly, No man can sincerely desire to abound and  excel most in those particular graces which are most oppo∣site and contrary to those particular sins which his natural temper, constitution, complexion, calling, or condition,
does most expose him and incline him to, but he that has true grace, but he whose heart is sincere with God, Psal. 18.23. I was upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. If passion be a sincere Christians head-lust, then his desires run most out for meekness; if pride, then his de∣sires are most for humility; if earthliness, then his desires are most for heavenly-mindedness; if unbelief, then his de∣sire,Luke 17.5. are most for faith; you shall then find him with the Disciples, crying out, Lord, increase our faith. But now, though a wicked mans heart rise against every grace, yet it rises most strongly against those particular graces which are most opposite and contrary to those particular lusts which are a wicked mans bosom lusts,Mat. 26.8, 9. his darling sins, &c. Hence the covetous heart rises and swells most against liberality, as you see in Judas,Rev. 3.15, 16, 17. Luke 19. What need this waste? Flesh and bloud looks upon all as lost that is laid out upon Christ, his servants and services. And the luke-warm Christians heart rises and swells most against zeal and fervency; and the griping Use∣rers heart rises and swells most against restitution;Job 21.14, 15. and the adulterers heart rises and swells most against purity, chastity, continency; and the ignorant mans heart rises and swells most against light and knowledge;Eccles. 7.10. the ignorant man is wil∣ling to go to hell in the dark, and ready, and bold enough to conclude, that we never had such sad and bad times as we have had, since there hath been so much preaching, and so much hearing, and so much fasting, and so much praying, and so much light and knowledge in the world. But now it is quite otherwise with a true child of God,Rom. 7.22, 23. for his heart rises and swells most against the Toad or Toads that are in his own bosom; and the daily and earnest desires of his soul are, that God would make him eminent in every grace, yea that God would make him most eminent in those particular graces which are most opposite and contrary to those parti∣cular lusts and corruptions which more peculiarly, more especially he hath cause to call his iniquity,Psal. 49.5. or the iniquities of his heart, and of his heels. Look, as we have some dirt, more or less, that will still cleave to our heels whilst we are in a dirty world; so there is some defilements and pollutions
that will still be cleaving to all our duties, services, wayes and walkings in this world, which we may well call the ini∣quity of our heels. Now a gracious heart rises most against these, &c. Thirteenthly, No man can truly love grace in another, but  he that has true grace in his own soul.1 John 3.10. No man can love a Saint as a Saint, but he that is a real Saint; no man can love holiness in another, but he that has holiness in his own soul; no man can love a good man for goodness sake, but he that is really good; We know that we have passed from death to life,1 John 3.14. This Text you have opened in the first Maxim of this Book. be∣cause we love the brethren. Sincere love to the brethren is a most evident sign of a Christians being already passed or translated from death to life; that is, from a state of nature into a state of grace; such a poor soul that dares not say that he has grace in his own heart, yet dares say before the Lord, that he loves, delights, and takes pleasure to see the holy gra∣ces of the Spirit sparkling and shining in the hearts, lives and lips of other Saints, secretly wishing in himself that his soul were but in their case; and that dares say before the Lord,Psal. 15.1, 4. Psal. 16.3. He that loves his brother (saith Augustine) better knows his love wherewith he loves, than his▪ brother whom he loves. that there are no men in all the world that are so precious, so lovely, so comely, so excellent, and so honour∣able in his account, in his eye, as those that have the Image of God, of Christ, of grace, of holiness most clearly, most fairly, and most fully stampt upon them. When a poor Chri∣stian can rejoyce in every light, in every Sun that out-shines his own; when he sees wisdom and knowledge shining in one Saint, and faith and love shining in another Saint, and humility and lowliness shining in another Saint, and meek∣ness and uprightness shining in another Saint, and zeal and courage shining in another Saint, and patience and con∣stancy shining in another, and then can make his retreat to his closet, admiring & blessing of the Lord for the various gra∣ces of his Spirit shining in his children, and be frequent and earnest with God, that those very graces might shine as so many Suns in his soul; doubtless such a poor soul has true grace, and is happy, and will be happy to all eternity. In Ter∣tullian's time, the Heathen would point out the Christians by
this mark, See how they love one another. Now to prevent mi∣stakes, I shall shew you the several properties of sincere love to the Saints. First, True love to the Saints is spiritual, it is a love for the Image of God that is stampt upon the soul, 1 John 5.1. Every one that loveth him that begat,1 John 4.7. loveth him also that is begot∣ten of him. A soul that truly loves, loves the father for his own sake, and the children for the fathers sake. If the Image of God be the load-stone that drawes out our love to the Saints, then our love is real to them; he that does not love the Saints as Saints, he that does not love them under a spiri∣tual notion he hath no true affection to them. Naturally we hate God,Gen. 3.15. 1 John 3.12. because he is a holy God, and his Law because it is an holy Law, and his people because they are a holy peo∣ple. 'Tis only the Spirit of God that can inable a man to love a Saint for the image of God that is in him; many there are which love Christians for their goods, not for their good; they love them for the money that is in their purses, but not for the grace that is in their hearts; many like the Bohemian Cur, fawn upon a good suit. Love to the Saints for the Image of God stampt upon them, is a flower that does not grow in natures garden. No man can love grace in another mans heart, but he that hath grace in his own; men do not more naturally love their parents,Prov. 29.10. Ezek. 25.15. and love their children, and love themselves, than they do naturally hate the image of God upon his people and wayes. I have read of one who was so lusty and quarrelsom, that he was ready to fight with his own image so often as he saw it in a glass. O! how many are there in these dayes, that are still a quarrelling and fighting with the image of God wherever they see it? True love is for what of the divine nature, for what of Christ and grace shines in a man; it is one thing to love a godly man, and an∣ther thing to love him for godliness: Many love godly men as they are Politicians, or Potent, or Learned, or of a sweet nature, or affable, or related, or as they have been kind to them; but all this is but natural love, but to love them because they are spiritually lovely, because of the
seed of God in them, because they are all glorious within,John 1.3.9. Psal. 45.13. is to love them as becometh Saints, it is to love them at a higher and nobler rate, than any hypocrite in the world can reach too. The Wasps flie about the Tradesman's shop, not out of love to him, but the honey and fruit that is there. But, Secondly, True love to the Saints is appretiating; a gra∣cious  soul sets the highest price, and the greatest value and esteem upon those that are gracious, Psal. 15.4. He honours them that fear the Lord;Psal. 119.119. Psal. 1.4. he looks upon the wicked as lum∣ber, but upon the Saints as jewels; he looks upon the wick∣ed as dross, but upon the Saints as the gold of Ophir; he looks upon the wicked as chaff, but upon the Saints as wheat;1 John 12. he looks upon the Saints as sons, but upon the wicked as slaves;Heb. 1. ult. he looks upon the Saints as heirs of salvation, but upon the wicked as heirs of damnation. Gracious souls do not value persons by their great Places, Offices, Names, Professions, Arts, Parts, Gifts, gay Cloaths, gold Chains, Honours, Riches, but by what they are worth for another world. As the great God, so gracious souls look not how rational men are, but how religious; not how great, but how gracious; not how high, but how holy,Psal. 16.3. and accordingly they value them. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent in whom is all my delight.Prov. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour. 'Tis grace that differences one man from another, & that exalts one man above another. A gracious man, though never so poor, and low, and contemptible in the world, is a better man than his wicked neighbour (though he be never so great or rich in the world) in the eye, account, and esteem of God, Angels and Saints, there is no man to the gracious man: The Sun doth not more excel and out-shine the Stars, than a righteous man doth excel and out-shine his unrighteous neighbour.Prov. 28.6. Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than he that is perverse in his wayes, though he be rich. A gracious man prefers a holy Job upon the dunghil, before a wicked Ahab upon the Throne: he sets a higher price upon a gracious Lazarus, though
cloathed with rags and full of sores,Luke 16. than upon a rich and wretched Dives, though he be cloathed gloriously, and fares sumptiously every day. This is, and this must be for a lamen∣tation,Psal. 45.13. Wicked men may highly prize and admire a the common gifts of the Saints, as Pharaoh admired at the wisdom of Joseph, and Ne∣buchadnezzar ad∣mired at the wis∣dom of Daniel; but they never prize nor admire at their graces. Every one that doth evil, hateth the light, Joh. 3.20. that this poor, blind, mad, besotted world rates and values men according to their worldly interest, greatness, glo∣ry and grandure; but gracious souls, they rate and value men by their graces, by their inward excellencies, and by what they are worth for eternity; in the eye of a gracious man; there is no wife to a gracious wife, no child to a gracious child, no friend to a gracious friend, no neighbour to a gracious neighbour, no Magistrate to a gracious Magistrate, no Minister to a gracious Minister, no Master to a gracious Master, nor no servant to a gracious ser∣vant; internal excellencies carries it with a gracious man, before all external glories. The Jews say, that those seventy souls that went with Jacob into Egypt, were as much worth as all the seventy Nations in the world: Doubtless, seventy gracious persons in the esteem and judgment of those that are gracious, are more worth than a whole world, yea than seventy worlds of graceless persons. Well Sirs, remember this; No man can truly prize, and highly value grace in ano∣ther, but he that hath grace in his own heart. Some prize Christians for their wit, others prize them for their wealth; some prize them for their birth and breeding, others prize them for their beauty and worldly glory; some prize them for the great things that have been done by them, others prize them for the good things that they have received from them; some prize them for their Eagles eyes, others prize them for their silver tongues, and others prize them for their golden parts; but he that is truly gracious, he prizes them for the grace of God that is in them, he sets the highest value upon  them for their holiness,No unregenerate person hath a love to all the Saints; for though he seems to love some, yet he loaths others; he is guilty of sinful partiality, having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of per∣sons. They seem to love the rich, and despise the poor, James 2. &c. But, Thirdly, True love to the Saints is universal to one Chri∣stian as well as another, to all as well as any, to poor La∣zarus as well as to rich Alraham, to a despised Job as well as to an admired David, to an afflicted Joseph as well as to a raised Iacob, to a despised Disciple as well as to an exalted
Apostle, Eph. 1.15. Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Iesus, and love unto all the Saints. Col. 1.4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Iesus, and of the love which ye have to all the Saints. Faith in Christ Jesus maketh love to all the Saints; therefore they go commonly coupled in Pauls Epistles. It was the glory of the Ephesians and Colossi∣ans, that their faith and love reached to all the Saints; their love was not a narrow love, a love confined to some particu∣lar Saints, but it was universal to all Saints, Phil. 4.21. Sa∣lute every Saint in Christ Iesus; the meanest as well as the ichest, the weakest as well as the strongest, the lowest as well as the highest, and those that have many infirmities as well as those that have fewer infirmities,Eph. 1.21, 22, 23 1 Pet. 2.17. and those that have but mean parts and gifts, as well as those that have the strong∣est parts, and the most raised gifts. All Saints have the same Spirit, the same Jesus, the same Faith, &c. they are all fel∣low-members, fellow-travellers, fellow-soldiers, fellow-Citizens, fellow-heirs, and therefore must they all be loved with a sincere and cordial love: Love is set upon the bro∣therhood, upon the whole fraternity of Believers, and not here and there upon one. Divine love casts an eye of favour upon grace in rags, upon a dunghil, in a dungeon, a den, a prison, a fiery-furnace;Psal. 16.3. grace is as lovely in the illiterate as in the greatest Scholar, in the servant as in the Master, in the maid as in the Mistris, in the child as in the Father, in the subject as in the Prince, in the buyer as in the seller, &c. Look, as all our delight must be in the Saints, so our delight must be in all the Saints. 'Tis sad & sinful to contemn our poor brethren; and yet this was the very case of the Corinthians,1 Cor. 11.21, 22. for they in their love-feasts carried it so unequally, that one was hungry, to wit, the poor; and another was drunken, to wit, the rich: And this made the Apostle put that question to them; What? have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? or put them to shame that have nothing? And the Apostle Iames doth very roundly reprove and condemn that partial love that was ge∣nerally among the Jews in his dayes, Iam 2.1, 2, 3 4. My bre∣thren, have not the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons; for if there come unto your assembly, a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay cloathing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place, and say to the poor, stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool; are ye not then partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil thoughts? Not that the Apostle doth simply or absolutely prohibit a civil differencing of men in place from others; for it cannot be denied but that there is a holy and warrant∣able respect of persons, in respect of their age, callings, gifts, graces and greatness in the world; but when the rich mans wealth is more regarded than the poor mans godliness; and when men carry it so to the rich, as to cast scorn, con∣tempt, disgrace and discouragement upon the godly poor. They that respect a rich man that has but a little grace, be∣fore a poor man that is rich in grace, are worthy of blame. All true born sons love to see the image and picture of their father, though hung in never so poor a frame, and in never so mean a cottage: So the true born sons of God, they love to see the image of God, the picture of God upon the poor∣est Saints. 'Tis sad to prefer a worldly lustre before heaven∣ly grace, a gold ring before a rich faith, a chain of gold be∣fore a chain of grace.Non ex personis fi∣dem, sed ex fide personas. Tertul. Ver. 5. Hearken my beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom? It is a vile thing, saith one of the Ancients, to have the faith of Christ in respect of persons. We do not judge of faith by persons, but of persons by faith. 'Tis the great wisdom of a Christian, not to judge of men by their outwards, but by their inwards; not by their externals, but by their internals; not by what they are worth for this world, but by what they are worth for that other world. The poor∣est Saints are God's portion, Deut. 32.9. They are his plea∣sant portion, Jer. 12.10. They are his peculiar treasure, Exod. 19.5. They are his jewels, Mal. 3.17. They are the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. They are his glory, Isa. 4.5. They are the crown of his glory and royal diadem, Isa. 62.3. and therefore 'tis a dangerous thing to flight them, to disown them, to look frowningly upon them, or to carry it unwor∣thily
towards them. Pompey told his Cornelia, It is no praise to thee to have loved (Pompeium Magnum) Pompey the Great, but if thou lovest (Pompeium miserum) Pompey the miserable, thou shalt be a pattern for imitation to all posterity: So I say, it is no great matter to love those that are rich and pi∣ous, great and gracious, high and holy; but to love the poor Saints of God in their lowest and most miserable condition, when they have not a rag to cover them, nor a crust to re∣fresh them, nor a fire to warm them, nor a friend to stand by them, nor a penny to help them; this is praise-worthy, this speaks our much of God, of Christ, of grace within. Romanus the Martyr, who was born of noble Parentage in∣treated his persecutors, that they would not favour him for his Nobility; For it is not (said he) the bloud of my Ance∣cestors, but my Christian faith that makes me Noble. 'Tis not race, nor place, but grace that makes a man truly noble; without a peradventure, he that loves one Saint for the image of God that is upon him, he cannot but fall in love with every Saint that bears the lovely image of the Father upon him; he cannot but love a Saint in rags as well as a Saint in robes, a Saint upon the dunghil as well as a Saint upon the throne; usually those Christians that have least of the world, have most of Christ; commonly those Christians that have least of the world, have most of heaven in their hearts, houses and lives. But, Fourthly, True love to the Saints will extend to those that are most remote in respect of place,Rom. 5.26. as well as to those that  are near. They of Macedonia and Achaia made a contribution for the poor Saints at Jerusalem.3 John 5. The Saints of Macedonia and Achaia did freely and cheerfully contribute to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, whose faces probably they had never seen. And Gaius is commended for his love to strangers. A graci∣ous man that has an estate, a treasury, an inheritance, he is like a common fountain that freely gives out to strangers as well as to near neighbors. A great fire will warm those that sit far from it, as wel as those that sit neer unto it: So sincere love will extend and stretch out it self to those Saints that are most remote; gracious souls do dearly love and highly va∣lue
those Saints whose faces they have never seen, nor are like to see in this world, and from whose hands they have not re∣ceived the least civility; and all upon the serious reports that they have had of the grace of God that has been spark∣ling and shining in them,Rom. 12.9. 1 Pet. 1.22. 1 John 3.18. whose habitations are at a great distance from them. A sincere love, an unfeigned love, a hearty love will be running out towards those that live most remote from us, if we do but understand that God is in them and with them of truth. But, Fifthly, Our love to the Saints is right, when we love them best, and most in whom the spiritual and supernatural causes of love are most sparkling and shining; where grace draws the affections, there the more grace we see, the more we shall love, Psal. 16.3. My goodness extendeth not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight.Psal. 45.19. There are Saints, and there are excellent Saints. The Hebrew word that is here rendred excellent, signifies magnificent ones, noble ones, glorious ones, wonder∣ful ones. O Sirs! there are some Saints that are magnifi∣cent in grace, noble in grace, glorious in grace, wonderful in grace. Now this is certain, if grace be the true reason why we love any, then the more excellent, the more magnificent any are in grace,Psal. 15.4. the more highly we shall prize them, and the more dearly we shall love them, and the more abundantly in our hearts we shall honour them. Look, as grace rises higher and higher in the same person, so we shall rise higher and higher in our love to the same person;Dan. 9.23. John 21.20. Daniel was greatly beloved, and Iohn was singularly beloved; and why? but because they were more eminently gracious than others were. Where there is most grace, there God is most honoured, and there Christ is most exalted, and there the Spirit is best pleased, and there Religion is most adorned, and there Satan is most dethroned, and there the world is most conquered, and there sin is most subdued, and there du∣ties are most exactly performed; and therefore, there the gracious soul can't but love best and most. There are some that seem to love such and such godly men, whose judgments
are weak and light, little, and parts low, and grace small; who yet look with a squint eye, an envious eye upon every Sun that outshines their own, upon every ones graces and excellencies that are more sparkling than their own. Though pride and envy have received their deaths-wound at the souls first conversion, yet they are not quite slain in a be∣liever; there is an aptness even in real Saints,Luk. 7.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. to grudge and repine at those gifts, graces and excellencies in others that outshine their own. John's disciples muttered and murmur∣ed, because Christ had more followers and admirers than John; and that spirit that lived in John's disciples, is still alive to this very day. This is, and this must be for a lamen∣tation. Well Sirs, look as the fairest day hath its clouds, the finest linnen its spots, the richest jewels their flaws, the sweetest fruits their worms; so when many precious Chri∣stians are not themselves, when they are in an hour of tem∣ptation, when their corruptions are up, and their graces down, they may and too often do,Num. 11.29. envy and repine at those graces, excellencies and abilities that do over-cast, cloud,Heb. 12.15. darken and outshine their own. The best of men are but men at the best, and there is still those bitter roots of pride, vain-glory, self-love, envy, &c. remaining in them, that occa∣sions their hearts to rise and swell, yea sometimes to cast disgrace upon those excellencies in others that themselves want: As that great man that could not write his own name,Eusebius speaks of him, in his Ec∣clesiastical Hist∣ry, &c. and yet called the liberal Arts, A publick Poyson and Pesti∣lence. This spiritual disease is mostly to be found among Christians that are got into some of the highest forms in Christianity; take your ordinary common Christians, and they commonly rejoyce most where they see most grace: And so do your Christians in a higher form too, when they come to themselves, and to make up their accounts, and have wept over those cursed roots of bitterness that are so apt to be sprouting out. Now, there is no greater argument that our grace is true, and that we do love others for grace sake, than our loving them best that have most grace, though they have but little of the world. A pearl is rich if found on a dunghil, though it may glister more when set in a ring of
gold; so many a poor believer is rich in grace, and preci∣ous, and glorious in the eye of Christ, and should be so in ours, though like Job he sits upon a dunghil; though in the eyes of the world he may seem to glister most, when adorned with riches, honour and outward pomp. If grace be the true reason why we love any person, then the more grace that person hath, the more we shall love him. A godly man loves all that are godly, but he loves them most, that excel most in the power, purity and practise of godliness, &c. But, Sixthly and lastly, True love to the Saints is constant, 'tis permanent,John 13.1. & 15.12. &c. 1 Cor. 13.8. Love never faileth, Heb. 13.1. Let brotherly love continue. 'Tis a love like that of Christ's, who loved his to the end. 1 Joh. 4.16. He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. Our love to our brother must not only lodge with us a night and away, but we must dwell in brotherly love. Look, as our love must be sincere without hypocrisie, so it must be constant without deficien∣cy; that love was never true that is not constant; true love like the pulse, will still be beating, it will still be working and running out to the person beloved; true love will not fawn upon a Christian when high, and frown upon him when low; it will not kiss him upon the throne, and kick him up∣on the dunghil. The grounds and causes of their love are constant, viz. God's commands, their spiritual relations, and the truth of grace in their souls; and therefore their love can't but be constant.Prov. 17.17. Christian friend∣ship makes such a knot, that great Alexander cannot cut, &c. A friend (saith Solomon) loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity. Euripides hit it, when he said, That a faithful friend in adversity, is better than a calm Sea to a weather-beaten Mariner. He that truly loves, will love in adversity as well as in prosperity, in storms as well as in calms, in winter nights as well as in Summer dayes; he that sincerely loves the Saints, he will love them as well when men frown upon them, as when they smile upon them; as well when men strike them, as when they stroke them; as well when men cast them down, as when they lift them up; as well when men cry, Crucifie them, crucifie them, as when they cry Hosanna, Hosanna, to them. Consalvus (a Spanish Bi∣shop
and Inquisitor) wondred how the Christians had that Commandement, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self, so in∣delibly printed in their hearts, that no torture could blot it out, and make them confess and betray one another, or cease from loving one another.Hieron. I have read of one Ursinus a Chri∣stian Physician, who being to suffer Martyrdom for the Gos∣pel of Christ, began to waver and faint; which when Vitalis a holy man saw, he stept to him, and though he knew it would cost him his life, yet he thus comforted and encouraged him, saying, What, have ye been heretofore so industrious to pre∣serve mens bodies, and will you now shrink at the saving of your own soul? Be couragious, fear not, &c. For which faithful counsel, he also was condemned to death, and suffer∣ed accordingly.Ruth 1. A true friend is neither known in prosperi∣ty, nor hid in adversity. True love is like that of Ruth's to Naomi, that of Jonathan's to David, permanent and constant.Job 6.15, 16. Many there be whose love to the Saints is like Job's brooks, which in the Winter, when men have no need of them, over∣flows with tenders of service, and shews of love; but when the season is hot and dry, & the poor thirsty traveller stands in most need of water to refresh him, then the brooks are quite dried up. They are like the Swallow, that will stay by you in the Summer of prosperity, but flie from you in the Winter of adversity. It is observed by Josephus of the Samaritans,Joseph Anti. lib. 11. p. 286. that when ever the Jews affairs prospered, they would be their friends, and profess much love to them; yea, they would vaunt of their alliance, saying, That they were near akin, and of the race of Ephraim and Manasses the sons of Joseph: But when the Jews were in trouble and affliction, and brought to an under, then they would not own them,Lib. 11. p. 272. Lib. 12. p. 304. Lib. 13. p. 322, 323. &c. nor have any thing to do with them; yea, then they would set themselves with all their ight against them, as the same Historian tells us. This age is full of such Samaritans; yet certainly, such as truly love, they will alwayes love; such as truly love the people of God, they will love them to the end. In the pri∣mitive times it was very much taken notice of by the very Heathen, that in the depth of misery, when fathers and mo∣thers forsook their children, Christians (otherwise strangers)
stuck closs one to another, their love of Religion, and one of another, proved firmer than that of nature. They seem to take away the Sun out of the world (said the Orator) who take away friendship from the life of man; for we do not more need fire and water, than constant friendship. Though wicked men may pretend great love to the Saints, yet their love is not constant;Gen. 31.24, 29. & 33 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Dan. 6. God sometimes indeed over-rules their spirits with a very strong hand, as he did Laban's and Esau's, or as he over-ruled the spirits of the Lions to pre∣serve Daniel, and of the Ravens to feed Elijah; but so soon as that over-ruling providence is over, they are as they were befoe. God for a time gave the Israelites favour in the eyes of the Egyptians, but before and after they were their utter enemies. But now a gracious soul, he loves the Saints at all times, his love to them is constant. But, Fourteenthly, That soul that dares not say that he has grace, yet can truly say before the Lord, that he prizes the least dram of grace above ten thousand thousand worlds, certain∣ly that soul has true grace in him. Doubtless there are none that can prize grace in their understandings and judgments above all the world,Mic. 6.6, 7. Phil. 3.18, 19. Mat. 19.16. to 25. Psal. 2.21. but such as are first taken out of the world by grace. There is no man on earth whose heart is void and empty of grace, but sets a higher value and price upon his lusts, or upon his relations, or upon his honours, or riches, or pleasures, or upon this or that worldly enjoy∣ment, than he does upon grace, or the fountain of grace; yea, how many thousands are there that set a higher price or value upon a Hound, a Hawk, a Horse, a Harlot, a good Trade, a fair Estate, a rich inheritance, yea upon the very toyes and trifles of this world, than they do upon God, or Christ, or grace? 'Twas never yet known in the world, that ever God sent such a man to hell, who prized grace above heaven it self, who had rather have grace and holiness with∣out heaven, than heaven it self without grace and holiness. Fifteenthly, That soul that dares not say that his condi∣tion is good, yet can say in truth of heart before the Lord,
that he would not change his condition with the vain, carnal, formal and prophane men of the world, for ten thousand worlds; that man is certainly for heaven, and heaven is cer∣tainly for that man: we may be very highly, and groundedly confident, that God will never cast that man to hell among devils and damned spirits at the great day, who in his day of life would not chuse to be in the condition of the men of the world, for as many worlds as there be men in the world. Look, as none meet in heaven, but such as are like to like in their renewed natures, principles and practises; so none meet in hell but such as are like to like in their old natures,Deut. 22.10. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. principles and practises. That God that would not suffer an Ox to be yoked with an Ass in this world; nor a Believer with an Infidel; will never suffer such to be yoked with devils and damned reprobates in that lower world, who would not to gain many worlds be willingly yoked with wicked men in this world; certainly they shall never be a Christians companions in that other world, whose society and company, and whose wickedness and baseness have been a grief, a tor∣ment, a hell to him in this world, Psal. 119.53, 136. Jer. 9.1, 2. Ezek. 9.4, 6. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. When Mrs. Kathe∣rine Brettergh was upon her dying bed, and most grievously assaulted by temptations; in the midst of her sore conflicts, this was no small support and comfort to her, That surely God would not send her to hell to live for ever among such wicked persons, whose company and whose sin was a burden to her in this world, &c. But, Sixteenthly,James 3.2. Eccles. 7.20. Prov. 20.7. Joh. 1.1, 8. That soul that dares not say that he does not  sin, (For in many things we offend all; and there is not a just man upon the earth that doeth good and sinneth not; and who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us) yet can say in uprightness before the Lord, that he would not willingly, resolutely, maliciously, wilfully, wickedly and hab tually sin against the Lord to gain a world; that soul that don't nor won't through grace assisting,Psal. 119.1, 3. 1 John 3.9. allow himself or in∣dulge himself in a course of sin, or in a trade of  in
the common practise of any known sin, that soul is certainly a gracious soul.Rom. 7.15. The evil that I do I allow not. 'Tis one thing for a man to sin, 'tis an other thing for a man to allow himself in sin; 'tis one thing for a godly man to step into a sin,Psal. 139 24. and 'tis another thing to keep the road of sin. Search me and try me, and see if there be any way of wickedness in me (or as the Hebrew runs, Any way of pain, or of grief, or of provocation) that is, any course of sin that is grievous or provoking to the eyes of divine glory. A real Saint can neither allow of sin, nor wallow in sin, nor be transformed into the image of sin, nor mix it self with sin. 'Tis possible for a sincere Christian to step into a sinful path, or to touch upon sinful facts,Gal. 6.1. Prov. 16.17. and now and then in an hour of temptation, to slide, to trip, and to be overtaken unawares; but his main way, his principle work, is to depart from ini∣quity. As a true traveller may now and then step a few steps out of his way, who yet for the main keeps his way, keeps the road; or as a Bee may now and then light upon a thistle, but her main work is to be gathering at the flowers; or as a Sheep may now and then slip into the dirt, or into a slow, but its main work is to be grazing upon the mountains. Cer∣tainly, O soul, if sin be now thy greatest burden, it shall ne∣ver hereafter prove thy eternal bane. God never yet sent any man to hell for sin, to whom sin has commonly been the greatest hell in this world. God has but one hell, and that is for those to whom sin has been commonly a heaven in this world. That man that hates sin, and that daily enters his protest against sin, that man shall never be made miserable by sin. Sin in a wicked man is like poyson in a serpent; it is in its natural place, it is delightful to a sinner; but sin in a Saint is like poyson in a man's body, it is offensive, and the heart rises against it, and is carried forth to the use of all divine Antidotes whereby it may be expelled and destroyed; nothing will satisfie a gracious soul, but the heart bloud of his lusts. Now, he shall never be damned for his sins, whose heart is set upon killing his sins. Seventeenthly, Such a poor soul that dares not say, that God is his God; or that Christ is his Redeemer, or that he has a work of grace upon his heart; yet can say with some inte∣grity
of heart before the Lord, that if God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and happiness were offered to him on the one hand, and all the honours, pleasures, profits, delights, and carnal contents of the world were offered him on the other hand, he had infinitely rather ten thousand thousand times chuse God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and happiness, than the contrary. Certainly such a soul has true grace in him, and a saving work past upon him; for none can freely, seriously, habitually, resolutely, chuse God and Christ, grace and glory, holiness and happiness, as their (summum bonum) chiefest good, but such who are really good.1 John 4.19. Deut. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. & 26.17, 18, 19. Look, as our love to God is but an effect of his love to us; We love him because he first loved us; so our chusing of God for our God, is but an effect of God's chusing us for his people; we chuse him because he first chose us: Such, who in their serious choice, set up God and Christ above all other per∣sons and things, such God will certainly make happy and bles∣sed for ever. God never did, nor never will, reject those, or damn those, who really chuse him for their God, and for their great all. The greatest part of the world chuse their lusts rather than God, and the creatures rather than Christ;Luke 12.21. they chuse rather to be great than gracious, to be rich in this world than to be rich towards God, to be outwardly happy than to be inwardly holy,Mat. 10.42. to have a heaven on earth than to have a heaven after death, and so they miscarry for ever. That soul that with Mary has chosen the better part, that soul with Mary shall be happy for ever; every man must stand or fall for ever as his choice has been. But, Eighteeenthly, Canst thou truly say in the presence of  the great and glorious God, that is the searcher of all hearts,Psal. 139.23, 24. that thou hast given up thy heart and life to the rule, autho∣rity and government of Jesus Christ? and that thou hast cho∣sen him to be thy Soveraign Lord and King, and art truly wil∣ling to submit to his dominion, as the only precious and righ∣teous government, and as the only holy and heavenly, swee and pleasant; profitable and comfortable, safe and best do∣minion in all the world, and to resign up thy heart, thy will,
thy affections, thy life, thy all, really to Christ, wholly to Christ,Isa. 26.13. and only to Christ? Canst thou, O poor soul! look up to heaven, and truly say, O dear Lord Jesus! other Lords, viz. the world, the flesh and the devil, have had do∣minion too long over me; but now these Lords I do heartily renounce,Isa. 33.22. I do utterly renounce, I do for ever renounce, and do give up my self to thee as my only Lord, beseeching thee to rule and reign over me for ever and ever: O Lord! though sin rages, and Satan roars, and the world sometimes frowns, and sometimes fawns; yet I am resolved to own thee as my only Lord, and to serve thee as my only Lord; and my greatest fear (by divine assistance) shall be of offend∣ing thee, and my chiefest care shall be to please thee, and my only joy shall be to be a praise, a name, and an honour to thee. O Lord, I can appeal to thee in the sincerity of my heart,Psal. 65.3. Rom. 7.23. that though I have many invincible sins, weak∣nesses and infirmities that hang upon me; and though I am often worsted by my sins, and overcome in an hour of tem∣ptation, yet thou that knowest all thoughts and hearts, thou dost know that I have given up my heart and life to the obe∣dience of Jesus Christ, and do daily give them up to his rule and government; and 'tis the earnest desire of my soul, above all things in this world, that Jesus Christ may still set up his Laws in my heart, and exercise his dominion over me. Now certainly, there is not the weakest Christian in all the world, but can venture himself upon such an appeal to God as this is; and without all peradventure, where such a frame and temper of spirit is, there the dominion of Jesus Christ is set up; and where the dominion of Christ is set up, there sin has no dominion; for the dominion of sin, and the domi∣nion of Christ are inconsistent, and therefore such a soul is happy, and will be happy to all eternity. But, Cant. 8.5. Acts 11.21, 22, 23 Psal. 71.16. Isa. 61.10.Nineteenthly, That man that will venture his soul upon Christ, and that will lean upon Christ, and cleave to Christ with full purpose of heart, and that will cleave to his bloud, and cleave to his righteousness, and cleave to his merits and satisfaction, in the face of all fears, doubts, disputes, cavils
and objections; and though it cannot clear its title to Christ, yet will stay and hang it self upon Christ for life and happi∣ness; that man is certainly a Believer, and will be ever∣lastingly saved. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him;Job 13.15. if I must die, I will die at his feet, and in the midst of death ex∣pect a better life;Mat. 15.22 to 28 that man acts faith to purpose that can love a frowning God, and hang upon an angry God, and fol∣low hard after a withdrawing God,Psal. 63.1, 8. yea and trust in a killing God, as here. Job had his Feverish sits, and his impatient slips, and yet he kept up his heroical resolution to lean upon the Lord, whilst he had but one minute to live; and this speaks out not only the truth, but also the strength of Job's faith in the midst of his extraordinary combats; when the soul is peremptorily and habitually resolved to cleave to the person of Christ, and to cleave to the merits of Christ,Gen. 2.24. Ruth 1.14, 15, 16, 17. Est. 4.16. and to cleave to the transactions of Christ with the Father, for the salvation of sinners (as the wife cleaves to her husband, or as the child cleaves to the father, or as Ruth cleaved to Naomi, or as the Ivy cleaves to the Oak) with an If I perish, I perish, then 'tis safe, then 'tis happy, then 'tis out of the dan∣ger of hell, then 'tis within the Suburbs of heaven. God never did, nor never will cast such a man to hell, whose soul is drawn forth to a secret resting, saying, leaning and rely∣ing alone upon Christ, for the obtaining of all that good, and all that glory that he has purchased, and his father has pro∣mised. But, Lastly, That man that makes it his principle care, his  main business, his work of works, to look to his heart, to watch his heart, and to reform his heart, that man doubtless has a saving work of God upon his heart. There are two things which a gracious soul most looks at; his God and his heart. Though a gracious man looks to the cleansing of his hands, yet his principle care is the reformation of his heart, the cleansing of his heart, according to that of the Apostle James; Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purifie your hearts ye double minded. And that of the Prophet Jeremiah;James 4.8. Jer. 4.14. O Jerusa∣lem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved.
Man must labour after a clean inside, as well as a clean out∣side; the conversation must not be only unspotted before the world, but the heart also must be unspotted before God; the heart is as capable of inward defilements as the body is of outward defilements.2 Cor. 7.1. O Sirs! though heart-defilement is least taken notice of, yet heart-defilement is the worst de∣filement, and the most dangerous defilement in the world; heart-defilement is spiritual defilement,Eph. 6.12. Vide za. and spiritual defile∣ment is the defilement of divels, which of all defilement is the most hateful, odious and pernicious defilement. The hy∣pocrites only care is to keep his life from defilement, but the sincere Christians care is mainly to keep his heart from defilement; for he very well knows, that if he can but keep his heart clean, he shall with more ease keep his life clean; if the fountain be kept pure, the streams will run pure: The heart is the spring of all actions, and therefore every action is as the spring is from whence it flows; if the spring be good, the action is good that flows from it; if the spring be evil, the action is evil that flows from it.M. 2.35. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, bringeth forth evil things. Certainly, the great work of a Christian lieth with his heart; the reformation of the heart is the highest and choicest part of reformation,Prov 23.26. because it is the reformation of the noblest part of man, and is that which God looks most after: The reformation of the heart, is indeed the heart of reformati∣on; there is nothing reformed to purpose, till the heart be reformed; if the heart be naught, all is naught; if that be very naught, all is very naught; if that be stark naught, all is stark naught; but if that be reformed, all is reformed. A gracious man's watch is mainly about his heart; Create in me a clean heart,Psal. 51.10. Psal. 86.11. Psal. 119.36. Psal. 119 80. Psal. 27.8. See Psal. 119.2. Acts 8 37. Heb. 8.10. Jer. 31 33. O God, and renew a right spirit within me; Unite my heart to fear thy name. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. When thou saidest, seek my face, my heart answered, Thy face Lord will I seek. Psal. 119.10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. Ver. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto
covetousness.Rom. 1.9. The heart of man is the fountain of life or death, and therefore sin in the heart, in some respects, is worse and more dangerous than sin in the life; and hence 'tis that the sincere Christian doubles his guard about his heart. Luther hit it, when he said, I more fear what is within me, than what comes from without; the storms and winds with∣out do never move the earth, 'tis only vapours within that causeth earth-quakes, as Philosophers observe.Mat. 23.25-30. Hypocrites (as our Saviour testifies) are all for the outside, they wash the platters and the cups, and beautifie the tombs like an adul∣teress, whose care is to paint and set a fair face upon a foul matter; but now a sincere Christian,Psal. 50.23. though he has a special respect to the well-ordering of his life, yet his main busi∣ness and work is about his heart; O, that this ignorant heart were but more enlightned! O, that this proud heart were but more humble! O that this prophane heart were but more holy! O, that this earthly heart were but more heavenly! O, that this unbelieving heart were but more believing! O, that this passionate heart were but more meek! O, that this carnal heart were but more spiritual! O that this luke∣warm heart were but more zealous for God, and Christ, and the Gospel, and the great concernments of eternity! O, that this slight heart were but more serious! O, that this dull heart were but more quickned! O, that this dead heart were but more enlivened! &c. The highest and hardest work of a Christian lieth with his heart. Mark, common light, common conviction, education, enforcement of con∣science, principles of common honesty and morality, the eye of man, the fear of man, the examples of man, the laws of man, and the rewards of man, with a hundred other things, may be very prevalent to reform the life, to regulate the outward conversation, and to keep that in some due deco∣rum; and yet all these things will be found too weak, too low to change the heart, to reform the heart, to mend the heart, to purifie the heart.Acts 15.9. To this great work there are principles of a higher nature required, Purifying their hearts by faith. 'Tis not a guard of moral vertues, but a guard of saving graces that can keep the heart in order; to reform
the heart, to keep the heart in a gracious frame, is one of the best and hardest works in the world, Prov. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life. The Text is about matter of life and death. The words are man∣datory, for all counsels in Scripture carry in them the force of a command. In the words you have two things observable, 1. A duty enjoyned, Keep thy heart with all diligence. 2. The reason or motive inforcing it, For out of it are the issues of life. In the duty there are two things considerable, 1. Here is the subject matter, the thing that is to be done, and that is, Keep thy heart. This duty is charged upon all, in peremptory and undispensable terms. 2. Here is the manner how it must be done, and that is, With all diligence. Keep. The Hebrew word  Natsar to keep, hath various significations, but the main is to keep in safe custody; we should keep our hearts as under lock and key, that they may be alwayes at hand when the Lord shall call for them, &c. Thy heart. By the heart the we are not to understand that par∣ticular vital member of the body, that in common speech we call the heart. Heart is not here taken properly for that no∣ble part of the body, which Philosophers call the primum vi∣vens, &c. ultimum moriens, the first that lives, and the last that dies. But by heart in a metaphor, the Scripture some∣times understands some particular noble faculty of the soul; sometimes the heart is put for the understanding, Rom. 1.21. Their foolish heart was darkned, that is, their understanding was darkned; sometimes 'tis put for the will and affections, Mat. 22.37.So Prov. 23.26. Deut. 10.12. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; that is, with thy will, and with all thy affections. The will is the chiefest power of the soul, as the heart is the principal part of the body;Mat. 8. and it commands all the affections as the Centurion did his servants;Job 27.6. sometimes 'tis put for the conscience, 1 Joh. 3.20. If our heart condemn us, God is greater han our heart, and knoweth all things; that is, if our conscience condemn us just∣ly, then our case must be assuredly sad, because God knows much more by us than we know by our selves, and can charge
us with many sins that conscience is not privy to;Psal. 19 12. sometimes 'tis put for the memory, Psal. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart; that is, in my memory. So Luke 2.19. But here 'tis taken comprehensively for the whole soul, with all its powers, noble faculties and endowments, together with their several operations; all which are to be watched over. With all diligence; or as the Hebrew runs, With all keep∣ing.  The Hebrew word  Shamar signifies,Cato, Cicero, Se∣neca, Socrates, and others, have laid down excellent rules for the go∣vernment of the outward man; but n one for the go∣vernment of the heart. to keep with watch and ward. A Christian is to keep a perpetual guard about his heart. A Lapide notes, that the Hebrew word is borrowed from military affairs. We should keep our hearts as soldiers keep a Garrison, with watch and ward. Lavater jumps with him, and tells us, that the word Shamar is taken from a besieged Garrison, begirt by many enemies without, and in danger of being betrayed by treacherous Citizens within; in which danger the soldiers upon pain of death are commanded to watch. Junius reads the word thus, Keep thy heart; Supra omnem custodiam, above all keeping. So Hierom reads, Prae omni custodia, above all keeping keep thy heart; that is, keep, keep, watch, watch, &c. So Rhodolphus reads it, Prae omni custodia; and so we read it in the Margin of our Bi∣bles. And the Syriack reads it in the same manner that our English doth. Cum omni cautione, with all caution and wari∣ness we are to keep our hearts. O, what guards and double guards! O, what watches, and double watches should men put upon their hearts! These words keeping, keep, import both a universal watchfulness over the heart, and a diligent watchfulness over the heart, and a constant watchfulness over the heart; and thrice happy are those persons who keep such a watch upon their hearts. A man is to keep his eye, and keep his mouth, and keep his feet; but above all keeping, he is to keep his heart. 'Tis a duty incumbent upon every Christian to keep his own heart; Keep thy heart, Thy self; thou mayest make another thy Park-keeper, or thy House-keeper, or thy Shop-keeper, or thy Cash-keeper, or thy Horse-keeper, or thy Nurse-keeper; but thou must be thy
own Heart-keeper. Keep thy heart with all diligence; some understand this of all kind of watchfulness. The Hebrew word is applyed to several sorts of keeping. As, First, It is applyed to those that are the keepers of a pri∣son,Gen. 39.21, 22, 23 So Job 7.12. where dangerous Fellons or Malefactors are to be look∣ed to, that they don't break away, 1 King. 20.39. Keep this man; so Joseph was made the Keeper of the prison. The Hebrew word is the same with that, in Prov. 4.23. Now, O ow diligent! how vigilant are men in looking after their prisoners? even so should we be in looking after our hearts, &c. Secondly, It signifies to keep, as men would keep a be∣sieged Garrison,Hab. 2.1. or City, or Castle, in time of war. So 'tis used in that, Hab. 2.1. Now, what strong guards, what watchful guards do men keep up at such a time? A gracious heart is Christ's Fort-royal. Now, against this Fort Satan will imploy the utmost of his strength, art & craft; and there∣fore how highly does it concern every Christian to keep a strong guard, a constant guard about his heart. But, Thirdly, It signifies to keep, as the Priests and Levites kept the Sanctuary of God, the Temple of God, and all the holy things that were committed to their charge: So the word is often used by the Prophet, Ezek. 44.8, 15, 16, &c. The Temple, and all the vessels of the Temple were to be kept pure, and clean, and sweet. Our hearts are the Tem∣ples of God, the Temples of the holy Ghost; and therefore we should alwayes keep a strong and diligent guard about them, that nothing may pass in or out, that may be either displeasing, provoking or grieving to them. But, Fourthly, The word signifies to keep, as a man keeps his life, Job 10.12. Thy visitation hath preserved (here is Shamar) my life. Now with what care, with what diligence, with what labour, with what watchfulness do men labour to preserve their natural lives? what a guard, what a watch do men daily
set about their lives; the same they should set about their hearts. But, Fifthly, Men should keep their hearts, as they keep a rich  treasure of money, or jewels, or plate. Now, to preserve a rich treasure, what locks, what bolts, what bars,All our spiritual riches are in our hearts. A good man may say with Bias, omnia mea mecum parto, all my goods I carry about with me. what chains are made use of? Our hearts are jewels more worth than all the Kingdoms, Crowns and Scepters of this world. There are few men that know how to value a God, a Christ, a Gos∣pel, a Covenant of grace, a Heaven, or their own hearts, as they should. What are mountains of gold, and rocks of pearl, to the heart, the soul of man? The heart is that pearl of price for which a man should venture his all, and lay down his all. O then! what a guard, what a watch should a man continually keep upon his heart? The heart is Camera omni∣potentis Regis, the presence chamber of the King of heaven; and upon this account it becomes a Christian alwayes to keep a guard upon his heart; he keeps his heart best who keeps it as his choisest treasure, &c. But, Sixthly, Men should keep their hearts, as a fond father  keeps his only child; the fond father will still keep his child within doors, he will still have him under his eye, and in his presence, that so no hurt, no harm may befal him day or night. Our eye should be still upon our hearts, or else they will give us the slip, and play the wantons with us. But, Seventhly, Men should keep their hearts, as Lovers keep  the love-tokens that are mutually sent one to another; they love to be often a looking upon them, and a thinking of them, and a talking of them; and will be sure to keep the strictest and the strongest guard upon them: So a Christian should still be a looking upon his heart, and a thinking upon his heart, and a speaking of his heart (either of the badness of it, or of the wants of it) and a keeping of the strictest and strongest guard upon his heart. But, Eighthly, A man should keep his heart as a man keeps his
house, when he is afraid and in danger of being robbed by thieves in the night. O! how wakeful, and watchful, and active will a man now be? but what's a man's house to his heart? A mans heart is in ten thousand times more danger than his house, and accordingly his guard should be most about his heart. But, Ninthly, A man should keep his heart, as men keep their gardens that are full of choice, rich, rare, ripe fruits and dowers. Now, what care, cost, and pains men are at to keep such gardens, you well know: And O, that you did but every day more and more experimentally know what it is to spend your greatest care and pains about your hearts, which are Christ's garden, his bed of spices, where all graces flourish! Cant. 4. ult. Tenthly and last, A man should keep his heart, as spruce men and women do their fine cloaths; O, they won't endure a speck, a spot upon them! 'Tis your wisdom, and O, that you would more and more make it your work to keep your hearts from all sinful specks and spots! Let not others be more careful to keep their outsides clean, than you are to keep your insides clean; for what are clean cloaths to a clean heart? 'Tis better to go to heaven in ragged cloaths with a clean heart, than to go to hell in fine cloaths with an unclean heart. Doubtless that man that makes it his business to keep his heart as men keep dangerous Fellons or Traitors, or as soldiers keep their Garrisons or Castles when closly be∣sieged, or as the Priests and Levites kept the Sanctuary of God, or as a man keeps his natural life, or as a man keeps a rich treasure, or as a fond father keeps an only child, or as Lovers keep their love-tokens, or as a man keeps his house when he is in danger to be robbed, or as a man keeps his pleasant garden, or as spruce men and women keep their fine cloaths; that man is doubtless a true Nathaniel, a man that has a work of God past in power upon his soul; yea that man whose sincere desires, and whose gracious purposes, and fixed resolutions, and faithful endeavours is to guard and watch his
heart, according to the particulars we have now hinted; that man without a peradventure is a gracious man, and one that has the root of the matter in him, and shall be happy to all eternity. Look, as no man can hear as he would and should, nor pray as he would and should, nor believe as he would and should, nor repent as he would and should, nor walk as he would and should; so no man can keep his heart as he would and should: but if a man makes it his great business and work to keep his heart, to watch his heart, to reform his heart, to better his heart, he is accepted of God, and shall be bles∣sed for-ever. 'Tis one of the greatest and cleerest evidences of grace, for a man to make it his greatest business, work and concernment in this world, to keep his heart alwayes in a gracious frame,Cant. 5.2. 2 Kings 22.19. 2 Chron. 32.26. James 5.11. Eccles. 5.1, 2. Col. 3.1, 2. 2 Cor. 7.11. to keep his heart alwayes in a wakeful frame, in a watchful frame, in a tender frame, in a believing frame, in a repenting frame, in an humble frame, in a pati∣ent frame, in a serious frame, in a heavenly frame, and in a jealous frame; for the more gracious the heart is, the more suspicious it will be. Satan has a strong party, a numerous party, an old party, a subtil party in all our hearts; and there∣fore it highly concerns us to watch our hearts with a holy jealousie: O Sirs! God hath never said, Above all keepings keep your Shops, or above all keepings keep your Estates, or above all keepings keep your Flocks, or above all keepings keep your Bags, or above all keepings keep your Friends, or above all keepings keep your Bodies, or above all keep∣ings keep your Names, or above all keepings keep your Conversations; but he hath said, above all keepings keep your hearts. Look,Fron. lib. 2. as the heart is the fountain of natural life, and if it fail life fails; and therefore it is strongly se∣cured with ribs about it, it is guarded in a castle of flesh and bones; so is the soul the fountain of spiritual life,2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Thes. 5.13. &c. and runs invisibly through all the body. Fountains were to be kept pure by the Roman Laws of the twelve Tables; and the heart that is the spring and fountain of all actions, is to be kept pure by the Laws of the great God. Men keep the heart principally from hurt, because every wound there is mortal. O, that men were as wise for their souls! God's eye is main∣ly
upon the heart. The heart well guarded and watcht, keeps all in security. Alexander was safe while Antipater kept the watch; so all within that little world Man, will be safe while the heart is strongly guarded. The heart is the foun∣tain, the root, the store-house, the primum mobile, the great wheel that sets all a going; and therefore above all keep∣ings keep your hearts. 'Tis a foolish thing to watch the out∣works, and leave the Fort-Royal without a guard; so 'tis a foolish thing to watch the out-works, the eye, the ear, the tongue, the hand, the feet (though these must all be watcht) and to leave the heart, which is a Christians Fort-Royal, without a guard. Omnia si perdas, animam servare memento. If all things else must needs be lost, Yet save thy soul what e're it cost. He that makes it his business to watch, and weep, and sigh, and groan most over his own heart, he doubtless is in a gra∣cious estate; he that makes it his work, his daily work, his greatest work,3 John 2. his work of works, to keep a continual guard upon his heart, he certainly is in a blessed estate; he that la∣mentingly cryes out, O, that my soul did but prosper as my body! O, that my inward man were but in as good a frame as my outward man! O, that this proud heart were but more humble! O, that this hard heart were but more softned! O, that this carnal heart were but more spiritual! O, that this earthly heart were but more heavenly! O, that this un∣believing heart were but more believing! O, that this passio∣nate heart were but more meek! O, that this slight heart were but more sericus! O, that this blind heart were but more enlightned! O, that this dull heart were but more quickned! O, my heart, my heart! when wilt thou be better? O, my God, my God! when shall my heart be better? O, bring it into a gracious frame, and for ever keep it in a gracious frame! He that thus lamentingly cryes out of his heart, he certainly has an honest heart, and will be happy for ever. O Lord, my memory is weak, and my utterance is bad, and my
understanding is dark, and my gifts are low, and my affecti∣ons are flat, and my temptations are strong,Psa. 39 22, 23, 24 and my corrup∣tions are prevalent; but thou who art the great heart search∣er, thou knowest that I would fain have my heart in a better temper; I had rather have my heart brought into a gracious frame, and kept in a gracious frame, than to have all the riches of the Indies, than to be an Emperor, yea than to be King over all the earth. If it be indeed thus with thee, thou art blest, and shalt be blest for ever, 2 Cor. 8.12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not (I know the Apostle speaks this in point of alms, but 'tis applicable to the case in hand, and to a hundred other cases.) God measures his peo∣ple not by their works, but by their wills; if their wills be to be more holy, humble, heavenly, and to have their hearts alwayes in a most gracious frame, then they are accepted of God; for every good man is as good in the eye of God, in the judgment of God, and in the account of God, as he would be. Not long before famous Mr. Banes died, some friends that were with him in his Library (which was an ex∣cellent one) fell a commending of it; I, saith he, there stand my books, but the Lord knows that for many years lost past, I have studied my heart more than Books. O, no Minister to him, no Scholar to him who studies his heart more than his books; nor no Christian to him who studies his heart more than his day-books, or more than his Shop-books, or that studies his heart more than his counting-house, or that studies his heart more than a good bargain, &c. That man is for heaven, and heaven is for that man, who makes it his greatest business in this world to watch his heart, to guard his heart; the hypo∣pocrite looks most to externals, but the sincere Christian looks most to internals; the hypocrites main watch is about his lips, but a sincere Christians main watch is about his heart; the hypocrites main work lyes without doors, but the sincere Christians main work lyes within doors. All know that know any thing, that both nature and grace begin at the heart, but art begins at the face. A painter doth not begin a picture at the heart; a picture hath but a face, but an outside.
And as nature begins at the heart, but art at the face; so grace begins at the heart, but hypocrisie at the face, at the outside of Religion. Every man is that really that he is in∣wardly.Rom. 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. Cer∣tainly, that man that makes it his great business to watch his heart, and to keep his heart alwayes in a gracious frame, that man is a gracious man. 'Tis true, our hearts are like our watches, seldom got to go well; and when they do go well, how hard a work is it to keep them going well? The motions of our watches are not constant; sometimes they go faster, and sometimes they go slower, and often they stand in need of mending. Though in these and many other respects, our hearts are like our watches, yet if we make it our grand work to keep a constant guard upon our hearts, and our main design in this world to have our hearts brought and kept in a gracious frame, our spiritual estate is good, and we shall be happy for ever, &c. In my other Writings there are variety of special evi∣dences, which the Christian Reader (if he please, and if need require) may make use of, in order to the further clear∣ing up of his gracious estate; and therefore let these twenty suffice at this time. And thus much for this Chapter, &c.
CHAP. III. Now in this Chapter I shall treat of sound, saving re∣pentance, of repentance unto Life; yea, of that Evan∣gelical repentance that hath the precious Promises of remission of sin and salvation running out unto it. My purpose at this time is not to handle the doctrine of Repentance at large, but only to speak so far of it as may speak it out to be evidential of the goodness and happiness of a Christians spiritual and eternal con∣dition. NOw before I come to open my self more particularly, give me leave to premise this in the general, viz. That there is a repentance that does accompany salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the world worketh death. Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. Acts 11.18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. Mat. 18.3. And Jesus said, verily I say unto you, except you be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Having premised thus much in the general, give me now leave to say, That there are three parts of true, sound, saving re∣pentance,
unto all which forgiveness of sin is promised: And the First is contrition or grief of heart for sins committed. Now this is called sometimes godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10. and sometimes a contrite spirit, Isa. 66.2. and sometimes a broken and contrite heart, Psal. 51.17. and sometimes the afflicting of our souls, Levit. 16.29. and sometimes the humbling of the heart, 2 Chron. 7.14. Lamen. 3.20. and sometimes a mourning, Zech. 12.10. and sometimes a weep∣ing, Mark 14.72. All repenting sinners are mourning sin∣ners. David repents and waters his couch with his tears, Psal. 6.6. Hezekiah repents and humbles himself for the pride of his heart, 2 Chron. 32.26. Ephraim repents, and Ephraim be∣moans himself and smites upon his thigh, and is even con∣founded, Jer. 31.18, 19. Mary Magdalen repents, and weeps, and washes Christs feet with her tears, Luke 7.38. The Co∣rinthians repented, and they were made sorry after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7.9. Repentance in the Hebrew is called Nacham, an irking of the soul; and in Greek Metamelia, after grief; and Metanoia, after wit; and in the Latine, Poenitentia. All which do import, that contrition or sorrow for sin, is one part of true repentance. O! the sighs, the groans, the sobs, the tears, that are to be found among repenting sin∣ners,Luth. Tom. 3.457. &c. Luther hit the Mark, when he said, What are all the Palaces of the world, to a contrite heart; yea, heaven and earth, seeing it is the seat of divine Majesty? Secondly, 'Tis very observable, that all mourning persons for their sins, are within the compass of the promise of for∣giveness of sins, Zech. 12.11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, Zech. 13.1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, Jer. 31.18. I have sure∣ly heard Ephraim bemoaning of himself, &c. Ver. 20. I will surely have mercy on him; or as the Hebrew has it, I will having mercy, have mercy on him. As soon as Ephraims heart is
troubled for his sins, Gods bowels are troubled for Ephraim; as soon as Ephraim, like a penitent child, falls a weeping at God's foot, God like a tender indulgent father falls a be∣moaning of Ephraim. Ephraim could not refrain from tears, and God could not refrain from opening his bowels of mer∣cy towards him. So Isa. 57.15. And how can the contrite heart be indeed revived and cheered without forgiveness of sins, without a pardon in the bosom? Melancthon makes men∣tion of a godly woman, who having upon her death-bed been in much conflict, and afterwards much comforted, brake out into these words: Now, and not till now, did I understand the meaning of these words, Thy sins are forgiven. There is no comfort to that which arises from the sense of forgiveness, Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God; speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her ini∣quities are pardoned. And why is the mourning soul pronoun∣ced the blessed soul, (Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted) but because the mourning soul is the pardoned soul? But what is that sorrow or mourning for sin,  that is a part of true repentance? The resolution of this question is very necessary for the preventing of all soul-deceits and mistakes, and for the quieting, setling and satisfying of souls truly penitent; and therefore I shall give these eight following Answers to it. First, It is a sorrow or grief that is spiritual, that is super∣natural;  no man is born with godly sorrow in his heart, as he is born with a tongue in his mouth. Godly sorrow is a plant of God's own planting, 'tis a seed of his own sowing, 'tis a flower of his own setting, 'tis of a heavenly off-spring, 'tis from God, and God alone: The spirit of mourning is from above, 'tis from a supernatural power and principle; there is nothing that can turn a heart of stone into flesh, but the spirit of God, Ezek. 36.25, 26. Godly sorrow is a
gift from God, Job 23.16. God makes my heart soft. No hand but a divine hand can make the heart soft and tender under the sight and sense of sin. Nature may easily work a man to mourn, and melt, and weep, under worldly losses, crosses and miseries, as it did David's men, 1 Sam. 30.4. But it must be grace, it must be a supernatural principle that must work the heart to mourn for sin. Secondly, godly sorrow is a sorrow for sin as sin, 'tis a mour∣ning rather for sin than for smart; 'tis not so much for loss of goods, lands, wife, child, credit, name, &c. but for that a holy God is offended, a righteous Law violated, Christ dishonour∣ed, the Spirit grieved, and the Gospel blemished, &c. Pe∣ter's sorrow was godly, but Judas his sorrow was worldly; Peter mourns over the evil of sin, but Judas mourns over the evil of punishment. David mourns over his sin, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, Psal. 51.4. And so 2 Sam. 24.10. And David's heart smote him after he had numbred the people; and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done, and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done foolishly. Da∣vid does not cry out, take away the threatned famine, but take away the iniquity of thy servant; nor he does not cry out, take away the enemies of thy servant, but take away the iniquity of thy servant; nor he does not say, take away the pestilence from the Land, but take away the iniquity of thy servant. But now when Pharaoh was under judgments, he never cryes to the Lord to take away his sins, his pride, his hardness, his obdurateness, his envy, his malice, his hatred, &c. but he cryes out, take away the judgment, take away the judgment, take away the frogs, take away the lice, take away the caterpillars, &c. But under all these dreadful and amazing judgments that he was under, such a word as this never fell from his lips, take away my sin, O Lord, take a∣way my sins; thy judgments do terrifie me, but my sins will damn me, and therefore what ever becomes of my life, king∣dom and crown, take away my sins and save my soul. David saw sin to be a greater evil, than flying before his enemies,
or than famine or pestilence was; and therefore he desires rather to be rid of his sins, than to be rid of the punishment that was due to his sin; but Pharaoh saw no such evil in sin, and therefore he cryes out, take away the plague, take away the plague. And Job upon the dunghil cryes out, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? JobJob 7.20. does not cry out, O, I have lost all my substance, I am bereaved of all my children, I am set as naked upon the dunghil as ever I was born; my friends reproach me, my wife tempts me to curse my God, which is ten thousand times worse than to curse my self; Satan persecutes me, and God has not only forsaken me, but is also become a severe enemy to me, &c. Job cryes out of his sin, and not of his sufferings; a deep sense of his sins swallows up as it were, all sense of his suf∣ferings. And so that great Apostle Paul does not cry out, O wretch∣ed man that I am, that bonds attend me in every place, and that I have neither house nor home to go to, and that I am despised, scorned, reproached and persecuted, and that I am accounted factious, seditious, rebellious, erronious, and that I am lookt upon as the off-scouring of the world, &c. O no, but he cryes out of his sin; O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Rom. 7.23, 24. So the Prophet Micah, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned, Micah 7.9. Though of all bur∣dens the indignation of the Lord be the greatest burden, yet divine indignation is but a light burden in comparison of sin. A gracious soul can better stand under the burden of God's indignation for sin, than it can stand under the burden of sin it self, which hath kindled that indignation, &c. Thirdly, Godly sorrow is a great sorrow, 'tis a superla∣tive  sorrow, 'tis a sad and serious sorrow; a sincere mourn∣ing is a deep mourning, it springs from serious and deep ap∣prehensions of the great anger and deep displeasure of God, and of the woful nature, demerit, burden, bitterness, vile∣ness and filthiness of sin, &c. The blessed Scripture seems to make godly sorrow a superlative sorrow, calling it a great
mourning, like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, and a bitterness, as one is in for his first-born, Zech. 12.10, 11. And so the Church, My bowels are troubled within me, mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously reelled, Lamen. 1.20. And David watered his couch with his tears, Psal. 6.6. And Mary Magdalen wept much, as Well as she loved much, Luke 7. And Peter went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26. ult. Clement observes, that all the time that Peter lived after this great fall, he would every night, when he heard the cock crow, fall upon his knees and weep bitterly.Hosea 7.14. Look, as shallow brooks make the greatest noise, so hypocrites and formalists may howl, and roar, and cry, and make more noise than the true penitent; but yet the sorrow of a true penitent is more inward, secret, solid, still and deep. As you know the deepest Rivers run most silently, and make least noise, so the deepest sorrow makes least noise. The mourning of repenting souls,Ezek. 7.16. Isa. 51.20. Isa. 59.11. under the apprehensions of their sins, is like the mourning of Doves; but the mourn∣ing of wicked men under the apprehension of their sins, is like the bellowing of Bulls, and roaring of Bears. Fourthly, A sincere mourning is an extensive mourning, 'tis an universal mourning. Godly sorrow and grief extends it self, not only to some sins, but to all sins, great and small. Look, as a holy heart hates all sin, so a holy heart mourns o∣ver all sin that it sees and knows to be sin. God hates one sin as well as another, and he has forbid one sin as well as ano∣ther, and he has revealed his wrath from heaven against one sin as well as another, and he is provoked by one sin as well as another, and Christ is crucified by one sin as well as another, and the Spirit is grieved as well by one sin as by another, and the Gospel is reproached by one sin as well as another, and the conscience is wounded by one sin as well as another, and Satan is gratified by one sin as well as another, and wicked mens mouths are opened by one sin as well as another, and young comers on in Religion are stumbled, grieved and offended by one sin as well as another, and the soul is endangered by one sin as well as another. An unsound
heart may mourn for great sins, that make great wounds in his conscience and credit, and that leave a great blot upon his name, or that waste or rot his body, or destroy his estate, or that expose him to publick scorn and shame, &c. Prov. 5.8-14. but for sins of omission, for wandring thoughts, idle words, deadness, coldness, slightness in religious duties and services, unbelief, secret pride, self-confidence, and a thousand more such gnats as these he can swallow without any remorse. But now godly sorrow is of a general extent, it mourns as well for small sins as for great. Davids heart smote him, as well for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, as it did for killing of Uriah with the sword. A gracious soul weeps o∣ver many sins, that none can charge upon him but God and his own conscience, Psal. 19.12. O cleanse thou me from se∣cret faults. Yea, let me say that godly sorrow and grief extends not only to a man's own sins, but also to the sins of others as well as his own, Ezek. 9.4, 5. And this you may see also in David, Psal. 119.53, 136, 158. And in Jeremiah, Jer. 9.1, 2, 3. And in Paul, Phil. 3.18. And in Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And if you please to turn to my Treatise on Holiness, you may see seven special arguments for this their practise, Page 139 to pag. 145. and therefore a touch in this place may suffice. Fifthly, Godly sorrow is a lasting sorrow, 'tis a durable  sorrow; as long as a Christian continues sinning, he can't but continue mourning. David's sins were alwayes before him, Psal. 51.3. though his Absalom nor his Bathsheba were not ever before him. Godly sorrow will every day follow sin hard at hells. Look, as a wicked man (in respect of his desire and will to sin) would sin for ever, if he should live for ever; so I may say, if a godly man should live for ever, he would sorrow for ever. After Paul had been converted many years (some think fourteen) you shall find him a mourn∣ing and lamenting over his sins, Rom. 7. An ingenious child will never cease mourning, till he ceases from offending an in∣dulgent father. Though sin and godly sorrow were never
born together, yet whilst a believer lives in this world, they must live together. And indeed holy joy and godly sorrow are no wayes inconsistent, Psal. 2.11. yea, a godly man's eyes are alwayes fullest of tears, when his heart is fullest of holy joy, &c. A man may go joying and mourning to his grave, yea to heaven at the same time. But now the sorrow, the grief of wicked men for sin, 'tis like a morning cloud, or the early dew, or the crackling of thorns under a pot, or a Post that quickly passeth by, or a dream that soon vanisheth, or like a tale that is told, &c. their sorrowful hearts and mournful eyes soon dry up together. As you may see in Esau, Ahab, Pharaoh and Judas; but the streams of godly sorrow will last and run, as long as sin hangs upon us, and dwells in us, 1 Cor. 15.9. I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God. Psal. 25.7. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. David prayeth to the Lord, not only to forgive but also to forget, both the sins of his youth, and the sins of his age. David remembred all his faults, both of former and of later times. David was well in years when he defiled himself with Bathsheba; and this he remembers and mourns over, Psal. 51. And 'tis very ob∣servable, that God charged his people for to remember old sins, Deut. 9.7. Remember and forget not how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness. Repentance is a grace, and must have its daily operation as well as other graces, witness the very covenant of grace it self, Ezek. 16.62, 63. I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord, that thou mayest remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified towards thee for all that thou hast done. Certainly a true penitent can no more satisfie himself with one act of repen∣tance, than he can satisfie himself with one act of faith, or or with one act of hope, or with one act of love, or with one act of humility, or with one act of patience, or with one act of self-denial. Godly sorrow is a Gospel-grace that will live and last as well and as long as other graces, 'tis a spring that in this life can never be drawn dry.
Sixthly, Godly sorrow is a divorcing sorrow, it divorces  the heart from sin, it breaks that ancient league that has been between the heart and sin;It is an excellent saying of Austin, He doth truly be∣wail the sins he hath committed, who never com∣mits the sins he hath bewailed. there is a strong firm league be∣tween every sinner and his sin, Isa. 28.15, 18. but when god∣ly sorrow enters, it dissolves that league, it separates between a sinner and his sin, it sets the soul at an everlasting distance from sin. The union between the root and the branches, the foundation and the building, the head and the members, the father and the child, the husband and the wife, the body and the soul are all neer, very neer unions; yet that between a sinner and his sin seems to be a neerer union. Observable is the story of Phaltiel.2 Sam. 3.14, 15, 16. You know when David had married Michol, Saul injuriously gave her to another; but when Da∣vid came to the crown, and sent forth his Royal commands that his wife should be brought to him, her husband dares not but obey, brings her on her journey, and then not with∣out great reluctancy of spirit, takes his leave of her. But what was Phaltiel weary of his wife, that he now forsakes her? O no, he was enforced, and though she was gone, yet he had many a sad thought about parting with her, and he never leaves looking till he sees her as far as Baharim, weeping and bemoaning her absence. Just thus stands the heart of every unregenerate man towards his sins, as Phaltiel's heart stood towards his wife. But when the springs of godly sorrow rise in the soul, the league, the friendship, the union that was be∣tween the sinner and his sins, comes to be dissolved and bro∣ken in pieces, Hosea 14.8. All godly sorrow sets the heart against sin; he that divinely mourns over sin, can't live in a course of sin; when of all bitters God makes sin to be the greatest bitter to the soul, then the soul bids an everlasting farewel to sin; now the soul in good earnest bids adieu to sin for ever. O Sirs!☜ this is a most certain Maxim (to live and die with) that either a mans sins will make an end of his mourning, or else his mourning will make an end of his sin; for he that holds on sinning, will certainly leave off mourn∣ing (no man can make a trade of sin, and yet keep his heart in a mourning frame) but he that holds on mourning for sin, will certainly leave off the trade of sin, holy grief for sin,
will sooner or later break off all leagues and friendships with sin.Isa. 59.1, 2. As sin makes a separation between God and a man's soul, so godly sorrow makes a separation between a man's soul and his sin. All holy mournings over sin, will by de∣grees issue in the wasting and weakning of the strength and power of sin, nothing below the death and destruction of sin will satisfie that soul that truly mourns over sin. But now, though you may find an unsound heart sometimes a lamenting over his sins, yet you shall never find him a leav∣ing off his sins. Pharaoh lamented over his sin, crying out, I have sinned,Exod. 9.27. & 10.16. the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wick∣ed. And again, Then Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron in haste, and he said, I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you. But though you find him here lamenting and com∣plaining over his sin, yet you never find him leaving or for∣saking of his sin. So Saul could cry out, he had sinned, but yet he still continued in his sin; he acknowledged that he did evil in persecuting of David, and yet he still held on perse∣cuting of him. An unsound heart mourns over sin, and yet he holds on in a course of sin; he sins and mourns, and mourns and sins, and commonly all his mourning for sin does but the more imbolden him in a way of sin; but the gracious soul sayes with Job,Job 34.32. If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more. He laments over sin and leaves it, he confesses it and forsakes it, and he is as willing to forgo it, as he is willing that God should forgive it. Seventhly, All (and if you please I shall give you many things in one) godly sorrow is the fruit and effect of Evan∣gelical faith, it flows from faith as the stream from the fountain, the branch from the root, and the effect from the cause, Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born. Look, as all legal sorrow flows from a legal faith, as you may see in Ahab's and the Ninevites, so all Evange∣lical sorrow flows from an Evangelical faith; They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn. All gracious mourning flows from looking, from believing; nothing breaks the heart of a sinner like a look of faith; all tears of godly sorrow drop from the eye of faith; godly sorrow rises and falls, as faith rises and falls; faith and godly sor∣row are like the fountain and the floud, which rise and fall together. The more a man is able by faith to look upon a pierced Christ, the more his heart will mourn over all the dishonours that he has done to Christ; the more deep and wide the wounds are that faith shews me in the heart and sides of Christ, the more my heart will be wounded for sin∣ing against Christ. Again, godly sorrow is not an enemy, but a friend to holy joy. I have read of a holy man, who lying upon his sick bed, and being askt which were his joyfullest dayes that ever he had, cryed out, O give me my mourning dayes, give me my mourn∣ing dayes again, for they were the joyfullest dayes that ever I had. The higher the springs of godly sorrow rise, the higher the tydes of holy joy rise; his graces will flourish most, who Evangelically mourns most. Grace alwayes thrives best in that garden (that heart) that is watered most with the tears of godly sorrow. He that grieves most for sin, will rejoyce most in God; and he that rejoyces most in God, will grieve most for sin. Again, the more a man apprehends of the love of God, and of the love of Christ; and the more a man tastes and is assured of the love of the Father, and of the love of the Son, the more that person will grieve and mourn, that he has offended, provoked and grieved such a Father, and such a Son. Remember this, as a man's assurance of peace and re∣conciliation with God rises, so his grief for sin rises; the more clear and certain evidences a man has of the love and favour of God to his soul, the more that man will grieve and mourn for sinning against such a God. There is nothing that thaws and melts the heart, that softens and breaks the heart, like the warm beams of divine love; as you may see in the
case of Mary Magdalen, Luk. 7. she loved much, and she wept much, for much was forgiven her; a sight of the free grace and love of Christ towards her, in an act of for∣giveness, broke her heart all in pieces. A man can't stand under the shinings of divine love with a frozen heart, nor yet with dry eyes; the more a man sees of the love of Christ, and the more a man tastes and enjoys of the love of Christ, the more that man will grieve and mourn for all the disho∣nours that he has done to Christ. The more an ingenious child sees, and tastes, and enjoys of his fathers love, the more he grieves and mourns that ever he should offend such a fa∣ther, or provoke such a father, who has been so loving and indulgent towards him. Injuries done to a friend cut deep, and the more near, and dear, and beloved a man's friend is to him, the more a man is afflicted and troubled for any wrongs or injuries that are done to him; and just so 'tis between God and a gracious soul. The free love and favour of God, and his unspeakable goodness and mercy manifested in Jesus Christ to poor sin∣ners, is the very spring and fountain of all Evangelical sor∣row; nothing breaks the heart of a poor sinner like the sight of God's free love in a Redeemer. A man can't seri∣ously look upon the firstness, the freeness, the greatness, the unchangeableness, the everlastingness, and the matchlessness of God's free favour and love in Christ, with a hard heart, or with dry eyes, Ezek. 36.31. compared with vers. 25, 26. O! who is there that has but one spark of ingenuity, that can read over that heart-breaking Scripture with dry eyes? Isa. 43.22, 23, 24.See Isa. 57.17, 18, 19. But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel; thou hast not brought me the small cattel of thy burnt offerings, neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices, I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense; thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifi∣ces, but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities, Now a man would think, after all this horrid abuse put upon God, this would certainly follow:
Therefore I will plague and punish thee, therefore my wrath shall smoak against thee, therefore my soul shall ab∣hor thee, therefore I will shut up my loving kindness in dis∣pleasure against thee, therefore I will shew no more mercy towards thee, therefore I will hide my face for ever from thee, therefore I will take vengeance on thee, therefore I will rain hell out of heaven upon thee, &c. O! but read and wonder, read and admire, read and stand amazed and asto∣nished, read and refrain from tears if thou canst, ver. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. The Prophets expression in that, Zech. 12.10. is very observable; They shall look up∣on him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one that mourneth for his only son. Now 'tis observable in a fa∣thers mourning for an only son, there is nothing but pure love, sincere love, hearty love; but in a sons mourning for his father, there may be and often is a great deal of self-love, self-respect, because the child may run and read in his fa∣ther's death, his own loss, his own ruin, his own undoing; but in the father's mourning for an only son, a man may run and read the integrity, purity, and ingenuity of the father's love; and 'tis only such a love as this as sets the soul a mourning and a lamenting over a crucified Christ. The thoughts and fears of wrath, of hell, and of condemnation, works unsound hearts to mourn; but 'tis the sight of a bleeding, dying Sa∣viour that sets ingenious, gracious souls a mourning. Eighthly and lastly, Godly sorrow, grief or mourning,  may be known by the inseparable concomitants or compani∣ons that attend it and wait on it,2 Cor. 7.11. and they are these seven. First, What carefulness or study;. 1. Concomitant of godly sorrow. the word notes the se∣rious intention of the mind, and the diligence and dexterity of the soul in shunning and avoiding sin, and arming of the soul against all occasions and temptations thereunto. The great care of the repenting soul is to leave all sin, to shake off all sin, to avoid all sin, and to weaken, and subdue, and
bring under all sin. O! the care, the caution, the circum∣spection, the vigilancy, the strivings and the strugglings of the repenting soul against temptations and corruptions. 2. Concomitant of godly sorrow.Secondly, Yea what clearing of your selves, , Apology or defence; which is not done either by denying of sin, or by excusing of sin committed, but by confession of sin,As the child makes his defence and apology to his father, not by denying or de∣fending his faults, but by confessing and disclaiming of them; so does the penitent soul carry it towards God. and disliking of sin, and bewailing of sin, and by walk∣ing quite cross and contrary to the sin confessed, disliked and bewailed; as Zacheus did, Luke 19.8. and as the Jailor did, Acts 16.33. The true penitent has no ways to cleer himself, but by arraigning, judging and condemning of himself, 1 Cor. 11.31. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. When men judge themselves, and condemn them∣selves, God is prevented, and the Devil defeated, as having nothing to say against them but what they have said before;☞ when men acknowledge their sins, and aggravate their sins, and pass the sentence of condemnation upon themselves for their sins, they shall find their acquittance from them fairly drawn in the bloud of Christ. Repentance for sin takes off the guilt of sin, and sin bewailed is as if it had never been committed; and this becomes the soul's Apology, Ezek. 18.21, 22. 3. Concomitant of godly sorrow.Thirdly, Yea what indignation or stomack, , wrath unto grief; it notes the very rising of the stomack with rage, and a being angry unto fretting, fuming and sick∣ness. Again, it notes the very heighth of anger and rage. The true penitent is not so exceeding angry with himself for any thing, as he is angry with himself for his sins. Indigna∣tion here imports the turning of all the passions of the soul wholly against sin. There are no men in the world so hot and angry against themselves for their sins,Isa. 2.20. as penitents are; witness those that polluted the Idols that they had perfumed, Isa. 30.22. witness David, Psal. 73.22. witness Ephraim, Hosea 14.8. and witness Paul, Rom. 7.22, 23. There are none that fret, and fume, and chafe at themselves for sin, as penitent souls do; there are none that loath themselves, that
abhor themselves, and that are weary of themselves, upon the account of their sins, like penitent souls. 'Tis not this thing, nor that, nor this enemy, nor that, nor this party, nor that, nor this design, nor that; but sin that is the main, the grand object of a penitents hatred, scorn, wrath, rage, re∣proach, disgrace and contempt, &c. He that would be angry and sin not, must be angry at nothing but sin. If some men would but spend more of their anger and indignation against their sins, they would not be so angry as they are with their brethren, that in disputable things differ from them. Fourthly, Yea what fear of God's displeasure,4. Concomitant of godly sorrow. and of do∣ing any more so wickedly before the Lord. Penitent souls are of all souls the most trembling souls, the most timerous souls, Prov. 28.14. Blessed is the man that feareth alwayes. The penitent Christian has still a jealous eye upon his own heart, words and wayes; he is very apt to suspect a snake under eve∣ry flower, and to fear a snare in every creature-comfort. The burnt child dreads the fire; he that has been once stung hates a snake, he that has been in danger of drowning, trem∣bles at the thoughts of going by water; and he that has once broke his leg, rides and walks with a fear of diligence and vigilancy all his life after. I have read of the Dove, that she is afraid of every feather that hath grown upon a Hawk; the very sight of any of the Hawks feathers, brings as much ter∣ror upon her, as if she saw the Hawk her self; such a native dread is (it seems) implanted in her, that it detests and ab∣hors the very sight of any such feather. In every penitent God implants such a holy fear, such a filial fear, such a reve∣rential fear, such a fear of diligence and vigilancy, that the penitent Christians heart rises, detests and abhors, not only gross sins, but the least motions, inclinations and temptati∣ons to sin. They that have paid dear for past guilt, that have known what an aking heart, a wounded conscience, and a bleeding soul means, that have experienced what the frowns of God, the threatnings of God, and the wrath of God means, will certainly beware of sin, watch and war against it, and fear to fall into it.
5. Concomitant of godly sorrow.Fifthly, Yea what vehement desire, , it signi∣fies such a desire of fervency, that can admit of no delay; it notes such a desire as produces diligence, activity, and in∣dustry. The true penitent is full of fervent and vehement de∣sires to be rid of his sins; Rachel was never more vehement and fervent in her desires after children, nor David after the water of the well Bethlehem, nor the hunted Hart after the wa∣ter-brooks, nor the betrothed Virgin for her marriage day, nor the Apprentice for his freedom, nor the Captive for his ran∣som, nor the Soldier for the conquest, nor the sick Man for his cure, nor the condemned Man for his pardon, than the true penitent is vehement and fervent in his desires to have his lusts subdued,Rom. 7.22, 23, 24 mortified and destroyed. Many a day have I sought death with tears (said blessed Cowper) not out of distrust, impatience or perturbation, but because I am weary of sin, and fearful of falling into it. If you ask the penitent, why do you hear, pray, read, and apply your self so seriously, so frequently, so unweariedly, and so con∣stantly to all sin-subduing administrations? he will tell you, 'tis out of a vehement and fervent desire that he has to he rid of his sins. If you ask him again, why he is so much in complaining against sin, in mourning over sin, and in war∣ring against sin? &c. he will tell you, out of a vehement and earnest desire that he has to be fully and finally delivered from sin. 6. Concomitant of godly sorrow.Sixthly, Yea what zeal. Zeal is an extream heat of all the affections set against sin, and working strongly towards God. David's zeal did eat up his sin as well as himself. And Paul was as zealous in propagating the Gospel, as he had been furious in persecuting of it. Many mens zeal is hot and burn∣ing, when scorns and reproaches are cast upon them; but the penitent man's zeal is most hot and burning, when Re∣ligion is scorned, Saints persecuted, truth endangered, and the great and dreadful name of God blasphemed, &c. The zeal of a true penitent will carry him on in a course of god∣liness, and in a course of mortification, in spight of all the diversions and oppositions that the world, the flesh, and
the devil can make. Holy zeal is a fire that will make its way through all things, that stands between God and the soul. The true penitent is unchangably resolved to be hid of his sins what ever it cost him; who ever escapes, who ever lives, he is fully determined his lusts shall die for it; only remember this, though zeal should eat up our sins, yet it must not eat up our wisdom, no more than policy should eat up our zeal. Seventhly, Yea what revenge. The true penitent revenges himself upon himself for his sins,7. Concomitant of godly sorrow. not by whips and scour∣ges as the Papists do;1 Cor. 9.27. A penitent sin∣ner loaths the very scars of his sins after they are healed, Nazian. but by buffetting the flesh, and bring∣ing it into subjection by fasting and prayer, and by crossing of his lusts, and loading of them with chains, and by diding the sword of mortification against them, and by with-holding from them that fuel that might feed them, and by the use of all other holy exercises, whereby the old man, the body of sin and death may be subdued to the obedience and discipline of the Spirit of God. Holy revenge will shew it self by contradicting of corrupt self, and by a severe chastising and punishing of all those instruments that have been servants to the flesh; as you may see by the daughters of Israel in dedi∣cating their looking-glasses, by which they had offended,Exod. 38.8. to the service of the Sanctuary;Acts 19.19. and as you may see by the Ephesians burning of their costly and curious books before all men;Luke 7. and by Mry Magdalens wiping of Christ's feet with her hair, wherewith formerly her fond and foolish lovers were inticed and intangled. And the same spirit you may see working in Zacheus, Luke 19.8, 9. and in the Jailor, Acts 16.23, 24, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34. And so blessed Cranmer thrust his right hand first into the fire, that being the hand by which he subscribed the Popish Articles, revengfully crying out, This unworthy right hand, this unworthy right hand, as long as he could speak. The common language of holy revenge is this; Lord, pour out all thy wrath, and all thy fierce anger, and all thy fiery indignation, upon this lust, and that lust; Lord, bend thy bow, and shoot all the arrows of thy displea∣sure, into the very heart of my strong corruptions; Lord,
when wilt thou rain hell out of heaven upon this proud heart, this unbelieving heart, this unclean heart, this worldly heart, this froward heart, this treacherous heart of mine, &c. I have read of Hannibal, that when he saw a pit full of the bloud of his enemies, he cryed out with much content and delight, O, beautiful sight! So when a penitent Christian sees his spiritual enemies, his strong corruptions, all in a goar bloud. O! how delightfully and rejoycingly does he cry out, O, beautiful sight! O, blessed sight, that e∣ver I have seen!Exod. 15. When the children of Israel saw the Egypti∣ans dead upon the Sea-shore, then they sang a song of praise; the Application is easie. O Sirs! let no man deceive his own immortal soul; for 'tis most certain, that repentance to life hath all these lively companions attending of it. Sound re∣pentance, and the companions of it, are born together, and will live and continue together till the penitent soul changes earth for heaven, grace for glory. And let thus much suffice for the first part of true repentance, &c. The second part of true repentance lyes in confession of sin, which flows out of a contrite heart; I mean, not a bare, formal, empty confession (such as is common amongst the worst of sinners, as that we are all sinners, and stand in need of a Saviour, God help us, God be merciful unto us, &c.) but of such a confession of sin as ariseth from a true sight and full sense of sin, and from the due apprehensions of a righte∣ous Law that is transgressed, and a holy God that is provoked, &c. When tongue and heart goes together, when the tongue speaks out of the abundance of the heart, when the tongue is the faithful interpreter of the heart, freely, ingenuously and humbly acknowledging iniquity, transgression and sin; and the penitent judging himself worthy of death, of wrath, of hell, and unworthy of the least mercy and favour from God, &c. Now such a confession as this is you shall find in repenting sinners; and if you look again, you shall find those persons
so confessing to be under the capacity of the promise of the forgiveness of their sins, &c. First, You shall find repenting sinners confessing their  sins, Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face unto thee, my God; for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.Repenting sin∣ners confess their sins, &c. Ver. 10. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy commandements, &c. Psal. 51.3. I acknowledge my trans∣gressions, and my sin is ever before me. Ver. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, Dan. 9.4, 5. I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, &c. We have sinned and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, &c. Ver. 8. O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at this day. Luke 15.18. I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee. Ver. 19. And am no more worthy to be called thy son, &c. 1 Cor. 15.9. For I am the least of all the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I perse∣cuted the Church of God, 1 Tim. 1.13. Who was before a blas∣phemer, and a persecuter, and injurious, &c. Isa. 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. I might ea∣sily produce a hundred other Scriptures to prove that re∣penting sinners are confessing sinners, but let these suffice, &c. Secondly, If you please to cast your eyes upon other Scriptures, you shall find these penitent confessing sinners to be expresly under the promises of the forgiveness of sins,Confessing peni∣tents are under the promises of forgiveness, &c. Turn to that, Job 33.27, 28. and ponder upon it. Prov. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but he that confesseth and forsaketh, shall have mercy. &c. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to for∣give us our sins. Psal. 22.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said, I will confess my transgressi∣ons unto the Lord, and then forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Seah. Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which then trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me; and
that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniqui∣ty: This will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember. Jer. 3.12, 13. Return thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, saith the Lord; only acknowledge thine iniquity. And observable is that prayer of Solomon, 1 King. 8.47-50. If they shall bethink themselves, and repent and make supplications to thee, saying, we have sinned, and have done perversly, we have com∣mitted wickedness; then hear thou their prayer, and forgive thy peo∣ple that have sinned against thee. But what are the properties or qualifications of true penitential confession of sin? They are these eight that follow. First, 'Tis free, 'tis voluntary, not forc'd, not extorted. Nehemiah, Ezra, Job, David, Daniel, Paul,Acts 26.10, 11. Ezra 9.9. Neh. 9. Daniel 9. Psal. 5. Job 49.4, 5. &c. were free and voluntary in the confession of their sins, as all know that have but read the Scripture. The true penitent confesses his sins with much candour, ingenuity and freedom of spirit; he is as free in his confession of sin, as he has been free in the commission of sin; his confessions are like water which runs out of a spring with a voluntary freeness, but the confessions of wicked men are like water that is forced out of a still with fire; their confessions are forced and extracted meerly from sence of pain and smart, or from fear of punish∣ments, &c. Pharaoh never confest his sin till God brought him to the rack,Exod. 10.16. 1 Sam. 15.24. Num. 22.23-35. Mat. 27.3, 4, 5. nor Saul till he was in danger of losing his Crown and Kingdom, nor Balaam till he sees the Angel stand with his drawn sword ready to slay him, nor Judas till hor∣ror of conscience and the pangs of hell had surprized him, and taken fast hold on him. Wicked men cast out their sins by confession, as Mariners do their wares in a storm, wish∣ing for them again in a calm; the confessions of wicked men
are commonly extorted or squeezed out, either by some out∣ward trouble, or by some inward distress; but penitential confession is free and ingenuous, arising from an inward de∣testation of sin, and from the contrariety of the heart to sin; and therefore were there no rod, no rack, ho wrath, no hell, the true penitent would very freely and readily confess his sins; when God is most free in bestowing of mercies, then are they most free in confessing their iniquities, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Look, as that is the best wine that flows from the grape with least pressing, and as that is the best honey which drops from the honey-comb without crushing; so those are the best confessions that flow, that drop freely, voluntarily from the soul, &c. Secondly, True penitential confession is full as well as free.  That confession is not sincere that is not full;Lam. 1.18, 19. God loves nei∣ther halting nor mincing confessions. These undid the Pha∣risee, Luke 18.11. As penitential confessions are not extort∣ed, so they are not straitned; sin must be confest in its parti∣cular species and parts, all known sins must be confest fully, plainly, particularly, as you may see by turning to these Scriptures, Lev. 26.40, 41, 42. & 19.21. Judg. 10.10. Psal. 51. 1 Sam. 12.19. 1 Tim. 1.13. Acts 26.10, 11. Dan. 9.5, 6, 7, 8-17. Lev. 16.21, 22, &c. Some there be that deny their sins with the Harlot, Prov. 30.20. Such is the way of an adulterous woman, she eateth and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness. And others there be that fa∣ther their sins on others, as Adam did, Gen. 3.12. and as Eve did, ver. 13. and as Aaron did, Exod. 32.22. and as Saul did, 1 Sam. 15.22. And many there are that hide their wicked∣ness, that conceal their wickedness, as that proud Pharisee did, Luk. 18.11, 12. That expression of the Prophet Hosea,Hosea 10.13. You have plowed wickedness, is rendred by the Septuagint, You have concealed wickedness, and indeed there is nothing more common to a wicked heart, than to keep closs his sin, than to cover and hide his transgressions. And certainly, this is that sore disease, that our first parents were sick to death of, al∣most six thousand years ago; and therefore 'tis no wonder if
we are all infected with it.Job 31.33. We are but flesh and bloud sayes one, it is my na∣ture sayes a se∣cond, I cannot help it sayes a third, I am not the first sayes a fourth, 'twas bad company drew me sayes a fifth, if it be a sin I am sorry for it says a sixth, if it be naught I cry God mercy sayes a se∣venth. And thus wicked men are as hypocritical in their confessions as they are in their professions, &c. Man by nature is a vain glorious creature, apt to boast and brag of the sins that he is free of, but unwilling to confess the sins that he is guilty of. There are no men so prone to conceal their own wickedness, as those that are most forward to proclaim their own good∣ness. There are many that are not ashamed to act sin, who yet are ashamed to confess sin; but certainly of all shame, that is the most shameful shame, that leads a man to hide his sins. But now the true penitent he makes conscience of con∣fessing small sins as well as great sins, secret sins as well as open sins, Psal. 90.8 Psal. 19.12. David confesses not on∣ly his great sins of murder and adultery, but he confesses al∣so his self-revenge intended against Nabal, and of his knife being so neer Sauls throat, when he cut off the lap of Saul's garment. A true Penitent is much in confessing and lament∣ing over that secret pride, that secret fleshliness, that secret worldliness, that secret hypocrisie, that secret vain glory, &c. that is only obvious to God and his own soul. But 'tis quite otherwise with wicked men; for they confess their grosser sins, but never observe their lesser sins; they confess their open sins, but never lay open their secret sins. Cain con∣fesses his murdering of his brother, but never confesses his secret enmity that put him upon washing his hands in his bro∣ther's bloud. Pharoah confesses his oppression of the chil∣dren of Israel, but he does not confess the pride of his heart, nor the hardness of his heart. Judas confesses his betraying of innocent blood, but he never confesses his covetousness, that put him upon betraying of the Lord of glory. And o∣thers have confest their Apostacy, who have never confest their hypocrisie that hath led them to Apostacy, &c. Well, this is certain, that those little sins, those secret sins, that ne∣ver break a sinners sleep, do often break a believers heart. Thirdly, As true penitential confession is full, so 'tis sin∣cere, 'tis cordial; 'tis not a feigned, nor a formal, nor a meer verbal confession, but an affectionate confession; 'tis a confession that has the mind, the heart, the soul as well as the
lip in it.Psal. 51.31. Jer. 18.19, 20. Isa. 26.8, 9. Ezra 9.6. Psal. 38.4. Job 42.6 Luke 18.13. The penitent man's confession springs from inward impressions of grace upon his soul, he heels what he confesses, and his affections go along with his confessions. The poor Publican smote upon his breast and confessed. Look, as the sick man opens his disease to his Physician, feelingly, affecti∣onately; and as the Client opens his case to his Lawyer, feelingly, affectionately; so the penitent opens his case, his heart to God, feelingly, affectionately; cold, careless, ver∣bal, formal, customary confessions are no small abominations in the eye of God, Jer. 12.2. Such mens confessions will be their condemnations at last, their tongues will one day cut their throats; though confession to men is a work of the voice, yet confession to God must be the voice of the heart. Some∣times the heart alone is sufficient without the voice, as you may see in Hannah, 1 Sam. 1.13, 14, 15. but the voice is ne∣ver sufficient without the heart, as you may see in that, Isa. 29.13. Such who make confession of sin to be only a lip-labour, such instead of offering the calves of their lips (as the Prophet requires, Hosea 14.2.) do but offer the lips of calves. Heart-confessions (without words) shall be effectual with God, and carry the day in heaven, when all formal, ver∣bal confessions, though they are never so eloquent or excel∣lent, shall be cast as dung in sinners faces, Isa. 1.12-16. Mary Magdalen weeps, and sighs, and sobs,Luke 7.38. but speaks neve a word; and yet by her heart-confessions she carries it with Christ, as is evident by his answer to her, Luke 7.48. H said unto her, thy sins are forgiven thee. Penitent souls confess sin feelingly, but wicked mens confessions make no impres∣sions upon them, their confessions run through them as wate runs through a pipe, without leaving any impression at al upon the pipe. Wicked men do no more taste nor relish the evil of sin, the poyson of sin, the bitterness of sin in any of their confessions, than the pipe does taste or relish the water that runs through it. Such who confess sin formally, or rhe∣torically, and yet love sin dearly, heartily, shall never get good by their confessions; certainly such confessions will never reach the heart of God, that do not reach our own hearts; nor such confessions will never affect the heart of
God, tht do not first affect our own hearts. Such as speak very ill of sin with their tongues, and yet secretly wish well to sin in their hearts, will be found at last, of all men the most miserablest. But, Fourthly, As penitential confession is sincere and cordi∣al,Ezra 10.3. so 'tis distinct and not confused. The true penitent has his particular and special bills of indictment, he knows his sins of omission, and his sins of commission; he remembers the sins that he hath most rejoyced and delighted in, he can't for∣get the sins that have had most of his eye, his ear, his head, his hand, his heart; the by-paths in which he has most walked, and the transgressions by which God has been most dishonoured, his conscience most wounded, and his corrupt nature most pleased & gratified,Psal. 51.3. are always before him. An implicite con∣fession is almost as bad as an implicite faith; wicked men cmmonly confess their sins by whole-sale, we are all sinners; but the true penitent confesses his sins by retail. Though it cant't be denied but that in some cases a general confession may be penitent,Luke 18.13. as you see in the Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner; yet it must be granted, that a true penitent can't content nor satisfie himself with a general confession. And therefore David confesses his particular sins of adultery and bloud-guiltiness,1 Tim. 1.13. and Paul particularizeth his sins of blasphemy, and persecution, and injuriousness against the Saints. And more you have of this in that, Act. 26.10, 11. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief Priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them; and I punished them oft in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blas∣pheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange Cities. So Judg. 10.10. And the children of Israel cryed unto the Lord, saying, we have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Balaam. We have sinned, there is their general confession; we have forsa∣ken our God, and also served Balaam, there is their distinct and particular confession, both of their Apostacy and Idolatry. And so 1 Sam. 12.19. And all the people said unto Samuel, pray
for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we dye not, for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a King. They were discontented with that government that the Lord had set over them, and they would need; be governed by a King, after the mode of other Nations; and this sin they confess di∣stinctly and particularly before the Lord and Samuel. And so David in that, 1 Chron. 21.17. And David said unto God, is it not I that commanded the people to be numbred? even I it is that have sinned and done evil indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done? Thus that princely Prophet confesses that parti∣cular sin that he then lay under the guilt of. And so Zacheus makes a particular confession, he does as it were point with his finger at that wrong and injustice that he had been guilty of; Behold Lord, half my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. Thus you see that true penitents make a particular confession of their right eye sins, and of their right hand sins; and indeed, what is confession of sin, but a setting our sins in order before the Lord? and how can this be done but by a distinct and particular enumeration of them? But to prevent mistakes, this must be taken with a grain of salt, this must be understood with this limitation; we are to con∣fess our sins distinctly, particularly, so far as we know them, so far as we are acquainted with them. There are many thou∣sand sins which we commit, that we know not to be sins, and there are many thousand sins committed by us, that can't be remembred by us. Now certainly it is impossible for us to recount or confess those sins that we know not, that we re∣member not; so that our particular confessions can only reach to known sins, so far as we can call them to mind; for indeed our particular acts of sin are innumerable, they are more in number than the hairs of our head; and indeed, we are as well able to tell the stairs of heaven, and to number the sands of the Sea, and to recount all the sparing mercies, the pitying mercies, the preventing mercies, the succouring mer∣cies, the supporting mercies, and the delivering mercies of God, as we are able to tell, to number, to recount, the indi∣vidual particular acts of sin that we are guilty of; yet so far
as the knowledge and memory of a penitent Christian rea∣ches, so far his confession reaches. But now, wicked men confess sin in the general, in the lump; as Tharaoh, I have sinned; and their conessions are commonly confused, and at random. When and where do you find wicked men confes∣sing their sins distinctly or particularly before God or man? this is none of the least of their miseries, that they have not a clear, distinct, particular view of their own corruptions and abominations. But, Fifthly, The true penitent does not only distinctly and particularly confess his sins, but he does very highly aggra∣vate his sins,Psal. 32.5. Levit. 16.21. by confessing not only the kinds and acts (so far as he knows and remembers them) but the circumstances of them also. There are (sometimes) some circumstances that may somewhat lessen a penitent mans sins; now these he rea∣dily and easily passes over, but then there are other circum∣stances which do exceedingly heighten and aggravate his sins, and that makes them more hainous and dangerous; and these he carefully and faithfully acknowledges. The penitential confessions recorded in the old and new Testament, are full of exaggerating expressions, as is evident in these instances. Ezra at once heightens and aggravates their sins by this cir∣cumstance, that they had been committed against manifold experiments that they had had, both of the severity, and al∣so of the mercy of the Lord, Ezra 9. and so does Nehemiah also, Neh. 9. The like instance you have in Daniel, Chap. 9. 5, 6. We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments: neither have we hearkened unto thy ser∣vants the Prophets which spake in thy Name, to our Kings, our Princes and our Fathers, and to all the people of the Land. In these words you have seven circumstances that Daniel useth in confessing of his and the peoples sins, and all to heighten and to aggravate them. First, We have sinned. Secondly, We have committed iniquity. Thirdly, We have done wickedly. Fourth∣ly, We have rebelled against thee. Fifthly, We have departed from thy percepts. Sixthly, We have not hearkened unto thy servants.
Seventhly, Nor our Princes, nor all the people of the Land. These seven aggravations which Daniel reckons up in his con∣fession, are worthy of our most serious consideration. The same spirit you may find working in Peter, Mark 14.72. When he thought thereon be wept; or neerer the Original; When he cast all these things one upon another, he wept. Ah wretch! that ever I was born, that ever I should deny the Lord that bought me; that ever I should deny him who hath, not only externally, but also internally called me; that ever I should deny him that made me an Apostle, that fed me at his table, that beautified me with his grace, and that in the Mount shew'd me some glimpses of his glory; that ever I should deny him who has brought me out of a state of death and wrath, into a state of life and love; that ever I should deny him that has been the best, the wisest, the holiest, the tender∣est, the faithfullest, and the noblest Master that ever man served. Ah, wretch that I am! he forewarned me of this sin before-hand, that I might be not only cautioned but armed against it, and yet I denied him; I promised him before∣hand, that I would never deny him, that I would never for∣sake him, that I would never turn my back upon him, and yet like a base coward, I have denied the captain of my sal∣vation; yea, this very night, and no longer ago, did I say a∣gain and again, that I would not deny him, and yet now, even now, I have most shamefully denied him; yea, I told him, that though all others, should deny him, yet would not I deny him, and yet in all the world there is not such ano∣ther to be found, that has so sadly, so desperately denied him, as I have denied him, and that before a silly Maid; nay, more beast that I am to my denying of him. I have added a most incredible lye, saying, I know not the man, when there was not a man in all the world that I was so well acquainted with as I was with Christ, feeding constantly at his table,There was scarce any Jew, which knew not Christ by sight, he being very famous for the many mira∣cles that were wrote by him. and drinking constantly of his cup, and living constantly up∣on his purse, and waiting constantly upon his person, and being a constant eye-witness of all the famous miracles that were wrought by him; nay, yet more monster that I am, I did not only lye, but I also bound that lye with an hideous Oath, I
did not only say that I knew not the man, but I also swore I knew not the man; nay, yet more than all this, I did not only basely deny him, I did not only tell an incredible lye against my own light and conscience, I did not only bind a fearful lye with a hideous oath, but I also fell a cursing and damning of my self, for so much the Greek word  imports; I wisht that the curse, the wrath or vengeance of God might fall upon me if I knew the man, I wisht my self separated from the presence and glory of God if I knew the man: And wo and alas to me, all this I did when my Lord and Master was neer me, yea when he was up∣on his trial; yea, and yet more, when all the world had for∣saken him, yea, and yet more, when I had the greatest and loudest call that ever I had to have stood by him, and to have given my testimony for him! And thus Peter casting up all these circumstances and aggravations together, and medita∣ting seriously on them, he went out and wept bitterly. Another fa∣mous instance of this you have in Paul, Act. 26.10, 11. In these two verses the Apostle layes down no less than eight ag∣gravations of his sins, and all to greaten and heighten them, that his soul might be the more ashamed and humbled in him, &c. First, That they were not the worst, but the best of men, viz. Saints; that they were not sinners but Saints, that they were not drunkards, swearers; adulterers, murderers, op∣pressors, Sabbath-breakers, but Saints; Saints by calling, Saints by their high & holy calling, Saints by profession, Saints by a Gospel-conversation. The Saints have I cast into prison. Secondly, To cast a man into prison for theft, for mur∣der for perjury, is no iniquity; I but sayes he, many have I cast into prison for professing the name of Jesus of Naza∣reth. O! 'tis dreadful to persecute men meerly for profes∣sing of Christ, and yet this I did; though their profession and practise went together, though they lived as they pro∣fest, though I had nothing against them, but in the matters of their God, yet upon that very single account did I perse∣cute them.
Thirdly, If it had been but one, or two, or three, or five,  or ten Saints that I had persecuted, the matter had not been much. O, but they were a great number; many of the Saints did I cast into prison. I have been a cruel ravening wolf, that have suckt the bloud not of a few, but of many of the preci∣ous lambs of Christ; I have neither spared nor pitied any sex, but have broken into every house, haling and dragging both men and women to prison, Act. 8.3. As for Saul, he made havock of the Church, entring into every house, and haling men and women, committed them to prison. Fourthly, Though he had cast them into prison, yet if he  had given them but some liberty in a prison, as Joseph had,Act. 9.1, 2. and as others have had, and as himself once had when he be∣got Onesimus in his bonds, Philemon v. 10. and when Onesipho∣rus oft refreshed him, and was not ashamed of his chain, 2 Tim. 1.16, &c. or as the primitive Christians had, the matter had not been so great. O, but I kept them closs pri∣soners; Many of the Saints did I shut up in prison. I shut them up from friends, from relations, and from all comfortable accommodations; and thus he further aggravates his sin. Fifthly, If he had rested there, if he had proceeded no  further, the matter had not been so bad; O, But I gave my voice against them to put them to death. My heart and my hand was not only against them, but my tongue also; if I could not kill them with my hand, I was ready and willing to kill them with my tongue; if the casting voice fell upon me, I would be sure to give it against them; I never wanted a word to do them a mischief; if they wanted a word, instead of a knife to cut their throats, I would be sure to lend them one. Sixthly, He rises yet higher; for he does not only severe∣ly  punish their bodies, but he does what he can to damn their souls; I compelled them to blaspheme, like that Italian, who first made his enemy deny God, and then stabb'd him, and so at once murdered both body and soul. As there is no love to soul love, so there is no cruelty to soul cruelty; and as there
is no mischief to soul mischief, so there is no murder to soul murder, and yet in this murder had Paul a hand. 'Tis sad to compel a man to bear a burden beyond his strength, to lye in chains, to forsake his own countrey, &c. but 'tis infinitely more sad, to compel a man to sin, to the least sin; but saddest of all to compel a man to blaspheme, And yet this I did, syes Paul, &c. Seventhly, He yet further aggravates his sin by his mad∣ness, by his exceeding madness against the Saints, in those words; And I was exceedingly mad against them. He was mad with rage and wrath, he was exceedingly mad with passion and fury against the dear Saints of God; mad men think madly, and mad men speak madly, and mad men act madly against those they are mad with; and so did he against the Saints. The Alcoran saith, That God created the Angels of light, and the Devils of the flame. Certainly, as God's children are children of the light, so Satan's children are fu∣rious children, wrathful children, children of the flame, children of madness; and such a one was Paul, &c. Eighthly and lastly, I did persecute them to strange Cities; them I did not kill I did scatter, I forced them to leave both house and home; them whom God had joyned together, I put asunder; I made the husband run one way, and the wife and children another way, and all of them glad to hide their heads in a corner. And thus you see, that true penitents in the confession of their sins, do cloath their sins with the highest aggravations imaginable. A penitent in his confession of sin cryes out, O! the sparing mercies, the preventing mercies, the succouring mercies, the supporting mercies, the renewed mercies, the delivering mercies that I have with a high hand sinned against. O, that clear light! O, that free love! O, that Gospel grace! O, those bowels of mercy that I have sinned against! O, the fatherly corrections, the dreadful warnings, the high resolutions, the serious protestations, the frequent vows and promises that I have desperately sinned against! O, the checks of conscience, the rebukes of con∣science,
the lashes of conscience, the wounds of con∣science, and the frequent motions of the spirit, and strivings of the spirit, that I have sinned against! &c. But now wicked men confess their sins slightly, carelesly, trifling∣ly; they are careful and skilful to hide their sins, to cloak their sins, and to extenuate and lessen their sins; and with the unjust Steward, for an hundred to set down fifty.Luke 16.6. All wicked men do commonly flatter themselves, that either their sins are not sins when indeed they are, or that they are not great and grievous sins when indeed they are, or that they are not so great and grievous as other mens sins are when indeed they are more grievous and hainous than other mens sins are, so far are they from aggravating of their sins; the truth is, wicked men are so far from aggravating of their sins, that they are still extenuating of them, and that by fa∣thering of them, sometimes upon their constitutions, some∣times upon bad company, sometimes upon their callings, sometimes upon Satan, and sometimes upon chance, as they call it, &c. But no more of this, enough is as good as a feast. Sixthly, The true penitent confesses his sins humbly, sor∣rowfully.  In his confessions he appears before the Lord with ropes about his neck (as Benhadad's servants) and with tears in his eyes; his confessions savour of contrition of heart, and not of ostentation of spirit; contrition of heart,Levit. 23.27.28. and confusion of face, is the common result of a penitential con∣fession. David waters his couch with his tears, (Psal. 6.6. and he mingles his meat with his tears (Psal. 42.3.) and Ezra and Daniel confess their sins with wet eyes and blushing cheeks. Confession without contrition,Ezra 9. Dan. 9. neither pleaseth God nor profiteth man; confession is the language of the tongue, contrition is the language of the heart, and God looks for both.Luke 18.13. The Publican does not only confess his sins, but he smites also upon his breast, as a man full of grief and sorrow; lying in the dust, and renting of garments, and putting on sackcloath and ashes were of old required of those that confest their iniquities. The spirit of repentance is a
spirit of mourning. Penitential confessions are commonly attended with grief in the heart,Compare these Scriptures toge∣ther, Psal. 51.17. Isa. 61.1. & 57.15 Job 16.20. Psal. 119.136. Jer. 9.1. Jer. 31.18, 19. and with shame in the face, Psal. 38.18. For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. He tels you not only that he will declare his iniquity, but he tells you also, that he will be sorry for his sin. The same spirit you may find working in Jacob, Hosea 12.4. yea, he had power over the Angel and prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him. The people of God in the day of their confession, do not only say we have sinned, but they also draw water and pour it out before the Lord in token of contrition, 1 Sam. 7.6. Every sin is as a sword in a peni∣tent mans bosom, and therefore whilst confessions are in his mouth, you shall mostly find, either tears in his eyes, or sorrow in his heart. And indeed, true confession of sin is many times rather a voice of mourning, than a voice of words; sometimes a penitent man's eyes will in some sort tell what his tongue can in no sort utter; many times the penitent is better at weeping than he is at speaking, Psal. 39.12. Hold not thy peace at my tears. Tears have a voice (as well as bloud hath) and are very prevalent Orators with God, Psal. 6.8. The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. Penitent tears are undeniable Ambassadors, and they never return from the throne of grace without an answer of grace. Tears are a kind of silent prayers, which though they say nothing, yet they obtain pardon, they prevail for mercy, and they carry the day with God, as you may see in that great and clear instance of Peter; he said nothing, he confest nothing that we read of, but went out and wept bitterly, and obtained mercy. That prescription that God gave to the Leper in the Law, is worthy of your most serious consideration; 'tis in that, Levit. 13.45. And the Leper in whom the plague is, his cloaths shall be rent, and his bead bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, unclean, unclean. In these words the Leper stands charged with four things; 1. To go in rent or torn garments, to note that there must be bro∣kenness and sorrow of heart joyned with confession of sin. 2. To go bare-headed, and that partly that men might not mistake him, but mainly to shew his humility under his pre∣sent
misery. 3. To put a covering upon his upper lip. (Some read it, upon his Mouchaches) The Jews in their mournings used this Ceremony among the rest, of covering their chin, mouth, Mouchaches, all under the nose. Now the use of this Ceremony in the Leper, was partly to preserve others from being infected by his loathsom breath, and partly to shew that God takes no pleasure nor delight in the breathings, the prayers of spiritual Lepers, of wicked men. God loves not to hear good words drop from an ill mouth, and partly to note that shame that must be mingled with his sorrow. 4. Twice to proclaim his own uncleanness, unclean, unclean. And thus you see that there was to be a closs connexion be∣tween the Lepers confession and his contrition; and thus 'tis with the true penitent; he does not only cry out, unclean, unclean, but he also rents and tears his garments, that is, he joyns contrition to his confession. But to prevent mistakes, and that I may not shoot an ar∣row, instead of giving a cordial, to the weak and weary soul; let me only give you this short hint, viz. That when the true penitent can't pour out his soul in heart-melting confessions before the Lord, yet then he can mourn over his own hard∣ness of heart; when he is at worst he can grieve that he can∣not grieve, and mourn that he cannot mourn, and melt that he cannot melt, and break that he cannot break; and he can bless God for every rod, and every stroak, and every word, and every work, and every Ordinance, and every frown, and every reproof, and every cross, and every comfort, that has the least tendency to the melting and mollifying of his soul. The true penitent alwayes sets a very high price and value upon a broken heart, though he has not the happiness alwayes to have his heart broken. I know that sometimes the peni∣tent soul is so shut up, that if he might have all the world he cannot mourn, he can only sit down, and sigh, and groan; nay, if all the joys and delights of heaven were to be bought for one single tear, he can't shed it; and yet all this time he can grieve that he cannot grieve for sin, and he can be sorry
that he cannot be sorry for sin; and without all peradventure this is in a measure true godly Gospel-sorrow for sin, &c. But now wicked men confess their sins, but they never grieve for their sins; they confess their sins, but they are not ashamed of their sins,Compare these Scriptures toge∣ther, Jer. 6.15. & 8.12. Zeph. 3.5. Isa. 3.9. Isa. 42.23. Heb. 6.6. Caligula used to say of himself, that he loved no∣thing better in himself, than that he could not be ashamd, &c. Aug. confes. lib. 2. cap. 3. they confess their sins, but they can't blush for their sins. Though men of good names, and of good natures, would be ashamed to be found doing of base things, things that are below them, that are not worthy of them, yet the generality of sinners are so bold and base, so ignorant, arrogant and impudent, so frontless and graceless, &c. that they are no wayes ashamed, no not of those very sins that has put Christ to an open shame; yea, that has put the Sun and Moon to a blush. Most sinners in these dayes have brows of brass, and whores foreheads that cannot blush; they are so far from being ashamed of their sins, that they think it a shame and disgrace not to sin, not to swear, and whore, and curse, and be drunk, and prophane Sabbaths, and dispise Or∣dinances; yea, there are many that are so far from being ashamed of their abominations, that they even glory in them, like those in that, Phil. 3.19. They shew their sins as So∣dom, they make both a sport of acting, and a jest of con∣fessing their sins. Thus Austin confesseth that it was some∣times with himself, before the Lord wrought upon him; I was stricken with such blindness, as that I thought it a shame unto me to be less vile and wicked than my companions whom I heard boast of their leudness, and glory so much the more, by how much they were the more filthy; therefore (saith he) lest I should be of no account, I was the more vicious; and when I could not otherwise match others, I would feign that I had done those things which I never did, lest I should seem so much the more abject, by how much I was the more innocent; and so much the more vile, by how much I was the more chast. But for a close remember this, The true penitent knows, that the more God has been displeased with the blackness of sin, the better he will be pleased with the blushing of the sinner; and therefore he can't but blush when either he looks upon sin within him, or God above him. But,
Seventhly, Penitential confession 'tis believing and fidu∣cial,  'tis mixt with some faith,Hosea 14.. though not alwayes with a strong faith; 'tis not like the confession of a Malefactor to the Judge, but like the confession of a child to his father, or like the confession of a sick man to his Physician. As a peni∣tent man has one eye of sorrow upon his sin, so he has ano∣ther eye of hope upon pardoning grace. Thus David,Psal. 51. though he had sinned greatly, yet he hangs upon free mercy, and begs his pardon believingly. Thus Daniel,Dan. 9.9. To the Lord our God belongs mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. Thus Sechaniah, Ezra 10.2.Ezra 10.2. And Sechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said unto Ezra, we have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the people of the Land, yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. If it were not for hope the heart would break; there was hope among them that Israel would repent, and there was hope among them that God would have mercy upon their repentance. And the same spirit was working in the Prodi∣gal; I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, fa∣ther, I have sinned against heaven and before thee.Luke 18.18. Though he was a Prodigal, yet he would go to God as to a father, who knew how to pity and forgive the mourning and repenting child. When confessions of sin are mingled with hopes of mercy, and the soul draws neer to God as a father, then the heart breaks most, and melts and mourns most. That confession of sin that is not mixt with some hope of pardon, and with some faith in the mercy of God is not penitential but desperate. Cain in some sort confesses,Gen. 4.16. but then he flies into the Land of Nod, and there he falls a building and planting, partly in con∣tempt of the dreadful doom God had past upon him, and partly to drown the noise of his conscience, and despairing of ever obtaining pardon in this world,2 Cor. 5.1, 2. or enjoying a house not made with hands in another world. Judas likewise con∣fesses his most hainous sin; I have sinned in betraying innocent bloud; but having no hope of pardon,Mat. 27.3, 4. no faith in that inno∣cent blood he had shed, he goes out and hangs himself. Judas had no faith to mingle with his confession, he confesses de∣spairingly not believingly, and so goes forth and strangles
himself. Since Adam fell in paradise, there has not been one wicked man in the world (continuing in that state) that has ever mixt faith with his sorrows, believing with his confes∣sing; 'tis only the penitent man that confesseth sin believing∣ly, and that is pardoned graciously, The confessing penitent reasons thus with God; Lord, though I am a sinful crea∣ture, yet thou art a merciful God; though I am unworthy of mercy, yet thou forgivest sins freely; though my sins reach as high as heaven, yet thy mercies teach above the heavens; I am here ready and willing to accuse and condemn my self, and therefore be thou as ready and as willing to absolve me, and forgive me. O Lord, though my sins are very many, yet thy mercies are exceeding more; though I have multiplied my sins, yet thou canst multiply thy pardons; though I am a sinner, a very great sinner, yet there is mercy with thee, that thou mayest be feared and loved, served and trusted; and therefore in the face of all my sins, provocations and unwor∣thiness, I will look up for mercy, and wait for mercy. But, Eighthly and lastly, True penitential confession is joyned with reformation. That confession of sin that carries forgivness of sin with it,Psal. 51.10. is attended with serious desires and earnest en∣deavours of reformation; therefore forsaking of sin is an∣next to confession of sin, Prov. 28.13. He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy. Confession of sin must be joyned with confusion of sin, or all's lost; God will never cross the book, he will never draw the red lines of Christ's bloud over the black lines of our transgressions, except confessing and forsaking go hand in hand. He that does not orsake his sin, as well as confess it, forsakes the benefit of his confession. And indeed, there is no real confession of sin, where there is no real forsaking of sin; 'tis not enough for us to confess the sins we have com∣mitted, but we must peremptorily resolve against the com∣mitting again the sins we have confest; we must desire as freely to forgo our sins, as we do desire God to forgive us our sins. Confession of sin is a spiritual vomit; now you know, a man that is burdened in his stomack, is heartily wil∣ling
to be rid of that oad on his stomack that doth oppress nature; and so a man that is real in his confession of sin, is as heartily willing to be rid of his sin, that lyes as a lod up∣on his conscience, as any sick man can be heartily willing to be rid of that load that lyes upon his stomack. The peniten∣tial confessor doth as heartily desire to be delivered from the power of his sins, as he does desire to be delivered from the sting and punishment of his sins. This is observable in the confession of good Sechaniah, Ezra 10.2, 3. We have tres∣passed against our God, and taken strange wives of the people of the Land: Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my Lord, and those that tremble at the commandement of our God, and let it be done according to the Law. And this was the former practise of the children of Israel, who joyned refor∣mation with their confession, as you may see in that, Judg. 10.15. We have sinned. Ver. 16. And they put away the strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord, and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. That, Job. 34.31, 32. is ob∣servable; Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born cha∣stisement, I will not offend any more; that which I see not teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. And the same spirit you may find working in those that were once gi∣ven up to sorcery and witchcraft, Act. 18. And many that believed came and confessed, and shewed their deeds. Ver. 19. Many also of them which used curious arts, brought their books to∣gether, and burned them before all men. Penitential confession leaves a holy awe and dread on the soul, to take heed of com∣mitting sins confest. Though a godly man may (in an hour of temptation, or in a day of desertion, or in a season of God's with-holding the gracious influences of heaven from falling upon his soul) commit a sin which he has seriously confest and sadly bewailed, yet he retains in his course and practise, such a holy fear and awe upon his heart, as in some measure proves armour of proof against future commissions of sin. But now wicked men are very ready, bold, and venturous to commit the same sins they have confest, as you may see in Saul, one while you shall have him confessing his sinful in∣juries
against David with tears; and soon after you shall find him pursuing of him in the wilderness of Zaph with three thousand chosen men at his heels.Compare 1 Sam. 24.16, 17. with Chap. 26.2, 3, 4 Exod. 9 27, 34. The same evil spirit was predominant in Pharaoh, one day you shall have him confes∣sing his sin, and promising to let Israel go, and the next day you shall find his heart hardned, and he peremptorily re∣solved that Israel shall not go. And so the Harlot made the confession of her sin,Prov. 7.14. to be but a provocation to more sin. The wicked sometimes confess their sins, but they never for∣sake their sins;2 Pet. 2. ult. after confesion they commonly return with the dog to his vomit; as FulgentiusFulgent. de Rem. peccat. l. 1. c. 12. hath worthily observed. Many (saith he) being pricked in conscience, confess that they have done ill, and yet put no end to their ill deeds; they humbly accuse themselves in God's sight of the sins which oppress them, and yet with a perverse heart rebelliously heap up those sins whereof they accuse themselves. The very par∣don which they beg with mournful-sighs, they impede with their wicked actions; they ask help of the Physician, and still minister matter to the disease, thus in vain indeavouring to appease him with penitent words, whom they go on to provoke by an impenitent course. Well remember this, real confession of sin is alwayes attended with real endeavours of turning from sin. Look, as the Patient layes open his diseases to the Physician for this very purpose, that he may be cured and healed; so the penitent soul confesses his sins to the Phy∣sician of souls on purpose to be cured and healed. The daily language of the penitent soul is this; Lord, when wilt thou heal the maladies of my soul? when wilt thou heal my un∣elief, and heal my pride, and heal my vain glory, and heal my hypocrisie, and heal my impurity, and heal my hard heart∣edness, and heal my carnalness, and heal my worldliness, and heal my selfishness? &c. Lord, I do as earnestly beg grace to heal my soul, as I do mercy to pardon my soul. And let thus much suffice for the second part of true Evangelical repentance. The third part of true Repentance lyes in turning from
all sin to God. That great and precious promise of forgive∣ness of sin is made over to repenting and ning from sin; all who truly repent of their sins, and turn from their sins, shall receive the forgiveness of their sins; pardon of sin is for that man, and that man is for pardon of sin, who truly repents and returns from his sin. Four things speak out this, &c. First, Scripture exhortations to repent, that so our sins  may be forgiven, Ezek. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruine. Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins. Acts 3.19. Re∣pent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, &c. Secondly, Express promises that our sins shall be forgiven  upon our repentance, 2 Chron. 7.14. If my people shall turn from their evil way, then will I forgive their sin. Prov. 28.13. Whose confesseth and frsaketh his sin, shall find mercy. Ezek. 18.21. If the wicked will turn from all his sins which he hath committed, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Ver. 22. All his transgressions which he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him. Thirdly, A most certain assurance of the forgiveness of  sins upon repentance, though they have been never so great and hainous, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well: Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be re like crimson, they shall be as wool. Fourthly, Express records and instances of forgiveness  unto such as have repented and turned from their sins, 2 Sam. 12.13. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and Nathan said to David, the Lord hath also put away thy sin. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim be∣moaning himself; turn thou me, and I shall be turned, &c. Surely
after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instruct∣ed, I sote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded, be∣cause I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my dear son? s he a pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do re∣member him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord. Luke 7.38. And shee stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet and anointed them with ointment. Ver. 47. Where∣fore I say, her sins which were many are forgiven. Chap. 15.18, 19, 20. I will arise and go to my father, and will say to him, fa∣ther, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son▪ And he arose and came to his father; but when he was yet a great way off; his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell upon his neck and kissed him. But what are the properties or qualifications of that right turn∣ing from sin, which brings poor sinners within the compass of the pro∣mise of forgiveness of sins? Now to this great question I shall give these four following Answers. First Answer. First, That turning from sin, which brings a man within the compass of the promise of forgiveness of sin, is a cor∣dial turning from sin, Joel 2.12. Turn ye, even to me, with all your heart. 2 Chron. 6.38. If they return to thee with all their heart, and with all their soul. Ver. 39. Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and forgive their sins. Deut. 30.10. If thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, &c. Jer. 3.10. And yet for all this, her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the Lord. Chap. 24.7. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. Wicked men are serious and cordial in their sinning, and they must be as serious and cordial in their returning, or they are lost and undone for ever. The true
penitent turns from sin with his heart, with all his heart, and with all his soul; he is turned in good earnest from his sins, whose heart is turned from his sins; if the heart turns not, all is naught, all is stark naught; he that turns from sin, but not with his heart, turns but feignedly, partially, hypocritical∣ly, deceifully. God is a just and a jealous God, and he will never endure corrivals or copartners in the throne, the heart of man; a holy God will never divide with an unholy De∣vil. The true God is a righteous God, and he will never share his glory with another; the true God must be served truly, heartily, he loves neither halting nor halving. Such as divide the rooms of their souls betwixt God and sin, God and Satan, God and the world, that swear by God and Malcham, that sometimes pray devoutly, and at other times curse most hideously; that halt betwixt God and Baal, are meer Hetero∣clites in Religion, and such whom God abhors. When a man's heart gives a bill of divorce to his sins, when his heart breaks the league with sin, when his heart casts it off, and casts it out as an abominable thing, then the heart is turned from sin really, effectually, &c. If notwithstanding all the professi∣ons that a man makes against his sins, his heart still loves them, and delights in them, and he will still retain them, and welcom them, and cleave to them, and make provision for them, &c. his repentance is feigned and not real, &c. But, The second Answer. Secondly, A true penitential turning is an universal turn∣ing,  a turning not from some sins, but from all sins, Ezek. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions. Ver. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit. Psal. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way. Ver. 128. I hate every false way. Ezek. 14.6. Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the Lord God, repent and turn your selves from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your abominations. Chap. 18.28. Because he considereth and turneth away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he
shall surely live, he shall not die. True repentance is a turning from all sin, without any reservation or exception; he never truly repented of any sin, whose heart is not turned against every sin. The true penitent casts off all the rags of old Adam, he throws down every stone of the old building, he will not leave a horn nor a hoof behind. That which Nehe∣miah speaks of himself in that, Neh. 13.7, 8. is very observa∣ble to our purpose. And I came to Jerusalem and understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God, and it grieved me sore (but he rests not there, but goes further) therefore I cast forth all the houshold-stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber. What should To∣biah do with a chamber? therefore he not only outs Tobiah, but outgoes all his stuff too. Thus the true penitent, when he considers all the evil that sin has done, how it has taken up not only one chamber, but every chamber in the soul, and how it has for many years quite shut out God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and every thing that is good; he is grieved sore, and so falls upon the outging of every lust, being highly re∣solved that neither Satan nor any of his retinue shall ever find the least entertainment in his soul any more. Such as are re∣solved against turning from any sin, are horrible profane; such as turn from some sins, but close with others, are hideous hy∣pocrites; such as turn from one sin to another, or change their sins as men do their fashions, are most sadly blinded, and desperately deluded by Satan; but such as turn not from some sins, but from every sin, are sincerely penitent. And certainly there are very grea reasons why the true penitent does turn, and must turn from sin universally. As, First, 'Tis to no purpose for a man to turn from some sins, if he does not turn from all his sins, James 1.26. If any man seem to be religious and bridle not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this mans Religion is in vain. This at first sight may seem to be a hard saying,One stab at the heart kills, one act of treason makes a Traitor, one spark of fire sets the house on fire, one flaw in a diamond spoyls the price of it, one puddle if we wallow in it, will defile us, one head of garlick will poyson a Leopard, say the Naturalists. that for one fault, for one fault in the tongue, all a mans Religion should be counted vain, and yet this you see the holy Ghost does peremptorily conclude. Let a man make never so glorious a profession of Religion, yet if he gives himself liberty to live in the practise of any
known lust, yea though it be but in a sin of the tongue, his Religion is in vain, and that one lust will separate him from God for ever. If a Wife be never so officious to her Husband in many things, and though she gives him content several wayes, yet if she entertains any other Lover into his bed be∣sides himself, it will alienate his affections from her, and for ever separate him from her. The application is easie. To turn from one sin to another, is but to be tossed from one hand of the Devil to another; it is but with Benhadad, to recover of one disease and die of another, it is but to take pains to go to hell. If a Ship spring three leaks, and only two be stopped, the third will sink the Ship; or if a man have two grievous wounds in his body, and take order only to cure one, that which is neglected will certainly kill him: 'Tis so here, if a man that has divers lusts fighting against the life of his preci∣ous soul, shall only mortifie and slay some of them, the rest will certainly destroy him, and all his pains in subduing some of them will be lost. I have read of a devout man, who had amongst many other vertues, the gift of healing, unto whom divers made resort for cure; among the rest, one Chromatius being sick sent for him, being come he told him of his sick∣ness, and desired that he might have the benefit of cure as others had before him: I cannot do it (said the devout per∣son) till thou hast beaten all the Idols and Images in thy house to pieces. O, that shall be done, said Chromatius, here take my keys, and where you find any Images let them be defaced, which was done accordingly; to prayer went the holy man, but no cure was wrought. O, saith Chromatius, I am as sick as ever, O, I am very weak and sick: It cannot be otherwise, replyed the holy man, nor can I help it; for certainly there is one Idol more in your house undiscovered, and that must be defaced too. True, sayes Chromatius, there is so indeed, there is one all of beaten gold, it cost 200 l. I would fain have saved it; but here take my keys again, you shall find it locked up fast in my chest, take it and break it in pieces; which done, the holy man prayed, and Chromatius was healed. The moral of this story is this: We are all spiritually sick, full of wounds and putrified sores; Christ our spiritual Phy∣sician
tells us, that if we will be cured, we must break off our sins by repentance. Now this we are willing to do in part, but not in whole; we would fain keep one Dalilah, one darling beloved sin, but it must not be, there must not be one sin unrepented of; we must repent as well for our Achans as our Absaloms, our Rimmons as our Mammons, our Davids as our Goliahs, our covert as well as our open sins, our loved as well as our loathed lusts, our heart abominations as well as our gross transgressions, our Babe iniquities as well as our Giant-like provocations; our repentance must be uni∣versal, or 'twill be to no purpose. Herod turned from many evils, but would not turn from his Herodias,Mark 6.18, 19, 20 and that was his ruin. Judas his life was as fair and as free from spots and blots, as the lives of any of the Apostles, no scandalous sin was to be found upon him, only that golden Devil covetousness was his sin, and his everlast∣ing ruin; his Apostleship, Preaching, working of Miracles, hearing of Christ, and conversing with him, &c. was to no purpose, because of that Serpent he kept in his bosom, which at last stung him to death. If a man lives in the practise of any known sin, the union between sin and his soul is not dis∣solved; and if that union be not dissolved, Christ and his soul was never united, and therefore such a person can never be saved. Saul spared Agag and the Witch of Endor, whom he should have destroyed, and so lost his Crown, his Kingdom, and his Soul, which was saddest of all. Gideon had seventy sons,Judg. 8.13. and but one bastard, and yet that one bastard destroyed all the rest. The Jewish Rabbins report, that the same night that Israel departed out of Egypt towards Canaan, all the Idols and idolatrous Temples in Egypt, by lightning and earth∣quakes were broken down: So when a man truly repents, all the Idols that were set up in his soul, are cast down. But, Secondly, God has so connexed the duties of his Law one to another, that if there be not a conscientious care to walk according to all that the Law requires, a man becomes a trans∣gressor of the whole Law, according to that of Saint James,
Chap. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law,He who prevari∣cates with God as to any one par∣ticular comman∣dement of his, his heart is naught, stark naught, and he is guilty of all: he hath no real regard to any of the commande∣ments of God, that hath not a regard to all the commandements of God, &c. and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all; the bond of all is broken, the au∣thority of all is slighted, and that evil disposition, that sinful frame of heart, that works a man to venture upon the breach of one command, would make him venture upon the breach of any command, were it not for some infirmity of nature, or because his purse will not hold out to maintain it, or for shame, or loss, or because of the eye of friends, or the sword of the Magistrate, or for some sinister respects; and might the breach of any other of the commands of God serve his turn, and advance his ends, he stands as strongly prest in spi∣rit to transgress them all, as to transgress any one of them. He that gives himself liberty to live in the breach of any one command of God, is qualified with a disposition of heart to break them all; every single sin contains virtually all sin in it. He that allows himself a liberty to live in the breach of any one particular Law of God, he casts contempt and scorn upon the authority that made the whole Law, and upon this ac∣count breaks it all. And the Apostle gives the reason of it in Verse 11. For he that said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not kill; now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the Law. Not that he is guilty of all distributively, but collectively; for the Law is copula∣tive, there is a chain of duties, and these are all so linked one to another, that you cannot break one link of the chain, but you break the whole chain. All the precepts of the Law are as it were a string of pearls strung by the authority of God; now break this string in any place, and all the pearls fall to the ground. No man can live in the breach of any known command of God, but he wrongs every command of God; and this at last he shall find to his cost, without sound repen∣tance on his side, and pardoning grace on God's. But, Thirdly, One sin never goes alone, Cain's anger is se∣conded  with murder,Gen. 4.6, 8. Ahab's covetousness is attended with bloudy cruelty, and Jeroboam's rebellion with idolatry, and Judas his thievery with treason. I might give instances of this in Adam and Eve, and in Lot, Abraham, Noah, Jacob, Joseph,1 King. 12.
Job, David, Solmon and Peter, &c. but a touch on this string is enough; one sin commonly disposes the heart to an∣other sin, a small sin many times draws the heart to a greater, nd one great sin draws the heart to another great sin, and that to a greater, till at last the soul comes to be drowned in all excess. Augustine relates this story of Manicheus, who being tormented with Flies,Exposit. in E∣vang. S. John, Tract. cap. 1. tom. was of opinion that the Devil made them and not God; why then, said one that stood by, f the Devil made Flies, then the Devil made Worms and not God, for they are living creatures as well as Flies; true said he, the Devil did make Worms: But said the other, if the Devil did make Worms, then he did make Birds, Beasts, and Man; he granted all. And thus saith that old Father by denying God in the Fly, he came to deny God in Man; and so consequently the whole Creation. And thus yielding to lesser sins, draws the soul to the comm ssion of greater, yea often to the greatest of all. I have both heard and read a sto∣ry of a young man, who being often tempted by the Devil and his own wicked heart, to commit three sins, viz. to kill his father, to lye with his mother, and to be drunk; the two former his heart would not yield to, as being things abhor∣rent to the light and law of nature, and therefore to free himself from the temptation, he yielded to the last and least; but when he was drunk, he killed his father and ravished his mother: Thus these two abominable sins, Murder and Incest were ushered in by one that was not of so deep a dye. There is something in sin, like the radical vertue that is in the seed of Herbs and Plants; the seed is but a small inconsiderable thing in it self, yet let it be but cast into the ground, and there rest quietly a time, and it will take root, and grow up to a great stock, and bring forth many flourishing branches, like the grain of mustard-seed, Mat. 13.31, 32. which though it be the least of seeds, yet being cast into the ground, grows up to be the greatest among herbs, and becometh a Tree, so that the birds of the Air come and lodge in the branches thereof. Satan will be sure to nest himself, to lodge himself in the least sins (as birdsnest and lodge themselves in the smallest branches of a Tree) and there he will hatch all
manner of wickedness. A sinful motion, if it be not reject∣ed, will procure consent, and consent will break forth into act, and one act will procure another act, until the multi∣plying of acts have begot a habit, and that habit hath choakt and stifled conscience, and when once conscience is stifled and benummed, it will be ready upon all occasions to lay the soul open, and to prostrate it to the basest and worst of sins. O! there is a prodigious evil in the least of sins, it will quick∣ly multiply it self into all manner of evils; unless sin be cut off in the first motion, it will proceed to action, and from action to delectation, and from delight to custom, and from custom to a habit; and so the soul will be in eminent danger of being undone for ever. A little thief put in at the win∣dow, may open the doors for stronger and greater to come in, that may take away both life and treasure at once. A lit∣tle wedge makes way for a greater, and so do little sins make way for greater. Satan and our own hearts will be modest at first, and therefore they are often in a combination, first to draw us to lesser sins, and then to greater, and so from sins less obnoxious to sins more scandalous, till we come to be ∣bominable to God, hateful to others, and a terror to our selves. Such as live in one sin, God will in justice give over to other sins. The Gentiles gave up themselves to idolatry, Rom. 1.23. And God gave them up to uncleanness, ver. 24. 'Tis impossible for any man to take one sin into his bosom, and to shut all others out; he that lives but in the allowance of him∣self in one sin, will find that sin at last to shut the door of heaven against him; and therefore the true penitent turns from sin universally. Fourthly, The reasons of turning from sin, are universal∣ly  binding to a penitent soul. There are the same reasons and grounds for a penitent man's turning from every sin, as there is for his turning from any one sin. Do you turn from this or that sin, because the Lord has forbid it? why upon the same ground you must turn from every sin,As in a Harp to make the musick good and harmo∣nious, it is not enough that all the strings be right tuned ex∣cept one; one string that jars, will spoyl the sweetest musick. The application is easie, &c. for God has forbid eve∣ry sin as well as this or that particular sin; there is the same authority forbidding or commanding in all; and if the autho∣rity
of God awes a man from one sin, it will awe him from all. There is one and the same Law-giver in respect of all the commandements; he that gave one commandement gave also another, therefore he that observes one commandement gave in obedience unto God, whose commandement it is, will ob∣serve all, because all are his commandements; and he that slights one commandement is guilty of all, because he doth contemn the authority and will of him that gave them all; even in those commands which he doth observe, he hath no respect to the will and authority of him that gave them. Therefore there is no obedience towards God, where there is not an uniform endeavour to please God, as well in one thing as in another. The same God that hath inhibited one sinful act, hath inhibited every sinful act; and therefore he that out of conscience and respect to God's will, and word, and authority; turns from any one sin, or abhors any one sin, he will out of conscience of the same will, and word, and authority, turn from every sin, and abhor every sin, be∣cause the same God in his word hath alike forbidden all. O Sis! how is it possible for a man truly to repent of this or that sin, because 'tis contrary to the Law, will and authority of God, but he must needs repent of whatsoever he knows to be contrary to the Law, will and authority of God. He that turns from any one sin because it is a transgression of the holy and righteous Law of God, he will turn from every sin upon the same account; he that turns from any one sin, be∣cause 'tis a dishonour to God, a reproach to Christ, a grief to the Spirit, a wound to Religion, &c. will upon the same grounds turn from every sin; he that turns from any one sin, because of the curse, the threatnings, the judgments, the wrath, the hell that hangs (as it were) over the head of that sin; he will turn from every sin, because the curse, the threatnings, the judgments, the wrath, the hell, that hangs over the head of that one sin, hangs over the head of every sin. By these hints 'tis most evident, that the reasons of turn∣ing from sin are universally binding to a penitent soul; and therfore he turns not from some sins only, but from every sin; he sayes not to one, but to all his Idols, Get you hence, for what have I any more to do with you.
Fifthly, One sin allowed, wallowed and tumbled in, is  sufficient to deprive a man for ever of the greatest good. Moses came within the sight of Canaan, but for one sin, viz. not sanctifying God's name at the water of Meribah, he was shut out; for him to be so neer the holy Land,Exod. 22. and yet so far off from entring into it, was doubtless of all stroaks the hardest that ever he felt. In the Law,Levit. 13. the Leper that had the spot of leprosie in any one part of his body, was accounted a Leper, although all the rest of his body were sound and whole, and accordingly he was to be shut up, and shut out from the society and company of the people of God; so one sin, one leprous spot, allowed and beloved, will for ever shut a man out from the glorious presence of God, Christ, the Spirit, Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect; one sin wallowed in, will as certainly deprive a man of the bles∣sed vision of God, and of all the treasures, pleasures and de∣lights that be at God's right hand, as a thousand. It was a sore vexation to King Lysimachus, that he should lose his earthly kingdom for one draught of water. O Sirs! 'twill be an everlasting vexation to such, who for one lust shall at last lose not an earthly, but a heavenly kingdom. One sin stript the fallen Angels of all their glory; and one sin stript our first parents of all their dignity and excellency.Gen. 3.4, 5. Satan by one loud lye to Adam and Eve made fruitless all that God had preached to them immediately before.Job 0.13. To turn from some sins, but not from all, is gross hypocrisie; one sin set up in the love and service of it, will keep Christ out of his throne; it speaks sin to be rampant, and Satan to be victorious; and what can be the issue of these things, but ruin and damnation?Rom. 6.16. One flye in the box of precious ointment, spoyls the whole box; one thief may rob a man of all his treasure, one disease may deprive a man of all his health, one strong wind may blow down and blow away all a man's comforts, and so one sin delighted and wallowed in, will make a man miserable for ever. Though this or that particular sin be very pleasant to the flesh, and delightful to the fancy, yet he is the wisest man, and he is the best man, and the only blest man in all the world, that keeps furthest from it; and therefore the
true penitent turns not meerly from this or that sin, but from every sin. Sixthly, The principle of Regeneration, and seed of grace, which God layes into the soul of every penitent per∣son at first conversion, is a universal principle, a principle that spreads it self over all the faculties of the soul,1 Thes. 5.23. and over all the members of the body, Psal. 45.13. The Kings daugh∣ter is all glorious within, her cloathing is of wrought gold. In re∣generation there is infused the habits or principles of all grace,Mat. 13.33. which like a divine leaven spreads it self over the whole man. Look, as Absalom's beauty was spread all over him,2 Sam. 24.25. even from the crown of his head to the soals of his feet; so grace spreads it self over every faculty of the soul, and over every member of the body. Look, as Solomon's Temple was all glorious both within and without; so that grace which a man receives at first conversion, makes him all glo∣rious both within and without.John 1.16. Look, as Adam's sin spread it self over the whole man, so that grace which we receive from the second Adam, spreads it self over the whole man. And as that grace which was in Christ, did diffuse and spread it self over all of Christ; so that grace which is in the true peni∣tent, does diffuse and spread it self all over the penitent. Now, look as heaven is contrary to all of hell, and as light is con∣trary to all darkness, and heat to all cold; so that divine, that noble, that universal principle of grace, which God at first conversion infuses into the penitents soul, is contrary to all sin; and therefore the penitent turns from all sin. But, Seventhly, The true penitent would have God to forgive him, not only some of his sins, but all his sins; and therefore 'tis but just and equal that he should turn from all his sins. If God be so faithful and just to forgive us all our sins,1 John 1.9. we must be so faithful and just as to turn from all our sins. The plaister must be as broad as the sore, and the tent as long and as deep as the wound. It argues horrid hypocrisie, damnable folly, and wonderful impudency, for a man to beg the pardon of
those very sins that he is resolved never to forsake. Look, as he that hath any one sin forgiven, hath all sins forgiven; so he that hath sincerely turned from any one sin, he hath turned from every sin; and he that hath not repented him of all known sin, he hath not yet sincerely repented of any known sin, nor as yet experienced the sweetness of forgiveness of sin. He that will not renounce those sins that he would have God to remit, shall be sure to have a hell (of guilt) in his con∣science. Of all fools there is none to him, that is very im∣portunate with God to forgive those sins, which he is resolved before-hand to commit; for what Prince (in his wits) will pardon his treasons that is resolved to continue a Traitor? or what Judge will forgive his thievery, that is peremptorily de∣termined to continue a thief? or what Husband will pardon his Wife that is resolved to defile his bed with other Lovers? Such as continue in the practise of those very sins, which they beg a pardon of, shall certainly go without their par∣don. Pardon of sin is for that man, and that man is for par∣don of sin, that is as truly willing to forsake his sins as he is to receive the pardon of his sins. Who would not look upon that man as a mad man, who should earnestly beg his par∣don, and yet before his pardon is sealed, should afresh cut purses, and murder persons before the eyes of the Judge? The pardoned soul is the repenting soul, and the repenting soul is the pardoned soul, Psal. 32.2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guil. He that begs pardon of sin, and is resolved against turning from sin, shall find no more sweetness in that grand promise of pardon, Prov. 28.13. than devils or damned spi∣rits do. Look as one sin unforgiven, will as certainly undo and damn a man as a thousand; so one sin unforsaken, will as certainly undo and damn a man as a thousand. The true pe∣nitent is as willing to turn from all his sins, as he is willing that God should pardon all his sins. But, Eighthly and lastly, There is in every penitent a sincere  hatred of sin, a universal hatred of sin, Psal. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil. Prov. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to
hate evil.True hatred is to the whole kind. Arist. Amos 5.15. Hate the evil and love the good. Psal. 119.104. Through thy precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate every false way. Ver. 128. Therefore I esteem all thy pre∣cepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way. Ver. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. Ver. 163. I hate and abhor lying, but thy Law do I love. True hatred is universal, 'tis of the whole kind; he who hates a toad because it is a toad, hates every toad; he that hates a ser∣pent because it is a serpent, hates every serpent; he that hates a wolf because 'tis a wolf, hates every wolf; he that hates a man because he is holy, hates every man that is holy; and so he that hates sin because it is sin, hates every sin, and therefore he can't but turn from it, and labour to be the death and ruin of it. Holy hatred is an implacable and an irrecon∣cilable affection; you shall as soon reconcile God and Satan together, Christ and Antichrist together, heaven and hell together, as you shall be able to reconcile a penitent soul and his sin together. A true penitent looks upon every sin as con∣trary to the Law of God, the nature of God, the being of God, the glory of God, and accordingly his heart rises a∣gainst it; he looks upon every sin as poyson, as the vomit of a dog, as the mire of the street, as thePliny saith, that the very trees with touching of it, would become barren. menstrous cloth, which of all things in the Law was most unclean, defiling and polluting; and this turns his heart against every sin, he looks upon every sin as having a hand in apprehending, betraying, binding, scourging, condemning and murdering of his Lord and Master Jesus Christ; and this works him not only to re∣frain from sin, but to forsake it, and not only to forsake it, but also to abhor it, and to loath it more than hell it self. The penitent soul will do all he can to be the death of every sin that has had a hand in the death of his Lord and Master; he looks upon the sins of his body, to be the tormentors of Christ's body, and the sins of his soul, to be the tormentors of Christ's soul, to be those that made his soul heavy to the death, and that caused the withdrawings of his father's love from him, and that forced him in the anguish of his soul to cry out,Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. And this raises up in him a universal hatred of sin; and a universal ha∣tred
of sin alwayes issues in a universal turning from sin. Now these eight arguments do sufficiently prove, that a true peni∣tential turning is a universal turning; a turning not from some sins, but from all sins. But some may be ready to object  and say, Sir, this is a hard saying, who can hear it? who can bear it?John 6.60. who shall then be saved? for if a man repents not unless he turns from every sin, then there is not a man to be found in all the world that repents; for there is not a man in all the world that turns from every sin, that forsakes every sin, &c. 1 King. 8.46. For there is no man that sinneth not. Prov. 20.9. Who can say,Job 9.30, 31. Psal. 130.3. 2 Chron. 6.36. Job 14.4. Psal. 51.5. Ponder upon these Scriptures, &c. I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin: It is a que∣stion that implyes a strong denial. Who can say it, and say it truly, that he is pure from his sin? surely none. He that shall say that he has made his heart clean, and that he is pure from his sin, sins in so saying; and commonly there are none more unclean than those that say, they have made their hearts clean, nor none more impure than they that say they are pure from their sin, Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon the earth, that doth good and sinneth not. These words in their absolute sense, are a full testimony of the imperfection of our inherent righteousness in this life, and that even ju∣stified persons come very short of that exact and perfect obe∣dience which the Law requireth, James 3.2. For in many things we offend all, or (as the Greek has it) we stumble all. 'Tis a metaphor taken from Travellers walking on stony or slippery ground, who are very apt to stumble or slide. This Apostle was worthily called James the just, and yet he num∣bers himself among the rest of the sanctified ones, that in many things offended all. The Apostle does not say, in ma∣ny things they offend all, but in many things we offend all. We that have more gifts than others, we that have more grace than others, we that have more assurance than others, we that have more experiences than others, we that have more preservatives to keep us from sin than others, even we in many things offend all; nor the Apostle doth not say, in
some things we offend all, but in many things we offend all; the Apostle speaking not of the singular individual acts of sin, but of the divers sorts of sin; nor the Apostle does not say, in many things we may offend all, but in many things we do offend all, 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. The Apostle does not say, if thou sayest thou hast no sin thou deceivest thy self, as if he spake to some particular person only, but if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves; nor the Apostle does not say, if ye say ye have no sin ye deceive your selves, as if he intended weak or ordinary Christians alone, but if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, we Apostles, we that in all grace, and in all holiness, and in all spiritual enjoy∣ments exceed and excel all others, even we sin as well as o∣thers. He that is so ignorant and so impudent, so saucy and so silly, as to say he has no sin, sins in saying so, and has no sincerity, no integrity, nor no ingenuity in him. Ver. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a lyar, and his word is not in us. As much as in us lyes we make God a lyar, if we say we have not sinned; he that says he has no sin, he does no sin, he does by consequence charge God with falshood, who hath frequently told us in that word of grace that can't deceive us, that all men are sinners, and that they have all gone astray, and that they all need pardoning and purging grace, and that upon these very accounts he sent his beloved Son to lay down his dearest life,Isa. 53.3. Rom. 10.23. & 5.12, &c. and to make himself an offering for sin. Now from these Scriptures these two things are most evident; First, that sinful qualities do remain in the most sanctified persons. Secondly, that these sinful qualities are sometimes very prevalent over the most sanctified persons; and there∣fore I shall answer the objection thus,  viz. That a true pe∣nitential turning from all sin, consists in these six things. First, In the alienation and inward aversation and draw∣ing off of the soul, from the love and liking of all sin, and from all free and voluntary subjection unto sin, the heart be∣ing filled with a loathing and detestation of all sin, Psal.
119.104, 128. as that which is most contrary to all good∣ness and happiness. Secondly, In the wills detestation and hatred of all sin.  When the very bent and inclination of the will is set against all sin, and opposes and crosses all sin, and is set upon the ruin and destruction of all sin, then the penitent is turned from all sin, Rom. 7.15, 19, 21, 23. Isa. 30.20. Thou shalt cast them away as a menstrous cloth, thou shalt say unto it, get thee hence. Hosea 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols. When the will stands upon such terms of de∣fiance with all sin, as that it will never enter into a league of friendship with any sin, then is the soul turned from every sin; When the will is set upon avenging it self upon all sin, and upon daily endeavours to mortifie and crucifie all sin, then is the penitent turned from all his sins; when those sins that were once to the will, as Dalilah to Sampson, are now to the will as Tamar to Amnon, then is the soul turned from sin with a witness. Thirdly, In the judgments turning away from all sin, by  disapproving, disallowing and condemning of it, Rom. 7.15. For that which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. O, saith the judgment of a Christian, sin is the greatest evil in all the world, 'tis the only thing that God abhors, and that brought Jesus Christ to the Cross, that damns souls, that shuts heaven, and that has laid the foundati∣ons of hell. O, it is the pricking thorn in my eye, the deadly arrow in my side, the two-edged sword that hath wounded my conscience, and slain my comforts, and separated between God and my soul. O, it is that which hath hindred my pray∣ers, and imbittered my mercies, and put a sting into all my crosses, and therefore I can't but disapprove of it, and dis∣allow of it, and condemn it to death, yea to hell, fom whence it came. I thus preach, and thus think (saith Chry∣sostom) that it is more bitter to sin against Christ, than to suf∣fer the torments of hell. Plutarch reports of Marcus Cato, that he never declared his opinion in any matter in the Senate,
but he would close it with this passage; Methinks still Car∣thage should be destroyed. So when ever a penitent looks up∣on his sins in his judgment, he is still saying, Methinks these sins should be destroyed, methinks this pride, this unbelief, this earthly-mindedness, this hypocrisie, this vain glory, &c. should be destroyed. Fourthly, In the purpose and resolution of the soul, the soul sincerely purposing and resolving never willingly, wil∣fully or wickedly to transgress any more,The true peni∣tent holds up his purposes and re∣solutions to keep off from sin, and to keep closs with God, though he be not able in e∣very thing, and at all times, to make good his purposes and resolutions, &c. Psal. 17.3. I have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. The general purpose and resolution of my heart is not to transgress; though par∣ticular failings may attend me, yet my resolutions and pur∣poses are firmly fixt against evil, Psal. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my wayes, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked are before me. David highly resolves so to bridle and muzzle up his mouth, that he would not break out into any impatient or unbeseeming speeches, that might give the wicked any advantage to reproach Reli∣gion, or to blaspheme the holy One of Israel, &c. Anselme was a man of a holy resolution; I had rather, saith he, go to hell pure from sin, than to heaven polluted with that filth. And saith another, I will rather leap into a bonfire, than wilfully to sin against God. When Valens the Emperor threatned Basil with imprisonment, banishment, death; Threaten, sayes he, your Boyes with such fray-bugs, and your purple Gallants, that give them∣selves to their pleasures; I am resolved neither menaces nor flatte∣ries shall silence me, or draw me to betray a good cause, or a good conscience, &c. Fifthly, In the earnest and unfeigned desires, and careful endeavours of the soul to abandon all sin, to forsake all sin, to be rid of all sin, Rom. 7.22, 23. Now where God sees this frame of spirit, there he will certainly pardon the failings, and pass by the imperfections of his people; and he will spare them as a man spareth his son that serveth him, Mal. 3.17. Now you know, when a prudent, tender, indulgent father sees his child to fail and come short in that which he enjoyns him to
do, yet knowing that his desires and endeavours is to please him and serve him, he will not be harsh, rigid; sowre or se∣vere towards him, but will spare him and exercise much ten∣derness and indulgence towards him; and will God, will God whose mercies reach above the heavens, and whose com∣passions are infinite, and whose love is like himself, carry it worse towards his children, than men do carry it towards theirs? surely no. God's fatherly indulgence accepts of the will for the work, Heb. 13.18. 2 Cor. 8.12. As a father will accept in his child the desire for the deed, and if there be a blemish in his child, he will pity it, and cast a mantle of love over it. A sick man is not more desirous to be rid of all his diseases, nor a prisoner to be freed from all his bolts and chains, than the true penitent is desirous to be rid of all his sins, &c. Sixthly and lastly, In the ordinary declining, shunning,  and avoiding of all known occasions, temptations, provoca∣tions, inducements and inticements to sin, &c. That royal Law, 1 Thes. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil, is a Law that is very precious in a penitent man's eye,See Jude 23. Exod. 23.7. Prov. 22.3. & 27.12. Prov. 5.8. and commonly lyes warm upon a penitent man's heart, so that take him in his ordinary course, and you shall find him very ready to shun, and be shie of the very appearances of sin, of the very shews and shadows of sin. Job made a covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. and Joseph would not hearken to his bold tempt∣ing Mistris to lye by her, or to be with her, Gen. 39.10. and David when himself would not sit with vain persons, Psal. 26.3, 4, 5.2 Sam. 24.20—ult and at another time he refused to take the thresh∣ing floor, Oxen and threshing instruments of Araunah as a gift, but would buy them, because he would avoid the very shew of covetousness, as some conceive. Austin being often ensnared in uncleanness in his younger dayes (before his con∣version) he was exceeding careful to avoid all occasions of it afterwards. Now a true penitential turning from all sin, lyes in these six things, and therefore you had need look a∣bout you; for if there be any one way of wickedness where∣in you walk, and which you are resolved you will not forsake,
you are no true penitents, and you will certainly lose your souls, and all the great and glorious things of another world. The third Answer. Thirdly, A true penitential turning is a constant and con∣tinued turning from sin.2 Chron, 7.15. As it is total in respect of the act, so it is final in respect of the time. True repentance takes an everlasting farewel, an everlasting adieu of sin; it saith with the Spouse, Cant. 5.3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have found the smart of sin, I have put off the garments of the old man, the rags of old Adam, and how shall I put them on again? The burnt child will dread the fire. The man that hath smarted for Suretyship, will by no means be perswaded to come again into bonds, though you urge him to it never so frequently, never so strongly, never so rhetorically, yet he will tell you he has smarted for it, he has paid dear for it, and therefore you must excuse him; he is peremptorily resolved, nay he hath seriously vowed against it; and though he be never so much intreated, and by varie∣ty of arguments importuned, yet still he remains inexorable. A Christian that hath truly repented, is so sensible of the free∣ness and sweetness of the grace of God on the one hand, and of the weight of sin and wrath of God on the other hand, that he is highly resolved never to have any more to do with Idols,Psal. 40.12. Hos. 14.8. never to meddle more with those burning coals. True repentance is a continued act, a repentance never to be re∣pented of. The true penitent is every day a turning further and further from sin, and neerer and neerer to God. There is nothing that fetches so many tears from a penitent man's eyes, nor so many sighs and groans from a penitent man's heart as this, that he can get no further off from sin, and that he can get no neerer nor no closser to God. Repentance for sin, and a willing continuance in sin, cannot consist in the same subject. A sincere penitent makes as much conscience of repenting daily, as he doth of believing daily, and he can as easily content himself with one act of faith, or love, or
fear, or hope, or joy, or obedience, as he can content him∣self with one act of repentance. My sins are ever before me.Psal. 51.3. This is the voice of every true penitent; Oh, that I might sin no more! Oh, that I might never dishonour God more! Oh, that I might never walk contrary to Jesus Christ more! Oh, that I might never grieve the spirit of grace more. To sin is common to man,1 John 1.8, 10. & 5.19. Isa. 28.15, 18. Psal. 139.24. Rom. 7.22, 23. yea to the best man in all the world, but to continue in a course of sin, is only proper to a wicked man. To err and fail that's humane, but to maintain a league or friendship with sin, that is diabolical. Though a true penitent dares not continue in a trade, a path of sin, whilst he lives in this world, yet sin will continue in him whilst he continues in this world; though sin and grace were not born together, and though sin and grace shall never die together, yet whilst a penitent man lives in this world they must live together. 'Tis one thing for sin to continue in us, and 'tis another thing for us to continue in sin. The Apostle having closed the fifth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, in the triumph of Gospel grace; That as sin hath reigned unto death, so grace might reign through righteousness nto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord,Rom. 6.1, 2. begins the next with a prevention of the abuse of this grace; What shall we say then? shall we conti∣nue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? To live in sin, in the face of Gospel-grace is most unreasonable, and to a gracious and ingenious nature impossible; the very question implyes a kind of impossibility. Such as were once dead in sin, and now by Gospel-grace are dead to sin, such can no longer con∣tinue in sin. Look, as 'tis not the meer falling into the water that drowns a man, but his lying and continuing in it; so it is not a meer falling into sin that damns a man, that drowns a man, that everlastingly undoes a man, but his living in it, his continuing in it. It is bad to sin, but 'tis infinitely worse to continue in sin. The first best is not to sin, the next best is not to continue in sin, no not for an hour, as Paul speaks in ano∣ther case (Gal. 2.5.) To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour. Certainly to argue from Gospel-mercy to sinful liberty, is the Devil's Logick. The more a man lives in the
sight of Gospel-grace, the more sin will be discountenanced, resisted, hated, and totally displaced. A man may as truly as∣sert, that the Sea burns, or that the fire cools, or that the Sun darkens the Air, as he may assert that the sight, sense, or sweet of Gospel-grace will breed security or carnality, loos∣ness or wickedness, in a gracious heart. The true penitent never ceases repenting, till he ceases living; he goes to hea∣ven with the joyful tears of repentance in his eyes; he knows that his whole life is but a day of sowing tears, that he may at last reap everlasting joyes. True repentance makes a final and everlasting separation between sin and the soul; it makes such an absolute and compleat divorce between sin and the soul, and casts them so far asunder, that no power nor poli∣cy can ever bring them to meet as lovers together. The true penitent looks upon sin as an enemy, and deals with it, as Amnon dealt with Tamar, 2 Sam. 13.15. And Amnon hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her; and Amnon said unto her, arise, be gone. And just thus doth the penitent soul carry it towards sin. He that truly repents, so turns from his sins, that he never returns to the bondage and service of his sins any more,Isa. 1.16. Psal. 85.8. Isa. 30.22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold; thou shalt cast them away as a menstrous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence. But now the repentance of hypocrites is not constant but inconstant, 'tis not stedfast but unstedfast, 'tis not permanent but transient, 'tis quickly on, as quickly off; Come, say they, in that, Hosea 6.1. and let us return unto the Lord. But ver. 4. O Ephraim! what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away. The hypocrites repentance is like Jo∣nah's Gourd, which came up in a night, and perished in a night, Jonah 4.10. An hypocrites repentance springs from mutable grounds, causes, considerations and circumstances; and therefore it is compared to a deceitful bow, Hosea 7.16. 'tis as variable as the wind. An hypocrite is only constant in
inconstancy, Psal. 78.8. whose spirit was not stedfast with God, Ver. 37. Neither were they stedfast in his Covenant, &c. An hypocrite puts off his sins in the day of adversity (as he doth his garments when he goes to bed) with an intent to put them on again in the morning of profperity, Ver. 34, 35, 36. When he slew them then they sought him, and they returned and en∣quired early after God; and they remembred that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer: Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lyed unto him with their tongues. In the language of the blessed Scripture, he is a dog that returns to his vomit again, and such a dog was Judas; and he is a swine that returns to the wallowing in the mire a∣gain, and such a swine was Demas;2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. and such dogs and swine are all hypocrites. It is an extraordinary vanity in some men to lay aside their sins for a time, but with a purpose to return to them again; as they fable it of the Serpent that layeth aside his poyson when he goeth to drink, and when he hath drank, he returns to it again. It is a sad and sore evil, when men say to their lusts, as Abraham said to his servants, Abide you here, and I will go and worship, and return again unto you, Gen. 22.5. doubtless such souls are as far off from sound repentance, as light is from darkness, or as hell is from heaven, &c. But in what respects is true penitential turning from sin,  such a turning from sin, as never to return to sin any more? In what re∣spects is the penitents turning from sin, a continued and stedfast turn∣ing from sin, &c. Sol. This is a very sober, serious, weighty question,  and bespeakes a very sober, serious and satisfactory Answer, and therefore I would answer the question, 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively, &c. Negatively, It is not such a turning from sin as never to  sin more, 1 King. 8.46. For there is no man that sinneth not. Prov. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean? I am pure from my sin? Prov. 24.16. A just man falleth seven times,
and riseth again. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon the earth that doth good, and sinneth not. Luke 17.4. If he tres∣pass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again unto thee, saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him. Mat. 18.21, 22. Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven times, but un∣til seventy times seven. James 3.2. For in many things we offend all; or we stumble all, as the Greek has it. 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Ver. 10. If we say we have not sinned, we make him a lyar, and his word is not in us. And what did the continual burnt-offering which was to be made day by day import, but a daily sinning, and expiating of it? &c. Num. 28.3. Such is the universal corruption of humane nature, that the souls of the best, of the purest, and of the holiest men in the world, do from day to day, yea from moment to moment, contract some filth and uncleanness. The choicest Saints can never acquit themselves from sins of infirmity, such as do inevita∣bly and inseparably cleave unto the best of men, especially considering the state and condition wherein they are, carry∣ing still about them corrupt flesh and bloud. Methodius com∣pares the inbred corruptions of man's heart to a wild Fig-tree, growing upon the wall of some goodly Temple or state∣ly Palace, whereof although the main trunk of the stem be broke off, and stump of the root be plucked up, yet the fi∣brous strings of it piercing into the joynts of the stone work, will not be utterly extracted, but will be ever and anon shooting and sprouting out, until the whole frame of the building be dissolved, and the stone work thereof be dis∣joynted and pulled in pieces. Secondly, It is not such a turning from sin, as that the true penitent shall never relapse into the same kind of sin any more; for a true penitent may fall into the same sin again and again. It was a sin for the disciples to sleep when Christ had commanded them to watch and pray,Mat. 26.40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. and yet they slept again and again. The prophet Jonah was a holy man, and
yet he relapsed into passion and discontent with God again and again; he was discontent with the work God set him a∣bout, therefore he flieth to Tarshish, Jonah 1.2, 3. and sor∣rows for it, and confesseth that they that trust upon lying vanities forsake their own mercies, Chap. 2.8. and yet when God had shewed mercy to Niniveh, he was exceedingly discontented with God again, Jonah 4.1. But it displeased Jo∣nah exceedingly, and he was very angry. And when the Lord, who might have sent him to his grave, or a frown'd him to hell, reasons lovingly, sweetly and mildly with him to take him off from his passion, Chap. 4.3, 4. and provides for him in his extremity; yet upon a very small occasion, viz. the taking away of a Gourd or shrub (which God did to con∣vince him of his folly and waspishness of spirit) he breaks out again into the same passion, or worse, as if he had never seen the evil of it, or been humbled for it, Jonah 4.8, 9. I am greatly angry, or I do well to be angry, even unto death. And that is very considerable that Job speaks concerning his friends, Job 19.3. These ten times have ye reproached me, yet are ye not ashamed. It is a sin to reproach any man, it is a grea∣ter to reproach a godly man; but yet greater to reproach a godly man under sad and sore afflictions; but yet greatest of all to reproach a godly man under his sufferings, often, fre∣quently; yet saith Job, These ten times have ye reproached me; and yet Job's friends were not only godly, but eminently godly. By this sad instance 'tis evident, that gracious men, yea that men eminently gracious, may fall into the same sin again and again, yea ten times, that is often. Though Christ told his disciples that his kingdom was not of this world,John 18.36. Mat. 18.1, 2, 3, 4. Mark 9 34. Luke 9.46. & 22.24, 26. yet at three several times their pride and ambitious humour put them upon striving for preheminence and worldly greatness. King Jehoshaphat, though he was a godly man, yet he joyns affinity with that non such wicked Ahab, for which he was smartly reproved by the Prophet, 2 Chron. 19.2. And Jehu went out to meet him, and said to King Jehoshaphat, shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord. Now though this gracious Prince was thus reproved and saved, even by a miracle of mercy,
2 Chron. 18.1, 2, 3, 30, 31. compared; yet soon after he falls into the same sin again, and joyns himself with Ahaziah King of Israel, who did very wickedly, 2 Chron. 20.35, 36. and for which he is severely reproved in verse 37. Then Elie∣zer the son of Dodavan of Mareshah, prophesied against Jehosha∣phat, saying, because thou hast joyned thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord hath broken thy works, and the Ships were broken that they were not able to go to Tarshish. Let was twice overcome with wine, &c. and Abraham, though the father of the faith∣ful, yet falls once and again into the same sin, Gen. 12.11, 12,Mat. 26. Gal. 2.11, 12, 13 13. compared with Chap. 20, 1, 2, 3, 4, 13. Peter falls once and again into the same sin, and John twice worshipped the Angel, and Sampson (who is by the Spirit of the Lord numbred amongst those Worthies of whom this world was not worthy, Heb. 11.32, 33, 38.) fell again and again into the same gross sin, as is evident in the 14, 15, & 16. Chap∣ters of the book of Judges. And the Church confesses, that their backslidings are many, Jer. 14.7. By all which 'tis most evident, that good men may fall again and again into the same sin; and no wonder, for though their repentance be never so sincere and sound, yet their graces are but weak, and their mortification but imperfect in this life, and therefore 'tis possible for a gracious soul to fall again and again into the same sin; if the fire be not wholly put out, who will think it impossible, that it should catch and burn again and again? I readily grant, that the Lord hath graciously promised to heal the backslidings of his people (Hosea 14.4. and so Jer. 3.22.See Jer. 3.1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your back∣slidings; behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.) But I can no where find in all the Scriptures, that God hath engaged himself by any particular promise or promises, that Christians truly converted, truly penitent, shall never fall a∣gain and again into the same sins, after their conversion. I cannot find in all the book of God, where God has engaged himself to give such strength or power against this sin or that, as that a Christian shall be for ever (in this life) put out of all possibility of falling again and again into the same sins.
No person on earth can shew such a promise, that when a Chri∣stian has been thus or thus troubled, grieved, humbled or melted for his sins, that then God will assuredly preserve him from ever falling into the same sins again. The sight of such a promise under God's own hand, would be as life from the dead to all real Christians, who fear nothing more than the sin of backsliding. Certainly, there is no such power or infinite vertue in the greatest horrors or terrors, troubles or sorrows that the soul can be under for sin, nor in the fullest, sweetest or choicest discoveries of God's rich grace and free love to the soul, as for ever to fence and secure the soul from relapsing into the same sin again and again. Though grace be a glorious creature, yet 'tis but a creature; grace is but a created habit, that may be prevailed against by Satans temp∣tations, and by the strong, secret, and subtile workings of sin in our hearts. But this must be carefully minded and re∣membred, that though the Saints may and do sometimes re∣lapse, yet they do not relapse in such a manner as wicked men do relapse. For, First, They do not relapse voluntarily, but involuntarily.  Involuntary relapses, are when the resolution and full bent of the heart is against sin, when the soul strives with all its might against sin, by sighs and groans, by prayers and tears, and yet by some invincible weakness is forced to fall back into sin again, because there is not spiritual strength enough to overcome. Secondly, They do not relapse out of choice, as wicked  men do, Isa. 66.3. Thirdly, They don't relapse out of any delight that they  take in relapsing; witness their sad complaints, their great lamentations, and their bitter mournings over their relapses. Relapses into diseases, and relapses into sins, are more trou∣blesom and dangerous than they are any wayes delightful, to all that are in their wits. Fourthly, They don't relapse out of any setled purpose or  resolution of heart to relapse, as wicked men do, Jer. 2.25. All the relapses of a Saint, are against the setled bent, byass and resolution of his soul.
Fifthly, They don't relapse out of any love or longing to relapse, as wicked men do, who long and love to return to the flesh-pots of Egypt. Sixthly, They don't relapse into enormities, as wicked men do (for 'tis not usual with God to leave his people fre∣quently to relapse into enormities; for by his spirit and grace, by his smiles and frowns, by his word and rod he doth commonly preserve his people from a common, a frequent relapsing into enormities, into gross wickednesses.) The com∣mon and ordinary relapses of the people of God, are relap∣ses into infirmities, as idle words, passion, hastiness, rash∣ness, vain thoughts, &c. and these God pardons in course; but the common and ordinary relapses of wicked men, are relapses into enormities, into gross impieties. Seventhly, They don't relapse habitually, constantly, as wicked men do; their relapses are transient, not perma∣nent, they are not of course. A Sheep may fall into the mire, but a swine wallows in the mire, &c. But secondly, I answer affirmatively, That notwithstand∣ing all this, yet a true penitential turning from sin, is a con∣tinued and stedfast turning from sin, and that in these five re∣spects. First, In respect of his habitual purpose and resolution, not to sin, Psal. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my wayes, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.See my Treatise on holiness, page 507, 508, 509. David resolves to lay a Law of restraint upon his tongue, and to clap a muzzle upon his mouth, whilst he was in the presence of the wicked, who did lye at the catch to ensnare him, and trapan him; come health, come sick∣ness, come honour, come reproach, come poverty, come plenty, come liberty, come restraint, come life, come death, the true penitent is fixed in his purpose and resolution not to sin. Jerom writes of a brave woman, that being upon the wrack, told her persecutors, that they might do their worst, for she was firmly resolved rather to dye than lye.
Secondly, In respect of his babitual desires, which are,  that he may not sin, Psal. 119.133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. David's great desire is that he may walk as in a frame, that he may walk by line and rule, exactly, accurately; and that though sin did dwell in him, that yet it might not reign in him; and though it did rebel in him, that yet it might not have domi∣nion over him; he would have his sins to be like those beasts in Daniel, whose dominion was taken away, though their lives were prolonged for a season and a time, Chap. 7.12. Psal. 119.10. O, let me not wander from thy commandements. Ver. 36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covet∣ousness. Under the name of covetousness, all manner of vi∣ciousness is to be understood, that being the root of all evil, 1 Tim. 6.10. Thirdly, In respect of his habitual endeavours, which still  are not to sin. The ordinary and habitual endeavours of a true penitent, are still set against sin; he ordinarily rows against the stream of sin, though sometimes the stream proves too strong for him. Psal. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. He hides the word in his heart as a treasure, that he might not lose it, and as a rule, that he might not transgress against it. The Law of God kept closs in the heart, is the best armour of proof against evil lusts. David locks up the Law of God in his heart, as in a chest or cabinet, to secure him against Satan's ambushes and assaults on the one hand, and to preserve him from sin on the other hand. So Psal. 18.23. I have kept my self from mine iniquity. Fourthly, In respect of his habitual hatred of sin. Al∣though  the true penitent does sometimes sin, yet he alwayes hates the evil he does; there is a firm and fixed hatred in his soul against sin, Psal. 119.1. Therefore I hate every false way. Ver. 113. I hate va oughts. Ver. 163. I hate and abhor lying. So Rom. 7.15. The evil that I hate, that I do. A penitent heart usually rises and swells against the toad in the bosom. Some say, that there is such a native dread and terror
of the Hawk implanted in the Dove, that she is afraid of eve∣ry feather, and that she detests and abhors the very sight of any feather that hath grown upon a Hawk; so there is such a detestation & abhorrency of sin divinely implanted in every penitent man's heart, that he cannot but hate every thing that looks like it, or that belongs to it, or that comes from it. Fifthly, In respect of his constant path, or continued way, or course of life, which is quite opposite and contrary to sin, Gal. 5.17. Isa. 26.7. The way of the just is uprightness, Prov. 16.17. The high-way of the upright is to depart from evil. It is as common and ordinary for upright persons to depart from evil, as 'tis for Passengers to keep the King's high-wayes. Though an upright man, through mistake or weakness of grace, or violence of temptation, may step out of a way of holiness, yet walking in a way of wickedness, cannot be charged upon him, Psal. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. You know the path and practise of penitent Zacheus, of penitent Paul, and of the penitent Jaylor, was quite contrary to those wayes of wickedness, that they had formerly walked in. The fourth Answer. But fourthly and lastly, As a true penitential turning from sin, is a constant and continued turning from sin; so 'tis a returning to God. Sin is an aversion from God, and repen∣tance is a conversion to God, Act. 26.18. Sound repentance is not only a ceasing from doing evil, but also a learning to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. Repentance and turning to God are joyned together, as being one and the same thing, Act. 26.20. The Prodigals repenting, was his returning to his Father, Luke 15.17. When he came  himself, he said, I will arise and go to my father, and say father▪  ave sinned against heaven and before thee, &c. The Hebrew word for repentance is from  Shob, which signifies to return; implying, a going back from what a man had done; it notes a returning or convert∣ing
from one thing to another, as from sin to God, from evil to good, from hell to heaven. The common call of sinners to repentance, is to turn from sin, and to return to God, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way,Consult these Scriptures, Isa. 44.22. Isa. 19.22. Isa. 59.20. Hosea 3.5. Hosea 6.1. Hosea 14.1. and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, &c. Jer. 1.4. If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto me; and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove. And so Chap. 18.11. Return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your way and your doings good. 1 Pet. 2.25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the shepherd and bishop of your souls. 'Tis not enough for a sinner to forsake his sins, but he must also return to the Lord. The true penitent subjects his heart to the power of divine grace, and his life to the blessed will and word of God. Look, as negative goodness can never satisfie a penitent soul, so nega∣tive goodness can never save an impenitent soul. It is not enough, O man, that thou art not thus and thus bad, but thou must be thus and thus good, or thou wilt be miserable for ever, Ezek. 18.21. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Ne∣gative righteousness and holiness, is no righteousness, no ho∣liness in the account of God.Luke 18.5. Mat. 20.13, 14. It was not the Pharisees nega∣tive righteousness, nor his comparative goodness, that could prevent his being rejected of God, or his being shut out of heaven, or his being turned into hell. It is not enough that the Tree bears no ill fruit, but it must bring forth good fruit, else it must be cut down and cast into the fire; that Tree that is not for fruit, is for the fire;Mat. 7.19. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit (sayes Christ) is hewn down and cast in∣to the fire. Heaven at last will be found too holy, and too hot, to hold such as please themselves, as satisfie themselves with a negative righteousness. All that negative righteousness and holiness can do, is only to help a man to one of the coolest chambers and easiest beds in hell. True repentance brings the heart and life, not only off from sin, but on to God too; it takes a man not only off from the wayes of death, but it engages him to walk in the paths of life, Psal. 119.3. They
do no iniquity,Nazianzene speaking of true repentance, very aptly compares the soul to a pair of writing tables, out of which must be washed what∣soever was writ∣ten with sin, and instead thereof the writing of grace must be writupon the soul, both being neces∣sary to true re∣pentance. Jer. 31.19. Job. 40.4, 5. Jer. 4.1. they walk in his wayes. Prov. 13.14. The Law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. Prov. 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may de∣part from hell beneath. Psal. 34.14. Depart from evil and do good. We read in Scripture of God's returning to us, as well as of our returning to God; in both there is repentance: When God returns to us, he repents of the evil of punishment that he hath brought upon us; and when we return to God, we repent of the evil of sin which we have committed against him. The true penitent, does not only sadly smite upon his thigh, and say, what have I done, but he also speedily faces about, and cryes out, I will do so no more. When God calls for true repentance, it is with an if thou wilt return, O Israel, return unto me. And when the people of God do provoke and encourage one another to repentance,Hosea 6.1. it is with a come let us return unto the Lord. Repentance unto life, is not a turning from sin to sin, nor 'tis not a turning from prophaness to ci∣vility, nor 'tis not a turning from civility to formality; but 'tis a turning from darkness to light,Acts 26.18. 'tis a turning from the wayes of iniquity into the wayes of piety, 'tis a turning from sin to God. In this respect Israel's repentance was very de∣fective; witness that sad complaint of the Prophet (Hosea 7.16.) They return (that is, they make a shew of repentance) but not to the most High. So they in that, Joel 2.12. have the half turn, but returned not to the Lord with all their hearts. So Jehu went far, and gave many a half turn, but never turned to the most High, and that was his ruin at last. Such a repen∣tance as brings the soul never the neerer to God, is a repen∣tance never the neer; but that repentance that brings the soul neerer to God, is a repentance never to be repented of. And let thus much suffice, to have spoken concerning that Evange∣lical Repentance, that hath the precious promises of remissi∣on of sin and salvation running out unto it, &c.
CHAP. IV. Several have observed to my hand,'Tis better that a hundred hypo∣crites should pe∣rish, than that one poor Christian should want his portion. Cotton on the Covenant, page 78. how far an Hypocrite may go; but my design in this Chapter, is to shew how far an Hypocrite cannot go. Many have discovered at large, what an Hypocrite can do; but my scope in this Chapter, is to shew what an Hypocrite cannot do. Some have shewed what an Hypocrite is, and I shall now shew what he is not. Some have shewed the several rounds in Jacob's Ladder, that an Hypocrite may climb up to; but my business and work in this Chapter, is to shew you the several rounds in Jacob's Ladder, that no Hypocrite under heaven can climb up to. FIrst, An Hypocrites inside is never answerable to his out∣side;  an Hypocrites inside is one thing,Mat. 23.25, 26, 27 Luke 11.39. and his outside another thing; an Hypocrite is outwardly clean, but inward∣ly unclean; he is outwardly glorious, but inwardly inglori∣ous. Hypocrites are like Apothecaries gally pots, having without the title of some excellent Preservative, but within they are full of some deadly poyson; they are like the Egyptian Temples, that were beautifull without, but within there was nothing to be found but Serpents and Crocodiles, and other venemous creatures. Hypocrites trade more for a good name, than for a good heart; for a good report, than for a good conscience; they are like Fidlers, more careful in tuning their Instruments, than in watching their spirits.Erasmi milia. Hypocrites are like white silver, but they draw black lines; they have a seeming sanctified outside, but stuff'd within with
malice, worldliness, pride, envy, &c. Like window cushions, made up of velvet and richly embroydered, but stuff'd within with hay. An Hypocrite may offer sacrifice with Cain, and fast with Jezabel; and humble himself with Ahab, and lament with the tears of Esau; and kiss Christ with Judas, and fol∣low Christ with Demas; and offer fair for the holy Ghost with Simon Magus,Acts 8.23. and yet for all this his inside as bad as any of theirs. An Hypocrite is a Cato without, and a Nero with∣in; a Jacob without, and an Esau within; a David without, and a Saul within; a Peter without, and a Judas within; a Saint without, and a Satan within; an Angel without, and a Devil within.Rom. 2.28, 29. An Hypocrit is a Jew outwardly, but an Atheist, a Pagan,Lucian. a Turk inwardly. I have read of certain Images, which on the outside were covered with gold and pearl, re∣sembling Jupiter and Neptune, but within were nothing but spiders and cobwebs; a fit resemblance of Hypocrites. Hy∣pocrisie is but an outside, like cloth of Arras, fair and beautiful without; but if you look to the inside, you shall find nothing but rags and ends. That Monk hit it, that said, To be a Monk in outward shew was easie, but to be a Monk in inward reality was hard. To be a Christian in outward shew is easie, but to be a Christian inwardly and really is very hard. An Hypocrites inside never ecco's or answers to his outside; his inside is vicious, and his outside is Religious: But let all such hypocrites know, that dissembled sanctity is double iniquity, and accordingly at last they shall be dealt with, Mat. 24.5. But, Secondly, No hypocrite under heaven is totally divorced from the love and liking of every known sin, there is still some secret lust or other,Job 20.12, 13, 14 which as a sweet morsel he rowls under his tongue, and will not spit it out; every Hypocrite tollerates some evil or other in himself, and takes liberty to transgress. An Hypocrite will make hard shift to daub up his conscience, and to secure himself from the checks thereof. After once the bag was committed to Judas his custody, after once he was chosen into that sweet office, he quickly put con∣science
out of office,It was a strange conceit of the Cerinthians and those Caini or Cainiani as they are called by some that ho∣noured Judas the Traitor, as some divine and super∣humane power, and called his treason a blessed piece of service, & that he know∣ing how much the death of Christ would pro∣fit mankind, did therefore betray him to death to save the race of men, and to do a thing pleasing to God. Irenaeus, Aug. de haeresi. and never left stealing and licking his fingers, whilst there was any money in his bag to finger. He∣rod knew much, and heard John Baptist, and had some tempo∣rary affections, and did many good things, Mark 6.20. But yet, 1. He kept Herodias his brother's wife, Mark 6.17. 2. He took away the life of John the Baptist, Mark 6.27. 3. He sets Jesus Christ at naught, and rejected him, Luke 23.11. As fair as Herod seemed to carry it, yet he lived in a known notorious sin, and unjustly murdered the messenger of God, and mocked and rejected Jesus Christ as a vile per∣son. Some sin or other alwayes reigns without controul, in an hypocritical heart. As they say of Witches, that they have one familiar or another that still sucks them. An Hy∣pocrite alwayes reserves one nest-egg or another in his heart or life, for Satan to sit and brood on. Jehu did many brave things, but yet he kept up the worship of his golden calves. Naaman promises high, but yet he is for bowing in the house of Rimmon. The Pharisees were very devout, but yet they loved the praises of men, and the uppermost seats in the Sy∣nagogues. There is never an hypocrite in the world, but will do what he can to save the life of his sin, though it be with the loss of his soul. O Sirs! Satan can be contented that Hy∣pocrites should yield to God in many things, provided they will be but true to him in some one thing; for he very well knows, that one sin lived in, and allowed, gives him as much advantage against the soul, as more. Satan can hold a man fast enough by one sin, as the Fowler can hold the bird fast enough by one claw; Satan knows, that one sin lived in and allowed, will marr all a mans sweetest duties and services; as one dead fly will marr the whole box of precious ointment, and as one jarring string will bring the sweetest musick out of tune. 'Tis said of Naaman the Syrian,Eccl. 10.1. that he was a va∣liant man, and a victorious man, and an honourable man,2 King. 5.1. and a great favourite with his Prince, but a Leper: So it may be said of many Hypocrites, they have such and such excellen∣cies, and they perform such and such glorious duties, but they live and allow themselves in this or that sin,Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. and that marrs the beauty of all their services. Satan knows, that
one sin lived in and allowed, will as certainly damn a man, as many; as one disease, one ulcerous part, may as certainly kill a man, as many. Satan knows, that one sin lived in and allowed,Lev. 31. will render a man as unclean in the eye of God as many. If the Leper in the Law had the spot of leprosie in any one part of his body, he was accounted a Leper, although all the rest of his body were sound and whole: So he who hath the spot of the leprosie of sin allowed in any one part of his soul, he is a spiritual Leper in the eye of God, he is un∣clean, though in other parts he may not be unclean. The Schoolmen say, that if a sow do but wallow in one miry or dirty hole, she is filthy; and certainly, that soul that doth but wallow in any one sin, he is filthy in the eye of God. Sa∣tan knows,Heb. 13.4. It is most true that the Heathen man saith, Qui habet unium vi∣tium shabet omnia; he that hath any one vice (viz. reigning) hath all others with it. Seneca de benef. l. 5. c. 15. that one sin lived in and allowed, will as effectu∣ally keep Christ and the soul asunder, as many; as one stone in the pipe will as effectually keep out the water, as many. Satan knows, that one sin lived in and allowed, will make way for many; as one thief can open the door to let in many more. Satan knows, that one sin lived in and allowed, will as certainly shut the soul out of heaven, as many; one enemy may shut the door upon a man as well as many: and what difference is there between that man that is shut out of hea∣ven for living in many sins, and he that is shut out of heaven for lving but in one sin? One sin lived in and allowed, will arm conscience against a man, as well as many: If there be but one crack in the honey glass, there the wasp will be buzzing. One sin allowed and countenanced, will spoyl the musick of conscience; one sin lived in and allowed, will make death as terrible and as formidable to the soul, as many; one hand-writing upon the wall made King Nebuchadnez∣zar's countenance to change,Dan. 5.5, 6. and his thoughts to be troubled, and the joynts of his loyns to be loosed, and his knees to be dashed one against another. Now all this Satan knows, and therefore he labours mightily to engage Hypocrites to live in the allowance of some one sin. O Sirs! remember that as one hole in a Ship will sink it, and as one stab at the heart will kill a man, and as one glass of poyson will poyson a man, and as one act of Treason will make a man a Traitor; so one
sin lived in and allowed, will damn a man for ever; one wound strikes Goliah dead, as well as three and twenty did Caesar; one Dalilah will do Sampson as much mischief,Suetonius. as all the Philistines; one wheel broken, spoyls all the whole clock; one vein's bleeding will let out all the vitals, as well as more; one bitter herb will spoyl all the pottage;Gen. 3. 1 Sam. 14.33. Josh. 7. Jonah 1. by eating one apple, Adam lost Paradise; one lick of honey endanger∣ed Jonathan's life; one Achan was a trouble to all Israel; one Jonah was lading too heavy for a whole Ship: So one sin lived in and allowed, is enough to make a man miserable for ever. One milstone will sink a man to the bottom of the Sea as well as a hundred; so one sin lived in and indulged, will sink a man to the bottom of hell as well as a hundred. I have read of a great Roman Captain, who as he was riding in his tri∣umphant Chariot through Rome, had his eyes never off of a Curtizan that walkt along the street, which made one say, Behold ho this great Captain that hath conquered such and such Armies, is himself conquered by one silly woman! There is never an Hypocrite in the world, but lyes under the con∣quest of one base lust or another, but lives under the reign and dominion of one sin or another. That soul that can in sincerity of heart appeal to a heart-searching God, that 'tis otherwise with him (viz. That he does not live nor allow himself in any one sinful way or practise) that soul, I dare assure in the Lord's name, is no hypocrite, Psal. 139, 23, 24. Thirdly, As an Hypocrites heart is never throughly sub∣dued to a willingness to part with every lust, so neither is his heart throughly subdued to a willingness to perform all known duties; sometimes he is all for publick duties, but makes no conscience of closet-duties, or of family-duties; sometimes he is all for the duties of the first Table, but makes no conscience of the duties of the second Table; and sometimes he is all for the duties of the second Table, but makes no conscience of the duties of the first Table; if he obeyes one command, he willingly lives in the neglect of an∣other; if he does one duty, he will be sure to cast off ano∣ther;
as he is not willing to fall out with every sin, so he is not willing to fall in with every duty. An Hypocrites obe∣dience is alwayes partial, 'tis never universal, he still baulks or boggles with those commands that cross his lusts. The Pharisees fasted,Mat. 23.23. Chap. 6. prayed, gave alms, and paid tythes: O, but they omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy and faith, and they were unnatural to parents, and under a petence of praying,Mat. 15.4, 5, 6. they made a prey of widows houses; under a pretence of piety, they exercised the greatest covetousness, unrighteousness and cruelty, and that upon wi∣dows, who are (usually the greatest objects of pity and cha∣rity; they made no bones of robbing the widow, under a pre∣tence of honouring of God: So Judas, under a pretence of lay∣ing up for the poor, robbed the poor; he pretended to lay up for the poor,John 12.6. After some men have made a long and high professi∣on, some one be∣loved lust or o∣ther, which they would never let go, parts Christ and them for e∣ver. but he intended only to lay up for himself, and to provide against a rainy day; it is probable that he had no great mind to stay long with his Lord, and therefore he was resolved to make the best market he could for himself. Judas being willing to set up for himself, under a cloak of holiness, he practises the greatest unfaithfulness. Though the Eagle soars high, yet still her eye is upon her prey; so though Ju∣das did soar high in profession, yet his eye was still upon his prey, upon his bags; and so he might have it, he cared not who went without it; so he might be rich, he did not care though his Lord and his retinue grew never so poor. Judas under all his shews of sanctity, had not so much as common honesty in him; counterfeit holiness is often made a stalking horse to much unrighteousness; but certainly it were better, with the Philosopher, to have honesty without Religion, than to have Religion without honesty. An Hypocrite may exer∣cise himself in some outward, easie, ordinary duties of Reli∣gion; but when shall you see an Hypocrite laying the ax to the root of the Tree, or a searching and trying his own heart, or severely judging his bosom sins, or humbly mourning and lamenting over secret corruptions, or doubling his guards a∣bout his own soul, or rejoycing in the graces, services or ex∣cellencies of others, or striving or pressing after the highest pitches of grace, holiness and communion with God, or en∣deavouring
more to cast out the beam out of his own eye, than the mote out of his brother's eye, or to be more severe against his own sins, than against the sins of others? Alas! an Hypocrite is so far from practising these duties, that he thinks them either superfluous or impossible. An Hypocrites obe∣dience is alwayes a limited and stinted obedience; it is either limited to such commands which are most sutable to his ease, safety, honour, profit, pleasure, &c. or else it is limited to the outward part of the command, and never extends it self to the inward and spiritual part of the command; as you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees; their obedience was all outward, they had no regard at all to the inward and spiri∣tual part of any command; as is evident in that high charge that Christ gives in against them, Mat. 5. They did not mur∣der, they did not commit adultery, they had an eye to the outward part of the command; but Christ charges them with unjust and adulterous thoughts, unchast glances, con∣templative wickedness, speculative uncleanness, &c. they having no regard at all to the inward and spiritual part of any command; common grace looks only to some particular du∣ties, but saving grace looks to all. Renewing grace comes off to positives as well as negatives,Isa. 1.16, 17. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. it teacheth us to cease to do evil, and it learns us also to do good; it teacheth us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and also to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. These words con∣tain the sum of a Christians duty, to live soberly towards our selves, righteously towards our neighbours, and godly to∣wards God, is true godliness indeed, and the whole duty of man. There is never an Hypocrite in the world, that can sincerely appeal to God, and say, Lord,Psal. 119.6. Luke 1.5, 6. Acts 13.22. thou knowest that my heart is subdued to a willingness to perform all known duties; I would willingly do the best I can to observe all thy royal Laws: Lord, I unfeignedly desire, and really endeavour to have an eye upon every command of thine, and to live up to every command of thine; and it is the real grief of my heart, and the daily burden of my soul, when I violate any of thy blessed Laws. He that can in uprightness thus appeal to God, shall never miscarry in that other world. But,
Fourthly, There is never an Hypocrite in the world that makes God, or Christ, or holiness, or his doing, or receiving good in his station, relation or generation; his grand end, his highest end, his ultimate end of living in the world; pleasures, profits and honours, are the Hypocrites all he aims at in this world; they are his Trinity which he adores and serves,1 John 2.16. and sacrificeth himself unto; an Hypocrite's ends are corrupt and selfish. God may possibly be at the high∣er end of his work, but self is at the further end; for he that was never truly cast out of himself,John 6.26. Mat. 6.1, 5, 16. Gal. 4.17. Isa. 58.3. Mal. 3.14. zech. 7.5, 6, 7. Gen. 34.21, 22 can have no higher end than himself. An Hypocrite is all for his own glory, he acts for himself, and from himself; so I may have the profit, the credit, the glory, the applause, come of God's glory what will; this is the language of an unsound heart. An Hy∣pocrite will seem to be very godly when he can make a gain of godliness, he will seem to be very holy when holiness is the way to outward greatness and happiness; but this religi∣ous wickedness will double damn the Hypocrite at last. Self∣ends are the operative ingredients in all an Hypocrite does, self is the chief Engine, self is the great wheel that sets all an hypocrites wheels a going. When hypocrites take up Re∣ligion,Rom. 16.18. Phil. 3.19. 'tis only to serve their own turns, to bring about their own carnal ends; they serve not the Lord, but their own bel∣lies; they use Religion only as a stream to turn about their own Mill, and the more neatly to effect their own carnal pro∣jects. Simon Magus will needs be baptized, and he is very desirous to have power to give the holy Ghost to others; but his aim being only to get a name,Acts 8.21. and to get money, Peter tells him to his face, that his heart was not right in the sight of God. No man can go higher than his principles, and therefore an hypocrite having no higher principles than him∣self, all he does must needs be terminated in himself. Look, as all the Rivers that come from the Sea, do return back again to the Sea from whence they come, so all those duties which arise from a mans self, must needs center in a mans self. An hypocrite alwayes makes himself the end of all his service; but let such hypocrites know, that though their profession be never so glorious, and their duties never so abundant, yet
their ends being selfish and carnal, all their pretentions and performances are but beautiful abominations in the sight of God. An hypocrite has alwayes a squint eye, and squint ey'd aims, and squint ey'd ends in all he does.Numb. 22, 23. Chapters. 2 Pet. 2.15. 2 King. 10. Balaam spake very religiously, and he multiplyed Altars and sacrifices; but the thing he had in his eye was the wages of unrighteousness. Jehu destroyed bloudy Ahab's house, he executed the venge∣ance of God upon that wicked family; he readily,1 King. 21. Jonah 3. resolutely and effectually destroyed all the worshippers of Baal, but his ends were to secure the Kingdom to him and his. Ahab and the Ninivites fasted in sackcloth, but it was meerly that they might not feel the heavy judgments that they feared would overtake them. The Jews in Babylon fasted and mourned,Zech. 7.5, 6. and mourned and fasted seventy years, but it was more to get off their chains than their sins, it was more to be rid of their captivity than it was to be rid of their iniquity. Look, as the Eagle hath an eye upon her prey when she flies highest, so these Jews in all their fasting, praying, mourning, they had only an eye to their own ease, deliverance, freedom, &c. in all their Religious duties they were acted from evil princi∣ples, and carried on by self-respects; and therefore Daniel denies, that in all that seventy years captivity they had prayed to any purpose. All this is come upon us,Dan. 9.13. yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniqui∣ties and understand thy truth. It is the end that dignifies or de∣baseth the action, that rectifies it or adulterates it, that sets a crown of honour, or a crown of shame upon the head of it. He that commonly, habitually, in all his duties and services, proposes to himself no higher ends than the praises of men, or rewards of men, or the stopping the mouth of natural conscience, or only to avoid a smarting rod, or meerly to se∣cure himself from wrath to come, he is an hypocrite. The ends of a mans actions are alwayes a great discovery either of sincerity or hypocrisie. Look, as great gifts, not sweet∣ned with sincerity, are no ornaments to us; so great infirmi∣ties not sowred with hypocrisie, are no great deformities to us. An hypocrites ends are alwayes below God, they are al∣wayes below glorifying of God, exalting of God, walking
with God, and enjoying communion with God. An hypo∣crite in all he does, still proposes to himself some poor, mean, ignoble self-end or other. But now mark, a sincere Christian, if he prayes, or hears, or gives,Psal. 115.1. 1 Thes. 2.6. or fasts, or repents, or obeys, &c. God's glory is the main end of all; the glory of God is his highest end, his ulti∣mate end. A sincere Christian can be content to be trampled upon and vilified, so God's name be glorified; the bent of such a heart is for God and his glory;Rev. 4.9, 10, 11. nothing but sincerity can carry a soul so high, as in all acts natural, civil and religi∣ous, to intend God's glory. A sincere Christian ascribes the praise of all to God,Rom. 14.7, 8. he sets the crown on Christ's head alone, he will set God upon the throne, and make all things else his servants, or his foot-stool; all must bow the knee to God, or be trodden in the dirt; he will love nothing, he will imbrace nothing but what sets God higher, or brings God neerer to his heart. The glory of God is the mark, the white, that the sincere, Christian has in his eye. The sincere Christian lives not to himself,1 Cor. 10. ult. Rev. 12.11. but to him who lives for ever; he lives not to his own will, or lusts, or greatness, or glory in this world, but he lives to his glory, whose glory is dearer to him than his own Life. Look, as bright shining golden vessels do not re∣tain the beams of the Sun which they receive, but reflect them back again upon the Sun; so the sincere Christian return and reflects back again upon the Sun of righteousness, the praise and glory of all the gifts, graces and vertues that they have received from him. The daily language of sincere souls is this;1 Chron. 29, 10, 18. Rom. 13.7. Non nobis Domine, non nobis Domine; Not unto us Lord, not unto us Lord, but to thy name be all the glory. A sincere Christian makes conscience of giving men their dues; how much more then does he make conscience of giving God his due.Psal. 96.7, 8. Now glory is God's due, and God stands upon no∣thing more than that we gve him the glory due unto his name,Propter te Domine propter te, was once and is still every sincere Christians Motto. as you may see in Psal. 29.1, 2. There are three gives in those two verses; Give unto the Lord, give unto the Lord, give unto the Lord the glory that is due unto his name. Glory i God's right, and he stands upon his right, and this the sincere
Christian knows, and therefore he gives him his right, he gives him the honour and the glory that is due unto his name. But pray do not mistake me, I do not say that such as are real∣ly sincere, do actually eye the glory of Christ in all their actions: Oh, no, this is a happiness desirable on earth, but shall never be attained till we come to heaven. By and base ends and aims will be still ready to creep into the best hearts; but all sincere hearts sigh and groan under them, they com∣plain to God of them, and they cry out for justice, justice upon them, and it is the earnest desires and daily endeavours of their souls to be rid of them; and therefore they shall not be imputed to them, nor keep good things from them: But now take a sincere Chistian in his ordinary, usual and habi∣tual course, and you shall find that his aims and ends in all his actions and undertakings are to glorifie God, to exalt God, and to lift up God in the world. If the Hypocrite did in good earnest aim at the glory of God in what he does, then the glory of God would swallow up all his by aims and carnl ends, as Aarons rod swallowed up the Magicians rods. Look, as the Sun puts out the light of the fire,Exod. 7.10, 11, 12. so the glory of God (where it is aimed at) will put out and consume all by and base ends. This is most certain, that which is a man's great end, that will work out all other ends; he that sets up the glory of God as his chief end, will find that his chief end will by degrees eat out all low and base ends. Look,Gen. 41.4. as Pharaoh's lean kin ate up the fat, so the glory of God will eat up all those fat and worldly ends that crowd in upon the soul in re∣ligious work. Where the glory of God is kept up as a man's greatest end, there all by and base ends will be kept at an un∣der. By what has been said, 'tis most evident, that an Hypo∣crite in all his transactions looks at himself, and designs the advance and advantage of himself. An Hypocrite is as well able to make a world, and to unmake himself, as he is able to make the glory of God, the exaltation of God his highest end, his utmost aim in what he does. But, Fifthly, No Hypocrite can live wholly and only upon the
righteousness of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, the me∣rits of Christ for justification and salvation. The hypocriti∣cal Scribes and Pharisees prayed and fasted,Mat. 6. Luke 18.11, 12. ponder upon that Rev. 3.16, 17, 18. and kept the Sab∣bath, and gave almes, &c. and in this legal righteousness they rested and trusted. Upon the performance of these and such like duties they laid the weight of their souls, and the stress of their salvation, and so perished for ever. An Hy∣pocrite rests upon what he doth, and never looks so high as the righteousness of Christ; he looks upon his duties as so much good moneys laid out for heaven; he weaves a web of righteousness to cloath himself withal, he never looks out for a more glorious righteousness to be justified by than his own, and so puts a slight upon the righteousness of Christ, Rom. 10.3. For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. The first step to sal∣vation is to renounce our own righteousness, the next step is to embrace the righteousness of Christ which is freely offer∣ed to sinners i the Gospel; but these things the Hypocrite minds not, regards not: The righteousness of an Hypocrite is not only imperfect, but impure, a rag, a filthy rag; and therefore he that rests upon such a righteousness,Isa. 64.6. must needs miscarry to all eternity. O Sirs! who will say that that man needs a Saviour, that can flie to heaven upon the wings of his own duties and services? If a man's duties can pacifie an infinite wrath, and satisfie an infinite justice, then farewel Christ, and welcom duties. He that will rest upon his own righteousness for life and justification, must needs sit down on this side salvation; he that rests upon his duties, and that rests upon a gift of knowledge, a gift of utterance, a gift of memory, or a gift of prayer, though he may come near to heaven, and bid fair for heaven, yet he will never be able to get into heaven. Now, how sad is it for a man to lose him∣self and his soul in a wilderness of duties, when he is upon the borders, yea the very brink of the holy Land; he that rests upon any thing in him, or done by him as a means to pro∣cure the favour of God, or the salvation of his soul, will put such a cheat upon himself as will undo him for ever. Non-submission
to the righteousness of Christ, keeps Christ and the hypocrite asunder; Christ will never love nor like to put the fine, clean,Rev. 9.7, 8. white linnen of his own righteousness upon the old garment, the old rags of an hypocrites duties;Mar. 9.16, 17. neither will Christ ever delight to put his new wine into such old bottles. An hypocrites confidence in his own righteousness,Prov. 21.27. turns his righteousness into filthiness. But now a sincere Christian, he renounces his own righteousness, he renounces all confidence in the flesh,Phil. 3.3. he looks upon his own righteous∣ness as dung, yea as dogs meat (as some interpret the word , in that, dicuntur quasi . Vide Bezam, vide a Lapíde. Phil. 3.8.) he will say no more to his du∣ties, to the works of his hands, ye are my Gods, Hos. 14.3. When they look upon the holiness of Gods nature, the righ∣teousness of his government, the severity of his Law, the terror of his wrath, they see an absolute and indispensable necessity of a more glorious righteousness than their own to appear before God in. A sincere Christian sets the highest price and value upon the righteousness of Christ, Psal. 71.16. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. Mark, the Emphasis doubled, of thine, and thine only; a sincere Christian is convinced of the nature, worth and excellency of the righteousness of Christ, and therefore he cryes out, I will make mention of thy righteousness, of thine only. The cost∣ly cloak (of Alcisthenes) which Dionisius sold to the Cartha∣ginians for an hundred Talents, was indeed a mean and beg∣garly rag in a sincere Christian's eye, to that embroidered mantle of righteousness that Christ puts upon his. A sincere Christian rejoyces in the righteousness of Christ above all, Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoyce in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath cloathed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the role of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorn∣eth her self with her jewels. It is matter of joy,Knolls Hist. and a sign of great favour from the great Turk, when a rich garment is cast upon any that comes into his presence: O then! what mat∣ter of joy must it be to a sincere Christian,Isa. 28.16. to have the rich and royal garment of Christ's righteousness cast upon him? A sincere Christian rests on the righteousness of Christ, as
on a sure foundation, Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength. It was a very sweet and golden expression of one, when he thought himself to be at the point of death; I confess, said he, I am not worthy, I have no merits of mine own to obtain heaven by;Guliel. Abbs in vita Bern. lib. 1. cap. 12. but my Lord had a dou∣ble right thereunto, an hereditary right as a son, and a meritorious right as a sacrifice; he was contented with the one right himse f, the other right he hath given unto me, by the vertue of which gift I do rightly lay claim unto it, and am not confounded. A sincere Chri∣stian looks upon the righteousness of Christ as that which renders him most splendid and glorious in the eyes of God, Phil. 3.9. And e found in him not having mine own righteous∣ness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ the righteousness which is of God by faith. The Church, saith Marlorat, which puts on Christ and his righteousness, is m re il∣lustrious than the Air is by the Sun. A sincere Christian looks upon the righteousness of Christ as his only security against wrath to come;1 Thes. 1. ult. wrath to come is the greatest wrath, wrath to come is the purest wrath, wrath to come is infinite wrath, wrath to come is everlasting wrath: Now the sincere Chri∣stian he knows no way under heaven to secure himself from wrath to come, but by putting on the robe of Christ's righ∣teousness. The story tells us (if we may believe it) that Pi∣late being called to Rome to give an account unto the Empe∣peror for some misgovernment and male-administration,Rom. 13.14. he put on the seamless coat of Christ, and all the time he had hat coat upon his back, Caesar's fury was abated. There is nothing that can abate the wrath and fury of a sin-revenging God, but the seamless coat of Christ's righteousness. Well, for a close remember this, There is never an hypocrite in the world that is more pleased, satisfied, delighted and content∣d with the righteousness of Christ, than with his own, &c. Though an hypocrite may be much in duties, yet he never lives above his duties; he works for life, and he rests in his work, and this proves his mortal wound. But, Sixthly, An Hypocrite never embraces a whole Christ, he can never take up his full and everlasting rest, satisfaction  and content in the person of Christ, in the merits of Christ,
in the enjoyment of Christ alone. No hypocrite did ever long and mourn after the enjoyment of Christ, as the best thing in all the world; no hypocrite did ever prize Christ for a sanctifier as well as a Saviour; no hypocrite did ever look upon Christ, or long for Christ to deliver him from the power of his sins, as much, or as well as to deliver him from wrath to come; no hypocrite can really love the person of Christ, or take satisfaction in the person of Christ,1 Thes. 1.10. the rayes and beam of Christs glory has never warm'd his heart; he never knew what bosom communion with Christ meant. An hypocrite may love to be healed by Ch ist, and to be padon∣ed by Christ, and to be saved by Christ, &c. but he can never take any complacency in the person of Christ, his heart never seriously works after union with Christ. The love of a sin∣cere Christian runs much out to the person of Christ, hea∣ven it self without Christ,Cant. 5.10. Phil. 1.21. & 3.7, 8, 9, 10. would be to such a soul but a poor thing, a low thing, a little thing, an uncomfortable thing, an empty thing; 'tis the person of Christ that is the sparkling Diamond in the ring of glory. No hypocrite in the world is sincerely willing to receive Christ in all his Offices, and to close with him upon Gospel terms.1 John 11, 13. Mat. 16.24. The terms upon which God offers Christ in the Gospel, are these, viz. That we shall accept of a whole Christ with a whole heart. Now mark, a whole Christ includes all his Offices, & a whole heart includes all our faculties: Christ as Mediator is King, Priest and Pro∣phet, and so God the Father in the Gospel offers him. Sal∣vation was too great and too glorious a work to be perfected and compleated by any one Office of Christ. Christ as a Pro∣phet instructs us, and as a Priest he redeems us, and intercedes for us, and as a King he sanctifies and saves us. The Apostle hit it when he said, He is made to us of God, wisdom, righteous∣ness, sanctification and redemption. Consider Christ as our Pro∣phet, and so he is made wisdom to us;1 Cor. 1.30. consider him as our Priest, and so he is made righteousness and redemption to us; consider him as our King, and so he is made sanctification and holiness to us. An hypocrite may be willing to imbrace Christ as a Priest to save him from wrath, from the curse, from hell, from everlasting burning, but he is never sincerely willing to
imbrace Christ as a Prophet to teach and instruct him, and as a King to rule and reign over him; many hypocrites may be willing to receive a Christ Jesus, that are not willing to re∣ceive a Lord Jesus; they may be willing to imbrace a saving Christ, but they are not willing to imbrace a ruling Christ, a commanding Christ.Luke 19 27. This man shall not rule over us. O Je∣rusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, how often would I have gathered thy children together,Mat. 23.37. Psal. 2.2, 3. John 5.40. John 1.11. Isa. 8 14. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. even as a hen gather∣eth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? And ye will not come to me that ye might have life. He came to his own, and his own received him not. An hypocrite is willing to receive Christ in one office, but not in every office; and this is that stumbling stone at which hypocrites stumble and fall, and are broken in pieces. Certainly Christ is as lovely and as comely s desirable, and delightful as eminent, and excellent in one office as he is in another, and therefore 'tis a just and righ∣teous thing with God, that hypocrites that won't receive him in every office,1 Cor. 1.1. should have no benefit by any one of his offices. Christ and his offices may be distinguished, but Christ and his offices can never be divided; whilst many have been a la∣bouring to divide one office of Christ from another, they have wholly stript themselves of any advantage or benefit by Christ. Hypocrites love to share with Christ in his happi∣ness, but they don't love to share with Christ in his holiness; they are willing to be redeemed by Christ, but they are not cordially willing to submit to the Laws and Government of Christ; they are willing to be saved by his bloud, but they are not willing to submit to his Scepter. Hypocrites love the priviledges of the Gospel, but they don't love the services of the Gospel, especially those that are most inward and spi∣ritual. But now a sincere Christian he owns Christ in all his offices,1 John 12. Mat. 2.6. Heb. 7.21, 26. Acts 3.22. John 12.46. he receives Christ in all his offices, and he closes with Christ in all his offices, he accepts of him not only as a Christ Jesus, but also as a Lord Jesus; he imbraces him not only as a saving Christ, but also as a ruling Christ. The Co∣lossians received him as Christ Jesus the Lord,Col. 2.6. they received a Lord Christ as well as a saving Christ, they received Christ as a King upon his throne,2 Cor. 4.5. as well as a sacrifice upon his
Cross. God the Father in the Gospel tenders a whole Christ; We preach Christ Jesus the Lord,Acts 5.31. and accordingly a sincere Christian receives a whole Christ, he receives Christ Jesus the Lord; he sayes with Thomas, My Lord, and my God;John 20.28. he takes Christ for his wisdom as well as for his righteousness, and he takes him for his sanctification as well as for his redemption. An hypocrite is all for a saving Christ, for a sin-pardoning Christ, for a soul-glorifying Christ, but regards not a ruling Christ, a reigning Christ, a commanding Christ, a sanctify∣ing Christ, and this at last will prove his damning sin, John 3.19, 20. But, Seventhly, An Hypocrite can't mourn for sin as sin, nor  grieve for sin as sin, nor hate sin as sin, nor make head against sin as sin. Mark, to hate sin is not, 1.Num. 22. Meerly to refrain from sin, for so Balaam did, even then when he was tempted to it. 2. To hate sin is not meerly to confess sin,Exod. 10.16. Mat. 27.4. for so Pharaoh and Judas did. 3. To hate sin is not meerly to be afraid to sin, for this may be where the hatred of sin is not. 4. To hate sin is not meerly to mourn because of the dreadful effects and fruits that sin may produce, for so Ahab did, and the Ninivites did, &c. He that sears sin for hell,Augustine. fears not to sin but to burn, but he hates sin indeed whoso hates sin as hell it self. It was a saying of one of the Ancients,Anselm. That if hell and sin were before him, he would rather fall into hell than fall in∣to sin; here was a true hatred of sin indeed. An hypocrite may be troubled for sin, as it blots his name, and wounds his consci∣ence, and brings a scourge, and destroys his soul, & shuts him out of heaven, and throws him to hell, but he is never troubled for sin, he never mourns for sin, he never hates sin because 'tis contrary to the nature of God, the being of God, the Law of God, the glory of God, the design of God, or because of the evil that is in the nature of sin, or because of the defiling and polluting power of sin. True hatred of sin is universal; 'tis of the whole kind; he who hates a toad because it is a toad, hates every toad; and he who hates a man because he is holy, hates every holy man; and so he who hates sin because
'tis sin,, Arist. Rhet. lib. 2. hates every sin, Psal. 119.128. I hate every false way. (True hatred is ever against the whole kind of a thing) Every sincere Christian hath in him a general hatred of every false way, and dares not allow himself in the least sin; What I do I allow not.Rom. 7.15. Rom. 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. The Greek word  is very significant;Chrysost. the simple Verb imports extream detestation, which is aggravated by the composition;Rom. 2.21. the word signifies to hate evil as hell it self. Though an hypocrite may hate some sins; Thou abhorrest Idols, yet that is out of some peculiar and particular indisposition to a particular sin;Doctor Sibs in his souls conflict makes the hatred of sin the surest and never failing character of a good soul, page 340. but this hatred of ths or that particular sin, a∣riseth not from an inward nature or gracious principle, as it doth in him that is a sincere Christian; & the reason is this, be∣cause that contrariety to sin which is in a real Christian arising from this inward gracious nature, is to the whole species or kind of sin, and is irreconcilable to any sin whatsoever. As contrarieties of nature are to the whole kind, as light is con∣trary to all darkness, and fire to all water; so this con∣trariety to sin arising from the inward man, is universal to all sin. Though a sincere Christian has not a universal victo∣ry over all sin, yet there is in him a universal contrariety to all sin. Victory argues strength, contrariety argues nature. Hence it is that an hypocrite may hate one sin, and love ano∣ther, because there is not a gracious nature in him which would be contrary to all. The inward nature of a Christian is to be judged by the universal contrariety of his inward man to all sin. Now this universal contrariety to all sin, will beget a univesal conflict with all sin. O Sirs! remember this, A universal contrariety to sin, can be found in no man but he that is sincere; and this universal contrariety to sin ar∣gues an inward nature of grace, and this is that which diffe∣rences a real Christian from an hypocrite, who may oppose some sins out of other principles and reasons. An hypocrite may be angry with this sin and that, which brings the smart∣ing rod, and wounds his conscience, and disturbs his peace, and imbitters his mercies, and strangles his comforts, and that layes him open to wrath, and that brings him even to the gates of hell, but he can never hate sin as sin. An hypo∣crite
he hates some sins, but likes others, he loaths some but loves others, he opposes some but practises others; like the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, that hated the deeds of the Nicolaitans, but loved luke-warmness.Rev. 2.5, 6. Many men detest theft that love covetousness, abhor whoredom that like irre∣religiousness, &c. There is no hypocrite under heaven, that can truly say, I hate every false way; but a sincere Christian he hates all sinful wayes, but his own first and most;1 Kings 5.18. an up∣right heart leaves no nest-egg for Satan to sit on, but the hy∣pocrite alwayes does. Mark, in true hatred there are six things observable. First, True hatred includes an extream detestation; eve∣ry  dislike is not hatred, but true hatred is an extream loath∣ing: Thou shalt cast them away as a menstrous cloth,Isa 30.22. thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence.Chap. 2.20. In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the Moles and to the Bats. Their detestation should be so great, that they should cast their most costly idols of silver and gold, into the most dark, nasty, dusty corners; to testifie the sincerity of their conversion to God, they should hate and abhor, abandon and abolish their gold and silver idols which they valued above all others. Secondly, True hatred includes an earnest separation. He  that hates his sin would fain be separated from his sin:2 Cor. 5.4. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan being burdened. A sincere Christian finds no burden to lay so heavy and weighty upon his spirit as sin, and therefore he groans to be delivered from it. In the Law,Deut. 24.3. he that hated his Wife did sue out a bill of divorce from her. He that truly hates sin, puts in many a bill into the Court of Heaven, that he may be for ever di∣vorced from his sin. Thirdly, True hatred includes an irreconcilable aliena∣tion.  He that hates sin, has his heart for ever alienated from sin; he who hates sin, can never be one with sin. Two angry
men may be made friends,Lawyers often fall out at the Bar, but are ve∣ry well agreed when they meet at the Tavern. but if two men hate each other, all friendship is everlastingly broken betwixt them. A man may be angry with sin, and yet made friends with sin again; but if once he comes to hate his sin, then all friendship with sin is everlastingly broken. When Christ and the soul comes to be really one, then sin and the soul comes to be everlast∣ingly two, &c. Fourthly, True hatred includes a constant and perpetual conflict; the flesh will be still lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.Gal. 5.17. Rom. 7.22, 23. Though sin and grace were not born together, and though sin and grace shall never die to∣gether; yet whilst a believer lives in this world, they must live together; and whilst sin and grace do cohabit together, they will still be opposing and conflicting one with another. That man that truly hates sin, will everlastingly conflict with sin, he will die fighting against his sins as one of the Dukes of Venice died fighting against his enemies with his weapons in his hand. Well Christians, remember this, Though to be kept from sin brings most peace and comfort to us, yet for us to oppose sin, and for God to pardon sin, that brings most glory to God, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Fifthly, True hatred includes a deadly intention and de∣struction; for nothing satisfies hatred but death and ruin. Saul hated David,1 Sam. 26.19, 20. 1 Sam. 23.23. Est. 5.14. and sought his life; he hunted him up and down as a Partridge in the mountains, he left no stone unturn'd, nor no means unattempted, whereby he might revenge himself upon David. Haman hated Mordecai, and nothing would sa∣tisfie him but to bring him to a shameful death, to see him hang'd on a gallows fifty cubits high (which was design'd saith Lyra, to put Mordecai to the greater shame, for he hanging hgh every one might see him and point to him.) Now when there was but one night betwixt Mordecai and a shameful death, divine providence opportunely strook in and saved hm from Haman's malice, and caused the mischief which he had plotted against Mordecai, suddenly to fall upon his own
pate; for he who was highly feasted with the King one day,2 Sam. 13.22, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. was made a feast for crows the next day. Absalom hated Amnon and killed him. Julian the Apostate hated the Chri∣stians with a deadly hatred, he put many thousands of them to death, and threatned and vowed that at his return from fighting against the Persians he would put all the Christians in his Empire to the sword, but God prevented him, by cut∣ting him off in that expedition. A Christian that hates sin, can't be satisfied but in the death and destruction of it; in all his duties the language of his soul is, Lord, let my sins be destroyed, whoever escapes let not my sins escape the hand of thy revenging justice: And in all Ordinances the langu∣age of his soul is, O Lord! when shall my sins be subdued and mortified, when shall my cursed corruptions be brought to an under? yea, when shall they all be drowned in the Red-Sea of my Saviours bloud, &c. Sixthly, True hatred includes an impartial aversation,  true hatred is of the whole kind; but of this before. To wind up all, ask thy heart what is it that thou abhorrest as the superlative evil? what is that which thou wouldst have separated as far from thee, as heaven is from hell? what is that thy heart will never renew league or friendship with any more? what is that against which thy soul doth rise, and with which (as Israel with Amalek) thou wilt have war for ever?Exod. 17.16. what is that which thou wilt be avenged of, and daily dost en∣deavour the mortifying and crucifying of? what is that which thou settest thy heart against in the comprehensive latitude thereof, whether great or little, open or secret? if it be sin, if it be thy sins, if it be all thy sins, then assuredly here is a true hatred of sin, and assuredly here is a most distinguishing character of a child of God, of a sound conversion, and of a saving change. It was not wont to be thus with thee, nor is this findable in any hypocrite,Judg. 14.3, 7. or in any unconverted per∣son upon the face of the earth;2 Sam. 13.15. sin was once to thee as Da∣lilah to Sampson, but now it is to thee as Tamar to Amnon;Job 20.12, 13. once it was a sweet morsel which thou heldst fast and wouldst not let it go,Isa. 30.22. but now it is the menstruous cloth which thou
castest away,Hos. 14.8. saying, Get thee hence: Now with Ephraim thou cryest out, What have I to do any more with Idols? O, if it be indeed thus with thee, then thou hast cause for ever to be much in blessing and in admiring of the Lord for his distin∣guishing grace and favour towards thee. O Sirs! the world is full of baits, snares and temptations, but whilst the hatred of sin burns in your breasts, you may cast up your caps, and throw the Gantlet to the world, the flesh and the devil. Well, remember this for ever, There are three things an hypocrite can never do. 1. He can never mourn for sin as sin. 2. He can never mourn for the sins of others as well as his own. Moses, Lot, David, Jeremiah, Paul, and those in that, Ezek. 9.4, 6. mourned for others sins as well as their own; but Pharoah, Ahab, Judas, Demas, Simon Magus never did. 3. He can never hate sin as sin. But, Eighthly, No hypocrite is habitually low or little in his own eyes, no hypocrite has ordinarily mean thoughts of him∣self,1 Cor. 8.1, 2. John 7.49. & 9.34. or a poor esteem of himself; no hypocrite loves to lessen himself to greaten Christ, to debase himself to exalt Christ; no hypocrite loves to be out-shin'd, all hypocrites love to write an I (not a Christ) upon what they do. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself,Luke 18.11, 12 Munday and Thursday were the Pharisees. fasting dayes, because Moses went up to the Mount on a Thursday, and came down on a Munday, saith Drusius. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulte∣rers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the week, I give tythes of all that I possess. All hypocrites stand not only upon their comparisons, but also upon the disparisons; I am not as this Publican. All hypocrites stand much upon their nega∣tive righteousness, and their comparative goodness. There is no hypocrite in the world, but sets down his penny for a pound, and alwayes prizes himself above the Market, 2 Kings 10.15, 16. And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Je∣honadab the son of Rechab, coming to meet him, and he saluted him, and said to him, Is thine heart right as my heart is with thy heart? and Jehonadab answered, it is; if it be, give me thine hand, and be gave him his hand, and he took him up to him into his chariot; and he said, come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord. Comets
make a greater blaze than fixed Stars; Come see my zeal for the Lord. Jehu his words were for the Lord, but his project was for the kingdom. The Actor in the Comedy said with his mouth, O coelum (O heaven) but with his finger he pointed to the earth. Lapidaries tell us of a stone called the Chely∣donian stone, that it will retain its vertue no longer than it is enclosed in gold; a fit emblem of an hypocrite, of a Jehu.John 12.43. Jehu made a great blaze, but he was but a Comet. An hypo∣crite alwayes loves the praise of men more than the praise of God, he loves more to be honoured by men than to be ho∣noured by God.John 5.44. How can ye believe which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour which cometh from God only. No∣thing below that power which raised Christ from the grave, can make an hypocrite purely nothing in his own eyes. An hypocrite is alwayes a great thing in his own eyes,Accius the Poet, though he were a Dwarf, yet would be pictu∣red tall of sta∣ture. The ap∣plication to the hypocrite is easie. and when he is nothing, a great nothing in others eyes, he can't bear it. An hypocrite can't endure to be out-shin'd in gifts, in gra∣ces, in experiences, in duties, in communion with God, in spiritual enjoyments. An hypocrites heart is full of pride, when his deportment is most humble; he alwayes thinks best of himself and worst of others, he looks upon his own vices as graces, and he looks upon other mens graces as vices, or at least, as no true currant coyn. A proud spirit will cast disgrace upon that excellency that himself wants,Eusebius Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 13. as Licinius who was joyned with Galerius in the Empire, he was so igno∣rant that he was not able to write his own name; he was a bitter enemy to learning, and as Eusebius reports of him, he called the liberal Arts a publick poyson and pestilence. The emptiest barrels makes the loudest sound, the worst metal the greatest noise, and the lightest ears of corn hold their heads highest. An hypocrite may well lay his hand upon his heart, and say, is it not so with me? is it not just so with me? But now sincere Chistians, they are men of another spi∣rit, of another temper, of another mettle, of another mind, their hearts lye low, when their gifts, and graces, and spiri∣tual enjoyments are high. Abraham is but dust and ashes in his own eyes.Gen. 18.27. The higher any man is in his communion with
God, the more low that man will be in his own eyes: Dust and ashes are poor, base, vile, worthless things, and such a thing as these was Abraham in his own eyes. So Jacob was a plain man,Gen. 32.10. an upright man; and lo, what a low esteem had he of himself, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies which thou hast shewed unto thy servant, &c. In the Hebrew it is, I am little before thy mercies; for the Hebrews have no comparative,Gen. 31. from ver. 38. to 41. The least mer∣cy, saith Jacob, is more worth than I, & more weighty than I and therefore they are wont to express this by a positive and a preposition. When Jacob had to do with Laban, he pleads his merits, but when he has to do with God, he pleads nothing but grace, setting a very low esteem upon himself; he looks upon himself as less than the least of mer∣cies, and as worse than the worst of creatures; the least of my mercies are greater than I deserve, and the greatest of my troubles are less than I deserve, saith Jacob. The langu∣age of a plain hearted Jacob is this; O Lord, I might with Job have been stript of all my comforts and enjoyments at a clap, and set upon a dunghil, I might with Lazarus have been begging my bread from door to door,Lam. 5.9. or I might have been getting my bread with the peril of my life, because of the sword of the wilderness, or I might have been with Dives in hell, a crying out for a drop of water to cool my tongue. A sincere Christian cannot tell how to speak good enough of God,Luk. 16.24. nor ill enough of himself. Agur was one of the wisest and holiest men on earth, and see how greatly he debases him∣self;Prov. 30.1, 2. Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man. Agur had seen Ithiel (God with me) and Ucal (God almighty) and this made him so vile and base in his own eyes; this made him villifie, yea nullifie himself to the utmost.Job was a non-such in regard of those perfe∣ctions and ¦grees of grace, of integrity, of sanctity, that he had attained to beyond any o∣ther Saints in the World, in his time and day. You know, no man ever received a fairer or a more valuable certificate under the hand of God, or the broad Seal of heaven for his being a soul famous in upright∣ness and holiness than Job as you may see, Job 1.8. And the Lord said unto Satan, hast thou coned my servant Job, than there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and escheweth evil. Job was high in worth, and humble in heart, Job 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine e seeth thee; I abhor my self
in dust and ashes. This expression is the deepest act of abhor∣rency; abhorrency strictly taken, is hatred wound up to the height. I abhor my self. The Hebrew word that is rendred abhor, signifies to reject, to disdain, to contemn, to cast off. Ah, sayes Job, I abhor my self, I reject my self, I disdain my self, I cast off my self, I have a very vile and base esteem of my self. David was a man of great integrity, a man after Gods own heart, and yet he looks upon himself as a Flea;1 King. 15.5. and what is more contemptible than  looks up∣on himself as a Flea, so he looks upon himself as a worm;1 Sam. 26.20 I am a worm and no man. The Hebrew word  Tolagnath,Psal. 22.6. that is here rendred a worm, signifies a very little worm which breedeth in scarlet, a worm that is so lil  that a man can hardly perceive it. A worm is the most despicable creature in the world, trampled under foot by man and beasts; he who was in God's eye a man after his own heart, is in his own eye but a despicable worm, A sincere Christian is a lit∣tle, little nothing in his own eyes. So Paul who had been caught up into the thd heav,Chrysostom.  learned his divinity among the Angels, as one speaks; and had such glorious Revelations as could not be uttered, yet he accounts himself less than the least of all Saints, Eph▪ .8 Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints.Vide Esius, m, &c. The Greek is  comparative made of a superlative, less than the least  Saints is a double diminutive, and signifies lesser than the least, if lesser might be, (not that any thing can be less than the least) Paul's rhetorick doth not cross Aristotles Philoso∣phy, the original word being a double dimintive; his mean∣ing is, that he was as little as could be, therefore he put him∣self down so little, as could not be less than the least. Here you have the greatest Apostle descending down to the lowest step of humility; great Paul is least of Saints,1 Tim. 1.15. last of the Apostles, and greatest of sinners. So Peter, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord;Luke 5.8. . or as the Greek runs, A man, a sinner, a very mixture and com∣pound of dirt and sin, a meer bundle of vice and vanity, of
folly and iniquity. So Luther, I have no other name than sinner, sinner is my name, sinner is my sirname, this is the name by which I shall be alwayes known; I have sinned, I do sin, I shall sin in infinitum, saith Luther speaking vilely and basely of himself. Lord, I am hell, and thou art heaven, said blessed Hooper, I am a most hypocrital wretch, not worthy that the earth should bear me, said blessed Bradford. Thus you see by these several instances, that sincere Christians do as it were take a holy pleasure and delight to debase, humble and villifie themselves. But this is a work hypocrites are meer strangers to; there is not an hypocrite under heaven that loves to debase himself, or that makes it his duty con∣scientiously to villifie and lessen himself, that Christ may be set up above all.Augustin. Humility is a grace hardly attained unto. Many (saith one) can more easily give all they have to the poor, than themselves become poor in spirit. But, Ninthly, No hypocrite will long hold out in the work and wayes of the Lord, in the want of outward incouragements, and in the face of outward discouragements. An hypocrite is an Apostate cased, and an Apostate is an hypocrite un∣cased, Job 27. ver. 8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God shall take away his soul? Ver. 10. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he alwayes call up∣on God? Or, as the Hebrew runs, Will he in every time call upon God? It may be he may formally call on God in time of prosperity; but can he seriously do it in time of adversi∣ty? Sometimes when the rod is upon them, then they will pour out a prayer to God;Isa, 26.16. In their affliction they will seek me earthly. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they re∣turned and enquired after God.Hos. 5. ult. Psal. 78, 34. But this was not the standing frame of their hearts. Ver. 36. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lyed unto him with their tongues. Ver. 47. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfast in his Covenant. When Pharoah was upon the wrack, he could roar out a confession,Exo. 10.16, 17. Ver. 19.20. and earnestly cry out for a prayer; but when the judgment was removed, Pharoah was
as proud, and hard, and blind as ever.1 King. 1.50, 51 When Adonijah was in danger of death, then he could hang on the horns of the Altar. When Ahab was threatned with utter desolation, then he could fast and lye in sackcloth; and so did the Minivites:Jonah 3. But all this was but like Ephraim and Judah's goodness, that as a morning cloud, and as the early dew passeth away. Will the hypocrite alwayes, or in every time call upon God? will the hypocrite call upon God as often as providence calls him to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as judgments call him to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as conscience calls him to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as 'tis his duty to call upon God? will he call upon God as often as others call upon him to call upon God? Oh no. The hypocrite will not alwayes call upon God, he will not persevere in prayer, he will not hold on, nor hold out in prayer, he is short spirited, he can't alwayes pray and not faint, or shrink back as sluggards do in work, or cowards in war, as the original word in Luke imports.Luke 18.1. . An hypocrite for want of an inward principle, can neither delight in God, nor alwayes call upon God. If God comes not at his call, if he opens not as soon as he knocks, he is out of patience, and ready to say with that proud prophane Prince; Behold, this evil is of the Lord, and what should I wait for him any longer?2 Kings 6:33. If any hypocrite obtains the mercy he desires, then he will throw off prayer; as he said, Take away the net, the fish is caught; if he obtains not the mercy, then he will grow weary of his duty. Thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.Mal. 1.13. Isa. 43.22. Prayer is too hard and too high a work for an unsound heart to hold on in; prayer is heart-work, and that proves heavy work to him. The soul of prayer lyes in the pouring out of the soul before God, and this is a work that an hypocrite has no skill in.1 Sam. 1.15. It was a prophane and blasphemous speech of that Atheistical wretch, that told God he was no common beggar, he never troubled him before with prayer,Hil. Mic. p. 376. and if he would but hear him that time, he would never trouble him again: Even such a spirit and such principles lye lurking in every hypocrites breast. Doubtless he hit it who said; How canst thou expect
that God should hear thee,Cyprian de ora∣tione Dominica. Psal. 116.1, 2. Gen. 32.24, to ver. 29. Hos. 12.3, 4. Mat. 15.22. to ver. 28. when thou wilt not hear thy self? or that God should give thee a return in prayer, when thou art not mindful what thou askest in prayer? But now a sincere Christian he will go on in prayer, speed or not speed; if he prevails he will love prayer the better all his dayes, if he don't for the pre∣sent prevail, he will be so much the more importunate with God in prayer: 'Tis as natural for a bird to live without Air, and for a fish to live without water, and for a man to live without food, as 'tis for a sincere heart to live without prayer. O, saith Chrysostom, it is more bitter than death to be spoyled of prayer.Dan. 6. Prayer is porta coeli clavis pa∣radisi, the seat of heaven, a key to let us into paradise. And hereupon (as he observes) Daniel chose rather to run the hazard of his life, than to lose or give over his private prayers. Prayer is the key of heaven, and a sin∣cere Christian loves much to be a handling of that key, though he should dye for it. As that Emperor said, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori, It behoves an Emperor to dye stand∣ing: So may I say, Oportet Christianum mori praecantem, It behoves a Christian to dye praying. An hypocrite will never hold out to the end; let but outward incouragements fail him, and his heart will quickly fail him in a way of duty. Hypocrites are like blazing Stars, which so long as they are fed with vapours, shine as if they were fixed Stars; but let the vapours dry up, and presently they vanish and disappear; let but the eye, the ear, the applause of men fail the hypocrite, and he will be ready to throw up all.2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. 2 Tim. 4.10. If an hypocrite can't make some gain of his godliness, some profit of his profes∣sion, some advantage of his Religion, he will be ready with Demas, to turn his back upon all religious duties and services. Look, as a lame horse, when he is heated will go well enough, but when he cools will halt down right; even so an hypocrite, though for a time he may go on fairly in his way, yet in the end he will halt down right, & bid farewel (if not defiance) to all religious duties and services: Profit and applause are usually the baits that hypocrites bite at, and if they miss these baits, then farewel profession, farewel Religion, farewel all. John 6.66. From that time many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with him. Many hypocrites who had given up
their names to Christ, and who for a time had been follow∣ers of Christ, at last deserted him and turned their back for ever upon him, Mat. 13.5. Some fall upon stony places, where they had not much earth (not much care to receive, not much understanding to apprehend, not much faith to believe, not much will to obey, or not much love to retain it) and forth∣with they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth. Ver: 6. And when the Sun was up they were scorched, and because they had no root they withered away. This second ground goes beyond the former; For 1. It receives the seed. 2. Incontinently: 3. With joy. 4. It brings up the seed sown, it sprung up to sundry degrees. 1. To external obedience and reformation in many things. 2. To an outward profession. 3. To a kind of faith; but when the Sun of persecution beat hot upon them they withered and fell away, not all at once, but by lit∣tle and little, as a leaf loseth his greeness and flourish, and withers by degrees. In the Palatinate, when the Sun of per∣secution began to scorch them, scarce one Professor of twen∣ty stood out, but fell to Popery as fast as leaves in Autumn. The Chrystal looks like pearl till it comes to the hammer∣ing; so an hypocrite looks like a Christian, and in many things acts like a Christian, till he comes to be hammered by sufferings, by persecutions, and then he discovers himself in his colours; and with Hymeneus and Alexander,1 Tim. 1.19, 20. Hos. 5.2. he makes shipwrack of faith and a good conscience. In suffering times hypocrites labour mightily to put out that light which shines in their bosoms, and when they have quencht that light, then farewel faith, farewel profession, farewel a good conscience, farewel all. The wolf, though he often dissembles, and closs∣ly hides his nature, yet he can't alwayes do so; for at one time or other he will shew himself to be a Wolf: So though an hypocrite may carry it clossly for a time, yet he will one time or other discover himself to be an hypocrite. It is re∣ported of the waters of Nilus, that having run many hundred of miles a pure and clear water, when it comes near the Mediterranean Sea, it begins to grow brackish and salt, and at last it falls into the Sea and loseth its name. Sooner or la∣ter this will be the case of all hypocrites, they won't retain
their spiritual fairness, clearness and sweetness long, but by degrees will grow brackish and salt, and lose their names, and all that seeming goodness and sweetness that once seemed to be in them. But now a sincere Christian he will hold on, and hold out in the wayes of the Lord in the want of all outward incou∣ragements, and in the face of all multiplyed discourage∣ments. When the eye of men, the favour of men, the boun∣ty of men, and all other encouragement from men fails, yet then a sincere Christian will hold up, and hold on in his work and way.Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. The righteous man shall go on in a way of righteouss to the end, no multiplyed calamities or miseries shall ever work him to decline the way of righteousness. From this way a sincere Christian will never be withdrawn, either by any hopes or advantages on the one hand, or by any fears or dangers on the other: Sincere Christians have not taken up Religion on such slight grounds, as to be either flattered or frighted out of it; sin∣cere Christians reckon upon afflictions,Joh. 16. ult. Acts 14.22. 2 Tim. 4.8. temptations, crosses, losses, reproaches on the one hand, and they reckon upon a crown of life, a crown of righteousness, a crown of glory on the other hand,Jer. 6.16. and hereupon they set up their staff, fully re∣solving never to depart from the good old way wherein they have found rest to their souls. Sincere Christians take Christ and his wayes for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in prosperity and adversity, they resolve to stand or fall, to suffer and reign, to live and die with him. When all outward incouragements from God shall fail, yet a sin∣cere Christian will keep closs to his God, and closs to his du∣ty.Heb. 3.17, 18. Although the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labour of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herds in the stalls; yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvaion. When all necessary and delightful mercies fail, yet he will not fail in his duty; though God with-hold his blessings, yet he will not with-hold his service
in the want of a livelihood, he will be lively in his duty; when he hath nothing to subsist by, yet then he will live up∣on his God, and joy in his God, and keep closs to this God. Though war and want come, yet he will not be wanting in his duty. Mark, there are three things in a sincere Christian that will strongly encline him to keep closs to the Lord, and closs to his wayes in the want of all outward incouragements,2 Cor. 5.14. Phil. 4.12, 13. Rom. 14.7, 8. and in the face of all outward discouragements: And the first is a forcible principle, Divine Love; the second, is a migh∣ty aid, the Spirit of God; and the third is a high aim; the Glory of God. Look, as Ruth kept closs to her mother in the want of all outward incouragements, and in the face of all outward discouragements; And RuthRuth 1.16, 17. said, whither thou goest I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; and nothing but death shall part thee and . So saith a sincere Christian, I will take my lot with Christ were ever it falls; I will keep closs to the Lord, and closs to my duty in the want of all outward incouragements, and in the face of all outward discourage∣ments. Though outward incouragements be sometimes as a side wind, or as oyl, or as chariot wheels, means to move a Christian to go on more sweetly, easily and comfortably in the wayes of God, yet when this wind shall fail, and these chariot wheels shall be knockt off, a sincere Christian will keep closs to the Lord and his wayes. All this is come upon us;Psal. 44.17, 18 yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsly in thy co∣venant; our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declin∣ed from thy wayes. But what do they mean by saying, All this is come upon us? Why that you may see in the foregoing part of the Psalm. Thou hast cast us off, and put us to shame,Vers. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The Jews sold Christ for thirty peace, and the Romans sold thirty of them for a penny, as Jose∣phus relates. and goest not forth with our armies; thou makest us turn back from the enemy, and they which hate us spoyl for themselves; thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat, and hast scattered us among the heathen; thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price; thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us; thou makest us a by-word among the heathen, a shaking of the head among the people. An∣tiochus Epiphanes lookt upon the Jews Religion as supersti∣tion; his wrath and rage was exceeding great, both against
the Jews, and against their Religion; he practised all man∣ner of cruelty upon the miserable Jews, but yet there was a remnant among them, who were faithful to the Lord, and to his Covenant, and to his Laws, and to his wayes, even to the death; though in the time of the Maccabees many revolted to Paganism, yet some maintained their constancy and inte∣grity to the last. That is a great word of the Prophet Mi∣cah.Mich. 4.5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. This absolute and peremptory resolution to be really the Lord's, and for ever the Lord's, is of the essence of true conversion. 'Tis not the world's flatteries that can bribe off a sincere Christian from the wayes of God; nor 'tis not the worlds frowns that can beat off a sincere Christian from the wayes of God: But an hypocrite will never, an hypocrite can never hold it out to the end; his ground-tackle will ne∣ver hold when the storm beats strong upon him. An hypo∣crite is hot at hand, but soon tires and gives in. But, Tenthly, No hypocrite ever makes it his business, his work to bring his heart into religious duties and services; he never makes conscience of bringing his heart into his work.Mat. 15 8. Mark 7.6. An hypocrite is heartless in all he does, Psal. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him; and they returned and enquired early after God.The Fox when caught in a gin, looks pitifully, but it is only to get out. They worshipped the Lord as the In∣dians do the devil, that he may do them no hurt. Ver. 36. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lyed unto him with their tongues. Ver. 37. For their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfst in his Covenant. All lip-labour is but lost labour: When mens hearts are not in their devotion, their devotion is meer dissimulation. These hypocrites sought God, and enquired early after God, but it was still with old hearts, which are no hearts in the account of God: They made lip work of it, and head-work of it, but their hearts not being in their work, all was lost, their seeking lost, their enquiring lost, their God lost, their souls lost, and eternity lost, Hos. 7.14. And they have not cried unto m with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds. When mens hearts are not in their prayers, all their
praying is but as an hideous howling in the account of God.As dogs, bruit beasts, and In∣dians do, when they are hun∣ger-bit. The cry of the heart is the only cry that God likes, loves and looks for; he accepts of no cry, he de∣lights in no cry, he rewards no cry but the cry of the heart. Hypocrites are heartless in their cryes, and therefore they cry and howl, and howl and cry, and all to no purpose; they cry and murmur, and they howl and repine; they cry and blaspheme, and they howl and rebel; and therefore they meet with nothing from heaven but frowns, and blows, and disap∣pointments, Isa. 29.13. Wherefore the Lord said, for as much as this people draw neer me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me. Ezek. 33.31. And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness. Though this people flocked to the Prophet in troops, as men and women do to places of pleasure; and though they carried it before the Prophet, as if they were Saints, as if they were the people of God, as if they were affected with what they heard, as if they were resolved to live out what the Prophet should make out to them, yet their hearts run after their covetousness. Though these hypocrites profest much love and kindness to the Prophet, and paid him home with smooth words, & seemed to be much affected, de∣lighted, ravished and taken with his person, voice and doctrine; yet they made no conscience of bringing their hearts into their duties. An hypocrite may look at some outward, easie, ordinary duties of Religion, but he never makes conscience of bringing his heart into any duties of Religion. When did you ever see an hypocrite a searching of his heart, or sitting in judgment upon the corruptions of his soul, or lamenting and mourning over the vileness and wickedness of his spirit? 'Tis only the sincere Christian that is affected, afflicted and wounded with the corruptions of his heart. When one told (blessed) Bradford, that he did all out of hypocrisie; because he would have the people applaud him: He answered, It is true, the seeds of hypocrisie and vain glory are in thee and me too, and will be in us as long as we live in this world;
but I thank God it is that I mourn under and strive against. How seriously and deeply did good Hezekiah humble himself for the pride of his heart;2 Chron. 32.25 out of the eater came meat, out of his pride he gat humility. O Sirs! A sincere Christian makes it his great business to get his heart into all his Religious duties and services, to get his heart into every way and work of God.2 Chron. 17.6. Psal. 86.12. Jehoshaphats heart was lifted up in the wayes of the Lord. So David, I'le praise thee,2 Chron. 22.9. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is reported, that when the Tyrant Trajane commanded Ig∣natius to be ript & unbowelled, they found Je∣sus Christ writ∣ten upon his heart in chara∣cters of gold; here was a heart worth gold. That's the golden Christian in∣deed, whose heart is writ upon all his duties and ser∣vices. O Lord, with all my heart. And so Psal. 119.7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart. Ver. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. So Jehoshaphat he sought the Lord with all his heart, Isa. 26.8. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. Vers. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee ear∣ly. Lamen. 3.41. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens. Rom. 1.9. For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son. Pauls very spirit, his very soul was in his service. Phil. 3.3. For we are the cir∣cumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoyce in Christ Je∣sus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Rom. 7.22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. Ver. 25. With the mind I my self serve the Law of God. A sincere Christian is al∣wayes best when his heart is in his work; and when he can't get his heart into his duties! Oh, how does he sigh, and groan, and complain, and mourn at the foot of God? Lord! my tongue has been at work, and my head has been at work, and my parts have been at work, and my eyes and hands have been at work, but where has my heart been this day? Oh, it is and must be for a sore and sad lamentation, that I have had so little of my heart in that service that I have tendered to thee! This is the daily language of an upright heart. But now all the work of an hypocrite, is to get his golden parts into his duties, and his silver tongue into his duties, and his nimble head into his duties; but he never makes conscience of getting his heart into his duties. If any beasts sacrificed by Heathens (who ever lookt narrowly into the intrails) was found without heart, this was held ominous, and construed
as very prodigious to the person for whom it was offered, as it fell out in the case of Julian. Hypocrites are alwayes heart∣less in all the sacrifices they offer to God, and this will one day prove ominous and prodigious to them. But, Eleventhly, An hypocrite never performes religious du∣ties  from spiritual principles, nor in a spiritual manner. An hypocrite is never inclined, moved and carried to God, to Christ, to holy duties, by the power of a new and inward principle of grace working a sutableness between his heart and the things of God. An hypocrite rests himself satisfied in the meer external acts of Religion, though he never feels any thing of the power of Religion in his own soul. An hy∣pocrite looks to his words in prayer, and to his voice in pray∣er, and to his gestures in prayer, but he never looks to the frame of his heart in prayer. An hypocrites heart is never toucht with the words his tongue utters, an hypocrites soul is never divinely affected, delighted, or graciously warmed with any duty he performs. An hypocrites spiritual performan∣ces never flow from spiritual principles, nor from a heart universally sanctified; though his works may be new, yet his heart remains old, his new practises alwayes spring from old principles; and this will prove the hypocrites bane,Vide Isa. 1.10, to 16. as you may see in that, Isa. 1.15. When you spread forth your hands to heaven, I will hide my eyes; and when you make many prayers, when you abound in duty, adding prayer to prayer (as the He∣brew runs) I will not hear, your hands are full of blood. These were unsanctified ones; their practises were new,Mat. 6. chap. 23 Luke 18. but their hearts were old still. The same you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees, who fasted, prayed, and gave alms, but their hearts were not changed, renewed, sanctified, nor principled from above; and this proved their eternal bane. Nicodemus was a man of great note, name,John 3.4. No man can understand spi∣ritual mysteries by carnal rea∣son. and fame among the Phari∣sees, and he fasted, and prayed, and gave alms, and paid tythes, &c. and yet a meer stranger to the new birth; Regeneration was a paradox to him. How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born?
This great Doctor was so great a Dunce, that he understood no more of the doctrine of Regeneration, than a meer child does the darkest precepts of Astronomy.1 Cor. 2.14. Look, as water can rise no higher than the spring from whence it came, so the natural man can rise no higher than nature. An hypocrite may know much, and pray much, and hear much, and fast much, and give much, and obey much, and all to no purpose, because he never manages any thing he does in a right man∣ner; he never carries on his work from inward principles of faith, fervency, life, love, delight, &c. Will the hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty? Ans. No, he cannot de∣light himself in the Almighty.Job 27.10. Job speaks of the hypocrite, as is evident, ver. 8. 1. To delight in God is one of the highest acts of grace; and how can an hypocrite put forth one of the highest acts of grace, who hath no grace? An hypocrite may know much of God, and talk much of God, and make a great profession of God, and be verbally thank∣ful to God; but he can never love God, nor trust in God, nor delight in God, nor take up his rest in God, &c. 2. An hypocrite knows not God, and how then can he delight in that God whom he does not know? An hypocrite has no in∣ward, saving, transforming, experimental, affectionate, pra∣ctical knowledge of God; and therefore he can never take any pleasure or delight in God. 3. There is no sutableness between an hypocrite and God, and how then can an hypo∣crite delight himself in God? There is the greatest contrarie∣ty imaginable 'twixt God and an hypocrite. God is light, and the hypocrite is darkness;2 Cor. 6.15, 16 God is holiness, and he filthiness; God is righteousness, and he unrighteousness; God is ful∣ness, and he emptiness. Now what complacency can there be where there is such an utter contrariety. 4. Every hypo∣crites heart is full of enmity against God, and how then can he delight himself in God? The carnal mind is enmity against God,Rom. 8.7. To delight in God, is Christi∣anorum propria virtus, saith Hierom. for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The best part of an hypocrite is not only averse, but utterly adverse to God and all goodness. The Eagle (saith the Phi∣losopher) hath a continual enmity with the Dragon and the Serpent. And so an hypocrites heart is still full of enmity against the Lord; and therefore he can never delight him∣self
in the Lord. 5. The stream, cream, and strength of an hypocrites delight runs out to himself, and to this lust or that, to this relation or that, to this creature-comfort or that, to this worldly enjoyment or that, or else to arts, parts, gifts, priviledges, &c. and therefore how can he delight himself in the Almighty? An Hypocrite alwayes terminates his de∣light in something on this side God, Christ and Heaven. Look, as the Apricock-tree, though it leans against the wall, yet it is fast rooted in the earth; so though an hypocrite may lean towards God, and towards Christ, and towards heaven, yet his delight is still rooted fast in one creature-comfort or another, &c.Mark 6. God nor Christ is never the adequate object of an hypocrites delight. An hypocrite is never principled to delight himself in a holy God, neither can he cordially, divinely, habitually, delight himself in holy duties. An hy∣pocrite may reform many evil things, and he may do many good duties, and yet all this while it is only his practises, but not his heart or principles that are changed and altered. Mark, though an hypocrite hath nothing in him which is es∣sential to a Christian as a Christian, yet he may be the com∣pleat resemblance of a Christian in all those things which are not essential to him. An hypocrite in all the externals of Religion, may be the compleat picture of a sincere Christi∣an; but then if you look to his principles, and the manner of his managing of holy duties, there you will find him lame and defective, and as much unlike a sincere Christian,1 Sam. 19.13, 16. as ever Michal's Image was unlike to David; and this will prove the great crack, the great break-neck of hypocrites at last. O Sirs! It is considerable, that outward motives and na∣tural principles have carried many Heathens to do many great and glorious things in the world. Did not Sisera do as great things as Gideon? the difference did only lye here, that the great things which Gideon did, he did from more spiritual principles and raised considerations, than any Sisera was act∣ed by.Heb. 11. And did not Diogenes trample under his feet the great and glorious things of this world, as well as Moses? The
difference did only ly in this, that Moses trampled under his feet the gay and gallant things of this world, from inward gracious principles, viz. faith, love, &c. and from high and glorious considerations, viz. heaven, the glory of God, &c. whereas Diogenes did only trample upon them from poor low prineiples, and from meer outward, carnal, external considerations, The favour of men, the eye of men, the commendations of men, the applause of men, and a great name among men, were golden apples, great things among the Philosophers. The application is easie. Mark, A sincere Christian, he looks to the manner as well as to the matter of his duties, he acts and performs duties, not only from strength of parts and acquired qualifications but from strength of grace and infused habits;Rom. 11.24. Ezek. 36.25. Jer. 31.33. Rom. 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.19. 2 Pet. 1.4. Eph. 3.17. 2 Cor. 13.5. he acts from God and for God, he acts from a new heart, he acts from the Law written in his heart, he acts from the love of God shed abroad in his heart, he acts from the divine nature commu∣nicated to him, he acts from the spirits in-dwelling in his heart, he acts from the fear of God establishing his heart. These be the springs and principles of a sincere Christians spiritual life and actions; and where they act and bear rule, it is no wonder if such motions and performances as the world may admire but not imitate. Sauls life (after his con∣version) was a kind of constant miracle;2. Cor. 11. so much he did, and so much he suffered, and so much he denyed himself, that if he lived in these dayes, his life would be a miracle; but yet if we consider the principles that he was acted by, the great wonder will be, not that he did so much, but that he did no more;Gal. 2.20. For, saith he, Christ liveth in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.Fox Acts and Monum. It was a great saying of blessed Bradford, That he could not leave a duty till he had found communion with Christ in the duty, till he had brought his heart into a duty-frame; he could not leave confession till he had found his heart touched, broken and humbled for sin, nor petition till he had found his heart taken with the beau∣ties of the things desired, and carried out after them; nor
could he leave thanksgiving till he had found his spirit en∣larged and his soul quickned in the return of praises. And it was a great saying of another, that he could never be quiet till he found God in every duty,Nunquam abs te absque te e∣cedo Bern. Me∣ditat. and enjoyed communion with God in every prayer. O Lord (said he) I never come to thee but by thee, I never go from thee without thee. A sincere Christian that is taken with Christ above all, can't be satisfied nor contented with duties or ordinances, without he enjoyes Christ in them, who is the life, soul and substance of them. But now hypocrites they do duties, but all they do is from common principles, from natural principles, and from an unsanctified heart, and that marrs all. Remigius a Judge of Lorraigne tells this story, That the Devil in those parts did use to give money to Witches,Preston's four Treatises. which did appear to be good coyn; it seemed to be currant at first, but being laid up a while, it then appeared to be nothing but leaves. Hy∣pocrites they make a great profession, and are much in the outward actions of Religion; they make a very fair shew, they hear, they read, they pray, they fast, they sing Psalms, and they give alms: But these duties being not managed from a principle of divine love, nor from a principle of spiri∣tual life, nor from a sanctified frame of heart, turn all into leaves, they are all lost, and the Authors of them cast and undone for ever and ever. But, Twelfthly, No hypocrite in the world loves the Word,  or delights in the Word, or prizes the Word, as 'tis a holy Word, a spiritual Word, a beautiful Word, a pure Word,Luther said he would not live in Paradise if he might with∣out the Word, but with the Word he could live in hell it self. a clean Word, Psal. 119.140. Thy word is very pure, there∣fore thy servant loveth it. There are no hearts but men after God's own heart, that can love the Word, and delight in the Word, and embrace the Word for its holiness, purity and spirituality; witness Paul, Rom. 7.12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandement holy, and just, and good. Well and what then? why saith he, Ver. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. But is this all? No saith he, Ver. 25. With the mind I my self serve the Law of God. Holy Paul de∣lights
in the Law as holy, and serves the Law as holy, just, and good. A sincere heart is the only heart that is taken with the Word for its spirituality, purity and heavenly beauty. None can joy in the Word as it is a holy Word, nor none can taste any sweetness in the Word as 'tis a pure Word, but sincere Christians, Psal. 19.8, 9, 10. The statutes of the Lord are right rejoycing the heart.These several Titles, Law, Statutes, Testi∣mony, Com∣mandements, Judgments, are used promiscu∣ously for the whole Word of God, com∣monly distin∣guished into Law and Gos∣pel. The commandements of the Lord is pure enlightning the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean (that is, the doctrine of the Word that teacheth the true fear of God) enduring for ever. The judgments of the Lrd are true and righteous altogether; more to be desired are they than gold, yea than much fine gold, sweeter also than honey and the honey comb; or as the Hebrew hath it, Sweeter than the droppings of honey combs. The Word of God, as it is a pure Word, a spiritual Word, a clean Word, a holy Word; so it rejoyces a sincere heart, and so it is sweeter than the very droppings of honey combs. The Word, as it is a pure Word, a holy Word, is more sweet to a sincere Christian than those drops which drop immediately and naturally without any force or art, which is counted the purest and sweetest honey. There is no profit, nor pleasure, nor joy to that which the purity of the World yields to a sincere heart, Psal. 119.48. My hands will I lift up to thy commandements which I have loved. Sometimes the lifting up of hands betokens admiration; when men are astonished and ravished they lift up their hands. I will lift up my hands to thy commandements; that is, I will admire the goodness, spiritualness, holiness, righteousness, purity and excellency of thy commandements. Luther would not take all the world for one leaf of the Bible, he took such sweet pleasure and excellent delight in it. Rabbi Chiia in the Jerusa∣lem Talmud sayes, That in his account all the world is not of equal value with one word out of the Law.Mr. Fox. The Martyrs would have given a load of Hay for a few Chapters of the Bible in English: Some of them gave five marks for a Bi∣ble, they were so delighted and taken with the Word, as it was a holy Word, a pure Word, a spiritual Word. Dolphins (they say) love musick; and so do sincere Christians love the musick of the Word. It's upon record, that Mary spent
the third part of her time in reading the Word, she was so affected and delighted with the holiness and purity of it. King Edward the sixth being about to lay hold on something that was above the reach of his short arm, one that stood by espying a boss'd Bible lying on the Table, offered to lay that under his feet to heighten him;Sir John Hay∣ward in vita. but the good young King disliked the motion, and instead of treading it under his feet, he laid it to his heart, to express the joy and delight that he took in the holy Word. But now neer did any hypocrite, since there was one in the world, ever love God as a holy God, or love his people as a holy people, or love his wayes as holy wayes, or love his word as a holy word. There is no hypocrite in the world that can truly say with David, Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loveth it. Saul could never say so, nor Ahab could never say so, nor Herod could never say so, nor Judas could never say so, nor Demas could never say so, nor Simon Magus could never say so, nor the Scribes and Pharisees could ne∣ver say so, nor the Stony ground could never say so, nor Isaiah's hypocrites could never say so. 'Tis true,Isa. 58. some of these did rejoyce in the Word, and delight in the Word, but not as it was a holy Word, a pure Word, for then they would have rejoyced and delighted themselves in the whole Word of God, every part of God's Word being pure and holy. Hypocrites are sometimes affected and delighted with the Word, as it is drest up with fine high notions (which are but mysterious nothings) they are taken with the Word as it is cloathed with arts, parts, and elegancy of phrase; they are pleased with the Word as it is apparelled with a spruce wit, or with silken expressions, or with some delicate elocution, Ezek. 33.32. So thou art to them as a very lovely song, of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument; or as the He∣brew may be read, Thou art as one that breaks jests. These hy∣pocrites lookt upon the solemnity and Majesty of the Word but as a dry jest; the Prophet being eloquent, and having a pleasing delivery, they were much taken with it, and it was as sweet and delightful to them as a fit of musick; but they
were not at all taken or delighted with the spirituality, purity and holiness of the Word, as is evident in ver. 31. And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness. It was a very smart reproof of ChrysostomChrysost. to his Hearers; This is that (saith he) which is like to undo your souls, you hear your Ministers as so many minstrels to please the ear, not to pierce the conscience. Augustin confesseth, that the delight which he took before his conversion in Saint Ambroses Sermons, was more for the eloquence of the words, than the substance of the matter. Hypocrites are taken more with the wit, eloquence of speech, action, quickness of fancy, smoothness of stile, neatness of expression, and rareness of notion, than they are with the spirituality, purity and holi∣ness of the Word, which they either hear or read. These hypocrites are like those children, who are more taken with the fine flowers that are strewed about the dish, than they are with the meat that is in the dish, and that are more taken with the red weeds and blew bottles that grow in the field, than they are with the good corn that grows there. But now, look as the prudent Farmer is taken more with a few hand∣fuls of sound corn, than he is with all the gay weeds that be in the field; so a sincere Christian is more taken with a few sound truths in a Sermon, than he is taken with all the strong lines, and high strains and flourishes of wit; or than he is taken with some new coyned phrases, or some quaint expres∣sions, or some seraphical notions, with which a Sermon may be deckt or drest up. Some are taken with the Word as the profession of it brings in customers into their Shops, and keeps up their credits in the world; others are taken with the Word, as it seems to tickle their ears and please their fancies: Some are affected with Sermons, because of the elegancy of the stile, delicacy of the words, smoothness of the language, and gracefulness of the delivery. And these deal by Sermons as many do by their Nosegays that are made up of many pickt (sweet) flowers, who after they have smelt to them a while, cast them into a corner, and never mind
them more; so these after they have commended a Sermon, after they have highly applauded a Sermon, they cast away the Sermon, they smell to the Sermon (if I may so speak) and say it is sweet, it is sweet, and presently they throw it by as a Nosegay that is withered, and of no further use. But now a sincere heart savours the Word, and relishes the Word, and is affected and taken with the Word, as it is a holy Word, a spiritual Word, a pure Word, which the most refined hypo∣crite under heaven never was affected or taken with, nor can be, whilst hypocrisie keeps the throne in his soul. But, Thirteenthly and lastly, An hypocrite can't endure to be  tryed, and searcht, and laid open; an hypocrite hates the light, and had rather go to hell in the dark, than come to be weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary.John 3.20. A soul-searching Ministry is to an hypocrite a tormenting Ministry, that's no man for his money that will never let his conscience alone; he knows he is like a velvet saddle, velvet without and straw within; he knows he is like a whited supulcher,Mat. 23.27, 28. glorious without, and dead bones within; and therefore his heart rises and swells against such a man, and such a Ministry, that is all for the anatomizing and laying of him open to himself, and to the world. But now look, as pure gold fears neither fire nor furnace, neither test nor touchstone, neither one bal∣lance nor another; so a sincere heart dares venture it self upon tryal, yea upon the very tryal of God himself, Psal. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts. A sincere Christian prayes his friends to search him, and he prayes soul-searching Ministers to search him; but above all, he begs hard of God to search him;See Job 31.5, 6 Search me, O God. The Hebrew word  is Imperat Kal; he commands God to search him. The original word signi∣fies a strict, curious, diligent search. A sincere Christian is very willing and desirous that God should throughly search him, that God should search into every corner and cranny of his heart, Psal. 26.2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart. Every word here has its weight; Ex∣amine
me, O Lord. The Hebrew word  signifis to melt, and so to try, which makes the most intrinsecal and eact discovery. O Lord, let my heart and reins be melted, that it may be known what metal they are made of, whether gold or tin; Prove me. The Hebrew word  signifies to view, as when a man gets upon some high Tower or Hill to see all from thence. Mount aloft, O Lord, take the high Tower, take the Hill, that thou mayest see what is in me; try me and know my thoughts. The Hebrew word  is from  Nasah, which properly signifies to take away, and is applied to Abrahams taking away of his son.Gen. 22.1. Lord, saith the Prophet, if upon searching and examining of me, thou shalt find any sin, any creature, any comfort, any enjoyment, that lyes in thy room, take it away, that thou mayest be all in all to me. A sincere Christian knows that God never brings a pair of scales to weigh his graces, but only a touch-stone to try the truth of his graces; he knows if his gold, his grace, be true,Mat. 12.20. though it be never so little, it will pass for currant with God, and therefore he is free to venture upon the clossest search of God.A false evi∣dence is the fruit of a slight and superficial search. Now, look as Bankrupts care not for casting up their accounts, because they know all is naught, very naught, yea stark naught with them: So hypocrites, they care not to come to the tryal, to the test, because they know all is naught, yea worse than naught with them; they have no mind to cast up their spiritual estates, because at the foot of the account they must be put to read their neck verse, undone, undone: And therefore, as old deformed women can∣not endure to look into the looking-glass, lest their wrinckles and deformity should be discovered; so hypocrites cannot endure to look into the glass of the Gospel, lest their defor∣mities, impieties and wickednesses should be discovered and detected. I have read of the Elephant, how unwilling he is to go into the water; but when he is forced into it, he pud∣dles it, lest by the cleerness of the stream he should discern his own deformity: So hypocrites, they are very unwilling to look into their own hearts, or into the cleer streams of Scriptures, lest their souls deformity and ugliness should ap∣pear to their own terror and amazement. O Sirs! look, as
it is a hopeful evidence that the Clyents cause is good, when he is ready and willing to enter upon a tryal; and as it is a hopeful sign that a man's gold is true gold, when he is willing to bring it to the touchstone; and that a man thrives when he is willing to cast up his Books: So it is a hopeful evidence that a Christian is sincere with God, when he is ready and willing to venture upon the tryal of God,Gal. 6.4, 5. when he is wil∣ling to cast up his Books, his accounts, that he may see what he is worth for another world. AugustinAug. in Psal. 33. Concl. 2. speaks of an acute person, who was wont to say that he prized that little time which he constantly set apart every dy for the examination of his conscience, far more than all the other part of the day which he spent in his voluminous controversies. Of all the duties of Religion an hypocrite dreads most that of self-ex∣amination, and that of venturing himself upon the search and tryal of God. Well, for a close, Though an hypocrite my deceive all the world,Job 34.21, 22. 2 Chron. 16 9. Prov. 5.21. & 15.3. Ambros. offic. l. 1 c. 14. like that counterfeit Alexander in Josephus his story, yet Augustus will not be deceived; the great God will not be deceived, for his eyes are quick and piercing into all things, persons and places. Look, as the eyes of a well drawn picture are fastned on thee which way soever thou turnest; so are the eyes of the Lord fastned on thee, O hypocrite, which way soever thou turnest. 'Twas a worthy saying of one, If thou canst not hide thy self from the Sun, which is God's Minister of light, how impossible will it be to hide thy self from him whose eyes are ten thou∣sand times brighter than the Sun? The eye of God many times is very terrible to an hypocrite, which makes him very shie of venturing upon the tryal of God: No hypocrite since the world stood, did ever love or delight to be searcht and tried by God. And thus I have shewed you the several rounds or steps in Jacob's Ladder, which no hypocrite under heaven can (whilst he remains an hypocrite) climb up to. And so much for this Chapter.
CHAP. V. Now in this fifth and last Chapter, I shall lay down some Propositions and Directions, that so you may see what a sober use and improvement Christians ought to make of their evidences for Heaven; and how in the use of gracious evidences they ought to live above their gra∣cious evidences, and how to exalt and lift up Christ above all their graces, evidences and performances. FIrst Proposition. 'Tis the wisdom, and ought to be the work of every Christian to own the least measure of grace that is in him,Though our graces like Gi∣deon's Army, are but a hand∣ful in compari∣son of our sins, which like the Midianites are innumerable, yet a handful of grace is to be owned in the midst of an Host of sins. though it be mixed and mingled with many weaknesses and infirmities: Sin is Satan's work, and grace is Christ's work; and therefore Christ's work ought to be eyed and owned, though it be mingled with much of Satan's work. That Christian is much clouded and benight∣ed, who hath two eyes to behold his sins, but never an eye to see his graces. Christ gets no glory, nor the soul gets no good, when a Christian is still a poring upon his sins. How can that Christian prize a little grace, and bless God for a little grace, and improve a little grace, who won't own a little grace because it is mingled with many weaknesses? Shall the Husbandman own a little wheat when mingled with a great deal of chaff?1 Sam. 21.13, 14. shall the Goldsmith own a little fi∣lings of gold when mingled with a great deal of dust? and shall not a Christian own a little grace when mingled with a great many failings? David had a great many infirmities, yet he owns his uprightness, Psal. 18.23. I was upright be∣fore
him. And JobJob 3. had a great many weaknesses, yet he owns his integrity, Job. 27.5. Till I die I will not remove my inte∣grity from me. Ver. 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. The Spouse was sensible of her blackness, yet owns her comeliness, Cant. 1.5. I am black, but comely. So Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but my heart waketh. Jeremiah was a man of many failings, yet he owns his hope in God, Jer. 17.17.Jer. 20.14—ult. Thou art my hope in the day of evil: The poor man in the Gospel was very sensible of the sad reliques and remains of unbelief that was in him, and yet with a holy boldness and confidence he pleads his faith, Mark 9.24. Lord, I believe, help my un∣belief. Peter miscarried sadly,Mat. 26.69—ult and yet he owns his love to Christ, Joh. 21.15. Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. Ver. 16. Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. Ver. 17. Lord, thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee. Paul had his infirmities and weaknesses hanging upon him, witness that 7th of the Romans; and yet how frequently and boldly does he own the grace of God that was in him, throughout his Epistles. Nothing keeps grace more at an under, than mens not owning of a little grace, because it is mingled with many infirmities. The best way to be greatly good, is to own a little, little good, though in the midst of much evil. But, The second Proposition is this. It is your wisdom, and  should be your work, to look upon all your graces and gra∣cious evidences as favours given you from above, as gifts dropt out of heaven into your hearts, as flowers of Paradise stuck in your bosoms by a divine hand. A man should never look upon his graces or his gracious evidences,Of thine own (saith David) have we given thee, 1 Chron. 29.14: but should be ready to say, these are the jewels of glory with which God has bespangled my soul, 1 Cor. 4.7. What hast thou that thou hast not received? What gift? what grace? what experience? what evidence hast thou that thou hast not received? All the light, and all the life, and all the love, and all the joy, and all the fear, and all the faith, and all the hope, and all the patience, and all the humility, &c. that thou hast, with all the evidences that arise from discovery of those graces, are
all grace gifts, they are all from above. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above,Jam. 1.17. and cometh down from the father of lights. Look, as all light flows from the Sun, and all water from the Sea, so all temporal, spiritual and eternal good flows from heaven. All your graces, and the greatest excel∣lencies that are in you, do as much depend upon God and Christ, as the light doth upon the Sun, or as the Rivers do upon the Sea,Joh. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psal. 87.7. or as the branches do upon the root. All my springs are in thee; all the springs of comfort that I have communicated to my soul, and all the springs of grace that I have to quicken me, and to evidence the goodness and happi∣ness of my spiritual estate and condition to me, they are all in thee. When a Christian looks upon his wisdom and know∣ledge, it concerns him to say, Here is wisdom and know∣ledge, I but 'tis from above; here is some weak love work∣ing towards Christ, but 'tis from above; here's joy, and comfort, and peace, &c. but these are all such flowers of Paradise as never grew in natures garden. Now when a Christian looks thus upon all those costly Diamonds of grace, of glory, with which his soul is bedeckt, he keeps low, though his graces and gracious evidences are high. Where this Rule is neglected, the soul will be endangered of being swell'd and pufft. It was a great saying of a very worthy man that is now with God, viz,Mr. Fox. That as he often got much good by his sins, so he often got much hurt by his graces. Dear hearts, when you look upon the stream, remember the fountain; when you look upon the flower, remember the root; when you look upon the Stars, remember the Sun; and when ever you look upon your graces, then be sure to remember Christ the fountain of grace, else Satan will certainly be too hard for you: Satan is so subtile, so artificial, and so critical, that he can make your very graces to serve him against your graces conquering joy by joy, sorrow by sorrow, humility by hu∣mility, fear by fear, and love by love; if you don't look upon all your graces as streams flowing from the fountain above, and as fruits growing upon the Tree of life that is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. Therefore when one of your eyes is fixt upon your graces, let the other be alwayes fixt upon Christ the fountain of grace.1 John 16. Of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace. Here they eye their gra∣ces, and the fountain of grace together. So Paul, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God,Gal. 2.20. who loved me and gave himself for me. Paul eyes Christ and his graces together; so Peter eyes Christ and his graces together. Lord,John 21.15. thou knowest hat I love thee. So those Worthies of whom this world was not worthy, they eye Christ and their graces together.Heb. 12.2. Look∣ing unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith.2 Cor. 5.17. Though grace be a new creature, a noble creature, a beautiful creature, an excellent creature, yet grace is but a creature,Col. 1.17. Phil. 4.12, 13. Cant. 4. ult. and such a creature that is strengthned, maintained, cherished and up∣held in your souls, in life and power, in beauty and glory, by nothing below the spiritual, internal and glorious operations of Christ, Col. 1.10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Ver. 11. Strengthned with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. Now when ever you look upon grace as a love∣ly, beautiful creature, O then remember that might and glo∣rious power of Christ, by which this creature is preserved and strengthned. Christians, your graces are holy and heaven∣ly plants of Christ's own setting and watering, and will you mind the plants more than that noble hand that set them? 'Tis Christ alone that can cause the desires of his people to bud, and their graces to blossom,Isa. 58.11. & 35.6, 7. and their souls to be like a watered garden, green and flourishing; and therefore let the eye of your souls be firstly, mostly and chiefly fixt upon Christ. But, The third Proposition is this. When you look upon your  graces in the light of the Spirit, it highly concerns you to look narrowly to it, that you don't renounce and rejecty our
graces, as weak and worthless evidences of your interest in Christ, and of that eternal happiness and blessedness that comes by Christ. The works of grace (saith my Author) which consists in those divine qualities of holiness and righ∣teousness,Grotius in Rom. 8.16. &c. Gal. 5.22, . is a sure Mark, a blessed character, whereby men may know whose children they are; even as the Spartans or Lacedemonians of old are said to know what stock and linage they were of, by a mark that was made upon their bodies by the head of a Lance or Speer. I readi∣ly grant, that you must not trust in your graces, nor make a Saviour of your graces; but yet you ought to look upon your graces, as so many signs and testimonies of the love and fa∣vour of God to your souls. What certainty can there be of Election, Remission of sin, Justification or Glorification, if there be not a certainty of your Sanctification and Renova∣tion; if that perswasion that is in you ahout your grace or sanctification be false, then that perswasion that is in you concerning remission of sin, predestination, justification and eternal salvation is false: This highly concerns all them to consider, that would not be miserable in both worlds. I know many cry up Revelations, Impressions, Visions (yea the visions of their own hearts) and speak lightly and slight∣ly of the graces of the Spirit, of sanctification, of holiness, as evidences of the goodness and happiness of a Christians condition. There were some in James his time, who cryed up faith,James 2.18. and union, and communion with Christ, but were destitute of good works. Well, what saith the Apostle? Shew me thy faith without thy works,Ver. 26. and I will shew thee my faith by my works; for as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead. Look, as the body without the spirit (or without breath, as the Greek word  primarily sig∣nifies) is dead; so that faith that is without works, which are as it were the breathings of a lively faith, is a dead faith. Though it be faith that justifieth the man, yet it is works that justifies a mans faith to be right and real, saving and ju∣stifying. So there were some in Johns time, viz. the Gno∣sticks, who talkt high of fellowship and communion with Christ, and yet walkt in darkness; they lived in all impu∣rity,
and yet would make the world believe that they were the only people who knew God, and had fellowship with God, but John tells us they were lyars.2 Cor. 6.14. If we say that we have fel∣lowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lye, and do not the truth. What fellowship hath light with darkness? Such walk in dark∣ness, who promise to themselves the future vision of God's face, whilst they go on in the wilful breach of God's royal Laws. Such who say they know him, and are swallowed up in the enjoyments of him, and yet in the course of their live walk contrary to him, such are lyars. He that saith I know him;1 John 2.4. and keeps not his commandements is a lyar. Sanctification and justification are both of them benefits of the Covenant of grace, and therefore to evidence the one by the other,Jer. 33.8, 9. Heb. 8.10, 12. can be no turning aside to the covenant of works: You may run and read in the Covenant of grace, that he that is justified is also sanctified, and that he that is sanctified is also justified and therefore, why may not he that knows himself to be real∣ly sanctified upon that very ground, safely and boldly con∣clude, that he is certainly justified. O Sirs! the same spiri that witesses to a Christian his justification; can shine upon his graces,1 Cor. 2.12. 1 Joh. 4.13, 14. and witness to him his sanctification as well as his justification; and without all controversie, 'tis as much the office of the Spirit to witness to a man his sanctification, as 'tis to witness to him his justification. But you will say, Sir, pray what should be the reasons why many men have, and why some do still cry down marks and signs, and deny sancti∣fication to be an evidence of mens justification, &c. and speak disgracefully of this practice that is now under con∣sideration? I conjecture the Reasons may be such as follow. First, Many Professors take up in a great name, and in a  great profession, and in great parts and gifts, though they have never found a through change,1 Thes. 5.23. John 3.3, 5. 2 Cor. 5.17. Acts 26.28. though they have never past the pangs of the new birth, though they have never ex∣perienced what it is to be a new creature, a throughout Chri∣stian. And hence it comes to pass, that they make head a∣gainst this way of evidencing the goodness and happiness of a mans condition, by inward gracious qualifications. Of all
men these are most apt to out-run the truth, and to run from one extream to another, and to be only constant in incon∣stancy. But, Secondly, Many professors are given up to spiritual judg∣ments (which are the sorest of all judgments) viz. luke-warmness, dead-heartedness, formality, indifferency, Apo∣stacy, blindness, hardness, and to strong delusions, that they should believe a lye,2 Thes. 2.10, 11, 12. because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Now, is it any wonder to see such men quarrel, and wrangle, and rail against the way and method of evidencing the goodness and happiness of a mans spiritual condition, by inherent gracious qualifica∣tions? But, Thirdly, In some this ariseth from their lusts, which they indulge and connive at, and which they have a mind to live quietly in; they are desirous to keep their peace, and yet unwilling to forsake their lusts; and hence they exclude this witness of water or sanctification to testifie in the Court of Conscience, whether they are beloved of God, or whether they are sincere hearted or no, or whether they have the root of the matter in them or no; for the want of this witness, water or sanctification, is a clear and full witness against them, that they are yet in their sins, under wrath, and in the way to eternal ruin; and that they have nothing to do with peace,Isa. 57. ult. Psal. 50.16. or comfort, or the promises, or Christ, or heaven, to take God's name into their lips, seeing they secretly hate to be reformed. There are many fair Professors that are foul sinners, and that have much of God, and Christ, and heaven, and holiness in their lips, when they have nothing but sin and hell in their hearts and lives. These mens conversions shame their profession, and therefore they cry out against sanctifi∣cation as a sure and blessed evidence of a mans justification: Such sinners as live in a course of sin, that make a Trade of sin,1 Thes. 2.12. that indulge their sins, that take up arms in defence of sin, that make provision for sin, that make a sport of sin, that take pleasure in sin, and that have set their hearts upon their
sins; such sinners can't but look upon the witness of sancti∣fication, as the hand-writing upon the wall, Dan. 5.5, 6. But, Fourthly, There are many who are great strangers to  their own hearts and the blessed Scriptures, and are ignorant of what may be said from the blessed Word,'Tis sad to be a stranger at home, and to be least ac∣quainted with a mans own heart. Aristotle. to evidence the lawfulness of this practice that is under our present conside∣ration. And hence it comes to pass that they cry down marks and signs, and deny sanctification to be a sure and blessed evi∣dence of mens justification. Ignorat sane improb omnis; ig∣norance is the source of all sin, the very well-spring from which all wickedness doth issue.'Tis said of knowledge, non habet inimicum praeter ignoran∣tem. Ignorance inslaves a soul to Satan, it lets in sin by Troops, locks them up in the heart, shuts out the means of recovery, and so plaisters up a mans eyes, that he can't see the things that belongs to his own or to others internal or eternal peace. The Scripture sets ig∣norant persons below the Ox and the Ass. Did men either see the deformity of sin,Isa. 1.3. or the beauty and excellency of ho∣liness, they would never delight in the one, nor cry down the other. Peter2 Pet. 2.12. tells you of some that speak evil of the things that they understood not, they did reprehend that which they could not comprehend. Ignorance is a breeding sin, a mother sin, all sins are seminally in ignorance; igno∣rance is the mother of all the mistakes, and of all the misrule in the world. Christ told the Sadduces,Mat. 22.29. That they did err not knowing the Scriptures; and so I may say many err in crying down such signs and evidences of grace which are bottomed upon Scripture, because they are ignorant of what the Scrip∣ture saith in the case. But, Fifthly, The generality of Christians are but Lambs,  Babes and Children in grace,Isa. 40.11. 2 Pet. 2.2, 3. 1 John 2.1. the springs of grace runs low in them, their fears frequently over-top their faith, and their strong passions and corruptions do often raise such a dust and smoak in their souls, that  they might have all the world, yea if their salvation lay upon it, they were not able to dis∣cern the least measure of grace in their own souls. A little grace is next to none, small things are hardly discerned; he
had need to have a clear light and good eyes, that is to dis∣cern a hair, a mote, or an atome. A little grace is not dis∣coverable but by a shining light from above. There are none so full of fears, and doubts, and questions, and disputes, about the truth of their faith in Christ, and the sincerity of their love to Christ, as those that least believe and least love. The Kingdom of God in most Christians,Mark 4.30, 31, 32. is but as a grain of mu∣stard-seed, which is the least of all seeds; and therefore▪ 'tis no wonder they see it not. The root of the matter in most Chri∣stians is but small, and that small root is often covered over with many sinful infirmities and weaknesses, and therefore we are not to look upon it as a strange thing, if we see such Chri∣stians not sensible of the root of the matter that is in them. Weak habits put forth such faint actions (and with so much interruption) that it is not an easie thing to discern whether they are the products of special or of common grace. Now most Christians having but small measures of grace, holiness and sanctification in them; and these small measures being much obscured and buried under the prevalency of fears, doubts and unmortified lusts, can speak but weakly and dark∣ly for them; & upon this ground they are not fond of bringing in this witness of sanctification to speak for them. In civil Courts men are not ambitious to bring such witnesses to the Bar, as can witnes but weakly & faintly in their case. Tis so here. Sixthly, Satan is a grand enemy to the peace, joy, com∣fort, assurance, settlement and satisfaction of every poor Christian; and therefore he will leave no stone unturn'd, nor no means unattempted,Psal. 77. Psal. 88. whereby he may keep them in a low, dark, unsettled and uncomfortable condition. When once a poor soul is brought over to Christ, how does the Devil bestir himself to keep such a soul so under fears, doubts and bondage, as that it may not in the least have an eye to any thing that may have a proper tendency to its comfort, joy, assurance, peace or quiet. The Devil will do all he can to furnish such (as ar egotten again by the resur∣rection of Christ from the dead) with all sorts of deadly weapons one of his Armoury to fight against those Argu∣ments and evidences which make for the peace and comfort
of their own souls. He that shall look seriously and impar∣tially upon the subtile, close, strong,2 Sam. 2.19. and rhetorical arguings of many distressed Christians (above their own natural parts) against the peace, rest, comfort, and settlement of their own souls, may safely conclude, that a hand of Joab, a hand of Sa∣tan, yea a strong hand of Satan, has been with them. He that shall please to read the life of Francis Spira (though he be no great Philosopher) yet he may easily discern with what subtilty and wonderful.2 Cor. 11.14. Sophistry Satan help him to argue against the pardonableness of his sins, and the possibility of his salvation. Satan knows how to transform himself into an Angel of light; Satan does not alwayes appear in one and the same fashion; but he appears in as many several shapes, fashions and changes, as Proteus did among the Poets: To deceive some, he has assumed a lightsom body, as if he were an Angel of heaven▪ as if he had been a holy one, cloathed with the brightness of celestial glory. To deceive others, he has appeared as an Angel of light, suggesting such things to them, and injecting such things into them, under fair and specious shews and pretences of Religion, Piety, Zeal and Holiness, which have had a direct tendency to the dishonour of God, the wounding of Christ, the grieving of the Spirit, the clouding or denying their evidences for heaven, the strangling of their hopes, and the death of all their comforts and joy. But, Seventhly and lastly, Some Christians live under high en∣joyments  and singular manifestations of God's love to them, they have God every day a shedding abroad of his love into their hearts by the holy Ghost.Rom. 5.5. Psal. 63.2, 3, 4. God is every day a filling their souls with life, light, love, glory and liberty;Mat. 17.4. Christ every day takes them up into the Mount, and makes such discoveries of himself and his glory to them, that they are ready frequently to cry out, Bonum est esse hic,Dan. 9.22, 23 Cant. 2.6. It is good to be here Christ often whispers them in the ear with an, O man, O woman, greatly beloved; Christ's left hand is eve∣ry day under their heads, and his right hand doth embrace them; they sit down every day under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet unto their taste; he makes out every day such sweet and clear manifestations of his admira∣ble
favour to their hearts,Psal 63.2, 3, 4, 5. that their souls are daily satisfied as with marrow and fatness. There are some precious Chri∣stians (I say not all,Cant. 8. I say not most) who live daily under sin∣gular glances of divine glory, and who are daily under the sensible embracements of God, and who daily lye in the bo∣som of the Father,Cant. 1.13. and who every night have Christ as a bundle of myrrh lying betwixt their breasts. Now these choice souls who live daily in the glorious manifestations of the Spirit, and enjoy a little heaven on this side heaven, these many times are so taken up with their high communion with God, with their spiritual enjoyments, and with their tastes of the glory of that other world, that they do not much mind such evidences as we have had under our consideration. And thus much for the Reasons, why some cry down Scrip∣ture marks, signs and evidences of grace, of holiness, of san∣ctification; and why others don't much mind them, or take any great notice of them. But, The fourth Proposition is this. If this way of trying our spiritual estates by holy and gracious qualifications, were not both lawful and useful, then certainly the holy Spirit would never have prescribed it, nor never have prest men so earn∣estly upon it, as we find he has done in the blessed Scripture. Take a taste, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith;Psal. 4.4. Vide Chrysostom on the words. Gal. 6.3, 4. 1 Tim. 6.17, 18, 19. prove your own selves. The precept is doubled, to teach us to redouble our diligence in this most needful, but much neglected duty of self-examination. The final try∣al of our eternal estates, doth immediately and solely belong to the Court of heaven, but the disquisitive part belongs to us. Here are two emphatical words in the Greek; First, , examine your selves. The word in the general sig∣nifies to take an experimental knowledge of any thing, that is either uncertain, unknown or hidden; most men are great strangers to God, to Christ, to Scripture, and to themselves, and therefore saith the Apostle, Examine your selves. Now if there were not sure marks and infallible signs whereby men may certainly know what their present estate is, and
how 'tis like to go with them in another world, the redou∣bled commnad of the Apostle would be in vain. The second Greek word is , prove your selves. The original word signifies a severe and diligent inquisition into our selves, so as to have a full experience of what is in us. Doubtless the Apostle would never call again and again upon us, to try and examine our selves whether we be in the faith, if it were not lawful to come to the knowledge of our faith, or of our being in the state of faithful Christians in a discursive way, arguing from the effect to the cause. So in that, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give all diligence to make your cal∣ling and election sure. The Greek word translated give dili∣gence, is very emphatical,. it signifies to do a thing not in an overly, lazy, careless way, but to do a thing with industry, vigilancy and unweariedness of spirit. Now it is granted on all hands, that election cannot be made more sure in respect of God or it self, but only in respect of us, that we may be more perswaded of it. Election cannot be made more sure than it is already, for those whom God hath elected shall be certainly glorified, but we must make it sure on our parts;Rom. 8.29.30. that is, we must labour to have a real bottom and grounded assurance that we are elected by God in his eternal decree, to obtain life and glory by Jesus Christ. There is a double cer∣tainty, 1. There is certitudo objecti, a certainty of the object; so our election is sure with God, for with him both it and all things are unchangable. 2. There is certitudo subjecti, the certainty of the subject; and so we must make our election sure to our selves in our own hearts and consciences. Now the means whereby we are to come to this assurance, is by adding grace to grace, and by causing those several graces to abound in us. This is the way of wayes to make all sure to us. Now by these Scriptures 'tis most evident, that we stand en∣gaged to make our election sure by holy signs and marks. But, The fifth Proposition is this. That other precious Saints that are now triumphing in glory, have pleaded their inte∣rest in God's love, and their hopes of a better life from graces
inherent.Grace in the working of it, is often com∣pared to life. Now, look as natural life is discerned by the actions thereof, as by so many signs, so also is su∣pernatural life. I'le only point at some of those Scriptures among many others, that clearly speak out this truth; the first Epistle of John, James 2.17—ult. Job. 23.10, 11, 12. and the whole 31. Chapter of Job, Psal. 119.6. Isa. 38.2, 3. Neh. 1. ult. & 13.14, &c. Now all these Scriptures do evident∣ly prove, that the precious servants of the Lord did take their graces for precious signs and testimonies of God's love, of their interest in Christ, and thereby received much com∣fort, peace and satisfaction. And truly, to deny the fruit growing upon the Tree to be an evidence that the Tree is alive, is to me as unreasonable as it is absurd: Certainly 'tis one thing to judge by our graces, and another thing to trust in our graces, to make a Saviour of our graces. There is a great deal of difference betwixt declaring and deserving Christians, they may doubtless look to their graces as evi∣dences of their part in Christ and salvation (and the clearer and stronger they are, the greater will be their comfort and assurance) but not as causes. No man advanced free grace like Paul; no man debased his own righteousness like Paul, he counted it but dung and dross; and no man exalted the righteousness of Christ like Paul,Phil. 3.6, 7, 8, 9 and yet by this way of signs he gathered much comfort and assurance, 2 Tim, 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. How plainly, how fully doth he here conclude his right to the crown of life, from his fighting a good fight, his finish∣ing his course (in a way of grace and holiness) and his keep∣ing the faith. is boasting; they boasted in the testimony of their consci∣ences. O the quiet and tran∣quility that arises from the testimony of a mans sinceri∣ty, both in heart and life. By this great instance you may clearly see, that a Christian may greatly exalt Christ, lift up free grace, tread upon his own righteousness (as to justification) and at the ve∣ry same time take comfort in his graces, and in his gracious actings. So in that, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoycing is this, the te∣stimony of a good conscience, that in godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. His joy was founded on the testi∣mony of his conscience; but from what did his conscience testifie? from his sincere conversation. Again, take that memorable instance of Job, God hid his face from him, the arrows of the Almighty stuck fast in him, Satan was let loose
upon him, the wife of his bosom proved a tempter to him, a tormenter of him; his most inward acquaintance deserted him, reproached him, and condemned him as an hypocrite; God writ bitter things against him, and made him to possess the iniquities of his youth, all was clouded above him, and he stript of all the outward comforts that did once surround him; so that he had nothing left to stay him, to refresh him, to support him, and to be a comfort and joy to him,Job 1.8. & 2.3. but the sense of his integrity, and the evidence he had of his own uprightness, his own righteousness, Job. 27.5. Till I die I will not remove my integrity from me. Ver. 6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. Job was under great afflictions, sore tempta∣tions, and deep desertions; now that which was his cordial, his bulwark in those sad times, was the sense and feeling of his own uprightness, his own righteousness; the sense and feeling of the grace of God in him, kept him from fainting and sinking under all his troubles. So 1 Joh. 2.3. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments, &c. In these words two things are observable; First, that where there is a true knowledge of Christ, there is an observation of his commandements. Secondly, that by this observation of his royal Law, we may know that our knowledge is sound and sincere. He speaks not of a legal, but of an evangelical keeping of his commandements. A conscionable and serious endeavour to walk in a holy course of life, according to God's will revealed in his Word, is a most certain mark or evidence that we have a saving knowledge of God, and that we are his children, and heirs of glory. Such who sincerely desire, and unfeignedly purpose, and firmly resolve, and faithfully endeavour to keep the commandements of God; these do keep the commandements of God evangelically and acceptably in the eye of God, the account of God. So ver. 6. He that saith he abideth in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked. Here you may observe two things; First, that by faith we are implanted into Christ. Secondly, that we discover our implantation into Christ by our imitation of Christ. Such as plead for sanctification a an evidence of
justification, don't make their graces causes of their im∣plantation into Christ, or of their justification before the throne of Christ, but they make them testimonies and wit∣nesses to declare the truth of their real implantation into Christ, and of their being justified before the throne of Christ. So 1 Joh. 3.14. We know we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. The Apostle makes this a great sign of godliness to love another godly man for godli∣ness sake; and the more godly he is, the more to love him and to delight in him. Now mark, this love of our brethren is not a cause of our translation from death to life (for the very word translated, supposeth such a grace, such a favour of God as is without us) but a sign of our translation from death to life. But of this I have said enough already; as you may see if you will but read from page 189. to page 200. of this Book. But, The most or∣dinary and safe way of coming to assurance, is the discoursive way in which a believer from the fruits and effects of grace infers he hath the habit, and from the habit concludes his jstification & adoption; and as this is a way least sub∣ject to delusion, so it is also most suited to a ra∣tional creature, whose way of acting is by discourse and argumentation.The sixth Proposition is this. There are many scores of precious promises made over to them that believe, to them that trust in the Lord, to them that set him up as the great ob∣ject of their fear, to them that love him, to them that de∣light in him, to them that obey him, to them that walk with him, to them that thirst after him, to them that suffer for him, to them that follow after him, &c. Now, all these scores of promises are made for the support, comfort and encou∣ragement of all such Christians whose souls are bespangled with grace. But now if we may not lawfully come to the knowledge of our faith, love, fear, delight, obedience, &c. in a discoursive way, arguing from the effect to the cause. What support, what comfort, what advantage shall a sincere Christian have by all those scores of promissory places of Scripture? Doubtless all those scores of promises would be as so many Suns without light, as so many springs without wa∣ter, as so many breasts without milk, and as so many bodies without souls, to all gracious Christians, were it not lawful for them to form up such a practical syllogism as this is, viz. The Scripture doth plainly and fully declare, that he that
believeth, feareth, loveth, obeyeth, &c. is blessed, and shall be happy for ever. But I am such a one that doth believe, fear, love, obey, &c. therefore I am blessed, and shall be happy for ever. Now although it must be granted that the major of this Proposition is Scripture, yet the assumption is from experience, and therefore a godly man being assisted therein by the holy Ghost, may safely draw the conclusion as undeniable. O that you would seriously consider, how lit∣tle would be the difference (should you shut out this discour∣sive way) betwixt a man and a beast, if a man should assent to a thing unknown through an instinct and impression, and should to one who asks him a reason of his perswasion, be able to return no other answer but this; I am perswaded be∣cause I am perswaded. But, The seventh Proposition is this. That the Scripture giveth  many signs and symptoms of grace; so that if a man cannot find all, yet if he discover some, yea but one, he may safely conclude, that all the rest are there; he who hath but one in truth of the forementioned characters in this book, hath se∣minally all; he who hath one link of the golden chain, hath the whole chain. Look, as he who hath one grace in truth, hath every grace in truth, though he doth not see every grace shining in his soul; so he that hath in truth any one evidence of grace in his soul, he hath virtually all. And, O that all weak, dark, doubting Christians, would seriously and fre∣quently ponder upon this Proposition, for it may be a staff to uphold them, and a cordial to comfort them under all their fears and faintings. But, The eighth Proposition is this. Without the light of the  holy Ghost our graces shine not; our graces are only the means by which our condition is known to us;Rom. 9.2. the efficient cause of this knowledge, is the Spirit illustrating our graces and making them visible, and so helping us to conclude from them, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received not the spirit of the
world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Our graces, our sanctification, as well as our election, vocation, justification and glorifica∣tion, are freely given to us of God; and the Spirit of God is given as well to discover the one as the other to us. Mark, the things freely given us may be received by us, and yet the receit of them not known to us; therefore the Spirit for our further consolation doth (as it were) put his hand and seal to our receits,Eph. 4.30. whence he is said to seal us up unto the day of re∣demption. The graces of the Spirit are a real earnest of the Spirit, yet they are not alwayes an evidential earnest; there∣fore an earnest is often superadded to our graces. For ever remember these few hints; 1. That it is the work of the Spirit to plant grace in the soul. 2. That it is the work of the Spirit to act and exercise the graces that he has planted there. 3. That it is the work of the Spirit to shine upon those gra∣ces that he has planted in the soul, and to cause the soul to see and feel what he has wrote. 4. That it is the work of the Spirit to raise springs of comfort and joy in the soul, upon the discovery of that grace which he has wrote in the soul. O Christians, till the Spirit of the Lord shine upon your graces,Job 33. you will still be in the dark. 'Tis only God's own Interpreter that must shew a man his righteousness. When the holy Ghost shines upon a Christians graces, then a Chri∣stian finds the springs of comfort to rise in his soul, and then he finds the greatest serenity and calmness in his spirit. O Sirs! no man can by any natural light or evidence in him, come to be assured of the grace wrought in his soul. Look, as no man can see the Sun but in the light of the Sun; so no man can see the graces of the Spirit but in the light of the Spirit.1 Joh. 5.13. A man may have grace, and not see it; he may be in a state of grace and not know it; as the child lives in the womb but don't perceive it, is heir to a crown but don't know it.Isa. 50.10. Rom. 8.13. O! till the Spirit shines upon his own work, a child of light may walk in darkness and see no light. Look, as no man can subdue his sins but by the power of the Spirit; so no man can see his graces but in the light of the Spirit. The confidence that a believer hath of the truth of grace wrought
in him, springs more from the Spirits removing his slavish fears, and answering his doubts, and shining upon his graces, and supporting his soul, than it does from that excellency and beauty of grace which shines in him. A man may read the promises over and over a thousand times, and yet never be affected, delighted or taken with them, till the Spirit of the Lord set them home upon his soul. And a man may read the threatnings over and over a thousand times, and yet never startle nor tremble, though he knows himself guilty of those very sins against which the threatnings are denounced, till the Spirit of the Lord sets home the threatnings in power upon his conscience; and then every threatning will be like the hand-writing upon the wall, which will cause his counte∣nance to be changed, and his thoughts to be troubled,Dan. 5.6, 7. and his joynts to be loosed, and his knees to be dashed one against another. It is just so in the matter of our graces, and graci∣ous evidences, till the holy Spirit shine upon them, till in the light of the Spirit we come to see them, they won't be wit∣nessing, comforting and refreshing to us; and therefore let not the pious Reader think, that by the strength of his natu∣ral light he shall ever attain to know the certainty of that grace which is in his soul, but let him rather beg hard of God for his holy Spirit, and that his Spirit may shine upon that good work which he hath begun in him, that so he may be perswaded, assured and comforted. Without the light of the Spirit, the work of the Spirit can't be seen, no more than a book written in the fairest hand or print, can be seen without light to see it or read it by. But, The ninth Proposition is this. Sincere Christians may safe∣ly  and groundedly rejoyce,Most Christi∣ans by experi∣ence find that their assurance and joy rises and falls as grace and holi∣ness, and as the evidences of grace and holi∣ness rise and fall in their souls. delight and take comfort in those graces, or in those divine qualities, which in the light of the Spirit they see and know are wrote in their souls. I don't say that a Christian should build the comfort of his justification upon his graces, or that he should rest on his graces, or trust to his graces, or make a Saviour of his graces, for this would be such a piece of Pharisaical Popery, as is justly to be de∣tested
and abhorred by all that love Christ, or are looking towards heaven: But this I say, a Christian may make several uses of his graces, he may safly look upon his graces as so many evidences of Christ's dwelling in him, and he may look upon his graces as so many heavenly bracelets, or as so many love to∣kens from God in which he may safely rejoyce. The gracious evidences that I have laid down in this Treatise, are blessed symptoms of salvation, and therefore to rejoyce in them, can be no transgression of any royal Law of heaven. He that can ex∣perimentally subscribe to any of the gracious evidences that are laid down in this Book, has such a fair certificate to shew for heaven, that no wicked man or hypocrite under heaven has the like to shew; and why such a man should not rejoyce in such a certificate, I can't at present see. I may and ought to rejoyce in the works of Creation: O! how much more then ought I to rejoyce in the work of Renovation, in the work of sanctification, which does so infinitely transcend the work of Creation? I may and ought to rejoyce in my natural life, health, strength, beauty; and why then should I not rejoyce in grace and holiness, which is the life, health, strength and beauty of my soul?Cant. 4.9. Christ delights in the gra∣ces of his people. Thou hast ravished my heart, (or thou hast behearted me, as the Hebrew runs) my sister, my spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, (or with one glance of thine eyes, as some read it) with one chain of thy neck. The eye of faith, say some; the eye of love, say others: The chain of obedience, say some; the chain of spiritual graces, say others, ravished Christ's heart; the one eye of faith, the one chain of obedience, unhearted Christ, wounded Christ; this one eye, this one chain robbed Christ of his heart, and laid the Spouse in the room of it. Now, shall Christ's heart be ravished with his childrens graces, and shall not their hearts be ravished and delighted with those very graces that ravish Christ's own heart? I may, yea I ought to rejoyce in the graces of others;1 Thes. 1, , 3, 4, 5. 2 Thes. 1.3, 4. and why then not in my own? I may, yea I ought to rejoyce in others outward mercies, and in my own outward mercies. O! how much more then ought I to rejoyce in the saving and distinguishing graces of the
Spirit, especially when I consider, that the least dram of grace is more worth than ten thousand thousand worlds,Hab. 3.18. Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.3. as every awakened conscience will tell you when they come to dye. Mark, firstly, mostly and chiefly a Christian is to re∣joyce in God and Christ; but secondarily and subordinately he may rejoyce in those graces, and in those gracious evi∣dences that God has given into his soul: Firstly, mostly and chiefly a Wife is to rejoyce in the person of her Husband, but secondarily, subordinately she may rejoyce in the brace∣lets, in the ear-rings, in the jewels, in the gold chains that are given her by her Husband. But, The tenth Proposition is this, viz. That that assurance that  the people of God may rise to by the sight of their graces, and upon the sight of their gracious evidences in the light of the spirit, is not so clear, and bright, and high, and full, a that it utterly excludes all fears, doubtings, conflicts,1 Cor. 13.12. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. or spi∣ritual agonies. Our knowledge of God, of Christ, of our selves, and of the blessed Scripture, which is the Rule of tryal, is imperfect in this life. And how then can our assu∣rance be perfect? David, a man eminent in grace and holi∣ness, had his up-hills and his down-hills, his Summer days and his Winter nights.Psal 73.25. Psal. 42.5, 11. Now you shall have him upon the Moun∣tains singing and saying, The Lord is my portion; and presently you shall have him in the Valleys, sighing and saying, Wh art thou cast down, O my soul; why art thou disquieted within me?Job 3. Psal. 77. Psal. 88. The same is evident in Job, Heman and Asaph. Such an assu∣rance as shall exclude all fears, doubts, conflicts, agonies, i very desirable on earth, but shall never be obtained till we come to heaven. The grievous assaults of Satan, the power of unbelief, and the prevalency of other corruptions in a Christians heart, may be such as may shake (I don't say over∣turn) that assurance which a Christian may gather from the sight and evidence of his graces in the light of the spirit.Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusteth as well against the spirit as it is a spirit of con∣solation, as it lusteth against the spirit as it is a spirit of san∣ctification; and therefore such an assurance as shall exclude
all sorts and degrees of fears and doubts,Doubting is not a vertue, as the Papists would make us believe, but 'tis a fruit of the flesh, and a thing most contrary and opposite to the nature of faith, Jam. 1.5. Mat. 21.21. & 13.31. And therefore Chri∣stians should pray hard to be rid of their doubts. is not attainable in this life; whilst we are in this old world we shall have wa∣ter with our wine, gall with our honey, and some clouds with our brightest Sun-shiny dayes, &c. Most Christians think, that as long as they have any doubtings they have no as∣surance; but they consider not that there are many degrees of infalible certainty, below a perfect or an undoubting certain∣ty: Doubtless some darkness, more or less, will overspread the face of every Christians soul, and unbelief in one degree or another will be making head against their faith; and hy∣pocrisie in one degree or another will be making head against sincerity, and pride in one degree or another will be making head against humility, and passion in one degree or another will be making head against meekness, and earthly-minded∣ness in one degree or another will be making head against heavenly-mindedness, &c. yet as long as a Christian has the sight of his graces or his gracious evidences, he may and ought to walk in much peace, comfort and joy. Such Chri∣stians as are resolved to lye down in sorrow, till they have at∣tained to a perfect assurance, must resolve to lye down in sorrow till they come to lay down their heads in the dust. Our graces are imperfect, and therefore that assurance that arises from the sight and evidence of them, must needs be imperfect;1 Thes. 3.10. perfect signs of grace can never spring from im∣perfect grace. Now, if this were seriously apprehended, stu∣died and minded by many weak Christians, they would not at every turn call their spiritual estates into question as they do, because they find some seeds and stirrings of pride, hy∣pocrisie, vain-glory, and other sinful humours and passions working in them. But, The eleventh Proposition is this, viz. When all your signs and evidences of the happiness and blessedness of your con∣dition fails you, and are so clouded, obscured, darkned and blotted, that you can't read them, that you can't take any comfort from them, then it highly concerns you to keep up
high, and precious, and honourable thoughts of God, of Christ, of his word, and of his wayes in your souls.Psal. 97.2. Cant. 5.6, 7. When Christ was withdrawn from his Spouse, and when the watch∣men that went about the City had smote her and wounded her, and when the keepers of the walls had took away her vail from her, yet then she keeps up in heart very high, pre∣cious and honourable thoughts of Christ, Ver. 10. My be∣loved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. Ver. 16. His mouth is most sweet, and he is altogether lovely; or his mouth is sweetnesses, and he is altogether desirablenesses, or all of him is desires, or he is wholly desirable. Here she breaks off her praises in a general Elogy, which no words can ex∣press enough. Alas! saith the Spouse, I want words to ex∣press how sweet, how lovely, how comely, how desirable, how eminent, and how excellent Christ is in my eye, and to my soul;Hag. 2.8. he is the desire of all Nations (de jure) and all that is perfect in heaven or earth, is but a dim shadow of his ex∣cellency and glory. Where Christ is there is heaven; heaven it self in the Spouse's eyes, without Christ, would be but a low little thing. The Spouse looks upon Christ as the spark∣ling Diamond in the ring of glory. So David when he was wofully clouded and benighted, when all was dark within him, and dark about him, and dark over him, Psal. 73. Ve∣rily I have cleansed my heart in vain,See Psal. 77. & Psal. 88. 1 Sam. 30.6. and washed my hands in innocency. Ver. 21. My heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. Ver. 22. I was as a beast before thee; or I was as a great beast, or as many beasts in one, as the Hebrew word Behemoth imports. Ver. 26. My flesh and my heart faileth; that is, my outward man and my inward man faileth me. And yet mark, at this very time, when the Psalmist was thus overcast, he keeps up in him very high, precious and honourable thoughts of God, Ver. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. Ver. 23. Nevertheless, I am conti∣nually with thee, thou hast holden me by my right hand. Ver. 24. Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Ver. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. Ver. 26. God is the strength (or rock) of my heart, and my portion for ever. Ver. 28.
It is good for me to draw near to God. So the Church in that, Micah 7. When God had hid his face from her. Ver. 7. When she sate in darkness. Ver. 8. When she was under the indignation of the Lord. Ver. 9. When the righteous man was perished, and there was none upright among men. Ver. 2. And when her enemies rejoyced, insulted and tri∣umphed over her. Ver. 8. & ver. 10. Yet now, even now, she keeps up in her soul very high, precious and honourable thoughts of the Lord. Ver. 7. My God will hear me. Ver. 8. When I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. Ver. 9. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness. I might give you twenty more instances, but enough is as good as a feast. Dear Christians, when your graces are not transparent, when your evidences for heaven are blotted, and when the face of God is cloud∣ed, O then keep up in your hearts high, precious and honour∣able thoughts of God and Christ, and of his Word and wayes,Acts 27.20. &c. When your Sun of righteousness is set in a cloud, when great darkness is upon your spirits, when all Moon-light, and Star-light of your graces and gracious evidences fails you,Psal. 22.3. yet then say with David, Thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel; and with Ezra, Thou hast punish∣ed me less than mine iniquities deserve;Ezra 9.13. Neh. 9.33. and with Nehemiah, Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly; and with the Church, The Lord is righteous.Lam. 1.18. In the darkest night, and under your deepest soul-distresses, say, Well, if I perish, if I should miscarry for ever, yet I will maintain and keep up in my heart high, and precious, and honourable thoughts of God and Christ: Say, well, though my graces are obscured, and my evidences for heaven are blurred and soyled, yet I shall to my last breath, say the Lord is good, and his Word is good, and his wayes are good; yea, though he should slay me, yet I will trust in him,Job 13.15. and entertain noble and glorious thoughts of him. This is the way of wayes to have your graces clear∣ed and strengthned, your evidences brightned, your comforts restored, and your assurance confirmed. But,
The twelfth Proposition is this, viz. That it is the great  duty and concernment of Christians to keep the evidences of their gracious and happy condition, alwayes bright and shi∣ning; Christians should make conscience of blurring and disfiguring the golden characters of grace in their souls. The least character of grace in the soul, is more worth than all the gold of Ophir, yea more worth than ten thousand thousand worlds;Eph. 4.30. Psal. 51.11, 12 and therefore every gracious Christian should be marvellous careful, that he does not by wilful omissions or sinful commissions, cloud, dim or darken the least character of grace; such as blot or lose their evidences for heaven, they lose the comfort of their lives in this world. Satans master-piece is first to work Christians to blot and blur their evidences for glory, by committing this or that hainous sin; and then his next work is to rob them of their evidences for glory, that so though at the long run they may get safe to hea∣ven, that yet Jacob like they may go halting and mourning to their graves. Satan knows, that whilst a Christians evidences are bright and shining, a Christian is temptation-proof. Satan may tempt him, but he can't conquer him; he may assault him, but he can't vanquish him. Satan knows, that whilst a Christians evidences for heaven are bright and shining, no afflictions can sink him, nor no opposition shake him, nor no persecution discourage him, nor no outward wants perplex him; and therefore he will use all his power and policy, all his arts, crafts and parts, to draw poor Christians to blot and blur their evidences for glory. Satan knows, that a man may lose one friend, and easily get another, lose his Trade in one place, and soon get a Trade in another place; lose health and get it, lose an estate and get an estate, &c. But if he loses his evidences for heaven, he knows it will cost him many a prayer, and many a sigh, and many a groan, and many a tear, and many a sad complaint, before he recovers his lost eviden∣ces; and therefore his grand design is to plunder a Christian of his evidences for heaven. O Sirs! keep but your eviden∣ces for heaven alwayes bright and shining, and then heavy af∣flictions will be light, and long afflictions will be short,2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. and bitter afflictions will be sweet; and then every evidence fainly
written in your hearts, will be a living comfort to you in a dying hour. When the tokens of death are upon your bodies, and you shall see the lively characters of grace shining in your souls,Luke 2.29. you will then cry out with old Simeon, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace; and with the Spouse, Make hast my beloved,Cant. 8. ult. and be like to a Roe, or to a young Hart upon the mountains of spices;Rev. 22.20. Phil. 1.23. and with the Bride, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; and with Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. When a man's evidences for heaven are either lost or blotted and blur'd, then he will be ready to cry out wih Da∣vid, O spare me yet a little, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be seen no more;Isa. 38.3. and with Hezekiah, to turn his face to the wall and weep. There are four things that above all others a Christian should labour to keep; 1. Christ. 2. His own heart. 3. The Word. 4. His evidences for heaven, bright and shining. But, The thirteenth Proposition is this, viz. It is the high con∣cernment of every Christian, either when he is in the dark, or when his graces shine brightest, and when his evidences for heaven are clearest, and his springs of comfort rise highest, then to have his heart and the eye of his faith most firmly fixt upon these three royal Forts, or these five Cities or refuge. It must be granted, that though our graces are our best jewels, yet they are imperfect, and do not give out their full lustre; they are like the Moon, which when it shines brightest hath her dark spots; and therefore a Christian had need have his eye, his heart fixt upon the five following royal Forts. You know in time of War there are the outworks, and there are the royal Forts: Now, when the Soldiers are beaten out of their out∣works, they retire to the royal Forts, and there they are safe, and then they cast up their caps and bid defiance to their proudest enemies. Now, our graces and our gracious evi∣dences, they are our out-works; and from these we may be beaten in a day of desertion and temptation, &c. Now if we make our retreat to the five following royal Forts, we may in a holy sence cast up our caps, and bid defiance to an host of Devils, yea to all the powers of darkness.
Qu. But Sir, Pray let us know which are these Royal Forts. Ans. They are these three that follow. The first is the free, rich, infinite, soveraign and glorious  grace of God.Gen. 6.8. Exod. 19.5. Eph 1.5, 6, 7. 1 Tim. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. The grace of our Lord was exceeding a∣bundant. The original word is , was over full, redundant, more than e∣nough, more than might serve the turn for him, who was the great∣est of sinners. By free-grace you are to understand the gra∣cious good will or favour of God, whereby he is pleased of his own free love to chuse and accept of some in Christ for his own, This we call first grace, because it is the fountain of all other grace, and the springs from whence they flow; and it's therefore called grace, because it makes a man gra∣cious with God. Now mark, there have been many Christi∣ans who have had no assurance of the love of God, no sight of their interest in Christ, no sealing of the spirit, nor no one clear evidence of grace, that they durst rest the weight of their souls upon; nor no one promise in the whole Book of God that they durst apply or rest upon, who yet daily casting or rowling themselves, their souls, and their everlast∣ing concernments, upon the infinite, free, rich and soveraign grace of God in Christ, have found some tolerable peace, comfort and refreshment in such a practise all their dayes. A Christian may lose the sight of his graces, and the eviden∣ces of his gracious estate; he may be so much in the dark, he may be so much benighted and bewildered in his spirit, that there may be no way under heaven left to him to enjoy peace, comfort, rest, quiet, settlement or contentment, but by casting or rowling of his soul upon the free, rich, infinite and soveraign grace of God in Christ; and here casting anchor, the poor bewildered, deserted, tempted,Isa. 50.10. tossed soul may be safe and at rest. The free love and favour of God will be a lamp to the soul in the darkest night,Psal. 4.6. Socrates prized the Kings coun∣tenance above his coyn. What is then the countenance of a God, to a gracious soul? it will be a sweet lump that will sweeten the bitterest cup, it will be a singular cor∣dial against all faintings, it will be armour of proof against all temptations, it will be an everlasting arm to you under all af∣flictions, it will be a Sun and a shield to you in every condi∣tion, Psal. 80.3. Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. Divine favour is that pearl of price that is most desirable, Dan. 9.17. The Lord make his face to shine upon his sanctuary
that is desolate, for the Lords sake. Numb. 6.24. The Lord make his face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you. Psal. 67.1. God be merciful to you, and bless you, and cause his face to shine upon you.Job 2.4. Life is a very desirable thing, skin for skin, yea all that a man hath will he give for his life; and yet the loving kind∣ness of God is better than life, Psal. 63. Thy loving kindness is better than life. The Hebrew word is Chajim, lives; to note that the loving kindness of God is better than many lives, yea than all lives, and the revenues of life, put many lives together, put all lives together; and yet there is more excellency in the least discovery of divine love than in them all. Many a man has been weary of his life, but who have e∣ver been weary of divine love? Dear Christians, are your graces or gracious evidences shining and sparkling? O then solace your selves mostly in the free love and favour of God; for in his free favour lyes the life of your souls, the life of your graces, the life of your comforts, yea in his free favour your all is bound up. If your graces or evidences are so clouded and darkned, that you are in a stormy day beat out of your out-works: O now run to the free grace and favour of God, as to your Royal Fort, as to your strong Tower, as to your City of Refuge, where you may be safe and happy for ever. In such a day ponder much upon these Scriptures, Hos. 14.4. I will heal their back-sliding, I will love them freely. God's love is a free love, having no motive or foundation but within it self; all the links of the golden chain of salvation are made up of free-grace. The people of God are freely loved, Deut. 7.6, 7, 8. and freely chosen, John 15.16, 19. Eph. 1.4. and freely accepted, Eph. 1.6. and freely adopt∣ed, Eph. 1.5. Gal. 4.5, 6. and freely reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. and freely justified, Rom. 3.24. Being justified freely by his grace; and freely saved, Eph. 2.5. By grace ye are saved. Ver. 8. For by grace are ye saved. Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us. Thus you see, that all the golden rounds in Jacob's Ladder that reaches from heaven to earth, are all made up of free-grace. Free-grace is the foundation of all spiri∣tual and eternal mercies; free-grace is the solid bottom and
foundation of all a Christians comfort in this world. Were we to measure the love of God to us by our fruitfulness, ho∣liness, humbleness, spiritualness, heavenly-mindedness, or gracious carriages towards him, how would our hope, our confidence, every hour,Rom. 4.16. yea every moment in every hour be staggered, if not vanquished? Bt all is of grace, of free-grace, that the promise might be sure, and that our salvation might be safe. O Sirs! it is free-grace that will strengthen you in all your duties, and that will sweeten all your mercie,Rom. 8.33, 34, 35, 36. and that will support you under all your changes, and that will arm you against all temptations, & answer all objections, and take off all Satans accusations, that may be cast in to disturb the peace and quiet of your souls; and therefore, whether your graces or gracious evidences do shine or are clouded, yet still have your recourse to the free-grace of God, as to your first Royal Fort, your first City of Refuge; and still cry out, Grace, grace. When your gracious evidences are clearest and fullest, it then concerns you to look upon free grace as your choicest and safest City of Refuge. But, The second Royal Fort that Christians should have their eys,  their hearts fixed upon,Imputed righ∣teousness seem to be prefigured by the skins wherewith the Lord after the full cloathed our first pa∣rents. The bo∣dies of the beasts were for sacrifice, & the skins to put them in mind, that their own righteousness was like the fig-leaves im∣perfect, & that therefore they must be justifi∣ed another way▪ whether their graces or gracious evi∣dences sparkle and shine, or are clouded and obscured, is the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. Beloved, there is a twofold righteousness in Christ. First, there is his essential and per∣sonal righteousness as God: Now this essential personal righteousness of Christ cannot be imputed to us. But then there is, Secondly, his Mediatory righteousness, that is that righteousness which he wrought for us as Mediator, whereby he did subject himself to the preceptt, to the penalties, com∣mands & curses, answering both Gods vindictive and rewarding justice. This is communicated to us, and made ours: by vir∣tue of which we stand recti in curia, justified in God's sight. The Mediatory righteousness of Christ is the matter of our justification. Now this Mediatory righteousness of Christ includes, First, the habitual holiness of his person in the ab∣sence of all sin, and in the rich and plentiful presence of all holy and requisite qualities. Secondly, the actual holiness of
his life and death by obedience. By his active obedience he perfectly fulfilled the commands of the Law, and by his pas∣sive obedience, his voluntary sufferings, he satisfied the penal∣ty and commination of the Law for transgressions. Mark, that perfect satisfaction to divine justice in whatsoever it re∣quires, either in way of punishing for sin, or obedience to the Law, made by the Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man, the Mediator of the new Covenant,Osiander was of opinion, that men were justi∣fied by the es∣sential righte∣ousness of Christ as God, which opinion is largely con∣futed by Calvin in his Institu∣tions. as a common head repre∣senting all those whom the Father hath given to him, and made over unto them that believe in him. This is that righ∣teousness that is imputed to us in justification. No other righteousness can justifie us before the throne of God. Look, as Christ was made sin for us only by imputation, so we are made righteous only by the imputation of his righteousness to us; as the Scripture clearly evidences, 2 Cor. 5.21. He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Jer. 23.6. The Lord our righteousness. (A soul truly sensible of his own unrighteous∣ness, would not have this sentence, The Lord our righteousness, blotted out of the Bible for ten thousand thousand worlds.) 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ Jesus is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, &c. And pray, how is Christ made righteous∣ness to the believer? Not by way of infusion, but imputation; not by putting righteousness into him, but by putting a righ∣teousness upon him, even his own righteousness; by the im∣puting his merit, his satisfaction, his obedience unto them, through which they are accepted as righteous unto eternal life, Rom. 5.19. As by one mans disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Christ's righteousness is his in respect of inhesion, but it is ours in respect of imputation; his righteousness is his perso∣nally, but ours meritoriously. Look, as there is a true and real union between us and Christ, so there is a real imputa∣tion of Christ's righteousness to us. And a gracious soul triumphs more in the righteousness of Christ imputed, than he would have done if he could have stood in the righteous∣ness in which he was created. This is the crowning comfort to a sensible and understanding soul, that he stands righteous
before a judgment-seat, in that full, exact, perfect, com∣pleat, matchless, spotless, pearless, and most acceptable righ∣teousness of Christ which is imputed to him. The righteous∣ness of Christ is therefore called the righteousness of God,Rom. 3.21, 22. Rom. 10.3. Phil. 3.9. be∣cause it is it which God hath designed, and which God doth accept for us in our justification, and for and in which he doth acquit and pronounce us righteous before his seat of justice.Luthers great fear was, that when he was dead this glori∣ous doctrine of free justificati∣on by the righ∣teousness of Christ would be sent packing out of the world. That we are freely justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, is the very Basis, foundation and state of Christian Religion, whereby it is distinguished from all other Religions whatsoever. Jews, Turks, Pagans and Pa∣pists explode an imputed righteousness, yea Papists jeer it, calling it a putative righteousness. Well Sirs, remember this once for all, viz. That the Mediatory righteousness of Christ is the life of your souls, and will afford you these most admirable comforts. First, In this righteousness there is enough to satisfie the  justice of God to the utmost farthing. The Mediatory righ∣teousness of Christ is so perfect, so full, so exact, so com∣pleat, and so fully satisfactory to the justice of God, as that divine justice cryes out, I have enough, and I require no more; I have found a ransom, and I am fully pacified to∣wards you, Ezek. 16.62, 63. But, Secondly, This Mediatory righteousness of Christ takes  away all our unrighteousness, it cancels every bond, it takes away all iniquity, and answers for all our sins. Lord,Isa. 53. Col. 2.12, 13, 14, 15. here are my sins of omission, and here are my sins of commission, but the righteousness of Christ hath answered for them all; here are my sins against the Law, and here are my sins against the Gospel, and here are my sins against the offers of grace, the tenders of grace, the strivings of grace, the bowels of grace, but the righteousness of Christ hath answered for them all. When a cordial was offered to one that was sick; O (said he) the cordial of cordials which I daily take is this; The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all our sins. O Sirs!1 Joh. 1.7. it would be high blasphemy for any to imagine that there
should be more demerit in sin,Rom. 8.1, 33, 34, 35. in any sin, in all sin, to con∣demn a believer, than there is merit in Christ's righteous∣ness to absolve him, to justifie him. But, Thirdly, This righteousness of Christ presents us perfect∣ly righteous in the sight of God. It is that pure, fine, white linnen garment, whereby our nakedness is covered before the face of God. And to her was granted (that is to the Lambs wife) that she should be arrayed in fine linnen,Rev. 19.8. clean and white; for the fine linnen is the righteousness of Saints, or the righteousnesses or justifications of Saints;. for the Greek is plural. Some by righteousnesses understand the righteousness of Christ im∣puted, and the righteousness of Christ imparted; but I ra∣ther close with those who say it is an Hebraism, the plural righteousnesses, noting that most perfect, compleat, absolute righteousness which Christ is pleased to put upon his people. Upon the account of this righteousness of Christ, the Church is said to be without spot or wrinkle,Eph. 5.27. and to be all fair. Thou art all fair my love,Cant. 4.7. Col. 2.10. there is no spot in thee. And to be compleat. And ye are compleat in him, which is the head of all principality nd power.Rev. 14.5. And to be without fault. They are without fault be∣fore the throne of God. And so Col. 1.21. And to present us holy, and unblamable, and unreprovable in the sight of God. But, Fourthly, This righteousness of Christ will answer to all the fears, doubts, and objections of your souls. How shall I look up to God? the Answer is, in the righteousness of Christ. How shall I have any communion with a holy God in this world? the Answer is, in the righteousness of Christ? How shall I find acceptance with God? the An∣swer is, in the righteousness of Christ. How shall I dye? the Answer is, in the righteousness of Christ? How shall I stand before a Judgment-seat? the Answer is, in the righteousness of Christ. Your sure and only way under all temptations, fears, conflicts, doubts and disputes, is by faith to remember Christ,That was a rare speech of Luther, Ips vi∣deret ubi anima mea mansura sit, qui pro ea sic solicitus fuit ut vitam pro ea posuerit, let him see to it where my soul shall rest, who took so much care for it, as that he laid down his life for it. and the sufferings of Christ, as your Mediator and Surety; and say, O Christ, thou art my sin in being made sin for me, and thou art my curse in being made a curse for
me; or rather I am thy sin, and thou art my righteousness, I am thy curse, and thou art my blessing, I am thy death and thou art my life; I am the wrath of God to thee, and thou art the love of God to me, I am thy hell, and thou art my heaven. O Sirs! if you think of your sins and of God's wrath, if you think of your guiltiness and of God's justice, your hearts will fail you and sink into despair; if you don't think of Christ, if you don't rest and stay your souls upon the Mediatory righteousness of Christ. But, Fifthly and lastly, The righteousness of Christ is the best  title that you have to shew for a Kingdom that shakes not,Heb. 12.28. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. for riches that corrupt not, for an inheritance that fadeth not a∣way, and for an house not made with hands, but one eternal in the heavens. The righteousness of Christ is your life, your joy, your comfort, your crown, your confidence, your hea∣ven, your all; and therefore whether your graces or graci∣ous evidences do sparkle and shine, or are clouded or blotted, yet still keep a fixed eye and an awakned heart upon the Me∣diatory righteousness of Jesus Christ, for that's the righte∣ousness by which you may happily live, comfortably die, and boldly appear before a Judgment-seat. But, The third Royal Fort, that Christians should have their  eyes, their hearts fixed upon, whether their graces or graci∣ous evidences sparkle and shine, or are obscured and cloud∣ed, is the Covenant of grace. The Covenant of grace is a new compact or agreement which God hath made with sin∣ful man out of his own meer mercy and grace,Deut. 4.23. Isa. 55.3. & 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Jer. 31.31. Psal. 50.5, &c. Hos. 14.4. Tit. 3.6. Eph. 1.5, 6, 7. Chap. 2.5 7, 8. Rom. 9.18, 23. Jer. 32.38, 39, 40, 41. Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. wherein he un∣dertakes both for himself and for faln man, & wherein he en∣gages himself to make faln man everlastingly happy. All man∣kind had been eternally lost, and God had lost all the glory of his mercy for ever, had he not of his own free-grace and mercy made such an agreement with sinful man. This Cove∣nant is called a Covenant of grace, because it flows from the meer grace and mercy of God. There was nothing out of God, nor nothing in God, but his meer mercy and grace that moved him to enter into Covenant with poor sinners. In the
Covenant of grace there are two things considerable, First, the Covenant that God makes for himself to us, which con∣sists of these Branches; 1. That he will be our God. 2. That he will give us a new heart, a new spirit. 3. That he will not turn away his face from us from doing of us good. 4. That he will put his fear into our hearts. 5. That he will cleanse us from all our filthiness, and from all our Idols. 6. That he will rejoyce over us to do us good. Secondly, here is the Co∣venant which God doth make for us to himself, which con∣sists in these things; 1. That we shall be his people. 2. That we shall fear him for ever. 3. That we shall walk in his Sta∣tutes, keep his Judgments and do them. 4. That we shall not depart from him. Upon many accounts I may not enlarge on these things; but by these short hints 'tis evident, that the Covenant of grace is an entire Covenant made by God, both for himself and for us. O Sirs! in the Covenant of grace God stands engaged to give whatsoever he requires. 1 Chron. 28.9.First, He requires us to know him, and he has engaged himself that we shall know him, Jer. 24.7. I will give them a heart to know me, that I am the Lord. And Jer. 31.34. They shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, Heb. 8.11. But, Secondly, The Lord frequently requires his people to trust in him, Psal. 62.8. Isa. 26.4. 2 Chron. 20.20. And he has engaged himself that his people shall trust in him, Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. But, Thirdly, The Lord frequently commands his people to fear him, Deut. 6.13. Chap. 8.6. And he has engaged him∣self that they shall fear him, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. But, Fourthly, The Lord frequently commands his people to love him, Deut. 11.1. Psal. 31.23. O love the Lord, all ye his
Saints. And he has promised and engaged himself, that his people shall love him, Deut. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul. But, Fifthly, The Lord frequently commands his people to  call upon him, and to pray unto him, Psal. 50.15. 1 Thes. 5.17. &c. And he has promised and engaged himself to pour upon them a spirit of prayer, Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications. But, Sixthly, The Lord frequently commands his people to re∣pent,  and to turn from their evil wayes, Hos. 14.1. Ezek. 14.6. Chap. 18.30. Acts 17.30. Acts 26.20. And he has promised and engaged himself, that they shall repent and turn from their evil wayes, Acts 5.30. Acts 11.18. 2 Tim. 2.25. Isa. 30.22. Jer. 24.7. But, Seventhly, The Lord has commanded his people to obey  him, and to walk in his Statutes, Jer. 24.7. And he has pro∣mised and engaged himself, that his people shall obey him, and walk in his Statutes, Ezek. 36.27. And I will put my spi∣rit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. So Ezek. 11.19, 20. Chap 37.23, 24. But, Eightly, The Lord commands his people to mourn for  their sins, Isa. 22.12. Joel 2.12. Jam. 4.10. And he has promised and engaged himself to give them a mourning frame, Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one that mourneth for an only son. Ezek. 7.16. They shall be on the mountains as the Doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his iniquity. But, Ninthly, The Lord commands his people to grow in grace,  2 Pet. 3.18. &c. And he has promised and engaged him∣self, that they shall grow in grace, Psal. 92.12, 13, 14. The
righteous shall flourish like the Palm-tree (which is alwayes green and flourishing) he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. The Cedar of all Trees is most durable, and shoots up highest. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God; they shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. See Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. Mal. 4.2. &c. But, Tenthly, The Lord commands his people not to suffer sin to reign in them, Rom. 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal body. And he has promised and engaged himself, that sin shall not reign in them, Rom. 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you. Jer. 33.8. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity. Ezek. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness; and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. Mich. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. But, Eleventhly, He has commanded his people to loath their sins, and to loath themselves for their sins, Psal. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil. Rom. 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. And the Lord has promised and engaged himself to give them such a frame of spirit, Ezek. 36.13. Then shall ye re∣member your own evil wayes, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations. Ezek. 6.9. And they that escape of you shall remember me among the Nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes which go a whoring after their Idols, and they shall loath themselves for the evils which they have commited in all their abominations. Ezek. 20.43. And there shall ye remember your wayes, and all your doings wherein you have been defiled, and ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils that ye have committed. But, Twelfthly and lastly, (for enough is as good as a feast) God has commanded us to hold out, to persevere to the end, 1 Cor. 15.58. Rev. 2.10. Luke 18.1. And the Lord has pro∣mised
and engaged himself, that they shall persevere, Job 17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way,2 Sam. 3.1. and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. Isa. 40.31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint. Thus you see by an induction of twelve parti∣culars, that what ever God requires of his people, he stands engaged by the Covenant of grace to give to his people, to do for his people. Now mark, the Covenant of grace  onfirmed to us in the surest and most glorious wa at can be imagined.Gen. 17.7. Heb. 13.20. Psal. 89.28. 2 Sam. 23.5. The Covenant of grace is so ongly ratified, that there can be no nulling of it▪ o▪ First, 'Tis confirmed to us by his Word. I will be your  God, and you shall be my people. Now,Jer. 33.38. 2 Cor. 1.20. all the promises of God in htm are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us; that is, they are stable and firm, as the Hebrew word signifies. They will eat their way over all Alps of opposition. In the new Covenant God neither makes nor fulfils any promises of sal∣vation, but in Christ and by Christ. Secondly, God hath ratified the Covenant of grace by his  oath; his promise is enough,Gen. 22.16. Heb. 6.19. but surely his oath must put all out of question; there's no room for unbelief now God hath sworn to it; had there been a greater God, he would have sworn by him. But, Thirdly, God hath ratified it by the death of his Son. A  mans last Will and Testament as soon as he is dead,Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.15, 26. is in force and cannot then be disannulled. The Covenant of grace is a Testamentary Covenant, which by the death of the Testator is so setled, that there is no altering of it. But, Fourthly and lastly, The Covenant of grace is ratified  by the seals which God hath annexed to it. What was sealed by the Kings Ring could not be altered.Esth. 8. God hath set his seals
to the Covenant of grace, his broad seal in the Sacraments, and his privy seal in the witness of his Spirit, and therefore 'tis sure and can't be reverst, &c. Now, when ever you look upon your graces or gracious evidences with one eye, be sure you look upon the Covenant of grace, your last royal Fort with the other eye. The whole hing of a mans comfort and happiness hangs upon the Cove∣ of grace. The Covenant of grace is the Saints original title to  'tis a Saints best and brightest evidence for life and salvation. re was an eternal design (an eternal plot, if I may so speak) be God the father and the Lord Jesus Christ; a bargain, a Covenant de between the Father and the Son, for the salvation of his chosen ; and by this patient and tenure of grace, all Saints have title to heaven, &c. Dear Christians, many times your gracious evidences are so blotted and blur'd that you can't read them. O then, turn to the Covenant of grace; when other evidences fail you, the Covenant of grace will be a glorious standing evi∣dence to you; 'tis upon the score of the Covenant that you must challenge an interest in all the glory of another world. The Covenant of grace is the great Charter, the Magna Charta of all your spiritual priviledges and immunities. Now in this great Charter the Lord declares, That sincerity shall go for perfection:Luke 1.5, 6. Acts 13.22. 2 Chron 3.8, 19, 20. In this great Charter the Lord hath de∣clared, That he judges his people by the standing bent and frame of their hearts, and not by what they are, under some pangs of passion, or in an hour of temptation. In this great Charter the Lord declares, That his eye is more upon his peo∣ples inward disposition, than 'tis upon their outward actions; and that his eye is more upon their will,2 Cor. 8.12. Phil. 2.13. than 'tis upon their work. In this great Charter, the Covenant of grace, the Lord hath declared, That he will not forsake his people, nor cast off his people,Ponder much upon Jer. 31.31, to 38. because of those failings and weaknesses that may and do attend them, 1 Sam. 12.22. For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name sake: because it hath pleased the Lord to make you his people. He chose you for his love, and he still loveth you for his choice. God will rather
pity his people under their weakness, than he will reject them for their weakness. The Covenant of grace that God hath made with his people, is as the Covenant that a man makes with his Wife. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, saith the Lord.Hos. 2.19, 20. Jer. 3.13. Turn O back-siding children, saith the Lord, for I am married unto you. Now, a man will never reject his Wife, he will never cast off his Wife for those common weaknesses and infirmi∣ties that daily attends her; no more will the Lord cast off his people, because of the infirmities that daily hang upon them. In this great Charter, the Covenant of grace, the Lord declares, that he will require no more than he gives; and that he will give what he requires, and that he will ac∣cept what he gives; and what can a God say more? and what can a gracious soul desire more? O Sirs! when all is cloudy over head, and all dark with∣in doors, when a Christians graces are not transparent, when his evidences for heaven are soiled and blotted, and when neither heart nor house are as they should be, 'tis good then to turn to the Covenant grace, and to dwell upon the Covenant of grace. Thus David did, 2 Sam. 23.5. Al∣though my house be not so with God, yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. Let me give a little light into the words. Although my house be not so with God.] Though David in the main had a good heart, yet he had but a wicked house. Absalom had slain his Brother, rebelled against his Father, and lay with his Fathers Concubines. And Amnon had de∣floured his Sister, &c. Now David under a deep sense of all this wickedness, and of his own personal unworthiness, sad∣ly sighs it out, Although my house be not so with God, &c. though I have not walked so exactly and perfectly as I shold have done, though neither I nor my house have walked answerable to those great mercies and singular kindnesses of God that have been extended to us. Yet he hath made with me an everlasting Covenant.] The word everlasting hath two acceptations; it doth denote, 1. Some∣times
a long duration,Vide Isa. 55.3. Gen. 17.7. Psal. 105.9, 10 Isa. 61.8. Heb. 13.20. in which respect the old Covenant clathed with figures and ceremonies is called everlasting, because it was to endure, and did endure a long time. . Some∣times it denotes a perpetual duration, a duration which shall last for ever. In this respect the Covenant of grace is ever∣lasting, it shall never cease, never be broken, nor never be alteed. Now, the Covenant of grace is an everlasting Co∣venant in a twofold respect. First, Ex parte soederantis, in respect of God, who will ne∣ver break Covenant with his people, but is their God, and will be their God for ever and ever, Psal. 48.14. For this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death: I and after death too; for this is not to be taken ex∣clusive; he will never leave his people, nor forsake his peo∣ple, Heb. 13.5, 6. Secondly, Ex parte confoederatorum, in respect of the peo∣ple of God who are brought into Covenant, and shall con∣tinue in Covenant for ever and ever. You have both these expressed in that excellent Scripture, Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Seriously dwell upon the place; it shews that the Covenant is everlasting on God's part, and al∣so on our part: On God's part, I will never turn away from them to do them good; and on our part, They shall never depart from me. How so? I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me (even that fear spoken of in ver. 39. That they may fear me for ever.) Ordered in all things.] O! what head can conceive, or what tongue can express that infinite counsel, wisdom, love, care and tenderness that the blessed God has exprest in order∣ing the Covenant of grace, so as it may most and best suit to all the wants, and straits, and necessities, and miseries, and desires, and longings of poor sinners souls. The Covenant of grace is so well ordered by the unsearchable wisdom of God, that you may find in it remedies to cure all your diseases,
and cordials to comfort you against all your faintings,Isa. 40.28. Psal. 147.5. and a spiritual armoury to arm you against all your enemies, viz. the world, the flesh, and the devil. Dost thou, O distressed sin∣ner, want a loving God, a compassionate God, a reconciled God, a sin pardoning God? here thou mayest find him in the Covenant of grace. Dost thou want a Christ to counsel thee by his wisdom, and to cloath thee with his righteousness, and to adorn thee with his grace? here thou mayest find him in a Covenant of grace. Dost thou want the Spirit to en∣lighten thee, to teach thee, to convince thee, to awaken thee, to lead thee, to cleanse thee, to cheer thee, and to seal thee up to the day of redemption?Eph. 1.13. here thou mayest find him in a Covenant of grace. Dost thou want grace, or peace, or rest, or quiet, or content, or comfort, or satisfaction? here thou mayest find it in a Covenant of grace. God has laid into the Covenant of grace, as into a common store, all those things that sinners or Saints can either beg or need. Look, as that is a well ordered Commonwealth where there are no wholsom Laws wanting to govern a people, and where there are no wholsom remedies wanting to relieve a people; so that must needs be a well ordered Covenant, where there is nothing wanting to govern poor souls, or to relieve poor souls, or to save poor souls; and such a Covenant is the Covenant of grace. And sure, the Covenant of grace is a sure Covenant,Jer. 31.31, 33, 35, 36, 37. Psal. 19.7. Rev. 3.14. Isa. 54.10. Deut. 7.9. The Lord thy God he is God, the faithful God (or the God of Amen) which keepeth Covenant with them that love him. Psal. 89.33. My Covenant will I not break (Hebrew, I will not prophane) nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. All God's precepts, all God's predictions, all God's menaces, and all God's promises, are the issue of a most just, faithful and righteous will. God can neither dye nor lye, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lye pro∣mised before the world began. There are three things that God can't do; 1. He can't dye. Nor, 2. He can't lye. Nor, 3. He can't deny himself, Josh. 23.14. And behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth; and ye know in all your hearts, and
in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning you, all are come to passe unto you, and not one thing hath failed thereof. O Sirs! the Covenant of grace is bottomed upon God's everlasting love,John 13.1. upon Gods unchangable love, upon God's free love; whom God loves once he loves for ever.Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love. God can as well cease to be, as he can cease to love those whom he has taken into Covenant with himself. And as the Covenant of grace is bottomed upon God's everlasting love, so 'tis bottomed upon Gods immuta∣ble counsel,Heb. 6.17. God willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel confirmed it by an oath. And as the Covenant of grace is bottomed upon the immu∣table counsel of God, so it is bottomed upon the free pur∣pose of God, 2 Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God standeth sure; that is, the decree and purpose of God's election stands firm and sure. Now, the purpose of God's election is com∣pared to a foundation, because it is that upon which all our happiness and blessedness is built and bottomed, and because as a foundation it abides firm and sure. And as the Covenant of grace is bottomed upon the free purpose of God, so 'tis bottomed upon the glorious power of God. The power of God is an infinite power,Isa. 33.11. Isa. 41.2. Mal. 4.1. 1 Cor. 1.25. it is a supream power, a power that overtops the power of all mortals: What's the stubble to the flames, the chaff to the whirlwind? no more is all created power to the power of God. The weakness of God is stron∣ger than men; and did not Pharaoh find it so? and Haman find it so? and Sennacherib find it so? and Nebuchadnezzar find it so? and Belshazzar find it so? and Herod find it so? In all the ages of the world the power of God hath bore down all before it; the power of God is an independant power, a matchless power, an incomparable power, an enduring power, an eternal power. And as the Covenant of grace is bottomed upon the power of God,Heb. 6.17, 18 Psal. 89.34, 35. so it is bottomed upon the oath of God, Luke 1.72. To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant. Ver. 73. The oath which he sware to our father Abraham. To think that God will break his oath, or be perjured, is an intollerable blasphemy. Once
more give me leave to say, the Covenant of grace is bot∣tomed not only upon the oath of God, but also upon the pre∣cious blood of Christ. The blood of Christ is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. Mat. 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins: Heb. 9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the re∣demption of the transgressions that were under the fist Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheri∣tance. Ver. 17. A Testament is of force after men are dead. It is called a Covenant and a Testament. 1. A Covenant in re∣spect of God, and a Testament in respect of Christ. 2. A Covenant in respect of the manner of agreement, and a Testament in respect of the manner of confirming. Jesus Christ died as a Testator, and by his death confirmed the Testamentary gift before made of Life and Salvation. Now, the Covenant of grace being thus gloriously bottomed as you se, it must roundly and undeniably follow, that th Cove∣nant of grace is a sure Covenant. For this is all my salvation and all my desire.] i. e. This is the great ground of all my hope concerning my salvation, and of all the happiness and blessedness which I look for in another world. This everlasting Covenant, this sure Cove∣nant, is the great Charter of Charters that I have to shew for eternal bliss. David was drawing neer to his eternal home, and whether his graces and gracious evidences for heavens happiness were bright and shining, or blotted and clouded, I shall not at this time stand to enquire; it is e∣nough that he stayes his soul upon the Covenant of grace, and that he comforts and solaces his soul in the Covenant of grace. And, O that all Christians, when their graces and gracious evidences are either clouded or blotted, or else sparkling and shining, that they would frequently eye these three royal Forts, viz. 1. The free-grace and favour of God. 2. The Mediatory righteousness of Christ. 3. The Covenant of grace. Now, that I may the more effectually prevail with you to look upon these royal Forts, and to delight in these royal Forts, and to prize these royal Forts, and to improve
these royal Forts. Give me leave to offer these three things briefly to your consideration. First, Our best graces and performances are not com∣mensurate  and square payment in the eyes of pure justice; all of them as inherent in us, and acted by us, are but imper∣fect excellencies. No man hath so much grace and holiness as is required, nor doth he so much as he is obliged to do: Every particular grace, though it be of an heavenly and di∣vine original, yet it is like the Stars twinkling, though placed in the heavens; so that if God should enter into judgment with the most righteous person, even the righte∣ousness that is in him,Psal. 143.2. Job. 14.3, 4. Rom. 3.20. would not be safety and defence unto him; for what a deal of pride have we mixt with a little hu∣mility? and what a deal of passion have we mixt with a little meekness? and what a deal of hypocrisie have we mixt with a little sincerity? and what a deal of earthly-mindedness have we mixt with a little heavenly-mindedness? and what a deal of unbelief have we mixt with a little faith? O Sirs! in the great business of your access to God, and of your acceptance with God,Rom. 3.20, to ver. 27. Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. and of your reconciliation to God, and of your ju∣stification before God. 'Tis best, safest and noblest, to bot∣tom your faith, hope and expectation, infinitely rather upon imputed righteousness than inherent righteousness, upon what Christ has done for you, than upon what he has done in you. Inherent righteousness is stained, imperfect, impure; but imputed righteousness is pure and perfect; if there were any stain, or any imperfection in that, it could not justifie us, it could not save us, it could not secure us from wrath to come. Such evidences as are not fetcht from any thing in us, nor from any things done by us, but are fetcht by faith from our free justification, and from Christ's full satisfaction which he hath wrought for us, will be found the most full, the most sweet, the most refreshing, the most comforting, and the most satisfying evidences. Christ is all fair, all perfect, all pure, and therefore let him be most in your eye, and most upon your hearts; but here take heed, that you don't look upon your graces, or your gracious evidences, as poor, low, weak, contemptible things (as too many do) for the least of
them is more worth than heaven and earth, and they may yield you much comfort, much support, much refreshing, and much satisfaction; though they can't yield you that full comfort, nor that full satisfaction as Christ himself can yield, as Christ's satisfaction can yield, as free justification can yield. Though children and friends can't yield to a Wife that full comfort, content, delight and satisfaction as her Hus∣band does, yet they may yield her much comfort, much con∣tent, much delight, much satisfaction. The application is easie. But, Secondly, Consider, That Christian that hath free-grace,  that hath free justification, that hath the Mediatory righte∣ousness of Christ, that hath the satisfaction of Christ, that hath the Covenant of grace most constantly in his sight, and most frequently warm upon his heart, that Christian of all Christians in the world is most free from a world of fears, and doubts, and scruples, which do sad, sink, perplex and press down a world of other Christians, who affect a life of sense, and who daily eye more what Christ is a doing in them, and what they are a doing for Christ, than they do eye, either his active or passive obedience. Christ hath done great things for his people, and he has suffered great things for his people, and he has purchased great things for his people, and he has prepared great things for his people; and yet many of his own dear people are so taken up with their own hearts, and with their own duties and graces, that Christ is little eyed by them, or minded by them; and what is this but to be more taken with the streams than with the Fountain? with the leaves, blossoms and fruit, than with the Tree it self? with the bracelets, ear-rings and gold chains, than with the Husband himself? with the Nobles that wait, than with the King that is waited on? And this is the great Reason why so many Christians (who will certainly go to heaven) do walk in darkness, and lye down in sorrow. But, Thirdly, Trusting in our own duties, and resting on our  own righteousness (and not on Christ's solely) is a close, se∣cret,
spiritual,Isa. 58.1, 2, 3. Zech. 7.5, 6. dangerous and unperceivable sin, which the nature of man is exceedingly prone unto. The Pharisees were mightily given up to trust in their own righteousness, to rest on their own righteousness,Mat. 6. chap. 23 Luke 18. and to boast and glory in their own righteousness; and this prov'd their mortal disease, their damning sin: trusting in their own righteousness had so besotted and benummed them, that they had no mind, no heart to open the gates of their souls, that the King of glory might enter in. And this was that which undid the Jews, Rom. 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. And 'tis observable, the Apostle useth an emphatical word of a Jew, Rom. 2.17. Thou restest in the Law,Look as there is nothing more pleasing to Christ, than the renouncing of all confidence in our own duties and righ∣teousness; so there is nothing more provoking to Christ, than the setting up of our own du∣ties and righte∣ousness. This is a secret Im∣posthume that kills thousands. , thou art secure in the Law, as in some admirable priviledge and signal testimony of Gods love. This was Bernards temptation, when being assisted in duty he could stroak his own head with bene fecisti Bernarde; O Bernard, this was gallantly done, now chear up thy self. It was the saying of a precious Saint, That he was more afraid of his duties than of his sins, for the one made him often proud, and the other made him alwayes humble. It was good counsel Luther gave, Cavendum est non solum à peccatis, sed à bonis operibus; We must take heed not only of our sins, but of our good works. Duties can never have too much diligence used about them, nor too little confidence placed in them; they are good helps, but bad Saviours; it is necessary we do them, but it is dangerous to rely upon them. If the devil cannot disswade us from performing Religious duties, then his next work will be to perswade us all he can to rely upon them to make Saviours of them, because this will as much gratifie Satan, and as certainly ruin our souls, as if we had wholly neglected them. O man, thine own righteousness rested in, will as certainly and eternally undo thee as the greatest and foulest enormities. This soul-sickness is that spi∣ritual Idolatry that will undo thee, for thou makest thy self a Saviour, and thy duties a Saviour, and sayest of thy duties, as they did of the golden Calf; These are the gods that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Open wickedness, open idola∣try
slayes her thousands, but secret idolatry, a secret resting upon duties slayes her ten thousands; multitudes bleed in∣ward by this disease, and die for ever. Open prophaness is the broad dirty way that leads to hell, but Religious duties rested in, is as sure a way, though a cleaner way to hell; pro∣phane persons and formal Professors, shall meet at last in one hell. Ah Christians! don't make Religious duties your mo∣ney, lest you and your money perish together. The Phenix gathers sweet odoriferous sticks in Arabia together, and then blows them with her wings and burns with them: So do ma∣ny shining Professors burn themselves with their own duties and services. You know in Noahs floud, all that were not in the Ark, though they climb up the tallest Trees, and the high∣est Mountains and Hills, yet were drowned: So let men climb up to the highest duties, yet if they be not housed in Christ, & in his righteousness, they will be as certainly damn∣ed, as the men in the old world were certainly drowned. Adam and all his posterity was to be saved by doing; Do this and live. And hence it is natural to all the sons and daughters of Adam to rest on duties, and to look for life and happiness in a way of doing; but if salvation were to be had by doing, what need of a Saviour? Well, remember this once for all, such as rest on duties, such as rest on their own righteousness, or on any thing on this side Christ, such shall find them as weak as the Assyrian, or as Jareb, they cannot heal them, they can∣not cure them of their wounds:Hos. 5.13. When Ephraim saw his sick∣ness, and Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, yet could they not heal him, nor cure him of his wound. Duties are to Satan as the Ark of God was to the Philistines; he trembles to see a soul di∣ligent in the use of them, and yet not daring to rely on them but on Christ; but when he can draw poor souls to confide in their duties, and to rest on their duties, then he has his de∣sign, then he claps his hands for joy, then he cryes out, Ah, ah, so would I have it. There is no sin that doth so formally and immediately oppose Christ, and reject Christ, and provoke Christ, as this of resting upon self-righteousness; and there∣fore above all, pray against this, and watch against this, and
weep over this. There is no man in his wits that hath a pre∣cious lading, that will dare to adventure it in a crackt and broken vessel; so there is no Christian in his wits that will dare to adventure the everlasting safety of his soul upon the leaking vessels and bottoms of his own holiness or services. O Sirs! your duties cannot satisfie the Justice of God, they cannot satisfie the Law of God; your present duties cannot satisfie for your former sins and rents that be behind. A man that payes his Rent honestly every year, does not thereby sa∣tisfie for the old Rent not paid in ten or twenty years before. Thy new obedience, O Christian, is too weak to satisfie for old debts, and therefore roll thy self on Christ, and Christ alone for life and for salvation. Bellarmine could say after all his disputes for relying on works, on Saints and Angels, Tu∣tius est, &c. The safest way is to rely on Jesus Christ. Now, let all these things work you to renounce your own righte∣ousness, and to take sanctuary alone in the pure, perfect, and most glorious righteousness of Jesus Christ, and in the free-grace of God.Austin. Paul is called by one the best child of grace in the world;Eph. 3.8. for whatsoever he was, or had, or did, he ascribeth all to free-grace; he was the chiefest of the Apo∣stles, and yet less than the least of all Saints; he was very eminent in grace, and yet what he was, he was by grace. By the grace of God I am what I am. He lived, yet not he, but Christ lived in him.1 Cor. 15.10. Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor. 15.10. Phil. 4.13. He laboured more abundantly than they all, yet not he, but the grace of God which was with him. He was able to do all things, but still through Christ that strengthned him. O, that these three last things might work you to be more in love with free-grace than ever, and to be more in love with the righteousness of Christ than ever, and to be more in love with the Covenant of grace than e∣ver. But, The fourteenth Proposition is this. The more grace, the more holiness, the more any man has of the Spirit of San∣ctification, the more clear, the more fair, the more full, the more sweet will his evidences be for heaven, for salvation;
and the more comfort, and the more assurance, and the more settlement, and the more of the witness of the spirit of Adop∣tion, such a person will certainly attain unto. That Spirit which is the earnest of our inheritance, and which seals us up to an holy assurance, is an holy Spirit;Eph. 1.13, 14. he is frequently called the holy Spirit. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.Psal. 51.11. Isa. 63.10. Eph. 4.30. 1 Thes. 4.8. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spi∣rit. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. H therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man but God, who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit. To make a man holy, is more than to create a world, 'tis a work too high, and too hard for Angels or men; it becomes none, and it can be done by none but by the holy Spirit. Sanctifi∣cation is the Spirits personal operation; 'tis the great work of the Spirit to shape,2 Thes. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. form and fashion the new-creature holiness in all the vessels of glory. The Spirit is the root of all holiness, and therefore the several parts of holiness are called the fruits of the Spirit. Holiness is the very picture of God;Gal. 5.22. and certainly no hand can carve that excellent pic∣ture but the Spirit of God. Holiness is the Divine nature, and none can impart that to man but the Spirit; the Spirit is the great principle of holiness. Now, the more grace, the more holiness any man hath, the more he is the delight of the Spirit; and the more the Spirit will delight to witness his Sonship, his Saintship, and his Heirship unto him. Scripture and experience will tell you, that commonly men of greatest holiness have been men of greatest assurance. This is cer∣tain, the more holiness the more assurance; for so the preci∣ous promises runs, Isa. 32.17. The work of righteousness shall be peace (to wit, peace of conscience, Rom. 5.1.) and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. Inherent righteousness (for of that he speaks, as is evident by the 15. and 16. verses of the same Chapter) is the high-way to assu∣rance and peace. So Psal. 50. ult. To him that ordereth his conversation aright, will I shew the salvation of God; that is, de∣clare my self to be his Saviour, say some; say others, I will give him a prospect of heaven here, and a full fruition of hea∣ven hereafter; say others, I will cause him to see and know that
he shall be saved. So John 14.21. He that hath my comman∣dements and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him. Ver. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him. Holy Christians shall have most of the spiritual presence of Christ, and of the sin∣gular manifestations of the love of Christ to their souls. The great reason of reasons why the springs of comfort, of joy, of inward peace, and of assurance, rises no higher in many Christians souls, is because the springs of grace and holi∣ness rises no higher in their souls. Had Christians more grace, and more holiness in their hearts and lives, God would quick∣ly bring down more of heaven and assurance into their souls. There is a blessed assurance (as I have told you before) which arises from the discovery of grace in the soul. Now, the more ample, large and full the matter of our assurance is, the more ample, large and full must our assurance be. Methinks the connexion of these four verses in Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14. shews this, When grace that appears to us, teacheth us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, &c. See what follows, then we are most likely to look for the blessed hope and glo∣rious appearing of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And that prayer of the Apostle for his Ephesians,Eph. 3.16, 17, 18 speaks as loudly in the case, That God would grant them to be strengthned by the Spirit, &c. to be rooted and grounded in love. And what then? That ye may comprehend with all Saints, the length and breadth of the love of God. Suppose in health or sickness, living or dying, a man should labour to support, comfort and chear up his spirit, in the thoughts or meditati∣ons of his eternal election and free justification. And sup∣pose that at that very time the Spirit of God, his own con∣science, Thes. 2.13, 14. a faithful Minister, or an experienced Christian should tell him, That if he be really justified, he is really sanctified. Now, if this man should say, What do you tell me of sanctification, or I know not whether I am sanctified or no, or I look not to sanctification, I mind not holiness, I regard not the fruits of the Spirit; will not the holy Spirit,
will not an enlightned conscience, will not a faithful Mini∣ster, will not an experienced Christian reply, Then certain∣ly thou art not elected, thou art not justified, for it is a truth as clear as the Sun, a truth that will admit of no dispute, viz.Rom 8.1, 13, 29, 30. That none are eternally elected and freely justified, but they are sanctified; and that they that are not sanctified, are not justified. Mark, there is a closs connexion of sanctification with justification in the promises of the Covenant; sanctifi∣cation and justificatiòn go hand in hand, they come forth like twins out of the womb of free-grace; as you may see in these remarkable Scriptures, Jer. 33.8.Bern. in Cant. Serm. 37. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity whereby they have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and where∣by they have transgressed against me; Here you see them both ex∣pressed together in the same deed, I will cleanse them from all their iniquity; there is our sanctification promised. And I will pardon all their iniquities; there is justification promised, So Mich. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and thou wilt cst all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Here you find justifica∣tion and sanctification again in the promise. He will subdue our iniquities; This is sanctifying. And he will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea; This is justifying. Heb. 8.10. I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts (there is the promise of sanctification) Vr. 12. And I will be mer∣ciful to their unrighteousness and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more; (There is the promise of justification. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; (There is our justification promised.) And to cleanse us from al unrighteousness; (There is the promise of sanctification. Ezek. 36.25. From all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you; (There is the promise of san∣ctification) Ver. 29. I will also save you from all your unclean∣nesses; (There is the promise of justification) 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. Justi∣fication and sanctification are inseparable companions; di∣stinguished they must be, but divided they can never be; where sin is pardoned, the gift of sanctity is still conferred. 'Tis weakness, 'tis wickedness for a man to conclude that he
is in an elected and justified estate when he has nothing, when he has not the least thing to evidence himself to be in a sanctified estate: Both justification and sanctification have a necessary respect to the salvation of all those that shall go to heaven. He that will go to heaven must be sanctified, and he that will go to heaven must be justified. No man can go to heaven without both; no man can go to heaven unless he be justified, Rom. 8.30. Whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. None are justified but such as are called, and none are glorified but such as are justified. And as no man can go to heaven but he that is ju∣stified, so no man can go to heaven but he that is sanctified, John 3.5. Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the king∣dom of God. Ver. 5. Jesus answerd, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot en∣ter into the kingdom of God.See my Trea∣tise on Holi∣ness. Heb. 12.14. And holiness, with∣out which no man shall see the Lord. By these Scriptures 'tis evi∣dent, that there is an absolute necessity both of sanctification and justification in reference to salvation. Now, as sanctifi∣cation and justification are linkt together; so the more clear, the more full, the more evident, and the more eminent a mans sanctification is, the more clear, the more full, the more evident and the more eminent will the evidences of his justification be. The greatest evidences of our sanctification carries with them the greatest assurance of our justification, and of our salvation. But, The fifteenth Proposition is this. When your graces are strongest, and your evidences for heaven are clearest, and your comforts rise highest upon the sight of your graces or gracious evidences, then in a special manner it concerns you to make it your great business and work to act faith a fresh, to act faith with a greater strength, upon the free, rich and glorious grace of God, and upon the Lord Jesus Christ. 'Tis reported of the Chrystal, that it hath such a vertue in it, that the very touching of it quickens other stones, and
puts a luster and beauty upon them. This is most true of faith; faith is a grace that gives strength and efficacy to all other graces, it is like a silver thred that runs thorow a chain of pearl, it hath an influence upon all other graces that are in the soul; faith is as the spring in the watch that moves the wheels, not a grace stirs till faith sets it at work. What is said of Solomons vertuous woman, viz.Prov. 31.15, 27 Heb. 11. Rom. 4.3. & 8.24. Zech. 12.10. That she sets all her Maidens to work, is most true of faith; faith sets all the graces in the soul at work. We love as we believe, and we obey as we believe, and we hope as we believe, and we joy as we believe, and we mourn as we believe, and we repent as we believe; all graces keep time and pace with faith, &c. Now when your graces are most shining, and your eviden∣ces for heaven are most sparkling, O then, give faith elbow-room, give faith full scope to exercise it self upon the Lord Jesus. Adams obedience to innocency was not more pleasing and delightful to God, than the exercise of your faith on the Lord Jesus will be at such a time pleasing and delightful to him; you are to look upon all your graces and gracious evi∣dences as your highest encouragement to a lively, cheerful,1 Joh. 5.13. Rom. 1.17. and resolute acting of faith upon the person of Christ, the righteousness of Christ, &c. All a Christians graces, and all his gracious evidences should be but as a golden bridge,Gen. 45.19, 21, 27. or as Josephs wagons, a means to pass his soul over to Christ a∣fresh by a renewed exercise of faith. When your graces and gracious evidences are most splendent, then be sure that Christ be found lying as a bundle of myrrhe between your breasts, and all is well, and will be well. Dear Christians,Cant. 1.12. when your eyes are fixt upon inherent righteousness,Plutarch in the life of Phocion tells us of a certain gentle-woman of Io∣nia who shewed the wife of Pho∣cion all the rich jewels and pre∣cious stones she had: She an∣swered her a∣gain, all my riches and jew∣els is my Hus∣bands. This is more applica∣ble to Christ, &c. The precious stone Opalum (is said) to have the vertue of all stones; the brightness of the Carbun∣cle, the purple colour of the Amethist, the amiable green∣ness of the Emerald; but what are all these to Christ. and up∣on your gracious evidences, then let your hearts be firmly fixt upon the Lord Jesus Christ and his imputed righteous∣ness. Pauls eye was fixt upon his grace, upon his better part, Rom. 7.22. I delight in the Law of God after the inward man. Ver. 25. And with my mind I serve the Law of God. And yet at the very same time his heart was set upon Christ, and taken up with Christ. Ver. 25. I thank God through our Lord Je∣sus Christ. Though Paul had an eye to his noble part, his bet∣ter part, his regenerate part; yet at the same time his heart
was taken up with the Lord Jesus Christ as freeing of him from the curse of the Law, the dominion of sin, the damna∣tory power of sin, and as translating of him into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. I thank God through our Lord Je∣sus Christ. So in Col. 2.2, 3. You have their eyes fixt upon grace, and at the same time their hearts fixt upon Christ; That their hearts might be comforted being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the ac∣knowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the father and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Their eyes were upon grace, but their hearts were taken up with Christ. So in Phil. 3.8. The Apostle had his eye upon the excellent knowledge of Christ. But Ver. 9. his heart is ta∣ken up with the righteousness of Christ. That I might be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Though Paul had his eye upon grace, upon inherent righteousness; yet in the very presence of his grace his heart was taken up with Christ, and with his imputed righteousness, as is evident in the Text. This is your glory Christians, in the presence and sight of all your graces and gracious evidences, to see the free grace of Christ and his infinite, spotless, matchless and glorious righteousness to be your surest, sweetest, highest and choicest comfort and re∣fuge. Look as Rebkekah was more taken with the person of Isaac than she was with his ear-rings,Gen. 24.30, 53, 64, 65, 66, 67. bracelets, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold: So it becomes a Christian in the presence of his graces and gracious evidences (which are Christs ear-rings, bracelets and jewels) to be▪ more taken up with Christ than with them.He that holds not wholly with Christ, doth very shamefully neg∣lect Christ. Aut totum me∣cum tene, aut totum omitte, Grego Nazien. Christ and his Mediatory righteousness should be more in a Christians eye, and always lye nearer to a Christians heart, than inherent righteousness. Grace is a ring of gold, and Christ is the sparkling diamond in that ring. Now, what's the ring to the sparkling diamond? 'Tis not safe to pore more upon inherent righteousness than upon imputed righteousness. 'Tis not wisdom to have our thoughts and hearts more taken up with our gracious dispo∣sitions and gracious actings, than with the person of Christ,
the righteousness of Christ, the life of Christ, the death of Christ, the satisfaction of Christ, &c. Dear Christians, was it Christ, or was it your graces, or your gracious evi∣dences, or your gracious dispositions, or your gracious act∣ings, that trod the wine-press of your Fathers wrath, that satisfied divine justice, that pacified divine anger, that did bear the curse, that fulfill'd the Law, that brought in an ever∣lasting righteousness, that discharged your debts, that pro∣cured you pardon, that made your peace, and that brought you into a state of favour and friendship with God? If you answer (as you must) none but Christ, none but Christ; O then, let your thoughts and hearts be firstly, mostly, chiefly and lastly taken up with the Lord Jesus. Though inherent grace be a glorious creature, yet 'tis but a creature. Now, when your thoughts and hearts are more taken up with inhe∣rent grace, than they are with Christ the spring and foun∣tain of all grace; you make an idol of inherent grace,John 1.16. Col. 2.2, 3. and reflect dishonour upon the Lord Jesus. A Christian may lawfully look upon his graces and his gracious evidences, and a Christian ought to be much in blessing and praising of God for his graces and gracious evidences, and a Christian may safely take comfort in his graces and gracious evidences as they are the fruits of God's eternal and unchangable love,Isa. 38.3. 2 Cor. 1.12. but still his work should be to live upon Christ, and to lift up Christ above all. 'Tis Christ, 'tis his Mediatory righte∣ousness, 'tis free-grace that a Christian ought to make the chief and only ground and bottom of his hope and comforts. Though good old Jacob did really rejoyce in the chariots and wagons that Joseph had sent to bring him down to Egypt,Gen. 45.26, 27, 28. yet he did more abundantly rejoyce in this, that Joseph was alive, and that shortly he should see and enjoy Joseph himself. Though a Christian may really rejoyce in his graces and gra∣cious evidences, yet above all he ought to rejoyce in Christ Jesus, to triumph in Christ Jesus,Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.3. 2 Cor. 2.14. Col. 3.11. and to take up in Christ Jesus as in his great all. There is a great aptness and proness in many (may I not say in most) gracious Christians, to gaze so much and so long upon their graces, upon their gracious dispositions, upon their gracious evidences, and upon their
gracious actings, that too often they neglect the exercise of faith upon Christ, upon the promises; they gaze so much and so long upon what is wrought in them, and done by them, that they forget their grand work, which is immediate closing with Christ, immediate embracing of Christ, immediate relying upon Christ, immediate staying, rowling, and rest∣ing upon Christ, for justification and salvation. Now, from these frequent miscarriages of Christians, some have taken the liberty and boldness very hotly and peremptorily to cry down the total use of all characters, signs and marks, the evil of which I have formerly pointed at, and therefore let this touch suffice here. Grace is excellent, yea very excellent, but Christ is infinitely more excellent than all your graces, and therefore above all let Christ still have the prehemi∣nence.Col. 1.18. Now, though it must be granted that a Christian may lawfully make use of his graces and gracious evidences in or∣der to his support, comfort and encouragement, yet it cannot be denyed but that the noblest, purest, highest and most ex∣cellent acts and exercises of faith,Cant. 8.5. Job 13.15. Psal. 42.5, 11. Isa. 50.10. Mic. 7.7, 8, 9, 10 John 20.27, 28, 29. are when a Christian clo∣ses with Christ, embraces Christ, hangs upon Christ, and stayes himself upon Christ, and upon free and precious pro∣mises, when sense and feeling fails, when joy and comfort fails, and when his gracious evidences for heaven fails. O now, to turn to Christ, and to turn to the breasts of a pro∣mise, and to live upon Christ, and to hang upon a promise, is the way of wayes to exalt Christ, and to glorifie Christ; there is nothing that pleases Christ, or that delights Christ, or that is such an honour to Christ, as these pure actings of faith are. Signs and evidences, are most sweet, comfortable and pleasing to us; but the pure actings of faith are most eyed and valued by Christ,Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. & 5.3, 4, 5, 6. and therefore many times Christ draws a curtain between him and the soul, and causes a Christians Sun to set at noon, and damps his joy, and marrs his peace, and clouds his evidences for heaven, on purpose to train up his children in the pure actings of faith. 'Tis sad when Christians make such immoderate use of their signs, marks, evidences, as damps and hinders those direct and im∣mediate acts of faith, whereby they should receive Christ,
and apply Christ, and rest upon Christ alone for pardon, peace, reconciliation, justification and salvation; he that pores so long and so much upon his graces or gracious evi∣dences as shall hinder him from the fresh and frequent act∣ings of faith upon Christ, he casts contempt upon Christ.Christ is an in∣comparable cordial, he is worthily called the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. Though the sight of a Christians graces and gracious eviden∣ces be very comfortable and delightful to him, yet the sight of Christ should be ten thousand times more comfortable and delightful to him. O Sirs! what are the favourites to the King himself? What are the servants to the Lord they wait on? what are the friends of the Bridegroom to the Bridegroom himself? what are all the bracelets and jewels to the Husband that gives them? no more are all a Christi∣ans graces or gracious evidences to the Lord Jesus himself. A Christian should say to all his gifts, graces, evidences and services, Stand by, make room for Christ, make room for Christ. Oh! none but Christ; Oh! none to Christ. Living by signs is most natural, pleasing and comfortable to us, but living by faith is most honourable to Christ. It is said, the just shall live by his faith, not by his evidences.Hab. 2.4. Heb. 10.38. When men pride themselves in their evidences, and when men secretly lean upon their evidences instead of leaning upon Christ, and when men bottom their hopes and comforts upon their signs and evidences, when they should be bottoming of all their hopes and comforts upon Christ; on a sudden Christ with∣draws, and the soul is immediately filled with clouds, fears, doubts, darkness; and all a mans graces and gracious evi∣dences are eclipsed, and he can see nothing, nor feel nothing, but deadness, hardness, barrenness, hypocrisie, unbelief, self-love, guilt, &c. which makes him a Magor-Missabib, a terror to himself. Now the design of Christ in all this is to train up his people in a life of faith, and to teach them in the want of their signs and evidences,Col. 3.3, 4. Col. 1.27. how to live above their signs and evidences upon himself, who is their life, their hope, their heaven, their happiness, their all. Now Christians, the best way to prevent these sore soul-distresses, is in the mode∣rate use of your signs and evidences, to live much in the fresh and frequent actings of faith upon the Lord Jesus, and in so
doing, you will neither grieve Christ, nor provoke Christ nor wrong your own precious and immortal souls. But, The sixteenth and last Proposition that I shall lay down is this: When ever any fresh doubts or fears rise in your hearts, upon the stirrings of corruptions, or debility of gra∣ces, or failing in duties, &c. then keep closs to these two Rules; First, have recourse to any of the former characters that are laid down in this Book, and while you find any of them shining in your souls; nay, though it were but one, ne∣ver pass any judgment against the happiness and blessedness of your spiritual or eternal estates. Secondly, turn your selves to such particular promises, and plead such particular promises, and rest and stay your trembling souls upon such particular promises,Sirtorius paid what he pro∣mised with fair words, Plutarch. But so does not God; men may eat their words, but God won't eat his. and cling fast to such particular pro∣mises, that have been comforts, cordials and supports to ma∣ny weak, doubting, trembling Christians, who have been al∣wayes afraid to say they had grace, or to say that God was their Father, or Christ their Redeemer, or the Spirit their Sanctifier, or Heaven their Inheritance, &c. I have read of a woman that was much disquieted in conscience, even to despair, endeavouring to be her own executioner, but was comforted by that blessed promise, Isa. 57.15. For thus saith the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. And I have read of another man, who being ready to dye; Lord, saith he, I chal∣lenge thee by that promise, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, and so was comforted. And I have read of some others that were comforted with that promise,rsin. and Beza. John 10.29. None shall pluck them out of my fathers hand. And I have read of another, who having deeply wounded his conscience by subscribing to Po∣pish errors, was much comforted by that blessed Scripture, 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all ac∣ceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. And I have read of another,Mr. Bilney the Martyr, Psal. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou thou wilt not despise. This promise was a cordial to Ber∣nard on his dy∣ing bed, he dy∣ed with this promise in his mouth. And Austin found so much sweetness in the same promise, that he caused it to be written on the wall over against his bed where he lay sick and dyed. who was much comforted under sore distresses by that promise, Isa. 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace (or as the Hebrew runs, Sha∣lom, Shalom, peace, peace) whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. And many have gone to heaven triumphant∣ly by the refreshing and comfort that they have found in these following Scriptures, John 6.37. All that the father giveth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out. Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Ver. 3. Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. And so Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that heareth say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take the water of life freely. So Hos. 14.4. I will heal their back-slidings, and love them freely. So Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy trangressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Isa. 57.18. I have seen his wayes, and will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourn∣ers. Ver. 19. I create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord, and I will heal him. O, these have been comforting promises, and up∣holding promises, and refreshing promises,The promises are pabulum fi∣dei, &c. anima fidei, the food of faith, and the soul of faith. to many doubt∣ing, drooping souls. 'Tis impossible that such a soul should ever drop into hell, that can cling fast to any of these pro∣mises, that can hang upon any of these promises, that can rest and lay the weight of their souls upon Christ in any of these promises: Doubtless relyance upon Christ in these preci∣ous promises hath ferried many poor, doubting, trembling souls to heaven. The promise is the golden Cabinet, and Christ is the costly jewel that is laid up in it. The promise is the field, and Christ is the pearl of price that is hid in it; all the promises they point to Christ, they lead to Christ, they hang upon Christ;2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. In the new Covenant, God neither makes any promises, nor fulfils any promises of salvation, but
in Christ and through Christ. Now when any fears, or dark∣ness, or doubts, or disputes arises in your souls about your spi∣ritual estates, Oh! then run to Christ in the promise, and plead the promise, and hang upon the breasts of the promise, and let your souls cleave closs to the promise; for this is the way of wayes to have your evidences cleared, your comforts re∣stored, your peace maintained, your graces strengthned, and your assurance raised and confirmed. FINIS.
Books Printed and are to be sold by John Hankock, at his Shop over against Gresham Colledge, in Bi∣shopsgate-street, next to the White Lyon at Great St. Hellins Gate, and at the first Shop in Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhil, at the Sign of the Three Bibles. ELeven Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel at Margarets New-Fish-Street. 1 Precious Remedies against Satans Devices: Or, Salve for Believers and Unbelievers sores; being a com∣panion for those that are in Christ, or out of Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretence of living a∣bove them; that are growing in spirituals, or decaying; that are tempted, or deserted; afflicted, or opposed; that have as∣surance, or want it; on 2 Cor. 2.11. 2 Heaven on Earth: Or, A serious Discourse touching a well grounded Assurance of mans everlasting happiness and blesseess; discovering the nature of assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the Causes, Springs and Degrees of it, with the resolution of several weighty Questions on the 8. of the Romans, 32, 33, 34. verses.
3 The unsearchable Riches of Christ: Or, Meat for strong Men, and Milk for Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons, from Ephes. 3.8. Preached on his Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill. 4 His Apples of Gold for young Men and and Women; And A Crown of Glory for Old men and Women: Or the Happiness of being Good betimes, and the Honour of being an Old Disciple, clearly and fully discovered, and closely and faithfully applyed. With the young mans objections answered, and the old mans doubts resolved. 5 A String of Pearls: Or, The best things reserved till last, delivered in a Sermon Preached in London, June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of (that Triumphant Saint) Mrs. Mary Blake, late Wife to his wor∣thy Friend Mr. Nicholas Blake, Merchant. 6 The Mute Christian; with Soveraign Anti∣dotes against the most miserable Exigents: Or, A Christian; with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under the greatest afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the saddest and darkest providences and chan∣ges: with Answers to divers Questions and Objections that are of great importance; all tending to win and work souls to be still, quiet, calm, and silent, under all changes, that have, or that may pass upon them in his world, &c. Lately printed and dedicated to all afflicted, distressed, dissatisfied, disquieted, and discomposed Christians throughout the world.
7 An Ark for all Gods Noahs in a stormy day. Wherein is shewed the transcendent excellency of a Be∣lievers portion; on Lament. 3.24. 8 The Crown and Glory of Christianity: Or, Holiness the only way to Happiness, discovered in 48. Sermons on Heb. 12.14. 9 The Privy Key of Heaven: Or, A Discourse of Closet-Prayer, Twenty Arguments for it, with the resolution of several Questions, &c. 10. A Heavenly Cordial for all that have had, or have escaped the Plague, &c. 11 Newly published, A Cabinet of choice Jewels; or, a Box of precious Ointment. Being a plain Discovery of what men are worth for Eter∣nity, and how 'tis like to go with them in another World. There is now in the Press a New Treatise writ∣ten by Mr. Thomas Brooks, called, Londons Lamentations: Or, A sober serious discourse concerning the late fiery dispen∣sation, wherein the procuring causes, and the final causes of that dreadful dispensation are laid open, with the duties that are incumbent, both upon those who have been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those consuming flames; with
thirteen supports, to bear up the hearts of such as have been sufferers: Here are many great Objections answered, and many weighty Questions resolved; and variety of Arguments to prove, that a little that the righteous man hath, is better than the riches of the wicked; with several other points of grand importance, all tending to the cooling, quieting, set∣ling, refreshing, upholding and comforting of all that have been sufferers by the late fiery calamity. The Godly Mans Ark: Or, City of Refuge, in the day of his distress, discovered in divers Sermons. The first of which was Preached at the Fu∣neral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moor. Whereunto are annexed Mrs. Moors Evidences for Hea∣ven, composed and collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of sickness. By Edmund Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury. A Book of Short-Writing, the most easie, exact, lineal, and speedy method, fitted to the meanest capacity: composed by Master Theophilus Metcalf, Professor of the said Art. Also a School-master, explaining the Rules of the said Book, with many new additions, very useful. Another Book of Short-hand, by Tho. Cross. A Copy-book of the newest and most useful Hands, with Rules whereby those that can read, may quickly learn to write: To which is added, brief directions for true spelling and Cyphering, and making divers sorts of Ink. There is now in the Press, ready to be published, an ex∣cellent new Book of Mr. Ralph Vennings, entituled, Sin the Plague of Plagues; or, Sinful on the worst f Evils. All Printed for, and are to be sold by John Hancock at the first Shop in Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil, at the sign of the three Bibles, or at his Shop in Bishops-Gate-Street, near great St. Hellins, over against Gresham-Colledge, 1669. FINIS.
