B5351 11276254 47253
SALUS POPULI OR A NATIONS HAPPINESSE, A SERMON Preached at the ASSISES holden at VVINCHESTER Iuly 22. 1658. BY EDWARD BUCKLER Minister of the Gospel at Calbourn in the Isle of Wight. Psalm 11. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Lex justa ministros habeat innocentes. Aug. in Psal. 51. 3. Faelix respub. in qua, qui imperat, timet Deum—Justin. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Rothwel, at the Fountain and Bare in Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside.
TO THE HONOVRABLE THE JUDGES For the last Western Circuit, Iudge Nicholes one of the Barons of his Higbnes Exchequer, and Iudge Foun∣tain, with Sir Henry Worsley Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of Southamptoh. Honourable Sirs, IF the publication of this Sermon shall be supposed to contribute nothing, that may advance the Interest of Christ and his People; but to prove rather an unnecessary addition to that Nauseus disease of Pamphlets, which the stomack of the Nation is already sick of: your selves are my witnesses, how many Hono∣rable persons are bound to divide the in∣convenience (or guilt) of it amongst them.
This yet, I confoss, is a supposition, which I expect no entertainment for but with that part of the Nation, which is at enmity with the Happiness of the whole. And even into these, how untooth some sovr i prove, et who cantel but tra wholesome? God, I am sure is able to per∣swade them by as mean a moagelas , that it is by no meanes advieable to lay a mine under thoe founaatons, when they must perish to the ruines o; nor to fly in their faces that would prevent the spring∣ing of it. The rest, when they look upon it coming to them (as all Sermons doe, or should) in the name of Almighty God, will, I hope, believe, and ccmply with all that is of God in it, for the sendes sake. Such as are conversant enough with that invaluable pair of blessings which is the subject of this discourse, to see the Nations Happiness, and their own wrapt up in it, will find a Remember aneer, Such as wish well to the Land of their Nativity, and would contribute to the Happiness of
it, if they knew which way, will find and Iner, as of their  and interest. For your selves, although I shall per∣haps have more  at my obe∣dince which hath troubled the Press with this Paper, then I had to suffer the continued repetition of it: I have yet this relief, that I shall hereby  one evidence of your great affections to the Happiness of the Nation, your unwillingness that any expe∣dient (though the meaest of a thousand) to remember them wherein it doth con∣sist, and how it is to be provided for, should fall to the ground. When you so earnestly desire the world should know, that you look upon it as your duty to promote Religion and Righteousness: 'tis an offer of very conside∣rable security, that you constantly do and will practise it. You received not your many Talents for any purpose that is lwer then this: nor can you imploy them to any advantage that is higher. Your Master is not like, by any other improve∣ment, to receive his own with so much
usury. Whose Honour and Interest, that you and all of your Quality, Parts, Power, Trusts, Places, and Imployments, may in all your designes and acting, sincerely aime at, is in the daily Prayers of Your Honours most humble Servant, in the things of Christ, EDVV. BUCKLER.
A SERMON Preached before the Judges at WINCHESTER ASSISES July the 22th. 1658. Psal. 122. 4, 5. whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord; unto the testimony of Israel: to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. For there are set Thrones of judgement, the Thrones of the house of David. UPon Davids bringing the Ark to Ieru∣salem, he pens this Psalm; his grateful apprehension of the happiness of that Church and Kingdome, under the pre∣sent dispensations of a gratious God, discovers it self. 1. In the Title, 'tis a Song of Degrees, which (to omit other nations about it) lunius translates, canti∣cum excellentissimum, a most excellent song: The notes of any other being by no means high enough to celebrate blessings of such a Character, as are here mentioned.
2. In the Psalm it self three waies, viz. In 1. A rapture of joy. 2. A description of the happiness he lay under the contemplation of. 3. An exhortation to Prayer for the continu∣ing of it. The Text is within the compass of the second of these, the matter of that peoples happiness, descri∣bed in three great enjoyments, viz. 1. Union, vers. 3. 2. Religion vers. 4. 3. Righteousness, vers. 5. I have pitcht upon the two latter, Religion and Righteousness. 1. Religion, a full provision for the free enjoy∣ment, holy solemnity, and due administration of the Ordinances of God. You will see it in conside∣ring the fourth verse, in these five particu∣lars, viz. 1. The place. 2. The persons. 3. Their actions. 4. Their ground. 5. Their end. 1. The place, whither. Relating to Ierusalem men∣tioned in the third verse, where the Ark of God was placed,Exod. 25. 22. Deut. 16. 16. which was a testimony of his presence with them; where that was, God was, there he promised to meet his people, and to commune with them, and there he commanded his people to meet him, hither the Tribes came up. Had they gone one Tribe to Dan, another to Bethel, a third to Hierusa∣lem, it had not been a Religion good enough to make a blessing of.
2. The Persons, the Tribes. Not here and there a man, but a multitude, and not a multitude of men condemnable as so many Formalists, poor ignorant souls, under low administrations and in the dark, for their punctual attendance upon Ordinances; they were the Tribes of the Lord, all owned as his by a standing in his Church, very many by a place in his heart; he that doubts this, did never consider how many thousands of every Tribe were sealed for the ser∣vants of God in their foreheads, (Revel. 7. 4, &c. Re∣ligion in any Nation, looks best like a Mercy, that is, like it self, when it bindes up the people of it to∣gether by multitudes. 3. Their Actions, the Tribes go up, rather indeed their freedome and liberty, there was no Lion in the way, the Law sent them, & the Magistrate kept them company: He went with the multitude to the house of God, Psal. 42. 4. Religion is then a pure, an unmixed mer∣cy, when a people can enjoy it, discharged of all en∣combrances, and never thrives into a greater bles∣sing, then when it sucks the brests of Kings Isa. 60. 16. 4. Their Ground, to the testimony of Israel. I know these words are diversly expounded, I in∣cline to their interpretation, who reade them for a testimony, and do mean a testimony of that peoples con∣formity to Gods commands: twas his ordinance that hither the Tribes should come, and this was witness enough to Israel, that there was a jus divinum in that solemnity. That Religion, or that part of reli∣gion, will never be able to contribute to a peoples happiness, that is not able to shew its Pedigree, that it came down from Heaven; you may by no means set it down amongst a nations priviledges, if God
can say, I commanded it not, neither came it into my heart, Ier. 7. 31. 5. Their End, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. A part of Gods worship and service put for the whole. when a Religion is set up for any, except meerely for religious ends, they much mistake, that look upon it as any part of a peoples glory. That's the first ingredient to that peoples happiness, Reli∣gion. 2. Righteousness. There are set thrones of Iudgement, the thrones of the house of David. A full provision for the administration of Iustice, and the happiness of that state and kingdome thankfully acknowledged. In the 1. Enjoyment of it for the present, there are set thrones of Iudgement. 2. Settlement of it for the future, the thrones of the house of David. 1. The enjoyment of it for the present, there are set thrones of Iudgement, a very amiable and pleasant prospect, where we see: 1. Iudgement, that is, recta judicatio justi atque in∣justi. it hath, its true, in Scripture many acceptati∣ons, but is here made up of hearing and determi∣ning, whether the cause depending be criminal or civil, as it is also in Lev. 19. 15. and to expound it (as we must do) into a blessing, (For the judgement is not yours, but Gods.) We are necessitated to interpret it, Of a Hearing. 1. With understanding, both matters of fact, and matter of Law. The persons that sate here, were wise men and under standing, in Deut. 1. 13. and this was it that qualified them for their Commis∣sion.
Those people are possessed of a very desirable priviledge, whose administrators of Law and Justice, are under characters of Gods own prescri∣bing, and have not the hearing of causes in the dark. 2. With Patience. It is hardly Iudgment, if it want deliberation, which is well worth the laying out upon all concernments, where we can mistake but once. The reason why the Lacedemonians dwelt so long upon causes that were Capital; Si in capitis discrimine erraverint, non est corrigendi consilii potestas. Loss of life is among those damages that are not ca∣pable of reparation. And even in lower cases, teme∣ritas judicis may be, calamitas innocentis; hasty sen∣tences may throw misery upon the guiltless; which David, you may be sure, would never put upon the account of a peoples happiness. 3. With both Ears. There be, you know, cases in which there may be nothing but Iustice in the de∣cision, and not a jot in the desider. And we must un∣derstand it. Of a Determining. 1. By Law. No Iudgment hath any other foun∣dation. You have nothing to discover offenders by, but this glass; nothing to restrain them with, but this bridle; nothing to smite them withal, but this sword. If Iudgment flow from any other spring,Amos 5. 7. how easily is it turned into wormwood? and how direct∣ly destructive is it to the very end that lawes were made for? (cum jus ab uno viro homines non conseque∣rentur, inventae sunt leges.Cic. 2. offic. The judgement of God is according to Law; else would he punish where there is no transgression: so is Iudgment in the Text, what else doth it make amongst that peoples priviledges?
2. By Law, quietly suffered to speak its own meaning; which in States and Kingdomes (as Da∣vids was) professing Religion, can never be expoun∣ded into an opposition to the law of God. Legisla∣tion, its true, is the highest act of the highest Pow∣ers on earth; yet as it is our interest to know they have no power, so its our duty to believe they have no intent, to cross in any one Iota, the will of Hea∣ven; if they do, such Laws and Iudgements must not take it amiss, if we be not able to reckon them amongst the materials of our happiness. For sin is a reproach to any people, Pro. 14. 34. this is judgment. 2. Thrones of judgement. The administration of Lawes hath from the beginning been allowed its Ensignes of State and Majesty; Christ himself, when he is described as a Iudge, is represented sitting up∣on a Throne, and a glorious train waiting upon him, Mat. 25. 31. and all Nations have seen cause to distinguish their magistrates, especially when in the exercise of their Office, by some or other mark of state and dignity, from other men; that Rods, Ax∣es, Lictors, Gowns, Maces, Swords, Trumpets and the like, might bespeak that fear and reverence of the people, which all authority must endeavour to be∣get, and nourish in that great and many-headed bo∣dy, or resolve to be trampled upon. When Delin∣quency shall be allowed its gallantry, and justice shall sneak up and down in a despised posture, and a vulgar Equipage; it may perhaps bespeak a peo∣ple thrifty, but by no means happy. Here are thrones of judgement: and these 3. Are set. The margin tells us that the Original is of the active voice, there do fit thrones of judgment.
The like expression you have in Dan. 7. 26. The judge∣ment shall sit.Aug. in. loc. And yet it is not the judgment that doth sit, but the Iudges. Mirum aenigma, saith Augu∣stine, tis a strange, a wonderful riddle. Be it so, yet it is doubtless a duty to expound it the duty, 1. Of the Iudges. Iudgment is mentioned, and Iudges are meant. Is it not to remember them, that Iustice and judgment should not be accounted amongst their accidents, which may be present or absent, without the destruction of their subjects; but should be lookt upon as their very forme, bestowing upon them both their essence and denomination? ... the duty 2. Of the judgement. To sit is a posture of com∣posedness. When judgments are not calm, delibe∣rate, digested, this part of the Text may (for all them) be a riddle still. But let's suppose the Active to be put for the Pas∣sive, and that Thrones are set; yet this doth David look upon as a happiness, that the Kingdome was in a posture of executing judgment: 'twas so protempore, and even that is a mercy fit to be acknowledged. Blessings from hand to mouth are blessings, and obli∣gations to thankfulness. But here is withal, 2. The Settlement of it for the future, the thrones of the house of David. Thrones of judgement there were before; but by the injury of the times often interrupted, alwaies changeable: but God had built David a sure house, (1. Reg. 11. 38.) Settled him the supreme magistrate over that people; they might now know upon what to bottome, and where to seek for the administration of justice. Civil go∣vernment
is a Nations blessing; the settlement of it is the addition of another, or a very merciful aug∣mentation of the former. As such God doth pro∣mise it, (1. Reg. 17. 14.) as such (in the Text) doth David acknowledge it; and so will every body else that believeth Solomon, Prov. 28. 2. For the trans∣gression of a Land many are the princes thereof. And so you have a short view of the particulars in the Text, the matter of Davids joy, and his peoples happiness; a full provision for Religion, vers. 4. and for the administration of Iudgment and Righteousness, vers. 5, And because I may not attempt to prosecute them in all their branches, I must deale in grose, and wrap up as much of both verses as I can, in this pro∣position or point of Doctrine. The condition of a people is then happy,  fit object of a good mans joy, when Religion and Righteousness, are joyntly provided for, and carried on together. Which I shall indeavour to make out, from 1. Scripture, and 2. Reason. The Scriptures I shall reduce to these—4 Ranks .. viz. 1. These two, religion and righteousness, are pro∣mised as a peoples Happiness, that God will set his Tabernacle among them Lev. 26. 11. and his Sanctuary in the midst of them, Ezek. 37. 26. All necessaries to the exercise of religion. That he will restore their Iudges as at the first, and their Counsellors as at the be∣ginning, Isa. 1. 26. reduce them to their primitive institution; of the same Character they first were, when they came out of Gods own hand, all necessa∣ries for the administration of Iustice. That he will make their Officers peace, and their Exactors righteous∣nesse.
Esa. 60. 17. When the troubles of a People shall become their Peace, and Publicans and Sinners shall be no longer Synonyma's, but Two names of the same persons, its no ordinary blessing. 2. When God would deale with a people in his Wrath, He Iudicially provides against their en∣joyment of these Two. Upon this account He for∣sook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the ten which he placed aongst men. Psal. 78. 60. and gave that people Sta∣tutes tat were nor good, and Iudgements whereby they should not live. Ezek. 20. 25. That by Statutes and Iudgements, are meant Lawes and Rules of Govern∣ment, in one kinde or other, is too plaine to be stood upon. Of the Morall, or Iudiciall Laws of God, none (I think) wil adventure to expound them. Of the Ce∣remonial, some have, & to make the Epithet here gi∣ven them, sutable, do distinguish between Bonum, non bonum, & Malum. But the Ceremonies were given in Expiationem peccati. These Statutes and Judgements In  peccati, Those in Mercy, and were a part of that peoples Glory (Deu. 4. 8. ro. 9. 4.) these in wrath as A great Contribution to their Shame and Misery, and so must be Statues and judgements, i. e. the Lawes, Government, Rites, and Customes of men, whom God set over them, or delivered them in his wrath. So there will be no question, why these Statutes are sayd not to be good, and but a little why these judg∣ments, such whereby they should not live; after we have considered, how often in Scripture, To live is put to signifie, not simply life, but the con∣venient accommodations of it, amongst which pro∣vision for our religious and civill Concernments, is of the first magnitude. This the Lord in this sad
dispensation; stript them of, by giving them A Government that cared for none of these things. 3. The Happinesse of a people is described by these Two. What Nation is there so great that hath sta∣tutes and judgments so righteous, as all that Law which I set before you this day? Deut. 4. 8. It is an Appeale to the people of Israel, whether God had dealt out happinesse to any other Nation, at the Rate that he had to them? and the instance is in their Statutes and judgements, the provision they had for Religion and righteousnesse, Statutes being Lawes for a people under a sacred consideration, and judgments under a Civill.Ainsw. in Deut. 4. 1. See to the same purpose, Psal. 147. 19. 20. 4. Ruine is threatned unto a people upon the neglect of these. If it be Religion, that Nation and Kingdome that will not serve her and her children shall perish; yea, those Nations shall utterly perish, Esa. 60. 12. If it be Righteousnesse, Gods Soule shall be aven∣ged on such a Nation. Jer. 5. 29. Reasons. 1. From the influence that these two, Religion and Righteousnesse, have upon a peoples Happinesse. An influence, if I may so expresse it, both 1. Morall, and 2. Physicall. 1. Religion and Righteousnesse have a Morall influ∣ence upon a peoples Happinesse;De Civit dei l. 5. c. 25. uni. es in l. 5. c. 21. The Lord loading A Nation with Blessings or Curses, according to their care or neglect of these. Of this you have a full account in Jer. 22. from the first to the seven∣teenth
Verse, to which I must but refer you. Augustine observes of Constantine, that God be∣stowed more blessings upon him and his people, then others did dare to wish for; and the contrary of Iulian, who yet was a man of a great spirit, and as fit for Empire, as the world afforded. That States and Kingdomes have naturally their Ortus and Inte∣ritus, their rise, groath, declination, and ruine, I think is but a fancy. it is the blessing of God, entailed (as it were) upon the godliness and honesty of a State and Nation that makes them prosperous. And tis the curse of God that pursues a wicked people to de∣struction. If Religion be provided for, from this day, (saith God, will I bless you, Hagg. 2. 18. 19. If Re∣ligion be neglected, you may date from that very point of time, a peoples misery; and write down every blessing they have left them, spoiled with a curse, Mal. 2. 2. If Righteousness be provided for, the mountains and hills shall bring such a people peace. Psalm 72. 2, 3. No place so barren, that shall not yield a complica∣tion of blessings. If Righteousness be neglected, what will such a people do in the day of visitation? Isaiah 10. 3. 2. Religion and Righteousness, have a Physical in∣fluence into, they have a natural tendency to a peo∣ples welfare. Religion will guide them to, and the due administration of Iustice will keep them in the nearest way to all the blessings of the life that now is, as well as of that which is to come. Do you but observe that sobriety, temperance, chastity, that patience, humbleness of minde, readiness to forgive, studious∣ness to be quiet: that industry, care, frugality, la∣boriousness:
that unanimity, love, publike spirited∣ness, fortitude, prudence, that eye and hand of Iustice upon delinquencies as to any of these, which the Scripture requires; and if health, and peace, and riches, and honour, and safety, and e∣very outward blessing, fall not soonr into your bo∣somes, then from your strictest observation of all the rules that ever any other booke, or discourse in the world, hath layd down to these purposes; ei∣ther there is a wisdome above Gods, or he delight∣eth not in the prosperity of his servants. Xenophon looking upon the flourishing condition of the Lacedemonians, and considering their inconsi∣derable beginning, it became the matter of his won∣der; but when he saw the provision they had made for the administration of Justice and Righteousness, Admirari prois desinebat, his wonder ceased. 2. These Two keep God with a people, and do settle them with a people under his protection; and these neglected, do cause him to depart, and to leave them naked. The Lord is with you while ye be with him, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you. 2 Chron. 15. 2. if we keep the word of his patience, he will also keep us from the hour of temptaion, Rev. 3. 10. the happiness of a people is in the presence of God, their misery in his departure from them. When he giveth quietness, who can make trouble? and when he hideth his face, who can behold him. whether it be done against a nation or against a man onely? Iob. 34. 29. I do not think the practice or that Bishop, so great a solecisne in politicks, as some others may, who when the ene∣my was coming upon them, instead of mustering his people, fell a reforming them. Ego (saith he) cura∣bo
ecclesiam, Deus pro me pugnabit. I will take care of my Church and God will fight for me. Though I doubt not, it was his duty to have done it sooner—I might adde 3. That these two are the Pillars, the foundation of a State. Other things about a building may be neglected, and it scarce be damnified. Rafters or Tile-stones may be out of order, and the house stand; but if the foundation aulter, down comes the whole about our ears,—and 4. That these make up a full provision for a peo∣ples happines; and secure every one of their interests as men, and as Christians. But I would reserve a little time for Application. Two uses onely I shall make of this point, viz. of 1. Information. 2. Exhortation. 1. Use, by way of information, in four particulars, viz. 1. That though principles of Religion and Righ∣teousness in this or that private person, may be very far influential upon a whole Kingdome for good; God blessing others for their sakes: yet tis the pro∣vision for, and the practise of these by the Rulers of a Nation, that doth advance them into a national blessing. Teir provision for these two, is not in or∣der to temselves alone, but to set them before all that are under tem: and their practice of them is a conveyance of good to a whole country. It being an ordinary way with God to concern a people, in the sins and judgements, in the duties and blessings of their superiors. The King sins, and the people suf∣fer, Ier. 15. 4. the King doth his duty, and the peo∣ple prosper, 1 Reg. 4. 25. Those that would deliver
the Magistrate from the care of either of these, have a minde to deliver the Nation from a funda∣mental blessing. 2. That these two, must be joyntly provided for, and carried on together: For First, what is his name, or what his sons name, if thou canst tell, that ever setled one of these in a Nation without the other? which of them is it that a peo∣ple can possibly enjoy alone? 1. Is it Religion without Righteousness? Who will adventure to give that religion a definition, which shall excommunicate one of those Two great Commandements on weich do hang all the Law and the Prophets? or undertake for any people under Hea∣ven, that they shall enjoy, profess, owne, practise: not corrupt, revile, despise, forsake the Truthes, wayes, worship, ad Ordinances of men shall have nothing to do with them? if any will engage for Religion upon these Termes, it must be one that hath not seriously considered, That a House full of Idolls, an Ephod for the Worship of God, and Teraphim for the Worship of the devill, and the running of the people a whoaring after these abominations, by whole Tribes, was the effect of No King in Israel, Judg. 17. 5. and 18. 30. 2. Is it Righteousnesse without Religion? then must Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Augustine, &c. Recant all that they have written to the con∣trary. However, Secondly, If these Two, for any thing that is in their Natures, had independency enough to stand each by it selfe, it were yet worth a wise mans en∣quiry,
whether God will suffer either this or that to stand so, as a peoples Happinesse, if the other be set aide. 1. Set religion aside, and suppose a people regard∣lesse of their duty towards God, and he will quickly take a course that they shall have little cause to boast of their Iustice and righteousnesse from men. He will take away the Judge and the Prudent, and the Ancient, and the Honourable, and the Counsellour; and give Children to be their Princes, and Babes to rule over them. Esa. 3. 2, 3, 4. They shall be oppressed and spoiled, and none shall save them, Deut. 28. 29. 2. Set righteousnesse aside, and suppose A people carelesse of their duties of Equity, if they do not throughly execute judgement between a man and his Neighbour; God will do to such a people as hee did to Shiloh Jer. 7. 5, 14. what was that? He re∣moved his ordinances, Psalm 78. 60, 61. If a Nati∣on will needs shew you Solomons melancholy prospect, The place of judgement that wickedness is there, (Eccle. 3. 16. 'T will not be long ere God will shew you ano∣ther of the same complexion. The waies of Sion mour∣ning, her places of assembly destroyed, her solemne feasts and Sabbaths forgotton. (Lam. 2.) that superstitious fable of Castor and Pollux, is a real truth of religion and righteousness, not that they live and die by turns, but that Solitariae graves, salutares geminae. They are never auspicious to a state and kingdome, but in con∣junction. 3. That to promote a Government against religi∣on, or a A religion against Government, is to contrive the buriall of both in a Nations ruine. A Govern∣ment that shall feign a Commission from Heaven,
to root out all that is, Antichristian from the face of the Earth; and a religion that shall be abundntly able to judge Antichristianisme enough to qualifie them for destruction, not onely in Ministers and Magistrates, and Lawyers, but in a Ministry, Magi∣stracy, Lawes and Government it selfe: and in every thing and person else, whose institution, or reason, or Conscience, shall forbid them a Communion in the same principles; if such Notions once become practicable, whither ( beseech you) shall the tribes go up? or if we knew where to set Thrones of Judgement, who shall sit upon them? 4. That antimagistraticall spirits, principles, and practises, have nothing in them of good will to a peoples Happinesse; which is no were enjoyable but under the shadow of Government. Neither God∣linesse nor Honesty will be able to finde, any where else,1 Tim, 2. 2. so much as a toleration. To designe Disorder, Anarchy, and Confusion, in the stead of it, is to study the removall of whatever is desirable, and to pro∣vide for the inlet of what wil render us most ridicu∣lous and miserable. You wil the more easily beleeve after you have considered 1. The Necessity of that Hedge which these Pio∣neeres would break down. If a Kindome indeed were peopled with Angells, or men that never lost their first Estate, they might be Lawes unto themselves; but as long as sons and daughters of fallen Adam, are the materialls, hee is a wise man that can tell what to do, without better security then Anarchy can aford him. The best men have peevish∣nesse enough to call for a huc usque; and what shall limit them if the Lawes do not? and for the other
sort, Lions, Beares, Woolves, Doggs, Swine, Mad men, if there be no Heire of restraint to chaine up and muzzle these, who can live? Twill be good newes, if you can tell where the honestest man in a Nation shall have innocency enough to save him harmlesse. If these Horses and Mules have no Bitts and Bridles, they will fall upon us, upon our persons, estates, consciences, liberties, religion, everything; nei∣ther will anything in the world but Order and Go∣vernment be able to releive us. Our strength and our riches will be vaine things to save us, they must let it alone for ever. The riches of a Nation will quickly be quartered and plundred into a morsell of bread, and the strength of it imployed to selfe-de∣struction. A potent people, if a lawlesse one, have onely this to brag of, that they neede no Forraigne Contribution to their Overthrow. Suis & ipsa Roma viribus ruit. Rome it selfe in such a case had onely weight e∣nough to presse her selfe to death. And when her Lawes were asleepe, her Watchmen waked but in aine. Nx una suis non credita Muris. She durst not trust er selfe one night within her own walls. Ty∣ranny is by all men lookt upon as a monstrous beast, but if it stood with Anarchy in competition for a wisemans vote, It would doubtlesse carry it. and (though the coice be hard) rather then to have none deputed in a State to hear us, Absolom himself were better be Master of his wish, Oh that I were made Iudge in the Land.1. Sa. 15. 4. Those Tonatick spirits that have pretended it to be their duty, to destroy all Magistracy and Order, have yet found it to be
their Interest, to set up something in the stead of it, and rather to make a King of Iohn of Leyden, then to continue headlesse. 2. How monstruous this would make a people, and all their Concernments, what a of parts, gifts, persons into one anothers places, and imployments it would bring for let me draw you a Picture of it. 1. In the Greater world, if the Earth should be enamell'd with Stars, and fruits and flowers should grow in the Firmament of Heaven; if the lesser lights should rule the day, and dispose the greater to the Government of the night; If the Sun should be pluckt down to walk upon, and a peice of dirt stuck up to shine in the place of it; if men should be necessitated to carry burthens upon the Pismire, and to learn wisdome of the Asse: In chaos antiquum confundimu, with how ugly a face would Nature looke! 2. In the lesser world, man, if the Head should be degraded to be trod upon, and the Heeles claim supremacy over the whole; if the eyes should be transposed into the Elbowes, and the shoulders take upon them to give ligt unto the body, &c. you have the blessings of Anarchy, and the issue of their design, who blaspeme Government, and fall down and worship disorder and confusion; out of which, he that shall undertake to extract Religion or Righteousnesse, will have a hard taske of it. 2. Use of Exhortation 1. To All, whom it calls to our 1. Gratitude. 2. Prayers. 3. Care.
1. To our Gratitude, for that degree of this Hap∣pinesse, in provisions for Religion and Righteousnesse, which God hath given us the possession of, I shall have no need to tell you. How much that is, you are not an Auditory that are strangers in England. Some things I shall mention. What apprehensions some of you may have of them, In sensu composito, upon the account of their Neighbourhood to other things, I am not to enquire. In sens diviso, if you consider them alone, I am very sure of your ac∣knowledgments, that they are worthy of thanks. Ex gr.—That your Law-makers shall be persons fear∣ing God, and of good conversation; That no man that is an Anti-Scripturist, a denyer of Ordinances, A common reviler of Religion, or of ay person for professing it, a Sabbath-breaker, Swearer, Curser, Drunkard, Tavern, or Ale-house haunter, shall have any thing to do in that great affaire;—That the cheif Officers of State, and Iud∣ges will be such as these will bestow their approbation up∣on; That both as to Legislation and execution, the persons cheifly interressed, are under the most sa∣cred Obligation that is imaginable, To uphold and maintaine the true reformed Protestant Christian Religion in the purity thereof, as is contained in the holy Scrip∣tures of the Old and New Testament, and to encourage the profession and professors of the same, and all this, to the uttermost of their power and to discharge their re∣spective trusts in order to the preservation of the Rights and Liberties of the people, and the good Government, peace, and welfare of these Nations. Now much we, suppose a considerable number of persons of the choicest Character, and of the highest pretences to Religion, and Righteousnesse, biasable to the produ∣ction
of what this Constitution can by no means be in∣terpreted into? or must acknowledge our share in the Blessings of the Text, ta call for thankfullnesse? Per∣haps a comparative glance upon other Nations, may the sooner perswade us that 'tis our duty to pay it. In some of which,Johnson Geo∣graphy, p. 165. 207. 236. 475. you may see in the Market∣place on the Lords day, as great an Assembly in the Afternoon, as you were able to see at Church in the morning. In some, the Chiefe Magistrates Tap-house in every great Town, inviting the people to be drunk, Cum privilegio, to increase the publick Revenue. In some Offices of all sorts, bought and sould at as dear a rate, as Land in England, at 20. yeares purchase: where the common people, how in∣dustrious soever, dare hardly own them an ability to provide themselves cloathes, or victualls. In some intolerable burthens imposed at discretion, to the finall desolation of diverse Families. And I could tell you more of this, were not this enough. Now what∣ever the Blessing be; if, God hath not dealt so with o∣ther Nations, may be found in the premisses, our Hal∣lelujahs must be the Conclusion, Psalm 147. Ult. If any say, many things desirable are yet wan∣ting, I have nothing to reply but this; that a princi∣ple that is able to suspend our tankfullnesse upon a∣ny such account, will not give us leave to blsse God for any thing till we come to Heaven.—It calls us, 2. To our Prayers, for a continuation of what we have, and a supply of what we yet want. Ta these Nationall blessings are of Gods disposing, we cannot doubt without the hazard of our Cristia∣nity, nor that the dispenseth them as Blessings, in
a way of Prayer. The Heathens could say. Dij, Quibus Imperium hoc steterat. That Empires had their foundations above; hence was Iupiter called Salutaris, and Stator, as their supposed Author of Stability and Safety, If Christians beleeve so much of God, they will send him their petitions. 3. To our Care. Of what? of every thing whereby Religion and Righteousnesse may thrive amongst us; especially of maintaining the Nurse of both, Peace. Peace with God, that we make not one bridge of our Sins, Peace amongst our selves, that we make not a∣nother of our Folly, for their passage from us. Pray consider what tis that hedgeth in the blessings of the Text, before and behinde; Tis Peace, Peace be∣fore, at the 3 verse, A city compact together, not di∣vided and subdivided into more Parties and factions, then they knew where to have names for; but (as another Translation reads it) at unity in it selfe. and then, Thither the Tribes go up; and Thrones of Iudgment are setled. Peace behinde at the 6 verse, at least, Rogate pacem. A prayer sent to Heaven for it, that these mercies might continue. This to All▪ 2. To those that are by Office, to attend the busi∣nesse of this day; as you would contribute to the Nations Happinesse, afford your respective contri∣butions towards te advancement of Religion and Righteousness, by suffering no breach upon either of them, to escape that just recompence of reward, which the Lawes have provided for it. First, For you may Lords, the Iudges, God forbid you should be supposed without serious apprehen∣sions upon your Spirits.
1. That God sits with you, Psalm 82. 1. and is present for more purposes then one, -as Testis, to see all you do, and with eyes that cannot look upon iniqui∣ty.-as Iudex, to passe his Sentence upon all yours, and what a holy care should be taken that the Bench be not divided, nor any occasion given for Luthers Deo gratias, aliter hic conclusum est, aliter in caelo. And as vindex, to make good if there be cause, the title you find him cloathed withall, in Psal. 94. 1. A God of revenges. 2. That you cannot be too zealous against the ob∣structions of a peoples Happinesse, the Happiss of all the people in tre great Nations, so many thousand soules conred in  religion and righteousnesse, which you are engaed to take care of. That if a destructive, a miseivous rape by restless, and incorrigible spirits, be made upon their blessings, Optimum misericordiae genus est occidere. 3. That as much as in you lies, you provide for the Honour of God, of the supreme Magistrate, of your selves, of the Nion, in providing for the safeguard of religion, and righteousness. 1. Of God, for the blaspheming of whose name, if occasion be given by a peoples wickedness, it is doubt∣lesse by their impunity. 2. Of the supreme Magistrate. When Iovinian was voted Emperour by the Army, he told them he was a Chirstian, and would not be a Leader of Pa∣gans. The more conformity can be wrought upon a people, the more of glory will be cast upon their Governours. `Tis not the lowest title of Iesus Christ himself that he is King of Saints. 3. Of your selves. God will honour those that
honour him. 1 Sam. 2. 30. Aristides for his care of Iuice, was called Graecorum faelicitas. How much more shall you be celebrated as our blssings, whilst you care for that, and rligion too! 4. Of the Nation, wose Statutes, how righteous soever, will ot leave upon them an imprssion of glory, unless thir judgements be of the sam Cha∣racter.▪and 4. Lastly. That you have no way else to answer the end of your institution, to be the Ministers of God to us for good, Ro. 13. 4. Secondly. For you that are to present misdemea∣nours against the blessings of the Text; you will, I hope, so discharge your oaths and trusts, that nei∣ther Religion nor Righteousness shall have any cause to complain. But I shall crave leave to tell you, 1. That Religion will, if you know any of her Or∣dinances lost, or profanely misapplyed, her duties disturbed, her solemnities rayled at, her great glory and ornament; The late Act for the better observation of the Lords day, despised, or neglected; or find her suf∣fering in any of her concernments that the Law hath taken notice of, and say nothing, she will complain. And 2. So will Iustice and Righteousness, if you con∣ceal any one Delinquency against it; especially their male-administrations, who have taken an oath, and a Commission, to dispense it, and I tink'twere better you stood charged by all the Bills of Inditement, that will be exhibited this Assizes; then that the cry of these against you should enter into the ears of the Lord of Saboth. Interest hath been a great word amongst us for di∣verse
years, and it is so still; and a national interest is sometimes talkt of. The great interest of any Na∣tion is to keep God with them. I shall conclude with a repetition of that exhortation, which the Doctrine we have been considering presseth you with; viz. that you would, all of you contribute towards the entertainment of God with us, by contributing to the safety of Religion and Righteousess. If these fail, God must be gon; and ask te Prophet what a woe, he will leave behind him. Hosa 9. 12. If Religion fail, where shall God walk? For his way is in the Sanctuary. Psalm 77. 13. Ad if Righteousness fail, with whom shall he converse? To be sure, the Throne of iniquity shall have no communion with him, Psalm. 94. 20. To provide as much as in you lies against these, the failing I mean, of Religion and Righteousness, is both your duty and your interest: that the Nation may be happy in the blessings of the Text, the Lord delighting to dwell amongst us, and to be in the midst of us. less then this we cannot have, and more we need not, to make us happy. FINIS.
