B859 12095720 53973
A SERMON Preached before the KING AT White-Hall, October 17. 1675. By MILES BARNE Fellow of St. Peter's College in Cambridge, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY. Printed by His Majesties special Command. London, Printed by T. Milbeurn for W. Cademan at the Popes-Head in the New-Exchange in the Strand, 1675.
2 Pet. chap. 3. ver. 16.— In which are some things hard to be Ʋnder∣stood, which they that are unlearned, and unstable, Wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own Destruction. THe clearness of Scripture, in all points necessary to Salvation, to all such as sincerely endea∣vour to believe, and find out the True Sense thereof: as it is a principle which suits very well with the nature and designe of a Rule; with the justice and goodness of God in propound∣ing it as such; and hath been urged with some success against those, who plead a ne∣cessity of having One Supream infallible Judge, to decide and determine all Contro∣versies, which shall happen to arise concern∣ing that Faith which was once deliver'd to
the Saints: Whose Decisions and Deter∣minations, say they, ought to be Receiv'd, by all the Sons of the Church [for as much as the Church is the same in all Ages] with equal Assent and Veneration with those of the Apostles: And this to be the only sure way, to keep the Ʋnity of the Faith, in the Bond of Peace. Whereby on the other hand 'tis said, New Articles of Faith may be dayly im∣posed; the Doctrines of men, pass for the Commandments of God; and humane Inven∣tions, receive the stamp, of Divine Autho∣rity; whereby men seem precluded the ge∣nuine methods, of coming to the Know∣ledge of the Truth, and those Precepts of of searching the Scriptures, seeking the King∣dom of Heaven, trying the Spirits, are ren∣dred Ineffectual; whereby men are so far from being able to give an account of their Faith, that their Ʋnderstandings are enslav'd by a principle of blind Obedience; so far from being led into the wayes of Religion,
by the cords of men, that they seem rather to be driven like Beasts, and acted like Pup∣pets, as 'tis phras'd by a late Author. As this Doctrine of the clearness of Scrip∣ture, hath prov'd successful to the beating down the pretences to an absolute Infallibi∣lity, and uncontroulable soveraignty over the Consciences of men: so on the other hand hath it mightily embolden'd the Pa∣trons of Liberty, not only to despise their Ecclesiastical Superiors, to throw off all obedience to Christs Ministers; [Whom He, notwithstanding, a little before his Re∣turn to his Fathers Court, for the further negotiating, and advancing the affairs of His Church, Anointed and Ordain'd to perform the Apostolical Offices, of Preach∣ing the Gospel; Remitting Sins; Inflicting Censures; Ministerially conferring the Holy Ghost; Deciding Controversies, and Admi∣nistring the Sacraments in his stead, here on earth till his second coming] but likewise to invade their Function, usurp their Sacred
Calling; especially that part of it which consists in Preaching and Expounding the Word. For, say they, since 'tis confess'd, the Scrip∣tures are sufficiently clear, to all unprejudi∣ced minds, such as are free, from the clogs of Passion and Interest; Why should these pretended Ministers of Christ take so much upon them? Are not all the Congregation Holy, and Learned, as well as they? Are they the only Temples of the Holy Ghost? And doth the Spirit of Prophesie reside solely in their Breasts? During the Dispensation of Moses, 'tis confess'd, there was a necessity of an Aaron; all along under the legal oeconomy, the Priests Lips did preserve Knowledge; and likewise during the raign of the Prophets, there was an appropriate Ministry. But the case is quite different under the Gospel, God having made clearer discoveries of himself, and poured out more liberally of his Spirit, upon all Flesh. The sense of the Law that
was Doubtful, Typical and Mysterious; the Prophecies were industriously couch'd un∣der dark Parables, and deliver'd in obscure sayings. But then the light, the glorious light of the Gospel, as 'twas universal, 'twas likewise so clear, that any one who runs may read. Why then should we not assert that Liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free? and since we have a Command, to work out our own Salvation, Why should we pin our Faith upon other mens sleeves? Thus these men, under the goodly Pre∣tences, of Christian Liberty, become enslav'd to spiritual pride and conceitedness; plead the Prerogative of the Gospel, in prejudice of Christs own Embassadors; urge, for their own private Conceptions, clearness of Scrip∣ture, to their own Confusion; and pry so long into the Doctrines of Theology, till at length they light on those hidden Mysteries, which they being Ʋnlearned and Ʋnstable, Wrest, unto their own Destruction. The way thus prepar'd, my Text yet leads me in∣to these following Considerations.
1. That the clearness of Scripture doth no wayes lessen the Authority, or take away the Necessity of Spiritual Guides. 2. That though the Scriptures be clear in themselves, yet private men, abandoning their Lawful Guides, and following their own Cor∣rupt Fancies, may deprave and distort them to their own Destruction. 3. That for preventing Mistakes from ri∣sing, and suppressing Errors when risen, 'tis the duty of Private men to submit their Judge∣ments in matters of Religion, to the Determi∣nations of those whom God hath constituted to be their Spiritual Guides and Governours; unless it manifestly appear, that such Deter∣minations are contrary to Gods Word. I. I begin with the First, That the Clear∣ness of Scripture, &c. For, if the Scriptures be so Clear, and Self-evident, as is pretended, then may men with greater security rely on the Directions of their Guides; and they have the less Reason to suspect their Con∣duct in those things, wherein they themselves
being Judges, they cannot be mistaken, if they sincerely attend them; the clearness of the Law is so far from lessening the Au∣thority, that it rather conciliates reverence to the Judge. The Profession of Physick doth not therefore become useless, because the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, contain the necessary Rules for Health; and may be understood by those who are capacitated, and will take the pains to do it. The Scriptures they do clearly contain the Doctrines of Salvation: And one way, whereby Christ prov'd himself the true Mes∣sias, was by answering that Character, the Prophets had given of Him, that the Poor should have the Gospel Preached unto them, i. e. Men as of small Capacities, and less Estates so of humble and teachable Dis∣positions; men who were Poor in Spirit, as well as in Fortune: And the perfection of the Christian Law consists in this, that there∣in God hath prescribed a reasonable service. The Rules of Life, which are therein laid
down, are not so much the product of abso∣lute power, and soveraignty; as the Result of infinite Mercy and Goodness. And these His Attributes led Him to consult the wants, and commiserate the Necessities of the meanest of Mankind: And therefore, as when He took upon Him to deliver Man, He did not abhor the Virgins Womb; and that He might become a Sacrifice for Sin, was content to be dis-array'd of His own E∣ternal Glory, to take upon Him the Form of a Servant, and to humble Himself to the Death, the shameful Death of the Cross: so likewise when He took upon Him the Office of a Teacher, by a wonderful Condescent, He accomodated His Doctrines to the rea∣son, & humane Affections of His Auditors. His Laws obtain'd as much by their suita∣bleness to our natures, as the Authority of the Speaker. When He preach'd His Divine Sermon to the Multitude, He did not Amuse them, with Mystical Theology, or torture their Understandings with profound Sub∣tilties;
but as He was the Brightness of His Fathers Glory, and the express Image of His Person; so He declar'd the Law of God, in a most Plain and Perspicuous manner. Mahomet indeed, that grand Impostor, was well Advis'd, to Pen his Alcoran in swelling Words, and mystical Phrases; and as in some things to Restrain, so in others to Indulge the sensual Appetite: For by this Stratagem, that sottish People with whom he had to do, were content to part with their natural Right, to gain an Unlaw∣ful Freedom, and to Admire what they were never like to Understand. But our new and perfect Law giver Christ Jesus, having no other design but the Salva∣tion of Souls, and being every way Adorn'd for so noble a Purpose; though He made the Gate Narrow, and the Path Strait; yet He hath Promised it shall be Open'd to all that Knock; and none, unless Wilfully, need Mistake the VVay which leads to Eternal Life.
But then, because He knew, there was no Rule so plain, but it might be Mistaken; no Precept so clear, but it might be Perverted; no Doctrine so pure, but it might be Corrup∣ted: Because He foresaw there would arise false Prophets, and false Teachers, whose business it would be to Seduce the Ignorant, and Debauch the Credulous: Because He foresaw a perpetual Succession of Gnosticks, who, in all Ages, would set up the Dagon of their own lascivious Fancies, in opposition to the Ark of His Covenant; and be so au∣dacious, as even to confront Divine Reve∣lations, with carnal reasoning: therefore to obviate, and prevent, the mischiefs of such grievous Wolves; before He took His Jour∣ney into his far Country, out of a tender care of that Flock, which He had purchas'd with his Blood, He appointed Overseers, and Pastors of His Flock; committed to them, and them only, the care of Feeding his Flock; amplified their Commission with the like Au∣thority, which he had receiv'd from his Fa∣ther;
promis'd to be with them unto the End of the World; and to assist them with that Spirit, which should guide them into all Truth. If then the Scriptures be so Clear, as to be understood even by the Multitude, then much more by the Disciples in general: If by the Disciples in general, much more by the Col∣lege of the Apostles, who were His special Fa∣vourites, and of his Cabinet-Council: If the Nations, to whom these Ministers in Chief, and Plenepotentiaries for Christ, made known the Will of God, were through∣ly instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven; then much more both They, and Their Suc∣cessors, upon whom they, in obedience to their Masters Command, conferr'd the same Pastoral power which they had receiv'd from Him. The Clearness then of Scripture, cannot reasonably be urg'd, in Prejudice of Christs Ministers; for, whatsoever is from hence al∣ledg'd, in favour of the People, the advan∣tage
will be still greater on their side. Thus hath God promis'd the Assistance of his Spirit to all private men, who sincerely endeavour to find out the Truth; then much less will He be wanting to the Governors of his Church, to whom He hath committed the care of the Souls of those private men, and given power even to confer the Holy Ghost. Are the Scriptures clear to them, much more to those, whom the Son of God hath signaliz'd, and set apart for the Lights of the World? Two Things are usually brought to hinder this Procedure: Either, that those Promises of Assistance were made only to the Apostles; or else that they depend on the conditioned Righteousness of Men. Where, by the way, it may be Observ'd, that by the First of these, the Claim of the People is ut∣terly cut off; and by the Second, they have as small Advantage. But they who argue thus, might do well to consider, that this Objection may strike at the very Foundation of the Faith. For, if
those promises of Assistance, which Christ made to His Church be Hypothecal; if they depend on the Performance of Men, then may the Foundation Totter, the Gates of Hell prevail, Christianity decay, and the Gospel it self be lost out of the World, be∣fore the End thereof, notwithstanding all Christs fair Promises to the Contrary. If they had been confin'd only to the Apostles, its Christian Religion had not long surviv'd the Author; every Martyrdom of an Apo∣stle, had pull'd down a Pillar of the Church, and by consequence, the whole Fabrick must have fallen to the ground in the very first Century of our Lord. Happy indeed had it been for Christen∣dom, that the Imperiousness of some Mo∣dern Bishops of Rome had not brought an Odium, though unjustly, upon Episcopacy in general, that their too much Lording it over the Flock, had not given Advantage to the Enemies of Church-Authority, and their Challenging to themselves at least an
indirect Power in Temporals, had not A∣larm'd the Kings of the Earth, to stand up, and take Counsel how they might Destroy so dangerous an Ʋsurpation of the pretended Vicegerent of the Lords Anointed. Happy had it been, if for the Support of their Secular Greatness, they had not Wrested the Scriptures to countenance such Doctrines, as have no clear and solid foundation therein; and that under pre∣tence of making the Church all Glorious Within, Her Governours all Trium∣phant Without, they had not defac'd Her Innocent Beauty, and made Her Militant in the worst of Senses. However, they can no way be Excused, who think they can never be Secure from Papal Supremacy, but by Demolishing the Evangelical Hierarchy, and introducing a Presbyterial Parity into the Catholick Church; and to avoid the Necessity of ha∣ving an Infallible Judge, leaving every pri∣vate prepossessed Fancy to the Perspicuity
of Scripture, whereby men are often bewil∣dred in a Labyrinth of Errors, seduc'd into those by-paths which lead to the Pit of De∣struction: For, notwithstanding that Beam of Divine Light, which shines so Bright in the Scriptures, it seems some men have Eyes either so weak as to be dazled at the sight of it, or else so blind with Pride or Malice, as not to perceive it: For, St. Peter tells us, there are in the Scriptures, some things hard to be Understood, which unlearned and unstable men Wrest, unto their own Destruction: And therefore the Unlearned should do well to consult their Teachers; the Unstable, those that are sound in the Faith; which brings me to my second ge∣neral Consideration. That though the Scrip∣tures be clear in themselves, yet Private men, abandoning their Guides, and following their own corrupt Fancies, may deprave and distort them to their own destruction. Who those Wresters were, or what those  are, wherewith St. Peter char∣geth
the Epistles of His beloved Brother Paul, I shall not strictly enquire; the Apo∣stle having pass'd them over in a profound silence, it will be difficult at this distance of time exactly to define; yet 'tis not impro∣bable, that either the Gnostick, or Cerinthian Hereticks, were here chiefly aim'd at, who upon a mistake of some Predictions, became the Founders of a Temporal Dominion of Christ after His Resurrection; wherein His Followers in their New Jerusalem, should wallow in sensual Lusts and Pleasures, spend the space of a Thousand Years, as in a Nup∣tial Festivity, and enjoy the all that is in the World; the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, in as am∣ple and exquisite a manner, as the most Epi∣curean soul could effect or covet: A fancy, in its first original, meerly Jewish; after∣wards entertain'd by some Judaizing Chri∣stians; and finally, rather rectified than a∣bandon'd, by some of the Fathers in the Pri∣mitive times. And if those sublime Wits,
who had all the Learning which either Jeru∣salem, Athens, or Rome, could Boast, were never less Mistaken in their Expositions, of some abstruse Texts of Scripture [whilst they deliver'd their Opinions but as private Doctors] what wonder if the unlearned, and unstable, Wrest, them to their own De∣struction? That they have, de facto, done this, is manifest, since 'twill be hard to instance in any one Century, which is not either charge∣able with new Heresies, or the reviving and improving of Old. And the most extrava∣gant Opinions, which ever yet saw the light, have still shrouded themselves under the Pa∣tronage of Holy Writ. What shall we say then, shall we condemn the Scriptures of Sin? Shall we say, That the Scriptures are of themselves either productive of Error, or not a sufficient store-house of Truth? God forbid. The Scriptures are Holy, Just, and Good, but private men Wrest them to their own Destruction. And this they do, first,
By their Ignorance; Secondly, By their In∣stability. I. First, by their Ignorance: where it will be presently Objected, that Ignorance is so far from being a cause of Error, or impiety, that, in a sober sence, 'tis truly the Mother of Devotion. The Wisdom of this World, is given in by Tertullian, as the prime Cause of Heresie; None were greater Tormentors of the Scriptures than the Phylosophers; for which Reason they are Branded by the same Author, with the Title of Arch-Here∣ticks: Particularly the Valentinian Heresie, concerning the portentous production of the Gods, comes from the Platonists; Mar∣cious Ʋnconcern'd, and Lazy God, was first set up by the Stoicks; the mortality of the Soul was the Doctrine of the Epicureans; the Impossibility of the Resurrection of the Flesh, of the whole stream of Phyloso∣phers. The Apostles tells us, Not many Mighty, not many Wise, not many Noble, were
Chosen: Cautions his Proselytes against Philosophy and vain Deceit, and concludes the Wisdom of this World, Foolishness with God. Wherefore, by  Vnlearned, in this place, we are not to understand Ideots, and those who never knew Letters; but we must understand those who will not be In∣structed by the Masters of Divine Wisdom, the Nolentes discere, those who refuse to hear the Church of the Living God, which alone is the Pillar and Foundation of Truth. And so their Learning, like Julians, only qualifies them, to deride the Doctrines of a Crucifi∣ed God, and by their Wisdom they become the more formidable Enemies of Christ's Kingdom. Thus, if Lucifer, the Son of the Morn∣ing, fall from his Allegiance, whole Legions of the Heavenly Host are involv'd in the Re∣bellion. That Heresie spreads like the Con∣tagion of a Leprosy, which hath an Arrius for its Founder, and a Constantius for its Promoter: And the Mahumetan Religion
owes as well its monstrous Birth, as its fatal Encrease to the Malice and Munning of an Apostate Jew, and a Renegado Christian. And to give but one instance more, but of a far more Modern Da and therefore of more Dangerous consequence; That un∣happy man Socinus, a person otherwise of singular Wit and Learning; but being in this sense unlearned, i. e. Having entertain'd so slender a Notion of the Church, as to date a general Defection from the very Deaths of the Apostles; upon this Perswasion, thought it not Robbery, to make himself e∣qual to the most Oecumenical Councils, to contradict the most receiv'd Doctrines of the Church; and from this Contempt of his Mother, to proceed to that daring pitch of Impiety, as to deny even the Lord that Bought him: so dangerous is it for private men, to rely solely upon the perspicuity of Scripture, or to measure the  of the In∣carnation of the Godhead, his Consubstan∣tiality with the Father, by the scantling of
Humane Reason. Cedat curiosit as fidei, glo∣ria saluti, was the Advice of as great a Wit as any Age hath bred. Our Curiosity must give place to our Faith; the thirst of Tem∣poral Glory, to the benefits of Eternal Sal∣vation. 'Tis true, by our Reason, we are first dispos'd to be Christians; for no Creature, beneath the Rational, is capable of Divine Revelation; but when once we have given up our Names to Christ, 'tis by our Faith we are Saved: but if we Assent to no Doctrines, but such as our Reason fully Comprehends, this is no longer Faith, but Science; and so we may continue Infidells, whilst we go under the Notion of Chri∣stians. And, since We live in such a Knowing Age, wherein all captivating the Ʋnder∣standing, though it be to the Obedience of Faith, is made the subject of Grievance and Complaint: And that we have to deal with men of such a sceptical Genius, as that
they do not only enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of our Faith, but moreover deny our very Creed; with whom a Treatise of Humane Reason is of more Force, than the Revelation of St. John the Divine. To the Consideration of these Men, I offer Two Things which I judge most proper. I. First, the Answer which Origen made to Celsus, when 'twas objected by that Ca∣lumniator against the Christians, that their Religion was built on a very sandy Foun∣dation, which durst not undergo the Test of Reason, but commanded its Converts not to Examine, but Believe, and their Faith should Save them. In part he owns the Ob∣jection, but wisely Retorts it upon his Ad∣versary, by telling him, that the Philosophers were the greatest Dictators in the World: Witness the Ipse dixit of Phythagoras, that their Systems contain'd some such se∣cret Dogmata, which their Disciples swal∣lowed solely upon the Credit of their Ma∣sters. And if the Masters of the Wisdom of
this World [which is either Foolishness, or at best, but Science, fasly so called] required so great submission from their Scholars, how much greater is to be given to those Do∣ctrines which are contain'd in the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, who were Taught of God, and spake as they were inspi∣red by the Holy Ghost? II. Secondly, I urge the Authority of my Lord Bacon, whose, if any, me thinks should be admitted by these Virtuosi in Re∣ligion; The Divine Prerogative, saith he, extends it self to the Whole Man; and re∣quires not only Obedience from our Wills, but Submission from our Understandings. And therefore, as we are bound to Obey the Divine Law, though our Wills reluct never so much against it; so are we obliged to believe whatsoever God hath Reveal'd, though never so improbable to our under∣standings: For if we believe no more than what we can demonstrate to be true, we do not believe the Truth deliver'd for the Au∣thors
sake, but the Author for the Truths sake; and so we pay no more Respect to the Ora∣cles of God, than we do to the Writings of Men, though never so much Suspected by us. The Faith which Justified Abraham, was conversant in a matter incredible to Reason: And therefore, the higher the My∣steries of Religion are above our Reason, the greater is the exercise and tryumph of our Faith, & the Honour done unto God in Be∣lieving. To conclude this Point, Great is the use of Reason in Religion, both as to the man∣ner of interpreting the Scriptures, & the de∣ducing true consequences, and wholesome conclusions from thence; and if it be wholly suppress'd, our Religion will degenerate in∣to Superstition; we shall be so far from pay∣ing God a Reasonable Service, that we shall offer Him the Sacrifice of Fools. But then it must be kept to a due temper; for, if be not managed by prudent Guides, 'tis apt to grow Wild, and Extravagant, to hurry us on to a Belief of the Fowlest Impostures, to a Practise
of the Grossest Impieties, which either the prevalency of the World, the domineering enmity of the Flesh, or the implacable malice of Satan, can propound to be Believed or Practis'd. II. The second Reason of Private Mens falling into Error, is their Instability in not adhering to their Guides; but forsaking them to go astray in the intricate paths of Error and Deceit. Heresie being nothing else but an Excision from, and Disobedience to the Church in points of Faith. And therefore the Apostle pronounceth an Heretick Self-Condemned; one who hath Wantonly cho∣sen to himself those Opinions: for an Obsti∣nate Defence whereof, after full and plain means of Conviction, he justly falls under the Censures of the Church, is Excommuni∣cated the Assembly of the Saints; & so with∣out Repentance & Reconciliation continues in a very dangerous estate, if that of Heathens and Publicans be acknowledg'd such. Not in Vain then are those frequent Cau∣tions
against Falling Away, those repeated Admonitions to Perseverance, those earnest Exhortations to hold fast the Profession, and contend for the Faith which was once Deli∣ver'd; those so much inculcated Commands of Obeying those who are set Over us in the Lord, Heb. 13. v. 7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose Faith follow. Ver. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they Watch for your Souls. For in Vain may those men com∣mit themselves to the immediate Assistance of God, who neglect to hear his Guides; and violate His Commandments, in hopes to procure His help & favour: For, from that very moment of time, they cease to be Mem∣bers of the Holy Catholick Church, they are become Out-lawries in a Gospel-sense, they have lost the Protection of the Heavenly King, and they lay under the Deprivation of the benefits belonging to the Subjects of that Je∣rusalem which is Above.
And what wonder, if being in this forlorn condition the Tempter take his advantage, lead them into the Wilderness, and there present to their disturb'd fancies false schemes of Religion, suggest unworthy apprehen∣sions of God; and whatsoever is by him thus suggested, is by them mistaken for new light and holy inspirations. And because this spirit of delusion dares put forth, among Christians, no Doctrines but such as pretend to be founded on the Scriptures: to this purpose they are wrested and tortur'd, their scope is mistaken, their sense abused, their Periods miserably mangled, their whole design perverted to countenance every Wild Opinion, which either a capricious fancy can imagine, or a Malicious Wit in∣vent. And from hence it comes to pass, that we have as many several sorts of Christians as there are different humours or Interests of men; & the Gospel with St. Paul, though in a quite contrary sense, is become all things unto all men.
And having made thus bold with the Scriptures, it cannot be expected that they should deal more modestly with any autho∣rity inferior to that; the most ancient Tra∣ditions must now give place to new disco∣veries. The Consent of the Catholick A∣postolick Church be borne down by the Dictates of a private, I might say, familiar spirit. Whereas there is all the reason in the World to believe that the Apostles best knew the mind of their Master, that they faithfully & fully communicated their know∣ledge to their successors, & so by certain steps and degrees we may arrive at this fundamen∣tal truth. That as the Church is the most faithfull Keeper, so the most authentick Ex∣positor of Scripture. Which fairly ushers in my third and last Consideration. That for the preventing Mistakes from Rising, and sup∣pressing Errors when Risen, 'Tis the duty of Private Men to submit their Judgements, in matters of Religion, to the Determinations of those whom God hath Constituted to be their
Spiritual Guides and Governours; Ʋnless it manifestly Appear, that such Determinations are contrary to Gods Word. And this I shall assert very briefly both from the qualificati∣ons of the Persons who are appointed to Rule in the Church, and the Reason of the thing. I. And that which first entitles the Gover∣nors of the Church to a superiority over their Subjects, is that special Ordination and Comis∣sion, which they have receiv'd from Christ, to instruct the World in all necessary Truths, and that Charge which he hath laid upon o∣thers to obey them. If any one listeth to see their Commission, He may find it recorded in any of the four Evangelists. I shall ex∣hibit it, as 'tis exemplified 28 Mat. 18, 19, 20. Verses. And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given, to me in Heaven, and Earth: Go ye therefore, and Teach all Nations, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you: And lo, I am with You alwayes un∣to
to the end of the World. In the which words there are these Three Things considerable: 1. That Christ commission'd His Disci∣ples immediately after He had proclaim'd Himself Omnipotent. 2. That this Com∣mission implies it to be Christs Will, that all Nations of the World should Obey them. 3. That He promised to be with Them and their Successors, unto the end of the World. And there cannot be a fuller instance, of the Perversness of some Men, who to evacuate and overthrow the Authority of the present Church, will needs confine  to some period of time, short of the final dissolution of all things, when time shall be swallow'd up of Eternity; if not contrary to the Grammatical sense of the Word, yet at least to the design of the Promise, and the nature of the Thing. Which of the Embassadors of earthly Potentates ever received so ample a commis∣sion? the Person commissioning was Om∣nipotent. The Commission was universal
in respect of Persons, time and place; 'twas directed to all the Nations, and to continue throughout all the Ages of the World, and for the Execution of it they were empowr'd from Above; wheresoever they came, they constituted a Spiritual Government, and they had full power to Enact such Laws as they thought tended to the Advance∣ment of their Masters Kingdom; and they did with Authority, and not by way of Counsel only, as some would have, deter∣mine such Controversies as arose, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Ʋs. All along their Spiritual progress, if any City refus'd to receive Them, or their Doctrine, they shook off the Dust of their Feet against it, as a dire Presage of some ensuing Judgment, as the next words mani∣festly declare; Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tollerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgement, than for that City. Wretched City! how has thy Disobedi∣ence ascertain'd, and aggrandiz'd thy Ruine.
The Lewd Inhabitants of Sodom and Go∣morrah shall find more Favour in the day of Judgement, than thy Citizens. Most true it is, their Power was purely Spiritual: Christ, the Prince of Peace, did not Com∣mission Generals to destroy, but sent forth Apostles to Convert the Nations, by de∣claring His Laws, & denouncing His Judg∣ments. But then they had no coercive power of the Sword, which God hath given to Magistrates, to inflict the Judgments which they denounc'd. But as they, because living under Heathen Powers, left the Event of their Spiritual Censures solely to Divine Vengeance, [which they who escap'd in this world, were sure to meet with in the next]; so is it still, unless Kings are graciously plea∣sed to shew themselves Nursing Fathers to the Church, to enforce Spiritual Censures, by Corporal Penalties, and adjudge those Unworthy the Protection of the Laws of the Realm, who are justly depriv'd of the Benefits of the Church. By all which, it ap∣pears,
that the Church is something else, than a Christian Common-wealth, since there was a Church before the Common-wealth became Christian; and neither the Levia∣than, nor any of his Disciples, hath yet been able to shew, how, or when the Church for∣feited Her antecedent Right: And that though the Governours thereof may chal∣lenge to themselves a Power distinct, yet no wayes Opposite to the Civil; The Shield of Faith, doth not Clash with the Sword of Justice. And maugre the designes of those, who have Evil will at Sion, this is not to erect Imperium in imperio, much less to set the Mitre above the Crown: Since whatsoever Power, is here challeng'd as of Divine Right, is purely Spiritual, exercis'd to Spiritual ends and purposes; so far from interfering with the Civil, from Absolving men from that Obedience, which is indis∣pensably due thereunto; that wheresoever it takes place, it abates nothing of that natural Right which the Magistrate had in the Af∣fairs
of Religion: Yet herein it will ap∣pear, that the Wisdom of the despised King of the Jews, did far surmount all the Policies of the world; in that he hath so interwoven the concerns of His Church, with the inte∣rest of the State, that at the same time any man shall dare to become an Enemy to his Kingdom, he must cease to be a Friend to Caesars. II. The reasonableness of this Submis∣sion, will appear from those promises of As∣sistance, which Christ hath made to them, but not to others without them; much less to others against them: And those are Illu∣mination, Direction and Power. Illuminati∣on, in things Obscure; Direction, in things Difficult; Power, to Encounter, and over∣come all Opposition. And this may be one Reason, why Christ did not Arm his Disciples with a Temporal Sword; for, certainly He, who had all Power given Him in Heaven, and on Earth, might have done it if He had pleas'd, because He furnish'd
them with such Extraordinary Virtues, as did abundantly supply the Defect of that. Thus they who could Raise the Dead from the Grave, needed no other Argument to gain the Living. They who could convince the Consciences, captivate the Understandings, beat down the Imaginations, and conquer the Affections of their Adversaries, needed no Sword, nor Spear, nor any of the Bloody Engines of War, to make themselves Ma∣sters of the Field. Now the same Spirit, though not in the same Measure, doth still reside in the Gover∣nors of the Church: though they do not equalize the Apostles in Working of Mira∣cles, diversities of Languages, extent of Juris∣diction; though they have not, as they had, the whole World for their Diocess; yet are they still Bishops of Souls; Pastors, and Doctors for the Consummation of the Saints, for the E∣difying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Ʋnity of the Faith, unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Either then let Private men
submit to their Spiritual Governours; exer∣cising their Commission according to Gods Word; or else let them warrant their Dis∣sent with greater, at least equal Attestations of the Divine Favour; and then there will be no great fear, of any danger arising from Dissenting Brethren. III. The reasonableness of this Submission will appear, from their study and learning in Divine Matters, and from the far less know∣ledge, and ordinary capacity in others. The Apostles, they had their Knowledge of Di∣vine things, either from a constant and fami∣liar converse with their Master, or else from that plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost, which He vouchsav'd them, immediately upon His Restauration to His Heavenly Kingdom. That which was thus Wonderfully be∣stowed upon them, their Successors are forc'd to acquire, by hard Study, great In∣dustry, frequent and fervent Address to the Fountain of Wisdom. For, not only the
Knowledge of Languages, a calmness of Mind, neither ruffled with the storms of Passion, nor distracted with the Cares of the World; but likewise a peircing Judgment, to distin∣guish between the Literal and Figurative sense, to weigh the scope and coherence of things, to compare one place with another, to Illustrate obscure Texts, by those which are more plain, to consult, and find out the sense of Antiquity, is required to a right understanding of the Scriptures: For, they do not only contain things of themselves hard to be understood; but moreover, those very things are rendred more difficult, by the Malice of Satan, & the Cunning of his Agents. The Enemy hath sown such a prodigious quantity of Tares, that 'tis very hard some∣times to find out the Wheat: What wonder then, if such a spawn of Monstrous Opini∣ons flow from the Scriptures falling either into Prophane hands, or being interpreted by a private, self conceited, and unruly Spi∣rit? If St. Paul, who was caught up into
the third Heavens, and was even oppress'd with Revelations; nevertheless cryes out, as well for the Difficulty, as the Dignity of his Function, Who is sufficient for these things? Then certainly it can be no Disparagement to the Laity, however quick-sighted they may be in other Affairs, to suppose them not such competent Judges here, as those of the Clergy are. And indeed, we hear of very few, though never such Despisers of the dull Clergy in their life-time, but are very wil∣ling to admit of their advise and assistance when they come to Dye. IV. Fourthly and lastly, the necessity of this Submission appears, as 'tis the only means to restore Peace and Unity to the Church; Happiness and Tranquility to the State, how ineffectual the several Projects of Comprehension, Toleration, unwarrantable Complyance have prov'd to effect the Work of Coalition: I mean to Compose those Diffe∣rences, and unite those Divisions which so furiously Rage among us; we either are, or
'tis to be fear'd, by sad Experience, may be Taught. These Projects can only lay claim to an Imaginary Happiness, and how-ever Plausible they may seem in the Notion, yet may they prove Dangerous in the Practise, at least, not attain the ends for which they were design'd. For, in truth, as well may we expect To gather Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles, as that a Toleration of Disagreements, should produce the Bles∣sed Fruits of Peace and Concord. These are Contraries, and destroy each other. Now, what other Expedient have we left but the Restoring, and Asserting the Dis∣cipline of the Church: That so they, who will neither Hold the Faith, nor keep a good Conscience, by being deliver'd up to Satan, may Learn, at least, not to Blaspheme. Ma∣ny and grievous are the Guilts, which are charg'd upon the Church of Rome; yet, such is the Exactness of Her Discipline, and the Obedience of Her Sons and Daughters,
Consequent upon it, as hath hitherto pre∣serv'd Her from Ruine. Now, if our Fears of the Increase of Popery, be as real, as they are pretended, me-thinks it should be no ill Policy to learn Wisdom from our Ad∣versaries; for that which preserves a Corrup∣ted Church from Falling, in all likely-hood will make a Pure One to Flourish. However, We are little the better for being deliver'd from the Slaveries of an Im∣plicit Faith, and Foreign Superstition, if we run into Licenciousness, Infidelity, and Irreligion at Home. For, who is so Blind as not to see that Irreverence and Disre∣spect for the Lord's Clergy, hath been ac∣companyed with a Manifest Decay of Piety, and a Notorious Contempt of the most Es∣sential Parts of Religion? That want of Submission, to the Just and Pious Deter∣minations of the Church, no less Justly and Piously ratifyed and established by the King and State, hath given Birth to such a Mon∣strous. Variety of Opinions, as hath scarce
left any Fundamental of the Faith unque∣stion'd, if not denyed; Atheism creeping in by Insensible Degrees, from indulging too great a Latitude in Matters of Reli∣gion. And now in the Close of All, Let every Man seriously consider with himself the Hainousness and Danger of Schism; and the Blessed Effects of Obedience. The Danger of Schism, in that it breaks the Precious Ʋnity of the Church, alienates the Affections of the Members thereof. Who, as they have but one Faith, so they should have but one Soul. And so instead of Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, For∣bearance, Meekness, Temperance, those love∣ly Fruits of the Spirit, which adorn Pri∣vat Men, and secure the Publick Peace, There arise Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Evil Surmising, Sedition, He∣resies, Murders; those ugly Works of the Flesh, which dissolve the Bonds of Society, and exclude Men from the Kingdom of
God. How that the Schismatick is arrested with Fears and Jealousies from without, when he considers his Sin of Disobedience against those whom the Lord hath set over him, and the Dreadfulness of the Churches Censures, when justly incur'd, for his Dis∣obedience. How that he is tormented with Sad and Uncomfortable Reflections from within; being Ʋnstable in all his Ways, ever Learning, but never coming to the Know∣ledge of the Truth; but being abandon'd to the Delusions of a Private Spirit, He is miserably tost'd to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, till at length He makes an E∣ternal Shipwrack of the Faith. On the contrary, the Blessed Effects of Obedience; how the Humble Christian, by an happy Resignation of his Judgment, there where our Lord seems to demand it, enjoys a perpetual Peace, and Freedom from Dispute, together with all his Fel∣low-Members of the same Mystical Body. As for those great Mysteries of Godliness,
which concern his Salvation, though they are above his Reason, yet not above his Faith; & he had rather Rely on the Churches Decisions of them, when he finds no place of Scripture, plainly contrary to such De∣cisions, than either give way to his own Curiosity, or heed to the Disputers of this World, lest He should thereby wrest them to his own Destruction. And this He thinks he may do with less Trouble to himself, and greater Assurance of the Truth, and so He continues Sound in the Faith, without be∣ing skill'd in those unhappy Controversies, in which the Disputers of this World have involv'd it. And this Harmony of Faith and Do∣ctrine is always accompanied with an entire League, and Union of Charity, [that com∣mon Badge by which Christians were once distinguish'd from the rest of the World] and a Blessed Ʋniformity of God's Publick Worship and Service, whereby the Mem∣bers of the Church Militant, in some sort
Resemble the Saints of the Church Trium∣phant. In a Word, in this Obedience, the Humble Christian goes on Securely, and Chearfully, in the Ways of God's Com∣mandments; And instead of troubling His Head with the  of Religion, practiseth those Plain, but most Important Duties of Godliness, Righteousness, & Sobriety; which will render his Life happy here, and Crown him with Eternal Felicity, hereafter. FINIS. ERRATA PAge 13. line 2. for Hypothecal read Hypothetical. l. 10. f. its r. the. l. 11. f. the r. its.
