B808 R37064 16199341 105057
A SERMON PREACHED Vpon the Fifth of November, 1679. In the Cathedrall Church at Gloucester. By CL. BARKSDALE. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. OXFORD. Printed for John Barksdale Book-seller in Cicester, 1680.
Psal. CXXII. VI. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that Love thee. TO observe the coherence and meaning of the Text, you may be pleased to look back to the 3 verse, Jerusalem is build∣ed as a City, that is Compact together: i. e. Jerusalem is a Lovely place; the very buildings, being so uniform and order∣ly joyn'd together, are very beautifull; an Emblem of that unity of minds, that should be in the Church of God. Then at the 4 verse, Thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel (or rather as our Critical Paraphrast has it, according to the Commandment unto Israel) to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. It was the place to which all the Inhabitants of the Land were obliged to go up thrice every year, to commemorate the mercies of God, afforded to his people Then at the 5 verse, For there are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David: i. e. Besides the Service of God, there also is the Sanhedrim, or supreme Judicatory of the Nation, that great Court, where the highest matters are decided. And there also is the Palace of David, where the King resides and his
Posterity shall sit upon his Throne. All these Con∣siderations infer the Duty of the Text, Pray for te  the City of God, wel compacted and  in it selfe erusa∣lem is the place where the House of God is, and his solemn service: erusalem is the seae of the King, and the seat of stice: Therfore Pay,  pray  the peace of Jerusalem, It is the duy of ll Good men, to pray for this place, and to love it most affection∣atly, and to beseech God to bestow a quiet enjoyment of all these Advantages, and all manner of prosperity upon it. They shall prosper that love thee: They that love, and pray, and contribute their utmost to Jerusalem, shall not loose their reward, they shall gain to themselves prosperitie. The Text you see, being thus explained, falls into two parts, A Duty, and a Reason: Th Duty in te former words, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: The Rea∣son in the later, They shall prosper that love thee: a reason which is the great Reason, and Common Motive to duty, taken from their own interet and benefit: They shall prosper that love thee, ô Jerusalem. So that, we have these two Observations: I. It is our duty to pray for the peace of the Church and State wherin we live. II. They that well performe this duty, procure pro∣sperity and happiness for themselves. I. It is our duty to love and pray for the peace of the Church and State wherin we live. I joyn the Church and the State together: for, as I said, at Jerusalem was the House of God, the Temple; and there also was the House of the King, and the Court of Justice. Re∣ligion and Justice are the great pillars of a Nation: when these stand frm and inviolate, then is a Nation hap∣py. That the Church may florish in true Religion, and
the State florish in the due Execution of Justice: this must be the desire of our hearts, this we must endevour every one in his place, and this must every one pray for: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. It is to this purpose that the Apostle Paul so ear∣nestly exhorts, that supplications and prayers be made for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that un∣der them we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty. The Kings and Emperors and Magistrates in those times were Heathens and perse∣cutors of Christian Religion yet the Apostle requires, that prayers and supplications be made for them. How much more ought we to pray for Christian Kings and Princes, that under the Gracious Government of these Nursing Fathers, Godliness and Honesty, Religion and Justice may be nourished and maintained: Good Rea∣son to pray for Magistrats in the State, under whose protection we live, and by whome we enjoy peace and quietness. And we have good reason too, to pray for Ministers in the Church. This the same Apostle requires: Pray for us. I desire your prayers for me and my fellow la∣bourors in the Gospel: those he means that are described there, that watch for your souls, and must give ac∣count for them; namely the Bishops and Ministers un∣der the Bishops. They that have such a great charge as the charge of Souls, that labour amongst you in the word and doctrine, that exhort and admonish you in the Lord; they certainly may well exspect the bene∣fit and help of your prayers. Pray for us Ministers in the Church, saith the Apostle, as well as for Magistrats in the State, that it may go well both with the Church and with the State. What the Apostle enoyns, that prayers should be made for Magistrats and Ministers, was duly remembred in
composing and framing the Liturgy and publick prayers of the Church of England; as you may easily acknow∣ledge, who are such obedient sons of the Church, as dayly to attend (which I do heartily wish, all, having no lawful hindrance, would do,) daily attend the pub∣lick divine Service. For example: O Lord save the King, And, endue thy Ministers with righteousness. Againe for the King: O God, Behold our gracious Soveraigne Lord the King, and so replenish him with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that he may alwayes encline to thy will and walke in thy wayes. And for the Ministers: Send downe upon our Bishops and Cu∣rats the healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Againe for the King: (By the way remember a Note of King Charls I of blessed memo∣ry; That sure some of his Enemies were the more of∣fended against the Common prayer book, because it taught us to pray so much and so often for the King: a reason which may make those who are loyal Subjects the more in love with it:) I say, Againe for the King, So rule the heart of thy Chosen Servant, that he may above all things seek thy Honour and Glory: So rule his heart, that he may study to preserve thy People com∣mitted to his charge in wealth, peace, and godliness. And yet againe, Save and defend our King, that un∣der him we may be Godly and quietly governed. Grant unto his whole Counsel, and to all that are put in Au∣thority under him, that they may truly and indiffer∣ently minister Justice to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of true Religion and Vertue. Where also you may remember, it follows for the Church; Give grace O Heavenly Father, to all Bishops and Curates, that they may both by their life and Doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and
rightly and duly administer thy Holy Sacraments. Thus Beloved are we taught, in our divine Offices, to pray according to the Apostolical Ordinance, for the King and subordinate Magistrates, for the Bishops and subordi∣nate Ministers. Surely, Brethren, did we dayly and duly joyn, as we ought to do upon many Accounts, in our excellent Com∣mon prayers, humbly and heartily: heartily I say (for we are many times, I fear, but cold and faint,) we should, I doubt not in Gods good time, finde the success of these u∣nited forces and assaults upon heaven (as Tertullian cals them) in the prosperity both of Church and State, as well as in the peace and comfort of our own Souls. But here's our misery: some (whether through infirmitie of mind, or obstinacy, God knowes,) will not come to Com∣mon prayers: (they account them common in the worst sense, that is, Common and unclean:) some of us, when we are at Church, in the House of God, mind not the Work of God, about which we come; behave not our selves as it becomes men that pray to the God of all Glory and Power; bring not with us that humility, that love, that faith, that zeale and fervor, that should accompany, and quicken and season our prayers. Aske and you shall receive, saith our Saviour: but then we must aske aright with faith, and zeale, and love, and hu∣mility, and (which is to be remembred, not only love to God, but Charity, sweet and amiable Charity, to∣ward our neighbors, even to our enemies also. Ye ask and receive not, saith S. James, because ye aske amiss. It is a common fault of People to murmur and complaine that Magistras are not so good, Ministers are not so good, as they should be. But, may not we rather complaine of our selves and confess, We do not pray for Ma∣gistrats, we do not not pray for Ministers, as we should pray. Verily, it were a course more becoming Christians & Godly
men to turne our murmurings against Governors, into pray∣ers and supplications for them. For we may well beleive that by our continual prayers, our earnest and sincere payers, prayers proceeding from an humble and lowly, penitent and obedient Heart, that which is supposed to need a∣mendment, would be redressed, our Grievances eased; or at least (which is a blessed fruit of true devotion,) our own souls would be better composed and fitted to bear all things without us, patiently and content∣edly. Give me leave to call to remembrance that which was known to some of us here present, how in the late times of trouble and confusion, before the miraculous Return of his Majestie now Reigning (whom God Al∣mighty long preserve to reign in Truth and peace) in the time of the late troubles, how zealous, how constant, (notwithstanding the danger of Assembling) were the pray∣ers of Ministers and People (faithfull even then to our afflicted Mother the Church of England;) as if the fire of persecution (as indeed it useth to do) had enflamed our devotions. We had a comfortable hope then; that should we live to see the King againe in his Throne, the Bishops in their Sees againe, and the Clergy pro∣tected, and the good laws and liberty restored to the languishing Church and people of God; we hoped and expected, that England would really become a Nation of Saints, an holy Nation, Christians not in name only, but in deed and in truth. But alas! What happened? Af∣ter our Kings Returne, and with him the Returne of our Laws, and our Liberty, and our Religion, after the reestablishment of our Church and State, to the wonder and admiration of all the World, was not our ingra∣titude, our unthankfulness no less wonderful? Did not the Devotions of many slacken and cool? Yea, did not Covetousness and Ambition, did not licentiousness and
profanation, did not intemperance and excess, strife and contention and faction, quickly spread themselves over the Nation, and usurp a new Dominion and reign over us? But to speake most gently, did not even the better sort fall much short of that zeal for Gods honour and service, that care of reformation and a∣mendment of Manners, both in our selves and others, which perhaps we once vowed, and certainely the Mercies, the unexspected and undeserved Mercies of God exacted at our hands? Surely, surely we were more strongly obliged to be an holy People, a thankfull People, a praying Peo∣ple; a People loving and Charitable, peaceable and obe∣dient; united in obedience to the State, and united in obedience to the Church: if not agreeing in all points of Doctrine and opinion (for there may be a mutual To∣leration in that respect,) yet however united in the com∣mon Faith of Christians, and in the common Devotions and publick prayers, formed with great Wisdom and mo∣deration, agreeable to the common Faith. Where the fault of our Divisions lyeth, God will Judge. But among our late Omissions since the Return, in Point of Solemn Assembling for Prayer and Thanksgiving, I cannot this Day forget to note the neglect formerly (I say not in this great City) generally in the lesser Parishes of the Country; the neglect of observing this great Day. A great Day, justly so stiled, but greatly neglect∣ed in the greatest part of the Nation. Was not this Neglect one sin among many other, to provoke God to permit new Plots, more Popish Plots & conspiracies, to be contrived, & fetcht out of the old Magazine of Hell 'against our merciful King and his loving People, against our Church and State, and all that is dear unto us. To these Traitors we shall say more anon: let us now go forward and speak to our Text. This, this I feare, may be matter of just complaint that
we were not thankful for our Peace and prosperity that returned with our King (whom God preserve,) but we murmured at the management both of Church and State. For remedy whereof I shall mention but two pla∣ces of Holy Writ, which, as I conceive, being well considered may serve to abate and calm our murmuring. As to the affaires of State, is the burthen of Taxes and Tribute a Grievance? For this, take the Sentence of our Lord: Give unto Cesar the things that are Cesars. As to the Church, are Ornaments of our Mother, and her Ceremonies an eye sore? For this Grief, take the good Aphorism of the Apostle, Let all things be don de∣cently and in Order. Ceremonies in some measure (and you may see the measure, if you please to read the Pre∣faces before the Liturgy,) some Ceremonies are necessary for the preserving of that decency, which the Word of God and our own reason and common sense requires: what Ceremonies are such, our Governors must judge, not we. Tribute is necessary for the Defense of the King and Kingdome: what Tribute is such, our Governors must judge, not we. They have the Power of Commanding: to us is left the praise of Obeying. These few words spoken of Tribute in the State and Ceremonies in the Church, cannot seem impertinent or improper to my Text: For it may be observed, that the peace of our Jerusalem hath been much impaired and is still endangered, by such as are apt, too apt to mur∣mur at One or Both. The Seditious in the State, use to disturbe the Civil Government, under pretence of hea∣vy Impositions and taxes: The Sectaries in Religion love to untie the bonds of Ecclesiastical Politie under colour of superstitious Rites and Ceremonies: both sorts are to be lookt upon, and lookt to, as enemies to the peace of our Jerusalem. And you will excuse your Teachers, and Spiritual Guids if they do Hoc agere, bestow much
care and paines in this behalf, that in this Noble City may be found no such Sectaries, no such seditious Persons. Beloved, it is our hearts Desire, and our prayer to God for you, that you may approve your selves, both obedient Subjects to the King (whome God pre∣serve) and dutiful Sons of the church. And in so do∣ing you will help to keep, help much (such a City) to keep and preserve and advance that which we pray for, the peace of our Jerusalem. Our Obedience must under God, and the King, I say our Obedience must both procure and advance our peace. And without obedience unto Governors, our prayers for them signi∣fy nothing, avail nothing. Pray for Governors; that's good: but then, we must obey them too. God is much pleased with the Obedience of his people; obedience to his own Laws and obedience to the Laws of his Vi∣cegerents. Indeed the Laws of his Vicegerents are in a sort Gods own Laws; ratified and established by God. For by him Kings Reigne, and Princes decree Jutice. O∣bedience to our Governors is obedience to God Al∣mighty and to Christ our Lord. What Saint Paul faith of servants may be fily applyed and accommodated to Subjects: Subjects, be obedient to your King, doing the will of God from the heart (not in out∣ward shew only, but from the heart) with good will shewing your obedience, as to the Lord and not unto men: knowing, that whatsoever good thing any man doth, the same shall be receive of the Lord. Or, as it is elsewhere expressed by the same hand, Knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the Reward: the re∣ward of your true and faithful Obedience. And this brings me to the Great Reason, or ef∣fectual Motive of our good Affection and good wishes to Jerusalem in the latter part of the Text: They shall prosper that love thee; that love and pray for thee O Jerusalem.
II. They that performe the Duty, that love the Church and State, and pray for the peace of them, procure prosperity and happiness for themselves. For the declaration and proof of this, let us consider first in general: That our prayers for others are always pro∣fitable to our selves. The Reason is, because our pray∣ing is the performance of a Duty pleasing unto God. It is pleasing unto God, because it is commanded by him. Pray one for another, saith Saint James. And omission of this duty is a sin, as appeares by the Words of Samuel: God forbid, that I should sin in ceasing to pray for you. Now, if it be a sin to deny another our prayers, if to pray for others be to performe a duty pleasing to God and commanded by Him: hence it clearly follows, that it will be Profitable and advan∣tageous to us. For this is an infallible Truth: No man ever obeyed God in vaine. Another Reason is, because in our praying for o∣thers, we exercise and encrease our brotherly kindness and Charity: And you know brotherly kindness and Charity is the great grace, the prince of Graces, commended unto us in the Gospel of Christ: who hath taught it, by his example and precept, and hath set it down as the proper mark and character of his Disciples. This love and charity, as it makes us prone to do o∣ther good Offices for our Neighbours, so especially does it incline us to pray for them. This is a Charitable of∣fice, which the poorest may performe for the richest: an Office which we can perfome for our worst enemies. When they stand at such a distance from us, that we can do them no other good, we can, and must pray for them, according to the Command of our Lord and Master. And by the exercise of this Charity, we encrease it, and procure no small benefit to our selves, as well as to them for whom we pray. Thus in generall.
Now let us in particular speak of our love to Je∣rusalem, and our praying for Jerusalem; that is, for our Church and State: and first for the State, or ci∣vil Government. What is the end and effect of our prayers for the State, for the King (whom God pre∣serve) and all that are in Autority under him, no man can better tell us than Saint Paul: That we may lead a quiet and peacible life, in all Godliness and Honesty. I. A quiet and and peacible life. Do you know what a blessing it is to lead a quiet and peacible life? If you do not value this blessing, look back upon the time, that is within our memory, the time of our late domestic Wars and tumults; when the late King, a just and merciful and religious Prince, was put be∣side his Government first, weakened and devested of his Royal power and prerogative first; and then de∣prived of his life and all. Look upon the time of our present Sovereigns exile in forreign parts, what facti∣ons, what changes and uncertainties of Government, what oppression and cruelties, before his Majesties hap∣py Returne. There are but few among us so old, that can look back to the 5 of November 1605. Not to speake of the terrible Invasion in 88, in the time of the famous Queen Elizabeth: when the Spanish Arma∣da (that Invincible Armada, as it was proudly na∣med,) threatned utter ruine to this Kingdome, but was it selfe by Gods Assistance ruined and defeated: when that of Claudian was hansomly applyed to the Queen; Onimium dilecta Deo, cui militat aether, Et con∣jurati veniunt ad classica venti! But the year 1605, some few among Old men may remember, and most men are acquainted with the history of the gunpowder Trea∣son: a Treason ploted by pretended Caholicks, and for the pretended promotion of Christian Religion: wher∣as, indeed and in truth, it was a plot most oppo∣site
to the doctrine of Christ, and tending to the de∣struction of a Church, (of all other Churches we know,) whose Doctrine and Constitutions are most agree∣ing with the primitive Church of Christ, truly Ca∣tholick and Apostolick. It was a plot for the destructi∣on (as the Records testify to all posteritie,) for the destruction of the King, (that King of such admirable learning and piety King James) the Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal branches, with the whole Clergy and Commons of this Realm, then assembled in Parlia∣ment; by popish treachery, appointed as sheep to the slaughter, in a most barbarous and savage manner, beyond the examples of former Ages. An unna∣tural Conspiracy (I speake the words of Autority) an unnatural Conspiracy: An horrible and wicked en∣terprize, plotted and intended this day (a dismall day, if it had taken affect) against the King and the whole State; for the subversion of the Government and the Religion establisht amongst us. But it pleased God, in a strange manner to disclose the plot and lay open the secret designe, (as he hath given a strange discovery of the late so much noised design, no less dangerous to our present King, than Church and State, yet in being and long to be by Gods good∣ness:) the Powder-Plot I say was marvellously di∣scovered: God gave the King to understand a dark and obscure Letter, and by that the black design came to light; the conspirators some taken, some slain in the pursuit, some Judged according to Law, condem∣ned and Executed, as was fit for Traytors. The la∣mentable and horrid effects and consequences of which Treason, had not the hand of God been against them and for us, are beyond my ability to comprehend, much more beyond my expression. 'Tis sufficient, if you imagine and fancy so much of that confusion and de∣solation,
which would have followed, as to make us have a more lively sense of the greatness of our deliverance, and the blessing of a quiet and a peaceable life, wher∣of I was speaking: and withall make us to solemnize this Day of our deliverance with due Thankfulness, and with a sober and Religious joy, together with bountiful Alms to the poor. I say againe, and would have it marked, with a sober and Religious joy, least in a sinful and profane celebration (as the manner of some is) we provoke God to deliver us to some new Plotters and Conspirators. And that there is a new plot of the papists in great part discovered, and in some part punished already, I need not tell you. I do but touch this thereby to urge you not only to a Religious thankfulness this Day, but to a sincere Amendment of life, and uniforme Obedience every Day, that the Sword of God hanging over our heads as it were by a slender thread, may be prevented and esca∣ped. Which I pray God, in mercy grant. In one of the prayers for this day, we desire of God to strengthen the hands of our gracious King, and of all that are in Authority under Him, with judge∣ment and justice to cut of all such workers of ini∣quity, as turn Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into faction. I remember we read it in the old Book for the Fifth of November about Forty years agon, thus: Cut of all such workers of iniquity, whose Re∣ligion is Rebellion, and their Faith is Faction. I doubt not, the alteration was made upon some reason, then. But more, since our Intelligence of the New Plot, (does it not stil proceed?) we may restore the Antient reading, and if ever it might be justly said, it may now most deservedly be pronounced of the Jesuitical Pa∣pists; Their Faith is Faction: Their Religion is Re∣bellion. If any man doth yet dey or doubt of This,
he may satisfy himself abundantly in the late Book pub∣lished by the most learned Bishop of Lincoln, to omit many other. Since this new-old plot of the Jesuits, the King the State and the Church have been judged to lie under so eminent danger, that doubts and fears have run through the whole Kingdom, but dwelt princi∣pally in London, the famous London, the Epiome or Compendium of the Kingdom. Before which time (I think I may say) in most of the space since the glo∣rious Return, Every man, that lov'd quiet, might sit quietly and safely under his own vine and his own fig∣tree (as the Hebrews speak,) that is, every man enjoy∣ed his own, and eat the labour of his hands securely, Religion was safe, and the people without fear did or might pray and hear as their forefathers pray'd and heard in the peaceable reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, and in the beginning of King Charles the first; namely, hear the saving word read and preached by lawfully ordained priests; and pray the good old prayers; only with a new Revise since the happy Return, for our better satisfaction and edification. Many more benefits I might mention, but our liberty and our daily bread, and our true Religion, (would it might shine in the Uniformity of our lives and actions,) these may suffice to shew the great reason we have to pray for our Jerusalem, for our Civil Government particu∣larly, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, free from plots and conspiracies of our irreconcileable Enemies, free from discords, and dissentions, of our own Brethren. But peace and quietness is then most valuable, when it is attended with that which follows, Godliness and Hone∣sty: The end and benefit of Government is, that we may lead a quiet and peacible life in all Godliness and honesty. Godliness and honesty are well joined with peace
and quietness: For publick tranquillity and safety is ot given us, that we should abuse it to rioting and drunkenness, to chambering and wantonness, to strife and envying: but that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, and being without fear of them, we might fear God, and serve him in holiness and righteous∣ness all our days: that is, behave our selves justly and mercifully toward our neighbours, devoutly and reve∣rently toward God: and this, with perseverance to the end. Righteousness and Holiness must go hand in hand together: Godliness and Honesty must not be parted. The good Laws of the Land are made as well to promote religion as Justice; and the commands of the King are to make his subjects Gods subjects, his people Gods peo∣ple. We have laws, wholsome laws, as on the one hand to keep us from offending God by swearing and propha∣nation, so on the other to restrain us from offending the neighbour by railing, evil speaking, and diffamation. Which particular I mention, because we live in an Age wherein evil speaking, and evil writing too, is brought into a fashion by busy-bodies, (or rather idle-bodies,) and made an exercise of Wit: which was given them, by the favour of God, for better uses. Grave and learned men are sometimes exposed in their Lampoons, begotten (as they say) by Copulation of male and female Wits: but these brats are not fit to be nursed up, or sent abroad into the world by the hand of any sober or civil person. Among the diseases of our time, such Scrible may be call'd the scab and itch of the Age: and unless those irregular and intemperate Wits be curbed by Authority, they may prove the very bane of humane society and all good fellowship. In the mean time, for your Lampoons, Contempt is the best reveng, and we may say with Tacitus Spreta exolescunt. When good men are reviled either by unruly Tongues, or sharper pens, they will think upon
the words of Christ, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you: and think upon the example of Christ their Master; who when he was reviled, reviled not again. Good laws I said, we have to keep us from dishonoring God by swear∣ing and prophanation, and to restrain us from offending the neighbour by slander and diffamation: Good Laws, if well executed. Therefore must we pray also, that the same God, who hath given us laws establish't by Acts of Parliament, and commanded by royal proclamation, for the maintenance of Godliness and honesty, would also be pleased, by his effectual Grace, to raise up the hearts and courage of Magistrates, both in this city and all other places, to maintain the laws, and see to their due execution. This is the way to have our peace and quietness re∣newed and continued to us by maintaining Godliness and honesty. Godliness (which you must remember is al∣ways to be joyned with honesty: The Godly man is al∣ways an honest man:) Godliness, I say hath the promise of this life, and of that which is to come: so Saint Paul. Temporal promises, and spiritual promises: prosperity of all sorts. For the soul also is said to prosper: And the prosperity of the soul is, when it proceedeth from grace to grace, and is prepared more and more for Glory. This is the chiefest part of the prosperity of those that love Jerusalem, and pray for Jerusalem. The prospe∣rity of the outward or temporal estate is, when you fol∣low your wordly business in your honest vocations with safety and good success: and this is the reward of those that love the State and Government. In seeking the hap∣piness and welfare of the King, they seek the good of Gods kingdome: for, The King reigns for God: and they that seek Gods Kingdom, shall have all necessaries of this life added to them. We have our Saviours word for it. They shall be prospered and blessed in their
outward concerns, and all their temporal affairs. The mention of Gods kingdom, puts me in mind of the other part proposed concerning the Church. I have shewed, how they procure a blessing for themselves, that love and pray for the publick State or common wealth, or civil government; now let me briefly shew you the same in respect of the Church, or Eclesiastical government: They that love the Church of God, and pray for the Church-men, do thereby procure pro∣sperity and happiness for themselves. The Christian Church at large, that is, the Ca∣tholick Church, is the Congregation of Christian people all the world over; but here we understand the ruling and unruling part of the Church, that is, the Bishops and Ministers under them; those particularly of the Church of England, placed under his Majesties supreme authority and government. And they that love the Church, are discerned by these two characters: They pray for the Bishops and Ministers, and obey their di∣scipline and instruction. For this Obedience  the bet testimony of their love. Now, they that pray for the Bishops and Minists, procure to themselves prosperity. 'Tis a great hp∣piness to the people of God, to have good Bishops and Ministers: and the way to have such, is to pray for them. These are call'd Labourers in Gods harvest: a our Saviour hath said, Pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his hrvest. The true labourers are of God's sending: they do not intrude themselves without a call, but are sent by God in an orderly way. That you may have ch, you must pray for them; and when you have them, you must pray for the continuance of them, and for God's blessing on them in their labours. So shall that gracious promise of God be fulfilled among us, which i recorded by
the prophet Jeremy: I will give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding: learned and godly Bishops and Ministers; such as the Church of England (Dicam ad∣stante invidiâ) such as our Church is blessed with in our Time, and hath been blessed with in the former Age. These are a great happiness to the people (if they would be pleased to know their own happiness,) a great happiness to the people of God. And this hap∣piness will be the better known, if you have the leasure sometimes to weigh the several parts of their office. They are to feed you (as the prophet said) to feed you with knowledge and understanding: brighter and clearer knowledge, than that in the prophet's time: The knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified: The knowledge of him, and the power of his Resurrection: They are to guide you in your doubts, to comfort you in your sorrows: They are to call you off from the way of error, and the path that leadeth to destruction: and to shew you the right and good way and to shew you what God would have you do, and what God will do for you, if you beleive in him and serve him; even bring you safe to everlasting Glory. You may be glad to pray for such persons, and to love them, by whose ministry you obtain such inestimable bene∣fis and blessings. And we must not only pray for them, but obey them too, that our obedience may secure our prosperity. Obedience I say, is the best testimony of love, and it is the fruit of love. The Apostle presses the duty of obedience to Bishops and Ministers, by the great bene∣fit of the Souls committed to their charge. They that obey their spiritual Rulers, shall be improved in their souls, advantaged in their whole conversation. So that a comfortable Account shall be given of them to Al∣mighty
God the lover of souls. For what greater com∣fort and joy can be both to Ministers and people, than to live together in the fear of God, and in mu∣tual love here; and when God shall call them hence, to meet again in heaven, and be with Christ in perfect joy for ever and ever. Thus much may serve for the prosperity of those that pray for and love the State, and likewise of their prosperity that pray for and love the Church. And now to draw to a Conclusion, if you please to reflect upon the plain discourse you have had the patience to hear, you may thence make a discovery of the friends and enemies either of Church or State. 1. We discern who are friends, and who enemies to the State. They that pray heartily for the State, for the King and all that are in Authority under the King: they that second their prayers with a loving, a peace∣able, humble and obedient behaviour, contributing to the publick what service they can in their several stations. These are the friends of the King, these are friends of the State, these the best Commonwealth-men, these the most loyal Subjects. The Ancient Christians, in the primitive Times, the times of persecution, were accused as enemies of the Roman Empire, and causes of all publick mischeifs and calamities. To refute this slander, and defend the innocent professors of Christianity, Tertullian a man of a strong wit and sharp Eloquence, pleads thus: Oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribus &c. We pray for all Princes, that it may please God to grant them long life, secure Goverment, a safe Family, valiant Armies, a faithful Counsel, a good people, quiet times, and whatsoever good things they themselves can desire, either as men or Princes. Thus the primitive Christians were wont to pray for the Princes
and Magistrates, and by these prayers proved they were friends to the present State. On the contrary, that man that takes himself to be a royallist, a friend of the King, and a faithful sub∣ject, and only talkes, or drinks a health; and does not, both in publick and private, pray for the welfare of the King and Kingdom, is very much mistaken. Can he truly love the King, that does not heartily pray for the King? The loving Subject, is the praying Sub∣ject; and he will not fail in any other act or duty of obedience. 2. For the discovery of the Churches freinds and enemies, you have heard, that by the Church is chief∣ly meant the Ruling part, the Bishops and Ministers. So the word seemeth to be understood in that precept of Christ, Die Ecclesiae, Tell it to the Church, i. e. to the Rulers of the Assemblies, as our learned Paraphrast has it out of Chrysostome. These Rulers spirituall, if we do not pray for, we are no freinds, but enemies of the Church. For these are given by the special favour and providence of God; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, as Saint Paul saith. They are given, as the same Apostle adds, that being instructed and guided by them, we be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Do∣ctrine. So then, if our settlement in the true Re∣ligion, and our preservation from dangerous Errors; if our edification and growth and perfection depend under God upon the sacred Ministry; certainely he, can be no freind to Religion and the Gospel, who does not not love and pray for the Bishops and Mini∣sters of the Gospel. Nevertheless it is true, and often found by sad experi∣ence, that Church-men have many Enemies. And no
wonder: For the Prophets of old, and after them the Apostles, yea Christ himselfe our Lord and Master, had their Enemies, slanderers, revilers. Elias the Prophet was accused as a troubler of Israel: Paul the Apostle was accounted for a seditious fellow, and his own Galati∣ans seem to have been his Enemies for his telling them the truth. And is not this that, which raiseth up en∣mity against our preachers somtimes, even the telling them the Truth. The truth is, we love our sins, and favour our own lusts and vanities, and would not be vehemently urged to part with any thing which is in deliciis, a delight to us, and dear as the right hand or eye. We care not to be taught, how to be grave, and yet withall kind; strict and yet courteous, tem∣perate and yet sociable; as our Religion, our Chri∣stianity exacteth. We can hear the Doctrine, but en∣dure not to come under the Discipline of the church. And here among the Churches Enemies, I might fall againe upon the Popish Traytors, both old and new, the grand Adversaries of our Jerusalem, both of our Church and State. But 'tis time to ease you, and I had rather pray, then inveigh. Wherefore I intreat you to joyn with me in your most ardent desires, that God would be pleased, still to discover, and defeat, and blast his and our enemies: that our Soveraigne Lord the King may still be protected by the Divine power, and directed by the Divine Wisdom: that the Parliament now summoned, may in due time meet together, and sit fst, with such unanimity and concord in their Counsels, such order and prudence and success in their Affaires, that they may be a joy to the King, and to all his faith∣full subjects, and may rise with the honour, the lasting honour, of having been the reestablishers of truth and peace for us and our posterity. I must not end, till I have in a word admonished
you of some other Traytors, and these the worst of all. For those Traitors aforementioned, could only de∣stroy the Body, but these destroy the Soul, the immor∣tal Soul: I mean these privy Conspirators in our own bosomes, our carnal lusts, and unruly passions, and our presumptuous Sins proceeding thence. I need not name them. These must be searched out, mortified, extingui∣shed, and totally destroyed. A great Work, but possible by the Grace of Almighty God, and by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ: which we shall receive, if we pray for it, as we ought to do, with humility and fervency and constancy. And therefore in the close of all, let me earnestly re∣quest of the Worthy Citizens here, that this magnifi∣cent and beautifull Basilica, the House of God (the Glo∣ry of your ancient Corporation,) and the solemn service dayly ministred in this Colledge, may be more frequen∣ted and attended by you. And withall, let me petition, that the daily Divine Service (at least in the mornings) may be procured and maintained according to the Injun∣ction of our good Mother the Church of England, in every Parish Church in this City. Consider of it (if you please) Right Worshipfull and beloved Brethren. Bear with my zeal in this proposal: If ever you will be zealous for publick and Common Prayer, Now is the time. Extra∣ordinary occasions call for our extraordinary care and diligence. Verbum sapienti. My last words shall be taken out of a Prayer appointed for this Day. O Lord! Let the Consideration of thy Goodness work in us true Repentance, that Iniquity may not be our ruine: And increase in us more and more a lively faith, and fruitfull Love in all holy Obedience; that thou maist continue thy favour, with the Light of the Gospel to us and our posterity for evermore. And that for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen. .
